© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in
GOVERNMENT OF TRIPURA
Report No. 2 of 2025
Report No. 2 of 2025 - Government of Tripura
https://cag.gov.in/ag/tripura/en
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Social, Economic, Revenue and General Sectors for 
the year ended 31 March 2024
 


Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Social, Economic, Revenue and General Sectors
for the year ended 31 March 2024
Government of Tripura
Report No. 2 of 2025

i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Particulars Paragraph(s) Page(s)
Preface v
Overview vii
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION
About this Report 1.1 1
Authority for Audit 1.2 1
Planning and Conduct of Audit 1.3 2
Significant Audit Observations 1.4 3
CHAPTER II: SOCIAL SECTOR
Introduction 2.1 5
RURAL DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
Performance Audit on “Mahatma Gandhi  National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act”
2.2 6
PUBLIC WORKS (DRINKING WATER AND 
SANITATION) DEPARTMENT
Performance Audit on “Jal Jeevan Mission”
2.3 58
EDUCATION (HIGHER) DEPARTMENT
Unfruitful expenditure
2.4 116
CHAPTER III: ECONOMIC SECTOR
Introduction 3.1 119
PUBLIC WORKS (ROADS AND BUILDING) 
DEPARTMENT
Wasteful expenditure
3.2 120
PUBLIC WORKS (ROADS AND BUILDING) 
DEPARTMENT
Unfruitful expenditure
3.3 123
CHAPTER IV: ECONOMIC SECTOR
(State Public Sector Enterprises)
Functioning of State Public Sector Enterprises 4.1 127
Introduction 4.1.1 127
Investment in PSEs 4.1.2 127
Reconciliation with Finance Accounts 4.1.3 129
Special support and guarantees to PSEs during the year 4.1.4 130
Accountability framework 4.1.5 131
Arrears in finalisation of accounts 4.1.6 132
Placement of Separate Audit Reports 4.1.7 133
Investments made by State Government in PSEs whose 
accounts 4.1.8 133

ii
Particulars Paragraph(s) Page(s)
are in arrears
Performance of PSEs as per their latest finalised accounts 4.1.9 134
Return on Investment on the basis of Present Value of 
Investment 4.1.10 138
Winding up of non-working PSEs 4.1.11 138
Impact of Audit Comments on Annual Accounts of PSEs 4.1.12 139
Coverage of this Chapter 4.1.13 140
POWER DEPARTMENT
(Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited)
Unfruitful expenditure
4.2 141
POWER DEPARTMENT
(Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited)
Avoidable expenditure
4.3 148
CHAPTER V: REVENUE SECTOR
General 5.1 153
Trend of Revenue Receipts 5.1.1 153
Revenue and return filling trends 5.1.2 156
Analysis of arrears of revenue 5.1.3 159
Evasion of tax detected by the Department 5.1.4 160
Pendency of refund cases 5.1.5 160
Analysis of the mechanism for dealing with the issues raised by 
Audit 5.1.6 161
Action taken on the recommendations accepted by 
the departments/ Government 5.1.7 163
Results of Audit 5.1.8 163
Coverage of this report 5.1.9 164
TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT
Performance Audit on “Functioning of District Transport 
Offices”
5.2 165
REVENUE DEPARTMENT
Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Collection of Stamp 
Duty and Registration Fees from Deed Registration”
5.3 199
FINANCE (Excise and Taxation) DEPARTMENT
Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Department’s 
Oversight on GST Payments and Return Filing (Phase-II)”
5.4 219
  CHAPTER VI: GENERAL SECTOR
 Introduction 6.1 245
 FINANCE DEPARTMENT
 Suspected excess payments 6.2 246

iii
Particulars Paragraph(s) Page(s)
 HOME (POLICE) DEPARTMENT
 Suspected and excess payments 6.3 250
CHAPTER VII: FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERV ATIONS
Follow up action on earlier Audit Reports 7.1 253
Monitoring 7.2 257
Outstanding Inspection Reports 7.3 257
Departmental Audit Committee Meetings 7.4 259
APPENDICES
Appendices -- 261-390

v
 
iv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 
31 March 2024 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of Tripura 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of India for being laid on the floor of the 
State legislature.  
2. This Report contains significant results of Performance Audit, Subject Specific 
Compliance Audit and Compliance Audit of departments of the Government of 
Tripura under Social, Economic, Revenue and General Sectors including 
departments of Rural Development, Public Works (Drinking Water and 
Sanitation), Education (Higher), Public Works (Roads & Building), Power, 
Transport, Revenue, Finance (Excise and Taxation), Finance and Home (Police) 
Departments. 
3. The cases mentioned in this Report are those which came to notice in the course 
of test audit during the year 2023-24 as well as those which came to notice in 
earlier years but could not be dealt with in the previous Reports. Matters relating 
to the period subsequent to 2023-24 have also been included, wherever 
necessary. The Report has been finalised after considering the response of the 
Government Departments, wherever received. 
4. Audit has been conducted in conformity with Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
PREFACE 
v

OVERVIEW

vii
v 
OVERVIEW 
 
CHAPTER-I  
INTRODUCTION 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) relates to 
matters arising from the performance audits and test audit of transactions of various 
departments of the Government of Tripura pertaining to Social, Economic, Revenue 
and General Sectors. The primary purpose of this Report is to bring to the notice of 
the State Legislature, significant results of audit.  
Out of 1,682 auditee units, 89 units were planned for audit during 2023-24. After 
carrying out risk assessment and keeping in view the available manpower, 41 units 
were actually audited during 2023-24 involving an expenditure of ₹ 3,522.72 crore. 
This Report, inter alia, contains three Performance Audits titled “Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act”, “Jal Jeevan Mission” and “Functioning 
of District Transport Offices” under the Rural Development, Public Works 
Department (Drinking Water and Sanitation) and the Transport Department 
respectively and two Subject Specific Compliance Audit titled “Collection of Stamp 
Duty and Registration Fees from Deed Registration” and “Department’s Oversight on 
GST Payments and Return Filing (Phase-II)” under Revenue and Finance (Excise and 
Taxation) Department and seven Compliance Audit Paragraphs. 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
SOCIAL SECTOR 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
Performance Audit on “Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act” 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)  was 
enacted in September 2005 and implemented in a phased manner between February 
2006 and April 2008 in all the rural districts of the country. The Act aims at 
enhancement of livelihood security of the households in rural areas of the country, by  
providing at least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to 
every rural household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work.  In 
addition, the Act also focuses on the creation of durable assets . Other objectives 
include protection of the environment, empowerment of rural women,  reduction of 
rural urban migration, fostering social equity and strengthening rural governance 
through decentralisation and processes of transparency and accountability. 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) was 
enacted in September 2005 and implemented in a phased manner between February 
2006 and April 2008 in all the rural districts of the country. The Act aims at enhancement 
of livelihood security of the households in rural areas of the country, by providing at 
least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every rural 
household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work.  In addition, the 
Act also focuses on the creation of durable assets. Other objectives include protection 
of the environment, empowerment of rural women, reduction of rural urban migration, 
fostering social equity and strengthening rural governance through decentralisation and 
processes of transparency and accountability.

viii
Overview
Overview 
vi 
The institutional mechanism and structure intended for effective planning of the 
scheme ensuring stakeholder participation had been established in the State. However, 
instances of low attendance in the Gram Sabha meetings, as recorded in the Gram 
Sabha resolutions, cast doubt on the effective and large- scale involvement of villagers 
in the planning process at the grass roots level. The Department primarily focused on 
the annual planning activity.  The Perspective Plan was neither prepared by the Gram 
Panchayat nor at the District level, as required under the guidelines. 
Regarding the financing of the scheme, the State did not receive the full labour-budget 
from the Centre. As against the 661 lakh to 702 lakh person days (PD), the Ministry 
accorded sanction for only 325 lakh to 430 lakh PDs during 2019-24. The sanctioned 
labour budget fell short ranging from 47 per cent to 65 per cent of the State’s demand 
during 2019-24. Additionally, the full quantum of funds, as per the sanctioned labour 
budget was not released by the Government of India in all the years except for 2020-
21, when the release was marginally higher than the sanction. Release of lesser funds 
as against the sanctions, varied from two per cent  to 24 per cent  during the period 
from 2019-20 to 2023-24.  There was no short release of the State’s share and the 
State Government even released advance funds in some years, pending receipt of 
funds from the Central Government for smooth implementation of the Scheme in the 
State. 
Furthermore, administrative funds to the tune of ₹ 11.87 crore were used for payment 
of damages and interest on delayed payment of EPF contributions, which was 
avoidable. 
As of March 2024, job cards were issued to 6.80 lakh house holds in the State 
involving 12.20 lakh individuals. This represents about 33 per cent  of the State’s 
population, as per the 2011 Census data. Sampled GPs and VCs issued job cards 
within 15 days of receipt of application from the applicants as per the provision of the 
Act. However, verification of job card applications revealed that there were instances 
of overwriting on receipt date of application, receipt of application without any date, 
etc. which was presumably done to adhere to the 15 days’ criterion for issue of job 
card from the date of receipt of application.  
Regarding the receipt of work demands and allocation of works to the job card 
holders, the GPs and VCs called for application for works only on the receipt of 
allocation of PDs. This practice undermines the Act’s objective, which guarantees job 
seekers the legal right to demand work at any time within their entitlement. 
Consequently, employment to the job seekers remained under the control of and was 
determined by the Government rather than being based on the actual demand from the 
job seekers. 
Audit noticed that the works undertaken across the State during 2021-22 and earlier 
periods had been completed. The completion rate of the works taken up during 2022-
23 and 2023-24 was 94.21 per cent and 98.32 per cent, respectively, across the State 
with the sampled districts achieving the rates between 92.62 per cent  to 99.60 per 
cent. Although the numeric indicators reflected high achievement, the actual physical 

Overview
ix
Overview 
vii 
verification of the sampled works revealed shortcomings in both the implementation 
and outcomes. During joint physical verification of the sampled works, deficiencies 
like non-existence/ thin density of plantation works, non-existence of village roads, 
roads in severely damaged conditions, and idle investment in infrastructure such as 
anganwadi centres, duck shelters and cattle shelters were also noticed. 
Serious deficiencies were noticed in the sampled works regarding their execution viz.  
non-uploading of geo-tagged photographs at three stages; failure to upload work 
completion photographs; non-maintenance of essential records such as site accounts 
registers; nursery stock account and distribution cum sale records; work progress 
registers; site inspection registers; and non-handing over of the completed works to the 
concerned GPs and VCs were noticed in audit against the sampled works.  It was seen 
that three stage photographs were not available in 73 cases out of the sampled 220 
works which were verified in audit. In none of the cases, site-inspection registers were 
available while completion certificates and handing over certificates were not 
available in 86 cases out of the 220 sampled works in both the sampled districts. 
All the deficiencies pointed towards serious lapses in oversight, execution and 
intended impact the Scheme. 
Deficiencies in Social Audit were also noticed. Checklist for preparation of Inspection 
Report was not finalised by the Social Audit Unit (SAU), Tripura. Social Audit teams 
submitted Inspection Reports with incomplete sections which lacked authentication by 
the Inspecting Officer. Despite these deficiencies, the draft Inspection Reports were 
accepted by the State SAU and issued to the GPs/ VCs. During the audit period, 
Ombudsmen were not appointed simultaneously across all the eight districts of the 
State. Additionally, the State had not designated an Appellate Authority to respond 
and look into the appeals against the decisions, findings, and awards of the 
Ombudsmen which was a serious lacuna in ensuring accountability under the scheme. 
Recommendations 
 Efforts may be made to ensure large scale involvement of villagers in the 
planning process by increasing awareness and encouraging active participation 
in Gram Sabha meetings. 
 Initiatives may be taken for the preparation of Perspective Plans identifying the 
local needs and gaps at the district level in various sectors as envisaged in the 
MGNREGA guidelines. 
 All statutory payments must be made promptly to avoid penalty and damages. 
 The Department may ensure timely issue of job cards to the applicants and 
ensure proper monitoring at regular intervals. 
 The Department may make efforts to get the person days sanctioned as per the 
annual entitlement of the job card holders. 
 The Department may ensure that MGNREGA job card holders receive the 
legally mandated 100 days of guaranteed wage employment per financial year. 

x
Overview
Overview 
viii 
 Completion certificates and handing over of works may be ensured immediately 
after completion of the works. 
 Uploading of geo tagged photographs for three stages of work may invariably 
be done in a timely manner to provide visual evidence of the project’s progress. 
 Deficiencies identified in the Social Audits conducted may be addressed 
promptly and Social Audit must be conducted scrupulously in accordance with 
the guidelines. 
Paragraph 2.2 
 
PUBLIC WORKS (Drinking Water and Sanitation) DEPARTMENT 
Performance Audit on “Jal Jeevan Mission” 
Access to clean drinking water is a fundamental human need and one of the most vital 
elements for sustaining life. Its significance is evident from the fact that ancient 
civilisations flourished in river valleys, where fresh and plentiful water was readily 
available. Even in the oldest sacred scripture Rig Veda, water is celebrated as a source 
of great happiness and compared to nurturing, loving mothers. 
Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) is a flagship scheme launched by the Government of India on 
15 August 2019. The objective of JJM is to ensure that every rural household has a 
Functional Household Tap Connection (FHTC) by 2024 to provide drinking water 
supply in adequate quantity (minimum 55 litres per capita per day (LPCD)) of 
prescribed quality (BIS:10500) on regular and long-term basis at affordable service 
delivery charges leading to improvement in living standards of rural communities. 
As of March 2024, 79 per cent of rural households had been provided with FHTCs in 
the State against the target set at the inception of JJM. The shortfall in achievement 
was mainly due to delays in well sinking, abandonment of pilot holes, delays in 
supply of power connections to completed water supply schemes, as noticed in 
sampled districts. Despite the expansion of the piped water supply, population 
affected by water borne diseases in the State specially in gastroenteritis and enteric 
fever remained high during 2019-24. Further, there were also instances of quantitative 
as well as qualitative dis-satisfaction among the beneficiaries, with issues such as 
insufficient water supply and poor water quality.  
There was poor involvement of rural communities for planning and implementation of 
in village water supply schemes. Further, District Water and Sanitation Mission 
(DWSM) remained inactive in sampled districts with respect to the planning, 
implementation and monitoring of water supply schemes in the districts. 
Implementation Support Agencies (ISAs) were first engaged in the State after lapse of 
almost three years since the inception of JJM, thereby affecting the mobilisation and 
capacity building efforts at the village level. There were also shortages of manpower 
and testing equipment in the State level laboratory as well as in the district and sub-
division level laboratories in the sampled districts which contributed to shortfalls in 

Overview
xi
Overview 
ix 
the prescribed water quality testing.  
There were instances of underutilisation of available funds for support and Water 
Quality Monitoring System (WQMS) activities. Several water supply schemes 
remained incomplete and suffered from time over runs due to inadequate feasibility 
study, lack of effective co-ordination with the Tripura State Electricity Corporation 
Limited (TSECL)/ other agencies for timely energisation of water supply schemes and 
delays in taking prompt decisions by the Government. Against the targeted Water 
Quality Affected (WQA) households, coverage of only 11 per cent had been achieved 
under quality component during the last five years. 
No plan was prepared for the assessment of ground level requirements and no action 
was taken for ensuring source sustainability or grey water management in the sampled 
districts. Further, financial sustainability also was not achieved due to the inaction of 
the VWSCs towards collection of community contributions for operation and 
maintenance of the water supply schemes. None of the in-village water supply 
schemes were handed over to the concerned village authorities in the sampled villages 
resulting in a lack of ownership by the rural community. 
Recommendation 
The Government may; 
 give priority to provide FHTC coverage to all rural households through 
efficient and effective deployment of available resources; 
 emphasise on qualitative and quantitative improvement of supplied water; 
 consider conducting an impact study to evaluate how piped water supply 
influences rural livelihoods; 
 ensure active involvement of rural communities by assigning clear roles to 
village authorities in planning, implementation, operation and monitoring of 
JJM scheme; 
 ensure that the DWSM develop a robust district level monitoring mechanism, 
including field visits, inspections and real time dashboard tracking; facilitates 
operation and maintenance frameworks that empower VWSCs to manage day 
to day operations; 
 focus on improving testing facilities by upgrading laboratory infrastructure 
and deploying manpower as per requirement; 
 adopt suitable system for sharing water test reports with the concerned village 
authorities on real time basis; 
 take effective and appropriate remedial measures towards timely completion 
of the water supply schemes and to ensure providing potable drinking water to 
every household; 
 develop effective plan after assessing the ground level requirement; 

xii
Overview
Overview 
x 
 implement source sustainability and grey water management measures to 
ensure that water supply schemes remain functional throughout their full 
design period; 
 ensure financial sustainability of the water supply schemes by community 
contribution for their operation and maintenance.  
Paragraph 2.3 
 
 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS 
EDUCATION (HIGHER) DEPARTMENT 
Unfruitful expenditure 
The indecisiveness of the Government and lack of coordination among the various 
departments in setting up of New Model Degree College resulted in unfruitful 
expenditure of ₹ 16.15 crore alongwith cost overrun of ₹ 22.08 crore. The 
construction work remained incomplete and the objective of the Government to meet 
the increasing demand for higher education was not achieved. 
Paragraph 2.4 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
ECONOMIC SECTOR 
 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS 
 
PUBLIC WPRKS (Roads and Building) DEPARTMENT 
 
Wasteful expenditure 
Construction of bridge (super structure) without any approved drawing and the 
consequent failure to ensure quality of appropriate steel materials used by the 
contractor resulted in the collapse of the super structure of the bridge with a wasteful 
expenditure of ₹ 2.13 crore on collapsed superstructure of the bridge and extra 
expenditure of ₹ 3.74 crore. 
Paragraph 3.2 
Unfruitful expenditure 
The Department took up road work without ensuring the availability of funds in 
violation of the provisions of General Financial Rules and CPWD Works Manual. As 
a result, the expenditure of ₹ 57.94 lakh on the partially constructed road remained 
unfruitful. 
Paragraph 3.3 

Overview
xiii
Overview 
xi 
CHAPTER-IV 
ECONOMIC SECTOR (STATE PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES) 
 
Functioning of Public Sector Enterprises 
As on 31 March 2024, the State of Tripura had 18 Public Sector enterprises (PSEs) 
(17 working and one non-working). Out of 17 working PSEs, 16 are Government 
companies and one is Statutory Corporation.  
The State Government’s investment (₹ 2,054.84 crore) as on 31 March 2024 consisted 
of 83.97 per cent towards capital and 16.03 per cent in long-term loans as against the 
investment of ₹ 1,714.35 crore as on 31 March 2020 consisting of 87.96 per cent  
(₹ 1,508.00 crore) towards capital and 12.04 per cent (₹ 206.35 crore) in long-term 
loans. 
Paragraphs 4.1.1 and 4.1.2 
As per the information furnished by the PSEs, during 2023-24, the State Government 
provided budgetary support of ₹ 276.08 crore in the form of capital (₹ 63.08 crore), 
loans (₹ 100 crore) and grants/ subsidy (₹ 113.00 crore). 
Paragraph 4.1.4 
As per the latest finalised accounts of PSEs as on 30 September 2024, the aggregate 
paid-up capital and accumulated losses of 17 working PSEs were ₹ 1,677.16 crore and 
₹ 1,863.59 crore respectively. Analysis of investment and accumulated losses of these 
PSEs revealed that the accumulated losses (net of free reserves) of five working PSEs 
(₹ 1,433.57 crore) had completely eroded their paid-up capital (₹ 846.00 crore). 
Paragraph 4.1.9.2 
 
 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS 
 
POWER DEPARTMENT 
(Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited) 
 
Unfruitful expenditure 
The Company’s failure to complete the Smart Grid project with the attributes of 
Advanced Metering Infrastructure and Peak Load Management resulted in unfruitful 
expenditure of ₹ 42.74 crore on the incomplete project apart from the avoidable 
expenditure of ₹ 1.10 crore on the manual meter readings and billings in respect 
thereof. 
Paragraph 4.2 
Avoidable expenditure 
Failure of the Company to obtain Environmental Clearance from the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India in violation of the 
Environment Impact Assessment Notifications, 1994 and 2006 before commissioning 

xiv
Overview
Overview 
xii 
of the 3x21 MW units of Gas Based Thermal Power Station at Rokhia, resulted in 
avoidable expenditure of ₹ 15.64 crore. 
Paragraph 4.3 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
REVENUE SECTOR 
 
General 
During the year 2023-24, the revenue raised by the State Government was 
₹ 3,707.93 crore which was 18.05 per cent of the total revenue receipts. The balance 
81.92 per cent of the revenue receipts during 2023-24 was received from the GoI in 
the form of State share of Union Taxes and Duties and Grants-in-Aid.  The collection 
of own revenue increased by ₹ 305.90 crore during 2023-24 as compared to previous 
year and the rate of growth of own revenue was 8.99 per cent in 2023-24 as compared 
to 17.70 per cent during 2022-23.  Revenue receipts of the State increased by 12.17 
per cent from ₹ 18,309.01 crore in 2022-23 to ₹ 20,538.02 crore in 2023-24. 
Paragraph 5.1.1 
Although the Revised Estimate (RE) targets were achieved in the years 2020-21 and 
2021-22, the actual collection was less than the RE projections for the years 2022-23 
and 2023-24. The State’s GST collection steadily increased over the years from 
₹ 1,056.01crore in 2020-21 to ₹ 1,589.78 crore in 2023-24. 
Paragraph 5.1.2 (i) 
Arrears of revenue under key heads- Taxes/ VAT, GST, and Taxes and Duties on 
Electricity increased from ₹ 161.24 crore as on 31 March 2023 to ₹ 189.44 crore as on 
31 March 2024, reflecting a 17.5 per cent rise. Notably, arrears pending for over five 
years also rose from ₹ 140.36 crore to ₹ 158.51 crore, indicating prolonged non-
recovery. 
Paragraph 5.1.3 
In the last ten years, 21 paragraphs involving ₹ 52.11 crore featured in the Audit 
Reports, of which 19 paragraphs involving ₹ 46.25 crore were accepted by the State 
Government. Out of this, only ₹ 1.20 crore (2.59 per cent) was recovered. 
Paragraph 5.1.6.2 
 

Overview
xv
Overview 
xiii 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
 
TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT 
 
Performance Audit on “Functioning of District Transport Offices” 
As per the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India, both the Centre and the 
States have jurisdiction over matters related to mechanically propelled vehicles, 
including the principles on which taxes on such vehicles are to be levied. 
Consequently, the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 was enacted by the Parliament to 
regulate various aspects of road transport, such as the issuance of driver and 
conductor licenses, vehicle registration, granting of various types of permits, etc. 
The Transport Department, Government of Tripura was established under the 
provisions of Section 213 of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988. The Transport Department 
functions through Office of the Joint Transport Commissioner (JTC) in West Tripura 
District and other seven District Transport Officers (DTOs). Further, there is also one 
Check-post at Churaibari under DTP North Tripura.  
The Department is primarily responsible for the following functions: (i) Registration 
of motor vehicles, (ii) Issue of driving licenses and conductor licenses, (iii) Issue of 
permits for goods and passenger vehicles, (iv) Collection of motor vehicle taxes, (v) 
Enforcement of Motor Vehicle Acts and Rules and (vi) Vehicular pollution control 
measures, etc. 
The VAHAN and SARATHI applications were introduced by the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways (MoRTH), Government of India (GoI), to streamline and 
standardise vehicle registration and driving license services across the country. The 
Department undertook the computerisation of its functions by implementing VAHAN 
(vehicle registration) and SARATHI (driving licence issuance) software in 2004 with 
an objective to achieve faster, transparent and better monitoring of revenue 
generation. Audit observed systemic lapses in the issuance, renewal, and regulation of 
driving licences, dealership licences, and driving training schools in Tripura. 
Instances of issuance of licences to underage individuals and operation of unlicensed 
driving schools reflect a disregard for statutory provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988 and Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989.  
Further, poor record-keeping, irregular licence validity periods, and non-compliance 
with educational and infrastructure requirements for driving schools highlight weak 
internal controls, inadequate monitoring, and a lack of regulatory enforcement. 
Government responses on audit observations either lacked evidentiary support or 
admitted to irregularities, further reinforcing the need for corrective institutional 
reforms 
The audit findings highlight several systematic deficiencies in Tripura’s transport 
sector. The absence of adequate controls to ensure the timely renewal of fitness 
certificates and permits for transport vehicles led to delays in the timely realisation of 
.

xvi
Overview
Overview 
xiv 
potential revenue. Despite having the real time vehicle compliance data in VAHAN 
database, the Department did not utilise the system effectively to identify defaulters, 
track dues or generate demand notices.  
The audit revealed significant systemic deficiencies in the regulation and control of 
transport vehicles in Tripura across critical areas such as fitness certification, tax 
collection, permit issuance, alteration fees, BH series taxation, and refunds. Despite 
the availability of comprehensive data through the VAHAN portal, the Transport 
Department failed to leverage this resource effectively for monitoring, enforcement, 
and compliance.  
Key lapses included the absence of automated enforcement mechanisms, short 
realisation of government dues, non-implementation of statutory refunds, and 
overcharging due to incorrect software inputs. These shortcomings not only resulted 
in substantial revenue loss but also exposed the public to safety and regulatory risks. 
The Department’s reliance on manual processes, lack of proactive monitoring, and 
poor coordination with software developers (NIC) reflect the need for urgent reforms 
to strengthen governance and accountability. 
The Department failed to enforce the provisions stipulated in the agreement with the 
service provider that resulted in non-realisation of the Government’s share from the 
issuance of smart cards.  
Due to non-integration of revenue collection with the online Government Receipts 
Accounting System (e-GRAS), the revenue receipts were not directly credited into the 
Government account and were parked outside the Government account for a 
considerable period before remittance into the Government account. 
The software system put in place for capturing data related to the vehicles passing 
through the check-gate was found to be unreliable, since it was being done manually, 
compromising both the security and integrity of the captured data.   
Lacunae in enforcement activity as well as inadequate monitoring resulted in low 
turnout of mandatory Pollution Under Control (PUC) tests of the vehicles. Lack in 
applying provisions related to compounding fees as well as lack of monitoring to 
identify deficiency of enforcement activity resulted in penalising with improper fine 
amount, which undermined the intended purpose of the Act and Rules.   
Due to setting up of targets without the required parameters, non-allocation of 
enforcement activities among the Motor Vehicle Inspectors, coupled with absence of 
proper documentation of enforcement activities, the efficiency and effectiveness of 
the enforcement activity remained unascertained. 
Despite the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH’s), Government of 
India’s advisory mandating the establishment of PUC centres at fuel stations and the 
introduction of mobile test centres, the Department failed to authorise such centres 
and did not deploy mobile units as of November 2024, thus hampering the efforts to 
combat vehicular pollution and improve air quality. The absence of a comprehensive 
manual outlining the processes and procedures for staff at all levels was noticed.  A 

Overview
xvii
Overview 
xv 
structured grievance redressal system was lacking. A significant shortfall in key 
enforcement staff especially Motor Vehicle Inspectors limited field operations and 
enforcement coverage. 
Recommendation 
 The Department may create and maintain an updated, centralised database of 
vehicle dealers and motor training schools, capturing licence validity, renewal 
status, and compliance checks for effective oversight. 
 The Department may ensure enforcement of act, rules and notifications 
uniformly across the State while issuing the driving licenses, trade licenses and 
licenses to operate driving schools. 
 The Department may enforce mandatory document verification (age, vehicle 
class eligibility) at DTO level before final issuance of licences, supported by 
digital audit trails in SARATHI/ VAHAN. 
 The Department should implement an automated monitoring system to track 
licensing violations in real time and action taking system to track violations, 
ensure follow-up action and initiate prompt corrective action.  
 The Department may take immediate steps to recover the outstanding revenue 
from tax and fee defaulters. The Department may collaborate with NIC to 
implement automated systems in the VAHAN portal for identifying and issuing 
notices to defaulters of fitness, tax, permit, and alteration fee. This should 
include real-time alerts, penalty calculations, and follow-up enforcement 
scheduling to ensure timely recovery and regulatory compliance. 
 The Department may institutionalise monthly reviews of VAHAN data at the 
DTO level for identification of defaulters.  
 Steps may be taken to incorporate provisions in the VAHAN software for 
generating alerts and issuing notices to permit and fitness defaulters. 
 The Department may immediately initiate arbitration or legal action to recover 
outstanding dues from the smart card service provider. Future contracts must 
include clearly defined penalty and enforcement clauses for default in payment 
to prevent revenue leakage. 
 The Department may take steps to link all revenue collection with the e-GRAS 
software, so that revenue receipts are credited directly into the Government 
account without delay.  
 The Department may put in place an effective monitoring system for collection 
and deposit of revenue.  
 The Department may initiate transition from the manual data entry system at 
Churaibari Check gate to an advanced automated system such as Radio 
Frequency Identification to streamline revenue collection processes and 
enhance overall operational efficiency.  

xviii
Overview
Overview 
xvi 
 The Department may increase the frequency and scope of enforcement actions 
to ensure compliance with PUC requirements. 
 The Department may establish enforcement targets based on critical 
parameters to enhance effectiveness of enforcement activity  
 Fines may be collected from the defaulters strictly as per the prescribed 
provisions of the relevant Act and Rules.  
 The Department should immediately comply with the MoRTH’s advisory and 
mandate PUC centres to achieve the objective of combating environmental 
pollution in the State. The Department may take steps to integrate its own 
Departmental Grievance Redressal System in VAHAN and SARATHI for the 
larger public interest.  
 The Department may draft a detailed office/operational manual as a resource 
and guide for the employees and other stakeholders.  
 The Department may take steps to immediately fill up the existing vacancies. 
Paragraph 5.2 
 
 
REVENUE DEPARTMENT 
Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Collection of Stamp Duty and 
Registration Fees from Deed Registration” 
To enhance the speed, transparency, and accountability of the registration process, the 
Government of Tripura launched the Tripura Online Registration System (TORS) in 
2012. In March 2021, the State adopted the National Generic Document Registration 
System (NGDRS)- a standardised and customisable application developed for use by 
registration departments nationwide. Initially, NGDRS was implemented on a pilot 
basis in the Sub-Registrar Offices (SROs) of Jirania and Mohanpur in West Tripura 
District. Based on its performance, the system was rolled out to all SROs across the 
State in March 2022, replacing the TORS software entirely. For Computerised Stamp 
Duty Administration System (C-SDAS) and for collection of stamp duty through e-
stamping mechanism in Tripura, the Stock Holding Corporation of India Limited 
(SHCIL) was selected as the Central Record Keeping Agency (CRA).  
Despite the commendable increase in revenue collections over the five-year period 
from 2019–2024, the audit found critical gaps in governance, institutional oversight, 
and operational controls. The acute manpower shortage- 88 per cent  vacancy in 
sanctioned posts severely hampered core registration functions, while deficiencies in 
the implementation of the NGDRS, such as the lack of biometric verification and 
PAN validation, undermined identity authentication and traceability in high-value 
transactions. The non-registration of lease deeds of banks and ATMs, incorrect 

Overview
xix
Overview 
xvii 
assessment of stamp duty, and failure to cancel refunded e-stamps resulted in 
substantial revenue losses. Furthermore, the audit noted a near-complete absence of 
internal audits, non-inspection of Authorised Collection Centres, inadequate staff 
training, and delayed or non-filing of Statements of Financial Transactions (SFTs)- all 
pointing to a weak internal control framework. Instances such as splitting of sale 
deeds to evade tax reporting obligations, absence of grievance redressal mechanisms, 
and poor taxpayer awareness further reflected a need for urgent structural reforms. 
Recommendations 
 The Department may assess the staffing needs and address the issue of staff 
shortage for the purpose of registration of deeds. 
 The Department may initiate the process of Aadhaar based authentication of 
the executants for registration of deeds and may also introduce the requirement 
of quoting of PAN of the executants before registering the documents valued 
more than ₹ 10 lakh. 
 The Department may inspect the public as well as private institutions/business 
premises and check their lease agreements, if any, in a phase-wise manner for 
ensuring registration of lease documents in cases of hire/lease for more than 
12 months. 
 The Department may arrange system generated cancellation and locking of the 
e-stamps on the SHCIL’s website immediately after refund of the amount. 
 Internal control mechanism should be strengthened to ensure realisation of 
stamp duty and registration fees. 
 All the Sub-registries may be audited by the internal audit at least once in every 
five years. 
 The liability of stamp duty and payment mode in respect of all the instruments 
may be prominently displayed on the departmental website and in all such 
public offices where such instruments are executed or presented. 
Paragraph 5.3 
 
 
FINANCE (Excise and Taxation) DEPARTMENT 
Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Department’s Oversight on GST 
Payments and Return Filing (Phase-II)” 
The introduction of Goods and Service Tax (GST) has replaced multiple taxes levied 
and collected by the Centre and States. GST, which came into effect from July 2017, 
is a destination-based consumption tax on the supply of goods or services or both 
levied on every value addition. The Centre and States simultaneously levy GST on a 
common tax base.  Central GST (CGST) and State GST (SGST)/ Union Territory 

xx
Overview
Overview 
xviii 
GST (UTGST) are levied on intra-state supplies, and Integrated GST (IGST) is levied 
on the inter-state supplies. 
Section 59 of the Tripura Goods and Service Tax (TGST) Act, 2017 stipulates GST as 
a self-assessment-based tax, whereby the responsibility for calculating tax liability, 
discharging the computed tax liability and filing returns is vested with the taxpayer.  
The GST returns must be filed online regularly on the common GST portal, failing 
which penalties will be payable.  Even if the business had no tax liability during a 
particular tax period, it must file a nil return mandatorily. Further, Section 61 of the 
TGST Act read with Rule 99 of the Tripura Goods and Service Tax Rules (TGST 
Rules), 2017 stipulate that the proper officer may scrutinise the return and related 
particulars furnished by taxpayers, communicate discrepancies to the taxpayers and 
seek an explanation.  
The Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) on Department’s Oversight on GST 
Payments and Return Filing was taken up considering the significance of the control 
mechanism envisaged for tax compliance and the oversight mechanism of the 
Commercial Taxes Organisation, Tripura (Department) in this new tax regime. The 
objectives were to assess the adequacy of the system in monitoring return filing and 
tax payments, extent of compliance and other departmental oversight functions.  
This SSCA was predominantly based on data analysis, which highlighted risk areas 
and red flags in GST returns filed for 2018-19 to 2020-21. The SSCA entailed 
assessing the oversight functions of State Jurisdictional formations at two levels – at 
the data level and at the functional level carried out through detailed audit of the 
Charges and scrutiny of GST returns, which involved accessing taxpayer records.  
A review of the functions of five Charges disclosed that there were deficiencies in 
oversight functions of Charges such as monitoring of return scrutiny, action on late 
filers/ non-filers, cancellation of registration and internal audit. As such, the functions 
of the charges were not fully carried out in an organised manner. 
Further, out of the 111 high value data inconsistencies identified by Audit the 
Department responded to 65 cases. Of these, 55 cases constituting 84.61 per cent , 
turned out to be compliance deficiencies amounting to ₹ 58.05 crore. The Department 
had not responded to 46 cases of inconsistencies, which had an identified mismatch of 
₹ 57.27 crore.  
Detailed audit of GST returns also suggested significant non-compliance. In 20 cases 
which were examined, granular records were not forthcoming constituted a significant 
scope of limitation. Audit observed deficiencies in 17 cases including identified 
mismatches in availing of ITC amounting to ₹ 35.68 crore. 
Considering the significant rate of compliance deficiencies, the Department must 
initiate remedial measures before they get time barred. From a systemic perspective, 
the Department needs to strengthen the institutional mechanism in the Charges to 
establish and maintain effective oversight on return filing, taxpayer compliance, tax 
payments, cancellation of registrations and recovery of dues from defaulters. 

Overview
xxi
Overview 
xix 
Recommendations  
The Department may  
 take immediate steps to formulate guidelines/ SOP and ensure the scrutiny of 
returns in a time bound manner before the cases become time barred;  
 initiate action against non-filers by assessing the tax liability through invoking 
of the ASMT-13 best judgment assessment order; 
 ensure timely verification of cancelled registrations to prevent undue loss of 
tax revenue; 
 conduct internal audit on regular basis, so that an optimum number of 
taxpayers can be audited in every financial year. 
Paragraph 5.4 
 
 
CHAPTER-VI 
GENERAL SECTOR 
 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS 
 
FINANCE DEPARTMENT 
 
Suspected excess payments 
Lack of integration between the Computerised Treasury Operating System and the 
Human Resource Management System, along with gaps in oversight by Drawing and 
Disbursing Officers and Treasury Officers, resulted in excess payments of ₹ 3.97 
crore towards salaries. 
Paragraph 6.2 
HOME (POLICE) DEPARTMENT 
Suspected and excess payments 
Failure of the Drawing and Disbursing Officer to detect non-compliance with the 
rules resulted in suspected and excess payment of ₹ 28.96 lakh indicating inadequate 
internal control, monitoring and accountability mechanisms in the office of the 
Superintendent of Police, Sepahijala. 
Paragraph 6.3 
 

xxii
Overview
Overview 
xx 
CHAPTER-VII 
Follow Up of Audit Observations 
As of September 2024, 88 paragraphs (65 paragraphs and 23 performance audits) 
relating to the Audit Report for the years 2006-07 to 2021-22 were awaiting 
discussion by the Public Accounts Committee. Of these, explanatory notes on 
68 paragraphs (51 paragraphs and 17 performance audits) have not yet been received 
from the departments.  
Paragraph 7.1.1(a) 
As of September 2024, 16 paragraphs (10 paragraphs and six performance audits) 
relating to the Audit Report for the years 2014-15 to 2021-22 were awaiting 
discussion by the Committee on Public Undertakings. Of these, explanatory notes on 
15 paragraphs (10 paragraphs and five performance audits) have not yet been received 
from the departments. 
Paragraph 7.1.1(b) 
Analysis of the position of outstanding Inspection Reports showed that 2,003 
paragraphs included in 256 IRs issued during the last five years up to 2023-24 were 
pending for settlement as of September 2024. Of these, even the first reply had not 
been received in respect of 865 paragraphs involving 98 IRs despite of repeated 
reminders. 
Paragraph 7.3 
Eleven Audit Committee Meetings were held during 2023-24 wherein 67 IRs and 321 
paragraphs were discussed and four IRs and 173 paragraphs had been settled. 
Paragraph 7.4 

CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION

Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
1
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 1 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION 
1.1 About this Report 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) relates to matters 
arising from the Performance Audit, Subject Specific Compliance Audit and test audit of 
transactions of various departments of the Government of Tripura pertaining to Social, 
Economic, Revenue and General Sectors. 
The primary purpose of this Report is to bring to the notice of the State Legislature, 
significant results of audit. The findings of audit are expected to enable the Executive to 
take corrective actions, to frame appropriate policies as well as to issue directives that will 
lead to improved financial management and contribute to better governance. Auditing 
standards require that the materiality level for reporting should be commensurate with the 
nature, volume and magnitude of transactions.  
In addition to outlining the scope and methodology of the audit, this chapter provides a 
synopsis of significant instances of non-compliance with applicable laws, rules, 
regulations, various orders and instructions issued by the competent authorities. 
1.2 Authority for Audit 
The office of the Accountant General (Audit) functioned as a Branch Office of the 
Accountant General, Assam from 1967. Since 18 November 1974, it has been functioning 
as an independent office. Following a restructuring of cadres in 1984, the audit functions 
were entrusted to the office of the Accountant General (Audit), Tripura and the Accounts 
and Entitlement functions were entrusted to the office of the Accountant General (A&E), 
Tripura. 
Under the guidance of the C&AG, the office of the Principal Accountant General (Audit), 
Tripura conducts audits of government departments, public sector undertakings, 
autonomous bodies and other institutions 1 under Social, Economic, Revenue and General 
Sectors, which are located throughout the State. The Principal Accountant General (Audit) 
is assisted by one Senior Deputy Accountant General. 
The authority for our audit is derived from the Articles 149 and 151 of the Constitution of 
India and the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1971 (C & AG’s (DPC) Act). Under Section 13 of the C & AG’s (DPC) Act, 
the office of the Principal Accountant General (Audit) has been entrusted with the audit of 
all expenditure incurred from the Consolidated Fund of Government of Tripura.  
Section 16 of the Act mandates this office to audit revenue receipts of the Government of 
Tripura. Additionally, under Section 143 (6) (a) of the Companies Act, 2013, the office 
conducts supplementary audits of the balance sheets of all State Government companies. 
 
1 World Bank assisted projects, Asian Development Bank assisted projects, etc. 

Chapter I: Introduction
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
2
Chapter I: Introduction 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 2 
This office is also responsible for auditing the accounts of autonomous bodies and 
authorities falling under Section 14, 15, 19 (2), 19 (3) and 20 (1) of the C&AG’s (DPC) 
Act. 
In addition to the above, this office is also responsible for auditing the accounts of the 
Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council (TTAADC), constituted under the 
provisions of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution. The Audit Report on the accounts of 
the Council is prepared separately and laid before the Council. The C&AG prescribes the 
principles and methodologies for various audits in the Auditing Standards and the 
Regulations on Audit and Accounts (Amendments), 2020. 
1.3 Planning and conduct of Audit 
The audit process commences with a risk assessment of the departments based on the 
expenditure incurred, criticality/ complexity of activities, priority accorded for the activity 
by the Government, level of delegated financial powers, assessment of internal controls, 
concerns of stakeholders, past audit findings, etc. Based on this risk assessment, the 
frequency and the extent of audits are decided and an annual audit plan is formulated 
accordingly.  
Upon completion of each audit, an Inspection Report (IR) containing audit findings is 
issued to the Head of the audited unit, with a request to furnish replies within one month 
of its receipt. Wherever replies are received, audit findings are either settled or further 
action for compliance is advised. Significant audit observations pointed out in these IRs, 
requiring the attention of the highest levels of the Government are processed for inclusion 
in the Audit Report, which is submitted to the Governor of Tripura under Article 151 of 
the Constitution of India for causing them to be laid on the Table of the State Legislature. 
Our Audit Plan is formulated to align with both the long term and short term goals of audit, 
in consonance with the overall “Vision and Mission” of the Supreme Audit Institution of 
India. It is formulated after carrying out the risk assessment and with due consideration of 
the available manpower. While framing the plan, key elements of the Audit Quality 
Management Framework (AQMF) such as materiality, inputs from Voucher Level 
Computerisation (VLC), financial size of the units, data from various e-governance 
initiatives taken by government, flagship programme undertaken by auditees, press 
criticism/ electronic media coverage, expected audit impact and continuous improvement 
based on past experience, etc. are taken into account to the extent possible. In addition, a 
sector wise analysis of government expenditure, the government’s investment policy in 
infrastructure development, industrialisation and socio-economic activities along with due 
consideration of possible audit impact are taken into account in prioritising auditee units 
for inclusion in the audit plan. 
Considering the availability of resources, we have focused on areas with higher financial 
risk, rather than to thinly dispersed resources across all the Government activities. This 

Chapter I: Introduction
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
3
Chapter I: Introduction 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 3 
targeted approached aims to achieve a more significant socio-economic impact and add 
value to governance. 
Out of 1,6822 auditee units, we planned 893 units for audit during the financial year 2023-
24. After conducting a risk assessment and with the manpower available, we audited 41 4 
units involving an expenditure of ₹ 3,522.72 crore. 
1.4 Significant Audit Observations 
During the year 2023-24, the State Government incurred an expenditure of ₹ 22,227.67 
crore against a budget provision of ₹ 28,885.09 crore under the Social, Economic and 
General Sectors. The sector-wise budget and expenditure for the year 2023-24 are depicted 
in the Charts 1.1 and 1.2. 
  
Source: Appropriation Accounts 2023-24 
This Report, inter alia, contains three Performance Audits titled “Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act”, “Jal Jeevan Mission” and “Functioning of 
District Transport Offices” under the Rural Development, Public Works (Drinking Water 
and Sanitation) Department and Transport Department respectively. In addition, this report 
contains two Subject Specific Compliance Audit titled “Collection of Stamp Duty and 
Registration Fee from Deed Registration” and “Department’s Oversight on GST Payments 
and Return Filing (Phase-II)” under Revenue and Finance (Excise and Taxation) 
Department and seven Compliance Audit paragraphs on major findings of audit from test 
 
2 As on 31 March 2023 {excluding Local Bodies (PRIs and ULBs), units under Central Government and 
Banks} 
3 Social Sector: 33 units, Economic Sector: 36 units, Economic Sector (SPSE): three units, Revenue 
Sector: 12 units and General Sector: five units 
4 Social Sector: 21 units, Economic Sector: seven units, Economic Sector (SPSE): four units, Revenue 
Sector: six units and General Sector: three units 
14772.52
5012.51
9100.06
Chart 1.1: Sector-wise Budget 
Estimates for 2023-24 
(₹ in crore)
Social Sector Economic Sector
General Sector
10655.12
3550.56
8021.99
Chart 1.2: Sector-wise 
Expenditure for 2023-24 
(₹ in crore)
Social Sector Economic Sector
General Sector

Chapter I: Introduction
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
4
Chapter I: Introduction 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 4 
check of the transactions of 41 units in the Social, Economic, Revenue and General Sectors 
involving an expenditure of ₹ 3,522.72 5 crore during 2023-24. Significant audit findings 
are discussed in the respective succeeding chapters.  
 
5 Social Sector: ₹ 1,524.93 crore, Economic Sector: ₹ 1,298.90 crore, Economic Sector (SPSE): ₹ 443.21 
crore, Revenue Sector: ₹ 26.78 crore and General Sector: ₹ 228.90 crore 

CHAPTER II: SOCIAL SECTOR

Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
5
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 5 
CHAPTER II: SOCIAL SECTOR 
2.1 Introduction 
This Chapter of the Audit Report presents the findings from the audit of Government 
units under the Social Sector. 
The total budget allocation and expenditure of the departments under Social Sector 
during the years 2023-24 are given in Table 2.1.1. 
Table: 2.1.1: Details of allocation and expenditure under Social Sector 
(₹ in crore) 
Department Budget 
allocation Expenditure 
Education (Higher)  290.56 217.09 
Education (School)  2,334.93 1,585.52 
Education (Social)  1,607.16 1,267.06 
Education (Elementary) 1,052.14 889.72 
Education (Youth Affairs and Sports)  122.94 95.89 
Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs  183.63 120.49 
Family Welfare and Preventive Medicine  985.23 650.76 
Health  685.16 460.24 
Health (AGMC & GBP) 211.96 163.44 
Labour Organisation  16.96 12.98 
Panchayat 528.13 392.65 
Public Works (Drinking Water and Sanitation)  569.61 417.08 
Relief and Rehabilitation  136.14 53.18 
Rural Development  3,091.19 2,541.85 
Tribal Welfare (Research)  19.68 5.49 
Kokborok and other Minority Languages  1.65 1.15 
Tribal Welfare  1,102.40 813.07 
Tribal Rehabilitation in Plantation and Particularly 
Vulnerable Tribal Group 41.36 34.44 
Urban Development  1,471.20 841.01 
Welfare of Scheduled Castes  138.25 33.86 
Welfare of Minorities  86.74 14.12 
OBC Welfare  78.63 41.34 
Skill Development  16.87 2.69 
Total number of departments = 23 14,772.52 10,655.12 
Source: Appropriation Accounts 2023-24 
During 2023-24, we audited 21 units under the Social Sector, covering an expenditure 
of ₹ 1,524.93 crore (including expenditures of the previous years). 
This Chapter contains two Performance Audits titled “Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act” and “Jal Jeevan Mission” under the Rural Development 
Department and Public Works (Drinking Water and Sanitation) Department 
respectively, along with one Compliance Audit Paragraph under the Education (Higher) 
Department involving monetary value of ₹ 38.23 crore. 
  

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
6
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 6 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
2.2 Performance Audit Report on ‘Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act’ 
 
Audit Snapshot 
 
 
       
Why did we do this audit? 
 To assess compliance with 
MGNREG Act & Guidelines. 
 To verify fund management, 
planning, monitoring & employment 
generation. 
 To Evaluate transparency & delivery 
of guaranteed wage employment. 
 
What did we find? 
 Only 66 average employment days provided 
against 100-day guarantee. 
 Funds were not provided to the State as per the 
annual requirement of 100 days wages. 
 Works were provided to job card holders on 
receipt of funds sanction from the government. 
 Inadequate IEC activities led to low awareness. 
 Large shortfall in social audits (54 per cent). 
 Weak monitoring, IEC, and grievance redressal. 
 Overall governance and oversight failures 
undermined MGNREGA’s objective of ensuring 
rural livelihood security. 
 
Registered Households 
6.80 lakh 
 
 
Unskilled Workers 
12.20 lakh 
 
 
Average Employment Days 
66 
       
What do we recommend? 
 Large scale involvement of villagers in the 
planning process. 
 Preparation of Perspective Plans 
 Prompt payment of statutory payments to avoid 
penalty and damages. 
 Timely issuance of job cards and regular 
monitoring. 
 Person Days to be sanctioned as per annual 
entitlement. 
 Job card holders to receive 100 days of guaranteed 
employment annually. 
 Allocation of more works to arrest the trend of 
migration. 
 Periodical verification of works. 
 Completion certificates and handing over of 
works. 
 GPs and VCs to conduct monthly reviews of 
works and record proceedings. 
 Uploading of geo-tagged photos at three stages 
 Conducting of Social audits as per guidelines. 


Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
7
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 7 
2.2.1 Background 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)  was 
enacted in September 2005 and implemented in a phased manner between February 
2006 and April 2008 in all the rural districts of the country. The Act aims at 
enhancement of livelihood security of the households in rural areas of the country, by  
providing at least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to 
every rural household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work.  In 
addition, the Act also focuses on the creation of durable assets. Other objectives include 
protection of the environment, empowerment of rural women,  reduction of rural urban 
migration, fostering social equity and strengthening rural governance through 
decentralisation and processes of transparency and accountability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2.2 Process for implementation of MGNREGA 
Overview of MGNREGA 
 
Major entitlements of a Beneficiary under the MGNREGA Scheme 
 Right to a Job Card 
 Right to demand and receive work within 15 days 
 Right to unemployment Allowance 
 Right to plan and prepare a Shelf of Projects 
 Right to obtain work within a radius of five kilometres 
 Right to worksite facilities 
 Right to notified wage rate 
 Right to receive wages within 15 days 
 Compensation for delay in payment of wages 
 Right to time-bound redressal of grievances and right to conduct concurrent social 
audits of all MGNREGS expenditure. 
.

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
8
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
8 
The main processes for the implementation of MGNREGA, as provided in the Act and 
the Operational Guidelines of MGNREGA, 2013 issued by Ministry of Rural 
Development (MoRD), Government of India (GoI), for implementation of MGNREGA 
are summarised in Table 2.2.1. 
Table 2.2.1: Implementation process of MGNRGEA in brief 
Process Brief details 
Registration of 
Households and 
Issue of job cards 
Adult members of rural households, willing to do unskilled manual work, 
may apply for registration to the Gram Panchayat (GP), who will issue 
‘Job Cards’ free of cost within 15 days of receipt of the application, 
containing therein a unique job number with details of registered adult 
members of the household and their photographs. 
Application for 
Employment and 
Allocation of 
Work 
A job card holder can submit an application for work in several ways: viz., 
oral or written application demanding work, through a telephone call or 
mobile call or Interactive Voice Response System or through a call center 
or through a website or a kiosk set up for the purpose or any other means 
authorised by the State Government. Applications for work can be filed 
individually or for a group together. If an applicant is not provided with 
the work within 15 days of demand, the State Government is liable to pay 
daily unemployment allowance6. 
Payment of 
Wages 
Wages are to be paid according to piece rate or daily rate and are to be 
disbursed on weekly/ fortnightly basis. 
In case of delay in payment of wages by more than 15 days, the wage 
seeker is entitled to receive compensation for the delay @0.05 per cent of 
the unpaid wages per day of delay beyond sixteenth day. 
Planning and 
Execution of 
Works 
GPs are required to prepare annual plans/ shelf of possible works to be 
taken as and when the demand arises, which are then to be consolidated 
by the Mandal Parishad, and thereafter by the Zilla Parishad. Each district 
has to prepare a five-year District Perspective Plan. 
At least 50 per cent of the works (by cost) must be executed by the GPs.  
Other Implementing Agencies may include Forest, Horticulture, 
Panchayati Raj Institutions, Engineering Departments, etc. as well as 
Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), Non-Government Organisations 
(NGOs) and Self Help Groups (SHGs). 
Funding Pattern 
 Expenditure on unskilled wage payments is borne 100 per cent by 
GoI. State Government is required to pay the unemployment 
allowance up to 25 per cent of skilled/ semi-skilled wage payments 
and material costs. 
 GoI also provides administrative expenses (six per cent) to the State 
Government.  
Permissible 
Works, 
Expenditure 
 List of permitted works (in order of priority) is specified in 
Schedule-I to the Act. These include water conservation, land 
development, forestry/  horticulture, rural connectivity projects, etc. 
 
6  Section 7(1) of MGNREG Act. The daily unemployment allowance will be at a rate not less than 
one fourth of the wage rate for the first thirty days during the financial year and not less than one 
half of the wage rate for the remaining period of the financial year. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
9
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 9 
Process Brief details 
Components, etc.  GoI has also prepared guidelines for ‘convergence’ of MGNREGA 
works with schemes/ activities of other departments. 
 Use of contractors is prohibited; as far as possible, tasks funded under 
the Act shall be performed by using manual labour and not machines. 
 Ratio of unskilled wages to material costs (including semi-skilled or 
skilled wages) should be 60:40. 
Social Audit, 
Accountability 
and Transparency 
There is a provision for Social Audit by the Gram Sabha every six months. 
The Gram Panchayat shall make available all relevant records related to 
the implementation of MGNREGA available for social audit.  
Grievance 
Redressal 
Mechanisms 
The Act provides for a Grievance redressal mechanisms at the Block and 
District level for dealing with any complaint in respect of 
implementation of the Scheme.  
2.2.3 Notification of districts for implementation of MGNREGA in the State  
GoI notified the implementation of the Act to all rural districts in the country in three 
phases: Phase I (February 2006); Phase II (April/ May 2007) and Phase III (April 2008). 
In the State of Tripura, the MGNREG Scheme (Scheme) was launched under Phase-I in 
February 2006 with a single District, namely, Dhalai. Of the remaining 7 districts, South 
Tripura and West Tripura were covered in Phase-II in April 2007 while Gomati, 
Khowai, North Tripura, Sepahijala and Unakoti were covered under Phase-III in April 
2008. 
2.2.4 Organisational arrangements 
The organogram for implementation of the scheme at different levels is shown in 
Chart 2.2.1. 
Chart 2.2.1: Organisational structure for implementation of MGNREGS 
Source: Rural Development Department, Government of Tripura 
with schemes/ activities of other departments.
GoI notified the implementation of the Act to all rural districts in the country in three 
phases: Phase I (February 2006); Phase II (April/ May 2007) and Phase III (April 2008). 
In the State of Tripura, the MGNREG Scheme (Scheme) was launched under Phase-I in 
February 2006 with a single District, namely, Dhalai. Of the remaining seven districts, 
South Tripura and West Tripura were covered in Phase-II in April 2007 while Gomati, 
Khowai, North Tripura, Sepahijala and Unakoti were covered under Phase-III in April 
2008.

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
10
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 10 
The institutional mechanism put in place by the Government of Tripura for the implementation 
of MGNREGA in the State is summarised in Chart 2.2.2. 
Chart 2.2.2: Institutional mechanism 
Programme Formulation and Implementation Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
 
 
Source: Rural Development Department, Government of Tripura. 
Rural Development Department, Government of Tripura, headed by the Secretary of the 
Department is the nodal department for implementation of MGNREGA in the State. 
The Secretary is assisted by the Additional Secretary and the Deputy Secretary at the 
State level while eight District Programme Coordinators (DPCs), 58 Programme 
Officers, other Programme Implementation Agencies (PIA), GPs and Village Councils 
(VC) implement the programme at the field level. The State Employment Guarantee 
Council and the State Social Audit Unit are responsible for monitoring and evaluation 
of the Scheme implementation in the State. The key stakeholders of the MGNREGA is 
Secy, Rural 
Development
Chief Engineer, 
MGNREGA
District Quality 
Monitoring 
Centre
(8 nos.)
Chief Emgineer, 
Rural 
Development
Supdt. Engineer, 
Rural 
Development
(4 nos.)
EE, Rural 
Development 
Divisions
(12 Nos.)
Addl. Secy, Rural 
Development
Jt. Secy, Rural 
Development
Dy. Secy.
Rural 
Development
Under Secy.
Rural 
Development
RD Department
Dist. Programme 
Coordinators 
(8 Nos.)
Programme 
Implementing 
Agency
Programme 
Officers
(58 Nos.)
Gram 
Panchayats/ 
Village 
Committees
(1193 Nos.)
State 
Employment 
Guarantee 
Council
State Social  
Audit Unit

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
11
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 11 
given in Table 2.2.2. 
Table 2.2.2: The key stakeholders of the MGNREGA at various levels 
Source: MGNREGA Operational Guidelines 2013 
2.2.5 Structural mechanism and formation of Scheme rules 
The State Government is required to formulate a State Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(SEGS) for providing not less than 100 days of guaranteed employment in a financial 
year to every household in the rural areas. As per Section 12 of the Act, the State 
Government is also required to constitute a State Employment Guarantee Council 
(SEGC) for regular monitoring and reviewing the implementation of the scheme at the 
State level and to prepare an Annual Report to be laid before the State Legislature. 
Key stakeholders at various levels Roles and Responsibilities 
National 
Level  
 Central Employment 
Guarantee Council  
 
 
 Ministry of Rural 
Development  
 Establish a central evaluation and 
monitoring system, advise the Central 
Government on all matters concerning 
the implementation of the Act. 
 Make Rules under the Act, issue 
Operational Guidelines for effective 
implementation of the Act, set up the 
National Employment Guarantee Fund, 
make budgetary allocation, etc. 
State 
Level  
 State Government    
 
 
 
 State Employment Guarantee 
Council  
  Make rules on matters pertaining to 
State responsibilities, policy 
formulation, guidelines, and overall 
supervision of MGNREGA 
implementation. 
 Advises the State Government on 
MGNREGA implementation and policy 
matters. 
District 
Level  
 District Programme 
Coordinator  
 Oversees the overall implementation of 
MGNREGA within the district 
 Managing the technical aspects of 
MGNREGA projects. 
Block 
Level 
 Programme Officer  
 Block Panchayat  
 Coordinating MGNREGA activities 
within the block, including work 
allocation, monitoring and resolving 
grievances. 
Village 
Level 
 Village panchayat 
 Village Employment Council  
 Identifying works, managing Job Card 
holders, and overseeing the 
implementation of MGNREGA projects 
within the village. 
Civil 
Society 
 Civil Society Organisations 
 Self Help Groups  
 Awareness generation, capacity 
building, and social accountability 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
12
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
12 
The State Government formulated (January 2006) the Tripura Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (TREGS). In July 2006, the State Government set up the SEGC and 
designated the Deputy Secretary and officers of the higher ranks of the Rural 
Development Department as the State Programme Coordinators, District Magistrates & 
Collectors of each district as the DPCs and the Block Development Officers as the POs 
for implementation of MGNREGS. The roles and responsibilities of these functionaries 
at each level were also clearly defined. 
 
 
 
 
2.2.6 Financial outlay and Physical Performance of the State at a Glance 
A summary of expenditure reported in the MGNREGA-Soft 7  along with other 
performance parameters on MGNREGA for the State of Tripura during the period from 
2019-20 to 2023-24 is given in Table 2.2.3. 
Table 2.2.3: Performance parameters under MGNREGA 
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Expenditure under MGNREGA in the State during 2019 -20 to 2023-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Expenditure on Wages  622.55 819.51 806.70 672.05 767.25 
Expenditure on material8  170.79 188.23 220.63 283.04 304.24 
Expenditure on administrative 
component 64.33 56.25 57.49 53.44 55.09 
Total expenditure  857.67 
(+54%) 
1,063.99 
(+ 24%) 
1,084.82 
(+ 2%) 
1,008.53 
(- 7%) 
1,126.58 
(+12%) 
Wage to material ratio 78:22 81:19 79:21 70:30 72:28 
Generation of employment under the Scheme 
Person days of employment 
generated in the State ( number in 
crore) 
3.44 4.37 4.26 3.34 3.70 
Average employment generated 
per House Hold against the target 
for 100 days (in days) 
60.78 74.66 71.85 59.92 63.16 
Average expenditure per person 
day (in ₹)9 
249 243 255 302 304 
Average wage received  per person 
day (in ₹) 181 187 191 199 208 
Source: MGNREGA MIS Report, State at a Glance report 
It may be seen from Table 2.2.3  that the expenditure under the Scheme showed an 
increasing trend during 2019-24 except in the year 2022-23. There was a marginal 
increase in the average wage cost per person day while there was significant increase in 
 
7  MGNREGA Soft is a web-enabled application for managing implementation of MGNREGA and 
capturing data in real-time or near real-time from the field which helps in quick and easy analysis. 
8  Expenditure on material component includes expenditure on wages of skilled and semi-skilled 
labourers. 
9  Average expenditure per person days is calculated on the basis of total expenditure to person days. 
Good Practice:  
The State Government established the required institutional framework and clearly 
defined the roles and responsibilities at all levels for effective implementation of 
MGNREGS 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
13
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
13 
average expenditure per person day.  
The number of households volunteered for work, the number of households which were 
provided 100 days of employment, the total number of job cards issued and the active 
job cards in the State, during 2019-20 to 2023-24 is depicted Chart 2.2.3. 
Chart 2.2.3: Details of households and the job cards during 2019-24  
 ( figures in lakh) 
 
Source: MGNREGA MIS Report, State at a Glance report 
It may be seen from Chart 2.2.3 that 1010 per cent of the households which volunteered 
for work during 2019-20 was provided 100 days of employment. However, the figure 
increased moderately to 20 per cent in 2020-21 and declined in subsequent years to  
18 per cent , nine per cent  and 12 per cent , during 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24 
respectively. 
Chart 2.2.4 depicts the average wages paid and employment per household during the 
period from 2019-20 to 2023-24. The chart indicates that even though the average wage 
cost or wages paid had been increasing, employment provided per HH showed mixed 
trend. It increased in the year 2020-21 and declined successively in next two financial 
years and showed a moderate increase in 2023-24. 
 
10  0.55/5.65*100= 9.73, 1.16/5.86*100=19.79, 1.09/5.93*100=18.38, 0.50/5.58*100=8.96 and 
0.69/5.87*100=11.75 
6.32 6.45 6.62 6.83 6.80
6.09 6.17 6.28 6.27 6.42
5.65 5.86 5.93 5.58 5.87
0.55
1.16 1.09
0.50 0.69
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Total Job Card Issued
No of Active Job Cards
No. of Household  volunteered for Job
No. of Household provided 100 days of employment

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
14
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 14 
Chart 2.2.4: Average wages (₹) and employment (in days) per household 
 
Source: MGNREGA MIS Report, State at a Glance report 
Chart 2.2.5 shows the representation of Scheduled Castes (SCs), Scheduled Tribes 
(STs) and women in the employment provided under the Scheme. It can be seen from 
Chart 2.2.5 that there was fair representation of all the three categories in the 
employment generated by the State under the Scheme during 2019-20 to 2023-24. 
Chart 2.2.5: Representation of SCs, STs and Women in the Employment under 
MGNREGS (in percentage of total employment) 
 
Source: MGNREGA MIS Report, State at a Glance report 
Chart 2.2.6 depicts the status of works taken up under the Act during the period from 
2019-20 to 2023-24. An analysis of the works taken up under the Scheme revealed that 
while the number of works undertaken by the State increased over the years, the 
percentage of ongoing works ranged from 37 per cent to 69 per cent. 
181 187
191
199
208
60.78
74.66 71.85 59.92
63.16
0
50
100
150
200
250
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Wages Paid Employment per HH
15.39 15.31 15 15.48 15.02
50.29 49.07 49.72 49.63
49.72
47.03 47.62 47.53 48.47 49.57
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
SCs STs Women

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
15
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
15 
Chart 2.2.6: Status of works taken up under MGNREGA  
(figures in lakh) 
 
Source: MGNREGA MIS Report, State at a Glance report 
Thus, decline in household employment generation along with the decline in completion 
of works indicated inadequacies in achieving the primary objectives of the Scheme i.e. 
providing livelihood security and creation of assets. 
2.2.7 Audit objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted with a view to obtain a reasonable assurance 
that: 
 The planning process and financial management practices were adequately geared 
towards achieving the goals of the Act, while adhering to relevant rules and 
regulations; 
 Fair access to employment opportunities was achieved, as well as employment 
adequately generated, leading to social protection and livelihood security as 
envisaged; 
 Durable and useful assets were created and maintained in compliance with rules and 
regulations, while ensuring convergence with other programmes/ schemes; and 
 Appropriate and adequate monitoring, social audit and grievance redressal system 
were in place and functioning as envisaged to achieve greater transparency and 
accountability. 
2.2.8 Audit criteria 
Audit findings were benchmarked against the following sources and criteria: 
 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005; 
 Operational Guidelines of MGNREGA, 2013 and the amendments thereto, Rules 
issued under the Act; 
1
1.25
2.29
2.55 2.71
0.61
0.79
0.7
1.61
1.41
0.39
0.46
1.59
0.94
1.3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
No. of works taken up No. of works completed No. of ongoing works

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
16
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
16 
 Annual Master Circulars issued by the MoRD, GoI; 
 Tripura State Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (as notified by State 
Government); 
 Orders, circulars and instructions, guidelines, etc. issued by Government of India 
and the State Government; 
 General Financial Rules, 2017 and Delegation of Financial Power Rules, 2019 
issued by the Government of Tripura with the amendments. 
2.2.9 Audit Scope and methodology 
Field audit was conducted between August 2024 and November 2024, involving the 
scrutiny of records/ documents at the State, District, Block and Gram Panchayats/ 
Village Committee levels covering the period from 2019-20 to 2023-24. The audit also 
included physical inspections of work sites and surveys/ interactions with the 
beneficiaries. In addition, electronic data from the MGNREGA-Soft for the sampled 
units and the State was analysed. 
An Entry Conference was held with the Secretary, Rural Development, Government of 
Tripura in July 2024, wherein the audit scope, objectives and approach were explained. 
The draft report was issued to State Government in May 2025. The important audit 
findings were also discussed in an Exit Conference held in June 2025 with the Secretary, 
Rural Development, Government of Tripura. The responses furnished by State 
Government were duly considered, while finalising the Report. 
2.2.10 Audit sample 
Out of the eight districts in Tripura, two districts, viz., Dhalai and Sepahijala were 
selected for audit. In each district, two Blocks and four GPs/ Village Committees in 
each Block were sampled for detailed scrutiny. The sample was selected using statistical 
sampling techniques 11  stratifying the districts, blocks, gram panchayats and village 
committees into lower and upper strata based  on the total expenditure under the scheme 
during 2019-24. A total of 220 works and 246 beneficiaries from the sampled GPs/ VCs 
were selected through simple random sampling for physical verification, field visits and 
surveys. Details of the audit sample are indicated in Appendix 2.2.1. 
2.2.11 Audit Findings 
 
Audit Objective 1: To assess whether the planning process and financial management 
practices were adequately geared towards achieving the goals of 
the Act, while adhering to relevant rules and regulations 
 
2.2.11.1 Prescribed procedures for planning 
According to Section 16 of the Act, every GP shall, after considering the 
recommendations of the Gram Sabha and Ward Sabhas, prepare a development plan, 
and maintain a shelf of possible works to be taken up under the Scheme, as and when 
demand for work arises. According to Para 6.3 of the Operational Guidelines of 
 
11  Stratified random sampling without replacement method 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
17
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
17 
MGNREGA, 2013, the Development Plan 12  should be prepared by matching the 
prioritised needs with the resources available.  
The development plans of individual GPs are to be consolidated by the Programme 
Officer and approved by the Intermediate/ Block Panchayats, while maintaining the 
priority of  works indicated by the GPs. A similar exercise will be carried out  at the 
district level, where the District Programme Coordinator collate all works within the 
district into the District Annual Development Plan.  
The DPC presents the District Annual Development Plan and District Labour Budget 
before the District Panchayat for approval. On approval, the District Plan and the 
District Labour Budget 13  are forwarded through the State Government, to GoI for 
enabling release of the Central share of funds.  The Operational Guidelines 14  also 
envisage preparation of multiyear District Perspective Plan for different departmental 
projects. 
The audit findings in respect of the planning processes are discussed in Paragraphs 
2.2.11.1(i) and 2.2.11.1(ii). 
2.2.11.1(i) Preparation of GP level development plan and shelf of   works 
In the sampled units, the works identified and recommended were approved through 
GP resolutions and there was evidence of Gram Sabha (GS) meetings to approve the 
shelf of works. However, instances of low 15 attendance in the Gram Sabha meetings, 
as recorded in the Gram Sabha resolutions, were noticed which cast doubt on the 
effective and large-scale involvement of villagers in the planning process at the grass 
root level. 
The findings of the beneficiary survey relating to holding of Gram Sabha meetings in 
the sampled GPs are summarised in Table 2.2.4. 
Table 2.2.4: The result of beneficiary survey on Gram Sabha meetings 
Audit Questions Finding 
Attendance at Gram Sabha 
meetings 
 43 per cent of beneficiaries stated that they did not attend 
the GS meetings. 
 68 per cent of the beneficiaries stated that GS meetings 
were not suitably advertised in the village for their 
awareness. 
Discussion and selection 
of  works at GS meetings 
58 per cent of beneficiaries stated that selection of works 
were not discussed in the GS meetings. 
Beneficiary survey revealed that the Gram Sabha meetings were not suitably advertised 
 
12  Development Plan is an Annual Plan for MGNREGA which is prepared by every GP 
13  Labour Budget contains projections for demand, person-days required to be generated and projected 
expenditure.  
14  Para No. 15.3.1.1 of the Operational Guidelines 
15  Audit noticed that in the sampled Jagannathpur VC, there were 611 registered active workers under 
323 Job Cards and attendance in the Gram Sabha was only 50 persons in 2020-21, 23 persons in 
2021-22 and 78 persons in 2022-23  

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
18
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 18 
for awareness and attendance of the village people. In addition, a majority of the 
respondents reported that the proposed works were not discussed during these meetings. 
Further, it was noticed that a sufficient number of works recognised as approved works 
by the Gram Sabha, remained in the shelf for each financial year. Works were taken up 
from the approved annual plan on priority basis, depending on the sanction of mandays 
received from the State through the district and the block authorities. The remaining 
works that could not be taken up continued to stay in the shelf. Across the four sampled 
blocks, the average rate of works taken up during 2019-24 varied from 35 per cent to 
64 per cent with the remaining works pending in shelf of works. The block-wise and 
year-wise position is shown in Chart 2.2.7. 
Chart 2.2.7: Percentage of works executed against the proposed number of works in 
respect of sampled Blocks during 2019-24 
 
Thus, as noticed in audit, a significant number of works remained in the shelf across the 
sampled districts, blocks and GPs during the period 2019-24.  
The Government replied (June 2025) that works were included in the shelf of projects 
in an exhaustive manner and prior to the preparation of the estimates. After that, the 
works were taken up as per demand of works on the local needs and preferences based 
on the decisions taken in the Gram Sabhas. If a particular work of importance could not 
be taken up during the financial year, the same was included in the shelf of projects in 
the next financial year.  
The reply of the Government is silent on the observation of audit regarding the low 
attendance in Gram Sabhas. Unless the community participation is not ensured and 
advertised well, the basic goal as envisaged under MGNREG Act of participatory 
planning will remain unmet. Further, the persistent shortfall between the approved and 
the works executed suggests a gap between planning and execution. 
 
41
49
58
63
70
53
76
70
54
70
33
25
58
34
63
23
24
40
35
45
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Manu Block Ambasa Block Nalchar Block Boxanagar Block

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
19
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
19 
2.2.11.1(ii) Non-preparation of Perspective Plan 
Para 15.3.1.1 of the Operational Guidelines on MGNREGA, 2013 envisages preparation 
of District Perspective Plan after identifying the needs and gaps in the districts in all the 
sectors. The district perspective plan is supposed to be a multiyear plan for different 
departmental projects.  
Audit noticed that the Department did not ensure preparation of any District Perspective 
Plan as envisaged in the guidelines.  
The Government replied (June 2025) that the State had prepared Perspective Plan till 
2016-17. But, the thrust of the scheme changes from year to year and so are the aims 
and aspirations of the Local Self Government. GoI also issues Annual Master Circular 
on yearly basis to highlight the focus of the scheme in the year. Subsequently, the 
concept of the preparation of the ‘Gram Panchayat Development Plan’ on yearly basis 
gained momentum and now the shelf of projects are being prepared on the yearly basis 
in a focused approach. 
The reply was not acceptable as preparation of Perspective Plan is a regulatory 
compliance. The Annual Master Circular and Gram Panchayat Development Plan does 
not replace the Perspective Plan which is necessary to identify the needs and gaps in 
the districts in all the sectors  
2.2.11.2 Financial position  
MGNREGS is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme implemented on a cost sharing basis 
between the GoI and the State Government. The GoI bears the entire cost of wages for 
unskilled manual workers and 75 per cent of the cost of material including wages for 
skilled  and semi-skilled workers. 
Administrative expenses (up to six per cent of total expenditure including up to 0.5 
per cent expenditure on Social Audit) are borne by the GoI while the State Government 
bears the cost of unemployment allowance payable under the scheme and 25 per cent 
of the material cost including wages of skilled and semi-skilled workers. Table 2.2.5 
shows the financial outlay under MGNREGS in the State during 2019-20 to 2023-24.  
Table 2.2.5: Funds availability under MGNREGS during 2019-20 to 2023-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Financi
al Year 
Opening 
Balance 
Central 
Share 
State 
Share 
Interest/
refund, 
etc. 
Advance 
fund from 
State 
Total 
available 
funds  
Refund 
to State 
Expendi
ture 
Closing 
balance 
2019-20 4.58 731.16 82.90 2.33 0.00 820.97 0.00 814.87 6.10 
2020-21 6.10 1,195.35 48.50 5.21 0.00 1,255.16 100.00 1,153.38 1.79 
2021-22 1.79 989.52 62.90 3.56 38.69 1,096.45 0.00 1,095.08 1.37 
2022-23 1.37 923.61 73.47 1.18 100.21 1,099.84 88.69 1,010.69 0.46 
2023-24 0.46 1,045.13 92.27 3.19 24.70 1,165.75 70.62 1,087.80 7.33 
 Total 4,884.77 360.04 15.47 163.60 5,438.17 259.31 5,161.82   
Source: Rural Development Department, Government of Tripura 
It can be seen from Table 2.2.5 that during 2019-24, an expenditure of ₹ 5,161.82 crore 
was incurred in the State for implementation of the Scheme. There was no shortfall in 
the release of the State’s share of funds. It was also noticed that to ensure uninterrupted 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
20
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
20 
fund flow for the Scheme, the State released advance funds to the Department pending 
receipt of funds from the Central Government. 
2.2.11.3 Non-sanction of Labour Budget as per the mandate under the Act 
The State has two categories of job card holders, ordinary card holders, who are entitled 
for 100 days work in a year, and Forest Right Act (FRA) beneficiaries, who are entitled 
for 150 days of work in a financial year per job card. Active 16 job card holders in the 
State during 2019-20 to 2023-24 ranged from 6.09 lakh to 6.42 lakh including 1.09 lakh 
FRA beneficiaries during these years.  
Based on this consolidated job card strength, the State submitted the Labour Budget 
proposal to the MoRD, GoI for 661 lakh to 702 lakh person days (PDs) 17  during 
2019-24. However, the Ministry accorded sanction for only 325 lakh to 430 lakh PDs 
during 2019-24. The Ministry did not sanction the full 100 and 150 labour days for the 
job card holders in the State during 2019-24 in contravention of the provisions under 
Section 3 of the MGNREG, Act, 2005 which provides a guarantee of unskilled manual 
work not less than 100 days in a financial year to every household whose adult members 
volunteer for work.  The analysis of job card holders and sanctioned person days under 
the scheme during 2019-14 revealed a consistent shortfall in approvals by the Ministry. 
Despite the State maintaining a stable number of active job card holders, the sanctioned 
labour budget fell significantly short ranging from 47 per cent to 65 per cent of the 
State’s demand during 2019-24. The details are depicted in Chart 2.2.8  and  
Chart 2.2.9. 
Chart 2.2.8: Status of job cards in the State during 2019-24 
   (in lakh) 
 
Source: MGNREGA MIS Report 
 
16  Any individual of household who has worked any one day in either the last three financial years or 
in current financial year 
17  Person days has been calculated yearly as FRA job cards*150 + Ordinary job cards*100 
6.32 6.45 6.62 6.83 6.80
6.09 6.17 6.28 6.27 6.42
1.09 1.09 1.09 1.09 1.09
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Total Job Card Issued Active Job Cards FRA Job Cards

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
21
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 21 
 
Chart 2.2.9: Entitlement, demand and sanction of Labour Budget during 2019-24 
 (in lakh PDs) 
 
Source: MGNREGA MIS report, records from the Rural Development Department, Government of 
Tripura 
The budget under the material component 18  and the administrative expenses 19  are 
directly linked to the labour budget. Since the labour budget was not sanctioned as per 
the State’s entitlement, the State consequently received less funds under both the 
material and the administrative component of the Scheme which adversely affected the 
overall implementation of the scheme in the State. 
2.2.11.4 Non-release of funds against the sanctioned labour budget 
During 2019-24, MoRD did not sanction the Labour Budget to the extent demanded by 
the State. The lower sanction of person-days (PDs) was further compounded by short 
release of funds corresponding to the sanctioned PDs in all years except 2020-21, when 
the release marginally exceeded the sanctioned PDs. Audit analysis showed that the 
shortfall in funds released, vis-à-vis the sanctioned PDs, ranged from two to 25 per cent 
during 2019-20 to 2023-24. 
Detailed position is shown in Table 2.2.6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18  Material component is 40 per cent  of the MGNREGA budget where labour component is 
60 per cent during a particular financial year. Administrative expense is six per cent  of the 
MGNREGA budget. 
19  Includes staff salary; supervision and monitoring costs; information, education and communication 
activities; etc. 
664 672 683 682 697
661 661 662 691 702
400 430 400
325
375
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Labour Budget entitlement Labour Budget placed Labour Budget Sanctioned

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
22
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
22 
Table 2.2.6: The approved labour days, central share of funds to be released, actual 
release and shortfall during 2019-24 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year 
Approved 
labour 
days  
(in lakh) 
Wage rate 
per day 
(in ₹) 
Central share 
to be released 
against 
approved 
labour days 
Central 
share 
actually 
released 
Short 
release (-)/ 
excess (+) 
Percentage of 
short/ excess 
release 
2019-20 400 192 76,800 57,942 (-)18,858 (-) 25 
2020-21 430 205 88,150 90,477 2,327 3 
2021-22 400 212 84,800 81,524 (-)3,276 (-) 4 
2022-23 325 212 68,900 67,301 (-)1,599 (-) 2 
2023-24 375 226 84,750 72,585 -()12,165 (-) 14 
Total 4,03,400 3,69,829 (-)33,571 (-) 8 
Source: Rural Development Department, Government of Tripura. 
Audit further noticed that during 2019-20 to 2023-24 the average wage received by the 
job card holders were below the full quantum of wages as prescribed by the GoI. 
Average wages paid ranged from 90 per cent to 97 per cent of the wage rate due to non-
achievement of work output fixed by the Department as noticed during the verification 
of works. An illustrative list is given in Appendix 2.2.2.  
The reduced PD sanction, combined with partial fund releases, constrained the State’s 
ability to generate employment as per demand and potentially delayed or limited wage 
disbursements to workers. 
Chart 2.2.10: Average wage received by the job card holders in the State during 2019-24 
(in ₹) 
 
Para 17 of the Schedule-I of the Act prescribes that the State Government shall link the 
wages, without any gender bias, with the quantity of work done and it shall be paid 
according to the rural Schedule of Rates (SoR) 20 fixed after Time and Motion Studies 
(TMS) for different types of work and different seasons and revised periodically. 
However, the State Government had not conducted any such TMS till November 2017.  
 
20  Rural SOR defines the per unit labour requirement for various items of work (e.g. digging, road work, 
plantation, water courses/ channel, etc.) 
192
205
212 212
226
180.7
186.92 190.78
199.23
207.5
175
200
225
250
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Wage rate fixed by the Government
Average wage received by the job card holders

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
23
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
23 
In this context, MoRD directed the Department (November 2017) to conduct TMS by 
February 2018. Further, the approved outcome of the TMS was to be integrated with 
Work Estimation Schedule ‘SECURE’21 by the State.  The State prepared the TMS and 
submitted it to the MoRD in April and October 2021, however as of March 2025, the 
same was yet to be approved by the Ministry due to issues with the SoR proposed by 
the State. Non approval of the TMS resulted in the exclusion of TMS data from the 
SECURE application, affecting the preparation of work estimates as the estimates 
arrived at presently are not based on proper study ultimately affecting the labour output 
and payment of wages. Without TMS-approved SoR, work estimates may not reflect 
realistic person-day requirements. Risk of over- or under-estimating the volume of work 
required for a given payment can lead to disputes over wages vs. output. It may 
indirectly cause gender bias if actual achievable outputs differ for different worker 
groups. This also affects proper monitoring of productivity. 
2.2.11.5 Delay in release of State share  
As per the terms and conditions in the sanction order issued by the MoRD to the 
Department conveying sanction of the central release of Scheme funds, the Central 
funds and the corresponding State share would be released by the State to the concerned 
State Nodal Account or to the Programme Implementing Agency’s account within a 
maximum period of 15 days from the receipt of Central funds in the State Treasury. 
Analysis of the release of Central funds and corresponding release of funds by the State 
from the State Treasury including the release of the State’s share, during 2019-20 to 
2023-24, showed delays up to 27 days. The maximum delay in days, year-wise in the 
release of Central funds and the corresponding State share is shown in the Chart 2.2.11. 
It was noticed that in 58 releases in the combined Central and State share during the 
period of audit, delay occurred in 17 cases with a maximum delay of 27 days. 
Chart 2.2.11: Year-wise maximum delay in release of Central funds and the State share 
(figures in days) 
 
Source: Records of the Rural Development Department, Government of Tripura 
The detailed position is shown in the Appendix 2.2.3. 
 
21  SECURE (Software for Estimate Calculation Using Rural rates for Employment) is a web based 
application for creating estimates for MGNREGA works.  
21
9
0
27
4
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Delay in release occurred

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
24
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
24 
The Government replied (June 2025) that the State is now strictly adhering to the norms 
and there is no more delay in the release of the funds.  
2.2.11.6 Payment of damages and interest on EPF from the Administrative fund 
of MGNREGA 
The Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 provides for 
the Provident Funds for the employees in factories and other establishments. The 
contribution to the Provident Fund by both the employee and the employer is a 
percentage of basic wages and dearness allowance, which is currently 12 per cent. The 
Rural Development Department, Government of Tripura decided (December 2015) to 
accord the benefit of the Employees Provident Fund (EPF) to all the contractual 
employees engaged under MGNREGA and also decided to bring all the MGNREGA 
employees under the Scheme with effect from 1 April 2017. While, the decision was 
taken in December 2015 to extend the benefit of EPF to the contractual employees 
engaged under MGNREGA, the department delayed its implementation with the office 
memorandum being issued after a delay of 17 months in May 2017. 
Audit further noticed that the Department failed to pay the employers’ share of the EPF 
contribution on time during April 2017 to November 2023 which attracted simple 
interest @ 12 per cent 22 and damages 23 on delayed payment. The Department paid 
(August and September 2024) damages and interest amounting to ₹ 11.87 crore towards 
delayed payments of EPF contribution to the EPF Organisation (EPFO) from the 
administrative funds under MGNREGA which was avoidable. 
While accepting the fact, Government stated (June 2025) that due to fund shortages 
and technical issues with MGNREGA Soft while implementing the SNA24 model and 
REAT25 module, remuneration payments to MGNREGA staff were delayed. As a 
result, the employer's share of EPF contributions was also not paid on time, leading to 
interest and damages imposed by EPFO. It was further added that the Department was 
taking all necessary steps to ensure that no such delay happens in future. 
2.2.11.7 Information, Education and Communication activities and Training 
Para 5.4 of the Operational Guidelines of MGNREGA, 2013 issued by MoRD stipulates 
that every State Government will undertake an intensive Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) exercise to publicise the key provisions of the Act and procedures 
to be followed for creation of awareness among rural people and other stakeholders, 
particularly MGNREGA workers in respect of the scheme provisions as well as their 
rights and entitlements.  
Further, para 5.1 of the Guidelines stipulates that all key agencies receive training to 
effectively discharge their responsibilities under the Act. 
 
22  Section 7Q of the Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 
23  Section 14-B of the Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 
24  SNA-Single Nodal Account. 
25  REAT-Real Time Expenditure Authorisation & Transfer module in Public Financial Management 
System (PFMS). 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
25
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
25 
While no formal IEC plan for MGNREGA was made available to Audit, it was noticed 
that the State Government utilised the Gram Rojgar Diwas 26 , which was conducted 
regularly every month in the sampled Gram Panchayats and Village Committees, for 
dissemination of information and raise awareness among the job card holders and the 
villagers. In addition, job cards and the Community Information Boards installed at the 
work sites were also used to spread important information viz. enrolment for job cards, 
basic rights of beneficiaries, selection of works, etc. related to MGNREGA. 
As regards the training of staff and Panchayati Raj Institution functionaries for their 
active participation in the village development and planning processes, the State 
Government utilised the services of the State Institute of Public Administration and 
Rural Development (SIPARD), Agartala and the Panchayat Raj Training Institutes 
(PRTIs)27 for different training courses. Audit noticed that during 2021-22 to 2023-2428, 
9,371 29  persons were imparted training on Panchayat Development Plan (PDP), 
Peoples’ Plan Campaign (PPC), Block Panchayat Development Plan (BPDP), Planning 
for Inclusive Development, etc. in the sampled districts. However, the Department had 
not prepared any training action plan for each category of functionaries as envisaged in 
the Operational Guidelines of MGNREGA, 2013 under the capacity building and 
awareness generation.  
The implementation of the IEC activities under MGNREGA were carried out through 
Gram Rojgar Diwas but no formal action plan was prepared. Although training activities 
were undertaken through SIPARD and PRTIs, a category wise training action plan for 
MGNREGA functionaries was absent.  
The Government replied (June 2025) that SIPARD, AD Nagar, Agartala and the PRTIs, 
were the primary agencies responsible for providing training to Panchayati Raj 
Institution members and Rural Development officials in the State. Additionally, an IEC 
activity calendar had been prepared at the State level, and all District Programme 
Coordinators had been instructed to follow the calendar for their activities.  
The reply was not acceptable as the Department did not prepare action plan for training 
as envisaged under the operational guidelines as such achievement could not be verified 
in audit. As regards the IEC activity calendar, no such document could be produced to 
audit neither by the State Office nor by the DPCs and POs offices during field 
inspection. 
2.2.11.8 Findings of beneficiary survey on awareness related to MGNREGA 
A total of 246 beneficiaries from the sampled 16 GPs/ VCs, with target of 15 
beneficiaries from each sampled GP, were selected through simple random sampling 
 
26  Gram Rojgar Diwas is a monthly event organised by GPs under the MGNREGA. Activities of Gram 
Rojgar Diwas are to process work applications, allocate work, pay wages and unemployment 
allowances, educate people on self-employment, and address grievances. 
27  There are four PRTIs in the State which serves all the eight districts of the State. 
28  Data of earlier years was not available. 
29  PRTI, West Agartala District-5,883 persons, PRTI, Dhalai District -3,319 persons and SIPARD at 
Agartala-169 persons. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
26
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
26 
for interaction/ survey. Similar questions were asked to all the beneficiaries to maintain 
uniformity.  
Summary of findings from the beneficiary survey relating to awareness about the 
provisions of the scheme is given in Table 2.2.7. 
Table 2.2.7: Result of beneficiary survey relating to awareness of the provisions of the 
scheme 
Audit Question Level of awareness 
Entitlement of at least 100 days 
per household  per annum 
Responses from 82 per cent  of the beneficiaries 
revealed that they were well aware of the provisions of 
the Act regarding entitlement of 100 days work per 
household per annum. 
Minimum wage rate 
62 per cent of the beneficiaries were aware of the wage 
rate under MGNREGA while the remaining 38 per cent  
stated that they were unaware about the wage rate. 
Timeline for payment of wages 64 per cent  of the beneficiaries stated that they were 
aware of the timeline for the payment of wages. 
Awareness for demand for work 
to the authority and type of 
machines permissible for 
MGNREGA works 
66 per cent  of the beneficiaries were aware of the 
process for submitting a demand for work while 92 per 
cent expressed ignorance about the types of machines 
permissible in MGNREGA works. 
The beneficiary survey revealed that while a majority of beneficiaries were aware of 
their core entitlement under MGNREGA such as provision of 100 days of work and the 
process for demanding work, however, there was scope for creation of more awareness 
among the beneficiaries. A major drawback in beneficiaries’ awareness as observed 
during the survey was that 92 per cent of the beneficiaries were not aware about the 
types of machines permissible for MGNREGA works. 
While admitting the audit finding, the Government stated (June 2025) that now IEC 
activity calendar had been prepared at State level and all DPCs had been instructed to 
take up activities as per calendar. Apart from that, advisories for more awareness 
generation in the field regarding the programme had been issued from time to time. The 
‘Rojgar Diwas’ was celebrated every month in each and every GP/ VC without fail 
where the villagers were made aware about the programme.  
Conclusion 
The institutional mechanism and structure intended for effective planning of the scheme 
ensuring stakeholder participation had been established in the State. However, instances 
of low attendance in the Gram Sabha meetings, as recorded in the Gram Sabha 
resolutions, cast doubt on the effective and large- scale involvement of villagers in the 
planning process at the grass roots level. The Department primarily focused on the 
annual planning activity. The Perspective Plan was neither prepared by the Gram 
Panchayat nor at the District level, as required under the guidelines. 
Regarding the financing of the scheme, the State did not receive the full labour-budget 
from the Centre. As against the 661 lakh to 702 lakh person days, the Ministry accorded 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
27
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
27 
sanction for only 325 lakh to 430 lakh PDs during 2019-24. The sanctioned labour 
budget fell short ranging from 47 per cent to 65 per cent of the State’s demand during 
2019-24. Additionally, the full quantum of funds, as per the sanctioned labour budget 
was not released by the Government of India in all the years except for 2020-21, when 
the release was marginally higher than the sanction. Release of lesser funds as against 
the sanctions, varied from two per cent to 25 per cent during the period from 2019-20 
to 2023-24. There was no short release of the State’s share and the State Government 
even released advance funds in some years, pending receipt of funds from the Central 
Government for smooth implementation of the Scheme in the State. 
Furthermore, administrative funds to the tune of ₹ 11.87 crore were used for payment 
of damages and interest on delayed payment of EPF contributions, which was avoidable. 
Recommendations 
 Efforts may be made to ensure large scale involvement of villagers in the 
planning process by increasing awareness and encouraging active participation 
in Gram Sabha meetings; 
 Initiatives may be taken for the preparation of Perspective Plans identifying the 
local needs and gaps at the district level in various sectors as envisaged in the 
MGNREGA guidelines; 
 All statutory payments must be made promptly to avoid penalty and damages. 
Audit Objective 2: To assess whether fair access to employment opportunities was 
achieved, as well as employment adequately generated, leading to 
social protection and livelihood security as envisaged 
2.2.11.9 Registration of households and issue of job cards 
The detailed procedure prescribed for issue of job cards as per the Operational 
Guidelines of MGNREGA, 2013 is as follows: 
Any adult person of a household may, on behalf of the members of the household, apply 
to the Gram Panchayat, in the jurisdiction of which they reside, for registration of their 
household for issuance of a job card. The application for registration can be  on the 
printed form or on a plain paper containing the names of the adult members, their age, 
caste/ tribe, address, Rashtriya Swastha Bima Yojana number, Aadhar number, Below 
Poverty Line status and bank/ post office account number. The operational guidelines also 
provides for registration through oral requests to Panchayat Secretary or Gram Rozgar 
Sahayak30 and can apply at Community Service Centres. 
The Panchayat Secretary shall receive the applications and issue a dated receipt and 
enter the details in the Job Card Register. After making   due enquiry, he shall make a 
recommendation to the Programme Officer to issue the job card. 
A 14-digit unique registration number (including codes for State, District, Mandal, GP 
 
30  Gram Rozgar Sahayak assist the GP in executing MGNREGA works at GP level 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
28
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
28 
and Habitation) is generated through MGNREGS MIS, which can be retrieved/ viewed 
online from any terminal. Gram Panchayats and the Rural Development Block 
(Mandal) can register a beneficiary and generate online unique registration number in 
the MGNREGA-Soft. 
The Panchayat Secretary maintains the details of job cards issued in the job  card 
Register. The joint photograph of the adult members of the household must be affixed 
to the job card within three months from the date of issue of the job card. 
Addition or deletion of members eligible to seek work is to be carried out in the job card 
as and when required or at the beginning of the financial year. The updated list shall be 
sent to the Programme Officer. 
The Panchayat Secretary or Field Assistant shall update the household job card at the 
time of payment of wages. The wage-days provided, and the wages paid to the workers 
shall be reflected in the job card. 
The main audit findings in respect of registration of households and issues relating to job 
cards  are discussed in Paragraphs 2.2.11.9(i) to 2.2.11.9(iii). 
2.2.11.9(i) Registration of Households and issue/ updating of job  cards 
As of March 2024, job cards had been issued to 6.80 lakh households covering 12.20 
lakh individuals across the State. This represented about 33 per cent of the total State 
population (36.71 lakh, as per the 2011 Census   data). In the two sampled districts, job 
cards were issued to 1.81 lakh households covering 3.22 lakh individuals. The 
detailed position is shown in the Table 2.2.8. 
Table 2.2.8: The number of job cards issued, household worked and person days 
generated in the State and in the sampled district  
Source: MIS-Report MGNREGA, report from State portal 
2.2.11.9(ii) Job Card Application Register and Issue of job cards 
Audit scrutiny in the sampled districts revealed that: 
Job Card Application Registers/ Files and the Job Card Registers were maintained in 
the sampled GPs in the four sampled Blocks under the sampled districts. Verification of 
Job Card Registers at the sampled GPs and VCs revealed that job cards were issued 
within 15 days of receipt of the application in accordance with the provisions of the act. 
However, verification of the job card applications revealed that there were instances of 
overwriting on application receipt date, and there were applications lacking a date of 
Sl 
No Particulars 
Population 
of the State/ 
District (in 
lakh) 
Number of 
HH to 
whom Job 
Card issued 
(in lakh) 
Total workers 
registered 
under the Job 
Cards (in 
lakh) 
Number of 
Household 
worked 
during the 
year (in 
lakh) 
Person days 
generated in 
the State/ 
District (in 
lakh) 
Person 
days 
generated 
per House 
Hold (in 
days) 
1. State 36.71 6.80 12.20 5.86 370 63.16 
2. Dhalai 
District 3.78 0.95 1.73 0.89 74.24 83.84 
3. Sepahijala 
District 5.43 0.86 1.49 0.72 41.79 57.75 
).

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
29
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
29 
receipt, etc. which had been presumably done to adhere to the 15 days’ timeline for 
issuance of job cards from the date of receipt of the application. As a result, audit could 
not conclusively verify adherence to the stipulated timeframe for issuing job cards. 
The Government accepted the audit findings and stated (June 2025) that all the DPCs 
had been instructed to ensure issuance of job cards within stipulated period from the 
date of receipt of applications. It had also been instructed to enquire the matter 
regarding overwriting on receipt date of application, receipt of application without any 
date, etc. 
2.2.11.9(iii) Beneficiary survey findings  
The responses from 246 beneficiaries regarding household registration and issues related 
to job cards are summarised in Table 2.2.9. 
Table 2.2.9: The result of beneficiary survey relating to household registration and issue 
of job cards 
Criteria Response 
Requests for 
registration 
83 per cent beneficiaries stated that they had submitted oral requests for 
registration while 17 per cent  stated that they had submitted written 
requests and in both the cases, job cards were issued.  
Receipt of job 
cards in time  
60 per cent of the beneficiaries stated that they had received the job cards 
within 15 days of application for job cards while the balance 40 per cent 
stated that they received the job cards in 15-30 days. 
Job cards in the 
custody of the 
beneficiaries 
In 221 cases, job cards were  produced to audit team during beneficiary 
survey while in remaining cases (25 cases) these could not be produced 
due to misplacement or non-availability of the job card at the time of 
survey. 
Photographs on 
the job  cards 
Only in 0.81 per cent cases, job cards were found without photographs, 
while in 90.65 per cent cases, job cards were found with photographs. In 
the balance 8.54 per cent cases, the job cards were not produced to audit.  
Source: Beneficiary survey findings 
The beneficiary survey revealed that in 40 per cent cases the Department could not 
adhere to the prescribed time line of issuing of Job Cards within 15 days from the date 
of submission of request by the applicants.  
While admitting the fact, the Government stated (June 2025) that instructions had been 
issued to the DPCs to monitor the audit findings relating to beneficiary survey and 
take action accordingly. 
2.2.11.10 Employment and Wages 
The Act and the Operational Guidelines of MGNREGA, 2013 stipulates that the single 
most important and distinguishing feature of MGNREGA is that provision of work is 
triggered by the demand for work by wage-seekers and work provided as their legal right. 
MGNREGA is a demand driven public wage employment programme where works are 
opened and jobs offered whenever there is a demand for work (jab kaam maangege, tab 
kaam khulega). 
The Operational Guidelines further stipulates that applications for work must be for at least 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
30
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
30 
14 days of continuous work and the work entitlement   of 100 days per household per 
year may be shared between different adult members of the same household. Work is 
to be provided to wage-seekers from registered households within 15 days of receipt of 
the application for work. Failure to do so entitles the worker to unemployment 
allowance. It shall be open to the PO and GP to direct applicants to do any type of 
permissible work under the Act. 
Workers are entitled to be paid on a weekly basis, and in any case within a fortnight of 
the date on which the work was completed. Any delay in wage payments entitles the 
worker to compensation under the provisions of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936. 
According to Para 18 and 20 below Schedule-II of the MGNREG Act, 2005 as far as 
possible employment shall be provided within a radius of five km. of the village where 
the applicant resides at the time of applying. If the work cannot be provided within five 
km. radius, then the labourers shall be paid 10 per cent  extra wages to meet 
transportation and expenses for living. Further, Rule 23 and 24 of the Act mandates the 
availability of safe drinking water, shade for children and the workers, first aid box with 
adequate materials and childcare facilities for the women accompanying children below 
the age of five years at the worksite being the worksite facilities as a welfare measure.  
The audit findings in respect of applications for allotment of work is discussed in the 
succeeding paragraph. 
2.2.11.10(i) Applications for work called for only after allotment of mandays to 
the GPs/ VCs by the State 
As discussed in Paragraph 2.2.11.3, the State did not receive the sanction of the Labour 
Budget according to its requirement during 2019-20 to 2023-24. The annual requirement 
for the job card holders ranged from 664 lakh to 697 lakh PDs, however, the State was 
sanctioned only 325 lakh to 430 lakh PDs during 2019-24. This had a resultant effect 
on the applications for demand of work by the individual beneficiaries. Sanctioned PDs 
were distributed by the State to the DPCs on a monthly basis in a financial year. DPCs31 
distributed the allotted PDs to the Blocks 32 and Blocks in turn distributed the same to 
the GPs 33 and VCs under their control. Audit noticed that the GPs and VCs called 
applications for works only after the receipt of the monthly sanctioned PDs from the 
Programme Officer through DPCs and thereafter, works were executed from the annual 
GP Development Plan.  
The current practice undermines Section 3 of the MGNREGA Act, which guarantees 
employment on demand. By allowing job applications only after PDs are allotted, the 
legal right to work is rendered ineffective, exposing the State to non-compliance with 
statutory provisions. Since job card holders are offered work only after administrative 
sanctions, genuine demand remains unrecorded. This misrepresents the actual need for 
employment in rural areas and leads to underreporting of demand of jobs by the Job 
 
31  There were eight District Programme Coordinators (DPCs) in the State 
32  There were 58 Blocks in the State 
33  There were 606 GPs and 587 VCs in the State as on 1 January 2024 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
31
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
31 
Card holders. Predetermined allocation of PDs and centrally controlled demand 
solicitation contradict the bottom-up planning model envisaged in MGNREGA, 
weakening the role of Gram Panchayats and disempowering beneficiaries.  Further, 
restricting applications to administratively selected windows can disproportionately 
affect vulnerable groups (landless, single women, etc.) who may need work outside the 
preset timelines, leading to inequitable access to entitlements. Finally, the denial of 
timely work due to the artificial control on demand can trigger complaints or even legal 
challenges by beneficiaries, exposing the Government to reputational and legal risk. 
Government replied (June 2025) that a MGNREGA worker could demand for work up 
to 100 days (150 days by the FRA beneficiary) in a financial year. However, due to 
intermittent flow of funds under MGNREGS from the Central Government, turn-out 
of job seekers usually aligned with the fund availability. 
2.2.11.10(ii) Beneficiary survey findings 
The main findings from the beneficiary survey of 246 beneficiaries relating to 
allotment of work, measurement and other aspects are summarised in Table 2.2.10. 
Table 2.2.10: The result of beneficiary survey relating to providing works  
Criteria Findings 
Submission of requests 
for work and providing 
of dated receipt by the 
Panchayat 
83 per cent of the beneficiaries stated that they had submitted oral 
requests for work and all of which were accepted. 
43 per cent of the beneficiaries received a dated receipt while 57 
per cent cases did not. 
Timeliness of work 
provision  
All the sampled beneficiaries (246 number) stated that work was 
provided within 15 days of their request. They also stated that 
applications for jobs were accepted only when PDs were allotted 
to the GPs or the VCs. 
Unemployment 
Allowance  
All the beneficiaries stated that applications for job were accepted 
only when PDs were allotted to the GPs or the VCs. As such, no 
unemployment allowance became due and paid.  
No. of days of 
employment the 
Household got in a year 
(last completed 
financial year) 
10 per cent of the beneficiaries got work for one day to 20 days, 
11 per cent got 21 days to 40 days of work, 14 per cent got 41 
days to 60 days of work, 8 per cent got stated 61 days to 80 days 
of work, 21 per cent received 81 days to 100 days of work, 19 
per cent  got 101 days to 150 days of work, and there was no 
response from 17 per cent of the beneficiaries. 
Maximum distance 
travelled from home for 
MGNREGA work 
All the beneficiaries stated that works were provided within five 
km. radius from their home. 
Whether extra 10 per 
cent wages were paid 
As the works were provided within five km. distance from their 
home, the payment of extra 10 per cent did not arise. 
Attendance Register 
and daily attendance 
34 per cent of the  beneficiaries stated that Attendance Registers 
were not maintained at the worksite and daily attendance was not 
recorded while 66 per cent of the beneficiaries confirmed that 
attendance registers were maintained and daily attendance was 
recorded. 
10 per cent of the beneficiaries got work for one day to 20 days, 
11 per cent got 21 days to 40 days of work, 14 per cent got 41 
days to 60 days of work, eight per cent got stated 61 days to 80 
days of work, 21 per cent received 81 days to 100 days of work, 
19 per cent got 101 days to 150 days of work, and there was no 
response from 17 per cent of the beneficiaries.

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
32
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
32 
Criteria Findings 
Availability of worksite 
facilities 
i)  First Aid Box: 96 per cent of the beneficiaries stated that 
first aid box was absent. 
ii) Child Care Facility:96 per cent of the beneficiaries stated 
that no child care facilities were available.  
iii) Shade: 43 per cent beneficiaries stated that shades at the 
worksite was not provided  
iv) Drinking Water: 43 per cent of the beneficiaries stated that 
drinking water was not available  
Source: Beneficiary survey findings 
The responses regarding payment of wages are depicted in Table 2.2.11. 
Table 2.2.11: The result of beneficiary survey relating to payment of wages 
Criteria Findings 
Whether any 
payment remained 
due 
All the beneficiaries stated that no payment remained due for their work 
under the scheme. 
Receipt of 
payment within 15 
days of completion 
of work 
All the beneficiaries stated that payments were received within 15 days 
of completion of works 
Mode of payment 
96 per cent  of the beneficiaries stated that they received payment 
though bank, however the remaining cases could not be verified due to 
non-production of bank pass books. 
Source: Beneficiary survey findings 
The Government replied (June 2025) that the DPCs were instructed to monitor the 
findings on beneficiary survey and act accordingly. 
Conclusion 
As of March 2024, job cards were issued to 6.80 lakh households in the State involving 
12.20 lakh individuals. This represents about 33 per cent of the State’s population, as 
per the 2011 Census data. Sampled GPs and VCs issued job cards within 15 days of 
receipt of application from the applicants as per the provision of the Act. However, 
verification of job card applications revealed that there were instances of overwriting 
on receipt date of application, receipt of application without any date, etc. which was 
presumably done to adhere to the 15 days’ criterion for issue of job card from the date 
of receipt of application. Further, delays in entry regarding work and payment details 
in the job cards were noticed in both the sampled districts. However, online records 
were found to be up to date. 
Regarding the receipt of work demands and allocation of works to the job card holders, 
the GPs and VCs called for application for works only on the receipt of allocation of 
PDs. This practice undermines the Act’s objective, which guarantees job seekers the 
legal right to demand work at any time within their entitlement. Consequently, 
employment to the job seekers remained under the control of and was determined by the 
Government rather than being based on the actual demand from the job seekers. 
ii) Child Care Facility: 96 per cent of the beneficiaries stated 
that no child care facilities were available. 
.
.
.
 facilities

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
33
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
33 
Recommendations 
The Department may:  
 ensure timely issue of job cards to the applicants and ensure proper monitoring 
at regular intervals; 
 make efforts to get the person days sanctioned as per the annual entitlement of 
the job card holders; 
 ensure that MGNREGA job card holders receive the legally mandated 100 days 
of guaranteed wage employment per financial year. 
Audit Objective 3: To assess whether durable and useful assets were created and 
maintained in compliance with rules and regulations, while 
ensuring convergence with other programmes/ schemes 
 
2.2.11.11 Execution of works 
The Act and the Operational Guidelines of the MGNREGA, 2013 prescribe the 
following guidelines for planning and execution of works: 
Schedule-I lists the permissible categories of works in order of priority viz., water 
conservation and harvesting; drought proofing, including afforestation and tree 
plantation; provision of irrigation facility, plantation, horticulture, land development; 
renovation of traditional water bodies, including de-silting of tanks; flood control and 
protection works, including drainage in water-logged areas; and rural connectivity to 
provide all-weather access. Maintenance of assets created under the scheme/ belonging 
to the above sectors would be considered as permissible works. 
The cost of material component of projects (including skilled/ semi-skilled wages) 
should not exceed 40 per cent of the total project costs. Engagement of contractors is not 
permitted; as far as possible, tasks under the scheme shall be performed using manual 
labour and not machines. 
All works would be required to have administrative and technical sanction obtained in 
advance. Measurements would be recorded in the Measurement Books maintained by 
qualified technical personnel in charge of the worksite. Also, States may evolve norms 
for measurement of work, and for this purpose, they undertake comprehensive work, 
time and motion studies.  
On completion of every project, a Project Completion Report should be prepared as per 
prescribed format, and the details entered therein should be verified by senior officer. 
The major audit findings in respect of execution of works are summarised in Paragraphs 
2.2.11.11(i) to 2.2.11.11(iii). 
2.2.11.11(i) Profile of works undertaken in the State and sampled districts  
The profile of works undertaken in the State under the Scheme during 2021-24 34 as 
 
34  Last three years under the audit review as the data for previous two years was not available. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
34
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 34 
well as in the sampled districts is shown in Table 2.2.12. 
Table 2.2.12: Nature of works undertaken in the State and corresponding share in the 
sampled districts 
Category of Works 
Number of works undertaken across the 
State Number of 
works 
undertaken 
in the 
sampled 
district 
Percenta
ge  of 
total 
works 
undertak
en in the 
sampled 
district 
2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Total 
Community assets or 
individual assets for 
vulnerable sections 
1,33,695 1,85,284 2,09,441 5,28,420 1,26,206 23.88 
Public works relating to 
Natural Resources 
Management 
83,465 58,669 48,581 1,90,715 46,015 24.13 
Rural infrastructure 11,571 11,125 13,134 35,830 5,518 15.40 
Common 
infrastructure for 
National Rural 
Livelihood Mission 
(NRLM) compliant 
Self-Help Groups 
42 40 53 135 17 12.59 
Total 2,28,773 2,55,118 2,71,209 7,55,100 1,77,756 23.54 
Source: MGNREGS MIS web reports 
As shown in Table 2.2.12, the highest proportion of MGNREGA works undertaken 
across the State during 2021–24 fell under the category of ‘Community or Individual 
Assets for Vulnerable Sections’, accounting for 70 per cent of total works (5.28 lakh 
out of 7.55 lakh). This was followed by ‘Natural Resource Management’ works, which 
showed a declining trend over the three years, and ‘Rural Infrastructure’ works. 
Notably, the number of works taken up for creating infrastructure for NRLM-compliant 
Self-Help Groups was minimal (only 135 works in three years), suggesting under 
utilisation of this component. 
The sampled districts accounted for 23.54 per cent of total works undertaken in the 
State. However, this share should be viewed in relation to their population or GP 
coverage to assess representativeness. Further, the decline in NRM works warrants 
examination to ensure balance between employment generation and creation of durable, 
eco-sustainable assets. 
2.2.11.11(ii) Works-in-progress vis a vis rate of completion of works  
A profile of the works undertaken by the State, the sampled districts and the blocks, 
number of works completed, and the number of works in progress is summarised in the 
Table 2.2.13. 
 
 
 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
35
Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
35
Table 2.2.13: The status of work taken up, completed and works in progress since the
beginning of implementation of MGNREGA in the State, sampled districts and blocks
Source: MGNREGS MIS web reports (status as on 1 March 2025)
As may be seen from Table 2.2.13 that more than 99 per cent of the works relating to
2021-22 and earlier periods had been completed in the State. Similar trends were
noticed in the case of the sampled districts and the sampled blocks as well. As regards
the completion rate of the works taken up during 2022-23 and 2023-24, the rate was
98.32 per cent and 94.21 per cent respectively for the State while in the sampled
districts, the rate varied between 92.62 per cent to 99.60 per cent.
With regard to the sampled blocks, Boxanagar Block lagged behind with a completion
rate of 76.65 per cent in 2023-24, while completion rate of the other three blocks was
in the range of 95.08 per cent to 99.79 per cent which was quite impressive. Reasons
for slow progress of works in the Boxanagar Block during 2023-24 were not found on
records. The achievement rate indicates under utilisation of capacity and unmet demand
for work in the State as the State was sanctioned funds to the tune of 45 per cent to
66 per cent of its requirement based on the active job card holders in the State and their
annual entitlement of 100 days’ work in a financial year.
Executing entity Year Works taken
up
Works
completed
Completion
(in percentage)
Works in
progress
State
2021-22 &
earlier 12,26,122 12,20,551 99.55 5,571
2022-23 1,20,833 1,18,801 98.32 2,032
2023-24 1,86,078 1,75,308 94.21 10,770
Total: 15,33,033 15,14,660 98.80 18,373
Dhalai District
2021-22 &
earlier 1,49,057 1,48,746 99.79 311
2022-23 22,602 22,512 99.60 90
2023-24 26,789 26,382 98.48 407
Total: 1,98,448 1,97,640 99.59 808
Sepahijala
District
2021-22 &
earlier 1,26,239 1,26,111 99.90 128
2022-23 15,316 15,240 99.50 76
2023-24 20,887 19,345 92.62 1,542
Total: 1,62,442 1,60,696 98.93 1,746
Ambassa Block
2021-22 &
earlier 16,410 16,400 99.94 10
2022-23 2,079 2,073 99.71 6
2023-24 2,743 2,608 95.08 135
Manu Block
2021-22 &
earlier 27,930 27,822 99.61 108
2022-23 4,609 4,591 99.61 18
2023-24 5,851 5,789 98.94 62
Total: 59,622 59,283 99.43 339
Boxanagar Block
2021-22 &
earlier 15,558 15,540 99.88 18
2022-23 868 862 99.31 6
2023-24 3,071 2,354 76.65 717
Nalchar Block
2021-22 &
earlier 21,635 21,631 99.98 4
2022-23 1,630 1,626 99.75 4
2023-24 3,282 3,275 99.79 7
Total: 46,044 45,288 98.36 756

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
36
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
36 
The Government accepted the fact and stated (June 2025) that due to some internal/ 
technical problems, work completion rate in Boxanagar Block was low in comparison 
to other Blocks selected in audit. The work completion rate would be at par with other 
blocks of the districts by July 2025. 
2.2.11.11(iii) Verification of works in audit 
In the sampled districts, blocks, GPs and VCs, Audit noticed that a total of 2,509 35 
works, involving ₹ 58.03 crore (Appendix 2.2.4) under the wage component and the 
material component, were executed during 2019-20 to 2023-24 under different work 
heads viz. Rural Connectivity (RC), Water conservation and water harvesting (WC), 
Land development (LD), Works on individual land (IF), Micro irrigation works (IC), 
Renovation of traditional water bodies (WH), Drought proofing (DP), Flood control 
and protection (FP), Fisheries (FR) and Anganwadi/ other rural infrastructure (AV). 
A total of 220 works involving ₹ 15.60 crore, (Appendix 2.2.4) constituting 27 per cent 
of the expenditure incurred by the sampled GPs and VCs were selected from the 
sampled four blocks for physical verification. The physical verification was conducted 
jointly by audit and the departmental officials.  
The GP is the single most important agency for executing MGNREGA works as Section 
16 (5) of the Act mandates that at least 50 per cent of the works in terms of cost under a 
scheme shall be allotted to GPs for implementation. The other Project Implementing 
Agencies (PIA) can be line departments of the Central or State Governments, District 
Panchayat, Panchayat at intermediate level, Gram Panchayat or any other local authority 
or Government undertaking or non-governmental organisation authorised by the Central 
Government or the State Government.  
In the physical verification of works, it was seen that the works were executed by the 
Engineering Divisions of the Rural Development Department, Tribal Welfare (Tribal 
Rehabilitation in Plantation and Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group) (TW (TRP & 
PTG) Department) under the Tribal Welfare Department, Forest Department, Tripura 
Rural Livelihood Mission (TRLM), Tripura Rehabilitation & Plantation Corporation 
(TRPC), Block and Gram Panchayats/ Village Committees as detailed in the 
Table 2.2.14. 
Table 2.2.14: Details of the works undertaken and the implementing agencies involved 
taken up for detailed audit 
Sl. 
No. Name of the implementing agency Number of works selected for detailed 
audit with their categories 
1. Engineering Divisions of Rural 
Development Department 40 works (RC-34, AV-4, IF-1 and FP-1) 
2. Sub Divisional Forest Officer, Forest 
Department 14 works (DP-4, DF-7, WC-2 and WH-1) 
3. Tribal Rehabilitation in Plantation 
and Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Eight works (IF-4 and DP-4) 
 
35  These works do not include the works undertaken by the TTAADC, as a Separate Audit Report is 
prepared for TTAADC and it includes MGNREGA works. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
37
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
37 
Sl. 
No. Name of the implementing agency Number of works selected for detailed 
audit with their categories 
Group Programme 
4. Tripura Rural Livelihood Mission 
(TRLM) Five works under IF 
5 Blocks Four works (RC-2 and IF-2) 
6. Tripura Rehabilitation & Plantation 
Corporation (TRPC) Two works under IF 
7. Gram Panchayats/ Village Committees 147 works (RC-25, IF-25, LD-41, WC-32, 
IC-17, WH-2, FP-1 and FR-4) 
Further, as per Rule 20 below Schedule-I of the MGNREG Act, 2005 engagement of 
contractors are prohibited in implementation of works under the Act and works 
executed by the departmental Implementing Officers who are guided by the 
departmental rules and regulations for maintenance of records viz. material-at-site 
account, work progress register, site inspection register for supervising officers and 
higher authorities, measurement books, work completion certificates, handing over and 
taking over certificate of the asset after completion of the work, etc. Further, MoRD 
has mandated geo-tagging36 of all MGNREGA assets at three stages, at the beginning 
of the work, at the mid-way and on completion of the work. 
The implementing agency wise audit observations are discussed in Paragraph 
2.2.11.11(iii)(a) to 2.2.11.11(iii)(f).  
2.2.11.11(iii)(a) Implementing Agency: Engineering Divisions of the Department 
(i) Rural connectivity 
The audit of 34 works37, out of 35 works executed by the Engineering divisions in the 
sampled districts, revealed that in 20 cases completion certificates were not prepared 
and in 17 cases the works were not handed over to the Village Committees or the Gram 
Panchayats. Three stage geo-tagged photographs were not uploaded in the Bhuvan 
App38 in 18 cases. In none of the cases Material at Site Account, Works Progress 
Register and Site Inspection Register for the visiting officers and supervisors were 
maintained. Detail position is given in the Appendix 2.2.5. 
In the Joint Physical Verification (JPV) by audit with departmental officials, all the 
sampled works were verified in audit. Minor issues were noticed in all the works 
(Appendix 2.2.5) . However, major maintenance requirements were noticed in two 
specific works. 
a) Widening of brick soling road with CC drain, cross drainage, earth conservation 
wall from 4.50 mile at Jeolcherra VC of Ambassa RD Block (Year of sanction: 
 
36  The Geo MGNREGA was rolled out on 1 September 2016 which is applicable to all works done 
under MGNREGS. 
37  Sl. No. 177, 178, 180-183, 186, 191-197, 199, 200-204, 206, 207, 209-220 of the Appendix 2.2.5 
38  National Remote Sensing Centre has developed mobile application and a web portal for displaying 
MGNREGA assets. Geo MGNREGA Bhuvan portal (e Governance) acts as a gateway to facilitate 
and coordinate the sharing of geospatial data. 
.

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
38
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 38 
2021-2022, sanctioned amount: ₹ 1.08 crore, expenditure: ₹ 1.06 crore).  
A 2.50 km stretch of the road was physically verified in audit and approximately 
25 locations were found to be badly damaged, rendering vehicular movement 
difficult. 
b) Construction of Box culvert on the road from Sudhangshu Ghosh Para katcha road 
to Kachimcherra VC border at Basudeb Para GP under Ambassa RD Block (Year 
of sanction: 2020-2021, sanctioned amount: ₹ 16.32 lakh; expenditure: ₹ 15.98 
lakh). 
The approach road to the box culvert on one side was completely washed away, 
resulting in the loss of road connectivity.  
The status of the works is shown in Photographs 2.2.1, 2.2.2, 2.2.3 and 2.2.4. 
Photographs 2.2.1 and 2.2.2: The status of road from 4.5 mile at Jeolcherra VC of Ambassa 
RD Block 
 
Photographs 2.2.3 and 2.2.4: Washed away part of the brick soling road, first photo during 
construction of the box culvert obtained from Bhuvan App and second photo as noticed in the 
JPV 
The Government replied (June 2025) that Chief Engineer, MGNREGA would enquire 
the matter and corrective actions would be taken accordingly. 
 


Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
39
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
39 
(ii) Anganwadi/ other rural infrastructure (AV) 
Under this work, four39 works, out of 16 works executed in the sampled districts, were 
undertaken   for construction of boundary walls for two schools and construction of two 
Anganwadi Centres. Deficiencies noticed in audit are mentioned in Appendix 2.2.5 . 
During the JPV (October 2024) it was noticed that although the two Anganwadi Centres 
were completed in June 2023 at a cost of ₹ 7.28 lakh but were lying idle since then. 
While accepting the fact, the Government stated (June 2025) that the matter would be 
taken up with the Social Welfare and Social Education Department and concerned 
Blocks. 
(iii) Works on individual land and Flood control and protection 
Under these works, two 40 works viz. ‘Construction of diversion storm water drain for 
community on the road from Lalcherra to Dalucherra VC of Manu RD Block at a cost 
of ₹ 3.64 lakh’ and ‘Construction of duckery shelter at individual land at a cost of 
₹ 0.82 lakh’ were executed. During the JPV, it was noticed that the storm water drain 
was functioning properly. However, in the second work, despite the completion of the 
duckery shelter, no ducks were present inside. Instead, the same was being used as a 
storage space for paddy and wheat. 
The Government replied (June 2025) that concerned District and Block would be 
instructed to enquire the matter and corrective actions would be taken accordingly. 
2.2.11.11(iii)(b) Implementing Agency: Forest Sub Divisions 
Drought proofing  
Under the above head, 11 41  works, out of 35 works, for the creation of bamboo 
plantation over 45 hectares, raising of polybag bamboo nursery for 1.55 lakh plants and 
maintenance of polybag nursery were undertaken by the Sub Divisional Forest Officers 
(SDFO), Manu and Sonamura during 2019-20 to 2021-22 at a cost of ₹ 56.81 lakh under 
the MGNREG Scheme. 
The SDFO, Manu and the SDFO, Sonamura could not provide (November 2024) 
nursery stock records and sale and distribution records in support of raising and lifting 
of bamboo seedlings from their nursery. During the JPV (November 2024), it was seen 
that there was no nursery, suggesting that the seedlings were likely not disposed of 
through sale or distribution.  
With regard to creation of bamboo plantation over 45 hectares, only a few bamboo 
plants were noticed during the JPV (November 2024) and the majority of the plantation 
sites were overgrown with jungle and bushes. Thus, expenditure of ₹ 56.81 lakh 
allocated for the drought proofing initiative, remained doubtful as the plantation did not 
yield any visible benefits and did not occupy productive area commensurate with the 
 
39  Sl. No. 184, 185, 205 and 208 of Appendix 2.2.5 
40  Sl. No. 179 and 198 of Appendix 2.2.5. Two out of two works were selected in audit. 
41  Sl. No. 44, 45, 67, 68, 87, 88, 89, 187, 188, 189 and 190 of Appendix 2.2.5 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
40
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
40 
funds spent. The status of the plantation is shown in Photographs 2.2.5 to 2.2.8. 
Photographs 2.2.5 and 2.2.6: Status of Bamboo Plantation over 5.0 ha at Deo RF VC 
under SDFO, Manu 
 
  
Photographs 2.2.7 and 2.2.8: Status of Bamboo plantation over 10.0 ha at Dalucherra 
VC under SDFO, Manu 
The Government replied (June 2025) that DPC, Dhalai would be instructed to enquire 
into the matter and action would be taken accordingly. 
2.2.11.11(iii)(c) Implementing agency: Tribal Welfare (Tribal Rehabilitation in 
Plantation and Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group) 
Department 
Eight42 works were selected, out of 162 works, in audit under ‘Works on individual 
lands’ and ‘Drought proofing’ categories which were executed in Dhalai District by the 
TW (TRP & PTG) Department, at a cost of ₹ 16.78 lakh, during 2019-20 and 2023-24 
under the convergence activity. Rubber plantations spread across four hectares and 
 
42  Sl. No. 18, 19, 20, 21, 71, 72, 73 and 74 of Appendix 2.2.5 


Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
41
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
41 
arecanut plantations spread across 14 hectares in the individual land of the beneficiaries 
were verified where rubber and arecanut seedlings were provided by the TW (TRP & 
PTG) Department and labour wages were paid from the Scheme. 
Work-wise findings are detailed in the Appendix 2.2.5 . The major findings are 
discussed below: 
Two works related to creation of rubber plantations on the land of two beneficiaries 43, 
covering a total area of two hectares were taken up during 2023-24 and both the works 
were completed in 2023-24. Expenditure of ₹ 1.71 lakh on wage component was 
provided from the Scheme. JPV conducted in September 2024 revealed that both the 
plantations were covered with shrubs and bushes while limited plantation was noticed 
on a portion of one beneficiary’s land. The status of the plantation is shown in 
Photographs 2.2.9 and 2.2.10. 
Photographs 2.2.9 and 2.2.10: Status of rubber plantation in the land of two 
beneficiaries viz. Lekharai Reang and Biharjoy Reang of Jeolcheera VC under 
Ambassa Block 
The presence of shrubs and bushes instead of a well maintained rubber plantation raises 
doubt about the implementation of the works. Further, expenditure of ₹ 1.71 lakh for 
labour wages without corresponding plantation development raises concerns about the 
effective utilisation of allocated funds. 
The Government replied (June 2025) that the DPC, Dhalai would be instructed to 
enquire into the matter and action would be taken accordingly. 
2.2.11.11(iii) (d) Implementing agency: Tripura Rural Livelihood Mission 
Five44 works, out of six works, were selected in audit under ‘Works on individual lands’ 
category which were executed by the TRLM in Dhalai District during 2022-23 at a cost 
of ₹ 1.17 lakh. Each project involved establishing moringa plantations on 0.05 hectares 
of land per beneficiary, collectively covering an area of 0.25 hectares. Seedlings were 
provided by the Horticulture Department, Government of Tripura and labour wages 
 
43  Shri Biharjoy Reang and Shri Lekharai Reang of Jeolcherra GP under Ambassa Rural Development 
Block. 
44  Sl. No. 1, 2, 10, 11 and 12 of Appendix 2.2.5 


Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
42
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
42 
were funded through the scheme. 
Workwise findings are detailed in the Appendix 2.2.5 . The major findings are 
discussed below: 
JPV (September 2024) of the sampled works revealed that the plantation sites were 
covered with shrubs and bushes and no moringa saplings were visible on the ground. 
The status of the plantation is shown in Photographs 2.2.11 and 2.2.12. 
  
Photographs 2.2.11 and 2.2.12: Status of Moringa plantation in favour of Manidipa 
Chakraborty and Suparna Das under Paschim Lalcharri GP 
The findings during the JPV raise concerns about the effective utilisation of the 
allocated funds and the achievement of the intended benefits under the drought proofing 
initiative.  
The Government replied (June 2025) that the DPC, Dhalai would be instructed to 
enquire into the matter and action would be taken accordingly. 
2.2.11.11(iii)(e) Implementing agency: Rural Development Blocks 
Four 45 works, out of 25 works, were selected in audit under ‘Works on individual 
lands’ and ‘Rural connectivity’ categories which were executed in the Ambassa Block 
during 2020-24 at a cost of ₹ 11.63 lakh. The RC category focussed on constructing 
brick soling road works while the IF category involved building two cattle shelters.  
Workwise findings are detailed in the Appendix 2.2.5 . The major findings are 
discussed below: 
JPV (September 2024) of all the sampled works revealed that the beneficiaries were 
using the cattle shelters for purposes other than their intended use, such as storing 
firewood, drying clothes, etc. Hence, selection of the beneficiaries was not appropriate. 
The status of works is shown in Photographs 2.2.13 and 2.2.14. 
 
45 Sl. No. 8, 9, 27 and 28 of Appendix 2.2.5. 


Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
43
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
43 
Photographs 2.2.13 and 2.2.14: Status of cattle shelter in Paschim Lalcharri GP under 
Ambassa, Block 
The Government replied (June 2025) that the concerned PO would be instructed to 
take up the matter with the beneficiaries and action would be taken accordingly. 
2.2.11.11(iii)(f) Implementing agency: Gram Panchayats/ Village Council  
14746 works, out of 2,203 works, were sampled in audit under ‘Rural connectivity, 
Water conservation and water harvesting, Land development, Works on individual 
lands, Micro Irrigation works, Renovation of traditional water bodies, Flood control 
and protection and Works on fisheries which were executed by the sampled GPs and 
VCs during 2019-24 at a cost of ₹ 5.65 crore. 
Workwise findings are detailed in the Appendix 2.2.5. The major findings are 
discussed below: 
Five47 road works under the head ‘Rural connectivity’ were taken up during 2019-20 to 
2022-23 in Jagannathpur VC, Jeolcheera VC and Basudebpara GP of Ambassa Block 
and completed at a cost of ₹ 50.69 lakh. Length of the roads varied from 1.20 km to 
1.98 km. A JPV (September 2024) revealed that, in three48 cases, no road infrastructure 
existed beyond 200 metres while in the remaining two cases, the roads were overgrown 
with thick jungle and bushes. Thus, expenditure of ₹ 50.69 lakh on the works turned 
out to be wasteful. The status of roads is shown in Photographs 2.2.15 to 2.2.18. 
 
46  Sl. No. 3 to 7, 13 to 17, 22 to 26, 29 to 43, 47 to 66, 77 to 86 and 90 to 176 of Appendix 2.2.5. 
47  Sl. No. 13, 14, 23, 29 and 32 of Appendix 2.2.5. 
48  i) Construction of Mitti Murram Roads from Samusesh Mog house to Tuikhangchara ii) Formation 
of new road from Boikhanta Haduk to Khalaram Reang house at Khadaban para and iii) Widening of 
Village link road Dumping centre to Purba Nalichara Border 
.
.

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
44
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
44 
  
Photograph 2.2.15 and 2.2.16: Status of Mitti Murram Roads from Samusesh Mog 
house to Tuikhangchara via Mandharam under Jagannathpur VC 
  
Photograph 2.2.17 and 2.2.18: Status of Village link road for Community from Old 
Bhudda Mandhir to Kachimchara road under Basudeb Para GP 
Further, two 49  works for excavation of irrigation channel under the head ‘Micro 
irrigation works,’ were executed during 2020-22 in West Karamcheera VC of Manu 
Block and completed at a cost of ₹ 3.41 lakh. Length of the irrigation channels were 
1.05 km and 0.06 km, respectively. However, JPV (November 2024) revealed that both 
the irrigation channels were covered with thick jungle and bushes and in need of 
immediate maintenance. Consequently, the expenditure of ₹ 3.41 lakh on these projects 
became wasteful expenditure. The status of the work is shown in Photographs 2.2.19 
and 2.2.20. 
The Government replied (June 2025) that the PO would be instructed to make an 
enquiry into the matter and corrective action would be taken accordingly. 
 
49  Sl. No. 50 and 56 of Appendix 2.2.5 


Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
45
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
45 
  
Photographs 2.2.19 and 2.2.20: Status of irrigation channel from Mahananda Das 
land to Masli cherra and Falguni Chakma land to Maslicherra  under West 
Karamcherra VC 
The Government replied (June 2025) that the DPCs were instructed to monitor the 
beneficiary survey findings and take action accordingly. 
Conclusion 
The MGNREGA mandated guaranteed wage employment to every rural household 
whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work with the basic objective 
of creation of durable assets, improved water security, soil conservation and higher land 
productivity, drought-proofing and flood management in rural India thereby fostering 
sustainable livelihood for the rural population. 
Audit noticed that highest proportion of works undertaken across the State was under 
‘Community assets or individual assets for vulnerable sections’ followed by ‘Public 
works relating to Natural Resources Management’ and ‘creation of rural infrastructure’. 
More than 99 per cent of the works relating to 2021-22 and earlier periods had been 
completed in the State. The completion rate of the works taken up during 2022-23 and 
2023-24 was 98.32 per cent and 94.21 per cent, respectively, across the State with the 
sampled districts achieving the rates between 92.62 per cent to 99.60 per cent. Although 
the numeric indicators reflected high achievement, the actual physical verification of 
the sampled works revealed shortcomings in both the implementation and outcomes. 
During joint physical verification of the sampled works, deficiencies like non-existence/ 
thin density of plantation works, non-existence of village roads, roads in severely 
damaged conditions, and idle investment in infrastructure such as anganwadi centres, 
duck shelters and cattle shelters were also noticed. 
Serious deficiencies were noticed in the sampled works regarding their execution viz.  
non-uploading of geo-tagged photographs at three stages; failure to upload work 
completion photographs; non-maintenance of essential records such as site accounts 
registers; nursery stock account and distribution cum sale records; work progress 
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
45 
  
Photographs 2.2.19 and 2.2.20: Status of irrigation channel from Mahananda Das 
land to Masli cherra and Falguni Chakma land to Maslicherra  under West 
Karamcherra VC 
The Government replied (June 2025) that the DPCs were instructed to monitor the 
beneficiary survey findings and take action accordingly. 
Conclusion 
The MGNREGA mandated guaranteed wage employment to every rural household 
whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work with the basic objective 
of creation of durable assets, improved water security, soil conservation and higher land 
productivity, drought-proofing and flood management in rural India thereby fostering 
sustainable livelihood for the rural population. 
Audit noticed that highest proportion of works undertaken across the State was under 
‘Community assets or individual assets for vulnerable sections’ followed by ‘Public 
works relating to Natural Resources Management’ and ‘creation of rural infrastructure’. 
More than 99 per cent of the works relating to 2021-22 and earlier periods had been 
completed in the State. The completion rate of the works taken up during 2022-23 and 
2023-24 was 98.32 per cent and 94.21 per cent, respectively, across the State with the 
sampled districts achieving the rates between 92.62 per cent to 99.60 per cent. Although 
the numeric indicators reflected high achievement, the actual physical verification of 
the sampled works revealed shortcomings in both the implementation and outcomes. 
During joint physical verification of the sampled works, deficiencies like non-existence/ 
thin density of plantation works, non-existence of village roads, roads in severely 
damaged conditions, and idle investment in infrastructure such as anganwadi centres, 
duck shelters and cattle shelters were also noticed. 
Serious deficiencies were noticed in the sampled works regarding their execution viz.  
non-uploading of geo-tagged photographs at three stages; failure to upload work 
completion photographs; non-maintenance of essential records such as site accounts 
registers; nursery stock account and distribution cum sale records; work progress 


Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
46
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
46 
registers; site inspection registers; and non-handing over of the completed works to the 
concerned GPs and VCs were noticed in audit against the sampled works.  It was seen 
that third stage photographs were not available in 73 cases out of the sampled 220 works 
which were verified in audit. In none of the cases, site-inspection registers were 
available while completion certificates and handing over certificates were not available 
in 86 cases out of the 220 sampled works in both the sampled districts. 
All the deficiencies pointed towards serious lapses in oversight, execution and intended 
impact the Scheme. 
Recommendations 
 Periodic verification of works may be conducted, and observations recorded in 
the Site Inspection Register. 
 Completion certificates and handing over of works may be ensured immediately 
after completion of the works. 
Audit Objective 4: To assess whether appropriate and adequate monitoring, social 
audit and grievance redressal system were in place and 
functioning as envisaged to achieve greater transparency and 
accountability 
2.2.11.12 Monitoring  
Monitoring is crucial for successful implementation of scheme because it provides a 
continuous feedback loop, allowing project managers to track progress, identify 
potential issues early, make necessary adjustments at mid-course and ensure that the 
scheme achieves its intended goals efficiently and economically at the intended 
timeframe, ultimately leading to better outcomes and accountability for the project. 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee scheme also provides for 
several monitoring mechanisms, including field visits; regular meetings by the 
Panchayats, the Programme Officers and the District Programme Coordinators; work 
verification by the State Quality Monitor (SQM); institution of vigilance mechanism; 
social audits; monitoring by the State Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC) and 
grievance redressal mechanism. Availability, adequacy and effectiveness of all the 
monitoring mechanisms for MGNREGS in the State was examined in audit.  
2.2.11.12(i) Monitoring by the Panchayat, POs and the DPCs 
According to the Operational Guidelines of MGNREGA, 2013, progress of 
implementation of the scheme should be reviewed and monitored by each level of 
Panchayat. The Programme Officer shall monitor and supervise the implementation of 
works taken up by the GPs and other implementing agencies within the block. The 
District Programme Coordinators shall review, monitor and supervise the performance 
of the POs and all the implementing agencies in relation to MGNREGA works and shall 
also conduct and cause to be conducted periodic inspection of the works in progress and 
verification of Muster Rolls. 
The details of rate of verification of works conducted by the District Programme 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
47
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
47 
Coordinators and Assistant District Programme Coordinators, the Programme Officers 
across the State and the sampled districts is represented in Chart 2.2.12. 
Chart 2.2.12: The rate of verification of works across the State and at the sampled 
districts by the DPCs, ADPOs and POs 
 
Source: Area officer report under MGNREGA-MIS 
As per MGNREGA MIS data, details of verification of works were not available for 
2019-20 and 2020-21, while the rate of verification of works varied from 1.03 per cent 
to 4.35 per cent of the total works undertaken by the State during 2021-22 to 2023-24, 
the works verification rate at the sampled districts varied from 0.70 per cent  to 
5.15 per cent (Chart 2.2.12). The detailed position is shown in Appendix 2.2.6. 
However, field verification of relevant records in audit revealed that Site Inspection 
Registers were not maintained by the implementing agencies. There was no 
documentation of site verification of works by the higher authorities or any site 
instructions. Though MIS reports indicate a verification rate between 1.03 per cent and 
4.35 per cent , audit could not verify these figures due to non-maintenance of Site 
Inspection Registers.  Additionally, there was no evidence on record indicating that the 
Panchayats conducted reviews of works in the sampled GPs and VCs. The lack of 
evidence of reviews by Panchayats indicates weak monitoring systems that can lead to 
inefficiencies, deprive the organisation in identifying areas where they can improve 
performance, optimise processes, or capitalise on new opportunities and also fraught 
with the risk of poor quality assets and undetected irregularities including potential 
misuse of funds. 
The Government replied (June 2025) that advisories had been issued to the DPCs to 
ensure maintenance of all the registers as per the Guidelines of MGNREGA. 
2.2.11.12(ii) Capturing of non-relevant photographs in geo-tagging 
Geo Tagging of completed assets through Bhuvan mobile platform, using android based 
mobile application has been developed exclusively for MGNREGA for field-level data 
1.03
4.35 4.31
0.7
5.01
3.69
0.96
3.81
5.15
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Verification rate for the State as a whole Verification at Dhalai District
Verification rate at Sepahijala Diatrict

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
48
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 48 
capturing, as well as asset visualisation capabilities and report generation tools. This 
includes capturing of GPS location of the asset along with photographs by MGNREGA 
Spatial Enumerators. Geo MGNREGA Phase-I was rolled out on 1 September 2016 which 
is applicable to all works completed under MGNREGS. Geo MGNREGA Phase-II was 
rolled out in November 2017. Under Geo MGNREGA. Phase-II geo-tagging of works 
is carried out in three stages viz: before initiation of work (first State), during the work 
(second stage) and after completion of work third stage). For effective tracking, the 
location of work captured in the first stage photograph should match with the locations 
in the second and third stage images. surrounding elements such as presence of trees, 
electrical towers, village paths, nearby houses, etc. as appearing in the first photograph 
are likely to remain consistent. The only visible difference should be the progressive 
advancement of the work itself.  
Audit noticed that in almost all the 220 works physically verified by audit (detailed 
position shown in the Appendix 2.2.5), the three-stage photographs were not uploaded 
on the Bhuvan app, instead unrelated or mismatched photographs were uploaded, which 
did not align with each other. As a result, actual execution of works on bare land, for 
which the three stage photography mechanism was specifically devised, could not be 
assessed in audit. 
Audit analysis of the three stage photographs uploaded for two different works (shown 
in Photographs 2.2.21 to 2.2.26) under the same PO revealed significant discrepancies. 
In the first case, regarding the construction of a water harvesting structure of 
Horticulture Farm at SK Para for Amrit Sarovar during 2022-23 (Expenditure: ₹ 24.70 
lakh), the photographs were found to be inappropriate and irrelevant. However, in the 
second case regarding the excavation of farm pond on Biplab Sarkar’s land at Jatindra 
Das Para under West Karamcheera VC during 2021-22 (Expenditure: ₹ 3.04 lakh), the 
photographs accurately showed the executed work and could be treated as exemplary 
models for three stage photography for all MGNREGA works.  
   
Photographs 2.2.21, 2.2.22 and 2.2.23: First stage, second stage and third stage photographs for 
construction of water harvesting structure of Horticulture Farm at SK Para for Amrit Sarovar 
during 2022-23, expenditure: ₹ 24.70 lakh 


Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
49
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
49 
   
Photographs 2.2.24, 2.2.25 and 2.2.26: First stage, second stage and third stage for excavation 
of farm pond on the land of Biplab Sarkar at Jatindra Das Para under West Karamcheera VC 
during 2021-22, expenditure: ₹ 3.04 lakh 
Adopting the model three stage photography ibid, the department would be able to 
enhance the transparency and accountability of MGNREGA works, facilitating 
effective monitoring and assessment.  
The absence of proper photographic evidence intended to verify the actual progress and 
completion of works undermines the reliability of the reported data raises concerns 
about the authenticity of asset creation and vulnerability to fraud and errors. 
The Government replied (June 2025) that the POs had been instructed to take all 
the precaution while taking three-stage photographs. 
2.2.11.12(iii) Verification of works by the State quality monitors 
According to Para 14.7 of the operational guidelines of MGNREGA, 2013 and the 
annual master circular on MGNREGA issued from time to time, each State is required 
to establish a State Quality Monitoring Unit. This unit shall comprise of State Quality 
Monitors (SQM) for each district and a Nodal Officer at the State level, holding at least 
the rank of Superintending Engineer. The SQM Unit will monitor & evaluate at least 
10 per cent of the works executed under the Scheme in each district of the State. The 
expenditure of these 10 per cent works should be at least ₹ 5.00 lakh and above for 
kutcha (earth) works and ₹ 10.00 lakh and above for the pucca (masonry) works. 
Further, as per Para 14.8 of the Operational Guidelines of MGNREGA, 2013, no SQM 
will be allotted to his/ her home district. 
State MGNREGS Engineering Cell was constituted in September 2019 and the district 
level Quality Monitors were appointed in August 2020. Audit, noticed that in Gomati 
District50 and a part period of Dhalai District 51, officers with the home districts as 
Gomati and Dhalai respectively were appointed as SQMs, in violation of the operational 
guidelines of MGNREGA, 2013, which explicitly prohibit such appointments to ensure 
objectivity and to avoid conflict of interest   
 
50  SQM was appointed for the period from August 2020 to March 2024 
51  SQM was appointed for the period from April 2023 to March 2024 


Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
50
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
50 
As against the target of 10 per cent verification52 of kutcha works costing ₹ five lakh 
and above, the actual verification by the SQM in the State during the years 2021-22, 
2022-23 and 2023-24 was 2.02, 3.53 and 1.23 per cent respectively. As regards, per cent 
of verification in the sampled districts, the same ranged between 0 to 7.46 per cent53. 
For the pucca works costing ₹ 10.00 lakh and above, the rate of verification by the SQM 
in the State during the years 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24 was 0.83, 3.60 and 
0.94 per cent respectively. As regards, the per cent  of verification in the sampled 
districts, the same ranged between 0 to 14.06 per cent54. Though, the rate of achievement 
exceeded the target in the sampled district, the same was achieved only once during the 
year 2022-23 and no verification was done in the previous and subsequent year. The 
detailed position is shown in Appendix 2.2.7) . Further, the SQMs did not use the 
prescribed ‘inspection formats’ as provided in the guidelines for capturing the detailed 
technical and other relevant information. 
These deficiencies in quality monitoring not only compromised the integrity and utility 
of the assets created but also hampered the scheme’s objectives of ensuring transparency 
and accountability in the creation of durable assets. Further, the consistent shortfall in 
mandatory verification indicates a weak monitoring mechanism.  
The Government replied (June 2025) that necessary advisories/ instructions had been 
issued to the DPCs and the Chief Engineer, Rural Development Department for 
compliance. 
2.2.11.12(iv) Vigilance mechanism  
Para 13.6.1 of the operational guidelines of MGNREGA, 2013 stipulates that all States 
shall make an arrangement for a three-tier vigilance mechanism to proactively detect 
irregularities in the implementation of the Act and to follow up detected irregularities 
and malfeasance, including those identified during social audit and ensure that the guilty 
are punished and recoveries of misspent funds duly made. 
Audit noticed that State and district level Vigilance Committees were constituted by the 
State in February 2021 while no Vigilance and Monitoring Committees (VMC) were 
formed at village level by the GPs and the VCs in the sampled GPs and VCs. 
Consequently, no activities or reports of the VMCs were available for review. 
The non-formation of VMCs at the village level undermines the transparency and 
accountability mechanisms integral to MGNREGA. Inactive or absent VMCs indicate 
limited oversight of the quality and progress of works.  
The Government replied (June 2025) that instructions had been issued to the DPCs 
for constituting and activating the VMCs. 
 
52  10 per cent of the works is to be verified by the SQMs. For kutcha works having value of work of 
₹ 5.00 lakh and more is eligible for verification by SQM while it is ₹ 10.00 lakh for pucca works. 
53  Sephahijala: 2021-2022 – 0 per cent, 2022-2023 – 7.46 per cent, 2023-2024 – 1.18 per cent,  
 Dhalai: 2021-2022 – 1.89 per cent, 2022-2023 – 4.17 per cent, 2023-2024 – 5.68 per cent 
54  Sephahijala: 2021-2022 – 0 per cent, 2022-2023 – 14.06 per cent, 2023-2024 – 0 per cent,  
 Dhalai: 2021-2022 – 0 per cent, 2022-2023 – 4.17 per cent, 2023-2024 – 0 per cent 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
51
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
51 
2.2.11.12(v) Monitoring of MGNREGS through National Mobile Monitoring 
System  
To ensure more transparency in the implementation of the Scheme in the States/ UTs, a 
provision for capturing of attendance at the worksite wherein muster rolls55 were issued 
for 20 or more workers through National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) App with 
geo-tagged time stamped photographs of the worker was started in May 2021. It was 
mandatory to capture the attendance of all the workers, except Individual Beneficiary 
Scheme/ Project) through NMMS. 
Audit noticed that the capturing of the attendance in NMMS in the State commenced in 
2021-22 but 1.44 per cent of the eligible muster rolls where 20 or more workers were 
employed were covered. In 2022-23 and 2023-24 the achievement rose to 82.66 per cent 
and 82.80 per cent respectively in the State. The details are shown in Table 2.2.15. 
Table 2.2.15: Number of muster rolls due for NMMS app and attendance actually taken 
in the State and in the sampled districts 
Sl. 
No. 
Domain 
of activity 
Financial 
Year 
Number of 
Muster Rolls 
eligible for 
NMMS 
Number of Muster 
Rolls filled through 
NMMS 
Percentage of 
achievement 
1. 
State 
2021-22 5,20,196 7,494 1.44 
2. 2022-23 2,99506 2,47,577 82.66 
3. 2023-24 2,12,296 1,75,783 82.80 
4. Dhalai 
District 
2021-22 64,803 1,081 1.67 
5. 2022-23 43,162 34,186 79.20 
6 2023-24 23,340 21,594 92.52 
7. Sepahijala 
District 
2021-22 71,271 2,077 2.91 
8. 2022-23 32,548 27,861 85.59 
9. 2023-24 19,487 17,137 87.94 
Source: MGNREGA MIS data 
As regards NMMS activity in the sampled districts, the Sepahijala District was well 
ahead of the State’s performance in all the three years 2021-24 and Dhalai District was 
also above the State’s average performance in two years except for 2022-23.  However, 
despite the fact that there was increase 56 in number of new works in the State during 
2021-22 to 2023-24, the number of muster rolls becoming eligible for taking attendance 
through NMMS decreased significantly in 2022-23 and 2023-24. As may be seen from 
Table 2.2.15 that the number of muster rolls in both the State and the sampled districts 
showed a year on year decline. This indicated that fewer muster rolls having more than 
20 workers probably due to fragmentation of labourers to bypass the NMMS.  
The Government replied (June 2025) that the matter of 20 or more workers not being 
employed at a time to avoid capturing the attendance of the workers through NMMS 
would be enquired and actions would be taken accordingly. 
 
55  Muster roll refers to a documents or a list of workers used to keep record of attendance, payroll etc. 
56  Number of new works taken up in 2021-22: 2,28,646, in 2022-23: 2,55,195 and in 2023-24: 2,70,892 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
52
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
52 
2.2.11.12(vi) Functioning of State Employment Guarantee Council in 
monitoring the scheme 
According to the Section 12 of the MGNREGA, 2005, for the purposes of regular 
monitoring and reviewing the implementation of the Act at the State level, every State 
Government shall constitute a State Council to be known as the State Employment 
Guarantee Council  with a Chairperson and such number of official members as may be 
determined by the State Government and not more than fifteen non-official members 
nominated by the State Government from Panchayati Raj Institutions, organisations of 
workers and disadvantaged groups. 
According to Para 2.4.1 of the operational guidelines of the MGNREGA, 2013 the 
SEGC shall prepare the annual report on implementation of MGNREGS in the State to 
be laid before the State Legislature by the State Government. 
Government of Tripura constituted the SEGC in the year 2006 with the Chief Minister, 
Tripura as the Chairman of the Council and the Chief Secretary of the State as a member 
and the Additional Secretary/ Joint Secretary/ Deputy Secretary, Rural Development 
Department as the Member Secretary of the Council. Audit noticed that no meetings of 
the Council were held in 2021-22 and 2022-23. However, one meeting each was 
conducted during 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2023-24. Audit further noticed that the 
frequency of the meetings of the SEGC to be held in a year was not fixed by the 
Government though it was required to be done as per the notification through which the 
first SEGC was constituted in the year 2006. 
Further, no annual report on implementation of the MGNREGS in the State was 
prepared by the SEGC for submission before the Legislature by the State Government 
since inception of the scheme though it was a requirement under the Operational 
Guideline of MGNREGA, 2013. 
Not holding monitoring committee meetings can significantly hinder project 
implementation, leading to delays, cost overruns, and potentially even project failure. 
These meetings are crucial for tracking progress, identifying issues early, and making 
necessary adjustments to keep the project on schedule and within budget. Similarly, 
non- preparation of annual report on project implementation can significantly hinder a 
project's success and sustainability. Without a comprehensive annual report, project 
managers and stakeholders lack crucial insights into progress, challenges, and overall 
project health, potentially jeopardising the project’s continuity in the long run. 
2.2.11.12(vii) Status of social audit for MGNREGA works  
An innovative feature of the MGNREGA is that it has institutionalised ‘Social Audit’57 
as a means of continuous public vigilance. The basic objective of social audit is to ensure 
public accountability in the implementation of projects, laws and policies. Social Audit 
is an effective means for ensuring transparency, participation, consultation and 
accountability under MGNREGA. The process of Social Audit combines people’s 
 
57  Section 17 of the MGNREG Act, 2005 and Paragraph 13.1.1 to 13.1.3 of the operational guidelines 
of the MGNREGA, 2013. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
53
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
53 
participation and monitoring with the requirements of the audit discipline. 
The Act mandates conduct of regular social audits under the Scheme by the Gram Sabha. 
The operational guidelines of MGNREGA, 2013 and the MGNREGA Audit of Schemes 
Rules, 2011 lays down the detailed procedures for half-yearly social audits by the Gram 
Sabha, including: establishment of an independent social audit unit for facilitating 
conduct of social audits specifying the process for conducting social audit through 
capacity building of resource persons, preparing social   audit formats and guidelines, 
creating awareness, facilitating verification of records with primary stakeholders and 
worksites, facilitating smooth conduct of social audit by Gram Sabhas, and hosting 
social audit/ action taken reports in the public domain. Schedule-I of the Act mandates 
verification of every work site to cross check the measurements in the field with that on 
Measurement Books and to assess the utility and outcomes of the work so executed and 
verification of every disbursement on record with the concerned beneficiaries.   
Audit noticed that the Social Audit Unit (SAU), Tripura  was constituted in March 2016 
and started functioning in September 2016. The Unit was registered under the Society 
Registration Act, 1860 in February 2021 as ‘The Society of Social Audit Unit-Tripura 
(SoSAU-T)’. The unit operated independently from the implementing departments of 
the Scheme in the State. Audit findings related to social audit are discussed below. 
2.2.11.12(vii)(a) Shortage of manpower 
Audit observed that the State Government did not appoint any Quality Monitors in the 
Social Audit Unit to assess the quality of assets created, as required under the 
Operational Guidelines of MGNREGA, 2013. Further, no State Resource Person (SRP) 
was in position, and there were significant shortfalls of 56 per cent and 59 per cent in 
the sanctioned posts of District Resource Persons (DRPs) and Block Resource Persons 
(BRPs), respectively (Appendix 2.2.8). 
Shortage of manpower had its impact on the verification of works in social audit. It was 
noticed that almost all the GPs and VCs were covered in Social Audit once in a year 
during 2019-24 but verification of works ranged from 34 per cent to 62 per cent out of 
the total works during 2019-24 with an average of 45.65 per cent of the total works as 
shown in Table 2.2.16. 
Table 2.2.16: Showing the verification of works by Social Audit during 2019-20 to 2023-24 
Sl. 
No. Year Total number of 
works 
Number of works 
verified 
Percentage of 
works verified 
1. 2019-20 79,594 39,365 49.46 
2. 2020-21 91,820 51,300 55.87 
3. 2021-22 1,28,321 79,586 62.02 
4. 2022-23 4,03,645 1,38,816 34.39 
5. 2023-24 2,58,511 1,30,093 50.32 
Total  9,61,891 4,39,160 45.65 
Source: SAU work verification MIS data 
A lower rate of verification of works may lead to an increased risk of undetected errors, 
non-compliance with regulations. This could also result in inaccurate financial 
reporting coupled with the risk of non-existent assets created under the scheme. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
54
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
54 
The Government replied (June 2025) that due to shortage of funds during 2023-24 and 
2024-25, the recruitment of resource persons like SAE, DRP & BRP under SAU, 
Tripura could not be undertaken.  
2.2.11.12(vii)(b) Deficiencies in audit procedures and verification of records 
Audit inspected the Social Audit Unit of MGNREGA and verified social audit 
inspection reports of the sampled GPs/ VCs and noticed that authentication of records-
checking (viz. checking of Muster Roll, Estimate copy, Work Orders, Administrative 
Approval and Expenditure Sanction memo, Annual Action Plan, verification of seven 
registers58, etc.) by means of pencils/ pen, etc. and signature with designation and date, 
etc. in the course of Social Audit were not done as noticed from the verification of 
records during audit of the sampled GPs and VCs where social audit was also 
conducted. As a result, the verification of documents could not be assured. 
Audit further noticed that no checklist was put in place for approval and finalisation 
of Inspection Reports. In the absence of which the Inspection Reports were found to 
be issued despite having the deficiencies such as submission of blank formats 
regarding Measurement sheet of Works Report on work verification status 59, etc. and 
also without any authentication by the Inspecting Officer. Despite these deficiencies, 
the draft Inspection Reports were accepted by the State SAU and issued to the GPs/ 
VCs. Details of the 15 test checked cases are given in the Appendix 2.2.9 . This 
undermines the credibility, transparency and accountability of Social Audit process 
The Government replied (June 2025) that the matter was discussed in the Executive 
Committee meeting held on 10 January 2025 and adopted a procedure for verification 
of documents and authentication of records during Social Audit. Instructions had been 
issued to all DRPs/ BRPs to comply with the procedure so adopted in the EC meeting. 
It was also stated that a standard check list had been finalised and shared with all the 
SAU audit teams for taking necessary action. 
2.2.11.12(vii)(c) Inadequate documentation of Gram Sabha meetings for 
finalisation of Social Audit findings 
Para 13.3 of the Operational Guidelines of MGNREGA, 2013 prescribes the detailed 
procedure for social audit process which inter alia includes holding Gram Sabha 
meetings to discuss the findings of the verification exercise and also to review the 
compliance on transparency and accountability. Further, para 13.3.11 stipulates that the 
entire proceeding of the Social Audit Gram Sabha meeting shall be video recorded.  
Examination of records related to Social Audit Inspection reports of the sampled GPs/ 
VCs revealed that Gram Sabha meetings conducted for finalisation of Social Audit 
findings were not video recorded. It was also noticed that the details of the persons who 
attended the Gram Sabha meetings to decide the social audit findings were not recorded 
 
58  Register-I Job Card related, Register-II Conduct of Gram Sabha related, Register-III Demand and 
allocation of work and wage payment related, Register-IV Register for work, Register-V Fixed asset 
register, Register VI Complaint register and Register-VII Material register. 
59  13 cases out of the 15 test-checked case from the sampled GPs and VCs. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
55
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 55 
properly in detail which was a serious lacuna. Since the Gram Sabha is the final body 
in deciding the findings of the Social Audit, it is very important that details of the 
persons who attended the Gram Sabha meetings are recorded in writing to ensure 
transparency and accountability.  
The Government replied (June 2025) that the instructions had been issued to DRPs/ 
BRPs to take geo-tagged photos of Gram Sabha and to upload real-time geo tagged 
photos and videos in the Panchayat Nirnay App, developed by Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj. It was also stated that a standard Gram Sabha attendance format had been finalised 
and shared with all the SAU audit team for taking necessary action. 
2.2.11.13 Grievance redressal 
The mechanism prescribed under the Act and the Operational Guidelines of 
MGNREGA for grievance redressal, transparency and accountability stipulates that the 
PO and the DPC will be the Grievance Redressal Officers at the block and district levels 
and grievances are to be acknowledged, and disposal intimated to the petitioner. The 
operational guidelines of MGNREGA, 2013 also stipulates appointment of Ombudsmen 
in all the districts for expeditious redressal of grievances regarding implementation of 
the Scheme. The guidelines also stipulate for appointment of Appellate Authority to 
handle the appeals against the decisions, findings and awards of the Ombudsman to 
ensure justice and fair play.  
Audit noticed that complaint registers were maintained at the sampled GPs/ VCs, POs 
and the DPC offices but no complaints were registered during 2019-24. However, 
complaints were registered directly with the Ombudsman. Audit noticed that 70 and 76 
complaints were submitted in 2022-23 and 2023-24 and out of which, 68 and 75 
complaints respectively were disposed of by the Ombudsman. No complaints were 
submitted to the Ombudsman in 2019-22.  
The State was yet to appoint (February 2025) an Appellate Authority to act upon the 
appeal against the decisions/ awards of the Ombudsman as required under the 
Operational Guidelines of MGNREGA. The absence of registered complaints coupled 
with the complaint submission only at ombudsman level indicates underutilisation of 
local grievance redressal mechanisms and poses risks for aggrieved citizens. In the 
absence of an appellate mechanism, citizens aggrieved by the decisions of the 
Ombudsman are left without recourse, undermining the principles of transparency, 
fairness, and accountability enshrined in the Scheme. 
The Government replied (June 2025) that the State had already shortlisted the 
Appellate Authority members. Formal appointment letters would be issued with the 
approval of the Government soon. It was also stated that appointment letters had been 
issued for clearing the gaps in the posts of the ombudspersons. At present, the 
department is accepting complaints lodged through CM’s helpline, newspaper 
clippings through the Task Monitoring System and through the traditional means as 
well. 
 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
56
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
56 
2.2.11.14 Record maintenance 
The three main sets of records critical to establishing provision of employment and 
creation of assets are the Job Card, Muster Rolls and Measurement Books. Job card is 
essential for recording details regarding beneficiary, work and payment. Muster Rolls 
and Measurement Books are essential for recording attendance and the quantity of 
work. In addition, Operational Guidelines of MGNREGA prescribes maintenance of 
seven registers60 by the GPs/ VCs well. 
Audit noticed that the prescribed records were maintained by the sampled GPs and 
VCs but the entries in the Registers were not checked and authenticated by the 
controlling Supervising Officers or the Programme Officers.  
The Government replied (June 2025) that instructions had been issued to the DPCs 
and the POs so that the entries in the Registers are checked and authenticated by the 
controlling Supervising Officers or the Programme Officers. 
Conclusion 
State Quality Monitors did not verify the works as per the targets set in the operational 
guidelines. SQM also did not utilise the inspection formats as provided in the guidelines 
for capturing the detailed technical and other information. No activity of the Vigilance 
and Monitoring Committees was noticed as no village level VMC was formed by the 
GPs and the VCs.  
Deficiencies in Social Audit were also noticed. Checklist for preparation of Inspection 
Report was not finalised by the SAU, Tripura. Social Audit teams submitted Inspection 
Reports with incomplete sections and lacked authentication by the Inspecting Officers. 
Despite these deficiencies, the draft Inspection Reports were accepted by the State SAU 
and issued to the GPs/ VCs. Furthermore, the Gram Sabhas convened for finalisation of 
Social Audit findings were neither video graphed as stipulated in the Operational 
Guidelines of the Scheme nor were the attendance records maintained properly. 
During the audit period, Ombudsmen were not appointed across all the eight districts of 
the State. Additionally, the State had not designated an Appellate Authority to respond 
and look into the appeals against the decisions, findings, and awards of the Ombudsmen 
which was a serious lacuna in ensuring accountability under the scheme.  
Site Inspection Registers were not maintained by the implementing agencies and site 
verification of works by the higher authorities and site instructions, if any, were also not 
recorded. Review of works by the panchayats in the sampled GPs and VCs was not 
done. 
 
 
 
60 Register-I Job Card related, Register-II Conduct of Gram Sabha related, Register-III Demand and 
allocation of work and wage payment related, Register-IV Register for work, Register-V Fixed asset 
register, Register VI Complaint register and Register-VII Material register. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
57
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 57 
Recommendations 
 Monthly review of works may be done by the GPs and VCs and proceedings 
may be recorded. 
 Uploading of geo tagged photographs for three stages of work may invariably 
be done in a timely manner to provide visual evidence of the project’s progress. 
 Deficiencies identified in the Social Audits conducted may be addressed 
promptly and Social Audit must be conducted scrupulously in accordance with 
the guidelines. 
  

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
58
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 58 
PUBLIC WORKS (DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION) DEPARTMENT 
2.3 Performance Audit on “Jal Jeevan Mission” 
 
2.3.1 Introduction 
Access to clean drinking water is a fundamental human need and one of the most vital 
elements for sustaining life. Its significance is evident from the fact that ancient 
civilisations flourished in river valleys, where fresh and plentiful water was readily 
available. Even in the oldest sacred scripture Rig Veda, water is celebrated as a source 
of great happiness and compared to nurturing, loving mothers. 
Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) is a flagship scheme launched by the Government of India on 
15 August 2019. The objective of JJM is to ensure that every rural household has a 
Functional Household Tap Connection (FHTC) by 2024 to provide drinking water 
supply in adequate quantity (minimum 55 litres per capita per day (LPCD)) of 
prescribed quality (BIS:10500) on regular and long-term basis at affordable service 
delivery charges leading to improvement in living standards of rural communities. 
 
Source: JJM Functionality Assessment of Household Tap Connections, 2022 
JJM is implemented by the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS), 
Ministry of Jal Shakti in partnership with States/ Union Territories.  
To ensure effective implementation of important programmes related to drinking water, 
the Public Works Department (Drinking Water & Sanitation) {PWD(DWS)} has been 
entrusted with the responsibility of implementation of all drinking water supply 
schemes and rural sanitation works across the entire State of Tripura. The Mission of 
PWD(DWS) is to enhance the quality of life of the people by providing sustainable and 
safe drinking water, improved sanitation facilities and services and promoting hygienic 
practices within communities. 
JJM is implemented under three components, viz, Coverage, Support and Water 
Quality.  
 
 


Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
59
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
59 
Component Purpose Key Activities Funding Norm 
Coverage 
Infrastructure 
development for 
FHTCs and piped 
water systems 
Source development, 
water treatment, 
storage, distribution 
networks, tap 
installation 
Major portion of funds 
allocated for this 
component 
Support 
Capacity building, 
IEC activities, 
community 
mobilisation, and 
support for Water 
Security Plans and 
VWSCs 
Training, IEC 
campaigns, VWSC 
formation, community 
awareness, gender 
inclusion 
Up to five per cent  of 
total annual allocation 
Water 
Quality 
Monitoring 
& 
Surveillance 
(WQMS) 
Regular testing of 
drinking water 
sources, strengthening 
laboratories, and 
ensuring safe water 
quality 
Lab setup/ 
strengthening, field 
test kits, training of 
volunteers, periodic 
water quality tests 
Up to two per cent  of 
total annual allocation 
In Tripura, rural areas are mostly dependent on underground water sources for drinking 
purposes. The State PWD (DWS) implemented various works in the State under JJM 
to provide potable drinking water which can be categorised as outlined below: 
(i) Piped Water Supply schemes (PWSSs) based on major river/ water body 
including the establishment of Surface Water Treatment Plant (SWTP); 
(ii) PWSSs based on ground water resources such as Deep Tube Well (DTW) and 
Small Bore Deep Tube Well (SBDTW); 
(iii) Innovative schemes; and 
(iv) Iron Removal Plants (IRPs), designed to provide iron-free water. 
2.3.2 Organisational set up 
As per the operational guidelines for the implementation of JJM issued by Department 
of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Ministry of Jal Shakti, Government of India in 
December 2019, the State Government would strengthen the already established State 
Water and Sanitation Mission (SWSM) 61 by providing necessary powers; to subsume 
existing Water and Sanitation Support Organisation (WSSO) 62 with SWSM, create 
District Water and Sanitation Missions (DWSM) 63 and Village Water and Sanitation 
Committees (VWSC)64 for effective implementation of various components of the JJM. 
It was also advised to (re) constitute the State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee 
(SLSSC) headed by the Chief Secretary/ Principal Secretary/ Secretary in charge of 
PHED/ RWS department for approval of schemes. In Tripura, PWD (DWS) was 
reconstituted (March 2020) for according approval to the Annual Action Plan of the 
 
61 headed by Chief Secretary of the State 
62 headed by a Director, Ex-Officio Addl. CE/ SE 
63 headed by District Magistrate & Collector 
64 headed by Panchayat Pradhan 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
60
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 60 
State and also to review the functioning/ performance of the existing schemes.  
The PWD (DWS) headed by the Secretary was responsible for overall implementation 
of rural water supply schemes in the State. He was assisted by the Chief Engineer (CE), 
who headed the organisation, along with six Superintending Engineers (SEs) at the 
Circle level and 11 Executive Engineers (EE) at the Divisional level. The organisational 
structure of the Department is given in Chart 2.3.1. 
Chart 2.3.1. Organisational Structure 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
The delivery mechanism under JJM at State, District and Village level is depicted in 
Chart 2.3.2 as under:  
:

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
61
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
61 
Chart 2.3.2: Delivery mechanism 
State Level 
 
District Level  
 
GP Level 
 
 
Source: Information furnished by Director, Water & Sanitation Support Organisation 
2.3.3 Audit objectives  
The Performance Audit was conducted with a view to obtain a reasonable assurance 
that:  
 programme objectives (output and outcomes) have been achieved successfully; 
 efficient institutional framework is in place for planning, implementation, and 
State Water and Sanitation Mission (SWSM) 
i) Apex Committee: To provide policy guidance and responsibility for the overall strategic 
planning and implementation of JJM 
ii) Executive Committee: Monitoring and evaluation of physical and financial performance, 
management of water supply schemes, performance review of annual plan and approval 
of next year plan, etc. 
State Level Scheme 
Sanctioning Committee 
(SLSSC) 
Approval of all projects/ 
schemes, ensure online MIS 
entries of approved projects, 
review the functioning/ 
performance of existing 
schemes 
Source Finding 
Committee (SFC) 
Review and approve water 
sources with due 
consideration of availability 
of potable drinking water, 
highlight water sources 
issues and suggest possible 
solutions 
Water and Sanitation 
Support Organisation 
(WSSO) 
As a separate 
organisation under 
SWSM for 
implementation of JJM 
scheme 
District Water and Sanitation Mission (DWSM) 
Headed by DM and Collector of the concerned districts is responsible for overall 
implementation of JJM at district level, coordinate with VWSCs, collect information, ensure 
preparation of VAP, approve VAP, finalisation of DAP and submit the same to SWSM, identify 
villages requiring ISA support, engage ISA, monitoring performance of ISA, etc.  
Village Water and Sanitation 
Committee (VWSC) 
A sub-committee in each Panchayat 
responsible for planning, monitoring, 
implementation and management of rural 
drinking water supply schemes within 
their jurisdiction. Ensuring community 
participation and decision making in all 
phases of in-village schemes. 
Implementation Support Agency (ISA) 
Non-Government Organisations/Village 
Organisations/ Women Self Help Groups/ 
Community Based Organisations/ Trusts/ 
Foundations referred to as ISAs act as a 
coordinating platform between DWSM and 
VWSC. Partners in mobilising and engaging 
the communities to plan, design, implement, 
manage, operate & maintain in-village water 
supply infrastructure. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
62
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
62 
post operational management of the schemes; 
 financial resources have been employed in an economic and efficient manner; 
and 
 assets created through the programme are sustainable for the next two to three 
decades and do not compromise water security for future generations. 
2.3.4  Audit criteria 
Audit findings were benchmarked against the following sources and criteria: 
 Operational guidelines for implementation of JJM; 
 Margdarshika for gram panchayat and VWSC to provide safe drinking water in 
rural households; 
 Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance (WQMS) Framework; 
 General Financial Rules, 2017; and 
 Orders issued by the State Government facilitating implementation of JJM. 
2.3.5 Scope of Audit and Audit methodology 
The Performance Audit was conducted between August 2024 and December 2024, 
covering the implementation of JJM scheme during the period 2019-24. The audit 
methodology involved test check of records in the office of the Chief Engineer, PWD 
(DWS), Director, WSSO and the sampled divisions. Audit examined the 
implementation of JJM in the following areas of Tripura as were selected on Simple 
Random Sampling Without Replacement method: 
 South Tripura and Unakoti Districts out of eight65 districts 
 Kumarghat, Sabroom and Belonia Divisions out of 1066 implementing divisions 
 four out of 12 blocks67 within the selected districts 
 20 Gram Panchayats (GPs)/ Village Councils (VCs) 68 in Tripura Tribal Areas 
Autonomous District Council area, out of 95 GP/ VCs69 within the selected blocks 
In addition, Joint Physical Verification (JPV) of 408 beneficiaries was also conducted 
and photographic evidences were taken to corroborate audit findings, wherever 
necessary.   
 
65  South Tripura and Unakoti Districts were selected. Other districts are West Tripura, North Tripura, 
Gomati, Khowai, Sepahijala, Dhalai. 
66  Agartala DWS Division-II under West Tripura District, Kalyanpur Division under Khowai District, 
Kumarghat Division under Unakoti District, Dharmanagar Division under North Tripura District, 
Udaipur Division under Gomati District, Belonia Division and Sabroom Division under South 
Tripura District, Ambassa Division and Kamalpur Division under Dhalai District, and Bishalgarh 
Division under Sepahijala District. 
67  Gournagar and Kumarghat blocks were selected from Unakoti District and Rajnagar and Rupaichari 
blocks were selected from South Tripura District. 
68  11 GPs and Nine VCs 
69  64 GPs and 31 VCs  

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
63
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
63 
The Entry Conference was held with the Secretary, PWD (DWS) on 24 July 2024 
wherein audit objectives, scope, criteria and methodology were discussed and inputs of 
the Government were obtained. Audit findings were discussed with the Secretary, PWD 
(DWS) in an Exit Conference (26 March 2025) and the responses of the Government 
including their written replies, were suitably considered while finalising this report. 
2.3.6 Acknowledgement  
Audit acknowledges the co-operation and assistance extended by the Department and 
its officials at various stages during conduct of this performance audit. 
2.3.7 Audit findings 
 
Audit Objective 1: To assess whether programme objectives (output and outcomes) 
have been achieved successfully 
 
2.3.7.1 Status of coverage of villages  
JJM has been launched in partnership with States, to enable every household in villages 
to have FHTC. As of August 2019, the State Government had identified 765 revenue 
villages for providing FHTC to every rural household in these villages by 2024,  
however, 100 per cent FHTC coverage had been achieved only in 57 villages i.e. 7.45 
per cent in the State. In the sampled districts, 100 per cent FHTC coverage had been 
achieved in 24.28 per cent and 3.30 per cent villages under Unakoti and South Tripura 
districts respectively as detailed in Table 2.3.1 and Chart 2.3.3. 
Table 2.3.1: Status of village coverage through FHTC under JJM (as of March 2024) 
State Level 
(Percentage in parenthesis) 
Unakoti 
(Percentage in 
parenthesis) 
South Tripura 
(Percentage in 
parenthesis) 
Total No. of Revenue Villages 765 (100) 70 (100) 121 (100) 
Village coverage as on 31 March 2024 
(100 per cent) 57 (7.45) 17 (24.28) 04 (3.30) 
Village coverage as on 31 March 2024 (in 
progress) 
708 
(92.55) 53 (75.72) 117 (96.70) 
Villages reported 70  with 100  per cent  
coverage 47 (6.14) 15 (21.43) 04 (3.30) 
Villages certified 71  with 100 per cent  
coverage 38 (4.97) 15 (21.43) 04 (3.30) 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) 
 
70  Villages who have claimed to have achieved ‘Har Ghar Jal’ 
71  Reported ‘Har Ghar Jal’ is verified by the Gram Sabha  

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
64
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
64 
Chart 2.3.3: Status of village coverage through FHTC under JJM (as of March 2024) 
 
In reply, the Government stated (March 2025) that all out efforts were being made for 
100 per cent coverage of the 765 villages at the earliest possible. The Government also 
furnished the achievement made in respect of villages coverage up to February 2025, 
which is shown in Table 2.3.2. 
Table 2.3.2: Status of village coverage through FHTC under JJM (as of February 2025) 
(percentage in parentheses) 
Particulars  State Level Unakoti South Tripura 
Total No. of Revenue Villages 765 (100) 70 (100) 121 (100) 
Village coverage by February 2025 
(completed 100 per cent) 117 (15.29) 21 (30.00) 8 (6.61) 
Village coverage by 28 February 
2025 (in progress) 648 (84.71) 49 (70) 113 (93.39) 
Villages reported with 100 per cent 
coverage 107 (13.99) 21 (30) 7 (5.79) 
Villages certified with 100 per cent 
coverage 96 (12.55) 20 (28.57) 7(5.79) 
As of March 2024, only 57 villages (7.45 per cent) had achieved 100 per cent  FHTC 
coverage. By February 2025, this improved to 117 villages (15.29 per cent ), still far 
from full saturation. We noticed district-level disparities where Unakoti District showed 
relatively better performance: 100 per cent coverage in 21 out of 70 villages 
(30 per cent) by February 2025, but South Tripura District lagged behind with only 
eight out of 121 villages (6.61 per cent) fully covered.  
Audit found a mismatch between villages reported as fully covered and those certified: 
at the State level, only 96 villages were certified as of February 2025, indicating 
potential over-reporting or delays in formal validation. In the span of nearly one year 
(March 2024 – February 2025), State-level full coverage rose by just 9.26 per cent, 
indicating slow project execution or systemic bottlenecks. 
765
70
121
57
17 4
708
53
117
47 15 438 15 4
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
State Level Unakoti District South Tripura District
Total No of Revenue Villages Village coverage as on 31-03-2024 (100%)
Village coverage as on 31-03-2024 (in progress) Villages reported with 100 % coverage
Villages certified with 100 % coverage

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
65
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
65 
Despite the lapse of the original timeline (2024), only 15.29 per cent of villages in 
Tripura had achieved 100 per cent FHTC coverage under the Jal Jeevan Mission by 
February 2025. The shortfall reflects significant delay in project execution and raises 
concerns over planning, resource deployment, and inter-agency coordination. The lag 
in certification of coverage also points to deficiencies in monitoring and third-party 
validation mechanisms. 
2.3.7.2 Coverage of household connection  
Every rural household has drinking water supply in adequate quantity of prescribed 
quality on regular and long-term basis at affordable service delivery charges leading to 
improvement in living standards of rural communities was the objective of JJM. 
However, this intended objective has not been fully realised.  
The State Government had targeted (August 2019) to provide all rural households 
(7,25,634 numbers) with FHTC by March 2024 under JJM, however, the number of 
households as on March 2024 increased to 7,48,639. As of March 2024, 5,90,719 72 
(78.91 per cent) rural households were provided with the FHTCs by the department. 
Table 2.3.3: Coverage of household connection through FHTC by PWD (DWS) 
Year 
Number of House 
Holds to be 
covered at the 
beginning of each 
year 
Target Achievement  
Excess (+)/ Shortfall (-) 
in respect of target 
(in percentage) 
State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts 
2019-20 869063 159963 68178 11471 45960 7418 (-) 22218 
(32.59) 
(-) 4053 
(33.33) 
2020-21 730739 161485 320473 69270 142211 34913 (-) 178262 
(55.62) 
(-) 34357 
(49.60) 
2021-22 547583 122715 382365 122715 163428 37675 (-) 218937 
(57.26) 
(-) 85040 
(69.30) 
2022-23 364269 76624 379801 76624 76024 14759 (-) 303777 
(79.98) 
(-) 61865 
(80.74) 
2023-24 290275 60286 281939 60286 122587 25011 (-) 159352 
(56.52) 
(-) 35275 
(58.51) 
Source: Format J-36 of JJM portal and Annual Action Plans 
It may be seen from Table 2.3.3 that across all five years, both the State and sampled 
districts failed to meet the annual targets. The shortfall ranged from around 33 per cent 
to 80 per cent. Although achievement figures improved in the final year of review with 
the State achieving 1,22,587 connections against a target of 2,81,939, the gap remained 
substantial at 56.52 per cent. The shortfall in achievement was mainly due to delays in 
sinking, abandoning of water supply schemes, delays in commissioning of schemes due 
to non-energisation of power connection, delay in deployment of rig machines, site 
selection, etc. as noticed in sampled districts. 
Further, at the beginning of 2022-23, though the total number of households to be 
covered by FHTCs was 3,64,269 (as per Format J-36 of JJM portal) but target set in the 
 
72  As per online progress report of household tap connections in format J-36 for the year 2023-24  
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
65 
Despite the lapse of the original timeline (2024), only 15.29 per cent of villages in 
Tripura had achieved 100 per cent FHTC coverage under the Jal Jeevan Mission by 
February 2025. The shortfall reflects significant delay in project execution and raises 
concerns over planning, resource deployment, and inter-agency coordination. The lag 
in certification of coverage also points to deficiencies in monitoring and third-party 
validation mechanisms. 
2.3.7.2 Coverage of household connection  
Every rural household has drinking water supply in adequate quantity of prescribed 
quality on regular and long-term basis at affordable service delivery charges leading to 
improvement in living standards of rural communities was the objective of JJM. 
However, this intended objective has not been fully realised.  
The State Government had targeted (August 2019) to provide all rural households 
(7,25,634 numbers) with FHTC by March 2024 under JJM, however, the number of 
households as on March 2024 increased to 7,48,639. As of March 2024, 5,90,719 72 
(78.91 per cent) rural households were provided with the FHTCs by the department. 
Table 2.3.3: Coverage of household connection through FHTC by PWD (DWS) 
Year 
Number of House 
Holds to be 
covered at the 
beginning of each 
year 
Target Achievement  
Excess (+)/ Shortfall (-) 
in respect of target 
(in percentage) 
State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts 
2019-20 869063 159963 68178 11471 45960 7418 (-) 22218 
(32.59) 
(-) 4053 
(33.33) 
2020-21 730739 161485 320473 69270 142211 34913 (-) 178262 
(55.62) 
(-) 34357 
(49.60) 
2021-22 547583 122715 382365 122715 163428 37675 (-) 218937 
(57.26) 
(-) 85040 
(69.30) 
2022-23 364269 76624 379801 76624 76024 14759 (-) 303777 
(79.98) 
(-) 61865 
(80.74) 
2023-24 290275 60286 281939 60286 122587 25011 (-) 159352 
(56.52) 
(-) 35275 
(58.51) 
Source: Format J-36 of JJM portal and Annual Action Plans 
It may be seen from Table 2.3.3 that across all five years, both the State and sampled 
districts failed to meet the annual targets. The shortfall ranged from around 33 per cent 
to 80 per cent. Although achievement figures improved in the final year of review with 
the State achieving 1,22,587 connections against a target of 2,81,939, the gap remained 
substantial at 56.52 per cent. The shortfall in achievement was mainly due to delays in 
sinking, abandoning of water supply schemes, delays in commissioning of schemes due 
to non-energisation of power connection, delay in deployment of rig machines, site 
selection, etc. as noticed in sampled districts. 
Further, at the beginning of 2022-23, though the total number of households to be 
covered by FHTCs was 3,64,269 (as per Format J-36 of JJM portal) but target set in the 
 
72  As per online progress report of household tap connections in format J-36 for the year 2023-24  
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
65 
Despite the lapse of the original timeline (2024), only 15.29 per cent of villages in 
Tripura had achieved 100 per cent FHTC coverage under the Jal Jeevan Mission by 
February 2025. The shortfall reflects significant delay in project execution and raises 
concerns over planning, resource deployment, and inter-agency coordination. The lag 
in certification of coverage also points to deficiencies in monitoring and third-party 
validation mechanisms. 
2.3.7.2 Coverage of household connection  
Every rural household has drinking water supply in adequate quantity of prescribed 
quality on regular and long-term basis at affordable service delivery charges leading to 
improvement in living standards of rural communities was the objective of JJM. 
However, this intended objective has not been fully realised.  
The State Government had targeted (August 2019) to provide all rural households 
(7,25,634 numbers) with FHTC by March 2024 under JJM, however, the number of 
households as on March 2024 increased to 7,48,639. As of March 2024, 5,90,719 72 
(78.91 per cent) rural households were provided with the FHTCs by the department. 
Table 2.3.3: Coverage of household connection through FHTC by PWD (DWS) 
Year 
Number of House 
Holds to be 
covered at the 
beginning of each 
year 
Target Achievement  
Excess (+)/ Shortfall (-) 
in respect of target 
(in percentage) 
State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts 
2019-20 869063 159963 68178 11471 45960 7418 (-) 22218 
(32.59) 
(-) 4053 
(33.33) 
2020-21 730739 161485 320473 69270 142211 34913 (-) 178262 
(55.62) 
(-) 34357 
(49.60) 
2021-22 547583 122715 382365 122715 163428 37675 (-) 218937 
(57.26) 
(-) 85040 
(69.30) 
2022-23 364269 76624 379801 76624 76024 14759 (-) 303777 
(79.98) 
(-) 61865 
(80.74) 
2023-24 290275 60286 281939 60286 122587 25011 (-) 159352 
(56.52) 
(-) 35275 
(58.51) 
Source: Format J-36 of JJM portal and Annual Action Plans 
It may be seen from Table 2.3.3 that across all five years, both the State and sampled 
districts failed to meet the annual targets. The shortfall ranged from around 33 per cent 
to 80 per cent. Although achievement figures improved in the final year of review with 
the State achieving 1,22,587 connections against a target of 2,81,939, the gap remained 
substantial at 56.52 per cent. The shortfall in achievement was mainly due to delays in 
sinking, abandoning of water supply schemes, delays in commissioning of schemes due 
to non-energisation of power connection, delay in deployment of rig machines, site 
selection, etc. as noticed in sampled districts. 
Further, at the beginning of 2022-23, though the total number of households to be 
covered by FHTCs was 3,64,269 (as per Format J-36 of JJM portal) but target set in the 
 
72  As per online progress report of household tap connections in format J-36 for the year 2023-24  

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
66
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
66 
State Annual Action Plan for that year was higher i.e. 3,79,801 FHTCs which indicated 
impractical planning. Besides, there was discrepancy in the total number of households 
to be covered through FHTCs during 2019-20 between the figures reflected in JJM 
Dashboard (7,25,634 as of August 2019) and in Format J-36 (8,69,063) of the JJM 
online portal. 
In reply, the CE stated (November 2024) that due to inadvertence the figure 8,69,063 
was reflected in Format J-36 instead of 7,25,634, which may be treated as the correct 
figure in this regard. 
As of March 2024, 1,57,920 rural households (21.09 per cent) were not provided with 
FHTC in the State and 32,309 rural households (20.02 per cent) remained to be covered 
through FHTC in the sampled two districts. Hence, the ultimate objective of providing 
FHTCs to all rural households by March 2024 remained unachieved. 
In reply, the Government stated (March 2025) that necessary action was being taken 
for 100 per cent household coverage. The Government also furnished the achievement 
made in respect of household coverage through FHTCs upto February 2025, which is 
shown in Table 2.3.4. 
Table 2.3.4: Coverage of household connection through FHTC (upto February 2025) 
Year 
Number of House 
Holds to be 
covered at the 
beginning of each 
year 
Target as per State 
Annual Action 
Plan for 2024-25 
Achievement 
Excess (+)/ Shortfall 
(-) in respect of 
target 
(in percentage) 
State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts 
2024-25 
(up to 
Feb 
2025) 
1,60,126 32,433 1,60,126 32,433 48,630 7,637 (-) 1,11,496 (-) 24,796 
Jal Jeevan Mission’s core objective to provide Functional Household Tap Connections 
to all 7.48 lakh rural households in Tripura by March 2024 remained unachieved despite 
five years of implementation. As of February 2025, only 6.39 lakh households (approx.) 
had been covered, leaving a gap of over 1.1 lakh households. 
Persistent shortfalls in annual targets (ranging from 33 per cent to 80 per cent) highlight 
systemic deficiencies in planning, execution, and monitoring. The presence of 
discrepant baseline data, overestimated targets, and frequent implementation 
bottlenecks (e.g., delays in water scheme commissioning, power connections, and site 
selection) point to weak institutional coordination and lack of accountability. 
2.3.7.2 (i) Functionality status of FHTC at household level  
Functionality is defined under operational guidelines of JJM as household taps having 
infrastructure for providing water in adequate quantity of prescribed quality on regular 
basis (continuous supply on long-term basis). A combined analysis of quantity, 
regularity and quality of water service has been presented leading to assessing the 
proportion of tap connections estimated to be functional at household levels. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
67
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
67 
A beneficiary survey in sampled 20 villages of two sampled districts to evaluate the 
level of output and outcomes achieved under JJM, JPV for 408 beneficiaries/ 
households was conducted and the result thereof is discussed below: 
2.3.7.2 (i) (a) Working household tap connection 
Out of 408 households surveyed by audit, 342 households (83.82 per cent) received 
piped water. However, the remaining 66 households (16.18 per cent ) did not receive 
piped water despite having tap connections, due to issues such as non-completion of 
water sources, leakage in distribution pipeline, non-energisation of water supply 
schemes, etc. A few illustrations are given in Photographs 2.3.1 and 2.3.2. 
  
Photographs 2.3.1 and 2.3.2: Dry tap connections 
In reply, the Government stated (March 2025) that efforts were made on a regular basis 
for making/ keeping every household tap connection functional. However, to improve 
functionality of FHTCs, necessary action would be taken for completion of water 
sources within stipulated timeframe. All in-village water supply schemes would be 
handed over to the respective village authorities and the petty maintenance works such 
as repairing of leakages in distribution pipelines would be done by the respective village 
authorities. The issue of non-energisation of water supply schemes was continuously 
followed up with the implementing agencies such as Tripura State Electricity 
Corporation Limited (TSECL)/ Tripura Renewable Energy Development Agency 
(TREDA), etc.  
The findings underscore a disconnect between infrastructure provision and actual 
service delivery. Merely installing tap connections without ensuring operational water 
supply fails the core objective of the Jal Jeevan Mission, which is to provide functional 
household tap connections. This not only compromises the credibility of reported 
coverage figures, but also delays the realisation of health, hygiene, and quality-of-life 


Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
68
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
68 
benefits for rural communities.  
2.3.7.2 (ii) Quantitative sufficiency of water supply provided through FHTCs 
Out of 408 households surveyed, 300 beneficiaries (73.53 per cent) received sufficient 
quantity (55 LPCD and above) of water, 42 households (10.29 per cent) did not receive 
adequate quantity of water and 66 households did not receive piped water supply at all. 
Chart 2.3.4: Quantitative sufficiency of piped water supply 
 
Source: Audit survey 
The Government replied (March 2025) that it was mainly due to frequent voltage 
fluctuations in rural areas of the State, which severely hampered the discharge capacity 
of the pumps. Additionally, leakage in distribution pipelines and non-closure of taps 
after use also resulted in low water pressure and discharge at distribution points away 
from source. Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC) strategies were being 
implemented through the engagement of Implementation Support Agencies (ISA) for 
proper use of FHTCs at household level. 
2.3.7.2 (iii) Qualitative satisfaction level of beneficiaries 
Chapter 10 of the operational guidelines of JJM provides that water testing is important 
for monitoring the operation of water supply, verification of the safety of drinking 
water, investigation of disease outbreaks, validation process and preventive measures. 
Water quality testing tools need to be used for deciding safety of drinking water at the 
source, within a piped distribution system or at the end of consumer.  
As per laboratory test reports of the District/Sub-divisional level laboratories, 
87.98 per cent 73  and 95.13 per cent 74  of total chemical and bacteriological tests 
respectively conducted during 2019-24 in the sampled districts (Unakoti and South 
Tripura) met the required standards as shown in Table 2.3.5. 
 
 
 
 
73  36,357 met the water quality standards against 41,322 chemical tests conducted during 2019-24 
74  37,791 met the water quality standards against 39,722 bacteriological tests conducted during 
2019-24 
74%
16%
10%
Sufficient water received Water not received Less quantity of water received

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
69
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
69 
Table 2.3.5: Year-wise position of laboratory testing of water samples under two 
sampled districts 
Year 
Total number of tests 
conducted 
Total number of quality 
tests meeting standards 
Total number of tests 
that did not meet 
standards 
Chemical Bacteriological Chemical Bacteriological Chemical Bacteriological 
2019-20 4,102 3,791 3,304 2,923 798 868 
2020-21 6,676 5,820 5,952 5,742 724 78 
2021-22 9,130 5,538 8,028 5,434 1,102 104 
2022-23 8,159 6,188 7,143 6,138 1,016 50 
2023-24 13,255 18,385 11,930 17,554 1325 831 
Total 41,322 39,722 36,357 37,791 4,965 1,931 
Source: Information furnished by the EE, DWS Divisions of Unakoti and South Tripura Districts  
During the beneficiary survey conducted by audit in these sampled districts, among the 
342 households who received piped water supply, only 108 households (31.58 per cent) 
reported receiving good quality water and expressed satisfaction. The remaining 234 
households (68.42 per cent) were not satisfied with the quality of supplied water due to 
iron content and unpleasant odour in the piped water.  
Chart 2.3.5: Qualitative satisfaction of beneficiaries 
 
Source: Audit Survey 
This indicates that a large number of beneficiaries did not receive potable water under 
JJM in the sampled districts.  Further, the claim of the Government regarding the supply 
of potable water to the beneficiaries was not commensurate with the actual ground level 
findings, highlighting a significant gap between reported outcomes and the reality.  
In reply, the Government stated (March 2025) that initially, the emphasis was more on 
creation of water supply schemes, coverage through FHTC and quantitative supply of 
water to households. Therefore, achievement in respect of quality through installation 
of IRPs attached to DTWs lagged behind. Further, in Tripura, iron content in the 
supplied water was the only concern though not hazardous to public health. However, 
necessary remedial steps such as installation of new IRPs as well as effective 
functioning of existing IRPs, wherever required, would be ensured. 
The findings highlight a significant disconnect between reported water quality 
compliance and actual user experience, as over two-thirds of households receiving 
32%
68%
 Satisfied with quality of water
 Not satisfied with quality of water

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
70
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 70 
piped water expressed dissatisfaction due to issues like high iron content and unpleasant 
odour. This not only undermines public confidence in the Jal Jeevan Mission but also 
poses a risk of households reverting to unsafe traditional water sources, thereby 
negating the health and hygiene benefits envisioned under the scheme. The delayed 
emphasis on water quality interventions, such as the installation and maintenance of 
Iron Removal Plants (IRPs), points to gaps in planning, prioritisation, and monitoring. 
2.3.7.3 Output and outcome 
As per paragraph 3.2(ii) of Chapter 12 of the operational guidelines of JJM, the 
Mission's primary output is to ensure adequate quantity of water of prescribed quality 
to all rural households through FHTC by 2024. In parallel, the Mission also strives to 
achieve four key measurable outcomes such as improved health conditions of rural 
communities; reduction in drudgery faced by women and girls and empowerment of 
women, reduced school dropout rates of upper primary level girls and increase in 
employment opportunities for rural communities. Such an approach would ensure 
socio-economic well-being of rural households. 
It was noticed that there were no cases of school dropouts among the surveyed 408 
households, however deficiencies were noticed in the remaining three key measurable 
outcomes during the beneficiary survey in the two sampled districts as discussed in 
Paragraphs 2.3.7.3 (i) to 2.3.7.3 (iv). 
2.3.7.3 (i) Reduction in water borne diseases 
As per the information furnished (December 2024) by the Health & Family Welfare 
Department, Government of Tripura, a total of 1,73,452 cases were registered of 
various water borne diseases (such as diarrhoea, jaundice, cholera, etc.) and seven death 
cases across the State during 2020 to 2024 as detailed in Table 2.3.6. 
Table 2.3.6: Population affected by water borne diseases in the State 
Disease 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
Affected Death Affected Death Affected Death Affected Death Affected Death 
Total 
estimated 
population 
40.51 lakh 41.40 lakh 41.85 lakh 42.23 lakh 41.94 lakh 
Gastro 
enteritis & 
Diarrhea 
39,918 01 29,470 01 33,375 00 32,106 01 27,958 01 
Jaundice 62 00 101 00 417 00 494 00 1,191 00 
Enteric 
fever 
2,383 00 1695 00 1,384 00 1,553 00 1,193 00 
Cholera 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 08 00 
Encephalitis 05 02 69 01 14 00 44 00 20 00 
Total 42,368 03 31,335 02 35,190 00 34,197 01 30,362 01 
Source: Information furnished by the Directorate of Family Welfare & Preventive Medicine, 
Government of Tripura as per Central Bureau of Health Intelligence, Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare, Government of India’s online portal 
It may be seen from Table 2.3.6, that the percentage of water borne diseases especially 
in gastroenteritis and enteric fever remained high across all the five years, raising 
concerns about the water quality. Further, the rise in jaundice cases highlights potential 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
71
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
71 
shortcomings in ensuring water safety and potability.  
In the two sampled districts, a total of 47,184 cases of water borne diseases were 
registered during the same period, with no reported deaths, as shown in Table 2.3.7. 
Table 2.3.7: Population affected by waterborne diseases in sampled districts  
Disease 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
Affected Death Affected Death Affected Death Affected Death Affected Death 
Gastro 
enteritis & 
Diarrhoea 
6,512 00 6,600 00 10,099 00 12,469 00 8,874 00 
Jaundice 15 00 41 00 116 00 146 00 163 00 
Typhoid 367 00 395 00 501 00 476 00 410 00 
Cholera 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 
Encephalitis 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 
Total 6,894 00 7,036 00 10,716 00 13,091 00 9,447 00 
Source: Information furnished by the Chief Medical Officers of Unakoti and South Tripura Districts  
The status regarding the population affected by water borne diseases in respect of State 
vis-à-vis in two sampled districts is shown in Chart 2.3.6. 
Chart 2.3.6: Population affected by water borne diseases in the State and in two sampled 
districts 
 
During the beneficiary survey, Audit noticed that out of 342 households which received 
piped water supply through FHTCs, 14 households (4.09 per cent) reported cases of 
water borne diseases such as vomiting, diarrhoea and skin diseases. 
This indicated that villagers were exposed to the risk of water borne diseases during 
2020-24 due to inadequate water quality testing and lack of infrastructure as well as 
manpower in rural water testing laboratories, as discussed in the Paragraphs 2.3.7.7 
(i) and 2.3.7.7 (ii). 
In reply, the Government stated (March 2025) that the safety of supplied water was 
ensured by the Government. The reason for suffering from gastroenteritis and diarrheal 
diseases was stated to be lack of knowledge in collection of water and its proper storage 
before consumption resulting in secondary level contamination. Proper Information, 
42,368
31,335
35,190 34,197
30,362
6,894 7,036
10,716
13,091
9,447
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Total affected by water borne diseases in whole State
Total affected by water borne diseases in sampled two districts

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
72
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
72 
Education and Communication (IEC) activities through the engagement of ISA was 
being undertaken to raise awareness. 
The persistent incidence of waterborne diseases across Tripura including areas with 
piped water coverage indicates systemic gaps in ensuring safe, potable water delivery 
under Jal Jeevan Mission. Despite investments in water infrastructure, the programme 
has yet to yield tangible public health outcomes in terms of disease reduction. This 
underlines the critical need for integrated water quality management, including robust 
source protection, regular testing, effective filtration (especially for iron and 
pathogens), and public health surveillance. 
2.3.7.3 (ii) Reduced drudgery of women in villages 
Paragraph 3.5 of the operational guidelines of JJM states that rural people, especially 
women spend a lot of time and energy in getting water for day-to-day use. This results 
in lack of participation in income generation opportunities, adverse health impacts, etc. 
JJM is to play a significant role in bringing 'ease of living' for rural community, 
especially women. 
Out of the 408 households surveyed, 342 households had received piped water supply 
through FHTCs. Among them, 263 beneficiaries reported that womens’ drudgery had 
been reduced due to availability of water at their homes. However, in 79 cases, despite 
the availability of FHTCs, womens’ drudgery was not reduced due to insufficient 
quantity as well as poor quality of piped water. Additionally, in remaining 66 
households, women drudgery was not reduced due to non-receipt of piped water supply. 
Chart 2.3.7: Drudgery of women 
 
Source: Based on responses received by Audit during beneficiary survey by Audit Team 
The Government replied (March 2025) that in light of the audit observation, drudgery 
of women in rural areas would be reduced by way of improving quantitative and 
qualitative level of supplied water through FHTCs.  
However, the intended benefit was not achieved due to non-receipt of piped water in 
66 households. The Government should consider undertaking a review of non-
64%
36%
Reduced drudgery of woman

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
73
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
73 
functional or underperforming FHTCs and take corrective action, along with periodic 
user feedback to assess the service impact. 
While the Jal Jeevan Mission has had a positive impact in several households by 
reducing women’s effort in water collection, the overall achievement remains partial 
and inconsistent. Non-functional tap connections, insufficient water supply, and poor 
water quality continue to impose a burden on rural women, defeating a major gender-
sensitive goal of the Mission. This indicates a service delivery gap between 
infrastructure rollout and actual utility. 
2.3.7.3 (iii) Increased income of rural communities 
Availability of piped water supply in rural households is one of the multiple factors 
contributing to increase in rural household income. Out of 342 households who received 
piped water supply through FHTCs, in 49 cases (14 per cent), beneficiaries informed 
that income of the households was increased due to water reaching homes. 
Chart 2.3.8: Increased income of households 
 
The Government replied (March 2025) that they had tried to increase income of rural 
communities by improving adequate quantitative and qualitative level of supplied water 
at households. Further, focused IEC activities would be carried out emphasising rural 
income generation. 
The low percentage of households reporting income gains indicates that the potential 
for economic empowerment through reliable water access remained underutilised. To 
fully realise the developmental impact of the Jal Jeevan Mission, the Government must 
integrate water supply initiatives with livelihood-supporting measures such as kitchen 
gardening, livestock rearing, or home-based enterprises. Without such linkages and 
focused IEC outreach, the broader socio-economic objectives of the Mission beyond 
infrastructure creation are unlikely to be fully achieved. 
2.3.7.3 (iv) WASH practices 
Water Access, Sanitation, and Hygiene commonly referred to as “WASH,” are integral 
components of SDG 6, which aims for clean water and sanitation for all. 
Out of the 408 households surveyed, only three households (0.7 per cent) had soak pits 
14%
86%
Household income increased Household income not increased

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
74
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 74 
despite the importance of ground water recharge and grey water management, while 
wastewater accumulation was observed in 93 households (23 per cent), raising risks for 
waterborne diseases. 
Chart 2.3.9: Disposal of waste water 
 
This suggests that although infrastructure for water access was expanding under JJM, 
inadequate grey water disposal and poor sanitation systems compromised the 
sustainability of the scheme and posed risks to public health. 
In reply, the Government stated (March 2025) that 6,144 community level soak pits, 
28,625 individual household level soak pits and 3,695 drainage channels were 
constructed in the State with the convergence of Swachh Bharat Mission-Gramin 
(SBM-G) fund, 15 th FC tied grant fund and Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) scheme fund for grey water management. 
Similarly, during the financial year 2025-26, 12,194 community level soak pits, 69,971 
individual household level soak pits and 3,573 drainage channels were targeted for grey 
water management. 
While the Government’s response highlighted significant efforts towards improving 
grey water management through the construction of soak pits and drainage channels, 
concerns related to wastewater accumulation and the prevention of waterborne diseases 
still need to be addressed. Low presence of soak pits at the household level in the sample 
survey (less than one per cent) contrasts sharply with the large numbers reported at the 
State level. 
2.3.7.4 Grievance redressal system 
Paragraph 3.6.2 of the JJM Operational Guidelines emphasised on water management, 
viz. service delivery including addressing the grievances proactively, etc. The State may 
create an independent regulatory body for the water supply sector which will also act 
as a water supply ombudsman so that any aggrieved user can approach it for redressal 
of her/ his grievances. Further, paragraph 11.1.5 of the JJM operational guidelines 
envisages that community will closely observe the functioning of their water supply 
scheme and will be empowered to file grievances with respective DWSM/ SWSM 
through a dedicated toll-free number, online portal, etc. 
1%
23%
76%
Household having soak pits
Household having waste water accumulation
Waste water discharged to drain

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
75
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
75 
Online portals such as CM helpline and Amar Sarkar portal  were used in the State for 
registering complaints regarding water supply related problems under JJM. A total of 
20,350 complaints were registered on these portals during the period 2019-24 against 
5,90,719 connections provided. Year wise position of complaints registered, resolved 
and average time taken in respect of the whole State and in the sampled districts is 
shown in Table 2.3.8. 
Table 2.3.8: Status of complaints management 
Year 
State Level Unakoti District South Tripura District 
Total no. of 
complaints 
registered 
Total no. 
of 
complaint
s resolved 
Average 
resolving 
time  
(in days) 
Total no. 
of 
complaints 
registered 
Total no. 
of 
complaints 
resolved 
Average 
resolving 
time  
(in days) 
Total no. 
of 
complaints 
registered 
Total no. 
of 
complaints 
resolved 
Average 
resolving 
time  
(in days) 
2019-20 2,010 2,010 12 89 89 11 284 284 16 
2020-21 128 128 17 0 0 - 18 18 17 
2021-22 1,178 ,1178 14 124 124 10 161 161 8 
2022-23 2,151 2,151 14 825 825 12 99 99 10 
2023-24 14,883 14,868 14 995 992 9 974 974 13 
Total 20,350 20,335  2,033 2,030  1,536 1,536  
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) 
It was however, noticed during Audit survey of 408 beneficiaries in 20 sampled villages 
that none of the beneficiaries registered complaints during the period nor did they know 
how to register complaints directly on these portals. Instead, the beneficiaries 
communicated their issues directly to Panchayat members/ pump operators/ concerned 
departmental engineers, who then registered the complaints on online portals. This 
indirect approach undermines transparency and accountability, increases the risk of 
complaints being omitted or misrepresented, and may result in grievances remaining 
unrecorded and unresolved. The lack of beneficiary awareness and empowerment to 
use official complaint mechanisms highlights a critical weakness in the programme’s 
design and execution that compromises its ability to ensure responsive and citizen-
centred service delivery. 
Further, the Department did not set a timeframe to resolve the complaints. The 
departmental engineers resolved75 all the complaints raised on these two portals due to 
lack of ownership at village level which is also discussed in Paragraph 2.3.7.14. 
In reply, the Government mentioned (March 2025) that majority of the registered 
complaints were pertaining to petty repair/ maintenance of leakages in distribution 
pipeline network and iron content in the piped water. Accepting the audit observation, 
the Government also stated that all the complaints were resolved by the departmental 
engineers alone due to lack of ownership and scarcity of skilled barefoot technicians at 
village level. However, all the in-village water supply schemes would be handed over 
to the concerned village authorities who would be responsible for carrying out regular 
operation and minor maintenance works of the schemes. It was further stated that the 
Department had conducted multiple training programmes for skill development. 
Moreover, Nal Jal Mitra Programme had been started from 16 December 2023 to train 
 
75with an average resolving time of 14 days ranging from 0 to 28 days 
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
75 
Online portals such as CM helpline and Amar Sarkar portal  were used in the State for 
registering complaints regarding water supply related problems under JJM. A total of 
20,350 complaints were registered on these portals during the period 2019-24 against 
5,90,719 connections provided. Year wise position of complaints registered, resolved 
and average time taken in respect of the whole State and in the sampled districts is 
shown in Table 2.3.8. 
Table 2.3.8: Status of complaints management 
Year 
State Level Unakoti District South Tripura District 
Total no. of 
complaints 
registered 
Total no. 
of 
complaint
s resolved 
Average 
resolving 
time  
(in days) 
Total no. 
of 
complaints 
registered 
Total no. 
of 
complaints 
resolved 
Average 
resolving 
time  
(in days) 
Total no. 
of 
complaints 
registered 
Total no. 
of 
complaints 
resolved 
Average 
resolving 
time  
(in days) 
2019-20 2,010 2,010 12 89 89 11 284 284 16 
2020-21 128 128 17 0 0 - 18 18 17 
2021-22 1,178 ,1178 14 124 124 10 161 161 8 
2022-23 2,151 2,151 14 825 825 12 99 99 10 
2023-24 14,883 14,868 14 995 992 9 974 974 13 
Total 20,350 20,335  2,033 2,030  1,536 1,536  
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) 
It was however, noticed during Audit survey of 408 beneficiaries in 20 sampled villages 
that none of the beneficiaries registered complaints during the period nor did they know 
how to register complaints directly on these portals. Instead, the beneficiaries 
communicated their issues directly to Panchayat members/ pump operators/ concerned 
departmental engineers, who then registered the complaints on online portals. This 
indirect approach undermines transparency and accountability, increases the risk of 
complaints being omitted or misrepresented, and may result in grievances remaining 
unrecorded and unresolved. The lack of beneficiary awareness and empowerment to 
use official complaint mechanisms highlights a critical weakness in the programme’s 
design and execution that compromises its ability to ensure responsive and citizen-
centred service delivery. 
Further, the Department did not set a timeframe to resolve the complaints. The 
departmental engineers resolved75 all the complaints raised on these two portals due to 
lack of ownership at village level which is also discussed in Paragraph 2.3.7.14. 
In reply, the Government mentioned (March 2025) that majority of the registered 
complaints were pertaining to petty repair/ maintenance of leakages in distribution 
pipeline network and iron content in the piped water. Accepting the audit observation, 
the Government also stated that all the complaints were resolved by the departmental 
engineers alone due to lack of ownership and scarcity of skilled barefoot technicians at 
village level. However, all the in-village water supply schemes would be handed over 
to the concerned village authorities who would be responsible for carrying out regular 
operation and minor maintenance works of the schemes. It was further stated that the 
Department had conducted multiple training programmes for skill development. 
Moreover, Nal Jal Mitra Programme had been started from 16 December 2023 to train 
 
75with an average resolving time of 14 days ranging from 0 to 28 days 
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
75 
Online portals such as CM helpline and Amar Sarkar portal  were used in the State for 
registering complaints regarding water supply related problems under JJM. A total of 
20,350 complaints were registered on these portals during the period 2019-24 against 
5,90,719 connections provided. Year wise position of complaints registered, resolved 
and average time taken in respect of the whole State and in the sampled districts is 
shown in Table 2.3.8. 
Table 2.3.8: Status of complaints management 
Year 
State Level Unakoti District South Tripura District 
Total no. of 
complaints 
registered 
Total no. 
of 
complaint
s resolved 
Average 
resolving 
time  
(in days) 
Total no. 
of 
complaints 
registered 
Total no. 
of 
complaints 
resolved 
Average 
resolving 
time  
(in days) 
Total no. 
of 
complaints 
registered 
Total no. 
of 
complaints 
resolved 
Average 
resolving 
time  
(in days) 
2019-20 2,010 2,010 12 89 89 11 284 284 16 
2020-21 128 128 17 0 0 - 18 18 17 
2021-22 1,178 ,1178 14 124 124 10 161 161 8 
2022-23 2,151 2,151 14 825 825 12 99 99 10 
2023-24 14,883 14,868 14 995 992 9 974 974 13 
Total 20,350 20,335  2,033 2,030  1,536 1,536  
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) 
It was however, noticed during Audit survey of 408 beneficiaries in 20 sampled villages 
that none of the beneficiaries registered complaints during the period nor did they know 
how to register complaints directly on these portals. Instead, the beneficiaries 
communicated their issues directly to Panchayat members/ pump operators/ concerned 
departmental engineers, who then registered the complaints on online portals. This 
indirect approach undermines transparency and accountability, increases the risk of 
complaints being omitted or misrepresented, and may result in grievances remaining 
unrecorded and unresolved. The lack of beneficiary awareness and empowerment to 
use official complaint mechanisms highlights a critical weakness in the programme’s 
design and execution that compromises its ability to ensure responsive and citizen-
centred service delivery. 
Further, the Department did not set a timeframe to resolve the complaints. The 
departmental engineers resolved75 all the complaints raised on these two portals due to 
lack of ownership at village level which is also discussed in Paragraph 2.3.7.14. 
In reply, the Government mentioned (March 2025) that majority of the registered 
complaints were pertaining to petty repair/ maintenance of leakages in distribution 
pipeline network and iron content in the piped water. Accepting the audit observation, 
the Government also stated that all the complaints were resolved by the departmental 
engineers alone due to lack of ownership and scarcity of skilled barefoot technicians at 
village level. However, all the in-village water supply schemes would be handed over 
to the concerned village authorities who would be responsible for carrying out regular 
operation and minor maintenance works of the schemes. It was further stated that the 
Department had conducted multiple training programmes for skill development. 
Moreover, Nal Jal Mitra Programme had been started from 16 December 2023 to train 
 
75with an average resolving time of 14 days ranging from 0 to 28 days 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
76
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
76 
1,262 candidates (at least one for each village) for capacity building of rural technicians 
through skill development training programmes. This would not only reduce the burden 
of repair/ maintenance workload on the departmental engineers but also result in 
reduced complaint resolving time. Moreover, IEC activities would be increased to 
create more public awareness on online complaint management portals. Besides, the 
timeframe for resolving complaints would be fixed and notified shortly by the State 
Government. 
Though the State Government claimed to resolve 99.93 per cent complaints registered 
on the online portals, the beneficiary survey conducted by audit revealed that 100 per 
cent of the complaints were not directly registered by the beneficiaries which points to 
unawareness and probability of non-registration of complaints. 
Conclusion 
As of March 2024, 79 per cent of rural households had been provided with FHTCs in 
the State. The shortfall in achievement was mainly due to delays in well sinking, 
abandonment of pilot holes, delays in supply of power connections to completed water 
supply schemes, as noticed in sampled districts. Despite the expansion of the piped 
water supply, population affected by water borne diseases in the State specially in 
gastroenteritis and enteric fever remained high during 2019-24. Further, there were also 
instances of quantitative as well as qualitative dis-satisfaction among the beneficiaries, 
with issues such as insufficient water supply and poor water quality. Due to non-receipt 
of piped water supply at home as well as insufficient quantity and poor quality of piped 
water, the drudgery of women was not reduced in 36 per cent of the surveyed 
households, indicating that the broader socio-economic objectives of the scheme were 
not fully realised. 
Recommendation 
The Government should; 
 give priority to provide FHTC coverage to all rural households through 
efficient and effective deployment of available resources; 
 emphasise on qualitative and quantitative improvement of supplied water; 
 consider conducting an impact study to evaluate how piped water supply 
influences rural livelihoods. 
Audit Objective 2: To assess whether efficient institutional framework is in place for 
planning, implementation, and post operational management of 
the schemes 
 
2.3.7.5 Poor involvement of rural community in planning and implementation 
To ensure effective implementation and to achieve the goal of providing safe drinking 
water in rural areas, paragraph 3.6 of the Operational Guidelines of JJM mandates 
preparation of action plans at village, district and State levels. It envisages that Village 
Action Plan (VAP) shall be prepared, incorporating key details such as the demographic 
data, physical features, water sources, the number of existing FHTCs and the number 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
77
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
77 
yet to be provided in all habitations and other details such as the specifics of the village, 
available drinking water infrastructure, identified gaps, proposed work to augment the 
existing infrastructure and water sources, etc. A VAP should be prepared by the Gram 
Panchayat or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. with 
support from ISA, Public Health Engineering Department (PHED)/ Rural Water Supply 
(RWS) Department, DWSM based on baseline survey, resource mapping and felt needs 
of the village community. The VAP should be approved in village meeting attended by 
at least 80 per cent of the village community. VAP will then be submitted to DWSM 
for further action. Technical approval is to be accorded by the PHED/ RWS 
Department/ Board.  
Subsequently, all the VAPs of the districts are consolidated to form a District Action 
Plan (DAP), which is prepared by the DWSM. Finally, the State Action Plan (SAP) is 
to be prepared and finalised by SWSM with the help of PHED/ RWS Department based 
on the DAPs. 
Audit noticed the following deficiencies in the planning process in the two sampled 
districts; 
 Lack of community participation in VAP preparation -There was no evidence of 
participation by at least 80 per cent of the village community in the preparation of 
VAPs. In 20 sampled villages, although VAPs were claimed to have been prepared 
in 15 villages during 2019-24, 13 76 VAPs (87 per cent) did not address the issues 
related to water quality, source sustainability, grey water management, water 
supply schemes and water sources identified as envisaged in the operational 
guidelines. Further, no base line survey, resource mapping and felt needs of village 
community, surveillance activities, etc. were found on records.  Hence, the 
objective of involvement of the rural community in the planning process remained 
unachieved. 
 Non-preparation of District Action Plan and District Annual Action Plan - In 
contravention of the provisions of paragraph 3.6.1 of operational guidelines of JJM, 
DAP was not prepared in the two sampled districts during 2019-24. Further, 
District Annual Action Plans (DAAPs), which were to be prepared every year after 
considering the views of the elected representatives such as MPs/ MLAs/ 
Chairpersons were also not prepared as envisaged in paragraph 5.3 of the 
operational guidelines of JJM.  In the absence of DAPs, the initiatives undertaken 
lacked an integrated approach in addressing the rural drinking water, security 
issues such as water safety plans, convergence for source sustainability, grey water 
management measures, etc. affecting sustained supply of quality water to the 
targeted people as discussed in Paragraph 2.3.7.6 (i) (b). 
 Absence of State Action Plan: The preparation of SAP envisaged the objective of 
 
76  Noorpur GP, Gournagar GP, Deoracherra VC, Unakoti VC, Yeazikhowra GP, Bagmara VC, North 
Bijoypur VC, West Ludhua VC, Chatakchari VC, South Manubankul VC, Niharnagar GP, Uttar 
Rangamura GP and South Srirampur GP 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
78
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
78 
achieving overall State drinking water security in such a way as to avoid arranging 
water supply through tankers/ trains, hand pump installation, etc. In the absence of 
SAP, the roadmap to achieve the FHTCs within 2024 along with long term drinking 
water security in the State was not addressed. Besides, the quantum of surface and 
ground water availability, technological interventions required for scattered/ hilly/ 
difficult areas, etc. were not planned effectively.  
 Improper preparation of Annual Action Plan: The Operational guidelines of JJM 
provide that the Annual Action Plan (AAP) of the State should be prepared from 
the approved SAP firming up the physical and financial district wise target to be 
submitted to the National JJM authority. In this regard, audit observed that though 
the Department prepared AAPs during 2019-24, these were not based on the SAP 
and DAPs.  
The audit findings point to a significant gap in the strategic planning and 
implementation framework under JJM at the State level, particularly the absence of 
SAP and DAPs. The preparation of AAPs without the foundational SAP violates the 
operational guidelines and raises concerns about the basis and credibility of the targets 
set during 2019-24. The Department failed to ensure preparation of the SAP with 
participation at the required levels which was indicative of scheme being formulated 
without any assessment of actual requirements and available resources. 
The absence of a coherent and hierarchical planning framework SAP, DAP/ DAAP, 
and quality VAPs had compromised the effectiveness, integration, and sustainability of 
the Jal Jeevan Mission in the sampled districts. This systemic lapse in planning 
processes had a cascading effect on implementation, community engagement, and long-
term water security, posing a serious risk to achieving the programme’s core objectives. 
While accepting the fact regarding poor community involvement during planning and 
execution phase, the Government stated (March 2025) that to bridge this gap ISAs had 
been engaged with a component of village level meeting with the beneficiaries for an 
elaborate acquaintance of in-village water supply schemes with its formulation, 
execution and operation and maintenance (O&M) activities to be performed in due 
course. The Government further added that to raise community involvement for post 
implementation management and O&M, the in-village water supply schemes would be 
handed over to the concerned village authorities who would be responsible for carrying 
out regular operation and minor maintenance works of the schemes. 
While the Government acknowledged the poor community involvement during the 
planning and execution phases and claimed corrective measures through engagement 
of ISAs, the fundamental issues of non-compliance with JJM operational guidelines and 
lack of strategic planning remained unaddressed.  
2.3.7.6 Institutional framework 
 
2.3.7.6 (i) Delivery mechanism 
Chapter 5 of the operational guidelines envisages creation of a four-tier institutional 
mechanism to be set up at National, State, District and Village levels for successful 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
79
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
79 
implementation of JJM. It includes the institutional framework spanning various levels 
and bodies entrusted with specific responsibilities to ensure smooth delivery of various 
components of the Programme. The institutional framework existing in the State is 
detailed in Chart 2.3.2. 
2.3.7.6 (i) (a) State Water and Sanitation Mission 
Paragraph 5.2 of the operational guidelines of JJM, stipulates setting up of a “State 
Water and Sanitation Mission” (SWSM) as a registered society, headed by the Chief 
Secretary with the Principal Secretary/ Secretary in-charge of PHED/ DWS 
Department. The Mission shall have (i) an Apex Committee and (ii) an Executive 
Committee.  The apex level committee in the State is entrusted with key functions 
related to policy, coordination, management and monitoring of the water supply and 
sanitation projects in the State. The executive level committee shall be responsible for 
ensuring necessary capacity building, monitoring of physical financial performance and 
management of water supply projects, engagement of third party inspection agencies, 
submission of Utilisation Certificates (UCs), audited statement of annual accounts to 
the Government of India, conduct of campaigns across the State, creation and 
maintenance of digital inventory of JJM assets on GIS platform, etc. The Apex 
Committee is expected to meet at least twice a year and if possible, quarterly. 
Audit observed that both the Apex and Executive Committees of SWSM were 
constituted in March 2020. However, the Apex Committee did not meet as per the 
prescribed frequency. The Apex Committee met twice during the year 2022-23 and 
only once during the years 2020-21, 2021-22 and 2023-24. Moreover, no performance 
review report/ follow-up action taken report by SWSM was found on record. 
Infrequent meetings thus not only violated the programme guidelines but also led to 
delays in strategic planning, financial approvals and policy guidance, co-ordination, 
monitoring and evaluation at the apex level which was critical for ensuring the 
successful implementation of JJM. The failure of the Apex Committee of the SWSM 
to meet with the prescribed frequency undermined its mandated oversight and strategic 
guidance functions. This limited institutional accountability, weakened monitoring and 
review of implementation progress under the programme, and potentially led to delays 
or deficiencies in course correction and policy direction. The absence of performance 
review and follow-up action taken reports further indicates a lack of systematic 
evaluation, reducing transparency and the ability to assess whether program objectives 
were being achieved. 
The Government replied (March 2025) that though formal SWSM meetings were 
conducted once in a year, regular review meetings regarding implementation of the 
programme were held by the Chief Secretary in presence of the Chief Minister/ 
Departmental Minister and other officials and the audit observation was noted for future 
guidance. 
2.3.7.6 (i) (b) District Water and Sanitation Mission  
Paragraph 5.3 of the operational guidelines of JJM provides for constitution of District 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
80
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
80 
Water and Sanitation Mission (DWSM) at the district level to ensure preparation and 
approval of the VAP after taking stock of each village, finalisation of DAP, DAAP, 
source sustainability and grey water management works through convergence with 
other related programmes, updating and validation of physical and financial progress 
on Integrated Management Information System (IMIS)77, monitoring and evaluation of 
physical financial performance and conducting monthly meetings to consider and 
accord administrative approval of in-village water supply schemes, planning protection 
and preservation of village water sources, preventing water bodies/ sources from getting 
polluted, etc. Further, DWSM is also responsible to identify villages requiring ISA 
support, engage ISAs from empanelled list and monitor their performance. 
The State Government constituted the DWSMs in all the eight districts of the State in 
March 2020. The Missions were headed by District Magistrate & Collector of 
concerned district, Superintending Engineer (SE) of concerned PWD (DWS) circle, 
Executive Engineer (EE) of divisions, and one member each from related line 
departments i.e. Rural Development Department, Tripura State Electricity Corporation 
Limited, Public Works (Water Resource) Department, Tripura Tribal Areas 
Autonomous District Council, Health & Family Welfare Department, Education 
Department, Agriculture & Farmers Welfare Department, Social Welfare Department. 
The notification of March 2020 also detailed the roles and responsibilities of the 
DWSMs. 
Audit observed that DWSMs had not performed the functions envisaged in the 
guidelines and specified in the State Government notification of March 2020 as no 
records related to the implementation of the above provisions were furnished to audit. 
In the two sampled districts, not even one meeting out of the 48 monthly meetings  to 
be held between April 2020 and March 2024 was conducted.  
This indicated that the DWSMs were largely non-functional. As a result, 
implementation of the programmes were not effectively reviewed or monitored by 
DWSMs, as required under the guidelines. The failure of DWSMs to discharge their 
mandated functions has weakened institutional oversight and inter-departmental 
convergence under the Jal Jeevan Mission. This has had a direct bearing on the quality 
of planning, sustainability of water sources, integration with sanitation efforts, and 
community engagement. 
Further, the road map to achieve the FHTCs by 2024 remained unachieved as non-
involvement of DWSM either contributed to incomplete scheme for prolonged periods 
or delayed completion of schemes as discussed in Paragraph 2.3.7.11. 
In reply, the Government stated (March 2025) that the audit observation was noted for 
future guidance and assured that all the DWSMs would be instructed again to perform 
their duties as per the roles and responsibilities prescribed in the JJM guidelines. 
 
77  IMIS provides a centralised platform for monitoring and managing the mission's progress, ensuring 
transparency, and facilitating timely resource allocation. IMIS tracks physical and financial progress, 
updates data on water supply and sanitation, and supports communication with the Ministry.  
.

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
81
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
81 
2.3.7.6 (i) (c) Village Water and Sanitation Committees  
Paragraph 5.4 of the operational guidelines of JJM provides for a Village Water and 
Sanitation Committee to be constituted as a sub-committee in each Panchayat 
comprising of 10 to 15 elected members of Panchayat up to 25 per cent, 50 per cent 
must be women and remaining 25 per cent may consist of representatives of weaker 
sections of the village (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes). VWSC is tasked with 
the planning, design, implementation, operation and maintenance of the in-village water 
supply schemes. VWSC is to hold periodic meetings at least four times in a year and 
maintain minutes/ records of the same.  
Examination of VWSCs related records of 20 sampled villages revealed the following; 
a) VWSCs were constituted (between May 2020 to October 2022) in 14 villages; and 
in remaining six villages no records were available regarding formation of VWSC. 
b) VAPs were found to be prepared before constitution of VWSC in 12 villages , 
indicating that VAP was prepared without community participation through 
VWSC. 
c) 50 per cent women representation was ensured only in six villages. 
d) No records of VWSC meeting such as minutes were maintained in any of the 
villages, despite guidelines mandating conduct of meetings at least four times in a 
year as envisaged in paragraph 5.4(xv) of the Operational Guidelines of JJM. 
e) During joint physical verification, Audit noticed that none of the water supply 
schemes were handed over to the respective village authorities/ VWSCs resulting 
in lack of ownership. 
f) VWSCs did not prepare any plan, design or take responsibility for operation and 
maintenance (O&M) of water supply systems or local water sources. 
g) None of the VWSCs mobilised and motivated the community to contribute towards 
regular O&M service charges required for the in-village water supply schemes. 
Further, VWSCs neither opened separate bank account for this purpose nor raised/ 
accumulated any fund earmarked for O&M of these schemes. 
The VWSCs in the sampled villages had failed to perform their mandated roles due to 
delayed formation, non-compliance with representation norms, absence of records, and 
a complete lack of involvement in planning, O&M, or financial management. This 
resulted in weak community ownership, compromised sustainability of water supply 
schemes, and non-realisation of the JJM’s core principle of decentralised, community-
managed water governance.  
While noting the audit observation for future guidance, the Government replied (March 
2025) that all the DWSMs and ISAs would be instructed again to encourage and help 
out the VWSCs in performing their duties as per JJM guidelines. 
2.3.7.6 (i) (d) Implementation Support Agency 
Paragraph 5.5 of the operational guidelines of JJM  stipulates that Non-Government 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
82
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
82 
Organisations/ Village Organisations/ Women Self Help Groups/ Community Based 
Organisations/ Trusts/ Foundations referred to as ISAs have a role as partners in 
mobilising and engaging the communities to plan, design, implement, manage, operate 
and maintain in-village water supply infrastructure. 
A total of nine78 ISAs were engaged by the Rig Division under PWD (DWS) (one ISA 
engaged in Dhalai district in October 2021, six ISAs in June 2022 and two ISAs in 
October 2023) in the State to cover 587 villages out of 765 villages. As of March 2024, 
178 villages remained un-allotted to any ISA. In the sampled Districts, all the 70 
villages were allotted to one ISA under Unakoti District, however in South Tripura 
District, 100 villages out of 121 villages were allotted to three ISAs during 2022-24. 
As of March 2024, no ISA was engaged in 21 villages under South Tripura District.  
On examination of records pertaining to engagements and functions related to ISAs in 
two sampled districts, it was noticed that the DWSM did not play any role in the 
engagement and monitoring of ISAs which was contrary to the provisions laid in 
paragraphs 5.3 and 5.5 of the operational guidelines of JJM. Further, there was delay in 
the engagement of the ISAs, absence of five-year District Action Plans, lack of 
coordination with DWSMs, ineffective community and women participation and lack 
of training activities undermined the intended outcomes of the mission, reflecting 
serious lapses in planning and oversight, in violation of the operational guidelines of 
JJM as detailed in Table 2.3.9. 
Table 2.3.9: Functions pertaining to ISA as envisaged in the guidelines and actual status 
Sl. 
No. 
As Prescribed in JJM Operational 
Guidelines 
Actual Position in Two Sampled 
Districts 
1 DWSM will engage ISAs from the 
empanelled ISAs enlisted by SWSM. 
DWSM had no involvement in engaging 
or monitoring ISAs. Rig Division under 
PWD (DWS) centrally engaged 15 ISAs 
up to July 2024. 
2 Based on the 5-year District Action Plan, 
villages to be covered each year will be 
identified based on need (last-mile 
connectivity, IEC campaigns, O&M 
support, new schemes, etc.) with clear 
timelines, ensuring all households have 
FHTCs by 2024. 
No 5-year District Action Plan with 
defined timelines was prepared by 
DWSM. Villages were not categorised 
based on their specific ISA activity 
requirements. 
3 Once selected by DWSM, ISAs must 
prepare an action plan for allotted 
villages for the entire scheme cycle, in 
collaboration with PHED/ RWS 
Department, specifying quarterly 
outputs. 
No such action plan was prepared by the 
ISAs in the sampled villages. 
4 ISA to facilitate women’s participation at 
all levels of planning, implementation, 
Out of 20 sampled villages, adequate 
women’s participation was ensured in 
 
78  Including six ISAs engaged during 2024-25 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
83
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 83 
Sl. 
No. 
As Prescribed in JJM Operational 
Guidelines 
Actual Position in Two Sampled 
Districts 
management, operation, and 
maintenance of in-village water supply 
systems. 
only six villages. 
5 ISA to facilitate constitution of sub-
committees of Gram Panchayats 
(VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group). 
ISAs did not play any role in constituting 
VWSCs or preparing VAPs. VWSCs 
were constituted in 14 out of 20 sampled 
villages between May 2020 and October 
2022, when VAPs were prepared (April 
2020-March 2021) before the 
engagement of the ISAs (2022-24). 
6 ISA to handhold Gram Panchayats and 
their sub-committees in all functions 
including planning, design, 
implementation, management, O&M of 
water supply infrastructure, opening 
bank accounts, mobilising community 
contribution, Gram Sabha meetings, 
resolutions, and sanitation/ greywater 
management. 
ISAs did not facilitate VWSCs in 
planning, O&M of in-village water 
supply infrastructure, opening bank 
accounts, mobilisation of community 
contribution, or sanitation and greywater 
management activities. 
7 ISA to conduct need assessment of 
FHTCs and motivate communities to 
adopt FHTCs. 
No such need assessment was conducted 
by ISAs. 
8 ISA to use Participatory Rural Appraisal 
(PRA) tools for community mobilisation 
and need assessment. 
No such tools were used by ISAs for 
community mobilisation. 
9 ISA to build awareness on water aspects 
including rainwater harvesting, artificial 
recharge, drinking water source 
augmentation/ sustainability. 
ISAs did not take any action in this 
regard. 
In reply, the Government stated (March 2025) that the audit observation was noted for 
future guidance and ensured that all the ISAs would be instructed again to perform their 
duties as per the JJM guidelines. 
The fact remains that the weak planning, poor coordination, limited community 
engagement and insufficient oversight created a serious gap between the requirements 
as per guidelines and the ground reality, risking the long-term success of JJM. 
2.3.7.7 Mechanism available for water quality monitoring 
Chapter 10 of the operational guidelines of JJM provides that monitoring of water 
quality involves laboratory and field testing of water samples collected from water 
sources and FHTCs. Facility of laboratories for water quality monitoring of rural areas 
already set up at State/ District/ Sub-division/ Block levels will be used for this purpose. 
Also, mobile water quality testing laboratories will be put into operation to the extent 
possible. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
84
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
84 
Further, Drinking Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance Framework (DWQ&F) 
issued by the Government of India in October 2021, outlined specific requirements for 
monitoring drinking water quality by establishing water quality testing laboratories in 
the States. The parameters for these laboratories were also specified in terms of 
infrastructure, manpower and water quality testing facilities. Furthermore, Paragraph 
10.2 of the operational guidelines of JJM provides that up to two per cent of programme 
funds were to be allocated for the Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance (WQMS) 
component of JJM. These funds were to be used for monitoring and surveillance of 
water quality in habitations at field level and for setting up and upgrading water quality 
testing laboratories at State, district and sub-district levels.  
However, during 2019-20 to 2023-24, the State utilised only 0.22 per cent to 
0.61 per cent  with respect to total funds allocated to the State, under the WQMS 
activity, as given in Table 2.3.19. As a result, there were instances of shortage of 
manpower as well as infrastructure in water quality testing laboratories at State/ 
District/ Sub-division levels as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs 2.3.7.7 (i), 
2.3.7.7 (ii) and 2.3.7.7 (iii). 
2.3.7.7 (i) Shortages of manpower, infrastructure and equipment for water 
quality testing 
The State Level Laboratory (SLL) was established in August 2013 and accredited to 
the National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) 
status in June 2016. It was noticed that the SLL had conducted tests on 46 out of 
73 required parameters (Appendix 2.3.1) as prescribed in Water Quality Monitoring & 
Surveillance (WQMS) framework of JJM. Of these 46 parameters, only 20 tests were 
accredited, the balance 26 parameters, for which SLL had the capability of examining, 
were yet to be applied for by the Department for getting NABL’s accreditation. Further, 
due to shortage of adequately trained manpower, testing of remaining 27 parameters 
could not be done. This limited scope of accreditation as well as testing capabilities 
indicates that the laboratory had neither the requisite infrastructure nor validated 
methods in place for the remaining parameters. Hence, while the laboratory was 
technically accredited, its utility in fulfilling the complete testing requirements under 
JJM remained significantly constrained. 
Shortfalls were also observed with respect to availability of equipment for water quality 
testing in SLL as well as in laboratories at district and sub-divisional levels against the 
envisaged parameters in WQMS framework of JJM is detailed in Appendix 2.3.2 (A). 
It was also noticed that no mobile testing units were mobilised as envisaged in the 
operational guidelines. 
In addition to the above, the suggestive guidelines for staff required for various levels 
of laboratories as per WQMS framework, 2021 vis-à-vis availability of manpower in 
the State level, District level and Sub-Divisional laboratories in the two sampled 
districts is shown in Appendix 2.3.2 (B). 
It was noticed in audit that in all the water testing laboratories at State level, District 
level (in sampled districts) and Sub-division level (under sampled districts), there was 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
85
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
85 
shortage of manpower against the requirement prescribed in the WQMS framework as 
summarised in Table 2.3.10. 
Table 2.3.10: Manpower requirement versus availability in water testing laboratories 
Suggestive guidelines for staff required for 
various level of laboratories as per WQMS 
framework 
Availability of manpower/ men-in-
position 
Laboratory type No. of HR required 
State level 14 5 
  Unakoti District South Tripura 
District 
District level 8 4 3 
Sub-division level 
Six for each Sub-
divisional laboratories 
Total three in two 
Sub-divisional 
laboratories 
Total five in two 
Sub-divisional 
laboratories 
Mobile Three for each mobile 
unit 0 0 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) and the concerned EEs in the sampled districts  
Further, it was noticed that the District level laboratories were also functioning as Sub-
division level laboratories with the same infrastructure and manpower due to shortage 
of trained manpower like chemists and microbiologists, thereby overburdening existing 
resources and affecting the efficiency of water quality monitoring. 
Such gaps in provision of laboratories, infrastructure, equipment for water quality 
testing and shortage of manpower contributed to extensive shortfalls in conduct of the 
prescribed water quality testing as discussed in Paragraph 2.3.7.7 (ii). 
The audit revealed systemic inadequacies in the water quality testing infrastructure 
across all levels: State, district, sub-divisional, and mobile units. Despite the existence 
of an NABL-accredited State Level Laboratory, its capability was restricted to only 40 
per cent  of the parameters prescribed under the JJM framework. The shortfall in 
equipment and trained manpower, especially with district-level labs doubling as sub-
divisional facilities without additional resources, had overburdened the system and 
weakened effective water quality surveillance. These deficiencies had directly 
contributed to shortfalls in prescribed testing frequency and coverage, thereby 
undermining the objectives of the Jal Jeevan Mission’s Water Quality Monitoring 
framework. 
The Government replied (March 2025) that 21 NABL accredited/ recognised water 
testing laboratories had been strengthened with manpower compatible to handle the 
required testing by engaging new 21 chemists and 16 microbiologists in November 
2024. 
2.3.7.7 (ii) Shortfall in water quality testing in laboratories 
According to paragraph 10.1 of the operational guidelines of JJM, all water sources 
under a Sub-division/ Block should be tested once for chemical parameters and twice 
for bacteriological parameters (pre and post monsoon) in a year. Where Sub-division 
level laboratories are required to test all water sources in their respective jurisdictions, 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
86
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
86 
District level laboratories are required to check 250 water sources/ samples per month 
i.e. 3,000 in a year as per the roster target available on IMIS of JJM including the 
positively tested samples referred by sub-divisional/ block/ mobile laboratories. The 
State laboratory is to test at least five per cent of the total drinking water samples across 
all the District level laboratories including positively tested samples referred by the 
District/ Sub-division level laboratories. 
The year-wise position of water quality tests conducted in the Sub-divisional 
laboratories and District laboratories in the State is depicted in Table 2.3.11. 
Table 2.3.11: Target vis-a-vis Achievement for water testing in various laboratories 
under the State 
Year 
Total 
no. of 
sources 
in the 
State 
Target Achievement 
Excess (+)/ Shortfall (-) 
Percentage in 
parenthesis 
Chemical Bacterio- 
logical Chemical Bacterio- 
logical Chemical Bacterio-
logical  
2019-20 6,230 6,230 12,460 2,850 2,471 (-)3,380 
(54.25) 
(-) 9,989 
(80.16) 
2020-21 8,465 8,465 16,930 10,484 8,959 (+) 2,019 (-) 7,971 
(47.08) 
2021-22 12,414 12,414 24,828 27,819 11,410 (+) 15,405 (-) 13,418 
(54.04) 
2022-23 20,223 20,223 40,446 18,770 9,908 (-)1,453 
(7.18) 
(-) 30,538 
(75.50) 
2023-24 22,249 22,249 44,498 36,716 44,303 (+) 
14,467 (-) 195 (0.44) 
Source: Information furnished by CE, PWD (DWS) 
Audit observed that the water quality testing in the State was irregular and inconsistent 
with the prescribed norms under the JJM. It may be seen from Table 2.3.11 that there 
was a major shortfall of 54.25 per cent in chemical tests conducted in water testing 
laboratories during 2019-20. Notably, in 2021-22 and 2023-24, the State exceeded the 
targets significantly, with a surplus of 15,405 and 14,467 tests respectively.  
The Department stated (May 2025) that fluctuation in timely collection of samples on 
regular basis by the women group/ VWSC had resulted in fluctuation of number of 
water samples tested in laboratories. This indicated that the Department was ineffective 
both in encouraging community participation to ensure regular water quality testing and 
in the efficient collection of water samples by the water quality laboratories. Moreover, 
there was persistent shortfall in bacteriological tests ranging between 0.44 per cent and 
80.16 per cent during 2019-24. This indicated that bacteriological tests were not 
conducted at regular intervals in a systematic manner as per the operational guidelines 
of JJM. This persistent gap in bacteriological testing, a key public health indicator, was 
due to shortage of microbiologists in the water testing laboratories. However, to 
overcome this gap, the Department engaged 16 microbiologists in November 2024. 
This points to systemic issues in planning, capacity, or monitoring, and undermines the 
credibility of water safety assurances under JJM. 
Further, as against the norms set in the operational guidelines of JJM for testing a 
minimum five per cent  of the total drinking water samples across all District level 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
87
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
87 
laboratories including positively tested samples referred by District/ Sub-division level 
to be conducted in State Level Lab, there was a shortfall in the number of chemical tests 
conducted during 2021-24 and shortfall in the biological tests conducted during 
2019-24 as shown in Table 2.3.12. 
Table 2.3.12: Status of water sample testing in State Level Laboratory 
Year 
No. of tests 
conducted at 
Division and 
Subdivision level 
laboratories (A) 
No. of samples to be 
tested at State level 
laboratory (five per 
cent of A) 
No. of samples 
referred to and 
conducted at State 
level laboratory 
Shortfall (-)/ Excess(+) 
with reference to 
number of samples to 
be tested at State Level 
vis-à-vis number of 
sample referred to and 
tested at State level 
Chemical Bacterio
logical Chemical Bacterio
logical Chemical Bacterio
logical Chemical Bacteriolog
ical 
2019-20 2,850 2,471 143 124 435 27 293 -97 
2020-21 10,484 8,959 524 448 672 71 148 -377 
2021-22 27,819 11,410 1,391 571 685 49 -706 -522 
2022-23 18,770 9,908 939 495 850 89 -89 -406 
2023-24 36,716 44,303 1,836 2,215 989 106 -847 -2,109 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) 
In addition to above, there were discrepancies in water quality testing data as furnished 
by the CE, PWD (DWS) and information furnished by the respective DWS Divisions 
under the sampled districts as shown in Table 2.3.13. However, the reasons for such 
inconsistencies were not found on record. 
Table 2.3.13: Target and achievement of chemical and bacteriological testing in sampled 
districts 
Year Source of 
information 
Total no. 
of sources 
in the 
district 
Target Achievement Excess (+)/ Shortfall (-) 
Chemical Bacterio 
logical Chemical Bacterio 
logical Chemical Bacteriological 
Unakoti district 
2019-20 CE Office 389 389 778 356 698 (-) 33 (-) 80 
Division 2 2 4 3,240 3,740 (+) 3,238 (+) 3,736 
2020-21 CE Office 524 524 1,048 496 756 (-) 28 (-) 292 
Division 97 97 194 4,547 4,148 (+) 4,450 (+) 3,954 
2021-22 CE Office 600 600 1,200 5,103 3,692 (+) 4,503 (+) 2,492 
Division 523 523 1,046 5,852 4,890 (+) 5,329 (+) 3,844 
2022-23 CE Office 1,598 1,598 3,196 4,152 3,446 (+) 2,554 (+) 250 
Division 947 947 1,894 6,057 5,049 (+) 5,110 (+) 3,155 
2023-24 CE Office 1,708 1,708 3,416 4,936 7,428 (+) 3,228 (+) 4,012 
Division 1,190 1,190 2,380 7,815 10,687 (+) 6,625 (+) 8,307 
South Tripura district 
2019-20 CE Office 676 676 1,352 469 1,023 (-) 207 (-) 329 
Division 510 510 1,020 772 51 (+) 262 (-) 969 
2020-21 CE Office 1,129 1,129 2,258 1,059 1,263 (-) 70 (-) 995 
Division 789 789 1,578 2,129 1,672 (+) 1,340 (+) 94 
2021-22 CE Office 1,499 1,499 2,998 3,278 648 (+) 1,779 (-) 2,350 
Division 1,369 1,369 2,738 3,278 648 (+) 1,909 (-) 2,090 
2022-23 CE Office 2,297 2,297 4,594 2,102 1,139 (-) 195 (-) 3,455 
Division 2,078 2,078 4,156 2,102 1,139 (+) 24 (-) 3,017 
2023-24 CE Office 2,561 2,561 5,122 5,440 7,698 (+) 2,879 (+) 2,576 
Division 2,779 2,779 5,558 5,440 7,698 (+) 2,661 (+) 2,140 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) and the concerned EEs in the sampled districts  

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
88
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
88 
It may be seen from Table 2.3.13  that there was shortfall in the number of 
bacteriological tests conducted at Sub-Divisional level laboratories under South Tripura 
District during 2019-20, 2021-22 and 2022-23 as compared to the number stipulated in 
the operational guidelines of JJM (twice in a year from each source). However, all the 
bacteriological tests conducted during the period met the standards, but some chemical 
tests fell short during 2021-22 to 2023-24 
Further, Audit also observed that though the Sub-Divisional laboratories (at Kumarghat 
and Belonia) were claimed to be functioning as District level laboratories in the sampled 
two districts; the District level laboratories neither conducted any test of the samples 
collected from different Sub-Divisions nor were any samples referred by sub-divisional 
laboratories including positively tested samples for further analysis. 
In Tripura, the chemical tests failed due to concentration of iron beyond acceptable 
limit and bacteriological tests failed due to presence of coliform bacteria. With regard 
to failure of chemical tests, the remedial measures include (i) in case of water supply 
system with IRP, backwash of IRP is ensured and regeneration of Filter media, if 
necessary and (ii) in case of water supply system without IRP, necessary arrangement 
is made to install IRP. With regard to failure of bacteriological tests, proper disinfection 
is made to the water supply system and thereafter bacteriological test is carried out to 
ensure quality of drinking water with no contamination.  
Audit noticed that remedial measures were taken in all the cases where water quality 
testing did not meet the prescribed standard (both chemical and bacteriological) in State 
level laboratory during 2019-24. However, at District/ Sub-division level laboratories, 
remedial measures were not taken in 25, 1,560 and 434 cases where chemical tests 
failed (did not meet the standard) during 2020-21, 2021-22 and 2023-24 respectively 
as detailed in Table 2.3.14. 
Table 2.3.14: Number of tests failed at District/ Sub-Division level laboratories and State 
level laboratory vis-à-vis remedial action taken  
Year 
No. of test failed at 
District/ Sub-
Division level 
laboratories 
Remedial action 
taken 
No. of test failed at 
State level 
laboratory 
Remedial action 
taken 
Chemi
cal 
Bacteriolo
gical  
Chemi
cal 
Bacteriolo
gical  
Chemi
cal 
Bacteriolo
gical  
Chemi
cal 
Bacteriolo
gical   
2019-20 601 24 601 24 67 3 67 3 
2020-21 642 62 617 62 51 4 51 4 
2021-22 2,341 70 781 70 73 11 73 11 
2022-23 2,078 21 2,078 21 146 6 146 6 
2023-24 3,986 22 3,552 22 127 5 127 5 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) 
In reply, the Government stated (March 2025) that due to shortage of manpower, 
recommended number of water samples could not be tested. However, with the 
engagement of new 21 chemists and 16 microbiologists in November 2024, number of 
testing has increased. 
The audit revealed systemic issues in water quality testing under JJM, with large-scale 
inconsistencies between reported figures by CE and district divisions, shortfalls in 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
89
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 89 
mandatory referral testing to State labs and remedial measures to be taken in the failed 
chemical tests. The lack of coordination between different lab tiers, inadequate 
manpower until late 2024, and poor data validation had significantly compromised 
water quality monitoring and risk response mechanisms across districts. 
2.3.7.7 (iii) Non-review of water quality testing 
As per paragraph 5.1.2.1 of WQMS framework of JJM, a Chief Chemist should be 
nominated by SWSM as a member of the Executive Committee of SWSM. Paragraph 
5.1.2.2 of the framework provides that the State level laboratory should be headed by 
the Chief Chemist to oversee the functioning of laboratories, water quality testing, 
monitoring and surveillance at all levels. The Chief Chemist should directly report to 
the Secretary/ Principal Secretary of the implementing department and should monitor/ 
guide the effective implementation of WQMS in the State. Further, paragraph 5.2 of 
the framework envisages inter alia the following roles and responsibilities of the Chief 
Chemist: 
 overall in-charge of all drinking water quality testing laboratories in the State, 
 prepare Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for proper sampling techniques i.e. 
collection, preservation, transportation, analysis, reporting and data interpretation 
of test results, 
 prepare Annual Action Plan (AAP) for WQMS activities, 
 plan corrective action in consultation with the Chief Engineer, 
 ensure cross verification of the test results in laboratories at all levels, and 
 ensure correctness of the data uploaded on IMIS of JJM. 
However, it was observed in audit that, no Chief Chemist had been nominated by 
SWSM for the State. As such neither was SOP and AAP prepared for WQMS activities 
in the State nor was cross verification of test results in laboratories at all levels and 
correctness of the data uploaded on IMIS of JJM ensured. As a result, the discrepancies 
between the data furnished by the concerned divisions and CE office regarding the 
number of laboratory tests conducted in sampled districts could not be reconciled and 
ascertained in audit. 
In reply, the Government stated (March 2025) that State level consultant on WQMSP, 
engaged by the Department, having requisite qualification of a Chief Chemist was 
functioning as Technical Manager (as per NABL guidelines) who was also performing 
the duties of same nature as of the Chief Chemist for day-to-day review of water quality 
testing. However, the engagement of a Chief Chemist in the State level laboratory on a 
regular basis was pending. 
The Government’s claim of having State level consultant on WQMSP/ Technical 
Manger functioning as a Chief Chemist was not acceptable as cross verification of the 
test results in laboratories at all levels to check correctness of the data uploaded on IMIS 
of JJM was not being done. Further, the discrepancies between the data furnished by 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
90
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
90 
the PWD (DWS) divisions and the CE office remained unresolved. 
2.3.7.8 Field Testing Kits  
As defined under the WQMS framework, Field Testing Kits (FTKs) are used for 
examining physiochemical contamination in water for initial screening. As per 
paragraph 10.1 of operational guidelines of JJM, all GPs/ VWSCs should ensure testing 
of all drinking water sources including private sources and sanitary inspection under 
their jurisdiction using FTKs. Paragraph 4.2 of WQMS framework provides that GPs/ 
VWSCs, especially five women in every village, are to undertake water quality testing 
using FTKs or testing devices, sanitary inspection and upload data on Water Quality 
Management Information System (WQMIS). Further, paragraph 4.3(v)(f) of the 
framework stipulates the frequency of FTK test to be conducted at least once in a month. 
Chart 2.3.10: Workflow for FTK test 
Source: Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance Framework, 2021 
Year wise position of utilisation of FTKs by village level authorities in the sampled 
districts are detailed in Table 2.3.15 and Table 2.3.16. 
Table 2.3.15: FTK tests done under Unakoti District 
Particulars Year 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Total No. of revenue villages 70 
Total No. of completed water sources 2 97 523 947 1,190 
Total No. of FTK users registered 8 67 93 107 93 
Total No. of FTKs distributed 20 0 91 83 079 
Villages where FTK tests done 21 080 27 32 66 
Total No. of samples tested using FTK 1,637 0 2,601 3,644 6,112 
Source: Information furnished by the EE, Kumarghat DWS Division 
It may be seen from Table 2.3.15 that, though there were a total of 70 villages under 
Unakoti District, FTK tests were undertaken only in 30 per cent to 46 per cent villages 
during 2019-20, 2021-22 and 2022-23, however, the number of villages using FTKs 
significantly increased up to 94 per cent during the year 2023-24.  
 
 
79  Water testing was done using the earlier stock of FTKs.  
80  No FTKs were used during 2020-21 due to COVID-19. 


Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
91
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
91 
Table 2.3.16: FTK test done under South Tripura District 
Particulars Year 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Total No. of revenue villages 121 
Total No. of completed water sources 510 789 1,369 2,078 2,779 
Total No. of FTK users registered 0 0 30 660 725 
Total No. of FTKs distributed 5 15 61 67 190 
No. of villages where FTK tests done 0 19 21 48 121 
Total No. of samples tested using FTK 0 252 196 757 7,290 
Source: Information furnished by the EE, Belonia DWS Division 
From Table 2.3.16, it may be seen that under South Tripura District- 
i) Though there were a total of 121 villages under South Tripura District, FTKs were 
not used in any of the villages during 2019-20. During 2020-23, FTKs were used 
only in 16 per cent to 40 per cent villages. The reason for such short coverage of 
villages in respect of water testing through FTK was not found on record. 
ii) No FTK user was registered during 2019-21. Though there were no registered FTK 
users during 2019-21, five FTKs and 15 FTKs were distributed during 2019-20 and 
2020-21 respectively, as stated by the Executive Engineer, Belonia DWS Division. 
In the absence of registered FTK users, Audit could not ascertain as to whom these 
FTKs were distributed and whether actual distribution took place or not. Further, 
though there were no registered FTK users during 2020-21, 252 samples were 
tested in 19 villages during the period. Therefore, genuineness of the FTK tests 
conducted remained doubtful to audit. 
iii) Though five FTKs were distributed in 2019-20, no tests were conducted. Though 
there were 510 completed water supply schemes upto 2019-20, no FTK test was 
conducted. Further, during 2020-23 the percentage of total samples tested using 
FTKs against the total number of completed schemes in the respective years ranged 
between 14 per cent to 36 per cent. However, FTKs were used in 100 per cent 
villages during the year 2023-24. 
Additionally, survey and examination of records at sampled 20 villages revealed the 
following: 
1. FTK users were identified by 16 village authorities and in remaining four villages 
FTK users were not identified. 
2. Though FTK users were identified in 16 villages, kits were distributed in 14 
villages, excluding Bishnupur VC of Rupaichari Block and South Srirampur GP of 
Rajnagar Block under South Tripura District.  
3. Paragraph 6.5(xii) of Drinking Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance (WQMS) 
Framework, 2021 states that at the village level, the VWSC is to maintain records 
on FTK testing, however, it was noticed that the results of FTK tests, water quality 
monitoring reports, etc. were not intimated to or available with any of the village 
authorities.  
4. As per WQMS framework, the FTK test reports were required to be uploaded in 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
92
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
92 
the JJM portal on regular basis by a nominated member of VWSC. But the water 
test reports were not available with the village authorities. Hence, in the absence 
of original test reports at village level, the veracity of the data uploaded in the IMIS 
of JJM remained doubtful. Further, among the 342 surveyed households who 
received piped water supply, 234 households (68.42 per cent) were not satisfied 
with the quality of supplied water due to iron content and unpleasant odour in piped 
water. 
In reply, the Government stated (March 2025) that all the ISAs would be directed to 
increase training to FTK users at village level and VWSCs would also be instructed for 
carrying out water quality tests using FTKs more efficiently and effectively. Further, 
the Government concurred with the audit observation and stated that the VWSCs should 
keep themselves updated on the test results and display the same in the panchayat 
offices to raise awareness among the villagers regarding prevailing water quality level 
in their respective villages with the support of local PWD (DWS) officials. 
Conclusion 
There was poor involvement of rural communities for planning and implementation of 
in village water supply schemes. Further, DWSM remained inactive in sampled districts 
with respect to the planning, implementation and monitoring of water supply schemes 
in the districts. ISAs were first engaged in the State after lapse of almost three years 
since the inception of JJM, thereby affecting the mobilisation and capacity building 
efforts at the village level. There were also shortages of manpower and testing 
equipment in the State level laboratory as well as in the district and sub-division level 
laboratories in the sampled districts which contributed to shortfalls in the prescribed 
water quality testing. The district level laboratories were found to be functioning at the 
level of sub-division laboratories in the sampled districts. Additionally, the concerned 
village authorities remained unaware about the reports of FTK tests, though these 
reports were to be uploaded to the JJM portal on regular basis by a nominated member 
of the VWSC. 
Recommendation 
The Government should; 
 ensure active involvement of rural communities by assigning clear roles to 
village authorities in planning, implementation, operation and monitoring of 
JJM scheme; 
 ensure that the DWSM develop a robust district level monitoring mechanism, 
including field visits, inspections and real time dashboard tracking; facilitates 
operation and maintenance frameworks that empower VWSCs to manage day 
to day operations; 
 focus on improving testing facilities by upgrading laboratory infrastructure 
and deploying manpower as per requirement; 
 adopt suitable system for sharing water test reports with the concerned village 
authorities on real time basis. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
93
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
93 
Audit Objective 3: To assess whether financial resources have been employed in an 
economic and efficient manner 
 
2.3.7.9 Financial planning 
According to paragraph 7.5 of the operational guidelines of JJM, every State is required 
to prepare a five year’s State Action Plan (SAP) wherein annual target of FHTCs and 
corresponding financial requirements should be projected. 
Year wise position of receipts, availability and utilisation of fund under JJM in the State 
during the years 2019-20 to 2023-24 is detailed in Table 2.3.17  and graphical 
representation is depicted in Chart 2.3.11. 
Table 2.3.17: Year wise position of fund received, availability and utilisation of fund 
under JJM 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Opening 
balance Receipt 
Misc. Receipt 
(Bank 
Interest) 
Total 
available 
fund 
Expenditure 
Refund to 
GoI (interest 
amount) 
Closing 
balance 
C S C S C S C S C S C S 
2019-20 48.94 3.97 145.37 4.99 1.64 0.00 204.91 59.50 6.08 0.00 0.00 136.46 2.87 
2020-21 136.46 2.87 117.46 23.33 2.34 0.26 282.72 194.74 22.57 0.00 0.00 61.51 3.89 
2021-22 61.51 3.89 714.09 69.12 3.02 0.34 851.97 597.48 67.61 2.34 0.26 178.80 5.48 
2022-23 178.80 5.48 849.91 85.22 2.53 0.28 1,122.22 798.67 82.54 3.02 0.34 229.55 8.10 
2023-24 229.55 8.10 744.18 103.01 4.64 0.52 1,090.00 864.74 105.76 2.53 0.28 111.10 5.58 
Total 655.26 24.31 2,571.01 285.67 14.17 1.4 3,551.82 2,515.13 284.56 7.89 0.88 717.42 25.92 
C= Central share; S= State share 
Chart 2.3.11: Year-wise position of funds received, their availability and utilisation 
under JJM 
 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS)  
52.91
139.33
65.4
184.28
237.65
150.36
140.79
783.21
935.13
847.19
1.64
2.6
3.36
2.81
5.16
204.91
282.72
851.97
1122.22
1090
65.58
217.31
665.09
881.21
970.5
0
0
2.6
3.36
2.81
139.33
65.4
184.28
237.65
116.68
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22
2022-23
2023-24
Closing balance Refund of interest amount Expenditure
Total available fund Misc. Receipt Receipt
Opening balance
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
93 
Audit Objective 3: To assess whether financial resources have been employed in an 
economic and efficient manner 
 
2.3.7.9 Financial planning 
According to paragraph 7.5 of the operational guidelines of JJM, every State is required 
to prepare a five year’s State Action Plan (SAP) wherein annual target of FHTCs and 
corresponding financial requirements should be projected. 
Year wise position of receipts, availability and utilisation of fund under JJM in the State 
during the years 2019-20 to 2023-24 is detailed in Table 2.3.17  and graphical 
representation is depicted in Chart 2.3.11. 
Table 2.3.17: Year wise position of fund received, availability and utilisation of fund 
under JJM 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Opening 
balance Receipt 
Misc. Receipt 
(Bank 
Interest) 
Total 
available 
fund 
Expenditure 
Refund to 
GoI (interest 
amount) 
Closing 
balance 
C S C S C S C S C S C S 
2019-20 48.94 3.97 145.37 4.99 1.64 0.00 204.91 59.50 6.08 0.00 0.00 136.46 2.87 
2020-21 136.46 2.87 117.46 23.33 2.34 0.26 282.72 194.74 22.57 0.00 0.00 61.51 3.89 
2021-22 61.51 3.89 714.09 69.12 3.02 0.34 851.97 597.48 67.61 2.34 0.26 178.80 5.48 
2022-23 178.80 5.48 849.91 85.22 2.53 0.28 1,122.22 798.67 82.54 3.02 0.34 229.55 8.10 
2023-24 229.55 8.10 744.18 103.01 4.64 0.52 1,090.00 864.74 105.76 2.53 0.28 111.10 5.58 
Total 655.26 24.31 2,571.01 285.67 14.17 1.4 3,551.82 2,515.13 284.56 7.89 0.88 717.42 25.92 
C= Central share; S= State share 
Chart 2.3.11: Year-wise position of funds received, their availability and utilisation 
under JJM 
 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS)  
52.91
139.33
65.4
184.28
237.65
150.36
140.79
783.21
935.13
847.19
1.64
2.6
3.36
2.81
5.16
204.91
282.72
851.97
1122.22
1090
65.58
217.31
665.09
881.21
970.5
0
0
2.6
3.36
2.81
139.33
65.4
184.28
237.65
116.68
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22
2022-23
2023-24
Closing balance Refund of interest amount Expenditure
Total available fund Misc. Receipt Receipt
Opening balance
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
93 
Audit Objective 3: To assess whether financial resources have been employed in an 
economic and efficient manner 
 
2.3.7.9 Financial planning 
According to paragraph 7.5 of the operational guidelines of JJM, every State is required 
to prepare a five year’s State Action Plan (SAP) wherein annual target of FHTCs and 
corresponding financial requirements should be projected. 
Year wise position of receipts, availability and utilisation of fund under JJM in the State 
during the years 2019-20 to 2023-24 is detailed in Table 2.3.17  and graphical 
representation is depicted in Chart 2.3.11. 
Table 2.3.17: Year wise position of fund received, availability and utilisation of fund 
under JJM 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Opening 
balance Receipt 
Misc. Receipt 
(Bank 
Interest) 
Total 
available 
fund 
Expenditure 
Refund to 
GoI (interest 
amount) 
Closing 
balance 
C S C S C S C S C S C S 
2019-20 48.94 3.97 145.37 4.99 1.64 0.00 204.91 59.50 6.08 0.00 0.00 136.46 2.87 
2020-21 136.46 2.87 117.46 23.33 2.34 0.26 282.72 194.74 22.57 0.00 0.00 61.51 3.89 
2021-22 61.51 3.89 714.09 69.12 3.02 0.34 851.97 597.48 67.61 2.34 0.26 178.80 5.48 
2022-23 178.80 5.48 849.91 85.22 2.53 0.28 1,122.22 798.67 82.54 3.02 0.34 229.55 8.10 
2023-24 229.55 8.10 744.18 103.01 4.64 0.52 1,090.00 864.74 105.76 2.53 0.28 111.10 5.58 
Total 655.26 24.31 2,571.01 285.67 14.17 1.4 3,551.82 2,515.13 284.56 7.89 0.88 717.42 25.92 
C= Central share; S= State share 
Chart 2.3.11: Year-wise position of funds received, their availability and utilisation 
under JJM 
 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS)  
52.91
139.33
65.4
184.28
237.65
150.36
140.79
783.21
935.13
847.19
1.64
2.6
3.36
2.81
5.16
204.91
282.72
851.97
1122.22
1090
65.58
217.31
665.09
881.21
970.5
0
0
2.6
3.36
2.81
139.33
65.4
184.28
237.65
116.68
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22
2022-23
2023-24
Closing balance Refund of interest amount Expenditure
Total available fund Misc. Receipt Receipt
Opening balance

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
94
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
94 
It may be seen from Table 2.3.17 that the State effectively utilised ₹ 2,799.70 crore 81 
which accounts for 96.17 per cent of the total net available funds of ₹ 2,911.23 crore82. 
The year wise financial requirement against the targeted FHTCs as per the five year 
action plan vis-à-vis funds available and its utilisation are shown in Table 2.3.18 and 
depicted in Chart 2.3.12. 
Table 2.3.18: Requirement vis-à-vis availability of fund and its utilisation 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Target and financial 
requirements projected 
in five years action plan Total 
fund 
available 
during 
the year 
Shortfall (-)/ 
Excess (+) in 
availability of 
fund in 
respect of. 
requirement 
projected in 5 
years AAP  
(in per cent) 
Total fund utilised83 Percentage 
of 
Utilisation 
of fund in 
respect of  
fund 
availability 
Target 
for 
FHTC 
Financial 
requirement 
Central 
share 
State 
share Total 
2019-20 58,252 202.74 204.91 (+) 1.07 59.50 6.08 65.58 32.00 
2020-21 32,0473 1,069.34 282.72 (-) 73.56 194.74 22.57 217.31 76.86 
2021-22 20,6183 420.27 851.97 (+) 102.72 599.82 67.87 667.69 78.37 
2022-23 13,5000 318.38 1,122.22 (+) 252.48 801.70 82.88 884.58 78.82 
2023-24 56,791 238.46 1,090.00 (+) 357.10 867.27 106.04 973.31 89.29 
Total 7,76,699 2,249.19 3,551.82   2,523.03 285.44  2,808.47   
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) 
Chart 2.3.12: Requirement vis-à-vis availability of fund and its utilisation (₹ in crore) 
 
 
81  Amount excluding refunded interest amount 
82  Amount including opening balance from earlier NRDWP Scheme in 2019-20, Central and State 
shares’ receipts during 2019-24 and non-refunded interest amount of 2019-20 as mentioned in 
Table 2.3.17 
83  Includes refunded amount of interest on Central Share and State share funds to the Central and State 
governments 
202.74
1069.34
420.27
318.38
238.46
204.91
282.72
851.97
1,122.22
1090
65.58
217.31
667.69
884.58
973.31
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 1100 1200
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22
2022-23
2023-24
Total Fund Utilised
Total Fund available during the year
Financial Requirement as per five year action plan

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
95
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
95 
Though the State Government prepared (November 2020) a five years’ action plan 
indicating annual financial requirements, the availability and utilisation of funds were 
not in coherence with the projected yearly requirements. It may be seen from 
Table 2.3.18 that the State Government failed to utilise the yearly fund available during 
2019-24 with the percentage of utilisation ranging between 32 per cent and 89 per cent. 
Therefore, efficient fund utilisation was missing in the State resulting in under-
utilisation of available funds during 2019-24. The State five years’ action plan assessed 
the fund requirement of ₹ 2,249.19 crore whereas the State Level Scheme Sanctioning 
Authority (SLSSC) approved the estimated cost of ₹ 4,299.67 crore during 2019-24. 
Thus, there was significant variation in the financial assessment for the five years as 
one was less by 19.91 per cent84 while the other was excess by 53.10 per cent85 from 
the actual utilisation. This indicated an improper assessment and inefficient financial 
planning.   
Furthermore, chapter 9 and paragraph 10.2 of the operational guidelines of JJM 
stipulate that up to five per cent and up to two per cent of the total allocated fund to a 
State should be utilised for support activities and WQMS activities respectively. 
However, during 2019-20 to 2023-24, the State utilised only 1.17 per cent  to 
2.50 per cent under support activity and 0.22 per cent  to 0.61 per cent under WQMS 
activity from the total allocated fund as shown in Table 2.3.19 and Chart 2.3.13. This 
is indicative of poor financial planning and lesser expenditure on WQMS activity which 
also resulted in the compromising of the quality of supplied water as discussed in 
Paragraphs 2.3.7.7 (i) and 2.3.7.7 (ii). 
Table 2.3.19: Fund allocated and fund utilised for Support and WQMS activities 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Total fund allocated Funds to be utilised Actually utilised 
Percentage of 
utilisation against 
total allocated fund 
Central State Total Support 
activities WQMS Support 
activities WQMS Support 
activities WQMS 
2019-20 145.37 4.98 150.35 7.52 3.01 1.76 0.87 1.17 0.58 
2020-21 117.46 23.33 140.79 7.04 2.82 2.77 0.54 1.97 0.38 
2021-22 714.09 69.12 783.21 39.16 15.66 10.04 3.04 1.28 0.39 
2022-23 849.91 85.22 935.13 46.76 18.70 17.50 2.03 1.87 0.22 
2023-24 744.18 103.01 847.19 42.36 16.94 21.16 5.16 2.50 0.61 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
84  19.91 per cent = (2808.47 – 2249.19) x 100/2808.47 
85  53.10 per cent = (4399.67 – 2808.47) x 100/2808.47 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
96
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 96 
 
Chart 2.3.13: Percentage of fund utilisation for Support and WQMS activities during 
2019-24 
 
Audit observed that while the State Government prepared a Five-Year Action Plan 
under the JJM projecting annual financial requirements and targets for tap connections, 
the actual fund availability and utilisation varied significantly across years. Annual 
utilisation ranged from as low as 32 per cent  to 89 per cent , indicating fluctuating 
financial execution.  
However, when aggregated over five years, the State achieved 96.17 per cent utilisation 
of total available funds. Notably, the total approved cost of schemes by SLSSC was 
almost double the financial estimate in the Action Plan, highlighting underestimation 
during planning. Further, spending on Support and WQMS activities remained below 
prescribed norms, reflecting weak financial prioritisation in these critical components.  
Overall, financial planning lacked consistency, and though fund absorption improved 
in later years, initial inefficiencies and poor allocation for support activities limited the 
programme’s effectiveness. 
2.3.7.9.(i) Fund release and expenditure  
For implementation of the Rural Water Supply Scheme (RWSS) under JJM, SWSM 
should maintain two accounts namely Programme Fund Account and Support Activities 
Account in any Public Sector Bank at the State Headquarters. 
The component-wise status of release of funds and expenditure made by the State under 
JJM during 2019-24 is shown in Table 2.3.20. 
 
 
 
55555
1.17
1.97
1.28
1.87
2.5
22222
0.58 0.38 0.39 0.22
0.61
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Percentage of allocated fund to be utilised for Support Activities
Percentage of fund actually utilised for Support Activities against the total allocated fund
Percentage of allocated fund to be utilised for WQMS Activities
Percentage of fund actually utilised for WQMS Activities against the total allocated fund

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
97
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
97 
Table 2.3.20: Component wise release of fund and expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Component Year 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Total 
Release Exp. Release Exp. Release Exp. Release Exp. Release Exp. Release Exp. 
Coverage86 GoI 145.37 56.87 117.46 191.43 714.09 584.41 803.22 780.04 692.09 839.42 2472.23 2452.17 
State 4.98 6.08 23.33 22.57 69.12 67.61 84.22 81.65 101.73 104.76 283.39 282.67 
 Total 150.36 62.95 140.79 214.01 783.21 652.01 887.44 861.68 793.82 944.18 2755.62 2734.84 
WQMS87 GoI 0.00 0.87 0.00 0.54 0.00 3.04 13.34 1.95 14.88 5.16 28.22 11.56 
State 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.11 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.11 0.08 
 Total 0.00 0.87 0.00 0.54 0.00 3.04 13.45 2.03 14.88 5.16 28.33 11.63 
Support GoI 0.00 1.76 0.00 2.77 0.00 10.04 33.35 16.68 37.21 20.16 70.56 51.41 
State 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.89 0.82 1.28 1.00 2.17 1.82 
 Total 0.00 1.76 0.00 2.77 0.00 10.04 34.24 17.50 38.49 21.16 72.73 53.23 
Gross Total   150.36 65.58 140.79 217.32 783.21 665.09 935.13 881.21 847.19 970.50 2856.68 2799.70 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) 
As per paragraph 7.4 of the operational guidelines of JJM, fund sharing pattern for 
coverage, support activities and WQMS between Central and State was to be 90:10 for 
Tripura. From Table 2.3.20, it may be seen that there was short release of matching 
State share of ₹ 5.67 crore 88  and ₹ 3.02 crore 89  against the Support and WQMS 
components during 2019-24. 
The Coverage component under JJM reflects strong financial performance. Over the 
five-year period from 2019-20 to 2023-24, a total of ₹ 2,755.62 crore was released, out 
of which ₹ 2,734.84 crore was spent, resulting in a high utilisation rate of 99.25 per 
cent. This indicates efficient planning and execution capacity. The fund releases rose 
steadily each year, from ₹ 150.36 crore in 2019–20 to ₹ 793.82 crore in 2023-24, and 
were effectively matched by corresponding expenditures. The trend reflects the State’s 
ability to absorb increasing volumes of funding while maintaining operational 
momentum. 
In contrast, the WQMS component shows significant underperformance. Of 
₹ 28.33 crore released over the same period, only ₹ 11.63 crore was utilised, 
representing a utilisation rate of just 41.05 per cent. Each year, a substantial portion of 
the allocated funds remained unspent, which points to systemic issues in 
implementation or lack of prioritisation. For example, in 2022-23, only ₹ 2.03 crore 
was spent against a release of ₹ 13.45 crore. Such consistent underspending undercuts 
efforts to ensure safe drinking water, especially given the critical role of WQMS in 
testing water quality for chemical and bacteriological parameters. 
A comparative view of the two components reveals a clear operational imbalance. 
While the infrastructure-oriented Coverage component achieved near-complete fund 
 
86  100 per cent as GoI share 
87  WQMS and support are in 90:10 funding pattern 
88  During 2019-24, under Support component, total Central share released was ₹ 70.56 crore and at 
90:10 ratio, corresponding State share to be released was ₹ 7.84 crore. But, actually State share 
released was ₹ 2.17 crore resulting in short release of State share by ₹ 5.67 crore. 
89  During 2019-24, under WQMS component, total Central share released was ₹ 28.22 crore and at 
90:10 ratio, corresponding State share to be released was ₹ 3.13 crore. But, actually State share 
released was ₹ 0.11 crore resulting in short release of State share by ₹ 3.02 crore.  
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
97 
Table 2.3.20: Component wise release of fund and expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Component Year 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Total 
Release Exp. Release Exp. Release Exp. Release Exp. Release Exp. Release Exp. 
Coverage86 GoI 145.37 56.87 117.46 191.43 714.09 584.41 803.22 780.04 692.09 839.42 2472.23 2452.17 
State 4.98 6.08 23.33 22.57 69.12 67.61 84.22 81.65 101.73 104.76 283.39 282.67 
 Total 150.36 62.95 140.79 214.01 783.21 652.01 887.44 861.68 793.82 944.18 2755.62 2734.84 
WQMS87 GoI 0.00 0.87 0.00 0.54 0.00 3.04 13.34 1.95 14.88 5.16 28.22 11.56 
State 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.11 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.11 0.08 
 Total 0.00 0.87 0.00 0.54 0.00 3.04 13.45 2.03 14.88 5.16 28.33 11.63 
Support GoI 0.00 1.76 0.00 2.77 0.00 10.04 33.35 16.68 37.21 20.16 70.56 51.41 
State 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.89 0.82 1.28 1.00 2.17 1.82 
 Total 0.00 1.76 0.00 2.77 0.00 10.04 34.24 17.50 38.49 21.16 72.73 53.23 
Gross Total   150.36 65.58 140.79 217.32 783.21 665.09 935.13 881.21 847.19 970.50 2856.68 2799.70 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) 
As per paragraph 7.4 of the operational guidelines of JJM, fund sharing pattern for 
coverage, support activities and WQMS between Central and State was to be 90:10 for 
Tripura. From Table 2.3.20, it may be seen that there was short release of matching 
State share of ₹ 5.67 crore 88  and ₹ 3.02 crore 89  against the Support and WQMS 
components during 2019-24. 
The Coverage component under JJM reflects strong financial performance. Over the 
five-year period from 2019-20 to 2023-24, a total of ₹ 2,755.62 crore was released, out 
of which ₹ 2,734.84 crore was spent, resulting in a high utilisation rate of 99.25 per 
cent. This indicates efficient planning and execution capacity. The fund releases rose 
steadily each year, from ₹ 150.36 crore in 2019–20 to ₹ 793.82 crore in 2023-24, and 
were effectively matched by corresponding expenditures. The trend reflects the State’s 
ability to absorb increasing volumes of funding while maintaining operational 
momentum. 
In contrast, the WQMS component shows significant underperformance. Of 
₹ 28.33 crore released over the same period, only ₹ 11.63 crore was utilised, 
representing a utilisation rate of just 41.05 per cent. Each year, a substantial portion of 
the allocated funds remained unspent, which points to systemic issues in 
implementation or lack of prioritisation. For example, in 2022-23, only ₹ 2.03 crore 
was spent against a release of ₹ 13.45 crore. Such consistent underspending undercuts 
efforts to ensure safe drinking water, especially given the critical role of WQMS in 
testing water quality for chemical and bacteriological parameters. 
A comparative view of the two components reveals a clear operational imbalance. 
While the infrastructure-oriented Coverage component achieved near-complete fund 
 
86  100 per cent as GoI share 
87  WQMS and support are in 90:10 funding pattern 
88  During 2019-24, under Support component, total Central share released was ₹ 70.56 crore and at 
90:10 ratio, corresponding State share to be released was ₹ 7.84 crore. But, actually State share 
released was ₹ 2.17 crore resulting in short release of State share by ₹ 5.67 crore. 
89  During 2019-24, under WQMS component, total Central share released was ₹ 28.22 crore and at 
90:10 ratio, corresponding State share to be released was ₹ 3.13 crore. But, actually State share 
released was ₹ 0.11 crore resulting in short release of State share by ₹ 3.02 crore.  
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
97 
Table 2.3.20: Component wise release of fund and expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Component Year 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Total 
Release Exp. Release Exp. Release Exp. Release Exp. Release Exp. Release Exp. 
Coverage86 GoI 145.37 56.87 117.46 191.43 714.09 584.41 803.22 780.04 692.09 839.42 2472.23 2452.17 
State 4.98 6.08 23.33 22.57 69.12 67.61 84.22 81.65 101.73 104.76 283.39 282.67 
 Total 150.36 62.95 140.79 214.01 783.21 652.01 887.44 861.68 793.82 944.18 2755.62 2734.84 
WQMS87 GoI 0.00 0.87 0.00 0.54 0.00 3.04 13.34 1.95 14.88 5.16 28.22 11.56 
State 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.11 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.11 0.08 
 Total 0.00 0.87 0.00 0.54 0.00 3.04 13.45 2.03 14.88 5.16 28.33 11.63 
Support GoI 0.00 1.76 0.00 2.77 0.00 10.04 33.35 16.68 37.21 20.16 70.56 51.41 
State 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.89 0.82 1.28 1.00 2.17 1.82 
 Total 0.00 1.76 0.00 2.77 0.00 10.04 34.24 17.50 38.49 21.16 72.73 53.23 
Gross Total   150.36 65.58 140.79 217.32 783.21 665.09 935.13 881.21 847.19 970.50 2856.68 2799.70 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) 
As per paragraph 7.4 of the operational guidelines of JJM, fund sharing pattern for 
coverage, support activities and WQMS between Central and State was to be 90:10 for 
Tripura. From Table 2.3.20, it may be seen that there was short release of matching 
State share of ₹ 5.67 crore 88  and ₹ 3.02 crore 89  against the Support and WQMS 
components during 2019-24. 
The Coverage component under JJM reflects strong financial performance. Over the 
five-year period from 2019-20 to 2023-24, a total of ₹ 2,755.62 crore was released, out 
of which ₹ 2,734.84 crore was spent, resulting in a high utilisation rate of 99.25 per 
cent. This indicates efficient planning and execution capacity. The fund releases rose 
steadily each year, from ₹ 150.36 crore in 2019–20 to ₹ 793.82 crore in 2023-24, and 
were effectively matched by corresponding expenditures. The trend reflects the State’s 
ability to absorb increasing volumes of funding while maintaining operational 
momentum. 
In contrast, the WQMS component shows significant underperformance. Of 
₹ 28.33 crore released over the same period, only ₹ 11.63 crore was utilised, 
representing a utilisation rate of just 41.05 per cent. Each year, a substantial portion of 
the allocated funds remained unspent, which points to systemic issues in 
implementation or lack of prioritisation. For example, in 2022-23, only ₹ 2.03 crore 
was spent against a release of ₹ 13.45 crore. Such consistent underspending undercuts 
efforts to ensure safe drinking water, especially given the critical role of WQMS in 
testing water quality for chemical and bacteriological parameters. 
A comparative view of the two components reveals a clear operational imbalance. 
While the infrastructure-oriented Coverage component achieved near-complete fund 
 
86  100 per cent as GoI share 
87  WQMS and support are in 90:10 funding pattern 
88  During 2019-24, under Support component, total Central share released was ₹ 70.56 crore and at 
90:10 ratio, corresponding State share to be released was ₹ 7.84 crore. But, actually State share 
released was ₹ 2.17 crore resulting in short release of State share by ₹ 5.67 crore. 
89  During 2019-24, under WQMS component, total Central share released was ₹ 28.22 crore and at 
90:10 ratio, corresponding State share to be released was ₹ 3.13 crore. But, actually State share 
released was ₹ 0.11 crore resulting in short release of State share by ₹ 3.02 crore.  

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
98
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
98 
utilisation, the quality assurance-driven WQMS component was marginalised. This 
disproportionate focus on infrastructure roll-out, without adequate investment in water 
safety monitoring, could compromise the mission’s core objective of providing safe 
drinking water to all. The low utilisation of funds under WQMS, despite the JJM 
guidelines allowing up to two per cent  of total allocation, highlights the need for 
targeted interventions. 
The Government stated (March 2025) that as per IMIS of Department of Drinking 
Water & Sanitation (DDWS), Government of India (GoI), Support and WQMS fund 
was allowed to be transferred for coverage activities, if needed, within the sanctioned 
amount. 
This argument is not tenable as flexibility to reallocate funds under IMIS guidelines is 
intended to provide temporary relief in exceptional circumstances, not to routinely 
bypass core mandates. The Support component (up to five per cent ) and WQMS 
component (up to two per cent ) are explicitly provided to ensure long-term 
sustainability of water supply infrastructure through community engagement, capacity 
building, and rigorous water quality surveillance. Persistent diversion of these funds 
effectively undermines the foundational pillars of the Jal Jeevan Mission. 
Besides, from Table 2.3.20  it may be seen that the total released amount under 
programme/ coverage (₹ 2755.62 crore) was not fully utilised (₹ 2734.84 crore). Hence, 
Government’s claim of transferring funds from Support and WQMS components to 
Coverage/ Programme component was not acceptable. Moreover, the audit findings 
indicate that even as funds were underutilised in WQMS and Support activities year 
after year, the State did not demonstrate any measurable outcomes in these areas to 
justify such diversion. There is also no evidence that reallocated funds were used as a 
last-resort measure after exhausting efforts to implement the original activities. 
2.3.7.10 Non-contribution of the share of capital cost by the communities 
Paragraph 6.1.2 of the operational guidelines of JJM provides for in-village piped water 
supply infrastructure and related source development to be implemented by Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e., VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. 
communities will contribute five per cent of the capital cost in cash and/ or kind and/ 
or labour in hilly and forested areas, North Eastern and Himalayan States. The 
community contribution made in cash towards in-village infrastructure creation will be 
deposited in the respective bank account of gram panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, 
i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ user group, etc. that may be opened with any scheduled 
commercial bank. This account is to be operated jointly by Chairperson of the Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ user group, etc. and 
respective Panchayat Secretary. Separate ledgers should be maintained for receiving 
community contribution (towards in-village infrastructure creation), incentive received 
and also for user fee provided by households towards meeting O&M requirements. The 
community contribution is to be paid to agency/ vendor as decided by DWSM. Further, 
paragraph 9.1(vii) of the JJM operational guidelines envisages that the Department 
should conduct IEC activities to encourage community contribution towards capital 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
99
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
99 
cost to instil ‘sense of ownership’. 
Audit noticed that:   
 no community contribution was collected in the entire State.  
 during 2019-24, the SLSSC approved 18,500 water supply schemes for the entire 
State under JJM at a total estimated cost of ₹ 4,299.67 crore. However, 
communities did not contribute their share amounting to ₹ 214.98 crore (at the rate 
of five per cent  of estimated cost) as of March 2024 as per details given in 
Table 2.3.21. 
Table 2.3.21: Details of capital cost contribution not shared by communities for the 
schemes sanctioned by SLSSC under JJM during 2019-24 
         (₹ in crore) 
Year Total number of schemes 
approved by SLSSC 
Total cost of schemes 
approved by SLSSC 
Contribution (@ five per cent) 
to be collected from 
communities 
2019-20 2,533 306.69 15.34 
2020-21 7,234 1,870.00 93.50 
2021-22 4,774 1,140.49 57.02 
2022-23 1,658 356.45 17.82 
2023-24 2,301 626.04 31.30 
Total 18,500 4,299.67 214.98 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) 
Further, during beneficiary survey in 20 sampled villages it was noticed that none of 
the beneficiaries were willing to contribute five per cent  of the capital cost for water 
supply schemes. The Government failed to promote a ‘sense of ownership’ among the 
local community by not getting community contribution of five per cent  of the 
estimated capital cost, as envisaged in paragraph 9.1(vii) of JJM operational guidelines. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Government replied (March 2025) that as 
asset creation (in terms of water supply schemes) under JJM was almost done in the 
State, all the in-village water supply schemes would be handed over to the respective 
village authorities and all the VWSCs would be motivated through ISAs to raise 
community contribution for O&M of the schemes. 
The Government argued that since asset creation was nearly complete, VWSCs would 
be motivated to raise community contributions for O&M. However, the audit finding 
concerns the mandatory capital cost contribution, not O&M. This response deflects 
from the issue and does not address the failure to collect the five per cent community 
contribution during the implementation phase, as explicitly required by the guidelines. 
Paragraph 9.1(vii) of the operational guidelines of JJM mandates IEC efforts to promote 
community ownership. The Government’s reply did not mention any IEC activities 
being conducted, despite audit citing complete non-compliance across the State. Also, 
while the guidelines call for joint bank accounts and ledger management to facilitate 
community contributions, audit revealed zero implementation of these foundational 
financial practices. There was no explanation from the Government about why these 
processes were not established. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
100
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 100 
Audit found that despite clear provisions under JJM operational guidelines mandating 
a five per cent community contribution towards capital cost in North Eastern States, no 
such contribution was collected across the State against 18,500 approved schemes 
worth ₹ 4,299.67 crore. The Government’s justification citing future mobilisation for 
O&M was misplaced, as it failed to address the non-compliance with capital 
contribution requirements during scheme implementation. The absence of any IEC 
activity to foster community participation further indicated a lack of institutional effort 
to promote ownership and sustainability at the village level. 
2.3.7.11 Efficiency and effectiveness of fund utilisation in implementing the 
scheme 
Piped Water Supply Schemes in villages were implemented based on major rivers/ 
water bodies/ ground water that included Surface Water Treatment Plant and laying of 
pipelines and distribution system and ground water sources that included Deep Tube 
Well and Small Bore Deep Tube Well and laying of pipe line and distribution system. 
Besides, Innovative schemes were also executed by the divisions. 
The status of implementation of rural water supply works at State and sampled districts 
level during 2019-24 is shown in Table 2.3.22, Chart 2.3.14 and Chart 2.3.15. 
Table 2.3.22: Status of implementation of water supply schemes in the State and 
sampled districts 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) and the concerned EEs in the sampled districts 
 
 
 
 
Year 
No. of incomplete 
works at the 
commencement of 
the year 
No. of new works 
sanctioned Total works 
No. of works 
commissioned/ completed 
(per cent) 
No. of incomplete 
works at the end of 
the year 
State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts 
2019-20 205 5 2,533 119 2,738 124 163 (5.9) 27 (21) 2,575 97 
2020-21 2,575 97 7,234 461 9,809 558 441 (5.8) 198 (35) 9,368 360 
2021-22 9,368 360 4,774 1,271 14,142 1,631 1,928(11.9) 836 (51) 12,214 895 
2022-23 12,214 795 1,658 707 13,872 1,502 2,947(20.7) 878 (58) 10,925 624 
2023-24 10,925 624 2,301 465 13,226 1,089 2,999 (22) 595 (55) 10,227 494 
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 100 
Audit found that despite clear provisions under JJM operational guidelines mandating 
a five per cent community contribution towards capital cost in North Eastern States, no 
such contribution was collected across the State against 18,500 approved schemes 
worth ₹ 4,299.67 crore. The Government’s justification citing future mobilisation for 
O&M was misplaced, as it failed to address the non-compliance with capital 
contribution requirements during scheme implementation. The absence of any IEC 
activity to foster community participation further indicated a lack of institutional effort 
to promote ownership and sustainability at the village level. 
2.3.7.11 Efficiency and effectiveness of fund utilisation in implementing the 
scheme 
Piped Water Supply Schemes in villages were implemented based on major rivers/ 
water bodies/ ground water that included Surface Water Treatment Plant and laying of 
pipelines and distribution system and ground water sources that included Deep Tube 
Well and Small Bore Deep Tube Well and laying of pipe line and distribution system. 
Besides, Innovative schemes were also executed by the divisions. 
The status of implementation of rural water supply works at State and sampled districts 
level during 2019-24 is shown in Table 2.3.22, Chart 2.3.14 and Chart 2.3.15. 
Table 2.3.22: Status of implementation of water supply schemes in the State and 
sampled districts 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) and the concerned EEs in the sampled districts 
 
 
 
 
Year 
No. of incomplete 
works at the 
commencement of 
the year 
No. of new works 
sanctioned Total works 
No. of works 
commissioned/ completed 
(per cent) 
No. of incomplete 
works at the end of 
the year 
State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts State Sampled 
districts 
2019-20 205 5 2,533 119 2,738 124 163 (5.9) 27 (21) 2,575 97 
2020-21 2,575 97 7,234 461 9,809 558 441 (5.8) 198 (35) 9,368 360 
2021-22 9,368 360 4,774 1,271 14,142 1,631 1,928(11.9) 836 (51) 12,214 895 
2022-23 12,214 795 1,658 707 13,872 1,502 2,947(20.7) 878 (58) 10,925 624 
2023-24 10,925 624 2,301 465 13,226 1,089 2,999 (22) 595 (55) 10,227 494 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
101
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
101 
Chart 2.3.14: Status of implementation of Water Supply Schemes in the State 
 
Chart 2.3.15: Status of implementation of Water Supply Schemes in the sampled 
districts 
 
It may be seen from Table 2.3.22 that 10,227 (55 per cent)90 works for the State and 
494 schemes (16.31 per cent)91 in two sampled districts remained incomplete at the end 
of March 2024. It was also observed that incomplete works in the State included two 
schemes92 more than 10 years old, 152 more than five years old and 2,939 more than 
 
90  Percentage has been calculated against the total of the opening balance of 2019-20 and the new works 
sanctioned during the years 2019 to 2024 which comes to 18,705. 
91  Percentage has been calculated against the total of the opening balance of 2019-20 and the new works 
sanctioned during the years 2019 to 2024 in the sampled districts which comes to 3,028. 
92  Two Surface Water Treatment Plants at Machmara under Unakoti District and Kalyanpur under 
Khowai District. 
2738
9809
14142
13872
13226
163
441
1928
2947
2999
2575
9368
12214
10925
10227
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22
2022-23
2023-24
No. of incomplete schemes at the end of the year in whole State
No. of schemes commissioned in whole State
Total schemes in whole State
124
558
1631
1502
1089
27
198
836
878
595
97
360
895
624
494
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22
2022-23
2023-24
No. of incomplete schemes at the end of the year in sampled districts
No. of schemes commissioned in sampled districts
Total schemes in sampled districts

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
102
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 102 
three years old while in the three divisions of two sampled districts, the number of 
similarly placed incomplete schemes was one more than 10 years old, 26 more than five 
years old and 130 more than three years old. Many of the incomplete schemes reported 
under JJM likely originated under legacy schemes. While JJM may have subsumed or 
aimed to complete these older works, their prolonged incompletion reflects bottlenecks 
in execution such as due to delay in timely possession of land with the interference of 
local bodies, public dispute, inadequate availability of labour forces, COVID 19 
pandemic and delay in energisation of water supply schemes, etc. which still persist. 
This historical backlog dilutes the performance metrics of JJM and needs to be 
segregated and tracked distinctly. 
Audit noted that despite continued sanctioning of new water supply schemes under JJM 
between 2019-24, the implementation remained inefficient, with over 55 per cent of the 
total schemes in the State and 16.31 per cent in sampled districts incomplete by March 
2024. Alarmingly, a significant number of these pending schemes were aged over three 
to 10 years, reflecting longstanding implementation delays. The data points to persistent 
inefficiencies in planning, execution, co-ordination and monitoring that undermine the 
timeliness and effectiveness of fund utilisation under the mission. 
Audit observed inefficient and ineffective expenditure during implementation/ 
execution of JJM scheme in the sampled districts as discussed below. 
(i) Surface Water Treatment Plant  
During 2019-24, no new SWTP was taken up by the Department. Of the seven ongoing 
SWTPs at the beginning of JJM, four SWTPs were completed and were functional as 
of April 2024 and the remaining three were in progress as shown in Appendix 2.3.3. 
Out of these four completed SWTPs, observation regarding implementation of one 
ongoing SWTP work (at Machmara) falling under sampled Unakoti District is 
discussed below. 
Examination of records of construction of SWTP at Machmara, (estimated cost ₹ 2.31 
crore and contract value ₹ 2.47 crore) under Kumarghat DWS Division revealed that 
the work was awarded in September 2013 and was stipulated to be completed by 
January 2015. There was considerable time overrun of almost 10 years (as of August 
2024) from the stipulated date of completion. The construction work was delayed due 
to multiple factors viz. initial delay in the approval of the layout plan and design, delay 
in preparation of approach road, due to suspension of work by the construction agency 
at different spells of time (total 576 days between February 2014 to January 2024), 
delay in correction of tilted (beyond one metre) intake well caused by flood in 2018-
19, due to COVID pandemic, delay in preparation of drawing/ design of steel foot 
bridge by the agency, etc. It was seen in audit that 13 out of 17 components of SWTP 
were completed (as of May 2023) at a cost of ₹ 2.00 crore. The intake well work was 
incomplete and raw water raising main, steel foot bridge and raw water pump house 
were not taken up as of August 2024. Audit observed that despite wilful suspension of 
the work by the defaulting agency contributed to substantial delay, the competent 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
103
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
103 
authority ( i.e. Superintending Engineer) did not take any penal action against the 
contractor though the Divisional Officer issued Show Cause Notice to the contractor in 
July 2017 and subsequently informed the SE in September 2017 recommending 
imposition of penalty under Clause 45.2 93 of the contract. However, no further action 
was taken, indicating a clear lapse in enforcing contractual provisions and ensuring 
accountability. The position of the incomplete SWTP at Machmara as of September 
2024 is shown in Photographs 2.3.3 to 2.3.6. 
  
Photograph 2.3.3: Incomplete Intake well Photograph 2.3.4: Aerator 
  
Photograph 2.3.5: CFC chamber Photograph 2.3.6: Surface water treatment 
Plant 
It is evident that the Department, with advance planning, adequate feasibility study, 
proper coordination and timely decisions, could have avoided the delay in construction 
and provided quality drinking water to the intended households.  
Audit observed that although four out of seven SWTPs were completed between 2019-
24, the scheme at Machmara, initiated as early as February 2014, remained incomplete 
even after a decade. Delay in design approval and repeated work suspensions by the 
contractor led to time overruns, yet the Department failed to initiate any penal action. 
This reflects inadequate contract enforcement, planning, and execution oversight. As a 
result, over 3,600 rural residents continued to be deprived of access to potable water, 
 
93  Clause 45.2 of the contract pertaining to liquidated damage stipulated that if the contractor fails to 
complete the work within stipulated period, the SE may without prejudice to any other method of 
recovery would deduct one tenth of one per cent of the contract value per calendar day subject to 
maximum of the contract value. 


Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
104
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 104 
highlighting significant lapses in delivering essential public services. 
The Government replied (March 2025) that all out efforts were being taken for early 
completion of the remaining three SWTPs. 
(ii) DTW and SBDTW schemes  
Ground water-based works involve sinking of wells viz. DTW and SBDTW; 
construction of pump house (only for DTW); laying and distribution of pipeline; 
electrification, etc. In addition, IRPs are installed after successful commissioning of 
DTW in quality affected areas where the raw water of DTW has high iron content 
beyond permissible limit of 1 mg/ litre. 
During 2019-24, targets set by the State Government for DTWs and SBDTWs along 
with the corresponding achievements are shown in Table 2.3.23. 
Table 2.3.23: Target and Achievement of DTW and SBDTW in the State 
Source: Information furnished by CE, PWD (DWS) 
Chart 2.3.16: Target and Achievement of DTW and SBDTW in the State 
Source: Information furnished by CE, PWD (DWS) 
Audit reviewed the implementation of ground water-based works namely DTWs and 
SBDTWs in the State during 2019–24. These works involved activities such as well 
sinking, pump house construction, pipeline distribution, and electrification. As per 
departmental records, the State failed to meet its annual targets in all five years. The 
182
111
140
64
349
93
790
289
441
135
1195
301
900
867
891
226
4054
1662
1437
848
2331
587
4729
2312
776
518
1889
845
3981
2011
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000
Target
Achievement
Target
Achievement
Target
Achievement
DTW Sunk
DTW
Commissioned
SBDTW
Commissioned
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Particulars 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-2024 
  Target Achievement 
 (per cent)    Target Achievement 
(per cent) Target Achievement 
(per cent) Target Achievement 
(per cent) Target Achievement 
(per cent) 
DTW sunk 182 111 (60.99) 790 289 (36.58) 900 867 (96.33) 1,437 848 (59.01) 776 518 (66.75) 
DTW 
Commissioned 140 64 (45.71) 441 135 (30.61) 891 226 (25.36) 2,331 587 (25.18) 1889 845 (44.73) 
SBDTW 
commissioned 349 93 (26.65) 1195 301 (25.19) 4,054 1,662 (40.99) 4,729 2312 (48.89) 3981 2,011 (50.51) 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
105
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
105 
achievement in DTW sinking ranged from 36.58 per cent  to 96.33 per cent , while 
commissioning of DTWs remained consistently low, between 25.18 per cent and 45.71 
per cent. Similarly, SBDTW commissioning hovered between 25.19 per cent and 50.51 
per cent. Notably, there were substantial gaps each year between the number of DTWs 
sunk and those actually commissioned, indicating delays in making the infrastructure 
operational. 
The persistent shortfall in commissioning of DTWs and SBDTWs, despite partial 
achievement in well sinking, points to inefficiencies in planning, coordination, and 
readiness of complementary infrastructure. This hindered the timely delivery of 
functional water supply services to rural populations and undermined the intended 
outcomes of the Jal Jeevan Mission. 
(ii)(a)  Failure of DTWs due to inadequate investigation 
Paragraph 8.4 of the operational guidelines of JJM regarding use of technology in 
planning and monitoring envisages use of Hydro Geo Morphological (HGM 94) Maps 
for location of groundwater sources, use of available village digital 3D contour maps 
prepared by MeITY95 for location of drinking water infrastructure and identifying gaps 
in village water supply infrastructure.  
It was noticed that among the two sampled districts (Unakoti and South Tripura), the 
percentage of abandoned DTWs with respect to total attempts made was quite less in 
South Tripura District (9.78 per cent) compared to Unakoti District (34.69  per cent). 
The factor behind better success rate was found to be utilisation of HGM maps during 
survey to identify potential DTW drilling sites in South Tripura District which was 
totally absent in Unakoti District. 
Audit observed that the Department did not have any investigation wing and did not 
collaborate adequately with expert organisations such as the Central Ground Water 
Board (CGWB) for the development and use of comprehensive HGM maps of the State. 
Moreover, the Department failed to emphasise extensive utilisation of advanced 
technologies viz. HGM maps, etc. to minimise such unfruitful expenditure on 
abandoned/ unsuccessful bore wells. 
The status of abandoned DTWs in the two sampled districts is detailed in Table 2.3.24. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
94  HGM maps are used to identify locations for sustainable drinking water sources and ground water 
recharge. HGM maps include information such as groundwater sustainability and potential locations, 
hydrological features, base map details and habitations. It helps State Governments to select the right 
locations for sustainability structures and bore wells. 
95  Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
106
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
106 
Table 2.3.24: Status of abandoned DTWs in two sampled districts 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of 
sampled 
District 
Drilling of DTW during 2019-24 
Total 
attempts 
Successfully 
sunk DTWs 
Abandoned 
DTWs 
Percentage of 
abandoned DTWs 
with reference to 
total attempts 
Expenditure 
on abandoned 
DTWs 
Unakoti 294 192 102 34.69 10.86 
South Tripura 511 459 5096 9.78 3.91 
Total 805 651 152  14.77 
Source: Information furnished by the concerned EEs in the sampled districts 
While accepting the audit observation, the Government replied (March 2025) that 
initially they had to depend largely on 1:50 K scale HGM maps until the availability of 
more reliable/ precise 1:10 K scale maps for 13 Blocks of hilly areas in January 2025. 
It was further stated that necessary instructions would be given to the executing 
divisions to use the same to lower the rate of abandoned DTW. 
The findings point to poor inter-district coordination, lack of institutionalised technical 
expertise, and systemic failure to operationalise available technology in planning, 
which undermined cost-efficiency and effectiveness of the Mission’s implementation. 
(ii)(b) Incomplete/ non-functional DTW scheme 
During 2019-24, the SLSSC/ SWSM approved 4,652 DTWs at an estimated cost of 
₹ 2,157.42 crore. Out of the approved 4,652 DTWs, 2,633 DTWs (56.60 per cent) were 
successfully sunk and only 1,857 DTWs (39.92 per cent) were commissioned. As of 
March 2024, 776 DTWs (29.4797 per cent) remained incomplete. 
Examination of records of three divisions under two sampled districts revealed that 990 
DTWs at an estimated cost of ₹ 408.67 crore were sanctioned during 2019-24 by 
SLSSC/ SWSM. Out of the approved 990 DTWs during 2019-24, 651 DTWs were 
successfully sunk but 504 DTWs (77.42 per cent) were completed. The remaining 147 
DTWs were incomplete due to non- completion of pump house and laying of 
distribution pipelines (122 DTWs) and non-energisation (25 DTWs) 98. This indicated 
deficiencies in execution by the Department and lack of coordination with the power 
supplying agency, TSECL. Non completion of the DTW schemes resulted in the denial 
of piped water supply to the intended beneficiaries. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
96  Excluding two unsuccessful DTWs against which no payment was made 
97  Against total DTWs sunk during 2019-24 
98  Pump house and laying and distribution line were completed. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
107
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
107 
Table 2.3.25: Status of DTWs 
Year 
No. of 
DTWs 
approved 
In entire State In sampled districts 
DTW sunk 
successfully 
DTW 
commissioned 
DTW not 
commissioned 
No. of DTWs 
approved 
DTW sunk 
successfully 
DTW 
commissioned 
DTW not 
commissioned 
2019-20 1,684 111 64 (-) 47 468 13 07 06 
2020-21 1,587 289 135 (-) 154 267 78 69 09 
2021-22 1,047 867 226 (-) 641 165 145 127 18 
2022-23 334 848 587 (-) 261 90 244 132 112 
2023-24 0 518 845 (+) 327 0 171 157 14 
 Total 4,652 2,633 1,857 776 990 651 49299 159100 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) and the concerned EEs in the sampled districts  
The Government replied (March 2025) that all out efforts were being taken to complete 
the DTWs in all respect including pump house, distribution pipeline network and 
energisation as early as possible. 
(iii) Iron Removal Plants 
Further, as per WQMS framework, habitations where the quality indicators of water are 
beyond the permissible limit set by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) for biological and 
chemical contaminations are to be designated as Water Quality Affected (WQA) 
habitations.  In Tripura, WQA areas were mainly due to high iron content which was to 
be mitigated by filtering the raw water through IRPs. 
The details of WQA habitations identified and provided with treated water during 
2019-24 is shown in Table 2.3.26. 
Table 2.3.26: Water Quality Affected Households 
Year Total WQA 
HH identified 
No. of HH 
targeted for 
providing 
treated water 
No. of HH 
provided 
with treated 
water  
Achievement (per cent) 
Against 
targeted HH 
Against total 
WQA Household  
2019-20 1,901,05 259 48 18.53 0.02 
2020-21 1,90,057 931 520 55.85 0.27 
2021-22 1,89,537 1,343 291 21.66 0.15 
2022-23 1,89,246 36,198 2,431 6.71 1.28 
2023-24 1,86,815 33,767 17,576 52.05 9.41 
Source: JJM-WQMIS portal, UCs and information furnished by the CE, DWS 
It is evident from Table 2.3.26 that while approximately 1.90 lakh WQA households 
were identified annually in Tripura during the period 2019-24, the proportion of 
households targeted and subsequently provided with potable drinking water through 
IRPs remained extremely low as the limited technical manpower resources of the 
department were heavily burdened with major focus on creation of water supply sources 
during the initial years rather than tackling WQA households. 
In the initial three years, the number of households targeted to provide treated water 
was negligible. For instance, only 259 households were targeted in 2019-20 out of 1.90 
lakh, of which just 48 (0.02 per cent of identified WQA households) were actually 
 
99  Excluding replacement of 12 DTWs under Belonia DWS Division where separate pump house and 
energisation were not required 
100  Including replacement of 12 DTWs under Belonia DWS Division where separate pump house and 
energisation were not required 
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
107 
Table 2.3.25: Status of DTWs 
Year 
No. of 
DTWs 
approved 
In entire State In sampled districts 
DTW sunk 
successfully 
DTW 
commissioned
DTW not 
commissioned 
No. of DTWs 
approved 
DTW sunk 
successfully 
DTW 
commissioned 
DTW not 
commissioned 
2019-20 1,684 111 64 (-) 47 468 13 07 06 
2020-21 1,587 289 135 (-) 154 267 78 69 09 
2021-22 1,047 867 226 (-) 641 165 145 127 18 
2022-23 334 848 587 (-) 261 90 244 132 112 
2023-24 0 518 845 (+) 327 0 171 157 14 
 Total 4,652 2,633 1,857 776 990 651 49299 159100 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) and the concerned EEs in the sampled districts  
The Government replied (March 2025) that all out efforts were being taken to complete 
the DTWs in all respect including pump house, distribution pipeline network and 
energisation as early as possible. 
(iii) Iron Removal Plants 
Further, as per WQMS framework, habitations where the quality indicators of water are 
beyond the permissible limit set by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) for biological and 
chemical contaminations are to be designated as Water Quality Affected (WQA) 
habitations.  In Tripura, WQA areas were mainly due to high iron content which was to 
be mitigated by filtering the raw water through IRPs. 
The details of WQA habitations identified and provided with treated water during 
2019-24 is shown in Table 2.3.26. 
Table 2.3.26: Water Quality Affected Households 
Year Total WQA 
HH identified 
No. of HH 
targeted for 
providing 
treated water 
No. of HH 
provided 
with treated 
water  
Achievement (per cent) 
Against 
targeted HH 
Against total 
WQA Household  
2019-20 1,901,05 259 48 18.53 0.02 
2020-21 1,90,057 931 520 55.85 0.27 
2021-22 1,89,537 1,343 291 21.66 0.15 
2022-23 1,89,246 36,198 2,431 6.71 1.28 
2023-24 1,86,815 33,767 17,576 52.05 9.41 
Source: JJM-WQMIS portal, UCs and information furnished by the CE, DWS 
It is evident from Table 2.3.26 that while approximately 1.90 lakh WQA households 
were identified annually in Tripura during the period 2019-24, the proportion of 
households targeted and subsequently provided with potable drinking water through 
IRPs remained extremely low as the limited technical manpower resources of the 
department were heavily burdened with major focus on creation of water supply sources 
during the initial years rather than tackling WQA households. 
In the initial three years, the number of households targeted to provide treated water 
was negligible. For instance, only 259 households were targeted in 2019-20 out of 1.90 
lakh, of which just 48 (0.02 per cent of identified WQA households) were actually 
 
99  Excluding replacement of 12 DTWs under Belonia DWS Division where separate pump house and 
energisation were not required 
100  Including replacement of 12 DTWs under Belonia DWS Division where separate pump house and 
energisation were not required 
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
107 
Table 2.3.25: Status of DTWs 
Year 
No. of 
DTWs 
approved 
In entire State In sampled districts 
DTW sunk 
successfully 
DTW 
commissioned 
DTW not 
commissioned 
No. of DTWs 
approved 
DTW sunk 
successfully 
DTW 
commissioned 
DTW not 
commissioned 
2019-20 1,684 111 64 (-) 47 468 13 07 06 
2020-21 1,587 289 135 (-) 154 267 78 69 09 
2021-22 1,047 867 226 (-) 641 165 145 127 18 
2022-23 334 848 587 (-) 261 90 244 132 112 
2023-24 0 518 845 (+) 327 0 171 157 14 
 Total 4,652 2,633 1,857 776 990 651 49299 159100 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) and the concerned EEs in the sampled districts  
The Government replied (March 2025) that all out efforts were being taken to complete 
the DTWs in all respect including pump house, distribution pipeline network and 
energisation as early as possible. 
(iii) Iron Removal Plants 
Further, as per WQMS framework, habitations where the quality indicators of water are 
beyond the permissible limit set by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) for biological and 
chemical contaminations are to be designated as Water Quality Affected (WQA) 
habitations.  In Tripura, WQA areas were mainly due to high iron content which was to 
be mitigated by filtering the raw water through IRPs. 
The details of WQA habitations identified and provided with treated water during 
2019-24 is shown in Table 2.3.26. 
Table 2.3.26: Water Quality Affected Households 
Year Total WQA 
HH identified 
No. of HH 
targeted for 
providing 
treated water 
No. of HH 
provided 
with treated 
water  
Achievement (per cent) 
Against 
targeted HH 
Against total 
WQA Household  
2019-20 1,901,05 259 48 18.53 0.02 
2020-21 1,90,057 931 520 55.85 0.27 
2021-22 1,89,537 1,343 291 21.66 0.15 
2022-23 1,89,246 36,198 2,431 6.71 1.28 
2023-24 1,86,815 33,767 17,576 52.05 9.41 
Source: JJM-WQMIS portal, UCs and information furnished by the CE, DWS 
It is evident from Table 2.3.26 that while approximately 1.90 lakh WQA households 
were identified annually in Tripura during the period 2019-24, the proportion of 
households targeted and subsequently provided with potable drinking water through 
IRPs remained extremely low as the limited technical manpower resources of the 
department were heavily burdened with major focus on creation of water supply sources 
during the initial years rather than tackling WQA households. 
In the initial three years, the number of households targeted to provide treated water 
was negligible. For instance, only 259 households were targeted in 2019-20 out of 1.90 
lakh, of which just 48 (0.02 per cent of identified WQA households) were actually 
 
99  Excluding replacement of 12 DTWs under Belonia DWS Division where separate pump house and 
energisation were not required 
100  Including replacement of 12 DTWs under Belonia DWS Division where separate pump house and 
energisation were not required 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
108
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
108 
covered for treatment of water. Although the number of households selected for 
providing treated water improved substantially in 2022-23 and 2023-24 (36,198 and 
33,767 households respectively), the coverage of total WQA households remained 
limited at only 1.28 per cent and 9.41 per cent respectively. 
During the same period, the Department initiated 2,662 IRPs across the State to address 
high iron content in drinking water, identified as the principal cause of WQA status in 
most habitations. However, only 540 IRPs (20  per cent ) were completed by March 
2024. In the two sampled districts, out of 381 targeted IRPs, 179 (47  per cent ) were 
completed, with achievement rates in the three concerned divisions ranging 101 from 
37.11 per cent to 66.96 per cent. These figures indicate a persistent mismatch between 
identification of affected households, infrastructure response, and actual delivery of 
safe drinking water. 
The position of IRPs taken up and completed in the whole State as well as in the two 
sampled districts is depicted in Table 2.3.27. 
Table 2.3.27: Details of IRP 
Number of IRPs taken up Total IRP 
taken up 
Total completed 
IRPs 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Position in entire State 
3 66 145 1,362 1,086 2,662 540 
Position in sampled districts 
2 11 74 120 174 381 179 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) and the divisions under the sampled districts 
Against the permissible limit of safe iron content in water upto 01 mg/litre as per JJM 
operational guidelines, Audit observed in two sampled districts that out of 258 water 
sample test reports 102  iron content was beyond the permissible limit in 130 cases 
ranging from 1.01 mg/ litre to 3.82 mg/ litre. 
The Director, WSSO stated (December 2024) that initially the Department was 
focusing more on creation of water supply schemes, coverage through FHTC and 
quantitative supply of water to households. So, achievement in respect of quality 
through implementation of IRP was less than the target set. Further, it was added that 
in Tripura, iron content in the supplied water was the only concern though not 
hazardous to public health. Out of 2,122 incomplete IRPs as of March 2024; 281 were 
completed, 809 were in progress, work orders were issued for 635 and 397 were in 
tendering stage as of December 2024. 
Further, during a site visit in two sampled districts, Audit noticed that there was iron 
content in the piped water supply even after attachment of IRPs with 14 DTWs. The 
reason was found to be the operators not conducting back wash of the IRPs regularly, 
which was also confirmed by the Director, WSSO. 
 
101  Kumarghat Division achieved 77 IRPs (66.96 per cent)  against target of 115; Belonia Division 
achieved 59 IRPs (37.11 per cent) against target of 159; and Sabroom Division achieved 43 IRPs 
(40.19 per cent) against target of 107 IRPs 
102  As per laboratory test registers of Kumarghat Sub Divisional laboratory and Belonia Sub divisional 
laboratory 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
109
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
109 
In reply, the Government stated (March 2025) that all-out efforts had been taken for 
proper back wash of IRPs and expected that the issue would improve after handing over 
of water supply schemes to the respective GPs/ VCs. 
(iv) Incomplete/ non-functional Innovative Water Supply Scheme 
As Tripura is a hilly terrain, it is not feasible to construct traditional water supply 
schemes such as SWTP, DTW, SBDTW, etc. due to insufficiency of ground and surface 
water.  Based on characteristics of water sources, water quantity and needs of these 
areas, innovative water supply schemes were implemented to provide drinking water 
connection to rural households. Different approaches were used, such as using local 
catchment water, spring or mountain water, rainwater harvesting, by collecting water 
in underground reservoirs from three to four SBDTWs, by installing masonry wells at 
the foothills, etc. 
The State Government initiated a total of 580 Innovative schemes (i.e. water resources) 
in the State during 2019-24. Of these, only 238 innovative schemes (41 per cent) were 
completed as of March 2024. 
Examination of records as well as information furnished (September 2024) by the 
Kumarghat and Sabroom DWS Divisions under sampled districts revealed that a total 
of 39 103  innovative schemes were taken-up under JJM during 2019-24 within the 
jurisdiction of Unakoti and South Tripura Districts. However, no innovative scheme 
was undertaken under Belonia Division. Out of the 39 schemes, only 17104 schemes (44 
per cent) were completed between October 2022 and February 2024 and 22105 schemes 
were in progress as of September 2024 as detailed in Appendix 2.3.4. Few incomplete 
schemes are shown in Photographs 2.3.7 to 2.3.10.  
  
Photographs 2.3.7 and 2.3.8: Incomplete Innovative scheme at Kalaigiri, Hiracherra VC under 
Gournagar Block of Unakoti District 
 
103  14 schemes under Kumarghat DWS Division and 25 schemes under Sabroom DWS Division 
104  Six schemes completed under Kumarghat DWS Division (Unakoti District) between October 2022 
and February 2024 and 11 schemes completed under Sabroom DWS Division 
105  Eight incomplete Innovative schemes under Unakoti District (Kumarghat DWS Division) with 
stipulated completion dates between August 2021 and August 2023; and 14 Innovative schemes under 
South Tripura District (Sabroom DWS Division) having stipulated completion date fixed between 
March 2022 and July 2024 


Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
110
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
110 
 
Photographs 2.3.9 and 2.3.10: Incomplete Innovative scheme at Manoranjan Para, Magroom VC 
under Rupaichari Block of South Tripura District 
The summary of the incomplete innovative schemes is as follows: 
 12 innovative schemes106 were incomplete (delays ranged from seven months to 
29 months reckoned from their respective stipulated dates of completion upto 
September 2024) due to delay in handing over of clear site by the concerned 
panchayats, non-availability of electric line, low voltage issues at the construction 
site to support execution of works. 
 Four innovative schemes (two under Kumarghat DWS Division and two under 
Sabroom DWS Division) remained incomplete (delayed by five months to 36 
months reckoned from their respective stipulated dates of completion up to 
September 2024) due to unauthorised delay by contractors. 
 One scheme (under Kumarghat DWS Division) was delayed by 14 months 
(reckoned from its stipulated date of completion up to September 2024) due to 
change in site and re-designing of scheme components. 
 Two schemes (under Sabroom DWS Division) were i nitially delayed (delay 
ranging between two to four months reckoned from its stipulated date of 
completion up to September 2024) in identifying suitable site at hilly and remote 
terrain coupled with poor connectivity to the construction site. 
 One scheme (under Sabroom DWS Division) was hindered (delayed by three 
months from its stipulated date of completion up to September 2024) due to major 
landslide over the entire premise of the plant because of heavy rainfall in August 
2024 which also caused significant damage to the access routes. 
 Though two schemes (under Kumarghat DWS Division) were completed but 
could not be made functional due to non-availability of electric service 
connection. 
As per the information furnished by the concerned DWS Divisions, a total of 1,333 107 
 
106  Three under Kumarghat DWS Division and nine under Sabroom DWS Division 
107  Excluding six innovative schemes under Sabroom DWS Division where targeted FHTC was not 
provided by the Division. 


Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
111
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 111 
FHTC connections were targeted from these 22 incomplete innovative schemes, against 
which 482 FHTC connections were provided. However, due to non-completion of the 
Innovative schemes with delays ranging between two to 36 months from their 
respective stipulated dates of completion, none of the households could be provided 
with water. Therefore, not only did the expenditure of ₹ 12.70 crore on these 22 
incomplete Innovative schemes remained idle but also the intended beneficiaries were 
deprived of potable drinking water under JJM. 
Further, six innovative schemes (detailed in Appendix 2.3.5 ) under South Tripura 
district (Sabroom DWS Division) which had been completed at a cost of ₹  2.94 crore 
remained non-functional as of September 2024 due to power problems viz. low voltage 
and non-availability of three phase connection. As a result, 137 households were 
deprived of piped water supply despite provision of FHTC connection provided through 
the Innovative schemes. 
Audit observed that despite the State Government’s initiative to implement 580 
innovative water supply schemes in geographically challenging areas of Tripura during 
2019-24, only 238 schemes were completed as of March 2024. In the two sampled 
districts, 22 out of 39 schemes remained incomplete due to delays in site handover, 
absence of power supply, contractor-related lapses, and design changes. This resulted 
in 1,333 targeted FHTC connections failing to provide actual water supply, rendering 
₹ 12.70 crore of expenditure idle. Additionally, six completed schemes remained non-
functional due to persistent power supply issues, depriving another 137 households of 
piped drinking water. The findings indicate critical gaps in inter-agency coordination, 
planning, and execution, undermining the intended outcomes of the Jal Jeevan Mission 
in remote and water-stressed areas. 
The Government replied (March 2025) that necessary action was being taken for early 
completion of the innovative schemes. 
Conclusion 
There were instances of underutilisation of available funds for support and WQMS 
activities. Several water supply schemes remained incomplete and suffered from time 
over runs due to inadequate feasibility study, lack of effective co-ordination with the 
TSECL/ other agencies for timely energisation of water supply schemes and delays in 
taking prompt decisions by the Government. Against the targeted WQA households, 
coverage of only 11 per cent had been achieved under quality component during the 
last five years. 
Recommendation 
Effective and appropriate remedial measures are required to be taken by the 
Government 
 towards timely completion of the water supply schemes; 
 to ensure providing potable drinking water to every household. 
 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
112
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 112 
Audit Objective 4: To assess whether assets created through the programme are 
sustainable for next two to three decades and do not compromise 
water security for future generations 
As per the operational guidelines of JJM, there is a recognised need to address the 
inadequacy of infrastructure for source sustainability measures such as aquifer 
recharge, rainwater harvesting, increased storage capacity of water bodies, reservoirs, 
de-silting, etc. The objective of source sustainability is to ensure that the water supply 
schemes remain functional throughout its full design period.  
For ground water-based sources, bore well recharge structures must be included in the 
project estimates. For surface water based Single Village Scheme (SVS), source 
sustainability measures such as watershed management, water conservation, etc. must 
be taken up through convergence with other schemes. Additionally, rainwater 
harvesting structures in all public institutions especially in water-stressed areas must be 
ensured. 
Approximately, 65 per cent  to 70 per cent  of the total water supply in rural areas 
emerges as greywater from the households. In most villages in arid and semi-arid areas, 
soak pits are considered a preferable option for greywater disposal emerging from 
households. Funds for these components can be sourced from Swachh Bharat Mission 
and contribution from donors, Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) and Member of 
Parliament Local Area Development (MPLAD)/ Member of Legislative Assembly 
Local Area Development (MLALAD) schemes. 
The operational guidelines envisage the inclusion of source sustainability and grey 
water management measures from the grass root level planning i.e. VAP, DAP to 
strategic SAP. The DWSM is responsible to ensure availability of funds through 
convergence and projects are to be approved only if these components are part of DPR. 
VWSCs are tasked with planning and supervision, while the PWD(DWS) is responsible 
for coordinating with other departments to ensure effective execution of source 
sustainability and greywater management measures. 
To ensure transparency and monitoring, States are required to geo-tag all the 
infrastructure assets under the water supply schemes. Every infrastructure asset either 
new or otherwise should be geo-tagged including washing and bathing places, 
greywater collection and treatment plants, source sustainability structures, etc. 
2.3.7.12 Non-assurance of sustainability aspect in planning process to improve 
source sustainability 
Contrary to the provisions of the operational guidelines of JJM, none of the 20 sampled 
villages in two sampled districts included source sustainability and grey water 
management measures in their VAPs. Due to the lack of effective inputs from the grass 
root rural community level, the same were neglected in both the DAPs and SAAPs as 
well. Further, technical measures were also not considered for evaluating source 
sustainability such as historical discharge of water sources (spring/ river, etc.), recharge 
rate of ground water, etc. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
113
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
113 
It was also observed that the construction of 1,595 recharge structures 108 across five 
districts (including the sampled Unakoti District) with an estimated cost of ₹ 18.04 
crore was planned and approved by the SLSSC only in August 2023. This implies that 
no action had been taken by the State Government regarding source sustainability prior 
to August 2023. 
The Government replied (March 2025) that with the convergence of SBM-G, 15 th FC 
grant fund and MGNREGA fund, 422 community level soak pits, 9,134 individual 
household level soak pits had been constructed in Unakoti District and 851 community 
level soak pits, 2,084 individual household level soak pits had already been constructed 
in South Tripura District for grey water management. Further, consequent upon 
declaration of theme “source suitability of Drinking Water” under Jal Shakti Abhiyan 
in the year 2023 with the focus on strengthening the water sources, five districts of the 
State namely, North Tripura, Unakoti, Dhalai, Khowai and Sephaijala had been 
identified as water stressed district. Accordingly, action was taken by the Department 
for implementation of direct recharge structures using JJM fund and this was expected 
to be completed by September 2025. 
However, during the survey of 408 beneficiaries in two sampled districts, it was seen 
that only three households had individual soak pits. Wastewater accumulation was 
found in 93 households (23 per cent), while in 312 households (76 per cent) waste water 
was discharged directly to the drains. Therefore, effective utilisation of the various 
measures taken by the Department towards sustainability and grey water management, 
as claimed above, remained questionable. Further, the Government’s claim regarding 
the implementation of direct recharge structures using JJM funds was found to be not 
achieved as neither was any plan made, nor any execution undertaken in the three 
implementing divisions under the two sampled districts as of March 2024, even after 
the lapse of almost one year from the declaration of the theme “source suitability of 
Drinking Water” under Jal Shakti Abhiyan in 2023. 
2.3.7.13 Non-assurance of financial sustainability by community contribution 
for operation and maintenance of water supply schemes 
Paragraph 6.1.2 of the operational guidelines of JJM provides that for in-village piped 
water supply infrastructure and related source development to be implemented by Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e., VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. 
communities will contribute five per cent of the capital cost in cash and/ or kind and/ 
or labour in hilly and forested areas, North Eastern and Himalayan States.  
Audit noticed that out of the 20 sampled villages in two districts, none of the 
panchayats/ VWSCs took any initiative for collecting community contributions for the 
initial construction and for the O&M of the in-village water supply schemes. Moreover, 
no household surveys were conducted by the VWSCs to assess the willingness of local 
 
108  In a drinking water supply system, a recharge structure is a type of construction designed to help 
replenish groundwater resources. These structures facilitate the natural process of water infiltration, 
allowing surface water to percolate into the ground and recharge aquifers. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
114
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
114 
rural communities regarding contributions. 
However, during the beneficiary survey conducted by audit, it was noticed that 395 out 
of 408 households (96.81 per cent) expressed their willingness to give contribution for 
O&M of the schemes, though not for initial construction. Further, the non-handing over 
of the completed water supply schemes to the concerned VWSCs resulted in lack of 
ownership by the village authorities. Additionally, due to inaction of VWSCs in 
collecting community contribution for the schemes, the entire financial burden for 
O&M of these schemes fell upon the State Government and as such financial 
sustainability through community contributions remained unachieved. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Government replied (March 2025) that with 
the implementation of “Operation and Maintenance Policy for Rural Water Supply in 
Tripura” in April 2025 and subsequent devolution of management and O&M of water 
supply schemes, the respective village authorities would be able to collect water tariff 
from the beneficiary households for ensuring a sustainable water supply system at the 
village level. 
2.3.7.14 Failure of Village Committees to Take over water supply schemes  
The State Government formulated ‘Standard Operative Procedure for Operation and 
Maintenance of Rural Water Supply Schemes’ on JJM infrastructure and ‘Bye Law for 
the Water User’s Committee responsible for management of PWSS in Tripura’ in 
January 2022. Both the policy documents were notified in February 2022 with the 
objective of handing over rural piped water supply schemes to the concerned Gram 
Panchayats/ Village Committees/ User Committees with directions to take necessary 
action for taking over the completed water supply schemes. However, it was found that 
none of the completed water supply schemes had been taken over by the 20 sampled 
village authorities. 
This indicates a significant gap between policy intent and implementation at the 
grassroots level. Although the Government reported that 7,446 SBDTWs had been 
handed over across the State, the absence of progress in the sampled areas suggests 
inconsistent execution and weak follow-through. The continued delay in transferring 
operational responsibility undermines the sustainability and community ownership 
envisaged under the Jal Jeevan Mission framework. 
In reply, the Government stated (May 2025) that total 7,446 SVSs were handed over to 
the User’s Committees in the State upto March 2024. The Government also expected 
to gradually increase the handing over of water supply schemes in the near future. 
Audit noticed that as of March 2024, 7,446 handed over SVS contributed to only 54.68 
per cent of the total 13,618109 SVS commissioned in the State and a substantial portion 
of SVS were yet to be handed over to the User’s Committee. 
Conclusion 
No plan was prepared for the assessment of ground level requirements and no action 
 
109Including 5,382 commissioned SVS prior to JJM period i.e. 2019-20. 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
115
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 115 
was taken for ensuring source sustainability or grey water management in the sampled 
districts. Further, financial sustainability was also not achieved due to the inaction of 
the VWSCs towards collection of community contributions for O&M of the water 
supply schemes. None of the in-village water supply schemes were handed over to the 
concerned village authorities in the sampled villages resulting in a lack of ownership 
by the rural community. 
Recommendation 
The Government should emphasise on; 
 developing effective plan after assessing the ground level requirement; 
 implementation of source sustainability and grey water management measures 
to ensure that water supply schemes remain functional throughout their full 
design period; 
 financial sustainability of the water supply schemes by community 
contribution for their operation and maintenance.  
Overall Conclusion 
The audit revealed that while Tripura's Jal Jeevan Mission made progress in extending 
piped water connections, it fell significantly short of its universal coverage and 
functionality goals by 2024. Delays in planning, poor community participation, 
inadequate institutional oversight, and chronic under investment in water quality testing 
compromised the effectiveness of the programme. Deficiencies in grievance redressal, 
operation and maintenance, and water quality management further undermined 
sustainability, equity, and public trust in service delivery. Urgent reforms in planning, 
implementation, monitoring, and community engagement are needed to achieve safe, 
reliable, and equitable rural drinking water access. 
  

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
116
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
116 
EDUCATION (HIGHER) DEPARTMENT 
2.4 Unfruitful Expenditure 
 
The indecisiveness of the Government and lack of coordination among the various 
departments in setting up of New Model Degree College resulted in unfruitful 
expenditure of ₹ 16.15 crore alongwith cost overrun of ₹ 22.08 crore. The 
construction work remained incomplete and the objective of the Government to 
meet the increasing demand for higher education was not achieved. 
To meet the increased demand for higher education, in January 2014, the State 
Government proposed to construct a New Model Degree College (NMDC) in West 
Tripura District. In the Sixth meeting of Rashtriya Uchchtar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA) 
held on 27 March 2015, Project Approval Board (PAB) 110 approved location of New 
Model Degree College in West Tripura District with total outlay of ₹ 12 crore of which 
₹ six crore was approved for the financial year 2015-16, subject to submission of 
Detailed Project Report (DPR). The college was to be managed by the Education 
(Higher) Department while the construction was to be carried out by the Public Works 
Department (PWD). Accordingly, PWD prepared the DPR for construction of NMDC 
at Old Central Jail Premises111, Agartala at a cost of ₹ 51.71 crore in July 2014. 
Examination of records (September 2023) of the Executive Engineer, Public Works 
(Roads and Building) (EE, PWD (R&B)), Agartala Division-I revealed that, Education 
(Higher) Department accorded Administrative Approval of ₹ 51.71 crore for 
construction of College building in October 2014. Technical Sanction to the detailed 
estimate for the work was accorded (July 2015) by the Engineer-in-Chief, PWD (R&B), 
Tripura for ₹ 28.33 crore including three per cent contingencies. A tender was floated 
for construction of the building at an estimated cost of ₹ 27.50 crore 112. The work was 
awarded in February 2016 at ₹ 28.87 crore which was 4.98 per cent above the estimated 
cost, to be completed within 24 months. The work commenced in March 2016.  
However, the work was not completed within the stipulated period (February 2018) due 
to multiple factors113 that led to delay of one year, with delays from 32 to 109 days at 
different intervals, as documented in the Hindrance Register. 
In December 2018, the Chief Minister of Tripura, during a site visit along with the 
Education Minister and other officials, advised that the NMDC be converted into an IT 
Hub. In a subsequent meeting in April 2019, the State Government took decision to 
relocate the NMDC to Kumartilla, West Tripura. The State Government sent a proposal 
to the Ministry of Human Resource Development, GoI in April 2019 requesting for 
 
110  The PAB examine, appraise and approves State Higher Education Plan and the release of the funds 
to States and Institutions. It also evaluates the performance of States and Institutions in RUSA 
111  16.47 acre of land 
112  Academic building (₹ 18.85 crore), Administrative Building (₹ 4.14 crore), Library Building (₹ 4.31 
crore) and Concealed conduiting for internal electrification (₹ 0.20 crore) 
113  Delayed issue of lay out plan and structural drawing (47 days), non-issue of design drawing 
(109 days), jail quarters falling in the alignment of Administrative building not vacated (34 days), 
Demonitisation of bank notes (85 days), not shifting of live electric pole from lay out area of academic 
building (57 days), non-availability of sand due to ban imposed by Tripura Government (32 days). 

Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
117
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
117 
change of location from Old Central Jail Complex to Kumaritilla, Agartala, within the 
same District. GoI approved the proposal in September 2019 on the condition that the 
expenditure incurred at the old site would be borne by the State Government at the new 
site.  
In January 2020, the Revenue Department, Government of Tripura approved allocation 
of 6.137 acres of land at old Central Jail campus to the Urban Development Department 
(UDD) for IT park project. In June 2020 UDD decided to include the project 
“Development of IT park” in the Smart City Mission and handed over the incomplete 
College building to Tripura Urban Planning & Development Authority (TUDA) 114. In 
September 2020, TUDA requested PWD to settle the present contract agreement and 
provide estimate of balance items of civil works of the project to enable them to invite 
tender for its completion. However, after a lapse of twenty months from the date of 
allotment (January 2020) of land, the UDD informed the Education (Higher) 
Department in September 2021 that they would not be able to take up the proposed IT 
Park as no tender was received against the Request for Proposals for the project. As a 
result, the State Government decided in May 2022 to proceed with the original plan of 
constructing the NMDC at the old Central Jail premises. The Education (Higher) 
Department subsequently requested PWD to commence construction of the college. 
But, the same could not be restarted (November 2024) even after 31 months since taking 
decision (May 2022) to construct the NMDC instead of IT park at old Jail Campus due 
to lack of funds.  
The status of the construction of the Model Degree College (September 2023) at Old 
Central Jail complex is shown in photographs 2.4.1, 2.4.2 and 2.4.3. 
Photograph 2.4.1: Library 
Block 
Photograph 2.4.2: 
Administrative Block 
Photograph 2.4.3: 
Academic Block 
The Department stated (April 2024 and December 2024) that they had started exploring 
for funds to complete the work of NMDC at Old Central Jail premises. It was also stated 
that the EE PWD had submitted (May 2023) the estimate for balance portion of the 
work for ₹ 36.00 crore which is yet to be approved (July 2024). As per the revised 
 
114  TUDA under UDD was constituted on 30 January 2019 with the Hon’ble Chief Minister of Tripura 
as Chairman of the Authority. The Secretary-in-Charge, Urban Development Department is the Vice 
Chairman of TUDA. 


Chapter II: Social Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
118
Chapter II: Social Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
118 
estimate, the cost overrun for completion of balance portion of the work was 
₹ 22.08 crore115.  
The Government replied (November 2024) that the Department was constantly giving 
endeavor to complete the pending works of Model Degree College by exploring fund 
provision from other sources. Accordingly, fund request had been made to complete 
the project under the scheme “Special Assistance for Capital Investment”. The project 
had been considered under “Special Assistance to States for Capital Investment” during 
the year 2024-25. The Department was optimistic to complete the work at the earliest. 
The frequent changes in decision of the proposed NMDC by the Government resulted 
in unfruitful expenditure of ₹ 16.15 crore 116  as well as the project could not be 
completed. The multiple changes in project direction exposed gaps in coordination 
between the Education Department, PWD and UDD. With the project being halted and 
later shifted to other purposes, a significant amount of financial and human resources 
were essentially tied up and wasted. The delay in construction postponed the 
availability of academic facilities for students, potentially limiting their opportunities 
for pursuing higher education locally and the objective to meet the increasing demand 
for higher education was not achieved. 
 
115  Balance work for the first contractor = ₹ 13.92 crore (tendered value of work: ₹ 28.87 crore minus 
value of work done excluding extra item of works: ₹ 14.95 crore ( i.e. ₹ 16.15  crore  minus 
₹ 1.20 crore). Therefore, the cost overrun is ₹ 22.08 crore (Estimate for balance work (₹ 36 crore) 
minus balance work for first contractor (₹ 13.92 crore)). 
116  Expenditure of ₹ 16.15 crore was incurred on the construction of NMDC by PWD, which includes a 
committed liability of ₹ 6.31 crore borne by the PWD from their own source of funds .  

CHAPTER III: ECONOMIC SECTOR

Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
119
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 119 
CHAPTER III: ECONOMIC SECTOR 
 
3.1 Introduction 
This Chapter of the Audit Report presents the findings from the audit of the State 
Government units under the Economic Sector. 
The details of the total budget allocation and expenditure of the departments under 
Economic Sector during the years 2023-24 are given in Table 3.1.1. 
Table 3.1.1: Details of allocation and expenditure under Economic Sector (Non-PSEs) 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of the Department Budget 
allocation Expenditure 
Co-operation Department 46.72 38.95 
Public Works (Roads and Buildings) Department 1,968.69 1,432.29 
Power Department 593.75 468.63 
Public Works (Water Resource) Department 332.96 195.20 
Information, Cultural Affairs Department 74.17 68.79 
Industries and Commerce Department 291.20 235.18 
Industries & Commerce (Handloom, Handicrafts and 
Sericulture) Department 40.45 35.56 
Fisheries Department 128.29 85.15 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare Department 604.84 395.91 
College of Agriculture  9.52 7.73 
Horticulture and Soil Conservation Department 143.13 107.22 
Animal Resource Development Department 176.46 138.97 
Forest Department 472.12 257.60 
Science, Technology and Environment Department 13.52 11.84 
Factories and Boilers Organisation 4.67 3.33 
Information Technology Department 52.97 38.08 
Tourism Department 59.05 30.13 
Total number of Departments = 17 5,012.51 3,550.56 
Source: Appropriation Accounts 2023-24 
During 2023-24, we audited seven units under the Economic Sector, covering 
expenditure of ₹ 1,298.90 crore (including expenditure of the previous years). 
This Chapter contains two Compliance Audit Paragraphs titled “Wasteful expenditure” 
and “Unfruitful expenditure” under the Public Works (Road and Building) Department 
involving money value of ₹ 6.45 crore. 
  

Chapter III: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
120
Chapter III: Economic Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
120 
PUBLIC WORKS (ROADS AND BUILDING) DEPARTMENT 
3.2 Wasteful expenditure 
Construction of bridge (super structure) without any approved drawing and the 
consequent failure to ensure quality of appropriate steel materials used by the 
contractor resulted in the collapse of the super structure of the bridge with a 
wasteful expenditure of ₹ 2.13 crore on collapsed superstructure of the bridge and 
extra expenditure of ₹ 3.74 crore. 
As per Section 1904.1 of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways Specifications 
for Road and Bridge Works, 2013, all work shall be in accordance with the approved 
drawings and specifications. Fabrication work shall be taken up after receipt of 
approved fabrication/ work drawings. 
The Public Works (Roads and Building) Department (PWD(R&Bs)), Government of 
Tripura accorded (May 2012) administrative approval and expenditure sanction of 
₹ 4.20 crore for construction of RCC bridge over Abhaya Cherra on Barapathari to 
Tulamura Road. The project, funded under NABARD, aims to provide the shortest 
connectivity of Rajnagar Block area and the district headquarters at Udaipur. Technical 
sanction of ₹ 4.42 crore117 including three per cent contingencies was approved (April 
2013) by the Chief Engineer (CE), PWD(R&B). The work was awarded (June 2014) 
to a contractor 118 at ₹ 5.20 crore (21.19 per cent above the estimated cost of ₹ 4.29 
crore put to tender) with a stipulated period of completion within 18 months. The 
Executive Engineer (EE), PWD(R&B), Belonia Division was in-charge of the 
construction. 
Examination (November 2023) of records of the Executive Engineer (EE), PWD 
(R&B), Belonia Division revealed that the work commenced in November 2014, but 
was not completed within the stipulated period. The construction was delayed due to 
various reasons and the contractor was granted multiple extensions of time. 
Meanwhile, in July 2020, a portion of the bridge collapsed due to various issues such 
as unspecified work of steel structure, inadequate number of joints in each junction, 
inadequate size of gusset plate, quality of steel materials and corrosion on steel 
members and joints. The contractor assured the EE, PWD(R&B), Belonia Division 
that he shall reconstruct the bridge at his own cost, however no work was done, and 
the contract was terminated by the EE, PWD (R&B), Belonia in June 2021 for 
fundamental breach of the contract under the contract agreement on the grounds of 
inability of the contractor to complete the work. However, before termination of the 
contract, the contractor was paid (January 2020) ₹ 4.83 crore 119 out of the total value 
of work of ₹ 4.86 crore. 
Audit noticed that General Arrangement (GA) drawing of the superstructure was 
 
117  based on Tripura PWD Schedule of Rates, 2011, ₹ 4.42 crore included ₹ 1.93 crore for superstructure 
and ₹ 2.36 crore for sub-structure and foundation 
118  Shri Subhas Podder 
119 including ₹ 2.13 crore expenditure made towards superstructure fabrication 
{PWD(R&B)},

Chapter III: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
121
Chapter III: Economic Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
121 
approved but the fabrication drawings on the basis of which the contractor had 
fabricated and erected the steel structure had not been approved by the Department. It 
was the contractor’s responsibility to prepare the fabrication drawing based on the 
approved GA drawing and to submit the same to EE for approval of the department, 
before commencement of the work. However, the bridge construction was based on 
unapproved fabricated drawings and payments were made by the EE, based on 
certification of Junior Engineer (JE), Assistant Engineer (AE) that the work met the 
specifications and approved drawings. Furthermore, the department failed to ensure 
production of test certificate of steel materials used in the work by the contractor which 
was part of the special condition of the agreement with the contractor. The Department 
did not ensure that the work was being executed as per the approved fabrication 
drawings, nor did it ensure the availability of test certificates for the steel materials. 
The status (November 2023) of the collapsed bridge is shown in Photographs 3.2.1, 
3.2.2 and 3.2.3. 
 
Photograph 3.2.1 Photograph 3.2.2 Photograph 3.2.3 
As the work had not been completed, the department floated a tender for the balance 
work in May 2022, however, the tendering process was not completed till August 
2024. The department awarded 120 the balance work at a cost of ₹ 3.74 crore which 
included the cost of dismantling of the damaged superstructure. 
Audit concluded that: 
 The Engineering Officers (JE, AE and EE) did not ensure the execution of bridge 
work (superstructure) according to the approved drawings. They also falsely 
certified that the work was in compliance with specifications, which directly led 
to the payment to the contractor for substandard work.  
 The test certificates for the steel materials were also not obtained, which was a 
special condition in the agreement. The lack of material testing further aggravated 
the situation, leading to quality issues and eventual collapse.  
 The expenditure of ₹ 2.13 crore incurred on the collapsed superstructure has been 
rendered wasteful as the superstructure must now be rebuilt from scratch. In 
addition, the Department will incur an extra expenditure of ₹ 3.74 crore to 
 
120  M/s Tantia Constructions Limited 


Chapter III: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
122
Chapter III: Economic Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 122 
complete the remaining work.  
 The primary objective of the construction of the bridge to replace the existing 
Bailey Bridge on the road was to provide better connectivity of Rajnagar Block 
area in South Tripura District with the district Head Quarter of Gomati District at 
Udaipur, thus facilitating the local and general population has not been achieved.  
Further, the status of the construction was sought from the EE in April 2025. It has been 
stated that the balance work commenced in October 2024 and the dismantling work of 
the collapsed deck slab and steel structure works has been completed. Thus, the bridge 
construction which was originally scheduled to be completed by May 2016, has been 
delayed by nine years as of April 2025 and is yet to be completed.  
While accepting the fact, the Government replied (July 2025) that the balance work was 
in progress and was expected to be completed by March 2026.  
Recommendation: 
 The government should fix responsibility on the concerned engineering 
officers for their certifying work that did not meet the specifications.  
 Regular material inspections and quality checks should be incorporated 
throughout the construction process so as to ensure that the materials used 
meet the required standards. 
  

Chapter III: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
123
Chapter III: Economic Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
123 
PUBLIC WORKS (ROADS AND BUILDING) DEPARTMENT 
3.3 Unfruitful expenditure 
 
The Public Works (Road and Building) Department took up road work without 
ensuring the availability of funds in violation of the provisions of General 
Financial Rules and CPWD Works Manual. As a result, the expenditure of 
₹ 57.94 lakh on the partially constructed road remained unfruitful. 
Para 2.1 of the CPWD Works Manual, 2014, as adopted by the State Government 121 
provides that no work should normally be commenced or any liability thereon incurred 
until administrative approval has been obtained and also necessary expenditure sanction 
has been accorded and allotment of funds made. 
Para 2.3 of the CPWD Works Manual, 2014 stipulates for  administrative approval 
through communication of formal acceptance of the proposals by the competent 
authority of the Administrative Ministry/ Department requiring the work.  
Para 2.4 of the CPWD Works Manual, 2014 states that  expenditure sanction is to be 
accorded by the administrative ministry/ department to indicate that funds for the 
project/ work have been provided, and liability can be incurred 
Further, as per General Financial Rules (GFR) 136 (1) as adopted by the State 
Government122, no work shall be commenced or liability incurred in connection with it 
until: (i) administrative approval has been obtained from the appropriate authority in 
each case, (ii) sanction to incur expenditure has been obtained from the competent 
authority, (v) funds to cover the charge during the year have been provided by the 
competent authority and (vi) tenders invited and processed in accordance with the rules.  
Examination (January-February 2022) of the records of the EE, PWD (R&B), 
Dharmanagar Division showed that the existing internal road passing through the 
Regional College of Physical Education (RCPE), Panisagar was being used by the 
inhabitants of East Panisagar, Pekucherra, Agnipassa Gram Panchayats and Ujan C.H. 
para ADC Village of North Tripura District. The Youth Affairs and Sports Department 
(YASD), Government of Tripura proposed to close the road towards Pekucherra for the 
purpose of creating a playground. In this regard, a decision was also made to divert the 
road from its current alignment. During a review committee (August 2013) led by the 
Hon’ble Minister, YASD, directed for construction of a diversion road on the east side 
of RCPE complex, thereby closing the existing internal road to public use.  
In a subsequent review meeting (November 2013) chaired by the Minister, YASD to 
review the status of achievement of ongoing development works at RCPE complex, the 
preparation of the plan and estimate for the construction of the road was entrusted to 
EE, PWD (R&B) with timelines for submission by 25 November 2013 and completion 
of the work by December 2013.  
 
121 vide Gazette Notification No. R.15(2)/MC-PWD dated 30 May 2007 
122 vide Notification No. 10(4)-FIN(G)/15(L) dated 24 August 2017 

Chapter III: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
124
Chapter III: Economic Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
124 
Further, in the review meeting held in April 2015, on the progress and status of sports 
infrastructure development works, the Engineer-in-Chief (E-in-C), PWD (R&B) 
requested the Secretary, YASD for allocation of the funds for construction of the road. 
However, YASD did not commit to providing any financial support for the road 
construction. During this meeting, it was agreed that the expenditure on the construction 
of the diversion road would be met from the resources of the PWD (R&B).  
Subsequently, Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanction (December 2015) of 
₹ 1.49 crore was accorded by PWD (R&B) for the work ‘Construction of Diversion 
road of RCPE, for realignment of existing internal carpet road from the junction of 
newly constructed Girls Hostel to Indoor sports hall (total 672 mtr), earth work, CD 
work protection work and brick soiling’ from their own resources123.  
After inviting tender in February 2016, the work was awarded (April 2016) to the lowest 
tenderer at ₹ 1.55 crore (seven per cent above the estimated cost of ₹ 1.45 crore) with 
the stipulated completion time of six months. The work commenced in April 2016, but 
was not completed within the stipulated time, i.e. October 2016 due to funds constraint 
and ultimately was stopped completely in September 2018. The contractor was paid 
(upto September 2020) ₹ 57.94 lakh against the total value of ₹ 58.23 lakh for the work 
completed so far. 
During a joint physical verification (February 2022) conducted by audit team and the 
Executive Engineer, PWD (R&B), Dharmanagar Division, North Tripura, it was seen 
that the work was suspended and incomplete with only partial execution of earth work 
having been done. The incomplete work executed for ₹ 58.23 lakh had not been put to 
public use as per the information provided by the EE (October 2024). The position 
(February 2022) of the diversion road and internal road at RCPE during the joint 
physical verification is depicted in Photographs 3.3.1, 3.3.2 and 3.3.3.  
   
Photograph 3.3.1: Diversion 
road of RCPE at starting 
point 
Photograph 3.3.2: Diversion 
road of RCPE at end point 
Photograph 3.3.3: Internal 
road of RCPE 
The Director, YASD also confirmed (October 2024) that during a meeting (January 
 
123 As per the Department’s Memorandum dated 11 December 2015, the expenditure involved on this 
account will be met from the overall budget provision under the head of account 5054-C.O. on Road 
& Bridges 04-800-99-60-53 Major Works-OTPMGSY-Construction for concerned Division. 


Chapter III: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
125
Chapter III: Economic Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 125 
2016) held under the chairmanship of Minister, YASD it was decided that the work 
would be undertaken by PWD (R&B) from their own resources. However, the EE, 
PWD (R&B) replied (April 2023, October 2024 and February 2025) that the work had 
been stopped due to non-receipt of funds from the client department (YASD). 
The reply of the EE is not acceptable since the PWD (R&B) Department was aware 
that YASD had categorically stated (April 2015 and January 2016) that the expenditure 
should be met from the Department’s own resources and would not be funded from the 
YASD budget.  
Despite the AA&ES granted for ₹ 1.49 crore for the project, which should have enabled 
PWD(R&B) to incur a liability for the project, the work could proceed as planned. The 
reply of the EE that the work was halted due to non-receipt of funds from YASD, 
conflicts with the fact that the expenditure was clearly supposed to be covered by PWD 
(R&B)’s own resources, as explicitly stated by YASD in April 2015 and January 2016.  
The liability to carry out the work was legally incurred once the AA&ES were granted, 
as these approvals are intended to authorise both the commitment of resources and the 
assumption of financial responsibility. However, despite this, the project was delayed 
and ultimately suspended due to issues with funding allocation, which indicates a 
failure in managing the financial resources. Therefore, even though AA&ES were 
obtained, necessary funds to cover the liability and complete the project were not 
properly allocated, resulting in an incomplete and unused project.  
Thus, the objective of providing an alternate road to serve the residents of surrounding 
areas has not been achieved. This not only resulted in wasted expenditure but also 
demonstrated a failure to prioritise public interest in infrastructure development.  
While accepting the fact, the Government stated (June 2025) that the balance work had 
already been resumed by utilising resources of the PWD(R&B) to ensure that the work 
and expenditure were fruitful as well as beneficial for the local residents of the nearby 
RCPE area.  
Recommendation 
The Government should ensure proper allocation of funds before taking up projects 
so that projects do not remain incomplete for want of funds. 
  

126

CHAPTER IV: ECONOMIC SECTOR
(State Public Sector Enterprises)

127
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
127 
CHAPTER IV: ECONOMIC SECTOR 
(STATE PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES) 
4.1 Functioning of State Public Sector Enterprises 
 
4.1.1 Introduction 
The State Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs) consist of State Government Companies 
and Statutory Corporations. The PSEs are established to carry out activities of 
commercial nature and occupy an important place in the State economy. As on 31 
March 2024, there were 18 PSEs (including one non-working) in Tripura. The details 
of the PSEs in Tripura as on 31 March 2024 are given in Table 4.1.1. 
Table 4.1.1: Total number of PSEs as on 31 March 2024 
Type of PSEs Working PSEs Non-working PSEs124 Total 
Government Companies125 16 1126 17 
Statutory Corporations  1 - 1 
Total 17 1 18 
None of these PSEs were listed on the Stock Exchange. During the year 2023-24, two127 
new PSEs were incorporated and no existing PSE was closed down.  
4.1.2 Investment in PSEs 
 
4.1.2.1 State Government’s investment in PSEs 
The position of the State’s investment in the State PSEs by way of share capital and 
long term loans as on 31 March 2024 has been depicted in Table 4.1.2. 
Table 4.1.2: Details of State’s total investment128 in PSEs  
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars 
Working PSEs Non-working PSEs 
Total Companies Statutory 
corporation Companies 
Equity 1,561.38 163.96 0.04 1,725.38 
Long-term loans 329.46 - - 329.46 
Total Investment 1,890.84 163.96 0.04 2,054.84 
The State Government’s investment (₹ 2,054.84 crore) as on 31 March 2024 consisted 
of 83.97 per cent towards capital and 16.03 per cent in long-term loans as against the 
investment of ₹  1,714.35 crore as on 31 March 2020 consisting of 87.96 per cent  
 
124 Non-working PSEs are those which have ceased to carry on their operations.  
125 Government companies include Other Companies referred to in Section 139(5) and 139(7) of the 
Companies Act, 2013.  
126 Tripura State Bank Limited  
127 Tripura Nature Trails and Resort Limited (incorporated on 21  November 2022) and Tripura Power 
Transmission Limited (incorporated on 19 January 2023).  
128 Investment figures are provisional and as provided by the PSEs excepting three PSEs (Serial No. A.9, 
A.10, A.11 and A.16 of Appendix 4.1.1), investment figures for which have been adopted from their 
finalised accounts for 2023-24. 

128
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
128 
(₹ 1,508.00 crore) towards capital and 12.04 per cent (₹ 206.35 crore) in long-term 
loans. A graphical presentation of State Government investment in PSEs during last 
five years (2019-20 to 2023-24) has been given in Chart 4.1.1. 
 
As can be seen from Chart 4.1.1  that, the State Government’s investment in PSEs 
during last five years showed an increasing trend. The State’s investment grew by 
19.86 per cent (₹ 340.49 crore) from ₹ 1,714.35 crore in 2019-20 to ₹ 2,054.84 crore 
in 2023-24.  
During 2023-24, out of 15129 working PSEs where State Government had made direct 
investment, 10 PSEs incurred loss (₹  365.27 crore) and 5 PSEs earned profit 
(₹ 1.44 crore) as per their latest finalised accounts (Appendix 4.1.1). None of the five 
profit making PSEs had declared any dividend. There was no recorded information 
about the existence of any specific policy of the State Government regarding payment 
of dividend by the PSEs.  
The State Government’s investment (historical value) in PSEs had eroded by 12.28 per 
cent in 2023-24, and the accumulated losses (₹ 1,433.56 crore 130) of four PSEs131 had 
completely eroded the State’s investment (₹  845.99 crore) in their paid-up capital, as 
per their latest finalised accounts. In addition, accumulated losses (₹ 0.01 crore) of one 
PSE (Tripura Power Transmission Limited) had completely eroded its paid up capital 
(₹ 0.01 crore), which was fully contributed by its holding company (Tripura State 
Electricity Corporation Limited). 
 
129  Excluding Tripura Natural Gas Company Limited (profit earned: ₹ 40.91 crore) and Tripura Power 
Transmission Limited (loss incurred: ₹  0.01 crore), which had no direct equity investment from the 
State Government. 
130 Net after adjusting the Free Reserves (₹ 61.07 crore) of PSE at Serial No. A9 of Appendix 4.1.1 
131 Serial No. A6, A9, A15 and B1 of Appendix 4.1.1 
1508.00 1561.92 1609.18 1652.33 1725.38
206.35 206.05 262.40 229.46 329.46
1714.35 1767.97
1871.58 1881.79
2054.84
0.00
500.00
1000.00
1500.00
2000.00
2500.00
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
(₹ in crore)
Chart 4.1.1: State's total investment in PSEs
Equity Long Term Loans Total

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
129
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
129 
4.1.2.2 Total Sector-wise investment in PSEs 
Details of the total investment of State Government and Other Stakeholders (Central 
Government, Holding Companies, Banks, Financial Institutions, etc.) in PSEs under 
various important sectors at the end of 31 March 2020 and 31 March 2024 has been 
given in Table 4.1.3.  
Table 4.1.3: Sector-wise details of total investments132 in PSEs 
(₹ in crore)  
Name of Sector 
Government/ Other 
Companies 
Statutory 
Corporations Total Investment 
2019-20 2023-24 2019-20 2023-24 2019-20 2023-24 
Power  1078.78 1,401.71 0.00 0.00 1078.78 1,401.71 
Manufacturing  427.04 536.58 0.00 0.00 427.04 536.58 
Financing  144.62 144.62 0.00 0.00 144.62 144.62 
Service  161.39 217.65 163.85 163.96 325.24 381.61 
Agriculture & Allied  76.25 127.52 0.00 0.00 76.25 127.52 
Miscellaneous  30.00 30.00 0.00 0.00 30.00 30.00 
Total 1918.08 2458.08 163.85 163.96 2081.93 2622.04 
Source: PSEs data  
It can be seen from Table 4.1.3 that as compared to 2019-20, the combined investment 
of State Government and Other Stakeholders increased by ₹ 540.11 crore (26 per cent) 
during 2023-24, which pertained to the Power Sector (₹ 322.93 crore), Manufacturing 
Sector (₹ 109.54 crore), Service Sector (₹ 56.37 crore) and in Agriculture and Allied 
Sector (₹ 51.27 crore). 
The increase in investment under the Power sector was mainly due to the net increase 
in borrowings (₹ 323.03 crore 133) availed by power sector companies from various 
sources during the period of five years (2019-24).  Increase in the investment under 
Manufacturing sector was attributable to additional equity infusion by the State 
Government to Tripura Jute Mills Limited (₹ 87.83 crore) and Tripura Small Industries 
Corporation Limited (₹ 21.71 crore) over the period of five years (2019-24). 
Similarly, the investment in the Service sector increased mainly due to additional equity 
contribution provided by the State Government to Tripura Handloom and Handicrafts 
Development Corporation Limited (₹ 55.86 crore). 
4.1.3 Reconciliation with Finance Accounts 
The figures in respect of equity and loans provided by the State Government as per the 
records of PSEs should agree with the corresponding figures appearing in the Finance 
Accounts of the State. In case of differences in the figures, the PSEs concerned and the 
Finance Department should carry out reconciliation of differences.  The position in this 
regard as on 31 March 2024 is given in Table 4.1.4. 
 
132 Investment figures are provisional and as provided by the PSEs excepting the PSEs, which had 
finalised their up-to-date accounts as at 30 September of 2020 and 2024 respectively. 
133 State Government: ₹ 123.41 crore; Central Government: ₹ 62.35 crore and Others: ₹ 137.27 crore  

130
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
130 
Table 4.1.4: Equity, loans outstanding as per the Finance Accounts vis-à-vis records of PSEs 
(₹ in crore)  
Outstanding in respect 
of 
Amount as per Finance 
Accounts 
Amount as per 
records of PSEs Difference 
Equity  1,666.68 1,725.38 58.70 
Loans  256.90 329.46 72.56 
Source: Finance Accounts 2023-24 and PSEs records 
As on 31 March 2024, there were unreconciled differences in the figures of equity 
(₹ 58.70 crore) and loan (₹ 72.56 crore) as per two sets of records. The differences in 
equity occurred in respect of 14 PSEs 134 falling under Service Sector (five PSEs), 
Agriculture and Allied Sector (four PSEs), Manufacturing Sector (two PSEs), Power 
Sector (two PSEs) and Finance Sector (one PSE). 
As regards Loan figures, the Finance Department disburses the loans to various 
Departments of the State Government for different sectoral activities and booked the 
amount sector-wise in the Finance Accounts. In turn, the Departments disburse these 
loans to respective PSEs functioning under their administrative control. Hence, PSE-
wise figures of State Government loans provided to various PSEs are not available in 
the State Finance Accounts. However, the State Government loan figure booked in the 
Finance Accounts (₹  256.90 crore) pertained to the PSEs under Power Sector 
(₹ 256.75 crore) and Service Sector (₹ 0.15 crore).  
The State Government may institutionalise a quarterly reconciliation mechanism 
between the Finance Department, Administrative Department concerned, and SPSEs 
to reconcile figures of equity, loans, and guarantees.  
The Finance Department may issue instructions to all departments concerned to 
maintain and report SPSE-wise loan disbursement details, and these should be 
incorporated into the Finance Accounts. 
A reconciliation certificate mechanism may be institutionalised and made mandatory 
for all SPSEs at the end of each financial year. 
4.1.4 Special support and guarantees to PSEs during the year 
The State Government provides financial support to PSEs in various forms through 
annual budgetary allocations.  The summarised details of budgetary outgo towards 
equity, loans and grants/ subsidies in respect of PSEs for the three years ended 2023-
24 are given in Table 4.1.5. 
Table 4.1.5: Details regarding budgetary support to PSEs 
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars 
2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
No. of 
PSEs Amount No. of 
PSEs Amount No. of 
PSEs Amount 
Equity capital outgo from 
budget  6  46.86  6  43.15 6 63.08 
Loans given from budget  1  56.36  1  100.00 1 100.00 
 
134 PSEs at Sl. Nos. A.1 to A.4, A.6 to A.10, A.12 to A.15 and B.1 of Appendix 4.1.1 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
131
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
131 
Particulars 
2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
No. of 
PSEs Amount No. of 
PSEs Amount No. of 
PSEs Amount 
Grants/ subsidy  from budget  4  120.71  4  160.70 3 113.00 
Total Outgo135 10  223.93  10  303.85  9 276.08 
Guarantees issued  1  100.00  1  175.00  1 100.00 
Guarantee commitment  -  -  -  -  - - 
Source: Figures as provided by the PSEs 
It can be seen from Table 4.1.5 that, the State Government had provided a total 
budgetary support of ₹ 276.08 crore to PSEs during 2023-24, which was lower by 
₹ 27.77 crore (9.14 per cent ) compared to last year (2022-23) but higher by 
₹ 52.15 crore (23.29 per cent) compared to the financial support provided during 2021-
22.  
The major beneficiaries of budgetary outgo during 2023-24 were Tripura State 
Electricity Corporation Limited (loan: ₹ 100.00 crore, grant/ subsidy: ₹  87.92 crore), 
Tripura Jute Mills Limited (equity: ₹  31.13 crore), Tripura Industrial Development 
Corporation Limited (grant/ subsidy: ₹ 19.77 crore) and Tripura Handloom and 
Handicrafts Development Corporation Limited (equity: ₹ 12.00 crore). 
4.1.5 Accountability framework 
The audit of the financial statements of a Company in respect of financial years 
commencing on or after 1 April 2014 is governed by the provisions of the Companies 
Act, 2013 (Act) and audit of the financial statements in respect of financial years that 
commenced earlier than 1 April 2014 continued to be governed by the Companies Act, 
1956. The new Act has brought about increased Regulatory Framework, wider 
Management responsibility and higher Professional Accountability.  
4.1.5.1 Statutory Audit/ Supplementary Audit 
Statutory Auditors appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
(C&AG), audit the financial statements of a Government Company. In addition, C&AG 
conducts the Supplementary Audit of these financial statements under the provisions 
of Section 143 (6) of the Act.  
Audit of Statutory Corporations is governed by their respective Legislations. The State 
of Tripura had only one Statutory Corporation (Tripura Road Transport Corporation), 
which was working. The C&AG is the sole auditor of this Corporation in terms of 
Section 19 (2) of the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 read with Section 33(2) of the Road Transport 
Corporations Act, 1950.  
4.1.5.2 Role of Government and Legislature 
The State Government exercises control over the affairs of these PSEs through its 
administrative departments. The Government appoints the Chief Executive and 
Directors on the Board of these PSEs.  
 
135 Actual number of PSEs, which received equity, loans, grants/ subsidies from the State Government. 

132
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
132 
The State Legislature also monitors the accounting and utilisation of State Government 
investment in the PSEs. For this purpose, the Annual Reports of State Government 
Companies together with the Statutory Auditors’ Reports and comments of the C&AG 
thereon are to be placed before the Legislature under Section 394 of the Act. Similarly, 
the Annual Reports of Statutory Corporations along with the Separate Audit Reports of 
C&AG are required to be placed before the Legislature as per the stipulations made 
under their respective governing Acts. The Audit Reports of C&AG are submitted to 
the Government under Section 19A of the C&AG’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1971.  
4.1.6 Arrears in finalisation of accounts 
Financial statements of the Companies are required to be finalised within six months 
from the end of the relevant financial year i.e. by end of September in accordance with 
the provisions of Section 96 (1) of the Companies Act. Failure to do so may attract 
penal provisions under Section 99 of the Act. Similarly, the accounts of Statutory 
Corporations, are to be finalised, audited and presented to the Legislature as per the 
provisions of their respective Acts.  
Timely finalisation of accounts is important for the State Government to assess the 
financial health of the PSEs and to avoid financial misappropriation and 
mismanagement. Persistent delay in finalisation of accounts is fraught with the risk of 
fraud and leakage of public money going undetected apart from violation of the 
provision of the Companies Act, 2013.  
The details relating to finalisation of accounts by working PSEs as of 30 September 
2024 is shown in Table 4.1.6.  
Table 4.1.6: Position relating to finalisation of Accounts of working PSEs 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
1. Number of working PSEs  15136 15 15 15 17137 
2. Number of Accounts finalised 
during the year  16138 13 18 13 17 
3. Number of Accounts in arrears  24 26 23 25 26 
4. Number of Working PSEs with 
arrears in Accounts  13 14 12 12 13 
5. Extent of arrears (number in 
years)  
1 to 4 
years 
1 to 5 
years 
1 to 6 
years 
1 to 7 
years 
1 to 7 
years 
As could be noticed from Table 4.1.6 that the accounts of only four139 out of 17 working 
PSEs were up-to-date as on 30 September 2024. Remaining 13 working PSEs had a 
backlog of total 26 accounts for periods ranging from one to seven years. The oldest 
 
136 Included Tripura Power Generation Limited which was incorporated on 28 January 2015.  
137  Included two new companies, with arrear of 3 accounts viz. Tripura Nature Trials and Resort Limited 
(2022-23 and 2023-24) and Tripura Power Transmission Limited (2023-24). 
138 Included four arrear accounts of Tripura Power Generation Limited (2015-16 to 2018-19).  
139  Tripura Natural Gas Company Limited, Tripura Power Generation Limited, Tripura Power 
Transmission Limited and Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited.  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
133
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
133 
Accounts in arrears were since 2017-18 (seven Accounts), which related to ‘Tripura 
Horticulture Corporation Limited’ as detailed in Appendix 4.1.1.  
The administrative departments concerned have the responsibility to oversee the 
activities of these entities and to ensure that their accounts are finalised and adopted by 
the PSEs within the stipulated period.   
The Accountant General (Audit), Tripura had been taking up the matter regularly with 
the PSEs140 and the administrative departments141 concerned of the State Government 
for liquidating the arrears of accounts of PSEs. However, the State Government and the 
PSEs concerned could not address the issue to clear all pendency of accounts of the 
PSEs in a time bound manner.  
4.1.7 Placement of Separate Audit Reports 
Timely placement of SARs in the State Legislature is important to ensure timely 
reporting on the functioning of the Corporation to the stakeholders and fix 
accountability of the Management for its performance.   
Tripura Road Transport Corporation (TRTC) was the only Statutory Corporation in the 
State of Tripura covered under the audit purview of C&AG. The Accounts of TRTC 
have been finalised upto 2019-20 and Separate Audit Reports (SARs) of the C&AG on 
these Accounts have also been issued. The SARs on the Accounts of TRTC have been 
placed (7 July 2023) in the State Legislature upto the accounting year 2019-20.  
Recommendations:  
a. The State Government may establish a dedicated unit to oversee the clearance of 
arrears in PSE accounts, set targets for individual PSEs, and monitor progress 
through this unit. 
b. The PSEs should reconcile their equity and loan figures with the State 
Government departments and ensure that any arrears in accounts are cleared.  
4.1.8 Investments made by State Government in PSEs whose accounts are in 
arrears 
The State Government had invested ₹  74.18 crore in six PSEs (equity: ₹  74.18 crore 
and loans: Nil) during the years for which these PSEs had not finalised their accounts 
as detailed in Table 4.1.7.  
Table 4.1.7: Investment by State Government in PSEs having accounts in arrears 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of PSE 
Accounts 
finalised 
upto 
Accounts 
pending 
finalisation 
Investment by State 
Government during the 
period of arrears 
Equity Loans 
1 Tripura Horticulture 
Corporation Limited  2016-17 2017-18 to 
2023-24 5.70 0.00 
2 Tripura Tea Development 2022-23 2023-24 9.50 0.00 
 
140 October 2023, January, June and September 2024 
141 October 2023 and June 2024 

134
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
134 
Sl. 
No. Name of PSE 
Accounts 
finalised 
upto 
Accounts 
pending 
finalisation 
Investment by State 
Government during the 
period of arrears 
Equity Loans 
Corporation Limited  
3 Tripura Rehabilitation 
Plantation Corporation Limited 2020-21 2021-22 & 
2023-24 9.70 0.00 
4 Tripura Jute Mills Limited  2022-23 2023-24 31.13 0.00 
5 Tripura Small Industries 
Corporation Limited  2022-23 2023-24 6.15 0.00 
6 
Tripura Handloom and 
Handicrafts Development 
Corporation Limited  
2022-23 2023-24 12.00 0.00 
Total: 74.18 0.00 
In the absence of accounts and their subsequent audit, it could not be verified if the 
investments made and the expenditure incurred have been properly accounted for and 
the purpose for which the amount was invested was achieved or not. 
The Government may consider not giving further financial assistance to the PSEs 
having backlog of Accounts until the accounts are made as current as possible. 
4.1.9 Performance of PSEs as per their latest finalised accounts 
The financial position and working results of working PSEs as per their latest finalised 
accounts as on 30 September 2024 are detailed in Appendix 4.1.1. Table 4.1.8 provides 
the comparative details of working PSEs turnover and State GSDP for a period of five-
year ending 2023-24.  
Table 4.1.8: Details of working PSEs-turnover vis-à-vis GSDP 
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Turnover142 1,289.82 1,742.31 1,878.68 2,077.17 2,107.82 
GSDP143 54,151.12 53,504.12 62,302.46 72,347.54 82,624.73 
Percentage of 
Turnover to GSDP  2.38 3.26 3.02 2.87 2.55 
As can be seen from Table 4.1.8 that the turnover of the working PSEs and the GSDP 
have shown an increasing trend during the five years under reference excepting the 
marginal decline (₹ 647.00 crore) in the GSDP during 2020-21. The year-wise 
percentage of State PSE turnover to GSDP, however, has shown a decreasing trend 
during recent three years (2021-22 to 2023-24). This was mainly due the comparatively 
slow pace of growth of PSE-turnover as against the GSDP during these three years. 
 
142 Turnover of working PSEs as per their latest finalised accounts as on 30 September of respective year  
143 GSDP figures as per MoSPI  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
135
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
135 
4.1.9.1 Key parameters 
Some other key parameters of PSEs performance as per their latest finalised accounts 
as on 30 September of the respective year are given in Table 4.1.9.  
Table 4.1.9: Key Parameters of PSEs 
(₹ in crore)  
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Debt  491.07  532.56  770.73  933.14  865.76 
Turnover144 1,289.82  1,742.31  1,878.68  2,077.17  2,107.82 
Debt/ Turnover Ratio  0.38:1  0.31:1  0.41:1  0.45:1  0.41:1 
Interest Payments  6.97  12.89  14.40  26.02 35.34 
Accumulated losses  1,120.95  1,055.60  1,181.86  1,485.57 1863.59145 
Debt-Turnover Ratio  
A low debt-to-turnover ratio (DTR) demonstrates a good balance between debt and 
income. Conversely, a high DTR can signal of having too much of debt against the 
income of PSEs from core activities. Thus, the PSEs having lower DTR are more likely 
to comfortably manage their debt servicing and repayments. 
It can be noticed from Table 4.1.9 above that during the period of five years (2019-24), 
the PSEs debt had increased by ₹  374.69 crore (76.30 per cent ) from ₹  491.07 crore 
(2019-20) to ₹ 865.76 crore (2023-24). The major increase in the PSE debts was during 
2021-22 (₹ 238.17 crore), which was mainly attributable to the increase of ₹ 235.40 
crore (2021-22) in the long term debts of Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited. 
A major portion (99.82 per cent) of PSE debts during 2023-24 pertained to Tripura 
State Electricity Corporation Limited (₹ 735.84 crore) and Tripura Industrial 
Development Corporation Limited (₹ 128.41 crore).  
It can further be seen from Table 4.1.9 that during 2019-24, the PSE Turnover had 
grown by ₹ 818.00 crore (63.42 per cent) from ₹ 1,289.82 crore (2019-20) to ₹ 2,107.82 
crore (2023-24). However, more than 80 per cent (₹ 1,690.68 crore) of PSE Turnover 
(₹ 2,107.82 crore) during 2023-24 was contributed by one power sector PSE (Tripura 
State Electricity Corporation Limited).  
During the four years (2019-23), the Debt to Turnover Ratio has increased from 0.38:1 
(2019-20) to 0.45:1 (2022-23), which indicated a deterioration in the position of PSEs 
in the servicing and repayment of their long-term debts as compared to previous years. 
The position had slightly improved during 2023-24 as the Debt to Turnover Ratio 
reduced to 0.41:1. 
Further, the accumulated losses of PSEs during 2019-24, had also increased by ₹ 742.64 
crore (66.25 per cent) from ₹ 1,120.95 crore (2019-20) to ₹ 1,863.59 crore (2023-24), 
 
144 Turnover of working PSEs as per their latest finalised accounts as on 30 September of the respective 
year 
145 Overall accumulated losses of 17 working PSEs after taking into account the accumulated losses of 
12 PSEs (₹ 2,183.02 crore) and accumulated profits of five PSEs (₹ 319.43 crore) 

136
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
136 
which was a drain on the financial resources of the State.  Three PSEs 146 alone 
accounted for 99.89 per cent (₹ 1,861.63 crore) of the overall accumulated losses of 
PSEs during 2023-24.  
4.1.9.2 Erosion of capital due to losses 
The aggregate paid-up capital and accumulated losses of 17 working PSEs as per their 
latest finalised accounts as on 30 September 2024 were ₹  1,677.16  crore and 
₹ 1,863.59  crore respectively (Appendix 4.1.1).   
Analysis of investment and accumulated losses of these PSEs revealed that the 
accumulated losses (net of free reserves) of five 147 working PSEs (₹  1,433.57 crore) 
had completely eroded their paid-up capital (₹  846.00 crore) as detailed in the Table 
4.1.10.  
Table 4.1.10: PSEs with complete erosion of paid-up capital 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of PSE Year of 
Accounts 
Paid up 
capital 
Accumulated 
losses 
Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited  2023-24 665.76 1109.73* 
Tripura Road Transport Corporation  2019-20 163.96 288.04 
Tripura Industrial Development Corporation Limited  2022-23 16.17 35.44 
Agartala Smart City Limited 2022-23 0.10 0.35 
Tripura Power Transmission Limited 2023-24 0.01 0.01 
Total  846.00 1,433.57  
*Net after adjusting ‘free reserves’  of ₹ 61.07 crore 
Accumulation of huge losses by these PSEs had eroded public wealth, which is a 
cause of serious concern and the State Government needs to review the working of 
these PSEs to either improve their profitability or close their operations.  
The overall position of losses148 incurred by working PSEs during 2019-20 to 2023-24 
are depicted in Chart 4.1.2. 
 
146 Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited (₹ 1,170.80 crore), Tripura Jute Mills Limited (₹ 402.79 
crore) and Tripura Road Transport Corporation (₹ 288.04 crore)  
147 Including one PSE (Tripura Power Transmission Limited), which had no direct equity investment by 
the State Government and its entire equity capital was subscribed by Tripura State Electricity 
Corporation Limited (holding company). 
148 As per the latest finalised accounts of working PSEs as on 30 September of the respective year  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
137
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
137 
 
(Figures in brackets show the number of working PSEs in respective years)  
From Chart 4.1.2, it can be seen that the working PSEs incurred losses during all the 
five years under reference and had shown an increasing trend. The losses of working 
PSEs during last five years were mainly driven by the losses incurred by the power 
sector PSEs. The overall losses149 of working PSEs, which were highest during 2023-
24 (₹ 322.93 crore) were mainly contributed by the losses (₹  324.19 crore) of Tripura 
State Electricity Corporation Limited.   
During the year 2023-24, out of 17 working PSEs, six PSEs earned an aggregate profit 
of ₹ 42.35 crore and eleven PSEs incurred loss of ₹ 365.28 crore. The details of major 
contributors to overall profits and losses of working PSEs are given in Table 4.1.11.  
Table 4.1.11: Major contributors to profits and losses of working PSEs 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of PSE Latest finalised 
accounts Profit (+)/ loss (-) 
Tripura Natural Gas Company Limited  2023-24 (+) 40.91 
Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited  2023-24 (-) 324.19 
Tripura Jute Mills Limited  2022-23 (-) 11.82 
Tripura Industrial Development Corporation 
Limited  2022-23 (-) 10.03 
4.1.9.3 Return on Capital Employed 
Return on Capital Employed (ROCE) is a profitability metric that measures the long 
term profitability and efficiency of the total capital employed by a company. 
Companies create value when they generate returns on the capital employed. ROCE is 
 
149 Comprising the losses of six PSEs (₹ 365.28 crore) and profits of 11 PSEs (₹ 42.35 crore). 
75.83 (15) 87.24 (15)
115.41 (15)
299.89 (15)
322.93 (17)
0.00
50.00
100.00
150.00
200.00
250.00
300.00
350.00
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
(₹ in crore)
Chart 4.1.2: Overall Position of losses of working PSEs (No. of 
working PSEs)
Overall Position of losses incurred by working PSEs during last five years

138
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
138 
an important decision metric for long term lenders. ROCE is calculated by dividing a 
company’s earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) by the capital employed150.   
During 2023-24, the overall Capital Employed in 17 working PSEs as per their latest 
accounts was ₹ 740.40 crore. Out of 17 working PSEs, the ROCE of five PSEs 151 was 
positive (between 0.03 per cent and 21.22 per cent) while the ROCE of nine PSEs was 
negative. The ROCE of the remaining three PSEs (Tripura Power Transmission 
Limited, Tripura Road Transport Corporation and Agartala Smart City Limited) could 
not be worked out due to the complete erosion of their Capital Employed ( Appendix 
4.1.1). 
4.1.10 Return on Investment on the basis of Present Value of Investment  
The Rate of Real Return (RORR) measures the profitability and efficiency with which 
equity and similar non-interest bearing capital have been employed, after adjusting 
them for the time value. To determine the Rate of Real Return on Government 
Investment (RORR), the investment of the State Government 152 in the form of equity, 
interest free loans and grants/ subsidies given by the State Government for operational 
and management expenses less disinvestments (if any) has been considered, and 
indexed to their Present Value (PV) and summated. The RORR is then calculated by 
dividing the ‘profit after tax’ (PAT) by the sum of the PV of the Government investment.  
During 2023-24, out of 15 153 working PSEs where the State Government had made 
direct equity investment, 10 PSEs incurred loss (₹ 365.27 crore) and 5 PSEs earned 
profit (₹ 1.44 crore) as per their latest finalised accounts (Appendix 4.1.1). On the basis 
of return on historical value, the State Government investment eroded by 12.28 per 
cent during 2023-24. On the other hand, the Rate of Real Return where the present 
value of investment is considered, the State Government investment eroded by 4.65 per 
cent as shown in Appendix 4.1.2 .  This difference in the percentage of investment 
erosion was on account of adjustments made in the investment amount for the time 
value of money.  
4.1.11 Winding up of non-working PSEs  
As on 31 March 2024, there was only one non-working PSE ( viz. Tripura State Bank 
Limited), which had been non-functional since 1971. The said PSE was in the process 
of liquidation under Section 248 of the Companies Act, 2013 154 since 1971. Since the 
PSE was neither contributing to the State economy nor meeting the intended objectives 
of its formation, the liquidation process to wind up this PSE needs to be expedited.  
 
150 Capital employed = Paid up share capital plus accumulated profits plus free reserves & surplus plus 
long term loans minus accumulated losses and deferred revenue expenditure  
151 Among these five PSEs, Tripura Natural Gas Company Limited had the highest positive ROCE of 
21.22 per cent. 
152 As per the records of PSEs  
153 Excluding Tripura Natural Gas Company Limited (profit earned: ₹ 40.91 crore) and Tripura Power 
Transmission Limited (loss incurred: ₹  0.01 crore), which had no direct equity investment from the 
State Government. 
154 The Companies Act, 2013 replaced the erstwhile Companies Act, 1956 with effect from 1 April 2014. 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
139
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
139 
4.1.12 Impact of Audit Comments on Annual Accounts of PSEs  
During October 2023 to September 2024, 14 working PSEs (all Companies) had 
forwarded 17 accounts to the Accountant General (Audit), Tripura. Sixteen accounts of 
thirteen Companies were selected for Supplementary Audit during the year while Non-
Review Certificates (NRC) was issued against one year accounts of one Company.  The 
audit reports of Statutory Auditors appointed by the C&AG and the supplementary 
audit conducted by the C&AG indicated that the quality of maintenance of State PSE 
accounts needs to be improved substantially.  The details of aggregate money value of 
the comments of the Statutory Auditors and the C&AG are given in Table 4.1.12.  
Table 4.1.12: Impact of audit comments on working Companies 
(₹in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 
2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
No. of 
accounts Amount No. of 
accounts Amount No. of 
accounts Amount 
1. Decrease in profit  4 7.05  1 3.26  1 0.03 
2. Increase in loss  3 11.87  6 7.93  10 11.20 
3. Non-disclosure of 
material facts  0 0.00  2 91.26  0 0.00 
4. Errors of 
classification  0 0.00  0 0.00  0 0.00 
During the year, the Statutory Auditors had given qualified certificates on 16 accounts 
of 13 companies and Disclaimer certificate on the accounts of one155 company.  There 
were two instances of non-compliance with the Accounting Standards in three 
accounts. The audit comments were based on the non-compliance with AS-15 
(Employee Benefits) and AS-29 (Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent 
Assets).   
The only Statutory Corporation in the State ( viz. Tripura Road Transport Corporation) 
for which the C&AG is the sole auditor, had not forwarded any accounts during the 
reporting period to the Accountant General (Audit), Tripura.   
Gist of some of the important comments of the Statutory Auditors and C&AG in respect 
of accounts of the PSEs is as under:  
Tripura Forest Development & Plantation Corporation Limited (2021-22) 
 ‘Provision for Income Tax’ under ‘Current Liabilities’ was overstated by 
₹ 2.39 crore due to not writing back the excess provisions created towards Income 
Tax liability despite the Tax Refunds received by the Company for the assessment 
years 2017-18 to 2020-21 on completion of the tax assessment. This 
correspondingly resulted in understatement of the ‘Profit for the year’ to the same 
extent.  
 
155 Tripura Forest Development and Plantation Corporation Limited (2021-22) 

140
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 140 
Tripura Handloom and Handicrafts Development Corporation Limited (2022-23) 
 ‘Current Liabilities’ was overstated by ₹  1.99 crore, due to carrying forward the 
long pending liabilities without confirmation and complete supporting details/ 
documentary evidence and as such, the same should have been written back.  
Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited (2023-24) 
 There was an unreconciled difference of ₹ 451.63 crore (pending since July 2021) 
between the closing balances of ‘Trade Receivables against power sold to domestic 
consumers’ as included under ‘Current Assets-Trade Receivables’ (₹ 112.84 crore) 
and as recorded under Company’s newly installed Tripura Revenue Management 
System Billing Software (₹ 564.47 crore). Since the difference in the Receivables 
is significant, the Company needs to reconcile the same at the earliest. 
 Capital Work in Progress was overstated by ₹  385.25 crore due to inclusion of 
various assets created under various Schemes which have already been closed for 
three to five years. This also resulted in the understatement of ‘Property Plant and 
Equipment (PPE)’ to the same extent. Due to the poor maintenance of the records 
and non-availability of complete details, depreciation chargeable on such assets 
and its impact on the ‘Loss for the year’ could not be quantified.  
Tripura Small Industries Corporation Limited (2022-23) 
 “Trade Payables” under “Other Current Liabilities” were overstated by ₹ 2.44 crore 
due to inclusion of long pending unreconciled balances which should have been 
written back since there was no confirmation or supporting details/ documents for 
these liabilities.  
 “Other Current Assets” were overstated by ₹ 385.25 crore due to inclusion of long 
pending ‘receivables’, which have been carried forward for long periods without 
any confirmation/ supporting details and therefore should have been written off. 
This resulted in corresponding understatement of “Loss for the year” by the same 
extent. 
4.1.13 Coverage of this Chapter 
This Chapter contains two Compliance Audit Paragraphs titled “Unfruitful 
expenditure” and “Avoidable expenditure” under the Power Department involving a 
money value of ₹ 59.48 crore. 
  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
141
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
141 
POWER DEPARTMENT 
(Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited) 
4.2 Unfruitful Expenditure  
The Company’s failure to complete the Smart Grid project with the attributes of 
Advanced Metering Infrastructure and Peak Load Management resulted in 
unfruitful expenditure of ₹ 42.74 crore on the incomplete project apart from the 
avoidable expenditure of ₹ 1.10 crore on the manual meter readings and billings 
in respect thereof. 
The Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited (Company) was selected in August 
2012 as one of 14 utilities identified for implementation of the Smart Grid Pilot Project 
under the India Smart Grid Task Force of the Ministry of Power (MoP), Government 
of India (GoI). In Tripura, the project was planned to be executed in the jurisdiction of 
Electrical Division (ED)-I, Agartala.  
The proposed Project aimed to increase the billed energy, improve collection efficiency 
and reduce Aggregate Technical and Commercial 156 losses with empowerment of 
consumers and ensure consumer awareness and demand response. The implementation 
of the said Project was envisaged to bring about total cash-flow benefits of ₹  6.29 
crores/ annum out of which ₹ 5.82 crore/ annum benefit was to flow with the 
implementation of the Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) 157 and ₹  0.47 crore/ 
annum benefit was to flow with the implementation of Peak Load Management 
(PLM)158.  
The Smart Grid Pilot Project was designed to be implemented with funding shared 
equally between the Company and the MoP on a 50:50 basis. In August 2012, the MoP 
approved a project cost of ₹ 24.08 crore under the Integrated Power Development 
Scheme (IPDS), covering both AMI and PLM components 
The Company revised the project cost in August 2015 from ₹ 24.08 crore (MoP’s share 
being ₹ 12.04 crore) to ₹ 63.43 crore (MoP’s share being ₹ 31.71 crore159). Audit noted 
that the Company had significantly expanded the scope to include the procurement of 
26,880 smart meters with load switches instead of Automated Meter Reader (AMR) 
meters, along with additional hardware and software such as a Network Management 
 
156  Aggregate Technical & Commercial (AT&C) losses are the total amount of energy lost in the 
electricity distribution system, including energy loss due to technical issues, theft, and billing 
inefficiency, as well as commercial losses due to payment defaults and collection inefficiency. 
157  Advance Metering Infrastructure (AMI) aims to provide Smart Meters to all consumers both domestic 
and non-domestic, the main objectives, inter alia , being to ensure (a) Advance meter reading, 
(b) Load control feature, (c) Meter Tamper detection, (d) Consumption profile identification, 
(e) Energy Audit, etc. 
158  Peak Load Management (PLM) aims to help the Grid-Discipline by partially curtailing load during 
peak times. This is achieved through consumer participation through incentives. The PLM, inter alia, 
aims in achieving the objectives viz. (a) Flatten the load curve, (b) Reduce the occurrence of black 
out, (c) Centralised control over load, etc. 
159  The project cost increased as in the tendering process, the rate quoted by the L1 bidder was 2.88 times 
higher than the estimated cost put to tender 

142
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
142 
System (NMS), web application servers, SAN storage, consumer portal, and SMS 
gateway. The significant changes in the scope of the work on the part of the Company, 
too, resulted in the revision of the project cost on a higher side and, as such, was 
indicative of deficient planning ab initio on the part of the Company. 
The MoP approved the revised project cost proposed by the Company and disbursed a 
total of ₹ 50.74 crore between May 2016 and July 2018 for project implementation. 
Scrutiny (August to October 2024) of the records of the Company revealed that: 
 The Company appointed (October 2013) Power Grid Corporation of India Limited 
(PGCIL) as Project Management Consultant (PMC) for the implementation of the 
project in the Electrical Division-I, Agartala at an agreement cost of ₹ 3.02 crore. 
 It awarded the work of “Implementation of Smart Grid Elements (Pilot) Tripura 
under the Electrical Division-I at Agartala” (September 2015) to a consortium 
consisting of M/s Wipro Limited (as Lead partner) and M/s JnJ Powercom Systems 
Limited (as the other partner) through three contracts160.  
 The Company and the Consortium signed the Contract Agreement in November 
2015 with the Scheduled Completion Time of 18 months from the date of 
notification of award i.e. the work was to be completed by March 2017.  
 As per the Contract, the Consortium was responsible for the installation, testing 
and commissioning of smart meters, ensuring communication of interval reads and 
daily reads from each meter to the control room, integration of the Smart Grid 
System with the existing Systems Applications and Products (SAP) 161 based 
metering, billing and collection system and other associated works as per 
agreement required for carrying out performance test, etc. The distribution of work 
between the Lead Partner i.e. M/s Wipro Limited and the other partner i.e. M/s JnJ 
Powercom Systems Limited as per the said Consortium Agreement 162 is depicted 
briefly in Table 4.2.1.  
Table 4.2.1: Statement showing the work distribution between the Lead Partner and the 
other partner as per the Consortium Agreement 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Partners Description of the work distribution as per the 
Consortium Agreement 
1. Lead Partner: 
M/s Wipro Limited 
 Project Management being the Prime Bidder 
 Supply, installation and commissioning of Application/ 
Database Servers  
 
160  (a) Supply Contract (Price of plant and equipment also referred to as First Contract)  for ₹ 54.95 
crore, (b) Services Contract (Installation and training charges  also referred to as Second Contract) 
for ₹ 8.44 crore and (c) Maintenance Contract (also referred to as Third Contract) for ₹ 16.68 crore. 
The total financial implication for the implementation of the said Smart Grid Project being ₹ 83.09 
crore (including PMC cost of ₹ 3.02 crore). 
161  SAP is a German multinational software corporation that makes enterprise software to manage 
business operations and customer relations. 
162  An integral part of the Contract Agreement signed between the M/s Wipro Limited (Lead partner) 
and M/s JNJ Powercom Systems Limited (Other partner) in July 2014. 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
143
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
143 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Partners Description of the work distribution as per the 
Consortium Agreement 
 Supply, installation and commissioning of required 
software not related to the Head End System 
 Overall solution design including the AMI solution 
2 Other partner: M/s JnJ 
Powercom Systems 
Limited 
 Supply & Installation of the Head End System163 
 Ensure the availability of Meter Data 
 Planning the schedule for AMI 
 Supply of Meter Data Acquisition System (MDAS 164) 
software, Smart Meters 
 Maintenance of the complete AMI and PLM. 
 The Company failed to include penal clauses in any of the contracts (namely 
contract with PMC as well as three contracts with the consortium) to safeguard the 
interests of the State Government in case of fundamental breach of the contract. As 
per Section 6.0 (viii) of the Agreement between TSECL and PGCIL, the 
consultancy fee was not to be withheld in case of commissioning delays not 
attributable to PGCIL. Audit observed that the Company released the entire 
consultancy fee of ₹ 3.02 crore to PGCIL even though the project suffered 
inordinate delays and was ultimately short-closed without achieving its objectives. 
The aforementioned payment of ₹ 3.02 crore, though to the extent of 100 per cent 
and in compliance with the contractual provisions protecting PGCIL against 
liability for delays beyond its control indicated a weakness in overall contract 
structuring, where consultancy fees were decoupled from the measurable deliveries  
or commissioning success. The Company, thus, incurred expenditure without 
securing accountability for effective project outcomes. 
 The businesses, as a matter of fact, being carried out by the Commercial Entities 
in the dynamic cut-throat competitive market conditions, it therefore, was 
incumbent on the part of the Company to incorporate the provisions of financial 
safeguards viz. “Risk & Cost Clauses and/ or Reassignment Provisions subject to 
adequate Risk & Cost Clauses to the Implementing Agency” in the Contract 
Agreement particularly in the event of possible fall-out/ disputes amongst the 
partners of the Consortium. However, the Company failed to do so which was 
indicative of the flawed Procurement Process on account of the deficient contract 
to that extent. 
 The Control Centre, an essential prerequisite for the effective operation of smart 
meters, was primarily responsible for integrating the MDAS software with the 
smart meters to enable remote meter reading, manage energy consumption, detect 
 
163 A Head-End System (HES) in smart metering  acts as the central communication and management 
platform for a utility's smart meter network.  It is the "Nerve Centre" that receives, processes, and 
manages data from thousands or even millions of smart meters. This includes collecting consumption 
data, performing remote diagnostics, and facilitating accurate billing. 
164  Meter Data Acquisition System (MDAS) Software is a software that collects, processes, and manages 
data from smart meters, often used for utilities and other organisations that rely on meter data.  

144
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
144 
meter tampering, optimise utility operations, and ensure Grid Discipline. The 
Company handed over the Control Centre to M/s  Wipro Limited before March 
2016. The Hardware Site Acceptance Test (SAT) was successfully conducted at the 
Control Centre in March 2016, followed by the initial Software Final Acceptance 
Test (FAT) in December 2016. 
 Out of 45,290 smart meters to be installed in the ED-I, the Consortium could install 
only 43,081 smart meters up to July 2019 after inordinate delay of 27 months from 
the scheduled completion time (March 2017). Out of the 43,081 smart meters so 
installed, only 34,300 smart meters were found to be communicating to the Control 
Centre. However, within a period of two to three months, these 34,300 smart meters 
also stopped communicating with the Control Centre due to technical glitches. 
 The Consortium failed to provide to the Company the Management Information 
System (MIS) in relation to the critical functionalities like daily billing reads on a 
monthly basis, data pertaining to the peak demand during the peak hours and off-
peak hours, peak load management, Demand Response (DR)/ Demand Side 
Management (DSM) 165, interval reads, and analytics based on interval reads , 
energy audits, etc. for the period commencing from August 2018 to May 2021. The 
performance testing of the smart metering system, being the crucial technical 
requirement of the contract, as such, could not be done due to failure on the part of 
the Consortium to provide the MIS. 
 In the meeting convened (March 2020) by the Company with all the 
stakeholders166, the Consortium, in response to the concerns raised by the 
Company over non-submission of the aforementioned MIS, agreed to resolve all 
the pending issues such as improvement in daily reads, billing reads, energy audit, 
warranty replacements, performance testing, etc . The Consortium also agreed to 
provide new MDAS along with proper license on their risk and cost. However, the 
Consortium Partner failed to provide these deliverables even after the lapse of a 
period of one year until May 2021.  
 M/s POWERCOM, the Israeli technology provider and Original Equipment 
Manufacturer (OEM) for M/s JnJ Powercom Systems Limited, failed to supply the 
required MDAS, which were critical for enabling essential meter communication 
functionalities. This fundamental non-performance meant that the installed meters 
could not support advanced features such as remote reading, load control, and 
tamper detection. The absence of MDAS and associated critical system 
components, clearly defined as responsibilities under the Consortium Agreement, 
prevented the execution of performance testing and formal system acceptance. This 
 
165 DSM is a cost-effective strategy that uses a variety of activities to reduce energy acquisition costs. 
These activities include (a) Energy Efficiency (EE), (b) Demand Response (DR), (c) Distributed 
Energy Resources (DER), (d) Incentivising customers to modify their energy consumption patterns 
during peak hours and (e) Encouraging customers to install end-use technologies that consume less 
energy. 
166 Ministry of power, GoI, Power Department, Government of Tripura, National Smart Grid Mission-
Project Management Unit, Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd., TSECL. 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
145
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
145 
failure to deliver core technological elements not only represented a breach of 
contractual obligations but also caused inordinate delays, ultimately leading to the 
collapse and premature closure of the project without achieving its intended 
objectives. 
 In view of the inability of M/s JnJ Powercom Systems Limited to close the project 
on time, M/s Wipro Limited requested (August 2020) the Company to allow it to 
take over the complete responsibility of the project closure from M/s  JnJ 
Powercom Systems Limited as per the stipulation of the Consortium Agreement. 
Examination of the records of the Company further revealed that: 
 The Company, notwithstanding the absence of any clause pertaining to 
reassignment of responsibility for execution of the work in the Consortium 
Agreement, accorded approval (April 2021) to M/s Wipro Limited’s proposal for 
re-implementation of the project with M/s Abhar Tech and M/s Iskra Meco as 
manufacturer for supply and installation of field devices.  
 The Company, while according approval to M/s  Wipro Limited proposal for re-
implementation of the project , failed to exercise due-diligence and safeguard the 
financial interests of the Company by imposing liquidated damages and/ or 
penalties for failure on the part of M/s Wipro Limited to provide the deliverables 
even after a considerable time-overrun of four years.   
 The Company had accorded approval to M/s Wipro Limited for Proof of Concept 
(POC)167 of 6,000 new smart meters under the pilot project with the new 
technology followed by the balance number of meters 168 after successful POC. 
However, after Product Data Integration (PDI) 169 and FAT, M/s Wipro Limited 
supplied only 5,000 meters of which 4,986 meters were installed at the Consumers’ 
premises. 
 M/s Wipro Limited expressed (February 2022) their inability to complete the 
project by March 2022 and requested the Company to give extra time to complete 
the project. In the 23 rd meeting of the Monitoring Committee for IPDS held (22 
March 2022) under the chairmanship of the Secretary (Power), GoI, the Company 
requested for an additional three months’ time to resolve the issues. However, the 
Monitoring Committee decided that no further extension could be given for 
completing this project and no further funding would be available for the same on 
the reasoning that the pilots were sanctioned for demonstration of Smart Grid 
Technologies and since the purpose has been served, this pilot could be closed.  
 In June 2022, the Company issued a notice of intent to short-close the project on 
an ‘as is, where is’ basis to the Lead Partner, M/s Wipro Limited, and subsequently 
 
167  Proof of Concept (POC) is a small-scale experiment that demonstrates if a product or service can be 
successfully deployed in the real world. 
168 45,290 smart meters installed earlier. 
169  Product Data Integration (PDI) is a solution that integrates product data from various sources within 
a Company. PDI ensures that all departments have access to consistent and up-to-date data. 

146
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 146 
short-closed the contract without invoking the ‘Risk & Cost’ clause for breach of 
contractual obligations by the consortium. Presently, all the equipment other than 
the smart meters, subsequent to short-closure of the Smart Grid Pilot Project, are 
kept in shut-down mode under the Company’s custody. The Company had already 
made total payments amounting to ₹ 42.74 crore to M/s Wipro Limited (up to 
August 2019) and returned the Performance Bank Guarantee (PBG) of ₹ 2.40 crore 
in June 2022. This decision was taken despite recommendations from the Technical 
Wing to invoke the ‘Risk & Cost’ clause and was made without obtaining 
concurrence from the Finance Wing or approval from the Board of Directors.  
 The Board of Directors of the Company, at its 100 th meeting held in September 
2022 under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Power Department, GoT directed 
that an enquiry committee be constituted to review the contract with a view to 
identifying clauses that could allow the imposition of penalties and/ or the 
revocation of the Performance Bank Guarantee (PBG) against the implementing 
partner. However, audit found no records indicating any follow-up action taken on 
these directives. 
 ED-I reverted to manual meter reading and door-to-door delivery of electricity bills 
using meter-reader services. The expenditure incurred on manual meter reading 
during 2018–19 to 2023–24 (up to December 2023) amounted to ₹ 1.10 crore. This 
reliance on manual processes effectively defeated the primary purpose of the 
project, which was to deploy smart meters to enable advanced meter reading, load 
control, meter tamper detection, consumption profiling, and comprehensive energy 
audits. 
Audit concluded that: 
 the failure of the Smart Grid Pilot Project in Tripura resulted from a combination 
of vendor non-performance, weak contractual safeguards, ineffective governance, 
technical shortcomings, and funding challenges. 
 The consortium, led by M/s JnJ Powercom Systems Limited, failed to deliver 
critical components such as the Meter Data Acquisition System and fully functional 
smart meters – elements essential to the project’s success. Poor coordination 
among consortium partners contributed to incomplete system integration and 
persistent operational inefficiencies. Despite repeated assurances during meetings, 
key issues such as performance testing, software acceptance, and energy audit 
implementation remained unresolved throughout the project period. 
 Contract management by the Company was similarly deficient. Penalties for delay 
or non-performance were not enforced, and the “Risk & Cost Clause” was not 
invoked despite clear breaches of contractual obligations. The premature return of 
₹ 2.40 crore Performance Bank Guarantee further weakened financial safeguards, 
ignoring explicit recommendations from the Technical Wing and proceeding 
without the concurrence of the Finance Wing. The underlying contract itself lacked 
robust legal provisions, including a clear clause for reassignment of responsibilities 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
147
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
147 
in the event of a partner’s default, leaving the project vulnerable to the 
consortium’s failures. 
 Governance and oversight were inconsistent and largely reactive. While the Board 
of Directors eventually directed the formation of an inquiry committee to examine 
contractual remedies, these steps were taken late in the process, and no evidence 
was found of any substantive follow-up on those directives. This points to systemic 
accountability gaps and inadequate decision-making. 
 Technically, the project suffered from prolonged delays, exceeding the scheduled 
completion time by 27 months, without achieving its core objectives. Essential 
functionalities such as energy audits, load control, and advanced metering 
capabilities never materialised. As a result, the utility was forced to revert to 
manual meter reading, entirely defeating the project’s purpose and incurring 
avoidable expenditures. 
 Finally, these persistent delays and operational failures compromised funding 
support from the Ministry of Power. Further assistance from the Centre was 
withheld beyond December 2020 due to the project's continued non-completion, 
exacerbating financial pressures on the Company and leaving significant 
investments unproductive. 
Thus, the failure in implementation of the project was rooted not only in procurement 
deficiencies and weak contract management but also in inadequate planning and change 
management. The significant change in scope from AMR meters to advanced smart 
meters with complex ICT systems led to substantial cost escalation, increased technical 
complexity, and elevated implementation risk without ensuring appropriate contractual 
safeguards, vendor capacity assessment, or revised competitive bidding. This poor 
management of scope change, combined with failures in enforcing contract conditions 
and risk mitigation measures, resulted in unfruitful expenditure of ₹ 42.74 crore and 
avoidable costs of ₹ 1.10 crore on manual meter readings, while failing to deliver the 
intended service benefits under the Smart Grid Pilot Scheme. 
The Government replied (August 2025) that despite their best efforts, the Company 
could not complete the Smart Grid Project on account of (a) the Covid-19 Pandemic 
and (b) refusal by the GoI in respect of further time-extension requested for by the 
Company. The State Government further stated that to complete the Smart Grid Project 
and to make the existing PLCC smart meters functional, a Letter of Award (LoA) had 
been issued (July 2025) to another Consortium170.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable since it is silent on the core issues 
highlighted by audit. Further, the issuance of LoA afresh to the new Consortium by the 
Company established the inadequate planning, execution and deficient project 
management which led to unfruitful expenditure of ₹ 42.74 crore and avoidable costs 
of ₹ 1.10 crore.  
 
170 M/s Aradhana Agency (lead partner) & M/s. Yitran Technologies Private Limited (other partner) 

148
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
148 
POWER DEPARTMENT 
(Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited) 
4.3 Avoidable expenditure 
Failure of the Company to obtain Environmental Clearance from the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India in violation of the 
Environment Impact Assessment Notifications, 1994 and 2006 before 
commissioning of the 3 x21 MW units of Gas Based Thermal Power Station at 
Rokhia, resulted in avoidable expenditure of ₹ 15.64 crore.  
The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) 171, 
Government of India, under the Environmental (Protection) Act 1986, promulgated  an 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Notification, 1994 (January 1994) and 
subsequent amendment in September 2006, mandating Environmental Clearance (EC) 
for expansion and modernisation of existing projects or activities or  for setting up of 
new projects listed in the Schedule of the said notifications. Further, all the projects 
were broadly categorised into two categories - Category ‘A ’ and Category ‘B’, based 
on the spatial extent of potential impacts on human health and natural and manmade 
resources.  Projects classified under Category ‘A’ require prior EC from the Ministry, 
while those under Category ‘B’ shall secure clearance from the respective State 
Environment Impact Assessment Authority (SEIAA). No construction activity or land 
development, except for activities limited to land acquisition or securing of land, shall 
be undertaken by the project management without obtaining the requisite prior 
Environmental Clearance.  
Furthermore, the General Condition of the EIA Notification, 2006 stated that, any 
project or activity specified in Category ‘B’ will be treated as Category ‘A’, if located 
in whole or in part within 10 Kilometers (km) of inter-State boundaries and 
international boundaries. 
Examination (August-October 2024) of the records of the office of the Managing 
Director, Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited (Company) revealed that 
between August 2002 and August 2013, the Company commissioned 3x21 Mega Watt 
(MW)172  Gas Based Thermal Power Station (TPS) at Rokhia in Sepahijala District, 
by replacing the existing six units173, each with an eight MW capacity. First two units 
(2x21 MW) were commissioned in August 2002 and March 2006 i.e. prior to EIA 
notification, 2006. As per the EIA notification, 1994 and amendment dated 13 June 
2002, fresh thermal power projects with project cost less than ₹  100 crore and 
expansion proposals with project cost less than ₹ 50 crore do not require EC. However, 
the project cost for first was ₹  85.17 crore and second unit was ₹  80.94 crore. Thus, 
both the units required EC as per EIA notification, 1994. Further, the third unit was 
commissioned after the EIA notification, 2006. Capacity wise (63 MW), the project 
 
171 Erstwhile known as Union Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) 
172 Comprising three units (Unit VII, Unit VIII and Unit IX) with 21 MW capacity each 
173 Units I to VI were commissioned between March 1990 and August 1997. 
i.e.

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
149
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
149 
was placed under Category ‘B’ 174, however its location within 10 Km of the 
international boundary 175 necessitated its classification as Category ‘A’, thereby 
requiring EC from the MoEF&CC. However, no EC was obtained for establishment 
of all the three 21 MW units before commissioning the units.  
The Company engaged (July 2013) M/s SENES Consultants India Private Limited, 
Kolkata for the EIA study and to facilitate the obtaining of the EC from the MoEF&CC 
within six months. In October 2013, the company applied for EC for the 3x21 MW 
units to MoEF&CC. However, the Consultant discontinued the work (December 2018), 
leading to the procedural delays for obtaining the EC. Subsequently, the Company 
engaged (August 2019) M/s MITCON Consultancy and Engineering Services Limited, 
Pune for EIA study and obtaining of the EC from the MoEF&CC, with the scheduled 
completion period of six months starting from August 2019. The Company finally 
submitted (August 2022) an application176 to the MoEF&CC for EC after nearly three 
years after engaging the second consultant. Overall, there was a delay of more than 
eight years in submitting the application for EC after the initial engagement of the 
Consultants. 
Meanwhile, the Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) constituted by the Ministry for EIA 
on Thermal Power & Coal Mining Projects in a meeting held on August 2014 observed 
that though capacity wise, the project falls under Category ‘B’, due to the provisions of 
General Condition of the EIA Notification, 2006 i.e. the location of the project site 
being within 10 km of the international boundary, the project is considered as Category 
‘A’. The Company acknowledged this violation in its communication (August 2014) to 
the MoEF&CC and committed to follow MoEF&CC Guidelines in the future. 
The MoEF&CC accorded (November 2023) the EC to the Company with a direction 
to (a) pay penalty of ₹ 3.79 crore to the Tripura State Pollution Control Board (TSPCB) 
and (b) total consolidated damage cost of ₹ 9.75 crore to be submitted through a bank 
guarantee  towards the Remediation Plan and Natural and Community Resources 
Augmentation Plan and (c) to incur Corporate Environmental Responsibility (CER) 
expenditure of ₹ 2.10 crore over a period of three years. The Company paid (November 
2023) a penalty of ₹ 3.79 crore to the TSPCB and submitted (November 2023) Bank 
Guarantee for consolidated damage cost of ₹ 9.75 crore to the TSPCB. 
Thus, the Company faced significant delays in obtaining EC for its 3x21 MW Thermal 
Power Station at Rokhia, primarily due to its own ignorance, procedural lapses and 
consultant disengagements. Despite initiating the EC process in 2013, the application 
was only submitted in 2022, resulting in an overall delay exceeding eight years. The 
avoidable expenditure of ₹ 15.64 crore177 incurred towards penalties and remediation 
 
174 Threshold limit for Category ‘B’ is Thermal Power Plants with less than 500 MW 
175  India-Bangladesh International Border is situated at 3.25 km East of the project site 
176  Application was submitted on PARIVESH portal. (Pro-Active and Response facilitation by 
Interactive, Virtual Environment Single Window Hub). It is a web-based system developed by 
MoEF&CC for online submission and monitoring of proposals seeking environmental, forest and 
wildlife clearances. 
177 ₹ 3.79 crore + ₹ 9.75 crore + ₹ 2.10 crore 

150
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 150 
was a direct consequence of these persistent lapses in statutory compliance and internal 
oversight. 
The Government replied (May 2025) that; 
 As per the EIA Notification 1994, EC was not required for a project whose 
investment is less than ₹ 100 crore. Investment for Unit -VII of TPS Rokhia was 
₹ 85.17 crore only.  
 As per the EIA Notification 2006, EC was not required for a project whose capacity 
is equal to or less than 500 MW. Installed capacity of Rokhia as on 31 March 2006 
was 42 MW (2 X 21 MW) after installation of Unit-VII and Unit-VIII. Accordingly, 
Environment Clearance was not required in this case. 
 Due to acute power crisis in the State, Unit-IX was commissioned on 31 March 
2013 considering the fact that TSECL had already obtained Environment Clearance 
for 91 MW and requesting clarification from MoEF& CC. 
The reply of the Government is not tenable and is factually incorrect for the following 
reasons: 
The Government contended that Environmental Clearance (EC) was not required for 
Unit-VII since the project cost was ₹  85.17 crore, which was below ₹  100 crore. This 
argument reflects an incorrect understanding of the EIA Notification, 1994 and its 
amendments. As per the amendment dated 13 June 2002 to the 1994 Notification: 
(i) fresh thermal power projects with investment less than ₹ 100 crore were exempt and 
(ii) however, for expansion or modernisation projects, the threshold was ₹ 50 crore. 
The project involved replacement of existing units and thus constituted expansion/ 
modernisation, rendering the applicable threshold ₹  50 crore. Since the cost of both 
Unit-VII and Unit-VIII exceeded ₹  50 crore, prior EC was mandatory under EIA 
Notification, 1994. 
The Government’s assertion that EC was not required under EIA Notification, 2006 
because the installed capacity was less than 500 MW is also erroneous. As per the EIA 
Notification, 2006: 
Thermal power projects below 500 MW are generally categorised as ‘Category B’, 
requiring clearance from SEIAA. However, the General Condition of the Notification 
stipulates that if the project is located within 10 km of an international boundary, it 
automatically falls under ‘Category A’, necessitating prior EC from MoEF&CC, 
regardless of capacity. 
The 3x21 MW Rokhia project site is located within 10 km of the international border, 
and thus triggering this condition i.e. the provisions applicable to Category ‘A’ project. 
Therefore, prior EC from MoEF&CC was mandatory for commissioning Unit-IX. 
The Company, in its communication dated August 2014 to MoEF&CC, had itself 
admitted violation of EC requirements and committed to adhere to the guidelines in 
future. The present denial contradicts this admission and undermines the credibility of 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
151
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises) 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 151 
the Government’s current stance. 
Beyond the initial non-compliance, the Company failed to exercise due diligence in 
monitoring the performance of consultants engaged for obtaining ex-post EC. The 
disengagement of the first consultant, prolonged delays in engaging the second 
consultant, and procedural delays resulted in an inordinate delay of over eight years 
before submission of the EC application. The Government’s reply is silent on these 
avoidable lapses in internal governance and contract management. 
The procedural violations and delays led directly to the imposition of penalties, 
remediation costs, and other financial liabilities amounting to ₹  15.64 crore. Had the 
Company adhered to statutory provisions from the outset and exercised effective 
oversight, these financial repercussions could have been avoided. 
The delay in obtaining EC for the Rokhia Thermal Power Station was primarily due to 
procedural lapses and consultant disengagements. This delay led to the imposition of 
penalties and avoidable expenditure of ₹  15.64 crore for violation of the EIA 
Notification. 

CHAPTER V: REVENUE SECTOR

Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
153
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
153 
CHAPTER V: REVENUE SECTOR 
 
5.1 GENERAL 
 
5.1.1 Trend of Revenue Receipts 
The Tax and Non-tax Revenue raised by Government of Tripura during the year 2023-
24, the net proceeds of State’s share of Union Taxes and Duties assigned to the State 
and Grants-in-aid received from the GoI during the year and the corresponding figures 
for the preceding four years are given in Table 5.1.1. 
Table 5.1.1: Trend of revenue receipts 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
I. Revenue raised by State Government 
Tax Revenue 2,101.79 2,332.44 2,616.31 2,999.68 3,287.41 
Non-tax Revenue 271.65 285.49 274.11 402.35 420.52 
Total 2,373.44  2,617.93 2,890.42 3,402.03 3,707.93 
Increase over previous year (per 
cent) 11.01 10.30 10.41 17.70 8.99 
II. Receipts from the GoI 
Net proceeds of State Share of 
Union Taxes and Duties 4,211.78 4,218.45 6,077.52 6,724.23 7,996.82 
Grants-in-aid  4,416.37 6,456.02 8,646.01 8,182.75 8,833.27 
Total 8,628.15  10,674.47 14,723.53 14,906.98 16,830.09 
III. Total Revenue Receipts of the 
State Government (I and II) 11,001.59 13,292.40 17,613.95 18,309.01 20,538.02 
IV. Percentage of I to III 21.57 19.69 16.41 18.58 18.05 
Source: Finance Accounts 
 
Table 5.1.1 and Chart 5.1.1 indicates that during the year 2023-24, the revenue raised 
by the State Government was ₹ 3,707.93 crore which was 18.05 per cent of the total 
Revenue Receipts. The balance 81.95 per cent of the revenue receipts during 2023-24 
8628.15
10674.47
14723.53
14906.98
16830.09
2373.44 2617.93 2890.43 3402.03 3707.93
78.43 80.31 83.59 81.42 81.95
21.57 19.69 16.41 18.58
18.05
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
90.00
0.00
2000.00
4000.00
6000.00
8000.00
10000.00
12000.00
14000.00
16000.00
18000.00
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
(in per cent)
(₹ in crore)
Chart 5.1.1: State and Central share in total revenue
Revenue from GoI
State's own revenue
Share of revenue from GoI to total revenue
Share of State's own revenue to total revenue

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
154
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 154 
was received from the GoI in the form of State share of Union Taxes and Duties and 
Grants-in-Aid. The collection of own revenue increased by ₹ 305.90 crore during 
2023-24 as compared to previous year and the rate of growth of own revenue decreased 
by 8.99 per cent in 2023-24 as compared to 17.70 per cent during 2022-23. Revenue 
Receipts of the State increased by 12.17 per cent from ₹ 18,309.01 crore in 2022-23 to 
₹ 20,538.02 crore in 2023-24. 
5.1.1(a) Tax Revenue  
During 2023-24 collection of Tax revenue increased by ₹ 287.73 crore (9.59 per cent) 
over the previous year. The details of Tax Revenue raised during the period 2019-20 to 
2023-24 are indicated in Table 5.1.2 
Table 5.1.2: Components of Own Tax Revenue during 2019-20 to 2023-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Head of revenue 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Increase (+) 
or decrease 
(-) of actual 
in 2023-24 
over 2022-23 
(per cent) 
Sales Tax/ Value 
Added Tax (VAT) 435.88 403.19 463.12 463.57 541.15 16.74 
Goods and Service 
Tax 1,026.63 1,056.01 1,282.69 1,459.01 1,589.78 8.96 
State Excise 231.70 287.36 319.60 368.11 417.00 13.28 
Stamps and 
Registration Fees 61.67 69.53 89.65 102.53 115.15 12.31 
Taxes on Vehicles 97.14 97.41 103.22 117.55 142.73 21.42 
Other Taxes on 
Income and 
Expenditure 
43.59 41.00 41.75 37.99 41.23 8.53 
Land Revenue 12.98 9.85 8.94 12.59 22.24 76.65 
Other Taxes and 
Duties on 
Commodities and 
Services 
161.58 255.84 273.37 402.49 374.63 (-)6.92 
Taxes & Duties on 
Electricity 30.54. 112.09 33.74 35.60 43.48 22.13 
Others 0.08 0.16 0.23 0.24 0.02 (-)91.67 
Total 2,101.79 2,332.44 2,616.31 2,999.68 3,287.41 9.59 
Source: Finance Accounts 
Goods and Service Tax : The reason attributed by the Finance (Excise and Taxation) 
Department for increase of collection of Goods and Service Tax (8.96 per cent) was 
due to more collection of SGST and Integrated GST (IGST) than the previous year. 
Taxes on Vehicles: The reason attributed by the Transport Department for increase of 
collection of Taxes on Vehicles (21.42 per cent) was due to cashless payment system 
introduced (7 November 2023) in all District Transport Offices for providing 
transparent Motor Vehicles related services in Tripura. Due to this mode, revenue 
collection from registration of private vehicles, Road Tax, fitness certificate, permit, 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
155
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
155 
transfer of ownership, etc. had increased from the previous year and also enforcement 
drive against the traffic violators, overloading had been conducted on a regular basis. 
Land Revenue: The Land Revenue Department attributed the increasing trend in the 
collection of land revenue to the implementation of flat rate of five per cent on the 
existing value of land, applied in a compounding manner, with effect from 1 April 2021. 
Stamp and registration Fees:  The reason attributed by the Revenue Department for 
increase in collection of Stamp and Registration Fees (12.31 per cent ) was due to 
increase in transaction of land. 
The other departments (indicated in Table 5.1.2 ), despite being requested (August 
2024), did not furnish (November 2024) the reasons for variations in Tax Receipts with 
respect to the previous year. 
5.1.1(b) Non-tax Revenue 
During 2023-24 collection of Non-tax revenue had increased by ₹18.17 crore (4.52 per 
cent) over the previous year. The details of the Non-Tax Revenue raised during the 
period 2019-20 to 2023-24 are indicated in Table 5.1.3. 
Table 5.1.3: Components of Non-tax Revenue during 2019-20 to 2023-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Head of revenue 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Increase (+)/ 
decrease (-) of actual 
in 2023-24 over 
2022-23 (per cent) 
1 Interest Receipts 19.25 18.11 24.43 22.93 27.15 18.40 
2 Industries 100.27 89.56 86.62 161.94 156.65 (-)3.27 
3 Police 65.13 75.79 82.77 122.42 145.94 19.21 
4 Public Works 4.95 6.94 6.67 6.11 8.61 40.92 
5 Forestry and 
Wildlife 13.82 19.45  21.35 15.83 16.56 4.61 
6 Water Supply and 
Sanitation  1.25 1.28  1.87 1.46 1.26 (-)13.70 
7 Misc. General 
Services 20.44 44.11  23.70 29.71 25.80 (-)13.16 
8 Other Administrative 
Services 8.29 5.22  7.07 6.58 7.42 12.77 
9 Medical and Public 
Health 8.94 1.88  1.73 3.54 3.25 (-)8.19 
10 Crop Husbandry 2.98 2.54 2.33 2.94 2.09 (-)28.91 
11 Animal Husbandry 2.05 1.57 1.30 1.42 1.58 11.27 
12 Housing 2.16 2.03 2.23 2.57 1.94 (-)24.51 
13 Education, Sports, 
Art and Culture 1.05 1.04  0.76 2.98 2.45 (-)17.79 
14 Stationery and 
Printing 2.15 1.50  1.06 1.46 1.76 20.55 
15 others178 18.92 14.47 10.22 20.46 18.06 (-)11.73 
Total 271.65 285.49 274.11 402.35 420.52 4.52 
Source: Finance Accounts 
 
178 Comprising 23 Major Heads including dividends and profits 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
156
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
156 
Crop Husbandry: The reason attributed by the Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
Department for decrease in collection (28.91 per cent) was due to less collection of Sale 
Proceeds of Agri Farm Produce, Cold Stores, selling of Tender Forms, etc. 
Stationery and Printing : The reason attributed by the General Administration 
(Printing & Stationery) Department for increase in collection (20.55 per cent) was due 
to increase in number of requisitions and collection of outstanding dues. 
The other departments (indicated in Table 5.1.3 ), despite being requested (August 
2024), did not furnish (November 2024) the reasons for variations in Non-tax Revenue 
Receipts with respect to the previous year. 
5.1.2 Revenue and return filing trends 
 
5.1.2(i) GST Revenue of Government of Tripura: Comparison between budget 
estimates and actual receipts 
The comparison of budget estimates and the corresponding actual collection of Goods 
and Service Tax (GST) during the period from 2020-21 to 2023-24 are shown in 
Table 5.1.4. 
Table 5.1.4: Revenue from GST during 2020-21 to 2023-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Budget Estimates (BE) Revised Estimates (RE) Actuals 
State GST State GST State GST 
2020-21 1,310.70 984.80 1,056.01 
2021-22 1,122.67 1,250.51 1,282.69 
2022-23 1,425.58 1,459.04 1,459.01 
2023-24 1,634.09 1,712.90 1,589.78 
Source: Information furnished by office of the Accountant General (A&E), Tripura  
It may be seen from Table 5.1.4 that, although the RE targets were achieved in the 
years 2020-21 and 2021-22, the actual collection was less than the RE projections for 
the years 2022-23 and 2023-24. The State’s GST collection steadily increased over the 
years from ₹ 1,056.01crore in 2020-21 to ₹ 1,589.78 crore in 2023-24. 
5.1.2(ii) Trends of Integrated GST apportionment to the State and its cross 
utilisation 
The IGST179 collected is apportioned between the Centre and the State where the goods 
or services are consumed. The revenue is allocated to the Centre at the CGST rate, and 
the remaining amount is apportioned to the consuming State. 
The trends of IGST apportionment to the State and its cross utilisation are given in 
Table 5.1.5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
179 IGST: It is a tax collected by the Central Government for an inter-State sale. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
157
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
157 
Table 5.1.5: Integrated Goods and Services Tax 
(₹ in crore) 
IGST component 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
IGST apportioned to the State as per 
Section 17 of IGST Act, 2017 124.17 103.55 163.70 198.29 
IGST provisionally/ ad- hoc 
apportioned to the State 74.82 61.68 45.50 (-)21.60 
IGST cross utilised between   
SGST180 as IGST (-) 42.96 (-) 57.15 (-) 80.88 (-)71.65 
IGST as SGST (+) 531.32 (+) 788.16 (+) 899.40 (+)973.62 
Apportionment of IGST – Transfer of 
Interest Compound to SGST   0.28 0.34 
Source: Information furnished by office of the Accountant General (A & E), Tripura 
5.1.2(iii) Registration under GST  
The total registrants under GST as on 31 March 2024 were 34,639, of which normal 
taxpayers were 31,848 which accounted for 91.94 per cent and composition taxpayers 
were 1,661 which accounted for 4.80 per cent . The category wise registrations under 
GST is given in Table 5.1.6. 
Table 5.1.6: Details of GST registrations upto 31 March 2024 
Category of Registrant No. of Registrants Percentage of total 
Normal taxpayers 31,848 91.94 
Composition taxpayers 1,661 4.80 
Tax Deductors at Source 1,034 2.99 
Tax Collectors at Source 88 0.25 
Input Service Distributors 0 0.00 
Others (Casual, NRTP, OIDAR)181 8 0.02 
Total Registrants 34,639 100 
Source: Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department 
5.1.2 (iv) GST Return filing pattern of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B  
The trends of filling of GSTR-1182 and GSTR-3B183 as on 31 March 2024 for the period 
from April 2023 to March 2024, as compiled from the summary reports shared by 
GSTN, are depicted in the Table 5.1.7. 
GSTR-I filed in April 2023 was 99.89 per cent while that of March 2024 was 
98.30 per cent. It was noticed that on an average about 99.9 per cent  tax payers filed 
their GSTR-I returns during 2023-24.  
 
 
180 SGST: It is a tax collected by the State Government for an intra-State sale. 
181 Non-Resident Taxable Person (NRTP), Online Information Data Access and Retrieval Services 
(OIDAR) 
182 GSTR-1: It is a sales return that is required to be filed by every GST registered person. 
183 GSTR-3B: It is a self-declared consolidated summary return of inward and outward supplies which is 
required to be filed by a registered person electronically on the GST common portal. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
158
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 158 
Table 5.1.7: Details of return filing (GSTR-I and GSTR-3B) during 2023-24 
Return 
Types GSTR-I GSTR-3B 
Months 
Due 
for 
filing 
Return 
filed 
Return 
filing 
(in 
percen
tage) 
Due 
for 
filing 
Return 
filed as 
on 31 
March 
2024 
Return 
filing 
(in 
percent
age) 
Return 
filed by 
due 
date 
Percen
tage of 
return 
filed 
by due 
date 
April 2023 18,310 18,290 99.89 18,310 18,308 99.99 NA NA 
May 2023 18,654 18,633 99.89 18,654 18,652 99.99 NA NA 
June 2023 18,945 18,924 99.89 18,945 18,942 99.98 NA NA 
July 2023 18,830 18,809 99.89 18,830 18,826 99.98 NA NA 
August 
2023 
19,096 18,819 98.55 19,096 19,092 99.98 NA NA 
September 
2023 
19,347 19,325 99.89 19,347 19,341 99.97 NA NA 
October 
2023 
19,238 19,087 99.21 19,238 19,231 99.96 NA NA 
November 
2023 
19,403 19,143 98.66 19,403 19,396 99.96 NA NA 
December 
2023 
19,575 19,542 99.83 19,575 19,564 99.94 NA NA 
January 
2024 
19,542 19,358 99.06 19,542 19,529 99.93 NA NA 
February 
2024 
19,678 19,306 98.11 19,678 19,665 99.93 NA NA 
March 
2024 
19,694 19,359 98.30 19,694 19,683 99.94 NA NA 
Source: Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department 
**NA-Not available  
5.1.2(v) Revenue earning from top 10 commodities/services  
The details of the revenue earned from the top 10 commodities/ services during 2023-
24 are given in the Table 5.1.8. 
Table 5.1.8: Revenue from top 10 commodities/ services during 2023-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of commodity SGST collections 
Total Ranking 
1 Tobacco & Products 28.13 1 
2 Electricals 21.71 2 
3 Automobile 17.93 3 
4 Cement & Products 16.46 4 
5 Food Items 16.33 5 
6 Iron & Steel 11.61 6 
7 Machinery 10.10 7 
8 Pharmaceutical & Medicines 7.84 8 
9 Electronics 6.09 9 
10 Tyres & Tube 4.71 10 
 
 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
159
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
159 
Sl. 
No. Names of Services SGST collection 
Total Ranking 
1 Works Contract 22.96 1 
2 Telecommunication & Postal/ Courier 19.89 2 
3 Insurance 14.58 3 
4 Banking & financial Institutions 5.71 4 
5 Health/ Heath Care 3.96 5 
6 Consultancy 1.42 6 
7 Manpower 0.68 7 
8 Hotel and Restaurant 0.57 8 
9 Education and related service 0.45 9 
10 Television/ Internet Entertainment 0.45 10 
Source: Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department 
5.1.3 Analysis of arrears of revenue 
The arrears of revenue as on 31 March 2024 on account of Taxes/ VAT, GST and Taxes 
and Duties on Electricity stood at ₹ 189.44 crore, of which, ₹ 158.51 crore (₹ 63.78 
crore on Taxes/VAT & GST and ₹ 94.73 crore 184) was outstanding for more than five 
years, as detailed in Table 5.1.9. 
Table 5.1.9: Arrears of revenue 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Head of 
revenue 
Total amount outstanding as on 
31 March 
Amount outstanding for more 
than five years as on 31 March 
2023 2024 2023 2024 
1 Taxes/ VAT 53.43 66.38 33.41 35.47 
2 GST 13.08 28.33 12.22 28.31 
3 Taxes and 
Duties on 
Electricity 
94.73 94.73 94.73 94.73 
Total 161.24 189.44 140.36 158.51 
Source: Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department.  
Audit observed that the arrears of revenue under key heads - Taxes/ VAT, GST, and 
Taxes and Duties on Electricity - increased from ₹ 161.24 crore as on 31 March 2023 
to ₹ 189.44 crore as on 31 March 2024, reflecting a 17.5 per cent rise. Notably, arrears 
pending for over five years also rose from ₹ 140.36 crore to ₹ 158.51 crore, indicating 
prolonged non-recovery. 
The largest contributor to the arrears continued to be “Taxes and Duties on Electricity,” 
which remained stagnant at ₹ 94.73 crore, suggesting the need to improve recovery 
efforts. Additionally, GST arrears showed a sharp increase, more than doubling from 
₹ 13.08 crore to ₹ 28.33 crore within a year, raising concerns about compliance and 
enforcement effectiveness. 
This persistent accumulation of arrears, especially long-pending dues, highlights weak 
recovery mechanisms and inadequate monitoring by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) 
Department. The growing and stagnant arrears pose a risk of revenue loss, fiscal strain, 
 
184 The amount is outstanding due to a case pending at Tripura Electricity Regulatory Commission for 
appeal against demand due. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
160
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
160 
and potential write-offs, undermining the State’s financial health and its ability to fund 
essential public services. 
5.1.4 Evasion of tax detected by the Department 
The details of cases of evasion of tax detected by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) 
Department, cases finalised and the demands for additional tax raised as reported by 
the Department, etc. are given in Table 5.1.10. 
Table 5.1.10: Evasion of tax 
Source: Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department  
As on 31 March 2023, 1,126 cases of evasion of tax/ VAT were outstanding. During 
2023-24, 193 new cases of evasion of tax were detected under Tripura VAT Act, 2004 
and GST Act, 2017, bringing the total number of pending cases to 1,319. Of these, 
assessments/ investigations in only 152 (11.52 per cent ) cases had been completed 
resulting in additional demand including penalty, etc. of ₹ 85 crore during the year 2023-
24. Consequently, 1,167 cases remained pending finalisation as on 31 March 2024. 
Government should put in place an effective mechanism to expedite the disposal of 
cases pending for finalisation. 
5.1.5 Pendency of refund cases 
The details of the refund claims received, refunds processed under GST, VAT and State 
Excise are shown in Table 5.1.11. 
Table 5.1.11: Details of pendency of refund cases 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 
GST Sales Tax/ VAT State Excise Total 
No. of 
Cases Amount No. of 
cases Amount No. of 
cases Amount No. of 
cases Amount 
1 Claims 
outstanding at the 
beginning of the 
year 
2 1.90  4 1.83  - - 6 3.73  
2 Claims received 
during the year 44 2.72  10 8.02  - - 54 10.74  
3 Refunds processed  
during the year 41* 2.62*  10** 7.65** - - 51 10.27  
4 Balance 
outstanding at the 
end of the year 
5 2.00***  4 2.20  - - 9 4.20  
*includes two rejected refund cases of ₹ 0.06 crore, **includes three rejected refund cases of ₹ 0.18 
crore, ***Three balance refund cases withheld and RFD-08 issued 
Source: Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department  
Head of 
revenue 
Cases 
pending as 
on 
31 March 
2023 
Cases 
detected 
during 
2023-24 
Total 
Number of cases in which 
assessment/ investigation 
completed and additional 
demand with penalty, etc. 
raised 
Number of 
cases pending 
for finalisation 
as on 
31 March 2024 No. of cases Amount  
(₹ in crore) 
Tax/ VAT 1,026 07 1,033 02 0.07 1,031 
GST 100 186 286 150 84.93 136 
Total 1,126 193 1,319 152 85.00 1,167 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
161
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 161 
During 2023-24, the State Government refunded ₹ 10.27 crore under GST, Sales Tax 
and State Excise in 51 cases. Fund claims in respect of 44 cases of GST of ₹ 2.72 crore 
and 10 cases of Sales Tax (VAT) of ₹ 8.02 crore were received during the year. During 
the year, 41 cases of GST of ₹ 2.62 crore and 10 cases of VAT of ₹ 7.65 crore were 
processed and refunded. 
Audit concludes that while the State Government efficiently processed 89 per cent of 
the total refund claims under GST and VAT during 2023-24, the absolute value of 
pending refunds rose to ₹ 4.20 crore, largely due to high-value VAT claims and 
withheld GST cases. The presence of rejected and withheld claims highlights gaps in 
applicant compliance and the need for robust scrutiny mechanisms. Persistent pendency 
risks delaying legitimate refunds, which can adversely affect taxpayer confidence and 
liquidity, underscoring the need for periodic monitoring, prompt resolution of withheld 
cases, and improved communication with taxpayers to ensure timely refund settlement. 
5.1.6 Analysis of the mechanism for dealing with the issues raised by Audit 
In order to assess the effectiveness of the departments/ Government in addressing the 
issues highlighted in the Inspection Reports (IRs)/ Audit Reports, the actions taken on 
the paragraphs and performance audits featured in the Audit Reports over the last ten 
years by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department have been evaluated. The 
findings are included in this Audit Report. 
The succeeding Paragraphs 5.1.6.1 and 5.1.6.2 outline the performance of the Finance 
(Excise & Taxation) Department with respect to cases detected during local audits over 
the last ten years, as well as the cases included in the Audit Reports for the years 2014-
15 to 2023-24. 
5.1.6.1 Position of Inspection Reports 
The summarised position of the outstanding IRs during the last ten years, paragraphs 
included in those reports and their status as on 30 September 2024 in respect of Finance 
(Excise & Taxation) Department are tabulated in Table 5.1.12. 
Table 5.1.12: Position of IRs 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Inspection Report Paragraphs Money Value 
2014-15 13 63 12.55 
2015-16 17 41 7.86 
2016-17 14 58 5.42 
2017-18 11 57 6.57 
2018-19 13 43 6.47 
2019-20 10 56 5.67 
2020-21 4 30 1.58 
2021-22 1 7 7.19 
2022-23 0 0 0 
2023-24 1 29 0 
Total 84 384 53.31 
The age-wise break up of outstanding IRs and the Paragraphs featured in these IRs from 
2014-15 to 2023-24, as on 30 June 2024, is shown in Table 5.1.13. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
162
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
162 
Table 5.1.13: Age wise break up of outstanding IRs 
(₹ in crore) 
Years Inspection Report Paragraphs Money value 
0-3 years 2 36 7.19 
4-6 years 27 129 13.72 
7-9 years 42 156 19.85 
10 years 13 63 12.55 
Total 84 384 53.31 
It is evident from Table 5.1.13 that as of 30 September 2024, two IRs and 36 paragraphs 
were outstanding for zero to three years, 27 IRs and 129 paragraphs were outstanding 
for four to six years, 42 IRs and 156 paragraphs were outstanding for seven to nine 
years and 13 IRs and 63 paragraphs were outstanding for more than 10 years. This 
indicates that the efforts taken by the Department for settlement of the outstanding IRs 
have been slow and inadequate. Necessary steps may be taken to increase the pace of 
settlement in this regard. 
5.1.6.2 Recovery in accepted cases 
The position of paragraphs included in the Audit Reports over the last ten years, 
including those accepted by the Department, the amount recovered during the year 
2023-24 and the cumulative recovery position of accepted cases as on 31 March 2024 
are shown in Table 5.1.14. 
Table 5.1.14: Position of recovery of accepted Audit paragraphs of Audit Reports 
(₹ in crore) 
Year of 
Audit 
Report 
Number of 
paragraphs 
included 
Money 
value of the 
paragraphs 
Number of 
paragraphs 
accepted 
including 
money value 
Money 
value of 
accepted 
paragraphs 
Amount 
recovered 
during 
2023-24 
Position of 
recovery of 
accepted 
cases as of 
2024 
2011-12 1 0.87 1 0.87 Nil 0.07 
2012-13 1 1.51 1 1.51 Nil 0.22 
2013-14 3185 11.17 3 6.06 Nil 0.24 
2014-15 2 0.39 2 0.39 Nil 0.28 
2015-16 2 0.46 2 0.46 Nil Nil 
2016-17 4186 31.87 3 31.73 Nil 0.01 
2017-18 3 1.77 3 1.77 Nil 0.05 
2018-19 3 1.30 2 0.69 Nil 0.06 
2019-20 1187 0.001188 1 0.001 Nil Nil 
2021-22189 1190 2.77 1 2.77 0.27 0.27 
Total 21 52.11 19 46.25 0.27 1.20 
It is evident from Table 5.1.14 that the progress of recovery even in accepted cases has 
been very slow. During the last ten years, 21 paragraphs involving ₹ 52.11 crore 
 
185 including one Performance Audit 
186 including one Performance Audit 
187 one Subject Specific Compliance Audit Report  
188 ₹ 12,041 
189 Audit Reports 2020-21 and 2021-22 had been merged. 
190 one Subject Specific Compliance Audit Report  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
163
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 163 
featured in the Audit Reports, of which 19 paragraphs involving ₹ 46.25 crore were 
accepted by the State Government. Out of this, only ₹ 1.20 crore (2.59 per cent) was 
recovered. 
The Department should pursue and monitor prompt recovery of the dues involved in 
accepted cases within a specified timeframe, since it would not only ensure better 
compliance with the relevant rules, but also augment Government revenues. 
5.1.7 Actions taken on the recommendations accepted by the Department/ 
Government 
The draft Performance Audits (PAs) conducted by the office of the Accountant General 
(Audit) are forwarded to the concerned departments with a request to furnish the replies. 
These PAs are also discussed in Exit Conferences and the departments’ views are 
incorporated or considered while finalising the Audit Report. 
During 2014-15 to 2021-22, four PAs and two Subject Specific Compliance Audits 
(SSCA) on Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department, Transport Department and 
Revenue Department were featured in the Audit Reports. The number of 
recommendations and their status is given in Table 5.1.15. 
Table 5.1.15: Details of recommendations of PAs and their status 
Year of 
Report 
Name of the performance 
audit 
No. of 
recommendations 
Status (as on September 
2023) 
2014-15 
IT Audit on 
Computerisation of Land 
Records 
3 
The PA has not been 
discussed in Public Accounts 
Committee (PAC). 
2015-16 
Collection of Revenue from 
outsourced Activities in 
Motor Vehicle Tax 
4 The PA has been discussed 
by PAC on 17 June 2022  
2016-17 
System and Procedures in 
force in the Taxes and 
Excise Organisation 
regarding Excise Duty 
3 The PA has not been 
discussed in PAC 
Border Area Development 
Programme 3 The PA has not been 
discussed in PAC 
2019-20 
SSCA on “Processing of 
Refund claims under GST 
in Tripura  
2 The SSCA has not been 
discussed in PAC 
2021-22 SSCA on “Transitional 
Credits under GST” 2 The SSCA has not been 
discussed in PAC 
Table 5.1.15 indicates that the discussion of PAs and SSCAs was not held in a timely 
manner in the PAC, which led to a loss of importance of the audit observations with the 
passage of time. 
5.1.8 Results of audit  
 
Position of local audit conducted during the year 
Test check of the records of six units of the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department 
and Transport Department during the year 2023-24 revealed non-realisation of 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
164
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 164 
outstanding revenue of ₹ 15.46 crore in 38 cases. Of these, reply in respect of seven 
cases has been received (September 2024). 
5.1.9 Coverage of this report 
This Chapter contains one Performance Audit titled “Functioning of District Transport 
Offices” under the Transport Department and two Subject Specific Compliance Audit 
titled “Collection of Stamp Duty and Registration Fees from Deed Registration” and 
“Department’s Oversight on GST Payments and Return Filing (Phase-II)” under the 
Revenue and Finance (Excise and Taxation) Department, respectively. 
  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
165
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
165 
TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT 
5.2 Performance Audit on “Functioning of District Transport Offices” 
 
5.2.1 Introduction 
As per the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India, both the Centre and the States 
have jurisdiction over matters related to mechanically propelled vehicles, including the 
principles on which taxes on such vehicles are to be levied. Consequently, the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1988 was enacted by the Parliament to regulate various aspects of road 
transport, such as the issuance of driver and conductor licenses, vehicle registration, 
granting of various types of permits, etc. 
The Transport Department, GoT was established under the provisions of Section 213 
of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988. The Transport Department functions through Office of 
the Joint Transport Commissioner (JTC) in West Tripura District and other seven 
District Transport Officers (DTOs). Further, there is also one Check-post at Churaibari 
under DTO North Tripura.  
The Department is primarily responsible for the following functions: 
 Registration of motor vehicles, 
 Issue of driving licenses and conductor licenses, 
 Issue of permits for goods and passenger vehicles, 
 Collection of motor vehicle taxes, 
 Enforcement of Motor Vehicle Acts and Rules, 
 Vehicular pollution control measures, etc. 
The VAHAN and SARATHI191 applications were introduced by the MoRTH, GoI, to 
streamline and standardise vehicle registration and driving license services across the 
country. The Transport Department, Government of Tripura undertook the 
computerisation of its functions by implementing VAHAN (vehicle registration) and 
SARATHI (driving licence issuance) software in 2004 with an objective to achieve 
faster, transparent and better monitoring of revenue generation.  
5.2.2 Financial outlay 
During the period 2019-20 to 2023-24, the Transport Department contributed ₹ 508.77 
crore (taxes on vehicles) to the State’s total revenue of ₹ 14,991.75 crore, which was 
approximately 3.39 per cent of the State’s total tax revenue. 
 
191  VAHAN and SARATHI are integrated, cloud-based applications designed to streamline vehicle 
registration and driving license processes. VAHAN manages vehicle-related services like 
registration, fitness certificates, and permits, while SARATHI manages driving license issuance and 
management. Both systems aim to provide comprehensive, online services through a centralised 
portal, reducing the need for physical visits to District Transport Offices. In Tripura, VAHAN 4.0 
and SARATHI 4.0 (upgraded versions) was implemented (between May-October 2018) in all the 
eight districts by the Transport Department. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
166
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
166 
The primary revenue sources of the Department included motor vehicle tax, vehicle 
registration fees, issuance of driving licenses and road permits, along with fines and 
penalties for violations.   
The department’s expenditure included administrative costs, pay and allowances, 
infrastructure development, etc.   
The revenue collected and expenditure incurred by the Department during the last five 
years is depicted in Table 5.2.1. 
Table 5.2.1: Position of revenue and expenditure during 2019-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Revenue collected Expenditure incurred192* 
2019-20 97.14 32.95 
2020-21 87.93 24.88 
2021-22 92.83 46.29 
2022-23 105.01 44.12 
2023-24 125.86  47.95 
Source: Information furnished by the Transport Department, Government of Tripura) 
5.2.3 Organisational setup 
The organisation chart of the Department is given in Chart 5.2.1. 
 
Source: Transport Department, Government of Tripura 
At the government level, the Transport Department is overseen by the Secretary, who 
 
192  Includes department’s expenditure and expenditure incurred under Central Sector Schemes  


Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
167
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
167 
is assisted by the Additional Secretary and Joint Secretary and other staff members. At 
the Commissionerate level, the JTC functions under the Commissioner of Transport. 
At the district level, DTOs are responsible for enforcing the provisions of the Motor 
Vehicles (MV) Act and Rules across all the eight districts193. The JTC is entrusted with 
the dual responsibilities of overseeing the entire process of collection of taxes, fees and 
fines throughout the State and holding the charge of DTO, West Tripura District. 
5.2.4 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit on “Functioning of District Transport Officers” was taken up 
with the objectives to assess: 
a) whether DTOs managed issuance, renewal and cancellation of licenses 
effectively as per the Act/ Rules;  
b) whether regulation and control over registration and use of vehicles through 
registration, issuing permits and fitness certificates was as per the Act/ Rules; 
c) whether DTOs efficiently assessed, levied, collected and remitted revenue (motor 
vehicle taxes, fines, penalties, cess, etc. as per Act/Rules) and took effective 
action on arrears;  
d) whether enforcement activities were effectively conducted to ensure compliance 
with the Motor Vehicles Acts/Rules with adequate follow up to deter violations; 
and 
e) whether DTOs have been provided with adequate manpower, equipment, and 
other resources to discharge the mandate as also to ensure public service delivery 
in a transparent and efficient manner.  
5.2.5 Audit Criteria  
The Department is primarily responsible for regulating the use of motor vehicles in the 
State, collecting motor vehicle tax, ensuring road safety, and controlling air and noise 
pollution. Audit findings were benchmarked against the following criteria: 
i. The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of 1988) 
ii. Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989  
iii. The Tripura Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1972 
iv. The Tripura Motor Vehicles Rules, 1991 
v. Notifications, circulars and guidelines issued by Government from time to time. 
5.2.6 Audit Scope and Methodology 
The Performance Audit on “Functioning of DTOs in Tripura” was conducted covering 
the period from April 2019 to March 2024. The audit methodology included data 
analysis, test check of records and information furnished by the three sampled district 
offices (West Tripura, Dhalai and North Tripura). Audit examined the core functions 
 
193 West Tripura, Dhalai, Unakoti, North Tripura, Khowai, Sepahijala, Gomati and South Tripura 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
168
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
168 
of the Department by scrutinising records pertaining to the implementation of Acts and 
Rules, operational efficiency and effectiveness in the realisation of various taxes, fees 
and fines.  
An Entry Conference was held on 25 July 2024 with the Secretary, Transport 
Department, Government of Tripura, wherein the audit objectives and scope were 
discussed.  
Records collected during audit and information furnished by the auditee were used as 
evidence. Audit conclusions were drawn after scrutiny of records, analysis of available 
data and responses to audit questionnaires. 
Field Audit was carried out covering data analysis, examination of records, physical 
verification of sampled driving schools, Pollution Under Control (PUC) centers 
registered under the sampled DTOs during the period between July and November 
2024. The Exit Conference was held on 21 May 2025 with the Secretary, Transport 
Department. The responses furnished by the department were duly considered, while 
finalising this report. 
5.2.7 Selection of sample 
Eight DTOs were stratified based on three key parameters: the number of vehicles 
registered, revenue collection and the volume of transactions handled. The strata 
consisted of three risk parameters i.e. high, medium and low risk. Samples were 
selected based on the combined weightage score of risk parameters. For high-risk 
category, JTC194, West Tripura was selected by default being the highest in risk score 
and the responsibilities handled. DTO, North Tripura was selected in the medium risk 
category since the only inter-state check-gate with vehicles weighing machine facility 
at Churaibari falls under its jurisdiction. DTO, Dhalai was selected in the low-risk 
category districts using random sampling method in IDEA software (Random 
seed – 14,258).  
5.2.8 Acknowledgement 
Office of the Principal Accountant General (Audit), Tripura acknowledges the 
co-operation extended by the Transport Department during the conduct of the 
Performance Audit.  
5.2.9 Trend of revenue 
The details of Revenue targets, actual receipts and total revenue receipts of the State is 
shown in Table 5.2.2. 
 
 
 
 
 
194 JTC acts as DTO for West Tripura District for enforcement of MV Act/Rules and collection of tax 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
169
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 169 
Table 5.2.2: Trend of revenue  
(₹ in crore) 
Year Revenue 
target  
Actual 
receipt  
Variation  
excess (+) 
shortfall (-) 
(3-2) 
Total revenue 
receipts of the 
State* 
Percentage of actual 
receipt vis-a-vis total 
revenue of the State 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
2019-20 92.09  97.14 5.05 2,373.44 4.09 
2020-21 101.22  87.93 (-)13.29 2,617.93 3.36 
2021-22 111.60  92.83 (-)18.77 2,890.42 3.21 
2022-23 110.39  105.01 (-)5.38 3,402.03 3.09 
2023-24 131.66  125.86 (-)5.80 3,707.93 3.39 
Source: Col. 2 and Col. 3 - Information as furnished by the Department  
Col. 5 - Finance Accounts [*includes tax and non-tax revenue] 
 
Tax revenue targets and actual tax receipts on MV during the period from 2019-20 to 
2023-24 along with the total tax receipts of the State during the same period are given 
in Chart 5.2.2.  
 
An analysis of revenue targets and actual receipts over the period 2019-20 to 2023-24 
revealed that while actual collections increased from ₹ 97.14 crore in 2019-20 to 
₹ 125.86 crore in 2023-24, targets were consistently underachieved except in 2019-20. 
The shortfall was most pronounced in 2021-22 (₹ 18.77 crore), though it narrowed in 
subsequent years, indicating improved forecasting or collection efficiency. However, 
the share of this revenue stream in the State’s total revenue receipts declined from 
4.09 per cent  in 2019-20 to 3.09–3.39 per cent  in the later years, reflecting slower 
growth relative to other revenue components. This trend highlights the need for more 
realistic target-setting, strengthened collection mechanisms, and strategic measures to 
enhance this revenue source's contribution to the State’s overall fiscal health. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
92.09 101.22
111.60 110.39
131.66
97.14
87.93 92.83
105.01
125.86
Chart 5.2.2: Actual receipt with respect to Revenue target
(₹ in crore)
Revenue target Actual receipt

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
170
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
170 
5.2.10 Audit findings 
 
Audit Objective 1: To assess whether DTOs managed issuance, renewal and 
cancellation of licenses effectively as per the Act/ Rules  
 
5.2.10.1 Irregularities in issue of driving licence in SARATHI 
(i) Issuance of driving licenses to underage individuals  - As per Section 3 of 
MV Act, 1988, no person shall drive a motor vehicle in any public place unless he holds 
a valid driving licence issued to him by the competent authority. As per Section 4 of 
MV Act, 1988, the minimum age for driving a motor vehicle is 18 years. However, a 
person attaining the age of 16 years may drive a motorcycle with an engine capacity 
not exceeding 50 cc.  
Analysis of SARATHI database revealed that a total of 2,03,468 driving licenses for 
non-transport vehicles were issued during 2019-24 in the State. In the sampled three 
districts 1,00,189 licenses were issued, of which 182 (0.19 per cent ) non-transport 
vehicle195 driving licences were issued to the individuals under the age of 18 years 
during the period 2019-24, in violation of the provisions of the MV Act. The district-
wise summary is given in Table 5.2.3. 
Table 5.2.3: Summary of licenses issued to the underage individuals during 2019-24 
Sl. 
No. District Transport Office Number of licenses 
issued 
Number of license issued to 
persons below 18 years 
(percentage given in 
parenthesis) 
1 DTO, West Tripura  70,358 131 (0.19) 
2 DTO, Dhalai  8,296 14 (0.17) 
3 DTO, North Tripura 21,535 37 (0.17) 
Total 1,00,189 182 
Source: SARATHI database 
The Government replied (June 2025) that all the 182 driving licenses were examined in 
the SARATHI portal and found that the driving licenses for light motor vehicles 
(LMVs) were issued to the eligible candidates that is after the age of 18 years, whereas 
driving licenses for motorcycles without gears were issued to the persons aged between 
16 and 18 years.   
The reply is not acceptable as the department could not provide any documentary 
evidence such as age-certified SARATHI entries, scanned license copies to show that 
the DLs were issued to the persons after attaining the age of 18 years in case of LMVs. 
Further, the Government accepted the issuance of DL for Motorcycles without gears to 
the persons aged between 16 and 18 years, but remained silent on whether these 
Motorcycles had engine capacity not exceeding 50 cc, as stipulated in Section 4 of the 
MV Act, 1988.  Further, a test-check of the driving licenses issued to the underage 
individuals from the MoRTH’s Parivahan website revealed that the licenses were even 
 
195 Except ‘motorcycle with engine capacity not exceeding 50 CC’ 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
171
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 171 
issued for LMV and motorcycles with gear contradicting the claim of the Government 
that all the licenses were issued to the eligible candidates.  
(ii) Transport vehicle licenses issued to individuals under the age of 20  - As per 
Section 4 (2) of the MV Act, 1988, subject to the provision of Section 18, no person 
under the age of 20 years shall drive a transport vehicle in any public place.  
Analysis of SARATHI database revealed that 2,253 driving licenses for transport 
vehicles were issued during 2019-24 in the State, of which 1,596 driving licenses were 
issued in the three sampled districts. It was seen that, four driving licenses (0.25 per 
cent) out of 1,596 driving licenses were issued to the individuals under the age of 20 
years for transport vehicles, in violation of the provision of the MV Act . District-wise 
summary is given in Table 5.2.4. 
Table 5.2.4: Summary of transport licenses issued to the underage individuals during 
2019-2024 
Sl. 
No. District Transport Office Number of 
licenses issued 
Number of licenses issued to the 
persons below 20 years age 
1 DTO, West Tripura  996 3 
2 DTO, Dhalai  20 Nil 
3 DTO, North Tripura 580 1 
Total 1,596 4 
Source: SARATHI database 
The Government replied (June 2025) that as per Section 7 of the MV Act, 1988, a 
learner license may be granted to drive a transport vehicle after one year from the issue 
of LMV Driving License and SARATHI accepts the same even below 20 years of age. 
However, it contradicts the Section 4 (2) of the MV Act, 1988 and NIC would be 
consulted in this regard. 
The reply is not acceptable as the justification provided by the Government does not 
address the core violation of Section 4 (2) of the MV Act, 1988 which explicitly 
prohibits the driving of transport vehicles by persons under the age of 20 and thus 
issuance of driving license is in gross violation of the Act. It was also noticed that after 
the observation of the audit, the DTO, North Tripura even cancelled the driving license 
citing reason as ‘underage while issuing license. Further, Section 7(1) imposes the 
restriction (essential requirement) for granting the Learner’s Licenses, not the issuance 
of actual driving licenses for any class of vehicles. 
Driving licences were issued in violation of the age restrictions prescribed under the 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, due to weak verification processes and poor adherence to 
statutory provisions. The Government’s response was not substantiated by evidence 
and, in one case, contradicted by post-audit corrective action. These lapses highlight 
systemic weaknesses in licence issuance and monitoring, warranting urgent corrective 
measures. 
5.2.10.2 Irregularities in renewal of dealership license of motor vehicle dealers 
(i) Violation of the provisions of TMVR, 1991 - As per Rule 35 of the Tripura Motor 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
172
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
172 
Vehicle Rules, 1991 as amended on 21 August 2014, every new applicant seeking a 
vehicle dealership196 license has to pay a license fee of ₹ 10,000 for a period of three 
years. Thereafter, the dealers have to renew the license with a payment of renewal fee 
of ₹ 5,000 for another period of three years. In case of non-renewal of license on time, 
late fee for renewal of license of ₹ 500 for every 30 days period following the expiry of 
the license will be imposed. The application for license/ renewal of license was required 
to be made by the dealers/ sub-dealers in the Form -B of Fourth Schedule of the TMVR, 
1991. 
Audit noticed (March 2025) that the three sampled DTOs had not maintained the 
records of dealership licenses issued to the vehicle dealers properly. Specifically, details 
such as the date of application, date of issue of dealership license, dealership license 
number, validity period, and renewal dates were not systematically documented. The 
absence of records prevented effective monitoring of renewals, enabled unauthorised 
operation of dealerships and contributed to revenue losses.  
Audit also noticed that DTO, West Tripura and DTO, Dhalai had issued dealership 
licenses to vehicle dealers for durations of one year to six vehicle dealers and five years 
to one vehicle dealer, respectively, in contravention of the provision of three years’ 
validity period, indicating procedural irregularities. As a result, six dealers were issued 
dealership licenses improperly with short validity periods in violation of the Tripura 
Motor Vehicle Rules, 2014 whereas one dealer got the benefit of extended validity. 
Despite this deviation, the registration and renewal fees were uniformly collected, 
highlighting a lack of correlation between license validity and applicable charges.  
The details of licenses issued for the validity period of one year and five years violating 
the TMV Rules are shown in Table 5.2.5. 
Table 5.2.5: Summary of validity period of dealership license registration/renewal 
Sl. 
No. Vehicle dealer’s name Jurisdictional 
office 
Date of 
Registration/ 
renewal 
Valid up to 
1 S.R. Motors, Amtali 
jutemill, Agartala 
DTO, West 
Tripura 03-11-2022 02-11-2023 
2 S.R. Motors, Amtali 
jutemill, Agartala 
DTO, West 
Tripura 06-02-2024 05-02-2029 
3 Pallavi Motors Pvt. Ltd., 
Khayerpur, Agartala 
DTO, West 
Tripura 20-05-2023 19-05-2024 
4 M/s Baba Loknath Motors, 
Manughat, Dhalai DTO, Dhalai 08-09-2023 07-09-2024 
5 M/s Ramthakur Enterprise, 
Shivtola  DTO, Dhalai 08-09-2023 07-09-2024 
6 M/s S.R. Motors, 
Kamalpur, Dhalai DTO, Dhalai 08-09-2023 07-09-2024 
7 M/s LS Automobiles, 
Halahali, Dhalai DTO, Dhalai 28-08-2023 27-08-2024 
Source: Information furnished by DTO, West Tripura and DTO, Dhalai 
 
196  Dealership means and includes a trader or reseller who deals in vehicles for sale to individuals directly 
or through Sub-dealers or by any other means. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
173
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
173 
The Government replied (June 2025) that the dealership license of S.R Motors, Agartala 
was initially issued for one year. It was printed for five years by mistake, which would 
be rectified. It was also stated that provisional dealership license was being issued for 
one year in case of any shortfall thus giving an opportunity to fulfil the criteria.  
The reply is not acceptable as issue of provisional license for one year was not 
commensurate with the provisions of the notification of the Transport Department, 
Government of Tripura, dated 21 August 2014.  
(ii) Non-information/non-renewal of dealership licenses: There were 49 dealers 197 
functioning under the jurisdiction of the three sampled DTOs. With regard to the same, 
audit noticed that: 
 DTO, North had information regarding renewal of license and validity period of 
the licenses for only six dealers out of the 17 dealers, however no information was 
available regarding the balance 11 dealers. 
 12 out of 26 vehicle dealers under DTO West Tripura were operating without 
renewal of dealership license, even after elapse of 24 months since the expiry of 
the validity of the license, thereby resulting in outstanding renewal fees for licenses 
including fines of ₹ 1.06 lakh as detailed in Appendix 5.2.1. 
Due to non-maintenance of proper records, the details of dealership license of vehicle 
dealers could not be cross-checked with the dealership license issue register in respect 
of all vehicle dealers operating under the three sampled districts. Further, the issuance 
of dealership licenses for durations inconsistent with the prescribed three years’ period, 
as mandated under the Rules, indicates non-compliance of the regulatory provisions. 
The Government replied (June 2025) that show cause notices for non-renewal of 
dealership licenses had been issued to Automobile dealers of the West Tripura District 
with the direction to regularise the licenses on payment of requisite fees.  
Audit revealed significant lapses in the regulation and renewal of vehicle dealership 
licenses across the sampled DTOs in Tripura. The concerned DTOs failed to maintain 
basic records such as the date of application, licence validity, and renewal status for 
several dealers, resulting in irregular issuance of licences with durations (one year and 
five years); Twelve dealers in West Tripura operating without valid renewals for over 
two years, leading to unrecovered renewal fees and fines; lack of a functioning 
dealership license register, which severely compromised oversight and compliance 
enforcement. 
Government’s justification of issuing one-year “provisional” licences was not 
supported by any enabling provision under the relevant notification, rendering such 
actions non-compliant. 
These lapses point to systemic weaknesses in monitoring and enforcement, resulting in 
regulatory non-compliance, revenue loss, and potential misuse of dealer credentials. 
 
197 West Tripura – 26, North Tripura – 17, Dhalai - 6 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
174
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
174 
5.2.10.3 Discrepancies in  renewal of license of Motor Driving Training Schools 
(i) Operation of driving schools without valid license  - Rule 24(1) of CMVR, 1989 
provides that no person shall establish or maintain any driving school or establishment 
for imparting instructions for hire or reward in driving motor vehicles without a license 
granted by licensing authority. Rule 24(4) of CMVR, 1989 states that the licensing 
authority may, on receipt of an application under sub-rule (2) and after satisfying that 
the applicant has complied with the requirements of sub-rule (3) grant or renew a 
licence in Form 11 (within a period of ninety days from receipt of such an application). 
Further, Rule 25 of CMVR, 1989 provides that a license granted shall be in force for a 
period of two years and may be renewed on an application made not less than sixty days 
before the date of its expiry.  
As of November 2024, six198 driving schools were functional in three sampled districts. 
Four out of six operational driving training schools were physically verified between 
August 2024 and November 2024, jointly by audit and the officers of the three sampled 
DTOs. The details of these four driving training schools is provided in Table 5.2.6.  
Table 5.2.6: Driving Training Schools operating without valid license 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Driving 
Training School Jurisdiction Valid license 
period 
Period without 
license 
Period without 
License (in year 
and months) 
1. National Driving 
school 
DTO, West 
Tripura 
01.04.2019 to 
26.08.2019 
27.08.2019 to 
29.12.2021 
2 years 4 month 
30.12.2021 to 
31.12.2023 
01.1.2024 to 
07.11.2024 
11 months 
2. Laxmi Driving 
school 
DTO, West 
Tripura 
 01.04.2019 to 
06.07.2019 
3 months 
07.07.2019 to 
06.07.2023 
07.07.2023 to 
04.08.2023 
1 month 
3. Chakraborty 
Driving school 
DTO, Dhalai 18.12.2021 to 
17.12.2023 
01.04.2019 to 
17.12.2021 
2 years 8 months 
- 18.12.2023 to 
12.09.2024 
8 months 
4. Raj Driving school DTO, North 
Tripura 
01.04.2019 to 
01.07.2020 
02.07.2020 to 
02.01.2024 
3 years 6 months 
Source: Records furnished by DTOs 
The following discrepancies were noticed: 
 The license validity of the National Driving School in West Tripura had expired in 
December 2023, however, the Department could not provide any document 
confirming the renewal of their license. 
 Chakraborty Driving School submitted the renewal application on 5 October 2023, 
however, the department granted approval for the renewal of license on 13 
September 2024, after a delay of approximately 11 months.  
 
198  West Tripura: National Driving school, Laxmi Driving school, Jyotsana Driving school, Principal, 
ITI, Agartala: Dhalai: Chakraborty Driving school: North Tripura: Raj Driving school 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
175
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
175 
 There were gaps in the license validity period between two consecutive terms in 
all the four driving training schools indicating that the driving schools were 
operating without any license during the intervening period and were granting 
trainings even in the absence of the license. These gaps in consecutive two license 
periods arose due to inordinate delay in renewal of licenses though the applications 
were received more than sixty days prior to the expiry date. Operating a driving 
school without a valid license during gap periods was a violation of the statutory 
requirements. 
(ii) Irregular grant of licenses despite non-compliance with prescribed standards  
Rule 24(3) of the CMVR, 1989, stipulates that the applicant for license of driving 
school owns and maintains a minimum of one motor vehicle each of the type in which 
instruction is imparted in the school; that all the vehicles available exclusively for 
purposes of imparting instruction, except motor cycles, are fitted with dual control 
facility to enable the instructor to control or stop the vehicle; the applicant or any 
member of the staff employed by him for imparting instructions possesses the minimum 
educational qualification of a pass in the tenth standard and a certificate in a course in 
motor mechanics or any other higher qualification in mechanical engineering from an 
institution established by the Central or a State Government or from an institution 
recognised by the Board of Technical Education of a State Government.  
Joint physical verification of the four driving training schools revealed the following 
deficiencies as under: 
 The Raj Driving school did not own any auto rickshaw despite having been granted 
a license for such a vehicle. 
 Both Laxmi Driving school and Chakraborty Driving school did not have any dual 
control facility in heavy goods vehicles, which was essential for safe and effective 
training 
 Eight199 out of the 16 instructors employed by the three driving training schools 
did not possess the minimum qualification of pass in tenth standard and motor 
mechanics certificate or any higher degree in mechanical engineering as stipulated 
in the CMV Rules.  
Although the driving training schools did not meet the prescribed standards, the 
licenses were granted to the training schools. These deficiencies point to serious lapses 
in regulatory compliance and oversight.   
The Government replied (June 2025) that there are various anomalies as per the 
provision of Rule 24 CMVR, 1989 in connection with the Motor Driving Training 
Schools renewal. The department has issued show cause notices to the Driving Training 
Schools for regularisation of the issue.  
 
 
199  Chakraborty Driving School - Two out of four instructors, National Driving School – Five out of 
eight instructors, Raj Driving School – One out of four instructors 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
176
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
176 
Conclusion 
Audit observed systemic lapses in the issuance, renewal, and regulation of driving 
licences, dealership licences, and driving training schools in Tripura. Instances of 
issuance of licences to underage individuals and operation of unlicensed driving 
schools reflect a disregard for statutory provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and 
CMVR, 1989.  
Further, poor record-keeping, irregular licence validity periods, and non-compliance 
with educational and infrastructure requirements for driving schools highlight weak 
internal controls, inadequate monitoring, and a lack of regulatory enforcement. 
Government responses either lacked evidentiary support or admitted to irregularities, 
further reinforcing the need for corrective institutional reforms 
Recommendation 
 The Department may create and maintain an updated, centralised database of 
vehicle dealers and motor training schools, capturing licence validity, renewal 
status, and compliance checks for effective oversight. 
 The Department may ensure enforcement of act, rules and notifications 
uniformly across the State while issuing the driving licenses, trade licenses and 
licenses to operate driving schools. 
 The Department may enforce mandatory document verification (age, vehicle 
class eligibility) at DTO level before final issuance of licences, supported by 
digital audit trails in SARATHI/ VAHAN. 
 The Department should implement an automated monitoring system to track 
licensing violations in real time and action taking system to track violations, 
ensure follow-up action and initiate prompt corrective action.  
Audit objective 2: To assess whether regulation and control over registration and use 
of vehicles through registration, issuing permits and fitness 
certificates was implemented by DTOs as per the Act/ Rules  
 
5.2.10.4 Non-realisation of fitness fee of transport vehicles 
Under Section 56 of the MV Act, 1988, a transport vehicle shall not be deemed to be 
validly registered unless it carries a certificate of fitness in such form containing such 
particulars and information as may be prescribed by the Central Government. As per 
Rule 62 of CMV Rules, 2023200 , the fitness validity of the transport vehicles is for two 
years for vehicles up to eight years old and it is to be renewed every year thereafter. As 
per the CMV Rules (Twenty-second Amendment) dated 29 December 2016, the fees 
chargeable for conducting test of a vehicle for grant or renewal of certificate of fitness 
are (a) motorcycle-₹ 200 (b) three wheelers/ LMVs-₹ 400, (c) medium and heavy 
vehicles- ₹ 600 and (d) motor vehicle-₹ 200.  In case of delay in renewal of fitness 
 
200 As per fifth amendment dated 12 September 2023 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
177
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
177 
certificate (FC), a fine of ₹ 50 per day is recoverable from the vehicle owner. 
Analysis of VAHAN data revealed that 5,495 transport vehicles registered in the State 
between April 2009 and March 2021 were due for renewal of FC at least once (up to a 
maximum of five times) between April 2019 and March 2024. Of these, 2,636 transport 
vehicles had expired FCs and were liable to pay FC fees amounting to ₹ 1,099.81 lakh 
under the three sampled districts. District-wise number of vehicles with expired fitness 
validity is summarised in Table 5.2.7. 
Table 5.2.7: Summary of fitness defaulter vehicles 
Sl. No. District No. of vehicles with expired 
fitness validity 
Fee + fine due  
(₹ in lakh) 
1 West Tripura 1,466 595.41 
2 Dhalai 537 241.25 
3 North Tripura 633 263.15 
Total 2,636 1,099.81 
Source: VAHAN database  
Failure to comply with the provisions of the MV Act regarding renewal of FC and 
continued use of such vehicles in public places poses a serious risk to road safety and 
also compromises air pollution controlling standards.  
Even though data on vehicles with expired FCs can be generated from the VAHAN 
portal, the Department neither initiated any enforcement drives nor took any corrective 
action specifically against the fitness defaulter vehicles. Further, VAHAN portal lacks 
a provision for automated notices or intimation to the owners of fitness defaulter 
vehicles unlike the provision that is available in the case of tax defaulter vehicles. 
The Government (June 2025) replied that the Transport Department and Police 
Department had jointly conducted regular enforcement drives in the entire State and all 
the documents of vehicles were checked and the vehicles with any expired documents 
were penalised as per the MV Act and rules. It was also stated that the Transport 
Department had served fitness defaulters notice and the amount collected up to 
31 March 2025 was ₹ 347 lakh against 5,349 fitness defaulter vehicles under DTO, 
West Tripura District. It was further stated that the Transport Department had taken the 
matter seriously as it was related to revenue generation of the State. 
Although the Government stated that the enforcement drives were conducted and 
notices were issued, there were systemic gaps as the capability of the VAHAN database 
to identify defaulters was not efficiently utilised. Further, the reply was silent about the 
default notices and amount recovered in other two sampled districts. 
5.2.10.5 Inadequate controls for monitoring and following up on road tax 
default cases of transport vehicles 
Section 4(1), (2) and 4A(1) of the Tripura Motor Vehicle Tax s Act, 1972 read with 
Notification dated 4 July 2018 issued by the Tripura Transport Department, stipulates 
that all motor vehicles other than National Permit Goods Carriage vehicles in Tripura 
shall pay tax annually in advance at the rates specified in Schedule-I. Further, Section 
4(B) of the Tripura Motor Vehicles Tax (Amendment) Act 2009 stipulates that if a 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
178
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
178 
vehicle owner fails to pay road tax within the grace period of 60 says, he shall be liable 
to pay penalty (i) for default of one month delay or part thereof at the rate of 
10 per cent of the total amount of annual tax or onetime tax payable, (ii) for default 
exceeding one month upto to the period of three months penalty at the rate of 
20 per cent of the annual tax or on time tax, (iii) for default exceeding three months and 
upto six months penalty at the rate of 30 per cent  of the annual tax or onetime tax 
payable, (iv) for default for the period exceeding six months upto 12 months penalty at 
the rate of 40 per cent of the annual tax or onetime tax and (v) for default for the period 
exceeding 12 months at the rate of 50 per cent of the annual tax or onetime tax payable. 
Analysis of VAHAN data revealed that there were 19,629 transport vehicles registered 
in the State between April 2004 and March 2018 due for annual road tax at least six 
times during the period between 2018-19 and 2023-24. In the three sampled districts 
9,869 transport vehicles had not paid their due taxes, resulting in unrealised revenue of 
₹ 1,047.54 lakh (Arrears of ₹ 703.16 lakh as reflected in VAHAN portal and 
₹ 344.38 lakh being the penalty calculated by audit).  
Thus, non-realisation of outstanding motor vehicle taxes and associated penalties not 
only resulted in the loss of revenue but also constituted a violation of the provisions of 
the MV Act. A summary of MV tax defaulters for transport vehicles for the period 
between April 2019 and March 2024 in the sampled districts is given in Table 5.2.8.  
Table 5.2.8: Summary of transport vehicle road tax defaulters 
(₹ in lakh) 
District  
Transport vehicle 
Total Number of 
vehicles 
Amount of Tax 
Arrear 
Penalty 
amount 
West Tripura 6,025 539.64 263.68 803.32 
Dhalai 2,132 76.93 38.19 115.12 
North Tripura 1,712 86.59 42.51 129.10 
Total 9,869 703.16 344.38 1,047.54 
Source: VAHAN database  
The Government replied (June 2025) that non-realisation of outstanding road tax is not 
correct because Department is issuing demand notices on regular basis and Motor 
Vehicle Inspectors are conducting non-stop enforcement drive against the tax 
defaulting vehicles. Whenever any defaulter vehicles found plying on the road, the 
Department is taking appropriate action as per Acts. It was further stated that in the 
previous financial year, a total of 5,082 numbers of tax demand notices were issued to 
the owners of defaulter vehicles for the West Tripura District. In response to that 1,014 
numbers of vehicle owners paid ₹ 151.90 lakh up to 31 March 2025.  
While the Government claimed regular issuance of demand notices and enforcement 
activities, the audit analysis of VAHAN data reflected ₹ 1,143 lakh as arrears, 
excluding penalty towards unpaid road tax on 19,629 transport vehicles for the period 
from 2019-2024. The recovery reported from West Tripura covers only a small portion, 
indicating that recovery from a large number of defaulters was still outstanding. This 
high figure of recoveries remaining to be realised highlights gaps in monitoring, follow-

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
179
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
179 
up and enforcement.  
5.2.10.6 Non-realisation of permit fee from transport vehicles  
Permit is an instrument issued by a State or Regional Transport Authority authorising 
the use of a motor vehicle as a transport vehicle in a specified manner as per the relevant 
provisions of Motor Vehicle Act and Rules framed thereunder.  
Section 66(1) of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 mandates the necessity of issuing permits 
to transport vehicles. No transport vehicle can be used in any public place unless it has 
a valid permit. As per the provisions contained in Section 81(1)(2) of the MV Act, a 
permit is granted to a transport vehicle for a period of five years and is subject to 
renewal for a further period of five years by submitting an application not less than 15 
days before the date of its expiry, along with the requisite application and permit fee201 
prescribed on the basis of the type of vehicle under Rule 78 of TMV Rules.   
Analysis of VAHAN data revealed the following deficiencies as detailed below: 
(i) Registration of transport vehicles without valid permit - During the period 
from 2019-20 to 2023-24, 35,406 transport vehicles were registered in the three 
sampled districts, of which 18,713 transport vehicles were required to be 
registered with a valid permit. However, these transport vehicles were operating 
without a valid permit. The details are given in Table 5.2.9. 
Table 5.2.9: Summary of transport vehicles registered without a valid permit 
Year 
Year wise 
transport 
vehicle 
registered 
Transport vehicle registered without valid permit in the three 
sampled DTOs  
(₹ in lakh) 
Dhalai North 
Tripura 
West 
Tripura Total Fee 
realisable 
2019-20 5,552 364 1,021 2,570 3,955 19.98  
2020-21 4,461 182 939 1,368 2,489 12.12  
2021-22 4,856 433 950 1,345 2,728 13.36  
2022-23 6,661 763 1,224 2,054 4,041 19.44  
2023-24 13,876 1,083 1,666 2,751 5,500 25.79  
Total 35,406 2,825 5,800 10,088 18,713 90.69 
  The Table 5.2.9 shows that 18,713 number of transport vehicles were operating 
without a valid license which is a violation of the provision of the MV Act. 
Further, non-registration of the transport vehicles without the permit led to non-
realisation of permit fees amounting to ₹ 90.69 lakh.  
(ii) Non-realisation of permit fee from permit defaulter vehicles - Analysis of data 
also revealed that transport vehicles registered between April 2009 and March 
2018 in the three sampled districts, the permit validity period of 2,105 contract 
carriage, 105 stage carriage and 561 goods transport vehicles permits were 
expired at least once (maximum of three times) till March 2024. Permit type-wise 
 
201  Permit renewal fee of stage carriage and goods carriage: ₹ 600 and for contract carriage viz., Auto 
Rickshaw: ₹ 450 and others motor cabs and Taxi, Bus, Jeep, etc.: ₹ 475. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
180
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
180 
number of vehicles with expired permit validity under the three sampled districts 
is summarised in Table 5.2.10.   
Table 5.2.10: Summary of permit defaulter transport vehicles 
(₹ in lakh) 
DTO 
Contract 
carriage Stage carriage Goods carriage Total 
Permit 
defaulter 
vehicles 
Fee 
due  
Permit 
defaulter 
vehicles 
Fee 
due  
Permit 
defaulter 
vehicles 
Fee 
due  
Number 
of vehicles 
Fee 
due  
West Tripura 1,126 6.52  103 0.54 427 2.99  1,656 10.05 
Dhalai 524 2.78  0 0 37 0.28  561 3.06 
North Tripura 455 2.49  2 0.018 97 0.71  554 3.22 
Total 2,105 11.81 105 0.558 561 3.98 2,771 16.33 
Source: VAHAN database 
From Table 5.2.10, it can be seen that permit fee amounting to ₹ 16.33 lakh was due 
for realisation from 2,771 transport vehicles during the period 2019-24. Thus, non-
renewal of permits not only deprived the State of timely revenue but also violated the 
provisions of the MV Act, which prohibit plying of vehicles in public places without a 
valid permit.   
Though data regarding vehicles with expired permits can be generated from VAHAN 
portal, the Department did not take any proactive measures to ensure timely renewal of 
permits. Moreover, unlike the system for tax defaulters, the VAHAN portal lacks a 
mechanism to issue notices to the permit defaulters.  
The Government replied (June 2025) that no demand notice could be generated from 
VAHAN Portal for permit expired vehicles like as was done for tax defaulters. It added 
that the matter had been taken up with NIC for generating a workflow for demand notice 
for permit expired vehicles in the VAHAN portal. It also stated that regular joint 
enforcement drives are conducted as per Acts and rules. 
Though it was acknowledged that the VAHAN portal lacks a functionality for 
automated demand notices for permit defaulters, the Department cannot abstain from 
its responsibility for monitoring and enforcing duties.  
5.2.10.7 Short real1isation of alteration fee of motor vehicles 
As per Section 52(1) and (3) of the MV Act, 1988, no owner of a motor vehicle shall 
alter the vehicle that the particulars contained in the certificate are at variance with those 
originally specified by the manufacturer. If any alteration is done without the approval 
of registering authority, the owner of the vehicle shall report such alteration to the 
registering authority within 14 days together with the prescribed fee. The Transport  
Department, Government of Tripura prescribed 202 chargeable fees 203 for alteration in 
 
202  vide Notification No. F.7(5)-TRANS/2011 dated 21 August 2014 
203  (i) alteration of motor vehicles with prior approval of the registering authority with fees chargeable 
as (a) Auto rickshaw: ₹ 500 (b) LMV: ₹ 2,000 and (c) MMV, HMV and above: ₹ 2,500 and  
(ii) alteration without prior approval of the authority with fees chargeable as (a) Auto rickshaw: 
₹ 3,000 (b) LMV: ₹ 4,000 and (c) MMV, HMV and above: ₹ 5,000 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
181
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
181 
the vehicle with prior approval and post approval of the authority for alteration of 
vehicles based on the conditions of alteration and the vehicle category. These fees are 
applicable for modifications such as changes in vehicle body structure, engine capacity, 
or other modifications that require approval from the Transport Department.  
Analysis of VAHAN data revealed that there was short realisation of alteration fee of 
₹ 29.90204 lakh from 1,841 vehicles in the three sampled districts during the period 
2019-24 is summarised in Table 5.2.11.  
Table 5.2.11: Summary of short realisation of alteration fee 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. Name of DTO Number of 
vehicles 
Alteration 
fee realised  
Alteration 
fee 
realisable205 
Short 
realisation of 
alteration 
fee 
1 West Tripura 1,204 16.75 35.93 19.18 
2 Dhalai 36 0.54 1.12 0.58 
3 North Tripura 601 6.95 17.09 10.14 
Total 1,841 24.24 54.14 29.90 
Source: VAHAN database  
Audit noticed that VAHAN portal lacked a feature to differentiate between alterations 
made with or without approval. The system could not accurately determine the 
applicable alteration fees as the stipulated fees were not being applied for alterations.  
This limitation in the VAHAN software, had led to the incorrect fee assessment since 
its implementation in January 2004. Despite this issue persisting for over two decades, 
the Transport Department had not identified or rectified the error as of March 2025.  
The matter was reported to the DTOs in November 2024.  
While accepting the audit observation, the Government replied (June 2025) that fee 
calculation done by VAHAN software which is auto generated so manual intervention 
could not be done in this process. It was further stated that the issue would be examined 
and taken up with the NIC to resolve the issue.  
Though the Department has now taken up the matter with NIC, the delay in addressing 
the deficiency has led to recurring revenue loss and continued non-compliance with the 
statutory provisions.  
5.2.10.8 Levy of higher rate of motor vehicle tax under BH series Registration 
mark 
Twentieth amendment of CMV Rules, 2021 by MoRTH, GoI introduced Bharat (BH) 
series registration with effect from 15 September 2021. Its primary objective is to 
facilitate seamless inter-state vehicle movement without the need for re-registration and 
is available to employees of Central Government, State Government, Public Sector 
Undertakings and Private Sector Companies having offices in four or more States. One 
registration mark has been made valid throughout the country. The tax is paid initially 
 
204  The rate of fee applicable for prior approval has been taken for each class of vehicles 
205  In addition to the short realised alteration fee, Inspection fee of ₹ 400, Smart Card printing fee of 
₹ 200 has also been taken into account. Moreover, for DTO, West Tripura, ₹ 25 towards postal fee is 
also added in the fee realisable.  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
182
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
182 
for a period of two years and can be extended in multiples of two up to 14 years, to the 
state where it is located during that period. In case of fully built non-transport vehicles, 
the motor vehicle tax206 shall be calculated electronically through the portal on the basis 
of invoice price excluding Goods and Services Tax (GST). The entire sale price is 
taxable and cannot be further edited at the dealer’s point once uploaded in the VAHAN 
system. Hence, all future tax calculations will be based on the value of sale price entered 
at the time of registration.    
Examination of records revealed that the Department 207, in January 2022 directed the 
vehicle dealers to upload the sale price of vehicles at the ex-showroom price (which 
includes tax/GST component) for automatic calculation of the motor vehicle tax 
registered under BH series in Tripura. Due to inclusion of tax component (GST), 
vehicle owners registered under BH series in Tripura were subjected to pay higher rate 
of MV tax throughout their life span compared to those registered in other states, where 
the GST is excluded from the sale price for tax.  
Analysis of VAHAN database revealed that 332 private vehicles were registered under 
BH series under the three sampled DTOs during 2021-24. A summary of tax 208 
collections for BH series registration during 2019-24 is shown in Table 5.2.12.  
Table 5.2.12: Summary of tax collection from BH series registration vehicles 
(₹ in lakh) 
District name 
Number of 
BH series 
vehicles 
Road tax collected 
on sale price (with 
GST) for two years 
Actual Road tax to 
be collected on sale 
price (without GST) 
for two years 
Excess tax 
collected in one 
tax period 
West Tripura 321 27.31 18.46 8.85 
Dhalai 9 0.44 0.32 0.12 
North Tripura 2 0.19 0.14 0.05 
Total 332 27.94 18.92 9.02 
Source: VAHAN database 
Table 5.2.12 shows that excess tax amounting to ₹ 9.02 lakh was collected from 332 
BH series registered vehicles during a single tax period due to inclusion of tax 
component in the sale price. The overcharged amount will recur every renewal period 
over the vehicle's life thereby magnifying the impact. 
The Department’s instruction to vehicle dealers to upload the ex-showroom price 
including the GST component into the VAHAN software led to improper calculation 
of BH series motor vehicle tax, contrary to the prescribed rule of excluding GST from 
the sale price. Given that the VAHAN software locks this value for all future renewals, 
this error will cause recurring over-taxation throughout the life of these registrations. 
This reflects a significant and ongoing compliance failure, resulting in unfair financial 
 
206  The rate of motor vehicle tax under BH series registration mark shall be eight per cent in case of 
vehicles with invoice price below ₹ 10 lakh, 10 per cent between ₹ 10 and ₹ 20 lakh and 12 per cent 
for invoice price above ₹ 20 lakh. Besides, two per cent extra charge shall be levied for diesel vehicles 
and two per cent less tax for electric vehicles 
207  Vide notification No. F.XXII-27/JTC/CON/2018/10244 dated 22 January 2022 
208  Calculated for one tax period (i.e. two years) 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
183
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 183 
burden on vehicle owners in Tripura compared to those in other states which follow the 
correct procedure.  
The Government replied (June 2025) that realisation of road tax was done through 
auto generated online VAHAN software, so manual intervention could not be done 
in this process. It was further stated that levy at a higher rate as pointed out by audit, 
was not correct.   
The reply of the Government was not acceptable.  Though the realisation of road tax 
was auto-generated by the VAHAN software and hence beyond manual intervention, 
the calculation by VAHAN software is dependent on the input data, particularly the sale 
price uploaded by the dealer at the time of registration. The Department in violation of 
the MoRTH, GoI notification, directed vehicle dealers for uploading prices of vehicles 
in VAHAN at the ex-showroom price (which includes tax/GST component) for 
calculation of motor vehicle tax registered under BH series in Tripura.   
5.2.10.9 Non-refund of road tax 
Section 4A(5) of the TMVT Act, 1972 provides that if one time tax in respect of the 
personalised vehicle has already been paid under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), and 
if the said vehicle is removed from Tripura on change of address or on cancellation of 
registration, the owner of such vehicle may be entitled to refund at a proportionate rate 
as may be determined by the Government by order from time to time. 
Analysis of VAHAN data revealed that 1,171 No Objection Certificates (NOCs) were 
issued during 2019-24 to the vehicle owners for assigning new registration mark in 
other states. These NOCs are essential for transferring a vehicle’s registration from one 
State to another, ensuring that there are no pending dues or obligations associated with 
the vehicle. Audit categorised these vehicles based on the number of years for which 
road tax had not been refunded, as summarised in Table 15.2.13. 
Table 5.2.13: Number of vehicles with pending tax refunds 
Office name 
Number of 
NOCs 
issued  
Non-refund of taxes for the 
period 
NOCs utilised 
for re-
registration in 
other States 
1 to 5 
years 
5 to 10 
years 
10 to 15 
years 
DTO, West Tripura 997 140 307 550 571 
DTO, North Tripura 118 16 45 57 87 
DTO, Dhalai 56 3 32 21 32 
Total 1,171 159 384 628 690 
Source: VAHAN database 
As can be seen from Table 5.2.13 that out of 1,171 NOCs issued during the period 
2019-24, 690 vehicles (59 per cent) were re-registered in other States as confirmed from 
VAHAN. This implies that a large number of vehicles actually moved out of Tripura 
permanently. Further, 1,171 vehicles had paid road tax, with 628 vehicles having paid 
for 10-15 years, 384 for 5-10 years and 159 for 1-5 years.  
It was further noticed that not even a single case relating to refund of motor vehicle tax 
was processed in the three sampled District Transport Offices during the period 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
184
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
184 
2019-24. Further, refund feature was inactive on the VAHAN portal. Furthermore, there 
was neither any prescribed application form for manual tax refunds nor were any 
records found to be maintained showing the applications received and processed in this 
regard. These deficiencies suggest a need for reviewing and streamlining the tax refund 
process to ensure compliance and fairness. 
The absence of any processed refund cases despite the issuance of 1,171 No Objection 
Certificates over 2019–24 clearly indicates that the Department has failed to implement 
the refund provision mandated under Section 4A(5) of the TMVT Act, 1972. The lack 
of an active refund feature on the VAHAN portal, absence of prescribed manual 
application forms, and failure to maintain any records of refund applications reflect 
serious gaps in process design and control. This systemic failure resulted in financial 
burden on the vehicle owners who, after paying one-time tax in Tripura, were required 
to pay the applicable motor vehicle tax again in other states without receiving the 
entitled proportionate refund. The findings underscore the urgent need for the 
Department to establish a transparent, time-bound, and accessible refund mechanism in 
line with MoRTH’s January 2024 directives, ensuring compliance with statutory 
provisions and fairness to taxpayers. 
The MoRTH directives align with the audit observations, emphasising the need for 
system reforms to address the deficiencies in the vehicle tax refund process. 
The Government stated (June 2025) that there was no provision for refund of tax for 
the vehicles going outside the State with NOC.  
The reply is factually incorrect as the provisions of Section 4A(5) of the TMVT Act, 
1972 clearly provide for refund of unutilised one-time tax when a vehicle is 
permanently moved out of the State and re-registered elsewhere. Thus, denying such 
refunds amounts to non-compliance with the regulatory provisions.  
Conclusion 
The audit findings highlight several systematic deficiencies in Tripura’s transport 
sector. The absence of adequate controls to ensure the timely renewal of fitness 
certificates and permits for transport vehicles led to delays in the timely realisation of 
potential revenue. Despite having the real time vehicle compliance data in VAHAN 
database, the Department did not utilise the system effectively to identify defaulters, 
track dues or generate demand notices.  
The audit revealed significant systemic deficiencies in the regulation and control of 
transport vehicles in Tripura across critical areas such as fitness certification, tax 
collection, permit issuance, alteration fees, BH series taxation, and refunds. Despite the 
availability of comprehensive data through the VAHAN portal, the Transport 
Department failed to leverage this resource effectively for monitoring, enforcement, 
and compliance.  
Key lapses included the absence of automated enforcement mechanisms, short 
realisation of government dues, non-implementation of statutory refunds, and 
overcharging due to incorrect software inputs. These shortcomings not only resulted in 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
185
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
185 
substantial revenue loss but also exposed the public to safety and regulatory risks. The 
Department’s reliance on manual processes, lack of proactive monitoring, and poor 
coordination with software developers (NIC) reflect the need for urgent reforms to 
strengthen governance and accountability. 
Recommendation 
 The Department may take immediate steps to recover the outstanding revenue 
from tax and fee defaulters. The Department may collaborate with NIC to 
implement automated systems in the VAHAN portal for identifying and issuing 
notices to defaulters of fitness, tax, permit, and alteration fee. This should 
include real-time alerts, penalty calculations, and follow-up enforcement 
scheduling to ensure timely recovery and regulatory compliance. 
 The Department may institutionalise monthly reviews of VAHAN data at the 
DTO level for identification of defaulters.  
 Steps may be taken to incorporate provisions in the VAHAN software for 
generating alerts and issuing notices to permit and fitness defaulters. 
Audit objective 3: To assess whether DTOs efficiently assessed, levied, collected and 
remitted revenue (Motor vehicle taxes, fines, penalties, cess, etc. 
as per Act/ Rules) and took effective action on arrears 
 
5.2.10.10 Non-realisation of State Government share 
The JTC, Agartala entered into an agreement (June 2017) with M-Tech Innovations 
Ltd.209, Pune (service provider) to execute Smart Card Project on build, own, operate 
and transfer basis in Tripura for a period of five years with effect from 1 September 
2017. The project included supply, installation, operation and maintenance of IT 
Infrastructure and related facilities for personalisation and issue of Smart Card based 
Driving Licenses and Vehicle Registration Certificates (printing and issue of smart 
cards) in the State. 
As per Clause 13 read with Clause 36 of the agreement, the Service provider shall pay 
30 per cent of the gross revenue collection to the State Government on monthly basis 
as revenue share of the State Government within the seventh day of every next month.  
Further, Clause 32 of the agreement stipulates that in case of any dispute of any nature 
whatsoever between the parties hereto, especially dispute regarding level of services 
being provided by successful bidder as per the agreement, which cannot be mutually 
resolved then the same shall be referred to the sole Arbitrator to be appointed by the 
parties and the proceedings would be conducted under the provisions of the Arbitration 
& Conciliation Act, 1996. The venue of such arbitration proceedings shall be at 
Agartala.  
Audit noticed that the service provider collected revenue by issuing smart cards at the 
 
209  A public limited company registered under the Companies Act, 1956 and having office at Plot No. 
1/2, Rajiv Gandhi Infotech Park, Phase-1, Hinjewadi, Pune-57. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
186
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
186 
rate of ₹ 119, ₹ 122 and ₹ 20 in respect of RC, DL and LL respectively. It was further 
noticed that during the period from September 2017 to December 2023, the service 
provider issued 11,76,735 smart cards 210 and collected ₹ 1,102.21 lakh towards the 
sale value of the smart cards. Under the agreement, ₹ 330.66 lakh (30 per cent) being 
the state government share was due to be remitted to the state government. However, 
the service provider remitted only ₹ 283.52 lakh, resulting in ₹ 47.14 lakh remaining 
outstanding. Audit had highlighted the underpayment of state government share in 
previous audits (May 2018 and February 2024). 
The JTC, at the instance of audit, directed (April 2024 and May 2024) the service 
provider to deposit the outstanding amount, but the same remained un-realised.  
As of March 2025, the Department had not initiated engagement of an Arbitrator211 as 
per the agreement clause nor had it invoked penalties for default as the agreement did 
not have any such clause in case of default by the service provider.  
The lack of sound internal controls and enforcement mechanisms as well as the failure 
of the Department to enforce the provisions of the agreement resulted in non-realisation 
of the Government’s due share of ₹ 47.14 lakh. 
The Government replied (June 2025) that the matter is now sub-judice before Hon’ble 
High Court of Tripura. However, as per the audit observation, notice would be issued 
to the agency shortly.  
5.2.10.11 Discrepancies in mode of collection of revenue   
As per Rule 7 of the General Financial Rules, 2017, all moneys received by or on behalf 
of the Government either as dues of Government or for deposit, remittance or otherwise, 
shall be brought into Government Account without delay, in accordance with such 
general or special rules as may be issued under Articles 150 and 283 (1) of the 
Constitution of India.  
To promote cashless transactions, the Finance Department, Government of Tripura 
introduced Online Government Receipts Accounting System (e-GRAS) on 1 August 
2019, to facilitate collection of tax and non-tax revenues. The e-GRAS platform has the 
functionality to collect online receipts through Debit/Credit Cards and UPI based 
payments including QR Code scanning. Further, the Point of Sale (POS) based e-
challan application is integrated with e-GRAS and the receipts are directly deposited to 
the state Treasury.  
Audit noticed the following discrepancies:  
i) The State Government approved (March 2023) the collection of revenue through 
State Bank of India (SBI) POS machines. However, no formal Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) or agreement was entered into with the SBI detailing the 
terms and conditions of this engagement which was essential for specifying clear 
timelines for transfer of collected funds to the government account.  
 
210 RC – 4,63,809, DL – 3,99,690, LL – 3,13,236 
211 Under the provisions of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
187
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
187 
ii) All receipts (tax and non-tax revenue) from VAHAN and SARATHI portals were 
collected through various online payment modes such as POS terminals, UPI, QR 
Codes, etc. However, these online payment modes were not integrated with the 
VAHAN and SARATHI portals. Moreover, the Department’s failure to integrate 
VAHAN and SARATHI portals with the e-GRAS software of the Finance 
Department led to the following discrepancies, as elaborated below:  
 Revenue receipts were not directly credited to the government account. 
Instead, the amounts were initially parked into the savings account of the 
respective bank branches and thereafter transferred to the government account 
through Challan/ e-GRAS payment gateway of State Government by the 
DTOs.  
 The VAHAN and SARATHI portals generated receipts and delivered services 
without confirming whether the payments made through the various payment 
modes was successful or not. Thus, due to non-integration of online payment 
systems with portals, the possibility of providing services without receiving 
the corresponding payment cannot be ruled out.  
iii) Examination of records (viz. bank statements, treasury challans, challan register, 
cash book, etc. for the month of March each year during the period 2019-24) 
revealed that revenues collected were initially held as cash in hand or deposited 
into bank accounts. It was noticed that there were delays in depositing these funds 
into the government account. The instances noticed are summarised below: 
a) DTO, Dhalai  
All the revenues collected (March of each year except March 2024) was collected 
in cash and deposited with Tripura State Co-operative Bank (TSCB) account. In 
March 2024, the revenue collected through POS machine was deposited with SBI 
account while the cash collection was deposited with TSCB account. It was also 
noticed that these funds remained in the bank account other than the Government 
account for a period ranging from seven days to 166 days, involving amount 
ranging from ₹ 9.59 lakh to ₹ 291.62 lakh. Thereafter, these accumulated funds 
in SBI/ TSCB for the particular periods were transferred to the Government 
account with further delays up to 28 days from the date of last collection of the 
transferred amount as shown in Appendix 5.2.2.  
b) DTO, North Tripura 
All revenues were collected and retained as cash in hand and treasury challans 
were generated after collection of revenue. In eight out of 272 cases 212, the 
revenue collected ranging from ₹ 0.08 lakh to ₹ 2.23 lakh was deposited into 
government account with delays ranging from 10 days to 116 days.  
In March 2024, the collected revenue amounting up to ₹ 64.03 lakh was 
temporarily held in a bank account for up to 15 days before being transferred to 
 
212 272 cases noticed in March of each year except March 2024 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
188
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
188 
the government account. The details of the delay in transferring the collected 
revenue is shown in Appendix 5.2.3.   
c) DTO, West Tripura 
All revenues were collected in cash and held in hand. Treasury challans were 
generated after collection of revenue. In 149 out of 1,093 cases, the corresponding 
revenue was deposited into the government account with the delays ranged 
between 10 days and 25 days and the amount involved ranged between 
₹ 0.01 lakh and ₹ 1.32 lakh.  
In March 2024, all collections were deposited into SBI account and accumulated 
up to 29 days involving amount of ₹ 491.33 lakh before being transferred to the 
government account. The details of the delays in transferring the collected 
revenue are shown in Appendix 5.2.4.  
Thus, the decision of the Department to deploy an intermediary POS machine without 
integrating with the VAHAN and SARATHI applications coupled with the absence of 
validation controls of revenue received while rendering services, resulted in parking of 
revenue outside the government account in violation of GFR Rule 7. This resulted in 
delays of up to 164 days and accumulation of large sums outside the Treasury, 
undermining transparency, accountability, and timely availability of public funds. 
The Government replied (June 2025) that the department will examine and take 
appropriate action. Further, it was also stated that the department is submitting the 
challan in due time but the time elapsed between the bank and treasury transaction. It 
was also stated that the integration of VAHAN and SARATHI portals with treasury 
accounts had been completed, but due to some technical issues, a letter had been issued 
to NIC for resolving the matter.  
The Government’s response, which attributed the delays to the time taken between bank 
and the treasury transactions, does not fully address the underlying procedural 
deficiencies such as the absence of MoU with SBI, non-integration of payment 
gateways with service portals, and delays in depositing the collected revenue.  
5.2.10.12 Deficiencies in managing the inter-state check gate-cum-weighbridge 
at Churaibari 
Section 138 (2) (b) of the MV Act, 1988 empowers state governments to make rules 
for establishment and use of weighing devices to detect overloading of goods-laden 
vehicles. 
Section 194 (1) of MV Act, 1988 states that whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes 
or allows a motor vehicle to be driven in contravention of the provisions of Section 113 
(deals with the limits of weight) or Section 114 (power to temporarily halt and inspect 
vehicles) shall be punishable with minimum fine of ₹ 20,000 and an additional amount 
of ₹ 2,000 per tonne of excess load, together with the liability to pay charges for off-
loading of the excess load.   
The Department had only a single check-gate at Churaibari in North Tripura District to 
.
.

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
189
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
189 
detect overloaded goods-laden vehicles and collection of associated taxes and fines. 
The trend of revenue receipts at Churaibari check gate during 2019-24 is given in 
Table 5.2.14. 
Table 5.2.14: Trend of revenue receipts at Churaibari check-gate 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year Tax Collection Non-Tax Collection Total 
2019-20 38.15  561.38 599.53 
2020-21 105.46  495.00 600.46 
2021-22 89.55  675.24 764.79 
2022-23 39.26  584.57 623.83 
2023-24 49.11  590.16 639.28 
Total 321.54 2,906.35 3,227.89 
Source: Information furnished by the Department  
Audit noticed the following irregularities with regard to the functioning of the check 
gate: 
i) Inadequate facility in vehicle weighing system at Check gate: 
 The weighbridge (machine) installed at the Check-gate could only measure the 
weight of the incoming goods laden vehicles up to 60 metric tons (MT). There 
was no provision to measure heavier vehicles beyond 60 MT. Additionally, the 
system for measuring the weight of the outgoing goods laden vehicles was not 
installed. These deficiencies may result in loss of revenue in terms of fines from 
overloaded vehicles that go undetected. 
 No documents were available indicating that the weighbridge had been 
calibrated by the State Legal Metrology Department, as mandated under Section 
24213 of the Legal Metrology Act, 2009.  
 No Annual Maintenance Contract (AMC) was in place for the existing weighing 
machine. Thus, the possibility of financial loss due to non-detection of 
malfunctioning of the weighing machine, cannot be ruled out.  
While accepting the audit observation, the Government stated (June 2025) that 
action would be taken for the upgradation of the infrastructure. 
While the Government accepted the audit observation and assured that the steps 
will be taken to upgrade the infrastructure, the inadequacies regarding lack of 
calibration as required under the Legal Metrology Act and the absence of AMC 
indicate non-compliance of the statutory requirements and failure to follow 
maintenance protocols.  
ii) Irregularities in revenue collection at check gate: 
 Both tax and non-tax revenues were being collected in cash and held in hand 
 
213  Section 24(1) of the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 specifies verification and stamping of weight or 
measure by the Controller, by general or special order, specify in this behalf, on payment of such fees 
as may be prescribed. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
190
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
190 
during 2019-23. The yearly collection of total revenue ranged between 
₹ 5.99 crore and ₹ 7.64 crore as shown in Table 5.2.14. 
Despite the instructions of the Government in November 2023 regarding 100 
per cent cashless collection of revenue, no online payment system for collection 
of revenue was made functional as of November 2024, and no reasons for such 
delay was found on record.   
 In respect of revenue collection in March (selected for detailed scrutiny) each 
year during 2019-23, the amount accumulated 214 was retained as cash in hand. 
Thereafter, the accumulated funds were deposited into the government account 
with delays extending up to 17 days. Since 2023-24, the revenue collected was 
being deposited into a bank account. In March 2024, in an instance, the revenue 
collection of ₹ 57.73 lakh was held in the bank account for 31 days before being 
transferred to the government account. The details of the delays are shown in 
Appendix 5.2.5. 
 Entries in the Cash book maintained at Churaibari Check-post for the period 
covered in audit i.e. 2019-24 were not authenticated by the DDO, undermining 
internal control and accountability.  
Government replied (June 2025) that previously all revenue collection was done 
only through cash mode. At present all revenues are collected through online/ 
POS’s machine. So, discrepancy may not arise in future. However, the 
department would examine the matter and appropriate action would be taken.  
iii) Irregularities in maintenance of data: 
 A single computer system using software from a third-party vendor was used 
for capturing data viz., vehicle number, date of entry, laden and unladen weight 
of vehicle, etc. of incoming goods laden vehicles in check-gate. The software 
used for capturing data could preserve data up to the maximum period of six 
months. Besides, the software was neither integrated with VAHAN and 
SARATHI nor with the weighbridge machine.  
Further, data entries were done manually compromising the security and 
integrity of the data captured (March 2025). Considering the importance and the 
size of the data handled daily, the Department has yet to install advanced 
software-based system like Radio Frequency Identification215 (RFID) to ensure 
data accuracy and operational efficiency.  
The absence of integration between the data capture software and the 
weighbridge raises concerns about the accuracy and reliability of the recorded 
data.  
If the weighbridge is not integrated with the data system, it means weights must 
 
214 Collection ranging between ₹ 2.35 lakh and ₹ 48.74 lakh and period ranging from one day to 21 days. 
215  RFID is a technology that works by using radio waves to automatically identify and track tags 
attached to objects.  
.

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
191
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
191 
be entered manually, which can lead to errors or even intentional underreporting 
to help vehicles avoid fines. This compromises the accuracy and reliability of 
records, making it hard to prove overloading violations if challenged. Manual 
processes also slow down operations, causing delays and congestion at the 
check gate. Without integration, the system cannot automatically verify vehicle 
details or permitted weight limits from VAHAN and SARATHI, increasing the 
possibility of overloaded vehicles go undetected. Further, manual entries 
compromise data integrity and security. This also makes monitoring and 
auditing difficult, as there is no secure, tamper-proof electronic trail of 
measurements.  
 Analysis could not be undertaken by audit due to unavailability of complete data 
for the period 2019-24 as data for only six months (March 2023 and November 
2023 to March 2024) was provided, and even this data was incomplete as all the 
important information such as vehicle type wise permissible weight limits, 
instances of overweight detection, fines realised, etc. was not captured.  
All the irregularities point towards the failure of the Department to develop an adequate 
system to monitor and control the functioning of the State’s sole inter-state check-gate 
despite the fact that it has a significant potential to generate substantial revenue for the 
State Government. Due to incomplete and inconsistent records, the audit could not 
assess the extent of revenue loss from undetected overloaded vehicles.  
Conclusion 
The Department failed to enforce the provisions stipulated in the agreement with the 
service provider that resulted in non-realisation of the Government’s share from the 
issuance of smart cards.  
Due to non-integration of revenue collection with the e-GRAS, the revenue receipts 
were not directly credited into the Government account and were parked outside the 
Government account for a considerable period before remittance into the Government 
account. 
The software system put in place for capturing data related to the vehicles passing 
through the check-gate was found to be unreliable, since it was being done manually, 
compromising both the security and integrity of the captured data.   
Recommendation 
 The Department may immediately initiate arbitration or legal action to recover 
outstanding dues from the smart card service provider. Future contracts must 
include clearly defined penalty and enforcement clauses for default in payment to 
prevent revenue leakage. 
 The Department may take steps to link all revenue collection with the e-GRAS 
software, so that revenue receipts are credited directly into the Government 
account without delay.  
 The Department may put in place an effective monitoring system for collection 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
192
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
192 
and deposit of revenue.  
 The Department may initiate transition from the manual data entry system at 
Churaibari Check gate to an advanced automated system such as Radio 
Frequency Identification to streamline revenue collection processes and enhance 
overall operational efficiency.  
Audit objective 4: To assess whether enforcement activities were effectively 
conducted by DTOs to ensure compliance with the Motor Vehicles 
Acts/ Rules with adequate follow up to deter violations 
 
5.2.10.13 Low turn up of vehicles for Pollution Under Control (PUC) test  
Rule 115(7) of the MV Rules, 1989 mandates that after the expiry of a period of one 
year from the date on which the motor vehicle was first registered, other than battery 
operated vehicles, every such vehicle shall carry a valid “Pollution Under Control 
(PUC)” certificate issued by an agency authorised for this purpose by the State 
Government. The validity of PUC certificate is twelve months for vehicles 
manufactured as per BS-IV or BS-VI norms216 and six months for vehicles with BS-III 
and below vide MoRTH, GoI’s notification dated 23 February 2012.  
District-wise total number of vehicles and number of vehicles which had undergone 
PUC tests in the sampled three districts during the period between April 2020 and 
March 2024 is given in Table 5.2.15. 
Table 5.2.15: Status of vehicles undegone up for PUC test during 2020-24 
District Year Total registered 
vehicles217 
Vehicles undergone 
PUC test Percentage 
West 
Tripura 
2020-21 2,31,350 97,876 42.31 
2021-22 2,40,286 1,56,174 65.00 
2022-23 2,52,218 1,44,992 57.49 
2023-24 2,65,749 1,60,933 60.56 
North 
Tripura 
2020-21 4,3,447   12,770  29.39  
2021-22 46,852   21,597  46.10  
2022-23 51,028   26,802  52.52  
2023-24 56,873   35,932  63.18  
Dhalai 
2020-21 24,263   10,953  45.14  
2021-22 26,468   15,176  57.34  
2022-23 29,579   20,789  70.28  
2023-24 32,992   28,001  84.87  
Source: Transport Department ( Note: Record of vehicles undergone for PUC test during 2019-20 was 
not provided.) 
Thus, it was observed that the turnout of vehicles for PUC tests in West Tripura District 
 
216  Bharat Stage (BS) norms are emission standards set by the Indian Government to regulate the release 
of air pollutants from motor vehicles. These standards aim to reduce harmful emissions like nitrogen 
oxides, carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, particulate matter, and sulphur oxides. 
217  Only the vehicles registered during last 15 years have been shown here because the possibility of 
non-functional vehicles pertaining to this period is minimum. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
193
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
193 
was substantially low, ranging between 42.31 per cent  and 65.00 per cent  despite 
having the highest population of vehicles. Similarly, turnout for PUC test in North 
Tripura District was also noticeably low ranging between 29.39 per cent and 63.18 per 
cent. In contrast, Dhalai District showed a steady increasing trend from 45.14 per cent 
during 2020-21 to 84.87 per cent during 2023-24.  
The low turnout of vehicles for mandatory PUC tests is a matter of great concern, since 
it not only violates the provisions of the MV Act but also adversely affects the air 
quality and health of the common public, undermining efforts to combat environmental 
pollution.  
Further, a test check of compound challans 218 for the period 2019-24 revealed that 
despite a substantial number of vehicles failing to undergo PUC tests, only two vehicles 
in Dhalai District out of the three sampled districts were penalised for non-possession 
of valid PUC certificate. Thus, it indicates lacuna in enforcement activities as well as 
inadequate monitoring system, which resulted in low turnout for mandatory PUC tests.   
The Government replied (June 2025) that special enforcement drive would be 
conducted for identifying such vehicles with lapsed PUC certificates. It also stated that 
at present all pollution testing centres are integrated with VAHAN software and SMS 
service is active. NIC was intimated to stop all the transactions after expiry of PUCC 
license. 
5.2.10.14 Short realisation of compounding fee 
As per the provisions laid down in the MV Act, 1988 read with the MV (Amendment) 
Act, 2019, any person who contravenes any provision of the Act or of any rule, 
regulation or notification made thereunder shall be punishable for the offences with fine 
as notified under the Act, as detailed in Table 5.2.16. 
Table 5.2.16: Provisions of penalties under MV Act 
Offence Description Section Prescribed fine 
(in ₹) 
Disobedience of orders, obstruction, and refusal of 
information 179(1), 179(2) Up to 2000 
Driving-W/o DL/ DL expired/ DL not specific 181 5000 
Using vehicle in unsafe condition 190(2) 1000-10000 
Using vehicle without registration 192 2000 
Using vehicle without permit 192A(1) 10000 
Driving vehicle exceeding permissible weight 194(1) 20000 
Penalty for not wearing protective headgear. 194D 1000 
Taking vehicle without authority 197(1) 5000 
Examination of records of the three sampled districts revealed short realisation of 
compounding fee amounting to ₹ 10.43 lakh in 276 (10 per cent) cases out of 2,700 
 
218  A "compound challan" refers to a traffic or other violation that can be settled by paying a 
predetermined fine (compounding fee) to the authorities. It's a way to resolve minor offenses without 
a court appearance, often involving traffic violations like speeding, not wearing a helmet, or jumping 
a red light.  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
194
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
194 
compound challans (as furnished to audit) by the enforcement wing during the period 
2019-24. The position is summarised in Table 5.2.17. 
Table 5.2.17: District-wise short realisation of compounding fines 
Name of DTOs Fine realisable 
(in ₹) 
Fine compounded and 
realised (in ₹) 
Difference 
(in ₹) 
West Tripura 1,90,600 1,01,400 89,200 
Dhalai 6,48,000 1,31,400 5,16,600 
North Tripura 5,35,000 97,500 4,37,500 
Total 13,73,600 3,30,300 10,43,300 
The Government introduced heavy fines for traffic violations through various 
provisions of MV Act and Rules to discourage reckless and dangerous driving and to 
enhance road safety upto the optimum level. However, penalising traffic violators with 
minimal fine much lesser than the prescribed amounts undermines the intended purpose 
of deterrence of dangerous driving.  
While accepting the audit observation, the Government stated (June 2025) that 
previously fines were realised manually through compound challans but all transactions 
were now done through online system, and penalties were realised through POS 
machines with pre-installed penalty provisions. Therefore, there would be no scope of 
discrepancy in realisation.  
The fact remained that Government had already sustained a loss of ₹ 10.43 lakh before 
introduction of the online system.  
5.2.10.15 Absence of proper target and documentation for enforcement activities 
Chapter XIII (Section 177 to 210) of the MV Act, 1988 contains various provisions on 
offences and penalties which can be settled through compounding of challans by the 
enforcement officials. Compounding of challans under Motor Vehicle Act 
means settlement between the enforcement agencies and the offender by which challan 
is disposed through depositing of notified fee by the offender.  
Checking of records of the three sampled districts revealed that enforcement activities 
had been carried out without any written manual and systematic planning, which led to 
deficiency in enforcement activity as portrayed below:  
(a) Setting of targets without the required parameters: Though yearly targets for 
enforcement activities were set in all the three sampled districts (West Tripura, 
North Tripura and Dhalai) during 2019-24, however no parameters such as traffic 
density, vehicle movement, accident prone places and historical trends of 
offences, etc. were considered while setting the targets.  Thus, setting of targets 
without considering these parameters hinder the effectiveness, resource allocation 
and probable outcome of the enforcement activities. 
(b)  Non-allocation of enforcement activities: The documented allocation of 
enforcement activities to Motor Vehicle Inspectors (MVIs) was neither prepared 
nor followed; hence was not made available to audit for verification. Thus, in the 
absence of clear duty allocations, defined roles and responsibilities, the possibility 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
195
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
195 
of inefficiency and reluctance in enforcement activities cannot be ruled out.  
As a result, the number of offences detected during the period 2019-24 could not 
be correlated with the enforcement activities undertaken, hindering the 
assessment of effectiveness of activities and strategies by audit. 
(c)  Non preparation of duty registers and monthly progress report: No duty 
registers for MVIs were available for review, which raised concerns regarding the 
tracking of enforcement activities, accountability and overall transparency of 
operations. Besides, monthly progress reports of enforcement activities were also 
not prepared, which hindered the evaluation of the performance and the 
understanding of trends in offence detection.  
Thus, due to setting up of targets without the required and crucial parameters, non-
allocation of enforcement activities among the MVIs, as well as the absence of proper 
documentation (such as maintenance of duty register of MVIs, progress reports) of 
enforcement activities, meant that the efficiency and effectiveness of the enforcement 
activity could not be ascertained by audit. 
The Government replied (June 2025) that the Department had set target of revenue 
collection and enforcement drives for the year 2025-26 and accordingly, enforcement 
calendars have been issued to the DTOs. It was further replied that the revenue target 
for the year 2024-25 fixed by the Finance department was ₹ 153.85 crore and the same 
has been achieved and revenue of ₹ 155.19 crore was realised out of which ₹ 20.84 
crore was realised from enforcement drive.  
The reply of the Government was not acceptable as the mere achievement of revenue 
targets does not address the core issues raised by audit. The audit observations relate to 
the lack of a structured enforcement manual, absence of systematic planning and non-
documentation of enforcement activities all of which directly impact the effectiveness, 
transparency and accountability of the enforcement activities. Further, the achievement 
revenue targets cannot be held to be a substitute for the quality of the enforcement 
activities.  
Conclusion 
Lacunae in enforcement activity as well as inadequate monitoring resulted in low 
turnout of mandatory PUC tests of the vehicles. Lack in applying provisions related to 
compounding fees as well as lack of monitoring to identify deficiency of enforcement 
activity resulted in penalising with improper fine amount, which undermined the 
intended purpose of the Act and Rules.   
Due to setting up of targets without the required parameters, non-allocation of 
enforcement activities among the MVIs, coupled with absence of proper documentation 
of enforcement activities, the efficiency and effectiveness of the enforcement activity 
remained unascertained. 
Recommendation  
 The Department may increase the frequency and scope of enforcement actions to 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
196
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
196 
ensure compliance with PUC requirements. 
 The Department may establish enforcement targets based on critical parameters 
to enhance effectiveness of enforcement activity. 
 Fines may be collected from the defaulters strictly as per the prescribed provisions 
of the relevant Act and Rules.  
Audit objective 5: Whether DTOs have been provided with adequate manpower, 
equipment, and other resources to discharge the mandate as also 
to ensure public service delivery in a transparent and efficient 
manner 
 
5.2.10.16 Non-compliance of advisory issued by the MoRTH, GoI 
In compliance with the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s (SC) directions dated 10 August 2017 
passed in the matter of WP(C) No. 13029 of 1985 to combat air pollution and improve 
air quality across the country, MoRTH, GoI issued an advisory to all the State 
Governments across India on 29 August 2017. The advisory inter-alia included that the 
State Transport Departments across the Country (i) will mandate the establishment of 
a PUC centre at every fuel station in their State and (ii) introduce well-equipped mobile 
test centres and programme to check visible polluting vehicle. 
Analysis of information furnished (October 2024) to audit revealed that the Department 
neither authorised PUC centres to operate at fuel stations, nor established any mobile 
test centres (November 2024), even after a lapse of more than seven years since the 
issuance of the advisory by the MoRTH.  
This delay of over seven years undermines the SC and the MoRTH’s objectives to 
combat environmental pollution caused by vehicular emissions. The lack of initiative 
reflects inadequate enforcement and monitoring mechanisms, compromising the 
effectiveness of emission testing and allowing non-compliant vehicles to continue 
contributing to air pollution.  
The Government replied (June 2025) that the Department was preferring the places for 
establishing PUCC centres near petrol pumps.  
5.2.10.17 Non-implementation of departmental grievance redressal system  
Any IT application providing the citizen centric services should provide an appropriate 
grievance redressal system for systematic redressal of grievances. However, the 
Department did not implement the grievance redressal/ feedback system within 
VAHAN and SARATHI. Instead, various online grievance redressal systems 219 from 
which complaints/ grievances as received from the general public regarding services of 
VAHAN and SARATHI were forwarded to the Transport Department.  
 
219  Task Monitoring System, Chief Minister’s help line and Centralised Public Grievance Redressal and 
Monitoring System, etc. which were operated for all the departments/activities of the State. Separate 
designated nodal officers were appointed for each platform at State level and at Department level for 
monitoring. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
197
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 197 
However, records in support of number of grievances received, number of grievances 
resolved, average time taken to resolve the grievances and public feedback, etc. were 
not maintained by the JTC/ DTOs. Further, guidelines/ directions regarding the 
timelines for resolution of different category of complaints were not prescribed by the 
State Government. Moreover, periodical reporting system to the supervisory staff 
regarding grievances and their redressal were not in practice. Thus, the deficiencies in 
the grievance redressal system as pointed out could adversely affect the quality-of-
service delivered to the citizens.  
The Government replied (June 2025) that CPGRAMS, CM Helpline Portal, etc. 
grievance redressal portals were active for lodging complains by the citizen and, regular 
and prompt redressal was being done for complaints received through these portals.  
But the fact remained that the VAHAN and SARATHI did not have any grievance 
redressal/ feedback system which could ensure prompt and systematic redressal of 
grievances and ensure proper monitoring by the supervisory staff.  
5.2.10.18 Departmental manual not prepared 
To ensure proper and effective functioning of various wings within the Department, it 
is essential to establish a comprehensive departmental manual that defines the processes 
and procedures to be followed by staff at all levels. Such a manual serve as a 
cornerstone for operational efficiency, accountability and transparency.  
It was, however, noticed that no such manual existed within the Department. In the 
absence of such manual, various checks and balances to be exercised by various 
functionaries of the Department for registration of vehicles, levy of taxes, etc. were not 
available at one place. The absence of such manual not only hampers the consistency 
and efficiency but also increases the risk of errors and mismanagement. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Government stated (June 2025) that 
necessary steps would be taken in this regard.  
5.2.10.19 Shortage of manpower 
Analysis of the sanctioned strength, vis-à-vis men-in-position of the Department as on 
31 March 2024, revealed that against the 94 sanctioned posts of Chief Motor Vehicle 
Inspectors (CMVIs), Sr. Motor Vehicle Inspectors (Sr. MVIs), Motor Vehicle 
Inspectors (MVIs), Accountants, Upper Division Clerks (UDCs) and Lower Division 
Clerks-cum-Data Entry Operators (LDC-cum-DEO), 75 officers/ officials were in 
position, leaving a vacancy of 19 posts, which was around 20 per cent of the sanctioned 
posts as shown in Table 5.2.18. 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
198
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 198 
Table 5.2.18: Category wise sanctioned strength, men-in-position and vacant posts 
Sl. No. Name of post Sanctioned 
strength 
Men-in-
position Vacant posts 
1 CMVI 4 4 - 
2 Sr. MVI 6 6 + 1# - 
3 MVI 19 8 11 
4 Accountant 1 1 - 
5 UDC 6 6 - 
6 LDC-cum-DEO 58 50 8 
Total 94 75 19 
# one supernumerary post for Schedule Caste category has not been included in vacancy computation 
It may be seen from Table 5.2.18 that there was acute shortage in MVIs where 11 
(58 per cent) out of 19 sanctioned posts remained vacant. Since the MVIs do the 
inspections/enforcement activities, the acute shortage in MVIs may undermine the 
operational efficiency of the enforcement activities. Moreover, no initiative was taken 
to fill the existing vacancies by the Department during 2019-24, despite a substantial 
increase of vehicle population from 4,86,188 to 7,65,389 (57.42 per cent) during that 
period. 
The Government replied (June 2025) that the department is doing needful for filling 
and upgradation of technical and administrative staff.  
Conclusion 
Despite the MoRTH’s advisory mandating the establishment of PUC centres at fuel 
stations and the introduction of mobile test centres, the Department failed to authorise 
such centres and did not deploy mobile units as of November 2024, thus hampering the 
efforts to combat vehicular pollution and improve air quality. The absence of a 
comprehensive manual outlining the processes and procedures for staff at all levels was 
noticed.  A structured grievance redressal system was lacking. A significant shortfall in 
key enforcement staff especially MVIs limited field operations and enforcement 
coverage. 
Recommendation 
 The Department should immediately comply with the MoRTH’s advisory and 
mandate PUC centres to achieve the objective of combating environmental 
pollution in the State. The Department may take steps to integrate its own 
Departmental Grievance Redressal System in VAHAN and SARATHI for the 
larger public interest.  
 The Department may draft a detailed office/operational manual as a resource 
and guide for the employees and other stakeholders.  
 The Department may take steps to immediately fill up the existing vacancies. 
  
1
2
3
4
5
6

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
199
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
199 
REVENUE DEPARTMENT 
5.3 Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Collection of Stamp Duty and 
Registration Fee from Deed Registration” 
 
5.3.1 Introduction 
Stamp duty (SD) is a tax payable on certain documents specified by statute to make 
them legally effective. SD is charged on documents that are necessary for the legal 
recording of specific transactions. Registration fee (RF) refers to the fee levied and 
collected by the State Government for registration of documents. RF covers the 
administrative costs involved in processing an individual’s or entity’s registration for a 
particular program, event, or service.  
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India prescribes the division of powers between 
the Union Government and State Governments. As per List I-Union List of the Seventh 
Schedule, the Union Government has the power to legislate the rates of stamp duty on 
bills of exchange, promissory notes, bills of lading, letters of credit, insurance policies, 
transfer of shares, debentures, proxies and receipts. The stamp duties are levied by the 
Union Government but are collected and appropriated by the concerned States except 
on documents other than those mentioned above, which are levied and collected by the 
States as in the List II-State List in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. 
To enhance the speed, transparency, and accountability of the registration process, the 
Government of Tripura launched the Tripura Online Registration System (TORS) in 
2012. In March 2021, the State adopted the National Generic Document Registration 
System (NGDRS) - a standardised and customisable application developed for use by 
registration departments nationwide. Initially, NGDRS was implemented on a pilot 
basis in the Sub-Registrar Offices (SROs) of Jirania and Mohanpur in West Tripura 
District. Based on its performance, the system was rolled out to all SROs across the 
State in March 2022, replacing the TORS software entirely. For Computerised Stamp 
Duty Administration System (C-SDAS) and for collection of stamp duty through e-
stamping mechanism in Tripura, the Stock Holding Corporation of India Limited 
(SHCIL)220 was selected as the Central Record Keeping Agency (CRA). As per the 
agreement executed (November 2018) between the Government of Tripura and the 
SHCIL, the responsibilities of CRA was to create need-based infrastructure, hardware 
and software and connectivity for facilitating its operations on the e-stamping project; 
to facilitate selection of approved intermediaries for the e-stamping and collection of 
stamp duty; collection of money and generation of e-stamp certificates through the 
computer systems; and effecting remittances to the State after reconciliation of 
accounts.  The Deputy Director, Land Records and Settlement, Government of Tripura 
was nominated as the ‘Nodal Officer’ in July 2020 for monitoring the implementation 
and transactions of e-stamping. 
 
 
220  SHCIL acts as the CRA for collection of stamp duty through e-stamp in the State. It eliminates the 
need for physical stamp paper and provides an electronic method for paying stamp duty to the 
government. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
200
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
200 
Until the introduction of e-GRAS in 2019, the fees for registration of various 
documents, including sale deeds, was collected through treasury challans generated 
under Computerised Online Treasury Operation System. However, now the registration 
and other related fees are to be paid online through e-GRAS.  
5.3.2 Organisational set-up 
 
5.3.3 Trend of Revenue 
Actual receipts from stamp duty and registration fee during the years 2019-20 to 
2023-24, along with the total tax receipts during the period are shown in Table 5.3.1. 
Table 5.3.1: Trend of Revenue 
(₹ in crore)  
Year  
Budget 
Estimate 
(BE) 
Actual 
receipts 
Total 
actual 
receipts 
Percentage 
of variation 
to BE 
Total tax 
receipt of 
the State 
Percentage of 
actual receipts 
vis-à-vis total 
tax receipts SD RF SD RF 
2019-20 55.00 47.87 13.80 61.67 12.13 2,101.80 2.93 
2020-21 64.00 53.72 15.81 69.53 8.64 2,332.44 2.98 
2021-22 70.69 70.20 19.45 89.65 26.82 2,616.31 3.43 
2022-23 94.60 80.83 21.70 102.53 8.38 2,999.68 3.42 
2023-24 114.84 89.75 25.40 115.15 0.27 3,287.41 3.50 
Source: Budget at a Glance and Finance Accounts of the Government of Tripura  
It can be seen from Table 5.3.1 that the actual receipts exceeded the budget estimates 
every year during 2019-20 to 2023-24. The percentage of variation between budget 
estimates and actual receipts ranged between 0.27 per cent to 26.82 per cent to budget 
estimates. Contribution of revenues from stamp duty and registration fees to the total 
tax receipts of the State increased steadily from 2.93 per cent to 3.50 per cent over the 
period from 2019-20 to 2023-24 with a marginal decrease from 3.43 per cent   
in 2021-22 to 3.42 per cent in 2022-23. 


Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
201
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 201 
There was an increasing trend of revenue receipts from stamp duty and registration fees 
during the period from 2019-20 to 2023-24 in the State as depicted in Chart 5.3.1. 
 
Out of the total 1,62,521 deeds registered and ₹ 397.11 crore of stamp duty and 
registration fees received from deed registration during 2019 to 2024 in the State, 
67,528 deeds (42 per cent) amounting to ₹ 251.73 crore (63.39 per cent) pertained to 
West Tripura district as shown in Chart 5.3.2 and 5.3.3. 
 
 
 
 
61.67
69.53
89.65
102.53
115.15
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
(₹ in crore)
Chart 5.3.1: Year-wise total receipts of stamp duty and registration fees 
during 2019 to 2024
18.52
67.53
12.33
6.41 10.72
10.66
20.24 16.11
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Number of deeds registered 
(in thousand)
Chart 5.3.2: District-wise total number of deeds registered, and stamp 
duty and registration fees received from deed registration during 2019 
to 2024

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
202
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
202 
 
5.3.4 Audit objectives 
The Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Collection of Stamp Duty and Registration 
Fees from Deed Registration” was conducted to get a reasonable assurance regarding: 
 the adequacy of resources like infrastructure, manpower, equipment, etc.; 
 adequacy, proficiency of the system and procedures relating to the method of 
data collection, compilation, analysis, fixation of market value and assessment 
and collection of stamp duty and registration fees; and 
 adequacy and performance of internal control mechanism of the Department in 
ensuring collection of stamp duty and registration fees. 
5.3.5 Audit criteria 
The audit objectives were benchmarked against the following sources of audit criteria 
 The Indian Stamp Act, 1899 and Rules framed thereunder; 
 The Indian Registration Act, 1908; 
 The Tripura Registration Rules, 1954; 
 The Tripura Stamp (Payment of Duty by means of e-Stamping) Rules, 2018; 
 Circular/ instructions issued by the Inspector General of Registration, 
Government of Tripura from time to time. 
5.3.6 Scope of audit and methodology 
The SSCA was conducted between July 2024 to September 2024 covering the period 
from April 2019 to March 2024 alongwith scrutiny of records of the office of the 
Inspector General of Registration; (Secretary, Revenue Department, Government of 
Tripura) Directorate of Land Records and Settlement; two District Registrars and four 
Sub-Registrars. 
25.57
251.73
18.33 11.41 15.32 16.02 31.64 27.07
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Stamp Duty & Registration Fees
received (₹ in crore)
Chart 5.3.3: District-wise amount of stamp duty and registration fees 
received from deed registration during 2019 to 2024

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
203
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
203 
Out of the eight districts, two districts 221 (25 per cent  of the districts) and four 
registration offices i.e. the Sub-Registry Offices 222 under the control of the District 
Registrars of the two districts were selected for SSCA by using the Probability 
Proportional to Size Without Replacement and the Simple Random Sampling Without 
Replacement methods respectively.  
As per Section 17 and 18 of Indian Registration Act, 1908, there are 19 registrable and 
34 non-registrable articles in Tripura that require stamp duty. Out of these, all 19 
registrable articles (Appendix 5.3.1) were covered in audit. 
In addition, all the lease agreements of the 272 bank branches and Automated Teller 
Machines (ATMs) under the jurisdictions of the four sampled Sub-Registrars were also 
covered during the audit. The draft audit findings were issued (March 2025) to the 
Government and were also discussed in the Exit Conference (June 2025) held with the 
Secretary, Revenue Department.  The views expressed during the exit conference and 
the reply received (June 2025) from the Government were suitably incorporated in the 
report. 
5.3.7 Audit findings 
Audit objective 1: To assess whether the resources like infrastructure, manpower, 
equipment, etc. are adequate 
5.3.7.1 Manpower position 
The manpower position of the office of the Department of Revenue of Government of 
Tripura against the various categories of post under registration organisation is shown 
in Table 5.3.2. 
Table 5.3.2: Statement showing vacancy position of officer/ staff under registration 
organisation 
(in number) 
Name of the post Sanctioned Strength Vacancy 
District Sub-Registrar 1 1 
Sub-Registrar 5 5 
Supervisor Technical 4 4 
Head Clerk/Accountant 26 23 
Record Keeper/UD Clerk 41 32 
Moharar 103 90 
Record Supplier 25 25 
Peon/Night Guard 53 46 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
There is an alarming level of vacancies across all sanctioned posts, with an overall 
shortfall of 226 out of 258 positions, i.e. approximately 88 per cent vacancy rate in the 
registration organisation.  
As can be seen in the Table 5.3.2, all District Sub-Registrar and Sub-Registrar posts 
are vacant (100 per cent ), seriously impairing registration functions and service 
 
221 West Tripura and Gomati Districts 
222 Sadar and Jirania under West Tripura District; Udaipur and Amarpur under Gomati District 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
204
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
204 
delivery. Supervisory and technical roles (Supervisor Technical – 100 per cent  
vacancy) are also entirely unstaffed, affecting oversight and technical support to the 
system. 
Audit also noted acute deficiency in support staff with Moharars (87 per cent), Record 
Keepers/UD Clerks (78 per cent), and Peons/Night Guards (87 per cent ) are largely 
vacant, undermining the basic functioning of offices, record management, and security.  
The high vacancy rate is likely to affect the efficient functioning and scaling up of the 
NGDRS system, especially in areas requiring data entry, document verification, and 
public interface. Insufficient staffing raises concerns about delays in service delivery, 
risks of record mismanagement, and non-compliance with mandatory registration 
procedures. 
Audit noticed that neither any assessment of manpower requirement was done nor 
separate sanctioned strength of employees exclusively for the purposes of registration 
of deeds was maintained. The registration works were being done by the existing 
manpower of the registration organisation and with the deputed staff from the Districts’ 
Administration.  
In reply, the Government stated (June 2025) that the process of recruitment/deputation 
would be taken up.  
5.3.7.2 Deficiencies in the National  Generic Document Registration System 
Government of Tripura implemented upgraded registration system NGDRS, a 
common, generic and configurable application developed for registration departments 
across the country, on a pilot basis in two SROs of Jirania and Mohanpur sub-divisions 
under West Tripura District which was later extended to all the other Sub-Registrar 
Offices from March 2022. Audit Scrutiny of the records at the four sampled SROs 
revealed the following: 
(a)  Not ensuring biometric based authentication on registration 
During registration of the documents, the biometric data (thumb impression) of the 
parties and witnesses for the document under registration were taken and embossed on 
the document. However, this biometric data was stored in JPEG format and no 
provision has been made in NGDRS for verifying their identity with the Unique 
Identification Authority of India (UIDAI)223, Government of India database. Biometric 
verification via UIDAI acts as a robust gatekeeper, ensuring only genuine, consenting 
parties’ complete property registrations. Matching biometric data (fingerprint/iris) with 
the Aadhaar database confirms a person’s identity. Moreover, biometric authentication 
is unique and non-replicable. One individual cannot have multiple Aadhaar-verified 
identities. Since Aadhaar authentication requires the physical presence of the parties 
 
223  UIDAI is a statutory authority established under the provisions of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of 
Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (“Aadhaar Act 2016”) on 12 July 
2016 by the Government of India, under the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. 
UIDAI was created to issue Unique Identification numbers (UID), named as "Aadhaar", to all 
residents of India.  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
205
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 205 
involved at the time of registration, it prevents unauthorised registrations without the 
knowledge or consent of property owners or buyers.  Thus, non-verification of the 
biometric data with the UIDAI database increases the risk of fraud while registration of 
the documents.  
To support this fact, audit’s examination of records revealed an instance of registration 
of sale document using fake documents (Aadhaar cards, etc.) in the Sub-Registrar, 
Amarpur in January 2023 which could have been prevented if the identity (biometric 
data) of the seller was verified with the UIDAI database at the time of registration. In 
this instance, a fake Aadhaar card  in the name of Shri Kandura Debbarma was used 
during registration of a sale document. However, following a complaint from the 
original owner, verification revealed that the Aadhaar card actually belonged to another 
person. Had the provision of verification of the bio-metric data with the UIDAI 
database existed in NGDRS, the registration of the sale document using the fake 
document could have been prevented. Other instances involving similar fraudulent 
activity which were undetected cannot be ruled out. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Government replied (June 2025) that the 
issue of incorporating biometric validation with UIDAI had been taken up with the 
District Registrars and the Director, Land Records and Settlement. The Government 
further stated that (i) the Directorate of Information and Technology under Industries 
and Commerce Department, Government of Tripura had been requested for integration 
of Aadhaar verification into the NGDRS portal and (ii) the Tripura Registration Rules 
had been amended (May 2025) for consent based Aadhaar authentication at the time of 
registration of documents. 
(b)  Validation checks for mandatory entry of Permanent Account Number not 
provided 
As per Section 139 A (5) of the Income Tax (IT) Act, 1961 read with Rule 114 B of IT 
Rules, Permanent Account Number (PAN) is to be quoted for sale or purchase of any 
immovable property for an amount exceeding ₹ 10 lakh. 
As per Section 285BA of the IT Act read with Rule 114E of the IT Rules, 1962, the 
Statement of Financial Transaction (SFT) 12 in Form 61A is required to be furnished 
to the Income Tax Department by the Registrar/Sub-Registrars for purchase or sale of 
immovable property valued at ₹ 30.00 lakh or more by any person under his 
jurisdiction. SFT in Form 61 also needs to be furnished in respect of transactions where 
declarations in Form 60 are received from the individuals who do not have PAN. 
Examination of records and documents related to the registration of deeds under Sub-
Registrar, Amarpur revealed that out of 58 sale deeds of immovable properties valued 
above ₹ 10 lakh, in 48 cases, PAN of sellers/purchasers was not quoted while 
registering the deeds. Moreover, Sub-Registrar, Amarpur could not provide 
declarations of the individuals who did not have PAN in Form 60 in the 48 deeds. The 
details are shown in Table 5.3.3. 
 
 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
206
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
206 
Table 5.3.3: Non-consideration of PAN 
Period 
Total number 
of sale deeds 
valued more 
than ₹ 10 lakh 
Total 
amount of 
sale value 
(₹ in lakh) 
Total number of 
deeds where 
PAN was quoted 
Total number 
of deeds where 
PAN was not 
quoted 
Value of sale 
deeds without 
PAN 
(₹ in lakh) 
2019-20 4 70.13 1 3 40.13 
2020-21 7 121.20 0 7 121.20 
2021-22 13 204.13 0 13 204.13 
2022-23 18 321.60 3 15 269.94 
2023-24 16 205.81 6 10 133.71 
Total 58 922.87 10 48 769.11 
 
Source: Registered sale deeds and other records 
Thus, out of 58 sale deeds of immovable property valued more than ₹10 lakh involving 
₹ 922.87 lakh during the period from 2019-20 to 2023-24, non-consideration of PAN 
of the seller/purchaser in 48 sale deeds (82.76 per cent) involving ₹ 769.11 lakh (83.34 
per cent), indicates inadequate and poor validation control in the system along with 
non-compliance of the stipulated rules. In the absence of PAN, these high-value 
transactions escape direct linkage with the Income Tax database, reducing traceability 
and enabling tax evasion. Hence, the possibility of the recipient (seller) evading income 
tax payment cannot be ruled out. 
Further, audit also noticed that out of 995 SFTs 224 filed by the District Sub-Registrar, 
Sadar during the period 2020-2022, invalid PAN was quoted in 98 SFTs 225 indicating 
that the necessary validation rules for the mandatory  entry of the executant’s PAN 
before registering the documents have not been provided in the System, leaving the 
scope for generation of incomplete SFT reports. 
The failure to collect or validate PAN violates mandatory provisions of the IT Act and 
reduces the reliability of financial reporting to tax authorities. Without PAN linkage, 
the transactions cannot be effectively monitored by the Income Tax Department, 
creating scope for income concealment by parties involved. The absence of mandatory 
validation checks for PAN entry allows the registration of incomplete or non-compliant 
sale deeds. 
In reply, the Government stated (June 2025) that the District Registrars and the 
Director, Land Records and Settlement had been instructed to initiate the process for 
Aadhaar based authentication of the executants for registration of deeds and to 
introduce the quoting of PAN of the executants for registering of documents valued 
more than ₹ 10 lakh.  
Recommendations 
 The Department may assess the staffing needs and address the issue of staff 
shortage for the purpose of registration of deeds. 
 The Department may initiate the process of Aadhaar based authentication of 
 
224 2020-21: 437; 2021-22: 558 
225 2020-21: 33; 2021-22: 65 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
207
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
207 
the executants for registration of deeds and may also introduce the requirement 
of quoting of PAN of the executants before registering the documents valued 
more than ₹ 10 lakh. 
Audit objective 2: To assess the adequacy, proficiency of the system and procedures 
relating to the method of data collection, compilation, analysis, 
fixation of market value and assessment and collection of stamp 
duty and registration fees 
5.3.7.3 Loss of ₹ 52.36 lakh due to non-registration of lease deeds of bank 
branches and ATMs 
Section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908 provides for compulsory registration of the 
leases of immovable property from year to year, or for any term exceeding one year or 
reserving a yearly rent. 
Examination of records related to the registration of deeds under the sampled four Sub-
Registrars226 and lease deeds of 272 bank branches and ATMs within their jurisdictions, 
revealed 156 instances where bank branches (128) and ATMs (28) did not register their 
lease agreements/deeds, despite being required to do so under the Act, as detailed in 
Table 5.3.4. 
Table 5.3.4: Loss of revenue due to non-registration of lease agreements 
Name of 
the Sub- 
Registrar 
No. of 
bank 
branches 
and 
ATMs 
Total number of bank 
branches/ ATMs where the 
lease agreements were not 
registered 
Loss of revenue due to non-
registration of lease 
agreements (₹ in lakh) 
Branch ATM Total Stamp 
duty227 
Regn. 
Fee Total 
Udaipur 50 26 4 30 3.89 1.27 5.16 
Amarpur 18 9 3 12 1.22 0.39 1.61 
Sadar 167 74 19 93 32.84 10.63 43.47 
Jirania 37 19 2 21 1.62 0.50 2.12 
Total 272 128 28 156 39.57 12.79 52.36 
Source: Lease documents/deeds of bank branches and ATMs 
Thus, non-registration of the lease agreements/deeds had resulted in a loss of 
₹ 52.36  lakh to the Government exchequer. The details are shown in Appendices 5.3.2 
(A), 5.3.2 (B), 5.3.2(C) and 5.3.2 (D). 
The failure to ensure registration of lease agreements led to significant revenue leakage, 
with ₹ 52.36 lakh lost in stamp duty and registration fees. This reflects systemic 
weaknesses in enforcing compliance with statutory provisions, particularly among 
institutional entities like banks. The absence of registered leases also poses legal risks, 
 
226  Udaipur, Amarpur, Sadar and Jirania 
227  Up to one year: three per cent SD and 1.50 per cent RF on the total sum payable under the lease, 
more than one year and up to five years: three per cent SD and 1.50 per cent RF on average amount 
equal to one year rent, more than five years and up to 10 years: five per cent SD and 1.50 per cent 
RF on average amount equal to one year rent, more than 10 years and up to 20 years: five per cent  
SD and 1.50 per cent RF on average amount equal to two years rent, more than 20 years and up to 30 
years: five per cent SD and 1.50 per cent RF on average amount equal to three years rent and more 
than 30 years: five per cent SD and 1.50 per cent RF on average amount equal to four years rent 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
208
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 208 
as such agreements may have limited enforceability in disputes. Moreover, it creates an 
inequitable environment where ordinary citizens are required to comply with legal 
norms, while larger institutions are able to bypass them without consequence, thereby 
undermining the credibility and effectiveness of the registration system. 
The systemic failure to enforce mandatory registration of such leases not only weakens 
compliance with legal provisions but also reflects inadequate oversight by the 
Registration Department in monitoring and penalising non-compliance, particularly 
from institutional entities like banks. 
It was further revealed that out of the 128 bank branches, 31 (24 per cent) had been 
functioning for 10 to 20 years and 51 (40 per cent) functioning for 20 years without 
registering their lease agreements, as shown in Chart 5.3.4. 
 
 
The analysis of lease agreement compliance by bank branches under the jurisdictions 
of sampled Sub-Registrar Offices revealed that a significant number of branches 
operated for prolonged periods without registering their lease deeds as mandated by 
law. Specifically, 31 bank branches (24 per cent) had been operating for 10 to 20 years, 
and another 51 branches (40 per cent) for over 20 years, without executing registered 
lease agreements. This long-term non-compliance highlights a persistent and systemic 
disregard of Section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908, which mandates registration of 
lease deeds for terms exceeding one year. 
Against the total number of bank branches under the jurisdictions of the sampled Sub-
Registrars, Chart 5.3.5 depicts bank-wise number of branches which were functioning 
without registering their lease agreements/deeds. 
The extent of the lapse is further underscored by Chart 5.3.5, which shows that several 
banks, including major public and private sector institutions, have numerous branches 
functioning without fulfilling registration requirements. While some banks had fewer 
than five non-compliant branches (grouped under "Others"), the overall trend suggests 
widespread institutional non-compliance. 
14
5
27 31
51
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0-3 Years 3-5 Years 5-10 Years 10-20 Years More than 20
Years
(in number)
Chart 5.3.4: Number of bank branches that did not register their lease 
agreements/ deeds
Number of Bank Branches

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
209
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
209 
 
N.B.- Banks with less than five branches without registration of deeds, viz., Axis Bank, Canara Bank, 
UCO Bank, Bank of India, etc. are mentioned as ‘Others’. 
This situation not only indicates chronic regulatory oversight failure but also suggests 
that substantial stamp duty and registration fees have gone uncollected over decades, 
causing cumulative revenue loss to the State. The lack of registered leases also 
undermines the legal enforceability of tenancy arrangements, potentially affecting 
dispute resolution and title clarity. Such longstanding gaps weaken both the legal and 
fiscal framework of property registration in the State. 
In reply, the Government stated (June 2025) that the Director, Institutional Finance 
under Finance Department, Government of Tripura, had been requested to take up the 
matter with all the banks working in Tripura for ensuring the registration and renewal 
of lease deeds of their branches and ATMs.  
5.3.7.4 Short levy of stamp duty and registration fees of ₹ 6.01 lakh 
 
(a) Short levy of stamp duty and registration fee due to incorrect calculation 
According to the Section 78 of the Registration Act, 1908, the State Government is 
responsible for determining the registration fees. Further, Section 80 ibid, stipulates that 
all the fees for registration of documents shall be payable on the presentation of such 
documents. 
As per Section 3 read with Schedule I of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 and the Indian 
Stamp (Tripura Fifth Amendment) Act, 2020, the rates of stamp duties for different 
registrable documents in Tripura has been fixed. 
Examination of records related to the registration of lease deeds under the sampled 
Sub-Registrars revealed 34 instances of short-levied stamp duty (₹ 4.06 lakh) and 
81
23
46
39
31
5
10
9
14
16
42
26
13
5
5
7
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Others
TSCB
TGB
SBI
PNB
NESF Bank
HDFC Bank
Bandhan Bank
Chart 5.3.5: Bank-wise number of branches which did not register their 
lease agreements/deeds
Number of bank branches without registered deeds
Total number of bank branches

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
210
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 210 
42 instances of short-levied registration fees (₹ 1.47 lakh) as detailed in Table 5.3.5 
and Appendix 5.3.3, due to incorrect calculation. 
Table 5.3.5: Short levy of stamp duty and registration fee 
 
Name of the 
Sub-
Registrar 
No. of instances of short levy 
of stamp duty and registration 
fee (in number) 
Short levy of registration fee 
(₹ in lakh) 
Stamp duty Registration fee Stamp duty Registration 
fee Total 
Udaipur 12 15 0.71 0.30 1.01 
Amarpur 6 7 0.38 0.12 0.50 
Sadar 15 17 2.95 1.03 3.98 
Jirania 1 3 0.02 0.02 0.04 
Total 34 42 4.06 1.47 5.53 
Source: Lease documents/deeds 
(b) Short levy of stamp duty and registration fee due to incorrect valuation of 
properties 
As per Article 31 of Schedule I of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, in case of exchange of 
properties, the stamp duty should be levied as a Conveyance (No. 23 of Schedule I) for 
a consideration equal to the value of the property of greatest value as set forth in such 
instrument. 
As per Article 23 of Schedule I of the Indian Stamp (Tripura Fifth Amendment) Act, 
2020, where the amount or the value of consideration of conveyance exceeds ₹ 900 but 
does not exceed ₹ 1,000, the duty of ₹ 50 has to be levied and for every ₹ 500 or part 
thereof in excess of ₹ 1,000, ₹ 25 has to be levied. 
Examination of records related to the registration of deeds under the Sub-Registrar, 
Amarpur revealed that there were two instances of short levy of stamp duty and 
registration fees due to incorrect valuation of properties as detailed in Table 5.3.6. 
Table 5.3.6: Short levy of stamp duty and registration fee 
(in ₹) 
Document 
Number 
Token 
number 
Date of 
registration 
Highest 
considerati
on value 
among the 
exchanged 
properties 
Value taken 
into 
considerati
on 
Stamp duty 
to be paid 
(@5  
per cent) 
Stamp duty 
actually 
paid 
Short levy 
of stamp 
duty 
Regn. Fee 
to be paid 
@ 1.5  
per cent) 
Regn. Fee 
actually 
paid 
Short levy 
of Regn. 
fee 
I-16378 of 
2022 
2022000
0015517 01.08.2022 4,13,438 42,000 20,672 2,100 18,572 6202 633 5,569 
I-16379 of 
2022 
2022000
0015518 01.08.2022 4,13,438 42,000 20,672 2,100 18,572 6202 633 5,569 
Total 37,144  11,138 
Source: Records pertaining to registered deeds 
The cumulative short levy of ₹ 6.01 lakh highlights significant lapses in the registration 
process, including weak internal controls, errors in fee calculation, and failure to apply 
appropriate valuation rules. These deficiencies suggest inadequate oversight and lack 
of proper training among Sub-Registrar staff in implementing the provisions of the 
Indian Stamp Act and the State’s amended fee schedules. As a result, the State 
Government suffered avoidable revenue losses. 
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 210 
42 instances of short-levied registration fees (₹ 1.47 lakh) as detailed in Table 5.3.5 
and Appendix 5.3.3, due to incorrect calculation. 
Table 5.3.5: Short levy of stamp duty and registration fee 
 
Name of the 
Sub-
Registrar 
No. of instances of short levy 
of stamp duty and registration 
fee (in number) 
Short levy of registration fee 
(₹ in lakh) 
Stamp duty Registration fee Stamp duty Registration 
fee Total 
Udaipur 12 15 0.71 0.30 1.01 
Amarpur 6 7 0.38 0.12 0.50 
Sadar 15 17 2.95 1.03 3.98 
Jirania 1 3 0.02 0.02 0.04 
Total 34 42 4.06 1.47 5.53 
Source: Lease documents/deeds 
(b) Short levy of stamp duty and registration fee due to incorrect valuation of 
properties 
As per Article 31 of Schedule I of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, in case of exchange of 
properties, the stamp duty should be levied as a Conveyance (No. 23 of Schedule I) for 
a consideration equal to the value of the property of greatest value as set forth in such 
instrument. 
As per Article 23 of Schedule I of the Indian Stamp (Tripura Fifth Amendment) Act, 
2020, where the amount or the value of consideration of conveyance exceeds ₹ 900 but 
does not exceed ₹ 1,000, the duty of ₹ 50 has to be levied and for every ₹ 500 or part 
thereof in excess of ₹ 1,000, ₹ 25 has to be levied. 
Examination of records related to the registration of deeds under the Sub-Registrar, 
Amarpur revealed that there were two instances of short levy of stamp duty and 
registration fees due to incorrect valuation of properties as detailed in Table 5.3.6. 
Table 5.3.6: Short levy of stamp duty and registration fee 
(in ₹) 
Document 
Number 
Token 
number 
Date of 
registration 
Highest 
considerati
on value 
among the 
exchanged 
properties 
Value taken 
into 
considerati
on 
Stamp duty 
to be paid 
(@5  
per cent) 
Stamp duty 
actually 
paid 
Short levy 
of stamp 
duty 
Regn. Fee 
to be paid 
@ 1.5  
per cent) 
Regn. Fee 
actually 
paid 
Short levy 
of Regn. 
fee 
I-16378 of 
2022 
2022000
0015517 01.08.2022 4,13,438 42,000 20,672 2,100 18,572 6202 633 5,569 
I-16379 of 
2022 
2022000
0015518 01.08.2022 4,13,438 42,000 20,672 2,100 18,572 6202 633 5,569 
Total 37,144  11,138 
Source: Records pertaining to registered deeds 
The cumulative short levy of ₹ 6.01 lakh highlights significant lapses in the registration 
process, including weak internal controls, errors in fee calculation, and failure to apply 
appropriate valuation rules. These deficiencies suggest inadequate oversight and lack 
of proper training among Sub-Registrar staff in implementing the provisions of the 
Indian Stamp Act and the State’s amended fee schedules. As a result, the State 
Government suffered avoidable revenue losses. 
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 210 
42 instances of short-levied registration fees (₹ 1.47 lakh) as detailed in Table 5.3.5 
and Appendix 5.3.3, due to incorrect calculation. 
Table 5.3.5: Short levy of stamp duty and registration fee 
 
Name of the 
Sub-
Registrar 
No. of instances of short levy 
of stamp duty and registration 
fee (in number) 
Short levy of registration fee 
(₹ in lakh) 
Stamp duty Registration fee Stamp duty Registration 
fee Total 
Udaipur 12 15 0.71 0.30 1.01 
Amarpur 6 7 0.38 0.12 0.50 
Sadar 15 17 2.95 1.03 3.98 
Jirania 1 3 0.02 0.02 0.04 
Total 34 42 4.06 1.47 5.53 
Source: Lease documents/deeds 
(b) Short levy of stamp duty and registration fee due to incorrect valuation of 
properties 
As per Article 31 of Schedule I of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, in case of exchange of 
properties, the stamp duty should be levied as a Conveyance (No. 23 of Schedule I) for 
a consideration equal to the value of the property of greatest value as set forth in such 
instrument. 
As per Article 23 of Schedule I of the Indian Stamp (Tripura Fifth Amendment) Act, 
2020, where the amount or the value of consideration of conveyance exceeds ₹ 900 but 
does not exceed ₹ 1,000, the duty of ₹ 50 has to be levied and for every ₹ 500 or part 
thereof in excess of ₹ 1,000, ₹ 25 has to be levied. 
Examination of records related to the registration of deeds under the Sub-Registrar, 
Amarpur revealed that there were two instances of short levy of stamp duty and 
registration fees due to incorrect valuation of properties as detailed in Table 5.3.6. 
Table 5.3.6: Short levy of stamp duty and registration fee 
(in ₹) 
Document 
Number 
Token 
number 
Date of 
registration 
Highest 
considerati
on value 
among the 
exchanged 
properties 
Value taken 
into 
considerati
on 
Stamp duty 
to be paid 
(@5  
per cent) 
Stamp duty 
actually 
paid 
Short levy 
of stamp 
duty 
Regn. Fee 
to be paid 
@ 1.5  
per cent) 
Regn. Fee 
actually 
paid 
Short levy 
of Regn. 
fee 
I-16378 of 
2022 
2022000
0015517 01.08.2022 4,13,438 42,000 20,672 2,100 18,572 6202 633 5,569 
I-16379 of 
2022 
2022000
0015518 01.08.2022 4,13,438 42,000 20,672 2,100 18,572 6202 633 5,569 
Total 37,144  11,138 
Source: Records pertaining to registered deeds 
The cumulative short levy of ₹ 6.01 lakh highlights significant lapses in the registration 
process, including weak internal controls, errors in fee calculation, and failure to apply 
appropriate valuation rules. These deficiencies suggest inadequate oversight and lack 
of proper training among Sub-Registrar staff in implementing the provisions of the 
Indian Stamp Act and the State’s amended fee schedules. As a result, the State 
Government suffered avoidable revenue losses. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
211
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 211 
In reply to Sub-paragraphs 5.3.7.4 (a) and 5.3.7.4 (b), the Government stated (June 
2025) that the District Registrars had been instructed to organise training programmes 
for Sub-Registry staff and officers with emphasis on correct calculation of stamp duty 
and registration fees. Moreover, the Department would develop a software tool to assist 
in pre-calculation of stamp duty and registration fee for the citizens, deed writers, and 
officials at the time of purchasing the e-stamps.   
5.3.7.5 Non-cancellation of e-stamps posing the risk of their reuse 
As per Rule 31 of Tripura Stamp (Payment of Duty by means of e-Stamping) Rules, 
2018, the Collector may, on an application in Form 6 accompanied by the original 
“spoiled” or “unused” or “not required for use” e-stamp certificate’, if satisfied as to 
the facts and circumstances of the case, make allowance for such e-stamp certificate in 
accordance with the provisions of sections 49 to 55 contained in Chapter V of the Act. 
Further, as per Rule 30 ibid , after verifying the details, the Registering Officer or 
District Registering Officer, District Registrar, Superintendent of Stamps or any other 
officer authorised by the Appointing Authority shall lock the e-stamp Certificate 
maintained in the central database server of the Central Record Keeping Agency.  
Rule 32 (1) ibid stipulates that the Collector shall have the power to cancel the e-stamp 
certificate, after verification and a certificate to this effect should be endorsed on the 
original e-stamp Certificate under his seal and signature. 
Examination of refund cases of stamp duty in two sampled District Registrars revealed 
that the District Registrars, Gomati and West Tripura had refunded stamp duty of seven 
and 186 e-stamp certificates respectively after deduction of 10 per cent of the stamp 
duty. However, none of the seven cases involving ₹ 2.80 lakh in District Registrar, 
Gomati were cancelled/locked on the SHCIL’s website.  
Non-cancellation of stamps on the SHCIL’s website after refund is fraught with the risk 
of re-use of the refunded e-stamps. 
This non-compliance poses a serious risk of the refunded e-stamps being reused 
fraudulently, leading to potential revenue loss for the State and compromising the 
integrity of the stamp duty administration system. The failure to cancel or lock e-stamps 
after refund also reflects weak enforcement of procedural safeguards and inadequate 
coordination between the registration authorities and the Central Record Keeping 
Agency. 
In reply, the Government stated (June 2025) that the Department had taken up the 
procedural correction where refund of stamp duty could be initiated only after providing 
the certificate of locking of stamp by the District Registrars.  Further, the Director, Land 
Records and Settlement had been instructed to take up the matter with the SHCIL for 
cancellation/locking of such e-stamps to prevent their misuse. 
  
 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
212
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
212 
Recommendations 
 The Department may inspect the public as well as private institutions/business 
premises and check their lease agreements, if any, in a phase-wise manner for 
ensuring registration of lease documents in cases of hire/lease for more than 12 
months. 
 The Department may arrange system generated cancellation and locking of the 
e-stamps on the SHCIL’s website immediately after refund of the amount. 
Audit objective 3: To assess the adequacy and performance of internal control 
mechanism of the Department in ensuring collection of stamp 
duty and registration fees 
5.3.7.6 Internal control 
Internal control mechanism is an integral and continuous process of any management 
in ensuring prudent financial management which serves as an effective mechanism to 
ensure accountability. The control mechanism in the department should be guided by 
Acts, Rules, Manuals, Compendium of instructions, etc. to protect the resources of the 
government and to ensure that revenue is correctly levied and timely realised by the 
government. Internal control mechanism to ensure realisation of stamp duty and 
registration fees was not effective as commented in the preceding paragraphs. Other 
cases of weak control noticed in audit are given in succeeding paragraphs. 
(a)  Non-providing of trainings to the staff of Sub-Registrar Offices 
As per clause 10 of the agreement (November 2018) between the Revenue Department, 
Government of Tripura and the SHCIL, the Stock Holding shall  provide suitable and 
adequate training to such of the Government personnel as the Government may 
nominate on the operation and the use of their system. Furthermore, the training for the 
first 10 officials will be provided free of cost. Additional training and refresher courses 
by other participants will be provided by SHCIL at the expense of the State. 
It was, however, noticed that no training was provided by the CRA (SHCIL) to the staff 
of the sampled four Sub-Registrar Offices. 
On being enquired (November 2024) by audit, the Directorate of Land Records and 
Settlement, Government of Tripura informed (February 2025) that training on e-stamp 
operations for Government officials would be imparted shortly. 
This lack of training has resulted in operational inefficiencies and increased the 
likelihood of procedural errors in handling e-stamp certificates, as observed in multiple 
audit findings. The failure to equip staff with the necessary skills and knowledge 
undermines the effective implementation of the e-stamping system and exposes the 
process to risks such as incorrect usage, non-compliance with prescribed procedures, 
and delayed service delivery. While the Directorate of Land Records and Settlement 
has assured that training will be conducted shortly, the delay reflects weak planning 
and oversight in operationalising critical reforms, highlighting the urgent need for 
institutionalised capacity building and timely execution of contractual obligations to 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
213
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 213 
ensure smooth and compliant functioning of Sub-Registrar Offices. 
In reply, the Government stated (June 2025) that the Director, Land Records and 
Settlement had been instructed to initiate the process of comprehensive training of the 
officers and staff involved in registration process with the help of SHCIL The first 
round of training would be taken up shortly in the District Registries and Sub-
Registries. 
b)  Non-existence of internal audit 
Internal audit is a vital component of internal control to enable an organisation to assure 
itself that the prescribed systems are functioning reasonably well. The Directorate of 
Audit, functioning since 2002 under the administrative control of the Finance 
Department, Government of Tripura, has been authorised by the State Government to 
conduct periodical internal audit of the offices and institutions under all State 
Government Departments, Autonomous Bodies, etc. 
As per the information furnished (January 2025) by the Directorate of Audit, out of the 
23 Sub-Registrar offices in the State, only seven Sub-Registrars were audited during 
2019-24 as per the Annual Audit Plan. It was also noticed that no audit observation on 
the collection of stamp duty and registration fees from deed registration were raised 
during this period. 
The internal audit mechanism, a critical element of internal control, was found to be 
largely absent in the functioning of Sub-Registrar Offices in Tripura. Despite the 
Directorate of Audit being authorised to conduct regular audits of all State Government 
offices, only seven out of 23 Sub-Registrar Offices were audited during the five-year 
period from 2019 to 2024. Moreover, none of these audits raised any observations 
related to the collection of stamp duty and registration fees, which are key revenue 
functions of these offices. This indicates a significant oversight gap in monitoring 
financial compliance and operational efficiency. The lack of comprehensive and 
focused internal audit weakens accountability, increases the risk of revenue leakage, 
and undermines the ability of the registration department to detect systemic lapses or 
procedural deviations in a timely manner. 
During exit conference the Department stated (June 2025) that necessary arrangement 
would be made for audit of all sub-registries by the internal audit at least once in every 
five years. 
In reply, the Government stated (June 2025) that the Director, Internal Audit under 
Finance Department, Government of Tripura had been requested to arrange the 
preparation of schedule to conduct internal audit of all the sub-registry offices in regular 
interval.  
c) Absence of designated Grievance Redressal Officer 
As per Chapter IX of the “Tripura Stamp (Payment of Duty by means of e-Stamping) 
Rules, 2018”, the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority may designate the Grievance 
Redressal Officer in the districts to inquire into the complaints received against the 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
214
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
214 
misconduct or irregularities of the CRA or its Authorised Collection Centres or any 
other official related to the implementation of the e-stamping system. 
It was, however, noticed that no Grievance Redressal Officer had been designated in 
the sampled districts during 2019-24, while a Grievance Redressal Officer had been 
designated for the West Tripura District in November 2024. 
The absence of a designated Grievance Redressal Officer in the sampled districts from 
2019 to 2024, despite the provision under Chapter IX of the Tripura Stamp (Payment 
of Duty by means of e-Stamping) Rules, 2018, reflects a critical gap in institutional 
accountability and citizen-centric service delivery. The role of the Grievance Redressal 
Officer is essential for addressing complaints related to misconduct or irregularities by 
the Central Record Keeping Agency (CRA), its authorised collection centres, or other 
officials involved in the implementation of the e-stamping system. The prolonged delay 
in designating such officers has likely hindered the timely resolution of grievances, 
reduced public confidence in the system, and increased the risk of unresolved 
irregularities going unchecked. Although a Grievance Redressal Officer was eventually 
appointed in West Tripura District in November 2024, the delay in implementation 
across districts highlights the need for urgent corrective action to institutionalise 
grievance redressal mechanisms state wide, ensuring transparency, responsiveness, and 
trust in the e-stamping framework. 
In reply, the Government stated (June 2025) that all the District Registrars had been 
designated (May 2025) as ‘Grievance Redressal Officer’ of their respective districts. 
d) Non-filing as well as delay in filing of Statement of Financial Transactions 
Filing of SFTs228 by the Sub-Registrars helps the IT Department to keep a watch on the 
high value transactions undertaken by the taxpayers. It also helps the IT Department to 
ensure that the transaction is duly disclosed in their Income Tax Return.  
Examination of records and documents related to the registration of deeds under Sub-
Registrar, Amarpur revealed that there were two instances of purchase/sale of 
immovable property valued at ₹ 30 lakh or more. It was, however, noticed that one SFT 
for sale deed valued at ₹ 30 lakh was registered on 1 November 2019 but was filed on 
13 December 2022, i.e. after a lapse of 30 months from the due date of filing of SFT 
(i.e. 31 May 2020).  
Moreover, filing of another SFT against a sale deed of ₹ 34.20 lakh registered on 4 May 
2022, was lying pending (August 2024). 
Due to non-furnishing of the SFT, chances of evasion of the vigil of the IT department 
on the high value transactions as well as evasion of payment of income tax by the 
recipient (seller) cannot be ruled out. 
Such delays and non-filing undermine the objective of SFT reporting, which is to ensure 
that high-value transactions are disclosed in the taxpayers’ income tax returns. These 
lapses not only compromise tax compliance and revenue surveillance but also reflect 
 
228 The stipulated date of filing SFT is 31 May of the next financial year  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
215
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 215 
serious weaknesses in the coordination between the registration authorities and the 
Income Tax Department. The absence of timely reporting increases the risk of tax 
evasion and reflects poorly on institutional accountability. 
In reply, the Government stated (June 2025) that the District Registrars had been 
instructed to keep strict vigil on high value transactions and to ensure timely filing of 
SFTs with the Income Tax Department.  
e)  Splitting up of sale value for evading filing of Statement of Financial 
Transaction 
Examination of records and documents related to the registration of deeds under Sub-
Registrar, Amarpur revealed an instance of splitting up of the value of sale at the time 
of registration of deed likely with the intent to evade payment of tax, as detailed in 
Table 5.3.7. 
Table 5.3.7: Splitting up of sale value for evading filing of SFT 
(₹ in lakh) 
Deed No Date of 
registration Seller Purchaser Khatian 
Number 
RS Plot 
(Hal) 
Property 
Boundaries Amount 
2023/AMP 
/1/2322 20.01.2023 
Smt. 
Buddhini 
Kalai and 
others 
Tripura State 
Electricity 
Corporation 
Limited 
263/1 1213 
1215 
East-
Chintahari 
Jamatia 
West-Self 
South-Road 
North-Road 
29.69 
2023/AMP 
/1/2323 -do- -do- -do- 263/1 
263/2 
1215 
1219 -Do- 29.69 
Source: Registered sale deeds 
It was noticed that though the same seller had sold the plot of land to the same 
purchaser, the plot was divided into two parts (with same boundaries) to keep the 
amount of sale under ₹ 30 lakh and two separate deeds of ₹ 29.69 lakh each, were 
registered on the same day, i.e. on 20 January 2023. This division of the transaction 
into two separate deeds on the same day appears to be a clear attempt to artificially 
reduce the reported value per deed below the ₹ 30 lakh threshold, thereby evading SFT 
filing obligations. 
The audit examination of registered deeds at the Sub-Registrar Office, Amarpur, 
revealed a case of deliberate splitting of sale consideration to evade the filing of a SFT, 
a statutory requirement under the Income Tax Act for immovable property transactions 
valued at ₹ 30 lakh or more.  
This practice not only undermines the intent of high-value transaction monitoring by 
the Income Tax Department but also exposes systemic weaknesses in scrutiny by the 
registration authorities. The failure of the Sub-Registrar Office to flag and report such 
transactions reflects inadequate oversight, absence of internal checks, and a lack of 
vigilance in detecting and preventing tax avoidance strategies. The incident highlights 
the need for enhanced verification protocols, flagging of suspicious patterns, and 
stricter compliance enforcement to safeguard the integrity of property registration and 
tax reporting systems. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
216
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
216 
In reply, the Government stated (June 2025) that no specific rules exist at present for 
prohibiting splitting of the sale value. However, the District Registrars had been 
instructed to examine such splitting as a single sale for the purpose of filing of SFTs.  
 
5.3.7.7 Non-inspection of Authorised Collection Centres and non-verification 
of collection of stamp duty 
As per Chapter VII of the “Tripura Stamp (Payment of Duty by means of e-Stamping) 
Rules, 2018”, all or any of the branches or offices of the CRA and the Authorised 
Collection Centres (ACCs) 229, in the State, may be inspected, as far as possible, 
according to the Schedule of Inspections referred to in Rule 33 of the Rules ibid. 
Further, the officers of different ranks may inspect the offices of the CRA and the ACCs 
and verify the collection of stamp duty made by the ACCs with the remittances made 
by the CRA to the government account on quarterly/ bi-monthly/ monthly basis. After 
inspection, they shall submit the inspection report to the Chief Controlling Revenue 
Authority, i.e. Inspector General of Registration. 
Examination of records of 39 ACCs 230 of the SHCIL under the four sampled Sub-
Registrars, revealed that none of the ACCs was inspected by any Government Officer 
of the Department in violation of Tripura Stamp (Payment of Duty by means of e-
Stamping) Rules, 2018. Non-inspection of ACCs and non-verification of collection of 
stamp duty was also confirmed by the respective Sub-Registrars/District Registrars. 
These rules mandate regular inspections and verification of stamp duty collections by 
ACCs to ensure that remittances made to the government account by the CRA are 
accurate and timely. The complete absence of such inspections and verification 
processes indicates a serious lapse in regulatory oversight and raises concerns about the 
reliability and accountability of stamp duty collections handled through these centres. 
This gap in monitoring not only increases the risk of misappropriation, underreporting, 
or delays in government revenue realisation but also reflects institutional weaknesses 
in enforcing compliance. 
During exit conference the Department stated (June 2025) that steps would be taken for 
inspection of branches/ offices/ ACCs of SHCIL at periodical interval as prescribed in 
the Tripura Stamp (Payment of Duty by means of e-Stamping) Rules, 2018, to verify 
the collection of stamp duty vis a vis it’s deposit to the government account. 
In reply, the Government stated (June 2025) that the Deputy Director, Land Records 
and Settlement (Nodal Officer for e-stamp) and the District Registrars had been 
instructed to carry out periodical inspection of the branches/ offices of the CRA and the 
Authorised Collection Centres and to submit their inspection reports to the Inspector 
 
229 Authorised Collection Centres under CRA, act as an intermediary between the Central Record 
Keeping Agency and the stamp duty payer for collection of stamp duty and for issuing e-stamp 
certificate. Authorised Collection Centres are entitled to collect the amount of stamp duty charged 
upon the instrument according to the rates as applicable to such instrument as per the provisions of 
the Act, from the stamp duty payer of any particular area as may be specified by the Appointing 
Authority, from time to time. 
230  Udaipur: 8; Amarpur: 9; Sadar: 20; Jirania: 2 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
217
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
217 
General of Registration. 
5.3.7.8 Lack of awareness 
None of the Sub-Registrars had undertaken any educative initiatives like media 
advertisements, awareness workshops for deed writers, business forums, etc. to actively 
publicise the liability of stamp duty on various types of instruments. The Departmental 
website too does not prominently display the stamp duty liability in respect of 
registrable as well as not compulsorily registrable instruments.  
In this regard, attention is drawn to a commendable practice followed by the District 
Transport Officer, Gomati under Transport Department, Government of Tripura. This 
includes conducting of various awareness programmes for school children and parents 
on road safety measures, display of hoardings/posters at the accident-prone areas, 
awareness programme for drivers of schools, motor syndicates, etc. 
This absence of public outreach contributes to low taxpayer awareness, unintentional 
non-compliance, and potential revenue loss due to underpayment or evasion of stamp 
duty. In contrast, proactive awareness efforts by the District Transport Officer, Gomati-
such as community engagement, educational outreach, and prominent visual 
communication demonstrate the impact of sustained public education. The registration 
department's failure to replicate similar strategies reflects a missed opportunity to 
enhance voluntary compliance, build public trust, and ensure greater transparency in 
stamp duty administration. 
In reply, the Government stated (June 2025) that the Director, Land Records and 
Settlement had been instructed (June 2025) to make necessary arrangements so that the 
Sub-Registrars could make educative initiatives (like advertisements in media, 
awareness workshops for deed writers, business forums, etc.) to actively publicise the 
liability of stamp duty on various types of instruments.  The Director, Land Records 
and Settlement had also been instructed to publicise the liability of stamp duty on 
various type of instruments on the departmental website.  
Recommendation 
 Internal control mechanism should be strengthened to ensure realisation of 
stamp duty and registration fees. 
 All the Sub-registries may be audited by the internal audit at least once in every 
five years. 
 The liability of stamp duty and payment mode in respect of all the instruments 
may be prominently displayed on the departmental website and in all such 
public offices where such instruments are executed or presented. 
Conclusion 
The SSCA revealed systemic deficiencies that pose significant risks to revenue integrity 
and administrative efficiency. Despite the commendable increase in revenue collections 
over the five-year period from 2019 to 2024, audit found critical gaps in governance, 
institutional oversight, and operational controls. The acute manpower shortage- 88 per 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
218
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 218 
cent vacancy in sanctioned posts severely hampered core registration functions, while 
deficiencies in the implementation of the NGDRS, such as the lack of biometric 
verification and PAN validation, undermined identity authentication and traceability in 
high-value transactions. The non-registration of lease deeds of banks and ATMs, 
incorrect assessment of stamp duty, and failure to cancel refunded e-stamps resulted in 
substantial revenue losses. Furthermore, audit noted a near-complete absence of 
internal audits, non-inspection of Authorised Collection Centres, inadequate staff 
training, and the delayed or non-filing of Statements of Financial Transactions - all 
pointing to a weak internal control framework. Instances such as splitting of sale deeds 
to evade tax reporting obligations, absence of grievance redressal mechanisms, and 
poor taxpayer awareness further reflected a need for urgent structural reforms. To 
safeguard public revenue and enhance transparency, the Department must prioritise 
institutional capacity building, ensure enforcement of statutory procedures, and adopt 
citizen-centric service enhancements. 
  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
219
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
219 
FINANCE (EXCISE AND TAXATION) DEPARTMENT 
5.4 Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Department’s Oversight on GST 
Payments and Return Filing (Phase-II)” 
 
5.4.1 Introduction 
The introduction of Goods and Service Tax (GST) has replaced multiple taxes levied 
and collected by the Centre and States. GST, which came into effect from July 2017, is 
a destination-based consumption tax on the supply of goods or services or both levied 
on every value addition. The Centre and States simultaneously levy GST on a common 
tax base.  Central GST (CGST) and State GST (SGST)/ Union Territory GST (UTGST) 
are levied on intra-State supplies, and Integrated GST (IGST) is levied on the inter-
State supplies. 
Section 59 of the Tripura Goods and Service Tax (TGST) Act, 2017 stipulates GST as 
a self-assessment-based tax, whereby the responsibility for calculating tax liability, 
discharging the computed tax liability and filing returns is vested with the taxpayer.  
The GST returns must be filed online regularly on the common GST portal, failing 
which penalties will be payable.  Even if the business had no tax liability during a 
particular tax period, it must file a nil return mandatorily. Further, Section 61 of the 
TGST Act read with Rule 99 of the Tripura Goods and Service Tax Rules (TGST 
Rules), 2017 stipulate that the proper officer may scrutinise the return and related 
particulars furnished by taxpayers, communicate discrepancies to the taxpayers and 
seek an explanation.  
This Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) was taken up considering the 
significance of the control mechanism envisaged for tax compliance and the oversight 
mechanism of the Commercial Taxes Organisation, Tripura (Department) in this new 
tax regime. 
5.4.2 Audit objectives 
This audit was oriented towards providing assurance on the adequacy and effectiveness 
of systems and procedures adopted by the Department with respect to tax compliance 
under GST regime.  Audit of ‘Department’s oversight on GST Payments and Return 
filing’ was taken up with the following audit objectives to seek a reasonable assurance 
on: 
 Whether the rules and procedures were designed to secure an effective check on 
tax compliance and were being duly observed by taxpayers; and 
 Whether the scrutiny procedures, internal audit and other compliance functions of 
the Charges were adequate and effective. 
5.4.3 Audit methodology and scope 
This SSCA was conducted based on data analysis, which highlighted risk areas and red 
flags pertaining to the period from April 2018 to March 2021.  Through data analysis a 
set of 16 deviations were identified across the domains of input tax credit (ITC), 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
220
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
220 
discharge of tax liability, registration and return filing.  Such deviations were followed 
up through a Centralised Audit (Limited Audit) 231, whereby these deviations were 
communicated to the relevant State departmental field formations and action taken by 
the jurisdictional formations on the identified deviations was ascertained without 
involving field visits. The centralised audit was supplemented by a Detailed Audit 
involving field visits for verification of records available with the jurisdictional field 
formations. Returns and related attachments and information were accessed through the 
State GST Portal as much as feasible to examine data/ documents relating to taxpayers 
(viz. registration, tax payment, returns and other departmental functions).  The Detailed 
Audit also involved accessing relevant granular records from the taxpayers such as 
invoices through the respective field formations. Besides, compliance functions of the 
departmental formations such as scrutiny of returns, action on late filers and non-filers, 
cancellation of registration and internal audit were also reviewed in selected charges.  
The review of the scrutiny of returns by the Department and verification of taxpayers’ 
records covered the period from April 2018 to March 2021, while the audit of the 
functions of five selected Charges covered the period 2020-21. The SSCA covered only 
the State administered taxpayers.  The field audit was conducted from May 2023 to 
January 2024.  
An Entry Conference of this SSCA was held in May 2023 with the Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura in which the audit objectives, sample selection, audit scope and 
methodology were discussed.  The Exit Conference was held in January 2024  with the 
Commissioner of Taxes during which the audit findings were discussed.  The views and 
responses received from the Commissioner of Taxes have been suitably incorporated in 
the relevant paragraphs. 
5.4.4 Audit Sample 
A data-driven approach was adopted for planning as also to determine the nature and 
extent of substantive audit.  The sample for this SSCA comprised a set of deviations 
identified through data analysis for Centralised Audit that did not involve field visits; a 
sample of taxpayers for detailed audit that involved field visits and scrutiny of 
taxpayers’ records at departmental premises; and a sample of Charges for evaluating 
the compliance functions of the departmental field formations. 
There were three distinct parts of the SSCA as under: 
(i) Part I- Audit of Charges 
Five charge offices 232 (out of total 15 Charges) which were not covered in SSCA 
Phase I, were considered as sample of charges for evaluation of their oversight 
functions for Phase II. 
 
231 Centralised Audit did not involve seeking taxpayer’s granular records such as financial statements 
related ledger accounts, invoices, agreements, etc.  
232  Udaipur, Belonia, Ambassa, Kailashahar and Dharmanagar Charges 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
221
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
221 
(ii) Part II – Centralised Audit 
The sample for Centralised Audit was selected by identification of high-value or high-
risk deviations from rules and inconsistencies between returns through data analysis for 
evaluation of the adequacy and effectiveness of the scrutiny procedure of the 
Department.  Accordingly, 111 deviations involving 99 taxpayers were selected for 
Centralised Audit under this SSCA. 
(iii) Part III-Detailed Audit 
Audit was conducted by accessing taxpayers’ records through charges for evaluation of 
the extent of tax compliance by taxpayers.  A sample of 20 taxpayers from Charge 
offices was selected for Detailed Audit on the basis of risk parameters (90 per cent ) 
such as ITC mismatch, ITC availed without payment of tax by suppliers, ITC availed 
after the limitation period, unsettled liability, exemptions to total turnover, ratio of 
IGST to (CGST + SGST) and evasion prone supplies comprising Large (L1 233 and 
L2234), Medium 235 and Small 236 strata taxpayers and the remaining (10 per cent ) 
taxpayers was drawn on random basis. 
The details of samples for Centralised Audit, Audit of Charges and Detailed Audit 
selected for this SSCA are brought out in Appendices 5.4.1 to 5.4.3.  
5.4.5 Audit criteria  
The source of audit criteria comprised the provisions contained in the TGST Act, IGST 
Act, and Rules made there under. In addition, the notifications and circulars issued by 
the Department relating to filing of returns, notifying the effective dates of filing of 
various returns, extending due dates for filing returns, rates of tax on goods and 
services, payment of tax, availing and utilising ITC, scrutiny of returns and oversight 
of tax compliance and scrutiny of returns and cancellation of registrations, etc . also 
formed part of the audit criteria. 
5.4.6 Audit findings  
The audit findings are categorised into the following three categories: 
 Oversight on Charge functions (Audit of Charges) 
 Centralised Audit (Limited Audit) 
 Detailed Audit 
5.4.7 Oversight on Charge functions– Audit of Charges  
The role of Charges is to provide oversight for ensuring compliance by taxpayers in 
respect of accuracy of the taxable value declared, calculation and payment of tax 
liabilities, filing of returns, ensuring compliance of GST Act, etc. For evaluating the 
functions of the charges, the audit areas include (i) scrutiny of returns, (ii) action on 
 
233 top 0.25 per cent of taxpayers based on turnover 
234 next 0.25 per cent of taxpayers based on turnover  
235 taxpayers with a minimum turnover of ₹ 7.5 crore 
236 taxpayers with a minimum turnover of ₹ 2.5 crore 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
222
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 222 
late-filers and non-filers, (iii) cancellation of registration and (iv) internal audit. The 
detailed findings are portrayed in the sub-paragraphs 5.4.7.1 to 5.4.7.4.   
5.4.7.1 Filing of returns vis-à-vis scrutiny of returns  
As per Section 61(1) of the TGST Act, 2017 the proper officer may scrutinise the return 
and related particulars furnished by the registered person to verify the correctness of 
the return and inform him of the discrepancies noticed, if any, in such manner as may 
be prescribed and seek his explanation there-to. Rule 99 of the TGST Rules, 2017 
mandates that the discrepancies, if any, noticed shall be communicated to the taxpayers 
to seek explanation in Form ASMT 10.  
The year-wise status of returns filed (GSTR 3B which is for summarising outward 
supplies, input tax credit and payment of GST liability and GSTR 1 which is for 
reporting invoice-wise details of outward supplies of goods and services.) vis-à-vis 
scrutiny of returns during the period from 2018-19 to 2020-21 under the selected five 
Charges is given in Table 5.4.1.  
Table 5.4.1: Consolidated position on return filings in sampled ranges 
Source: Information furnished by Charge offices 
From Table 5.4.1, it can be seen that during the period 2018-21, out of 5,78,748 returns 
(GSTR 1 and GSTR 3B), 2,11,800 (i.e. 36.40 per cent) returns were not filed. Of which, 
number of GSTR 3B returns not filed were 47,638 (16.46 per cent) and that of GSTR 
1 returns not filed was 1,64,162 (56.73 per cent).  It is observed that higher number of 
returns to be filed with respect to GSTR 1 return.  
The year-wise position of scrutiny of returns, show cause notice (SCN) issued and 
recovery thereof is as detailed in Table 5.4.2.  
 
Charge name Financial 
year 
Number of returns 
to be filed 
Total 
number 
of returns 
to be filed 
Number of returns 
filed 
Number of return 
not filed 
Total 
return 
not filed 
Col (8+9) GSTR 3B GSTR 1 GSTR 3B GSTR 1 GSTR 
3B GSTR 1 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Ambassa 
2018-19 13,294 13,294 26,588 11,096 4,964 2,198 8,330 10,528 
2019-20 14,725 14,725 29,450 11,789 5,315 2,936 9,410 12,346 
2020-21 15,425 15,425 30,850 11,190 5,969 4,235 9,456 13,691 
Udaipur 
2018-19 21,124 21,124 42,248 18,533 8,158 2,591 12,966 15,557 
2019-20 23,394 23,394 46,788 19,993 9,024 3,401 14,370 17,771 
2020-21 24,691 24,691 49,382 19,190 11,240 5,501 13,451 18,952 
Kailashahar 
2018-19 11,596 11,596 23,192 10,131 5,155 1,465 6,441 7,906 
2019-20 13,616 13,616 27,232 11,743 5,746 1,873 7,870 9,743 
2020-21 14,752 14,752 29,504 11,649 6,982 3,103 7,770 10,873 
Dharmanag
ar 
2018-19 21,619 21,619 43,238 18,755 9,860 2,864 11,759 14,623 
2019-20 23,966 23,966 47,932 21,082 10,498 2,884 13,468 16,352 
2020-21 25,715 25,715 51,430 20,861 12,784 4,854 12,931 17,785 
Belonia 
2018-19 19,425 19,425 38,850 17,308 8,618 2,117 10,807 12,924 
2019-20 22,187 22,187 44,374 19,545 9,656 2,642 12,531 15,173 
2020-21 23,845 23,845 47,690 18,871 11,243 4,974 12,602 17,576 
Total 2,89,374 2,89,374 5,78,748 2,41,736 1,25,212 47,638 1,64,162 2,11,800 
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 222 
late-filers and non-filers, (iii) cancellation of registration and (iv) internal audit. The 
detailed findings are portrayed in the sub-paragraphs 5.4.7.1 to 5.4.7.4.   
5.4.7.1 Filing of returns vis-à-vis scrutiny of returns  
As per Section 61(1) of the TGST Act, 2017 the proper officer may scrutinise the return 
and related particulars furnished by the registered person to verify the correctness of 
the return and inform him of the discrepancies noticed, if any, in such manner as may 
be prescribed and seek his explanation there-to. Rule 99 of the TGST Rules, 2017 
mandates that the discrepancies, if any, noticed shall be communicated to the taxpayers 
to seek explanation in Form ASMT 10.  
The year-wise status of returns filed (GSTR 3B which is for summarising outward 
supplies, input tax credit and payment of GST liability and GSTR 1 which is for 
reporting invoice-wise details of outward supplies of goods and services.) vis-à-vis 
scrutiny of returns during the period from 2018-19 to 2020-21 under the selected five 
Charges is given in Table 5.4.1.  
Table 5.4.1: Consolidated position on return filings in sampled ranges 
Source: Information furnished by Charge offices 
From Table 5.4.1, it can be seen that during the period 2018-21, out of 5,78,748 returns 
(GSTR 1 and GSTR 3B), 2,11,800 (i.e. 36.40 per cent) returns were not filed. Of which, 
number of GSTR 3B returns not filed were 47,638 (16.46 per cent) and that of GSTR 
1 returns not filed was 1,64,162 (56.73 per cent).  It is observed that higher number of 
returns to be filed with respect to GSTR 1 return.  
The year-wise position of scrutiny of returns, show cause notice (SCN) issued and 
recovery thereof is as detailed in Table 5.4.2.  
 
Charge name Financial 
year 
Number of returns 
to be filed 
Total 
number 
of returns 
to be filed 
Number of returns 
filed 
Number of return 
not filed 
Total 
return 
not filed 
Col (8+9) GSTR 3B GSTR 1 GSTR 3B GSTR 1 GSTR 
3B GSTR 1 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Ambassa 
2018-19 13,294 13,294 26,588 11,096 4,964 2,198 8,330 10,528 
2019-20 14,725 14,725 29,450 11,789 5,315 2,936 9,410 12,346 
2020-21 15,425 15,425 30,850 11,190 5,969 4,235 9,456 13,691 
Udaipur 
2018-19 21,124 21,124 42,248 18,533 8,158 2,591 12,966 15,557 
2019-20 23,394 23,394 46,788 19,993 9,024 3,401 14,370 17,771 
2020-21 24,691 24,691 49,382 19,190 11,240 5,501 13,451 18,952 
Kailashahar 
2018-19 11,596 11,596 23,192 10,131 5,155 1,465 6,441 7,906 
2019-20 13,616 13,616 27,232 11,743 5,746 1,873 7,870 9,743 
2020-21 14,752 14,752 29,504 11,649 6,982 3,103 7,770 10,873 
Dharmanag
ar 
2018-19 21,619 21,619 43,238 18,755 9,860 2,864 11,759 14,623 
2019-20 23,966 23,966 47,932 21,082 10,498 2,884 13,468 16,352 
2020-21 25,715 25,715 51,430 20,861 12,784 4,854 12,931 17,785 
Belonia 
2018-19 19,425 19,425 38,850 17,308 8,618 2,117 10,807 12,924 
2019-20 22,187 22,187 44,374 19,545 9,656 2,642 12,531 15,173 
2020-21 23,845 23,845 47,690 18,871 11,243 4,974 12,602 17,576 
Total 2,89,374 2,89,374 5,78,748 2,41,736 1,25,212 47,638 1,64,162 2,11,800 
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 222 
late-filers and non-filers, (iii) cancellation of registration and (iv) internal audit. The 
detailed findings are portrayed in the sub-paragraphs 5.4.7.1 to 5.4.7.4.   
5.4.7.1 Filing of returns vis-à-vis scrutiny of returns  
As per Section 61(1) of the TGST Act, 2017 the proper officer may scrutinise the return 
and related particulars furnished by the registered person to verify the correctness of 
the return and inform him of the discrepancies noticed, if any, in such manner as may 
be prescribed and seek his explanation there-to. Rule 99 of the TGST Rules, 2017 
mandates that the discrepancies, if any, noticed shall be communicated to the taxpayers 
to seek explanation in Form ASMT 10.  
The year-wise status of returns filed (GSTR 3B which is for summarising outward 
supplies, input tax credit and payment of GST liability and GSTR 1 which is for 
reporting invoice-wise details of outward supplies of goods and services.) vis-à-vis 
scrutiny of returns during the period from 2018-19 to 2020-21 under the selected five 
Charges is given in Table 5.4.1.  
Table 5.4.1: Consolidated position on return filings in sampled ranges 
Source: Information furnished by Charge offices 
From Table 5.4.1, it can be seen that during the period 2018-21, out of 5,78,748 returns 
(GSTR 1 and GSTR 3B), 2,11,800 (i.e. 36.40 per cent) returns were not filed. Of which, 
number of GSTR 3B returns not filed were 47,638 (16.46 per cent) and that of GSTR 
1 returns not filed was 1,64,162 (56.73 per cent).  It is observed that higher number of 
returns to be filed with respect to GSTR 1 return.  
The year-wise position of scrutiny of returns, show cause notice (SCN) issued and 
recovery thereof is as detailed in Table 5.4.2.  
 
Charge name Financial 
year 
Number of returns 
to be filed 
Total 
number 
of returns 
to be filed 
Number of returns 
filed 
Number of return 
not filed 
Total 
return 
not filed 
Col (8+9) GSTR 3B GSTR 1 GSTR 3B GSTR 1 GSTR 
3B GSTR 1 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Ambassa 
2018-19 13,294 13,294 26,588 11,096 4,964 2,198 8,330 10,528 
2019-20 14,725 14,725 29,450 11,789 5,315 2,936 9,410 12,346 
2020-21 15,425 15,425 30,850 11,190 5,969 4,235 9,456 13,691 
Udaipur 
2018-19 21,124 21,124 42,248 18,533 8,158 2,591 12,966 15,557 
2019-20 23,394 23,394 46,788 19,993 9,024 3,401 14,370 17,771 
2020-21 24,691 24,691 49,382 19,190 11,240 5,501 13,451 18,952 
Kailashahar 
2018-19 11,596 11,596 23,192 10,131 5,155 1,465 6,441 7,906 
2019-20 13,616 13,616 27,232 11,743 5,746 1,873 7,870 9,743 
2020-21 14,752 14,752 29,504 11,649 6,982 3,103 7,770 10,873 
Dharmanag
ar 
2018-19 21,619 21,619 43,238 18,755 9,860 2,864 11,759 14,623 
2019-20 23,966 23,966 47,932 21,082 10,498 2,884 13,468 16,352 
2020-21 25,715 25,715 51,430 20,861 12,784 4,854 12,931 17,785 
Belonia 
2018-19 19,425 19,425 38,850 17,308 8,618 2,117 10,807 12,924 
2019-20 22,187 22,187 44,374 19,545 9,656 2,642 12,531 15,173 
2020-21 23,845 23,845 47,690 18,871 11,243 4,974 12,602 17,576 
Total 2,89,374 2,89,374 5,78,748 2,41,736 1,25,212 47,638 1,64,162 2,11,800 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
223
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
223 
Table 5.4.2: Position of scrutiny, SCN issued and recovery in sampled ranges 
Charge 
Name 
Financial 
year 
Number 
of 
return 
filed 
(Both 
GSTR-1 
+ 3B) 
Number of 
returns 
scrutinised 
Number 
of 
ASMT 
10 
issued 
Number of 
discrepancies 
accepted 
Number 
of SCN 
issued 
Related 
amount 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
Amount 
recovered 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
Ambassa 
2018-19 16,060 576 0 0 87 1,328.21 35.97 
2019-20 17,104 432 0 0 40 522.44 0 
2020-21 17,159 472 42 14 23 342.75 0 
Kailashahar 
2018-19 26,691 496 0 0 0 0 0 
2019-20 29,017 521 0 0 29 205.03 89.86 
2020-21 30,430 584 28 0 05 0.44 0.44 
Belonia 
2018-19 15,286 178 0 0 16 2.88 0 
2019-20 17,489 288 58 19 03 56.33 0 
2020-21 18,631 367 40 29 01 1.33 5.03 
Udaipur 
2018-19 28,615 223 0 0 0 0 0 
2019-20 31,580 314 40 16 0 0 0 
2020-21 33,645 120 40 29 0 0 0 
Dharmanagar 
2018-19 25,926 486 0 0 0 0 0 
2019-20 29,201 875 39 0 0 0 0 
2020-21 30,114 937 68 0 0 0 0 
Grand total 3,66,948 6,869 355 107 204 2,459.41 131.30 
Source: Information furnished by Charge offices 
From Table 5.4.2, it can be seen that 6,869 returns (1.87 per cent) out of 3,66,948  
returns filed had been scrutinised in the selected five Charges during the period 2018-
21. The remaining 3,60,079 returns (98.12 per cent) remained unscrutinised. Intimation 
of discrepancies in ASMT 10 had been issued to 355 cases out of 6,869 cases 
scrutinised during the period under audit.  SCN had been issued in 204 cases for 
recovery of ₹ 24.59 crore during the period 2018-21. However, only ₹ 1.31 crore had 
been recovered against the total amount of ₹ 24.59 crore related to SCNs issued. The 
balance amount of ₹ 23.28 crore remained outstanding.    
Thus, it was observed that there was low performance in scrutiny of returns. It was also 
observed that the Department did not prepare detailed guidelines/ standard operating 
procedure (SOP) for scrutiny of returns in the State.   
The matter was intimated to the respective Charges during January 2024. In Exit 
Conference (January 2024), the Commissioner of taxes stated that specific reply would 
be given at the earliest. However, no response has been received (April 2025).  
Recommendation 1  
The Department may take immediate steps to formulate guidelines/ SOP and ensure 
the scrutiny of returns in a time bound manner before the cases become time barred.  
5.4.7.2 Lack of action on non-filers 
Section 46 of the TGST Act, 2017 read with Rule 68 of TGST Rules, 2017 stipulates 
that a notice in FORM GSTR-3A shall be issued, electronically, to a registered person 
who failed to file the return within the due date requiring filing of return within 15 days.  
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
223 
Table 5.4.2: Position of scrutiny, SCN issued and recovery in sampled ranges 
Charge 
Name 
Financial 
year 
Number 
of 
return 
filed 
(Both 
GSTR-1 
+ 3B) 
Number of 
returns 
scrutinised 
Number 
of 
ASMT 
10 
issued 
Number of 
discrepancies 
accepted 
Number 
of SCN 
issued 
Related 
amount 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
Amount 
recovered 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
Ambassa 
2018-19 16,060 576 0 0 87 1,328.21 35.97 
2019-20 17,104 432 0 0 40 522.44 0 
2020-21 17,159 472 42 14 23 342.75 0 
Kailashahar 
2018-19 26,691 496 0 0 0 0 0 
2019-20 29,017 521 0 0 29 205.03 89.86 
2020-21 30,430 584 28 0 05 0.44 0.44 
Belonia 
2018-19 15,286 178 0 0 16 2.88 0 
2019-20 17,489 288 58 19 03 56.33 0 
2020-21 18,631 367 40 29 01 1.33 5.03 
Udaipur 
2018-19 28,615 223 0 0 0 0 0 
2019-20 31,580 314 40 16 0 0 0 
2020-21 33,645 120 40 29 0 0 0 
Dharmanagar 
2018-19 25,926 486 0 0 0 0 0 
2019-20 29,201 875 39 0 0 0 0 
2020-21 30,114 937 68 0 0 0 0 
Grand total 3,66,948 6,869 355 107 204 2,459.41 131.30 
Source: Information furnished by Charge offices 
From Table 5.4.2 , it can be seen that 6,869 returns (1.87 per cent) out of 3,66,948  
returns filed had been scrutinised in the selected five Charges during the period 2018-
21. The remaining 3,60,079 returns (98.12 per cent) remained unscrutinised. Intimation 
of discrepancies in ASMT 10 had been issued to 355 cases out of 6,869 cases 
scrutinised during the period under audit.  SCN had been issued in 204 cases for 
recovery of ₹ 24.59 crore during the period 2018-21. However, only ₹ 1.31 crore had 
been recovered against the total amount of ₹ 24.59 crore related to SCNs issued. The 
balance amount of ₹ 23.28 crore remained outstanding.    
Thus, it was observed that there was low performance in scrutiny of returns. It was also 
observed that the Department did not prepare detailed guidelines/ standard operating 
procedure (SOP) for scrutiny of returns in the State.   
The matter was intimated to the respective Charges during January 2024. In Exit 
Conference (January 2024), the Commissioner of taxes stated that specific reply would 
be given at the earliest. However, no response has been received (April 2025).  
Recommendation 1  
The Department may take immediate steps to formulate guidelines/ SOP and ensure 
the scrutiny of returns in a time bound manner before the cases become time barred.  
5.4.7.2 Lack of action on non-filers 
Section 46 of the TGST Act, 2017 read with Rule 68 of TGST Rules, 2017 stipulates 
that a notice in FORM GSTR-3A shall be issued, electronically, to a registered person 
who failed to file the return within the due date requiring filing of return within 15 days.  
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
223 
Table 5.4.2: Position of scrutiny, SCN issued and recovery in sampled ranges 
Charge 
Name 
Financial 
year 
Number 
of 
return 
filed 
(Both 
GSTR-1 
+ 3B) 
Number of 
returns 
scrutinised 
Number 
of 
ASMT 
10 
issued 
Number of 
discrepancies 
accepted 
Number 
of SCN 
issued 
Related 
amount 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
Amount 
recovered 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
Ambassa 
2018-19 16,060 576 0 0 87 1,328.21 35.97 
2019-20 17,104 432 0 0 40 522.44 0 
2020-21 17,159 472 42 14 23 342.75 0 
Kailashahar 
2018-19 26,691 496 0 0 0 0 0 
2019-20 29,017 521 0 0 29 205.03 89.86 
2020-21 30,430 584 28 0 05 0.44 0.44 
Belonia 
2018-19 15,286 178 0 0 16 2.88 0 
2019-20 17,489 288 58 19 03 56.33 0 
2020-21 18,631 367 40 29 01 1.33 5.03 
Udaipur 
2018-19 28,615 223 0 0 0 0 0 
2019-20 31,580 314 40 16 0 0 0 
2020-21 33,645 120 40 29 0 0 0 
Dharmanagar 
2018-19 25,926 486 0 0 0 0 0 
2019-20 29,201 875 39 0 0 0 0 
2020-21 30,114 937 68 0 0 0 0 
Grand total 3,66,948 6,869 355 107 204 2,459.41 131.30 
Source: Information furnished by Charge offices 
From Table 5.4.2, it can be seen that 6,869 returns (1.87 per cent) out of 3,66,948  
returns filed had been scrutinised in the selected five Charges during the period 2018-
21. The remaining 3,60,079 returns (98.12 per cent) remained unscrutinised. Intimation 
of discrepancies in ASMT 10 had been issued to 355 cases out of 6,869 cases 
scrutinised during the period under audit.  SCN had been issued in 204 cases for 
recovery of ₹ 24.59 crore during the period 2018-21. However, only ₹ 1.31 crore had 
been recovered against the total amount of ₹ 24.59 crore related to SCNs issued. The 
balance amount of ₹ 23.28 crore remained outstanding.    
Thus, it was observed that there was low performance in scrutiny of returns. It was also 
observed that the Department did not prepare detailed guidelines/ standard operating 
procedure (SOP) for scrutiny of returns in the State.   
The matter was intimated to the respective Charges during January 2024. In Exit 
Conference (January 2024), the Commissioner of taxes stated that specific reply would 
be given at the earliest. However, no response has been received (April 2025).  
Recommendation 1  
The Department may take immediate steps to formulate guidelines/ SOP and ensure 
the scrutiny of returns in a time bound manner before the cases become time barred.  
5.4.7.2 Lack of action on non-filers 
Section 46 of the TGST Act, 2017 read with Rule 68 of TGST Rules, 2017 stipulates 
that a notice in FORM GSTR-3A shall be issued, electronically, to a registered person 
who failed to file the return within the due date requiring filing of return within 15 days.  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
224
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 224 
Section 62 (1) of TGST Act, 2017 read with Rule 100 (1) of TGST Rules, 2017, in case 
the taxpayer fails to file the returns even after such notice, the proper officers may 
proceed to assess the tax liability of the said person to the best of their judgment and 
issue an assessment order in Form ASMT 13.  
Filing of returns is related to payment of tax, which implies non-filing of returns can be 
fraught with substantial risk of loss of tax revenue.   
Year-wise information relating to action taken on non-filers of returns (GSTR 3B and 
GSTR 1) during the period from 2018-19 to 2020-21 for the five selected Charges is 
given in Table 5.4.3.   
Table 5.4.3: Action on non-filers  
Name of 
Charge Year GSTR-3A 
issued 
Number of return filed in 
pursuance of GSTR 3A notice ASMT 13 
Ambassa 
2018-19 0 0 0 
2019-20 0 0 0 
2020-21 895 0 0 
Udaipur 
2018-19 0 0 0 
2019-20 0 0 0 
2020-21 270 0 0 
Kailashahar 
2018-19 0 0 0 
2019-20 0 0 0 
2020-21 756 0 0 
Dharamnagar 
2018-19 153 0 0 
2019-20 0 0 0 
2020-21 1,033 0 0 
Belonia 
2018-19 0 0 0 
2019-20 0 0 0 
2020-21 690 0 0 
Total 3,797 0 0 
Source: Information furnished by Charge offices  
From Table 5.4.3, it can be seen that no GSTR 3A were issued by the four out of five 
Charges during 2018-19 and no GSTR 3A were issued by the five Charges during 2019-
20. However, GSTR 3A were issued to a total of 3,797 taxpayers by the five Charges 
during the years 2018-19 and 2020-21. It was observed that the Department did not 
initiate any action against the taxpayers for issue of best judgement assessment order in 
Form ASMT 13. 
The reason for lack of action against taxpayers issued GSTR-3A notice was neither 
stated to audit nor found on records.  
The matter was intimated to the respective Charges during January 2024. In Exit 
Conference (January 2024), the Commissioner of taxes stated that specific reply would 
be given at the earliest. However, no response has been received (April 2025) 
Recommendation 2 
The Department may initiate action against non-filers by assessing the tax liability 
through invoking of the ASMT-13 best judgment assessment order. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
225
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 225 
5.4.7.3 Inadequate follow-up on non-filing of GSTR 10 
Section 29 of TGST Act, 2017 read with Rule 22(3) of the TGST Rules stipulates for 
cancellation of registration either by the proper officer on suo moto or on application 
filed by the taxpayer or his legal heir having regard to circumstances where the business 
has been discontinued, change in constitution of business or the taxable person is no 
longer liable to be registered. The proper officer shall issue an order in Form GST REG 
19 within a period of 30 days from the date of application submitted under Rule 20 or 
as the case may be.  
As per Circular dated 30 December 2019, GSTR 3A has to be issued to the taxpayer, 
where GSTR 10 has not been filed.  If the taxpayer still fails to file the final return 
within 15 days of the receipt of notice, then an assessment order ASMT 13 under 
Section 62 of the TGST Act read with rule 100 of the TGST Rules shall have to be 
issued to determine the liability of the taxpayer under sub-section (5) of Section 29. 
Section 45 of the TGST Act read with Rule 81 of the TGST Rules, 2017 the final return, 
has to be filed within three months of the effective date of cancellation or the date of 
order of cancellation, whichever is later, by the taxpayer.  
The year-wise details of cancellation of registration for five Charges, selected under 
Charges audit are as given in Table 5.4.4. 
Table 5.4.4: Year-wise details of cancellation of registration, filing of GSTR 10 and 
action taken 
Charge Financial 
year 
Number of cases for which 
cancellation orders issued in REG 
19 
Number of 
cases where 
GSTR 10 filed 
Action 
taken on 
non-filing 
of GSTR 10 
On 
taxpayer 
application 
Suo-moto 
by 
Department 
Total  
Ambassa 
2018-19 31 1 32 0 0 
2019-20 44 97 141 0 0 
2020-21 24 142 166 18 0 
Total 99 240 339 18 0 
Udaipur 
2018-19 27 0 27 19 0 
2019-20 75 34 109 25 0 
2020-21 15 16 31 01 0 
Total 117 50 167  45 0 
Kailashahar 
2018-19 34 1 35 0 0 
2019-20 28 2 30 0 0 
2020-21 23 14 37 08 0 
Total 85 17 102 08 0 
Dharmanagar 
2018-19 69 0 69 0 0 
2019-20 136 215 351 0 0 
2020-21 90 100 190 35 0 
Total 295 315 610 35 0 
Belonia 
2018-19 10 0 10 02 0 
2019-20 33 160 193 10 0 
2020-21 41 80 121 29 0 
 Total 84 240 324 41 0 
Grand Total 680 862 1,542 147 0 
Source: Information furnished by the Charge offices 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
226
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 226 
From Table 5.4.4, it can be seen that during the period 2018-21, registrations had been 
cancelled in 680 cases on application filed by taxpayers and tax authorities had taken 
suo-moto cancellation of registrations in 862 cases. It was observed that only 147 
taxpayers out of the total 1,542 cases of cancelled registrations had filed GSTR 10.  
Thus, 1,395 (90 per cent) out of 1,542 cancelled taxpayers did not file the final GSTR 
10 returns.  
The Department did not take any action on non-filers of final GSTR 10 returns by 
cancelled taxpayers (April 2025).    
The matter was intimated to the respective Charges in January 2024. In Exit Conference 
(January 2024), the Commissioner of Taxes stated that specific reply would be given at 
the earliest. However, no response has been received (April 2025).  
Recommendation 3 
The Department may ensure timely verification of cancelled registrations to prevent 
undue loss of tax revenue.    
5.4.7.4 Non-conducting of internal Audit 
As per Section 65 of the TGST Act, 2017 the Commissioner or any officer authorised 
by him, by way of a general or a specific order, may undertake audit of any registered 
person for such period, at such frequency and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
Section 2 (13) of the TGST Act, 2017, defines “Audit” as the examination of records, 
returns and other documents maintained or furnished by the registered person under 
this Act or the rules made thereunder or under any other law for the time being in force 
to verify the correctness of turnover declared, taxes paid, refund claimed and input tax 
credit availed and to assess his compliance with the provisions of this Act or the Rules 
made thereunder.   
Examination of information furnished (December 2023) to Audit revealed that the 
Department had not initiated any action  plan for conduct of audit during the period 
covered by Audit. The reason for such absence of audit plan was neither found on 
records nor stated to Audit.  
The matter was intimated to the respective Charges in January 2024. In Exit Conference 
(January 2024), the Commissioner of Taxes stated that specific reply would be given at 
the earliest. However, no response has been revived (April 2025). 
Recommendation 4 
The Department may conduct internal audit on regular basis, so that an optimum 
number of taxpayers can be audited in every financial year.    
5.4.8 Inconsistencies in GST returns -Centralised audit 
Audit analysed GST returns data pertaining to 2018-19 to 2020-21 as made available 
by GSTN. Rule-based deviations and logical inconsistencies between GST returns filed 
by taxpayers were identified on a set of 16 parameters, which can be broadly 
categorised into three domains – ITC, Annual Return & financial statements and Tax 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
227
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
227 
& Interest payment. 
Out of the 13 prescribed GST returns237, the following basic returns that apply to normal 
taxpayers were considered for the purpose of identifying deviations, inconsistencies, 
and mismatches between GST returns: 
 GSTR 1: Monthly return furnished by all normal and casual registered taxpayers 
making outward supplies of goods and services or both and contains details of 
outward supplies of goods and services.  
 GSTR 2A: A system-generated statement of inward supplies for a recipient. It 
contains the details of all B2B transactions of suppliers declared in their Form GSTR 
1, ISD details form GSTR 6, details form GSTR 7 and GSTR 8 respectively by the 
counterparty and import of goods from overseas on bill of entry, as received from 
ICEGATE Portal of Indian Customs. 
 GSTR 3B: Monthly summary return of outward supplies and input tax credit 
claimed, along with payment of tax by the taxpayer to be filed by all taxpayers except 
those specified under Section 39(1) of the Act. This is the return that populates the 
credit and debits in the Electronic Credit Ledger and debits in Electronic Cash 
Ledger. 
 GSTR 6: Monthly return for Input Service Distributors providing the details of their 
distributed input tax credit and inward supplies. 
 GSTR 8: Monthly return to be filed by the e-commerce operators who are required 
to deduct TCS (Tax collected at source) under GST, introduced in October 2018. 
 GSTR 9: Annual return to be filed by all registered persons other than an Input 
Service Distributor (ISD), Tax Deducted at Source/Tax Collected at Source, Casual 
Taxable Person, and Non-Resident taxpayer. This document contains the details of 
all supplies made and received under various tax heads (CGST, SGST and IGST) 
during the entire year along with turnover and audit details for the same.  
 GSTR 9C: Annual audit form for all taxpayers having a turnover above five crores 
in a particular financial year. It is a reconciliation statement between the annual 
returns filed in GSTR 9 and the taxpayer's audited annual financial statements. 
The details of data analysis undertaken on the 16 identified parameters and impact 
thereon is given in Table 5.4.5 (a) and Table 5.4.5 (b). 
 
 
 
237 i) GSTR-1, ii) GSTR-3B, iii) GSTR-4 (taxpayers under the Composition scheme), iv) GSTR-5 (non-
resident taxable person), v) GSTR-5A (Non-resident OIDAR service providers), vi) GSTR-6 (Input 
service distributor), vii) GSTR-7 (taxpayers deducting TDS), viii) GSTR-8 (E-commerce operator), ix) 
GSTR-9 (Annual Return), x) GSTR-10 (Final return), xi) GSTR-11 (person having UIN and claiming 
a refund), xii) CMP-08, and xiii) ITC-04 (Statement to be filed by a principal/job-worker about details 
of goods sent to/received from a job-worker). 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
228
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
228 
Table 5.4.5 (a): Details of Data Analysis undertaken 
Sl. 
No. Algorithm used Risk pursued 
Domain: ITC 
1 
ITC available as per GSTR 2A with all its amendments 
was compared with the ITC availed in GSTR 3B in table 
4A (5) (accrued on domestic supplies) excluding the 
reversals in table 4B (2) but including the ITC availed in 
the subsequent year from table 8C of GSTR 9 and blocked 
credits. 
ITC mismatch between 
GSTR 2A and GSTR 3B 
2 
ITC available from GSTR 2A was compared with Table 
8A of GSTR 9 which captures ITC available from GSTR 
2A (as an auto-populated non-editable field) but excludes 
those entries in GSTR 2A where the supplier has not filed 
GSTR 1 by due date of its filing and excludes the ITC for 
the period during which the recipient taxpayer was under 
composition scheme. 
ITC passed on without 
supplier remitting tax 
3 
ITC availed through table 4 of GSTR 3Bs pertaining to the 
period 2018-19 to 2020-21 filed after October of the 
following year. 
ITC availed in GSTR 3B 
filed after the cut-off 
period238. 
4 
ISD ITC availed in table 6G of GSTR 9 or table 4(A)(4) 
of GSTR 3B of recipient was compared with the sum of 
table 5A, table 8A, and table 9A of GSTR 6 of distributor 
GSTINs. 
Incorrect availing of ISD 
credit 
 Domain: Annual Return and financial statements  
5. 
Positive figure in table 12F of GSTR-9C and examination 
of reasons provided in table 13 for mismatch. 
Mismatch of ITC availed 
between Annual returns 
and Books of accounts. 
6. 
Positive figure in table 14T of GSTR 9C and examination 
of reasons provided in table 15 for mismatch. 
Reconciliation between 
ITC availed in Annual 
returns with expenses in 
financial statements. 
7. 
Negative figure in table 9R of GSTR 9C and examination 
of reasons provided in table 10 for mismatch.  
Mismatch in tax paid 
between books of 
accounts and returns 
 Domain: Tax and Interest payment 
8. 
Reverse Charge Mechanism (RCM) payments in table 4G 
(tax payable) of GSTR 9 were compared with ITC availed 
in table 6C, 6D and 6F (ITC availed) GSTR 9. In cases 
where GSTR 9 was not available, RCM payment in table 
Short payment of tax 
under RCM versus ITC 
availed in GSTR 3B/ 
GSTR 9  
 
238 Amendment was made in the TGST Act to give effect to this recommendation of GST council sub-
section (5) and (6) of section 16 of the TGST Act vide Circular No. 30/2024-GST (State) dated 25 
October 2024 with effect from 1 July 2017 which stipulates that notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section (4), in respect of an invoice or debit note for supply of goods or services or both pertaining 
to the Financial Years 2017-18, 2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020-21, the-registered-person shall be entitled to 
take input tax credit in any return under Section-39 which is filed upto the 30 November 2021. This 
impacts deviations for FYs 2018-19 and 2019-20 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
229
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
229 
Sl. 
No. Algorithm used Risk pursued 
3.1(d) of GSTR 3B was compared with tables 4(A)(2) and 
4A(3) of GSTR 3B. Greater of difference in GSTR 9 and 
GSTR 3B considered where both were available. 
9. 
The greater of tax liability between GSTR 1 (tables 4 to 
11), considering advances and amendments, and GSTR 9 
(tables 4N, 10 and 11) was compared with tax paid details 
in GSTR 3B tables 3.1(a) and 3.1(b). In cases where GSTR 
9 was not available, GSTR 3B tax paid was compared with 
GSTR 1 liability. 
Unsettled liabilities. This 
would lead to short 
payment/ non-payment of 
tax. 
10. 
Table 3.1(a)+(b) of GSTR 3B was compared with tax 
liability declared in the e-way bills and cases where GSTR 
3B are less than e-way bills are identified. 
Suppression of tax 
liability based on e-way 
bill verification 
11. 
The composition taxpayers whose turnover on all India 
basis (Central and State jurisdiction) under all GSTINs of 
the same PAN have crossed the turnover limit of ₹ 50 lakh 
in 2018-19 and ₹ 75 lakh in 2019-20. 
Ineligible composition 
levy scheme i.e. 
taxpayers continue to 
operate under 
composition levy scheme 
despite crossing 
threshold for the same. 
12. 
Taxpayers who have not filed GSTR 3B but have filed 
GSTR 1 or where GSTR 2A available, indicating 
taxpayers carrying on the business without discharging 
tax. 
GSTR 3B was not filed 
but GSTR 1 is available 
13. 
Interest calculated at the rate of 18 per cent on cash portion 
of tax payment on delayed filing of GSTR 3B vis-à-vis  
interest declared in GSTR 3B. 
Short payment of interest 
Table 5.4.5 (b): Details of Data Analysis undertaken (Turnover mismatch) 
Sl. 
No. Algorithm used Risk pursued 
14. Table 3.1(a) of GSTR 3B was compared with column 6 of 
table 9 of GSTR 2A. Cases where GSTR 3B values are less 
than that of GSTR 2A are identified. 
Under-declaration of 
taxable supplies by 
comparing TDS returns 
15. Unbilled revenue at the beginning of the year in table 5B 
of GSTR 9C should tally with the unbilled revenue of the 
previous GSTR 9C shown in table 5H. Any mismatch 
indicates suppression of taxable turnover. 
Suppression of taxable 
value based on unbilled 
revenue declared in 
GSTR 9C 
16. Negative figure in table 7G of GSTR 9C and examination 
of reasons provided in table 8 for mismatch. 
Mismatch in taxable 
turnover declared in table 
7G of GSTR 9C  
The data analysis pertaining to Tripura on the 16 identified parameters and extent of 
deviations/ inconsistencies observed are summarised in (Appendix 5.4.4).  
5.4.8.1 Non-submission of reply by the department 
Audit issued audit queries for 111 deviations in respect of 99 taxpayers in the 16 
14.
15.
16.

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
230
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
230 
dimensions. These audit queries were issued to the respective Charges in August-
September 2023 without further scrutiny of taxpayer’s records. The audit check in these 
cases was limited to verifying the Department’s action on the identified deviations/ 
mismatches identified from the taxpayer’s returns. 
Department’s response in 46 cases is still awaited (April 2025) though the Department 
gave assurance that it would furnish all replies during the Exit Conference. These cases 
are detailed in Appendix 5.4.5 (A). These entail 41 cases amounting to a mismatch of 
₹ 57.27 crore 239 in tax liability/ ITC/ short payment of interest (on delayed payment of 
tax) and five240 cases relating to inconsistencies in turnover as detailed in Appendices 
5.4.5 (B) and 5.4.5 (C).  
Considering the amount involved in the above-mentioned inconsistencies and its likely 
conversion into compliance deviations, the replies of the Department are of paramount 
importance. Hence, the Department is required to expedite verification of these cases 
as a priority. 
Recommendation 5 
The Department may urgently pursue the 46 inconsistencies and deviations pointed 
out by Audit, for which responses have not been provided.  
5.4.8.2 Results of centralised audit 
An overview of the extent to which each of the 15 241 dimensions translated into 
compliance deviations based on responses received from the Department to the audit 
queries, is summarised below. 
5.4.8.3 Summary of Centralised audit 
Out of 65 deviations, where replies were received Audit noticed compliance deviations 
from the provisions of the Act in 55 cases (Col. No. 14 of Appendix 5.4.6) relating to 
mismatch of ITC/ tax liability of ₹ 58.05 crore 242 (Col. No.15 of Appendix 5.4.6 ) 
constituting 84.61 per cent of the 65 inconsistencies/mismatches in data, for which the 
Department responses were received. Of these 55 cases, ASMT-10 have been issued in 
38 cases amounting to ₹ 33.70 crore243 (Col. No. 6 & 7 in Appendix 5.4.6). In 12 cases, 
department accepted the audit observations and stated that matter is under 
correspondence with taxpayer amounting to ₹ 6.73 crore 244 (Col. No. 8 & 9 in 
Appendix 5.4.6). In three cases amounting to ₹ 17.32 crore (Col. No. 10 in Appendix 
5.4.6) Department had taken proactive action. In two cases, replies of tax  
 
239 Including two cases of Ineligible composition levy scheme involving turnover amount of ₹ 2.61 crore 
240 Excluding turnover amount of ₹ 443.79 crore 
241 Data analysis has been carried out on 16 identified parameters.  However, Department furnished 
responses in respect of 15 parameters.   
242 Excluding two cases of Ineligible composition levy scheme of ₹ 20.76 crore, two cases of unbilled 
revenue of ₹ 0.32 crore and four cases of TDS returns of ₹ 0.14 crore. 
243 Excluding two cases of unbilled revenue involving turnover amount of ₹ 0.32 crore and three cases 
of TDS returns of ₹ 0.13 crore 
244 Excluding one case of Ineligible composition levy scheme involving turnover amount of ₹ 1.69 crore 
and one case of TDS returns of ₹ 0.01 crore 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
231
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
231 
authority were not accepted by Audit amounting to ₹ 0.31 crore 245 (Col. No.12 and 13 
of Appendix 5.4.6). 
In the remaining 10 cases (Col. No.4 of Appendix 5.4.6) out of 65 cases, constituting 
15.38 per cent , as the Department’s reply was acceptable to Audit and had valid 
explanations, these cases require no further action.  
A few illustrative cases are given below: 
(i) ITC mismatch between GSTR 2A and GSTR 3B 
GSTR 2A is a purchase related dynamic tax return that is automatically generated for 
each business by the GST portal, whereas GSTR 3B is a monthly return in which 
summary of outward supplies along with ITC declared and payment of tax are self-
declared by the taxpayer.  
To analyse the veracity of ITC utilisation, relevant data were extracted from GSTR 3B 
and GSTR 2A for the years 2018-19 to 2020-21, and the ITC paid as per suppliers’ 
details was matched with the ITC credit availed by the taxpayer. The methodology 
adopted was to compare the ITC available as per GSTR 2A with all its amendments 
and the ITC availed in GSTR 3B in Table 4A (5)246 considering the reversals Table 4B 
(2)247 but including the ITC availed in the subsequent years 2019-20 to 2021-22 from 
table 8C of GSTR 9.  
Audit observed that in case of (GSTN-1XXXXXXXXXXXXM) under Bishalgarh Charge, 
the ITC available as per GSTR 2A during 2018-19 and 2019-20 was ₹ 1.45 crore and 
₹ 1.74 crore respectively (total ₹ 3.19 crore) and the ITC availed in table 4A (5) of 
GSTR 3B during 2018-19 and 2019-20 was ₹ 3.20 crore and ₹ 2.95 crore respectively 
(total ₹ 6.15 crore). This resulted in mismatch of ITC availed amounting to ₹ 2.96 crore, 
which was communicated to the Superintendent of Taxes in September 2023.   
The Department replied (March 2025) that ASMT 10 had been issued to the taxpayer, 
seeking the reasons for the said discrepancy.  
(ii) ITC Availed on GSTR 3B filed after the cut off period 
The GST Act provides for availing of ITC only till the due date of furnishing GSTR 3B 
for the month of September following the end of the financial year to which such ITC 
pertains or furnishing of relevant Annual Return, whichever is earlier. Accordingly, if 
any GSTR 3B is furnished after such time, ITC availed therein becomes inadmissible. 
In order to review the extent of excess/irregular ITC availed on this account, the ITC 
availed through table 4 of GSTR 3B pertaining to 2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020-21 filed 
by the taxpayer beyond the due dates of September GSTR 3B return of the following 
year, were identified at data level.  
Based on the data analysis, it was observed that in case of GSTIN-1XXXXXXXXXXXXS 
under Bishalgarh Charge, the ITC availed by the taxpayer beyond the due date of 
 
245 Excluding one case of Ineligible composition levy scheme involving turnover amount of ₹ 19.07 crore 
246 all other eligible ITC 
247 other ITC reversed 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
232
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 232 
September GSTR 3B return of the following year was ₹ 0.70 crore. This resulted in 
mismatch of ITC availed amounting to ₹ 0.70 crore during the year 2019-20, which was 
communicated to the Superintendent of taxes, Bishalgarh Charge in September 2023. 
The Department replied (March 2025) that ASMT 10 had been issued to the taxpayer, 
seeking the reasons for the said discrepancy.  
(iii) Incorrect availing of ISD credit 
In order to analyse whether the ITC availed by the taxpayer is not in excess of that 
transferred by the ISD, the ITC availed as declared in the returns of the taxpayer was 
compared with the ITC transferred by the ISD(s) in their GSTR 6.   
The methodology adopted was to compare table 6G (net of table 7B) of GSTR 9 with 
the sum of table 5A, table 8A, and table 9A (considering adjustments) of GSTR 6 for 
respective GSTIN. In cases where table 7B was null, table 7H values were considered.  
In cases where GSTR 9 was not available, table 4(A)(4) [net of table 4(B)(2)] of GSTR 
3B was compared with the sum of table 5A, table 8A, and table 9A (considering 
adjustments) of GSTR 6 for respective GSTIN.  
Based on the data analysis, it was observed that in case of (GSTIN-
1XXXXXXXXXXXXJ) under Charge-VII, the taxpayer availed ITC of ₹ 0.13 crore in 
table 6G (net of table 7H) of GSTR 9 which was more than the ISD transferred of ₹ 0.06 
crore (the total sum of table 5A, table 8A, and table 9A, considering adjustments) of 
GSTR 6 for respective GSTIN during the year 2018-19. Thus, the taxpayer availed 
excess ITC of ₹ 0.07 crore, which was communicated to the Superintendent of taxes in 
September 2023. 
The Department replied (March 2025) that ASMT 10 had been issued to the taxpayer, 
seeking the reasons for the said discrepancy.  
(iv) Short payment of tax under RCM versus ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 9 
In order to analyse the veracity of tax paid under Reverse Charge Mechanism (RCM), 
the datasets in GSTR 3B and annual return GSTR 9 pertaining to RCM were compared 
to check whether the tax has been discharged fully on the activities/ transactions under 
RCM. In cases where GSTR 9 was filed, the RCM payments in table 4G were compared 
with ITC availed in table 6C, 6D and 6F. In cases where GSTR 9 was not available, 
RCM payments in table 3.1(d) of GSTR 3B were compared with table 4(A)(2) and table 
4A (3) of GSTR 3B.   
Based on the data analysis, it was observed that in case of GSTIN-
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH) under Charge V, there was short payment of tax under 
Reverse Charge Mechanism of ₹ 0.40 crore during the year 2018-19, which was 
communicated to the Superintendent of taxes, Charge V in September 2023. 
The Department replied (January 2025) that an inspection in Form INS-01 was 
executed against the taxpayer which is in hearing stage. Any further development in 
this matter will be intimated in the due course said discrepancy. 
 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
233
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 233 
(v) Unsettled tax liabilities (GSTR 1 and GSTR 9) 
GSTR 1 depicts the monthly details of outward supplies of goods or services, which 
are also reported by the taxpayer in the relevant columns of the annual return (GSTR-9).  
Further, taxable value and tax paid thereof are also shown in GSTR 3B.  
To analyse the undischarged tax liability, relevant data were extracted from GSTR 1, 
and GSTR 9 for the years 2018-19 to 2020-21, and the tax payable in these returns was 
compared with the tax paid declared in GSTR 9. Where GSTR 9 was not available, a 
comparison of tax payable between GSTR 1 and GSTR 3B was resorted to. The 
amendments and advance adjustments declared in GSTR 1 and GSTR 9 were also 
considered for this purpose.  
For the algorithm, tables 4 to 11 of GSTR 1 and tables 4G, 4N, 10 and 11 of GSTR 9 
were considered. The greater of tax liability between GSTR 1 and GSTR 9 was 
compared with the tax paid declared in tables 9 and 14 of GSTR 9 to identify the short 
payment of tax.  
It was observed that in case of (GSTIN-1XXXXXXXXXXXXXX) under Charge II, the tax 
payable shown in GSTR 1 during 2018-21 was ₹ 5.99 and the tax payable declared in 
GSTR 9 during 2018-21 was ₹ two crore. This resulted in a mismatch of tax liability 
amounting to ₹ 3.99 crore, which was communicated to the Superintendent of taxes, 
Charge II in September 2023. 
The Department replied (January 2025) that notice has been issued to the taxpayer.  
(vi) Suppression of tax liabilities based on e-way bill verification 
To analyse the extent of short-payment of tax, relevant data related to tax liability 
declared in GSTR 3B for the years 2018-19 to 2020-21 were compared with disclosures 
made in e-way bill. For the algorithm, the cases where tax payable (table 3.1 (a) plus 
table 3.1 (b) of GSTR 3B) were less than the tax liability declared in the e-way bills 
were chosen.  
It was observed that in case (GSTIN-1XXXXXXXXXXXXT) under Charge IV, the value 
of total taxable supply as per GSTR 3B during 2018-21 was nil but the e-way bill tax 
liability during 2018-21 was ₹ 3.16 crore. Thus, the e-way bills tax liability was more 
than the total outward supplies value declared in GSTR 3B by ₹ 3.16 crore, which was 
communicated to the Superintendent of taxes, Charge IV September 2023. 
The Department replied (January 2025) that ASMT 10 has been issued to the taxpayer.  
(vii) Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and return (table 9R of 
GSTR 9C) 
To review the extent of identified mismatch in tax paid reported in the annual return 
vis-à-vis the financial statements, the relevant data pertaining to table 9 of GSTR 9C 
(reconciliation statement) for the years 2018-19 to 2020-21 submitted by the taxpayer 
as required under Rule 80(3) of CGST/ SGST Rules was analysed at data level.  
Table 9 of GSTR 9C attempts to reconcile the tax paid by segregating the turnover 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
234
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
234 
rate-wise and comparing it with the tax discharged as per annual return GSTR 9. The 
unreconciled amounts could potentially indicate tax levied at incorrect rates, incorrect 
depiction of taxable turnover as exempt or incorrect levy of CGST/SGST/IGST. There 
can also be situations wherein supplies/ tax declared, are reduced through amendments 
(net of debit notes/credit notes) in respect of the transactions carried out in the 
subsequent year from April to September. To rule out the possibility of incorrect 
disclosure of the tax paid amount in GSTR 9C, the amount was also compared with 
actual tax payment details in GSTR 9.  
It was observed that in case of (GSTIN 1 XXXXXXXXXXXXI) under Charge II, there 
was mismatch in tax paid during 2018-19 between books of accounts and annual 
return, where tax payable as per table 9P of GSTR 9C was ₹ 4.97 crore and tax paid 
as per table 9Q of GSTR 9C was ₹ 4.52 crore. This resulted in short payment of tax 
for ₹ 0.45 crore, which was communicated to the Superintendent of taxes, Charge II 
in September 2023.  
The Superintendent of Taxes, Charge II replied (September 2023) that the taxpayer 
had been directed to appear before the tax authority to clarify the unreconciled/ 
mismatch in payment of tax within seven days from the date of receipt of notice. 
However, no further response regarding recovery of the outstanding tax liability has 
been received (April 2025). 
(viii) Under-declaration of taxable supplies by comparing TDS returns 
TDS under GST ensures advance collection of tax at the source of payment, improving 
compliance and preventing revenue leakage by ensuring that the supplier correctly 
reported taxable turnover. The tax deducted as declared in GSTR-7 by deductee is 
captured in Table-9 of GSTR-2A. The cases where the taxable value declared on 
account of outward taxable supplies (other than zero rated, nil rated and exempted) in 
GSTR 3B were less than the net amount liable for TDS credit as per Table 9 of GSTR 
2A have been identified.  
It was observed that in case of (GSTN-1 XXXXXXXXXXXXXJ) under Charge VII, the 
outward taxable supply declared in GSTR 3B was nil, but the net amount of TDS 
deducted as per GSTR 2A was ₹ 0.09 crore during the FYs 2018-20. Thus, the total 
taxable supply declared in GSTR 3B was less than the amount of net TDS deducted in 
GSTR 2A by ₹ 0.09 crore, which was communicated to the Superintendent of Taxes, 
Charge VII September 2023. 
The Superintendent of Taxes, Charge VII replied (January 2025) that ASMT 10 has 
been issued to the taxpayer.  
(ix) Suppression of taxable value based on unbilled revenue declared in GSTR 9C 
In order to review the extent of identified mismatch in taxable turnover reported in the 
annual return vis-à-vis the financial statements for the years 2018-19 to 2020-21, the 
relevant data pertaining to table 5 of the GSTR 9C (reconciliation statement) for the 
years 2018-19 to 2020-21 pertaining to disclosures of unbilled revenue submitted by 
the taxpayer as required under Rule 80(3) of CGST/ SGST Rules was analysed at data 
Charge VII in September 2023.

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
235
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
235 
level.  
Table 5B figures of GSTR 9C for the years 2018-19 to 2020-21 which captures the 
unbilled revenue at the beginning of the financial year was compared with table 5H of 
the previous GSTR 9C returns which captures the unbilled revenue of the end of the 
year to review the extent of identified mismatch in turnover declared in the annual 
return with the financial statements. 
Unbilled revenue for that part of transactions that are recorded in the books of accounts 
on an accrual basis but against which no invoices have been issued till the close of the 
financial year. Ideally, the unbilled revenue at the beginning of the year in table 5B of 
GSTR 9C should tally with the unbilled revenue shown in table 5H of the previous 
GSTR 9C. Any mismatch could be an indication of suppression of taxable turnover.  
It was observed that in case of (GSTN-1 XXXXXXXXXXXXQ) under Charge-I, the 
unbilled revenue at the beginning of the year 2020-21 under table 5B of GSTR 9C was 
of ₹ 0.01 crore and the unbilled revenue at the end of previous year 2019-20 under table 
5H of GSTR 9C was of ₹ 0.21 crore. This resulted in mismatch of unbilled revenue of 
₹ 0.20 crore, which was communicated to the Superintendent of Taxes in September 
2023.  
The Superintendent of Taxes, Charge-I in response stated (January 2025) that notice in 
Form-ASMT 10 was issued to the dealer.  
(x) Ineligible composition levy  
At the data level, Audit identified composition taxpayers whose turnover on pan India 
basis (Central and State jurisdiction) under all GSTINs of the same PAN have crossed 
the turnover limit of ₹ 0.50 crore in 2018-19 and ₹ 0.75 crore in 2019-20, but still 
continue to avail the benefit of composition scheme. 
Based on the data analysis, it was observed that in case of (GSTIN-
1XXXXXXXXXXXXR) under Charge VI, the taxpayer had availed the Composition levy 
scheme despite having turnover of  ₹ 1.69 crore during the year 2019-20, which was 
communicated to the Superintendent of Taxes in September 2023. 
The Department replied (January 2025), that DRC 01A had been issued to the taxpayer, 
intimation of tax ascertained payable.  
(xi) GSTR 3B not filed but GSTR 1/ GSTR 2A available 
At the data level, we have attempted to identify those taxpayers who have not filed 
GSTR 3B but have filed GSTR 1. GSTR 3B return is the instrument through which the 
liability can be offset, and ITC is credited in the ledger.  The very availability of GSTR 
1 and non-filing of GSTR 3B indicates that the taxpayers had undertaken/ carried on 
the business during the period but have not discharged their tax liability. It may also 
include cases of irregular passing on of ITC. All such cases, therefore, warrant 
investigation.  
Based on the data analysis, it was observed that in case of (GSTIN-
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU) under Charge VII, the taxpayer did not file GSTR 3B returns 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
236
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
236 
but GSTR 1 returns were available with a tax liability of ₹ 0.29 crore during the year 
2019-20. This resulted in undischarged tax liability of ₹ 0.29 crore, which was 
communicated to the Superintendent of Taxes in September 2023. 
The Department replied (March 2025) that ASMT 10 had been issued to the taxpayer, 
seeking the reasons for the said discrepancy.  
(xii) Short payment of interest  
Section 50 of the TGST Act, 2017 stipulates that every person liable to pay tax in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder but fails to pay 
the tax or any part thereof to the Government within the period prescribed, shall for the 
period for which the tax or any part thereof remains unpaid, pay interest at the rate 
notified. 
As per Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) notification 248 
(F.No.CBEC-20/01/08/2019-GST dated 18 September 2020), the taxpayer is liable to 
pay interest only on net cash tax liability i.e. cash component, if there is delay in 
payment of tax. 
The extent of short payment of interest on account of delayed remittance of tax during 
2018-19 to 2020-21 was identified through the tax paid details in GSTR 3B and the 
date of filing of the GSTR 3B. The due date of filing of GSTR 3B for the respective 
months (including any extension provided) and the actual date of filing of GSTR 3B 
has been considered to work out the interest liability and only the net tax liability (cash 
component) has been considered to work out the interest payable.    
It was observed that in case of (GSTIN-1 XXXXXXXXXXXXT) under Charge-I, there 
was short payment of interest on delayed payment of tax with the interest liability of 
₹ 0.003 crore for FY 2018-19, ₹ 0.42 crore for FY 2019-20 and ₹ 0.007 crore for FY 
2020-21, which was communicated to the Superintendent of Taxes in September 2023.  
The Superintendent of Taxes, Charge-I replied (October 2023) that intimation in Form 
ASMT 10 had been issued to the taxpayer. Further reply was awaited (April 2025).  
5.4.8.4 Analysis of causative factors 
The Department’s response to 55 cases out of the sample of 111 data 
deviations/inconsistencies were examined. Of these, 12 cases could not be conclusively 
commented upon as the Department was in correspondence with the respective 
taxpayers. The factors that caused the data deviations/ inconsistencies in the remaining 
cases are as follows: 
5.4.8.4 (i) Deviations from GST law and rules 
Out of the 111 deviations summarised in Appendix 5.4.4, the tax authorities had issued 
ASMT 10 conveying discrepancies to the taxpayers in 38 cases for ₹ 33.70 249crore and 
 
248 This circular was issued by the Central Government. The State Government is implementing it but 
has not issued a similar circular. 
249 Excluding two cases of unbilled revenue involving turnover amount of ₹ 0.32 crore and three cases 
of TDS returns of ₹ 0.13 crore 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
237
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
237 
were in correspondence with the respective taxpayers or issued DRC 01A in 12 cases 
involving ₹ 6.73 crore 250. Details are given in Appendices 5.4.7 (A) and 5.4.7 (B). 
5.4.8.4 (ii) Cases where Department’s reply was not accepted to Audit. 
Out of the 111 non-compliance cases, replies of tax authority were not accepted by 
Audit in two cases for ₹ 0.31 crore251 (Col. No.12 and 13 of Appendix 5.4.6). In these 
cases, the Tax authority only forwarded explanation/ submission of the taxpayers 
without explicitly commenting on the audit observations and relevant documents. 
Details are given in Appendix 5.4.7 (C). 
5.4.8.4 (iii) Cases where action was taken before issue of Audit Queries 
Department had already taken action in three cases out of the 65 responses received as 
detailed in Appendix 5.4.7 (D). One illustrative case is discussed below: 
A taxpayer (GSTIN-1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT) under Bishalgarh Charge, the tax payable 
shown in GSTR 1 during 2018-20 was ₹ 8.72 crore and the tax payable declared in 
GSTR 9 during 2018-20 was ₹ 0.62 crore. This resulted in a mismatch of tax liability 
amounting to ₹ 8.10 crore, which was communicated to the Superintendent of taxes, 
Bishalgarh Charge in September 2023. 
The Department replied in (March 2025) that the matter was under sub-judice with 
effect from 24 November 2020.  
5.4.9 Detailed audit of GST returns 
In a self-assessment regime, the onus of compliance with the law is on the taxpayer. 
The role of the Department is to establish and maintain an efficient tax administration 
mechanism to provide oversight. With a finite level of resources, for an effective tax 
administration, to ensure compliance with law and collection of revenue, an efficient 
governance mechanism is essential. An IT driven compliance model enables 
maintaining a non-discretionary regime of governance on scale and facilitates a targeted 
approach to enforce compliance. 
From an external audit perspective, Audit also focused on a data-driven risk-based 
approach. Thus, apart from identifying inconsistencies/deviations in GST returns 
through pan-State data analysis, a detailed audit of GST returns was also conducted as 
a part of this review. A risk-based sample of 20 taxpayers was selected for this part of 
the review. The methodology adopted was to initially conduct a desk review of GST 
returns and financial statements filed by the taxpayers as part of the GSTR 9C and other 
records available in the back-end system to identify potential risk areas, inconsistencies/ 
deviations and red flags. Desk review was carried out by an audit team from the office 
of the Principal Accountant General (Audit), Tripura. Based on desk review results, 
detailed audit was conducted in Commercial Tax Department, Tripura field formations 
by requisitioning corresponding granular records of taxpayers such as financial ledgers, 
 
250 Excluding one case of Ineligible composition levy scheme involving turnover amount of ₹ 1.69 crore 
one case of TDS returns of ₹ 0.01 crore 
251 Excluding one case of Ineligible composition levy scheme involving turnover amount of ₹ 19.07 crore 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
238
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
238 
invoices, etc. to identify causative factors of the identified risks and to evaluate 
compliance by taxpayers. 
5.4.9.1 Scope limitation (non-production of records) 
There was scope limitation of audit due to non-production of granular record by the 
Department. During the desk review of taxpayer’s records available in the back-end 
system, Audit identified the risks related to excess ITC and tax liability mismatches for 
detailed examination. On the ITC dimension, the mismatches were identified by 
comparing GSTR 3B with GSTR 2A and GSTR 9, and the declarations made in table 
12 and 14 of GSTR 9C. On the tax liability dimension, the mismatches were identified 
by comparing GSTR 1 and GSTR 9 and the declarations in table 5, table 7, and table 9 
of GSTR 9C. However, in none of the selected cases, the Department provided the 
corresponding granular records such as the financial statements, supplementary ledgers, 
invoices, copies of the agreement, etc. required for examining the causative factors for 
mismatches of ITC and tax liability. Audit requisitioned these granular records of the 
taxpayers through the respective Charges. The jurisdiction-wise non- production of 
records is summarised in Table 5.4.6. 
Table 5.4.6: Non-production of records  
Charge Name Sample No. of cases where granular 
records were not provided 
Number of taxpayers Number of taxpayers 
Charge-I 3 3 
Charge-III 4 4 
Charge-IV 1 1 
Charge-V 3 3 
Charge-VI 2 2 
Charge-VII 3 3 
Charge-VIII 3 3 
Dharmanagar 1 1 
Total 20 20 
The granular records were not produced for any of the above 20 cases. As a result, 
deviations relating to mismatch of the ITC amounting to ₹ 35.68  crore could not be 
examined in detail by Audit. 
5.4.9.2 Audit findings 
As brought out in the previous paragraphs, detailed audit involved a desk review of 
GST returns and other basic records to identify risks and red flags, which were followed 
up by field audit to identify the extent of non-compliance by taxpayers and action taken 
by the departmental field formations. Non-compliance by taxpayers at various stages 
impacts the veracity of returns filed, utilisation of ITC and discharge of tax payments. 
Audit observed deficiencies in 17 cases with revenue implication of ₹ 35.68 crore 
including mismatches relating to availing of ITC. The audit findings are categorised as 
under:  
a) Returns  
b) Utilisation of ITC  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
239
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 239 
5.4.9.3 Returns 
Non-filing of Reconciliation Statement (GSTR 9C) 
Section 44(1) of TGST Act, 2017 every registered person other than person paying tax 
under Section 51 or 52 shall furnish an annual return in Form GSTR 9 for every 
financial year electronically on or before the thirty-first day of December following the 
end of such financial year.  
Section 44 (2) of the TGST Act, 2017 read with Rule 80 (2) of TGST Rules, 2017 
stipulates that every registered person whose aggregate turnover during a financial year 
exceeds two crore rupees shall get his accounts audited in accordance with the 
provisions of sub-section (5) of Section 35 shall furnish, the annual return in Form 
GSTR 9, electronically,  under sub-section (1) along with a copy of the audited annual 
accounts and a reconciliation statement, in Form GSTR 9C, electronically, reconciling 
the value of supplies declared in the return furnished for the financial year with the 
audited annual financial statement. 
In this regard, every registered person whose aggregate turnover during a financial year 
exceeds two crore should get his account audited as specified under Section 35 (5) of 
the TGST Act, 2017 and read with Rule 80(3) of TGST Rules, 2017.  
Further, as per Section 46 of the TGST Act, 2017 where a registered person fails to 
furnish a return under Section 39 or 44 or 45, a notice shall be issued to him to furnish 
such return within fifteen days in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
Audit examined the filing of audited annual accounts and reconciliation statement for 
the FYs 2018-21 and observed that in three cases, the taxpayers did not file GSTR 9C 
despite their annual turnover exceeding ₹ two crore as details in Table 5.4.7. 
Table 5.4.7: Non-filing of GSTR 9C 
Sl. 
No. GSTIN Charge Year Turnover   
(₹ in crore) 
Due date 
(GSTR 9C) 
Filing Date 
(GSTR 9C) 
1 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9 Charge-III 
2018-19 30.36 31.12.2019 Not filed 
2019-20 23.36 31.12.2020 Not filed 
2020-21 13.16 31.12.2021 Not filed 
2 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM Charge-V 
2018-19 33.65 31.12.2019 Not filed 
2019-20 19.56 31.12.2020 Not filed 
2020-21 87.06 31.12.2021 Not filed 
3 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX3 Charge-VI 
2018-19 19.78 31.12.2019 Not filed 
2019-20 22.68 31.12.2020 Not filed 
2020-21 15.80 31.12.2021 Not filed 
The Department replied (February 2025) that the taxpayer (GSTIN-
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9) had filed GSTR 9C for 2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020-21 on 12 
February 2025, 13 February 2025 and 14 February 2025 respectively, but no supporting 
documents were furnished to Audit. In case of taxpayer (GSTIN-
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXX3), it was stated that GSTR 3A notice has been issued and in case 
of taxpayer (GSTIN-16AAAGM0289C1ZM) no reply has been furnished to audit (April 
2025).  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
240
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
240 
5.4.9.4 Mismatch relating to ITC 
Input Tax Credit means the Goods and Services Tax paid by a taxable person on 
purchase of goods and/ or services that are used in the course or furtherance of business. 
To avoid cascading effect of taxes, credit of taxes paid on input supplies can be used to 
set-off for payment of taxes on outward supplies. 
Section 16 and Section 17 of the TGST Act, 2017 prescribe the eligibility and 
conditions to avail ITC. Credit of CGST cannot be used for payment of SGST/ UTGST 
and credit of SGST/ UTGST cannot be utilised for payment of CGST. Rule 36 to Rule 
45 of the TGST Rules, 2017 prescribes the procedures for availing and reversal of ITC. 
Audit analysed the data set of GSTR 2A in respect of selected taxpayers along with 
datasets of GSTR 3B, GSTR 9 and GSTR 9C filed by the taxpayers and noticed 
mismatches of input tax credit among returns. Audit could not examine mismatches in 
detail since relevant granular records were not produced by the Department.  
Audit observed 17 instances of ITC related mismatches for ₹ 35.68  crore out of 
20 sample cases examined. The deficiencies were due to availing ITC irregularly, 
availing ineligible ITC and non/ short reversal of ITC. Hence, these cases remained as 
mismatches. The details of mismatches in input tax credit noticed by Audit are given in 
Table 5.4.8. 
Table 5.4.8: Mismatch in input tax credit claimed by taxpayers 
Sl. 
No. Parameter 
No. 
of 
cases 
No. of 
Charge 
office 
Amount of 
mismatch  
(₹ in crore) 
1 
Mismatch in availing of ITC as per GSTR 2A and 
GSTR 9:  
To check whether the taxpayer has availed ITC on 
transactions where the supplier would not have 
discharged tax. If table 8A of GSTR 9 (auto 
populated from GSTR 2A) is less than GSTR 2A 
ITC availment, it indicates either ITC availed on 
invoices for which tax was not discharged or availed 
ITC on invoices issued after the effective date of 
cancellation of the supplier (Appendix 5.4.8). 
The matter was intimated to the respective 
Superintendents of Taxes in January 2024.  
6 5 22.57  
 
In case of three taxpayers GSTIN- 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX, GSTIN-
1XXXXXXXXXXXX8 and GSTIN – 1XXXXXXXXXXXX9, Department stated 
(February 2025) that notice in Form ASMT 10 had been issued to the taxpayers.  
The Department replied (February 2025) that in case of the taxpayer (GSTIN-
1XXXXXXXXXXXXM), there was no mismatch in ITC availment as the amount of 
ITC claimed in GSTR 9 was ₹ 2,79,85,732, which was less than the amount of ITC 
auto-populated in GSTR 2A i.e. ₹ 42,92,20,875.  
Also, in case of taxpayer (GSTR-1XXXXXXXXXXXXO), it was stated (February 
2025) that on verification the total ITC available in GSTR 2A during FY 2019-20 was 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
241
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
241 
Sl. 
No. Parameter 
No. 
of 
cases 
No. of 
Charge 
office 
Amount of 
mismatch  
(₹ in crore) 
₹ 2,20,38,367 and the ITC claimed in GSTR 9 was ₹ 1,74,33,210. Thus, ITC claimed 
in GSTR 9 was less than ITC availed in GSTR 2A.  
The replies in both cases were not acceptable as the amount of ITC in table 8A (GSTR 
9) figure was less than the amount of ITC in GSTR 2A, this mismatch indicated the 
possibility of either taxpayer availing ITC on invoices for which tax was not discharged 
by the supplier or ITC availed on invoices issued after the effective date of cancellation 
of the supplier.  
In case of taxpayer (GSTIN-1XXXXXXXXXXXXXD), no reply has been furnished 
(April 2025).  
2 
Mismatch of ITC between Annual Return and 
Financial Statements (table 12F of GSTR 9C): 
To identify mismatch in ITC availed between the 
Annual Return and the Financial Statements. Table 
12F of the GSTR 9C captures the unreconciled ITC 
between the annual return GSTR 9 and that declared 
in the Financial Statements for the year after the 
requisite adjustments (Appendix 5.4.9). 
The matter was intimated to the respective 
Superintendents of Taxes in January 2024. 
1 1 1.33 
 For taxpayer (GSTIN-1XXXXXXXXXXXD), no reply has been furnished (April 
2025).  
3 
Mismatch between ITC availed in GSTR 3B and 
ITC available in GSTR 2A: 
To analyse, data regarding GSTR 3B and GSTR 2A 
were extracted from the Department’s report and the 
ITC paid as per suppliers’ details was matched with 
the ITC credit availed by the taxpayer and compare 
the ITC available as per GSTR 2A with all its 
amendments and the ITC availed in GSTR 3B in 
table 4A (5) considering the reversals in table 4B (2) 
(Appendix 5.4.10). 
The matter was intimated to the respective 
Superintendents of Taxes in January 2024. 
10 6 11.78  
 
In case of four taxpayers (GSTIN-1XXXXXXXXXXXX8, GSTIN-
1XXXXXXXXXXXXI, GSTIN- 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL and GSTIN-
1XXXXXXXXXXXX9), Department stated (February 2025) that notice in Form 
ASMT 10 had been issued to the taxpayers. 
In case of taxpayer (GSTIN-1XXXXXXXXXXXXZ), it was stated (February 2025) 
that DRC-01 had been issued.  
In case of taxpayer (GSTIN-1XXXXXXXXXXXXU), the Department replied 
(January 2025) that, the excess ITC shown during the FY 2019-20 was due to the ITC 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
242
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
242 
Sl. 
No. Parameter 
No. 
of 
cases 
No. of 
Charge 
office 
Amount of 
mismatch  
(₹ in crore) 
claimed during FY 2019-20 related to the FY 2018-19. The rest of the amount of excess 
ITC was reversed in GSTR 3B return during the FY 2019-20. In case of taxpayer 
(GSTIN-1XXXXXXXXXXXXX), the excess ITC was due to the ITC claimed during 
FY 2020-21 pertaining to the FY 2019-20. 
Regarding mismatch of ITC in case of taxpayer (GSTIN-1XXXXXXXXXXXX3) for 
the FY 2018-19, it was stated that the taxpayer had excess unutilised ITC of 
₹ 4,10,24,808 during FY 2017-18, which the taxpayer had utilised in the subsequent 
FY 2018-19. In respect of mismatch of ITC for the FY 2020-21, the taxpayer paid tax 
through DRC-03 amounting to ₹ 1,45,07,923.  
In case of taxpayer (GSTIN-1XXXXXXXXXXXXM), it was stated (February 2025) 
that the taxpayer availed less ITC of ₹ 3,97,12,325 in GSTR 3B against ITC accrued 
in GSTR 2A during the FY 2017-18. The said amount was carried forward in 2018-19. 
Thus, the total ITC available for FY 2018-19 was ₹ 8,27,77,904 (₹ 4,30,65,579 + 
₹ 3,97,12,325). However, the taxpayer claimed ITC of ₹ 6,61,21,961 in GSTR-3B 
during FY 2018-19, resulting in a short availment of ITC as compared to the total 
available amount. 
However, in all these cases no supporting documents were furnished to Audit. In the 
absence of relevant documents Audit could not verify the Department’s replies.  
In case of taxpayer (GSTIN-1XXXXXXXXXXXXI), it was stated (January 2025) that 
for mismatch of ITC for FY 2018-19, notice in Form ASMT 10 had been issued to the 
taxpayer. It was further stated that mismatch of ITC of ₹ 1,50,16,525 for FY 2019-20 
was due to technical glitch and no discrepancy had been found. The reply was not 
acceptable since supporting documents along with detail reasons for technical glitch 
causing mismatch and the subsequent adjustment of mismatch amount had not been 
furnished to audit. 
5.4.10 Conclusion 
The Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) on Department’s Oversight on GST 
Payments and Return Filing was taken up considering the significance of the control 
mechanism envisaged for tax compliance and the oversight mechanism in this new tax 
regime. The objectives were to assess the adequacy of the system in monitoring return 
filing and tax payments, extent of compliance and other departmental oversight 
functions.  
This SSCA was predominantly based on data analysis, which highlighted risk areas and 
red flags in GST returns filed for 2018-19 to 2020-21. The SSCA entailed assessing the 
oversight functions of State Jurisdictional formations at two levels – at the data level 
and at the functional level carried out through detailed audit of the Charges and scrutiny 
of GST returns, which involved accessing taxpayer records.  
A review of the functions of five Charges disclosed that there were deficiencies in 
oversight functions of Charges such as monitoring of return scrutiny, action on late 
filers/ non-filers, cancellation of registration and internal audit. As such, the functions 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
243
Chapter V: Revenue Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
243 
of the charges were not fully carried out in an organised manner. 
Further, out of the 111 high value data inconsistencies identified by Audit the 
Department responded to 65 cases. Of these, 55 cases constituting 84.61 per cent , 
turned out to be compliance deficiencies amounting to ₹ 58.05 crore252. The Department 
had not responded to 46 cases of inconsistencies, which had an identified mismatch of 
₹ 57.27 crore 253.  
Detailed audit of GST returns also suggested significant non-compliance. In 20 cases 
which were examined, granular records were not forthcoming constituted a significant 
scope of limitation. Audit observed deficiencies in 17 cases including identified 
mismatches in availing of ITC amounting to ₹ 35.68 crore. 
Considering the significant rate of compliance deficiencies, the Department must 
initiate remedial measures before they get time barred. From a systemic perspective, 
the Department needs to strengthen the institutional mechanism in the Charges to 
establish and maintain effective oversight on return filing, taxpayer compliance, tax 
payments, cancellation of registrations and recovery of dues from defaulters. 
5.4.11 Summary of recommendations  
 The Department may take immediate steps to formulate guidelines/ SOP and 
ensure the scrutiny of returns in a time bound manner before the cases become 
time barred.  
 The Department may initiate action against non-filers by assessing the tax 
liability through invoking of the ASMT-13 best judgment assessment order. 
 The Department may ensure timely verification of cancelled registrations to 
prevent undue loss of tax revenue. 
 The Department may conduct internal audit on regular basis, so that an 
optimum number of taxpayers can be audited in every financial year. 
 The Department may urgently pursue the 46 inconsistencies and deviations 
pointed out by Audit, for which responses have not been provided. 
 
 
 
252 Excluding turnover amount of ₹ 21.22 crore 
253 Excluding turnover amount of ₹ 443.79 crore 

CHAPTER VI: GENERAL SECTOR

Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
245
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 245 
CHAPTER VI: GENERAL SECTOR 
6.1 Introduction 
This Chapter of the Audit Report presents the findings from the audit of Government 
units under the General Sector. 
The total budget allocation and expenditure of the departments under General Sector 
during the years 2023-24 are given in Table 6.1.1. 
Table: 6.1.1: Details of allocation and expenditure under General Sector 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of the Department Budget 
allocation Expenditure 
Parliamentary Affairs  36.65 33.40 
Governor’s Secretariat  8.21 7.06 
General Administration (SA) Department 179.17 112.89 
Election Department 134.48 118.95 
Law Department 195.92 171.27 
General Administration (AR) Department 3.91 3.09 
General Administration (P & T) Department 13.15 9.50 
Economic and Statistics Department 15.63 6.76 
Home (Police) Department 2,177.23 1,836.71 
General Administration (Political) Department 9.42 7.58 
Planning and Co-ordination Department 47.55 32.60 
Home (Jail) Department 59.67 45.97 
General Administration (Printing and Stationary) 
Department  19.49 12.18 
Finance Department 5,932.76 5,418.92 
Institutional Finance 5.60 3.94 
Treasuries 11.79  8.12 
High Court 50.38 36.56 
Fire Service Organisation  178.65 141.64 
Civil Defence  1.89 0.66 
Employment and Manpower  9.19 7.33 
Home (FSL, PAC, Prosecution & Co-ordination Cell) 
Department  9.32 6.86 
Total number of departments = 21 9,100.06 8,021.99 
Source: Appropriation Accounts 2023-24 
During 2023-24, we audited three units under the General Sector, covering expenditure 
of ₹ 228.91 crore (including expenditures of the previous years). 
This Chapter contains two Compliance Audit Paragraphs titled “Suspected excess 
payment” and “Suspected and excess payment” under the Finance Department and 
Home (Police) Department involving money value of ₹ 4.26 crore. 
  

Chapter VI: General Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
246
Chapter VI: General Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
246 
FINANCE DEPARTMENT 
6.2 Suspected excess payments 
 
Lack of integration between the Computerised Treasury Operating System and 
the Human Resource Management System, along with gaps in oversight by 
Drawing and Disbursing Officers and Treasury Officers, resulted in excess 
payments of ₹ 3.97 crore towards salaries. 
The Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS), launched in 2010 under the 
National e-Governance Plan, was an extension of the treasury computerisation project 
aimed at modernising State financial operations. Funded by the Government of India, 
it was part of the Mission Mode Project for the “Computerisation of State Treasuries”. 
IFMS was envisioned as a comprehensive, web-based financial accounting system to 
enable real-time management, monitoring, and control of fund allocations and 
transactions across State Government departments-focusing on efficiency, cost 
reduction, and the adoption of modern public expenditure practices. 
In Tripura, IFMS was not implemented as an integrated software solution. Instead, 
standalone applications were developed: Centralised Treasury Operation System 
(CTOS) (December 2010) for budgeting and payments and Human Resource 
Management System (HRMS) (May 2014) for payroll and personnel management. An 
attempt to integrate CTOS and HRMS (payroll and e-service book) in Tripura was 
initiated in October 2016. The State Government engaged RITES Ltd. to undertake the 
integration, focusing on payroll and e-service book functionalities. However, the 
project remained incomplete due to technical challenges, including compatibility issues 
between different DOT NET Framework versions, lack of a feasibility study and 
inadequate project oversight.  
The Design Report prepared by RITES Ltd. outlined plan for integrating CTOS with 
HRMS, particularly for payroll data. However, as of now, these systems operate 
independently without full integration. Integration of HRMS and CTOS streamlines 
payroll by automating data transfer, ensuring real time consistency and reducing 
manual errors. This enhances transparency through audit trails and accelerates 
processing times. The integration of the CTOS and the HRMS is essential for ensuring 
accurate, efficient, and transparent management of government payroll and fund 
disbursement.  
Due to non-integration, automated data transfer between HRMS and CTOS for salary 
processing was not feasible. Consequently, the workflow necessitated manual 
intervention. Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDOs) had to manually select 
employee beneficiaries from CTOS and input their net salary amounts based on salary 
slips generated in HRMS. These digitally signed PDF slips were then uploaded into 
CTOS as e-vouchers. Salary disbursement occurred only after approval and processing 
by the respective Treasury, resulting in a fragmented and inefficient payroll system. 
The lack of integration, as observed in Tripura resulted in significant systemic 
weaknesses, including manual duplication of work, inflated salary payments and 

Chapter VI: General Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
247
Chapter VI: General Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
247 
potential fraud. 
An analysis of data dump of CTOS and HRMS provided (May 2023) by the Tripura 
State Data Centre of the Finance Department for the period from 2017-18 to 2022-23 
revealed several cases of suspected excess payments of ₹ 3.97 crore through salary bills 
as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
6.2.1 Excess payment of salary/ inflation of salary figures of ₹ 2.93 crore 
An analysis of data furnished by the Finance Department revealed that 3,920 employees 
under 634 DDOs received salary payments exceeding their entitled amounts over 
periods ranging from a few months to several years. These 6,011 excess payments 
resulted from manual entries of inflated salary amounts into the CTOS during the period 
from April 2017 to February 2023, varying from ₹ one per month to ₹ 8.72 lakh per 
month.  An illustrative list of cases involving employees who received excess salary 
payments exceeding ₹ 20,000 per month, totalling ₹ 1.27 crore, is provided in 
Appendix 6.2.1. The remaining smaller cases are included in summary Table 6.2.1 
Table 6.2.1: Range wise details of excess salary drawn 
Excess range Distinct count 
of DDO 
Number of 
cases 
Distinct count 
of employees 
Excess salary 
(in ₹) 
Above ₹ 5,00,000 1 6 1 48,32,000 
₹ 2,00,001 to ₹ 5,00,000 1 3 1 11,16,000 
₹ 1,00,001 to ₹ 2,00,000 1 3 1 3,34,225 
₹ 20,001 to ₹ 1,00,000 64 182 97 64,62,535 
    1,27,44,760 
₹ 10,001 to ₹ 20,000 111 357 214 52,67,545 
₹ 1,001 to ₹ 10,000 398 2,457 1,363 1,01,15,396 
₹ 1 to ₹ 1,000 445 3,003 2,488 11,89,416 
Grand total 634 6,011 3,920 2,93,17,117 
Source: Data provided by the Finance Department, Government of Tripura 
6.2.2. Inadmissible payment of ₹ 95.26 lakh in “Other allowances”  
Audit noticed that ₹ 95.26 lakh was disbursed as salary through the unauthorised 
insertion of fictitious, non-sanctioned, or inflated allowances in the “Other Allowances” 
field of the HRMS under two DDOs. These entries were neither approved by the 
Finance Department nor reflected in the employees’ official entitlements. The 
deliberate manipulation of this field aimed to inflate the gross salary escaped detection, 
as HRMS lacked internal validation rules or audit trails for verifying the legitimacy of 
“Other Allowances” field. Details of these cases are provided in Appendix 6.2.2.  
A physical verification conducted at Twikorma High School, Gomati District, 
confirmed the audit findings of suspected salary withdrawals. The cashier of the school 
exploited system vulnerabilities over a period of 48 months (January 2019 to February 
2023) by manipulating entries in both the CTOS and HRMS to withdraw a total of 
₹ 1.53 crore, comprising of (i) ₹ 77.28 lakh withdrawn by inflating salary figures in 
CTOS and (ii) ₹ 75.21 lakh withdrawn by inserting unauthorised allowances under the 
“Other Allowances” field in HRMS.  
The breakdown of the suspected withdrawals is detailed in Appendix 6.2.3. 

Chapter VI: General Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
248
Chapter VI: General Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 248 
6.2.3 Suspected salary payment of ₹ 8.82 lakh in the name of terminated 
employees 
Audit noticed that between May 2020 and July 2023, a total of ₹ 8.82 lakh was 
fraudulently disbursed as salary under a single DDO by preparing salary bills in the 
names of two terminated employees and withdrawing the corresponding amounts 
through another employee’s bank account, as detailed in Appendix 6.2.4.  
These instances highlight serious lapses in financial oversight, indicate weaknesses in 
internal controls and highlight the need for system integration. These manipulations 
were possible due to the lack of automated cross-verification between CTOS and 
HRMS and thus remained undetected.  
In reply, the Government stated (July 2024) that the efficiency of the CTOS system was 
dependent on manual data entry, submission of relevant documents by the DDO and 
further manual checks at the approver or treasury level. The system functionality 
checked the availability of the budget, correctness of the head of account, correctness 
of payment mandate file formats, etc. which were required for payment through RBI e-
Kuber. The Government further stated that it would implement a new version of IFMS 
(Ver. 2.0) and the proposed system would have cohesive HRMS and Treasury systems 
which would ensure seamless data transfer and automated checks thereby minimising 
the manual involvement. 
The Government further stated that CTOS and HRMS were not integrated for pay roll 
data sharing and the onus lay with the individual treasuries/ sub-treasuries to check the 
data manually and that most of the discrepancies occurred due to manual interventions 
with ill motives and subsequent oversights. 
However, the fact remains that the Government failed to ensure the integration of CTOS 
and HRMS data outlined in the scope of work contained in the design report of CTOS, 
thereby creating financial system vulnerabilities and opportunities for manipulation of 
the systems. Additionally, the DDOs and Treasury/ Sub-Treasury officers did not 
diligently perform their duties in ensuring correctness of facts and figures in bills, 
resulting in suspected excess payment of government money.  

Chapter VI: General Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
249
Chapter VI: General Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 249 
 
 
Thus, the non-integration of the Computerised Treasury Operating System (CTOS) 
with the Human Resource Management System (HRMS) led to systemic failures in 
financial governance, marked by weak internal controls over payroll and fund 
disbursement processes. The lack of integration enabled manual data entry and 
bypassing of validation checks, which facilitated fraudulent activities such as inflated 
salary entries, unauthorised payments under “Other Allowances” and payment of salary 
to terminated employees. Further, the Treasury also did not have access to employee 
service status record in the HRMS. These lapses culminated in fraudulent excess 
payments amounting to ₹ 3.97 crore over a period of six years. 
The Government stated (July 2025) that the Finance Department had already taken 
various initiatives to recover the unauthorised excess amount drawn by the Government 
employees and ₹ 1.41 lakh relating to excess salary had been recovered. The concerned 
offices had also been requested to initiate disciplinary actions as per CCS (CCA) Rules 
against the errant officials responsible for such excess drawal. 
The Government further stated that, to prevent recurrence of such irregularities, it had 
taken some interim measures and also long term strategies. As a part of interim 
measures, the Finance Department had already procured IDEA Software to detect 
unusual transactions. The State Government had also asked NIC, Tripura to develop a 
next Gen. HRMS. This system would be integrated with existing CTOS and 
subsequently with the proposed IFMS 2.0 to ensure flawless salary bill processing 
framework. 
As a part of long term strategy, the State Government had planned to develop an IFMS 
2.0 to enhance efficiency and transparency in Financial Administration. Consultants 
had been engaged to prepare System Requirement Specification. 
 


Chapter VI: General Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
250
Chapter VI: General Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
250 
HOME (POLICE) DEPARTMENT 
6.3 Suspected and excess payments 
 
Failure of the Drawing and Disbursing Officer (DDO) to detect non-compliance 
with the rules resulted in suspected and excess payment of ₹ 28.96 lakh 
indicating inadequate internal control, monitoring and accountability 
mechanisms in the office of the Superintendent of Police, Sepahijala. 
Rule 21 of General Financial Rules, 2017 provides that, every officer incurring or 
authorising expenditure from public moneys should be guided by high standards of 
financial propriety. Every officer should also enforce financial order and strict 
economy and see that all relevant financial rules and regulations are observed, by his 
own office and by subordinate disbursing officers. 
Rule 71 (2) (b) of Travelling Allowance (TA)  Rules provides that TA for a local 
journey shall be admissible if the temporary place of duty is beyond eight km from the 
official’s residence or from the place of duty.  
Examination (January 2024) of the records of the office of the Superintendent of 
Police (SP), Sepahijala, and analysis of the HRMS and CTOS showed instances of 
fraudulent payments of salary to fictitious employees, fraudulent payments of TA/DA 
and payments of excess salary to employees, as discussed below; 
A Suspected payment of ₹ 14.37 lakh to fictitious beneficiary 
A Beneficiary ID (523367) was created (May 2018) in the name of Shri Khanilal 
Debbarma in the office of the Superintendent of Police (SP), Sepahijala. He was 
assigned the constable ID 10406. It was noticed that the office of the SP, Sepahijala 
had drawn ₹ 14.37 lakh254 from Bishalgarh Treasury between May 2018 and January 
2024 by submitting 83 bills (three pay bills and 80 TA bills) which were paid to Shri 
Khanilal Debbarma 255 (details in Appendix 6.3.1 ). However, the name of 
Shri Khanilal Debbarma was not on the records of the office of the SP, Sepahijala. 
The creation of a fictitious beneficiary ID by the DDO led to a suspected payment of 
₹ 14.37 lakh. 
The SP, Sepahijala stated (August 2024) that Shri John Jamatia, UDC was responsible 
for the irregularities while he was working in Pay Cell and TA Section. He had 
admitted his involvement and was placed under suspension (February 2024) and 
Departmental proceedings initiated against him. The final outcome is awaited. 
B Suspected payment of TA/ DA of ₹ 11.17 lakh 
Examination of records of TA bills revealed instances of suspected payments made to 
the employees of the office of the SP, Sepahijala despite their not having performed 
any outside duty. Discrepancies were found between the treasury statement of bills and 
the office copies of the bills. Further, it was also observed that the bills were passed 
 
254₹ 14,37,061 
255Beneficiary Unique ID (523367)/ Payee was created by the DDO, SP Sepahijala office in May 2018 

Chapter VI: General Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
251
Chapter VI: General Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
251 
using different constable IDs for the same employee. The details are as given in 
Table 6.3.1. 
Table 6.3.1: Fraudulent payment of TA/ DA 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of official 
(Beneficiary 
code) 
Constable 
Number 
used 
Total 
amount 
credited 
(in ₹) 
Remarks 
1 Shri John 
Jamatia, UDC,  
(191019) 
Not 
Available 
5,98,540  Instances of payment received 
through bills, but name not 
included in the office copy of the 
treasury statement of bills.  
 No outside duty was performed by 
them since their joining in 2012. 
2 Shri Suchitra 
Singha, LDC, 
(232638) 
Not 
Available 
96,545 
3 Shri Harinath 
Debbarma, 
Constable 
(140038) 
C/10407 
C/10521 
C/10304 
C/10306 
C/10640 
C/10602 
3,47,085  He was posted in canteen at SP 
office since January 2016 and had 
not performed outside duty. 
 The Bills were passed using 
different Constable IDs in sanction 
orders. 
4 Shri Khokan 
Dey, LDC  
(151973) 
C/10606 
C/10304 
C/10301 
C/10603 
75,330  No outside duty was performed 
since his joining in 2012.  
 These Bills were passed by using 
different Constable IDs in sanction 
Orders. 
 Total  11,17,500  
The details of the suspected payment made to the four officials during the period from 
August 2020 to December 2023 are shown in Appendix 6.3.2. 
The SP, Sepahijala stated (August 2024) that Shri John Jamatia, UDC was responsible 
for the irregularities. He had admitted his involvement and was placed under 
suspension (February 2024) and Departmental proceedings had been initiated against 
him. 
C Excess drawal of salary of ₹ 3.42 lakh 
Analysis of HRMS and CTOS data revealed excess payment of salary of ₹ 0.86 lakh 
to Shri Suchitra Singha, LDC during the months of November 2020, September 2021 
and January 2022 which was offset by a deduction of the same amount from the salary 
of Shri Parimal Debbarma, Constable. It was seen that Shri Suchitra Singha used 
multiple Beneficiary Code and bank accounts in the CTOS data, al though the 
employee number remained the same in the HRMS data.  The details are given in 
Appendix 6.3.3. 
It was also observed that Shri Harinath Debbarma, Constable was paid (October 2023) 
₹ 2.56 lakh 256 as pay arrears through Bill Number 939 dated 11 October 2023, 
 
256 vide Bill Number 939 dated 11 October 2023 for ₹ 2,55,606 

Chapter VI: General Sector
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
252
Chapter VI: General Sector 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 252 
however, he was not entitled to such arrears. 
Thus, the SP, Sepahijala stated (August 2024) that Shri Suchitra Singha, LDC and 
Shri John Jamatia UDC were responsible for the irregularities. They had admitted their 
involvement and were placed under suspension (February 2024) and Departmental 
proceedings had been initiated against them. 
Failure of the DDO to maintain financial propriety resulted in suspected and excess 
payment of ₹ 28.96 lakh which is indicative of inadequate monitoring, lack of internal 
controls and poor accountability fixation in the office of the SP office, Sepahijala. 
Ineffective internal controls coupled with lack of accountability had thus led to 
suspected payments amounting to ₹ 28.96 lakh.  
Recommendation: 
 It is recommended that the State Government establish a robust internal control 
system to strengthen financial oversight and ensure effective governance across 
field units in its jurisdiction. 
 It is recommended that government rules meant to ensure fiscal prudence 
should be scrupulously followed and systemic accountability norms put in 
place.  
 The State Government should consider continued monitoring and periodic 
rotation of staff performing DDO duties at regular intervals so as to reduce the 
possibility of fraudulent practices.  

CHAPTER VII: 
FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERV ATIONS

Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
253
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
253 
CHAPTER VII 
FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERV ATIONS 
7.1 Follow-up action on earlier Audit Reports 
 
7.1.1 Explanatory notes not submitted 
The Reports of the C&AG represent the culmination of the audit scrutiny process. 
Therefore, it is imperative that these reports elicit appropriate and timely response from 
the executive. The Finance Department of the Government of Tripura issued (July 
1993) instructions to all the administrative departments, directing them to initiate, suo 
motu, positive and concrete actions on all audit paragraphs and reviews featuring in the 
C&AG’s Audit Reports regardless of whether the cases are taken up for examination 
by the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) or the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(COPU) of the Tripura Legislative Assembly or not, and to furnish detailed notes 
indicating the corrective or remedial actions taken or proposed to be taken within a 
period of three months of the presentation of the Audit Reports to the Legislature. 
Serious irregularities noticed in audit are included in the C&AG’s Audit Reports and 
presented to the State Legislature. 
(a) Public Accounts Committee  
As of September 2024, a total of 88 paragraphs (65 paragraphs and 23 performance 
audits) related to the Audit Reports for the years 2006-07 to 2021-22 were pending 
discussion by the PAC. Of these, explanatory notes on 68 paragraphs (51 paragraphs 
and 17 performance audits) had not been received from 19 departments. The position 
of pending explanatory notes on paragraphs and performance audits from the last five 
years’ Audit Reports awaiting discussion by the PAC is shown in Table 7.1.1. 
Table 7.1.1: Position of pending explanatory notes on paragraphs and performance 
audits of Audit Reports awaiting discussion by PAC during 2016-17 to 2021-22 
Year of the 
Audit Report 
(Commercial/ 
PSEs) 
Date of 
placement of 
Audit Report in 
the State 
Legislature 
Total performance audits 
and paragraphs included in 
the Audit Report 
Number of performance audits/ 
paragraphs for which 
explanatory notes were not 
received 
Performance 
audits Paragraphs Performance 
audits Paragraphs 
2016-17 23-11-2018 3 7 1 7 
2017-18 30-08-2019 4 9 2 6 
2018-19 17-03-2022 3257 10 2 7 
2019-20 28-03-2022 1 5 3 3 
2021-22258 08-01-2024 3 8 3 8 
Total 14 39 11 31 
The departments who had not submitted explanatory notes were Public Works (Roads 
and Building) Department: 29, six for Finance Department, five for Revenue 
Department, four for Rural Development Department, three each for Home (Police), 
Public Works (Water Resource) and Forest Departments, two each for Home (Jail), 
 
257 Including one standalone Performance Audit Report on “Select District Hospitals in Tripura” 
258 Only one Audit Report (i.e. Audit Report 2021-22) was published by merging Audit Reports for the 
years 2020-21 and 2021-22. 

Chapter VII: Follow Up of Audit Observations
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
254
Chapter VII: Follow Up of Audit Observations 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 
254 
Health and Family Welfare Department and Food and Civil Supplies Departments and 
one each to other nine departments259. 
The issue of pending explanatory notes for audit paragraphs was raised (July 2024) with 
the Finance Department, Government of Tripura with the objective to expedite the 
submission of these notes by the concerned departments to reduce the existing backlog. 
(b) Committee on Public Undertakings 
As of September 2024, 16 paragraphs (10 paragraphs and six performance audits) 
relating to the Audit Reports for the years 2014-15 to 2021-22 were awaiting discussion 
by the COPU. Of these, explanatory notes on 15 paragraphs (10 paragraphs and five 
performance audits) had not been received from the two departments. The departments 
responsible for non-submission of explanatory notes on were Industries and Commerce 
Department (11 paragraphs) and Power Department (four paragraphs). 
The position of receipt of replies/ explanatory notes for these pending paragraphs/ 
performance audits from the State Government/ administrative departments concerned 
is given in Table 7.1.2. 
Table 7.1.2: Position of pending Explanatory notes (as on 30 September 2024) 
Year of the 
Audit Report 
(Commercial/ 
PSEs) 
Date of 
placement of 
Audit Report in 
the State 
Legislature 
Total performance audits 
and paragraphs included in 
the Audit Report 
Number of performance audits/ 
paragraphs for which 
explanatory notes were not 
received 
Performance 
audits Paragraphs Performance 
audits Paragraphs 
2014-15 23-03-2016 1 2 Nil 2 
2015-16 15-03-2017 1 Nil 1 Nil 
2016-17 23-11-2018 1 1 1 1 
2017-18 30-08-2019 1 4 1 4 
2018-19 17-03-2022 0 2 0 2 
2019-20 28-03-2022 1 0 1 0 
2021-22260 8-01-2024 1 1 1 1 
Total 6 10 5 10 
The issue of pending explanatory notes for audit paragraphs was raised (July 2024) with 
the Finance Department, Government of Tripura with the objective to expedite the 
submission of these notes by the concerned departments to reduce the existing backlog. 
7.1.2 Discussion of Audit Reports by PAC/ COPU 
The procedures for the State Legislatures in dealing with the CAG’s Audit Reports are 
regulated by the rules framed or adapted under Article 208 of the Constitution of India. 
These rules provide for the examination of the Audit Reports by a Committee of the 
respective Legislature known as the Public Accounts Committee. Some of the State 
Legislatures have also established Public Undertakings Committees to consider the 
Audit Reports (Commercial) relating to the State public undertakings or the audit 
observations included in the chapters relating to corporations and companies contained 
in the Audit Reports of those States in respect of which separate Audit Reports 
 
259 Transport, Public Works (DWS), education (School), Agriculture, Planning and Co-operation, Animal 
Resource, Law, UDD and Tourism 
260 Only one Audit Report (i.e. Audit Report 2021-22) was published by merging Audit Reports for the 
years 2020-21 and 2021-22. 

Chapter VII: Follow Up of Audit Observations
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
255
Chapter VII: Follow Up of Audit Observations 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24 Government of Tripura 
 
255 
(Commercial) are not prepared. The Public Accounts and the Public Undertakings 
Committees of the Legislatures do not, however, function as executive bodies. They 
submit their reports containing their findings on the Audit Reports examined by them 
and their recommendations to the Legislature. 
(a) Status of discussion of Audit Reports by PAC 
The status of performance audits and paragraphs that featured in the State Audit Reports 
and subsequently discussed by the PAC from October 2023 to September 2024 is 
detailed in Table 7.1.3. 
Table 7.1.3: Performance audits/ paragraphs featured in State Audit Reports vis-à-vis 
discussed by PAC from October 2023 to September 2024 
We raised the issue of holding regular PAC meetings with Chairman PAC, Tripura 
Legislative Assembly (July 2024), with the objective of reducing the pendency of the 
discussion of the audit paras.  
(b) Status of discussion of Audit Reports by COPU 
The status of performance audits and paragraphs relating to PSEs that featured in the 
State Audit Reports and discussed by the COPU from October 2023 to September 2024 
is detailed in Table 7.1.4. 
Table 7.1.4: Performance audits/ paragraphs featured in State Audit Reports vis-à-vis 
discussed by COPU from October 2023 to 30 September 2024 
 
261 Para 1.5 of AR 2011-12, Para 1.3 of AR 2016-17, Para 1.3 of AR 2014-15 and Para 2.2 of  
AR 2018-19 
262 Para 4.7 & 4.8 of AR 2007-08 and 2.12 of AR 2008-09 
263 Para 3.3, 3.5 and 3.5 of AR 2013-14 
Audit Report 
Year 
Number of performance audits/ paragraphs 
Appeared in Audit Reports Discussed by PAC from October 2023 to 
September 2024 
Performance audits Paragraphs Performance audits261 Paragraphs262 
2006-07 5 23 0 0 
2007-08 4 19 0 2 
2008-09 6 18 0 1 
2009-10 3 13 0 0 
2010-11 3 14 0 0 
2011-12 4 9 1 0 
2012-13 4 8 0 0 
2013-14 5 7 0 0 
2014-15 4 9 1 0 
2015-16 5 9 0 0 
2016-17 3 7 1 0 
2017-18 4 9 0 0 
2018-19 3 10 1 0 
2019-20 1 5 0 0 
2021-22 3 8 0 0 
Total 57 168 4 3 
Audit Report 
Year 
Number of performance audits/ paragraphs 
Appeared in Audit Reports Discussed by COPU from October 2023 
to September 2024 
Performance audits Paragraphs Performance audits Paragraphs263 
2013-14 1 3 Nil 3 
2014-15 1 2 Nil Nil 

Chapter VII: Follow Up of Audit Observations
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
256
Chapter VII: Follow Up of Audit Observations 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 
256 
We raised the issue of holding of regular COPU meetings was raised with Chairman 
COPU, Tripura Legislative Assembly (July 2024) with an objective to reduce the 
pendency of the discussion of the audit paras.  
7.1.3 Action taken on the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee/ 
Committee on Public Undertakings  
The administrative departments are required to take appropriate action on the 
recommendations made in the Reports of the PAC/ COPU presented to the State 
Legislature. Following the circulation of the Reports of the PAC/ COPU, the Heads of 
Departments must prepare Action Taken Notes (ATNs) detailing the action taken or 
proposed to be taken in response to the recommendations of the PAC/ COPU and 
submit the same to the State Assembly Secretariat.  
(a) Public Accounts Committee 
As of September 2024, ATNs on 160 recommendations of the PAC made between 
2010-11 and 2023-24 were awaited from the concerned administrative departments, of 
which, 60 pertained to Finance (Excise and Taxation) Department, 19 to Public Works 
(Roads and Building) Department, 11 to Education (Social Welfare and Social 
Education) Department, nine to Urban Development Department, seven to Transport 
Department, six each to Education (Higher) Department, Industries & Commerce 
Department, Public Works (Drinking Water and Sanitation) Department and Education 
(School) Department, five to Health and Family Welfare Department, four each to 
Fisheries Department and Animal Resource Development Department and 17 ATNs to 
other departments.  All the concerned departments are required to expedite submission 
of ATNs to the PAC without further delays.  
(b) Committee on Public Undertakings 
As of September 2024, ATNs on 58 recommendations of the COPU made between 
2010-11 and 2014-15 are pending submission from the concerned administrative 
departments as shown in Table 7.1.5. 
Table 7.1.5: Compliance to COPU reports 
Sl. 
No. 
COPU 
Report 
Number 
Date of 
placement in 
the State 
Assembly 
Based on Audit 
Report for the 
year 
Total No. of 
recommendations 
in COPU report 
No. of 
recommendations 
where ATNs not 
received 
1 41 
01-11-2010 
2000-01 5 5 
2 42 2006-07 3 3 
3 43 2002-03 8 8 
4 44 1989-90 9 9 
5 45 
06-03-2012 
2006-07 8 8 
6 46 2007-08 5 5 
7 47 2007-08 1 1 
8 48 On spot study tour 5 5 
2015-16 1 Nil Nil Nil 
2016-17 1 1 Nil Nil 
2017-18 1 4 Nil Nil 
2018-19 0 2 Nil Nil 
2019-20 1 Nil Nil Nil 
2021-22 1 1 Nil Nil 
Total 7 13 Nil 3 
Chapter VII: Follow Up of Audit Observations 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24 Government of Tripura 
 
255 
(Commercial) are not prepared. The Public Accounts and the Public Undertakings 
Committees of the Legislatures do not, however, function as executive bodies. They 
submit their reports containing their findings on the Audit Reports examined by them 
and their recommendations to the Legislature. 
(a) Status of discussion of Audit Reports by PAC 
The status of performance audits and paragraphs that featured in the State Audit Reports 
and subsequently discussed by the PAC from October 2023 to September 2024 is 
detailed in Table 7.1.3. 
Table 7.1.3: Performance audits/ paragraphs featured in State Audit Reports vis-à-vis 
discussed by PAC from October 2023 to September 2024 
We raised the issue of holding regular PAC meetings with Chairman PAC, Tripura 
Legislative Assembly (July 2024), with the objective of reducing the pendency of the 
discussion of the audit paras.  
(b) Status of discussion of Audit Reports by COPU 
The status of performance audits and paragraphs relating to PSEs that featured in the 
State Audit Reports and discussed by the COPU from October 2023 to September 2024 
is detailed in Table 7.1.4. 
Table 7.1.4: Performance audits/ paragraphs featured in State Audit Reports vis-à-vis 
discussed by COPU from October 2023 to 30 September 2024 
 
261 Para 1.5 of AR 2011-12, Para 1.3 of AR 2016-17, Para 1.3 of AR 2014-15 and Para 2.2 of  
AR 2018-19 
262 Para 4.7 & 4.8 of AR 2007-08 and 2.12 of AR 2008-09 
263 Para 3.3, 3.5 and 3.5 of AR 2013-14 
Audit Report 
Year 
Number of performance audits/ paragraphs 
Appeared in Audit Reports Discussed by PAC from October 2023 to 
September 2024 
Performance audits Paragraphs Performance audits261 Paragraphs262 
2006-07 5 23 0 0 
2007-08 4 19 0 2 
2008-09 6 18 0 1 
2009-10 3 13 0 0 
2010-11 3 14 0 0 
2011-12 4 9 1 0 
2012-13 4 8 0 0 
2013-14 5 7 0 0 
2014-15 4 9 1 0 
2015-16 5 9 0 0 
2016-17 3 7 1 0 
2017-18 4 9 0 0 
2018-19 3 10 1 0 
2019-20 1 5 0 0 
2021-22 3 8 0 0 
Total 57 168 4 3 
Audit Report 
Year 
Number of performance audits/ paragraphs 
Appeared in Audit Reports Discussed by COPU from October 2023 
to September 2024 
Performance audits Paragraphs Performance audits Paragraphs263 
2013-14 1 3 Nil 3 
2014-15 1 2 Nil Nil 

Chapter VII: Follow Up of Audit Observations
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
257
Chapter VII: Follow Up of Audit Observations 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 
256 
We raised the issue of holding of regular COPU meetings was raised with Chairman 
COPU, Tripura Legislative Assembly (July 2024) with an objective to reduce the 
pendency of the discussion of the audit paras.  
7.1.3 Action taken on the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee/ 
Committee on Public Undertakings  
The administrative departments are required to take appropriate action on the 
recommendations made in the Reports of the PAC/ COPU presented to the State 
Legislature. Following the circulation of the Reports of the PAC/ COPU, the Heads of 
Departments must prepare Action Taken Notes (ATNs) detailing the action taken or 
proposed to be taken in response to the recommendations of the PAC/ COPU and 
submit the same to the State Assembly Secretariat.  
(a) Public Accounts Committee 
As of September 2024, ATNs on 160 recommendations of the PAC made between 
2010-11 and 2023-24 were awaited from the concerned administrative departments, of 
which, 60 pertained to Finance (Excise and Taxation) Department, 19 to Public Works 
(Roads and Building) Department, 11 to Education (Social Welfare and Social 
Education) Department, nine to Urban Development Department, seven to Transport 
Department, six each to Education (Higher) Department, Industries & Commerce 
Department, Public Works (Drinking Water and Sanitation) Department and Education 
(School) Department, five to Health and Family Welfare Department, four each to 
Fisheries Department and Animal Resource Development Department and 17 ATNs to 
other departments.  All the concerned departments are required to expedite submission 
of ATNs to the PAC without further delays.  
(b) Committee on Public Undertakings 
As of September 2024, ATNs on 58 recommendations of the COPU made between 
2010-11 and 2014-15 are pending submission from the concerned administrative 
departments as shown in Table 7.1.5. 
Table 7.1.5: Compliance to COPU reports 
Sl. 
No. 
COPU 
Report 
Number 
Date of 
placement in 
the State 
Assembly 
Based on Audit 
Report for the 
year 
Total No. of 
recommendations 
in COPU report 
No. of 
recommendations 
where ATNs not 
received 
1 41 
01-11-2010 
2000-01 5 5 
2 42 2006-07 3 3 
3 43 2002-03 8 8 
4 44 1989-90 9 9 
5 45 
06-03-2012 
2006-07 8 8 
6 46 2007-08 5 5 
7 47 2007-08 1 1 
8 48 On spot study tour 5 5 
2015-16 1 Nil Nil Nil 
2016-17 1 1 Nil Nil 
2017-18 1 4 Nil Nil 
2018-19 0 2 Nil Nil 
2019-20 1 Nil Nil Nil 
2021-22 1 1 Nil Nil 
Total 7 13 Nil 3 
Chapter VII: Follow Up of Audit Observations 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24 Government of Tripura 
 
257 
by COPU at 
TFDPC 
9 49 25-02-2014 2008-09 10 10 
10 50 20-02-2015 2004-05 4 4 
Total    58 58 
Of these 58 recommendations, 13 each pertained to Forest Department (Tripura Forest 
Development and Plantation Corporation Ltd.) and Power Department (Tripura State 
Electricity Corporation Limited), 22 to Industries and Commerce Department (Tripura 
Industrial Development Corporation Ltd.: eight, Tripura Jute Mill Ltd.: seven, Tripura 
Small Industries Corporation Ltd.: four, Tripura Tea Development Corporation Ltd.: 
two, Tripura Handloom and Handicrafts Development Corporation: one), seven to 
Tribal Welfare (Tribal Rehabilitation in Plantation and Particularly Vulnerable Tribal 
Group) and three to the Transport Department (Tripura Road Transport Corporation).  
Recommendation: 
The State Government should review and strengthen the mechanisms for responding 
to audit observations. The Government may ensure that designated nodal officers of 
all Departments submit explanatory notes to audit paragraphs/ performance audits 
and ATNs on the recommendations of PAC and COPU promptly and without delay. 
7.2 Monitoring 
The following committees were formed at the Government level to monitor the follow 
up action on Audit Reports and PAC/ COPU’s recommendations. 
7.2.1 Departmental Monitoring Committee 
Departmental Monitoring Committees (DMCs) were established (April 2002) by all 
Government departments, chaired by the respective departmental Secretaries, to 
monitor the follow up actions on Audit Reports and PAC/ COPU recommendations. 
The committees are mandated to convene monthly meetings and submit progress 
reports to the Finance Department on a monthly basis. 
Details regarding the meetings of the DMCs during 2023-24, though called for (July 
2024), were not furnished (October 2024). 
7.2.2 Apex Monitoring Committee 
An Apex Monitoring Committee was formed (April 2002) at the State level under the 
chairmanship of the Chief Secretary to monitor the follow up action on Audit Reports 
and PAC/ COPU’s recommendations. 
Details regarding the meetings of the Apex Monitoring Committee during 2023-24, 
though called for (July 2024), were not furnished (October 2024). 
7.3 Outstanding Inspection Reports 
The Principal Accountant General (Audit), Tripura conducts periodical inspections of 
Government departments to test check transactions and verify the maintenance of 
accounts and other records according to prescribed rules and procedures. Audit 
observations on financial irregularities and deficiencies in the maintenance of initial 
accounts noticed during local audits and not settled on the spot are communicated to 
the audited entities and the higher authorities through Inspection Reports (IRs). The 

Chapter VII: Follow Up of Audit Observations
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
258
Chapter VII: Follow Up of Audit Observations 
Audit Report for the year 2022-23, Government of Tripura 
 
258 
more serious irregularities are reported to the Government. The Government instructed 
(July 1993) that the first reply to the IRs should be furnished within one month from 
the date of receipt of IR. 
An analysis of the position of outstanding IRs showed that 2,003 paragraphs involving 
₹ 2,776.97 crore included in 256 IRs issued during the last five years up to 2023-24 
were pending for settlement, as of September 2024. 
The year-wise position of outstanding IRs, paragraphs and money value involved for 
the last five years as on 30 September 2024 are given in Table 7.3.1. 
Table 7.3.1: Details of pending IRs 
Position of IRs Outstanding as of September 2024 Total 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Number of IRs pending 
for settlement 47 80 48 43 38 256 
Number of outstanding 
audit observations 327 590 332 362 392 2,003 
Money value involved 
(₹ in crore) 434.55 930.11 221.49 430.55 760.27 2,776.97 
The details in Table 7.5.1  indicate that the departments were not serious in taking 
necessary action for final settlement of such cases.  
Of these 2,003 paragraphs in 256 IRs, even the first reply had not been received in 
respect of 865 paragraphs involving 98 IRs, despite repeated reminders. The year-wise 
break-up of the outstanding IRs and the position of response thereto is given in 
Table 7.3.2. 
Table 7.3.2: Position of Outstanding IRs where first reply not received 
Years No. of outstanding First reply not received 
IRs Paras IRs Paras 
2019-20  47 327 12 101 
2020-21 80 590 27 218 
2021-22 48 332 17 131 
2022-23 43 362 12 123 
2023-24 38 392 30 292 
Total 256 2003 98 865 
As a result, the following important irregularities commented upon in those IRs were 
not addressed as of September 2024. 
Table 7.3.3: Irregularities not addressed 
Nature of irregularities Number of 
cases 
Amount involved  
(₹ in crore) 
Excess/ Irregular/ Avoidable/ Unfruitful/ 
Wasteful/ Unauthorised/ Idle expenditure  397 761.99 
Blocking of funds 103 300.20 
Non-recovery of excess payments/ overpayments 121 95.78 
Under assessment 40 12.19 
Loss of Revenue 150 91.58 
Misappropriation/ Suspected misappropriation 10 5.85 
Others 971 1,501.86 
Total 1,792 2,769.45 

Chapter VII: Follow Up of Audit Observations
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
259
Chapter VII: Follow Up of Audit Observations 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24 Government of Tripura 
 259 
It is evident from Table 7.3.2 that 1,792 audit observations involving ₹ 2,769.45 crore 
across 865 IRs  issued over the past five years remained unresolved. These observations 
pertain to serious financial irregularities including the blocking of funds, excess/ over 
payments, loss of revenue, under assessment, excess/ irregular/ wasteful/ idle 
expenditure, etc. and remained un-addressed by the departments concerned, 
highlighting a matter of serious concern. 
7.4 Departmental Audit Committee Meetings 
As per the Office Memorandum dated 14 July 1993 issued by the Government of 
Tripura, the Departmental Audit Committees (DACs) are required to be constituted by 
each Department with the Secretary of the Department as Chairman, Head of the 
Department as Member and one Officer of the rank of Deputy Secretary from the 
Finance Department as Member and the Deputy Accountant General, Tripura as 
Convener. The DACs are tasked with monitoring the progress in disposal of the 
outstanding audit paras and IRs issued by the Principal Accountant General (Audit), 
Tripura. Eleven Audit Committee meetings were held during 2023-24 wherein 67 IRs 
and 321 paragraphs were discussed and four IRs and 173 paragraphs had been settled.  
It is recommended that the Government may strengthen monitoring committees, 
existing process and ensure that an effective system exists for the timely responses to 
audit observations, thereby improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the audit 
process. 
 
 
 
 
Agartala    (SHAILENDRA VIKRAM SINGH) 
The:                  Principal Accountant General (Audit), Tripura 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi               (K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
The:         Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
30 December 2025
13 January 2026

APPENDICES

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
261
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 261 
Appendix 2.2.1 
Statement showing the details of the audit sample 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.10) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the selected 
District 
Name of the 
selected Blocks 
Name of the 
selected GPs/ VCs 
Number of selected works and 
beneficiaries 
1. 
Dhalai 
Ambassa 
Jagannathpur 
1. Number of selected 
works: Two hundred 
twenty (detailed positions 
are given in Appendix 
2.2.5). 
2. Number of selected 
beneficiaries: Two 
hundred forty-six. 
2. Jeolcherra 
3. Basudebpara 
4. Paschim Lalcharri 
5. 
Manu 
Dalucherra 
6. Deo R.F. 
7. West 
Karamcherra 
8. S.K. Para 
9. 
Sepahijala 
Nalchar 
Kaliram 
10. Paschim Nalchar 
11. Kumariakucha 
12. Indrakumar Para 
13. 
Boxanagar 
Anandnagar 
14. Kalashimura 
15. Dayalpara 
16. Boxanagar 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
262
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 262 
Appendix 2.2.2 
Statement showing the details of output-based wage payment. 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.4} 
Sl. 
No. Name of the work Name of the 
Block/ GP 
Y ear of 
sanction Work code Estimated 
cost (in ₹) 
Total labour 
wages paid 
(in ₹) 
Work output 
as per MB 
(in %) 
Rate of 
wage 
(in ₹) 
Actual 
Amount 
paid (in ₹) 
1. 
Formation of new road from 
Boikhanta Haduk to Khalaram 
Reang house at Khadaban para 
Ambassa/ 
Jagannathpur 2019-20 3004001009/RC/942245340
3 5,89,799 4,92,150 95.00 192 182 
2. Construction of irrigation cannel 
from Rahim Bati Reang 
Ambassa/ 
Jeolchhara 2019-20 3004001010/IC/9010243103 1,37,757 1,26,087 95.09 192 183 
3. 
Landleveling at tha land of Rejiya 
Keaton W/o Noyab Mia under 
Anandanagar GP 
Boxanagar/ 
Anandanagar 2020-21 3001013002/LD/942251423
9 4,62,879 4,28,966 96.58 205 198 
4. 
Development of agriland at Rahena 
Begam W/o Abdul Jalil at 
Kalshimura GP 
Boxanagar/ 
Kalashimura 2021-22 3001013001/LD/942255867
3 5,67,153 5,25,800 94.24 212 200 
5. 
Excavation of pond over the land of 
Uttam Kr. Debbarma S/o Padma Basi 
at Kaliram ADC Village 
Nalchar/ 
Kaliram 2021-22 3001014043/WC/901032303
9 3,24,721 2,98,260 92.00 212 195 
6. 
Excavation of farm pond on the land 
of Mohanlal Debnath at Raman 
Debnath Para 
Manu/ West 
Karamchhara 2021-22 3004004024/IF/9422490003 3,56,277 2,96,933 90.06 212 191 
7. 
Excavation of new farm pond over 
the L/O-Narayan Das S/o Achiram at 
Paschim Nalchar G.P 
Nalchar/ 
Paschim 
Nalchar 
2022-23 3001014023/WC/901035068
9 3,46,576 3,13,000 94.49 212 200 
8. 
Agri Land levelling on the land of 
Bishu Kumar Debberma S/o Bahadur 
at Indra Kumar 
Nalchar/ Indra 
Kumar Para 2022-23 3001014040/LD/942263773
6 5,77,914 3,29,670 93.44 212 198 
9. 
Community waste land development 
near the land of Arun and Pranati 
Paul 
Ambassa/ 
Paschim 
Lalchari 
2022-23 3004001021/LD/942259634
0 4,57,635 3,59,847 94.45 212 200 
10. 
Extention of Agri Land on the land of 
Sanjib Debbarma S/o Budhirai 
Debbarma at Dayalpara VC 
Boxanagar/ 
Dayal Para 2023-24 3001013017/LD/942267105
7 4,42,360 2,88,027 91.17 226 206 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
263
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 263 
Appendix 2.2.3 
Statement showing the delay in release of Central funds and the State share 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.11.5) 
(₹ in lakh) 
Date of 
Sanction 
by the 
Ministry 
Amount FD release 
date Amount 
Final credit 
to the SNA 
account 
Date of 
release of 
State share 
Amount 
Final credit 
to the SNA 
account 
Delay in 
credit of 
Central 
share 
Delay in 
credit of 
State 
share 
Financial Y ear - 2019-20 
09-04-2019 533.24 23-04-2019 533.24 26-04-2019 23-04-2019 55.54 26-04-2019 2 2 
05-08-2019   16-08-2019 5,021.03 27-08-2019       7   
21-10-2019 643.21 11-11-2019 643.21 19-11-2019 11-11-2019 67 19-11-2019 14 14 
30-12-2019 196.15 24-01-2020 196.15 29-01-2020 24-01-2020 20.43 29-01-2020 15 15 
05-02-2020 359.98 02-03-2019 359.98 07-03-2020 02-03-2019 37.5 07-03-2020 16 16 
11-02-2020 359.98 13-03-2020 359.98 18-03-2020 13-03-2020 37.5 18-03-2020 21 21 
Financial Y ear - 2020-21 
05-04-2020 6,378.08 23-04-2020 6,378.08 29-04-2020 23-04-2020 1,318.04 29-04-2020 9 9 
06-11-2020 507.50 31-10-2020 507.50 04-11-2020 23-11-2020 43.87 30-11-2020  9 
Financial Y ear - 2022-23 
25-05-2022   06-07-2022 3,661.45 06-07-2022 06-07-2022 3,614.67 06-07-2022 27   
Financial Y ear - 2023-24 
12-02-2024 6,946.17 28-02-2024 6,946.17 02-03-2024 28-02-2024 2,315.56 02-03-2024 4 4 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
264
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 264 
Appendix 2.2.4 
Statement showing the number of works under the sampled GPs/ VCs during 2019-20 to 
2023-24 and the number of works selected for detailed audit and Joint Physical 
Verification 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.11.11(iii)} 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the 
District 
Name of the 
Block 
Name of the 
GPs/ VCs 
Total No. 
of works 
during 
2019-20 to 
2023-24 
Expenditure 
(in ₹) 
No. of 
works 
selected for 
audit 
Expenditure 
(in ₹) 
1 
Dhalai 
Ambassa  
Jagannathpur 147 4,01,58,431  13 1,63,83,777  
2 Jeolcherra 240 6,13,27,103  14 2,09,55,016  
3 Paschim Lalcheri 82 1,54,52,303  11 33,15,935  
4 Basudebpara 147 2,98,78,264  10 75,32,608  
  Sub Total 616 14,68,16,101  48  4,81,87,336  
1 
Manu  
Deo R.F. 338 7,29,71,489  21 1,23,31,507  
2 Dalucherra 209 5,38,90,859  18 1,32,59,079  
3 S.K. Para 392 9,95,53,433  19 3,83,78,968  
4 West 
Karamcherra 179 2,55,83,533  10 24,14,835  
  Sub Total 1,118 25,19,99,314  68  6,63,84,389  
1 
Sepahijala  
Boxanagar  
Anandanagar 79 2,04,68,648  12 57,83,055  
2 Boxanagar 81 2,16,96,749  17 74,92,593  
3 Dayalpara 37 62,77,899  12 22,64,462  
4 Kalshimura 98 2,84,74,860  12 64,14,462  
  Sub Total 295 7,69,18,156  53 2,19,54,572  
1 
Nalchar  
Kumaria Kucha 99 2,75,69,468  14 66,50,327  
2 Paschim Nalchar 210 4,66,39,354  12 53,42,716  
3 Indrakumar para 111 2,04,89,540  14 43,99,800  
4 Kaliram 60 98,33,847  11 30,64,692  
  Sub Total 480 10,45,32,209  51 1,94,57,535  
Grand Total 2,509 58,02,65,780 220 15,59,83,832 
Source: Dynamic report of the selected GPs/VCs 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
265
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 265 
Appendix 2.2.5 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
Name of the Mandal: Ambassa                                                                                                               Name of the GP: Paschim Lalcharri 
1 NRLM-CLF 23,640 23,450 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. MB was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority 
including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor 
(NLM) was not found. 4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Photographs were found uploaded 
in the Bhavan App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 6. Completion Certificate was not found 
Work code:  
3004001/IF/9422529254 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Plantation site was covered with shrubs and 
bushes. 2. No Moringa plants were seen. 3. CIB 
was found. 
2 NRLM-CLF 23,640 23,450 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. MB was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority 
including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor 
(NLM) was not found. 4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Photographs were found uploaded 
in the Bhavan App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs 6. Completion Certificate was not found 
Work code:  
3004001/IF/9422529256 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Plantation site was covered with shrubs and 
bushes. 2. No Moringa plants were seen. 3. CIB 
was found. 
3 Gram panchayat 5,99,855 5,36,136 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was 
not found. 3 Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhavan 
App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs.  
Work code:  
3004001021/LD/9422670880 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
4 Gram panchayat 4,81,425 4,00,530 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA & 
ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme 
Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs were found 
uploaded in the Bhavan App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs.  
Work code:  
3004001021/WC/9010296519 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Pond was found in good condition. 2. No CIB 
was found 
5 Gram panchayat 4,57,635 3,69,327 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA & 
ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme 
Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs were found 
uploaded in the Bhavan App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs.  
Work code:  
3004001021/LD/94225963401 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Development community waste land was found. 
2. CIB was found. 
6 Gram panchayat 3,78,828 3,54,270 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA & 
ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme 
Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs were found 
uploaded in the Bhavan App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. . 
Work code:  
3004001021/LD/9422638907 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Paddy plantation found in the land. 2. CIB was 
found. 
7 Gram panchayat 1,11,555 99,222.1 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was 
not found. 3. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhavan App but specific Land Marking was not available in the 
Photographs. . 
Work code:  
3004001021/RC/9422523085 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Road was found in good condition. 2. CIB was 
found 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
266
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 266 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
Name of the Mandal: Ambassa                                                                                                               Name of the GP: Paschim Lalcharri 
8 Panchayat samiti/ 
Block 87,000 84,410 
1. Material at Site Account for receipt and utilisation of materials received by the IO directly in the Site was not found. 2. 
Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found. 4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Third Stage Geo Tagged Photo was 
not Uploaded in the Bhavan App because work is ongoing. Specific Land Marking was not clear in the First Stage and 
Second Stage photographs. 6. Completion Certificate and Handing Over and Taken over document was not found.  
Work code:  
3004001/IF/9422483757 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Cattle shelter was found but the beneficiary is using 
the cattle shelter for purposes like storing firewood, 
drying clothes, etc. Hence, selection of the beneficiary 
was not appropriate. 2. No CIB was found. 
9 Panchayat samiti/ 
Block 87,000 80,650 
1. Material at Site Account for receipt and utilisation of materials received by the IO directly in the Site was not found. 2. 
Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found. 4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Third Stage Geo Tagged Photo was 
not Uploaded in the Bhuban App because work is ongoing. Specific Land Marking was not clear in the First Stage and 
Second Stage photographs. 6. Completion Certificate and Handing Over and Taken over document was not found.  
Work code:  
3004001/IF/9422489026 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Cattle shelter was found but the beneficiary is using 
the cattle shelter for purposes like storing firewood, 
drying clothes, etc.. Hence, selection of the beneficiary 
was not appropriate. 2. No CIB was found. 
Name of the Mandal: Ambassa                                                                                                               Name of the GP: Basudebpara 
10 NRLM-CLF 23,640 23,450 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. MB was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher 
Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National 
Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 6. Completion 
Certificate was not found. 
Work code:  
3004001/IF/9422529107 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Plantation site was covered with shrubs and bushes. 
2. No Moringa plants were seen. 3. CIB was found. 
11 NRLM-CLF 23,640 23,450 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. MB was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher 
Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National 
Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 6. Completion 
Certificate was not found. 
Work code:  
3004001/IF/9422529114 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Plantation site was covered with shrubs and bushes. 
2. No Moringa plants were seen. 3. CIB was found. 
12 NRLM-CLF 23,640 23,450 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. MB was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher 
Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National 
Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 6. Completion 
Certificate was not found. 
Work code:  
3004001/IF/9422529115 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Plantation site was covered with shrubs and bushes. 
2. No Moringa plants were seen. 3. CIB was found. 
13 Gram panchayat 9,85,909 8,42, 823.1
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA 
& ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001030/RC/9422493739 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Road was covered with shurbs and bushes. 2. No 
CIB was found. 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
267
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 267 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
Name of the Mandal: Ambassa                                                                                                               Name of the GP: Basudebpara 
14 Gram panchayat 8,44,088 7,41,460 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction 
(AA & ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, 
District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban 
App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001030/RC/9422479815 
JPV Remarks: 
1. 100-meter (approx.) road from starting point was clear and 
after that covered with shrubs and bushes. 2. No CIB was 
found. 
15 Gram panchayat 5,14,468 4,22,443 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction 
(AA & ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, 
District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the 
Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001030/IF/9422524788 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Pond was found in good condition. 2. CIB was found 
16 Gram panchayat 5,01,624 3,30,688 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2.Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including 
the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level 
Monitor (NLM) was not found. 3. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking 
was not available in the Photographs.  
Work code:  
3004001030/IF/9422483480 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Pond was found in good condition. 2. No CIB was found 
17 Gram panchayat 3,23,444 2,83,118 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction 
(AA & ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, 
District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban 
App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001030/WC/9010278244 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Pond was found in good condition. 2. CIB was found 
Name of the Mandal: Ambassa                                                                                                                   Name of the GP: Jeolcherra 
18 Dy. Director PGP 93,266 91,684 
1.Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including 
the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level 
Monitor (NLM) was not found. 3. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 4. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs.  
Work code:  
3004001/IF/9422722442 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
19 Dy. Director PGP 88,366 87,010 
1.Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including 
the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level 
Monitor (NLM) was not found. 3. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 4. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001/IF/9422722440 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
20 Dy. Director PGP 88,366 85,428 
1.Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including 
the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level 
Monitor (NLM) was not found. 3. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 4. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001/IF/9422722443 
JPV Remarks: 
Some parts have plantation but covered with shrubs and 
bushes, while other parts are clear but lack of plantation. 
21 Dy. Director PGP 88,366 85,202 
1.Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including 
the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level 
Monitor (NLM) was not found. 3. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 4. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001/IF/9422722445 
JPV Remarks: 
Plantation was found but covered with shrubs and bushes 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
268
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 268 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
22 Gram panchayat 14,31,477 13,23,602 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found. 3 Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in 
the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001010/RC/9422478204 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Road was in good condition. 2. No CIB was found. 
23 Gram panchayat 12,33,681 11,01,698 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA 
& ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Project 
Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific 
Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001010/RC/9422509172 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Road was covered with shrubs and bushes. 2. No 
CIB was found. 
24 Gram panchayat 8,36,581 7,64,394 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA 
& ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Project 
Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific 
Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001010/RC/9422492223 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
25 Gram panchayat 3,70,708 3,30,182 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA 
& ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Project 
Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific 
Land Marking was not available in the Photographs . 
Work code:  
3004001010/IC/9422448929 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
26 Gram panchayat 1,37,757 1,31,487 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA 
& ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Project 
Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific 
Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001010/IC/9010243103 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Irrigational channel was covered with shrubs and 
bushes.  2. No CIB was found. 
27 Panchayat samiti/ 
Block 4,99,388 4,99,337 
1. Material at Site Account for receipt and utilisation of materials received by the IO directly in the Site was not found. 2. 
Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found. 4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Third Stage Geo Tagged Photo was 
not Uploaded in the Bhuban App because work is ongoing. Specific Land Marking was not clear in the First Stage and 
Second Stage photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001/RC/9422531124 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Some part of the road was in good condition, but the 
other parts were covered with shrubs and bushes. 2. 
CIB was found 
28 Panchayat samiti/ 
Block 4,98,634 4,98,358 
1. Material at Site Account for receipt and utilisation of materials received by the IO directly in the Site was not found. 2. 
Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found. 4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Third Stage Geo Tagged Photo was 
not Uploaded in the Bhuban App because work is ongoing. Specific Land Marking was not clear in the First Stage and 
Second Stage photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001/RC/9422531060 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Some part of the road was in good condition but the 
other parts were covered with shrubs and bushes. 2. 
CIB was found 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
269
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 269 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
Name of the Mandal: Ambassa                                                                                                                 Name of the GP: Jagannathpur 
29 Gram panchayat 21,71,874 18,85,732 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction 
(AA & ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, 
District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the 
Photographs . 
Work code:  
3004001016/RC/PP/64720 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Some part of the road was in good condition but the other 
parts were covered with shrubs and bushes. 2. CIB was found. 
30 Gram panchayat 12,30,936 11,56,376 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction 
(AA & ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, 
District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban 
App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001009/LD/9422474976 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
31 Gram panchayat 9,83,332 8,48,376 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction 
(AA & ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, 
District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban 
App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001009/RC/9422521637 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
32 Gram panchayat 6,10,831 4,97,550 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including 
the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor 
(NLM) was not found. 3. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 4. Photographs were found 
uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001009/RC/9422453403 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Some part of the road was in good condition but the other 
parts were covered with shrubs and bushes. 2. CIB was found. 
33 Gram panchayat 3,28,796 2,66,114 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction 
(AA & ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, 
District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban 
App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001009/IF/9422660573 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
Name of the Mandal: Manu                                                                                                                Name of the VC: S.K. Para 
34 Gram Panchayat 19,84,550 18,13,329 
Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA 
& ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. 
Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the 
Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004023/WC/9010352521 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Check Dam was found in good condition. 2. CIB was found 
35 Gram Panchayat 9,42,999 8,52,578 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction 
(AA & ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, 
District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App with specific Land Marking. 
Work code:  
3004004023/WC/9010352514 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
36 Gram Panchayat 4,98,400 4,40,796 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction 
(AA & ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, 
District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App with specific Land Marking. 
Work code:  
3004004023/IC/9422452270 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted   

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
270
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 270 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
37 Gram Panchayat 4,88,583 4,21,163 
Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor 
(NLM) was not found. 3. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not 
available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004023/FR/9010211472 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
38 Gram Panchayat 4,73,721 4,05,943 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA 
& ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. 
Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App with specific Land Marking. 
Work code:  
3004004023/FR/9010211454 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Pond was found in good condition. 2. CIB was found 
39 Gram Panchayat 4,45,288 3,93,702.6 
Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor 
(NLM) was not found. 3. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not 
available in the Photographs . 
Work code:  
3004004023/IF/9422700095 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
40 Gram Panchayat 2,66,207 3,84,492 
Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA 
& ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. 
Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004023/IC/9422452279 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
41 Gram Panchayat 4,15,028 3,38,976 
Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA 
& ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. 
Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App with specific Land Marking. 
Work code:  
3004004023/RC/9422477324 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
42 Gram Panchayat 2,95,982 2,58,352 
Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA 
& ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. 
Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004023/IF/9422490490 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
43 Gram Panchayat 3,01,000 2,55,169 
Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor 
(NLM) was not found. 3. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not 
available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004023/IC/9422452271 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
44 SDFO 5,34,300 4,78,368 
1. Material at Site Account for receipt and utilisation of materials received by the IO directly in the Site was not found.2. 
Day to day Work Progress Register was not found.3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor 
(NLM) was not found.4. Stock accounts, sale/ distribution records were not found. 5. Project Village Monitoring 
Committee Report was not found. 6. MB was not found. 7. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but 
specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 8. Payment for carrying cost was made to the carrying 
contractors without mentioning the name and number of the vehicle. 9. Income Tax was not deducted from the bills of 
suppliers/carrying contractors. 10. Work Completion Certificate was not found. 
Work code:  
3004004/DP/9422412522 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Plantation site was covered with shrubs and bushes. 2. 
Plantation site was found at Central Nursery, Manu 
instead of Longtharai Beat of Manu Range but no records 
for change of site could be produced. 3. No scrap of 
shade net/ bamboo posts etc. were found at plantation 
site. 4. Neither any bamboo seedlings were seen nor 
stock accounts, sale/ distribution records could be 
produced. 5. CIB was found. 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
271
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 271 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
45 SDFO 1,85,980 1,77,628 
1. Material at Site Account for receipt and utilisation of materials received by the IO directly in the Site was not found. 2. 
Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found. 4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. MB was not found. 6. Nursery records 
for lifting of bamboo seedling/plant or vouchers for purchase of bamboo seedlings from outside the Department or from 
the open market was not found. 7. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was 
not available in the Photographs. 8. Payment for carrying cost was made to the carrying contractors without mentioning 
the name and number of the vehicle. 9. Income Tax was not deducted from the bills of suppliers/carrying contractors. 10. 
Work Completion Certificate was not found. 
Work code:  
3004004/DP/9422412936 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Plantation site was covered with shrubs and bushes. 
Few bamboo plants were seen. 2. No fencing/ scrap of 
fencing were found at plantation site. 3. No CIB was 
found. 
46 SDFO 1,89,392 1,89,383 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found. 3. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 4. MB was not found. 5. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 6. Work 
Completion Certificate was not found. 
Work code:  
3004004/WC/9010298746 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
Name of the Mandal: Manu                                                                                                           Name of the GP: West Karamcherra 
47 Gram Panchayat 3,56,277 3,20,240.5 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 3. 
Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State 
Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the 
Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004024/IF/9422490003 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Pond was found in good condition. 2. CIB was found 
48 Gram Panchayat 4,42,062 3,16,827.8 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found. 3. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in 
the Photographs . 
Work code:  
3004004024/FR/9010207769 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Pond was covered with shrubs and bushes, needs 
cleaning. 2. CIB was found. 
49 Gram Panchayat 4,30,154 3,03,510 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found. 3. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in 
the Photographs. 4. All three stages (before, during and after) of photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App 
with Specific Land Marking. 
Work code:  
3004004024/FR/9010207771 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Pond was found in good condition. 2. Specific Land 
Marking was found. 3. CIB was found. 
50 Gram Panchayat 2,95,369 2,63,868 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 3. 
Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State 
Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the 
Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004024/IC/9422445506 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Irrigation channel was covered with shrubs and 
bushes, needs cleaning. 2. No CIB was found. 
51 Gram Panchayat 2,96,718 2,56,299 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 3. 
Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State 
Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the 
Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004024/WC/9010361046 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Pond was found in good condition. 2. CIB was found 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
272
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 272 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
52 Gram Panchayat 4,55,259 2,55,897 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was 
not found. 3. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the 
Photographs  
Work code:  
3004004024/IF/9422688936 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Pond was found in good condition. 2. CIB was 
found 
53 Gram Panchayat 3,77,139 2,29,020 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was 
not found. 3. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App with specific Land Marking. 
Work code:  
3004004024/IF/9422489959 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Pond was found in good condition. 2. CIB was 
found 
54 Gram Panchayat 3,23,281 2,26,880 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 3. Site 
Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality 
Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App 
but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs.. 
Work code:  
3004004024/WC/9010334752 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Pond was found in good condition. 2. CIB was 
found 
55 Gram Panchayat 2,25,437 1,65,433 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 3. Site 
Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality 
Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App 
but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004024/IC/9422465160 
JPV Remarks: 
Irrigational channel and CIB were found 
56 Gram Panchayat 1,38,413 76,860 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 3. Site 
Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality 
Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App 
but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004024/IC/9422428185 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Irrigational channel was covered with surbs and 
bushes. 2. No CIB was found. 
 Name of the Mandal: Manu                                                                                                                          Name of the GP: Deo R.F. 
57 Gram Panchayat 13,77,387 12,87,454 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA & 
ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme 
Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs were found 
uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004006/WH/9010206163 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Check Dam was found in good condition. 2. 
CIB was found 
58 Gram Panchayat 7,25,957 7,07,310 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA & 
ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme 
Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs were found 
uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs . 
Work code:  
3004004006/RC/9422458131 
JPV Remarks: 
1. As stated during JPV, the Mud Road has been 
upgraded to Brick Soling Road. As such, Mud 
Road was not found in audit 2. No CIB was found. 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
273
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 273 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
59 Gram Panchayat 7,34,588 7,01,140 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA & 
ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme 
Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs were found 
uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004006/RC/9422458129 
JPV Remarks: 
1. As stated during JPV, the Mud Road has been 
upgraded to Brick Soling Road. As such, Mud 
Road was not found in audit 2. No CIB was found. 
60 Gram Panchayat 7,56,503 6,76,050 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA & 
ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme 
Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs were found 
uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004006/RC/9422458130 
JPV Remarks: 
1. As stated during JPV, the Mud Road has been 
upgraded to Brick Soling Road. As such, Mud 
Road was not found in audit 2. No CIB was found. 
61 Gram Panchayat 5,71,935 5,32,120 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA & 
ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme 
Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs were found 
uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004006/RC/9422458132 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
62 Gram Panchayat 5,67,058 5,25,670 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was 
not found. 3. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the 
Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004006/RC/9422454449 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
63 Gram Panchayat 5,38,930 5,04,400 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was 
not found. 3. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the 
Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004006/RC/9422454445 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
64 Gram Panchayat 3,73,544 3,17,817 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was 
not found. 3. Third Stage Geo Tagged Photo was not Uploaded in the Bhuban App. Specific Land Marking was not clear in 
the First Stage and Second Stage photos uploaded in the Bhuban App. 
Work code:  
3004004006/IF/9422534686 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
65 Gram Panchayat 3,21,216 3,13,928 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA & 
ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme 
Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Third Stage Geo Tagged 
Photo was not Uploaded in the Bhuban App. Specific Land Marking was not clear in the First Stage and Second Stage photos 
uploaded in the Bhuban App. 
Work code:  
3004004006/WC/9010322682 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
66 Gram Panchayat 3,46,762 3,12,880 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA & 
ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme 
Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Third Stage Geo Tagged 
Photo was not Uploaded in the Bhuban App. Specific Land Marking was not clear in the First Stage and Second Stage photos 
uploaded in the Bhuban App. 
Work code:  
3004004006/WC/9010318708 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
274
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 274 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
67 SDFO 3,67,060 3,44,880 
1. Material at Site Account for receipt and utilisation of materials received by the IO directly in the Site was not found.2. Day to 
day Work Progress Register was not found.3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, 
District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found.4. Stock 
accounts, sale/distribution records were not found. 5. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 6. MB was not 
found. 7. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
8. Payment for carrying cost was made to the carrying contractors without mentioning the name and number of the vehicle. 
9. Income Tax was not deducted from the bills of suppliers/carrying contractors. 10. Work Completion Certificate was not found. 
Work code:  
3004004/DP/9422416270 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Plantation site was covered with shrubs and 
bushes. Few bamboo plants were seen. 2. No 
fencing/ scrap of fencing were found at 
plantation site. 3. No CIB was found. 
68 SDFO 2,18,890 2,18,685 
1. Material at Site Account for receipt and utilisation of materials received by the IO directly in the Site was not found.2. Day to 
day Work Progress Register was not found.3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, 
District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found.4. Stock 
accounts, sale/distribution records were not found. 5. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 6. MB was not 
found. 7. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
8. Payment for carrying cost was made to the carrying contractors without mentioning the name and number of the vehicle. 
9. Income Tax was not deducted from the bills of suppliers/carrying contractors. 10. Work Completion Certificate was not found. 
Work code:  
3004004/DP/9422441376 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Plantation site was covered with shrubs and 
bushes. Few bamboo plants were seen. 2. No 
fencing/ scrap of fencing were found at 
plantation site. 3. No CIB was found. 
69 SDFO 2,90,005 2,89,617 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme 
Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
3. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 4. MB was found. 5. Photographs were found uploaded in the 
Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 6. Work Completion Certificate was not found. 
Work code:  
3004004/WH/9010206272 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
70 SDFO 1,81,000 1,80,998 
Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme 
Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
3. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 4. MB was not found. 5. Photographs were found uploaded in the 
Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 6. Work Completion Certificate was not found 
Work code:  
3004004/WC/9010298885 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
71 Dy. Dir. PGP, 
Dhalai 6,87,425 5,31,380 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme 
Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
3. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but 
specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 5. Work Completion Certificate was not found. 
Work code:  
3004004/DP/9422415635 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
72 Dy. Dir. PGP, 
Dhalai 4,12,452 3,94,962 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme 
Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
3. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but 
specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs.5. Work Completion Certificate was not found. 
Work code:  
3004004/DP/9422415183 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
73 Dy. Dir. PGP, 
Dhalai 4,12,452 2,02,598 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme 
Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
3. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but 
specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 5. Work Completion Certificate was not found. 
Work code:  
3004004/DP/9422415358 
JPV Remarks: 
No CIB was found. 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
275
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 275 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
74 Dy.Dir.PGP,Dhal
ai 4,12,452 1,99,310 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found. 3. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the 
Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 5. Work Completion Certificate was not 
found. 
Work code:  
3004004/DP/9422415364 
JPV Remarks: 
No CIB was found. 
75 Dy.Manager,TRP
C 1,09,924 1,09,599 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found. 3. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the 
Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004/IF/9422533085 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
76 Dy.Manager,TRP
C 91,866 69,875 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found. 3. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the 
Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004/IF/9422713746 
JPV Remarks: 
No CIB was found. 
Name of the Mandal: Manu                                                                                                                                    Name of the GP: Dalucherra 
77 Gram Panchayat 9,26,606 8,35,786 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA & 
ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004004/RC/9422454619 
JPV Remarks: 
1. As stated during JPV, the Mud Road has been 
upgraded to Brick Soling Road. As such, Mud Road 
was not found in audit. 2. No CIB was found. 
78 Gram Panchayat 5,79,847 5,23,380 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA & 
ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs.  
Work code:  
3004004004/RC/9422471327 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
79 Gram Panchayat 5,77,569 5,03,042 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA & 
ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004004/RC/9422454616 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
80 Gram Panchayat 5,30,915 4,93,331 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA & 
ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004004/RC/9422475758 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
81 Gram Panchayat 6,21,640 4,92,587 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA & 
ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs.  
Work code:  
3004004004/RC/9422454614 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
82 Gram Panchayat 3,49,943 3,15,449 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA & 
ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs.  
Work code:  
3004004004/WC/9010323805 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
276
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 276 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost Actual exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
83 Gram Panchayat 3,60,856 3,14,383 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA 
& ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs.  
Work code:  
3004004004/WC/9010317823 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
84 Gram Panchayat 3,55,095 3,05,364 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA 
& ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs.  
Work code:  
3004004004/IF/9422699335 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
85 Gram Panchayat 3,33,235 3,04,923 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in 
the Photographs.  
Work code:  
3004004004/WC/9010322463 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Check Dam was found in good condition. 2. No 
CIB was found 
86 Gram Panchayat 3,44,069 3,00,384 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Copy of Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA 
& ES) was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 4. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004004/IF/9422542614 
JPV Remarks: 
No JPV was conducted 
87 SDFO 10,63,700 10,63,699.5 
1. Material at Site Account for receipt and utilisation of materials received by the IO directly in the Site was not found. 
2. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found.3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found.4. Stock accounts, sale/distribution records were not found. 5. Project Village Monitoring Committee 
Report was not found. 6. MB was not found. 7. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land 
Marking was not available in the Photographs. 8. Payment for carrying cost was made to the carrying contractors without 
mentioning the name and number of the vehicle. 9. Income Tax was not deducted from the bills of suppliers/carrying 
contractors. 10. Work Completion Certificate was not found. 
Work code:  
3004004/DP/9422412731 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Plantation site was covered with shrubs and 
bushes. 2. No scrap of shade net/bamboo posts etc. 
were found at plantation site. 3. Neither any 
bamboo seedlings were seen nor stock accounts, 
sale/ distribution records could be produced. 4. No 
CIB was found. 
88 SDFO 4,32,675 4,32,675 
1. Material at Site Account for receipt and utilisation of materials received by the IO directly in the Site was not found. 
2. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found. 4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. MB was not found 6. Nursery records 
for lifting of bamboo seedling/ plant or vouchers for purchase of bamboo seedlings from outside the Department or from 
the open market was not found. 7. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was 
not available in the Photographs. 8. Payment for carrying cost was made to the carrying contractors without mentioning 
the name and number of the vehicle. 9.Income Tax was not deducted from the bills of suppliers/carrying contractors. 10. 
Work Completion Certificate was not found. 
Work code:  
3004004/DP/9422441387 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Plantation site was covered with shrubs and 
bushes. Few bamboo plants were seen. 2. No 
fencing/ scrap of fencing were found at plantation 
site. 3. No CIB was found. 
,

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
277
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 277 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
Name of the Mandal: Boxanagar                                                                                                                     Name of the GP: Anandnagar 
89 SDFO 1,85,980 1,76,668 
1. Material at Site Account for receipt and utilisation of materials received by the IO directly in the Site was not found. 2. Day 
to day Work Progress Register was not found. 3. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme 
Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
4. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found. 5. MB was not found 6. Nursery records for lifting of bamboo 
seedling/ plant or vouchers for purchase of bamboo seedlings from outside the Department or from the open market was not 
found. 7. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
8. Payment for carrying cost was made to the carrying contractors without mentioning the name and number of the vehicle. 
9.Income Tax was not deducted from the bills of suppliers/carrying contractors. 10. Work Completion Certificate was not found. 
Work code:  
3004004/DP/9422412939 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Plantation site was covered with shrubs and 
bushes. Few bamboo plants were seen. 2. No 
fencing/ scrap of fencing were found at 
plantation site. 3. No CIB was found. 
90 Gram Panchayat 7,16,595 6,98,734 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. No demand application and work allocation was found in the case 
file. 3. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 4. Mustor roll movement slip was not found in the case file. 5. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 6. Work completion 
certificate was not found in the work file. 7. No CIB was uploaded in the website. 8. No QC was conducted and thus no such 
report was found as such 9. Monitoring committee report was not available. 10. No social audit was conducted as found in the 
audit. 11. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 12. Site Inspection Report by the Higher 
Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level 
Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013002/LD/9422474815 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB was found broken in joint physical 
verification. 
91 Gram Panchayat 8,80,418 8,42,262 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Work allocation was not found in the case file. 3. Drawing and 
design of the work was not found. 4. Mustor roll movement slip was not found in the case file. 5. Photographs were found 
uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 6. Work completion certificate 
was not found in the work file. 7. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such  
8. Monitoring committee report was not available. 9. No social audit was conducted as found in the audit. 10. Site inspection 
report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 11. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was 
not found. 12. CIB was not uploaded. 
Work code:  
3001013002/LD/9422469525 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was not found. 2. Worksite was found 
idle as no agricultural activities were being 
performed. 
92 Gram Panchayat 4,62,879 4,33,171 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Work allocation was not found in the case file. 3. Drawing and 
design of the work was not found.4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not 
available in the Photographs. 5. Work completion certificate was not found in the work. 6. CIB was not uploaded in the 
website.7. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 8. Monitoring committee report was not available. 9. 
No social audit was conducted as found in the audit. 10. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case 
file. 11. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, 
State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013002/LD/9422514239 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was not found 2. Variation in 
measurement upto 12 mtrs. less than that of 
mentioned in the detailed estimate) was also 
noticed during the joint physical verification of 
the mentioned work. 3. Actual Measurement of 
the executed work couldn’t be verified as the 
MB was not produced. 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
278
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 278 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
93 Gram Panchayat 3,77,371 2,57,008 
1. Gram Sabha Resolution in relation to the work executed was not found. 2. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 
3. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 4. Manual Measurement Book was not maintained in relation to the work concerned 
5. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 6. In Work 
completion certificate authorise person’s sign was not found in the work file. 7. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was 
found as such8. Social audit was not conducted for the work concerned 9. Monitoring committee report was not available. 10. Site 
inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 11. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013002/LD/9422575793 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was not found. 2. Worksite was 
found idle as no agricultural activities 
were being performed 
94 Gram Panchayat 1,98,251 1,86,167 
1. Gram Sabha Resolution in relation to the work executed was not found. 2. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 3. Day 
to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 4. Manual Measurement Book was not maintained in relation to the work concerned 
5. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 6. No CIB 
was uploaded in the website. 7. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 8. Social audit was not conducted for 
the work concerned 9. Monitoring committee report was not available. 10. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found 
in the case file. 11. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, 
State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013002/LD/9422542810 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was found broken during the Joint 
Physical Verification of work. 2. No 
details of the work were found on the 
remaining portion of the CIB. 
95 Gram Panchayat 9,47,948 7,06,954 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 3. Neither the Photographs 
for the after stage was found uploaded in the Bhuban App nor any specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs uploaded 
for the other two stages. 4. No CIB was uploaded on the website 5. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 
6. Monitoring committee report was not available. 7. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 8. Site 
Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor 
(SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013002/WC/9010352205 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
96 Gram Panchayat 9,94,183 9,06,257 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Copy of design and drawing etc was not found in the case file. 3. Manual 
Measurement Book was not maintained in relation to the work concerned 4. Neither the Photographs for the after stage was found 
uploaded in the Bhuban App nor any specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs uploaded for the other two stages 
5. No CIB was uploaded in the website 6. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 7. Monitoring committee 
report was not available. 8. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 9. Site Inspection Report by the 
Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level 
Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013002/WC/9010352210 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
97 Gram Panchayat 2,15,497 1,94,740 
1. Gram sabha resolution in relation to the work concerned was not found. 2. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 3. Day 
to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 4. Work allocation was not found in the case file 5. Manual Measurement Book 
was not maintained in relation to the work concerned 6. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 7. Monitoring 
committee report was not available. 8. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 9. Site Inspection 
Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and 
National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013002/LD/9422665379 
JPV Remarks: 
Executed work and the agri land was 
found idle. 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
279
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 279 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
98 Gram Panchayat 8,81,037 72,190 
1. Gram sabha resolution in relation to the work concerned was not found. 2. Day to day Work Progress Register was not 
maintained. 3. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 4. Work allocation was not found in the case file 5. Manual 
Measurement Book was not maintained in relation to the work concerned. 6. Photographs for during and after stage were not found 
7. Work completion certificate was not fully verified. It was not signed by the respective IO.  8. No CIB was uploaded in the 
website 9. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found 10. No Social audit was conducted for the work concerned 
11. Monitoring committee report was not available. 12. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 
13. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State 
Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013002/WC/9010352204 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Source of the fund was found in connection 
to the XV FC (Tied Fund) not from the fund 
from MGNREGA. 2. Beneficiary was not 
found on the spot for Joint Physical 
Verification of the selected work. 
Name of the Mandal: Boxanagar                                                                                                             Name of the GP/VC: Kalashimura 
99 Gram Panchayat 
 5,83,757 3,12,085 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Work allocation annexure-iv against the demand application was not 
found in the case file. 3. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 4. Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no 
any specific Land Marking was t done for the photographs. 5. In Work completion certificate signature was not found in the works 
file. 6. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 7. Social audit was not conducted 8. Site inspection report 
by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 9. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme 
Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013001/LD/9422495599 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB was not found in joint physical 
verification of the work 
100 Gram Panchayat 5,90,609 5,57,405 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Work allocation against the demand application was not found in the 
case file. 3. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 4. Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific 
Land Marking was t done for the photographs. 5. CIB was not uploaded in website 6. No QC was conducted and thus no such 
report was found as such 7. Monitoring committee report was not found. 8. Social audit was not conducted. 9. Site inspection 
report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 10. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not 
found. 
Work code:  
3001013001/LD/9422542958 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Information displayed on the CIB was 
blurred and thus even the authority could not 
ascertain the worksite with respect to the CIB. 
2. Worksite remained idle despite the fact that 
the agri land was developed in the year 21-22. 
101 Gram Panchayat 5,72,839 5,38,328 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 3. Manual 
Measurement Book was not maintained in the case file. 4. Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land 
Marking was t done for the photographs.5. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 6. No QC was conducted and thus no such report 
was found as such 7. Social audit was not conducted 8. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 
9. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality 
Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013001/LD/9422544006 
JPV Remarks: 
1. The Agri land was found to be densed with 
grass and jungle and was not in use since the 
completion of the work. 
102 Gram Panchayat 5,41,533 5,36,020 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 3. Three stage 
photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was t done for the photographs. 4. Work completion certificate 
was not signed. 5 Manual measurement book was not maintained for the work concerned 6. CIB was not uploaded in the website 
7. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 8. Social audit was not conducted 9. Site inspection report by 
supervising officer was not found in the case file. 10. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme 
Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013001/RC/9422451103 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was not found. 2. Road was found 
broken. 3. Variation in measurement was 
noticed as per the detailed estimate, but actual 
variation couldn’t be ascertained due to the 
non-production of the measurement book. 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
280
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 280 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
103 Gram Panchayat 5,71,583 5,59,195 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Manual Measurement Book was not maintained for the work 
concerned. 3. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 4. Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific 
Land Marking was done for the photographs. 5. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 6. No QC was conducted and thus no such 
report was found as such 7. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 8. Site Inspection Report 
by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and 
National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013001/LD/9422469807 
JPV Remarks: 
1. No any information was found to be printed 
on the CIB. 2. Beneficiary was not available 
on site 
104 Gram Panchayat 5,67,153 5,30,005 
1. Day to day work progress register was not maintained. 2. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 3. Three stage 
photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was t done for the photographs. 4. Work completion certificate 
was not signed. 5. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 6. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such. 7. 
Monitoring committee report was not found in the case file. 8. Social audit was not conducted 9. Site inspection report by 
supervising officer was not found in the case file. 10. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme 
Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013001/LD/9422558673 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was not found. 2. Agriland was found 
idle. 
105 Gram Panchayat 3,01,743 2,82,777 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Work allocation against the demand application was not found in the 
case file. 3. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 4. Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific 
Land Marking was t done for the photographs. 5. Work completion certificate was not found. 6. Mustor Roll Movement slip was 
not found for the work concerned. 7. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 8. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was 
found as such 9. Social audit was not conducted 10. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 11. 
Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality 
Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013001/LD/9422575342 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was not found. 2. Variation in 3 stage 
photographs was also noticed when compared 
to the photos uploaded in the BHUVAN 
Portal in the MIS. 
106 Gram Panchayat 5,95,673 4,65,625 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 3. Manual MB was 
not maintained for the work concerned. 4. Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was t 
done for the photographs. 5. Work completion certificate was not found. 6. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 7. No QC was 
conducted and thus no such report was found as such 8. No monitoring Committee report was available. 9. Social audit was not 
conducted 10. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file.11. Site Inspection Report by the Higher 
Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level 
Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013001/WC/9010323100 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB was found uprooted on the site. of 
Excavation of Pond on the land of Suman 
Sarkar S/o Bhuvan Sarkar at Kalshimura GP 
107 Gram Panchayat 5,38,423 4,60,763 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Name of the work was not found in the annual action plan. 3. Drawing 
and design of the work was not found. 4. Neither after stage photographs were found uploaded not any specific Land Marking was 
done for the photographs uploaded for the other two stages. 5. Work completion certificate was not found 6. Work allocation 
against the demand form submitted was not found in the case file. 7. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 8. No QC was conducted 
and thus no such report was found as such 9. Social audit was not conducted. 10. Site inspection report by supervising officer was 
not found in the case file. 11. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme 
Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013001/LD/9422665879 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Information displayed on the CIB in 
relation to the work done was found incorrect. 
108 Gram Panchayat 2,63,702 2,12,557 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 3. Work was not 
found in the annual action plan. 4. Neither after stage photographs were found uploaded nor any specific Land Marking was done 
for the photographs uploaded for the other two stages. 5. Work completion certificate was not found. 6. CIB was not uploaded in 
the website. 7. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 8. Social audit was not conducted 9. Site inspection 
report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 10. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not 
found. 
Work code:  
3001013001/LD/9422595201 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB was not found  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
281
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 281 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
109 Gram Panchayat 6,15,177 4,75,170 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Drawing and design of the work was not found.3. Work 
demand and allocation form was not found 4. Photographs of none of the stages were found uploaded in the portal. 5. Work 
completion certificate was not found 6. Work was not found in the annual action plan. 7. CIB was not uploaded in the 
website. 8. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 9. Social audit was not conducted. 10. Site 
inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file.11. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority 
including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level 
Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013001/LD/9422595248 
JPV Remarks: 
1. No CIB was found on the site. 2. Variation in 
width was also noticed in relation to the MBs and 
detailed estimate 3. Worksite found idle as no 
agricultural activities was In place. 
Name of the Mandal: Boxanagr                                                                                                                                Name of the GP: Dayal Para 
110 Gram Panchayat 3,84,811 2,23,670 
1. Work was not found in the annual action plan.  2. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 3. Gram sabha resolution 
in relation to the work concerned was not found in the VC 4. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 
5. Work allocation against the demand application was not found in the case file. 6. Manual measurement book was not 
maintained for the work concerned. 7. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was 
not available in the Photographs. 8. Work completion certificate was not singed by the respective IO. 9. No QC was 
conducted and thus no such report was found as such 10. Monitoring committee report was not available. 11. Site inspection 
report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 12. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including 
the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013017/LD/9422496350 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Information displayed on the CIB was blurred 2. 
Work was not found to be completed as per the 
measurement when compared with the detailed 
estimate despite submission of the work completion 
certificate. 3. Measurement book was not produced  
111 Gram Panchayat 3,47,962 1,63,484 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Gram sabha resolution in relation to the work concerned was 
not found in the VC 3. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 4. Neither after stage Photographs were found 
uploaded nor any specific land markings were found in the photographs uploaded for the other two stages. 5. Work 
completion certificate was found unverified in the works file. 6. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 7. No QC was 
conducted and thus no such report was found as such 8. Monitoring committee report was not available. 9. No social audit 
was conducted as found in the audit. 10. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 11. Site 
Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality 
Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013017/LD/9422540189 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
112 Gram Panchayat 3,27,592 3,01,089 
1. Work was not found in the annual action plan. 2. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 3. Drawing and 
design of the work was not found. 4. Neither after stage Photographs were found uploaded nor any specific land markings 
were found in the photographs uploaded for the other two stages CIB was not uploaded in the website. 5. No QC was 
conducted and thus no such report was found as such 6. Monitoring committee report was not available. 7. Social audit was 
not done as no such report was found in relation to the work concerned. 8. Site inspection report by supervising officer was 
not found in the case file. 9. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013017/LD/9422594440 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was not found on the worksite. 2. Work site 
was found to be idle as the whole area was covered 
in grass and jungle leading to the fact that it was not 
in use for a long time. 
113 Gram Panchayat 24,202 12,940 
1. Work was not found in the annual action plan. 2. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 3. Drawing and 
design of the work was not found. 4. Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was 
t done for the photographs. 5. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 6. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was 
found as such 7. Monitoring committee report was not available. 8. Social audit was not done as no such report was found 
in relation to the work concerned. 9. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 10. Site 
Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality 
Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013017/IF/9422698558 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
282
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 282 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
114 Gram 
Panchayat 1,21,557 1,07,554 
1. Work was not found in the annual action plan.  2. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 3. Drawing and design of the work was 
not found. 4. Neither after stage Photographs were found uploaded nor any specific land markings were found in the photographs uploaded for the 
other two stages. 5. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 6. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 7. Monitoring committee 
report was not available. 8. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 9. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority 
including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013017/LD/9422638252 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
115 Gram 
Panchayat 21,266 9,500 
1. Work was not found in the annual action plan. 2. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 3. Day to day Work Progress Register was not 
maintained. 4. Work allocation against the demand raised through demand application was not found in the case file. 5. Three stage photographs were 
found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was t done for the photographs. 6. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 7. No QC was conducted 
and thus no such report was found as such. 8. Social audit was not done as no such report was found in relation to the work concerned. 9. Site inspection 
report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 10. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, 
District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found 
Work code:  
3001013017/IF/9422698555 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
116 Gram 
Panchayat 1,41,626 1,08,176 
1. Work was not found in the annual action plan.  2. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 3. Day to day Work Progress Register was not 
maintained. 4. Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was t done for the photographs. 5. No QC was 
conducted and thus no such report was found as such 6. Monitoring committee report was not available. 7. Social audit was not done as no such report 
was found in relation to the work concerned. 8. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 9. Site Inspection Report 
by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor 
(NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013017/WC/901035905
8 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
117 Gram 
Panchayat 2,90,600 2,65,152 
1. Work was not found in the annual action plan.  2. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 3. Day to day Work Progress Register was not 
maintained. 4. CIB Voucher was not found in the case file. 5. Neither after stage Photographs were found uploaded nor any specific land markings 
were found in the photographs uploaded for the other two stages CIB was not uploaded in the website. 6. Work completion certificate was not found 
in the works file. 7. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 8. Monitoring committee report was not available. 9. Social audit 
was not done as no such report was found in relation to the work concerned. 10. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case 
file. 11. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor 
(SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found 
Work code:  
3001013017/LD/9422673082 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Information displayed on 
the CIB was blurred. 2. No 
voucher in relation to the 
payment of the CIB was 
produced to audit. 
118 Gram 
Panchayat 1,84,033 1,60,120 
1. Work was not found in the annual action plan.  2. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 3. Drawing and design of the work was 
not found. 4. Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was t done for the photographs. 5. CIB was not uploaded 
in the website. 6. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 7. Monitoring committee report was not available. 8. Social audit 
was not done as no such report was found in relation to the work concerned. 9. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case 
file. 10. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor 
(SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found 
Work code:  
3001013017/LD/9422672246 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
119 Gram 
Panchayat 16,014 9,070 
1. Work was not found in the annual action plan.  2. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 3. Day to day Work Progress Register was not 
maintained. 4. Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was done for the photographs. 5. No QC was conducted 
and thus no such report was found as such 6. Monitoring committee report was not available. 7. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not 
found in the case file 8. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State 
Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found 
Work code:  
3001013017/IF/9422698553 
JPV Remarks: 
Compost pit was filled up and 
thus was not in use. 
120 Gram 
Panchayat 4,42,360 3,05,317 
1. Work was not found in the annual action plan.  2. Drawing and design of the work was not found. 3. Day to day Work Progress Register was not 
maintained. 4. Neither after stage Photographs were found uploaded nor any specific land markings were found in the photographs uploaded for the 
other two stages CIB was not uploaded in the website. 5. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 6. Monitoring committee 
report was not available. 7. Social audit was not done as no such report was found in relation to the work concerned. 8. Site inspection report by 
supervising officer was not found in the case file.9. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013017/LD/9422671057 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
283
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 283 
 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
Name of the Mandal: Boxanagar                                                                                                                                   Name of the GP: Boxanagar 
121 Gram Panchayat 5,24,620 2,60,247 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Work was not found in the respective annual action plan. 3. Drawing and 
design of the selected work was not found in the case file 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land 
Marking was not available in the Photographs. 5. Work Completion certificate was not signed by the IO 6. No QC was conducted and 
thus no such report was found as such 7. Monitoring committee report was not available. 8. No social audit was conducted as found in 
the audit. 9. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 10. Site Inspection Report by the Higher 
Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level 
Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013004/WC/9010283081 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB was found broken and thus the name 
of the work and other information can’t 
be verified through the CIB 
122 Gram Panchayat 85,245 46,770 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. work allocation form was not found in the case file. 3. Drawing and 
design of the selected work was not found in the case file 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land 
Marking was not available in the Photographs. 5. Work Completion certificate was not found. 6. No QC was conducted and thus no 
such report was found as such 7. Monitoring committee report was not available. 8. No social audit was conducted as found in the 
audit. 9. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 10. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority 
including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) 
was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013004/IC/9422432461 
JPV Remarks: 
Irrigation chanell from the land of 
humayun kabir to harimangal chera was 
found clogged just after 100 ft. of 
commencement of work. 
123 Gram Panchayat 3,27,616 1,01,523 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Drawing and design of the selected work was not found in the case file 
3. Work allocation was not found in the case file. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking 
was not available in the Photographs. 5. Work Completion certificate was not verified. 6. No CIB was uploaded in the website. 7. No 
QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 8. Monitoring committee report was not available. 9. Site inspection 
report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 10. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme 
Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013004/LD/9422542251 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB was not found on the land of 
Shyamal Nama s/o Niranjan nama  
124 Gram Panchayat 3,43,826 1,54,968 
1. Work was not found in the annual action plan.  2. Drawing and design of the work was not found in the case file 3. Day to day Work 
Progress Register was not maintained. 4. Work allocation was not found in the case file. 5. Photographs were found uploaded in the 
Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 6. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was 
found as such 7. Monitoring committee report was not available. 8. No social audit was conducted as found in the audit. 9. Site 
inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 10. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the 
Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013004/LD/9422600837 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was not found. 2. Upon 
measurement of the work site, variation 
in measurement i.e upto 10 mtr less in 
length was also noticed as per the 
detailed estimate and MB 
125 Gram Panchayat 3,36,928 1,08,282 
1. Work was not found in annual action plan 2. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 3. Drawing and design of the 
selected work was not found in the case file 4. work allocation was not found against the demand application form in the case file. 5. 
After stage photograph was not found. Moreover, no any specific Land Marking was available in the other two stages Photographs 
uploaded in the website. 6. Work completion certificate was not signed by the respective IO and Pradhan. 7. No CIB was uploaded in 
the website. 8. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 9. Monitoring committee report was not available. 10. 
No social audit was conducted as found in the audit. 11. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 13. 
Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality 
Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013004/LD/9422589337 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was not found despite having CIB 
voucher of ₹ 3,494 in the file. 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
284
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 284 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
126 Gram Panchayat 3,11,710 1,15,552 
1. Work was not found in the annual action plan of the respective year. 2. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 
3. Drawing and design of the selected work was not found in the case file 4. work allocation against the demand application form 
submitted was not found in the case file. 5. During and after Stage Photographs were not found uploaded in the Bhuban. 6. Work 
Completion certificate was not signed by the respective IO and Pradhan. 7. No CIB was uploaded in the website. 8. No QC was 
conducted and thus no such report was found as such 9. Monitoring committee report was not available. 10. No social audit was 
conducted as found in the audit. 11. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 12. Site Inspection 
Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) 
and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013004/LD/9422653008 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was not found 2. Land was not found 
to be in use. Whole area was found to be 
covered in jungles. 
127 Gram Panchayat 2,41,900 1,15,163 
1. Work was not found in the annual action plan of the respective year. 2. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 
3. Drawing and design of the selected work was not found in the case file 4. work allocation against the demand application form 
submitted was not found in the case file. 5. Neither the after-stage photograph was not found to be uploaded in the Bhuban portal 
nor any specific Land Marking was done for the photograph uploaded for the other two stage. 6. Work completion cert was not 
found 7. No CIB was uploaded in the website. 8. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 9. Monitoring 
committee report was not available. 10. No social audit was conducted as found in the audit. 11. Site inspection report by 
supervising officer was not found in the case file. 12. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme 
Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013004/LD/9422653045 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was found uprooted on the site. of 
Extension of agri land on the land of Atikul 
Islam s/o Abdul Majid at Boxanagar GP 
128 Gram Panchayat 
7m less in L/B?  5,69,684 3,02,756 
1. Work was not found in the annual action plan of the respective year. 2. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 
3. Drawing and design of the selected work was not found in the case file 4. work allocation against the demand application form 
submitted was not found in the case file. 5. Neither the after-stage photograph was not found to be uploaded in the Bhuban portal 
nor any specific Land Marking was done for the photograph uploaded for the other two stage.  6. Work Completion certificate was 
not signed by the respective IO and Pradhan 7. No CIB was uploaded in the website. 8. No QC was conducted and thus no such 
report was found as such 9. Monitoring committee report was not available. 10. No social audit was conducted as found in the 
audit. 11. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 12. Site Inspection Report by the Higher 
Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level 
Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013004/LD/9422671522 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was found to be broken 2. Information 
displayed on the CIB was blurred and thus 
can’t be traced. 3. Variation in measurement 
i.e upto 07 mtrs. Less was noticed in JPV 
when compared with the detailed estimate  
129 Gram Panchayat 1,10,825 1,03,489 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Drawing and design of the selected work was not found in the case 
file 3. work allocation annexure-iv against the demand application form submitted was not found in the case file. 4. Mustor roll 
movement slip was not found in the case file. 5. Three stage Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but any specific 
Land Marking was not done for the photograph uploaded in the Bhuban portal. 6. Work Completion certificate was not signed by 
the respective IO and Pradhan 7. No CIB was uploaded in the website. 8. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found 
as such 9. Monitoring committee report was not available. 10. No social audit was conducted as found in the audit. 11. Site 
inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 12. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including 
the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was 
not found. 
Work code:  
3001013004/WC/9010313112 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB was not found on the excavation of 
irrigation tank on the Abul Hashem S/o Akter 
Hossain 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
285
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 285 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
130 Gram Panchayat 2,10,359 1,69,294 
1. Work was not found in the annual action plan of the respective year. 2. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 
3. Drawing and design of the selected work was not found in the case file 4. Copy of technical sanction was not found in the case 
file. 5. CIB voucher in relation to the work concerned was not found in the case file.  
6. Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was done for the photographs. 7. In Work 
Completion certificate authorised person’s signature was not found 8. No CIB was uploaded in the website. 9. No QC was 
conducted and thus no such report was found as such 10. Monitoring committee report was not available. 11. No social audit was 
conducted as found in the audit. 12. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 13. Site Inspection 
Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) 
and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013004/IC/9422473155 
JPV Remarks: 
1. 75 mtrs. of concrete drainage channel was 
found to be constructed by the R.D. on the 
existing irrigation channel. 2. Both RD and 
MGNREGA works were constructed on the 
same location. 
131 Gram Panchayat 5,34,340 3,91,599 
1. Work was not found in the annual action plan of the respective year.  2. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 
3. Drawing and design of the selected work was not found in the case file. 4. work allocation annexure iv was not found in the case 
file. 5. After stage Photographs was not found. 6. No CIB was uploaded in the website. 7. No QC was conducted and thus no such 
report was found as such 8. Monitoring committee report was not available. 9. No social audit was conducted as found in the audit. 
10. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 11. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority 
including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor 
(NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013004/LD/9422658708 
JPV Remarks: 
Worksite found idle as no agricultural activity 
was found in agri land on the land of Abul 
Kalam Azad S/o Tajul Islam 
Name of the Mandal: Nalchar                                                                                                                                      Name of the GP: Kaliram 
132 Gram Panchayat 3,24,721 3,02,470 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land 
Marking was not available in the Photographs. 3. QC was not conducted 4. Monitoring committee report was not found 5. No 
social audit was conducted. 6. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 7. Site Inspection Report 
by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and 
National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014043/WC/9010323039 
JPV Remarks: 
1. Information displayed on CIB has been 
erased. 2. Measurement was found 5 mtr less 
w.r.t the detailed estimate and Measurement 
Book. 
133 Gram Panchayat 2,32,113 90,863 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Work was not found in the annual action plan 3. Drawing and design for 
the respective work was not found in the case file. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land 
Marking was not available in the Photographs. 5. Work completion certificate was found duly signed but the amount of the executed 
work was not found mentioned in the certificate. 6. QC was not conducted 7. Monitoring committee report was not found 8. Site 
inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file.  
9. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality 
Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014043/IC/9422455556 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was not found at the worksite during 
joint physical verification. 2. Diversion drain 
was not constructed as per the estimate. Work 
was found to be incomplete despite work 
completion in the measurement book.  
134 Gram Panchayat 1,61,068 1,28,444 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land 
Marking was not available in the Photographs. 3. Work completion certificate was found duly signed but the amount of the executed 
work was not found mentioned in the certificate 4. QC was not conducted 5. Monitoring committee report was not found 6. No 
social audit was conducted. 7. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 8. Site Inspection Report 
by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and 
National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014043/LD/9422583582 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was not found at the worksite during 
joint physical verification. 2. Work site was 
covered with jungles and grasses thus was not 
in use.2 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
286
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 286 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
135 Gram Panchayat 2,20,003 2,07,410 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. QC was not conducted 3. Monitoring committee report was not 
found 4. No social audit was conducted. 5. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 6. 
Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State 
Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014043/WC/9010323043 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB was not found at the worksite during joint 
physical verification. 
136 Gram Panchayat 1,90,462 1,70,010 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. QC was not conducted 3. Monitoring committee report was not 
found 4. No social audit was conducted. 5. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 6. 
Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State 
Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014043/WC/9010323080 
JPV Remarks: 
During JPV it was noticed that CIB was broken and 
information on the CIB could not be verified. 
137 Gram Panchayat 1,19,821 1,06,180 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Work was not found in the annual action plan. 3. Photographs were 
found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 4. Work completion 
certificate was found duly signed but the amount of the executed work was not found mentioned in the certificate 5. QC was 
not conducted 6. Monitoring committee report was not found 7. No social audit was conducted. 8. Site inspection report by 
supervising officer was not found in the case file. 9. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme 
Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014043/LD/9422567442 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was not found at the worksite during joint 
physical verification. 2. Agri land was not in use. 
138 Gram Panchayat 1,02,650 95,740 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Work was not found in the annual action plan 3. Drawing and 
design was not found in the file for the selected work. 4. Work completion certificate was found duly signed but the amount 
of the executed work was not found mentioned in the certificate 5. QC was not conducted 6. Monitoring committee report 
was not found 7. No social audit was conducted. 8. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case 
file. 9. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, 
State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014043/LD/9422645478 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was not found on the worksite during JPV. 2. 
A house was constructed at the place of intended 
work site, thus original purpose of the MGNREGA 
work i.e. land development for agricultural purpose 
was not served 
139 Gram Panchayat 3,12,611 2,98,320 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Work was not found in the annul action plan. 3. Work completion 
certificate was not certified by the respective IO. 4. QC was not conducted 5. Monitoring committee report was not found 
6. No social audit was conducted. 7. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 8. Site 
Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality 
Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014043/IF/9422699074 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
140 Gram Panchayat 3,18,485 2,78,675 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. QC was not conducted 3. Work completion certificate was neither 
signed by the respective IO nor the amount of the executed work was found to be mentioned in the certificate 4. Monitoring 
committee report was not found 5. No social audit was conducted. 6. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not 
found in the case file. 7. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014043/IF/9422700356 
JPV Remarks: 
Measurement variation wrt estimate was found i.e 
width of the work site was 4m less than the estimate.  
141 Gram Panchayat 14,060 13,560 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found.2. Work was not found in the annual action plan. 3. Copy of technical 
sanction of the work was not found in the case file. 4. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific 
Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 5. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 6. QC was not conducted 7. 
Monitoring committee report was not found 8. No social audit was conducted. 9. Site inspection report by supervising officer 
was not found in the case file. 10. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014043/IF/9422734272 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was not found on the worksite during JPV. 2. 
Compost pit was not in use, it was covered with tree 
leaves and garbage’s 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
287
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 287 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
Name of the GP: Nalchar                                                                                                          Name of the GP/VC: Paschim Nalchar 
142 Gram Panchayat 5,52,581 5,35,257 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land 
Marking was t done for the photographs. 3. QC was not conducted 4. Monitoring committee report was not found 5. No social 
audit was conducted. 6. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 7. Site Inspection Report by 
the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and 
National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014023/WC/9010301797 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Citizen Information Board was not found. 
2. Upper part was not available only 
foundation of CIB existed 
143 Gram Panchayat 4,37,244 2,20,144 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found.2 Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land 
Marking was t done for the photographs. 3. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 4. QC was not conducted 5. Monitoring committee 
report was not found 6. No social audit was conducted. 7. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case 
file. 8. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State 
Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014023/WC/9010286346 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
144 Gram Panchayat 2,45,801 2,27,958 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Drawing and design of the work was not available3. Third stage photo 
was not uploaded 4. CIB was not uploaded in the website 5. QC was not conducted 6. Monitoring committee report was not found 
7. No social audit was conducted. 8. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 9. Site Inspection 
Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) 
and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014023/LD/9422635834 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Citizen Information Board was broken and 
was not in place. 2. Information was not 
readable. 
145 Gram Panchayat 3,37,154 3,13,002 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Drawing and design of the executed work was not found. 3. Third stage 
photo was not found uploaded in the MIS. 4. QC was not conducted. 5. Monitoring committee report was not found 6. No social 
audit was conducted. 7. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 8. Site Inspection Report by 
the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and 
National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 8. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 
3001014023/LD/9422636437 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
146 Gram Panchayat 1,55,652 1,42,070 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2 After stage photo was not uploaded. Moreover, no any specific landmarking 
was done for the photo uploaded of the before and during stage CIB was not uploaded in the website 3. QC was not conducted 4. 
Monitoring committee report was not found 5. No social audit was conducted. 6. Site inspection report by supervising officer was 
not found in the case file. 7. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme 
Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014023/WC/9010351052 
JPV Remarks: 
Citizen Information Board was broken and 
was not in place. 
147 Gram Panchayat 3,05,852 2,91,513 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land 
Marking was not available in the Photographs.3. CIB was not uploaded in the website 4. QC was not conducted 5. Monitoring 
committee report was not found 6. No social audit was conducted. 7. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found 
in the case file. 8. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme 
Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014023/FP/9010240714 
JPV Remarks: 
Citizen Information Board was not found. 
148 Gram Panchayat 1,84,280 1,68,620 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2 Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land 
Marking was t done for the photographs. 3. QC was not conducted 4. Monitoring committee report was not found 5. No social 
audit was conducted. 6. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 7. Site Inspection Report by 
the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and 
National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014023/IF/9422702761 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Citizen Information Board was broken and 
was not in place. 2. Land lying idle 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
288
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 288 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
149 Gram Panchayat 1,13,451 1,03,160 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. After stage photo was not uploaded. 3. Amount was not mentioned in the 
work completion certificate. 4. QC was not conducted 5. Monitoring committee report was not found 6. No social audit was 
conducted. 7. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 8. Site Inspection Report by the Higher 
Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level 
Monitor (NLM) was not found 
Work code:  
3001014023/IF/9422723110 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Citizen Information Board was broken. 2. 
Details were not available. 
150 Gram Panchayat 2,75,389 2,41,393 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land 
Marking was t done for the photographs. 3. QC was not conducted 4. Monitoring committee report was not found 5. No social 
audit was conducted. 6. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 7. Site Inspection Report by 
the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and 
National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014023/IF/9422704425 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Incomplete information in Citizen 
Information Board. 2. Land lying idle 
151 Gram Panchayat 4,26,204 3,69,700 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Gram Sabha resolution for the work concerned was not found. 3. Three 
stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was t done for the photographs. 4. QC was not conducted 
5. Monitoring committee report was not found 6. No social audit was conducted. 7. Site inspection report by supervising officer 
was not found in the case file. 8. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014023/IF/9422732044 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
152 Gram Panchayat 3,46,576 3,20,326 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. After stage photo was not uploaded. Moreover, no any specific landmarking 
was done for the photo uploaded of the before and during stage. 3 CIB was not uploaded in the website. 4. QC was not conducted 
5. Monitoring committee report was not found 6. No social audit was conducted.7. Site inspection report by supervising officer 
was not found in the case file. 8. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014023/WC/9010350689 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
Name of the Mandal: Nalchar                                                                                                            Name of the GP/VC: Kumariakucha 
153 Gram Panchayat   2,85,169 1,51,614 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Work was not found in the Annual Action Plan 3. Gram sabha resolution 
for the work concerned was not found. 4. Drawing and design for the work concerned was not made. 5. CIB was not uploaded in 
the website. 6. QC was not conducted 7. Monitoring committee report was not found 8. No social audit was conducted. 9. Site 
inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 10. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including 
the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was 
not found. 
Work code:  
3001014017/IC/9422473014 
JPV Remarks: 
Citizen Information was not found 
154 Gram Panchayat 1,91,594 1,73,094 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Work was not found in the Annual Action Plan 3. Gram sabha resolution 
for the work concerned was not found. 4. Manual MB was not prepared for the work concerned. 5. Three stage photographs were 
found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was t done for the photographs. 6. QC was not conducted 7. Monitoring 
committee report was not found 8. No social audit was conducted. 9. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found 
in the case file. 10. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme 
Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014017/IF/9422690909 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
155 Gram Panchayat 9,50,811 9,27,740 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Work was not found in the Annual Action Plan 3. Gram sabha resolution 
for the work concerned was not found. 4. Demand and allocation form was not found in the website 5 Three stage photographs 
were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was t done for the photographs. 6. QC was not conducted 7. Monitoring 
committee report was not found 8. No social audit was conducted. 9. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found 
in the case file. 10. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme 
Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014017/LD/9422527840 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
289
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 289 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
156 Gram Panchayat 8,31,512 8,11,340 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Gram sabha resolution for the work concerned was not found. 3. QC was 
not conducted 4. Monitoring committee report was not found 5. No social audit was conducted. 6. Site inspection report by 
supervising officer was not found in the case file. 7. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme 
Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found 
Work code:  
3001014017/WC/9010301786 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
157 Gram Panchayat 6,19,672 6,04,540 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Gram sabha resolution for the work concerned was not found. 3. Three 
stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was t done for the photographs. 4. QC was not conducted 
5. Monitoring committee report was not found 6. No social audit was conducted. 7. Site inspection report by supervising officer 
was not found in the case file. 8. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014017/WC/9010294395 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Details were not readable on the Citizen 
Information Board. 2. Only MGNREGA-
Logo was visible.  
158 Gram Panchayat 5,98,762 5,84,210 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Gram sabha resolution for the work concerned was not found. 3. Three 
stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was t done for the photographs. 4. QC was not conducted 
5. Monitoring committee report was not found 6. No social audit was conducted. 7. Site inspection report by supervising officer 
was not found in the case file. 8. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014017/WC/9010302881 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
159 Gram Panchayat 6,81,312 2,07,350 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Gram sabha resolution for the work concerned was not found. 3. Three 
stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was t done for the photographs. 4. QC was not conducted 
5. Monitoring committee report was not found 6. No social audit was conducted. 7. Site inspection report by supervising officer 
was not found in the case file. 8. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014017/WH/9010202607 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
160 Gram Panchayat 3,50,447 2,12,307 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Work was not found in the Annual Action Plan 3. Gram sabha resolution 
for the work concerned was not found. 4. Measurement Book was not maintained for the work concerned. 5. QC was not conducted 
6. Monitoring committee report was not found 7. No social audit was conducted. 8. Site inspection report by supervising officer 
was not found in the case file. 9. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014017/IF/9422700098 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
161 Gram Panchayat 5,94,893 5,31,388 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Work was not found in the Annual Action Plan 3. Gram sabha resolution 
for the work concerned was not found. 4. Manual Measurement Book was not maintained for the work concerned. 5. QC was not 
conducted 6. Monitoring committee report was not found 7. No social audit was conducted. 8. Site inspection report by supervising 
officer was not found in the case file. 9. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014017/WC/9010360519 
JPV Remarks: 
Citizen Information Board was available, but 
it displayed the works of 2022-23.  
162 Gram Panchayat 1,77,152 1,60,365 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Work was not found in the Annual Action Plan 3. Gram sabha resolution 
for the work concerned was not found. 4. Manual MB was not maintained. 5. QC was not conducted 6. Monitoring committee 
report was not found 7. No social audit was conducted. 8. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case 
file. 9. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State 
Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014017/IF/9422690907 
JPV Remarks: 
Nil 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
290
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 290 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
163 Gram Panchayat 3,41,499 3,15,576 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Work was not found in the Annual Action Plan 3. Gram sabha resolution 
for the work concerned was not found. 4. Drawing and design for the work concerned was not made. 5. Third stage photo was not 
found attached in the MIS. 6. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 7. QC was not conducted 8. Monitoring committee report was 
not found 9. No social audit was conducted. 10. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 11. 
Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality 
Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014017/IC/9422473013 
JPV Remarks: 
Citizen Information was not found 
164 Gram Panchayat 4,72,570 4,40,034 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Work was not found in the Annual Action Plan 3. Gram sabha resolution 
for the work concerned was not found. 4. Drawing and design for the work concerned was not made. 5. Third stage photo was not 
found attached in the MIS. 6. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 7. QC was not conducted 8. Monitoring committee report was 
not found 9. No social audit was conducted. 10. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 11. 
Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality 
Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014017/IC/9422473010 
JPV Remarks: 
Citizen Information Board was not found. 
165 Gram Panchayat 3,97,555 3,68,346 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not found. 2. Work was not found in the Annual Action Plan 3. Gram sabha resolution 
for the work concerned was not found. 4. Drawing and design for the work concerned was not made. 5. Third stage photo was not 
found attached in the MIS. 6. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 7. QC was not conducted 8. Monitoring committee report was 
not found 9. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 10. Site Inspection Report by the Higher 
Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level 
Monitor (NLM) was not found. 
Work code:  
3001014017/IC/9422473012 
JPV Remarks: 
Citizen Information Board was not found. 
Name of the Mandal: Nalchar                                                                                                             Name of the GP/VC: Indrakumar Para 
166 Gram Panchayat 1,60,641 1,79,698 
1. Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. 
Work was not found in the annual action plan. 3. No gram sabha resolution was found for the work concerned. 4. Design and 
drawing for the work was not found in the records 5. Manual measurement book was not Maintained for the work concerned. 6. 
Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not done for the photographs uploaded. 7. 
In Work completion certificate authorised person’s signature was not found in the works file. 8. No QC was conducted and thus 
no such report was found as such 9. Monitoring committee report was not found. 10. An audit query was raised via query No. 
Rep(Field Party)/PA_MGNREGA/SPJ/NLC/PO/19-24/11 dt. 10.02.2025 in relation to the extra expenditure of ₹ 19,057 against 
the sanctioned amount. 11. Social audit was not conducted 12. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the 
case file. 13. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, 
State Quality 
Work code:  
3001014040/WC/9010275852 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Citizen Information Board was not found. 
2. Barrage was not found. 
167 Gram Panchayat 1,02,250 1,01,953 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Work was not found in the annual action plan. 3. No gram sabha 
resolution was found for the work concerned. 4. Design and drawing for the work was not found in the records 5. Manual 
measurement book was not Maintained for the work concerned. 6. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but 
specific Land Marking was not done for the photographs uploaded. 7. Work completion certificate was not signed by the IO 8. No 
QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 9. Monitoring committee report was not found. 10. Social audit was 
not conducted. 11. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 12. Site Inspection Report by the 
Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National 
Level Monitor (NLM) was not found 
Work code:  
3001014040/IC/9010250902 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Citizen Information Board was not found.2. 
Katcha channel was not found. 3. Pakka drain 
was found 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
291
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 291 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
168 Gram Panchayat 1,83,731 1,83,601 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Work was not found in the annual action plan. 3. No gram sabha 
resolution was found for the work concerned. 4. Design and drawing for the work were not found in the records 5. Manual 
measurement book was not Maintained for the work concerned. 6. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific 
Land Marking was not done for the photographs uploaded. 7. Work completion certificate was not found in the works file. 8. No QC 
was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 9. Monitoring committee report was not found. 10. Social audit was not 
conducted 11. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 12. Site Inspection Report by the Higher 
Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level 
Monitor (NLM) was not found 
Work code:  
3001014040/IC/9010250938 
JPV Remarks: 
Citizen Information Board was not found. 
169 Gram Panchayat 2,47,858 2,35,396 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Work was not found in the annual action plan. 3. No gram sabha 
resolution was found for the work concerned. 4. Design and drawing for the work was not found in the records 5. Work demand and 
allocation was not found in the records 6. Manual measurement book was not Maintained for the work concerned. 7. Photographs 
were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not done for the photographs uploaded. 8. Work completion 
certificate was not singed by the IO. 9. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 10. Monitoring committee 
report was not found. 11. Social audit was not conducted 12. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case 
file. 13. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State 
Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found 
Work code:  
3001014040/WC/9010275849 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Citizen Information Board was not in 
place and was broken. 2. CIB shows the 
project of 2018-19. 3. CIB details were not 
clear 
170 Gram Panchayat 3,22,364 3,17,740 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Work was not found in the annual action plan. 3. No gram sabha 
resolution was found for the work concerned. 4. Design and drawing for the work was not found in the records 5. Work allocation 
against the demand raised was not found in the records 6. Manual measurement book was not Maintained for the work concerned. 
7. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land Marking was not done for the photographs uploaded. 8. 
Work completion certificate was not found.9. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 10. Monitoring 
committee report was not found. 11. Social audit was not conducted 12. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found 
in the case file. 13. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme 
Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found 
Work code:  
3001014040/RC/9422452051 
JPV Remarks: 
1. CIB was not found in joint physical 
verification of the work. 2. During JPV it 
was noticed that katcha road was only 
partially constructed 
171 Gram Panchayat 2,54,764 2,54,458 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Work was not found in the annual action plan. 3. No gram sabha 
resolution was found for the work concerned. 4. Work allocation annexure iv against the demand raised was not found in the records 
5. Manual measurement book was not Maintained for the work concerned. 6. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App 
but specific Land Marking was not done for the photographs uploaded. 7. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found 
as such 8. Monitoring committee report was not found. 9. Social audit was not conducted 10. Site inspection report by supervising 
officer was not found in the case file. 11. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District 
Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found 
Work code:  
3001014040/WC/9010278029 
JPV Remarks: 
Citizen Information Board was not found. 
172 Gram Panchayat 4,85,504 3,06,485 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Work was not found in the annual action plan. 3. No gram sabha 
resolution was found for the work concerned. 4. Design and drawing for the work was not found in the records 5. Work allocation 
annexure iv against the demand raised was not found in the records 6. Manual measurement book was not Maintained for the work 
concerned. 7. Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was done for the photographs. 8. No 
QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such. 9. Monitoring committee report was not found. 10. Social audit was 
not conducted 11. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file.12. Site Inspection Report by the Higher 
Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level 
Monitor (NLM) was not found 
Work code:  
3001014040/LD/9422560315 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB was not found in joint physical 
verification of the work. 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
292
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 292 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
173 Gram Panchayat 2,16,493 2,03,449 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Work was not found in the annual action plan. 3. No gram sabha 
resolution was found for the work concerned. 4. Design and drawing for the work was not found in the records 5. Work allocation 
against the demand raised was not found in the records 6. Manual measurement book was not Maintained for the work concerned. 
7. After stage photographs were not found uploaded in the Bhuban Portal.  8. CIB was not uploaded in the website.9. No QC was 
conducted and thus no such report was found as such 10. Monitoring committee report was not found. 11. Social audit was not 
conducted 12. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 13. Site Inspection Report by the Higher 
Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level 
Monitor (NLM) was not found 
Work code:  
3001014040/RC/9422510389 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Citizen Information Board was flat-down to 
ground and backside up. 2. Single side Drain 
was found and was covered with jungle. 3. 
Drain was not found from pump house 
174 Gram Panchayat 3,58,201 2,07,859 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Work was not found in the annual action plan. 3. No gram sabha 
resolution was found for the work concerned. 4. Design and drawing for the work was not found in the records 5. Mustor Roll 
Movement slip was not found. 6. Manual measurement book was not Maintained for the work concerned. 7. Three stage 
photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking was done for the photographs. 8. Work completion certificate 
was not found in the works file. 9. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 10. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was 
found as such 11. Monitoring committee report was not found. 12. Social audit was not conducted 13. Site inspection report by 
supervising officer was not found in the case file. 14. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme 
Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found 
Work code:  
3001014040/RC/9422510388 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Citizen Information Board was not found. 
2. Drain was covered with soil and jungle 
175 Gram Panchayat 5,77,914 3,42,208 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Work was not found in the annual action plan. 3. No gram sabha 
resolution was found for the work concerned. 4. Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking 
was t done for the photographs. 5. CIB was not uploaded in the website. 6. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was 
found as such 7. Monitoring committee report was not found. 8. Social audit was not conducted. 9. Site inspection report by 
supervising officer was not found in the case file. 10. Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme 
Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found 
Work code:  
3001014040/LD/9422637736 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Citizen Information Board was not found. 
2. Not in Agricultural use and idle land 
176 Gram Panchayat 3,99,451 3,53,964 
1. Day to day Work Progress Register was not maintained. 2. Work was not found in the annual action plan. 3. No gram sabha 
resolution was found for the work concerned. 4. Three stage photographs were found uploaded but no any specific Land Marking 
was done for the photographs. 5. No QC was conducted and thus no such report was found as such 6. Monitoring committee report 
was not found. 7. Social audit was not conducted 8. Site inspection report by supervising officer was not found in the case file. 9. 
Site Inspection Report by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, State Quality 
Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found 
Work code:  
3001014040/IF/9422716810 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Nearly half of the Citizen Information 
Board was covered with soil and details was 
not clear. 2. Land was idle and not in 
agricultural use  
Name of the Mandal: Nalchar                                                                                                             Name of the GP/VC: Paschim Nalchar 
177 EE, RD, Div-II, 
Bishramganj 24,34,564 24,09,573 
1.Work Completion and Handing over Certificate was not found. 2. Challan copy/FTO of labour cess was not found. 3. Labour 
payments were released to the Labour Supplier/Sardar. 4. Delivery challan of Bricks/Jhama (qty 2000) of Invoice No. RPC/2022-
23/165, Dtd 24.09.2022 was not furnished. 5. Gate passes of 720 bag Cement and 600 kg of TMT bar 6. Records revealed that 
4500 bricks were received after completion of the Works. 7. Mason worked upto 13.01.2022 (as per MR) but Sand, Bricks were 
received after that date, even after completion of the Works also. 8. Three stage photographs and CIB was found uploaded in the 
Bhuban App. Specific landmark was not clear among three stage photographs. 
Work code:  
3001/RC/9422478777 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB was found erected. 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
293
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 293 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
Name of the Mandal: Nalchar                                                                                                             Name of the GP/VC: Indrakumar paar 
178 EE, RD, Div-II, 
Bishramganj 7,84,380 7,08,330 
1. Completion Certificate was not signed by the EE, RD Division, Bishramganj. 2. Challan copy/FTO of labour cess was not 
found. 3. Labour payments were released to the Labour Supplier/Sardar. 4. Three stage photographs and CIB was found 
uploaded in the Bhuban App. Trees as landmark noticed in the 1st and 3rd stage photographs are matched but is not clear in 
2nd stage photograph.  
Work code:  
3001/RC/9422478740 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB was not found. 
179 EE, RD, Div-II, 
Bishramganj 1,05,594 81,681 
1. Completion Certificate was not signed by the EE, RD Division, Bishramganj. 2. Challan copy/FTO of labour cess was not 
found. 3. Labour payments were released to the Labour Supplier/Sardar. 4. Three stage photographs and CIB was found uploaded 
in the Bhuban App but no specific landmark was found. 
Work code:  
3001014/IF/9010236590 
JPV Remarks: 
1.CIB was not found 2. No duck was available 
inside the Duckery Shelter 3. Duckery Shelter 
was being used as a store as it was found to be 
full of straws (paddy/wheat). 
180 EE, RD, Div-II, 
Bishramganj 9,55,048 9,22,978 
1. Work Completion and Handing Over Certificate was not furnished. 2. Material at Site Account, Works Progress Register and 
Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not available for inspection. 3. Challan copy/FTO of labour cess was not 
found. 4. Labour payments were released to the Labour Supplier/Sardar. 5. MB was not furnished. 6. Gate passes of 111 bag 
cement and 58 kg TMT bar was not furnished.7. Three stage photographs and CIB was found uploaded in the Bhuban App. 1st 
stage and 2nd stage photographs uploaded in the Bhuban App show 'during stage photographs' (i.e, 2nd stage). Photograph of 
actual 1st stage was not available in the Bhuban App. Specific landmark in the photographs was not clear. 
Work code:  
3001/RC/9422494301 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB was not found 
Name of the Mandal: Nalchar                                                                                                             Name of the GP/VC: Kaliram 
181 EE, RD, Div-II, 
Bishramganj 16,27,260 14,11,570 
1. Completion Certificate was not signed by the EE, RD Division, Bishramganj. 2. Challan copy/FTO of labour cess was not 
found. 3. Labour payments were released to the Labour Supplier/Sardar. 4. Delivery challans of Sand of 7.95 cum out of 142.95 
cum (vide Tax Invoice 09, dtd. 09.04.2021) was not furnished 5. Delivery challans of Sand of 126.28 cum (vide Tax Invoice 18, 
dtd. 09.09.2021) was not furnished. 6. As per MR, Mason worked from 03.12.2020 to 06.12.2020, but stone aggregate (chips) 
of 21 cum was received after eight and half months later (on 24.08.2021). 7. Three stage photographs and CIB was found 
uploaded in the Bhuban App. Coconut tree and Corrugated tin roof were found as landmark. 
Work code:  
3001/RC/9422476984 
JPV Remarks: 
1.CIB was found installed but no details were 
available in the CIB. 2. purpose of construction 
of the Culvert was partially hampered as road 
approaching to Culvert was steep, hazardous, 
and very poor condition. 
Name of the Mandal: Nalchar                                                                                                             Name of the GP/VC: Kumariakucha 
182 EE, RD, Div-II, 
Bishramganj 12,58,881 11,62,423 
1. Completion Certificate was not signed by the EE, RD Division, Bishramganj. 2. Challan copy/ FTO of labour cess was not 
found. 3. Material at Site Account, Works Progress Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not 
available for inspection. 4. Labour payments were released to the Labour Supplier/,Sardar. 5. Gate passes of 230 bag cement 
and delivery challan of 3 cum sand was not furnished. 6. Two times expenditure was made for CIB. Steps taken in this regard 
was not intimated to Audit. 7. Store Indent vide No. 84/9, 2022-23 dtd. 03.01.2023 was for 4,300 kgs of TMT bar but 4,976 kgs 
TMT bar was lifted. Gate pass of only 3,397 kgs TMT bar out of 4,300 kgs under Indent 84/9 for the works was available. But 
gate pass of 903 kgs (i.e., 4,300 minus 3,397) TMT bar under the Indent ibid was not found. Gate passes of 202 kgs and 1,377 
kgs TMT bar were found under Indent No. 35/2021-22/14.09.2021 for Diversion channel at Kalamkhet and 113/2021-
22/05.01.2022 for Single cell box culvert at Baniacherra respectively. 8. Three stage photographs and CIB was found uploaded 
in the Bhuban App. Landmark of 1st and 2nd stage photographs was found but was not found in 3rd stage. 
Work code:  
3001/RC/9422515385 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB was found installed but expenditure was 
shown as ₹ 11,83,937 instead of actual 
expenditure of ₹ 11,62,423 in the CIB. 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
294
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 294 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
Name of the Mandal: Boxanagar                                                                                                             Name of the GP/VC: Anandanagar 
183 EE, RD, Div-II, 
Bishramganj 8,23,553 7,57,605 
1. Completion Certificate was not signed by the EE, RD Division, Bishramganj. 2. Material at Site Account, Works Progress 
Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not available for inspection. 3. Challan copy/FTO of labour cess 
was not found. 4. Labour payments were released to the Labour Supplier/Sardar. 5. Three stage photographs were uploaded in the 
Bhuban App, but no specific landmark was found. CIB was not found in the photographs. 
Work code:  
3001/RC/9422478033 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Details in the CIB were not legible. No logo 
of MGNREGA was visible 2. Road was 
broken in two places and found muddy and 
hazardous. 
184 EE, RD, Div-II, 
Bishramganj 7,80,137 3,67,311 
1. Completion Certificate was not signed by the EE, RD Division, Bishramganj. 2. Material at Site Account, Works Progress 
Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not available for inspection. 3. Challan copy/FTO of labour cess 
was not found. 4. Labour payments were released to the Labour Supplier/Sardar. 5. Delivery challans of 14 cum sand were not 
found. 6. Photo was uploaded in the Bhuban App where CIB was not found. 
Work code:  
3001013002/AV/9422442776 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Details were not traceable in the CIB. 2. Site 
was full of jungles 3. Anganwadi Centre was 
found locked 4. Centre was found to be idle 
since completion. 
185 EE, RD, Div-II, 
Bishramganj 7,80,137 3,60,656 
1. Completion Certificate was not signed by the EE, RD Division, Bishramganj. 2. Material at Site Account, Works Progress 
Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not available for inspection. 3. Challan copy/FTO of labour cess 
was not found. 4. Labour payments were released to the Labour Supplier/Sardar. 5. Delivery challans of 17 cum sand were not 
found. 6. Photo was uploaded in the Bhuban App. 
Work code:  
3001013002/AV/9422443129 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Anganwadi Centre was found locked. 2. 
Centre was found to be idle since completion. 
Name of the Mandal: Boxanagar                                                                                                             Name of the GP/VC: Boxanagar 
186 EE, RD, Div-II, 
Bishramganj 10,53,966 9,21,832 
1. Completion Certificate was not signed by the EE, RD Division, Bishramganj. 2. Material at Site Account, Works Progress 
Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not available for inspection. 3. Challan copy/FTO of labour cess 
was not found. 4. Labour payments were released to the Labour Supplier/Sardar. 5. Except 3rd, 1st and 2nd stage photo was 
uploaded in the Bhuban App but no specific landmark was found. Photo of erected CIB was found uploaded. 
Work code:  
3001/RC/9422478028 
 CIB was not found. 
187 SDFO Sonamura 
SPJ 15,59,320 15,60,380 
1. Muster Roll of wage payment of ₹ 58,220 for the period from 08.03.2021 to 17.03.2021 was not found 2. Date of work in muster 
roll was not available 3. Material at Site Account for receipt and utilisation of materials received by the IO directly in the Site was 
not found 4. Site Inspection Register by the Higher Authority including the Programme Officer, District Programme Coordinator, 
State Quality Monitor (SQM) and National Level Monitor (NLM) was not found 5. Day to day Work Progress Register was not 
found 6. Project Village Monitoring Committee Report was not found 7. Measurement Book (MB) was not furnished 8. Tender 
documents/ Quotations/Records relating to rate fixed for the materials purchased for the works were not furnished 9. Supply orders 
and delivery challans for materials such as Sand, Cement, Bricks chips, RCC pillar, Cement post, Barbed wire were not furnished 
10. Work order/ contract for Monitoring and Evaluation was not available 11. Reasons for non-availability of date, certification, 
IO’s sign, counter sign etc. on tax invoices/bills were not stated 12. Copy of permission of the competent authority for excess 
expenditure of ₹ 4,920 in wages and overall excess of expenditure of ₹ 1,060 than expenditure sanctioned was not furnished 13. 
Reasons for non-deduction of GST and IT from material bills were not stated 14. Reasons for non-deduction of IT from the labour 
suppliers/ sardars were not stated. 15. Work/ Project Completion Certificate/ Report was not found 16. None of the stages 
photograph was found in the file. However, all three stage photographs were uploaded in the Bhuban App, but no specific landmark 
was found. CIB was found in the third stage photograph. 
Work code:  
3001/DP/9422442855 
JPV Remarks: 
1.No CIB was found. 2. Bamboo density was 
very poor. 3. covered with full of 
jungles/weed. 4. very poor maintenance and 
fencing was not there in many places. 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
295
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 295 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
188 SDFO Sonamura 
SPJ 2,63,856 3,07,676 
1. Registers/records maintained for correspondences/requisitions for saplings made from different establishments/organisations 
were not available. 2. Register/records containing details of stock and distribution/sale of saplings/seedlings were not found. 3. 
Muster Roll of wage payment of ₹ 80,560 (vide MR No. 7321, 10825 to 10828) were not furnished. 4. Copy of permission of the 
competent authority for excess expenditure of ₹ 43,820 than Expenditure Sanctioned was not furnished. Reasons for excess 
expenditure were not stated. 5. MB was not furnished. 6. Work Completion Certificate was not found. 7. Except 3rd, 1st and 2nd 
stage photographs of without specific landmark were uploaded in the Bhuban App wherein no CIB was found.  
Work code:  
3001/DP/9422460421 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Worksite was not found though raising and 
maintenance of such type of Nursery (poly 
bag) site remained near/ within the premises/ 
boundary of Forest Range Office, Boxanagar. 
2. No CIB was found 3. Details of stock and 
distributions of poly bag sapling were not 
furnished. 
189 SDFO Sonamura 
SPJ 7,57,000 6,28,552 
1. As records were not made available, it could not be ascertained in audit whether the works were implemented as per estimate, 
scheme guidelines, financial rules and following codal formalities in regard to veracity of expenditure incurred. 2. The following 
records/ information relating to the works were not furnished -  Expenditure Sanction, Drawings/ diagram, Estimate, records 
relating to fixing purchase rate and selection of vendors, Work order, Supply order, materials at site account register, Stock and 
distribution/ sale register/ records for saplings/ seedlings, Works progress report, MB, MRs, Bills/ vouchers, delivery challans, 
FTOs, three stage geo tagged photographs, Inspection (by higher authority) register, work completion certificate/ report etc. 
3. Except 3rd, 1st and 2nd stage photographs were uploaded in the Bhuban App wherein no CIB was found. Specific landmark 
was not clear in between 1st and 2nd stage photographs 
Work code:  
3001/DP/9422460424 
JPV Remarks: 
1.Worksite was not found though raising and 
maintenance of such type of Nursery (poly 
bag) site remained/ earmarked near/ within 
the premises/ boundary of Forest Range 
Office, Boxanagar. 2. No records were made 
available to Audit. 
190 SDFO Sonamura 
SPJ 2,82,680 2,92,007 
1. As records were not made available, it could not be ascertained in audit whether the works were implemented as per estimate, 
scheme guidelines, financial rules and following codal formalities in regard to veracity of expenditure incurred. 2. The following 
records/ information relating to the works were not furnished - Expenditure Sanction, Drawings/ diagram, Estimate, records 
relating to fixing purchase rate and selection of vendors, Work order, Supply order, materials at site account register, Stock and 
distribution/ sale register/ records. Works progress report, MB, MRs, Bills/ vouchers, delivery challans, FTOs, three stage geo 
tagged photographs, Inspection (by higher authority) register, work completion certificate/ report etc. 3. As per MIS Portal, excess 
expenditure of ₹ 9,327 than sanctioned was incurred. Copy of permission of the competent authority for the excess expenditure 
was not furnished. Reasons for excess expenditure was not stated. 4. Except 3rd, 1st and 2nd stage photographs were uploaded in 
the Bhuban App wherein no CIB was found. Specific landmark was not clear in between 1st and 2nd stage photographs. 
Work code:  
3001/DP/9422458929 
JPV Remarks: 
1.No CIB was found. 2. plantation was 
covered with full of weed/jungles 3. 
maintenance was very poor. 
191 EE, RD, SNM 
(Dhanpur) Div 19,34,315 19,24,853 
1. Completion Certificate was not signed by the EE, RD Division (Dhanpur), Sonamura and date of handing over was not available. 
2. Expenditure sanction of ₹ 19.34 lakh was for Harimohan Cherra instead of Harimangal Cherra. 3. Labour payments were 
released to the Labour Supplier/ Sardar. 4. Store Indent (vide No. 1/EE/RD/SNMD/2024-25 dated 13.05.2024) of 71 bag cement 
was raised after completion of the project. 5. Non lifting of 71 bag cement implied that either quality of works was compromised 
or preparation of non-realistic estimate. 6. Three stage photographs were uploaded in the Bhuban App and CIB was found in the 
photographs. Building and HT Electric line as landmarks were found. 
Work code:  
3001/RC/9422523983 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB was found installed. 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
296
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 296 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
Name of the Mandal: Boxanagar                                                                                                             Name of the GP/VC: Dayalpara VC 
192 EE, RD, Div-II, 
Bishramganj 6,22,018 5,98,390 
1. Completion Certificate was not signed by the EE, RD Division, Bishramganj. 2. Material at Site Account, Works Progress 
Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not available for inspection. 3. Challan copy/FTO of labour cess 
was not found. 4. Labour payments were released to the Labour Supplier/ Sardar. 5. Gate pass was found for 150 bags cement out 
of 290 bags. In reply against an audit query regarding gate passes raised on 05.12.2024 vide this office letter No. Rep (Field Party) 
/PA_MGNREGA/NLC/BSGD/19-24/01, the EE, RD Division, Bishramganj furnished the remaining gate passes of 140 bags 
cement. But scrutiny of gate passes further revealed that a total of 110 bags cement out of 140 bag cement was received after 
completion of the work. Reasons for lifting of 110 bag cement from store after completion of work was not stated. 6. Three stage 
photographs and CIB was found uploaded in the Bhuban App. 
Work code:  
3001/RC/9422516469 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB was found during joint physical 
verification. 
Name of the Mandal: Boxanagar                                                                                                             Name of the GP/VC: Kalshimura GP 
193 EE, RD, Div-II, 
Bishramganj 17,37,875 14,84,532 
1. Completion Certificate was not signed by the EE, RD Division, Bishramganj. 2. Material at Site Account, Works Progress 
Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not available for inspection. 3. Challan copy/FTO of labour cess 
was not found. 4. Labour payments were released to the Labour Supplier/Sardar. 5. Issuance of Supply order of 4200 Pickets after 
two months of completion of the project and handing over the asset. 6. Three stage photographs and CIB was found uploaded in 
the Bhuban App. College boundary wall was found as landmark. 
Work code:  
3001/RC/9422488331 
JPV Remarks: 
1. No details were available in the CIB 2. 
Road was broken, only two wheelers can 
pass. 3. Road approaching culvert was very 
poor condition. 4. Full of muddy was also 
observed in many places on the road. 
Name of the Mandal: Manu                                                                                                            Name of the GP/VC: Dalucherra VC 
194 EE, RD, Dhalai 
Div-II 22,85,848 22,85, 025.28
1.Completion Certificate was not signed by the EE, RD, Manu and the work was not yet to be handed over to the Village Committee 
or to the concerned authority. 2. Verification of Store records revealed that all the Cements utilised for the work were lifted from 
the Store beyond the completion date of the Work. Reason for such discrepancy was not stated to audit. Records of TMT Bars 
could not be verified in audit since these were issued from the Ambassa RD Store. 3.Labour payments were released to the Labour 
Sardar.  4. Material at Site Account, Works Progress Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not available 
for inspection. 5. Third Stage Geo Tagged Photo was not Uploaded in the Bhuban App. Specific Land Marking was not clear in 
the First Stage and Second Stage photographs.  
Work code:  
3004004/RC/9422505985 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB with the Constructed structure was found 
in the JPV. 
195 EE, RD, Dhalai 
Div-II 19,26,812 19,21,113 
1.Completion Certificate and Handing Over Taken over document was not available in the file. So could not be verified in audit. 
Date of commencement and completion was taken in audit from the CIB. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar. 
3. As per the Estimate, Labour Wage was ₹ 3.15 lakh while actual expenditure was ₹ 4.38 lakh. 4. Material at Site Account, Works 
Progress Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not available for inspection. 5. Photographs were found 
uploaded in the Bhuban App with specific Land Markings were available in all the Three Stages of the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004/RC/9422464183 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB with the Constructed structure was found 
in the JPV. 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
297
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 297 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost Actual exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
196 EE, RD, Dhalai Div-
II 19,09,320 18,44,347 
1. Completion Certificate was not signed by the EE, RD, Manu and the work was yet to be handed over to the Village 
Committee or to the concerned authority. There were two different dates of completion in the CIB and the Completion 
Certificate submitted by the IO in the Office. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar. 3. As per the 
Estimate Labour Wage was ₹ 3.00 lakh while actual expenditure was ₹ 7.86 lakh. 4. Material at Site Account, Works 
Progress Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not available for inspection. It was also 
noticed that 380 bags of Cement were lifted from the Store after completion of the Work. Reason was not stated for 
lifting of Cement after completion of the Work. 5. Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific 
Land Marking was not available in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004004/RC/9422479766 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB with the Constructed structure was found in the 
JPV. But the CIB writings were washed away. 
197 EE, RD, Dhalai Div-
II 7,86,144 7,83,155 
1. Completion Certificate was signed by the EE, RD, Manu and the work was yet to be handed over to the Village 
Committee or to the concerned authority. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar. 3. Material at Site 
Account, Works Progress Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not available for inspection. 
4. Third State Geo Tagged Photo was not Uploaded in the Bhuban App. Specific Land Marking was not clear in the 
First Stage and Second Stage photos uploaded in the Bhuban App. 
Work code:  
3004004/RC/9422479777 
JPV Remarks: 
As stated during JPV, the brick soling road has been 
upgraded to Black Top Carpeted Road. As such, 
Brick Soling Road was not found in audit. 
198 EE, RD, Dhalai Div-
II 3,62,824 3,63,766.92 
1. Completion Certificate was signed by the EE, RD, Manu and the work was yet to be handed over to the Village 
Committee or to the concerned authority. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar 3. As per the Estimate 
Labour Wage was ₹ 1.14 lakh while actual expenditure was ₹ 1.18 lakh. 4. Material at Site Account, Works Progress 
Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not available for inspection. 5. CIB was not uploaded 
in the Bhuban App though Third Stage Geo Tagging was not done. 
Work code:  
3004004/FP/9010237685 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB was not found in the JPV. Storm Water Drain 
as per Bhuban Photo was found in the JPV 
Name of the Mandal: Manu                                                                                                            Name of the GP/VC: Deo R.F. VC 
199 EE, RD, Dhalai Div-
II 39,62,716 39,10,834 
1. Completion Certificate and Handing Over Taken over document was not available in the file. So could not be verified 
in audit. Date of commencement and completion could not be verified also due to this. CIB was not uploaded.  2. Labour 
payments were released to the Labour Sardar. 3. As per the Estimate Labour Wage was ₹ 10.91 lakh while actual 
expenditure was ₹ 17.11 lakh. 4. Material at Site Account, Works Progress Register and Site Inspection Register was 
not maintained and was not available for inspection. 5. Third Stage Photographs were not uploaded in the Bhuban App 
Work code:  
3004004/RC/9422508322 
JPV Remarks: 
Work was seen in the Joint Physical Verification. 
Soil erosion at the base of the Baily Bridge was 
noticed at the both ends. 
200 EE, RD, Dhalai Div-
II 86,84,990 86,62,346 
1.Completion Certificate and Handing Over Taken over document was available in the file. Date of Completion in the 
CIB was 30-04-2024 while in the completion certificate the same was recorded as 29-06-2024. 2. Labour payments 
were released to the Labour Sardar. 3. As per the Estimate Labour Wage was ₹ 10.91 lakh while actual expenditure was 
₹ 17.11 lakh. 4. Material at Site Account, Works Progress Register were not maintained and were not available for 
inspection.  Site Inspection Register was maintained but not signed by the visiting higher officers, as a result whether 
inspection was carried out by the higher officers during the work could not be ascertained in audit. 5. First Stage Photo 
did not match with Second and Third Stage Photos due to non-maintenance of specific land marking while Geo Tagging.  
Work code:  
3004004/RC/9422524332 
JPV Remarks: 
Work was seen in the Joint Physical Verification. It 
was noticed in the JPV that a part of the Road was 
damaged due to Soil Erosion in one side.  
Verification of the Single Cell Box Culvert, which 
was constructed in replacement of 4 Nos CD 
Structure, revealed that no Weep Holes were kept in 
the Wing Walls while sufficient number of Weep 
Holes were not provided in the main structure of the 
Box Culvert.  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
298
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 298 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
Name of the Mandal: Manu                                                                                                            Name of the GP/VC: S.K. Para 
201 EE, RD, Dhalai 
Div-II 87,25,190 85,94,609 
1.Completion Certificate was signed by the IO and the EE, RD Manu Division. The work was yet to be handed over as 
presumed in audit as the and Handing Over Taken over document was not available in the file. 2. Labour payments were 
released to the Labour Sardar 3. As per the Estimate, Labour Wage was ₹ 14.26 lakh including the contingencies while actual 
expenditure was ₹ 29.63 lakh. Reason for excess was not stated to audit. 4. Material at Site Account, Works Progress Register 
were not maintained and were not available for inspection. Site Inspection Register was also not maintained as a result whether 
inspection was carried out by the higher officers could not be ascertained in audit. 5. The sanctioned amount and actual 
expenditure for the work were ₹ 87.25 lakh and ₹ 85.95 lakh as found in audit while in the CIB it was noticed that these were 
written as ₹ 8.72 lakh and ₹ 8.59 lakh, respectively.  
Work code:  
3004004/RC/9422508856 
JPV Remarks: 
Work was seen in the Joint Physical Verification 
and found as uploaded in the MGNREGA 
Website except the discrepancy as pointed out in 
the CIB. 
202 EE, RD, Dhalai 
Div-II 78,83,430 78,49,656 
1.Completion Certificate was signed by the IO and the EE, RD Manu Division. The work was yet to be handed over as 
presumed in audit as the and Handing Over Taken over document was not available in the file. 2. Labour payments were 
released to the Labour Sardar 3. As per the Estimate Labour Wage was ₹ 10.73 lakh while actual expenditure was ₹24.41 lakh. 
Reason for excess was not stated to audit. 4. Material at Site Account, Works Progress Register were not maintained and were 
not available for inspection. Site Inspection Register was maintained but occasional visit by the Supervising Officer and other 
Officers, if any was not found. The EE, RD Division signed the Inspection Register in May 2024 while the work was on the 
verge of completion. 5. 1,020 bags of cement was lifted from the Store after completion of the Work. Reason for lifting of 
cement after completion of the work was not stated to audit. 
Work code:  
3004004/RC/9422526782 
JPV Remarks: 
Work was seen in the Joint Physical Verification 
and found as uploaded in the MGNREGA 
Website. Major soil erosion was noticed in one 
side of the Wing Wall of the Box Culvert. It was 
also noticed that Sand Bags were temporarily used 
to arrest the Soil Erosion.   
203 EE, RD, Dhalai 
Div-II 34,02,305 34,02, 310.76
1. Completion Certificate was not available in the work file. The work was yet to be handed over as presumed in audit as the 
and Handing Over Taken over document was also not available in the file. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour 
Sardar. 3. As per the Estimate Labour Wage was ₹ 2.90 lakh while actual expenditure was ₹ 10.34 lakh. Reason for excess 
was not stated to audit. 4. Material at Site Account, Works Progress Register were not maintained and were not available for 
inspection. Site Inspection Register was not maintained as such visit by the Supervising Officer and other Officers, if any was 
not found. 5. Third Stage Photographs were not uploaded in the Bhuban App. 1st Sage and 2nd Stage photographs did not 
match with each other as no specific land marking was used during photograph. 
Work code:  
3004004/RC/9422506163 
JPV Remarks: 
Work was seen in the Joint Physical Verification. 
Gabion structures were constructed for Baily 
Bridge, but the CIB was not available. 
204 EE, RD, Dhalai 
Div-II 24,65,910 21,80,067 
1.Completion Certificate was available in the work file. The work was yet to be handed over as presumed in audit as the and 
Handing Over Taken over document was not available in the file. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar. 3. 
Material at Site Account, Works Progress Register were not maintained and were not available for inspection. Site Inspection 
Register was not maintained as such visit by the Supervising Officer and other Officers, if any was not found. 4. CIB recorded 
the date of Commencement and Completion of the work both on 06-12-2019.  
Work code:  
3004004/RC/9422460066 
JPV Remarks: 
Work was seen in the Joint Physical Verification 
and found as uploaded in the Bhuban site. 
205 EE, RD, Dhalai 
Div-II 12,93,030 12,80,100 
1.Completion Certificate was available in the work file and the constructed Boundary Wall was duly handed over to the Village 
Committee. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar. 3. Material at Site Account, Works Progress Register 
were not maintained and were not available for inspection. Site Inspection Register was maintained but the Supervising Officer 
recorded completion only in the Site Inspection Register as such visit by the Supervising Officer and other Officers from time 
to time during construction, if any, was not found. 4. CIB was not uploaded as noticed from the Photos from the Bhuban 
Application.  
Work code:  
3004004023/AV/9422442999 
JPV Remarks: 
Work was seen in the Joint Physical Verification. 
CIB was found installed but no information was 
recorded in the CIB. It was also noticed that 
paintings in the Boundary Wall were virtually 
washed away. 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
299
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 299 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
Name of the Mandal: Ambassa                                                                                                           Name of the GP/VC: Jagannathpur VC 
206 EE, RD, Dhalai 20,97,240 20,32,180 
1.Completion Certificate was not available in the Work File and not verified in audit. Work was yet to be handed 
over to the Village Committee or to the concerned authority as presumed in audit since Handing Over cum Taking 
Over Certificate was also not available in the File. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar 3. 
Material at Site Account, Works Progress Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not 
available for inspection. 4. As per the Working Estimate Labour Wage was ₹ 6.37 lakh while the actual 
expenditure was ₹ 6.82 lakh. 5. Third Stage Geo Tagged Photo was not Uploaded in the Bhuban App.  
Work code:  
3004001/RC/9422459934 
JPV Remarks: 
CIB with the Constructed structure was found in the JPV. In 
two segments, the road was found damaged.  
207 EE, RD, Dhalai 20,34,790 18,89,872 
1.Completion Certificate and Handing Over Taken over document was not available in the file. So could not be 
verified in audit. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar. 3. Material at Site Account, Works 
Progress Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not available for inspection. 4. 2 
Stage Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App with specific Land Markings were available in all 
the Photographs. Third Stage photographs were not uploaded in the MGNREGA Website. 
Work code:  
3004001/RC/9422507809 
JPV Remarks: 
Constructed structure was found in the JPV. No CIB was 
installed. JPV further revealed that Provision of road Side Drain 
was not considered in the Work as a result a portion of the Road 
Was damaged due to Upstream Rain Water.  
208 EE, RD, Dhalai 16,71,460 15,14,779 
1.Completion Certificate and Handing Over Taken over document were not available in the file. So could not be 
verified in audit. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar. 3. As per the Estimate Labour Wage 
was ₹2.76 lakh while actual expenditure was ₹ 3.04 lakh.. Reason for excess was not stated to audit. 4. Material 
at Site Account, Works Progress Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not available 
for inspection. It was also noticed that 136 bags of Cement were lifted from the Store after the last MR Date (04-
08-2021) of the Work. 5. Two Stage Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App but specific Land 
Marking was not available in the Photographs.. 3rd stage photographs were not uploaded in the MGNREGA 
Website,  
Work code:  
3004001009/AV/9422443074 
JPV Remarks: 
Constructed structure was found in the JPV. But CIB was not 
installed as required under the rules.  
209 EE, RD, Dhalai 20,38,100 14,23,755 
1. The work is an ongoing work, so Completion Certificate and Handing Over to the Village Committee or to 
the concerned authority are yet to be done. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar. 3. Material 
at Site Account, Works Progress Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not available 
for inspection. 4. Two Stage Photographs were found uploaded in the Bhuban App with specific Land Marking 
in the Photographs. 
Work code:  
3004001/RC/9422524975 
JPV Remarks: 
Constructed structure was found in the JPV. It was noticed in 
the JPV that the Side Drain was constructed, and the 
construction work was in progress. As per the Work Plan, the 
Side Drain can’t be connected to the Main Drain on the 
Ambassa Gandacheera Road, for connectivity with the Main 
Road Side drain at Ambassa Gandacheera Road. 
210 EE, RD, Dhalai 13,98,707 13,87,495 
1.Completion Certificate was not available in the work file so could not be verified in audit. Handing Over Taken 
over was done to the Jagannathpur VC. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar. 3. Material at 
Site Account, Works Progress Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was not available 
for inspection. 4. It was noticed that 50 bags of Cement and 0.405 MT of TMT bars were lifted from the Store 
after the last MR Date (17-12-2023) of the Work. Reason was not stated for lifting of Cement after completion 
of the Work. 5. CIB was not uploaded in the Bhuban App and Third Stage Geo Tagging was not done. 
Work code:  
3004001/RC/9422515715 
JPV Remarks: 
Constructed structure was found in the JPV. CIB was installed 
there.  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
300
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 300 
Appendix 2.2.5 (contd.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost Actual exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
211 EE, RD, Dhalai 13,98,707 13,62,191 
1.Completion Certificate was not available in the work file so could not be verified in audit. Handing Over 
Taken Over was done to the Jagannath Pur VC. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar. 3. 
Material at Site Account, Works Progress Register and Site Inspection Register was not maintained and was 
not available for inspection. 4. Store lifting data was not made available to audit. 5. Third Stage Photographs 
were not uploaded in the Bhuban App. 
Work code:  
3004001/RC/9422515718 
JPV Remarks: 
Constructed structure was found in the JPV. CIB was not 
installed there. 
212 EE, RD, Dhalai 12,60,645 12,58,792 
1.Completion Certificate and Handing Over Taken Over document was not available in the file. So could not 
be verified in audit.  2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar 3. Material at Site Account, Works 
Progress Register were not maintained and were not available for inspection.  Site Inspection Register was also 
not maintained, as a result whether inspection was carried out by the higher officers during the work could not 
be ascertained in audit. 4. Third Stage Photographs were not uploaded in the Bhuban App. 
Work code:  
3004001/RC/9422487643 
JPV Remarks: 
Work was seen in the Joint Physical Verification. CIB was 
installed but date of commencement and the date of completion 
was not recorded in the CIB.  
213 EE, RD, Dhalai 8,74,777 8,60,565 
1.Completion Certificate was not available in the work file so could not be verified in audit. Handing Over 
Taken over was done to the Jagannath Pur VC. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar. 3. As 
per the Estimate, Labour Wage was ₹ 1.21 lakh while actual expenditure was ₹ 2.23 lakh. Reason for excess 
was not stated to audit. 4. Material at Site Account, Works Progress Register were not maintained and were 
not available for inspection. Site Inspection Register was also not maintained as a result whether inspection 
was carried out by the higher officers could not be ascertained in audit. 5. Third Stage Photographs were not 
uploaded in the Bhuban App. 
Work code:  
3004001/RC/9422515727 
JPV Remarks: 
Work was seen in the Joint Physical Verification. The Brick 
Soling Road has been upgraded to CC Road as such physically 
the work could not be seen. CIB was found installed but not 
uploaded in the Bhuban App.   
Name of the Mandal: Ambassa                                                                                                           Name of the GP/VC: Jeolchera 
214 EE, RD, Dhalai 1,07,85,700 1,06,27,133 
1.Completion Certificate and Handing Over Taken over document were not available in the file. So could not 
be verified in audit.  2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar 3. As per the Estimate Labour 
Wage was ₹ 24.87 lakh while actual expenditure was ₹27.29 lakh. Reason for excess was not stated to audit. 
4. Material at Site Account, Works Progress Register were not maintained and were not available for 
inspection. Site Inspection Register was also not maintained as a result occasional visit by the Supervising 
Officer and other Officers, if any, was not found. 5. 1532 bags of cement and 3.851 MT of TMT bars were 
lifted from the Store after the last MR date (12-06-2022) of the Work. Reason for lifting of cement and steel 
after completion of the work was not stated to audit. 
Work code:  
3004001/RC/9422496657 
JPV Remarks: 
Work was seen in the Joint Physical Verification. Out of 3,5 
Km stretch of the Road, JPV Team visited nearly 2.5 Km of the 
road. It was noticed that out the visited 2.5 Km stretch of the 
road, at least in 25 places road was badly damaged and no 
vehicular movement was possible. 
215 EE, RD, Dhalai 46,88,846 35,55,420 
1.Completion Certificate and Handing Over Taken over document was not available in the file. So could not 
be verified in audit. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar. 3. Material at Site Account, Works 
Progress Register were not maintained and were not available for inspection. Site Inspection Register was also 
not maintained as such visit by the Supervising Officer and other Officers, if any was not found. 4. 390 bags 
of cement and 0.931 MT of TMT bars were lifted from the Store after the last MR date (16-02-2021) of the 
Work. Reason for lifting of cement and steel after completion of the work was not stated to audit. 5. Third 
Stage Photographs were not uploaded in the Bhuban App.  
Work code:  
3004001/RC/9422459200 
JPV Remarks: 
Work was seen in the Joint Physical Verification. CIB was there 
but CIB writings were washed away. Weep Holes were not 
there in the Wing Walls as well as in the main structure of the 
Box Culvert.  
216 EE, RD, Dhalai 18,03,670 17,74,081 
1.Completion Certificate and Handing Over Taken over document was not available in the file. So could not 
be verified in audit. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar 3. Material at Site Account, Works 
Progress Register were not maintained and were not available for inspection. Site Inspection Register was not 
maintained as such visit by the Supervising Officer and other Officers, if any was not found. 4. As per the 
Estimate Labour Wage was ₹ 4.21 lakh while actual expenditure was ₹ 5.06 lakh. Reason for excess was not 
stated to audit. 5. Third Stage Geo Tagged photographs were not uploaded in the MGNREGA Website. 
Work code:  
3004001/RC/9422459203 
JPV Remarks: 
Work was seen in the Joint Physical Verification. CIB was there 
but no CIB writing was available.  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
301
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 301 
Appendix 2.2.5 (concld.) 
Statement showing the work wise audit findings from verification of files and records and findings from Joint Physical Verification (JPV) 
{Reference: Paragraphs 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(i), 2.2.11.11(iii)(a)(ii), 2.2.11.11(iii)(c), 2.2.11.11(iii)(d), 2.2.11.11(iii)(e), 2.2.11.11(iii)(f) and 2.2.11.12(ii)} 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
executing entity 
Estimated 
cost 
Actual 
exp. Audit findings (from verification of files and records) Work code 
and JPV remarks 
Name of the Mandal: Ambassa                                                                                                           Name of the GP/VC: Paschim Lalchari 
217 EE. RD. Dhalai 9,54,307 8,26,375 
1. Completion Certificate and Handing Over Taken over document was not available in the file. So could not be 
verified in audit.  2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar 3. Material at Site Account, Works Progress 
Register were not maintained and were not available for inspection. Site Inspection Register was also not maintained, 
as such visit by the Supervising Officer and other Officers from time to time during construction, if any, was not 
found. 4. As per the Estimate Labour Wage was ₹1.21 lakh while actual expenditure was ₹1.60 lakh. Reason for 
excess was not stated to audit. 5. CIB was not uploaded as noticed from the Photos from the Bhuban Application.  
Work code:  
3004001/RC/9422459918 
JPV Remarks: 
Work was seen in the Joint Physical Verification. CIB was 
found installed but it was found damaged. Weep Holes 
were not there in the Wing Walls as well as in the main 
structure of the Box Culvert.  
218 EE. RD. Dhalai 5,43,964 5,18,115 
1.Completion Certificate and Handing Over Taken over document was not available in the file. So could not be 
verified in audit. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar 3. Material at Site Account, Works Progress 
Register were not maintained and were not available for inspection. Site Inspection Register was also not maintained 
as such visit by the Supervising Officer and other Officers from time to time during construction, if any, was not 
found. 4. Third Stage photographs and CIB was not uploaded as noticed from the Photos from the Bhuban 
Application.  
Work code:  
3004001/RC/9422459912 
JPV Remarks: 
Work was seen in the Joint Physical Verification. CIB was 
found installed but no information was recorded in the CIB.  
Name of the Mandal: Ambassa                                                                                                           Name of the GP/VC: Basudebpara 
219 EE. RD. Dhalai 33,81,073 32,42,983 
1.Completion Certificate and Handing Over Taken over document were not available in the file. So could not be 
verified in audit.  2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar. 3. Material at Site Account, Works Progress 
Register were not maintained and were not available for inspection. Site Inspection Register was also not maintained 
as a result visit by the Supervising Officer and other Officers from time to time during construction, if any, was not 
found. 4. As per the Estimate Labour Wage was ₹ 6.37 lakh while actual expenditure was ₹ 6.61 lakh. 5. Hundreds 
of bags of cement was lifted from the Store after the last MR date (21-09-2021) of the Work. Reason for lifting of 
cement after completion of the work was not stated to audit. 5. CIB was not uploaded as noticed from the Photos 
from the Bhuban Application.  
Work code:  
3004001/RC/9422479598 
JPV Remarks: 
Work was seen in the Joint Physical Verification. CIB was 
not found installed.. 
220 EE. RD. Dhalai 16,31,760 15,98,743 
1. Completion Certificate and Handing Over Taken over document was not available in the file. So could not be 
verified in audit. 2. Labour payments were released to the Labour Sardar. 3. Material at Site Account, Works Progress 
Register were not maintained and were not available for inspection. Site Inspection Register was also not maintained 
as a result visit by the Supervising Officer and other Officers from time to time during construction, if any, was not 
found. 4.  306 bags of cement and 0.557 MT of TMT bars were lifted from the Store after the last MR date (12-10-
2021) of the Work. Reason for lifting of cement and steel after completion of the work was not stated to audit. 5.  
Third Stage Phots and CIB was not uploaded as noticed from the Photos from the Bhuban Application.  
Work code:  
3004001/RC/9422479594 
JPV Remarks: 
Work was seen in the Joint Physical Verification. CIB was 
not found installed. 
JPV further noticed that approach road to the Box Culvert 
in one side completely washed away and road connectivity 
was lost. It was also noticed that during construction phase 
also portion of the approach road was damaged as seen 
from the Photo uploaded in the Bhuban App. With the 
passage of time the road has been completely washed away 
and road connectivity was lost.  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
302
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 302 
Appendix 2.2.6 
Statement showing the number of works taken up by the State as a whole and the two sampled districts and verification of works at 
the level of District Programme Coordinator, Additional District Programme Coordinator and the Programme Officer during 2021-
22 to 2023-24 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.11.12.(i)} 
Yea r Number of new 
works taken up 
State Dhalai Sepahijala 
2021-22 
228773 24852 23294 
Number of 
works verified 
DPC ADPC PO Total DPC ADPC PO Total DPC ADPC PO Total 
424 377 1,548 2,349 34 25 116 175 56 35 132 223 
Percentage of 
verification 0.19% 0.16% 0.68% 1.03% 0.14% 0.10% 0.47% 0.70% 0.24% 0.15% 0.57% 0.96% 
2022-23 
Number of new 
works taken up 
State Dhalai Sepahijala 
2,55,148 33,035 29,448 
Number of 
works verified 
DPC ADPC PO Total DPC ADPC PO Total DPC ADPC PO Total 
923 749 9,424 11,096 131 121 1,403 1,655 104 97 922 1,123 
Percentage of 
verification 0.36% 0.29% 3.69% 4.35% 0.40% 0.37% 4.25% 5.01% 0.35% 0.33% 3.13% 3.81% 
2023-24 
Number of new 
works taken up 
State Dhalai Sepahijala 
2,71,209 39,973 27,154 
Number of 
works verified 
DPC ADPC PO Total DPC ADPC PO Total DPC ADPC PO Total 
1,026 972 9,689 11,687 135 95 1,245 1,475 129 108 1,160 1,397 
Percentage of 
verification 0.38% 0.36% 3.57% 4.31% 0.34% 0.24% 3.12% 3.69% 0.48% 0.40% 4.27% 5.15% 
Source: Area officer report under MGNREGA-MIS 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
303
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 303 
Appendix 2.2.7 
Statement showing the number of Kutcha (earth work) and Pucca (masonry work) works 
which were eligible for verification by the State Quality Monitors (SQM) and the status 
of verification by the SQM during 2021-22 to 2023-24 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.11.12(iii)} 
Financial Year 2021-22 
Sl.  
No. Name of the District 
No. of Kutcha 
works where 
expenditure was 
₹ 5 Lakh or more 
No. of 
Kutcha 
works 
verified by 
SQM where 
expenditure 
was ₹5 lakh 
or more. 
Percentage 
of 
verification 
of Kutcha 
Works by 
the SQM 
No. of 
Pucca 
works 
where 
expenditure 
was ₹ 10 
lakh or 
more. 
No. of 
Pucca 
works 
verified by 
SQM where 
expenditure 
was ₹10 
lakh or 
more. 
Percentage 
of 
verification 
of Pucca 
Works by 
the SQM 
1 Sepahijala 222 0 0.00 70 0 0.00 
2 Khowai 149 1 0.67 62 1 1.61 
3 Dhalai 106 2 1.89 123 0 0.00 
4 Gomti 163 4 2.45 119 2 1.68 
5 South Tripura 57 6 10.53 130 5 3.85 
6 North Tripura 23 1 4.35 244 0 0.00 
7 Unakoti 49 2 4.08 153 0 0.00 
8 West Tripura 24 0 0.00 64 0 0.00 
Total for the State 793 16 2.02 965 8 0.83 
Financial Year 2022-23 
1 Sepahijala 67 5 7.46 64 9 14.06 
2 Khowai 112 0 0.00 87 4 4.60 
3 Dhalai 72 3 4.17 72 3 4.17 
4 Gomti 74 3 4.05 45 2 4.44 
5 South Tripura 51 0 0.00 71 0 0.00 
6 North Tripura 82 1 1.22 60 0 0.00 
7 Unakoti 52 3 5.77 82 0 0.00 
8 West Tripura 29 4 13.79 103 3 2.91 
Total for the State 539 19 3.53 584 21 3.60 
Financial Year 2023-24 
1 Sepahijala 169 2 1.18 122 0 0.00 
2 Khowai 87 0 0.00 67 0 0.00 
3 Dhalai 88 5 5.68 215 0 0.00 
4 Gomti 89 0 0.00 115 0 0.00 
5 South Tripura 51 0 0.00 131 0 0.00 
6 North Tripura 81 0 0.00 118 0 0.00 
7 Unakoti 58 1 1.72 53 1 1.89 
8 West Tripura 28 0 0.00 139 8 5.76 
Total for the State 651 8 1.23 960 9 0.94 
Note: Plantation works were included in Kutcha works where expenditure was ₹ five lakh or more  
 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
304
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 304 
Appendix 2.2.8 
Statement showing the detail of sanctioned posts, men in position and shortage of the 
State Resource Person, District Resource Persons and the Block Resource Persons 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.11.12 (vii)(a)} 
Name of the resource 
person 
Sanctioned 
strength 
Men in 
position Shortage Percentage 
of shortages 
SRP 1 0 1 100 
DRPs 36 16 20 56 
BRPs 116 48 68 59 
Source: Reply of the SAU 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
305
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 305 
Appendix 2.2.9 
Details of the Social Audit Inspection Reports test checked in audit in course of PA on 
MGNREGA for the period from 2019-20 to 2023-24. 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.11.12(vii)(b)} 
SI 
No 
Name of the 
GP/ VC Yea r 
Availability 
Minutes of 
entry 
meeting 
Availability of 
verification key 
records of works 
availability 
of 
measureme
nt sheet of 
works 
Copy of 
Gram 
Sabha 
meeting 
minutes 
Details of the 
persons present 
in Gram Sabha 
with full details 
viz. name, 
fathers name, 
etc. 
(Yes or No) 
1 
Dalucherra 
2020-21 No Blank and without 
signature Not found Yes No 
2 2021-22 Yes Blank and without 
signature Not found Yes No 
3 2022-23 Yes Blank and without 
signature Not found Yes No 
4 2023-24 Yes Without signature Without 
signature Yes No 
5 
SK Para 
2020-21 Yes Blank and without 
signature Not found Yes No 
6 2021-22 Yes Blank and without 
signature Not found Yes No 
7 
DEO RF 
2020-21 Yes Blank and without 
signature Not found Yes No 
8 2021-22 Yes Blank and without 
signature Not found Yes No 
9 2023-24 Yes Blank and without 
signature 
No 
Comment Yes No 
10 
Jagannathpur 
2020-21 Yes Blank and without 
signature Not found Yes No 
11 2021-22 Yes Blank and without 
signature Not found Yes No 
12 2022-23 Yes Blank and without 
signature Not found Yes No 
13 2023-24 Yes Blank and without 
signature Not found Yes No 
14 Jeolcharra 2020-21 Yes Blank and without 
signature Not found Yes No 
15 2023-24 Yes Without signature Not found Yes No 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
306
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 306 
Appendix 2.3.1 
List of 73 parameters required to be checked by State level laboratory as per 
WQMS framework 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.3.7.7 (i)} 
Sl 
No Parameters Parameter checked in 
State level laboratory 
Whether NABL 
accredited (Yes/ No) 
Physical Parameters  
1 Temperature  Yes Yes 
2 Colour  Yes Yes 
3 Odour  Yes Yes 
4 Taste  Yes Yes 
5 Turbidity  Yes Yes 
6 pH  Yes Yes 
Chemical Parameters  
7 TDS/ Elect. Conductivity  Yes Yes 
8 Total Alkalinity  Yes Yes 
9 Chloride  Yes Yes 
10 Fluoride Yes Yes 
11 Ammonia No NA 
12 Nitrate  Yes Yes 
13 Nitrite Yes No 
14 Sulphate  Yes Yes 
15 Silica  Yes No 
16 Potassium Yes No 
17 Boron Yes No 
18 Calcium (as Ca)  Yes Yes 
19 Magnesium (as Mg)  Yes Yes 
20 Total Hardness  Yes Yes 
21 Sulphide  Yes No 
22 Chloramines (as Cl2)  No NA 
Heavy Metals  
23 Iron Yes Yes 
24 Manganese Yes Yes 
25 Copper Yes No 
26 Total Chromium (as Cr) Yes No 
27 Cadmium Yes No 
28 Lead Yes No 
29 Nickel Yes No 
30 Total Arsenic (as As) Yes Yes 
31 Mercury Yes No 
32 Barium Yes No 
33 Zinc No NA 
34 Aluminium Yes No 
35 Selenium Yes No 
36 Silver Yes No 
37 Molybdenum (as Mo) Yes No 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
307
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 
307 
Appendix 2.3.1 (concld.) 
List of 73 parameters required to be checked by State level laboratory as per 
WQMS framework 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.3.7.7 (i)} 
Sl No Parameters Parameter checked in 
state level laboratory 
Whether NABL 
accredited (Yes/ No) 
Biological Contaminations  
38 Total coliform bacteria  Yes No 
39 E. coli/ Thermotolerant coliform bacteria Yes No 
Specific Parameters  
40 Total Pesticide Residue No NA 
41 Cyanide No NA 
42 Poly Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAH) No NA 
43 Free Residual Chlorine Yes Yes 
44 Poly chlorinated Biphenyls No NA 
45 N-Nitro-sodi-methylamine (NDMA) No NA 
46 Anionic Detergents (as MBAS) Yes No 
47 Oils & Grease No NA 
48 Dissolved Oxygen (DO) Yes Yes 
Biochemical Oxygen  
49 Demand (BOD) Yes No 
50 Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) Yes No 
51 Mineral oil Yes No 
52 Phenolic Compound (asC6H5OH) Yes No 
53 
Trihalomethanes 
a. Bromoform 
b. Dibromomethane 
c. Bromodichloromethane 
d. Chloroform 
No NA 
Individual Pesticide  
54 Alachlor No NA 
55 Atrazine No NA 
56 Aldrin/ Dieldrin No NA 
57 Alpha HCH No NA 
58 Beta HCH No NA 
59 Butachlor Yes No 
60 Chloropyriphos No NA 
61 Delta HCH No NA 
62 2, 4-Dichlorophenoxyactic acid No NA 
63 Dichlorodiphenytri- chloroethane (DDT) No NA 
64 Endosulfan (alpha, beta and sulphate) No NA 
65 Ethion Yes No 
66 Gamma–HCH (Lindane) No NA 
67 Isoproturon No NA 
68 Malathion Yes No 
69 Methyl parathion No NA 
70 Monocrotophos No NA 
71 Phorate No NA 
72 Uranium No NA 
73 Total Organic Carbon (TOC) No NA 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS)  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
308
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 308 
Appendix 2.3.2(A) 
Non-availability of laboratory infrastructure in State laboratory as well as 
laboratories in the sampled districts 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.3.7.7 (i)} 
Laboratory type Name of equipment required but not available/ lying non-functional 
in laboratories 
State level laboratory 
Vacuum Pump 
Hydride generator with all accessories 
Fume coup board,  Pressure pump 
Membrane filtration 
PCR machine 
Unakoti District 
District level laboratory, 
Unakoti District 
(also acting as Sub-
Divisional laboratory, 
Kumarghat with no 
separate facilities) 
Colour Comparator, Ion Meter 
Wet & dry thermometer 
Thermometer 
Bio Safety Cabinet 
Water Bath,  Colony Counter 
Membrane filtration assembly with vacuum pump 
Balance (separate from chemical division balance) 
Refrigerator (separate from chemical division refrigerator) 
Water Still 
Voltage Stabilizer/Inverter 
Heating Mantle 
Magnetic Stirrer,  Microscope 
Arsenic Testing Instrumentation 
DO meter 
Specific Ion meter along with electrodes (for fluoride) 
Fume coup board 
Auto burette and auto pipette 
Argon, Nitrogen, Hydrogen, Helium Gas cylinder 
Kjeldal distillation apparatus 
Pressure pump 
Centrifuge 
Redflux Apparatus/COD digester 
Sub-Division level 
laboratory, Kailashahar 
under Unakoti district 
Colour Comparator 
Turbidity Meter 
Wet & Dry thermometer 
Thermometer 
Spectrophotometer 
Ion Meter,  Bio Safety Cabinet 
Water Bath, Colony Counter 
Membrane filtration assembly with vacuum pump 
Balance (separate from chemical division balance) 
Refrigerator (separate from chemical division refrigerator) 
Water Still 
Voltage Stabilizer/ Inverters 
Heating Mantle,  Magnetic Stirrer 
Arsenic Testing Instrumentation,  DO Meter 
Specific Ion meter along with electrodes (for fluoride) 
Fume coup board 
Auto burette and auto pipette 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
309
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 309 
Appendix 2.3.2(A) (contd.) 
Non-availability of laboratory infrastructure in State laboratory as well as 
laboratories in the sampled districts 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.3.7.7 (i)} 
Laboratory type Name of equipment required but not available/ lying non-
functional in laboratories 
Sub-Division level 
laboratory, Pacherthal under 
Unakoti district 
Colour Comparator 
Wet & dry thermometer 
Thermometer, Ion Meter 
Bio Safety Cabinet, Water Bath 
Colony Counter 
Membrane filtration assembly with vacuum pump 
Balance (separate from chemical division balance) 
Refrigerator (separate from chemical division refrigerator) 
Water Still, Heating Mantle 
Magnetic stirrer 
UV laminar flow air chamber for bacteriological analysis 
Arsenic Testing Instrumentation 
DO Meter 
Specific Ion meter along with electrodes (for fluoride) 
Fume coup board 
Auto burette and auto pipette 
South Tripura District 
District level laboratory, 
South Tripura District 
(also acting as Sub-
Divisional laboratory, 
Belonia with no separate 
facilities) 
Ion Meter 
Bio Safety Cabinet 
Water Bath (44*C-45*C) 
Autoclave for disposal 
Colony counter 
Balance (separate from chemical division balance) 
Membrane filtration assembly with vacuum pump 
Water Still, Hot Plate 
Voltage Stabilizer/Inverters 
Heating Mantle 
Hot air oven,  Magnetic Stirrer 
Microscope 
UV laminar flow air chamber for bacteriological analysis 
Arsenic Testing Instrumentation 
DO meter 
Specific Ion meter along with electrodes (for fluoride) 
Fume coup board 
Auto burette and auto pipette 
Auto burette and auto pipette 
Argon, Nitrogen, Hydrogen, Helium Gas cylinder 
Kjeldal distillation apparatus 
Pressure pump 
Sub-Division level 
laboratory, Sabroom 
Ion Meter 
Bio Safety Cabinet 
Autoclave for disposal 
Colony counter 
Balance (separate from chemical division balance) 
Refrigerator (separate from chemical division refrigerator) 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
310
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 310 
Appendix 232(A) (concld.) 
Non-availability of laboratory infrastructure in State laboratory as well as 
laboratories in the sampled districts 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.3.7.7 (i)} 
Laboratory type Name of equipment required but not available/ lying non-
functional in laboratories 
Sub-Division level laboratory, Santir 
bazar 
Balance 
Wet & dry thermometer 
Ion Meter 
Bio Safety Cabinet 
Colony counter 
Membrane filtration assembly with vacuum pump 
Balance (separate from Chemical division balance) 
Water still 
Heating Mantle 
Magnetic stirrer 
UV laminar flow air chamber for bacteriological analysis 
Arsenic Testing Instrumentation 
Specific Ion meter along with electrodes (for fluoride) 
Fume coup board 
Auto burette and auto pipette 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) and the concerned EEs in the sampled districts  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
311
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 311 
Appendix 2.3.2 (B) 
Non-availability of required manpower in State level laboratory as well as 
laboratories in the sampled districts 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.3.7.7(i)} 
Suggestive guideline for staff required for various level of 
laboratories as per WQMS Framework Availability of manpower/ men-in-position Laboratory 
type Human Resource (HR) position No. of HR 
required 
State level 
Chief Chemist/ Chief Water Analyst 01 
Only 3 Research Assistants, 1 Chemist, 1 
Laboratory Attendant 
Senior Chemist/Senior Water 
Analyst/Senior Microbiologist 
01 
Chemist/Water Analyst 02 
Microbiologist/bacteriologist 01 
Laboratory Assistant 03 
Data Entry Operator 02 
Laboratory Attendant 02 
Field Assistant (task/need based) 02 
Total 14 5 
District 
level 
Chemist/Water Analyst 01 Only 1 Research 
Assistant, 1 Chemist, 1 
Laboratory attendant and 
1 Data Entry operator 
available at Unakoti 
District laboratory which 
is also acting as Sub-
Divisional Laboratory, 
Kumarghat with the 
same manpower. 
Only 1 Sr. 
Research Assistant, 
1 Chemist and 1 
Data Entry 
Operator available 
at South Tripura 
District laboratory 
which is also acting 
as Sub-Divisional 
Laboratory, 
Belonia with the 
same manpower. 
Microbiologist/bacteriologist 01 
Laboratory Assistant 02 
Data Entry Operator 01 
Laboratory Attendant 01 
Field Assistant (task/need based) 
02 
Total 08 04 03 
Sub-
divisional/ 
Block level 
Junior Chemist 01 Only 1 Research 
Assistant and 1 Chemist 
available in Kailashahar 
Sub divisional 
laboratory. 
Only 1 Research 
Assistant available in 
Pecharthal Sub 
divisional laboratory. 
Only 1 Jr. Research 
Assistant, 1 
Chemist and 1 Data 
Entry Operator 
available in 
Santirbazar Sub-
divisional 
laboratory.  
Only 1 Sr. 
Research Assistant 
and 1 Chemist 
available in 
Sabroom Sub-
divisional 
laboratory. 
Junior Microbiologist 01 
Laboratory Assistant 01 
Data Entry Operator 01 
Laboratory Attendant 01 
Field Assistant (task/need based) 
01 
Total 
12 
(for two Sub 
Divisional 
laboratories) 
03 05 
Mobile 
Junior Chemist/Microbiologist 01 Not available under Unakoti and South Tripura 
District. Field Assistant (task/need based) 01 
Driver 01 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) and the concerned EEs in the sampled districts  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
312
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 312 
Appendix 2.3.3 
Status of SWTP in whole state 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.3.7.11(i)} 
Name of SWTP Completed during FY Ongoing 
SWTP at Uttar Dasda 2021-22  
SWTP at Fatikroy 2022-23  
SWTP at Kakraban 2023-24  
SWTP at Srimantapur 2023-24  
SWTP at Jamjuri  Ongoing 
SWTP at Machmara  Ongoing 
SWTP at Kalyanpur  Ongoing 
Source: Information furnished by the CE, PWD (DWS) 
 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
313
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 313 
Appendix 2.3.4 
Details of incomplete innovative schemes (as of September 2024) under two sampled districts 
{Reference: Paragraph: 2.3.7.11(iv)} 
Sl. 
No. 
location of the innovative 
scheme 
Stipulated 
date of 
completion as 
per contract 
FHTC 
targeted 
(in Nos.) 
FHTC 
provided 
(in Nos.) 
Total expenditure 
incurred 
(in ₹) 
Reason for non-completion 
Unakoti District (Kumarghat DWS Division) 
1 Innovative scheme at North 
Hiracherra 22-08-2021 145 0 25,83,118 Unauthorised delay by contractor 
2 Innovative scheme at Kalaigiri 02-08-2023 325 325 2,26,26,889 Unauthorised delay by contractor 
3 Innovative scheme at 
Noonacherra 31-07-2023 210 35 1,41,99,429 Delay due to change in site and redesigning of 
scheme components 
4 Innovative scheme at Darchawi 04-07-2023 80 0 1,85,10,529 
Delay in handing over of clear site by concerned 
Panchayat, non-availability of electric line at 
construction site to support execution of work, 
transformer installed but service connection not 
provided 
5 Innovative scheme at Beha Kr. 
Para 09-04-2023 75 0 2,15,15,472 
Delay in handing over of clear site by concerned 
Panchayat, non-availability of electric line at 
construction site to support execution of work 
6 Innovative scheme at Pajendra 
Para 14-07-2023 90 0 64,60,328 
Delay in handing over of clear site by concerned 
Panchayat, non-availability of electric line at 
construction site to support execution of work 
7 Innovative scheme at Subal Para 02-07-2023 130 0 29,91,316 
Raw motor pump house, jack well, aerator, 
sedimentation tank, HRF cum SSF, CWR 
completed, transformer installed but service 
connection not provided 
8 Innovative scheme at 
Ramdulapara 31-07-2023 100 97 97,71,115 
Raw motor pump house, jack well, aerator, 
sedimentation tank, HRF cum SSF, CWR 
completed, transformer installed but service 
connection not provided 
Total  1,155 457 9,86,58,196  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
314
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 314 
Appendix 2.3.4 (contd.) 
Details of incomplete innovative schemes (as of September 2024) under two sampled districts 
{Reference: Paragraph: 2.3.7.11(iv)} 
Sl. 
No. location of the innovative scheme 
Stipulated date 
of completion 
as per contract 
FHTC 
targeted 
(in Nos.) 
FHTC 
provided 
(in Nos.) 
Total 
expenditure 
incurred 
(in ₹) 
Reason for non-completion 
South Tripura District (Sabroom DWS Division) 
1 Innovative scheme at Kushan Chandra Para, 
Harbatali VC 16-07-2024 NA 0 0 
Delay in identifying suitable and available 
location in a hilly terrain during the initial 
phase, poor connectivity to the construction 
site and also delayed due to construction of 
a retaining wall because of sandy soil to 
ensure structural stability. 
2 Innovative type mini SWTP at Manoranjan 
Para 04-02-2024 NA 0 55,00,000 
Initial delay in handing over of clear suitable 
site by concerned Panchayat, poor 
connectivity to the construction site, and 
operations hindered due to consistent low 
voltage issues. 
3 Innovative type masonry well at Bijoy Para-I 
05-05-2022 
15 0 
29,89,797 Delay in site possession due to non-availability 
of suitable site in time 
4 Innovative type masonry well at Bijoy Para-
II 15 0 
5 Innovative type masonry well at Banarai 
Para-I 15 0 
6 Innovative type masonry well at Assam Para 
26-05-2022 
10 0 
46,00,000 Delay in site possession due to non-availability 
of suitable site in time 
7 Innovative type masonry well at Rasik Ch. 
Para-I 10 10 
8 Innovative type masonry well at Rasik Ch. 
Para-II 15 15 
9 Water supply scheme at Paschim Takka 
Tulsi-2 18-03-2022 48 0 7,00,000 Delay in site possession due to non-availability 
of suitable site in time 
10 Water supply scheme at Paschim Takka-1 18-03-2022 50 0 12,00,000 Delay in site possession due to non-availability 
of suitable site in time 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
315
Appendices 
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 315 
Appendix 2.3.4 (concld.) 
Details of incomplete innovative schemes (as of September 2024) under two sampled districts 
{Reference: Paragraph: 2.3.7.11(iv)} 
Sl. 
No. location of the innovative scheme 
Stipulated date 
of completion 
as per contract 
FHTC 
targeted 
(in Nos.) 
FHTC 
provided 
(in Nos.) 
Total 
expenditure 
incurred 
(in ₹) 
Reason for non-completion 
South Tripura District (Sabroom DWS Division) 
11 Innovative scheme at Jagatram Para, Betaga 
VC 01-05-2024 NA 0 43,00,000 
Initial delay in identifying suitable site in 
that remote and rugged terrain coupled with 
poor connectivity to the site. 
12 Innovative scheme at PurboTakka, 
PurboTakka VC 01-07-2024 NA 0 70,00,000 
Major landslide occurred over the entire 
premise of the plant due to heavy rainfall in 
August 2024 which also caused significant 
damage to the access routes. 
13 Innovative type masonry well at Amlighat 
Meru Para 21-04-2024 NA 0 21,00,000 Inordinate delay by the agency. 
14 Masonry well at Amlighat Meru-I NA 0 Inordinate delay by the agency. 
Total  178 25 2,83,89,797  
Source: Information furnished by Kumarghat and Sabroom DWS Divisions 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
316
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 316 
Appendix 2.3.5 
Details of non-functional Innovative schemes (as of September 2024) under Sabroom 
DWS Division, South Tripura District 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.3.7.11(iv)} 
Sl. 
No. Location Present Status 
Total 
expenditure 
incurred as per 
IMIS 
(₹ in lakh) 
Reason for 
schemes/ 
works lying 
non-
functional 
Total No. of 
FHTC 
provided 
from each 
scheme 
1 Innovative type mini SWTP at 
Tir Kumar Para, Magroom VC 
Physically 
completed, 
unable to 
operate 
smoothly due to 
power problem 
74.62 
low voltage of 
power and non-
availability of 
three phase 
connections 
16 
2 Innovative type mini SWTP at 
Chintaram Para, Magroom VC 34.48 13 
3 Innovative type mini SWTP at 
Gunadhan Para, Bagmara VC 83.29 21 
4 Innovative type mini SWTP at 
Banarai Para, Magroom VC 67.38 63 
5 Innovative type masonry well at 
Birdhan Para-I, Bagmara VC 17.02 15 
6 Innovative type masonry well at 
Birdhan ParaII, Bagmara VC 17.07 9 
Total  293.86  137 
Source: Information furnished by EE, Sabroom DWS Division 
 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
317
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 317 
Appendix 4.1.1 
Summarised financial position and working results of Government companies and Statutory Corporations as per their latest finalised 
financial statements/accounts (2023-24) 
(Reference: Paragraphs 4.1.2.1, 4.1.6, 4.1.9, 4.1.9.2, 4.1.9.3 and 4.1.10) 
(Figures in columns (5) to (12) are ₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Sector/ name of 
the Company 
Period of 
Accounts 
Year in 
which 
accounts 
finalised 
Paid-up 
Capital 
@ 
Loans 
outstanding 
at the end 
of year 
Accumulated 
Profit (+)/ 
Loss (-) 
Free 
Reserve 
& 
Surplus 
Turnover 
Net 
profit 
(+)/ loss 
(-) 
Net 
impact of 
Audit 
Comments 
Capital 
Employed 
Return 
on 
capital 
employed 
Percentage 
return on 
capital 
employed 
Manpower 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
A. Working Government Companies            
AGRICULTURE & ALLIED             
1 
Tripura Forest 
Development & 
Plantation 
Corporation 
Limited 
2021-22 2024-25 9.20 0.00 109.13 0.00 42.24 0.20 3.04 118.33 0.04 0.03 127.00 
2 
Tripura 
Horticulture 
Corporation 
Limited 
2016-17 2024-25 4.74 0.00 -4.38 0.00 26.79 -0.54 0.86 0.36 -0.54 -150.00 50.00 
3 
Tripura Tea 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited  
2022-23 2024-25 64.45 0.00 -34.11 0.00 11.00 -4.97 0.00 30.34 -4.97 -16.38 982.00 
4 
Tripura 
Rehabilitation 
Plantation 
Corporation 
Limited 
2020-21 2023-24 8.85 0.00 1.78 0.00 18.69 -4.22 0.22 10.63 -4.22 -39.70 131.00 
5 
Tripura Nature 
Trails and Resort 
Limited 
2022-23 2024-25 10.00 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.00 0.06 0.00 10.06 0.08 0.80 0.00 
Sector wise total   97.24 0.00 72.48 0.00 98.72 -9.47 4.12 169.72 -9.61 -5.66 1,290.00 
@ Paid up capital includes share application money 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
318
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 318 
Appendix 4.1.1 (contd.) 
Summarised financial position and working results of Government companies and Statutory Corporations as per their latest finalised 
financial statements/accounts (2023-24) 
(Reference: Paragraphs 4.1.2.1, 4.1.6, 4.1.9, 4.1.9.2, 4.1.9.3 and 4.1.10) 
(Figures in columns (5) to (12) are ₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Sector/ name of 
the Company 
Period of 
Accounts 
Year in 
which 
accounts 
finalised 
Paid-up 
Capital 
@ 
Loans 
outstanding 
at the end 
of year 
Accumulated 
Profit (+)/ 
Loss (-) 
Free 
Reserve 
& 
Surplus 
Turnover 
Net 
profit 
(+)/ loss 
(-) 
Net 
impact of 
Audit 
Comments 
Capital 
Employed 
Return 
on 
capital 
employed 
Percentage 
return on 
capital 
employed 
Manpower 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
FINANCING                           
6 
Tripura Industrial 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited 
2022-23 2024-25 16.17 128.41 -35.44 0.00 6.21 -10.03 0.38 109.14 -8.88 -8.14 51.00 
Sector wise total   16.17 128.41 -35.44 0.00 6.21 -10.03 0.38 109.14 -8.88 -8.14 51.00 
MANUFACTURING                         
7 Tripura Jute Mills 
Limited  
2022-23 2023-24 410.76 1.05 -402.79 0.00 0.00 -11.82 0.09 9.02 -11.82 -131.04 82.00 
8 
Tripura Small 
Industries 
Corporation 
Limited  
2022-23 2024-25 87.52 0.21 -80.43 0.00 15.77 -2.83 4.96 7.30 -2.83 -38.77 57.00 
Sector wise total   498.28 1.26 -483.22 0.00 15.77 -14.65 5.05 16.32 -14.65 -89.77 139.00 
POWER                           
9 
Tripura State 
Electricity 
Corporation 
Limited  
2023-24 2024-25 665.76 735.84 -1170.80 61.07 1,690.68 -324.19 3.21 291.87 -290.66 -99.59 2,783.00 
10 
Tripura Power 
Generation 
Limited 
2023-24 2024-25 0.10 0.00 -0.03 0.00 0.00 -0.01 0.09 0.07 -0.01 -14.29 0.00 
11 
Tripura Power 
Transmission 
Limited 
2023-24 2024-25 0.01 0.00 -0.01 0.00 0.00 -0.01 0.00 0.00 -0.01 Not 
workable 
0.00 
Sector wise total   665.87 735.84 -1,170.84 61.07 1,690.68 -324.21 3.30 291.94 -290.68 -99.57 2,783.00 
@ Paid up capital includes share application money  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
319
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 319 
Appendix 4.1.1 (contd.) 
Summarised financial position and working results of Government companies and Statutory Corporations as per their latest finalised 
financial statements/accounts (2023-24) 
(Reference: Paragraphs 4.1.2.1, 4.1.6, 4.1.9, 4.1.9.2, 4.1.9.3 and 4.1.10) 
(Figures in columns (5) to (12) are ₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Sector/ name of 
the Company 
Period of 
Accounts 
Year in 
which 
accounts 
finalised 
Paid-up 
Capital 
@ 
Loans 
outstanding 
at the end 
of year 
Accumulated 
Profit (+)/ 
Loss (-) 
Free 
Reserve 
& 
Surplus 
Turnover 
Net 
profit 
(+)/ loss 
(-) 
Net 
impact of 
Audit 
Comments 
Capital 
Employed 
Return 
on 
capital 
employed 
Percentage 
return on 
capital 
employed 
Manpower 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
SERVICES                           
12 
Tripura 
Handloom and 
Handicrafts 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited  
2022-23 2024-25 190.97 0.00 -164.92 0.00 7.81 -6.55 3.23 26.05 -6.54 -25.11 109.00 
13 
Tripura Urban 
Transport 
Company Limited  
2022-23 2024-25 0.90 0.00 2.36 0.00 0.44 0.31 0.03 3.26 0.38 11.66 2.00 
14 
Tripura Tourism 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited 
2021-22 2023-24 13.67 0.00 -1.72 0.00 4.50 0.35 0.00 11.95 0.39 3.26 90.00 
15 Agartala Smart 
City Limited 
2022-23 2024-25 0.10 0.00 -0.35 0.00 0.00 -0.11 0.43 -0.25 -0.12 Not 
workable 
28.00 
Sector wise total   205.64 0.00 -164.63 0.00 12.75 -6.00 3.69 41.01 -5.89 -14.36 229.00 
MISCELLANEOUS                         
16 
Tripura Natural 
Gas Company 
Limited 
2023-24 2024-25 30.00 0.00 206.10 0.00 282.22 40.91 0.00 236.10 50.09 21.22 15.00 
Sector wise total   30.00 0.00 206.10 0.00 282.22 40.91 0.00 236.10 50.09 21.22 15.00 
Total A (All sector wise working 
Government companies) 
  1,513.20 865.51 -1,575.55 61.07 2,106.35 -323.45 16.54 864.23 -279.62 -32.35 4,507.00 
@ Paid up capital includes share application money  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
320
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 320 
Appendix 4.1.1 (concld.) 
Summarised financial position and working results of Government companies and Statutory Corporations as per their latest finalised 
financial statements/accounts (2023-24) 
(Reference: Paragraphs 4.1.2.1, 4.1.6, 4.1.9, 4.1.9.2, 4.1.9.3 and 4.1.10) 
(Figures in columns (5) to (12) are ₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Sector/ name of 
the Company 
Period of 
Accounts 
Year in 
which 
accounts 
finalised 
Paid-up 
Capital 
@ 
Loans 
outstanding 
at the end 
of year 
Accumulated 
Profit (+)/ 
Loss (-) 
Free 
Reserve 
& 
Surplus 
Turnover 
Net 
profit 
(+)/ loss 
(-) 
Net 
impact of 
Audit 
Comments 
Capital 
Employed 
Return 
on 
capital 
employed 
Percentage 
return on 
capital 
employed 
Manpower 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
B. Working Statutory corporation                       
SERVICES                           
1 
Tripura Road 
Transport 
Corporation 
2019-20 2022-23 163.96 0.25 -288.04 0.00 1.47 0.52 4.85 -123.83 0.52 Not 
workable 
133.00 
Sector wise total   163.96 0.25 -288.04 0.00 1.47 0.52 4.85 -123.83 0.52 Not 
workable 
133.00 
Total B (All sector wise working 
Statutory Corporation) 
  163.96 0.25 -288.04 0.00 1.47 0.52 4.85 -123.83 0.52 Not 
workable 
133.00 
Grand Total (A+B)   1,677.16 865.76 -1,863.59 61.07 2,107.82 -322.93 21.39 740.40 -279.10 -37.70 4,640.00 
C. Non working Government companies           
FINANCING                           
1 Tripura State 
Bank Limited 
Non functional and in the process of liquidation. 
Sector wise total   0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Total C (All sector wise non 
working Government company) 
  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Grand Total (A+B+C)   1,677.16 865.76 -1,863.59 61.07 2,107.82 -322.93 21.39 740.40 -279.10 -37.70 4,640.00 
@ Paid up capital includes share application money 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
321
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 321 
Appendix 4.1.2 
Statement showing Rate of Real Return on Government Investment 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.10) 
(₹ in crore) 
Financial 
Year 
Present 
value of 
total 
investment 
at the 
beginning 
of the year 
Equity 
infused by 
the State 
government 
during the 
year 
Net interest 
free loan 
given by the 
State 
Government 
during the 
year 
Interest 
free loan 
converted 
into 
equity 
during 
the year 
Grants/ 
subsidies 
given by the 
State 
Government 
for 
operational 
and 
administrative 
expenditure 
Disinvestment 
by the State 
Government 
during the 
year at face 
value 
Total 
investment 
during the 
year 
Total 
investment 
at the end 
of the year 
Average 
rate of 
interest 
Present 
value of 
total 
investment 
at the end 
of the year 
Minimum 
expected 
return to 
recover 
cost  of 
funds for 
the year 
Total 
earnings/ 
profit 
after tax 
(PAT) 
for the 
year 
A B C D E F G H I J K= I x 
(1+J/100) 
L= I 
x(J/100) M 
Upto 
1999-
2000 
0.00 156.02 2.58  0.00 0.00 0.00 158.60 158.60  12.25 178.03 19.43  -10.90 
2000-01 178.03 20.44 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 20.44 198.47 10.82 219.94 21.47 -11.00 
2001-02 219.94 25.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 25.33 245.27 10.35 270.66 25.39 -25.62 
2002-03 270.66 15.53 9.13 0.00 0.00 0.00 24.66 295.32 7.08 316.23 20.91 -8.52 
2003-04 316.23 18.35 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 18.35 334.58 9.92 367.77 33.19 -8.45 
2004-05 367.77 22.99 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 22.99 390.76 9.17 426.59 35.83 -18.99 
2005-06 426.59 23.40 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 23.40 449.99 8.56 488.51 38.52 -19.11 
2006-07 488.51 36.22 11.04 0.00 45.00 0.00 92.26 580.77 8.46 629.90 49.13 -16.33 
2007-08 629.90 29.07 4.78 0.00 50.00 0.00 83.85 713.75 8.27 772.78 59.03 -9.50 
2008-09 772.78 31.13 30.50 0.00 28.06 0.00 89.69 862.47 8.00 931.47 69.00 -19.84 
2009-10 931.47 25.79 16.50 0.00 139.56 0.00 181.85 1,113.32 7.98 1,202.16 88.84 -1.97 
2010-11 1,202.16 13.27 0.00 0.00 108.94 0.00 122.21 1,324.37 8.88 1,441.97 117.60 -4.36 
2011-12 1,441.97 27.29 75.85 0.00 64.05 0.00 167.19 1,609.16 8.41 1,744.49 135.33 -104.98 
2012-13 1,744.49 30.94 0.00 0.00 63.43 0.00 94.37 1,838.86 8.44 1,994.06 155.20 -103.46 
2013-14 1,994.06 41.27 0.00 0.00 110.09 0.00 151.36 2,145.42 8.53 2,328.43 183.00 -137.51 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
322
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 322 
Appendix 4.1.2 (concld.) 
Statement showing Rate of Real Return on Government Investment 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.10) 
(₹ in crore) 
Financial 
Year 
Present 
value of 
total 
investment 
at the 
beginning 
of the year 
Equity 
infused by 
the State 
Government 
during the 
year 
Net interest 
free loan 
given by the 
State 
Government 
during the 
year 
Interest 
free loan 
converted 
into 
equity 
during 
the year 
Grants/ 
subsidies 
given by the 
State 
Government 
for 
operational 
and 
administrative 
expenditure 
Disinvestment 
by the State 
Government 
during the 
year at face 
value 
Total 
investment 
during the 
year 
Total 
investment 
at the end 
of the year 
Average 
rate of 
interest 
Present 
value of 
total 
investment 
at the end 
of the year 
Minimum 
expected 
return to 
recover 
cost  of 
funds for 
the year 
Total 
earnings/ 
profit 
after tax 
(PAT) 
for the 
year 
A B C D E F G H I J K= I x 
(1+J/100) 
L= I 
x(J/100) M 
2014-15 2,328.43 38.88 12.00 0.00 128.31 0.00 179.19 2,507.62 13.18 2,838.12 330.50 -139.06 
2015-16 2,838.12 38.48 0.00 0.00 88.79 0.00 127.27 2,965.39 12.95 3,349.41 384.02 -148.41 
2016-17 3,349.41 60.74 13.25 0.00 87.28 0.00 161.27 3,510.68 7.50 3,773.98 263.30 -129.39 
2017-18 3,773.98 30.53 0.00 0.00 77.35 0.00 107.88 3,881.86 7.50 4,173.00 291.14 -201.89 
2018-19 4,173.00 34.81 0.00 0.00 70.77 0.00 105.58 4,278.58 7.16 4,584.93 306.35 -218.15 
2019-20 4,584.93 49.89 0.00 0.00 83.82 0.00 133.71 4,718.64 7.89 5,090.94 372.30 -93.57 
2020-21 5,090.94 52.34 0.00 0.00 71.18 0.00 123.52 5,214.46 7.67 5,614.41 399.95 -108.99 
2021-22 5,614.41 46.86 0.00 0.00 120.71 0.00 167.57 5,781.98 7.50 6,215.63 433.65 -141.22 
2022-23 6,215.63 43.15 100.00 0.00 160.70 0.00 303.85 6,519.48 7.55 7,011.70 492.22 -320.14 
2023-24 7,011.70 63.08 100.00 0.00 113.00 0.00 276.08 7,287.78 7.44 7,829.99 542.21 -363.83 
Total       2,962.47      
 
Year Total earnings/ 
loss in 2023-24 
Investment by the State Government 
as per total of the column H above 
Return on State Government 
investment on the basis of historical 
value 
Present value of State 
Government investment at 
the end of 2023-24 
Real return on State Government 
investment considering the present value 
of investments 
  A B C D E 
2023-24 -363.84 2,962.47 -12.28 7,829.99 -4.65 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
323
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 323 
Appendix 5.2.1 
Statement showing vehicle dealers functioning without renewal of trade license 
under DTO, West Tripura 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.10.2(ii)} 
Name of the dealer Licence 
valid up to 
Renewal 
fee (in ₹) 
Fine due Fine 
amount 
realisable 
(in ₹) 
Total 
(in ₹) 
Period in 
months (up to 
15 August 24) 
Rate/ 
30 days 
(in ₹) 
Eastern Auto Mobiles, AA 
Road Motorstand, 
Agartala 
23-08-2023 5,000 11 500  5,500 10,500 
M/S Sree Maa Motors, 
Thakurpalli road, Agartala 23-08-2023 5,000 11 500  5,500 10,500 
Jain Auto Agency, Mora 
Chowmuhani, Agartala 08-04-2024 5,000 4 500  2,000 7,000 
Jain Udyog, Milanchakra, 
Agartala 12-08-2022 5,000 24 500  12,000 17,000 
M/s Panna Motor, 
Chandrapur, Agartala 24-08-2023 5,000 11 500  5,500 10,500 
M/s Progressive 
Automobiles Pvt. Ltd, 
Nagicherra, Agartala 
23-02-2024 5,000 5 500  2,500 7,500 
Sengupta Bajaj, 
Banmalipur, Agartala 07-04-2024 5,000 4 500  2,000 7,000 
Tarasankar Motor Pvt. 
Ltd., Agartala (LMV & 
HMV) 
23-02-2024 5,000 5 500  2,500 7,500 
Tarasankar Motor Pvt. 
Ltd., Agartala (3-Wheeler) 20-06-2024 5,000 1 500  500 5,500 
Jain Udyog, A.D. Nagar, 
Agartala 08-04-2024 5,000 4 500  2,000 7,000 
Jain Udyog, Ashram 
Chowmuhani, Agartala 08-04-2024 5,000 4 500  2,000 7,000 
S.R. Motors, Amtali 
jutemill, Agartala 02-11-2023 5,000 9 500  4,500 9,500 
Total 1,06,500 
Source: Information as furnished by JTC, West Tripura 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
324
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 324 
Appendix 5.2.2 
Statement showing collection at DTO, Dhalai and delay in deposit of revenue into Government Account  
{Reference:  Paragraph 5.2.10.11(iii)} 
Month/Year Collection 
from 
Collection up 
to  
Accumulation 
period (in 
days) 
Amount 
Collected  
(in ₹) 
Deposited in 
Government 
Account/ 
Treasury 
Delay in deposit 
(in days) 
Overall delay 
range up to  
(in days) 
March 2020 27-02-2020 20-03-2020 22 40,07,760 21-03-2020 1 23 
20-03-2020 31-03-2020 12 9,59,248 28-04-2020 28 40 
March 2021 05-02-2021 16-03-2021 12 52,44,964 17-03-2021 1 13 
17-03-2021 31-03-2021 15 24,77,288 03-04-2021 3 18 
March 2022 
15-01-2022 03-03-2022 20 54,45,262 04-03-2022 1 21 
04-03-2022 09-03-2022 6 10,58,297 10-03-2022 1 7 
10-03-2022 19-03-2022 10 10,41,965 21-03-2022 12 22 
19-03-2022 30-03-2022 12 11,81,897 31-03-2022 1 13 
31-03-2022 07-05-2022 38 50,33,591 10-05-2022 3 41 
March 2023 22-02-2023 30-03-2023 38 54,59,287 30-03-2023 0 38 
31-03-2023 06-06-2023 68 89,03,557 07-06-2023 1 69 
March 2024 17-10-2023 28-03-2024 164 2,91,61,660 30-03-2024 2 166 
Source: Records as maintained at DTO, Dhalai and report of e-GRAS, Tripura 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
325
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 325 
Appendix 5.2.3 
Statement showing collection at DTO, North Tripura and delay in deposit of revenue into Government Account  
{Reference:  Paragraph 5.2.10.11(iii)} 
Challan 
No. Challan date Particulars Scroll 
No. 
Challan amount  
(in ₹) 
Treasury 
Voucher No. 
Deposited to 
Govt./ Treasury 
Delay in deposit  
(In days) 
1001 19-03-2020 Fine Money 1-33 15,500 15 12-05-2020 54 
1026 21-03-2020 Licence Fee 1-33 7,900 7 02-04-2020 12 
1032 24-03-2020 Road Tax 1-71 90,176 111 18-07-2020 116 
1033 24-03-2020 Registration Fee 1-34 20,850 87 26-06-2020 94 
976 09-03-2021 Road Tax 1-186 1,23,466 917 19-03-2021 10 
977 09-03-2021 Registration Fee 1-173 44,250 912 19-03-2021 10 
978 09-03-2021 Road Tax 1-234 57,802 973 31-03-2021 22 
844 14-03-2022 Registration Fee 1-80 2,23,100 760 28-03-2022 14 
March 2024 
1202 30-03-2024* Road Tax 246-3 38,97,747 838 31-03-2024 1 
1203 30-03-2024* Other Fees 246-6 16,84,612 841 31-03-2024 1 
1204 30-03-2024* Other Fees 246-5 7,25,889 840 31-03-2024 1 
1205 30-03-2024* Fine Money 246-4 94,760 839 31-03-2024 1 
Source: Records maintained at DTO, North and Treasury records 
* Challan was generated against cumulative revenue collected for 15 days ( i.e. 15 March 2024 to 29 March 2024) 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
326
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 326 
Appendix 5.2.4 
Statement showing collection at DTO, West Tripura and delay in deposit of revenue 
into Government Account 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.10.11(iii)} 
Challan 
No. Challan date Particulars Challan 
amount (₹) 
Treasury 
Voucher 
No. 
Date of deposit Delay  
(in days) 
1927 05-03-2021 Registration Fee 33,528 1730 17-03-2021 12 
1951 05-03-2021 Registration Fee 78,414 1918 30-03-2021 25 
1982 10-03-2021 Registration Fee 72,147 1897 26-03-2021 16 
1983 10-03-2021 Registration Fee 98,207 1901 26-03-2021 16 
1984 10-03-2021 Registration Fee 98,207 1900 26-03-2021 16 
1985 10-03-2021 Registration Fee 98,207 1899 26-03-2021 16 
1986 10-03-2021 Registration Fee 98,207 1898 26-03-2021 16 
1987 10-03-2021 Registration Fee 98,207 1902 26-03-2021 16 
1999 10-03-2021 Road Tax 5,200 1858 22-03-2021 12 
2000 10-03-2021 Road Tax 5,200 1859 22-03-2021 12 
2020 10-03-2021 Registration Fee 42,544 1850 22-03-2021 12 
2026 10-03-2021 Registration Fee 54,249 1857 22-03-2021 12 
2055 10-03-2021 Registration Fee 52,149 1856 22-03-2021 12 
2077 10-03-2021 Registration Fee 40,248 1841 22-03-2021 12 
2078 10-03-2021 Registration Fee 54,249 1843 22-03-2021 12 
2079 10-03-2021 Registration Fee 67,858 1842 22-03-2021 12 
2080 10-03-2021 Registration Fee 42,940 1844 22-03-2021 12 
2137 17-03-2021 Registration Fee 78,440 1911 30-03-2021 13 
1769 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 59,373 1488 18-03-2022 10 
1770 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 31,216 1489 18-03-2022 10 
1771 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 45,117 1490 18-03-2022 10 
1772 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 51,758 1491 18-03-2022 10 
1773 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 53,258 1492 18-03-2022 10 
1774 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 55,836 1493 18-03-2022 10 
1775 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 58,535 1494 18-03-2022 10 
1776 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 43,125 1495 18-03-2022 10 
1777 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 30,662 1496 18-03-2022 10 
1778 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 53,258 1463 19-03-2022 11 
1779 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 44,842 1455 19-03-2022 11 
1780 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 58,535 1465 19-03-2022 11 
1781 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 52,583 1472 19-03-2022 11 
1782 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 53,258 1464 19-03-2022 11 
1783 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 59,373 1468 19-03-2022 11 
1784 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 45,117 1469 19-03-2022 11 
1785 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 58,535 1470 19-03-2022 11 
1786 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 53,416 1473 19-03-2022 11 
1787 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 45,117 1454 19-03-2022 11 
1788 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 33,936 1456 19-03-2022 11 
1789 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 45,117 1471 19-03-2022 11 
1790 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 55,626 1458 19-03-2022 11 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
327
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 327 
Appendix 5.2.4 (contd.) 
Statement showing collection at DTO, West Tripura and delay in deposit of revenue 
into Government Account 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.10.11(iii)} 
Challan 
No. Challan date Particulars Challan 
amount (₹) TV No. TV date Delay  
(in days) 
1791 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 53,258 1462 19-03-2022 11 
1792 08-03-2022 Registration Fee 33,936 1457 19-03-2022 11 
2196 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 67,182 1922 23-03-2023 16 
2197 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 1,00,501 1895 23-03-2023 16 
2198 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 51,852 1918 23-03-2023 16 
2199 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 51,852 1915 23-03-2023 16 
2200 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 54,771 1919 23-03-2023 16 
2201 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 54,762 1920 23-03-2023 16 
2202 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 54,771 1921 23-03-2023 16 
2203 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 54,771 1893 23-03-2023 16 
2204 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 57,382 1900 23-03-2023 16 
2205 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 51,922 1894 23-03-2023 16 
2206 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 67,444 1901 23-03-2023 16 
2207 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 74,182 1897 23-03-2023 16 
2208 07-Mar-2023 Registration Fee 1,01,161 1896 23-03-2023 16 
2209 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 54,771 1898 23-03-2023 16 
2210 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 54,771 1899 23-03-2023 16 
2211 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 42,792 1916 23-03-2023 16 
2212 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 33,102 1917 23-03-2023 16 
2213 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 73,832 1911 23-03-2023 16 
2214 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 74,182 1908 23-03-2023 16 
2215 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 66,032 1909 23-03-2023 16 
2216 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 1,16,548 1910 23-03-2023 16 
2217 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 91,448 1905 23-03-2023 16 
2218 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 1,32,468 1906 23-03-2023 16 
2219 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 54,232 1907 23-03-2023 16 
2220 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 60,794 1902 23-03-2023 16 
2221 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 63,822 1903 23-03-2023 16 
2222 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 45,102 1904 23-03-2023 16 
2223 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 68,232 1912 23-03-2023 16 
2224 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 72,192 1913 23-03-2023 16 
2225 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 1,06,761 1914 23-03-2023 16 
2226 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 1,08,261 1993 23-03-2023 17 
2227 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 55,742 1996 23-03-2023 17 
2228 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 51,922 1992 23-03-2023 17 
2229 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 1,28,068 1988 23-03-2023 17 
2230 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 55,912 2077 23-03-2023 21 
2231 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 67,042 1989 23-03-2023 17 
2232 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 57,382 1995 23-03-2023 17 
2233 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 60,794 1987 23-03-2023 17 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
328
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 328 
Appendix 5.2.4 (contd.) 
Statement showing collection at DTO, West Tripura and delay in deposit of revenue 
into Government Account 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.10.11(iii)} 
Challan 
No. Challan date Particulars Challan 
amount (₹) TV No. TV date Delay  
(in days) 
2234 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 67,444 1994 24-03-2023 17 
2235 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 54,771 2007 24-03-2023 17 
2236 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 57,382 1990 24-03-2023 17 
2237 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 67,322 1991 24-03-2023 17 
2238 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 3,500 1961 24-03-2023 17 
2239 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 3,500 1963 24-03-2023 17 
2240 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 3,500 1962 24-03-2023 17 
2241 07-03-2023 Road Tax 1,150 1960 24-03-2023 17 
2242 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 59,618 1868 24-03-2023 16 
2243 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 69,068 1870 24-03-2023 16 
2244 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 63,818 1871 24-03-2023 16 
2245 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 68,508 1873 24-03-2023 16 
2246 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 59,618 1872 24-03-2023 16 
2247 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 5,125 1853 24-03-2023 16 
2248 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 5,725 1855 24-03-2023 16 
2249 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 21,675 1874 24-03-2023 16 
2250 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 1,01,617 1865 24-03-2023 16 
2251 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 64,868 1875 24-03-2023 16 
2252 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 5,125 1861 24-03-2023 16 
2253 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 5,125 1860 24-03-2023 16 
2254 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 59,618 1867 24-03-2023 16 
2255 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 69,208 1876 24-03-2023 16 
2256 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 74,808 1877 24-03-2023 16 
2257 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 69,068 1878 24-03-2023 16 
2258 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 58,568 1879 24-03-2023 16 
2259 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 5,125 1864 24-03-2023 16 
2260 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 5,725 1863 24-03-2023 16 
2261 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 5,725 1862 24-03-2023 16 
2262 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 93,097 1856 24-03-2023 16 
2263 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 93,097 1857 24-03-2023 16 
2264 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 76,771 1858 24-03-2023 16 
2265 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 98,905 1859 24-03-2023 16 
2266 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 8,920 2025 24-03-2023 20 
2267 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 11,400 2034 24-03-2023 20 
2268 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 11,400 2033 24-03-2023 20 
2269 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 11,400 2035 24-03-2023 20 
2270 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 11,400 2036 24-03-2023 20 
2271 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 19,400 2039 24-03-2023 20 
2272 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 19,400 2040 24-03-2023 20 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
329
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 329 
Appendix 5.2.4 (contd.) 
Statement showing collection at DTO, West Tripura and delay in deposit of revenue 
into Government Account 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.10.11(iii)} 
Challan 
No. Challan date Particulars Challan 
amount (₹) TV No. TV date Delay  
(in days) 
2273 07-03-2023 Registration Fee 4,800 2026 27-03-2023 20 
2274 07-03-2023 Road Tax 6,600 2027 27-03-2023 20 
2275 07-03-2023 Road Tax 10,113 2041 27-03-2023 20 
2276 07-03-2023 Road Tax 22,900 2043 27-03-2023 20 
2277 07-03-2023 Road Tax 22,900 2044 27-03-2023 20 
2278 07-03-2023 Road Tax 18,320 2042 27-03-2023 20 
2279 07-03-2023 Road Tax 15,000 1983 24-03-2023 17 
2280 07-03-2023 Road Tax 1,200 1973 24-03-2023 17 
2281 07-03-2023 Road Tax 1,200 1974 24-03-2023 17 
2282 07-03-2023 Road Tax 900 1975 24-03-2023 17 
2283 07-03-2023 Road Tax 900 1976 24-03-2023 17 
2284 07-03-2023 Road Tax 1,200 1977 24-03-2023 17 
2285 07-03-2023 Road Tax 1,200 1964 24-03-2023 17 
2286 07-03-2023 Road Tax 900 1965 24-03-2023 17 
2287 07-03-2023 Road Tax 900 1966 24-03-2023 17 
2288 07-03-2023 Road Tax 1,200 1967 24-03-2023 17 
2289 07-03-2023 Road Tax 1,200 1968 24-03-2023 17 
2290 07-03-2023 Road Tax 1,200 1969 24-03-2023 17 
2291 07-03-2023 Road Tax 900 1959 24-03-2023 17 
2292 07-03-2023 Road Tax 1,200 2028 27-03-2023 20 
2293 07-03-2023 Road Tax 900 2029 27-03-2023 20 
2294 07-03-2023 Road Tax 900 2030 27-03-2023 20 
2295 07-03-2023 Road Tax 1,200 2031 27-03-2023 20 
2296 07-03-2023 Road Tax 900 2032 27-03-2023 20 
2297 07-03-2023 Road Tax 900 1970 24-03-2023 17 
2298 07-03-2023 Road Tax 3,640 1971 24-03-2023 17 
2301 09-03-2023 Road Tax 3,640 1972 24-03-2023 15 
2335 18-03-2023 Registration Fee 70,835 2156 31-03-2023 13 
2370 18-03-2023 Registration Fee 54,771 2078 28-03-2023 10 
2371 18-03-2023 Registration Fee 27,550 2076 28-03-2023 10 
March 2024 
1196 01-03-2024 Road Tax 11,68,426 861 30-03-2024 29 
1197 01-03-2024 Other Fees 6,59,875 866 30-03-2024 29 
1198 02-03-2024 Road Tax 10,27,056 867 30-03-2024 28 
1199 02-03-2024 Other Fees 5,59,300 862 30-03-2024 28 
1200 04-03-2024 Road Tax 7,62,671 863 30-03-2024 26 
1201 04-03-2024 Other Fees 2,12,875 864 30-03-2024 26 
1202 05-03-2024 Road Tax 7,05,673 865 30-03-2024 25 
1203 05-03-2024 Other Fees 12,11,975 860 30-03-2024 25 
1204 06-03-2024 Road Tax 28,89,130 859 30-03-2024 24 
1205 06-03-2024 Other Fees 10,01,320 858 30-03-2024 24 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
330
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 330 
Appendix 5.2.4 (concld.) 
Statement showing collection at DTO, West Tripura and delay in deposit of revenue 
into Government Account 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.10.11(iii)} 
Challan 
No. Challan date Particulars Challan 
amount (₹) 
TV 
No. TV date Delay 
(in days) 
1206 07-03-2024 Road Tax 15,12,489 856 30-03-2024 23 
1207 07-03-2024 Other Fees 5,91,650 855 30-03-2024 23 
1208 11-03-2024 Road Tax 10,19,163 857 30-03-2024 19 
1209 11-03-2024 Other Fees 10,01,000 854 30-03-2024 19 
1210 12-03-2024 Road Tax 15,34,348 853 30-03-2024 18 
1211 13-03-2024 Other Fees 9,48,735 852 30-03-2024 17 
1212 13-03-2024 Road Tax 8,78,916 851 30-03-2024 17 
1213 13-03-2024 Other Fees 3,58,375 850 30-03-2024 17 
1214 14-03-2024 Road Tax 14,31,731 849 30-03-2024 16 
1215 14-03-2024 Other Fees 9,51,250 840 30-03-2024 16 
1216 15-03-2024 Road Tax 6,69,356 841 30-03-2024 15 
1217 15-03-2024 Other Fees 4,78,537 837 30-03-2024 15 
1218 16-03-2024 Road Tax 23,67,556 838 30-03-2024 14 
1219 16-03-2024 Other Fees 12,10,425 842 30-03-2024 14 
1220 18-03-2024 Road Tax 1,34,031 843 30-03-2024 12 
1221 18-03-2024 Other Fees 7,67,025 844 30-03-2024 12 
1222 19-03-2024 Road Tax 18,48,281 846 30-03-2024 11 
1223 19-03-2024 Other Fees 10,39,200 847 30-03-2024 11 
1224 20-03-2024 Road Tax 20,53,097 848 30-03-2024 10 
1225 20-03-2024 Other Fees 6,84,850 835 30-03-2024 10 
1226 21-03-2024 Road Tax 2,85,545 836 30-03-2024 9 
1227 21-03-2024 Other Fees 4,83,375 839 30-03-2024 9 
1228 22-03-2024 Road Tax 8,30,837 833 30-03-2024 8 
1229 22-03-2024 Other Fees 7,28,525 834 30-03-2024 8 
1230 26-03-2024 Road Tax 18,88,713 832 30-03-2024 4 
1231 26-03-2024 Other Fees 13,36,375 845 30-03-2024 4 
1232 26-03-2024 Other Fees 2,61,799 831 30-03-2024 4 
1233 26-03-2024 Other Fees 18,400 830 30-03-2024 4 
1195 27-03-2024 Registration 
Fee 21,93,180 829 28-03-2024 1 
1237 27-03-2024 Road Tax 4,50,794 877 31-03-2024 4 
1238 27-03-2024 Other Fees 5,02,250 876 31-03-2024 4 
1239 28-03-2024 Road Tax 12,25,681 875 31-03-2024 3 
1240 28-03-2024 Other Fees 7,25,400 874 31-03-2024 3 
1234 30-03-2024 Fine Money 1,44,000 869 31-03-2024 0 
1236 30-03-2024 Other Fees 24,900 879 31-03-2024 1 
1241 30-03-2024 Road Tax 9,99,587 873 31-03-2024 1 
1242 30-03-2024 Other Fees 10,08,875 872 31-03-2024 1 
1243 30-03-2024 Road Tax 30,62,110 871 31-03-2024 1 
1244 30-03-2024 Other Fees 12,40,600 870 31-03-2024 1 
1255 30-03-2024 Other Fees 3,853 868 30-03-2024 0 
1325 30-03-2024 Other Fees 40,000 878 31-03-2024 1 
       
Source: Transport Department  
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 330 
Appendix 5.2.4 (concld.) 
Statement showing collection at DTO, West Tripura and delay in deposit of revenue 
into Government Account 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.2.10.11(iii)} 
Challan 
No. Challan date Particulars Challan 
amount (₹) 
TV 
No. TV date Delay 
(in days) 
1206 07-03-2024 Road Tax 15,12,489 856 30-03-2024 23 
1207 07-03-2024 Other Fees 5,91,650 855 30-03-2024 23 
1208 11-03-2024 Road Tax 10,19,163 857 30-03-2024 19 
1209 11-03-2024 Other Fees 10,01,000 854 30-03-2024 19 
1210 12-03-2024 Road Tax 15,34,348 853 30-03-2024 18 
1211 13-03-2024 Other Fees 9,48,735 852 30-03-2024 17 
1212 13-03-2024 Road Tax 8,78,916 851 30-03-2024 17 
1213 13-03-2024 Other Fees 3,58,375 850 30-03-2024 17 
1214 14-03-2024 Road Tax 14,31,731 849 30-03-2024 16 
1215 14-03-2024 Other Fees 9,51,250 840 30-03-2024 16 
1216 15-03-2024 Road Tax 6,69,356 841 30-03-2024 15 
1217 15-03-2024 Other Fees 4,78,537 837 30-03-2024 15 
1218 16-03-2024 Road Tax 23,67,556 838 30-03-2024 14 
1219 16-03-2024 Other Fees 12,10,425 842 30-03-2024 14 
1220 18-03-2024 Road Tax 1,34,031 843 30-03-2024 12 
1221 18-03-2024 Other Fees 7,67,025 844 30-03-2024 12 
1222 19-03-2024 Road Tax 18,48,281 846 30-03-2024 11 
1223 19-03-2024 Other Fees 10,39,200 847 30-03-2024 11 
1224 20-03-2024 Road Tax 20,53,097 848 30-03-2024 10 
1225 20-03-2024 Other Fees 6,84,850 835 30-03-2024 10 
1226 21-03-2024 Road Tax 2,85,545 836 30-03-2024 9 
1227 21-03-2024 Other Fees 4,83,375 839 30-03-2024 9 
1228 22-03-2024 Road Tax 8,30,837 833 30-03-2024 8 
1229 22-03-2024 Other Fees 7,28,525 834 30-03-2024 8 
1230 26-03-2024 Road Tax 18,88,713 832 30-03-2024 4 
1231 26-03-2024 Other Fees 13,36,375 845 30-03-2024 4 
1232 26-03-2024 Other Fees 2,61,799 831 30-03-2024 4 
1233 26-03-2024 Other Fees 18,400 830 30-03-2024 4 
1195 27-03-2024 Registration 
Fee 21,93,180 829 28-03-2024 1 
1237 27-03-2024 Road Tax 4,50,794 877 31-03-2024 4 
1238 27-03-2024 Other Fees 5,02,250 876 31-03-2024 4 
1239 28-03-2024 Road Tax 12,25,681 875 31-03-2024 3 
1240 28-03-2024 Other Fees 7,25,400 874 31-03-2024 3 
1234 30-03-2024 Fine Money 1,44,000 869 31-03-2024 0 
1236 30-03-2024 Other Fees 24,900 879 31-03-2024 1 
1241 30-03-2024 Road Tax 9,99,587 873 31-03-2024 1 
1242 30-03-2024 Other Fees 10,08,875 872 31-03-2024 1 
1243 30-03-2024 Road Tax 30,62,110 871 31-03-2024 1 
1244 30-03-2024 Other Fees 12,40,600 870 31-03-2024 1 
1255 30-03-2024 Other Fees 3,853 868 30-03-2024 0 
1325 30-03-2024 Other Fees 40,000 878 31-03-2024 1 
       
Source: Transport Department  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
331
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 331 
Appendix 5.2.5 
Statement showing collection at Churaibari Check Post and delay in deposit of revenue into Government Account  
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.10.12 (ii)) 
Month/ 
Year Collection from Collection 
up to  
Accumulation 
period (In 
days) 
Amount collected  
(in ₹) 
Deposited in Govt. 
account/ Treasury 
Delay in deposit 
(in days) 
Overall delay 
ranged up to (in 
days) 
March, 2020 01-03-2020 15-03-2020 15 31,84,540 17-03-2020 2 17 
16-03-2020 31-03-2020 16 14,83,000 08-04-2020 8 24 
March, 2021 01-03-2021 16-03-2021 16 45,55,000 17-03-2021 1 17 
17-03-2021 31-03-2021 15 44,58,500 01-04-2021 1 16 
March, 2022 
01-03-2022 19-03-2022 19 48,74,340 21-03-2022 2 21 
20-03-2022 29-03-2022 10 25,28,480 29-03-2022 0 10 
30-03-2022 31-03-2022 2 4,41,000 12-04-2022 12 14 
March, 2023 
01-03-2023 21-03-2023 21 30,55,430 27-03-2023 6 27 
22-03-2023 30-03-2023 9 15,91,100 31-03-2023 1 10 
31-03-2023 31-03-2023 1 2,35,000 17-04-2023 17 18 
March, 2024 26-02-2024 28-03-2024 31 57,72,940 30-03-2024 2 33 
29-03-2024 14-04-2024 16 32,43,045 14-04-2024 0 16 
Source: Records maintained at Churaibari Check post 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
332
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 332 
Appendix 5.3.1 
List of registrable articles in Tripura 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3.6) 
Sl. No. Particulars 
1 Partition Deed  
2 Sale Deed 
3 Power of Attorney 
4 Acknowledgement Deed 
5 Reconveyance of Mortgaged Deed 
6 Release Deed 
7 Settlement Deed 
8 Revocation of settlement 
9 Surrender of Lease Deed 
10 Transfer of Lease 
11 Adoption Deed 
12 Agreement to Sale 
13 Conveyance Deed 
14 Exchange Deed 
15 Gift Deed 
16 Lease Deed 
17 Mortgage Deed 
18 Partnership Deed 
19 Cancellation Deed 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
333
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 333 
Appendix 5.3.2 (A) 
Statement showing list of various bank branches and ATMs not having registered lease 
agreement under SRO, Udaipur 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3.7.3) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
lessee Term Condition Rent/ 
month  SD due RF due Total 
due 
1 HDFC, Udaipur 9 1st 3 year @ ₹ 25,000 thereafter 
increase of 15 % every after 3 years  25,000 17,362 6,334 23,696 
2 Induslnd bank, 
Udaipur 9 1st 3 year @ ₹ 21,945 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 3 years  21,945 15,241 4,572 19,813 
3 TGB, Jamjuri 10 1st 5 year @ ₹ 12,456 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 5 years  12,456 8,034 2,410 10,444 
4 TGB, Kakraban 10 1st 5 year @ ₹ 7,535 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 5 years  7,535 4,860 1,458 6,318 
5 TGB, Killa 10 1st 5 year @ ₹ 4,741 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 5years  4,741 3,058 917 3,975 
6 
TGB, Gargee 10 1st 5 year @ ₹ 7,132 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 5 years  7,132 4,600 1,380 5,980 
TGB, Garjee 5 5 year @ ₹ 9,931 including V-SAT 
rent @ ₹ 500. 9,931 5,959 1,788 7,746 
7 
TGB_Bagma 10 
1st 5 year @ ₹ 4,800 thereafter 
increase of rent @ ₹ 8,300 for rest of 
5 years  
4,800 3,930 1,179 5,109 
TGB_Bagma 5 5 year @ ₹ 14,400 including V-SAT 
rent @ ₹ 500. 14,400 5,184 2,592 7,776 
8 TGB, Tulamura 10 1st 5 year @ ₹ 13,312 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 5years  13,312 8,586 3,082 11,668 
9 TGB, 
Chandrapur 10 1st 5 year @ ₹ 15,300 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 5years  15,300 9,869 2,961 12,829 
10 PNB, Killa 
( AT M) 10 1st 5 year @ ₹ 3,000 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 5 years  3,000 1,935 581 2,516 
11 PNB, Salgarah 15 1st 5 year @ ₹ 15,147 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 5 years  15,147 21,039 6,312 27,350 
12 TGB, Maharani 10 
1st 5 year @ ₹ 14,400 thereafter 
increase of 15% and ₹ 500 (V-Sat) 
every after 5 years  
14,400 9,438 2,831 12,269 
13 SBI, Garjee 
(Branch) 5 For 5 year @ ₹ 35,687 35,687 12,847 6,424 19,271 
14 
SBI, Garjee 
( AT M) 3 For 3 year @ ₹ 4,000 4,000 1,440 720 2,160 
SBI, Garjee 
( AT M) 3 For 3 year @ ₹ 4,500 4,500 1,620 810 2,430 
15 
Agartala Co-
operative Urban 
Bank Ltd., 
Udaipur  
9 1st 3 year @ ₹ 15,262 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 3 years  15,262 10,599 3,180 13,779 
16 
Indian Overseas 
Bank, Udaipur 
( AT M) 
10 1st 5 year @ ₹ 5,000 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 5 years  5,000 3,225 968 4,193 
17 
North East 
Small Finance 
Bank Ltd. 
10 1st 3 year @ ₹ 17,000 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 3 years  17,000 11,806 3,542 15,348 
18 SBI, Palatana 5 For 5 years @ ₹ 10,000  10,000 3,600 1,800 5,400 
SBI, Palatana 5 For 5 years @ ₹ 12,000  12,000 4,320 2,160 6,480 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
334
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 334 
Appendix 5.3.2(A) (concld.) 
Statement showing list of various bank branches and ATMs not having registered lease 
agreement under SRO, Udaipur  
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3.7.3) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Lessee Term Condition 
Rent/ 
mont
h 
SD due RF 
due 
Total 
due 
19 Bandhan Bank, 
Udaipur 15 1st 3 years @ ₹ 12,000 thereafter 
increase of 10% every after 3 years 12,000 17,583 5,275 22,857 
20 
Bandhan Bank, 
Udaipur, 
( AT M) 
15 1st 3 years @ ₹ 6,000 thereafter 
increase of 10% every after 3 years 6,000 8,791 2,637 11,429 
21 
Punjab 
National Bank 
(PNB), 
Gokulpur 
20 1st 5 years @ ₹ 25,000 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 5 years 25,000 37,450 11,235 48,685 
22 
Tripura 
Gramin Bank 
(TGB), 
Gangacherra 
10 1st 5 year @ ₹ 9,035 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 5 years 9,035 5,828 1,748 7,576 
23 
State Bank of 
India (SBI), 
Ramesh 
Chowmuhani  
9 For 9 years @ ₹ 28,888 28,888 17,333 5,200 22,533 
SBI, Ramesh 
Chowmuhani  5 For 5 years @ ₹ 34,665 34,665 12,479 6,240 18,719 
24 
Tripura State 
Cooperative 
Bank (TSCB), 
Mirza 
15 1st 5 year @ ₹ 6,885 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 5 years 6,885 9,562 2,869 12,431 
25 PNB, Bagma  Rent @ ₹ 13,500 13,500 4,860 2,430 7,290 
26 TGB, Udaipur 10 1st 5 year @ ₹ 69,072 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 5 years 69,072 44,551 13,365 57,917 
27 TGB_Udaipur, 
RM_office 10 1st 5 year @ ₹ 18,000 thereafter 
increase of 25% every after 5 years 18,000 12,150 3,645 15,795 
28 ESAF Bank, 
Udaipur 9 1st 3 year @ ₹ 50,000 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 3 years 50,000 34,725 10,418 45,143 
29 TSCB, Salgara 10 1st 3 year @ ₹ 3,500 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 3 years 3,500 2,431 729 3,160 
30 TGB, 
Gokulpur 10 1st 5 year @ ₹ 19,431 thereafter 
increase of 15% every after 5 years 19,431 12,533 3,760 16,293 
Total 3,88,827 1,27,551 5,16,377 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
335
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 335 
Appendix 5.3.2(B) 
Statement showing list of various bank branches and ATMs not having registered lease 
agreement under SRO, Amarpur 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3.7.3) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Lessee Term Condition Rent/ 
month SD due RF due Total 
due 
1 Bandhan Bank, 
Amarpur 8 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 6,000 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after every 
5 years  
6,000 3,870 1,161 5,031 
2 
TGB, Amarpur 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 16,900 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after every 
5years  
16,900 11,154 3,346 14,500 
TGB, Amarpur 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 36,250 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after every 
5 years  
36,250 23,925 7,178 31,103 
3 TSCB, Amarpur 6 
Montly rent @ ₹ 12,292 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after every 
3 years  
12,292 7,928 2,378 10,307 
4 
SBI_Amarpur 5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 27,947 for 5 years  27,947 10,061 5,030 15,091 
SBI, Amarpur 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 33,536 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after every 
5 years  
33,536 21,631 6,489 28,120 
5 
SBI, Amarpur 
( AT M) 4 For 5 years @ ₹ 1,200 1,200 432 216 648 
SBI, Amarpur 
( AT M) 10 For 5 years @ ₹ 1,400 1,400 840 252 1,092 
6 TGB, Natunbazar 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 8,670 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after every 
5 years  
8,670 5,592 1,678 7,270 
7 PNB, Natunbazar 
(Branch) 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 9,240 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after every 
5 years  
9,240 5,960 1,788 7,748 
8 PNB, Natunbazar 
( AT M) 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 4,000 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after every 
5 years  
4,000 2,580 774 3,354 
9 TSCB, Natunbazar 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 6,900 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after every 
5 years  
6,900 9,584 2,875 12,459 
10 TGB, Ompi 
(Branch) 
10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 8,504 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after every 
5 years  
8,504 5,485 1,645 7,130 
11 TGB, Ompi (ATM) 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 3,000 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after every 
5 years  
3,000 1,935 581 2,516 
12 TGB, Taidu 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 17,100 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after every 
5 years  
17,100 1,1030 3,309 14,338 
Total  1,22,006 38,700 1,60,706 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
336
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 336 
Appendix 5.3.2(C) 
Statement showing list of various bank branches and ATMs not having registered lease 
agreement under SRO, Sadar 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3.7.3) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. No. Name of the 
Lessee Term Condition Rent per 
month SD due RF due Total due 
1 
Agartlal 
Cooperative Urban 
Bank (ACUB), 
Agartala 
10 Monthly rent @ ₹ 45,000 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 20% 
after every 3 years 
45,000 29,700 8,910 38,610 
2 ACUB, Joynagar 5 Montly rent @ ₹ 20,160 for 5 
years 20,160 7,258 3,629 10,886 
3 Axis Bank, 
Kunjaban 9 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 15,000 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 10% 
after every 3 years 
15,000 9,960 3,654 13,614 
4 Axis Bank, Sankar 
Chowmuhani  9 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 66,000 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 12% 
after every 3 years 
66,000 44,542 13,363 57,905 
5 Bandhan Bank, 
Agartala 9 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 89,000 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 15% 
after every 3 years 
89,000 61,810 18,543 80,354 
6 Bandhan Bank, 
Narayanpur Bazar 20 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 14,000 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 10% 
after every 5 years 
14,000 19,492 5,848 25,340 
7 
Bandhan Bank, 
Lake Chowmuhani 
Bazar 
20 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 23,000 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 10% 
after every 5 years 
23,000 32,023 9,607 41,630 
8 Bandhan Bank, 
kathaltali  10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 10,000 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 10% 
after every 5 years 
10,000 6,300 1,890 8,190 
9 Bandhan Bank, 
Bordawali 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 33,356 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 08 
% after every 5 years 
33,356 43,344 15,770 59,114 
10 Federal Bank, 
Agartala 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 60,930 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 25% 
after every 5 years 
60,930 92,918 27,875 1,20,793 
11 HDFC Bank, 
Nutannagar 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 29,003 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 15% 
after every 3 years 
29,003 46,961 15,385 62,346 
12 HDFC Bank, Math 
Chowmuhani  15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 65,480 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 15% 
after every 3 years 
65,480 1,05,987 34,734 1,40,721 
13 HDFC, Sankar 
Chowmuhani  15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 89,250 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 15% 
after every 3 years 
89,250 1,44,451 47,343 1,91,794 
14 IDFC, Agartala 9 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 35,000 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 15% 
after every 3 years 
35,000 24,337 8,867 33,205 
15 Indusind Bank, CR 
Road 9 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 59,500 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 10% 
every after 3 years 
59,500 39,419 14,494 53,913 
16 
Indian Overseas 
Bank (IOB), 
Agartala (ATM) 
10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 10,000 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 15% 
every after 5 years 
10,000 6,450 1,935 8,385 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
337
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 337 
Appendix 5.3.2(C) (contd.) 
Statement showing list of various bank branches and ATMs not having registered lease 
agreement under SRO, Sadar 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3.7.3) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No Name of the Lessee Term Condition Rent per 
month SD due RF 
due 
Total 
due 
17 
Northeast Small 
Finance Bank 
(NESFB), Agartala 
16 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 34,375 for 10 years & 
after 10 years rent shall be enhanced at 
the rate of 15% every after 3 years  
34,375 47,747 14,324 62,071 
18 NESFB, Durjoynagar 6 Monthly rent @ ₹ 11,040 for 6 years  11,040 6,624 1,987 8,611 
19 PNB, GB Bazar 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 15,260 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after every 
5 years  
15,260 22,218 6,666 28,884 
20 PNB, Baramura_GTP 
Branch 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 16,835 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after every 
5 years  
16,835 24,512 7,353 31,865 
21 PNB, AK 
Road_Branch 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 8,800 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after every 
5 years  
8,800 12,813 3,844 16,657 
22 
PNB, Camper Bazar 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 3,500 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after every 
5 years  
3,500 2,310 693 3,003 
PNB, Camper Bazar 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 18,000 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after every 
5 years  
18,000 25,002 7,501 32,503 
23 PNB, Chandrapur 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 15,300 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after every 
5 years  
15,300 21,252 6,375 27,627 
24 PNB, Chandrapur 
( AT M) 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 5,500 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after every 
5 years  
5,500 3,548 1,064 4,612 
25 PNB, Kaman 
Chowmuhani 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 66,769 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after every 
5 years  
66,769 44,067 13,220 57,287 
26 PNB, Mantribari 
Road 12 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 73,500 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after every 
5 years  
73,500 1,10,104 33,031 1,43,135 
27 PNB, Mantribari 
Road (ATM) 12 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 6,500 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after every 
5 years  
6,500 9,737 2,921 12,658 
28 PNB, Ramnagar 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 26,960 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after every 
5 years  
26,960 39,254 11,776 51,030 
29 PNB, Ramnagar 
( AT M) 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 7,500 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after every 
5 years  
7,500 4,838 1,451 6,289 
30 SBI, AGMC 10 For 10 years @ ₹ 13,875/ month 13,875 8,325 2,498 10,823 
31 SBI, Assam Rifles 2 For 2 years @ ₹ 12,692/ month 12,692 4,569 2,285 6,854 
SBI, Assam Rifles 5 For 5 years @ ₹ 13,375/ month 13,375 4,815 2,408 7,223 
32 SBI, Assam Rifles 
( AT M) 5 For 5 years @ ₹ 850/ month 850 306 153 459 
33 SBI, Secretariat 5 For 5 years @ ₹ 4,788 /month 4,788 1,724 862 2,586 
34 
SBI, Secretariat. 
(Branch office and 
AT M) 
5 For 5 years @ ₹ 5,378/ month 5,378 1,936 968 2,904 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
338
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 338 
Appendix 5.3.2(C) (contd.) 
Statement showing list of various bank branches and ATMs not having registered lease 
agreement under SRO, Sadar 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3.7.3) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Lessee Term Condition Rent per 
month SD due RF due Total 
due 
35 SBI, Salbagan 10 For 10 years @ ₹ 10,376/month 10,376 6,226 1,868 8,093 
36 SBI, Usha Bazar 
( AT M) 5 For 5 yrars @ ₹ 9,150/month 9,150 3,294 1,647 4,941 
37 SBI, RBO 
&RACC South 20 Monthly rent @ ₹ 1,83,084 for 10 
years 1,83,084 21,9701 65,910 2,85,611 
38 SBI, Agartala 
Bazar Branch 10 Monthly rent @ ₹ 1,19,100 for 10 
years 1,19,100 71,460 21,438 92,898 
39 SBI, Akhaura 
Road 10 
Monthly rent for first 5 years @ 
₹ 16,506 & enhanced to @ ₹  27,510 
for next 5 years. 
16,506 13,205 3,961 17,166 
40 SBI, Amtali 10 
Monthly rent for first 5 years @ 
₹ 25,413 & enhanced to @ ₹  37,050 
for next 5 years. 
25,413 18,739 5,622 24,361 
41 
SBI, 
Milanchakra 
( AT M) 
5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 6,000 for 5 years 6,000 2,160 1,080 3,240 
42 SBI, Nagerjola 
( AT M) 10 
Monthly rent for first 5 years @ 
₹ 5,400 & enhanced to @ ₹  6,500 for 
next 5 years. 
5,400 3,570 1,071 4,641 
43 
SBI, 
Radhanagar 
( AT M) 
5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 6,382 for 5 years 6,382 2,298 1,149 3,446 
44 
SBI, Rajdhani 
Petroleum 
( AT M) 
5 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 5,000 upto 31 
March 2021 & enhanced to @ ₹ 5,750 
w.e.f. 1 April 2021 
5,000 1,935 968 2,903 
45 SBI, Chandrapur 5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 52,048 for 5 years 52,048 18,737 9,369 28,106 
46 SBI, CR Road 5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 62,000 for 5 years 62,000 22,320 11,160 33,480 
SBI, CR Road 5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 90,000 for 5 years 90,000 32,400 16,200 48,600 
47 SBI, CR Road  
( AT M ) 5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 5,625 for 5 years 5,625 2,025 1,013 3,038 
48 SBI, Dukli 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 13,992 upto 30 June 
2020 & enhanced to @ ₹ 16,650 w.e.f 
1 July 2020 
13,992 9,193 2,758 11,950 
49 SBI, 
Jogendranagr 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 36,960 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 5 years 
36,960 23,839 7,152 30,991 
50 SBI, Dukli 
( AT M) 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 6,000 upto 30 June 
2017 & enhanced to @ ₹  8,000 w.e.f 
1 July 2017 
6,000 4,200 1,260 5,460 
51 SBI, MBB 
College 5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 66,888 for 5 years 66,888 24,080 12,040 36,120 
52 SBI, MBB 
College (ATM) 5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 2,000 for 5 years 2,000 720 360 1,080 
53 SBI, Badharghat 
( AT M) 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 8,000 upto 30 June 
2022 & enhanced to @ ₹ 11,000 w.e.f 
1 July 2022 
8,000 5,700 1,710 7,410 
54 SBI, ONGC 5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 71,397 for 5 years 71,397 25,703 12,851 38,554 
55 SBI, PBB 
branch 20 Monthly rent @ ₹ 91,542 for 20 years 91,542 1,09,850 32,955 1,42,806 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
339
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 339 
Appendix 5.3.2(C) (contd.) 
Statement showing list of various bank branches and ATMs not having registered lease 
agreement under SRO, Sadar 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3.7.3) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Lessee Term Condition Rent per 
month SD due RF due Total 
due 
56 SBI, RACC North 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 1,49,744 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 25% after 
every 5 years 
1,49,744 1,01,077 30,323 1,31,400 
57 SBI, RMS 
Chowmuhani 10 Monthly rent @ ₹ 1,15,325 for 10 
years 1,15,325 69,195 20,759 89,954 
58 SBI, RMS 
Chowmuhani (ATM) 5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 10,000 for 5 years 10,000 3,600 1,800 5,400 
59 SBI, TLA (ATM) 5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 8,400 for 5 years 8,400 3,024 1,512 4,536 
60 SBI, TMC 7 Monthly rent @ ₹ 8,189 for 7 years 8,189 4,913 1,474 6,387 
SBI, TMC 5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 17,620 for 5 years 17,620 6,343 3,172 9,515 
61 SBI, TMC (ATM) 5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 1,607 for 5 years 1,607 579 289 868 
62 SBI, University 10 Monthly rent @ ₹ 20,000 for 10 years 20,000 12,000 3,600 15,600 
63 SBI, University 
( AT M) 10 Monthly rent @ ₹ 846 for 10 years 846 508 152 660 
64 TGB, Abhoynagar 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 2,88,714 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after 
every 5 years 
2,88,714 4,20,367 1,26,110 5,46,477 
65 TGB, Agartala 10 
Monthly rent was @ ₹ 44,226 w.e.f. 
14 December 2014 & enhanced to @ 
₹ 73,725 w.e.f. 14 December 2019 
44,226 35,385 10,616 46,001 
66 TGB, Aralia 5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 8,631 for 5 years 8,631 5,179 1,554 6,732 
67 TGB, Badharghat 10 
Monthly rent was @ ₹ 10,975 w.e.f. 4 
August 2015 & enhanced to @ 
₹ 16,615 w.e.f. 4 August 2020 
10,975 8,277 2,483 10,760 
68 TGB, Bardowali 19 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 63,567 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after 
every 5 years 
63,567 1,02,377 30,713 1,33,090 
69 
TGB, Camper Bazar 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 6,490 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after 
every 5 years 
6,490 4,283 1,285 5,568 
TGB, Camper Bazar 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 13,200 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after 
every 5 years 
13,200 8,712 2,614 11,326 
70 TGB, Capital 
Complex 10 Monthly rent @ ₹ 13,200 /month, after 
5 years rent was @ ₹ 18,729 13,200 9,579 2,874 12,452 
71 TGB, Dhaleswar 5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 31,280 for 5 years 31,280 11,261 5,630 16,891 
72 TGB, Durga 
Chowmuhani  10 Monthly rent @ ₹ 20,960 for 10 years 20,960 12,576 3,773 16,349 
73 TGB, Hapania 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 18,125 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 5 years 
18,125 25,175 7,553 32,728 
74 TGB, 
Jogendranagar 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 16,888 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 5 years 
16,888 23,457 7,037 30,494 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
340
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 340 
Appendix 5.3.2(C) (contd.) 
Statement showing list of various bank branches and ATMs not having registered lease 
agreement under SRO, Sadar 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3.7.3) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
Lessee Term Condition Rent per 
month SD due RF due Total 
due 
75 TGB, Joynagar 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 51,604 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 5 years  
51,604 71,677 21,503 93,180 
76 TGB, MB Tila 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 22,987 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after 
every 5 years  
22,987 33,470 10,041 43,510 
77 TGB, Nutunnagar 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 15,000 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after 
every 5 years  
15,000 21,840 6,552 28,392 
78 
TGB, New 
Kunjaban 
Township 
15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 11,930 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after 
every 5 years  
11,930 17,370 5,211 22,581 
79 TGB, Pratapgarh 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 10,634 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after 
every 5 years  
10,634 15,482 4,645 20,127 
80 TGB, RO West 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 40,000 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 5 years  
40,000 55,560 16,668 72,228 
81 TGB, MG Bazar 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 46,364 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 5 years  
46,364 66,392 19,918 86,310 
82 TSCB_ Battala 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 34,840 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 10% after 
every 3 years  
34,840 23,064 6,919 29,983 
83 TSCB, Battala 
Evening 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 10,171 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 3 years  
10,171 7,064 2,119 9,183 
84 TSCB, Capital 
Complex 10 Monthly rent @ ₹ 4,384 for 10 years 4,384 2,630 789 3,420 
85 TSCB, Durga 
Chowmuhani  12 Monthly rent @ ₹ 1,600 for 12 years 1,600 1,920 576 2,496 
86 
TSCB, GB Bazar 6 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 17,250 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 3 years   
17,250 11,126 3,338 14,464 
TSCB, GB Bazar 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 25,578 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 3 years  
25,578 41,388 12,416 53,804 
87 
TSCB, 
Gukhabasti 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 12,668 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 5 years  
12,668 8,171 2,451 10,622 
TSCB, 
Gukhabasti 4 For 4 years @ ₹ 16,769/month 16,769 6,037 3,018 9,055 
88 TSCB, Lake 
Chowmuhani 20 
Monthly rent @10,000 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 5 years  
10,000 14,980 4,494 19,474 
89 TSCB, MB Tilla 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 12,340 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 5 years  
12,340 17,140 5,142 22,282 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
341
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 341 
Appendix 5.3.2(C) (concld.) 
Statement showing list of various bank branches and ATMs not having registered lease 
agreement under SRO, Sadar 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3.7.3) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Lessee Term Condition 
Rent 
per 
month 
SD due RF due Total 
due 
90 TSCB, MG 
Bazar 9 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 57,600 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 10% 
after every 3 years  
57,600 38,131 11,439 49,571 
91 TSCB, Mahesh 
Khola 10 For 10 years @ ₹ 3,485/month 3,485 2,091 627 2,718 
92 
Ujjavan Small 
Finance, 
Agartala 
9 
1st year monthly rent @ 
₹ 1,20,000 shall be enhanced at 
the rate of 5% after every year  
1,20,000 88,243 31,864 1,20,107 
93 Yes Bank, 
Agartala 12 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 1,01,250 shall 
be enhanced at the rate of 10% 
after every 3 years  
1,01,250 1,41,000 60,944 2,01,944 
Total 32,84,650 10,62,762 43,47,412 
 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
342
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 342 
Appendix 5.3.2 (D) 
Statement showing list of various bank branches and ATMs not having registered lease 
agreement under SRO, Jirania 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3.7.3) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Lessee Term Condition Rent/ 
month SD due RF 
due 
Total 
due 
1 Canara Bank, NIT 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 15,000 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 10% after 
every 3 years 
15,000 9,000 2,700 11,700 
2 
IOB, Ramchandra 
Nagar 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 4,896 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after 
every 5 years 
4,896 3,231 969 4,201 
IOB, Ramchandra 
Nagar 3 For 3 years @ ₹ 7,050 7,050 2,538 1,269 3,807 
3 NESF Bank, 
Jirania 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 11,655 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 3 years 
11,655 8,094 2,428 10,522 
4 NESF Bank, 
Khumulwng 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 8,000 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 5 years 
8,000 11,112 3,334 14,446 
5 PNB, Khumulwng 15 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 3,870 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 5 years 
3,870 5,375 1,612 6,987 
6 PNB, Mandai 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 10,200 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after 
every 5 years 
10,200 6,732 2,020 8,752 
7 PNB, Ranirbazar 
( AT M) 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 5,999 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after 
every 5 years 
5,999 3,959 1,188 5,147 
8 SBI, Khumulwng 5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 18,000 for 5 
years 18,000 6,480 3,240 9,720 
9 SBI, NIT 10 Monthly rent @ ₹ 26,770 for 10 
Years 26,770 16,062 4,819 20,881 
10 SBI, Ranir Bazar 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 17,512 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 25% after 
every 5 years 
17,512 11,821 3,546 15,367 
11 SBI, Ranir Bazar 
( AT M) 5 Monthly rent @ ₹ 5,000 for 5 
Years 5,000 1,800 900 2,700 
12 TGB, 
Bankimnagar 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 11,264 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 5 years 
11,264 7,265 2,180 9,445 
13 TGB, 
Champaknagar 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 15,800 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 5 years 
15,800 10,191 3,057 13,248 
14 TGB, Debinagar 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 4,800 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 5 years 
4,800 3,096 929 4,025 
15 TGB, Kashipur 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 18,728 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 20% after 
every 5 years 
18,728 12,360 3,708 16,068 
16 TGB, Khumulwng 15 Monthly rent@ ₹ 4,450 for 15 
years 4,450 5,340 1,602 6,942 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
343
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 343 
Appendix 5.3.2 (D) (concld.) 
Statement showing list of various bank branches and ATMs not having registered lease 
agreement under SRO, Jirania 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3.7.3) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Lessee Term Condition Rent/ 
month SD due RF due Total 
due 
17 
TGB, Mandai 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 3,584 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 5 years 
3,584 2,312 693 3,005 
TGB, Mandai 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 4,166 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 5 years 
4,166 2,687 806 3,493 
18 TGB, NIT 10 Monthly rent @ ₹ 10,220 for 10 
years 10,220 6,132 1,840 7,972 
19 TSCB, 
Champaknagar 10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 9,500 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 3 years  
9,500 6,598 1,979 8,577 
20 TSCB, 
Khayerpur  10 
Monthly rent @ ₹ 12,880 shall be 
enhanced at the rate of 15% after 
every 3 years  
12,880 8,945 2,684 11,629 
21 TGB, 
Mohanpur 10 Monthly rent @ ₹ 17,740 for 10 
years 17,740 10,644 3193 13,837 
 Total 1,61,775 50,695 2,12,469 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
344
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 344 
Appendix 5.3.3 
Statement showing the list of lessees who had made short payment of stamp duty or 
registration fees 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3.7.4) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Lessee SD to 
be paid 
RF to 
be 
paid 
SD paid RF 
paid 
Total 
paid SD due RF due 
SRO, Udaipur 
1 
Bank of Borada (BOB), 
Mirza 2,310 693 2,500 633 3,133 0 60 
BOB, Mirja 9,723 2,917 2,520 1,263 3,783 7,203 1,654 
2 Bank of India (BOI), 
Udaipur 71,180 21,354 71,500 15,919 87,419 0 5,435 
3 Central bank of India, 
Udaipur  9,675 2,903 9,000 2,703 11,703 675 200 
4 IDBI, Udaipur  33,089 14,544 35,000 10,608 45,608 0 3,936 
5 PNB, Kakraban 9,900 2,970 9,000 2,703 11,703 900 267 
6 PNB, Killa 12,578 3,773 11,700 3,513 15,213 878 260 
7 PNB, Salgarah 3,950 1,185 3,600 2,163 5,763 350 0 
8 SBI, Udaipur  2,92,110 87,633 2,59,700 77,921 3,37,621 32,410 9,712 
9 IOB, Udaipur  7,256 2,177 6,750 2,098 8,848 506 79 
10 Bank of India (BOI), 
Jamjuri 26,797 8,039 28,000 6,003 34,003 0 2,036 
11 Ujjavan Bank, Udaipur  31,610 9,483 10,800 4,838 15,638 20,810 4,645 
12 SBI, Gokulpur 9,235 3,377 5,020 3,033 8,053 4,215 344 
13 Shri Abhik Datta 2,970 891 2,700 813 3,513 270 78 
14 National Insurance Co. 
Ltd.,  Udaipur  14,466 4,340 11,400 3,423 14,823 3,066 917 
15 Narayan Ch. Saha 3,780 1,890 3,600 1,803 5,403 180 87 
 Total 71,463 29,709 
SRO Amarpur 
1 UCO Bank, Amarpur 15,279 4,584 6,600 1,983 8,583 8,679 2,601 
2 PNB, Amarpur 19,459 5,838 11,050 4,818 15,868 8,409 1,020 
3 IDBI, Rangamati 7,974 3,463 7,230 2,163 9,393 744 1,300 
4 IDBI, Ompi 4,002 1,732 4,600 1,083 5,683 0 649 
IDBI, Ompi 5,317 2,298 4,800 1,443 6,243 517 855 
5 Bajaj Finance, Amarpur 10,765 3,229 9,300 2,793 12,093 1,465 436 
6 Hindustan Petroleum 
Corporation 19,892 5,968 1,400 534 1,934 18,492 5,434 
Total 38,306 12,295 
 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
345
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 345 
Appendix 5.3.3 (concld.) 
Statement showing the list of lessees who had made short payment of stamp duty or 
registration fees 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3.7.4) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Lessee SD to 
be paid 
RF to 
be 
paid 
SD 
paid RF paid Total 
paid SD due RF due 
SRO Sadar 
1 Axis bank, Dhaleswar 45,923 19,715 46,000 13,773 59,773 0 5,942 
2 BOI, Melarmath 34,187 10,256 34,100 10,263 44,363 87 0 
3 BoB, Ramnagar 29,327 12,784 30,000 8,793 38,793 0 3,991 
4 ICICI, Sankar 
Chowmahoni 93,064 30,767 93,300 25,837 1,19,137 0 4,930 
5 Indian Bank, 
Gurkhabasti 17,266 5,180 8,650 2,598 11,248 8,616 2,582 
6 Indian Bank, HGB 
Road 162908 48872 67000 20,043 87,043 95,908 28,829 
7 Indus Bank, Agartala 43,657 17,588 40,000 17,617 57,617 3,657 0 
8 PNB, Usha Market 31,508 9,452 26,000 4,293 30,293 5,508 5,159 
9 PNB, Barjala 14,283 4,285 6,500 1,953 8,453 7,783 2,332 
10 PNB, Battala Super 
Market 88,618 26,585 41,500 12,363 53,863 47,118 14,222 
11 PNB, Dhaleswar 18,928 5,678 8,600 2,538 11,138 10,328 3,140 
12 PNB, MG Bazar 38,438 11,532 9,510 5,238 14,748 28,928 6,294 
13 PNB, Badharghat 14,560 4,368 6,600 1,983 8,583 7,960 2,385 
14 SBI, AD Nagar 48,593 14,578 40,700 12,225 52,925 7,893 2,353 
15 SBI, Usha Bazar 23,688 7,106 21,100 6,320 27,420 2,588 786 
16 South Indian Bank, 
Agartala 85,400 25,620 38,000 15,513 53,513 47,400 10,107 
17 UCO Bank, Purbasha 60,600 21,915 50,000 14,988 64,988 10,600 6,927 
18 Union Bank, Agartala 51,407 15,422 41,000 15,438 56,438 10,407 0 
19 Union Bank, 
Kasharipatti 21,124 9,141 30,500 6,333 36,833 0 2,808 
20 Union Bank, LN Bari 19,446 5,834 21,000 5,676 26,676 0 158 
Total 2,94,779 1,02,946 
SRO Jirania 
1 SBI, RK Nagar 26,426 7,928 24,000 7,050 31,050 2,426 878 
2 
Reliance Jio Infratel 
Pvt. Ltd, Jirania 10,832 3,426 11,300 3,380 14,680 0 46 
3 ICICI_Jirania 13,270 4,872 13,500 4,063 17,563 0 809 
Total 2,426 1,733 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
346
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 346 
Appendix 5.4.1 
Sample selected for Centralised Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.4) 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTIN Year 
Deviation 
Amount  
(in ₹) 
1 ITC mismatch between GSTR 
2A and GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXN 2018-19 6,59,335 
2019-20 4,19,81,441 
2 ITC mismatch between GSTR 
2A and GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX0 2018-19 69,32,150 
2019-20 3,29,85,964 
3 ITC mismatch between GSTR 
2A and GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXD 2018-19 10,81,063 
2020-21 3,48,19,204 
4 ITC mismatch between GSTR 
2A and GSTR 3B 1xXXXXXXXXXXXX3 2018-19 56,12,392 
2019-20 3,00,99,644 
5 
ITC mismatch between GSTR 
2A and GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI 
2018-19 3,04,01,164 
2019-20 35,879 
2020-21 50,648 
6 ITC mismatch between GSTR 
2A and GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM 2018-19 1,75,34,964 
2019-20 1,21,31,726 
7 ITC mismatch between GSTR 
2A and GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 2018-19 1,44,70,409 
2019-20 1,35,43,015 
8 ITC mismatch between GSTR 
2A and GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 2018-19 5,80,135 
2019-20 2,66,09,181 
9 ITC mismatch between GSTR 
2A and GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW 2018-19 2,52,53,211 
2019-20 18,74,821 
10 ITC mismatch between GSTR 
2A and GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXZ 2018-19 2,72,372 
2019-20 2,53,68,479 
11 ITC mismatch between GSTR 
2A and GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM 2018-19 1,85,77,143 
2020-21 45,57,347 
12 
ITC mismatch between GSTR 
2A and GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 
2018-19 1,00,50,180 
2019-20 1,10,30,513 
2020-21 7,75,552 
13 ITC mismatch between GSTR 
2A and GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI 2018-19 2,19,959 
2019-20 2,06,88,803 
14 ITC mismatch between GSTR 
2A and GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX0 2018-19 17,41,496 
2020-21 1,84,23,728 
15 ITC passed on without supplier 
remitting tax 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP 2019-20 3,89,896 
2020-21 18,73,017 
16 
ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed 
after the cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 
2018-19 2,16,55,633 
2019-20 2,59,13,284 
2020-21 1,39,273 
17 ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed 
after the cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX3 2018-19 4,67,93,397  
18 ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed 
after the cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH 2018-19 2,34,48,829 
2019-20 34,72,193 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
347
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 347 
Appendix 5.4.1 (contd.) 
Sample selected for Centralised Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.4) 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTIN Year 
Deviation 
Amount  
(in ₹) 
19 ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS 2019-20 70,39,352  
20 ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 2019-20 67,95,921  
21 ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXZ 2019-20 17,31,263 
2018-19 42,51,834 
22 
ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 
2018-19 5,87,698 
2019-20 8,53,017 
2020-21 42,60,410 
23 ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX1 2018-19 55,84,535 
2020-21 50,864 
24 ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG 2018-19 55,03,548  
25 ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 2019-20 48,00,052 
2018-19 3,25,415 
26 ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 2018-19 46,33,534  
27 Incorrect availing of ISD credit 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXJ 2018-19 6,62,340 
28 
Short payment of tax under RCM 
versus ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 
9 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH 
2018-19 2,19,694 
2019-20 37,64,756  
29 Short payment of tax under RCM versus 
ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 9 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 2018-19 37,62,544  
30 Short payment of tax under RCM versus 
ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 9 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX0 2019-20 37,49,927  
31 Short payment of tax under RCM versus 
ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 9 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW 2018-19 32,43,399  
32 Short payment of tax under RCM versus 
ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 9 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 2018-19 25,30,409  
33 
Short payment of tax under RCM 
versus ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 
9 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH 
2018-19 7,49,144 
2019-20 3,09,370  
34 
Short payment of tax under RCM 
versus ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 
9 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB 
2018-19 31,996 
2019-20 8,91,660  
35 Short payment of tax under RCM versus 
ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 9 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXO 2020-21 7,91,792  
36 
Short payment of tax under RCM 
versus ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 
9 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX5 
2018-19 2,51,395 
2019-20 4,90,533  
37 Short payment of tax under RCM versus 
ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 9 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS 2019-20 6,35,445  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
348
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 348 
Appendix 5.4.1 (contd.) 
Sample selected for Centralised Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.4) 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTIN Year 
Deviation 
Amount  
(in ₹) 
38 
Short payment of tax under RCM 
versus ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ 
GSTR 9 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 
2018-19 10,375 
2020-21 5,31,697  
2019-20 35,817  
39 
Mismatch of ITC availed between 
Annual returns and Books of accounts 
(Table 12F) 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW 
2018-19 38,30,520  
2020-21 15,789  
40 
Mismatch of ITC availed between 
Annual returns and Books of accounts 
(Table 12F) 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW 2018-19 32,43,397  
41 
Mismatch of ITC availed between 
Annual returns and Books of accounts 
(Table 12F) 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXV 2019-20 22,69,906  
42 
Mismatch of ITC availed between 
Annual returns and Books of accounts 
(Table 12F) 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH 
202021 10,92,436  
2018-19 19,82,976  
2019-20 2,64,339  
43 
Reconciliation between ITC availed 
in Annual returns with expenses in 
financial statements (Table 14T) 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC 2018-19 59,70,139  
44 
Reconciliation between ITC availed 
in Annual returns with expenses in 
financial statements (Table 14T) 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXV 2018-19 48,93,612 
45 
Reconciliation between ITC availed 
in Annual returns with expenses in 
financial statements (Table 14T) 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXR 
2018-19 3,21,499  
2020-21 25,55,949  
46 
Reconciliation between ITC availed 
in Annual returns with expenses in 
financial statements (Table 14T) 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG 2019-20 20,08,356  
47 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 2018-19 4,04,69,622  
2019-20 4,04,80,692  
48 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC 
2018-19 9,836  
2019-20 12,352  
2020-21 7,19,25,664 
7,19,25,664  
49 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM 
2018-19 1,31,240  
2019-20 3,52,11,592  
2020-21 67,32,284  
50 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
2018-19 64,30,894  
2019-20 1,34,25,000 
1,34,25,000  
2020-21 2,01,02,004 
2,01,02,004  
51 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX3 2019-20 1,24,164  
2020-21 3,44,14,796  
52 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW 2018-19 2,96,16,296  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
349
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 349 
Appendix 5.4.1 (contd.) 
Sample selected for Centralised Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.4) 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTIN Year 
Deviation 
Amount 
(in ₹) 
53 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS 
2018-19 2,016 
2019-20 2,58,62,292 
2020-21 36,93,456 
54 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXV 2018-19 37,88,088 
2020-21 3,01,35,168 
55 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9 2019-20 1,11,19,530 
2020-21 1,11,46,787 
56 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXR 2020-21 2,42,44,184 
57 Suppression of tax liability based on 
E-way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 2018-19 3,73,75,728 
2019-20 4,06,10,056 
58 
Suppression of tax liability based on 
E-way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 
2018-19 1,31,682 
2019-20 2,06,30,898 
2020-21 1,08,21,213 
59 Suppression of tax liability based on 
E-way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX1 2018-19 20,71,544 
2019-20 37,48,441 
60 Suppression of tax liability based on 
E-way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 2018-19  50,07,267 
61 Suppression of tax liability based on 
E-way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB 2018-19  31,47,658 
62 Suppression of tax liability based on 
E-way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG 2018-19  24,15,574 
63 Suppression of tax liability based on 
E-way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX4 2018-19  22,26,756 
64 Suppression of tax liability based on 
E-way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 2018-19  21,13,040 
65 Suppression of tax liability based on 
E-way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY 2018-19  16,47,586 
66 Suppression of tax liability based on 
E-way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 2018-19 21,575 
2019-20 15,88,448 
67 Suppression of tax liability based on 
E-way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI 2019-20 9,48,832 
2020-21 5,71,240 
68 Mismatch in tax paid between books 
of accounts and returns (table 9R) 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI 2018-19  44,74,903 
69 Mismatch in tax paid between books 
of accounts and returns (table 9R) 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXX 2018-19 43,36,551 
2020-21 3,830 
70 Mismatch in tax paid between books 
of accounts and returns (table 9R) 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX0 2019-20  36,09,330 
71 Mismatch in tax paid between books 
of accounts and returns (table 9R) 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXN 2018-19  20,53,147 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
350
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 350 
Appendix 5.4.1 (contd.) 
Sample selected for Centralised Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.4) 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTIN Year 
Deviation 
Amount 
(in ₹) 
72 Under-declaration of taxable 
supplies by comparing TDS returns 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXJ 2018-19 6,71,081 
2019-20 2,16,377 
73 Under-declaration of taxable 
supplies by comparing TDS returns 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX1 2019-20  4,03,635 
74 Under-declaration of taxable 
supplies by comparing TDS returns 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXA 2019-20 206,804 
75 Under-declaration of taxable 
supplies by comparing TDS returns 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXE 2018-19  65,320 
76 Under-declaration of taxable 
supplies by comparing TDS returns 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU 2019-20 2,40,986 
77 
Suppression of taxable value based 
on unbilled revenue declared in 
GSTR 9C 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXQ 2020-21 19,87,872 
78 
Suppression of taxable value based 
on unbilled revenue declared in 
GSTR 9C 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP 2018-19  12,30,882 
79 
Suppression of taxable value based 
on unbilled revenue declared in 
GSTR 9C 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXO 2018-19 3,64,000 
80 
Suppression of taxable value based 
on unbilled revenue declared in 
GSTR 9C 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX1 2020-21  1,70,395 
81 Mismatch in taxable turnover 
declared in GSTR-9C Table 7G 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXO 2019-20 3,29,32,93,280 
82 Mismatch in taxable turnover 
declared in GSTR-9C Table 7G 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXQ 
2018-19 24,03,62,828 
2019-20 15,48,19,278 
2020-21 74,84,53,459 
83 Mismatch in taxable turnover 
declared in GSTR-9C Table 7G 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 2019-20  53,83,52,663 
84 Mismatch in taxable turnover 
declared in GSTR-9C Table 7G 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 2020-21  32,66,76,230 
85 Mismatch in taxable turnover 
declared in GSTR-9C Table 7G 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 2019-20  23,95,62,632 
86 Ineligible composition levy 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXK  
2018-19 1,75,00,000 
2019-20 9,42,38,096 
2020-21 7,90,00,000 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
351
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 351 
Appendix 5.4.1 (contd.) 
Sample selected for Centralised Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.4) 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTIN Year 
Deviation 
Amount 
(in ₹) 
87 Ineligible composition levy 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXR 2019-20 1,68,87,756  
88 Ineligible composition levy 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI 2018-19 1,32,76,500  
89 Ineligible composition levy 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXK 2018-19 1,28,28,015  
90 GSTR 3B was not filed but GSTR 
1 is available 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 2019-20 1,43,01,150  
91 GSTR 3B was not filed but GSTR 
1 is available 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU 2019-20 28,91,840  
92 GSTR 3B was not filed but GSTR 
1 is available 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXJ 2018-19 19,61,605  
93 GSTR 3B was not filed but GSTR 
1 is available 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY 2018-19 9,27,732  
2019-20 7,41,986  
94 GSTR 3B was not filed but GSTR 
1 is available 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXJ 2018-19 15,94,492  
95 GSTR 3B was not filed but GSTR 
1 is available 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 2019-20 5,65,793  
2020-21 9,82,438  
96 GSTR 3B was not filed but GSTR 
1 is available 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU 2019-20 12,08,738  
97 GSTR 3B was not filed but GSTR 
1 is available 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 2018-19 10,01,589  
98 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 
2018-19 30,582  
2019-20 41,78,141  
2020-21 673  
99 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 
201819 4,00,168  
2019-20 33,57,142  
202021 21,223  
100 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXA 2019-20 35,99,305  
101 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH  2018-19 11,91,828  
2019-20 16,04,577  
102 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 
2018-19 8,22,424  
2019-20 9,59,039  
2020-21 4,13,492  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
352
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 352 
Appendix 5.4.1 (concld.) 
Sample selected for Centralised Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.4) 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTIN Year Deviation Amount 
(in ₹) 
103 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXN  
2018-19 14,86,888  
2019-20 5,18,424  
2020-21 1,03,737  
104 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXX  2018-19 8,81,422  
2019-20 11,97,055  
105 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX6 2018-19 8,89,386  
2019-20 10,32,537  
106 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 
2018-19 8,79,426  
2019-20 5,59,325  
2020-21 4,04,363  
107 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 
2018-19 5,86,147  
2019-20 9,21,985  
2020-21 2,05,630  
108 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXJ 2018-19 10,78,313  
2019-20 5,56,728  
109 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 
2018-19 3,569  
2019-20 13,12,632  
2020-21 2,67,408  
110 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP 
2018-19 4,28,655  
2019-20 6,51,667  
2020-21 4,48,563  
111 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXE 
2018-19 14,35,208  
2019-20 28,686  
2020-21 40,442  
Total 7,02,76,91,592 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
353
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 353 
Appendix 5.4.2 
Sample selected for Range Audit  
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.4) 
Sl. No. Charge name 
1 Ambassa 
2 Udaipur  
3 Kailashahar 
4 Dharmanagar 
5 Belonia 
 
 
Appendix 5.4.3 
Sample selected for Detailed Audit  
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.4) 
Sl. No GSTIN Jurisdiction Name 
1 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXD Charge-I 
2 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY Charge-I 
3 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP Charge-I 
4 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXZ Charge-III 
5 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL Charge-III 
6 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM Charge-III 
7 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9 Charge-III 
8 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU Charge-IV 
9 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM Charge-V 
10 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXX Charge-V 
11 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU Charge-V 
12 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX3 Charge-VI 
13 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXZ Charge-VI 
14 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXO Charge - VII 
15 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX3 Charge - VII 
16 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM Charge - VII 
17 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXX Charge - VIII 
18 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 Charge - VIII 
19 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI Charge - VIII 
20 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI Dharmanagar 
 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
354
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 354 
Appendix 5.4.4 
Summary of extent of deviations/ inconsistencies observed 
{Reference: Paragraphs 5.4.8 and 5.4.8.4 (i)} 
Sl. 
No Parameter Algorithm used Amount  
(in ₹) 
Number of 
deviations 
1 
ITC mismatch 
between GSTR 2A 
and GSTR 3B 
ITC available as per GSTR 2A with all its 
amendments was compared with the ITC availed in 
GSTR-3B in table 4A (5) (accrued on domestic 
supplies) excluding the reversals in table 4B(2) but 
including the ITC availed in the subsequent year 
from table 8C of GSTR 9 and blocked credits.  
40,83,61,918 14 
2 
ITC passed on 
without supplier 
remitting tax 
ITC available from GSTR-2A was compared with 
Table 8A of GSTR-9 which captures ITC available 
from GSTR-2A (as an auto-populated non-editable 
field) but excludes those entries in GSTR-2A where 
the supplier has not filed GSTR-1 by due date of its 
filing and also excludes the ITC for the period 
during which the recipient taxpayer was under 
composition scheme. 
22,62,913 1 
3 
ITC availed in 
GSTR 3B filed after 
the cut-off period. 
ITC availed through table 4 of GSTR 3Bs 
pertaining to period 2018-19 to 2020-21 filed after 
October of the following year  
16,78,40,052 11 
4 Incorrect availing 
of ISD credit 
ISD ITC availed in GSTR 9 table 6G or GSTR 3B 
table 4(A)(4) of recipient was compared with the 
sum of table 5A, table 8A, and table 9A of GSTR 6 
of distributor GSTINs 
6,62,340 01 
5 
Short payment of 
tax under RCM 
versus ITC availed 
in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 
9 
Reverse Charge Mechanism (RCM) payments in 
GSTR 9 table 4G (tax payable) were compared 
with ITC availed in GSTR 9 table 6C, 6D and 6F 
(ITC availed). In cases where GSTR 9 was not 
available, RCM payment in GSTR 3B table 3.1(d) 
was compared with GSTR 3B 4(A)(2) and 4A(3). 
Greater of difference in GSTR 9 and GSTR 3B 
considered where both were available 
2,19,99,953 11 
6 
Mismatch of ITC 
availed between 
Annual returns and 
Books of accounts 
Positive figure in GSTR 9C table 12F and 
examination of reasons provided in table 13 for 
mismatch  
1,26,99,363 04 
7 
Reconciliation 
between ITC 
availed in Annual 
returns with 
expenses in 
financial statements 
Positive figure in GSTR 9C table 14T and 
examination of reasons provided in table 15 for 
mismatch 
1,57,49,555 04 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
355
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 355 
Appendix 5.4.4 (concld.) 
Summary of extent of deviations/ inconsistencies observed 
{Reference: Paragraphs 5.4.8 and 5.4.8.4 (i)} 
Sl. 
No Parameter Algorithm used Amount 
(in ₹) 
Number of 
deviations 
8 Unsettled liabilities 
The greater of tax liability between GSTR 1 
(tables 4 to 11), considering advances and 
amendments, and GSTR 9 (tables 4N, 10 and 11) 
was compared with tax paid details in GSTR 3B 
tables 3.1(a) and 3.1(b). In cases where GSTR 9 
was not available, GSTR 3B tax paid was 
compared with GSTR 1 liability. 
40,90,77,957 10 
9 
Suppression of tax 
liability based on       
e-way bill 
verification  
GSTR 3B table 3.1(a)+(b) was compared with tax 
liability declared in the e-way bills and cases 
where GSTR 3B are less than e-way bills are 
identified 
13,50,77,538 11 
10 
Mismatch in tax 
paid between books 
of accounts and 
returns 
Negative figure in GSTR 9C table 9R and 
examination of reasons provided in table 10 for 
mismatch 
1,44,77,758 04 
11 
Under-declaration 
of taxable supplies 
by comparing TDS 
returns 
Table 3.1(a) of GSTR 3B was compared with 
Column 6 of Table 9 of GSTR 2A. Cases where 
GSTR 3B values are less than that of GSTR 2A 
are identified.  
18,04,205 05 
12 
Suppression of 
taxable value based 
on unbilled revenue 
declared in GSTR 
9C 
Unbilled revenue at the beginning of the year in 
GSTR 9C table 5B should tally with the unbilled 
revenue of the previous GSTR 9C shown in table 
5H. Any mismatch indicates suppression of 
taxable turnover.  
37,53,149 04 
13 
Mismatch in 
taxable turnover 
declared in GSTR 
9C table 7G 
Negative figure in GSTR 9C table 7G and 
examination of reasons provided in table 8 for 
mismatch. 
5,54,15,20,370 05 
14 Ineligible 
composition levy 
The composition taxpayers whose turnover on all 
India basis (Central and State jurisdiction) under 
all GSTINs of the same PAN have crossed the 
turnover limit of ₹ 50 lakh in 2018-19 and ₹  75 
lakh in 2019-20.  
23,37,30,367 04 
15 
GSTR 3B was not 
filed but GSTR 1 is 
available 
Taxpayers who have not filed GSTR 3B but have 
filed GSTR 1 or where GSTR 2A available, 
indicating taxpayers carrying on the business 
without discharging tax.  
2,61,77,363 08 
16 Short payment of 
interest 
Interest calculated at the rate of 18 per cent  on 
cash portion of tax payment on delayed filing of 
GSTR 3B vis-à-vis interest declared in GSTR 3B.  
3,24,96,790 14 
Total 7,02,76,91,592 111 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
356
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 356 
Appendix 5.4.5 (A) 
Replies not received in case of Centralised Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.8.1) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No 
Audit Dimension 
Sample Department’s Reply 
not received 
Number Amount of 
mismatch Number Amount 
1 2 3 4 5 
1 ITC mismatch between GSTR 2A and 
GSTR 3B  14 40.84 08 24.17 
2 ITC passed on without supplier remitting 
tax 01 0.23 0 0 
3 ITC availed in GSTR 3B filed after the cut-
off period. 11 16.78 08 14.91 
4 Incorrect availing of ISD credit  01 0.07 0 0 
5 Short payment of tax under RCM versus 
ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 9 11 2.20 04 0.31 
6 Mismatch of ITC availed between Annual 
returns and Books of accounts 04 1.27 02 0.66 
7 
Reconciliation between ITC availed in 
Annual returns with expenses in financial 
statements  
04 1.57 04 1.57 
8 Unsettled liabilities 10 40.91 2 10.59 
9 Suppression of tax liability based on e-way 
bill verification 11 13.51 04 1.04 
10 Mismatch in tax paid between books of 
accounts and returns 04 1.45 01 0.21 
11 Under-declaration of taxable supplies by 
comparing TDS returns  05 0.18 1 0.04 
12 Suppression of taxable value based on 
unbilled revenue declared in GSTR 9C 04 0.38 02 0.06 
13 Mismatch in taxable turnover declared in 
GSTR 9C table 7G  05 554.15 02 443.69 
14 Ineligible composition levy  04 23.37 02 2.61 
15 GSTR-3B not filed but GSTR 1 available 08 2.62 02 0.29 
16 Short payment of interest 14 3.25 04 0.93 
Total 111 702.78 46 501.08 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
357
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 357 
Appendix 5.4.5 (B)  
Cases of non-receipt of departmental reply (ITC/ Tax liability mismatch) 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.8.1) 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTIN Year Amount (in ₹) 
1 ITC mismatch between GSTR 2A and 
GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXN 2018-19 6,59,335 
2019-20 4,19,81,441 
2 ITC mismatch between GSTR 2A and 
GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXD 2018-19 10,81,063 
2020-21 3,48,19,204 
3 ITC mismatch between GSTR 2A and 
GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX3 2018-19 56,12,392 
2019-20 3,00,99,644 
4 ITC mismatch between GSTR 2A and 
GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI 
2018-19 3,04,01,164 
2019-20 35,879 
2020-21 50,648 
5 ITC mismatch between GSTR 2A and 
GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 2018-19 5,80,135 
2019-20 2,66,09,181 
6 ITC mismatch between GSTR 2A and 
GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXZ 2018-19 2,72,372 
2019-20 2,53,68,479 
7 ITC mismatch between GSTR 2A and 
GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM 2018-19 1,85,77,143 
2020-21 45,57,347 
8 ITC mismatch between GSTR 2A and 
GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI 2018-19 2,19,959 
2019-20 2,06,88,803 
9 ITC availed in GSTR 3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 
2018-19 2,16,55,633 
2019-20 2,59,13,284 
2020-21 1,39,273 
10 ITC availed in GSTR 3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX3 2018-19  4,67,93,397 
11 ITC availed in GSTR 3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH 2018-19 2,34,48,829 
2019-20 34,72,193 
12 ITC availed in GSTR 3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 2019-20  67,95,921 
13 ITC availed in GSTR 3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX1 2018-19 55,84,535 
2020-21 50,864 
14 ITC availed in GSTR 3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG 2018-19  55,03,548 
15 ITC availed in GSTR 3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 2019-20 48,00,052 
2018-19 3,25,415 
16 ITC availed in GSTR 3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 2018-19  46,33,534 
17 Short payment of tax under RCM versus 
ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 9 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB 2018-19 31,996 
2019-20 8,91,660 
18 Short payment of tax under RCM versus 
ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 9 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXO 2020-21  7,91,792 
19 Short payment of tax under RCM versus 
ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 9 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX5 2018-19 2,51,395 
2019-20 4,90,533 
20 Short payment of tax under RCM versus 
ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 9 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 
2018-19 10,375 
2020-21 5,31,697 
2019-20 35,817 
21 Mismatch of ITC availed between Annual 
returns and Books of accounts (Table 12F) 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW 2018-19  32,43,397 
22 Mismatch of ITC availed between Annual 
returns and Books of accounts (Table 12F) 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH 
2020-21 10,92,436 
2018-19 19,82,976 
2019-20 2,64,339 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
358
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 358 
Appendix 5.4.5 (B) (concld.) 
Cases of non-receipt of departmental reply (ITC/ Tax liability mismatch) 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.8.1) 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTIN Year Amount  
(in ₹) 
23 
Reconciliation between ITC availed in 
Annual returns with expenses in financial 
statements (Table 14T) 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC 2018-19  59,70,139 
24 
Reconciliation between ITC availed in 
Annual returns with expenses in financial 
statements (Table 14T) 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXV 2018-19  48,93,612 
25 
Reconciliation between ITC availed in 
Annual returns with expenses in financial 
statements (Table 14T) 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXR 
2018-19 3,21,499 
2020-21 25,55,949 
26 
Reconciliation between ITC availed in 
Annual returns with expenses in financial 
statements (Table 14T) 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG 2019-20  20,08,356 
27 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC 
2018-19 9,836 
2019-20 12,352 
2020-21 7,19,25,664 
28 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXV 2018-19 37,88,088 
2020-21 3,01,35,168 
29 Suppression of tax liability based on e-way 
bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 2018-19  50,07,267 
30 Suppression of tax liability based on e-way 
bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX4 2018-19  22,26,756 
31 Suppression of tax liability based on e-way 
bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY 2018-19  16,47,586 
32 Suppression of tax liability based on e-way 
bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI 2019-20 9,48,832 
2020-21 5,71,240 
33 Mismatch in tax paid between books of 
accounts and returns (Table 9R)  1XXXXXXXXXXXXXN 2018-19  20,53,147 
34 Ineligible composition levy  1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI 2018-19 1,32,76,500 
35 Ineligible composition levy  1XXXXXXXXXXXXXK 2018-19 1,28,28,015 
36 GSTR-3B not filed but GSTR 1 available 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY 2018-19 9,27,732 
2019-20 7,41,986 
37 GSTR-3B not filed but GSTR 1 available 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU 2019-20 12,08,738 
38 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 
2018-19 4,00,168 
2019-20 33,57,142 
2020-21 21,223 
39 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX 2018-19 8,81,422 
2019-20 11,97,055 
40 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 
2018-19 8,79,426 
2019-20 5,59,325 
2020-21 4,04,363 
41 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 
2018-19 3,569 
2019-20 13,12,632 
2020-21 2,67,408 
Total 57,26,91,275 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
359
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 359 
Appendix 5.4.5 (C) 
Cases of non-receipt of departmental reply (Turnover mismatch) 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.8.1) 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTIN Year Amount 
(in ₹) 
1 Under-declaration of taxable supplies 
by comparing TDS returns. 1XXXXXXXXXXXX1 2019-20  4,03,636 
2 
Suppression of taxable value based on 
unbilled revenue declared in GSTR 
9C 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXO 2018-19  3,64,000 
3 
Suppression of taxable value based on 
unbilled revenue declared in GSTR 
9C 
1XXXXXXXXXXXX1 2020-21  1,70,395 
4 Mismatch in taxable turnover declared 
in GSTR 9C table 7G 1XXXXXXXXXXXXO 2019-20  3,29,32,93,280 
5 Mismatch in taxable turnover declared 
in GSTR 9C table 7G 1XXXXXXXXXXXXQ 
2018-19 24,03,62,828 
2019-20 15,48,19,278 
2020-21 74,84,53,459 
Total 4,43,78,66,876 
 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
360
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 360 
Appendix 5.4.6 
Summary of deficiencies and compliance deviations  
{Reference: Paragraphs 5.4.8.3 and 5.4.8.4 (ii)} 
(₹ in crore) 
Audit dimension267 
Summary of deficiencies Summary of compliance Deviations  
Cases where 
reply received 
Department 
reply accepted 
by audit 
Accepted by Department including cases where 
action is yet to be initiated  
Department 
reply not 
acceptable to 
audit 
(rebuttal) 
Total 
With valid 
explanation ASMT-10 
Under 
correspondence 
with taxpayer 
Action taken 
before query 
Sl. 
No 
Dimension No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
1 ITC mismatch between GSTR 2A and GSTR 3B 26 16.67 1 3.99 5 12.68 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 12.68 
2 ITC passed on without supplier remitting tax 1 0.23 0 0 1 0.23 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0.23 
3 ITC availed in GSTR 3B filed after the cut-off period 3 1.87 0 0 2 1.27 1 0.60 0 0 0 0 3 1.87 
4 Incorrect availing of ISD credit 01 0.07 0 0 1 0.07 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0.07 
5 Short payment of tax under RCM versus ITC availed in 
GSTR 3B/ GSTR 9 7 1.89 1 0.37 4 0.75 2 0.77 0 0 0 0 6 1.52 
6 Mismatch of ITC availed between Annual returns and 
Books of accounts (table 12F) 2 0.61 2 0.61 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
7 Unsettled liabilities 8 30.32 2 6.54 4 11.60 1 4.00 1 8.09 0 0 6 23.69 
8 Suppression of tax liability based on e-way bill 
verification 7 12.46 0 0 4 4.14 1 0.21 1 7.80 1 0.31 7 12.46 
9 Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and 
returns (table 9R) 3 1.24 1 0.36 1 0.43 1 0.45 0 0 0 0 2 0.88 
10 Under-declaration of taxable supplies by comparing 
TDS returns 4 _268 0 0 3 - 1 - 0 0 0 0 4 - 
  
 
267 Data analysis has been carried out on 16 identified parameters.  However, Department furnished responses in respect of 15 parameters.   
268 Total TDS returns in the five cases is ₹ 0.18 crore, out of which department’s reply in respect of TDS returns of ₹ 0.04 crore in one case was not received, in the compliance deviation three 
cases involving of ₹ 0.13 crore (ASMT-10) and one case of ₹ 0.01(Under correspondence with taxpayer) have been observed.  
264
265
265
264

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
361
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 361 
Appendix 5.4.6 (concld.) 
Summary of deficiencies and compliance deviations  
{Reference: Paragraphs 5.4.8.3 and 5.4.8.4 (ii)} 
(₹ in crore) 
Audit dimension269 
Summary of deficiencies Summary of compliance Deviations  
Cases where 
reply received 
Department 
reply accepted 
by audit 
Accepted by Department including cases where 
action is yet to be initiated  
Department 
reply not 
acceptable to 
audit 
(rebuttal) 
Total 
With valid 
explanation ASMT-10 
Under 
correspondence 
with taxpayer 
Action taken 
before query 
Sl. 
No 
Dimension No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
11 Suppression of taxable value based on unbilled revenue 
declared in GSTR 9C 2 -270 0 0 2 - 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 - 
12 Mismatch in taxable turnover declared in GSTR 9C 
table 7G 3 -271 3 - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
13 Ineligible composition levy 2 -272 0 0 0  0 1 - 0 0 1 - 2 - 
14 GSTR 3B not filed but GSTR 1 available 6 2.33 0 0 3 0.65 2 0.25 1 1.43 0 0 6 2.33 
15 Short payment of interest 10 2.32 0 0 8 1.88 2 0.44   0 0 10 2.32 
Total 65 70.01 10 11.96 38 33.70 12 6.72 3 17.32 2 0.31 55 58.05 
 
269 Data analysis has been carried out on 16 identified parameters.  However, Department furnished responses in respect of 15 parameters.   
270 Total unbilled revenue 5H & 5B of GSTR 9C in the four cases is ₹ 0.38 crore, out of which department’s reply in respect of unbilled revenue of ₹ 0.06 crore in two cases was not received, in 
the compliance deviation two cases involving unbilled revenue of ₹ 0.32 crore have been observed.  
271 Total unreconciled taxable turnover (TTO) in Table 7G of GSTR 9C in the five cases is ₹ 554.15 crore out of which Department’s reply in respect of mismatched TTO of ₹ 443.69 crore in two 
cases was not received, in three cases involving mismatched TTO of ₹ 110.46 crore valid explanation were provided by the Department to audit.   
272 Total ineligible composition levy in the four cases is ₹ 23.37 crore, out of which Department’s reply in two cases of ₹ 2.61 crore was not received, in the compliance deviation two cases 
involving of ₹ 1.69 crore (Under correspondence with taxpayer) and other ₹19.07 crore (rebuttal) have been observed.  
266
266
267
267
268
269
268
269

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
362
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 362 
Appendix 5.4.7 (A)  
Cases of Centralised Audit where ASMT 10 issued  
{Reference: Paragraph 5.4.8.4(i)} 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTIN Year Amount  
(in ₹) 
1 ITC mismatch between GSTR 2A and 
GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM 2018-19 1,75,34,964 
2019-20 1,21,31,726 
2 ITC mismatch between GSTR 2A and 
GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 2018-19 1,44,70,409 
2019-20 1,35,43,015 
3 ITC mismatch between GSTR 2A and 
GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW 2018-19 2,52,53,211 
2019-20 18,74,821 
4 ITC mismatch between GSTR 2A and 
GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 
2018-19 1,00,50,180 
2019-20 1,10,30,513 
2020-21 7,75,552 
5 ITC mismatch between GSTR 2A and 
GSTR 3B 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX0 2018-19 17,41,496 
2020-21 1,84,23,728 
6 ITC passed on without supplier 
remitting tax 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP 2019-20  3,89,896  
2020-21  18,73,017  
7 ITC availed in GSTR 3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS 2019-20 70,39,352 
8 ITC availed in GSTR 3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 
2018-19 5,87,698 
2019-20 8,53,017 
2020-21 42,60,410 
9 Incorrect availing of ISD credit 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXJ 2018-19 6,62,340 
10 
Short payment of tax under RCM 
versus ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 
9 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW 2018-19  32,43,399 
11 
Short payment of tax under RCM 
versus ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 
9 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 2018-19  25,30,409 
12 
Short payment of tax under RCM 
versus ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 
9 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH 
2018-19 7,49,144 
2019-20 3,09,370 
13 
Short payment of tax under RCM 
versus ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 
9 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS 2019-20  6,35,445 
14 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX3 2019-20 1,24,164 
2020-21 3,44,14,796 
15
15 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW 2018-19  2,96,16,296 
16 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS 
2018-19 2,016 
2019-20 2,58,62,292 
2020-21 36,93,456 
17 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9 2019-20 1,11,19,530 
2020-21 1,11,46,787 
18 Suppression of tax liability based on e-
way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 
2018-19 1,31,682 
2019-20 2,06,30,898 
2020-21 1,08,21,213 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
363
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 363 
Appendix 5.4.7 (A) (contd.) 
Cases of Centralised Audit where ASMT 10 issued  
{Reference: Paragraph 5.4.8.4(i)} 
Sl. 
No Dimension GSTIN Year Amount 
(in ₹) 
19 Suppression of tax liability based 
on e-way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX1 2018-19 20,71,544 
2019-20 37,48,441 
20 Suppression of tax liability based 
on e-way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG 2018-19  24,15,574 
21 Suppression of tax liability based 
on e-way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 2018-19 21,575 
2019-20 15,88,448 
22 
Mismatch in tax paid between 
books of accounts and returns 
(Table 9R) 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
2018-19 43,36,551 
2020-21 3,830 
23 
Under-declaration of taxable 
supplies by comparing TDS 
returns. 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXJ 
2018-19 6,71,081 
2019-20 2,16,377 
24 
Under-declaration of taxable 
supplies by comparing TDS 
returns. 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU 2019-20  2,40,986 
25 
Under-declaration of taxable 
supplies by comparing TDS 
returns. 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXA 2019-20  2,06,804 
26 
Suppression of taxable value 
based on unbilled revenue 
declared in GSTR 9C 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXQ 2020-21  19,87,872 
27 
Suppression of taxable value 
based on unbilled revenue 
declared in GSTR 9C 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP 
2018-19 12,30,882 
28 GSTR-3B not filed but GSTR 
1/2A available  1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU 2019-20  28,91,840 
29 GSTR-3B not filed but GSTR 
1available 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXJ 2018-19  19,61,605 
30 GSTR-3B not filed but GSTR 
1available 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXJ 2018-19 15,94,492 
31 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 
2018-19 30,582 
2019-20 41,78,141 
2020-21 673 
32 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXA 2019-20 35,99,305 
33 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 
2018-19 8,22,424 
2019-20 9,59,039 
2020-21 4.13,492 
34 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXN 
2018-19 14,86,888 
2019-20 5,18,424 
2020-21 1,03,737 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
364
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 364 
Appendix 7 (A) (concld.) 
Cases of Centralised Audit where ASMT 10 issued  
{Reference: Paragraph 5.4.8.4 (i)} 
Sl. 
No Dimension GSTIN Year Amount 
(in ₹) 
35 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX6 2018-19 8,89,386 
2019-20 10,32,537 
36 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 
2018-19 5,86,147 
2019-20 9,21,985 
2020-21 2,05,630 
37 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP 
2018-19 4,28,655 
2019-20 6,51,667 
2020-21 4,48,563 
38 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXE 
2018-19 14,35,208 
2019-20 28,686 
2020-21 40,442 
Total 34,14,95,755 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
365
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 365 
Appendix 5.4.7 (B) 
Under correspondence with taxpayers  
{Reference: Paragraph 5.4.8.4 (i)} 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTIN Year Amount  
(in ₹) 
1 ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed after the 
cut-off period. 1XXXXXXXXXXXZ 2019-20 17,31,263 
2018-19 42,51,834 
2 Short payment of tax under RCM versus 
ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 9 1XXXXXXXXXXXH 2018-19 2,19,694 
2019-20 37,64,756 
3 Short payment of tax under RCM versus 
ITC availed in GSTR 3B/ GSTR 9 1XXXXXXXXXXX2 2018-19  37,62,544 
4 Unsettled liabilities 1XXXXXXXXXXXX 
2018-19 64,30,894 
2019-20 1,34,25,000 
2020-21 2,01,02,004 
5 Suppression of tax liability based on e-
way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXL 2018-19  21,13,040 
6 Mismatch in tax paid between books of 
accounts and returns (Table 9R) 1XXXXXXXXXXXXI 2018-19  44,74,903 
7 Under-declaration of taxable supplies by 
comparing TDS returns. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXE 2018-19  65,320 
8 Ineligible composition levy  1XXXXXXXXXXXXR 2019-20 1,68,87,756 
9 GSTR-3B not filed but GSTR 1available  1XXXXXXXXXXXX8 2019-20 5,65,793 
2020-21 9,82,438 
10 GSTR-3B not filed but GSTR 1available  1XXXXXXXXXXXT 2018-19 10,01,589 
11 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXH 2018-19 11,91,828 
2019-20 16,04,577 
12 Short payment of interest 1XXXXXXXXXXXJ 2018-19 10,78,313 
2019-20 5,56,728 
Total 8,42,10,274 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
366
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 366 
Appendix 5.4.7 (C) 
Cases where Department’s reply was not accepted to Audit. 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.4.8.4 (ii)} 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTIN Year Amount 
(in ₹) 
1 Suppression of tax liability based on E-
way bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXB 2018-19  31,47,658 
2 Ineligible composition levy 1XXXXXXXXXXXK 
2018-19 -279 
2019-20 -280 
2020-21 -281 
Total 31,47,658 
 
 
Appendix 5.4.7 (D) 
Cases where action was taken before issue of Audit Queries 
{Reference: Paragraph 5.4.8.4 (iii)} 
Sl. 
No. Dimension GSTIN Year Amount 
(in ₹) 
1 Unsettled liabilities  1XXXXXXXXXXXXT 2018-19 4,04,69,622 
2019-20 4,04,80,692 
2 Suppression of tax liability based on e-way 
bill verification 1XXXXXXXXXXXXT 2018-19 3,73,75,728 
2019-20 4,06,10,056 
3 GSTR-3B not filed but GSTR 1available  1XXXXXXXXXXXXT 2019-20 1,43,01,150 
Total 17,32,37,248 
  
 
279 Turnover amount of ₹ 1.75 crore 
280  Turnover amount of ₹ 9.42 crore 
281  Turnover amount of ₹ 7.90 crore 
270
271
272
270
271
272

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
367
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 367 
Appendix 5.4.8 
Mismatch between ITC availed in table 8A of GSTR 9 and GSTR 2A 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.9.4) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Charge Yea r 
GSTR 9-8A 
(ITC auto populated 
from GSTR 2A) 
GSTR 2A 
ITC availment 
Mismatch 
ITC  
1 2 3 4 5 6 (5-4) 
1 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXD Charge-I 2018-19 1,33,61,69,079 1,33,66,64,685 4,95,606 
2 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9 Charge-III 2018-19 2,07,40,362 2,27,94,315 20,53,953 
3 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM Charge-V 2018-19 39,62,10,609 42,92,20,875 3,30,10,266 
4 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXO Charge-VII 2019-20 1,74,33,210 2,00,64,841 2,631,631 
5 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXX Charge-VIII 2018-19 1,38,70,110 1,41,84,857 31,870,110 
6 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 Charge-VIII 
2019-20 19,91,87,401 28,32,21,734 8,40,34,333 
2020-21 26,39,51,973 37,11,23,245 107,171,272 
Total  22,57,07,346 
 
 
 
Appendix 5.4.9 
Mismatch in ITC under table 12F of GSTR 9C  
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.9.4) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. GSTIN Charge Yea r 
GSTR 9C-12D 
ITC declared as 
per financial 
statement 
GSTR 9C-12E 
ITC claimed as 
per annual 
return 
GSTR 9C-12F 
Mismatch ITC 
1 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXD  Charge-I 2019-20 1,33,84,85,288 1,35,18,55,866 1,33,70,578 
Total 1,33,70,578 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
368
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 368 
Appendix 5.4.10 
Mismatch between ITC availed in GSTR 3B and ITC availed in GSTR 2A  
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.9.4) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Charge Yea r GSTR 3B  
ITC availed 
GSTR 2A  
ITC eligible Mismatch ITC 
1 2 3 4 5 6 (Col. 4 – Col.5) 
1 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXZ  Charge-III 2018-19 2,49,91,718 2,31,55,880 18,35,838 
2 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL  Charge-III 2018-19 5,99,96,835 5,96,32,084 3,64,750 
3 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9  Charge-III 2018-19 2,51,07,580 2,27,94,315 23,13,264 
2019-20 1,50,90,990 1,38,29,612 12,61,378 
4 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU  Charge-V 2019-20 46,33,189 37,17,278 9,15,911 
5 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXX  Charge-V 2020-21 6,63,45,159 6,52,11,684 11,33,475 
6 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX3  Charge-VI 2018-19 26,02,60,996 21,93,82,074 4,08,78,922 
2020-21 16,18,53,397 15,74,09,693 44,43,704 
7 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM  Charge-VII 2018-19 6,61,21,960 4,30,65,580 2,30,56,381 
8 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8  Charge-VIII 2018-19 40,00,68,413 38,25,17,962 1,75,50,451 
9 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI Charge-VIII 2018-19 2,44,34,639  2,15,45,016 28,89,623 
2020-21 2,39,32,058 2,22,29,510 17,02,548 
10 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI  Dharmanagar 2018-19 12,83,08,305 12,38,69,978 44,38,327 
2020-21 10,57,23,162 9,07,06,637 1,50,16,525 
Total excess ITC 11,78,01,088 
 
 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
369
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 369 
Appendix 6.2.1 
Excess payment of salary where the excess payment was more than ₹ 20,000 in each case 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
DDO 
Code Bill ID Bill No. Bill Date Employee Name 
Employee 
Number 
(HRMS) 
Beneficiary 
Code 
(CTOS) 
Net salary as 
per salary 
bill (HRMS) 
Actual salary 
paid (CTOS) 
Excess 
payment 
Recovery 
as on July 
2025 a b c d e f g h i j k (j-i) 
A Excess payment of salary where the excess payment was more than ₹ 5,00,000  
1 22007 7672 66 16-12-2022 Litan Das 108857 118504 20,310 8,92,310 8,72,000  
2 22007 8670 71 17-01-2023 Litan Das 108857 118504 26,862 8,98,862 8,72,000  
3 22007 9760 78 21-02-2023 Litan Das 108857 118504 23,586 8,95,586 8,72,000  
4 22007 5959 50 15-10-2022 Litan Das 108857 118504 22,310 7,94,310 7,72,000  
5 22007 6796 56 16-11-2022 Litan Das 108857 118504 20,310 7,92,310 7,72,000  
6 22007 5740 57 17-11-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 16,616 6,88,616 6,72,000  
         Total 48,32,000  
B Excess payment of salary where the excess payment was ₹ 2,00,001 to ₹ 5,00,000  
7 22007 3212 33 20-08-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,116 3,90,116 3,72,000  
8 22007 3816 39 20-09-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,616 3,90,616 3,72,000  
9 22007 4818 52 20-10-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,616 3,90,616 3,72,000  
         Total 11,16,000  
C Excess payment of salary where the excess payment was ₹ 1,00,001 to ₹ 2,00,000  
10 3024 16235 311 19-12-2017 Alak Das 56638 140049 44,567 1,64,467 1,19,900  
11 3024 17549 335 17-01-2018 Alak Das 56638 140049 44,567 1,56,144 1,11,577  
12 3024 18541 356 12-02-2018 Alak Das 56638 140049 44,567 1,47,315 1,02,748  
         Total 3,34,225  
D Excess payment of salary where the excess payment was ₹ 20,001 to ₹ 1,00,000  
13 16013 2540 140 27-02-2019 Amit Ghosh 109440 212539 52,017 1,48,701 96,684  
14 22007 4750 48 20-10-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,933 99,933 81,000  
15 10037 11357 136 16-02-2019 Bijan Kumar Mandal 93885 178762 6,588 87,358 80,770  
16 3024 13476 340 16-02-2019 Alak Das 56638 140049 47,377 1,24,977 77,600  
17 11084 21495 1221 20-01-2020 Pradip Das 43096 222144 26,921 99,187 72,266  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
370
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 370 
Appendix 6.2.1 (contd.) 
Excess payment of salary where the excess payment was more than ₹ 20,000 in each case 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
DDO 
Code Bill ID Bill No. Bill Date Employee Name 
Employee 
Number 
(HRMS) 
Beneficiary 
Code 
(CTOS) 
Net salary as 
per salary 
bill (HRMS) 
Actual salary 
paid (CTOS) 
Excess 
payment 
Recovery 
as on July 
2025 a b c d e f g h i j k (j-i) 
18 22007 113 2 16-03-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,116 90,116 72,000  
19 22007 723 13 19-04-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,116 90,116 72,000  
20 22007 1358 18 17-05-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,116 90,116 72,000  
21 22007 1940 23 20-06-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,116 90,116 72,000  
22 22007 2393 28 20-07-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,116 90,116 72,000  
23 22007 6637 65 20-01-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,489 90,489 72,000  
24 22007 7317 70 19-02-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,489 90,489 72,000  
25 22007 1862 16 20-06-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,385 89,385 71,000  
26 22007 2338 21 20-07-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,385 89,385 71,000  
27 22007 3014 27 24-08-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,433 89,433 71,000  
28 22007 3552 32 20-09-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,933 89,933 71,000  
29 22007 6042 58 20-12-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,433 89,433 71,000  
30 22007 5337 53 17-11-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,433 88,933 70,500  
31 22007 68 2 18-03-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 19,385 89,385 70,000  
32 22007 581 7 17-04-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 19,385 89,385 70,000  
33 22007 1215 11 20-05-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 19,385 89,385 70,000  
34 22007 7111 74 18-01-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 19,385 89,385 70,000  
35 22007 7805 79 18-02-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 19,385 89,385 70,000  
36 22007 6459 65 18-12-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,677 78,677 60,000  
37 7103 9661 70 23-11-2019 Subash Dasgupta 27922 151613 65,647 1,23,647 58,000  
38 7063 8694 507 22-10-2021 Uday Kumar Debbarma 21558 104871 49,745 99,745 50,000  
39 7063 13109 1106 19-02-2021 Biplab Sukla Das 21626 107023 27,319 77,319 50,000  
40 22007 3208 33 19-08-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,677 68,677 50,000  
41 22007 5068 54 18-10-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 19,177 69,177 50,000  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
371
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 371 
Appendix 6.2.1 (contd.) 
Excess payment of salary where the excess payment was more than ₹ 20,000 in each case 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
DDO 
Code Bill ID Bill No. Bill Date Employee Name 
Employee 
Number 
(HRMS) 
Beneficiary 
Code 
(CTOS) 
Net salary as 
per salary 
bill (HRMS) 
Actual salary 
paid (CTOS) 
Excess 
payment 
Recovery 
as on July 
2025 a b c d e f g h i j k (j-i) 
42 22007 5745 59 18-11-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,677 68,677 50,000  
43 12024 6711 573 16-11-2021 Uttam Saha 119721 144613 20,241 66,681 46,440  
44 1006 4600 136 28-11-2018 Sukanta Debbarma 20699 221696 6,697 51,697 45,000  
45 22028 188 1 14-03-2018 Sukumar Chandra Datta 10075 106305 8,953 53,417 44,464  
46 18026 165 1 16-03-2019 Binay Sinha 104485 170356 37,441 81,217 43,776  
47 7108 248 5 15-03-2018 Akhtar Hossain 51755 188197 4,282 47,982 43,700  
48 3024 9639 248 22-11-2018 Rakhal Chandra Dey 106883 199661 41,917 84,445 42,528  
49 3024 8748 222 15-10-2018 Alak Das 56638 140049 44,957 86,962 42,005  
50 3054 160 14 15-03-2018 Sukumal Das 30741 159949 23,861 65,658 41,797  
51 21024 2883 61 16-10-2017 Pranab Sharma 15173 186347 24,472 65,979 41,507  
52 7063 12672 682 20-01-2022 Gakul Debbarma 21638 105887 16,536 56,536 40,000  
53 7111 12434 501 18-01-2022 Bijay Sunar 53118 164947 37,327 77,327 40,000  
54 8083 830 5 16-03-2021 Kanti Ranjan Deb Roy 54509 175324 29,535 69,535 40,000  
55 22007 703 8 24-04-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,029 58,029 40,000  
56 22007 1194 13 20-05-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,029 58,029 40,000  
57 22007 1805 20 18-06-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,029 58,029 40,000  
58 1036 1647 288 19-06-2021 Fagu Kacchap 62406 123016 37,900 77,330 39,430  
59 7118 2525 90 29-05-2021 Anorsh Debbarma 72015 243484 42,001 80,792 38,791  
60 3024 13476 340 16-02-2019 Dhirode Debbarma 67633 183809 28,917 67,334 38,417  
61 11084 299 13 15-03-2019 Pradip Das 43096 222144 24,949 63,300 38,351  
62 10001 103 1 14-03-2019 Asit Kumar Das 129 209423 46,777 84,817 38,040  
63 14028 2493 178 18-07-2018 Shyamal Baidya 71210 143309 23,714 61,416 37,702  
64 9217 20459 32 16-09-2022 Subhas Das 11680 149428 25,667 62,391 36,724  
65 9217 32649 49 16-12-2022 Subhas Das 11680 149428 23,667 60,391 36,724  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
372
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 372 
Appendix 6.2.1 (contd.) 
Excess payment of salary where the excess payment was more than ₹ 20,000 in each case 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
DDO 
Code Bill ID Bill No. Bill Date Employee Name 
Employee 
Number 
(HRMS) 
Beneficiary 
Code 
(CTOS) 
Net salary as 
per salary 
bill (HRMS) 
Actual salary 
paid (CTOS) 
Excess 
payment 
Recovery 
as on July 
2025 a b c d e f g h i j k (j-i) 
66 3024 6732 176 12-09-2018 Rajib Ratan Tripura 123442 230638 21,702 57,930 36,228  
67 3024 8748 222 15-10-2018 Dhirode Debbarma 67633 183809 23,457 59,685 36,228  
68 11084 11612 699 25-08-2017 Pradip Das 43096 222144 24,208 59,500 35,292  
69 22028 188 1 14-03-2018 Swapan Kumar Sarkar 22550 106274 14,362 49,647 35,285  
70 21031 2363 189 19-06-2019 Rabi Charan Debbarma 41147 100472 33,851 68,917 35,066  
71 11074 20427 602 14-12-2018 Saibal Chandra Pandit 67608 206999 60,217 95,217 35,000  
72 9217 2253 8 16-04-2022 Subhas Das 11680 149428 24,198 58,415 34,217  
73 9217 2335 8 16-04-2021 Subhas Das 11680 149428 27,199 61,416 34,217  
74 9217 4739 12 16-05-2021 Subhas Das 11680 149428 27,199 61,416 34,217  
75 9217 14247 28 16-08-2021 Subhas Das 11680 149428 26,198 60,415 34,217  
76 9217 17556 35 16-09-2021 Subhas Das 11680 149428 26,198 60,415 34,217  
77 9217 22328 44 16-10-2021 Subhas Das 11680 149428 26,198 60,415 34,217  
78 9217 25950 51 16-11-2021 Subhas Das 11680 149428 24,198 58,415 34,217  
79 15068 5357 202 15-06-2020 Sanjib Patra 62299 171256 55,817 89,634 33,817 33,817 
80 9217 11609 23 20-07-2020 Subhas Das 11680 149428 26,213 59,509 33,296  
81 9217 14643 27 16-08-2020 Subhas Das 11680 149428 26,213 59,509 33,296  
82 9217 17635 34 16-09-2020 Subhas Das 11680 149428 26,213 59,509 33,296  
83 9217 22897 42 16-10-2020 Subhas Das 11680 149428 26,213 59,509 33,296  
84 9217 32045 59 16-01-2021 Subhas Das 11680 149428 26,413 59,709 33,296  
85 4014 6242 409 24-01-2023 Bijoy Mohan Tripura 37355 175252 38,346 71,449 33,103  
86 3063 3809 129 19-07-2021 Rasamati Nama 65730 121095 23,670 55,245 31,575  
87 14028 791 46 18-04-2018 Barenjoy Tripura 73134 123816 12,412 43,545 31,133  
88 1011 2729 41 20-08-2021 Dayal Chakma 6366 210263 39,192 70,192 31,000  
89 15085 10309 454 15-09-2021 Suchitra Singha 45028 232638 30,336 61,336 31,000 31,000 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
373
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 373 
Appendix 6.2.1 (contd.) 
Excess payment of salary where the excess payment was more than ₹ 20,000 in each case 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
DDO 
Code Bill ID Bill No. Bill Date Employee Name 
Employee 
Number 
(HRMS) 
Beneficiary 
Code 
(CTOS) 
Net salary as 
per salary 
bill (HRMS) 
Actual salary 
paid (CTOS) 
Excess 
payment 
Recovery 
as on July 
2025 a b c d e f g h i j k (j-i) 
90 22006 6839 166 21-11-2022 Dilip Roy 78854 152315 30,631 61,631 31,000  
91 8004 44067 582 15-02-2021 Bhabesh Chakraborty 63908 114051 26,517 57,464 30,947  
92 5070 10066 67 21-10-2022 Kamalesh Debbarma 108421 118371 74,286 1,05,008 30,722  
93 15096 337 5 16-03-2022 Uttam Debbarma 108472 125851 24,678 55,286 30,608 30,608 
94 8101 31517 78 16-11-2020 Krishna Kamal Deb 36392 113079 28,613 58,717 30,104  
95 7063 2299 193 17-05-2021 Gakul Debbarma 21638 105887 14,848 44,848 30,000  
96 7063 3148 257 18-06-2021 Uday Kumar Debbarma 21558 104871 47,391 77,391 30,000  
97 7063 4157 328 16-07-2021 Uday Kumar Debbarma 21558 104871 49,245 79,245 30,000  
98 7063 5521 389 18-08-2021 Uday Kumar Debbarma 21558 104871 49,245 79,245 30,000  
99 7063 6705 448 20-09-2021 Uday Kumar Debbarma 21558 104871 49,245 79,245 30,000  
100 7063 16821 641 23-02-2023 Ranadhir Bhattacharjee 21918 107175 45,107 75,107 30,000  
101 7111 14037 534 20-02-2022 Bijay Sunar 53118 164947 37,327 67,327 30,000  
102 8073 26091 143 16-09-2019 Gopendra Chandra Paul 82928 170520 30,717 60,717 30,000  
103 8222 46151 1609 16-11-2017 Kalpana Jamatia 67545 176416 30,482 60,482 30,000  
104 9068 9248 147 19-06-2019 Sanjib Kumar Bardhan 26579 206492 44,577 74,577 30,000  
105 9068 20834 342 20-09-2019 Jagannath Acharjee 16779 213572 45,037 75,037 30,000  
106 19020 102 2 16-03-2022 Sekhar Debbarma 18199 171645 34,335 64,335 30,000  
107 22007 133 2 18-03-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 23,029 53,029 30,000  
108 22007 6768 91 17-01-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 23,029 53,029 30,000  
109 22007 7437 100 18-02-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 23,029 53,029 30,000  
110 8101 26318 72 15-10-2020 Krishna Kamal Deb 36392 113079 29,113 58,717 29,604  
111 20048 9376 400 16-11-2019 Siddhartha Debbarma 91366 231749 35,492 64,992 29,500  
112 20048 10411 509 17-12-2019 Siddhartha Debbarma 91366 231749 35,492 64,992 29,500  
113 19013 6142 67 16-11-2021 Manika Das 28196 168527 20,991 50,321 29,330  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
374
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 374 
Appendix 6.2.1 (contd.) 
Excess payment of salary where the excess payment was more than ₹ 20,000 in each case 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
DDO 
Code Bill ID Bill No. Bill Date Employee Name 
Employee 
Number 
(HRMS) 
Beneficiary 
Code 
(CTOS) 
Net salary as 
per salary 
bill (HRMS) 
Actual salary 
paid (CTOS) 
Excess 
payment 
Recovery 
as on July 
2025 a b c d e f g h i j k (j-i) 
114 19013 7869 78 16-01-2022 Manika Das 28196 168527 20,991 50,321 29,330  
115 8222 27711 967 16-09-2019 Damodar Chatterjee 110152 180324 36,365 65,365 29,000  
116 11078 11873 46 19-09-2020 Sabitri Jamatia 78292 132113 11,192 39,992 28,800  
117 11034 569 5 15-03-2022 Nirantan Noatia 78582 191962 27,381 56,056 28,675  
118 3024 6732 176 12-09-2018 Alak Das 56638 140049 45,457 73,957 28,500  
119 14028 695 40 18-04-2018 Shyamal Baidya 71210 143309 22,829 51,079 28,250  
120 5001 135 11 14-03-2018 Arabinda Deb 101209 128119 21,051 49,137 28,086  
121 4014 1283 73 25-06-2020 Bir Kumar Debbarma 34077 184290 22,252 50,283 28,031  
122 12021 4906 280 20-09-2018 Bharat Milan Jamatia 126707 107224 13,928 41,959 28,031  
123 12021 8919 450 25-01-2019 Bharat Milan Jamatia 126707 107224 15,342 43,373 28,031  
124 3024 1291 25 20-04-2018 Alak Das 56638 140049 44,567 72,567 28,000  
125 7063 10039 609 18-11-2021 Uday Kumar Debbarma 21558 104871 47,745 75,745 28,000  
126 7063 11183 642 18-12-2021 Uday Kumar Debbarma 21558 104871 47,745 75,745 28,000  
127 22018 7639 569 19-12-2022 Sudhangshu Kumar Shil 86469 214794 9,531 37,079 27,548  
128 8083 6900 243 18-05-2021 Gopal Sarkar 126114 187607 22,507 49,603 27,096  
129 7063 3151 259 18-06-2021 Rathindra Mazumder 32566 153014 68,719 95,719 27,000  
130 20028 76 14 12-03-2018 Sachindra Debbarma 25939 217489 6,888 33,888 27,000  
131 11044 7357 24 20-07-2020 Narayan Chandra Das 9844 126731 22,062 48,827 26,765  
132 3066 1472 21 20-04-2017 Bikash Debbarma 134453 158372 4,650 31,339 26,689  
133 5042 13801 981 19-02-2022 Sahadeb Das 62512 238421 4,564 31,204 26,640  
134 6043 3692 42 18-09-2021 Rina Debbarma 22409 142838 28,649 54,649 26,000  
135 3024 8748 222 15-10-2018 Sumit Chakraborty 59389 125909 20,974 46,581 25,607  
136 1006 168 2 17-03-2020 Sarat Chandra Bardhan 80130 209012 18,749 44,042 25,293  
137 22006 4787 97 27-10-2020 Dilip Roy 78854 152315 20,821 45,821 25,000  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
375
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 375 
Appendix 6.2.1 (contd.) 
Excess payment of salary where the excess payment was more than ₹ 20,000 in each case 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
DDO 
Code Bill ID Bill No. Bill Date Employee Name 
Employee 
Number 
(HRMS) 
Beneficiary 
Code 
(CTOS) 
Net salary as 
per salary 
bill (HRMS) 
Actual salary 
paid (CTOS) 
Excess 
payment 
Recovery 
as on July 
2025 a b c d e f g h i j k (j-i) 
138 22006 5407 109 23-11-2020 Dilip Roy 78854 152315 20,321 45,321 25,000  
139 2020 1109 29 18-04-2022 Kanai Lal Chakraborty 70576 126561 24,736 49,686 24,950  
140 11136 16302 215 17-10-2022 Tarani Jamatia 22838 122472 40,950 65,658 24,708  
141 11136 19106 235 17-11-2022 Tarani Jamatia 22838 122472 38,950 63,658 24,708  
142 11136 21621 263 19-12-2022 Tarani Jamatia 22838 122472 38,950 63,658 24,708  
143 11084 6297 322 15-06-2018 Pradip Das 43096 222144 23,771 48,320 24,549  
144 14028 6631 462 21-01-2021 Kishan Kumar Tripura 72264 138707 22,685 47,185 24,500  
145 8249 40992 1542 17-12-2018 Saumen Datta 123793 208010 34,117 58,342 24,225  
146 3024 10638 307 16-12-2019 Himachal Rajkumar 58691 224775 49,417 73,494 24,077  
147 3024 12036 328 21-01-2020 Himachal Rajkumar 58691 224775 49,417 73,494 24,077  
148 1036 3862 439 14-09-2017 Shakti Nama 62603 122583 20,509 44,518 24,009  
149 8083 6900 243 18-05-2021 Kanti Ranjan Deb Roy 54509 175324 30,535 54,535 24,000  
150 7103 10899 77 23-12-2019 Subash Dasgupta 27922 151613 65,647 89,347 23,700  
151 7103 12213 80 28-01-2020 Subash Dasgupta 27922 151613 65,647 89,347 23,700  
152 3024 9639 248 22-11-2018 Kumbha Karna Kalai 64003 131126 38,117 61,778 23,661  
153 20002 5751 584 16-08-2022 Gopal Chandra Das 49489 111577 33,319 56,775 23,456  
154 15027 6855 23 17-07-2021 Sankar Chandra Saha 39006 163478 36,599 59,979 23,380 23,380 
155 8027 31810 231 16-11-2021 Nakul Chandra Bardhan 46625 119246 24,550 47,801 23,251  
156 22006 7888 193 21-02-2022 Dilip Roy 78854 152315 17,236 40,312 23,076  
157 3067 9949 663 25-11-2022 Biswapati Chakraborty 47928 200804 27,315 50,315 23,000  
158 14028 5408 392 20-11-2018 Shyamal Baidya 71210 143309 28,445 51,445 23,000  
159 14028 6111 451 17-12-2018 Shyamal Baidya 71210 143309 28,445 51,445 23,000  
160 14028 6778 491 18-01-2019 Shyamal Baidya 71210 143309 28,145 51,145 23,000  
161 22006 2378 66 21-06-2022 Dilip Roy 78854 152315 15,236 38,236 23,000  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
376
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 376 
Appendix 6.2.1 (contd.) 
Excess payment of salary where the excess payment was more than ₹ 20,000 in each case 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
DDO 
Code Bill ID Bill No. Bill Date Employee Name 
Employee 
Number 
(HRMS) 
Beneficiary 
Code 
(CTOS) 
Net salary as 
per salary 
bill (HRMS) 
Actual salary 
paid (CTOS) 
Excess 
payment 
Recovery 
as on July 
2025 a b c d e f g h i j k (j-i) 
162 2075 505 14 19-03-2019 Pounami Pal 108735 165406 20,677 43,527 22,850  
163 11136 13329 173 15-09-2022 Tarani Jamatia 22838 122472 40,950 63,658 22,708  
164 8004 9336 92 14-06-2021 Mangal Krishna Jamatia 64474 101924 33,061 55,618 22,557  
165 2075 3082 87 14-06-2019 Gopal Krishna Majumdar 134420 219899 19,701 42,011 22,310  
166 1036 934 116 16-05-2019 Bikash Debbarma 109752 116966 19,096 41,292 22,196  
167 8083 7585 206 16-05-2018 Sulakshna Debbarma 64716 176896 16,072 38,244 22,172  
168 11070 1908 52 17-04-2019 Tarani Jamatia 22838 122472 33,592 55,642 22,050  
169 14028 3574 274 28-08-2017 Ram Krishna Chakraborty 72153 138787 14,962 37,012 22,050  
170 13042 12192 570 16-01-2023 Narayan Das 74134 163654 42,227 64,227 22,000  
171 13042 13759 664 17-02-2023 Narayan Das 74134 163654 42,227 64,227 22,000  
172 15068 23062 1053 17-02-2021 Bipul Kanti Datta 54788 185278 18,134 40,134 22,000 22,000 
173 21031 3918 325 19-08-2019 Samir Debbarma 41470 100077 50,217 72,017 21,800  
174 21031 5003 465 17-09-2019 Samir Debbarma 41470 100077 50,217 72,017 21,800  
175 21031 6329 566 18-10-2019 Samir Debbarma 41470 100077 50,217 72,017 21,800  
176 11084 12602 727 15-09-2018 Pradip Das 43096 222144 22,524 44,230 21,706  
177 11084 14199 809 13-09-2017 Chandra Kannya Murasing Wc 53219 132591 16,327 38,029 21,702  
178 14028 2425 172 18-07-2018 Barenjoy Tripura 73134 123816 12,852 34,541 21,689  
179 19023 2443 158 19-07-2021 Krishna Kumar Biswas 132997 199235 20,881 42,559 21,678  
180 20002 9110 830 20-11-2018 Vikram Singh 46374 113342 17,377 38,801 21,424  
181 2018 1833 23 20-05-2020 Sukumar Chandra Das 65536 191584 90,717 1,11,907 21,190  
182 8004 22 4 10-03-2021 Dulal Chandra Banik 63935 161003 35,035 56,056 21,021  
183 14028 5603 575 20-10-2022 Kishan Kumar Tripura 72264 138707 22,835 43,835 21,000  
184 9066 29007 582 16-12-2021 Narayan Debnath 20314 213717 20,659 41,518 20,859  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
377
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 377 
Appendix 6.2.1 (concld.) 
Excess payment of salary where the excess payment was more than ₹ 20,000 in each case 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
DDO 
Code Bill ID Bill No. Bill Date Employee Name 
Employee 
Number 
(HRMS) 
Beneficiary 
Code 
(CTOS) 
Net salary as 
per salary 
bill (HRMS) 
Actual salary 
paid (CTOS) 
Excess 
payment 
Recovery 
as on July 
2025 a b c d e f g h i j k (j-i) 
185 13036 11811 436 16-01-2020 Ratan Das 41320 234184 36,817 57,667 20,850  
186 8222 42593 1757 16-12-2022 Susmita Roy(I) 131474 228077 9,829 30,669 20,840  
187 4002 165 8 19-03-2020 Utpal Chakma 119007 230489 9,765 30,502 20,737  
188 4014 5721 415 19-02-2019 Shankar Sutradhar 38510 221576 31,997 52,592 20,595  
189 11070 19808 659 18-11-2017 Pradip Kumar Das 24246 125244 38,392 58,941 20,549  
190 14028 6286 630 21-11-2022 Kishan Kumar Tripura 72264 138707 22,835 43,335 20,500  
191 12021 9666 483 19-02-2019 Bharat Milan Jamatia 126707 107224 15,342 35,609 20,267  
192 1036 3807 487 16-10-2018 Bikash Debbarma 109752 116966 15,438 35,623 20,185  
193 7063 158 7 17-03-2021 Arun Kumar Debbarma 42429 131723 36,243 56,286 20,043  
194 7063 1099 104 19-04-2021 Arun Kumar Debbarma 42407 183210 56,286 76,329 20,043  
         Total 64,32,535 1,40,805 
Grand Total (A+B+C+D) 1,27,44,760 1,40,805 
Source: Data furnished by the Finance Department, Government of Tripura 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
378
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 378 
Appendix 6.2.2 
Fraudulent withdrawal of salary by inserting inadmissible amount in “Other allowance” field in HRMS 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
DDO 
code Bill No. Bill date Bill ID 
No. Employee name 
Employee 
No. 
(HRMS) 
Beneficiary 
code (CTOS) Basic pay Other 
allowance 
Net salary 
paid291 
1 22007 38 18-09-2022 5004 Litan Das 108857 118504 27,300 7,73,205 7,95,515 
2 22007 72 17-02-2022 7825 Litan Das 108857 118504 24,100 7,72,000 7,89,393 
3 22007 31 16-08-2022 3521 Litan Das 108857 118504 24,100 7,72,000 7,88,598 
4 22007 2 18-03-2022 194 Litan Das 108857 118504 24,100 7,72,000 7,87,393 
5 22007 8 20-04-2022 724 Litan Das 108857 118504 24,100 7,72,000 7,87,393 
6 22007 15 20-05-2022 1464 Litan Das 108857 118504 24,100 7,72,000 7,87,393 
7 22007 20 18-06-2022 2389 Litan Das 108857 118504 24,100 7,72,000 7,87,393 
8 22007 26 15-07-2022 2906 Litan Das 108857 118504 24,100 7,72,000 7,87,393 
9 22007 67 17-01-2022 6863 Litan Das 108857 118504 24,100 6,72,000 6,89,393 
10 22007 62 20-12-2021 6433 Litan Das 108857 118504 23,400 6,72,000 6,88,616 
11 3067 7 16-03-2023 279 Alkama Ali 55417 107835 36,200 60,000 1,04,103 
12 3067 51 20-04-2023 1442 Alkama Ali 55417 107835 36,200 60,000 1,01,279 
13 3067 625 17-11-2022 9681 Alkama Ali 55417 107835 36,200 60,000 96,935 
14 3067 51 20-04-2023 1442 Md Jahir Uddin 50073 147642 35,300 70,000 96,880 
15 3067 7 16-03-2023 279 Biswanath Sinha 55719 112806 31,200 60,000 90,821 
16 3067 51 20-04-2023 1442 Biswanath Sinha 55719 112806 31,200 60,000 90,821 
17 3067 7 16-03-2023 279 Purnendu Ghosh 55656 128773 27,100 60,000 89,955 
18 3067 51 20-04-2023 1442 Purnendu Ghosh 55656 128773 27,100 60,000 89,955 
19 3067 625 17-11-2022 9681 Biswanath Sinha 55719 112806 31,200 60,000 88,665 
20 3067 625 17-11-2022 9681 Md Jahir Uddin 50073 147642 35,300 60,000 87,584 
21 3067 7 16-03-2023 279 Dipankar Sinha 55630 132625 27,100 60,000 87,455 
22 3067 51 20-04-2023 1442 Dipankar Sinha 55630 132625 27,100 60,000 87,455 
  
 
291 excluding admissible deductions 
273
273

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
379
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 379 
Appendix 6.2.2 (contd.) 
Fraudulent withdrawal of salary by inserting inadmissible amount in “Other allowance” field in HRMS 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
DDO 
code Bill No. Bill date Bill ID 
No. Employee name 
Employee 
No. 
(HRMS) 
Beneficiary 
code (CTOS) Basic pay Other 
allowance 
Net salary 
paid292 
23 3067 729 20-12-2022 10974 Alkama Ali 55417 107835 36,200 50,000 86,935 
24 3067 7 16-03-2023 279 Md Jahir Uddin 50073 147642 35,300 60,000 86,880 
25 3067 625 17-11-2022 9681 Purnendu Ghosh 55656 128773 26,300 60,000 85,775 
26 3067 388 20-08-2022 5783 Md Jahir Uddin 50073 147642 35,300 50,000 85,084 
27 3067 388 20-08-2022 5783 Alkama Ali 55417 107835 36,200 50,000 84,935 
28 3067 298 21-07-2022 4533 Md Jahir Uddin 50073 147642 35,300 50,000 83,319 
29 3067 625 17-11-2022 9681 Dipankar Sinha 55630 132625 26,300 60,000 83,275 
30 3067 388 20-08-2022 5783 Biswanath Sinha 55719 112806 31,200 50,000 81,459 
31 3067 729 20-12-2022 10974 Biswanath Sinha 55719 112806 31,200 50,000 78,744 
32 3067 298 21-07-2022 4533 Biswanath Sinha 55719 112806 31,200 50,000 77,129 
33 3067 388 20-08-2022 5783 Sujan Sen 53189 114396 31,200 50,000 76,736 
34 3067 241 21-06-2022 3506 Sujan Sen 53189 114396 30,300 50,000 76,677 
35 3067 241 21-06-2022 3506 Biswanath Sinha 55719 112806 30,300 50,000 76,122 
36 3067 388 20-08-2022 5783 Purnendu Ghosh 55656 128773 26,300 50,000 75,775 
37 3067 729 20-12-2022 10974 Purnendu Ghosh 55656 128773 26,300 50,000 75,775 
38 3067 241 21-06-2022 3506 Md Jahir Uddin 50073 147642 34,300 50,000 75,709 
39 3067 298 21-07-2022 4533 Sujan Sen 53189 114396 31,200 50,000 75,176 
40 3067 241 21-06-2022 3506 Purnendu Ghosh 55656 128773 26,300 50,000 74,460 
41 3067 298 21-07-2022 4533 Purnendu Ghosh 55656 128773 26,300 50,000 74,460 
42 3067 729 20-12-2022 10974 Dipankar Sinha 55630 132625 26,300 50,000 73,275 
43 3067 729 20-12-2022 10974 Md Jahir Uddin 50073 147642 35,300 50,000 72,644 
44 3067 241 21-06-2022 3506 Dipankar Sinha 55630 132625 26,300 50,000 71,960 
  
 
292 excluding admissible deductions 274
274

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
380
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 380 
Appendix 6.2.2 (concld.) 
Fraudulent withdrawal of salary by inserting inadmissible amount in “Other allowance” field in HRMS 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
DDO 
code Bill No. Bill date Bill ID 
No. Employee name 
Employee 
No. 
(HRMS) 
Beneficiary 
code (CTOS) Basic pay Other 
allowance 
Net salary 
paid293 
45 3067 388 20-08-2022 5783 Dipankar Sinha 55630 132625 26,300 50,000 71,072 
46 3067 298 21-07-2022 4533 Dipankar Sinha 55630 132625 26,300 50,000 69,767 
47 3067 51 20-04-2023 1442 Sujan Sen 53189 114396 31,200 15,000 48,688 
48 3067 553 21-10-2022 8740 Alkama Ali 55417 107835 36,200 5,000 41,935 
49 3067 553 21-10-2022 8740 Biswanath Sinha 55719 112806 31,200 5,000 38,459 
50 3067 553 21-10-2022 8740 Md Jahir Uddin 50073 147642 35,300 5,000 34,584 
51 3067 553 21-10-2022 8740 Sujan Sen 53189 114396 31,200 5,000 33,736 
52 3067 553 21-10-2022 8740 Purnendu Ghosh 55656 128773 26,300 5,000 32,775 
53 3067 553 21-10-2022 8740 Dipankar Sinha 55630 132625 26,300 5,000 30,275 
Total of other allowances 95,26,205  
  
 
293 excluding admissible deductions 275
275

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
381
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 381 
Appendix 6.2.3 
Excess salary payment and Fraudulent withdrawal in “Other allowance” field in HRMS 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
DDO 
Code Bill ID Bill No. Bill Date Employee Name 
Employee 
Number 
(HRMS) 
Beneficiary 
Code 
(CTOS) 
Net salary as 
per salary 
bill (HRMS) 
Actual salary 
paid (CTOS) 
Excess 
payment 
a b c d e f g h i j k (j-i) 
A Excess payment of salary 
1 22007 7672 66 16-12-2022 Litan Das 108857 118504 20,310 8,92,310 8,72,000 
2 22007 8670 71 17-01-2023 Litan Das 108857 118504 26,862 8,98,862 8,72,000 
3 22007 9760 78 21-02-2023 Litan Das 108857 118504 23,586 8,95,586 8,72,000 
4 22007 5959 50 15-10-2022 Litan Das 108857 118504 22,310 7,94,310 7,72,000 
5 22007 6796 56 16-11-2022 Litan Das 108857 118504 20,310 7,92,310 7,72,000 
6 22007 5740 57 17-11-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 16,616 6,88,616 6,72,000 
7 22007 3212 33 20-08-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,116 3,90,116 3,72,000 
8 22007 3816 39 20-09-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,616 3,90,616 3,72,000 
9 22007 4818 52 20-10-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,616 3,90,616 3,72,000 
10 22007 4750 48 20-10-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,933 99,933 81,000 
11 22007 113 2 16-03-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,116 90,116 72,000 
12 22007 723 13 19-04-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,116 90,116 72,000 
13 22007 1358 18 17-05-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,116 90,116 72,000 
14 22007 1940 23 20-06-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,116 90,116 72,000 
15 22007 2393 28 20-07-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,116 90,116 72,000 
16 22007 6637 65 20-01-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,489 90,489 72,000 
17 22007 7317 70 19-02-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,489 90,489 72,000 
18 22007 1862 16 20-06-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,385 89,385 71,000 
19 22007 2338 21 20-07-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,385 89,385 71,000 
20 22007 3014 27 24-08-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,433 89,433 71,000 
21 22007 3552 32 20-09-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,933 89,933 71,000 
22 22007 6042 58 20-12-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,433 89,433 71,000 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
382
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 382 
Appendix 6.2.3 (contd.) 
Excess salary payment and Fraudulent withdrawal in “Other allowance” field in HRMS 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
DDO 
Code Bill ID Bill No. Bill Date Employee Name 
Employee 
Number 
(HRMS) 
Beneficiary 
Code 
(CTOS) 
Net salary as 
per salary 
bill (HRMS) 
Actual salary 
paid (CTOS) 
Excess 
payment 
a b c d e f g h i j k (j-i) 
23 22007 5337 53 17-11-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,433 88,933 70,500 
24 22007 68 2 18-03-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 19,385 89,385 70,000 
25 22007 581 7 17-04-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 19,385 89,385 70,000 
26 22007 1215 11 20-05-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 19,385 89,385 70,000 
27 22007 7111 74 18-01-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 19,385 89,385 70,000 
28 22007 7805 79 18-02-2020 Litan Das 108857 118504 19,385 89,385 70,000 
29 22007 6459 65 18-12-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,677 78,677 60,000 
30 22007 3208 33 19-08-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,677 68,677 50,000 
31 22007 5068 54 18-10-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 19,177 69,177 50,000 
32 22007 5745 59 18-11-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,677 68,677 50,000 
33 22007 703 8 24-04-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,029 58,029 40,000 
34 22007 1194 13 20-05-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,029 58,029 40,000 
35 22007 1805 20 18-06-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 18,029 58,029 40,000 
36 22007 133 2 18-03-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 23,029 53,029 30,000 
37 22007 6768 91 17-01-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 23,029 53,029 30,000 
38 22007 7437 100 18-02-2019 Litan Das 108857 118504 23,029 53,029 30,000 
Total-A 77,28,500 
 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
383
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 383 
Appendix 6.2.3 (concld.) 
Excess salary payment and Fraudulent withdrawal in “Other allowance” field in HRMS 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
DDO 
code 
Bill ID 
No. Bill No Bill Date Employee name Employee 
No. (HRMS) 
Beneficiary 
code (CTOS) Basic pay Other 
allowance 
Net salary 
paid 
B Fraudulent withdrawal of salary by inserting inadmissible amount in “Other allowance” field in HRMS 
1 22007 5004 38 18-09-2022 Litan Das 108857 118504 27,300 7,73,205 7,95,259 
2 22007 7825 72 17-02-2022 Litan Das 108857 118504 24,100 7,72,000 7,89,393 
3 22007 3521 31 16-08-2022 Litan Das 108857 118504 24,100 7,72,000 7,88,598 
4 22007 194 2 18-03-2022 Litan Das 108857 118504 24,100 7,72,000 7,87,393 
5 22007 724 8 20-04-2022 Litan Das 108857 118504 24,100 7,72,000 7,87,393 
6 22007 1464 15 20-05-2022 Litan Das 108857 118504 24,100 7,72,000 7,87,393 
7 22007 2389 20 18-06-2022 Litan Das 108857 118504 24,100 7,72,000 7,87,393 
8 22007 2906 26 15-07-2022 Litan Das 108857 118504 24,100 7,72,000 7,87,393 
9 22007 6863 67 17-01-2022 Litan Das 108857 118504 24,100 6,72,000 6,89,393 
10 22007 6433 62 20-12-2021 Litan Das 108857 118504 23,400 6,72,000 6,88,616 
Total -B 75,21,205  
Total (A+B) 1,52,49,705  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
384
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 384 
Appendix 6.2.4 
Fraudulent withdrawal of salary by preparing bills of terminated employees 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2) 
(Amount in ₹)  
Sl. 
No. 
Bill 
No. Bill date DDO 
code 
Bill prepared in HRMS in name of (Employee 
No./ Employee name) 
Salary 
amount 
Transferred to (Employee No./ 
Employee name) 
Total amount 
drawn by 
Subhas Das 
1 14 16-05-2020 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 33,296 11680/ Subhas Das 58,537 
2 19 16-06-2020 9217 103770/ Prasenjit Dasgupta 33,296 11680/ Subhas Das 58,537 
3 23 20-07-2020 9217 103770/ Prasenjit Dasgupta 33,296 11680/ Subhas Das 59,509 
4 27 16-08-2020 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 33,296 11680/ Subhas Das 59,509 
5 34 16-09-2020 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 33,296 11680/ Subhas Das 59,509 
6 42 16-10-2020 9217 103770/ Prasenjit Dasgupta 33,296 11680/ Subhas Das 59,509 
7 52 16-12-2020 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 33,296 11680/ Subhas Das 59,509 
8 59 16-01-2021 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 33,296 11680/ Subhas Das 59,709 
9 8 16-04-2021 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 34,217 11680/ Subhas Das 61,416 
10 12 16-05-2021 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 34,217 11680/ Subhas Das 61,416 
11 28 16-08-2021 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 34,217 11680/ Subhas Das 60,415 
12 35 16-09-2021 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 34,217 11680/ Subhas Das 60,415 
13 44 16-10-2021 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 34,217 11680/ Subhas Das 60,415 
14 51 16-11-2021 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 34,217 11680/ Subhas Das 58,415 
15 8 16-04-2022 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 34,217 11680/ Subhas Das 58,415 
16 13 16-05-2022 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 34,217 11680/ Subhas Das 58,415 
17 18 16-06-2022 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 34,217 11680/ Subhas Das 58,415 
18 23 16-07-2022 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 35,144 11680/ Subhas Das 60,372 
19 32 16-09-2022 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 36,724 11680/ Subhas Das 62,391 
20 41 17-10-2022 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 36,724 11680/ Subhas Das 62,391 
21 49 16-12-2022 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 36,724 11680/ Subhas Das 60,391 
22 58 19-01-2023 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 40,516 11680/ Subhas Das 68,323 
23 6 16-04-2023 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 40,516 11680/ Subhas Das 68,323 
24 12 16-05-2023 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 40,516 11680/ Subhas Das 68,323 
25 22 17-07-2023 9217 26808/ Apurba Das 40,516 11680/ Subhas Das 70,603 
Total 8,81,701   

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
385
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 385 
Appendix 6.3.1 
Details of fraudulent payments by creating fictitious beneficiary 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.3) 
Sl. 
No. Bill ID No. Bill Date Particulars Amount 
(in ₹) Remarks 
1 2838 11-05-2018 Pay Bill 32,731  
2 6368 15-06-2018 Pay Bill 81,850  
3 9684 26-08-2020 TA Bill 9,900  
4 13522 13-10-2020 TA Bill 9,900  
5 13524 13-10-2020 TA Bill 9,900  
6 13530 13-10-2020 TA Bill 9,900  
7 13532 13-10-2020 TA Bill 9,630  
8 13533 13-10-2020 TA Bill 4,950  
9 20128 05-01-2021 TA Bill 500  
10 21785 04-02-2021 TA Bill 500  
11 3975 31-05-2021 TA Bill 9,900  
12 11322 28-09-2021 TA Bill 9,900  
13 11327 28-09-2021 TA Bill 9,900  
14 22381 16-02-2022 TA Bill 9,900  
15 21862 07-02-2022 TA Bill 19,800  
16 3868 19-05-2022 TA Bill 9,900  
17 3869 19-05-2022 TA Bill 19,800  
18 3870 19-05-2022 TA Bill 29,700  
19 3878 19-05-2022 TA Bill 9,900  
20 3879 19-05-2022 TA Bill 19,800  
21 5086 07-06-2022 TA Bill 19,800  
22 5088 07-06-2022 TA Bill 8,370  
23 5089 07-06-2022 TA Bill 9,900  
24 6649 28-06-2022 TA Bill 9,900  
25 6747 01-07-2022 TA Bill 9,900  
26 6133 20-06-2022 TA Bill 9,900  
27 6134 20-06-2022 TA Bill 9,900  
28 6135 20-06-2022 TA Bill 8,460  
29 6136 20-06-2022 TA Bill 19,800  
30 6137 20-06-2022 TA Bill 19,800  
31 9678 06-08-2022 TA Bill 9,900  
32 9679 06-08-2022 TA Bill 9,900  
33 9680 06-08-2022 TA Bill 28,260  
34 9681 06-08-2022 TA Bill 19,800  
35 9682 06-08-2022 TA Bill 19,800  
36 9683 06-08-2022 TA Bill 18,720  
37 10706 23-08-2022 TA Bill 19,800  
38 10707 23-08-2022 TA Bill 19,800  
39 10708 23-08-2022 TA Bill 19,800  
40 10711 18-08-2022 TA Bill 18,270  
41 10712 23-08-2022 TA Bill 19,800  
42 17371 02-11-2022 TA Bill 9,900  
43 17372 02-11-2022 TA Bill 19,800  
44 17373 02-11-2022 TA Bill 19,800 TA bill produced to Audit 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
386
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 386 
Appendix 6.3.1 (concld.) 
Details of fraudulent payments by creating fictitious beneficiary 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.3) 
Sl. 
No. Bill ID No. Bill Date Particulars Amount 
(in ₹) Remarks 
45 17377 02-11-2022 TA Bill 19,800  
46 17379 02-11-2022 TA Bill 9,900  
47 17380 02-11-2022 TA Bill 19,800  
48 17620 07-11-2022 TA Bill 9,900  
49 18107 14-11-2022 TA Bill 9,900  
50 19858 03-12-2022 TA Bill 9,900 TA bill produced to Audit 
51 23364 13-01-2023 TA Bill 29,700 TA bill produced to Audit 
52 23365 13-01-2023 TA Bill 19,800 TA bill produced to Audit 
53 23366 13-01-2023 TA Bill 19,800  
54 23367 13-01-2023 TA Bill 19,800  
55 23493 16-01-2023 TA Bill 19,800  
56 23494 16-01-2023 TA Bill 9,900  
57 24415 24-01-2023 TA Bill 9,900  
58 24516 21-01-2023 TA Bill 9,900  
59 25430 07-02-2023 TA Bill 19,800  
60 27796 09-03-2023 TA Bill 9,540  
61 29101 17-03-2023 TA Bill 9,900  
62 3326 08-05-2023 TA Bill 29,700 TA bill produced to Audit 
63 3398 19-05-2023 TA Bill 9,900  
64 4585 24-05-2023 TA Bill 9,540  
65 7071 23-06-2023 TA Bill 9,540  
66 7552 07-07-2023 TA Bill 9,900  
67 8537 21-07-2023 Pay Bill 2,14,570  
68 7595 10-07-2023 TA Bill 9,900  
69 10968 25-08-2023 TA Bill 9,900 TA bill produced to Audit 
70 11321 30-08-2023 TA Bill 19,530  
71 11873 04-09-2023 TA Bill 9,900 TA bill produced to Audit 
72 11874 04-09-2023 TA Bill 9,900  
73 12142 11-09-2023 TA Bill 9,900 TA bill produced to Audit 
74 12266 12-09-2023 TA Bill 9,900 TA bill produced to Audit 
75 13705 25-09-2023 TA Bill 9,900  
76 15230 04-10-2023 TA Bill 9,900  
77 19766 21-11-2023 TA Bill 9,900 TA bill produced to Audit 
78 20430 30-11-2023 TA Bill 29,700  
79 20429 30-11-2023 TA Bill 7,200  
80 20241 28-11-2023 TA Bill 4,500  
81 22596 26-12-2023 TA Bill 9,900 TA bill produced to Audit 
82 22992 01-01-2024 TA Bill 29,700  
83 23745 12-01-2024 TA Bill 9,900  
Total 14,37,061  
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
387
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 387 
Appendix 6.3.2 
Details of inadmissible payment of TA/ DA bills 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.3) 
Sl. 
No. 
Bill 
No Bill ID Date Amount 
(in ₹) Remarks 
A Shri John Jamatia, UDC (Beneficiary code-191019) 
1 346 9684 26-08-2020 9,900 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
2 489 13527 13-10-2020  4,950 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
3 490 13530 13-10-2020 9,900 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
4 491 13532 13-10-2020 9,900 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
5 492 13533 13-10-2020  9,900 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
6 494 13522 13-10-2020 9,900 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
7 495 13524 13-10-2020 9,900 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
8 496 13526 13-10-2020  9,900 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
9 497 13520 13-10-2020  9,900 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
10 556 15918 10-11-2020  8,770 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
11 559 15915 10-11-2020  9,900 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
12 560 15912 10-11-2020  2,935 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
13 833 20128 05-01-2021  11,200 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
14 895 21785 04-02-2021  2,920 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
15 932 23190 20-02-2021 5,220 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
16 1023 26197 22-03-2021  12,520 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
17 1024 26201 22-03-2021 2,800 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
18 1040 27093 25-03-2021  2,000 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
19 1043 27092 25-03-2021  3,000 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
20 156 2971 17-05-2021 29,700 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
21 157 2970 17-05-2021  15,750 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
22 194 4216 24-05-2021 18,720 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
23 223 4111 02-06-2021 39,600 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
24 224 4107 02-06-2021 29,700 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
25 275 5066 21-06-2021 29,700 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
26 300 6006 07-07-2021 27,270 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
27 354 8062 29-07-2021 39,600 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
28 355 8063 29-07-2021 4,500 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
29 429 9795 02-09-2021  24,480 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
388
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 388 
Appendix 6.3.2 (contd.) 
Details of inadmissible payment of TA/ DA bills 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.3) 
Sl. 
No. 
Bill 
No Bill ID Date Amount 
(in ₹) Remarks 
30 482 11322 28-09-2021  24,165 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
31 483 11324 28-09-2021 24,750 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
32 484 11325 28-09-2021 15,000 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
33 485 11327 28-09-2021 23,310 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
34 486 11328 28-09-2021 13,770 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
35 524 12622 01-10-2021 5,960 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
36 525 12609 01-10-2021  7,920 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
37 528 12606 01-10-2021  29,730 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
38 529 12599 01-10-2021 29,700 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
39 531 12613 01-10-2021  9,900 Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
40 532 12601 01-10-2021 9,900 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
 Total 5,98,540  
Sl. 
No. 
Bill 
No Bill ID Date Amount 
(in ₹) Remarks 
B Shri Suchitra Singha, LDC (Beneficiary code-232638) 
1 532 12601 01-10-2021 4,950 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
2 524 12622 01-10-2021 7,975 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
3 531 12613 01-10-2021  3,400 
Name present in the treasury s tatement of the bill, 
but name not included in the office copy of t reasury 
statement of the bill 
4 529 12599 01-10-2021 14,760 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
5 528 12606 01-10-2021 19,800 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
6 484 11325 28-09-2021 9,750 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
7 483 11324 28-09-2021 9,090 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
8 485 11327 28-09-2021 11,970 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
9 486 11328 28-09-2021  9,900 
Name present in the treasury statement of the bill, but 
name not included in the office copy of treasury 
statement of the bill 
10 179 4125 30-05-2020  4,950 
Payment received through this bill, but name not 
included in the office copy of the treasury statement 
of bill. 
   Total 96,545  
Sl. 
No. 
Bill 
No. Bill ID Date Amount 
(in ₹) Remarks 
C Shri Harinath Debbarma, (Beneficiary code-140038, Constable No. C/10534) 
1 716 10706 23-08-2022 9,900 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
2 713 10707 23-08-2022 9,900 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
3 714 10708 23-08-2022 13,185 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
4 715 10712 23-08-2022 29,700 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
5 1642 16284 19-10-2022 9,900 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
  

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
389
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 389 
Appendix 6.3.2 (concld.) 
Details of inadmissible payment of TA/ DA bills 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.3) 
Sl. 
No. 
Bill 
No Bill ID Date Amount 
(in ₹) Remarks 
6 1107 17369 02-11-2022 19,800 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
7 1108 17371 02-11-2022 19,800 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
8 1116 17373 02-11-2022 19,800 By using his Constable ID C/10534 
9 1113 17379 02-11-2022 19,800 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
10 1114 17380 02-11-2022 9,900 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
11 1242 19858 03-12-2022 9,900 By using his Constable ID C/10534 
12 1420 23364 13-01-2023 9,900 By using his Constable ID C/10534 
13 1418 23365 13-01-2023 19,800 By using different Constable ID C/10407 
14 1419 23366 13-01-2023 19,800 By using his Constable ID C/10534 
15 1417 23367 13-01-2023 9,900 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
16 1434 23493 16-01-2023 9,900 By using his Constable ID C/10534 
17 1479 24516 21-01-2023 19,800 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
18 162 3326 08-05-2023 19,800 By using his Constable ID C/10534 
19 242 3998 19-05-2023 7,200 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
20 650 10968 25-08-2023 9,900 By using different Constable ID C/10521 
21 737 11873 04-09-2023 9,900 By using different Constable ID C/10304 
22 751 12142 11-09-2023 9,900 By using different Constable ID C/10306 
23 753 12266 12-09-2023 9,900 By using different Constable ID C/10304 
24 1048 19766 21-11-2023 9,900 By using different Constable ID C/10640 
25 1269 22596 26-12-2023 9,900 By using different Constable ID C/10602 
       3,47,085   
Sl. 
No. 
Bill 
No Bill ID Date Amount 
(in ₹) Remarks 
D Shri Khokan Dey, LDC (Beneficiary code-151973) 
1 1269 22596 26-12-2023 9,900 By using Constable ID C/10606 
2 1417 23367 13-01-2023 9,900 Office copy of the Bill not produced to audit 
3 751 12142 11-09-2023 9,900 By using Constable ID C/10304 
4 753 12266 12-09-2023 9,900 By using Constable ID C/10301 
5 1420 23364 13-01-2023 9,900 By using Constable ID C/10603 
6 1418 23365 13-01-2023 9,900 By using Constable ID C/103076 
7 1419 23366 13-01-2023 15,930 By using Constable ID C/10504 
    75,330  
 Total (A+B+C+D) 11,17,500  
 

Appendices
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura
390
Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2023-24, Government of Tripura 
 390 
Appendix 6.3.3 
Details of excess payment of salary 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.3) 
Name Months 
As per HRMS data  As per CTOS data Salary credited 
Employee No. Amount 
(in ₹) 
GPF 
A/C No. 
Beneficiary 
code 
Amount 
(in ₹) Bank A/C No. Less 
(in ₹) 
More 
(in ₹) 
Shri Parimal 
Debbarma, 
Constable 
November 2020 043249 42,717 15257 232648 2,717 . . .xxxxxx0191 40,000 -- 
September 2021 043249 51,372 15257 232648 20,372 . . .xxxxxx0191 31,000 -- 
January 2022 043249 43,872 15257 232648 28,872 . . .xxxxxx0191 15,000 -- 
Shri Suchitra 
Singha, LDC 
November 2020 045028 24,465 35431 106204 64,465 . . .xxxxxx5992 -- 40,000 
September 2021 045028 30,336 35431 232638 61,336 . . .xxxxxx2438 -- 31,000 
January 2022 045028 30,336 35431 232638 45,336 . . .xxxxxx2438 -- 15,000 
Total        86,000 86,000 
 

© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in
GOVERNMENT OF TRIPURA
Report No. 2 of 2025
Report No. 2 of 2025 - Government of Tripura
https://cag.gov.in/ag/tripura/en
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Social, Economic, Revenue and General Sectors for 
the year ended 31 March 2024
 
