Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India on   
Performance Audit on  
Effectiveness of measures taken by the 
Government of West Bengal for containing Water 
Pollution
Government of West Bengal  
Report No. 3 of 2025
(Performance Audit – Civil)
  
COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
https://cag.gov.in/ag2/west-bengal/en
Government of West Bengal – Report No. 3 of 2025


Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India on  
Performance Audit on  
Effectiveness of measures taken by the 
Government of West Bengal for containing Water 
Pollution
Government of West Bengal
Report No. 3 of the year 2025
(Performance Audit-Civil)

(i)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Reference to
Paragraph Page
Preface - (iii)
Executive Summary - (v)-(xi)
CHAPTER I : Introduction
Introduction 1.1 1
Water Budget of the State 1.2 1
Water pollution in West Bengal 1.3 1-2
Budget Provision 1.4 2-3
Water Pollution prevention and control mechanism 1.5 3-4
Institutional arrangement for management of water pollution 1.6 4-5
Reasons for conduct of Audit 1.7 5-6
CHAPTER II : Audit Framework
Audit objective 2.1 7
Audit criteria 2.2 7-8
Audit scope and Methodology 2.3 8-10
Structure of the Audit Report 2.4 10
Acknowledgement 2.5 10
CHAPTER III : Planning for prevention and control of water pollution in Rivers, 
Lakes and Ground water
Introduction 3.1 11
State Water Policy 3.2 11-12
Short term Action Plan under State Environment Plan 3.3 12-16
Action Plan for abatement of pollution, rejuvenation, protection 
and management of identified Polluted River Stretches
3.4 16-26
CHAPTER IV : Municipal Sewage treatment for restoration of Polluted River 
Stretches and Lakes
 Introduction 4.1 27-28
Gap in sewage treatment 4.2 28-29
Pollution Abatement for River Ganga 4.3 30-40
Pollution Abatement of River Vidyadhari 4.4 40-45
Pollution Abatement of River Mahananda 4.5 45-48
Pollution Abatement of River Mayurakshi 4.6 48-51
Pollution Abatement of river Dwarka 4.7 51-52
Pollution Abatement of Mathabhanga and Churni 4.8 52-54
Non utilisation of sewage treatment facility for Mirik Lake 4.9 54-56
Santragachi Lake (Howrah) 4.10 57-58
CHAPTER V : Industrial Wastewater Management
Introduction 5.1 59-60
Consent Management 5.2 60-77

(ii)
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Reference to
Paragraph Page
CHAPTER VI : Ground Water Quality Management
Introduction 6.1 79
Status of ground water abstraction 6.2 79-81
Qualitative aspects of ground water 6.3 81-88
CHAPTER VII : Monitoring of Water Quality
Introduction 7.1 89
Water Quality Monitoring 7.2 90-92
Inspection of Industries 7.3 92-95
Monitoring of STPs 7.4 95-96
Online Continuous Effluent Monitoring System (OCEMS) 7.5 96
Utilisation of fund under Water Quality Monitoring & 
Surveillance
7.6 96-97
Monitoring of Drains 7.7 97-98
Sustainable Development Goals 7.8 98-99
APPENDICES
No. Particulars Pages
1 No. of inspections in 28 SPIs 101-103
2 Types of Stations vis-a-vis frequency of Water Quality Monitoring 104
3 Drains having Faecal Coliform beyond limit (100 MPN/100 ml) 105
4 Drains having BOD & COD beyond limit (BOD<10 mg/l; 
COD<50 mg/l)
106-107
Glossary of Abbreviations
Glossary of Abbreviations 109-111

(iii)
PREFACE
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been 
prepared for submission to the Governor of the State of West Bengal 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of India for being laid before the 
Legislature of the State. The report has been prepared in accordance with 
the Performance Auditing Guidelines, 2014 and Regulations on Audit 
and Accounts, 2020 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
The report contains results of Performance Audit on “Effectiveness 
of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for containing 
Water Pollution” covering the period from 2018-19 to 2022-23. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

Executive Summary

(v)
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The National Green Tribunal (NGT) passed an order in 2018 directing states to 
revise, prepare and implement Action Plans to restore polluted river stretches 
and to ensure 100 per cent treatment of sewage by 31 March 2020. The timeline 
for completing all steps of the Action Plans including completion of setting up 
of Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) and their commissioning was 31 March 
2021. 
NGT passed another order in 2019 to check compliance with several statutory 
requirements related to waste and environment management and advisories 
issued to the States. CPCB had identified (2017) 17 polluted river stretches 
where River rejuvenation programme was to be implemented.
Goal 6 of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) calls for access to safe 
and affordable drinking water, sanitation facilities, and hygiene for all by 2030. 
According to the SDG index-2020 of NITI Aayog, as regards the performance 
of West Bengal against SDG-6 (Clean water and sanitation), it was observed 
that the score of the State declined to 81 from 83 in 2019.
Further, research studies showed impact of water pollution on agriculture 
produce and aquatic animals in the State as well as risks to human health from 
water contamination such as Diarrhoea, Enteric Fever, Vibrio cholera etc. and 
prevalence of Arsenicosis and Fluorosis. 
Thus, Audit decided to study the issue of water pollution through a Performance 
Audit. 
(Paragraph 1.7)
Significant Audit Findings: 
Planning for prevention and control of water pollution in Rivers, 
Lakes and Ground water.
•	 The State Water Policy for West Bengal had not been framed even after 
a lapse of 12 years of the finalisation of the National Water Policy, 2012. 
Further, a standardised State level water related information database 
system had not been established. In the absence of a State Water Policy, 
issues related to water governance such as water pollution, encroachments 
on water bodies, adequacy of infrastructure, conservation, management of 
water and water pricing could not be effectively addressed.
(Paragraph 3.2)
•	 The State Environment Plan-2020 aimed at preparation of inventory of 
water bodies as a Short term Action Plan. Audit, however, observed that 
the inventory of identified water bodies could not be completed within the 
stipulated time period of one year and was still in progress (March 2024).
(Paragraph 3.3.1)
•	 Strategies for conservation of identified water bodies had not been defined 
till March 2024. Due to non-inventorisation of water bodies and subsequent 
non-preparation of action plans for restoration, concerted efforts could 

(vi)
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
not be made for conservation and effective management of water bodies. 
Estimation of financial intervention needed for addressing issues related to 
restoration of those water bodies like weed infestation, sewage discharge, 
encroachments etc. was also not possible.
(Paragraph 3.3.2)
•	 Out of total 128 Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in the State, only six ULBs 
were covered under Faecal Sludge and Septage Management, as of 
November 2023.
(Paragraph 3.3.3)
•	 WBPCB was yet (March 2024) to prepare a zero industrial wastewater 
plan. Joint inspection of the test checked industries showed that only five 
out of the 27 inspected industries had the facility to store and re-use treated 
wastewater. 
 (Paragraph 3.3.4)
•	 Out of 34 selected STPs and 65 industries, 09 STPs and 23 industries did 
not have provision for re-use of treated wastewater and the treated water 
was discharged directly into drains. The stipulated GIS enabled MIS for 
mapping sources of generation of wastewater and quality of wastewater 
production in urban West Bengal was not created till November 2023. 
 (Paragraph 3.3.5)
•	 The State did not have a database for non-point sources of pollution for 
assessment of pollution load and, therefore it was not included in the Action 
Plan for Rejuvenation of River Ganga.
 (Paragraph 3.4.1)
•	 Action Plan for the Ganga was not revised in consideration of the updated 
estimated sewage from the 402 drains and the execution of the Action 
Plan continued with the initial estimation of 1,084 MLD from 29 towns 
consisting of 55 drains. Thus, remedial action for abatement of pollution 
of river Ganga was not commensurate with the actual extent of sewage 
discharged.
(Paragraph 3.4.1.1)
•	 According to the Action Plan for rejuvenation of river Ganga, 33 out of total 
55 identified drains of the river Ganga were either connected or proposed 
to be connected to different STPs. For the remaining 22 drains, feasibility 
of work was to be completed by February 2021, but the same had not 
been completed, till December 2023. The implementing agency, Kolkata 
Metropolitan Development Authority (KMDA) was yet to prepare project 
proposals for connecting the drains, falling into the river Ganga, with STPs. 
As a result, untreated sewage was draining into the river Ganga directly 
causing pollution of the river. It is evident that the Action Plan approved in 
July 2020 was deficient as it did not adequately address the pollution load 
encompassing the actual number of drains falling into Ganga. 
(Paragraph 3.4.1.2)

Executive Summary
(vii)
•	 WBPCB was yet to implement a plan for the Environmental Management 
of Dairy Farms and Gaushalas and bring these farms under consent 
management as stipulated in Guidelines for ‘Environmental Management 
of Dairy Farms and Gaushalas’ issued by CPCB in July 2020. Inability in 
bringing the Dairy Farms and putting Gaushalas under consent management 
coupled with laxity in charting out an appropriate sewerage management 
plan caused considerable organic load in the DVC canal. It also led to 
polluted discharge into the river Ganga, with BOD concentration at an 
average of 28 mg/l against the norms of 3 mg/l.
(Paragraph 3.4.1.3 (v))
•	 Risks to human health from water borne diseases and water-based diseases 
as a result of pollution of rivers and lakes were not assessed while preparing 
the Action Plans for rejuvenation of polluted water stretches.
(Paragraph 3.4.3)
•	 Water Quality Review Committee was not constituted in the State even after 
a lapse of 23 years from the establishment of Water Quality Assessment 
Authority. 
(Paragraph 3.4.4)
Municipal Sewage treatment for restoration of Polluted River 
stretches and Lakes
•	 NGT set a deadline of March 2021 to take all steps for rejuvenation of 
polluted river stretches including setting up of STPs and their commissioning. 
As of March 2021, the estimated sewage generation for the State was 
5,457 MLD and the total capacity for sewage treatment of the 29 existing 
and 36 proposed STPs was 1,202 MLD. However, installed capacity of STPs 
was only 897 MLD (16.44 per cent) causing a gap of 4,560 MLD. There 
was a huge gap between sewage generation and the capacity available for 
its treatment, leading to deterioration of water quality of rivers.
(Paragraph 4.2)
•	 The sewage treatment capacities were impaired in the absence of an adequate 
sewerage conveyance system including connecting to the household sewer 
line, non-installation of disinfection system, deficient co-ordination among 
different agencies and deficient functioning of established infrastructure 
etc.
(Paragraph 4.3)
•	 Out of 41 commissioned STPs, 26 STPs were in operation with an 
installed capacity of 383.8 MLD. Only 232.5 MLD was being utilized i.e. 
60.60 per cent of 383.80 MLD. There was a gap of 1,339 MLD in treatment 
capacity and almost 85 per cent of total sewage generated was released into 
the river Ganga without treatment.
 (Paragraph 4.3.1)
•	 Due to inadequate/inefficient sewage treatment facilities for drains 
discharging into the river Ganga, the pollutant load in the river water 
continuously exceeded the prescribed limits during the period 2018-23. 

(viii)
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
While the number of times BOD breached the prescribed limit ranged 
between 15-46 per cent of total tests conducted, FC was above norms in 
74-97 per cent of test cases, and DO did not meet the prescribed standards 
in one to 18 per cent tests. 
(Paragraph 4.3.4)
•	 In consideration of the ecological importance of the East Kolkata Wetland 
(EKW), WBPCB was supposed to carry out water analysis tests of EKW. 
Quality analysis of water of EKW at two outlets (Bamanghata Jalpath and 
Uttar hatgachha ) had been carried out by WBPCB during June 2018 to 
May 2019, but thereafter, no such tests were carried out. Surveillance of 
physicochemical and biological properties of the wastewater that entered 
into EKW was not undertaken by WBPCB. In the absence of a continued 
monitoring mechanism, the qualitative nature of the sewage entering EKW 
and the efficiency of sewage treatment through aquaculture could not be 
assessed. 
(Paragraph 4.4.1)
•	 Due to the delay in finalisation of project report of STPs for about 42 months, 
sewage treatment infrastructure for river Mahananda was non-operational. 
As a result, water quality of the river Mahananda got deteriorated. As per 
the water quality tests conducted by WBPCB during the period 2018–23, 
the BOD and FC exceeded the prescribed limits by CPCB. 
(Paragraphs 4.5.1 & 4.5.3)
•	 Inability of the Public Health & Engineering Department (PHED) in timely 
taking up the integration of household sewage collection system with 
the STP coupled with inaction of WBPCB in restricting the hotels from 
unauthorisedly discharging directly into the river led to deterioration in the 
water quality of the river Dwarka. 
(Paragraph 4.7)
•	 Gorkhaland Territorial Administration  (GTA) had prepared DPR for 
improvement of drainage and sewerage system in Mirik Lake. The DPR 
envisaged construction of three STPs having sewage treatment capacity of 
1,200 Kilo Litre Per Day. The STPs were completed in June 2019 after 
incurring an expenditure of ` 36.30 crore by the GTA. However, the STPs 
were not operationalized and pollution in the lake continued unabated. 
(Paragraph 4.9)
Industrial Wastewater Management
•	 Five out of 51 sampled Seriously Polluting Industries (SPIs) were operating 
without valid Consent to Operate (CTO) which had already expired for 
periods ranging between 05 to 48 months.
(Paragraph 5.2)
•	 Mandatory 08 and 20 number of inspections in case of SPI and GPI 
respectively were not carried out by WBPCB during 2018-23 in case of 
nine industries.
(Paragraph 5.2.3)

Executive Summary
(ix)
Ground Water Quality Management
•	 The steady decline in water level and gradual transformation of safe and 
semi critical blocks into critical blocks during the period 2020-22 indicated 
that there was a sharp decline in ground water level.
(Paragraph 6.2)
•	 In the two-arsenic affected selected districts ( Nadia and North  
24 Paraganas), out of a population of 63.15 lakhs covered under ground 
water based Functional Household Tap Connection (FHTC), 46 lakh i.e. 
73 per cent were not provided with Arsenic Iron Removal Plants (AIRP) 
under Piped Water Supply Schemes (PWSS), although the areas were 
arsenic affected.
(Paragraph 6.3.1.2)
•	 As of December 2023 under the PWSS, only 1.48 lakh, out of 4.61 lakh 
fluoride affected households of Birbhum district were provided with FHTC 
i.e. only 32 per cent of households are getting treated piped water.
(Paragraph 6.3.2.2)
•	 Out of 128 ULBs in the State, 79 did not have solid waste processing 
facilities and the waste got disposed at dumping grounds. As per the 
Annual Report of WBPCB for the year 2022-23 only 23 per cent of waste 
generated was processed as of March 2023. The unprocessed fresh waste 
was gradually getting converted into legacy waste and adding to dumpsites. 
As of August 2023, there were 123 dumpsites in the State having a legacy 
waste of 111.44 lakh MT, of which only 49.68 lakh MT of legacy waste was 
processed leaving a balance of 61.76 lakh MT.
 (Paragraph 6.3.4)
Monitoring of Water Quality
•	 According to CPCB’s guidelines, monitoring stations at both upstream and 
downstream of a river needed to be established by the State PCBs. There 
was only one monitoring station each against the stipulated two (upstream 
and downstream) for nine Polluted River Stretches. Thus, the monitoring of 
ground water quality was not satisfactory as the data generated was based 
on a limited number of testing locations. 
(Paragraph 7.2.2)
•	 According to Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016, the ground water quality 
within 50 meters of the periphery of a landfill site shall be periodically 
monitored by State PCB covering different seasons in a year to ensure 
that the ground water is not contaminated. Out of 123 landfill/dumpsites, 
WBPCB had only one ground water monitoring station at one dumpsite 
(at Dhapa, Kolkata). In the absence of adequate number of ground water 
quality monitoring stations, around the periphery of dumpsites, the extent 
of ground water contamination due to leaching could not be assessed by 
Audit.
(Paragraph 7.2.3)

(x)
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
•	 According to CPCB’s status report for West Bengal STPs as of March 2023, 
there were 11 non-operational STPs out of a total of 41 on the river Ganga. 
Due to non-operation of STPs, the management of municipal sewage, as 
conceived in related action plans, could not be effectively undertaken, and 
the river Ganga continued to receive untreated sewage.
(Paragraph 7.4.1)
•	 Only 16 industrial units had the Online Continuous Emission Monitoring 
System (OCEMS), developed by CPCB, out of 65 sampled industries. 
Thus, real time tracking of discharge of pollutants could not be effectively 
implemented even after more than four years of CPCB’s instruction.
(Paragraph 7.5)
Recommendations: 
1. The Environment Department should complete the inventory of all 
wetlands and water bodies in a time bound manner and prepare Action 
Plans for their effective management. 
2. WBPCB should ensure implementation of the State’s ‘Re-use of treated 
wastewater Policy’ and work towards achieving Zero industrial wastewater 
as envisaged in SEP 2020.
3. WBPCB should periodically update its database of pollution sources, 
including non-point sources for assessment of actual pollution load so 
that the pollution can be addressed before discharge into canals, rivers 
and other water bodies.
4. The Environment Department should consider risk to human health and 
environment while preparing action plans for mitigation of pollution of 
water.
5. Urban Development & Municipal Affairs (UD&MA) Department should 
complete the ongoing STPs as well as operationalize the non-functional 
STPs at the earliest and ensure strict compliance with environmental 
norms in their operations.
6. WBPCB should bring East Kolkata Wetlands into its regular monitoring 
schedule and plan for effective remedial measures.
7. Urban Development & Municipal Affairs (UD&MA) Department should 
complete the projects related to connections of household sewage with 
STPs and tapping of drains not connected with STPs on priority basis. 
8. WBPCB should ensure that Industrial units are in possession of valid 
CTOs and impose penalties in case of lapses.
9. WBPCB should strengthen its monitoring mechanism to adhere to the 
required number of inspections and ensure compliance by polluting 
industries.
10. WBPCB needs to enforce, through consent management, treatment of all 
industrial effluents, with special emphasis on installation of CETPs in 
clusters for the unorganized small industries.

Executive Summary
(xi)
11. Authorisation for groundwater abstraction should be strictly regulated 
and monitored through the consent administration of WBPCB.
12. PHED should implement schemes in a time bound manner to reduce 
cases of arsenic and fluoride contamination and provide safe and clean 
drinking water to the entire affected population. 
13. UD&MA should take measures for effective implementation of Solid 
Waste Management Rules, 2016 and set up adequate waste processing 
facilities to prevent water contamination due to leaching.
14. WBPCB should establish a representative number of stations/locations 
for water quality monitoring, particularly in the identified hot spots.
15. Government should implement the proposal of the State Board on 
engagement of manpower and strengthen the water quality monitoring 
mechanism for effectively carrying out its mandate.
16. WBPCB should develop and upgrade its laboratories and obtain National 
Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) 
Accreditation, Occupational Health and Safety Management System 
(OH&SMS) certification and EPA recognition by Ministry of Environment 
Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) to enhance assurance level.
17. WBPCB should monitor all the STPs regularly and take action to ensure 
that the STPs were working and were complying with the discharge 
standards. It should also ensure installation of Online Continuous 
Emission Monitoring System (OCEMS) for STPs/ETPs and use the data 
for effective surveillance and monitoring.

CHAPTER - I
Introduction

1
Chapter-I 
Introduction
1.1 Introduction
“Water is life’s matter and matrix, mother and medium. There is no life 
without water.”1 Goal 6 of United Nations’s Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDG) acknowledged that access to safe water, sanitation and hygiene is the 
most basic human need for health and well-being. Demand for water is rising 
owing to rapid population growth, urbanisation and increasing water needs from 
agriculture, industry, and energy sectors.
Large-scale water abstraction and discharge of untreated/partially treated 
wastewater into water bodies has substantially contributed to water 
pollution. Water pollution poses a significant challenge to human health and 
ecological balance of water bodies, thereby reducing productivity of aquatic 
environment. 
1.2  Water Budget of the State
Water Budget is a hydrological tool used to quantify the flow of water in and out 
of a system. According to the available data 2 for 2015, total water availability 
for the State of West Bengal was about 160.35 billion cubic metre (BCM), 
out of which surface water was approximately132.77 BCM and ground water 
27.58 BCM. The total demand was 90.54 BCM, thus leaving a positive gap of 
69.81 BCM in the State. 
West Bengal, as per 2011 census, had a population of approximately nine crores 
with a decadal growth rate of 13.93 per cent (2001-11).With rise in population, 
the availability of water including for food production, may worsen unless an 
effective system of management of water is put in place. 
1.3  Water pollution in West Bengal
The main causes of river water pollution in West Bengal are: 
 (i) discharge of municipal wastewater, 
 (ii) discharge of industrial wastewater, 
 (iii) insufficient solid waste management, 
 (iv) pollution from non-point sources3. 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), in 2018, identified 17 Polluted 
River Stretches (PRS) 4 in West Bengal categorised under five Priority 5  
1 Quoted by Albert Szent - Gyorgyi, a Hungarian Nobel Lauret (Physiology 1937).
2 Paper published by Indian Council of Agricultural Research in February 2022.
3 Pollution that originates from many diffuse sources, rather than a single, identifiable point, like 
a factory pipe, and is often carried into waterways by runoff or precipitation. 
4 Ganga, Barakar, Churni, Damodar, Darakeswar, Dwaraka, Jalangi, Kaljani, Kansai, Karala, 
Mathabhanga, Mahananda, Mayurakshi, Rupnarayan, Silabati, Teesta and Vidyadhari. 
5 The polluted locations in a continuous sequence are defined as polluted river stretches and 
categorised in five priority classes based on BOD concentration.

2
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Classes (I to V)6 based on maximum Biological Oxygen Demand7 (BOD) level. 
Four rivers8 which were in the list of 17 PRS under Priority V , have since been 
excluded (2022) from the list of PRS.
In respect of ground water, 83 blocks in eight districts of the State, having a 
population of about 109.26 lakh were identified as arsenic affected, and 43 blocks 
with a population of 6.15 lakh in seven districts were identified as affected by 
fluoride, as shown in Figure 1.1 and 1.2.
Figure 1.1: Arsenic affected blocks 
in West Bengal
Figure 1.2: Fluoride affected blocks 
in West Bengal
(Source: State Environment Report-I, West Bengal 2021, WBPCB)
1.4  Budget Provision
The Urban Development and Municipal Affairs (UD&MA) Department, 
Government of West Bengal (GoWB) was charged with management of 
municipal wastewater. For this purpose, the Department under State Plan 
made budget provisions for the Major Head ‘Water Supply and Sanitation’ 
for prevention of air and water pollution (Budget Head: 2215-02-106) under 
Revenue Head. The Budget provision vis-a-vis the actual expenditure incurred 
for prevention of air & water pollution during the period from 2018-19 to 
2022-23 is shown in Chart 1.1.
6 Priority I - Monitoring locations exceeding BOD concentration 30.0 mg/l, Priority II - BOD 
between 20.0 – 30.0 mg/l, Priority III - BOD between 10.0 – 20.0 mg/l, Priority IV - BOD 
between 6.0 – 10.0 mg/l, Priority V - BOD between 3.0 – 6.0 mg/l.
7 Amount of dissolved oxygen needed by aerobic biological organisms to break down organic 
material present in a given water.
8 Kaljani, Karola, Mayurakshi and Silabati.
Arsenic Affected Blocks
Other Blocks
Fluoride Affected Blocks
Other Blocks

Chapter - I
3
Chart 1.1: Budget provision vis-a-vis the actual expenditure incurred for prevention of 
Air and Water Pollution during the period from 2018-19 to 2022-23. 
123.41
123.74
71.29
33.97
26.32
122.60
70.10
83.54
41.20
27.43
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
AMOUNT  IN CRORE 
YEARS
BUDGET  HEAD (72-2215-02-106)
Budget Provision Revised (` in crore) 
Actual Expenditure (` in crore)
(Source: Budget Publications, GoWB)
Further, UD&MA made provisions under the budget head ‘Capital Outlay 
on Urban Development’ (Major head: 4217) for State Development Schemes 
which, inter alia , included projects for rejuvenation and augmentation of 
Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) and the expansion of sewerage and drainage 
services.
Besides above budget provisions, the West Bengal State National Ganga River 
Basin Authority (NGRBA) Program Management Group (SPMG) during 
2018-23 received an aggregate Central Share of ` 577.38 crore9 from National 
Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) under the Namami Gange scheme and also 
received State Share of ` 315.74 crore. Against the total receipt of ` 893.12 crore, 
total expenditure of ` 896.47 crore was incurred as of March 2023. The excess 
expenditure against fund received was sourced from additional State share and 
interest income of SPMG.
1.5  Water Pollution prevention and control mechanism
The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, mandates setting 
up of a Pollution Control Board, both at Central and State levels, to restore 
and maintain the wholesomeness of water bodies; to plan a nation-wide 
programme for the prevention, control and abatement of water pollution; and 
to collect, compile and publish technical and statistical data related to water 
pollution. Protection and improvement of environment was also regulated under 
Government of India’s Environment Act, 1986. 
9 Including an opening balance of ` 64.60 crore.

4
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Control of water pollution may be reviewed through initiatives of:
	•  prevention (control of pollution before it happens),
	•  control (measures to mitigate pollution once it occurs), and 
	•  monitoring, as mapped in Chart 1.2:
Chart 1.2: Water Pollution 
I. Prevention of
pollution
1. Assessment of 
major sources of
water pollution.
2. Database regarding 
source of water 
pollution.
3.Programmes/ Action
Plans for pollution
prevention, treatment
and restoration of
polluted water in
rivers, lakes and
ground water.
4. Institutional
arrangement.
of5. Adequacy 
infrastructure /funding.
II. Control of
pollution
1.Compliance to the Action
Plans for Polluted River 
Stretches, State Environment  
Plan.
2. Implementation of STP/
Effluent Treatment Plant 
(ETP)/Common Effluent 
Treatment Plant (CETP).
3. Implementation of
Programmes/schemes in
ground water quality affected 
habitation.
4. Consent Management of
Industries.
III. Monitoring
1. Inspection of Sewage
Treatment Plants (STPs) by 
WBPCB.
2. Inspection of identified
drains by West Bengal 
Pollution Control Board 
(WBPCB).
3. Inspection of Grossly
Polluted Industries (GPIs)
and Seriously Polluted
byIndustries (SPIs) 
WBPCB.
4. Surface Water Quality
Monitoring.
5. Ground Water Quality
Monitoring.
(Source: Action plans for Rejuvenation of Polluted River Stretches, State Environment Plan, 
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution), Act, 1974).
1.6 Institutional arrangement for management of water pollution 
Effective abatement of water pollution requires co-ordinated efforts across 
multiple institutional levels, ensuring that policies are not only framed but 
also effectively implemented and monitored for achieving the desired results. 
While policies for abatement of water pollution were prepared by Ministry of 
Environment Forests and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) and the Environment 
Department of West Bengal at National and State level respectively, the 
implementation was done by UD&MA and Public Health Engineering 
Departments (PHED). Both CPCB and WBPCB were responsible for the 
monitoring part.
Institutional arrangements based on functions for abatement of water pollution 
are shown in Chart 1.3:

Chapter - I
5
Chart 1.3: Institutional arrangement
POLICY-MAKING
Ministry of 
Environment  
Forests and
Climate
Change
(MoEF&CC) at 
the Govt. of
India level
Department of 
Environment, 
GoWB at the 
State level
IMPLEMENTATION
The Department of 
Urban Development 
and Municipal Affairs 
(UD&MA)
Department of 
Public Health 
Engineering
(PHED), GoWB 
MONITORING
Central Pollution Control 
Board (CPCB) under 
MoEF&CC at Govt. of 
India level 
West Bengal Pollution 
Control Board 
(WBPCB) under 
Department of 
Environment, GoWB  
(Source: Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution), Act, 1974 and minutes of River 
Rejuvenation Committee)
While the responsibility for monitoring and controlling pollution in West 
Bengal rests with the WBPCB, various other Authorities/ Departments also play 
a significant role in prevention of water pollution in the State. The role of these 
authorities in planning, execution and monitoring of various programmes for 
prevention of water pollution in the State are as depicted in Chart 1.4.
Chart 1.4: Role of various authorities in planning, execution and monitoring of the 
programmes for prevention of water pollution
•West Bengal Pollution Control Board (WBPCB) for
environmental monitoring and planning.
Environment
Department
(Monitoring and
Planning) 
•Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority (KMDA)
•Asansol Durgapur Development Authority (ADDA)
•Siliguri and Jalpaiguri Development Authority (SJDA)
•Municipal Engineering Directorate (MED)
UD&MA Department
(project execution 
agencies) 
• West Bengal State NGRBA Program Management Group
(SPMG)
• Public Health Engineering Department (PHED)
• West Bengal River Rejuvenation Committee
(WBRRC), chaired by Member Secretary,WBPCB, to prepare
and monitor execution of river rejuvenation action plans
Others
(project execution and 
implementation agencies) 
1.7 Reasons for conduct of Audit
The National Green Tribunal (NGT) order against the Original Application (OA) 
No. 673/2018 dated 06 December 2018, directed States to revise, prepare 

6
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
and implement Action Plans to restore polluted river stretches and to ensure 
100 per cent  treatment of sewage by 31 March 2020. The timeline for 
completion of all steps in the Action Plans including setting up of STPs and 
their commissioning was 31 March 2021.
NGT passed another order on 26 September 2019, in the matter of the  
OA No. 360/2018 to check compliance with several statutory requirements 
related to waste and environment management and advisories issued to the 
States. This was in response to the growing concerns regarding non-compliance 
with the provisions of Waste Management Rules and Regulations of 2016, and 
other relevant rules and regulations related to water quality and conservation, 
and air and noise pollution management in the States.
CPCB had identified (2017) 17 polluted river stretches where River rejuvenation 
programme was to be implemented.
Goal 6 of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) call for acess to safe 
and affordable drinking water, sanitation facilities, and hygiene for all by 2030. 
According to SDG index - 2020 of NITI Aayog, as regard the performance of 
West Bengal in SDG-6 (Clean water and sanitation), it was observed that the 
score of the State declined to 81 from 83 in 2019. 
Further, research studies showed impact of water pollution on agricultural 
produce and aquatic animals in the State as well as risks to human health from 
water contamination such as Diarrhoea, Enteric Fever, Vibrio cholera etc. and 
prevalence of Arsenicosis and Fluorosis.
Thus, Audit decided to study the issue of water pollution through a Performance 
Audit. 

CHAPTER - II
Audit Framework

7
CHAPTER-II
Audit Framework
2.1 Audit objective
The measures taken by the State of West Bengal to prevent and contain water 
pollution were examined with certain specific audit objectives in mind. 
The objectives for this Performance Audit were to assess whether:
	•  Steps taken by the State Government to prevent water pollution of rivers, 
lakes and ground water were adequate;
	•  Measures undertaken to control water pollution achieved the desired 
objective;
	•  Monitoring of water pollution was effective to prevent and control water 
pollution and
	•  Appropriate steps have been taken to achieve the relevant targets under 
Sustainable Developmental Goal (SDG)-6, relating to water pollution.
2.2 Audit criteria
Audit findings are based on criteria derived from the following sources:
•The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974.
•National Water Policy, 2012.
•National Environment Policy, 2006.
•NGRBA Guidelines and NGRBA Programme Framework.
•Manual on Sewerage and Sewage Treatment Systems
(2013).
•Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering 
Organization (CPHEEO), Ministry of Urban Development, 
Government of India.
Government 
of India 
Acts/Rules/
Guidelines 
•State Environment Plan.
•West Bengal Prevention and Control of Water Pollution
(procedure for Immersion of Idol after Pujas) Rules in
September 2018.
Government 
of WB 
Acts/Rules/ 
Guidelines 
•NGT orders.
•Guidelines and instructions issued by Central Pollution
Control Board/ State Pollution Control Boards.
•Minutes of the River Rejuvenation Committee Meetings.
Others
Water quality criteria
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has developed a concept of designated 
best use for use of water. According to this concept, out of the several uses 
of water of a particular water body, the use which demands highest quality is 
termed its designated best use. Five designated best uses have been identified. 

8
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
This classification helps the water quality managers and planners to set water 
quality targets and design suitable restoration programmes for various water 
bodies as shown in Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1: Water Quality Criteria 
Designated Best 
Use
Class of 
water
Criteria
Drinking water 
source without 
conventional 
treatment but 
after disinfection
A • Total Coliforms Organism MPN/100 ml shall be 50 or 
less
• pH between 6.5 and 8.5
• Dissolved Oxygen (DO) 6 mg/l or more
• Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) - five days 20°C 
2mg/l or less
Outdoor bathing 
(Organised)
B • pH between 6.5 and 8.5
• Dissolved Oxygen 5 mg/l or more
• Biochemical Oxygen Demand - three days 20°C 3 mg/l 
or less
• Faecal Coliforms<=500 MPN/100 ml (desirable)
• Faecal Coliforms<=2500 MPN/100 ml (max permissible)
• Faecal Streptococci<=100 MPN/100 ml (desirable)
• Faecal Streptococci<=500 MPN/100 ml (max permissible)
Drinking water 
source after 
conventional 
treatment and 
disinfection
C • Total Coliforms Organism MPN/100ml shall be 5000 or 
less
• pH between 6.0 to 9.0
• Dissolved Oxygen 4mg/l or more
• Biochemical Oxygen Demand - five days 20°C 3mg/l or 
less
Propagation of 
Wildlife and 
Fisheries
D • pH between 6.5 to 8.5
• Dissolved Oxygen 4mg/l or more
• Free Ammonia (as N) 1.2 mg/l or less
Irrigation, 
Industrial 
Cooling, 
Controlled Waste 
disposal
E • pH between 6.0 to 8.5
• Electrical Conductivity at 25°C micro mhos/cm Max 2250
• Sodium absorption Ratio Max 26
• Boron Max 2mg/l
2.3 Audit scope and Methodology
The Performance Audit was conducted between June and November 2023, 
covering the period from 2018-19 to 2022-23. The Performance Audit sought 
to evaluate the systems and processes in place for prevention, control and 
monitoring of water pollution caused due to (i) urban sewage, (ii) industrial 
effluents and (iii) groundwater metal contamination ( i.e. arsenic, fluoride, 
chloride) for the period of 2018-23. 

Chapter - II
9
Audit sampling included the following:
• All four PRS under priority I to III.
• One river each from priority IV and
V using random sampling
• One from the four de-listed rivers
through random sampling from the total
17 PRS
1. Polluted River
Stretches (PRS)
• Out of 61 STPs, 34 STPs were selected
using random sampling
2. Sewage Treatment
Plants (STPs)
• Out of 54 GPIs, 14 were selected using
random sampling
• Out of 400 SPIs, 51 SPIs were selected
using Stratified Random Sampling
(SRS).
3. Grossly Polluting
Industries 
(GPI)/Seriously
Polluting Industries 
(SPI)
• Out of total 13 Arsenic, Fluoride and 
Chloride affected districts, four districts 
were identified through random sampling 
using IDEA. North 24 Parganas and 
Nadia for Arsenic; Birbhum and South 
24 Parganas for Fluoride; and South 
24 Parganas for Chloride.
4. Ground Water
SAMPLING
Audit Methodology included the following:
 Analysis of records/documents and data using Computer Assisted Audit 
Techniques (CAAT)
 Issue of requisitions/queries/observations
 Joint physical inspections along with photographic evidence
 Independent water quality tests by engaging CPCB.
CPCB was requested to extend its water quality analysis service for testing of 
the quality of treated wastewater of eight STPs, four Effluent Treatment Plants 
(ETPs) and a Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP). The water from seven 
drains/canals and a lake were also subjected to quality analysis by soliciting 
services of CPCB.
An Entry Conference was held on 27 June 2023, with the Secretary, Environment 
Department wherein the audit objectives, scope and methodology were 
discussed. Representatives from other line departments and organisations such 
as WBPCB, State Urban Development Agency (SUDA), Kolkata Municipal 
Corporation (KMC), Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority (KMDA), 

10
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
State Water Investigation Directorate (SWID) and East Kolkata Wetlands 
Management Authority (EKWMA) also participated in the Entry Conference. 
A separate meeting with Member Secretary, WBPCB was held on  
11 July 2023 wherein the audit objectives, scope and methodology were also 
discussed. 
Exit Conference was held on 12 March 2024, with the Special Secretary, 
Environment Department wherein the audit observations were discussed. The 
replies obtained from the Department have suitably been incorporated in the 
Report, wherever relevant.
2.4 Structure of the Audit Report
The Performance Audit Report has been structured on the basis of specific audit 
findings from the test checked districts and contains seven chapters.
• Introduction
Chapter I
• Audit Framework
Chapter II
• Planning for prevention and control of
water pollution in Rivers, Lakes and
Ground water
Chapter III
•Municipal Sewage treatment for restoration
of Polluted River stretches and Lakes
Chapter IV
• Industrial Wastewater Management
Chapter V
• Ground Water Quality Management
Chapter VI
• Monitoring of Water Quality
Chapter VII
2.5 Acknowledgement
We acknowledge the co-operation extended by the Environment Department,  
UD&MA, PHED, WBPCB and KMDA in providing the records and information 
for smooth conduct of the Performance Audit. We also acknowledge the 
assistance through technical expertise provided for conducting water quality 
tests by the Regional Offices of CPCB. 

CHAPTER - III
Planning for prevention 
and control of water 
pollution in Rivers, Lakes 
and Ground water

11
Chapter- III
Planning for prevention and control of water pollution in 
Rivers, Lakes and Ground water
3.1 Introduction
According to the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, WBPCB 
is required to plan comprehensive programmes for prevention and control of 
water pollution and secure execution thereof. For this purpose, identification of 
the water polluting sources, type and the quantity of pollutants discharged into 
the environment was to be done. Further, as per Section 16 (h) of the Act, CPCB 
must plan and cause to execute a nationwide programme for the prevention, 
control or abatement of water pollution.
CPCB’s Report on ‘River Stretches for Restoration of Water Quality 
(September 2018)’ under National Water Quality Monitoring Programme for the 
year 2016-17, listed 17 stretches10 of different rivers in the State as ‘polluted’.
In September 2018, the National Green Tribunal (NGT) 11 directed all States to 
prepare Action Plans within two months to bring all the polluted river stretches 
under the category, “fit for at least bathing purpose” ( i.e. BOD < 3 mg/l and  
FC < 500 MPN/100 ml). 
In response to the order 12 of NGT, the CPCB summarised seven themes 13, and 
directed the State Governments to compile information which inter alia included 
three14 of these specific thematic areas relating to abatement of water pollution 
viz. (i) Water Quality Management Plan, (ii) Domestic Sewage Management 
Plan and (iii) Industrial Wastewater Management Plan.
This Chapter deals with the planning mechanism envisaged under the State 
Environment Plan (SEP) and the Action Plans of the Polluted River Stretches 
(PRS) for implementation of the Rejuvenation programmes prepared in 
compliance with NGT’s OA 360/2018 and 673/2018 respectively. Audit findings 
are discussed in succeeding paragraphs.
3.2 State Water Policy
To assess surface water and ground water resources, governments require 
adequate and comparable information. Thus, it is necessary to establish 
databases of the availability of all types of hydrologic data and to identify 
surface and ground water resources and potential sources of water supply and 
prepare national profiles. 
10 Barakar, Churni, Damodar, Darakeswar, Dwaraka, Ganga, Jalangi, Kaljani, Kansai, Karala, 
Mathabhanga, Mahananda, Mayurakshi, Rupnarayan, Silabati, Teesta and Vidyadhari.
11 Order against the Original Application No. 673/2018.
12 In the matter of the Original Application (OA) Number 360/2018.
13 (i) Solid Waste Management Plan, (ii) Water Quality Management Plan, (iii) Domestic 
Sewage Management Plan, (iv) Industrial Wastewater Management Plan, (v) Air Quality 
Management Plan, (vi) Mining Activity Management Plan and (vii) Noise Pollution 
Management Plan.
14 The remaining themes are related to noise pollution, air pollution, mining and solid wastes. 

12
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
National Water Policy, 2012 was framed to assess the existing situation of water 
resources of the country and to propose a plan of action with a unified national 
perspective. The policy envisaged that States would frame and adopt a State 
Water Policy. 
Audit observed that the State Water Policy for West Bengal had not been 
framed even after a lapse of 12 years of the finalisation of the National 
Water Policy. Further, a standardised State level water related information 
database system had not been established. In the absence of a State 
Water Policy, issues related to water governance such as water pollution, 
encroachments on water bodies, adequacy of infrastructure, conservation, 
management of water and water pricing could not be effectively addressed, 
as discussed in this Report. 
The Department accepted (March 2024) the audit observation and stated that the 
rural area water supply issues were being looked after by the PHED while the 
urban area water supply issues were addressed by KMDA and KMC. However, 
the fact remains that the Government has been in continuous default by not 
framing a State Water Policy in consonance with the National Water Policy 
2012. 
3.3 Short term Action Plan under State Environment Plan
In compliance with NGT’s OA No. 360/2018, the Environment Department, 
GoWB prepared (2020) the State Environment Plan (SEP) by collating 
information from 23 districts and 125 urban local bodies (ULBs) on seven 
thematic areas, as defined by the CPCB.
Further, as per the NGT order, OA No. 360/2018, the SEP was to include 
various short-term action plans related to abatement of water pollution. These 
short-term plans were to be finalised by various stakeholders 15 and had to be 
completed within 6 to 12 months from the date of the preparation of the SEP. It 
was noted in Audit that during the period of 2018-19 to 2022-23, a number of 
Action Plans have been initiated by different implementing agencies, but none 
of them were completed as detailed in Paragraphs 3.3.1 to 3.3.5.
3.3.1 Inventory of Wetlands
Wetlands are a vital part of the hydrological cycle and are highly productive 
eco-systems which support rich biodiversity and provide a wide range of eco-
system services such as water storage, water purification, flood mitigation, 
erosion control, aquifer recharge etc. 
A. MoEF&CC’s guidelines for implementing Wetlands (Conservation and 
Management), 2017 Rules required developing a list of activities, to be 
regulated and permitted within the notified wetlands and their zone of 
influence, and defining the strategies for conservation and wise use of 
notified wetlands.
B. Wetlands (Conservation and Management) Rules, 2017, inter alia, require16 
that the State Wetlands Authority (SWA) would prepare a comprehensive 
15 UD&MA Department, WBPCB, ULBs etc.
16 Vide Rule 5(4)(d).

Chapter - III
13
digital inventory17 of all wetlands within a period of one year from the date 
of publication of these Rules, and upload the same on a dedicated web 
portal, to be developed by the Central Government for the said purpose. 
The inventory was to be updated every ten years. 
C. The State Environment Plan 2020, also aimed at preparation of an inventory 
of water bodies, as a short-term action plan. 
D. NGT 18 required (22 July 2021), National Wetlands Committee to identify 
and inventorise wetlands with the assistance of State Governments and 
obtain brief documents19 of each of the identified wetlands. 
Audit, however, observed that the inventory of identified water bodies could 
not be completed within the stipulated time period of one year and was still in 
progress (March 2024) as detailed below:
	•  Water Resources Investigation and Development Department (WRIDD), 
Government of West Bengal was designated as the State’s Nodal agency 
for restoration of water bodies including wetlands vide Chief Secretary’s 
notification dated 31 May 2021. 
	•  According to the National Wetland Inventory Assessment Atlas prepared 
by the Space Application Centre of Indian Space Research Organization 
(ISRO), a total of 9,119 wetlands with an area of above 2.25 Ha each were 
identified in the State. 
	•  In the first phase, the Department of Environment, GoWB entrusted the 
work of preparation of brief documents for 23 wetlands to the Institute 
of Environmental Studies and Wetland Management (IESWM 20) in 
September 2021. Subsequently, WRIDD prepared (March 2022) fact 
sheets of 94 wetlands. 
The Department also stated (March 2024) that the work of preparation of 
brief documents for 23 wetlands had been completed and preparation of brief 
documents for 221 wetlands were at their final stages. 
Even three years after the NGT order, the Department did not notify wetlands 
and their zone of influence and define the strategies for their conservation, in 
compliance with the MoEF&CC’s guidelines. This leaves the wetlands with 
highly productive eco-system and rich biodiversity at the risk of potential 
damage.
3.3.2 Inventory of Ponds/ Lakes
The MoEF&CC’s guidelines for implementing Wetlands (Conservation and 
Management) Rules 2017 requires State Wetlands Authorities to prepare brief 
documents for each wetland (such as lagoon, lake, marsh, urban lake etc.) to 
be notified for regulation under the Rules 2017, delineating demarcation of 
17 Details of wetlands with digital maps and coordinates.
18 Vide its order in OA 351/2019.
19 The brief document would record the physical as well as socio-economic importance and 
Bio diversity of the wetlands, which would enable the district administration to use and 
manage the wetlands.
20 IESWM was established in March 1986 with the primary objective of carrying out studies 
related to wetland functions and its ecology. The Institute is an Autonomous Body under the 
administrative control of the Department of Environment, Government of West Bengal.

14
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
wetlands boundary, demarcation of its zone of influence, ecological character, 
pre-existing rights and privileges etc. Audit observed that brief documents for 
the identified water bodies were not prepared. 
Action plans, timelines, and fund requirements for conservation/protection of 
the identified ponds/lakes were also not prepared.
NGT also, vide its order dated 25 February 2020 directed States to identify 
ponds and lakes for assessment of water quality, to prepare action plans for 
restoration of prioritized ponds or lakes and execute the approved action plans. 
Accordingly, the Environment Department, GoWB, identified (October 2020) 
15,000 water-bodies (ponds, lakes, tanks etc.) in the State for protection and 
restoration works.
Further, as per directions issued by NGT vide order dated 25 February 2020 these 
identified water bodies were to be prioritized and restored by March 2021. 
However, Audit observed that the State Government had only taken up the 
work of preparation of brief documents. Strategies for conservation of identified 
water bodies had not been defined till March 2024. 
Due to non-inventorisation of water bodies and subsequent non-preparation 
of action plans for restoration, concerted efforts could not be made for 
conservation and effective management of water bodies. Estimation of 
financial intervention needed for addressing issues related to restoration of 
those water bodies like weed infestation, sewage discharges, encroachments 
etc. was also not possible. 
Recommendation 1:
The Environment Department should complete the inventory of all wetlands 
and water bodies in a time bound manner and prepare Action Plans for their 
effective management. 
3.3.3 Faecal Sludge and Septage Management
Department of UD&MA, GoWB notified (May 2022) a Faecal Sludge and 
Septage Management (FSSM) Policy. The Policy points out that in the absence 
of adequate infrastructure for treatment and disposal, faecal sludge/septage was 
disposed of in open nullahs/outfall channels, causing pollution of rivers, canals 
and other water bodies. It further states that one of the reasons of high faecal 
coliform concentration in rivers was due to the direct disposal of faecal sludge/
septage in outfall channels leading to rivers. 
The FSSM Policy cited the following three-pronged approach towards adopting 
State-wide FSSM system:
(a)  Co-treatment of faecal sludge and 
septage generating in the ULBs at
own or nearby STPs; 
(b) Setting up of independent Faecal 
Sludge and Septage Treatment Plants 
(FSTP) at ULB level or at cluster of ULB 
level;
(c) In case of small town ( Population<one 
lakh) co-treatment of Faecal Sludge and
Septage in new STPs (connected with
intersepting sewer with diversion) 

Chapter - III
15
The FSSM Policy had also drawn a time frame for setting up of FSSM systems 
in municipal towns. As per the time frame, all the 128 ULBs of West Bengal 
were to be covered under FSSM systems by the year 2024-25. 
Audit observed that though FSSM systems for 50 ULBs were to be set up by the 
end of March 2023, only six ULBs were covered till November 2023. Further, 
ULB-wise data for the quantity of septage generation and the quantity treated 
was not maintained by UD&MA and therefore the adequacy and effectiveness 
of the septage treatment facility could not be ascertained. 
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that co-treatment of septage was 
being considered wherever Sewage Treatment Plants were available and in 
other cases, the work of setting up of Faecal Sludge Treatment Plants had been 
initiated.
3.3.4 Zero Industrial Wastewater Plan
According to SEP-2020 issued by CPCB, WBPCB had to prepare a zero 
industrial wastewater plan within a period of six months to one year, to reduce 
discharge of untreated or partially treated industrial wastewater into water 
bodies. 
However, WBPCB was yet to prepare a zero industrial wastewater plan 
(March 2024). Joint inspection of the test checked industries showed that 
only five21 out of the 27 inspected industries had the facility to store and 
re-use treated wastewater.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that it had issued direction to 
paper and distillery units to comply with the Zero Liquid Discharge guidelines 
of CPCB. 
3.3.5 Utilisation of Treated Wastewater/Effluent
According to the Benchmark devised by the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs, Government of India, in the context of basic municipal services 
related to water supply, sewerage, solid waste management and storm water 
drainage, at least 20 per cent of the treated water should be reused/recycled.  
SDG-6 commits Governments to halving the proportion of untreated wastewater 
and substantially increasing recycling and safe reuse by 2030.
The State Government constituted a committee in April 2019 for preparation 
of a comprehensive Policy on ‘Treated Wastewater Re-use Policy of Urban 
West Bengal’. The Policy for re-use of treated wastewater was adopted in  
June 2020 and focused on strategies for recycling of water through appropriate 
centralised or decentralised technology and execution thereof in a time bound 
manner across urban areas. The policy set a targeted timeline of 2022 to re-use 
25 per cent of treated wastewater.
The Policy further elucidated immediate objectives (i.e. those to be achieved in 
two years span), medium term objectives (to be achieved in next four years) and 
long-term objectives (in further four years). 
21 (i) Himadri Chemicals and Industries Ltd, (ii) Jay Shree Chemical and Fertilisers,  
(iii) CESC coal washers, (iv) Shyam Tar Products and (v) Burdwan Kraft Board LLP.

16
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
The immediate objectives laid down in the Policy were to:
	•  Assess sources of generation of wastewater and quantity of wastewater 
production in urban West Bengal and create a Geographic Information 
System (GIS) enabled Management Information System (MIS) 
	•  Identify bulk users of water like industrial clusters, Railways, Infrastructure 
projects etc. and quantify their potential water demand as bulk user of water
	•  Assess the existing centralised and decentralised plants of wastewater 
treatment especially the STPs, ETPs and CETPs and take appropriate 
measures for up-gradation or expansion.
The Policy also aimed at setting up of a State Level High Powered Committee 
under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary of the State, a State Level Steering 
Committee under the chairmanship of Principal Secretary of UD&MA for 
overall supervision, monitoring and policy advice, and a State Level Wastewater 
Management Cell at State Urban Development Agency (SUDA) for supervising 
the regular implementation and monitoring of waste water treatment and its use.
Audit scrutiny of the 34 selected STPs and 65 Industries (14 GPIs 22 + 
51 SPIs23), revealed that 09 STPs and 23 industries did not have provision for 
re-use of treated wastewater and the treated water was discharged directly 
into drains. In four sampled industries, though re-use of treated water was 
stated to be done, the actual quantity of treated re-used wastewater could 
not be ascertained in the absence of a recording system. 
Moreover, the stipulated GIS enabled MIS for mapping sources of 
generation of wastewater and quantity of wastewater production in urban 
West Bengal was not created till November 2023.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that necessary instructions had 
been issued to water polluting industries and STP operators to maximise re-use 
of treated wastewater. 
However, in absence of records regarding re-use of treated wastewater, the 
extent of actual re-use of wastewater could not be ascertained in Audit.
Recommendations 2: 
WBPCB should ensure implementation of the State’s ‘Re-use of treated 
wastewater Policy’ and work towards achieving Zero industrial wastewater, 
as envisaged in SEP 2020.
3.4  Action Plan for abatement of pollution, rejuvenation, protection 
and management of identified Polluted River Stretches
In consequence to NGT’s 24 direction (September 2018), GoWB constituted 
(January 2019) a River Rejuvenation Committee (RRC) for the preparation of 
Action Plans for effective abatement of pollution, rejuvenation, protection and 
management of each of the identified polluted River stretches. As per the NGT 
22 GPI: Industries discharging effluents into water course and the untreated effluent which have 
BOD load of 100 kg per day or more, and/or handle hazardous substances.
23 SPI: Industries discharging effluents into water course and under CPCB’s 33 SPI classified 
sectors.
24 Order against the OA No. 673/2018.

Chapter - III
17
order, Action Plans were required to be prepared within two months from the 
date of the said order. It was observed that though the Action Plans for all the 
17 identified PRS were prepared by RRC, these Plans were approved by CPCB 
for implementation only between July 2019 and October 2020, i.e. after a delay 
of eight months to 23 months.
Audit observed the following deficiencies in rejuvenation of the identified 
polluted river stretches:
3.4.1 Identification of Polluting Sources of River Ganga
As per the Action Plan for Rejuvenation of River Ganga, the main causes 
of river water quality deterioration are i) discharge of industrial wastewater, 
ii) discharge of municipal wastewater and iii) pollution from non-point sources. 
To improve its water quality these three issues were required to be addressed. 
It was, however, noted that the State did not have a database for non-point 
sources of pollution for assessment of pollution load and, therefore it was 
not included in the  Action Plan for Rejuvenation of River Ganga. With 
respect to assessment of pollution from point sources viz. municipal sewage 
and Industrial effluents, audit comments are detailed below:
3.4.1.1  Assessment of pollution sources from municipal sewage from the 
Ganga front towns
Continuous assessment of water quality of important fresh water sources is 
a mandated responsibility of WBPCB. The river Ganga is one of the most 
important water sources in the State of West Bengal, covering 29 main towns 
in the State. The approved Action Plan (July 2020) for river Ganga identified 
55 drains in the catchment of the polluted stretch of the River with approximately 
1,084 MLD of total sewage generation requiring integration to existing as well 
as proposed STPs.
Audit observed that in 2022 CPCB monitored 104 drains, discharging untreated 
sewage into the river Ganga, twice a year, while WBPCB monitored 56 drains 
discharging into River Ganga fortnightly, leaving the rest 48 drains out of 
monitoring mechanism of WBPCB. Thus, designing of strategies for reducing 
pollution load of river Ganga, as envisaged in the Action Plan, based on 
continuous assessment, could not be achieved as all the identified polluting 
drains were not monitored by WBPCB. This was evident from the monitoring 
reports of CPCB (pre-monsoon 2022) that the BOD load of the 104 drains 
falling into river Ganga remained as high as 194.85 Ton per day (TPD).
Audit further observed that UD&MA submitted in the context of an NGT case 
(600/2018 in February 2022) that 402 drains had been identified by the UD&MA 
in 42 Ganga front towns discharging wastewater into the river Ganga. 
However, Action Plan for the Ganga was not revised in consideration of 
the updated estimated sewage from the 402 drains, and the execution of 
the Action Plan continued with the initial estimation of 1,084 MLD from 
29 towns consisting of 55 drains. Thus, remedial action for abatement of 
pollution of river Ganga was not commensurate with the actual extent of 
sewage discharged.

18
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that even small drains with flow 
less than one MLD had been included in the 402 drains list, and WBPCB 
presently monitors 105 major drains (with flow of one MLD and above). 
However, WBPCB generates water quality monitoring reports for only 56 drains 
and the continuous quality assessment of remaining identified drains was yet to 
commence. Further, the Department did not provide any supportive documents 
regarding monitoring of 105 major drains by WBPCB. 
3.4.1.2  Action Plan for connecting the drains falling into Ganga with STPs
According to the Action Plan for rejuvenation of river Ganga, 33 out of total 
55 identified drains (29 towns) of the river Ganga were either connected 
or proposed to be connected to different STPs. For remaining 22 drains, as 
per the CPCB guidelines, the feasibility of the work in these channels was 
to be completed by February 2021, but the same was not completed, till  
December 2023.
The implementing agency, Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority 
(KMDA) engaged two institutes 25 to assess the water quality and flow of  
70 drains into river Ganga including previously identified 55 drains. The report 
was prepared by the institutes during 2022-23. 
However, KMDA was yet to prepare project proposals for connecting the 
drains, falling into river Ganga, with STPs. Further, as per the CPCB’s 
latest report on Water Quality Monitoring of drains (pre-monsoon 2022), 
only one drain was tapped26. As a result, untreated sewage drains into river 
Ganga directly causing pollution of the river.
Thus, it is evident that the Action Plan approved in July 2020 was deficient 
as it did not adequately address the pollution load encompassing the actual 
number of drains falling into Ganga. The implementation of the Action 
Plan was also deficient as only one drain was connected to an STP.
3.4.1.3  Assessment of Industrial effluents in the Action Plan of River 
Ganga
According to Section 25 and 26 of the Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act 1974, no industry can discharge sewage or trade effluent into a 
stream or well or sewer or land beyond the permissible standards prescribed by 
CPCB.
Audit, however, observed that many drains 27 were carrying industrial 
effluents and coloured effluents from various industrial clusters28. WBPCB 
had neither taken the initiative to find out the possible cause of the water 
pollution nor did it initiate an updating exercise of its database regarding 
water polluting industries during the Audit period as detailed below: 
25 Jadavpur University (JU) and the Indian Institute of Engineering, Science and Technology 
(IIEST), Shibpur.
26 Construction of interception structures on the drains and diverting the drains water to STPs.
27 Sarenga and Ramkrishna Ghat in Howrah, Green Channel in Haldia Churial in  
South 24 Parganas etc.
28 Jalan Industrial Complex, Sankrail Industrial Complex, Food Park and Poly Park, Haldia etc.

Chapter - III
19
(i)  Source of industrial pollution through Sarenga Khal into Ganga not 
completely ascertained
NGT29 on the issue of discharge of industrial effluents into the river Hooghly 
through Sarenga Canal30, observed (July 2023) that WBPCB had not updated 
the numbers of water polluting industries of all the clusters31 in Howrah. 
According to the advice of NGT, WBPCB visited (September 2023) the area in 
order to ascertain the status of various industrial units in the area and identify 
the possible sources of discharge to the said canal. Water quality analysis in 
August 2023 showed that the canal water had high BOD with Zero Dissolved 
Oxygen (DO). However, the final report on identifying the possible sources of 
discharge to the said canal was still to be prepared (November 2023). 
A joint inspection of the Sarenga Khal32 in November 2023 with officials of 
WBPCB revealed that the canal water was brown in colour and presence of 
oil was palpable. Colour traces were seen in the canal water even near the 
confluence point.
Figure 3.1: Coloured canal water with 
traces of oil and grease
Figure 3.2: Coloured canal water 
near confluence
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that inspections were being 
carried out to identify industries polluting the canal. This indicated that source 
of industrial pollution through Sarenga Khal into river Ganga was yet to be 
ascertained by WBPCB.
(ii)  Source of industrial pollution through Green Belt Canal yet to be 
ascertained.
Environment Pollution Abatement Action Plans for Haldia, inter alia, included 
monthly water quality monitoring of the Green Belt Canal  (GBC). The 
29 OA No. 75/2023/EZ.
30 Drainage channel of about 10.35 KM maintained by Irrigation and Waterways Department 
(I&WD) of GoWB, drains industrial effluent from these clusters.
31 Bamungachi Industrial Cluster, Food Park, Poly Park, Jalan Industrial complex and Sankrail 
Industrial Complex.
32 Means drain/canal carrying industrial sewage.

20
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
industries of the major industrial town-Haldia, discharge their treated effluents 
in the GBC, which drains into the Haldi River, a tributary of river Hooghly. The 
water quality of GBC is monitored monthly by WBPCB at 11 sampling stations. 
The rationale was that the water quality of GBC at different locations can be 
used as an indicator of the quality of discharges from individual industries, as 
most of the industries are having typical characteristic discharges to the GBC. 
Analysis of the monitoring data for the period from 2018 to 2022 of the 
11 sampling points of the canal revealed that the parameters like Biological 
Oxygen Demand (BOD), Oil and Grease (O&G) and Total Suspended Solids 
(TSS) regularly exceeded the norms as shown in the Chart 3.1.
12 12
10 9
12
8 9 10
8 77
9
5 6
10
6 5 6 5
9
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Number of Samples
Years
Chart 3.1 - GBC Quality 
Total Sample
TSS more than 100 mg/l
BOD more than 3 mg/l
Oil & Grease more than 1 mg/l
Criteria - BOD < 3 mg/l, O&G < 1 mg/l & TSS <100 mg/l
Further, at the discharge point (Patikhali gate) into the river Hooghly, the above 
parameters were seen to be high during the period 2018-23 as in Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Test result of GBC at Near Patikhali gate (Max in a Year)
Year TSS (mg/l) COD (mg/l) BOD (mg/l)
Oil and 
Grease 
(mg/l)
Sulphide 
(mg/l)
2018 1,436 206.00 12.50 1.50 3.456
2019 1,488 421.81 160.00 3.04 0.390
2020 576 338.78 150.00 1.70 BDL*
2021 790 351.02 180.00 2.20 BDL
2022 576 56.84 29.06 3.40 BDL
Criteria 100 50 3 1 1
*Below Detection Level
Audit conducted a joint inspection of the GBC along with officials of the 
WBPCB in October 2023 and observed that at the first sampling point of 
GBC, Oil and Grease was distinctly visible on the water surface. It was also 
observed that the canal became narrow from the sampling point 6 onwards 
due to siltation.

Chapter - III
21
Figure 3.3 :1st sampling point of GBC, Oil 
and Grease was distinctly visible on the 
water surface
Figure 3.4: Narrow stretch of green belt 
canal from the sampling point 6 onwards 
due to siltation
However, records regarding analysis of the possible sources of water pollution 
were not available. In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that inspections 
were being carried out to identify the polluting industries to the said canal.
(iii)  Source of pollution discharging into Ramakrishna Ghat drain yet to be 
identified.
Ramakrishna Ghat  drain ( Howrah) 
is one of the drains carrying mixed 
effluent and discharges directly into 
the river Ganga. A detailed study was 
carried out by CPCB in April 2022 to 
identify the source of pollution at the 
catchment area of the drain. CPCB 
observed that untreated industrial 
effluent, laced with heavy metal 
concentrations of minerals ( i.e. Cd, 
Cu, Fe, Pb, Mn, Ni and Zn), was 
discharged into the canal.
Based on the study report, CPCB 
issued (November 2022) directions 
to WBPCB to identify the source of 
discharge of high metal bearing acidic 
effluent into the drain and take necessary action to stop the discharge of untreated 
effluent. WBPCB was also directed to prepare an action plan for interception 
and diversion, and treatment of the above drain. 
Audit observed that WBPCB had neither updated its inventory for 
polluting units on the lines of CPCB’s direction in November 2022, nor 
had it prepared an action plan for interception and diversion of the above 
drains. In the absence of an action plan, concerted effort could not be 
initiated for abating pollution to the drain.
1st SAMPLING POINT OF GBC, OIL AND 
GREASE DISTINTLY VISIBLE ON WATER 
SURFACE
Figure 3.5: Ramakrishna Ghat drain

22
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that it had conducted inspections 
of several units which were discharging untreated effluent to Ramkrishna Ghat 
drain, and it had ordered for closure of five units in April 2023. 
However, the updated inventory for polluting units was not on record, and 
interception and diversion work was not initiated in respect of the Ramkrishna 
Ghat drain.
(iv)  Inventory of the dyeing units discharging untreated colour effluents 
directly into the municipal drains 
An STP with a capacity of 9.5 MLD was commissioned with effect from 
July 2022 at Nabadwip, Nadia district. Joint field inspection of the STP with 
the KMDA officials in November 2023 showed that the treated effluent was 
brown in colour with foam. Observing the treated effluent, some dyeing units 
were inspected on the same day, and it was noticed that the units were operating 
without effluent treatment facilities and the coloured discharge was directly 
falling into the municipal drains of Nabadwip town which is connected to the 
STP designed for treating municipal sewage only.
Figure 3.6 : Final treated discharge with 
colour and foam
Figure 3.7 : Dying unit operating without 
ETP
Audit observed that the concerned Executive Engineer of KMDA, informed 
(July 2023) Barrackpore Regional office, WBPCB regarding the mixing of 
industrial colour/dye with drain water thereby, affecting the performance 
of the STP as it was equipped to treat municipal waste only. 
However, remedial action taken by the WBPCB was not found on record. 
Moreover, an inventory of the dyeing industries in this area was also not 
available with WBPCB.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that regulatory actions against 
two dyeing units at Nabadwip for discharging untreated effluent had since been 
initiated.
(v)  Inventory of the dairies discharging untreated effluents 
“Guidelines for Environmental Management of Dairy Farms and Gaushalas” 
were issued by the CPCB in July 2020. The major environmental issues, as per 

Chapter - III
23
the guidelines, are discharge of cow dung and urinal wastewater into drains 
and rivers without any treatment. To address the environmental issues, the 
guidelines prescribed measures for management of both solid and liquid wastes 
from dairy farms and gaushalas in addition to the Siting Policy33 and Regulatory/
Monitoring Mechanism of WBPCB. The guidelines, inter-alia, stipulated the 
following:
	•  Preparation of inventory of the dairy farms and gaushalas,
	•  The SPCB shall publish a public notice for dairy farms to obtain Consent To 
Establish (CTE) and Consent To Operate (CTO) under Water Act, 1974 as  
well as Air Act, 1981 as per the categorisation of industries. 
	•  Dairies and gaushalas should ensure that the wastewater, being discharged 
is adequately treated so as to meet the standards as prescribed by SPCBs.
Audit further observed that WBPCB was yet to implement a plan for the 
Environmental Management of Dairy Farms and Gaushalas and bring 
these farms under consent management34. Inventory of the dairy farms and 
Gaushalas was not prepared (November 2023). 
Audit observed from the records of WBPCB that cow dung is being regularly 
discharged into the Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) canal, linked to river 
Ganga, by more than 200 cattle sheds which exist in this stretch of the canal. 
Direct discharge of cow dung into the canal causes severe water pollution in the 
canal and a considerable part of organic load was reaching the river. 
From the monitoring report (2018-22) of CPCB for the canal, it was observed 
that at the outfall point on River Ganga, the BOD load varied from 6.36 to 
54.64 Tonnes Per Day (TPD) with an average of 24.33 TPD. The coliforms (Total 
and Faecal) counts were significantly high indicating the discharge of domestic 
wastewater into the canal. Nazirgunj Khal  which carries the wastewater of 
DVC canal also indicated that the average BOD, COD concentrations (Average 
49.20 mg/l and 227.60 mg/l respectively) did not comply with the general 
standards for discharge of environmental pollutants into inland surface waters.
NGT (March 2023) passed orders for setting up of a Bio-gas plant, dredging 
of DVC canal, removal of illegal khatals/cow sheds/cattle sheds and putting in 
place appropriate sewerage management plan.
Audit conducted a joint inspection of the DVC canal with representatives of 
WBPCB, Dankuni Municipality and Irrigation and Waterways Department 
(I&WD) in November 2023, and observed the following:
	•  Discharge of cow dung into the canal was continuing. The Irrigation and 
Waterways Department (I &WD) incurred an expenditure of ` 6.76 crore 
during 2022-23 to 2023-24 to clean the canal.
	•  The proposed bio-gas plant was yet to come up. There were no records 
available in support of bringing the dairies under consent management of 
WBPCB.
33 Siting policy clearly bring out the areas to be avoided for establishment of polluting 
industries.
34 Soliciting consent from WBPCB for establishing and operating units having impact on 
environment.

24
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Figure 3.8 : Dankuni Canal filled with cow dung
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that setting up of a bio-gas plant 
is under process.
Thus, inability in bringing the Dairy Farms and putting Gaushalas under 
consent management coupled with laxity in charting out an appropriate 
sewerage management plan caused considerable organic load in the DVC 
canal. It also led to polluted discharge into the river Ganga, with BOD 
concentration at an average of 28 mg/l against the norms of 3 mg/l. 
Recommendation 3:
WBPCB should periodically update its database of pollution sources, 
including non-point sources for assessment of actual pollution load so that 
the pollution can be addressed before discharge into canals, rivers and 
other water bodies.
3.4.2  Finalisation of Action Plan for the river Vidyadhari without proper 
survey 
Action Plan for rejuvenation of the 20 kms stretch of river Vidyadhari35 
(July 2019) stated that the river runs through rural areas and had no major 
towns on its banks. The major villages on its banks were Haroa, Minakhan and 
Malancha. The total sewage generation in the catchment area was estimated to 
be 1,539.24 MLD. 
Public Health Engineering Department (PHED), Government of West Bengal 
entrusted (March 2021) the project “Preparation of Concept Plan and Detailed 
Project Report for rejuvenation of the polluting stretch of River Vidyadhari ” 
to IIT Kharagpur. The Action Plan, prepared in July 2019, assumed that no 
municipal town contributes to the sewage flowing into the river Vidyadhari. 
Draft Report on ‘Preparation for Concept Plan and Detailed Project Report 
for Rejuvenation of the River’, submitted by IIT indicated that STPs for 
35 From Haroa Bridge to Malancha Burning Ghat.

Chapter - III
25
six Municipalities 36 contributing an estimated sewage of 186 MLDs as of  
2021 needed to be considered for setting up instead of PHED’s original 
estimation of one STP for 170 MLD at Ghusighata.
Audit observed that detailed design work for setting up of STPs in the six 
municipalities could not be started due to non-availability of land, which 
was to be provided by the concerned ULBs. In the 15 th RRC meeting  
(September 2022), it was decided that as river Vidyadhari was receiving 
wastewater through different canals of Kolkata Metropolitan Area, KMDA 
would prepare project proposals for setting up of Faecal Sludge Treatment Plants 
(FSTPs)/STPs wherever feasible. However, as of March 2024, such proposals 
for setting up of FSTPs/STPs had not been finalised.
Audit further observed that five STPs 37 with an aggregate sewage treatment 
capacity of 117.20 MLD were planned for Bagjola-Keshopur Khal, falling into 
river Vidyadhari, with target date of completion being May 2024. However, 
construction work for the five STPs had not commenced till August 2023 due to 
non-availability of land.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that the work of setting up STPs 
in municipal towns had been initiated.
Thus, delay in construction of proposed STPs allowed continued flow of 
untreated sewage into the river Vidyadhari. 
3.4.3  Assessment of risks of polluted water to environment and health
Polluted water in rivers, lakes and ground water poses risks to environment as 
well as health of people exposed to the polluted water.
Risks to human health from water borne diseases and water-based diseases 
because of pollution of rivers and lakes were not assessed while preparing 
the Action Plans for rejuvenation of polluted water stretches.
Further, Environment Department was yet to inventorise (as discussed in 
Paragraphs 3.3.1 and 3.3.2) water bodies including wetlands for their regulation 
to protect biodiversity and ecosystems. 
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that in the 17 th Meeting  
(December 2023) of the RRC, it was decided that the Department of Health, 
GoWB would initiate regular health check-ups at bathing ghats to gauge the 
health impact due to change in the water quality of the river.
36 Barasat, Dumdum, Madhyamgram, New Barrackpore, North Dumdum and Rajarhat-
Gopalpur.
37 
Sl No. Location Proposed capacity (MLD)
1 For Kestopur Khal- Adjacent to the premises of existing 
Bagjola STP at Prafullakanan, Kestopur
41
2 At Bonhooghly in Baranagar Municipality 8.7
3 At Prafullakanan in North Dum Dum Municipality 33
4 At Prafullakanan STP-1 in South Dum Dum Municipality 27
5 At Jatragachi in Bidhannagar Municipal Corporation 7.5

26
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Recommendation 4:
The Environment Department should consider risk to human health and 
environment while preparing action plans for mitigation of pollution of 
water.
3.4.4 Non-establishment of Water Quality Review Committee
Assessment of water quality is essential for pollution control, to prevent health 
hazards and from an environmental angle. Government of India (GOI) vide its 
order (May 2001) established the Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA) 
for exercising powers under the Environment Protection Act, 1986. The role of 
the Authority, inter alia, involves issuing directions to the State Government 
and Local Bodies for prevention and control of water pollution. The order 
also directed the State Governments to constitute a State Level Water Quality 
Review Committee (WQRC) to improve co-ordination between Central and 
State agencies for effective monitoring of quality of both surface and ground 
water resources including identification of Hot Spots for taking necessary action 
for improvement of water quality.
Audit further observed that the 6th meeting of WQAA in March 2008, decided to 
reconstitute the State level WQRCs to make them more result oriented and have 
relevant linkages with water resource management at the State level. Ministry of 
Water Resources (MoWR) had requested (July 2008) the States to reconstitute 
the state level WQRC.
Audit however, noticed that WQRC was not constituted in the State even 
after a lapse of 23 years from the establishment of Water Quality Assessment 
Authority.
WBPCB stated (March 2024) that drinking water quality is guided by the 
Ministry of Water Resources standards, and the wastewater quality by the 
Ministry of Environment and Forest standards. 
However, in the absence of WQRC, effective review of the quality of both 
surface and ground water resources and identification of Hot Spots for taking 
necessary action for improvement of water quality was not done.

CHAPTER - IV
Municipal Sewage 
treatment for restoration 
of Polluted River Stretches 
and Lakes

27
Chapter IV
Municipal Sewage Treatment for Restoration of Polluted 
River Stretches and Lakes 
4.1 Introduction
According to the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India (Article 246), 
‘Water’ is a State Subject, and it is the responsibility of the States/UTs to ensure 
cleanliness and development of rivers within their jurisdiction. The Union 
Government supplements efforts of the States/UTs by providing financial and 
technical assistance for abatement of pollution in identified stretches of rivers 
in the country.
CPCB in association with SPCBs/Pollution Control Committees (PCCs) in 
different States/ UTs has been monitoring the water quality of rivers and other 
water bodies across the country, through a network of monitoring stations under 
the National Water Quality Monitoring Programme (NWQMP). Based on water 
quality monitoring results, CPCB in September 2018 had identified 351 polluted 
stretches on 323 rivers across the country which included 17 rivers from West 
Bengal. The polluted locations in a continuous sequence are defined as Polluted 
River Stretches (PRS) and categorised in five priority classes based on BOD 
concentration as follows:
 (i) exceeding BOD levels >30 mg/l, 
 (ii) BOD between 20 mg/l & 30 mg/l, 
 (iii) BOD between 10 mg/l & 20 mg/l, 
 (iv) BOD between 6 mg/l & 10 mg/l and 
 (v) BOD between 3 mg/l & 6 mg/l.
NGT38 in the case of Restoration of Polluted River stretches  asked 
(December 2019) all the States and Union Territories to revise, prepare and 
implement action plans to restore polluted PRSs. The order directed 100 per cent 
treatment of sewage by 31 March 2020 to the extent of in-situ remediation. The 
timeline for completing all steps of the action plans including completion of 
setting up of STPs and their commissioning was March 2021.
Audit observed that due to non-processing of solid and liquid waste within 
the time line, the Principal Bench of the Hon’ble NGT in its order dated 
01 September 2022, had directed the State Government to deposit ` 3,500 crore 
as compensation within two months.
Accordingly, the State Government deposited ` 3,500 crore in a ring fenced 
account and a sum of `137.10 crore has been incurred from the account till 
November 2023. Fund from this ring fenced account will be utilized for future 
purposes as and when required.
Of the 17 PRS identified (2018) by CPCB in West Bengal, seven river stretches 
were examined in the course of Audit. CPCB’s Report on “PRS for Restoration 
38 Order against the OA No. 673/2018.

28
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
of Water Quality-2022” was also examined by Audit wherein it was noted that 
the water quality, based on the BOD level, of these seven sampled PRS changed 
over the period from 2018 to 2022 leading to a change in their status, as shown 
in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Status of sampled PRS 
Sl No. Name of River Status in 2018 Status in 2022
Remarks on 
quality of 
water
1 Mahananda Priority-II Priority-I Deteriorated
2 Churni Priority-III Priority-II Deteriorated
3 Mathabanga Priority-IV Priority-III Deteriorated
4 Ganga Priority-III Priority-IV Improved
5 Dwarka Priority-III Priority-V Improved
6 Vidyadhari Priority-I Priority-II Improved
7 Mayurakshi Priority-V Excluded from PRS Improved
Audit observed that although the water quality of three rivers Dwarka, 
Vidhyadhari and Ganga improved in terms of BOD, the bacteriological  
contamination in terms of the level of Faecal Coliform (FC) was still 
at an alarming level as discussed in paragraphs 3.3.2 , 3.7.1 and 3.4.4. 
Further, in contravention of the Guidelines of Water Quality monitoring issued 
(December 2007) by CPCB which requires that sampling stations should be 
located upstream and downstream of significant pollution outfalls like city, 
sewage drains and industrial effluent outfalls, the river Mayurakshi was 
excluded from the polluted river stretch list by CPCB on the basis of the water 
quality report of WBPCB for only the upstream water as discussed in detail in 
Paragraph 4.6.2.
This Chapter deals with the management of municipal sewage for abatement 
of pollution of the seven selected PRS and two lakes namely Santragachi and 
Mirik lakes. 
Audit findings are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
4.2 Gap in sewage treatment
STPs play a crucial role in managing wastewater. The main functions of 
STPs include (a) pollution reduction by removing harmful contaminants,  
(b) environmental protection by ensuring that discharge water meets 
environmental standards, (c) water recycling by reusing treated wastewater and 
(d) public health protection by preventing spread of diseases associated with 
untreated sewage.
NGT set a deadline of March 2021 to take all steps for rejuvenation of 
polluted river stretches including completion of setting up of STPs and 
their commissioning.
As of March 2021, the estimated sewage generation for the State was 5,457 MLD 
and the total capacity for sewage treatment of the 29 existing and 36 proposed 
STPs was 1,202 MLD. However, installed capacity of STPs was only 897 MLD 
(16.44 per cent) causing a gap of 4,560 MLD as shown in Chart 4.1.

Chapter - IV
29
Chart 4.1 : Total Sewage Generation vs Sewage Treatment 
Installed 
capacity for 
Sewage 
Treatment, 897, 
16.44% 
Gap in 
treatment of 
Sewage 
Generation, 
4560, 83.56% 
Further, out of 897 MLD of installed capacity, the operationalized capacity was 
337 MLD (37.56 per cent) and the actual utilized capacity was only 213 MLD 
(63.20 per cent). Further the aggregate capacity of environmentally compliant 
STPs (i.e. STPs meeting discharge standards of MoEF&CC and NGT norms39) 
was only 126 MLD. 
In addition to the above sewage generation, there were 123 dumpsites in the 
State with legacy solid waste of 61.76 MT (August 2023) which also contributed 
to the water pollution. 
Further, out of 7,322 villages in the four sampled districts of the State, 
only 197 villages were declared as Open Defecation Free plus (ODF+) 
till December 2023. The unsafe faecal disposal practice contributed to the 
conversion of large areas of land into faecal fields which potentially put water 
sources at risk of flooding with faecal material during rains.
Thus, there was a huge gap between sewage generation and the capacity 
available for its treatment, leading to deterioration of water quality of 
rivers. Considering rapid urbanisation and resultant rise in sewage generation, 
there is a need to bridge the existing gap on priority. Apart from filling up this 
gap, there is also a need to synchronise future requirement of sewage treatment 
capacity.
The detailed reasons for gaps in sewage treatment capacity are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. Audit observations on municipal sewage treatment in 
respect of seven sampled rivers are in succeeding paragraph:
39 As per MoEF&CC norms vide their order dated 13 October 2017 (i) For cities other 
than metro cities, state capitals and Union Territories - pH-6.5 to 9.0, BOD < 30mg/l,  
TSS < 100 mg/l and FC < 1,000 MPN/100 ml and as per the norms of NGT vide order dated 
30 April 2019 revised the norms as BOD < 10 mg/l, pH – 5.5 to 9.0, TSS < 20 mg/l, COD 
< 50 mg/l; FC – desirable <100 MPN/100 ml & permissible < 230 MPN/100 ml, Nitrogen-
Total < 10 mg/l and Phosphorous-Total < 1.0 mg/l.
Installed capacity for 
Sewage Treatment, 
897 MLD, 
16.44%
Gap in 
treatment 
of Sewage 
Generation,
4,560 MLD, 
83.56%

30
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
4.3 Pollution Abatement for River Ganga
National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA) was established  
(February 2009) with the objective of ensuring that by the year 2020 no 
untreated municipal or industrial effluents are discharged into the River Ganga. 
Namami Gange was approved by Government of India in 2015 to accomplish 
the twin objectives of effective abatement of pollution and conservation- 
rejuvenation of river Ganga. The Action Plan for Rejuvenation of River Ganga 
identified (July 2020) a total 120 kms stretch from Tribeni to Diamond Harbour 
encompassing 29 Towns40 of West Bengal located on the banks of the Ganga, 
as polluted. 
Audit observed that 17 projects (new/renovation) involving setting up of 26 STPs 
with an aggregate capacity of 491.68 MLD and an aggregate approved cost of 
` 2,862.95 crore were taken up (between February 2011 and September 2020) 
for treating municipal sewage falling into the river Ganga. An expenditure of 
` 1,707.39 crore was incurred on setting up of STPs along with Intersection and 
Diversion structures (as of June 2023). Of the 26 STPs, 19 STPs with a total 
capacity of 231.68 MLD were completed and operationalized by KMDA.
However, Audit observed that the sewage treatment capacities were 
impaired in the absence of adequate sewerage conveyance systems 
connecting to the household sewer line, non-installation of disinfection 
system, deficient co-ordination amongst different agencies, deficient 
functioning of established infrastructure, etc., as discussed below:
4.3.1 Non-achievement of targets for sewage treatment
The aim of the  Namami Gange programme41 was to target sanitation of all 
anthropogenic activities, waste management of all industrial units, reduce water 
pollution levels etc. Sewage Treatment Plants play an important role in meeting 
the objectives of the Programme and controlling water pollution. The status of 
41 STPs commissioned in 29 towns on the bank of river Ganga in the State as 
of March 2023, is detailed in Chart 4.2 and Chart 4.3.
40 Baidyabati, Bansberia, Baranagar, Barrackpore, Bhadreswar, Bhatpara, Budge Budge, 
Champdani, Chandannagar, Diamond Harbour, Garulia, Gayeshpur, Halisahar, Howrah, 
Hooghly-Chinsura, Kalyani, Kamarhati, Kanchrapara, Khardaha, Kolkata MC, Konnagar, 
Maheshtala, Naihati, North Barrackpore, Panihati, Rishra, Serampore, Titagarh and 
Uttarpara-Kotrung. 
41 The Cabinet Approval to Namami Gange was given on 13 May 2015. The programme was 
to be implemented by 2020. 

Chapter - IV
31
675.40
70%
291.60
30%
Chart 4.2 : Un-utilized 
capacity of STP in Ganga 
towns
Installed capacity Un-utilized capacity
232.50
15% 
1,339.00
85% 
Chart 4.3 : Total sewage 
treatment Gap in Ganga 
towns
Utilised capacity Treatment Gap
675.40
70%
291.60
30%
Chart 4.2 : Un-utilized 
capacity of STP in Ganga 
towns
Installed capacity Un-utilized capacity
232.50
15% 
1,339.00
85% 
Chart 4.3 : Total sewage 
treatment Gap in Ganga 
towns
Utilised capacity Treatment Gap
Commissioned STP (Nos.)-41
Installed capacity (MLD/No)-675.4/ 41
Operational (MLD/No)-383.8 / 26
Non-operation (MLD)-291.6 /15
Total sewage- 1,571.5 MLD
Utilised capacity-232.5 MLD
Treatment gap- 1,339 MLD
	•  Out of 41 commissioned STPs, 26 STPs were in operation with an installed 
capacity of 383.80 MLD. Audit observed that only 232.50 MLD was 
being utilized i.e. 60.60 per cent of 383.80 MLD. The underutilization 
of the installed capacity was mainly due to pending work of diversion of 
sewerage to the STPs by providing house connections and installation of 
Interception and Diversion (I&D) network for the drains.
	•  The reasons for non-operation of 15 STPs were mainly due to damaged 
infrastructure and wastewater load not reaching the STPs. 
Thus, there was a gap of 1,339 MLD 42 in treatment capacity and almost 
85 per cent  of total sewage generated was released into the river Ganga 
without treatment. 
4.3.2 Compliance status of the STPs
MoEF&CC vide their order dated 13 October 2017, stipulated the standard 43 
to be followed for treated sewage from STPs. Further, NGT vide order dated 
30 April 2019 revised this standard 44, which inter alia stipulated that BOD is 
required to be <10 mg/l.
The Monitoring report of CPCB (for March 2023), revealed that out of total 
26 operational STPs installed on the river Ganga in the State, only 13 were 
found to be compliant in terms of BOD and only seven STPs were compliant in 
terms of  FC45 criteria of the NGT norms. 
42 Total sewage (1,571.50 MLD) – Utilised capacity (232.50 MLD) = 1,339.00 MLD.
43 (i) For cities other than metro cities, state capitals and Union Territories - pH-6.5 to 9.0, 
BOD <30 mg/l, TSS < 100 mg/l and FC < 1,000 MPN/100ml.
44 pH – 5.5 to 9.0, TSS < 20 mg/l, COD< 50 mg/l; FC – desirable < 100 MPN/100 ml  
& permissible < 230 MPN/100 ml, Nitrogen-Total < 10 mg/l and Phosphorous-  
Total < 1.0 mg/l.
45 FC > 1,000 MPN/100 ml.
Chart 4.2 : Un-utilized capacity of STP 
in Ganga towns
Chart 4.3 : Total sewage treatment 
Gap in Ganga towns
MLD
MLD
MLD
MLD

32
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Further, it was noted that the entire length of the river Ganga was polluted by 
Faecal Coliform bacteria, in variable degrees as was evident from the water 
quality data during the period 2018-22 of all the 14 monitoring stations of 
WBPCB as shown in Chart 4.4.
170
294 288
319 337
168
286 272
316 332
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Chart 4.4 : Total nos. of samples and the nos. of samples  where 
FC > 1000 ( MPN/100 ml)
Total no. of samples No. of samples where FC > 1000 MPN/100 ml
(Source: Water quality data of WBPCB under National Water Monitoring Programme) 
Audit observed that despite high bacteriological contamination which might lead 
to waterborne diseases, adequate steps were not being taken by the implementing 
agencies as mentioned in the Action Plan (like Kolkata Municipal Corporation, 
Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority  etc.), for rejuvenation of river 
Ganga as was evident from the STP monitoring report of CPCB (March 2023). 
It was also observed that disinfection system i.e. chlorination plants for 
mitigating bacteriological contamination were not available in 12 out of total 
26 operational STPs. 
Audit findings in sampled STPs of towns located on the river Ganga, are 
discussed in succeeding paragraphs:
4.3.2.1 Gayeshpur STP 
The work of setting up of Gayeshpur STP with 8.33 MLD installed capacity was 
administratively approved (February 2011) by the National River Conservation 
Authority at an estimated cost of `168.67 crore for completion by February 2014. 
It was seen that KMDA took more than two years to finalise the tender and 
finally the work was awarded at a cost of ` 156.93 crore in October 2013. The 
STP started operations from September 2017. 
Audit observed that since operationalization of the STP, it did not run at 
full capacity. As per the report46 of March 2023, only 2.95 MLD of capacity 
was being utilised against an installed capacity of 8.33 MLD. It was also 
noted that out of 15,000 households in the catchment area, 11,575 house 
46 Monthly Progress Report sent by the WBSPMG (West Bengal State NGRBA Programme 
Management Group) to the NGRBA in the NGT matter OA No 673.

Chapter - IV
33
connections only ( i.e. house sewer connected to drains) were completed 
till November 2023. Further, four drains were also yet to be tapped ( i.e. 
intercepted and diverted to STP for treatment).
In reply the Department stated (March 2024) that for feeding full capacity 
sewage, work of Interception and Diversion of six untapped drains carrying 
sewage was under process.
4.3.2.2 Panihati  STP 
The work of rejuvenation of existing three STPs 47 along with lifting station & 
pumping station, sewage network and five years operation and maintenance 
was awarded in December 2019 at a tendered cost of ` 52.99 crore. These STPs 
were to cater to three municipal towns along the river Ganga viz. Panihati, 
Garulia and Naihati and were to be rejuvenated within one year of award of the 
contract. Audit observed the following lapses in implementation of the project:
	•  Joint site inspection of Panihati (August 2023) by Audit along with the 
officers of KMDA, revealed that operation and maintenance had started 
from July 2022, without getting CTO 48 from WBPCB and without 
completion of all the components viz. connection from the Lifting Station 
(LS) to the Main Pumping Station (MPS) intersecting the main outfall 
drain (PB Ghat drain) of the Panihati Municipality into Ganga. 
	•  The sewer connection to the existing work and intersection with the drain 
could not be done as requisite approval was not received from the concerned 
Department49. The letter regarding existing sewage line was addressed to 
the concerned Executive Engineer only in June 2022, more than two years 
after taking up the work in January 2020. This indicated poor planning and 
lack of effective co-ordination between the departments.
	•  Instead, a portion of the nearby drain was being diverted to the pumping 
station for feeding the STP . The effluents from the STP were falling into 
nearby ditches along the Kalyani Expressway contributing to pollution 
levels. Water quality test of the samples taken from the STP outlet 
(02 November 2023) by CPCB, in the presence of the officials of WBPCB 
and Audit, showed that the level of TSS and FC was higher than the 
permissible limit50 in the tested samples.
47 Waste Stabilization Pond Technology of total capacity of 22.5 MLD.
48 Section 25 of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 inter alia provides 
that no person shall, without the previous consent of State Board establish any treatment 
or disposal system which is likely to discharge sewage into a stream or well or sewer or on 
land.
49 Existing manholes lying on roads belong to the Public Works Department.
50 TSS - 277 mg/l against the permissible limit of 50 mg/l, FC-70 × 10 2 mg/l against the 
permissible limit of 1,000 mg/l.

34
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Figure 4.1: A portion of the sewage from 
nearby drain was being taken to 
the pumping station for feeding STP .
Figure 4.2: PB Ghat drain falling into 
Ganga untapped.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that the sewage from PB Drain 
was tapped partially.
Thus, the main objective of the Panihati STP to tap one of the most polluted 
drains viz. PB Ghat drain was yet to be fulfilled. This was also evident from the 
Report51 of WBPCB which stated that the drain had a flow of 4.76 MLD and 
pollution load above permissible limit52.
4.3.2.3 Naihati STP
A Sewage Treatment Plant with capacity of 6.5 MLD for Naihati Municipality 
was approved in March 2019 at a cost of ` 14.71 crore by NMCG. The scheduled 
date of completion of the STP was January 2021, however, it was completed in 
July 2022. The STP was jointly inspected by Audit along with representatives 
of KMDA in August 2023. 
Audit observed that the STP was not in operation since January 2023, due to 
failure of one of its Waste Stabilization Ponds (WSP). The pond was found to 
be filled with weed and grass during the joint inspection of the STP by Audit 
and KMDA. 
Audit also noted that the Garifa South Drain, one of the drains connected 
to the STP, was filled with plastic and other solid waste, and sewage was 
flowing into the river Ganga, without treatment.
51 Report on Assessment of Pollution Loads to River Ganga through 56 outfalls by the School 
of Water Resources Engineering, Jadavpur University.
52 COD-102 mg/l, BOD-50 mg/l, TC-1.6x107 MPN/100ml and FC-5.2×105 MPN/100ml.

Chapter - IV
35
Figure 4.3: WSP filled with weed 
and grass
Figure 4.4: Garifa South drain 
carrying plastic and other solid 
waste into river Hooghly
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that due to failure of retaining 
wall foundation, the STP became non-operational and after rectification work 
the STP has become functional. KMDA further added that the drain was under 
control of local ULB ( Naihati Municipality) and the responsibility of cleaning 
the drain on a regular basis lies with the ULB.
However, the reply may be seen in view of the fact that KMDA did not furnish 
any water quality test report in support of the functional status of the STP. 
4.3.2.4 Budge Budge STP
The work of setting up of a 9.3 MLD capacity STP, seven lifting stations, one 
main pumping station, sewerage network and O&M for 10 years in Budge 
Budge Municipal town was awarded in January 2016 to a private agency by 
the Executive Engineer, West bank Division, Ganga Action Plan (GAP) Sector, 
KMDA, at a tendered cost of `190.09 crore for completion by January 2019. 
Audit observed that the house connection work was still in progress, as of 
November 2023 and `135.93 crore had been paid to the contractor. Provisional 
time extension was given upto September 2023 by KMDA to complete the 
work. However, the incomplete Budge Budge  STP was commissioned in 
February 2022 and was treating only 3.46 MLD of sewage against the required 
installed capacity of 9.30 MLD. 
Joint site inspection (August 2023) revealed that wastewater from Churial 
drain and another unnamed drain were flowing into river Ganga. Sewage 
from these two drains had not been tapped and diverted to the STP, and 
thus, untreated wastewater of the drains was adding to the pollution load 
of the river. Both these drains were also not being monitored by WBPCB.
In reply, KMDA stated (March 2024) that house connection work was in 
progress and after completion of the work, sewage will be diverted to STP.

36
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Figure 4.5: Unnamed outfall 
discharging in River Ganga.
Figure 4.6: Churial drain 
discharging in River Ganga.
4.3.2.5 Nabadwip STP 
The Nabadwip STP with a capacity of 10 MLD was installed in 1995 for 
Nabadwip Town. Executive Engineer, Nadia Division, PHED was responsible 
for the operation and maintenance of the STP. However, the non-operation 
of the STP was reported in June 2021, by the concerned Executive Engineer, 
Nadia Division to the Chief Engineer, HQ, PHED. Subsequently, CPCB also 
reported on the non-operation of Nabadwip STP in its Inspection Report  
(December 2022) and recommended that the STP be made operational with 
immediate effect. 
However, during joint site inspection (November 2023) by Audit with the 
officials of PHED, it was seen that the STP was still not functioning and PHED 
had not taken any action to make it operational. It was also observed that the 
anaerobic pond was infested with dense vegetation, and the facultative 53 
and maturation ponds were being used for pisciculture by Nabadwip 
Municipality.
Figure 4.7: Anaerobic Pond infested 
with dense vegetation
Figure 4.8: Facultative Pond 
used for pisciculture.
53 Pond to treat wastewater through sedimentation and anaerobic oxidation of organic materials.

Chapter - IV
37
In response to an audit query, PHED stated (June 2023) that the STP had been 
handed over to the concerned Nabadwip Municipality for its operation and 
maintenance. The reply is not acceptable as the existing wastewater line and 
pumping works from the MPS to STP were still being maintained by PHED, 
whereas five waste stabilisation ponds 54 which are an integral part of this STP, 
were handed over (November 2013) to the concerned Municipality and were 
being used for pisciculture. 
This indicated that there was absence of a clear delineation of duties between 
agencies for proper maintenance and monitoring of the created infrastructure to 
control pollution.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that it would strive to strengthen 
coordination with the concerned municipality, in future.
4.3.2.6 Uttarpara-Kotrung and Konnagar STP
The work “ Rejuvenation of 
existing STP along with lifting 
station and pumping station 
including sewage network and 
five years of operation and 
maintenance at Uttarpara-
Kotrung and Konnagar ” in 
Hooghly District was taken up 
in June 2020 and completed in 
July 2022, at a tendered value 
of ` 17.11 crore with a design 
capacity of 22 MLD. 
However, CPCB’s Monitoring 
report (January-March 2023) 
showed that the STP was non-
compliant with the discharge 
norms set by NGT. The existing 
BOD and COD levels in the 
treated sewage were 36 mg/l and 64 mg/l respectively against the NGT standards 
of < 10 mg/l for BOD and < 50 mg/l for COD. 
The amount of sewage pumped out at pumping stations must be received at the 
STP. To ensure that there is no leakage of sewage, flow meters are required to 
be installed both at the pumping station and at the STP. 
Joint inspection of the STP in August 2023, along with representatives of 
KMDA revealed that though a flow meter was installed at the pumping 
station, it was not installed at the STP. Thus, the quantum of sewage 
received at the STP could not be ascertained. Solid waste including plastic 
waste was found dumped on the embankments of the Waste Stabilization 
Ponds (WSP).
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that the matter of dumping of 
solid waste had been taken up with the concerned Gram panchayat.
54 Two anaerobic ponds, two facultative and one maturation.
Figure 4.9: Dumping of Solid waste on the 
embankment of WSP

38
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
4.3.2.7 Baidyabati and Bhadreswar STP
The work “Rejuvenation of existing STP along with lifting station and pumping 
station including sewage network and five years of operation and maintenance at 
Baidyabati and Bhadreswar under Hooghly District” was taken up in June 2021 by  
KMDA and completed in July 2022 at a tendered amount of ` 11.78 crore, with 
a design capacity of 7.60 MLD. 
Joint inspection of the STP for Bhadreswar in August 2023, along with the 
representatives of KMDA revealed that the pond water of the STP was 
laced with cow dung and the water was foamy with dead fish floating in 
the pond. Audit also observed that the untreated drain water was being 
allowed to flow into the river Ganga, carrying solid waste, including plastic.
Water quality tests of the sample from the Bhadreswar STP outlet done 
(02 November 2023) by CPCB in the presence of officials of WBPCB and 
Audit showed that the level of FC (at 22 × 10 2 MPN/100 ml) was much 
higher than the permissible limit of 230 MPN/100 ml defined by the NGT.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that slurry of cow dung was 
entering the STP through drains and DPR was being prepared to tap drains of 
Baidyabati and Bhadreshwar Municipalities.
However, the STP did not manage wastewater and ensure discharge standards 
even though it was under regular operation and maintenance of KMDA. 
Figure 4.10: Dead fish in sewage treating 
pond laced with cow dung
Figure 4.11: Untapped sewage carrying 
solid waste drains into the river
Thus, from the above illustrative cases on the inspections of the sampled STPs it 
was evident that the desired objective of installation of STPs was sub-optimally 
achieved due to factors like under-utilisation of capacity, non-integration of 
sewage networks and drains with STPs, absence of dis-infection systems and 
inadequate maintenance of the STP ponds etc.
4.3.3 Pollution abatement of Tolly Nullah
Tolly Nullah also called as ‘ Adi Ganga’  was excavated for the purposes of 
navigation; however it has presently ceased to be a free flowing channel due 

Chapter - IV
39
to siltation, rapid dense inhabitation along its banks, dumping of solid waste, 
discharge of untreated sewage, etc. The nullah is connected to river Hooghly at 
one end and to Vidyadhari River at its other end. The nullah carries all types of 
drainage and municipal wastes from 28 wards of Kolkata Municipal Corporation 
(KMC) along with three wards of Rajpur-Sonarpur Municipality and finally 
drains into the river Hooghly. 
The issue of pollution in river Adi Ganga  first came before NGT in 
July 2015. However, due to the continued pollution, NGT in its order dated  
21 September 2020 (OA 12/2015) directed the KMC to set up an STP by 
December 2020, remove encroachments, rehabilitate the displaced persons 
within six months and clear the river of silt and hydrophytes. NGT further 
directed that KMC should prepare an action plan to deal with accumulation of 
solid waste underneath the elevated metro station and around the piers within 
one month and implement the plan within the next month.
In this regard, Audit observed the following:
	•  KMC prepared a DPR of ` 938.89 crore (Phase-I) and ` 219.64 crore 
(Phase-II) for Pollution Abatement Project for Rejuvenation of River Adi 
Ganga under the ‘ Namami Gange Program’  in August 2022. NMCG 
approved Phase-I of the project in December 2022 for `653.67 crore and 
issued Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanctions (AA&ES) for 
the same in January 2023. However, as of November 2023, AA&ES for 
Phase-II had not been issued and the tendering process for Phase-I was still 
underway.
	•  Besides, dredging work was to be done for both phase-I and II, from State 
fund. While Phase-I55 of the dredging work was completed (May 2023) at a 
cost of ` 10.03 crore, dredging under Phase-II56 of Tolly Nullah measuring 
5.37 kms, (at an estimated cost of ` 13.02 crore), was still in progress as of 
September 2023.
Figure 4.12: Dredging work in progress Figure 4.13: Dredging 
work yet to be started
55 From the confluence point to Chetla Bridge measuring 4.7 kms.
56 From Kudghat Metro station to Chetla Bridge (Phase-II).

40
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Thus, the project for pollution abatement of Tolly Nullah could not be 
completed even after eight years of the matter coming to the notice of NGT, 
and the untreated sewage of 25.10 MLD continued to flow into river Adi 
Ganga.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that technical evaluation of bids 
of the project under Phase-I (under NMCG) was under process and the dredging 
work of Tolly Nullah would be completed by October 2025.
4.3.4 Impact on the water quality of river Ganga
Due to inadequate/inefficient sewage treatment facilities for drains discharging 
into the river Ganga, the pollutant load in the river water continuously exceeded 
the prescribed limits during the period 2018-23. While the number of times 
BOD breached the prescribed limit ranged between 15 per cent to 46 per cent 
of total tests57 conducted, FC was above norms in 74 per cent to 97 per cent of 
test cases, and DO did not meet the prescribed standards in one to 18 per cent 
tests. Details of the same are depicted below in Chart 4.5.
170
294 288
319 337
250
72
135 112 92
52
13
164
271 261
311 282
186
21 45 41 57
2 0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 (Till
Oct.)
No. of Samples
Years
Chart 4.5 : Total Samples vis-a-vis number of samples breached
the prescribed limit for BOD, FC and DO -Ganga River 
Total Sample
FC more than 2500 MNP/100 ml
BOD more than 3 mg/l 
DO less than 5 mg/l
 
(Source: Water quality data of WBPCB under National Water Monitoring Programme)
Recommendation 5:
UD&MA Department should complete the ongoing STPs as well as 
operationalise the non-functional STPs at the earliest and ensure strict 
compliance with environmental norms in their operations.
4.4 Pollution abatement of River Vidyadhari
The Action Plan for rejuvenation of the river Vidyadhari was prepared in 
July 2019 by PHED encompassing management of municipal wastewater and 
industrial waste water management. The estimated budget for the plan was  
` 2,515 crore and projects under it, were to be completed by March 2023. 
As per the Action Plan, eight drains were initially identified as carrying  
1,539 MLD of sewage from areas of KMC and its vicinity into river Vidyadhari. 
57 Water quality test done by WBPCB under National Water Monitoring Programme.
MPN

Chapter - IV
41
Further, there were nine existing STPs with a total treatment capacity of 
1,233.24 MLD, including 910 MLD being treated naturally in the East Kolkata 
Wetland. 
The work of preparing the DPR for rejuvenation of PRS of Vidyadhari was 
given to IIT, Kharagpur by PHED. Audit observed that IIT, Kharagpur, while 
preparing the DPR, had identified numerous other drains with outlets into the 
river Vidyadhari, in addition to the initially identified eight drains of the adjoining 
urban and semi urban areas which carried untreated sewage, eventually disposing 
into the river Vidyadhari. The report added that the untreated or partially treated 
industrial effluents from industrial cluster at Calcutta Leather Complex, housing 
over 500 small-medium industries were discharging about 150 kg of heavy 
metal Chromium on a daily basis into the urban wastewater channel that was 
then being drained into fishponds of the East Kolkata Wetlands.
Based on these additional drains highlighted by IIT, the RRC of the State, in 
its 15th meeting, on 30 September 2022, engaged KMDA to set up additional 
STPs/FSTPs for six municipalities58. The work of setting up these STPs was to 
be carried out by KMDA. However, Audit observed that as of December 2023, 
no progress was made in this regard due to unavailability of site. 
Audit also conducted a joint inspection of the existing nine STPs in 
July-August 2023 and observed that sewage with either no treatment or 
partial treatment, was being discharged into various municipal canals and 
finally falling into the Vidyadhari River as discussed below.
4.4.1 East Kolkata Wetland
East Kolkata Wetlands (EKW), is an important Ramsar59 site, situated on the 
Eastern fringes of Kolkata and spread out over an area of 12,500 hectare 60. 
East Kolkata Wetlands Management Authority (EKWMA) works towards 
conservation and management of EKW. It is estimated that EKW naturally 
treats around 910 MLD of sewage generated in Kolkata city before discharging 
into Vidyadhari River. In this regard, Audit observed the following:
	•  EKWMA and CPCB conducted (October 2019) a study which identified 
the EKW as under immediate threat of species extinction and habitat 
destruction due to anthropogenic factors. The study showed that the sewage 
that enters the Wetlands consists of toxic and non-biodegradable matter, 
including a range of heavy metals. The result of sample test (9 th, 16th and 
23rd December 2018) conducted by CPCB of the raw sewage showed that 
pH of the sewage was alkaline (7.76 to 8.03), DO was completely absent 
and BOD varied from 39 to 87 mg/l. The analysis of the samples from the 
Wetland of EKW also indicated presence of heavy metals such as lead, 
cadmium, chromium.
58 i) Barasat, ii) Dum Dum, iii) Madhyamgram, iv) North Dum Dum, v) New Barrackpore and 
vi) Rajarhat Gopalpur.
59 A Ramsar site is a wetland site designated to be of international importance under the Ramsar 
Convention, also known as “The Convention on Wetlands”, an international environmental 
treaty signed on 02 February 1971 in Ramsar, Iran, under the auspices of UNESCO.
60 Approximately 45.93 per cent comprises water bodies and 38.92 per cent is agricultural 
land. The remaining portion is occupied by urban and rural settlement (10.42 per cent) and 
sites for garbage disposal 4.73 per cent.

42
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
	•  In consideration of the ecological importance of the EKW, WBPCB was 
supposed to carry out water analysis tests of EKW. Audit noted that a 
quality analysis of water of EKW at two outlets 61 had been carried out by 
WBPCB during June 2018 to May 2019 (once in a month), but thereafter, 
no such tests were carried out. These tests revealed that as against 
permissible limits prescribed by the MoEFCC, the level of BOD exceeded 
the prescribed limit by seven times, TSS was 14 times higher and FC was 
in excess of 24 times of permissible level.
Joint site inspection of EKW (July 2023) revealed that the sewage flowing 
through Dry Weather Flow (DWF) was diverted into sewage fed fishery 
ponds at Bantala lock gate. However, there was no flow meter or other 
measuring mechanism to assess the actual quantity of wastewater diverted 
to the fish ponds. Thus, the quantity of wastewater treated through sewage 
fed fish ponds of EKW could not be ascertained. 
Sewage of DWF diverted to fish pond through lock gate
Figure 4.14 : Bantala Lock gate on DWF Figure 4.15 : EKW Fish pond
Further, surveillance of physicochemical and biological properties of the 
wastewater that entered into EKW was not undertaken by WBPCB. In the 
absence of a continued monitoring mechanism, the qualitative nature of 
the sewage entering EKW and the efficiency of sewage treatment through 
aquaculture could not be assessed. 
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that it was decided that flow meters 
would be installed by KMC at different points of the canals to measure the 
volume of sewage passing through EKW. It also added that CPCB had fixed two 
points within EKW where water quality sewage would be monitored. WBPCB 
stated (March 2024) that henceforth it would monitor water quality on a regular 
basis and data would be uploaded in the portal.
However, due to the absence of regular monitoring of the sewage in EKW, the 
adequacy of the natural treatment process and requirement of further remedial 
measures such as setting up of STPs, treatment of hard metals etc. could not be 
assessed.
61 Bamanghata Jalpath and Uttar hatgachha.

Chapter - IV
43
Recommendation 6:
WBPCB should bring EKW into its regular monitoring schedule and plan 
for effective remedial measures.
4.4.2 Operational status of Bangur STP
The STP at Bangur with 
an installed capacity of 
52 MLD was in operation 
since 2011. The STP treats 
wastewater from part of North 
Kolkata and South Dum Dum  
Municipality and discharges 
into Bagjola canal which 
ultimately falls into the river 
Vidyadhari. The STP received 
about 26 MLD raw sewage 
generated from parts of North 
Kolkata and South Dum Dum  
Municipalities. However, the 
treated wastewater of the STP 
was not being re-used and 
was being drained out into 
Bagjola canal. It was noted 
that the STP does not have chlorination facility required for bacteriological 
disinfection and the treated sewage was discharged into the Bagjola canal laced 
with heavy concentration of faecal coliform. Water Analysis Reports for the 
period December 2022 to March 2023, as made available by KMC revealed that 
the treated wastewater was not compliant with treated discharge standards62.
Water quality test of the samples from the Bangur STP outlet conducted 
(November 2023) by CPCB in the presence of officials of WBPCB and 
Audit showed that the level of FC (49 × 10 2 MPN/100 ml) was much higher 
than the permissible limit of 1,000 MPN/100 ml.
Thus, the STP could not bring pollution load of sewage down to the 
prescribed level and continued to discharge treated sewage containing FC 
above prescribed limits due to absence of chlorination facilities.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that tender would be floated soon 
for installation of chlorination facility.
4.4.3 Kestopur/Bagjola STP 
The Kestopur/Bagjola  STP, with an installed capacity of 27.27 Million Litre per 
Day (MLD), was receiving 19 MLD sewage from Salt Lake area. Section 17(f) 
of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 required  
WBPCB to inspect STPs regularly. However, against these norms, it 
was noted that WBPCB had not carried out inspection of the STP during  
2018-19 to 2022-23. 
62 As set in NGT order dated 30.04.2019 in OA 1069/2018 for parameters like BOD at 
15-19 mg/l, TSS at 26-30 mg/l and FC at 14,706-46,808 MPN/100 ml.
Figure 4.16: Primary Clarifier at the STP

44
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Further, as per the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, any 
STP is required to obtain a CTO from the relevant Pollution Control Board 
before commencing actual operations. However, Audit observed that the 
Kestopur/Bagjola STP was functioning without CTO and thus remained outside 
the regular monitoring of WBPCB for environmental compliances.
As per the latest (September 2023) water quality test report of the STP, the value 
of BOD in Kestopur/Bagjola STP was 18 mg/l, COD 60 mg/l and the FC level 
was 6,500 MPN/100 ml, which were not compliant with the discharge norms 
of NGT.
The joint inspection of the site by Audit & Engineers of the UD&MA Department 
(10 August 2023) revealed that the treated wastewater was not being re-used 
and was drained out into Dum Dum Cantonment Canal which later joins with 
Vidyadhari river through the Bagjola canal. It was noted that chlorination of 
treated effluents was also not done before discharging the treated water into 
the canal as there was no facility for chlorination at the STP. Thus, the treated 
sewage was loaded with heavy concentration of faecal coliform. 
Figure 4.17: Treated water discharging into 
outlet drain
Figure 4.18: Treated water discharging 
into Bagjola canal through Dum Dum 
Cantonment canal
Thus, it is evident that the action plan for rejuvenation of river Vidyadhari 
was not implemented within the stipulated time period of March 2023. 
Further, STPs were not fully equipped to treat wastewater and there 
was lack of continuous monitoring system for drains which impaired the 
adequacy and efficiency of the remedial interventions for river Vidyadhari. 
4.4.4 Impact on the water quality of the river Vidyadhari
WBPCB monitored the water quality at two different locations 63 on this 
river. Audit scrutiny of the results of the water quality analysis for the period  
2018-23 (upto October 2023) showed that the quality parameters of the river 
water regularly did not meet the approved standards. During 2018-23 (up 
63 Upstream-Haroa Bridge and downstream-Malancha Burning ghat.

Chapter - IV
45
to October 2023), the water quality analysis of river Vidyadhari was done  
132 times by WBPCB, and it was noticed that the standards for BOD were 
breached 129 times in the range of 3.19-29.64 mg/l, for FC 131 times in the 
range 4,000 -3,00,000 MPN/100 ml, for DO 111 times in the range 0.1-4.6 mg/l. 
Regular failure of the river water in meeting prescribed quality standards on 
parameters like BOD, FC and DO underlined unabated sewage contamination 
of the river water as shown in Chart 4.6. 
23
21 21
24 24
2021 20 20
24 24
20
22 21 20
24 24
20
23
21 20
24 24
20
18
20
22
24
26
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 (Till
Oct.)
No. of  Samples
Years
Chart 4.6: Total Samples vis-a-vis number of samples which 
breached the prescribed limit for BOD, FC and DO in
Vidyadhari River
Total Sample
FC more than 2500 MNP/100 ml
BOD more than 3 mg/l
DO less than 5 mg/l
(Source: Water quality data of WBPCB under National Water Monitoring Programme)
4.5 Pollution abatement of River Mahananda
The river Mahananda originates in Darjeeling District and enters Siliguri town 
at Champasari area. The river is non-tidal in nature and receives substantial 
amount of municipal sewage round the year from Siliguri city. In absence 
of effective remedial measures, the untreated sewage continued to flow into 
the river Mahananda resulting in further deterioration of its water quality. 
As a result, during the period 2018-22, the river had been degraded (i.e. from 
priority II to I) by CPCB. In this context, Audit observed the following:
4.5.1  Inordinate delay in finalisation of the DPR for constructing the 
STPs
According to the Action Plan for rejuvenation of PRS-Mahananda River, which 
was prepared (July 2019), by the Siliguri Jalpaiguri Development Authority 
(SJDA), there was no functional STP for treating the 44 MLD of sewage 
draining into the river through eight major drains on the right bank and 12 on the 
left bank of the Mahananda River. The main objective of the Action Plan was 
to treat municipal sewage flowing into the rivers Mahananda and its tributaries 
Jorapani and Fuleswari.
Accordingly, the Plan envisaged (July 2019) setting up of two STPs64 with a total 
capacity of 47 MLD in Siliguri town. The STPs were to be completed within a 
period of 1.5 to five years. SJDA was entrusted with the task of management of 
municipal wastewater and setting up of STPs. Further UD&MA Departmental 
contemplated another STP at the right bank of River Mahananda. 
64 Naukaghat (32 MLD) and one at Jorapani (15 MLD).
MPN

46
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Audit observed that prior to preparation of the said Action Plan, SJDA had 
invited EOI in June 2018 for the preparation of a DPR to operationalize two 
existing but incomplete STPs (STP II and STP III) on the river Mahananda. This 
DPR which was prepared by SJDA was vetted by KMDA and its finalization 
took more than two years due to lack of effective co-ordination between the 
two entities. Finally, the DPR was submitted (February 2021) to the UD&MA 
Department for Administrative Approval. 
However, the UD&MA Department, GoWB did not accord Administrative 
Approval for the work due to change in scope of work and therefore KMDA was 
assigned the task of preparing a fresh DPR for the project (i.e. for rehabilitation 
of STP-II and STP-III) in January 2022. This DPR was prepared and approved 
in June 2022, based on which, KMDA awarded (May 2023) the work 65 of 
Rejuvenation and Augmentation of existing two STPs at a total tendered cost of 
` 73.33 crore to a private agency. 
In respect of STP-I on the right bank of Mahananda, an agency was engaged by 
KMDA to prepare a DPR for the 48 MLD STP.  Approval of the DPR was pending 
till August 2023 although the project was scheduled to be commissioned by 
March 2025 as per the affidavit submitted (March 2023) by State Government 
to NGT66.
Thus, due to delay in finalisation of DPR for about 42 months, it was 
noted that sewage treatment infrastructure for river Mahananda was non-
operational. Audit conducted a joint physical inspection (September 2023) 
of major drains near Surya Sen Park, Noukaghat with the officials of 
KMDA and found that the untreated sewage of the drains, carrying plastic 
and other solid waste, were draining into rivers Mahananda, Jorapani and 
Fuleshwari.
Figure 4.19 : Untreated sewage carrying plastic and other solid waste flowing into river 
Mahananda and Jorapani
65 Rejuvenation and Augmentation work for existing two STPs (54 MLD) including Interception 
and Diversion network for tapping existing drains falling into the River Mahananda (from 
the eastern bank) including operation and maintenance for a period of five years.
66 OA_10 of 2016.

Chapter - IV
47
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that the work of rejuvenation 
of STP-II and STP-III was ongoing and was expected to be completed 
by June 2025 and added that the DPR for STP-I had been submitted in  
February 2024.
4.5.2 Interim measures
Due to continued delay on the part of relevant authorities in taking remedial 
action for controlling water pollution on the river Mahananda, a Committee 
for assessment of environmental compensation was appointed by NGT vide 
order dated 20 September 2021. The Committee assessed that an environmental 
compensation of ` 2.40 crore was to be paid and directed SJDA to deposit the 
amount with the District Magistrate, Darjeeling. This amount would be used 
for taking up works related to  restoration of water quality of the river. SJDA 
accordingly deposited ` 2.00 crore with District Magistrate, Darjeeling as an 
interim compensation. 
It was noticed in Audit that, out of the above ` 2.00 crore received as part 
of interim measures, the DM had taken up (December 2022) works of an 
estimated value of ` 0.80 crore67, which inter alia included setting up of in-situ 
bioremediation work at two locations68.
Audit conducted joint physical inspection (September 2023) of both the work 
sites with the official of KMDA and found that at Naukaghat the drain and 
the area abutting the drain were filled with plastic and other solid waste. The 
untreated sewage was passing into the river carrying solid waste. Further, at 
Surya Sen Park the wheel paddle aerator was not functioning and was clogged 
with plastic and other solid waste. The area abutting the drain was also littered 
with plastics and other solid waste. 
 
Figure 4.20 : Untreated sewage was passing into the river carrying solid waste at Surya 
Sen park and Naukaghat
67 (i) ` 0.21 crore -Installation of iron grates at the major drains falling into the river Mahananda 
at Siliguri Town, (ii) construction of public toilets at ` 0.45 crore and (iii) in-situ bio-
remediation work for two number of drains at ` 0.13 crore.
68 (i) Naukaghat with cascading technology and (ii) Surya Sen Park with wheel paddle aerator 
technology.

48
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Audit further observed that in the 16th River Rejuvenation Committee (held at the 
level of the Member Secretary, WBPCB, being the chairman of RRC) meeting 
held on 30 June 2023, the issue of pollution of the river due to discharge from 
cattle sheds near Siliguri was flagged. However, no effective remedial action 
was taken.
4.5.3  Impact on water quality of Mahananda River due to prolonged 
delay in implementation of Action Plan
The delay in implementation of remedial measures to control water pollution on 
the river Mahananda, deteriorated the quality of the river water over a period. 
Audit observed that as per the water quality tests conducted by WBPCB during 
the period 2018-23, the BOD, COD and FC exceeded the prescribed limits set 
by CPCB as shown in Chart 4.7.
24 22 20 22 24 2018
11 10 11 12 11
24 22 17 20 23 20
4 4 3 3 5 5
0
10
20
30
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 (till
Oct.)
No. of Times
Years
Chart 4.7: Total Samples vis-a-vis number of samples breached the
prescribed limit for BOD, FC and DO in Mahananda River 
Total Sample BOD more than 3 mg/l
FC more than 2500 MNP/100 ml   DO less than 5 mg/l
(Source: Water quality data of WBPCB under National Water Monitoring Programme)
4.6 Pollution abatement of River Mayurakshi
River Mayurakshi originates in Jharkhand, flows through the districts of 
Birbhum and Murshidabad in West Bengal before draining into the river Ganga. 
The 95.00 km stretch of this river from Suri to Durgapur, had been identified 
as a Polluted River Stretch (PRS) by CPCB. An Action Plan for Rejuvenation 
of the Mayurakshi River was submitted by RRC, West Bengal to the CPCB, in  
September 2020.
According to the Action Plan, Suri (up-stream town) and Sainthia (down-stream 
town) were the two major towns in the catchment of the identified polluted 
stretch, with a total of 26 drains69 contributing to the pollution of the river with 
an aggregate sewage of 6.72 MLD70. At the time of identification of the PRS, the 
BOD level of the river was 5.2 mg/litre and therefore, the river was put under 
the category of Priority-V by CPCB in 2018.
Under the approved Action Plan, the Municipal Engineering Directorate 
(MED) of UD&MA Department was charged with management of municipal 
wastewater. Further, it was also proposed to set up structures for primary 
69 12 at Suri and 14 at Sainthia.
70 Suri: 4.04 MLD and Sainthia: 2.68 MLD.
MPN

Chapter - IV
49
treatment of wastewater71 at the 26 drains by providing screens, sedimentation 
tanks, disinfection facilities (by due date of June 2021).
4.6.1  Primary treatment facilities for municipal wastewater at Suri and 
Sainthia
The UD&MA Department, GoWB accorded (March 2020) Administrative 
Approval of ` 78.96 lakh and ` 86.26 lakh for setting up of primary treatment 
facilities for municipal wastewater at Suri and Sainthia, respectively. These 
works were to be carried out by Executive Engineer, Birbhum Division, MED 
with May 2022, as the stipulated completion date.
Audit observed the following:
	•  Primary treatment of wastewater structures at Suri was not completed (till 
September 2023) for the 12 identified drains because the required land for 
the project could not be arranged by the Suri Municipality. 
	•  The Executive Engineer, MED, Birbhum awarded (June 2021) the work 
-“In-situ and Ex-situ works for biological water treatment of drainage water 
for environment remediation of Sainthia Municipality” to a contractor 
at an estimated cost of ` 82.59 lakh to be completed within 12 months . 
However, progress of the work was only 70 per cent and no further funds 
were allocated for the project by the UD&MA to the Executive Engineer, 
MED, Birbhum.
	•  Further, as per the site inspection Report by the MED, the sustainability of 
the bio-remediation work depended upon diversion of existing drains and 
other minor adjustments, which would involve additional costs beyond 
the original DPR sanctioned amount.  Accordingly, these additional 
works of in-situ and ex-situ biological water treatment of drainage water 
for environment remediation of Sainthia were awarded in June 2022 at 
a tendered amount of ` 26.72 lakh by the Executive Engineer, MED, 
Birbhum to a private agency with scheduled date of completion being 
within six months from issue of work order. Work valuing ` 9.97 lakh was 
completed till May 2023, with a physical progress of 40 per cent and no 
payment thereof was made to the Executive Engineer, MED, Birbhum by 
the UD&MA Department till September 2023. 
Joint physical inspection of the bio-remediation work along with the officials of 
MED (September 2023) revealed that the construction of earthen embankment 
and the linking of existing drains to the treatment facilities were not completed, 
and therefore the primary treatment facilities could not be put to use, as shown 
in Figure 4.21.
71 (i) Biological water treatment, (ii) Construction of Chlorination system.

50
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Figure 4.21 : In-complete bio-remediation works for treatment of drain water at Sainthia
Thus, the bio-remediation work could not be completed in any of the 
identified outfalls for Suri and Sainthia towns till September 2023, and the 
untreated sewage continued to discharge directly into the river Mayurakshi. 
This rendered the entire expenditure of ` 42.22 lakh 72 on the primary 
wastewater treatment facilities at Sainthia town unfruitful as the intended 
outcome of treating municipal wastewater could not be achieved even after 
the lapse of more than one year from the scheduled date of completion 
(May 2022). 
4.6.2  Delisting of the river from the list of PRS in disregard to the norms 
of CPCB
The ‘ Guidelines for Water Quality Monitoring’  issued (December 2007) by 
CPCB require that sampling stations should be located upstream and downstream 
of significant pollution outfalls like city sewage drains and industrial effluent 
outfalls. 
The water quality status of the river Mayurakshi was monitored by the WBPCB 
under the National Water Monitoring Programme on a monthly basis at the 
Water Intake Point for Suri Town i.e. up-stream of the river Mayurakshi. The 
95 km polluted river stretch had no other monitoring station in its downstream 
stretch.
Audit observed that WBPCB had carried out wastewater analysis for Sainthia 
Municipality (downstream town) in June 2020, and the analysis report 
highlighted that the BOD levels (mg/l) were in the range of 5.37-65.83 and 
FC (MPN/100 ml) was in the range of 1,200-5,800, breaching the prescribed 
limits73. Since June 2020, wastewater quality analysis was not carried out by the 
WBPCB for the downstream town of Sainthia.
It was, however, observed that based on the water quality report of only 
the upstream water at Suri, without conducting test on the downstream 
at Sainthia, the river Mayurakshi was delisted from the polluted river 
72 ` 32.25 lakh + ` 9.97 lakh.
73 BOD-3 mg/l and FC- 2,500 MPN/100 ml.

Chapter - IV
51
stretches (Priority-V) in September 2022 by CPCB.  Further, none of the 
primary treatment of wastewater structures as envisaged in the Action 
plan for management of sewage were completed for either of the catchment 
towns (i.e. Suri and Sainthia) till September 2023. 
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that setting up of another water 
monitoring station at a downstream town was under consideration.
4.7 Pollution abatement of river Dwarka
The Dwarka River is a tributary of River Bhagirathi. The Dwarka originates 
in Jharkhand, flows through Birbhum district and finally flows through 
Murshidabad district, where it joins the River Bhagirathi. The Tarapith to 
Sadhak Bamdeb Ghat, about 1.5 km long stretch of this river has been identified 
as “Polluted”. The river is non-tidal in nature and receives domestic wastewater 
from the adjoining area of the Tarapith Temple round the year. BOD and FC are 
the principal pollutants in this river stretch. 
The work of construction of an STP with a capacity of 4.25 MLD including 
two lifting Stations and sewer line was awarded in February 2020 by Birbhum 
Division, PHED. This STP was partially completed and commissioned 
in September 2022, at a cost of ` 25.88 crore. Yet the household sewage 
connection system to feed the STP was not implemented by PHED. A DPR 
was prepared and submitted to the PHED in January 2021 by the Chief 
Engineer, Planning & Water Quality Monitoring, PHED, but the proposal was 
administratively approved only in June 2022, i.e. almost 1.5 years after the 
proposal. As of September 2023, only one component of the integration work 
had been tendered at a cost of ` 0.29 crore. As a result, all the eight major 
identified drains contributing to pollution of the river continued discharging 
into the river.
Figure 4.22 : Untapped Drains discharging into the river

52
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Audit further observed that 30 hotels were discharging waste directly into 
the river. Though the issue was discussed in the RRC meeting (16 th meeting  
June 2023) and accordingly the implementing agency, PHED had handed over 
the list of the hotels to WBPCB, action was not taken to stop the discharge of 
untreated sewage from the hotels into the river.
Thus, inability of the implementing authority, PHED in timely taking up the 
integration of household sewage collection system with the STP coupled with 
inaction of WBPCB in restricting the hotels from unauthorised discharge 
directly into the river led to deterioration in the water quality of the river.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that the scope for integration of 
various components to STP was included at a later stage and the work was 
delayed as the area was congested and crowded. The reply is not tenable as the 
scope for integration of various components to STP should have been considered 
before the work of construction of the STP was awarded.
4.7.1 Impact on water quality of Dwarka River 
Audit observed that due to non-integration of household sewage collection system 
with STP, the water quality of river Dwarka deteriorated as was evident from the 
water quality tests conducted by WBPCB during 2018-23, where the number of 
times BOD breached the prescribed limit ranged between 23 per cent to 85 per cent  
of total times the tests were conducted while FC was found to have breached 
the limit in a range between 75 per cent to 100 per cent as shown in Chart 4.8.
23
21 20
22
24
20
8
13
17
5
7
14
23
19 20 20 21
15
1 0 0 0 0 0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 (till
Oct.)
No. of Times
Years
Chart 4.8: Total Samples vis-a-vis number of samples breached the 
prescribed limit for BOD, FC and DO in Dwarka River
Total Sample
FC more than 2500 MNP/100 ml
BOD more than 3 mg/l
DO less than 5 mg/l
Criteria - BOD should be less than 3 mg/l
    FC should be lesser than 2,500 MNP/100 ml (maximum permissible) 
DO should be greater than 5mg/l
(Source: Water quality data of WBPCB under National Water Monitoring Programme)
4.8 Pollution abatement of Mathabhanga and Churni
The river Mathabhanga originates from the river Padma in Bangladesh, enters 
India at the Gede of Nadia district, and terminates near Majhdia splitting into 
two portions, one moving down south draining into the Bay of Bengal, and 
the other moving towards southwest as the river Churni to meet the Ganga at 
Payradanga in Nadia district. 
According to the Action Plans of Churni and Mathabhanga prepared by KMDA 
and PHED respectively (July 2020) and proposed by RRC for approval of 
CPCB, the causes of pollution of these two river stretches were:
MPN
MPN

Chapter - IV
53
 (i) Untreated industrial wastewater discharge from a sugar mill in Darshana 
in Bangladesh (untreated trade effluent in the river three-to-four times 
during the year).
 (ii) Municipal sewage discharge from Ranaghat Town.
Records showed that the matter relating to effluent discharge from the sugar 
industries of Bangladesh was taken up with the Foreign Ministry (of Bangladesh) 
by the Ministry of External Affairs, GOI. 
Approved Action Plan of the river Churni (July 2020) envisaged construction 
of three STPs along with Interception and Diversion (I&D) network for existing 
nine drains at the Ranaghat municipality at an estimated cost of ` 48.63 crore. 
Subsequently, total 14 drains were identified during detailed survey at the time 
of preparation of the DPRs. These projects were to be implemented by KMDA. 
In this regard Audit observed:
  Out of three STPs, KMDA awarded (November 2021) the job of construction 
of two STPs74 with I&D Network for existing six number of drains falling 
in River Churni (including five years of Operation & Maintenance Period) 
to a contractor. 
  The work was awarded (November 2021) at a tendered cost of 
` 45.19 crore with November 2023 as the stipulated date of completion. 
As of October 2023, ` 7.07 crore was paid to the contractor by KMDA and 
only 27 per cent of the work was completed. 
  In respect of the other proposed STP at Chaitanya Ghat with a capacity 
of 5.2 MLD which was planned for the remaining eight drains, the work 
could not be started, as land for the same had not been obtained by KMDA. 
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that the work of two ongoing 
STPs would be completed by July 2024 and the work of remaining one STP 
(5.2 MLD) would commence after purchase of land.
Figure 4.23: Drains falling into the River Churni
74 4.0 MLD capacity at Sreenathpur and 2.6 MLD at Silver Jubilee Road.

54
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Thus, slow progress in the construction of STPs in Ranaghat town resulted in 
further degradation of the water quality of Churni and Mathabhanga.
4.8.1 Impact on water quality of Mathabhanga and Churni Rivers 
(A) Mathabhanga River
During the period 2018-23, tests were conducted by WBPCB wherein it was 
observed that the number of times BOD breached the prescribed limit, ranged 
between 58 per cent to 83 per cent. Similarly, FC breached the prescribed limits 
between 75 per cent to 100 per cent of times and DO did not meet the prescribed 
standards between 89 per cent to 100 per cent, as shown in the Chart 4.9.
Chart 4.9: Total Sample vis-a-vis number or samples breached the prescrived 
limit for BOD, FC and Do in Mathabhanga River
12 11 10 11 12 97 7 7 10 10 612 11 10 10 12 912 10 10 10 12 8
0
10
20
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 (till
Sept.)
No. of Times
Years
Chart 4.9: Total Samples vis-a-vis number of samples breached the 
prescried limit for BOD, FC and DO in Mathabhanga River
Total Sample BOD more than 3 mg/l
(Source: Water quality data of WBPCB under National Water Monitoring Programme)
(B) Churni River
During 2018-23 while the number of times BOD breached the prescribed limit 
ranged between 50 per cent to 75 per cent of total times tests were conducted, for FC 
it ranged between 88 per cent to 100 per cent, and DO did not meet the prescribed 
standards in 83 per cent to 100 per cent test cases, as shown in the Chart 4.10.
Chart 4.10: Total Sample vis-a-vis number or samples breached the 
prescrived limit for BOD, FC and Do-Churni River
24 24 24 22 24
18
12 12
18 14 14 10
24 23 21 21 24
18
23
20
21 21 22 18
0
10
20
30
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 (till
Sept.)
No. of Times
Years
Chart 4.10 : Total Samples vis-a-vis number of samples breached 
the prescribed limit for BOD, FC and DO-Churni River
Total Sample
FC more than 2500 MNP/100 ml
BOD more than 3 mg/l 
DO less than 5 mg/l
(Source: Water quality data of WBPCB under National Water Monitoring Programme)
4.9 Non-utilisation of sewage treatment facility for Mirik Lake
The hill town Mirik, in Darjeeling district is centered around tourism with Mirik 
lake being the focal point. This central lake has been losing its aesthetic value 
MPN
24 24 24 22 24
18
12 12
18 14 14 10
24 23 21 21 24
18
23
20
21 21 22 18
0
10
20
30
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 (till
Sept.)
No. of Times
Years
Chart 4.10 : Total Samples vis-a-vis number of samples breached 
the prescribed limit for BOD, FC and DO-Churni River
Total Sample
FC more than 2500 MNP/100 ml
BOD more than 3 mg/l 
DO less than 5 mg/l
24 24 24 22 24
18
12 12
18 14 14 10
24 23 21 21 24
18
23
20
21 21 22 18
0
10
20
30
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 (till
Sept.)
No. of Times
Years
Chart 4.10 : Total Samples vis-a-vis number of samples breached 
the prescribed limit for BOD, FC and DO-Churni River
Total Sample
FC more than 2500 MNP/100 ml
BOD more than 3 mg/l 
DO less than 5 mg/l
MPN

Chapter - IV
55
due to growing anthropogenic activities besides natural causes like siltation. 
WBPCB’s water quality reports of the lake water reflected this deterioration.
Gorkahaland Territorial Administration  (GTA) prepared a DPR in 2013 for 
improvement of drainage and sewerage system in Mirik. Following the revision 
of discharge standards for treated effluents by MoEF&CC in November 2015, 
GTA revised the DPR without altering the sanctioned amount of ` 37.39 crore. 
The DPR envisaged construction of three STPs having sewage treatment capacity 
of 1,20075 Kilo Litre Per Day (KLD) for different wards of Mirik Municipality. 
The STPs were completed in June 2019 after an expenditure of ` 36.30 crore 
was incurred by the GTA. However, the STPs were not operationalized.
Subsequently, Mirik Notified Area Authority took possession of the three 
STPs in February 2023. However, as house to house connections for feeding 
through the sewer network to the STPs were not included in GTA’s DPR, MED 
prepared a DPR of ` 8.61 crore for house service connection along with three 
years Operation and Maintenance in February 2023. It was noted that despite a 
lapse of 50 months from completion of the STPs, work had not commenced till 
August 2023.
Audit conducted a joint physical inspection of the three STPs, along with 
representatives of the Division Office, MED, Siliguri, Mirik Municipality and 
the WBPCB in September 2023. This inspection revealed that:
	•  All the three STPs were not functional since completion of their 
construction as none of the drains were connected and work for  
house-to-house connection had not been taken up. 
	•  Untreated sewage was flowing into the lake water and coloured wastewater 
was noticed beside an outfall to the lake. 
	•  The lake water was found to be eutrophic.
	•  As no dredging work was carried out in the lake, sediment deposition was 
observed.
	•  Though WBPCB’s water quality analysis reports of the lake indicated 
non-compliance with the stipulated standards, no remedial actions such 
as arresting discharge of untreated wastewater into the lake and periodic 
dredging of the lake were found to have been taken. Chairman, Mirik 
Municipality stated that due to paucity of fund, remedial action could not 
be taken.
75 i.e. STP 1 (600 KLD), STP 2 (300 KLD) and STP 3 (300 KLD).

56
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Figure 4.24: Untreated sewage along with 
coloured effluent flowing into the lake
Figure 4.25: Sedimentation in the lake
Thus, three sewage treatment facilities created at an expenditure of 
` 36.30 crore could not be used even after four years of their completion 
and the pollution in the lake continued unabated.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that UD&MA Department has 
initiated measures for making the STPs functional.
4.9.1 Impact on water quality of Mirik Lake (Darjeeling)
Audit observed that during 2018-23, BOD exceeded the prescribed limit in the 
years 2018, 2019, 2022 and 2023 while FC breached the limit in all the five 
years and DO did not meet the prescribed standards in 2019 and 2023.
The number of times BOD breached the prescribed limit ranged between zero 
to 80 per cent of the total times tests were conducted by WBPCB, while FC 
exceeded the range between 20 to 83 per cent times. It was further noted that 
DO did not meet the prescribed standards in zero to 10 per cent cases as shown 
in the Chart 4.11.
12 11
8
11 12
10
6
2
0 0
4
8
10 9
3
9 9
7
0
1 0 0 0 1
0
5
10
15
2018 2019 2020
No. of Times 
Years
Chart 4.11: Total Samples vis-a-vis number of samples breached
the prescribed limit for BOD, FC and DO-Mirik Lake
Total no. of samples
FC more than 2500 MNP/100 ml
2021 2022 2023
(Till Oct.)
BOD more than 3 mg/l
DO less than 5 mg/l
(Source: Water quality data of WBPCB under National Water Monitoring Programme)
MPN

Chapter - IV
57
4.10 Santragachi lake (Howrah)
Figure 4.26: Santragachi lake
Santragachi Lake is located next to the Santragachi Railway Station, Howrah. 
The lake attracts a large number of migratory birds in winter, particularly in 
December and January. Observing damage to the lake due to discharge of 
untreated sewage and other waste from Howrah Municipal Corporation (HMC) 
area, in January 2016, a case was filed before the National Green Tribunal 
(NGT), Special Bench to prevent further damage to the lake. 
The tribunal issued (January 2016) notices to the HMC and the Forest 
Department to take remedial actions such as sealing of the outlets creating 
pollution and acting against illegal construction. The WBPCB was also directed 
by NGT to furnish a status report about the compliance with environmental 
norms. Subsequently, the Tribunal ordered the following in June 2020: 
 a) The Railway Ministry was to provide land to KMDA for setting up of the 
STP for treatment of Santragachi Lake water.
 b) The cost of the project would be shared between HMC and the Railways 
in the ratio of contribution of sewage and, 
 c) Encroachments from the Lake would be removed.
In September 2021, the Tribunal reviewed the progress and constituted a 
Committee to examine the Detailed Project Report (DPR) of ` 28.82 crore 
prepared by the KMDA for remedial measures to be taken to prevent pollution 
to Santragachi Lake.
Based on the DPR, audit observed that KMDA was assigned the work of 
construction of a garland drain around all sides of the Lake including interception 
and diversion of all outfalls to convey untreated effluents into the STP. KMDA 
proposed setting up of a low-cost sanitation treatment process by providing a 
Waste Stabilisation Pond (WSP), STP and two pumping stations. 
Joint inspection of the Lake along with officials of WBPCB in November 2023 
revealed that a major part of the Lake was covered with hyacinth. The work of 
the STP along with the garland drain had not yet commenced, though the NGT’s 
stipulated period expired in November 2022. Further, residential units and shops 
were abutting the lake leading to direct discharge of waste into the lake. 

58
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Figure 4.27 : Lake covered with water 
hyacinth
Figure 4.28 : Littering of solid waste near 
the lake
Records also revealed that the land for setting up of the STP was not allocated 
by Indian Railways as of October 2023. The water quality analysis, carried 
out by WBPCB, in March 2023, revealed high levels of BOD (15 mg/l), high 
concentration of Total Coliforms (TC) (24,000 MPN/100 ml) and low levels 
of DO at 3.2 mg/l.
Thus, remedial measures for revival of the lake could not commence even 
after seven years since the matter first came before NGT in 2016, and the 
discharge of untreated sewage continued into the lake.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that the Administrative Approval 
for the project from the UD&MA Department was awaited.
Recommendations 7:
UD&MA Department should complete the projects related to connections 
of household sewage with STPs and tapping of drains not connected with 
STPs on priority basis.

CHAPTER - V
Industrial Wastewater 
Management

59
Chapter V
Industrial Wastewater Management 
5.1 Introduction
According to Section 25/26 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Act, 1974, “no industry can discharge sewage or trade effluent into a stream or 
well or sewer or land beyond the permissible standards prescribed by CPCB”. 
Any contravention of the provisions, shall be punishable with imprisonment 
or fine under section 43/44 of the Act. The WBPCB can also issue directions 
for closure of an industry and disconnection of electricity in case of persistent 
defiance by any polluting industry under Section 33-A of the Water Act, 1974.
Under Section 17 (f) of the Water Act, 1974, the Board is responsible for 
inspecting sewage or trade effluents and works and plants for the treatment of 
sewage and trade effluents.
As per State Environment Report of 2020-21, 454 industries76 (Grossly Polluting 
Industries-GPIs and Seriously Polluting Industries-SPIs) had been identified 
under different categories as water polluting industries of which 65 77 were 
selected for detailed scrutiny in audit as shown in Charts 5.1 and 5.2.
Chart 5.1: Category of 400 Seriously Polluting Industries
CATEGORY OF 400 SERIOUSLY POLLUTING 
INDUSTRIES (SPI)
(Source: Records of WBPCB)
76 400 SPIs and 54 GPIs.
77 51 SPIs and 14 GPIs.

60
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Chart 5.2: Category of 54 Grossly Polluting Industries
Chemical, 2
Distillery, 3
Fertilizer, 1
Food and 
Beverages, 8 
Oil & Refinery, 1
Others , 10
Pesticides, 1
Petrochemicals, 3
Pharmaceuticals, 1
Pulp & Paper, 19
Sugar, 2
CATEGORY OF 54 GROSSLY POLLUTING
INDUSTRIES (GPI) 
Textiles, 3 
(Source: Records of WBPCB)
This Chapter deals with Industrial Wastewater Management being 
implemented by WBPCB through various provisions of the Water Act, 
1974 and the Environment Act, 1986. Audit findings are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs.
5.2 Consent Management
According to the Water Act78, 1974, industrial units, that started operations after 
obtaining Consent to Establish (CTE), issued by the WBPCB, had to apply 
to the WBPCB for CTO 79 which will be valid for five years. No industry can 
operate without a valid CTO. This CTO is granted to an industry on the basis of 
review of following information:
 (i) Name of the products/ by-products and the quantity to be produced per 
month, 
 (ii) Discharge/emission parameters with prescribed standards and the 
frequency of effluent and emission sampling, 
 (iii) Type and quantity of fuel used etc.
Thus, through CTO, WBPCB monitors compliance to environmental laws and 
standards in terms of raw material consumed, emissions, effluents, and waste 
discharges standards. The renewal of applications of CTO should be filed by the 
industry at least 120 days prior to its expiry. 
Audit observed that as of March 2023, five 80 out of 51 sampled SPIs were 
operating with CTOs that had already expired for periods ranging between 
five to 48 months, as shown in Chart 5.3.
78 Section 25 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974.
79 The validity of the CTO of Red industries was increased (June 2016) by WBPCB from three 
to five years.
80 SPI 1-M/s Sreema Dyeing and Bleaching work; SPI 2-M/s Kalachand Electroplating Work; 
SPI 3-M/s Monoranjan Jalui; SPI 4-M/s Dhara Brothers; SPI 5-M/s Biplab Processing.

Chapter - V
61
Chart 5.3: CTO Expiration Period
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
SPI 1 SPI 2 SPI 3 SPI 4 SPI 5
5 9
39
48
9
Months
SPI  Units 
CTO expiration period 
(Source: Records of WBPCB)
Thus, due to non-renewal/delayed renewal of CTOs, compliance with 
environmental laws by these industries could not be ensured by the WBPCB.
The Department did not furnish any reply in this regard.
Recommendation 8:
WBPCB should ensure that Industrial units are in possession of valid CTOs 
and impose penalties in case of lapses.
5.2.1  Mandatory Inspection by WBPCB for environment surveillance 
According to the Comprehensive Inspection Policy (2019) 81 of WBPCB, SPIs 
were to be inspected once in a year. Subsequently, WBPCB, as per the directions 
of CPCB, issued (January 2020) an order82 which mandated inspection of SPIs 
at a frequency of six months 83. Inspection procedure of WBPCB is depicted in 
Chart 5.4.
81 Memo No. 1546-4A-6/2015 (Part-II) dated 29.05.2019.
82 Memo No. 689 (8)- 384/ WPB/ O&E/ 2020.
83 Highly Polluting 17 category Industries- three months and Red category other than  
17 category industries six months.

62
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Chart 5.4: Inspection Procedure by WBPCB
Visit to Industry/concerned Site
Serve Notice to Industry/Organization as per provisions of the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Air (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981  
Conduct Inspection
Collect samples of Effluent, Emission and Waste, if necessary, after
issuance of relevant Notice for sample collection and analysis 
Exit the Industry/ Concerned site
Submit Report of Inspection
Audit observed the following:
	•  Out of 51 sampled SPIs, 34 SPIs were operational during 2018-23.
	•  Records related to inspection by WBPCB in case of six out of 34 SPIs, 
were not available.
	•  Each of the SPIs was required to be inspected eight times from  
May 2019 to March 2023. However, it was noted that 26 operational SPIs84 
were not inspected by the WBPCB for the mandated eight times over the 
five years period. Audit observed that out of 26 operational SPIs, 14 SPIs 
were inspected up to three times, six SPIs four times, five SPIs five times and 
one SPI six times during 2018-23, as detailed in Chart 5.5 and Appendix 1.
Chart 5.5: No of inspection in 26 SPIs
84 2 SPIs have been regularly inspected.

Chapter - V
63
Further, as per Rule 6 of Hazardous Waste Management Rules, 2016, industries 
were required to apply and obtain an authorisation from WBPCB for managing 
hazardous waste. 
Audit observed that out of 65 sampled industrial units, while all 14 GPIs 
had valid hazardous waste authorization, 22 out of 51 SPIs did not have this 
authorization. 
The above issue indicated that WBPCB did not efficiently monitor compliance 
with the mandated frequency of inspection for effective environmental 
surveillance of industries.
Recommendation 9:
WBPCB should strengthen its monitoring mechanism to adhere to the 
required number of inspections and ensure compliance by polluting 
industries.
5.2.2 Action taken against non-compliant GPIs and SPIs
As per Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, Board officials 
conduct regular inspections of the industries under their consent management. In 
case of any non-compliance noticed, the industries were to be allowed reasonable 
time to comply with the environmental statutes. On repetitive violation of 
environmental norms, the defaulting units were to be served with show-cause 
notices/directions, followed by technical hearing, time-bound compliance 
submitting a bank guarantee as security and imposition of fines. Repeated 
non-compliance would lead to closure of the units along with disconnection of 
electricity under extreme circumstances. 
Since 2017, GPIs in addition to the quarterly monitoring by WBPCB, were also 
being monitored by CPCB. The monitoring by CPCB was done by engaging 
joint teams of experts/third party technical institutes like IITs, NITs, etc. 
WBPCB had to take appropriate action such as issuance of directions to ensure 
implementation of pollution control measures, as suggested by CBPC within 
15 days of receipt of such inspection report from CPCB. Further, in case of 
Show Cause Notices issued by CPCB/WBPCB the units were to be re-inspected 
by WBPCB and closure directions issued in case of non-compliance within  
30 days. The compliance status as well as action taken by WBPCB during the 
period 2018-23 is detailed in Table.5.1.
Table 5.1: Status of action taken by WBPCB for GPIs
Year
Total No. 
of GPIs 
inspected
Non 
Complying 
GPIs (%)
Non-complying GPIs 
issued with Show 
Cause Notice (SCN)
Temporarily 
closed GPIs 
after issuance 
of notice
Permanently 
closed GPIs
2018-19 44 12(27) 8 (6 SCN & 2 Closure) 4 Nil
2019-20 48 5(10) 2 (SCN) 3 Nil
2020-21 54 23(43) 15 (SCN) 8 Nil
2021-22 55 16(29) 11 (SCN) 4 1
2022-23 56 12(21) 4 (SCN) 8 Nil
(Source: Regional Director, Kolkata, CPCB)

64
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
From the table, it can be seen that during the audit period, percentage of non-
complying GPIs ranged between 10 per cent and 43 per cent, with reference to 
GPIs inspected.
Similarly, the instances of non-compliances were observed in case of the 
sampled 51 SPIs as detailed in Table 5.2
Table 5.2: Status of action taken by WBPCB for sampled SPIs
Year No. of 
sampled SPI
Non complying 
SPIs (per cent)
No. of Notices 
issued
No. of notices 
issued for 
closure
No. of 
Directions 
issued
2018-19 51 14(27) 15 2 2
2019-20 51 12(24) 5 1 4
2020-21 51 3(6) 4 0 2
2021-22 51 6(12) 5 0 5
2022-23 51 14(27) 10 1 7
From the table, it may be seen that during the audit period, percentage of non-
complying SPIs ranged between six and 27 per cent. 
Thus, percentage of non-complying SPIs in 2022-23 in comparison with 
2018-19 remained the same despite monitoring by WBPCB. Some illustrative 
cases highlighting failure of WBPCB in taking timely action against the non-
compliant industries have been discussed in Table 5.3.
5.2.3  Implementation of Charter based participatory approach for 
reduction in water consumption, effluent generation and pollution 
load 
Textiles, Pulp and Paper, and Distilleries industries were categorised under the 
17 categories of highly water consuming and polluting industries by CPCB. 
To accomplish desired level of environmental protection and to meet objectives 
of the National Mission for Clean Ganga, CPCB formulated (February 2015) 
industry specific ‘Charter based participatory approach for reduction in water 
consumption, effluent generation and pollution load by adoption of cleaner 
technologies & training for best management practices’. 
SPCBs were to ensure proper implementation of the said Charter and were 
responsible for monitoring and surveillance of industries as against Charter 
norms. Participating units were not allowed to bypass Effluent Treatment Plant 
(ETP) systems and discharge partially treated/untreated effluent into any water 
streams. 
The implementation of the Charter was considered to have commenced on the 
date of issue of directions/ instructions from SPCBs/PCCs and the entire action 
plan was to be implemented before 31 March, 2017. However, as of June 2023, 
WBPCB was yet to implement the Charter in these three ( Textiles, Pulp and 
Paper, and Distilleries Industries) categories of industries.
According to the WBPCB’s inventory, there were 127 85 industries under these 
three categories, of which Audit conducted a detailed scrutiny of 14 86 units. 
85 110 textile, 16 pulp and paper and one distillery.
86 11 textile, two pulp and paper and one distillery.

Chapter - V
65
Scrutiny of records and joint physical inspection of the units along with officials 
of WBPCB revealed the following issues:
	 Mandatory eight and 20 number of inspections in case of SPI and GPI 
respectively were not carried out by WBPCB during 2018-23 in nine 
industries87.
	 In nine industrial units88 ETPs were either non-operational or did not meet 
the effluent discharge standards.
	 Flow meters required at ETP inlets and outlets for measuring the quantity 
of untreated effluent received and treated effluent discharged were not 
installed in nine industries89.
	 Hazardous Waste Authorization 90, to be issued by WBPCB was not 
possessed by eight units91.
	 No facility for reusing treated waste water existed in 11 industrial units92.
	 Under the West Bengal Ground Water Resources (Management, Control 
and Regulation) Rules 2006, the State Water Investigation Directorate is 
responsible for issuing permits for ground water extraction. Audit observed 
that four industries 93 were drawing groundwater for industrial purposes 
without valid authorisation,
	 Against the authorisation of 8.25 KLD, an industrial unit (Tirupati Udyog) 
extracted 44.38 KLD of ground water.
Violations of CTO conditions noticed during Joint physical verification of the 
selected industries are detailed in Table 5.3:
87 M/s Sreema Dyeing & Bleaching Works, Sunrise Industry, M/s Bijoy Processing Industries, 
International Bleaching & dyeing Works, Chiranjilal Rayons Pvt. Ltd., Rupa & Co. Ltd., 
M/s Onkar Parivahan Finance Pvt. Ltd., East India Paper & Board Mills and Carlsberg India 
Pvt. Ltd.
88 Sunrise Industry, M/s Bijoy Processing Industries, International Bleaching & dyeing Works, 
Chiranjilal Rayons Pvt. Ltd., Rupa & Co Ltd., Superfine Thread Co., M/s Onkar Parivahan 
Finance Pvt. Ltd., East India Paper & Board Mills and Carlsberg India Pvt. Ltd.
89 M/s Sreema Dyeing & Bleaching Works, Sunrise Industry, M/s Bijoy Processing Industries, 
International Bleaching & dyeing Works, Krishna Tissue Pvt. Ltd., Chiranjilal Rayons Pvt. 
Ltd., M/s Onkar Parivahan Finance Pvt. Ltd., East India Paper & Board Mills and Burdwan 
Kraftboard LLP earlier name was Bardhaman Dharmaraj Paper Mill (P) Ltd.
90 Hazardous Waste Authorization (HWA) is required for the generation, collection, reception, 
storage, transportation, treatment, disposal or any other manner of handling of hazardous 
and other wastes listed in Schedules I, II and Parts B & D of Schedule III of the Hazardous 
Wastes (Management and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016.
91 M/s Sreema Dyeing & Bleaching Works, M/s Bijoy Processing Industries, International 
Bleaching & dyeing Works, Krishna Tissue Pvt. Ltd., Superfine Thread Co., East India 
Paper & Board Mills, Carlsberg India Pvt. Ltd. and Ballavpur Paper Mfg Ltd.
92 M/s Sreema Dyeing & Bleaching Works, Sunrise Industry, M/s Bijoy Processing Industries, 
International Bleaching & dyeing Works, Chiranjilal Rayons Pvt. Ltd., Rupa & Co. Ltd., 
Superfine Thread Co., M/s Onkar Parivahan Finance Pvt. Ltd., East India Paper & Board 
Mills, Carlsberg India Pvt. Ltd. and Ballavpur Paper Mfg Ltd.
93 Chiranjilal Rayons Pvt. Ltd., Superfine Thread Co, M/s Onkar Parivahan Finance Pvt. Ltd. 
and East India Paper & Board Mills.

66
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
949596979899100
Table 5.3: Violations of CTO conditions during 2018-23
Sl 
No.
Industry Inspection and Test 
Samples
Action taken by WBPCB Audit observation (Joint 
physical verification)
CATEGORY-TEXTILE
1. M/s Chiranjila 
Rayons Pvt. 
Ltd. (SPI)
• WBPCB inspected 
five times against the 
stipulated eight times  
(63 per cent).
• Total five samples 
of the trade effluents 
were analysed during 
the audit period, all of 
which were found to 
be non-compliant with 
discharge standards94.
• Show cause notice was 
issued in September 
2019, followed by a 
hearing in December 
2021.
• WBPCB issued 
direction in May 2022, 
and an Environment 
Compensation (EC) of 
` 3.15 lakh was imposed 
along with a Bank 
Guarantee of ` 5.00 lakh 
which was duly paid by 
the unit.
• Despite the action 
taken by the WBPCB, 
compliance with 
environmental norms 
had not been done.
• ETP was not fully 
functional, partially 
treated colored effluent 
was being discharged. 
(April 2023)
• Water quality tests done 
(23 November 2023) by 
CPCB in the presence of 
officials of WBPCB and 
Audit also showed that 
the industry was non-
compliant (TSS 95-1,477 
and SAR96-71.9).
2. M/s Onkar 
Parivahan 
Finance Pvt. 
Ltd. (SPI)
• WBPCB inspected 
five times against the 
stipulated eight times 
(63 per cent).
• Two sample reports 
of treated effluents 
were made available to 
Audit, both were found 
to be non-compliant97.
• Three (3) show-cause 
notices98 were issued.
• Closure order with 
disconnection of 
electricity in November 
2022 which was 
suspended in December 
2022 based on corrective 
action taken by the unit.
• Environment Compen-
sation of ` 2.00 lakh was 
imposed for violation 
of environmental norms 
and also Bank Guarantee 
of ` 5.00 lakh was 
taken as an assurance 
for compliance with the 
Board’s directions as well 
as environmental norms.
• Despite action taken by 
WBPCB, compliance 
with environmental 
norms was not done.
• Coloured effluent was 
coming out from the 
discharge point of the 
ETP and falling in the 
low-lying land in front 
of the unit’s main gate. 
(July 2023).
• Water quality tests done 
(23 November 2023) by 
CPCB in the presence of 
officials of WBPCB and 
Audit also showed that 
the industry was non-
compliant (BOD 99-184,  
COD100- 321 and  
SAR -41.7).
94 25.04.2018 (BOD-665.70 mg/l, COD-1418.30 mg/l, O&G-12.20 mg/l, Sulphide-11.84 mg/l, TSS-370.00 
mg/l), 28.08.2019 (SAR-103.84, TDS-610.00 mg/l, TSS-104.00 mg/l), 14.08.2020 (BOD-97.60 mg/l, 
COD-539.47 mg/l, pH-9.38, TDS-3482.00 mg/l), 27.10.2021 (BOD-213.55 mg/l, COD-674.97 mg/l, 
TDS-2388.00 mg/l, SAR-43.16), 26.04.2023 (COD-183.46 mg/l, TDS- 1234.00 mg/l, TSS- 166.00 mg/l, 
SAR- 5.04).
95 Total Suspended Solids (Permissible limit-100 mg/l).
96 Sodium Adsorption Ratio (Permissible limit-26 mili mol/l).
97 16.01.2019 (pH 9.55, TDS 2859.00) and on 27.01.2020 (SAR-165.94, pH-8.79 and TDS-2410.00 mg/l).
98 24.04.2019, 10.02.2020 and 22.06.2020.
99 Biological Oxygen Demand (permissible limit-30 mg/l).
100 Chemical Oxygen Demand (permissible limit-250 mg/l).

Chapter - V
67
Sl 
No.
Industry Inspection and Test 
Samples
Action taken by WBPCB Audit observation (Joint 
physical verification)
3. Sun Rise 
Industry (SPI)
• WBPCB inspected on 
three occasions against 
the required eight 
times (38 per cent).
• Three samples 
tested from 2018-23. 
All found non-
compliant101.
• Three Show cause 
notices were issued in 
September 2018 & 2019, 
and July 2022.
• The industry continued 
to operate without 
compliance to the 
discharge standard. No 
further action on part of 
WBPCB was found on 
records.
4. M/s Sreema 
Dyeing & 
Bleaching 
Works (SPI)
• WBPCB inspected on 
four occasions out of 
required eight times 
(50 per cent).
• ETP was not 
operational during 
WBPCB’s inspection.
• Issued a temporary 
closure order with 
disconnection of 
electricity in November 
2019.
• Directions issued for 
Non-compliance with 
environmental norms 
in December 2021 by 
WBPCB.
• Show-cause notice was 
issued in December 2022 
for not commissioning 
ETP and closure notice 
was suspended in 
December 2022 without 
ensuring compliance by 
the industry.
• Compliance to the 
discharge standards was 
yet to be ensured as no 
test report of effluent 
was made available, 
and the unit continued 
discharging untreated 
effluent directly into 
KMC drain.
5. International 
Bleaching & 
Dyeing Works 
(SPI)
• WBPCB inspected on 
five out of required 
eight inspections. 
(63 per cent).
• ETP was not 
operational during 
WBPCB’s inspection.
• Show Cause Notices 
were issued by WBPCB 
in February 2019 and 
July 2021 followed by a 
hearing in May 2022.
• WBPCB directed in 
August 2022, the 
concerned Regional 
Office to keep a vigil on 
the unit.
• The unit was operating 
without CTO during the 
period 2018-21 (upto 
22 March 2021).
• CTO was issued in 
March 2021 (valid up to 
October 2025) without 
ensuring operational 
status of the ETP. 
• Records regarding 
inspections were not 
available since August 
2022 and during the 
joint site inspection, it 
was noticed that the ETP 
was non-operational and 
final discharge was made 
into KMC drain without 
any treatment.
101
101 02.08.2018-(TSS-104.00 mg/l, BOD-192.77 mg/l, COD-462.80 mg/l and pH>10), 18.06.2019-(TSS-
3684.00 mg/l, BOD-50.87 mg/l) and 17.06.2022- SAR-175.92.

68
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
102103104
Sl 
No.
Industry Inspection and Test 
Samples
Action taken by WBPCB Audit observation (Joint 
physical verification)
6. M/s Tirupati 
Udyog (SPI)
• WBPCB inspected 
on two occasions 
out of required 
eight inspections 
(25 per cent)
• ETP was not in 
operation.
• Action taken by WBPCB 
was not found on record.
• No inspections were 
done during 2018-19 and 
2021-23.
• Show-Cause notice was 
not issued by WBPCB 
for non-operation of 
ETP, though CTO 
was renewed upto 
30 November 2023.
CATEGORY: PULP AND PAPER
7. M/s Burdwan 
Kraft Board 
LLP (Formerly 
Bardhaman 
Dharmaraj 
Paper Mills 
Pvt. Ltd. (GPI)
• WBPCB inspected 
four out of required 
20 inspections 
(20 per cent).
• During 2018-23, 
WBPCB had taken 
three water samples 
for testing and found 
on two 102 occasions 
that the effluent was 
breaching permissible 
limits.
• Show cause notice was 
issued in January 2022, 
for non-compliance with 
environmental norms. 
Further action was not on 
records.
• No action had been 
taken after detecting 
non-compliance by 
the industries with the 
discharge norms in 
December 2022.
• No test was done since 
December 2022. 
8. M/s Ballavpur 
Paper Mfg Ltd. 
(GPI).
• WBPCB inspected the 
unit 15 times out of 
required 20 inspections 
(75 per cent). 
• On nine 103 occasions 
the effluent did not 
meet the prescribed 
standards.
• Primary clarifier was 
found in a damaged 
condition even though 
the third-party inspection 
(CPCB) in March 2022 
recommended its repair 
at the earliest. However, 
no action was taken.
• 540 KLD of ground 
water was being 
extracted against the 
permission of 120 KLD 
from SWID.
• No permission for 
hazardous waste 
authorisation was taken.
• There was no system for 
re-use of treated water.
• Sludge was kept in open 
within the premises.
CATEGORY: MILK PROCESSING AND DAIRY PLANT
9. M/s Mother 
Dairy (GPI)
• The effluent of the 
unit was found non-
compliant on four 104 
occasions out of 
total 20 inspections 
(quarterly) done during 
the period.
• The unit also failed 
to install Online 
Continuous Effluent 
Monitoring System 
(OCEMS) connecting 
with the CPCB server.
• It was seen that direction 
was issued only on one 
occasion i.e. 06.08.2021 
for non-compliance with 
the Environment norms 
and an Environmental 
compensation of 
` 4.25 lakh was imposed 
for non-compliance. 
However, the unit 
remained non-compliant 
on four occasions during 
the Audit period.
• The ETP was partially 
running.
• The online effluent 
monitoring system 
(OCEMS) was not 
functioning
102 08.11.2021 (TSS-580.00 mg/l, COD-15727 mg/l, BOD-6218.75 mg/l), 14.12.2022 (COD-
272.80 mg/l, BOD-94.17 mg/l).
103 12.04.2018 (BOD-59.83 mg/l, COD-400 mg/l), 18.07.2018 (BOD-127.61 mg/l, 
COD-519.77  mg/l), 10.09.2018 (BOD-76.91 mg/l, COD-459), 18.12.2018 (TSS-134.00 mg/l, 
BOD-1543.75 mg/l, COD-6775 mg/l), 21.05.2019 (BOD-93.75 mg/l, COD-455.40 mg/l), 
19.08.2022 (BOD-35.44 mg/l), 04.12.20 (BOD-71.25 mg/l), 24.03.2021(BOD- 36.46 mg/l), 
04.03.2022 (BOD-40.08 mg/l).
104 02.07.2020 (BOD-50.65 mg/l), 11.08.2021 (TSS-176.00 mg/l and BOD-46.13 mg/l), 
29.04.2022 (TSS-208.00 mg/l) and on 06.04.2023 (BOD- 42.15 mg/l).

Chapter - V
69
Sl 
No.
Industry Inspection and Test 
Samples
Action taken by WBPCB Audit observation (Joint 
physical verification)
10. M/s Meghna 
Farm Products 
(SPI)
• WBPCB inspected 
on four out of 
required eight 
mandatory inspections 
(50 per cent)
• Four105 Show-cause 
notices were issued for 
non-compliance. 
• No further action was 
taken by the WBPCB.
• There was no system for 
re-use of treated water.
• Reserve tank for effluent 
stores the wastewater 
for treatment. However, 
several outlets were 
found in the reserve tank 
that did not lead to ETP 
which indicated that 
untreated effluent was 
being discharged into the 
water stream. 
CATEGORY- METAL SURFACE TREATMENT
11. M/s DMP 
Projects Pvt. 
Ltd. (SPI)
• WBPCB inspected 
the unit on three out 
of required mandatory 
eight inspections 
(38 per cent)
• Effluent was found to 
be non-compliant 106 
with discharge 
standards on all the 
three occasions.
• Nothing was found 
on record regarding 
WBPCB’s follow up 
action.
• Hazardous Waste 
Authorization expired on 
31 January 2023 and has 
not been renewed since.
• During joint inspection 
(July 2023) the unit was 
found not functioning, 
however hazardous 
waste was stored in a 
tank at the premises.
12. M/s Bhusan 
Power and 
Steel Ltd. (SPI)
• WBPCB was inspected 
on three out of required 
eight inspections 
(38 per cent)
• The unit was non-
compliant on one 
occasion.
• Presence of multiple 
number of outlets all 
along the boundary 
wall beside the ETP 
was pointed out.
• Nothing was found on 
record regarding any 
follow up action by 
WBPCB.
• No follow-up/ show 
cause notice was found 
on record
105106
5.2.4  Trade Effluents from the tanneries in Calcutta Leather Complex
Calcutta Leather Complex (CLC) was set up in 2005, for accommodating 
approximately 500 tanneries, to allow them to operate in a modern and 
environment-friendly manner. As of 2023, 517 tanneries had relocated to CLC 
and obtained NOC from WBPCB. The CLC was equipped with 40 MLD CETP, 
comprising eight modules of five MLD each, for treating trade effluents107 of the 
tanneries. However, as of July 2023, only four modules 108 i.e. Module V-VIII 
were functioning, after modules I-IV went out of operation in August 2022. 
105 05.07.2018, 30.08.2018, 30.07.2021, 12.12.2022.
106 06.12.2018 (BOD-45.13 mg/l, Iron- 27.92 mg/l, pH- 4.98, TSS-638.00 mg/l, Zn-42.85 mg/l), 
11.03.2019 (pH-4.98, TSS-638.00 mg/l, BOD-45.13 mg/l, Zinc-42.85 mg/l and Iron-
27.92 mg/l) and 28.10.2021 (Zn-7.57 mg/l).
107 Trade effluent is liquid waste that comes from industrial process. 
108 Total 20 MLD (Five MLD each).

70
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
The four modules in operation were receiving about 15-16 MLD of trade 
effluent. During the period 2018-19 to 2022-23, WBPCB inspected the Complex 
49 times. Further, a joint inspection of CLC was also carried out by Audit with 
officials of KMDA (July 2023). Based on these inspections, the following was 
noticed: 
	•  WBPCB carried out water quality analysis of CETP outlets 49 times during 
2018-19 to 2022-23. During this analysis it was noticed that the discharge 
effluent standards for pollutants like Chloride and TDS regularly exceeded 
permissible limits, while other pollutants such as Ammonical Nitrogen, 
BOD, COD, TDS, TSS and Total Chromium exceeded the Design/
MoEF&CC discharge standard limits by 35, 34, 13, 41, 16 and 5 times, 
respectively. Details of this analysis are as shown in Chart 5.6 below.
Chart 5.6: Treated Effluent exceeding the discharge norms
6
11
10
11 11
6
11
6
10
2
5
6
8
5
10
1
2
3
1
6
4
8
9
10 10
0
1 1 1
2
1
4
2
3
6
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Treated Effluent exceeding the discharge norms 
(outlet of CETP) 
COD more than 250 mg/l
Total  Chromium more than 2 mg/l
Total Sample
BOD more than 20 mg/l 
TDS more than 3,100 mg/l 
TSS more than 50 mg/l
Ammonical Nitrogen more than 50 mg/l
All the  three canals within the 
Complex were heavily contaminated 
due to unauthorised discharge of 
tannery effluent, bypassing the 
CETP. On perusal of WBPCB 
records it was seen that the Board 
had not monitored the water quality 
in the storm water canals regularly. 
Seven water quality test reports 109 
of storm water canals for the period 
from May 2018 to July 2019 were 
found on record which showed 
that the levels for parameters like 
Sulphide, Total Chromium, TSS, 
COD exceeded the treated effluent 
109 15 May 2018, 23 August 2018, 29 November 2018, 21 February 2019, 02 May 2019,  
18 June 2019 and 31 July 2019.
Figure 5.1: Storm water drain 3 carrying untreated 
effluent and falling into the drainage canal


Chapter - V
71
discharge levels of the CETP outlet on all the seven counts 110. This indicated 
that the effluents from the tanneries were being discharged directly into the 
canals, bypassing the CETP. Thus, CLC tanneries were discharging untreated 
effluents directly into canals, which were ultimately flowing into the Vidyadhari 
river causing environmental pollution.
The Joint Inspection of the CLC (July 2023) also revealed that tannery effluent 
was flooding the internal roads and abutting vacant plots due to leakage and 
overflow, and ultimately accumulating in vacant areas of the complex. 
Figure 5.2: Flooding of tannery effluent due 
to leakage/overflow
Figure 5.3: Undisposed sludge of CETP
Water quality tests of the CLC’s CETP Module (V-VIII), was also done by 
CPCB (in November 2023), in the presence of officials of WBPCB and 
Audit. These tests revealed that the CETP of the Complex was non-compliant 
with environmental norms as the effluent had a BOD load of 80 mg/l 
against an acceptable standard of 20 mg/l and COD was 276 mg/l against  
250 mg/l. 
From the above it is evident that the leather industry discharged effluents laced 
with chromium compounds and sulphides into water bodies. The International 
Agency for Research on Cancer under WHO had recognised chromium 
compounds as human carcinogens. Since the storm water canal opens into the 
Vidyadhari River, the effluents were getting widely dispersed, causing immense 
risk to human and aquatic health.
110 
Parameter CETP outlet range Canal water range
Sulphide 0 38.84-151.04
Total Chromium 0.26-0.36 5.4-37.52
TSS 4-79 79-1,407
COD 66.03-237.83 391.32-11,924.17

72
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
In reply, WBPCB stated (March 2024) that no untreated sewage from the 
tanneries was being directly discharged. They also stated that untreated sewage 
mixed with the process effluent generated from tannery units were being sent to 
CETP for final treatment. 
However, from the water quality tests done (November 2023) by CPCB and the 
joint inspection by Audit, it was seen that there was no proper treatment of the 
tannery effluents and the canals continued to be heavily contaminated. 
Recommendation 10:
WBPCB needs to enforce, through consent management, treatment of all 
industrial effluents, with special emphasis on installation of CETPs in 
clusters for the unorganised small industries.
5.2.5  Implementation of Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index 
Action Plan
In order to assess the impact of industrial clusters on the environment, CPCB 
uses a Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index (CEPI) comprising 
parameters for Water Environment, Air Environment and Land Environment. 
Industrial clusters with aggregated CEPI score of 70 and above are generally 
considered by MoEF&CC as critically polluted Cluster.
MoEF&CC issued a Memorandum dated 13 January 2010 imposing a moratorium 
on setting up of new industries and expansion of existing industries, requiring 
Environmental Clearance, in Critically Polluted Areas (CPAs). In West Bengal 
three industrial towns viz. Haldia, Howrah and Asansol were identified as CPAs, 
and thus the moratorium extended to all the three places.
To improve the environment quality, WBPCB initiated a series of time bound 
action plans from 2010 onwards. The CPCB conducted monitoring in the CPAs 
during February-April 2013 and re-assessed the CEPI scores. In view of the 
reassessment, MoEF&CC lifted (September 2013) the moratorium subject to 
the conditions that. 
 (i) The concerned SPCB shall ensure compliance with approved action plans 
for the CPAs, 
 (ii) SPCB shall review quarterly, the implementation of the action plans and 
report to CPCB and, 
 (iii) SPCB, through third party, will undertake an annual monitoring of CPA for 
computing CEPI.
In this context, Audit observed that compliance reports related to the CEPI 
action plan for the above three CPAs were available only for the year 2014 and 
reports for subsequent years were not found.
Subsequently, CPCB, as per the order of the NGT 111, undertook a project for 
monitoring environmental qualities during 2017-18 of around 100 Polluted 
111 OA No. 1038/2018 dated 13.12.2018

Chapter - V
73
Industrial Areas (PIAs) throughout the country, which includes all the above 
three CPAs, one Severely Polluting Area (SPA) - Durgapur and one additional 
site (Bandel) in the State. Accordingly, action plans were prepared (June 2019) 
for each of the five PIAs based on the WBPCB’s monitoring of environmental 
qualities.
In context of the above action by WBPCB, Audit observed the following:
5.2.5.1 Implementation of Action Plans in Haldia CPA
According to the Action Plan for Haldia CPA, prepared by WBPCB, a 
total amount of ` 720.98 crore was estimated for execution of various 
environmental improvement activities to be carried out by large industries in 
Haldia by Haldia Development Authority (HDA) and Haldia Municipality by 
December 2023. The Action Plan inter alia included storm water management, 
which was to be undertaken by HDA, Haldia Municipality and the Irrigation 
and Waterways Department. Based on audit analysis (upto September 2023) 
of the implementation of the Action Plan, the following points, as shown in  
Table 5.4 were observed. 
Table 5.4: Present status of action plan of Haldia CPA112
Action point Responsible 
Agencies Details of Action points Audit observation
Storm Water 
Management
HDA, Haldia 
Municipality 
and Irrigation 
and Waterways 
Department
1. Construction of drains 
along with road from Adani 
Wilmar Ltd.  to Azad Hind 
Nagar areas.
Constructed but yet to be linked with the main drain 
along with HPL link road to Mansatala Canal. As 
a result, untreated effluent, was getting discharged 
into low-lying open land.
2. Construction of 4 km long 
drain along with HPL link 
road to Mansatala Canal.
The scheme could not be executed till date. Estimate 
amounting to `15.10 crore for the work 112 was 
prepared by the HDA and sent (December 2019) 
to the Member Secretary, WBPCB for approval of 
the project, but the same was not approved as of 
October 2023 by WBPCB. 
3. De-silting of Mansatala 
green belt, Horekhali, 
Bhagyabantapur, Chunamara 
and Atafala Canals and 
repairing of lock-gates and 
sluice gates of the respective 
canals.
Letters had been issued by WBPCB (2019 and 
2020) to Irrigation and Waterways Department 
(I&WD) for de-silting of the Canals, but the same 
was not executed. I&WD carried out a preliminary 
survey in March 2022 for de-silting of the canals 
with a total approximate cost of ` 9.80 crore but 
work had not started as of March 2024.
During the joint field inspection of Mansatala Canal and HPL Link Road with 
the officials of the WBPCB in December 2023, Audit observed that the work 
related to the storm water management as envisaged in the Action Plan was yet 
to be implemented as shown in Figure 5.4. Further, untreated effluent, filled 
with white scum and foul odour, was getting discharged into a low-lying open 
land along the HPL road as shown in the Figure 5.5.
112 ‘Construction of RCC surface drain from Adani Wilmar lndustrial Unit to Manasatala Canal 
along HPL Link Road’.

74
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
WATER HYACINTH 
FILLED MANASTALA 
CANAL
Figure 5.4: Mansatala green belt was found 
to be filled with aquatic weeds such as water 
hyacinth, hydrophytes
Figure 5.5: Effluent from the industries 
was discharging into a low lying open 
land along HPL Link Road
5.2.5.2 Implementation of Action Plans in Howrah CPA
CPCB considered two major industrial clusters of Howrah viz. Jalan Industrial 
Complex and Bamungachi Industrial Cluster as CPA. As per records, a total of 
486 red category industries were operating from these two industrial clusters. 
Barjora Khal, a drainage channel of about 10.35 km maintained by Irrigation 
and Waterways Department (I&WD) of Government of West Bengal, drains 
industrial effluent from Jalan Industrial complex, Sankrail Industrial Complex, 
Food Park and Poly Park. Keeping in view the environmental load bearing 
capacity of the sensitive area, WBPCB had delineated (2015), inter alia, the 
following actionable measures in Table 5.5.
Table 5.5: Action points for Howrah CPA
Sl. 
No. Action points Responsible stake holders
1 Installation of Central Effluent Treatment 
Plant (CETP) at Jalan Industrial Complex.
Industry Association, Industry, WBPCB 
and MoEF on cost sharing basis. 
2 Development of proper drainage facility in 
Jalan Industrial Complex. 
Industry Association, Industry.
3 Embankment and desilting of effluent 
carrying canal at Jalan Industrial Complex. 
Industry Association, Industry.
4 Development of proper drainage facility 
Bamungachi area.
Howrah Municipal Corporation and 
Bally Municipality.

Chapter - V
75
Audit observed that the work of de-siltation of Barjora Khal  was not taken 
up (as of March 2024) though a DPR for this work at an estimated cost of 
` 7.07 crore was prepared by I&WD (September 2023). 
Joint physical inspection of selected industries, in July 2023, revealed that 
CETP was not installed at the Jalan Industrial Complex, and the industrial 
effluent was drained through Barjora Khal (Sarenga Khal). Regular water 
quality analysis for the Barjora Khal was not being done by WBPCB and 
thus, compliance with environmental standards could not be ensured as 
discussed in Paragraph no. 3.4.1.3(i).
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that majority of the action points 
involving various stakeholders, had been successfully implemented by WBPCB 
and overall environmental quality of these areas has improved.
However, the Department did not provide any supportive documents regarding 
improvement of environmental quality and implementation of the Action Plan. 
5.2.6 Water Pollution of Kana Damodar River 
The NGT’s Principal Bench, New Delhi , in OA 735/2022, while hearing a 
petition over pollution of water in Rajapur Canal, Janai basin canal which 
ultimately pollutes Kana Damodar River (a tributary of River Hooghly), ordered 
(January 2023) the constitution of a Joint Committee comprising State PCB, 
District Magistrate, Howrah and CPCB who shall inspect the site and submit its 
report along with observation and recommendations for remedial action, within 
two months. The committee submitted its report to NGT in August 2023. The 
observations of the Committee inter-alia included the following:
	•  The water samples collected from different places during the inspection 
did not comply with the bathing standards prescribed by the CPCB.
	•  At the point of collection of water samples from Janai basin canal, the 
water quality was observed to be exceptionally poor with no DO, a high 
BOD (92.5 mg/l) and very high level of TC (2.3 lakh MPN/100 ml) level. 
Consequently, four dyeing/colouring units 113 were identified by WBPCB in 
the Kalachara area of Hooghly districts as being responsible for polluting the 
canals. Three out of four industries were inspected (November 2023) jointly by 
Audit with officials of WBPCB and it was observed that these industries were 
not complying with environmental norms. Despite these violations, WBPCB 
did not take adequate steps to control untreated discharge into water 
bodies even though the industries were continuously violating environment 
norms during 2018-23. Joint site inspection of the canal showed coloured 
discharge from the industries into Janai Canal (Figure 5.6).
113 (i) M/s Paul fabrics, (ii) M/s Kohinoor Sarees Pvt Ltd., (iii) M/s Uday Industries Ltd., (iv) 
M/s Sarat Industries.

76
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Figure 5.6:Janai canal in front of the above industries
Table 5.6: The lapses of the units and action taken by WBPCB during 
2018-23 and post NGT order in May 2023114115
Sl 
No. Industry Inspection and Test 
samples
Action taken by 
WBPCB
Audit observation 
(Joint Physical 
verifications)
1 M/s Paul 
fabrics
WBPCB inspected the 
unit six114 times during 
2018-23 against the 
stipulated eight times.
Four water quality 
test reports were made 
available, and it was 
observed that on all 
the four occasions 115 
the effluent was non-
compliant with the 
discharge standards.
Show Cause 
Notice was issued 
in November 
2018. A Closure 
order was issued 
(May 2023) in 
consequence to the 
NGT case for non-
compliance.
• ETP was not working 
properly and was in 
poor condition.
• Stagnant effluent 
was found outside 
the boundary.
• Effluent was being 
discharged into 
drains bypassing the 
sand filter.
• The suspension of 
closure order was 
affected (August 
2023) without 
ensuring compliance 
status of the unit.
114 07.03.2019, 03.06.2019, 14.06.2022, 28.07.2022, 13.04.2023 and 23.06.2023.
115 28.9.2018 (TSS-3040.00 mg/l, COD-1619.00 mg/l, BOD-300.00 mg/l), 03.06.2019 (BOD-
214.83 mg/l, COD-635.67 mg/l, O&G-1.90 mg/l, Phenols-1.16 mg/l, TSS-112.00 mg/l), 
14.07.2022 (BOD-106.90 mg/l, SAR-334.68, TDS-9,706.00 mg/l &TSS-472.00 mg/l) and 
28.07.2022 (BOD-66.70 mg/l, SAR-491.71, TDS-9,816.00 mg/l).

Chapter - V
77
Sl 
No. Industry Inspection and Test 
samples
Action taken by 
WBPCB
Audit observation 
(Joint Physical 
verifications)
2 M/s Kohinoor 
Sarees
WBPCB inspected the 
unit six116 times during 
2018-23, against the 
stipulated eight times.
Three117 test results of 
the effluent were made 
available, all of which 
were non-compliant.
Show cause notice 
was issued on 
24 May 2022 by 
WBPCB. 
A Closure order 
was issued on 18 
May 2023 to the 
unit which was 
suspended (04 
August 2023) after 
levying a penalty 
of ` 50,000 and 
enforcing a bank 
guarantee of ` 2.00 
lakh.
• The ETP was not 
running at the time 
of inspection. 
• The drain in front 
of the main gate of 
the unit was found 
to contain coloured 
liquid waste.
• The suspension 
of closure order 
was done without 
ensuring compliance 
with discharge 
norms.
3 M/s Sarat 
Industries
WBPCB conducted 
four inspections 118 
during 2018-23 
against the stipulated 
eight times.
The unit was non-
compliant in three 119 
test cases.
Closure order for 
Sarat industries 
was issued on 07 
February 2020 by 
WBPCB due to 
non-compliance 
which was 
suspended in 
March 2020 by 
WBPCB.
• It was observed that 
no inspections were 
done during 2020-22 
till January 2023.
• A show-cause notice 
was issued on 31 
March 2023, for 
non-compliance to 
environmental norms 
and unit was asked to 
upgrade the ETP.

CHAPTER - VI
Ground Water Quality 
Management

79
Chapter VI
Ground Water Quality Management
6.1 Introduction
According to the State Environment Plan (SEP) 2021, despite availability of 
adequate groundwater resources, the State is burdened with issues such as  
(i) Water Scarcity in hard rock areas (ii) Intensive ground water extraction in 
alluvial areas (iii) Quality issues such as infestation of arsenic, fluoride and 
salinity etc.
According to the data120 of Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) of 2022, total 
annual ground water recharge of the State was assessed as 23.61 Billion Cubic 
Meter (BCM), and the annual extractable ground water resources at 21.42 BCM. 
The annual ground water extraction was 10.07 BCM i.e. 47.01 per cent  of 
extractable ground water.  
This chapter deals with the steps taken by the State Government in addressing 
quantitative and qualitative issues related to ground water resources and its 
impact on human health and environment.
6.2 Status of ground water abstraction
The SEP, 2021 stipulated that there was a need to review and strengthen the 
existing system of ground water extraction in the State. The West Bengal 
Groundwater Resources (Management, Control and Regulation) Act, 2005 
covers extraction and sustainable use of groundwater.  As per the Act, all 
groundwater extraction must be strictly regulated and limited to the shallow 
aquifer level, so that it can be easily recharged through rainwater.
The Report 121 of the CGWB covering 345 blocks/Assessment Units (AU) 
showed that during 2020 to 2022, the number of blocks categorized as critical122 
from the point of view of the rate of ground water extraction had increased from 
One block to 22 blocks.  The blocks with high saline water had also increased 
from zero to 60. Ground water extraction had also increased from 44.60 to 
47.01 per cent of annual ground water recharge (23.61 BCM) during this period 
as depicted in Charts 6.1 and 6.2.
120 Dynamic Ground Water Resources of India 2022.
121 The dynamic ground water resource assessment (in 2022).
122 The rate of ground water extraction exceeds annual rate of recharge.

80
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Chart 6.1: Categorisation of assessment units/blocks in terms 
of quality and stage of extraction
268
191
76 1 0 0
345
232
31 22 0 60
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Total
Assessment
Units
Safe Semi Critical Critical Over
Exploited
Saline
NO. OF ASSESSMENT UNITS
CATEGORISATION    OF     ASSESSMENT   UNITS 
Ground Water Resource Assessment
Categorisation
2020 2022
Chart 6.2: Status of Ground Water Extraction
29.33 26.56
11.84
44.60
23.60 21.42
10.07
47.01
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Total Annual GWR 
(BCM)
Annual Extractable 
GWR (BCM)
Annual GW Extraction 
(BCM)
Status of GW Extraction
 
(%)
QUANTITY (IN BCM)
Ground Water Resource  Asse ssm ent Categor isation
2020 2022
The steady decline in water level and gradual transformation of safe and semi 
critical blocks into critical blocks during 2020-22 indicated that there was a 
sharp decline in ground water level. Audit further observed the following:
	•  The CTO issued by WBPCB requires an industrial unit to regularly submit 
a ‘Returns of Water Consumption’  to WBPCB. However, WBPCB did 
not ensure compliance of this condition before renewal of CTOs to all  
65 selected industrial units during the Audit period.
	•  Under the West Bengal Ground Water Resources (Management, Control 
and Regulation) Rules 2006, the State Water Investigation Directorate 
is responsible for issuing permits for ground water extraction . Out of 
51 sampled SPIs, 32 industries did not have a valid NOC from State 
Water Investigation Directorate (SWID) for extraction of ground water. 
Further, as flow meters were not installed at ground water intake points 
for recording ground water extraction, the actual extraction of ground 

Chapter - VI
81
water by industries could not be assessed by Audit in all the test checked 
51 SPIs. 
	•  Analysis of groundwater monitoring data of CGWB for the period 
(2000-20) from the existing 1500 hydrograph stations in the State also 
showed significant fall in water level/piezometric level to the order of  
> 20 cm/year in eleven123 districts. These districts represented areas where 
intensive groundwater withdrawal had taken place to meet the growing demand 
for water due to rapid urbanisation, agricultural and industrial activities.
Joint inspection of industries revealed that industrial use of ground water was not 
effectively monitored by WBPCB and SWID as NOC for extraction of ground 
water, installation of flow meter etc., were not ensured. Thus, despite the alarming 
situation regarding depletion of ground water levels in the State, control 
mechanism for ensuring regulated ground water extraction and its use was 
not effectively invoked by strictly adhering to the provisions of the West Bengal 
Ground Water Resources (Management, Control and Regulation) Rules 2006. 
Recommendation 11:
Authorisation for groundwater abstraction should be strictly regulated and 
monitored through consent administration of WBPCB.
6.3 Qualitative aspects of ground water 
Water quality refers to physical, chemical, biological and radiological 
characteristics of water. Protection of groundwater against geogenic and 
anthropogenic reasons are of foremost importance for groundwater dependent 
ecology and safeguarding human health. Out of 1.74 crore households in the 
State (as of December 2023), only 0.72 crore ( i.e. 41 per cent) were provided 
with tap connection for supply of safe drinking water. Measures taken to address 
the issues related to qualitative aspects of groundwater are discussed below:
6.3.1 Arsenic contamination
Arsenic is a significant contaminant in terms of its toxic nature with exceedingly 
diverse manifestations of poisoning. As per Bureau of Indian Standard (BIS) 
2012 (IS 10500: 2012), the acceptable limit of Arsenic is 0.01 mg/l. The State 
had identified 83 blocks in 8 districts 124 with about 109.26 lakh population as 
arsenic affected. 
6.3.1.1 Status of Arsenic contamination in the sampled districts
In respect of two sampled districts viz. Nadia and North 24 Parganas , Audit 
observed that 38 out of a total 39 blocks (97.5 per cent) were arsenic affected. 
The ground water quality test reports of these two districts for the period  
2018-23 revealed that 34 per cent  of the total samples 125 including samples 
from Piped Water Supply Schemes (PWSS) were non-compliant in terms of the 
acceptable limit for arsenic. Further in respect of PWSS samples, the extent of 
arsenic contamination was around 51 per cent as detailed in the Table 6.1.
123 Birbhum, Murshidabad, Purba Bardhaman, Nadia, Howrah, Hooghly, North and South  
24 Parganas, Purba and Paschim Medinipur and Kolkata Metropolitan district.
124 Purba Bardhaman, Nadia, Murshidabad, Malda, North 24 Parganas, South 24 Parganas, 
Hooghly and Howrah.
125 Hand pumps, dug wells, community tanks, PWSS etc.

82
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Table 6.1: Statement of non-compliance of samples 
from drinking water sources
District
Extent of arsenic contamination 
(for all source)
Extent of Arsenic 
contamination in PWSS
Total 
samples
Compliant 
samples
Non-compliant 
samples
Total 
samples
Compliant 
samples
Non-compliant 
samples
North 24 
Parganas
1,09,511 69,277 
(63 per cent)
40,234 
(37 per cent)
3,545 2,210 
(62 per cent)
1,335 
(38 per cent)
Nadia 76,095 52,900 
(70 per cent)
23,195  
(30 per cent)
1,813 434 
(24 per cent)
1,379  
(76 per cent)
Total 1,85,606 1,22,177 
(66 per cent)
63,429   
(34 per cent)
5,358 2,644 
(49 per cent)
2,714  
(51 per cent)
It is significant to note that the percentage of non compliant samples was higher 
in piped water supply schemes. 
6.3.1.2 Remedial measures for Arsenic contamination 
Under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM)  erstwhile “National Rural Drinking Water 
Programme (NRDWP)”, of Government of India, a goal was set to provide 
100 per cent tap connection to all rural households by March 2024, in a mission 
mode, including arsenic affected villages.
Status of Functional Household Tap Connection (FHTC) under the Piped 
Water Supply Schemes (PWSS) of PHED of Government of West Bengal in 
arsenic affected blocks of the sampled districts as of March 2023 is detailed in  
Chart 6.3.
Chart 6.3: Arsenic affected blocks.
Total population in affected blocks
Total FHTC Surface water
Total FHTC Ground water based PWSS WITH AIRP
Total FHTC
Total FHTC Ground water
NO. OF FHTC
10007665
NORTH 24 PARGANAS NADIA TOTAL
6706432
3479034
3227398
461899
5167600
5406036
2318190
3087846
1195644
15175265
12112468
579724
6315244
1657543
The above chart showed that a population of 1.21 crore (80 per cent ) had 
so far been provided with FHTCs under PWSS based on ground water and 
surface water sources. Out of this, only 57.97 lakh (48 per cent) were provided 
with surface water FHTCs and the remaining 63.15 lakh with ground water 
FHTCs.

Chapter - VI
83
Total  Population in affected 
blocks- 1.52 Crore  
Population provided with 
FHTC - 1.21 crore 
Population provided with 
ground water FHTC - 0.63 
Crore 
Population  provided with 
AIRP - 0.17 Crore 
Population not  provided 
with AIRP - 0. 46 Crore 
Population provided with 
surface water FHTC - 0.58 
Crore 
Population not provided 
with FHTC - 0.31 crore 
From the above chart it may be observed that out of a population of  
63.15 lakhs covered under ground water based FHTC, 46 lakh i.e. 73 per cent 
were not provided with Arsenic Iron Removal Plants (AIRP) under PWSS, 
although the areas were arsenic affected.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that under Jal Jeevan Mission 
action was being taken to cover all affected areas with safe water supply by 
December 2024. 
However, the target of providing safe drinking water in the areas was not 
achieved till date due to the poor quality of water supplied.
6.3.1.3 Health impact
According to the data furnished by the West Bengal Health and Family Welfare 
(WBH&FW) Department, the total number of people affected due to Arsenic 
was 1,032 during the period 2018 to 2022 as detailed in Chart 6.4.
Chart 6.4: Cases of Arsenicosis
125 138
71
359 339
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
No. of cases
Years
Cases of Arsenicosis 
The number of Arsenicosis cases (medical condition like skin lesions/
cardiovascular diseases/cancer etc.) detected in eight arsenic affected districts 
during 2018-19 was 125 and rose to 359 in 2021-22 and marginally decreased 
to 339 in 2022-23.

84
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
6.3.2 Fluoride contamination 
While fluoride is important for bone and teeth development, intake of high 
fluoride content for long durations can result in dental, skeletal and non-skeletal 
fluorosis. The desirable limit for fluoride in drinking water in India is 1.0 mg/l, 
although the acceptable limit set by WHO guidelines is 1.5 mg/l. 
6.3.2.1 Status of contamination
In West Bengal, 225 villages in 43 blocks of seven districts, are identified 
as endemic for fluorosis and people in this region are at risk of fluoride 
contamination. A total population of 6.15 lakh was estimated to be affected by 
fluoride contamination in these areas. 
Out of 43 blocks affected by fluorosis 126, two sampled districts i.e. South 
24 Parganas  and Birbhum had eight blocks with fluoride concentration  
above 1.5 mg/l. 
Four blocks of Birbhum district viz. Khayrasole, Nalhati-I, Rampurhat-I, and 
Suri-II were worst affected where fluoride concentration ranged between 2.28 to 
7.8 mg/l. Of the 16,351 samples tested by PHED, during 2018-23, 340 samples 
had presence of fluoride beyond the permissible limit. 
6.3.2.2 Status of mitigation measures in Birbhum District
According to the mandate of JJM, the PHED was committed to provide water 
of specified quality and quantity to every rural household through piped water 
supply by March 2024. However, as of December 2023 under the PWSS, only 
1.48 lakh, out of 4.61 lakh fluoride affected households of Birbhum district 
were provided with FHTC i.e. only 32 per cent of households are getting treated 
piped water. 
Further, according to the recommendations (September 2022) of the Fluoride 
Task Force (FTF) 127, pending completion of providing treated piped water to 
68 per cent of the households, the Department would take interim measures for 
fluoride mitigation for the households. 
Audit observed that as an interim measure, 26 Community Water Purification 
Plants (CWPP)128 were installed in 10 blocks between January and December 
2022, at a total cost of ` 5.17 crore by PHED. Out of these 26 CWPP, only seven 
were installed in three129 out of the four worst affected blocks where 60 per cent 
of cases were observed. Audit further observed that one of the worst affected 
blocks (Suri-II) had not been provided with CWPP. 
Thus, due to improper planning in installation of CWPP, the worst fluoride 
affected places remained vulnerable.
126 Discolouration of teeth/increase in bone mass/limitation of joint movement.
127 Fluoride Task Force was constituted by Govt of W.B. to guide PHED to mitigate the 
contamination of fluoride.
128 A facility to treat, store and distribute treated water to a small community.
129 Khayrasole, Nalhati-I, Rampurhat-I.

Chapter - VI
85
Chart 6.5: Community Water Purification Plant installed 
in fluoride affected blocks. 
CWPP installed in 
worst affected 
Areas- 7CWPP
installed in 
other than 
worst affected 
areas-19
No. of CWPP installed 
CWPP installed in worst affected areas
CWPP installed in other than worst affected area
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that all areas affected by poor 
water quality would be covered with PWSS to provide safe drinking water by 
December 2024 under JJM.
6.3.2.3 Health Impact
As per data provided by Health and Family Welfare Department, GoWB,  
17,921 fluoride affected cases were observed in the State during 2018-23 as 
shown in Chart 6.6. 
Chart 6.6: Fluoride affected cases
3190
2521 2466
3506
6238
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
No. of cases
Years
Fluoride affected cases 
(Source: Records of Health and Family Welfare Department, GoWB)
Despite interim mitigation measures taken by the State, the number of fluoride 
affected cases continued to rise, during 2018-23 and thus, remained an area of 
concern.
Recommendation 12:
PHED should implement schemes in a time bound manner to reduce cases 
of arsenic and fluoride contamination and provide safe and clean drinking 
water to the entire affected population.
CWPP installed 
in other than 
worst affected 
areas-19

86
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
6.3.3 Bacteriological Pollution
Bacteriological contamination of ground water may cause various water-borne 
diseases such as diarrhoea, typhoid, fever, dysentery, cholera, hepatitis etc. State 
Environment Plan 2021, alluded to instances of leakages in pipes used for water 
supply and faecal contamination from sewer drains. Audit observed that records 
were not maintained by PHED to register complaints received regarding such 
contamination. Further, audit also observed that:
	•  As per Department of Health and Family Welfare, GoWB, the number of 
bacteriological contaminated habitations in the State had increased from 
3,928 in 2017-18 to 4,812 in 2020-21. 
	•  The bacteriological test reports of the PWSS water in four sampled 
districts showed the presence of Total Coliform (660 cases out of total 
6,096 samples tested) and E. coli (206 cases out of total 6,009  samples 
tested).
	•  As per State Environment Plan 2021 of WBPCB, 15 blocks of Purulia 
district were found to be contaminated. The percentage of samples found 
to be contaminated varied between 10 per cent and 58 per cent, indicating 
the pervasiveness of the problem in Purulia.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that different remedial steps such 
as increase in testing, chlorination in PWSS, dissemination of water quality 
reports etc., were being taken. It also added that real time monitoring of chlorine 
dozing and phasing out of dug wells was under process.  
However, the remedial actions taken viz. repairing leakages in water supply 
pipes, disinfection with chlorination etc., were sub-optimal, and 1,85,330 cases 
of bacteriological contamination were recorded during 2018-23. Against it, 
only in respect of 30,308 cases (16 per cent) were remedial measures, such as 
disinfection followed by awareness generation, taken, as seen from the records 
of PHED (March 2023).
6.3.3.1  Health impact of Bacteriological contamination of ground water
According to the data furnished by the West Bengal Health and Family Welfare 
Department for the period 2018 to 2022, 92.81 lakh people were affected by 
Diarrhoea, Enteric Fever, Vibrio cholera, of which 137 were reported to have 
died during the period.
Thus, the measures taken by PHED for dealing with bacteriological contamination 
of ground water were not able to adequately address prevention of water borne/
water related diseases in the State.
6.3.4  Absence of Solid Waste Treatment leading to ground water 
contamination
Improper handling of solid waste poses potential problem to human health. 
Population living close to waste dumps and those, whose water supply has 
become contaminated either due to waste dumping or leaching from landfill sites 
are more likely to be impacted. Uncollected solid waste also obstructs storm 
water runoff, resulting in the forming of stagnant water bodies that become 
breeding ground of diseases such as diarrhoea, cholera, malaria etc.

Chapter - VI
87
Solid Waste Management Rules 2016, of GoI came into force in April 2016. A 
time frame of two years was given as per the Rules for collection of segregated 
waste and setting up of solid waste processing facilities. However, it was noted 
that adequate infrastructure for implementation of these Rules had not been 
created till December 2023.
Further, audit observed the following.
	•  Out of 128 ULBs in the State, 79 did not have solid waste processing 
facilities, and the waste got disposed at dumping grounds. As per Annual 
Report of WBPCB for the year 2022-23 only 23 per cent of waste generated 
was processed as of March 2023.
	•  The unprocessed fresh waste was gradually getting converted into 
legacy waste and adding to dumpsites. As of August 2023, there were  
123 dumpsites in the State having a legacy waste of 111.44 lakh MT, 
of which only 49.68 lakh MT of legacy waste was processed leaving a 
balance of 61.76 lakh MT.
	•  Out of the 123 dumpsites, only two 130 had leachate treatment facilities 131 
and two132 had geo-membrane to arrest leaching. In the absence of these 
treatment facilities, the possibility of water contamination from dumpsites 
could not be ruled out.
Figure 6.1: Leachate coming out of Dhapa dumping yard of KMC
130 Kolkata (Dhapa) and Baidyabati (RWMC).
131 Leachate treatment facilities are designed to treat the liquid that percolates through waste 
materials in landfills, reducing its environmental impact by removing pollutants like organic 
matter, ammonia and suspended solids.
132 Rajpur-Sonarpur, Bhatpara

88
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
	•  Further, as per RRC, town-wise Solid Waste status (June 2023), 39 towns 
along with the seven selected PRS had generated 7,881 TPD solid waste 
out of which only 1,526.1 TPD was processed. Due to lack of adequate 
fresh waste processing facility, Audit observed that 6,354.9 TPD of solid 
waste was disposed of unscientifically in 39 towns.
Thus, inadequate management of solid waste could lead to problems that impair 
human and animal health, and ultimately result in economic, environmental and 
biological losses.
Recommendation 13:
UD&MA Department should take measures for effective implementation of 
SWM Rules, 2016 and set up adequate waste processing facilities to prevent 
water contamination due to leaching.

CHAPTER - VII
Monitoring of Water 
Quality

89
Chapter VII
Monitoring of Water Quality
7.1 Introduction
Monitoring of water bodies helps in identifying existing and emerging water 
quality problems, and in gathering information to design remedial programmes 
for implementing effective pollution control measures, and to ascertain extent 
of compliance with environmental norms.
The responsibility of monitoring water quality of surface water, including 
sewage and effluents, and groundwater in the State rests with following entities 
as shown in Chart 7.1 below:
Chart 7.1:  Responsibility of monitoring water quality in the State.
Note: RRC has been constituted for the preparation of Action Plans for effective abatement of 
pollution, rejuvenation, protection and management of each of the identified PRS. 
This chapter deals with the adequacy of the water quality monitoring system in 
the State with respect to surface and ground water, and achievements made with 
regard to SDGs therein.

90
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
7.2 Water Quality Monitoring
Under the National Water Monitoring Programme (NWMP-1978), WBPCB 
monitors surface and ground water quality through 140 133 monitoring stations 
of West Bengal. This monitoring is done as per the Guidelines on Water 
Quality Monitoring, 2017, issued by CPCB. In this context, Audit observed the 
following:
7.2.1 Classification of Water Quality Monitoring Stations 
Guidelines on Water Quality Monitoring, 2017, delineated four different types 
of stations for surface water monitoring viz. (i) Baseline, (ii) Flux/Impact,  
(iii) Hot Spot and (iv) Trend stations.  
For Ground Water, all monitoring stations were to be classified as Baseline 
stations and could be re-classified as Trend or Hot spot stations, wherever there 
is a perceived problem. 
The frequency of sampling of surface and ground water and the parameters of 
analysis were prescribed, based on the type of monitoring stations as detailed 
in Appendix-2.
Audit observed that the monitoring stations for surface water were not 
differentiated by WBPCB as prescribed in the Guidelines. In absence of 
classification of monitoring stations, the adequacy of the tests conducted could 
not be ascertained by Audit. This also impacted the main objectives of water 
quality monitoring programmes which inter alia included rational planning 
of pollution control strategies, identification of the nature and magnitude of 
pollutants and evaluation of the effectiveness of pollution control efforts already 
in existence.
Further it was also noticed that while the Ganga River water was monitored 
twice a month as per the above-mentioned Guidelines, the other rivers and lakes 
were monitored only once in a month, though these rivers were more polluted 
than the Ganga.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that it would select hotspots on 
different rivers of West Bengal.
The Guidelines on Water Quality Monitoring, were issued by CPCB in 2017, 
however classification of monitoring stations was not done till March 2024, 
impacting efficacy of the monitoring process.
7.2.2 Adequacy of Water Quality Monitoring Stations 
According to CPCB’s guidelines for National Water Monitoring Programme 
(NWMP), 2019, monitoring stations at both upstream and downstream 
of a river need to be established by the State PCBs. CPCB also proposed  
(February 2019) that State PCBs augment the monitoring networks. 
133 72 stations are Surface water monitoring stations (55 River stations, 14 Ponds/Lakes stations, 
two Canal stations and one marine water) and 68 are Ground water monitoring stations.

Chapter - VII
91
Out of the 17 PRS, Audit observed that there was only one monitoring station 
each against the stipulated two (upstream and downstream) for nine PRS134 .
Further, the CPCB guidelines delineated that every district needs to have at least 
two groundwater locations for testing and monitoring. 
However, Audit observed that 
the districts of Jalpaiguri, 
Alipurduar, Jhargram, had not 
identified ground water testing 
locations while the districts 
of Malda, Murshidabad, 
Coochbehar had only one 
location each instead of the 
required two.
Thus, the monitoring of 
ground water quality was 
not satisfactory as the data 
generated was not adequately 
representative, being based on 
a limited number of testing 
locations. 
Further, WBPCB had not taken 
any initiatives to augment 
the existing monitoring 
stations. Therefore, the water 
quality assessment would not 
reflect the actual extent of 
pollution due to geogenic and 
anthropogenic activities.
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that it would consider establishment 
of more monitoring stations. 
The CPCB’s guidelines for augmentation of monitoring network had come 
into existence in 2019, however they had not been effectively implemented till 
March 2024 by the State.
7.2.3 Monitoring of ground water at dumping sites 
According to Schedule-I of Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 of GoI, the 
ground water quality within 50 meters of the periphery of a landfill site shall 
be periodically monitored by State PCB covering different seasons in a year to 
ensure that the ground water is not contaminated. 
However, out of 123 landfill/dumpsites in the State, WBPCB had only one 
ground water monitoring station at one dumpsite (at Dhapa, Kolkata)  
134 Jalangi, Barakar, Dwarkeshwar, Mayurakshi, Mathabhanaga, Kaljani, Karola, Silabati and 
Kansi.
JALPAIGURI ALIPURDUAR
COOCH BIHAR
MALDA
JHARGRAM
MURSHIDABAD
Figure 7.1: Ground water quality 
monitoring stations

92
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
In the absence of adequate number of ground water quality monitoring stations 
around the periphery of dumpsites, the extent of ground water contamination 
due to leaching could not be assessed by Audit. 
Recommendation 14:
WBPCB should establish a representative number of stations/locations for 
water quality monitoring, particularly in the identified hot spots.
7.3 Inspection of Industries 
In compliance with the orders of NGT dated 28 August 2019, CPCB carried 
out a Performance Review of the WBPCB and observed (2019-20) that there 
were 3,900 red category industries, 12,185 orange and 19,351 green category 
industries as depicted in Chart 7.2.
Chart 7.2: Category of industries registered with WBPCB
Green 19,351, 
55%
Orange 12,185, 
34%
Red 3,900, 11%
Audit observed that WBPCB did not inspect these industries at scheduled 
intervals due to inadequate number of regional offices, lack of environmental 
laboratories as well as technical manpower during 2018-23, as discussed below:
7.3.1 Monitoring through Regional offices 
WBPCB operated through 11 Regional Offices (RO) covering 23 districts of 
West Bengal. Audit observed that RO Malda and Siliguri of WBPCB, controlled 
four districts each while Durgapur and Haldia ROs controlled three districts 
each. Thus, each of the RO had to cover vast areas which impaired adequate 
monitoring. 
WBPCB, in its 170th Board meeting highlighted (September 2019) the need for 
expansion of RO network and proposed the setting up of new regional offices in 
different districts. However, work of setting up of proposed ROs, to strengthen 
the monitoring infrastructure, was not taken up till date (December 2023). 
7.3.2 Availability of technical manpower
CPCB in its Report 135 recommended (September 2020) strengthening of 
manpower to ensure effective performance of WBPCB.
135 Performance Audit of SPCBs placed before NGT in OA-95 of 2018.

Chapter - VII
93
The sanctioned strength and men-in position (MIP) of WBPCB for the period 
2018-23, are detailed in Chart 7.3:
Chart 7.3: Details of sanctioned strength and MIP in respect of WBPCB
Men-in-position
Men-in-position
(Source: Annual Reports and website of WBPCB)
Thus, there were 60 per cent vacancies  in manpower during 2018-23. The 
shortage of manpower had consequential effect on the discharge of mandatory 
functions especially monitoring, as discussed below:
Data related to inspections of industries revealed that during 2018-23, there 
was a significant shortfall in the number of WBPCB inspections as detailed in 
Paragraph 5.2.1 (Chart 5.5) and Table 5.3. 
Thus, shortage of staff had an adverse effect on WBPCB’s mandatory 
functions of conducting industrial inspections at prescribed intervals, 
and testing of industrial effluent/emission to ensure compliance with 
environmental norms. 
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that considering the increase in 
responsibilities in many new emerging areas, the State Board recently reviewed 
the manpower requirement and accordingly sent a proposal to the State 
Government for effectively carrying out its mandated activities.
7.3.3 Environmental Laboratories
WBPCB had a Central Laboratory at its Head Office in Kolkata and five 136 
Regional Laboratories which catered to the 23 districts of the State. 
Ministry of Environment Forest & Climate Change (MoEF&CC) directed 
(August 2011) that all SPCB Laboratories and/Central Laboratories must acquire 
accreditation137 under the Environment (Protection) Act (EPA), 1986, along 
with Occupational Health and Safety Management System-18001 (OHSMS) 
Certification before getting recognised under the Environment (Protection) 
Act,1986. Furter, all the existing recognised laboratories needed to acquire 
accreditations within a period of one year from the date of issue of the above 
MoEF&CC direction.
136 Barrackpore, Hooghly, Durgapur, Haldia and Siliguri. 
137  ISO-17025 (NABL Accreditation) or ISO-9001.

94
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Audit observed that only the Central Laboratory at Kolkata received all the 
three required certifications while the Regional Laboratories were yet to obtain 
these accreditations, as detailed in Table 7.1.
Table 7.1: Status of accreditation of WBPCB’s 
laboratory as of March 2024
Requirement NABL 
Accreditation
OHSMS 
accreditation EPA
Central Lab   
Hooghly Lab   
Barrackpore Lab   
Haldia Lab   
Siliguri Lab   
Durgapur Lab   
(Source: Records of WBPCB)
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that WBPCB was in the process 
of obtaining the required accreditation for all its Laboratories.
In the absence of accreditations, audit could not derive an assurance on the 
quality of testing by these Laboratories.
7.3.3.1  Strengthening of laboratories under Namami Gange  
Programme
National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) granted (June 2018) administrative 
approval and expenditure sanction of ` 12.93 crore for the project on 
“Strengthening of laboratories under Namami Gange Programme”.
Under the above project, the existing laboratories at Kolkata, Barrackpore 
and Malda/ Berhampur were proposed to be strengthened by the West Bengal 
State Level Program Management Group (WBSPMG) and completed within 
nine months from the date of sanction of the project. All laboratories to be 
strengthened under this project were to perform as Ganga monitoring Centres 
and would further strengthen the work of NMCG. A fund of ` 12.93 crore was 
placed with WBSPMG by NMCG. The executing agency for the project was 
the WBPCB. Audit observed that as of March 2023, an expenditure of only  
` 4.70 crore had been incurred by WBPCB.  The reasons for non-completion of 
the project, even after a lapse of more than four years were not made available 
to Audit.
Further, all the sanctioned posts for the project were not filled even after six 
years of the project being sanctioned. The details of sanctioned strength vis-a-vis 
person in position of the Laboratories under the project is shown in Table7.2.
Table 7.2: Men in Position vis a vis Sanctioned Strength at Kolkata, 
Barrackpore and Malda/ Berhampur Laboratories
Sl 
No. Designation Sanctioned 
Strength (SS) 
Person in Position 
(PIP) as on March 2023 
Vacancies
1. Junior/Senior Research Fellow 12 08 04
2. Jr. Lab Asstt. 09 09 00

Chapter - VII
95
Sl 
No. Designation Sanctioned 
Strength (SS) 
Person in Position 
(PIP) as on March 2023 
Vacancies
3. Attendant 09 05 04
5. Field Attendant 06 04 02
6. MTS 03 02 01
Total 39 28 11
(Source: Records of WBPCB)
Thus, WBPCB failed to achieve the NMCG objective of putting in place a 
strengthened water quality monitoring mechanism for the river Ganga as 
envisaged.
Recommendations:
15. Government should implement the proposal of the State Board on 
engagement of manpower and strengthen the water quality monitoring 
mechanism for effectively carrying out its mandate.
16. WBPCB should develop and upgrade its laboratories and obtain NABL 
Accreditation, OH&SMS certification and EPA recognition by MoEF&CC 
to enhance assurance level.
7.4 Monitoring of STPs
CPCB issued directions, under section 18(1) (b) of the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 to WBPCB in March 2017 to take up monitoring 
of STPs discharging into the river Ganga on a monthly basis and forward the 
reports to CPCB. 
Audit observed that WBPCB, however, monitors STPs discharging into Ganga 
once in three months as per its internal orders dated 14 January 2020. The status 
of WBPCB’s monitoring of STPs on the Ganga during the period 2018-23 is as 
detailed in Table 7.3.
Table 7.3: Monitoring of STPs by WBPCB
Year
No. of 
commissioned 
STPs in the 
State
Frequency of 
Monitoring 
required 
(Quarterly)
Frequency of 
monitoring 
actually done 
(Quarterly)
Percentage of 
monitoring
2018-19 33 396 12 3
2019-20 40 480 46 10
2020-21 41 164 41 25
2021-22 41 164 66 40
2022-23 41 164 76 46
(Source: Inspections and water quality Monitoring reports of WBPCB)
From the above table, it can be seen that during 2018-23, the monitoring 
frequency of STPs by WBPCB ranged between 03 per cent and 46 per cent 
only. Further, from the test reports of WBPCB it was noticed through test check 
of records that STPs were non-compliant with discharge standards for FC and 
BOD ranging between 83 per cent to 100 per cent and 52 per cent to 71 per cent 
respectively. Audit, however, observed that the WBPCB did not act against the 
non-compliant STPs as discussed in Chapter III.

96
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
7.4.1 Non-operational STPs
CPCB issued directions (June 2019), under Section 18(1)(b) of the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, to WBPCB regarding non-
operational STPs in West Bengal and stated that:
 (a) WBPCB shall impose environmental compensation on the operators for 
not operating STPs.
 (b) WBPCB shall direct the concerned authorities to prepare and submit time 
bound action plans for up-gradation and rehabilitation of non-operational 
STPs. 
According to CPCB’s status report for West Bengal STPs as of March 2023, 
there were 11 non-operational STPs out of a total of 41 on the river Ganga. 
Audit observed that due to the non-operation of STPs, the management of 
municipal sewage, as conceived in related action plans, could not be effectively 
undertaken, and the river Ganga continued to receive untreated sewage.
7.5 Online Continuous Effluent Monitoring System (OCEMS)
Central Pollution Control Board in February 2014 issued instructions to State 
Pollution Control Boards and Pollution Control Committees to direct industries, 
Common Effluent Treatment Plants (CETPs) and STPs etc., to install Online 
Continuous Emission Monitoring System (OCEMS), developed by CPCB, to 
help track the discharges of pollutants units.
Audit observed that only 16 industrial units had OCEMS out of 65 sampled 
industries. 
CPCB, further, instructed (June 2019) WBPCB to direct all concerned local 
bodies/authorities operating STPs to install OCEMS at the outlet of STPs to 
monitor performance against established parameters and provide connectivity 
to CPCB and WBPCB servers for continuous monitoring within three months.
Audit observed that out of the sampled 34 STPs being operated by local bodies/
authorities, none had installed the OCEMS till December 2023.
Thus, the real time tracking of discharge of pollutants could not be effectively 
implemented even after more than four years of CPCB’s instruction.
Recommendation 17:
WBPCB should monitor all the STPs regularly and take action to ensure 
that the STPs were working and were complying with the discharge 
standards. It should also ensure installation of OCEMS for STPs/ETPs 
and use the data for effective surveillance and monitoring.
7.6  Utilisation of funds under Water Quality Monitoring & 
Surveillance
Para 10.2 of the Operational Guidelines (December 2019) of National Jal Jeevan 
Mission (JJM), Government of India, stipulated that up to two per cent of the 
allocation under JJM to States could be utilized for carrying out Water Quality 
Monitoring and Surveillance (WQM&S) activities. The Guidelines also provided 
that the fund could be utilized for activities like setting up of laboratories, 

Chapter - VII
97
upgrading of existing laboratories which inter alia  included procurement of 
equipment, instruments, chemicals/ reagents, glassware, consumables, etc.
Audit observed that PHE Department, Government of West Bengal, during the 
period 2019-20 to 2022-23, could utilise only 26 per cent of the fund earmarked 
for WQM&S activities, and an aggregate fund of ` 389.85 crore remained 
unutilised, as shown in the Table 7.4.
Table.7.4: Allotment and utilisation of funds for WQM&S under JJM 
(` in Crore)
Year
Total allotted 
fund under 
JJM (Centre& 
State)
Earmarked 
WQM&S fund 
(2 per cent of the 
total allotted fund)
Total expenditure 
incurred in 
WQM&S activities 
(Centre & State)
Un-utilised 
fund under 
WQM&S 
activities
2019-20 1,658.88 33.18 11.25 21.93
2020-21 2,690.30 53.80 37.00 16.80
2021-22 11,664.95 233.30 29.20 204.10
2022-23 10,300.42 206.00 58.98 147.02
Total 26,314.55 526.28 136.43 389.85
In reply, the Department stated (March 2024) that Water Quality Monitoring 
activities, within the fund ceiling of two per cent of the allotted fund under Jal 
Jeevan Mission, were carried out as per approved Annual Action Plan (AAP) 
for WQMS, and there was no scope to take up WQMS activity beyond the 
approved AAP. However only 26 per cent of earmarked fund for Water Quality 
Monitoring could be utilised.
7.7 Monitoring of Drains 
Due to rapid urbanisation, industrialisation and increase in anthropogenic 
activities in the past few decades, most of the canals have been converted to 
drains and are treated as mode of disposal of pollutants. Most of these drains 
are man-made and carry municipal, industrial and mixed waste in addition to 
natural storm water. To address this surface water pollution issue, it is a must to 
have accurate information available about the sources of pollution.
CPCB carried out the monitoring of 104 drains discharging into the River Ganga 
in West Bengal on a half yearly basis (Pre and Post Monsoon). In comparison, 
WBPCB monitors only 56 drains along the river Ganga on a quarterly basis. 
It was further seen that WBPCB and UD&MA in the matter of NGT case  
(OA No. 600/2018) mentioned (February 2022) that 402 drains had been 
identified as discharging into the Ganga in the State. 
Thus, WBPCB should have prepared an Action Plan to monitor all the identified 
drains instead of monitoring a limited number of discharge points.
Further, analysis of water quality test reports of WBPCB from January to  
March 2023 of these 56 drains being monitored by WBPCB showed that: 
	•  18 drains had Faecal Coliform in the range of 78,000 and  
7,90,00,000 (MPN/100ml) and rest of the 37 drains were not monitored  
for FC (Appendix-3).

98
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
	•  50 drains had BOD between 10.11 mg/l and 366.67 mg/l, and 45 drains 
had COD between 50.35 mg/l and 995.32 mg/l which was much higher 
than the permissible limit138 (Appendix-4).
7.8 Sustainable Development Goals
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development set at the Sustainable  
Development Summit held at United Nations Headquarters in September 2015, 
contained 17 Goals and 169 targets. The action 
for achievement of Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) started on 01 January 2016 
and these were expected to be achieved by 
31 December 2030. 
Of the 17 SDG goals, Goal 6- ‘Ensure 
availability and sustainable management of 
water and sanitation for all’ is relevant for 
the extant audit. 
According to the SDG index-2020 of NITI 
Aayog, as regards the performance of West 
Bengal against SDG 6 (Clean water and 
sanitation), it was observed that the score of the State declined to 81 from  
83 in 2019 139. The achievement of West Bengal against target specified under  
SDG 6-Clean Water and Sanitation is detailed in Table 7.5.
Table 7.5: Achievement of following targets under SDG 6
Targets Indicator Audit observations
6.1 6.1.1 Only 48.12 per cent  of households 
in the State of West Bengal were 
provided with tap connected drinking 
water against the national average of  
76.59 per cent as per data of Jal Jevan 
Mission.
To achieve universal 
and equitable access 
to safe and affordable 
drinking water for all by 
2030.
Proportion of population 
using safely managed 
drinking water services.
6.3 6.3.1 The gap in sewage treatment of about 
84 per cent  indicated that the State’s 
wastewater management, planning, and 
monitoring had not been effectively 
converged with the vision set in SDG 6. 
(Chart 4.1 under para no. 4.2)
Issues on treatment of industrial effluent 
were pointed out in paras 5.2.2, 5.2.3, 
5.2.4 and 5.2.6.
To improve water quality 
by reducing pollution, 
eliminating dumping 
and minimising release 
of hazardous chemicals 
and materials, halving 
the proportion of 
untreated wastewater 
and substantially 
increasing recycling and 
safe reuse globally, by 
2030.
Tracks the proportion 
of wastewater flows 
from households, 
services and industrial 
economic activities that 
are safely treated before 
it is discharged into the 
environment.
6.3.2 As discussed in Chapter IV and Chapter 
V of this Report, the sewage/effluent 
flowing into water bodies had pollution 
loads in excess of prescribed limits.
Track proportion of 
bodies of water with 
good ambient water 
quality.
138 Permissible limit for STP as per order of NGT dt 30.04.2019, pH-(5.5-9.0), BOD-10 mg/l, 
COD-50 mg/l, FC-100(MPN/100 ml).
139 No report of NITI Aayog since 2020 was available on records to assess the subsequent 
performance of the State against this SDG for the period covered under Audit.
Figure 7.2: SDG 6

Chapter - VII
99
Targets Indicator Audit observations
Further as pointed out in Chapter VI 
there was contamination of the ground 
water due to leaching and of the surface 
water due to unscientific waste dumping 
and faecal disposal.
Chapter VII highlights inadequate 
infrastructure and manpower to carry out 
monitoring as per prescribed schedule, 
which in turn impaired assessment 
of water quality and achievement 
of targeted goal of reducing water 
pollution.
6.4 6.4.1 The extent of re-use of treated 
wastewater (municipal and industrial) 
and abstraction of groundwater without 
authorization were pointed out in Para 
3.3.4 and 3.3.5 of Chapter III of this 
Report.
To substantially increase 
water use efficiency 
across all sectors and 
ensure sustainable 
withdrawals and supply 
of fresh water to address 
water scarcity and 
substantially reduce 
the number of people 
suffering from water 
scarcity.
Change in water use 
efficiency over time
6.4.2 The control and monitoring mechanism 
for ensuring regulated ground water 
extraction and its use was not effectively 
invoked, as detailed in para 6.2 of 
Chapter VI. 
Level of Water Stress: 
fresh water withdrawals 
as a proportion of 
available fresh water 
resources.
KOLKATA
The  
(MANISH KUMAR)
Principal Accountant General 
(Audit-II) West Bengal
Countersigned
NEW DELHI
The
(K. SANJAY MURTHY)
Comptroller and Auditor General of India


Appendices

101
APPENDIX
Appendix 1
(Paragraph: 5.2.1, Chart-5.5)
No. of inspections in 28 SPIs
Sl. 
No. Name of Industries Category 
Name of 
Regional 
Office
Industry 
Operational 
status
Inspection 
date
No. of 
inspections
1 Allied Blenders and 
Distillers Pvt. Ltd. SPI/Food & Beverage Hooghly Operational 08.11.2021 1
2 Chittaranjan 
Locomotive Works SPI/Heavy Engineering Asansol Operational 10.07.2023 1
3 Sunrise Industry SPI/Dyeing & Bleaching 
unit Salt Lake Operational 02.08.2018, 
18.06.2019 2
4 Process Galvaniser SPI/Galvanising Howrah Operational 24.07.2019, 
14.07.2022 2
5 Carlsberg India Pvt. 
Ltd.
SPI/Distillery including 
Fermentation Industry Hooghly Operational 31.01.2018, 
14.01.2020 2
6 M/S Bhusan Power 
& Steel Ltd. SPI Hooghly Operational 06.12.2019, 
10.12.2021 2
7 Indian Oil 
Corporation SPI/Oil & Grease Alipore Operational 20.08.2019, 
23.11.2020 2
8 Sterile Extrusion Pvt 
Ltd.
SPI/Industry or process 
involving metal 
surface treatment or 
process.
Asansol Operational 11.03.2019,  
17.12.2020 2
9 M/s. Sreema Dyeing 
& Bleaching Works SPI/ Bleaching Unit Salt Lake Operational
25.06.2019, 
07.09.2021, 
12.12.2022
3
10 Kalachand 
electroplating Works SPI/Galvanising Salt Lake Operational
28.05.2019, 
03.11.2020, 
04.12.2020
3
11 Vishnu Chemical 
Works SPI/Basic Chemicals Salt Lake Operational
20.07.2018, 
25.07.2019, 
27.01.2022
3
12 Chiranjilal Rayons 
Pvt. Ltd.
SPI/Yarn, textile dyeing 
and bleaching. Howrah Operational
28.08.2019,  
14.08.2020, 
27.10.2021
3
13 Monoranjan Jalui SPI/Galvanising Howrah Operational
08.09.2018, 
28.09.2020, 
05.05.2022 
3
14 Himadri Chemicals 
& Industries Ltd.
SPI/Coke making, 
Liquefaction. Hooghly Operational
17.09.2019, 
23.06.2021, 
10.05.2022
3
15
International 
Bleaching & dyeing 
Works
SPI/Dyeing, Bleaching Salt Lake Operational
26.11.2018, 
21.01.2021, 
15.07.2021, 
11.01.2022
4

102
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Sl. 
No. Name of Industries Category 
Name of 
Regional 
Office
Industry 
Operational 
status
Inspection 
date
No. of 
inspections
16 Dhara Brothers SPI/Galvanising Howrah Operational
22.03.2018, 
19.02.2019, 
20.01.2020, 
16.01.2023 
4
17 M/s Onkar Parivahan 
Finance Pvt. Ltd.
SPI , Dyeing Activity 
with Digital Printing & 
Embroidery
Howrah Operational
16.01.2019, 
27.01.2020, 
28.07.2021, 
24.11.2022
4
18 DIC India Ltd. SPI/printing ink 
manufacturing Kolkata Operational
05.08.2019, 
17.08.2021, 
24.02.2022, 
24.08.2022,   
24.02.2023
5
19 Marathon Electric 
Motor India Ltd. SPI/Galvanising Kolkata Operational
09.10.2020, 
08.04.2021, 
26.11.2021, 
24.05.2022
4
20 Indian Government 
Mint SPI/Galvanising Kolkata Operational
28.11.2018, 
20.08.2019, 
23.11.2020, 
30.11.2022
4
21 East India Paper & 
Board Mills SPI Howrah Operational
26.02.2018, 
08.02.2019, 
25.02.2021, 
05.08.2021, 
07.02.2023
5
22 Nirmal Wires Private 
Ltd. SPI Howrah Operational
26.06.2018, 
25.07.2018, 
26.07.2019, 
19.07.2022, 
25.01.2022
5
23 Fabricon(DAD) SPI/Galvanising Alipore Operational
10.01.2019, 
17.01.2020, 
11.01.2021,  
08.03.2022,  
23.08.2022
5
24 Meghna Farm 
Products SPI/Milk Processing Alipore Operational
03.07.2018,  
12.04.2021,  
18.11.2021,  
11.11.2022, 
12.07.2023
5
25 Philips Carbon Black 
Ltd. SPI/Industrial Carbon Durgapur Operational
10.04.2019, 
04.09.2020,  
05.04.2021,  
06.04.2022
4

Appendices
103
Sl. 
No. Name of Industries Category 
Name of 
Regional 
Office
Industry 
Operational 
status
Inspection 
date
No. of 
inspections
26 Rupa & Co. Ltd. SPI/Yarn, textile dyeing 
and bleaching. Howrah Operational
15.05.2018, 
14.08.2020, 
29.12.2020, 
01.10.2021, 
06.05.2022, 
01.03.2023
6
27 M/S Bijoy 
Processing Industries SPI/Dyeing, Bleaching Salt Lake Operational
09.01.2018, 
29.09.2018, 
17.01.2019, 
14.01.2020, 
21.01.2021, 
15.07.2021, 
18.01.2022, 
07.07.2022,   
14.01.2023
9
28 NTPC - SAIL Power 
Company Ltd. SPI/Thermal Power Durgapur Operational
28.02.2019, 
10.12.2019, 
14.02.2020, 
25.11.2020, 
05.05.2021,  
05.08.2021,  
23.11.2021,  
01.02.2022, 
21.11.2022
9

104
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Appendix-2
(Paragraph: 7.2.1)
Types of Stations vis-à-vis frequency of Water Quality Monitoring
Source of 
Water Type of Station Definition of Station Frequency
Surface Baseline Location where there is no 
influence of human activity on 
Water quality.
Perennial rivers and 
lakes/reservoirs: Six 
times a year.
Seasonal rivers: Six 
times during flow 
period.
Trend, Flux/
Impact and Hot 
Spots
Trend: a particular point on a 
watercourse to exhibit variance 
due to both geogenic and 
anthropogenic activities.
Flux/Impact: location on main 
river stem for measuring mass 
of particular pollutant.
Hot Spots:  location 
where concentration of a 
particular parameter or a 
group of parameters, except 
bacteriological parameters, 
exceeds permissible limit 
of drinking water quality as 
prescribed in BIS code IS 
10500-2012.
Trend: Once every 
month.
Flux: Twice every 
month.
Hot Spots: Twice every 
month.
Ground 
Water
Baseline All stations are classified as 
base station
Twice in a year

Appendices
105
Appendix-3
(Paragraph: 7.7)
Drains having Faecal Coliform beyond limit (100 MPN/100 ml)
Sl 
No Name of Drain/Channel Date of 
Collection
Date of 
Reporting
Faecal 
Coliform 
(MPN/100ml)
1. SHIBPUR BURNING GHAT 27.12.2022 04.01.2023 7,90,00,000
2. TELKAL GHAT 27.12.2022 04.01.2023 2,40,00,000
3. 130, FORESHORE ROAD 27.12.2022 04.01.2023 2,40,00,000
4. DHANKHETI KHAL, 
GARDEN REACH
15.12.2022 04.01.2023 1,30,00,000
5. CIRCULAR CANAL 
(CHITPUR GHAT DRAIN)
18.10.2022 04.01.2023 84,00,000
6. JAGANNATH DRAIN 27.12.2022 04.01.2023 49,00,000
7. COSSIPORE DRAIN 18.10.2022 04.01.2023 46,00,000
8. DEWANGAZI DRAIN 27.12.2022 04.01.2023 33,00,000
9. NAZERGUNJ KHAL 16.11.2022 04.01.2023 23,00,000
10. KUTHIGHAT DRAIN 18.10.2022 04.01.2023 17,00,000
11. NIMTALA BURNING GHAT 18.10.2022 04.01.2023 17,00,000
12. TOLLY NULLAH 
(ADI GANGA)
14.11.2022 04.01.2023 13,00,000
13. SINGHI MORE KHAL 17.11.2022 04.01.2023 13,00,000
14. N.C. PAL KHAL, SANKRAIL 16.11.2022 04.01.2023 7,80,000
15. MUNIKHALI KHAL 16.11.2022 04.01.2023 7,80,000
16. DRAIN @ AKHRA FOOD 
GHAR
16.11.2022 04.01.2023 2,30,000
17. BAZARPARA, GARIGHAT 
DRAIN
17.11.2022 04.01.2023 1,30,000
18. SARASWATI KHAL 17.11.2022 04.01.2023 78,000

106
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Appendix-4
(Paragraph: 7.7)
Drains having BOD & COD beyond limit 
( BOD < 10 mg/l; COD <50 mg/l)
Sl 
No. Name of Drain/Channel Date of 
Collection
Date of 
Reporting COD BOD
1 Shibpur Burning Ghat 27.12.2022 04.01.2023 995.32 366.67
2 Kamarhati Jute Mill Drain 13.02.2023 13.03.2023 947.69 313.33
3 Bhatpara Drain 01.02.2023 06.03.2023 675.42 282.50
4 Barrackpur Khal (S.P.Bunglow) 24.01.2023 20.02.2023 727.93 200.00
5 Alliance Mill Drain 01.02.2023 06.03.2023 468.31 186.67
6 Telkal Ghat 27.12.2022 04.01.2023 609.66 175.00
7 Dhankheti Khal, Garden Reach 15.12.2022 04.01.2023 356.91 160.00
8 Jangipur Drain 02.02.2023 06.03.2023 321.72 151.25
9 Bagh Khal 06.02.2023 06.03.2023 501.13 145.00
10 Jagannath Drain 27.12.2022 04.01.2023 365.82 145.00
11 130, Foreshore Road 27.12.2022 04.01.2023 357.73 140.00
12 Titagarh Drain 07.02.2023 06.03.2023 354.16 128.57
13 Khardah Khal 13.02.2023 13.03.2023 203.01 117.50
14 Champdani Ferry Ghat Drain 20.02.2023 13.03.2023 231.38 110.00
15 Bhatpara Open Pucca Drain 01.02.2023 06.03.2023 239.39 105.00
16 Ramkrishna Mallick Ghat 27.12.2022 04.01.2023 257.15 92.50
17 Thanarkhal 01.02.2023 06.03.2023 196.19 86.25
18 Debitala Panchakhal 16.02.2023 13.03.2023 217.51 82.40
19 Garifa Drain (South) 17.01.2023 15.02.2023 164.99 77.00
20 Drain Near Pb Ghat at 
Kamarhati 07.02.2023 13.03.2023 193.69 75.00
21 Kuthighat Drain 18.10.2022 04.01.2023 148.00 73.75
22 Balurghat Monirampur Pucca 
Drain 24.01.2023 20.02.2023 141.63 71.00
23 Pratapnagar Rajbari Drain 16.02.2023 13.03.2023 164.54 69.17
24 Garifa Drain (North) 17.01.2023 15.02.2023 142.99 68.75
25 Imambara Khal 14.02.2023 13.03.2023 199.72 66.67
26 N.C. Pal Khal, Sankrail 16.11.2022 04.01.2023 220.00 53.12
27 Dewangazi Drain 27.12.2022 04.01.2023 139.52 52.50
28 Cossipore Drain 18.10.2022 04.01.2023 102.00 50.00
29 Monirampur Barrackpur Drain 24.01.2023 20.02.2023 120.82 47.50
30 Halisahar Drain 09.01.2023 09.02.2023 143.07 46.67
31 Nimtala Burning Ghat 18.10.2022 04.01.2023 175.00 44.69
32 Rosbora Khal 14.02.2023 13.03.2023 88.65 43.00
33 Chinsurah Majir Rasta Drain 14.02.2023 13.03.2023 87.05 36.67
34 Barrackpur Drain(Adjacent to 
Ramkrishna Mission) 24.01.2023 20.02.2023 70.81 35.00
35 Majher Char Khal 09.01.2023 09.02.2023 82.54 33.33

Appendices
107
Sl 
No. Name of Drain/Channel Date of 
Collection
Date of 
Reporting COD BOD
36 Chandni Ghat Drain 14.02.2023 13.03.2023 47.19 27.50
37 Dhopa Ghat Drain 14.02.2023 13.03.2023 65.71 27.50
38 Nazergunj Khal 16.11.2022 04.01.2023 76.00 25.00
39 Circular Canal ( Chitpur Ghat 
Drain) 18.10.2022 04.01.2023 40.00 23.13
40 Tolly Nullah (Adi Ganga) 14.11.2022 04.01.2023 71.00 20.63
41 Drain at Akhra Food Ghar 16.11.2022 04.01.2023 58.00 20.00
42 Singhi More Khal 17.11.2022 04.01.2023 104.12 19.17
43 Halisahar Municipality Drain 09.01.2023 09.02.2023 52.09 15.63
44 New Bager Khal 09.01.2023 09.02.2023 50.35 15.00
45 Saraswati Khal 17.11.2022 04.01.2023 64.49 13.25
46 Baidyabati Drain 20.02.2023 13.03.2023 54.59 13.00
47 Bagher Khal (Fodder Khal) 09.01.2023 09.02.2023 37.18 12.60
48 Bazarpara, Garighat Drain 17.11.2022 04.01.2023 52.84 10.83
49 Dhobi Ghat Drain 24.01.2023 20.02.2023 24.00 10.25
50 Munikhali Khal 16.11.2022 04.01.2023 31.00 10.11

Glossary of 
Abbreviations

109
GLOSSARY OF ABBREVIATIONS
Abbreviation Full form
AAP Annual Action Plan
ADDA Asansol Durgapur Development Authority
AIRP Arsenic Iron Removal Plants
AU Assessment Unit
BCM Billion Cubic Meter
BIS Bureau of Indian Standard
BOD Biological Oxygen Demand
CAAT Computer Assisted Audit Techniques
CEPI Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index
CETPs Common Effluent Treatment Plants
CGWB Central Ground Water Board
CLC Calcutta Leather Complex
COD Chemical Oxygen Demand
CPA Critically Polluted Area
CPCB Central Pollution Control Board
CPHEEO Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organization 
CTE Consent To Establish 
CTO Consent to Operate
CWPP Community Water Purification Plant
DO Dissolved Oxygen
DPR Detailed Project Report
DVC Damodar Valley Corporation
EC Environment Compensation
EKW East Kolkata Wetland
EKWMA East Kolkata Wetlands Management Authority
EPA Environment (Protection) Act,1986
ETP Effluent Treatment Plant
FC Faecal Coliform
FHTC Functional Household Tap Connection
FSSM Faecal Sludge and Septage Management
FSTP Faecal Sludge and Septage Treatment Plant 
FTF Fluoride Task Force
GAP Ganga Action Plan
GBC Green Belt Canal
GIS Geographic Information System
GoI Government of India
GoWB Government of West Bengal
GPIs Grossly Polluting Industries

110
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness of measures taken by the Government of West Bengal for 
containing Water Pollution”.
Abbreviation Full form
GTA Gorkhaland Territorial Administration
HDA Haldia Development Authority
HMC Howrah Municipal Corporation
HWA Hazardous Waste Authorization
IESWM Institute of Environmental Studies and Wetland Management
IIEST Indian Institute Engineering, Science and Technology
I&D Interception and Diversion
ISRO Indian Space Research Organization
I&WD Irrigation and Waterways Department
JJM Jal Jeevan Mission
JU Jadavpur University
KLD Kilo Liter Per Day
KMC Kolkata Municipal Corporation
KMDA Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority
LLP Limited Liability Partnership
LS Lifting Station
MED Municipal Engineering Directorate
MIP Men In Position
MIS Management Information System
MLD Million Litre Per Day
MoEF&CC Ministry of Environment Forests and Climate Change
MoWR Ministry of Water Resources
MPN Most Probable Number
MPS Main Pumping Station
MT Metric Ton
NABL National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories
NGRBA National Ganga River Basin Authority
NGT National Green Tribunal
NMCG National Mission for Clean Ganga
NOC No Objection Certificate
NRDWP National Rural Drinking Water Programme
NWMP National Water Monitoring Programme
NWQMP National Water Quality Monitoring Programme
OA Original Application
OCEMS Online Continuous Emission Monitoring System
ODF+ Open Defecation Free Plus 
O&G Oil and Grease
OH&SAS Occupational Health and Safety Assessment Specification
OHSMS Occupational Health and Safety Management System
PCC Pollution Control Committees

Glossary of Abbreviations
111
Abbreviation Full form
PHED Public Health Engineering Department
PIAs Polluted Industrial Areas
PIP Person in Position
PRS Polluted River Stretch
PWSS Piped Water Supply Schemes
RO Regional Office
RRC River Rejuvenation Committee
RWMC Regional Waste Management Centre
SDG Sustainable Development Goals
SEP State Environment Plan
SJDA Siliguri Jalpaiguri Development Authority
SPA Severely Polluting Area
SPCB State Pollution Control Board
SPMG State Program Management Group
SPIs Seriously Polluting Industries
SS Sanctioned Strength
STP Sewage Treatment Plants
SUDA State Urban Development Agency
SWA State Wetlands Authority
SWID State Water Investigation Directorate
TC Total Coliform
TPD Ton Per Day
TSS Total Suspended Solid
UD&MA Urban Development & Municipal Affairs
ULBs Urban Local Bodies
WBH&FW West Bengal Health and Family Welfare
WBPCB West Bengal Pollution Control Board
WBRRC West Bengal River Rejuvenation Committee
WBSPMG West Bengal State Level Program Management Group
WHO World Health Organization
WQAA Water Quality Assessment Authority
WQM&S Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance
WQRC Water Quality Review Committee
WRIDD Water Resources Investigation and Development Department
WSP Waste Stabilization Ponds

Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India on   
Performance Audit on  
Effectiveness of measures taken by the 
Government of West Bengal for containing Water 
Pollution
Government of West Bengal  
Report No. 3 of 2025
(Performance Audit – Civil)
  
COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
https://cag.gov.in/ag2/west-bengal/en
Government of West Bengal – Report No. 3 of 2025
