 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India on 
Land Management in Tribal Areas and 
Anganwadi Services under Integrated Child  
Development Services   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of West Bengal 
Report No. 1 of 2025 

 
 
 
 

 
 
i 
Table of Contents 
Description  Page 
Preface v 
Executive Summary vii 
PART-I: Performance Audit on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
Paragraph 1.1: Introduction 2 
Paragraph 1.2: Absence of a foolproof system for identifying the tribal 
population and its land holding 6 
Paragraph 1.3: Alienation of land by the Scheduled Tribes under Section 
14C 7 
Paragraph 1.4: Transfer of land to ECL and BCCL 19 
Paragraph 1.5: Implementation of the Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) 
Act, 2006 
26 
Paragraph 1.6: Internal Control Mechanism 34 
PART-II: Performance Audit of Anganwadi Services under Integrated Child 
Development Services 
Paragraph 2.1: Introduction 39 
Paragraph 2.2: Planning 42 
Paragraph 2.3: Establishment of Projects and AWCs 44 
Paragraph 2.4: Financial Management 45 
Paragraph 2.5: Financial position: SNP and AWS-ICDS 46 
Paragraph 2.6: Inadmissible claims raised by the State Government 
through Utilisation Certificates 47 
Paragraph 2.7: Parking of funds 48 
Paragraph 2.8: Supplementary Nutrition Programme (SNP) 49 
Paragraph 2.9: Operation of non-formal Pre-School Education (PSE) in 
AWCs 66 
Paragraph 2.10: Nutrition and Health Education 70 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
ii 
Description  Page 
Paragraph 2.11: Inadequate infrastructural facilities and amenities in the 
AWCs 70 
Paragraph 2.12: Construction and upgradation of AWCs 72 
Paragraph 2.13: Shortage of Human Resources 76 
Paragraph 2.14: Training & Orientation Programme 78 
Paragraph 2.15: Monitoring & Review 79 
Paragraph 2.16: Grievances/ complaints redressal mechanism 80 
 
  

Table of Contents 
 
iii 
Appendices  
Description  Page 
Appendices of Performance Audit on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
Appendix 1.1 Details of the 11 test -checked purchase deeds of 
Individual - A 83 
Appendix 1.2 Land purchase details of Individual- ‘A’, from tribals, 
during 2016 to 2022 85 
Appendix 1.3 Cases where Sale Prices were less than the Fair Market 
Prices 89 
Appendix 1.4 Improper assessment of Fair Market value by Revenue 
Officers 92 
Appendix 1.5 Short payment to tribal raiyats by the test -checked 
ECL/ BCCL offices 95 
Appendices of Performance Audit of Anganwadi Services under Integrated Child 
Development Services 
Appendix 2.1 Details of 12 CDPOs of ICDS Projects and 48 AWCs 
selected under six test-checked districts 97 
Appendix 2.2 Bifurcated/ trifurcated ICDS Projects in the six selected 
districts 98 
Appendix 2.3 Statement of Salary of Staff as per submitted Utilisation 
Certificates 100 
Appendix 2.4 Excess expenditure of ₹ 115.09 crore on SNP items 101 
Appendix 2.5 Shortfall in coverage of severely malnourished children in 
SNP 102 
Appendix 2.6 Disruptions in providing Supplementary Nutrition 103 
Appendix 2.7 Unwarranted savings due to non -compliance of SNP menu 
in Malda District 105 
Appendix 2.8 Rates of damaged ICDS food items 106 
Appendix 2.9 Availability of weighing machines in the test -checked 
projects 107 
Appendix 2.10 Summary of the excess transportation charges 108 
Appendix 2.11 Excess expenditure on reimbursement of cooking cost of 
SNP items 109 
Appendix 2.12 Facilities available in the test-checked AWCs 111 
Appendix 2.13 Visits by Supervisors, in the test -checked AWCs, in the 
six selected districts 114 
Abbreviations 117 

 
v 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface 
This Performance Audit Report for the year ended March 202 2 has 
been prepared for submission to the Governor of West Bengal under 
Article 151(2) of the Constitution of India for being laid before the 
Legislative Assembly of West Bengal.  
This Report contains significant results of Performance Audits on 
Land Management in Tribal Areas and Anganwadi Services under 
Integrated Child Development Services in terms of State’s 
performance in achieving the objectives of both on the basis of 
relevant Acts, Rules, Guidelines, Circulars etc., framed or issued by 
the Government of India and the Government of West Bengal.  
The instances men tioned in this Report are those  which came to 
notice in the course of test audit in respect of Land Management in 
Tribal Areas and Anganwadi Services under Integrated Child 
Development Services (pertaining to  2017-18 to 2021 -22) in the 
State of West Bengal as well as those which came to notice in earlier 
years, but could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports; 
instances relating to the period subsequent to 2021-22 have also been 
included wherever necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

 
 
 

 
 
Executive Summary
 
 
 

 
 
vii 
Executive Summary 
This Performance Audit Report contains two individual performance audits viz. 
i) Performance Audit on Land Management in Tribal Areas and ii) Performance 
Audit of Anganwadi Services under Integrated Child Development Services.  
Part-I: Performance Audit on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
According to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, promulgated 
under Article 342 of the Constitution of India (amended from time to time), 
40 Ethnic Tribes have been notified as Scheduled Tribes (STs), in West Bengal. 
As per Census 2011, tribal population of West Bengal constituted 5.08 per cent 
of the total tribal population of the country, while the ST population in West 
Bengal constituted 5.8 0 per cent of the total population of the State of West 
Bengal. Among these ethnic tribes of West Benga l, Toto (Jalpaiguri district), 
Birhor (Purulia) and Lodha (Paschim Medinipur), were notified as Particularly 
Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs), considering backwardness, across different 
development indicators.  
The Tribal Development (TD) Department, (created in March 2014 by 
bifurcating the Backward Classes Welfare Department ), is assisted by the 
Directorate of Tribal Development (headed by the Commissioner) and acts as 
the nodal authority for tribal welfare related activities in the State. At the district 
level, the functions are managed by the Project Officer -cum-District Welfare 
Officer (PO -cum-DWO), designated as Revenue Officer in terms of 
West Bengal Land Reforms Act. The Directorate of Land Records and Surveys 
(DLRS), West Bengal, under the Land & Land Reforms and Refugee Relief & 
Rehabilitation Department (L&LR and RR&R), is responsible for land reforms 
administration in each district. 
Regarding implementation of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest 
Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 {Forest Rights Act (FRA), 
2006}, the West Bengal Tribal Development and Co-operative Corporation Ltd. 
(WBTDCC), under the administrative control of the Department, was the nodal 
office.  
In the above backdrop, a Performance Au dit covering the period of 
five financial years (FYs) 2017-18 to 2021-22, was undertaken to examine the 
existence/ efficacy of the system of identification of tribal persons and tribal 
specified areas, in the State of West Bengal; procedures of alienation and 
restoration of land, belonging to the scheduled tribes, to protect the rights of the 
ST population, and adequacy of the internal control mechanism. 
Significant audit observations that emerged from the audit were as follows: 
• Audit observed that there were no notified tr ibal areas in the State of 
West Bengal. In the test -checked districts t he existent system of 
identification of tribal population and their land holdings for flagging in land 
records was not foolproof, as no topical survey was conducted by the Land 
Revenue authorities and identification of tribal land was being made based 
on the surname, and that too, without any comprehensive surname list. This 
assumed significance in the context of the fact that there were no notified 
tribal areas in the State. 
(Paragraph 1.2) 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
viii 
• Transfers of tribal holdings by the tribal population to non -tribal buyers, 
were regulated under Section 14 (C) of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 
1995 (WBLR Act). However, the said Act did not contain clear -cut 
directives regarding the procedure to be adopted for sale/ transfer of land by 
the tribal population and the timelines by which the applications for transfer/ 
sale, were to be disposed of by the PO-cum-DWOs. Consequently, there was 
no uniformity in dealing with the land transfer applications and t he codal 
provisions were interpreted according to the wisdom of the individual 
PO-cum-DWO, leading to an asymmetric approach in interpretation.  
(Paragraphs 1.3.1.1 & 1.3.2.5)  
• The WBLR Act does not contain provisions regarding transfers of tribal 
holdings between the tribal population. Therefore cases of transfers/  sale 
between tribal sellers and tribal buyers  were not routed through the 
PO-cum-DWOs, leading to the extent of checking being diluted. This 
facilitated instances of exploitation of marginalized tribals, by affluent and 
influential tribal individuals, and even instances of land ending up in the 
hands of a private company, without the original tribal land owners being 
legitimately compensated.  
(Paragraph 1.3.2.1) 
• In the test -checked districts, there were instances of tribal lands being 
alienated through by-passing of the pe rmission of the Revenue Officer, as 
well as improper assessment of the Fair Market value of tribal lands by the 
Revenue officers, resulting in the tribal land owners receiving sale proceeds 
that were lower than the assessed fair market value. Absence of a provision 
for obtaining valid proof against receipt of land price by tribal sellers also 
constituted a weakness in the system. 
(Paragraphs 1.3.3, 1.3.4.2 & 1.3.4.3) 
• Instances were noticed where Government failed to protect interests of the 
tribal people in case of acquisition of land in mineral rich areas by Eastern 
Coalfields Limited (ECL)/  Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL) through 
inaction and non -involvement of district level functionaries ( i.e., ROs, 
Collectors of the respective districts, etc.). This resulted in short receipt of 
compensation by tribal land owners amounting to ₹ 15.25 crore during 
FYs 2017-18 to 2021 -22 in 66 test -checked cases and deficiencies in 
rehabilitation and resettlement provided by these ECL/ BCCL offices to ST 
people whose lands were acquired. There was difference in price of land 
paid by ECL for vested land and land purchased from the STs. Audit found 
that for an acre of land, tribals were compensated at much lower rates 
ranging between ₹ 2.50 lakh and ₹ 12.63 lakh vis-à-vis the compensation 
allowed to the Government ranging between ₹ 19.77 lakh and ₹ 125.00 lakh. 
State functionaries were not involved in the preparation process of 
Rehabilitation Action Plan (RAP) despite provisions in the policy of these 
entities. 
(Paragraph 1.4) 
• Implementation of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest 
Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 was deficient, as 
Committees for vesting of Forest Rights remained non -functional and 
progress in distribution of record of rights to the tribal dwellers of for est 

Executive Summary 
 
ix 
land, was slow.  It was observed that in  Paschim Medinipur and Jhargram 
districts, out of total 36,056 cases of rejection, in 18,894 cases (52 per cent) 
rejection was attributable to insufficiency in documentation/ evidence of 
residence; 8,606 cases (24 per cent) were for receipt of multiple applications 
against the same land; while 8,464 cases (23 per cent) were not allowed due 
to the land against which the claims had been made, not being forest land.   
(Paragraphs 1.5.1 & 1.5.2) 
• Forest Rights Act, 2006 envisaged grant of habitat rights to all Particularly 
Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs). Audit found no evidence to indicate 
that such an exercise was at all undertaken and the PVTGs granted habitat 
rights.  
(Paragraph 1.5.7) 
• The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition 
of Forest Rights) Rules 2007  stipulated that the State Government was to 
ensure that forest dwelling scheduled tribes and other traditional forest 
dwellers were extended benefits accruing from all government schemes , 
including those relating to land  improvement, land productivity, basic 
amenities and other livelihood measures . No reply, regarding the status on 
this account, was received from W est Bengal Tribal Development 
Co-operative Corporation Limited (the nodal authority for implementation 
of Forest Rights Act in the State). 
(Paragraph 1.5.8) 
Recommendations: 
1.1 State Government may consider putting in place a system of 
identification of the tribal population and its land holdings, by way 
of extensive surveys. 
1.2 State Government may assess the feasibility of putting in place 
guidelines for averting full land alienation among tribals. 
1.3 In view of instances of exploitation of marginalized tribals by 
affluent tribals, State Government may consider introducing a 
suitable mechanism to ensure that transfer of land from one tribal 
raiyat, to another tribal raiyat, is permitted with due authorisation. 
1.4 State Government should develop effective checks and validation  
controls in e-nathikaran/ banglarbhumi portals in cases involving 
alienation of land from tribal communities.  
1.5 While processing the application for sale of land, belonging to an 
ST person, State Government may consider introducing a 
mechanism to ensure that responsible officers are held accountable 
for failing to ensure compliance with the provisions under Section 
14 C of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act. 
1.6 State Government may consider installing  a system of 
cross-verification of the data available with other departments, to 
ensure proper receipt of sale proceeds by tribal sellers. 
1.7 State Government may consider ensuring more proactive 
involvement and monitoring on part of the District Collectors, as 
per Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, 2012, in cases where 
land is purchased directly by companies/ Eastern Coalfields 
Limited/ Bharat Coking Coal Limited for any purpose. 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
x 
1.8 State Government may consider introducing a suitable mechanism 
to ensure that a hassle-free verification process to grant recognition 
and vesting of forest rights to tribal persons is in place. 
1.9 State Government may expedite the grant of habitat rights to 
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups. 
1.10 State Government may ensure that the benefits accruing from 
Government schemes are duly passed on to the forest dwelling 
scheduled tribes, as per extant Rules & Regulations. 
1.11 State Government may consider prescribing Standard Operating 
Procedures/ Guidelines, for disposal of cases under Section 14C of 
the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955, in a time-bound manner. 
1.12 State Government may ensure that Coal India constitutes the 
Project Group as envisaged in its Rehabilitation & Resettlement 
Policy to oversee resettlement and rehabilitation activities of tribals 
whose land was acquired for mining activities.  
Part-II: Performance Audit of Anganwadi Services under Integrated Child 
Development Services 
Since 1975, Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme, a 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme, has been implemented by the Government of 
India, Ministry of Women & Child Development. The scheme aimed inter-alia 
at providing Supplementary Nutrition to children below six years of age and 
Pregnant Women and Lactating Mothers (PW&LM); non-formal P re-School 
Education (children of three to six years); Nutrition & Health Education for 
women (15-45 years); etc.  
The Women & Child Development and Social Welfare (WCD&SW) 
Department (Department) of the Government of West Bengal, implements the 
scheme at the State level.  
This Performance Audit focused on the Supplementary Nutrition Programme 
(SNP) and non-formal Pre-School Education (PSE), with Nutrition & Health 
Education, along with the aspects of manpower, infrastructure and 
facilities/ amenities available with the Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) functioning 
under the Scheme. The performance of Anganwadi Services for these 
components, during Financial Years (FYs) 2017 -18 to 2021-22, was reviewed 
in audit.  
Significant audit observations that emerged from the audit were as follows:  
 
• The aim of decentralis ed planning had not been fully achieved, as Annual 
Programme Implementation Plans (APIPs) to implement the scheme, were 
not prepared based on district level inputs. 
 (Paragraph 2.2.2) 
• In the district of North 24 Parganas, 26 AWCs (11 per cent), under the Child 
Development Project Officer (CDPO), Panihati, remained non-operational 
due to shortage of manpower and lack of adequate infrastructure.    
(Paragraph 2.3) 
• The State had shown an expenditure of ₹ 6,564.70 crore (as per Utilisation  
Certificates) against Central share of ₹ 4,334.78 crore received by the State, 
indicating that there was an excess expenditure of ₹  2,229.92 crore. 

Executive Summary 
 
xi 
The State Government did not furnish n ecessary clarifications regarding 
sources of funds from which the excess expenditure was met, authority 
under which such excess expenditure had been incurred, and how such 
excess expenditure was regularised, etc.  
(Paragraph 2.5) 
• The APIPs stipulated that the salary of staff posted at the Directorate level 
was not to be borne from the Government of India (GoI) share under the 
scheme. In contravention of the stipulation , the State had submitted 
Utilisation Certificates (UCs) to GoI, mentioning payment for salary of the 
staff at the office of the Director, ICDS, as well as the non -entitled staff at 
the CDPO and Project levels. Further, the UCs furnished by the State 
reflected more than 25  per cent as the GoI share, during the audit period. 
Reasons for submission of inadmissible expenditure, as GoI share in UCs, 
amounting to ` 207.54 crore, were not elaborated by the Department/ 
Directorate. 
(Paragraph 2.6) 
• In terms of the West Bengal Treasury Rules (WBTR), the Personal Ledger 
Accounts (PLAs), not opened for discharging liabilities of the Government 
arising out of special enactments were to be closed at the end of the year. 
Further, the Finance Department, Govt. of  West Bengal, in March and 
July 2019, instructed  surrender of funds, pertaining to the FY  2018-19 or 
earlier, which were lying unutilised in PLAs, as of June  2019. Audit 
observed that contrary to the provisions, in North 24 Parganas district, an 
amount of ₹ 56.15 lakh towards the cost of food items remained parked in 
the PLA of the District Magistrate, while in Malda district the retained fund 
was ` 33.85 lakh.   
(Paragraph 2.7.2) 
• Due to non-acceptance of the lowest rates of the SNP items, the Department 
incurred excess expenditure of ₹ 115.09 crore, towards procurement of SNP 
items. 
(Paragraph 2.8.1.1) 
• During FYs 2020 -21 and 2021 -22, against an expenditure of 
₹ 1,429.12 crore to be incurred towards food security allowance (provided 
in lieu of SNP), an expenditure of ₹  2,264.85 crore had been shown in the 
utilization certificates, leading to an unexplained excess expenditure of 
₹ 835.73 crore, reasons for which were not available in the records. 
(Paragraph 2.8.2) 
• Shortfall in coverage of eligible children, under the SNP, ranged between 
11 per cent and 22 per cent, whereas, in respect of PW&LM, the shortfall 
in coverage ranged between three per cent and nine per cent during the 
FYs 2017-18 to 2021-22. 
(Paragraph 2.8.3) 
• Nutritional values of ‘Take Home Ration’ (THR), distributed during 
FYs 2020-21 and 2021-22, was less by 21 per cent in case of children and 
by 34 per cent in case of pregnant and lactating mothers, against the 
standards provided under National Food Security Act, 2013.  
(Paragraph 2.8.5.2) 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
xii 
• THR had not been provided for six months  during the Covid pandemic 
period due to non -receipt of instructions from the Department, despite the 
Ministry having advised the State Government (July 2020) to ensure 
uninterrupted supply of Supplementary Nutrition to the beneficiaries. 
(Paragraph 2.8.5.2 ii) 
• Contrary to Government directives, samples of food provided at the AWCs 
had never been checked by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB).  
(Paragraph 2.8.5.3) 
• The shortfall in procurement of  ‘Early Childhood Care and Education 
(ECCE)’/ Pre-School Education (PSE) Kits, in the five years from 2017-18 
to 2021-22, was 96 per cent.  
(Paragraph 2.9.1) 
• During FYs 2017 -18 and 2021 -22, against the total requirement of 
5,84,873 medicine kits (one kit for each AWC , for each year), only 
1,16,904 medicine kits (20 per cent) had been purchased by the Department.  
(Paragraph 2.9.2) 
• During FYs 2017 -18 and 2021 -22, against the total requirement of 
20,85,504 sarees for AWWs and AWHs, only 8,51,617 sarees (59 per cent) 
had been purchased by the Department.  
(Paragraph 2.9.3) 
• Only 61,314 AWCs (51 per cent), out of the total operational 
1,19,481 AWCs (as of March 2022), were housed in ‘own buildings’, 
19,479 AWCs were being run in rented buildings, while the rest were being 
run in rooms that were neither owned, nor rented, by the ICDS.  
(Paragraph 2.11) 
• Construction work of only 2,056 toilets (11 per cent) , out of the 
18,319 toilets, sanctioned during the FYs 2017 -18 to 2019 -20, ha d been 
completed as of November 2022. Further, none of the 11,174 drinking water 
projects could be completed. 
(Paragraph 2.12.5) 
Recommendations:  
2.1 The planning process may be decentrali sed in conformity with the 
envisaged approach, by obtaining Annual Programme  
Implementation Plans from the Project and district level offices. 
2.2 Effective steps may be taken early to operationalise non-functional 
projects by providing required manpower and infrastructural 
facilities. 
2.3 Department may ensure immediate reconciliation of figures 
pertaining to receipts and expenditure under Integrated Child 
Development Services Scheme. 
2.4 Efforts should be made to promote Supplementary Nutrition for 
300 days per year as per the stipulated calorific and nutritive values 
to ensure specified nutrition for the intended beneficiaries. 

Executive Summary 
 
xiii 
2.5 Regular sample testing of food distributed under Supplementary 
Nutrition Programme by the Anganwadi Centres may be carried out 
to ensure that food of specified quality and standard is distributed. 
2.6 Steps may be taken to ensure the availability of facilities/ amenities, 
for non-formal Pre -School Education  (PSE), at the A nganwadi 
Centre level, in order to improve the quality of services being 
provided. 
2.7 Anganwadi Centres may be equipped with child-friendly buildings, 
essential facilities/ amenities (e.g. toilet facilities, safe drinking 
water, medicine kits etc.), for smooth and effective delivery of 
Integrated Child Development Services Scheme, in a time -bound 
manner. 
2.8 Department may take steps for recruitment and posting of adequate 
number of functionaries at various levels, to ensure better service 
delivery as envisaged under the scheme. 
2.9 The monitoring and supervision mechanism for delivery of services 
under Integrated Child Development Services Scheme  may be 
strengthened in compliance with the Scheme guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
PART
-
I
 
Performance Audit 
on 
Land Management in 
Tribal 
A
reas 
 
 

 
 
1 
TRIBAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND & LAND REFORMS AND 
REFUGEE RELIEF & REHABILITATION DEPARTMENTS 
 
 Performance Audit on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
 
Snapshot 
As per Census 2011, tribal population of West Bengal constituted 5.08 per cent 
of the total tribal population of the country, while the Scheduled Tribes (STs) 
population in West Bengal constituted 5.8 0 per cent of the total population of 
the State of West Bengal. Of the ST population in West Bengal, ethnic tribes 
namely, Toto (Jalpaiguri district), Birhor (Purulia) and Lodha (Paschim 
Medinipur), were notified as Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs), 
considering backwardness, across different development indicators.  
The Tribal Development (TD) Department, (created in March 2014 by 
bifurcating the Backward Classes Welfare Department ), acts as the nodal 
authority for tribal welfare related activities, in the State. The TD Department 
is assisted by one Directorate at State level and differe nt district level 
functionaries, who are  designated as Revenue Officer s (ROs) in terms of 
West Bengal Land Reforms (WBLR) Act. The Directorate of Land Records and 
Surveys (DLRS), West Bengal, under the Land & Land Reforms and Refugee 
Relief & Rehabilitation Department (L&LR and RR &R) looks after the land 
reforms administration in each district.  A Performance Audit covering the 
financial years (FYs) 2017-18 to 2021-22, was undertaken to assess the various 
aspects related to land management in tribal areas. 
Audit observed that there were no notified tribal areas in the State of West 
Bengal. The existent system of identification of tribal population and their land 
holdings for flagging in land records was not foolproof, in the test -checked 
districts, as no top ical survey was conducted by the Land Revenue authorities 
and identification of tribal land was being made based on the surname, and that 
too, without any comprehensive surname list.  
(Paragraph 1.2) 
Transfers of tribal holdings, by the tribal population, to non-tribal buyers, were 
regulated under Section 14 (C) of the WBLR Act. However, Audit noticed that 
there was no uniformity in dealing with the land transfer applications and the 
codal provisions were interpreted according to the wisdom of the individual 
PO-cum-DWOs, leading to an asymmetric approach in interpretation.  
(Paragraphs 1.3.1.1 & 1.3.2.5)  
The WBLR Act does not contain provisions regarding transfers of tribal 
holdings between t he tribal population. Therefore , cases of transfers/ sale 
between tribal sellers and tribal buyers were not routed through the 
PO-cum-DWOs, leading to the extent of checking being diluted.  
(Paragraph 1.3.2.1) 
In the test-checked districts, there were instances of tribal lands being alienated 
through by-passing of the permission of the Revenue Officer as well as improper 
assessment of the Fair Market value of tribal lands  by the Revenue officers, 
resulting in the tribal land owners receiving sale proceeds that were lower than 
the assessed fair market value.  
(Paragraphs 1.3.3, 1.3.4.2 & 1.3.4.3) 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
2 
Instances were noticed where Government failed to protect interests of the tribal 
people in case of acquisition of land in mineral rich areas by Eastern Coalfields 
Limited (ECL)/  Bharat Co king Coal Limited (BCCL) through inaction and 
non-involvement of district level functionaries ( i.e., ROs, Collectors of the 
respective districts, etc.). This resulted in short receipt of compensation by tribal 
land owners amounting to ₹ 15.25 crore during FYs  2017-18 to 2021 -22 in 
66 test-checked cases and deficiencies in rehabilitation and resettlement 
provided by these ECL/ BCCL offices to ST people whose lands were acquired. 
There was difference in price of land paid by ECL for vested land and land 
purchased from the STs. Audit found that for an acre of land, tribals were 
compensated at much lower rates ranging between ₹ 2.50 lakh and ₹ 12.63 lakh 
vis-à-vis the compensation allowed to the Gov ernment ranging between 
₹ 19.77 lakh and ₹ 125.00 lakh. State functionaries were not involved in the 
preparation process of Rehabilitation Action Plan (RAP) despite provisions in 
the policy of these entities. 
(Paragraph 1.4) 
Further, deficiencies in i mplementation of the Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (Forest 
Rights Act, 2006) came to notice during audit as distribution of record of rights 
to the tribal dwellers of forest land  was slow. It was noticed that in Paschim 
Medinipur and Jhargram districts, out of total 36,056 cases of rejection for 
granting record of rights, 52  per cent (18,894 cases) cases accounted for 
insufficient documentation or evidence of residence; while 24  per cent 
(8,464 cases) for not being forest land and rest 24  per cent (8,606 cases) for 
mulitiple applications against same piece of land. 
(Paragraphs 1.5.1 & 1.5.2) 
No habitat rights to Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) were 
granted in contravention of Forest Rights Act, 2006. Further, the Scheduled 
Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) 
Rules 2007 stipulated that the State Government was to ensure that forest 
dwelling scheduled tribes and other traditional forest dwellers were extended 
benefits accruing from all government schemes including those relating to land 
improvement, land productivity, basic amenities and other livelihood measures. 
No reply, regarding the status on this account, was received from West Bengal 
Tribal Development Co-operative Corporation Limited (the nodal authority for 
implementation of Forest Rights Act in the State).  
(Paragraphs 1.5.7 & 1.5.8) 
1.1 Introduction 
According to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, promulgated 
under Article 342 of the Constitution of India, as amended till date, 40 Ethnic 
Tribes have been notified as Scheduled Tribes (STs), in West Bengal1. As per 
Census 2011, the ST population in West Bengal constituted 5.8 0 per cent2 of 
the total population of the State, while the Tribal population of West Bengal 
constituted 5.08 per cent of the total tribal population of the country. Among 
the ethnic tribes of West Bengal, Toto (Jalpaiguri district), Birhor (Purulia) and 
Lodha (Paschim Medinipur), were notified as Particularly Vulnerable Tribal 
Groups (PVTGs), in terms of backwardness, ac ross different development 
 
1 Source: Annual Administrative Report of the Tribal Development Department 2017-18 
2 52,96,953 out of 9,12,76,115 

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
 
3 
indicators. The ST population was highest in the Paschim Medinipur district 
(8.80 lakh), followed by Purulia (5.41 lakh), Bardhaman (4.89  lakh) and 
Bankura (3.69  lakh). There is, however, n o Scheduled tribal area in 
West Bengal. 
Convergence of Acts relating to management of tribal land, including issue 
of alienation: Alienation of land means dispossession of land of an individual 
or community, following transfer or change of ownership, title or possession. 
Section 14, Chapter IIA, of the West Bengal Land Reforms (WBLR) Act, 1955, 
is the fundamental legislation dealing with land alienation and restoration of 
alienated lands of tribal communities 3  in West Bengal, including various 
restrictions and stipulated ways of transfer of land by an ST raiyat4.  
The Project Officer -cum-District Welfare Officer (PO -cum-DWO), Backward 
Classes Welfare, of each district, has been designated as the ‘Revenue Officer5’ 
(RO) of the district, under the WBLR Act, 1955.  
The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of 
Forest Rights) Act, 2006 [Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006], seeks to recognize 
and vest the forest rights and occupation, in forest land, in forest dwelling STs 
and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (OTFDs), who have been residing in such 
forests for generations, without any recorded rights. It provides for a framework 
for recording the forest rights so vested and the nature of evidence required for 
such recognition and vesting, in regard to forest land. Out of the 23 districts of 
the State, 13 districts6 were identified where there was scope of implementation 
of the provisions of FRA, 2006. The rules of business of the Tribal Development 
(TD) Department encompass all matters pertaining to the FRA and forest 
produce.  
Reflection in land records:  The Directorate of Land Records and Surveys 7 
(DLRS), West Bengal, under the L&LR and RR &R Department is responsible 
 
3 Section 14E of Chapter IIA of the WBLR Act, 1955, inter -alia stipulates the powers of Revenue Officer 
to set aside improper transfers, by a ST raiyat,  in contravention of the provisions of Section 14C, or if 
the permission for the transfer is found to have been obtained by misrepresentation or fraud.  When the 
Revenue Officer has passed any such order, he shall restore the transferred plot of land or part thereof, 
to the transferor or his successor-in-interest. The word "restoration" shall mean restoration of the plot 
of land or part thereof, which has been transferred by a raiyat belonging to a Scheduled Tribe and 
include an equivalent quantum of plot o f land or part thereof, of the same character, within the near 
vicinity of the transferred plot of land or part thereof. 
4 ‘Raiyat’ means a person or institution holding land for any purpose.  
5 As per the WBLR Act, 1955, substantial powers, regarding the alienation and restoration of Tribal land, 
are vested in the “Revenue Officers”. The matter of alienation of tribal land is specifically dealt with in 
the Backward Classes Welfare Department and the Tribal Development Department. The Officers of the 
Department i.e., PO-cum-DWOs/ Addl. DWOs/ BCWOs, in the districts, act as the “Revenue Officer” 
and discharge their duties for the purposes of implementing the provisions of Chapter IIA, Section 14 of 
the WBLR Act, in relation to transfer of tribal lands. Moreover, these Departments are also entrusted 
with the work of enforcement of restoration of alienated lands, to the Scheduled Tribes, under the extant 
Rules. 
6 Purulia, Bankura, Paschim Medinipur, Jhargram, Jalpaiguri, Alipurduar, Bardhaman, Cooch Behar, 
Hooghly, Birbhum, Darjeeling, Kalimpong and Murshidabad. 
7 The DLRS and Joint Land Reforms Commissioner, WB, implements the integrated set-up of land reforms 
administration, at different administrative levels, in each district, and looks after the work relating to 
the set-up. He functions under the overall control, supervision and guidance of the Board of Revenue, in 
general, and the Land & Land Reforms Commissioner, in particular.  He is also responsible for 
implementation of land reforms measures in the State. The DLRS, West Bengal, is authorised to issue 
technical instructions, subject to guidelines, if any, that may be issued by the Board of Revenue, from 
time to time, to be followed in technical matters, including preparation of maps, land surveys etc. The 
DLRS may issue such detailed instructions, as are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act, or with 
the provisions of any act or Rules, or with any order or notification of the Government, or the Board of 
Revenue, for the time being, in force. 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
4 
for land reforms administration in each district. It flags the relevant plot 
numbers held by ST community as ‘Section 14C applicable’ in its database of 
land records. During the mutation process in “ Banglarbhumi” (online portal of 
Land and Land Reforms Department to help citizens access land details and 
view all land related transactions in the State), the memo number of the 
permission order granted by the RO of the district is recorded. As per the records 
made available to audit, the L & LR and RR &R Department comes into the 
picture during the process of verification of land details, when it is to be 
ascertained if a particular plot of land belongs to a person from a Scheduled 
Tribe, and the mutation part, after the sale/ mortgage/ gift/ transfer deed, is made 
in the Registration offices, under the Directorate of Registration and Stamp 
Duty.  
1.1.1 Organizational Structure  
The Tribal Development (TD) Department, which had been created 
(March 2014) by bifurcating the Backward Classes Welfare Department, is 
assisted by the Directorate of Tribal Development (headed by the Commissioner 
of TD Directorate) and acts as the nodal authority for tribal welfare related 
activities, in the State. At the district level, the functio ns are managed by the 
PO-cum-DWO/ District Welfare Officer. The West Bengal Tribal Development 
and Co -operative Corporation Ltd. (WBTDCC), under the administrative 
control of the Department, was the nodal office for implementation of the Forest 
Rights Act, 2006. 
Chart 1.1: Organisational Structure of the TD Department 
 
Source: Data sourced from TD Department; Note: CRI: Cultural Research Institute, ACR: Assistant 
Commissioner for Reservation, JCR: Joint Commissioner for Reservation; JS: Joint Secretary, DS: 
Deputy Secretary , OSD: Officer on Special Duty , WBSCSTOBCDFC: West Bengal Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes Development and Finance Corporation , 
WBTDCC: West Bengal Tribal Development Cooperative Commission and SO: Section Officer 
 
 
Secretary 
 
Minister-in-charge 
 
Corporation 
 
WBSCSTO 
BCDFC 
 
WBTDCC 
Ltd. 
 
Directorate 
 
Jt. Director 
 
Deputy Director 
 
Asst. Director 
 
SO (Ind) 
 
District 
Establishment 
PO-cum-DWO/ District 
Tribal Officers 
 
Commissioner 
 
Director 
 
Deputy Director 
 
Cultural Research 
Officer 
 
CRI 
 
Secretariat 
 
Spl. Secy. 
  
JCR
  
 
JS
  
 
JS
  
 
DS
  
 
Jt. Director 
 
CRI 
 
Asst. 
Secy. 
 
Registrar 
 
OSD 
 
Inspecting Staff 
 
Special Officer 
 
Liasion Officer 
 
Section Officer 
 
Typist Supervisor 
 
Head Assistants 

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
 
5 
1.1.2 Audit Objectives 
The audit objectives were to examine whether: 
• an effective and efficient system, to identify tribal persons and tribal 
specified areas, in the State of West Bengal, was in existence. 
• the procedures of alienation and restoration of land, belonging to the 
scheduled tribes, had been properly followed and modified, as required, 
in a timely manner, to protect the rights of the ST population. 
• there were adequate internal controls in place, to monitor the 
management of tribal land. 
1.1.3 Audit Criteria 
Audit assessed various aspects of compliance, to the following Acts and Rules: 
• West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 
• The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 
• West Bengal LR Manual 
• Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition 
of Forest Rights) Act, 2006, and the Rules framed thereunder  
• West Bengal Land Reforms Rules, 1965 
• The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 
• Orders and notifications, issued from time to time, by the GoI and 
GoWB 
In addition, Audit also examined the adequacy of land value / compensation 
paid, and rehabilitation measures taken in regard to tribal lands acquired by the 
Eastern Coalfields Limited (ECL) and Bharat Coking Coal Limited, (BCCL) 
(both being subsidiaries of Coal India Limited), with regard to the 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) policy/ schemes of Coal India Limited.  
1.1.4 Audit Scope and methodology 
Audit covered a period of five years, from FY 2017 -18 to FY 2021-22. At the 
State level, records of the Tribal Development Department, its Directorate and 
the West Bengal Tribal Development and Co -operative Corporation Ltd. 
(WBTDCC), were scrutinised. Six districts, viz. Paschim Bardhaman, Birbhum, 
Paschim Medinipur, Jhargram, Jalpaiguri and Purulia, were selected, based on 
stratified sampling on the ST population, as per  Census 2011. In these 
six test-checked districts, relevant records of PO-cum-DWOs, Divisional Forest 
Officers (DFOs), District Land and Land Reforms Officers (DL&LROs), 
Additional District Sub -Registrars (ADSRs) and Land Acquisition Officers 
(LAOs), were scrutinized. In addition, records of three Eastern Coalfields 
Limited offices8 (ECL) and one Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL) office 9, 
in the Paschim Bardhaman district, as well as one ECL office 10 in the Purulia 
district, were also checked, as these companies had acquired land from people 
belonging to ST communities, during the period covered by Audit.  
 
8 Salanpur Area, Sripur Area and Kunustoria Area 
9 Barakar Area 
10 Parbelia Area 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
6 
An entry conference was held in January 2023, with the Tribal Development 
Department and the Land & Land Reforms department, wherein the audit 
objectives, audit criteria, sampling and methodology were discussed. Responses 
received from various levels of fu nctionaries, against audit communications, 
were also factored in, while arriving at the audit findings. Further, repl ies as 
received (May 2023) from the Land & Land Reforms and Refugee  Relief & 
Rehabilitation Department have been suitably factored in the Report.  
Audit Findings 
The Performance Audit revealed various systemic and compliance deficiencies, 
as well as weaknesses in the internal control mechanism, in the management of 
Tribal Lands, in the selected districts. These have been discussed in the 
following paragraphs. 
1.2 Absence of a foolproof system for identifying the tribal population 
and its land holdings 
As already mentioned in Paragraph 1.1 of this Report, there is no scheduled 11 
tribal area in West Bengal. However, the same may be viewed in conjunction 
with the following facts:  
(i) In the Directorate of Land Records and Surveys, Kolkata, no system of 
identification of tribal population, by the LR authorities, was in place. The 
test-checked DL & LRO offices could no t furnish any data on the 
block-wise tribal population, for the period under Audit. The offices also 
stated that block-wise land holding areas could not be segregated for the 
tribal population and that no records were maintained by them, in respect 
of the number of block-wise landless STs.  
(ii) No surveys had been conducted by the LR authorities, in the selected 
districts, to identify the tribal land. Tribal land was being identified on the 
basis of the surnames of the persons whose land was to be mutated and 
flagged under Section 14C 12. In the absence of an exhaustive list of 
surnames for determining tribal identity, prescribed by the TD 
Department, the comprehensiveness of the process of identification of 
STs, and their land holdings, was doubtful and incomplete. Thus, chances 
of tribal land remaining unflagged by the L&LR and RR &R Department 
could not be ruled out. Absence of an exhaustive database of the tribal 
population and their land holdings, led to non-protection of ST land rights, 
as highlighted later in this report (vide Paragraphs 1.4.2 and 1.4.3). 
(iii) In cases involving alienation of land from tribal communities (i.e. transfer 
of land from tribals to non -tribals) it was essential that specific guidance 
was in place for the Registering Authorities to ensure that the price of land 
actually paid to tribals, on sale of their landholdings, was not lower than 
 
11 As per the Constitution of India, the President of India, may, by order, declare an area to be a Scheduled 
Area. 
12 Section 14C of Chapter II A the WBLR Act, 1955, deals with the various modes of transfer of land, by 
Scheduled Tribe communities, which includes sale or gift to the Government, for public or charitable 
purpose and with the ST persons - complete usufructuary mortgage for a period not exceeding seven 
years, sale, gift, will or exchange with another ST person. It is also provided that, any such  ST 
raiyat may, with the previous permission, in writing, of the Revenue Officer, transfer, by sale, his plot 
of land, or any part thereof, to a person not belonging to any Scheduled Tribe, on fulfillment of certain 
conditions. 

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
7 
the prevalent market rates of land in the vicinity. Audit observed that in 
absence of such guidance, apart from the scanned copies of deeds, no 
tribal-wise details were maintained in relation to price/ consideration of 
land actually paid with reference to the market value, in the Registering 
offices. Audit also observed that no comments/ observations had been 
made by the Registering Authorities in cases involving price/ 
consideration of land actually paid being lower than market value. This 
meant that there was no mechanism to safeguard the financial interest of 
the tribals.  
The ADSR offices stated that there was no role of the Registering 
Authorities, in cases where the price of land payable was found/ 
discovered to be lower than the prevalent market rates of land in the 
vicinity.  
In reply, the L&LR and RR&R Department stated (May 2023) that 
identification of tribal population on the basis of surname of the raiyats and 
flagging their lands in the system of mutation, has been done in most of the 
cases and the work in respect of the left -out cases was going on. This was not 
exhaustive but covered a high percentage of the lands of tribal people. A holistic 
and comprehensive survey may not be feasible for identification of lands of each 
of the persons belonging to Scheduled Tribe. Moreover, no area in West Bengal 
is Scheduled area in terms of the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution. 
The reply though did not enclose any details regarding actual identification of 
tribal population based on surname of the raiyats and flagging their lands in the 
system of mutation & did not offer any reason as to why a holistic and 
comprehensive survey was not feasible. Hence, Audit was not able to gain 
assurance regarding  the authenticity of the furnished reply.  Further, the 
Departmental reply did not touch upon the issue of protection of financial 
interest of the tribal population. 
Recommendation: 
1.1 State Government may consider putting in place a system of 
identification of the tribal population and its land holdings, by way 
of extensive surveys. 
1.3 Alienation of land by the Scheduled Tribes under Section 14C 
As per Section 14C of Chapter IIA of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955, 
a raiyat, belonging to ST, may transfer his holding or part thereof, inter alia, by 
sale or exchange, in favour of any person belonging to a n ST. It was provided 
that any such raiyat may, with the previous written permission of the Revenue 
Officer (PO-cum-DWO), transfer, by sale, his holding, or any part thereof, to a 
non-ST person. It was further provided that no such permission shall be granted 
by the RO, unless he is satisfied that no purchaser, belonging to ST, is willing 
to pay the fair market price o f the holding or any part thereof, and that the 
proposed sale is intended to be made for one or more of the following purposes, 
namely:  
a. for the improvement of any part of the holding,
b. for investment, or
c. for such other purposes, as may be prescribed.

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
8 
1.3.1 Transfer of land by ST raiyats 
 
1.3.1.1 Absence of specific conditions for sale / transfer of land by STs, 
resulted in different decisions by different PO-cum-DWOs  
As sub-section (e) of Section 14C stipulated that sale may be permitted by the 
RO “for such other purposes as may be prescribed”, it was imperative that the 
Government prescribed the admissible purposes for granting permissions. 
Government, however, had not specified the same, as of date (March 2023). In 
the test-checked districts, it was noticed that, out of the total 191 permissions, 
granted during 2017 -22, in 106 cases (55  per cent), transfer of land, from the 
ST raiyats belonging to non -tribal buyers, was permitted, for other purposes 
excluding prescribed ones by invoking sub-section (e), as detailed in Table 1.1. 
Table 1.1: Purposes for which permissions were granted under Section 14C 
during 2017-22  
Sl. 
No. District 
No. of 
permissio
ns 
granted 
(2017-22) 
Permissions granted for 
Remarks 
Buying 
a new 
piece 
of land 
Buying 
a new 
house/ 
flat 
Constructi
on/ repair 
of dwelling 
houses 
Medical 
Treatment 
Daughter’
s marriage 
Other 
purposes 
1 Paschim 
Bardhaman 
151 12 03 15 17 19 85 Out of the 85 
permissions granted 
for “Other purposes”, 
51 permissions had 
been issued for 
transfer of tribal land 
to ECL and BCCL, for 
mining activities. 
2 Paschim 
Medinipur 
10 0 0 0 0 0 10 Permissions were 
granted only when 
there had been a prior 
exchange of land, 
from the non -tribal 
buyer to the tribal 
raiyat. 
3 Jhargram 3 0 0 1 0 0 2 -- 
4 Birbhum 12 5 1 5 1 0 0 Most of the applicants 
cited a host of reasons 
for sale of their land, 
sometimes citing up 
to three reasons. 
5 Purulia 0 - - - - - - No permissions were 
granted during 2017 -
22  
6 Jalpaiguri 15 2 3 1 0 0 9 For other purposes, 
applicants cited 
reasons such as old 
age/ Fixed deposit / 
barren land sale / to 
return loan amount/ 
business purpose etc. 
Total 191 19 07 22 18 19 106  
Source: Data furnished by PO-cum-DWO of respective districts 
Scrutiny also showed variance in the approaches adopted by different ROs. In 
Paschim Bardhaman, Birbhum, Jalpaiguri and Jhargram, permissions were 
granted not only for purposes like buying a new piece of land or house 
(investment) and construction / repair of their dwelling houses (improvement) 
but also for purposes like medical treatment, daughter’s marriage, urgent work 
etc. It was further observed that the PO -cum-DWOs of these districts did not 
call for any documents in support of investments, or improvements of any part 

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
 
9 
of the holdings to be made by these tribal persons, while granting permissions. 
In Paschim Medinipur, however, permissions had been given only fo r the 
purpose of investment and on six occasions, permissions had been denied on the 
ground that they were sought for daughter’s marriage, treatment, business and 
purchase of land. 
Non-issuance of clear instructions was not in consonance with the spirit of 
Section 14C and the extant  Act, therefore, could not be a deterrent against 
alienation of tribal land, in favour of non-tribal purchasers. 
On this being pointed out, PO-cum-DWOs, Birbhum and Paschim Bardhaman, 
confirmed (January 2023) non-availability of any clear directions from the 
higher authorities, in regard to the applicability of the phrase “for such other 
purposes as may be prescribed”. PO -cum-DWO, Birbhum, further stated that 
the same would be brought to the notice of the higher authorities, for directions. 
PO-cum-DWOs, of the other test-checked districts, had not furnished any reply 
(September 2024).  
1.3.1.2 Absence of guidelines for averting full land alienation 
It was observed that there was no system of pre -permission check, in place, 
either for the PO -cum-DWOs, or for the Land Authorities, who were the 
custodians of land records and where the final mutations took place , to ensure, 
before granting permission under Section 14C, that the tribal person alienating 
(through exchange/ gift/ mortgage) land did not become completely landless in 
the process.  
A good practice was observed in Paschim Medinipur, where the PO-cum-DWO 
granted permission for alienation of land, under Se ction 14C, on the 
pre-condition that the non -tribal person (intended buyer) transferred another 
piece of land, of at least the same value, in favour of the tribal person (intended 
seller). In the other five test -checked districts, there was no system in place to 
ensure this, in the absence of protective regulations. 
However, no such protection existed in the cases where sale / exchange/ gift/ 
mortgage was made between tribal sellers and tribal buyers, which, as per the 
position of law, were not routed through the PO -cum-DWO. In the absence of 
any protective regulations, the intended tribal sellers were exposed to the risk 
of becoming landless.  
Audit observed, in Birbhum, that, out of 12 permissions issued during 2017-22, 
in six cases, the tribal sellers had become entirely landless, in their respective 
mouzas13, due to sale of their small land-holdings to non-tribals. 
On this being pointed out in audit, the PO -cum-DWO, Birbhum, stated 
(January 2023) that: (i)  in the absence of any systemic checks having been 
prescribed, care was being taken to avert such cases of landlessness, while 
conducting hearings, on a case-to-case basis and (ii) since cases of tribal to tribal 
land transfer were not routed through the RO, chances of the selle r becoming 
landless could not be identified and prevented by the RO. The PO -cum-DWO, 
Paschim Bardhaman, also clarified (February 2023) that no such guidelines, for 
averting full land alienation, had been prescribed by Government.  
 
13 ‘Mouza’ is a geographical expression of a unit of landmass for revenue settlement and revenue 
collection. 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
10 
In reply, the L&LR and RR&R Department stated (May 2023) that the matter 
of assessment of feasibility of guidelines for averting full land alienation has 
been referred to the Tribal Development Department and it is under their 
examination. 
Recommendation:  
1.2 State Government may assess the feasibility of putting in place 
guidelines for averting full land alienation among tribals. 
1.3.2 Lack of control on transfer of land among tribal individuals 
 
1.3.2.1 Exploitation of marginalized tribals by affluent tribals  
Scrutiny of case records and files relating  to mutation (change in Record o f 
Rights), in the office of the Block Land & Land Reforms Officer (BL&LRO), 
Neturia, in Purulia district, revealed that a permission order had been issued, in 
February 2016, by the PO-cum-DWO, Purulia, to an individual A 14, belonging 
to the ST community, for sale of 19.3375 acres of land, to a private limited 
company, namely M/ s Shakambhari Ispat and Power Ltd. (Company).  
Case records/ files, related to the aforesaid permission order, were not furnished 
to Audit, by the PO-cum-DWO, Purulia, though called for. Subsequently, out of 
19.3375 acres of the above -mentioned land,  11 sale deeds, involving 
9.432 acres, were scrutinized by Audit, in ADSR, Raghunathpur and the District 
Registrar, Purulia. Detailed scrutiny of the 11 purchase deeds and the 
corresponding sale deeds, revealed that, at first, land had been bought from 
tribals, on several occasions (duri ng 2012 -14), by the t ribal individual ‘A’. 
Subsequently, the entire parcel of land had been sold to the Company, against a 
single permission order, issued in February 2016. 
The recitals of the deeds and scrutiny of connected records showed: 
• Since these transactions of sale of lands were done within the ST 
community, such cases, where the sale/ exchange/ gift/ mortgage had been 
made between tribals to tribals, had n ot been routed through the 
PO-cum-DWO, as per the position of law.  
• There was no mechanism, in place, to ensure payment of fair market price, 
to the ST seller, by an ST buyer. In the 11 test-checked cases, tribal land 
had been transferred, in favour of individual A (ST buyer), at a value 
lower than the assessed market value determined by the ADSR, 
Raghunathpur (as per the registered deeds), under the Directorate of 
Registration and Stamp Reven ue. The raiyats belonging to the ST 
community were, thereby, wrongfully deprived o f ` 8.40 lakh, while 
transferring lands to the ST buyer, at prices below the assessed market 
rate (details shown in Appendix 1.1). Had the cases been routed through 
the Reven ue Officer, and a system of cross -verification of the data / 
information, available with the Registration Directorate been in place, due 
receipt of the “fair market value” of land, to the tribal seller could have 
been ensured.  Had there been such a system in place, such 
short-payments, to the tribal sellers, could have been avoided. 
Going by the spirit of Section 14C of the WBLR Act, 1955, provisions have 
been made in this section to safeguard the tribal raiyats, against any kind of land 
 
14 Shri BXXXu Baski, District: Paschim Bardhaman, PS: Jamuria 

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
 
11 
alienation, by force, greed, inducement, deceit etc. However, exploitation of 
small marginalized tribals, at the hands of affluent and influential tribal 
individuals, cannot be ruled out, in these types of intra-community transactions. 
On this being pointed out in audit, PO -cum-DWO, Purulia, stated  
(January 2023) that the matter was out of his knowledge, as no permission was 
required, during transfer of land from one tribal raiyat, to another tribal raiyat. 
Recommendation:  
1.3 In view of instances of exploitation of marginalized tribals by 
affluent tribals, State Government may consider introducing a 
suitable mechanism to ensure that transfer of land from one tribal 
raiyat, to another tribal raiyat, is permitted with due authorisation. 
1.4 State Government should develop effective checks and validation 
controls in e-nathikaran/ banglarbhumi portals in cases involving 
alienation of land from tribal communities.  
1.3.2.2 Land was eventually transferred to a private company, without 
payment of fair prices to the original tribal land owners, due to lack 
of checks exercised by the PO-cum-DWO 
Scrutiny of sale deeds, registered in the ADSR, Raghunathpur, in the Purulia 
district, revealed that several plots of land (total area of 7.855 acres), were 
bought by a single ST individual (same individual ‘A’, referred to in 
Paragraph 1.3.2.1), from other tribal people, during 2016 to 2022, resulting in 
alienation of land from tribals, without any control or checks having been 
exercised by the concerned authorities. Details of the sale deeds registered are 
as shown in Appendix 1.2. This entailed a loss of ` 21.01 lakh to the original 
tribal landowners owing to payment being made to them at rates below the fair 
price.  
In this context, it is noteworthy that the same tribal person (individual A) had 
earlier been involved in purchase of land, from small and marginalized tribals 
in the area, thereby avoiding the permission of the PO-cum-DWO, and had later 
transferred the whole chunk of land, t o a private company  (as discussed in 
Paragraph 1.3.2.1). The land finally ended in the hands of a private company, 
on the basis of a single permission accorded by the PO-cum-DWO of the district. 
There were no records available to indicate that the concerned PO -cum-DWO 
had assessed, in the instant case, the justifications, merits and modus-operandi 
of accumulation of land, by the tribal person A, by purchasing smaller pieces of 
land, from other tribal persons. Thus, the PO had failed to exercise such checks, 
which could have ensured that the selling tribals received fair market value of 
their lands and u sed the sale proceeds for “improvement” or “investment” 
purposes. 
On this being pointed out in audit, the PO -cum-DWO, Purulia, replied 
(January 2023) that the matter was out of his knowledge, as no permission was 
required, during transfer of land, from one tribal raiyat, to another tribal raiyat. 
1.3.2.3  Indirect a cquisition of tribal land by Priva te Company at 
concessional rate 
During scrutiny of Long term settlement (LTS) case records & files maintained 
in the O/o the DL&LRO, Purulia, Sale Deeds registered in ADSR Raghunathpur 
& related conversion files maintained in the BL&LRO, Neturia, it was revealed 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
12 
that three number of permission orders were issued by the PO -cum-DWO, 
Purulia to two individuals (married couple) belonging to ST community 
(Individual A and his wife) 15 for sale of 29.4975 acre of land to Shakambhari 
Ispat and Power Ltd. (SIPL) in mouza –Radhamadhabpur16 in Purulia district in 
February 2016. The whole quntum of land was sold to SIPL in March 2016 and 
details of sale deeds registered (ADSR Raghunathpur) in favour of SIPL against 
the respective Permission Orders are shown in the table below: 
Table 1.2: Details of acquisition by SIPL 
Sl. 
No. 
Permission 
order/ Date Name of the seller Name of the 
purchaser 
Deed No/ Year & 
(Date of Registration) 
Area 
(Acre) 
1 172/ BCWP 
Dt.12.02.2016 
BXXXu Baski  Shakambhari Ispat 
and Power Ltd. 
(SIPL) 
140300748/ 2016 
(17.03.2016) 
140300766/ 2016 
(21.03.2016) 
140300767/ 2016 
(21.03.2016) 
19.3375  
2 260/ BCWP  
Dt 26.02.2016 
140300749/ 2016 
(17.03.2016) 
4.51 
3 261/ BCWP  
Dt. 26.02.2016 
NXXXli Baski; 
W/o BXXXu Baski 
140300739/ 2016 
(17.03.2016) 
5.65 
    Total Area 29.4975   
Source: Data obtained from office of DL&LRO, Purulia 
Firstly, small plots of land were bought from marginalized tribals on several 
occasions (during 2012 -15) by this couple belonging to the ST community. 
Later the whole parcel of land was sold to SIPL as mentioned earlier in the 
Paragraph 1.3.2.1.  
Moreover, the quantum of land held in the name of the tribal individual ‘A’ & 
his wife (29.4975 acres) crossed the prescribed land ceiling area17 prescribed 
under section 14 M of the WBLR Act, 1955, before it was ultimately sold to 
SIPL in March 2016. However, the title of land (ROR) was not in their name, 
nor were any documents found on record regarding the steps taken by the 
concerned LR authorit y (DL &LRO Purulia) for vesting of excess of ceiling 
area.  
Further scrutiny of LTS cases and case files related to vesting of  excess of  
ceiling area, under Section 14 Y of the WBLR Act, 1955, in DL&LRO, Purulia, 
revealed that SIPL had applied for LTS of 72.83 acres of land. Detailed scrutiny 
revealed that, out of 72.83 acres, the company had purchased 52.53 acres of 
land, without prior permission of the State Government. The L&LR and RR&R 
Department, in its communication in April 2018, stated that 52.53 acres of tribal 
Raiyati land (beyond the ceiling area as per Section 14 Y) had been mutated in 
the name of the company. The company agreed to obtain permission, under 
section 14Y of the WBLR Act, 1955, in respect of 63.35 acres of land (including 
10.82 acres of Govt. vested land apart from those 52.53 acres of tribal Raiyati 
land). Audit observed that the residual 9.48 acres (3 .53 acres of tribal Raiyati 
 
15 BXXXu Baski & NXXXli Baski; W/o BXXXu Baski) 
16 JL no. 117 & in mouza – Madandi, JL no. 120 of Neturia Block 
17 24.22 Acres 

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
 
13 
land for which requisite permission was not available and 5.95 acres of 
non-tribal Raiyati land), was still to be purchased.  
Permission was, therefore, granted under the provisions of Section 14Y of the 
WBLR Act, 1955, in September 2019, by the L& LR Department, to SIPL, for 
the acquisition and holding of the 63.35 acres of land, as per the following 
conditions. 
i) LTS of 52.53 acres of land on payment of concessional Salami18, at the 
rate of two per cent of the current market value and the usual annual rent 
of 0.3 per cent of the current market value. 
ii) LTS of 10.82 acre s of Govt vested land on payment of Salami, at the 
rate of 95 per cent of the current market value and the usual annual rent 
of 0.3 per cent of the current market value. 
iii) The Company was not to acquire the said land illegally or forcibly, in 
any circumstances, whatsoever. 
SIPL requested (September 2019) the DL&LRO, Purulia, for grant of LTS, for 
63.65 acres and the formal proposal for LTS was sent, to the L&LR and RR&R 
Department, by DL&LRO, Purulia, in December 2019, stating that the market 
value of 63.35 acres was ` 5.64 crore, as per the valuation, assessed by Inspector 
General, Registrations (IGR) West Bengal. 
The possession of the aforesaid land (63.35 acres) was given to the SIPL, in 
March 2020, as communicated by BL &LRO, Neturia, to the DL&LRO, 
Purulia. 
Further scrutiny of LTS case records revealed that a sanction of LTS of 
5.28 acres19 of land was again accorded to SIPL, in August 2021, the possession 
of which was given to SIPL in September 2021. 
Audit scrutiny and cross -verification of the land schedule attached with the 
aforementioned two Sanction Orders, with the land schedule attached with the 
Permission Orders given by the PO-cum-DWO, Purulia, revealed that 
52.53 acres and 5.28 acres of land included all the plots of tribal land ( i.e. 
29.4975 acres) purchased against three Permission Orders issued by the 
PO-cum-BCW, Purulia. Detailed analysis revealed the following: 
a) Even though the titles of the various tribal plots had not been transferred 
in the couple`s name, nor had the ROR been framed in their favour, 
permission had been granted, for sale of these plots, by this couple, by 
the PO-cum-DWO, Purulia. The extant rules and regulations, in regard 
to vesting of  excess of ceiling area  under Section 14 M of the WBLR 
Act, 1955, failed to act as deterrent against this mass acquisition of ST 
land by two tribal individuals (married couple)  at the first instance  and 
its consequent sale to a private company. 
b)  SIPL c ould purchase and acquire such a large parcel of tribal land 
(i.e. 29.4975 acres), belonging to several number of small and 
marginalised tribals, from two tribal individuals (couple), against only 
three permission orders of PO-cum-DWO, Purulia. As such, the entire 
 
18 The premium payable/ paid in connection with acquisition of land is called as salami 
19 2083-GE(M)/3M -40/15 (Pt-I) dt 25.08.2021 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
14 
system put in place for safeguarding the interests of tribals, as envisaged 
under the provisions of Section 14C of the WBLR Act, was defeated.  
c) The private company was accorded sanction for LTS of 52.53 acres and 
5.28 acres (inclusive of 29.4975 acres of tribal land) of such land, on 
payment of concessional Salami, at the rate of two per cent of the current 
market value, as against the usual salami of 95  per cent, while the 
interests of the tribal raiyats, who might have been rendered landless, was 
ignored. Due to this indirect acquisition of land, the company was 
completely absolved from the responsibility of making any provisions for 
rehabilitation of Project Affected Persons (PAPs), among whom, the 
majority were tribals. The LR authorities, that accorded the sanction for 
LTS, against tribal land, failed to initiate any corrective measures, with 
regard to ensuring proper compensation.  
On the contrary, the private company was allowed to retain the land in excess 
of ceiling area, through grant of LTS, at much lower rates, as compared to the 
LTS against original government vested land, as illustrated in Table 1.3. 
Table 1.3: Difference in rate of land for Government vested land and land 
purchased from the STs 
Sl 
No. 
Details of Land 
Schedule 
Land value received by the 
marginalised Tribals by 
sale of land to affluent 
tribal, i.e. finally sold to 
company 
(` per acre) 
Value of land paid by 
SIPL as salami at the rate 
of 95 per cent to 
Government on 
Government vested land 
(` per acre) 
1  Mouza - Madandi,  
Jl No. 120 Neturia 
Block in Purulia 
84,29220 9,20,000 
Source: Data obtained from DL&LRO, Purulia 
1.3.2.4 Permission issued to sale tribal land without ascertaining the 
Ownership/ title of land in favour of the seller  
A Permission Order was granted to Bxxxu Baski, by PO-cum-DWO, Purulia in 
February 2016, for sale of land to Shakambhari Ispat and Power Ltd . (SIPL). 
During scrutiny of one sale deed registered (in 2017), in favour of Bxxxu Baski, 
in the ADSR, Raghunathpur , and its cross -verification with the plots of land 
mentioned in the schedule attached with the Permission order , it was observed 
that 0.25 acres of land (Plot no. 38, Khatian no 361; Area 0.13 acre & Plot no . 
38, Khatian no . 170; Area 0.12 acre), was included in the permission order 
referred above. However, the purchase deed of the plot concerned  was 
registered in name of Bxxxu Baski, only in May 2017, after the issuance of 
Permission Order. 
This raises a question on system of verification of land titles of the plots of land 
included in the schedule, annexed with the aforesaid Permission order, as Bxxxu 
Baski was accorded permission to sell tribal land plots (i.e. 0.25 acres), though 
the title of land was not in his favour at that point of time. Details are given in 
Table 1.4. 
 
20 purchase value per acre of land as calculated from Appendix 1.1  

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
 
15 
Table 1.4: Details of Purchase Deed of Bxxxu Baski 
Deed No./ year 
and Name of 
Registration 
Office 
Date of 
Registration 
Buyer Name/ 
Buyer’s 
Address 
Seller Name Seller 
Address 
Plot & Khatian No and 
Area of each plot 
Total 
Area of 
Land 
(Acres) 
140300968/ 
2017 
Raghunathpur 
04.05.2017 Bxxxu Baski,  
 
Axxl Murmu 
& Mxxxxeb 
Murmu, 
Sxxxxeb 
Murmu, 
Sxxxxan 
Murmu, 
Village: 
Madandi, 
District: 
Purulia, PS: 
Neturia, 
Pin: 
723121 
Plot No.: RS-38 
Khatian No.: 291 Area: 
0.12 acre 
 
Plot No.: RS-38 Khatian 
No.: 361 Area: 0.13 acre 
 
Plot No: RS-38 
Khatian No.:170 Area: 0.12 
acre 
 
Plot No.: RS-35 Khatian 
No.: 170 Area: 0.02 acre 
 
Plot No.: RS-39 Khatian 
No.: 170 Area 0.05 acre 
0.44 
Source: Data obtained from Office of DL&LRO, Purulia 
1.3.2.5 Absence of a time limit for processing of applications 
As per the extant Rules, a tribal seller has to apply to the Revenue Officer of the 
District, for obtaining permission, for sale / transfer of his plot of land, to any 
non-tribal person.  Scrutiny of records revealed that there had been delays in the 
processing of applications by the PO -cum-DWOs (Revenue officers), of the 
test-checked districts, as shown in Table 1.5. 
Table 1.5: Delays in processing of applications by PO -cum-DWOs, during 
2017-22  
Sl. 
No. District 
Total 
number of 
applications 
received 
during 
2017-22 
Applicati
ons not 
processed 
Permiss
ions 
granted 
Permissi
ons 
denied 
Status of application under process (pendency) 
for 
less 
than 
one 
year 
for one 
year to 
less 
than 
two 
years 
for two 
years 
to less 
than 
three 
years 
for three 
years to 
less than 
four 
years 
for 
more 
than 
four 
years 
1 Paschim 
Bardhaman21 
193 11 151 2 9 6 0 0 8 
2 Paschim 
Medinipur 
77 24 10 6 13 6 7 4 7 
3 Jhargram 3 0 3 0 - - - - - 
4 Birbhum 31 0 15 0 12 1 0 2 1 
5 Purulia  15 0 0 0 6 8 1 0 0 
6 Jalpaiguri22 75 0 15 0 8 9 3 5 7 
 Total 394 35 194 8 48 30 11 11 23 
Source: Data obtained from Offices of PO-cum-DWO of respective districts 
It was observed that no time limit was stipulated, either under the Act, or under 
the Rules, for disposal of applications received by the PO -cum-DWOs, for 
permission. No subsequent notifications or orders were also found on record, 
prescribing any time limit for disposal (acceptance / rejection) of such 
applications. This position was detrimental to the welfare of the tribal populace, 
as such delays made the entire process of the sale of tribal land very 
 
21 For Paschim Bardhaman, the dates of application for six cases were not available; hence, the status of 
the same has not been included in the above table 
22  Out of 75 cases of permission, received in the office of the PO -cum-DWO, between 2017 -22, 
15 permissions had been granted, and 60 cases of permissions had remained pending. Out of the 60 
pending cases, 32 had been checked in audit 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
16 
cumbersome, leading to deterioration of the demand and price of tribal land. 
This was likely to have acted as a disincentive for tribal persons in getting their 
land property flagged under Section 14C.  
On this being pointed out in audit, PO -cum-DWOs, Birbhum and Paschim 
Burdwan, reiterated (January 2023 and February 2023 respectively) that no time 
limit had been prescribed in the rules, for dis posal of cases under Section 14C. 
PO-cum-DWO Purulia, stated (January 2023) that the delays were caused due 
to the time taken for ascertaining the genuineness of the transfer of ST land, in 
light of various allegations of non-ST persons, motivating STs, for selling their 
land, for various purposes, including business. The remainin g test -checked 
districts did not furnish any reply (September 2024). 
1.3.3 Tribal land was alienated, by -passing permission of the Revenue 
Officer 
In the office of the PO-cum-DWO, Purulia, it was observed that one application, 
of one intended tribal seller B 23, had remained pending, for the purpose of 
permission of sale to a non -tribal person, under Section 14C. Further scrutiny 
of the application showed that a sale deed of the land, with the same particulars 
(viz. area, plot no., khatian etc.), had been executed and registered, in favour of 
a non-tribal person, in the office of the DSR, Purulia, in April 2022, at a rate 
less than the prevailing market rate, even though the application for permission 
had still remained undisposed at the PO -cum-DWO’s end, as of date 
(January 2023).   
Moreover, in the instant case, the raiyat was wrongfully deprived of 
` 1.67 lakh24, while transferring lands to a non -ST buyer, at a price below the 
market rate. 
On further cross -verification of the land schedule, available in the registered 
sale deed, and the corresponding details of Plot & Khatian, as per the land 
records of the LR department (i.e. DL & LRO, Purulia), it was revealed that the 
above-said plot had been mutated in favour of a non-tribal person25.  
It was evident that DSR, Purulia, had failed to apply the necessary checks, while 
processing the application for the sale of land, belonging to an ST person, 
without obtaining, the requisite permission of the RO, in terms of Section 14 C 
of the WBLR Act. M oreover, the Record of Rights (ROR) was framed in the 
name of the non-tribal buyer, even though the said plot should have been flagged 
as tribal land, in the LR records, under Section 14C of the WBLR Act. 
On this being pointed out in audit, PO -cum-DWO, Purulia, replied 
(January 2023) that the matter was not in his knowledge, as the applicant had 
sold his land without permission and had not communicated this matter. The 
DL&LRO Purulia did not furnish any reply (September 2024). 
Thus, the authorities responsible for safeguarding the interests of the tribal 
persons had failed in doing so.  Owing to such failure in safeguarding the 
interests of the tribal persons, the TD Department may contemplate introducing 
a mechanism for ensuring that defaulting Officers are held accountable for such 
failure in discharging their duties.  
 
23 Shri Mxxxb Txxxey 
24 Market Value- ₹ 4.67 lakh and Set Forth Value- ₹ 3.00 Lakh 
25 Shri Sxxxxsh Mxxxxrjee, of  Chunabhatti Rani Road, Purulia 

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
 
17 
1.3.4 Absence of a system of cross -verification of data available with other 
departments 
Cross-verification of permission orders, from the offices of the PO-cum-DWOs 
of the selected districts, with the corresponding sale deeds, from the offices of 
the Districts Registrar/ ADSR offices concerned, revealed several irregularities, 
as described in the following paragraphs: 
1.3.4.1 Receipt of sale proceeds was less than the assessed fair market value, 
in Birbhum and Jhargram  
Scrutiny of permissions, granted by the PO-cum-DWOs, in two districts, viz.: 
Birbhum and Jhargram, for sale of land to non -tribal persons, revealed that 
15 permissions had been accorded by the said offices, during the period between 
December 2019 and May 2022. Study of the corresponding 15 sale deeds and 
their recitals, obtained from the offices of the District Registrars, Birbhum and 
Jhargram, revealed that, in 10 cases (out of these 15 cases), the tribal sellers had 
actually received amounts lower than the amounts sanctioned by the concerned 
ROs. As a result, the tribal sellers had received short -payment of fair market 
prices amounting to ` 83.51 lakh, in these 10 cases, as detailed in Appendix 1.3. 
On this being pointed out in audit, the PO -cum-DWO, Birbhum, stated 
(January 2023) that cross-verification of the data available with the Registration 
Department was being done and valuation reports of the land in question were 
being taken. It was being ensured that the tribal seller received the due fair 
market value, as assessed by the  RO, through examination  of deeds and 
otherwise. The PO -cum-DWO, Jhargram, stated (December 2022) that, due 
hearings of the ST sellers had been conducted, to ascertain that the lands were 
proposed to be sold without any fear, coercion or entrapment. Disposal of the 
cases were done after considerable duration of time and there were sufficient 
opportunities for availing prospective buyers. However, the above instances, 
found by Audit, were contrary to the replies of the PO-cum-DWOs. 
1.3.4.2 Improper assessment of Fair Market value by the Revenue Officer in 
Paschim Bardhaman 
In Paschim Bardhaman , scrutiny revealed that permissions of sale, of land 
belonging to tribal persons, to non-tribal buyers, were being issued after holding 
enquiries and ensuring, inter alia, that no ST buyer was willing to pay the fair 
market price of the holding. However, this was not enough to protect the 
interests of the tribal sellers, as the actual paymen t of fair market prices, by 
non-ST buyers, was not being ensured. Consequent ly, it was observed that, in 
20 test-checked cases, in the district, during 2017 -22, permissions had been 
issued, by the PO-cum-DWO, for transfer of holding or part thereof, by a raiyat 
belonging to an ST person, to a private person not belonging to S T, at rates 
lower than the mark et values, as determined through e -assessment26, by the 
Directorate of Registration and Stamp Revenue. The short payments, vis-à-vis 
the market rates, amounted to ` 94 lakh, in these 20 cases, as detailed in 
Appendix 1.4. 
On this being pointed out in audit, the PO -cum-DWO, Paschim Bardhaman , 
stated (February 2023) that documents had been requisitioned (October 2022) 
 
26 The market value of the land, at the time of registration, is assessed through e -assessment, by the 
Directorate of Registration and Stamp Revenue. 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
18 
from the respective ADSRs, but the same had not been received. The reply was 
not tenable, as the PO -cum-DWO, Paschim Bardhaman, had verified the 
valuations of land, received from the respective ADSRs, while granting 
permissions under Section 14C of the WBLR Act, 1955.  
1.3.4.3 Non-receipt of any valid proof of the total amount of transaction 
In Paschim Bardhaman district, the perm ission orders, issued by the 
PO-cum-DWO, in exercise of the powers vested under Clause 12 of Section 2 
of the WBLR Act, 1955, directed the applicants to submit valid proof of total 
amount of transaction, within one month of the transfer of property.  
However, no such valid proofs, of the total amounts of the transactions made, 
had been received by the PO-cum-DWOs (ROs), in any of the cases, with regard 
to permissions accorded, during 2017-22. Subsequent efforts, if any, on the part 
of the district authorities, for receiving the same, were not found available on 
records. Consequently, the PO -cum-DWOs were not in a position to ascertain 
whether the transfer of land, by a raiyat belonging to a ST community, had been 
made by registered instruments, and at t he agreed price mentioned in the 
permission letter. On this being pointed out in audit, the PO -cum-DWO, 
Paschim Bardhaman, stated (February 2023) that the same would be 
communicated to the concerned sellers/ purchasers.  
Audit observed that the extant Rules and Regulations were silent on the aspect 
of role of the RO, in regard to ascertaining the actual quantum of receipt of 
value, for the land sold by the tribal seller and its subsequent usage. Also, 
Standard Operating Procedures had not been framed, in regard to the registering 
authorities, for counte r-verification of records from the ROs. No checks were 
available in the designated software of e -Nathikaran 27 , in cases involving 
alienation of land for tribal communities. There was no specific arrangement, in 
e-Nathikaran, for entry of specific comments or observations by the registering 
officers, in cases where the valuation of land was found/ discovered to be lower 
than the prevalent market rates of land in the vicinity. 
It was noticed, in audit, that there was no system for cross -verification of the 
data/ information available with other departments, which could have avoided 
instances of short payment to tribal sellers.  
In reply, L&LR and RR&R Department stated (May 2023) the matter  of 
assessment of feasibility of installing a system of cross -verification of data to 
ensure proper receipt of the sale proceeds by the tribals was under examination. 
Recommendations:  
1.5 While processing the application for sale of land, belonging to an 
ST person, State Government may consider introducing a 
mechanism to ensure that responsible officers are held accountable 
for failing to ensure compliance with the provisions under Section 
14 C of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act. 
1.6 State Government may consider installing a system of cross 
verification of the data available with other departments, to ensure 
proper receipt of sale proceeds by tribal sellers. 
 
27 ‘E-Nathikaran’ is an online portal of the Finance Department, that allows property owners to complete 
the process of registering a property in Kolkata and other cities in West Bengal 

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
 
19 
1.4 Transfer of land to ECL and BCCL 
Prayers were submitted (February 2021) by the General Managers of the Eastern 
Coalfields Limited (ECL) and Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL), to 
PO-cum-DWO, Paschim Bardhaman and Purulia, for acquiring tenancy land 
belonging to persons from ST community to revive and boost up coal mining 
activities in different areas in Paschim Bardhaman and Purulia districts. 
Applications were also received, by the PO -cum-DWOs, from person(s) 
belonging to the ST community, for transfer of their lands, in the said areas, to 
ECL/ BCCL. On the basis of the same and after holding enquiry and hearing, 
the PO-cum-DWO of Paschim Bardhaman district, being the RO, in exercise of 
the powers vested under clause 12 of Section 2 of the WBLR Act, 1955, issued 
(between March 2018 and January 2021 28) permissions to 74 applicant s, to 
transfer their lands to ECL / BCCL. It was mentioned in the permission orders 
that compensation was to be provided to the land owners, as per the 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy (R&R Policy), 2012, of Coal India 
Limited.   
As mentioned above, permissions were issued by the RO of Paschim 
Bardhaman, in 74  cases, for transfer of holding or part thereof, by a raiyat 
belonging to the ST community to ECL or BCCL. Scrutiny, however, showed 
that there were instances of lack of governance and control, in the form of 
inadequate involvement of the concerned government functionaries ( i.e. ROs, 
Collectors of the respective districts, etc.) in the process, leading to short-receipt 
of compensation by the tribal land owners and deficiencies in the 
implementation of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement scheme, as elaborated in 
the succeeding paragraphs.  
1.4.1  Short payment of land compensation  
As per Section 26 of the Act of 2013, the Collector shall determine the market 
value of land, following the criteria stipulated under the said Section, for 
assessing and determining the market value of land. In the above test -checked 
cases, the valuation of land under transfer, had not been mentioned in any of the 
permission letters and, instead, it had been mentioned that the same was done 
“As per Coal India norms”.  
It was observed, from the records of the four ECL offices and one BCCL office 
at Barakar, that land had been purchased, by the test -checked offices, directly 
from ST raiyats, at negotiated rates, which were much lower than the fair market 
prices for those plots of land, as determined by e-assessment by the Directorate 
of Registration and Stamp Revenue. Neither the provisions of the Act of 2013, 
nor the provisions of the R&R P olicy, 2012, had been followed by any of the 
test-checked ECL and BCCL offices, in determining the amount of land 
compensation. It was also noticed that there had not been any involvement of 
the District Collector in the process. 
Scrutiny further revealed that, in the order sheets for granting permission under 
Section 14C of the WBLR Act, 1955, the market valuation reports of the ADSR, 
had been reviewed by the PO -cum-DWO, along with other documents. It was 
mentioned, in the order sheet of the PO -cum-DWO, Paschim Bardhaman, that 
compensation would be provided to the land owners, as per the R & R Policy of 
Coal India Limited. It was evident that the absence of any proactive pursuance, 
 
28 Order dates were not available for 14 applicants 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
20 
on the part of the PO -cum-DWO (i.e. the RO), had led to deprivation of the 
tribal raiyats by ₹ 15.25 crore, in 66 test-checked cases, during FYs 2017-18 to 
2021-22. Table 1.6 gives an overview of the short payment, to the tribal raiyats, 
by the test-checked ECL/ BCCL offices, due to payment of land compensation 
(detailed in Appendix 1.5), below the market rates.  
Table 1.6: Short payment to tribal raiyats, by the ECL/ BCCL offices, due 
to payment of land compensation below the market rate 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the ECL/ 
BCCL office 
Number of 
cases test-
checked, 
involving sale 
by tribal raiyats 
Market 
value of 
land (` in 
lakh) 
Set forth 
value29  
(` in lakh) 
Deed 
Sale 
Value 
(` in 
lakh) 
Short payment vis-
à-vis  market rate 
(` in lakh) 
(percentage of 
short payment) 
1. ECL, Salanpur Area 37 767.29 127.30 127.30 639.99 (83.41) 
2. ECL, Sripur Area 22 592.15 61.79 61.79 530.36 (89.57) 
3. ECL, Kunustoria Area 04 312.20 15.71 15.71 296.49 (94.97) 
4. BCCL, Barakar Area 01 82.10 45.12 45.12 36.98 (45.04) 
5. ECL, Parbelia group 
(Sodepur Area) 
02 25.86 4.80 4.80 21.06 (81.44) 
Total 66 1,779.60 254.72 254.72 1,524.88 (85.68) 
Source: Data obtained from offices of ECL/ BCCL and PO-cum-DWO 
It is seen from Table 1.6 that there was short payment against the market value 
of land, ranging between 45 to 95 per cent, in the 66 test-checked cases.  
The General Manager, ECL Kunustoria Area, stated (November 2022) that, as 
the land acquisition had been made by the direct purchase mode, there was no 
provision of involvement of the Collector for determining land compensation. 
It was further stated that, in the direct purchase mode, ECL management had 
negotiated directly with the landowners, for suitable compensation against land 
and employment. BCCL, Barakar , replied (February 2023) that the set forth 
value as land compensation , as offered by BCCL , had be en decided after 
negotiating with the tribal person from whom the land was acquired. The replies 
were not tenable, as such sale of land violated the provisions of the R&R Policy, 
2012, and the  Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (Act of 2013). No reply 
was furnished by the other test-checked ECL offices (September 2024). 
1.4.2 Differences in the prices of land paid by ECL for vested land and land 
purchased from STs  
Scrutiny of records of ECL, Sripur Area and Salanpur area, revealed that, during 
the period between 2016 and 2021, ECL had acquired or proposed to acquire 
land, from private landowners, including ST landowners, as well as 
Government, for mining purposes. Scrutiny of records of ECL, Sripur and ECL 
Salanpur areas, however, revealed that there were considerable differences in 
the rates of land paid by ECL, for vested land 30 and land purchased from ST 
landowners, as shown in Table 1.7.  
 
29 It is the value set forth in the instrument 
30 As per Section 3A (1) of the WBLR Act, 1955, the rights and interests of all non-agricultural tenants and 
under- tenants, under the West Bengal Non-Agricultural Tenancy Act, 1949, shall vest in the State, free 
from all encumbrances, and the provisions of Sections 5 and 5A of the West Bengal Estates Acquisition 
Act, 1953 , shall apply, with such modifications as may be necessary, mutatis mutandis , to all such 
non-agricultural tenants and under-tenants, as if such non-agricultural tenants and under-tenants, were 
intermediaries and the land held by them were estates and person holding under a non -agricultural 
tenant or under tenant were a raiyat.   

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
 
21 
Table 1.7: Differences in the rates of land paid by ECL for vested land and 
land purchased from ST land owners 
Sl. 
No. ECL office Site 
Land value provided to the 
Raiyats (₹ in lakh per acre)31 Land value provided 
to Government (₹ in 
lakh per acre) Rate with 
job 
Rate without 
job 
1. ECL, Sripur 
Area 
Kalipahari – OC patch A 2.50 12.00 62.57 
2. Bhanora – OC patch 2.50 12.00 102.59 
3. Kalipahari – OC patch B 
(proposed rate) 
3.00 12.60 125.00 
4. ECL, Salanpur Gourandi 2.50 12.63 19.77 
Source: Data obtained from ECL Offices; Note: Raiyats are initially inducted on training basis 
for six months mainly as  Security Guard s. On successful completion of training period they 
would be considered for regularization as permanent employees.  
Analysis of the table indicated that for an acre of land, tribals were compensated 
at much lower rates ranging between ` 2.50 lakh and ` 12.63 lakh vis-à-vis the 
compensation allowed to the Government ranging between ` 19.77 lakh and 
` 125.00 lakh. 
Evidently, there was lack of pursuance, by the concerned, PO-cum-DWO of the 
district in ensuring that the ST landowners received fair prices for the lands 
transferred by them, to ECL.   
1.4.3 Deficiencies in tribal land acquisition, rehabilitation and resettlement, 
by ECL/ BCCL, facilitated by lack of involvement of Government 
As per the Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) Policy, 2012, in addition to 
compensation for land, the coal companies were required to provide R&R 
packages, for Project Affected Persons (PAPs), to compensate them for the loss 
of their livelihood. Apart from compensation for house sites, houses, trees, cow 
sheds, costs of shifting etc., employment was also to be provided, to the land 
oustees. In addition to this, efforts were also to be made to rehabilitate them, by 
construction of houses, roads, streets, schools and provision of water etc., 
wherever feasible. The provisions of Act of 2013  were also applicable, when 
the appropriate Government acquired land for its own use, hold and control, 
including for public sector undertakings, public purposes projects for industrial 
corridors and mining activities. The R&R Policy, 2012, inter alia, provided for 
just and fair compensation to the affected families, whose land had been 
acquired, or was proposed to be acquired, or were affected by such acquisition. 
Adequate provisions for loss of livelihood of such affected persons, including 
their rehabilitation and resettlement, were required to be made under this policy. 
Scrutiny of records, made available to Audit, in the offices of the 
PO-cum-DWOs of the respective districts and the General Managers of four 32 
ECL areas and one BCCL area at Barakar, regarding transfer of land belonging 
to ST landowners to ECL / BCCL, as well as other rehabilitation and 
resettlement measures undertaken during 2017-22, revealed the following: 
 
31 As per the R&R Policy 2012, all the land losers, who are not eligible for employment, shall be entitled 
to receive monetary compensation, in lieu of employment. Land losers who are offered employment will 
have the option to either opt for employment, or t o forego employment and opt for monetary 
compensation. 
32 Salanpur, Sripur, Kunustoria and Parbelia 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
22 
1.4.3.1 Non-conduct of socio-economic survey 
As per the R&R Policy 2012, a baseline socio -economic survey was to be 
carried out, to identify the PAPs who were enlisted to receive benefits, in line 
with Coal India’s R&R Policy. The basic objective of such socio -economic 
studies, was to generate baseline data on the social and econ omic status of the 
population that was likely to lose its means of livelihood or homestead land, due 
to acquisition of the land for such projects. The assistance of reputed 
independent institutional agencies that were well versed with the social matrix 
of the concerned areas was to be taken, in conducting such socio -economic 
surveys. The database created in the survey was to be used to formulate a viable 
and practical Rehabilitation Action Plan, for the affected persons, in line with 
their entitlements. 
Scrutiny revealed that no socio -economic or social impact assessment survey, 
as mentioned above, had been conducted in ECL, Kunustor ia area, or in ECL, 
Parbelia area. Whether such survey was conducted in ECL, Sripur area was 
neither forthcoming from the available records nor stated by the respective 
authority of the office. ECL, Parbelia area, however, replied (January 2023) that 
the Ac t of 2013 had still not been implemente d by GoWB, and, hence, no 
socio-economic survey/ social impact assessment survey had been conducted. 
The reply was not tenable, as the Act of 2013 was already applicable for the 
State. ECL, Kunustor ia area, stated (November 2022) that all the mines of 
Kunustoria Area had been operational from the pre -nationalization period, so 
the said survey had not been carried out, as t here was no change in the 
socio-economic condition of the area. It was further stated that, for new projects, 
it would be carried out, in future, as per the R&R Policy. BCCL, Barakar stated 
(February 2023) inter alia that since the land occupied was uninhabited, 
therefore no socio-economic survey/ social impact assessment was conducted. 
1.4.3.2 Preparation of Rehabilitation Action Plans (RAPs), without 
consultation with the State Government 
As per the R&R Policy, 2012, viable and practicable Rehabilitation Action 
Plans (RAPs) were to be formulated, by ECL / BCCL, for the affected persons, 
in line with their entitlements, based on the socio-economic studies conducted. 
The Rehabilitation Action Plans were to inter alia, refer to socio -economic 
survey and activities, to ensure restoration of incomes of the PAPs, in line with 
the R&R Policy; Project specific arrangements were also to be made, to deal 
with the grievances of PAPs. Time tables, benchmarks and arrangements fo r 
monitoring the resettlement and rehabilitation efforts, were also to be 
formulated, in consultation with the PAPs and the State Government. 
Scrutiny revealed that, though ECL, Salanpur area, Sripur area and BCCL, 
Barakar, had prepared project reports, in respect of the mining projects 
undertaken, the State Government had not been consulted during their 
preparation. In reply to an audit observa tion in this regard, ECL, Kunustoria, 
stated (November 2022) that, as the land, under its area, was non-residential and 
had been acquired by the direct purchase mode, no RAP had been prepared. 
ECL, Parbelia, and BCCL, Barakar stated (January and February 2 023 
respectively) that RAP had not been formulated, as no homestead existed on the 
plots acquired. 

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
 
23 
The replies of the authorities of ECL, Kunustoria and Parbelia, were not tenable, 
as they were in contravention of the provisions of the R&R Policy, 2012. As per 
the said policy, the RAPs were to, inter alia, address the description of the 
institutional and other mechanisms, for provision of entitlements, as well as 
project-specific arrangements, to deal with the grievances of the PAPs. The 
same was not dependent on whether the land was residential or non-residential. 
1.4.3.3 Non-formation of resettlement and rehabilitation committee 
As per the R&R policy 2012, a committee was to be constituted at the project 
level, under the Chairmanship of the Collector, to be called the ‘Rehabilitation 
and Resettlement Committee’, for monitoring and reviewing the progress of 
implementation of the rehabilitation and resettlement scheme and also carrying 
out post -implementation social audits, in consultation with the village 
panchayats in rural areas and municipalities in urban areas, in the manner 
decided by the concerned State Government. The said Committee, inter alia, 
was to approve the detailed rehabilitation plan for the project, in consultation 
with the displaced persons and gram sabhas; expedite issue of domicile 
certificates and other necessary documentation, required for the state 
authorities; monitor and review the progress of the rehabilitation scheme; grant 
benefits and hand over possession of land, in a smooth manner; and carry out 
post-implementation social audits, in consultation with the authorities. 
Scrutiny revealed that no such committees had  been formed in any of the 
test-checked ECL offices. There had also not been any involvement of the State 
Government in the process.  In the absence of any such committees, the issue of 
rehabilitation and resettlement, where homesteads had been acquired, were 
limited to only one -time lumpsum payment of ` 3.00 lakh, in lieu of alternate 
house sites, assistance in designing, shifting allowance, compensation for 
construction of cattle sheds, monetary compensation for construction of work 
sheds etc. Consequently, many stipulations in the R&R policy, relating to the 
functions of the Resettlement and Rehabilitation Committee, as aforesaid, 
remained unachieved, thereby depriving the PAPs of the related benefits.  
Scrutiny of the files, in ECL, Salanpur area, revealed that, at various points of 
time, the villagers were unwilling to vacate their existing hutments / structure/ 
households, without plots of land to be provided by ECL, wherein they could 
construct their new houses or structures. In response to the strong demands of 
the villagers, the ECL authorities stated (March 2020) that there was no 
provision of providing land for rehabilitation in the Salanpur area, as the life of 
the mining activity was very less. Th us, the resettlement efforts of ECL were 
largely guided by the profitability aspect and not by the provisions of the R&R 
Policy, 2012, or the Act of 2013. Further, the tribals were rendered landless in 
the process, in the absence of any effective supervisi on, on the part of the 
concerned district authorities.  
1.4.3.4 Absence of community facilities 
As per the R&R policy, 2012, ECL / BCCL should have provided, at each site, 
a school, road with street light, pukka drain, pond, dugwell or tubewell for 
drinking water supply, community centre, place of worship, dispensary and 
grazing land for cattle and playground. Further, the approach, f or operation of 
community facilities, was to be flexible and all efforts were to be made, to 
involve the state and local self -government or Panchayat, for operating the 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
24 
facilities. In the preamble to the R&R Policy, 2012, it had been highlighted that 
greater emphasis needed to be given to community requirements, like schools, 
hospitals etc. It had further been highlighted that, only proper resettlement and 
rehabilitation would elicit the required co-operation of the PAPs.  
Scrutiny revealed that, in the absence of any rehabilitation and resettlement of 
the PAPs in separate areas, the stipulated provisions, as mentioned above, had 
not been adhered to. BCCL, Barakar replied (February 2023) that as the land 
was uninhabited ther efore no community facilities as envisaged in the R&R 
Policy 2012 were envisaged. 
1.4.3.5 Non-extension of option to land losers regarding Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Benefits 
As per the R&R Policy, 2012, the land losers would have the option for 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement benefits, in accordance with the awards for 
each affected family, in terms of the entitlements passed by the concerned 
District Collector, or as per the policy, with his consent. The policy laid 
emphasis on giving the land losers the option to choose which methods of 
compensation best suited their needs.  
Scrutiny revealed that no options had been provided to the land losers, to choose 
from the awards determined by the Collector, or as per the R&R policy, with 
the consent of the Collector. Further, the Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
benefits, determined by the test-checked ECL/ BCCL offices, did not have the 
consent of the concerned Collectors. Lack of supervision on the part of the 
Collectors resulted in offering of benefits, by these ECL / BCCL offices, that 
were much below the entitlements of the land losers, in terms of the provisions 
of the R&R Policy, 2012.  
In reply to the above, General Manager, ECL, Kunustoria area, stated 
(November 2022) that, as the land acquisition of non-residential land, had been 
done by the direct purchase mode, exercising of the Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement process and involvement of the District Magistrate, was not 
applicable. The contention was not acceptable, as it violated the stipulations of  
the Coal India’s R&R Policy, 2012, and the Act of 2013. BCCL, Barakar stated 
(February 2022) that no rehabilitation benefit would be provided to the PAPs as 
the land was uninhabited. It was also stated that in case any habitation was 
identified prior to c ompletion of the project, then rehabilitation entitlements 
would be provided to the PAPs as envisaged in the R&R Policy 2012. No reply 
was furnished by ECL, Salanpur area; ECL Parbelia and Sripur area; though 
called for (September 2024). 
1.4.3.6  Non-involvement of Collector in the Census and identi fication of 
displaced families 
The R&R Policy, 2012, stipulated that for acquisition of land for projects, a 
census would be undertaken, in a manner to be decided by the Collector or 
project authority, for identification of the displaced families, preparation of their 
socio-economic profile and preparation of list of persons eligible for the purpose 
of receiving rehabilitation and resettlement benefits. A photo identity card was 
to be issued to each entitled PAP, under the signature of the Collector or the 
project authority concerned. 

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
 
25 
Scrutiny revealed that, though census had been undertaken by the ECL 
authorities, where homesteads had been acquired, the Collectors had not been 
involved in the process and no photo identity cards had been issued, under the 
signature of the Collector or p roject authority concerned, to the entitled PAPs. 
BCCL, Barakar, replied (February 2023) that, as the land occupied for projects 
was uninhabited, therefore no census , under the R&R Policy , 2012, was 
undertaken. Due to non-inclusion of the Collector in the process, the PAPs were 
deprived from the rehabilitation and resettlement benefits , as enshrined in the 
R&R Policy, 2012, as well as in the Act of 2013. Further, the PAPs were also 
deprived of the market value, for sale of land to the ECL/ BCCL. 
1.4.3.7 Non-payment of solatium 
Under Section 26 of the Act of 2013, solatium amount, equivalent to 
100 per cent of the compensation amount, in addition to the market value of the 
land, was to be provided. In every such case, the  Collector was to award an 
amount, calculated at the rate of 12 per cent per annum on such market value, 
for the period commencing on and from the date of publication of the 
notification of the social impact assessment study , under Section 4 (2), till the 
date of the award of the Collector or the date of taking possession of the land, 
whichever was earlier. Provisions for payment of solatium, under the Act of 
2013 and escalation of land compensation, were also stipulated under the R&R 
Policy 2012.  
Scrutiny of records, of the four ECL and BCCL offices, revealed that there had 
been no payment of solatium, in any of the test-checked cases, in contravention 
of the stipulations of the Act of 2013 and the R&R Policy, 2012. Further, there 
had also not been payment of any amount, at the rate of 12 per cent per annum, 
in any of the cases. If solatium at 100 per cent of the compensation amount, in 
addition to the market value of the land, is considered, the tribal raiyats were 
deprived of `17.80 crore 33 in 66 test -checked cases, during FYs 2017 -18 to 
2021-22, in the five test-checked ECL and BCCL offices. 
Best Practices: Land acquisition, under the project “Improvement/ Upgradation 
of NH 60 to four lane34,” under Section 3G under National Highway Act, 1956, 
in the Paschim Medinipur district, was reviewed in audit. In the said case, the 
award statement, signed by the Special Land Acquisition Officer 35, Paschim 
Medinipur, showed that the compensation amount included the: (a) amount 
allowed for the land itself, without trees, buildings etc., if any (b) amount 
allowed for trees, crops, houses, huts , or any such immovable objects 
(c) solatium at the rate of 100  per cent of the market value and (d) additional 
compensation, at the rate of 12 per cent, on the value of the land.  
1.4.3.8 Payment of monetary compensation in lumpsum without any option 
of annuity 
As per the R&R Policy, 2012, all the land losers, who were not eligible for 
employment, were entitled to receive monetary compensation, in lieu of 
employment, at the rate of ` 5.00 lakh for each acre of land, on pro-rata basis. 
 
33 Calculated as 100 per cent of the market value of land, payable to the tribal raiyats, in 66 test-checked 
cases, as per Table. 1.6 
34 Notification No.: S.O.5028E; Date of Notification: 28.09.2018; Declaration No.: S.O.1566E; Date of 
Declaration: 09.04.2019 
35 Competent Authority u/ s 3(a) of the NH Act, 1956 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
26 
Further, they could opt for payment of such compensation amount, in the form 
of annuity payable to them, either monthly, annually, or at such intervals, as 
may be opted for, by them. The annuity was to be paid for a maximum period 
extending up to 60 years of age or the life of the project for which the land had 
been acquired, whichever was earlier.  
Scrutiny revealed that, in all the test -checked ECL and BCCL offices, the 
monetary compensation, received by the PAPs, on this count, had been paid in 
lumpsum and not in the form of annuity. There was no material available on 
records to indicate that any o ption for payment of monetary compensation, in 
the form of annuity, had been provided to the land losers, by these offices.    
1.4.3.9 Non-provision for shifting of the tribal community as a unit  
It had been stipulated, in the R&R policy 2012, that the tribal communities were 
to be shifted as a unit and that they were to be provided facilities to meet the 
specific needs of the tribal communities that would allow them to maintain their 
unique cultural identity. 
Scrutiny revealed that, in the absence of rehabilitation and resettlement of the 
tribal land losers, shifting of the project affected tribal communities as a unit, to 
maintain their unique cultural identity, had not been achieved, in two ECL areas.  
In reply to the audit observations included under the Paragraph 1.4.3 , the 
L&LR and RR&R Department stated (May 2023) that anomalies were related 
to cases of procurement of land by the ECL and other subsidiaries of the 
Ministry of Coal, Go I. However, it remained silent on whether the State 
Government had flagged these issues to ECL and other subsidiaries or the 
Ministry.  
Recommendation:  
1.7 State Government may consider ensuring more proactive 
involvement and monitoring on part of the District Collectors , as 
per Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, 2012 , in cases where 
land is purchased directly by companies / Eastern Coalfields 
Limited/ Bharat Coking Coal Limited for any purpose. 
1.5 Implementation of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional 
Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 
The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of 
Forest Rights) Act, 2006 [Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006] , was notified for 
operation, with effect from December 2007. The Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Rules, 200736, were 
notified in January 2008, for implementing the provisions of the Act. The Act 
enlisted certain forest rights, of forest dwelling STs and Other Traditional Forest 
Dwellers (OTFDs), on all forest land, which, inter alia, included: (i) the right to 
hold and live in the forest land, under individual or common occupation, for 
habitation or for self -cultivation for livelihood, by a member or members of a 
forest dwelling ST or OTFDs, (ii) community rights and (iii) other right s, 
including community tenures of habitat and habitation, for primitive tribal 
groups and pre -agricultural communities etc. The recognition and vesting of 
 
36 These Rules were subsequently amended by the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Amendment Rules, 2012 

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
 
27 
forest rights, under this Act, was subject to the condition that such STs had 
occupied forest land before the 13th day of December 2005. The land was to be 
restricted to the area under actual occupation and was, in no case, to exceed an 
area of four hectares. 
The PO-cum-DWOs, in the districts, were the nodal officers under FRA, 2006, 
and the WBTDCC, under the TD department, was the nodal authority for 
implementation of FRA in the State. The Gram Sabha was to be the authority 
for initiating the process for determining the  nature and extent of individual or 
community rights, or both, that may be given to the forest dwelling STs and 
OTFDs, within the local limits of its jurisdiction. The Gram Sabha was to send 
the claim to the Forests Rights Committee (FRA), who was to verify the same, 
with the supporting evidence. Subsequently, the Gram Sabha was to pass a 
resolution and forward the same to the SDLC. The SDLC was to examine the 
resolution passed by the Gram Sabha and prepare the record of forest rights and 
forward it to the DLC , for a final decision. The decision of the DLC , on the 
record of forest rights, would be final and binding. 
Table 1.8 depicts the position of issue of individual and community forest 
pattas, to the forest dwelling STs, in the six test -checked districts, since the 
inception of the Act. 
Table 1.8: Status of issue of individual and community forest pattas, to the 
forest dwelling STs, in the six test-checked districts 
District 
Claims received Claims 
Accepted Claims rejected Claims pending Area of land 
distributed (in acres) 
Individu
al 
Commu
nity 
Individ
ual 
Commu
nity 
Individua
l 
Commun
ity 
Individ
ual 
Commu
nity Individual Communit
y 
Paschim 
Bardhaman 
2,110 172 2,110 172 Nil Nil Nil Nil 345.44 31.56 
Paschim 
Medinipur 
28,648 1,096 5,216 17 23,432 1,079 Nil Nil 1,233.72 3.75 
Jhargram 20,753 164 9,300 72 11,453 92 Nil Nil 2,308.68 38.87 
Birbhum37 656 32 498 13 158 19 Nil Nil 73.81 8.61 
Purulia 21,921 648 7,983 76 13,938 572 Nil Nil 3,992.11 58.87 
Jalpaiguri38 1,817 172 1,731 163 86 9 0 0 3,155.74 244.06 
Total 75,905 2,284 26,838 513 49,067 1,771 0 0 11,109.50 385.72 
Source: Data provided by the PO-cum-DWOs of the concerned districts 
In the Paschim Medinipur and Jhargram districts, out of total 36,056 cases of 
rejection, rejection in 18,894 cases (52  per cent) was attributable to 
insufficiency in documentation / evidence of residence; 8,606 cases 
(24 per cent) were rejected due to receipt of multiple applications against the 
same land; while 8,464 cases (24 per cent) were not allowed due to the land 
against which the claims had been made, not being forest land. The above three 
factors were also cited by the PO -cum-DWOs of Purulia and Birbhum, as 
reasons for rejection of claims. In the district of Jalpaiguri, the claims which 
pertained to non-forest land were rejected. 
Recommendation:  
1.8 State Government may consider introducing a suitable mechanism 
to ensure that a hassle-free verification process to grant recognition 
and vesting of forest rights to tribal persons is in place. 
 
37 On the basis of the reply of the PO-cum-DWO, Birbhum 
38 On the basis of Memo No: 1744 / PO-DWJ/ BCW  dated: 27/ 09/ 2022, of the PO-cum-DWO, Jalpaiguri 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
28 
1.5.1 Committees for vesting of Forest Rights remained non-functional 
Under Section 6(1) of the Act, the Gram Sabha was the designated authority, 
for initiating the process of determining the nature and extent of individual or 
community forest rights, or both, that may be given to the forest dwelling STs 
and OTFDs, within the loca l limits under the Act, by receiving claims; 
consolidating and verifying them; and preparing a map, delineating the area of 
each recommended claim, in such a manner as may be prescribed, for exercise 
of such rights. The Gram Sabha was to, thereafter, pass a resolution to that effect 
and forward a copy of the same to the Sub-Divisional Level Committee (SDLC), 
constituted by the State Government. The SDLC was to examine the resolution 
passed by the Gram Sabha and prepare the record of forest rights and forwar d 
the same, through the Sub -Divisional Officer, to the District Level Committee 
(DLC), for a final decision. The DLC was to consider and finally approve the 
record of forest rights, prepared by the Sub -Divisional Level Committee. The 
decision of the DLC, on the record of forest rights, was to be final and binding. 
It was noticed that meetings of these committees were not held in any of the 
test-checked districts during the audit period. Consequently, there was no 
question of receiving claims, consolidating and verifying them, preparing the 
record of forest rights, according final approval of the record of forest rights and 
granting of patta39 to the forest dwelling STs, during 2017 -22. In reply to an 
audit query, PO -cum-DWO, BCW and TD, Paschim Bardhaman, stated 
(November 2022) that such committees,  as detailed above had been 
non-existent, since the creation of the district in 2017. It was further stated that 
new SDLCs as well as DLC, would be constituted in the district at the earliest, 
following FRA guidelines. 
It was also not clear whether the pattas had actually been distributed to the 
respective claimants, as there was no evidence of receipt of the pattas, by the 
claimants, in the Paschim Bardhaman district. C onsequent upon directions 
(June 2019) from TD department, the Additional District Magistrate, 
BCW&TD, Paschim Bardhaman, had directed (June 2019) all BDOs, in the 
Paschim Bardhaman district, to cause to find all the registers for the year 2008-
11, of Gram Sabha meetings and applications under FRA, 2006, in  the Gram 
Panchayat Offices, having forest areas in their jurisdiction. No developments in 
this regard, were however, noticed during audit. 
Audit noticed that records were not available at any level with regard to the 
number of claims, for issue of individual and forest pattas, received during 
2017-22, from the forest dwelling STs and that were pending finalisation. It was 
also noticed from a complaint received in the Paschim Bardhaman district, that 
the STs of the Raniganj Block had submitted 17 applications, to the respective 
Block office, between July 2019 and August 2019, for individual and 
community pattas, but no action had been taken thereagainst.   
In an advisory to the District Magistrates of the districts regarding disposal of 
claims received under the FRA, 2006, the TD department stated 
(November 2016) that the process of receipt and disposal of claims is dynamic 
subject to provisions of the ST & OTFD (Recognition of Forest Rights), Act 
2006 and Rule 11 of the ST & OTFD (Recognition of Forest Rights) Rules 2007 
 
39 A document evidencing lawful possession of land by a person 

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
29 
and hence this process should continue in appropriate cases. It was also stated 
in the instant advisory that in areas where the Gram Sabha felt confident that 
there would be no further claims, in regard to rights (individual, community and 
community resources), a certificate to the effect that FRA operation was totally 
complete, in the area under the Gram Sabha, may be obtained by the District 
Magistrates.  
It was revealed that no such certificate had been obtained, from the Gram 
Sabhas, in any of the selected districts. Consequently, it was evident that the 
FRA operation had not been completed, in any of the areas under the Gram 
Sabhas. In the Entry Conferen ce of the instant Performance Review 
(January 2023), the representative of the L&LR and RR &R Department stated 
(May 2023) that a considerable number of applications for forest pattas had 
been received by the Department, in the “Duare Sarkar” programme, tha t had 
commenced from September 2022. 
1.5.2  Slow progress in distribution of RoRs to the patta recipients under 
FRA 
As per Section 3(1)(g) of FRA, 2006, forest pattas, on forest land and title 
(Records of Rights or RoR), were to be mandatorily issued to the forest 
dwellers. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, GoI, in a letter (April 2015) addressed 
to the Principal Secretaries of the States, stated that the FRA process would only 
be completed when RoRs had been created. Further, the purpose of rights 
recognition would be realized only when permanent RoRs were entered in the 
records. In this regard, the Directorate of Land Re cords and Surveys, West 
Bengal, informed (July 2015) the TD Department, that titles (RoRs) had been 
issued after a thorough survey of the areas and their mapping, in accordance 
with the earlier recorded forest villages 40  (which had been converted into 
revenue villages). Table 1.9 shows the position of issue of RoRs, to the patta 
recipients, in the six test-checked districts. 
Table 1.9: Status of issue of RoRs, to the patta recipients, in the six 
test-checked districts 
Sl. 
No. District 
Number of claims accepted Number of RoRs issued Percentage of 
issue of RORs 
vis-à-vis claims 
accepted 
Reasons for 
delay in issue 
of RoRs Individual Community Individual Community 
1 Paschim 
Bardhaman 
2,110 172 0 0 00 No clear report 
of RORs was 
available with 
the district. 
2 Paschim 
Medinipur 
5,216 17 3,944 0 75 -do- 
3 Birbhum 498 13 No break-up was available. The 
LR office, in the district, stated  
(January 2023) that a total of 498 
RoRs had been issued under the 
FRA. 
97 - 
40 Forest villages mean the settlements which have been established inside the forests, by the Forest 
Department of any State Government, for forestry operations or which were converted into forest 
villages, through the forest reservation process. They include forest settlement villages, fixed demand 
holdings, all types of taungya settlements, by whatever name called, for such villages , as well as lands 
for cultivation and other uses, permitted by the Government. On conversion of the forest village to 
revenue village, the legal status of land would be altered from “forest” to “revenue”.  

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
30 
Sl. 
No. District 
Number of claims accepted Number of RoRs issued Percentage of 
issue of RORs 
vis-à-vis claims 
accepted 
Reasons for 
delay in issue 
of RoRs Individual Community Individual Community 
4 Jhargram 9,300 72 No break-up was available. The 
LR, as well as BCW office, in 
the district, stated  (January 
2023) that a total of 2,639 RoRs 
had been issued under the FRA. 
28 - 
5 Purulia 7,983 76 Under process 00 Reply from 
DL&LRO not 
received. 
6. Jalpaiguri 1,731 163 The Dy. DL & LRO, Jalpaiguri 
stated (January 2023) that a total 
of 1,894 RoRs had been issued 
under the FRA. 
100 
Source: Data obtained from Directorate and District offices 
Table 1.9 indicates that the process of issue of RoRs, against the pattas issued, 
was still in progress, in the Paschim Medinipur, Purulia and Jhargram districts, 
even after a lapse of more than 15 years from the implementation of the FRA 
and the rules made thereunder. Thus, the objective of vesting of forest rights, in 
a time-bound manner, was not achieved. 
On this being pointed out, the PO -cum-DWO, Birbhum, stated (January 2023) 
that RoRs had been issued to the forest dwellers (individuals and community), 
who were found eligible. In reply to an audit query, the PO -cum-DWO, BCW 
and TD, Paschim Bardhaman, stated (November 2022) that there was no 
evidence available with the office to indicate as to whether RoRs had been 
granted against the forest pattas, in the Paschim Bardhaman district. It was 
further stated that survey and mapping had not been done to identif y the forest 
areas in respect of which RoRs were to be issued to tribal forest dwellers. This 
indicated that no RoRs had been issued, in the district of Paschim Bardhaman, 
against the pattas issued.  
In reply, the L&LR and RR& R Department inter alia stated that issuance of 
RoRs was slow in districts of Paschim Bardhaman and Jhargram only. It was 
further stated that for Jhargram district, there was an error in the number of 
accepted claims, and that for almost all the eligible cases, RoRs have been 
issued. While, for the district of Purulia , the Department stated that since then 
(January 2023) , 6,364 RoRs have been issued. However, no details to 
substantiate their response in respect of Jhargram & Purulia were furnished.  
1.5.3 Geo-referencing for assessment of potential areas and re-examination 
of rejected claims under FRA, 2006 
Keeping in view the need to proactively pursue progress of vesting of rights in 
a time -bound manner, the Mi nistry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA) , GoI, had 
requested States (July 2015) to create geo -referenced databases41. As per Rule 
6(b) of the Forest Right Rules, district administration, in general, and the SDLC, 
in particular, were expected to assist the Gram Sabhas and the Forest Rights 
Committees (FRCs), by providing forest and revenue maps. In this context, 
MoTA, Go I, directed (July 2015) the State that geo -referenced forest and 
revenue maps were to be generated, which were to be provided to the Gram 
41 A Geo-referenced database is a database of vesting of individual and community forest rights, with 
associated geographic location coordinates. 
- 

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
 
31 
Sabhas and the FRCs. Accordingly, claims which had been rejected on the 
ground of insufficient evidence , or which prima facie  required additional 
examination, could be re-examined. The FRCs and Gram Sabhas could consider 
the evidence from these maps and lists together with other evidence, while 
deciding the claims , including the area to be approved. PO -cum-DWOs were 
responsible for ensuring the generation of geo-referenced maps. 
In response to the audit queries the following were replied by the 
PO-cum-DWOs of the districts:  
• The PO-cum-DWO, Jalpaiguri, did not furnish any reply.  
• PO-cum-DWO, Birbhum, stated (January 2023) that the rejected claims 
had already been re-verified under geo-referenced data; the latitude and 
longitudes of the places had also been identified.   
• PO-cum-DWOs, of Paschim Bardhaman and Paschim Medinipur, stated 
(between November 2022 and January 2023) that no geo -referenced 
satellite images/ maps had been provided to the Gram Sabhas and FRCs.  
• PO-cum-DWOs, of Jhargram and Purulia, stated (December 2022 and 
January 2023 respectively) that the work was under progress.  
Thus, in five out of six test-checked districts, either geo-referencing had not 
been done/ details had not been made available / geo-referenced data had not 
been provided. As such, the objective of use of technology , for evidencing the 
claims under FRA, was hardly fulfilled. 
1.5.4 Preparation of final maps and incorporation of forest rights 
MoTA, GoI, vide its letter (March 2014) addressed to the TD Department, stated 
that, as per the Forest Rights Rules, on completion of the process of settlement 
of rights and issue of titles, as specified in Annexures II, III and IV of the Rules, 
the Revenue and Forest departments were to prepare a final map of the forest 
land so vested, and the concerned authorities42 were required to incorporate the 
forest rights, so vested, in the revenue and forest records, as the case may be, 
within the specified period of record updation under the State laws, or within a 
period of three months, whichever was earlier.  
Scrutiny revealed that the final maps of the forest land, so vested, had not been 
prepared (as of January 2023) in any of the six test-checked districts, even after 
passage of almost nine years from GoI’s letter of March 2014. The process of 
incorporation of the forest rights, so vested, in the revenue and forest records, 
had also not been completed. 
In reply to audit queries in this regard: 
• The PO-cum-DWO, Paschim Bardhaman, attributed (November 2022) 
the same to non -completion of the process of settlement of rights and 
issue of titles.  
• The PO-cum-DWO, Birbhum, stated (January 2023) that the final map 
would be prepared after joint inspection  by the Forest department and 
L&LR department.  
• PO-cum-DWOs, of Jhargram and Purulia, stated (December 2022 and 
January 2023 respectively) that the work was under progress. 
 
42 The Land & Land Reforms and Refugee Relief Rehabilitation Department and Forest Department 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
32 
Non-preparation of final maps , in any of the test -checked districts , was 
indicative of the fact that the objective of completion of the process of 
settlement of rights and issue of titles , in a time -bound manner , remained 
unachieved.  
1.5.5  Non-identification of hamlets or settlements and the process of their 
consolidation 
As per Rule 2A of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Rules, 2007 the State Government was to ensure 
that: 
(a) every panchayat, within its boundaries, prepared a list, of the group of 
hamlets or habitations, unrecorded or un-surveyed settlements or forest villages 
or taungya 43 villages, that were formally not part of any Revenue or Forest 
village records, and to have this list passed, by convening the Gram Sabha of 
each such habitation, hamlet or habitation, included as villages, for the purpose 
of the Act, through a resolution in the Panchayat, and to submit such lists to the 
Sub Division Level Committees. 
(b) The SDOs , being members of the SDLCs , were to consolidate the lists of 
hamlets and habitations, which, at present, were not part of any villages, but had 
been included as villages, within the Panchayat, through a resolution, and had 
been formalised as a village, either by adding to the existi ng village, or 
otherwise, after following the process, as provided in the relevant State laws 
these lists were then to be finalised by the District Level Committees, after 
considering public comments, if any. 
(c) On finalisation of the lists of such hamlets and habitations, the process of 
recognition and vesting of rights, in these hamlets and habitations, had to be 
undertaken, without disturbing any rights that had already been recognized. 
No material was, however, found available on records, in regard to 
implementation of Rule 2A of the Rules, in the districts of Paschim Bardhaman, 
Jhargram and Purulia. On this being pointed out in audit, PO -cum-DWO, 
Birbhum, stated (January 2022) that the hamlets were well identified in the local 
blocks and gram panchayat areas, where such tribals lived in the forest areas. 
The basis / rationale of such a reply, was, however, not clear to Audit. 
PO-cum-DWO, Paschim Medinipur , stated (December 2022) that only those 
claims had been considered by Gram Sabha, for which the applicant had applied 
for patta under FRA. The PO-cum-DWO, Jalpaiguri, did not furnish any reply 
on the issue (September 2024). 
1.5.6 Inadequate awareness generation and capacity building programmes 
on FRA 
The Action Plan of the TD department, for recognition of Forest Rights, under 
FRA, 2006, inter alia, included arrangement for building awareness, regarding 
the provisions of the Act, as well as process of its implementation, by holding 
camps at the State level, Divisional level, district level and sub-divisional level, 
as also by a rranging training programmes. Mo TA, GoI, directed that a kit of 
standardized stationery, like copies of Act and Rules, in the local language; 
important circulars; forms; maps; sample verification reports; and land category 
 
43 The ‘taungya’ is a system whereby villagers and sometimes forest plantation workers are given the right 
to cultivate agricultural crops, during the early stages of forest plantation. 

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
 
33 
checklists, were available at Gram Sabha level. Similarly, a kit for the 
implementing officials was also to be provided. Audit, however, observed 
documents/ records, on awareness generation / capacity building programmes, 
on FRA, if any, undertaken by the district administration, were not available in 
the Paschim Bardhaman and Paschim Medinipur districts. Documentary 
evidence for availability of such kits, with the implementing authorities, was  
not furnished, though called for. FRA, 2006, had, however, been translated in 
the Santhali, Bengali and Hindi languages, for wide publicity. 
Table 1.10: Status of awareness generation/ capacity building programmes 
undertaken in the six test-checked districts 
Sl. No. District Awareness generation/ capacity building programmes undertaken 
1. Birbhum Advertisements in local newspapers, as well as notices in public places, 
local panchayats and block offices. 
2. Jalpaiguri Records were not available and reply to audit query was not furnished. 
3. Jhargram The PO-cum-DWO of the district stated (December 2022) that various 
awareness programmes  had been conducted, including meetings, 
distribution of forms etc., at the block level. However, documents / 
records, in support of the same, could not be furnished. 
4. Paschim 
Bardhaman 
No awareness generation/ capacity building programmes, on FRA, were 
undertaken, since the creation of the district in 2017. 
5. Paschim 
Medinipur 
Training and workshops were undertaken at the time FRA was first 
implemented in the district. 
6. Purulia The PO-cum-DWO of the district stated (January 2023) that meetings had 
been conducted at the district level, with the forest officials, DL&LRO, 
Land Reforms officials, SDOs and BDOs. Further, instructions had been 
issued to BDOs, to convene meetings at their level, for awareness 
programmes. However, documents/ records, in support of the same, could 
not be furnished. 
Source: Records of PO-cum-DWO offices & Audit queries 
It was, thus, evident from the above table that the desired awareness generation 
and capacity building, on FRA had not been in place, in the manner envisaged 
during the audit period.  
1.5.7 Rights to Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTG) 
As per FRA, 2006, in view of the differential vulnerability of the PVTGs among 
the forest dwellers, the DLCs were expected to play a proactive role in ensuring 
that all PVTGs received habitat rights, in consultation with the concerned 
PVTG’s traditional institutions and also that their claims for habitat rights were 
filed before the concerned Gram sabhas. In the state of West Bengal, Toto 
(Jalpaiguri district), Birhor (Purulia) and Lodha (Paschim Medinipur), were 
notified as Particularly Vulnerable Tribal G roups (PVTGs), in terms of 
backwardness, across different development indicators. 
Scrutiny, however, revealed that no such exercise, as envisaged in FRA, 2006 
had been carried out in the district of Paschim Medinipur even though the 
“Lodha” tribe existed in the district. Nothing was found on record in Jalpaiguri 
and Purulia districts in respect of the PVTGs in those districts. 
Recommendation:  
1.9 State Government may expedite the grant of habitat rights to 
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups. 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
34 
1.5.8 Post-claim support and handholding to holders of forest rights 
As per Rule 16 of the ST & OTFD (Recognition of Forest Rights) Rules 2007, 
the State Government was to ensure through its departments, especially the 
tribal and social welfare, environment and forest, revenue, rural development, 
panchayati raj and other de partments relevant to the upliftment of forest 
dwelling scheduled tribes and other traditional forest dwellers, that the benefits 
accruing from all government schemes, including those relating to land 
improvement, land productivity, basic amenities and other livelihood measures, 
were to be extended to such claimants and communities, whose rights had been 
recognized and vested under the Act. 
No reply, regarding the status on this account, was received from WBTDCC 
(which was the nodal authority for implementation of FRA in the State), though 
called for (October 2022). However, at the district level, the PO -cum-DWO, 
Birbhum, stated (January 202 3) that support, through various Government 
schemes, was being provided to the forest patta holders, in accordance with 
their eligibility. PO -cum-DWOs, of Paschim Bardhaman, Paschim Medinipur 
and Jhargram, stated (November and December 2022) that no records  were 
available with them,  in regard to any upliftment measures for forest dwelling 
scheduled tribes or for such claimants and communities, whose rights had been 
recognized and vested, under FRA, 2006, in the relevant districts. 
PO-cum-DWO, Jhargram, further stated that post -claim support and 
handholding to the holders of forest rights would be done subsequently.  
Recommendation:  
1.10 State Government may ensure that the benefits accruing from 
Government schemes are duly passed on to the forest dwelling 
scheduled tribes, as per extant Rules & Regulations.  
1.6 Internal Control Mechanism 
Internal control is an integral component of an organisation’s management 
processes and is established in order to provide reasonable assurance that the 
organisation’s operations are carried out effectively, economically and 
efficiently. It aims to ensure compliance of rules and regulations and therefore, 
provides safeguards against mismanagement or loss. 
Audit observed several internal control mechanism deficiencies in the 
administrative, operational and monitoring controls, in the management of tribal 
lands in the State. Internal audit arrangements were found to be non -existent 
and did not provide complet e assurance against irregularities. Deficiencies in 
the internal control mechanism are discussed in the following subparagraphs:  
1.6.1  Absence of a Standard Operating Procedure for disposal of cases 
under Section 14C 
Scrutiny revealed that no Standard Operating Procedures had been prescribed, 
by the GoWB, to dispose of cases pertaining to Section 14C of the WBLR Act. 
Also, no checklists had been prescribed by the Government, regarding the 
records and documents to be seen by the ROs, while making enquiries, or 
passing orders relating to land alienation or restoration. It was also observed that 
no Manual of Standing Orders had been prescribed for the working of the ROs. 

PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas 
 
35 
The Act was also silent on any uniform processes to be taken up, while making 
enquiry, inspection or hearings, or in regard to any official format of permission 
orders, in cases of land alienation. 
In the absence of any Standard Operating Procedures ( SOPs)/ guidelines/ 
Check-list etc., as mentioned above, for proceedings under Chapter IIA, Section 
14, granting permission orders of land alienation, to tribal persons, was at the 
discretion of the ROs in the district. Consequently, arbitrariness in decision 
making, on part of the ROs, could not be ruled out. 
On this being pointed out in audit, PO -cum-DWO, Birbhum, replied 
(January 2023) that there were no standard operating procedures or guidelines, 
in regard to proceedings under Section 14 C. However, the matter was being 
forwarded to the higher authorities, for directions. No reply in this regard, was 
received from the other PO-cum-DWOs in the remaining, test-checked districts 
(September 2024). 
The West Bengal Land Reforms Rules, 1965, were notified under the WBLR 
Act, 1955. In respect of Section 14C, the said Rules, prescribed only the form 
of application for redemption of usufructuary mortgage44, the manner of enquiry 
on such applications; and the manner of execution of final orders. However, the 
Rules, were silent on the procedures of enquiry, and the records and documents 
to be checked, while granting permission to a tribal raiyat, for transferring, by 
sale, his holding or any part thereof, to a person not belonging to any ST, under 
Section 14C of the Act. 
In reply, L&LR and RR&R Department stated (May 2023) that it has taken up 
the issue of prescribing the specified purposes in respect of section 14C of the 
WBLR Act and the time limit for disposal of permissions u/s 14C of the WBLR 
Act. It was also stated that the SOP for disposal of cases under Section 14C of 
the WBLR Act was under process. 
Recommendation:  
1.11 State Government may consider prescribing Standard Operating 
Procedures/ Guidelines, for disposal of cases under Section 14C of 
the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955, in a time bound manner. 
1.6.2  Absence of monitoring and evaluation mechanism in regard to the ST 
land transferred to ECL and BCCL 
It was mentioned in the R&R Policy, 2012, of Coal India Limited, that the 
Rehabilitation Action Plans  (RAPs) would be monitored and evaluated 
periodically, after the completion of the land acquisition process. Resettlement 
and rehabilitation activities were the responsibility of a separate group45. It was 
also stipulated in the policy that the said project group would closely interact 
with the State authorities, during implementation of the RAP. 
Scrutiny of records of the test-checked ECL offices did not indicate that such a 
project group had been created. Consequently, there was no monitoring or 
evaluation mechanism, in regard to issues of resettlement and rehabilitation of 
tribals whose land was acquired for mining activities.  
 
44 A type of mortgage where the mortgagor delivers the possession and the right to enjoy income of and 
from the property, to the mortgagee 
45  A separate group was to be constituted , both at the project and corporate level , for planning, 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the RAP. 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
36 
The matter was referred to Government in March  2023; reply from the Tribal 
Development Department awaited (September 2024). 
Recommendation:  
1.12 State Government may ensure that Coal India constitutes the 
Project Group as envisaged in its Rehabilitation & Resettlement 
Policy to oversee resettlement and rehabilitation activities of tribals 
whose land was acquired for mining activities.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
PART
-
II
 
Performance Audit 
of
 
Anganwadi Services 
under Integrated Child 
Development Services
 
 
 

 
37 
WOMEN & CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT 
Performance Audit of Anganwadi Services under Integrated Child 
Development Services  
 
Snapshot 
 
Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme, introduced in 1975, 
has been implemented by the Government of India (GoI), Ministry of Women 
& Child Development as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme. The objectives of the 
scheme include providing Supplementary Nutrition to children below six years 
of age and Pregnant Women and Lactating Mothers (PW&LM); non-formal Pre-
School Education (children of three to six years); Nutrition & Health Education 
for women (15-45 years); etc.  
This Performance Audit aimed at examining the Supplementary Nutrition 
Programme (SNP) and the non-formal Pre -School Education (PSE), with 
Nutrition & Health Education, along with the aspects of manpower, 
infrastructure etc., available with the Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) functioning 
under the Scheme. In the State of West Bengal, the Women & Child 
Development and Social Welfare (WCD&SW) Department (Department) of the 
Government of West Bengal, implements the S cheme. During the  audit, 
performance of Anganwadi Services for the abovementioned components, 
during Financial Years (FYs) 2017-18 to 2021-22, was reviewed.  
It was noticed that the aim of decentralis ed planning had not been fully 
achieved, as Annual Programme Implementation Plans (APIPs) were not 
prepared based on district level inputs . In the di strict of North 24 Parganas, 
26 AWCs (11 per cent), under the Child Development Project Officer (CDPO), 
Panihati, remained non -operational due to shortage of manpower and lack of 
adequate infrastructure.  Shortfall in coverage of eligible children, under the 
SNP, ranged between 11 per cent and 22 per cent, whereas, in respect of 
PW&LM, the shortfall in coverage ranged between three per cent and 
nine per cent during the FYs 2017-18 to 2021-22.  
(Paragraphs 2.2.2, 2.3 & 2.8.3) 
The State had shown an expenditure of ₹ 6,564.70 crore (as per Utilisation 
Certificates) against Central share of ₹ 4,334.78 crore received by the State, 
indicating that there was an excess expenditure of ₹  2,229.92 crore. The State 
Government did not furnish necessary clarifications regarding sources of funds 
from which the excess expenditure was met, authority under which such excess 
expenditure had been incurred, and how such excess expenditure was 
regularised, etc. 
(Paragraph 2.5) 
Instances of violation of stipulation of APIPs were noticed as the State had 
submitted Utilisation Certificates (UCs) to GoI, mentioning payment for salary 
of the staff at the office of the Dir ector, ICDS, as well as the non -entitled staff 
at the CDPO and Project levels. Further, the UCs furnished by the State reflected 
more than 25 per cent as the GoI share, during the audit period. Reasons for 
submission of inadmissible expenditure, as GoI share in UCs, amounting to 
` 207.54 crore, were not elaborated by the Department/ Directorate. 
(Paragraph 2.6) 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
38 
In terms of the West Bengal Treasury Rules (WBTR), the Personal Ledger 
Accounts (PLA s), not opened for discharging liabilities of the Government 
arising out of special enactments were to be closed at the end of the year. 
Further, the Finance Department, Govt. of West Bengal, in March and 
July 2019, instructed surrender of funds, pertaining to the FY 2018-19 or earlier, 
which were lying unutilised in Personal Ledger Accounts, as of June  2019. 
Audit observed that contrary to the provisions, in North 24 Parganas district, an 
amount of ₹ 56.15 lakh towards the cost of food items remained parked in the 
PLA of the District Magistrate, while, in Malda district, the retained fund was 
` 33.85 lakh. 
(Paragraph 2.7.2) 
During FYs 2020 -21 and 2021 -22, against an expenditure of ₹  1,429.12 crore 
to be incurred towards food security allowance (provided in lieu of SNP), an 
expenditure of ₹ 2,264.85 crore had been shown in the utilization certificates, 
leading to an unexplained excess expenditure of ₹  835.73 crore, reasons for 
which were not available in the records.  
(Paragraph 2.8.2) 
Shortfall in procurement of  ‘Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE)’ / 
non-formal Pre -School Education  (PSE) Kits, during the audit period, was 
96 per cent. It was noticed that Take Home Ration (THR) for six months (during 
Covid pandemic) was not provided despite GoI having advised the State 
Government (in July 2020) to ensure supply of Supplementary Nutrition to the 
beneficiaries. Even nutritional values for THR, distributed during FYs 2020-22 
was less by 21 and 34 per cent than the prescribed standards under National 
Food Security Act, 2013,  in respect of children and PW&LM respectively. 
Purchase of lesser number of medicine kits (only 20 per cent) than total 
requirement of 5,84,873 (one kit each for Anganwadi Centres) was noticed 
during the audit period. Audit also observed that non-acceptance of lowest rates 
for SNP items led to excess expenditure of ₹ 115.09 crore.  
(Paragraphs 2.8.1.1, 2.8.5.2, 2.9.1 & 2.9.2) 
Contrary to Government directives, samples of food provided at the AWCs had 
never been checked by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB).  
(Paragraph 2.8.5.3) 
During FYs 2017 -18 and 2021 -22, against the  total requirement of 
20,85,504 sarees for AWWs and AWHs, only 8,51,617 sarees (59 per cent) had 
been purchased by the Department.  
(Paragraph 2.9.3) 
With regard to  infrastructural facilities it was noticed that out of the total 
operational 1,19,481  AWCs (as of March 2022), only 61,314 AWCs 
(51 per cent) were housed in ‘own buildings’, 19,479 AWCs were being run in 
rented buildings while the rest were being run in rooms that were neither owned, 
nor rented, by the ICDS.  
(Paragraph 2.11) 
Construction work of only 2,056 toilets (11 per cent), out of the 18,319 toilets, 
sanctioned during the FYs 2017 -18 to 2019 -20, had  been completed as of 
November 2022. Further, none of the 11,174 drinking water projects related to 
State could be completed on time. 
(Paragraph 2.12.5) 
 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
39 
2.1 Introduction 
Launched in October 1975, the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) 
Scheme is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, implemented by the Government of 
India, Ministry of Women & Child Development (the Ministry). It aims at 
improving the nutritional and health status of children in the age group of zero 
to six  years 46 , Pregnant Women and Lactating 47  Mothers (PW&LM) and 
providing non-formal Pre-School Education to children (three to six years), in 
an integrated manner, to ensure proper growth and development of children.  
The components of service delivery under ICDS include provision of 
Supplementary Nutrition for children below six years of age and PW&LM; non-
formal Pre-School Education (children of three to six years); Nutrition & Health 
Education for women (15 -45 years); Immunization; Health check -ups and 
referral services (for all children up to six years and for PW&LM).  
2.1.1  Organizational set up  
The Women and Child Development & Social Welfare  (WCD&SW) 
Department of the Government of West Bengal (GoWB) implements the ICDS 
Scheme, with Director-ICDS being the State coordinator for the Scheme. At the 
district level, the District Magistrates are vested with the responsibility of 
implementation along with the District Programme Officers (DPOs). Under the 
Scheme, ICDS services are delivered through Anganwadi Centers (AWCs 48). 
The Child Development Project Officers (CDPOs) oversee execution of the 
Scheme at block / municipality level with all AWCs under a CDPO being 
grouped as a Project. As of March 2022, 576 projects were operational in the 
State. 
A trained female worker, designated as the Anganwadi Worker (AWW), looks 
after each AWC, and is responsible for the delivery of all services under the 
Scheme, except Immunization. Each AWW is assisted by an Anganwadi Helper 
(AWH). Supervisors, under the control of the CDPOs, have the responsibility 
of supervising and guiding AWWs, in planning and organizing the delivery of 
ICDS services. As regards health related services, these are looked after by the 
Health & Family  Welfare (H&FW) Department of the GoWB and Medical 
Officer/ Auxiliary Nurse Midwife are assigned for such health-related services. 
The delineation of responsibilities for various services is shown in Table 2.1 
and the organisational hierarchy related to ICDS is exhibited in Chart 2.1: 
 
 
 
 
46 children in the age group of six months - six years 
47 Lactating mothers are mothers of children in the age group of zero to six months 
48 Anganwadi centres (AWCs) are rural/ urban childcare and maternal care development centres. AWCs 
were started in 1975 as part of the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) programme.  The 
programme's goal was to combat child hunger and malnutrition.  

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
40 
Table 2.1: Delineation of responsibilities for delivery of Services under 
ICDS 
Sl. 
No. Service and Target Group Service delivery by Ministry/ Department 
(i) Supplementary Nutrition  (SNP) for 
Children below six years, PW&LM 
AWW and AWH  Ministry of Women & Child 
Development, GoI / State 
WCD&SW Department (ii) Non-formal Pre-School Education 
(PSE) for Children with age between 
three to six years  
AWW 
(iii) Nutrition & Health Education for 
Women (15-45 years)  
AWW/ Auxiliary Nurse 
Midwife (ANM)/ 
Medical Officer (MO) 
Ministry of H&FW, GoI / 
Ministry of WCD, GoI / State 
WCD&SW Department 
(iv) Immunization for Children below 
six years, PW&LM  
ANM/ MO Ministry of H&FW, GoI / 
State H&FW Department 
(v) Health Check-up for Children below 
six years, PW&LM 
ANM/ MO/ AWW   
(vi) Referral Services for Children below 
six years, PW&LM 
AWW/ ANM/ MO 
Chart 2.1: Organisational Hierarchy of ICDS 
 


PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
41 
2.1.2 Audit focus and objectives  
This Performance Audit focused on the following components of ICDS: 
• Performance of the Supplementary Nutrition Program (SNP), 
• Non-formal Pre-School Education (PSE) to children (three to six years) 
and, 
• Nutrition & Health Education for women (15 to 45 years) under AWCs.  
• Further, aspects related to manpower, infrastructure and other facilities 
available with AWCs were also covered49. 
The objectives of this performance audit were to assess whether the: 
• Planning for implementation of Anganwadi services was oriented 
towards achievement of the schematic objectives and for ensuring 
coverage of eligible beneficiaries under the scheme;  
• Fund management of the scheme complied with the scheme guidelines;  
• SNP was being implemented as envisaged under the scheme guidelines; 
• Non-formal pre-school education and nutrition & health education to 
women were being implemented, as per the scheme guidelines;  
• Infrastructural facilities had been adequately provided for, in the AWCs, 
for smooth delivery of services; 
• Deployment, training and orientation of manpower were adequate for 
efficient delivery of the package of services, in regard to both quality, as 
well as coverage and 
• Monitoring of the programme had been effective in securing timely and 
corrective remedial measures.  
2.1.3  Audit Criteria  
Audit comments on various aspects of implementation of the ICDS Scheme, 
were framed with reference to the following criteria:  
• Scheme guidelines, norms, rules, manuals and other instructions, issued 
by the Ministry and by the State Government50. 
• Operational Guidelines for food safety and Hygiene and Guidelines for 
monitoring and supervision51.  
• National Food Security Act, 2013.  
• ICDS Broad Framework for Implementation, issued by the Ministry of 
Women & Child Development, GoI (October 2012).  
• General Financial Rules (GFR), West Bengal Financial Rules (WBFR), 
West Bengal Treasury Rules (WBTR) & other related orders of the State 
Government.  
 
49 The other three service components (Immunization, Health Check - ups and Referral Services as 
mentioned in Table 2.1) provided under the Scheme, through the Health & Family Welfare Department, 
were not covered under the scope of this audit 
50 W&CD Ministry, GoI's Scheme guidelines/ rules/ instructions/ norms for ICDS services; ICDS Scheme 
guidelines for Monitoring & Supervision of Scheme (issued by Central Monitoring Unit-ICDS, National 
Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development -NIPCCD); ICDS Manual for  District level 
functionaries; ICDS- User's Manual issued by the Ministry of W&CD, GoI (November 2012) 
51 Operational Guidelines for Food Safety & Hygiene in ICDS issued by the Ministry of W&CD, GoI  
(December 2013); Guidelines for Monitoring & Supervision visits to ICDS Blocks & AWCs issued by 
the Ministry of W&CD, GoI (October 2010) 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
42 
2.1.4  Audit Coverage and Methodology  
The performance of Anganwadi Services w ith respect to ICDS, during 
FYs 2017-18 to 2021 -22, was reviewed between November  2022 and 
January 2023, through test -check of relevant records of the WCD&SW  
Department; ICDS Directorate under the Department; six District Programme 
Offices (Bankura, Birbhum, Nadia, Malda, North 24 Parganas and Jalpaiguri); 
12 CDPOs in these six districts and 48 AWCs under these 12 Project offices 
(Appendix 2.1). Selection of these six districts 52  was done using the Simple 
Random Sampling Without Replacement (SRSWoR) method 53. Similarly, the 
SRSWoR sampling method was employed for selection of the 12  CDPOs 
(Project offices) and 48 AWCs, as well.  
An Entry Conference was held in November 2022, with the WCD&SW 
Department, wherein the audit objectives, coverage and methodology, were 
discussed. An Exit Conference was held (February 2024) with the Principal 
Secretary of the WCD&SW Department to discuss the audit  findings. Results 
of such discussions have been duly included in this Report, wherever applicable. 
AUDIT FINDINGS 
 
2.2 Planning 
 
2.2.1 Household survey and mapping of the project area 
As per relevant provisions 54  contained in the User’s Manual of ICDS, a 
household survey of all families, especially of mothers and children in the age 
group of zero to six years, was to be done annually at the grassroots level, in all 
rural/ tribal/ urban areas, by Anganwadi Workers. Identification of eligible 
ICDS beneficiaries such as PW&LM, children less than six years old, 
individuals who require special attention and their willingness to avail the 
services from AWC was to be done through this survey. 
The AWCs were required to maintain a Register of Family Details or Household 
Survey Register, wherein the details 55  of the families / households surveyed, 
would be recorded56.  The information/ data, recorded in the Register of Family 
Details, was to be updated every year.  
AWCs were to forward the survey data, to the CDPOs. After compilation of the 
data thus received, the CDPOs were to send the same to the DPOs  for further 
action.  
It was noted that data regarding household surveys was being recorded at the 
AWC level and being maintained only manually in the Register of Family 
Details57. However, in order to maintain & preserve data, it was essential to 
 
52 Out of the 23 districts of the State of West Bengal 
53 After arranging them (in terms of the number of beneficiaries) division-wise 
54 Para 1.1 and 1.2 of the ICDS User’s Manual, issued by the Ministry of W&CD, GoI, in November 2012 
55  Data including name, sex, age, SC/ ST/ Other, religion, Aadhaar No., marital status, physical 
condition-disabled or not, whether pregnant/ lactating, births & deaths, migration etc. 
56 to identify families who lived in the areas covered by the AWCs 
57 Register 1 (Family Details) as per User’s Manual of ICDS 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
43 
ensure that the same is maintained electronically, in a computeri sed 
environment. No such steps to digitally store data were taken between 2017-21 
by the State. It was only in March 2021, that the Ministry of W&CD, GoI, rolled 
out the Poshan Tracker Portal (mobile-based app), as an important governance 
tool to enable rea l-time monitoring and tracking of all AWCs, AWWs, 
beneficiaries and nutrition service delivery. Districts were onboarded, onto the 
portal/ app by the State, in April -May 2022. Therefore, the  database of 
beneficiaries (AWC-wise, Project-wise and district-wise)58, was available only 
from April 2022 onwards, in the online portal maintained by the Ministry of 
WCD.  
Based on these surveys the summaris ed position in test -checked districts is 
shown in Table 2.2. 
Table 2.2: Summary of household surveys carried out in the 12 test-checked 
CDPOs 
Total population of 
the test-checked 
CDPOs (as of 
January 2022) 
No. of children 
(00 to 03 years) 
No. of 
children (03 
to 06 years) 
No. of 
pregnant 
women 
No. of 
lactating 
mothers 
No. of children 
with special 
needs 
(in per cent) 
25,22,906 1,01,531 (4.02) 95,821 (3.80) 16,922 (0.67) 19,237 (0.76) 503 
 Source: Survey Reports provided by the respective CDPO- Project offices 
From Table 2.2 it would be evident that, out of the total population of 25,22,906, 
the potential SNP and PSE beneficiaries were 2,34,014 59 (9.28 per cent) and 
95,821 (3.80 per cent) respectively. 
2.2.2 Annual Programme Implementation Plans 
The National ICDS Mission was constituted to provide policy support and 
guidance to the States, with an empowered structure called the National Mission 
Steering Group (NMSG) and the Empowered Programme Committee (EPC 60) 
respectively under the ‘Chairpersonship of Minister -of-State (Independent / 
Charge) for Women & Children’ and the ‘Secretary, Ministry of Women and 
Child Development’.  
The Broad Framework for Implementation of ICDS, issued (October 2012) by 
the Ministry of WCD, envisaged decentralised planning, by identification of the 
specific needs of the district, project and local levels, through Annual 
Programme Implementation Plans (APIPs). In this context, it was observed that, 
contrary to guidelines in the ICDS Framework, none of the six  test-checked 
DPO offices had prepared separate annual action plans / APIPs, during 
FYs 2017-18 to 2021-22 at the local/ district level. The WCD&SW Department 
had compiled an APIP  for the s aid years, on the basis of Monthly Progress 
 
58  CDPO represents a project and all the AWCs under a CDPO are grouped together as a Project. 
59 1,01,531 + 95,821 + 16,922 + 19,237 + 503 
60 The Empowered Programme Committee at the central level is headed by the Secretary, Ministry of 
Women and Child Development. It is the highest technical body for planning, supervising and 
monitoring the effective implementation of ICDS Mission. At the State level, the Chief Secretary was the 
Chairperson of the State Empowered Committee. The Annual Programme Implementation Plans (APIP) 
had to be approved by the State Empowered Programme Committee, headed by the Chief Secretary. 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
44 
Reports (MPR s)/ Quarterly Progress Reports (QPRs) submitted by Districts / 
Projects, Utilisation Certificates ( UCs) etc., and submitted the APIP to the 
Ministry, for app roval. The bottom -up decentralis ed planning approach, as 
envisaged in the ICDS framework had therefore, not been followed.  
The Department did not offer any comment on the above issue in the Exit 
Conference.  
2.3 Establishment of Projects and AWCs  
For rural/ tribal areas, Community Development (CD) Blocks 61 were the units 
for sanction of an ICDS Project, irrespective of the number of villages / 
populations, while, in the urban areas, the norm was one project per one lakh 
population. For proper functioning of ICDS Projects, the Department decided 
(April 2010) to set up additional Projects, by bifurcating 62 or trifurcating63 the 
existing ones and therefore, there could be more than one project under a CDPO. 
The ICDS Scheme also prescribed norms for the setting up of AWCs, based on 
population, as shown in Table 2.3.  
Table 2.3: Population norms for setting up of AWCs 
Number of People No. of AWCs 
400-800 1 
800-1,600 2 
1,600-2,400 3 
Thereafter, multiples of 800 1 Additional AWC 
300-800 (tribal / riverine/ desert/ hilly/ other difficult 
areas) 
1 
Source: Norms provided by the Ministry of WCD, GoI 
As of March 2022, 576 Projects 64 (including 181 Projects in the six selected 
districts) and 1,19,481 AWCs (including 37,891 AWCs, in the six selected 
districts) were operational in the State. 
Table 2.4: Availability of Projects & AWCs as against norms in the State (as 
on 31 March, 2022) 
Total No. of 
Projects required  
as per norms 
No. of 
Projects 
sanctioned 
No. of 
Projects 
operational 
No. of AWCs 
required as 
per norms65 
No. of AWCs 
sanctioned 
No. of 
AWCs 
operational 
576 576 576 1,19,481 1,19,481 1,19,481 
Source: Data provided by the Directorate-ICDS under the WCD&SW Department, GoWB 
Scrutiny of records of the DPO, North 24 Parganas, however, revealed that 
26 AWCs (out of the 232 reported), under the CDPO, Panihati, were 
non-operational due to shortage of manpower and lack of adequate 
infrastructure.  
 
61 A Community Development Block (CD block), also known as a ‘Block’, is a sub -division of a Tehsil, 
administratively earmarked for planning and development 
62 existing Project being divided into two projects 
63 existing Project being divided into three projects 
64 576 projects (423: rural, 75: urban and 78: tribal projects) 
65 after factoring in norms for tribal/ urban areas 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
45 
In this regard, CDPO, Panihati, stated (February 2023) that efforts 66 had been 
made to operationalize these AWCs. It was further stated that the beneficiaries 
were subsumed in other operational AWCs for availing of scheme benefits. The 
fact, however, remained that the operational status of the AWCs, as shown by 
the Department did not present a true picture and it is possible that the re are 
more AWCs in the State that  are inoperational. Moreover, inability of the 
Department to operationalise these AWCs frustrated the schematic objective of 
setting up these centres within accessible distance of beneficiaries. 
2.3.1 Bifurcation of existing ICDS Projects  
To ensure proper functioning of the Projects, through stronger supervision and 
better monitoring of AWCs, the WCD&SW Department decided (April 2010) 
to set up additional Projects, by bifurcating the existing ones which had more 
than 300 AWCs. It was seen, in the test-checked districts, that the Department 
had bifurcated/ trifurcated (February 2012) 48 Projects, in six selected districts 
(Appendix 2.2), to form 100 Projects. Although these additional Projects were 
reported to be operational, on verification in test-checked districts, it was found 
that, none of the additional Projects thus created, were practically operational as 
they did not have (i) separate infrastructure / offices; (ii) separate DDO Codes 
and (iii) dedicated manpower had not been posted there (as of 31 March 2022).  
Further, due to shortage of CDPOs, it was observed that the existing CDPOs of 
the main Project offices, were entrusted with additional charge of other Projects. 
Therefore, the basic objective of better supervision and monitoring of the 
AWCs, through bifurcation / trifurcation of existing Projects, remained 
unachieved.   
Recommendations:  
2.1 The planning process may be decentralis ed in conformity with the 
envisaged approach, by obtaining Annual Programme 
Implementation Plans from the Project and district level offices.  
2.2 Effective steps may be taken early to operationalise non-functional 
projects by providing required man power and infrastructural 
facilities. 
2.4 Financial Management  
There were different fund sharing patterns between Centre and State for various 
components of the ICDS programme. The fund sharing pattern (CS:SS) related to 
recurring expenditure, for the Supplementary Nutrition Program (SNP 67 ), 
between GoI and the State Government, was 50:50. The cost sharing ratio, for 
all components of Anganwadi Services ( AWS)/ ICDS (General) 68 was 60:40, 
between GoI and the State Government. However, for the salary component of 
specified ICDS functionaries69, the ratio between GoI and State was revised to 
25:75, from FY 2018-19 onwards.  
 
66 identifying the place and completing the selection process of AWWs and AWHs 
67 SNP is separate expenditure component distinct from Anganwadi Services/ ICDS (General). 
68 Implementation of Anganwadi Services under Umbrella ICDS scheme includes expenditure components 
of ICDS viz. ICDS (General) renamed as Anganwadi Services (General)  which includes salary of 
earmarked staff (district & project level), honorarium of AWW & AWH, rent, pre -school kit, Medicine 
kit, uniform of AWW & AWH, Monitoring & Evaluation, Hiring of vehicle, Petroleum, Oil & Lubricant 
(POL), Information Education & C ommunication (IEC), Administrative expenses, Equipment/ 
Furniture, Training etc., Other services include construction/ upgradation of AWCs, toilets & drinking 
water facility. 
69 DPO & Statistical Assistant at District level and CDPO, Supervisor & Statistical Assistant at CDPO 
level 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
46 
Funds approved under Annual Programme Implementation Plans 
The Department generally submits the Annual Programme Implementation 
Plans (APIPs) to the Ministry, in the month of February preceding the upcoming 
fiscal. Based upon such APIPs, component -wise fund requirements for the 
Scheme, for the subsequent financial year, are put up before the EPC under the 
Ministry, for approval and release. The APIPs approved by GoI, for 
implementation of ICDS, in the State during FYs 2017 -18 to 2021 -22 are as 
detailed in Table 2.5. 
Table 2.5: Approved Annual Programme Implementation Plans (` in crore) 
Financial 
Year 
AWS/ ICDS 
(General) SNP Other services Total 
CS SS CS SS CS SS CS SS 
2017-18 524.49 349.73 418.62 418.62 10.04 6.69 953.15 775.04 
2018-19 510.81 488.02 544.20 544.20 133.00 19.46 1,188.01 1,051.68 
2019-20 680.92 551.32 598.62 598.62 100.89 18.49 1,380.43 1,168.43 
2020-21 678.22 524.31 658.48 658.48 82.01 48 1,418.71 1,230.79 
2021-22 727.10 690.18 658.48 658.48 1.40 0.93 1,386.98 1,349.59 
Total 3,121.54 2,603.56 2,878.40 2,878.40 327.34 93.57 6,327.28 5,575.53 
Source: Approved APIPs of the Ministry of WCD, GoI, furnished by the WCD&SW Department, 
GoWB. Note: CS-Central Share; SS-State Share; SNP-Supplementary Nutrition Programme 
Further, component -wise (salary, honorarium, hiring of vehicles, uniforms, 
medical kits, PSE kits etc.) allotment and expenditure (District-wise), as per the 
approved APIPs, were not provided to Audit by the Department, although called 
for. 
2.5  Financial position: SNP and AWS-ICDS 
The approved APIPs for implementation of ICDS, in the State during 
FYs 2017-18 to 2021 -22 have been discussed in Table 2.5 of Paragraph 2.4. 
Against approved APIPs, funds were released by the GoI (Central share) to the 
State and the State released the Central share along with its share (State share), 
to the implementing units. Funds were utilized by the implementing units and 
thereafter Utilisation Certificates (UCs) were furnished by the State to the GoI. 
From the UCs,  during the FYs 2017 -18 to 2021 -22, the following position in 
regard to funds received vis-à-vis the expenditure incurred, emerged, as shown 
in Table 2.6. 
Table 2.6: Allotment and Expenditure, as per UCs  (` in crore) 
Financial 
Year 
Funds received from GoI Expenditure Excess (-)/ 
Savings (+) 
over funds 
received 
from GoI 
AWS- 
ICDS 
(General) 
SNP Total 
AWS- ICDS 
(General) SNP Total 
CS SS CS SS CS SS 
A B C D E F G H I=E+G J=F+H K=I-D 
2017-18 278.05 192.43 470.48 601.89 192.73 582.75 571.68 1184.64 764.41 -714.16 
2018-19 555.56 680.47 1,236.03 669.77 272.72 678.72 781.31 1348.49 1054.03 -112.46 
2019-20 565.38 598.62 1,164.00 738.52 398.72 777.38 806.00 1515.90 1204.72 -351.90 
2020-21 376.89 419.03 795.92 730.95 446.63 319.76 313.43 1050.71 760.06 -254.79 
2021-22 339.11 329.24 668.35 668.49 459.00 796.47 835.19 1464.96 1294.19 -796.61 
Total 2,114.99 2,219.79 4,334.78 3,409.62 1,769.80 3,155.08 3,307.61 6,564.70 5,077.41 -2,229.92 
Source: Utilisation Certificates furnished by the ICDS Directorate 
From analysis of the approved APIPs and details of UCs mentioned ibid, the 
following position emerged: 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
47 
• During 2017-22, against the Central Share70 of ₹ 5,999.94 crore {for AWS/ 
ICDS (General) & SNP}  approved under APIPs, ₹ 4,334.78 crore was 
released to GoWB. Reasons for short release (₹ 1,665.16 crore) of funds, 
were not evident from records produced before Audit.  In the Exit 
Conference held in Februa ry 2024, the Pr. Secretary, WCD& SW 
Department stated that plans were submitted to the GoI for approval and that 
there was a difference in fund proposed, fund approved, and fund received 
from GoI. However, reasons for actual short release of central funds were 
not clarified by the Department. 
Against Central share of ₹ 4,334.78 crore received by the State, the State 
had shown an expenditure of ₹ 6,564.70 crore (as per UCs), indicating that 
there was an excess expenditure of ₹ 2,229.92 crore. Necessary 
clarifications regarding sources of funds from which the excess expenditure 
was met, authority under which such excess expenditure had been incurred, 
and how such excess expenditure was regularised, etc., were not furnished. 
In the Exit Conference held in February 2024, the Pr. Secretary, WCD&SW 
Department stated that the figures would be checked. The response of the 
Department raised doubts about the veracity of the reported figures of 
expenditure.  
• The expenditure of ₹ 5,077.41 crore (State share - as per UCs), on AWS / 
ICDS (General) & SNP, was lower ( seven per cent) than ₹ 5,481.96 crore, 
being the amount approved as State share in APIPs for these two 
components. This indicated that there was scope for more accuracy in 
assessing the requirement of funds.  
2.6 Inadmissible claims raised by the State Government through 
Utilisation Certificates 
As per the APIPs, the salary of staff posted at the Directorate level was not to 
be borne from the GoI share under the scheme. Moreover, only the salary of the 
regular staff, at the District level (DPO and Statistical Assistant) and at the 
Project level (CDPO, Supervisor and Statistical Assistant) was to be paid under 
‘Anganwadi Services’, under the ICDS scheme, where the GoI share would b e 
60 per cent, for the FY 2017-18, and 25 per cent, from FY 2018-19 onwards. 
However, the State had submitted UCs to GoI, mentioning the payment of salary 
of the staff at the office of the Director71, ICDS, as well as the non-entitled staff 
at the CDPO and Project levels. Further, the UCs furnished by the State reflected 
more than 25  per cent as the GoI share, during the audit period, as shown in 
Appendix 2.3. 
Reasons for  submission of inadmissible expenditure, as GoI share in UCs, 
amounting to ` 207.54 crore, were not elaborated by the Department / 
Directorate. Records of the Department/ Directorate did not indicate as to 
whether the inadmissible claim of ₹ 207.54 crore, was reimbursed by the GoI 
or not.   
 
70 UCs did not include details of the component ‘Other charges’, hence actual release on this component 
by the GoI and actual expenditure by the State (as Central & State share) could not be ascertained in 
audit 
71 Directorate-ICDS level (excess GoI share, reflected in UCs during the audit period: ` 5.07 crore); 
DPO/ district level (excess GoI share, reflected in UCs during the audit period:  ` 16.10 crore) and 
CDPO level (excess GoI share, reflected in UCs during the audit period: ` 186.37 crore) 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
48 
In the Exit Conference held in February 2024, the Pr. Secretary stated that 
admissibility varied from year to year. It was, however, assured that the 
Department would look into the issue. 
2.7  Parking of funds  
 
2.7.1 Unspent Funds under National Nutrition Mission: ₹ 321.50 crore 
The National Nutrition Mission (NNM) was launched by the Government of 
India, in the year 2017-18. The goals of NNM were to achieve improvement in 
the nutritional status of c hildren from zero to six years, a dolescent girls, 
PW&LM, in a time -bound manner 72 . The main components of the scheme 
comprised i) Information Computer Technology Enabled Real Time Monitoring 
of Schemes (ICT -RTM) ii) Training and Capacity Building iii) Community 
Mobilization and Behaviour Change Communication (BCC) iv) Innovation 
v) Performance Incentives and vi) Flexi Activities. 
Scrutiny of vouchers revealed that the WCD&SW Department had sanctioned 
(March 2019) ` 302.38 crore 73, in respect of NNM, in the FY 2018 -19. The 
amount was drawn74 and transferred to the Savings Bank account75 of the State 
Nutrition Mission. Further, the Ministry of Women and Child Development, 
GoI, also sanctioned 76  (March 2021) ` 19.12 crore (CS only), in the 
FY 2020-21, for procurement of two additional sets of uniforms, for AWWs and 
AWHs, under the Poshan Abhiyan. This amount too, had been transferred to the 
said bank account, by the Directorate. Hence, fund amounting to ` 321.50 crore 
(` 302.38 crore +  ` 19.12 crore), was transferred to the bank account of the 
State Nutrition Mission. 
The Ministry of Finance, GoI, however, directed77 (March 2021) that all bank 
accounts should be closed, except the Single Nodal Agency (SNA) account, by 
transfer of fund to the SNA account. Accordingly, an amount of ` 356.49 crore 
(including interest), pertaining to NNM, was transferred to the SNA account of 
WB Poshan Abhiyaan, in July 2022. Audit observed that this   fund of 
` 356.49 crore was lying unutilised in the nodal account as of March 2023.  
As the sanctioned fund was to be utilis ed for vital components viz. ICT-RTM, 
Training and Capacity Building, Community Mobilization and Behaviour 
Change Communication etc., for improvement  in the nutritional status of 
children from zero to six years, a dolescent girls, PW&LM, the non-utilization 
of the same defeated the purpose for which it was sanctioned, thereby depriving 
beneficiaries of intended benefits. 
Reasons for not utilising these funds and keeping it parked in a bank account 
for a period ranging between two and four years 78 were not forthcoming from 
the records. Hence, the purpose for which the funds had been provided to the 
Directorate was defeated. 
 
72 during the next three years, beginning FY 2017-18 with fixed targets which included bring down stunting 
of the children, in the age group of zero to six years, from 38.4 per cent to 25 per cent, by the year 2022 
73 Central Share (CS): ₹ 241.90 crore and State Share (SS): ₹ 60.48 crore 
74 by the Directorate 
75 Punjab National Bank A/ c 1096011085150 
76 vide order no.4091-FS/ WCD-14099/ 51/ 2018 dated 31.03.2021 
77 Memo No. F. No.1(13)/ PFMS/ FCD/ 2020 dated 23 March 2021 
78 ₹ 302.38 crore since FY 2018-19 and ₹ 19.12 crore since FY 2020-21 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
49 
The Director ICDS, in the Exit Conference stated (February 2024) that the 
scheme had been renamed as Poshan Abhiyan and the funds had been 
transferred to the account of that scheme and was being spent therefrom. No 
details, however, in regard to funds spent, if any, were provided. 
2.7.2  Parking of ICDS funds in Personal Ledger Accounts  
Para 6.09(1)(a) of West Bengal Treasury Rules stipulates that the Personal 
Deposit Account created by debit to the Consolidated Fund of the State, other 
than those created under any law or rule having the force of law by transferring 
fund from the Consolid ated Fund of the State for discharging liabilities of the 
Government arising out of special enactments, shall be closed at the end of the 
financial year by minus debit of the balance to the relevant service Heads in the 
Consolidated Fund of the State. Besi des, the Finance Department, GoWB, in 
March and July 2019, instructed 79  surrender of funds, pertaining to the 
FY 2018-19 or earlier, which were lying unutilized in Personal Ledger 
Accounts, as of June 2019.  
• Scrutiny of records revealed that North 24 Parganas district had received 
funds of ₹ 1.91 crore, towards the cost of food items, under the ICDS 
scheme, in March 2017, for the FY 2016 -17 which had been deposited in 
the District Magistrate’s Personal Ledger Account (PLA) to avoid lapse of 
grants. Out of the said funds, expenditure of ` 1.35 crore was incurred, 
during the period from FY 2017 -18 to FY 2022 -23 and an unutilised  
amount of ₹  56.15 lakh remained parked in the PLA of the District 
Magistrate, (as of July 2023).  
• In Malda district, scrutiny revealed that Directorate of ICDS, GoWB, had 
allotted ` 49.40 lakh and ` 3.24 lakh in February 2020 and March 2020, 
respectively, to five CDPOs 80, for ‘meeting administrative cost’ and one 
CDPO for meeting ‘GoI’s Crash Programme of Nutrition for children’. Out 
of total ` 52.64 lakh  (₹ 49.40 lakh + ₹ 3.24 lakh), ` 12.81 lakh, was 
transferred to DM’s PL account in March 2020, which formed a part of the 
unspent balance of ` 33.85 lakh. However, the source and the purpose of 
the balance fund of ` 21.04 lakh (` 33.85 lakh minus ` 12.81 lakh), could 
not be ascertained in audit, due to non-availability of relevant records. 
Thus, it was evident that the provisions of WBTR and instructions of the 
Finance Department, referred ibid, were not adhered. Moreover, as  SNA 
account was an interest -bearing account, keeping unspent funds in PLA, not 
only violated the GoI’s instructions, but also resulted in loss of interest. 
Recommendation:  
2.3 Department may ensure immediate reconciliation of figures 
pertaining to rec eipts and expenditure under Integrated Child 
Development Services Scheme. 
2.8 Supplementary Nutrition Programme (SNP)  
The Supplementary Nutrition Programme (SNP) targets all children within the 
age group of six months to six years, with a focus on children suffering from 
malnutrition, Pregnant Women and Lactating Mothers (PW&LM). Entitlements 
 
79 Memo No. 3290-F(Y) dated 13.03.2019 and 3718-F(Y) dated 02.07.2019 
80 Five ICDS Projects viz. Habibpur, Kaliachak-III, Gazole, Old Malda & Harishchandrapur-I. 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
50 
referred to in Sections 4 81 , 5 82  and 6 83  of the National Food Security Act 
(NFSA), 2013 are provided under SNP to these categories of beneficiaries. To 
regulate these entitlements, Supplementary Nutrition Rules, 2017 (SNP Rules) 
were promulgated84 by the Ministry of WCD and specified nutritional standard 
for each category were devised to be provided in line with the Act. 
The applicable rates for providing such Supplementary Nutrition were 
determined by the WCD&SW Department from time to time. The prescribed 
rates per beneficiary for different categories and type of meals per day were as 
detailed in Table 2.7. 
Table 2.7: Nutritional norms for SNP 
Category of Beneficiary Supplementary Nutrition to be 
provided in the form of 
Calories 
(K. Cal) 
Protein 
(gm) 
Financial Norms 
(`  per beneficiary 
per day) 
Children 
(6 months to 72 months)  
Morning Snacks / Ready to Eat (RTE) 
and Hot Cooked Meal (HCM) 
(Mandatory spot-feeding85 for age group 
3-6 years) 
500  12-15    8.00 
Severely Malnourished 
Children (SAM)  
(6 months to 72 months)  
Same as above, with more quantity of 
RTE 
800  20-25    12.00 
Pregnant Women and 
Lactating Mothers  
Hot Cooked Meal – Spot feeding 600  18-20    9.50 
Source: Ministry  of WCD ’s framework for ICDS scheme implementation and WCD&SW 
Department (GoWB)’ s day-wise SNP menu for ICDS beneficiaries 
2.8.1 Irregularities in purchase of items for Supplementary Nutrition 
Programme 
The SNP Rules86 prescribe that the procurement of food items and preparation 
of meals by the State Government is to be in accordance with the guidelines, 
instructions or order, issued by the Central Government, from time to time.  
The Finance Department, GoWB, in the year 2009, suggested the formation of 
a committee that would frame guidelines for fixing the price of SNP items, on a 
bi-monthly basis, based on information compiled from various official sources. 
Accordingly, a Rate Revision Committee (RRC), under the Chairmanship of 
Principal Secretary 87 , WCD Department, for fixing rates of SNP items was 
constituted (December 2009). Since then, the SNP rates for procurement of 
major items (Masoor dal, iodised salt and mustard oil)88 have been fixed by the 
RRC. Before finalising the rates of items, the RRC was to requisition the rates 
 
81 Section 4 of NFSA, 2013 provided that  every pregnant woman and lactating mother was entitled to 
meals, free of charge, during pregnancy and six months after childbirth, through the local Anganwadi, 
so as to meet the specified nutritional standard. 
82 Section 5 (1) (a)  of the Act provided that children in the age group of six months to six years, were 
entitled to appropriate meals, free of charge, through the local Anganwadi, so as to meet the nutritional 
standards specified in the Act. 
83 Section 6 laid down that the State Government would, through the local Anganwadi, identify and provide 
meals, free of charge, to children who were suffering from malnutrition, so as to meet the desired 
nutritional standards. 
84 Notification dated 20.02.2017 of the Ministry of WCD, GoI. 
85 ‘Spot feeding’ means hot cooked meal (HCM) eaten at the AWC, by the ICDS beneficiaries 
86 SNP Rule 7(1) 
87 The other members of the committee comprised of representatives from the Finance Department, Food 
and Supplies (F&S) Department, Financial Advisor, Women & Child Development and Social Welfare 
and the Agricultural Marketing (AM) Department. The committee had been constituted in the year 2009, 
as per the instruction of the Finance Department 
88 Rice is allocated by GoI through the Food Corporation of India (FCI), at a subsidised rate 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
51 
from the Food and Supplies (F&S) and Agricultural Mark eting (AM) 
Departments. These Departments provided the prevailing wholesale and retail 
rates of items, and the rates were, accordingly, finalised in the RRC meetings. 
The rates fixed for masoor dal , mustard oil, iodised salt and rice 89 remained 
valid for three months. These items were then purchased at these fixed rates by 
the district authorities. The rates so decided were also binding upon the agencies 
(WBECSC, NCCF, WBTDCC and CONFED)90, as well as upon the Self Help 
Groups, responsible for supply of food items for SNP. The payments were made 
to these agencies for supply of items at the project level, by CDPOs. 
In conformity with the prescribed standards and rates per beneficiary, the State 
Government had chalked out the menu chart for cooked meals and Take -home 
rations (THRs) to be provided from each Anganwadi centre. This menu was 
revised from time to time by the WCD&SW Department. 
The quantity requirement, of various items, as per the menu chart approved by 
the State Government was as follows: 
Table 2.8: Quantity requirement based on Menu Chart 
Ingredients 
Children Pregnant women and lactating mother 
Required quantity 
per week 
Required quantity 
per month 
Required quantity 
per week 
Required quantity 
per month 
Rice 540 gm 2.16 kg 1,080 gm 4.32 kg 
Mustard Oil 30 ml 0.12 lt 60 ml 0.24 lt 
Masoor Dal 90 gm 0.36 kg 180 gm 0.72 kg 
Salt 18 gm 0.072 kg 30 gm 0.12 kg 
Source: Records of Directorate of ICDS 
2.8.1.1  Excess expenditure of ₹ 115.09 crore on procurement of SNP items 
at higher rates 
Audit analysed the wholesale rates provided by the F&S and AM Departments, 
against the rates approved by the RRC , during the financial years 2017 -18 to 
2019-20 (as FYs 2020-21 and 2021-22 fell within the pandemic period and the 
RRC rates had not been used during these two years). The comparison is shown 
in Table 2.9. 
Table 2.9: Quoted vis-à-vis approved rates 
Period Commodity Unit 
Rate of 
Agricultural 
Marketing Deptt. 
(in `) 
Rate of Food & 
Supplies 
Department (in `) 
Approved 
Rate (in `) 
Excess/ 
less than 
Min. 
(in `) Min. Max. Min. Max. 
01.02.2017 
to 
30.04.2017 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 107.00 110.00 NA NA 105.00 -2.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 85.00 100.00 NA NA 85.00 0.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 10.00 16.00 NA NA 10.00 0.00 
01.05.2017 
to 
31.07.2017 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 95.00 97.00 86.00 103.00 95.00 9.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 70.00 80.00 54.00 87.00 60.00 6.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 12.00 16.00 7.00 14.50 10.00 3.00 
01.08.2017 
to 
31.10.2017 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 91.00 95.00 82.00 98.00 95.00 13.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 67.00 80.00 41.00 54.00 49.00 8.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 13.00 17.00 7.00 14.50 10.00 3.00 
 
89 in case of non-supply by Food Corporation of India 
90 WBECSC: West Bengal Essential Commodities Supply Corporation Ltd., NCCF: National Consumer 
Cooperative Federation Ltd., WBTDCC: West Bengal Tribal Development Cooperative Corporation 
Ltd. and CONFED: West Bengal State Multipurpose Consumer Cooperative Federation Ltd. 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
52 
Period Commodity Unit 
Rate of 
Agricultural 
Marketing Deptt. 
(in `) 
Rate of Food & 
Supplies 
Department (in `) 
Approved 
Rate (in `) 
Excess/ 
less than 
Min. 
(in `) Min. Max. Min. Max. 
01.11.2017 
to 
31.01.2018 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 93.00 96.00 90.00 100.00 95.00 5.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 65.00 68.00 41.00 54.00 50.00 9.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 12.00 16.00 7.00 14.50 10.00 3.00 
01.02.2018 
to 
30.04.2018 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 94.00 96.00 92.00 98.00 96.00 4.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 55.00 66.00 42.00 60.00 60.00 18.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 10.00 16.00 7.00 14.50 10.00 3.00 
01.05.2018 
to 
31.07.2018 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 94.00 96.00 92.00 100.00 89.00 -3.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 55.00 64.00 40.00 58.00 58.00 18.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 11.00 16.00 7.00 15.50 10.00 3.00 
01.08.2018 
to 
31.10.2018 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 96.00 116.00 101.00 120.00 101.00 5.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 59.00 67.00 50.00 70.00 60.00 10.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 12.00 16.00 6.00 17.00 10.00 4.00 
01.11.2018 
to  
31.01.2019 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 97.00 122.00 98.00 101.00 101.00 4.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg NA NA NA NA 60.00 NA 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 8.00 17.00 13.00 17.00 10.00 2.00 
01.02.2019 
to 
30.04.2019 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 100.00 120.00 98.00 117.00 98.00 0.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 64.00 72.00 50.00 79.00 62.00 12.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 10.00 16.00 13.00 17.00 10.00 0.00 
01.05.2019 
to 
31.07.2019 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 94.00 117.00 95.00 117.00 98.00 4.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 65.00 78.00 50.00 81.00 64.00 14.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 9.00 16.00 17.00 13.00 10.00 1.00 
01.08.2019 
to 
30.10.2019 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 90.00 110.00 98.00 118.00 98.00 8.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 70.00 75.00 82.00 90.00 60.00 -10.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 8.00 18.00 13.00 17.00 10.00 2.00 
01.11.2019 
to 
31.01.2020 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 104.00 122.00 98.00 121.00 107.00 9.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 77.00 95.00 85.00 93.00 77.00 0.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 9.00 18.00 15.00 18.00 15.00 6.00 
Source: Records of Directorate of ICDS . Note: NA- Not available; Min. (Minimum) and Max. 
(Maximum) represent rates of different brands, during concerned period 
It can be seen from Table 2.9 that: 
• The lowest rate of the items had not been approved by the RRC , on all 
occasions. The rates approved were higher by  ` 1 to ` 18 per kg for 
different items, on different occasions. On three occasions91, the rates of 
items were lower than the minimum rate quoted by the two agencies.  
Audit analysed the monetary impact of  using higher rates for the procurement 
of these items, during FYs 2017 -18 to 2019 -20, as detailed in  Appendix 2.4. 
From this analysis it may be seen that, due to non-acceptance of the lowest rates 
of SNP items, the Department had incurred excess expenditure of 
` 115.09 crore, during February 2017 to January 2020, for procurement of SNP 
items. Reasons for non-acceptance of lower rates by the RRC, were not provided 
to Audit. 
 
91 (i) February 2017 to April 2017: for Mustard Oil; (ii) From May 2018 to July 2018: for Mustard Oil 
and (iii) August 2019 to October 2019: for Masoor Dal 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
53 
2.8.2 Excess expenditure on SNP shown in the UCs provided to GoI 
During the pandemic period (2020 -21 and 2021 -22), owing to the closure of 
AWCs, the nutritional support to IC DS beneficiaries (children and p regnant 
women &  lactating mothers) were provided through THR in lieu of SNP 
(morning snacks and hot cooked meal). 
Audit analysed  the THR orders issued by the Department during closure of 
AWCs, in FYs 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 and noticed that THR , in the shape of 
Masoor dal, rice, potatoes etc., had been distributed for 17 months92. The rates 
at which these items were to be procured were also prescribed in these THR 
orders. It was noted that d uring these two years, total SNP expenditure (THR / 
HCM) of ` 2,264.85 crore was shown in the UCs submitted to GoI by the State. 
The above -mentioned expenditure was compared by Audit with the amount 
calculated as per number of beneficiaries during 2020 -21 & 2021 -22. The 
details of this expenditure calculated by Audit are as shown in Table 2.10. 
Table 2.10: Distribution of THR during FYs 2020-21 & 2021-22 
Distribution (Month/ 
Year) Item Quantity 
(kg/ gm) 
Rate per 
kg (in `) 
Amount 
(in `) 
Total amount per 
month per 
beneficiary (in `) 
 FY 2020-21 (A) 
2nd THR (April 2020) Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 69.00 
Potato 2 kg 18.00 36.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 90.00 27.00 
3rd THR (May 2020) Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 76.00 
Potato 2 kg 22.00 44.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 85.00 26.00 
4th THR (July 2020) Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 84.00 
Potato 2 kg 26.00 52.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 85.00 26.00 
5th THR (August 2020) Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 98.00 
Chhola 1 kg 65.00 65.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 90.00 27.00 
6th THR (September 2020) Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 98.00 
Chhola 1 kg 65.00 65.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 90.00 27.00 
7th THR (October 2020) Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 98.00 
Chhola 1 kg 65.00 65.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 90.00 27.00 
8th THR (November 2020) Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 91.00 
Chhola 1 kg 56.00 56.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 96.00 29.00 
9th THR (December 2020) Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 91.00 
Chhola 1 kg 56.00 56.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 96.00 29.00 
10th THR (January 2021) Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 53.00 
Potato 2 kg 9.00 18.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 96.00 29.00 
Total expenditure per beneficiary in FY 2020-21 (in `) 758.00 
Total number of beneficiaries, as per UC 89,66,338 
Total expected expenditure (in `) (A) = (758 x 89,66,338) 679,64,84,204.00 
 
92 FY 2020-21: nine months and FY 2021-22: eight months 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
54 
Distribution (Month/ 
Year) Item Quantity 
(kg/ gm) 
Rate per 
kg (in `) 
Amount 
(in `) 
Total amount per 
month per 
beneficiary (in `) 
  FY 2021-22 (B) 
11th THR (June 2021) Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 67.00 
Potato 2 kg 16.00 32.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 98.00 29.00 
12th THR (July 2021) Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 67.00 
Potato 2 kg 16.00 32.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 98.00 29.00 
13th THR (August 2021) Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 66.00 
Potato 2 kg 16.00 32.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 92.00 28.00 
14th THR  
(September 2021) 
Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 66.00 
Potato 2 kg 16.00 32.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 92.00 28.00 
15th THR (October 2021) Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 66.00 
Potato 2 kg 16.00 32.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 92.00 28.00 
16th THR  
(November 2021) 
Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 77.00 
Potato 2 kg 21.00 42.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 96.00 29.00 
17th THR (January 2022) Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 73.00 
Potato 2 kg 19.00 38.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 96.00 29.00 
18th THR (February 2022) Rice 2 kg 3.00 6.00 67.00 
Potato 2 kg 17.00 34.00 
Masoor Dal 300 gm 90.00 27.00 
Total expenditure per beneficiary in FY 2021-22 (in `) 549.00 
Total number of beneficiaries as per UC 90,62,666 
Total expected expenditure (in `)= (549x90,62,666) 497,54,03,634.00 
Expenditure for  aanuary and February 2022 (two months, on RReady to eat’ 
Pushti93 item (in `) 
34,74,54,097.00 
Maximum expenditure on normal SNP in March 2022 (in `)94 217,18,35,900.00 
Total expenditure in FY 2021-22 (in `) (B) 749,46,93,631.00 
Total=A+B 1429,11,77,835.00 
Source: Records from Directorate of ICDS 
From Table 2.10, it may be seen that expenditure of ₹ 1,429.12 crore should 
have been incurred towards distribution of THR / HCM, provided in lieu of 
morning snacks and hot cooked meal, as per the orders issued by the 
Department. However, in comparison, a total of ` 2,264.85 crore was spent on 
THR/ HCM during this period as per UCs submitted to GoI by the State. During 
these two years , normal cooked meals had not been served 95 and ‘Take home 
ration’ had been distributed, as per the Department’s orders. As such, UCs for 
these FYs (2020 -21 and 2021 -22) have shown an unexplained excess 
expenditure of ` 835.73 crore, reasons for which were not forthcoming from 
records. 
 
93 As per directives of the WCD&SW Dept., ‘Ready to Eat’ Pushti was also distributed for the month of 
January and February 2022 
94 Number of beneficiaries X rate per meal X 25 days as SNP was restored in March 2022. 
95 Except in March 2022 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
55 
2.8.3 Shortfall in coverage in SNP (State overall position)  
The components of service delivery under ICDS include provision of 
Supplementary Nutrition for children below six years of age and pregnant 
women and lactating mothers. The Consolidated Progress Reports (as of 31st 
March during FYs 2018-22) of the State showed the number of AWCs reporting, 
number of AWCs providing SNP, number of SNP beneficiaries etc. 
The overall position 96 , in regard to the population registered, vis-à-vis the 
number of beneficiaries, showed  a shortfall in the coverage of Supplementary 
Nutrition, in 23 districts of West Bengal, during the financial years 2017 -18 to 
2021-22, as shown in Table 2.11.  
Table 2.11: Shortfall in coverage in SNP 
Year 
(as on 
31st 
March) 
Number of 
AWCs     
reported 
Number of 
AWCs 
providing SNP 
for 21 days or 
more in a 
month 
Total population Number of SNP 
beneficiaries Percentage of shortfall 
Children 
(0-6 
years) 
PW&LM Children 
(0-6 year) PW&LM 
Children 
(0-6 
years) 
PW&LM 
2018 1,15,09897 1,14,818 76,25,658 14,19,204 61,17,637 13,20,684 20 7 
2019 1,16,01598 1,15,829 76,83,076 14,90,318 59,57,876 13,60,835 22 9 
2020 1,16,68599 1,16,634 77,05,935 15,03,341 63,21,698 14,18,138 18 6 
2021 1,17,065100 1,17,058 81,02,512 16,21,478 72,00,814 15,68,154 11 3 
2022 1,19,392101 1,19,269 81,96,634 15,44,516 68,70,745 14,65,148 16 5 
Source: Consolidated MPRs provided by the Directorate of ICDS 
 
• As may be seen from Table 2.11, the shortfall in coverage of eligible 
children, under the SNP, ranged between 11 per cent and 22  per cent 
during the period  under audit. In respect of PW&LM, the shortfall in 
coverage ranged between three per cent and nine per cent, which was 
indicative of lack of outreach on part of the AWWs.  No reason / 
clarification in this regard was furnished by the  Department, though 
sought for. 
• Similarly, shortfall in the coverage of Supplementary Nutrition, in 
regard to severely malnourished children, was also observed during the 
FYs 2018-22. The shortfall ranged between 33 per cent (FY 2018-19) to 
100 per cent (FY 2020-21) as shown in Appendix 2.5. Reasons for the 
shortfall in coverage were not found on record. 
• As per the Ministry’s Nutritional & Feeding Norms102 (endorsed by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court), each AWC was to ensure provision of 
supplementary nutrition, to the extent of 300 days in a year (i.e. 25 days 
in a month). In the APIPs, the cost of SNP was calculated on the basis 
of 300 nutrition days in a year. However, in the reporting format of the 
SNP, viz. Monthly Progress Report (MPR) (Format -II), only 21 plus 
 
96 Based on examination of consolidated MPRs provided by the Directorate of ICDS 
97 Out of the total operational 1,15,384 (sanctioned: 1,19,196) AWCs of 575 operational (sanctioned: 576) 
Projects  
98 Out of the total operational 1,16,113 (sanctioned: 1,19,475) AWCs of 575 operational (sanctioned: 576) 
Projects  
99 Out of the total operational 1,16,753 (sanctioned: 1,19,525) AWCs of 575 operational (sanctioned: 576) 
Projects  
100 Out of the total operational 1,17,142 (sanctioned: 1,19,481) AWCs of 576 Projects 
101 Out of the total operational 1,19,481 (sanctioned: 1,19,481) AWCs of 576 Projects 
102 Made effective from February 2009 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
56 
days was used as criteria instead of stipulated 25 days or more. Hence, 
the MPR  (Format-II), was inconsistent with the Scheme norms. The 
Directorate did not provide any clarification in this regard. 
• It was noticed, from the test-checked AWCs, that during FYs 2017-18 to 
2019-20103, there were instances when the number of nutrition days were 
less than the stipulated 25 days 104, as shown in Appendix 2.6. Reasons 
for the same, as emerged from test -check of records inter alia included 
non-availability of food items, closure of AWCs due to vacation etc. 
2.8.4  Lifting of less quantum of rice vis-à-vis actual requirement 
For the purposes of supplementary nutrition under ICDS, GoI  provides rice at 
concessional rates. Rice, so provided, is lifted by the State authorities, from 
Food Corporation of India, as per allotment orders issued by the Ministry. After 
receiving the allocation, the Directorate of ICDS distributes the allocation 
district-wise as per their requirement. 
Audit analysed the lifting of Rice during the FYs 2018 -19 to 2021-22105, with 
respect to the number of beneficiaries in the State, as shown in Table 2.12. 
Table 2.12: Lifting of Rice against number of beneficiaries 
FY 
Number of 
beneficiaries 
Requirement of rice 
per year per child/ 
women as per menu 
(kgs) 
Required quantity as per 
menu (kgs) 
Total rice 
required 
(in MTs) 
Quantity 
lifted 
from FCI 
(in MTs) 
Percentage 
of lifting 
w.r.t 
requirements Children Women Children Women Children Women 
2018-19 62,09,049 14,46,761 27 54 16,76,44,323 7,81,25,094 2,45,769 1,30,803 53 
2019-20 63,21,698 14,18,138 27 54 17,06,85,846 7,65,79,452 2,47,265 1,31,456 53 
2020-21* 89,66,338 18 16,13,94,084 1,61,394 1,44,035 89 
2021-22* 90,62,666 16 14,50,02,656 1,45,002 1,60,797 111 
Source: Ministry of WCD ’s framework for ICDS scheme implem entation and WCD&SW 
Department, GoWB’ s day-wise SNP menu for ICDS beneficiaries  
* During the FYs 2020-21 and 2021-22, THR was distributed, instead of cooked meals, wherein 
two kgs of Rice was distributed to all the registered beneficiaries  
From Table 2.12, it may be noted during the FYs 2018-19 and 2019-20 (normal 
years), lifting of rice from FCI was only 53 per cent of the requirement 106 , 
considering all the beneficiaries. Lifting of less quantum of rice from FCI during 
2018-19 and 2019 -20 indicated the possibility that lesser number of 
beneficiaries vis-à-vis beneficiaries enrolled in AWCs were being served hot 
cooked meals. 
2.8.5 Non-adherence to the nutritional norms of SNP    
The aim of SNP was to reduce/ prevent malnutrition among children  and 
PW&LM, by providing supplementary nutrition, as per applicable nutritional 
norms. 
The nutritional standards for children in the age group of 6 months to 3 years, 
age group of 3 to 6 years , as well as PW&LM , were required to be met by 
providing ‘Take Home Rations’, or nutritious hot cooked meals, in accordance 
with the ICDS scheme guidelines and norms prescribed in Schedule II of the 
 
103 During FYs 2020-21 and 2021-22 THR was distributed as AWCs were closed due to Covid pandemic 
104 The shortfall in nutrition days (i.e. less than 25 days in a month), ranged between 4 months and 
25 months in the test-checked AWCs during FYs 2017-18 to 2019-20 
105 Data pertaining to FY 2017-18 was not available 
106 Information pertaining to procurement of rice from other agencies (other than FCI) was not available 
at the Department level. 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
57 
National Food Security Act (NFSA), 2013. The Act mandates providing 
nutritional value of 500 calories and 12-15 gm protein per day, for children, and 
600 calories and 18-20 grams of protein per day for PW&LM.  
2.8.5.1 Non-adherence to SNP menu  
As per the provisions of NFSA as referred ibid, the nutritional standards for 
children (six months to three years) and for childr en (three to six years) are 
500 calories and 12-15 gm of proteins. States were to formulate menus based 
on these standards prescribed in order to meet nutritional requirements of the 
targeted groups. Accordingly, WCD&SW Department, West Bengal, prescribed 
(March 2018) menu107 for supplementary nutrition under Anganwadi services.  
Director of ICDS, while finalizing the menu (June 2018) for days108 (2, 4 & 6), 
for children, under SNP, stipulated that the sanctioned rate for Morning Snacks 
would be ` 4.50 per head per day containing a half of a boiled poultry 
egg (₹ 2.50) and a banana (₹ 2.00).  
However, in Malda district, test check of records disclosed that the nutritional 
aspects had been compromised, due to non -distribution of the items of SNP 
menu as prescribed by the Department. It was observed, from the records of 
DPO, Malda, that, as against the sanctioned amount of ₹  4.50 per head per day 
for three days (days -2, 4 & 6), bananas had not been provided as morning 
snacks, to beneficiaries, during the entire period between 8 th June 2018 and 
16th March 2020. Thereafter, the SNP menu had been su spended, from 
17th March 2020 (due to COVID pandemic). It was observed that a ripe banana 
contained about 110 calories, 1 gram protein, 28 grams carbohydrates, 15 grams 
sugar (natural), 3 grams fibre and 450 mg potassium.  
Thus, non-distribution of banana, contrary to the Government directives, during 
the period 2018-2020, resulted in deprivation of  required nutritional benefits to 
3.62 lakh- 4.35 lakh children109, in the age group of six months to six years, and 
led to unwarranted savings of ` 20.45 crore (Appendix 2.7).  
2.8.5.2 Nutritional values of Rtake home ration’, distributed during 
FYs 2020-21 and 2021-22, was lesser than standards of NFSA, 2013 
As the Anganwadi services were provided for 25 days in a month, the nutritional 
value, prescribed for a month, for children, was a minimum of 12,500 calories 
(500 calories X 25 days) and 300 gm of protein (12 gm X 25 days) and 
15,000 calories (600 calories X 25 days) and 450 gm of protein (18 gm X 25 
days) for PW&LM. 
As mentioned earlier, during the Pandemic period (FYs 2020-21 and 2021-22), 
support to ICDS beneficiaries (children and PW&LM) was provided in the form 
of THRs.   
Audit analysed the nutritional value of items distributed as THR, in the FYs 
2020-21 and 2021-22 as detailed in Table 2.13. 
 
107 which was to be introduced in the Anganwadi centres with immediate effect 
108 As per Revised day-wise menu of SNP dated 08.06.2018 of the WCD&SW Department menu for the 1st, 
3rd and 5th day: Ready to eat- as morning Snacks (₹ 2.08), Hot cooked meal- Rice with full egg curry and 
Potato (₹ 5.51). Menu for the 2 nd ,4th and 6th day: Morning snacks- Poultry egg boiled (Half) (₹ 2.50) 
and Banana  (₹ 2.00), Hot cooked meal- Khichdi (₹ 3.90) 
109 The monthly banana feeding days varied between 6 and 13 days. 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
58 
Table 2.13: Nutritional value of THR distributed during FYs 2020-22 
Items 
Calorie 
per 100 
gram 
Protein per 
100 gram 
(gram) 
Quantity 
distributed 
per month 
Calories from 
distributed 
quantity 
Protein from 
distributed 
quantity (gram) 
Rice 346.00 6.40 2 kg 6,920.00 128.00 
Potato 97.00 1.60 2 kg 1,940.00 32.00 
Masoor dal 343.00 25.10 300 gm 1,029.00 75.20 
Total nutritional value 9,889 calories 235.20 gm 
Chhola 369.00 22.50 1 kg 3,690.00 225.00 
Total nutritional value, including Chhola 13,579 calories 460.20 gm 
Source: Records of ICDS Directorate  
Out of the 17 months, in which THR was distributed to beneficiaries, 2 kgs of 
rice, 2 kgs of potato and 300 gms of masoor dal were distributed, in 12 months 
(in 2020-21 and 2021-22). The THR, so distributed in these 12 months, was not 
in conformity with the nutritional value prescribed under the NFSA110 , as it 
comprised of only 9,889 calories (79 per cent) and 235 gm (78  per cent) of 
protein, whereas the Act prescribed minimum of 12,500 calories and 300  gms 
of protein per month, for children.  
In case of PW &LM, the Act provided minimum nutritional value of 15,000 
calories and 450 gms of protein per month, whereas the THR comprising 2 kgs 
of rice, 2 kgs of potato and 300 gms of masoor dal , distributed in these 
12 months, had a nutritional value of only 9,889 calories (66 per cent) and 
235 gms (52 per cent) of protein. Hence, the nutritional value of the ‘take home 
ration’ in terms of calorific value was less than the standards prescribed under 
the Act, by 21 per cent in case of children and by 34 per cent in case of 
PW&LM. 
Hence, the THR, distributed during these 12 months in the FYs 2020 -21 and 
2021-22, was less in nutritive value than the standards prescribed under the 
Food and Security Act, 2013. 
(i) Non-distribution of THR for six months during Covid pandemic  
Rule 8 of the Supplementary Nutrition (under the Integrated Child Development 
Services Scheme) Rules, 2017, prescribed that “In case of non-supply of meals 
to beneficiaries in Anganwadi centres on any day due to non -availability of 
foodgrains or any other reason, the State Government shall pay food security 
allowance to every beneficiary as per rates specified in the rules”. During the 
Pandemic period i.e. FYs 2020-21 and 2021-22, all the AWCs were closed and 
the State Government had distributed THR to all beneficiaries, for 17 months, 
from April 2020 to February 2022. Normal SNP was provided from the month 
of March 2022 onwards. 
It was, however, observed that THR had not been provided, for six months, 
during the Covid period (March 2020 to February 2022), due to non -receipt of 
instructions from the Department, despite the Ministry having advised the State 
Government (July  2020) to ensure uninterrupted supply of Supplementary 
Nutrition to the beneficiaries, during the Pandemic. Consequently, the intended 
beneficiaries were deprived of the nutritional benefits as envisaged in the Rules 
referred ibid. 
 
110 National Food Security Act (NFSA), 2013: SCHEDULE II -Nutritional standards: The nutritional 
standards for children in the age group of 6 months to 3 years, age group of 3 to 6 years and pregnant 
women and lactating mothers required to be met by providing “Take Home Rations” or nutritious hot 
cooked meal in accordance with the Integrated Child Development Services Scheme 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
59 
(ii) Non-distribution of RReady To Eat’ packets  
During the Pandemic period, while giving directions111 for distribution of THR 
to SNP beneficiaries, for January 2022 (17 th THR) and February 2022 
(18th THR), Director of ICDS categorically mentioned that in addition to 
distribution of THR, irrespective of the beneficiary’s age and nutritional status, 
morning snacks to all children, as well as special supplementary food for 
severely malnourished children, in the form of Ready To Eat packets (RTE), 
would also be provided, in the manner shown in Table 2.14. 
Table 2.14: Distribution of RTE packets as Morning snacks 
Sl. 
No. Target Group Quantity/ Weight of the RTE 
packet (in Gram) 
Colour Code of 
the Packet 
1. Children of 06 (six) months to 
06 (six) years 
01 (one) packet of 480 grams each 
per child per month 
Green 
2. Severely Malnourished Children 
of 06 (six) months to 06 (six) 
years 
05 (five) packets of 480 grams 
each, per child per month 
Orange 
Source: Memo No. 2044(23) dated 13.12.2021 of the Directorate-ICDS, GoWB 
Scrutiny of records, of the test -checked districts disclosed that the distribution 
of RTE, along with THR, for the months of January 2022 (17 th THR) & 
February 2022 (18 th THR round), had not been done, in five of the 
six test-checked districts (except Nadia). Reasons for non -distribution of RTE 
packets were, however, not available in the records made available. This 
deprived the children from availing the benefits of supplementary nutrition, in 
the form of RTE, contrary to the directives ibid. 
2.8.5.3 Inadequate quality checking and monitoring of SNP 
As per the Operational Guidelines for Food Safety & Hygiene for SNP, the food 
provided to the beneficiaries should be of acceptable quality and safe for human 
consumption. The CDPO or Supervisor was required to draw samples of HCM 
served at the AWCs and send the same for testing, to a FSSAI 112 / NABL113 
accredited laboratory. The specified periodicity of sample testing of HCM, was 
once in a quarter.  
In addition, to ensure the quality of the meals being provided, a provision for 
testing of HCM by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) 114, through Quality 
Control Laboratories (QCLs), had also been envisioned in the above-mentioned 
instructions. ICDS functionaries were also required to send samples to QCLs of 
the FNB.  FNB, in collaboration with the State Government, was to carry out 
periodic checks and test the meal or get it tested through accredited/ recognized 
Government Food Research Laboratories, so as to ensure that the meal met with 
the specified nutritional standards and quality. Similarly, officers, authorised by 
the State Government, were also to conduct surprise checks, draw samples and 
get them tested through the laboratories, to ensure quality and nutrient value of 
meals. 
 
111 December 2021 & February 2022 
112 Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
113 National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories 
114 The Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) is a technical support wing of the Child Development Bureau, 
under the Ministry of WCD, GoI, Its activities are mainly related to nutrition, education and training 
for ICDS functionaries, as well as food analysis and standardization. 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
60 
During test-check of AWCs between December 2022 and January 2023, it was, 
however, noticed that the samples of food, provided at the AWCs, had never 
been checked by the FNB in its QCLs. No samples had been collected by the 
field units of FNB, during FYs 2017 -18 to 2021-22. The CDPOs had also not 
sent samples of food to FSSAI/ NABL accredited laboratories and QCLs of the 
FNB, during FYs 2017 -18 to 2021 -22. Moreover, the quality testing of the 
water, available at the AWCs, had not been carried out.  Further, no surprise 
check, to ensure the quality and nutrient value of the meals, was conducted. 
All these were indicative of indifference of the Department towards 
maintenance of specified nutritional standards and quality of HCM being 
distributed under ICDS. 
2.8.5.4 Damage to food items due to improper storage 
As per the ICDS revised Guidelines 2021 115 (i) food stocks at the Anganwadi 
Centers were to be stored in airtight bins, or stacked neatly in gunny bags and 
stored in areas free of rodents and insects (ii) dry ingredients, like iodized salt, 
condiments, oils, soyabean, pulses etc., were to be stored in airtight containers 
and (iii) all stored raw materials and ingredients were to be kept under dry and 
cool conditions, to prevent spoilage and contamination.  
Implementation of the Scheme involved storage of food items for SNP (e.g., 
rice, masoor dal, iodized salt, soyabean chunks, mustard oil etc.), at the Project 
Godowns, in large quantities, as well as at the AWCs, in smaller quantities.  
Available records for the State revealed that 3,961.13 quintals of rice, supplied 
to different districts under SNP, during FY 2020-21, had been damaged for 
reasons not on record , leading to a loss of ` 1.07 crore 116 on account of this 
damage.    
Further, scrutiny of records in the test -checked districts revealed that the 
following food items had been damaged, during the period 2017-18 to 2021-22 
(Table 2.15) and had become unsuitable for human consumption. 
Table 2.15: Loss due to damaged food items in six selected districts 
Name of the item Quantity damaged Rate (in `) Amount (in `) 
(A) (B) (A x B) 
Rice  497.83 qtl  2,700 per qtl  13,44,141  
Masoor Dal  411.25 qtl  7,700 per qtl 31,66,625  
Mustard Oil  1,69,416.76 litre  107 per litre  1,81,27,593  
Iodized Salt  1,31,486.21 kg  11 per kg  14,46,348  
Soyabean  32,049.85 kg  80 per kg   25,63,988  
Chhola  1652 kg  52 per kg  85,904  
Total 2,67,34,599  
Source: Information furnished by the test-checked districts 
The purchase rates of these food items (Rice, Masoor Dal, Mustard Oil and 
Iodized Salt), during the period from November 2019 to April 2021, are detailed 
in Appendix 2.8. Considering the lowest purchase rates for each of the items 
during the said period, there was a loss of ` 2.67 crore, due to this damage, 
during the period under audit, in five out of the six test-checked districts117.  
 
115 Streamlining Guidelines of SNP 
116 the rate of procurement was ₹ 2,700 per quintal 
117 Bankura, Birbum, Nadia, Malda and North 24 Parganas 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
61 
2.8.5.5 Non-availability of weighing machines, in the test -checked Project 
offices and AWCs  
Each AWC was required to monitor the growth of the children, by recording 
their weight on a monthly or quarterly basis as per norms118. Under this activity, 
AWWs were required to measure weight and assess the nutritional status of all 
infants and young children. In the event of detection of any faltering growth, the 
AWC was required to take corrective measures, like counselling of parent s; 
providing additional food in case of severely underweight children; or making 
referrals to health facilities. In keeping with the objective, the AWCs were 
required to be provided with adult119 and baby weighing machines by the State.  
The availability of weighing machines, in the sampled districts, was examined 
during audit. It was noticed that there were shortfalls in the availability of 
functional weighing machines, viz. child weighing machines / scales (ranging 
between 5 per cent and 54  per cent) and adult weighing machines / scales 
(ranging between 26 per cent and 87 per cent), in the operational AWCs, in the 
12 test-checked Projects (Appendix 2.9). This had prevented regular weight 
measurement and monitoring of the registered babies / children and PW&LM, 
which was essential for identifying underweight, malnourished babies/ children 
and PW&LMs, for taking remedial action as per guidelines.   
 
 
Pictures 2.1 & 2.2:  Weight measurement of children using salter type weighing scale, at the Banpur 
Dhanukpara AWC and Uttar Kharika Danga AWC, respectively, under CDPO, Habibpur Project, in 
Malda district (aanuary 2023) 
Among the 48 test -checked AWCs, adult weighing machines were either not 
available or were non-functional in 12120 AWCs (25 per cent of the test-checked 
AWCs), whereas, in 9 121 AWCs (19 per cent), child weighing machines were 
non-functional. In the absence of these weighing machines, identification of 
vulnerable groups like malnourished children could not be done and nor could 
remedial action be correctly taken. 
2.8.5.6 Miscellaneous irregularities relating to SNP  
For implementation of the scheme GoI allocates rice at a subsidised rate of ₹ 300 
per quintal, on a quarterly basis. After receiving the allocation, the Directorate 
of ICDS distributes the allocation district-wise. Thereafter, as per orders of the 
 
118 As per the norms of the Scheme, children under the age of three years were to be weighed once a month 
and children who were 3-6 years of age, were to be weighed once in three months. 
119 Children of age 5 -6 years (depending on their weight also) were weighed, using adult weighing 
machines, as the baby weighing machines were not suitable for bigger children.  
120 In 12 AWCs, adult weighing machines were either not available or were non -functional; Nadia 
(Chakdaha: one and Ranaghat-1 Addl.: one); Malda (English Bazar & Old Malda:  two and Habibpur: 
four) and North 24 Parganas {Basirhat-I: one and Panihati (Urban): three} 
121 Child weighing machines were non -functional in; Birbhum (Rampurhat-I: three AWCs): Nadia 
(Chakdaha: one AWC and Ranaghat-1 Addl.: one AWC) and North 24 Parganas (Panihati: four AWCs) 


CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
62 
district authority, the rice is procured and distributed CDPO -wise, through the 
carrying contractor and is finally distributed to the AWCs, by the respective 
CDPOs. Fund was also released to the district offices by the Department for 
payments to be made for lifting of rice from FCI.  
(i) THR not provided, even after procurement of rice at higher rates  
For providing supplementary nutrition to scheme beneficiaries, GoI allocated 
32,129.80 MT of rice to the State for the fourth quarter of FY 2020 -21. 
WCD&SW Department communicated (January 2021) an additional 
requirement of 29,094.44 MT of rice, to the Ministry of WCD, for meeting the 
requirement of distribution of THR122, to beneficiaries, for December 2020 and 
the 4th Quarter of 2020-21. Additional allocation as sought for by the State was, 
however, not received from GoI, for reasons not on record. Subsequently, THR, 
for the months of December 2020 and January 2021, was distributed to 
beneficiaries from the existing stocks. 
As of February 2021, the balance stock of rice available with the State was only 
9,064.28 MT. However, due to distribution of THR in place of HCM (during the 
Pandemic period) to all enrolled beneficiaries, the requirement of rice increased 
significantly. A ccordingly, the Directorate re -calculated an additional 
requirement of 29,132.13 MT of rice, for the 4th quarter (of the FY 2020 -21), 
for the entire State, and forwarded (April 2021) the same to the Department. 
Food & Supplies (F&S) Department, GoWB arrang ed for supply of 
29,132.13 MT of rice at a cost of ` 97 crore 123 , from the Decentralized 
Procurement Stock124 and this rice was allotted to the districts in May 2021. By 
this time ( i.e.  May 2021), the quarterly allocation of 31,157 MT of  rice from 
GoI had also been received. It was noted that THR was not distributed to 
beneficiaries during February 2021 to May 2021 due to non -availability of 
adequate stock of rice. This indicated that the Department could not ensure 
timely procurement of the additional quantity of rice to meet nutritional needs 
of beneficiaries. Distribution of THR rice was resumed only from June 2021 
onwards.  
Details of allotment of rice distribution of THR etc., as culled out from the 
Monthly Progress Reports are detailed in Table 2.16. 
Table 2.16: Procurement and consumption of rice 
Month 
Allotment 
of Rice 
(in MT) 
Whether THR 
provided 
Beneficiaries 
as per MPR 
(in number) 
Rice required @ 
two kg per 
beneficiary 
(in MT) 
Balance 
quantity, as on 
31.03.2022 
(in MT) 
Opening Stock as 
on February 2021 
9,064.28 -- -- -- -- 
May 2021 31,157.00* No  --  -- 
29,132.13 
June 2021 0.00 Yes 89,29,524 17,859.05 
July 2021 31,157.00* Yes 90,47,946 18,095.89 
 
122 As per norms of THR, two kg rice per month per beneficiary, was to be distributed uniformly. As such, 
the demand of rice, during Covid-19, had increased significantly. Hence, additional quantity of rice was 
required, for distribution of THR to the beneficiaries. 
123 charging ₹ 3,329.70 per quintal whereas the purchase price of FCI rice was ₹ 300 per quintal. 
124 The State Government (Food & Supplies Department) procures, stores and issues food grains, under 
the Targeted Public Distribution System. The Scheme of Decentralised Procurement (DCP) refer to the 
manner of procurement of foodgrains for the central govern ment stock, through the state agencies, 
rather than through the central agency of FCI. Under DCP, State undertakes direct purchase of paddy/ 
wheat, on behalf of GoI. Purchase centres are opened by the State Government and its agencies. 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
63 
Month 
Allotment 
of Rice 
(in MT) 
Whether THR 
provided 
Beneficiaries 
as per MPR 
(in number) 
Rice required @ 
two kg per 
beneficiary 
(in MT) 
Balance 
quantity, as on 
31.03.2022 
(in MT) 
August 2021 0.00 Yes 90,62,666 18,125.33 
September 2021 0.00 Yes 90,62,666 18,125.33 
October 2021 45,107.81* Yes 90,62,666 18,125.33 
November 2021 0.00 Yes 90,62,666 18,125.33 
December 2021 52,404.14* No -- -- 
January 2022 0.00 Yes 90,62,666 18,125.33 
February 2022 0.00 Yes 90,62,666 18,125.33 
March 2022 0.00 SNP125  resumed 
(HCM started) 
83,35,893 12,251.29 
Total 1,98,022.37    1,56,958.21 41,064.16 
Source: Records of ICDS Directorate; * Quarterly allocations from GoI; Note: THR was not  
distributed during February 2021 to May 2021 and in December 2021  
From the above Table, it is evident that the Department had 41,064.16 MT of 
undistributed rice, in its stock, as of March 2022. It was also observed that 
despite availability of sufficient stock of rice, the Department could not ensure 
distribution of THR in the months of May and December 2021.  
No reply, in this regard, was received from the Department, as of 
September 2024.  
(ii) Excess expenditure on procurement of rice at higher rates from other 
Agencies  
GoI allocates rice through FCI at a subsidized rate of ` 300 per quintal. The 
State Government can procure rice from other agencies, only if FCI is unable to 
supply the respective allocation, after receipt of a ‘no supply’ certificate from 
FCI. 
Scrutiny of records, of the DPO and CDPO offices, of the six test -checked 
districts, revealed that these DPOs and CDPOs had procured rice from different 
State Government agencies, viz. West Bengal Essential Commodities Supply 
Corporation Ltd. (WBECSC) / West Bengal State Multipurpose Consumers 
Cooperative Federation Ltd.  (CONFED)/ District Controller of Food & 
Supplies (DCFS), at much higher rates, ranging between ` 2,500 per quintal 
and ` 3,000 per quintal, during 2017-19, resulting in excess expenditure of  
` 20.62 crore, towards the cost of rice as detailed  in Table 2.17.  
Table 2.17: Excess expenditure on procurement of rice during the period 
2017-19 
District 
Excess expenditure on procurement of rice over and above the subsidized rate of FCI 
Quantity 
purchased 
(in qtl) 
Agency 
from 
whom 
procured 
Range of 
Rates 
(₹ per qtl) 
Expenditure 
incurred 
(in ₹) 
Required expenditure 
at subsidized rate (@ 
₹ 300 per qtl) 
(in ₹) 
Excess 
Expenditure 
incurred 
(in ₹) 
Birbhum 65,325 WBECSC 2,500-2,950 17,56,98,500 1,95,97,500 15,61,01,000 
North 24 
Parganas 
14,334 CONFED 2,500-3,000 3,58,36,250 43,00,350 3,15,35,900 
Nadia 5,480 WBECSC 2,500-3,000 1,46,26,000 16,44,000 1,29,82,000 
Jalpaiguri 2,585 WBECSC 2,550-3,000 63,93,450 7,75,500 56,17,950 
Total 20,62,36,850 
Source: Records made available at test-checked districts  
 
125 As hot cooked meals started in March 2022, the calculation of rice required (50 gm per children & 100 
gm for PW&LM per day) is for 25 days. As per the Consolidated MPR of March 2022: the total number 
of children, including 6 months - 3 years & 3 - 6 years, were: 68,70,745 & PW&LM were: 14,65,148 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
64 
Though the above procurement was to be made after obtaining a ‘no supply’ 
order from FCI, none of the above districts could produce such an order in 
support of procurement of rice from other agencies, at higher rates. 
Thus, procurement of rice over and above the subsidized rates of FCI, had 
resulted in avoidable excess expenditure of ` 20.62 crore from Government 
exchequer. 
(iii) Avoidable expenditure due to allowance of transportation charges of 
food grains, in violation of prevailing Government orders-` 1.07 crore  
The WCD&SW Department constituted District Level Tender Committees 
(DLTCs) for each district 126, to fix the rates for transportation of food articles 
like masoor dal, soyabean, rice etc., procured for beneficiaries of ICDS, under 
SNP, from district to block godowns and thereafter from block godowns to 
AWCs. Accordingly, the DLTCs, fixed the rates for transportation, from time to 
time, through a tendering process. Necessary agreements had been entered into 
with the concerned agencies by the DPOs (ICDS) of each district, for 
transportation of such food grains. 
In this regard audit observed that Food & Supplies Department, GoWB, allowed 
(January 2019) transport rebate to distributor/ wholesaler for doorstep delivery 
of food grains, under Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) based on the 
distance for carrying the food grains. It was also noticed that the same orders 
were also being followed by the School Education Department, GoWB  for 
carrying food grains under the Mid-day Meal (MDM) scheme. 
Scrutiny of records of the test -checked districts, however, disclosed that the 
rates of transportation charges of food grains were fixed, for delivery of food 
items under SNP, without taking into cognizance the above -mentioned 
Government orders (regarding the transportation of food grains). Reasons for 
non-adoption of existing rates of transportation charges, as followed in other 
comparable schemes (MDM,  PDS), were not available in records made 
available. The excess expenditure ranged between ₹ 15 and ₹ 74 per quintal per 
km., with the total avoidable expenditure being ₹ 1.07 crore 127  towards 
transportation charges (details in Appendix 2.10).  
No reply was offered by the DPOs, though called for (September 2024). 
(iv) Non-supply of food grains (Rice and Masoor dal) - ` 13.64 lakh  
The carrying contractors, after lifting the food grains from FCI / Project 
godowns128 , were required to deliver the same to the designated centers. In 
support of delivery of food grains, sub -allotment reports (delivery challans) 
were to be furnished by the carrying contractors to the issuing authority. 
Scrutiny of the sub-allotment of food grain records, of DPO, Bankura, revealed 
that under CDPO, Barjora, the carrying contractor, in three distribution orders 
(between October 2020 and February 2021), had lifted 1,780 quintals of rice 
and 298 quintals of Masoor dal. However, after lifting, the carrying contractor 
 
126 Comprising of the District Magistrate, District Programme Officer/ Child development Project Officer 
(CDPO)-ICDS, Regional Transport Officer (RTO), District Controller of Food & Supplies (DCFS) etc. 
127 Birbhum: ₹ 43.68 lakh {DPO: ₹ 41.44 lakh; CDPO (Suri-II): ₹ 2.24 lakh)}; Jalpaiguri: ₹ 62.91 lakh 
(DPO: ₹ 62.91 lakh) and Bankura: ₹ 0.90 lakh (CDPO Chhatna: ₹ 0.90 lakh) 
128 based on the orders of DPOs/ CDPOs 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
65 
had not submitted any sub-allotment report (delivery challans etc.), of the THR 
items, to the CDPO office. As per the verification report furnished by the CDPO, 
it was found that 225 quintals of rice and 64 Quintals of Masoor dal had not 
been distributed (till August 2023) among the AWCs, by the carrying contractor.  
Considering the prevailing procurement rates, the cost of the food grains not 
supplied to the AWCs was calculated at ` 13.64 lakh129. 
Loss of food grains, amounting to ` 13.64 lakh was attributable to lack of 
monitoring on the part of the CDPO Barjora under DPO Bankura. The CDPO 
did not furnish (i) Copy of the FIR, if any, lodged against the carrying contractor 
(ii) details of the action, if any, taken to recover the cost of food grains from the 
contractor and (iii) details of the carrying cost paid to the contractor. 
(v) Short delivery of 190.70 quintals of FCI Rice to Project Godowns  
DPO, Jalpaiguri allocated 600 quintals of rice 130  to CDPO, Dhupguri . Audit 
scrutiny of the delivery challans and stock register of FCI Rice, at CDPO, 
Dhupguri, revealed that out of the total allotted quantity of 600 quintals, only 
409.30 quintals of rice 131 had been received by  the CDPO, resulting in a short 
delivery of 190.70 quintals. The value of rice short delivered was required to be 
recovered from the agency that had transported the rice from the FCI / DCFS 
godown to the Dhupguri project godown.  
CDPO, Dhupguri, in his reply (August 2023), stated that the matter had been 
reported to the DPO, Jalpaiguri. However, no action (recovery of cost of 
undelivered rice or other penal action) was found to have been taken against the 
erring contractor. 
(vi) Food quantities not traceable in Stock register - ` 36.51 lakh  
In terms of the West Bengal Financial Rules, all materials received in Stock 
should be recorded in the appropriate Stock Register. Issues therefrom and 
balance in stock was also to be properly maintained through proper accounting.  
In this regard, Audit observed that, as per entries made in the stock book of 
CDPO, Matiali, in Jalpaiguri district, the stock position of food grains viz. Rice, 
Masoor Dal, Mustard Oil and Salt, as on 09 June 2017, was as follows:  
Table 2.18: Cost of total food grains as per stock as on 09 June 2017 
Item Quantity Rate (in `) Total amount (in `) 
Rice 800 quintals 2,650 per quintal 21,20,000 
Masoor Dal 220 quintals 6,000 per quintal 13,20,000 
Mustard Oil 2,100 litres 95 per litre 1,99,500 
Iodised salt 1,100 kgs 10 per kg 11,000 
Total 36,50,500 
Source: Records of CDPO, Matiali 
There were, however, no entries as to issue of the above quantities of food grains 
to the AWCs nor was the stock carried forward in the subsequent stock register 
entry dated 18 July 2017. This raised serious doubts as to proper utilization of 
the stock valued at ` 36.51 lakh and chances of misappropriation thereof could 
not be ruled out. 
 
129 (225 X ₹ 3,329.70 + 64 X ₹ 9,600) = ₹ 13.64 lakh 
130 vide work order no. 312/ DIST/ ICDS dated 23.11.2020 
131 vide challan no. 1988 to 1991 dated 24.11.2020 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
66 
Further, the stock register, for the period 2017 -18 to 2021 -22, had not been 
maintained in a proper format and there was no certified periodical closing and 
opening balances of quantities of the food items. 
The CDPO Matiali had not furnished any reply in this regard (September 2024). 
(vii) Excess reimbursement of cooking cost to AWCs - ` 20.64 lakh  
For implementing SNP in the State, the WCD&SW Department had fix ed the 
cost of Supplementary Nutrition per head, per day, for children (six months to 
six years) and PW&LM and severely malnourished children, as being ` 8.00, 
` 9.50 and ` 12.00, respectively.  
Further, in order to meet nutritional requirements of beneficiaries, eggs and 
vegetables were to be procured by AWCs and costs of the same were reimbursed 
by CDPOs as cooking cost. Details of the same are shown in Table 2.19 below: 
Table 2.19: Rate of cooking cost reimbursable to AWCs as per day -wise 
menu chart followed for supplementary nutrition at AWCs 
Type of 
beneficiaries 
Cost for 1st, 3rd and 5th 
day of week per head 
per day (in `) 
Cost of 2nd, 4th and 6th day of week per head 
per day (in `) 
Average 
cost per 
head per 
day (in `) Egg Potato Total Egg Soyabean Potato Green 
Veg. Total 
Children 5.00 0.28 5.28 2.5 1.02 0.42 1.03 4.97 5.125 
PW&LM 5.00 1.33 6.33 5.00 2.13 0.56 1.66 9.35 7.84 
Source: Menu Chart as per G overnment Orders of the Directorate ICDS; Note: Costs for 
Severely Malnourished Children have been ignored, due to insignificant number 
The cooking cost is reimbursable to AWWs based on the total number of meals 
served by them, to the beneficiaries, on a monthly  basis. It was seen  during 
scrutiny of records that in test-checked CDPOs, payment released to AWWs was 
in excess of the total number of meals required  to be served, considering the 
number of beneficiaries enrolled in the project. During FY 2019-20, the excess 
payment to the AWWs towards reimbursement of cooking cost stood at 
` 20.64 lakh (Appendix 2.11) considering the month -wise number of 
beneficiaries who availed the benefits of SNP. 
Reasons for the excess reimbursement made to the AWWs were not clarified to 
Audit, though called for. 
Recommendations:  
2.4 Efforts should be made to promote Supplementary Nutrition for 
300 days per year as per the stipulated calorific and nutritive values 
to ensure specified nutrition for the intended beneficiaries.  
2.5 Regular sample testing of food distributed under Supplementary 
Nutrition Programme by the Anganwadi Centres may be carried out 
to ensure that food of specified quality and standard is distributed. 
2.9 Operation of non-formal Pre-School Education (PSE) in AWCs  
One of the objectives of the ICDS scheme is laying the foundation for proper 
psychological, physical and social development of children, through non-formal 
Pre-School Education. Pre-School Education was to be provided for 300 days 
in a year, i.e. for 25 days in a month to children of the three to six years of age 
group. Availability of adequate facilities was a pre -requisite for effective 
implementation of this component of the Scheme.   

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
67 
2.9.1  Purchases of ECCE/ PSE Kits 
The Early Childhood Care and Education 132  (ECCE) programme, as part of 
PSE, aims at repositioning the AWCs as vibrant Early Childhood Development 
Centers, providing a joyful learning environment. The emphasis is on four 
dedicated hours of ECCE sessions , covering development priorities for each 
sub-stage i.e. early stimulation/ interaction needs for children below three years, 
and develop  mentally appropriate pre -school education for children who are 
three to six years old and a more structured and planned school readiness 
component, for children who are five to six years old. 
The ICDS guidelines provided for ECCE Kits133, for each AWC @ ` 5,000 per 
AWC per annum (including the cost of Pre- School Education Kits and Activity 
Book). It was noticed that GoI approved ` 266.66 crore134 for purchase of ECCE 
Kits during FYs 2017-18 to 2021-22.  
Examination of records revealed that as against the requirement of 
5,84,873 number of kits during 2017-18 to 2021-22, only 25,997 number of kits 
were procured (during 2017 -18 and 2018-19) at a total cost of ` 7.75 crore by 
the Directorate. No procurement of ECCE kits was made in the FYs 2019-20 to 
2021-22. Reasons for not purchasing ECCE kits were not found available in 
records. 
It was, therefore, evident from above that the shortfall in procurement, in these 
five years, was around 96 per cent135 and the majority of AWCs had not received 
the ECCE kits, even once in these five years adversely impacting pre -school 
education.  
2.9.2  Purchase of Medicine Kits 
ICDS guidelines also provide for supply of medicine kits @ ` 1,500 per annum, 
for each AWC. Each medicine kit is to contain  prescribed medicines136 as per 
quantities approved by the Department.  
From the available records it was seen that GoI approved ` 81.75 crore for 
purchase of medicine kits during 2017-18 to 2021-22. It was further ascertained 
from records that as against the requirement of 5,84,873 number of medicine 
kits, for AWCs, during 2017-18 to 2021-22, only 1,16,904 number of kits were 
procured at a cost of ` 11.37 crore by the Directorate.  
It was therefore, evident from above that t he shortfall in procurement of 
medicine kits, in these five years, was around 80 per cent and no AWCs had 
received medicine kits in the years 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2021-22. Reasons for 
not purchasing the medicine kits were not found available on records.  
2.9.3 Shortfall in procurement of uniform (sarees) 
Ministry of WCD, Govt. of India, revised its norms (in November 2017) , to 
increase the rate of uniform to ` 400 per saree/ local dress, for two sets each, of 
 
132 ECCE/ non-formal Pre-School Education (PSE) covers children of age group 3-6 years 
133  Comprising of items like toys, blocks, presentation board, water colour, activity books etc. 
134 Exact Funds received for this particular purpose could not, however, be ascertained by Audit as the 
sanction orders of GoI were inclusive of all the components of Anganwadi Services (General)  
135 Kits required: (5,84,873 minus kits procured: 25,997)/ (Kits required: 5,84,873) = 96 per cent   
136 like paracetamol syrup, paracetamol tablets, B -complex syrup, Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS), 
Povidone iodine solution etc. 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
68 
AWW and AWH, in every year.  Examination of approved APIPs from 2017-18 
to 2021-22 revealed that provision for sarees, along with other components like 
ECCE Kit, medicine kit etc., for AWWs and AWHs had been included in the 
annual plans. 
The requirement of funds proposed by the State, funds approved by GoI, and 
the expenditure incurred, during FYs 2017 -18 to 2021 -22, is given in 
Table 2.20.  
Table 2.20: Approval vis-à-vis expenditure on uniforms in 2017-22 
Financial 
Year 
Proposed 
to GoI 
(` in lakh) 
Approved 
by GoI 
(` in lakh) 
No. of 
AWWs 
& AWHs 
Requirement 
of uniforms 
Expenditure incurred 
Number 
Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
2017-18 NA  1,292.29 2,09,519 4,19,038 14,696 0.29 
2018-19 1,845.09 1,671.62 2,09,058 4,18,116 0 0.00 
2019-20 1,879.68 1,669.35 2,08,840 4,17,680 3,94,712 11.84 
2020-21 1,898.02 1,668.68 2,09,670 4,19,340 1,92,439 5.77 
2021-22 1,817.60 1,817.60 2,05,665 4,11,330 2,49,770 7.50 
 Total 20,85,504 8,51,617 25.40 
Source: Records of Directorate of ICDS; Note: Exact Funds received for this particular purpose 
could not be ascertained, as the sanction orders of GoI were inclusive of all components of 
Anganwadi Services (General).  
It is evident from Table 2.20 that during FYs 2017-18 and 2021-22, against the 
total requirement of 20,85,504  sarees, for AWWs and AWHs, only 8,51,617 
(41 per cent) sarees had been purchased by the Department at a cost of 
₹ 25.40 crore. Thus, there was a shortfall of 59  per cent in procurement , as 
against requirements during these five years. It was also noted that in the 
FY 2018-19, no sarees had been purchased for AWWs and AWHs. Reasons for 
shortfall in procurement of uniforms were, however, not forthcoming from 
records. 
2.9.4 Deficiencies in facilities and amenities at the AWCs impacting PSE 
Ministry of WCD, GoI137 instructed that ICDS owned AWC buildings must have 
separate sitting rooms for children / women, child -friendly toilets, space for 
playing of children (indoor and outdoor activities), safe drinking water facilities, 
separate kitchen and store for storing food items. Government owned AWC 
buildings were considered better suited for PSE 138  activities (indoor area, as 
well as outside play area), as compared to rented rooms & others. Further, ICDS 
Mission’s Broad Framework for Implementation also envisaged provisioning of 
‘special education activity kits / books’ for Children with Special Needs 
(CWSN).  
It was seen from the 48 test-checked AWCs, that: 
• Only 21 AWCs (44 per cent) were functional from their own buildings. 
 
137 vide G.O. No. 16 -3/ 2009-ME Vol. II dated 10th March 2011 in its instruction to the States/ Union 
Territories (UTs) 
138 AWWs were required to maintain Pre-School Education Registers at the AWCs, in which the names of 
the eligible children (children in the age-group of three to six years), as well as their attendance, were 
to be recorded. 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
69 
• In three AWCs 139 , PSE activities were being carried out in open spaces 
instead of a proper room. 
• PSE kits comprised 41 items140 of learning for the children, in the age group 
3-6 years. Audit noticed that nine AWCs did not have PSE kits. Further, in 
the remaining test-checked AWCs it was found that there were insufficient 
number of items141 in the PSE kits. 
• None of the 48 AWCs had special education activity kits / books for 
Children with Special Needs (CWSN). 
• Blackboards were available in 26 of 48 AWCs (54 per cent) only. 
  
Pictures 2.3 & 2.4: AWC running in a small room of a private house, with a small outside area, with nominally 
available PSE kit, at the Kalitala Litchubagan AWC, in the Nadia district (December 2022) 
  
Pictures 2.5 & 2.6: PSE in open space, in the Lotabhanga AWC, in Malda district. The centre was functioning 
from a small, rented room, without sufficient indoor space for PSE activities (aanuary 2023) 
Failure of the Department in providing the requisite infrastructure, with the 
required facilities / amenities, led to deficient implementation of PSE and 
impacted the quality of services being delivered. 
Recommendation:  
2.6  Steps may be taken to ensure the availability of facilit ies/ amenities, 
for non-formal Pre-School Education (PSE), at the Anganwadi 
Centre level, in order to improve the quality of services being 
provided. 
 
139 Kalachandpur AWC (Indpur, Bankura), Kalikapur-III AWC (Rampurhat-I, Birbhum) and Lotabhanga 
AWC (Habibpur, Malda). 
140 These items indicated water colours, art & craft set, brush, non -toxic crayons, shape posters, dolls, 
activity cards, conversation cards, slates, kitchen set, fruit set, vegetable set, animal set, doctor set, 
jigsaw puzzle, letters & numbers, puzzle board, number wheel, alphabet sorting trays etc.  
141 Only some toys & charts were found available in the test-checked AWCs. 


CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
70 
2.10  Nutrition and Health Education   
The objective of Nutrition and Health Education (NHE) component under 
ICDS, was to enhance the capability of the mother (in the age group of 15 years 
to 45 years) in looking after the health and nutritional needs of children.  
The strategy for providing NHE, inter alia, included Home visits by the AWW, 
to educate parents so that they could plan for an effective role in the child’s 
growth and development, with special emphasis on newborn children. 
2.10.1 Dissemination of NHE, during home visits and mothers’ meetings  
ICDS Mission’s Broad Framework for Implementation provides that nutrition 
and health education is to be imparted to beneficiaries through home visits, local 
gatherings etc. 
Identification of the homes of pregnant women and young children, to be visited 
by AWWs, within their respective jurisdictions, was stated to be done through: 
(i) the registered beneficiaries who availed of Supplementary Nutrition from the 
AWCs and (ii) mother’ meetings.  
However, the number & periodicity of home visits to be conducted by the 
AWWs, for dissemination of NHE, had not been fixed in any of the test-checked 
projects. Moreover, number of home visits actually conducted by AWWs was 
also not available in the records  produced. As such attainment of envisaged 
objectives of NHE could not be ascertained in audit. 
  
2.11  Inadequate infrastructural facilities and amenities in the AWCs  
An AWC was required142 to have a separate sitting room for children / women, 
separate kitchen, store for storing food items and separate space for children to 
play (indoor and outdoor activities). Moreover, the Broad Framework for 
Implementation of the ICDS Mission (2013) envisaged that AWCs should be 
child friendly, with al l relevant infrastructural facilities like toilets, drinking 
water, provision of electricity etc. The Framework also envisaged a space of at 
least 600 sq. ft. for the AWCs.   
Audit of the AWCs however, revealed noticeable shortages in terms of 
infrastructural facilities and amenities which would hamper child -friendly 
service delivery.  As per data provided by the Directorate of ICDS, out of the 
total operational 1,19,481 AWCs in the State (as of March 2022), 61,314 AWCs 
(51 per cent), were housed in ‘own buildings’, under the control of the 
ICDS-Directorate. A total of 19,479 AWCs were being run in rented buildings, 
while the rest were being run in rooms that were neither owned,  nor rented143, 
by the ICDS. Further, 36,084  AWCs (30 per cent) had no toilet facilities and 
10,680 AWCs (nine per cent) did not have safe drinking water facilities.  
With regard to the six test -checked districts, the infrastructural facilities & 
amenities (including utensils, furniture), ava ilable in the AWCs, as of 
March 2022, are detailed in Table 2.21.  
 
142 Vide para 4 of the guidelines 
143 Such as AWCs accommodated in rent -free schools, rent -free private houses and rent -free Govt. 
buildings 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
71 
Table 2.21: Infrastructural facilities and amenities in AWCs  in the 
test-checked districts 
Infrastructural 
facilities & 
amenities 
North 24 
Parganas Nadia  Bankura Birbhum Malda Jalpaiguri Total of 
test-
checked 
AWCs (Availability in per cent) 
Operational 
AWCs    
10,368    6,934   5,739  5,191  5,723   3,936    48 
Own building   2,773  
(27)    
2,275  
(33) 
4,124  
(72)  
3,724  
(72)  
1,954   
(34)  
2,592   
(66)   
Rented house   5,478  743  0  0  1,584  586  
Primary school 
building  
872    1,543   626  101 80   110    
Private house   931    2,105   44  1,122  360   545    
Other Govt. 
Building  
314  268  945  244  1,745  103 
PSE kit  NA   945  
(86)  
Not 
furnished 
NA 5,520 
(4)  
NA   
Electricity  4,381  
(42) 
475 (7) 0  0  25  
(0.44) 
120  
(3) 
Furniture 144 NA   1,109 
(16)   
NA NA 3,120  
(55) 
2,882  
(73)  
Black Board  NA   1,578 
(23) 
NA 3,724 (72) 1,945 
(34)  
3,039  
(77) 
Drinking water  9,485  6,898  4,441  3,680  5,723  3,629  
Toilet  7,553    5,548   3,011  3,268  3,342   2,107    
Source: Information & documents furnished by the test-checked DPO-ICDS offices 
It follows from scrutiny of the data and Table 2.21 that 
• The shortfall in operation of AWCs, from ‘Government owned 
buildings’, ranged between  28 per cent and 73 per cent. It indicated 
that infrastructure, suitable for implementation of various schematic 
interventions, was not available in many of the AWCs.  
• In most of the AWCs of test-checked districts, there was no electricity 
for lighting of rooms or for cooling the rooms during summer. The 
shortfall in this regard ranged between 58 per cent and 100 per cent. In 
the test -checked 48  AWCs, only four AWCs 145  had electricity 
connections. 
Further, the facilities available in the 48 test -checked AWCs, are shown in 
Appendix 2.12. It was noticed that: 
• Only 21 AWCs (44 per cent) were being run from ‘own buildings’,  
under the control of the ICDS Directorate.  
 
144 Furniture here refers to Chair, Table and Almirah 
145 Kalitala Litchubagan AWC & Uttar Palitpara GSFP Primary School AWC, in Ranaghat -I Additional 
Project; Panchpota Masjid Para AWC & 1 No. Anandanagar Netaji Adarshya Sangha Club AWC, in 
the Chakdah Project, under the Nadia District. 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
72 
• The Kalachandpur AWC (Indpur , Bankura) was running in an open 
verandah of a private house. The Kalikapur -III AWC (Rampurhat -I, 
Birbhum) was running in an open space and the Lotabhanga AWC 
(Habibpur, Malda) and Bapuji Colony  2 AWC {English Bazar & Old 
Malda (Urban), Malda}, were running in very small, rented rooms.  
• In 23 AWCs, there were no toilet facilities.  
• None of the 48 test-checked AWCs had the following facilities  
a) gas ovens/ cylinder and water filter, for safe drinking water 
b) Medicines/ medical kits 
Infrastructural deficiencies adversely impacted the quality of the services viz. 
adequate space for spot feeding, hygienic conditions, medical kits, playing 
facilities etc., under the scheme. 
2.12 Construction and upgradation of AWCs 
As per provisions of the Ministry’s Broad Framework for Implementation of the 
ICDS Mission (2013), adequate and appropriate infrastructure for AWCs, 
including construction of new buildings, should be ensured.  
In order to create better infrastructure in AWCs, the Ministry approved 
construction of 7,102  new AWCs, as well as upgradation of 5,988 existing 
AWCs, in between 2013-14 and 2016-17, based on the approved APIPs of the 
State. The fund sharing pattern between GoI and the State, for this was 75:25, 
for units sanctioned in FYs 2013 -14 and 2014-15, and 60:4 0 for FY 2016 -17. 
The construction of AWC units, sanctioned during FY 2016-17, was to be done 
in convergence with the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment  
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), which provided for an expenditure of ` 2.00 lakh 
from the General Fund 146  as the cost of construction for each AWC, during 
FY 2016-17. For Construction & Renovation of AWCs, funds were released 
directly to the District Magistrates, who in turn released those funds to the Block 
Development Officers (BDOs) / Executive Officers-Panchayat Samities (EOs-
PSs), for execution of the sanctioned works.  
Shortcomings noticed, in regard to the utilisation of these funds, are discussed 
in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2.12.1  Loss of central funds due to non-utilisation of previous grants  
During 2013-14, GoI sanctioned construction of 320 AWCs and upgradation of 
5,000 AWCs at an estimated cost of ₹64.40 crore (GoI share being 
₹ 48.30 crore). First instalment of GoI share of ₹24.15 crore was released in 
October 2013. The amount received from GoI stipulated completion of 
construction of the AWCs, within the financial year or six months from the date 
of receipt of the funds , failing which installment due to the State would be 
considered for allocation to other States. From the scrutiny of available records, 
 
146 AWCs constructed from “General Fund”, refers to the construction completed using the funds received 
out of the sharing pattern of the Central Govt. and State Govt, against AWCs constructed under 
Convergence scheme in which construction were done utilising Funds out of the receipts of the Rural 
Development Department. 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
 
73 
it was noticed that the Department had released (October 2014) ` 32.20 crore147, 
to the Directorate of Social Welfare , for construction of 160 AWCs and 
up-gradation of 2,500 AWCs, in the State.   
The status of utilization of funds, as received from the  districts (as of 
August 2022), was as detailed in Table 2.22. 
Table 2.22: Status of utilization of GoI funds sanctioned during 2013-14 
Sl. 
No. 
Purpose of 
Grant 
No. of 
units 
approved 
Total amount 
allotted to 
districts, 
including 
matching 
grant of State 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of 
units for 
which 
UCs were 
received 
Value of 
UCs 
received 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
No. of 
units for 
which 
UCs were 
not 
received 
UCs 
pending 
from the 
districts as 
of August 
2022 
(₹ in lakh) 
1.   Construction 
of AWCs   
160   720.00   96   431.79   64   288.21   
2.   Upgradation 
of AWCs   
2,500   2,500.00   1,349   1,550.54 
  
1,151   949.46   
Total   3,220.00       1,982.33      1,237.67   
Source: Documents provided by the WCD&SW Department  
It would thus follow from above that even after a lapse of more than eight years 
from the date of release of funds, utilization certificates of ` 12.38 crore were 
yet to be furnished by the district authorities to the Department. Due to this, the 
Department was denied the second instalment of funds , amounting to 
` 24.15 crore, from GoI. The status of construction of the 64 remaining AWCs 
and upgradation of 1,151 AWCs, for which UCs had not been furnished by the 
districts, could not be ascertained in audit.   
2.12.2 Non-utilisation of funds 
It was noticed that GoI had allotted (December 2014) an amount of 
` 7.41 crore, towards upgradation of 988 AWCs, subject to utilization of funds 
within the current FY or within six months from the date of receipt of the 
funds.  Even though Grants-in-aid of ` 7.41 crore of the Central Share, had 
been credited to the State exchequer in December 2014,  the Department 
released ` 9.88 crore (GoI: ` 7.41 crore; State Share: ` 2.47 crore) to the 
Director of Social Welfare in September 2015, i.e. after a lapse of eight months 
from the date of receipt of the funds from GoI. The entire funds of ` 9.88 crore 
remained unutilised, as of August 2022. 
2.12.3 Inordinate delays in the completion of construction and upgradation 
of AWCs 
GoI had made allotment of ` 81.38 crore, during FY 2016-17, for construction 
of 6,782 AWCs, in convergence with MGNREGA. The total allotment of 
` 135.64 crore (including GoI share: ` 81.38 crore and State share: 
` 54.26 crore) was released to the districts in FY 2016 -17. Records disclosed 
that out of 6,782 AWCs, utilization certificates, for construction of 3,265 AWCs 
 
147 first instalment of the Central share, received in October 2013: ₹  24.15 crore and matching grant of 
State share: ₹ 8.05 crore 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
74 
amounting to ` 66.55 crore, had not been received by the Department from the 
districts, as of August 2022.  Thus, there had been inordinate delays, ranging 
upto six years, in respect of construction of 3,265 number of AWCs.  
In the Exit Conference held in February 2024, regarding delay of six years in 
the completion of construction and upgradation of 6,782 AWCs through 
MGNREGA scheme, the Principal Secretary conveyed that it was not possible 
to construct AWCs presently within a cap of  ₹ 7.00 lakh, which included a 
labour component to be provided through MGNREGA for ₹  5.00 la kh and 
materials component of ₹  2.00 lakh. It was also stated that it was difficult to 
converge construction of AWCs with other schemes and that there was hardly 
any fund available for maintenance and upkeep of the AWCs.  
However, the response did not clarify whether these issues had been flagged to 
the GoI, for appropriate redressal. Further, the status of construction of these 
3,329 (3,265+64) AWCs was also not conveyed to Audit.  
2.12.3.1 Status of construction and upgradation of AWCs in test -checked 
districts 
Scrutiny of records related to construction and upgradation of AWCs, in three 
of the test -checked districts 148  (the status of the other three districts was not 
made available to Audit), revealed that 1,126 units were sanctioned for 
construction/ upgradation149 at a cost of ₹ 19.85 crore.  
• It was noticed that in Bankura district, out of ₹ 16.01 crore sanctioned 
for construction or/ and upgradation of 854 AWCs, only 510 AWCs had 
been completed and an amount of ₹  9.13 crore could only be utilized 
by the district authorities.  
• Similarly, in Birbum and Jalpaiguri districts out of 272 units, 
sanctioned for construction and upgrdation of AWCs, at a cost of 
₹ 3.84 crore, only 262  units could be completed after expending an 
amount of ₹ 3.55 crore. 
The fact that 354 AWCs had not been completed (November 2022), indicated a 
lackadaisical approach of the Department and the concerned authorities. 
Besides, utili sation of the aforesaid fund for other purposes, not related to 
construction or/ and upgradation of AWCs, can not be ruled out. 
2.12.4 Construction of AWCs under RIDF-XXV: non-completion of projects 
The Government of West Bengal also received funds for the construction of 
AWCs, from the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
(NABARD). NABARD sanctioned loans for financing the construction of 
AWCs from the Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF).  
Under RIDF-XXV , NABARD sanctioned ` 189.70 crore (February 2020), for 
the construction of 1,430 AWCs, in different districts of the State.  These 
construction works were scheduled to commence from February 2020.  
 
148 Bankura, Birbhum and Jalpaiguri 
149 Bankura (854 units: ₹  16.01 crore); Birbhum (160 units: ₹  1.60 crore) and Jalpaiguri (112 units: 
₹ 2.24 crore) 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
75 
The physical and financial status of construction of AWCs, under RIDF -XXV , 
was as shown in Table 2.23. 
Table 2.23: Physical & financial progress of construction of AWCs, using 
RIDF funds (as of November 2022)     (₹ in lakh)  
Sl. 
No. District 
No. of 
AWCs 
sanctioned 
Total 
project 
cost 
NABARD 
Loan 
No. of 
units 
completed 
No. of 
units 
not 
started 
Work in 
progress 
Total 
cost of 
work 
done 
1. Hooghly 125 1,600.03 1,360.82 73 21 31 622.51 
2. Paschim 
Medinipur 
322 4,128.69 3,509.12 104 48 170 1,390.70 
3. Nadia 22 281.33 239.23 21 01 0 251.63 
4. Bankura 157 2,013.03 1,711.99 81 15 61 585.60 
5. Birbhum 09 115.13 97.84 03 06 0 38.02 
6. Howrah 15 191.92 163.10 09 03 03 143.16 
7. Paschim 
Bardhaman 
14 178.92 152.04 04 02 08 83.25 
8. Malda 17 217.26 184.62 17 0 0 216.53 
9. Purulia 51 656.07 557.76 07 21 23 244.37 
10. Kalimpong 220 3,471.16 2,951.55 162 13 45 2,100.71 
11. Purba 
Medinipur 
432 5,527.89 4,697.92 149 76 207 3,295.09 
12. Purba 
Bardhaman 
46 588.87 500.46 12 0 34 436.84 
Total 1,430 18,970.30  16,126.4 642 206 582 9,408.41 
Source: Records provided by the WCD&SW Department; Note: Residual funds, other than 
NABARD loan, were to be borne by the State  
As evident from Table 2.23, the physical achievement was only 44.89 per cent, 
as just 642 out of 1 ,430 targeted projects had been completed, till 
November 2022. This has led to delay of more than two years in completion of 
these projects and denial of services to intended beneficiaries.   
There were no recorded reasons for not commencing work related to 206 AWCs. 
However, records of the test -checked districts showed that seven buildings in 
Bankura and one in Nadia, had not been executed due to land disputes.  
2.12.5 Inordinate delays in the construction of toilets and drinking water 
facilities 
With a view to providing proper sanitation and drinking water in AWCs, GoI 
released funds during the period from FY 2017 -18 to FY  2019-20, for 
construction of toilets, as well as for providing drinking water facilities in the 
AWCs, as shown in Table 2.24.  

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
76 
Table 2.24: Status of construction of toilets & drinking water facilities (as 
of November 2022) 
FY of 
sanction 
Units 
sanctioned 
Cost 
per 
unit 
(in ₹) 
Sanctioned 
amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
Amount 
released by 
Central 
Government 
(60 per cent of 
sanctioned 
amount)  
(₹ in lakh) 
Amount 
released by 
State 
Government 
(40 per cent of 
sanctioned 
amount)  
(₹ in lakh) 
No of units 
constructed 
(as of 
November 
2022) 
Amount 
expended 
(₹ in lakh) 
Construction of toilets in AWCs  
2017-18  2,274 12,000  272.88  163.73  109.15  2,056 249.12 
2018-19  2,054 12,000  246.48  147.89  98.59  Nil Records not 
furnished 
2019-20  13,991 12,000  1,678.92  1,007.35  671.57  Nil Nil 
Total 18,319  2,198.28 1,318.97 879.31 2,056 249.12 
Construction of drinking water facilities  
2017-18  2,871 10,000  287.10  172.26  114.84  Nil Records not 
furnished 
2018-19  2,871 10,000  287.10  172.26  114.84  Nil Records not 
furnished 
2019-20  5,432 10,000  543.20  325.92  217.28  Nil Nil 
Total 11,174  1,117.40 670.44 446.96 Nil -- 
Grand 
Total 
 3,315.68 1,989.41 1,326.27 2,056 249.12 
Source: Information & documents furnished by the WCD&SW Department 
From the above Table 2.24 it can be seen that the construction work of only 
2,056 toilets, out of the 18,319 toilets sanctioned during the FYs 2017 -18 to 
2019-20, had been completed as of November 2022 , despite availability of 
funds. Further, as none of the 11,174  drinking water facilities could be 
completed, the beneficiaries were deprived of access to safe drinking water. 
Reasons for non-utilisation of the funds were not clarified by the Department. 
Recommendation:  
2.7  Anganwadi Centres may be equipped with child-friendly buildings, 
essential facilities/ amenities (e.g. toilet facilities, safe drinking 
water, medicine kits etc.), for smooth and effective delivery of 
Integrated Child Development Services Scheme, in a time -bound 
manner.  
2.13  Shortage of Human Resources  
In the Anganwadi services framework, the CDPOs 150 , ACDPOs 151  and 
Supervisors152 had oversight functions, while AWWs153 and AWHs154 were the 
frontline workers, providing the core services.  The overall staff position in the 
 
150 The CDPO holds direct charge of the scheme in ICDS Project (block/ municipality) 
151 The ACDPO assists the CDPO in running of the scheme in ICDS Projects (block/ municipalities). 
152 The Supervisor guides/ supervises the AWWs in running the AWC and submission of MPR etc. The 
Supervisor reports to the CDPO. 
153 An ‘Anganwadi Worker’ (AWW) is a lady engaged from the local community, she is an honorary 
worker, under the ICDS scheme, at the AWC. The AWW runs the AWC for delivery of services under 
the ICDS scheme and is paid monthly honorarium, as decided by the Government. 
154 The ‘Anganwadi Helper’ (AWH) is a lady engaged from the local community, she is an honorary worker 
under the ICDS scheme at the AWC, to assist the AWW in running the AWC, for delivery of services 
under the ICDS scheme. The AWH is paid monthly honorarium, as decided by the Government. 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
77 
State for the ICDS framework (576 ICDS projects; 1,19,481 AWCs), as of 
March 2022, is shown in Table 2.25.  
Table 2.25: PIP vis-à-vis the sanctioned strength (as of March 2022)   
No. of CDPOs No. of ACDPOs No. of 
Supervisors No. of AWWs No. of AWHs 
SS PIP SS PIP SS PIP SS PIP SS PIP 
576 274 (48 
per cent) 
225 82 (36 
per cent) 
5,053 1,179 (23 
per cent) 
1,19,481 1,05,679 
(88 
per cent) 
1,19,481 1,00,521 
(84 
per cent) 
Source: Consolidated MPR provided by the Directorate-ICDS, GoWB; 
SS: Sanctioned Strength and PIP: Persons-in-Position 
From the table above, it is evident that there were shortages of 12 to 16 per cent 
in the posts of AWWs and AWHs respectively, who actually provide the field 
level services under ICDS. Thus, shortage of manpower in this category raises 
the risk of non -delivery of services to intended beneficiaries. There was also 
acute shortage (ranging from 52 to 77 per cent) in the supervisory cadre i.e. in 
the posts of Supervisors, ACDPOs and CDPOs. Absence of supervisory staff 
impacted both monitoring of the Scheme and consequential quality of services 
provided under ICDS.  
Further, in the test -checked districts, there were significant shortages in these 
key posts, as reflected in Table 2.26.  
Table 2.26: PIP versus sanctioned strength, in test -checked districts (as of 
March 2022)    
District 
CDPOs ACDPOs Supervisors AWWs AWHs 
SS 
PIP 
per ce
ntage 
short
ageSS 
PIP 
perce
ntage 
short
ageSS 
PIP 
perce
ntage 
short
ageSS 
PIP 
perce
ntage 
short
ageSS 
PIP 
perce
ntage 
short
age
Bankura 27 16 41 10 2 80 258 58 78 5,739 5,203 9 5,739 4,896 15 
Birbhum 24 14 42 6 2 67 213 55 74 5,191 4,627 11 5,191 4,041 22 
Nadia 30 12 60 17 9 47 288 44 85 6,934 6,461 7 6,934 6,033 13 
Malda 26 12 54 11 2 82 249 65 74 5,723 5,036 12 5,723 4,901 14 
North 24 
Parganas 
58 25 57 20 11 45 431 119 72 10,368 9,614 7 10,368 9,402 9 
Jalpaiguri 16 4 75 9 2 78 167 42 75 3,936 3,470 12 3,936 2,908 26 
Source: Consolidated MPR furnished by the Directorate and the respective DPOs; 
SS: Sanctioned Strength and PIP: number of Persons-in-Position   
As of March 2022, the six selected districts had 37,891 155 operational AWCs. 
However, there were 34,411 AWWs and 32,181 AWHs in position respectively 
which indicated that there were AWWs/ AWHs holding charge of more than one 
AWC. 
155 Each AWC was to be looked after by one AWW and one AWH. 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
78 
Audit noticed that owing to shortages in the respective cadre, CDPOs had also 
been made responsible for more than one Project, which adversely affected their 
work of supervision, coordination and guidance. Similarly, shortage of 
Supervisors (as shown in Table 2.26), in the test-checked projects also impacted 
service delivery under ICDS.    
Reasons for non -recruitment of adequate manpower by the Department were 
not clarified to Audit. It was also noticed that the Recruitment Rules for the post 
of Supervisor were pending  for approval (as of April 2020) with the Finance 
Department156.  
2.14  Training & Orientation Programme
The success of the programme depends largely on the effectiveness of training 
provided to frontline workers. Training of functionaries, at all levels, has been 
built into the ICDS programme. 
The State Government was preparing and submitting the State Training Action 
Plan (STRAP), for trainings 157  of AWWs/ AWHs and Supervisors, to the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development, for necessary approval. STRAP 
was to be included as a component of the APIP.  Apart from STRAP, Early 
Childhood Care and Education (ECCE) training was also to be imparted to 
AWWs and AWHs. During FYs 2017-18 to 2021-22 an amount of ₹ 28.87 crore 
(GoI share: ₹  17.35 and State share: ₹  11.52 crore) was received by the 
Department on account of training. The Department could, however, utilize 
₹ 21.95 crore only. 
• Training of Supervisors and AWWs / AWHs had been organized
through the Middle Level Training Centre (MLTC) and Anganwadi
Worker Training Centre (AWTC). It was seen from records that three
MLTCs and 21 AWTCs were running in the State.  The Department/
Directorate did not furnish detailed records relating to training
programmes conducted by the MLTCs/ AWTCs to Audit.
• The National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development158
(NIPCCD) has been designated as the apex institute for training of
CDPOs and ACDPOs by GoI. However, the Department / Directorate
did not furnish details of training conducted through NIPCCD and its
Regional Centres, to Audit.
As such, A udit could not ascertain the physical and financial performance 
(targets and achievements) of the training programmes. As training & 
orientation plays a crucial role in the ICDS Scheme, it is essential that a 
comprehensive review be undertaken by the State Government to understand 
the efficacy of the training programmes being organised.  
156 the period since when these Rules had been pending for approval, was not mentioned by the Department 
157 induction/ job/ refresher trainings 
158 NIPCCD is an autonomous Institute under the aegis of the Ministry of Women & Child Development, 
GoI. An apex Institution working towards delivering quality systems in training, counseling and research 
in the areas of topical concerns related to Women and C hild Development. NIPCCD has its 
Headquarters in New Delhi and five Regional Centres (Guwahati, Bengaluru, Lucknow, Indore & 
Mohali). 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
79 
Recommendation: 
2.8 Department may take steps for recruitment and posting of adequate 
number of functionaries at various levels, to ensure better service 
delivery as envisaged under the scheme.  
2.15 Monitoring & Review 
In terms of the Ministry of Women and Child Development Guidelines 
(March 2011), Monitoring and Review Committees were to be constituted, at 
different levels, to review the implementation of the Scheme. Moreover, as per 
Ministry’s Guidelines for Monitoring & Supervision (October 201 0) and the 
Broad Framework for Implementation, the ICDS Scheme had an in -built 
monitoring system, through which regular reports / returns (Monthly Progress 
Reports) flow upwards, from the AWCs to blocks, districts, State and finally, in 
an aggregated form, to the Government of India. 
2.15.1 State Level Monitoring & Review Committee 
There was a State Level Monitoring & Review Committee159 (SLMRC), headed 
by the Chief Secretary to oversee and review implementation of ICDS in the 
State. The Committee was required to meet every six months, to monitor and 
review the Scheme. 
The Department did not provide relevant records of the SLMRC 160 meetings 
pertaining to the FYs 2017-18 to 2021-22, though called for. As such, the extent 
to which the prescribed role of the SLMRC in monitoring, had been carried out 
could not be ascertained in audit.   
2.15.2 District & Block Level Committees 
The District Level Monitoring & Review Committee (DLMRC) headed by the 
District Magistrate ( DM), with the DPO as the Member -Secretary was to be 
constituted in each district. Similarly, Block Level Monitoring & Review 
Committee (BLMRC) headed by the  Sub-Divisional Magistrate (SDM), with 
the CDPO as its convener was to be set up. Both these Committees were to meet 
at least once in a quarter, or as and when required.  
In the test -checked units, it was noticed that, although the DLMRCs and 
BLMRCs were stated to have held review meetings, from time to time, detailed 
records, such as minutes of meetings and reports of the DLMRCs, during 
FYs 2017-18 to 2021 -22, were not available on record in all cases . In Nadia 
district, eight161 review meetings were held, whereas, in Malda district, as per 
documents made available by the DPO -ICDS, only two meetings were held in 
FY 2019-20 and three in the FY 2020-21. 
159 SLMRC included the Chief Secretary, as the chairperson of the committee; Principal Secretaries/ 
Secretaries of different departments; five Members of Parliament from the State, on rotational basis 
for one year; five Members of the Legislative Assembly of the St ate, also on rotational basis for one 
year; State Mission Director of the National Rural Health Mission; Regional Director of NIPCCD; 
Member of the Food & Nutrition Board of the State; Principals of MLTCs & AWTCs on rotational 
basis in each year and Joint Secretary (ICDS), WCD&SW Department. 
160 with recommendations and follow-up actions taken thereon 
161  FY 2017-18: Two, FY 2018-19: Two, FY 2019-20: Three, FY 2020-21: NA & FY 2021-22: One. 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
80 
2.15.3 Shortfall in visits of AWCs, by Supervisors and CDPOs/ ACDPOs 
As per Ministry's Guidelines for Monitoring & Supervision (October 2010), all 
Supervisors were required to visit a minimum of 50 per cent of the AWCs, under 
their respective jurisdiction, every month. A CDPO / ACDPO was required to 
visit at least 250 AWCs per month, on a rotational basis, and to ensure coverage 
of 100 per cent AWCs in a year.    
In selected districts it was noticed that as there were shortages at the level of 
both CDPOs and Supervisors against the sanctioned strength (detailed in 
Paragraph 2.13), they had to supervise a larger number of Projects/ AWCs.  
In the test -checked units, the supervision / monitoring visits to AWCs by 
Supervisors (Appendix 2.13), had fallen short of the required number. Further, 
owing to poor documentation and insufficient data pro vided to A udit, the 
percentage of shortfall in supervision of AWCs by CDPOs/ ACDPOs could not 
be ascertained. Thus, supervision and monitoring visits remained inadequate, 
during the period covered in the audit, which was likely to have led to poor 
service delivery.  
2.15.4  Visits of AWCs, by DPOs and other Directorate officials 
The Ministry’s guidelines, for Supervision visits to Blocks and AWCs, by 
officials of the State Government, envisaged as follows:  
• DPOs were to cover all blocks (ICDS Projects) per quarter and ensure
10 per cent coverage of all AWCs in those blocks under their jurisdiction,
in a year. However, the test-checked AWCs and blocks had rarely or not
at all been visited by the concerned DPOs. The test -checked DPOs and
Project offices could not provide relevant records / reports of the
supervision visits carried out by the DPOs, for the period under review.
• Other Directorate officials (Dy. Director/ Asstt. Director) were to cover at
least five AWCs each month and 20 per cent of blocks every year. The
test-checked AWCs and blocks had not been visited by the Directorate
officials. There were no documentary records of their visits, at the
test-checked AWCs/ ICDS Project offices.
Thus, the DPOs, as well as the Directorate officials, had not complied with the 
scheme guidelines, with regard to supervision visits to Blocks and AWCs.     
2.16  Grievances/ complaints redressal mechanism 
Effective and efficient implementation of the Scheme depends on the existence 
of a proper mechanism for grievance redressal; documentation of the 
grievances/ complaints received; and their redressal. In the test -checked 
Districts and Project offices, there was no proper documentation for: 
(i) grievances or complaints received (ii) redressal of grievances or remedial 
action taken in their regard, during the period covered under audit. 
The Directorate  instructed the district authorities to initiate a system of 
grievance redressal162, for addressing issues faced by the beneficiaries, only in 
September 2022.  
162 A drop box was to be set up at the office of the BDOs where the grievances of the public were to be 
dropped and those grievances were to be docketed and sent to the office of the CDPOs for necessary 
action 

PA of Anganwadi Services under ICDS 
81 
Since January 2021, the Ministry of WCD had introduced Poshan 2.0163, which 
includes a facility for online submission of grievances through the portal.  
However, as of January 2023 no grievances or complaints had been lodged, by 
any members of the public, through the said online platform.    
Recommendation: 
2.9 The monitoring and supervision mechanism for delivery of services 
under Integrated Child Development Services Scheme  may be 
strengthened in compliance with the Scheme guidelines. 
Kolkata         (BIBHUDUTTA BASANTIA) 
The Principal Accountant General (Audit-I) 
West Bengal 
Countersigned 
New Delhi         (K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
163 ‘Poshan 2.0’ is an Integrated Nutrition Support Programme, which seeks to address the challenges of 
malnutrition in children, adolescent girls and PW&LM. The objectives of Poshan 2.0 are to: contribute 
to the human capital development of the country; address challenge s of malnutrition; promote 
nutrition awareness and good eating habits for sustainable health & wellbeing and address nutrition 
related deficiencies through key strategies. With a view to improve implementation as well as to 
accelerate improvement in nutrition and child development outcomes, the existing scheme components 
have been re-organized under Poshan 2.0. 


Appendices 

Appendix 1.1 
(Refer paragraph 1.3.2.1) 
Details of the 11 test-checked purchase deeds of Individual - A 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Seller Name of the 
Purchaser PS/ Mouza Khatian 
No. 
J.L. 
No. Plot No. 
Area of 
Land 
{ACRE = 
Decimal/ 
100} 
(Acre) 
Deed No./ 
year 
Purchase 
Price (`) 
Market 
Value (`) 
Short 
Payment 
vis-à-vis 
market 
rate (`) 
1 SXXXli Devi BXXXu Baski 
(Individual-A) 
Neturia/ 
Radhamadhabpur 
11 117 RS-36,37 & 43 0.30 140302078/ 
2012 
30,000 52,843 22,843 
2 DXXXli Kara & 
SXXXani Mudi 
Neturia/ 
Radhamadhabpur 
6 117 RS-36,37 & 43 0.29 140302079/ 
2012 
29,000 51207 22,207 
3 NXXXnjan Mudi & 
NXXXda Mudi 
Neturia/ 
Radhamadhabpur 
155 117 RS-36,37,43,5 & 7 0.91 140302196/ 
2012 
47,000 1,56,613 1,09,613 
46 36 0.04 
4 BXXXl Mudi & 
HXXXdhan Mudi 
Neturia/ 
Radhamadhabpur 
109 117 RS-44,47, 49,54 & 55 0.12 140302202/ 
2012 
39,500 62,533 23,033 
5 RS-44,47,49 & 55 0.13 
5 RXXXn Mudi, 
JXXXnnath Mudi & 
KXXXta Mudi 
Neturia/ 
Radhamadhabpur 
52 117 RS-44,47,49,54 & 55 0.24 140302203/ 
2012 
12,000 42,447 30,447 
6 PaXXXanan Mudi, 
SXXXuntala Mudi 
& KXXXala Mudi 
Neturia/ 
Radhamadhabpur 
152 117 RS-44 & 47 0.05 140302499/ 
2012 
5,000 48,126 43,126 
84 RS-44 & 47 0.05 
7 KXXi Saren & 
others 
Neturia/ 
Radhamadhabpur 
18 117 RS-11,28,3 & 10 0.41 140300165/ 
2013 
3,30,000 5,25,601 1,95,601 
20 117 RS-9,11,28,3 & 10 0.42 
45 117 RS-11,12,28,3 & 10 0.41 
115 117 RS-11,28,3 & 10 0.41 
159 117 RS-11,12,28,3 & 10 0.41 
196 117 RS-11,12,28,3 & 10 0.41 
197 117 RS-9,11,12,28, 3 & 
10 
0.83 
Appendices 
83

Source: Records of ADSR, Raghunathpur; Registrar, Purulia and BL&LRO, Neturia  
Sl. 
No. Name of the Seller Name of the 
Purchaser PS/ Mouza Khatian 
No. 
J.L. 
No. Plot No. 
Area of 
Land 
{ACRE = 
Decimal/ 
100} 
(Acre) 
Deed No./ 
year 
Purchase 
Price (`) 
Market 
Value (`) 
Short 
Payment 
vis-à-vis 
market 
rate (`) 
8 SXXXtan Mandi Neturia/ Madandi 357 120 RS-26,29,46,47, 
109,110,111,192,171 
& 191 
0.441 140300601/ 
2013 
23,280 1,02,591 79,311 
9 PXXXham Mandi 
& SXXi Mandi 
Neturia/ Madandi 178 120 RS-26,29,46,47, 
109,110,111, 192,171 
& 191 
0.441 140300609/ 
2013 
1,01,265 3,21,184 2,19,919 
255 120 RS-28,30,31,49, 
50,51 & 186 
1.56 
10 HXXXi Soren & 
others 
Neturia/ Madandi 397 120 RS-26,29,46,47, 
109,110,111, 
171,189,191 & 192 
0.30 140300807/ 
2013 
1,34,000 2,26,674 92,674 
25 RS-26,29,46,47, 
109,110,111, 
171,189,191 & 192 
0.30 
112 RS-26,29,46,47, 
109,110,111, 
171,189,191 & 192 
0.30 
29 RS-46,109 & 192 0.44 
11 SXXXmlal Murmu 
& others 
Neturia/ Madandi 372 120 RS-146 & 149 0.11 140300934/ 
2014 
44,000 44,880 880 
381 RS-146 & 149 0.11 
Total 9.432 7,95,045 16,34,699 8,39,654 
CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
84

Appendix 1.2 
(Refer paragraph 1.3.2.2) 
Land purchase details of Individual- ‘A’, from tribals, during 2016 to 
2022 Deed No./ 
year 
Name of 
Registration 
Office 
Date of 
Registration Seller Name Seller Address Plot & Khatian No 
Area of 
Property in 
Acre 
(ACRE=Deci
mal/ 100) 
Purchase 
Value 
(in `) 
Market 
Value 
(in `) 
Difference 
(in `) 
140300006/ 
2016 
ADSR, 
Raghunathpur 
05.01.2016 DXXXu Soren Village: Gobag, 
District: Purulia, PS: 
Neturia, 
Pin: 723160 
Plot No.: RS-822/ 1195 
Khatian No.: 00062 
0.14 1,20,000 1,20,344 344 
140301439/ 
2016 
10.06.2016 SXXu Murmu & 
NXXXn Murmu 
District: Purulia, PS: 
Neturia, 
Pin: 723121 
Plot No.: RS-01199 
Khatian No.: 00158 
Plot No.: RS-01199 
Khatian No.: 00207 
0.45 94,930 94,974 44 
140300706/ 
2017 
31.03.2017 SXXXXmoni 
Hembram & 
LXXXXmoni 
Hembram 
Village: Madandi, 
District: Purulia, PS: 
Neturia, 
Pin: 723121 
Plot No.: RS-089 
Khatian No.: 00384 
Plot No.: RS-00089 
Khatian No.: 00315 
Plot No.: RS-00089 
Khatian No.: 0276 
0.50 50,000 4,09,332 3,59,332 
140300968/ 
2017 
04.05.2017 AXXl Murmu 
& three Others 
Village: Madandi, 
District: Purulia, PS: 
Neturia, 
Pin: 723121 
Plot No.: RS-00038 
Khatian No.: 00291 
Plot No.: RS-00038 
Khatian No.: 00361 
Plot No: RS-00038 
Khatian No.: 00170 
Plot No.: RS-00035 
Khatian No.: 00170 
Plot No.: RS-39, 
Khatian No.: 170 
0.44 88,000 3,63,539 2,75,539 
Appendices 
85

Deed No./ 
year 
Name of 
Registration 
Office 
Date of 
Registration Seller Name Seller Address Plot & Khatian No 
Area of 
Property in 
Acre 
(ACRE=Deci
mal/ 100) 
Purchase 
Value 
(in `) 
Market 
Value 
(in `) 
Difference 
(in `) 
140301389/ 
2017 
15.06.2017 GXXXXharan 
Murmu 
& two Others 
District: Purulia, PS: 
Raghunathpur, 
Pin: 723133 
Plot No.: LR-01477 
Khatian No.: 00241 
0.90 2,25,000 7,90,474 5,65,474 
140302106/ 
2017 
08.09.2017 KXXXXada Majhi 
Hembram 
District: Purulia, PS: 
Neturia, 
Pin: 723121 
Plot No.: RS-0389 
Khatian No.: 00040 
Plot No.: RS-01211 
Khatian No.: 00040 
Plot No.: RS-01218 
Khatian No.: 00040 
Plot No.: RS-01220 
Khatian No.: 00040 
Plot No.: RS-01231 
Khatian No.: 00040 
0.78 5,00,214 5,00,214 00 
140302261/ 
2017 
10.10.2017 HXXXXhan 
Hembram 
District: Purulia, PS: 
Neturia, 
Pin: 723142 
Plot No.: RS-00144 
Khatian No.: 00382 
Plot No.: RS-00152 
Khatian No.: 00382/ 00 
0.29 1,45,000 1,45,000 00 
140300369/ 
2018 
16.02.2018 SXXXXlal Saren Village: Madandi, 
District: Purulia, PS: 
Neturia, 
Pin: 723121 
Plot No.: RS-00175 
Khatian No.: 00331 
Plot No.: RS-00177 
Khatian No.: 00331 
Plot No.: RS-00182 
Khatian No.: 00331 
Plot No.: RS-00185 
Khatian No.: 00331 
Plot No.: RS-00200 
Khatian No.: 00331 
Plot No.: RS-202 
Khatian No.: 331 
0.955 3,93,600 9,95,784 6,02,184 
CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
86 

Deed No./ 
year 
Name of 
Registration 
Office 
Date of 
Registration Seller Name Seller Address Plot & Khatian No 
Area of 
Property in 
Acre 
(ACRE=Deci
mal/ 100) 
Purchase 
Value 
(in `) 
Market 
Value 
(in `) 
Difference 
(in `) 
Plot No.: RS-203 
Khatian No.: 331 
Plot No.: RS-00214 
Khatian No.: 00331 
Plot No.: RS-00175 
Khatian No.: 00152 
Plot No.: RS-00177 
Khatian No.: 00152 
Plot No.: RS-00182 
Khatian No.: 00152 
Plot No.: RS-00185 
Khatian No.: 00152 
Plot No.: RS-00200 
Khatian No.: 00152 
Plot No.: RS-00202 
Khatian No.: 00152 
Plot No.: RS-00203 
Khatian No.: 00152 
Plot No.: RS-00214 
Khatian No.: 00152 
140300749/ 
2018 
23.03.2018 MXXXal Mudi Village: 
Radhamadhabpur, 
District: Purulia, PS: 
Neturia 
Plot No.: RS-00390 
Khatian No.: 00206 
0.19 95,000 1,82,875 87,875 
140301120/ 
2019 
23.04.2019 SXXXXmoni Hansda 
& five Others 
District: Purulia, PS: 
Raghunathpur, 
Pin: 723133 
Plot No.: LR-00479 
Khatian No.: 00546 
Plot No.: LR-00442 
Khatian No.: 00216 
0.21 63,000 2,02,125 1,39,125 
Appendices 
87 

Deed No./ 
year 
Name of 
Registration 
Office 
Date of 
Registration Seller Name Seller Address Plot & Khatian No 
Area of 
Property in 
Acre 
(ACRE=Deci
mal/ 100) 
Purchase 
Value 
(in `) 
Market 
Value 
(in `) 
Difference 
(in `) 
Plot No.: LR-00442 
Khatian No.: 0321 
140302702/ 
2019 
22.10.2019 IXXXr Majhi 
& four Others 
Village: Mahuda, 
District: Purulia, PS: 
Para, 
Pin: 723145 
Plot No.: LR-01375 
Khatian No.: 00300 
Plot No.: LR-01474 
Khatian No.: 00300 
0.17 1,50,000 2,21,000 71,000 
140303683/ 
2022 
07.09.2022 CXXXXmani Saren, 
SXXXXmani Mandi 
City: Asansol, 
District: 
Paschimbardhaman, 
PS: Asansol, 
District: Bankura, PS: 
Saltora, 
Pin: 713361 
Plot No.: LR-01135 
Khatian No.: 00259 
Plot No.: LR-01137 
Khatian No.: 00259 
1.94 11,64,000 11,64,000 00 
140304462/ 
2022 
25.11.2022 BXXXXanath Hansda 
& four Others 
Village: Banspati, 
District: Bankura, PS: 
Saltora 
Plot No.: LR-01116/ 
Khatian No.: 00024 
0.89 5,98,000 5,98,000 00 
Total 7.855 36,86,744 57,87,661 21,00,917 
Source: Records of ADSR, Raghunathpur 
CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
88 

Appendix 1.3 
(Refer paragraph 1.3.4.1) 
Cases where Sale Prices were less than the Fair Market Prices 
Sl. 
No. 
Date of 
Application 
Order No. & 
Date 
Name of the Seller and 
Address 
Name of the 
Purchaser and 
Address 
Land Schedule 
Area of 
Land 
(in deci.) 
Reason of 
Sale 
Valuation of 
land allowed 
by PO-BCW 
(in ₹) 
Payment 
to the 
Tribal 
seller as 
noticed in 
sale deeds 
registered 
(in ₹) 
Short 
payment of 
fair market 
price to 
tribal seller 
(in ₹) 
1 05.11.2019 129/ BCW & 
TD/ Birb 
dated 25-01-
2022 
BXXXa Soren, Vill.-
Muluk Adibasi Pally, 
PS- Bolpur 
SXXXm SXXXer 
Singha, Vill.- 
Budhura, PO-
Palsha, PS-Labpur 
PS-Bolpur, Mouza-
Ballavpur, JL No. 
63, Khatian No. 
1410, Plot No. 3427 
& 3488 
Shuna land 
16 NA 19,14,255 15,00,000 4,14,255 
2 26.06.2019 416/ BCW & 
TD/ Birb 
dated 28-02-
2022 
GXXXo Hembram, 
Vill-Khoshnatore, PO-
Hatjanbazar, PS-Suri 
Md. ZXXXr 
Rahaman, Vill.-
Madrasapally, PO-
Hatjanbazar 
Mouza-
Khosanatore, JL 
No. 99, Khatian No. 
67, Plot No. 328 
37 NA 18,00,000 2,09,000 15,91,000 
3 27.08.2019 71/ BCW & 
TD/ Birb 
dated 03-01-
2022 
MXXXti Murmu, Vill.-
Kaligang, PO- 
Santiniketan 
PS-Bolpur 
1. DXXXk Kr. Das,
PO & PS-Suri
2. GXXXam Ghosh,
Trisulapally, Bolpur 
PS-Bolpur, Mouza-
Bengutia, JL No. 
73, Khatian No. 
639, Plot No. 77 & 
78 
Shali land 
187 NA 16,00,000 10,21,700 5,78,300 
4 18.12.2020 107/ BCW & 
TD/ Birb 
dated 20-01-
2022 
SXXXXwati Kisku & 
FXXXXni Tudu 
Vill.-Kondaipur, PO-
Purandarpur, PS-Suri 
PXXXXh 
Mukherjee, 
Hatjanbazar, ward 
No.-18, Suri 
PS-Suri, Mouza-
Kandaipur, JL No. 
61, Khatian No. 
1471 & 1472, Plot 
No. 1224 
Baid land 
116 NA 7,50,000 2,00,000 5,50,000 
Appendices 
89 

Sl. 
No. 
Date of 
Application 
Order No. & 
Date 
Name of the Seller and 
Address 
Name of the 
Purchaser and 
Address 
Land Schedule 
Area of 
Land 
(in deci.) 
Reason of 
Sale 
Valuation of 
land allowed 
by PO-BCW 
(in ₹) 
Payment 
to the 
Tribal 
seller as 
noticed in 
sale deeds 
registered 
(in ₹) 
Short 
payment of 
fair market 
price to 
tribal seller 
(in ₹) 
5 18.12.2020 108/ BCW & 
TD/ Birb 
dated 20-01-
2022 
PXXXXti Mejhen alias 
Murmu, Vill.- 
Kondaipur, PO-
Purandarpur, PS-Suri 
PXXXXh 
Mukherjee, 
Hatjanbazar, ward 
No.-18, Suri 
PS-Suri, Mouza-
Kandaipur, JL No. 
61, Khatian No. 
208, Plot No. 1224 
Baid land 
116 NA 7,50,000 2,00,000 5,50,000 
6 26.08.2019 72/ BCW & 
TD/ Birb 
dated 03-01-
2022 
DXXXy Murmu, Vill.-
Kaliganj, PO- 
santiniketan 
1. DXXXk Kr. Das,
PO & PS-Suri
2. JXXXXXXanath
Mondal, Vill.-
Indragacha, PO-
Haraipur 
PS-Bolpur, Mouza-
Dwarkanathpur, JL 
No. 128, Khatian 
No. 1440, Plot No. 
2/ 1571 & 49 
Shuna & Danga 
land 
304 NA 58,00,000 27,00,000 31,00,000 
7 26.08.2021 73/ BCW & 
TD/ Birb 
dated 13-01-
2022 
SXXXu Soren & three 
others at 
Vill.-Nahudari, PO- 
Chakdaha, PS-Suri 
Dhanmuni Hansda 
at Vill.-Jibdharpur, PO- 
Chakdaha, PS-Suri 
UXXXm Ghosh & 
two others, PO-Suri 
PS-Suri, Mouza-
Jibdharpur, JL No. 
118, Khatian No. 
410, 411, 412, 413 
& 414, Plot No. 525 
Danga land 
160 NA 7,25,000 5,44,320 1,80,680 
8 16.09.2021 436/ BCW & 
TD/ Birb 
dated 04-03-
2022 
BXXi Baski, Vill.-
Kondaipur, PO-
Purandarpur, PS-Suri 
MXXXa AXXXXul 
Uddin, MXXXa 
AXXXXruddin & 
MXXXa 
MXXXXar Uddin, 
Vill.- Goal Gram, 
PO-Dhaltikuri, PS-
Suri 
PS-Suri, Mouza-
Purandarpur, JL No. 
63, Khatian No. 
3476, Plot No. 1195 
Baid land 
40 NA 3,00,000 2,31,566 68,434 
CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
90 

Sl. 
No. 
Date of 
Application 
Order No. & 
Date 
Name of the Seller and 
Address 
Name of the 
Purchaser and 
Address 
Land Schedule 
Area of 
Land 
(in deci.) 
Reason of 
Sale 
Valuation of 
land allowed 
by PO-BCW 
(in ₹) 
Payment 
to the 
Tribal 
seller as 
noticed in 
sale deeds 
registered 
(in ₹) 
Short 
payment of 
fair market 
price to 
tribal seller 
(in ₹) 
9 19-09-19 134/ BCW/ 
JGM dated 
06.02.2020, 
Jhargram 
Shri GXXXXh 
CXXXXra Murmu, 
Vill.-Ankro PO-Binpur, 
PS- Binpur, Dist.-
Jhargram 
Shri BXXm KXXh 
Paul 
Janglekhas, JL No. 
395, Khatiyan No. 
11387, Plot No. 
4431 & 4430 
5.94 Daughter’s 
Education 
32,58,000 20,50,000 12,08,000 
10 04-12-18 888/ BCW/ 
JGM dated 
13.12.2019, 
Jhargram 
Shri LXXXXan 
Hembram, Vill.-
Bajgeria PO-Jheutla, 
PS-Keshpur, Dist.- 
Paschim Medinipur 
Shri JXXXXdra 
NXXh Ruidas 
Kurchibani, JL No. 
247, Khatian No. 
LR-1005, Plot No. 
159 
10 Son & 
Daughter’s 
Education 
3,60,000 2,50,000 1,10,000 
Total 1,72,57,255 89,06,586 83,50,669 
Source: Records of District Registrar, Birbhum & Jhargram and PO-cum-DWOs (ROs) of Birbhum & Jhargram 
Appendices 
91 

Appendix 1.4 
(Refer paragraph 1.3.4.2) 
Improper assessment of Fair Market value by Revenue Officers 
Sl. 
No. Seller Name and Address Private 
Purchaser Mouza JL 
No. 
Khatian 
No. 
Plot 
Nos. 
Total 
Area of 
Sale Unit 
Reason for 
Selling the 
Land 
Agreed sale 
Value of 
land sold 
Market 
value of 
land 
Short Payment 
vis-à-vis the 
market rate 
1 RXXXXl Kisku  
Vill-Keradihi, Hirapur, Paschim 
Bardhaman 
Non-Tribal 
Individual 
Hirapur 18 3330 6705, 
6706 & 
6707 
32 Deci New 
construction 
House 
5,79,840 16,15,322 10,35,482 
2 BXXXXni Murmu  
Vill-Keradihi, Hirapur, Paschim 
Bardhaman 
Non-Tribal 
Individual 
Hirapur 18 3562 6705, 
6706 & 
6707 
65 Deci Treatment 11,77,800 32,81,122 21,03,322 
3 CXXXi Orang 
Vill-Hazrabera, PO-Panagarh 
Bazar, PS-Kanksa, Paschim 
Bardhaman 
Non-Tribal 
Individual 
Panagarh 85 304 2925 2 Katha Daughter 
Marriage 
3,40,000 9,90,000 6,50,000 
4 CXXXi Orang 
Vill-Hazrabera, PO-Panagarh 
Bazar, PS-Kanksa, Paschim 
Bardhaman 
Non-Tribal 
Individual 
Panagarh 85 304 2925 2 Katha Construction 
House 
3,40,000 9,90,000 6,50,000 
5 CXXXi Orang   
Vill-Hazrabera, PO-Panagarh 
Bazar, PS-Kanksa, Paschim 
Bardhaman 
Non-Tribal 
Individual 
Panagarh 85 304 2925 60 Satak Daughter 
Marriage 
85,000 2,47,500 1,62,500 
6 CXXXi Orang   
Vill-Hazrabera, PO-Panagarh 
Bazar, PS-Kanksa, Paschim 
Bardhaman 
Non-Tribal 
Individual 
Panagrah 85 304 2925 60 Satak/ 
2.60 
Katha 
Construction 
House 
4,42,000 12,87,000 8,45,000 
7 PXXXn Besra, 
Jamgram 
Non-Tribal 
Individual 
Jamgram 20 1892 1895, 
1910, 
1913, 
1920, 
75 Deci Renovation of 
old house 
9,50,000 9,67,441 17,441 
CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
92 

Sl. 
No. Seller Name and Address Private 
Purchaser Mouza JL 
No. 
Khatian 
No. 
Plot 
Nos. 
Total 
Area of 
Sale Unit 
Reason for 
Selling the 
Land 
Agreed sale 
Value of 
land sold 
Market 
value of 
land 
Short Payment 
vis-à-vis the 
market rate 
1921, 
1925, 
1926 & 
1955 
8 SXX Majhi  Private 
Company 
Dhasal 56 479 846 32 Deci Construction 
House 
6,72,000 15,05,200 8,33,200 
9 SXXXXra Kora 
Borthole. Kalajhria 
Non-Tribal 
Individual 
Borthole 24 177 149 & 
569 
2 Katha Daughter 
Marriage 
1,00,000 1,97,997 97,997 
10 AXXXXny Tudu 
Bani Park Apartment, Gopalpur 
Non-Tribal 
Individual 
Bortoria/ 
Gopalpur 
10 595 & 748 697 144 Sq. ft. Due to 
Transfer of 
flat 
1,00,000 1,77,930 77,930 
11 i) AXXXXa Kora,
ii) HXXXXal Kora
Non-Tribal 
Individual 
Sitla 21 i) RS-146
ii) RS-146
i) 693
ii) 1346
14 Deci For Purchase 
another Land 
11,05,000 18,32,740 7,27,740 
12 MXXXk Kora  Non-Tribal 
Individual 
Borira 9 229 1201, 
1223 & 
1224 
29 Deci Daughters 
marriage 
2,45,000 2,45,259 259 
13 LXXXXXam Murmu  Non-Tribal 
Individual 
Kalla 28 2661 520 40 Deci Treatment & 
daughters 
marriage 
9,90,000 13,59,433 3,69,433 
14 SXXXi Majhi  Non-Tribal 
Individual 
Hatgarui 13 113 408, 
409 & 
410 
42 Deci Treatment 4,00,000 6,69,708 2,69,708 
15 AXXXXny Tudu  Non-Tribal 
Individual 
Bortoria/ 
Gopalpur 
8 399 697 & 
135 
774 Sq. ft. Purchase 
another flat 
10,00,000 12,29,022 2,29,022 
16 SXXXXhu Majhi  Private 
Company 
Dhasal 56 122/ 2 579 & 
581 
23 Deci For setting up 
of industry 
4,83,000 8,53,000 3,70,000 
17 LXXXXXanta Hembram  Non-Tribal 
Individual 
Shibpur 20 788 425 & 
816 
4.95 Deci Treatment 2,70,000 3,67,537 97,537 
Appendices 
93 

Sl. 
No. Seller Name and Address Private 
Purchaser Mouza JL 
No. 
Khatian 
No. 
Plot 
Nos. 
Total 
Area of 
Sale Unit 
Reason for 
Selling the 
Land 
Agreed sale 
Value of 
land sold 
Market 
value of 
land 
Short Payment 
vis-à-vis the 
market rate 
18 BXXXXam Tudu  
Bankidanga, Asansol 
PXXXs 
Saha 
Kataldihi 38 1436 1035 & 
1051 
2.91 Acre Renovation of 
old Houses 
etc. 
22,00,000 25,49,680 3,49,680 
19 SXXXji Gond  
Shivpur, Power Station, Jamuria 
SXXh 
Tayub, 
Pariharpur 
Jamuria 21 3519 1369 16 Deci Treatment 15,00,000 15,93,600 93,600 
20 SXXXu Murmu  
Brindabanpur, Kanksa 
CXXXXan 
Paki 
Bandra 74 979 4142 66 Deci Own 
treatment & 
Purchase of 
another land 
5,00,000 9,11,075 4,11,075 
Total 1,34,79,640 2,28,70,566 93,90,926 
Source: Records of Revenue Officer, Paschim Bardhaman 
CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
94

Appendices 
95 
Appendix 1.5 
(Refer paragraph 1.4.1) 
Short payment to tribal raiyats by the test-checked ECL/ BCCL offices 
Sl. 
No. Name of seller 
Market 
value of 
land (`) 
Deed Sale 
Value (`) 
Short Payment 
vis-à-vis market 
rate (`) 
1. Txxxs Hansda 32,44,800 6,00,775 26,44,025 
2. Sxxxj Tudu 33,38,464 5,97,043 27,41,421 
3. Jxxxxni Soren 31,90,971 5,34,880 26,56,091 
4. Mxxxn Tudu 29,20,320 5,85,016 23,35,304 
5. Jxxxxda Tudu 7,54,300 84,740 6,69,560 
6. Nxxxxni Tudu 9,25,396 1,96,948 7,28,448 
7. Rxxxxal Maddi 10,75,500 1,80,259 8,95,241 
8. Sxxxxntala Besra 18,55,279 2,60,686 15,94,593 
9. Mxxxxl Hansda 23,51,576 3,95,804 19,55,772 
10. Bxxxxi Soren 26,14,730 4,02,998 22,11,732 
11. Sxxxxnanda Hansda 23,88,165 3,06,203 20,81,962 
12. Axxxxit Mudi 10,90,784 1,61,201 9,29,583 
13. Bxxxn Mudi 24,26,076 3,57,725 20,68,351 
14. Sxxxa Murmu 19,23,216 3,41,081 15,82,135 
15. Dxxxp Kisku 17,49,004 2,67,390 14,81,614 
16. Sxxxxta Marandi 17,49,004 2,56,934 14,92,070 
17. Bxxxxal Marandi 21,02,170 3,18,521 17,83,649 
18. Nxxxxh Cxxxxra Mudi 25,40,452 4,43,305 20,97,147 
19. Bxxxd Murmu 31,04,333 4,59,077 26,45,256 
20. Lxxxxnder Tudu 12,82,695 2,34,155 10,48,540 
21. Mxxxxli Mardi 25,98,520 5,58,509 20,40,011 
22. Mxxxu Majhi 28,23,810 4,60,796 23,63,014 
23. Sxxxxal Besra 24,45,431 4,75,925 19,69,506 
24. Mxxa Marddi 31,14,719 5,23,235 25,91,484 
25. Cxxxxuram Marddi 18,91,665 2,45,182 16,46,483 
26. Kxxxr Murmu 30,66,300 5,75,941 24,90,359 
27. Sxxxxal Mudi 9,23,076 1,27,137 7,95,939 
28. Rxxxn Majhi 33,23,516 5,14,437 28,09,079 
29. Rxxxxal Maddi 19,87,077 1,91,513 17,95,564 
30. Bxxxl Mudi 9,25,361 1,27,851 7,97,510 
31. Kxxxl Mudi 9,18,020 1,26,839 7,91,181 
32. Axxl Mudi 9,19,010 1,26,661 7,92,349 
33. Axxxxti Mudi 9,02,053 1,23,102 7,78,951 
34. Mxxxxeb Murmu 16,36,964 2,54,244 13,82,720 
35. Mxxxxeb Murmu 13,96,770 2,92,838 11,03,932 
36. Bxxxxrath Tudu 49,36,000 9,77,121 39,58,879 
37. Lxxxxxdar Tudu 2,93,188 53,521 2,39,667 
38. Txxxn Marandi 68,27,200 5,02,000 63,25,200 
39. Rxxxi Cxxxd Tudu 21,53,073 1,28,000 20,25,073 
40. Rxxxi Cxxxd Tudu 9,12,341 46,000 8,66,341 
41. Sxxxxxndan Tudu 21,53,072 1,28,000 20,25,072 
42. Bxxxn Tudu 39,12,088 2,54,000 36,58,088 
43. Mxxxsh Kora 6,23,326 44,000 5,79,326 
44. Rxxu Mahali 73,55,104 3,82,000 69,73,104 
45. Sxxxl Hansda 
46. Bxxxxxnath Tudu 38,86,853 2,52,000 36,34,853 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
96 
Sl. 
No. Name of seller 
Market 
value of 
land (`) 
Deed Sale 
Value (`) 
Short Payment 
vis-à-vis market 
rate (`) 
47. Sxxxxra Besra 38,69,023 2,52,000 36,17,023 
48. Sxxxxar Kora 6,51,659 46,000 6,05,659 
49. Rxx Kora 95,200 4,000 91,200 
50. Rxxu Mahali 57,39,200 4,22,000 53,17,200 
51. Sxxxl Murmu 49,63,256 3,84,000 45,79,256 
52. Rxxxi Tudu 15,14,119 4,47,500 10,66,619 
53. Dxxxk kora 34,78,292 9,80,000 24,98,292 
54. Mxxxla Murmu & Ors. 22,79,970 3,85,000 18,94,970 
55. Nxxxxdra Murmu & Ors. 18,26,496 2,40,000 15,86,496 
56. Sxxxl Soren 12,98,160 2,50,000 10,48,160 
57. Cxxxan Murmu 11,30,900 2,12,500 9,18,400 
58. Nxxxxra Murmu & three others 22,39,888 4,75,000 17,64,888 
59. Bxxxxn Majhi 23,05,768 3,45,000 19,60,768 
60. Mxxxxli Mejhian and others 36,66,348 1,58,000 35,08,348 
61. Mxxxxda Majhi and others 1,58,38,917 7,94,600 1,50,44,317 
62. Sxxa Dxxi Dudhariya and others 61,48,012 2,74,000 58,74,012 
63. Sxxa Dxxi Dudhariya and others 55,67,141 3,45,000 52,22,141 
64. Sxxxxal Murmu and others 82,10,199 45,12,000 36,98,199 
65. Pxxxxxhwar Mandi and others 5,34,832 4,70,000 64,832 
66. Gxxxxxda Majhi 20,50,704 10,000 20,40,704 
Total 17,79,59,856 2,54,82,193 15,24,77,663 
Source: Data obtained from offices of ECL/ BCCL and PO -cum-DWO (RO), Paschim 
Bardhaman 

Appendices 
97 
Appendix 2.1  
(Refer paragraph 2.1.4) 
Details of 12 CDPOs of ICDS Projects and 48  AWCs selected under six 
test-checked districts  
Selected 
District Selected Project Selected AWC 
Bankura 1. Indpur ICDS Project (i) Kalachandpur AWC 
(ii) Banshidihi AWC    
(iii) Rowtora AWC    
(iv) Nuniabaid AWC    
2. Chhatna Main ICDS
Project 
(i) Kumargara AWC  
(ii) Parasibona AWC  
(iii) Taljhari-II AWC 
(iv) Kumirdoha-II AWC 
Birbhum 3. Suri-II ICDS Project (i) Sirsita-III AWC    
(ii) Indragacha AWC    
(iii) Dhananjoybati AWC 
(iv) Ikra AWC    
4. Rampurhat-I ICDS
Project 
(i) Kalikapur-III AWC 
(ii) Turukdihi AWC    
(iii) Palsa AWC    
(iv) Majhkanda AWC 
Nadia 5. Chakdaha ICDS
Project 
(i) Panchpota Masjed Para AWC  
(ii) 1 No. Anandanagar Netaji Adarshya Sangha Club AWC 
(iii) Natapuli Gangsara Majher Gram AWC     
(iv) Hingnara Adibasipara AWC     
6. Ranaghat Addl.-I ICDS
Project 
(i) Kalinarayanpur Ajoy Colony AWC     
(ii) Kalitala Litchubagan AWC     
(iii) Uttar Palitpara GSFP Primary School AWC 
(iv) Taherpur Nutanpara AWC     
Malda 7. English Bazar & Old
Malda ICDS Project 
(Urban) 
(i) Telipukur North AWC  
(ii) Bapuji Colony-II AWC 
(iii) Bashatti-II AWC  
(iv) Paulpara AWC  
8. Habibpur ICDS
Project 
(i) Lotabhanga AWC  
(ii) Asrafpur AWC  
(iii) Uttar Kharika danga AWC 
(iv) Banpur Dhanukpara AWC  
North 24 
Parganas 
9. Basirhat –I ICDS
Project (Rural) 
(i) Kayalbari F.P. School AWC 
(ii) Shibhati ICDS Centre AWC 
(iii) Bilepur H/O Nur Islam Gazi AWC 
(iv) Ghojadanga Paruipara F.P. School AWC 
10. Panihati ICDS Project
(Urban) 
(i) Swamiji Sangha (Agarpara Adarsha Nagar) AWC 
(ii) Simlanagar Unnayan Samity AWC 
(iii) Abijatri Sangha AWC 
(iv) Agarpara Sporting Club AWC 
Jalpaiguri 11. Dhupguri Addl.-I
ICDS Project (Rural) 
(i) Surendra Nagar Prem Minj House AWC 
(ii) N Doors T.G. Church Line Robot House AWC 
(iii) Kathalguri T.G. Upper Line Laxmi House AWC 
(iv) Haldibari T.E. School Line AWC 
12. Matiali ICDS Project
(Tribal) 
(i) Chilouni T.G. Factory Line S.S.K School AWC 
(ii) Khalpara Pry. School AWC 
(iii) Meteli T.G. Sukha line AWC 
(iv) Ayetadhura Uttar Dhujhora AWC 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
98 
Appendix 2.2 
(Refer paragraph 2.3.1) 
Bifurcated/ trifurcated ICDS Projects in the six selected districts 
District 
Name of the ICDS 
Project before 
bifurcation 
Name of the ICDS Project after 
bifurcation 
In- charge of the ICDS 
Project Remarks 
Bankura Chhatna ICDS 
Project 
Chhatna ICDS Project CDPO, Chhatna ICDS 
Project  
Separate DDO 
Code was not 
allotted, 
separate office 
was not set up 
and CDPO & 
other staff were 
not posted for 
additional 
projects.  
Chhatna Addl. ICDS Project 
Onda ICDS Project Onda ICDS Project CDPO, Onda ICDS 
Project Onda Addl. ICDS Project 
Raipur ICDS 
Project 
Raipur ICDS Project CDPO, Raipur ICDS 
Project  Raipur Addl. ICDS Project 
Ranibandh ICDS 
Project 
Ranibandh ICDS Project CDPO, Ranibandh ICDS 
Project  Ranibandh Addl. ICDS Project 
Birbhum Bolpur ICDS 
Project 
Bolpur ICDS Project. CDPO, Bolpur ICDS 
Project Bolpur Addl. ICDS Project 
Md. Bazar ICDS 
Project  
Md. Bazar ICDS Project CDPO, Md. Bazar ICDS 
project  Md. Bazar Addl. ICDS Project 
Nalhati-I ICDS 
Project 
Nalhati-I Main ICDS Project CDPO, Nalhati -I ICDS 
project  Nalhati-I Addl. ICDS Project 
Rampurhat-I ICDS 
Project  
Rampurhat-I Main ICDS Project CDPO, Rampurhat -I 
ICDS project Rampurhat-I Addl. ICDS Project 
Sainthia ICDS 
Project 
Sainthia Main ICDS Project CDPO, Sainthia ICDS 
project Sainthia Addl. ICDS Project 
Nadia Karimpur-II ICDS 
Project  
Karimpur-II ICDS Project CDPO, Tehatta -II ICDS 
Project  
Separate DDO 
Code was not 
allotted, 
separate office 
was not set up 
and CDPO & 
other staff were 
not posted for 
additional 
projects.  
Karimpur-II Addl. ICDS Project 
Tehatta-I ICDS 
Project 
Tehatta-I ICDS Project CDPO, Tehatta -I ICDS 
Project  Tehatta-I Addl. ICDS Project 
Kaliganj ICDS 
Project 
Kaliganj ICDS Project CDPO, Kaliganj ICDS 
project  Kaliganj Addl. ICDS Project 
Nakashipara 
ICDS Project 
Nakashipara ICDS Project CDPO, Nakashipara 
ICDS project Nakashipara Addl. ICDS Project 
Chapra ICDS 
Project 
Chapra ICDS Project CDPO, Chapra ICDS 
project  Chapra Addl. ICDS Project 
Krishnagar-I ICDS 
Project  
Krishnagar-I ICDS Project CDPO, Kaliganj  ICDS 
project  Krishnagar-I Addl. ICDS Project 
Hanskhali ICDS 
Project 
Hanskhali ICDS Project CDPO, Hanskhali ICDS 
project  Hanskhali Addl ICDS Project 
Santipur ICDS 
Project 
Santipur ICDS Project CDPO, Nakashipara  
ICDS project Santipur Addl. ICDS Project 
Ranaghat-I ICDS 
Project 
Ranaghat-I ICDS Project CDPO, Hanskhali ICDS 
project  Ranaghat-I Addl. ICDS Project 
Ranaghat-II ICDS 
Project  
Ranaghat-II ICDS Project CDPO, Ranaghat -II 
ICDS project Ranaghat-II Addl. ICDS Project 
Chakdah ICDS 
Project 
Chakdah ICDS Project CDPO, Kaliganj ICDS 
project  Chakdah Addl. ICDS Project 
Haringhata ICDS 
Project 
Haringhata ICDS Project CDPO, Haringhata ICDS 
project Haringhata Addl. ICDS Project 
Malda English Bazar ICDS 
Project  
English Bazar ICDS Project CDPO, English Bazar 
ICDS Project  
Separate DDO 
Code was not 
allotted, 
separate office 
was not set up 
and CDPO & 
other staff were 
not posted for 
additional 
projects.  
English Bazar Addl. ICDS Project 
Habibpur ICDS 
Project 
Habibpur ICDS Project CDPO, Habibpur  ICDS 
Project  Habibpur Addl.-I ICDS Project 
Habibpur Addl.-II ICDS Project 
Bamongola ICDS 
Project  
Bamongola ICDS Project CDPO, Bamongola ICDS 
Project  Bamongola Addl. ICDS Project 
Gazole ICDS 
Project 
Gazole ICDS Project CDPO, Gazole  ICDS 
Project Gazole Addl.-I ICDS Project 
Gazole Addl.-II ICDS Project 

Appendices 
99 
District 
Name of the ICDS 
Project before 
bifurcation 
Name of the ICDS Project after 
bifurcation 
In- charge of the ICDS 
Project Remarks 
Manikchak ICDS 
Project 
Manikchak ICDS Project CDPO, Manikchak ICDS 
Project  Manikchak Addl. ICDS Project 
Kaliachak-I ICDS 
Project  
Kaliachak-I ICDS Project CDPO, Kaliachak-I ICDS 
Project  Kaliachak-I Addl. ICDS Project 
Kaliachak-III ICDS 
Project  
Kaliachak-III ICDS Project CDPO, Kaliachak -III 
ICDS Project Kaliachak-III Addl. ICDS Project 
Ratua-I ICDS 
Project 
Ratua-I ICDS Project CDPO, Ratua -I ICDS 
Project  Ratua-I Addl. ICDS Project 
North 24 
Parganas 
Sandeshkhali-I 
ICDS Project 
Sandeshkhali-I ICDS Project CDPO, Sandeshkhali -I 
ICDS Project 
Separate DDO 
Code was not 
allotted, 
separate office 
was not set up 
and CDPO & 
other staff were 
not posted for 
additional 
projects.  
Sandeshkhali-I Addl. ICDS 
Project 
Swarupnagar ICDS 
Project  
Swarupnagar ICDS Project CDPO, Swarupnagar 
ICDS Project Swarupnagar Addl. ICDS Project 
Hingalganj ICDS 
Project 
Hingalganj ICDS Project CDPO, Hingalganj ICDS 
Project  Hingalganj Addl. ICDS Project 
Minakhan ICDS 
Project 
Minakhan ICDS Project CDPO, Minakhan ICDS 
Project  Minakhan Addl. ICDS Project 
Haroa ICDS Project Haroa, ICDS Project CDPO, Haroa ICDS 
Project  Haroa Addl. ICDS Project 
Hasnabad ICDS 
Project 
Hasnabad ICDS Project CDPO, Hasnabad ICDS 
Project  Hasnabad Addl. ICDS Project 
Baduria ICDS 
Project 
Baduria ICDS Project CDPO, Baduria ICDS 
Project  Baduria Addl. ICDS Project 
Bongaon(R) ICDS 
Project  
Bongaon(R) ICDS Project CDPO, Bongaon(R) 
ICDS Project Bongaon(R) Addl. ICDS Project 
Bagdah ICDS 
Project 
Bagdah ICDS Project CDPO, Bagdah ICDS 
Project  Bagdah Addl. ICDS Project 
Gaighata ICDS 
Project 
Gaighata ICDS Project CDPO, Gaighata  ICDS 
Project  Gaighata Addl. ICDS Project 
Rajarhat ICDS 
Project 
Rajarhat ICDS Project CDPO, Rajarhat ICDS 
Project  Rajarhat Addl. ICDS Project 
Barasat-I ICDS 
Project 
Barasat-I ICDS Project CDPO, Barasat -I ICDS 
Project  Barasat-I Addl. ICDS Project 
Deganga ICDS 
Project 
Deganga ICDS Project CDPO, Deganga ICDS 
Project  Deganga Addl. ICDS Project 
Jalpaiguri Dhupguri ICDS 
Project 
Dhupguri ICDS Project CDPO, Dhupguri ICDS 
Project  
Separate DDO 
Code was not 
allotted, 
separate office 
was not set up 
and CDPO & 
other staff were 
not posted for 
additional 
projects.  
Dhupguri Addl.-I ICDS Project 
Dhupguri Addl.-II ICDS Project 
Mal ICDS Project Mal ICDS Project CDPO, Mal ICDS 
Project Mal Addl.-I ICDS Project 
Mal Addl.-II ICDS Project 
Nagrakata ICDS 
Project 
Nagrakata ICDS Project CDPO, Nagrakata ICDS 
Project  Nagrakata Addl. ICDS Project 
Maynaguri ICDS 
Project 
Maynaguri ICDS Project CDPO, Maynaguri ICDS 
Project  Maynaguri Addl. ICDS Project 
Jalpaiguri ICDS 
Project 
Jalapiguri ICDS Project CDPO, Jalpaiguri ICDS 
Project  Jalpaiguri Sadar Addl. ICDS 
Project  
Rajganj ICDS 
Project 
Rajganj ICDS Project CDPO, ICDS Project. 
Rajganj Addl. ICDS Project 
Source: Documents furnished by the respective DPOs-ICDS 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
100 
Appendix 2.3  
(Refer paragraph 2.6) 
Statement of Salary of Staff as per submitted Utilisation Certificates 
(` in crore) 
Entitled Staff/ Admissible 
Central Share (CS) and 
amounts shown in UCs 
Financial Year Excess GoI 
share reflected 
in UC during 
2017-22 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Director Level 
Nil 0.00 0.00 DNA* 0.00 0.00 0.00 
CS 0.00 0.00 DNA 0.00 0.00 0.00 
UC submitted 1.19 1.31 DNA 2.57 0.00 5.07 
Excess Salary 1.19 1.31 DNA 2.57 0.00 5.07 
District Level 
DPO 2.18 3.56 DNA 2.28 2.36 10.38 
Stat. Asstt. 0.86 0.93 DNA 0.48 0.48 2.75 
Total 3.04 4.49 DNA 2.76 2.85 13.13 
CS 1.82 1.12 DNA 0.69 0.71 4.34 
UC submitted 7.03 7.64 DNA 3.86 1.92 20.45 
Excess Salary 5.21 6.51 DNA 3.17 1.21 16.10 
CDPO level 
CDPO 11.22 8.33 DNA 21.47 22.96 63.98 
Supervisor 46.08 13.58 DNA 96.01 99.49 255.16 
Stat. Asstt. 7.95 7.79 DNA 20.31 0.00 36.05 
Total 65.25 29.70 DNA 137.79 122.45 355.19 
CS 39.15 7.43 DNA 34.45 30.61 111.64 
UC submitted 73.09 53.65 DNA 112.38 58.88 298.00 
Excess Salary 33.94 46.23 DNA 77.93 28.27 186.37 
Grand Total 40.34 54.05 DNA 83.67 29.48 207.54 
Source: Records of Directorate of ICDS; *DNA stands for Data Not Available 

Appendices 
101 
Appendix 2.4 
(Refer paragraph 2.8.1.1) 
Excess expenditure of ₹ 115.09 crore on SNP items 
Period Commodity Unit 
Quantity required for 
three months, as per 
menu 
Number of 
Beneficiaries, as per UC 
Excess 
rate 
(in `) 
Excess expenditure (in `) 
Children Mother Children Mother Children Mothers 
01.02.2017 
to 
30.04.2017 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 0.36 ltr 0.72 ltr 76,09,020 14,19,204 -2.00 -54,78,494.00 -20,43,654.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 1.08 kgs 2.16 kgs 76,09,020 14,19,204 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 0.21 kgs 0.36 kgs 76,09,020 14,19,204 0.00 0.00 0.00 
01.05.2017 
to 
31.07.2017 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 0.36 ltr 0.72 ltr 76,09,020 14,19,204 9.00 2,46,53,225.00 91,96,442.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 1.08 kgs 2.16 kgs 76,09,020 14,19,204 6.00 4,93,06,450.00 1,83,92,884.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 0.21 kgs 0.36 kgs 76,09,020 14,19,204 3.00 47,93,683.00 15,32,740.00 
01.08.2017 
to 
31.10.2017 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 0.36 ltr 0.72 ltr 76,09,020 14,19,204 13.00 3,56,10,214.00 1,32,83,749.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 1.08 kgs 2.16 kgs 76,09,020 14,19,204 8.00 6,57,41,933.00 2,45,23,845.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 0.21 kgs 0.36 kgs 76,09,020 14,19,204 3.00 47,93,683.00 15,32,740.00 
01.11.2017 
to 
31.01.2018 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 0.36 ltr 0.72 ltr 76,09,020 14,19,204 5.00 1,36,96,236.00 51,09,134.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 1.08 kgs 2.16 kgs 76,09,020 14,19,204 9.00 7,39,59,674.00 2,75,89,326.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 0.21 kgs 0.36 kgs 76,09,020 14,19,204 3.00 47,93,683.00 15,32,740.00 
01.02.2018 
to 
30.04.2018 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 0.36 ltr 0.72 ltr 76,09,020 14,19,204 4.00 1,09,56,989.00 40,87,308.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 1.08 kgs 2.16 kgs 76,09,020 14,19,204 18.00 14,79,19,349.00 5,51,78,652.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 0.21 kgs 0.36 kgs 76,09,020 14,19,204 3.00 47,93,683.00 15,32,740.00 
01.05.2018 
to 
31.07.2018 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 0.36 ltr 0.72 ltr 61,96,182 14,46,761 -3.00 -66,91,877.00 -31,25,004.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 1.08 kgs 2.16 kgs 61,96,182 14,46,761 18.00 12,04,53,778.00 5,62,50,068.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 0.21 kgs 0.36 kgs 61,96,182 14,46,761 3.00 39,03,595.00 15,62,502.00 
01.08.2018 
to 
31.10.2018 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 0.36 ltr 0.72 ltr 61,96,182 14,46,761 5.00 1,11,53,128.00 52,08,340.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 1.08 kgs 2.16 kgs 61,96,182 14,46,761 10.00 6,69,18,766.00 3,12,50,038.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 0.21 kgs 0.36 kgs 61,96,182 14,46,761 4.00 52,04,793.00 20,83,336.00 
01.11.2018 
to 
31.01.2019 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 0.36 ltr 0.72 ltr 61,96,182 14,46,761 4.00 89,22,502.00 41,66,672.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 1.08 kgs 2.16 kgs 61,96,182 14,46,761 NA 0.00 0.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 0.21 kgs 0.36 kgs 61,96,182 14,46,761 2.00 26,02,396.00 10,41,668.00 
01.02.2019 
to 
30.04.2019 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 0.36 ltr 0.72 ltr 61,96,182 14,46,761 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 1.08 kgs 2.16 kgs 61,96,182 14,46,761 12.00 8,03,02,519.00 3,75,00,045.00 
Iodized Salt 1 Pkt 0.21 kgs 0.36 kgs 61,96,182 14,46,761 0.00 0.00 0.00 
01.05.2019 
31.07.2019 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 0.36 ltr 0.72 ltr 63,15,045 14,18,138 4.00 90,93,665.00 40,84,237.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 1.08 kgs 2.16 kgs 63,15,045 14,18,138 14.00 9,54,83,480.00 4,28,84,493.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 0.21 kgs 0.36 kgs 63,15,045 14,18,138 1.00 13,26,159.00 5,10,530.00 
01.08.2019 
to 
30.10.2019 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 0.36 ltr 0.72 ltr 63,15,045 14,18,138 8.00 1,81,87,330.00 81,68,475.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 1.08 kgs 2.16 kgs 63,15,045 14,18,138 -10.00 -6,82,02,486.00 -3,06,31,781.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 0.21 kgs 0.36 kgs 63,15,045 14,18,138 2.00 26,52,319.00 10,21,059.00 
01.11.2019 
to 
31.01.2020 
Mustard Oil 1 ltr 0.36 ltr 0.72 ltr 63,15,045 14,18,138 9.00 2,04,60,746.00 91,89,534.00 
Masoor Dal 1 kg 1.08 kgs 2.16 kgs 63,15,045 14,18,138 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Iodized Salt 1 pkt 0.21 kgs 0.36 kgs 63,15,045 14,18,138 6.00 79,56,957.00 30,63,178.00 
Total 81,52,68,078.00 33,56,76,036.00 
Total Excess Expenditure 1,15,09,44,114.00 
Source: Information furnished by Directorate of ICDS 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
102 
Appendix 2.5 
(Refer paragraph 2.8.3) 
Shortfall in coverage of severely malnourished children in SNP 
Source: Records of Directorate of ICDS 
FY Category 
Total 
population 
(as per APIP) 
Number of SNP 
beneficiaries (as 
per UCs) 
Percentage of 
shortfall 
2018-19 Severely Malnourished 19,134 12,867 32.75 
2019-20 Severely Malnourished 13,598 6,653 51.07 
2020-21 Severely Malnourished 9,996 0 100 
2021-22 Severely Malnourished 9,488 15,761 No shortfall 

Appendices 
103 
Appendix 2.6 
(Refer paragraph 2.8.3) 
Disruptions in providing Supplementary Nutrition 
Test-check
ed district 
Test-
checked 
ICDS 
Project 
Test-checked AWC 
Disruptions in providing SN 
(i.e. SN provided less than 
the stipulated 25 days in a 
month in AWC) (in no. of 
months) during the period 
2017-18 to 2019-20 
Remarks 
Bankura Indpur Kalachandpur AWC 13 months (less than 25 days) As all the AWCs 
were closed 
during the Covid 
pandemic.THR 
was given during 
the entire pe riod 
of (April 2020 to 
February 2022), 
except for six 
months. 
Banshidihi AWC 21 months (less than 25 days) 
Rowtora AWC 12 months (less than 25 days) 
Nuniabaid AWC 13 months (less than 25 days) 
Chhatna Kumargara AWC 11 months (less than 25 days) 
Parasibona AWC 8 months (less than 25 days) 
Taljhari-II AWC 9 months (less than 25 days) 
Kumirdoha-II AWC 8 months (less than 25 days) 
Birbhum Suri-II Sirsita-III AWC Started functioning from 
21.06.21 
Indragachha AWC 14 months (less than 25 days) 
Dhananjoybati-III AWC 19 months (less than 25 days) 
Ikra AWC 15 months (less than 25 days) 
Rampurhat-I Majhkhanda AWC 13 months (less than 25 days) 
Palsa AWC 14 months (less than 25 days) 
Turukdihi AWC 10 months (less than 25 days) 
Kalikapur-III AWC 4 months (less than 25 days 
Nadia Chakdaha  Panchpota Masjed Para AWC 13 months (less than 25 days) 
1 No. Anandanagar Netaji 
Adarshya Sangha Club AWC 
9 months (less than 25 days) 
Natapuli Gangsara Majher 
Gram AWC 
20 months (less than 25 days) 
Hingnara Adibasipara AWC 25 months (less than 25 days) 
Ranaghat-I 
Addl. 
Kalinarayanpur Ajoy Colony 
AWC 
8 months (less than 25 days) 
Kalitala Litchubagan AWC–
Kalitala Litchubagan, 
Ramnagar-I G.P. AWC 
10 months (less than 25 days) 
Uttar Palitpara GSFP Primary 
School AWC 
11 months (less than 25 days) 
Taherpur Nutanpara AWC 11 months (less than 25 days) 
Malda English Bazar 
& Old Malda 
Telipukur North AWC 7 months (less than 25 days) 
Bapuji Colony-II AWC 7 months (less than 25 days) 
Bashatti-II AWC 11 months (less than 25 days) 
Paulpara AWC 15 months (less than 25 days) 
Habibpur Lotabhanga AWC 12 months (less than 25 days) 
Asrafpur AWC 18 months (less than 25 days) 
Uttar Kharika danga AWC 13 months (less than 25 days) 
Banpur Dhanukpara AWC 13 months (less than 25 days) 
North 24 
Parganas 
Basirhat-I 
(Urban) 
Shibhati Shivhati AWC 12 months (less than 25 days) As all the AWCs 
were closed 
during t he Covid 
pandemic, THR 
was given except 
for six months. 
Ghojadanga, Paruipara 
Paruipur AWC 
15 months (less than 25 days) 
Koyelbari AWC 15 months (less than 25 days) 
Bilepur AWC 14 months (less than 25 days) 
Panihati 
(Urban) 
Abhijatri Sangha AWC 10 months (less than 25 days) 
Agarpara Sporting Club AWC 11 months (less than 25 days) 
Simlanagar Unnayan Samity 
AWC 
9 months (less than 25 days) 
Swamiji Sangha, Agarpara 
AWC 
10 months (less than 25 days) 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
104 
Test-check
ed district 
Test-
checked 
ICDS 
Project 
Test-checked AWC 
Disruptions in providing SN 
(i.e. SN provided less than 
the stipulated 25 days in a 
month in AWC) (in no. of 
months) during the period 
2017-18 to 2019-20 
Remarks 
Jalpaiguri Dhupguri 
Addl.-I 
New Doors T.G. Church line 
Ronot House AWC 
8 months (less than 25 days) 
Kathalguri T.G. upper line 
Laxmi House AWC 
8 months (less than 25 days) 
Surendra Nagar Prem Minj 
House AWC 
8 months (less than 25 days) 
Haldibari T.E. School line 
AWC 
8 months (less than 25 days) 
Matiali Matelli T.G. Suka Line AWC 15 months (less than 25 days) 
Chalouni T.G. Factory line, 
SSK AWC 
16 months (less than 25 days) 
Aythadhura AWC 15 months (less than 25 days) 
Khalpara Primay School 
AWC 
11 months (less than 25 days) 
Source: Information furnished by the test-checked AWCs 

Appendices 
105 
Appendix 2.7 
(Refer paragraph 2.8.5.1) 
Unwarranted savings due to non -compliance of SNP menu in Malda 
District 
Sl. 
No. Month/ Year 
Total Nos. of 
Children 
Beneficiary (6 
months to 6 
Years) as 
reflected in 
MPR 
Nos. of Feeding 
Days (2,4,6) 
during the 
monthly period 
except Sundays 
and Holidays 
Unwarranted Saving 
by not providing a 
piece of Banana @ 
₹ 2.00 per children 
beneficiary as 
Morning Snacks on 
Days (2,4,6) 
Nutritional Impact 
1 8th June 2018 to 
30th June 2018 
3,89,083 9 70,03,494.00 A single piece of ripe 
banana provides 
about 110 calories, 
1 gram protein , 28 
grams carbohydrates, 
15 grams sugar 
(naturally occurring), 
3 grams fib re, and 
450 mg potassium. 
2 July 2018 3,93,213 13 1,02,23,538.00 
3 August 2018 3,91,460 13 1,01,77,960.00 
4 September 2018 3,91,843 13 1,01,87,918.00 
5 October 2018 3,91,629 11 86,15,838.00 
6 November 2018 3,98,683 13 1,03,65,758.00 
7 December 2018 4,00,318 12 96,07,632.00 
8 January 2019 3,93,835 10 78,76,700.00 
9 February 2019 3,94,096 12 94,58,304.00 
10 March 2019 3,85,449 12 92,50,776.00 
11 April 2019 3,94,734 13 1,02,63,084.00 
12 May 2019 3,97,601 13 1,03,37,626.00 
13 June 2019 3,94,858 13 1,02,66,308.00 
14 July 2019 3,98,592 13 1,03,63,392.00 
15 August 2019 3,91,496 13 1,01,78,896.00 
16 September 2019 3,79,259 11 83,43,698.00 
17 October 2019 3,81,329 12 91,51,896.00 
18 November 2019 3,68,990 13 95,93,740.00 
19 December 2019 3,71,734 13 96,65,084.00 
20 January 2020 3,70,702 12 88,96,848.00 
21 February 2020 3,62,238 13 94,18,188.00 
22 1st March 2020 to 
16th March 2020 
(SNP Menu was 
suspended w.e.f. 
17th March 2020) 
4,34,867 6 52,18,404.00 
Total 20,44,65,082.00 
Source: Information furnished by DPO, Malda 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
106 
Appendix 2.8 
(Refer paragraph 2.8.5.4) 
Rates of damaged ICDS food items 
Order No. & Date Period Items 
Price 
(recommended by the 
committee) (in `) 
296-SW/ 3S-158/ 08 
Dated:16.01.2020  
01.11.2019 to 
31.01.2020 
Rice (fine) IR-36 2,700 per quintal 
Masoor Dal (small Variety) 7,700 per quintal 
Mustard Oil (Agmark) (Engine/ Mashall/ 
Saloni/ Jyotikiran/ Suman/ Navjeevan/ 
Shiv)  
107 per one litre bottle 
Iodized Salt (Ashirbad/ Annapurna/ Tata/ 
Ankur Sampoorna)  
15 per kg 
1798(2)-SW/ WCD-
14023/ 1/ 2018  
SW/ O/ 3S-158/ 08  
Dated: 02.06.2020  
01.05.2020 to 
31.07.2020 
Rice (fine) IR-36 2,900 per quintal 
Masoor Dal (Small Variety) 8,500 per quintal 
Mustard Oil (Argmark) (Engine/ Mashall/ 
Saloni/ Jyotikiran/ Suman/ Navjeevan/ 
Shiv)  
108 per one litre bottle 
Iodized Salt (Ashirbad/ Annapurna/ Tata/ 
Ankur Sampoorna)  
11 per kg 
2174(2)-SW/ WCD-
14023/ 1/ 2018  
SW/ O/ 3S-158/ 08  
Dated:10.08.2020  
01.08.2020 to 
31.10.2020 
Rice (fine) IR-36 2,700 quintal 
Masoor Dal (Small Variety) 9,000 quintal 
Mustard Oil (Argmark) (Engine/ Mashall/ 
Saloni/ Jyotikiran/ Suman/ Navjeevan/ 
Shiv)  
118 per one litre bottle 
Iodized Salt (Ashirbad/ Annapurna/ Tata/ 
Ankur Sampoorna)  
11 per kg 
4440(2)-SW/ WCD-
14023/ 1/ 2018  
SW/ O/ 3S-158/ 08 
Dated:04.12.2020  
01.11.2020 to 
31.01.2021 
Rice (fine) IR-36 2,700 per quintal 
Masoor Dal (Small Variety) 9,600 per quintal 
Mustard Oil (Argmark) (Engine/ Mashall/ 
Saloni/ Jyotikiran/ Suman/ Navjeevan/ 
Shiv)  
122 per one litre bottle 
Iodized Salt (Ashirbad/ Annapurna/ Tata/ 
Ankur Sampoorna)  
11 per kg 
826(2)-SW/ WCD-
14023/ 1/ 2018  
SW/ O/ 3S-158/ 08  
Dated:19.02.2021  
01.02.2021 to 
30.04.2021 
Rice (fine) IR-36 2,700 per quintal 
Masoor Dal (Small Variety) 9,000 per quintal 
Mustard Oil (Argmark) (Engine/ Mashall/ 
Saloni/ Jyotikiran/ Suman/ Navjeevan/ 
Shiv)  
122 per one litre bottle 
Iodized Salt (Ashirbad/ Annapurna/ Tata/ 
Ankur Sampoorna)  
11 per kg 
132/ ICDS/ BNK 
dated 18.02.2020 
18.02.20 to 
18.07.20 
Soyabean (Soya Chunk) 80 per kg 
Source: Information furnished by Directorate of ICDS 
Note: The rates of Supplementary Nutrition (Rice, Masoor Dal, Mustard oil and Iodized Salt) 
had been fixed on the basis of the recommendations made in the meeting held by the Committee 
of SNP, during the period from 01.11.2019 to 30.04.2021 

Appendices 
107 
Appendix 2.9 
(Refer paragraph 2.8.5.5) 
Availability of weighing machines in the test-checked projects 
Name of test-
checked ICDS 
project 
Operational 
AWCs 
Adult weighing machines in AWCs Child weighing machines in AWCs 
Available Functional Shortfall 
(per cent) Available Functional Shortfall 
(per cent) 
Indpur 
(Bankura) 
247 247 165 82 (33) 247 205 42 (17) 
Chhatna 
(Bankura) 
204 204 64 140 (69) 199 185 19 (9) 
Suri-II 
(Birbhum) 
186 186 186 0 (0) 186 186 0 (0) 
Rampurhat-I 
& Addl. 
(Birbhum) 
324 276 241 83 (26) 306 280 44 (14) 
Chakdaha 
(Nadia) 
382 302 211 171 (45) 302 215 167 (44) 
Ranaghat-I 
Addl. (Nadia) 
209 209 144 65 (31) 209 186 23 (11) 
English Bazar 
& Old Malda 
(U) (Malda)  
175 175 96 79 (45) 175 140 35 (20) 
Habibpur 
(Malda) 
300 300 145 155 (52) 300 285 15 (5) 
Basirhat-I 
(North 24 
Parganas) 
279 279 35 244 (87) 279 128 151 (54) 
Panihati 
(Urban) 
North 24 
Parganas 
206 206 206 0 (0) 206 206 0 (0) 
Dhupguri 
Additional-I, 
Jalpaiguri 
274 274 248 26 (10) 274 234 40 (15) 
Matiali, 
Jalpaiguri 
246 246 175 71 (29) 246 158 88 (36) 
Source: Records of test-checked 12 CDPOs 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
108 
Appendix 2.10 
{Refer paragraph 2.8.5.6 (iii)} 
Summary of the excess transportation charges 
Sl. 
No. 
DPO/ 
CDPO 
Total 
Quantity 
transported 
(in Quintal) 
Range of rates 
of 
transportation 
allowed per 
quintal 
(in ₹) 
Payment 
released to 
Contractor 
(in ₹) 
Range of 
admissible rates 
of 
transportation 
per Quintal* 
(in ₹) 
Admissible 
total payment 
to the 
contractor 
(considering 
the furthest 
distance 
godown) 
(in ₹) ** 
Excess 
transportation 
charges 
(in ₹) 
1. DPO, 
Birbhum 
55,965.45 97-144 69,19,724 22.80 - 69.84 27,75,159 41,44,565 
2. CDPO, 
Suri-II 
5,996.43 71 4,25,746.53 33.60 2,01,480.05 2,24,266.48 
3. DPO, 
Jalpaiguri 
98,689 145-150 1,46,79,361 85 83,88,571 62,90,790.00 
4. CDPO, 
Chhatna 
5,974.38 55 3,28,590.90 40 2,38,975.20 89,615.70 
Total 2,23,53,422.43 1,16,04,185.25 1,07,49,137.18 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked offices; 
*As per the order of Food & Supplies Department; **Total amount admissible has been calculated on
the basis of distance of the Project godowns from FCI godowns / AWCs from Project godowns as 
provided in the order(s) of Food & Supplies Department 

Appendix 2.11 
{Refer paragraph 2.8.5.6 (vii)} 
Excess expenditure on reimbursement of cooking cost of SNP items 
10 (A): Birbhum 
Name of 
CDPOs Month 
No. of Beneficiaries 
No. of 
feeding days 
Maximum amount reimbursable (in ₹) Actual 
payment 
(in ₹) 
Excess 
payment 
(in ₹) Children PW&LM 
Children (Avg. @ 
` 5.125 per head 
per day) 
PW&LM (Avg. 
@ ` 7.84 per 
head per day) 
Total 
Suri-II August 2019 7,504 1,950 23 8,84,534.00 3,51,624.00 12,36,158.00 13,59,006.00 1,22,848.00 
September 2019 7,504 1,950 24 9,22,992.00 3,66,912.00 12,89,904.00 13,03,893.00 13,989.00 
October 2019 7,504 1,950 23 8,84,534.00 3,51,624.00 12,36,158.00 12,54,378.00 18,220.00 
November 2019 7,504 1,950 26 9,99,908.00 3,97,488.00 13,97,396.00 14,50,656.00 53,260.00 
December 2019 7,504 1,950 25 9,61,450.00 3,82,200.00 13,43,650.00 13,98,255.00 54,605.00 
January 2020 6,752 2,031 26 8,99,704.00 4,13,999.00 13,13,703.00 13,75,430.00 61,727.00 
February 2020 6,795 2,035 24 8,35,785.00 3,82,906.00 12,18,691.00 13,10,586.00 91,895.00 
March 2020 7,229 2,035 12 (THR as 
well) 
7,04,828.00 2,64,713.00 9,69,541.00 9,70,386.00 845.00 
Total 4,17,389.00 
Rampurhat-I July 2019 18,674 4,668 26 24,88,311.00 9,51,525.00 34,39,836.00 34,78,618.00 38,782.00 
September 2019 18,787 4,696 24 23,10,801.00 8,83,599.00 31,94,400.00 32,45,015.00 50,615.00 
November 2019 19,078 4,769 24 23,46,594.00 8,97,335.00 32,43,929.00 33,76,446.00 1,32,517.00 
December 2019 19,114 4,778 26 25,46,941.00 9,73,948.00 35,20,888.00 38,44,702.00 3,23,814.00 
January 2020 19,244 4,811 26 25,64,263.00 9,80,674.00 35,44,937.00 38,05,209.00 2,60,272.00 
February 2020 20,193 5,048 23 23,80,250.00 9,10,255.00 32,90,505.00 34,36,871.00 1,46,366.00 
Total 9,52,365.00 
Total Amount 13,69,754.00 
Source: Information furnished by CDPOs  
Note: In the month of March 2020, the cost of 2 kg Potato per beneficiary @ ` 18 per kg, has also been included 
Appendices 
109

10 (B): North 24 Parganas - Panihati 
Month Children PW & LM Days 
On Khichdi Day On Rice Day Total 
(in `) 
Total amount 
reimbursed 
(in `) 
Difference 
(in `) Child @ 
` 5.74 
Mother @ 
` 6.05 
Child @ 
` 6.30 
Mother @ 
` 7.40 
April 2019 4,264 561 26 3,18,179.70 44,122.65 3,49,221.60 53,968.20 7,65,492.10 8,36,332.00 70,839.87 
May 2019 4,280 545 26 3,19,373.60 42,864.25 3,50,532.00 52,429.00 7,65,198.90 8,22,748.00 57,549.15 
June 2019 4,384 586 26 3,27,134.10 46,088.90 3,59,049.60 56,373.20 7,88,645.80 8,46,542.00 57,896.22 
July 2019 4,316 525 26 3,22,059.90 41,291.25 3,53,480.40 50,505.00 7,67,336.60 8,17,558.00 50,221.43 
August 2019 4,301 529 26 3,20,940.60 41,605.85 3,52,251.90 50,889.80 7,65,688.20 9,03,854.00 1,38,165.83 
September 2019 4,298 545 26 3,20,716.80 42,864.25 3,52,006.20 52,429.00 7,68,016.20 8,21,727.00 53,710.79 
October 2019 4,197 512 26 3,13,180.10 40,268.80 3,43,734.30 49,254.40 7,46,437.60 8,02,419.00 55,981.36 
November 2019 4,209 527 26 3,14,075.60 41,448.55 3,44,717.10 50,697.40 7,50,938.60 7,19,023.00 -31,915.63 
December 2019 4,267 528 26 3,18,403.50 41,527.20 3,49,467.30 50,793.60 7,60,191.60 8,07,066.00 46,874.36 
January 2020 4,104 520 26 3,06,240.50 40,898.00 3,36,117.60 50,024.00 7,33,280.10 7,79,908.00 46,627.92 
February 2020 4,083 536 26 3,04,673.50 42,156.40 3,34,397.70 51,563.20 7,32,790.80 8,30,034.00 97,243.24 
March 2020 4,083 543 26 3,04,673.50 42,706.95 3,34,397.70 52,236.60 7,34,014.70 7,84,939.00 50,924.29 
Total 90,78,031.00 97,72,150.00 6,94,118.83 
Grand Total 20,63,872.83 
Source: Information furnished by CDPO Panihati 
CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
110

Appendix 2.12 
(Refer paragraph 2.11) 
Facilities available in the test-checked AWCs 
Project Test-checked AWC Own building/ rented/ other 
(rent-free) 
Drinking 
water 
facilities 
available 
Water 
filter/ 
RO 
Toilet 
facilities 
available 
Gas Stove 
and 
Cylinder 
of ICDS 
Scheme 
Medici
ne Kit 
Disabled 
friendly 
(CWSN) 
Toilet 
facilities 
Indpur 
(Bankura) 
(i) Kalachandpur AWC In verandah of Private house Yes No No No No No 
(ii) Banshidihi AWC School Yes No No No No No 
(iii) Rowtora AWC School Yes No No No No No 
(iv) Nuniabaid AWC Own building but due to shortage 
of space running in School 
Yes No No No No No 
Chhatna 
(Bankura) 
(i) Kumargara AWC Community building Yes No No No No No 
(ii) Porasibona AWC Own building No No No No No No 
(iii) Taljharia-II AWC Own building Yes No Yes No No No 
(iv) Kumirdoha-II AWC Own building Yes No Yes No No No 
Suri-II 
(Birbhum) 
(i) Sirsita-III AWC Open space Yes No No No No No 
(ii) Indragacha AWC School Yes No No No No No 
(iii) Dhananjoybati AWC Private Yes No No No No No 
(iv) Ikra AWC Own building Yes No Yes No No No 
Rampurhat-I 
(Birbhum) 
(i) Kalikapur-III AWC Open space No No No No No No 
(ii) Turukdihi AWC Own building No No No No No No 
(iii) Palsa AWC Own building Yes No Yes No No No 
(iv) Majhkanda AWC School No No No No No No 
Chakdaha 
(Nadia) 
(i) Panchpota Masjed Para AWC Rented No No Yes No No No 
(ii) 1 No. Anandanagar Netaji 
Adarshya Sangha Club AWC 
Own building No No Yes No No No 
(iii) Natapuli Gangsara Majher 
Gram AWC 
Rented No No Yes No No No 
(iv) Hingnara Adibasipara AWC Own building No No Yes No No No 
Appendices 
111

Project Test-checked AWC Own building/ rented/ other 
(rent-free) 
Drinking 
water 
facilities 
available 
Water 
filter/ 
RO 
Toilet 
facilities 
available 
Gas Stove 
and 
Cylinder 
of ICDS 
Scheme 
Medici
ne Kit 
Disabled 
friendly 
(CWSN) 
Toilet 
facilities 
Ranaghat-I 
(Addl.) 
(Nadia) 
(i) Kalinarayanpur Ajoy Colony 
AWC 
Private but no rent Yes No Yes No No No 
(ii) Kalitala Litchubagan AWC Private but no rent Yes No Yes No No No 
(iii) Uttar Palitpara GSFP Primary 
School AWC 
Primary school building Yes No Yes No No No 
(iv) Taherpur Nutanpara AWC Own building Yes No Yes No No No 
English 
Bazar & Old 
Malda 
(Urban) 
(Malda) 
(i) Telipukur North AWC Rented Yes No No No No No 
(ii) Bapuji Colony 2 AWC Small rented room Yes No Yes No No No 
(iii) Bashatti 2 AWC Primary school building Yes No Yes No No No 
(iv) Paulpara AWC Rented Yes No No No No No 
Habibpur 
(Malda) 
(i) Lotabhanga AWC Rented, PSE running in open 
space due to small rented room 
AWC 
Yes No Yes No No No 
(ii) Asrafpur AWC Own building Yes No Yes No No No 
(iii) Uttar Kharika Danga AWC Rented Yes No Yes No No No 
(iv) Banpur Dhanukpara AWC Own building Yes No Yes No No No 
Basirhat-I 
(North 24 
Parganas) 
(i) Kayalbari F.P. School AWC Own building Yes Yes Yes No No No 
(ii) Shibhati AWC Own building No No No No No No 
(iii) Bilepur H /O Nur Islam Gazi 
AWC 
Rented Yes No No No No No 
(iv) Ghojadanga Paruipara F.P.  
School AWC  
Primary school building Yes No No No No No 
Panihati 
(Urban) 
(North 24 
Pgs.) 
(i) Swamiji Sangha (Agarpara 
Adarsha Nagar) AWC 
Rented Yes No No No No No 
(ii) Simlanagar Unnayan Samity 
AWC 
Rented No No No No No No 
CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
112 

Project Test-checked AWC Own building/ rented/ other 
(rent-free) 
Drinking 
water 
facilities 
available 
Water 
filter/ 
RO 
Toilet 
facilities 
available 
Gas Stove 
and 
Cylinder 
of ICDS 
Scheme 
Medici
ne Kit 
Disabled 
friendly 
(CWSN) 
Toilet 
facilities 
(iii) Abijatri Sangha AWC Rented Yes No No No No No 
(iv) Agarpara Sporting Club AWC Rented Yes No No No No No 
Dhupguri 
(Addl-I) 
(Jalpaiguri) 
(i) Surendra Nagar Prem Minj 
House AWC 
Own building Yes No Yes Yes (by 
own 
Arrangem
ent) 
No No 
(ii) New Dooars T.G. Church Line 
Robot House AWC 
Own building Yes No Yes No No No 
(iii) Kathalgur i T .G. Upper Line 
Laxmi House AWC 
Own building Yes No Yes No No No 
(iv) Huldibari T .E. School Line 
AWC 
Own building Yes No Yes No No No 
Matiali 
(Jalpaiguri) 
(i) Chilouni T.G . Factory line 
S.S.K School AWC 
SSK School No No No No No No 
(ii) Khalpara Pry. School AWC Own building No No Yes No No No 
(iii) Meteli T.G. Sukha line AWC Own building Yes No No No No No 
(iv) Ayetadhura Uttar Dhujhora 
AWC 
Own building No No Yes No No No 
Source: Information furnished by the test-checked AWCs. 
Appendices 
113

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
114 
Appendix   2.13  
(Refer paragraph 2.15.3) 
Visits by Supervisors, in the test -checked AWCs, in the six selected 
districts   
District  Test-checked AWCs (name of selected 
ICDS Project) 
Minimum no. of visits* 
to the AWC to be made 
by the Supervisor, 
during the FYs 2017-18 
to 2021-22 (minimum 6 
visits in a year ) 
Total no. of visits 
of the AWCs, made 
by Supervisors, 
during the FYs 
2017-18 to 2021-22 
Shortfall 
against the 
minimum visits 
to be made by 
Supervisor 
Bankura Kalachadpur AWC (Indpur ICDS 
Project)    
30 8 22 
Nuniabaid AWC (Indpur ICDS 
Project)  
30 11 19 
Banshidihi AWC (Indpur ICDS 
Project)  
30 7 23 
Rowtora AWC (Indpur ICDS Project) 30 6 24 
Kumargara AWC (Chhatna ICDS 
Project)    
30 14 16 
Porasibona AWC (Chhatna ICDS 
Project)  
30 10 20 
Taljharia-II AWC (Chhatna ICDS 
Project)  
30 10 20 
Kumirdoha-II AWC (Chhatna ICDS 
Project)  
30 6 24 
Birbhum Dhananjoybati AWC (Suri -II ICDS 
Project)    
30 1 29 
Ikra AWC (Suri-II ICDS Project)  30 0 30 
Indragacha AWC (Suri -II ICDS 
Project)  
30 0 30 
Sirsita-III AWC (Suri-II ICDS AWC)  30 1 29 
Majhkhanda AWC (Rampurhat -I ICDS 
Project)    
30 NA NA 
Palsa AWC ( Rampurhat-I ICDS 
Project)    
30 6 24 
Turukdihi AWC (Rampurhat -I ICDS 
Project)    
30 NA NA 
Kalikapur-III AWC (Rampurhat-I ICDS 
Project)    
30 NA NA 
Nadia Hingnara Adibashi Para AWC 
(Chakdaha ICDS Project)  
30 9 21 
Natapuli Gangsara Majher Gram AWC 
(Chakdaha ICDS Project)    
30 6 24 
Panchpota Masjed Para AWC 
 (Chakdaha ICDS Project)  
30 5 25 
1 No. Anandanagar Netaji Adarshya 
AWC (Chakdaha ICDS Project)    
30 11 19 
Uttar Palitpara Pry. School AWC 
(Ranaghat-I Addl. ICDS Project)    
30 21 09 
Kalinarayanpur Ajoy Colony AWC 
(Ranaghat-I Addl. ICDS Project)    
30 21 09 
Kalitala Lichubagan AWC (Ranaghat -I 
Addl. ICDS Project)    
30 27 3 
Taherpur Natunpara AWC (Ranaghat -I 
Addl. ICDS Project)    
30 21 9 
Malda Telipukur North AWC (English Bazar & 
Old Malda ICDS Project)    
30 6 24 
Bapuji Colony -II AWC (English Bazar 
& Old Malda ICDS Project)  
30 36 No shortfall 
against the 
minimum 

Appendices 
115 
District  Test-checked AWCs (name of selected 
ICDS Project) 
Minimum no. of visits* 
to the AWC to be made 
by the Supervisor, 
during the FYs 2017-18 
to 2021-22 (minimum 6 
visits in a year ) 
Total no. of visits 
of the AWCs, made 
by Supervisors, 
during the FYs 
2017-18 to 2021-22 
Shortfall 
against the 
minimum visits 
to be made by 
Supervisor 
Bashatti-II  AWC (English Bazar & Old 
Malda ICDS Project)    
30 15 15 
Paulpara  AWC (English Bazar & Old 
Malda ICDS Project)    
30  16 14 
Lotabhanga AWC (Habibpur ICDS 
Project)    
30 16 14 
Asrafpur AWC (Habibpur ICDS 
Project)    
30 8 22 
Uttar Kharika  Danga AWC (Habibpur 
ICDS Project)    
30 11 19 
Banpur Dhanukpara AWC (Habibpur 
ICDS Project)    
30 11 19 
North 24 
Parganas 
Shibhati AWC (Basirhat -I ICDS 
Project)      
30 11 19 
Ghojadanga, Paruipara AWC (Basirhat -
I ICDS Project)    
30 7 23 
Koyelbari AWC (Basirhat -I ICDS 
Project)    
30 5 25 
Bilepur AWC (Basirhat -I ICDS 
Project)  
30 6 24 
Abhijatri Sangha AWC (Panihati Urban 
ICDS Project)    
30 16 14 
Agarpara Sporting Club AWC (Panihati 
Urban ICDS Project)    
30 16 14 
Swamiji Sangha Agarpar a AWC 
(Panihati Urban ICDS Project)    
30 15 15 
Simlanagar Unnayan Samity AWC 
(Panihati Urban ICDS Project)    
30 9 21 
Jalpaiguri Haldibari T.G . School Line AWC 
(Dhupguri Additional-I ICDS Project)    
30 30 0 
Surendra Nagar T.E. AWC (Dhupguri 
Additional-I ICDS Project)    
30 29 1 
Kathalguri T.G . AWC (Dhupguri 
Additional-I ICDS Project)    
30 18 12 
New Dooars T.G . AWC (Dhupguri 
Additional-I ICDS Project)    
30 17 13 
Matiali T.G. Sukha Line AWC (Matiali, 
ICDS Project)    
30 16 14 
Ayethadhura Uttar Dhujara AWC 
(Matiali ICDS Project)    
30 28 02 
Chilouni T.G. Factory line SSK School 
AWC (Matiali ICDS Project)    
30 7 23 
Khalpara Primary School AWC (Matiali 
ICDS Project)    
30 23 07 
Source: AWCs report in the test-checked districts; Note: NA- Not Available 
*As per the Guidelines for Monitoring and Supervision Visits to ICDS Anganwadi Centres
(AWCs) issued (October 2010) by the ICDS Evaluation & Monitoring Unit, Ministry of Women 
& Child Development, GoI, a supervisor (ICDS) is expected to visit a minimum of 50  per cent 
of AWCs under her jurisdiction every month.  

Abbreviations 
 
117 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Abbreviations used in PA on Land Management in Tribal Areas  
Abbreviations Full Form 
ACR Assistant Commissioner for Reservation 
ADSR Additional District Sub-Registrar 
BCCL Bharat Coking Coal Limited 
BCW Backward Classes Welfare Department 
BL&LRO Block Land & Land Reforms Officer 
CRI Cultural Research Institute 
DFO Divisional Forest Officer 
DL&LRO District Land and Land Reforms Officer 
DLC District Level Committee 
DLRS Directorate of Land Records and Surveys 
DS Deputy Secretary 
ECL Eastern Coalfields Limited 
FRA Forest Rights Act 
FRC Forest Rights Committee 
FY Financial Year 
IGR Inspector General, Registrations 
JCR  Joint Commissioner for Reservation 
JS Joint Secretary 
L&LR and RR&R Land & Land Reforms and Refugee Relief & 
Rehabilitation Department 
LAO Land Acquisition Officer 
LTS Long term settlement 
MoTA Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
OSD Officer on Special Duty 
OTFDs Other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
PAPs Project Affected Persons 
PO-cum-DWO Project Officer cum District Welfare Officer 
PVTGs Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups 
R&R Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
RAPs Rehabilitation Action Plans 
RO Revenue Officer 
ROR Record of Rights 
SIPL Shakambhari Ispat and Power Ltd. 
STs Scheduled Tribes 
TD Tribal Development 
WBLR West Bengal Land Reforms 
WBSCSTOBCDFC West Bengal Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and 
Other Backward Classes Development and Finance 
Corporation 
WBTDCC West Bengal Tribal Development and Co -operative 
Corporation Ltd. 

CAG’s Performance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
118 
Abbreviations used in PA on Anganwadi Services under Integrated Child 
Development Services 
Abbreviations Full Form 
A&M Agricultural and Marketing 
ANM Auxiliary Nurse Midwife 
APIP Annual Programme Implementation Plan 
AWC Anganwadi Center 
AWH Anganwadi Helper 
AWTC Anganwadi Worker Training Centre 
AWW Anganwadi Worker 
BCC Behaviour Change Communication 
BDOs Block Development Officers 
BLMRC Block Level Monitoring & Review Committee 
CD Community Development 
CDPO Child Development Project Officer 
CONFED West Bengal State Multipurpose Consumer 
Cooperative Federation Ltd. 
DLMRC District Level Monitoring & Review Committee 
DPO District Programme Officer 
ECCE Early Childhood Care and Education 
EOs-PSs Executive Officers-Panchayat Samity 
F&S Food and Supplies 
FNB Food and Nutrition Board 
FY Financial Year  
GFR General Financial Rules 
GoWB Government of West Bengal 
ICDS Integrated Child Development Scheme 
ICT-RTM Information Computer Technology Enabled Real Time 
Monitoring of Schemes 
MGNREGA Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act 
MLTC Middle Level Training Centre 
MO Medical Officer 
MPR Monthly Progress Reports 
NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
NCCF National Consumer Cooperative Federation Ltd., 
NIPCCD National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child 
Development 
NNM National Nutrition Mission 
PSE Non-formal Pre-School Education 
PW&LM Pregnant Women and Lactating Mothers 
QCL Quality Control Laboratory 
QPRs Quarterly Progress Reports 
RIDF Rural Infrastructure Development Fund 
RRC Rate Revision Committee 
SDM Sub-Divisional Magistrate 
SLMRC State Level Monitoring & Review Committee 
SNP Supplementary Nutrition Programme 

Abbreviations 
119 
Abbreviations Full Form 
SRSWoR Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement 
THR Take-Home Ration 
TPDS Targeted Public Distribution System 
WBECSC West Bengal Essential Comm odities Supply 
Corporation Ltd. 
WBTDCC  West Bengal Tribal Development Cooperative 
Corporation Ltd. 
WCD&SW Women & Child Development and Social Welfare 

Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
on Implementation of Samagra Shiksha in 
West Bengal
Government of West Bengal  
Report No. 3 of 2026  
(Performance Audit - Civil)  
  
COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
https://cag.gov.in/ag1/west-bengal/en
Report No. 3 of 2026 - Government of West Bengal  
