Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India   
for the period ended March 2023
Government of West Bengal  
Report No. 5 of 2025  
(Performance & Compliance Audit - Civil)  
 
 
KDWdZK>>ZE
h/dKZ'EZ>K&/E/
ǁǁǁ͘ĐĂŐ͘ŐŽǀ͘ŝŶ
 
 
 
 
 
 


ŚƚƚƉƐ͗ͬͬĐĂŐ͘ŐŽǀ͘ŝŶͬĂŐϭͬǁĞƐƚ ͲďĞŶŐĂůͬĞŶ


  
COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
https://cag.gov.in/ag1/west-bengal/en
Report No. 5 of 2025 - Government of West Bengal  


 
 

Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the 
period ended March 2023   
Government of West Bengal 
Report No. 5 of 2025 

i 
Table of Contents 
Description Page 
Preface iii 
Executive Summary v 
Chapter 1: Performance Audit on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
Paragraph 1.1: Introduction 3 
Paragraph 1.2: Salient features of the Scheme 6 
Paragraph 1.3: Organisational set up 6 
Paragraph 1.4: Engagement of ICs & TPAs and Payments made therein 7 
Paragraph 1.5: Audit objectives 8 
Paragraph 1.6: Audit criteria 8 
Paragraph 1.7: Audit coverage and methodology 8 
Paragraph 1.8: Implementation of the Scheme 9 
Paragraph 1.9: Financial Resources 35 
Paragraph 1.10: Fund Management 38 
Paragraph 1.11: Internal control mechanism, monitoring and supervision 42 
Chater 2: Individual Paragraph of Compliance Audit on Availability of an inclusive 
and accessible environment in Educational Institutions for Persons with 
Disabilities/ Children with Special Needs 
Paragraph 2.1: Educational opportunities  48 
Paragraph 2.2: Accessible/ Barrier Free Environment and availability of 
assistive devices to Persons/ Children with Disabilities 57 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
ii 
Appendices 
Description Page 
Appendix 1.1 
ICs engaged under the Scheme with period of engagement 
63 
TPAs engaged under the Scheme with period of engagement 
Appendix 1.2 
Six selected districts with names of test -checked Private 
HCPs empaneled under the Scheme in each district under the 
DNO-SS & CMOH 
64 
Appendix 1.3 Improper Gradation of empanelled HCPs in selected 
districts under the DNO-SS & CMOH 66 
Appendix 1.4 District-wise details of Avoidable Expenditure 69 
Appendix 1.5 Non-conduct of requisite training / workshop/ beneficiary 
audit by the ICs 73 
Appendix 1.6 
Patients’ survey conducted in test -checked HCPs revealed 
that in-patients under the Scheme had paid consultation fees 
before admission 74 In-patients under the Scheme had to bear cost of Diagnostic 
Tests before admission and paid money during 
Hospitalisation 
Appendix 1.7 Monitoring, visit, review, audit of the SS Scheme by the 
district authority (District Key Manager) 75 
Appendix 2.1 List of Departments and other offices selected for audit 76 
Abbreviations 79 

 
iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface 
This Performance & Compliance Audit Report for the period ended 
March 2023 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of 
West Bengal under Article 151 (2) of the Constitution of India for 
being laid before the Legislative Assembly of West Bengal.  
This Report contains significant results of Performance Audit on 
Swasthya Sathi Scheme and Compliance Audit on availability of an 
inclusive and accessible environment in Educational Institutions for 
Persons with Disabilities/ Children with Special Needs to assess the 
State’s performance in achieving the objectives based on relevant 
Acts, Rules, Guidelines/ norms, Circulars etc., framed or issued by 
the Government of India and the Government of West Bengal.  
The instances men tioned in this Report are those  which came to 
notice in course of test audit of the Swasthya Sathi  Scheme and 
educational institutions in the State of West Bengal for the period 
ended March 2023 as well as those which came to notice in earlier 
years, but could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports; 
instances relating to the period subsequent to 2022-23 have also been 
included wherever necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

 
 
 

 
 
Executive Summary 
 
 

 
 
v 
Executive Summary 
This Performance & Compliance Audit Report contains one performance audit 
on ‘ Swasthya Sathi  Scheme’ and one compliance audit paragraph on 
‘Availability of an inclusive and accessible environment in Educational 
Institutions for Persons with Disabilities/ Children with Special Needs’.  
Chapter 1: Performance Audit on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
The Government of West Bengal (GoWB) rolled out (February 2017) a 
comprehensive group health insurance scheme called the “Swasthya Sathi” for 
providing protection to beneficiaries from financially debilitating effects of 
illnesses. The Scheme was implemented by the Health and Family Welfare 
(H&FW) Department, GoWB. To implement the Scheme, the Swasthya Sathi 
Samiti (SS Samiti), a registered Society, was set up by the GoWB  to act as the 
State Nodal Agency (SNA). 
The Scheme initially covered only volunteers and other contractual workers and 
then it was expanded to include all permanent residents of the State (except 
those already covered by any other Government health insurance / assurance 
scheme). The mode of implementation was initially through a hybrid mode 
(both insurance and assurance), which was shifted entirely to assurance mode 
only.  
This Performance Audit (PA) of the Swasthya Sathi Scheme (SS Scheme) was 
taken up to cover the period from 2018 -19 to 2022 -23 wherein an amount of 
` 6,882.06 crore was expended under the Scheme.  
Significant audit observations that emerged from the audit were as follows: 
• Neither any comprehensive guidelines nor any Annual Action Plans for 
achieving the programme objectives were prepared by the SNA  as of 
July 2024.  
(Paragraph 1.8.1.1) 
• The number of families enrolled under the Scheme (as of March 2023) 
was around 10 per cent higher than the number of families holding 
Ration Cards in the State, as per the Public Distribution System (PDS) 
records (of August 2023). Consequently, the risk of benefits of the 
Scheme getting passed on to ineligible beneficiaries, in deviation of 
norms, could not be ruled out.  
{Paragraph 1.8.1.2 (i)} 
• The SNA issued instructions to district authorities (October  2021), to 
collect Aadhaar numbers and update the same in the SS website. 
However, there was non-completion of the linking process which would 
not only lead to non-compliance with Scheme verification protocols, but 
also impede the intended objective of eradicating multiple enrolments of 
the same beneficiary under the SS Scheme. 
{Paragraph 1.8.1.2 (iii)} 
 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
vi 
• Test-check of records of 50 private empanelled hospitals showed that 
31 hospitals were improperly allowed higher grading vis-à-vis available 
infrastructure, services being offered, sanctioned bed strength of 
hospitals etc. Due to improper gradation, these Health Care Providers 
(HCPs) though entitled to lower package rates as per applicable norms 
of the SS Scheme were being paid at higher rates.  Consequently such 
anomalies resulted in excess payment of ₹ 14.48 crore to these HCPs. 
Paragraph 1.8.1.3 (ii) 
 
• As against 3,038 HCPs to be empanelled to service 2.43 crore 
beneficiary families, only 2,605 HCPs were empanelled for the State as 
a whole, limiting the choice of hospitals and impacting service delivery 
for enrolled beneficiaries.  
{Paragraph 1.8.1.4 (i)} 
• During the period April 2018 and July 2022, 3,955  claims valued at 
₹ 7.26 crore were not paid to the HCPs by five Insurance Companies 
(ICs). Reasons for such non -payment b y ICs were not available in 
records. Further, despite the existence of penal provisions in the 
Agreements, the SNA did not recover penalty of ₹  31.33 crore from 
three ICs for delayed settlement of claims.  
{Paragraph 1.8.1.5 (ii) (A) and (iii)} 
• National Insurance Company  and Bajaj Allianz  General Insurance 
Company had not refunded ` 9.78 crore to the SNA for failing to reach 
the mandated claim ratio as per Agreements.  
{Paragraph 1.8.1.5 (iv)} 
• There was excess expenditure of ₹  46.97 crore on enrolment and 
distribution of smart cards to 1.65 crore fa milies by Third  Party 
Administrators (TPAs)/ Implementation Support Agencies (ISAs).  
(Paragraph 1.8.1.6) 
 
• Out of joint review of 65 empanelled p rivate HCPs in test -checked 
six districts, shortage of Resident Medical Officers and nursing staff was 
noticed in 32 and 36 HCPs respectively. Further, there was no system of 
providing free Outpatient Department ( OPD) consultation to SS 
beneficiaries in any of the 65  test-checked HCPs.  In 16 test -checked 
HCPs, it was seen that Emergency wards did not have adequate/ 
appropriate equipment or facilities such as defibrillator, ventilator, 
infusion pump etc. 
(Paragraph 1.8.3.1) 
• In-Patients’ survey involving 399 in -patients in test -checked HCPs of 
six test -checked districts revealed that 141  in-patients had paid 
consultation fees ranging between  ₹ 70 and ₹  700, whereas 
112 in-patients had to bear costs ranging between ₹ 250 and ₹ 20,000 for 
diagnostic tests.  This was in contravention of the provisions of the 
Scheme which envisaged cashless treatment. 
(Paragraph 1.8.3.2) 

Executive Summary 
 
vii 
• Budgetary support for implementing the Scheme was not adequate, due 
to which the SNA had to pay ₹ 10.85 crore as interest on loan s 
(₹ 721.95 crore) availed to implement the Scheme during 2020 -22. 
Non-implementation of Ayushman Bharat – Swasthya Sathi  (AB-SS) 
deprived the State’s population especially migrant ones (who move to 
other States in India)  of the benefit of accessing cashless health care 
services in a network of hospitals across the country. Thereby, GoWB 
could not avail the central funding to supplement the State’s expenditure 
on the Swasthya Sathi Scheme and residents of the State were denied 
benefits under AB-SS. 
(Paragraphs 1.9.2 and 1.9.3) 
• Audit noted that six test -checked districts furnished Utilisation 
Certificates (UCs) amounting to ₹  15.43 crore to the SNA without 
obtaining UCs from sub -allottees, who were responsible for actual 
expenditure. This practice entailed the risk of mis -utilisation of allotted 
funds. 
(Paragraph 1.10.2.1) 
• In selected six districts, no information/ documentation was available to 
indicate/ corroborate whether beneficiary audits had been conducted by 
the ICs during the period covered under audit (2018-19 to 2022-23). Due 
to non -conduct of such audits , the performance of HCPs from the 
perspective of the beneficiaries remained unassessed. 
(Paragraph 1.11.1) 
• Post Discharge Medical Audit (PDMA)  was not conducted till 
January 2023. During PDMA s conducted between February to 
March 2023, penalties amounting to ₹ 11.78 crore were imposed by the 
SNA on the HCPs, out of which ₹ 8.36 crore only was realised. 
(Paragraph 1.11.2) 
• SNA could not finalize the creation and recruitments of 245 contractual 
posts which were required to ensure hassle free enrolment of 
beneficiaries, empanelment as well as monitoring of hospitals, conduct 
Medical Audit etc. These posts inter alia  included medical officers, 
accountants, data entry operators  etc. This resulted in lack of proper 
monitoring, delay in making payment to HCPs and inadequate Medical 
Audits. 
(Paragraph 1.11.4) 
• Grievances lodged were neither auto populated in the SNA portal, nor 
were these acknowledged by the SNA. No mechanism to track the 
redressal of grievances was seen available in the SNA portal. No 
timeline and escalation mechanism had been prescribed for the 
settlement of grievances. Auto Short Message Service (SMS) alerts were 
not sent to the complainant either at the time of submission of grievance 
or at the time of its disposal. 
(Paragraph 1.11.5) 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
viii 
Recommendations: 
1.1 The State Government may take steps to expeditiously frame 
comprehensive guidelines for the Scheme as well as prepare Annual 
Action Plans to ensure planned / systematic implementation of the 
SS Scheme.  
1.2 The SNA may consider integrating the SS database with other 
databases related to Government schemes to ensure sanctity/ 
authenticity of beneficiaries and put in place a validation control 
mechanism to increase the reliability of data. Clear guidelines need to 
be issued by the  H&FW Department to the SNA to carefully verify 
family details, residency status etc., at the time of enrolment. 
1.3 The State Government may ensure that grading of empanelled HCPs 
is awarded by the SNA after proper inspections duly taking into 
consideration availability of infrastructure, manpower and services at 
the HCPs.  
1.4 The Government may ensure that the SNA undertakes recoveries to be 
effected from ICs, in a timely manner.  
1.5 The Government may ensure that the SNA exercises due diligence in 
monitoring & control over TPAs to ensure that the latter deliver 
services to beneficiaries as per the Scheme objectives and in line with 
the terms and conditions of applicable Agreements. 
1.6 The State Government may ensure that the SNA and the district 
authorities carry out periodic inspections and closely monitor HCPs to 
ensure that standards of infrastructure, facilities / amenities and 
personnel in the empanelled hospitals are maintained as per terms and 
conditions of applicable Agreements. 
1.7 Based on the number of beneficiaries projected to be covered under 
the Scheme, the SNA should prepare a realistic budget to ensure fund 
availability and efficient financial management. 
1.8 The State Government may consider introducing appropriate 
mechanism to ensure that funds are utilised only for sanctioned 
purposes and UCs are submitted strictly as per the extant Financial 
Rules. 
1.9 The State Nodal Agency may ensure that PDMAs are regularly 
conducted by the Medical Audit team and based on results of this, 
required action is taken by the concerned authorities. 
1.10 The State Government may expedite creation of required posts and 
subsequent process of recruitment/ posting of personnel at the district 
level for ensuring smooth implementation of the Scheme. 
Chapter 2: Individual Paragraph of Compliance Audit on Availability of 
an inclusive and accessible environment in Educational Institutions for 
Persons with Disabilities/ Children with Special Needs 
The Constitution of India promulgates equality, freedom, justice and dignity for 
all individuals and mandates an inclusive society for all, including Persons with 
Disabilities (PwDs), with the right to education, work and public assistance for 

Executive Summary 
 
ix 
people affected by disability. The legal enactments framed by the Central and 
the State Government, in adherence to the Constitutional requirement, aim to 
ensure equal access to education, employment, healthcare, and other essential 
services.  
A Compliance Audit was undertaken to assess whether inclusive and accessible 
educational opportunities were ensured by the State Government / local 
authorities to children/ persons suffering from disabilities. 
Significant audit observations that emerged from the audit were as follows: 
• Three to nineteen per cent of identified Children with Special Needs 
(CwSN), of age group between 6 and 18 years, remained deprived of 
regular education during the period from 2015-16 to 2022-23. 
(Paragraph 2.1.1.1) 
• Against the requirement to set up 6,335 Resource Centres/ Rooms in the 
State, at the level of Gram Panchayats (GPs) & wards, District Education 
Officers could construct only 1,799  Resource Centres/ Rooms  upto 
March 2024, representing slow progress in the provision of this facility 
to CwSN. 
(Paragraph 2.1.1.2) 
• As per the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) 
Act, 2009, Pupil Teacher Ratio (PTR) for special teachers was stipulated 
as 10:1 and 15:1 for primary level and Upper Primary level respectively. 
However, against  1,35,796 CwSN enrolled in 35,658 Schools of the 
State, the number of Special Educators available was 1,112  only. This 
resulted in a shortage of 7,941 Special Educators in the State. 
Consequently, ratio between availability of Special Educators and 
CwSN ranged between 1:101 and 1:122, during the period 2015 to 2023. 
(Paragraph 2.1.1.3) 
• During the period 2015 -23, as against a training target of 2,45,479 
Teachers/ Special Educators over three courses, only 1,64,545 could be 
trained, leading to a shortfall of 33 per cent. Again, during 2020-21 to 
2022-23 no training was imparted to the 384 existing teachers of the 70 
Government sponsored special schools. 
(Paragraph 2.1.1.4) 
• Distribution of Braille textbooks, during the period from 2015 -16 to 
2022-23 was not in accordance with the actual number of visually 
impaired CwSN. As a result, a total of 5,652 such students (21 per cent) 
were deprived of Braill e textbooks. Further, free text books with large 
prints were also to be provided to C wSN with low -vision. However, 
against 1,30,312 large print textbooks required to be distributed during 
the period from 2015 -16 to 2022 -23, it was noted that 
37,998 (29 per cent) large print textbooks could not be distributed.   
(Paragraphs 2.1.1.5 and 2.1.1.6) 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
x 
• Accessibility for PwDs  in Government Polytechnics and Industrial
Training Institutes (ITIs)  in the State was not ensured. This not only
impacted the objective of achieving universal accessibility for PwDs but
also deprived them of the opportunity to lead their lives with full dignity
and freedom, in a barrier free environment.
(Paragraph 2.2.1.1) 
• Infrastructure like ramps, ramp with handrails for barrier free access and
suitable toilets for CwSN could not be developed in 4,083 ( 6 per cent),
43,313 (68 per cent) and 43,778 (69 per cent) schools respectively in the
State. As of March 2023, out of 70 Sponsored Special Schools, it was
observed that ramp w ith handrails for barrier  free access and suitable
toilets for C wSN were not available in 17 and 32 Sponsored Special
Schools respectively.
(Paragraph 2.2.1.2) 

Chapter 1          
Performance Audit on 
Swasthya Sathi Scheme 

 
 
1 
Chapter 1: Performance Audit on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
 
HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
 
 Performance Audit on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
 
Snapshot 
The Government of West Bengal (GoWB ) rolled out (February 2017) a 
comprehensive group health insurance scheme called the “Swasthya Sathi” for 
providing protection to beneficiaries from financially debilitating effects of 
illnesses. The scheme was i mplemented by the Health and Family Welfare 
(H&FW) Department, GoWB. To implement the S cheme, the Swasthya Sathi 
Samiti (SS Samiti), a registered Society, was set up by the GoWB to act as the 
State Nodal Agency (SNA).  
The cover age of beneficiaries under the S cheme was gradually increased in 
stages, initially covering only volunteers and other contractual workers and then 
expanding to universal coverage for all permanent residents of the State (except 
those already covered by any other Government health insuran ce/ assurance 
scheme). The mode of coverage also underwent changes, where it was initially 
implemented through a hybrid mode (both insurance and assurance) but was 
subsequently amended to assurance mode only.  
Under the hybrid mode, Insurance Companies (ICs) were responsible for claim 
management of up to ₹ 1.50 lakh per family, per annum under the insurance 
mode, while the SNA was responsible for processing, as well as settling all 
claims beyond ₹ 1.50 lakh and up to ₹ 5.00 lakh under the assurance mode. 
Under the current approach, Third Party Administrators (TPAs) / 
Implementation Support Agencies (ISAs) have been engaged for processing and 
settlement of claims.  
This Performance Audit (PA) of the Swasthya Sathi Scheme (SS Scheme) was 
taken up to cover the period from 2018 -19 to 2022 -23 wherein an amount of 
` 6,882.06 crore was expended under the Scheme.  
Key Audit Findings 
Neither any comprehensive guidelines nor any Annual Action Plans for  
achieving the programme objectives were prepared by the SNA, as of July 2024.  
(Paragraph 1.8.1.1) 
The number of families enrolled under the S cheme (as of March 2023) was 
around ten per cent higher than the number of families holding Ration Cards in 
the State, as per the Public Distribution System (PDS) records (of August 2023). 
Consequently, the risk of benefits of the Scheme getting passed on to ineligible 
beneficiaries, in deviation of norms, could not be ruled out.  
{Paragraph 1.8.1.2 (i)} 
 
There were 27 Government Super Speciality Hospitals (SSHs) empanelled 
under the SS Scheme in the State, however none of them had been empanelled 
as Grade-A under the Scheme. Owing to lower grading (and consequently lower 
package rates), ICs paid lesser amo unt for treatments/ medical procedures in 
these super speciality hospitals, as part of the claim settlement, thus impacting 
the revenue flow of these hospitals.  
Paragraph 1.8.1.3 (i) 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
2 
Test check of records of 50 private empa nelled hospitals showed that 
31 hospitals were improperly allowed higher grading vis-à-vis available 
infrastructure, services being offered, sanctioned bed strength of hospitals etc. 
Due to improper gradation, these Health Care Providers (HCPs) though entitled 
to lower package rates as per applicable  norms of the SS Scheme were being 
paid at higher rates. Consequently such anomalies resulted in excess payment 
of ₹ 14.48 crore to these HCPs. 
Paragraph 1.8.1.3 (ii) 
As against 3,038 HCPs to be empanelled to service 2.43 crore beneficiary 
families, only 2,605 HCPs were empanelled for the State as a whole, limiting 
the choice of hospitals and impacting service delivery for enrolled beneficiaries. 
{Paragraph 1.8.1.4 (i)} 
Despite the existence of penal provisions in the Agreements, the SNA did not 
recover penalty of ₹ 31.33 crore from three ICs for delayed settlement of claims. 
{Paragraph 1.8.1.5 (iii)} 
There was excess expenditure of ₹ 46.97 crore on enrolment and distribution of 
smart cards to 1.65 crore families by TPAs/ ISAs. 
(Paragraph 1.8.1.6) 
Budgetary support for implementing the Scheme was not adequate, due to 
which the SNA had to pay ₹ 10.85 crore as interest on loans  (₹ 721.95 crore) 
availed to implement the Scheme during 2020 -22. Non -implementation of 
Ayushman Bharat – Swasthya Sathi (AB-SS) deprived the State’s population 
especially migrant ones (who move to other States in India) of the benefit of 
accessing cashless health care services in a network of hospitals across the 
country. Thereby, GoWB could not avail the central funding to supplement the 
State’s expenditure on the Swasthya Sathi Scheme and residents of the State 
were denied benefits under AB-SS. 
(Paragraphs 1.9.2 and 1.9.3) 
Audit noted that six test -checked districts furnished Utilisation Certificates 
(UCs) amounting to ₹  15.43 crore to the SNA  without obtaining UCs from 
sub-allottees, who were responsible for actual expenditure . This practice 
entailed the risk of mis-utilisation of allotted funds. 
(Paragraph 1.10.2.1) 
Post Discharge Medical Audit (PDMA) was not conducted till January 2023. 
During PDMA s conducted between February to March 2023, penalties 
amounting to ₹ 11.78 crore were imposed by the SNA on the HCPs, out of which 
₹ 8.36 crore only was realised. 
(Paragraph 1.11.2) 
SNA could not finalize the creation and recruitments of 245 contractual posts 
which were required to ensure hassle free enrolment of beneficiaries, 
empanelment as well as monitoring of hospitals, conduct Medical Audit etc. 
These posts inter alia  included Medical Officers, Accountants, Data Entry 
Operators etc. This resulted in lack of proper monitoring, delay in making 
payment to HCPs and inadequate Medical Audits. 
(Paragraph 1.11.4) 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
3 
Grievances lodged were neither auto populated in the SNA portal, nor were 
these acknowledged by the SNA. No mechanism to track the redressal of 
grievances was seen available in the SNA portal. No timeline and escalation 
mechanism had been prescribed for the settlement of grievances. Auto Short 
Message Service ( SMS) alerts were not sent to the complainant either at the 
time of submission of grievance or at the time of its disposal. 
(Paragraph 1.11.5) 
1.1 Introduction 
1.1.1 Inception of the Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
The Government of West Bengal (GoWB) decided (February 2016) to 
implement a comprehensive Group Health Insurance Scheme namely 
“Swasthya Sathi  (SS)”. The Scheme was officially launched by the State 
Government in December 2016 and rolled out in February 2017. The Health 
and Family (H&FW) Department, GoWB was responsible for implementing the 
Swasthya Sathi Scheme in the State. 
To implement the SS S cheme, the Swasthya Sathi Samiti 1  (SS Samiti), a 
registered Society under the West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961 was 
set up to act as the State Nodal Agency (SNA). The SS Samiti was under the 
administrative control of the H&FW Department, GoWB.  
1.1.1.1 Categories of beneficiaries covered 
The categories of beneficiaries covered under the Scheme as well as the mode 
of implementation, gradually evolved as follows: 
➢ When the Scheme was rolled out, it was to cater to volunteers / contractual
workers2 in the State, and their families with the aim of protecting them
from financially debilitating effects of illnesses. During this initial phase,
the Scheme was implemented through a Hybrid Mode explained below:
o Between the period February 2017 to July 2022, a mix of insurance and
assurance modes, i.e. a ‘Hybrid Mode’ was followed for the Scheme.
• Insurance mode : Whereby Insurance Companies (ICs), were
engaged to provide secondary and tertiary 3 care of up to ₹  1.50 lakh
per annum per family. Under this mode, ICs paid the costs of
treatment of patients directly to the hospitals and premiums on behalf
of beneficiaries were paid to ICs by the Government.
• Assurance mode:  Coverage of above ₹  1.50 lakh and up to
₹ 5.00 lakhs per annum per family  was provided by the H&FW
Department itself. Under the assurance mode, the Government paid
1 Governing Body of the Swasthya Sathi Samiti is headed by the Chief Secretary to the GoWB (Chairman) 
with the Secretary & ex-officio State Nodal Officer (SS), H&FW Department, GoWB as Secretary. The 
Executive Committee is headed by the Pr. Secretary (Chairman) with the Secretary & ex -officio State 
Nodal Officer (SS), H&FW Department, GoWB as Secretary. 
2 Volunteers and other workers engaged in various development programme of the Government - members 
of Self-Help Groups, Civic Police/ Green Police/ Civic Defence/ Village Police Volunteers, Disaster 
Management workers, Home Guard/ National Volunteer Force (NVF), Accredited Social Health Activist 
(ASHA) workers, Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) workers and other contractual/ casual/ 
daily rated workers. 
3 As per Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS), secondary care facilities provide specialized essential 
care including operative services, emergency and critical care, blood transfusion services etc., whereas 
tertiary care requires highly specialized equipme nt and expertise (for instance, specialized care in a 
hospital setting such as renal dialysis or heart surgery). 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
4 
costs of treatment to private hospitals, after the bills were cleared by 
Third Party Administrators (TPAs4), engaged by the Government. 
➢ In September 2018, the Government decided to include under the Swasthya
Sathi Scheme (SS Scheme), beneficiary families covered under the
erstwhile Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 5  (RSBY). Beneficiaries
selected on the basis of the deprivation index of the Socio Economic and
Caste Census (SECC) 2011 6 were also covered  under the Scheme. It was
decided to implement this part of the scheme through Assurance Mode and
to do away with the services of ICs.  Enrolment as well as claim
management (for upto ₹  5.00 lakh per annum per family for secondary /
tertiary care) for these new beneficiaries was to be done directly by the
H&FW Department, with the help of TPAs for bill settlement.
➢ Coverage of the Scheme was extended further in December 2020 to make
it a Universal Health Protection Scheme for all permanent residents7 of the
State. It was decided that the additional beneficiaries (brought under the
scheme from December 2020 onwards) would also be covered under the
Assurance mode ( i.e., providing of secondary and tertiary care of upto
₹ 5.00 lakh per annum per family without engaging ICs) along with RSBY
and SECC beneficiaries.
➢ The entire Scheme (i.e., beneficiaries of all categories including volunteers/
contractual workers as discussed ibid) was shifted to the Assurance mode
on 16 July 2022.
1.1.1.2 Enrolment and claim management procedure 
Enrolment and claim management procedure followed under the SS Scheme 
was as described below: 
Enrolment procedure: (i) In the initial phase when the Scheme was limited to 
contractual workers and volunteers, eligible lists of these employees/ volunteers 
were provided by the concerned Departments to ICs and accordingly the 
selected ICs carried out their enrolment at camps/ centres set up for the purpose. 
(ii) Subsequently, RSBY and SECC beneficiaries were identified from the list
provided by Government of India ( GoI) and enrolled by selected TPAs at
camps/ centres set up for the purpose.
4 Third Party Administrator (TPA)  means a Company registered with the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority (IRDA) and engaged for a fee for providing health services.  
5 Health Insurance Scheme launched (April 2008) by Government of India (GoI) for the workers in the 
unorganized sector to provide health insurance cover to Below Poverty Line (BPL) families. The 
premium amount was shared by Centre and the States in 60:40 ratio. 
6 SECC 2011 had considered seven deprivation indicators for inclusion in the list of households below the 
poverty level. Out of which, rural families under six categories had been recognised under SS Scheme 
viz. SECC D1 (Only one room with kacha walls and ka cha roof), SECC D2 (No adult member between 
age 16 to 59), SECC D3 (Female headed households with no adult male member between age 16 to 59), 
SECC D4 (Disabled member and no able -bodied adult member), SECC D5 {Scheduled Caste ( SC)/ 
Scheduled Tribe ( ST) households} and SECC D7 (Landless households deriving major part of their 
income from manual casual labour). Further, families living in Municipal areas and engaged in any 
occupational job which is hazardous, as per SECC 2011, were also recognised under SS Scheme. 
7 Except those covered by any Health Insurance/ Assurance Scheme/ coverage by any Government or 
Government Organisation or Parastatal or Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) etc., under any health 
protection scheme. 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
 
5 
(iii) As part of universalization of the Scheme in 2020, all permanent residents 
of the State, except those covered by any Health Insurance or Assurance Scheme 
of any Government or Government Organisations, Parastatals / Public Sector 
Undertakings etc., were to be enrolled by TPAs at camps/ centres set up for the 
purpose. 
(iv) Smart Cards were to be provided to all beneficiaries after completion of the 
enrolment process. 
Claim Management Procedure: The Swasthya Sathi Scheme is managed via a 
paperless Information Technology (IT) platform since its inception. All claims 
are managed/ monitored through an IT based Transaction Management System 
(TMS). The TMS is a dedicated online portal for claim management and 
monitoring of the SS Scheme. All claims along with supporting documents were 
to be submitted by Health Care Providers (HCPs)  to this IT platform and 
processed through TMS . The claim management procedure under the 
SS Scheme involved ‘Hospitalisation (and its pre-authorisation)’ and ‘treatment 
& claim management’, as detailed below: 
A. Hospitalization and Pre-authorisation: 
A beneficiary requiring treatment under the Scheme could get admitted to any 
of the empanelled hospitals, but the eligibility of the said beneficiary to receive 
treatment would be verified with reference to the SS Scheme Smart card. 
Further, treatment under the SS Scheme was also subject to pre -authorisation 
approval by ICs / TPAs. Under the pre -authorisation process, the HCP would 
block the relevant treatment package for the patient and upload relevant 
prescriptions/ investigation reports/ documents on TMS. All these documents/ 
reports were subject to verification/ ratification of ICs/ TPAs. Once this process 
was complete, the admission of the patient was authorised by the ICs/ TPAs and 
required treatment provided. The entire process was routed through the TMS 
portal. 
B. Treatment and Claim settlement: 
After completion of treatment, the patient was to be discharged from the HCP 
with medicines for five days. Further, a transport allowance was to be given to 
the patient by the HCP and patient feedback was to be taken.  
All supporting documents relating to claims had to be filed by HCPs within 
seven days from the date of discharge of the insured person. These claims were 
to be then settled / paid by ICs within one month of claims being preferred by 
the HCPs. TPAs were to settle / process the claims of HCPs and forward them 
to SNA within 15 days of these being preferred by HCPs, to enable the State 
Government to make payment to HCPs. The entire processing of claims was 
done through the TMS (except for release of payment by ICs/ State Government 
to HCPs, as discussed in paragraph 1.4). 
1.1.1.3  Coverage of beneficiaries 
As of March 2023, the number of families enrolled under the SS Scheme was 
2.43 crore, covering 8.62 crore beneficiaries. Numbe r of empanelled HCPs 
under the S cheme, as of March 2 023, stood at 2,605 (Government: 520  and 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
6 
Private: 2,085). Further, 1,948 packages8 were approved for the Scheme by the 
State.   
Table 1.1: Number of families enrolled and empanelled HCPs under the 
Scheme  
Year No. of Beneficiary families enrolled 
(progressive figures) 
No. of empanelled HCPs 
(progressive figures) 
2016-17 34,49,697 635 
2017-18 45,62,473 896 
2018-19 53,12,654 1,307 
2019-20 1,00,18,581 1,537 
2020-21 1,85,98,621 2,082 
2021-22 2,34,67,586 2,395 
2022-23 2,43,06,508 2,605 
Source: Document received from the SNA 
1.2 Salient features of the Scheme 
• Paperless, cashless, Smart Card 9  based Scheme under which all 
pre-existing diseases were covered. The SS Scheme provided basic health 
cover for secondary and tertiary care up to ₹ 5.00 lakh per annum per 
family.  
• The unit of enrolment under the SS Scheme was the family. There was no 
cap on the family size and parents from both spouses were included. All 
dependent persons in the family were also covered.  
• The entire premium/ cost of treatment was borne by the State Government 
and no contribution from the beneficiary was required. 
• A Swasthya Sathi Smart Card was provided to each family on the day of 
enrolment. Smart Card captured all the details of family members, 
photographs, biometric, address, mobile number, SECC ID. As per norms, 
only one Swasthya Sathi  card was to be issued to every fam ily, to the 
eldest female member of the family.  
1.3 Organisational set up   
As discussed in paragraph 1. 1.1, the SS Scheme was implemented by the 
H&FW Department through the SS Samiti, which acted as SNA. Further, a State 
Level Implementation Committee (SLIC), under the chairmanship of the Chief 
Secretary, was constituted (March 2016) to oversee the implementation of the 
Scheme.  
 
8 Empanelled Hospitals provided free Health Care Services and for providing such services a specific rate 
for specific medical procedure was fixed (termed as “Package”) by the Package Selection Committee 
(formed in June 2016) under the Authority of the H&FW Department.  
Each package comprises Registration Charges; ‘consultation fees of Surgeons/ Anaesthetists / Medical 
Practitioners’, cost of medicines/ surgical equipment/ diagnostic tests, etc., for Out -patient 
consultations; for In-patients, Bed charges, Nursing charges, cost of diet given to patients, ‘expenses 
incurred for consultations, diagnostic tests and blood/ medicines up to one day before the admission of 
the patient’ and ‘cost of diagnostic tests and medicines up to five days of the discharge from the hospital 
for the same ailment/ surgery’.  
9 Smart Card is for the purpose of identification of each beneficiary under the SS Scheme. The beneficiary 
will produce this card at the time of admission for the purpose of identification and medical treatment. 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
 
7 
At the district level, a District Nodal Agency (DNA), functioning under the 
chairmanship of the District Magistrate was responsible for Scheme 
implementation and monitoring of activities under it. 
The DNA inter-alia comprised a team of one officer of the rank of Additional 
District Magistrate and one Deputy Magistrate, who acted as the District Key 
Manager (DKM), and District Nodal Officer (DNO), respectively. 
The DKM was responsible for implementation of the Scheme including 
supervision and monitoring at the district level. The District Nodal Officer 
looked after the day-to-day implementation of the Scheme with the help of two 
District Coordinators10 deployed by the SNA. Besides this, the Chief Medical 
Officer of Health (CMOH) of the concerned district also handled some aspects11 
pertaining to the Scheme’s implementation.  
1.4 Engagement of ICs & TPAs and Payments made therein 
Engagement of ICs: Under the Insurance mode , responsibility of claim 
management ( i.e. processing, checking and settlement of claims) of up to 
₹ 1.50 lakh per family per annum (on floater basis 12) rested with ICs. Further, 
under the Hybrid mode, ICs were responsible for enrolment of beneficiaries, for 
which the SNA paid an enrolment cost of ` 25/ 24 per beneficiary family to the 
concerned ICs.  
During 2018-19 to 2022-23 (period of review) five ICs were engaged from time 
to time (Appendix 1.1). These companies were engaged by the SNA via open 
tendering and separate agreements were entered13 into with the selected ICs by 
the SNA. 
ICs released payment to HCPs through bank accounts { through National 
Electronic Funds Transfer ( NEFT)/ Real-Time Gross Settlement ( RTGS) 
mechanism} and uploaded the Unique Transaction References (UTRs-payment 
reference) in the TMS. Based on uploaded UTRs, payment to ICs were adjusted 
by the Government against premiums released to them. 
Engagement of TPAs: Under the Assurance mode, SNA was responsible for 
processing as well as settling all claims. Under the Hybrid mode, SNA was 
responsible for processing as well as settling claims beyond ₹ 1.50 lakh and up 
to ₹ 5.00 lakh per family per annum (on floater basis). For management of 
claims which were to be paid by the SNA, the latter engaged  IRDA enlisted 
TPAs (against payable fees) as Implementation Support Agency (ISA) through 
open tendering.   
TPAs were responsible for verifying the claims submitted by HCPs based on 
medical documents uploaded in the TMS. If the claim was found admissible it 
was approved by the TPA. Claims that were found inadmissible were rejected 
by the TPA and such rejection a long with the cause was reflected in the TMS 
for information of the concerned HCPs. Besides claim management, under the 
Assurance mode, TPAs were also responsible for enrolment of beneficiaries. 
 
10 One Hospital Coordinator and one IT Coordinator. 
11 Empanelment of HCPs, Post Discharge Medical Audit (PDMA) & surveillance etc. 
12 Entire sum insured is meant for all the members (a particular amount is not fixed for any member). So, 
if one family member makes a claim, the cover reduces for the rest by that amount. 
13 District-wise rates from the ICs were sought for. ICs were selected on the basis of lowest quoted rate. 
Initial agreement was executed for around one year. It was subsequently renewed in respect of two ICs. 
In respect of one IC (Iffco Tokio General Insurance) the agreement was not renewed after 31.12.2019.  

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
8 
Final payments against the approved claims were made by the SNA directly to 
the bank accounts of concerned HCPs. After completion of payment, payment 
details were shared by the SNA with the TPA concerned and the latter then 
uploaded the UTRs (payment reference) in the TMS.  
During the period covered under review (2018 -19 to 2022 -23) two TPAs viz. 
MD India Health Insurance Private Ltd. and Heritage Health Insurance Private 
Ltd. were selected for management of claims under the Hybrid mode. Further, 
Medi Assist Insurance Private Ltd. and Paramount Health Services and 
Insurance Private Ltd. were also selected for claim management as well as 
enrolment under the Assurance mode. Details are in Appendix 1.1. 
1.5 Audit objectives 
Audit objectives were to assess whether 
• An efficient and effective system had been developed to ensure
implementation of the Scheme;
• Financial resources were adequate, and funds were provided in a timely
manner to ensure proper implementation of the Scheme;
• Funds were utilized appropriately; and
• Internal control mechanism, monitoring and supervision were adequate
and effective.
1.6 Audit criteria
The performance of the Scheme was assessed against the criteria drawn from 
the following:  
• West Bengal Financial Rules;
• West Bengal Clinical Establishment Act, 2017 ( WBCE Act) and Rules
thereunder;
• Agreements14 executed by the SNA with ICs and TPAs; and
• Orders, rules, notifications, circulars, instructions issued by GoI and
State Government from time to time in this regard.
1.7 Audit coverage and methodology
Performance of the Swasthya Sathi Scheme during the years 2018-19 to 2022-23 
was reviewed between May 2023 and Februar y 2024. During the Performance 
Audit (PA), records of the H&FW Depa rtment (SS Samiti/ SNA) and 
six DNOs15, including the concerned CMO sH, along with 65 private HCPs 16 
were test -checked (Appendix 1.2). Of the six districts, five districts were 
selected through simple random sampling while Birbhum district was selected 
on judgmental basis. Further, a beneficiary survey 17  of patients was also 
conducted to assess the efficacy of services received under the Scheme.  
An Entry Conference was held on 21 August 2023 with the Secretary of the 
H&FW Department, wherein audit objectives, coverage and methodology were 
14  Scheme norms/ features, terms & conditions with Appendices mentioned in the  Notice Inviting 
Tender (NIT) and Agreement 
15 District Nodal Officers -Swasthya Sathi under DKM of the respective DM office. Districts covered 
included Birbhum, Hooghly, North 24 Parganas, Purba Medinipur, Jalpaiguri and Murshidabad 
16 In addition, five public HCPs were also test-checked 
17 399 in-patients were surveyed during the visits to the HCPs 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
 
9 
explained. An Exit conference was also held (November 2024) to discuss the 
audit findings. Replies of the SS Samiti received in July 2024 and that of the 
H&FW Department received in December 2024, have been suitably 
incorporated in the Report. 
Audit Observations 
  
1.8 Implementation of the Scheme 
As explained above, the implementation of the SS Scheme involved many 
stakeholders since it was being implemented through ICs, TPAs, HCPs and the 
H&FW Department & the SNA. Therefore, to assess the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the implementation process, audit scrutinized scheme records 
related to multiple stakeholders. Audit findings based on this examination are 
as follows:  
1.8.1 Implementation of the SS Scheme: The performance of the SNA 
 
1.8.1.1 Non-preparation of Annual Action Plans and Guidelines 
The Swasthya Sathi Samiti  or the SNA was registered as a Society under the 
West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961 in  November 2016. In terms of 
clause 3.2 of the Memorandum of Association (MoA) of the Samiti read with 
clause 6.5.2 (ix) of its Rules & Regulation, the Samiti was to prepare Annual 
Action Plans (AAPs) for the SS scheme, to ensure systematic and decentralized 
planning of programme activities to attain the objectives.  
However, it was seen that no such AAPs were prepared by the SNA during the 
period covered under audit to ensure that there was a systematic, planned 
approach towards implementing the Scheme.  
In reply, the SNA stated ( July 2023) that the AAP was published in the 
administrative calendar of the H&FW Department. However, this was not found 
acceptable by Audit since it was noted that the administrative calendar 
contained only the schedule of monitoring  and review meetings for resolving 
various issues and did not have any mention of the AAPs. SNA in its updated 
reply (July 2024) stated that AAPs would henceforth be prepared as required 
under the MoA of the SS Samiti. 
Further, in terms of Clause 3.2 of the MoA, the Samiti or SNA was to plan 
strategies and lay down detailed guidelines for achieving programme objectives 
within the overall broad policy and framework established by the State 
Government. However, it was noted that despite lapse of more than six years 
since the inception of the Scheme (in February 2017), no comprehensive 
guidelines for achieving programme objectives of the SS Scheme were prepared 
by the Samiti as of July 2024. All Scheme related features, such as basic 
information, terms and conditions, implementation structures etc., were found 
available in a scattered manner across various documents such as NITs, 
Agreements, Notification, note -sheets, minutes of meetings and the official 
portal of the Scheme18.  
 
18 https://swasthyasathi.gov.in/ (also referred to as SNA Portal) 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
10 
While accepting the observation, the SNA stated (July 2024) that preparation of 
comprehensive guidelines for the Scheme was underway. 
Recommendation:  
1.1. The State Government may take steps to expeditiously frame 
comprehensive guidelines for the Scheme as well as prepare Annual 
Action Plans to ensure planned/ systematic implementation of the 
SS Scheme. 
1.8.1.2 Enrolment of beneficiaries under the Scheme 
 
(i) Enrolment under the Scheme 
In December 2020, the SS Scheme was extended as a Universal Health 
Protection Scheme for all permanent residents of the State 19. Prior to this 
universalization, only pre -identified and approved categories of beneficiaries 
(like contractual workers, volunteers, RSBY, categories of SECC beneficiaries 
etc.) were covered under the Scheme. These categories of beneficiaries were 
either already identified by other Departments 20 or were enrolled under other 
schemes 21 . However, after expansion & universalization, identification of 
beneficiaries under the SS Scheme per se became vital, especially to exclude 
people who were not permanent residents of West Bengal and those covered 
under other Government Health Insurance / Assurance Schemes (who were to 
be excluded from the Scheme).  
Audit observed that at the time of enrolment no steps were taken by the SNA to 
confirm whether the beneficiary was - (a) a permanent resident of the State; or 
(b) not covered under any other Health Insurance / Assurance schemes. The 
system of verifying documents in support of permanent residence was not in 
vogue. Only a declaration was taken at the time of application that members of 
the family were not covered under any other Government sponsored Health 
Insurance/ Assurance Scheme and that they were not receiving any medical 
allowance from the Government. Besides this, no other measures were taken by 
the H&FW Department/ SNA to verify whether the applicant was already 
covered by any other Health Scheme like the West Bengal Health Scheme 22 
(WBHS), Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS), Employees’ State 
Insurance (ESI) scheme etc., prior to enrolment. 
It is pertinent to mention here that health schemes like WBHS and ESI were 
implemented by the Finance Department and Labour Department of GoWB, 
respectively. As these schemes captured Aadhaar numbers, the competent 
authority could have initiated de -duplication steps (using Aadhaar as primary 
key) prior to enrolling a beneficiary under the SS Scheme. 
As a result in June 2021, SNA realised  that in some districts like Bankura, 
Malda, Murshidabad and Birbhum, number of cards issued was more than that 
 
19 Except those covered by any Government  health insurance/ assurance scheme/ coverage by any 
Government/ Government Organizations, Parastatals/ PSUs etc. 
20 For contractual employees etc. 
21 RSBY and SECC beneficiaries 
22 The WBHS is meant for regulating the medical benefits for the State Government employees and their 
family members, with a view to providing better medical facilities to the employees and their family 
members 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
 
11 
of the projected number of families 23. Accordingly, it was decided that the 
district authority should conduct data analysis. However, the result of such 
analysis was not on record.  
Audit attempted to compare the SS enrolment numbers for the State, with the 
figures of families holding Ration Cards as per the Public Distribution System 
(PDS) records. Based on this comparison, the following was noted (as detailed 
in Table 1.2 below): 
Table 1.2: State level position of families enrolled under the SS Scheme 
vis-à-vis families holding Ration Cards  
Families enrolled in 
Swasthya Sathi (as of 
March 2023) 
Families holding Ration Cards 
in West Bengal (as of 
August 2023) 
Difference 
2,43,06,508 2,21,27,063 21,79,445 
Source: a) Ration card data sourced from wbpds.wb.gov.in (p ortal of Food & Supplies (F&S) 
Department, GoWB) & b) Enrolled data based on document received from the SNA. 
As seen from the table above, the number of fa milies enrolled under the 
SS Scheme was much higher (around 10 per cent) than the number of families 
holding Ration Cards in West Bengal. Consequently, the risk of benefits of the 
Scheme getting passed on to ineligible beneficiaries, in deviation of norms, 
could not be ruled out. 
As per the SS Scheme norms, only one Swasthya Sathi card is to be issued in 
every ‘Family’, to the eldest female member of the family. However, at the time 
of enrolment of beneficiaries, the modalities followed by the SNA / District 
Authorities in ensuring due compliance of this aspect, remained unclear to 
Audit, as in this regard, no documentation was found on record.  
Further, discrepancies between the number of  families enrolled under the 
SS Scheme and those possessing ration cards were also noticed in test-checked 
districts, as detailed below. 
Table 1.3: District-wise details of enrolment in the test-checked districts 
Name of 
district 
Families enrolled in 
Swasthya Sathi 
(as of March 2023) 
Families holding Ration cards 
(number) 
Difference 
(percentage) 
Birbhum 10,94,469 9,34,987 (as of August 2023) 1,59,482 (17) 
Hooghly 14,89,660 13,87,934 (as of August 2023) 1,01,726 (7) 
Purba 
Medinipur 
14,89,914 12,74,397 (as of August 2023) 2,15,517 (17) 
Jalpaiguri 4,51,913 5,41,672 (as of August 2023) -89,759* 
North 24 
Parganas 
23,65,320 23,00,733 (as of December 
2023) 
64,587 (3) 
Murshidabad 21,07,139 (as of January 
2024) 
16,85,347 (as of January 2024) 4,21,792 (25) 
Source: Ration card data as obtained from wbpds.wb.gov.in portal of F&S Department, GoWB 
compared with data provided by concerned district DNO -SS office * percentage has not been 
calculated since families enrolled in SS Scheme is lower than those holding ration cards  
 
23 Projection was made by doing extrapolation of the 2011 Census. 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
12 
From Table 1.3 above, it can be seen that in five 24 out of six test -checked 
districts the number of families enrolled under the Scheme was higher than the 
number of families holding Ration cards and this difference was higher than the 
State average (i.e. 10 per cent) in three districts25. 
The SNA (July 2024) accepted the fact and stated this could be due to decadal 
growth rate and splitting of families. It also informed that mapping of all 
members through Aadhaar numbers was ongoing and work of data sanitisation 
had been initiated & would be further strengthened to delete duplicate members 
from the SS database. 
The reply of the Government shows that the H&FW Department itself is not 
clear about the reasons behind the difference and that this is an issue which 
requires detailed examination, especially in view of significant percentage of 
higher enrolment numbers in  districts like Murshidabad (25  per cent), 
Purba Medinipur (17 per cent), Birbhum (17 per cent) etc.  
Thus, in absence of adequate control measures , as mentioned ibid, for 
elimination of ineligible beneficiaries  at the time of enrolment, there is an 
inherent risk that a family which is not a permanent resident of the State, is 
covered under some other health scheme and may be benefitting from this 
Scheme, and may also be in possession of more than one SS Card, with the 
scope to avail additional cover of ` 5.00 lakh under the S cheme, against each 
card. 
Recommendation: 
1.2. The SNA may consider integrating the SS database with other 
databases related to Government schemes to ensure sanctity/ 
authenticity of beneficiaries and put in place a validation control 
mechanism to increase the reliability of data. Clear guidelines need to 
be issued by the H&FW Department to the SNA to carefully verify 
family details, residency status etc., at the time of enrolment. 
(ii) Status of verification of single member family
The SS Scheme norms define a family to be covered under the Sc heme as the 
beneficiary herself/ himself, spouse of the eligible beneficiary, children of the 
beneficiary and parents of both the spouses; and any other dependent member 
with physical disabilities not covered normally as per the definition of family in 
SS Scheme. 
As noted in the previous para, in June 2021 the SNA realised that the number 
of Swasthya Sathi cards issued had become more than the number of projected 
families. The SNA therefore requested (October 2021) all district authorities to 
undertake a physical verification of cards with only a ‘single member’, so that 
the existing card of this single member could be blocked and his/ her name could 
be added to another card held by other family member /s ( considering the 
definition of family specified for that purpose).  
In this regard, scrutiny of performance of district authorities of six test-checked 
districts revealed the following position: 
24 Except Jalpaiguri 
25 Birbhum, Purba Medinipur and Murshidabad 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
13 
Table 1.4: District-wise verification status of single member family 
Name of the 
test-checked 
district 
Number of single 
member families 
in respect of 
whom physical 
verification was to 
be conducted 
Number of single 
member families in 
respect of whom 
physical verification 
was conducted 
Number of single 
member families 
found ineligible 
Number of cards 
blocked 
(A) (B) (C = percentage of 
Col. B) 
(D = percentage of 
Col. C) 
(E = percentage 
of Col. D) 
Birbhum 36,655 12,400 (34 per cent) 6,286 (51 per cent) 48 (0.76 per cent) 
Hooghly 76,763 205 (0.27 per cent) 124 (60 per cent) 124 (100 per cent) 
Purba 
Medinipur 
71,227 8 (0.01 per cent) 0 0 
Jalpaiguri 7,826 6,692 (86 per cent) 5,062 (76 per cent) 818 (16.16 
per cent) 
North 24 
Parganas 
79,891 36,601 (46 per cent) Information not provided 
Murshidabad 85,309 No records/ data provided 
Total 3,57,671 55,906 (15.63 per cent) 11,472 (20.52 per cent) 990 (8.63 per cent) 
Source: Information, document provided from the SNA and respective District offices  
From the foregoing Table 1.4, it can be seen that the status of physical 
verification was extremely poor with less than 50 per cent of single member 
families having been verified in four districts. In case of Purba Medinipur, this 
number was as low as 0.01 percentage, while no verification details were 
provided by the district with the largest number of such beneficiaries requiring 
verification (i.e. Murshidabad with 85,309 single member families).  Between 
51 to 76 per cent of verified beneficiaries were found ineligible in three districts 
but only in case of one district (Hooghly) were all ineligible cards blocked by 
the district authorities.  
Thus, despite identification of flaws and lapse of considerable time (since 
October 2021), the district authorities did not take appropriate action to rectify 
this issue, despite issue of specific instructions in this regard by the SNA. 
The SNA in its reply (July 2024) accepted the fact and directed the district 
authorities to expedite the verification process. 
(iii) Aadhaar updation status of SS database
Post universalisation of the scheme in December 2020, SNA decided to capture 
Aadhaar26 numbers in the SS database, especially for the purpose of eradicating 
multiple enrolments of the same beneficiary under the Scheme.  Accordingly, 
the SNA issued instructions to district authorities (October  2021), to collect 
Aadhaar numbers and update the same in the SS website. 
In this regard it was noted that while in four of six test -checked districts, there 
was less than 10 per cent pendency in Aadhaar updation, this pendency was 
significantly high (ranging up to almost 24 per cent) in Murshidabad and 
Jalpaiguri. Details of Aadhaar updation in the six  test-checked districts are as 
follows: 
26 Aadhaar is a 12-digit individual identification number issued by the Unique Identification Authority of 
India on behalf of the GoI. The number serves as a proof of identity and address, anywhere in India. 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
14 
Table 1.5: Status of Aadhaar updation in the test-checked districts 
Name of the 
test-checked 
district 
Total No. of Swasthya Sathi 
members 
Number of members for whom 
Aadhaar updation pending Percentage 
Birbhum 39,72,331 (as of March 2023) 3,66,281 (as of August 2023) 9.22 
Hooghly 51,51,111 (as of March 2023) 4,76,304 (as of August 2023) 9.25 
Purba Medinipur 51,19,640 (as of December 2023) 1,12,363 (as of December 2023) 2.19 
Jalpaiguri 13,10,748 (as of March 2023) 3,09,033 (as of January 2024) 23.58 
North 24 Parganas 81,75,579 (as of March 2023) 4,97,581 (as of January 2024) 6.09 
Murshidabad 75,68,809 (as of December 2023) 11,54,871 (as of December 2023) 15.26 
Source: Information, document provided from the SNA and respective District offices 
Non-completion of the linking process would not only lead to non -compliance 
with Scheme verification protocols, but also impede the intended objective of 
eradicating multiple enrolments of the same beneficiary under the SS scheme. 
Furter, non-linking of Aadh aar details would also limit the tools available to 
cross-check and verify if the beneficiary was availing benefits under any other 
Government Insurance/ Assurance schemes.  
In reply (December 2024) the H&FW Department stated that capturing of 
Aadhaar number was now mandatory and currently 92 per cent of Swasthya 
Sathi beneficiaries were linked with Aadh aar numbers. It was also added that 
District Authorities have been asked to expedite the Aadhaar linking process. 
1.8.1.3 Empanelment and grading of HCPs 
Empanelment of HCPs: For the empanelment process, eligible private HCPs 
had to upload their details online on the SS portal. The HCP would then be 
inspected by the IC for empanelment under the Scheme. From July 2022 
onwards i.e., after the discontinuance of the Insurance mode, the 
recommendation for hospital empanelment was instead made by the Clinical 
Establishment (CE) Licensing  Authority27 of the district. Final decision with 
respect to being empanelled was to be taken by the Swasthya Sathi Hospital 
Empanelment Committee, based on verification and checking of credentials of 
the HCP. All public HCPs providing secondary and tertiary health care services 
were deemed to be empanelled under the SS Scheme.  
Grading of HCPs: A Committee of experts further recommended the gradation 
of hospitals into four categories28, viz. Grade-A, Grade-B, Grade-C and Grade-R 
27 A Clinical Establishment (CE) Licence is the registration of a CE (hospital, nursing home, diagnostic 
centre or single-doctor clinic) by the Government in terms of the WBCE Act 2017. The CE Authority, is 
the CMOH of the district, who provides the licence,  facilitates policy formulation, resource allocation 
and determines standards of treatment. The CE Authority can impose fines for non -compliance of the 
provisions of the Act. The CE Authority visits HCPs and awards grades after verifying availability of 
the Infrastructure and Manpower as uploaded by the HCPs through self-declaration in the SS portal.  
28 Grades of Government hospitals were to be awarded based on the facilities and availability of number 
of beds in the hospitals – (i) All Super/ Multi Speciality Hospital/ Medical College & Hospital are  
categorized as  Grade-A; (ii) District Hospitals, State General Hospitals, Special Hospitals, Sub -
Divisional Hospital (SDH) having Cardiac Care Unit (CCU), Special Newborn Care Unit (SNCU), 
High-end Diagnostic Centres etc., are  categorized as  Grade-B; (iii) All other empanelled hospitals 
(HCPs) having minimum 30 bed strength for inpatients are categorized as Grade-C and (iv) General 
Hospitals having bed strength within the range of 10 to 29 are categorized as Grade-R.  
Grades of private hospitals (HCPs) were to be awarded in the following manner – (i) Other than Super/ 
Multi Speciality Hospitals/ Medical College & Hospitals, National Accreditation Board for Hospitals & 
Healthcare Providers’ (NABH) Accreditation, gradation of Private hospitals were to be awarded based 
on the score obtained by the hospit als in the empanelment inspection. Hospitals that do not fall under 
above categories, which scored 80 per  cent and above as per Selection Criteria are categorized as 
Grade-A; (ii) All other Hospitals which scored at least 60 per cent but below 80 per cent are categorized 
as Grade-B; (iii) Other Hospitals (scoring below 60 per cent) qualified for empanelment are categorized 
as Grade-C and (iv) General Hospitals having bed strength within the range of 10 to 29 are categorized 
as Grade-R. 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
 
15 
as per infrastructure and manpower available in the hospital. It was the 
responsibility of the IC/ TPA to evaluate the HCPs in terms of available medical 
facilities with the recommendation of the CMOH of the concerned district. In 
both Hybrid/ Assurance modes, the Hospital Empanelment Committee at SNA 
took a final decision regarding grading. Moreover, based on periodic review 
change in gradation of HCPs could also be done by the Hospital Empanelment 
Committee.  
Package Rates: The State level Swasthya Sathi Package Selection Committee 
undertook selection of different packages, package rates and categories. 
Package rates for different medical procedures were fixed based on the grading 
accorded to the hospital, with Grade -A getting the highest ra te and Grade -R 
getting the lowest rate.  
Shortcomings noticed in audit, in the process of gradation of empanelled HCPs, 
are described in the following paragraphs: 
(i) Improper gradation of Government hospitals   
In terms of clause 7.3.1 of the agreement executed between SNA and ICs, all 
Super/ Multi Speciality Hospital s/ Medical College s & Hospital s would be 
categorized as Grade-A Hospitals. 
There were 27  Government Super Speciality Hospitals (SSHs) empanelled 
under the SS Scheme in the State. However, it was noted that none of these 
Hospitals had been empanelled as Grade-A29 under the Scheme. The reasons for 
this were not available in records produced to Audit. Owing to lower grading 
(and consequently lower package rates), ICs paid lesser amount for treatments/ 
medical procedures in these super speciality hospitals, as part of the claim 
settlement, thus impacting the revenue flow of these hospitals. 
In six test-checked districts it was observed that during the period April 2018 to 
July 2022, ICs 30 approved 22,501 claims pertaining to nine SSHs (comprising  
treatment packages for 2 to 11431 procedures), against which ₹  5.55 crore was 
received by the hospitals. Out of 22,501 claims, 22,288 claims listed under 
105 treatment packages were re -calculated 32  by Audit considering rate of 
Grade-A. It was observed that had these SSHs been categorised as Grade -A, 
they would have earned an additional revenue of ₹ 4.6833crore from ICs. 
In reply, the SNA informed (July 2024) that these SSHs were made fully 
operational in a phased manner and thus, as and when they became operational, 
gradation of the hospital was done. The H&FW Department, in its reply 
(December 2024) added that in view of the audit observation, gradation of SSHs 
as applicable would be made at the earliest.  
 
29 26 Hospitals were Grade-B and One Hospital was Grade-C. 
30 Bajaj Allianz General Insurance Company & Oriental Insurance Company Limited 
31 Such as i) 79 cases of Appendectomy (package code SS00600079), Grade-A rate: ` 15,000 and Grade-B 
rate: ` 13,500 and ii) 606 cases of Normal Delivery (package code SS00900095) Grade-A rate: ` 5,000 
and Grade-B rate: ` 3,500. 
32 Out of 114 treatment packages, the rates of 105 treatment packages (which were available both under 
Grade-A and Grade-B) were considered for calculation.  
33 Jangipur SSH, Murshidabad  (₹ 0.04 crore); Sagardighi SSH, Murshidabad  (₹ 0.004 crore); 
Arambagh SSH, Hooghly (₹ 0.14 crore); Panskura SSH, Purba Medinipur (₹ 0.13 crore); Egra SSH, 
Purba Medinipur  (₹ 0.55 crore); Nandigram SSH, Purba Medinipur  (₹ 0.83 crore); Suri SSH, 
Birbhum (₹ 0.46 crore); Jalpaiguri SSH, Jalpaiguri  (₹ 0.99 crore) and Mal SSH, Jalpaiguri  
(₹ 1.54 crore). 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
16 
The reply of the SNA was not acceptable as it was observed during test check 
that prompt action for review of grading was not being taken by the State. In 
case of Suri SSH (Birbhum district), it was noted that the Hospital 
Superintendent had requested the concerned CMOH in January 2021 to upgrade 
the said SSH from Grade -B to  Grade-A as the hospital was delivering all 
multispecialty services to patients.   Despite this, no action to upgrade the 
hospital to Grade-A was taken by the SNA (as of August 2023).  
(ii) Improper gradation of empanelled private hospitals / nursing homes 
(HCPs)  
Test check of records of private empanelled HCPs, in five test-checked districts, 
during joint visits by Audit teams  (along with officers/ officials of the district 
offices 34 ) revealed anomalies / irregularities viz. non-compliance with the 
general criteria/ parameters35 for empanelment, as envisaged by the SNA. As 
per the grading pattern approved by the SNA, hospitals with scores of 
80 per cent and above would be considered as Grade -A hospitals while those 
with scores between 60 per cent and 80 per cent were Grade-B. Other Hospitals 
scoring below 60 per cent were to be empanelled as Grade-C, whereas Hospitals 
having bed strength within the range of 10 to 29 were Grade-R Hospitals.  
A review of 50 hospitals in five test-checked districts was carried out by Audit 
during joint inspections conducted between November 2023 and 
February 2024. During these joint visits, audit verified whether the availability 
of infrastructure/ manpower/ services at the HCPs was as per their gradation. In 
doing so A udit followed the prescribed grading procedure and identified the 
lacunae in those HCPs & graded them accordingly. Based on this examination, 
the following was noted by Audit: 
➢ There were a total of 31 hospitals where the grading was needed to be 
reviewed, based on available infrastructure, services being offered, 
sanctioned strength of hospitals etc.  
• Grading of five ‘Grade -A’ HCPs was needed to be downgraded to 
either ‘Grade-B’ (three HCPs) or ‘Grade-C’ (two HCPs). 
• Similarly, grading of 24 ‘Grade-B’ HCPs was to be reviewed to either 
‘Grade-C’ (23 HCPs) or ‘Grade-R’ (one HCP). Further, two ‘Grade-C’ 
HCPs were to be downgraded as ‘Grade-R’ HCPs. 
Due to improper gradation, these HCPs though entitled to lower package rates 
as per applicable norms of the SS Scheme were being paid at higher rates. 
Consequently such  anomalies/ irregularities, resulted in payment of 
₹ 14.48 crore in excess to 29 HCPs 36  (under Assurance mode), between 
July 2022 (16 July 2022) and the end of 2022-23 (31 March 2023), as detailed 
in Table 1.6. Further details in this regard are in Appendix 1.3:  
 
34 DNO-SS (District Swasthya Sathi Cell) & CMOH offices 
35 General criteria/ parameter such as health service infrastructure, hospital sanctioned bed strength, 
staff: patient ratio, emergency services, care unit & indoor facilities, diagnostic services & laboratory 
facilities, Bio-medical waste management etc. 
36 Though in two HCPs there was improper gradation, no financial outgo was involved. 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
17 
Table 1.6: District-wise details of improper gradation of HCPs 
Name of the test-
checked district 
No. of empanelled 
private HCPs test-
checked in the district 
No. of visited empanelled 
HCPs with improper37 
gradation 
Additional payment 
calculated based on 
revised Grading 
(in ₹) 
Hooghly 10 5 (50 per cent) 2,58,98,085 
Purba Medinipur 10 7 (70 per cent) 5,12,46,981 
Jalpaiguri 10 4 (40 per cent) 55,18,660 
North 24 Parganas 10 7 (70 per cent) 2,25,26,400 
Murshidabad 10 8 (80 per cent) 3,96,10,005 
Total 50 31 (62 per cent) 14,48,00,131 
Source: Information, documents provided by the HCPs & joint physical visit by audit with the 
respective district officials 
Thus, the SNA as well as district authorities had improperly allowed higher 
grading for the empanelled private HCPs in the districts in violation of the 
stipulated criteria/ parameters for such gradation. They had  also not exercised 
adequate control/ inspection & monitoring over the empanelled HCPs and their 
grading procedure under the Scheme.  
In reply, the SNA (July 2024) accepted improper gradation of three HCPs  out 
of 29 HCPs pointed out by A udit and downgraded them, whereas in respect of 
the remaining HCPs, the SNA conveyed that gradation was as per the prescribed 
norms. 
However, for these 26 HCPs, on the dates of joint visits by Audit, shortcomings 
were noticed owing to which such lower grading was pointed out.  
Recommendation: 
1.3  The State Government may ensure that grading of empanelled HCPs 
is awarded by the SNA after proper inspections duly taking into 
consideration availability of infrastructure, manpower and services 
at the HCPs. 
1.8.1.4 General criteria of empanelment of HCPs and utilisation of the 
services of empanelled HCPs 
As per the Agreement between the SNA and ICs, the insurer was to ensure that 
the beneficiaries enrolled under the Scheme were provided with the option of 
choosing from a list of empanelled HCPs for seeking treatment. All network 
hospitals providing services under the Scheme, on the day of signing of the 
Agreement between SNA and insurer, would be deemed to be empanelled 38 by 
the insurer. Clause 6.8 of the Agreement stipulated that the insurer would ensure 
that an adequate number of public & private HCPs were empanelled and that 
there should be at least one hospital for every 8,000 families enrolled in the 
Scheme. Further, as already discussed in paragraph 1.8.1.3, after the 
discontinuance of the Insurance mode, the responsibility of empanelment of 
HCPs vested on the CE Licensing Authority of the concerned district. 
37 Which were found to have been improperly allowed higher Grading in contrast to the specified 
parameter (per cent) of SNA 
38 In addition to the already enlisted HCPs, healthcare providers having adequate facilities and offering 
services as stipulated in the norms will be empanelled after being inspected by the IC or their 
representatives in consultation with the DNO -SS and appro ved by the District Administration/ State 
Government/ State Nodal Agency. 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
18 
(i) Non-compliance with the general criteria for empanelment of HCPs
Audit noted instances of non -compliance with the general criteria for 
empanelment as detailed below: 
(a) Review of records revealed that 2.43 crore families were enrolled in the
State as of March 2023. Accordingly, as against 3,038 39 HCPs to be
empanelled to service these 2.43 crore beneficiary families, based on
documents furnished by the SNA, Audit noted that only 2,605 HCPs were
empanelled for the State as a whole, limiting the choice of hospitals and
impacting service delivery for enrolled beneficiaries.
(b) Records of test -checked districts revealed that there were instances of
lesser number of HCPs being empanelled in five of the six sampled
districts, as shown in Table 1.7.
Table 1.7: Details of empanelled HCPs in the test-checked districts 
Name of test-checked 
district 
No. of 
families 
enrolled as of 
March 2023 
No. of HCPs 
required to be 
empanelled* 
No. of 
HCPs 
empanelled 
Less 
empanelment 
of HCPs 
(per cent) 
Birbhum 10,94,469 137 94 43 (31) 
Hooghly 14,89,660 186 166 20 (11) 
Purba Medinipur 14,89,914 186 193 0 
Jalpaiguri 4,51,913 56 42 14 (25) 
North 24 Parganas 23,65,320 296 285 11 (4) 
Murshidabad 21,05,531 263 170 93 (35) 
Source: Data provided by the DNO-SS offices of test-checked six districts; * One HCP for every 
8,000 families 
As can be seen from the Table 1.7, except for Purba Medinipur, there were 
lesser number of empanelled HCPs as compared to norms, which resulted in 
limited choice for enrolled beneficiaries under the Scheme. This also raised the 
risk that enrolled beneficiaries would need to travel long distances to visit 
empanelled HCPs and avail medical services under the Scheme. 
Lesser availability of empanelled HCPs was further exacerbated by the fact that 
in some test-checked districts like Jalpaiguri (15 HCPs) and Hooghly (87 HCPs) 
there were significant number of inactive40 HCPs.  
Despite being inactive, the above -mentioned private hospitals / nursing homes 
(HCPs) were shown ‘active’ in the SNA portal which was a dis -service to the 
beneficiaries during health emergencies. It was the responsibility of the 
respective DKMs 41-SS and the SNA to ensure that empanelled HCPs were 
actually providing services under the SS Scheme.  
The SNA accepted (July 2024) the audit observation and stated that all districts 
have been directed to conduct regular survey and surprise visits of inactive 
hospitals to assess actual issues being faced by the hospitals. 
39 (2,43,06,508/ 8,000)  
40 Inactive HCPs mean HCPs unable to provide services under the Scheme. 
41 District Key Manager 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
19 
(ii) Underutilisation of empanelled HCPs
For proper implementation of the SS scheme, the role of empanelled HCPs was 
crucial. As mentioned in paragraph 1.8.1.4 (i), there were 2,605 empanelled 
HCPs. However, the data generated from the SS Scheme portal showed the 
presence of 2,694 empanelled HCPs (as of 31 March 2023). The reasons for the 
discrepancy in the above-mentioned figures were not found on record.  
However, claim-wise details of 2,694 HCPs as obtained from the SS Scheme 
portal for the period February 2017 to March 2023 were examined by Audit and 
the following was noted: 
Table 1.8: Status of claims as submitted by HCPs 
Number of claims during February 2017 to 
March 2023 
Number of HCPs (per cent) against 
the total empanelled HCPs 
“ZERO” Claim 918 (34) 
Number of Claims ranging between 1 to 10 124 (4) 
Number of Claims ranging between 11 to 100 262 (10) 
Number of Claims ranging between 101 to 200 158 (6) 
More than 200 1,232 (46) 
Total 2,694 (100) 
Source: Data generated from the Swasthya Sathi Scheme portal 
From Table 1.8 it may be seen that 48 per cent of the empanelled HCPs during 
this six-year period had either not admitted any SS Scheme beneficiaries or had 
admitted less than 100 claims. This indicated that beneficiaries were either not 
aware of these empanelled HCPs or had not chosen these hospitals for treatment 
due to reasons not known. Thus, even after empanelment, the services of 
48 per cent of the empanelled HCPs, could not be utilised adequately, 
restricting the choice for patients. 
In reply, the SNA stated (October 2023) that the choice of HCP was the 
prerogative of the patients, and the H&FW Department had no control over such 
choice. The reply was not tenable as it was noted that adequate inspections of 
these HCPs were not carried out by the concerned authorities to investigate the 
reasons behind such poor admissions.  
Besides, joint visits by Audit to private HCPs (along with officers / officials of 
the district offices) in test -checked six districts during the period July 2023 to 
February 2024 revealed that signage 42 / posters/ banners (conspicuously 
displaying empanelment of the HCP under the SS Scheme) were not properly 
displayed to provide guidance to patients or for patients’ awareness. 
1.8.1.5 Undue financial advantage extended to Insurance Companies 
Under the Hybrid mode, ICs played a major role in operating the Scheme 
(Insurance Component up to ₹ 1.50 lakh). Between April 2018 and July 2022, 
five43 companies were engaged as ICs at different points of time, by the SNA. 
42 As per clause 3 of the Agreement between the SNA and TPA/ ISA, for the ease of the beneficiary the 
hospital shall display recognition and promotional material, network status and procedures for 
admission at prominent locations including but not limited to  outside the hospital, at the reception and 
admission counter and casualty/ emergency department. ISA shall make regular inspections to check 
whether such signage has been displayed properly or not. 
43 Bajaj Allianz General Insurance Company Ltd., Iffco  Tokio General Insurance, National Insurance 
Company Ltd., Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. and United India Insurance Company Ltd. 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
20 
In course of audit, it was observed that various clauses stipulated in the 
Agreements were not enforced appropriately by the SNA, which allowed undue 
advantage to the ICs as detailed in the following paragraphs. 
(i) Inadmissible consideration of enrolment cost of ₹ 6.27 crore under IEC 
In terms of clause 21.144 and 22.145 of the five Agreements signed by the SNA 
with ICs, these Companies in consultation with the SNA would prepare  and 
implement a communication strategy for launching / implementing the SS 
Scheme. The objective of these interventions was to make beneficiaries aware 
about the enrolment process and benefits of the Scheme. 
Accordingly, the Insurers were required to share a draft Information, Education 
& Communication (IEC) and Behaviour Change Communication (BCC) plan46 
with the SNA within 15 days of signing of the contract. As per the Agreement, 
the cost of these IEC and BCC activities would be borne by the Insurer. These 
IEC and BCC Plans were submitted by the I nsurers to the SNA (between 
May 2018 and February 2020) and were subsequently accepted by the SNA.  
Swasthya Sathi Scheme norms stipulated that under the Insurance mode of the 
Scheme, the premium part was to be paid to the ICs by the State Government 
on behalf of the beneficiaries. The annual premium was based on an ‘insurance 
coverage of ₹ 1.50 lakh’ and included an ‘enrolment cost 47 of providing Smart 
Cards at the rate of ₹ 25 / ₹ 24, for new enrolment of each beneficiary family’. 
Thus, the cost of enrolment was included as part of the annual premium paid by 
the State to the ICs. 
Further, as per the agreements, 10  per cent of the quoted price (or Annual 
Premium) was to be spent by the ICs during a policy year on IEC and allied 
activities in consultation with the SNA. Review of records/ information made 
available to audit revealed that five ICs had spent an amount of ₹ 52.65 crore 
(BAGIC 48 : ₹ 27.54 crore, NIC 49 : ₹ 11.20 crore, UIIC 50 : ₹ 9.13 crore, 
OIC51: ₹ 2.09 crore and IFFCO 52: ₹ 2.69 crore) on IEC activities during their 
agreement period.  Out of ₹ 52.65 crore, an amount of ₹ 6.27 crore was found 
to have been spent by three ICs (NIC:  ₹ 0.50 crore, BAGIC: ₹ 5.73 crore and 
IFFCO: ₹ 0.04 crore) for enrolment purpose53 despite the fact that enrolment of 
beneficiaries was not a component of IEC activities.  
Thus, ₹  6.27 crore as cost of enrolment charged by the ICs, as part of IEC 
component was inadmissible as it had already been paid as part of payment of 
annual premium by the Government. The reasons for considering enrolment 
cost, as IEC activity, were not evident from records. 
 
44 Clause 21.1 of Agreement dated 29.03.2018 
45 Clause 22.1 of Agreement dated 16.01.2020 
46 IEC and BCC activities inter alia included wall writing, hoarding, organizing health camps, Call Centre 
support etc. 
47 ` 25 (April 2018 to 15 January 2020) / ` 24 (16 January 2020 to 15 July 2022) 
48 Bajaj Allianz General Insurance Company Ltd. 
49 National Insurance Company Ltd. 
50 United India Insurance Company Ltd. 
51 Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. 
52 Iffco-Tokio General Insurance 
53 Enrolment charge, engagement of manpower for new enrolment centre etc. 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
21 
In reply, the SNA stated (July 2024) that clarification of ICs was that ` 25 was 
used for blank cards only and other components pertaining to enrolment cost 
viz. the cost of printer, ribbon, card jacket, hospital booklet, setting up of 
enrolment centre etc., were met from the IEC component. 
The reply was not tenable as the enrolment cost was paid by the SNA which 
was duly included in the premium and there was no scope to adjust the cost of 
enrolment from the amount meant for IEC activities, which was also included 
in the premium paid. Thus, adjustment of any of the enrolment components from 
funds meant purely for meeting IEC activities was not in conformity with the 
extant norms of the Scheme. 
(ii) Non-payment/ delayed payment of claims by Insurance Companies
Insurance Regulations, 2016 stipulated that an insurer shall settle or reject a 
claim, as may be the case, within 30 days of claims being preferred. The SNA 
also considered a 30 days' timeline for settlement of claims. Clause 4.12 of the 
executed Agreements between SNA and ICs stipulated that if the claim was not 
settled by the IC within 30 days from it being preferred, hospitals would be paid 
a penal interest at the rate of one per cent of claimed amount per 15 days of 
delayed settlement. 
An analysis of data related to 13.36 lakh approved claims (provided by SNA) 
for the period between April 2018 and July 2022 was carried out by Audit using 
the Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis (IDEA) software. Based on this 
analysis, the following issues were noticed. 
A. Claims approved but not paid by the Insurance Companies
During the period between April 2018 and July 2 022, five ICs did not pay 
3,955 claims at an estimated value of ₹ 7.26 crore to the hospitals despite the 
fact that these claims had already been approve d by them. Reasons for such 
non-payment by ICs were not available in the records made available to Audit. 
IC-wise details of claims approved but not paid are detailed below: 
Table 1.9: IC-wise details of claims (April 2018 to July 2022) approved but 
not paid 
Name of the 
Insurance Company 
Public Hospitals Private Hospitals Total 
Number of 
claims not 
settled 
Amount of 
claims not 
settled 
(in ₹) 
Number 
of claims 
not settled 
Amount of 
claim not 
settled 
(in ₹) 
Number 
of claims 
not 
settled 
Amount of 
claims not 
settled 
(in ₹) 
Bajaj Allianz General 
Insurance Company 
0 0 3 72,606 3 72,606 
Iffco-Tokio General 
Insurance 
9 66,650 4 1,70,372 13 2,37,022 
National Insurance 
Company Ltd. 
134 40,84,336 490 1,89,85,765 624 2,30,70,101 
The Oriental 
Insurance Company 
Ltd. 
885 42,88,097 592 1,43,26,389 1,477 1,86,14,486 
United India 
Insurance Company 
Ltd. 
698 30,77,041 1140 2,75,25,361 1,838 3,06,02,402 
Total 1,726 1,15,16,124 2,229 6,10,80,493 3,955 7,25,96,617 
Source: Data furnished by the SNA-SS Scheme 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
22 
Further scrutiny of records revealed that District Key Manager (DKM), SS, 
Jalpaiguri had taken up (September 2022) the matter with the concerned IC54 as 
the latter had not disbursed 742 approved claims to HCPs amounting to 
₹ 97.65 lakh. All the 742 claims had been kept pending by the IC for more than 
30 days, violating the claim settlement procedure as discussed ibid. However, 
even after lapse of 15 months (as of December 2023) no records of payment of 
claims to the respective HCPs by the IC were available. 
Records produced to Audit did not reveal if any measures had been taken by the 
SNA to impose any penalty on these ICs for non-settlement of claims.  
B. Short payment of penal interest
It was observed that payments with respect to 3.09 lak h claims (Government: 
0.74 lakh and  Private: 2.35 lakh) were made by the ICs after 30 days 55 of 
submission of claim by the HCPs. For such delayed payment, ICs should have 
paid interest amounting to ₹ 9.46 crore (Government: ₹ 1.31 crore and Private: 
₹ 8.15 cror e) to the hospitals as per the A greement. Analysis of claim data, 
however, revealed that ICs paid only ₹ 0.51 crore (Government: ₹ 0.02 crore  
and Private: ₹ 0.49 crore) as interest as detailed in Table 1.10 and Table 1.11. 
Table 1.10: Details of Government HCPs 
Name of the Insurance Company 
Total Number 
of claims paid 
beyond 30 days 
Interest 
to be paid 
(in ₹) 
Interest 
actually paid 
(in ₹) 
Short 
payment of 
Interest 
(in ₹) 
Bajaj Allianz General Insurance 
Company Ltd. 
3,204 4,82,777 5,649 4,77,128 
Iffco-Tokio General Insurance 5,310 2,95,982 4,405 2,91,577 
National Insurance Company Ltd. 7,514 15,63,274 14,834 15,48,440 
The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. 28,508 79,60,488 1,90,675 77,69,813 
United India Insurance Company Ltd. 29,065 27,86,404 2,470 27,83,934 
Total 73,601 1,30,88,925 2,18,033 1,28,70,892 
Source: Data furnished by the SNA-SS Scheme 
Table 1.11: Details of Private HCPs 
Name of the Insurance Company 
Total Number 
of claims paid 
beyond 30 days 
Interest to 
be paid 
(in ₹) 
Interest 
actually 
paid (in ₹) 
Short payment 
of Interest 
(in ₹) 
Bajaj Allianz General Insurance 
Company Ltd. 
4,112 14,58,649 12,893 14,45,756 
Iffco-Tokio General Insurance 3,290 13,08,514 45,921 12,62,593 
National Insurance Company Ltd. 44,094 1,93,67,117 8,98,665 1,84,68,452 
The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. 1,47,550 4,35,20,969 37,07,003 3,98,13,966 
United India Insurance Company Ltd. 36,560 1,58,90,083 2,42,506 1,56,47,577 
Total 2,35,606 8,15,45,332 49,06,988 7,66,38,344 
Source: Data furnished by the SNA-SS Scheme 
The SNA did not monitor delays in settlement of claims by the ICs and no 
efforts were made to accurately assess the interest payable by the ICs to HCPs 
for these delays. Such inadequate monitoring and supervisory control over the 
activities of ICs by both the SNA and the district authorities led to bestowing of 
undue financial advantage on the Companies.  
54 United India Insurance Company Ltd. 
55 On a conservative approach, delay has been calculated considering dates of claims processed by the 
ICs 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
 
23 
In reply, the SNA stated (November 2023) that the matter was communicated 
to the concerned ICs. No further reply was offered by the SNA / H&FW 
Department.  
(iii)  Non-imposition of penalty on Insurance Companies (₹ 31.33 crore) 
P
erformance of ICs was to be judged against various criteria like settlement of 
claims, enrolment related activities etc. As a deterrent to underperformance, the 
agreements with ICs provided for various penal provisions.  
With regard to timeliness in settlement of claims, settlement within 30 days 
from date of submission of claim was stipulated as an acceptable standard. 
Non-adherence to the same was to attract a penalty based on the following 
c
riteria: 
Table 1.12: Details of points assigned for under-p erformance 
Benchmark Points assigned in under-
performance severity scale 
If 10 per cent of claims remain unpaid at the end of 30 days Four Points 
If between 10 and 25 per cent of the claims remain unpaid after 
30 days 
Eight Points 
If between 25 and 40 per cent of the claims remain unpaid after 
30 days 
10 Points 
If more than 40 per cent of claims remain unpaid after 30 days 12 Points 
Source: Information & documents provided by the SNA-SS Scheme 
The threshold limits prescribed for imposition of penalty on ICs, based on the 
severity of under-performance, were as under: 
Table 1.13: Details of Penalty Provision 
Threshold limit of points Penalty provision 
Below 11 points but above 5 points One per cent of total annual premium amount of 
the concerned IC. 
11 -18 points Three per cent of total annual premium amount of 
the concerned IC. 
18-24 points Five per cent of total annual premium amount of 
the concerned IC and cancellation of renewal. 
False intimation of any of the above parameter IC barred from bidding for three years. 
Source: Information & documents provided by the SNA-SS Scheme 
Scrutiny of details regarding settlement of all claims by NIC, OIC & UIIC for 
the period from 16 January 2020 to 15 July 2022 revealed that the  percentage 
of claims settled by the ICs after 30 days ranged between 14 per cent and 
48 per cent. However, the SNA neither assessed the performance of the ICs in 
terms of the applicable penal clause nor imposed any penalty against the ICs as 
de
tailed below: 
Table 1.14: IC-w ise details of penalty to be imposed  
Name 
of the 
IC 
Total 
number 
of Claims 
settled 
Number of 
claims 
settled 
after 30 
days 
Percentage 
Point to be 
obtained on 
under-
performance 
severity 
scale 
Penal provision to 
be imposed 
Total 
premium 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Penalty to 
be 
imposed 
(₹ in crore) 
NIC 4,00,421 56,305 14 8 1 per cent of Penalty 671.14 6.71 
OIC 5,09,172 2,42,069 48 12 3 per cent of Penalty 694.35 20.83 
UIIC 1,66,904 68,366 41 12 3 per cent of Penalty 126.27 3.79 
Total 31.33 
Source: Data & information provided by the SNA-SS Scheme 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
24 
From the foregoing Table it may be seen that despite the existence of penal 
provisions in the Agreements, the SNA did not recover penalty of ₹ 31.33 crore 
from the ICs for their underperformance in terms of timely settlement of claims. 
This not only amounted to extension of undue financial benefit to the ICs but 
also diluted the built -in control mechanism for timely settlement of claims . 
Similar observation covering the period upto  2018-19 had also featured in 
C&AG’s Compliance Report (Government of West Bengal) for the year ended 
March 2020. 
In reply, the SNA stated (July 2024) that the penalty for delayed payment to the 
hospitals could not be arrived at with reasonable accuracy as the responsibility 
of uploading the status of actual payments rested with the ICs. It was, thus, 
difficult for the SNA to know the status of actual payments made by the ICs, 
until payment details were uploaded by ICs. Further, it was added that the 
accounts of ICs had not yet been closed and SNA was making all efforts to 
upgrade the software so that actual penalties could be reflected automatically.  
The reply was not acceptable as during audit it was noted that all the data 
required for the calculation of penalty was already available in the TMS, but 
was not utilised by the SNA for this purpose.  
(iv) Non-refund of premium (₹ 8.46 crore) and interest ( ₹ 1.32 crore) by ICs 
for deficiency in providing services 
The Agreements executed between the SNA and ICs stipulated specific clauses 
regarding refund of premium in case of deficiency of service by the ICs: 
A.  Clause 9.5 of the Agreement executed between the SNA and the ICs 
stated that in case the Claim Ratio (total amount of claims paid as compared to 
the total insurance premium received during the policy period) fell below 
80 per cent then the Insurer, would return to the SNA the difference between 
actual claim amount paid and 80 per cent of the insurance premium received 
during the policy period. 
B.  As per clause 22.2 of the Agreement, if the amount spent on IEC and 
allied activities was less than 10 per cent of premium then the difference was to 
be refunded to the SNA.  
Further, the insurers were required to refund the applicable part of the premium 
pertaining to any deficiency, within the stipulated period of 90 days from the 
end of policy period, failing which the insurer would have to pay interest at the 
rate of two per cent per annum, above the bank rate fixed by the Reserve Bank 
of India. 
With reference to the above clauses audit scrutiny revealed cases of violation of 
stipulated clauses of the Agreement, wherein two of five ICs either did not 
refund or delayed refund of the premium amount, as follows:  
• Bajaj Allianz General Insurance Company (BAGIC) was engaged for 
the period from 1 April 2018 to 15 January 2020 and total refundable 
amount as calculated by SNA for deficiency of service (shortfall in payment 
to HCPs and lesser amount being spent on IEC activities) was ₹ 51.19 crore. 
The demand for payment was raised by the SNA with the IC. However, the 
Company refunded the said amount between 30 April 2020 and 
18 December 2020. Due to delay in refund of premium, demand regarding 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
 
25 
refund of interest amounting ₹  0.87 crore was raised by the SNA (latest in 
February 2022). However, no refund of this interest amount was made by 
the IC (as of July 2024).  
• National Insurance Company (NIC)  was engaged for the period from 
16 January 2020 to 15 July 2022 and an amount of ₹  15.16 crore was to be 
refunded to the SNA by the IC for expending lesser amount o n IEC and 
allied activities. The SNA directed (December 2022) the IC to refund the 
said amount along with corresponding interest. However, it was noticed that 
NIC had not refunded the amount (July 2024), for reasons not on record. An 
interest of ₹ 0.45 crore 56  on the refundable  amount was due from 
16 October 2022 onwards at the rate as stated in the Agreement.  
SNA in reply (July 2024) stated that the matter was communicated to ICs. One 
of the ICs, namely, BAGIC disagreed with the amount to be refunded as claimed 
by the SNA and in this context the SNA had sought legal views. With reference 
to NIC, the H&FW Department stated (December 2024) that ` 6.70 crore had 
been refunded (October 2024) by the NIC  (` 8.46 crore was not refunded), 
although no documentary evidence in support of this was furnished to Audit. 
The replies were silent regarding recovery of interest amount from the two 
Companies.  
Recommendation:  
1.4 The Government may ensure that the SNA undertakes recoveries to 
be effected from ICs, in a timely manner. 
1.8.1.6 Undue financial advantage extended to Third Party Administrators  
Audit observed that under the Hybrid mode, (in implementation till July 2022), 
enrolment of targeted beneficiaries was done by  the ICs, for which a fees of 
₹ 25/ 24 per family in terms of card cost, was paid by the Department. These 
ICs were selected by the SNA through open tendering process. 
Further, under the Assurance mode of the SS Scheme, when the State engaged 
IRDA57 enlisted Third Party Administrators (TPAs) as Implementation Support 
Agencies (ISAs), tenders were floated and therein separate district -wise rates 
were sought from TPAs for claim management and enrolment. Accordingly, the 
rates finalised for TPAs/ ISAs selected, during April 2019 to March 2023, were 
as follows:  
➢ Based on tenders floated in November 2018 by SNA, Medi Assist 
Insurance Private Ltd.58 (Medi Assist) and Paramount Health Services 
and Insurance Private Ltd.59 (Paramount) were selected as the TPA/ ISA, 
being the lowest bidders. As per the Agreements signed with these 
agencies, district -wise rates for enrolment in terms of card cost (per 
family) were fixed between ₹ 48.85 and ₹ 59.50. ISAs commenced work 
from April 2019 and continued up to 15 July 2021. 
 
56 as on 31 March 2023 
57 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
58 For 17 districts viz. Alipurduar, Bankura, Birbhum, Coochbehar, Howrah, Hooghly, Jalpaiguri, Malda, 
Murshidabad, Nadia, North 24 Parganas, Paschim Bardhaman, Paschim Medinipur, Purba 
Bardhaman, Purba Medinipur, Purulia and South 24 Parganas 
59 for six districts viz. Dakshin Dinajpur, Darjeeling, Jhargram, Kalimpong, Kolkata, & Uttar Dinajpur 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
26 
➢ After expiry of the aforesaid contract, fresh tenders were invited
(February 2021) by the SNA and based on this, Medi Assist and
Paramount again emerged as the lowest bidders. District -wise rates for
enrolment in terms of card cost in these cases w ere fixed between
₹ 41.99 and ₹ 51 for 23 districts. Work commenced from 16 July 2021
and continued up to end of March 2023.
➢ Besides the above mentioned ISAs, three Public Sector PSUs viz. West
Bengal Electronics Industries Development  Corporation Ltd ., Webel
Technology Ltd . and Saraswaty Press Ltd. were also engaged 60 (as
ISAs) for the purpose of issuance of cards at the same rates61 as allowed
to TPAs who were functioning as the ISAs.
The SNA incurred an expenditure of ₹ 95.73 crore, under the Assurance mode, 
for phase -wise enrolment of 1.65 crore families during the period from 
April 2019 to March 2023. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that the process of enrolment in different modes of 
operation i.e. Hybrid mode and Assurance mode was the same. Despite this, 
while tendering under the Assurance mode, the SNA did not impose any ceiling/ 
maximum limit with regard to cost of issue of the Swasthya Sathi cards by ISAs. 
As a result, the cost of issue of cards under the Assurance mode was much 
higher than that in the Hybrid mode.  While in the Hybrid mode the cost of issue 
of a card was ₹ 25 / 24 per card for a family, the same cost was almost double 
under the Assurance mode and ranged between ₹ 41.99 to ₹ 59.50. 
As a result, the SNA availed the same service of enrolment from ISAs at much 
higher rate than that of the ICs, entailing an excess expenditure of 
₹ 46.97 crore62 (49 per cent) as detailed in Appendix 1.4. 
In reply, the SNA had stated (October 2023) that the cost of enrolment under 
Assurance mode included ancillary cost like Card Jacket, Chit Distribution 63 
fees, cost of Hospital booklet etc., and ISAs under Assurance Mode were 
selected through open tenders. In a further reply (December 2024), the H&FW 
Department inter-alia stated that (a) both e -tenders ( i.e. ISAs and Insurance 
Companies) were different, hence, rate negotiation was never considered 
prudent and (b) ICs were actually paying around ` 60 per card to their Card 
service providers as cost of each card. Thus, the current enrolment cost arrived 
through competitive bidding appeared to be reasonable. 
The replies were not tenable as 
• Card cost/ cost of enrolment under Insurance mode @ ` 25/ 24 was also
arrived at through open tenders for the same nature of service. Also, even
if ICs were actually paying around ` 60 per card, only ` 25/ 24 was
actually allowed by the Government for these cards. Moreover, no
documentary evidence was furnished to establish that a higher rate of
` 60 per card was being paid by ICs.
60 During April 2019 to March 2023 
61 As finalised for the ISAs, through tenders 
62 From April 2019 to March 2023, including 18 per cent Goods & Services Tax (GST).  
63 Chit distribution is enrolment pertaining to RSBY and SECC beneficiaries based on a pre -determined 
list. For that purpose, a chit consisting of the details of beneficiary family (as per RSBY/ SECC) 
alongwith date and venue of such enrolment camp was distributed at block level prior to enrolment.  

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
27 
• It was observed during audit of test -checked districts that neither any
Card Jacket nor any Hospital booklet was provided to the beneficiaries
under the Assurance mode. Further, no chit distribution was required for
enrolment under the Assurance mode, for other than RSBY and SECC
beneficiaries. Besides, the cost of this chit distribution was only
` 1.00 per family for RSBY and SECC beneficiaries.
1.8.1.7 Assurance Mode: Irregularities noticed during data analysis 
As Swasthya Sathi claims to be a paperless Scheme, its operation and processing 
is done through an IT platform called the Transaction Management System 
(TMS). All claims of HCPs under the Scheme are submitted and managed 
through the TMS, developed by the SNA for that purpose. 
Data pertaining to 7.24 lakh claims during the period 2018-19 to 2022-23 under 
Assurance mode, as furnished by the SNA, were analyzed by Audit. This 
analysis revealed  the inability of the SNA in ensuring adequate validation 
controls in the IT system resulting in the following discrepancies/ irregularities:  
(i) Payment made prior to admission/ discharge of patients
As already discussed in paragraph 1.1.1.2, the HCPs could raise claims only 
after discharge of the patient. This meant that there was no scope for the SNA 
to release payment to HCPs either before admission or prior to being discharged. 
An amount of ₹ 1.51 crore was found to have been paid by SNA to HCPs before 
admission of patients in respect of 2,229 claims, whereas 24 claims amounting 
to ₹ 0.08 crore were found paid prior to discharge of patients. 
In reply, SNA stated (July 2024) that the procedure of updating the Payment 
Reference Number (UTR No.) at the Swasthya Sathi  portal was done by the 
ISA/ TPA manually and there were instances when the date of payment was 
entered wrongly and as a result, the payment date was showing a date earlier 
than the actual payment date. Further, SNA stated that they had upgraded to 
automated-UTR-update to eliminate human errors. 
The SNA however did not enclose any documentary evidence to support its 
contention that dates of payments were wrongly entered and that the system has 
been upgraded.   
(ii) Wrong or duplicate mobile numbers  linked with the beneficiary
database
Data analysis revealed that there were large number of beneficiaries registered 
against same or invalid mobile numbers64. Overall, 2 to 2,139 beneficiaries were 
linked with a single mobile number in the SNA database. Also, Phone numbers 
used in case of 44,334 claims were not in the proper format65.  
SNA stated (July 2024) that at an earlier stage of the Scheme, when mobile 
numbers of patients or any family members were supposed to be entered in 
TMS, there was no validation of the same and thus, while registering a patient 
for treatment, there were instances where the mobile number was not captured/ 
or not properly entered. It was  also stated that hospitals were now entering the 
correct phone numbers of patients. 
64 Mobile numbers are significan t for searching records related to any beneficiary in the database, who 
may approach the registration desk without the ID. 
65 like CKD STAGE V, 0, 1234567890, 000000000000 etc. 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
28 
(iii) Same doctor admitting patients in different districts on the same day
Analysis of data of the SNA revealed that the same doctors (recognised by 
Registration numbers) were seen to be admitting patients in different districts 
(even in case of districts far away from each other) on the same day in respect 
of 6,410 claims, involving a payment of ` 2.44 crore, which were approved by 
TPA for payment. Chances of some of these admissions being fraudulent could 
not be ruled out. As a consequence, veracity of such claims remained doubtful. 
In reply the SNA stated (July 2024) that an Artificial Intelligence (AI) tool has 
been developed to track down such cases and corrective action for those cases 
would be taken accordingly. The reply, however, did not throw any light on the 
genuineness of such claims. 
1.8.2 Implementation of the SS Scheme: Performance of ICs and TPAs 
1.8.2.1 Delay in Pre-authorisation under Assurance mode 
Clause 9 of the Agreement executed with TPAs stipulated that pre-authorization 
requests were to be scrutinized and approved by the TPA within 24 hours of 
their receipt from HCPs, if all conditions were fulfilled. Delay in according 
approval to pre-authorisation requests could lead to delays in getting treatment. 
For the period October 2018 to March 2023, action time 66  in respect of 
24.49 lakh pre-authorisation requests approved under the Assurance mode (as 
per data obtained from the Swasthya Sathi portal) was scrutinised in audit. It 
was noticed that 10.47 lakh pre-authorisations (43 per cent) were not approved 
within the stipulated period of 24 hours. District -wise delays in according 
pre-authorisation approval ranged between 25 per cent 67  (Kalimpong) to 
61 per cent 68 (Birbhum). 
Delay in approving valid pre -authorisation requests not only deprived the 
patients entitled under the Scheme from getting treatment in time but also 
indicated poor performance on the part of the TPAs.  
Despite such poor performance by the TPA, the SNA neither took up this issue 
with TPAs nor did it initiate any remedial actions in coordination with TPAs. 
Further, in the absence of any penal clause in the agreement, no penalty for such 
delayed approvals by TPAs, could be imposed on them.  
In reply (July 2024) the SNA stated that due to non -availability of required 
documents, some pre-authorizations were delayed. 
1.8.2.2 Training Programmes / Workshops and beneficiary audit not 
conducted by ICs 
As per Agreement executed between SNA and ICs, the latter were supposed to 
(i) conduct training of each enrolment team during the period of enrolment;
(ii) conduct training for personnel in the concerned h ospitals’ at least twice a
year and  (iii) conduct beneficiary audit on random basis within 30 days of
discharge of patients from the HCPs.
66 Time gap between upload of pre-authorization request and approval of pre-authorization. 
67 1,641 out of 6,612 approved requests. 
68 80,019 out of 1,32,261 approved requests. 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
 
29 
However, during audit of test -checked six district offices (including 
test-checked private HCPs) no relevant documentation / records regarding any 
such trainings conducted by ICs or with any beneficiary audit undertaken, were 
produced before Audit (Appendix 1.5). Thus, Audit could not gain assurance on 
whether these activities, which had a direct impact on quality of service 
delivery, were actually undertaken by ICs or not. 
1.8.2.3 Training programmes not conducted by TPAs  
Similarly, as per terms of applicable Agreements, TPAs were also responsible 
for (i) continuous review of medical facilities available at the Network 
Hospitals69; and (ii) organizing training programme for empanelled hospitals, 
Rogi Sahayaks70 (under Rogi Sahayata Kendra) and Swasthya Sathi help desk 
personnel. 
However, audit of test -checked six district offices (including the test -checked 
private HCPs) revealed that the TPAs had not fulfilled their training obligations 
in accordance with the terms of the Agreements. This issue of non -conduct of 
training programmes was not taken up by the SNA with the TPAs, hampering 
proper implementation of the Scheme and delivery of quality services.  
The SNA had accepted (July 2024) the audit observation and informed that 
documentation of training by the TPAs will be maintained. 
1.8.2.4 Building Awareness among beneficiaries through IEC activity  
Under Hybrid mode, ICs along with SNA were responsible for building 
awareness about the SS Scheme amongst beneficiaries through various IEC 71 
activities. With the departure of ICs, responsibility of creating awareness lay 
with the Government authorities viz. SNA and DNA. 
Review of records in test -checked six district offices revealed that during the 
period under audit no IEC activities were conducted in the test-checked districts 
by the ICs except Bajaj Allianz General Insurance Company which had 
organised one camp72 in Birbhum district.  
In reply the SNA informed (July 2024) that planned IEC activities could not be 
rolled out by the ICs due to COVID-19. 
Recommendation:  
1.5 The Government may ensure that the SNA exercises due diligence in 
monitoring & control over TPAs to ensure that the latter deliver 
services to beneficiaries as per the Scheme objectives and in line with 
the terms and conditions of applicable Agreements. 
1.8.3 Implementation of the SS Scheme: Performance of HCPs  
The objective of the Scheme is to provide cashless treatment to beneficiaries. 
Package rates of Swasthya Sathi included all expenses related to treatment like 
consultation, bed charges, diagnostic test & medicines ‘from one day before 
admission’ and ‘upto five days of discharge of the patient’. The Scheme also 
 
69 Empanelled Hospitals 
70 Rogi Sahayaks facilitate the process of admission of SS beneficiaries in Government HCPs. These Rogi 
Sahayaks were initially functioning in RSBY, thereafter inducted for implementation of SS Scheme 
71 Information, Education & Communication 
72 between November 2018 and December 2018 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
30 
aimed to provide Outpatient Department ( OPD) facilities to the beneficiaries. 
As per clause 5 of Article 14 of the Agreement between SNA and ICs, activities 
such as charging treatment cost from patients, claiming for services not 
provided etc., on the part of the HCPs, were considered malpractices. Specific 
penal provisions, against those malpractices by the HCPs, were stipulated in the 
Agreement. Further, a survey was conducted by Audit through visit of different 
HCPs in the test-checked districts. 
1.8.3.1 Poor health care services in test-checked HCPs 
WBCE Act, 2017 and Rules thereunder were enacted by GoWB to preserve 
minimum standards of facilities and service to be provided by Clinical 
Establishment (HCPs) to beneficiaries. For empanelment under the SS Scheme, 
HCPs should mandatorily have a valid CE Licence. After empanelment, HCPs 
were required to provide medical  treatment/ facility to beneficiaries in 
accordance with given standards. 
However, during visit to test -checked HCPs, deviations were noted by Audit 
which eventually deprived beneficiaries from getting  standard medical 
treatment as detailed below: 
(i) Shortage of healthcare personnel in test-checked HCPs
WBCE Act, 2017 and rules thereunder specified that healthcare personnel were 
to be engaged in accordance with bed strength of HCPs. Further, as per norms 
of the SS scheme, HCPs had to engage healthcare personnel, in keeping with 
the stipulation of the mentioned Act & Rules. 
A total of 65 empanelled private HCPs in test-checked six districts were jointly 
reviewed by Audit along with officers / officials of the district offices. With 
reference to the WBCE Rules, the following shortage of healthcare personnel 
{(Resident Medical Officer (RMO) and nursing staff} were noted by Audit: 
Table 1.15: District-wise position of shortage of healthcare personnel in 
test-checked HCPs  
Name of the 
test-checked district
No. of 
empanelled 
HCPs
HCPs wherein 
RMOs were not 
found during 
joint visit
HCPs wherein 
strength of RMOs 
was not in 
compliance to 
WBCE Act/ Rules73 
HCPs wherein strength of 
Nursing staff was not in 
compliance with WBCE 
Act/ Rules74 
(A) (B) (C) (D) (E) 
Birbhum 12* 3 7 8 
Hooghly 10 3 2 6 
Purba Medinipur 10 0 1 4 
Jalpaiguri 10 3 3 3 
North 24 Parganas 10 2 9 7 
Murshidabad 10 3 10 8 
Source: Information provided by the visited Private HCPs in test-checked six districts; 
*In Birbhum district, out of 15 HCPs visited three HCPs did not furnish any records to Audit.
73 There shall be at least one doctor to act as RMO is case of HCP upto 15 beds. Thereafter for every 
additional 15 beds or fraction thereof there shall be one additional RMO upto 100 beds. For every 
additional 20 beds or fraction thereof, there shall be further one additional RMO from 101 to 200 beds. 
For every additional 25 beds or fraction thereof, there shall be further one additional RMO from 201 to 
300 beds. For 300 beds onwards one additional RMO for every additional 50 beds or fraction thereof 
and so on. 
74 There shall be at least four qualified registered Nursing staff in case of a HCP upto 15 beds. Thereafter 
for every additional five beds or fraction thereof one additional nursing staff shall be engaged. 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
 
31 
The above position of shortage of RMOs and Nursing staff/ shortage of Nursing 
staff having requisite qualification in HCPs indicated that the quality of 
healthcare services was compromised and there was lack of monitoring on the 
part of the SNA/ H&FW Department. 
In reply, the SNA stated (July 2024) that the matter has been communicated to 
concerned CE licensing authority and the District Surveillance Teams (DST 75) 
had been instructed to visit HCPs to identify shortage of manpower. It was also 
added that the HCPs had been directed to comply with the CE Act 2017. 
In addition to the above, during test  check it was noted that in  two HCPs (i.e., 
Jyoti Nursing Home, and Joy Durga Nursing Home & Diagnostic), in Birbhum 
district the HCPs could not furnish any statutory documents like CE licence, fire 
No-Objection Certificate ( NOC)/ licence, NOC / licence of WB Pollution 
Control Board etc., to Audit. In case of Jyoti Nursing Home HCP, three of the 
five nursing staff did not have any professional qualification to perform nursing 
duties. Hence, in the absence of statutory documents as well as medical staff the 
quality of treatment provided by these HCPs was doubtful. It is pertinent to 
mention that during the years 2018 -19 to 2022-23, ₹ 4.26 crore (3,033 claims) 
and ₹ 0.03 crore (27 claims) were paid to Jyoti Nursing Home and Joy Durga 
Nursing Home & Diagnostic respectively in settlement of claims.  
SNA in reply stated (July 2024) that it had instructed concerned CMOsH to 
conduct physical inspections. Based on physical inspections, one HCP 76 was 
suspended whereas the other HCP77 had produced all statutory documents to the 
CMOH during physical inspection.  
(ii) Non-availability of OPD treatment in empanelled hospitals 
Clause 6.6 of the Agreement signed between the SNA and ICs stipulated that 
both the public and private HCPs should provide free registration and Outpatient 
Department (OPD) consultation to SS enrolled beneficiaries.  However, in case 
of 65 test-checked HCPs it was observed by Audit that there was no system of 
providing free OPD consultation to SS beneficiaries.  Only In -patient 
Department (IPD) patients and Day Care patients (like for dialysis, etc.) were 
entertained under the Scheme.  
SNA replied (July 2024) that OPD / IPD treatment is given as per required 
clinical protocols and that a new module has been developed in the Information 
Database to keep track of OPD cases.   
(iii) Male and female patients kept in same area 
The West Bengal Clinical Establishment Rules stipulated that except for 
Intensive Therapy Unit (ITU) and Intensive Cardiac Care Unit (ICCU) with 
provision of curtains, no male patients were to be allowed to stay with female 
patients inside a ward. Further, there should be separate wards  for male and 
female patients. 
 
75 DST comprise of CMOH (Chairman) & Dy. CMOH-I (Member-Convenor) of the concerned district 
76 Jyoti Nursing Home 
77 Joy Durga Nursing Home & Diagnostic 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
32 
• In case of two HCPs (Birbhum 78 and Murshidabad79 districts) it was seen
that male and female IPD patients were kept in the same area.
• In one HCP (in Jalpaiguri 80 district) both male and female IPD patients
were treated in Intensive Care Unit (ICU) step-down ward81 without any
curtains for separation.
Picture 1.1: Male & female patients kept in the 
same ward in Glocal Hospital Bolpur, Birbhum.
Picture 1.2: Male & female patients kept together 
in the ICU step -down ward of Marina Medical 
Centre Pvt. Ltd, Jalpaiguri.
In reply, the SNA stated (July 2024) that DSTs have been asked to conduct visits 
and identify the hospitals which were not maintaining patient privacy policy as 
per CE guidelines. 
(iv) Under equipped Emergency and other Critical Care Services
(A) Emergency Ward : In 16 of 50 test -checked HCPs, it was seen that
Emergency wards did not have adequate / appropriate equipment or facilities
such as defibrillator, ventilator, infusion pump etc. Although at the time of
empanelment these 16 HCPs had declared that Emergency wards were
available, it was noticed  that these wards were only basic in nature, without
requisite equipment to handle patient emergencies effectively.
Picture 1.3: No facility like oxygen supply etc., 
was available. Only an observation table  & 
doctor’s table were there (New Amtala NH, 
Murshidabad). 
Picture 1.4: No facilities available, only beds 
kept in an area earmarked as an emergency 
ward (Loknath Nursing Home, Birbhum).  
78 Glocal Hospital Bolpur, Birbhum 
79 Manmohini Healthcare Pvt. Ltd., Berhampore 
80 Marina Medical Centre Pvt. Ltd. 
81 Step-down wards provide an intermediate level of care for patients with requirements somewhere 
between that of the general ward and the Intensive Care Unit. 


PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
33 
(B) NICU, CCU / ICU, Burn Unit: In test -checked HCPs in selected
six districts, basic amenities were either not found available or found
non-functional in Critical Care Units like Neonatal Intensive Care Unit
(NICU)82, ICU / Cardiac Care Unit ( CCU)83 and Burn Unit. In test -checked
16 HCPs, NICU was either non -functional or ill -equipped whereas in nine
HCPs, ICU / CCU was not adequately equipped; and in eight HCPs, basic
facilities84 as required to handle burn patients were not available.
Picture 1.5: The room earmarked as NICU 
but basic infrastructure was not kept (Holy 
Heart Medical Centre, Murshidabad). 
Picture 1.6: Basic infrastructure was not 
kept in Burn Unit apart from beds and 
table (Gitaram Hospital, Murshidabad). 
Visits if any, carried out by the concerned Government officers with respect to 
regular monitoring of the HCPs under the Scheme were not put on record. This 
indicated that there were shortcomings in supervision and monitoring by the 
competent district and State authorities which ultimately affected the quality of 
treatment provided to beneficiaries. 
In reply, the SNA  stated (July 2024) that CE Licencing Authorities had been 
directed to undertake regular monitoring of the wards/ units such as emergency, 
NICU, CCU/ Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU), etc. at the HCPs.  
(v) Absence of certain services in HCPs in contravention of empanelment
criteria
Both Public and Private HCPs are major stakeholders under the SS Scheme, 
responsible for actual service delivery to beneficiaries . Appendix 16 of the 
Agreement signed between SNA and ICs stipulated certain criteria for 
empanelment of HCPs under the SS Scheme. The district health authorities 
recommended HCPs to SNA for empanelment under the Scheme after 
verification of the concerned hospital.  
A joint physical verification of 50 test-checked private HCPs, in five 
test-checked districts85 was conducted by Audit along with the district officials. 
During this verification a number of shortcomings were observed in 
infrastructure, services, patient facilities, infection control practices etc., as 
reflected in Table 1.16: 
82 in NICU equipment like Heart or cardiorespiratory monitor, Respirator or mechanical ventilator  etc. 
are essential 
83 in CCU Respiratory ventilator, patient monitor, infusion pump etc., are essential 
84 Canopy over the bed, adequate infection control mechanism etc. 
85 Except Birbhum, as the information was not complete due to inadequate records 


CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
34 
Table 1.16: Absence of certain services in visited HCPs 
Services/ facilities 
No. of HCPs where the 
services/ facilities are not 
available (percentage) 
I- General and Infrastructural Information
Adequate signage (SS scheme poster or banner for SS Hospital at strategic 
location) 
46 HCPs (92) 
Provision for elevator or ramp (Both ramp and elevator) 17 HCPs (34) 
Parking places (Provision for parking place for ambulances) 17 HCPs (34) 
II- Infection Control Measures
Waste handling materials / other waste treating chemicals (personal 
protective gears such as boots, goggles, gloves, gowns etc., & waste treating 
chemicals) 
15 HCPs (30) 
Regular validation tests for sterilization of OT, ICU, NICU, CSSD86 25 HCPs (50) 
Vaccination of Bio-medical waste handlers against TT, Hepatitis B 44 HCPs (88) 
Regular Autoclaving of Instruments & Linen 12 HCPs (24) 
Carbolization of the OT, Labour Room etc. 15 HCPs (30) 
III- Provisions for Patient Rights
Adequate provision for Patient Privacy use of curtains for treatment and 
separate changing room 
25 HCPs (50) 
Display of Rights and Responsibility of the Patients at prominent places 
in bilingual language of local community 
35 HCPs (70) 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism in the facility 45 HCPs (90) 
Functioning complaint Drop Box 24 HCPs (48) 
IV- Evaluation and Care of In-Patient
Physical examination of the SS patients and capturing their full medical 
history prior to admissions  
16 HCPs (32) 
Proper maintenance of medical records 30 HCPs (60) 
V- Health & Safety
Display of Emergency Telephone numbers in the HCPs 
(Reception, Emergency Room, Fire Control Room, Security Supervisor, 
Chief Maintenance Engineer & Police) 
42 HCPs (84) 
Display of fire exits and escape routes in the HCPs 19 HCPs (38) 
Display of No Smoking Area, Do’s and Don'ts etc., in entire hospital/ 
prohibited areas 
33 HCPs (66) 
Source: Records of visited HCPs; Note: OT: Operation Theatre & TT: Tetanus Toxoid 
The SNA in reply stated (July 2024) that, the District Authorities / DSTs have 
already been instructed  to conduct physical visits to such hospitals to comply 
with the audit observations. 
All these were indicative of shortcomings in implementation of the SS scheme, 
through deficiencies in services provided by HCPs.  
1.8.3.2 Other irregularities noticed in HCPs 
(i) Money charged from the Scheme’ patients
In-Patients’ survey involving 399 in -patients was conducted by Audit in 
test-checked HCPs of six test -checked districts which revealed that 
141 in-patients had paid consultation fees ranging between ₹ 70 and ₹ 700, 
whereas 112 in-patients had to bear costs ranging between ₹ 250 and ₹ 20,000 
for diagnostic tests before admission. Fu rther, 24 in-patients had been charged 
money during hospitalization by the HCPs  (Appendix 1.6) in contravention of 
schematic provisions which envisaged cashless treatment. 
86 Central Sterile Services Department 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
35 
Regarding the instances of money being charged, the H&FW Department stated 
(December 2024) that all proven cases have been dealt with very seriously & 
refund in all cases has been ensured and the concerned hospitals have been 
warned. 
(ii) Short payment towards transport allowance of SS patients
Jeebandeep Nursing Home is a Grade -‘C’ Nursing Home (NH) under 
SS Scheme at Dhupguri, Jalpaiguri. As per Swasthya Sathi Scheme norms all 
patients treated in private hospitals would receive ₹ 200 at the time of discharge 
towards transport allowance. Accordingly, the said HCP received ₹  200 per 
admitted SS patient in the claims package which was to be paid to patients at 
the time of discharge. Scrutiny of the admission register of SS patients revealed 
that there were acknowledgements of receiving ₹ 100 only instead of ₹ 200 by 
the SS patients at the time of discharge since April  2018. The said fact was 
corroborated by documen ts of Transport Allowance (TA) acknowledgements 
provided by the SS patients as well as from patient survey reports. The HCP 
treated 2,784 SS patients during the period from April 2018 to December 2023. 
Hence, an amount of ₹ 2.78 lakh 87 was wrongfully retained by the HCP and 
beneficiaries were deprived of the allotted TA under the scheme.  
The H&FW Department in reply (December 2024), stated that audit 
observations have been considered seriously and instructions issued to all 
district authorities to conduct physical visits on regular basis and submit reports. 
Further, the Department also stated that, various reforms in the software module 
have been introduced, like upgradation of software with modern technologies, 
involvement of AI in trigger management, issuance of various advisories 
restricting cases susceptible to misuse etc., to bolster the implem entation 
process. 
Recommendation: 
1.6 The State Government may ensure that the SNA and the district 
authorities carry out periodic inspections and closely monitor HCPs 
to ensure that standards of infrastructure, facilities/ amenities and 
personnel in the empanelled hospitals are maintained as per terms 
and conditions of applicable Agreements. 
1.9 Financial Resources 
The adequacy of the f inancial resources, available for implementation of the 
Scheme, was assessed and the following observations were noticed: 
1.9.1 Fund position of the Scheme  
The main source of funds for the SS scheme was budgetary allocation from the 
State wherein funds were allotted to SNA by the H&FW Department, GoWB.  
In addition, refund of premium88, penalty collected for violations of the norms, 
interest earned from bank etc., were other sources of funds for the Scheme.  
87 (₹ 100 X 2,784) 
88 Agreement executed between SNA and ICs stipulated specific clause regarding refund of premium, viz. 
in case the claim ratio (hospital claims paid to premium received) is less than 80 per  cent, then the 
insurer will return the difference between actual claim and 80 per cent of the insurance premium to the 
SNA. Ten per cent of the Annual Premium was to be spent during a policy year on IEC and allied 
activities in consultation with the SNA. The amount spent, less than 10 per cent of premium on IEC, was 
to be refunded to the SNA. 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
36 
Funds allotted by the H&FW Department to the SNA were drawn by the SNA 
and deposited to the Deposit Account of SS Samiti. To implement the scheme, 
Cash Credit Loan (CCL 89) was also raised, as discussed in the subsequent 
paragraph. 
Payment of premium to ICs, fees to TPAs, cost of enrolment, expenditure for 
IEC activities etc. were made from the Deposit Account. The procedure of 
settlement of claims to HCPs, under the Assurance mo de (and from 16 July 
2022), has been discussed in paragraph 1.4. 
In this regard, Audit observed that admissible claims of HCPs were settled / 
processed and forwarded by TPAs to SNA within the stipulated period of 
15 days of claims being preferred by HCPs. On receipt of admissible claims 
from TPAs, payments were made by SNA to bank accounts of HCPs. 
Year-wise budgetary allocation, total funds available and expenditure of the 
State on the Scheme are shown in Table 1.17. 
Table 1.17: Year -wise budgetary allocation, total fund available and 
expenditure on Swasthya Sathi Scheme    (₹ in crore) 
Financi
al Year 
(FY) 
Opening 
Balance 
Allotment 
Received 
Other 
funds 
received
Cash 
Credit 
Loan 
(CCL) 
Total Expenditure 
Repaym
ent of 
CCL 
Total 
Expenditure 
Closing 
Balance 
2018-19 50.66 48.33 197.21* 0 296.21 240.68 0 240.68 55.53 
2019-20 55.53 420.08 218.55@ 0 694.16 555.18 0 555.18 138.98 
2020-21 138.98 688.39 56.34# 720.66 1,604.37 999.84 557.39 1,557.23 47.13 
2021-22 47.13 2,371.13 0 1.29 2,419.56 2,074.46 175.41 2,249.88 169.69 
2022-23 169.69 2,500.00 0 0 2,669.69 2,279.09 0 2,279.09 390.60 
Total 6,027.93 472.10 721.95 6,149.25 732.80 6,882.06 
Source: Relevant records furnished by the H&FW Department and the Samiti, GoWB; *This 
included transfer of unspent balance of RSBY (State Share) fund of ` 130.58 crore, transfer of 
State Share pertaining to AB-Swasthya Sathi Scheme (Scheme discussed in paragraph 1.9.3) of 
` 45 crore and refund from ICs ` 21.50 crore; @This included transfer of State Share pertaining 
to AB-Swasthya Sathi Scheme of ` 218 crore; # Refund of Insurance Premium. 
It can be seen from Table 1.17 that during the period 2018-19 to 2022-23, out 
of total SS Scheme funds available 90 of ₹ 7,272.64 crore, total expenditure of 
₹ 6,882.06 crore (95 per cent) was incurred. The Scheme expenditure jumped 
from 2020-21 as the coverage was extended in December 2020 to make it a 
Universal Health Protection Scheme for all the permanent residents of the State. 
1.9.2 Payment of interest due to delay in release of budgetary allotment 
SS Scheme was implemented simultaneously in both Hybrid and Assurance 
mode. Under Hybrid mode, SNA had to pay premium to the selected ICs for 
health coverage upto ₹ 1.50 lakh per beneficiary family. As per Agreement 
executed between SNA and ICs, one fourth of the premium had to be paid at the 
commencement of every quarter in a year 91 and accordingly, SNA had to 
maintain adequate fund for advance payment of premium. 
89 In May 2020, Finance Department, GoWB allowed Swasthya Sathi Samiti to raise CCL of upto 
` 1,000 crore for Swasthya Sathi Scheme. 
90 ‘Opening balance of 2018 -19’ plus ‘funds received during 2018 -19 to 2022 -23’ viz. ` 50.66 crore + 
` 6,027.93 crore + ` 472.10 crore + ` 721.95 crore 
91 Clause 64BV of IRDA Act 1938 stipulated that Insurance Premium is required to be paid in advance to 
cover the risk 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
37 
Review of records  of auditee entities did not give rise to  any data to indicate 
whether a proper assessment of budgetary requirement was made by the 
concerned authorities, especially with reference to the number of beneficiaries 
projected  to be enrolled under   the SS Scheme. During the   period between 
2018-19 and 2020 -21, it was seen that against a budgetary allotment of 
₹ 1,156.80 crore, the actual expenditure incurred was ₹ 1,795.70 crore, resulting 
in a budgetary deficit of ₹ 638.90 crore.  
During, 2018-19 and 2019-20, this expenditure in excess of budgetary allotment 
was managed from unspent balances of ot her Schemes like RSBY, 
AB-Swasthya Sathi  etc. In 2020 -21, against a budget allotment of 
₹ 688.39 crore, upto September 2020, ₹ 131 crore (19 per cent) was released by 
the H&FW Department to SNA and the remaining amount of ₹  557.38 crore 
was released between December 2020 and March 2021. 
It was noted that in order to meet the premium expenditure of the SS Scheme 
for the year 2020-21, the SNA took a CCL of ₹ 720.66 crore from West Bengal 
State Co -operative Bank (WBSCB) at an interest rate of 7.85 per cent per 
annum in September 2020. Similarly, in 2021-22, CCL of ₹ 1.29 crore was taken 
by the SNA 92. Entire loan of ₹ 721.95 crore and interest of ₹  10.85 crore was 
settled in a phased manner by 2021-22. 
Thus, due to delay in release of  budget allotment the SNA had to pay interest 
amounting to ₹  10.85 crore which eventually placed an undue burden on the 
State exchequer. 
In reply the SNA (July 2024) accepted that due to liquidity crisis CCL was taken 
with the approval of the Finance Department, GoWB which was duly refunded. 
Recommendation: 
1.7 Based on the number of beneficiaries projected to be covered under 
the Scheme, the SNA should prepare a realistic budget to ensure fund 
availability and efficient financial management. 
1.9.3 Non-implementation of the Ayushman Bharat-PMJAY 
A flagship health care programme namely Ayushman Bharat was launched by 
GoI in March 2017. Subsequently, the Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana  
(PMJAY), a component under Ayushman Bharat  was announced in 
February 2018. The objective of Ayushman Bharat-PMJAY (AB-PMJAY) was 
to provide coverage up to ` 5.00 lakh per family per year for secondary and 
tertiary care hospitalization to poor and vulnerable families. Beneficiaries for 
the scheme were proposed to be based on deprivation and occupational criteria 
as per SECC 2011 data 93 . Consequent to launch of the said scheme, the 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana  (RSBY), was also subsumed under 
AB-PMJAY. The National Health Authorit y 94  (NHA) was responsible for 
implementation of the AB-PMJAY Scheme. 
In May 2018, GoI asked the State to sign a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) for rolling out AB-PMJAY in West Bengal. However, as 
the State was already implementing the Swasthya Sathi Scheme with almost 
92 From WBSCB at an interest rate of 7.85 per cent per annum 
93 Rural households which are included are ranked based on their status of seven deprivation criteria (D1 
to D7). Urban households are categorised based on occupation categories. 
94 Successor of National Health Agency; National Health Authority (NHA) is the apex body responsible 
for implementing flagship public health insurance/ assurance scheme PMJAY 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
38 
identical fea tures, the MoU was signed between NHA, GoI and H&FW 
Department (GoWB) in May 2018 for implementation of AB -PMJAY in 
alliance 95  with the existing  Swasthya Sathi Scheme as Ayushman Bharat -
Swasthya Sathi (AB-SS). 
Initially, NHA identified 1.12 crore SECC beneficiaries in the State for 
implementation of AB -PMJAY and later the number of beneficiaries was 
revised to 1.24 crore. Central funds were to be provided for the Scheme as per 
fund sharing pattern of 60:40 between GoI and the State Government. 
For implementation of the AB-SS Scheme, the SNA, opened an escrow 96 
account with the State Bank of India and deposited ₹ 231.71 crore as State share 
in September 2018 97 besides Central share of ₹ 193.3498 crore (50 per cent of 
the first tranche of Central share of grant -in-aid and administrative expenses) 
having been  deposited in the same month 99. The scheme was rolled out on 
23 September 2018 but in January 2019, the State decided to withdraw from the 
AB-SS Scheme due to violation of clauses of the MoU.   
In February 2019, NHA requested the State to refund the Central share amount 
along with interest after adjustment of claim amount paid / payable for the 
treatment of AB -SS beneficiary families. Accordingly, the State Government 
refunded (March 2019) ₹ 162.06 crore to GoI after adjusting ₹ 31.28 crore 
against expenditure which had already been incurred. 
It is pertinent to mention here that AB -PMJAY Scheme provided greater 
flexibility100 to States including implementation mode, beneficiary population, 
health benefit package, hospital empanelment etc. Further, non-implementation 
of AB-SS also deprived the State’s population especially migrant ones101 of the 
benefit of accessing cashless health care services 102 in a network of hospitals 
across the country.  
Thus, non-implementation of the AB-SS Scheme resulted in a financial loss to 
the State as the GoWB could not avail the central funding to supplement  the 
State’s expenditure on the Swasthya Sathi Scheme, besides denying residents of 
the State benefits under AB-SS.  
In reply, the SNA stated (July 2024) that implementation of AB-SS in the State 
of West Bengal was yet to be finalised. 
1.10 Fund Management 
Audit while assessing the objective of utilization of the fund allotted under the 
Scheme, made the following observations: 
95 The scheme will be implemented through the existing IT Platform and modalities of Swasthya Sathi, 
covering both the targeted beneficiary of PMJAY and the existing beneficiary of Swasthya Sathi Scheme. 
96 An escrow account is a third -party account where funds are kept before they are transferred to the 
ultimate party. It provides security against scams and frauds especially with high asset value and 
dispute-prone sectors. 
97 on 15 September 2018 
98 ₹ 16.78 crore – 50 per cent of Administrative Expenditure and ₹ 176.56 crore – 50 per cent of first 
tranche of the Central Government’s share 
99 on 17.09.2018 
100 State Government can determine its own modus operandi regarding implementation of the Scheme, and 
GoI would provide financial assistance corresponding to targeted beneficiaries as identified by the GoI. 
101 The beneficiaries/ Smart Card holders of SS Scheme (as a whole) who move/ go to other States in India 
are not able to avail the benefits outside West Bengal whereas AB-PMJAY has portability feature. 
102 Swasthya Scheme has empanelled  Hospitals only in West Bengal, whereas AB - PMJAY has network 
hospitals across the Country. 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
39 
1.10.1 Excess adjustment of Central Fund 
As discussed in paragraph 1.9.3, an amount of ₹ 162.06 crore was refunded to 
GoI (March 2019) after adjusting ₹ 31.28 crore 103 against expenditure which 
had already been incurred under SS  Scheme pertaining to beneficiaries who 
were eligible under AB -PMJAY, on pro -rata basis. Utilization Certificate for 
this amount of ₹ 31.28 crore was furnished (December 2019) by the SNA to the 
GoI.  
In course of audit, it was noted that an expenditure of ₹ 0.81 crore (out of 
₹ 31.28 crore) was inadmissible as the same was erroneously calculated, as 
detailed below: 
The adjustment of Central share included ₹ 0.83 crore for administrative 
expenses against the claim management fees104 of TPA. The claim management 
fees of TPA (in respect of AB-SS Scheme) were to be regulated in keeping with 
Article 5 of the Agreement executed between SNA and TPA. This clause 
stipulated that in case the number of persons treated under Assurance mode in 
a month fell below 0.5 per cent of the number of enrolled beneficiaries, TPA 
fees would be paid @ 0.5 per cent of the number enrolled beneficiaries. In case, 
it did not fall below the prescribed criteria, the admissible amount based on 
number of enrolled beneficiaries was to be paid. 
Audit observed that ₹ 0.83 crore was adjust ed as claim management fees 
(23 September 2018 to 09 January 2019), of the TPA105 under Assurance mode 
for the AB -SS and RSBY Schemes. Detailed scrutiny in this regard revealed 
that calculation of this fee was made by SNA erroneously 106 based on targeted 
beneficiaries (1.12 crore families under AB -SS Scheme and 62.90 lakh under 
RSBY) to be included under AB -SS, instead of actual number of enrolled 
beneficiaries under the AB-SS Scheme. 
Audit further observed that all these beneficiaries were not enrolled under 
AB-SS Scheme (as of January 2019). In addition, it was also noted that the 
enrolment count reflected in the SS portal under the AB -SS Scheme was only 
19.83 lakh families at that time. 
Thus, adjustment of Central share should have been restricted to ₹ 0.02 crore107 
instead of ₹ 0.83 crore , which resulted in adjustment of excess claim 
management fees of ₹ 0.81 crore. 
In reply, the SNA admitted (July 2024) that claim management fees were 
calculated based on the entire targeted beneficiary families as treatment had to 
be extended to all these 1.75 crore families. Reply was not justified as clause 5 
of the referred Agreement recognised beneficiaries actually enrolled instead of 
targeted beneficiaries. 
Hence, ₹ 0.81 crore was irregularly adjusted against the Central share of AB-SS 
Scheme fund which should have been refunded to GoI by the SNA. 
103 ₹ 30.45 crore towards grant-in-aid and ₹ 0.83 crore towards administrative expenses 
104 ` 13.31 per claim 
105 MD India Health Insurance Pvt. Ltd. 
106 AB-SS Scheme: 0.5 per  cent of 1.12 crore X TPA fees @ ` 13.31 per enrolment count X 3 months  
= ` 0.22 crore & RSBY: 62.90 lakh X TPA fees @ ` 0.93 per enrolment X 2 months = ` 1.17 crore, 
which totals to ` 1.39 crore. 60 per cent of ` 1.39 crore comes to ` 0.83 crore 
107 0.5 per cent of 19,82,764 X TPA fees @ ` 13.31 per enrolment count X 3 months i.e. October 2018 to 
December 2018 for the AB -SS Scheme. Considering the Central share of 60 per  cent, the allowable 
adjustment was to be ` 0.02 crore. 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
40 
1.10.2 Irregularities relating to fund management in test-checked districts 
Scrutiny of relevant records in six-test checked districts showed that there were 
irregularities/ deficiencies in fund management / utilization which were 
inconsistent with the sanctioned purposes/ terms of release of funds by the SNA. 
1.10.2.1 Submission of UCs by district authorities  without obtaining the 
same from sub-allottees 
The SNA while placing funds in favour of district authorities (DNO -SSs), for 
incurring various Scheme related expenditure mandated that Utilization 
Certificates (UCs) were to be submitted by DNOs against funds so released. 
Review of records in test -checked districts revealed that in most cases, these 
funds were subsequently sub -allotted by DNOs to other field functionaries for 
expenditure/ utilization. During the FYs 2018-19 to 2022-23, district authorities 
(DNO-SS) in test -checked districts, sub -allotted funds amounting to 
₹ 15.43 crore. However, UCs for these were communicated to the SNA without 
DNOs obtaining the same from sub -allottees, who were responsible for actual 
expenditure. Such a practice adopt ed by the district authorities for submission 
of UCs, entailed the risk of misutilisation of allotted funds. 
While accepting the audit observation, the SNA stated (July 2024) that the 
district authorities had been instructed to submit UCs along with the UCs of all 
the peripheral units. 
Recommendation: 
1.8 The State Government may consider introducing appropriate 
mechanism to ensure that funds are utilised only for sanctioned 
purposes and UCs are submitted strictly as per the extant Financial 
Rules. 
1.10.2.2 Night Shelters for patient attendants-irregularities therein 
It was noticed that the SNA had released (October 2018) a fund of ₹ 10.23 crore 
to the DKMs of 23 districts for construction of Night Shelters for patient 
attendants including arrangement for drinking water, seating arrangements etc., 
@ ₹ 5.00 lakh for each District Hospital and @ ₹ 2.00 lakh for each Public 
Health Centre (PHC)/ Rural Hospital (RH). The SNA stipulated that funds were 
to be utilised strictly for the purpose for which they had been allocated. Further, 
Finance Department, GoWB, instructed (June 2021) that funds lying unutilised 
in Bank Accounts should be refunded to the State exchequer. 
Although construction of Nights Shelters etc., did not come under the purview 
of the Swasthya Sathi Scheme, funds for setting up the shelters were released 
by the SNA, for reasons not on record. However, scrutiny in test -checked 
districts revealed that these funds were either not utilised for the sanctioned 
purpose or were unutilized & not refunded to the SNA as discussed in 
subsequent paragraphs. 
(i) The DNO-SS, Murshidabad had received (October 2018) ₹ 67.00 lakh
from the SNA for construction of Night Shelter s but the shelters were
neither constructed nor were funds allotted for the purpose refunded to the
SNA. In reply, the DNO, Murshidabad had admitted this fact.

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
 
41 
(ii) ₹ 24.00 lakh was allotted (October 2018) in favour of the DNO -SS, 
Jalpaiguri  for  construction  of  Night Shelters  in nine  HCPs108. The 
DNO-SS further sub -allotted (January 2019) this amount in favour of 
CMOH Jalpaiguri. The CMOH incurred an expenditure of ₹ 9.88 lakh for 
the said purpose leaving an unspent balance of ₹ 14.12 lakh, parked in 
bank accounts (as of February 2024). From the available records however, 
the status of construction of night shelters remained unclear.  
(iii) In October 2018, ₹ 83 lakh was allotted to DNO -SS, North 24 Parganas 
district for construction of Night Shelters . The fund was subsequently 
sub-allotted to CMOsH, North 24 Parganas ( ₹ 36 lakh) and Basirhat 
(₹ 47 lakh) in December 2019. Scrutiny revealed that the entire fund was 
lying unutilised with the two CMOsH (as of August 2023). 
The SNA in reply stated (July 2024) that as per clause 3.2 (xvi) of the 
Memorandum of Association (MOA) of SS Samiti, it was felt that relatives of 
SS beneficiaries admitted in public hospitals who had to stay at night on the 
premises needed to be managed properly so that they could  be located and 
identified by the hospital administration.  
The reply was not tenable as this was incidental to the attainment of the main 
objective of the SS Scheme. Further, most of the night shelters were yet to be 
constructed, despite passage of around five years and funds were lying 
unutilized in bank accounts, in violation of extant norms. 
1.10.2.3 Retention of unspent funds by the district authorities 
(i) Out of funds amounting to ₹ 20 lakh received between October 2018 to 
February 2019 from t he SNA by the DNO -SS, Birbhum for different 
purposes (such as organising Health Camps, for conveying message 
from the Chief Minister to individual beneficiaries under SS Scheme ), 
the district authority incurred an expenditure of ₹ 1.37 lakh for the 
aforementioned purposes (between June 2020 to March 2022). 
However, the remaining balance of ₹ 18.63 lakh was lying idle in the 
bank account of DNO-SS, Birbhum as of August 2023 and had not been 
refunded to the SNA. 
(ii) On the same lines, an amount of ₹ 26.00 lakh was released 
(February 2019) to the DNO -SS, North 24 Parganas for conveying a 
message from the Chief Minister to Scheme beneficiaries. Out of this, 
an amount of ₹  17.38 lakh was sub -allotted to various blocks (during 
August 2019 & August 2023) and the balance amount of ₹ 8.62 lakh109 
was lying idle in the bank account of the DNO -SS, North 24 Parganas 
(as of August 2023) and had not been refunded to the SNA.  
While accepting the audit observation, SNA stated (July 2024) that the 
unutilised fund would be taken back from districts / adjusted with subsequent 
allotments. 
 
108 Two District Hospitals and Seven RH/ PHCs. 
109 ₹ 26,00,000.00 – (₹ 11,47,030.00 + ₹ 5,90,890.00) 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
42 
1.10.2.4 Unauthorised payment of remuner ation to Rogi Sahayaks 
(₹ 11.10 lakh) 
In order to facilitate a help desk at Government empanelled HCPs, SNA of 
RSBY had decided 110  to engage five Rogi Sahayaks  at Super Speciality 
Hospitals and two Rogi Sahayaks  at Block Primary Health Centres and 
Government Hospitals  at a  remuneration of ₹ 6,500 per month from RSBY 
funds. Post the decision to include contractual workers of RSBY into the fold 
of SS Samiti, the remuneration of these contractual employees, was being borne 
under the SS Scheme. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that although the Uttar Mechogram BPHC 
RK Samiti, Purba Medinipur, was not empanelled as an HCP under the 
SS Scheme, remuneration of ₹ 11.10 lakh for two Rogi Sahayaks was paid, for 
the period April 2018 to December 2023, to that BPHC from SS funds.  
In reply, SNA while accepting the audit observation regarding payment of 
remuneration to Rogi Sahayaks stated (July 2024) that Uttar Mechogram BPHC 
had been instructed to provide Swasthya Sathi benefit to concerned patients / 
beneficiaries immediately.   
Thus, non-adherence of Government order resulted in unauthorized expenditure 
of ₹ 11.10 lakh. 
1.11 Internal control mechanism, monitoring and supervision 
As the aim of the SS Scheme was to deliver quality cashless health care services 
to a beneficiary base as large as 8.62 crore and implement the Scheme with the 
involvement of multiple stakeholders, it was imperative to develop an effective 
and efficient monitoring and internal control mechanism.  
The SS Samiti had formed (February 2021) a State Surveillance Team111 (SST) 
and DSTs for verification of infrastructure claims of private HCPs to ensure that 
norms and standards were adhered to. Besides this, the Scheme also provided 
for beneficiary surveys and post discharge medical audits etc.  
While assessing the adequacy of the internal control mechanism (ICM), 
monitoring and supervision system of the Scheme , the following observations 
were noted.  
1.11.1 Conduct of Beneficiary audit 
In terms of clause 23.2 (read with clause 24.2) of the Agreement signed between 
the SNA and IC, the insurer would conduct beneficiary audits for the 
SS Scheme. The Insurer would visit discharged beneficiaries 112 on a random 
basis, and obtain feedback on the HCP, verify the admission process and 
treatment received at the empanelled HCPs. The format for conducting the audit 
and the composition of the team was to be shared by the Insurer with the SNA 
at the time of signing of Agreement. A third-party verification of the Insurer’s 
report on the beneficiary audit was to be conducted by the SNA either through 
its own Medical Audit team, or through any other agency, as decided by the 
State Government.  
110 February 2015 and November 2016 
111 Director of Health Services -WB (Chairman); Director of Medical Education -WB (Co-Chairman) & 
Technical Officer-SS (Member-Convenor) 
112 within 30 days of discharge of the patient from the hospitals 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
 
43 
In selected six districts, no information / documentation was available to 
indicate/ corroborate whether such beneficiary audits had been conducted by the 
ICs during the period covered under audit (2018-19 to 2022-23). Further, under 
the Assurance mode of the SS Scheme (introduced in July 2022), it was essential 
that a suitable clause be inserted in the agreements with TPAs to ensure that 
beneficiary audits were conducted by them. However, no such clause was 
included in the test -checked Agreements and hence no such beneficiary Audit 
was conducted by the TPAs.   
Thus, due to non-conduct of such audits by ICs/ TPAs, the performance of HCPs 
from the perspective of the beneficiaries was not  assessed during the period of 
audit. 
In reply, SNA accepted (July 2024) the audit observation and stated that district 
authorities have been directed to maintain proper documentation in this regard. 
1.11.2  Inadequate Post Discharge Medical Audit 
The SNA constituted (February 2023) a Medical Audit Team comprising 
Medical Officers, at the level of the SNA to conduct the Post Discharge Medical 
Audits (PDMAs). This Medical Audit Team functioned under the ambit of SST. 
The Medical Audit Team was instructed (February 2023) to  verify at least 30 
per cent of the discharged claims and to identify and eliminate any claims which 
were not as per the norms of the Scheme.  Any claim found to be deficient was 
to be put under the “trigger”, which was to be responded to by the concerned 
HCP within seven days. If any of those claims were proven as malafide by the 
medical audit team, amount already paid to the HCP was to be recovered by the 
SNA.  
Scrutiny of records of SNA revealed that PDMA  was never conducted during 
the FYs 2018 -19 to 2022 -23 (up to January 2023) for reasons not on record. 
However, SST through its Medical Aud it Team conducted 
21,100 (eight per cent) PDMAs against 2,74,258 113 PDMAs to be conducted 
during the period February 2023 to March 2023. Out of these, triggers were 
issued against 1,166  (six per cent) claims and action, including penalty, was 
imposed against 74 HCPs. This also highlighted that in these cases, the TPAs 
had not properly checked the claims of the HCPs. 
Records made available to audit revealed that against a penalty amount of 
₹ 11.78 crore imposed by the SNA on the HCPs for irregular claims, only 
₹ 8.36 crore was recovered (November 2023). This indicated that the TPA did 
not exercise due diligence while checking the claims. 
In reply, the SNA stated (July 2024) that during the audit period, no PDMA was 
conducted and the same was started from April 2023 onwards.   
Recommendation:  
1.9 The State Nodal Agency may ensure that PDMAs are regularly 
conducted by the Medical Audit team and based on results of this, 
required action is taken by the concerned authorities.  
 
113 Provided by SNA 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
44 
1.11.3  Lack of proper monitoring 
As stated in paragraph 1.3 , one officer of the rank of Additional District 
Magistrate was nominated by the District Magistrate to act as District Key 
Manager (DKM). The DKM was responsible for implementation of the Scheme 
including its supervision and monitoring. The DKM was inter alia required to: 
• undertake field visits and assess performance with regard to the enrolment 
status through periodic review meetings; 
• co-ordinate with the district administration to organize health camps for 
building awareness about “Swasthya Sathi” Scheme in the districts; 
• visit empanelled hospitals/ nursing homes to check beneficiary facilitation 
and record observations; 
• ensure training of Field Key Officers  (FKOs), IT staff and other support 
staff at the district level, besides ensuring that hospital training workshops 
are conducted by the IC; and 
• ensure empanelment of optimum number of eligible hospitals, both public 
and private as well as c arry out medical audit/ regular inspection of HCPs 
for proper care and counselling of beneficiaries at the HCPs.  
In this context it was noted that monitoring and supervision in the test-checked 
districts was very inadequate and there was lack of proper documentation 
related to any monitoring / field visits, review meetings, internal audit etc., of 
the SS Scheme undertaken by the district authority (DKM) as detailed in 
Appendix 1.7.  
In reply, the SNA accepted (July 2024) the audit observation and stated that the 
district authorities were directed to maintain proper documentation pertaining 
to PDMA/ Medical Audit, beneficiary audit, Grievance redressal etc. 
1.11.4 Inadequate human resources  
The SS Samiti was set up in November 2016 and at this time, eight contractual 
posts were used for the functioning of the Samiti at the State level and two posts 
were used for each district level office. All the ten contractual posts (eight State 
level & two District level posts), were engaged for the RSBY Scheme and their 
services were also utilised in implementing the SS Scheme.   
Further, for implementation of the SS Scheme in Assurance mode, the Samiti, 
in its 2 nd General Body meeting (July 2018), decided to create 245 additional 
contractual posts114 with the approval of the Finance Department, GoWB. As 
per the details of this proposal, 61 posts were to be created at the Samiti/ State 
level while 115 and 69 posts were identified for creation at the sub-division and 
district level respectively. However, this proposal was turned down by the 
Finance Department in September 2019 due to lack of bylaws / regulations in 
 
114 i) Specialist Medical Officer: four, ii) Medical Officer (MBBS): 23, iii) Assistant Finance Officer: four, 
iv)Accountants: eight, v) Call Centre Assistants: 23, vi) Data Entry Operator (for District Kiosk): 23, 
vii) Data Entry Operator (for Permanent Enrolment Centre) : 115, viii) Deputy IT Manager : two, 
ix) Assistant Data Analysis, Monitoring and Education Officer: three  x) Assistant Hospital 
Empanelment & Claim Officer: two, xi) Nodal Co-ordinator: 12, xii) Assistant IEC Officer: two, xiii) 
Data Analytical Officer: 23 and xiv) Consultant (Legal): one 

PA on Swasthya Sathi Scheme 
 
45 
the SS Samiti for undertaking this kind of recruitment of personnel. Finally, 
“The Swasthya Sathi Samiti Officers and Other Employees Service bylaws and 
Rules” were prepared by the Samiti in June 2020 and sent to Finance 
Department for approval in February 2021. However, the “The Swasthya Sathi 
Samiti Officers and Other Employees Service bylaws and Rules” were not 
approved by the Finance Department.  
A separate proposal for engagement of 35 personnel for strengthening the SNA, 
was approved by the Finance Department in January 2023. Against this, eight 
employees were engaged (at SNA level) through outsourcing as of 
October 2023 by the SS Samiti. Consequently, the District Offices (DNOs-SS) 
continued to function with a skeleton staff (only two persons in each district).  
It is pertinent to mention here that staff structure at the district level {two posts 
for each district i.e. one District Coordinator (DC) (Hospital) and one DC (IT)}, 
was initially approved on the lines of the RSBY Scheme. However, this needs 
to be viewed against the fact that the ambit of the SS Scheme was significantly 
wider than that of RSBY, especially after universalization. As of May 2023, the 
number of beneficiaries  in the SS Scheme was 8.62 crore whereas only 
62.90 lakh beneficiaries were covered under RSBY. Besides this, the number of 
district wise beneficiaries (ranging between  1.99 lakh  in Kalimpong and 
82.51 lakh in North 24 Parganas ) as well as the number of district-wise 
empanelled HCPs (ranging between 7115 and 283116) were also widely diverse, 
whereas the staff structure of each district under the SS Scheme remained the 
same. As the workload of DC (IT) and DC (Hospital) was to be proportionate 
to the number of beneficiaries and number of empanelled HCPs, the same staff 
structure, without giving cognisance to the size of beneficiaries and HCPs  for 
every district, lacked justification.  
Further, it was also observed that the Joint Director, Swasthya Sathi, H&FW 
Department, had proposed (September 2021) engaging at least one accounting 
personnel to cope up with accounting and financial workload at the district level. 
The Joint Secretary, H&FW Department had also recommended 
(September 2021) engagement of two Data Managers, at the District level to 
cope with the increased workload since the universalization of the SS Scheme. 
Notwithstanding this, no effective steps were taken by the H&FW Department 
for engagement of such staff.  
In reply (July 2024), the SNA while accepting the audit observation, stated 
that the engagement process for required human resources has been initiated and 
e-tender has been floated for this. The SNA further stated that in the meantime, 
additional manpower has been arranged through outsourcing and deputation at 
the SNA level . However, the reply remained silent regarding requirement / 
engagement of human resources in districts, which crucially impacts the 
implementation of the Scheme at the ground level.  
Recommendation:  
1.10  The State Government may expedite creation of required posts and 
subsequent process of recruitment/ posting of personnel at the district 
level for ensuring smooth implementation of the Scheme. 
 
 
115 Kalimpong 
116 North 24 Parganas 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
46 
1.11.5 Grievance Redressal System 
As per extant practice grievances117 of beneficiaries under the Scheme could be 
registered offline through written applications / Whats App/ Call Centre118 etc. 
Grievances could also be registered through the web portal – “How Can I Help 
You119”. Grievances received by Call Centres were registered on the SNA 
server. 
In this regard audit observed the following: 
• Grievances lodged were neither auto populated in the SNA portal, nor
were these acknowledged by the SNA. No mechanism to track the
redressal of grievances was seen available in the SNA portal.
• No timeline and escalation mechanism had been prescribed for the
settlement of grievances.
• Auto SMS alerts were also not sent to the complainant either at the time
of submission of grievance or at the time of its disposal.
• Review of data relating to grievances/ complaints lodged revealed that as
of March 2023, 3.68 lakh grievances had been lodged by discharged
patients through the SS Call Centre. In addition, 1.84 lakh complaints
were lodged by beneficiaries with SS Samiti/ SNA through other modes120
during the period 2018-19 to 2022-23. However, due to non-furnishing of
records, the status of follow up action taken by the SNA (if any), could
not be ascertained. In response to an audit query, the State authority stated
that all complaints were dispose d of but no records (online / offline) in
support of this claim were made available to audit.
• In July 2022 the SNA had decided to set up Call Centres at the district
level also, in addition to the existing Call Centre at the State level.
Accordingly, in September 2022 the SNA released ₹  33.00 lakh to
22 districts121 (@₹ 1.50 lakh per district). However, it was seen during
test-check that such Call Centres were not set up in any of the six sampled
districts (February 2024).
In reply the SNA stated (July 2024) that action is being taken based on the audit 
observations. 
The H&FW Department in reply (December 2024), stated that audit 
observations in this regard have been considered very seriously and measures 
like initiation of PDMA; issuing of instructions to district authorities to conduct 
regular physical visits; upgradation of software with modern technologies; 
issuance of various advisories to restrict cases susceptible to misuse etc., have 
been adopted. 
117 Denial of treatment at the time of admission, demanding extra money at the time of admission, 
medicines not provided at the time of discharge, not returning of SS Card at the time of discharge etc. 
118 Toll free number (Swasthya Sathi): 18003455384 
119 https://helpline.swasthyasathi.gov.in and Mobile App ‘Swasthya Sathi’ 
120 ‘May I Help You’ (4,006), Mobile App (2,453), Online Portal/ Whats  App (21,433), Call Centre 
(1,55,937). 
121 except Kolkata district 

Chapter 2 
Individual Paragraph of 
Compliance Audit 

47 
Chapter 2: Individual Paragraph of Compliance Audit 
WOMEN & CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL WELFARE, 
SCHOOL EDUCATION, HIGHER EDUCATION, MASS EDUCATION 
EXTENSION & LIBRARY SERVICES AND TECHNICAL 
EDUCATION, TRAINING & SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENTS  
Availability of an inclusive and accessible environment in Educational 
Institutions for Persons with Disabilities/ Children with Special Needs  
Inability of Government of West Bengal in enrolling identified eligible 
school going Children with Special Needs (CwSN) resulted in CwSN being 
deprived of access to inclusive education. Further, instances of inadequate 
number of Resource Centres, shortage of Special Educators and acute 
shortfall in training being imparted to teaching staff were noticed.
The Constitution of India promulgates equality, freedom, justice and dignity of 
all individuals and mandates an inclusive society for all, including Persons with 
Disabilities (PwDs). Article 41 of the Indian Constitution mandates the States 
to make effective provisions for securing the right to education, work and public 
assistance for people affected by disability. 
In order to reduce inequalities associated with disabilities, different Legislations 
and Acts122 were enacted from time to time. A key development in this regard 
was the enactment of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act (RPwD Act) 
in 2016. The RPwD Act through its various provisions aimed to ensure equal 
access to education, employment, healthcare, and other essential service s. In 
order to implement the provisions of the RPwD Act, the Rights of PwDs Rules 
(Central Rules) were promulgated by Government of India (GoI) & the same 
came into effect from June 2017. Similarly, at the State level, the Government 
of West Bengal (GoWB) ena cted the West Bengal Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities (WBRPwD) Rules, 2018 (State Rules) in July 2018. 
Women & Child Development and Social Welfare  (WCD&SW) Department, 
GoWB is the Nodal Department for implementation of various schemes meant 
for PwDs in the State. The implementation of educational schemes in the State 
is, however, a multi -sectoral and collaborative endeavour where various 
Departments of the GoWB/ units thereof are involved. Roles/ responsibilities of 
major implementing authorities are detailed in Table 2.1 below: 
Table 2.1: Roles/ responsibilities of major implementing authorities 
Authority Entrustment/ Responsibility 
The State Commissioner 
(Disabilities), WCD&SW 
Department 
Implementation of various schemes, coordination and 
monitoring with respect to the implementation of the RPwD 
Act 2016. 
School Education (SE) 
Department   
Implementation of ‘Inclusive Education’ for PwDs through 
Paschim Banga Samagra Shiksha Mission  (PBSSM). 
Provision of Braille & Large Print textbooks, Assistive 
122 Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992, PwDs (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full 
Participation) Act, 1995, National Trust for the Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental 
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999, etc. 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
48 
Authority Entrustment/ Responsibility 
devices and different allowances/ stipends to Children with 
Special Needs (CwSN) upto 18 years of age.  
Department of Mass Education 
Extension & Library Services 
(DMEE&LS) 
Providing education, training, and hostel facilities to 
Children with benchmark disabilities through Sponsored/ 
Recognised Special schools and extending support to Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGO)s. Implementation and 
monitoring of scholarship for students with Disabilities 
studying in Class-IX and above. 
Department of Higher Education 
(HE) 
Implementing provisions of the RPwD Act through 
Government and aided higher educational institutions. 
Implementation and monitoring of scholarship for students 
with Disabilities pursuing studies at graduate and post 
graduate levels. 
Technical Education, Training 
and Skill Development 
Department (TET&SD) 
Implementing provisions of the RPwD Act through 
technical educational institutions and providing skill 
development training to school dropout s and unemployed 
youths. 
Source: Records of respective Department 
An audit was undertaken to assess whether inclusive and accessible educational 
opportunities were ensured by the State Government/ local authorities to 
children suffering from disabilities. The audit was undertaken in two phases, 
during November 2020 to Oc tober 2021 and September/  October 2024, 
covering the period upto 2022-23. Audit was conducted through scrutiny of 
records at the nodal/  implementing Departments/  unit level as detailed in  
Appendix 2.1. Records at unit level were scrutinised  with respect to five 
selected Districts123, nine blocks and four municipalities124.  
Audit findings which emanated in course of audit scrutiny are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs.  
2.1  Educational opportunities   
 
The RPwD Act, as well as Government programmes on education of children, 
aim to cover  children with disabilities under the umbrella of universal 
education. As per Section 16 (i) of the RPwD Act, Government and Local 
Authorities should endeavour that all educational institutions funded or 
recognised by them provide Inclusive Education (IE) 125  to children with 
disabilities (CwDs) and admit them without discrimination and provide 
education and opportunities for sports and recreation activities equally with 
others. 
2.1.1 Implementation of Inclusive Education 
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009 
guaranteed a legal mandate to provide free and compulsory education to every 
child in a neighbourhood school.  
 
123 Hooghly, Kolkata, Malda, North 24 Parganas and Purba Medinipur  
124 The selection of Districts/ Blocks/ Municipal establishments was made based on statistical sampling 
method i.e., Probability Proportional to Size and Without Replacement (PPSWOR)  
125 A system of education wherein students with and without disability learn together and the system of 
teaching and learning is suitably adapted to meet the learning needs of different types of students with 
disabilities. 

Compliance Audit Paragraph 
49 
The Samagra Shiksha  (SS 126 ) Scheme, an integrated centrally sponsored 
scheme for school education, was launched by the GoI in 2018. In case of 
West Bengal, this scheme is implemented as the Paschim Banga Samagra 
Shiksha Mission (PBSSM)127. The SS scheme was aimed at education of all 
children {including CwDs also referred to as Children with Special Needs 
(CwSN) 128 }, from pre -nursery to Class -XII, studying in Government, 
Government-aided schools and schools under Local Bodies. CwSN are 
covered through the intervention of IE under the SS scheme. Data related to 
educational institutions are uploaded in the Unified District Information System 
for Education  (UDISE 129) by all schools imparting formal education from 
Class I-XII. 
2.1.1.1 Non-enrolment of all identified children with disabilities 
The inclusion of CwSN in mainstream and specialized education was an 
essential benchmark for measuring equitable access to learning opportunities. 
During the Audit period (2015 -16 to 2022 -23), number of identified C wSN 
ranged between 1,32,806 and 1,92,915. Apart from enrolment in regular schools 
under SE Department, C wSN were also enrolled in special schools (under 
DMEE&LS) and in private schools. 
Data sourced from the Annual Report of the PBSSM, and reply furnished by the 
SE Department revealed that 3 to 19 per cent identified CwSN, of age group 
between 6 and 18 years, remained deprived of regular education 
through Government/ Private/ Special schools, during the period from 2015-16 
to 2022-23, as shown in Table 2.2 below: 
Table 2.2: Status of enrolment of CwSN 
Year 
Number of 
CwSN 
Identified 
Number of 
CwSN enrolled 
in Regular 
Schools under 
SE Department 
Number of CwSN 
enrolled in Special 
Schools under 
DMEE&LS 
Number of 
CwSN 
enrolled in 
Private 
Schools 
Total 
enrolment 
in schools 
(UDISE 
data) 
Number of 
CwSN not 
enrolled in 
Schools 
(percentage) 
A B C D E F=C+D+E G=B-F 
2015-16 1,92,915 1,57,947 5,479 4,479 1,67,905 25,010 (13) 
2016-17 1,69,691 1,26,528 6,426 4,713 1,37,667 32,024 (19) 
2017-18 1,58,446 1,31,733 6,392 3,593 1,41,718 16,728 (11) 
2018-19 1,61,332 1,42,392 10,211 3,412 1,56,015 5,317 (3) 
2019-20 1,32,806 1,18,766 5,451 3,712 1,27,929 4,877 (4) 
2020-21 1,49,434 1,22,498 8,761 8,328 1,39,587 9,847 (7) 
2021-22 1,58,085 1,36,162 8,761 4,591 1,49,514 8,571 (5) 
2022-23 1,59,129 1,35,796 7,212 7,647 1,50,655 8,474 (5) 
Source: a)  From 2015 -16 to 2019 -20: Annual Report of PBSSM and b) From 2020 -21 to 
2022-23: as per reply furnished by the SE Department. In its reply, the SE Department stated 
that this data represented 1. UDISE data, 2. Reports shared by District Offices and 3. Data 
sourced from Department of Mass Education Extension & Library Services (DMEE &LS) 
126 Samagra Shiksha (launched in 2018)-an overarching programme for school education sector extending 
from pre-nursery to class XII is implemented with the broader goal of improving school effectiveness 
measured in terms of equal opportunities for schooling and equitable learning outcomes. It subsumed 
inter-alia the scheme namely Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), which was launched in 2000-01.
127 Paschim Banga Sarva Siksha Mission after integration with Paschim Banga Rashtriya  Madhyamik 
Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) was renamed (September 2018) as Paschim Banga Samagra Siksha Mission 
(PBSSM). PBSSM is registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860.  
128 SS referred to Children with disabilities as Children with Special Needs (CwSN) 
129 UDISE is a database on school education developed by Department of School Education, Ministry of 
Human Resource Development, GoI and maintained by National Informatics Centre (NIC), GoI. It 
was launched in 2012-13.  

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
50 
The State Project Director, PBSSM in reply (October 2024) stated that the status 
of enrolment of CwSN in special schools as reflected in UDISE is less than the 
number of identified CwSN, as the data covering all special schools is yet to be 
captured in the UDISE database in a consistent manner. However to support this 
contention, no corroborative evidence was furnished along with the reply to 
Audit.  
It was further added by Director, PBSSM that the issue of coverage of a greater 
number of Special Schools during the forthcoming updation of UDISE database, 
would be taken up with the DMEE&LS along with the office of the 
DEOs-SSM130.  
2.1.1.2 Inadequate establishment of Resource Centres 
Section 17(e) of the RPwD  Act, stipulated that the Government should take 
measures to establish an adequate number of Resource Centres to support 
educational institutions at all levels of school education. The major objectives 
of Resource Centres inter alia included remedial assistance 131 required by the 
CwSN. 
In this regard, it was observed that to promote inclusive education, PBSSM had 
issued instructions (September 2010) to all District Education Officers (DEOs) 
to construct Resource Centres/ Rooms for CwSN at every Gram Panchayat and 
ward level on priority basis.  
There are 342 Blocks and 127 Municipalities/  Corporations under 
24 educational districts132, comprising 3,342 GPs and 2,993 wards in the State  
as of March 2023 . Thus, there was a requirement to set up 6,335 Resource 
Centres/ Rooms in the State, at the level of GPs & wards. However, against this, 
only 1,799 Resource Centres/ Rooms were constructed upto March 2024 by the 
DEOs, representing slow progress in the provision of this facility to CwSN.  
Status of number of Resource Centres/ Rooms established in the test -checked 
districts upto 2022-23 vis-à-vis requirement, is shown in Chart 2.1.  
 
130 District Education Officer-Samagra Shiksha Mission 
131 Whenever the child is unable to comprehend the lesson in regular classroom he/  she may be taken to 
the Resource Centre/ Room and a skilled teacher provides remedial tutorial. 
132 In the State, there are 23 administrative districts, with Siliguri being an additional educational district 

Compliance Audit Paragraph 
 
51 
 
Source: Data sourced from PBSSM  
It may be seen from Chart 2.1 above that there were inadequate number of 
Resource Centres/  Rooms in the five test -checked districts. This shortage 
ranged between 93 per cent in case of North 24 Parganas to 67 per cent in case 
of Hooghly district, impacting provision of essentially required support services 
to CwSN in these districts.  
2.1.1.3 Shortage of Special Educators / Resource Support 
Section 17(c) of the RPwD  Act, stipulated that the Government and Local 
Authorities should take measures to employ and train teachers including 
teachers who were qualified in sign language and Braille and those who were 
trained in educating children with intellectual disability 133. Samagra Shiksha 
also aimed to provide inclusive education to C wSN by employing Special 
Educators who would provide resource and technical support to them. PBSSM 
was supposed to fill existing vacancies by appointment of Special Educators in 
the State. Special Educators should mandatorily be available for all enrolled 
CwSN. 
It was noticed in audit that no norms regarding number of Special Educators to 
be employed as per number of C wSN were stipulated by the SS scheme. 
However, as per The RTE Act, 2009, Pupil Teacher Ratio (PTR) for special 
teachers in general schools was stipulated as 10:1 and 15:1 for primary level 
and Upper Primary level 134  respectively. For sponsored special schools 135, 
 
133 Intellectual Disability involves problems in general mental abilities such as Intellectual functioning 
like learning, problem solving, judgement and adaptive functioning like activities of daily life such as 
communication and independent living. 
134  As per Notification dated 21 September 2022 of Ministry of Education 
135 Sponsored Special schools, under MEE&LS Department, cater to children with disabilities in providing 
specialised education and support services. These schools are funded by the State Government. 
141
880
510
192
329
38
58
168
36
44
103
822
342
156
285
K O L K A T A N O R T H  2 4  
P A R G A N A S
H O O G H L Y M A L D A P U R B A  
M E D IN IP U R
Required no. of Resource Center/ Room
No. of Resource Center/ Room established upto 2022-23
No. of Resource Center/ Room yet to be established
Chart 2.1: Inadequate Establishment of Resource Centers 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
52 
MEE&LS Department stipulated a teacher student ratio of 1:10 for Visually 
Impaired and Hearing -Impaired students and 1:6 for intellectually disabled 
students and students belonging to multiple categories of disabilities. 
It was however observed in audit that: 
(i) SE Department: There was an overall shortage of Special Educators in
the State. There were 1,35,796 C wSN enrolled in 35,658 schools of the State
against which the number of Special Educators available for providing support
to these children was 1,112, leading to a shortage of 7,941 Special Educators in
the State136. PBSSM did not take necessary steps to appoint additional Special
Educators during the period 2015 -16 to 2022 -23. As a result, the number of
Special Educators gradually decreased from 1,268 in 2015 -16 to 1,112 in
2022-23 in the State. Ratio between availability of Special Educators and CwSN
ranged between 1:101 and 1:122, during the period 2015 to 2023 137. Thus, as
per the existing status of availability of special educators in the State, effective
measures would need to be taken by the SE Department to ensure that the
stipulated PTR is met.
(ii) Special Schools under MEE&LS Department:   As of March 2023,
there were 70 Sponsored Special Schools run by the MEE&LS Department in
the State. It was observed that as of March 2023 the availability of teaching staff
in these Schools was only 384 (50 per cent) against a sanctioned strength138 of
775. The number of students enrolled in these schools was 5,204. This resulted
in an adverse PTR of 14:1 as against the norms of 10:1 for Visually Impaired
and Hearing-Impaired students and 6:1 for Intellectually disabled Students and
students belongin g to multiple categories of disabilities as laid out by the
MEE&LS Department.
In this regard it was also noted in audit that the Person s-in-position as of 
March 2023 had reduced to 384 from 427 in 2020-21. 
Resource and technical support for C wSN through trained and qualified 
teachers was, thus, adversely impacted by shortage of special educators. 
2.1.1.4 Shortfall in training of Teachers and Staff 
(i) SE Department: Section 17(d) of the RPwD Act specified that Government
and the local authorities should take measures to train professionals and staff to
support inclusive education at all levels of school education. One of the main
objectives of the SS scheme was to sensitize teachers of regula r schools and to
train them to teach and involve C wSN in the general classroom. The SS
guidelines also stipulated undertaking capacity building programmes for
existing Special Educators.
136 For 2022 -23: No. of C wSN enrolled=1,35,796; Available Special Educators=1,112; Shortage: 
(1,35,796/15)-1,112=7,941. As the bifurcation of CwSN in primary and upper primary levels was not 
available, the calculation has been made conservatively, considering the C wSN to Special Educator 
ratio of 15:1. 
137 Calculated on the basis of number of C wSN enrolled in the State against the number of Special 
Educators for the years 2015-16 to 2022-23. 
138 As segregated figures for various categories of CwSN (Visually impaired, Hearing-Impaired, multiple 
categories of disabilities etc.) were not available, the comparison has been made against sanctioned 
strength  

Compliance Audit Paragraph 
 
53 
Scrutiny of records revealed that PBSSM undertook training of teachers and 
existing Special Educators relating to C wSN, as per the approved annual plan. 
However, it was observed that during the period 2015 -23, as against a training 
target of 2,45,479 Teachers/  Special Educators over three courses 139 , only 
1,64,545 could be trained by PBSSM, leading to a shortfall of 33 per cent.  
In reply (July 2022), the SE Department stated that the training programme had 
been designed and will be taken up in a phased manner. However, reply with 
regard to reasons for not being able to meet training targets was not furnished.  
(ii) MEE&LS Department:  The MEE&LS Department stated that Teaching 
Staff of Special Schools were being imparted relevant training by the 
Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI) under the continued rehabilitation 
education programme.  
In this regard it was observed that during the period 2020 -21 to 2022 -23 no 
training was imparted to the 384 existing teachers of the 70 Government 
sponsored special schools, under the MEE&LS Department in the State.  
Lack of proper training for teachers could affect C wSN by limiting learning 
opportunities and access to the latest developments in the field. Addressing this 
issue through structured training programmes was crucial for better student 
support. 
2.1.1.5 Non-providing of Textbooks in Braille Language 
To promote and facilitate inclusive education, the RPwD Act, under Section 
17(g), stipulated that the Government and the Local Authorities should take 
measures to provide books and other learning materials to students with 
benchmark disabilities free of cost, up to the age of 18 years. 
(i) SE Department:  The Student-oriented component of IE under 
SS focuses on specific needs and well -being of students, including those with 
disabilities. As per this component, SS was to provide free text books in Braille 
for CwSN suffering from blindness. Accordingly, Braille textbooks were to be 
provided to students with blindness, studying in Government and Government 
aided schools as per the annual plans of SS finalised by the PBSSM140.    
It was, however, observed that distribution of Braille textbooks, during the 
period from Financial Years (FYs) 2015-16 to 2022-23 was not in accordance 
with the actual number of visually impaired C wSN. As a result, a total of 
5,652 such students (21 per cent) were deprived of Braille textbooks, during the 
period covered under audit.  
This fact was also corroborated from review of records in the test -checked 
districts. In the five test -checked districts, no annual targets were 
set for providing Braille books to C wSN who were visually impaired. During 
2019-20, against 592 visually impaired C wSN, Braille books were distributed 
 
139 1. Two/ three days Non-residential Training of Teachers on Curriculum Adaptation, 2. two/ three days 
Training of existing Special Educators on Curriculum Adaptation and 3. two/ three days Training of 
Teachers on Sign Language 
140 Plans are approved by the Project Approval Board, Department of School Education & Literacy, 
Ministry of Education, GoI 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
54 
to only 121 C wSN. Further, no Braille books were distributed to 326  CwSN 
suffering from blindness in Malda District (during 2021 -22 to 2022 -23) and 
308 visually impaired C wSN of North 24 Parganas (during 2020 -21 to 
2022-23). 
SE Department in reply (July  2022) stated that directions have been issued to 
districts to place orders well in advance based on actual requirement, so that 
targeted children can get textbooks at the beginning of the academic year.   
(ii) MEE&LS Department:  The Department did not provide any free
Braille Text books to the visually impaired students enrolled in sponsored
schools run by the Department. Physical verification in five test -checked
districts showed that all the 647  students suffering from blindness, studying in
the seven sponsored special schools, were deprived of Braille Textbooks during
2022-23.
2.1.1.6 Non-distribution of free large print textbook for C wSN with 
low-vision 
Like Braille Textbooks, free textbooks with large prints were also to be provided 
to CwSN with low-vision, under the IE intervention of SS. Accordingly, these 
textbooks with large prints were to be provided to C wSN with low vision 
studying in Government and Government -aided schools upto class VIII (till 
2017-18) and thereafter upto class XII as per the annual plans of SS finalised by 
the PBSSM141. 
It was observed from records that against 1,30,312 large print textbooks  
required to be distributed during the period from 2015 -16 to 2022 -23, 
37,998 (29 per cent) large print textbooks could not be distributed during the 
period. Among the test -checked five districts, such non -distribution was 
observed in Malda district, where large print textbooks could not be provided to 
837 (100 per cent) students with low vision, in 2022 -23. The reasons for such 
non-distribution were not ascertainable from the records. 
The SE Department in its reply stated (July 2022) that, as per the existing 
practice, respective districts placed orders for printing and supply of large print 
textbooks with the West Bengal Textbook Corporation Ltd., based on actual 
requirement. However, the process of printing the textbooks was getting 
delayed due to placement of orders from different districts at different times. It 
was further stated that a centralised approach was adopted to streamline the 
process from the academic session 2022.  
Contention of the SE Department with regard to adoption of centralised 
approach was however not convincing as Audit had noted non -distribution of 
large print textbooks to 57 per cent (9,288) of eligible 16,280 low vision 
students in 2022 -23 also, highlighting  that there had  been no improvement in 
the delivery and distribution system.  
141 Plans are approved by the Project Approval Board, Department of School Education & Literacy, 
Ministry of Education, GoI 

Compliance Audit Paragraph 
55 
2.1.2 Scholarships to students with benchmark disabilities 
Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (DEPwD), under the 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment (MSJE), GoI, provided scholarships 
for students with disabilities at the Pre-Matric142, Post-Matric143 and Top-Class 
education144 levels, through the National Scholarship Portal (NSP). Candidates 
could apply for any of the scholarships through the NSP based on requisite 
documents. The participating schools/ colleges were required to verify the 
documents submitted and the State Commissioner for PwDs (as the State nodal 
officer), was empowered to carry out final verification of applications and 
prepare a merit list at the State level for submission to the DEPwD. Payment of 
scholarships to beneficiaries was made through the Public Finan cial 
Management System (PFMS) directly into the bank accounts of the 
beneficiaries. Scrutiny of these three scholarships, during the period from 2016-
17 to 2022-23145 revealed the following: 
Pre-Matric Scholarship: Out of 5,266 applications received during 2016 -23 
from PwD students, 4,304 applications were found valid. Of these valid 
applications, 2,439 applications were included in the final merit list. Review of 
PFMS data for the period showed that payment of Pre-Matric Scholarships was 
finally made to only 2,332 applicants during the period 2016-23. With regard to 
the remaining 646 applications, these were shown as pending for verification at 
the level of State Commissioner for PwD, as detailed in Table 2.3.  
Table 2.3: Profile of applications in respect of Pre-Matric Scholarship 
Year 
Number of 
application
s received 
Number of 
valid 
applications 
Actual No. of 
applications 
pending for 
verification 
Number of 
applications 
in the merit 
list 
Number of 
applications 
found in 
PFMS 
2016-17 552 448 53 395 289 
2017-18 978 929 38 805 804 
2018-19 2,312 2,154 122 919 919 
2019-20 863 534 329 188 188 
2020-21 NF NF NF NF NF 
2021-22 232 111 66 45 45 
2022-23 329 128 38 87 87 
Total 5,266 4,304 646 2,439 2,332 
Source: Records furnished by the Office of the State Commissioner of PwDs, WB, NF: Not 
Furnished 
142 Students with disabilities studying in classes IX and X. Under Pre -Matric scholarship an amount 
ranging between ₹ 1,000 to ₹ 9,600 per annum was paid depending on the category (Maintenance 
allowance/ Book allowance etc.) of scholarship 
143 Students with disabilities studying in classes XI, XII, Post -Matriculation Diploma/ Certificates and 
Bachelor’s Degree or Diploma in India and Master’s Degree/ Diploma from any University 
recognised by University Grants Commission ( UGC)/ All India Council for Technical Education 
(AICTE). Under Post-Matric scholarship an amount ranging between ₹ 1,500 to ₹ 1,50,000 per annum 
was paid depending on the category (Maintenance allowance/  Disability allowance/ Reimbursement 
of compulsory non-refundable fee allowance etc.) of scholarship 
144 Students with disabilities pursuing studies at graduate and post graduate degree or diploma in notified 
Institutes of Excellence in education identified by DEPwD . Under Top Class scholarship an amount 
ranging between ₹ 5,000 to ₹ 2,00,000 per annum was paid depending on the category (Maintenance 
allowance/ Special allowance/ Purchase of computer etc.) of scholarship 
145 except 2020-21 due to non-furnishing of data by the State Commissionerate 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
56 
Reasons for 646 applications pending verification at the level of State 
Commissioner for PwDs during 2016 -17 to 2022 -23 and non -inclusion of 
107 (2,439-2,332) merit listed candidates in PFMS, could not be ascertained 
from the records by Audit. Also, reasons for large number of applications being 
found invalid were also not provided to Audit. Further, fate of 1,219 valid 
applications (4,304-646-2,439) could not be reconciled from records of State 
Commissioner of PwDs. 
Post-Matric Scholarship: Against 15,528 applications received during the 
period 2016 -17 to 2022 -23, 9,965  applications were found valid of which 
4,593 applications featured in the final merit list as approved by DEPwD. Of 
these, 4,381 applications were approved for payment in PFMS for Post -Matric 
Scholarship, while 4,394 applications remained pending verification at the level 
of State Commissioner for PwD, as detailed in Table 2.4. 
Table 2.4: Profile of applications in respect of Post-Matric Scholarship 
Year 
Number of 
the 
applications 
received 
Number of 
valid 
applications 
Actual No. 
of 
applications 
pending for 
verification 
Number of 
applications 
in the merit 
list 
Number of 
applications 
found in 
PFMS 
2016-17 1,445 1,112 249 863 652 
2017-18 3,433 3,106 566 2,156 2,156 
2018-19 4,848 3,278 1,974 728 728 
2019-20 730 453 295 156 156 
2020-21 NF NF NF NF NF 
2021-22 1,077 475 142 333 333 
2022-23 3,995 1,541 1,168 357 356 
Total 15,528 9,965 4,394 4,593 4,381 
Source: Records furnished by Office of the State Commissioner of PwDs, WB , NF: Not 
Furnished 
Reasons for large number of applications (5,563 applications146) being declared 
invalid, pendency of final verification of 4,394 applications at the level of the 
State Commissioner and non -inclusion of 212  (4,593-4,381) merit listed 
candidates in PFMS could not be ascertained in audit due to non-availability of 
detailed records. Further, the fate of 978 applications (9,965  - 4,593 - 4,394), 
despite being found valid, could not be reconciled from records of State 
Commissioner of PwDs.  
Top Class Scholarship: During the period 2016 -17 to 2022 -23, 
121 applications were received from PwD students for availing the Top Class 
Scholarship. Of these, 108 applications were found valid by the State 
Commissioner of PwDs and 72 applications were included in the final merit list, 
as approved by DEPwD. Review o f PFMS data showed that payments were 
made to 71 applicants. The details are given in Table 2.5. 
146 15,528 – 9,965 applications 

Compliance Audit Paragraph 
57 
Table 2.5: Profile of applications in respect of Top Class Scholarship 
Year 
Number of the 
applications 
received 
Number of 
valid 
applications 
Actual No. of 
applications 
pending for 
verification 
Number of 
applications 
in the merit 
list 
Number of 
applications 
found in 
PFMS 
2016-17 2 1 0 1 1 
2017-18 8 4 4 0 0 
2018-19 8 8 3 5 4 
2019-20 17 17 0 17 17 
2020-21 NF NF NF NF NF 
2021-22 54 49 2 27 27 
2022-23 32 29 0 22 22 
Total 121 108 9 72 71 
Source: Records furnished by Office of the State Commissioner of PwDs, WB ; NF: Not 
Furnished  
As evident from table above, nine applications remained pending for 
verification at the level of State Commissioner of P wDs during 2 016-17 to 
2022-23. Further, reasons for 13 applications (121 -108) being invalid and one 
application (72 -71) not being forwarded to PFMS for payment, were not 
forthcoming from the records of the State Commissioner of PwDs. Moreover, 
the fate of 27 valid applicati ons (108 -9-72), could not be reconciled from 
records of the State Commissioner of PwDs. 
2.2 Accessible/ Barrier Free Environment and availability of assistive 
devices to Persons/ Children with Disabilities 
2.2.1 Barrier free environment for PwDs/ CwDs 
The Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, GoI, launched a programme , 
namely, “Accessible India Campaign (Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan)” in December 
2015, as a nation -wide campaign for achieving universal accessibility and 
barrier free environment for PwDs in Government buildings.  
Accessibility in Government Buildings: Section 46 of the PwD Act envisaged 
improving accessibility of PwDs in Government buildings. Sections 40, 44 & 
45 of the RPwD Act, read with Rule 17 of the Central Rules 147 inter-alia 
stipulated that permission should be granted for a building plan structure and 
certificate of completion for buildings may be issued if the construction 
complies with the rules framed by the Central Government. Further, all existing 
public buildings shoul d be made accessible for PwDs, in accordance with the 
rules formulated by the Central Government, within a period not exceeding five 
years from the date of notification of such Rules.  
2.2.1.1 Barrier free environment for PwDs in Government Polytechnic 
Institutes and Industrial Training Institutes 
Regarding accessibility of PwD students in Government Polytechnics and 
Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) Audit observed the following: 
147 Rights of Persons with Disabilities Rules 2017 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal  
 
58 
Polytechnic Institutes: Physical verification of six148 Government Polytechnic 
Institutes by Audit 149  indicated that barrier free access for students with 
disabilities was yet to be made available. In this context it was observed that 
• No ramp was available in two150 of six test-checked polytechnics, and 
a lift for attending classes being held on upper floors was available in 
only one Polytechnic (APC Roy Polytechnic Institute, Kolkata).  
• In four 151 out of six test -checked polytechnics, toilets suitable for 
PwDs were not available. 
Lack of necessary infrastructure in the polytechnic institutes can be seen from 
the Pictures 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3:  
   
Picture 2.1: No ramp at the entrance to 
Dr. Meghnad Saha Institute of 
Technology, Haldia, Purba Medinipur 
Picture 2.2: No lift in Birla Institute of 
Technology, Kolkata 
Picture 2.3: Toilets of Hooghly Institute 
of Technology, Hooghly not disabled 
friendly 
Industrial Training Institutes:  During physical inspection 152  of six 153 
Government Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs), in five selected Districts by 
Audit, it was observed that:  
• Ramp was available only in one154 out of six test-checked ITIs. 
• No lifts were available in any of the six test-checked ITIs, for use by 
PwDs. 
• Barrier free suitable toilets for PwDs were not available in five155 out 
of six test-checked ITIs.  
Lack of infrastructure in the ITIs is evident from Pictures 2.4, 2.5 and 2.6: 
 
148 Kolkata: Birla Institute of Technology and APC Roy Polytechnic Institute; North 24 Parganas: AJC 
Bose Polytechnic; Hooghly: Hooghly Institute of Technology; Purba Medinipur: Dr. Meghnad Saha 
Institute of Technology and Malda: Malda Polytechnic Institute 
149 During March to September 2021 
150 Purba Medinipur: Dr. Meghnad Saha Institute of Technology and Malda: Malda Polytechnic Institute  
151 Malda: Malda Polytechnic; North 24 Parganas: AJC Bose Polytechnic; Hooghly: Hooghly Institute of 
Technology and Purba Medinipur: Dr. Meghnad Saha Institute of Technology 
152 During March to September 2021 
153 Kolkata: Government ITI, Gariahat; North 24 Parganas: Government ITI, Barrackpore and Halisahar 
Government ITI; Hooghly: Government ITI Hooghly; Purba Medinipur: ITI Haldia and Malda: 
Government ITI, Malda 
154 Kolkata: Government ITI, Gariahat 
155  North 24 Parganas: Government ITI, Barrackpore and Halisahar Government ITI; Hooghly: 
Government ITI Hooghly; Kolkata: Government ITI, Gariahat and Malda: Government ITI, Malda 


Compliance Audit Paragraph 
 
59 
 
 
 
 
 
Picture 2.4: Halisahar Government 
ITI, North 24 Parganas 
 Picture 2.5: Government ITI, 
Hooghly 
 Picture 2.6: Toilets of Workshop, 
Govt. ITI, Malda 
It is evident that accessibility for PwDs in Government Polytechnics and ITIs in 
the State was not ensured. This not only impacted the objective of achieving 
universal accessibility for PwDs but also deprived them of the opportunity to 
lead their lives with full dignity and freedom, in a barrier free environment. 
2.2.1.2 Barrier free accessibility to Children with Disabilities in various 
Schools  
The RPwD  Act, under Section 16 (ii), stipulated that to meet the goal of 
inclusive education, Government and the Local Authorities should endeavour 
to provide barrier free access and ensure that buildings, campuses and various 
facilities are accessible to Children  with Disabilities studying in those 
educational institutions. 
Schools under SE Department:  The SS Abhiyan, under infrastructure 
development and maintenance, provided for ramps with railings, barrier free 
access and separate toilets for C wSN in schools. In November 2019, PBSSM 
also issued directions for the construction of inclusive 156 toilets in schools to 
achieve the objective of 100 per cent barrier free infrastructure in schools. 
It was , however, observed in audit that infrastructure like ramps, ramp with 
handrails for barrier free access and suitable toilets for C wSN could not be 
developed in 4,083 (six per cent), 43,313 (68 per cent) and 43,778 (69 per cent) 
schools157 respectively in the State. 
Schools under MEE&LS Department: As of March 2023, out of 70 Sponsored 
Special Schools under MEE&LS Department it was observed that ramp with 
handrails for barrier free access and suitable toilets for CwSN were not available 
in 17 and 32 Sponsored Special Schools respectively. 
2.2.2  Inadequate Assessment Camps for Providing Assistive Devices 
To promote and facilitate inclusive education, the RPwD Act, under 
Section 17(g), stipulated that the Government and Local Authorities should take 
measures to provide appropriate assistive devices to students with benchmark 
disabilities, free of cost, up to the age of eighteen years. 
(i)  SE Department:  The SS Abhiyan guidelines mandate providing 
assistive devices free of cost to students with benchmark disabilities up to the 
 
156 An inclusive toilet is for use of a person who may require accompaniment of caregiver. 
157 Out of 63,727 Government and Government-aided schools. 


CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
60 
age of 18 years, enrolled in Government/  Government-aided schools, by 
conducting assessment camps. The Artificial Limbs Manufacturing Corporation 
of India (ALIMCO), functioning under the administrative control of the MSJE, 
GoI, supplied assistive devices f or the C wSN enrolled in Government/ 
Government-aided schools under the SE Department of GoWB. 
Further, as per guidelines of the PBSSM, annual assessment camps were to be 
conducted at two to three different locations of a Block in the presence of the 
Medical Officer, Special Educators and ALIMCO officials, for taking 
measurements and impressions for  assistive devices. Accordingly, the State 
Project Director, PBSSM was to prepare Annual Plans for conducting such 
assessment camps based on the number of Blocks, Municipalities and Municipal 
Corporations in the State. 
As against the stipulation to organize at least two camps in a year at the Block  
(342)/ Municipality (120)/ Municipal Corporation  (seven) level158, only 96 to 
584 camps were held during 2016-23. Due to non-organisation or organisation 
of lesser number of camps, all the C wSN could not avail the opportunity of 
getting screened for assistive devices. 
Also, it was observed that, during 2016-23, lesser number of supportive devices 
(ranging from 1 to 79 per cent) were provided to C wSN, in comparison to the 
targets set (except in 2017-18 & 2021-22) as evident from the Table 2.6: 
Table 2.6: Statement showing distribution of Assistive Devices to CwSN 
Year Providing Assistive Devices (Aids & Appliances) to enrolled CwSN 
No. of CwSN to be covered Achievement 
2016-17 13,050 11,803 (90) 
2017-18 11,735 12,073 (103) 
2018-19 26,811 19,278 (72) 
2019-20 18,316 12,700 (69) 
2020-21 19,161 4,105 (21) 
2021-22 19,161 20,313 (106) 
2022-23 25,866 25,586 (99) 
Source: Data sourced from State Project Director, PBSSM 
During scrutiny of records in the test-checked Districts, it was observed that no 
assistive devices were provided to the C wSN of Kolkata (2016 -17), Hooghly 
(2017-18 & 2020-21) and Malda (from 2017-18, 2018-19 to 2020-21).  
Thus, due to the organisation of lesser numbers of camps, CwSN were deprived 
of being screened for Aids and Appliances essential for their daily requirements 
and learning. Further even for those who were screened, the Department was 
unable to meet the requirements of assistive devices for all of them. This 
resulted in lack of necessary support  to those deprived , potentially hindering 
their educational and personal development. 
(ii) MEE&LS Department: The Department did not implement this provision
of the RPwD Act. Due to such non -compliance, 72,804 C wSN, studying in
110 special schools (sponsored: 70  and recognised: 40), during the period
covered under audit, were deprived from receiving the benefit of free
assessments and assistive devices.
158 Considering the number of Blocks, Municipalities and Municipal Corporations as of March 2023 

Compliance Audit Paragraph 
61 
In reply, the MEE&LS Department stated (September 2024) that an initiative 
had been taken to provide assistive devices to C wSN in collaboration with the 
WCD&SW Department, GoWB. However, no documents in support of this 
were produced to Audit. 
Thus, C wSN studying in special schools under MEE&LS Department were 
deprived from the benefit of assistive devices. 
The objective of providing free and compulsory education to C wSN 
remained largely unachieved due to non-enrolment of all identified CwSN, 
shortfall in establishment of Resource Centres, shortage of Special 
Educators and inadequacies in imparting training to such staff. There were 
shortfalls in terms of coverage of C wSN/ PwDs in educational scholarship 
schemes. The objective of establishing a n accessible and barrier free 
environment for CwSN/ PwDs in educational institutions was compromised 
due to deficiency in requisite infrastructure and non-availability of assistive 
devices. 
Kolkata         (BIBHUDUTTA BASANTIA) 
The Principal Accountant General (Audit-I) 
West Bengal 
Countersigned 
New Delhi         (K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India 

Appendices 

Appendices 
63 
Appendix 1.1 
(Refer paragraph 1.4) 
ICs engaged under the Scheme with period of engagement 
Name of the Insurance Company Period of engagement No. of Districts covered 
Bajaj Allianz General Insurance 
Company Ltd.  
01.04.2018 to 15.01.2020 18159 
Iffco Tokio General Insurance 01.04.2018 to 31.12.2019 05160 
National Insurance Company Ltd. 16.01.2020 to 15.07.2022 06161 
United India Insurance Company Ltd. 08162 
Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. 09163 
Source: Document received from the SNA 
TPAs engaged under the Scheme with period of engagement 
Name of the TPA Mode of 
operation Period of engagement 
Number of 
Districts 
covered164 
MD India Health Insurance Private 
Ltd. 
Hybrid 01.09.2017 to 31.08.2020 all districts of the 
State 
Heritage Health Insurance Pvt. Ltd. 01.09.2020 to 31.08.2022 
Medi Assist Insurance Pvt. Ltd. Assurance 01.04.2019 to 15.07.2021 17 districts165 
Paramount Health Services and 
Insurance Pvt. Ltd. 
6 districts166 
Medi Assist Insurance Pvt. Ltd. 16.07.2021 to 31.03.2023 18 districts167 
Paramount Health Services and 
Insurance Pvt. Ltd. 
7 districts168 
Source: Document received from the SNA 
159 Bankura, Birbhum, Cooch Behar, Dakshin Dinajpur, Darjeeling, Hooghly, Howrah, Kalimpong, 
Kolkata, Malda, Murshidabad, Nadia, North 24 Parganas, Paschim Bardhaman, Purba Bardhaman, 
Paschim Medinipur, Purba Medinipur and South 24 Parganas. 
160 Alipurduar, Jalpaiguri, Jhargram, Purulia and Uttar Dinajpur. 
161 Howrah, Kolkata, Murshidabad, Nadia, North 24 Parganas and South 24 Parganas. 
162Alipurduar, CoochBehar, Dakshin Dinajpur, Darjeeling, Jalpaiguri, Kalimpong, Malda  and Uttar 
Dinajpur. 
163 Bankura, Birbhum, Hooghly, Jhargram, Paschim Bardhaman, Purba Bardhaman, Paschim Medinipur, 
Purba Medinipur and Purulia. 
164 District-wise rate was sought for in NIT, based on lowest quoted rate TPAs were selected. 
165 Alipurduar, Bankura, Birbhum, Cooch Behar, Hooghly, Howrah, Jalpaiguri, Malda, Murshidabad, 
Nadia, North 24 Parganas, Paschim Bardhaman, Purba Bardhaman, Paschim Medinipur, Purba 
Medinipur, Purulia and South 24 Parganas. 
166 Dakshin Dinajpur, Darjeeling, Jhargram, Kalimpong, Kolkata and Uttar Dinajpur. 
167 Alipurduar, Bankura, Birbhum, Cooch Behar, Dakshin Dinajpur, Hooghly (16 -04-2022 to 31 -03-
2023), Howrah, Jalpaiguri, Jhargram, Kalimpong, Kolkata, Malda, Paschim Bardhaman, Purba 
Bardhaman (16-04-2022 to 31 -03-2023), Paschim Medinipur, Purba Medinipur, Pur ulia and Uttar 
Dinajpur 
168 Hooghly (16 -07-2021 to 15 -04-2022), Purba Bardhaman (16 -07-2021 to 15 -04-2022), Darjeeling, 
Murshidabad, Nadia, North 24 Parganas and South 24 Parganas. 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
64 
Appendix 1.2 
(Refer paragraph 1.7) 
Six selected districts with names of test -checked Private HCPs empaneled 
under the Scheme in each district under the DNO-SS & CMOH 
Name of 
district Sl. No. 
Name of the test checked Private Healthcare 
Providers (Hospital/ Nursing Home) 
empaneled under the Scheme 
Gradation* of the 
HCPs 
Birbhum 1 Asha Nursing Home A 
2 New Apanjan Nursing Home A 
3 Acharyya Multispecialty Hospital B 
4 Jyoti Nursing Home B 
5 Loknath Nursing Home B 
6 Bolpur Nursing Home B 
7 Care Nursing Home & Diagnostic Centre B 
8 Dr. Ajit Kumar Nan & Binapani Nan Memorial Nursing 
Home 
B 
9 Glocal Hospital Bolpur B 
10 Hospaccx B 
11 Swastik Clinic & Seva Sadan Private Ltd. B 
12 Joy Durga Nursing Home C 
13 Pratap Nursing Home C 
14 Swastha Bitan C 
15 PMP Nursing Home C 
Hooghly 1 Arogya Nursing Home B 
2 Seva Hospital B 
3 Medisky Hospital and Diagnostics B 
4 Kalpataru Nursing Home B 
5 Apexx Nursing Home B 
6 New United Nursing Home B 
7 Nabodoy Nursing Home B 
8 City Nursing Home C 
9 Badal Chandra Das Memorial Medical Complex C 
10 Arogyalok Seba Niketan R 
Purba 
Medinipur 
1 Dr. Bidhan Chandra Roy Hospital A 
2 Chandipur Multi-speciality Hospital A 
3 Baroma Multi-speciality Hospital A 
4 Monideepa Nursing Home B 
5 The Life Care B 
6 Anandalok Seva Sadan & Polyclinic B 
7 Mother Nursing Home B 
8 HITECH Nursing Home B 
9 Nightingale Nursing Home B 
10 Nabajiban Maternity-cum-Nursing Home C 
Jalpaiguri 1 Siliguri Greater Lions Eye Hospital A 
2 Maharaja Agrasen Health Care Centre A 
3 Tulip Health Care B 
4 Siliguri Greater Lions Shri Vidyasagar Oswal Eye 
Hospital 
B 
5 Poorni Healthcare Pvt Ltd. B 
6 Marina Medical Centre Pvt. Ltd. B 
7 Care N Cure Nursing Home B 

Appendices 
65 
Name of 
district Sl. No. 
Name of the test checked Private Healthcare 
Providers (Hospital/ Nursing Home) 
empaneled under the Scheme 
Gradation* of the 
HCPs 
8 Medicare Nursing Home B 
9 Touch Nursing Home Private Limited C 
10 Jeebandeep Nursing Home C 
North 24 
Parganas 
1 Eco Hospital and Diagnostics A 
2 Sankara Nethralaya A 
3 BMRC Hospitals Ltd. A 
4 Galaxy Multispeciality Hospital A 
5 Charnock Hospitals Pvt. Ltd. A 
6 M/s Bibhuti Bhushan Hospital Pvt. Ltd. B 
7 Eden Nursing Home B 
8 Phoenix Hospital and Diagnostic Centre Pvt. Ltd. B 
9 New Sebayan Nursing Home & Diagnostic Centre B 
10 Aslam Nursing Home C 
Murshidabad 1 Gitaram Hospital Private Limited A 
2 Manmohini Healthcare Pvt. Ltd. A 
3 Nidan Nursing Home B 
4 Lila Hospital Pvt Ltd. B 
5 Nibedita Health Care (A Unit of Gangapada Super 
Speciality Hospital Pvt. Ltd.) 
B 
6 Bhagwangola Medical Institute B 
7 Holy Heart Medical Centre (A Unit of Ainul Memorial 
Hospital Pvt. Ltd.) 
B 
8 New Amtala Nursing Home & Diagnostic Centre B 
9 Khanam Nursing Home C 
10 BPL & General Nursing Home C 
Total: 65 Private HCPs 
* Gradation showing the different grades of the HCPs awarded by the H&FW Department
according to the availability of the infrastructure at the HCPs

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
66 
Appendix 1.3 
{Refer paragraph 1.8.1.3 (ii)} 
Improper Gradation of empanelled HCPs in selected districts  under the 
DNO-SS & CMOH 
Name of 
district 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the test 
checked Private 
HCPs empanelled 
under the Scheme 
Grade 
Whether 
the 
gradation 
was 
found 
proper? 
(yes/ no) 
Scoring 
(percentage) 
found on the 
basis of the 
criteria 
stipulated by 
SNA 
Gradation 
which 
should 
have been 
given* 
Drainage of 
Govt. fund 
(period from 
16.07.2022 to 
31.03.2023 i.e., 
in `) 
Hooghly 1 Arogya Nursing 
Home 
B No 113 (43) C 1,08,06,721 
2 Seva Hospital B No 144 (55) C 61,90,270 
3 Medisky Hospital 
and Diagnostics 
B Yes 180 (69) B 0 
4 Kalpataru Nursing 
Home 
B No 131 (50) C 48,20,777 
5 Apexx Nursing 
Home 
B No 151 (58) C 22,95,556 
6 New United 
Nursing Home 
B Yes 199 (77) B 0 
7 Nabodoy Nursing 
Home 
B No 120 (46) C 17,84,761 
8 City Nursing Home C Yes 86 (33) C 0 
9 Badal Chandra Das 
Memorial Medical 
Complex 
C Yes 94 (36) C 0 
10 Arogyalok Seba 
Niketan 
R Yes Below 30 beds R 0 
District-wise Total 2,58,98,085 
Purba 
Medinipur 
1 Dr. Bidhan 
Chandra Roy 
Hospital 
A Yes 234 (90) A 0 
2 Chandipur Multi -
speciality Hospital 
A Yes 219 (84) A 0 
3 Baroma Multi -
speciality Hospital 
A No 170 (65) B 1,62,75,994 
4 Monideepa 
Nursing Home 
B No 143 (55) C 80,63,569 
5 The Life Care B No 112 (43) C 78,83,272 
6 Anandalok Seva 
Sadan & Polyclinic 
B No 126 (48) C 60,80,917 
7 Mother Nursing 
Home 
B No 143 (55) C 41,54,380 
8 HITECH Nursing 
Home 
B No Below 30 beds R 42,03,688 
9 Nightingale 
Nursing Home 
B No 112 (43) C 45,85,161 
10 Nabajiban 
Maternity-cum-
Nursing Home 
C Yes 112 (43) C 0 
District-wise Total 5,12,46,981 
Jalpaiguri 1 Siliguri Greater 
Lions Eye Hospital 
A Yes 240 (92) A 0 
2 Maharaja Agrasen 
Health Care Centre 
A Yes 230 (89) A 0 
3 Tulip Health Care B No 140 (54) C 21,67,539 
4 Siliguri Greater 
Lions Shri 
Vidyasagar Oswal 
Eye Hospital 
B Yes 209 (80) B 0 
5 Poorni Healthcare 
Pvt. Ltd. 
B No 137 (53) C 72,089 

Appendices 
67 
Name of 
district 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the test 
checked Private 
HCPs empanelled 
under the Scheme 
Grade 
Whether 
the 
gradation 
was 
found 
proper? 
(yes/ no) 
Scoring 
(percentage) 
found on the 
basis of the 
criteria 
stipulated by 
SNA 
Gradation 
which 
should 
have been 
given* 
Drainage of 
Govt. fund 
(period from 
16.07.2022 to 
31.03.2023 i.e., 
in `) 
6 Marina Medical 
Centre Pvt. Ltd. 
B Yes 175 (67) B 0 
7 Care N Cure 
Nursing Home 
B No 144 (55) C 5,43,524 
8 Medicare Nursing 
Home 
B No 127 (49) C 27,35,508 
9 Touch Nursing 
Home Private 
Limited 
C Yes 153 (59) C 0 
10 Jeebandeep 
Nursing Home 
C Yes 60 (23) C 0 
District-wise Total 55,18,660 
North 24 
Parganas 
1 Eco Hospital And 
Diagnostics 
A No 135 (52) C 44,16,182 
2 Sankara 
Nethralaya 
A Yes NABH 
accredited (single 
speciality i.e. eye 
hospital) 
A 0 
3 BMRC Hospitals 
Ltd. 
A Yes NABH 
accredited 
A 0 
4 Galaxy 
Multispeciality 
Hospital 
A No 126 (48) C 24,28,031 
5 Charnock 
Hospitals Pvt. Ltd. 
A Yes NABH 
accredited 
A 0 
6 M/s Bibhuti 
Bhushan Hospital 
Pvt. Ltd. 
B No 69 (27) C 62,73,904 
7 Eden Nursing 
Home 
B No 96 (37) C 51,26,859 
8 Phoenix Hospital 
and Diagnostic 
Centre Pvt. Ltd. 
B No 116 (45) C 28,38,237 
9 New Sebayan 
Nursing Home & 
Diagnostic Centre 
B No 119 (46) C 14,43,187 
10 Aslam Nursing 
Home 
C No Below 30 beds R 0 
District-wise Total 2,25,26,400 
Murshidabad 1 Gitaram Hospital 
Private Limited 
A No 174 (67) B 9,65,352 
2 Manmohini 
Healthcare Pvt. 
Ltd. 
A No 165 (63) B 2,67,23,987 
3 Nidan Nursing 
Home 
B No 124 (48) C 53,42,631 
4 Lila Hospital Pvt . 
Ltd. 
B Yes 157 (60) B 0 
5 Nibedita Health 
Care (A Unit of 
Gangapada Super 
Speciality Hospital 
Pvt. Ltd.) 
B No 154 (59) C 43,59,307 
6 Bhagwangola 
Medical Institute 
B No 114 (44) C 11,13,812 
7 Holy Heart 
Medical Centre (a 
unit of Ainul 
Memorial Hospital 
Pvt. Ltd.) 
B No 101 (39) C 6,73,917 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
68 
Name of 
district 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the test 
checked Private 
HCPs empanelled 
under the Scheme 
Grade 
Whether 
the 
gradation 
was 
found 
proper? 
(yes/ no) 
Scoring 
(percentage) 
found on the 
basis of the 
criteria 
stipulated by 
SNA 
Gradation 
which 
should 
have been 
given* 
Drainage of 
Govt. fund 
(period from 
16.07.2022 to 
31.03.2023 i.e., 
in `) 
8 New Amtala  
Nursing Home & 
Diagnostic Centre 
B No 105 (40) C 4,30,999 
9 Khanam Nursing 
Home 
C Yes 71(24) C 0 
10 BPL & General 
Nursing Home 
C No Below 30 beds R 0 
District-wise Total 3,96,10,005 
GRAND TOTAL 14,48,00,131 
Source: Records of the test -checked HCPs; *Grade-A- 80 per cent and above, Grade-B- 
60 per cent to 80 per cent, Grade-C- Below 60 per cent and Grade-R- HCPs having bed strength 
within the range of 10 to 29 

Appendix 1.4 
(Refer paragraph 1.8.1.6) 
District-wise details of Avoidable Expenditure (in `) 
Name of the 
District 
Name of the 
TPA/ ISA Period Rate per Card Enrolment 
Count 
Enrolment 
Cost 
Expenditure 
including Tax 
Avoidable cost 
per Card 
Avoidable 
Expenditure 
excluding Tax 
Avoidable 
Expenditure 
including Tax 
A B C D E F G=F x 118 
per cent 
H=D minus 
` 25 I=H x E J=I x 118 
per cent 
Alipurduar Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
59.50 2,02,345 1,20,39,527.50 1,42,06,642 34.50 69,80,902.5 82,37,465 
Bankura Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
49.99 4,03,796 2,01,85,762.04 2,38,19,199 24.99 1,00,90,862.04 1,19,07,217 
Birbhum Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
48.85 4,60,443 2,24,92,640.55 2,65,41,316 23.85 1,09,81,565.55 1,29,58,247 
Coochbehar Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
59.45 2,37,684 1,41,30,313.80 1,66,73,770 34.45 81,88,213.8 96,62,092 
Dakshin 
Dinajpur 
Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
55.00 35,124 19,31,820 22,79,548 30.00 10,53,720 12,43,390 
Hooghly Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
49.85 7,40,762 3,69,26,985.70 4,35,73,843 24.85 1,84,07,935.7 2,17,21,364 
Howrah Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
55.00 5,35,993 2,94,79,615 3,47,85,946 30.00 1,60,79,790 1,89,74,152 
Jalpaiguri Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
59.50 1,65,707 98,59,566.50 1,16,34,288 34.50 57,16,891.5 67,45,932 
Kolkata Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
55.00 56,684 31,17,620 36,78,792 30.00 17,00,520 20,06,614 
Malda Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
54.00 3,98,283 2,15,07,282 2,53,78,593 29.00 1,15,50,207 1,36,29,244 
Murshidabad Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
49.45 10,40,137 5,14,34,774.65 6,06,93,034 24.45 2,54,31,349.65 3,00,08,993 
Nadia Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
49.95 5,68,733 2,84,08,213.35 3,35,21,692 24.95 1,41,89,888.35 1,67,44,068 
North 24 
Parganas 
Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
48.89 11,69,208 5,71,62,579.12 6,74,51,843 23.89 2,79,32,379.12 3,29,60,207 
Appendices 
69

Name of the 
District 
Name of the 
TPA/ ISA Period Rate per Card Enrolment 
Count 
Enrolment 
Cost 
Expenditure 
including Tax 
Avoidable cost 
per Card 
Avoidable 
Expenditure 
excluding Tax 
Avoidable 
Expenditure 
including Tax 
A B C D E F G=F x 118 
per cent 
H=D minus 
` 25 I=H x E J=I x 118 
per cent 
Pashim 
Burdwan 
Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
49.95 4,03,883 2,01,73,955.85 2,38,05,268 24.95 1,00,76,880.85 1,18,90,719 
Pashim 
Medinipur 
Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
54.95 6,23,300 3,42,50,335 4,04,15,395 29.95 1,86,67,835 2,20,28,045 
Purba 
Burdwan 
Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
49.65 9,45,322 4,69,35,237.3 5,53,83,580 24.65 2,33,02,187.3 2,74,96,581 
Purba 
Medinipur 
Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
52.95 6,50,582 3,44,48,316.90 4,06,49,014 27.95 1,81,83,766.9 2,14,56,845 
Purulia Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
57.50 2,99,752 1,72,35,740 2,03,38,173 32.50 97,41,940 1,14,95,489 
South 24 
Parganas 
Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
48.89 9,53,365 4,66,10,014.85 5,49,99,818 23.89 2,27,75,889.85 2,68,75,550 
Uttar Dinajpur Medi Assist 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
55.00 50,442 27,74,310 32,73,686 30.00 15,13,260 17,85,647 
Dakshin 
Dinajpur 
Paramount 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
55.00 1,03,068 56,68,740 66,89,113 30.00 30,92,040 36,48,607 
Darjeeling Paramount 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
59.50 1,67,893 99,89,633.50 11,787,768 34.50 57,92,308.5 68,34,924 
Jhargram Paramount 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
57.50 1,49,076 8571870 1,01,14,807 32.50 48,44,970 57,17,065 
Kalimpong Paramount 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
59.50 23,433 13,94,263.50 16,45,231 34.50 8,08,438.5 9,53,957 
Kolkata Paramount 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
55.00 3,60,510 1,98,28,050 2,33,97,099 30.00 1,08,15,300 1,27,62,054 
Uttar Dinajpur Paramount 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
55.00 1,65,455 91,00,025 1,07,38,030 30.00 4963650 58,57,107 
Kolkata Saraswati Press 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
55.00 14998 8,24,890 9,73,370 30.00 4,49,940 5,30,929 
Howrah Webel 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
55.00 71,482 39,31,510 46,39,182 30.00 21,44,460 25,30,463 
CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
70

Name of the 
District 
Name of the 
TPA/ ISA Period Rate per Card Enrolment 
Count 
Enrolment 
Cost 
Expenditure 
including Tax 
Avoidable cost 
per Card 
Avoidable 
Expenditure 
excluding Tax 
Avoidable 
Expenditure 
including Tax 
A B C D E F G=F x 118 
per cent 
H=D minus 
` 25 I=H x E J=I x 118 
per cent 
Nadia Webel 01-04-2019 to 
15-07-2021 
49.95 39,665 19,81,266.75 23,37,895 24.95 9,89,641.75 11,67,777 
Alipurduar Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
45.10 85,526 38,57,222.60 45,51,523 20.10 17,19,072.6 20,28,506 
Bankura Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
41.99 1,31,839 55,35,919.61 65,32,385 16.99 22,39,944.61 26,43,135 
Birbhum Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
41.99 1,71,064 71,82,977.36 84,75,913 16.99 29,06,377.36 34,29,525 
Coochbehar Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
44.99 2,15,495 96,95,120.05 1,14,40,242 19.99 43,07,745.05 50,83,139 
Dakshin 
Dinajpur 
Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
47.99 1,52,171 73,02,686.29 86,17,170 22.99 34,98,411.29 41,28,125 
Hooghly Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
41.99 59,305 24,90,216.95 29,38,456 16.99 10,07,591.95 11,88,959 
Howrah Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
41.99 2,79,763 1,17,47,248.37 1,38,61,753 16.99 47,53,173.37 56,08,745 
Jalpaiguri Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
47.99 1,85,223 88,88,851.77 1,04,88,845 22.99 42,58,276.77 50,24,767 
Jhargram Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
49.50 59,161 29,28,469.50 34,55,594 24.50 14,49,444.5 17,10,345 
Kalimpong Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
50.99 16,664 8,49,697.36 10,02,643 25.99 4,33,097.36 5,11,055 
Kolkata Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
48.00 1,63,991 78,71,568 92,88,450 23.00 37,71,793 44,50,716 
Malda Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
41.99 3,02,392 1,26,97,440.08 1,49,82,979 16.99 51,37,640.08 60,62,415 
Pashim 
Burdwan 
Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
44.99 1,85,179 83,31,203.21 98,30,820 19.99 37,01,728.21 43,68,039 
Pashim 
Medinipur 
Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
41.99 2,76,088 1,15,92,935.12 1,36,79,663 16.99 46,90,735.12 55,35,067 
Appendices 
71

Name of the 
District 
Name of the 
TPA/ ISA Period Rate per Card Enrolment 
Count 
Enrolment 
Cost 
Expenditure 
including Tax 
Avoidable cost 
per Card 
Avoidable 
Expenditure 
excluding Tax 
Avoidable 
Expenditure 
including Tax 
A B C D E F G=F x 118 
per cent 
H=D minus 
` 25 I=H x E J=I x 118 
per cent 
Purba 
Burdwan 
Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
41.99 16,389 6,88,174.11 8,12,045 16.99 2,78,449.11 3,28,570 
Purba 
Medinipur 
Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
41.99 3,46,921 1,45,67,212.79 1,71,89,311 16.99 58,94,187.79 69,55,142 
Purulia Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
44.99 1,64,280 73,90,957.20 87,21,329 19.99 32,83,957.2 38,75,069 
Uttar Dinajpur Medi Assist 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
48.01 3,00,353 1,44,19,947.53 1,70,15,538 23.01 69,11,122.53 81,55,125 
Darjeeling Paramount 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
51.00 1,02,799 52,42,749 61,86,444 26.00 26,72,774 31,53,873 
Hooghly Paramount 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
41.99 2,63,501 11064406.99 1,30,56,000 16.99 44,76,881.99 52,82,721 
Murshidabad Paramount 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
41.99 4,07,102 1,70,94,212.98 2,01,71,171 16.99 69,16,662.98 81,61,662 
Nadia Paramount 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
41.99 2,86,145 1,20,15,228.55 1,41,77,970 16.99 48,61,603.55 57,36,692 
North 24 
Parganas 
Paramount 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
41.99 6,23,537 2,61,82,318.63 3,08,95,136 16.99 1,05,93,893.63 1,25,00,794 
Purba 
Burdwan 
Paramount 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
41.99 2,12,721 89,32,154.79 1,05,39,943 16.99 36,14,129.79 42,64,673 
South 24 
Parganas 
Paramount 16-07-2021 to 
31-03-2023 
41.99 4,83,967 2,03,21,774.33 2,39,79,694 16.99 82,22,599.33 97,02,667 
Total 1,65,28,701 81,12,85,552 95,73,16,951 39,80,68,027 46,97,20,272 
Source: Records furnished by SNA 
CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
72

Appendices 
73 
Appendix 1.5 
(Refer paragraph 1.8.2.2) 
Non-conduct of requisite training/ workshop/ beneficiary audit by the ICs 
Name of the 
selected 
district 
Name 
of 
Insura
nce 
Compa
ny 
Period of 
engagement 
for SS 
Scheme 
Whether any 
training conducted 
by the IC 
Whether 
any 
workshop 
conducted 
by the IC 
Whether any 
beneficiary 
audit 
conducted by 
the IC 
Remark 
Birbhum BAGIC 01.04.2018 to 
15.01.2020 
As per Information 
furnished by the 
district authority one 
Hospital training and 
one enrolment 
training had been 
conducted in 
November 2018 and 
December 2019. 
No No No reason 
was provided 
by the district 
authority. 
OIC 16.01.2020 to 
15.07.2022 
No No 
Hooghly BAGIC 01.04.2018 to 
15.01.2020 
The DNO informed that no records in this regard are 
available.  
No reason 
was provided 
by the district 
authority. 
OIC 16.01.2020 to 
15.07.2022 
Purba 
Medinipur 
BAGIC 01.04.2018 to 
15.01.2020 
No No No No reason 
was provided 
by the district 
authority. 
OIC 16.01.2020 to 
15.07.2022 
No No No 
Jalpaiguri IFFCO 01.04.2018 to 
31.12.2019 
No. The DNO has 
informed that no 
records in this regard 
are available. 
No. The 
DNO has 
informed that 
no records in 
this regard 
are available 
at that end. 
No. The DNO 
has informed 
that no records 
in this regard 
are available at 
that end. 
No reason 
was provided 
by the district 
authority. 
UIIC 16.01.2020 to 
15.07.2022 
No. The DNO has 
informed that no 
records in this regard 
are available. 
No. The 
DNO has 
informed that 
no records in 
this regard 
are available.     
No. 
The DNO has 
informed that 
no records in 
this regard are 
available. 
North 24 
Parganas 
BAGIC 01.04.2018 to 
15.01.2020 
No No No No reason 
was provided 
by the district 
authority. 
OIC 16.01.2020 to 
15.07.2022 
No No 
Murshidabad BAGIC 01.04.2018 to 
15.01.2020 
No No No No reason 
was provided 
by the district 
authority. 
OIC 16.01.2020 to 
15.07.2022 
No No 
Source: Information furnished by the selected districts i.e. DNO-SS offices 
BAGIC: Bajaj Allianz General Insurance Company Limited; UIIC: United India Insurance 
Company Limited; OIC: Oriental Insurance Company Limited  and IFFCO: Iffco Tokyo 
General Insurance Ltd. 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
74 
Appendix 1.6 
{Refer paragraph 1.8.3.2 (i)} 
Patients’ survey conducted in test-checked HCPs revealed that in-patients 
under the Scheme had paid consultation fees before admission 
Name of district 
No. of test-
checked private 
hospital/ nursing 
home (HCP) 
Survey 
conducted 
among 
in-patients (in 
Nos.) 
No. of in-patients 
who had paid 
consultation fees 
before admission 
Range of consultation 
fees paid by the 
in-patients before 
admission (in ₹) 
Birbhum 15 92 41 300 to 400 
Hooghly 10 54 23 150 to 700 
Purba Medinipur 10 72 21 70  to 500 
Jalpaiguri 10 22 9 300 to 500 
North 24 Parganas 10 71 14 300 to 400 
Murshidabad 10 88 33 300 to 400 
399 141 
Source: Records of test-checked HCPs 
In-patients under the Scheme who had to bear cost of Diagnostic Tests 
before admission and paid money during Hospitalisation 
Name of 
district 
No. of test-
checked 
private 
hospital/ 
nursing 
home 
(HCP) 
Survey 
conducted 
among 
in-patients 
(in Nos.) 
No. of in-
patients 
who had to 
bear cost of 
Diagnosis 
before 
admission 
Range of 
amount 
paid by the 
in-patients 
(in ₹) 
No. of Patients 
who paid 
money during 
Hospitalisation 
Range of 
amount paid 
by the 
in-patients 
(in ₹) 
Birbhum 15 92 19 Data not 
available 
9 Data not 
available 
Hooghly 10 54 15 250 to 8,500 7 800 to 22,000 
Purba 
Medinipur 
10 72 24 300 to 
18,000 
4 500 to 12,000 
Jalpaiguri 10 22 9 100 to 
20,000 
0 Not applicable 
North 24 
Parganas 
10 71 14 500 to 
13,054 
3 2,650 to 14,800 
Murshidabad 10 88 31 600 to 
20,000 
1 2,350 to 4,390 
Total 399 112 24 
Source: Records of test-checked HCPs 

Appendices 
75 
Appendix 1.7 
(Refer paragraph 1.11.3) 
Monitoring, visit, review, audit of the SS Scheme by the district authority 
(District Key Manager) 
Name of 
district 
No. of visits to 
enrolment 
centre during 
2018-19 to 2022-
23 
No. of 
periodic 
meeting 
conducted 
during 2018-
19 to 2022-
23 
No. of health 
camps 
conducted 
during 2018-
19 to 2022-
23 
No. of visits to 
empanelled 
hospitals/ nursing 
homes (HCPs) 
during 2018-19 to 
2022-23 
No. of medical 
audit 
conducted 
during 2018-
19 to 2022-23 
Birbhum Only in 2020 two 
visits of 
enrolment centre  
were conducted. 
However, no 
observation of the 
visits was 
recorded. 
Information 
regarding any 
other visit to 
enrolment centre 
was not furnished 
to Audit. 
Nil Nil No details regarding 
visit of empanelled 
hospitals/ nursing 
homes were 
furnished to Audit. 
No documents / 
record 
regarding 
Medical Audit 
were furnished 
to Audit. 
Hooghly The DNO informed that records relating to visit to enrolment centre, 
conducting of periodic health meeting / camps and visits to empanelled 
hospitals/ nursing homes (HCPs) were not available with the authority. 
The DNO 
informed that 
Records 
relating to 
Medical Audit 
were not 
available with 
the authority 
Purba 
Medinipur 
05 04 Nil 03 NA 
Jalpaiguri NA NA NA NA NA 
North 24 
Parganas 
No documents / 
record of such 
visit was 
furnished to 
Audit. 
Nil Nil Although the 
district authority 
mentioned that 
visits were done, no 
details regarding 
visit of empanelled 
hospitals/ nursing 
homes were 
furnished to Audit. 
No documents / 
record 
regarding 
Medical Audit 
were furnished 
to Audit. 
Murshidabad Although the 
district authority 
mentioned that 
visits were done, 
no documents/ 
record of such 
visit was 
furnished to 
Audit. 
Nil Nil Although the 
district authority 
mentioned that 
visits were done, no 
details regarding 
visit of empanelled 
hospitals/ nursing 
homes were 
furnished to Audit. 
No documents/ 
record 
regarding 
Medical Audit 
were furnished 
to Audit. 
Source: Information, documents provided from the selected/ visited six district offices; 
NA: Not Available 

Appendix 2.1 
(Refer Chapter 2) 
List of Departments and other offices selected for audit  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Department/  
Directorate and other 
Bodies 
Auditee Units selected in the test-checked districts 
Kolkata North 24 Parganas Hooghly Purba Medinipur Malda 
1. Department of School 
Education and 
Directorates including 
PBSSM 
District Education 
Officer, PBSSM 
District Education 
Officer, PBSSM 
District Education 
Officer, PBSSM 
District Education 
Officer, PBSSM 
District Education 
Officer, PBSSM 
Resource Centre, 
Motilal R.F.P School 
Resource Centre, 
Amdanga P. Pry 
School 
Resource Centre, 
Piyarapur Pry. School 
Resource Centre, 
Byabattarhat Adarsh 
High School 
Pandua A.K. High 
School Resource Centre, 
Pandua 
Resource Centre, S.B. 
Girls School 
Resource Centre, 
Madhyamgram Jr. 
Basics Pry. School 
Resource Centre, 
Barasath Pathshala 
Resource Centre, 
Khoskhana Pry. 
School 
Resource Center, Bhutni 
Chandipur High School 
Motilal R.F.P School Amdanga P. Pry 
School 
Piyarapur Pry. School Byabattarhat Adarsh 
High School 
Pandua A.K. High 
School 
S.B. Girls School Madhyamgram High 
School 
Barsath Pathshala Khoskhana Pry. 
School 
Bhutni Chandipur High 
School 
2. Technical Education 
Training & Skill 
Development Department 
and Directorates 
including Paschim Banga 
Society for Skill 
Development (PBSSD) 
APC Roy Polytechnic AJC Bose 
Polytechnic, 
Berachampa 
Hooghly Institute of 
Polytechnic 
Dr. Medhnad Saha 
Polytechnic 
Malda Polytechnic 
College, Malda 
BIT, Vidya Sagar 
University 
___ ___ ___ ___ 
Govt. ITI, Gariahat Govt. ITI, 
Barrackpore 
Govt. ITI, Hooghly Haldai ITI Govt. ITI, Malda 
___ Govt. ITI, Halisahar ___ ___ ___ 
District Project 
Manager, PBSSD 
District Project 
Manager, PBSSD 
District Project Manager, 
PBSSD 
District Project 
Manager, PBSSD 
District Project Manager, 
PBSSD 
76
CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 

Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Department/  
Directorate and other 
Bodies 
Auditee Units selected in the test-checked districts 
Kolkata North 24 Parganas Hooghly Purba Medinipur Malda 
3. Department of Higher 
Education and 
Directorate 
Jadavpur University, 
Kolkata 
West Bengal State 
University, Barasat 
___ ___ University of Gour 
Banga, Malda 
St. Xavier's College, 
Kolkata 
Barasat Govt. College Chandanagar Govt. 
College 
Panskura Banamali 
College 
Malda College, Malda 
Asutosh College, 
Bhawanipur 
Mrinalini Dutta 
Mahavidyapith 
Tarkeswar Govt. College Mahishadal Raj 
Mahavidyalaya 
Gazole Mahavidyalaya, 
Gazole 
4. Department of Mass 
Education Extension & 
Library Services and 
Directorate of Mass 
Education Extension 
District Mass 
Education Extension 
Officer 
District Mass 
Education Extension 
Officer 
District Mass Education 
Extension Officer 
District Mass 
Education Extension 
Officer 
District Mass Education 
Extension Officer 
___ ___ ___ Moyna Ram 
Krishnanyan 
Ashram, Moyna 
Sponsored Special 
School 
R.P. Roy Memorial Blind 
School, Malda Sponsored 
Special School 
Calcutta Blind 
Sponsored Special 
School 
Ichapur Deaf & 
Dumb Sponsored 
Special School 
Prabartak Institute for 
Mentally Retarded 
(Sponsored Special 
School), Chandannagar 
Shruti Sponsored 
Special School, 
Haldia 
Pipla Residential Deaf 
and Dumb Sponsored 
Special School, 
Harishchandrapur 
Light House for Blind 
Sponsored Special 
School 
R.K.M Sponsored 
Special School for 
Blind, Surjapur 
Louis Braille Memorial 
School for the Sightless 
(High) (Sponsored 
Special School) 
Vivekananda 
Mission Ashram, 
Haldia (Sponsored 
Special School) 
Subodh (Sponsored 
Special School) 
Mentaid (Recognised 
Special School) 
Pradip (Recognised 
Special School) 
Pratibandhi Kalyan 
Kendra, Abinash 
Mukherjee Road, 
Chandannagar 
(Recognised Special 
School) 
___ Adhikari Residential 
School for the Mentally 
Retarded, Malda 
(Recognised Special 
School) 
Appendices 
77

Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Department/  
Directorate and other 
Bodies 
Auditee Units selected in the test-checked districts 
Kolkata North 24 Parganas Hooghly Purba Medinipur Malda 
Morning Glory 
(Recognised Special 
School) 
Haripada Biswas 
Pratibandhi Vidyalay 
(Recognised Special 
School) 
Snehaneer, Uttarpara 
(Recognised Special 
School) 
___ Kotwali Seleha Memorial 
School, English Bazar, 
Malda (Recognised 
Special School) 
Source: Records of the Nodal Department 
Note: Besides, records of the Women & Child Development and Social Welfare Department (WCD&SW) (Nodal Department) including State Commissioner for PwD 
were also test-checked 
CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
78

Abbreviations
79 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THIS REPORT 
Abbreviations Full Form 
AAPs Annual Action Plans 
AB-SS Ayushman Bharat-Swasthya Sathi 
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education 
BCC Behaviour Change Communication 
BPHCs Block Primary Health Centres 
CCL Cash Credit Loan 
CCU Cardiac Care Unit 
CE Clinical Establishment 
CGHS Central Government Health Scheme 
CMOH Chief Medical Officer of Health 
CwDs Children with Disabilities 
CwSN Children with Special Needs 
DC District Coordinator 
DEOs District Education Officers 
DKM District Key Manager 
DNA District Nodal Agency 
DNO District Nodal Officer 
DST District Surveillance Teams 
GoI Government of India 
GoWB Government of West Bengal 
H&FW Health and Family Welfare 
HCPs Health Care Providers 
ICCU Intensive Cardiac Care Unit 
ICs Insurance Companies 
ICU Intensive Care Unit 
IE Inclusive Education 
IEC Information, Education & Communication 
IPD In-patient Department 
IPHS Indian Public Health Standards 
IRDA Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
ISAs Implementation Support Agencies 
ITIs Industrial Training Institutes 
ITU Intensive Therapy Unit 
MEE&LS Mass Education Extension & Library Services 
MoA Memorandum of Association 
NABH National Accreditation Board for Hospitals & Healthcare 
Providers’ 
NH Nursing Home 
NHA National Health Authority 
NICU Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
NSP National Scholarship Portal 
OPD Outpatient Department 
PBSSD Paschim Banga Society for Skill Development 
PBSSM Paschim Banga Samagra Shiksha Mission 
PDMA Post Discharge Medical Audit 
PDS Public Distribution System 

CAG’s Performance & Compliance Audit Report on Govt. of West Bengal 
80 
Abbreviations Full Form 
PICU Pediatric Intensive Care Unit 
PMJAY Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
PTR Pupil Teacher Ratio 
PwDs Persons with Disabilities 
RCI Rehabilitation Council of India 
RMO Resident Medical Officer 
RPwD Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
RSBY Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
SDH Sub-Divisional Hospital 
SECC Socio Economic and Caste Census 
SLIC State Level Implementation Committee 
SNA State Nodal Agency 
SNCU Special Newborn Care Unit 
SSHs Super Speciality Hospitals 
SST State Surveillance Team 
TMS Transaction Management System 
TPAs Third Party Administrators 
UCs Utilisation Certificates 
UDISE Unified District Information System for Education 
UGC University Grants Commission 
UTRs Unique Transaction References 
WBHS West Bengal Health Scheme 
WCD&SW Women & Child Development and Social Welfare 

 
 

Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India   
for the period ended March 2023
Government of West Bengal  
Report No. 5 of 2025  
(Performance & Compliance Audit - Civil)  
 
 
KDWdZK>>ZE
h/dKZ'EZ>K&/E/
ǁǁǁ͘ĐĂŐ͘ŐŽǀ͘ŝŶ
 
 
 
 
 
 


ŚƚƚƉƐ͗ͬͬĐĂŐ͘ŐŽǀ͘ŝŶͬĂŐϭͬǁĞƐƚ ͲďĞŶŐĂůͬĞŶ


  
COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
https://cag.gov.in/ag1/west-bengal/en
Report No. 5 of 2025 - Government of West Bengal  
