Government of West Bengal                 Report No. 3  of the year 2023  
Ó COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in
https://cag.gov.in/ag1/west-bengal/en
Government of West Bengal
Report No. 3 of the year 2023
Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation
th
 of the 74  Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992


Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Performance Audit on the  Efficacy of Implementation 
of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 
Government of West Bengal
Report No. 3  of the year 2023

(i)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Paragraphs Page No.
Preface v
Executive Summary vii
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
Brief History of Municipal Governance in West Bengal 1.1 1
74th Constitutional Amendment 1.2 1
Trend of Urbanisation in West Bengal 1.3 2
Profile of the Urban Local Bodies in West Bengal 1.4 2
Organisational structure of Urban Administration in West 
Bengal 1.5 4
Organisational structure for the administration of Urban areas 
in West Bengal 1.5.1 4
Organisational Structure of Urban Local Bodies 1.5.2 5
CHAPTER II
AUDIT FRAMEWORK
Audit Objectives 2.1 7
Audit Criteria 2.2 7
Audit Scope and Methodology 2.3 8
Acknowledgement 2.4 9
Chapters of Audit Findings 2.5 10
CHAPTER III
COMPLIANCE TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE SEVENTY-FOURTH 
CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT ACT
Comparison of State level legislations with the provisions of 
Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act 3.1 11
Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 3.2 16
Overriding powers of the State Government over the ULBs 3.3 23
Institutional mechanism for empowerment of ULBs 3.4 24
State Election Commission 3.4.1 24
Reservation of seats 3.4.2 25
Holding of elections of ULBs and formation of Boards 3.4.3 25
Composition of Municipalities/Corporations 3.4.4 27
Chairman/Mayor 3.4.5 28
Ward Committees 3.4.6 29
District Planning Committee and Metropolitan Planning 
Committee 3.4.7 30
State Finance Commissions 3.4.8 33
Accounts and Audit 3.4.9 34

(ii)
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Municipal Accounts Committees 3.4.10 39
Standing Committees 3.4.11 40
Parastatals and their role in urban governance 3.4.12 42
CHAPTER IV
FINANCIAL RESOURCES OF URBAN LOCAL BODIES
Sources of Revenue in ULBs 4.1 45
Funds Flow to ULBs 4.2 46
State Finance Commission (SFC) Grants 4.3 46
Short release of SFC Grants 4.3.1 46
Delay in the release of SFC Grants 4.3.2 48
Central Finance Commission (CFC) 4.4 48
Own Sources of Revenue for the ULBs 4.5 51
Insufficiency of own sources of revenue of the ULBs, in 
comparison to their total receipts 4.5.1 51
Property Tax 4.5.2 52
Tax on Cart, Carriage and Animal 4.5.3 58
License Fees for Advertisement 4.5.4 59
Rent from markets 4.5.5 60
Fee for Certificates for enlistment of profession, trade and 
callings 4.5.6 60
Other revenue sources of ULBs 4.5.7 61
Budget Estimates 4.6 62
Budget Preparation 4.6.1 62
Creation of Basic Services for Urban Poor Fund 4.6.2 63
Expenditure by the ULBs 4.7 64
CHAPTER V
HUMAN RESOURCES
Staff pattern of ULBs in the State 5.1 65
Recruitment of human resources in the ULBs 5.2 67
Vacancies in the ULBs and per capita staff 5.3 67
CHAPTER VI
PERFORMANCE IN THE DISCHARGE OF DEVOLVED FUNCTIONS
Water Supply 6.1 71
Efficacy in supply of water by the ULBs 6.1.1 71
Solid Waste Management 6.2 79
Efficacy of ULBs in the delivery of solid waste management 
related services by the ULBs 6.2.1 80
Sanitation and Public Health 6.3 90
Efficacy in implementation of sewerage and drainage 
functions 6.3.1 91
Efficacy in functions relating to Public Health 6.3.2 96

Table of Contents
(iii)
List of Appendices
Appendix No. Description Para No. Page No.
Appendix-1
List of 18 functions to be devolved to ULBs 
as enumerated in the Twelfth Schedule of the 
Constitution
1.2 101
Appendix-2 List of Audit Units 2.3 102
Appendix-3 Annual Financial Statements pending for submission 
to ELA (as on 31/3/2021) 3.4.9.1 104
Appendix-4 Constitution of Municipal Accounts Committees 
(MACs) in the 27 test-checked ULBs 3.4.10 107
Appendix-5
Difference between the Closing Balances of the 
previous financial years and the Opening Balances of 
the current financial years, in regard to Property Tax, 
for 11 ULBs, during FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21
4.5.2.1 (i) 109
Appendix-6 Interest collected by 17 ULBs, during FYs 2015-16 
to 2020-21
4.5.2.1 
(iii) 110
Appendix-7 Delay in General Valuation in 25 ULBs 4.5.2.3 113
Appendix-8 License fee for advertisement collected by 23 ULBs, 
during FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21 4.5.4.1 114
Appendix-9 Other Revenue Sources of ULBs 4.5.7 117
Appendix-10 Revision of fees and charges in ULBs  as on 31 st 
March 2023 4.5.7 118
Appendix-11 Departments of a Municipal establishment 5.1 119
Appendix-12
Details of Sanctioned Strength vis-à-vis Persons-
in-Position, of Regular/Part-time Medical Officers, 
Staff Nurses, ANMs, Laboratory Technicians and 
Pharmacists, in UPHCs
6.3.2.2 122
Glossary of Abbreviations 123

v
Preface

vi

(v)
PREFACE
This Report on audit of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), under the 
West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993; Kolkata Municipal Corporation 
Act, 1980; Howrah Municipal Corporation Act, 1980 and West 
Bengal Municipal Corporation Act, 2006, has been prepared for 
submission to the Government of West Bengal.
The Report, covering the period 2015-16 to 2020-21, contains the 
results of Performance Audit of the ‘Efficacy of Implementation of 
the 74
th Constitutional Amendment Act’ in West Bengal.
The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

Executive Summary

(vii)
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The 74th Constitutional Amendment, which came into effect on 1 June 1993, 
provided a clear mandate for democratic decentralisation and sought to 
create an institutional framework for ushering in democracy at the grassroots 
level, through self-governing local bodies, in the urban areas of the country. 
It empowered Urban Local Bodies to perform 18 functions listed in the 12 th 
Schedule of the Constitution.
As per Census 2011, West Bengal had a population of 9.13 crore, out of which 
2.91 crore (31.87 per cent) were residing in urban areas and 1.66 crore in areas 
covered under the 125 ULBs in the State. Urban areas in West Bengal face 
multiple challenges in regard to waste management, sanitation, public health 
issues and poverty alleviation. In this scenario, ULBs have an important role 
to play, as most of these issues can be handled best at the local level. In West 
Bengal, the three tiers of Urban Local Bodies are categorised on the basis of 
the population in their jurisdiction, population density and occupational pattern.
The objective of this Audit was to assess whether the State Government had 
adequately empowered the Urban Local Bodies, by creating a robust institutional 
framework, supported by transfer of functions, funds and functionaries; whether 
the ULBs were able to deliver the services devolved to them in a satisfactory 
manner and whether they had attained self-reliance for financing their activities 
through taxation and other sources of revenue.
Out of the 18 functions to be devolved, one function, relating to fire services, 
had not been devolved to ULBs. Out of the remaining 17 functions devolved to 
ULBs, in case of 15 functions, ULBs had an overlapping role with parastatals/
departments; in case of one function, ULBs had minimal role and, in case of one 
function, were ULBs solely responsible.
Holding regular elections and participation of elected representatives in citizen-
centric development activities is crucial to democratic decentralisation. There 
was delay in holding elections in 109 ULBs, which ranged from six months 
to 32 months. Thus, non/delayed holding of elections may result in the ULBs 
being rendered ineligible for the Central Finance Commission (CFC) grants.
Preparing long-term and short-term development plans and formation of different 
committees with earmarked objectives, to ensure integrated development in all 
spheres, are crucial for the effective functioning of the ULBs. Audit, however, 
noticed non-preparation of draft development plans, in all the 27 test-checked 
ULBs, with only six ULBs having prepared annual development plans. 
Pendency in the preparation and submission of Annual Financial Statements 
was noticed in 119 ULBs, raising concerns about the proper management 
and utilisation of financial resources. Delays in constitution of State Finance 
Commissions (SFC) and delayed release of State Finance Commission and 
Central Finance Commission Grants, adversely affected the financial position 
of the Urban Local Bodies.
It was noticed that the revenues raised by ULBs from their own sources were 
low and they were dependent upon grants for their functioning. Significant 

(viii)
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
amounts, pertaining to Property Tax, were due to the Urban Local Bodies. The 
test-checked ULBs had not explored all the possible areas mandated in the Acts, 
to augment their own source revenue. 
Sufficient and suitably trained Human Resources are critical for the effective 
functioning of any institution. However, Audit observed that the last staff 
assessment for ULBs had been conducted in 1995, although the ambit of service 
delivery and the urban population had increased manifold over the past 27 years. 
Recruitment to all categories of staff of ULBs, through the Municipal Service 
Commission, was made mandatory with effect from January 2019, yet a large 
number of vacancies were existing in the ULBs. 
The 12th Schedule, added by the 74th Constitutional Amendment, envisaged supply 
of water and public health and sanitation, including solid waste management, 
among the 18 functions to be devolved to the ULBs. The Acts governing the 
ULBs also incorporated devolution of these functions to the ULBs. 
Audit noticed that, out of the 27 test-checked ULBs, 17 were fully/partially 
dependent on parastatals for supply of water; five ULBs had no role in water 
supply; four of them were dependent on parastatals; and, in case of one ULB, 
citizens were dependent only on tube-wells for supply of water. Only one ULB 
had achieved the benchmark of 135 litres per capita per day water supply and 
none of the test-checked ULBs had achieved the benchmark of providing 100 
per cent house connections and 24 hours of water supply. 
In the area of solid waste management, delays were noticed in the preparation of 
plans for implementation of the solid waste management function, by agencies 
engaged by SUDA. Further, these plans were not distributed among the ULBs. 
Segregation at source, as well as collection and disposal of solid waste in a 
segregated manner, are essential for effective solid waste management. Audit 
noticed that, out of 27 ULBs, 14 ULBs had not implemented segregation at 
source and four ULBs had not implemented door-to-door collections. Six ULBs 
did not have their own dumping sites or sanitary landfill sites and only four out 
of 27 ULBs had functional processing facilities for solid waste. 
In the area of sewerage and drainage, among four ULBs having underground 
sewerage systems, only Kolkata MC had a functional underground sewerage 
system, while the remaining ULBs were dependent on networks of drains. In 
20 ULBs, the sewerage and drainage network/drains discharged into rivers or 
canals, and only seven of these ULBs had STPs in their municipal areas. 
Based on the above observations, Audit recommends that:
	 •	 Government may ensure that the 17 functions that have been either 
partially devolved or not devolved at all, may be handed over to the ULBs, 
to the maximum extent possible on priority
	 •	 Government may ensure that elections for the ULBs are held in a timely 
manner, in consultation with the State Election Commission
	 •	 Ward Committees may be constituted, as per the Acts, so that the ground 
level priorities of citizens are factored into the decisions of the ULBs
	 •	 Government may ensure constitution and effective functioning of the 
District Planning Committees, for integrated planning and development

Executive Summary 
(ix)
	 •	 ULBs may prepare Draft Development Plans and Annual Development 
Plans, for strategic and holistic development of their jurisdictional areas
	 •	 Government may constitute the SFCs and implement their recommendations 
in a timely manner
	 •	 Government may stipulate a uniform timeframe for preparation of the 
Annual Financial Statements of all ULBs, as also for timely submission of 
Annual Financial Statements, for audit by the statutory auditor (ELA)
	 •	 Government may ensure that ULBs conduct internal audit regularly and 
take remedial action to strengthen their internal control system
	 •	 Government may ensure that MACs are constituted every year and 
meetings held regularly, to discuss the audit reports (including internal 
audit reports) of the concerned ULBs 
	 •	 SFC and CFC grants may be released in a timely manner 
	 •	 Recommendations of the SFCs, relating to devolution, may be implemented, 
to the maximum extent possible 
	 •	 ULBs may take all possible measures to increase revenue from property 
tax  
	 •	 Government may ensure that valuation of properties in the ULBs is 
conducted in a timely manner and, while determining the value of land, the 
guidance values fixed by the State Government are taken into consideration, 
to avoid undervaluation of properties 
	 •	 ULBs may be advised to initiate discussion with the Departments of the 
Government, to decide the quantum of services which would be delivered 
to them and the resultant service charges to be levied and collected 
	 •	 ULBs are to ensure that Rates/Fees levied by them may be revised, time to 
time
	 •	 ULBs may prepare their budgets within the stipulated timeframe, 
considering their actual requirements of funds
	 •	 The BSUP fund should be mandatorily created by all ULBs and regular 
contributions should be made therein, to ensure delivery of basic services 
to the urban poor, as well as to the inhabitants of slum areas
	 •	 ULBs may explore all possible areas to augment their own revenue and 
strengthen their collection efficiency. They may also arrange special 
drives, from time to time, to collect arrears, in order to meet their revenue 
expenses
	 •	 A professional assessment of the staff requirements for the ULBs, to enable 
them to cater to the growing urban population, may be taken up
	 •	 Government may take immediate steps for filling the existing vacancies in 
the ULBs, through the West Bengal Municipal Service Commission
	 •	 Government may provide adequate funds and functionaries to ULBs, 
to enable them to construct and maintain water supply projects and 
also to take possession of water supply projects from parastatals/other 
departments

(x)
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
	 •	 Government may introduce regular monitoring, for achieving the Service 
Level Benchmarks, to ensure supply of quality water to citizens
	 •	 ULBs may levy and collect fees for supply of water from both domestic and 
non-domestic consumers, as per extant rules. Metering of water may also 
be taken up, to charge fees based on consumption and increase the own 
sources of revenue
	 •	 ULBs may take steps to reduce waste generation and achieve 100 per 
cent segregation of waste at source, as well as collection, processing and 
disposal of segregated waste
	 •	 ULBs may implement 100 per cent door-to-door collection of solid waste 
and involve waste pickers/Self Help Groups in this endeavour
	 •	 ULBs may prepare and adopt bye-laws and implement levy and collection 
of user fees from waste generators
	 •	 ULBs may be equipped with adequate manpower and funds, for effective 
implementation of the Solid Waste Management Rules
	 •	 Government may take immediate steps to construct STPs, with the active 
involvement of the ULBs
	 •	 ULBs may take up construction of the sewerage and drainage infrastructure, 
wherever necessary, on priority basis, and ensure 100 per cent house sewer 
connections, as per Service Level Benchmarks
	 •	 Government may ensure that all UPHCs in the ULBs are functioning 
properly, with laboratory facilities.  They may also ensure placement of 
requisite human resources, to implement the NUHM, aiming at the urban 
poor population’ s health needs.

CHAPTER  I
Introduction

1
CHAPTER I
Introduction
In West Bengal, there are 125 Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) under the 
administrative control of Urban Development and Municipal Affairs Department 
(UD&MAD), Government of West Bengal. There are several other parastatals 
and agencies working in the sphere of urban governance. This Chapter discusses 
the profile of ULBs in the State and their structure, the trend of urbanisation and 
the organisational structure of the UD&MAD. 
1.1  Brief History of Municipal Governance in West Bengal
The history of municipal governance in West Bengal dates back to the eighteenth 
century, when the Calcutta Corporation was formed by the Charter of 1726. Later, 
the Calcutta Municipal Corporation (presently Kolkata Municipal Corporation) 
was established by the Calcutta Municipal Consolidation Act of 1876. Apart 
from that, a number of municipal establishments came up in West Bengal during 
the second half of nineteenth century1. Since 1850, there were a number of Acts 
relating to municipal administration 2, at different points of time. Prior to the 
introduction of the 74 th Constitutional Amendment, all Municipalities in West 
Bengal were governed by the Bengal Municipal Act, 1932, while the Kolkata 
Municipal Corporation was governed by the Kolkata Municipal Corporation Act, 
1980; Howrah Municipal Corporation by the Howrah Municipal Corporation 
Act, 1980; and Chandernagore Municipal Corporation by the Chandernagore 
Municipal Corporation Act, 19553.
1.2 74 th Constitutional Amendment
The Seventy-Fourth Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 (74 th CAA), 
which came into effect on 1 June 1993, introduced Part IX A (concerning the 
Municipalities), which deals with issues relating to Municipalities. The Act 
provided for grant of Constitutional status to Urban Local Bodies. Article 243W 
of the 74th CAA authorised the State Legislatures to enact laws to endow local 
bodies with powers and authority, as may be necessary to enable them to function 
as institutions of Self-Government and make provisions for devolution of 
powers and responsibilities. The 74th CAA, inter alia, provided for constitution 
of three types of ULBs viz. (i) Municipal Corporations, for large urban areas (ii) 
Municipal Councils, for small urban areas and (iii) Nagar Panchayats, for areas 
in transition from a rural area to urban area.
1 Source: Municipal Statistics of West Bengal (2013-14), Bureau of Applied Economic and 
Statistics, Department of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government of West 
Bengal.
2 Act XXVI of 1850, Act XX of 1856, Bengal Municipal Act 1884, the Calcutta Municipal Act, 
1951 etc.
3 Chandernagore Municipal Corporation Act, 1990 was published on 22 September 1993 
and repealed the Chandernagore Municipal Act, 1955; Asansol Municipal Corporation Act, 
1990 and Siliguri Municipal Corporation Act, 1990, relating to constitution of the Asansol 
and Siliguri Municipal Corporations, respectively, were published on 15 September 1993; 
Durgapur Municipal Corporation Act, 1994 was published on 1 October 1996. Bidhannagar 
Municipal Corporation was constituted with effect from 18 June 2015.

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
2
The Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution specified 18 functions to be devolved 
to ULBs, as listed in Appendix-1. Out of the 18 functions listed in the 12 th 
Schedule, except for fire services, the remaining 17 functions were devolved to 
ULBs by the State Acts governing ULBs.
1.3 Trend of Urbanisation in West Bengal
As per Census 2011, out of the total population of West Bengal (9.13 crore), 
2.91 crore (31.87 per cent) was residing in urban areas.  The growth rate of 
urban population, in the decade 2001-2011, was 29.72 per cent. The projected 
total population of West Bengal in 2021 is 9.81 crore and the projected urban 
population is 3.53 crore (35.98 per cent)4. The decadal growth rate of urban 
population of West Bengal, for the period 2011 to 2021, is 21.31 per cent. As per 
Census 2011, the actual population residing in the areas under the jurisdiction 
of ULBs, was 1.66 crore5.
Urban areas in West Bengal face multiple challenges, ranging from waste 
management, sanitation, public health issues, poverty alleviation etc.  In this 
scenario, the ULBs have an important role to play, as most of these issues can 
be handled best at the local level.
1.4	 Profile	of	the	Urban	Local	Bodies	in	 West	Bengal
As on 31 March 2021, there were 125 ULBs in West Bengal, located in 23 
districts (including Kolkata).  Among these 125 ULBs, there were 7 Municipal 
Corporations (MC), 115 Municipalities and 3 Notified Area Authorities (NAA)6. 
There were, in total, 2,947 Wards, in the 125 ULBs. The basis of classification 
of the ULBs in the State is shown in Table 1.1.7
Table	1.1:	Classification	of	ULBs	in	West	Bengal
Sl. No. Classification	of	
ULB Basis	of	Classification
1. Municipal 
Corporations7
Any one or more than one municipal area together with, or 
exclusive of, any railway station, village within the jurisdiction of 
any Gram Panchayat land, or building, in the vicinity of such area 
which –
 (i) contains a population of not less than 5 lakh inhabitants, 
 (ii) has a density of population of not less than 3,000 inhabitants 
per square kilometre of area, and 
(iii) has an occupational pattern in which more than three-fourth 
of the adult population are chiefly engaged in pursuits other 
than agriculture, and if the income of the Corporation from 
taxation and other sources is likely to be adequate for the 
discharge of the functions of the Corporation 
4 Source: Report of the Technical Group on Population Projections, July 2020, National 
Commission on Population, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India.
5 As per Census 2011, the ‘urban population’ comprises the people living in ULBs, as well as 
other urban units, such as Cantonment Boards, Town Panchayats etc.
6 In terms of Section 2(41A) of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993, NAA of a notified area 
means a Nagar Panchayat for a transitional area, that is to say, an area in transition from a 
rural area to an urban area as defined in Article 243Q of the Constitution of India.
7 The above criteria for constitution of Municipal Corporation as contained in the West Bengal 
Municipal Corporation Act, 2006, is applicable to all Corporations except Kolkata Municipal 
Corporation and Howrah Municipal Corporation, which are governed by their respective acts.

Chapter I: Introduction
3
Sl. No. Classification	of	
ULB Basis	of	Classification
2. Municipalities Any town, together with, or exclusive of, any railway station, 
village, land or building in the vicinity of any such town which-
 (i)  contains a population of not less than 30,000 inhabitants, 
 (ii) has a density of population of not less than 750 inhabitants 
per square kilometre of area, and 
(iii) has an occupational pattern in which more than one-half of 
the adult population are chiefly engaged in pursuits other 
than agriculture, and if the municipal income from taxation 
and other sources is likely to be adequate for the discharge of 
municipal functions.
In terms of Section 3 of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993, the 
State Government has power to determine separate conditions, 
to constitute any area of the hill areas as a municipal area.
3. Notified	Area	
Authorities 
(NAAs)
 (i) Any urbanised area which does not fulfil the conditions for 
being immediately constituted a municipal area, or
 (ii) any area which is comprised in a newly developing town, or 
(iii) an area where new industries have been or are being 
established.
(Source: respective Acts)
In terms of Section 7 of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993, the Municipalities 
and NAAs, are classified into the following five groups (Table 1.2), based on 
the population, as ascertained at the last preceding census.
Table	1.2:	Category-wise	number	of	ULBs	(Municipalities	and	NAAs)	in	
West Bengal
Category/
Group Required Criteria
No. of Municipalities 
and NAAs belonging 
to the Category/Group
A Municipal areas having population above 2,15,000 14
B Municipal areas having population above 1,70,000 but 
not exceeding 2,15,000
7
C Municipal areas having population above 85,000 but 
not exceeding 1,70,000
34
D Municipal areas having population above 35,000 but 
not exceeding 85,000
39
E Municipal areas having population not exceeding 
35,000
24
Total 118
(Source: data furnished by UD&MA Department)
North 24 Parganas  district has the largest number of ULBs (27 ULBs; one 
Municipal Corporation and 26 Municipalities), while Alipurduar, Jhargram and 
Kalimpong districts have one ULB each. Apart from the ULBs, there are also three 
Industrial Township Authorities, the Nabadiganta Industrial Township Authority 
(NDITA), Golden City Industrial Township Authority and Sector-VI Industrial 
Township Authority. The Industrial Township Authorities are also governed by 
the West Bengal Municipal Act. Out of the three Industrial Township Authorities, 
only NDITA is audited by the Examiner of Local Accounts (ELA), at present. 

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
4
The remaining two Industrial Township Authorities are yet to be brought under 
the purview of audit by ELA. NDITA has the power to levy and collect property 
tax, deliver services in the sphere of solid waste management, sewerage, water 
supply etc., but it does not have elected representatives. The Chairman and the 
Vice-Chairman are appointed by the State Government from among the members 
of the NDITA.
The Municipalities8 located in the hill areas of West Bengal i.e., areas within 
the region, as specified in clause ( o) of Section 2 of the Gorkhaland Territorial 
Administration (GTA) Act, 2011, are also governed by the West Bengal 
Municipal Act.
1.5  Organisational Structure of Urban Administration in West 
Bengal
1.5.1  Organisational Structure for the Administration of Urban 
areas in West Bengal
The UD&MA Department is entrusted with the responsibility of providing 
administrative support to all the ULBs in West Bengal. It is headed by an 
officer in the rank of Principal Secretary, who looks after the various functions 
of the Department, as also the Directorate of Local Bodies (DLB), Municipal 
Engineering Directorate (MED), West Bengal Valuation Board (WBVB), State 
Urban Development Agency (SUDA) and other organisations of the Department.
The organisational structure of the UD&MAD is given in Chart 1.1.
Chart 1.1: Organisational Structure of the UD&MA Department, 
Government of West Bengal
Chapter 1: Introduction 
 
 5  
 
Chart 1.1: Organisational Structure of the UD&MA Department, Government of  
West Bengal 
 
 
The role of the directorates, statutory bodies, attached offices and other developmental 
authorities, which act as parastatals in urban governance , are discussed in  the succeeding 
Chapters.  
 
In the ULBs, the Chairman (in the case of Municipality and NAA )/Mayor (in the case of 
Municipal Corporation), elected by the majority of the Board of Councillors (BoC) 9, is th e 
executive head. The Chairman/Mayor presides over the meetings of  the Chairman -in-
                                                 
9 ‘Board of Councillors ’ consists of all the Councillors representing wards of the  Municipality / Municipal 
Corporation. 
1.5.2  Organisational	Structure	of	Urban	Local	Bodies 
 
 
 
    
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Urban Development & 
Municipal Affairs 
Directorate 
1. Directorate of Local 
Bodies (DLB) 
2. Municipal 
Engineering 
Directorate (MED) 
3. Institute of Local 
Government & Urban 
Studies (ILG&US) 
 
Statutory Bodies  
1. West Bengal Valuation 
Board (WBVB) 
2. West Bengal 
Municipal Service 
Commission (WBMSC) 
3. Howrah Improvement 
Trust (HIT) 
 
Attached Offices 
1. State Urban 
Development Agency 
(SUDA) 
2. Salt Lake 
Reclamation & 
Development Circle 
(SLRDC) 
3. Estate Office and 
other offices 
 
Development Authorities: 
21 Development Authorities 
Industrial Township 
Authorities:  
3 Industrial Township 
Authorities 
125	Urban	Local	
Bodies 
7 Municipal 
Corporations, 115 
Municipalities and 
3 Notified Area 
Authorities 
8 Four ULBs-Darjeeling Municipality, Kurseong Municipality, Kalimpong Municipality and 
Mirik NAA.

Chapter I: Introduction
5
The role of the directorates, statutory bodies, attached offices and other 
developmental authorities, which act as parastatals in urban governance, are 
discussed in the succeeding Chapters. 
1.5.2	 Organisational	Structure	of	Urban	Local	Bodies
In the ULBs, the Chairman (in the case of Municipality and NAA)/Mayor (in 
the case of Municipal Corporation), elected by the majority of the Board of 
Councillors (BoC)9, is the executive head. The Chairman/Mayor presides over 
the meetings of the Chairman-in-Council10/Mayor-in-Council11, responsible for 
governance of the ULB. All executive powers of the Municipality vest in the 
Chairman-in-Council/Mayor-in-Council.
The Executive Officer (in case of Municipality and NAA)/Commissioner (in 
case of Municipal Corporation), subject to the supervision and control of the 
Chairman/Mayor, functions as the Principal Executive Officer of the ULB. The 
Executive Officer/Commissioner exercises such powers and performs such 
functions, as are notified by the State Government, from time to time.
The organisational structure of the Municipal Corporations varies among 
Corporations. An illustrative structure is given in Chart 1.2.
Chart 1.2: Organisational Structure of a Municipal Corporation
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
6 
 
Council10/Mayor-in-Council11, responsible for governance of the ULB. All executive powers of 
the Municipality vest in the Chairman-in-Council/Mayor-in-Council. 
The Executive Officer (in case of Municipality and NAA )/Commissioner (in case of Municipal 
Corporation), subject to the supervis ion and control of the Chairman/Mayor, functions as the 
Principal E xecutive Officer of the ULB. The Executive Officer/ Commissioner exercises s uch 
powers and performs such functions, as are notified by the State Government, from time to time. 
The organisational structure of the Municipal  Corporations varies among Corporations. An 
illustrative structure is given in Chart 1.2. 
Chart 1.2: Organisational Structure of a Municipal Corporation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
10 ‘Chairman-in-Council’ consists of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other members selected by the Chairman. 
11 ‘Mayor-in-Council’ consists of the Mayor, the Deputy Mayor and other members selected by the Mayor.  
 
Mayor-in-Council 
The Mayor 
 
Borough Committees, 
headed by Chairman 
 
Board of Councillors  
 
Municipal 
Commissioner 
 
Secretary 
 
Special/Joint 
Municipal 
Commissioner 
Controller of 
Finance/Finance 
Officer,  
Chief Municipal 
Engineer/ 
Executive 
Engineer etc. and 
other staff 
Legislative	 
Structure 
 
Administrative 
Structure 
 
Municipal 
Corporations 
9 ‘Board of Councillors’ consists of all the Councillors representing Wards of the Municipality/
Municipal Corporation.
10 ‘Chairman-in-Council’ consists of the Chairman, the Vice-Chairman and other members 
selected by the Chairman.
11 ‘Mayor-in-Council’ consists of the Mayor, the Deputy Mayor and other members selected by 
the Mayor.

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
6
The organisational structure of Municipalities/NAAs is as follows-
Chart 1.3: Organisational Structure of Municipalities/NAAs
Chapter 1: Introduction 
 
 7  
 
 
The organisational structure of Municipalities/NAAs is as follows- 
Chart 1.3: Organisational Structure of Municipalities/NAAs 
 
 
* In terms of Section 15 of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993; i n respect of the municipal areas included in 
Group D and Group E, all the powers and functions vested with the Chairman -in-Council are examined or 
performed by the Chairman. 
Further, in terms of Section 22 of the WBM A ct, every Municipality, with a population of three 
lakh or more, may group the wards into a maximum of five Boroughs. A Borough is constituted 
with not less than six contiguous wards. Section 11 of the KMC Act, Section 11 of the HMC Act 
and Section 22 of the WBMC Act , also mandate the formation of Borough s. As per the Acts  
ibid, a Borough Committee is constituted for each Borough.  The Councillors of the respective 
wards are the members of the Borough Committees and elect the Chairman (not being a member 
of Chairman-in-Council/Mayor-in-Council) from among themselves. The Borough Co mmittees 
discharge the functions assigned by the concerned ULBs. At the ward level, the ULBs constitute 
Ward Committees , under the chairmanship of the Ward Councillor s.
 
Municipalities/ 
NAAs 
 
The Chairman-in-Council* 
The Chairman 
 
Board of Councillors  
 
Executive Officer 
 
Finance Officer 
 Other staff of 
the	ULB 
Legislative	 
Structure 
 
Administrative 
Structure 
 
* In terms of Section 15 of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993; in respect 
of the municipal areas included in Group D and Group E, all the powers and 
functions vested with the Chairman-in-Council are examined or performed by 
the Chairman.
Further, in terms of Section 22 of the West Bengal Municipal Act, every 
Municipality, with a population of three lakh or more, may group the Wards 
into a maximum of five Boroughs. A Borough is constituted with not less than 
six contiguous Wards. Section 11 of the Kolkata Municipal Corporation Act, 
Section 11 of the Howrah Municipal Corporation Act and Section 22 of the West 
Bengal Municipal Corporation Act, also mandate the formation of Boroughs. 
As per the Acts ibid, a Borough Committee is constituted for each Borough. 
The Councillors of the respective Wards are the members of the Borough 
Committees and elect the Chairman (not being a member of Chairman-in-
Council/Mayor-in-Council) from among themselves. The Borough Committees 
discharge the functions assigned by the concerned ULBs. At the Ward level, 
the ULBs constitute Ward Committees, under the chairmanship of the Ward 
Councillors.

Chapter I: Introduction
i
CHAPTER  II
Audit Framework

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
ii

7
CHAPTER II
Audit Framework
The overall objective of this performance audit was to ascertain whether the 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) had been duly empowered, in terms of funds, 
functions and functionaries, to establish themselves as effective institutions 
of local self-government and whether the Seventy-fourth Constitutional 
Amendment Act, 1992 (74 th CAA), had been effectively implemented in the 
State. This Chapter discusses the audit objectives, the Acts/Rules from where 
the audit criteria were sourced and the audit scope and methodology.
2.1  Audit Objectives
The objectives of the Performance Audit (PA) were to assess:
 ● whether the ULBs had been duly empowered, by the State Government, 
to discharge their functions/responsibilities, in a time-bound, economical 
and sustainable manner, through creation of appropriately designed 
institutions/institutional mechanisms;
 ●  the effectiveness of the functions stated to have been devolved;
 ●  whether the ULBs had been empowered to access adequate resources, 
including sufficient resources for discharge of the functions stated to have 
been devolved to them.
2.2  Audit Criteria
The criteria for the Performance Audit were derived from the following: 
 (i) 74th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 
 (ii) Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC) Act, 1980
 (iii) Howrah Municipal Corporation (HMC) Act, 1980
 (iv) West Bengal Municipal (WBM) Act, 1993
 (v) West Bengal Municipal Corporation (WBMC) Act, 2006
 (vi) West Bengal Town and Country (Planning and Development) Act, 
1979
 (vii) West Bengal State Election Commission Act, 1994
 (viii) West Bengal Municipal Elections Act, 1994
 (ix) West Bengal Valuation Board (WBVB) Act, 1978
 (x) West Bengal District Planning Committee (DPC) Act, 1994
 (xi) West Bengal Metropolitan Planning Committee (MPC) Act, 1994
 (xii) West Bengal Municipal Service Commission (MSC) Act, 2018
 (xiii) West Bengal Municipal (Finance and Accounting) Rules, 1999
 (xiv) West Bengal Municipal Employees’ (Recruitment) Rules, 2005
 (xv) West Bengal Municipal Elections (Reservation of Seats) Rules, 1994
 (xvi) West Bengal Municipal (Ward Committee) Rules, 2001
 (xvii) West Bengal Municipal (Building) Rules, 2007

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
8
 (xviii) Kolkata Municipal Corporation Building Rules, 2009
 (xix) West Bengal Municipalities (Procedure and Conduct of Business) 
Rules, 1995
 (xx) Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016
 (xxi) West Bengal Trees (Protection and Conservation in Non-Forest Areas) 
Act, 2006
 (xxii) West Bengal Slum Areas (Improvement & Clearance) Act, 1972
 (xxiii) Calcutta Burial Boards Act, 1881
 (xxiv) Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960
 (xxv) West Bengal Urban Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and 
Regulation of Street Vending) Rules, 2018
 (xxvi) West Bengal Fire Services Act, 1950
 (xxvii) West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973
 (xxviii) Accounting Manual for Urban Local Bodies, issued by erstwhile 
Change Management Unit, UD&MA Department, Government of 
West Bengal, January 2006
 (xxix) Guidelines of National Urban Health Mission (NUHM)
 (xxx) Central Finance Commission Reports and State Finance Commission 
Reports
 (xxxi) State Government orders, notifications, circulars and instructions, 
issued from time to time, on the constitution and action taken reports 
of the State Finance Commission, recruitment of staff of municipalities 
etc.
2.3  Audit Scope and Methodology
The Performance Audit, covering the period for the FYs April 2015 to March 
2021, was carried out in two phases: from January 2021 to March 2021 and from 
July 2021 to February 2022, due to the disruption arising out of the COVID 
pandemic. Out of 125 ULBs, 26 ULBs, located in 14 districts, were selected 
through Stratified Simple Random Sampling, with population (Census 2011) 
as the size measure from each tier (strata) of ULBs. In addition, the Kolkata 
Municipal Corporation (KMC), being located in the State capital, was also 
selected for the PA.
Apart from ULBs, the Urban Development and Municipal Affairs Department, 
eight other State Government Departments, five organisations (two Directorates, 
two Statutory Bodies and one Urban Development Agency) and four Authorities/
Development Authorities, under the Urban Development and Municipal Affairs 
Department, offices of the District Planning Committee (DPC) in 14 districts 
and offices of the Chief Medical Officer of Health (CMOH), under the Health 
and Family Welfare Department, in 14 districts, were also covered in the 
Performance Audit.
The list of 27 ULBs and other audit units selected for Performance Audit, is 
given in Appendix-2.  The district-wise list of selected ULBs is given in Chart 
2.1.

Chapter II: Audit Framework
9
Chart	2.1:	District-wise	list	of	the	ULBs	selected	for	the	PA
Chapter II: Audit Framework 
 
11 
 
 
Chart 2.1: District-wise list of the ULBs	selected	for	the PA 
 
 
Out of the 18 functions specified in the 12 th Schedule, activities relating to following five 
functions were selected for detailed study, under the PA- 
 Property Tax 
 Water Supply 
 Water Tax/Charges 
 Solid Waste Management 
 Public Health and Sanitation 
Audit observations relating to Property Tax have been discussed in Chapter IV, while the other 
selected functions have been discussed in Chapter VI. 
An Entry Conference was held on 21 September 2021 , with the Additional Secretary, UD&MA  
Department, along with representatives from the selected ULBs, in which the audit methodology, 
scope, objectives a nd criteria were explained.  The draft Performance Audit Report was 
forwarded to the Department on 21 September 2022. The Exit Conference was held on 28 
Out of the 18 functions specified in the 12 th Schedule, activities relating to 
following five functions were selected for detailed study, under the PA-
	 		 	  	Property Tax
	 		 	  	Water Supply
	 		 	  	Water Tax/Charges
	 		 	  	Solid Waste Management
	 		 	  	Public Health and Sanitation
Audit observations relating to Property Tax have been discussed in Chapter IV , 
while the other selected functions have been discussed in Chapter VI.
An Entry Conference was held on 21 September 2021, with the Additional 
Secretary, UD&MA Department, along with representatives from the selected 
ULBs, in which the audit methodology, scope, objectives and criteria were 
explained. The draft Performance Audit Report was forwarded to the Department 
on 21 September 2022. The Exit Conference was held on 28 October 2022, with 
the Principal Secretary of the Department, to discuss the audit observations, 
conclusions and recommendations. The views expressed by the Department 
have been suitably mentioned at relevant places.
2.4  Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the UD&MA 
Department; Directorates and offices under the UD&MAD (DLB, MED, 

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
10
SUDA, WBVB, WBMSC); Authorities/Development Authorities (ADDA, 
KMDA, NDITA, SJDA); other departments of Government of West Bengal 
(Appendix-2) and the ULBs, in conduct of the Performance Audit.
2.5  Chapters of Audit Findings
Audit Observations, relating to status of devolution of functions, funds and 
functions, are presented in the following chapters:
Chapter III - Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth  Constitutional 
Amendment Act
Chapter IV - Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies
Chapter V - Human Resources
Chapter VI - Performance in the discharge of the devolved functions. 

Chapter II: Audit Framework
i
CHAPTER  III
Compliance to the provisions 
of the Seventy-fourth 
Constitutional Amendment 
Act

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
ii

11
CHAPTER III
Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth 
Constitutional Amendment Act
Articles 243Q to 243ZG, introduced by the 74 th CAA, enjoined the State to 
make provisions in the State Acts, to enable the ULBs to perform as local self-
governments, with devolved functions. The State Government enacted the West 
Bengal Municipal Act, 1993, on 31 May 1994 and repealed the then existing 
Bengal Municipal Act, 1932. The Kolkata Municipal Corporation Act, 1980 and 
Howrah Municipal Act, 1980, were already in force. The West Bengal Municipal 
Corporation Act, 2006, governing the Corporations (except for Kolkata and 
Howrah), came into force on 29 May 2008 and replaced the Siliguri Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1990, the Asansol Municipal Corporation Act, 1990, the 
Chandernagore Municipal Corporation Act, 1990 and the Durgapur Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1994. 
This Chapter presents the comparison of State level legislations with the 
provisions of the 74 th CAA, empowerment of ULBs by the State Acts and 
compliance with provisions of 74 th CAA. Audit observed that, although 
provisions were made in the State Acts to devolve the 18 functions enshrined 
in the 12 th Schedule, ULBs had been accorded sole responsibility in only one 
function and had overlapping/minimum roles in most of the functions, with no 
role in one function. Extension of the tenure of the Administrators/Board of 
Administrators, delays in holding municipal elections, non-formation of Ward 
Committees, Standing Committees and Municipal Accounts Committees, non-
formation and non-functioning of District Planning Committees (DPC), delays 
in constitution of State Finance Commissions (SFC), non-preparation and 
non-submission of Annual Financial Statements of ULBs and non-conduct of 
internal audits, were also observed. Audit could not analyse present status of the 
Kolkata Metropolitan Planning Committee (KMPC) and the role of parastatals, 
due to non-availability of information from the respective departments/  
authorities. 
3.1  Comparison of State level legislations with the provisions of 
the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
Article 243W of the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, 
authorised the State Legislatures to enact laws to endow local bodies with powers 
and authority, as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions 
of self-government and make provisions for devolution of powers and 
responsibilities, with respect to preparation of plans for economic development 
and social justice. A comparison of the State Acts, with the provisions under the 
74th CAA, is given in Table 3.1.

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
12
Table 3.1: Comparison of State level legislations with the provisions 
of the 74th CAA
Provision of 
Constitution 
of India
Requirement as per the Constitution Provision of State Act/Acts
Article 243Q Constitution of Municipalities: provides for 
constitution of three types of Municipalities, 
namely Nagar Panchayats for transitional 
areas, Municipal Councils for smaller urban 
areas and  Municipal Corporations for  larger 
urban areas.
Municipal Corporations: 
 •   Section 2(21) and Sections 3 to 5 of the KMC Act
 •  Section 2(6) and Sections 3 to 5 of the HMC Act 
 •  Section 2(18), Sections 3 to 10 of the WBMC Act 
Municipalities: 
 •   Section 2(38A) and Sections 3 to 13 of the WBM 
Act
Notified	Area	Authorities	(NAAs)	(Nagar	Panchayats):	
 •   Section 2(41A) and Sections 378, 379 and 381 of 
the WBM Act
In terms of Section 3 of the West Bengal Municipal 
Act, 1993, the State Government has the power to 
determine separate conditions, to constitute any area 
of the hill areas, as a municipal area.
Article 243R Composition of Municipalities: all the 
seats in a Municipality shall be filled by 
direct elections and by persons with special 
knowledge in municipal administration 
nominated by Government. The Legislature 
of a State may, by law, provide for 
representation to the Municipality of, 
Members of Parliament and Legislative 
Assembly, whose constituencies lie within the 
municipal area and Members of the Council 
of States and State Legislative Council, who 
are registered as electors within the city.
Municipal Corporations: 
 •  Sections 5 and 50 of the KMC Act
 •  Sections 5 and 30 of the HMC Act 
 •  Sections 10 to 12 of the WBMC Act 
Municipalities and NAAs: 
 •  Sections 13, 26 and 28 of the WBM Act
The provisions of the State Acts do not explicitly provide 
for representation for the Members of Parliament and 
Legislative Assembly, whose constituencies lie within 
the municipal area and Members of the Council of State 
and State Legislative Council, who are registered as 
electors within the city. 
However, Section 13 of the KMC Act, dealing with the 
remuneration of the Mayor, indicates that the Mayor 
can simultaneously hold the post of either a Member 
of Legislative Assembly or a Member of any House of 
Parliament. 
Article 243S Constitution and composition of Wards 
Committee: provides for constitution of 
Wards Committees in all municipalities with 
a population of three lakh or more.
Municipal Corporations: 
 •  Section 11A of the KMC Act
 •  Section 11A of the HMC Act
 •  Section 23 of the WBMC Act
Municipalities and NAAs: 
 •  Section 23 of the WBM Act
Article 243T Reservation of seats:  seats to be reserved 
for Scheduled Castes (SC)/Scheduled Tribes 
(ST), women and Backward classes, for 
direct election.
Section 29 of the West Bengal Municipal Elections 
(WBME) Act, 1994, and the West Bengal Municipal 
Elections (Reservation of Seats) Rules, 1994, relating 
to election to the Municipalities and Municipal 
Corporations, including KMC, provide for the same.

Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
13
Provision of 
Constitution 
of India
Requirement as per the Constitution Provision of State Act/Acts
Article 243U Duration of Municipalities: municipalities 
have a fixed tenure of five years from the date 
of their first meeting and re-elections are to be 
held within six months of the end of tenure.
Municipal Corporations: 
 •  Section 81 of the KMC Act
 •  Sections 5 and 40 of the HMC Act
 •  Sections 11 and 13 of the WBMC Act 
Municipalities and NAAs: 
 •  Sections 14 and 21A of the WBM Act
As per the provisions of Section 5(4) of the HMC Act, 
Section 11(4) of the WBMC Act and Section 14(4) 
of the WBM Act, if it is not possible to hold general 
elections before expiry of the period of five years, the 
Board of Councillors shall stand dissolved on the expiry 
of the said period and all the powers or functions, vested 
with the municipal authorities, shall be performed, 
by person/persons appointed vide notification by the 
State Government,  who are to be designated as the 
Administrator or Board of Administrators.
Article 243V Disqualifications	 for	 membership:  a 
Person shall be disqualified for a member of 
a Municipality-
 •   If he is so disqualified by any law in 
force for the purposes of elections of 
the Legislature of the State concerned.
 •   If he is so disqualified by or under any 
law made by the Legislature of the 
State. 
Municipal Corporations: 
 •  Sections 61 and 61A of the KMC Act
 •  Section 40A of the HMC Act 
 •  Section 14 of the WBMC Act 
Municipalities and NAAs: 
 •  Section 21B of the WBM Act
Further, Sections 30 to 35 of the WBME Act, 1994, 
detail the terms for disqualification of membership. 
Article 243W Powers, authority and responsibilities of 
the Municipalities: all municipalities would 
be empowered with such powers as may 
be necessary to enable them to function as 
effective institutions of self-government and 
to carry out the responsibilities in relation to 
the 12th Schedule. 
Municipal Corporations: 
 •   Sections 29, 30, 210B, 445 and Chapters XIX, 
XX, XXA, XXII, XXIIIA, XXIV , XXVII, 
XXVIII of the KMC Act
 •   Sections 87, 226A and Chapters X, XIA, XIIA, 
XIII, XIV , XVIII of the HMC Act 
 •   Sections 96S, 96T, 97, 98, 244, 257, 332, 333, 
402, 402A and Chapters XI, XIII, XV , XVI, 
XVIII, XX of the WBMC Act 
Municipalities and NAAs: 
 •   Sections 63, 64, 95B, 167, 194, 297 and Chapters 
XXIV , XXIV A, XVI, XVII, XVIII, XVIIIA, XIX, 
XXIII of the WBM Act
(The Sections and Chapters relating to discharge of 
functions, as delineated in the 12 th Schedule and as 
provided in Paragraph 3.2 and Table 3.2)

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
14
Provision of 
Constitution 
of India
Requirement as per the Constitution Provision of State Act/Acts
Article 243X Power to impose taxes by, and funds of the 
Municipalities:
•	 Municipalities are to be empowered to 
levy and collect taxes, fees, duties etc., 
•	 Constitution of funds, for crediting 
and withdrawal of moneys by the 
Municipality.
•	 Grants-in-aid are to be given to 
Municipalities from the State.
	Power to levy and collect taxes, fees, duties etc.
Municipal Corporations: 
•	 Sections 131, 170, 199, 204, 210, 210A, 210B, 
211, 212, 213, 217, 234, 237, 239, 248, 265, 
307, 331, 355, 392, 393, 400, 430, 450C, 469, 
499, 521, 543 and 610 of the KMC Act
•	 Sections 60, 87, 87A, 88, 88B, 102 and 220 of 
the HMC Act
•	 Sections 69, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 109, 
111, 113, 133, 141, 310 and 384 of the WBMC 
Act
Municipalities and NAAs: 
•	 Sections 93, 94, 94A, 95, 95A, 95B, 97, 100, 
117, 118, 276 and 440 of the WBM Act
	Constitution of funds for crediting and 
withdrawal of moneys by the Municipality
Municipal Corporations: 
•	 Sections 119 and 124 of the KMC Act
•	 Sections 55 and 56 of the HMC Act
•	 Sections 62 and 63 of the WBMC Act
Municipalities and NAAs: 
•	 Sections 67 and 69 of the WBM Act
	Grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from the 
State
Municipal Corporations: 
•	 Sections 120, 121, 122, 123, 123A, 123B of 
the KMC Act
•	 Section 60A of the HMC Act
•	 Section 70 of the WBMC Act
Municipalities and NAAs: 
•	 Section 71 of the WBM Act
Article 243Y Finance Commission: State Government 
shall constitute Finance Commission for:
•	 Reviewing the financial position of the 
Municipalities and taking such steps that 
help in boosting the financial condition 
of the Municipal bodies.
•	 Determination of the taxes, fees, tolls 
and duties that are assigned to or 
appropriated by the Municipalities and 
distributing, between the State and the 
Municipalities, the net proceeds thereof, 
as charged by the State Government.
•	 Allotting funds to the Municipal bodies 
in the State, from the Consolidated Fund 
of the State.
Section 123B of the KMC Act, Section 55A of the 
HMC Act, Section 62A of the WBMC Act and 70A of 
the WBM Act, provide for creation of a separate fund, 
namely, the Non-lapsable Basic Services for Urban Poor 
Fund in ULBs, for delivery of basic services to urban 
poor and for allocating funds from the State Finance 
Commission therein.
Provisions	 regarding	 review	 of	 financial	 position	
of	 the	 ULBs,	 taking	 steps	 that	 help	 in	 boosting	 the	
financial	condition,	determination	of	the	taxes,	fees,	
tolls and duties that are assigned to or appropriated 
by	 the	 ULBs	 and	 distributing	 the	 net	 proceeds	
thereof	between	the	State	and	the	ULBs,	allocation	
of	 funds	 to	 ULBs	 from	 the	 Consolidated	 Fund	 of	
State, are not included in the State Acts related to 
governance	of	ULBs.

Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
15
Provision of 
Constitution 
of India
Requirement as per the Constitution Provision of State Act/Acts
Article 243Z Audit of accounts of Municipalities: 
Provision for maintenance of accounts by 
the Municipalities and the auditing of such 
accounts. 
	Maintenance of Accounts
Municipal Corporations: 
•	 Section 155 of the KMC Act and Section 73 of 
the HMC Act, deal with keeping of accounts of 
all financial transactions, in such manner and 
form, as the State Government may prescribe.
•	 Section 83 of the WBMC Act states that the 
accounts of the Corporation is to be kept by 
Finance Officer.
Municipalities and NAAs: 
•	 Section 84 of the WBM Act
	Audit
Municipal Corporations: 
•	 Sections 156 to 159 of the KMC Act deal 
with audit of accounts by the Chief Municipal 
Auditor of the Corporation (i.e. Internal Audit). 
Section 160 of the Act ibid deals with audit of 
the accounts by the State Government or by 
auditor appointed by the State Government.
•	 Sections 74 to 76 of the HMC Act deal with 
audit of accounts by the Chief Auditor of the 
Corporation (i.e. Internal Audit). Section 77 of 
the Act ibid deals with audit of the accounts by 
the auditor appointed by the State Government.
•	 Sections 84 to 86 of the WBMC Act deal with 
audit of accounts by the Chief Auditor of the 
Corporation (i.e. Internal Audit). Section 87 of 
the Act ibid deals with audit of the accounts by 
the auditor appointed by the State Government.
Municipalities and NAAs: 
•	 In terms of Section 86 of the WBM Act, the 
accounts of the ULBs may be audited by the 
auditor appointed by the State Government.
Article 
243ZA read 
with Article 
243K 
Elections to the Municipalities:  the 
superintendence, direction and control of all 
procedure of election of the Municipalities 
shall be vested in the State Election 
Commission (SEC).
Municipal Corporations: 
•	 Section 50 of the KMC Act
•	 Section 30 of the HMC Act 
•	 Section 12 of the WBMC Act 
Municipalities and NAAs: 
•	 Section 28 of the WBM Act
Article 243 
ZD 
Committee for District Planning: 
•	 Constitution of District Planning 
Committee at the district level.
•	 Composition of District Planning 
Committee.
•	 Preparation of draft development plan 
and forwarding to the Government.
Municipal Corporations: 
•	 Section 239 of the HMC Act 
•	 Section 333 of the WBMC Act 
Municipalities and NAAs: 
•	 Section 297 of the WBM Act
There is no provision for preparation of a draft 
development plan in the KMC Act.
Provision for constitution of the West Bengal District 
Planning Committee is contained in District Planning 
Committee Act, 1994.

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
16
Provision of 
Constitution 
of India
Requirement as per the Constitution Provision of State Act/Acts
Article 
243ZE 
Committee for Metropolitan Planning:  
provision for constitution of a Metropolitan 
Planning Committee (MPC), in every 
Metropolitan area with a population of 10 
lakh or more.
•	 Section 3 of the West Bengal Metropolitan Planning 
Committee Act, 1994, deals with the constitution, 
composition and functioning of the Metropolitan 
Planning Committee (MPC). 
•	 Section 239 of the HMC Act also refers to 
preparation of a draft plan, in consultation with 
District Planning Committee or Metropolitan 
Planning Committee, as the case may be.
(Source: provisions of the Acts)
The above table indicates that, barring areas relating to provisions of State 
Finance Commission and Central Finance Commission, reservation of seats 
and constitution of Metropolitan Planning Committees, the enacted statutes 
complied with the provisions of the 74th CAA. Provisions relating to reservation 
of seats and constitution of Metropolitan Planning Committees, were covered 
in separate Acts/Rules12 enacted by the Government of West Bengal. Provisions 
regarding State Finance Commissions and Central Finance Commissions were 
not covered in any Acts, although an Act, namely the West Bengal Finance 
Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2011, came into effect from 
January 2012, pertaining to the powers, composition, requisite qualification of 
members, manner of selection etc., of the State Finance Commissions.
3.2	 Empowerment	of	Urban	Local	Bodies	and	their 	functioning
The 74th CAA sought to empower ULBs to perform functions and implement 
schemes, in relation to the 18 subjects specified in the 12th Schedule.  The State 
was expected to enact legislation, to implement the Amendment.
Audit observed, however, that the legal provisions were not backed by decisive 
actions, in particular, with regard to provisions pertaining to the devolution of 
functions and creation of appropriate institutional mechanisms for effective 
decentralisation, as discussed subsequently in this Report.
Audit also observed several overlaps in discharge of functions between the 
ULBs and parastatals/Government departments. The State Government, through 
Amendments, had transferred 17 functions, out of the 18 specified functions, to 
the ULBs (the only function not covered was Fire Services).
The function-wise role of the ULBs is depicted in Table 3.2. 
12 The West Bengal Municipal Elections (WBME) Act, 1994, along with the West Bengal 
Municipal Elections (Reservation of Seats) Rules, 1994 and West Bengal Metropolitan 
Planning Committee Act, 1994.

Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
17
Table 3.2: Actual status of devolution of functions
Sl. 
No. Functions Activities Status of devolution Act provisions
Functions	where	the	ULBs	have	full	jurisdiction
1 Vital statistics, 
including 
registration of 
birth and deaths
Coordinating 
with hospitals/
crematoriums etc., for 
obtaining information
The ULBs have full powers 
in exercise of all these 
functions.
•	 Chapter XXVII of the KMC Act, 
1980
•	 Chapter XVIII of the HMC Act, 
1980
•	 Chapter XX of the WBMC Act, 
2006
•	 Chapter XXIII of the WBM Act, 
1993
Maintaining and 
updating database
Issue of birth & death 
certificates
Functions	where	the	ULBs	have	dual	role/overlapping	jurisdiction	
1 Regulation of 
slaughterhouses 
and tanneries
Ensuring quality of 
animals and meat
ULBs have overlapping role 
with the State Government in 
this activity.
•	 Chapter XXIV of the KMC Act, 
1980 
•	 Chapter XIV of the HMC Act, 
1980
•	 Chapter XVIII of the WBMC Act, 
2006
•	 Chapter XVIII of the WBM Act, 
1993 
•	 West Bengal Meat Control Order, 
1966
Disposal of waste ULBs have full powers in 
the exercise of all these 
functions.
Operation and 
maintenance of 
slaughterhouses
2 Urban planning, 
including town 
planning
Formulation of 
Master Plans/
Development Plans/
Zonal Plans
ULBs have an overlapping 
jurisdiction in devising 
development plans, in 
co-ordination with the 
Development Authorities.
•	 Section 29 of the KMC Act, 1980 
•	 Section 226A(b) (i) of the HMC 
Act, 1980
•	 Section 97(3) of the WBMC Act, 
2006
•	 Section 63(3) and Chapter XXV A 
of the WBM Act, 1993
•	 Section 13(1)(ii)(f) of the  West 
Bengal Town and Country 
(Planning and Development) 
[WBT&C (P&D)] Act, 1979
Enforcing master 
planning regulations
Master planning regulations 
are prepared and enforced by 
the Development Authorities.  
ULBs have no role in 
areas where Development 
Authorities exist. Where 
there are no Development 
Authorities, this function is 
devolved to the ULBs.
Enforcing building 
bye-laws and licenses
ULBs have a shared role in 
enforcing building bye-laws 
and licenses, alongside the 
Development Authorities.
Group housing 
scheme 
ULBs have a shared role with 
the development authorities 
and the concerned State 
Government Department 
(Housing), in this area of 
activity.
Development of 
industrial areas
Development of industrial 
areas is to be carried out by 
the Development Authorities; 
ULBs have no assigned role 
in this area.

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
18
Sl. 
No. Functions Activities Status of devolution Act provisions
3 Roads and 
bridges
Construction and 
maintenance of roads
ULBs have a dual role in this 
function, along with PWD 
and an overlapping role with 
the Development Authorities.
•	 Section 29(e) of the KMC Act, 
1980
•	 Section 226A(b) (iv) of the HMC 
Act, 1980
•	 Sections 97(1) and 244 of the 
WBMC Act, 2006 
•	 Sections 63(1) and 167 of the  
WBM Act, 1993
•	 WBT&C (P&D) Act, 1979
•	 Statutes of formation and 
functioning of various 
Development Authorities
Construction and 
maintenance of 
bridges, drains, 
flyovers and footpaths
4 Public 
amenities, 
including 
street lighting, 
parking lots, 
bus stops 
and public 
conveniences
Installation and 
maintenance of 
streetlights
ULBs have an overlapping 
role, with the Development 
Authorities and other State 
Government agencies.
•	 Section 29(e) and (f) of the KMC 
Act, 1980
•	 Section 226A(b) (xvi) of the HMC 
Act, 1980
•	 Sections 97(1) and 257 of the  
WBMC Act, 2006
•	 Sections 63(1), 167 and 194 of the 
WBM Act, 1993
•	 WBT&C (P&D) Act, 1979
•	 Statutes of formation and 
functioning of various 
Development Authorities
Construction and 
maintenance of 
parking lots
ULBs have an overlapping 
role, with the Development 
Authorities, in this activity.
Construction and 
maintenance of public 
toilets
 ULBs have an overlapping 
role in this function, with the 
Development Authorities
Deciding and 
operating bus routes
ULBs have no role in 
deciding and operating bus 
routes. This role is vested in 
the Transport Department of 
the State Government.
5 Planning for 
land-use and 
construction of 
buildings
Regulating land use Although empowered by the 
respective Acts in this regard, 
ULBs have practically no 
role in this area. Regulation 
of land use is dealt by the 
Development Authorities, 
in their respective 
jurisdictions. In ULBs 
outside the jurisdiction of 
any Development Authority, 
regulation of land use 
remains largely untouched.
•	 Section 29 of the KMC Act, 1980
•	 Section 226A(b) (ii) of the HMC 
Act, 1980
•	 Section 97(3) of the WBMC Act, 
2006
•	 Section 63(3) of the WBM Act, 
1993
•	 Sections 13 and 53 of the WBT&C 
(P&D) Act, 1979
•	 Rule 53 of the West Bengal 
Municipal (Building) Rules, 2007
•	 KMC Building Rules, 2009
Approving building 
plans/high rises
ULBs, except KMC, have 
full powers in sanctioning 
of plans of buildings having 
height up to 14.50 meters. In 
case of buildings above this 
height, permission is to be 
obtained from the Municipal 
Engineering Directorate 
(MED), Government of West 
Bengal. KMC has full power 
in sanctioning building plans 
upto any height. 
Demolishing illegal 
buildings.
ULBs have a shared role with 
the Development Authorities, 
in exercising these powers.

Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
19
Sl. 
No. Functions Activities Status of devolution Act provisions
6 Water supply 
for domestic, 
industrial and 
commercial 
purposes
Treatment of water ULBs have an overlapping 
role in this function, with 
the Development Authorities 
and the Public Health 
Engineering Department 
(PHED), Govertment of West 
Bengal.
•	 Section 29, Chapter XVII of the 
KMC Act, 1980
•	 Chapter X of the HMC Act, 1980
•	 Section 97(1) and (3), Chapter XI 
of the WBMC Act, 2006
•	 Section 63(1) and (3), Chapter XV 
of the WBM Act, 1993
•	 Chapters VII and VIII of the 
WBT&C (P&D) Act, 1979
Distribution of water
Storage of water
Providing water 
connection
Operation and 
maintenance
Collection of charges ULBs have full powers in 
this area of activity.
7 Public health, 
sanitation, 
conservancy 
and solid waste 
management
Maintenance of 
hospitals, dispensaries
ULBs have full powers 
in these areas, subject to 
observance of directives 
issued by regulatory agencies 
and competent authorities 
within the Central and State 
Government, in this regard.
•	 Sections 30, 210B and Chapters 
XIX, XX of the KMC Act, 1980
•	 Clause (h) of Section 87(1), 
Chapters X, XIV of the  HMC Act, 
1980
•	 Sections 97(2), 98(3), 105 and 
Chapters XI, XVI of the WBMC 
Act, 2006
•	 Sections 63(2), 64(3), 95B and 
Chapters XVI, XVII of the WBM 
Act, 1993
•	 Chapters VII and VIII of the 
WBT&C (P&D) Act, 1979
•	 NUHM Guidelines of Government 
of India, as well as guidelines 
issued by the Department of Health 
& Family Welfare, Government of 
West Bengal
•	 Provisions relating to legacy 
waste removal, basic service 
delivery and construction of 
household latrines, were not 
found in the Acts.
Immunization/
vaccination
Cleaning and 
disinfection of 
localities 
ULBs have full powers in 
this area of activity.
Construction and 
O&M of SWM 
Treatment Plants
ULBs have an overlapping 
role in this function, with the 
Development Authorities, 
particularly KMDA and 
MED.
Legacy waste 
removal
Basic service delivery ULBs have full powers in 
this area of activity.Conservancy charge 
collection
Sewerage and 
drainage
ULBs have an overlapping 
role in this function, with the 
Development Authorities, 
particularly KMDA and 
Public Health Engineering 
Department (PHED), 
Govertment of West Bengal.
Construction of 
household latrines
ULBs have full powers in 
this area of activity.
8 Urban forestry, 
protection of 
the environment 
and promotion 
of ecological 
aspects
Forestation and 
plantation
ULBs have an overlapping 
role in this function, along 
with the Forest Department, 
Govertment of West 
Bengal and Development 
Authorities.
•	 Section 29 of the KMC Act, 1980
•	 Sections 97(1) and 98(5) of the 
WBMC Act, 2006
•	 Sections 63(1) and 64(5) of the 
WBM Act, 1993
•	 Chapter VII and VIII of the 
WBT&C (P&D) Act, 1979
•	 The WB Trees (Protection & 
Conservation in Non-Forest 
Areas) Act, 2006
•	 Provisions for protection of the 
environment and promotion 
of ecological aspects, were not 
found in the Acts.
Awareness campaign
Protection of the 
environment and 
promotion of 
ecological aspects
Maintenance of 
natural resources, like 
water bodies etc.

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
20
Sl. 
No. Functions Activities Status of devolution Act provisions
9 Provision of 
urban amenities 
and facilities, 
such as parks, 
gardens, 
playgrounds 
etc.
Construction and 
O&M of parks and 
gardens
ULBs have an overlapping 
role in this function, with the 
Development Authorities, as 
well as Railways and various 
departments of the State 
Government.
•	 Section 29(o) of the KMC Act, 
1980 
•	 Section 226A (b) (xi) of the HMC 
Act, 1980
•	 Section 63(3) of the WBM Act, 
1993
•	 Section 97(3) of the WBMC Act, 
2006
•	 Chapters VII and VIII of the 
WBT&C (P&D) Act, 1979
10 Planning for 
economic 
and social 
development
Policies for social 
development
ULBs have a dual role in 
planning for economic and 
social development, along 
with the State Government.
•	 Section 226A (b) (iii) of the HMC 
Act, 1980
•	 Sec 333 of the WBMC Act, 2006
•	 Section 297 of the WBM Act, 
1993 
•	 There is no provision for 
planning for economic and 
social development in KMC Act, 
1980.
11 Slum 
improvement 
and upgradation
Identifying 
beneficiaries
ULBs have overlapping 
roles, with the Development 
Authorities, in the exercise of 
all these functions.
•	 Section 445 of the KMC Act, 1980
•	 Chapter XIII of the HMC Act, 
1980  
•	 Chapter XV of the WBMC Act, 
2006
•	 Chapter XIX of the WBM Act, 
1993
•	 WB Slum Areas (Improvement & 
Clearance) Act, 1972
Affordable housing
Upgradation
12 Burial and 
burial grounds, 
cremations, 
cremation 
grounds 
and electric 
crematoriums
Construction 
and O&M of 
crematoriums and 
burial grounds and 
electric crematoriums
ULBs have shared roles with 
development authorities, 
in the exercise of all these 
functions. The Calcutta Burial 
Boards Act, 1881, vests the 
control and management 
of all Government Burial 
grounds, within Kolkata and 
its suburbs, on the Calcutta 
Burial Boards. 
•	 Chapter XXVIII of the KMC Act, 
1980 
•	 Section 226A(b) (xiii) of the HMC 
Act, 1980
•	 Section 332 of the WBMC Act, 
2006
•	 Chapter XXIV of the WBM Act, 
1993
•	 Chapters VII and VIII of the 
WBT&C (P&D) Act, 1979
•	 Provisions of the Calcutta Burial 
Boards Act, 1881
13 Cattle pounds; 
preventing 
cruelty to 
animals
Catching and keeping 
strays
ULBs have shared roles 
with State Government in 
the exercise of all these 
functions.
•	 Section 30(i), Chapter XXXI of 
the KMC Act, 1980
•	 Section 226A(b) (xiv) of the HMC 
Act, 1980
•	 Sections 96S, 96T and 98(3) of the 
WBMC Act, 2006 
•	 Section 64(3), Chapter XXI of the 
WBM Act, 1993
•	 Section 35 of the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960
Sterilizations and 
anti-rabies treatment
Ensuring animal 
safety

Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
21
Sl. 
No. Functions Activities Status of devolution Act provisions
14 Urban poverty 
alleviation
Identifying 
beneficiaries
ULBs have dual role in 
this area of activity, being 
the executing agency in 
identification of beneficiaries, 
based on criteria set by 
the Central and the State 
Governments. 
They also have a shared role 
with SUDA, West Bengal, in 
implementation of livelihood 
and employment generation 
programs of the State and 
Central Governments.  
•	 Section 30 of the KMC Act, 1980
•	 Section 226A(b) (x) of the HMC 
Act, 1980
•	 Section 98(7) of the WBMC Act, 
2006
•	 Section 64(5) of the WBM Act, 
1993
•	 WB Urban Street Vendors 
(Protection of livelihood and 
regulation of street vending) 
Rules, 2018 
•	 Scheme guidelines issued by the 
State and Central Governments, 
relating to various schemes
Livelihood and 
employment
Street vendors 
welfare
ULBs have full powers in 
exercise of this activity.
15 Promotion 
of cultural, 
educational 
and aesthetic 
aspects
Schools and 
education
As per municipal laws, 
except for KMC, the role 
of the ULBs is limited to 
maintaining and running 
pre-primary schools, civic 
education, adult education, 
social education, non-formal 
education etc. The KMC Act 
empowers KMC to establish, 
maintain and give aid to 
primary schools. Further, 
the UD&MA Department 
also implemented the Sishu 
Siksha Prakalpa (SSP), for 
providing primary education, 
in urban areas, through the 
Sishu Shiksha Kendras 
(SSKs), under the control 
of ULBs. Some ULBs have 
also been running primary 
schools historically, from the 
pre-independence era. 
However, the primary 
schools in the State are under 
the control of the District 
Primary School Councils 
(DPSC), constituted as per 
the West Bengal Primary 
Education Act, 1973, and 
are under the control of 
Department of School 
Education, Government of 
West Bengal. 
Thus, ULBs have an 
overlapping role with the 
Department of School 
Education, in the sphere 
of primary education and 
running primary schools.
•	 Section 30 of the KMC Act, 1980 
•	 Section 226A(b) (xii) of the HMC 
Act, 1980
•	 Section 98(2) of the WBMC Act, 
2006
•	 Section 64(2) of the WBM Act, 
1993 
•	 West Bengal Primary Education 
Act, 1973

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
22
Sl. 
No. Functions Activities Status of devolution Act provisions
Fairs and festivals ULBs have been devolved 
with the discretionary 
function of organisation and 
management of fairs.
•	 Section 30(f) of the KMC Act, 
1980
•	 Section 226A(b) (xii) of the HMC 
Act, 1980
•	 Section 98(4) of the WBMC Act, 
2006
•	 Section 64(4) of the WBM Act, 
1993
Cultural buildings/
institutions
ULBs have a dual role in 
this area, along with the 
West Bengal Heritage 
Commission.
•	 Chapter XXIIIA of the KMC Act, 
1980
•	 Chapter XIIA of the HMC Act, 
1980 
•	 Sections 402 and 402A of the 
WBMC Act, 2006
•	 Chapter XIV A of the WBM Act, 
1993
•	 West Bengal Heritage Commission 
Act, 2001
Heritage
Public space 
beautification
ULBs have an overlapping 
role in this function, along 
with the Development 
Authorities.
•	 Chapter XXI of the KMC Act, 
1980 
•	 Section 226A(b) (xi) of the HMC 
Act, 1980
•	 Section 97(3) of the WBMC Act, 
2006
•	 Section 63(3) of the WBM Act, 
1993 
•	 Chapter VII and VIII of the 
WBT&C (P&D) Act, 1979
Functions	where	the	ULBs	have	minimum/partial	role	or	act	as	implementing	agencies
1 Safeguarding 
the interests of 
weaker sections 
of society, 
including the 
handicapped 
and mentally 
retarded 
Identifying 
beneficiaries 
ULBs act merely as 
implementing agencies for 
some of the related Central 
and State Government 
schemes. They have a 
limited role in identifying 
beneficiaries, subject 
to approval of the State 
Government and providing 
benefits. Identification of 
beneficiaries, providing 
benefits etc., are executed by 
other Departments as well.
•	 Section 30 of the KMC Act, 1980
•	 Section 226A(b) (viii) of the HMC 
Act, 1980 
•	 Section 98(1) of the WBMC Act, 
2006 
•	 Section 64(1) of the WBM Act, 
1993
•	 Scheme guidelines issued by the  
State and Central Governments, 
relating to various social welfare 
schemes
Providing tools/
benefits 
Housing programs
Scholarships
Functions	where	the	ULBs	have	no	role
1 Fire Services Establishing and 
maintaining fire 
brigades
This function has not been 
devolved to ULBs and is 
vested with the West Bengal 
Fire Services Department.
•	 Chapter XXA of the KMC Act, 
1980
•	 Chapter XIA of the HMC Act, 
1980
•	 Chapter XIII of the WBMC Act, 
2006 
•	 Chapter XVIIIA of the WBM Act, 
1993
•	 WB Fire Services Act, 1950
Issuing of fire safety 
certificates, in regard 
to high-rise buildings
Though empowered by 
respective Acts for issuing 
fire safety certificates, in 
practice, the West Bengal 
Fire Services Department, 
rather than ULBs, perform 
this activity. 
(Source: provisions of the Acts and information furnished by the UD&MAD)

Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
23
It is evident from the Table 3.2 that out of 18 functions, ULBs were solely 
responsible for one function; had minimum role or acted as implementing 
agencies in one function; had no role in one function and in respect of the 
fifteen functions, had dual role/overlapping jurisdiction with other departments/
parastatals. 
Further, it is observed from Table 3.2 that the State Government had not fully 
devolved functions, relating to land-use, to ULBs. The KMDA and other 
development authorities play a major role in these functions, thereby restricting 
the autonomy of ULBs. It is evident that the State Government did not completely 
devolve 17 out of the 18 functions to ULBs even after lapse of 27 years since 
the constitutional amendment came into effect which undermines the spirit of 
74th CAA.
Recommendation: 
 1. Government may ensure that the 17 functions that have been 
either partially devolved or not devolved at all, may be handed 
over	to	the	ULBs,	to	the	maximum	extent	possible	on	priority.
3.3	 Overriding	powers	of	the	State	Government	over 	the	ULBs
Audit observed that the State Government had overriding powers over ULBs, 
which was against the provisions of the 74 th CAA. A few such provisions are 
indicated in Table 3.3.
Table	3.3:	Overriding	powers	of	the	State	Government	over	the	ULBs
Sl. 
No. Subject Provisions
1. Power to determine the 
number of Wards in Municipal 
Areas
As per Section 7 of the WBMC Act and Section 8 of the WBM Act, the State 
Government has the sole authority to determine the number of Wards in ULBs, 
without obtaining the views of the concerned ULBs.
2. Power to frame Rules As per Section 600 of the KMC Act, Section 215 of the HMC Act, Section 361 
of the WBMC Act and Section 417 of the WBM Act, the State Government is 
unilaterally empowered to make rules for the functioning of the ULBs, without 
consulting the latter in this regard.
3. Decision with respect to 
doubts as to powers, duties 
or functions of the Municipal 
authorities
According to the provisions of Section 609 of the KMC Act, Section 29 of the 
HMC Act, Section 48 of the WBMC Act and Section 424 of the WBM Act, in 
case of any doubt with respect to any particular power, duty, function or rule 
pertaining to the Municipal authorities, the decision of the State Government 
thereon shall be final.
4. Power to sanction and 
modify bye-laws/regulations 
of ULBs, by the State 
Government
As per the provisions of Section 604 of the KMC Act, Section 362 of the WBMC 
Act and Section 420 of the WBM Act, any regulation made by the ULBs shall 
not have any validity, unless and until it is approved by the State Government.
Section 604 of the KMC Act and Section 362 of the WBMC Act also empower 
the State Government to modify regulations, without the concurrence of the 
ULBs.
The HMC Act does not have any such provision.
5. Power to cancel or modify 
bye-laws/regulations of ULBs 
by the State Government
Section 605 of the KMC Act, Section 218 of the HMC Act, Section 364 of the 
WBMC Act and Section 421 of the WBM Act, empower the State Government 
to modify or cancel by-laws/regulations. These sections also provide scope for 
representation by the ULBs, but the State Government is the ultimate authority 
to cancel or modify the regulation, either wholly or partially.

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
24
3.4	 Institutional	mechanism	for 	empowerment	of	ULBs
As stated above, the State Government had transferred 17 functions to the 
ULBs. The discharge of these functions can be effective only when appropriate 
institutions are established and adequately empowered. The 74th CAA provided 
for the establishment of such institutional mechanisms, as can be seen from Table 
3.1. This Para discusses the effectiveness of such institutional mechanisms.
3.4.1 State Election Commission
As per Article 243ZA(1) of 74 th CAA, the powers of the State Election 
Commission (SEC) include superintendence, direction and control of the 
preparation of electoral rolls for and the conduct of all elections to Municipalities. 
Sl. 
No. Subject Provisions
6. Power to annul proceedings 
and to prohibit passing of 
orders by the ULBs
As per the provisions of Section 370 of the WBMC Act and Section 429 of the 
WBM Act, the State Government is empowered to annul any proceedings or 
resolution or order of the ULB, if they think that such proceedings are not in 
conformity with the provisions of law.
7. Power to dissolve the ULBs Section 117 of the KMC Act, Section 53 of the HMC Act, Section 60 of the 
WBMC Act and Section 431 of the WBM Act, empower the State Government 
to dissolve the elected board of the civic body, on grounds of incompetence, 
persistence default in discharge of duties or abuse of powers.
8. Sanction to deposit and invest 
surplus funds
As per the provisions of Section 55 of the HMC Act, Section 62 of the WBMC 
Act and Section 68 of the WBM Act, the ULBs may invest money, not required 
for immediate use, in securities or in fixed deposits, with prior approval of and 
under direction from, the State Government.
As per Section 130 of the KMC Act, surplus moneys, standing at the credit of 
any of the accounts of the Municipal Fund, cannot be transferred permanently 
by the Corporation, in whole or in part, from one account to another, without 
prior approval of the State Government. Money which is not transferred, may 
be invested in public securities or small savings accounts schemes, approved by 
the State Government.
9. Sanction to borrow money As per the provisions of Section 134 of the KMC Act, Section 61 of the HMC 
Act, Section 71 of the WBMC Act and Section 72 of the WBM Act, the ULBs 
may raise loans from any public financial institution, nationalised banks or any 
other lending institution. However, no such loans can be raised without the 
prior approval of the State Government. Further, the State Government may 
require the ULBs to observe financial discipline in the matter of debt servicing, 
including creation of sinking funds for repayment of loans.
10. Approval of the State 
Government in case of 
estimated cost of works or 
purchases above certain limits
As per the provisions of Section 57A of the HMC Act, Section 66 of the WBMC 
Act, approval of the State Government is required to be obtained, if the estimated 
cost of purchases or works exceeds ` one crore. Similarly, in terms of Section 
73A of the WBM Act, such approval is required in case of Municipalities, if the 
estimated value exceeds ` forty-five lakh.
11. Lease/Sale of properties As per the provisions of Section 80 of the WBM Act, prior approval of the State 
Government is necessary, to let out on hire, grant lease of, or sell or transfer, any 
immovable property belonging to the Municipality, but not required for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act, for valuable consideration.
12. Improvement schemes for 
bustee or slums
As per provisions contained in Section 530 of the KMC Act, Section 185 of the 
HMC Act, Section 297 of the WBMC Act and Section 287 of the WBM Act, 
improvement schemes, for the purpose of effecting environmental or general 
improvement of bustees or slums, require the approval of the State Government.
(Source: respective Acts)

Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
25
In line with the provisions of the Constitution, Section 5 of the West Bengal State 
Election Commission (WBSEC) Act, 1994, also vests the same responsibilities 
on the West Bengal State Election Commission (WBSEC). Section 50 of the 
KMC Act, Section 12 of the WBMC Act, and Section 28 of the WBM Act, also 
contain similar provisions.
The West Bengal Municipal Elections (WBME) Act, 1994, came into effect in 
July 1994, to consolidate and amend laws relating to the holding of elections 
to the Municipalities in West Bengal. Audit observed that, in terms of the 
provisions contained in the WBME Act, 1994, WBSEC had been entrusted with 
powers for delimiting Municipal areas into Wards; preparation and revision 
of electoral rolls; reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled 
Tribes and women; qualification and disqualifications from membership of a 
Municipality; and holding general elections.
As per Section 36(3) of the WBME Act, 1994, read along with Section 8 of 
the West Bengal State Election Commission (WBSEC) Act, 1994, the State 
Government, in consultation with the Commission, is to fix the date or dates, on 
which, and the hours during which, the polls would be conducted.
These provisions indicate that the State Election Commission can decide upon 
the dates of holding of General Elections, to any Municipality or Municipal 
Corporation, on the expiry of its duration, only with the consent of the State 
Government.
3.4.2 Reservation of seats
Section 29 of the West Bengal Municipal Elections Act, 1994 and the West 
Bengal Municipal Elections (Reservation of Seats) Rules, 1994, provide 
for reservation of seats for persons belonging to Scheduled Castes (SC) and 
Scheduled Tribes (ST), in the same proportion to the total number of seats to be 
filled by direct election to the ULB, as the population of the SCs or of the STs 
in the Municipal area, bears to the total population of that Municipal area. The 
Section and Rule, ibid, also provide for reservation of not less than one-third of 
the seats earmarked for SCs and STs, as well as of the total number of seats of 
the ULBs, for women.
As per reply furnished (May 2023) by the West Bengal State Election 
Commission, required number of seats for SC, ST and women were reserved in 
the last municipal elections held in 2015-16 and 2017-18.
3.4.3	 Holding	of	elections	of	ULBs	and	formation	of	Boards
As per Section 81 of the KMC Act, Sections 5(3) and 40 of the HMC Act, 
Sections 11(2) and 13 of the WBMC Act and Sections 14(2) and 21A of the WBM 
Act, the duration of holding office of elected Councillors/Board of Councillors, 
is five years from the date of the first meeting after the general election and 
subsequent elections are to be conducted, by the State Election Commission, 
before the expiry period of five years. Further, as per provisions 13 contained 
in the HMC, WBMC and WBM Acts, if it is not possible to hold the general 
elections before the expiry of the period of five years, the Board of Councillors 
13 Section 5(4) of the HMC Act, Section 11(4) of the WBMC Act and Section 14(4) of the WBM 
Act.

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
26
shall stand dissolved on the expiration of the five years period. Section 117 of 
the KMC Act, Section 53 of the HMC Act, Section 60 of the WBMC Act and 
Section 431 of the WBM Act, also empower the State Government to dissolve 
the ULBs, in case of incompetence shown or persistent default in performing 
their duties/exercise of functions or in case of abuse of or exceeding their powers. 
Following dissolution, all the powers or functions, vested with the municipal 
authorities, are to be exercised by persons appointed by the State Government 
(in case of KMC) or the Administrator/Board of Administrators appointed by 
the State Government (in case of other ULBs). The provisions of the Acts ibid 
also mandate to hold general elections within six months of dissolution of ULBs 
for constitution of a new Board, thereby limiting the period of dissolution and 
tenure of the Administrator or Board of Administrators, to six months.
Article 243U of the Constitution and the respective Acts mandate holding of 
general elections within six months of the dissolution of the concerned ULBs, 
for constitution of a new Board, thereby limiting the period of dissolution and 
tenure of Administrator or Board of Administrators, to six months.
Audit observed that -
(i) During 2019-20, the State Government amended the HMC, WBMC and 
WBM Acts14, by inserting the provision that, if it is not possible to hold the 
election before the expiry of the period of six months, the State Government 
may, by notification, extend the term of such Administrator or Board of 
Administrators, for a further period not exceeding twelve months. This is a 
contravention of Article 243U, which clearly states that the Municipality should 
have a fixed tenure of five years from the date of its first meeting and re-election 
to be held within six months of the end of tenure and it undermines the spirit of 
democratic decentralisation.
(ii) Between August 2018 and December 2018, 16 ULBs were dissolved 
and, between February 2020 and October 2020, 93 ULBs were dissolved, due 
to expiry of the tenures of their existing Boards out of which 91 ULBs were 
dissolved for more than six months, as on March 2021. On 18 June 2019, the 
Darjeeling Municipality was dissolved by the State Government, following 
Section 431 of the WBM Act. The Chandernagore Municipal Corporation was 
also dissolved by the State Government, following Section 60 of the WBMC 
Act, on 24 August 2018. As on 31 March 2021, elections had not been conducted 
in any of the ULBs, to constitute the new Boards. Instead, the municipal 
functions and administrations were being run by Administrators or Board of 
Administrators, appointed by the State Government, from time to time. Delays in 
holding elections and tenures of the Administrators/Board of Administrators, in  
125 ULBs, are given in Table 3.4. 
14 Amendment to Section 53, by the Howrah Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2019 
dated 30 July 2019; amendment to Section 60, by the West Bengal Municipal Corporation 
(Amendment) Act, 2006 dated 30 July 2019; and amendment to Section 431, by the West 
Bengal Municipal (Amendment) Act, 2019 dated 7 January 2020.

Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
27
Table	3.4:	Delays	in	holding	elections	in	ULBs,	as	on	31	March	2021
Delay 6 
months 
to 10 
months
10 
months 
to 11 
months
13 
months 
to 14 
months
21 
months 
to 22 
months
27 
months 
to 28 
months
28 
months 
to 29 
months
29 
months 
to 30 
months
31 
months 
to 32 
months
Total
Number	of	ULBs# 3 87 1 1 4 1 11 1  109
#	In	13	ULBs15,	the	validity	of	the	existing	Boards	did	not	expire	and	in	two	ULBs	period	
of	dissolution	of	ULBs	did	not	exceed	six	months,	as	on	31	March	2021,	hence,	elections	
were not due. Election in HMC could not be held due to administrative reasons16.
The municipal election in KMC was held in December 2021 and in the remaining 
108 ULBs in February 2022, with a further delay of 10 months, in addition to 
the delays shown in Table 3.4 above, in holding municipal elections from the 
date of dissolutions and date of elections. 
The State Government (February 2021) stated that the elections were not 
held due to the pandemic. The reply, however, does not justify the delays in 
holding elections in 18 ULBs, including the Darjeeling Municipality and the 
Chandernagore Municipal Corporation, where the tenure of the elected Boards 
had expired between August 2018 and June 2019.
In the absence of elected councils, the involvement of elected representatives in 
decision making and implementation, was missing. 
Further, the Central Finance Commissions (CFCs) have recommended of 
holding regular elections as a pre-condition for receipt of grants. However, 
during audit it was found that delays in holding elections in 109 ULBs ranged 
from six to 32 months. Thus, non/delayed holding of elections may result in the 
ULBs being rendered ineligible for the CFC grants. 
Recommendation: 
	 2.	Government	 may	ensure	that	elections	for	the	ULBs	are	held	in	a	
timely manner, in consultation with the State Election Commission.
3.4.4  Composition of Municipalities/Corporations
Article 243R of the Constitution stipulates the composition of Municipalities. 
Section 3 of the KMC Act, Section 5 of the HMC Act, Section 9 of the WBMC 
Act and Section 12 of the WBM Act, state that the municipal authorities would 
consist of the Corporation/Municipalities, the Mayor-in-Council (in case of 
Corporations)/the Chairman-in-Council (in case of Municipalities and NAAs) 
and the Mayor/Chairman.
As per Section 5 of the KMC Act, Section 5 of the HMC Act, Section 10 of the 
WBMC Act and Section 13 of the WBM Act, the Corporations and Municipalities 
15 Buniyadpur, Coopers’ Camp NAA, Dhupguri, Domkal, Durgapur MC, Haldia, Kalimpong, 
Kurseong, Mirik NAA, Nalhati, Panskura, Pujali and Raiganj. 
16 The demerger of Bally Municipality, from Howrah Municipal Corporation, is subjudice, in the 
Hon’ble Kolkata High Court, after issue of notification regarding the demerger, by the State 
Government.
(Source: data furnished by UD&MAD)

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
28
consist of elected Members, as well as Members with special knowledge or 
experience of municipal administration, nominated by the State Government, 
in accordance with Article 243R of 74 th CAA. The nominated Members do 
not have voting power. However, the said Acts do not contain provisions with 
respect to the nomination of Members of the Legislative Assembly, Members 
of the Legislative Council, Members of the Lok Sabha, Members of the Rajya 
Sabha, representing the constituencies which comprise wholly or partly the 
Municipal area, as members of the Municipalities/Corporations.
Thus, the representation of elected peoples’ representatives in Municipalities/
Corporations, was not as per the prescribed norms. 
 3.4.5 Chairman/Mayor
Article 243R (2)(b) of the Constitution stipulates that the State Legislature may, 
by law, provide the manner of election of the Chairperson of the Municipality. 
Audit observed that provisions contained in the Municipal/Municipal 
Corporation Acts17, provide for selection of the Mayor/Chairman by the elected 
Councillors, from among themselves. Except for the KMC Act, the Acts also 
empower the State Government to elect a Mayor/Chairman from among the 
elected Members, if the elected Members (Councillors) of the ULB fail to elect 
a Mayor and/or a Chairman. 
In case of Corporations, the respective Acts also provide for election of a 
Chairman (distinct from the Chairman of a Municipality or NAA), who convenes 
the meetings of the Corporation, presides over the meetings (except for the first 
meeting) and to whom the Councillors tender resignation in writing18. 
The Mayor/Chairman should be a whole-time functionary.  However, as per 
Section 13 of the KMC Act and Section 28 of the WBMC Act, it is implicit that 
the Mayor may hold the post of either a Member of Legislative Assembly or a 
Member of any House of the Parliament, simultaneously. The Mayor presides 
over the meeting of Mayor-in-Council, presents the budget, allots business 
among members of the Mayor-in-Council etc. In case of Municipalities 19, the 
Chairman presides over the meeting of Chairman-in-Council, allocates business 
among members of the Chairman-in-Council etc. 
The Model Municipal Law, 2003, circulated by the Ministry of Urban 
Development (MoUD), Government of India (GoI), provides that the term 
of office of the Mayor/President shall be coterminus with the duration of the 
Municipality and the executive powers of the Municipality shall be exercised 
by the Mayor-in-Council/Chairman-in-Council. 
Audit observed that the tenure of the Mayor/Chairman is coterminus with the 
Councillors, i.e., five years20. Audit also observed that, in terms of Section 33 
17 Section 6 of the KMC Act, Section 8 of the HMC Act, Section 17 of the WBMC Act and Section 
17 of the WBM Act.
18 Sections 81, 94 and 98 of the KMC Act; Sections 40, 44 and 48 of the HMC Act; Sections 13, 
50 and 55 of the WBMC Act.
19 In terms of Section 16 of the WBM Act.
20 As per Section 7 of the KMC Act, Section 9 of the HMC Act, Section 18 of the WBMC Act and 
Section 18 of the WBM Act.

Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
29
of the KMC Act, Section 22 of the HMC Act, Section 41 of the WBMC Act 
and Section 15 of the WBM Act, the executive powers of the ULBs have been 
vested in the Mayor-in-Council/Chairman-in-Council. Section 16 of the WBM 
Act envisages the Chairman as being the executive head of the Municipality/
NAA and vests the municipal administration under his control. 
 3.4.6 Ward Committees
Article 243S of the Constitution provides for Ward Committees in all 
Municipalities with a population of three lakh or more.
Section 11A of the KMC and HMC Acts, as well as Section 23 of the WBMC and 
WBM Acts, mandate the formation of Ward Committee, in each Ward of the ULBs, 
irrespective of the population of the ULBs. The Sections ibid also state that the 
Councillor, elected from a Ward, shall be the Chairperson of the Ward Committee 
for that Ward. They also prescribe the composition and function of the committee. 
The Ward Committees are to consist of: (i) elected Councillors from the Wards and 
(ii) local residents, nominated by the Councillor and the Municipality. The term of 
Ward Committees is co-terminus with the council. The Ward Committees, subject to 
general supervision of the Borough Committee or the Municipality, are to supervise 
and monitor the detection of violations of various provisions of the WBM Act, 
execution of various obligatory and discretionary functions of the concerned ULBs, 
work of assessment, collection of property tax, other taxes and sums, planning and 
execution of development schemes for the Ward, maintenance of public utilities, 
safeguarding of the assets of the Municipality, redressal of public grievances etc.
Thus, the Ward Committees are required to act as a bridge between the municipal 
government and citizens and to provide a space for citizen participation in local 
level planning. They are expected to perform duties such as preparation and 
submission of Ward development schemes for allotment of funds, ensuring proper 
utilisation of allotted funds, maintenance of public utilities and safeguarding the 
assets of the ULBs.
Audit, however, observed that, out of the 27 test-checked ULBs, Ward 
Committees had been formed in 12 21 ULBs, had not been formed in 12 ULBs, 
while data regarding formation of Ward Committees was not furnished by 
three ULBs 22. Non-formation of Ward Committees defeated the objective of 
facilitating community participation in local governance.  The ULBs did not 
furnish any reason for non-formation of Ward Committees. The absence of 
community participation is expected to adversely impact the prioritisation 
of development works, and also lead to non-monitoring of the execution of 
schemes and utilisation of the assets created. 
21 ULBs where Ward Committees were formed with latest period of formation: Bansberia (in 
2015-16), Barasat (in 2017-18), Habra (in 2013-14), Jhalda (in 2015-16), Kaliyaganj (in 
2015-16), Kharagpur (in 2017-18), Midnapore (in 2013-14), Panihati (date not furnished), 
Pujali (in 2017-18), Raiganj (in 2017-18), Ramjibonpur (in 2015-16) and Siliguri MC (in 
2015-16 and 2016-17).
22 ULBs where Ward Committees were not formed: Bongaon, Contai, Coochbehar, Gobardanga, 
Jiaganj-Azimganj, Kalna, Katwa, Kolkata MC, Mal, Suri, Tufanganj and Uttarpara-Kotrung. 
ULBs which did not furnish data: Asansol MC, Barrackpore and Konnagar.

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
30
Recommendation:
 3. Ward Committees may be constituted, as per the Acts, so that the 
ground level priorities of citizens are factored into the decisions of 
the	ULBs.
3.4.7  District Planning Committee and Metropolitan Planning 
Committee
 	District Planning Committee (DPC)
Article 243ZD of the Constitution provides for constitution of District Planning 
Committees (DPCs), for consolidation of plans prepared by the Panchayats and 
the Municipalities in a district and to prepare a draft development plan for the 
district.
Accordingly, the State Government enacted the West Bengal District Planning 
Committee (DPC) Act, 1994 and the West Bengal District Planning Committee 
(DPC) Rules, 1994. The Act extends to the whole of West Bengal, except for the 
KMC area and areas covered under the provisions of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill 
Council Act, 1988. In terms of Section 3 of the Act, DPCs were to be constituted 
in all districts, while, for Siliguri, a Sub-division Planning Committee was to be 
constituted. 
The main function of the DPC is to consolidate the plans of Panchayats/
ULBs in the district and prepare a draft development plan, for approval of the 
Government.
The West Bengal DPC Rules stipulates the formation of an Urban Development 
Sub-Committee, District Planning and Co-ordination Sub-committee and other 
sub-committees, to assist the DPCs in preparation of their draft development 
plans. The functions of the Urban Development Sub-Committees, inter alia, 
include examination and integration of plans drawn up by different ULBs 
of the districts, consideration of issues relating to water supply, solid waste 
management, disposal of sewage etc. The functions of the District Planning 
and Co-ordination Sub-Committees, inter alia, include preparation of the draft 
development plans of the concerned districts, with regard to the matters of 
common interest between the ULBs and the Panchayats, formulation of plans 
for integrated infrastructure, like water supply, disposal of solid waste and 
sewerage etc.
The status of formation of DPCs pertinent to test-checked ULBs is discussed in 
Table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Status of formation of DPCs
Sl. No. District ULBs	under	
the districts Status of DPC
1. Birbhum Suri The DPC was constituted in FY 2014-15 but the Urban Development 
Sub-Committee and the District Planning and Co-ordination Sub-
Committee, were not constituted. After that, the DPC was not 
constituted.  
Information regarding meetings of DPC was not furnished. 

Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
31
In the Coochbehar and Murshidabad districts, DPCs were not constituted 
during the period 2015-16 to 2020-2123. In case of Darjeeling district, the DPC 
was formed but was transferred to the Gorkhaland Territorial Administration 
(GTA)24. A Sub-division Planning Committee for Siliguri was not constituted. 
 	Metropolitan Planning Committee (MPC)
Article 243ZE of the Constitution provides for Constitution of a Metropolitan 
Planning Committee (MPC), in every Metropolitan area, to prepare a draft 
development plan for the Metropolitan area 25 as a whole, on matters of 
common interest between the Municipalities and the Panchayats. The State 
Government enacted the West Bengal Metropolitan Planning Committee 
Act, 1994. As per provisions of this Act, the Kolkata Metropolitan 
Planning Committee (KMPC) was constituted in October 2001, as one 
of the first Metropolitan Planning Committees in India. Chief Minister,  
West Bengal, is the Chairperson of KMPC and the Minister-in-Charge, Municipal 
Administration and Urban Development Department, is the Vice-Chairperson. 
Secretary, Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority (KMDA), is the 
Member-Secretary of the KMPC and the office of the KMDA is the Secretariat 
of the KMPC. KMPC also constituted an Executive Committee, to finalise the 
sectoral plan, as well as five sectoral sub-committees, to prepare the perspective 
master plans of different sectors of development. 
23 Information for seven districts was not available.
24 Vide notification dated 10 September 2012, issued by the Department of Planning, Government 
of West Bengal.
25 “Metropolitan area” means an area having a population of ten lakh or more, comprised in 
one or more districts and consisting of two or more Municipalities or Panchayats or other 
contiguous areas.
Sl. No. District ULBs	under	
the districts Status of DPC
2. Hooghly Bansberia,  
Konnagar,  
Uttarpara-
Kotrung
The DPC was constituted in FY 2014-15. The Urban Development 
Sub-Committee and District Planning and Co-ordination 
Sub-Committee were also constituted. Thereafter, no DPCs 
were constituted. However, the ULBs submitted their Annual 
Development Plans pertaining to FYs 2018-19 and 2019-20, to the 
Planning Section of the district.
During the period 2015-16 to 2020-21, only one meeting was held 
(in 2015-16).
3. Uttar Dinajpur Kaliyaganj,  
Raiganj
The DPC was constituted in FY 2013-14 and, thereafter, in FY 2019-
20. Information about constitution of the Urban Development Sub-
Committee and District Planning and Co-ordination Sub-Committee, 
was not available.
Formal meetings of DPC were not held during the period 2015-16 
to 2020-21.
4. East Midnapore Contai The last DPC was constituted in FY 2018-19. The Urban 
Development Sub-Committee and District Planning and Co-
ordination Sub-Committee were not constituted.  
Meetings of DPC were not held during the period 2015-16 to  
2020-21.
(Source: information furnished by respective district authorities)

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
32
The ULBs under the Kolkata Metropolitan Area (KMA) 26 were to submit 
the Draft Development Plans and Annual Development Plans, to KMPC, for 
approval. 
However, information regarding the recent functional status of the KMPC was 
not furnished to Audit.
		Preparation	of	Draft	Development	Plans	by	ULBs
As per the provisions of Section 333 of the WBMC Act and Section 297 of 
the WBM Act, the Board of Councillors is to prepare a Draft Development 
Plan (DDP) for the municipal/notified area, in consultation with the District 
Planning Committee (DPC), for a period of five years and submit it to the 
Urban Development Sub-Committee, under the DPC, at least one year before 
completion of the term of the preceding Draft Development Plan. 
Section 336 of the WBMC Act and Section 300 of the WBM Act, provide for 
preparation of an Annual Development Plan (ADP), for one financial year, 
covering only the relevant portion of the DDP, in consultation with the DPC, 
which is to be submitted to the State Government, within the last week of the 
month of October of the year preceding the period for which the ADP pertains. 
The State Government is to consider the ADP, based on the availability of funds 
for the purpose and to approve the ADP, with necessary modifications, if any.
Similar provisions exist in Sections 239 and 242 of the HMC Act. However, 
provisions relating to preparation of DDP and ADP, are not available in the KMC 
Act. Sections 333 to Section 336 of the WBMC Act provide for preparation and 
finalisation of Development plans by the Municipal Corporation.
Audit observed that none of the 27 test-checked ULBs had prepared DDPs, 
during FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21. Two ULBs (Panihati and Pujali) had prepared 
City Development Plans for five years, anchored with the Jawaharlal Nehru 
National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM). The City Development Plans do 
not, however, supplement the statutory Draft Development Plans. 
Audit further noticed that, during FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21, only six out of 27 
selected ULBs (Gobardanga, Jiaganj-Azimganj, Katwa, Konnagar, Midnapore 
and Uttarpara-Kotrung) had prepared ADPs. Only two ULBs, viz., Konnagar 
and Uttarpara-Kotrung, had submitted the ADPs to the respective DPC (Hooghly 
DPC); both these ULBs were under the KMA area. However, information relating 
to submission of the ADP to KMPC, was not furnished by the two ULBs. 
At the district level, non-constitution of DPCs and sub-committees under DPCs,  
non-functioning of the constituted DPCs, and, at the ULB level, non-preparation 
of draft development plans and annual development plans, in accordance with 
the codified provisions, defeated the purpose behind integrated planning and 
development of the concerned areas through the DPCs. Absence of holistic 
development plans by DPCs, encompassing areas of service delivery, such as 
supply of potable water, solid waste management and sewerage etc., affected 
the implementation of devolved functions by ULBs.
26 KMA area is a planning area, as specified in the First Schedule, under Section 16 of the West 
Bengal Town and Country (Planning and Development) Act, 1979. KMA extends over six 
districts (Kolkata, Howrah, Hooghly, Nadia, North 24 Parganas and South 24 Parganas). 
The area comprises of four Municipal Corporations, 37 Municipalities and 23 Panchayat 
Samities.

Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
33
The observation regarding non-formation of DPC was forwarded to the 
Department of Planning and Statistics, Government of West Bengal, in 
November 2022, but reply was not received. 
Recommendation:
 4. Government may ensure constitution and effective functioning 
of the District Planning Committees, for integrated planning and 
development. 
	 5.	ULBs	 may	 prepare	 Draft	 Development	 Plans	 and	 Annual	
Development Plans, for strategic and holistic development of their 
jurisdictional areas.
3.4.8 State Finance Commissions (SFCs)
Articles 243I and 243Y of the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992, 
make it mandatory for the State Government to constitute a Finance Commission, 
within one year of the commencement of the CAA and, thereafter, on expiry of 
every five years.  SFCs are required to review the financial position of local 
bodies (i.e., Panchayats and Municipalities) and to make recommendations to 
the Governor for devolution of funds. 
In West Bengal, there were delays in formation of SFCs and their subsequent 
recommendations, as shown in Table 3.6.
Table 3.6: Delays in constitution of State Finance Commissions
Finance 
Commission
To be 
constituted 
as per 
Constitution
Actual date of 
appointment
Actual date of 
report submission
Date of 
submission of 
Action Taken 
Report
Period of delay 
in constitution of 
SFC, in terms of 
Constitutional norms
1st 1993-1998 30 May 1994 27 November 1995 22 July 1996 -
2nd 1998-2003 14 July 2000 6 February 2002 15 July 2005 2 years
3rd 2003-2008 22 February 2006 31 December 2008 16 July 2009 3 years
4th 2008-2013 30 April 2013 2 February 2016 6 June 2022 5 years
5th 2013-2018 23 May 2022 - - 9 years
6th 2018-2023 - Not constituted - -
It was also noticed that the tenure of 4th SFC was extended for 22 months, in place 
of its original tenure of 12 months, which ultimately led to delayed submission 
of its report. Significant delays in constitution and subsequent submission of 
recommendations of the SFCs, as per Constitutional norms, deprived the ULBs 
from getting their share of State revenues, at an enhanced rate, in a time-bound 
manner. 
Out of 46 recommendations made by the 1st SFC, the State Government accepted  
35 recommendations. In case of the 2nd SFC, out of 18 recommendations made, 
six were accepted. The 3 rd SFC made 32 recommendations, out of which 16 
were accepted, three recommendations were agreed to in principle and the rest 
were either already implemented or left for further examination27.  The status of 
27 4th SFC Report, Part-III.
(Source:	SFC	Reports	and	Orders/Notifications,	issued	by	the	Finance	Department,	Government	of	West	Bengal)

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
34
recommendations of the 4th SFC, as per the Action Taken Report (ATR) of the 
State Government is detailed in Table 3.7.
Table 3.7: Action taken on the recommendations of the 4th SFC
Sl. 
No. Recommendations Action Taken by the State Government
1. Recommendations relating to Fiscal Devolution : 
The Commission recommended grants of ` 1,103.80 
crore for the financial year 2015-2016 and progressive 
enhancement at the rate of 15 per cent per annum, from 
2016-2017 to 2019-2020. 
(vide Para Nos. 14.5 & 14.15 of Part-I of the Report). 
The State Government agreed to devolve ` 900 crore 
to the Local Bodies for the year 2016-2017 from its 
Own Tax Revenues and an annual increase of three per 
cent from 2017-2018 to 2019-2020. Necessary budget 
provisions were made accordingly.
2. Further recommendations relating to Fiscal 
Devolution: The Commission recommended that 60 
per cent  of the recommended grant should be spent 
towards creation of new assets and 40 per cent of the 
grant should be spent as expenditure towards payment 
of electricity bills, O & M, cost of water supply 
schemes, street lights and regular maintenance of other 
assets created by the Urban Local Bodies 
(vide Para No. 14.20 of Part-I of the Report).
The State Government accepted the recommendation of 
the Commission.
3. Other recommendations : In addition to the above, 
the Commission made some other recommendations, 
relating to improvement of the functioning of the Rural 
Local Bodies (RLBs) and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), 
like institutional strengthening, structural changes and 
resource generation. The Commission suggested that 
an Empowered Committee, under the Chief Secretary, 
may be set up, consisting of the Secretary-in-charge 
of Panchayats & Rural Development Department, 
Secretary of the Municipal Affairs Department, 
Secretary of the Finance Department and Secretary 
of the Law Department, to follow-up the accepted 
recommendations and ensure full implementation.
(Chapter VI to Chapter XII and Para Nos. 14.8, 14.11, 
14.17, 14.21, 14.35, 14.36 & 16.11 of Part-I of the 
Report). 
A State Level Committee of Secretaries, under the 
Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary, Government 
of West Bengal and comprising of Additional 
Chief Secretary, Panchayats & Rural Development 
Department, Principal Secretary, Finance Department 
and Secretary, Urban Development & Municipal 
Affairs Department, was constituted to look into other 
measures recommended by the Commission. The 
Committee held meetings and deliberated over several 
issues, viz. inclusion of solid waste management as 
an obligatory duty of the Gram Panchayats, issue of 
notification relating to minimum standards of service 
delivery, waste management by the Urban Local Bodies, 
Ward level vigilance for prevention of pollution, 
recovery of unpaid tax, handing over of operation and 
maintenance of motor supply projects to the concerned 
Municipalities by the Public Health Engineering 
Department, revitalizing the Gram Samsads, Gram 
Sabha and Ward Sabhas, audit at regular intervals, 
revitalizing the statistical cells of the Directorate/
Offices of P&RD Department etc.
Observations relating to release of SFC grants have been discussed in Paragraph 
4.3.
Recommendation:
 6.  Government may constitute the SFCs and implement their 
recommendations in a timely manner.
3.4.9 Accounts and Audit
As per Article 243Z of the Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by 
law, make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the 

Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
35
Municipalities and the auditing of such accounts. Maintenance of accounts in 
the ULBs and the audit arrangements are discussed below.
3.4.9.1	 Annual	Accounts	of	the	ULBs
The Task Force constituted 28 by the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
(C&AG), to recommend budget and accounting formats for the ULBs in India, 
inter alia , suggested adoption of accrual-based accounting, by the ULBs. 
Based on the recommendations of the Task Force, the Ministry of Urban 
Development (MoUD), Government of India, had prepared a National Municipal 
Accounting Manual (NMAM), with the support of the C&AG. In terms of the 
recommendations of the Task Force of the C&AG and the National Municipal 
Accounting Manual, the Government of West Bengal introduced an accrual-
based Double Entry System, in place of the existing cash-based accounting 
system, in the ULBs in the State29. 
The Change Management Unit (CMU)30, under the Kolkata Urban Services for 
the Poor (KUSP) programme, of the Government of the West Bengal, assisted 
by the Department for International Development (DFID) of the Government 
of United Kingdom, brought out an Accounting Manual for ULBs, covering 
aspects of the accrual-based double entry system and facilitated the introduction 
of the accrual-based double entry accounting system, in 40 ULBs in the Kolkata 
Metropolitan Area (KMA), except for KMC. 
Under the accrual-based double entry accounting system, the ULBs are 
required to prepare the following five reports. (1) Balance Sheet (2) Income & 
Expenditure Statement (3) Receipts & Payments Account (4) Trial Balance and 
(5) Cash Flow Statement. All the ULBs were also required to prepare Opening 
Balance Sheets for the inception years.
Provisions for following the accrual-based double entry system were made 
by amending Section 84 of the WBM Act and insertion of Section 86A of 
the WBMC Act 31, which specifically mandate ULBs to prepare their Annual 
Financial Statements. 
Audit observed that:
 (i) There was lack of uniformity in the Acts/Rules, in regard to the components 
of the mandatory Annual Financial Statements required to be prepared by 
ULBs, as shown in Table 3.8.
28 Based on the recommendations of the Eleventh Finance Commission and Guidelines issued by 
the Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
29 The Government of West Bengal was also committed to introducing the double entry accrual-
based Accounting System, in view of the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed with 
Government of India, to access funds under the Urban Reforms Incentive Fund (URIF).
30 A registered society; CMU was merged with SUDA vide order of UD&MAD dated 7 June 
2017.  
31 With effect from 1 October 2006 and 1 March 2010, respectively.

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
36
Table 3.8: Components of Annual Financial Statements 
as per different Acts/Rules
Components of Annual Financial 
Statements, as per Accounting 
Manual	of	ULBs	published	by	
erstwhile CMU
Components of Annual Financial 
Statements, as per WBM Act and 
WBMC Act
West Bengal Municipal (Finance 
& Accounting) Rules, 1999 
(Rule 260)
(1) Balance Sheet, (2) Income 
& Expenditure Statement, (3) 
Receipts & Payments Account, (4) 
Trial Balance and (5) Cash Flow 
Statement
(1) Balance Sheet, (2) Income & 
Expenditure Account, (3) Receipt 
& Payment Account and (4) Cash 
Flow Statement
(1) Balance Sheet, (2) Income 
and Expenditure Statement,  
(3) Statement of Cash Flow,  
(4) Receipts and Payments Account, 
(5) Revenue Trend Analysis and  
(6) Notes to Accounts
(Source: respective Acts/Rules/Orders)
As on 31 March 2021, the ULBs prepared and submitted the Annual Financial 
Statements including notes to accounts comprising of – Balance Sheet, Income 
and Expenditure Statement, Receipt and Payment Accounts and Trial Balance. 
 (ii) The ULBs in the Kolkata Metropolitan Area (KMA) started preparation 
of annual accounts, following the accrual-based double entry accounting 
system, from 2006-07, while the ULBs in non-KMA areas started following 
it from 2007-08.  As on 31 March 2021, all the 124 ULBs, including HMC, 
were following the accrual-based double entry accounting system and 
preparing the above reports as per the Accounting Manual of ULBs. KMC 
also follows the accrual-based double entry accounting system. 
Audit observed that as on 31 March 2021, three ULBs viz., Bishnupur (for 
the period 2007-08), Buniadpur (for the period 2014-15) and Domkal (for the 
period 2015-16) did not prepare and submit to the Examiner of Local Accounts 
(ELA), the Opening Balance Sheets as well as subsequent Annual Financial 
Statements. As on 31 March 2021, 544 Annual Financial Statements of  
124 ULBs 32, had not been submitted to the ELA for audit. The year-wise 
number of Annual Financial Statem ents, pending for submission to the ELA, 
are shown in Appendix-3.
It can be seen from Appendix that Annual Financial Statements, pertaining 
to financial years as far back as 2007-08, are still due for preparation and 
submission for audit. 
As on 31 March 2021, the pendency in the number of years in preparation and/
or submission of Annual Financial Statements of 125 ULBs, is shown in Chart 
3.1. 
32 Out of these 124 ULBs, the annual accounts of five erstwhile ULBs (Jamuria, Raniganj, Kulti, 
Rajarhat Gopalpur and Bally Municipalities), which were later merged with three Municipal 
Corporations, were not prepared and submitted. 

Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
37
Chart 3.1: Pendency in the preparation and/or submission of Annual 
Financial Statements
Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act 
41 
  
It can be seen from Appendix that Annual Financial Statements, pertaining to financial years as 
far back as 2007-08, are still due for preparation and submission for audit.  
As on 31 March 2021, the pendency in the number of years in preparation and/or submission of 
annual financial statements of 125 ULBs, is shown in Chart 3.1.  
 
Chart 3.1: Pendency in the preparation and/or submission of annual financial statements 
 
 
Six ULBs, viz., Arambagh, Basirhat, Jangipur, Purulia, Suri  and Taki, had no pendency in the 
preparation and submission of annual financial statements, as of March 2021. Thirty-four Annual 
Financial Statements, of five erstwhile Municipalities, which have been merged with three 
Municipal Corporations and have ceased to exist as individua l ULBs, were also not prepared  
(as on 31 March 2021), as detailed in Table 3.9.  
Table 3.9: Pendency in preparation of annual financial statements by five erstwhile 
municipalities 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Municipality 
Municipal 
Corporations 
with which the 
Municipality was 
merged 
Date of merger Period of Annual 
Financial 
Statements not 
prepared and 
submitted 
Number of 
Annual 
Financial 
Statements 
1 Rajarhat Gopalpur 
Municipality 
Bidhanangar 
Municipal 
Corporation 
June 2015 
(2015-16) 
2012-13 to 2015-16 4 
2 Bally Municipality Howrah 
Municipal 
Corporation 
June 2015 
(2015-16) 
2008-09 to 2015-16 8 
3 Jamuria Municipality Asansol 
Municipal 
Corporation 
June 2015 
(2015-16) 
2008-09 to 2015-16 8 
4 Raniganj Municipality 2011-12 to 2015-16 5 
5 Kulti Municipality 2007-08 to 2015-16 9 
(Source: data	maintained	by	ELA) 
Non-preparation of annual financial statements, within the prescribed period, indicates failure on 
the part of the ULBs and raises serious concerns about the management of Municipal Fund s and 
utilisation of public money provided to the ULBs , in the form of grants -in-aid. Further, the FC-
XIV recommended that to be eligible for Performance Grants, the ULB has to submit audited 
annual accounts that relate to a year not earlier than two years preceding the year in which it 
seeks to claim the performance grant. The FC -XV also recommended timely av ailability of 
88 
20 11 
1 year to 5 years 6 years to 10 years More than 10 years
No.	of	ULBs
Six ULBs, viz., Arambagh, Basirhat, Jangipur, Purulia, Suri and Taki, had no 
pendency in the preparation and submission of Annual Financial Statements, 
as of March 2021. Thirty-four Annual Financial Statements, of five erstwhile 
Municipalities, which have been merged with three Municipal Corporations 
and have ceased to exist as individual ULBs, were also not prepared  
(as on 31 March 2021), as detailed in Table 3.9. 
Table 3.9: Pendency in preparation of Annual Financial Statements by 
five	erstwhile	Municipalities
Sl. 
No.
Name of the 
Municipality
Municipal Corporation 
with which the 
Municipality was 
merged
Date of merger
Period of Annual 
Financial Statements 
not prepared and 
submitted
Number 
of Annual 
Financial 
Statements
1 Rajarhat Gopalpur 
Municipality
Bidhanangar Municipal 
Corporation
June 2015 
(2015-16)
2012-13 to 2015-16 4
2 Bally Municipality Howrah Municipal 
Corporation
June 2015 
(2015-16)
2008-09 to 2015-16 8
3 Jamuria Municipality Asansol Municipal 
Corporation
June 2015 
(2015-16)
2008-09 to 2015-16 8
4 Raniganj Municipality 2011-12 to 2015-16 5
5 Kulti Municipality 2007-08 to 2015-16 9
Non-preparation of Annual Financial Statements, within the prescribed period, 
indicates failure on the part of the ULBs and raises serious concerns about the 
management of Municipal Funds and utilisation of public money provided to 
the ULBs, in the form of grants-in-aid. Further, the FC-XIV recommended that 
to be eligible for Performance Grants, the ULB has to submit audited annual 
accounts that relate to a year not earlier than two years preceding the year in 
which it seeks to claim the Performance Grant. The FC-XV also recommended 
timely availability of accounts, both before and after audit, of individual ULBs 
online in the public domain from 2021-22, as the entry level conditions to qualify 
for its recommended grants. Owing to non/delayed preparation of accounts by 
ULBs, the audit of the accounts has been delayed. This may result in the ULBs 
being rendered ineligible for the CFC grants.
(Source:	data	maintained	by	the		ELA)

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
38
Recommendation:
 7.  Government may stipulate a uniform timeframe for preparation 
of	the	Annual	Financial	Statements	of	all	ULBs,	as	also	for	timely	
submission of Annual Financial Statements, for audit by the 
statutory	auditor	(ELA).
3.4.9.2 Audit
	 (i)	Statutory	 Audit	by	the	Examiner	of	Local	Accounts	(ELA),	preparation	
of	Audit		Report,	laying	of	Audit	Report	in	the	State	Legislature	and	
discussion	 thereon	 in	 the	 specific	 committee	 constituted	 for	 that	
purpose.
In terms of Municipal laws 33, the accounts of all the ULBs are to be examined 
and audited by an Auditor appointed by the State Government. Accordingly, the 
State Government appointed an Examiner of Local Accounts (ELA), an officer 
of the Indian Audit & Accounts Department, in the rank of Deputy Accountant 
General, as the Auditor for audit of accounts of the ULBs. The ELA, thus, is 
the Primary/Statutory Auditor of the accounts of ULBs. The ELA also conducts 
the Compliance Audit and Performance/Detail Compliance Audit of the ULBs. 
The ELA prepares Separate Audit Reports (SARs) on the annual accounts of 
ULBs34, audited and examined by the ELA. The ELA also prepares a Compliance 
Audit Report, namely the ‘Report of the Examiner of Local Accounts on Urban 
Local Bodies’, for each year, which is laid in the State Legislature, by the State 
Government, in terms of Section 163A of the KMC Act, Section 80A of the 
HMC Act, Section 91A of the WBMC Act and Section 90A of the WBM Act.
The ‘Committee on Local Fund Accounts’ (CLFA) was constituted through 
the Rules of Procedure of the Committee on Local Fund Accounts of the West 
Bengal Legislative Assembly (Internal Working) Rules, 2018 35, for discussion 
of the Report of the ELA on ULBs and reporting thereon36.  The said Committee 
came into operation with effect from 3 August 2018. As on 31 March 2021, 
evidence taking of four paragraphs had been discussed by the committee.
 (ii) Internal Audit
Section 156 of the KMC Act, Section 74 of the HMC Act and Section 84 of the 
WBMC Act, provide for monthly internal audit of accounts of the Corporations, 
by the Chief Municipal Auditor/Chief Auditor, who is a staff of the Corporation. 
Section 157 of the KMC Act, Section 75 of the HMC Act and Section 85 of the 
WBMC Act, contain provisions for the reports of the Chief Municipal Auditor/
Chief Auditor, in matters in addition to the accounts, as well as submission 
33 Section 160 (1) of the KMC Act, Section 77 (1) of the HMC Act, Section 87 (1) of the WBMC 
Act and Section 86 (1) of the WBM Act.
34 In terms of Section 161 of the KMC Act, Section 78 of the HMC Act, Section 88 of the WBMC 
Act and Section 87 of the WBM Act.
35 Made under Rule 279 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the West Bengal 
Legislative Assembly. 
36 Previously, the State Level Audit Committee (SLAC) had been constituted, in February 2006, 
to examine the findings of the Report of the ELA on ULBs.  However, no paras had been 
discussed in the SLAC.

Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
39
of these reports to the Municipal Commissioner (in case of KMC and other 
Corporations)/Mayor-in-Council (in case of HMC). 
Similar provisions for Municipalities and NAAs exist in Rule 24 of the WB 
Municipal (Finance and Accounting) Rules, wherein an officer is to be authorised 
by the Chairman-in-Council, to conduct checking of the Municipal Fund, at least 
once every month and submission of a report thereon, to the Municipal Accounts 
Committee. This Rule is also applicable to the Municipal Corporations37, except 
for KMC and HMC. The West Bengal Municipal (Internal Audit) Rules, 1997, 
provide for conducting internal audit of the accounts, by engaging Audit Officer/s, 
under the Director of Cooperative Audit or Government registered Auditor(s) 
(Chartered Accountant Firms) and reporting in this regard, to the Chairman.
Audit noted that Asansol MC and Siliguri MC had not appointed Chief Municipal 
Auditor/Chief Auditor. During the period 2015-16 to 2020-21, Audit observed 
that 17 ULBs38, including Asansol MC and Siliguri MC, had conducted internal 
audit, by engaging external agencies, but there was pendency of one to three 
years, in conducting internal audit, in 15 ULBs. Six ULBs had not conducted 
internal audit at all, while data was not available for three ULBs39.
In Kolkata MC, as on 31 March 2021, internal audit for the year 2018-19, was 
conducted by the Chief Municipal Auditor and, thus, there was pendency of two 
years, in the conduct of internal audit.
Audit observed that, out of 26 test-checked ULBs (except Kolkata MC), only 12 
ULBs had conducted monthly checking of the Municipal Fund, while only two 
ULBs ( Panihati and Raiganj) had conducted quarterly checking of accounts 
of the Municipal Fund, during FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21. The quarterly audit 
reports had neither been submitted to the Municipal Accounts Committee, nor 
had they been further forwarded to the Director of Local Bodies.
Recommendation:
	 8.		 Government	 may	 ensure	 that	 ULBs	 conduct	 internal	 audit	
regularly and take remedial action to strengthen their internal 
control system. 
3.4.10  Municipal Accounts Committees
Section 10 of the KMC Act and the HMC Act, Section 21 of the WBMC Act 
and Section 92 of the WBM Act, envisage the formation of Municipal Accounts 
Committees (MAC), each year, by the Board of Councillors, to examine the 
37 The WBM (Finance and Accounting) Rules, 1999, were made applicable for Municipal 
Corporations (except KMC and HMC), vide Order No. 248/MA/O/C-5/A/2A-2/1999 dated 26 June 
2013, by the erstwhile Department of Municipal Affairs, Government of West Bengal. The order 
also specified that the powers vested with the Chairman in the said rules, would be exercised by the 
Commissioner of the Corporation, or, in the Commissioner’ s absence, by the Secretary.
38 Upto 2016-17: one ULB (Asansol MC); upto 2017-18: one ULB (Kalna); upto 2018-19: 
nine ULBs (Bansberia, Barrackpore, Habra, Kaliyaganj, Kharagpur, Konnagar, Midnapore, 
Raiganj and Uttarpara-Kotrung); upto 2019-20: four ULBs (Gobardanga, Panihati, Pujali 
and Ramjibonpur); upto 2020-21: one ULB (Barasat). Siliguri MC, conducted internal audit 
but did not specify upto which period the internal audit was conducted.
39 Bongaon, Contai, Jiaganj-Azimganj, Katwa, Mal and Tufanganj did not conduct internal 
audit. Data was not furnished by Coochbehar, Jhalda and Suri. 

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
40
accounts of the ULBs, scrutinise the report on the accounts by the Auditor 
and submit a report to the ULBs, from time to time, on such examination 
and scrutiny.  The Municipal Accounts Committees consist of three to five 
Councillors, elected from the Councillors themselves and a maximum of two 
nominated persons, having special knowledge and experience in financial 
matters, not being members/employees/officers of the ULBs.
Formation of MACs, in ULBs, during the period for the FYs 2015-16 to 2020-
21, is shown in the Table 3.10.
Table 3.10: Constitution of Municipal Accounts Committee in the 
test-checked	ULBs
Financial 
Year
No.	of	ULBs	
where MAC was 
formed
No.	of	ULBs	where	
meetings of MAC 
were held
No.	of	ULBs	
where MAC was 
not formed
No.	of	ULBs	who	
did not furnish 
data/specific	data
2015-16 9 4 14 4
2016-17 3 1 20 4
2017-18 4 3 19 4
2018-19 5 3 18 4
2019-20 Nil - 22 5
2020-21 1 1 21 5
(Source:	data	furnished	by	the	ULBs)
Two ULBs ( Asansol MC and Raiganj) did not furnish the relevant data. The 
Mal and Panihati Municipalities stated that MACs had been formed but did not 
specify whether MACs had been constituted in each year, for the period 2015-
16 to 2020-21. Details of the ULBs are provided in Appendix-4. 
Audit observed that, during FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21, the Kolkata MC had 
constituted MACs twice, in FYs 2015-16 and 2017-18. The MAC formed in FY 
2015-16 had continued in FY 2016-17 and it had held meetings in FY 2016-17, 
to discuss the audit reports.  In FY 2017-18, a fresh MAC was formed, which 
continued till FY 2018-19 and discussed the audit reports in its meetings. Thus, 
in contravention to the provisions of the Act, new MACs were not constituted 
every year in the KMC.  Similar instances of continuation of MACs beyond 
the stipulated time of one year were noticed in the case of the Siliguri MC, 
Coochbehar Municipality and Habra Municipality. 
It is also evident from Table 3.10 that MACs had not been constituted in most of 
the test-checked ULBs, due to which their audit reports had not been discussed and 
corrective measures with respect to observations made by Audit could not be taken.
Recommendation:
 9.  Government may ensure that MACs are constituted every year 
and meetings held regularly, to discuss the audit reports (including 
internal	audit	reports)	of	the	concerned	ULBs.	
 3.4.11  Standing Committees
Section 23AA of the WBM Act mandates the formation of six different 
Standing Committees, consisting of not less than three and not more than nine 

Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
41
Councillors.  In terms of Section 23B of the Act ibid, the Standing Committees 
are responsible for submitting recommendations, indicating the difficulties 
relating to implementation of development programmes under their respective 
jurisdictions and also indicating therein, possible measures to remove such 
difficulties.
Section 24 of the WBMC Act also envisages the formation of six Standing 
Committees40. The Municipal Corporations have the power to recast the shape 
of Standing Committees, by way of segregating or amalgamating the functions. 
As per Section 25 ibid, the functions of the Standing Committees are the same 
as in the case of Municipalities. The KMC Act does not have a provision for 
formation of Standing Committees. 
The status of formation of six Standing Committees, in 24 of the test-checked 
Municipalities, was as shown in Table 3.11.
Table 3.11: Status of formation of Standing Committees in Municipalities
Sl. 
No.
Name of the Standing 
Committees
Municipalities in which 
constituted 
(Period of constitution)
Municipalities in 
which not constituted
Municipalities which 
did not furnish data
1. Finance and Resource 
Mobilisation Standing 
Committee 
 1.  Bansberia (2015-16)
 2.  Barrackpore (2015-16)
 3.  Contai (2015-16)
 4.  Coochbehar (2017-18)
 5.  Habra (2013-14) #
 6.  Jhalda (2015-16)
 7.  Kaliyaganj (2016-17)
 8.  Katwa (2015-16) 
 9.  Kharagpur (2018-19)
10. Mal (2015-16) 
11. Midnapore (2013-14)
12. Panihati (2015-16)
13. Pujali (2017-18)
14. Ramjibonpur (2015-16)
15. Suri (2015-16)
1. Bongaon 
2. Kalna
3. Raiganj
4. Tufanganj
5. Uttarpara-Kotrung
1. Barasat
2. Gobardanga
3. Jiaganj–Azimganj 
4. Konnagar
2. Solid Waste Management 
Standing Committee
3. Water Supply Standing 
Committee
4. Public Works Standing 
Committee
5. Health Education and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation Standing 
Committee
6. Public Health and Sanitation 
Standing Committee
In Siliguri MC, five out of six Standing Committees were constituted, although 
information about the period of constitution was not furnished; the Standing 
Committee on Health and Sanitation was not formed. Asansol MC did not 
furnish information.
40 (i) Finance and Resource Mobilisation Standing Committee, (ii) Solid Waste Management 
Standing Committee, (iii) Water Supply Standing Committee, (iv) Public Works and Public 
Safety Standing Committee, (v) Health and Sanitation Standing Committee and (vi) Education 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation Standing Committee.
(Source:	data	furnished	by	the	ULBs)
# Public Health and Sanitation Standing Committee was not formed in Habra Municipality

Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
42
3.4.12  Parastatals and their role in urban governance
Parastatals are institutions/organisations, which are wholly or partially owned 
and managed by the Government (formed as autonomous bodies or through a 
specific legislation) and discharge some of the functions of the ULBs. 
The UD&MA Department did not furnish the details of parastatals and directorate 
and or other departments functioning in the sphere of urban governance in the 
State along with ULBs. However, Audit observed that there are a number of 
parastatals, which are performing significant roles with regard to ULBs, in 
urban governance; the role of parastatals is discussed in Table 3.12.
Table 3.12: Role of parastatals, directorates and other departments 
related to urban governance
Name of the Parastatals Functions
Directorate	of	Local	Bodies	
(DLB)
DLB is a directorate under the UD&MA Department, with two divisional 
offices. The functions of DLB include – (i) regular inspection of all ULBs, 
except all Corporations; (ii) release of salary, dearness allowance, dearness 
relief and pension, to ULBs, for municipal employees; (iii) monitoring of 
the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) 
and Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana-National Urban Livelihoods Mission 
(DAY-NULM) projects, under the guidance of SUDA; and (iv) examination 
of the replies of ULBs, in regard to Statutory Audit, by the Examiner of 
Local Accounts.
DLB has also been empowered to dispose of all matters relating to 
appointments and promotion, with regard to already sanctioned vacant 
posts existing in different Municipalities and Notified Area Authorities. 
Municipal Engineering 
Directorate (MED)
MED was constituted as a full-fledged directorate in 1981. MED provides 
technical support relating to civil, mechanical and electrical engineering to 
the ULBs (except KMC and HMC). It also conducts technical evaluation 
of the tenders/e-tenders floated by ULBs, under the two-bid system.
MED has been assigned the duty of executing projects/schemes relating 
to AMRUT, DAY-NULM, National Urban Health Mission (NUHM) etc. 
State Urban Development 
Agency (SUDA)
SUDA is a registered society, under the West Bengal Society Registration 
Act, 1961, constituted  vide  an order of the erstwhile Municipal Affairs 
Department, issued in May 1991.
The functions of SUDA include – (i) supporting ULBs in ensuring 
reforms and systematic planning towards improved urban governance,  
(ii) providing basic citizen centric services and establishing infrastructure 
facilities related to water supply, roads, drainage, sanitation, solid waste 
management, sewerage, streetlight, in their respective jurisdictions.
Presently, SUDA is responsible for implementing and monitoring 
several National Flagship Programmes, including the AMRUT, Special 
Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF) Programme, Pradhan Mantri Awas 
Yojana (PMAY)/Housing for All (HFA)-Urban, DAY-NULM, NUHM,  
Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM)-Urban, National Social Assistance 
Programme (NSAP), health schemes sponsored by the State Government, 
such as Community Based Primary Health Care Services (CBPHCS) and  
Urban Primary Health Care Services (UPHCS) etc. 
SUDA provides handholding support to ULBs, to execute activities funded 
by the State and Central Finance Commissions.

Chapter III: Compliance to the provisions of the Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act
43
Name of the Parastatals Functions
West Bengal Municipal Service 
Commission (WBMSC)
WBMSC was constituted  for recruitment of personnel for ULBs and 
Development Authorities, as per requisitions sent directly by the ULBs 
and Development Authorities.
West Bengal Valuation Board 
(WBVB)
WBVB conducts periodic general valuation, to revise the annual value of 
all municipal holdings, for revision of property tax of the holdings under 
the ULBs (except KMC and HMC).
Kolkata Metropolitan 
Development Authority 
(KMDA)
KMDA, which substituted the erstwhile Calcutta Metropolitan 
Development Authority (CMDA), was established in 1970, under a 
Presidential Ordinance and was later provided statutory status, under the 
KMDA Act of 1972.
With the enactment of the West Bengal Town and Country (Planning and 
Development) Act, 1979, KMDA was designated as the statutory planning 
and development authority for the Kolkata Metropolitan Area (KMA).
The primary function of KMDA is to prepare the Land Use & Development 
Control Plan (LUDCP) and execute various development schemes.
The Water & Sanitation Sector of KMDA implements/executes the 
augmentation of water supply scheme, in different Municipalities of  
West Bengal, under AMRUT, State Fund and Special Infrastructure Fund. 
All repair and maintenance works of such projects, during their warranty 
periods and thereafter, are undertaken by this sector.
The Sewerage Drainage and Solid Waste Management Sector of 
KMDA looks after different Storm Water Drainage schemes throughout  
West Bengal. This Sector also looks after Solid Waste Management 
schemes within the Kolkata Metropolitan Area. At present, it has been 
assigned with the works of bio-remediation and bio-mining of legacy 
waste, in a scientific manner, in different dumpsites throughout the State of  
West Bengal.
KMDA is also involved in the operation and maintenance of a large number 
of pumping stations, of both clear water and sewage water, in different 
municipalities. It also plays a vital role in the vetting of Detailed Project 
Reports (DPRs)/Estimates of electro-Mechanical works of ULBs.
KMDA is empowered to levy and collect development charges for granting 
permission for carrying out any development or change of use of land, in 
terms of Section 102 of the West Bengal Town and Country (Planning and 
Development) Act.
Asansol Durgapur Development 
Authority (ADDA) and Siliguri 
Jalpaiguri Development 
Authority (SJDA)
These development authorities prepare Land Use & Development Control 
Plans (LUDCPs) and execute development schemes for the planning 
regions under their jurisdictions. 
ADDA and SJDA are also empowered to levy and collect development 
charges for granting permission for carrying out any development or 
change of use of land.
Institute	of	Local	Government	
&	Urban	Studies	(ILG&US)
Provides training to the personnel of the ULBs (excluding KMC).
Public Health Engineering 
Department (PHED) 
Provides water supply to a few ULBs outside the KMA area. STPs in some 
Urban Areas are constructed and operated by PHED.
(Source: data available from the websites of the respective departments)
The roles of the parastatals, directorates and other departments, in mobilisation 
of resources, human resource and service delivery, are discussed in the suceeding 
chapters. 

CHAPTER IV
Financial Resources 
of Urban Local Bodies

45
CHAPTER IV
Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies
The devolved functions can be carried out effectively by the ULBs only when 
they are supported with sufficient financial resources, by means of predictable 
fiscal transfers, or access to own revenue streams. Predictable fiscal transfers 
to the ULBs need to be ensured through a robust State Finance Commission 
mechanism. Access to own sources of revenue would include both the power to 
levy and collect from specific revenue streams. 
The Chapter analyses the financial resources of ULBs, covering receipts from 
State Finance Commissions, Central Finance Commissions and own source 
revenue, self-reliance of the ULBs in terms of share of own source revenue 
in total receipts and empowerment of the ULBs to explore various sources 
of own fund revenue. Audit observed delays in the transfer of SFC and CFC 
grants to ULBs, short-release of SFC grants, unsatisfactory performance of 
ULBs in mobilisation of property tax and other own source revenue, along with 
deficiencies in budget preparation. 
4.1 Sources of Revenue in ULBs
ULB funds comprise receipts from (i) their own sources (ii) grants and assistance 
from the Central and State Governments (iii) share of taxes, in the form of 
assigned revenues and (iv) loans obtained from public financial institutions 
or nationalised banks or such other institutions as the State Government may 
approve. A flow chart of sources of revenues of a ULB, is given in Chart 4.1.
Chart 4.1: Sources of Revenue of ULBs
ULB Funds
Own Source 
Revenue
Tax Revenue
 Non Tax Revenue
Property 
Tax
Tax on cart 
and carriage
Rent from 
Municipal 
Markets/ 
Slaughter 
Houses
Fees for 
Supply of 
water
(Water 
charges)
Other Fees 
and 
Charges
Grants
Central and 
State 
Finance 
Commission 
Grants
Grants for 
Development 
and 
Establishment
Grants for 
implementation 
of Schemes
Assigned 
Revenue
Entertainment 
Tax
Tax on 
Vehicles
Tax on Trade, 
Profession and 
Callings
Loan
Loan from 
Nationalised 
Banks, 
Government 
and external 
organisations 
such as Asian 
Development 
Bank
Fees for 
Advertisement

46
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
4.2 Funds Flow to ULBs
Central Government grants are allocated and released to the UD&MA 
Department, through the Finance Department. The UD&MA Department, 
in turn, sanctions the grants (Non-plan), to the State Urban Development 
Agency (SUDA), for onward transmission to the ULBs. SUDA releases the 
funds through the individual bank accounts of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). In 
addition, State Government grants are also released to ULBs, by the UD&MA 
Department, through treasuries (Local Fund Account) 41. Establishment grants, 
such as Salary, Dearness Allowance, Pension Contribution etc., are released to 
the Directorate of Local Bodies, which, in turn, releases the grants to the ULBs 
through treasuries (Local Fund Account). 
Details of grants released to ULBs were not available from the Directorate of 
Local Bodies and State Urban Development Agencies. Hence, details of grants 
released to the 125 ULBs in the State, as worked out by Audit, during the period 
from FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21, are indicated in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Grants to 125 ULBs, during the period from FYs 2015-16 to 
2020-21
(` in crore)42
Years Grants42 Assigned Revenue Total Release
2015-16 3,796.88 87.33 3,884.21
2016-17 5,349.38 133.47 5,482.85
2017-18 6,771.46 178.96 6,950.42
2018-19 8,049.88 164.63 8,214.51
2019-20 5,541.52 152.06 5,693.58
2020-21 6,023.48 129.69 6,153.17
(Source: data furnished by the UD&MAD and SUDA, Budget documents of the UD&MAD 
and Appropriation Accounts of West Bengal)
Assigned Revenue comprises of Entertainment Tax, Taxes on Vehicles and Tax 
on Trade, Profession and Callings. Data relating to revenue of ULBs from own 
sources, is not maintained at UD&MAD.
4.3 State Finance Commission (SFC) Grants
4.3.1 Short release of SFC Grants
The 4th SFC Report mentioned about short release of 3rd SFC grants, during the 
period 2010-11 to 2014-15. The actual release of grants, vis-a-vis the grants 
recommended by the 3rd SFC, is shown in Table 4.2.
41 ‘Local Fund Account’ refers to the Municipal Fund maintained in the treasuries. In terms of 
Rule 20 of the West Bengal Municipal (Finance & Accounting) Rules, 1999, ‘Municipal Fund’ 
shall be treated as Local Fund and kept in the concerned Treasury, under the major head of 
account “8448-Local Fund Account-00-102-Municipal Fund”, in the Public Account, as a 
part of the Government Account.
42 Contains capital as well as revenue grants, of the Central and State Governments, released 
to ULBs, from UD&MAD, DLB and SUDA. The grants, inter alia, contain grants released 
under Central Finance Commissions (FC-XIII and XIV), State Finance Commissions (3rd SFC 
and 4th SFC), AMRUT, NULM, NUHM, PMAY/HF A-Urban, Green City Mission, West Bengal 
Urban Employment Scheme (WBUES), Fixed grants, Development grants, Salary and other 
allowances to municipal employees etc.

Chapter IV: Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies
47
Table 4.2: Actual release vis-a-vis recommendations of the 
3rd SFC in 125 ULBs
(` in crore)
Year Proposed total 
Release by the 3rd SFC
Actual 
Release
Percentage of 
release
2010-11 192.00 137.24 71.48
2011-12 215.04 117.34 54.57
2012-13 240.84 172.86 71.77
2013-14 269.74 137.59 51.01
2014-15 302.11 143.01 47.35
(Source: 4th SFC Report)
The 4th SFC, in its report submitted in February 2016, recommended devolution 
of ` 442.49 crore, as grant to ULBs, in 2015-16. It also recommended that this 
amount should grow at 15 per cent per annum, for each of the next five years, 
with the general caveat that, if, in a particular year, the own tax revenue of the 
State grows by less than 15 per cent, this devolution would be proportionately 
reduced.
Scrutiny of records revealed that the State Government, started releasing the 4th 
SFC grants from the FY 2019-20, i.e., three years after the submission of the 
SFC report to the State Government. Although allotment orders for release of 4th 
SFC grants were published in FY 2018-19, the grants were actually disbursed 
only in FY 2019-20. 
The year-wise allocation, as recommended by the 4 th SFC and the actual 
allocation made by the State Government, to the 125 ULBs, is given in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Recommended devolution by the 4th SFC and the actual 
allocation made by the State Government, to the ULBs
(` in crore)
Year Allocation, as recommended in the 4th 
SFC Report 
Actual allocation by the 
State Government
2015-16 442.49 - 
2016-17 508.86 - 
2017-18 585.19 - 
2018-19 672.97 - 
2019-20 773.92 193.06
2020-21 0 79.87
Total 2,983.43 272.93
(Source: data regarding release of grants furnished by the UD&MAD and Table 14.15.1 of 
the 4th SFC Report, Part-I, February 2016)
As per the recommendations of the 4 th SFC, the allocation of grants to ULBs, 
for the award period, from the FYs 2015-16 to 2019-20, worked out to be  
` 2,983.43 crore. It is evident from Table 4.3 that, as on 31 March 2021, only 
` 272.93 crore was released to the ULBs, against the required allocation of 
` 2,983.43 crore, which was merely 9.15 per cent of the total recommended 
allocation. 

48
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
4.3.2 Delay in the release of SFC Grants
Although the reference period of the 3 rd SFC was from the FYs 2008-09 to 
2012-13, the grants actually started to be devolved from FY 2010-11. Delayed 
receipt of SFC grants, by local bodies, was also observed by the 4 th SFC. For 
example, the first quarter allocation of FY 2011-12 was actually transferred at 
the end of FY 2012-1343.
Considerable delay was noticed in the release of 4 th SFC grants, to the ULBs, 
during the period from FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21, as discussed in Table 4.4. 
Further, as discussed in the previous paragraph, while the State Government had 
published allotment orders for the release of 4th SFC grants in FY 2018-19, the 
grants were actually disbursed only in FY 2019-20. 
Table 4.4: Delay in release of 4th SFC grants, for the period from FYs 
2015-16 to 2020-21
(` in crore)
Year of releasing Funds 
(As per Allotment Orders)
Grant for the 
period
Amount of 
grants
Delay in years
2018-19
2015-16 21.44 3 years
2016-17 88.91 2 years
2017-18 19.40 1 year
2019-20
2016-17 105.31 3 years
2017-18 66.64 2 years
2018-19 20.42 1 year
2020-21
2016-17 4.25 4 years
2017-18 2.36 3 years
2018-19 6.95 2 years
2019-20 6.99 1 year
2021-22
2016-17 1.63 5 years
2017-18 2.34 4 years
2018-19 0.21 3 years
2019-20 0.54 2 years
2020-21 1.39 1 year
Total 348.78
(Source: data regarding release of grants furnished by the UD&MAD and allotment orders 
of the 4th SFC)
The UD&MAD had released grants of ` 348.78 crore, with delays ranging 
between one and five years. 
It has been discussed in Para 4.5.1 that the financial resources of test-checked 
ULBs were largely dependent on grants. In this backdrop, short and/or delayed 
release of SFC grants to ULBs, affected the financial position of ULBs and 
timely implementation of plans.
4.4 Central Finance Commission (CFC)
Article 280 (3) (c) of the Constitution mandates the Central Finance Commission 
(CFC) to recommend measures to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State, 
43 Paragraph 4.21, 4th SFC Report, Part-I.

Chapter IV: Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies
49
to supplement the resource of Municipalities based on the recommendations of 
the respective SFCs. The 13th and 14th Finance Commissions had recommended 
Basic Grants and Performance Grants to ULBs, as a percentage of the divisible 
pool account. 
In the recommendations of the 15 th FC, ULBs have been categorised into two 
groups, based on population – ‘Million Plus’ Cities (cities or urban agglomerations 
with population more than a million) and ‘Non-Million Plus’ Cities. For ‘Million 
Plus’ Cities, the 15 th FC recommended ‘Million Plus’ Cities Challenge Fund 
(MCF), where the amount of grants is linked to the performance of these cities 
in improving their air quality and meeting service level benchmarks for urban 
drinking water supply, sanitation and solid waste management (SWM). The 
grants for Non-Million Plus Cities are divided into untied grants (40 per cent of 
the total grants) and tied grants for SWM, sanitation, water supply etc. (60 per 
cent of the total grants).
In case of delay in release of grants to ULBs, by the State Government, after 
having received them from the Union Government, both the 14 th and 15 th FC 
recommended payment of interest to ULBs on the amount of grants released 
with delays. 
Tables 4.5 and 4.6 depict the allocation and release of 14 th FC and 15 th FC 
grants, during the period from FYs 2015-16 to 2019-20 and FYs 2020-21 to 
2021-22, respectively.
Table 4.5: Release of 14th FC Grants to 125 ULBs
(` in crore)
Year
Grants recommended by the FC Grants released to ULBs, by the 
UD&MAD Delay in release of grantsBasic 
Grants
Performance 
Grants Total Basic 
Grants
Performance 
Grants Total
2015-16 637.21 0.00 637.21 558.19 0.00 558.20 -
2016-17 882.33 260.41 1,142.74 441.17 0.00 441.17
2nd instalment of Basic Grants of 
` 441.17 crore and Performance 
Grants of ` 260.41 crore, 
pertaining to FY 2016-17, were 
released in FY 2017-18.
2017-18 1,019.45 294.69 1,314.14 1,460.62 260.41 1,721.03 -
2018-19 1,179.32 334.66 1,513.98 1,179.32 0.00 1,179.32 -
2019-20 1,593.51 438.20 2,031.71 688.39 294.69 983.09
2nd instalment of ` 688.40 crore 
pertaining to 2019-20 was 
released in 2020-21.
2020-21*  -  - - 688.40 0.00 688.40 -
Total 5,311.82 1,327.96 6,639.78 5,016.09 555.10 5,571.21
It is evident from Table 4.5 that there were delays in the release of Basic Grants 
and Performance Grants, during FYs 2016-17 and 2019-20. Further, there was 
short receipt of 14th FC grants, amounting to ` 1,068.59 crore (Basic Grants of 
` 295.73 crore and Performance Grants of ` 772.86 crore), during FYs 2015-16 
to 2019-20. 
(Source: data from allotment orders of FC grants)
*The award period of 14th FC grants was FYs 2015-16 to 2019-20.

50
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Table 4.6: Release of 15th FC Grants to 125 ULBs
(` in crore)
Grants Allocated by the FC Grants Released to ULBs by the 
 UD&MAD
For Million Plus Cities
Year Tied-Air 
Quality
Tied-SWM/ 
Sanitation Total Tied-Air 
Quality
Tied-SWM/ 
Sanitation Total Delay in release of 
grants
2020-21 419.00 419.00 838.00 209.50 209.50 419.00 Balance allocation of 
` 419.00 crore pertaining 
to air quality and SWM/
sanitation for 2020-21 
was released in 2021-22. 
For Non-Million Plus Cities
Year Untied Tied Total Untied Tied Total Delay in release of 
grants
2020-21 1,286.00 321.50 321.50 643.00 Balance allocation of 
` 643.00 crore pertaining 
to 2020-21 (tied and 
untied) was released in 
2021-22.
(Source: data from the allotment orders of FC grants)
It is evident from Table 4.6 that there was delay in the release of 15th FC grants 
to the ULBs. 
The State Government had to bear interest, amounting to ` 25.09 crore, for 
delayed release of 14 th FC grants, as on 31 March 2021 and ` 17.82 crore, for 
delayed release of 15th FC grants, as on September 2021. However, reasons for 
delayed release of 14th and 15th FC grants were not furnished by the department.
The CFC grants are the major sources of finance for delivery of basic services 
such as solid waste management, sanitation, water supply etc. Thus, delayed 
release of CFC grants affected the financial position of the ULBs as well as the 
delivery of citizen centric services.
The matter was reported to the UD&MA Department in September 2022 and 
Finance Department in November 2022. In reply, the Departments agreed 
(January 2023) with the audit observation on delayed release of SFC and 
CFC grants and subsequent payment of interest on delayed release. Finance 
Department stated that the SFC grants are released after obtaining requisitions 
from the UD&MA Department and Utilisation Certificates of previously released 
grants. With regard to delayed release of CFC grants, the Finance Department 
stated that interest payment for delayed release is utilised by the ULBs for their 
requirement. The UD&MA Department stated that the payment of interest was 
within the purview of the grant release guidelines and, such interest amount 
augments the fund available for development work. 
Recommendation:
 10. The SFC and CFC grants may be released in a timely manner. 
 11. The recommendations of SFCs, relating to devolution, may be 
implemented, to the maximum extent possible.

Chapter IV: Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies
51
4.5 Own Sources of Revenue for the ULBs
Own sources of revenue for the ULBs comprise of tax revenue and non-tax 
revenue. Provisions contained in the KMC Act, the WBMC Act and the WBM 
Act, empower ULBs to levy taxes on property, carts, carriages and tolls on ferries, 
bridges and heavy trucks. Non-tax revenue comprises fee for advertisement, 
stallage/rent from markets, fee for trade, profession and callings, fee for supply 
of water, building plan permission fee, mutation fee etc. ULBs also earn revenue 
from parking fees, renting of community halls and guest houses etc. 
The position, in regard to own sources of revenue, in the test-checked ULBs, is 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs:
4.5.1	 	Insufficiency	of	own	sources	of	revenue	of	the	ULBs,	in	com-
parison to their total receipts
Own sources of revenue are pivotal for discharging functions devolved to the 
ULBs and achieving self-reliance. Audit observed that, during the period from 
FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21, the collection of own sources of revenue was very 
poor in comparison to the total receipts of ULBs, rendering them dependent on 
grants, for their functioning. 
A comparison of own sources of revenue, to total receipts, in 26 out of 27 test-
checked ULBs, is given in Table 4.7.
Table 4.7: Own sources of revenue vis-à-vis total receipts
(` in crore)
Financial 
Year
Receipt from 
Grants during 
the year 
(Capital+Revenue)
Receipts from 
Assigned 
Revenue 
during the 
financial	year	
Own Sources 
of Receipts / 
Collections 
during the 
financial	year
Total 
Receipts 
during the 
financial	
year 
Percentage 
of Own 
receipts 
to total 
receipts 
2015-16  1,711.04  785.08  1,473.62  3,969.73  37.12 
2016-17  2,444.02  519.45  1,483.01  4,446.49  33.35 
2017-18  2,829.79  315.63  1,643.97  4,789.39  34.33 
2018-19  3,263.05  823.50  1,634.13  5,720.68  28.57 
2019-20  3,066.88  671.34  1,596.59  5,334.81  29.93 
2020-21#  935.13  20.76  260.68  1,216.58  21.43 
Total 14,249.91 3,135.76 8,092.00 25,477.68 31.76
(Source: data furnished by 26 ULBs)
# Kolkata MC	furnished	figures	up	to	FY	2019-20,	since	figures	for	FY	2020-21	had	not	been	
finalised.	Thus	figures	for	2015-16	to	2019-20	are	inclusive	of	figures	of	Kolkata MC. The 
Kalna Municipality did not furnish reply. 
It is evident from Table 4.7 that the percentage of receipts of ULBs from ‘own 
sources’, to the total receipts, ranged between 21.43 per cent and 37.12 per cent, 
indicating that ULBs were dependent on grants, which diluted the objective of 
financial empowerment of the ULBs.

52
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Tax Revenues of ULBs
4.5.2 Property Tax
ULBs are empowered to levy property tax on lands and buildings, as per 
provisions contained in Section 170 of the KMC Act, 102 of the WBMC Act 
and 93 of the WBM Act. It is one of the major contributors of revenue from 
own sources. The rates of the property tax are determined as per the formula 
prescribed in respective municipal acts, based on the annual valuation of all 
the holdings determined by the West Bengal Valuation Board (WBVB), in 
consultation with ULBs, except for Kolkata MC. The Final Valuation List 
published by the WBVB, becomes the Assessment List of the ULBs; based 
on the Assessment List, property tax is approved and levied by the ULBs. The 
annual valuation, assessment and determination of property tax in Kolkata MC 
is done by Kolkata MC itself.
Audit observations relating to Property tax, in the test-checked ULBs, are 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
4.5.2.1 Collection of Property Tax
Section 216 of the KMC Act, Section 158 of the WBMC Act and Section 149 
of the WBM Act, stipulate that, when property tax becomes due on any land 
or building, the Chairman (in case of Municipality/NAA)/Commissioner (in 
case of Corporation) shall cause to be presented to the owner or the occupier 
thereof, a bill for the amount due. Such property tax shall be payable in quarterly 
instalments and every such instalment shall be deemed to be due on the first day 
of the quarter, in respect of which it is payable.
If any amount due is paid within 30 days from the date of presentation of the 
bill, a rebate, up to 10 per cent of the amount of tax, as may be determined by 
the Board of Councillors, is allowed. A notice of demand is served to the person 
liable to pay tax, if such tax is not paid within 30 days from the presentation of 
bill and, if within 30 days of the service of the notice of demand, the sum due is 
not paid, the person shall be deemed to be in default. 
Audit observed the following in this regard:
	 (i)	Outstanding	property	tax	and	low	tax	collection	efficiency
The status regarding collection of property tax from households, as well as non-
residential/commercial/industrial properties, during the period from FYs 2015-
16 to 2020-21, is shown in Table 4.8.
Table 4.8: Outstanding property tax in the test-checked ULBs
(` in lakh)
Year
Demand Collection Outstanding Percentage of collection
Arrear Current Total Arrear Current Total Arrear Current Total Arrear Current Total
2015-16 3,74,367.12 70,318.79 4,44,685.91 22,581.03 41,965.69 64,546.72 3,51,786.09 28,353.10 3,80,139.19 6.03 59.68 14.52
2016-17 4,06,833.72 77,255.27 4,84,088.99 23,076.01 46,482.00 69,558.01 3,83,757.71 30,773.27 4,14,530.98 5.67 60.17 14.37
2017-18 4,47,054.25 82,956.88 5,30,011.13 26,598.06 48,190.03 74,788.09 4,20,456.19 34,766.85 4,55,223.04 5.95 58.09 14.11
2018-19 4,88,259.89 86,811.21 5,75,071.10 23,892.57 50,187.28 74,079.85 4,64,367.32 36,623.93 5,00,991.25 4.89 57.81 12.88
2019-20 3,14,051.13 90,462.97 4,04,514.10 23,945.12 50,490.72 74,435.84 2,90,106.01 39,972.25 3,30,078.26 7.62 55.81 18.40
2020-21 3,24,948.72 95,623.46 4,20,572.18 46,499.55 52,506.63 99,006.18 2,78,449.17 43,116.83 3,21,566.00 14.31 54.91 23.54
(Source: data furnished by 27 ULBs)

Chapter IV: Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies
53
From Table 4.8, it is evident that, as on 31 March 2021, the total outstanding 
property tax of 27 test-checked ULBs stood at ` 3,215.66 crore.
The trends of arrear collection, current collection and overall collection, are 
shown in Chart 4.2 below-
Chart 4.2: Trends of Arrear Collection, Current Collection and Total 
Collection, during FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21
6.03 5.67 5.95 4.89 7.62
14.31
59.68 60.17 58.09 57.81 55.81 54.91
14.52 14.37 14.11 12.88
18.40
23.54
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2015 - 16 2016 - 17 2017 - 18 2018 - 19 2019 - 20 2020 - 21
Percentage of Collection Against Demand
Arrear Collection Current Collection Total Collection
Audit also observed huge differences between the Closing Balances and the 
Opening Balances of demand and collection of property tax of successive years, 
in case of 11 ULBs, viz., Bansberia, Bongaon, Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Katwa, 
Kolkata MC, Konnagar, Panihati, Pujali, Ramjibonpur and Uttarpara-Kotrung, 
which indicated poor record-keeping (details shown in Appendix-5). 
The ULBs did not furnish specific reply in regard to the differences and the 
steps taken by them to reconcile these differences. 
 (ii) Non-presentation of bills and non-serving of demand notices
Section 216 of the KMC Act, Section 158 of the WBMC Act and Section 149 of 
the WBM Act, mandate ULBs to present bills to persons liable to pay property 
tax, when property tax becomes due. In terms of Section 217 of the KMC Act, 
Section 159 of the WBMC Act and Section 151 of the WBM Act, a notice of 
demand is to be served to a defaulter who has not paid property tax within 30 
days after the presentation of the bill. 
Audit observed that, out of 27 test-checked ULBs, only 18 ULBs had presented 
bills to taxpayers and only 11 ULBs had served demand notices to defaulters, 
for not paying property tax. A summary is given in the Table 4.9.

54
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Table 4.9: ULBs which presented bills of property tax to taxpayers and 
served demand notices to defaulters
Bills of property tax Demand Notices to defaulters
Served
18 ULBs:
Bansberia, Barasat, Barrackpore, 
Bongaon, Contai, Gobardanga, 
Habra, Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Katwa, 
Kharagpur, Kolkata MC, Mal, 
Midnapoe, Panihati, Pujali, Siliguri 
MC, Tufanganj
11 ULBs:
Bansberia, Barasat, Barrackpore, 
Bongaon, Gobardanga, Habra, Kalna, 
Katwa, Kolkata MC, Mal,Tufanganj
Not served
7 ULBs:
Asansol MC, Coochbehar, Jhalda, 
Jiaganj-Azimganj, Konnagar, 
Raiganj, Ramjibonpur
14 ULBs:
Asansol MC, Contai, Coochbehar, 
Jhalda, Jiaganj-Azimganj, Kaliyaganj, 
Kharagpur, Konnagar, Midnapore, 
Panihati, Pujali, Raiganj, Siliguri, 
Ramjibonpur
(Source: data furnished by ULBs)
Two	ULBs	did	not	furnish	definite	information.
Presentation of bills is pivotal to making aware the person liable to pay property 
tax, about the incidence of tax. Further, any taxpayer, who fails to pay property 
taxes in a timely manner, may not be termed as a defaulter and steps to recover 
of taxes cannot be initiated, as per law, unless he/she is served with bills of 
property tax and/or notice of demand. 
 (iii) Non-imposition of penalty and interest 
Sections 217(3) and (4) of the KMC Act, Sections 160(2) and (3) of the WBMC 
Act and Section 151(4) of the WBM Act, provide for imposition of penalty 
upto 15 per cent and simple interest up to 10 per cent44 on and in addition to the 
amount of property tax due. 
Audit found that, except for Kolkata MC, the rest of the 26 test-checked 
ULBs had not imposed penalties and seven ULBs ( Asansol MC, Siliguri MC, 
Gobardanga, Kaliayganj, Mal, Pujali and Ramjibonpur ) had not imposed 
interest on arrear collections of property tax. The penalty collected by Kolkata 
MC, during the period 2015-16 to 2020-21, was ` 40.07 lakh. The interest 
collected by 17 ULBs, during the period 2015-16 to 2020-21, was ` 6.02 crore 
(details given in Appendix-6). Three ULBs viz., Bongaon, Contai and Kolkata 
MC, collected interest on arrear property tax, during 2015-16 to 2020-21, but 
did not furnish the amount collected as interest. 
Imposition of penalty and interest not only allows ULBs to earn additional 
revenue, but also act as a deterrent against default in payment of property 
tax. Thus, during the FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21, non-imposition of penalty and 
44 For Kolkata MC, the rate of simple interest is three per cent above the prime lending rate of 
the State Bank of India, as prevalent on the 1st day of January of the particular calendar year, 
where the annual valuation is less than ` one lakh, and at the rate of six per cent above such 
prime lending rate, where the annual valuation is ` one lakh and above. Such interest shall be 
payable for the period commencing on the 1st day of quarter following that in which the bill is 
presented and ending with the month in which the payment is made.

Chapter IV: Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies
55
interest resulted in loss of revenue, amounting to atleast ` 8.27 crore45 (` 5.37 
crore as penalty and ` 2.90 crore as interest). 
 (iv) Non-collection of surcharge for non-residential and commercial use of 
properties
For use of land or buildings or other properties or portion thereof, for commercial 
or non-residential purposes, ULBs are empowered to levy and collect surcharge 
on and in addition to property tax, from such holdings, as per provisions 
contained in Section 109 of the WBMC Act and Section 97 of the WBM Act. 
The rate of surcharge is fixed by the ULBs, and it could be up to 50 per cent of 
the property tax. In case of Municipalities, the minimum rate of surcharge has 
been stipulated to be 20 per cent of property tax.
Twelve ULBs had imposed surcharge during FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21, in 
addition to property tax, for use of properties for non-residential purposes. 
Out of these 12 ULBs, six ( Bongaon, Jiaganj-Azimganj, Katwa, Kolkata  MC, 
Konnagar and Panihati) had maintained the details of demand of surcharge and, 
as on 31 March 2021, the outstanding surcharge, in these six ULBs, stood at  
` 76.66 crore. Three ULBs (Barasat, Contai and Siliguri MC) had not maintained 
the details of demand of surcharge and the remaining three ULBs (Gobardanga, 
Habra and Pujali) did not furnish specific information. 
The remaining 15 ULBs did not implement surcharge on non-residential/
commercial use of properties. The ULBs did not furnish reason for the same. 
4.5.2.2 Property Tax Board
The Thirteenth Finance Commission (13 th FC) had recommended that State 
Governments set up state level Property Tax Boards, to assist all ULBs in 
the States, in putting in place, an independent and transparent procedure for 
assessing property tax. 
The West Bengal Valuation Board (WBVB) (erstwhile West Bengal Central 
Valuation Board), under the UD&MA Department, established under the West 
Bengal Valuation Board Act, 1978, functions as the Property Tax Board of the 
State. The Board consists of a Chairman and four other members appointed by 
the State Government. The Director of Local Bodies (DLB), West Bengal, is an 
ex-officio member of the Board. One of the members of the Board is to be its 
Member-Secretary and is expected to function as the Chief Executive Officer 
of the Board.
In terms of Section 123 of the WBMC Act and Section 110 of the WBM Act, the 
general valuation holdings of all ULBs (except KMC and HMC) are conducted 
by the West Bengal Valuation Board. For KMC and HMC, the general valuations 
of holdings is done by the ULBs themselves. The process of valuation by the 
WBVB is depicted in Chart 4.3.
45 Calculated considering penalty and simple interest at the rate of five percent on arrear 
collection of tax.

56
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Chart 4.3: The process of valuation by WBVB
Adoption of 
resolution of 
valuation by 
the ULB
Intimation to 
WBVB and 
State
Government 
(UD&MAD)
Notification 
issued by the 
UD&MAD,  
under Section  
9(1) of the 
WBVB Act, 
spcifying the 
area where Board 
will commence 
work
Public notice under 
Section 16 of the 
WBVB Act, 
requesting tax-
payers to file 
statements 
(Annexure-III)
relating to their 
properties
Obtaining municipal 
maps, total no. of 
holdings and list of 
Field Assistants from 
the ULB. The Field 
Assistants are 
engaged by the ULB. 
Imparting 
training to 
Field 
Assistants by 
WBVB
Door-to-door field work by the 
Field Assistants,  under 
supervision of WBVB and 
meeting with the Chairperson of 
the ULB, for determination of 
zones, land prices of zones etc.
Preparation of Draft Valuation 
List (DVL)  from collected data 
and publication of DVL
Reviewing 
objection 
petitions 
received from 
tax-payers
Publication of Final 
Valuation List 
(FVL),  by WBVB
The Final Valuation List, published by the WBVB, becomes the Assessment 
List of the ULB, in terms of Section 123 of the WBMC Act and Section 110 of 
the WBM Act. Thus, ULBs themselves are primarily responsible for initiating 
the process of revision of annual valuation. In terms of Section 19 of the WBVB 
Act, ULBs are required to make payment to the Board, for conducting general 
valuation. The valuation for Kolkata MC was carried out by the ULB itself.
Audit observed that, while fixing the value of land for each zone, in consultation 
with the ULB, WBVB wholly depended on the figures supplied by the ULBs 
and the value of land, as fixed by the Inspector General of Registration 46, was 
not considered. This may result in undervaluation of properties and resultant 
determination of property tax.
WBVB stated (September 2021) that the matter of considering the value of land, 
fixed by the Inspector General of Registration, while determining the value of 
land under each zone, for general valuation, is under active consideration.
4.5.2.3 Valuation and Assessment of Property Tax
Section 122 of the WBMC Act and Section 109 of the WBM Act, mandate 
conducting of general valuation, to ensure revision of annual valuation of all 
the holdings of a municipal area, at the termination of a successive period 
46 The Inspector General of Registration and Commissioner of Stamp Revenue, West Bengal, is 
the Head of Directorate of Stamp Revenue and Registration, Finance Department (Revenue), 
Government of West Bengal. The Registering Officers of the district establishments, under 
the Directorate, are entrusted with the duty of transparent determination of the market value 
of land, under the West Bengal Stamp (Prevention of Under-Valuation of Instruments) Rules, 
2001.

Chapter IV: Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies
57
of five years, by the Chairman-in-Council/Corporation. As discussed in the 
previous paragraph, after the valuation procedure has been completed, the Final 
Valuation List, prepared by the WBVB, is notified by the State Government, as 
the Assessment List of the ULB and this list remains valid for a period of five 
years. If the general valuation could not be completed before the expiration 
of last valuation, or the new assessment list could not be given effect, the last 
assessment list should continue to be in force.
In case of Kolkata MC, as per KMC Act, the valuation may be conducted either 
by the KMC or by the WBVB. However, Kolkata MC itself conducted the 
valuation on an yearly basis. 
Out of the remaining 26 test-checked ULBs, Audit observed that, in case of 20 
ULBs, there had been delays in conducting general valuation of the holdings of 
the municipal areas, ranging from three months (Bongaon) to more than twenty-
five years (Kaliyaganj) (details given in Appendix-7). A summary of the range 
of delays is given in Chart 4.4. 
Chart 4.4: Range of delays in general valuation, in 20 ULBs
4
9
2
1
2
1 1
Upto 1 year More than 1
year - upto 5
years
More than 5
years - upto
10 years
More than 10
years -upto 15
years
More than 15
years - upto
20 years
More than 20
years - upto
25 years
More than 25
years - upto
30 years
No. of ULBs
(Source: data furnished by WBVB)
Apart from the 20 ULBs, in Contai Municipality, general valuation of properties 
had not been done since the inception of the WBVB. In the remaining five 
ULBs, there were no delays in general valuation. 
4.5.2.4 Service Charges from Central Government properties
Under Clause (1) of Article 285 of the Constitution of India, Central Government 
properties are exempted from paying all taxes imposed by a State or by any 
authority within a State. Ministry of Finance, Government of India, decided 
(May 1954) that Central Government properties would pay service charges to 
local bodies, for specific services rendered, with effect from 1 April 1954. The 
Central Government also fixed (March 1967) the rates of service charges, as a 
percentage of the realisable property tax.
Article 285 of the Constitution, Section 171(6) of the KMC Act, Section 111 
of the WBMC Act and Section 100 of the WBM Act, also exempt Central 
Government properties from payment of property tax and mandate levying and 
collecting service charges, based on annual values, at rates determined by the 
Central Government. 

58
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Further directive issued (December 2009) by the Ministry of Urban Development 
(MoUD), Government of India, on the basis of the order of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India, also mentioned collection of service charges as a percentage of 
the property tax. As per the directive, State Governments were requested to take 
note of the order and advise ULBs to regulate payment of service charges, in the 
light of the judgement.
Audit observed that there was an anomaly regarding the determination of service 
charges, since the calculation of service charges, as per the Central Government, 
was based on the realisable property tax, whereas, as per the State Acts, the 
determination was to be done on the basis of annual value of the property. It 
was noticed that, as of March 2021, necessary steps had not been initiated by 
the State Government, to dispose of the anomaly between the directive and the 
State Acts, regarding the basis of determination of service charges.
Out of the 27 test-checked ULBs, Audit, observed that 19 ULBs 47 had not 
imposed service charges on Central Government properties within their 
jurisdiction. Only seven ULBs, viz. Bongaon, Coochbehar, Katwa, Kharagpur, 
Kolkata MC, Siliguri MC and Suri, had implemented levy/collection of service 
charges, while specific information for one ULB (Panihati) was not available.
Recommendation:
 12. ULBs may take all possible measures to increase revenue from 
property tax.
 13. Government may ensure that valuation of properties in the ULBs is 
conducted in a timely manner and, while determining the value of 
land,	the	guidance	values	fixed	by	the	State	Government	are	taken	
into consideration, to avoid undervaluation of properties.
 14. ULBs may be advised to initiate discussion with the Departments of 
the Central Government, to decide the quantum of services which 
would be delivered to them and the resultant service charges to be 
levied and collected. 
4.5.3 Tax on Cart, Carriage and Animal
Sections 170, 209A, 209B and 209F of the KMC Act, Sections 102 and 148 to 
150 of the WBMC Act and Section 93, 127 and 128 of the WBM Act, provide 
for levy and collection of tax on registration of cart, carriage and animals. 
As per provisions, every cart and carriage 48, kept or used within the municipal 
area, is required to be registered, on payment of tax for registration. The tax 
is leviable on the owner or on the persons having possession or control of the 
carriages and animals and may be paid for half-year or a complete year.
47 Asansol MC, Bansberia, Barasat, Barrackpore, Contai, Gobardanga, Habra, Jhalda, Jiaganj-
Azimganj, Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Konnagar, Mal, Midnapore, Pujali, Raiganj, Ramjibonpur, 
Tufanganj and Uttarpara-Kotrung. 
48 ‘Carriage’ means any wheeled vehicle used for conveyance of human beings and goods and 
includes van-rickshaw or cycle-rickshaw but does not include a motor vehicle, bicycle or 
tricycle. ‘Cart’ means any cart, hackery or wheeled vehicle, with or without springs.

Chapter IV: Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies
59
Audit observed that only four ULBs ( Kolkata MC, Siliguri MC, Barrackpore 
and Konnagar) had levied and collected tax on cart, carriage and animals, while 
20 ULBs49 had not levied tax on cart, carriage and animals within the municipal 
area. Three ULBs ( Asansol MC, Barasat and Raiganj) did not furnish the 
requested information.
Non-tax Revenue
4.5.4 License Fee for Advertisement
Previously, fees for advertisements, was levied and collected in the form of tax 
on advertisements, other than advertisements published in the newspapers, as 
per provisions of Section 170 of the KMC Act, 102 of the WBMC Act and 93 of 
the WBM Act. Following amendments made to the respective acts in 2019-2050, 
the entry regarding tax on advertisement was removed from the list of taxes 
leviable by the ULBs and was classified as fees for advertisement. 
Audit observed the following, with regard to levy and collection of fees for 
advertisement:
4.5.4.1 Collection of license fees for advertisement
a) Section 204 of the KMC Act, Sections 142 and 144 of the WBMC Act and 
Section 123 of the WBM Act, empower ULBs to collect fees for display of 
advertisements. 
Audit noticed that 23 ULBs had collected license fee for advertisements, in 
their respective municipal areas and the total amount collected during 2015-
16 to 2020-21 stood at ` 36.60 crore (details given in Appendix-8). Two 
ULBs ( Pujali and Gobardanga) had not collected license fee for display of 
advertisements. Two ULBs (Jhalda and Jiaganj-Azimganj) did not furnish the 
requested information.
b) Audit observed that, out of the 23 ULBs which had collected fees for 
advertisement, 14 ULBs had not maintained demand details for fee for 
advertisement; five ULBs ( Asansol MC , Bansberia, Kalna, Katwa and 
Ramjibonpur) had maintained details of current demand only; and four ULBs 
(Contai, Kolkata MC, Siliguri MC and Suri) had maintained arrear and current 
demand for fee for advertisement. Contai Municipality had maintained arrear 
and current demand for the period 2015-16 to 2018-19 and Kolkata MC, had 
maintained it for the period 2015-16 to 2019-20. Kolkata MC did not furnish 
data for 2020-21. 
Absence of demand details indicates that the ULBs had not maintained 
data regarding the number of advertisements displayed in their municipal 
jurisdictions, number of unauthorised advertisements being displayed after 
expiry of the stipulated period ( i.e. the period for which permissions had been 
granted) and fee paid for advertisement, as well as loss of revenue due to non-
renewal of licence fee.
49 Bansberia, Bongaon, Contai, Coochbehar, Gobardanga, Habra, Jhalda, Jiaganj-Azimganj, 
Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Katwa, Kharagpur, Mal, Midnapore, Panihati, Pujali, Ramjibonpur, Suri, 
Tufanganj, Uttarpara-Kotrung. 
50 The West Bengal Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2019; the West Bengal Municipal 
(Amendment) Act, 2019 and the Kolkata Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2019.

60
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
c) Audit also observed that, as on 31 March 2021, the outstanding fees for 
advertisement, stood at ` 25.22 crore, in case of seven ULBs51. 
4.5.4.2 Collection of license fee for site
In terms of Section 203 of the KMC Act, Section 143 of the WBMC Act and 
Section 122 of the WBM Act, the owner, occupier, lessee or an advertising 
agent, should obtain license for use of site for display of advertisement, after 
making payment for license fee. The license is to be issued for a period of one 
year. 
Audit observed that, out of the 23 ULBs which had collected fee for 
advertisements, 21 ULBs had not collected licence fee, for use of sites for 
display of advertisements. Only two ULBs ( Asansol MC  and Kolkata  MC) 
had collected license fee for use of sites for display of advertisements and, as 
on 31 March 2021, the outstanding license fee, for these two ULBs, stood at 
` 29.92 crore. 
4.5.5 Rent from markets
a) As per provisions of Section 430 of the KMC Act, Section 310 of the WBMC 
Act and Section 276 of the WBM Act, ULBs may levy premium, stallage, rent 
or fee, for the occupation or use of any stall, shop, stand, shed or pen in a 
municipal market or put up to public auction, or dispose of by private sale, the 
privilege of occupying stall, shop etc. 
During scrutiny of records for the FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21, Audit observed that 
collection efficiency of stallage/rent, by the ULBs, from municipal markets, 
was poor and, as on 31 March 2021, the outstanding amount of stallage/rent, 
from municipal markets, in case of 22 ULBs, stood at ` 18.49 crore, with an 
overall collection efficiency 52 of 55.63 per cent . Four ULBs ( Asansol MC , 
Barrackpore, Gobardanga and Siliguri  MC) did not furnish the requested 
information to Audit. 
Pujali Municipality had no municipal market under its jurisdiction.
b) Out of the 22 ULBs, only nine ULBs viz., Contai, Habra, Katwa, Kharagpur, 
Kolkata MC, Konnagar, Panihati, Ramjibonpur and Uttarpara-Kotrung  had 
presented bills to owners/occupiers of shops in municipal markets, while five 
ULBs viz., Coochbehar, Kalna, Mal, Raiganj and Tufanganj had not presented 
such bills. The remaining eight ULBs viz., Bansberia, Barasat, Bongaon, 
Jhalda, Jiaganj-Azimganj, Kaliyaganj, Midnapore and Suri did not furnish the 
requested information.
4.5.6	 	Fee	for	Certificates	for	enlistment	of	profession,	trade	and	
callings
In terms of Section 199 of the KMC Act, Section 141 of the WBMC Act and 
Section 118 of the WBM Act, every person engaged or intending to be engaged 
in any profession, trade or calling, as specified in the Schedules appended to the 
Acts, either by himself or by an agent or representative, is required to obtain a 
51 Arrear and current demand in case of four ULBs (Contai, Kolkata MC, Siliguri MC and Suri), 
current demand in case of two ULBs (Asansol MC and Bansberia) and data furnished by one 
ULB (Panihati Municipality) during audit.
52  Percentage of collection against demand. 

Chapter IV: Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies
61
Permanent Certificate of Enlistment or Provisional Certificate of Enlistment, or 
get the Permanent Certificate of Enlistment renewed, on or before the expiry of 
the validity period, by payment of fee for enlistment. 
The Provisional Certificate of Enlistment is issued for a period of one year and is 
not renewable; it has to be converted into a Permanent Certificate of Enlistment, 
on or before completion of the validity period. A Permanent Certificate of 
Enlistment may be obtained for a maximum period of three years together and 
be renewed for a maximum period of three years.
Accordingly, as mandated in the respective Acts/guidelines issued by State 
Government, ULBs are required to maintain registers or databases for Permanent 
and Provisional Certificates of Enlistment, to check over non-renewal of 
Permanent or Provisional Certificates of Enlistment. 
Audit, observed that two ULBs ( Jhalda and Tufanganj), were not maintaining 
records of issued Permanent Certificates of Enlistment, while the remaining 25 
ULBs were maintaining the same. 
Audit also observed that the ULBs had not been empowered by the Acts, to 
conduct mandatory inspections, to keep check on trades or professions being 
carried out, without obtaining Certificates of Enlistment or without renewal 
of Provisional or Permanent Certificates of Enlistment. In the absence of 
mandatory provision, Audit observed that only four ULBs were conducting 
such inspections.
Audit also noticed that the Konnagar Municipality, in contravention of the 
provisions contained in the Act, had renewed Provisional Certificates of 
Enlistment, instead of converting them to Permanent Certificates of Enlistment, 
during FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21.
In the absence of maintenance of database/registers and regular inspections, 
ULBs were not able to monitor the trades, profession and callings being carried 
out in their jurisdiction, without obtaining Certificates of Enlistment, or without 
their renewal. Thus, ULBs lost the opportunity to augment their own source 
revenue. 
4.5.7 Other revenue sources of ULBs
		License fee for private markets
Section 436 of the KMC Act, Section 308 of the WBMC Act and Section 278 of 
the WBM Act, provide that, to establish and keep open a private market, license 
has to be obtained from the ULB, after payment of license fee. 
Audit observed that only three of the test-checked ULBs ( Barrackpore, Katwa 
and Uttarpara-Kotrung) had maintained records of the private markets in 
their municipal areas and two of these ULBs ( Katwa and Uttarpara-Kotrung) 
had issued licenses for opening private markets but did not collect license 
fees. 18 ULBs had not granted licenses and prescribed license fee for private 
markets. Five ULBs did not furnish the requested information (details given in 
Appendix-9), while one ULB ( Contai) did not have private market under its 
jurisdiction. 

62
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
		Surcharge on transfer of immovable properties (Additional Stamp Duty)
Section 210A of the KMC Act, Section 133 of the WBMC Act and Section 
117 of the WBM Act, empower the Corporation/BoC to levy surcharge on the 
transfer of immovable property situated within the municipal area concerned, in 
the form of additional stamp duty.
Audit noticed that 16 ULBs were not levying surcharge, in the form of additional 
stamp duty. Only two ULBs were collecting additional stamp duty, while nine 
ULBs did not furnish reply (details given in Appendix-9). 
		Stacking fee
In terms of Rule 44 of the KMC Building Rules, 2009 and Rule 24 of the West 
Bengal Municipal Building Rules 2007, the Corporation or the BoC, may levy 
stacking fee, for depositing any building material, including building rubbish, 
in any street, for which they shall be charged. Further, different rates may be 
specified for different categories of streets.
Audit found that only eight ULBs, including Kolkata MC, had imposed stacking 
fees, fifteen ULBs had not imposed it, while information was not provided by 
the remaining four ULBs (details given in Appendix-9). 
Further, out of 27 test-checked ULBs only 15 ULBs, provided information 
regarding latest revision in fees/charges (details given in Appendix-10). Non-
revision of fees/charges, resulted in a substantial dependence on grants from the 
Central and State Governments, rather than generating own source of revenue.
In the Exit Conference (October 2022), the Department acknowledged the audit 
observation relating to unsatisfactory performance of ULBs in mobilizing the 
sources of own revenue, particularly property tax. The Department agreed that 
the ULBs were unaware of many possible sources of revenue, such as Additional 
Stamp duty, Stacking fee etc. The Department agreed to take up the matters 
relating to non-collection of surcharges from commercial/semi-commercial/
industrial holdings, non-maintenance of demand surcharge and non-imposition 
of Service Charges from the properties of Central Government. In regard to non-
collection of taxes on cart, carriage and animals, the Department opined that such 
provisions relating to archaic sources of tax revenue, require reconsideration. 
In regard to non-consideration of rates of Inspector General of Rates by WBVB, 
while determining the valuation in ULBs, the Department agreed to take up the 
issue with Member Secretary, WBVB. 
Recommendation :
 15. ULBs are to ensure that Rates/Fees levied by them may be revised, 
time to time. 
4.6 Budget Estimates
4.6.1 Budget Preparation
In terms of Section 131 of the KMC Act, Section 69 of the WBMC Act and Section 
82 of the WBM Act, ULBs are required to prepare and adopt budget estimates of the 
income likely to be received by them and the expenditure likely to be incurred by 
them, on account of the municipal government of the area under their jurisdiction. 

Chapter IV: Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies
63
The Sections ibid further stipulate that these budget estimates are to be adopted 
by 10th March (in case of Municipalities), 22 nd March (in case of Kolkata MC) 
and 31st March (in case of other Corporations). Section 69 of the WBMC Act 
and Section 82 of the WBM Act, also provide for preparation of revised budgets, 
for the Corporations and Municipalities, respectively. 
In this regard, Audit observed that –
 (i) Two ULBs, viz. the Mal and Panihati  municipalities, did not place the 
budget estimates before their Board of Councillors, for adoption, for 
the periods from the FYs 2015-16 to 2016-17 and 2015-16 to 2017-18, 
respectively. 
 (ii) During FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21, 19 ULBs had presented their budgets, 
to their Board of Councillors, for adoption, with delays ranging from ten 
days (Mal: 2018-19) to eight months (Ramjibonpur: 2020-21).
 (iii) Two ULBs, viz. Contai and Jiaganj-Azimganj, had not prepared budget 
estimates during FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21.
4.6.2 Creation of Basic Services for Urban Poor Fund
In terms of Section 123B of the KMC Act, Section 62A of the WBMC Act 
and Section 70A of the WBM Act, ULBs are required to create a separate 
fund, called ‘Basic Services for Urban Poor’ (BSUP), within their respective 
jurisdictions, including the slum areas. A minimum of 25 per cent of the funds 
within the budget of the ULB from own sources, assigned revenues, allocation 
from SFC and CFC, grants from externally aided projects, contributions from 
various sources etc., are to be earmarked and used for providing basic services 
to the urban poor, including inhabitants of the slum areas, on a yearly basis.
The fund is a non-lapsable fund. In the event of the annual allocations not being 
fully utilised, the balance funds should not be transferred to the municipal fund 
but carried forward for utilisation in the subsequent years. The fund allocation 
in subsequent years shall be considered in addition and shall not be reduced by 
the unspent funds of the previous years.
Audit, however, observed that only the Katwa Municipality had created the 
BSUP fund, as mandated, while 17 ULBs53 had not created the fund; nine ULBs 
(Asansol MC, Bongaon, Contai, Gobardanga, Jhalda, Kaliyaganj, Kharagpur, 
Konnagar and Suri) did not furnish reply.
The matter was referred to the State Government in September 2022, no reply 
was furnished. 
Recommendation:
 16. ULBs may prepare their budgets within the stipulated timeframe, 
considering their actual requirements of funds.
 17. The BSUP fund should be mandatorily created by all ULBs and 
regular contributions should be made therein, to ensure delivery of 
basic services to the urban poor, as well as to the inhabitants of slum 
areas.
53 Bansberia, Barasat, Barrackpore, Coochbehar, Habra, Jiaganj-Azmganj, Kalna, Kolkata 
MC, Mal, Midnapore, Panihati, Pujali, Raiganj, Ramjibonpur, Siliguri MC, Tufanganj and 
Uttarpara-Kotrung.

64
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
4.7 Expenditure by the ULBs
Seventeen ULBs 54 had furnished complete data, regarding revenue expenses 
and own source revenue, while the desired information was not made available 
by the remaining 10 ULBs.
Audit observed that the own source revenue of the ULBs was not sufficient to 
meet their revenue expenditure, as evident from Table 4.10. 
Table 4.10: Comparison of own source revenue with the total revenue 
expenditure 
(` in crore)
Year Total revenue 
Expenditure Own source revenue 
Percentage of own fund 
receipt to total revenue 
expenditure of ULBs
2015-16 395.63 144.19 36.45
2016-17 481.02 155.63 32.35
2017-18 599.38 179.89 30.01
2018-19 672.78 214.38 31.86
2019-20 652.03 200.31 30.72
2020-21 587.29 184.04 31.34
Total 3,388.13 1,078.44 31.83
(Source: data furnished by the ULBs)
From Table 4.10, it is evident that the ULBs were dependent on grants to meet 
their revenue expenditure and were far from achieving budgetary self-reliance, 
which is essential for carrying out their devolved functions. 
Recommendation :
 18. ULBs may explore all possible areas to augment their own revenue, 
strengthen	 their	 collection	 efficiency	 and	 arrange	 special	 drives,	
from time to time, to collect arrears, in order to meet their revenue 
expenses. 
While endorsing the observations and recommendation made by audit, The 
UD&MA Department issued an order (March 2023) directing that henceforth 
Finance Officers would act as Nodal Officers for revenue mobilization of ULBs.
54 Asansol MC, Bansberia, Barasat, Barrackpore, Contai, Habra, Kaliyaganj, Katwa, Kharagpur, 
Konnagar, Midnapore, Panihati, Pujali, Raiganj, Ramjibonpur, Suri and Uttarpara-Kotrung.

CHAPTER V
Human Resources

65
CHAPTER  V
Human Resources
Adequate and qualified manpower is essential for the empowerment of ULBs. 
This Chapter deals with staff patterns, vacancies and recruitment of staff in 
ULBs. Audit observed significant gaps in the professional assessment of staff 
requirements, large numbers of vacancies and poor per capita staff, in the ULBs, 
which affected the smooth functioning of ULBs and their service delivery.
5.1 Staff pattern of ULBs in the State
Section 53 of the WBM Act lays down details of posts for the municipal 
establishment, allows the Municipality and NAA to determine the municipal 
establishment and number of officers for itself, out of the posts referred in that 
Section, and, if necessary, to create posts of such officers and fix the salaries and 
allowances to be paid and granted to such officers, by the BoC, with the prior 
approval of the State Government.
In pursuance of the above provision, staff norms for each of the Municipalities 
were fixed by the erstwhile Municipal Affairs Department in 1995, and were 
approved by the Finance Department, Government of West Bengal.
Rule 23 of the West Bengal Municipalities (Procedure and Conduct of Business) 
Rules, 1995, details the departments of the Municipalities, which are required to 
discharge the obligatory, discretionary and transferred functions, as delineated in 
Sections 63 to 65 of the WBM Act, devolved to them in line with the 74th CAA. 
The West Bengal Municipal (Recruitment) Rules, 2005, provide the category 
of staff under each department, with their eligibility criteria and procedure for 
selection. The framework of the departments is given in Appendix-11.
Apart from the above, each Municipality has posts of one Executive Officer and 
one Finance Officer, who are appointed by the State Government and are not 
under the administrative control of the Board of Councillors of the Municipality. 
The Executive Officer is the chief executive officer of the Municipality.
Section 14 of the KMC Act and Section 30 of the WBMC Act, contain the list 
of officers for the municipal establishment, as shown in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: List of officers of Kolkata MC and other Municipal 
Corporations, as per the respective Acts
Kolkata MC Other Municipal 
Corporations
Name of 
the post
1. Municipal Commissioner
2. Joint Municipal Commissioners
3. Deputy Municipal Commissioners
4. Controller of Municipal Finances and 
Accounts (CMFA)
5. Chief Municipal Auditor (CMA)
6. Municipal Engineer-in-Chief
7. Chief Municipal Engineers
1. Commissioner
2. Chief Engineer
3. Deputy Commissioner, 
Revenue
4. Health Officer
5. Finance Officer
6. Chief Auditor
7. Secretary

66
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Kolkata MC Other Municipal 
Corporations
8. Chief Municipal Architect and Town Planner
9. Chief Municipal Health Officer
10. Chief Municipal Law Officer
11. Municipal Secretary
(Source: respective Acts)
In case of Kolkata MC, the Municipal Commissioner, Joint Municipal 
Commissioners, the Controller of Municipal Finances and Accounts (CMFA) 
and the Chief Municipal Auditor (CMA), and, in case of other Municipal 
Corporations, all the officials mentioned in Table 5.1, are appointed by: (i) the 
State Government, in consultation with the MIC, from amongst the persons 
who are, or have been, in the service of the State Government or (ii) if directed 
by the State Government, by the MIC, in consultation with the State Public 
Service Commission or (iii) by the MIC, with the prior approval of the State 
Government, from amongst officers who are or have been in the service of the 
Corporation. In case of Kolkata MC, the other officers mentioned in Table 
5.1 are appointed by the MIC, in consultation with the State Public Service 
Commission, or by the State Government, in consultation with the MIC, from 
amongst persons who are or have been in the service of Government.
Section 17 of the KMC Act and Section 33 of the WBMC Act define the 
officers and staff, other than those mentioned in Table 5.1, as the ‘municipal 
establishment’. In Kolkata MC, the officer and staff constituting the municipal 
establishment are maintained through a Schedule of Posts and any revision in 
the schedule of posts requires approval of the State Government. In case of other 
Municipal Corporations, the State Government fixes the norms for regulating 
the size of the establishment and prior approval of the State Government is 
required for creation of posts. Kolkata MC engaged an agency to carry out a 
study on its organisational development strategy, which submitted its report in 
2005, while, in the Siliguri MC, staff pattern had not been assessed since its 
formation in 1994.
Department-wise data for the ULBs had not been maintained at the level of the 
Directorate of Local Bodies (DLB) which is entrusted with the matters relating 
to appointments and promotions (in case of already sanctioned posts). Thus, 
the details of departments relating to the test-checked ULBs were not available. 
From the information furnished by the Kolkata MC, it was noticed that it has 57 
departments55, for discharging its municipal functions; Siliguri MC has only 13 
departments; while no such information was available for Asansol MC.
Audit observed that, after fixing of staff norms in 1995, further staff 
requirements had not been assessed by the State Government, although the 
service delivery functions had increased manifold, over the years, since 1995. 
ULBs had, from time to time, been requesting the UD&MAD, for filling up 
of vacancies or creation of posts, due to vacancies or increased workload, 
but the department had not taken up staff assessment for all the ULBs, in a 
comprehensive manner.
55 As per the Schedule of Establishment of KMC: 2022-23.

67
Chapter V: Human Resources
5.2 Recruitment of human resources in the ULBs
In the Municipalities, as well as Corporations (including the Kolkata MC), 
posts of officers/employees are classified as Group A, B, C or D. The appointing 
authorities for Municipalities and Municipal Corporations are given in the Table 
5.2.
Table 5.2: Appointing authorities
ULB Appointing authority
Kolkata MC In case of category-A posts, the Municipal Commissioner; in case of category-B 
posts, a Joint Municipal Commissioner; in case of category-C posts and 
category D posts, such officer or officers of the Corporation as the Municipal 
Commissioner may, with the prior approval of the Mayor-in-Council, designate 
in this behalf.
Municipal Corporations 
other than Kolkata MC
All the posts of officers and other employees, by the Commissioner, with the 
approval of the Corporation and the State Government.
Municipalities/NAA Appointments of all officers and employees, other than the Executive Officer, 
Finance Officer and Health Officer, are made by the Municipality, with the prior 
approval of the State Government.
The West Bengal Municipal Service Commission was constituted under the 
UD&MAD, vide  the West Bengal Municipal Service Commission Act 2018 
(WBMSC), with effect from January 2019, for direct recruitment of personnel, 
for prescribed categories of posts and services, in the establishment of the 
Urban Local Bodies (Municipal Corporations, Municipalities, Notified Area 
Authorities, Industrial Township Authorities), Development Authorities and 
establishment of different organisations under the UD&MAD, such as the 
WBVB. Prior to that, recruitment in Municipalities was being done by the 
Municipalities, under supervision of the Director of Local Bodies and, in case of 
Municipal Corporations, through the erstwhile Municipal Service Commission, 
constituted under Section 26 of the KMC Act.
Audit observed that the WBMSC, after its constitution in January 2019, had 
conducted recruitment of personnel for the Kolkata MC, Durgapur MC and 
Siliguri MC. Insofar as Municipalities are concerned, as on September 2021, 
WBMSC had carried out recruitment of personnel for only one Municipality 
(Kalyani), although significant numbers of vacancies exist across the ULBs in 
the State.
5.3 Vacancies in the ULBs and per capita staff
In terms of the order of erstwhile Municipal Affairs Department (September 2009), 
Director of Local Bodies was entrusted with matters relating to appointment 
and promotion of already sanctioned posts existing in Municipalities. Further, 
in terms of the memo of the Finance Department (June 2018), a State Level 
Committee, on rationalisation and optimal utilisation of human resources in the 
State, was constituted, for scrutiny/assessment to be carried out for the creation 
of posts/restructuring of the service cadre in Government establishments, 
including local bodies, before being processed/concurred with, by the Finance 
Department, for being placed before the State Cabinet, for its consideration.
(Source: respective Acts)

68
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Audit noticed that in spite of the formation of committees and constitution 
of the WBMSC, significant vacancies existed in the ULBs. As of July 2021, 
against the sanctioned posts (85,247 in 123 ULBs56 in West Bengal), the actual 
staff position was 40,195, i.e. there were 52.85 per cent vacancies. The vacancy 
position of the 27 test-checked ULBs is given in Chart 5.1.
Chart 5.1: Percentage of vacancies in the 27 test-checked ULBs 
(as of July 2021)
8.05
20.69
21.13
22.06
23.81
26.29
31.11
31.76
33.33
36.52
38.28
40.22
47.47
47.83
49.59
50.32
50.79
57.78
58.81
59.76
60.72
63.59
64.71
64.76
64.89
69.40
73.97
0.00 10.00 20.00 30.00 40.00 50.00 60.00 70.00 80.00
Gobardanga
Bongaon
Barasat
Contai
Tufanganj
Katwa
Pujali
Jiaganj Azimganj
Kaliyaganj
Konnagar
Habra
Mal
Raiganj
Kharagpur
Suri
Siliguri MC
Coochbehar
Ramjibonpur
Midnapore
Uttarpara Kotrung
Kolkata MC
Kalna
Barrackpore
Jhalda
Bansberia
Panihati
Asansol MC
Percentage of vacant posts
The sanctioned staff position and actual staff position per 1,000 capita, are 
depicted in Chart 5.2.
Chart 5.2: Sanctioned staff position and actual staff position, 
per 1,000 capita
 
Chart 5.2: Sanctioned staff position and actual staff position, per 1,000 capita 
 
1.50
2.71
1.46
2.34
2.13
2.21
5.68
1.92
1.74
5.37
4.50
1.35
3.24
2.38
1.77
10.47
3.85
3.65
3.18
1.55
2.43
1.18
2.29
1.54
3.60
3.00
2.12
0.39
0.95
1.15
0.82
1.69
1.72
2.80
1.76
1.07
1.89
3.07
0.90
1.18
1.75
0.92
4.11
2.44
2.18
1.31
0.47
1.67
0.62
0.97
0.76
1.81
2.29
0.85
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
10.00
12.00
Sanctioned Staff per 1,000 capita
 Persons-in-position per 1,000 capita
(Source: data furnished by the DLB)
56 Except for Buniadpur and Domkal.

69
Chapter V: Human Resources
The sanctioned staff position per 1,000 capita, ranged between 1.18 (Raiganj) and 
10.47 (Kolkata MC) and the actual staff position per 1,000 capita, ranged between 
0.39 (Asansol MC) and 4.11 ( Kolkata MC). These figures indicate the deficient 
position of human resources in ULBs. In the absence of permanent staff, ULBs 
had to engage contractual/casual staff to perform their functions. This led to burden 
on the municipal funds, since 85 per cent of the salary and 100 per cent dearness 
allowances of only permanent staff, would have been borne by the State Government.
The data furnished by the 1757 ULBs, out of the 27 test-checked ULBs, showed 
large vacancies, as on 31 March 2021, in Departments engaged in revenue 
collection and service delivery functions, as detailed in Table 5.3.
Table 5.3: Vacancies in accounts, revenue and service delivery 
departments in 17 test-checked ULBs, as on 31 March 2021
Department Sanctioned 
Strength
Person-in-
position Vacancy Percentage of 
vacancy
Accounts Department 47 29 18 38.30
Revenue Department 195 49 146 74.87
Public Health & Sanitation Department 225 104 121 53.78
Public Works Department 68 46 22 32.35
Water Supply Department 221 102 119 53.85
Lack of manpower in the Revenue department, as well as in the departments 
related to service delivery, such as Public Health and Sanitation, Public Works 
and Water Supply, was likely to have affected the revenue collection of the 
ULBs and also caused hindrances in delivery of services to citizens.
In the Exit Conference (October 2022), the Department stated that Directorate 
of Local Bodies (DLB), under the Department, had started assessing the staff 
requirements in various categories of posts in ULBs. The Directorate of Local 
Bodies further stated (February 2023) that the planning and programming of 
recruitment of staff of ULBs had been disrupted, due to the pandemic. However, 
with regard to the huge number of vacancies in the ULBs, despite constitution 
of the WBMSC, DLB also cited the austerity measures imposed upon by the 
State Government, restricting all new appointments, without the prior approval 
of Finance Department. Further, DLB also stated that most of the vacancies 
were in Group D posts, whose recruitment could be done by ULBs themselves. 
However, Audit noted that the State Government needed to take steps to fill in 
the vacancies, as the ULBs were heavily dependent on grants.
Recommendation:
 19. A professional assessment of the staff requirements for the ULBs, to 
enable them to cater the growing urban population, may be taken 
up.
 20. Government may take immediate steps for filling the existing 
vacancies in the ULBs, through the West Bengal Municipal Service 
Commission.
57 Bansberia, Barrackpore, Bongaon, Contai, Habra, Kalna, Katwa, Kharagpur, Konnagar, 
Mal, Midnapore, Panihati, Pujali, Ramjibonpur, Suri, Tufanganj and Uttarpara-Kotrung.
(Source: data furnished by the ULBs)

CHAPTER VI
Performance in the 
discharge of devolved 
functions

71
CHAPTER  VI
Performance in the discharge of devolved functions
One of the prime objectives of the 74 th CAA was to empower the ULBs, to 
enable them perform functions relating to citizen-centric services, by devolving 
the functions enshrined in the 12 th Schedule, through State Acts. In West 
Bengal, provisions were made in the State Acts to enable them to deliver the 
basic services. This Chapter deals with the performance of ULBs in discharging 
the functions relating to service delivery, in regard to water supply, including 
collection of water charges, solid waste management and sanitation and public 
health.
In water supply, dependency of the ULBs on parastatals, for supply of water, 
failure to provide 100 per cent  water connection to households and non-
collection of water charges to meet the revenue expenses by most of the 
ULBs, were observed. In solid waste management, non-preparation of waste 
management plans, failure to collect, process and dispose segregated waste, 
non-implementation of bye-laws and non-collection of conservancy charges, 
were observed. In regard to functions relating to sanitation, lack of an organised 
underground sewerage and drainage system and drainage system not being 
connected to households, limited or no role of ULBs except Kolkata MC in the 
O&M of Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) were noticed in audit. In performing 
functions relating to urban health, non-functioning of the Urban Primary Health 
Centres (UPHCs) as per norms and vacancies in various posts, including Medical 
Officers, in UPHCs, were noticed. These deficiencies affected the discharge of 
the devolved functions by ULBs.
6.1 Water Supply
6.1.1 Efficacy in supply of water by the ULBs
Although adequate provisions were made in the Municipal laws, by empowering 
ULBs to discharge functions, relating to supply of water, Audit noted that not all 
the selected ULBs had achieved self-reliance in discharging this function, as on 
31 March 2021, as discussed in succeeding paragraphs.
6.1.1.1 Source of supply of water
Section 29 of the KMC Act, Section 63 of the WBM Act and Section 97 of the 
WBMC Act, describe water supply as an obligatory function for Municipalities, 
Kolkata MC and other Municipal Corporations in West Bengal. These Sections 
also require the ULBs to make adequate provisions relating to construction and 
maintenance of water-works and providing, by itself or by agency, means for 
supply of water for public and private purposes.
Section 234 of the KMC Act, Section 226 of the WBM Act and Section 176 of 
the WBMC Act, provide that it is the duty of the ULB to supply wholesome 
water to its inhabitants. Supply of wholesome water to the public, by erecting 
hydrants, stand-posts or through other conveniences to public, has also 
been covered in Section 237 of the KMC Act, Section 179 of the WBMC  
Act and Section 233 of the WBM Act.

72
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Section 236 of the KMC Act and Section 178 of the WBMC Act, provide for 
supply of wholesome water to huts and slums.
Audit observed that:
(i) Out of the 27 test-checked ULBs, only ten had their own water plants/
treatment plants, for supply of wholesome water to their inhabitants. However, 
out of these ten ULBs, two ULBs ( Asansol MC and Uttarpara-Kotrung) 
were also dependent on other sources, viz. parastatals, other departments and 
organisations, for supply of potable water.
(ii) Audit further noted that the remaining 17 test-checked ULBs were 
dependent on water plants, under the control of parastatals/departments, for the 
supply of water. Details of the sources of supply of water, in the test-checked 
ULBs, are given in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Source of Supply of Water in the 27 test-checked ULBs
Name 
of the 
Source
Water Plant / 
Facility owned 
by ULB
Water Treatment Plant/Facility operated by 
Parastatals / Departments
Tube-wells Ground Water
PHED KMDA
Any other 
Development 
Authority/
Organisation
No. and 
Name 
of the 
ULB
10 ULBs:
1. Asansol MC
2. Contai
3. Coochbehar
4. Kalna
5. Katwa
6. Kolkata MC,
7. Midnapore
8. Ramjibonpur
9. Suri
10. Uttarpara-
Kotrung
10 ULBs:
1. Asansol MC
2. Bongaon
3. Gobardanga
4. Habra
5. Jhalda
6. Kharagpur,
7. Mal
8. Raiganj
9. Siliguri MC
10. Tufanganj
7 ULBs:
1. Bansberia*
2. Barasat*
3. Barrackpore*
4. Konnagar*
5. Panihati
6. Pujali
7. Uttarpara-
Kotrung*
1 ULB:
1. Asansol MC by 
Steel Authority 
of India Limited 
(SAIL)
20 ULBs:
1. Asansol MC
2. Bansberia
3. Barasat
4. Barrackpore
5. Contai
6. Coochbehar
7. Gobardanga
8. Habra
9. Jhalda
10. Katwa
11. Kharagpur
12. Kolkata MC
13. Konnagar
14. Mal
15. Midnapore
16. Panihati
17. Pujali
18. Siliguri MC
19. Suri
20. Tufanganj
4 ULBs:
1. Barasat,
2. Barrackpore
3. Coochbehar
4. Uttarpara- 
Kotrung
(Source: information furnished by the ULBs)
* Trans-municipal water supply project with other ULBs, implemented by the KMDA
The Kaliyaganj Municipality did not furnish information.

73
Chapter VI: Performance in the discharge of devolved functions
Seventeen ULBs, which were dependent on parastatals/departments, 
for the supply of water, had not taken over the water plants from the 
parastatals/departments. Six ULBs stated reasons for the same, as given in  
Table 6.2.
Table 6.2: Reasons due to which six ULBs could not take over water 
plants from parastatals/department
Sl. 
No. Name of the ULB Parastatal/ 
Department Reasons for not taking hand-over
1. Gobardanga PHED Infrastructure not available in the ULB
2. Habra PHED ULB does not have the infrastructure for 
O&M
3. Mal PHED Financial constraints of the ULB
4. Panihati KMDA Insufficient infrastructure and funds crisis 
in the ULB
5. Pujali KMDA Constraint of funds for maintaining 
and operating the project, with repair 
and up-gradation, as well as manpower  
constraints 
6. Tufanganj PHED Paucity of funds and technical expertise for 
maintenance
(Source: information furnished by the ULBs)
(iii) Out of the 27 test-checked ULBs, Audit noticed that five ULBs viz., 
Bongaon, Jhalda, Jiaganj-Azimganj, Mal and Raiganj municipalities had no 
role in supply of water to its citizens. In Bongaon and Jhalda municipalities, 
water was supplied by PHED from its own water plant; house connections do 
not exist in these ULBs. In Jiaganj-Azimganj Municipality the only source of 
water is shallow hand tube-wells, the ULB has no role in drilling of tube-wells 
or granting permission for the same. Mal and Raiganj municipalities were also 
dependent on PHED for water supply.
(iv) Further, twenty ULBs were dependent on tube-wells and four ULBs 
on ground water sources, in addition to their own water plant/water plants 
of parastatals/department, which was indicative of the insufficiency of water 
supply from water plants (Table 6.1).
Barrackpore, Barasat, Pujali  and Siliguri MC admitted (July to December 
2021) the fact of insufficient water supply in their areas.
ULBs which did not have own water plants, were dependent on parastatals/
departments for supply of water. Due to insufficient supply of water, the 
Barrackpore Municipality stated that it had to rely on ground water sources, 
while the Pujali Municipality informed that local people of the municipal 
area were dependent on deep tube-wells, hand pumps etc. Siliguri MC 
stated that it had decided to install tube-wells, to deal with the scarcity of  
water.

74
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
In 13 ULBs, new water supply projects were planned/undertaken under the 
AMRUT scheme, State fund or from other grants funds 58. Four ULBs (Contai, 
Coochbehar, Gobardanga and Pujali), stated that there was no water supply 
project in the pipeline, while eight ULBs ( Barasat, Jhalda, Kalna, Katwa, 
Konnagar, Ramjibonpur, Siliguri MC and Suri) did not furnish the requested 
information.
6.1.1.2 Storage and distribution of water
Section 243 of the KMC Act and Section 187 of the WBMC Act, empower 
the KMC and other Corporations, to construct, operate, maintain, manage 
or purchase or take on lease waterworks or right to store or take and convey 
water, either within or outside the Corporation area. Sections 251 and 252 of the 
KMC Act provide for laying of mains and service mains, respectively; similar 
provisions in regard to other Corporations, are contained in Sections 195 and 
196 of the WBMC Act.
In terms of Section 228 of the WBM Act, municipalities, either singly, or jointly 
with any other ULB or local authority, within or without a municipal area, may 
undertake construction of water-works and operate, manage or maintain any 
water-works, subject to approval of the State Government.
Audit noted that -
 (i) Storage of water, in reservoirs, was being done by parastatals, in 12 of the 
test-checked ULBs, as furnished in Table 6.3.
Table 6.3: Storage of water by parastatals
Sl. No. Parastatal/Department Name of the ULB
1.
KMDA
Bansberia
2. Barasat
3. Panihati
4. Pujali
5. MED Coochbehar
6.
PHED
Gobardanga
7. Habra
8. Jhalda
9. Kharagpur
10. Mal
11. Siliguri MC
12. Tufanganj
(Source: information furnished by the ULBs)
 (ii) In two ULBs ( Asansol MC and Barrackpore), both the ULBs and the 
parastatals, were managing storage of water. Nine ULBs ( Contai, Kalna, 
58 AMRUT grants: Bansberia, Barrackpore, Panihati and Uttarpara-Kotrung municipalities 
through KMDA; Asansol MC, Bongaon, Habra and Midnapore municipalities through MED. 
Special BRGF grants:  Kharagpur Municipality through MED. State Funds:  Jiaganj-
Azimganj, Mal and Tufanganj municipalities through MED. UIDSSMT and State Funds: 
Raiganj Municipality, through MED. Kolkata MC, through various government grants and 
own source revenue. 

75
Chapter VI: Performance in the discharge of devolved functions
Katwa, Kolkata  MC, Konnagar, Midnapore, Ramjibonpur, Suri  and 
Uttarpara-Kotrung) were managing reservoirs themselves. In three ULBs 
(Katwa, Ramjibonpur and Uttarpara-Kotrung ), the reservoirs had been 
constructed by parastatals (PHED, KMDA and ADDA) but had, later 
on, been handed over to the ULBs. The Bongaon, Raiganj and Jiaganj-
Azimganj municipalities had no role in the storage of water. Kaliyaganj 
Muncipality did not furnish reply.
 (iii) In eleven ULBs, the construction, operation and maintenance of pipelines, 
for distribution of water, was being carried out by parastatals (details 
in Table 6.4). In four ULBs, viz. Asansol MC, Bansberia, Habra and 
Kharagpur, the work was being executed both-by the ULBs, as well 
as the parastatals, while nine ULBs had been managing the said work 
themselves.
Table 6.4: Details of distribution of water by parastatals in 11 ULBs
Sl. No. Parastatal/Department Name of the ULB
1.
KMDA
Panihati
2. Pujali
3.
MED
Coochbehar
4. Kalna
5.
PHED
Bongaon
6. Gobardanga
7. Jhalda
8. Mal
9. Raiganj
10. Siliguri MC
11. Tufanganj
(Source: information furnished by the ULBs)
Barasat Municipality had informally taken over the operation and maintenance 
of pipeline from KMDA . Kaliyaganj Muncipality did not furnish reply and 
Jiaganj-Azimganj Municipality had no role in water supply.
6.1.1.3 Water connections
Section 254 of the KMC Act, Section 198 of the WBMC Act and Section 231 of 
the WBM Act, vest power on the ULBs, to allow connections to premises, from 
mains or supply mains.
ULBs, are required to ensure water connections to households, for discharging 
their obligatory function relating to supply of wholesome water. The Handbook 
of Service Level Benchmarking was published (2006) by the Ministry of Urban 
Development (MoUD), Government of India, for achieving the goal of improved 
service delivery to citizens.
Twenty-five ULBs furnished information regarding the number of households, 
where water connections had been provided, as on 31 March 2021. Details 
regarding the percentage of households with water connections, are given in 
Chart 6.1.

76
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Chart 6.1: Percentage of Households with water connections, 
in selected ULBs, as on 31 March 2021
 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.36 
4.64 
16.38 
19.00 
19.31 
22.67 
29.50 
30.37 
33.61 
37.08 
39.00 
43.47 
52.47 
55.06 
60.47 
64.73 
68.44 
68.54 
68.81 
86.63 
93.48 
0.00 10.00 20.00 30.00 40.00 50.00 60.00 70.00 80.00 90.00 100.00
Bongaon
Jhalda
Jiaganj-Azimganj
Raiganj
Jamuria (Asansol MC)
Gobardanga
Contai
Habra
Asansol (Asansol MC)
Raniganj (Asansol MC)
Kulti (Asansol MC)
Siliguri MC
Tufanganj
Uttarpara-Kotrung
Midnapore
Suri
Katwa
Barasat
Pujali
Kharagpur
Bansberia
Konnagar
Barrackpore
Coochbehar
Ramjibonpur
Percentage of Households with water connections
(Source: data furnished by ULBs. The Jamuria, Kulti  and Raniganj municipal areas 
have been merged with the Asansol Municipal Corporation. However, data in regard to 
these municipalities was furnished to Audit separately and, hence, they have been shown 
separately in Chart 6.1.)
Five ULBs, viz., Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Kolkata  MC, Mal and Panihati, did not 
furnish data in this regard. It is evident from Chart 6.1 that, none of the test-
checked ULBs had provided water connections to all the households, therefore, 
it could not be ensured that every household had access to clean water.
6.1.1.4 Quantity, continuity and quality of water supply
The Handbook of Service Level Benchmarking indicators fixed the quantity 
and continuity of water supply, at 135 litres per capita per day  (lpcd) and 24 
hours, respectively. The handbook also fixed ensuring quality of water supplied 
at 100 per cent. The status of quantity and continuity of water supply, in the test-
checked ULBs, are depicted in Charts 6.2 and 6.3.

77
Chapter VI: Performance in the discharge of devolved functions
Chart 6.2: Quantity of water supplied
135 130 125 120
112
100 100
80 80
74 70 70 70 70
45 40
20
10 9.60 7.15
00 5 10 15
23
35 35
55 55
61 65 65 65 65
90 95
115
125 125.40127.85
135
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Quantity of water supplied (Lpcd)
 Gap in supply (Lpcd)
20
9 8.5 8.3 8 7 7 6.5 6 6 6 6 6 5 5 5 5 4
2 1 1 0
0
5
10
15
20
25
Supply Hours
Chart 6.3: Continuity of water supply (in hours)
135 130 125 120
112
100 100
80 80
74 70 70 70 70
45 40
20
10 9.60 7.15
00 5 10 15
23
35 35
55 55
61 65 65 65 65
90 95
115
125 125.40127.85
135
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Quantity of water supplied (Lpcd) Gap in supply (Lpcd)
20
9 8.5 8.3 8 7 7 6.5 6 6 6 6 6 5 5 5 5 4
2 1 1 0
0
5
10
15
20
25
Supply Hours
It is evident that only one ULB ( Bansberia) had achieved the benchmark of 
supplying 135 lpcd water. With regard to continuity of the supply of water, none 
of the ULBs had achieved the benchmark.
Audit also found that only ten ULBs (Asansol MC, Barasat, Contai, Coochbehar, 
Katwa, Kharagpur, Kolkata MC, Midnapore, Ramjibonpur and Suri) had tested 
the quality of water supplied. Two of these ULBs viz. Barasat and Suri had 

78
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
conducted such tests, as and when needed. 12 ULBs had not conducted quality 
tests of the water supplied. Four ULBs ( Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Konnagar and 
Siliguri MC) did not furnish the desired information. Jiaganj-Azimganj had no 
role in water supply and did not conduct any tests.
6.1.1.5 Metering of water connections
Section 262 of the KMC Act, Section 206 of the WBMC Act and Section 226 
of the WBM Act, state that ULBs may provide water meters and attach the 
same in the supply mains, in the premises connected with the service mains. 
The expenses of providing and attaching meters are to be borne by the ULBs. 
Section 265 of the KMC Act and Section 209 of the WBMC Act, provide for 
payment, as per the reading of the water meter. The Handbook of Service Level 
Benchmarking fixed the target of extent of metering of water connections at 100 
per cent.
Audit observed that only five ULBs, viz. Asansol MC, Coochbehar, Contai, 
Kharagpur and Pujali, had provided water-meters. Contai and Pujali had 
provided water-meters to households but were not taking reading of these 
meters.
The Kharagpur and Coochbehar municipalities had provided only a few meters 
and had not generated bills for consumers, while Asansol MC had provided 
meters for bulk water connections, apartments and commercial properties only.
Fifteen ULBs59 did not provide water-meters. Six ULBs (Bansberia, Barrackpore, 
Gobardanga, Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Ramjibonpur ) did not furnish the desired 
information. Jiaganj-Azimganj Municipality had no house connections and, 
hence, water meters had not been installed.
6.1.1.6 Collection of fees for supply of water
Section 234 of the KMC Act, Section 176 of the WBMC Act and Section 226 
of the WBM Act, empower ULBs to collect fees for supply of water, at rates 
determined by regulations. The Handbook of Service Level Benchmarking also 
pegged the cost recovery in water supply services at 100 per cent.
Audit observed that only three ULBs, viz., Kharagpur, Ramjibonpur and Siliguri 
MC, had collected fees for supply of water, from domestic consumers and seven 
ULBs (Asansol MC, Katwa, Kharagpur, Kolkata MC, Konnagar, Ramjibonpur 
and Siliguri MC), had collected the same from non-domestic consumers.
Twenty ULBs60 had not collected water charges from domestic consumers and 
sixteen ULBs61 had not collected the same from non-domestic consumers.
Three ULBs ( Gobardanga, Kaliyaganj, Kalna ) did not furnish the requested 
information. Jiaganj-Azimganj Municipality had no house connections and, 
hence, fees for supply of water had not been collected.
59 Barasat, Bongaon, Habra, Jhalda, Katwa, Kolkata MC, Konnagar, Mal, Midnapore, Panihati, 
Raiganj, Siliguri MC, Suri, Tufanganj and Uttarpara-Kotrung.
60 Asansol MC, Bansberia, Barasat, Barrackpore, Bongaon, Contai, Coochbehar, Habra, Jhalda, 
Katwa, Kolkata MC, Konnagar, Mal, Midnapore, Panihati, Pujali, Raiganj, Suri, Tufanganj 
and Uttarpara-Kotrung.
61 Bansberia, Barasat, Barrackpore, Bongaon, Contai, Coochbehar, Habra, Jhalda, Mal, 
Midnapore, Panihati, Pujali, Raiganj, Suri, Tufanganj and Uttarpara-Kotrung.

79
Chapter VI: Performance in the discharge of devolved functions
The ULBs were empowered by the State Acts for the devolved function relating 
to supply of water to citizens. However, Audit observed the following issues 
affecting the efficacy of delivery of water supply services:
 i. The ULBs were still largely dependent on parastatals like KMDA and 
PHED for treatment and supply of water for their citizens. As a result, they 
could not achieve the Service Level Benchmarks with respect to per capita 
supply of water, continuity of water supply.
 ii. The ULBs were unable to take over the projects from the parastatals due to 
fund constraint and lack of required infrastructure and expertise.
 iii. ULBs failed to provide connections to all households although this is 
mandated in the Act.
 iv. The ULBs did not take initiative to levy and collect fees for supply of 
water from domestic and non-domestic consumers to meet the revenue 
expenses relating to supply of water.
In the Exit Conference (October 2022), the Department stated that it had been 
trying to assess the insufficiency, in regard to the function relating to supply of 
water and bridge the gaps through AMRUT projects.
Recommendation:
 21. Government may provide adequate funds and functionaries to 
ULBs, to enable them to construct and maintain water supply 
projects and also to take possession of water supply projects from 
parastatals/other departments.
 22. Government may introduce regular monitoring, for achieving the 
Service Level Benchmarks, to ensure supply of quality water to 
citizens.
 23. ULBs may levy and collect fees for supply of water from both 
domestic and non-domestic consumers, as per extant rules. 
Metering of water may also be taken up, to charge fees based on 
consumption and increase the own sources of revenue. 
6.2 Solid Waste Management
The Acts governing ULBs had detailed provisions regarding management of 
solid waste by the ULBs. However, the detailed provisions, for Municipal 
Corporations governed by the WBMC Act, 2006, were added under Section 
300, by the WBMC (Second Amendment) Act, 2018, published in December 
2018.
The ULBs are also required to comply with Solid Waste Management Rules, 
2016, by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFC), 
Government of India, which came into force from 8 April 201662.
These rules apply to ULBs, census towns, notified areas, notified industrial 
townships, areas under the control of the Indian Railways, airports, ports and 
harbours, defence establishments, State and Central government organisations 
etc. and to every domestic, institutional, commercial and any other non-
62 In exercise of the powers conferred by the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and in 
supersession of the Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000.

80
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
residential solid waste generator situated in the areas (except to generators of 
Bio-Medical waste, e-waste, industrial waste, hazardous waste etc).
These rules delineate the duties and responsibilities of local bodies, as also of the 
department dealing with Urban Development in the State Government, District 
Magistrates, State and Central Pollution Control Boards and other authorities.
Compliance of the ULBs, with these rules and their efficacy in performing the 
functions conferred on them, by the municipal laws of the State, are discussed 
in the succeeding paragraphs.
6.2.1  Efficacy of ULBs in the delivery of solid waste management 
related services
6.2.1.1 Preparation of plan for solid waste management
As per Rule 11 of SWM Rules, the State Government was required to prepare 
a State Policy and Solid Waste Management Strategy for the State, within one 
year from the notification of the said rules. Further, as per Rule 15(a) of the 
rules, ibid, ULBs were required to prepare a SWM plan, within six months 
from the date of notification of the State Policy and Strategy on Solid Waste 
Management and submit a copy of the same to the UD&MAD.
The UD&MAD published the State Policy and Strategy on Solid Waste 
Management in January 2018. In compliance with provisions contained in SWM 
Rules, ULBs were required to prepare their SWM plans within six months, i.e. 
by July 2018.
Audit noticed that the Kolkata MC had published (September 2019) a Master 
Plan for SWM and the Kharagpur Municipality had prepared (November 2017) 
a Detailed Project Report (DPR) for SWM, under the Swachh Bharat Mission. 
Apart from these, seven ULBs63 had prepared plans/DPRs for SWM functions, 
either solely or as a part of other projects, at different points of time, but none 
of the plans were in accordance with the provisions of the SWM Rules. The 
remaining 18 ULBs had not prepared plans for SWM.
Audit noted that the State Urban Development Agency (SUDA) had engaged 
agencies for preparation of micro-plans, as per SWM Rules, 2016, in all the 124 
ULBs (except Kolkata MC), by inviting Expression of Interest (EoI) in May 
2019, and issued work orders, to selected agencies, between September and 
December 2019. However, the micro-plans/DPRs, prepared by the agencies, 
were not distributed among the ULBs, to implement the SWM functions, as per 
plans.
Further, SUDA stated (September 2022) that the final DPRs of all the ULBs 
(except Kolkata MC, for which DPR had not been prepared by the micro 
planning agency), had been approved by the State Level Task Force (SLTF) of 
UD&MAD, but were yet to be placed before the State High Power Committee 
(SHPC), for its approval. The DPRs would be circulated to the respective ULBs 
only after the approval of SHPC.
It is evident that the ULBs did not receive the micro plans/DPRs prepared by the 
agencies (as on September 2022) which had resulted in delay in implementation 
63 Asansol MC, Bansberia, Habra, Konnagar, Panihati, Siliguri MC and Uttarpara-Kotrung. 

81
Chapter VI: Performance in the discharge of devolved functions
of the SWM function, in conformity with the SWM Rules. Further, due to delay 
in the engagement of agencies, the planning process had been delayed by three 
years (as of September 2022).
6.2.1.2 Collection and segregation of waste
Section 29 of the KMC Act, Section 63 of the WBM Act and Section 97 of the 
WBMC Act, describe the collection, removal and disposal of solid waste, as an 
obligatory function for municipalities, KMC and other Municipal Corporations 
in West Bengal. Sections 322 and 329 of the KMC Act, Section 260 of the 
WBM Act and Section 300 of the WBMC Act, also reiterate the responsibility 
of the ULBs in the management of solid waste.
(i) The Handbook of Service Level Benchmarks, published by MoUD, fixed 
the collection efficiency i.e. percentage of waste collection vis-à-vis generation, 
at 100 per cent.
Audit noted that the total daily waste, generated by the 27 test-checked ULBs, 
was 7,080.97 Tonnes per day (TPD), out of which 6,695.09 TPD was being 
collected daily by the ULBs. Thus, the overall collection efficiency was 94.55 
per cent (Chart 6.5) . The individual collection efficiencies of the 27 test-
checked ULBs are given in Chart 6.4.
Chart 6.4: Collection efficiency of 27 test-checked ULBs
100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
99.28
99.06
98.04
96.72
96.03
95.12
94.24
92.31
92.31
91.67
90.00
89.83
89.80
88.83
86.34
85.00
83.33
76.77
65.00
60.00
8.90
0.00
Collection Efficiency of ULBs
In case of the Pujali Municipality, the collection efficiency was ‘nil’, since the 
Municipality had no role in the collection, segregation and disposal of solid 
waste. In the case of Ramjbonpur Municipality, the collection efficiency was 
8.90 per cent only.
(ii) Rule 15 (b) of the SWM Rule mandates ULBs to arrange for door-to-
door collection of segregated solid waste from all households, including slums 
and informal settlements, commercial, institutional and other non-residential 
premises.
Out of the 27 test-checked ULBs, 22 had introduced door-to-door collection and 
12 had implemented segregation of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) at source. 

82
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
The status of door-to-door collection and segregation of MSW at source, is 
depicted in Table 6.5.
Table 6.5: Status of implementation of door-to-door collection and 
segregation at source
Door to Door Collection Segregation at Source
Implemented Not implemented Implemented Not implemented
Number and 
names of the 
ULBs
22 ULBs:
Bansberia, Barasat, 
Barrackpore, 
Bongaon, Contai, 
Coochbehar, 
Gobardanga, Habra, 
Jiaganj-Azimganj, 
Kaliyaganj, Kalna, 
Kharagpur, Kolkata 
MC, Konnagar, Mal, 
Midnapore, Panihati, 
Raiganj Suri, Siliguri 
MC, Tufanganj and 
Uttarpara-Kotrung
4 ULBs:
Asansol MC, 
Katwa, Pujali and 
Ramjibonpur
12 ULBs:
Barasat, 
Barrackpore, 
Jiaganj-Azimganj, 
Kalna, Katwa, 
Kharagpur, Kolkata 
MC, Konnagar, 
Ramjibonpur, 
Siliguri MC, Suri 
and Uttarpara-
Kotrung
14 ULBs:
Asansol MC, Bansberia, 
Bongaon, Contai, 
Coochbehar, Gobardanga, 
Habra, Kaliyaganj, Mal, 
Midnapore, Panihati, 
Pujali, Raiganj and 
Tufanganj
(Source: data furnished by the ULBs)
The Asansol MC and Ramjibonpur Municipalities were collecting Municipal 
Solid Waste from vats/community bins only. The Jhalda Municipality did not 
furnish reply.
(iii) For segregation at source, separate storage of waste is necessary. Rule 
4(a) of the SWM Rules states that it is the responsibility of the waste generators 
to segregate and store the waste generated by them, in three separate streams, 
namely, bio-degradable, non-biodegradable and domestic hazardous wastes, in 
suitable bins and to handover the segregated waste to authorised waste pickers or 
waste collectors, as per directions or notifications issued by the local authorities, 
from time to time.
Audit, however, observed that, out of the 27 test-checked ULBs, only 20 64 had 
supplied bins to households. Further, out of 20 ULBs, 14 65 had issued only 
two types of bins, instead of three, to households, to encourage segregation at 
source. Only Siliguri MC has supplied three types of bins, although they were 
supplied at different points of time. Out of the 20 ULBs, three ( Barrackpore, 
Coochbehar and Raiganj) did not specify the type of bins supplied and two did 
not furnish information.
Five ULBs (Asansol MC, Bansberia, Gobardanga, Midnapore and Pujali) had 
not issued bins to households and two ULBs viz. Habra and Jhalda did not 
furnish the requested information.
Audit also observed that SUDA had centrally procured two types of bins and 
supplied them to the ULBs.
64 Barasat, Barrackpore, Bongaon, Contai, Coochbehar, Jiaganj-Azimganj, Kaliyaganj, Kalna, 
Katwa, Kharagpur, Kolkata MC, Konnagar, Mal, Panihati, Raiganj, Ramjibonpur, Siliguri 
MC, Suri, Tufanjganj and Uttarpara-Kotrung. 
65 Barasat, Bongaon, Contai, Jiaganj-Azimganj, Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Katwa, Kharagpur, Mal, 
Panihati, Ramjibonpur, Suri, Tufanganj and Uttarpara-Kotrung. 

83
Chapter VI: Performance in the discharge of devolved functions
Due to non-supply of three different types of bins, the objective of segregation 
at source could not be achieved in a proper manner.
6.2.1.3 Carriage of solid waste
Section 324 of the KMC Act, Section 265 of the WBM Act and Section 300E 
of the WBMC Act, provide for arrangement of vehicles or other suitable means, 
for removal of solid waste.
(i) Audit noted that all the 27 test-checked ULBs had primary and secondary 
waste collection vehicles 66 for transportation of MSW. In case of 22 ULBs 67, 
secondary waste collection vehicles had been provided by SUDA. Out of 
these 22 ULBs, 10 ULBs 68 were solely dependent on SUDA (and KMDA, in 
case of Bansberia Municipality), for secondary waste collection vehicles. In 
case of two ULBs ( Kharagpur and Kolkata MC), secondary waste collection 
vehicles had been purchased from the funds provided by SUDA. However, the 
Gobardanga, Jhalda and Panihati municipalities did not furnish any reply in this  
regard.
The Pujali Municipality had no role in solid waste management, yet SUDA 
had supplied it six secondary waste collection vehicles (tipper/dump truck). 
The ULB had purchased one secondary waste collection vehicle (movable 
compactor), from the funds provided by SUDA. Since the ULB was unable to 
use the vehicles, these six vehicles were lying idle, while the movable compactor 
was transferred to the Maheshtala Municipality.
(ii) In 12 ULBs 69, the primary waste collection vehicles were not 
compartmentalized, which resulted in mixing of waste and defeated the objective 
of source segregation, segregated collection and carriage of solid waste. In six 
ULBs viz. Contai, Kalna, Katwa, Konnagar, Mal and Uttarpara-Kotrung, the 
primary waste collection vehicles were compartmentalized. No information 
was available in regard to eight ULBs. In the Pujali Municipality, the primary 
waste collection vehicles had not been put to use.
6.2.1.4  Sanitary land filling, dumping and processing of solid waste
Section 325 of the KMC Act, Section 267 of the WBM Act and Section 300G of 
the WBMC Act, provide for disposal of solid waste at places within or outside 
municipal areas.
66 ‘Primary collection’ refers to collection of waste stored at source i.e. from individual households 
and shops, offices and any other non-residential premises (door-to-door collection) to carry 
to another point determined by ULB/transfer stations or dump site or waste processing site. 
The vehicles used in primary collection, such as containerized push carts, tricycles or small 
mechanised vehicles, are called primary collection vehicles. ‘Secondary collection’ refers 
to picking up of waste from community bins, waste storage depots, or transfer stations and 
transporting it to waste processing sites or to the final disposal sites. The vehicle used in 
secondary collection, such as trucks and compactors, are called secondary collection vehicles.
67 Asansol MC, Bansberia, Barasat, Barrackpore, Bongaon, Contai, Coochbehar, Habra, 
Jiaganj-Azimganj, Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Katwa, Konnagar, Mal, Midnapore, Pujali, Raiganj, 
Ramjibonpur, Siliguri MC, Suri, Tufanganj and Uttarpara-Kotrung. 
68 Asansol MC, Barasat, Bongaon, Contai, Jiaganj-Azimganj, Konnagar, Midnapore, Pujali, 
Raiganj and Ramjibonpur. 
69 Bansberia, Barasat, Barrackpore, Bongaon, Coochbehar, Jiaganj-Azimganj, Kaliyaganj, 
Kolkata MC, Raiganj, Siliguri MC, Suri and Tufanganj. 

84
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Section 327 of the KMC Act, Section 268 of the WBM Act and Section 300H 
of the WBMC Act, empower ULBs to construct, acquire, operate, maintain, 
develop and manage any work, within or outside the municipal area, for the 
purpose of receiving, storing, treating, processing and disposing solid waste 
or converting such solid waste into compost or other matter and run it on a 
commercial basis.
Section 328 of the KMC Act, Section 268 of the WBM Act and Section 300H 
of the WBMC Act, also empower ULBs to utilise solid waste, for filing up any 
well, tank or low land, on a commercial basis, within or outside the municipal 
area.
Rule 15 (w) of the SWM Rules, also mandates the ULBs to undertake, on their 
own or through any other agency, construction, operation and maintenance of 
sanitary landfills70 and associated infrastructure, for disposal of residual waste. 
Rule 15 (zh) ibid directs the ULBs to stop land filling or dumping of mixed waste, 
while Rule 15 (zi) ibid directs allowing only the non-usable, non-recyclable, 
non-biodegradable, non-combustible and non-reactive inert waste and pre-
processed reject and residue from waste processing facilities, to go to sanitary 
landfills, to achieve the desired objective of zero waste going to landfills.
As per Rule 22 ibid, the timeline for identification, procurement and setting up 
of solid waste processing facilities and sanitary landfill facilities, was fixed at 
two years. For ULBs having population below one lakh, the timeline was fixed 
at three years.
Further, the criteria for sanitary landfill sites have been delineated in Schedule–I 
of the  SWM Rules, which, inter alia, state that the site shall be 100 meters away 
from rivers, 200 meters away from ponds, 200 meters away from highways etc. 
The landfill sites are required to be fenced, to prevent entry of unauthorised 
persons and stray animals.
Audit observed that:
(i) Out of 27 test-checked ULBs, only five ULBs had solid waste processing 
units, as on 31 March 2021, as per details given in Table 6.6.
Table 6.6: Details of solid waste processing in ULBs
Sl. No. ULB Details of solid waste the processing facility
1. Kolkata MC The ULB has one centralised compost plant of 500 TPD, at Dhapa in PPP 
model. The project was commissioned in 1999.
A 2-TPD plastic waste management plant as a pilot project at Dhapa, to 
convert plastic waste into benches, chairs etc. started in July 2021.
2. Siliguri MC The ULB has one compost plant, in the Public Private Partnership (PPP) 
model. The project was commissioned in 2019, with a capacity of 21 Tonnes 
per month.
70 ‘Sanitary land filling’ means the final and safe disposal of residual solid waste and inert wastes, 
on land, in a facility designed with protective measures against pollution of ground water, 
surface water and fugitive air dust, wind-blown litter, bad odour, fire hazard, animal menace, 
bird menace, pests or rodents, greenhouse gas emissions, persistent organic pollutants slope 
instability and erosion. ‘Dump sites’ refer to land utilised by a local body for disposal of solid 
waste, without following the principles of sanitary land filling. 

85
Chapter VI: Performance in the discharge of devolved functions
There is a compost plant processing unit in the Mal Municipality, which is non-
operational.
(ii) Only three ULBs, viz., Kalna, Konnagar and Uttarpara-Kotrung, have their 
own sanitary landfill facilities. The sanitary landfill of the Kalna Municipality 
is not yet operational. The common landfill site of Konnagar and Uttarpara-
Kotrung is located at the Regional Waste Management Centre (RWMC) under 
the Baidyabati Municipality. In case of Konnagar municipality, partially mixed 
waste, is dumped in the landfill sites.
(iii) Six ULBs ( Contai, Jhalda, Katwa, Mal, Ramjibonpur and Suri) do not 
have their own dumping sites for MSW. These six ULBs were dumping MSW 
on unauthorised lands, including on the side of railway tracks ( Mal), vested 
land (Suri) etc. The Asansol MC has five dumping sites, out of which two are 
not in possession of the ULB and are on Panchayat lands (Jamuria, Kulti). The 
dumping site at Kulti is an abandoned mining place.
The present dumping site at the Habra Municipality has been exhausted and the 
cluster project with Ashokenagar-Kalyangarh Municipality is not operational. 
As a result, the ULB presently dumps mixed waste on the land of the Social 
Welfare Department, Government of West Bengal, at Ward No. 24. Pujali 
Municipality has a dumping site at Ward No. 2, beside the Hooghly River, 
which, in turn, is an infringement of SWM Rules. The Municipality had to stop 
dumping there, due to objections raised by local people. The ULB had sent a 
proposal for purchase of land, to UD&MAD, in May 2021, to which response 
was awaited (as of August 2021).
Seventeen ULBs71 have own their dumping sites, where mixed solid waste is 
disposed.
(iv) The dumping sites of five selected ULBs (Barasat, Bongaon, Coochbehar, 
Jiaganj-Azimganj and Tufanganj) were not fenced. In case of 12 ULBs, the 
location of the dumping sites infringed the SWM Rules, due to non-observance 
of one or more than criteria, such as not being 100 m away from river or 200 m 
away from habitations or 200 m away from water supply etc.
71 Bansberia, Barasat, Barrackpore, Bongaon, Coochbehar, Gobnardanga, Jiaganj-Azimganj, 
Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Kharagpur, Kolkata MC, Midnapore, Panihati, Pujali, Raiganj, Siliguri 
MC and Tufanganj. 
Sl. No. ULB Details of solid waste the processing facility
3. Konnagar The ULB has a 42 TPD Capacity Composting Plant, constructed with aid 
from JICA, under the Kolkata Solid Waste Management Improvement 
Project (KSWMIP), a trans-municipal solid waste management project, 
with six ULBs, including Uttarpara-Kotrung. The project was constructed 
by KMDA and handed over to these ULBs. The project started operations 
from 2019.
The project has two parts - a Compost Plant and a Transfer Station. The 
residual 10.95 TPD waste (mixed waste/inert waste) is sent to the Regional 
Waste Management Centre (RWMC), at Baidyabati, for sanitary landfill.
4. Uttarpara-
Kotrung
This ULB is also a part of KSWMIP consisting of a Compost Plant and a 
Transfer Station. The residual waste (mixed waste) is sent to the RWMC, at 
Baidyabati, for sanitary landfill.
(Source: data furnished by the ULBs)

86
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
(v) In case of three ULBs, viz., Kalna, Katwa and Ramjibonpur, Bio-Medical 
waste was found to have been disposed, in the dumpsites, by private clinics and 
nursing homes.
(vi) During joint physical verification with officers/officials of the ULBs, 
heaps of waste at the dumping sites, burning of waste and dumping by the 
riverside, were noticed. Photographs taken during the joint physical verification 
are given below.
Exhibit 6.1: Burning of solid waste (prohibited 
as per SWM Rules, 2016), in an open dumping 
site of the Coochbehar Municipality.
Exhibit 6.2: Open municipal dumping 
ground in Ward No. 06, on the banks of 
Raidak River of the Tufanganj Municipality
Exhibit 6.3: Heaps of garbage at the 
Ramchandrapur dumping Ground, in the 
Panihati Municipality
Exhibit 6.4: Heaps of garbage at the 
Muktapukur dumping ground, in the 
Barrackpore Municipality
6.2.1.5  Framing of Bye-laws and collection of user fees
Section 95B of the WBM Act and Section 105 of the WBMC Act, empower 
ULBs to collect Special Conservancy Charges, from the waste generators, 
for providing municipal services in connection with the removal of solid 
waste. Section 210B of the KMC Act, however, provides for levy of Special 
Conservancy Charges on commercial and industrial establishments only. All 
these Sections also empower ULBs to determine the rates of such charges 
and make regulations specifying the occasions on which such charges may be 
imposed, the rates and mode of collection etc.
Section 332 of the KMC Act and Section 300B of the WBMC Act, empower 
ULBs to impose administrative charges or special cleansing service charges, for 

87
Chapter VI: Performance in the discharge of devolved functions
sweeping, cleansing of the premises and for collecting and final disposal of the 
rubbish and offensive matters, on the owner or the occupier of any premises, 
at such rates as may be determined by the CIC/MIC, from time to time. Any 
unpaid sum under this Section, is recoverable from the person concerned, as 
an arrear tax, under these Acts. Similar provisions for non-residential premises 
exist in Sections 333 of the KMC Act, Section 266 of the WBM Act and Section 
300B of the WBMC Act.
Section 338 of the KMC Act, Section 272 of the WBM Act and Section 300K 
of the WBMC Act, provide for imposition of fines, for depositing or throwing 
solid waste, in contravention of these Acts.
In terms of Rule 15 (e) of the SWM Rules, ULBs were required to frame bye-
laws, incorporating the provisions of these rules, within one year from the date 
of notification of these rules and also to ensure their timely implementation. The 
bye-laws were required to prescribe criteria for levying of spot fines for persons, 
who were littering or had failed to comply with the provisions of these rules, 
and delegate powers, to officers or local bodies, to levy spot fines, as per the 
bye-laws framed. Rule 15 (f) ibid, allows ULBs to impose and collect user fee 
from the waste generators.
Audit observed that only four ULBs, viz., the Asansol MC, Kolkata MC, Siliguri 
MC and Uttarpara-Kotrung Municipality, had prepared regulations/bye-laws 
for solid waste management activity. The bye-laws prepared by the Kolkata MC 
was approved and published (August 2020) by the State Government, while 
the bye-laws prepared by Asansol MC and Uttarpara-Kotrung had been sent 
(January 2021) to SUDA, for approval. Detailed information, about the bye-
laws prepared by the Siliguri MC, was not available. 22 ULBs72 had not framed 
bye-laws in regard to the SWM function.
Audit observed that four ULBs, viz. the Kolkata MC, Siliguri MC, Barrackpore 
and Konnagar, were collecting user fees from waste generators. The Asansol MC 
and Uttarpara-Kotrung had not collected user fees, although they had prepared 
bye-laws for the purpose. 20 ULBs 73 did not frame bye-laws and collect user 
charges.
Jhalda Municipality did not furnish the requested information.
6.2.1.6  Integration of waste pickers and Self-Help Groups in solid 
waste management
Rules 15(c) and (d) of the SWM Rules provide for integration of the organisations 
of waste pickers or informal waste collectors and Self-Help Groups (SHGs), to 
facilitate their participation in solid waste management, including in door-to-
door collection.
Audit noted that only eight ULBs (Barasat, Barrackpore, Bongaon, Konnagar, 
Pujali, Siliguri MC, Suri and Uttarpara-Kotrung) had formed SHGs and three 
72 Bansberia, Barasat, Barrackpore, Bongaon, Contai, Coochbehar, Gobardanga, Habra, 
Jiaganj-Azimganj, Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Katwa, Kharagpur, Konnagar, Mal, Midnapore, 
Panihati, Pujali, Raiganj, Ramjibonpur, Suri and Tufanganj. 
73 Bansberia, Barasat, Bongaon, Contai, Coochbehar, Gobardanga, Habra, Jiaganj-Azimganj, 
Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Katwa, Kharagpur, Mal, Midnapore, Panihati, Pujali, Raiganj, 
Ramjibonpur, Suri and Tufanganj. 

88
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
ULBs ( Bongaon, Habra, Uttarpara-Kotrung ) had established a system to 
recognise the waste pickers, for their integration in solid waste management 
activities.
Seventeen ULBs 74 did not form SHGs and two ULBs ( Jhalda and Jiaganj-
Azimganj) did not furnish the requested information.
6.2.1.7  Gap between waste generation and disposal, legacy waste 
and environmental compensation
(i) Audit found that there were gaps in the total waste generated, collected, 
dumped and processed in the 27 test-checked ULBs, (daily status as on 31 
March 2021), as shown in Chart 6.5:
Chart 6.5: Gap in solid waste management in the 27 test-checked ULBs
Chapter VI: Performance in the discharge of devolved functions 
 
97 
  
Rules 15(c) and (d) of the SWM Rule s provide for integration of the organisations of waste 
pickers or informal waste collectors and Self Help Groups, to facilitate their participation in solid 
waste management, including in door-to-door collection. 
Audit noted that o nly eight ULBs ( Barasat, Barrackpore, Bongaon, Konnagar, Pujali, Siliguri 
MC, Suri and Uttarpara-Kotrung) had formed SHGs and three ULBs ( Bongaon, Habra, 
Uttarpara-Kotrung) had established a system to recognise the waste pickers , for their integration 
in solid waste management activities.  
Seventeen ULBs 74 did not form SHGs and two ULBs ( Jhalda and Jiaganj -Azimganj) did not 
furnish the requested information.  
 
 
(i) Audit found that there were gaps in  the total waste generat ed, collect ed, dump ed and 
processed in the 27 test -checked ULBs, (daily status as on 31 March 2021 ), as shown in 
Chart 6.5: 
 
Chart 6.5: Gap in solid waste management in the 27 test-checked ULBs 
 
It is evident from Chart 6. 5 that there are huge gap s in the waste generat ed and 
processed, as well as in  disposal of the residual wast e into sanitary landfill sites.  The 
chart also depicts that 85 per cent of the waste generated daily and 89.93 per cent of the 
waste collected daily, was being unscientifically dumped; only 0.53 per cent of the waste 
generated daily and 0.56 per cent  of the waste collected daily was going to  sanitary 
landfills. 9.54 per cent  of the waste generated daily and 10.09 per cent  of the waste 
collected daily was going for  processing75. This indicated the inability of the ULBs in 
discharging their functions relating to solid waste management.  
                                                 
74   Asansol MC, Bansberia, Contai, Coochbehar, Gobardanga, Habra, Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Katwa, Kharagpur, 
Kolkata MC, Mal, Midnapore, Panihati, Raiganj, Ramjibonpur and Tufanganj.  
75  Unscientific dumping of 85 per cent of the waste generated daily, 89.93 per cent of the waste collected daily: 
(6,021.11/7,080.97) per cent and (6,021.11/6,695.09) per cent, respectively; 0.53 per cent of the waste generated 
7,080.97 6,695.09 6,021.11 
675.45 
37.42 
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
Waste Generated
(TPD)
 Waste Collected
(TPD)
Waste Dumped
(TPD)
Waste Processed
(TPD)
Waste for
Scientific
Sanitary Landfill
(TPD)
6.2.1.7  Gap between waste generation and disposal, legacy waste and   
  environmental compensation 
It is evident from Chart 6.5 that there are huge gaps in the waste generated and 
processed, as well as in disposal of the residual waste into sanitary landfill sites. 
The chart also depicts that 85 per cent of the waste generated daily and 89.93 per 
cent of the waste collected daily, was being unscientifically dumped; only 0.53 
per cent of the waste generated daily and 0.56 per cent of the waste collected 
daily was going to sanitary landfills. 9.54 per cent of the waste generated daily 
and 10.09 per cent of the waste collected daily was going for processing75. This 
indicated the inability of the ULBs in discharging their functions relating to 
solid waste management.
(ii) Audit also found that a huge quantity of legacy waste, with a volume of 
62,91,950 Metric Tonne (MT), had accumulated in 20 out of 27 ULBs, as shown 
in Chart 6.6.
74 Asansol MC, Bansberia, Contai, Coochbehar, Gobardanga, Habra, Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Katwa, 
Kharagpur, Kolkata MC, Mal, Midnapore, Panihati, Raiganj, Ramjibonpur and Tufanganj. 
75 Unscientific dumping of 85 per cent of the waste generated daily, 89.93 per cent of the waste 
collected daily: (6,021.11/7,080.97) per cent and (6,021.11/6,695.09) per cent, respectively; 
0.53 per cent of the waste generated daily and 0.56 per cent of the waste collected daily going 
to sanitary landfills: (37.42/7,080.97) per cent and (37.42/6,695.09) per cent, respectively; 
9.54 per cent of the waste generated daily and 10.09 per cent of the waste collected daily going 
for processing: (675.45/7,080.97) per cent and (675.45/6,695.09) per cent, respectively.

89
Chapter VI: Performance in the discharge of devolved functions
Chart 6.6: Legacy waste in 20 ULBs
There was more than 5,00,000 MT legacy waste, in case of Asansol MC 
(11,00,000 MT) and Kolkata MC (41,50,000 MT). In 2021-22, KMDA and 
SUDA had engaged agencies for bio-remediation/bio-mining of legacy waste, 
in all the ULBs.
(iii) Hon’ble National Green Tribunal (NGT), in its order dated 17 July 
2019, directed that, in case of failure on the part of the ULBs to commence 
bio-remediation of legacy waste, in compliance with Rule 22 of the SWM 
Rules (Sl. no. 11), from 1 November 2019, they would be liable to pay 
compensation.
In another order dated 17 January 2020 76, the Hon’ble NGT directed that, in 
case of non-compliance with Rule 22 of the SWM Rules, 2016 (Sl. nos. 1 to 
10)77, ULBs would be liable to pay compensation from 1 April 2020. Since 
95 ULBs were not able to comply with Hon’ble NGT’s direction with respect 
to legacy waste and 124 ULBs failed to comply with the observance of Rule 
22 of the SWM Rules, West Bengal State Pollution Control Board calculated 
the monthly compensation, to be paid by the respective ULBs, from 1 July 
202078.
Audit, however, noticed that, SUDA, on behalf of the ULBs, paid a total 
amount of ` 26.62 crore79, as environmental compensation, to the Environment 
Compensation Fund, under WBPCB, Department of Environment, Government 
of West Bengal, for the period July 2020 to May 2021, in compliance with 
directions of the Hon’ble NGT, from the interest of Swachh Bharat Mission 
76 Vide OA No. 519/2019 and 606/2018 respectively.
77 Serial nos. 1 to 10; deal with the timeframe for implementation, and state that necessary 
infrastructure for implementation of these rules shall be created by the local bodies and other 
concerned authorities, as the case may be, on their own, directly, or by engaging agencies, 
within the timeframe specified under these rules.
78 Due to the pandemic, the start of period of payment monthly compensation was fixed from 1 
July 2020. 
79 With respect to Rule 22 (Sl. No. 11) dealing with legacy waste: ` 5.16 crore for the period 
July 2020 to October 2020, paid in November 2020; With respect to Rule 22 (Sl. No. 1 to 
10) dealing with fresh waste : ` 6.52 crore for the period July 2020 to September 2020, paid 
in November 2020 and ` 11.48 crore for the period November 2020 to May 2021, paid in 
August 2021. ` 3.46 crore was also paid in three phases (July 2020, August 2020 and March 
2021), but the pertinent period of compensation was not furnished. ` 6.49 crore for the period 
November 2020 to May 2021, was yet to be paid by SUDA.

90
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
(SBM) funds 80. ` 6.49 crore pertaining to the compensation for the period 
November 2020 to May 2021, was yet to be paid by SUDA.
The ULBs were empowered by the State Acts to carry out the devolved function 
of SWM. Audit, however, noticed the following issues affecting the service 
delivery, with regard to solid waste management:
 i. ULBs were not given the power to prepare plans for solid waste management, 
although they were the implementing agencies at the grassroots level.
 ii. ULBs failed to implement segregation at source and door-to-door collection 
of solid waste. They were dependent on SUDA, for supply of bins, primary 
and secondary vehicles.
 iii. ULBs failed to estimate the projected waste generation, arrangement for 
processing units, dumping sites and land filling sites.
 iv. ULBs did not frame bye-laws and did not levy and collect user fees 
from waste generators, to meet their revenue expenses and reduce waste 
generation at source.
 v. ULBs did not take necessary steps for bio-remediation and bio-mining of 
legacy wastes.
In the Exit Conference (October 2022), the Department agreed that many 
ULBs were infringing the stipulation contained in SWM Rules, due to rapid 
urbanization, reaching out to dumping sites.
Recommendation:
 24. ULBs may take steps to reduce waste generation and achieve 
100 per cent segregation of waste at source, as well as collection, 
processing and disposal of segregated waste.
 25. ULBs may implement 100 per cent door-to-door collection of solid 
waste and involve waste pickers/Self Help Groups in this endeavour.
 26. ULBs may prepare and adopt bye-laws and implement levy and 
collection of user fees from waste generators.
 27. ULBs may be equipped with adequate manpower and funds, for 
effective implementation of the Solid Waste Management Rules. 
6.3  Sanitation and Public Health
The functions of ULBs relating to public health and sanitation, inter alia , 
include construction, maintenance and cleansing of sewers, drains, sewerage 
and drainage works, sewage treatment and preparation of compost manure from 
sewage and other refuse etc.
The urban public health delivery system remains one of the most important 
areas to be addressed under the public health function of the ULBs, since access 
to urban health facilities is severely restricted81 for the urban poor. The National 
Urban Health Mission (NUHM), launched in 2013, is a sub-mission under the 
National Health Mission (NHM), which aims to cater to the unique and diverse 
80 Interest accrued in the Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM) fund maintained at the bank account of 
SUDA.
81 NUHM Framework for Implementation, May 2013.

91
Chapter VI: Performance in the discharge of devolved functions
needs of the urban poor and vulnerable population. Cities having a population of 
50,000 and above and the district headquarters, were covered under the mission.
6.3.1   Efficacy in implementation of sewerage and drainage functions
In regard to the efficacy in delivery of sewerage and drainage related services, 
by ULBs, Audit observed as follows:
6.3.1.1  Sewerage and drainage network, outfall
As discussed in Paragraph 6.3, Section 63 of the WBM Act and Section 97 of 
the WBMC Act, describe the construction, maintenance and cleansing of sewers 
and drains, sewerage and drainage network (in the sphere of public works) and 
disposal of liquid waste (in the sphere of public health and sanitation), as obligatory 
functions. Section 29 of the KMC Act also has similar provisions but does not 
demarcate these functions as being separate from each other. Section 277 of the  
KMC Act and Section 245 of the WBM Act, also reiterate the role of the ULBs, 
in providing drainage and sewerage.
Audit, noted that-
(i) Only four ULBs had underground sewerage and drainage networks. 
The Kolkata Municipal Corporation had a sewerage and drainage network of 
approximately 480 km of piped sewer and 180 km of brick sewer. The Panihati 
Municipality had an underground sewerage network of 23 km, which was not 
functional. The Uttarpara-Kotrung Municipality had an underground sewerage 
network of 8.5 km, while the length of the sewerage network in Konnagar was 
0.6 km only. These ULBs also had a network of drainage systems, consisting of 
both open and closed surface drains.
In 20 ULBs82, the sewerage and drainage network consisted of a drainage system 
of open or closed surface drains, or both. Three ULBs ( Raiganj, Ramjibonpur 
and Siliguri MC) did not furnish information about their sewerage and drainage 
networks.
Underground Drainage System removes toxic materials and disease causing 
organisms by draining them away through the channels and do not cause 
contamination in soil. Open and closed drains may choke due to littering, 
leading to disruption of sewerage and drainage.
(ii) Audit also noted that, in 20 ULBs 83, the drains were finally discharging 
waste into rivers, canals or lowland near rivers. Nine out of these 20 ULBs 
(Bansberia, Barrackpore, Jiaganj-Azimganj, Katwa, Kolkata  MC, Konnagar, 
Panihati, Pujali and Uttarpara-Kotrung ), were finally discharging waste into 
the Hooghly River, directly or indirectly. Only seven (Bansberia, Barrackpore, 
Jiaganj-Azimganj, Katwa, Kolkata  MC , Konnagar and Panihati ) of these 
ULBs had functional/partially functional STPs, indicating that untreated 
sewage was being discharged into the Hooghly, as well as other rivers, causing 
82 Asansol MC, Bansberia, Barasat, Barrackpore, Bogaon, Contai, Coochbehar, Gobardanga, 
Habra, Jhalda, Jiaganj-Azimganj, Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Katwa, Kharagpur, Mal, Midnapore, 
Pujali, Suri and Tufanganj. 
83 Asansol MC, Bansberia, Barasat, Barrackpore, Bongaon, Coochbehar, Habra, Jhalda, 
Jiaganj-Azimganj, Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Katwa, Kolkata MC, Konnagar, Mal, Midnapore, 
Panihati, Pujali, Tufanganj and Uttarpara-Kotrung. 

92
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
pollution of water. Eleven ULBs84 were discharging into various rivers, canals 
and ditches.
Three ULBs viz. Kalna, Kharagpur and Suri, were discharging into roadside 
ditches and paddy fields. Four ULBs viz. Gobardanga, Raiganj, Ramjibonpur 
and Siliguri MC, did not furnish the requested information.
During joint physical verification with officers/officials of the ULBs, outfall 
of untreated sewers, falling into rivers and clogged open drains, was noticed. 
Some photographs taken during the joint physical verification are given 
below:
Exhibit 6.5: Municipal high drain with 
untreated sewage falling into the Ichamati 
River, in Ward No. 05 at the Bongaon 
Municipality
Exhibit 6.6: Untreated sewer outfall point 
into the Bhagirathi River, at Ward No. 07 
at the Jiaganj-Azimganj Municipality
Exhibit 6.7: Clogged drain at Ward no. 07, at 
the Tufanganj Municipality
Exhibit 6.8: Confluence of municipal 
drain with Torsha River, near Electric 
crematorium, at Ward No. 10, at the 
Coochbehar Municipality
84 Asansol MC, Barasat, Bongaon, Contai, Coochbehar, Habra, Jhalda, Kaliyaganj, Mal, 
Midnapore and Tufanganj. 

93
Chapter VI: Performance in the discharge of devolved functions
(iii) Audit found that, in 18 ULBs 85, houses had septic tanks with or without 
soak pit systems. Out of these 18 ULBs, in case of 12 ULBs 86, septic tanks, 
with/without soak pits, were connected with the drainage system. Five ULBs 
viz. Bansberia, Contai, Coochbehar, Kalna and Konnagar did not specify the 
system of discharge of household wastewater, while, in one ULB ( Tufanganj), 
there was no connection between the septic tanks/soak pits and the drainage 
system. Nine ULBs viz. Asansol MC, Bongaon, Gobardanga, Habra, Kolkata  
MC, Midnapore, Raiganj, Ramjibonpur and Siliguri  MC did not specify the 
sanitation system in the households.
(iv) Audit noted the prominent role of parastatals in the sewerage and drainage 
functions, in Municipal areas. In the Uttarpara-Kotrung Municipality, the 
operation and maintenance of the sewerage system is carried out by KMDA, 
while the operation and maintenance of the drainage system is carried out by the 
ULB. The rejuvenation of the lifting station and the pumping station were being 
carried out by KMDA. Further, in the Bansberia and Barasat municipalities, 
construction of the drainage system had been done by KMDA. In case of 
Barasat, the operation and maintenance function is being carried out by the 
ULB. The role of parastatals, in regard to Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs), is 
discussed in the next paragraph.
The operation and maintenance of sewerage and drainage system by parastatals 
undermined the devolution of power conferred on the ULBs as envisaged in 
the State Acts. During audit, it was noticed that ULBs did not estimate or were 
unaware of the liquid waste generated under area of its jurisdiction, which was 
a primary step, required towards mitigating the environmental issues caused by 
liquid wastes.
6.3.1.2  Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) and disposal of faecal sludge
Section 98 of the WBMC Act and Section 64 of the WBM Act delineate the 
treatment of sewage and preparation of compost manure from sewage and other 
refuse, as discretionary functions.
(i) Seven ULBs out of 27 test-checked ULBs had 13 STPs in their Municipal 
areas, out of which seven STPs were under the direct control of two ULBs 
(Kolkata MC and Jiaganj-Azimganj Municipality). Details of these STPs are 
given in Table 6.7.
85 Bansberia, Barasat, Barrackpore, Contai, Coochbehar, Jhalda, Jiaganj-Azimganj, Kaliyaganj, 
Kalna, Katwa, Kharagpur, Konnagar, Mal, Panihati, Pujali, Suri, Tufanganj and Uttarpara-
Kotrung. 
86 Barasat, Barrackpore, Jhalda, Jiaganj-Azimganj, Kaliyaganj, Katwa, Kharagpur, Mal, 
Panihati, Pujali, Suri, Uttarpara-Kotrung. 

94
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Table 6.7: STPs in Municipal Areas
Sl. 
No. ULB No. of 
STPs
Authority of 
Operation & 
Maintenance
Installed 
Capacity, 
in Million 
Litres per 
day (MLD)
Present 
Operational 
Capacity, 
in Million 
Litres per 
day (MLD)
Details of STPs
1. Bansberia 1 KMDA 0.3 0.3 Commissioned in July 2020. At 
present it is partially operational 
and is undergoing renovation by the 
KMDA, to make it fully operational.
The ULB has no role.
2. Barrackpore 2 KMDA 24 0 Operations are yet to be started.
The ULB has no role.
3. Jiaganj-
Azimganj
2 
(Oxidation 
ponds)
Jiaganj-
Azimganj 
Municipality 
1.39 0.94 Previously, the O&M was with 
PHED. PHED transferred them to 
the ULB, in March 2010. They are 
partially operational. At present, 
rejuvenation is being done by MED.
4. Katwa 1 PHED 4.36 2.36 Operational.
The ULB has no role.
5. Kolkata MC 5 Kolkata MC 179 70 Three STPs are operational and 
two are non-operational. The entire 
O&M lies with Kolkata MC.
3 new STPs, with a total design 
capacity of 108 MLD, were under 
construction.
6. Konnagar 
(Uttarpara)
1 KMDA 22 12 Partially operational.
The ULB has no role. 
7. Panihati 1 KMDA 12 0 At present, non-operational, work is 
in progress.
The ULB has no role.
[Source: information furnished by ULBs, National Inventory of STPs by CPCB, March 
2021; Monthly and Quarterly Progress Reports submitted to the National Mission for Clean 
Ganga (NMCG) and National Green Tribunal (NGT)]
It is evident from Table 6.7, even in these seven ULBs, out of the 13 STPs, only 
eight STPs were operational/partially operational. Further, out of the installed 
capacity of 243.05 MLD in these 13 STPs, the present operational capacity was 
only 85.6 MLD.
(ii) Further, during joint physical verification with municipal officials, the STP 
at Jiaganj-Azimganj Municipality was found to be partially functional (Exhibit 
6.9 and 6.10).

95
Chapter VI: Performance in the discharge of devolved functions
Exhibit 6.9: Partially functional oxidation 
pond at the STP of the Jiaganj-Azmiganj 
Municipality
Exhibit 6.10: Pump house of the partially 
functional STP of the Jiaganj-Azmiganj 
Municipality
STPs had not been established in the remaining 20 ULBs, due to which untreated 
waste was being sent to the drains, canals, rivers, low lands etc.
(iii) Eighteen ULBs87 had been collecting and dumping sludge. Out of these, 
only two ULBs, viz. Bansberia and Uttarpara-Kotrung,  had facilities of 
treatment of sludge before dumping. The Bansberia Municipality had a Faecal 
Sludge Treatment Plant (FSTP), where manure is produced. In case of Uttarpara-
Kotrung, the sludge was being dumped at the Regional Waste Management 
Centre at Baidyabati. The remaining 16 ULBs were dumping untreated sludge 
into dumping grounds. Nine ULBs viz. Gobardanga, Habra, Katwa, Kolkata  
MC, Midnapore, Raiganj, Ramjibonpur, Siliguri  MC  and Tufanganj did not 
furnish the requested information.
Audit further observed the following issues, affecting the efficacy of discharge 
of the sewerage and drainage function by the test-checked ULBs:
 i. Lack of an organised underground sewerage and drainage system and 
drainage system not being connected to households, for effective discharge 
of wastewater generated in the municipal area were noticed. The presence of 
open surface drains was also a matter of concern, since these drains may choke 
due to littering, leading to disruption of sewerage and drainage services.
 ii. Except for Kolkata MC, parastatals like the KMDA, PHED and MED, 
had played a major role in the construction, operation and maintenance of 
STPs. In the test-checked ULBs, Audit noticed a limited role, or no role, 
for ULBs, in this regard. Parastatals also had a role in the construction, and 
operation and maintenance of the sewerage network and drainage system.
 iii. The ULBs were unable to carry out treatment and disposal of the collected 
faecal sludge.
87 Asansol MC, Bansberia, Barasat, Barrackpore, Bongaon, Contai, Coochbehar, Jhalda, 
Jiaganj-Azimganj, Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Kharagpur, Konnagar, Mal, Panihati, Pujali, Suri and 
Uttarpara-Kotrung. 

96
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Recommendation:
 28. Government may take immediate steps to construct STPs, with the 
active involvement of the ULBs.
 29. ULBs may take up construction of the sewerage and drainage 
infrastructure, wherever necessary, on priority basis, and ensure 
100 per cent house sewer connections, as per Service Level 
Benchmarks.
6.3.2  Efficacy in functions relating to Public Health
Out of the 27 selected ULBs, the National Urban Health Mission (NUHM) was 
operational in 21 ULBs with population of 50,000 or more. Audit observations, 
in this regard, are discussed in the following paragraphs.
6.3.2.1  Functioning of Urban Primary Health Centres (UPHCs)
In terms of the NUHM Guidelines 2013, and Guidelines for Organising Urban 
Primary Health Centre Services (January 2018), the UPHCs should function 
for eight hours, every day, to provide health services to citizens. The suggested 
timings were 12 PM to 8 PM, or dual shifts from 8 AM to 12 PM and 4 PM to 
8 PM. Each UPHC was to have morning and evening Out Patient Departments 
(OPDs) (OPD timings could vary, as per state norms). The UPHCs were also 
required to have laboratory facilities, for conducting routine blood and urine 
tests etc., as well as pharmacy facilities.
Audit however, observed that, as on 31 March 2021:
 (i) Out of 21 ULBs, in one ULB viz. Asansol MC, there were two non-
operational UPHCs out of 23 UPHCs.
 (ii) Twelve UPHCs out of 33 in three ULBs (in Barasat, all six UPHCs; in 
Asansol MC , five UPHCs; and in Raiganj, one UPHC), did not have 
laboratory facilities. In 15 ULBs88 all 192 UPHCs had laboratory facilities. 
Three ULBs viz., Bansberia, Bongaon and Suri, did not furnish requested 
information.
 (iii) In 213 UPHCs under 15 ULBs 89 (except two non-operational UPHCs 
under Asansol MC), the OPD timings were less than eight hours a day. 
In four UPHCs, under two ULBs, viz. Jiaganj-Azimganj and Katwa, 
the OPD timings in UPHCs were eight hours or more. Four ULBs viz., 
Bansberia, Bongaon, Midnapore and Raiganj, did not furnish the requested 
information. In none of the 21 ULBs, were the OPD timings variable.
Except for three ULBs, viz. Bansberia, Bongaon and Suri, which did not furnish 
information, 223 functional UPHCs in 18 ULBs (except two non-operational 
UPHCs under Asansol MC) had pharmacy facilities. The details of OPD 
timings, laboratory and pharmacy facilities in UPHCs, in 21 ULBs, are given 
in Table 6.8.
88 Bansberia, Barrackpore, Contai, Coochbehar, Habra, Jiaganj-Azimganj, Kaliyaganj, Kalna, 
Katwa, Kharagpur, Kolkata MC, Konnagar, Panihati, Siliguri MC, Suri and Uttarpara-Kotrung. 
89 Asansol MC, Barasat, Barrackpore, Contai, Coochbehar, Habra, Kaliyaganj, Kalna, 
Kharagpur, Kolkata MC, Konnagar, Panihati, Siliguri MC, Suri and Uttarpara-Kotrung. 

97
Chapter VI: Performance in the discharge of devolved functions
Table 6.8: Details of OPD timings and Laboratory/Pharmacy facilities in 
UPHCs, in 21 ULBs
Sl. 
No.
Name of the 
ULBs Population No. of 
UPHCs
OPD Timing in 
UPHCs
OPD 
Timing in 
hours
No. of 
UPHCs with 
Laboratory 
facilities
No. of 
UPHCs 
with 
Pharmacy 
facilities
1 Asansol MC 11,52,443 23 10 AM to 4 PM 6 18 Yes
2 Bansberia 1,03,920 2 Data not furnished Data not 
furnished
Data not 
furnished
Data not 
furnished
3 Barasat 2,78,435 6 11 AM to 4 PM, in 
other 5 cases 9 AM 
to 2 PM
5 0 Yes
4 Barrackpore 1,52,783 3 12 PM to 4 PM 4 3 Yes
5 Bongaon 1,08,864 2 Data not furnished Data not 
furnished
Data not 
furnished
Data not 
furnished
6 Contai 92,226 2 2 PM to 6 PM 4 2 Yes
7 Coochbehar 77,935 2 10 AM to 4 PM 6 2 Yes
8 Habra 1,47,221 3 11 AM to 3 PM 4 3 Yes
9 Jiaganj- 
Azimganj
51,790 2 12 PM to 8 PM 8 2 Yes
10 Kaliyaganj 53,530 1 10AM to 2 PM 4 1 Yes
11 Kalna 56,722 1 10 AM to 5 PM 7 1 Yes
12 Katwa 81,615 2 8 AM to 6 PM 10 2 Yes
13 Kharagpur 2,07,604 6 10 AM to 3 PM 5 6 Yes
14 Kolkata MC 44,96,694 144 9 AM to 2 PM 5 144 Yes
15 Konnagar 76,172 2 10 AM to 3 PM 5 2 Yes
16 Midnapore 1,69,264 3 Data not furnished Data not 
furnished
3 Yes
17 Panihati 3,77,347 8 11 AM to 5 PM 6 8 Yes
18 Raiganj 1,83,612 4 Data not furnished Data not 
furnished
3 Yes
19 Siliguri MC 5,13,264 10 10 AM to 2 PM 4 10 Yes
20 Suri 67,864 1 12 PM to 5 PM 5 Data not 
furnished
Data not 
furnished
21 Uttarpara- 
Kotrung 
1,59,147 3 9 AM to 2 PM 5 3 Yes
6.3.2.2  Shortage of manpower in UPHCs
As per Guidelines, the UPHCs were to be staffed by two Medical Officers 
(doctors) - one regular and one on part-time basis. There were to be three staff 
nurses, one pharmacist, one laboratory technician and four to five Auxiliary 
(Source: data furnished by the ULBs)

98
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Nurse Midwives (ANMs) (depending upon the population covered), apart 
from clerical and support staff. Apart from part-time Medical Officers, all the 
staff were to be recruited by the Chief Medical Officer of Health (CMOH) of 
the district, under the Department of Health and Family Welfare (DH&FW), 
Government of West Bengal. The part-time Medical Officer could be recruited 
by the ULB itself.
Audit observed that, as on 31 March 2021:
 (i) Eight ULBs, viz. Asansol  MC, Bansberia, Kalna, Kolkata  MC, Panihati, 
Raiganj, Siliguri  MC and Uttarpara-Kotrung,  had shortfall in the posts 
of regular/permanent and part-time Medical Officers in the UPHCs. 
Shortages, in case of regular/permanent Medical Officers, were noticed 
in 11 ULBs 90. In case of part-time Medical Officers, shortages were 
noticed in 10 ULBs 91. In case of seven ULBs viz. Barasat, Contai, 
Jiaganj-Azimganj, Katwa, Kharagpur, Konnagar and Midnapore , there 
were no vacancies in the posts of Medical Officers (details given in 
Appendix-12 ).
 (ii) Shortages of staff nurse were noticed in 18 ULBs 92, while shortages of 
ANMs were noticed in 20 ULBs.
  There was no shortfall of staff nurses in two ULBs ( Jiaganj-Azimganj 
and Suri). One ULB (Bongaon) did not furnish the requested information 
regarding staff nurse and ANM (details given in Appendix-12).
 (iii) In nine ULBs viz. Asansol MC , Habra, Jiaganj-Azimganj, Kalna, 
Kharagpur, Kolkata MC , Panihati Raiganj and Siliguri  MC, there was 
shortage of pharmacists and, in eight ULBs viz. Asansol MC , Contai, 
Kalna, Kharagpur, Kolkata MC, Midnapore, Panihati and Raiganj, there 
was shortage of laboratory technician. One ULB (Bongaon) did not furnish 
the requested information. There was no shortfall of pharmacists in case 
of 11 ULBs and of laboratory technician, in 12 ULBs (details given in 
Appendix-12).
In the remaining six ULBs, viz. Gobardanga, Jhalda, Mal, Pujali, Ramjibonpur 
and Tufanganj, where NUHM had not been implemented and, in case of the 
ULBs under the NUHM scheme, one or more schemes, relating to health, such 
as Community Based Primary Health Care Services (CBPHCS), Urban Primary 
Health Care Services (UPHCS), Urban Reproductive and Child Health (Urban 
RCH), National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme (NVBDCP), were 
operational.
90 Asansol MC, Bansberia, Habra, Kaliyaganj, Kalna, Kolkata MC, Panihati, Raiganj, Siliguri 
MC, Suri and Uttarpara-Kotrung.
91 Asansol MC, Bansberia, Barrackpore, Coochbehar, Kalna, Kolkata MC, Panihati, Raiganj, 
Siliguri MC and Uttarpara-Kotrung.
92 Asansol MC, Bansberia, Barrasat, Barrackpore, Contai, Coochbehar, Habra, Kaliyaganj, 
Kalna, Katwa, Kharagpur, Kolkata MC, Konnagar, Midnapore, Panihati, Raiganj, Siliguri 
MC and Uttarpara-Kotrung

Appendices

101
Appendices
Appendix-1
List of 18 functions to be devolved to ULBs as enumerated in the Twelfth 
Schedule of the Constitution
(Vide Para: 1.2, Page: 2)
 1. Urban planning, including town planning.
 2. Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings.
 3. Planning for economic and social development.
 4. Roads and bridges.
 5. Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes.
 6. Public health, sanitation, conservancy and solid waste management.
 7. Fire services.
 8. Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of 
ecological aspects.
 9. Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, including 
the handicapped and mentally retarded.
 10. Slum improvement and upgradation.
 11. Urban poverty alleviation.
 12. Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, 
playgrounds.
 13. Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects.
 14. Burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds; and 
electric crematoriums.
 15. Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals.
 16. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths.
 17. Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops 
and public conveniences.
 18. Regulation of slaughterhouses and tanneries.

102
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Appendix-2
List of Audit Units
(Vide Para: 2.3, Page: 8)
Audit Units
A. Urban Local Bodies
Sl. No. Name of the District Name of the ULB
Municipal Corporations
1. Darjeeling Siliguri Municipal Corporation (SMC)
2. Kolkata Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC)
3. West Burdwan Asansol Municipal Corporation (AMC)
Municipalities/NAA
4. Birbhum Suri
5. Coochbehar Coochbehar
6. Tufanganj
7. East Burdwan Kalna
8. Katwa
9. East Midnapore Contai
10.
Hooghly
Bansberia
11. Konnagar
12. Uttarpara-Kotrung
13. Jalpaiguri Mal 
14. Murshidabad Jiaganj-Azimganj
15.
North 24 Paraganas
Barasat
16. Barrackpore
17. Bongaon
18. Gobardanga
19. Habra 
20. Panihati
21. North Dinajpur Kaliyaganj
22. Raiganj
23. Purulia Jhalda
24. South 24 Paraganas Pujali
25.
West Midnapore
Kharagpur 
26. Midnapore 
27. Ramjibonpur
Audit Units Other than Urban Local Bodies
B. Departments under Government of West Bengal
Sl. No. Name of the Unit
1. Department of Urban Development & Municipal Affairs (UD&MA)
2. Department of School Education
3. Department of Women & Child Development and Social Welfare
4. Finance Department
5. Fire and Emergency Services Department
6. Health and Family Welfare Department
7. Land and Land Reforms and Refugee Relief and Rehabilitation Department
8. Public Health Engineering Department
9. Transport Department

103
Appendices
C. Authority/Development Authorities under UD&MA Department
Sl. No. Name of the Unit
1. Asansol Durgapur Development Authority (ADDA)
2. Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority (KMDA)
3. Nabadiganta Industrial Township Authority (NDITA)
4. Siliguri Jalpaiguri Development Authority (SJDA)
D. Directorates/Statutory Bodies/Attached Offices under UD&MA Department
Sl. No. Name of the Unit
1. Directorate of Local Bodies (DLB)
2. Municipal Engineering Directorate (MED)
3. West Bengal Valuation Board (WBVB)
4. West Bengal Municipal Service Commission (WBMSC)
5. State Urban Development Agency (SUDA)
E.  District Planning Committees (DPCs) in 14 districts
F. Offices of the Chief Medical Officer of Health (CMOH), under the Health and 
Family Welfare Department, in 14 districts

104
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Appendix-3
Annual Financial Statements pending for submission to the ELA 
(as on 31/3/2021)
(Vide Para: 3.4.9.1; Page: 36)
Sl. 
No. ULB
Accounts (Annual 
Financial Statements) in 
Arrear as on 31/3/2021
Number 
of Arrear 
AccountsRelating to the year
1 Alipurduar  Municipality 2018-20 2
2 Asansol Municipal Corporation 2015-20 5
3 Ashokenagar-Kalyangarh Municipality 2015-20 5
4 Baduria Municipality 2011-20 9
5 Baidyabati Municipality 2018-20 2
6 Bally  Municipality 2008-16 8
7 Balurghat Municipality 2017-20 3
8 Bankura Municipality 2018-20 2
9 Bansberia Municipality 2017-20 3
10 Baranagar Municipality 2018-20 2
11 Barasat Municipality 2015-20 5
12 Barrackpore Municipality 2018-20 2
13 Baruipur Municipality 2017-20 3
14 Beldanga Municipality 2016-20 4
15 Berhampore Municipality 2016-20 4
16 Bhadreswar Municipality 2015-20 5
17 Bhatpara Municipality 2019-20 1
18 Bidhannagar Municipal Corporation 2014-20 6
19 Birnagar Municipality 2019-20 1
20 Bishnupur Municipality 2007-20 13
21 Bolpur Municipality 2017-20 3
22 Bongaon Municipality 2015-20 5
23 Budge Budge Municipality 2018-20 2
24 Buniadpur Municipality 2014-20 6
25 Burdwan Municipality 2019-20 1
26 Chakdaha Municipality 2018-20 2
27 Champdany Municipality 2019-20 1
28 Chandernagore Municipal Corporation 2014-20 6
29 Chandrakona Municipality 2018-20 2
30 Contai Municipality 2015-20 5
31 Coochbehar Municipality 2014-20 6
32 Coopers’Camp Notified Area Authority 2011-20 9
33 Dainhat Municipality 2018-20 2
34 Dalkhola Municipality 2018-20 2
35 Dankuni Municipality 2012-20 8
36 Darjeeling Municipality 2018-20 2
37 Dhuliyan Municipality 2015-20 5
38 Dhupguri Municipality 2012-20 8

105
Appendices
Sl. 
No. ULB
Accounts (Annual 
Financial Statements) in 
Arrear as on 31/3/2021
Number 
of Arrear 
AccountsRelating to the year
39 Diamond Harbour Municipality 2014-20 6
40 Dinhata Municipality 2014-20 6
41 Domkal Municipality 2015-20 5
42 Dubrajpur Municipality 2013-20 7
43 Dum Dum Municipality 2016-20 4
44 Durgapur Municipal Corporation 2017-20 3
45 Egra Municipality 2014-20 6
46 Englishbazar Municipality 2018-20 2
47 Gangarampur Municipality 2010-20 10
48 Garulia Municipality 2016-20 4
49 Gayeshpur Municipality 2008-20 12
50 Ghatal Municipality 2017-20 3
51 Gobardanga Municipality 2016-20 4
52 Guskara Municipality 2014-20 6
53 Habra Municipality 2018-20 2
54 Haldia Municipality 2019-20 1
55 Haldibari Municipality 2014-20 6
56 Halisahar Municipality 2018-20 2
57 Haringhata Municipality 2015-20 5
58 Hooghly-Chinsurah Municipality 2017-20 3
59 Howrah Municipal Corporation 2016-20 4
60 Islampur Municipality 2018-20 2
61 Jalpaiguri Municipality 2018-20 2
62 Jamuria Municipality    2008-16 8
63 Jhalda Municipality 2011-20 9
64 Jhargram Municipality 2016-20 4
65 Jiaganj-Azimganj Municipality 2008-20 12
66 Joynagar-Mozilpur Municipality 2017-20 3
67 Kalimpong Municipality 2019-20 1
68 Kaliyaganj Municipality 2016-20 4
69 Kalna Municipality 2018-20 2
70 Kalyani Municipality 2016-20 4
71 Kamarhati Municipality 2018-20 2
72 Kancharapara Municipality 2016-20 4
73 Kandi Municipality 2009-20 11
74 Katwa Municipality 2019-20 1
75 Kharagpur Municipality 2016-20 4
76 Kharar Municipality 2017-20 3
77 Khardah  Municipality 2018-20 2
78 Khirpai Municipality 2015-20 5
79 Kolkata Municipal Corporation 2019-20 1
80 Konnagar Municipality 2019-20 1
81 Krishnanagar Municipality 2019-20 1

106
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Sl. 
No. ULB
Accounts (Annual 
Financial Statements) in 
Arrear as on 31/3/2021
Number 
of Arrear 
AccountsRelating to the year
82 Kulti Municipality 2007-16 9
83 Kurseong Municipality 2011-20 9
84 Madhyamgram Municipality 2016-20 4
85 Maheshtala Municipality 2018-20 2
86 Mal Municipality 2008-20 12
87 Mathabhanga Municipality 2018-20 2
88 Mekhligunj Municipality 2008-20 12
89 Memari Municipality 2019-20 1
90 Midnapore Municipality 2018-20 2
91 Mirik Notified Area Authority 2007-20 13
92 Murshidabad Municipality 2009-20 11
93 Nabadwip Municipality 2019-20 1
94 Naihati  Municipality 2018-20 2
95 Nalhati Municipality 2015-20 5
96 New Barrackpore Municipality 2015-20 5
97 North Barrackpore Municipality 2018-20 2
98 North Dum Dum Municipality 2013-20 7
99 Old Malda Municipality 2018-20 2
100 Panihati  Municipality 2018-20 2
101 Panskura Municipality 2018-20 2
102 Pujali  Municipality 2018-20 2
103 Raghunathpur Municipality 2009-20 11
104 Raiganj Municipality 2018-20 2
105 Rajarhat Gopalpur Municipality  2012-16 4
106 Rajpur-Sonarpur Municipality 2017-20 3
107 Ramjibonpur Municipality 2013-20 7
108 Rampurhat Municipality 2019-20 1
109 Ranaghat Municipality 2014-20 6
110 Raniganj Municipality     2011-16 5
111 Rishra  Municipality 2018-20 2
112 Sainthia Municipality 2016-20 4
113 Santipur Municipality 2018-20 2
114 Serampore Municipality 2018-20 2
115 Siliguri Municipal Corporation 2018-20 2
116 Sonamukhi Municipality 2008-20 12
117 South Dum Dum Municipality 2017-20 3
118 Taherpur Notified Area Authority 2016-20 4
119 Tamralipta Municipality 2018-20 2
120 Tarakeswar Municipality 2014-20 6
121 Titagarh Municipality 2019-20 1
122 Tufangunj Municipality 2017-20 3
123 Uluberia Municipality 2015-20 5
124 Uttarpara-Kotrung Municipality 2017-20 3
Total  544

107
Appendices
Appendix-4
Constitution of Municipal Accounts Committees (MACs) in the 27 test-checked ULBs
(Vide Para: 3.4.10; Page: 40)
Year
ULBs where 
MACs were 
formed
ULBs where 
meetings of 
MACs were held
ULBs where MACs were not formed ULBs which did 
not furnish data
2015-16 1. Bansberia
2. Contai
3. Kaliyaganj
4. Kharagpur
5. Kolkata MC
6. Konnagar
7. Pujali
8. Siliguri MC
9. Tufanganj
1. Kharagpur
2. Kolkata MC
3. Pujali
4. Siliguri MC
1. Barasat
2. Barrackpore
3. Bongaon
4. Coochbehar
5. Gobardanga
6. Habra
7. Jhalda
8. Jiaganj-Azimganj
9. Kalna
10. Katwa
11. Midnapore
12. Ramjibonpur
13. Suri
14.  Uttarpara-
Kotrung
1. Asansol MC
2. Mal
3. Panihati
4. Raiganj
2016-17 1. Bansberia
2. Kaliyaganj
3. Pujali
1. Pujali 1. Barasat
2. Barrackpore
3. Bongaon
4. Contai
5. Coochbehar
6. Gobardanga
7. Habra
8. Jhalda
9. Jiaganj-Azimganj
10. Kalna
11. Katwa
12. Kharagpur
13. Kolkata MC
14. Konnagar
15. Midnapore
16. Ramjibonpur
17. Siliguri MC
18. Suri
19. Tufanganj
20.  Uttarpara-
Kotrung
1. Asansol MC
2. Mal
3. Panihati
4. Raiganj
2017-18 1. Bongaon
2. Coochbehar
3. Kolkata MC
4. Pujali
1. Coochbehar
2. Kolkata MC
3. Pujali
1. Bansberia
2. Barasat
3. Barrackpore
4. Contai
5. Gobardanga
6. Habra
7. Jhalda
8. Jiaganj-Azimganj
9. Kaliyaganj
10. Kalna
11. Katwa
12. Kharagpur
13. Konnagar
14. Midnapore
15. Ramjibonpur
16. Siliguri MC
17. Suri
18. Tufanganj
19.  Uttarpara-
Kotrung
1. Asansol MC
2. Mal
3. Panihati
4. Raiganj

108
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Year
ULBs where 
MACs were 
formed
ULBs where 
meetings of 
MACs were held
ULBs where MACs were not formed ULBs which did 
not furnish data
2018-19 1. Barasat
2. Barrackpore
3. Katwa
4. Kharagpur
5. Pujali
1. Barrackpore
2. Katwa
3. Pujali
1. Bansberia
2. Bongaon
3. Contai
4. Coochbehar
5. Gobardanga
6. Habra
7. Jhalda
8. Jiaganj-Azimganj
9. Kaliyaganj
10. Kalna
11. Kolkata MC
12. Konnagar
13. Midnapore
14. Ramjibonpur
15. Siliguri MC
16. Suri
17. Tufanganj
18.  Uttarpara-
Kotrung
1. Asansol MC
2. Mal
3. Panihati
4. Raiganj
2019-20 Nil Nil 1. Bansberia
2. Barasat
3. Barrackpore
4. Bongaon
5. Contai
6. Coochbehar
7. Gobardanga
8. Habra
9. Jhalda
10. Jiaganj-Azimganj
11. Kaliyaganj
12. Kalna
13. Katwa
14. Kharagpur
15. Konnagar
16. Midnapore
17. Pujali
18. Ramjibonpur
19. Siliguri MC
20. Suri
21. Tufanganj
22.  Uttarpara-
Kotrung
1. Asansol MC 
2. Kolkata MC
3. Mal
4. Panihati
5. Raiganj
2020-21 1. Barrackpore 1. Barrackpore 1. Bansberia
2. Barasat
3. Bongaon
4. Contai
5. Coochbehar
6. Gobardanga
7. Habra
8. Jhalda
9. Jiaganj-Azimganj
10. Kaliyaganj
11. Kalna
12. Katwa
13. Kharagpur
14. Konnagar
15. Midnapore
16. Pujali
17. Ramjibonpur
18. Siliguri MC
19. Suri
20. Tufanganj
21.  Uttarpara-
Kotrung
1. Asansol MC 
2. Kolkata MC
3. Mal
4. Panihati
5. Raiganj
(Source: data furnished by the ULBs)

109
Appendices
Appendix-5
Difference between the Closing Balances of the previous financial years and the Opening 
Balances of the current financial years, in regard to Property Tax, for 11 ULBs, during FYs 
2015-16 to 2020-21
(Vide Para: 4.5.2.1 (i); Page: 53)
Financial 
Year ULB
Closing Balance 
of Property Tax 
for the previous 
financial year 
(` in lakh)
Opening Balance 
of Property Tax  
for the current 
financial year 
(` in lakh)
Difference 
(` in lakh)
Total 
difference 
(` in lakh)
2016-17 Bansberia 812.58 811.69 0.89 -26,694.81
Bongaon 84.35 72.41 11.94
Kalna 55.12 77.13 -22.01
Katwa 62.69 61.99 0.70
Kolkata MC 3,62,874.15 3,89,600.13 -26,725.98
Konnagar 212.06 190.17 21.89
Panihati 1,935.13 1,923.37 11.76
Uttarpara-Kotrung 760.95 754.95 6.00
2017-18 Bansberia 861.51 861.99 -0.48 -32,523.31
Kaliyaganj 6.38 31.17 -24.79
Katwa 66.14 56.25 9.89
Kolkata MC 3,95,792.75 4,28,296.36 -32,503.61
Konnagar 231.31 235.03 -3.72
Panihati 2,043.80 2,044.40 -0.60
2018-19 Bansberia 915.42 914.74 0.68 -33,036.84
Kaliyaganj 27.67 27.45 0.22
Katwa 109.17 111.66 -2.49
Kolkata MC 4,34,335.90 4,67,485.46 -33,149.56
Konnagar 283.83 302.15 -18.32
Panihati 2,189.51 2,169.16 20.35
Pujali 133.70 102.74 30.96
Uttarpara-Kotrung 933.78 852.46 81.32
2019-20 Bansberia 965.58 968.91 -3.33 1,86,939.86
Katwa 165.04 157.97 7.07
Kolkata MC 4,78,748.72 2,91,806.20 1,86,942.52
Konnagar 348.83 352.04 -3.21
Panihati 2,331.32 2,334.51 -3.19
2020-21 Bansberia 1,049.10 1,042.97 6.13 5,129.91
Katwa 225.19 226.09 -0.90
Kolkata MC 3,05,108.86 2,99,939.45 5,169.41
Konnagar 426.07 422.01 4.06
Panihati 2,555.32 2,604.37 -49.05
Ramjibonpur 12.35 12.09 0.26
(Source: data furnished by the ULBs)

110
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Appendix-6
Interest collected by 17 ULBs, during FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21
(Vide Para: 4.5.2.1 (iii); Page: 54)
Sl. 
No. ULB Financial 
Year
Amount of interest 
collected (`)
Total interest 
collected (`)
1. Bansberia 2015-16 2,85,037.17 24,52,134.00
2016-17 4,07,976.13
2017-18 3,02,621.87
2018-19 4,71,256.35
2019-20 6,13,435.67
2020-21 3,71,806.81
2. Barasat 2015-16 3,46,708.00 42,85,608.00
2016-17 5,50,279.00
2017-18 6,76,241.00
2018-19 7,62,754.00
2019-20 8,94,243.00
2020-21 10,55,383.00
3. Barrackpore 2015-16 2,15,800.00 22,20,300.00
2016-17 2,81,200.00
2017-18 3,91,300.00
2018-19 4,58,300.00
2019-20 4,82,800.00
2020-21 3,90,900.00
4. Coochbehar 2015-16 9,69,520.00 38,70,284.00
2016-17 7,79,256.00
2017-18 6,60,552.00
2018-19 5,66,625.00
2019-20 5,31,159.00
2020-21 3,63,172.00
5. Habra 2015-16 97,000.00 9,44,000.00
2016-17 72,000.00
2017-18 98,000.00
2018-19 74,000.00
2019-20 2,51,000.00
2020-21 3,52,000.00
6. Jhalda 2015-16 34,000.00 2,07,000.00
2016-17 38,000.00
2017-18 58,000.00
2018-19 43,000.00
2019-20 28,000.00
2020-21 6,000.00
7. Jiaganj- Azimganj 2015-16 87,999.00 14,45,717.00
2016-17 74,350.00
2017-18 79,616.00
2018-19 1,43,418.00
2019-20 3,12,219.00
2020-21 7,48,115.00

111
Appendices
Sl. 
No. ULB Financial 
Year
Amount of interest 
collected (`)
Total interest 
collected (`)
8. Kalna 2015-16 1,74,000.00 12,44,000.00
2016-17 3,16,000.00
2017-18 1,64,000.00
2018-19 1,60,000.00
2019-20 1,35,000.00
2020-21 2,95,000.00
9. Katwa 2015-16 64,773.00 3,79,335.00
2016-17 65,105.00
2017-18 48,154.00
2018-19 73,859.00
2019-20 62,474.00
2020-21 64,970.00
10. Kharagpur 2017-18 4,00,000.00 45,00,000.00
2018-19 5,00,000.00
2019-20 13,00,000.00
2020-21 23,00,000.00
11. Konnagar 2015-16 1,19,000.00 25,07,000.00
2016-17 3,79,000.00
2017-18 3,07,000.00
2018-19 6,95,000.00
2019-20 3,26,000.00
2020-21 6,81,000.00
12. Midnapore 2015-16 2,85,000.00 93,28,000.00
2016-17 8,49,000.00
2017-18 16,32,000.00
2018-19 21,71,000.00
2019-20 25,11,000.00
2020-21 18,80,000.00
13. Panihati 2015-16 23,86,000.00 1,36,75,000.00
2016-17 27,79,000.00
2017-18 24,34,000.00
2018-19 18,65,000.00
2019-20 17,49,000.00
2020-21 24,62,000.00
14. Raiganj 2015-16 22,362.00 2,33,994.00
2016-17 27,004.00
2017-18 32,578.00
2018-19 34,353.00
2019-20 37,320.00
2020-21 80,377.00
15. Suri 2015-16 4,922.82 1,94,447.38
2016-17 52,499.11
2017-18 54,434.26
2018-19 30,959.45
2019-20 26,363.92
2020-21 25,267.82

112
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Sl. 
No. ULB Financial 
Year
Amount of interest 
collected (`)
Total interest 
collected (`)
16. Tufanganj 2015-16 97,110.00 4,71,034.00
2016-17 95,127.00
2017-18 82,406.00
2018-19 66,229.00
2019-20 69,032.00
2020-21 61,130.00
17. Uttarpara- Kotrung 2015-16 11,15,000.00 1,22,75,000.00
2016-17 10,08,000.00
2017-18 10,31,000.00
2018-19 65,06,000.00
2019-20 10,20,000.00
2020-21 15,95,000.00
Total 6,02,32,853.38 i.e. 
` 6.02 crore
(Source: figures furnished by ULBs)

113
Appendices
Appendix-7
Delay in General Valuation in 25 ULBs
(Vide Para: 4.5.2.3; Page: 57)
Sl. 
No ULB Due Date of General 
Valuation
Delay in General Valuation, 
as on 31 March 2021
No delay
1 Jiaganj-Azimganj 1/4/2021 -
2 Raiganj 1/4/2024 -
3 Suri 1/4/2021 -
4 Tufanganj 1/4/2023 -
5 Uttarpara-Kotrung 1/4/2024 -
Delay less than one year
1 Barrackpore 1/7/2020 9 months
2 Bongaon 1/1/2021 3 months
3 Mal 1/4/2020 1 year
4 Midnapore 1/4/2020 1 year
More than one year - upto five years
1 Bansberia 1/7/2019 1 year 9 months
2 Coochbehar 1/4/2017 4 years
3 Kalna 1/4/2017 4 years
4 Kharagpur 1/7/2016 4 years 9 months
5 Konnagar 1/7/2019 1 year 9 months
6 Panihati 1/4/2019 2 years
7 Pujali 1/1/2020 1 year 3 months
8 Ramjibonpur 1/4/2018 3 years
9 Siliguri MC 1/4/2018 3 years
More than five years - upto ten years
1 Habra 1/7/2011 9 years 9 months
2 Katwa 1/4/2013 8 years
More than ten years - upto fifteen years
1 Gobardanga 1/7/2009 11 years 9 months
More than fifteen years - upto twenty years
1 Asansol MC 1/1/2002 19 years 3 months
2 Barasat 1/10/2001 19 years 6 months
More than twenty years - upto twenty-five years
1 Jhalda 1/1/1998 23 years 3 months
More than twenty-five years - upto thirty years
1 Kaliyaganj 1/10/1995 25 years 6 months
(Source: data furnished by West Bengal Valuation Board)

114
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Appendix-8
License fee for advertisement collected by 23 ULBs, during 
FYs 2015-16 to 2020-21
(Vide Para: 4.5.4.1; Page: 59)
Sl. 
No. ULB
Pertinent Year 
of license fees 
collection for 
advertisement
License Fee 
Collection for 
Advertisement 
(` in lakh)
Total License Fee 
Collection for 
Advertisement during 
the Audit Period 
(` in lakh)
1 Asansol MC 2020-21 2.00 2.00
2 Bansberia 2015-16 1.27 4.64
2016-17 1.27
2017-18 1.05
2018-19 1.05
3 Barasat 2015-16 29.52 158.94
2016-17 28.13
2017-18 40.88
2018-19 37.00
2019-20 7.51
2020-21 15.90
4 Barrackpore 2015-16 18.99 103.07
2016-17 19.66
2017-18 24.77
2018-19 25.42
2019-20 6.98
2020-21 7.25
5 Bongaon 2015-16 2.70 25.64
2016-17 2.55
2017-18 8.78
2018-19 7.03
2019-20 4.26
2020-21 0.32
6 Contai 2015-16 7.47 43.19
2016-17 8.34
2017-18 8.23
2018-19 11.39
2019-20 5.23
2020-21 2.53
7 Coochbehar 2015-16 11.58 66.56
2016-17 9.20
2017-18 9.96
2018-19 10.84
2019-20 16.66
2020-21 8.32
8 Habra 2015-16 8.50 38.04
2016-17 6.84
2017-18 6.75
2018-19 6.56
2019-20 6.56
2020-21 2.83

115
Appendices
Sl. 
No. ULB
Pertinent Year 
of license fees 
collection for 
advertisement
License Fee 
Collection for 
Advertisement 
(` in lakh)
Total License Fee 
Collection for 
Advertisement during 
the Audit Period 
(` in lakh)
9 Kaliaganj 2015-16 0.73 1.29
2016-17 0.34
2017-18 0.01
2018-19 0.08
2019-20 0.03
2020-21 0.10
10 Kalna 2015-16 1.20 7.20
2016-17 1.20
2017-18 1.20
2018-19 1.20
2019-20 1.20
2020-21 1.20
11 Katwa 2015-16 0.93 9.34
2016-17 1.23
2017-18 1.13
2018-19 0.88
2019-20 3.00
2020-21 2.17
12 Kharagpur 2015-16 6.24 23.99
2016-17 5.58
2017-18 5.34
2018-19 3.93
2019-20 1.10
2020-21 1.80
13 Kolkata MC 2015-16 657.81 2397.74
2016-17 657.84
2017-18 807.48
2018-19 221.92
2019-20 52.69
14 Konnagar 2015-16 0.85 6.08
2016-17 1.56
2017-18 1.36
2018-19 0.80
2019-20 1.51
15 Mal 2015-16 1.01 26.09
2016-17 0.62
2017-18 4.74
2018-19 11.22
2019-20 2.77
2020-21 5.73
16 Midnapore 2015-16 11.66 99.81
2016-17 19.52
2017-18 20.55
2018-19 17.60
2019-20 21.52
2020-21 8.96

116
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Sl. 
No. ULB
Pertinent Year 
of license fees 
collection for 
advertisement
License Fee 
Collection for 
Advertisement 
(` in lakh)
Total License Fee 
Collection for 
Advertisement during 
the Audit Period 
(` in lakh)
17 Panihati 2015-16 17.81 75.65
2016-17 17.21
2017-18 15.90
2018-19 13.55
2019-20 9.13
2020-21 2.05
18 Raiganj 2015-16 7.19 61.10
2016-17 11.55
2017-18 11.86
2018-19 6.79
2019-20 11.05
2020-21 12.66
19 Ramjibonpur 2016-17 0.05 0.25
2017-18 0.05
2018-19 0.05
2019-20 0.05
2020-21 0.05
20 Siliguri MC 2015-16 67.79 479.97
2016-17 75.99
2017-18 95.64
2018-19 119.32
2019-20 21.89
2020-21 99.34
21 Suri 2015-16 1.29 10.49
2016-17 1.29
2017-18 1.93
2018-19 5.62
2019-20 0.36
22 Tufanganj 2015-16 0.69 4.61
2016-17 0.29
2017-18 1.50
2018-19 1.12
2019-20 1.01
23 Uttarpara- 
Kotrung
2015-16 1.61 14.61
2016-17 2.06
2017-18 2.67
2018-19 5.30
2019-20 2.97
Total collection of fees for advertisement 3,660.30
(Source: data furnished by ULBs)

117
Appendices
Appendix-9
Other Revenue Sources of ULBs
(Vide Para: 4.5.7, Page: 61, 62)
License Fee for Private Markets
ULBs which granted 
licenses to Private 
Markets
ULBs which did not grant licenses to Private 
Markets
ULBs which did not furnish 
the requisite information
1. Katwa
2. Uttarpara-Kotrung
Barrackopre maintained 
records but did not issue 
license.
1. Bansberia
2. Barasat
3. Bongaon
4. Coochbehar
5. Habra
6. Jhalda
7. Kaliyaganj
8. Kalna
9. Kharagpur
10. Kolkata MC
11. Konnagar
12. Mal
13. Midnapore
14. Panihati
15. Raiganj
16. Ramjibonpur
17. Suri
18. Tufanganj
1. Jiaganj-Azimganj
2. Pujali
Levy of Surcharge in the form of Additional Stamp Duty
ULBs which levied 
Surcharge in the form of 
Additional Stamp Duty
ULBs which did not levy Surcharge in the 
form of Additional Stamp Duty
ULBs which did not furnish 
the requisite information
1. Mal
2. Midnapore
1. Barasat
2. Bansberia
3. Bongaon
4. Contai
5. Jiaganj-Azimganj
6. Kaliyaganj
7. Kalna
8. Kharagpur
9. Kolkata MC
10. Konnagar
11. Pujali
12. Raiganj
13. Ramjibonpur
14. Siliguri MC
15. Suri
16. Uttarpara-Kotrung
1. Asansol MC
2. Barrackpore
3. Coochbehar
4. Gobardanga
5. Habra
6. Jhalda
7. Katwa
8. Panihati
9. Tufanganj
Imposition of Stacking Fees
ULBs which imposed 
Stacking Fees ULBs which did not impose Stacking Fees ULBs which did not furnish 
the requisite information
1. Kaliyaganj
2. Katwa
3. Kolkata MC
4. Mal
5. Midnapore
6. Raiganj
7. Ramjibonpur
8. Uttarpara-Kotrung
1. Bansberia
2. Barasat
3. Bongaon
4. Contai
5. Coochbehar
6. Habra
7. Jiaganj-Azimganj
8. Kalna
9. Kharagpur
10. Konnagar
11. Panihati
12. Pujali
13. Siliguri MC
14. Suri
15. Tufanganj
1. Asansol MC
2. Barrackpore
3. Gobardanga
4. Jhalda
(Source: data furnished by ULBs)

118
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Appendix-10
Revision of fees and charges in ULBs as on 31st March 2023 
(Vide Para: 4.5.7, Page: 62)
Sl. 
No. ULB
Financial Year during which latest revision in fees/charges was given effect
License 
fees for 
Advertisement
Rent from 
Market
Surcharge on transfer of 
immovable properties (to 
be collected in the form of 
Additional Stamp Duty)
Stacking 
Fees
License Fees 
from Private 
Markets
1. Barasat 2018-19 Information not 
furnished Not implemented Information 
not furnished
Not 
implemented
2. Barrackpore 2017-18 
(April 2017)
Information not 
furnished Information not furnished
2022-23  
(October 
2022)
Not 
implemented
3. Bongaon 2022-23 
(15/7/2022)
2021-22 
(10/12/2021) Not implemented Not 
implemented
Not 
implemented
4. Coochbehar Information not 
furnished
Last revised in 
FY 2004-05 Information not furnished Not 
implemented
Not 
implemented
5. Contai Information not 
furnished
Information not 
furnished Not implemented Information 
not furnished
Information 
not furnished
6. Kaliyaganj 2022-23
Last revised in 
FY  
2023-24
Not implemented Information 
not furnished
Not 
implemented
7. Katwa 2021-22 
(1/1/2022)
2016-17 
(30/8/2016) Information not furnished 2020-21 
(1/1/2021)
No 
information 
furnished
8. Kharagpur Information not 
furnished
2022-23 
(June 2022) Not implemented Not 
implemented
Not 
implemented
9. Midnapore 2021-22 2022-23 
(April 2022) 2013-14 2018-19 
 (July 2018)
Not 
implemented
10. Panihati 2018-19 
(31/12/2018)
2021-22 
(1/8/2021) Information not furnished Information 
not furnished
Not 
implemented
11. Pujali Not 
implemented
No Municipal 
Market exists Not implemented Not 
implemented
Information 
not furnished
12. Ramjibonpur 2022-23 
(1/1/2023)
Specific reply not 
furnished Not implemented 2022-23 
(1/1/2023)
Not 
implemented
13. Siliguri MC 2016-17 2022-23 
(August 2022) Not implemented Not 
implemented
Information 
not furnished
14. Suri 2015
Specific 
information not 
furnished
Not implemented Not 
implemented
Not 
implemented
15. Uttarpara-
Kotrung
Information not 
furnished 2017-18 Not implemented Last revised 
in 2010
Information 
not furnished
Not Implemented means collection of fees/charges had not been started by the ULBs.
(Source: data furnished by ULBs)
Note: 
Latest revision of rates with respect to Fees for renewal of certificate of trade, profession and callings 
was done in FY 2015-16, as per separate guidelines issued with respect to the Municipalities and 
Municipal Corporations by the erstwhile Department of Municipal Affairs, Government of West 
Bengal in August 2015. No further revision of rates took place till 31/3/2022.

119
Appendices
Appendix-11
Departments of a Municipal establishment
(Vide Para: 5.1, Page: 65)
Sl. 
No.
Department Basic Functions performed by the Department Category of staff under the 
Department
1. General 
Administration 
Department
1.  Recruitment, control and management of officers 
belonging to the cadre of common Municipal Service and 
relations with Directorate of Local Bodies and Municipal 
Service Commission
2. Training of all services.
3. Vigilance and anti-corruption.
4. Grievance redressal and staff welfare.
5.  Conduct of activities involving relations with the Central 
and State Governments and local bodies.
6. Computer and data processing.
7. Municipal press.
8. Legal matters.
9. Information and public relations.
10.  Establishment and administration of commercial projects 
and enterprises like municipal market and shopping 
complex.
11. Establishment and staff matter.
12. Auction.
13.  Discharge of functions not specifically allotted to any 
other department.
1. Law Officer
2. Personal Assistant
3. Secretary
4. Office Superintendent
5. Head Clerk
6. Work Assistant
7. Clerk-cum-Typist
8. Upper Division Clerk
9. Clerk
10. Darwan
11.  Peon/ Helper/Mazdoor/
Attendant/Ambulance 
Attendant/Messenger
2. Accounts 
and Cash 
Department
1. Municipal fund including cash.
2. Annual, interim and revised budget estimates.
3. Grants and loans.
4. Maintenance of accounts.
5. Audit including internal audit.
6. Treasury and bank.
7. Provident Fund of officers and employees.
8. Pension and retirement benefits of officers and employees.
9. Group Insurance and Salary Savings Insurance.
1. Accountant
2. Deputy Accountant
3. Cashier
4. Assistant Cashier
3. Revenue 
Department
1.  Assessment including assessment of Central and State 
Government properties and railway properties.
2. Liaison with Central Valuation Board.
3. Assessment Tribunal/Review Committee.
4.  Collection of property tax and service charges including 
those in relation to Central Government.
5. Government and railway properties.
6. Collection of advertisement tax and other taxes.
7. Granting of licenses.
8. Collection of fees and service charges.
9.  Collection of rents from municipal properties and tolls 
from municipal ferries and bridges.
1. Assessment-in-Charge
2. Assessment Inspector
3. Tax Collector
4.  Assistant Tax Collector/
Assistant Tax Daroga/
License Inspector
5.  Market Supervisor/
Market Inspector
6. Tax Collection Sarkar

120
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Sl. 
No.
Department Basic Functions performed by the Department Category of staff under the 
Department
4. Public Works 
Department
1.  Construction and maintenance of all buildings, roads, 
pathways, drains and sewerages.
2.  Executions and maintenance of general development 
works.
3. Road-rolling service.
4. Plan sanctioning.
5. Unauthorised buildings and unsecured buildings.
6. Appeals against Orders relating to buildings.
7. Survey.
8. Preparation and maintenance of municipal map.
9.  Maintenance of records of municipal properties including 
land.
10. Town planning.
11. Land and land use control.
12. Regulation of building uses.
13.  Urban renewal, area development, spot development and 
commercial housing.
14. Bustee  development.
15. Development of fringe areas.
16. House drainage and sewerage connection.
17.  Beautification of the municipal area including municipal 
properties.
1. Executive Engineer
2. Structural Engineer
3. Assistant Engineer
4.  Sub-Assistant Engineer 
(Technical Supervisor)
5.  Work Sarkar (Field 
Supervisor)
6. Surveyor
7. Draftsman
5. Water Supply 
Department
1.  Production of filtered water including filtration, 
chlorination and silt clearing, storage and distribution.
2.  Management of unfiltered water including laying of 
pipelines and maintenance thereof.
3. Operation of pumping and boosting stations.
4.  Laying of primary and secondary grids of filtered water 
and maintenance thereof.
5.  Water connection—domestic, non-domestic and 
community.
6. Sinking and maintenance of tubewells.
7. Water supply to the neighbouring area.
8. Supply of extra drinking water on special occasions.
1. Sub-Assistant Engineer
2. Pump Supervisor
3. Pipeline Inspector
4. Pump Operator
5.  Mistry (Hand 
Tubewells)/Mistry 
(Pipeline)
6.  Assistant Mistry (Hand 
Tubewells)/Assistant 
Mistry (Pipeline)
6. Public 
Health and 
Convenience
1.  Medical service (hospital, dispensary, maternity and 
child health).
2. Health services—
   (a) Health establishment.
   (b) Conservancy and solid waste management.
   (c) Drainage and sewerage.
   (d) Vaccination.
   (e) Registration of births and deaths.
   (f) Burning ghat, burial ground and dumping ground.
   (g)  Other sanitary requirements.
3. Health immunisation and nutrition programme.
4. Family welfare and planning.
5. Food adulteration.
1. Health Officer
2. Sanitary Inspector
3. Sanitary Assistant
4. Mate
5.  Recorder (for Burning 
Ghat)
6.  Dom (for Burning Ghat)
7.  Motor Vehicle-in-
Charge
8. Driver

121
Appendices
Sl. 
No.
Department Basic Functions performed by the Department Category of staff under the 
Department
6. Slaughterhouse.
7. Motor vehicles and ambulance.
8. Control of environmental pollution.
7. Lighting and 
Electricity 
Department
1. Street lighting.
2. Area lighting.
3.  Maintenance of all types of pumps and motors (in 
relation to clean water and turbid water).
4.  Lighting of municipal parks, buildings and other 
installations.
5.  Electrical plants and machineries including photo electric 
and non-conventional energy sources.
6. Maintenance of electric crematoriums.
1. Electric Mistry
2. Lighting Supervisor
8. Education 
Department
1. Primary and Secondary Education.
2. Technical Education.
3. Adult and Non-Formal Education.
4. National Literacy Programme.
5.  Cultural Development including Music and Art 
Education.
6. Sports and Physical Culture.
7. Library.
8. Creche.
9. In-service Teachers’ Training Programme.
1. Teacher
9. Stores 
Department
1. Purchase and maintenance of stores.
2. Supply of stores to various departments.
3. Disposal of un-serviceable stores.
1. Store Keeper
10. Information 
Technology 
Department
1. Information technology related works. 1. System Analyst
[Source: West Bengal Municipalities (Procedure and Conduct of Business) Rules, 1995 and West Bengal 
Municipal Employees’ (Recruitment) Rules, 2005]

122
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Appendix-12
Details of Sanctioned Strength vis-à-vis Persons-in-Position, of Regular/Part-time Medical Officers, Staff Nurses, ANMs, Laboratory 
Technicians and Pharmacists, in UPHCs
(Vide Para: 6.3.2.2, Page: 98)
Sl. 
No.
Name of the 
ULBs Population
Sanctioned 
Strength  
 of Medical 
Officer (MO) 
Actual No. of 
MO Shortfall 
Sanctioned 
strength of 
Staff Nurse 
Actual 
No. of 
Staff 
Nurse 
Shortfall 
Sanctioned 
strength of 
ANM 
Actual 
No of 
ANM 
Shortfall 
Sanctioned 
strength of 
Pharmacist 
Actual 
No. of 
Pharmacist 
Shortfall 
Sanctioned 
strength 
of Lab 
technician 
Actual 
No. of Lab 
technician 
Shortfall 
Regular Part-
time Regular Part-
time Regular Part-
time
1 Asansol MC 11,52,443 23 23 18 4 5 19 50 0 50 61 15 46 23 13 10 23 14 9
2 Bansberia 1,03,920 2 2 1 - 1 2 4 0 4 10 3 7 2 2 0 2 2 0
3 Barasat 2,78,435 6 6 6 6 0 0 12 0 12 28 0 28 6 6 0 6 6 0
4 Barrackpore 1,52,783 3 3 3 0 0 3 6 0 6 15 3 12 3 3 0 3 3 0
5 Bongaon 1,08,864 DNF DNF DNF DNF DNF DNF DNF DNF DNF DNF DNF DNF DNF DNF DNF DNF DNF DNF
6 Contai 92,226 2 2 2 2 0 0 4 0 4 9 2 7 2 2 0 2 1 1
7 Coochbehar 77,935 2 2 2 0 0 2 4 2 2 8 1 7 2 2 0 2 2 0
8 Habra 1,47,221 3 3 2 3 1 0 6 2 4 15 0 15 3 1 2 3 3 0
9 Jiaganj- 
Azimganj
51,790 2 2 2 2 0 0 4 5 -1 5 1 4 2 1 1 2 2 0
10 Kaliyaganj 53,530 1 1 0 1 1 0 2 0 2 5 0 5 1 1 0 1 1 0
11 Kalna 56,722 1 1 0 0 1 1 2 0 2 6 0 6 1 0 1 1 0 1
12 Katwa 81,615 2 2 2 2 0 0 4 1 3 8 1 7 2 2 0 2 2 0
13 Kharagpur 2,07,604 6 6 6 6 0 0 12 2 10 21 5 16 6 5 1 6 5 1
14 Kolkata MC 44,96,694 144 144 70 74 74 70 288 83 205 450 103 347 144 110 34 144 87 57
15 Konnagar   76,172 2 2 2 2 0 0 4 0 4 8 3 5 2 2 0 2 2 0
16 Midnapore 1,69,264 3 3 3 3 0 0 9 0 9 3 2 1 3 3 0 3 2 1
17 Panihati 3,77,347 8 8 1 1 7 7 16 2 14 38 1 37 8 1 7 8 1 7
18 Raiganj 1,83,612 8 4 1 1 7 3 8 0 8 18 6 12 4 1 3 4 2 2
19 Siliguri MC 5,13,264 20 10 5 8 15 2 20 2 18 51 9 42 10 7 3 10 10 0
20 Suri 67,864 2 1 1 1 1 0 2 2 0 7 2 5 1 1 0 1 1 0
21 Uttarpara- 
Kotrung 
1,59,147 6 3 3 2 3 1 6 0 6 16 3 13 3 3 0 3 3 0
(Source: data furnished by ULBs)
DNF– Data Not Furnished.

i
Appendices
Glossary of 
Abbreviations

ii
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act

123
Glossary of Abbreviations
Sl. No. Abbreviation Full form
1. ADDA Asansol Durgapur Development Authority
2. ADP Annual Development Plan
3. AMRUT Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation
4. BoC Board of Councillors
5. BRGF Backward Regions Grant Fund
6. BSUP Basic Services for Urban Poor
7. C&AG Comptroller and Auditor General
8. CAA Constitutional Amendment Act
9. CBPHCS Community Based Primary Health Care Services
10. CIC Chairman-in-Council
11. CLFA Committee on Local Fund Accounts
12. CMA Chief Municipal Auditor
13. CMDA Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority
14. CMFA Controller of Municipal Finances and Accounts
15. CMOH Chief Medical Officer of Health
16. CMU Change Management Unit
17. CPCB Central Pollution Control Board
18. DDP Draft Development Plan
19. DFID Department for International Development
20. DH&FW Department of Health and Family Welfare
21. DLB Directorate of Local Bodies
22. DPC District Planning Committee
23. DPR Detailed Project Report
24. ELA Examiner of Local Accounts
25. EoI Expression of Interest
26. FC Finance Commission
27. FSTP Faecal Sludge Treatment Plant
28. FY Financial Year
29. GTA Gorkhaland Territorial Administration
30. HFA Housing for All
31. HIT Howrah Improvement Trust
32. HMC Howrah Municipal Corporation
33. ILG&US Institute of Local Government and Urban Studies
34. JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency 
35. JNNURM Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
36. KMA Kolkata Metropolitan Area
37. KMC Kolkata Municipal Corporation
38. KMDA Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority
39. KSWMIP Kolkata Solid Waste Management Improvement Project
40. KUSP Kolkata Urban Services for the Poor
41. LUDCP Land Use and Development Control Plan
42. MC Municipal Corporation
43. MED Municipal Engineering Directorate

124
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
Sl. No. Abbreviation Full form
44. MIC Mayor-in-Council
45. MLD Million litres per day
46. MoEFC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
47. MoU Memorandum of Understanding
48. MoUD Ministry of Urban Development
49. MPC Metropolitan Planning Committee
50. MSW Municipal Solid Waste
51. NAA Notified Area Authority
52. NDITA Nabadiganta Industrial Township Authority
53. NGT National Green Tribunal
54. NMCG National Mission for Clean Ganga
55. NSAP National Social Assistance Programme
56. NUHM National Urban Health Mission
57. NULM National Urban Livelihood Mission
58. NVBDCP National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme
59. OPD Out Patient Department
60. PA Performance Audit
61. PHED Public Health Engineering Department
62. PMAY Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana
63. PPP Public Private Partnership
64. PWD Public Works Department
65. SBM Swachh Bharat Mission
66. SC Scheduled Caste
67. SFC State Finance Commission
68. SHPC State High Power Committee
69. SJDA Siliguri Jalpaiguri Development Authority
70. SLRDC Salt Lake Reclamation and Development Circle
71. SLTF State Level Task Force
72. SMC Siliguri Municipal Corporation
73. ST Scheduled Tribe
74. STP Sewage Treatment Plant
75. SUDA State Urban Development Agency
76. SWM Solid Waste Management
77. TPD Tonnes per day
78. UD&MAD Urban Development and Municipal Affairs Department
79. ULB Urban Local Bodies
80. UPHC Urban Primary Health Centre
81. UPHCS Urban Primary Health Care Services
82. Urban RCH Urban Reproductive and Child Health
83. URIF Urban Reforms Incentive Fund
84. WBM West Bengal Municipal
85. WBMC West Bengal Municipal Corporation
86. WBMSC West Bengal Municipal Service Commission
87. WBSEC West Bengal State Election Commission
88. WBVB West Bengal Valuation Board

Government of West Bengal                 Report No. 3  of the year 2023  
Ó COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in
https://cag.gov.in/ag1/west-bengal/en
Government of West Bengal
Report No. 3 of the year 2023
Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Performance Audit on the Efficacy of Implementation
th
 of the 74  Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992
