COMPTROLLER
 & AUDITOR
 GENERAL
 OF
 INDIA
सत्यमेव जयते
के नियंत्रक
 एवं
 महालेखापरीक्षक
भारत
COMPTROLLER
 & AUDITOR
 GENERAL
 OF
 INDIA
सत्यमेव जयते
के नियंत्रक
 एवं
 महालेखापरीक्षक
भारत

2
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

1
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Project Imports Scheme
Union Government
Department of Revenue (Indirect Taxes - Customs)
Report No. 27 of 2026
(Performance Audit – Civil)
(Laid on the table of Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on .............)

2
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

i
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Sl. No. Contents Page
1 Preface i
2 Executive Summary iii to viii
3 Glossary of Terms and Abbreviations ix to x
4 Chapter I : Overview of Project Imports Scheme 1-6
5 Chapter II : Review of procedural adequacy in the Project 
Imports Scheme 7-32
6 Chapter III : 
Ease of Doing Business initiatives for 
facilitation of Imports under Project Imports 
Scheme
33-41
7 Chapter IV : Monitoring and Internal control 43-54
8 Appendices and Statements 55-69
Table of Contents

ii
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

i
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
This Report has been prepared for submission to the President of India under 
Article 151 of the Constitution of India.
The Report contains significant results of the Performance Audit on ‘Project 
Imports Scheme’.
The instances mentioned in this Report are those which came to notice in 
the course of test audit conducted during the period 2024-25, and covering 
transactions of the period April 2019 to March 2024.
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Performance Auditing 
Guidelines issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
Audit acknowledges the cooperation received from Ministry of Finance (MoF), 
Department of Revenue (DoR) and their field formations at each stage of the 
audit process.
Preface

ii
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

iii
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
About this Performance Audit
The Project Import (PI) scheme is designed to facilitate the rapid, duty-
concessional import of machinery, components, and raw materials for setting up 
new industrial plants or substantial expansion of capacity greater than 25 per cent 
of industrial plants. The scheme seeks to achieve the objective of smooth and 
quick assessment of imports by providing for a simplified process of classification 
and valuation. 
Under the scheme, all goods imported for a project are classified under one 
chapter heading 9801 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 and are assessed at a 
uniform customs duty rate even though other headings may cover these goods 
more specifically. The scheme is available to projects falling under specified 
sectors like, industrial plant, irrigation project, power project, mining, and oil/ 
mineral exploration project. 
The scheme of project imports is mainly governed by the Customs Tariff Heading 
(CTH) 9801 and Notes to Chapter 98 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975; Project Import 
Regulations (PIR), 1986; General Exemption Notification Nos. 12/2012-Customs 
dated 17 March 2012 and 21/2012-Customs dated 17 March 2012.
The performance audit was conducted to assess adequacy of statutory provisions 
to support simplified procedures for project imports, compliance with procedural 
requirements and effectiveness of internal controls. The audit covered various 
aspects relating to registration, importation and finalisation of contracts of 
project import scheme at the port level.
The audit was carried out for the period of five years from FY 2019-20 to FY 2023-
24. As per the DG Systems’ data, during this period, a total of 485 contracts were 
registered under the Project Import Scheme with CIF value of `1.34 Lakh crore.  
The total revenue collected under the scheme amounted to ` 10,567.09 crore 
and duty foregone on account of concessional assessment under the scheme 
stood at ` 6,704.55 crore.
Out of the total 1,467 PI registrations across 34 Customs Commissionerates, a 
sample of 915 cases (62.37 per cent) were drawn from three categories, viz., 
Finalised (421 cases), Ongoing (449 cases), Registration done but no imports 
made (45 cases) from 18 Commissionerates. Out of the total 915 selected 
cases, 139 cases involving a CIF value of ₹15,818.11 crore pertaining to nine 
Commissionerates were not made available to Audit.
Executive Summary

iv
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
A declining trend was observed in both the number of contracts registered and the 
CIF value of the contracts during the period from FY 19-20 to FY 23-24. Over these 
years, the proportion of new contracts registered under the scheme decreased 
significantly by 78.10 per cent and the value of the contracts by 77.45 per cent 
mainly due to simplification/revision in duty structure during last 15 years and 
lesser rate of duty in categories of goods required for setting up of an industrial 
plant or project.  Among all eligible sectors, the power sector accounted for the 
largest share of project imports during this period.
Structure of the Report
This report contains 36 audit observations and 11 recommendations. The 
performance audit has revenue implication of ₹128.58 crore along with procedural 
irregularities involving ₹2,979.33 crore. Responses were received from CBIC and 
its field formations for 28 paras, which have fully/partially accepted the audit 
findings. Response for remaining eight paras are awaited. Similarly, nine out of 
11 recommendations have been accepted by CBIC, and not accepted in respect 
of two recommendations.
This report is divided into four chapters. Chapter I presents an overview of 
Project Imports Scheme along with audit objectives, scope, sample, audit criteria 
and audit methodology used to conduct this Performance Audit. Chapters II to IV 
cover the audit findings, conclusions and recommendations related to review of 
procedural adequacy in project imports scheme, Ease of Doing Business measures 
under the scheme, and monitoring and internal controls. The Key findings from 
the performance review are highlighted in subsequent paragraphs.
Chapter II: Review of procedural adequacy in the Project Import Scheme
In this chapter, Audit reviewed the existing statutory provisions of the scheme and 
identified various ambiguities arising from subsequent notifications, compliance 
irregularities, and lack of clarity in regulatory provisions. The chapter includes 21 
audit observations involving a revenue implication of ₹125.58 crore, procedural 
irregularities involving ₹2,112.78 crore, along with five recommendations.
The Project Import Regulations (PIR), 1986 do not prescribe specific timelines for 
registration of projects or for completion of imports under registered contracts. 
The absence of defined timeframes impacts project implementation schedules, 
reflect procedural inefficiencies and further weakens control over import 
Summary of Audit Findings

v
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
compliance, and may potentially lead to duty evasion, not accounting of goods, 
and loss of revenue to the Government.
 (Para 2.1 and 2.2)
Extension of Project Import benefits to not notified projects and ineligible 
machinery/goods indicates deficiencies in verification of project eligibility at the 
assessment stage and not adhering to notification provisions, leading to loss of 
revenue.
(Para 2.4 and 2.7)
Audit scrutiny of 383 finalised Project Import cases revealed that in 57 cases across 
eight Commissionerates, contracts were finalised without obtaining mandatory 
Installation Certificates, conducting the prescribed Plant Site Verification (PSV) 
and obtaining other prescribed documents such as Reconciliation Statements, 
copies of Bills of Entry, invoices, and final payment certificates. These deficiencies 
in finalisation of the contracts, indicated not adhering to prescribed procedures 
under the Project Import Regulations (PIR) and the Customs Law Manual.
(Para 2.11 and 2.12)
Chapter III: Ease of Doing Business initiatives for facilitation of Imports under 
Project Import Scheme 
In this chapter, Audit examined key aspects of trade facilitation, including cargo 
dwell time, documentation requirements, time taken for finalisation of assessments 
and contracts, and transaction costs. The chapter contains six audit observations 
with no monetary value and includes two recommendations.
Audit observed substantial delays in the clearance of goods under the Project 
Import (PI) Scheme, which is contrary to the objective of procedural simplification 
and expeditious cargo movement. Such delays (ranging from 3 to 1,149 days) 
point to inefficiencies in coordination, document processing and system-level 
approvals within the Project Import framework. Not adhering to prescribed 
timelines adversely impacts project implementation schedules and undermines 
the targets envisaged under the National Trade Facilitation Action Plan (NTFAP), 
thereby affecting the ease of doing business.
(Para 3.1)
The delays and inconsistencies observed in the finalisation of Bills of Entry, even 
after completion of project contracts, indicate deficiencies in post-clearance 
monitoring and inadequate linkage of records between project registration and 
related import documentation. Further, instances of premature finalisation of 

vi
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Recommendations
Bills of Entry without corresponding finalisation of project contracts were also 
noticed, which point to weak internal controls and lack of coordination between 
the assessing and project monitoring sections.
(Para 3.3)
Chapter IV: Monitoring and Internal Control
Although the Customs Department has computerized its operations through the 
Electronic Data Interchange system, the performance audit identified systemic 
issues in the finalisation of provisional assessments and Project Import contracts, 
as well as in the adequacy of oversight mechanisms and internal controls. The 
chapter includes nine systemic audit observations involving a revenue implication 
of ₹3.00 crore, procedural irregularities involving ₹866.55 crore, along with four 
recommendations.
Audit observed instances of not renewing of Bank Guarantees and Bonds in cases 
where finalization of Project Import contracts remained pending, indicating 
deficiencies in monitoring and weak internal controls.
(Para 4.1)
The pendency of recovery in confirmed demand cases indicates weaknesses 
in the Department’s follow-up and monitoring mechanism for enforcement of 
adjudicated demands. Prolonged delays or failure in recovery not only result in 
blockage of government revenue but may also lead to difficulties in realization 
due to expiry of limitation periods or not traceable of importers.
(Para 4.3)
Recommendations
Recommendation No 1: CBIC may consider prescribing a specific time frame for 
completion of Project Import contract registration after receipt of a complete 
application, and issue suitable instructions to ensure uniform compliance across 
field formations.
Recommendation No 2: CBIC may consider amending the Project Import 
Regulations, 1986 to prescribe a time limit for completion of imports and closure 
of projects. Besides, integrating system-based alerts in ICES to flag cases where 
no import activity has occurred beyond a prescribed period, will enable timely 
review and closure of such registrations.

vii
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Recommendation No 3: CBIC may ensure automated document validation 
controls are embedded within the ICES registration module to prevent 
registration without submission of mandatory documents.
Recommendation No 4: CBIC may review similar project import cases to ensure 
correct classification and duty application as per tariff provisions. Further, 
Board may integrate automated validation controls within the ICES/License 
Module to flag ineligible contract registrations based on the registration date, 
classification, etc. thereby ensuring compliance with the conditions prescribed 
in the relevant customs notifications.
Recommendation No 5: The CBIC may institute mandatory system-based 
validation checks within ICES to ensure that finalisation of Project Import case 
cannot be processed unless the Installation Certificate and Plant Site Verification 
report are uploaded and verified.
Recommendation No 6: CBIC may consider introducing system-based monitoring 
of dwell time for all Project Import Bills of Entry in ICES and analyse delays 
across its field formations to identify process bottlenecks and take corrective 
measures.
Recommendation No 7: CBIC may consider incorporating a linkage mechanism 
in ICES to ensure that finalisation of Project Import contracts automatically 
triggers validation of associated Bills of Entry, preventing isolated or premature 
closure. Besides, automated alerts for pending or overdue BEs finalisations 
would also enable systematic monitoring at the Commissionerate level.
Recommendation No 8: CBIC may instruct field formations to strictly enforce the 
requirement for renewal of Bonds and Bank Guarantees until the Project Import 
contracts are finalized in accordance with the provisions of the PIR, 1986. A 
system-based alert mechanism in ICES may be instituted to monitor the validity 
of Bonds/BGs and flag pending cases nearing expiry.
Recommendation No 9: CBIC may direct all field formations to ensure that all 
imports involving related parties, covered under the Project Import Regulations, 
1986, are promptly referred to the Special Valuation Branch (SVB) in accordance 
with prescribed guidelines. Further, an internal compliance checklist may be 
integrated into the ICES system to flag related-party transactions automatically 
for SVB reference before assessment.
Recommendation No 10: CBIC may strengthen its demand recovery and 
monitoring framework by instituting a centralized register or digital tracker 
within ICES to capture the status of all confirmed demands along with recovery 
actions initiated.

viii
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Recommendation No 11: CBIC  may direct all field formations to strictly 
adhere to the reporting and monitoring framework prescribed in Circular 
No. 22/2011-Customs dated 4 May 2011. The Project Import Registers may 
be digitally maintained and monitored periodically to ensure data integrity. 
The Directorate General of Performance Management (DGPM) may consider 
developing an automated dashboard linked with ICES to capture and consolidate 
pendency across Commissionerates in real time.

ix
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Glossary of Terms and Abbreviations
Abbreviation Expanded Form
AAR Authority of Advance Ruling
ACC Air Cargo Complex
ADD Anti-Dumping Duty
AIDC Agricultural Infrastructure and Development Cess
BCD Basic Custom Duty
BE Bills of Entry
BG Bank Guarantees
BRC Bank Realisation Certificate
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India
CBIC Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs
CGST Central Goods and Services Tax
CIF Cost, Insurance and Freight Value
CRIP Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process
CTH Custom Tariff Heading
CVD Countervailing Duty
DGPM Directorate General of Performance Management
EDI Electronic Data Interchange
EODB Ease of Doing Business
EPCG Export Promotion Capital Goods
GST Goods and Service Tax
IAD Internal Audit Department
IBC Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
ICD Inland Container Depot
ICES Indian Customs EDI System
IGST Integrated Goods and Service Tax
JNCH Jawaharlal Nehru Custom House
MIS Management Information System
MPR Monthly Progress Report
MTPA Million Tonnes Per Annum
NAC National Assessment Centre
NCH New Customs House
NCLT National Company Law Tribunal
NTFAP National Trade Facilitation Action Plan
NTPC National Thermal Power Corporation
OOC Out of Charge
PA Performance Audit

x
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Abbreviation Expanded Form
PAC Public Accounts Committee
PD Provisional Duty Bond
PI Project Import
PIR Project Import Regulations
PSV Plant Site Verification
SCN Show Cause Notice
SEZ Special Economic Zones
SVB Special Valuation Branch
SWS Social Welfare Surcharge
TRA Telegraphic Release Advice
WTO World Trade Organisation

1
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
CHAPTER I
Overview of Project Imports Scheme
1.1  Introduction
Pr
oject Imports scheme facilitates importing various items of machinery, 
equipment, raw materials, etc. required for initial setting up or for substantial 
expansion of an existing project involving not less than 25 per cent of the installed 
capacity. These imports are subject to certain procedural requirement to be 
complied by the importers. 
The Project Imports (PI) scheme was first introduced in 1965 through the 
Project Imports (Registration of Contract
1) Regulations, 1965, which established 
project-wise pre-assessment/registration procedures under the Customs/Tariff 
framework. This was superseded by Project Import Regulations, 1986 (PIR) vide 
Ministry of Finance, Notification No.230/1986-Customs dated 3 April 1986.
The objective of the scheme is to simplify the procedures with a view to facilitate 
quicker customs clearance of goods imported. Goods under Project Imports are 
assessed at lower rate of duty than the Tariff Rate under Notification No.50/2017
2 
dated 30 June 2017, as amended from time to time.
1.2  Project Imports – An Overview  
Normally
, imported goods are classified separately under different tariff headings 
and assessed to applicable Customs duty, but as a variety of goods are imported 
for setting up of an Industrial Project, their separate classification and valuation for 
assessment to duty becomes cumbersome. Further, the suppliers of a contracted 
project, do not value every item or parts of machinery which are supplied in 
stages. Hence, ascertaining values for different items delays assessment leading 
to demurrage and time and cost overruns for the project. 
Therefore, to facilitate smooth and quick assessment by a simplified process of 
classification and valuation, the goods imported under Project Import Scheme 
are placed under a single CTH 9801 in the Customs Tariff Act, 1975. This facilitates 
assessment and ensures faster clearances of goods.
1  Registration of Contracts is done under Regulation 5 of the Project Imports Regulations, 
1986 whereby an importer intending to avail the benefits of the Project Imports Scheme must 
register the project contract with Customs before importing the goods.
2  In supersession of Notification Nos.12/2012-Customs dated 17-03-2012, 21/2002-Customs 
dated 01-03-  2002 & 17/2001-Customs dated 01-03-2001

2
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
The projects covered under this Scheme are Industrial Plant Projects; Irrigation 
Plant Projects; Power Projects (other than solar power plant/projects 3); Mining 
Projects; Projects for the exploration of oil or other minerals, and such other 
projects as the Central Government may, having regard to the economic 
development of the country, notify in the Official Gazette. 
Goods that can be imported under Project Import Scheme are machinery, 
prime movers, instruments, apparatus, appliances, control gear, transmission 
equipment, auxiliary equipment, equipment required for research and 
development purposes, equipment for testing and quality control, components, 
raw materials for the manufacture of these items, etc. In addition, spare parts, 
consumables up to 10 per cent of the assessable value of the goods can also be 
imported under Project Import.
The Basic Customs Duty (BCD)/ Additional duty of customs (equivalent to excise 
duty) on imports has been fully/ partially exempted (subject to with/without 
conditions as specified against each entry) on the goods falling under Tariff 
heading 9801 of the Customs tariff.  The effective rate of BCD applicable to such 
projects is Nil / 2.5 per cent / 5 per cent ad valorem and IGST
4 is applicable at 18 
per cent ad valorem. Other duties such as countervailing duty (CVD) on subsidised 
articles, Countervailing Duty (CVD) of Central Excise Duty (pre-GST period), Social 
Welfare Surcharge
5 (SWS), Anti-Dumping Duty (ADD), Agricultural Infrastructure 
and Development Cess6 (AIDC) are payable unless otherwise they are specifically 
exempted. 
1.3  Audit Objectives
The objectiv
es of the PA were to assess  
(i) whether 
the statutory provisions/ rules, regulations, instructions/ 
notifications with regard to registration, imports, monitoring and finalization 
of Project Imports were adequate;
(ii)
 whether 
there was compliance to rules, regulations and procedures framed 
under Customs Act 1962, Project Import Regulations 1986, Notifications and 
Instructions issued by the Board from time to time;
(iii)
 whether 
adequate and effective internal controls exist to safeguard the 
interests of the Government.
3  Inserted vide Notification No.54/2022-Cus., dated 19-10-2022
4 Notification No.01/2017-Integrated Tax (Rate), dated 28-06-2017
5 Notification No.11/2018-Customs, dated 02-02-2018
6 Notification No.11/2021-Customs, dated 01-02-2021

3
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
1.4  Audit Scope & Sampling Me thodology  
The assessment period covered under this PA was from FY 2019-20 to FY 2023-24.  
Out of a total of 34 Customs Commissionerates dealing with the Project Imports 
Scheme, 18 Commissionerates (52.94 per cent) were selected for this audit.
During the course of audit, various aspects of Project Imports Scheme, relating 
to registration, importation and finalisation of contracts were examined at ports 
viz., Sea/Air Cargo, Inland Container Depot (ICD) within the jurisdiction of the 
selected 18 Commissionerates.  
Based on risk assessment and data analysis, 915 cases out of the total 1467 PI 
registrations (62.37 per cent) were selected under the following three categories 
for detailed examination, as elaborated in table below:
 Table 1.1:  Category-wise Sample Selection 
Finalised Ongoing
Registration 
done but no 
imports made
Total 
cases/ 
selected
Sample 
produced 
to Audit
Sample 
not 
Produced 
to AuditTotal Selected Total Selected Total Selected 
534 421 888 449 45 45 1,467/ 
915
776 139
Source: DG Systems, CBIC
The details of Universe and Sample selected audit office-wise are given in 
Appendix - 1 and the list of cases not produced to Audit are given in Appendix-2
The sectoral representation of the selected 915 sample cases are depicted below:
Chart 1.1: Sectoral representation of selected sample
 Source: DG Systems, CBIC

4
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
The objectives, scope and audit methodology for the Performance Audit were 
discussed in the Entry Conference held on 18 March 2025 between Audit and 
Department of Revenue. The draft findings were discussed during the Exit 
Conference held on 05 May 2026 and response received from DoR on 04 May 
2026 have been incorporated along with suitable rebuttals, wherever applicable.
1.5  Audit Criteria
The Audit crit
eria for the audit were drawn from the following:
	 The Customs Act, 1962;
	 The Customs Tariff Act, 1975;
	 Project Imports Regulations,1986;
	 Customs Valuation (Determination of value of Imported Goods) Rules, 2007;
	 Customs (Finalisation of Provisional Assessment) Regulations, 2018, and
	 Customs Manual and Circulars and Notifications issued by CBIC from time to 
time.
1.6  Cases regis tered during the audit period
During the audit period FY 2019-20 to FY 2023-24, a total of 485 contracts were 
registered under the Project Imports Scheme, involving an aggregate CIF value 
of ₹1.34 lakh crore. The year-wise break-up of the number of contracts and their 
corresponding CIF values is presented in the chart below.
Chart 1.2: year- wise contracts registered with CIF Values 
 Source: DG Systems, CBIC

5
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Analysis of the above data revealed a downward trend in the number of project 
import registrations during FY 2020-21 and FY 2021-22. Further, a sharp decline 
in registrations was observed in FY 2023-24 as compared to the preceding year. 
Over the five-year period under review, the number of contracts registered under 
the Project Imports Scheme decreased from 146 in FY 2019-20 to 32 in FY 2023-
24, representing a decline of 78.10 per cent.
1.7  Revenue under Project Imports Scheme
De
tails of revenue parameters, namely Assessable Value, Duty Collected, and 
Duty Foregone, in respect of imports under the Project Imports Scheme during 
the audit period FY 2019-20 to FY 2023-24, are presented below:
Chart 1.3: Assessable Value, Duty Collected, and Duty Foregone on  
imports made under Project Imports Scheme
During the five-year period from FY 2019-20 to FY 2023-24,as seen from the above 
chart, the total revenue collected under the Project Imports Scheme amounted to 
₹10,567.09 crore, while the duty foregone on account of concessional assessment 
under the scheme stood at ₹6,704.55 crore.
1.8  Earlier Report of CAG on Project Imports Scheme
A 
Performance Audit on the Project Imports Scheme was earlier conducted and 
findings/recommendations featured in C&AG’s Audit Report No. 42 of 2016 
(Indirect Taxes- Customs). This report was subsequently taken up for discussion 
by the Honourable Public Accounts Committee (PAC).  
 Source: DG Systems, CBIC

6
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
In all, out of nine Audit recommendations, eight recommendations have 
been accepted and five implemented by the Department.  Action taken on 
recommendations and status of its implementation by the Customs was reviewed 
during the current audit and persistent irregularities owing to inadequate 
monitoring on recommendations have been included in this report, as detailed 
in Appendix-3.
1.9   Acknowledg ement
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by the Ministry of Finance (MoF), 
Department of Revenue (DoR) along with their field formations in providing 
necessary information and records during of the conduct of audit. 

7
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Audit examined the existing statutory provisions of project import regulations, 
CBIC Circulars and notifications with regard to registration of contract, assessment 
of imported goods. Audit observed instances, which indicated that some of 
the provisions are ambiguous leading to short levy of duty. Further, cases of 
incorrect grant of project imports concession due to not submitting of requisite 
documents and cases finalised even in absence of relevant documents indicated 
lacuna in compliance to the prescribed provisions. The findings are detailed in 
the succeeding paragraphs:
2.1 Absence of prescribed timelines for registration of Project Import Contracts 
R
egulation 5 of the Project Import Regulations, 1986, as amended, mandates 
that importers apply in writing to the proper officer at the port of import for 
registration of project import contracts, along with the prescribed documents, 
prior to commencement of imports. However, the PI Regulations or the Citizen’s 
Charter does not stipulate any specific timeframe for completion of the registration 
process after submission of the application.
Audit observed that the registration process, inter alia, involved multiple 
intermediary steps such as execution of bonds and bank guarantees, verification 
of the sponsoring authority’s letter, and scrutiny of the list of goods proposed for 
import. In the absence of prescribed timelines for completion of these activities, 
Commissionerates were not following uniform practices, resulting in delays. These 
delays were attributable both to the department, in registering the contracts, 
and to the importers, owing to delayed submission of requisite documents and 
responses to queries raised by Customs authorities.
Review of the time taken for registration of the 776 selected cases revealed that 
110 cases (23.35 per cent) were registered within a period exceeding one month, 
including five cases where the delay extended beyond three months, as detailed 
below:
Table 2.1: Time taken in registration 
Time taken in Registration Number of cases
Upto 30 days 361
31 to 90 days 105
Beyond 90 days 5
Data not available 305
Total 776
CHAPTER II
Review of procedural adequacy in the Project 
Imports Scheme

8
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Out of the five delayed cases of above three months, in two instances across 
ACC Bengaluru and NCH Mumbai, involving a total CIF value of ₹112.92 crore, 
delays of 92 days and 303 days were recorded in completing registration after 
submission of the requisite documents. In the other three cases, the delay was 
on part of the importers in complying with the required conditions.
NCH Mumbai stated (September 2025) that there is no timeline for registration of 
Project in regulation 5 of PIR.
An illustrative case is detailed hereunder:
M/s. A1 under Air Cargo Complex, Bengaluru submitted the application for 
registration on 28 September 2022. Despite submitting all relevant documents, 
the registration was done by department on 28 July 2023, after 303 days.
ACC Bengaluru stated (September 2025) that the delay in registration was owing 
to the time taken in verification of the genuineness of the Essentiality Certificate 
issued by the Project Authority. 
The delay in registration of Project Import contracts indicates inadequate 
monitoring and absence of defined timelines in the internal procedures or Citizen’s 
Charter. Such delays can postpone concessional assessment under Heading 9801, 
impact project implementation schedules, and reflect procedural inefficiencies. 
The lack of a prescribed turnaround time also limits accountability and uniformity 
across Commissionerates and may be a contributing factor to the significant 
decline in the number of contracts registered under the Project Imports Scheme.
Recommendation No 1: CBIC  may consider prescribing a specific time frame for 
completion of Project Import contract registration after receipt of a complete 
application, and issue suitable instructions to ensure uniform compliance across 
field formations.
CBIC while agreeing with the audit observation regarding the importance of 
timely Project Import contract registration, stated (May 2026) that registration 
timelines may vary depending upon completeness of documents, technical 
scrutiny, verification of the sponsoring authority’s letter, execution of bond/bank 
guarantee, verification of genuineness of the bank guarantee, etc.
Accordingly, field formations have been advised to ensure prompt registration, 
strictly adhering to prescribed procedures and duly considering the relevant 
timelines outlined in the Citizen’s Charter. Further, timelines for intermediate 
stages viz., scrutiny for completeness, deficiency memo, and verification of 
recommendatory letters issued by the sponsoring authority / genuineness of bank 
guarantee have been specified for ensuring timely registration of PI contracts.

9
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
2.2 Absence of prescribed timelines for completion of Imports and closure 
of pr
ojects
The Project Import Regulations (PIR), 1986 do not prescribe any specific time 
limit for completion of imports under a registered project contract from the date 
of its registration. The absence of a defined timeframe leaves the import process 
open-ended and susceptible to delays in project completion and finalisation.
Further, in terms of Regulation 7 of the PIR, 1986, read with Paragraph 5 of Chapter 
5 of the Customs Law Manual, an importer is required to submit, within three 
months from the date of the last import, a Reconciliation Statement showing the 
quantity and value of imported goods along with an Installation Certificate issued 
by a registered Chartered Engineer, copies of Bills of Entry, invoices, and other 
relevant documents necessary for finalisation of the contract.
These requirements were reiterated in Circular No. 22/2011-Customs dated 
4 May 2011, issued in line with the recommendations of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General (CAG) in an earlier Performance Audit Report (PA 24 of 2009-10  
and the same was reiterated in PA 42 of 2016), emphasizing timely completion 
and finalisation of project imports.
Audit scrutiny of 353 ongoing Project Import cases revealed that in 56 cases 
across seven Commissionerates
7, the time elapsed since the previous import 
ranged from seven to 125 months, involving a total CIF value of ₹2,124.58 crore, 
without adequate justification from the importers. (Statement-1)
In five cases under Mundra Commissionerate, involving a CIF value of ₹29.08 crore, 
it was further observed that the projects had already commenced commercial 
operations (September 2022), however, the respective project import contracts 
were yet to be finalised by the Department.
An illustrative case is detailed hereunder:
M/s A2 registered a Project with CIF value of ₹40.69 crore in November 2020 
for import of Capital Goods/equipment for initial setting up of project at Kolkata 
Metro Railway, West Bengal falling under Kolkata Port Commissionerate.
The importer had imported (February 2021) the capital goods availing duty 
concession amounting to ₹2.62 crore. The importer had neither submitted any 
documents for finalisation of contract nor applied for extension of time even after 
lapse of more than 31 months. No extension of time was granted by department 
to the importer either for submission of the documents nor did department 
initiate any action as instructed in circular cited supra.
7 CC Port Kolkata (4 cases); ICD-Tughlakabad, Delhi (30 cases); ACC, Delhi (8 cases); CC, Noida (5 
cases); CC Mundra (6 cases); CC Ahmedabad (2 cases); CC Jodhpur (1 case)

10
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Kolkata Port Commissionerate stated (September 2025) that action has been 
initiated by enforcement of Bonds/ Bank Guarantees, issuance of duty demand 
and Show Cause Notices, and imposition of penalties and that efforts are being 
made to expedite the process and ensure compliance in a time-bound manner.
The reply in respect of other Commissionerates was as under: 
Jodhpur Commissionerate stated (August 2025) that action can only be taken 
after clearance of the last consignment, as specified in Regulation 7. Further, 
the matter is sub-judice before the Hon’ble High Court and without final order of 
Hon’ble court, action cannot be taken. 
The reply may be reviewed as the interim order did not restrict finalization of the 
contract. It clarified that in case the petitioners were to fail in the writ petitions, 
they will pay the differential customs duty. As a matter of fact, after the interim 
order, 83.34 per cent of the goods were imported through 29 bills of entries and 
only 16.66 per cent of the remaining goods was pending for import since 15 
March 2023, i.e., more than two years of receipts of last consignment.
Mundra Commissionerate stated (December 2025) that letters had been issued 
to the importers for submitting the reasons for delay in import after registration 
of various projects and submit documents if all imports have been made so that 
project might be finalised.
Ahmedabad Commissionerate stated (December 2025) that PIR did not prescribe 
any timeline for completion of imports under the contract. It further stated that (i) 
in many cases, the importer registered the project at one port, and imported the 
goods from various ports; (ii) the Department came to know about the completion 
of the project when the importer submitted the documents for finalization of the 
project and that no action be initiated for delay in submission of documents for 
finalization of contract against the importer.  In respect of other importer, it was 
directed to submit the required documents for finalisation of the case.
The absence of a defined timeline for completion of imports under the Project 
Import Scheme and delays in submission of reconciliation documents have 
resulted in prolonged pendency of finalisation of contracts. This weakens control 
over import compliance, may potentially lead to duty evasion, not accounting of 
goods, and loss of revenue to the Government.
Recommendation No 2: CBIC may consider amending the Project Import 
Regulations, 1986 to prescribe a time limit for completion of imports and 
closure of projects. Besides, integrating system-based alerts in ICES to flag cases 
where no import activity has occurred beyond a prescribed period, will enable 
timely review and closure of such registrations.

11
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
CBIC stated (May 2026) that imports under Project Import contracts depend on 
the nature, scale, and execution schedule of projects, which vary across sectors 
and may extend over several years. Hence, import requirements cannot always be 
anticipated at the time of registration. The Board further stated that Sponsoring 
Authorities, being aware of project timelines, have been consulted on prescribing 
a definite time limit for completion of imports under PIR, 1986. CBIC also informed 
that Project Import licences are registered through the Licence Module with an 
expiry date, after which imports are not permitted. An electronic ledger is available 
for monitoring imports and utilisation.
Audit concurs with the response that inherent complexities are involved in 
execution of large-scale and technically complex industrial projects, where import 
requirements may vary depending upon the nature and stage of implementation. 
However, the audit observation was not on the overall duration of projects, but 
on the significant time gap since the last import by the firms, which ranged from 
seven to 125 months in the sampled cases. Such prolonged gaps indicate the 
absence of a structured monitoring framework for timely completion and closure 
of Project Import contracts.
While noting the Board’s approach of system-based monitoring through the 
Licence Module and electronic ledger, Audit is of the view that the Department, 
in consultation with the Sponsoring Authorities, may consider prescribing sector-
specific timelines for completion of imports and finalisation of contracts, duly 
taking into account the nature of business and project requirements. This would 
facilitate timely completion and closure of Project Import contracts.
2.3  Lack of clarity in regulatory provisions on levy of Anti-Dumping Duty on 
g
oods imported under Project 
Goods imported under the Project Imports Scheme are classified under CTH 9801 
for the purpose of basic customs duty and other duties specified in the Project 
Import Regulations, 1986 and relevant exemption notifications.  However, Anti-
Dumping Duty is not a customs tariff rate linked to classification under Chapter 
98. It is imposed under Section 9A of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 through specific 
anti-dumping notifications issued by the Government.
Audit noticed that certain goods liable to ADD under their actual tariff headings 
were cleared under Chapter 9801 without payment of ADD., viz., as per 
Notification No. 7/2017-Customs (ADD) dated 17 February 2017, anti-dumping 
duty is leviable on seamless tubes and pipes of carbon steel imported from the 
People’s Republic of China, at rates prescribed therein.

12
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
M/s. A3, registered a project for setting up a Thermal Power Extension Project 
(2 × 660 MW) in Uttar Pradesh under Chennai-II Commissionerate, and availed 
concessional duty at 5 per cent under Sl. No. 597(iii) of Notification No. 
50/2017-Customs dated 30 June 2017.
Audit scrutiny revealed that the importer had imported, between August 2017 
and April 2018, Seamless Steel Pipes (SA106-C) of various dimensions from 
the People’s Republic of China, involving an assessable value of ₹218.34 lakh. 
However, the applicable ADD, amounting to ₹23.98 lakh, was not paid at the time 
of import, despite being leviable under notification ibid.
CBIC stated (May 2026)  that the goods imported under project imports are 
classified under tariff heading 9801 of the Custom Tariff Act, 1975 and subjected 
to the specified rate of duty instead of merit assessment of imported goods. 
However, the levy of ADD on the specific goods is an independent issue vis-à-
vis the project imports. If the goods imported under project imports are part 
of the investigation by Directorate General of Trade Remedies (DGTR) and the 
resultant findings of DGTR recommend the levy of ADD on goods covered under 
project imports, then the levy of ADD may be specifically mentioned in the ADD 
notification.
The response of the Board on specific mention on levy of ADD on goods covered 
under project Imports scheme would bring clarity in regulatory provisions, 
thereby ensuring statutory levies are charged uniformly at the field formation 
level.
2.4 Incorrect availing of Project imports concessions on projects not notified 
N
otification No. 42/1996-Customs dated 23 July 1996 enlists the projects 
eligible under Project Imports. As per sub-item (6) of CTH 9801/980100, such 
projects are classifiable under CTH 98010019.
Audit scrutiny of 736 cases revealed that in two cases under Mundra 
Commissionerate, concessional assessment under CTH 9801 was incorrectly 
extended to projects not notified, resulting in inadmissible concession of ₹122.80 
lakh.
Audit observed that in both the above cases, the projects were classified by the 
assessee under CTH 98010019, for manufacture of particle board/fibre board 
including densified wood and manufacture of alloy wheels for two and four-
wheelers.
However, these projects were not included in the list of notified projects under 
the said notification. Therefore, the benefit of concessional duty under the Project 

13
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Import Scheme was not admissible and resulted in short payment of customs 
duty amounting to ₹122.80 lakh.
Extension of Project Import benefits to projects not notified indicates deficiencies 
in verification of project eligibility at the assessment stage and not adhering to 
notification provisions, leading to loss of revenue.
This was pointed out (May 2025) to the department and the reply is awaited 
(May 2026).
2.5 Incorrect grant of project concession due to not verifying of substantial 
e
xpansion
As per Regulation 3(c) of the Project Import Regulations (PIR), 1986, “substantial 
expansion” refers to an expansion which increases the existing installed capacity 
by not less than 25 per cent. At the time of finalisation of the contract, importers 
are required to substantiate their claim of substantial expansion by producing 
documentary evidence such as Chartered Engineer’s Certificate, annual accounts, 
balance sheets, or any other relevant record. The Proper Officer is required to 
verify the fulfilment of this condition prior to the registration of the project 
contract under the Project Import Scheme.
Audit observed that in two cases under NCH, Mumbai Commissionerate, such 
verification was not carried out prior to registration. The total project value 
involved was ₹34.64 crore.
An illustrative case is detailed hereunder:
M/s. A4 registered for substantial expansion of the unit, under New Custom 
House, Mumbai Commissionerate for manufacture of cement with CIF value of 
₹34.47 crore. 
Audit observed that the importer’s application dated 09 September 2021 
submitted to the Ministry for Project Import endorsement indicated a proposed 
capacity expansion of 3.50 Million Tonnes Per Annum (MTPA) for Clinker (existing 
capacity being 6.5 MTPA) and 5.00 MTPA for Cement (existing capacity being 9 
MTPA). However, in the importer’s subsequent application to the Ministry dated 
09 September 2022 and in the application for registration of the contract dated 
23 September 2022, the proposed capacity addition for cement was revised from 
5.00 MTPA as proposed earlier to 1.80 MTPA (existing capacity: 9 MTPA).
This revised proposal for Cement expansion fell short of the mandatory 25 per 
cent increase required to qualify as “substantial expansion” under Regulation 3(c) 
of the Project Import Regulations, 1986. Despite this, the department granted 

14
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Project Import registration without verifying the fulfilment of the stipulated 
condition.
NCH Mumbai while accepting the audit observation stated (August 2025) that 
initial/existing capacity of the project was not mentioned in the Recommendation 
letter/Essentiality Certificate. However, substantial expansion was mentioned. The 
expansion capacity of the clinker was increased by 53.85 per cent which is more 
than double the required 25 per cent criteria. The Department further stated that 
PSV/Installation Certificate report categorically mentioned the capacity enhanced 
to be above 25 per cent.
The reply of the department needs to be reviewed with regard to the expansion in 
capacity of cement production which had not achieved the 25 per cent expansion 
criteria as necessitated by the Project Imports Regulations, 1986.
Non-verification of the criteria of substantial expansion before registration 
indicates lapses in internal control and procedural compliance, and may lead to 
ineligible extension of project import benefits and consequent risk to government 
revenue.
2.6 Violation of conditions stipulated at the time of registration of contract
As 
per Regulation 5 of the Project Import Regulations (PIR), 1986, the application 
for assessment under the Project Import Scheme must specify the description of 
the articles to be manufactured, list of items to be imported, installed capacity, 
and must be accompanied by all required supporting documents. 
All items of machinery, including components required for the initial setup of a 
unit or substantial expansion of an existing unit of a specified industrial plant, 
irrigation project, power project, mining project, exploration project, or other 
projects notified by the Central Government for economic development, are 
classifiable under Customs Tariff Heading (CTH) 9801.
Audit scrutiny revealed that in 14 cases across six Commissionerate
8, out of 485 
registrations made during 2019–20 to 2023–24, the conditions prescribed at the 
time of registration were not complied with:
•	 Installed and additional capacity of the plant for substantial expansion was 
not declared;
•	 Approved list of goods to be imported was not submitted;
8 NCH, Mumbai (3 cases); CC, Ludhiana (1 case); ICD Tughlakabad, Delhi (2 cases);  ACC Delhi (2 
cases); CC Kolkata (4 cases); JNCH, Mumbai (2 cases)

15
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
•	 Goods were imported from suppliers other than those approved in the 
contract, and 
•	 Goods that were imported exceeded the registered project value.
These lapses indicate not adhering to the mandatory registration conditions and 
not submitting of key documents such as the original deed of contract, agreement 
with foreign supplier, essentiality certificate from the appropriate authority, 
and industrial license, among others, at the time of registration, resulting in 
incorrect grant of concessional duty benefits/undue duty foregone amounting 
to ₹68.69 crore, involving a CIF value of ₹1,055.45 crore in 14 cases under six 
Commissionerates.
NCH Mumbai while accepting the audit observation, stated (July and September 
2025) that initial/existing capacity of the project was not mentioned in the 
Recommendation letter/Essentiality Certificate of M/s A4. However, Annexure-I 
submitted by the importer mentions the installed capacity of the existing plant 
and the proposed addition thereto. The Department further stated that PSV/
Installation Certificate report categorically mentioned the capacity enhanced 
to be above 25 per cent in respect of M/s A5 imported machinery as per the 
recommendation letter is for the purpose of reconditioning of picture tubes 
which itself amounts to manufacturing process. In respect of M/s. A6, it was 
stated (September 2025) that clarification was sought with regards to the under-
valuation of goods imported under PI Scheme. 
JNCH Mumbai replied (October 2025) that owing to the original file not being 
available, in respect of M/s A7, tracer circular was issued and a part file was 
created by calling fresh and essential documents from the importer. For the other 
case in respect of M/s A8, department would strictly adhere to the compliance of 
the Circular No 22/2011 dated 4 May 2011.
Kolkata Port Commissionerate, while accepting the audit observation stated 
(September 2025) that appropriate action would be taken in all four cases. 
In the remaining five cases in respect of three Commissionerates (ICD Tughlakabad, 
ACC Delhi & Ludhiana commissionerate), reply is awaited (May 2026).
An illustrative case is detailed hereunder:
M/s. A9, registered under the Ludhiana Customs Commissionerate, imported 
project goods through 27 Bills of Entry (BsE), which were provisionally assessed by 
the department. However, the attested list of items to be imported as mandated 
under Regulation 5(4) of PIR, 1986, was not submitted by the importer.
Despite the absence of this mandatory document, the department proceeded 
with assessment without complying to the prescribed conditions at the time of 
contract registration. The duty foregone in this case amounted to ₹45.61 crore.

16
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
The absence of such mandatory documents indicates deficiencies in verification 
and approval processes during registration under the Project Import Scheme, 
potentially leading to incorrect grant of concessional duty benefits and risk of 
misuse of the scheme.
Recommendation No 3: CBIC may ensure automated document validation 
controls are embedded within the ICES registration module to prevent 
registration without submission of mandatory documents.
CBIC stated (May 2026) that the Project Imports Module introduced in ICES in 2019 
already captures key project registration details, including item-wise quantity 
and value of imports, particulars of the Sponsoring Authority’s certificate, bond 
details, and CIF value in foreign currency. The system also maintains a project 
ledger with quantity and value wise debits for monitoring imports under the 
registered project.
Audit acknowledge the Board’s contention on availability of system-enabled 
controls in the Project Imports Module. However, the audit observations pertain 
to specific instances where prescribed conditions under the Project Import 
Regulations were not complied with, such as not submitting of the approved list 
of goods to be imported, not declaring of installed/additional capacity in cases 
of substantial expansion, and import of goods from suppliers not included in the 
approved list. These deficiencies were noticed despite the availability of system 
provisions.
2.7 Incorrect grant of duty concession to ineligible machinery
The 
Project Imports Scheme extends concessional duty benefits to eligible goods 
forming part of an approved project, subject to conditions prescribed under 
the relevant regulations and notifications. Certain categories of machinery and 
equipment have been specifically excluded from the scope of the scheme through 
notifications and judicial pronouncements. 
Audit, however, noticed instances where concessional duty under the Project 
Imports Scheme was incorrectly extended to such ineligible items. 
Two illustrative cases are given below:
(i)  Captive Power Plants: CBIC vide its Notification No. 67/1987-Customs dated 
01 March 1987, excluded captive power plants from the purview of concessional 
assessment under the Project Import Scheme. Further, the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court, in Union of India vs. A 36
9  Ltd., upheld the validity of the said notification 
and confirmed the exclusion of captive power plants from the ambit of Project 
9 1999 (112) ELT 753 SC

17
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Import benefits. The Court categorically held that the Government’s intention 
was not to extend the benefit of concessional duty to captive power plants.
Audit scrutiny of 736 registered project import cases revealed that in one case, 
registered under Mundra Commissionerate, involving a CIF value of ₹83.00 crore, 
the benefit of Project Import was incorrectly extended to a captive power plant, 
contrary to the above provisions.
This resulted in short payment of customs duty amounting to ₹278.69 lakh, 
corresponding to the imported machinery value of ₹44.76 crore.
Mundra Commissionerate stated (December 2025) that letters have been issued 
to the importer to pay the demanded duty with interest.
(ii) Coal Transportation System: As per Regulation 5(3)(a) of the Project Import 
Regulations (PIR), 1986, the application for registration of a Project Import shall 
specify the location of the plant or project. The Hon’ble Authority for Advance 
Rulings (AAR), New Delhi, in the case
10 of M/s A10, held that equipment for a 
dedicated coal mine, transportation of coal from mine to production unit, and 
water intake and pumping systems in power projects are not eligible for Project 
Import concessions.
Audit scrutiny of 736 cases revealed that in one case registered under Chennai 
II Commissionerate, two Bills of Entry involving assessable value of ₹424.10 lakh 
were cleared at concessional rate of duty. The importer, registered for a project 
to set up a non-recovery type Vertical Coke Oven Plant of 0.4 MTPA capacity at 
Ballari, Karnataka, had imported a “Coal Transportation System”, which was not 
included in the list of approved items in the Essentiality Certificate issued by the 
Sponsoring Authority.
Consequently, the concessional rate of duty of 5 per cent under Sl. No. 601 of 
Notification No. 50/2017-Customs dated 30 June 2017, was not applicable, and 
the goods should have been classified under Chapter Heading 8428 9010 as 
“other machinery for coal handling”, leviable to Basic Customs Duty at 7.5 per 
cent. The short levy of duty due to incorrect concession amounted to ₹13.76 lakh.     
The incorrect extension of Project Import benefits to machinery/goods not being 
eligible indicates not adhering to statutory notifications and inadequate scrutiny 
at the time of registration and assessment, leading to loss of revenue to the 
Government.
This was pointed out (May 2025) to the department and the reply is awaited 
(May 2026).
10  Ruling No. AAR/08/CUS/2008, dated 19 December 2008; Application No. AAR/01/CUS/2008, 
2009 (246) E.L.T. 801 (A.A.R.)

18
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
2.8 Discrepancies between goods permitted to be imported and actually 
import
ed
As per Regulation 5 of the Project Import Regulations (PIR) 1986, the application 
for registration of a Project Import contract must be accompanied by an approved 
list of items issued by the concerned sponsoring authority. The list should include 
description, quantity, specification, quality, and dimension of each item. The 
actual imports are required to conform to this approved list.
Audit scrutiny of 736 cases revealed that in five cases across four 
Commissionerate
11, there were discrepancies between the goods permitted 
for import and the goods actually imported, resulting in incorrect availment of 
concessional duty, and short levy of ₹1.35 crore (Statement–2).
Mundra Commissionerate stated (December 2025) that letter dated 20 November 
2025 had been issued to the importer to pay duty along with interest and penalty 
failing which action will be initiated under Custom Act, 1962.   
NCH-Mumbai stated (September 2025) that as per the judgement given by Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in the case of M/s A11, Auxiliary equipment is to be considered as 
the part of Project Import.
Response of the department may be reviewed as the items imported were not a 
part of the approved list of items for the Project, produced to Audit. 
An illustrative case is detailed hereunder
M/s. A12 registered under Tuticorin Commissionerate, imported (January 2021) 
‘Multipurpose Seat’ with assessable value of ₹222.82 lakh, classified under CTH 
9801 0013, and availed exemption from Basic Customs Duty (BCD) under Sl. No. 
602 of Notification No. 50/2017-Customs dated 30 June 2017.
Audit scrutiny revealed that the imported item was not included in Annexure 
“B” (approved list of imported items) issued by the Sponsoring Authority. 
Consequently, the duty exemption under the Project Import Scheme was not 
admissible. The imported goods should have been classified under CTH 9401 
8000 as “other seats”, with BCD at 25 per cent, Social Welfare Surcharge (SWS) at 
10 per cent on BCD, and IGST at 18 per cent. This resulted in a short levy of duty 
of ₹72.31 lakh.
Ministry’s reply is awaited (May 2026).
11 CC Chennai II (1 case); CC Mundra (1 case), NCH-Mumbai (2 cases) and CC Tuticorin (1 case)

19
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
2.9 Non/short levy of customs duty due to incorrect availment of exemption
As 
per Notification No. 50/2017-Customs dated 30 June 2017 (Sl. Nos. 597 to 
606), customs duty rates were prescribed for different projects under the Project 
Import Scheme (PIR) along with specified conditions.
Audit scrutiny of 736 cases revealed that in 19 cases involving 17 importers across 
six Commissionerate12, 84 Bills of Entry with a total assessable value of ₹290.90 
crore were incorrectly assessed at nil or concessional duty rates instead of the 
applicable merit rates, resulting in non/short levy of customs duty amounting to 
₹51.14 crore (Statement-3), as detailed hereunder:
2.9.1 Non/short levy of Custom duty of ₹26.75 crore on final assessment 
or
der 
M/s. A13 registered two separate Project Import (PI) contracts under the 
Bhubaneswar Commissionerate for setting up the “2x600 MW Thermal Power 
Plant” at Khadagprasad Village, Odisha. 
The importer had filed 45 Bills of Entry during the period July 2011 to December 
2016 for import of various goods and machinery classified under Chapter Heading 
No. 9801 0013 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (covering goods required for power 
projects). The importer availed concessional customs duty benefits at NIL or 5 per 
cent under Sl. No. 507 of Notification No. 21/2002-Customs dated 01 March 2002 
and Notification No. 12/2012-Customs dated 17 March 2012.
Audit observed that despite the lapse of more than three years from the date 
of the last import, the importer had not submitted mandatory post-importation 
documents such as the reconciliation statement, installation certificate, and final 
payment certificate, required for finalization of provisional assessments under 
Section 18(1) of the Customs Act, 1962 and Regulation 7 of the Project Import 
Regulations, 1986. Consequently, 42 BEs valued at ₹973.18 crore were finalized at 
the standard customs duty rate of 10 per cent, disallowing the concessional rate 
earlier claimed under Notifications ibid. 
In the meantime, due to delay in the progress of the project and consequent default 
in repayment obligations, the Financial Creditors of the company approached the 
Hon’ble National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT), Hyderabad, seeking initiation 
of the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CRIP) under the provisions of 
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC), 2016. The Hon’ble NCLT, Hyderabad, 
admitted the application for initiation of CRIP vide its order dated 29 August 2018 
against the importer company.
12 CC Ahmedabad (1 case); CC Chennai-II (7 cases); ICD Tughlakabad, Delhi (4 cases); CC (Port) 
Kolkata (4 cases); NCH-Mumbai 1 (1 case); CC Bhubaneswar (2 cases)

20
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Due to not submitting of the requisite documents by the importer, the remaining 
three Bills of Entry (BEs) could not be assessed, and consequently, the goods 
covered under these BEs were not granted Out of Charge (OOC). The goods have 
been lying un-cleared in the port premises since December 2016, and the matter 
is presently under adjudication before the Hon’ble NCLT in connection with the 
ongoing insolvency proceedings.
As a result, differential customs duty of ₹200.54 crore along with interest of 
₹145.89 crore (totalling ₹346.43 crore) was demanded and lodged with the 
Hon’ble NCLT in May 2019 following initiation of Corporate Insolvency Resolution 
Process (CRIP) against the importer under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 
2016. The case has since moved into Liquidation proceedings as per NCLT 
order dated 27 November 2019, and the department’s claim for realization of 
outstanding duty has been filed with the Liquidator.
As per the Project Import Regulations, 1986, a project is required to be registered 
only once with the jurisdictional customs authority for import of goods required 
for initial setting up, expansion, or modernization of a plant. Grant of two 
separate registrations for the same project, without adequate justification or 
documentation, indicates procedural irregularity and lack of internal control in 
the registration process.
Scrutiny of the Final Assessment Order, NCLT case records, and available Bills 
of Entry revealed that the importer was granted two separate Project Import 
(PI) registrations. However, the registration files and related correspondence 
authorizing dual registrations were not made available to Audit for verification. 
The following deviations were observed: 
i)
 Manually assessed BsE not included in final assessment or
der
Audit observed that, apart from 42 Bills of Entry (BEs) included in the final 
assessment order, six additional BEs filed by the importer were assessed manually 
(Non-EDI) but were not included in the final assessment order issued to the 
importer and the same was submitted to the Hon’ble NCLT on 10 May 2019 for 
recovery of customs duty.
Out of these six BEs, four BEs having an assessable value of ₹73.72 crore were 
assessed manually and not considered during finalisation of the project contract, 
resulting in not levying customs duty of ₹19.79 crore as per provisions of Section 
18(2) of the Customs Act, 1962.The remaining two BEs were not made available 
to Audit, preventing verification of their assessment and inclusion status.
Non-inclusion of manually assessed Bills of Entry in the final assessment order 
led to short levy of customs duty of ₹19.79 crore, contrary to the provisions of 
Section 18(2) of the Customs Act, 1962. The omission also indicates deficient 

21
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
record management and weak internal controls in ensuring that both EDI and 
non-EDI assessments are reconciled and accounted for at the time of project 
finalisation.
Paradeep Customs Division replied (October 2025) that, based on the audit 
observation, another four BEs with assessable value of ₹101.89 crore were traced 
(including above two BEs) for which a supplementary /final assessment order has 
been issued (June 2025) to the importer demanding Customs duty amounting to 
₹48.93 crore along with applicable interest.
ii)
 Short le
vy of Customs Duty amounting to ₹6.96 crore during final assessment 
Scrutiny of the finally assessed 42 Bills of Entry (BEs) revealed that the assessable 
value of three BEs was incorrectly taken in the final assessment order issued by 
the department, as detailed below:
Table 2.2: Assessment Discrepancies in Bills of Entry (BEs) 
(₹ in crore)
Sl.
No. BE Date Assessable value taken in 
final assessment order
Actual Assessable 
value
1 24.06.2015 5.52 11.03
2 24.06.2015 4.41 8.83
3 31.08.2015 5.50 21.83
15.43 41.69
Thus, the assessable value of ₹41.69 crore was erroneously recorded as ₹15.43 
crore, resulting in understatement by ₹26.26 crore. This led to a short levy of 
customs duty amounting to ₹6.96 crore in the final assessment order, in violation 
of Section 18(2) of the Customs Act, 1962.
The error in recording assessable values indicates lapses in verification and 
reconciliation of import data during project finalisation. Non-adoption of correct 
assessable values led to short levy of ₹6.96 crore and inaccurate reporting to 
NCLT, thereby undermining the integrity of the assessment process and causing 
potential revenue loss to the Government.
Paradeep Customs division stated (October 2025) that a corrigendum had been 
issued (June 2025) to the importer to pay the differential duty of ₹6.96 crore.
2.9.2 Short le vy of Customs duty and incomplete Project Import 
documentation
 
M/s. A14 registered in Bhubaneswar Commissionerate, filed 60 Bills of Entry 
between 7 October 2011 and 23 June 2017 for Project Import goods/machinery 

22
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
under CTH 9801 at Nil rate of BCD availing the benefit of Sl. No. 400 of Notification 
No. 21/2002-Customs dated 1 March 2002 and Sl. No. 507 of Notification No. 
12/2012-Customs dated 17 March 2012.
The importer failed to submit installation certificates, reconciliation certificates, 
and other documents required for finalisation of the Project Import contract.
Consequently, the department finalised the 60 BsE at the rate of 10 per cent 
BCD, disallowing the exemption, and levied a total duty of ₹719.98 crore, which 
was lodged as a claim with NCLT Hyderabad Bench on 4 November 2019. The 
insolvency petition against the importer was admitted by NCLT on 13 October 
2019. 
Registration files granting project import registration to the importer were not 
made available to Audit. It was seen from the final assessment that for BE dated 
27 October 2012, the assessable value was taken as ₹ 27.92 lakh instead of ₹ 
33.43 crore, resulting in a short levy of customs duty of ₹ 9.71 crore and under-
claiming of the demand lodged with NCLT.
Not submitting of mandatory documents delayed proper finalisation of the 
project import contract and incorrect reckoning of assessable value in Bill of Entry 
resulted in short levy of customs duty of ₹ 9.71 crore, reducing the recoverable 
claim from the insolvent entity.
Bhubaneswar Commissionerate stated (October 2025) that a corrigendum has 
been issued (April 2025) to the importer to pay the differential duty of ₹9.71 crore.  
2.9.3 Non lev y of Basic Customs Duty
Notification No. 50/2017–Customs dated 30 June 2017 (Sl. Nos. 597 to 606), 
prescribes the effective rates of Basic Customs Duty (BCD) for goods falling under 
Heading 9801 imported under the Project Import Scheme. As per Sl. No. 603 of the 
said Notification, a ‘Nil’ rate of BCD is admissible for Water Supply Projects, only 
if the goods are imported against contracts registered on or before 30 September 
2022, in accordance with Condition No. 111 appended to the Notification. 
Consequently, Water Supply Projects registered on or after 1 October 2022 are 
not eligible for the Nil rate of duty and are liable to be assessed at the applicable 
merit rate.
Audit observed non levy of BCD amounting to ₹3.43 crore in eight instances 
across four Commissionerate
13. 
13 CC Ahmedabad (1 case); CC Chennai-II (3 cases); CC (Port) Kolkata (3 cases); and NCH-Mumbai 
(1 case).

23
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
An illustrative case is highlighted hereunder:
M/s. A15 availed ‘Nil’ Basic Customs Duty (BCD) under Sl. No. 603 of Notification 
No. 50/2017-Customs dated 30 June 2017, for a Water Supply Project (30 MLD 
SWRO Desalination Plant).  The contract was awarded to the importer and 
registered in Chennai II Commissionerate. The imports were made from October 
2019 to July 2021 in Chennai Sea, Chennai Air, ACC Mumbai, Mangalore Sea and 
Nhava Sheva port.
The project became operational in 2022, and a substantial expansion was applied 
in October 2023. The department allowed the exemption under the original PI 
registration. Two other Water Supply projects registered after 30 September 
2022 were also incorrectly assessed at ‘Nil’ BCD. Goods against 15 Bills of Entry, 
assessable value ₹ 28.36 crore, were incorrectly exempted, resulting in not levying 
customs duty of ₹ 2.76 crore.
Chennai II Commissionerate stated (July 2025) that action has been taken for all 
the seven Bills of Entry in respect of M/s A16 and an amount of ₹297.81 lakh was 
recovered which included interest of ₹ 82.67 lakh.
In respect of M/s. A15, it was stated (February 2025) that there was no change 
in the end-user, the project site, or the overall purpose of importation. The scope 
of the project was expanded by the end-user, M/s. A15, in continuation of the 
same contractual relationship with the importer, and the substantial expansion 
was recommended by the Sponsoring Authority. As importer got the contract for 
substantial expansion of the project, amendment of contract was initiated and 
the said contract was amended.
The departmental reply is not acceptable, as amendments under Regulation 
6(1) can only be made during project implementation, not after completion. 
The 30 MLD SWRO Desalination Plant was commissioned in 2022, and therefore 
amendment subsequent to its commissioning was not in order. The subsequent 
expansion constituted a new project requiring fresh registration under the Project 
Import Regulations. However, the importer applied for substantial expansion 
only in October 2023, after withdrawal of the exemption under Sl. No. 603 of 
Notification No. 50/2017-Customs dated 30 June 2017. Allowing imports under 
the old 2019 registration enabled avoidance of 7.5 per cent duty, resulting in 
irregular extension of exemption and undue financial benefit.
NCH Mumbai replied (August 2025) that the importer paid differential duty along 
with interest amounting to ₹55,373/- .
Kolkata Port Commissionerate stated (September 2025) that demand notice 
would be issued to the three importers after scrutiny.
Ahmedabad Commissionerate stated (December 2025) that as per Condition No. 
111 applicable to SI. No. 597 to 606 of Notification No. 50/2017-Customs dated 

24
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
30 June 2017, benefit of concessional rate of duty to project imports is admissible 
only to those projects, which have been registered on or before 30 September 
2022.  However, the importer registered for the project on 21 October 2023. In 
view of the above, Pre-Notice Consultative letter dated 15 October 2025 has been 
sent to the importer to pay the differential duty along with applicable interest.
2.9.4 Not paying IGS T
(i) M/s 
A17, registered under Kolkata Port Commissionerate, imported goods 
for the initial setting up of a cement manufacturing plant and incorrectly paid 
IGST at the rate of 5 per cent under Sl. No. 257 of Schedule I of Notification 
No. 1/2017–IT (Rate) dated 28 June 2017, applicable to assistive devices for 
the disabled. 
 Audit ob
served that project imports under CTH 9801 attract IGST at the rate 
of 18 per cent under Sl. No. 451 of Schedule III of the same notification, 
resulting in short levy of ₹455.52 lakh. 
 The departmen
t accepted the audit observation and recovered the amount 
in February 2025.
(ii) M/s 
A18, registered under Chennai II Commissionerate, availed IGST 
exemption under Sl. No. 150 of Notification No. 2/2017–IT (Rate) dated 28 
June 2017, applicable only to supplies made by a Government entity against 
grants from the Government. 
 Audit ob
served that the supplier was a foreign company and not a government 
entity, rendering the exemption inapplicable. IGST @ 18 per cent amounting 
to ₹392.69 lakh was therefore payable as per Sl. No. 451 of Schedule III of 
Notification No. 1/2017–IT (Rate) dated 28 June 2017.
 The departmen
t accepted (August 2025) the audit observation and issued a 
show cause notice for recovery of duty with interest.
(iii) M/s 
A19, registered under Chennai II Commissionerate, incorrectly claimed 
IGST exemption under Sl. No. 1 of Notification No. 45/2016 dated 13 August 
2016, which is applicable only to Special Advance Authorization for textile 
materials. 
Audit observed that the exemption was not applicable to the goods imported by 
the assesse, thereby resulting in not paying IGST of ₹26.89 lakh. 
This was pointed out (May 2025) to the department and the reply is awaited 
(May 2026). 

25
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
2.9.5 Short lev y of Excise duty
As per the Central Excise Tariff, “Elastic Pad, Helical Springs, Tension Clamp, and 
Base Plate Pads” are classifiable under CETH/CTH 3926, 7320, 7326, and 7302 
respectively, and attract Central Excise Duty at the rate of 12.5 per cent. 
Audit noticed that in four cases involving three importers under ICD-Tuglakabad 
(Import) Commissionerate, the above goods were imported under the Project 
Import Scheme and assessed at a concessional rate of 6 per cent vide Serial No. 272B 
of Notification No. 12/2012-CE dated 17 March 2012. The goods were, however, 
not eligible for project import classification and should have been assessed under 
their respective tariff headings at 12.5 per cent. This misclassification led to a 
short levy of Central Excise Duty amounting to ₹236.73 lakh.
This was pointed out (May 2025) to the department and the reply is awaited 
(May 2026).
2.9.6 Incorrect allowance of concessional duty
As 
per Condition No. 111 attached to Sl. Nos. 597 and 601 of Notification No. 
50/2017-Customs dated 30 June 2017, a concessional rate of Basic Customs 
Duty (BCD) at five per cent is applicable only when goods are imported against 
contracts registered on or before 30 September 2022 under the Project Import 
Regulations, 1986.
Audit observed from the records in the License Module that in two licences 
registered under Chennai-II Commissionerate, were found to have been registered 
after 30 September 2022, rendering them ineligible for the concessional rate of 
5 per cent BCD and the applicable rate in these cases was 7.5 per cent BCD as 
per the said notification condition. The incorrect availing of concessional duty 
resulted in a short levy of ₹13.35 lakh.
On this being pointed out, (May 2025) the department replied (October 2025) 
that SCN has been issued for recovery of differential duty along with interest.
The incorrect extension of concessional BCD to contracts registered after the 
prescribed cut-off date (30 September 2022) reflects ineffective validation controls 
in the license registration and assessment processes. The absence of system-
based validation checks in the ICES/License Module allowed ineligible cases to be 
processed under concessional rates without proper scrutiny or approval.
Recommendation No 4: CBIC may review similar project import cases to ensure 
correct classification and duty application as per tariff provisions. Further, 

26
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Board may integrate automated validation controls within the ICES/License 
Module to flag ineligible contract registrations based on the registration date, 
classification, etc thereby ensuring compliance with the conditions prescribed 
in the relevant customs notifications.
CBIC, while accepting the audit observation, stated (May 2026) that the Project 
Import Regulations, 1986 provide for uniform classification under CTH 9801 and 
a fixed rate of duty for imports covered under registered projects. Accordingly, 
variation in classification or applicable duty rate is not envisaged under the 
scheme. The Board further stated that field formations have been advised to review 
similar project import cases to ensure correct classification and duty assessment 
as per tariff provisions and to take necessary action wherever required. It was 
also informed that project import licences are registered through the ICES Licence 
Module, wherein details such as notification, registration date, licence expiry, and 
classification are mandatorily captured.
2.10 Not submitting/delay in submission of reconciliation statement and 
other documen
ts
As per Regulation 7 of the Project Import Regulations (PIR), 1986  read with Para 5 
of Chapter 5 of the Customs Law Manual, importers are required to submit, within 
three months from the date of clearance of the last consignment, a Reconciliation 
Statement showing the description, quantity, and value of the goods, along with 
Installation Certificate from a registered Chartered Engineer, copies of Bills of 
Entry (BE), invoices, final payment certificate, and other documents necessary 
for finalisation of the contract.
Audit observed 201 cases with CIF value of ₹14,860.97 crore across 11 
Commissionerate
14, out of 736 sampled cases, where importers had submitted 
the reconciliation statements and other documents belatedly with delay ranging 
from 35 days to 21.7 years. (Statement - 4).
Further, in 38 cases with CIF value of ₹6,683.86 crore across four Commissionerate
15, 
the importers did not submit the required documents within the due date, with 
delay ranging from 119 days to 10 years (as of 31 March 2024) (Statement - 5).
14  ACC New Delhi (1 case); CC Chennai II (29 cases); CC Bengaluru (2 cases), CC (Prev)-Lucknow 
(8 cases); ICD Tughlakabad New Delhi (43 cases); NCH-Mumbai (56 cases); JNCH-Mumbai (7 
cases); CC Jodhpur (3 cases); CC (Port) Kolkata (38 cases); CC Mundra (9 cases) and CC Noida (5 
cases) 
15 CC Bhubaneshwar (2 cases): CC Chennai-II (16 cases): CC Mundra (5 cases); CC Visakhapatnam 
(15 cases)

27
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
An illustrative case is detailed hereunder
M/s A20 was registered under Bhubaneswar Commissionerate for a Power Project 
with CIF value of ₹932.48 crore. The last import was made in December 2013, 
with the due date for submission of documents being March 2014. However, the 
importer did not submit the required documents until 31 March 2024, resulting 
in a delay of 10 years.
Paradeep Customs Commissionerate stated (October 2025) that AC, 
Bhubaneshwar-II division has been requested (March 2025) to conduct Plant Site 
Verification.
Further, out of these 239 cases, Show Cause Notices (SCNs) not issued, was 
noticed in 194 cases, while in the remaining 45 cases, details regarding issuance 
of SCNs were not made available (Statement - 6).
Paradeep Customs Commissionerate in respect of M/s. A21 stated (October 2025 
that once the importer submits the required documents the said project would be 
taken up for finalization. 
Kolkata Port Commissionerate stated (September 2025) that importer subsequently 
complied with the conditions and contracts were finalized and no revenue loss 
occurred and that the delays were procedural and condoned by the proper officer 
in deserving cases.
Jodhpur Commissionerate stated (August 2025) that appropriate penal action 
would be initiated and outcome shared shortly.
Mundra Commissionerate stated (December 2025) that letters have been issued 
to the importers for submission of the requisite documents to finalize the project.
Visakhapatnam Commissionerate stated (October 2025) that out of 15 cases, 
notices have been issued to the party for submission of the requisite documents.  
In respect of two cases, a letter was sent to Chennai Customs, for assessing the bill 
of entries of the parties and final reply is awaited. In respect of balance four cases 
pertaining to M/s. A22, they had submitted Proportionate Mega Power Certificate 
for 70.68 per cent and the final certificate is yet to be received.
JNCH, NCH Mumbai and Chennai-II Commissionerate stated (July 2025) that 
various case laws exist which allows the importer to avail the benefits of the 
exemptions under Project Import in case of not submitting of documents within 
three months of last import. In respect of M/s. A23, the relevant documents are 
under trace, without which, it was not possible at this stage for the department 
to definitively establish the cause of delay in finalization.
The response of these Commissionerate (JNCH, NCH Mumbai and Chennai-

28
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
II) is not acceptable as the delay in submission of reconciliation statement and 
other documents is not in compliance with the Regulation 7 of the PIR, 1986. It 
indicates inadequate monitoring impacting timely finalization of Project Import 
cases. There was no request for extension of time limit by the importer nor any 
extension allowed by the Proper Officer, was found on record. 
The prolonged delays in submission of documents and not initiating of SCNs 
undermines the monitoring and control mechanism for Project Import contracts 
and exposes the Government to potential revenue loss.
2.11 Finalization of PI Contracts without submission of mandatory documents
As 
per Regulation 7 of the Project Import Regulations (PIR), 1986 read with Para 
5 of Chapter 5 of the Customs Law Manual, importers are required to submit, 
within three months from the date of clearance of the last consignment, a 
Reconciliation Statement showing the description, quantity, and value of goods, 
along with the Installation Certificate from a registered Chartered Engineer, copies 
of Bills of Entry, invoices, final payment certificate, and other requisite documents 
necessary for finalisation of the contract. The Proper Officer is required to finalise 
the provisional assessments only after receipt and scrutiny of these documents.
Audit scrutiny revealed that in 28 cases under five Commissionerates
16, involving 
CIF value of ₹ 1,130.02 crore (Statement-7), the importers had not submitted 
the prescribed documents, including Reconciliation Statements, Installation 
Certificates, copies of Bills of Entry, invoices, and final payment certificates. 
Despite this, the contracts were finalised by the department, indicating not 
adhering to the prescribed procedures under the PIR and Customs Law Manual.
Mundra Commissionerate stated (December 2025) that letter has been issued to 
the importer to pay duty along with interest and penalty failing which action will 
be initiated under Custom Act, 1962.   
An illustrative case is detailed hereunder
M/s. A24 registered the Dadri Bhavana Nangal Project under NCH, Mumbai 
Commissionerate with a CIF value of ₹194.75 lakh. The project was finalised on 15 
March 2023 without submission of proof of payment, Bank Realisation Certificate 
(BRC), or details of bank transactions.
Audit further noticed that the department accepted self-certification from the 
importer as proof of payment, instead of verifying independent documentary 
evidence. This constitutes not complying with prescribed procedures under the 
Project Import Regulations, as proper verification of payment is critical to ensure 
that imported goods correspond to actual project expenditure.
16 ICD Tughlakabad, Delhi (16 cases); JNCH-Mumbai (4 cases); NCH-Mumbai (5 cases); CC  (Prev) 
Lucknow (2 cases)  and CC Mundra (1 case)

29
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Finalisation of contracts without receipt of complete documentation undermines 
the control mechanism intended to verify the correctness of concessional duty 
benefits availed under the Project Import Scheme, besides, leading to the risk of 
misclassification, excess import, or not utilising of imported goods for declared 
project purposes, resulting in potential loss of revenue.
JNCH and NCH Mumbai stated (September/October 2025) that various case laws 
exist which allows the importer to avail the benefits of the exemptions under 
Project Import in case of not submitting of documents within three months of last 
import. It stated that BRC is not a prescribed document in the PIR 1986. In respect 
of M/s. A25, the payment certificate issued by the Chartered Accountant has been 
accepted, and orders was passed by the adjudicating authority.
In respect of M/s. A26, equipment certificate was issued by AGM, NTPC which 
indirectly concurred that all goods have been installed. The project was registered 
way back in 2005 and hence unlikely that NTPC would issue fresh installation 
certificate. The Plant Site Verification (PSV) would be received from jurisdictional 
GST formation for the projects having value of more than ₹1 crore in future.
The reply of the department is not acceptable in view of Public Notice No. 59/2003 
dated 02 June 2003 and extant standard practice wherein Bank remittance 
certificate has been pressed upon for the finalisation of the Contract. The fact 
remains that the project was finalised without submission of the final payment 
certificate prescribed vide the said public notice.
2.12 Finalization of project contracts without installation certificate and 
plan
t site verification
As per the provisions of Regulation 7 of the Project Import Regulations, 1986 
(PIR) read with Board’s Circular No. 22/2011-Customs dated 04 May 2011, the 
importer is required to submit a certificate from a registered Chartered Engineer 
certifying the installation of imported machinery along with other documents for 
finalisation of the project contract.
Further, in order to ensure that the imported goods have actually been installed 
and used for the intended purpose, PSV is to be carried out by the jurisdictional 
CGST/Customs Field formations where the plant is located, in all cases where the 
value of the project exceeds ₹one crore. The particulars of such contracts are 
also to be shared with the jurisdictional GST office to confirm installation at the 
declared plant site.
Audit scrutiny of 383 finalised project import cases revealed that in 29 cases 
across seven Commissionerates
17, the contracts were finalised without obtaining 
17 CC Chennai-II (12 cases): CC (Prev)-Lucknow (5 cases); ICD Tughlakabad, Delhi (2 cases); CC 
Jodhpur (2 cases), CC Mundra (3 cases), NCH, Mumbai (3 cases) and CC Noida (2 cases).

30
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
the mandatory Installation Certificate and without conducting the required PSV. 
The total value of these projects amounted to ₹ 948.13 crore, involving duty 
foregone amounting to ₹ 7.75 crore (Statement–8).
NCH Mumbai in respect of M/s. A27, stated (September 2025) that PSV was 
conducted, however owing to wrong address the letter was not delivered initially. 
In respect of M/s. A26, the department has written letters to the jurisdictional 
central excise authorities to issue PSV. 
In respect of M/s. A28, NCH Mumbai stated (September 2025) that PSV has been 
received in the year 2012 wherein it is confirmed by the Chartered Engineer that 
goods imported has been installed at their premises. 
The response in case of M/s. A28, may kindly be reviewed in view of the fact that 
Audit contention was on the discrepancy of submission of two PSVs during 2012 
and 2015 for finalisation and the Chartered Engineer certificate cannot supersede 
the PSV certificate.
Mundra Commissionerate stated (December 2025) that letters have been issued 
to the importers (M/s. A29, M/s. A30 and M/s. A31) to submit their submissions 
on not complying in submitting ICs and PSVs. Reply is awaited from the importer’s 
end and that appropriate action would be initiated against the importer, as per 
provisions of the Customs Act, 1962.
Jodhpur Commissionerate in respect of M/s. A32, stated (August 2025) that for 
Government Departments and Public Sector Undertakings (PSU), the requirement 
of PSV under project imports can be fulfilled by means of issuing appropriate 
Certificate by the Head of PSU/Government Undertaking in the rank of Chairman/ 
Executive Director. Accordingly, a certificate of Utilization and Installation has 
been issued by the Executive Director Power Grid-NR-I, SCO Bay, Faridabad. In 
case of M/s A33, the importer has submitted the Installation Certificate dated 08 
November 2017 issued by the registered Chartered Engineer.
The reply is not tenable as the certificate was not issued by the appropriate 
authority in the case of M/s A33. In case of M/s. A32, the fact remains that the 
finalisation of the project was done without PSV.
A few cases are illustrated hereunder:
(i)
 M/s. 
A34, registered under Chennai II Commissionerate, with a CIF value of 
₹92.08 crore for a Power Project, made the last import on 13 September 
2019 and submitted documents for finalisation on 02 March 2022. The 
case was, however, finalised on 05 May 2022 without conducting Plant Site 
Verification (PSV).
(ii)
 M/s. 
A35, a metro rail project, registered under Customs (Preventive), 

31
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Lucknow Commissionerate, involving CIF value of ₹47.15 crore, made the 
last import on 30 November 2018. The case was finalised on 26 April 2022 
without a Plant Site Verification report.
(iii)
 M/s. 
A36, a water treatment project, registered under ICD-Tughlakabad 
Commissionerate, with a project value of ₹ 10.00 crore, made the last import 
on 10 February 2017 and submitted documents on 06 June 2018. The case 
was finalised on 15 November 2019 without obtaining the Installation 
Certificate and Plant Site Verification.
The reply from the Department is awaited (May 2026).
The absence of such verification and certification defeats the basic objective of 
ensuring end-use compliance of the imported goods and increases the risk of 
diversion or misuse of goods imported at concessional duty under the Project 
Import Scheme. This indicates weak internal control and not complying with 
prescribed procedures by the department before finalisation of contracts.
Recommendation No 5: The CBIC may institute mandatory system-based 
validation checks within ICES to ensure that finalisation of Project Import case 
cannot be processed unless the Installation Certificate and Plant Site Verification 
report are uploaded and verified.
CBIC (May 2026) while accepting the audit observation stated that a new module 
needs to be developed on ICEGATE where the importer can raise request to the 
officer to register Project Imports license along with required document. Other 
documents such as installation certificate, plant site verification can be uploaded 
by importer on e-sanchit through ICEGATE portal. The uploaded document can be 
linked to Project Imports license in ICES for approval of the officer.
2.13 Conclusion
The Pr
oject Imports Scheme facilitates the import of machinery, equipment, raw 
materials, and other goods required for the initial setting up of a project or for 
substantial expansion of an existing project involving not less than 25 per cent 
of the installed capacity. The scheme aims to simplify customs procedures and 
enable quicker clearance of project-related imports by allowing assessment of 
such goods under a single tariff heading at a concessional rate of duty.
The Performance Audit of the scheme however, revealed delays in registration 
of sampled project import contracts, indicating inadequate monitoring and the 
absence of clearly defined timelines in internal procedures. The lack of prescribed 
turnaround time also limits accountability and results in Commissionerates, not 
adopting uniform practices. 

32
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Audit further observed that the absence of a defined timeline for completion of 
imports under the scheme, coupled with delays in submission of reconciliation 
documents by importers, has led to prolonged pendency in the finalisation of 
project import contracts and then remaining open for years. This weakens the 
control mechanism for verifying compliance with scheme conditions and may 
potentially result in duty evasion, not accounting of goods, and consequent loss 
of revenue to the Government.
It was also noticed that in certain cases, the requirement of substantial expansion 
prior to registration was not adequately verified, leading to ineligible extension 
of project import benefits. Further, concessional duty benefits were incorrectly 
extended to ineligible machinery/goods, contrary to the provisions of statutory 
notifications, indicating the need for stronger scrutiny at the stages of contract 
registration and assessment.
Audit also observed instances of delayed submission of documents and also 
some cases, where contracts were finalised without receipt of complete 
documentation, undermining the intended control mechanism for verifying 
eligibility of concessional duty benefits and increasing the risk of misclassification, 
excess import, or not utilising of imported goods for the declared project, thereby 
posing potential revenue risks.

33
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
With a view to facilitating smooth and expeditious assessment, the Project 
Imports scheme provides for a simplified process of classification and valuation 
wherein all goods imported under the scheme are classified under a single 
Customs Tariff Heading (CTH 9801) and are subject to a uniform rate of duty. In 
essence, the scheme aims to streamline procedures, minimize undue delays in 
cargo clearance, and ensure a quicker and simpler assessment process.
Audit examined certain aspects of this facilitation mechanism, including the 
dwell time of goods at ports, ICDs, and air cargo complexes; the timeliness of 
document submission by importers; and the time taken for finalisation of 
provisional assessments of Bills of Entry as well as Project Import contracts. The 
audit findings are discussed in the subsequent paragraphs.
3.1  Inordinate delay in clearance of goods under project import
In 
alignment with trade facilitation goals under the WTO Free Trade Agreement, 
the National Trade Facilitation Action Plan (NTFAP) 2020–2023 prescribes 
indicative clearance timelines of within 48 hours for sea cargo and ICDs, and 
within 24 hours for air cargo to promote ease of doing business.
Audit carried out a dwell time analysis for 3,798 BsE pertaining to 155 Project 
Import cases across nine Commissionerates
18. Delay ranging from 3 to 1,149 days 
was observed in 564 BsE covering 97 PI cases (Statement - 9 & 9A), as detailed 
hereunder: 
Table 3.1: Delay in clearance of goods under Project Imports
Delay Range Number of BsE
0 - 3 months 512
3 months - 1 year 41
1 year & above 11
Total 564
18 CC Ahmedabad (1 case); ACC Bengaluru (1 case); CC Bengaluru (2 cases); CC Jodhpur (1 case); 
CC Ludhiana (1 case); CC Visakhapatnam (3 cases); CC Kolkata (11 cases); CC Chennai –II (74 
cases) and CC Tuticorin (3 cases).
CHAPTER III
Ease of Doing Business initiatives for facilitation of 
imports under Project Imports Scheme

34
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
In response, Visakhapatnam Commissionerate and ACC Bengaluru stated (July & 
October 2025) that the imports are provisionally assessed in PI Scheme requiring 
documents like physical bond, BG and duty payment details  and delay was 
majorly on account of importers in submission of the required documents. 
Jodhpur Commissionerate stated (August 2025) that delay was on account of 
late submission of the reconciliation certificate and system facilitated assessment 
requiring re-appraisement for debiting the bond.
Kolkata Commissionerate stated (September 2025) that clearance of BsE were 
not done by PI Finalization Cell.
Ahmedabad Commissionerate stated (December 2025) that dual debits under 
both the Project Import Licence and EPCG licence were not permitted by the 
system and that manual Out of charge (OOC) was granted which was subsequently 
regularised in the system at a later stage.
The existence of substantial delays in clearance of goods under the PI Scheme 
is contrary to the intended objective of procedural simplification and faster 
cargo movement. Such delays indicate inefficiencies in coordination, document 
processing, or system-level approvals within the Project Import mechanism. 
Not adhering to prescribed clearance timelines adversely affects project 
implementation schedules and undermines the targets set under the NTFAP , 
thereby impacting the overall ease of doing business.
Recommendation No 6 : CBIC may consider introducing system-based monitoring 
of dwell time for all Project Import Bills of Entry in ICES and analyse delays 
across its field formations to identify process bottlenecks and take corrective 
measures.
CBIC stated (May 2026) that MIS reports are available for monitoring dwell time 
and that National Assessment Centre (NAC) dashboards have been provided in 
ICES for effective monitoring.
The response of the Board may be reviewed in view of the fact that despite the 
monitoring mechanisms in place, Audit observed delays exceeding one year in 11 
sampled cases and delays beyond three months in 41 cases. This indicates gaps in 
monitoring and timely intervention at the field level. Therefore, the specific cases 
pointed out in audit may be reviewed, and the existing monitoring framework 
may be further strengthened to ensure effective implementation of Ease of Doing 
Business measures down to the last mile.
3.2  Delay in/not finalising project imports
As 
per Regulation 7 of the Project Import Regulations (PIR), 1986, importers are 
required to submit all relevant documents within three months from the date 

35
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
of clearance of the last consignment, or within such extended period as may be 
allowed by the Proper Officer, for the purpose of finalisation of assessment. 
Further, Para 3.1 of Circular No. 22/2011-Customs dated 4 May 2011 stipulates 
that finalisation of assessments under Project Imports should be completed 
within 60 days from the date of submission of the required documents by the 
importer. In exceptional circumstances, where finalisation is not possible within 
this period, the competent authority may extend the time limit, provided reasons 
are recorded in writing.
Audit observed 102 cases of delayed finalisation of assessments with a delay 
ranging from 26 to 8,694 days, involving an aggregate project value of ₹5,401.18 
crore across nine Commissionerates
19 ( Statement 10(A) ), despite receipt of 
requisite documents from the importers. The commisionerate-wise range of 
delay along with number of instances of delay, are detailed in Chart 3.1 below:
Chart 3.1: Delay in finalisation
Further, it was observed that 38 assessments remained pending for finalisation 
since the year 2016 with a delay upto 2,840 days as of 31 March 2024,  involving 
a total project value of ₹1,773.91 crore across 11 Commissionerates
20, even 
though the required documents had been submitted.  ( Statement 10(B)). The 
commisionerate-wise range of pendency in finalization along with number of 
instances of pending finalization, are detailed in Chart 3.2 below:
19 CC Chennai II (14 cases); CC (Prev) Lucknow (4 cases); CC Jodhpur (2 cases); CC Mundra (3 
cases); NCH-Mumbai (33 cases); ACC Delhi (33 cases); CC Noida (3 cases); JNCH-Mumbai (5 
cases); CC Visakhapatanam (5 cases)
20 CC Ahmedabad (2 cases); CC Bengaluru ( 2 cases); CC Chennai II (6 cases); CC Cochin(1 case); 
JNCH Mumbai (3 cases); CC Ludhiana (1 case); CC Mundra (3 cases); NCH-Mumbai (3 cases); ACC 
Delhi (9 cases); ICD Tughlakabad (7 cases); CC Visakhapatanam (1 case)


36
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Chart 3.2: Details of pending finalisation upto 31.03.2024
These delays were attributable both to the department, in finalizing the contracts 
even though required documents had been submitted by the imports, and to 
the importers as well, owing to delayed submission of requisite documents 
and responses to queries raised by Customs authorities. Delay in submission of 
documents by importers was observed in four cases with one each in Chennai II, 
Kolkata Port, Bhubaneswar and ICD-Tuglakhabad Commissionerate, with delay 
ranging from 49 to 1,818 days.
In reply, Commissionerates (NCH Imports and JNCH, Mumbai, Jodhpur, ACC 
Bengaluru, Chennai-II, Visakhapatnam and Ludhiana ) stated (April-October 
2025) that the delay is majorly on account of insufficient documents being 
submitted by importers which at times involves multiple stakeholders, viz., Plant 
Site Verification from GST, final Assessment from Internal Audit Department 
(IAD), Port Congestions, Logistics Issues, Customs brokers, Systems and technical 
glitches, etc.
An illustrative case is detailed hereunder:
M/s. A12 had registered M/s. B1 (Unit 1 & 2) under Project Imports in Tuticorin 
Customs, with a contract price of USD 94 million for supplies and services.
As per the available records, M/s. B1 Unit-1 and Unit-2 commenced commercial 
operations on 31 December 2014 and 31 March 2017, respectively. 
The importer, in its letter dated February 2013, stated that all imported materials 
were fully utilised in the project and further certification of completion would be 
furnished by the Chairman/Competent Officer of M/s. B1 after closure of all linked 


37
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
contracts. However, despite repeated departmental correspondence (November 
2020 to October 2024) seeking the installation and bank transaction certificates, 
no response from M/s. B1 was found in the files produced to Audit.
Further, the nature and details of additional contracts executed in 2015 were not 
furnished, preventing verification of the project’s revised scope and cost. As per 
Regulation-5 of Project Import Regulations, 1986, any amendments in contract or 
revised cost must be communicated by the sponsoring authority to the Customs 
department, however, no such communication was available in records.
The project was eventually brought into the PI module as per Circular No. 
27/2019-Customs (09 October 2019) and PI Bond valuing ₹9,843.75 crore, against 
which 29 BsE valued at ₹19.50 crore were debited in the bond ledger. Despite 
commissioning of both units and commencement of operations several years 
ago, the project import contract remained unfinalised as of March 2024, even 
though most imports appeared to be of consumable nature.
There was inordinate delay in finalisation of the Project contract despite the project 
having been commissioned and operational since 2014–2017. Lack of response 
from the importer and sponsoring authority, coupled with not submitting of 
requisite installation and reconciliation certificates, indicates weak post-import 
monitoring and not complying with Project Import Regulations. This reflects 
systemic deficiencies in coordination between the Customs field formation and 
the implementing agency, leading to pendency of high-value cases in records long 
after project completion.
This was pointed out (April 2025) to the department and the reply is awaited 
(May 2026).
The delays and pendency in finalisation of Project Import assessments indicate 
not adhering to the timelines prescribed under Regulation 7 of the Project Import 
Regulations, 1986 and Circular No. 22/2011-Customs. While Commissionerates 
have attributed delays largely to deficiencies on the part of importers and 
involvement of multiple external stakeholders, Audit observed that lack of 
effective inter-departmental coordination, sequential rather than parallel 
processing of verifications, and absence of defined internal timelines within 
Customs formations have significantly contributed to prolonged pendency. 
Such delays undermine the control mechanism for timely verification of actual 
installation and utilisation of imported goods, thereby exposing the system to 
potential revenue risks and administrative inefficiencies. Further, the absence 
of a robust, system-based monitoring mechanism to track and pursue delays in 
finalisation across field formations has resulted in recurring pendency without 
accountability. Further, this may be a contributing factor to the significant decline 
in the number of contracts registered under the Project Imports Scheme.

38
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
CBIC (May 2026) stated that the decline in registrations under the Project Import 
Scheme is mainly due to the phased withdrawal of concessional duty benefits 
pursuant to the Union Budget 2022-23 announcement. The Government decided 
to gradually phase out concessional rates on project imports and apply a moderate 
tariff rate of 7.5 per cent to promote domestic manufacturing and provide a level 
playing field under the “Make in India” initiative. Accordingly, project contracts 
registered after 30 September 2022 are no longer eligible for concessional duty 
benefits under Notification No. 45/2025-Customs dated 24 October 2025, as 
amended, and are subject to the standard tariff rate of 7.5 per cent. Concessional 
rates of 5 per cent or Nil BCD remain applicable only to contracts registered on or 
before 30 September 2022.
Audit notes the Board’s response regarding the phased withdrawal of concessional 
duty benefits under the Project Import Scheme. However, till a formal notification 
on the sunset clause is brought, the project import contracts already in vogue 
continue to remain governed by the extant provisions of the Project Import 
Regulations, 1986. Therefore, the ongoing contracts require continued and 
effective monitoring and prompt finalisation so as to safeguard government 
revenue and avoid accumulation of pending cases.
3.3  Delay in/not finalizing provisionally assessed Bills of Entry
P
ara 3.1 of Circular No. 22/2011-Customs dated 4 May 2011 stipulates that 
finalisation of assessments under Project Imports should be completed within 
60 days from the date of submission of the required documents by the importer.
Audit scrutiny of 383 finalised Project Import cases revealed that in 77 registrations 
across eight Commissionerates
21, covering 50 importers, there were delays and 
instances of not finalising of assessment in respect of 662 BsE. Of these, 167 BsE 
were finalised with delays ranging from 22 to 5,978 days, while the remaining 495 
BsE were not finalised and continued to remain provisional, with delays ranging 
from 84 to 5,924 days (Statement 11), as detailed hereunder:
Table 3.2: Delay in finalization of provisionally assessed BEs
Delay Range Number of cases
0 - 3 months 53
3 months - 1 year 220
1 year & above 389
Total 662
21 CC Chennai II (1 case); CC (Prev) Lucknow (3 cases); ICD Tughlakabad (12 cases); CC Jodhpur (2 
cases); CC (Port) Kolkata (56 cases); ACC Delhi (1 case); NCH-Mumbai (1 case); CC Noida (1 case)

39
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Audit further observed that in 82 registrations across two Commissionerates 22, 
covering 36 importers, a total of 581 Bills of Entry were finalised at the time of 
import itself, even though the corresponding project contracts were either not 
finalised or finalised with significant delay.
NCH Mumbai, while concurring with the audit observation stated (September 
2025) that the project has already been finalized and efforts would be made to 
ensure timely action in future cases. 
Jodhpur Commissionerate stated (August 2025) that the delay was on account of 
system glitch and lapse was procedural in nature.
Kolkata Port Commissionerate stated (September 2025) that delay or not finalising  
bills of entry are largely due to late or incomplete submission of documents by the 
importers, and not due to any departmental negligence.
The existence of delays and inconsistencies in finalisation of BsE, even after 
the completion of project contracts, indicates deficiencies in post-clearance 
monitoring and record linkage between project registration and related import 
documentation. Premature finalisation of BsE without corresponding project 
finalisation also reflects weak internal controls and lack of coordination between 
assessing and project monitoring sections. These actions undermine the integrity 
of the final assessment process, affect timely closure of bonded obligations, and 
pose risks of incorrect duty assessments or revenue leakage.
Recommendation No 7: CBIC may consider to incorporate  a linkage mechanism 
in ICES to ensure that finalisation of Project Import contracts automatically 
triggers validation of associated Bills of Entry, preventing isolated or premature 
closure. Besides, automated alerts for pending or overdue BsE finalisations 
would also enable systematic monitoring at the Commissionerate level.
CBIC stated (May 2026) that MIS report for project Import License BsE pending 
for finalization can be created at the Commissionerate level in the ICES system for 
monitoring and speedy disposal. Further, bulk finalization module is available in 
ICES to finalize BEs in Bulk.
3.4  Irregularities observed in PI Module
With 
a view to facilitate smooth and expeditious assessment of Project Import 
cases, a dedicated Project Imports module within the Indian Customs EDI System 
(ICES) was developed to streamline end-to-end processing of project import 
contracts. The following issues were observed in the PI module:
22 ICD Tughlakabad (34 cases); NCH Delhi (2 cases)

40
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
(i) Details of BG not captured electronically
 It w
as observed in audit that the Project Import (PI) Module did not mandate 
entry of Bank Guarantee (BG) details, such as BG number, in the ‘Bond 
Management’ tab. Consequently, crucial information regarding BGs was not 
captured electronically. 
 Audit v
erification from physical records revealed that BGs amounting to 
₹3 crore were taken in respect of three cases registered in Ahmedabad 
Commissionerate, but these details were not reflected in the PI Module. This 
gap limits electronic tracking and monitoring of BGs, potentially affecting 
revenue safeguards.
 This w
as pointed out (April 2025) to the department and the reply is awaited 
(May 2026).
(ii)  Live pr
ojects not entered in the PI Module
 As per 
Circular No. 27/2019-Customs dated 03 September 2019, all live 
projects were required to be compulsorily registered in the ICES system 
under the Project Import (PI) Module, with registration to be completed by 
15 September 2019.
 Audit scrutin
y revealed that 85 projects in ICD Tughlakabad and NCH-Import 
Commissionerates, Delhi were not registered in the PI Module as mandated, 
despite being live as of the prescribed date.
 On being 
pointed out (February and April 2025), the department replied 
(April 2025) that in 26 cases, the importer executed bonds online which were 
linked with ICES. The reply for the remaining 59 cases is still awaited (May 
2026).
 The r
eply may be reviewed as live projects were required to be compulsorily 
registered, as per the Board Circular ibid. Consequently, the accurate 
pendency of Project Import cases is not available with DG (System).
(iii) 
 Online Telegr
aphic Release Advice (TRA) not issued in License Module
 CBIC vide 
its Circular No. 27/2019-Customs dated 3 September 2019, issued 
instructions on the rollout of the Project Import Module in ICES. Under 
the prescribed process for filing import declarations, it was stated that for 
imports at ports other than the port of registration, an online TRA can be 
issued through the System at the port of registration.

41
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Audit scrutiny revealed that in two Commissionerates23, in respect of 65 Project 
Import registrations, 848 Bills of Entry involving a CIF value of ₹682.38 crore were 
filed at ports other than the port of registration. However, despite the availability of 
the online TRA facility in ICES, no online TRA was issued for clearance of these goods.
This was pointed out (May 2025) to the department and the reply is awaited 
(May 2026).
3.5  Conclusion
With a 
view to facilitating smooth and expeditious assessment, the Project 
Imports scheme provides for a simplified process of classification and valuation 
wherein all goods imported under the scheme are classified under a single 
Customs Tariff Heading (CTH 9801) and are subject to a uniform rate of duty. In 
essence, the scheme aims to streamline procedures, minimize undue delays in 
cargo clearance, and ensure a quicker and simpler assessment process.
Audit examined various aspects of this facilitation mechanism, including the dwell 
time of goods at ports, ICDs, and air cargo complexes; the timeliness of document 
submission by importers; and the time taken for finalisation of provisional 
assessments of Bills of Entry as well as Project Import contracts. 
Delay in clearance of goods under the Project Import Scheme defeated the 
objective of procedural simplification and faster cargo clearance envisaged under 
the scheme and the National Trade Facilitation Action Plan (NTFAP). 
Delays and pendency in finalisation of Project Import assessments reflect not 
complying with the timelines prescribed under Regulation 7 of PIR, 1986 and 
Circular No. 22/2011-Customs. Audit observed that, apart from deficiencies on 
the part of importers, inadequate inter-departmental coordination, absence of 
defined internal timelines, and lack of system-based monitoring mechanisms 
significantly contributed to prolonged pendency, thereby increasing administrative 
inefficiencies and potential revenue risks. 
Further, delays and inconsistencies in finalisation of Bills of Entry, including 
premature finalisation without corresponding closure of project contracts, 
indicate weak post-clearance monitoring and inadequate linkage between project 
registration and import documentation. 
Such delays indicate inefficiencies in processing and coordination within the 
Project Import mechanism, adversely impacting project implementation 
timelines, ease of doing business, and possibly contributing to the declining use 
of the scheme.
23 CC Chennai II (62 cases) and CC Tuticorin (3 cases)

42
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

43
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Internal control is broadly defined as a process designed to provide reasonable 
assurance regarding the achievement of objectives of effectiveness and efficiency 
of operations, reliability of financial reporting and compliance with applicable 
laws and regulations. A robust internal control system serves not only as a 
deterrent against fraudulent activities but also significantly reduces the likelihood 
of such occurrences. 
Audit focused on systemic issues relating to the Bank Guarantee and Bond 
management, finalisation of provisional assessments and project import contracts, 
adequacy of oversight mechanisms, and internal controls to ensure compliance 
with prescribed procedures and safeguarding of revenue. The findings thereon 
are detailed hereunder:
4.1  Inadequacies in Bank Guaran tee (BG)/Bond management
In terms of Regulation 5 of the Project Import Regulations, 1986, read with 
Board’s Circular No. 12 of 2011 dated 1 March 2011 and 22 of 2011 dated 4 May 
2011, a Bank Guarantee (BG) equivalent to two percent of the CIF value of goods 
proposed to be imported, subject to a maximum of ₹One crore, is required to 
be obtained at the time of registration of a Project Import contract. The Bank 
Guarantee should be supported by an undertaking for renewal from time to time. 
Further, as per para 3.3 (v) of Chapter 6 of Customs Manual 2023, the Bond 
should be made out for an amount equal to the CIF value of the contract sought 
to be registered.
However, renewal of the BG is not required after completion of six months from 
the date of submission of all necessary documents viz., utilization or installation 
certificates issued by the jurisdictional GST authority or other specified authorities 
to the satisfaction of the Proper Officer, for finalisation of the contract.
This relaxation applies only when all requisite documents, including proof of 
installation and utilization of imported goods at the project site, are furnished 
in full and verified by Customs. The Customs Commissioner has to ensure 
adherence to the prescribed timelines for finalization of Project Imports, so that 
finalization occurs within the validity period of the BG/Bond, thereby safeguarding 
government revenue.
CHAPTER IV
Monitoring and Internal Control

44
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
4.1.1 Not re validating Bank Guarantee/Not renewing Bond
Audit scrutiny of 776 cases revealed that in 244 registrations numbers with 183 PI 
cases across 11 Commissionerate24, with Bank Guarantees amounting to ₹19.54 
crore and Bonds amounting to ₹7,249.18 crore were not renewed despite being 
ineligible for relaxation ibid, posing a potential risk to revenue (Statement–12).
JNCH Mumbai stated (October 2025) that the BG had auto renewal clause. NCH 
Imports, Mumbai stated (September 2025) that importers have submitted renewal 
letter for BGs. Visakhapatnam Commissionerate (October 2025) and City Customs 
Bengaluru stated (July 2025) that it would be ensured that BGs are renewed. 
Jodhpur Commissionerate stated (August 2025) that after issuance of Notification 
No. 54/2022 dated 19 October 2022, PI Regulations have become infructuous. For 
M/s. C1, the last imports was done on 15.03.23 and bond was valid on that date. 
No imports were made under PIR, however the bond would remain till completion 
of project.
Kolkata Port Commissionerate stated (June 2025) that the referred projects 
are finalised, however, the bond details/ledger details was not provided due to  
physical files not being available in the Commissionerate
Audit observed that, in the absence of a standardised mechanism for tracking 
the validity, renewal, and discharge of bonds and bank guarantees, disparate 
practices were being followed across Customs field formations, underscoring the 
need for stronger monitoring, uniform procedures, and robust documentation 
controls.
An illustrative case is detailed hereunder:
M/s. C2 in Visakhapatnam Commissionerate registered for project with a CIF value 
of ₹29.94 crore and executed bond for ₹30.50 crore on 28 December 2021 with 
bond number 2001950416 with validity upto 28 December 2022.  The project is 
an ongoing one and not finalised yet.  However, the importer had not revalidated 
the bond till 31 March 2024. 
Visakhapatnam Commissionerate stated (Oct 2025) that the validity period of the 
bonds has been extended in the ICES.
24 ACC Delhi (28 cases); ICD Tughlakabad Delhi (139 cases); ACC Bengaluru (10 cases); CC 
Bengaluru (13 cases); CC (Prev) Lucknow (8 cases); NCH-Mumbai (9 cases); CC Jodhpur (1 case); 
CC (Port) Kolkata (3 cases); CC Noida (17 cases); JNCH-Mumbai (2 cases) and CC Visakhapatnam 
(14 cases)

45
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
4.1.2 Non/short submission of r equisite Bond and Bank Guarantee
Audit scrutiny of 776 project import registrations revealed one case of short 
collection of Bank Guarantee  of ₹38.46 lakh (submitted ₹60 lakh instead of the 
required ₹98.46 lakh) in Ahmedabad Commssionerate and short collection of 
Bonds in two cases amounting to ₹111.98 lakh (Statement – 13)  in JNCH Mumbai 
and Kolkata Port Commissionerates.
In reply, Ahmedabad Commissionerate stated (December 2025) that letter has been 
written to the importer to submit the BG for additional amount of ₹38.46 lakh. 
Kolkata Commissionerate replied (September 2025) that issue had been taken for 
further guidance.
JNCH, Mumbai stated (October 2025) that project value was ₹73.25 crore against 
this the importer had submitted bonds of ₹77.31 crore and ₹14.23 lakh which is 
more than the project value itself, thereby safeguarding the Government Revenue.
The response of the department may be reviewed in view of the fact that the 
short calculation was owing to not reckoning of correct foreign exchange rate 
and the bond was required to be taken for ₹77.88 crore with consequent short 
calculation of ₹56.77 lakh. 
4.1.3 Bonds for imports other than port of r egistration not debited
Audit noticed that in three cases registered across two Commissionerates 25, 
imports were made at ports other than the port of registration, but the 
corresponding Bonds were not debited in ICES (Statement 14).
Chennai II Commissionerate replied (April 2025) that the goods imported from 
M/s. C6 were assessed with BCD exemption and IGST at the rate of 18 per cent was 
paid. It was further stated that ICES 1.5 was not linked with the SEZ online portal 
at the time of import; therefore, imports at these ports would not automatically 
reflect as debits in the Bond ledger.
Despite the Bills of Entry being assessed and applicable duties paid, no documentary 
evidence was provided for the debit entries in the linked bond or bond ledger for 
these imports. This indicates a systemic lapse in ensuring that imports through ports 
not registered are appropriately debited against project bonds, which is essential 
for finalisation of project import contracts. Bonds not debited compromises the 
integrity of the bond tracking system, increases risk of revenue leakage, and 
hampers accurate monitoring of imports against project registrations. 
25 NCH-Mumbai (2 cases) and CC Chennai II (1 case)

46
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
4.1.4 Bank Guaran tee renewed for compliant PI cases
As per para 3.2 of Customs Circular No. 22/2011 dated 04 May 2011, field 
formations were advised not to insist on renewal of bank guarantees beyond six 
months from the date of submission of all prescribed documents, including the 
Plant Site Verification (PSV) report, for finalisation of Project Import contracts.
Audit noticed that M/s C3, registered a Project Import contract with NCH, 
Mumbai Commissionerate in August 2008. The importer submitted all 
documents for finalisation in August 2011, and the PSV report, issued by the 
Assistant Commissioner, Central Excise (24 December 2012) was acknowledged 
by the department in March 2013. Despite this, the department neither finalised 
the contract nor adhered to the Board’s instructions and instead sought renewal 
of the bank guarantee in February 2014 and February 2015. Aggrieved by the 
department’s action, the importer filed a writ petition before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Bombay, which, in May 2015, directed the department not to 
encash the bank guarantee or insist upon its renewal. However, the contract 
was finalised only in July 2022, after a delay of seven years from the Court’s 
directions.
The delay in finalisation despite availability of all requisite documents and the 
continued insistence on renewal of the bank guarantee, contrary to the Board’s 
circular and the Hon’ble High Court’s directions, reflect deficient monitoring and 
weak internal controls in the administration of Project Import contracts. The 
prolonged delay also caused avoidable hardship to the importer and unnecessary 
administrative expenditure.
Non-renewal/late renewal of bank guarantee and bond in cases pending 
finalisation points to weak monitoring and internal controls. On the other 
hand, insistence on renewal without timely finalisation, despite submission of 
the prescribed documents and PSV, undermines the intent of the safeguard 
mechanism envisaged under the Board’s circular.
Recommendation No 8: CBIC may instruct field formations to strictly enforce the 
requirement for renewal of Bonds and Bank Guarantees until the Project Import 
contracts are finalized in accordance with the provisions of the PIR, 1986. A 
system-based alert mechanism in ICES may be instituted to monitor the validity 
of Bonds/BGs and flag pending cases nearing expiry.
CBIC stated (May 2026) that the recommendation has been circulated to field 
formations to improve compliance relating to renewal and monitoring of Bonds 
and Bank Guarantees (BGs). The Board referred to RBI Master Circular dated 02 
July 2012, under which banks are advised to incorporate auto-renewal clauses 

47
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
in BGs to ensure continuity till formal discharge. CBIC further stated that Bonds 
under the Customs Act, 1962 remain valid till fulfilment of prescribed conditions 
and field formations have been advised to ensure acceptance of BGs with auto-
renewal clauses, maintain Bonds/BGs alive till six months after submission of 
finalisation documents, maintain digital records of Bonds/BGs, and periodically 
monitor their validity. The Board also informed that facilities for monitoring 
expiry status of Bonds and BGs are available in ICES through STA role-based 
reports.
Audit acknowledges that Board has circulated the audit recommendations to field 
formations for improving the compliance on renewal and monitoring of Bonds/
Bank Guarantees. Further progress in this regard, would be watched in future 
audits.
4.2  Valuation of imported goods between related persons
As 
per Sub-rule (3)(a) of Rule 3 of the Customs Valuation (Determination of Value 
of Imported Goods) Rules, 2007, where the buyer and seller are related, the 
transaction value may be accepted only if examination of the circumstances of 
sale indicates that the relationship has not influenced the price.
This provision is of particular importance in cases of imports under the Project 
Import Regulations, 1986, as it ensures that the valuation of goods reflects their 
true transactional worth, thereby preventing any under or overvaluation that 
could affect the customs duty liability.
The Special Valuation Branch (SVB) is the designated authority for examining 
and determining the value of imported goods in transactions involving related 
parties. Accordingly, imports made from related entities are required to be 
referred to the SVB for valuation and issue of an order confirming or revising 
the declared value.
Audit scrutiny of 736 Project Import cases revealed that in 21 cases covering 11 
importers under the Import-I Commissionerate, NCH Mumbai and Chennai II 
Commissionerate involving a total CIF value of ₹866.55 crore, the transactions 
between related parties were not referred to the SVB for valuation as required 
under the rules (Statement-15).
NCH Mumbai stated (September 2025) that M/s. C4 was directed to submit the 
SVB investigation report at the earliest. In respect of M/s. A6, SVB order-in-original 
was submitted by the firm. Reply in respect of remaining cases are awaited (May 
2026).

48
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
An illustrative case is discussed hereunder:
Audit observed in one case of M/s. C4 with a CIF value of ₹ 27,043.67 lakh 
registered for the initial setting up of Rapid Metrorail Services in Gurgaon that 
both buyer and seller are related as defined under the Rule 2 cited supra. 
Department did not refer these cases to SVB which indicates not complying with 
the procedure stipulated under the Sub-rule cited supra, which might lead to 
potential revenue implications, if any, due to improper valuation of imported 
goods.
Not referring related party import transactions to the SVB for valuation constitutes 
a deviation from Rule 3(3)(a) of the Customs Valuation Rules, 2007, and the 
established CBIC procedure for related-party transactions. The omission increases 
the risk of incorrect valuation and potential revenue loss due to acceptance of 
transaction values that may have been influenced by relationship considerations. 
It also indicates lapses in internal review and oversight at the Commissionerate 
level.
This was pointed out (May 2025) to the department and the reply is awaited 
(May 2026).
Recommendation No 9: CBIC may direct all field formations to ensure that all 
imports involving related parties, covered under the Project Import Regulations, 
1986, are promptly referred to the SVB in accordance with prescribed guidelines. 
Further, an internal compliance checklist may be integrated into the ICES system 
to flag related-party transactions automatically for SVB reference before 
assessment.
CBIC, while accepting the Audit observation, stated (May 2026) that the 
department has issued Circular No. 5/2016-Customs dated 09 February 2016, 
prescribing the procedure for investigation of related party import cases by the 
SVBs and the procedure to be observed by the field formations for referring cases 
to SVBs for investigation. Accordingly, field formations have been requested to 
ensure compliances regarding referral of related party import cases to SVB in 
terms of aforesaid circular.
4.3  Confirmed demands not recovered
Section 
28(10) of Customs Act, 1962 provides that where an order determining 
the duty is passed by the Proper Officer under this section, the person liable to 
pay the said duty shall pay the amount so determined along with the interest due 
on such amount whether or not the amount of interest is specified separately. 

49
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Audit noticed that Department had confirmed 30 demands involving revenue 
of ₹150.38 lakh in two Commissionerate 26 which were pending for recovery 
(October 2025). 
Kolkata Port Commissionerate stated (May 2025) that demand notice would be 
issued after scrutiny. NCH Mumbai stated (September 2025) that the contract has 
already been de-registered on 25 June 2020. The concerned group is looking after 
the demand of differential duty from the importer.
The pendency of recovery in confirmed demand cases indicates weaknesses 
in the Department’s follow-up and monitoring mechanism for enforcement of 
adjudicated demands. Delay or failure in recovery not only results in blockage of 
government revenue but may also lead to difficulties in realization due to expiry 
of limitation periods or not tracing of importers. The absence of an effective 
tracking system for demand recovery highlights deficiencies in compliance with 
the provisions of Section 28(10) and internal revenue monitoring procedures.
Recommendation No 10: CBIC may strengthen its demand recovery and 
monitoring framework by instituting a centralized register or digital tracker 
within ICES to capture the status of all confirmed demands along with recovery 
actions initiated.
CBIC, while accepting the audit observation, stated (May 2026) that the 
Department has issued Master Circular No. 1081/02/2022-CX dated 19 January 
2022, providing guidelines for recovery of arrears of Indirect Taxes and Customs. 
It was also informed that this recommendation had been shared with the field 
formations in order to improve compliance regarding recovery of confirmed 
demand cases.
4.4  Incorrect reporting of pendency of Project Contracts
Boar
d’s Circular No. 22/2011-Customs dated 4 May 2011 stipulates that the 
Commissioner of Customs is required to monitor the pendency of Project Import 
cases and submit a Monthly Report (Annexure-I) to the Chief Commissioner of 
Customs of the concerned Zone. 
The Chief Commissioner, in turn, is to compile a Quarterly Consolidated Report 
(Annexure-II) and forward it by the 15th of the following month to the Directorate 
General of Performance Management (DGPM), New Delhi. 
The DGPM is responsible for monitoring pendency at the All-India level, analyzing 
trends in finalization, and recommending corrective measures to the Board.
26 NCH-Mumbai (1 case) and CC (Port) Kolkata (29 cases)

50
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Audit examination revealed that filing of Annexure-I by the Commissionerates 
was irregular. In several instances, the information was not furnished to Audit. 
Cross-verification of data from the Project Import Registers with the Monthly 
Progress Reports (MPRs) submitted by the Department could not be completed, 
as the registers were not maintained properly and not closed periodically.
Further scrutiny of records in nine  Commissionerate
27 showed that as on 31 
March 2024, a total of 127 Project Import cases, involving a cumulative value of 
₹66,796.59 crore, remained pending for finalization. However, Audit could not 
reconcile these figures with the corresponding data in MPRs/Annexure-I, as such 
reports were either incomplete or unavailable (Statement-16). 
In reply, Kolkata Port Commissionerate, while accepting the audit observation 
stated (September 2025) that discrepancy is due to not reconciling of MPR data 
with updated PI register resulting in inclusion of disposed/duplicate cases and 
corrective measures would be undertaken.
Bhubaneswar Commissionerate stated (October 2025) that MPR data relates to 
provisionally assessed BEs of PI cases registered at Paradeep or at other ports for 
which TRA has been issued. The BsE which are finalized manually are still shown 
as pending in the EDI System. Besides, some pending BsE pertaining to other ports 
are also reckoned in the MPR. 
Jodhpur and Ludhiana Commissionerate stated (August & October 2025) that no 
monthly report in respect of PI cases were sent. Jodhpur Commissionerate has 
sent the monthly report (Annexure-I) from June 2025 onwards.
Mundra Commissionerate stated (December 2025) that audit objection is 
acknowledged and strict compliance and practice of record keeping has been 
started.
The absence of proper maintenance of Project Import Registers and failure to 
submit prescribed monthly and quarterly monitoring reports indicate serious 
lapses in compliance with Board’s Circular No. 22/2011-Customs. The lack of 
reliable and consolidated data on pendency undermines the effectiveness of 
monitoring at both Zonal and DGPM levels, affecting the Board’s ability to assess 
progress and enforce timely finalization of Project Import cases. Weak record 
management and irregular reporting also raise concerns over transparency, 
internal control, and accountability in the administration of the Project Import 
Scheme.
27 CC Ahmedabad (7 cases); CC Bhubaneshwar (2 cases); CC Cochin (14 cases); CC (Prev) Lucknow 
(5 cases); CC Jodhpur (33 cases); CC (Port) Kolkata (33 cases); CC Ludhiana (1 case); CC Mundra 
(28 cases) and CC Noida (4 cases).

51
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Recommendation No 11: Board may direct all field formations to strictly 
adhere to the reporting and monitoring framework prescribed in Circular No. 
22/2011-Customs. The Project Import Registers should be digitally maintained 
and monitored periodically to ensure data integrity. The DGPM may consider 
developing an automated dashboard linked with ICES to capture and consolidate 
pendency across Commissionerates in real time.
CBIC, while accepting the audit observation, stated (May 2026) that the field 
formations have been advised to strictly adhere to the reporting and monitoring 
framework prescribed in Circular no. 22/2011-Customs dated 4 May 2011 and to 
digitally maintain and close project Import Registers periodically to ensure data 
integrity.
Sharing bulk data from ICES to DGPM, followed by creation of dashboards by 
DGPM, is not technically feasible. Dashboard in ADVAIT can be created in ADVAIT 
to monitor pendency on T+1 day basis. ADVAIT team will deliver the above 
commitments in 3 months.
4.5  Mismat ch in reporting of Project Import Contracts
Audit observed in Tuticorin Commissionerate that four Project Import cases, 
comprising 215 Bills of Entry (BsE) with a total assessable value of ₹21,366.97 crore, 
were filed. Of these, 192 BsE, with an assessable value of ₹21,268.53 crore, were 
filed at Tuticorin Port (INTUT1) itself. However, the Monthly Report for Tuticorin 
Port (March 2024) recorded only two contracts with a total value of ₹10,792.09 
crore, indicating incorrect reporting of provisional BsE relating to Project Import 
cases. This discrepancy was brought to the notice of the Department.
Prior to the introduction of the PI Module in ICES, Bonds were called Provisional 
Duty (PD) Bonds, requiring importers to furnish PD bonds corresponding to the 
value of imports under each registered Project Import contract.
Audit further examined PD/PI bonds for three registrations made for M/s. B1 
(Units 1&2, 3&4, and 5&6). The PD bond for Unit 1&2 was not furnished to audit, 
and details of the corresponding BsE were unavailable. In respect of Unit 3&4, a 
PD bond amounting to ₹22,523.25 crore was taken, and 52 BsE with an assessable 
value of ₹4,091.87 crore were debited for imports made up to August 2019.
Consequently, the Monthly Report of Tuticorin CH Port (INTUT1) should have 
reflected a total of 244 BsE (192 under PI module + 52 under PD bonds) with 
an assessable value of ₹25,360.40 crore. However, the report recorded only two 
contracts valued at ₹10,792.09 crore, resulting in incorrect reporting of pendency 
details.

52
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
The incorrect reporting of Project Import cases and BsE values in the Monthly 
Report indicates weaknesses in record-keeping, monitoring, and reconciliation 
of PD and PI bond-linked imports. Unavailability of PD bond details for certain 
projects further hindered verification of actual imports and undermined the 
reliability of pendency data.
This was pointed out (May 2025) to the department and the reply is awaited 
(May 2026).
4.6  Maint enance of records
As per Regulations 4 and 5 of the Project Import Regulations, 1986, read with the 
provisions of the Customs Appraising Manual, a Contract Register is required to 
be maintained in the prescribed format, wherein contract numbers are assigned 
at the time of registration. The register should record details such as the contract 
value, Bills of Entry, and TRA Nos., and should be reviewed monthly by the Proper 
Officer for effective monitoring.
In addition to the Contract Register, other essential records such as the Confirmed 
Demand Register, Unconfirmed Demand Register, PD Register, Adjudication 
Register, and TRA Register are also required to be maintained and closed 
periodically under proper authentication.
For comprehensive coverage and end-to-end verification of Project Import (PI) 
cases throughout their life cycle, a sample of 915 cases (out of 1,467 registrations 
made pan-India, covering 62.37 per cent) was selected. The sample included cases 
categorized as Finalized, Ongoing, and Registered but imports not yet made.
However, 139 PI cases, involving a total CIF value of ₹15,818.11 crore pertaining 
to nine Commissionerates
28, were not made available to audit despite repeated 
requests and reminders (Appendix 2).
In order to obtain a holistic view of the scheme’s design and implementation, 
Audit sought (October 2024) records such as policy formulation files, MIS reports, 
manpower deployment details, evaluation/review reports, and other related 
documentation from the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance. However, 
despite follow-up reminders issued in November 2024, December 2024, and 
January 2025 the requested files were not furnished.
28 ACC, Bengaluru; ICD, Bengaluru; CC Chennai II; CC Visakhapatnam; CC Bhubaneswar ; CC 
(Port) Kolkata; JNCH, Mumbai; ICD Tughlakabad, Delhi; NCH, Delhi.

53
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Further, Audit noticed that records were not properly maintained in three 
Commissionerates29, with no evidence of monthly closing of mandatory registers 
(Appendix 4). Moreover, critical registers such as PI Contract Registers, Bank 
Guarantee Registers, Demand Confirm Registers, and TRA cases were not 
produced in seven Commissionerates
30, as detailed in Appendix 5.  
In reply, Paradeep Customs Division stated (October 2025) that PI files of the two 
importers relate to the year 2010 & 2011 and even after best efforts that could 
not be traced out. They further stated that there is no separate bank guarantee 
register maintained for project import contracts.
The ongoing Performance Audit on Project Imports is being undertaken on a 
pan-India basis to enable comparative analysis of scheme and not producing of 
relevant records limits our efforts in providing necessary assurance on the overall 
functioning of the scheme. 
4.7  Conclusion
In this 
chapter, Audit focused on systemic issues relating to the Bank Guarantee 
and Bond management, finalisation of provisional assessments and project 
import contracts, adequacy of oversight mechanisms, and internal controls to 
ensure compliance with prescribed procedures and safeguarding of revenue.
Audit observed not renewing of Bonds and Bank Guarantees in pending Project 
Import cases, without fulfilment of prescribed conditions such as submission of 
installation and utilization certificates, indicating weak monitoring and internal 
controls.
Audit also observed pendency in recovery of confirmed demands which points to 
weaknesses in follow-up and enforcement mechanisms. This led to blockage of 
government revenue and increased the risk of not realizing of adjudicated dues. 
The Project Imports Scheme was intended to simplify customs procedures and 
enable quicker clearance of project-related imports under a single concessional 
tariff heading, thereby facilitating the implementation of large and complex 
projects. However, the number of contracts registered under the Project Imports 
Scheme declined significantly from 146 in FY 2019–20 to 32 in FY 2023–24, 
reflecting a 78.10 per cent decrease over the five-year period, as brought in Para 
1.6.
29  CC Mundra; CC Cochin; CC Chennai II
30  CC Ahmedabad; CC Mundra; CC Bhubaneshwar; CC Ludhiana; CC Tuticorin; CC (Port) Kolkata; 
JNCH, Mumbai

54
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Audit acknowledges that five out of nine recommendations of the earlier 
Performance Audit (AR No. 42 of 2016) have been implemented, including the 
development of the Project Imports Module and Bond Management Module in 
ICES 1.5.  
New Delhi
Dated: 29 July 2026
 
New Delhi
Da
ted: 03 August 2026 
   (SMITA GOP
AL)
            Principal Direct
or (Indirect Taxes) 
 (K. SANJAY MURTHY)
  Comptr
oller and Auditor General of India
Countersigned


55
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Appendices and Statements

56
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)56
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

57
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Appendix-1 :  Project Import Universe and Sample
Refer : Para No. 1.4
Sl. No Name of the 
FAO/BO
Commissionerate Finalised Ongoing Regn done, Imports 
not yet made Total cases
Total Selected Total Selected Total Selected Total Selected Total Selected
1 Ahmedabad 4 2 22 22 42 42 4 4 68 68
2 Bengaluru 3 2 33 33 89 89 2 2 124 124
3 Chandigarh 2 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1
4 Chennai 3 2 52 52 166 50 1 1 219 103
5 Delhi 3 2 67 67 116 116 0 0 183 183
6 Hyderabad 3 1 7 7 24 24 0 0 31 31
7 Kolkata 4 1 116 116 57 57 0 0 173 173
8 Mumbai 6 2 213 100 377 54 9 9 599 163
9 Lucknow 2 2 13 13 5 5 0 0 18 18
10 BO Kochi 2 1 0 0 8 8 0 0 8 8
11 BO Jaipur 1 1 3 3 1 1 29 29 33 33
12 BO 
Bhubaneshwar 1 1 8 8 2 2 0 0 10 10
 Tot
al 34 18 534 421 888 449 45 45 1467 915
Appendix - 2 – Details of Records not produced cases
Refer: Para No. 1.4 & 4.6
Sl. 
No. Commissionerate No. of 
registration
CIF Value (in 
cr.)
Status of Project 
(Finalised/Ongoing) Sector
1 ACC Bengaluru 21 560.71 Ongoing/Finalised Power/Transportation etc.
2 ICD, Bengaluru 9 100.26 Ongoing/Finalised Transportation and others
3 Chennai -II 3 97.45 Finalised Power/Transport/Irrigation
4 CC, Visakhapatnam 3 Not 
Available
Ongoing Not available
5 CC, Bhubaneswar 4
Not 
Available Finalised Power
6 CC Port, Kolkata 42 11,532.43 Ongoing/Finalised Industrial/Transportation sector/
Power Project/Mining Project/
Exploration for oil
7 JNCH, Mumbai 13 704.43 Finalised/Newly 
registered
Not available 
8 ICD-Tughlakabad 37 2,184.32 Ongoing/Finalised Transportation (Metro rail)/Power 
generation or transmission/Water 
Supply and others
9 ACC-NCH, Delhi 7 638.53 Ongoing/Finalised Transportation (Metro rail)
Total 139 15818.13
57
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

58
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Appendix 3: Mapping of Recommendations or findings of the earlier report (AR No. 42 of 2016)
Refer : Para No. 1.8 
Sl.  
No Recommendations Board’s response to 
Audit Recommendation
Current Status 
(implemented/ 
not 
implemented)
Findings in the 
current audit report 
that can be mapped 
with earlier report.
1 Recommendation No. 1 
Audit recommends that the Ministry, 
after reviewing the existing statutory 
provisions and rulings of the apex court 
on this issue remove the inconsistency 
in the provisions for assessment under 
project imports by issuing appropriate 
instructions.
The Board stated that 
they are considering 
withdrawal of the circular 
dated 8 August 1987.
Implemented.
No findings in 
Current report / 
Para- 3.1 of AR 42 of 
2016 (Inconsistency 
in interpretation of 
statutory provisions)
2 Recommendation No. 2 
Audit recommends that the Ministry 
may consider amending the PIR 
1986, to provide for the condition of 
time bound completion of imports 
to be incorporated in the contracts 
registered under Project Import 
scheme.
The Board stated that 
they were considering a 
time period of three years 
extendable by two years 
for completion of imports 
under Project Imports in 
consultations with other 
ministries.
Not implemented
Para 2.2 of Current 
report / Para 3.2 of 
AR 42 of 2016
3 Recommendation No. 3 
Audit recommends that the provisions 
regarding sponsoring authority in the 
PIR 1986 may be clarified to establish 
a primary sponsoring authority for 
composite/ integrated projects to avoid 
any scope for undue benefits and for 
better monitoring of projects.
The Board stated that 
recommendation is being 
examined and suitable 
amendment/clarification 
would be issued Not implemented
No findings in 
Current report / 
Para- 3.2 of AR 42 
of 2016 (Multiple 
Sponsoring 
authorities)
4 Recommendation No. 4 
Audit recommends that the Ministry 
may consider reviewing the volume of 
documents required under the Project 
Import scheme with a view to simplify 
the requirements
The Board stated that 
documents specified in 
the Regulation for pre 
and post import stages 
are reasonable. However, 
Ministry concurs that 
there is a need for 
meticulous monitoring at 
the senior level.
Recommendation 
seems to be not 
implemented and 
only scheme was 
digitized.
No findings in 
Current report. 
Para- 5.2 of AR 42 
of 2016 (Inadequate 
facilitation and 
delays)
5 Recommendation No. 5 
Audit recommends that Board may 
streamline the process and monitor 
the imports effected through other 
ports, by exploring the possibility 
of electronic transmission of TRA 
assessments (BEs) from TRA ports to 
the port of registrations, to avoid delay 
in finalisation of contracts.
The Board stated that 
based on the changes 
in the PIR, a Project 
Management Module 
will be developed in ICES 
1.5 including electronic 
transmission of TRA 
assessments (BEs) from 
TRA ports to port of 
registration.
Implemented.
Para 3.4 (iii) of 
Current report.
58
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

59
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Appendix 3: Mapping of Recommendations or findings of the earlier report (AR No. 42 of 2016)
Refer : Para No. 1.8 
Sl.  
No Recommendations Board’s response to 
Audit Recommendation
Current Status 
(implemented/ 
not 
implemented)
Findings in the 
current audit report 
that can be mapped 
with earlier report.
6 Recommendation No. 6 
Audit recommends that the Ministry 
review the factors contributing to high 
transaction costs associated with the 
Project Import scheme, and compare 
the benefits of the scheme, vis-a vis 
other schemes (like EPCG)
The Board stated that 
the Project Import 
Scheme is not linked to 
any export obligation 
and it has its distinct 
advantages. Review of 
regulations would be 
taken up with objective of 
procedural simplification 
and enhancing level of 
automation in ICES 1.5. 
This would bring down 
the transaction cost.
Implementation 
of 
recommendation 
may not be 
ascertained.
No findings in 
Current report. Para- 
5.5 of AR 42 of 2016 
(Transaction costs)
7 Recommendation No. 7 
Audit recommends that for having 
better control over the Project imports 
and for monitoring their credit/debits 
in the Bond Ledger in an efficient and 
accurate manner, Board may consider 
introducing a centralized Bond 
Management Module separately for 
Project Imports to monitor the imports 
made through the Port of Registration 
and the imports made in other Ports 
through TRA
The Board stated that 
Ministry concurs with 
recommendation on 
creation of Centralised 
Bond Management 
module in ICES 1.5 after a 
thorough review of PIR. Implemented.
Para 4.1.1, 4.1.2, 
4.1.3 and 4.1.4 of 
Current report / Para 
6.1.2 of AR 42 of 
2016.(Incorrect debit 
of Bonds in Bonds 
module
8 Recommendation No. 8 
Audit recommends that for effective 
monitoring of Project Import cases 
through Customs EDI system (ICES 1.5) 
Board may explore the possibility of a 
Project Management Module on the 
lines of EPCG scheme in ICES so as to 
reduce the dependency on monitoring 
of Project Import cases through 
manual system.
The Board stated that 
based on the changes 
in the PIR, a Project 
Management Module will 
be developed in ICES 1.5. Implemented.
Para-3.4 (I, II & iii) 
and Para 4.4 of 
Current report. 
9 Recommendation No. 9 
Audit recommends that Board may 
consider having a centralized database 
for project import cases so that 
inconsistency of data among different 
entities could be avoided.
The Board stated that 
Ministry concurs with 
recommendation on 
creation of Centralised 
Database in ICES 1.5 after 
a thorough review of PIR.
Implemented.
Para-3.4 (I, II & iii) 
and Para 4.4 of 
Current report. /
Para 6.2.6 of AR 42 
of 2016 (Incorrect 
reporting of 
pendency of Project 
contracts)
59
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

60
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Appendix -  4: Maintenance of Records
Refer : Para No.  4.6
Sl. No. Commissionerate Maintenance
1 CC Mundra Confirmed demand register, Unconfirmed Demand Register, PD Register, TRA 
Register
2 CC Cochin Copy of Project Import Registration documents, Copy of Indemnity of Bond/
Provisional Duty Bond
3 CC Chennai II
Project Contract registration register, PD/PI Bond register, BG register, register 
of SCNs issued, register of OIOS issued, register for SVB cases, register/File for 
incoming/outgoing TRAs
Appendix - 5: Non production of records
Refer : Para No. 4.6
Sl. No. Commissionerate Non Production
1 CC Ahmedabad, 
CC Mundra 363 TRA Cases/Partial Production
2 CC Bhubaneshwar Project Import Contract Register, Bank Guarantee Register
3 CC Ludhiana Contract register, confirmed demand register, unconfirmed register, PD 
register, adjudication register, TRA register
4 CC Tuticorin
Approved list of items from the sponsoring authority; Annexure b; 
copy of bonds; plant site verification certificate’ import trade licence; 
installed capacity of project
5 CC (Port) Kolkata
File opening register;  re-import bond register;  re-export bond register; 
demand register (confirmed and unconfirmed); provisional assessment 
bond register; refund register and concerned files; internal audit report; 
statistical report & return file;  bond & bank guarantee register; MPR/
MTR for the 2020-2021(PIFC) and other; TRA register
6 JNCH-Mumbai Confirmed demand register, unconfirmed register, PD register, 
adjudication register, TRA register 
60
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

61
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Statement – 1 : Absence of prescribed timelines for completion of Imports
               Refer :  Para No. 2.2 
Sl. 
No. Commissionerate No. of Project CIF Value of Contract 
Registered (₹ in cr) Delay in range (in months)
1 CC (Port) Kolkata   4 117.52 20-31
2 ICD Tughlakabad 30 576.43 28-125
3 ACC, New Delhi 8 33.79 7-35
4 CC, Noida 5 105.62 08-61
5 CC, Mundra 6 83.86 14-56
6 CC, Ahmedabad 2 612.33 14-33
7 CC, Jodhpur 1 595.03 7
 Tot
al 56 2,124.58 7-125
  
  Statement 2 : Discrepancies between goods permitted to be imported and actually imported.
Refer : Para No. 2.8
Sl. 
No. Commissionerate No. of 
Project
CIF Value of 
In-Admissible 
goods ( ₹ in cr)
Description of In-
Admissible Goods 
Imported
Differential Duty to be 
collected
 ( ₹ in cr)
1 NCH, Mumbai 2 3.97 Outdoor 
Housing Blower, 
Surveillance 
Cabinet, Ranger 
Surface Top 
Hammer Drill Rig
0.22
2 CC, Mundra 1 7.89 Chip Melter and 
Pretreatment 
system, Melting 
Furnance, Holding 
Furnance
0.26
3 CC, Chennai II 1 3.63 Bell Less Top 
Equipment, 
Bellow, Manual 
Ball & Google 
Value along with 
Mating Flanges, 
Gasket and 
Fasteners
0.15
4 CC, Tuticorin 1 2.23 Multipurpose Seat 0.72
 TO
TAL 5 17.72  1.35
61
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Go
vernment (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

62
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Statement 3: Not levying /Short levy of Customs duty due to incorrect availment of exemption
Refer : Para No. 2.9
Sl. 
No. Commissionerate
No. 
of 
case
Commodity
Assessable 
Value  
(₹ in cr)
Rate of 
Duty 
applicable
Rate 
of 
duty 
levied
Short/Non 
levy of duty  
(₹ in cr)
1 NCH, Mumbai 1 Communication 
Equipment
0.03 18 5 0.004
2 CC, Port, Kolkata 4 Apron Feeder Steel 
Parts, Apron Feeder 
Hydraulic System, 
Spillage Conveyor 
Fabricated Parts, 
Robo lab Equipment, 
Auto Sampling 
Equipment, Online 
Particle Size Analyzer, 
Hammer Crusher 
Mechanical Parts etc
35.88 18 5 4.63
3 ICD Tughlakabad 4 Base Plate Pad, 
Helical Spring, 
Tension Clamp, 
Elastic Pads
32.38 23.42 16.10 2.37
4 CC, Ahmedabad 1 Escalators in SKD 
Condition with 
Mandatory spares 
and tools, 
18.09 27.74 24.49 0.59
5 CC, Chennai II 7 Plug Valve, Sdss 
pipes, Super Duplex 
Pipes, UF System, 
Prv Valve, Bronze, 
Adhesive Membrane, 
Epoxy Primer, 
Borosilicate Glass 
Blocks
55.67 7.5/18 Nil 7.09
6 CC, Bhubaneswar 2
 P
ower Plant related 
products
148.85  -  - 36.46
 Tot
al 19  290.90   51.14
62
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Go
vernment (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

63
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Statement 4 : Delay in submission of reconciliation statement and other documents/  
Documents not submitted
Refer : Para No. 2.10
Sl. No. Commissionerate No. of Project CIF Value of goods 
(₹ in cr)
Delay range (in 
days)
1 NCH, Mumbai 56 5803.45 162-7923
2 JNCH, Mumbai 7 NA 35-1647
3 CC (Port) Kolkata   38 4982.37 457-6738
4 ICD, Bengaluru 2 155.98 721-859
5 ICD Tughlakabad 43 1,138.84 174-2277
6 ACC, Delhi 1 1 462
7 CC, Noida 5 293.81 92-1230
8 CC (Prev), Lucknow 8 207.55 482-1706
9 CC, Mundra 9 338.55 199-1476
10 CC, Jodhpur 3 51.83 213-1372
11 CC, Chennai II 29 1,888.08 46-1419
 Tot
al 201 14860.97 35-7923
Statement - 5 : Delay in Submission of Reconciliation Statement and other documents/  
Documents not submitted
                                                    Refer : Para No. 2.10 
Sl. 
No. Commissionerate
No. of 
Project 
Registration
CIF value of 
goods 
(₹ in cr)
Duty collected     
(₹ in cr)
Duty 
Foregone   
(₹ in cr)
Delay range 
(in days)
1 CC, Bhubaneswar 2 2,624.89 Ongoing Ongoing 1958-3667
2 CC, Visakhapatnam 15 500.31 118.48 58.96 119-1669
3 CC, Mundra 5 33.67 7.12 1.89 368-1613
4 CC, Chennai II 16 3,524.99 45.57 17.94 429-2496
 Tot
al 38 6,683.86 171.17 78.79 119-3667
63
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

64
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Statement - 6: Delay in submission of Reconciliation statement and other documents/  
Documents not submitted
                                                    Refer : Para  2.10 
Sl. 
No. Commissionerate No. of 
Registration
CIF Value of 
goods (₹ in cr) Whether SCN is issued by the Dept.
1 CC Bhubaneswar 2 2,624.89 No
2 CC, Chennai-II 45 48.45 No
3 ICD, Bengaluru 2 155.97 No
4 CC (Prev), Lucknow 8 207.55 No
5 NCH, Mumbai 56 5,316.18 Not issued in 55 cases and one case 
Deficiency Memo issued.
6 CC Jodhpur 3 51.83 No
7 CC Port, Kolkata 38 4,982.37 No
8 ICD Tughlakabad 43 1,138.84 Not Available
9 ACC-NCH Delhi 1 50.96 Not Available
10 CC, Mundra 14 372.22 No
11 CC, Noida 5 293.81 No
12 JNCH, Mumbai 7 487.22 No
13 CC, Visakhapatnam 15 500.32 No
 Tot
al 239 16230.61  
Statement - 7 : Finalization of PI Contracts without submission of mandatory documents
                                           Refer : Para No.2.11 
Sl. 
No. Commissionerate No. of 
Registration
Name of documents not 
submitted
CIF value of 
goods (₹ in 
cr)
Duty 
Foregone  
(₹ in cr)
1 NCH, Mumbai 5 Project was finalised without 
proof of payment, BRC or 
details of Bank Transactions
811.66 Not 
Available
2 JNCH, Mumbai 4 No Finalisation documents are 
available in the file, Project was 
finalised without any finalised 
documents
161.45 Not 
Available
3 ICD Tughlakabad, 
Delhi
16 Reconciliation Certificate, 
Installation Certificate, 
Chartered Engineer Certificate
104.30  Not 
A
vailable
4 CC (Prev) Lucknow 2 Reconciliation statement 34.03 0.97
5 CC Mundra 1 Reconciliation statement 18.58 0.60
 Tot
al 28  1,130.02 1.57
64
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Go
vernment (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

65
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Statement – 8 : Finalisation of project contracts without installation certificate and plant site verification
Refer: Para No. 2.12 
Sl. No. Commissionerate No. of 
Registration 
CIF Value of goods 
(₹ in cr)
Duty foregone 
( ₹ in cr)
1 NCH, Mumbai 3 5.63 Not Available
2 ICD-Tughlakabad 2 12.75 0
3 CC Noida 2 25.22 0.79
4 CC (Preventive) Lucknow 5 163.63 1.90
5 CC Mundra 3 72.86 5.06
6 CC Jodhpur 2 47.05 Not Available
7 CC Chennai II 12 620.99 Not Available
 Tot
al 29 948.13 7.75
Statement 9 : Inordinate delay in clearance of goods under Project Import
Refer : Para No. 3.1
Sl. 
No. Commissionerate No. of 
Registration No. of BE
Assessable 
Value 
(₹ in cr)
Total Duty 
(₹ in cr)
Delay range 
(in days)
1 ACC, Bengaluru 1 1 2.63 0.47 63
2 ICD, Bengaluru 2 2 4.68 1.15 57- 116
3 CC, Visakhapatnam 3 6 56.20 13.77 40-555
4 CC, Ludhiana 1 1 24.05 5.89 42
5 CC, Ahmedabad 1 16 60.30 2.16 58-1149
6 CC, Jodhpur 1 3 0.51 0.12 34-45
7 CC (Port) Kolkata 11 27 172.03 37.10 30-299
 Tot
al 20 56 320.40 60.66 30-1149
Statement 9A : Inordinate delay in clearance of goods under Project Import
 Refer : Para No. 3.1 
Sl. No. Commissionerate No. of Registration No. of BE Delay range
(in days)
1 CC, Chennai II 74 480 3-718
2 CC, Tuticorin 3 28 03-09
 Tot
al 77 508 03-718
65
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

66
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Statement 10A : Delay in/Not finalising Project Import 
 Refer:  Para No. 3.2 
Sl. 
No. Commissionerate No. of Registration CIF Value of Goods   
(₹ in cr)
Delay range
(in days)
1 NCH, Mumbai 33 2,539.60 174-8694
2 JNCH, Mumbai 5 454.84 71-1444
3 CC, Visakhapatanam 5 100.24 35-288
4 ACC, Delhi 33 997.63 53-2589
5 CC, Noida 3 50.34 71-442
6 CC, Lucknow 4 67.32 296-612
7 CC, Mundra 3 50.23 26-179
8 CC, Jodhpur 2 47.06 320-445
9 CC, Chennai-II 14 1,094 67-791
 Tot
al 102 5,401.18 26-8694
Statement - 10B : Delay in/Not finalising Project Import
 Refer: Para No. 3.2 
Sl. 
No. Commissionerate No. of 
case
CIF Value of goods 
(in cr)
Whether contract is 
finalised or not (Yes /No)
Delay range (in 
days)
1 NCH Mumbai 3 223.52 No 247-1996
2 JNCH, Mumbai 3 112.23 No 119-595
3 CC, Bengaluru 2 11.93 No 1025-2731
4 CC, Visakhapatanam 1 47.17 No 426
5 ICD Tughlakabad 7 122.86 No 1419-2840
6 NCH, Delhi 9 164.01 No 231-1502
7 CC, Mundra 3 212.55 No 40-334
8 CC, Ahmedabad 2 207.69 No 1608-1958
9 CC, Chennai-II 6 330.72 No 287-1969
10 CC, Cochin 1 149.00 No 2358
11 CC, Ludhiana 1 192.23 No 672
 Tot
al 38 1,773.91  40-2840
66
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Go
vernment (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

67
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Statement 11 : Delay in/Not finalising provisionally assessed Bills of Entry
 Refer:  Para No. 3.3 
Sl. 
No. Commissionerate No. of 
Registration
CIF value 
of goods 
(₹ in cr)
Total 
No. of 
BsE
No. of BE 
finalised
Range of 
delays in 
days for 
finalization 
of BE
No. of BE 
where 
finalization 
is pending
Range of 
delays in 
days where 
finalization is 
pending
1 NCH, Mumbai 1 397.00 50 50 291 0 -
2 ICD Tughlakabad 12 362.52 38 31 22-1674 7 414-2402
3 ACC, Delhi 1 7.06 12 12 471 0 -
4 CC, Noida 1 19.66 8 8 350 0 -
5 CC (Prev) Lucknow 3 32.25 22 18 233 4 1749-1779
6 CC, Jodhpur 2 47.06 38 38 199-324 0 -
7 CC Chennai II 1 0.48 1 1 664 0 -
8 CC (Port) Kolkata 56 4,809.95 493 9 2067-5978 484 84-5924
 Tot
al 77 5,675.98 662 167 22-5978 495 84-5924
Statement 12 : Bond/Bank Guarantee not revalidated
                                                                                     Refer : Para No. 4.1.1
Sl. No. Commissionerate No. of 
Registration
CIF Value 
(₹ in cr) Bond or BG Amount of 
BG (₹ in cr)
Amount of 
Bond  
(₹ in cr)
1 NCH, Mumbai 9 743.15 BG 4.46 0
2 JNCH, Mumbai 2 28.59 BG 0.57 0
3 CC (Port), Kolkata 3 55.37 BG/Bond 0.58 12.00
4 ACC, Bengaluru 10 435.29 Bond 0 446.39
5 CC, Bengaluru 13 1027.15 BG/Bond 1.62 812.47
6 CC, Vishakhapatnam 14 1,088.46 BG/Bond 0.90 2275.93
7 ICD Tughlakabad 139 2783.00 BG/Bond 7.26 2364.10
8 CC, Noida 17 698.91 BG/Bond 2.78 516.39
9 CC (Prev) Lucknow 8 199.23 Bond 0 181.42
10 CC, Jodhpur 1 595.03 Bond 0 446.35
11 ACC, New Delhi 28 262.44 BG/Bond 1.37 194.13
 Tot
al 244 7,916.62 19.54 7249.18
67
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

68
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Statement  13 : Not submitting/short submission of requisite Bond and Bank Guarantee
                                                                                              Refer : Para No. 4.1.2 
Sl. 
No. Commissionerate No. of 
Registration
CIF 
Value of 
Contract 
(₹ in cr)
Value 
of Bond 
to be 
obtained 
(₹ in cr)
Value 
of Bond 
obtained 
(₹ in cr)
Shortfall 
in  Bond 
(₹ in cr)
2% of 
CIF 
value  
(for 
BG) (₹ 
in cr)
 BG 
obtained 
(₹ in cr)
Short 
fall in 
BG (₹ 
in cr)
1 JNCH, Mumbai 1 73.25 77.88 77.31 0.57 - - -
2 CC (Port), Kolkata   1 30.25 30.80 30.25 0.55 - - -
3 CC, Ahmedabad 1 49.23 49.23 50.00 - 0.98 0.60 0.38
 Tot
al 3 152.73 157.91 157.56 1.12 0.98 0.60 0.38
Statement-14 : Not Debiting Bonds from imports other port of registration
Refer : Para No. 4.1.3
Sl. No. Commissionerate No. of Registration CIF Value (in cr.)
1 NCH, Mumbai Zone 1 2 241.90
2 CC Chennai II 1 36
Total 3 277.90
Statement  15 :  : Valuation of goods between related party 
Refer :  Para No. 4.2 
Sl. No Commissionerate No. of Project Import 
Cases
Assessable value 
(₹ in cr)
1 NCH, Mumbai 5 455.63
2 CC, Chennai II 16 410.92
 Tot
al 21 866.55
68
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

69
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)
Statement 16 : Incorrect reporting of pendency of Project Imports
Refer : Para No. 4.4
Sl. 
No. Commissionerate
No. of PI 
cases as per 
Register as 
on 31-03-
2024
Value 
as per 
Project 
Import 
register     
(₹ in cr)
No. of PI 
cases as 
per MPR/ 
Annexure-I 
For March 
2024
Value as 
per MPR/ 
Annexure-I 
(₹ in cr)
Difference
No. of 
Project 
Import
Value
 (₹ in cr)
1 CC, (Prev) Lucknow 5 147.39 5 6.34 0 141.06
2 CC, Noida 4 104.08 0 0.00 4 104.08
3 CC, Mundra 28 2,042.75 Not 
Available
Not 
Available
Not 
Available
Not 
Available
4 CC, Ahmedabad 7 1,306.02 Not 
Available
Not 
Available
Not 
Available
Not 
Available
5 CC, Jodhpur 33 54,369.53 Not 
Available
Not 
Available
Not 
Available
Not 
Available
6 CC, Ludhiana 1 192.23 Nil Nil 1 192.23
7 CC (Port), Kolkata  33 3,558.62 57 11,988.41 24 8,429.79
8 CC, Cochin 14 3,972.13 13 3,431.51 1 540.62
9 CC, Bhubaneswar 2 1,103.84 3 440.47 1 663.37
 Tot
al 127 66,796.59 78 15,866.73 31 10,071.15
69
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

70
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

70
Report No. 27 of 2026 - Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs)

COMPTROLLER
 & AUDITOR
 GENERAL
 OF
 INDIA
सत्यमेव जयते
के नियंत्रक
 एवं
 महालेखापरीक्षक
भारत
COMPTROLLER
 & AUDITOR
 GENERAL
 OF
 INDIA
सत्यमेव जयते
के नियंत्रक
 एवं
 महालेखापरीक्षक
भारत