Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Scheme for Faster Adoption and Manufacturing 
of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles in India
Union Government
Ministry of Heavy Industries
Report No. 10 of 2026
(Performance Audit - Civil)
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in
Report No. 10 of 2026 –Union Government  Ministry of Heavy Industries
https://cag.gov.in/en/page-10-of-26


Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Scheme for Faster Adoption and Manufacturing 
of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles in India
Union Government
Ministry of Heavy Industries
Report No. 10 of 2026
(Performance Audit - Civil)

Report No. 10 of 2026
i
CHAPTER/ 
PARAGRAPH
SUBJECT PAGE No.
Preface v
Executive Summary vii
Chapter I INTRODUCTION
1.1 Introduction 1
1.2 Mechanism for implementation of FAME India Scheme 1
1.3 Phase-I of FAME India Scheme 2
1.4 Phase-II of FAME India Scheme 3
1.5 Fund allocation and utilisation 3
1.6 Physical progress under the Scheme 4
1.7 Trend in growth of xEVs in India 4
1.8 Audit objectives 5
1.9 Audit scope and sampling 5
1.10 Audit criteria 5
1.11 Audit methodology and Engagement with Stakeholders 6
1.12 Acknowledgment 6
Chapter II DEMAND INCENTIVES
2.1 Procedure for claiming and disbursement of demand 
incentive
7
2.2 Financial and Physical progress 8
2.3 Demand Incentive Delivery Mechanism (DIDM) portal 
in Phase-I
8
2.4 Non-reliable data of demand incentive under Phase-I 9
2.5 Demand Incentive Delivery Mechanism (DIDM) portal 
for Phase-II
10
2.6 Deficiencies in DIDM Portal (Phase-II) 11
2.7 Timeliness in submission and processing of claims 12
2.8 Demand aggregation for e-3-wheelers 13
2.9 Non-inclusion of cost of onboard charger in ex-factory 
price
14
2.10 Electric buses 15
2.11 Summing up 18
CONTENTS

Report No. 10 of 2026
ii
CHAPTER/ 
PARAGRAPH
SUBJECT PAGE No.
Chapter III TESTING AND CERTIFICATION
3.1 Procedure for testing and certification of electric 
vehicles
20
3.2 Audit findings:
3.2.1 - Timelines for testing and certification 21
3.2.2 - Tests for conformity of production 22
3.2.3 - Testing standards for EV charging stations/ 
equipment
23
3.2.4 - Testing standards for determining compliance to 
localisation requirements
24
3.2.5 - Claims made by the OEMs in violation of 
localisation requirements
25
3.2.6 - Release of demand incentive for ineligible 
claims
26
3.3 Summing up 28
Chapter IV CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE
4.1 Approval of charging infrastructure projects 30
4.2 Status of implementation of charging infrastructure 
projects
31
4.3 Audit sampling 32
4.4 Audit findings relating to Phase-I of the Scheme:
4.4.1 - No roadmap for creating charging infrastructure 
and approval of projects without inviting EoI
32
4.4.2 - Non-installation of envisaged charging 
infrastructure
33
4.4.3 - Delay in installation of charging infrastructure 33
4.4.4 - Non-functional charging infrastructure 34
4.4.5 - Non-execution of Central Management System 
for Charging Stations
35
4.4.6 - No revenue model for charging stations 37
4.5 Audit findings relating to Phase-II of the Scheme:
4.5.1 - Negligible progress of projects 37
4.5.2 - Charger type and compatibility 39
4.5.3 - Status of charging stations – Joint physical 
inspection
40
4.6 Summing up 45

Report No. 10 of 2026
iii
CHAPTER/ 
PARAGRAPH
SUBJECT PAGE No.
Chapter V TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT (R&D)
5.1 Project approval process 47
5.2 Audit findings:
5.2.1 - Status of Technology Development projects 48
5.2.2 - Non-signing of MOUs with the Implementing 
Agencies
51
5.2.3 - Monitoring of projects 52
5.3 Summing up 53
Chapter VI IEC, FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND CONVERGENCE
6.1 Information, Education and Communication 54
6.2 Financial Management 54
6.3 Convergence/synergy among different agencies 57
6.4 Summing up 63
Annexures-I to IX 67-83
 

Report No. 10 of 2026
v
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been prepared for 
submission to the President of India under Article 151 of the Constitution of India. The 
Report has been prepared in accordance with the Performance Auditing Guidelines, 2014 
and Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2020 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India.
The Report contains the results of Performance Audit of the Scheme for Faster Adoption 
and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles in India (FAME India Scheme) covering 
the period from March 2015 to March 2024.
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
PREFACE

vii
Report No. 10 of 2026
Executive Summary
The Ministry of Heavy Industries (erstwhile Department of Heavy Industry) launched the 
Scheme for Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles in India 
(FAME-I), for promotion of electric and hybrid vehicles with an outlay of ₹795 crore for a 
period of two years, commencing from April 2015. The scheme was subsequently extended up 
to March 2019 with an enhancement in outlay from ₹795 crore to ₹895 crore. Phase II of the 
scheme (FAME-II) was formulated with an outlay of ₹10,000 crore which was subsequently 
enhanced to ₹11,500 crore for the period from April 2019 to March 2024. The scheme was 
implemented through five components, viz. Demand Incentive; Charging Infrastructure; 
Technology Platform (R&D); Pilot Projects; and Information, Education and Communication.
The Performance Audit of the Scheme covered the period from March 2015 to March 2024 
with the objectives to assess whether:
(i) implementation of the various components of the Scheme was done economically, 
efficiently and effectively as envisaged in the Scheme guidelines, in order to promote 
the use of electric vehicles; and 
(ii) there was synergy amongst different Ministries/Departments for the growth of e-mobility 
and its ecosystem. 
The Performance Audit covered various aspects of planning, implementation and monitoring 
of the Scheme by the Ministry of Heavy Industries, testing agencies viz. Automotive 
Research Association of India, International Centre for Automotive Technology and Global 
Automotive Research Centre; Bureau of Energy Efficiency (under Ministry of Power), 
selected State Transport Undertakings, and project implementing agencies in respect of 
technology platform/R&D projects and pilot projects.
The main audit findings are as under:
Demand Incentives
There were discrepancies in the Demand Incentive Delivery Mechanism (DIDM) portal 
(Phase I & II) such as non-preparation of Detailed Project Report and non-signing of Service 
Level Agreement for portal development. As such, important aspects such as key deliverables, 
timelines, testing protocols, data/system integrity requirements, defects management and 
change management procedures were not contractually defined. Also, the Portal did not have 
functionalities for end-to-end online processing of claims by the Ministry, and there was lack 
of validation controls in the Portal.
(Paras 2.3, 2.5 and 2.6)
There were discrepancies in the information/data contained in the physical/e-files and data 
dump of the Portal (Phase-I) i.e. mismatch in the total amount and number of electric vehicles 
(EVs) for which demand incentive had been sanctioned/disbursed to the Original Equipment 
Manufacturers (OEMs). As the physical/e-files relating to processing of demand incentive 

viii
Report No. 10 of 2026
claims provided by the Ministry did not contain any vehicle-wise details, Audit was unable 
to analyse or derive assurance as to the admissibility of the demand incentive reported in 
these files.
(Para 2.4)
Three OEMs did not include the cost of the onboard charger in the ex-factory price of e-2-
wheelers models and instead sold the charger as an accessory so that the ex-factory price of 
the vehicle did not exceed the notified threshold of ₹1.5 lakh, and the vehicle models became 
eligible for demand incentive. The OEMs refunded ₹296.52 crore to the customers as a cost of 
charger and a sum of ₹29.45 crore was yet to be refunded till February 2025. 
(Para 2.9)
Under Phase-I of the Scheme, proposal of State Transport Undertakings/Municipal Corporations 
for 425 e-buses were approved by the Ministry in 10 cities across the country involving a 
subsidy of ₹278.42 crore from the Ministry. All the e-buses had been deployed. Under Phase-II, 
as of 31 December 2025, 5,195 e-buses had been deployed under the Scheme, out of the revised 
target of 6,862 buses.
(Para 2.10.2)
The central server required to be developed for monitoring performance of e-buses had not been 
developed by the Ministry despite an assurance given (November 2019) in the third meeting 
of the Project Implementation and Sanctioning Committee that the central server would be 
available by December 2020.
(Para 2.10.3)
Recommendations:
1) The Ministry may develop a robust mechanism for end-to-end processing of demand 
incentive claims on DIDM portal for more transparency and timely disbursement of 
demand incentives.
2) The Ministry may identify the constraints leading to low target achievement of e-buses 
under the Demand Aggregation method and take necessary remedial actions to ensure that 
the targets are achieved in this category.
3) The Ministry may take action for early development of central server for monitoring of 
performance of e-buses deployed by various State Transport Undertakings.
Testing and Certification
No timelines were notified by the Ministry for testing and issuance of Eligibility Assessment 
Reports (EARs) by the testing agencies under the FAME India Scheme. In the absence of this, 
there was no control/monitoring over the time taken by testing agencies to complete the testing 
and certification process and considerable time (ranging up to 497 days) was taken in issuing 
EARs by the testing agencies.
(Para 3.2.1)

ix
Report No. 10 of 2026
There was no provision for electric vehicle models to undergo Conformity of Production 
(COP) tests for annual revalidation in Phase-I, rendering it impossible to ascertain that the 
OEMs were using the same components that were originally tested and approved at the time 
of initial eligibility assessment. Further there was no provision in CMVR, 1989 for whole-
vehicle safety COP testing for electric/battery-operated vehicles till December 2022, i.e. more 
than eight years after notification of the FAME India scheme.  Provisions for the same were, 
however, notified (June 2021) by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) 
and implemented from December 2022 for all electric vehicles. Further, component-level 
COP for ‘traction battery’, was notified by MoRTH in December 2022 and implemented 
from 31 March 2023.
(Para 3.2.2)
Five OEMs violated the localisation requirements stipulated under the Phased Manufacturing 
Programme despite which demand incentive of ₹467.96 crore was disbursed to them. The 
violation was discovered at a later stage, after the testing agencies carried out detailed 
examination of records, physical plant inspection, and strip-down analysis of vehicles, on the 
specific directions of the Ministry itself. Two out of the five OEMs refunded the entire demand 
incentive availed by them including interest, amounting to ₹190.90 crore to the Ministry. 
Further, de-registration/ recovery of demand incentive against the remaining three OEMs was 
under process.
(Para 3.2.5)
There were violations of Scheme guidelines such as sale of vehicle after the validity period 
of FAME Eligibility Assessment Certificate resulting in recovery of ₹6.18 crore (894 EVs) 
from the OEMs and non-availability of CMVR and FAME Eligibility Certification resulting in 
recovery of demand incentive of ₹0.60 crore (58 EVs) done from the OEMs.
(Para 3.2.6.1)
In respect of 5,198 e-3-wheelers of two OEMs, the Ministry disbursed demand incentive 
without restricting it to the amount specified by the testing agencies in eligibility certificates, 
resulting in excess disbursement amounting to ₹1.65 crore.
(Para 3.2.6.2)
Recommendations:
1) Testing agencies may develop and strictly follow the timelines for testing and issue of 
Eligibility Assessment Reports. An online platform for certification system may also be 
developed to achieve transparency and efficiency.
2) The Ministry may formulate comprehensive Standard Operating Procedure for testing 
and certification under FAME and other schemes and for adherence to localisation 
guidelines for the testing agencies.
3) The Ministry may include important details of vehicle testing (i.e. CMVR and FAME 
eligibility certification details including effective period, admissible demand incentive) as 
validation rules in FAME portal for processing of demand incentive claims.

x
Report No. 10 of 2026
Charging Infrastructure
There was no roadmap/action plan for setting up of adequate public charging infrastructure 
in Phase I. The Project Implementation and Sanctioning Committee (PISC) awarded (during 
2015-19) charging infrastructure projects to three agencies (i.e. BHEL, Rajasthan Electronics 
and Instruments Ltd. (REIL) and Mahindra Reva), without inviting any Expression of 
Interest. Charging infrastructure projects were sanctioned based on proposals received from 
implementing agencies. 
(Para 4.4.1)
In case of one project awarded to REIL in January 2019, expenditure of ₹12.66 crore was 
rendered infructuous as 122 KW chargers and power transformers were not powered; solar 
plants were not commissioned and unused cable was reportedly lying with the installation 
agency. 
(Para 4.4.4)
Under the sanctioned charging infrastructure projects, funds had been allocated by the Ministry 
for creation of Central Management System (CMS) software for managing the charging 
stations. Audit observed that IIT Madras had already developed a CMS in June 2017 out of 
funds released by the Ministry under the Technology Development (R&D) component, but the 
same was not adopted/operationalised by the Ministry.
(Para 4.4.5)
There was negligible progress in setting up of charging infrastructure in Phase II. Out of a 
total of 2,877 charging stations (20 implementing agencies) approved by PISC for ‘Cities’, 
only four implementing agencies commissioned a total of 148 charging stations. Besides, 
no funds were released under ‘Highways and Expressways’ Project as there was negligible 
progress in installation/commissioning of charging stations under this project. The Ministry 
cancelled all 1,576 charging stations approved under this project. Further, none of 8,412 
charging stations awarded to three oil marketing companies was commissioned as on the 
stipulated completion date of 31 March 2024. 
(Para 4.5.1)
Audit team and officials of implementing agencies jointly inspected (February to July 2023) 
104 charging stations/chargers including 25 solar plants installed at such charging stations. 
Various issues were seen during the joint physical inspection such as chargers not being 
powered, chargers removed from installation site, chargers not found installed at sites, non-
awareness of the staff about charging procedure, non-functional Charging Management 
System, vandalism to occupy parking space designated for EV charging, damaged chargers, 
car chargers installed at parking designated for two-wheelers, etc.
(Para 4.5.3)

xi
Report No. 10 of 2026
Recommendations:
1) The Ministry may consider instituting an integrated and outcome-oriented framework 
for planning, installation, and operation of EV charging infrastructure so as to address 
the systemic issues relating to non-installation, delays in commissioning, non-functioning 
of charging infrastructure, and lack of commercial viability. This may be done through a 
clearly designated nodal agency with end-to-end accountability,
2) A comprehensive approach may be adopted encompassing (i) identification and 
development of strategically located charging sites, including intra-city urban areas and 
inter-city highways/expressways, through geospatial planning with prior convergence 
and formal agreements with land-owning agencies; (ii) establishment of a single-window, 
time-bound mechanism for according all statutory clearances and ensuring parallel 
processing of approvals; and (iii) advance creation and augmentation of requisite electrical 
infrastructure, including transformers and cabling, by DISCOMs to enable plug-and-play 
deployment.
3) The Ministry may prescribe standardised concession agreements, a transparent and 
viable tariff framework, and clear guidelines for levy and collection of user charges, so as 
to provide commercial certainty to operators and landowners. Mandatory integration of all 
charging stations with a functional Central Management System may also be ensured for 
real-time monitoring, interoperability, and improved utilisation. 
4) A robust mechanism for operation and maintenance, including capacity building of site 
personnel, installation of adequate signage, and periodic performance audits of assets such 
as solar plants and charging equipment, may be instituted to ensure sustained functionality. 
The Ministry may also delineate accountability across implementing agencies, including 
Oil Marketing Companies and retail operators, through clearly defined roles, milestones, 
and enforceable performance standards to ensure timely commissioning and effective 
utilisation of EV charging infrastructure.
Technology Development (R&D)
Out of the 16 technology development projects approved during Phase-I of the Scheme, nine 
projects had been completed. Of the remaining seven projects, four projects were closed, 
one project was cancelled, and two projects were still in progress. Out of nine completed 
projects, eight projects were completed with delays ranging from 1 month to 24 months 
without any approval from Project Sanctioning and Implementation Committee for extension 
of the timelines. 
(Para 5.2.1)
In four projects for which the Ministry had contributed a total grant of ₹13.08 crore, no formal 
MoU was entered into with the implementing agencies elaborating the objectives, scope 
and deliverables of the project, and the roles and responsibilities of implementing agencies, 
monitoring mechanism, etc. to facilitate expeditious progress of the projects. 
(Para 5.2.2)

xii
Report No. 10 of 2026
Recommendation:
1) The Ministry may identify the constraints leading to non-completion/pre-mature closure 
of R&D projects and take necessary remedial actions to ensure that such projects reach 
their logical conclusion by the respective implementing agencies in respect of deliverables 
of projects and utilisation of funds released to them under the Scheme.
IEC, Financial Management, & Convergence 
Out of the aggregate amount of ₹48 crore allocated for Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) activities during Phase-I and Phase-II of the Scheme, the Ministry 
could utilise an amount of ₹7.52 crore for such activities. Further, the Ministry was required 
to implement a suitable IEC program for creating consumer awareness and promotion of the 
Scheme. However, the Ministry did not devise any policy/action plan in this regard. 
(Para 6.1)
Due to shortage of manpower, National Automotive Board (NAB) did not effectively perform 
the functions designated to it at the time of its setting up, viz. act as the nodal professional 
agency for automotive sector, issuance of homologation certificates, coordination amongst 
testing agencies, MoRTH and other Ministries, etc. 
(Para 6.3.1)
Notifying electricity tariff for EV charging stations at higher than Average Cost of Electricity 
(ACOS), two-part tariff or not notifying the tariff had a cascading effect of increasing the 
service charges leviable for use of EV charging facility by EV users. Only 15 out of 36 States/
UTs had notified a single-part tariff aligned with ACOS in terms of the guidelines for charging 
stations issued by the Ministry of Power (MoP).
(Para 6.3.2.1)
Instances were observed where electricity connections with required load were not released 
to charging stations even after considerable period in contravention of the guidelines for 
charging stations issued by the Ministry of Power (MoP). It was also seen that there was no 
evidence of load enhancement in 91 out of 104 charging stations jointly inspected.
(Para 6.3.2.2)
Only 22 States and 5 union territories had nominated (January 2022) their nodal agencies to 
expedite the setting up of charging infrastructure while nodal agencies in remaining States/UTs 
were not notified. Further, the Ministry selected implementing agencies for establishment of 
charging infrastructure without consulting respective DISCOMs. Since, major aspects such 
as provision of upstream infrastructure, electrical connection under appropriate category, 
load enhancement, discounted service charges, etc. come under the domain of respective 
DISCOMs, non-involvement of DISCOMs in implementation of the projects resulted in 
resulted in impediments in targeted implementation of the projects. 
(Para 6.3.2.4)

xiii
Report No. 10 of 2026
Recommendations:
1) The Ministry may devise a comprehensive policy for creating consumer awareness 
including preparation of an annual plan.
2) The Ministry may adequately equip National Automotive Board for carrying out its 
mandate of issuing homologation certificates and being a nodal professional agency for 
automotive sector-related efforts of the Government.
3) The Ministry may consider setting up a coordination mechanism with representation 
from all stakeholders for ensuring synchronisation in the establishment of charging 
infrastructure.

Report No. 10 of 2026 
1 
 
 
Chapter-I 
Introduction 
 
1.1 Introduction 
The Government of India approved (March 2011) the National Mission for Electric 
Mobility (NMEM) in order to promote electric mobility and manufacturing of electric 
vehicles in India. Subsequently in 2013, the National Electric Mobility Mission Plan 2020 
(NEMMP 2020) was unveiled, with the vision to encourage reliable, affordable and 
efficient hybrid and electric vehicles, collectively termed as xEVs, through collaboration 
of the Government and Industry for promotion and development of indigenous 
manufacturing capabilities, required infrastructure, consumer awareness and technology 
thus enabling Indian automotive industry to achieve global xEV manufacturing leadership 
and contributing towards National Fuel Security. 
As part of NMEM, the Ministry of Heavy Industries (erstwhile Department of Heavy 
Industry) formulated a Scheme viz. Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) 
Electric Vehicles in India (FAME India) having five components, viz. Demand 
Incentives, Charging Infrastructure, Technology Platform (R&D), Pilot Projects and 
Information, Communication and Education (ICE). The Scheme was implemented in two 
phases – Phase-I from March 2015 to March 2019, and Phase-II from April 2019 to 
March 2024. 
1.2 Mechanism for implementation of FAME India Scheme  
The mechanism for implementation of FAME India Scheme involved the following 
stakeholders: 
(i) Ministry of Heavy Industries: The Ministry of Heavy Industries is the nodal agency 
for planning, implementation and review of the Scheme, and is responsible for allocation 
of funds for various components of the Scheme. 
(ii) Project Implementation and Sanctioning Committee (PISC): The PISC is headed 
by the Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries and includes members 1 from other 
Ministries/Agencies/Industry. PISC approves specific projects under various components 
of the Scheme. It also approves flexibility in distribution of funds within and across 
various components of the Scheme. 
(iii) National Automotive Board (NAB): NAB is the operating agency for 
implementation of the Scheme, including disbursement of funds for various components 
under the overall supervision and direction of the Ministry of Heavy Industries. The 
 
1 Chairman, National Automotive Board; Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor, Ministry of Heavy 
Industries; Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary in charge of Auto Division in the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries; Joint Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways; Director, Automotive Research 
Association of India (ARAI), Director General, Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM); 
Director General, Automobile Components Manufacturers Association (ACMA); Director, Society of 
Manufacturers of Electric Vehicles; and  Director (Auto), Ministry of Heavy Industries. 

1
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
1 
 
 
Chapter-I 
Introduction 
 
1.1 Introduction 
The Government of India approved (March 2011) the National Mission for Electric 
Mobility (NMEM) in order to promote electric mobility and manufacturing of electric 
vehicles in India. Subsequently in 2013, the National Electric Mobility Mission Plan 2020 
(NEMMP 2020) was unveiled, with the vision to encourage reliable, affordable and 
efficient hybrid and electric vehicles, collectively termed as xEVs, through collaboration 
of the Government and Industry for promotion and development of indigenous 
manufacturing capabilities, required infrastructure, consumer awareness and technology 
thus enabling Indian automotive industry to achieve global xEV manufacturing leadership 
and contributing towards National Fuel Security. 
As part of NMEM, the Ministry of Heavy Industries (erstwhile Department of Heavy 
Industry) formulated a Scheme viz. Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) 
Electric Vehicles in India (FAME India) having five components, viz. Demand 
Incentives, Charging Infrastructure, Technology Platform (R&D), Pilot Projects and 
Information, Communication and Education (ICE). The Scheme was implemented in two 
phases – Phase-I from March 2015 to March 2019, and Phase-II from April 2019 to 
March 2024. 
1.2 Mechanism for implementation of FAME India Scheme  
The mechanism for implementation of FAME India Scheme involved the following 
stakeholders: 
(i) Ministry of Heavy Industries: The Ministry of Heavy Industries is the nodal agency 
for planning, implementation and review of the Scheme, and is responsible for allocation 
of funds for various components of the Scheme. 
(ii) Project Implementation and Sanctioning Committee (PISC): The PISC is headed 
by the Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries and includes members 1 from other 
Ministries/Agencies/Industry. PISC approves specific projects under various components 
of the Scheme. It also approves flexibility in distribution of funds within and across 
various components of the Scheme. 
(iii) National Automotive Board (NAB): NAB is the operating agency for 
implementation of the Scheme, including disbursement of funds for various components 
under the overall supervision and direction of the Ministry of Heavy Industries. The 
 
1 Chairman, National Automotive Board; Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor, Ministry of Heavy 
Industries; Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary in charge of Auto Division in the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries; Joint Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways; Director, Automotive Research 
Association of India (ARAI), Director General, Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM); 
Director General, Automobile Components Manufacturers Association (ACMA); Director, Society of 
Manufacturers of Electric Vehicles; and  Director (Auto), Ministry of Heavy Industries. 

2
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
2 
 
 
Ministry/NAB reimburse/settle demand incentive claims of manufacturers of vehicles 
(i.e. Original Equipment Manufacturers) and hybrid retrofit kit manufacturers/suppliers. 
Further, NAB is also the nodal agency for creation and upgradation of automotive testing 
infrastructure for R&D, testing and homologation. 
(iv) Technology Advisory Group (TAG) on Electric Mobility: It is the nodal body 
under joint supervision of Ministry of Heavy Industries and Department of Science and 
Technology, to focus on technology development (R&D) component of the Scheme. It 
recommends specific projects for approval to PISC. 
1.3 Phase-I of FAME India Scheme  
The Ministry of Heavy Industries notified Phase-I of the Scheme on 13 March 2015 for 
implementation in FY 2015-16 and 2016-17 with an outlay of ₹795 crore. The period of 
implementation of Phase-I, was extended till 2018-19 and the budget allocation was 
enhanced to ₹895 crore.  
The Scheme components under Phase-I were as follows: 
(i) Demand Incentive: The demand incentive was available to the buyers of xEVs in the 
form of an upfront reduced purchase price.  
(ii) Charging infrastructure: The Scheme envisaged setting-up of adequate public 
charging infrastructure to instill confidence amongst xEV users, through active 
participation and involvement of various stakeholders. Both normal and fast charging 
infrastructure were to be created under the Scheme. Public places were to be mandated 
through amendment in by-laws and building codes, etc. by the relevant agencies. 
Interlinking of renewable energy sources with charging infrastructure, smart grid, use of 
ICT etc. was to be encouraged. 
(iii) Technology Development (R&D):  Technology development was to be taken up 
through a collaborative approach with the industry and academia, including both 
Government-funded as well as PPP projects. Department of Science and Technology was 
to play a pivotal role. The automotive testing infrastructure for R&D, testing and 
homologation was to be upgraded for meeting the requirements of new regulations and 
standards. 
(iv) Pilot Projects: The pilot projects were intended to fulfil objectives of introduction of 
new technologies, trial of new business models etc. with special focus on public 
transportation. Proposals for pilot projects were to be approved/sanctioned by the Project 
Implementation and Sanctioning Committee. 
(v) Information, Education and Communication (IEC):  An extensive IEC programme 
was to be undertaken for creating consumer awareness and promotion of the Scheme, on 
a need basis, through education and training, publicity, organisation of business 
meets/seminars/conferences/symposia etc. jointly by the Ministry of Heavy Industries, 
voluntary organisations, etc.  
 

3
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
2 
 
 
Ministry/NAB reimburse/settle demand incentive claims of manufacturers of vehicles 
(i.e. Original Equipment Manufacturers) and hybrid retrofit kit manufacturers/suppliers. 
Further, NAB is also the nodal agency for creation and upgradation of automotive testing 
infrastructure for R&D, testing and homologation. 
(iv) Technology Advisory Group (TAG) on Electric Mobility: It is the nodal body 
under joint supervision of Ministry of Heavy Industries and Department of Science and 
Technology, to focus on technology development (R&D) component of the Scheme. It 
recommends specific projects for approval to PISC. 
1.3 Phase-I of FAME India Scheme  
The Ministry of Heavy Industries notified Phase-I of the Scheme on 13 March 2015 for 
implementation in FY 2015-16 and 2016-17 with an outlay of ₹795 crore. The period of 
implementation of Phase-I, was extended till 2018-19 and the budget allocation was 
enhanced to ₹895 crore.  
The Scheme components under Phase-I were as follows: 
(i) Demand Incentive: The demand incentive was available to the buyers of xEVs in the 
form of an upfront reduced purchase price.  
(ii) Charging infrastructure: The Scheme envisaged setting-up of adequate public 
charging infrastructure to instill confidence amongst xEV users, through active 
participation and involvement of various stakeholders. Both normal and fast charging 
infrastructure were to be created under the Scheme. Public places were to be mandated 
through amendment in by-laws and building codes, etc. by the relevant agencies. 
Interlinking of renewable energy sources with charging infrastructure, smart grid, use of 
ICT etc. was to be encouraged. 
(iii) Technology Development (R&D):  Technology development was to be taken up 
through a collaborative approach with the industry and academia, including both 
Government-funded as well as PPP projects. Department of Science and Technology was 
to play a pivotal role. The automotive testing infrastructure for R&D, testing and 
homologation was to be upgraded for meeting the requirements of new regulations and 
standards. 
(iv) Pilot Projects: The pilot projects were intended to fulfil objectives of introduction of 
new technologies, trial of new business models etc. with special focus on public 
transportation. Proposals for pilot projects were to be approved/sanctioned by the Project 
Implementation and Sanctioning Committee. 
(v) Information, Education and Communication (IEC):  An extensive IEC programme 
was to be undertaken for creating consumer awareness and promotion of the Scheme, on 
a need basis, through education and training, publicity, organisation of business 
meets/seminars/conferences/symposia etc. jointly by the Ministry of Heavy Industries, 
voluntary organisations, etc.  
 
Report No. 10 of 2026 
3 
 
 
1.4 Phase-II of FAME India Scheme  
The Ministry notified Phase-II of the Scheme on 8 March 2019 for a period of three 
years, commencing from 1 April 2019, with an outlay of ₹10,000 crore including 
committed liabilities of ₹366 crore from Phase-I.  In June 2021, the Scheme was extended 
up to March 2024 and fund allocation was enhanced to ₹11,500 crore (October 2023).  
The Scheme components under Phase-II were as follows:  
(i) Demand Incentives: In the e-3-wheelers, e-4-wheelers and e-buses segments, demand 
incentive was applicable to vehicles used for public transportation or those registered for 
commercial purposes. However, for e-2-wheelers segment, demand incentive was also 
applicable for privately owned vehicles. Demand incentive for all segments, except 
e-buses was to be disbursed through an e-enabled framework (FAME portal 2 for Phase-I 
and II). 
(ii) Charging Infrastructure: A total of 2,500 charging stations were to be established 
so as to have at least one charging station in a grid of 3 km x 3 km. About 100 charging 
stations were to be established on both sides of about 1,500 km of major highways at an 
interval of approximately 25 km each. In addition, about 200 charging stations were to be 
installed on express highways connecting twin cities. All the charging infrastructure was 
to be established as per the notification 3 issued by the Ministry of Power, as amended 
from time to time. 
(iii) IEC activities: For administration, monitoring, IEC activities, an outlay of ₹38 crore 
was made. 
1.5 Fund allocation and utilisation 
The component-wise fund allocation and financial progress under the Scheme was as 
under:   
Table 1: Component-wise allocation and utilisation Phase-I and II 
(₹ in crore) 
Component Phase-I Phase-II 
Allocation Utilisation Allocation Utilisation 
Demand incentive (e-2 wheelers, e-3 
wheelers and e-4 wheelers) 
495 364.93 7,048 6,224.00* 
Demand incentive (e-buses) - - 3,209 1,322.07 
Charging infrastructure 30 Nil# 839 633.45 
 
2 FAME Portal is an e-enabled framework and mechanism set-up under the Ministry/NAB through 
which demand incentive was disbursed. The manufacturers of vehicles (Original Equipment 
Manufacturers) and hybrid retrofit kit manufacturers/suppliers were to submit their claims for 
reimbursement of demand incentive on a monthly basis through this Portal which were to be settled by 
the Ministry/NAB in not more than a month’s time. 
3 Notification issued vide No. 12/2/2018-EV dated 14 December 2018 on the subject ‘Charging 
Infrastructure for Electrical Vehicles - Guidelines and Standards’ 

4
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
4 
 
 
Component Phase-I Phase-II 
Allocation Utilisation Allocation Utilisation 
Technology platform (R&D) 
(including testing infrastructure) 
190 150.73 Dropped Dropped 
Pilot projects 70 342.39 Dropped Dropped 
IEC  10 0.86 38 21.38 
Committed expenditure of Phase-I - - 366 329.73 
Allocation enhanced without indicating 
component wise enhancement 
100 - - - 
Total 895 858.91 11,500 8,530.63 
(Position as of March 2024) 
* Includes under process and withheld claims. 
# Although no amount was utilised in Phase-I from the funds allocated under the component ‘Charging 
infrastructure’, amount of ₹43.10 crore and ₹1.00 crore were released for charging infrastructure projects 
out of the funds available under other components viz. Pilot Projects and Technology Platform respectively.  
1.6 Physical progress under the Scheme 
In Phase-I, no component-wise targets were set. The component-wise targets in Phase-II 
and the component-wise achievements in both the phases were as follows: 
Table 2: Component-wise physical progress under Phase-I and Phase-II 
Component Phase-I Phase-II 
Target Achievement Target Achievement* 
Demand incentive for e-2-
wheelers, e-3-wheelers and e-4-
wheelers 
No target 
set 
2,80,988 17,36,222 15,18,029 
Demand incentive for e-buses 425 7,262 4,604 
Charging Infrastructure 
(EV Public Charging Stations) 
495# 8,560 148 
Technology Development 16 Component Dropped 
(Position as of March 2024) 
* Achievement in respect of demand incentives includes under process and withheld claims.  
# These were installed from the funds allocated for ‘Pilot Project’ rather than from the funds allocated for 
installation of Charging infrastructure. 
1.7 Trend in growth of xEVs in India 
Since the inception (March 2015) of FAME India Scheme, the share of electric vehicle 
registration in the total vehicle registration has grown from 0.08 per cent to 6.82 per cent  
up to the year 2023-24, as shown below: 

5
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
5 
 
 
Table 3: Registration of Electric Vehicles (EVs) from 2015-16 to 2023-24 
Year Total vehicles 
registered 
Total EVs 
registered4 
Percentage share of 
EV 
2015-16 2,01,24,808 16,176 0.08% 
2016-17 2,16,50,783 55,847 0.26% 
2017-18 2,39,59,,052 96,493 0.40% 
2018-19 2,53,14,381 1,46,950 0.58% 
2019-20 2,45,91,216 1,73,604 0.71% 
2020-21 1,75,20,165 1,42,386 0.81% 
2021-22 1,84,43,944 4,59,058 2.49% 
2022-23 2,23,30,911 11,83,342 5.30% 
2023-24 2,46,41,140 16,81,343 6.82% 
Source: Vahan5 Dashboard 
1.8 Audit objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted to assess whether: 
(i) implementation of the various components of the Scheme was done economically, 
efficiently and effectively as envisaged in the Scheme guidelines, in order to 
promote the use of electric vehicles; and  
(ii) there was synergy amongst different Ministries/Departments for the growth of 
e-mobility and its ecosystem. 
1.9 Audit scope and sampling 
The Performance Audit covered various aspects of the implementation of both Phase I 
and II of the FAME India scheme for the period from March 2015 to March 2024. The 
coverage of audit included the Ministry of Heavy Industries; testing agencies viz. 
Automotive Research Association of India, International Centre for Automotive 
Technology and Global Automotive Research Centre, Bureau of Energy Efficiency 
(under Ministry of Power), selected State Transport Undertakings, and project 
implementing agencies in respect of technology platform/R&D projects and pilot 
projects. Details of audit sampling have been given under relevant chapters/paras of this 
Report.  
1.10 Audit criteria 
Audit criteria was derived from the following sources: 
 Scheme notifications/guidelines as amended from time to time. 
 National Electric Mobility Mission Plan (NEMMP) 2020. 
 Minutes of meetings of Project Implementation and Sanctioning Committee, 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs, Expenditure Finance Committee, and 
Technology Advisory Group. 
 
4 This represents the total vehicle registered i.e. eligible and non-eligible in FAME India Scheme.  
5 https://vahan.parivahan.gov.in/vahan4dashboard/vahan/vahan/view/reportview.xhtml 

6
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
6 
 
 
 Guidelines of Ministry of Power relating to charging infrastructure. 
 Model Building Bye Laws 2016 of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs for 
Electric Vehicle charging infrastructure. 
 Standards relating to electric vehicles such as safety standards, battery standards, 
charging standards. 
 Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 and General Financial Rules. 
 Sanction letters and demands for grants, Memoranda of Understanding, 
agreements, contracts, etc., Invitation for Expression of Interest, letter of award, 
tender documents, bids submitted by bidders, purchase orders.  
 Publications of NITI Aayog on e-mobility, Annual reports of Ministry of Heavy 
Industries and implementing agencies. 
1.11 Audit methodology and Engagement with Stakeholders 
Before taking up the Performance Audit, meetings with various stakeholders were held 
(Annexure-I) to gain insight of the electric mobility ecosystem and the role of various 
agencies involved in the implementation of FAME India Scheme. 
The Performance Audit commenced with an Entry Conference with the Ministry of 
Heavy Industries on 13 February 2023. Thereafter, examination of records of the Ministry 
and implementing agencies was conducted between February 2023 and March 2024. 
The draft Performance Audit Report was issued to the Ministry on 11 December 2024. 
The response of the Ministry was received in February 2025. Audit findings were also 
discussed with the Ministry in the Exit Conference held on 17 February 2025. The 
responses of the Ministry on the draft Audit Report and those expressed during the Exit 
Conference have been considered and suitably incorporated while finalising this Report.  
1.12 Acknowledgment  
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries, its implementing units and other stakeholders associated with the Scheme and 
their officials during various stages of audit. 
  

7
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
7 
 
 
Chapter-II 
Demand Incentives 
 
Under the FAME India Scheme, demand incentive was provided to end users/ purchasers 
upfront in the form of a reduction (discount) in the purchase price of the electric vehicle 
and the discount provided is subsequently claimed by the Original Equipment 
Manufacturers (OEMs) from the Ministry of Heavy Industries. An e-enabled framework/ 
online system for submission and processing of claims of OEMs and reimbursement of 
demand incentive was envisaged under the Scheme. Demand incentive was applicable to 
the electric vehicles which had been tested and certified as compliant with the provisions 
of Central Motor Vehicle Rules (CMVR), 1989 and the FAME India Scheme guidelines, 
by the testing agencies notified under CMVR, 1989.  
This Chapter first deals with audit observations on the disbursement of demand incentive 
to OEMs of electric 2-wheelers (e2W), electric 3-wheelers and auto-rickshaws (e3W), 
and electric 4-wheelers passenger vehicles (e4W) under Phase I & II of the Scheme. The 
issues relating to demand incentive for electric buses have been discussed later in the 
Chapter. 
2.1 Procedure for claiming and disbursement of demand incentive  
The procedure for claiming and disbursement of demand incentive for Electric Vehicles 
(EVs) under the Scheme consists of the following steps: 
(i) Pre-registration of OEM followed by registration of OEM with NAB/Ministry:  
OEM to apply for registration to National Automotive Board (NAB) in prescribed format 
offline or through the Portal developed by the Ministry. 
(ii) EV Homologation & Eligibility Assessment by Testing Agencies:  Testing agency 
to conduct assessment of pre-registered EV models to check eligibility under Scheme, 
compliance with provisions of CMVR, 1989, and assessment of technology functions as 
prescribed in Scheme guidelines; and to issue Eligibility Assessment Report (EAR) 
certifying eligibility of EV model under the Scheme and specifying the amount of 
demand incentive permissible for the EV model. 
(iii) Registration of EV Model:  OEM to register EV models for which they intend to 
avail demand incentive on the Portal developed by MHI. 
(iv) Vehicle Sale and Registration:  Vehicle dealer to collect information from 
purchaser/customer as per Scheme guidelines (e.g. identity proof, address proof, driving 
license, mobile number, email ID of purchaser, RTO Registration number, etc.), and send 
the information to OEM. 
(v) Claim Submission by OEM:  OEM to submit the reimbursement claim of demand 
incentive once in a month but not later than 120 days from the sale of vehicle. After 
submitting the claim for reimbursement, each OEM to submit an undertaking regarding 
compliance with Scheme guidelines. 

8
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
8 
 
 
(vi) Clearance of demand incentive by NAB/Ministry:  After scrutiny of claims/ 
records submitted by OEMs, the Ministry to approve and pay the demand incentive to 
OEMs in their designated bank account through NAB. 
The features of demand incentive component under Phase-I and Phase-II of the FAME 
Scheme are given at Annexure-II. 
2.2 Financial and Physical progress 
The total budget allocation and expenditure under the demand incentive component of the 
Scheme in respect of e-2-wheelers, e-3-wheelers and e-4-wheelers (except e-buses 6) was 
as under: 
Table 4: Budget Allocation and Expenditure for demand incentive component 
Sl. 
No. 
Phase  Year  Total Budget  
(₹ in crore) 
Expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
1. Phase-I 2015-16 to 2018-19 495.00 364.93 
2.  Phase II 2019-20 to 2023-24 7,048.00 6,570# 
# Expenditure up to 16 January 2025 and includes under process and withheld claims. 
 
Under Phase-I, no targets were specified for the number of e-vehicles to be covered. 
Under Phase-II, category-wise targets for e-vehicles were set. The details of physical 
targets and achievements in respect of demand incentive for e-2-wheelers, e-3-wheelers 
and e-4-wheelers (except e-buses) was as under:  
Table 5: Physical Progress for demand incentive component (as of 16 January 2025) 
Component Category Phase-I Phase II 
Target  Achievement Target  Achievement 
Demand 
Incentive 
e-2W No targets set 2,80,988 15,50,225 14,28,009 
e-3W 1,55,536 1,64,180 
e-4W 30,461 22,548 
 Total - 2,80,988 17,36,222 16,14,737 
 
2.3 Demand Incentive Delivery Mechanism (DIDM) portal in Phase-I 
As per proposal (18 September 2014) submitted by the Ministry of Heavy Industries to 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), an IT system was to be developed by a 
professional IT service provider for simple, efficient and robust mechanism for transfer of 
incentives to the intended beneficiaries. The task of developing this IT system was 
awarded to a private agency viz. M/s Net Creative Mind Solutions Pvt. Ltd., a vendor 
empanelled with National Informatics Centre Services Incorporated (NICSI). In 
 
6 Audit observations on e-buses have been separately discussed in para 2.10 

9
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
9 
 
 
September 2015, the Ministry launched DIDM Portal for Phase-I. An expenditure of 
₹17.78 lakh was incurred on development of the Phase-I Portal. 
As per the above-stated proposal submitted to EFC, a Detailed Project Report (DPR) was 
to be prepared by the IT service provider, describing the network design, hardware, 
system architecture, software and security, database structure, MIS features/packages for 
impact assessment, system of manual checks, oversight and audit to ensure the accuracy, 
correctness, and robustness of the system. Further, as per the best practices followed for 
procurement of services, a Service Level Agreement was required to be entered into with 
the vendor for defining the terms and conditions of service delivery. Audit, however, 
observed that the vendor did not prepare and submit the DPR and the Ministry did not 
sign any formal Service Level Agreement with the vendor. As such, important aspects 
such as key deliverables, timelines, testing protocols, data/system integrity requirements, 
defects management and change management procedures were not contractually defined. 
Instead, a work order was issued, which included only the schedule of work, payment 
terms and penalty clauses. 
Further, the proposal submitted to EFC envisaged an efficient and robust IT system for 
transfer of incentives to the intended beneficiaries. Audit, however, observed that the 
DIDM Portal only allowed the Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) to submit 
claims online. It did not have the functionalities for end-to-end online processing of 
claims. Thus, the Ministry had to process all the claims manually/offline.  
Thus, the objective of developing an efficient and fully automated incentive transfer 
system remained largely unachieved. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that the deliverables by the IT vendor were 
governed by the terms of the work order issued and the General Financial Rules. The 
vendor did all the works assigned as per work order. DPR for the e-enabled IT system 
was not part of the work order while a separate Service Level Agreement was not issued. 
The reply needs to be seen in the context that the vendor executed the tasks based on the 
work order, which did not specify the key deliverables, timelines, testing protocols, or 
quality benchmarks etc. In the absence of a DPR and Service Level Agreement, there 
were no comprehensive parameters against which the performance of the Portal could be 
evaluated or monitored, which also impacted the completeness and integrity of the data in 
the DIDM portal, as discussed in the next para. 
2.4 Non-reliable data of demand incentive under Phase-I 
According to the information provided by the Ministry, demand incentive amounting to 
₹364.93 crore was sanctioned and released by the Ministry to the National Automotive 
Board (NAB) during Phase-I of the Scheme and further disbursement of the demand 
incentive to the OEMs was to be done by NAB.  

10
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
10 
 
 
On analysis of the data provided by the Ministry through three sources viz., (a) access to 
DIDM Portal 7 (Phase-I); (b) data dump 8 of DIDM Portal (Phase-I); and (c) physical 
files/e-files relating to processing of demand incentive claims, Audit observed the 
following discrepancies: 
(i) Discrepancies in the data on DIDM Portal (Phase-I): The DIDM Portal did 
not have any data on demand incentive for the period November 2017 to March 
2019. Further, the figures of the t otal demand incentive amount on the Portal’s 
homepage (i.e. ₹359.58 crore claimed against 2,80,830 vehicles), did not match 
with the total demand incentive amount reflected on the DIDM Portal (i.e. 
₹201.84 crore9 against 1,57,256 vehicles). 
(ii) Discrepancies in data dump of DIDM Portal (Phase-I): The data dump 
reflected (-)₹423.28 crore as demand incentive claimed against 2,80,830 EVs, 
which did not match with the amount shown on the Portal. 
(iii) Discrepancies and non-availability of vehicle-wise data in physical/e-files: 
While the physical files/e-files did not contain any vehicle-wise details, the total 
demand incentive disbursed to OEMs under Phase-I, as per these files, 
was ₹320.87 crore for 2,57,095 vehicles.  
Due to the above stated discrepancies, Audit could not derive assurance on the 
admissibility as well as correctness of the demand incentives sanctioned under Phase-I of 
the Scheme. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that the data on the DIDM Portal may not be 
updated and therefore in case of any discrepancy between data on the Portal and that in e-
office/physical files, the data in e-office/physical files may be considered as final. 
While Audit acknowledges the response of the Ministry, the fact remains that the 
physical/e-files did not have the vehicle-wise data. As such, Audit was unable to derive 
any assurance as to the admissibility of the demand incentive reported in these files.  
2.5 Demand Incentive Delivery Mechanism (DIDM) portal for Phase-II 
For Phase-II of the Scheme, a new portal viz. DIDM Portal (Phase-II) was developed and 
rolled-out at a cost of ₹5.13 lakh per annum, for submitting demand incentive claims by 
the OEMs for further processing by the Ministry. Audit observed the following 
discrepancies in connection with development of DIDM Portal (Phase-II):  
(i) Award of work to same vendor despite issues in DIDM Portal (Phase-I) 
There were persistent issues such as absence of end-to-end processing mechanism in the 
DIDM Portal (Phase-I) for disbursement of demand incentive and unreliable data in the 
 
7  Front-end access to the system was provided with login credentials through the URL:  
http://fame-india.gov.in/index.aspx 
8 SQL data dump was provided in a DVD through NIC. The data dump was imported and analysed using 
IDEA software. 
9 Demand incentive released (i.e. disbursed to OEMs): ₹196.69 crore; approved but pending for payment: 
₹ 0.43 crore; pending for payment: ₹4.72 crores 

11
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
11 
 
 
portal (as discussed in paras 2.3 and 2.4). Audit, however, observed that the work of 
design and development of DIDM Portal (Phase-II) along with integration of portal with 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Bharat Portal was awarded (August 2019) to Net Creative 
Mind Solutions Pvt. Ltd., i.e. the same vendor who had developed DIDM Portal (Phase-
I), on nomination basis. While approving the award of work to vendor, it was recorded 
that ‘the department is already running an online portal for FAME-I successfully’.   
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that the selection of the same vendor for Phase II 
Portal was driven by the urgency of the task and their familiarity with FAME-I portal, 
leveraging Rule 194 of General Financial Rules, 2017 to ensure timely delivery under 
exceptional circumstances. 
The reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact that persistent issues related to Phase-I 
Portal were not taken into consideration while awarding the work to the same vendor for 
development of Phase II Portal. 
(ii) Non-availability of Service Level Agreement  
The Service Level Agreement  (SLA) with the vendor specifying the scope of work, key 
deliverables, timelines, etc. was not found on the records of the Ministry. In the absence 
of SLA, it was not clear how the Ministry satisfied itself about the completion of work of 
developing the portal, and its proper functioning as per the business rules. It was also 
observed that the performance of Net Creative Mind Solutions Pvt. Ltd. was not found 
satisfactory by the Ministry and therefore in February 2023, the Ministry awarded project 
management including portal-related work to IFCI Limited for the period up to March 
2025. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that the deliverables by the IT vendor were 
governed by the terms of the work order dated 19 August 2019 and the General Financial 
Rules, 2017.  
The reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact that the work order did not specify 
performance parameters for the vendor resulting in manual processing of the claims and 
several deficiencies as discussed in the next para. 
2.6 Deficiencies in DIDM Portal (Phase-II) 
Audit observed the following deficiencies in the DIDM Portal (Phase-II) and its data 
dump: 
(i) Portal incapable of end-to-end processing:  After OEMs had submitted their 
claims on the Portal, further processing of the claims was being done 
manually/offline by the Ministry.  
(ii) Lack of validation control: The Portal accepted invoice dates for period beyond/ 
before the Scheme period, such as, 2027, 2044, 2088, 1975, 1990, 2001 and 2002, 
etc. The Portal accepted duplicate entries of vehicle registration number, and the 
Ministry paid for such duplicate claims received from the OEMs. Thus, there was 
no validation control regarding the claims submitted in the portal.   

12
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
12 
 
 
(iii) Delayed integration of Portal with Vahan/Sarathi:  The demand incentive 
claims were being verified by calling for ‘Vahan Portal’ data from the Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways in MS-Excel files. As such, integration of DIDM 
Portal with Vahan/Sarathi portal would have facilitated expeditious verification of 
claims. However, the Ministry integrated DIDM Portal with Vahan/Sarathi portal 
in November 2023 after sales of electric vehicles had grown. As a result, there 
were instances of demand incentives being paid to OEMs for ineligible vehicles, 
viz. non-electric vehicles. 
(iv) Portal downtime: The Portal, on some occasions, did not allow demand incentive 
claims to be submitted even if the claim was lodged within the prescribed time 
limit. Also, there were several instances when the Portal remained unavailable.  
The Ministry replied (July 2024/February 2025) that: 
 IFCI Limited had been appointed as the Project Management Agency (PMA) in 
February 2023 and they were instructed to automate the system. Post induction of 
IFCI as PMA, separate automated module for claims processing along with the 
validations pertaining to Scheme guidelines, Operational Guidelines and 
integration with Vahan portal had been inbuilt. 
 Data entry in the Portal was susceptible to human/clerical errors and basic 
principles of Scheme guidelines were checked before approving the claims. 
Hence, there was adequate control mechanism in the Ministry for processing the 
claims and there was no wrongful processing on this count. 
 After IFCI had taken control of the Portal, there had been only a single instance of 
downtime of the Portal. 
Audit acknowledges the response of the Ministry. However, it may be noted that IFCI 
took control of the Portal in March 2023, after major duration of the Scheme period for 
Phase-II had already elapsed.  
2.7 Timeliness in submission and processing of claims 
Audit observed that demand incentive was disbursed by the Ministry despite delay in 
submission of claims by OEMs, as discussed below: 
(i) Submission of claims by OEMs 
As per the operational guidelines for the disbursement of demand incentives for Phase-II 
(March 2019), OEMs were to submit the reimbursement claims once a month but not later 
than 120 days after the sale of the vehicle at the dealer’s end. 
Audit observed that out of a total 13,59,081 electric vehicles for which demand incentive 
claims were approved and paid as of 31 March 2024, in case of 30,490 vehicles (2.24 per 
cent of total vehicles sold), the OEMs submitted demand incentive claims after more than 
120 days from the date of generation of invoice. These claims were approved, and amount 
of ₹112.21 crore was paid to the OEMs by the Ministry. 

13
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
13 
 
 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) stated that due to instances of downtime of FAME 
portal, OEMs were allowed to upload their claims beyond 120 days, only after assessing 
the reason for delay by the OEM. Post appointment of IFCI as the Project Management 
Agency in February 2023, the dependence on bucket creation with the limit of 2,000 
claims had been removed, and multiple bucket numbers could be generated without first 
filling 2,000 claims. 
Audit acknowledges the response of the Ministry. However, it may be noted that even 
after appointment of IFCI as the Project Management Agency,  demand incentive claims 
for 12,291 electric vehicles were processed by the Ministry despite delayed submission of 
claims by the OEMs, which was in violation of the Scheme guidelines. 
(ii) Delay in disbursement of demand incentive to OEMs 
Audit observed that there was no timeline prescribed for processing and settlement of 
demand incentive claims by the Ministry. Scrutiny of data relating to demand incentives 
in Phase-II provided by the Ministry as of 31 March 2023 revealed that the Ministry took 
time up to 400 days in settlement of demand incentive claims of OEMs, as detailed in 
Annexure-III. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that the claims were processed manually since there 
was no provision available on FAME portal for automatic processing of the claims. The 
FAME portal was mainly used for lodging of claims by OEMs. Once OEMs lodged the 
claim, corresponding Vahan data was sought from the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways and the claims were processed in MS-Excel sheet. Post induction of IFCI as 
Project Management Agency in February 2023, separate automated module for claims 
processing with the validations pertaining to Scheme guidelines, operational guidelines 
and integration with Vahan has been inbuilt.  
The reply may be seen in light of the fact that the Ministry has still been processing the 
claims as the expenditure on demand incentives for electric vehicles sold as of 31 March 
2024, was stated as ₹6,224 crore in April 2024 which was subsequently stated as ₹6,570 
crore as on 16 January 2025.    
2.8 Demand aggregation for e-3-wheelers 
The Project Implementation and Sanctioning Committee entrusted (June 2021) Energy 
Efficiency Services Limited (EESL) for demand aggregation and centralised procurement 
of 3 lakh e-3-wheelers (by March 2022) for onward supply to interested entities, with the 
aim of lowering their initial cost burden. Accordingly, Convergence Energy Services 
Limited (CESL), a subsidiary of EESL, issued an Expression of Interest (EoI) on 16 July 
2021 for aggregation of demand for e-3-wheelers from interested entities, with two 
options viz. outright purchase or lease/EMI. In response to the EoI, demand for a total of 
82,699 e-3-wheelers was aggregated. CESL initiated a tender process on 6 August 2021 
for procuring one lakh e-3-wheelers. The Board of Directors (BoD) of CESL approved 
(23 October 2021) the procurement of one lakh e-3Ws, subject to budgetary clearance and 
endorsement from BoD of the parent company EESL.    

14
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
14 
 
 
Audit observed that whereas CESL was in need for approval of equity infusion of ₹72 
crore from EESL for financing the procurement, proposal for the same was never 
submitted to EESL nor was any communication made with the Ministry/PISC. As a 
consequence, there was no further progress and there was no procurement/supply of e-3-
wheelers through demand aggregation as of March 2024.  
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that CESL approached all the stakeholders to 
ascertain the e-3-wheelers market scenario on asset lite model 10 as per the approval from 
CESL’s Board. Due to several market constraints, response was negative from the market 
even with the partial investment proposed by CESL. Accordingly, it was decided not to 
put up the proposal to CESL’s Board of Directors. Since the aggregation model did not 
work in the case of e-3-wheelers, the demand incentive was passed on to individual 
buyers, etc. of e-3-wheelers. As against the target number of 1,55,536 e-3-wheelers, 
incentive was disbursed for 1,64,890 e-3-wheelers (106 per cent of target). 
While the reply of the Ministry is acknowledged, it may be noted that the target was 
revised from the initial target of 5 lakh e-3-wheelers to 1.55 lakh e-3-wheelers in 9 th PISC 
meeting (19 October 2023). The achievement of demand incentive disbursement to the 
extent of 106 per cent was made only with reference to the revised target.  
2.9 Non-inclusion of cost of onboard charger in ex-factory price 
The Ministry’s notification dated 8 March 2019 stipulated that ‘maximum ex-factory 
price’ of e-2-wheelers should not cross ₹1.5 lakh. Further, the notification for Phased 
Manufacturing Programme (PMP) issued by MHI in March 2019 (as revised from time to 
time) specified that on-board charger was one of the components required to be 
indigenised/localised for eligibility under the FAME Scheme. Compliance with Scheme 
guidelines and notifications was to be checked by the testing agencies and the Eligibility 
Assessment Report (EAR) containing details of all the components used along with the 
ex-factory price of the e-vehicle was to be issued for electric vehicle models.  
Audit observed that three OEMs did not include the cost of the on-board charger in the 
ex-factory price of e-2-wheeler models, and instead sold the charger as an accessory. By 
doing this, the ex-factory price of the vehicle remained below the notified threshold of 
₹1.5 lakh, and the vehicle models became eligible for demand incentive. The Ministry 
accordingly disbursed demand incentive amounting to ₹1,418.62 crore to these OEMs for 
such models of e-2-wheelers. The testing agencies 11 also certified the eligibility of these 
models for the demand incentive under the scheme, ignoring the fact that onboard charger 
was an integral part of e-2-wheelers.  
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that the total amount refundable to the customers 
on account of non-inclusion of cost of charger in the ex-factory price amounted to 
₹325.97 crore. Out of this, OEMs had refunded ₹296.52 crore upto December 2024 to the 
customers towards cost of chargers and a sum of ₹29.45 crore was yet to be refunded. 
 
10  An asset-lite model is a business strategy where a company minimises its ownership of physical 
assets, relying instead on partnerships or outsourcing to provide services or products. 
11 Automotive Research Association of India and International Centre for Automotive Technology. 

15
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
15 
 
 
OEMs deposited ₹61.66 crore with IFCI (Project Management Agency) which shall be 
released to the OEMs only upon their making the balance refund to the eligible 
customers. 
The reply may be viewed in light of the fact that the Audit observation was not related to 
non-refund of the cost of charger to the customers but to the non-inclusion thereof in the 
ex-factory price of e-2-wheeler models by three OEMs which would otherwise have the 
effect of making those vehicle models ineligible for demand incentive. Further, the 
responsibility of testing agencies which had certified the eligibility of such models should 
also be fixed. 
2.10 Electric buses 
The FAME India Scheme aimed at creating market for electric vehicles by incentivising, 
through demand incentives, all the vehicle segments i.e. 2-wheelers, 3-wheelers, 
passenger 4-wheelers, light commercial vehicles and Buses. In respect of electric buses 
(e-buses), the demand incentive was extended to the State Transport Undertakings 
(STUs)/ Municipal Corporations (MCs) against procurement/deployment of e-buses. E-
buses were deployed in cities across the country through respective STUs/MCs during 
both Phase I and II of the Scheme, for which demand incentive was released by the 
Ministry. 
2.10.1    Process of approval of demand incentive for e-buses 
The process for initiation of proposals, procurement/deployment of e-buses, and approval/ 
sanction of demand incentive under Phase-I and II of the Scheme is explained below: 
(i) Process followed during Phase-I 
When the Scheme was initially launched, e-buses were approved for purchase and 
deployment by the Project Implementation and Sanctioning Committee (PISC) under the 
‘Pilot Project’ component 12, on the basis of individual proposals submitted by different 
STUs/MCs for various cities. Later, in October 2017, the Ministry issued an Expression 
of Interest (EoI) for obtaining proposals from STUs/MCs to deploy multi-modal public 
transport on CAPEX 13 model; approval of proposals was to be done using selection 
parameters such as population of the city, average PM 2.5 of the city, number of vehicles 
registered in the city, ranking in Swachhata Abhiyan, etc.  
The process of approval of proposals during Phase-I involved the following steps:   
 
12  The pilot projects are intended to fulfil objectives of introduction of new technologies, trial of new 
business models etc. with special focus on public transportation.  
13  In the CAPEX model (also known as the Outright Purchase Model), the Vehicle Manufacturer 
(OEM) supplies the bus, battery and chargers to the STU/MC who purchases them and undertakes 
ownership, operations, and maintenance.  

16
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
16 
 
 
Chart 1: Process of approval of proposals under Phase-I  
 
Demand incentive of 60 per cent of the purchase cost of e-bus or ₹1.5 crore, whichever is 
less, was to be borne by the Ministry and released to the respective STU/MC, while the 
remaining 40 per cent was to be borne by STU/MC itself.  
(ii) Process followed during Phase-II 
Under Phase-II of the Scheme, the Ministry adopted two methods for inviting proposals 
for deployment of e-buses in cities across the country. The first method involved the 
issuance of an Expression of Interest (EoI), while the second method was through a 
process of demand aggregation 14 facilitated by Energy Efficiency Services Limited 
(EESL). 
(a) EoI method 
The Ministry issued an EoI on 4 June 2019, inviting proposals from STUs and MCs to 
avail incentives under Phase-II on an Operational Cost Model (OPEX) 15 basis. The 
proposals from STUs and MCs were examined by the PISC based on parameters such as 
availability of power at an affordable price, availability of space/locations for installation 
of charging infrastructure, dedicated depot for parking of buses and installation of 
chargers, concession in registration fees of such vehicles, etc. 
As per the EoI issued by the Ministry, a Model Concession Agreement, as prepared by 
the NITI Aayog, was to be adopted by the STUs for the selected cities, and the same was 
to be incorporated in the bid documents. The process of approval for the deployment of e-
buses through EoI was similar to that followed during Phase-I (refer Chart 1 above). 
(b) Demand Aggregation method 
In the 5th PISC meeting dated 9 June 2021, it was realised that the Scheme was in its third 
year; however, expenditure of only ₹842.14 crore (including ₹326 crore committed 
 
14  Demand aggregation was a process of combining/aggregating demand from various STUs/MCs for 
centralised procurement to yield better value for money through economies of scale.  
15  Under the OPEX Model (or Gross Cost Contract), the vehicle manufacturer (OEM) owns, operates, 
and maintains the buses, batteries, and charging infrastructure and gets a fixed remuneration from 
the STUs/MCs based on assured kilometers. 
Issuance of 
Expression of 
Interest (EoI) by 
MHI
Receipt of proposals 
from various 
STUs/MCs
Proposals  placed before 
Screening committee for 
evaluation and 
recommendation
Approval by 
PISC/Secretary, MHI 
on the 
recommendation of 
Screening Committee
Issuance of 
LoA to the 
selected 
STU/MC
Receipt of copy of 
supply/purchase order issued by 
STU/MC to OEMs after 
following due tendering process
Release of funds 
by MHI to 
STU/MC

17
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
17 
 
 
expenditure of Phase-I) had been incurred. To overcome the low uptake of e-buses, it was 
decided to aggregate the demand for e-buses through EESL. Accordingly, a 
notification/corrigendum of the Scheme guidelines was issued (11 June 2021) by the 
Ministry stating that for demand aggregation in respect of e-buses, nine cities (having 4-
million plus population) would be targeted by EESL on  OPEX basis. The same was 
undertaken by Convergence Energy Services Ltd. (CESL), a subsidiary of EESL. 
Release of funds under both the methods: 
The entire subsidy amount was to be released to STU/MC for further payment to the 
selected bidder in the following instalments. 
Table 6: Manner of release of funds to STUs/MCs 
Instalment 
no. 
Activity being completed Percentage of demand 
incentive to be released by 
the Ministry 
1st Mobilisation advance to be released after the 
issue of supply order and signing of the 
agreement by STU/MC with selected bidders  
20% 
2nd  Delivery of e-buses  40% 
3rd  After six months of the successful commercial 
operation of e-buses 
40% 
 
2.10.2   Status of deployment of e-buses 
Under Phase-I of the Scheme, proposal of STUs/MCs for 425 e-buses were approved by 
the PISC in 10 cities across the country involving a subsidy of ₹278.42 crore from the 
Ministry. All the e-buses had been deployed as of March 2023. City/STU-wise 
deployment of e-buses is given in Annexure-IV. 
Under Phase-II of the Scheme, 3,738 e-buses were sanctioned by the PISC against the EoI 
issued in June 2019 to STUs/MCs in 26 cities across the country involving a subsidy of 
₹1803.06 crore from the Ministry. As of March 2023, 2,776 e-buses had been deployed 
with a total released amount of ₹1,026  crore. City/STU/MC-wise deployment of e-buses 
under Phase II is given in Annexure-V . In addition, a total of 3,472 e-buses were 
sanctioned through the Demand Aggregation method in five cities (with 4 million plus 
population). As of March 2023, no e-buses had been deployed through demand 
aggregation. However, ₹155.35 crore had been released for two out of five cities, which 
was lying with the STUs.  
In the 8 th PISC meeting held on 19 May 2023, it was observed that as per the Scheme 
outlay for Phase-II, an amount of ₹3,545 crore was to be utilised for supporting 7,090 
buses, however, due to savings on account of reduction in prices during the bidding 
process managed by CESL and STUs, the target for deployment of e-buses was increased 
to 9,458 e-buses with a total outlay of ₹4,307 crore. Subsequently, in the 9 th PISC 
meeting held in October 2023, the target for deployment of e-buses was again reduced to 
7,262 e-buses with an outlay of ₹3,209 crore. Out of the revised target of 7,262 buses, as 

18
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
18 
 
 
of March 2024, 4,604 buses (EoI method: 3,133 e-buses; and Demand Aggregation 
method: 1,471 e-buses) had been deployed under the Scheme. The target was further 
reduced to 6,862 from time to time against which the actual deployment as of 31 
December 2025 was 5,195 e-buses. 
2.10.3    Monitoring performance of e-buses  
As per Clause 14 of the EoI issued (4 June 2019) by the Ministry, each STU was required 
to develop an online platform to monitor the performance of e- buses deployed under the 
Scheme. The online platforms developed by STUs would monitor various parameters 
including daily running kilometers, equivalent fuel saved in litres/day, equivalent CO 2 
reduction per day, etc. Further, these online platforms would be interconnected with a 
central server developed by the Ministry so that all the data is available with the Ministry 
for monitoring purposes. 
Audit observed that the central server to be developed for monitoring performance of e-
buses had not been developed by the Ministry as of December 2023. This was despite the 
assurance given by the Ministry in the 3 rd PISC meeting (25 November 2019) that the 
central server would be available by December 2020. However, despite a lapse of three 
years, the Ministry could not develop the central server. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) stated that Covid-19 pandemic had resulted in 
disruptions and the activities directly related to e-buses could be restarted only after 
March 2022. The requirement of a central server was directly linked to the operation of e-
buses. In the absence of manufacturing and delivery of e-buses, the priority was to ensure 
procurement and availability of e-buses for STUs. However, the Ministry engaged with 
States and Cities and worked with them to create online portal. Further, the Phase-II 
Scheme period ended on 31 March 2024. 
The reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact that over 40 per cent of the e-buses had 
been deployed by STUs as of March 2023. Non-development of central server for 
monitoring e-bus performance could have hampered the Ministry’s ability to effectively 
track the performance of e-buses deployed by STUs and to initiate corrective action 
wherever required, etc.  
2.11 Summing up 
Under Phase-I of FAME India Scheme, the Ministry developed the Demand Incentive 
Delivery Mechanism (DIDM) Portal without having a Detailed Project Report 
(DPR)/deliverables and timelines. While submission of claims for demand incentives by 
the Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) could be made online on the Portal, it did 
not have any mechanism for end-to-end processing and disbursement of demand 
incentive claims as envisaged by the Expenditure Finance Committee.  Further, the  Portal 
did not have any data on demand incentive claimed/sanctioned/disbursed for the period 
November 2017 to March 2019.  
The data of demand incentives disbursed during Phase-I, as made available by the 
Ministry from three sources , did not tally with the final figures of demand incentive 

19
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
19 
 
 
reported by the Ministry. As such, Audit was unable to derive an assurance on the 
admissibility and correctness of the demand incentive sanctioned under the Scheme. 
For Phase-II of the Scheme, the work for development of the DIDM Portal was assigned 
to the same vendor (of Phase I), without considering the deficiencies in Phase I portal. In 
the absence of any timelines for processing of claims, Audit could not assess the delay or 
effectiveness of the incentive delivery mechanism. The Portal was not integrated with 
Vahan/Sarathi portal for most of the period of the Scheme.  
In respect of e-buses, Audit observed that during Phase-I, 425 e-buses were deployed as 
allocated in 10 cities through CAPEX model. During Phase-II, 5,195 e-buses were 
deployed against the target of 6,862 e-buses. Further, the Ministry did not develop a 
central server, as envisaged, for monitoring the performance of e-buses. 
Recommendations: 
1) The Ministry may develop a robust mechanism for end-to-end processing of demand 
incentive claims on DIDM portal for more transparency and timely disbursement of 
demand incentives. 
2) The Ministry may identify the constraints leading to low target achievement of e-
buses under the Demand Aggregation method and take necessary remedial actions to 
ensure that the targets are achieved in this category. 
3) The Ministry may take action for early development of central server for monitoring 
of performance of e-buses deployed by various State Transport Undertakings. 
 
 
  

20
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
20 
 
 
Chapter-III 
Testing and Certification 
As per the Scheme guidelines, in order to meet the qualifying criteria for demand 
incentive, the electric vehicles (xEVs) including its variants and versions shall, inter 
alia, (a) be manufactured in the country; (b) be duly type-approved 16 under the 
provisions contained in Central Motor Vehicles Rules (CMVR), 1989; and (c) be tested 
for the qualifying targets, prescribed under the Scheme for various vehicle parameters, 
by any of the authorised testing agencies in the country as per eligibility assessment 
procedure (Annexure-VI). 
3.1 Procedure for testing and certification of electric vehicles 
Each Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) had to approach a designated testing 
centre for testing and homologation services. The testing centres were to certify whether 
a particular vehicle was entitled to get the benefit under demand incentive component 
and to specify the level of benefit (i.e. amount of demand incentive) that the vehicle 
would get. The authorised test centres were: (a) Automotive Research Association of 
India (ARAI), Pune; (b) International Centre for Automotive Technology (ICAT), 
Manesar; and (c) Central Institute of Road Transport (CIRT), Pune. 
(i) Eligibility Assessment of xEV Models 
Testing agencies were authorised to test and certify the e-vehicles against eligibility 
parameters for FAME India Scheme. After receipt of vehicle model from OEM, each 
testing agency was expected to first type-approve the vehicle model with reference to 
CMVR, 1989, and also test the vehicle model as per eligibility criteria for FAME India 
Scheme. After completion of testing, testing agency was expected to issue necessary 
certificate of eligibility, i.e. Eligibility Assessment Report (EAR). 
(ii) Conformity of Production (COP) 
Conformity of Production refers to the process of establishing compliance of components 
from the production series of a vehicle which has already been type-approved, to the 
provisions of the notified standard (Clause 2.10 of Automotive Industry Standards). All 
vehicle models approved under FAME India Scheme have to undergo Conformity of 
Production tests against all eligibility parameters by the recognised testing agencies at 
least once a year. 
3.2 Audit findings 
Audit examined the testing-related records at two testing agencies (ARAI, Pune, and 
ICAT, Manesar). The audit observations relating to testing and certification process are 
discussed in the succeeding sub-paragraphs. 
 
 
16  Type Approval: The procedure whereby a testing agency certifies that a type of vehicle or its systems 
satisfies the relevant provisions of CMVR 

21
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
21 
 
 
3.2.1 Timelines for testing and certification 
(i) Non-formulation of timelines by the Ministry 
Timelines are fundamental for effective time management of any project/activity and for 
facilitating monitoring, bringing uniformity in the time taken to perform similar activities 
by different agencies and creating accountability. Audit, however, observed that no 
timelines had been notified by the Ministry for testing and issuance of Eligibility 
Assessment Reports by the testing agencies under the Scheme. In the absence of this, 
there was no control/monitoring over the time taken by testing agencies to complete the 
testing and certification process. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that timelines were not prescribed for testing/ 
certification as the testing agencies (ARAI and ICAT) were autonomous bodies and were 
empowered to formulate guidelines according to their requirements. 
However, absence of a defined timeline raises concerns about the accountability of 
testing agencies and the efficiency of the testing and certification process.  
(ii) Non-formulation of timelines by ICAT, Manesar 
Audit observed that ICAT, Manesar had not specified any internal timeline for the 
completion of tests under CMVR, 1989 or for FAME eligibility assessment. 
ICAT had an online portal (ICAT Online Certification System - IOCS) for end-to-end 
processing of applications for homologation from customers/OEMs, and for monitoring 
the progress of testing and certification by ICAT and OEMs. However, end-to-end 
processing of applications received from OEMs for testing/certification of vehicle models 
was not being done on IOCS portal. Only OEM registration and application submission 
was being done on the portal, and all other downstream processes and communications 
were being done by ICAT offline/by email. 
Further, there was no consolidated/real-time record of status of testing requests, status of 
mandatory tests conducted, reason for rejection of application/delay in processing of 
application, etc. in IOCS. Hence, neither ICAT nor OEMs were able to monitor the 
status/progress of testing on the portal. 
The Ministry, while endorsing the reply of ICAT, stated (February 2025) that CMVR 
certification involves multiple steps and stakeholders, making it impossible to define a 
generic timeline. It allows flexibility for corrections and submissions. With reference to 
the IOCS portal, ICAT stated that they are in process to develop IOCS 2.0 with all the 
advanced features as suggested, by March 2026. 
The reply may be seen in light of the fact that a structured timeline would provide clarity, 
facilitate smoother implementation, and prevent potential bottlenecks. It would also help 
in fixing accountability and putting a check on the whole process. 
(iii) Time taken in issue of Eligibility Assessment Reports  
The Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI), Pune had formulated a standard 
operating procedure as per which maximum time of 45 days was prescribed for 

22
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
22 
 
 
processing of application for testing. With reference to this timeline of 45 days, Audit 
observed that there was delay in issuance of Eligibility Assessment Reports (EARs) by 
testing agencies as detailed in the table below:  
Table 7: Number of days taken to issue Eligibility Assessment Reports (EARs) 
Sl. 
No. 
Number of 
days taken 
to issue 
EARs 
ARAI ICAT 
No of vehicle 
models 
against which 
EARs were 
issued 
Percentage No of vehicle 
models against 
which EARs 
were issued 
Percentage 
1.  0 to 15 days 181 25% 30 12% 
2.  15 to 30 days 137 19% 26 10% 
3.  30 to 45 days 90 13% 18 7% 
4.  More than 45 
days 
312 43% 181 71% 
Total 720  255  
Thus, in 312 out of 720 requests (43 per cent) received by ARAI between April 2015 to 
September 2023, EARs were issued after a period of 45 days. The actual time taken in 
issue of EARs ranged up to 428 days. Further, in 181 out of 255 requests (71 per cent) 
received by ICAT between March 2015 to May 2023, EARs were issued after a period of 
45 days and the actual time taken ranged up to 497 days. 
The Ministry, while endorsing the replies of testing agencies, stated (February 2025) that 
delay in issuing certificates after receipt of the application was based on various 
shortcomings from the OEMs side, which cannot be attributed to the testing agencies.  
It is evident from the reply that neither the OEMs nor the testing agencies had the clarity 
regarding testing and certification process which was necessary to streamline and expedite 
the process and avoid such delays. 
3.2.2 Tests for conformity of production  
(i) Absence of provision for ‘conformity of production’ test during Phase-I 
Audit observed that under Phase-I of the Scheme, there was no provision for electric 
vehicle models to undergo Conformity of Production (COP) tests for annual revalidation, 
rendering it impossible to ascertain that (i) the OEMs were using the same components 
that were originally tested and approved at the time of initial eligibility assessment, and 
(ii) the vehicles under production by OEMs were conforming to xEV technology 
parameters, as originally tested and approved at the time of initial eligibility assessment.  
Thus, the demand incentives under Phase-I of the Scheme had been disbursed without 
conducting any COP/revalidation testing as there was no provision for the same. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that COP was already required for vehicles, and 
CMVR certification was necessary for approvals under the FAME Scheme. In Phase-I, 

23
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
23 
 
 
COP ensured that the electric vehicles met required standards, with initial certification 
based on prototype testing and COP verifying production models.   
The reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact that under CMVR, 1989, the COP 
requirement existed only for exhaust emission (internal combustion engine) vehicles. 
(ii) Notification for ‘conformity of production’ tests  
Until December 2022, there was no provision in CMVR, 1989 for whole-vehicle safety 
COP testing for electric vehicles. Provisions for the same were notified (June 2021) by 
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) and implemented from 
December 2022 for all electric vehicles. Further, component-level COP for ‘traction 
battery’ i.e. the power source of electric vehicles, was notified by MoRTH in December 
2022 and implemented from 31 March 2023. 
There was no assurance on conformity of the traction battery/whole-vehicle safety with 
performance/ safety parameters and there was no mechanism to ensure that approved 
components were being used by the OEMs during manufacturing of electric vehicles, till 
the above notification regarding provisions for COP requirements. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that as electric vehicles continue to develop, 
MoRTH keeps updating its rules and guidelines to make sure that the industry grows 
responsibly and efficiently. 
The reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact that until the implementation of 
provisions relating to safety and performance parameters, there was no assurance that 
mass-produced electric vehicles continued to meet the parameters that had been approved 
at the prototype stage. Audit, however, appreciates the remedial action taken by the 
Government for incorporating the relevant provisions in CMVR, 1989.  
3.2.3 Testing standards for EV charging stations/equipment 
The Project Implementation and Sanctioning Committee (PISC), in its meeting held on 13 
May 2015, had approved in-principle, a project on ‘Preparation of specifications and 
finalising draft standards of xEV charging stations’ for ARAI, Pune. As per directions of 
the Ministry, ARAI prepared the draft standards and further submitted the same to the 
Ministry in a meeting held in February 2018. In the meeting, it was decided to further 
submit the draft standards to the Bureau of India Standards (BIS) for formulation of BIS 
standards on the subject. BIS has notified IS-17017 on Electric Vehicle Conductive 
Charging System between 2018 and 2024.  
In order to enforce due compliances by the EV charging stations, the above standards 
were needed to be made mandatory by the appropriate authority. Audit, however, 
observed that as of March 2024, these standards had not been made mandatory for all 
types of manufacturers/charge point operators. Non-mandatory testing of charging 
equipment/charging stations may pose significant risks/hazards.  
The Ministry replied (February 2025) stated that the Ministry of Power vide office 
memoranda dated 17 September 2024 and 10 January 2025 had also issued Guidelines for 

24
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
24 
 
 
Installation and Operation of Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure-2024 which were 
applicable to battery charging equipment and charging stations.  
The reply may be seen in light of the fact that the above guidelines were issued 
(September 2024) after the end of both the phases of the Scheme. Audit, however, 
appreciates the remedial action taken by the Government as this would address the safety 
risks for the users of charging infrastructure in future. 
3.2.4 Testing standards for determining compliance to localisation requirements 
The Ministry notified Phased Manufacturing Programme (PMP) on 6 March 2019 
specifying therein localisation/indigenisation requirements for electric vehicles. As per 
the Ministry’s directions (29 March 2019), all testing agencies were to ensure strict 
compliance with the localisation requirements stipulated in the PMP notification before 
issuing Eligibility Assessment Reports to the OEMs.   
Audit observations in this context are discussed below: 
(i) No provision to validate the undertakings by OEMs 
For getting certification under the FAME Scheme, the OEMs were required to provide ‘a 
sample vehicle’ for every approved model for testing along with its technical 
specifications to a specified testing agency and FAME certificates were issued on the 
basis of testing of such ‘sample vehicles’. It was the responsibility of OEM to ensure that 
all vehicles manufactured and sold by it conform to the declared specifications and 
performance of the said sample vehicle. OEMs furnished an undertaking to testing 
agencies wherein they agreed that: 
 the vehicles would be built so as to ensure that they continue to meet the criteria as 
per PMP and CMVR type approval,  
 they would domestically manufacture all parts, components, assemblies or sub-
assemblies and CMVR notified safety critical components as per PMP, and 
 in the event of breach of any of the assurances/undertakings given, they undertook 
to indemnify the test agency and its officers. 
Also, with each claim for demand incentive, the OEMs has to submit an undertaking that 
the claim was as per provisions of the Scheme guidelines and the vehicles had been 
manufactured as per the PMP guidelines. 
Audit observed that the Ministry relied upon the undertakings given by the OEMs for 
disbursing demand incentive. There was no provision to check whether the OEMs, post 
testing and certification process, were complying with the FAME and PMP guidelines 
and respective undertakings while manufacturing, registration and sale of vehicles. 
(ii) Violation of guidelines by OEMs while manufacturing and sale of vehicles  
Based on certain complaints regarding violations of FAME guidelines and PMP 
guidelines by the OEMs, the Ministry directed the testing agencies to carry out detailed 

25
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
25 
 
 
examination of records, physical plant inspection, and strip-down analysis of vehicles. 
The examination revealed the following deviations: 
 OEMs had not applied in time to the testing agencies for revalidation of their 
electric two-wheeler models for obtaining full localisation approval applicable with 
effect from 1 April 2021. 
 OEMs continued selling their vehicles with imported parts. Various parts 17 for 
which mandatory localisation was required as per PMP notification were being 
imported by the OEMs even after 1 April 2021.  
 The OEMs did not apply for revalidation of all their vehicle models even after 
expiry of one year in September/October 2022, which was a mandatory requirement 
as per FAME-II guidelines. 
From the examination, it emerged that the Ministry had disbursed demand incentive 
amounting to ₹467.96 crore to five OEMs despite the above deviations (refer para 3.2.5).  
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that in order to bring synergy between testing 
agencies, SOP for Common Testing Protocol & Strip-down Activity, was drafted and 
approved by the Committee of all the testing agencies headed by Director, ARAI on 18 
December 2024. Additionally, during the Exit Conference (February 2025), the Ministry 
informed that the learnings from Phase-I and Phase-II of the Scheme had been 
incorporated while formulation of PM e-drive Scheme, such as addition of strip down 
procedure, etc. 
It is evident from the reply that strict and adequate mechanism to ensure compliance with 
the localisation requirements was lacking among the testing agencies during the period of 
implementation of FAME India Scheme. Audit, however, appreciates the remedial action 
taken by the Ministry for the subsequent Scheme (PM e-drive) wherein the testing 
agencies are required to conduct annual strip down test for electric vehicles after 
randomly selecting the vehicles from the customers who have purchased electric vehicles 
under the Scheme or from OEMs’ manufacturing plants. 
3.2.5 Claims made by the OEMs in violation of localisation requirements 
The Ministry had notified (March 2019) Phased Manufacturing Programme (PMP) to 
promote indigenous manufacturing of electric vehicles, its assemblies/sub-assemblies and 
parts/inputs of the sub-assemblies thereon. The PMP stipulated different dates for 
indigenisation of different parts/components of electric vehicles in a phased manner. The 
Ministry further directed (March 2019) all the testing agencies notified under the Scheme 
to ensure strict compliance of PMP before issue of eligibility certificate to the OEMs for 
facilitating registration of their vehicles under Phase-II of the Scheme. The PMP was 
revised from time to time by the Ministry. 
 
17 on-board charger, wheel rim integrated with hub-motor, traction motor controller/inverter, electronic 
throttle, AC-DC converter 

26
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
26 
 
 
As per the revised PMP notification of October 2021, for eligibility under Phase-II of the 
Scheme, all the vehicle parts/components (except battery cells, and thermal and battery 
management system) for e-2-wheelers and e-3-wheelers were to be domestically 
manufactured with effect from 1 April 2021, and for e-4-wheelers with effect from 1 
April 2022.  
Audit observed that the Ministry had disbursed demand incentive amounting to ₹467.96 
crore (as of 7 June 2024) to five OEMs which had not fulfilled the localisation 
requirements stipulated in the PMP notification. The testing agencies had not found any 
non-compliance with the localisation requirements stipulated in the PMP notification at 
the time of testing and issuance of Eligibility Assessment Report to the OEMs. These 
OEMs had also submitted undertaking regarding compliance with the Scheme guidelines 
and PMP notification. The violation was discovered at a later stage, after disbursement of 
demand incentive, and after the testing agencies carried out detailed examination of 
records, physical plant inspection, and strip-down analysis of vehicles, on the specific 
directions of the Ministry itself. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that two out of the five OEMs had refunded the 
entire demand incentive availed by them including interest, amounting to ₹190.90 crore to 
the Ministry. However, the remaining three OEMs had not refunded the demand incentive 
and hence orders for de-registration of those three OEMs along with instructions to repay 
the entire availed incentive to the Ministry had been issued in October-November 2023. 
Further, orders to debar the three OEMs from all the Schemes of the Ministry for a period 
of two years had also been issued. Further, at the request of the Ministry, the Serious 
Fraud Investigation Office was conducting investigation in the matter, under the 
provisions of the Companies Act, 2013.  
Audit appreciates the action taken by the Ministry against the delinquent OEMs. 
However, an amount of ₹277.96 crore remains to be recovered from the three OEMs. 
3.2.6 Release of demand incentive for ineligible claims 
3.2.6.1    Claims without assurance on conformity with Scheme eligibility criteria 
Scheme Guidelines (March 2019) provided that in order to avail demand incentive, each 
vehicle model needed to satisfy minimum technical eligibility criteria with regard to 
performance and efficiency of vehicles to be notified separately and get the vehicle model 
‘type-approved’ as per prescribed/standard testing procedure at recognised testing 
agencies notified under Rule 126 of Central Motor Vehicle Rules (CMVR), 1989 by the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH).  
Further, the guidelines/notifications for FAME India Scheme stipulated the following: 
(a) Eligibility Assessment Procedure : Under Phase-II, an Eligibility Assessment 
Procedure was notified in May 2019 by the Ministry for assessment of vehicle 
models/variants to determine eligibility for demand incentive. The procedure outlined the 
technical specifications for an electric vehicle to qualify for demand incentive under the 

27
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
27 
 
 
Scheme. Testing agencies were to issue eligibility certificates/Eligibility Assessment 
Reports (EAR) to the OEMs. 
(b) Revalidation Testing: OEMs were to provide the list of VINs (Vehicle Identification 
Numbers) and battery packs (with unique identification number) available in the vehicle 
production plant to the testing agency which randomly selected one VIN and one battery 
pack for carrying out the tests. Thereafter, revalidation certificate was to be issued to 
OEMs.   
(c) Frequency of FAME Eligibility Assessment Tests: Eligibility certificate issued by 
testing agencies were valid for one financial year from April to March as per the 
Ministry’s notification of March 2019. OEMs were to submit revalidation certificate to 
the Ministry/National Automotive Board (NAB) for all vehicle models approved under 
the Scheme at the frequency of one year. OEMs were allowed an additional time of one 
month, over and above the one-year period, to provide revalidation certificate for the 
approved models. Further, as per Ministry’s OM of April 2021, demand incentive claims 
for vehicle models approved by the Ministry/NAB and sold after one year of the 
certification date were to be admissible only if revalidation was done within an additional 
time of one month.  
The validity of the eligibility certificate issued by the testing agencies was extended many 
times as detailed below: 
Table 8: Validity Extension of Eligibility Certificates 
Date of Notification Effect of Notification / Revision 
22 March 2019 Certificates issued during 2019-20 were valid till 31 March 2020 
27 April 2020 Certificates issued during 2019-20 were valid till 30 June 2020 
25 June 2020 Certificates issued during 2019-20 were valid till 30 September 2020 
23 September 2020 Certificates issued during 2019-20 were valid till 31 December 2020 
13 January 2021 Certificates issued during 2019-20 were valid till 31 March 2021 
12 April 2021 Certificates issued during 2020-21 were valid for one year from the 
date of the certificate 
In the above context, Audit analysed the data on demand incentive under Phase-II in 
respect of the electric vehicles (EVs) other than electric buses to ascertain whether the 
sale of EVs (for which demand incentive had been granted) took place within the validity 
period of the eligibility certificates issued under the Scheme by the testing agencies. 
Audit observed that demand incentive amounting to ₹6.78 crore was approved for 952 
EVs which were ineligible in terms of the provisions of Scheme guidelines/ notifications. 
The details are given in the table below: 
 
 
 

28
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
28 
 
 
Table 9: Demand Incentive approved for ineligible EVs (other than e-buses) 
Particulars Number of 
EVs 
Demand incentive 
approved (₹ crore) 
Sale of vehicle after the validity period of FAME 
Eligibility Assessment Certificate 
894 6.18 
CMVR and FAME Eligibility Certification not available 58 0.60 
Total 952 6.78 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that: 
 Amount of ₹6.18 crore was recovered/under recovery for cases where EVs had been 
sold beyond validity period of FAME eligibility certificates; and 
 Amount of ₹0.60 crore was recovered for cases where CMVR certificates and 
FAME eligibility certificates were not available. 
Audit appreciates the recovery action taken/initiated by the Ministry.  
3.2.6.2    Excess disbursement of demand incentive  
The Ministry’s notification dated 3 April 2019 required testing agencies to specifically 
mention in the Eligibility Assessment Report, the amount of demand incentive to which a 
particular model of vehicle was entitled. Further, as per para 2.1 of the Eligibility 
Assessment Procedure for FAME-II, notified (28 May 2019) by the Ministry for 
compliance by all notified testing agencies, while applying for the eligibility 
certificate, the applicant was to furnish minimum ‘ex-showroom price’ of the vehicle 
model/variant(s) for all category of e-vehicles except for e-buses. 
The guidelines also specified that the amount of demand incentive would be determined 
by the testing agencies as ₹10,000 per kWh (battery capacity) subject to a cap of 20 per 
cent of ex-showroom price of the vehicle. The amount so determined was to be specified 
by the testing agencies in the eligibility certificates.  
On test check of records/data, Audit observed that in respect of 5,198 e-3-wheelers of two 
OEMs, the Ministry disbursed demand incentive without restricting it to the amount 
specified by the testing agencies in eligibility certificates, resulting in excess 
disbursement amounting to ₹1.65 crore. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that the excess disbursement of ₹1.65 crore for 
5,198 e-3-wheelers had been recovered from the OEMs. 
3.3 Summing up 
Testing agencies played a significant role in implementation of FAME India Scheme. 
They were to test and certify the electric vehicles for eligibility under the Scheme along 
with compliance to localisation guidelines, and also to determine the amount of eligible 
demand incentive. Audit observed that the testing agencies did not follow a strict timeline 
for testing and issue of Eligibility Assessment Reports under the Scheme. Also, there was 
no end-to-end online platform for certification system to achieve transparency and 

29
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
29 
 
 
efficiency. Also, there was lack of an adequate standard operating procedure with the 
testing agencies to check on violations of localisation guidelines by the OEMs. 
Further, Audit observed that demand incentive amounting to ₹6.78 crore was approved 
for 952 ineligible electric vehicles in violation of the Scheme guidelines/ notifications. 
Audit appreciates the action taken by the Ministry for recovery of ₹190.90 crore from two 
of the five OEMs to whom demand incentive of ₹467.96 crore had been disbursed despite 
their failure to comply with the prescribed localisation requirements for parts/components 
of electric vehicles.  
Recommendations: 
1) Testing agencies may develop and strictly follow the timelines for testing and issue of 
Eligibility Assessment Reports. An online platform for certification system may also be 
developed to achieve transparency and efficiency. 
2) The Ministry may formulate comprehensive Standard Operating Procedure for 
testing and certification under FAME and other schemes and for adherence to 
localisation guidelines for the testing agencies. 
3) The Ministry may include important details of vehicle testing (i.e. CMVR and FAME 
eligibility certification details including effective period, admissible demand incentive) 
as validation rules in FAME portal for processing of demand incentive claims. 
  

30
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
30 
 
 
Chapter-IV 
Charging Infrastructure 
An accessible and robust charging infrastructure network is an essential prerequisite for 
achieving the transition to electric mobility. Under National Electric Mobility Mission 
Plan (NEMMP) 2020, lack of public charging infrastructure was identified as a key 
barrier to the large-scale adoption of electric vehicles in India. The FAME India Scheme 
targeted the creation/development of charging infrastructure network for electric vehicles 
under both Phase-I and Phase II of the Scheme. 
4.1 Approval of charging infrastructure projects 
(i) Charging infrastructure projects sanctioned in Phase-I 
Based on the proposals received from the implementing agencies, the Project 
Implementation and Sanctioning Committee (PISC) of the Ministry sanctioned five 
charging infrastructure projects under Pilot Projects/ Technology Platform components of 
the Scheme at a cost of ₹44.10 crore during Phase-I, as shown in the table below:  
Table 10: Charging Infrastructure Projects under Phase I 
Sl.No. Name of 
Implementing 
Agency  
Name of project  No. of 
charging 
stations 
sanctioned 
Grant by 
Ministry 
(₹ crore)  
Date of 
sanction 
by PISC 
1. REIL18 & 
BHEL19  
Solar based charging 
stations  
4 1.000 20.08.2015 
2. Mahindra Reva  Charging infrastructure  25 0.687  13.05.2015 
3. REIL  Charging stations  200        5.606 15.06.2017 
4. REIL  Charging stations 
(including 25 grid-
connected solar based) 
270  25.759  03.01.2019 
5. BHEL  Grid connected solar 
charging stations on 
Delhi-Chandigarh 
highway 
40      11.051 03.01.2019 
  Total 539 44.103   
(ii) Charging infrastructure projects sanctioned in Phase-II 
The process chart for approval of charging infrastructure projects during Phase-II was as 
shown below: 
  
 
18 Rajasthan Electronics and Instrumentation Limited (REIL) 
19 Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) 

31
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
31 
 
 
Chart 2: Stages of Charging Infrastructure Projects Sanction (Phase II) 
 
 
Out of the revised allocation of ₹839 crore 20 for creation of charging infrastructure under 
Phase-II, the Ministry released ₹633.41 crore for three charging infrastructure projects as 
shown in the table below: 
Table 11: Charging Infrastructure Projects under Phase II 
Name of Project No. of charging 
stations approved 
Funds released 
(₹ in crore) 
Date of sanction by 
PISC 
Cities 2,877 21.99 25.11.2019 and 
31.08.2020 
Highways and Expressways 1,576  Cancelled 08.10.2021 
Oil Marketing Companies  8,412 611.45 17.03.2023 and 
20.02.2024 
Total 12,865 633.44  
PISC sanctioned the ‘Cities’ and ‘Highways and Expressways’ projects after inviting 
Expressions of Interest. During a review (May 2023) of the progress of implementation of 
these two projects, the Ministry found that only 148 charging stations had been 
commissioned under the ‘Cities’ project only. The Ministry, therefore, cancelled the 
remaining charging stations awarded under these two projects (refer para 4.5.1). 
4.2 Status of implementation of charging infrastructure projects 
The status of implementation of charging infrastructure projects sanctioned under Phase I 
and Phase II is as shown in table below: 
  
 
20 Original allocation was ₹1,000 crore 
Approval of Projects by Project Implementation and Sanctioning 
Committee 
Submission of Proposal by Implementing Agency 
Expression of Interest inviting Proposals 
 
Evaluation of Proposals by Technical Evaluation Committee 
Issue of Letter of Awards by the Ministry after Land Agreements 
 
 

32
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
32 
 
 
Table 12: Status of Charging Infrastructure Projects (as on 31 March 2024) 
Phase No. of charging stations 
sanctioned21 
No. of charging stations commissioned 
by Implementing Agencies 
Phase I 539 495 
Phase II 8,560 148 
Total 9,099 643 
4.3  Audit sampling 
In addition to examination of records of the charging infrastructure projects, 104 charging 
stations located in five cities (Delhi, Chandigarh, Ranchi, Shimla and Nagpur) and two 
Highways/Expressways (i.e. Delhi-Jaipur-Agra and Delhi-Chandigarh) were selected for 
detailed test-check and joint physical inspection by Audit, out of the 499 charging stations 
for which data was available at the time of sampling (March 2022).  
4.4 Audit findings relating to Phase-I of the Scheme 
The audit findings pertaining to creation of charging infrastructure during Phase-I of the 
Scheme have been discussed in the succeeding sub-paragraphs. 
4.4.1 No roadmap for creating charging infrastructure and approval of projects 
without inviting EoI 
The Scheme envisaged setting-up of adequate public charging infrastructure to instill 
confidence amongst xEV users, through active participation and involvement of various 
stakeholders. Audit, however, observed that there was no formal roadmap/action plan for 
setting up of adequate public charging infrastructure in Phase I. 
As per Rule 144 of the General Financial Rules, every authority delegated with the 
financial powers shall have the responsibility and accountability to bring efficiency, 
economy and transparency in matters relating to public procurement and promotion of 
competition in public procurement. Audit, however, observed that charging infrastructure 
projects were sanctioned by the Ministry based on proposals received from implementing 
agencies. The Project Implementation and Sanctioning Committee (PISC) awarded 
(during 2015-19) charging infrastructure projects to three agencies (i.e. BHEL, REIL and 
Mahindra Reva), without inviting any Expression of Interest (EoI). Moreover, records as 
to how these proposals were initiated or received by the Ministry were not made available 
to Audit. As such, Audit could not examine the rationale behind the selection of these 
agencies. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that selection of sites for charging infrastructure 
was to be done based on the future potential for use of electric vehicles in these sites. 
Charging infrastructure proposals received from BHEL, REIL and Mahindra Reva were 
put up to PISC for their approval and approved on merits by the PISC.  
 
21 Excludes cancelled charging stations of the ‘Cities’ project (i.e. 2877-148=2729) and the ‘Highways 
and Expressways’ project (i.e. 1576) under Phase-II. 

33
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
33 
 
 
The Ministry, however, did not furnish the reasons for not inviting EoI for the selection of 
agencies. Merits on which the agencies were selected were also not furnished/intimated to 
Audit. 
4.4.2 Non-installation of envisaged charging infrastructure 
Two implementing agencies viz. REIL and BHEL did not install the specified number of 
charging stations as detailed in the table below: 
Table 13: Charging Stations not installed 
Name of 
Implementing 
Agency 
Date of sanction 
by PISC 
No. of charging 
stations sanctioned 
No. of charging 
stations 
commissioned 
REIL 03.01.2019 270 248 
BHEL 03.01.2019 40  20  
While endorsing the reply of REIL, the Ministry stated (February 2025) that in addition to 
248 charging stations commissioned, REIL had completed installation of 2 numbers of 
122 kW EV chargers and commissioning and power up was in process. Installation of the 
remaining 20 EV chargers was in process. Delay was due to identifying locations from 
various cities involving many agencies, survey feasibility, obtaining statutory clearance, 
agreement with land-owning agencies, obtaining power for the commissioning of 
chargers. 
The reply, however, does not justify the significant delay of five years in execution of the 
project by REIL.  
While endorsing the reply of BHEL, the Ministry stated (February 2025) that the actual 
capacity of solar plant and EV chargers installed and commissioned by BHEL was as per 
the space availability, site feasibility and clearances received. Further, during execution 
stage, BHEL faced multiple challenges such as convincing the respective site owners, 
space availability at site, and approval of Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation 
(PESO) for fuel stations of HPCL and IOCL. 
While acknowledging the reply of the Ministry, it is stated that the actual number of 
charging stations and capacity of solar plants actually installed by BHEL were 
significantly less than those approved by the PISC. Further, approval of MHI should have 
been taken before any significant scope reduction. 
4.4.3 Delay in installation of charging infrastructure 
The projects for installation of 200 charging stations by REIL (sanctioned in June 2017), 
270 EV charging stations (including 25 grid-connected solar charging stations) by REIL 
(sanctioned in January 2019), 40 grid connected solar EV charging stations on Delhi-
Chandigarh highway by BHEL and one solar-based charging station by BHEL were to be 
completed within 5 months, 10 months, 12 months and 6 months respectively, from the 
date of receipt of funds from the Ministry.  

34
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
34 
 
 
Audit observed delay in the implementation of these projects as presented in the table 
below: 
Table 14: Delay in Implementation 
Delay Range Number of 
charging 
stations out of 
200 
(REIL) 
Number of 
charging 
stations out 
of 270 
(REIL) 
Number of 
charging stations 
out of 40 solar-
based stations on 
Delhi Chandigarh 
Highway 
(BHEL) 
1 solar-based 
charging 
stations 
(BHEL) 
No delay 0 25 11 0 
Less than 5 
months 
69 25 0 0 
5 to 10 months 114 22 1 0 
10 to 15 months 16 88 8 0 
15 to 20 months 1 39 0 0 
20 months and 
above 
0 49 0 1 
Not 
Commissioned 
0 22 20 0 
BHEL cited (September 2023) the outbreak of COVID-19, delay in finalisation of the 
site/strategic location, etc. as the reasons for the delay. 
Further, while endorsing REIL’s response, the Ministry stated (February 2025) that delay 
was due to identifying locations from various cities involving many agencies, survey 
feasibility, getting statutory clearance, signing agreement with land-owning agencies, 
getting power for the commissioning of chargers. The project was also new and one of its 
kind, so it took considerable time in execution. 
It is evident from the replies that feasibility of projects including availability of sites were 
not ascertained beforehand. Also, the projects, despite being new, had been approved 
based on the proposals of REIL/BHEL only. 
4.4.4 Non-functional charging infrastructure 
In one project viz. 270 EV charging stations (including 25 grid-connected solar charging 
stations), it was observed that charging infrastructure installed and commissioned was 
non-functional as detailed in the table below:  
Table 15: Non-functional charging infrastructure  
Reason for non-functional charging 
infrastructure 
Number of 
units 
Rate per unit 
(In ₹) 
Infructuous 
expenditure 
(₹ crore) 
122 kW chargers not powered 25 30,00,000 7.50 

35
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
35 
 
 
Reason for non-functional charging 
infrastructure 
Number of 
units 
Rate per unit 
(In ₹) 
Infructuous 
expenditure 
(₹ crore) 
Transformers (PSS) not powered22 26 8,50,000 2.21  
Solar plant not commissioned 14 15,00,000 2.10 
1.1 KV cable not used 2695 meters 2765 0.75 
11 KV cable not used 1720 meters 611 0.10 
  Total 12.66 
Thus, expenditure of ₹12.66 crore as shown above was rendered infructuous.  
REIL replied (July 2023) that due to the huge investment required for taking the 
electricity connection for 122 KW EV charger and upstream infrastructure and very low 
return on such investment, landowners were not interested.  
The Ministry, while endorsing REIL’s response, replied (February 2025) that out of 25 
solar power plants, 17 power plants had been commissioned. REIL was pursuing with the 
landowners for commissioning of the remaining solar plants at the earliest. REIL was 
rigorously following up for powering up the 122 kW EV chargers and Packaged Sub- 
Stations (PSS). The unused cable was with the installation agency for powering up of 122 
kW EV chargers.  
The reply may be seen in the context that REIL had already reported the above mentioned 
charging infrastructure as commissioned, even though the same was non-functional.  
4.4.5 Non-execution of Central Management System for Charging Stations 
Under the sanctioned charging infrastructure projects, funds had been allocated by the 
Ministry for creation of Central Management System (CMS) software for managing the 
charging stations. It was observed that IIT Madras had already developed a CMS in June 
2017 out of funds released by the Ministry under the Technology Development (R&D) 
component, but the same was not adopted/operationalised by the Ministry.  
Audit observations relating to the creation of CMS are discussed below: 
(i) Project for installation of 200 EV Charging Stations by REIL (June 2017) 
REIL submitted (March 2019) utilisation of ₹0.96 crore for creation of CMS (comprising 
₹0.81 crore for development of CMS and ₹0.15 crore for SIM related expenditure)  
against the provision of ₹0.60 crore.  
Audit observed that REIL had awarded (January 2019) the project for ‘Supply of CMS 
for EV Charging Stations’ to L-2 bidder at less than L1 prices, citing, inter-alia, ready-
made solution and e-mobility experience with L2 bidder. However, the L2 bidder could 
not complete the work. REIL paid the first instalment of ₹0.16 crore to the vendor despite 
unsatisfactory performance, and refused payment of the remaining amount of ₹0.65 crore 
as the vendor did not complete the project. Further, against the utilisation of ₹0.15 crore 
 
22 Warrantee of transformers also expired. 

36
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
36 
 
 
on SIM related expenditure reported by REIL to the Ministry, REIL could provide details 
of actual expenditure for only ₹0.03 crore to Audit. 
CMS was not found functional in any of the charging stations commissioned by REIL 
which were physically inspected by Audit. 
The Ministry, while endorsing REIL’s response, stated (February 2025) that REIL 
deputed internal IT manpower to get the remaining work executed by the CMS vendor. 
REIL utilised the entire sanctioned grant ₹0.96 crore and also made the extra expenditure 
for the CMS. 
The fact remains that REIL released the first installment to the vendor despite 
unsatisfactory performance. During joint inspection, in many cases, chargers were found 
removed from installation site, damaged, not found powered with adequate sanctioned 
load, etc. (refer para 4.5.3). 
(ii) Project for installation of 270 EV charging stations by REIL (January 2019) 
The proposal approved by the PISC included ₹1.62 crore for the CMS component. Work 
order for execution of CMS component was issued to a vendor in December 2021 and the 
project was to be commissioned within 90 days from the date of the issue of work order. 
However, the vendor did not complete the project.  
The Ministry, while endorsing REIL’s response, stated (February 2025) that REIL 
incurred the sanctioned expenditure of ₹1.62 crore against the compliance of REIL 
obligations for the CMS by REIL internal IT team. CMS configuration and related 
activities were undergoing. 
However, during joint physical inspection of selected charging stations, none of the 
charging stations was found to have CMS. 
(iii) Project for installation of 40 EV charging stations by BHEL 
Against allocation of ₹1.10 crore for CMS component in January 2019, BHEL reported 
utilisation of ₹1.07 crore for the commissioning of CMS.  
Audit observed that BHEL attempted to develop CMS internally, but in March 2020 
expressed its inability to develop the CMS. However, BHEL reported utilisation of 
₹98.24 lakh to the Ministry towards payment of salaries to its officials engaged in 
development of the CMS. 
Subsequently, BHEL placed order (February 2021) on a vendor for procurement of CMS 
and mobile application for one year at an order value of (-) 23 ₹74,340. The selected 
vendor delivered the CMS and mobile app and commissioned the project on 9 August 
2021. However, the CMS became non-functional after expiry of one year when the 
contract with vendor ended. 
BHEL replied (September 2023) that since know-how of some advanced features was not 
available with BHEL, it outsourced the same from a third party. Further, BHEL’s internal 
 
23 The selected vendor agreed to pay ₹74,340 to BHEL for the work 

37
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
37 
 
 
team was associated with ‘in-house’ development, installation and testing, system 
maintenance, monitoring, troubleshooting etc. CMS was in the evolving stage and there 
was no ready reference for a proven product/ reference project in the country. BHEL had 
completed its scope of work in line with the approved PISC proposal. 
The Ministry, while endorsing BHEL’s response, stated (February 2025) that though the 
operation of CMS by BHEL was neither envisaged in the approved PISC proposal, nor 
was part of scope of work of BHEL, however CMS was kept live in working condition 
for one year by BHEL with operation and maintenance. 
The fact remains that BHEL deployed its human resources for the development of the 
CMS without assessing its internal capacity and availability of technological know-how 
and incurred expenditure of ₹98.24 lakh. 
4.4.6 No revenue model for charging stations 
PISC’s approval for the REIL project of 200 EV charging stations included a condition 
for having a suitable revenue model to self-sustain the charging installations. REIL had 
entered into MoUs with charging station site owners (i.e. HPCL, IOCL and BPCL) in 
which it was envisaged that site owners would develop a revenue sharing model.  
Audit observed that there was no revenue model operational in any of the charging 
stations. There were no records with REIL or the Ministry relating to fixation of user 
charges. As such, the facility operators/site owners had no clarity regarding the amount 
and procedure for levy and collection of user charges from charging station users.  
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that the land owners’ scope of work included taking 
electricity connection for powering up the EV chargers; operation and maintenance; 
revenue generation; safety and security of the EV chargers etc. REIL had handed over the 
EV chargers to the landowners for day-to-day operation and maintenance. The 
landowners’ revenue was very less due to very low utilisation of the EV charging 
infrastructure. 
It is evident from the reply that no initiative had been taken for development of a revenue 
model or fixation of user charges for charging stations. 
4.5 Audit findings relating to Phase-II of the Scheme 
The audit findings pertaining to creation of charging infrastructure during Phase-II of the 
Scheme have been discussed in the succeeding sub-paragraphs: 
4.5.1 Negligible progress of projects 
A summary of the implementation of charging station projects in Phase-II is presented in 
the table below: 
  

38
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
38 
 
 
Table 16: Summary of Implementation of Charging Infrastructure Projects 
Project Name No. of 
charging 
stations 
Amount 
released 
(₹ crore) 
Audit observation 
Cities 2,877 21.96 • 148 out of 2,877 charging stations were 
commissioned 
• Remaining charging stations were cancelled 
• Extension was granted (September 2024) to 
REIL and Energy Efficiency Services Limited 
(EESL) up to 31 March 2025 
Highways and 
Expressways 
1,576 - • All charging stations were cancelled 
Oil Marketing 
Companies 
(Ministry of 
Petroleum and 
Natural Gas) 
8,412 611.45 • None of the charging stations were 
commissioned as on stipulated completion date 
of 31 March 2024. 
• PISC extended (February 2024) the stipulated 
date for commissioning till December 2024.  
• 4,523 charging stations were installed (1 
January 2025) while none of them was 
commissioned. 
Audit observations regarding the “Cities” and “Highways and Expressways” projects are 
discussed in the sub-paragraphs below. 
4.5.1.1    ‘Cities’ Project 
Out of a total of 2,877 charging stations (20 implementing agencies) approved by PISC, 
only four implementing agencies commissioned a total of 148 charging stations (May 
2023). This comprised of 67 charging stations commissioned by Energy Efficiency 
Services Limited (EESL), 30 charging stations by Kerala State Electricity Board (KSEB), 
50 charging stations by State Municipal Corporations and one charging station by Power 
Grid Corporation of India Limited (PGCIL). 
Audit examined records of two implementing agencies, viz. EESL and REIL. 
Implementation details of these two agencies are presented in the table below: 
Table 17: Implementation by EESL and REIL in Phase II 
Name of 
Implementing 
Agency 
No. of charging 
stations 
approved by 
PISC 
No. of charging 
stations 
awarded by 
Ministry 
Scheduled date 
for completion 
of Project 
Charging 
stations 
commissioned  
EESL 669 384 June 2021 67 
REIL 1,061 730 June 2021 Nil 
The Ministry cancelled (March - July 2023) remaining 317 charging stations awarded to 
EESL and all the charging stations awarded to REIL, and asked EESL and REIL to 
refund ₹6.27 crore and ₹8.15 crore respectively with interest at the rate of 10 per cent per 
annum.  

39
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
39 
 
 
EESL cited (November 2023) COVID-19-induced intermittent lockdowns, issues relating 
to installation and upgradation of upstream electrical infrastructure (transformer 
augmentation, cable laying, etc.) including costs associated with such infrastructure, 
availability of land, other land-related approval issues, electricity tariff for charging 
stations as reasons for the delay.  
REIL replied (July 2023) that it had installed 49 charging stations and commissioned four 
charging stations, but further work could not be executed due to delay in signing revenue 
sharing agreement, electrical connection, high initial investment for electrical 
infrastructure, etc.  
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that both organisations (EESL and REIL) now 
asserted their readiness to implement the project and demonstrated their commitment and 
capability. The Ministry allowed (Mar-Sep 2024) EESL and REIL to establish 30 and 222 
charging stations respectively by 31 March 2025. As such, the refund amount of ₹14.42 
crore was not payable by them. 
The reply may be viewed in light of the fact that cancellation of projects before granting 
extension till 31 March 2025 had the effect of further delaying the establishment of 
charging infrastructure.  
Thus, adequate charging infrastructure could not be created within the Scheme period to 
instill confidence among EV users, as envisaged in the Scheme.  
4.5.1.2     ‘Highways and Expressways’ Project 
The Ministry cancelled this project in July 2023 as there was negligible progress in 
installation/ commissioning of charging stations under this project. This not only resulted 
in failure to establish charging infrastructure for electric vehicles, but also meant that the 
objective of alleviating the uncertainty regarding availability of adequate charging 
stations and instilling confidence amongst the users of electric vehicles could not be 
achieved. 
The Ministry cited (February 2025) lack of adequate electrical infrastructure, including 
necessary transformer upgrades and cable laying, low utilisation rates deterring 
investment, COVID-19, etc. as reasons for non-installation of electric vehicle chargers on 
highways and expressways. Further, since very poor progress on the project was made 
and no further improvement was expected, the funds allocated were cancelled in July 
2023.  
4.5.2 Charger type and compatibility 
EoI for the ‘Cities’ and ‘Highways and Expressways’ projects envisaged installation of 
various type of chargers. One of the specified chargers was CHAdeMO charger. 
Audit observed that at the time of approval of this charger by the Ministry, no vehicles 
having CHAdeMO chargers (50/100 kW) were plying in India. The CHAdeMO chargers 
(50/100 kW) required additional electrical load and related infrastructure with nil 
potential to generate any revenue for the implementing agencies. As such, the inclusion/ 

40
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
40 
 
 
installation of CHAdeMO charger in charging stations contributed to making the project 
commercially non-viable. 
Although this charger was removed (June 2022) in later projects approved under the 
Scheme, implementing agencies had already placed orders with suppliers and delivery of 
chargers had also taken place in a few cases (e.g. EESL had placed orders for 696 combo 
chargers24 with CHAdeMO fast chargers, and supplied/installed/prepared commissioning 
of 148 such chargers;  REIL placed orders for 481 combo chargers with CHAdeMO fast 
chargers and received deliveries for 155 chargers under the ‘Cities’ project). 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that the passenger car segment was dominated by 
Japanese manufacturers, and they were expected to introduce electric vehicles with the 
CHAdeMO charger in India. However, Japanese vehicle manufacturers in India did not 
introduce any such electric vehicle model. Further, it was also stated in Exit Conference 
(February 2025) that later in 8 th meeting of the PISC held in May 2023, CHAdeMO was 
removed as a compulsory charger for release of subsidy under the Scheme. 
Thus, even after release of funds amounting to ₹10.37 crore 25 towards CHAdeMO 
chargers under Phase-I and Phase-II and incurring of expenditure thereon, these chargers 
could not be utilised.  
4.5.3 Status of charging stations – Joint physical inspection 
Audit team and designated officials 26 of implementing agencies i.e. BHEL, EESL and 
REIL, jointly inspected (February - July 2023) 104 charging stations/chargers (BHEL: 20, 
REIL:72 and EESL:12) including 25 solar plants installed at such charging stations. 
Additionally, Audit also collected data relating to solar plants installed at 20 other 
locations. Audit observations are discussed below: 
4.5.3.1    Joint inspection of chargers/charging stations  
Audit observations noticed during joint physical inspection of charging stations/chargers 
are presented in table below:  
Table 18:  Observations on Charging Stations 
Particulars Observations on 
charging stations 
BHEL REIL EESL Total 
No. No. No. No. % 
Charging stations 
jointly inspected 
20 72 12 104 100 
Non-
functional 
Chargers not installed at 
site 
0 2 0 2 1.92 
 
24  Including quantity variation of +/-20 per cent 
25  Worked out in proportion of load of CHadeMO chargers (50KW/60 KW) in the overall load of combo 
chargers (122 KW/142 KW) 
26  Sr. Engineer (in case of REIL), Additional General Manager (in case of BHEL) and Engineer (in 
case of EESL) 

41
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
41 
 
 
Charging 
Stations 
Chargers removed from 
Site (Not traceable) 
1 (0) 19 (8) 0 (0) 20 19.23 
Charging stations not 
powered/could not be 
switched on 
6 32 0 38 36.54 
Total 7 53 0 60 57.69 
Other Issues No awareness about 
service charges leviable 
20 70 NA 90 86.54 
Staff/facility owner not 
aware of the EV charging 
procedure 
1 62 NA 63 60.58 
CMS non-functional 17 72 0 89 85.58 
Premises had commercial 
electricity connection on 
existing load 
19 70 8 97 93.27 
Signboards/monoliths not 
installed 
13 62 10 85 81.73 
Vandalism to occupy 
parking space designated 
for EV charging 
0 0 3 3 2.88 
Damaged chargers 0 3 0 3 2.88 
Payment of parking 
charges was required in 
addition to service 
charges 
0 9 1 10 9.62 
Car chargers installed at 
parking designated for 
two-wheelers 
0 0 2 2 1.92 
Some of the photographs of jointly inspected charging stations/chargers are shown below: 
 
 
Picture 1: Dwarka, Sector-10, Metro parking 
Chargers removed from installation site and kept in storage 


42
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
42 
 
 
 
  
Picture 2: Sawhney Automobiles, Solan, Himachal Pradesh 
Chargers removed from installation site            
 
  
Picture 3: Shiv Filling Station, Solan, Himachal Pradesh 
Chargers removed from installation site            
       
 
Picture 4: Charging station vandalised in order to occupy parking space designated 
for EV charging 
     


43
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
43 
 
 
 
Picture 5: EV Parking Space Occupied 
With regard to parking charges levied on the users, EESL replied (January 2025) that they 
have addressed the issue through land-owners for parking charges levied upon the EV 
users. 
In respect of the charging stations not installed or not powered, the Ministry, while 
endorsing REIL’s response, stated (February 2025) that REIL shifted 2 numbers of EV 
chargers to new locations due to administrative reasons. Land-owner agreed to 
compensate reasonable residual value of seven missing EV chargers. All EV chargers 
were powered with the existing connection and handed over to the landowner. The 
chargers were to be operated at service charges decided by the State nodal agency. 
Training was provided at the time of commissioning.  
In respect of the other deficiencies noticed during joint inspection, the Ministry, while 
endorsing BHEL’s response, stated (February 2025) that CMS was not functional due to 
its non-configuration with the EV chargers. Utilisation being very low, land-owners did 
not invest in the separate electricity connection due to fixed charges and low return on 
investment. Responsibility of safety and security of the EV chargers lied with the 
landowners. The chargers were to be operated at service charges decided by the State 
nodal agency. 
Audit acknowledges the response of the Ministry. However, the fact remains that 
proposals for setting up charging stations were presented and approved without 
ascertaining feasibility. BHEL and REIL commissioned all charging stations without 
ensuring adequate load and load enhancement. Inadequate electricity load was bound to 
have discouraged facility operators from operating chargers.  
4.5.3.2    Joint inspection of solar plants 
Results of joint inspection of 20 charging stations of BHEL and five charging stations of 
REIL (covered in audit sample) having solar plants and analysis of similar data for 20 
other solar plants of REIL are discussed below. 
 


44
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
44 
 
 
(i) Solar plants of BHEL 
Out of a total of 20 solar plants of BHEL, solar plants with a total capacity of 49 kW in 
four locations were non-functional while in one location, solar plant with 20 kW capacity 
started generating electricity27 during the period of joint inspection. The power generation 
efficiency of solar plants at the remaining 15 grid-connected solar charging stations 
ranged between 3.25 per cent to 89.22 per cent. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that efficiency of solar plant depends on various 
factors such as sunny weather, formation of shadow of nearby objects (if any), proper and 
regular cleaning of solar modules. The site owning agencies (HPCL, IOCL and HTCL) 
were responsible for proper operation and maintenance of the charging stations including 
solar plant. This aspect was also intimated to staff of the site-owning agencies during on-
site training. 
(ii) Solar plants of REIL 
REIL had reported commissioning of all 25 grid-connected solar charging stations. 
However, Audit found that solar plants at 14 charging stations (including two locations 
where chargers and solar plants/systems were dismantled and put aside) were not actually 
commissioned.  
Further, Audit observed that the power generating efficiency 28 of solar plants at the 
remaining 11 grid-connected solar charging stations was as follows: 
 Two solar plants were operating at negligible efficiency of 0.83 per cent and 4.02 
per cent. 
 Five solar plants were operating at efficiency between 50 per cent and 75 per cent.  
 Four solar plants were operating at efficiency between 75 per cent and 93 per cent 
The Ministry, while endorsing REIL’s response, replied (February 2025) that at the time 
of installation, all EV chargers were powered with the existing connection and handed 
over to the land owners. Due to low utilisation and to avoid minimum charges and penalty 
for providing power/load enhancement/separate electricity connection to the EV charger, 
the landowner was reluctant to take the separate electricity connection/load enhancement. 
REIL stated that 17 out of 25 power plants had been commissioned (January 2025). 
Landowners at remaining locations applied for net metering connection and the release of 
net metering connection was under process by DISCOM. REIL was pursuing with the 
landowners for commissioning of the solar plants at the earliest. 
4.5.3.3    Utilisation of charging stations  
The status of utilisation of charging stations for which joint physical inspection was 
conducted is shown in the table below: 
 
27  The solar plant (IOCL Petrol Pump, Sukhmani) of 20 kW capacity generated 15 kWh till 3:30 PM on 
a full sunny day. 
28  Calculated as a percentage of number of units actually generated by the solar plant to the number of 
units that should have been generated.  

45
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
45 
 
 
Table 19: Utilisation of charging stations 
(No. of charging stations) 
Status REIL 
(72) 
BHEL 
(20) 
EESL  
(12) 
No vehicle charged 43 6 0 
Chargers were removed from site 19 0 0 
Information on vehicles charged not available 10 0 0 
Charging recorded 0 14 12 
Amount collected (in ₹) 0 8,854 18,38,500 
The Ministry, while endorsing responses of BHEL and REIL, replied (February 2025) 
that chargers were handed over to the respective authorities/owners of properties for 
further operation and maintenance, according to PISC approval. Utilisation of EV 
chargers depends upon availability and adoption of EVs in the area, proper operation, and 
maintenance of chargers. Further, the less utilisation of EV charger may be due to low EV 
density. 
The reply may be seen in the context that numerous issues adversely impacting the use of 
charging stations were observed during the joint physical inspection, such as chargers not 
being powered, inadequate sanctioned load, non-functional CMS, chargers removed from 
installation site, etc.  
Audit, however, appreciates the utilisation of charging stations commissioned by EESL 
which also resulted in earning of revenue. 
4.6 Summing up 
Audit observed that the Ministry did not have a roadmap during both Phases of the 
Scheme for addressing lack of adequate public charging infrastructure which was a key 
barrier to the large scale adoption of Electric Vehicles (EVs).  
During Phase I, 497 out of a total of 539 charging stations were commissioned. However, 
in Phase II, 148 out of a total of 2,877 (5 per cent)  charging stations approved under 
‘Cities’ project were commissioned while remaining charging stations of the ‘Cities’ 
project and all 1,576 charging stations approved under ‘Highways and Expressways’ were 
cancelled due to no/negligible progress. Subsequently, the Ministry allowed REIL and 
EESL to commission 222 and 30 charging stations of the ‘Cities’ project. Negligible 
progress in Phase II was attributed to non-viability of projects and reluctance on the part 
of implementing agencies due to high cost of upstream infrastructure. Also, the Ministry 
awarded 8,412 charging stations to three Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs). However, 
the OMCs did not commission any charging station as of March 2024.  
Joint physical inspection of charging stations brought out deficiencies such as 
commissioning of charging stations without ensuring adequate load/electricity connection 
under EV tariff; instances of non-installation of chargers; charging stations found 
disconnected from power source or connected without adequate sanctioned load; chargers 

46
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
46 
 
 
removed from installation site, damaged chargers; non-awareness of staff at EV charging 
stations, etc. 
Audit appreciates the revenue earnings made by EESL from the utilisation of charging 
infrastructure created and utilised under the Scheme and recommends the replication of 
this revenue model. 
Recommendations: 
1) The Ministry may consider instituting an integrated and outcome-oriented 
framework for planning, installation, and operation of EV charging infrastructure so 
as to address the systemic issues relating to non-installation, delays in commissioning, 
non-functioning of charging infrastructure, and lack of commercial viability. This may 
be done through a clearly designated nodal agency with end-to-end accountability, 
2) A comprehensive approach may be adopted encompassing (i) identification and 
development of strategically located charging sites, including intra-city urban areas 
and inter-city highways/expressways, through geospatial planning with prior 
convergence and formal agreements with land-owning agencies; (ii) establishment of a 
single-window, time-bound mechanism for according all statutory clearances and 
ensuring parallel processing of approvals; and (iii) advance creation and augmentation 
of requisite electrical infrastructure, including transformers and cabling, by DISCOMs 
to enable plug-and-play deployment. 
3) The Ministry may prescribe standardised concession agreements, a transparent and 
viable tariff framework, and clear guidelines for levy and collection of user charges, so 
as to provide commercial certainty to operators and landowners. Mandatory integration 
of all charging stations with a functional Central Management System may also be 
ensured for real-time monitoring, interoperability, and improved utilisation.  
4) A robust mechanism for operation and maintenance, including capacity building of 
site personnel, installation of adequate signage, and periodic performance audits of 
assets such as solar plants and charging equipment, may be instituted to ensure 
sustained functionality. The Ministry may also delineate accountability across 
implementing agencies, including Oil Marketing Companies and retail operators, 
through clearly defined roles, milestones, and enforceable performance standards to 
ensure timely commissioning and effective utilisation of EV charging infrastructure. 
  

47
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
47 
 
 
Chapter-V 
Technology Development (R&D) 
The Technology Development (R&D) component under Phase-I of the FAME India 
Scheme was aimed at implementing R&D projects with collaboration between the 
Government, Industry and Academia. This collaborative effort was aimed at addressing 
the need for rapid development of electric mobility, making the market for electric 
vehicles self-sustaining, and upgrading automotive testing infrastructure for meeting the 
requirements of new regulations and standards. 
For implementation of the Technology Development (R&D) component, the Ministry of 
Heavy Industries and the Department of Science and Technology created (1 February 
2016) an Inter-Ministerial Technology Advisory Group (IM-TAG). IM-TAG was 
entrusted with the evaluation and recommendation of proposed R&D projects on electric 
mobility for further consideration and final approval by the Project Implementation and 
Sanctioning Committee (PISC). IM-TAG was also responsible for monitoring the 
approved R&D projects. 
5.1 Project approval process 
The process of sanction and approval of projects under the Technology Development 
(R&D) component involved the following steps: 
(i) Submission of proposal:  Proposal was submitted to the designated cell in the 
Ministry for Technology Development (R&D) projects. 
(ii) Evaluation and recommendation:  Proposal was evaluated by IM-TAG, which 
considered and recommended proposed projects. 
(iii) Approval: Recommendations of IM-TAG were considered by the Project 
Implementation and Sanctioning Committee (PISC) for final approval. 
(iv) Funding: After final approval, funding was provided to the projects by the 
Ministry. 
(v) Monitoring: IM-TAG monitored the progress of the approved projects and 
recommended mid-course corrections, premature closure of projects that ceased 
to be viable, additional funding where required, etc. 
In Phase-I of the Scheme, PISC approved a total of 16 projects (Annexure-VII). These 
projects had an aggregate cost of ₹266.12 crore, with the Ministry’s share of ₹179.86 
crore (68 per cent ) and the remaining share coming from the industry partner(s)/ 
academic institution (implementing agency). As of 31 March 2023, the Ministry had 
disbursed29 ₹149.70 crore towards these projects.  
The Technology Development (R&D) component was discontinued in Phase-II of the 
Scheme. However, the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
 
29 The remaining funds could not be released due to premature closure of projects, non-procurement of 
testing equipment in one project and cancellation of two projects 

48
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
48 
 
 
Industry observed30 (6 December 2021) that Phase-II of the FAME scheme was limited to 
subsidising EV purchases and charging infrastructure, and recommended that its scope 
could have been broadened to include funding/grants for development of EV components 
and R&D, development of components for charging infrastructure and capital 
subsidy/incentive for manufacturing of EV components. 
5.2 Audit findings 
The audit observations on the implementation of the Technology Development 
component of the FAME India Scheme are discussed below.  
5.2.1    Status of Technology Development projects 
Out of the 16 projects approved in Phase-I of the Scheme, nine projects had been 
completed as of March 2023. Of the remaining seven projects, four projects were closed, 
one project was cancelled, and two projects were still in progress (Annexure-VII). 
Audit observations in this regard are discussed in the sub-paragraphs below.  
5.2.1.1    Delay in completion of projects 
Technology Development/R&D projects had been sanctioned by PISC with defined 
objectives and time duration (ranging from six months to five years) during which the 
projects had to be completed. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that as of March 2023, out of nine projects completed by 
implementing agencies, eight projects were completed with delays ranging from one 
month to 24 months (Annexure-VIII) without any approval from PISC for extension of 
the timelines, as detailed below: 
Table 20: Delay in completion of projects 
Range of delay Number of Projects 
Less than 1 year 3 
1 to 2 years 2 
2 years or more 3 
For the remaining one project, the respective implementing agency obtained approval 
from the PISC for extension of the project duration. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that the agencies were informing about the status of 
the projects and fund utilisation statement. Thus, PISC had approved these projects and 
the Ministry had been monitoring the same as provided under the scheme. 
The reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact that the project completion was supposed 
to be within the timelines prescribed by PISC at the time of sanction. Non-obtaining of 
extension by implementing agencies indicated that adherence to timelines for project 
completion was not being adequately monitored by the Ministry. 
 
 
30 Report No. 309 on Electric & Hybrid Mobility – Prospects and Challenges in Automobile Industry 
pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries (6 December 2021) 

49
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
49 
 
 
5.2.1.2     Non-completion of projects 
Audit observed that the following two projects were still ongoing as of March 2023, 
although the scheduled completion dates had elapsed: 
Table 21: Non-completed projects 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
project 
Name of the 
implementing 
agency 
Cost of  
project 
Share of 
Ministry 
Fund 
released by 
Ministry 
Scheduled 
completion 
of the 
project 
1. 
Technology Pilot 
for DC Charging 
Technologies for 
EV Bus. 
KKWIEER31 
Nasik, 
Maharashtra 
1.50 0.90 0.90 January 
2020 
2. 
Project for Centre 
for Battery 
Engineering 
IIT, Madras 23.30 17.20 10.64 March 
2023 
 
Extension in timeline had been given by the Ministry in the case of only one project, 
namely 'Project for Centre for Battery Engineering’, whereas the other project was still 
ongoing without having any extension from the Ministry. Non-completion of these 
projects indicate that their intended objectives remained unfulfilled. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) it was following up with the Project Implementing 
Organisations for closure of the projects and achieving fruitful outcomes.  
5.2.1.3      Premature closure of four projects 
Audit observed that the following four projects were prematurely closed: 
Table 22: Prematurely closed projects 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
project 
Implementi
ng agency 
Grant 
released by 
the Ministry 
Grant utilised 
by the 
Implementing 
agency 
Outstanding 
funds with the 
Implementing 
agency 
1 Centre for 
Advanced Research 
in Electrified 
Transportation 
(CARET) 
Aligarh 
Muslim 
University 
4.78 4.23 0.55 
2 Development of 
Vehicle-to-Grid 
enabled Charging 
Station Networks & 
Technologies 
IIT Delhi 5.42 2.91 2.51 
 
31 KK Wagh Institute of Engineering Education and Research 

50
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
50 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
project 
Implementi
ng agency 
Grant 
released by 
the Ministry 
Grant utilised 
by the 
Implementing 
agency 
Outstanding 
funds with the 
Implementing 
agency 
3 Synchronous 
Reluctance Motor 
Drive for Indian 
Electric Vehicle 
Applications. 
IIT Madras 0.56 0.40 IIT Madras 
refunded the 
remaining grant 
of ₹0.16 crore 
4 Test facility 
infrastructure for 
Electric Vehicle 
(EV) and Electric 
Vehicle Supply 
Equipment (EVSE) 
performance 
test/certification at 
three32 centers of 
NATRIP 
NATRIP
, 
Manesar 
73.00 46.63 NATRIP 
refunded the 
unutilised grant 
of ₹26.37 crore  
 Total 83.76 54.17  
Audit found that two projects (Sl. No. 1 & 2 above) were prematurely closed as the 
Ministry did not approve extension requests from the implementing agencies; and in one 
project (Sl. No. 3), the industry partner withdrew support during project execution leading 
the Implementing agency to close the project. As regards the project at Sl.No.4, NATRIP 
vide order dated December 2023 informed its centres that the project could not be 
completed owing to various restrictions amid Covid 19 pandemic protocol. NATRIP 
further decided to financially close the project and has refunded ₹26.37 crore to the 
Ministry in January 2024. 
In this regard, it may be highlighted that IM-TAG was responsible for recommending 
mid-course corrections, short-closure of projects that ceased to be viable, adding or 
removing members from project consortia, etc. However, Audit observed that these 
projects had not been put up before IM-TAG for review, suggestions, mid-course 
corrections, etc. indicating inadequate monitoring. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that in research activities, the stated objectives are 
not always met due to unforeseen reasons. Considerable research had been done in these 
projects. However, they had to be closed when found unviable, or an industry member 
withdrew from the project. Further, the Covid 19 pandemic exacerbated the challenges. 
IIT Delhi has refunded ₹2.67 crore on 15 March 2024 while in case of AMU the process 
of recovery has been initiated. 
 
 
32 Three centres of NATRiP are: International Centre for Automotive Technology (ICAT), Manesar 
Global Automotive Research Centre (GARC), Chennai and National Automotive Test Track 
(NATRAX), Indore. 

51
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
51 
 
 
The reply was, however, silent on the monitoring of progress of these projects. With 
timely monitoring, the feasibility of the projects and the intent of the industry partner 
could have been identified at an early stage. This would have allowed for timely remedial 
action rather than continuing with the project.  
5.2.2 Non-signing of MOUs with the Implementing Agencies 
The Ministry issued (November 2017) a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for the 
R&D projects sanctioned under Phase-I of FAME India scheme. As per the SOP, a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was required to be drawn up between the 
Ministry and the academic institution/implementing agency elaborating the project 
objectives, scope, deliverables, roles and responsibilities of implementing agencies, 
monitoring mechanism, etc. to facilitate expeditious progress of the projects. 
However, Audit observed that in the following four projects, towards which the Ministry 
had contributed a total grant of ₹13.08 crore, no formal MoU was entered into with the 
implementing agencies: 
Table 23: Non signing of MoU with MHI 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the project Implementing 
agency 
Cost of 
project 
Share of 
Ministry 
Funds 
released by 
Ministry 
1. Development and 
prototyping of ICT 
enabled smart charging 
network components 
IIT Delhi 10.02 5.98 5.42 
2. Synchronous Reluctance 
Motor Drive for Indian 
Electric Vehicle 
Applications. 
IIT Madras 2.61 1.69 0.56 
3. HUB and SPOKE 
consortium for e-2-
wheelers and e-3-
wheelers Electric Drives. 
Non-Ferrous 
Materials 
Technology 
Development 
Centre (NFTDC), 
Hyderabad 
3.03 2.32 2.32 
4. Centre for Advanced 
Research in Electrified 
Transportation (CARET) 
Aligarh Muslim 
University 
(AMU) 
7.23 5.98 4.78 
    Total 13.08 
In two of these projects (Sl. Nos. 1 and 2 above), the implementing agencies (IIT Delhi 
and IIT Madras) had sent draft MoUs to the Ministry for approval. However, no response 
was received from the Ministry. As for the third project (Sl. No. 3), the implementing 
agency (NFTDC, Hyderabad) did not initiate any draft MoU for consideration of the 
Ministry. Reasons for non-signing of MoU in case of the fourth project were not available 
on records. 

52
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
52 
 
 
Non-signing of MoUs resulted in lack of clarity regarding the roles and responsibilities of 
stakeholders, and inadequate oversight and monitoring. Further, three out of the four 
projects (Sl. No. 1, 2 and 4) were closed prematurely. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that the Ministry regularly monitored the progress 
of the projects so that the projects met the intended outcomes. Further, PISC was notified 
as the apex body, which would review the projects and would remove any difficulties in 
execution of the same and therefore the projects were reviewed by PISC from time to 
time.  
The reply was, however, silent on the reasons for non-signing of MoUs which was 
required as per the SOP issued by the Ministry.  
5.2.3 Monitoring of projects 
An Inter-Ministerial Technology Advisory Group (IM-TAG) on electric mobility was 
constituted on 1 February 2016 under the joint supervision of the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries and the Department of Science and Technology. IM-TAG was required to 
recommend mid-course corrections, short-closure of projects that ceased to be viable, 
additional funding where required, addition/removal of members from consortia projects, 
etc. Further, projects were to be considered completed or closed based on decision of IM-
TAG. As per the records/information provided by the Ministry, two meetings  of IM-TAG 
were held (March 2016 and March 2017) under Phase-I.  
Subsequently, on 18 February 2022, the Ministry constituted a Project Review and 
Monitoring Committee (PRMC) under the chairmanship of Director, ARAI for 
monitoring as well as smooth, timely and successful execution of R&D Projects. 
The Ministry had approved 16 Technology Development projects during the period from 
May 2015 to January 2019, allocating total assistance of ₹179.86 crore. Given the fact 
that most of the projects were either completed belatedly or closed prematurely, timely 
constitution of PRMC could have played a role in removing obstacles and streamlining 
the processes for project completion. Further, PRMC was required to meet at least once 
every three months. It was observed that PRMC had met three times 33 during the period 
from March 2022 to March 2023.  
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that as on 14 February 2025, five meetings of 
PRMC had been held. PRMC reviewed the outcomes achieved, prototypes developed, 
testing and validation activities carried out, grants utilised, reasons for delay, knowledge 
sharing carried out in terms of number of papers published, persons trained, etc. At its 
meeting held on 12 February 2025, the PRMC had recommended closure of all the 
remaining projects.  
Audit acknowledges the significance of PRMC’s role in monitoring of projects. However, 
timely constitution of PRMC was crucial for early identification of issues and risks which 
would have enabled removal of obstacles and completion of projects in time.  
 
33 One meeting was held in March 2022 and two meetings in May 2022 

53
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
53 
 
 
5.3 Summing up 
Technology Development component was a key element of the FAME India Scheme 
aimed at making EVs market self-sustaining. Audit observed that MHI undertook 16 
projects during Phase-I. Out of 16 projects, four projects were closed prematurely and 
two projects were still not completed. The Ministry also did not sign Memoranda of 
Understanding with the Implementing Agencies of four projects which resulted in lack of 
clarity regarding their roles and responsibilities, and inadequate oversight and monitoring. 
Recommendation: 
1) The Ministry may identify the constraints leading to non-completion/pre-mature 
closure of R&D projects and take necessary remedial actions to ensure that such 
projects reach their logical conclusion by the respective implementing agencies in 
respect of deliverables of projects and utilisation of funds released to them under the 
Scheme. 
  

54
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
54 
 
 
Chapter-VI 
IEC, Financial Management and Convergence 
 
6.1    Information, Education and Communication  
The FAME India Scheme also had a component viz. Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) in both the phases of the Scheme. Under this component, an 
extensive IEC programme was supposed to be undertaken to create awareness and 
promotion of the Scheme through education and training, publicity, organisation of 
business meets/ seminars/ conferences/ symposia, etc. jointly by the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries, voluntary organisations, etc. According to the National Electric Mobility 
Mission Plan (NEMMP) 2020, one of the significant barriers to larger and faster adoption 
of electric mobility was consumer non-acceptability due to low consumer awareness.  
During Phase I of the Scheme, amount of ₹10 crore was allocated for the IEC component 
out of the total budgetary allocation of ₹795 crore 34. In Phase II, amount of ₹38 crore 35 
was allocated out of the total budgetary allocation of ₹10,000 crore. Scrutiny of records 
revealed that out of the allocated fund of ₹10 crore in Phase I, the Ministry utilised only 
₹86 lakh i.e. 8.6 per cent. During Phase II, the Ministry utilised only ₹6.66 crore (17.52 
per cent as of March 2023) out of the total allocated fund of ₹38 crore. 
Moreover, as per Scheme guidelines, the Ministry was required to implement a suitable 
IEC program for creating consumer awareness and promotion of the Scheme. However, 
the Ministry did not devise any policy/action plan in this regard and conducted these 
activities on ad-hoc basis. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that at the time of launch of Phase-I, the EV 
industry faced significant challenges, including low consumer awareness. Therefore, the 
Ministry undertook IEC activities based on industry feedback and expert inputs. As a 
result, ₹86 lakh was utilised reflecting the nascent state of the industry. With Phase-II, the 
EV ecosystem matured, necessitating a greater emphasis on consumer awareness and 
stakeholder engagement. The IEC budget under Phase-II was increased to ₹38 crore. By 
31 December 2024, ₹22 crore (58  per cent  of the allocated funds) had already been 
utilised, demonstrating structured approach to public awareness and industry 
participation.  
6.2 Financial Management 
Audit findings relating to financial management under the Scheme are discussed in 
succeeding sub-paragraphs: 
6.2.1 Budgeting under the Scheme 
Planning and budgeting are crucial for effective public expenditure management. The 
budget serves as the primary tool for ensuring the efficient delivery of public services. By 
 
34 Budget allocation of Phase-I was enhanced by ₹100 crore in November 2018. 
35 During Phase-II of the Scheme, IEC component also included administrative expenditure 

55
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
55 
 
 
enabling sound financial management, it helps translate policy decisions into successful 
administrative actions.  
Audit observed following discrepancies in budgeting during both phases of the Scheme as 
discussed below: 
(i) Phase-I: 
The Ministry of Heavy Industries notified Phase-I of the Scheme on 13 March 2015 for 
implementation in FY 2015-16 and 2016-17 with an outlay of ₹795 crore. Subsequently, 
the implementation period was extended till 2018-19.  
Audit observed that from 2015-16 to 2017-18, the Ministry incurred expenditure of only 
₹384 crore i.e. 48 per cent  of the initial outlay. Despite less utilisation, the Ministry 
increased the Scheme's outlay by ₹100 crore to ₹895 crore in November 2018 without 
providing a component-wise allocation for the additional funds.  Due to non-utilisation of 
funds, the Ministry carried forward ₹366 crore as committed expenditure of Phase-I to 
Phase-II of the Scheme. However, an amount of ₹36.27 crore still remained unutilised as 
of March 2023 i.e, even after four years of the scheduled completion of Phase-I.  
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that at the time of launch of Phase-I, the EV 
industry was still in its infancy. Due to evolving nature of the industry, the competent 
authority approved this extension beyond its initial two-year timeframe leading to Phase-I 
spanning from 2015-16 to 2018-19.  
The reply did not address the issue of budgeting during Phase-I of the Scheme. 
(ii) Phase-II 
The Ministry notified Phase-II of the Scheme vide notification dated 8 March 2019. 
Phase-II initially envisaged for a period of three years, i.e. from 2019-20 to 2021-22, was 
later extended to March 2024. The outlay of the scheme was ₹10,000 crore (including 
committed expenditure of ₹366 crore from Phase-I of the Scheme), which was enhanced 
to ₹11,500 crore in October 2023.  
The main component of the Scheme was demand incentive for which ₹8,596 crore (86 
per cent  of total outlay) was allocated. Out of the allocated amount, ₹2,000 crore was 
designated for e-2-wheelers, ₹2,500 crore for e-3-wheelers, ₹551 crore for e-4-wheelers, 
and ₹3,545 crore for e-buses. The table below provides the percentage of disbursement of 
demand incentive for each category as of March 2023. 
Table 24: Category-wise Allocation and Utilisation of funds 
(₹ in crore) 
Category Allocated funds Utilised funds as of 
March 2023 
Percentage of total 
allocated fund disbursed 
e-2W 2,000 2,549 127% 
e-3W 2,500 408 16% 
e-4W 551 156 28% 
e-Buses 3,545 1,181 33% 

56
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
56 
 
 
As can be seen from the table above, during the period 2019-20 to 2022-23, the Ministry 
could disburse only 16 per cent and 28 per cent of allocated demand incentive for e-3-
wheelers and e-4-wheelers respectively, whereas for e-2-wheelers, the Ministry disbursed 
more than allocated fund (127 per cent).  
In May 2023, PISC (8 th Meeting) decided to reallocate the funds between different 
heads/segment of electric vehicles. Revised allocation of funds is given in the table 
below: 
Table 25: Category wise revised Allocation  
(₹ in crore) 
Category Allocated fund Revised allocation  Percentage change in 
allocation 
e-2-wheelers 2,000 3,500 75% 
e-3-wheelers 2,500 700 (-)72% 
e-4-wheelers 551 250 (-)54% 
e-Buses 3,545 4307 21% 
As shown in the table above, while the allocation for e-2-wheelers was increased by 75 
per cent, allocation for e-3-wheelers and e-4-wheelers decreased by 72 per cent and 54 
per cent respectively. 
This situation highlights deficiencies in budgeting and planning, indicating that the initial 
financial projections for the Scheme were not realistic. The persistent underutilisation of 
allocated funds undermines the effectiveness of budget planning and execution within the 
Ministry. Additionally, these changes in the budget at the fag end (May 2023) of the 
Scheme period raise concerns about the overall effectiveness of the demand incentive 
programme. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that by December 2024, 93 per cent  of total 
demand incentive outlay had been processed, ensuring that scheme objectives were met 
efficiently. The budgetary changes were made because the Scheme evolved based on real-
world adoption, ensuring that funds were directed towards segments with maximum 
impact; the sharp rise in e-2-wheelers adoption required increased allocation, while e-3-
wheelers and e-4-wheelers adoption lagged due to infrastructure gaps and market 
hesitancy; and Phase-II's flexibility allowed course correction based on historic EV sales 
data and stakeholder feedback. 
Although the underutilisation of allocated funds and subsequent reallocation of funds 
were indicative of lack of effective budgeting, Audit appreciates the course correction 
made by the Ministry through this reallocation of funds. 
6.2.2 Non-maintenance of separate bank accounts by Implementing Agencies 
According to the sanction orders issued by the Ministry, implementing agencies were 
required to maintain a separate bank account for the grants released. 

57
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
57 
 
 
Scrutiny of records revealed that in contravention of the above provision of sanction 
orders, following seven agencies did not maintain any separate bank account for the grant 
received from the Ministry under the Scheme.  
 
Table 26: Non maintenance of separate Bank accounts 
                   (₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of agency Name of component 
of the Scheme 
Name of the project Grant 
released 
1. West Bengal Transport 
Corporation, Kolkata 
Demand incentive  
(e-buses)  
Deployment of 80 e-
buses in Phase I 
43.00 
2. Nagpur Municipal 
Corporation, Nagpur 
Demand incentive  
(e-buses) 
Deployment of 40 e-
buses in Phase II 
10.80 
3. Indian Institute of 
Technology (IIT), 
Delhi 
Technology 
Development 
Development of 
Vehicle-to-Grid 
enabled Charging 
Station Networks & 
Technologies 
5.42 
4. Aligarh Muslim 
University, Aligarh 
Technology 
Development  
Centre for Advanced 
Research in Electrified 
Transportation 
(CARET) 
4.78 
5. Non-Ferrous Materials 
Technology 
Development Center, 
Hyderabad 
Technology 
Development  
Project for advanced 
Gen-IV lead acid 
battery and Gen. 
Nickel-zinc battery for 
EVs 
4.00 
6. REIL, Jaipur Charging 
Infrastructure 
200 EV Charging 
Stations (EVCS) and 
270 EV Charging 
Stations  
31.35 
7. BHEL Charging 
Infrastructure 
Solar Based Charging 
Infrastructure 
0.50 
   Total  99.85 
Non maintenance of a separate bank account makes it difficult to ascertain the amount of 
interest earned on the funds. Further, it also complicates the process of verifying how the 
grants provided by the Ministry have been utilised, making it difficult to trace the 
expenditure accurately. 
While accepting (February 2025) the observation, the Ministry noted it for future 
compliance. 
6.3 Convergence/synergy among different agencies 
As per National Electric Mobility Mission Plan, 2020, the roll out of the xEV charging 
infrastructure, interventions and the various schemes was to be done through the National 
Automotive Board in partnership with the concerned infrastructure Ministries/ 

58
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
58 
 
 
Departments. Accordingly, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA), 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) and Ministry of Power (MoP) were 
to be actively involved along with the other stakeholder Central Government Ministries, 
State Governments/Union Territories, Local Governments, the automotive industry, 
Power and Oil marketing companies and the testing agencies. 
Audit observations in this regard are discussed in succeeding sub-paragraphs. 
6.3.1 Role of National Automotive Board 
The National Automotive Board (NAB) was established in August 2013 as an 
autonomous society. Key functions of NAB, inter alia, included the following:  
a) Issuance of homologation certificates based on testing reports submitted by the 
testing centres to ensure oversight and standardisation of testing procedures and 
remove conflict of interest in performance of two separate roles, namely testing 
and certification.  
b) Administer, monitor, coordinate, regulate and synergise the functioning of 
testing centres to ensure healthy competition amongst the centres, maintain the 
required quality of service being offered, and benchmark facilities so that there 
are optimum returns on the investment made by the Government. 
c) As Nodal Professional Agency, NAB was to 
 be repository of technical data, domain knowledge and expertise for auto 
policy related issues as also key automotive sector related ongoing and 
future initiatives of the Ministry of Heavy Industries and other Ministries 
like MoRTH and MoHUA; 
 provide the institutional framework and technical support to assist MoRTH 
in framing automotive sector regulations and activities. 
 facilitate collaborative R&D activities; 
 develop skill sets and competencies in automotive R&D and testing; and 
 prepare policies and carry out accreditation of test labs. 
Audit observed that NAB had not been able to effectively discharge the above mandated 
functions. For instance, issue of homologation certificates was one of the essential 
functions and mandate of NAB. However, NAB did not perform this function. Also, NAB 
did not coordinate with MoRTH and other Ministries for a comprehensive approach to 
promotion of electric vehicles in the country. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that given NAB’s relatively recent establishment, 
some of its broader mandates required time for structured implementation, including 
capacity building and expertise development. Presently, there was a shortage of 
manpower in NAB. The process of strengthening NAB was ongoing, and as the 
organisation developed further, it was expected to take on an expanded role in supporting 

59
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
59 
 
 
the automotive sector. Efforts were being made to ensure that NAB effectively fulfilled 
its intended mandate while complementing the existing automotive ecosystem.  
The reply may be seen in the context that more than 10 years had elapsed since the 
establishment of NAB. As such, NAB was required to be adequately equipped for 
carrying out its mandate. 
 6.3.2 Synergy in setting up charging infrastructure 
The Note for Expenditure Finance Committee in respect of Phase-I of the Scheme, inter-
alia, recognised requirement of regulatory amendments for commercial business of EV 
charging, metering, and billing methods, etc. As charging infrastructure was within the 
domain of Ministry of Power (MoP), charging stations in Phase-II were to be established 
as per the Ministry of Power notification (December 2018) on ‘Charging Infrastructure 
for Electric Vehicles-Guidelines and Standards’ as amended from time to time.     
MoP rolled out (December 2018) and revised (2019 and 2022) these guidelines for state 
level functionaries from time to time. As per the guidelines, the Bureau of Energy 
Efficiency (BEE) was the central nodal agency for roll out of EV public charging 
infrastructure. 
Development of charging infrastructure in terms of MoP guidelines required convergence 
amongst the Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI), MoP, implementing agencies, State 
Governments, Power distribution companies (DISCOMs), State Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions, etc. The Project Implementation and Sanctioning Committee (PISC), in its 
7th meeting, insisted on adherence to MoP guidelines by implementing agencies while 
implementing charging infrastructure projects.  
6.3.2.1    Electricity Tariff 
The revised consolidated guidelines and standards on ‘Charging Infrastructure for Electric 
Vehicles’ issued by MoP (January 2022) stipulate that the tariff for the supply of 
electricity to public EV charging stations was to be a single-part tariff (i.e. without any 
fixed charges) and shall not exceed the Average Cost of Supply (ACOS). The table below 
presents particulars of electricity tariffs prevailing in various States/UTs (April 2024):  
Table 27: Electricity Tariff for Public EV Charging Stations in 36 States/UTs 
Particulars No. of States/ UTs 
Single-part tariff up to ACOS 15 
Single-part tariff higher than ACOS  3 
Two-part tariff  15 
Tariff for EV Charging Stations not specified 3 
Total 36 
          (Source: BEE) 
As shown in the table above, out of 36 States/UTs, only 15 have notified a single-part 
tariff aligned with ACOS.  
Notifying tariff at higher than ACOS, two-part tariff or not notifying any tariff for EV 
charging stations had a cascading effect of increasing the service charges leviable for use 

60
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
60 
 
 
of EV charging facility by EV users. Energy Efficiency Services Limited (an 
implementing agency for charging infrastructure) also stated that not notifying tariff for 
EV charging stations or notifying a two-part tariff comprising monthly fixed charges and 
energy charges results in higher EV charging tariffs for end user. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that although fixation of power tariff, being a State 
subject, was regulated by the State Electricity Regulatory Commission (SERC), MoP had 
been revising the guidelines. The latest revision (September 2024) envisaged continuation of 
the single part tariff upto ACOS until March 2028.   
The fact remains that 21 out of 36 States/UTs have not notified single-part tariff upto 
ACOS which indicates lack of convergence at the level of State Government/UTs, for 
setting up of EV charging stations.  Consequently, the charging infrastructure operator 
would be required to pay fixed charges apart from energy charges. 
6.3.2.2    Electricity Connection 
MoP’s revised consolidated guidelines and standards on ‘Charging Infrastructure for 
Electric Vehicles’ (January 2022) stipulate the following: 
 The connection for a public charging station should be provided or modification to 
an already provided connection should be done within seven days in metro cities, 
15 days in other municipal areas and 30 days in rural areas.   
 Separate metering arrangement shall be made for public charging stations so that 
consumption may be recorded and billed as per applicable tariff for EV charging 
stations.  
Further, NITI Aayog’s Handbook for EV Charging Stations stipulates that if the 
sanctioned load of the existing connection is not sufficient, the owner of the host facility 
must apply to DISCOM for an increase in the sanctioned load. 
Audit observed that there were many instances where electricity connections with 
required load were not released to charging stations even after considerable period of 
time. It was also seen that out of 104 charging stations jointly inspected, there was no 
evidence of load enhancement in 91 charging stations while 99 stations did not have 
electricity connection on EV tariff.  
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that in the guidelines revised in September 2024, 
MoP included penalty for delayed connections in the Electricity Rules, 2020; reduced 
timelines for granting electricity connection (ranging from 3 days for metros to 90 days in 
cases where distribution mains or commissioning of new substations was required); need 
for separate metering even for consumers with lower tariff/kWh of electricity for solar 
and non-solar hours.  
While Audit appreciates above revisions in the MoP guidelines, enforcement of revisions 
needs to be monitored and followed up for making charging stations a viable business 
model and speeding up their establishment. 
   

61
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
61 
 
 
6.3.2.3     Database of Public Charging Stations 
Para 6.1 of revised MoP guidelines (January 2022) required the Bureau of Energy 
Efficiency (BEE) to create and maintain a national online database of public charging 
stations in consultation with the State Nodal Agencies (DISCOMS). 
Audit observed that the BEE’s database (EV Yatra mobile app) of public charging 
stations did not include the following: 
 charging stations installed and commissioned under Phase-I of the Scheme. 
 real time status of charging stations. 
 names and contact numbers of the contact person to enquire about availability of 
charging stations (in most cases); and 
 an interface for slot reservations. 
The non-inclusion of all charging stations established under the FAME India Scheme 
highlights lack of synergy and coordination between the BEE (MoP) and the Ministry of 
Heavy Industries. Further, lack of real-time information about chargers as well as 
charging facility for slot reservation in the mobile app undermined the benefits of having 
a mobile app/database of charging stations. 
BEE replied (April 2024) that data for Phase-I was not received from any agency. The 
complete features of the EV Yatra application were not functional due to filtering and 
security protocols on NIC server. Charge point operators were not mandated to report 
their data to BEE (Central Nodal Agency) or the State Nodal Agency. The provision for 
slot reservations was currently deactivated due to lack of mandate in the MoP guidelines. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that in the revised guidelines (September 2024), 
MoP emphasised the aspect of maintaining details of charging stations across the country. 
The revised guidelines, inter-alia, included provision of open Application Programming 
Interface (APIs) for third-party developers restricted to non-confidential information, for 
integrating value added services into the National database and advised charge point 
operators to adopt open communication standards/protocols for data sharing.  Further, the 
charging stations installed by public entities including those installed by OMCs had been 
onboarded on the portal.  
While Audit appreciates above revisions in the MoP guidelines and acknowledges the 
Ministry’s response, display of real time information relating to all public charging 
stations as also facility for slot reservation would also add value to the BEE’s mobile 
app/database of charging stations.  
  

62
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
62 
 
 
6.3.2.4    Role of State Nodal Agency and DISCOMs in implementation of projects 
Para 11.2 of MoP guidelines (January 2022) required every State Government to 
nominate a Nodal Agency (DISCOM/Central or State PSU etc.) to expedite the setting up 
of charging infrastructure and the State Nodal Agency (DISCOM), in turn, was to select 
the implementing agency for installation, operation and maintenance of charging stations 
for designated period. 
Audit observed that out of 28 States and 8 UTs, only 22 States and 5 UTs (Annexure-IX) 
had nominated (January 2022) their nodal agencies.  
Audit also observed that during implementation of the FAME India Scheme, the Ministry 
of Heavy Industries selected implementing agencies for establishment of charging 
infrastructure across the country under both the Phases of the Scheme. However, the 
implementing agencies were selected without consulting respective DISCOMs. Since 
major aspects, such as provision of upstream infrastructure, electrical connection under 
appropriate category, load enhancement, service charges, etc. come under the domain of 
respective DISCOMs, the non-involvement of DISCOMs resulted in impediments in 
targeted implementation of the projects.  
Although, it is a fact that the Ministry provided subsidy for installation of charging 
stations, successful implementation of projects needed coordinated efforts of the Ministry, 
implementing agencies, DISCOMs and other agencies (such as Central Electricity 
Authority, BEE, etc). It was observed that delay in commissioning of charging stations in 
Phase-II was mainly attributable to issues relating to electrical infrastructure development 
through DISCOMs, EV tariff connections approval, etc. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that MoP revised (September 2024) the guidelines 
to include the following requirements: 
 all relevant agencies, including electricity distribution companies (DISCOMs), the 
Central Electricity Authority (CEA), and State Government agencies were to 
cooperate and provide necessary support to the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) i.e. 
the BEE.  
 State Nodal Agency was responsible for coordinating with DISCOMs to facilitate 
electricity connections for public, community, workplace, and e-bus depot charging 
stations. 
 a State-level Steering Committee chaired by Secretary in-charge of Energy and 
comprising Secretaries of Transport, Municipal Administration and Urban 
Development, and such other members as required was to be constituted to plan and 
monitor the implementation of EV charging infrastructure at the State level.  
 
 

63
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
63 
 
 
 A Central Steering Committee chaired by the Additional Secretary of the Ministry 
of Power including members from relevant Ministries, representative from States, 
BEE and CEA was to review the implementation of these guidelines.  
The Ministry further stated that above framework was expected to alleviate the issues 
faced by the stakeholders and in ensuring faster setting up of EV public charging stations.  
While Audit appreciates the revisions (September 2024) in the MoP guidelines and 
acknowledges the response of the Ministry, the new framework needs to be effectively 
implemented to alleviate the issues faced in setting up of charging infrastructure.  
6.3.3 Synergy with the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
The FAME India Portal did not have an interface with the VAHAN/SARATHI portal of 
MoRTH to strengthen in-built controls and facilitate automatic verification of the EV 
details submitted by the OEMs. This lack of coordination between the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries (MHI) and MoRTH resulted in deficiencies in verification of EVs by MHI, and 
demand incentives being paid to OEMs for ineligible vehicles. 
The Ministry replied (February 2025) that initially, in Phase-I and Phase-II, claims were 
verified by calling for VAHAN data from MoRTH in MS-Excel files. The need for 
mapping arose as the quantitative EV sales grew in Phase-II. Application Programming 
Interface (API) integration of Phase-II portal with VAHAN took place from November 
2023.  
The reply may be seen in the context that the integration of the Portal took place only at 
the fag end of the Scheme. 
6.4 Summing up 
Information, Education, and Communication (IEC) was a critical component of the 
Scheme, given that low consumer awareness about electric vehicles (EVs) among existing 
and potential customers was a significant barrier. Out of the aggregate amount of ₹48 
crore allocated for IEC activities during Phase-I and Phase-II of the Scheme, the Ministry 
could utilise an amount of ₹7.52 crore for such activities.  
National Automotive Board did not effectively perform functions designated to it at the 
time of its establishment, viz. functioning as a nodal professional agency for automotive 
sector, issuance of homologation certificates, ensuring coordination amongst testing 
agencies, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) and other Ministries, etc. 
Successful implementation and performance of charging infrastructure, metering, billing 
etc. required convergence amongst various agencies including the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries, Ministry of Power (MoP), State Governments, DISCOMs, site owners, Oil 
 
 

64
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
64 
 
 
Marketing Companies, etc.  However, there is a scope for better synergy amongst various 
Ministries/ Government agencies. 
Recommendations: 
1) The Ministry may devise a comprehensive policy for creating consumer awareness 
including preparation of an annual plan. 
2) The Ministry may adequately equip National Automotive Board for carrying out its 
mandate of issuing homologation certificates and being a nodal professional agency 
for automotive sector-related efforts of the Government. 
3) The Ministry may consider setting up a coordination mechanism with representation 
from all stakeholders for ensuring synchronisation in the establishment of charging 
infrastructure. 
 (Anand Mohan Bajaj) 
New Delhi Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Dated: (Commercial and Report Central) 
 and Chairman, Audit Board 
Countersigned 
New Delhi (K. Sanjay Murthy) 
Dated:                Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
25 May 2026
27 May 2026

Annexures

67
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
67  
Annexure-I  
(Referred to in para 1.11) 
Engagement with various stakeholders  
Date Details of engagement with 
stakeholders 
Purpose 
28 July 2022 A workshop with various stakeholders of 
the FAME India scheme was held in 
Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI). 
Participants included representatives 
from MHI, Automobile Research 
Association of India (ARAI), 
Automotive Component Manufacturers 
Associations (ACMA) and Original 
Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) i.e. 
Tata Motors, Mahindra and Mahindra, 
Hero Electric etc. 
To understand the issues 
involved in 
implementation of FAME 
India scheme. 
09 September 
2022 
Meeting with NITI Aayog To have an insight into 
the role of NITI Aayog in 
relation to the FAME 
India scheme and 
discussion on various 
issues relating to e-
mobility in India 
17 October 
2022 
Workshop with Automotive Research 
Association of India, Pune 
To have an insight into 
EV testing mechanism 
and role of testing 
agencies in relation to the 
FAME India scheme. 
18 November 
2022 
Meeting with Society of Manufacturers 
of Electric Vehicles (SMEV) 
To have an insight into 
role of SMEV in electric 
mobility in India and 
FAME India scheme. 
01 December 
2022 
Meeting with Society of Indian 
Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM) 
To have an insight into 
role of SIAM in relation 
to the FAME India 
scheme. 
07 February 2023 Meeting with  Auto  Components  
Manufacturers Association (AMCA) 
To have an insight about 
their role in relation to 
the FAME India scheme. 
  

68
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
68 
 
Annexure-II  
(Referred to in para 2.1) 
Features of Demand Incentive component 
 Features of demand incentive component under Phase-I 
Under Phase-I of the scheme, the demand incentive  component had the following 
features: 
 Demand incentive was available for private and commercial electric 2-wheelers; 
electric 3-wheeler auto rickshaws; commercial electric 4-wheeler passenger 
vehicles; electric Light Commercial Vehicles; Buses and for retrofitment of 
commercial electric 4-wheeler vehicles. The rates of demand incentive for various 
categories of vehicles were specified under the Scheme. 
 Electric vehicles covered under Phase-I were Mild Hybrid 1 (excluded w.e.f. 1 April 
2017), Strong Hybrid 2, Plug-in Hybrid (PHEV) 3, and Pure Electric/Battery Electric 
Vehicle (BEV)4 technologies, which are collectively termed as xEVs. 
 Demand incentive was allowable for electric vehicles fitted with either conventional 
(lead-acid) batteries or advanced batteries (Lithium-ion battery and other new 
technology batteries). 
 Phase-I was initially restricted to smart cities, major metro agglomerations, State 
capitals, and other urban agglomerations/cities with one million plus population (as 
per 2011 census) and cities of the northeastern States. A revised notification was 
issued in June 2015 to extend the Scheme to all cities/areas without any 
geographical limitations in some of the States/UTs and to selected districts/cities in 
other States. Further, since 30 September 2015, the Scheme was made applicable to 
the whole of India in respect of electric and hybrid 2-wheelers and 3-wheelers.  
 Features of demand incentive component under Phase-II 
Under Phase-II of the Scheme, the demand incentive  component had the following 
features: 
 
1 Hybrid Electric Vehicle is a vehicle that for the purpose of mechanical propulsion draws energy from 
consumable fuel as well as Energy / power storage device (e.g. battery, capacitor, etc.). Mild Hybrid 
Electric Vehicle (Mild HEV) has a ‘Stop-Start’ arrangement, Electric Regenerative Braking System (a 
system, which during braking, provides for the conversion of vehicle kinetic energy into electrical 
energy) and a ‘Motor Assist’ (motor alone is not capable to propel the vehicle from a stationary 
condition). 
2 Strong Hybrid Electric Vehicle (Strong HEV) is a vehicle which has a ‘Stop-Start’ arrangement, 
‘Electric Regenerative Braking System’ and a ‘Motor Drive’ (motor alone is capable to propel the 
vehicle from a stationary condition). 
3 Plug-in HEV (PHEV)/ Range Extended Electric Vehicle (REEV) is a Strong HEV which has a 
provision for ‘Off Vehicle Charging’ (OVC) of ‘Rechargeable Energy Storage System (ReESS)’. 
4 Pure Electric/Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV) is a vehicle which is powered exclusively by an electric 
motor whose traction energy is supplied exclusively by traction battery installed in the vehicle and has 
an ‘Electric Regenerative Braking System’. 
36
37
38
39
39
3837
36

69
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
69  
 Uniform demand incentive at the rate of ₹10,000 per kWh for all categories of e-
vehicles, subject to review and revision by Project Implementation and Sanctioning 
Committee.  
 Amount of demand incentive was capped for all categories of e-vehicles at 20 per 
cent of ex-showroom price 5. The cap on demand incentive for e-2-wheelers was 
revised to 40 per cent of vehicle cost or ₹15,000 per kWh whichever is less in June 
2021 and was again decreased to 15 per cent of the ex-factory price6 or ₹10,000 per 
kWh whichever is less from 1 June 2023.  
 Vehicles covered included e-4-wheelers (including plug in Hybrid and strong 
Hybrid), e-3-wheelers (including registered e-rickshaws/e-carts) and e-2-wheelers. 
Restricted to e-vehicles fitted with advanced battery (Lithium-ion battery and other 
new technology batteries). 
 
  
 
5 Price of the vehicle including taxes 
6 Price of the vehicle at factory gate before applicable taxes  
40
41
40
41

70
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
70 
 
Annexure-III  
{Referred to in para 2.7 (ii)} 
Time Taken for settlement of demand incentive claims of OEMs 
 
Description 
of vehicle 
Range of days for settlement of 
claims 
Total incentive paid 
(₹ crore) 
e-2 wheelers 0 to 25 56.98 
26 to 50 548.69 
51 to 75 579.52 
76 to 100 277.29 
101 to 125 40.14 
126 to 149 3.37 
Total 1505.99 
e-3 wheelers 0 to 25 56.97 
26 to 50 128.96 
51 to 75 45.52 
76 to 100 25.65 
101 to 125 11.00 
126 to 150 3.99 
151 to 175 .01 
176 to 200 3.66 
201 to 225 .004 
226 to 250 0 
251 to 275 .01 
276 to 300 0 
301 to 325 0 
326 to 350 0 
351 to 375 0 
376 to 400 1.64 
Total 277.414 
e-4 wheelers 0 to 25 9.91 
26 to 50 37.57 
51 to 75 29.41 
76 to 100 13.63 
101 to 125 4.43 
Total 94.95 

71
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
71 
 
Annexure-IV 
(Referred to in para 2.10.2) 
Status of deployment of e-buses during Phase-I 
(₹ in crore) 
S. 
No. 
 
Name of State Transport 
Undertaking/ Municipal 
Corporation and City/State 
 
No. of 
buses 
sanctioned 
 
No. of 
buses 
deployed 
 
Grant 
sanctioned 
 
Grant 
utilised as on 
31 March 
2023 
 
1. West Bengal Transport 
Corporation (WBTC), 
Kolkata, West Bengal 
80 80 43.00  43.00 
2 Himachal Road Transport 
Corporation (HRTC), Shimla, 
Himachal Pradesh 
75 75 67.07 65.07 
3 Telangana State Road 
Transport Corporation 
(TSTRC), Hyderabad, 
Telangana 
40 40 44.00  44.00 
4 Brihanmumbai Electric 
Supply & Transport (BEST), 
Mumbai, Maharashtra 
40 40 29.52 29.52 
5 Atal Indore City Transport 
Service Ltd. (AICTSL), 
Indore, Madhya Pradesh 
40 40 19.77  19.77 
6 Urban Transport Directorate, 
Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 
40 40 19.77 19.77 
7 Jammu and Kashmir State 
Road Transport Corporation 
(JKSRTC), Jammu 
40 40 19.77  19.77 
8 Navi Mumbai Municipal 
Transport (NMMT), Navi 
Mumbai, Maharashtra 
30 30 14.83 14.83 
9 Mumbai Metropolitan Region 
Development Authority 
(MMRDA), Mumbai, 
Maharashtra 
25 25 15.25  15.25 
10 Assam State Transport 
Corporation (ASTC), 
Guwahati, Assam 
15 15 7.42 7.42 
Total 425 425 280.42  278.42 
  
 

72
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
72 
 
Annexure-V 
(Referred to in para 2.10.2) 
Status of deployment of e-buses through EoI during Phase-II (as of March 2023) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State Transport 
Undertaking and City/State 
Buses 
Allocated 
Buses 
delivered 
Funds 
sanctioned 
Total payment 
made 
1 Andhra Pradesh State Road 
Corporation (APSRC), 
Andhra Pradesh 
100 91 45 10.80 
2 Bihar State Road Transport 
Corporation, Bihar  
25 25 12.25 12.25 
3 Silvassa Smart City Ltd. 
(SSCL), Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
25 25 11.25 9.27 
4 Delhi Transport Corporation 
(DTC), Delhi 
300 300 165 99 
5 Delhi Metro Rail Corporation 
Ltd (DMRC), Delhi 
100 100 45 27 
6 Surat Municipal Corporation 
(SMC), Gujarat 
300 193 130.85 52.81 
7 Rajkot Rajpath Ltd (RRL), 
Gujarat 
150 50 64.68 16.89 
8 Ahmedabad Janmarg 
Limited, Gujarat 
150 150 67.5 67.5 
9 Gujarat State Road Transport 
Limited (GSRTCL), Gujarat  
100 50 45 13.5 
10 Bengaluru Metropolitan 
Transport Corporation 
(BMTC), Karnataka 
300 242 157.28 62.91 
11 Karnataka State Road 
Transport Corporation 
(Intercity), Karnataka 
50 50 27.5 5.5 
12 BEST UNDERTAKING, 
Maharashtra 
340 340 167 167 
13 Pune Mahanagar Parivahan 
Mahamandal Ltd (PMPML), 
Maharashtra 
150 150 82.5 49.5 
14 Navi Mumbai Municipal 
Transport Corporation, 
Maharashtra 
150 150 78 78 
15 Nagpur Municipal 
Corporation (NMC), 
Maharashtra 
40 40 18 10.8 

73
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
73 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State Transport 
Undertaking and City/State 
Buses 
Allocated 
Buses 
delivered 
Funds 
sanctioned 
Total payment 
made 
16 Maharashtra State Road 
Transport Corporation 
(Intercity) (MSRTC), 
Maharashtra 
150 0 82.5 16.5 
17 Capital Region Urban 
Transport, Bhubaneswar 
(CRUTB), Odisha 
50 35 22.5 4.5 
18 Jaipur City Transport Service 
Limited (JCTSL), Rajasthan 
100 0 45 9 
19 Rajasthan State Road 
Transport Corporation 
(Intercity) (RSRTC), 
Rajasthan 
48 0 26.5 5.28 
20 Dehradun Smart City Limited 
(Uttarakhand) (DSCL), 
Uttarakhand 
30 30 13.5 6.3 
21 Directorate of Urban 
Transport, Uttar Pradesh 
(DUT), Uttar Pradesh 
600 600 270 214.02 
22 West Bengal Transport 
Corporation (WBTC), West 
Bengal 
50 25 27.5 5.5 
23 Kadamba Transport 
Corporation Limited (Goa) 
(KTCL), Goa 
150 50 72.5 36.5 
24 Chandigarh Transport 
Undertaking (CTU), 
Chandigarh 
80 80 32.25 26.56 
25 Jammu Smart City Limited 
(JSCL), Jammu & Kashmir 
100 0 47 9.4 
26 Srinagar Smart City Limited 
(SSCL), Jammu & Kashmir 
100 0 47 9.4 
 Total 3738 2776 1803.06 1025.69 

74
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
74 
 
Annexure-VI 
(Referred to in introductory para of Chapter-III) 
Gist of the Incentive Eligibility Assessment Procedure as laid down in the 
FAME India Scheme guidelines 
 
1.0 Applicability 
 This procedure shall be applicable for assessment of vehicle models (including 
their variants and versions) for eligibility and applicability of incentives 
announced by Government of India under National Mission for Electric 
Mobility (NMEM). This assessment procedure shall be applicable only to 
vehicle models (including their variants and versions) which fall under the 
purview of Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 (CMVR). 
2.0 Procedure: 
2.1 In the case of vehicle models (including their variants and versions) qualifying 
under criteria specified in Clause 1.0, the vehicle manufacturer shall apply to 
test agencies notified under Rule 126 of CMVR for assessment as per this 
procedure. This application can be made along with application for type 
approval of the concerned vehicle model (including its variants and versions) or 
as a stand-alone application for assessment as per this procedure. The concerned 
test agency shall conduct the assessment as detailed below: 
2.1.1 Compliance to CMVR: 
2.1.1.1 The vehicle model (including its variants and versions) shall comply with the 
applicable regulations as on date as per Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989. For 
this purpose, the vehicle model (including its variants and versions) shall be 
type approved as per specified standards. 
2.1.2 Assessment of Technology Functions  
2.1.2.1 The following technologies provided in a xEV shall deem to qualify subject to 
compliance to the specified requirements: 
(a) Idle Start-Stop 
(b) Regenerative Braking 
(c) Motor Assist 
(d) Motor Drive (only for Strong HEV/Plug-in HEV/REEV) 
2.1.3 Fuel Consumption: 
 The fuel consumption measurement shall be done for all types of Hybrid 
Electric Vehicles as per the specified procedure. The test report for fuel 
consumption test shall specify the approved fuel consumption value in 
comparison with the targets specified for relevant vehicle categories.  
2.1.4 Electrical Energy Consumption: 
 
 
The electrical energy consumption measurement shall be done for all BEVs as 
per the specified standard. The test report for Electrical Energy Consumption 
test shall specify the approved value in comparison with the targets specified for 
relevant vehicle categories. 
 

75
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
75 
  
2.1.5 Electric Range: 
 For Plug-in HEVs/RE-HEVs and BEVs the electric range measurement shall  
be done as per the specified standards. The test report shall specify the  
approved value in comparison with the target specified for relevant vehicle 
categories. 
3.0 Application for Eligibility Assessment 
3.1 For Vehicle Models Already Type Approved: 
3.1.1 In case of the vehicle model (including its variants and versions), for which 
eligibility assessment is required, is already type approved as per provisions of 
CMVR, the vehicle manufacturer shall submit to test agency an application  
enclosing copies of homologation certificate and homologation test reports  
required for assessment as per Clause 2.0. 
3.1.2 The test agency shall determine the adequacy of documents submitted by  
vehicle manufacturer. In case, additional testing is required for assessment of 
certain parameters, the test agency shall conduct the required tests. 
3.1.3 Once the information on all relevant parameters is obtained (as per clause 3.1.1 
and/or 3.1.2), the test agency shall issue a “Eligibility Assessment Report” to 
vehicle manufacturer. This report shall contain information on vehicle 
performance with respect to all applicable parameters specified in Clause 2.0 in 
comparison with the defined targets. 
3.2 For New Type Approval along with Eligibility Assessment: 
3.2.1 In case of vehicle model (including its variants and versions) for which new 
Type Approval is required, the vehicle manufacturer shall along with 
application for Type Approval request test agency to conduct assessment for 
eligibility as per Clause 2.0. The vehicle manufacturer shall submit to test 
agency the technical specifications and other relevant document (if any). 
3.2.2 After successful completion of Type Approval and assessment as per Clause 
2.0, the test agency shall issue a Type Approval Certificate and a ‘Incentive 
Eligibility Assessment Report’ to vehicle manufacturer. This report shall  
contain information on vehicle performance with all applicable parameters  
specified in Clause 2.0 in comparison with the defined targets. 

76
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
76 
 
 
Annexure-VII 
(Referred to in paras 5.1 and 5.2.1) 
  
List of the Technology Development Projects  
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Project title Implementing 
Agency 
PISC 
meeting in 
which the 
project was 
approved 
Cost of 
project 
Share of 
Ministry 
Funds 
released  
Date of 
release of 
funds 
Duration 
of project 
Status of 
project 
1. Preparation for 
specifications and 
finalizing Draft 
Standards of xEV 
Charging Stations 
 
Automotive 
Research 
Association of 
India (ARAI), 
Pune 
1st meeting 
held on 13 May 
2015 
0.15 0.15 0.15 30.6.2015 6 months Completed 
2. Project for Charging 
Infrastructure 
Management System 
IIT, Madras 1 st meeting 
held on 13 May 
2015 
1.00 1.00 1.00 18.8.2015 12 months  Completed 
3. Establishment of testing 
infrastructure for 
Certification testing of 
Electric and Hybrid 
Vehicles 
ARAI, Pune 1st meeting 
held on 13 May 
2015 
50.00 30.00 30.00 30.6.2015 33 months Completed 

77
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
77 
  
Sl. 
No. 
Project title Implementing 
Agency 
PISC 
meeting in 
which the 
project was 
approved 
Cost of 
project 
Share of 
Ministry 
Funds 
released  
Date of 
release of 
funds 
Duration 
of project 
Status of 
project 
4. Technology development 
project for advanced 
Gen-IV lead acid battery 
and Gen. Nickel-zinc 
battery for EVs 
Non-Ferrous 
Materials 
Technology 
Development 
Centre, 
Hyderabad 
2nd meeting 
held on 20 
August 2015 
4.00 4.00 4.00 09.02.2016 2 years Completed 
5. Development of xEV 
one platform 
ARAI, Pune 4th meeting 
held on 22 
January 2016 
44.00 22.00 1.50 17.06.2016 23 months Cancelled 
6. Centre for 
Advanced Research 
in Electrified 
Transportation (CARET) 
Aligarh Muslim
University 
(AMU) 
5th meeting 
held on 20 July 
2016 
7.23 5.98 4.78 26.06.2016 3 years Closed 
7. Project for Centre for 
Battery Engineering 
Indian Institute 
of Technology, 
Madras 
6th meeting 
held on 23 
March 2017 
23.30 17.20 10.64 29.5.2017 5 years Ongoing 
8. Project for Hierarchical 
Nanostructure Carbon 
Materials derived from 
Candle Soot and 
Graphene for High Rate 
and High-Performance 
Indian Institute 
of Technology, 
Hyderabad and 
ARCI, 
Hyderabad 
6th meeting 
held on 23 
March 2017 
2.60 1.30 1.09 19.9.2017 55 months  Completed 

78
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
78 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Project title Implementing 
Agency 
PISC 
meeting in 
which the 
project was 
approved 
Cost of 
project 
Share of 
Ministry 
Funds 
released  
Date of 
release of 
funds 
Duration 
of project 
Status of 
project 
Electrodes for 
Automotive Batteries 
and Super-capacitors 
9. Proposal for 
development of Light 
Weight REEV (Range 
Extended Electric 
Vehicle) 
with Renewable 
Energy based Fuel cell  
Range Extender 
IISc, Bengaluru 6th meeting 
held on 23 
March 2017 
1.20 0.30 0.30 08.06.2017 42 months  Completed 
10 Project for Development 
of AC-DC Combined 
Public Charging Station 
Suitable for Indian 
Application 
ARAI, Pune 7 th meeting 
held on 15 
June 2017 
3.50 1.75 1.75 17.01.2018 12 months  Completed 
11 Development and 
prototyping of ICT 
enabled smart  Charging 
Networks components 
 
Indian Institute 
of Technology, 
Delhi 
8th meeting 
held on 1 
November 
2017 
10.02 5.98 5.42 22.03.2018 2 years Closed 

79
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
79 
  
Sl. 
No. 
Project title Implementing 
Agency 
PISC 
meeting in 
which the 
project was 
approved 
Cost of 
project 
Share of 
Ministry 
Funds 
released  
Date of 
release of 
funds 
Duration 
of project 
Status of 
project 
12 Technology Pilot for DC 
Charging for EV Bus 
K K Wagh 
Institute of 
Engineering 
Education and 
Research, Nasik  
8th meeting 
held on 1 
November 
2017 
1.50 0.90 0.90 22.03.2018 2 years Ongoing 
13 Switched Reluctance 
Traction motor and 
controller for 
2 wheelers and 3 
wheelers 
National 
Institute of 
Technology, 
Surathkal, 
Karnataka 
8th meeting 
held on 1 
November 
2017 
16.98 12.29 12.29 16.03.2018 2 years Completed 
14 HUB and SPOKE 
consortium for e-2 
wheelers and e-3 
wheelers Electric Drives. 
Non-Ferrous 
Materials 
Technology 
Development 
Centre, 
Hyderabad 
8th meeting 
held on 1 
November 
2017 
3.03 2.32 2.32 26.03.2018 2 years Completed 
15 Synchronous 
Reluctance Motor 
Drive for Indian 
Electric Vehicle 
Applications. 
Indian Institute 
of Technology, 
Madras 
8th meeting 
held on 1 
November 
2017 
2.61 1.69 0.56 22.03.2018 3 years Closed 

80
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
80 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Project title Implementing 
Agency 
PISC 
meeting in 
which the 
project was 
approved 
Cost of 
project 
Share of 
Ministry 
Funds 
released  
Date of 
release of 
funds 
Duration 
of project 
Status of 
project 
16 Test facility 
infrastructure for 
Electric Vehicle (EV) 
and EV Supply 
Equipment (EVSE) 
performance 
test/certification at 
three7 centers of 
NATRIP 
National 
Automotive 
Testing and 
R&D 
Infrastructure 
Project 
(NATRiP), 
Manesar 
11th meeting 
held on 3 
January 2019 
95.00 73.00 73.00 13.03.2019 10 months  Closed 
   Total 266.12 179.86 149.70    
 
7 International Centre for Automotive Technology (ICAT), Manesar; Global Automotive Research Centre (GARC), Chennai; and National Automotive Test Tracks 
(NATRAX), Indore. 
42
42

81
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
81 
  
Annexure-VIII 
(Referred to in para 5.2.1.1)  
List of Technology Development Projects completed with delays 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the project Implementing 
Agency 
Duration of 
the project 
(in months) 
Date of 
release 
Scheduled 
completion 
date# 
Actual date of 
completion 
Delay 
(months) 
1. Preparation for 
Specifications and Finalizing Draft 
Standards of xEV Charging Stations 
ARAI, Pune 06 30.06.2015 December 2015 September 2017 21 
2. Project for Charging Infrastructure 
Management System 
IIT, Madras 12 18.08.2015  August 2016 June 2017 10 
3. Establishment of testing 
infrastructure for Certification  
testing  of Electric and Hybrid 
Vehicles 
ARAI, Pune 33 30.06.2015 March 2018 March 2020 24 
4. Technology development project 
for advanced Gen- IV lead acid 
battery and Gen. Nickel-zinc battery 
for EVs 
NFTDC, 
Hyderabad 
24 09.02.2016  February 2018 March 2018 1 
5. Proposal for development of Light 
Weight REEV (Range Extended 
Electric Vehicle) with Renewable 
Energy based Fuel cell Range 
Extender 
(Uchhatar Avishkar Yojana) 
 
IISc Bangalore* 42 08.06.2017 February 2021 September 2022 19 

82
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
82 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the project Implementing 
Agency 
Duration of 
the project 
(in months) 
Date of 
release 
Scheduled 
completion 
date# 
Actual date of 
completion 
Delay 
(months) 
6. Project for Development of AC-DC 
Combined Public Charging Station 
suitable for Indian Application 
ARAI, Pune 12 17.01.2018  January 2019 January 2021 24 
7. Switched Reluctance Traction motor 
and controller for 2 wheelers and 3 
wheelers. 
NIT, 
Surathkhal 
24 16.03.2018 March 2020 December 2020 9 
8. HUB and SPOKE consortium for e-2 
wheelers and e-3 wheelers Electric 
Drives. 
NFTDC 
Hyderabad 
24 26.03.2018  March 2020 March 2022 24 
 
# Counted from the date of 1st installment of grant to implementing agency 
* Project was sanctioned to IISC Bangalore, but fund was released to IIT Madras as it was the Nodal agency for Uchhatar Avishkar Yojana  
 
 

83
Report No. 10 of 2026
Report No. 10 of 2026 
83 
  
Annexure-IX 
(Referred to in para 6.3.2.4) 
List of State Nodal Agencies under the e-Mobility Programme 
S. No. State State Nodal Agency 
1 Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands 
Directorate of Transport 
2 Andhra Pradesh New and Renewable Energy Development Corporation of 
Andhra Pradesh (NREDCAP) 
3 Arunachal Pradesh Central Electrical Zone, Power Department 
4 Bihar Transport Department 
5 Chandigarh Chandigarh Renewable Energy and Science & Technology 
Promotion Society (CREST) 
6 Chhattisgarh Transport Department 
7 Delhi Delhi Transco Limited (DTL) 
8 Gujarat Energy & Petrochemicals Department (EPD) 
9 Haryana Haryana Renewable Energy Development Agency 
(HAREDA) 
10 Himachal Pradesh Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board Limited (HPSEBL) 
11 Karnataka Bengaluru Electricity Supply Company Limited (BESCOM) 
12 Kerala Kerala State Electricity Board Ltd. (KSEBL) 
13 Lakshadweep Lakshadweep Energy Development Agency (LEDA) 
14 Madhya Pradesh M.P Power Management Co. Ltd. 
15 Maharashtra Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company Ltd. 
(MSEDCL) 
16 Meghalaya Meghalaya Power Distribution Corporation Ltd. (MePDCL) 
17 Mizoram Power & Electricity Department 
18 Odisha Engineer-in-Chief, Electricity 
19 Puducherry Electricity Department, Puducherry 
20 Punjab Punjab State Power Corporation Ltd. (PSPCL) 
21 Rajasthan Jaipur Vidyut Vitran Nigam Limited (JVVNL) 
22 Sikkim Power Department 
23 Tamil Nadu Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation Ltd. 
(TANGEDCO) 
24 Telangana Telangana State Renewable Energy Development Corporation 
Ltd., (TSREDCO) 
25 Uttar Pradesh Invest UP 
26 Uttarakhand Uttarakhand Power Corporation Limited (UPCL) 
27 West Bengal West Bengal State Electricity Distribution Company 
Limited(WBSEDCL) 
 
 

Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Scheme for Faster Adoption and Manufacturing 
of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles in India
Union Government
Ministry of Heavy Industries
Report No. 10 of 2026
(Performance Audit - Civil)
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in
Report No. 10 of 2026 –Union Government  Ministry of Heavy Industries
https://cag.gov.in/en/page-10-of-26
