Report No 4 of 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Green India Mission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
Report No. 4 of 2026 
(Performance Audit)

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
i 
 
Contents 
 
 
 Contents Page No. 
 Preface  iii 
 Executive Summary v 
Chapter I Introduction 1 
Chapter II Planning under Green India Mission 8 
Chapter III Financial Management 30 
Chapter IV Implementation of Green India Mission 48 
Chapter V Monitoring and Evaluation 85 
 Annexures 113-155 
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface 
 
This Report for the year ended March 2025  has been prepared for 
submission to the President of India under Article 151 of the Constitution 
of India. 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India contains the 
observations of Performance Audit on Green India Mission for the year 
2015-2023. These observations have been updated up to 31 March 2025. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those which came to notice 
during test audit for the period 2015 -23, as well as those which  came to 
notice in earlier years but could not be reported in previous Audit Reports; 
matters relating to the period subsequent to 2022 -23 have also been 
included, wherever necessary. 
The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
v 
Executive Summary 
The Government of India launched the National Mission for a Green India as one of the eight 
core missions under the National Action Plan on Climate Change in 2008. The Green India 
Mission (GIM) which was a sub -scheme under National Mission for a Green Indi a was 
subsequently endorsed by the Prime Minister’s Council on Climate Change in 2011. As a key 
component of India’s climate strategy, GIM aims to protect, restore and enhance forest and tree 
cover, improve ecosystem services and contribute meaningfully to  the country’s climate 
mitigation and adaptation efforts . As per Mission Document of 2011, the GIM aimed to 
increase and improve forest cover along with improved ecosystem services in 10 million 
hectare (mha) of land in a period of 10 years (2011 -2020) at a total cost of ₹46,000 crore. In 
alignment with its global climate responsibilities, India has also  committed, under the Paris 
Agreement, to creating an additional carbon sink of 2.5 to 3 billion tonnes of CO₂ equivalent 
by 2030, an objective in which GIM was envisaged to play a pivotal role. 
This Performance Audit examines the implementation of the GIM, administered by the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC), across 16 sampled States 
and Union Territories during the period 2015-16 to 2024-25. 
GIM was approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs in February 2014 as a 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme with an ambitious target of undertaking afforestation activities 
over 2.8 million hectare within four years (2014 -15 to 2017 -18) at an estimated cost of 
₹13,000 crore, which was a subset of the targets envisaged under the 2011 Mission Document 
of GIM. Out of ₹13,000 crore, a total of ₹10,600 crore was to be sourced through convergence 
with schemes like Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and  Planning Authority 
(₹6,000 crore), Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(₹4,000 crore) and National Afforestation Programme (₹600 crore). However, it was observed 
that the convergence of activities of GIM with other afforestation schemes amounting to 
₹10,600 crore could not be achieved and the proposed funding support could not be att ained. 
Consequently, all the activities for GIM were financed by MoEF&CC through the limited 
annual budgetary support received from the Government of Indi a. Only ₹1,149.14 crore 
(47.88 per cent) had been provided during 10 years of implementation (2015 -16 to 2024-25), 
leaving the Mission significantly short of the funding projected to meet its objectives. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
vi  
Audit scrutiny reveals that while the country’s overall forest and tree cover marginally 
increased from 24.62 per cent (ISFR 2021) to 25.17 per cent (ISFR 2023), GIM, despite being 
the flagship afforestation programme of MoEF&CC, could not deliver commensurate output. 
As of March 2025, afforestation interventions were made only on 0.14793 million hectare of 
land during the period 2015-16 to 2024-25, against the approved target of 2.8 million hectare 
to be achieved by 2018 under GIM.  
In order to realign Green India Mission with India’s Nationally Determined Contribution of 
creation of an additional carbon sink of 2.5-3 billion tonnes of carbon equivalent through forest 
and tree cover, the Ministry adopted new afforestation target of 25 million hectare in 2021, to 
be achieved by 2030. Further, the implementation guidelines for achieving the new target of 
25 million hectares set in 2021 had not been framed by the Ministry as of September 2025.  
A decade into its implementation, the Mission’s progress remains negligible. The Performance 
Audit findings show that the shortfalls stem from fundamental weaknesses in planning and 
design as well as deficiencies in execution and monitoring.  
GIM was premised largely on convergence of funds and activities from multiple Central and 
State schemes. However, at the planning stage itself, the anticipated support from stakeholders 
to the convergence effort did not materialise. Not only did the signif icant sources of funds 
identified, i.e., the CAMPA funds, MGNREGA and NAP remain inaccessible, the convergence 
at activity level also did not fructify. The National Executive Council, constituted to ensure 
interdepartmental coordination and could not resol ve the issues hindering convergence. 
Compounding these issues was the non -constitutional or non -operational status of several 
institutional bodies envisaged at the State and District levels, which were critical for steering 
the Mission towards its objectives. 
As convergence could not materialise, the Perspective Plans of States and UTs were 
progressively scaled down, leaving GIM dependent almost entirely on limited budgetary 
support from the Ministry. This severe resource constraint triggered a cascading effect , 
resulting in sluggish implementation, curtailed interventions and dilution of outcomes under 
the Scheme. 
Conceptually, GIM is a forward-looking initiative that adopted a landscape-level approach and 
emphasised greening of ecologically fragile and critical areas such as scrublands, ravines, 
wetlands and abandoned mines. However, Audit observed that on the grou nd plantation 
activities were largely confined to low -vulnerability sites, while ecologically critical 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
vii 
landscapes despite being identified in multiple studies and present across several States, were 
largely ignored. This departure from the Mission’s core philosophy significantly undermined 
its ecological relevance and potential impact. 
The bulk of GIM interventions were concentrated under Sub Mission 1, which focused on 
improving the quality of existing forest cover. In contrast, Sub Missions 2, 3 and 4 (Ecosystem 
restoration and increase in Forest Cover, Enhancing tree cover in Urban an d Peri-Urban areas 
and Agro Forestry and Social Forestry) where substantial scope existed for new plantations and 
expansion of forest and tree cover, elicited limited attention and weak response from both 
Central and State authorities, thereby constraining the Mission’s overall effectiveness. 
Notably, despite the existence of a dedicated GIS Cell for monitoring the Scheme, the Ministry 
did not adequately leverage its data and technological capability to assess outcomes or initiate 
mid-course corrections. As a demonstration of effective analysis  of data available with 
MoEF&CC using available technology, Audit attempted to independently validate and evaluate 
the performance reports under GIM by evaluating the area where GIM interventions were 
undertaken using a GPS device, by viewing the KMLs of plantation sites on Google Earth Pro 
and leveraging the services of IISc, Bangalore, to conduct temporal analysis. This analysis 
revealed little to no improvement in nearly 70 per cent  of the locations assessed. Weak 
field-level monitoring, coupled with the absence of validation of data reported by States, further 
restricted the Ministry’s ability to evaluate performance and address emerging deficiencies in 
a timely manner. 
In sum, the decade -long implementation of the Green India Mission reflects a compelling 
vision constrained by inadequate planning, fragmented institutional coordination, persistent 
under-funding, underutilisation of technology and weak monitoring mechanism s. The 
experience of GIM underscores the critical need for realistic planning, assured financing, 
robust institutional frameworks and outcome -oriented monitoring if future environmental 
missions are to translate ambition into measurable impact.  
The key audit findings and recommendations emanating therefrom are presented in the sections 
that follow. 
Key Audit Findings and Recommendations 
Chapter II: Planning under Green India Mission 
The absence of convergence, which was central to the implementation strategy of GIM, was 
evident across all levels of the institutional hierarchy established under the Mission. GIM 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
viii  
activities lacked to align effectively with CAMPA, MGNREGS and other Central/State 
afforestation initiatives. Non -receipt of collative Annual Plans of Operation (APOs) and 
operation of afforestation schemes like Nagar Van Yojana and School Nursery Yojana in silos, 
undermined the potential for synergistic outcomes through convergence.  
Recommendation: 
The Ministry may reassess the convergence aspect of GIM with CAMPA, MGNREGS and 
other Central and State afforestation schemes, especially the reasons for its persistent non -
achievement, so as to ascertain its feasibility for implementation of the Mission.  
(Para 2.1) 
The meetings of National Governing Council and National Executive Council at the apex level 
were conducted less often than the prescribed frequency, resulting in delays in the approval of 
Perspective Plans, APOs and non -resolution of key issues relating to  the implementation of 
GIM. Non-constitution of revamped bodies and inadequate functioning of the revamped bodies 
at the State and the District level hindered not only the programmatic convergence envisioned 
under GIM but also led to faulty selection of sites. 
Recommendation: 
The Ministry should ensure strict adherence to the prescribed frequency of meetings of the 
National Governing Council and the National Executive Council to enable timely planning, 
effective guidance and prompt resolution of implementation issues under the Scheme. It 
should also review the need for multiple bodies at the State and District levels for GIM 
implementation to establish an effective and accountable decentralised governance 
framework. 
(Paras 2.2.1, 2.2.2 and 2.2.3) 
Instances were noticed where the bottom -up approach in planning of GIM activities was not 
adhered to, both in terms of identification of areas and assignment of physical targets, 
ultimately resulting in non-achievement of targets under the Mission. 
Recommendation: 
The Ministry may ensure that the ‘bottom -up planning’ envisaged under the Mission is 
followed by all States so that the physical targets as well as suitability of the areas for 
interventions are communicated from the (bottom) village level to the (top) State level.  
(Para 2.3) 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
ix 
Despite vulnerability being a key criterion for identifying GIM landscapes, Audit observed 
cases where landscapes with low to moderate priority or vulnerability were selected for 
interventions over more vulnerable landscapes, indicating non -prioritisation of landscapes 
more vulnerable to climate change.  
Recommendation: 
The Ministry should prioritise selection of more vulnerable landscapes for afforestation 
activities within available budgetary resources so as to optimise the impact of plantations in 
line with the objectives of the mission in dealing with climate change.  
(Para 2.5.1) 
Chapter III: Financial Management 
Absence of  convergence of activities of GIM with other afforestation schemes led to the 
non-attainment of proposed funding support of ₹10,600 crore. Further, against outlay of 
₹2,000 crore approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs from the 12 th Plan 
outlay for the initial four years of the Scheme along with ₹400 crore from 13 th Finance 
Commission grants towards states share, only ₹1,149.14  crore (47.88 per cent), was received 
through budgetary support during 10 years of implementation (2015-16 to 2024-25). 
Recommendation: 
The Ministry may review its financial planning for the Scheme, especially with respect to the 
repeated non-achievement of convergence aspect. Further, the Government of India may 
also provide adequate funding to GIM to achieve its intended target. 
(Para 3.1) 
Out of a total of 68 APOs of 16 sampled States/UT approved by MoEF&CC during 2015 -16 
to 2024-25, only six APOs were received by the Ministry before the commencement of the 
APO period/financial year. N one of these six APOs could be approved before the 
commencement of APO period/financial year.  
Recommendations: 
• MoEF&CC should fix a timeline for submission of APOs so that APOs may be approved 
well before the start of the financial year and funds released timely. 
• Taking into consideration varied geographical/climatic conditions of regions/States, 
MoEF&CC should prepare a plantation calendar defining clear schedules for advance 
work and plantation/creation activities to enhance the survival of plants and fund 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
x  
disbursement should be aligned as per the timelines provided in the schedule to ensure 
timely execution of planned activities. 
(Para 3.3) 
Delay in release of funds at each institutional level was noticed in Audit, which resulted in 
non-utilisation of funds during the APO period, cost escalation, downsizing of targets, thereby 
adversely impacting the achievement of targets. 
Recommendation: 
State Governments, SFDAs and FDAs should consciously work towards ensuring adherence 
to the timelines for fund release, so that the funds can reach JFMCs on time for 
implementation of proposed activities. 
(Para 3.4) 
In eight out of 16 States/UT, SFDAs/FDAs did not maintain their Annual Accounts. Further, 
in three States where Annual Accounts were prepared, the same were not audited. In six States, 
the amount of funds utilised by SFDAs/FDAs and shown in their UCs did n ot match with the 
subsidiary records maintained by them.  
Recommendation: 
MoEF&CC should ensure that SFDAs/FDAs prepare their Annual Accounts every year and 
get them audited regularly. Further, UCs should be prepared and submitted by SFDAs/FDAs 
to the Ministry only after reconciliation with underlying accounts. 
(Paras 3.10 and 3.11) 
Chapter IV: Implementation of Green India Mission 
The implementation of the Mission was hindered by a lack of convergence and shortfall in 
plantation targets due to limited budgetary support. As against the target of 1.4 mha (as per the 
Cabinet Approval of GIM in 2014) for improving the quality of forest cover under GIM, the 
achievement could be made in only 0.11384 mha, leading to a shortfall of 91.87 per cent. 
Further, as against the target of 1.4 mha (as per the Cabinet Approval of GIM in 2014), for 
increasing the forest cover under GIM, achievement could be made in only 0.03409 mha 
leading to a shortfall of 97.57 per cent.  
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
xi 
Recommendation: 
The Ministry may reassess its targets and identify and address the bottlenecks such as 
absence of convergence, shortfall in plantation targets due to limited budget and 
non-identification of specific landscapes that have contributed to the significant shortfall in 
achievement under GIM. 
(Paras 4.1.1 and 4.1.2) 
Shortfall in allocation of targets under Sub Mission 2 was largely attributable to the 
non-identification of unique landscapes like scrublands, seabuckthorn, ravines, abandoned 
mining areas for GIM interventions, despite their existence in the States. 
Recommendation: 
Within the financial constraints, the Ministry should ensure coverage of diverse unique 
ecosystems so as to encompass both protection and restoration, besides increase in the forest 
cover. 
(Para 4.4.1) 
Non-native species were given priority for plantation over native species by the States, 
defeating the objective of GIM to restore native species mix at the landscape level. 
Recommendation: 
The Ministry may consider randomly inspecting plantation sites to verify and curb the 
preference for exotic species over indigenous varieties.  
(Para 4.5) 
Despite afforestation being achieved in 1,47,925.63 ha in 16 States/UT, no State, except 
Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, conducted any assessment of carbon sequestration during 
2015-2025. 
Recommendation: 
The Ministry should make efforts to monitor the carbon sequestered by the forests treated 
under GIM so that its contribution towards achieving the Nationally Determined 
Contribution is known, besides aiding climate change mitigation strategies. 
(Para 4.8.2) 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
xii  
Cases of non-uniform approach being adopted by the Ministry in stipulation of targets for all 
three components, namely, advance, creation and maintenance works of the plantation exercise 
under all Sub Missions. 
Recommendation: 
The Ministry should ensure that the entire plantation exercise comprising of advance , 
creation and maintenance works approved for a site, is completed by cross-verifying Annual 
Plans of Operation of subsequent years. It may also review the requirements of all three 
components for the different Sub Missions. 
 (Para 4.9) 
Improper planning on the part of ICFRE regarding maintenance and the upkeep of the flux 
towers installed in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh led to idling of the infrastructure built for 
quantification of carbon sequestration despite incurring an expenditure of ₹3.50 crore. 
Recommendation: 
Efforts may be made to operationalise the flux towers at the earliest to enable quantification 
of carbon sequestered by forests and prevent further idling of these infrastructural assets. 
(Para 4.10.2) 
Chapter V: Monitoring and Evaluation 
Monitoring of Mission activities at three of the four levels of monitoring prescribed in the 
Mission Document was deficient with the State Forest Departments as well as the Mission 
Directorate failing to conduct the same.  
Recommendation: 
MoEF&CC should ensure that monitoring, as prescribed under the Implementation 
Guidelines, is carried out on a regular basis for continuous assessment of the performance 
of the Mission, so that corrective actions, if needed, may be made in time. 
(Paras 5.1.1, 5.1.3 and 5.1.4) 
Despite instructions of MoEF&CC to create/open a web -link on their website for public to 
access the details of activities taken up under the GIM, 14 out of the 16 implementing States/UT 
did not comply with the same.  
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
xiii 
Recommendation: 
The Ministry should ensure compliance with the instructions issued for creation of web-link, 
as the same can be used for monitoring the progress of GIM in the States as well as check 
faulty reporting besides maintaining transparency in dissemination of inf ormation to the 
stakeholders. 
(Para 5.3) 
In 14 States/UT, social audits were not conducted by the Gram Sabhas, while in Mizoram and 
Uttarakhand, social audit was conducted intermittently.  
Recommendation: 
MoEF&CC should ensure that social audit is conducted by Gram Sabha so that participation 
of the local community in the implementation of GIM is ensured. 
(Para 5.4) 
Independent attempt to conduct evaluation by Audit indicated reporting of inflated data, 
overlap of reported coordinates of plantation sites, inaccuracy in reporting of achievement of 
plantation. Non-validation of KML files received by MoEF&CC from the Sta tes resulted in 
achievement being overstated. GIS analysis of plantation sites in nine States revealed that 
70 per cent of the areas showed no noticeable changes attributable to GIM interventions during 
the period 2016 -17 to 2019 -20, as assessed up to 2024 . Ground truthing confirmed limited 
plantation activity, further constrained by inappropriate site selection, inconsistent spacing of 
planting pits and the use of undersized saplings by the Forest Department. 
Recommendation: 
To ensure reliable assessment and effective planning, the Ministry should consider adopting 
or leveraging GIS technology for validation of KML Files of the plantation sites, along with 
ground truthing of sites and maintain a central geospatial database of all sites to avoid 
duplication of sites. 
(Para 5.7) 
 
 
  

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
1 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
 
1.1  Background 
Forests have a significant role to play in mitigating climate change, conserving natural 
biodiversity and maintaining the hydrological balance of the region , besides meeting the 
consumptive needs of human beings. The Government , in 1980 , passed the Forest 
(Conservation) Act, aiming to protect the forests of our country. The Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) 1, in 1988 , issued a National Forest Policy for 
management of forests of the country with an objective to ensure environmental stability and 
the preservation of ecological balance. The Policy enunciates the national goal of bringing 
33 per cent of the country's geographical area under forest cover. MoEF&CC in 2004 (revised 
in 2014) adopted a uniform code, the National Working Plan Code, to sustainably manage, 
conserve and utilise the forest resources and to bring uniformity in forest management planning 
across the country. 
Over the years, climate change has emerged as a global challenge requiring an integrated global 
response. As a party 2 to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) which aims to achieve stabilisation of Green House Gas (GHG) concentrations in 
the atmosphere, the Government, in a bid to address climate change concerns and to promote 
sustainable development, announced National Mission for a Green India as one of the eight 
Missions3 under the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) in 2008, which was 
endorsed by the Prime Minister’s Council on Climate Change (PMCCC) in 2011. Till 2016-17, 
National Mission for a Green India included only one Scheme, i.e., Green India Mission (GIM). 
In 2017-18, the National Afforestation Programme was merged with GIM , while the Forest 
Fire Prevention and Management Scheme (FFPM) was subsumed under it  in 2021, thereby 
making National Mission for a Green India an umbrella scheme having two sub-schemes, viz., 
FFPM and GIM. This Performance Audit focuses on the implementation of the sub -scheme 
GIM, which is being implemented by MoEF&CC. 
 
 
1 The erstwhile Ministry of Environment and Forests was renamed as the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change vide 
order dated 31.7.2014. 
2 India is a party to UNFCC w.e.f. 1993. 
3 National Solar Mission, National Mission for a Green India, National Mission for Sustainable Habitat, National Water Mission,  
National Mission for Sustaining the Himalayan Ecosystem, National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture, National Mission on 
Strategic Knowledge for Climate Change and National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency. 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
2  
1.2 Green India Mission 
The Green India Mission aimed to increase and improve forest cover along with improved 
ecosystem services in 10 million hectares (mha) of land in a period of 10 years at a total cost 
of ₹46,000 crore as per its Mission Document of 2011. 
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs in February 2014 approved GIM as a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme 4 in the 12 th Plan at a total cost of ₹13,000 crore 5, for carrying out 
afforestation activities on 2.8 mha land within four years (2014 -15 to 2017 -18). This was a 
subset of the targets envisaged under the 2011 Mission Document of GIM. 
Further, in order to realign Green India Mission with India’s Nationally Determined 
Contribution6 of creation of an additional carbon sink of 2.5 -3 billion tonnes of carbon 
equivalent through forest and tree cover between 2021 -2030, MoEF&CC in 2021 revised the 
Mission Document of GIM of 2011. In order to achieve this goal, the revised Mission 
Document for the duration 2021-2030 envisages achieving a new target of afforestation of over 
one mha at an estimated cost of ₹12,190 crore 7 through GIM alone and a target of 24 mha 8 
through convergence9 with ongoing Central/State Government schemes. 
As of March 2025, ₹1,224.31 crore have been provided for implementation of GIM activities 
(2015-16 to 2024-25), corresponding to which 0.14793 million hectare (mha) of land has been 
treated under GIM. 
1.3  Objectives of Green India Mission 
With a view to respond to climate change by a combination of adaptation and mitigation 
measures, the Mission aimed at protecting and restoring India’s diminishing forest cover, 
thereby enhancing carbon sinks and adaptation of vulnerable species/ecosystems and forest 
dependent communities to climate change. 
The broad objectives to be covered under GIM (as per the original Mission Document 2011) 
were as follows: 
• Increase forest/tree cover to the extent of five million ha (mha) and improve quality of 
forest/tree cover of another five mha of forest/non-forest lands. 
 
4 The Centrally Sponsored Scheme provides Central and State share of funds at a ratio of 90:10 for North -Eastern/special category 
states and 75:25 for remaining states. The ratio for remaining states was revised to 60:40 in October 2015. 
5 This includes ₹2,000 crore from the 12 th Plan Outlay, ₹400 crore from the 13 th Finance Commission Grant, ₹6,000 crore from 
convergence with Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA), ₹4,000 crore from 
convergence with Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) and ₹600 crore from convergence 
with National Afforestation Programme (NAP). 
6 Nationally Determined Contribution is a climate action plan of a nation under the Paris Agreement. 
7 The Mission costs would be met partly from the budget under ongoing Green India Mission (₹5,000 crore) and balance from funds 
available under National Fund of CAMPA (₹7,190 crore). 
8 12 mha during 2021-25 and 12 mha during 2025-30. 
9 National/State CAMPA, National Adaptation Fund for Climate Change, National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture, National 
Bamboo Mission, Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture, National Skill Development Programme, MNREGA, Namami 
Gange, etc. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
3 
• Improve ecosystem services including biodiversity, hydrological services and carbon 
sequestration, as a result of treatment of 10 mha of forest land/non-forest land. 
• Increase forest-based livelihood income of about three million households living in and 
around forests. 
• Enhance carbon dioxide sequestration by 50 to 60 million tonnes by the year 2020.  
While the overarching objectives of GIM remained consistent, the Sub Missions, targets and 
timelines were revised. The evolution of the Sub Missions along with the targets and estimated 
costs, as revised over time, is shown in Table 1 below:   
Table 1: Details of GIM as revised over the years 
Year 
Overall Target 
2011 
10 mha 
2014 
2.8 mha 
(subset of 2011 targets) 
2021 
25 mha 
Total estimated cost ₹46,000 crore ₹13,000 crore ₹12,190 crore10 
Period of 
Implementation 
10 years (2011-2021) 4 years (2014-2018) 10 years (2021-2030) 
Sub Mission 1 Enhancing the quality of 
forest cover and improving 
ecosystem services 
(4.9 mha) 
Enhancing the quality of 
forest cover and improving 
ecosystem services 
(1.37 mha) 
Enhancing the quality of 
forest cover and improving 
ecosystem services 
(0.30 mha) 
Sub Mission 2 Ecosystem restoration and 
increase in forest cover 
(1.8 mha) 
Ecosystem restoration and 
increase in forest cover 
(0.50 mha) 
Ecosystem restoration and 
increase in forest cover 
(0.70 mha) 
(This includes Sub 
Missions 3, 4 and 5 of the 
previous versions) 
Sub Mission 3 Enhancing tree cover in 
urban and peri-urban areas 
(including institutional 
lands)  
(0.20 mha) 
Enhancing tree cover in 
urban and peri-urban areas 
(including institutional 
lands)  
(0.06 mha) 
 
 
Enhancement of 
household incomes and 
diversification of 
livelihoods for forest 
dependent communities  
(Livelihood Improvement 
Training Centres/Nursery 
Research Centres/Non -
Timber Forest Produce 
Processing Centres)  
(200 in total) 
Sub Mission 4 Agro-Forestry and Social 
Forestry (increasing 
biomass and creating 
carbon sink)  
(3 mha) 
Agro-Forestry and Social 
Forestry (increasing 
biomass and creating 
carbon sink)  
(0.84 mha) 
- 
Sub Mission 5 Restoration of Wetlands  
(0.10 mha) 
Restoration of Wetlands  
(0.03 mha) 
- 
Carbon sequestration 
target 
50 to 60 million tonnes of 
carbon equivalent by 2020. 
14 to 17 million tonnes of 
carbon equivalent by 2018.  
2.5 to 3.0 billion tonnes  of 
carbon equivalent by 2030. 
Note: Since 2021, Sub Missions 3, 4 and 5 were merged into Sub Mission 2 ‘Ecosystem restoration and increase 
in forest cover’ while ‘Community livelihood enhancement’ was made a separate Sub Mission 3.  
 
10 This fund was earmarked for afforestation on one mha under GIM. Afforestation on 24 mha was to be undertaken through 
convergence. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
4  
GIM also entailed c ross cutting interventions  such as promotion of alternative energy 
resources, community livelihood enhancement, corridors for effective dispersal and 
establishment of plant and animal species, protection of Community Conserved Areas and 
Sacred Groves.  
1.4 Planning process under GIM  
The planning process under GIM fosters a ‘landscape approach’ where landscapes are 
identified at different levels (L1, L2 and L3) for implementation of various Sub Missions. All 
landscapes are identified using a combination of criteria like projected vulnerability of forests 
to climate change, status of forest cover, biodiversity and other ecosystem values, critical 
habitats, corridors and potential of the area for carbon sink. Once the criteria have been listed, 
various maps, spatial and attribute data sets are collected from different sources like Forest 
Survey of India (FSI), Space Application Centres, State Departments, etc.  
At L1 level, broad landscapes of interest/importance are identified using landforms or 
catchments as base layer. Next, the forest cover and scrub layer are overlaid on this base layer 
to identify areas of interest. Once the landscapes at L1 have been ident ified, L2 and L3 level 
landscapes are selected using the same criteria used for selecting L1 landscapes.  
 
 
Figure 1: Graphic representation of various landscapes involved under GIM  
Activities under various Sub Missions of GIM are planned for implementation in the landscape 
areas. 
1.5 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted with the following objectives: 
(i)  whether adequate institutional and coordination mechanisms exist at the Centre as well 
as the State level for planning and implementation of GIM? 
L1
Landscape
L2
Landscape
L3 
Landscape
L1 Landscape
Large contiguous areas of forests and non-
forests in a catchment area or watershed
L2 Landscape
Operational units (usually forest division) 
within L1 landscape (milli watershed)
L3 Landscape
Working units (usually village) within L2 
landscape (micro watershed)

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
5 
(ii)  whether the objectives and targets stipulated under the Mission were achieved?  
(iii)  whether funds for execution of the Mission were released on time and were utilised 
properly for the intended purpose? 
(iv)  whether the existing review and monitoring mechanism is adequate and effective for 
the realisation of quantifiable targets under each Sub Mission? 
1.6 Audit Scope  
In view of the multiple governance levels, i.e., Union, State, District and Village, the Audit cut 
across MoEF&CC, State Forest Departments and other implementing agencies. The Audit 
involved participation of all 15 States and one Union Territory (Arunachal Pradesh, Andhra 
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Odisha, Punjab, Sikkim, Uttarakhand and West 
Bengal) that were a part of GIM during the audit period, except for Manipur11.  
1.6.1  Period of Audit 
Audit was conducted for the period 2015-16 to 2022-23 and findings updated till March 2025, 
thereby including operation of GIM under the original as well as the revised Mission 
Documents, so that Audit can highlight the latest position of implementation of GIM to enable 
the Ministry to take remedial action, if required, prior to the 2030 deadline for achievement of 
India’s Nationally Determined Contribution and the coterminous Mission Objectives.  
1.6.2  Audit scope 
GIM interventions had been undertaken in a total of 2,505 L3 landscapes in the 16 sampled 
States/UT during the Audit period. In view of the large number of L3 landscapes and the 
necessity for ensuring a representative sample  for ascertaining the implementation of Sub 
Missions, the L3 landscapes were divided into two categories. 
✓ Category A: L3 landscapes where only one Sub M ission had been carried out . 
10 per cent of L3 landscapes subject to maximum of 10 numbers were selected in 
each State/UT.  
✓ Category B: L3 landscapes where more than one Sub Mission had been carried out. 
100 per cent  of L3 landscapes subject to maximum of 20 L3 landscapes were 
selected in each State/UT.  
 
11 Excluded on account of law and order exigencies prevailing in the State. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
6  
• A total of 385 L3 landscapes (under Category A and B) were chosen for Audit in 16 
States/UT.  
• For assessment of adequacy and effectiveness of institutional framework, identification 
of landscapes, financial management and cross -cutting interventions, 186 L2 
landscapes corresponding to the selected L3 landscapes were taken up in 68 L1 
landscapes for Audit. (Annexure I).  
• Additionally, two plantation sites from each selected L3 landscape were chosen for 
Joint Physical Verification to assess the plantations with respect to their survival, height 
of the plants, types of species planted, etc. Preference was given to plantation sites 
where creation12 work was carried out in/before 2020 -21 to assess the success of the 
plantation. A total of 675 plantation sites covering an area of 14,785.4 ha were chosen 
for Joint Physical Verification. 
Audit also covered the implementation of the World Bank aided Ecosystems Services 
Improvement Project (ESIP13) in the selected landscapes of GIM in two states, namely, Madhya 
Pradesh and Chhattisgarh.  
1.7 Audit Criteria 
The Audit criteria included: 
• Mission Documents for National Mission for a Green India-2011 and 2021 
• Implementation Guidelines of National Mission for a Green India 2014 
• Convergence Guidelines for Integrated Greening Interventions under the Mission 
• Convergence Guidelines of the Mission with CAMPA and MGNREGS 
• National Working Plan Code 2014 
1.8 Audit Methodology 
Audit held an Entry Conference with MoEF&CC on 5 March 2024 , wherein the audit 
objectives, criteria, scope and methodology were shared. Entry Conferences were also held by 
the State Audit Offices with the concerned State Governments. Field Audit included 
examination of records, files, plantation journals, landscape plans at MoEF&CC, State FDAs, 
FDAs, JFMCs and Joint Physical Verification of sites. Audit also engaged the services of the 
 
12 One of the components of plantation exercise that includes plantation of seedlings including casualty replacement.  
13 The objective of the project was to improve forest quality; land management and Non -Timber Forest Produce’s benefits for forest 
dependent communities. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
7 
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore , to use satellite imagery for assessing the performance 
of plantation activity under GIM of 170 plantation sites with an area of 1,397 ha (Annexure II). 
Further, out of these 170 plantation sites, audit conducted ground truthing exercise of 46 sites. 
The draft Performance Audit Report containing Audit Findings was issued to the MoEF&CC 
on 13 May 2025, seeking response from the Ministry. The response of the Ministry received in 
July 2025 has been considered and discussed with the Ministry during the Exit Conference held 
on 10 September 2025. The Ministry submitted revised response on the PA Report on 
16 September 2025. The responses of the Ministry have been suitably incorporated in the Audit 
Report.  
1.9 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by M oEF&CC, GIM Directorate and selected 
State FDAs, FDAs and JFMCs during the course of the Performance Audit. 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
8  
Chapter II 
Planning under Green India Mission 
 
The Scheme Guidelines acknowledge the pivotal role planning has on the results that the 
Mission aims to achieve. Focus was given to a bottom-up planning process that would enable 
stakeholders at the village level to define and organise the priorities and actions under the 
Mission. The planning process was also to leverage opportunities that arise from convergence 
with programmes/schemes with similar objectives.  
The institutional structure under GIM at various levels was guided by three core principles: 
• Strengthening of institutions for decentralised forest governance 
• Use of existing institutional spaces rather than creating new institutions  
• Convergence of Mission activities with other existing schemes, programmes and 
missions 
Figure 2: Graphic representation of institutional framework of GIM  
As mentioned in Figure 2  above, several bodies were tasked with providing maximum 
convergence opportunities and strategic direction to the Mission. However, the deficiencies in 
the functioning of these bodies, such as their non -constitution, non-functioning or inadequate 
functioning, as detailed in the succeeding paragraphs, limited the achievement of convergence 
of GIM with other schemes. Thus, not only were the institutions at the National level unable to 
provide overall guidance and monitor the convergence aspect, but the insti tutions at the State 
and the District level were also found unable to initiate measures that would have led to 
convergence and aid bottom-up planning process. 
National Level 
(MoEF&CC)
National 
Governing 
Council (NGC)
National 
Executive 
Council (NEC)
GIM Mission 
Directorate 
State Level
State Forest 
Development 
Agency (SFDA)
State Steering 
Committee 
(SSC)
District Level
Forest 
Development 
Agency (FDA)
District 
Planning 
Committee
Landscape 
Level Planning 
Committee
Village Level
Joint Forest 
Management 
Committee 
(JFMC)
Gram Sabhas

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
9 
2.1  Non-convergence of GIM with other Afforestation Schemes 
Convergence of GIM with schemes and programmes of Ministries/Departments (particularly 
CAMPA and MGNREGS) was central to the implementation of GIM wherein linkages with 
other ongoing land-based greening/restoration programmes and schemes of different agencies14 
were to be formed to mobilise funds available with similar schemes in order to achieve the 
objective of enhancing and improving forest cover, ecosystem services and creating a carbon 
sink. Convergence would also find synergies amongst these schemes and he lp avoid duplicity 
of work. As per the discussions of the Technical Committee meeting 15 (March 2013) 
convergence need not mean apportioning a fixed percentage of fiscal resources for GIM by the 
concerned agency. Rather , it meant implementation of an identified activity for a given 
landscape by the concerned agency as per the village’s micro plan. Hence, activities which 
could easily converge and dovetail with other schemes were to be identified for GIM. 
2.1.1  Non-convergence with CAMPA 
In a meeting of the Prime Minister’s Council of Climate Change held in February 2011, the 
need to locate resources for GIM by unlocking the CAMPA funds was stressed upon. The 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs in February 2014 approved GIM for the 12 th Plan 
period and one year spill over to the 13th Plan to be implemented at a total cost of ₹13,000 crore, 
which included ₹10,600 crore through convergence with schemes like CAMPA (₹6,000 crore), 
MGNREGS (₹4,000 crore) and NAP (₹600 crore). The Scheme was revised in 2021 with a new 
target of 25 million hectare (24 mha through convergence and one mha through GIM) to be 
achieved by 2030. CAMPA was once again made a primary contributor for securing funds for 
both the portions of the new target. Of the total estimated cost of ₹12,190 crore 16 of the one 
mha target, 59 per cent of the funds (₹7,190 crore) were to come from National CAMPA.  
Thus, since the inception of the Scheme till present, CAMPA funds have been envisaged as a 
major source of funding for the successful implementation of GIM. However, Audit observed 
that accessing CAMPA funds was fraught with difficulties and convergence, a s envisaged, 
could not be achieved, as detailed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
• A steering committee constituted in January 2012 for overall planning, coordination 
and monitoring the implementation of GIM, in its first meeting (June 2012), decided 
 
14 Integrated Wasteland Management Programme, National Afforestation Programme, programmes under Compensatory 
Afforestation Management Fund and Planning Authority, schemes of Animal Husbandry Department, programmes of renewable 
energy of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, etc. 
15 Under the chairmanship of the Additional Director General of Forests (Forest Conservation) to provide technical guidance and 
inputs in connection with the implementation of GIM. 
16 ₹5,000 crore from the budget of GIM. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
10  
that a Working Group be constituted with members from the Ministry and States to 
draw the convergence mechanism/guidelines. Audit observed that though the Working 
Group had officials of the Ministry, Principal Chief Conservators of Forest (PCCF) of 
some States, officials from the Department of Land Resources and the Ministry of Rural 
Development, the representation from Ad -hoc CAMPA17, a major stakeholder, was 
missing.  
• The issue was also discussed by the Forest Conservation Division with Ad-hoc CAMPA 
in March 2013, where it was noted that assisted natural regeneration, which is one of 
the main activities in CAMPA, done through funds relating to Net Present Value could 
be carried out under convergence with CAMPA. It was also decided to hold frequent 
meetings to break the existing deadlock for financing of GIM. Audit observed no action 
on the abovementioned points were taken thereon for financing GIM through this 
convergence.  
• 46 per cent  of the total funds ( ₹13,000 crore) that were approved by the Cabinet 
Committee in February 2014 were to be mobilised from CAMPA. The Ministry, on its 
part, could not take any concrete efforts to achieve convergence with CAMPA.  
• Notwithstanding the above, the Ministry again included CAMPA funds amounting to 
₹7,190 crore for meeting its revised targets of 2021.  
It was also observed that even though the Ministry repeatedly emphasised exploring the 
possibility of utilisation of CAMPA funds in GIM’s National Executive Council (NEC)18 
meetings, National CAMPA participated in only two19 of the 10 NEC meetings held during the 
audit period.  
Thus, even after a lapse of 10 years from the approval of the Mission, the Ministry has not been 
able to end the impasse in financing the Mission from CAMPA funds. Hence, the financial 
planning which relies on CAMPA funds, both for the Scheme and convergence aspect, seems 
difficult to achieve given the lack of progress in breaking the CAMPA funding logjam which 
affects achievement. 
 
17 Pursuant to the order of the Supreme Court in October 2002, Compensatory Afforestation Fund was created and all amounts 
collected from user agencies towards Compensatory Afforestation and Net Present Value of the diverted forest land were to be 
deposited in the Fund. In 2004, CAMPA Authority was notified by MoEF for management of the Compensatory Afforestation Fund. 
However, as CAMPA could not become operational, the Supreme Court in 2006 constituted Ad-hoc CAMPA under the chairmanship 
of Director General Forest and Special Secretary, MoEF. All monies received on behalf of CAMPA and lying with the concerned 
officials of the State Government were directed to be transferred to Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
18 A Committee at the National Level that approves the Perspective Plan and Annual Plan of Operation of the States while ensurin g 
inter-departmental coordination and convergence. 
19 Meeting held in August 2021 and January 2025. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
11 
The only initiative taken by the Ministry was the issuance of Convergence Guidelines of GIM 
with CAMPA to the States in 2015, wherein activities to be taken under CAMPA in 
convergence with GIM were identified along with the funding mechanism. 
MoEF&CC stated (September 2025) that GIM would develop landscape specific proposals 20 
for which ₹7,190 crore is projected but the final outcome shall be subject to the approval of the 
stipulated authority as laid down under the C ompensatory Afforestation Fund Act 2016 and 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Rules 2018. 
The reply may be viewed in the light of the fact that the the provisions of the C ompensatory 
Afforestation Fund Act and Rules do not allow inclusion of any other scheme and thus CAMPA 
funds cannot be used for full or partial funding of the existing schemes of the Ministry. 
Moreover, with only five years left out of the 2021-2030 period, meeting the above projections 
and achievements in this aspect may require focused and intensive interventions. 
2.1.2  Non-convergence with MGNREGS 
In response to the Expenditure Finance Committee memo of GIM circulated among the 
concerned departments for obtaining their comments on 24 April 2012, the Ministry of Rural 
Development in July 2012 emphatically stated that earmarking a percentage of funds at the 
national level for convergence was not tenable under the M GNREGS, but effective 
convergence could be achieved at the Gram Panchayat level. It suggested that the 
implementation mechanism and approach of GIM needed to be in tune with the stated 
objectives ( i.e., decentralised forest governance and people centricity) and in view of this, 
arrangements should be made to release funds to Gram Panchayats (as is under M GNREGS) 
for better accountability, implementation and convergence.  
Despite MoRD’s negative response with respect to earmarking funds for GIM, MoEF&CC 
accounted for a significant portion, amounting to ₹4,000 crore (30.77 per cent) to be provided 
from MGNREGS. This is indicative of inadequate convergence planning as is evident in the 
non-achievement of the objectives of GIM, primarily due to the shortfall in funds (Para 3.1).  
Audit observed that, except for issuing the Convergence Guidelines in 2015 and requesting the 
States to prepare L3 micro-plans accounting for convergence, the Ministry made no endeavour 
to monitor that the same is achieved. 
 
20 Based on Afforestation and Assisted Natural Regeneration including planting of native species and protection of natural regeneration 
across degraded [ravine/mangrove/Aravalli] tracts, Soil and Moisture Conservation Measures and Enhancement of the Ecosystem  
Services Restoration which entails enhancing biodiversity, groundwater recharge, carbon sequestration and livelihood support for 
local communities. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
12  
MoEF&CC stated (July 2025) that given the seasonal nature of the works under the Green India 
Mission, the convergence with M GNREGS is not practically possible. However, the fact 
remains that GIM -MGNREGS Convergence Guidelines issued by MoEF&CC in 2015 
categorically state the time and manner in which planning and implementation under GIM can 
be carried out in convergence with M GNREGS. Further, a time schedule for operationalising 
convergence of GIM with M GNREGS is also given under these Guidelines. Hence, th e 
guidelines and planning need to be reworked, if the targeted goals are to be achieved. 
2.1.3  Non-convergence with National Afforestation Programme (NAP)  
In a meeting on financing of GIM (March 2013), it was pointed out that the approach of the 
two afforestation programmes, namely, GIM and NAP, was different and that pooling in more 
funds from NAP would be difficult. While NAP focused only on afforestation of degraded 
forest lands, GIM was a broader scheme that aimed to improve the quality of the forest as well 
as increase the forest cover through cross sectoral activities on a landscape basis. Despite this 
difference, funds amounting to ₹600 crore from NAP were approved for GIM in February 2014. 
Contrary to the above, the Ministry in July 2015 felt the need to converge both NAP and GIM 
as both schemes worked towards increasing India’s diminishing tree cover. But owing to the 
different institutional structures and GIM’s broader landscape perspective (wherein contiguous 
areas of both forest and non-forest lands are treated), the unified institutional structure for NAP 
and GIM was not found feasible (August 2015) and the Ministry continued to run two similar 
schemes until their actual 21 merger in 2021. Hence, the intricacies involved in seeking 
convergence, which should have been foreseen at the time of planning, were ignored. 
Thus, the synergies between GIM, CAMPA, M GNREGS and NAP could not be unlocked at 
the top level for addressing the sustainable management of forest resources required for the 
effective implementation of the Scheme through convergence.  
Convergence was also factored in the bottom-up planning process, wherein the States were to 
prepare and furnish L3 micro plans, duly taking into account all the activities to be implemented 
through convergence. These financial micro plans were to include a  detailed break-up of the 
funds from various sources such as GIM, CAMPA, MGNREGS, NAP, etc. Audit observed that 
MoEF&CC approved the Annual Plans of Operation without the receipt of these mandatory 
documents from all 16 States/UT involved under GIM.  
 
21  The Ministry in January 2018 ordered the merger of GIM and NAP. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
13 
MoEF&CC stated (July 2025) that interdepartmental and inter -schematic convergence with 
other relevant schemes in the State is in practice in 11 out of 16 States. However, the field audit 
conducted in these States has revealed absence of convergence. It was found that the States did 
not furnish any information  related to financial micro -plans entailing the break -up of funds 
from various sources/schemes for convergence even to the Ministry during the Audit Period.  
Further, scrutiny of information furnished by  the Ministry in respect of achievement of 
convergence by 11 States revealed the following: 
• The convergence details given by four States, namely, Uttarakhand, Andhra Pradesh, 
Kerala and Odisha, only mentioned strategies for the achievement of convergence 
rather than actual achievement. 
• Jammu & Kashmir  and West Bengal stated that afforestation activities through 
convergence were in practice in their States. However, no supporting records were 
furnished to Audit. 
• As far as the States of Sikkim, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh are 
concerned, some details of work carried out through the funds of other schemes like 
MGNREGS, CAMPA, State Medicinal Plants Board were shared with Audit. But the 
fact remains that the achievement made was not disclosed under GIM, as the progress 
reports were devoid of such information. 
• The State of Mizoram reported non-achievement of convergence. 
2.1.4  Implementation of afforestation schemes of similar nature running in isolation 
The Department of Expenditure in June 2011 stated that all schemes with objectives similar to 
GIM may be identified and dovetailed into the Mission. An Evaluation Committee constituted 
for reviewing the schemes under the 12 th Five Year Plan in October 2016 suggested that the 
Mission Directorate of GIM should be made a National Directorate for all afforestation 
activities across schemes/Ministries with a database at the national level. It would be mandatory 
for all agencies dealing with afforestation to report to the Mission Directorate of GIM.  
The Ministry, in January 2017, decided to merge GIM with all the afforestation schemes of the 
Ministry in meeting the challenge of sustainable forest management. 
Audit, however, observed that despite the decision taken to merge all afforestation 
programmes, schemes like Nagar Van Yojana (with the objective to enhance the trees outside 
forests and green cover in cities leading to enhancement of biodiversity and ecological benefits 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
14  
to the urban and peri -urban areas) and School Nursery Yojana (aiming to provide an 
environment for the students to understand and appreciate the significance of plants in 
maintaining and sustaining the natural eco -systems) by National Afforestation and 
Eco-Development Board were still running parallel to GIM in MoEF&CC. Further, it was also 
noticed that Nagar Van Yojana and School Nursery Yojana had components similar to Sub 
Mission 3 ‘Enhancing tree cover in Urban and Peri -Urban Areas’ and were being funde d by 
CAMPA funds.  
MoEF&CC stated (July 2025) that Nagar Van Yojana and School Nursery Yojana are special 
schemes funded in totality by National CAMPA with National Afforestation Eco-development 
Board of the Ministry functioning as Programme Division. These initiatives are independent of 
GIM in their implementation and fund flow modalities but complement and contribute to the 
landscape approach adopted u nder GIM for its landscapes. Both these schemes are 
complementing the Mission’s interventions under the Sub Mission 3 of the  GIM Mission 
Document of 2011 and the Sub Mission 2 of the Revised Mission Document 2021. However, 
the fact remains that the achievement made under these Schemes had not been reflected in the 
progress reports of GIM as maintained by the Ministry and the States.  
2.1.5  Non-receipt of collative Annual Plan of Operations (APOs) 
Since plantation/afforestation activities are taken up throughout the country by different 
Central Ministries, State Governments and other organisations with separate implementation 
and monitoring mechanisms, the Ministry in 2022 issued the Integrated Convergence 
Guidelines to converge all afforestation schemes for addressing sustainable management of 
forest resources. 
As per these guidelines, States are required to submit a collative APO incorporating the targets 
and achievements of all afforestation schemes being implemented in the State. The single 
collative APO was to be prepared having scheme-wise targets along with KML files22 from the 
other line departments, to avoid duplication and uniformly cover the priority areas.  Audit, 
however, observed that none of the 16 States/UT submitted collative APOs to MoEF&CC till 
March 2025. In the absence of collative APOs from States, the mobilisation of resources from 
other schemes could not be determined. Further, duplication of afforestation activities of GIM 
with other schemes cannot be ruled out. 
 
22 A Keyhole Markup Language file is an XML based file format used to display geographic data  in an Earth browser like Google 
Earth. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
15 
MoEF&CC stated (July 2025) that the submission of collative APOs is a major component of 
the National Afforestation Management System (NAMS), launched in June 2025 and the same 
shall be implemented in spirit post the release of the revised Implementation G uidelines of 
Green India Mission. The reply may be viewed in the light of the fact that the National 
Afforestation Management System is yet to be implemented by MoEF&CC. 
Thus, it is evident from the above that similar afforestation schemes/activities in States were 
either not converged or reported under GIM, leading to non -realisation of the synergies that 
were to be achieved through convergence. 
Recommendation No. 1: 
The Ministry may reassess the convergence aspect of GIM with CAMPA, MGNREGS and 
other Central and State afforestation schemes, especially the reasons for its persistent 
non-achievement, so as to ascertain its feasibility for implementation of the Mission. 
2.2  Institutional Machinery under GIM 
GIM envisages a four-tier institutional structure, with MoEF&CC facilitating the 
implementation of the Mission at the National level, the State Forest Development Agency 
(SFDA) at the State level, the Forest Development Agency (FDA) at the District level and the 
Joint Forest Management Committees (JFMCs)/Van Sa nrakshan Samitis/Village Forest 
Committees23 mandated under the Gram Sabha at the Village level. 
2.2.1  Deficiencies observed at the National Level 
At the national level, the Mission has a Governing Council, chaired by the Minister of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, to provide for overall guidance and synergy of action 
and a National Executive Council chaired by the Secretary, MoEF&CC, with th e overall 
responsibility for the Mission.  The Mission Directorate, chaired by the Mission Director and 
supported by a team of experts and secretarial staff, has the overall accountability for the 
Mission deliverables at the National level. 
 
23 Henceforth in the Report, Van Sanrakshan Samitis/Village Forest Committees are referred to as Joint Forest Management 
Committees (JFMCs). 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
16  
 
Figure 3: Institutional Structure at the National Level 
As per the Implementation Guidelines, the NGC would meet at least once a year and the NEC, 
twice a year. Audit, however, observed that as against the mandatory 10 meetings of NGC 
which were to be conducted during the period 2015 to 2025, only two meetings were conducted 
as of March 2025, depriving the Mission of overall guidance and synergy with other 
programmes. The NEC, which was responsible for scrutinising and approving the Plans 
submitted by the States, held only 10 out of the 20 mandatory meetings dur ing this period, 
leading to delays in approval of Perspective Plans and APOs sent by the States and non-
resolution of underl ying issues (as discussed in Paras 2.1, 2.4, 3.3 and 4.4.1.4), thereby 
delaying the implementation of GIM activities. The Ministry while noting the observation 
stated that the issue would be addressed in future. 
2.2.2  Deficiencies observed at the State Level 
GIM was to support revamping of the existing institutions (of the National Afforestation 
Programme), which meant inclusion of additional higher rank officials for greater 
empowerment, having responsibility for providing maximum convergence opportunities at the 
implementation level. The composition of the Committees is detailed in Annexure III. 
A revamped State Forest Development Agency 24 (SFDA) was to act as the State Mission 
Directorate to solicit cross -sectoral representation and guide the Mission activities. 
Additionally, a State Steering Committee was vested with the overall management of the 
Mission in the State. The detailed functions of the two bodies have been provided in the figure 
below: 
 
24 The revamped SFDA was to be chaired by the Chief Minister of the State and had more members than the existing SFDA, which not 
only had fewer members but was also chaired by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (further details in Annexure III). 
•Provides overall guidance and synergy of action for GIM with
other programmes.
•Approves Annual Report of GIM.National Governing Council (NGC) 
•Approves the Perspective Plan and APO for each State.
•Monitors the progress of the utilisation of funds released by the
State GIM.
•Ensures inter-departmental coordination and convergence.
National Executive Council (NEC) 
•Overall accountability for the Mission Deliverables at the 
National Level.
•Scrutiny and sanction of projects along with monitoring and 
evaluation.
Mission Directorate

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
17 
 
Figure 4: Institutional Structure at the State level 
Out of the 16 sampled States/UT, Audit observed non-constitution of revamped SFDA in nine 
States, and a non-functional SFDA in one State. Further, the State Steering Committee was not 
found constituted in one State. The details are given in Table 2 below: 
Table 2: Deficiencies observed in the institutional structure at the State Level 
Nature of deficiency 
observed in Audit 
Remarks 
Non-constitution of 
revamped SFDA 
• Observed in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, 
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Odisha, Kerala and Sikkim. 
• GIM was being implemented through existing SFDAs in these States. 
Non-functional bodies 
of SFDA/SSC 
• Though the orders of revamping were notified in October 2015, the General 
Body of the SFDA Uttarakhand was not found functional, whereas the SLEC 
was functional with effect from September 2019, which resulted in delay in 
implementation of GIM by four years. 
• The State Steering Committees of Andhra Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Karnataka and Uttarakhand were not functional. 
Non-constitution of 
SSC 
• The committee was not found constituted in the State of West Bengal. The 
functions of SSC were being undertaken by SLEC despite not having the 
mandate. 
Absence of the revamped SFDA in most States and lack of meetings of revamped General Body 
of SFDA and/or SLEC during the period of Audit (2015 -2025) (Annexure IV)  in seven 
States/UT viz., Arunachal Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Mizoram and Uttarakhand led to non -achievement of programmatic convergence at the L1 
level landscape as envisioned (Para 2.1).  
Further, though the State Steering Committees were found constituted in 15 out of 16 
States/UT, the meetings of 11 functional SSCs were not held as per the prescribed frequency 
•General Body (GB): Provides overall guidance and oversees
implementation of the Mission's objectives.
•State Level Executive Committee (SLEC): Gives technical
approval to districts' Annual Plan of Operations (APOs) and
prepares the State APO for submission to State Steering
Committee for finalisation.
State Forest Development Agency 
(SFDA)
•Finalises the State APO and forwards it to MoEF&CC.
•Finalises Perspective Plan for each L1 level landscape and
forwards it to MoEF&CC.
•Monitors progress of the utilisation of funds released by State
GIM.
•Works as an Empowered Committee for according financial
sanctions and approvals at the State level.
•Provides guidance and synergy with other programmes
ensuring convergence.
State Steering Committee (SSC)

Report No. 4 of 2026 
18  
of at least once in six months and in six States 25, the SSC had conducted only one meeting 
during 2015 -2025, as given in Annexure IV . Non -functional SSCs resulted in Perspective 
Plans/APOs being sent to the Ministry without the mandatory scrutiny, rectifications and 
approvals, as was noticed in the States/UT of Karnataka, Jammu & Kashmir, West Bengal, 
Uttarakhand and Andhra Pradesh.  
SFDA Maharashtra stated (July 2025) that there was no need to constitute a separate State 
Level Executive Committee, as majority of the members including the Principal Secretary 
(Forests) of SLEC were already a part of the Steering Committee. As such, the Office of the 
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests prepared the APO for submission to the Steering 
Committee for approval.  
The reply may be viewed in the light of the fact that the State APO was prepared by the PCCF 
office itself without the consultation of SLEC  which led to deviation in the targets set under 
the Perspective Plan of the Maharashtra and one of its Forest Division (Dahanu) (Para 2.3). 
Madhya Pradesh stated that absence of the revamped SFDA did not have any adverse impact 
on the successful implementation  of the scheme. The fact remains that issues relating to 
convergence were not addressed in Madhya Pradesh. 
2.2.3  Deficiencies observed at the District Level 
At the district level, the implementation of the Mission was to be facilitated by revamped Forest 
Development Agencies (FDAs) that would link with the District Planning Committee and the 
Landscape Level Planning (LSP)/Cluster Level Committee. 
 
25  Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Maharashtra, Sikkim and Odisha. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
19 
      
 
Figure 5: Institutional Structure at the District level 
Out of 16 States/UT, Audit observed that FDAs of 13 States had not been revamped. Out of the 
three revamped FDAs, Audit observed non -functional FDA in the case of Haryana. Only one 
meeting was held in case of revamped FDA of Mizoram during the period 2015 -25. 
(Annexure IV) 
The District Steering Committee was not constituted in 10 out of 16 States/UT, while the 
District Planning Committee was not constituted in nine out of 16 States/UT and Landscape 
Level Planning Committee was not constituted in 13 out of 16 States/UT. Details are given in 
Table 3: 
Table 3: Deficiencies observed in the institutional structure at the District Level 
Nature of deficiency observed 
in Audit 
Remarks 
Non-revamping of FDA  • Observed in the FDAs of Odisha, three forest divisions in Punjab, West 
Bengal, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Maharashtra, 
Sikkim, Karnataka, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh ; 12 out of 14 
divisions of Madhya Pradesh, and two out of five FDAs in Arunachal 
Pradesh. 
Non-functional FDA • Noticed in the case of Haryana, as no meetings were held from January 
2016 to March 2025. 
Non-constitution of District 
Steering Committee 
• Not constituted in the States of Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, 
Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra ; in 12 out of 14 divisions 
in Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh ; in 15 out of 16 divisions of Jammu 
& Kashmir and West Bengal. 
• General Body: Deals with policy issues pertaining to
convergence of different programmes at the Panchayat level.
• District Level Executive Committee (DLEC): Prepares the
Annual Plan of Operation (APO) for the district.
• Responsible for implementation of the Mission in the District.
• Brings convergence issues to the notice of District Steering
Committee and State Level Executive Committee for resolution.
Forest Development Agency
(FDA)
•Provides coordination and cohesion between implementation
structures of other schemes and GIM.District Steering Committee
(DSC)
•Approves L2 Landscape Plans.District Planning Committee
(DPC)
•Prepares L2 Landscape Plans.
•Monitors preparation of landscape plans at the L3 level, i.e.,
village level.
•Identifies the entities at village level for formulation of the
micro-plan.
Landscape Level Planning
(LSP)/Cluster Level Committee

Report No. 4 of 2026 
20  
Nature of deficiency observed 
in Audit 
Remarks 
Non-constitution of District 
Planning Committee 
• Not constituted in nine26 out of the 16 States/UT involved in GIM. 
Non-constitution of Landscape 
Level Planning/Cluster Level 
Committee (a sub -committee of 
the revamped FDA) 
• Not constituted in 13 States27 out of the 16 States selected in GIM. 
• Due to non-constitution of LSP in Jammu & Kashmir and Sikkim, the 
landscape plans at the L2 level (district level) could not be formulated.  
• Due to non-constitution of LSP in Uttarakhand, the L2 landscapes were 
selected by the SFDA. 
• Selection of L2 landscapes was done by a consultant (Jadavpur 
University) taking support of forest divisions and GIS Cell in West 
Bengal. The LSP , which included representatives of Joint Forest 
Management Committees and key -line agencies who are at the grass 
root level and hence in a better position to identify suitable degraded 
sites could have helped avert the selection of sites with existing fore st 
cover under Sub Mission 1 (discussed in Para 4.3.2.1). 
Due to non -revamping of FDAs in most States, issues relating to convergence of different 
schemes with GIM could not be brought to the notice of DSC and SLEC and the overall 
implementation of GIM at the district level was hampered. This resulted in identification of 
sites comprising of dense forests t hat did not require any plantation or were already saturated 
under different afforestation schemes ( discussed in  Paras 2.4, 2.5.2  and Chapter IV  
subsequently). 
MoEF&CC stated (September 2025) that based on the learnings of implementation and the 
feedback from the States, the Governing body at both the SFDA and FDA level is not proposed 
under the Guidelines of the Revised Mission Document 2021. 
Recommendation No. 2: 
The Ministry should ensure strict adherence to the prescribed frequency of meetings of the 
National Governing Council and the National Executive Council to enable timely planning, 
effective guidance and prompt resolution of implementation issues under the Scheme. It 
should also review the  need for  multiple bodies at the State and District levels for GIM 
implementation to establish an effective and accountable decentralised governance 
framework. 
 
 
 
26 Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Mizoram, Punjab and West Bengal. 
27 Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Sikkim, Uttarakhand and West Bengal. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
21 
2.2.4  Deficiencies observed at the Village Level 
At the village level, planning and implementation are vested with local-level institutions of the 
Gram Sabha, i.e., revamped Joint Forest Management Committees (JFMCs). As an institution, 
the JFMC conforms and contributes to decentralised forest governance, empowering the 
community on one hand and securing sustainable forest management on the other. 
 
Figure 6: Institutional Structure at the Village Level 
A village level micro plan is a need based and site -specific forest development plan of the 
village aiming to meet the rural community’s demand for fodder, fuel wood, Non-Timber 
Forest Produce, etc. It includes action plan for implementing plantation activities under various 
schemes. As per the Implementation Guidelines of GIM, micro plans were to be developed by 
the JFMCs in a participatory manner for each constituent unit or village of the L2 leve l 
landscape, duly incorporating priorities and requirements of the local communities. The same 
were to be approved by the respective Gram Sabha. A total of 421 sampled JFMCs in 16 
States/UT were to prepare the micro plans. Audit observed that out of 421 JFMCs, 164 had not 
prepared the micro plans, leading to a shortfall of 38.95 per cent. 
Table 4: Discrepancies observed in the preparation of Micro Plans 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Deficiency observed 
Andhra Pradesh Out of the 12 sampled JFMCs, only four JFMCs (D.Solumula, Borathada, E.Solumula, 
Karakapattu) had prepared micro plans, of which only two micro plans of D.Solumula and 
E.Solumula JFMCs were approved by Gram Sabhas. 
Arunachal Pradesh None of the 29 JFMCs had prepared the micro plans. 
Chhattisgarh Although micro plans were prepared by all 25 sampled JFMCs, none of them were 
approved by the Gram Sabha. 
Haryana Out of 30 JFMCS, micro plans were prepared by 29 JFMCs. However, none were approved 
by the Gram Sabha. 
Jammu & Kashmir None of the 16 JFMCs had prepared micro plans. 
Maharashtra Out of 38 sampled JFMCs in six divisions, only 13 JFMCs had prepared micro plans.  
•Approves the micro plans prepared by the JFMCs.Gram Sabha
•Prepares the micro plan (L3 level plan) and implements the
activities envisaged under the Mission.Joint Forest Management Committee 
(JFMC)

Report No. 4 of 2026 
22  
Name of the 
State/UT 
Deficiency observed 
Madhya Pradesh Out of 30 sampled JFMCs, micro plans were prepared by 16 JFMCs of seven divisions 28. 
In Umaria division, certain works like promotion of rearing cattle of advanced breed, 
implementation of cyclic grazing, provision of modern cooking implements, etc., that were 
planned by JFMCs were not implemented, leading to non-addressal of priorities of JFMCs. 
Kerala Although micro plans were prepared by all 30 sampled JFMCs, none of them were 
approved by the Gram Sabha. 
Uttarakhand None of the 44 sampled JFMCs in Uttarakhand prepared the micro plans. 
West Bengal Though the micro plans were prepared by all 24 sampled JFMCs, none were approved by 
the Gram Sabha. 
Odisha It was observed that out of 30 sampled JFMCs, micro -plans were prepared by only three 
JFMCs. 
Sikkim Though the micro plans had been prepared by all 24 sampled JFMCs, none of them were 
approved by the Gram Sabhas. It was observed that the micro -plans lacked basic 
information29 which was required to be filled as per the format of micro plan shared by 
MoEF&CC (September 2016). 
Thus, out of 257 micro plans prepared by the JFMCs in the States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Mizoram, Odisha, Punjab, West Bengal and Sikkim, 134 micro plans (52.14 per cent) were not 
found approved by their respective Gram Sabhas. 
The micro plans or the L3 level landscape plans duly approved by the Gram Sabha are 
scrutinised to prepare an L2 level landscape plan which is then further scrutinised to prepare a 
L1 level landscape plan. Audit observed that even though 164 micro plans ha d not been 
prepared by the JFMCs in eight States/UT30, the same had been incorporated as L3 landscapes 
in the Perspective Plans approved by the Ministry. Development of the micro plans at the 
village level was central to the Mission’s activities, in the absence of which, planning and 
implementation of activities for improvement of a village could not be stakeholder-driven.  
MoEF&CC noted (September 2025) the observation. 
 
 
 
 
 
28 Barwani, Narmadapuram, Burhanpur, South Seoni, Sehore, Raisen and Sendhwa. 
29 Name of L1, L2 and L3 landscapes with geo-coordinates, Action Plan including phasing of programme and budgeting, physical and 
financial targets of the plan both under GIM and through convergence, time for saturation of landscape (tentative), projected  
improvement in the average annual income of forest dependent communities, capacity building plan. 
30 Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Odisha. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
23 
Recommendation No. 3: 
The Ministry should ensure that micro plans of the selected L3 landscapes are prepared by 
all the States and approved by the Gram Sabha so that the participation of the local 
communities is secured and their interests addressed. 
 
2.3  Non- adherence to bottom-up planning under GIM 
With a view to allow effective participation of local stakeholders in decision -making and 
selection of priorities, the Mission adopted a bottom-up approach in planning. 
    
 
Figure 7: Mechanism of approval of landscape plans at various levels 
Audit, however, observed that top-down planning was followed as against bottom-up planning 
as envisaged in the Implementation Guidelines for selection of landscapes.  
i. A case of top -down planning as against the bottom -up planning was noticed in two 
Divisions of Maharashtra, where there was variation in the targets proposed by the 
Divisions and those incorporated in the Perspective Plan of the State:  
Table 5: Deviations observed in the Perspective Plan (PP) of the Forest Division and the State 
Sl. No. Name of Division Name of Village Sub 
Mission 
Deviations observed 
As per PP of 
the Division 
As per PP of the 
State 
1 DCF Dahanu All 10 villages 4 40 ha 388 ha 
2 DCF Nandurbar All villages 4 Nil 202.40 ha 
 
Preparation of
Village Micro
Plan by the
JFMCs
Approval of
Micro Plan by
the Gram
Sabha
Preparation of
L2 Level
Perspective
Plan by the
Landscape
Planning
Committee
Approval of
L2 Level
Perspective
Plan by the
District
Planning
Commitee
Preparation of
State Level
Perspective
Plan by the
State Level
Executive
Committee
Finalisation of
State Level
Perspective
Plans by State
Steering
Committee for
onward
transmission
to MoEF&CC
Approval of
State Level
Perspective
Plan by
National
Executive
Council
L3 Level 
L2 Level 
L1 Level MoEF&CC
CC 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
24  
Thus, the targets that were incorporated in the Perspective Plan of the State were not 
proposed by the Divisions. The State stated  (July 2025) that the deviations observed in 
the Perspective Plans of DCF Dahanu and Nandurbar were exceptions. However, the fact 
remains that in the absence of SLEC, the State APO is being prepared by the PCCF office 
without consultation with the chairman of the Executive Committee of the FDA, which 
explains the variation in the targets being taken at the State Level. 
ii. MoEF&CC, in September 2020, approved the APO (2020 -21) for Nayagarh Division, 
Odisha, for inclusion in GIM. Audit, however, observed that forest guards of five JFMCs, 
Nayagarh FDA communicated (December 2020) the non-availability of sites suitable for 
plantation to the FDA. Despite this adverse report, the Division reported full achievement 
in its Progress Report of 2021 -22, clearly indicating that the APO (2020 -21) was 
unilaterally prepared by SFDA, Odisha. Further , the plantations in these locations were 
observed to have been carried out in dense forests, resulting in poor growth of plants (1 to 
4 feet) even after the third year. 
iii. In West Bengal, it was observed that due to non-availability of land in Kharagpur Forest 
Division, interventions under Sub Mission 4 (c) Agro -forestry and Social Forestry on 
highways/rural roads/canals, etc., could be carried out in only 30 out of 50 ha in one L3 
landscape31 under Kalaikunda Range. In a similar instance, funds to the tune of ₹ 5 lakh 
were surrendered by Bankura (North) Division on account of non -execution of 18 ha 
plantation in five L3 landscapes32 under Chhatna Range due to non-suitability of the land 
in March 2022. 
The above instances indicate that the bottom-up approach was not adhered to both in terms of 
identification of areas and assignment of physical targets, ultimately resulting in non - 
achievement of targets under the Mission. 
MoEF&CC noted (September 2025) the observation. 
Recommendation No. 4: 
The Ministry  may ensure that the ‘bottom -up planning’ envisaged under the Mission is 
followed by all States so that the physical targets as well as suitability of the areas for 
interventions are communicated from the (bottom) village level to the (top) State level. 
 
 
31 Dumuria-Sirishboni. 
32 Bali Dumdumy, Jamdahari, Korrah, Kumargara and Patabar. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
25 
2.4  Delay in approval of Perspective Plan of the States 
Audit observed delays ranging between 14 to 44 months in approval of Perspective Plans due 
to lackadaisical approach of the Ministry. Some cases have been discussed below: 
i. SFDA Haryana submitted its Perspective Plan in November 2017. Despite multiple 
reminders from the State during the period from May 2018 to July 2021, the Ministry 
approved the plan in August 2021, after a delay of 44 months. 
ii. SFDA West Bengal, in March 2017, submitted its Perspective Plan to the Ministry for 
approval. However, the Ministry returned the same to the State in May 2017, for want 
of some clarifications. Audit noticed that the matter was not pursued by either of the 
parties until December 2018. The revised Plan was finally received in February 2019 
after a reminder from the Ministry in January 2019 and approved by the NEC in 
July 2019, causing a cumulative delay of 24 months. 
iii. The Perspective Plan of Maharashtra was received in the Ministry in December 2014 
and placed before the NEC in May 2015, wherein it was deferred by the NEC for want 
of certain details. Audit observed that the Ministry took 15 months (September 2016) 
to convey the reasons for deferment of the Perspective Plan to the State. The revised 
Perspective Plan was received in November 2016 but approved by the NEC in January 
2018. Thus, there was a delay of 32 months in the approval of the Perspective Plan.  
iv. SFDA Arunachal Pradesh submitted its Perspective Plan in December 2019. 
MoEF&CC took almost nine months to scrutinise the Perspective Plan and convey the 
deficiencies observed to SFDA in October 2020. Revised Perspective Plan was received 
in the Ministry i n December 2020 and approved by the National Executive Council 
(NEC) in August 2021. Thus, there was a cumulative delay of 16 months on the part of 
the Ministry. 
v. The Perspective Plan for Himachal Pradesh was submitted by the State thrice, i.e., in 
March 2013, February 2015 and March 2016. Audit observed that after several 
correspondences made between the Ministry and the State for revision of the 
Perspective Plan, it was finally approved by the NEC in January 2018 leading to a delay 
of 14 months. Although the last revised Perspective Plan was submitted by the State in 
March 2017, revision was not carried out in terms of identification of new landscapes. 
This resulted in selection of sites that had already been taken up under different state 
schemes. Further, it was observed that even in April 2023, DFOs of Pangi and Kinnaur 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
26  
forest divisions kept expressing their inability to execute works as proposed in the 
Perspective Plans due to non-availability of land in the selected landscapes33.  
Thus, improper planning and scrutiny on the part of MoEF&CC led to the delay in approval of 
the Perspective Plan further leading to delay in implementation of GIM interventions in the 
States and selection of saturated landscapes as observed in case of Himachal Pradesh. 
2.5  Deficiencies in Perspective Plans 
Examination of the Perspective Plans of the States revealed the following shortcomings:  
2.5.1  Moderate to less vulnerable landscapes prioritised for GIM interventions 
One of the criteria enunciated in the Mission Documents of GIM (2011 and 2021) for selection 
of project areas under the Mission included projected vulnerability to climatic change. A 
vulnerability analysis helps to identify forest types and regions which r equire adaptation 
strategies to enable forests to cope with climate change. During the course of Audit, it was 
observed that moderate to less vulnerable landscapes were given more priority over highly 
vulnerable landscapes in the following States: 
i. Based on the climate vulnerability exercise carried out by Himachal Pradesh Forest 
Department, L2 and L3 landscapes selected for GIM interventions were classified under 
four major biogeographic zones, namely, North -Western Himalayas, Western 
Himalayas, Shi waliks and the Trans Himalayas. The Study showed that the 
North-Western Himalayas was the most vulnerable landscape followed by Western 
Himalayas, Trans Himalayas and Shiwaliks. Audit observed that out of the 29 L3 
landscapes (Annexure V) for which funds were released in June 2020, 15 L3 landscapes 
(52 per cent) belonged to the Shiwalik zone, which was the least vulnerable zone.  
ii. In case of Andhra Pradesh, out of the nine circles 34 proposed by the State in 
February 2012 for undertaking bridge plan activities35, only Visakhapatnam Circle was 
selected by the Ministry. It was observed that neither vulnerability assessment exercise 
was carried out by the State nor any studies regarding climate vulnerability were 
considered for selection of landscapes in the Perspec tive Plan. Audit observed that as 
per the Atlas on Vulnerability of Indian Agriculture to Climate Change 2013 36, 
 
33 Killar-57 and Moorang-I-177. 
34 Anantapur, Kurnool, Guntur, Visakhapatnam, Warangal, Nizamabad, Khammam, Eluru and Tirupathi. 
35 The Bridge Plan comprised of initial activities that the State was to undertake after selection of landscapes for GIM interve ntions 
and before the preparation of the Perspective Plan. 
36 Issued by Central Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture, Hyderabad, a constituent organisation of the Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
27 
Anantapur, Guntur and Kurnool (Annexure VI)  were more vulnerable than 
Visakhapatnam. Hence, despite being less vulnerable, Visakhapatnam was selected for 
interventions. SFDA Andhra Pradesh, stated (July 2025), that the decision to select 
Vishakhapatnam Circle was taken at the level of PCCF considering multiple operational 
factors, however the State acknowledged Audit’s emphasis on vulnerability based 
planning. 
iii. Based on Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment by the Environmental Planning 
and Coordination Organisation, Bhopal, SFDA Madhya Pradesh selected 18 districts 
for GIM interventions. Audit observed that out of 18 districts, five districts lay in 
‘moderate to low’ category while three districts selected for forest interventions did not 
figure in the Vulnerability Profile created by the State (Annexure VII). Only 10 out of 
31 highly vulnerable districts mentioned in the vulnerability assessment report were 
selected for GIM interventions. SFDA Madhya Pradesh, stated (July 2025), that the 
landscapes were selected on the basis of biotic pressure, area of open forests and 
degraded forests. However, the fact remains that the selection was to be done taking 
into account the vulnerability of the sites for which the vulnerability profile was created. 
iv. Audit observed that six out of  11 districts (54.55 per cent) (Annexure VIII) selected 
for GIM interventions under the Perspective Plan of Chhattisgarh, lay in the category 
of ‘low to moderately vulnerable’ according to the district -wise Vulnerability 
Assessment of Chhattisgarh funded by United Nations Development Programme 
(June 2014). Only five out of 12 highly vulnerable districts mentioned in the 
vulnerability assessment report were selected for GIM interventions. 
Given that vulnerability was a significant criterion for identification of GIM landscapes, the 
lack of above mentioned criteria in the various Perspective Plans proposed by the States was 
not examined by the Ministry and funding was approved for landscapes  of low 
priority/vulnerability, thus, hampering overall project implementation. 
Recommendation No. 5: 
The Ministry should prioritise selection of more vulnerable landscapes for afforestation 
activities within available budgetary resources so as to optimise the impact of plantations in 
line with the objectives of the mission in dealing with climate change.  
 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
28  
2.5.2  Usage of old baseline data in Perspective Plans 
Baseline data provides a benchmark to analyse and monitor physical progress, thereby 
facilitating comparison and assessment of the performance of the Scheme in improving 
ecosystems and quality of forests. The baseline data formed an integral component of t he 
Perspective Plan. Audit observed usage of outdated baseline data for important parameters like 
forest cover, total population, wasteland estimation for identification of landscapes in five 
States/UT, namely, Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Jammu & Kashmir, Haryana and Maharashtra at 
the time of submission of the Perspective Plan to MoEF&CC ranging from four to 17 years (as 
detailed in the Annexure IX). 
Moreover, in the case of Haryana, though the Perspective Plan was approved in August 2021, 
the data related to the forest cover and the wasteland was outdated by four years due to which 
landscapes selected in Jhajjar District were found to be saturated resulting in zero interventions 
in the District. The SFDA, in its reply, stated that the Perspective Plan of Haryana prepared 
during 2014 -15 was sent for approval to MoEF&CC in November 2017 but approved in 
August 2021. During this gap period no revision coul d be made based on new baseline data. 
The reply is not acceptable as the approved Perspective Plan was based on data that was four 
years old even at the time of submission to the Ministry in 2016-17. 
Consideration of old baseline data for the compilation of the Perspective Plans did not provide 
a true picture of the prevailing conditions and led to improper planning, which in turn affected 
the implementation of the Plan. 
MoEF&CC noted (September 2025) the observation. 
2.6  Conclusion 
The implementation of Green India Mission was significantly impacted by systemic lapses in 
decentralised forest governance, a key component under planning that was to be achieved 
through strengthening of various institutions at the State and District Level s and bottom -up 
planning. Most institutions were not constituted/revamped. Further, absence of crucial 
stakeholders in the Committees and irregular conduct of mandatory meetings deprived the 
Mission from the overall guidance in implementation, especially w ith respect to the 
much-needed convergence. Lack of concrete and coordinated efforts at the level of the Ministry 
to achieve convergence such as non -receipt of collative APOs and independent execution of 
other afforestation schemes highlight important gaps. This led to the paucity of funds, thereby 
impacting the overall progress of GIM. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
29 
The non-constitution of Committees also resulted in selection of dense forests for plantation 
instead of degraded forest areas, identification of saturated sites and non -adherence to 
bottom-up approach of planning. 
The cases observed revealed gaps in the prioritisation of landscapes for Mission interventions. 
These gaps were primarily due to deficient Perspective Plans, which lacked comprehensive 
vulnerability assessments and relied on outdated baseline data. This resulted in the selection of 
less vulnerable landscapes and failure in identifying unique landscapes that warranted targeted 
interventions. 
All these deficiencies prevented GIM from evolving into a focussed and climate -resilient 
afforestation initiative.  
 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
30  
Chapter III 
Financial Management 
Financial Management is the strategic process of planning, organising, controlling and 
monitoring financial resources to achieve intended objectives. Ensuring financial 
accountability, transparency, optimal use of available funds and informed decision making in a 
constantly changing environment is crucial for any scheme. Audit observed deficiencies in 
financial management of the scheme as discussed below: 
3.1 Financial outlays 
As already discussed, (Chapter II, Para 2.1) that the CCEA in February 2014 approved GIM 
for the 12th Plan period and one year spill over to the 13th Plan, i.e., upto 2017-18 at a total cost 
of ₹13,000 crore, which included ₹10,600 crore through convergence.  However, it was 
observed that the convergence of activities of GIM with other afforestation schemes amounting 
to ₹10,600 crore could not be achieved and the proposed funding support could not be attained.  
Consequently, as of March 2025 all the funding for GIM was financed by MoEF&CC through 
the limited annual budgetary support received from the Government of India, as detailed below: 
Table 6: Budget and Expenditure of Green India Mission 
(₹ in crore)  
Financial Year Budget Estimate Revised Estimate Actual Expenditure Savings/Excess 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) = (3) – (4) 
2015-16 64.00 72.00 70.20 1.80 
2016-17 45.01 42.01 41.62 0.39 
2017-18 47.08 47.80 46.99 0.81 
2018-19 159.00 175.94 175.94 0.00 
2019-20 4.00 107.62 111.29 (-)3.67 
2020-21 185.00 103.37 112.92 (-)9.55 
2021-22 200.00 195.00 156.96 38.04 
2022-23 290.00 161.40 137.65 23.75 
2023-24 169.00 120.00 119.13 0.87 
2024-25 170.00 124.00 104.29 19.71 
Total 1333.09 1149.14 1076.99 72.15 
It can be seen from the above table that although the financial sanction of the CCEA was only 
up to 2018, the MoEF&CC continued to receive funds in the subsequent period as well. Further, 
against outlay of ₹2,000 crore approved by the CCEA for the initial four years of the Scheme 
from 12 th Plan outlay  alongwith ₹400 crore from 13 th Finance Commission grants towards 
states share , only ₹1,149.14  crore (47.88 per cent ) had been provided during 10 years of 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
31 
implementation (2015-16 to 2024 -25), leaving the Mission significantly short of the funding 
projected to meet its objectives. The fact that the Mission was under -funded was also pointed 
out by the 16 th Parliamentary Committee of Estimates (2018 -19) and NITI Aayog 
(November 2020). It was stated that the funds allocated to the Scheme were grossly insufficient 
and recommended that adequate financial allocation be made so that the activities of the 
Mission could be carried out more efficiently.  
Hence, the shortage of budgetary funds combined with unsuccessful attempts at convergence 
crippled the implementation of the Scheme and adversely impacted the achievement of targets 
set under the perspective plans, as discussed in detail in Chapter IV. 
MoEF&CC stated (July  2025) that the effectiveness of the Mission’s interventions was 
conditioned by the inadequate allocation of funds . MoEF&CC further added that the 
convergence under the Green India Mission is stipulated in terms of the activities with their 
achievements collating at the national level and not in the terms of any financial resources from 
any schemes. The Ministry stated that there was never any provision of roping in of funds from 
other schemes for implementing the GIM interventions. 
The reply of the Ministry contradicts the approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs (2014), which envisaged mobilising funds of ₹10,600 crore through convergence with 
schemes such as CAMPA (₹6,000 crore), MGNREGS (₹4,000 crore) and NAP (₹600 cr ore), 
as well as the approval of revised targets in 2021, which prescribed mobilisation of 
₹7,190 crore from CAMPA funds to ensure the overall objectives of increasing and improving 
forest cover, as discussed in Chapter II (Para 2.1) and Chapter IV (Para 4.1). 
Recommendation No. 6: 
The Ministry may review its financial planning for the Scheme, especially with respect to the 
repeated non-achievement of convergence aspect. Further, Government of India may also 
provide adequate funding to GIM to achieve its intended target. 
 
3.2 Release of funds to State Governments 
As per prescribed process, after getting the approval of Perspective Plans by National Executive 
Council (NEC) 37, the States send their Annual Plan of Operations (APOs) to the Centre for 
seeking approval of NEC. Once approved, MoEF&CC releases the Central Share to the State 
Government/UT, which then releases the funds along with the State’s matching share into the 
 
37 The Perspective Plan and Annual Plan of Operation (APO) for each state are approved by the National Executive Council chaired 
by the Secretary (MoEF&CC). 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
32  
bank account of State Forest Development Agency (SFDA). The SFDA releases the funds to 
Forest Development Agencies (FDAs), who then transfer funds to the respective Joint Forest 
Management Committees (JFMCs) for carrying out proposed activities in identified areas. 
With regard to Perspective Plans of 16 sampled States/UT  approved by MoEF&CC during 
2015-16 to 2024-25, Audit observed that against the approved cost of ₹8,237.19 crore (Centre’s 
share of ₹5,928.22 crore and State’s share of ₹2,308.97 crore), MoEF&CC could provide a sum 
of ₹898.15 crore (including unspent balance of ₹3.38 crore) only to these 16 States/UT, i.e., 
15.15 per cent against the Centre’s share projected under Perspective Plans till March 2025, 
whereas the States had contributed ₹326.16 crore (14.12 per cent) as their matching share. 
The details of funds provided to SFDAs of 16 sampled States/UT and expenditure incurred 
there against on the proposed afforestation and support activities during 2015 -16 to 2024-25 
are detailed below: 
Table 7: Details of releases and utilisation of funds under GIM by 16 sampled States/UT 
(₹ in crore) 
Financial 
Year 
Unspent 
Balance 
(Opening 
Balance) 
Releases 
(Centre38 
and State 
share) 
Total Available 
Fund 
Expenditure 
Incurred (per cent) 
Unspent Balance 
(Closing 
Balance) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) = (2) + (3) (5) (6) = (4) – (5) 
2015-16 0.00 81.91 81.91 43.80 (53.5%) 38.11 
2016-17 38.11 61.61 99.72 69.26 (69.4%) 30.46 
2017-18 30.46 53.40 83.86 56.56 (67.4%) 27.30 
2018-19 27.30 98.53 125.83 87.61 (69.6%) 38.22 
2019-20 38.22 131.79 170.01 97.62 (57.4%) 72.39 
2020-21 72.39 149.00 221.39 116.52 (52.6%) 104.87 
2021-22 104.87 184.05 288.92 177.39 (61.4%) 111.53 
2022-23 111.53 186.30 297.83 228.41 (76.7%) 69.42 
2023-24 69.42 133.09 202.51 152.21 (75.2%) 50.30 
2024-25 50.30 144.63 194.93 134.04 (68.8%) 60.89 
 
 
 
38 Including unspent balance of bridge plan activities. Bridge plans comprised of initial activities that the States were to undertake after 
selection of landscapes for GIM interventions and before the preparation of the Perspective Plan, such as constitution of State GIM 
cell, conducting workshops, nursery development, soil moisture conservation, micro planning, landscape survey, etc. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
33 
As would be seen from the table above, an expenditure of only ₹1163.42 crore could be made 
against allocation of ₹1224.31 crore during the years 2015-16 to 2024-25. The funds provided 
to States could not be fully utilised for the proposed activities, as the same were transferred 
with delay by either the Centre/State Governments or SFDAs/FDAs to JFMCs as discussed in 
succeeding paragraphs. 
3.3 Delay in approval of Annual Plan of Operations 
Timing is crucial for planting saplings as young plants need time to adjust to the site and 
develop a stable root system to enhance their chance of survival in the long run. Hence, weather 
patterns and soil conditions need to be factored in to identify the  ideal time and season for 
plantation activity to thrive. T aking into account the different geographical and climatic 
conditions in different States where monsoon season reaches in different times and plantation 
seasons starts accordingly, it is utmost nec essary that all the APOs of the States should be 
approved well before the APO period, so that that provision of funds and its timely releases to 
States could be made before plantation seasons. For this, it is necessary to fix the cut -off date 
for submissio n of APOs by the States and prepare a region -specific calendar for the entire 
country, which includes timelines for undertaking each pre -requisite activities such as soil 
moisture conservation works, plant preparation, sowing of seeds/saplings, etc., before starting 
the plantation activity. 
However, Audit found that neither in Mission Documents nor in Implementation Guidelines of 
GIM such cut -off date was prescribed.  A parallel may be drawn from the Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund Rules 2018, which mandate that APOs duly approved by the State Authority 
shall be submitted before 31 December of every year to the National Authority for the next 
financial year. The need for preparation of a plantation calendar for activities and timely release 
of funds under GIM was also emphasised by the NEC in its meeting of July 2019. However, 
the Directorate has not complied with the instructions of its own Executive Council.  
Audit observed that during 2015-16 to 2024-25, a total 68 APOs of 16 sampled States/UT were 
approved by MoEF&CC, wherein only six 39 APOs were received by MoEF&CC before the 
APO period/financial year. However, none of them were approved before the commencement 
of APO period/financial year.  
 
39 Andhra Pradesh (APO for 2018 -19), Punjab (APO for 2020 -21), Sikkim (APO for 2018 -19, 2020-21, 2021-22) and West Bengal 
(APO for 2020-21). 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
34  
The lack of a timeline for submission and approval of APOs under GIM is a concern, as it is a 
pre-requisite for the timely release of funds and their optimal utilisation for achievement of 
targets set under APOs . Thus, in the absence of a plantation calendar and a cut -off date of 
submission of APOs by States, the Mission could not receive APOs, accord approvals in a 
timely manner, which ultimately had a cascading effect on the release of fund to States/UT and 
on the afforestation activities proposed under APOs. 
MoEF&CC, while noting the Audit observation stated (September 2025) that timelines for the 
submission of Perspective Plans and the Annual Plans of Operations have been provided under 
the revised Implementation Guidelines of the Mission. However, the revised implementation 
guidelines are yet to be issued. 
Recommendation No. 7: 
MoEF&CC should fix a timeline for submission of APOs so that APOs may be approved 
well before the start of the financial year and funds released timely. 
Recommendation No. 8: 
Taking into consideration varied geographical/climatic conditions of regions/States, 
MoEF&CC should prepare a plantation calendar defining clear schedules for advance work 
and plantation/creation activities to enhance the survival of plants and fund disbur sement 
should be aligned as per the timelines provided in the schedule to ensure timely execution of 
planned activities. 
 
3.4 Delay in release of funds 
Given that GIM activities are season -specific, timely release of funds to the implementing 
agencies is of utmost importance for utilisation of funds during the year on the proposed 
activities.  However, it was observed that there were delays in timely rele ase and transfer of 
funds at various levels, resulting in non -utilisation of funds during the APO years and taking 
up of the proposed activities in subsequent year resulted into either downsizing of targets or 
cost escalation of APOs, as discussed below: 
3.4.1 Delay in release of funds at MoEF&CC level 
The funds to the States were released in two instalments 40 and the release of the 
second/subsequent instalment was subject to the progress of work and fund availability.  
 
40 After new procedure for funding to States was introduced (March 2021) under Single Nodal Agency, the releases to States are being 
made in four instalments of 25 per cent each. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
35 
Audit observed that for 22 out of the 24 APOs 41 approved in the first quarter, funds could be 
released from July only. It was further observed that in case of 33 APOs42, the first instalment 
was released to States between October and March and in seven43 such cases fund could not be 
released to SFDAs during the APO period. 
On examination of 19 APOs 44 (13 States), where first release was made between December 
and March, it was found that in 11 APOs45 (11 States/UT), ₹24.25 crore (22.24 per cent) out of 
the first instalment amount of ₹109.03 crore only could be utilised during the APOs’ period. 
This not only delayed the release of second instalment of APOs to the subsequent year but also 
led to downsizing of targets of one46 APO by MoEF&CC to the extent of first release and cost 
escalation in case of four47 APOs.  
MoEF&CC stated (July 2025) that the funds were released to the States on the basis of 
submission of the required documents as specified under the Scheme Guidelines, availability 
of the funds, Single Nodal Agency (SNA)48 balances and Guidelines for the release of funds of 
the Ministry of Finance. As per the Ministry of Finance's fund release Guidelines, the next 
instalment will be released only after the utilisation of 75 per cent of the previously released 
funds. It also stated that unspent funds parked in the SNA accounts of the States, significantly 
impacted overall budgetary allocations and lead to a reduction in the budget at the Revised 
Estimates stage due to the non-utilisation of funds by the States under the GIM Scheme.  
The reply of the MoEF&CC is not tenable as the issues related to non -utilisation of funds, 
parking of unspent balances in SNA accounts and delay in submission of requisite documents 
by States were largely associated with the delay in approval of APOs and s ubsequent release 
of funds by MoEF&CC.  Further, non -receipt of required documents from the States in time 
 
41 Except in two cases of SFDAs – Himachal Pradesh (APO for 2020-21) and Jammu & Kashmir (APO for 2020-21). 
42 APOs of Andhra Pradesh (2018 -19 and 2021 -22), Arunachal Pradesh (2022 -23), Chhattisgarh (2019 -20 and 2021 -22), Haryana 
(2021-22 and 2023-24), Jammu & Kashmir (2022-23), Karnataka (2017-18, 2018-19, 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2022-23), Kerala (2015-
16 and 2019 -20), Madhya Pradesh (2019 -20 and 2022 -23), Mizoram (2018 -19, 2019-20, 2020-21, 2021-22 and 2022 -23), Odisha 
(2015-16, 2017-18, 2021-22 and 2022-23), Punjab (2017-18 and 2019 -20), Sikkim (2021-22), Uttarakhand (2021-22 and 2022-23) 
and West Bengal (2019-20 and 2022-23). 
43 Andhra Pradesh (APO 2018-19 and 2021-22), Arunachal Pradesh (APO 2022-23), Haryana (APO 2021-22), Kerala (APO 2015-16) 
and Punjab (APO 2017-18 and 2019-20). 
44 Andhra Pradesh (APO 2021 -22), Arunachal Pradesh (APO 2022 -23), Chhattisgarh (APO 2021 -22), Haryana (APO 2021 -22), 
Jammu & Kashmir (APO 2022 -23), Karnataka (APO 2017 -18, 2018-19, 2020-21 and 2022 -23), Kerala (APO 2015 -16), Madhya 
Pradesh (APO 2019-20), Mizoram (APO 2018-19, 2020-21 and 2021-22), Odisha (APO 2015-16 and 2022-23), Punjab (APO 2017-
18), Uttarakhand (APO 2022-23) and West Bengal (APO 2019-20). 
45 Andhra Pradesh (2021-22), Arunachal Pradesh (2022-23), Chhattisgarh (2021-22), Jammu & Kashmir (2022-23), Kerala (2015-16), 
Madhya Pradesh (2019 -20), Punjab (2017 -18), Uttarakhand (2022 -23), Odisha (2015 -16), Haryana (2021 -22) and West Bengal 
(2019-20). 
46 Andhra Pradesh (2016-17). 
47 Karnataka (2016-17), Odisha (2017-18 and 2018-19), Punjab (2017-18). 
48 Since Financial Year 2021-22, the Union Government has been implementing the Single Nodal Agency (SNA) model for enhancing 
visibility and transparency in fund flows to States under Centrally Sponsored Schemes. For each Scheme, the State Government 
designates one SNA and opens its account in a scheduled commercial bank. Other implementing agencies of the Scheme open Zero 
Balance Subsidiary Accounts to draw funds from the SNA account. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
36  
indicates the need to strengthen the internal control mechanism at the level of the Ministry and 
better monitoring and coordination between MoEF&CC and States. 
3.4.2 Delay in release of funds at State Government level 
GIM Guidelines stipulate that the States would make provisions in their budget and transfer 
the funds well in time to the bank accounts of the SFDAs for implementation of the Mission 
through FDAs. Further, MoEF&CC in its funds’ release order stipulated that state governments 
would make provisions in their budget and on receipt of funds from the Reserve Bank of India, 
release the grants of above funds within 15 days of the issue of the sanction letter to SFDA, 
under intimation to MoEF&CC. 
However, 13 out of 16 State/UT Governments released the funds to their SFDAs with  delays 
ranging from six to 1252 days, as discussed in Annexure X. 
SFDA Maharashtra, Haryana, Kerala and Sikkim stated (June/July 2025) that due to non -
availability of State matching share and unavoidable circumstances at the State Governments’ 
level, the disbursements were delayed. SFDA Uttarakhand cited that lack of cla rity regarding 
revamped SFDA delayed the fund releases.   
3.4.3 Delay in release of funds at State Forest Development Agencies (SFDAs) level 
Release orders issued by MoEF&CC state that SFDAs shall transfer the amount earmarked to 
the concerned FDAs for carrying out proposed activities in different L2 landscapes within 
seven days of receipt of funds from the State Government. Audit found that six SFDAs did not 
observe this condition strictly and released funds to the concerned F DAs with delays ranging 
from three to 667 days, as discussed in Annexure XI. 
SFDA Andhra Pradesh acknowledged (June 2025) the observation. 
3.4.4 Delay in release of funds at Forest Development Agencies (FDAs) level 
As per the Mission Guidelines, the FDAs shall transfer funds to JFMCs, which are to 
implement the Mission activities at the village level. In this regard, MoEF&CC has reiterated 
in each sanction order of fund release that the FDAs shall release the amount to JFMCs within 
15 days of receipt of funds from the SFDA, preferably by Electronic Clearance System. 
However, it was observed that FDAs of eight SFDAs had released the funds to their respective 
JFMCs with delays ranging from one to 418 days (Annexure XII). 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
37 
In its reply, MoEF&CC forwarded the response of SFDA Madhya Pradesh, which stated 
(June 2025) that in future, timeline of 15 days for release of funds will be ensured. SFDA 
Uttarakhand attributed (July 2025) the delay in transfer of funds to Mother -Child account 
mode, which is now replaced with hassle free SNA mode of fund transfer in GIM scheme. 
3.4.5 Short release of States’ matching share 
Being a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, the State Governments were required to provide a 
matching share of funds in the prescribed ratio. Audit noticed that two State Governments did 
not contribute their committed matching share and shortfall of ₹13.50 crore49 was observed in 
the same during 2015-16 to 2024-25. 
Thus, delay in release of funds by MoEF&CC/State Governments/SFDAs/FDAs and short 
release of matching share by State Governments resulted in non-utilisation of funds during the 
APO period, cost escalation, downsizing of targets, thereby adversely impacting  the 
achievement of targets set under the Perspective Plans of the States. 
SFDA Madhya Pradesh stated (June 2025) that the State Government had not reduced the 
amount of state share released under Green India Mission and there had been no reduction of 
funds as per the budgetary provision at any level by the State Government. The reply of SFDA 
Madhya Pradesh is not acceptable as the Utilisation Certificates submitted to MoEF&CC 
disclose that the State matching share was not released as per the prescribed ratio. Further,  
MoEF&CC assured (July 2025) that State Governments had been in structed and advised to 
ensure timely release of funds to the FDAs and JFMCs to ensure implementation of the 
proposed activities as scheduled. 
Recommendation No. 9: 
State Governments, SFDAs and FDAs should consciously work towards ensuring adherence 
to the timelines for fund release, so that the funds can reach JFMCs on time for 
implementation of proposed activities. 
 
3.5 Parking of funds 
As per the conditions of the sanction order of fund releases issued by MoEF&CC, the entire 
fund should be utilised by the end of the financial year following the provisions of the General 
 
49 Chhattisgarh (₹4.05 crore) and Madhya Pradesh (₹9.45 crore). 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
38  
Financial Rules. The SFDAs shall furnish Utilisation Certificates (UCs) along with details of 
the unspent balance, interest accrued and the reasons for non-utilisation of funds.  
Audit observed cases related to parking of funds which have been discussed below: 
i. SFDA Uttarakhand made a fixed deposit account of the released amount of ₹22.23 crore 
(Centre and State share) in February 2016 and transferred the amount, including interest 
to the revamped SFDA in October 2017. The revamped SFDA also made FDs 
amounting to ₹23.48 crore in favour of itself and FDAs in February 2018. Thus, the 
funds for plantation activity were parked in the bank as fixed deposits for more than 
three years. SFDA Uttarakhand stated (July 2025) that due to delay in implementation 
of GIM activities, the funds were kept in a fixed deposit account. 
ii. In Odisha, during 2015-16 to 2022-23, FDA Berhampur received a total fund of ₹12.64 
crore from its SFDA. UCs submitted by FDA Berhampur to SFDA for these years 
disclosed that a total expenditure of ₹11.11 crore was reported thereunder with an 
unspent balance of ₹0.50 crore, as of March 2023. However, bank accounts of their 
JFMCs showed that a total amount of ₹6.62 crore was available with them, as on 
31 March 2023.  
iii. Similarly, FDA Nayagarh had received ₹2.43 crore during 2022 -23 from Odisha’s 
SFDA. In the UCs for the year 2022 -23, it reported that an amount of ₹2 crore was 
utilised till March 2022 -23. However, bank accounts of its 23 JFMCs to which funds 
were released disclosed that as on 31 March 2023, a total sum of ₹1.26 crore was lying 
in their bank accounts.  
Hence, it can be concluded that both the FDAs had provided inflated figure of 
expenditure in their UCs. 
iv. In Karnataka, an unspent balance of ₹1.38 crore 50 (including interest) prior to 2021, 
when Single Nodal Agency was introduced, was lying in the bank accounts of 
18 JFMCs of three FDAs, namely, Hassan, Kalaburgi and Sirsi, which were not 
reported/remitted to the SFDA. As a result, this amount has not been transferred to the 
Single Nodal Agency account and remains parked with the JFMCs. 
 
50 ₹0.81 crore in four JFMCs (Chikkalingdalli, Kusarampalli, Jawahar Nagar, Sheri Bikanalli) of FDA Kalaburgi, ₹0.52 crore in 
10 JFMCs (Babdisar, Bellate, Heggodamane, Igod, Kanagod, Halagadikoppa, Mandlikoppa, Muttige, Nigode Tumragod, Sampgod) 
of FDA Sirsi and ₹0.05 crore in four JFMCs (Hampapura, Madapura, Gobbli, Yaladhahalli) of FDA Hassan. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
39 
v. With a view to achieve integration of various afforestation programmes, MoEF&CC in 
January 2018 decided to merge its two Centrally Sponsored Schemes, National 
Afforestation Programme (NAP) and GIM together into a single scheme. As a result of 
this merger, all the budget and assets of NAP were to be transferred to GIM. However, 
it was noticed that in five 51 States, funds amounting to ₹14. 73 crore relating to NAP 
were still lying with SFDAs . On being pointed out by Audit, SFDA Madhya Pradesh 
transferred the c entral share amounting to ₹6.78  crore pertaining  to NAP funds to 
MoEF&CC in May 2025. The replies of SFDAs of the four 52 States is still awaited  
(September 2025).   
Thus, the parking of funds by States contributed to the limited achievement of the targets set 
under GIM, which was already reeling under pressure due to the paucity of funds. 
3.6 Suspected misappropriation of ₹9.19 crore 
The FDAs should release funds to the JFMCs within 15 days of receipt of funds from SFDA 
preferably by Electronic Clearance System (ECS) and the JFMCs shall deposit the fund thus 
received from FDA in their exclusive and separate bank accounts. 
SFDA Mizoram released a sum of ₹9.19 crore to FDA Kolasib for carrying out afforestation 
activities under GIM in March 2023 leading to its non-utilisation during the year. However, in 
its UCs and progress reports for the year 2022-23, FDA Kolasib had reported full utilisation of 
funds till March 2023. Audit found that FDA Kolasib had withdrawn (April 2023) the entire 
amount of ₹9.19 crore in cash and could not provide any documentary evidence for utilisation 
of the cash withdrawn. Further, bank statements of 12 JFMCs under the FDA Kolasib were also 
verified by Audit, with a view to assess as to whether the withdrawn fund was transferred to 
their bank accounts. However, no credit of funds to their bank accounts was observed.  
Hence, in the absence of documentary evidence for utilisation of ₹9.19 crore and its 
non-deposition in the JFMCs bank accounts, Audit could not vouch upon utilisation of the fund 
for the envisaged purpose. Cash withdrawal of such a large amount and the lack of supporting 
documents for the funds’ utilisation is a risk area for misappropriation of funds. 
SFDA Mizoram stated (January 2025) that the fund was released to the JFMCs. The reply of 
the SFDA is not tenable as the documents provided in support of the claim do not disclose that 
 
51 Himachal Pradesh (₹0.34 crore), Madhya Pradesh (₹11.31 crore), Andhra Pradesh (₹1.18 crore), Uttarakhand (₹1.90 crore) and 
Sikkim (₹0.10 lakh). 
52 Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Odisha and West Bengal. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
40  
FDA Kolasib had disbursed ₹9.19  crore to JFMCs. Further, no voucher in support of the 
expenditure for the amount of ₹9.19 crore was provided to Audit. 
3.7 Non-achievement of financial decentralisation 
GIM was to provide an opportunity to reform the concept of Joint Forest Management in the 
country by decentralising forest governance. Greater decentralisation in decision making, 
devolution of power and adequate support was to be given to JFMCs. Financial devolution of 
powers was also envisaged in the Implementation Guidelines of GIM, which require FDAs to 
transfer funds received from SFDAs to the revamped JFMCs. 
Audit observed deficiencies in decentralisation in five States, with respect to non -transfer of 
full amount by FDAs to JFMCs. The FDAs made their own purchases as well as carried out 
work departmentally. Thus, overall financial control was centralised at the FDA level, which is 
detailed in Annexure XIII. 
Recommendation No. 10: 
Considering the decentralised structure of implementation and fragmentation of funds, 
there is need for better monitoring and coordination at State as well as Centre level. 
 
3.8 Other irregularities  
Although the Scheme was already underfunded, it was essential that APOs of the States should 
have been approved with proper due diligence and the funds provided to States be best utilised 
on approved items/activities. However, it was observed that MoEF&CC did not conduct due 
diligence while approving the APOs of States. Further , SFDA/FDA/JFMC incurred 
expenditure on non-permitted activities/items, as discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
3.8.1 Shortcomings in approving Annual Plan of Operations (APOs) 
While approving the APOs, MoEF&CC was required to follow the cost norms proposed under 
the GIM Implementation Guidelines of 2014.  However, it was observed that MoEF&CC did 
not carry out proper due diligence in approving the APOs and making releases of Centre’s share 
to two SFDAs 53. In case of SFDA Arunachal Pradesh, it did not follow the cost norms while 
approving the APO (2021 -22). As against the low -altitude area proposed for afforestation 
activities for Advance works, the cost norm of high-altitude area was approved, which escalated 
the cost of the APO by ₹0. 15 crore. MoEF&CC made an excess release of its share to SFDA 
Andhra Pradesh against the APO (2016-17) of ₹2.66 crore, which was downsized to ₹2.23 crore 
 
53 Arunachal Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
41 
in March 2018. The excess amount of ₹0.35 crore which was made by MoEF&CC should have 
been adjusted against future releases. 
MoEF&CC forwarded the response of SFDA Andhra Pradesh, which acknowledged 
(June 2025) the fact that the Centre’s share was received in excess.  Further, in case of APO of 
Arunachal Pradesh MOEF&CC stated (September 2025) that the average of both cost norms 
(low-altitude and high -altitude) submitted by the State/UT, vis-à-vis the area approved was 
considered while approving the APO.   
The reply of MoEF&CC is not tenable as it did not average out cost norms and approved the 
activities under APO at cost norm of high-altitude area.  
Recommendation No. 11: 
MoEF&CC should conduct proper scrutiny  and due diligence of the APOs before 
sanctioning and releasing funds. 
3.8.2 Excess/unauthorised/irregular expenditure 
As per the directives of the Government of India, public funds should be used in an economical 
manner without giving scope for excess/irregular/unauthorised expenditure. Funds for the 
Mission are provided under two heads to SFDAs, viz., afforestation activities and support 
activities54.  
For strengthening the forest departments and local institutions, areas and activities such as 
capacity building of frontline staff, leveraging teams of subject matter specialists for 
information and communication technology (including Remote Sensing/GIS ca pabilities),  
strengthening of range offices inter alia developing them as forest and wildlife resource centres 
(with library, documentation, map room, GIS and MIS cell facilities), enhancing mobility and 
communication infrastructure support at forest rang e and section level, etc., were defined in 
the Mission Document of GIM (2011) and funding support was being provided under APOs of 
the SFDAs. 
Scrutiny of records of SFDAs/FDAs/JFMCs disclosed the following irregularities in 
expenditure incurred: 
 
54  Support activities include research, publicity/media/outreach activities, monitoring and evaluation, livelihood improvement activities, 
strengthening of Forest Departments/local -level institutions and Mission organisation, operation and maintenance, contin gencies 
and overheads. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
42  
i. SFDA Odisha and FDAs of two SFDAs, namely, Haryana and Andhra Pradesh, did not 
adhere to approved rates/cost norms or approved activities in time, thereby incurring 
excess/unauthorised expenditure of ₹5.82 crore 55 during 2020 -21 and 2022 -23, as 
shown in the table below: 
Table 8: Excess/unauthorised expenditure 
Nature of Expenditure Audit observation 
Excess expenditure Under APO for 2020-21, an amount of ₹8.09 crore at a wage rate of ₹298 was 
approved for SFDA Odisha . As the SFDA could not carry out the proposed 
activities during the year 2020 -21, the same were completed in 2022-23 at a 
total cost of ₹13.82 crore (at  prevailing wage rate of ₹315). Thus, delay in 
execution of proposed activities led to excess expenditure of ₹5.73 crore. 
Although APO 56 (2020-21) of Andhra Pradesh was not approved by 
MoEF&CC, yet the activities proposed thereunder were executed with a total 
expenditure of ₹2.47 crore. Audit further observed that under this APO, avenue 
plantation (creation work) of 12 km was proposed for execution with a total cost 
of ₹0.20 crore taking into account a rate 57 of ₹1,69,454 per km. However, the 
said work had actually been executed at the rate of ₹2,15,000 per km and a total 
expenditure of ₹0.26 crore incurred thereagainst, which was ₹0.06 crore over 
and above the proposed cost.  
Unauthorised expenditure There was no provision for cost of wages of a protection watcher, under Sub 
Mission 4. However, during 2022-23, five58 JFMCs of FDA Jind made payment 
of ₹0.03 crore irregularly, towards wages to watchers for protection of 
plantation of clonal eucalyptus plants under Sub Mission 4. 
ii. In eight 59 States, SFDAs/FDAs/JFMCs incurred an expenditure of ₹3.24 crore on 
activities such as, procurement of utensils, furniture, generator, firewood, construction 
community hall, conference hall at Forest Secretariat, dry yard, school buildings, 
cemetery hut, f ootpath, information building, pavilion at volleyball, sheds and 
boundary walls, renovation of Division and Forest Range Office,  etc., which were not 
in line with the activities proposed under GIM, as reported in detail in Annexure XIV.   
MoEF&CC forwarded the response of SFDAs Sikkim, Andhra Pradesh and Kerala . The 
SFDAs justified (June  2025) the expenditure as being incurred on proper infrastructure, 
capacity building and strengthening of implementing institutions.  
 
55  SFDA Odisha in 2020-21 (₹5.73 crore), SFDA Haryana in 2022-23 (FDA Jind: ₹0.03 crore) and SFDA Andhra Pradesh in 2020-21 
(FDA Paderu: ₹0.06 crore). 
56  Total cost of APO (2020-21) was ₹7.41 crore. 
57  By considering the wage rate of ₹439 per day, applicable for year 2020-21. 
58  JFMCs namely Bahadurgarh, Pillu Khera, Julana, Ghimana and Naguran. 
59  Arunachal Pradesh, Odisha, Mizoram, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and Sikkim. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
43 
The replies of the SFDAs are not tenable as expenditure incurred by them was not covered 
under the permissible areas and activities defined in the Mission Document of GIM. The 
Mission was already under-funded and utilisation of GIM funds for non-permissible activities 
could have been purposefully channelised for envisaged plantation activities, which would 
have led to improving the limited performance of GIM. 
Recommendation No. 12: 
SFDAs/FDAs should adhere to the timeline while executing activities proposed under APOs 
so as to avoid cost escalation on account of rise in wages. 
Recommendation No. 13: 
SFDAs/FDAs/JFMCs should incur expenditure on admissible items mentioned in GIM 
Implementation Guidelines only and do so as per the  rules/procedures/instructions issued 
from time to time.  
 
3.9 Non-payment of wages through bank account 
The sanction orders of MoEF&CC state that payments towards wages should be made through 
bank accounts of recipients in case of contractual engagements, in compliance with the 
provisions of the Direct Benefit Transfer Scheme. It was further mentioned that 
contractors/middlemen/intermediate agencies will not be engaged for execution of any of the 
works under the Scheme so as to ensure that full wages are paid to the workers. 
However, Audit observed that in nine States, FDAs/JFMCs made wage payments to labourers 
in cash/cheque (Annexure XV). Further, 10 FDAs of three States carried out the afforestation 
work through contractors, instead of engaging the workers directly on the basis of prevailing 
wage rates (Annexure XVI). 
By paying the labourers in cash and not engaging the workers directly, the FDA/JFMCs not 
only violated the provisions of the sanction orders but also contributed to the weakening of 
internal controls that were set in the Scheme to plug leakages and promote financial inclusion. 
Further, in the absence of Direct Benefit Transfer to the recipients’ account, Audit could not 
vouch for the authenticity of the labourer rolls and disbursement made to them.  
SFDA Andhra Pradesh and Uttarakhand assured (June/July 2025) that steps are being taken to 
transition the payment process to the DBT system.  

Report No. 4 of 2026 
44  
Recommendation No. 14: 
SFDAs/FDAs should ensure financial powers are devolved to the JFMCs  and that the 
provisions of Direct Benefit Transfer Scheme for payment of wages to the workers are 
complied with. 
 
3.10 Preparation and audit of Annual Accounts 
As per the sanction order issued by MoEF&CC for release of funds, the SFDA/FDAs were to 
maintain and present their annual accounts. Further, the sanction letter also mandates auditing 
of the accounts of the SFDA/FDAs through a reputed Chartered Accountant, empanelled with 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. The Audit Report was to be submitted to 
MoEF&CC along with the utilisation certificates (UCs).  
However, Audit observed that in eight States mentioned in Annexure XVII, the SFDAs/FDAs 
did not maintain their Annual Accounts. In the absence of Annual Accounts, the accountability 
for the funds provided for activities under GIM could not be established. In three States, though 
SFDAs/FDAs prepared their Annual Accounts, they were not got audited (Annexure XVIII). 
Hence, the authenticity and correctness of figures of utilisation of funds reported by the bodies 
could not be verified.  
SFDA Andhra Pradesh stated ( June 2025) that the steps are being taken to get the annual 
accounts of FDA, Paderu audited. SFDA Madhya Pradesh stated that necessary action for audit 
of Annual Accounts by empanelled Chartered Accountants has been initiated. Though SFDA 
Uttarakhand replied (July 2025) that third-party audit by Chartered Accountant empanelled by 
CAG had been done  in FY 2024 -25 for period 2021 -22 to 2023 -24, it did not provide any 
documentary evidence in support of its claim. SFDA Haryana, in its  reply (July 2025), stated 
that all expenditure was incurred by Implementing Agency and the account was also maintained 
by the Implementing Agency (FDA). The reply of SFDA Haryana is not tenable as it  
did not provide the Annual Accounts, if any, prepared by its FDAs. Moreover, it was a 
mandatory requirement for SFDA to prepare its Annual Accounts by consolidating the figures 
of releases/expenditure incurred by FDAs/JFMCs during the years and submit to MoEF&CC. 
3.11 Utilisation Certificates 
In respect of recurring grants, Rule 238 (2) of the General Financial Rules (GFR) states that 
the concerned Ministry or Department should not release any amount for the subsequent 
financial year unless the Utilisation Certificate (UC) in respect of grants of preceding financial 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
45 
year is submitted. Further, sanction order of funds released envisaged that the entire fund 
should be utilised by the end of the current financial year following the provisions of GFR. The 
SFDA shall furnish UC along with details of unspent balance and interest accrued.  
Audit found that as a result of non-maintenance of separate bank accounts, 
non-preparation/audit of Annual Accounts by SFDAs/FDAs, there was mismatch/misreporting 
of figures of utilisation of funds as reported in the UCs and the Progress Reports submitted by 
them to their reporting authority. In six 60 States it was found that the funds reported by 
SFDAs/FDAs as shown in their UCs, did not match with the subsidiary records maintained by 
them. All such cases are discussed in Annexure XIX . The above mismatch indicates the 
mechanism of financial accountability viz., preparation of subsidiary records/annual accounts 
and submission of UCs was not reliable, as SFDAs/ FDAs submitted the UCs without proper 
reconciliation with underlying records and accounts, which led to reporting of unreliable 
figures of utilisation of funds by SFDAs/FDAs. 
In their replies SFDA Kerala and Uttarakhand stated (June/July 2025) that the mismatch had 
been corrected and submitted to MoEF&CC. However, details of the reconciliation and the 
impact of corrective action on the funds utilised, if any, was not furnished to Audit. 
Recommendation No. 15: 
MoEF&CC should ensure that SFDAs/FDAs prepare their annual accounts every year and 
get them audited regularly. Further, UC should be prepared and submitted by SFDAs/FDAs 
to the Ministry only after reconciliation with underlying accounts.  
 
3.12  Maintenance of separate bank account and refund of interest 
Implementation Guidelines of Green India Mission envisage that the SFDA will open a separate 
bank account in a nationalised bank to operate and transact the funds received under GIM. 
Further, as per the sanction letters pertaining to funds released by MoEF&CC , the funds 
received by the SFDAs/FDAs/JFMCs 61 shall be deposited in its exclusive and separate bank 
account. Further, interest amount if any, accrued on the deposit of these funds shall be treated 
as part of the SFDAs/FDAs/JFMCs additional resources and would be adjusted towards further 
instalments of the grant/assistance in the same financial year. 
 
 
60 Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Kerala, Maharashtra, Odisha and Uttarakhand. 
61 The respective JFMCs shall deposit the funds received from FDAs in their exclusive and separate bank account in a Nationalise d 
Bank/a Cooperative Bank or a Post office. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
46  
However, Audit observed that in six States ( Annexure XX ), SFDAs/FDAs/JFMCs did not 
follow the above provisions and funds received by them were either deposited in bank accounts 
where the funds of other schemes were also deposited or opened a current bank account, instead 
of an interest -bearing account. Audit a lso found that in four States, SFDA/FDA/JFMCs had 
earned interest on fund released to them for afforestation activities under GIM, yet they neither 
refunded nor reported the same in the Utilisation Cer tificates submitted to MoEF&CC 
(Annexure XXI). 
In the absence of maintenance of a separate interest -bearing bank account by the 
SFDAs/FDAs/JFMCs, the actual utilisation of funds, unspent balance and interest earned, if 
any, during these years by SFDA and reported to MoEF&CC could not be verified in Aud it.  
Further, due to non-reporting of interest by SFDA/FDAs/JFMCs, the interest accrued could not 
be adjusted in subsequent instalments and was parked with them. 
MoEF&CC forwarded the response of some SFDAs, namely, Maharashtra, Punjab and 
Uttarakhand, wherein SFDA Uttarakhand assured (July 2025) that instructions were issued for 
opening of separate bank accounts for GIM and SFDA Punjab stated (March 2025) that now a 
separate bank account is being maintained for GIM. SFDA Maharashtra stated that since 
September 2021, a new interest-bearing saving account for Single Nodal Agency was opened. 
However, it was silent on the issue of opening of separate bank accounts for JFMCs. 
Further, on the issue of non-remittance of interest, SFDA Punjab intimated (May 2025) that out 
of the available interest of ₹0.16 crore, it had utilised a sum of ₹0.11 crore towards payment to 
labourers and the balance amount of ₹0.05 crore had been deposited in the government account. 
However, SFDA did not provide any documentary ev idence in support in this regard. SFDA 
Uttarakhand stated (July 2025) that instructions had been issued to the concerned FDAs/JFMCs 
for calculation and reporting of interest earned by them while SFDA Haryana stated (July 2025) 
that information had been asked from the concerned DFOs and after its receipt, the interest 
amount would be transferred to MoEF&CC. 
3.13  Conclusion 
The implementation of GIM was marred by financial and systemic deficiencies in planning, 
convergence and allocation/release of funds. Underfunding, delays in approval of Annual 
Operational Plans at the level of MoEF&CC, delays in release and utilisation of funds at each 
level and weak internal controls collectively hampered the Mission’s ability to achieve its 
intended results.  

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
47 
Further, governance deficiencies including incorrect reporting of utilisation certificates, non -
maintenance of separate bank accounts and cases of suspected misappropriation indicate weak 
accountability mechanisms. Lack of time bound reconciliation of accounts at each level in the 
States, non-maintenance of annual accounts by SFDAs/ FDAs and their independent audit by 
empanelled Chartered Accountants, further increased the risks of financial irregularities in the 
implementation of the Scheme. 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
48  
Chapter IV 
Implementation of Green India Mission 
The objectives of increasing and improving the quality of forest cover along with the improved 
ecosystem services (including biodiversity, hydrological services, carbon sequestration) from 
the treated forest land under GIM were to be achieved through activities under the five Sub 
Missions62 and cross-cutting interventions.  
The progress achieved in meeting the targets of the Mission and deficiencies observed with  
respect to the implementation of the Mission have been detailed in the subsequent paragraphs: 
4.1  Shortfall in achievement of targets under GIM 
The Mission Document 2011 envisaged a total target of 10 mha comprising of increase in the 
forest cover on 5 mha (through Sub Missions 2, 3 and 4) and improving the quality of forests 
in another 5 mha (through Sub Missions 1 and 5) by 2021. Out of the 10 mha, interventions in 
only 2.8 mha were approved by the Cabinet in 2014 which were to be achieved by 2018.  
The Revised Mission Document of 2021 stated that about 11.22 mha area had been included 
under plantations during the period  2015-16 till 2020 -21 under the Twenty Point Program, 
which included schemes of the Central and the State Governments, besides Green India 
Mission. However, the achievement under GIM separately was not disclosed in the Revised 
Mission Document  2021. Further, the Revised Mission Document enunciated a new set of 
targets of GIM, i.e., 25 mha (1 mha to be treated through the budget of MoEF&CC and 24 mha 
through convergence) to be completed during the period 2021 to 2030.  
MoEFCC stated (September 2025) that the implementation of the new targets of 25 mha as per 
Mission Document 2021 had not yet started as its implementation guidelines was under 
approval from the Competent Authority. 
In view of above, Audit analysed achievement  of targets of 2.8 mha included in the Cabinet 
approval of 2014, which were to be achieved by 2018. 
 
62 Sub Mission 1(a): Moderately dense forest cover but showing degradation, Sub Mission 1 (b): Eco-restoration of degraded open 
forests Type A: with plenty of root stock, with little or no scope of planting, Type B: with open blanks having limited root stock, Type 
C: largely open areas with sparse undergrowth and Sub Mission 1(c ): Restoration of Grasslands.  
 Sub Mission 2(a): Rehabilitation of shifting cultivation areas, Sub Mission 2(b): Restoring scrublands, Sub Mission 2(c): 
Restoring/planting seabuckthorn, Sub Mission 2(d): Restoration of mangroves, Sub Mission 2(e): Ravine reclamation and Sub 
Mission 2(f): Restoration of abandoned mining areas. 
 SM 3: Enhancing tree cover in Urban and Peri-Urban areas. 
 Sub Mission 4(a): Farmers’ land including current fallows, Sub Mission 4(b): Shelterbelt plantations, Sub Mission 4(c): Highways/ 
Rural Roads/Tank Bunds.  
 SM 5: Restoration of Wetlands. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
49 
Audit observed that the targets of 8,22,253.40 ha ( 28.6 per cent) only were approved in the 
Perspective Plans of 16 states during the period 2015-16 to 2026-27 due to inadequate planning 
and paucity of funds as discussed in Chapters II and III.  
The Sub Mission wise targets and achievements made under GIM as of March 2025 are as 
follows: 
Table 9: Targets and achievement under GIM  
(in ha) 
Name of the Sub Mission Targets as per 
Cabinet Approval 
of 2014 
Targets as per 
approved 
Perspective Plans 
Total Achievement 
under GIM as of March 
2025 
SM 1: Enhancing the quality of 
forest cover and improving 
ecosystem services 
1.37 million 0.54 million 0.11376 million 
SM 2: Ecosystem restoration and 
increase in forest cover 
0.50 million 0.09 million 0.01825 million 
SM 3: Enhancing tree cover in 
Urban and Peri-Urban areas 
0.06 million 0.01 million 0.00170 million 
SM 4: Agro -Forestry and Social 
Forestry 
0.84 million 0.17 million 0.01414 million 
SM 5: Restoration of Wetlands 0.03 million 0.01 million 0.00008 million 
Total 2.8 million 0.82 million 0.14793 million 
It was observed that GIM interventions could be carried out in only 1,47,925.63 ha by the 
selected 16 States/UT till March 2025 (Annexure XXII). The shortfalls against the  targets as 
mentioned above are given in Table 10: 
Table 10: Shortfall in cumulative achievement (March 2025) as compared to the targets approved by the 
Cabinet in 2014 and as per approved Perspective Plans  
Name of the Sub 
Mission 
Shortfall (in mha) as 
compared to the 
Cabinet Approval in 
2014 
Percentage 
shortfall 
Shortfall (in mha) as 
compared to targets as 
per approved 
Perspective Plans 
Percentage 
shortfall 
SM 1: Enhancing 
quality of forest cover 
and improving 
ecosystem services  
1.25624 91.70 0.4302 79.08 
SM 2: Ecosystem 
restoration and increase 
in forest cover  
0.48175 96.35 0.0737 80.16 
SM 3: Enhancing tree 
cover in Urban and Peri-
Urban areas  
0.0583 97.17 0.0123 87.85 
SM 4: Agro -Forestry 
and Social Forestry  
0.82586 98.32 0.1528 91.53 
SM 5: Restoration of 
Wetlands  
0.02992 99.72 0.0059 98.66 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
50  
Sub Mission Wise analysis of targets and achievements is discussed below: 
4.1.1  Target of improving the quality of forest cover (through Sub Missions 1 and 5) 
Audit observed that as against the target of 1.4 mha (as per the Cabinet Approval of GIM 
in 2014) for improving the quality of forest cover under GIM, the achievement could be made 
in only 0.11384 mha63 leading to a shortfall of 91.87 per cent. Further, there was a shortfall of 
79.30 per cent as against the targets under the approved Perspective Plans. The shortfall may 
be viewed in the light of the fact that the Perspective Plan targets by themselves fell short of 
the Mission targets by 60.71 per cent. 
4.1.2  Target of increasing the quality of forest cover (through Sub Missions 2, 3 and 4) 
As against the target of 1.4 mha (as per the Cabinet Approval of GIM in 2014), for increasing 
the forest cover under GIM, achievement could be made in only 0.03409 mha64 leading to a 
shortfall of 97.57 per cent. Further, there was a shortfall of 87.51 per cent as against the targets 
under the approved Perspective Plans. For these Sub Missions also, the Perspective Plan targets 
fell short of the Mission targets by 80.71 per cent. 
MoEF&CC (September 2025) stated that the shortfall in achievement was a direct result of the 
severe under funding of the Scheme and the fund disbursement modalities that existed from 
time to time.  
It is pertinent to note that the targets approved under the Mission in 2014 were to be achieved 
by 2018, however, the Ministry continued implementation up to March 2025, and even then, 
achievement remained short by 94.7 per cent. Further, the revised target of 25 mha as envisaged 
in the Mission Document 2021 had not yet been implemented. Given the pace of progress 
observed in last 11 years since start of the implementation of this Scheme (2014), though the 
States have five more years till 2030 to meet the targets outlined in the Perspective Plans, the 
goals envisaged in the Perspective Plan under GIM would be fully achieved only if exceptional 
effort is put in by all agencies involved in the Mission. 
Recommendation No. 16: 
The Ministry may reassess its targets and identify and address the bottlenecks such as 
absence of convergence, shortfall in plantation targets due to limited budget and 
non-identification of specific landscapes that have contributed to the significant shortfall in 
achievement under GIM. 
 
 
63 (0.11376+0.00008) mha. 
64 (0.01825+0.00170+0.01414) mha 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
51 
4.2  Variation in reporting of physical achievements under GIM 
As per the Implementation Guidelines and fund release orders under GIM, an annual progress 
report of the activities taken up by SFDA was to be submitted to the Ministry. For this purpose, 
a quarterly statement of accounts and progress of works carried out in L3 level landscapes was 
to be submitted by each JFMC to the FDA, which was to compile its own progress report for 
onward submission to SFDA and finally to the Ministry. 
Audit observed a variation ranging between 0.06 ha and 6,121.50 ha in the achievements 
reported by the States and those reported by the Ministry in 14 States/UT (as can be seen from 
Table 11). 
Table 11: Variation in reporting of physical achievements by MoEF&CC and the States/UT involved 
under GIM 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Target as per 
Perspective Plan 
(in ha) 
Achievement 
(Creation Work) 
till March 2025 
reported by 
MoEF&CC 
Achievement 
(Creation Work) 
till March 2025 
reported by States 
to Audit 
Variation in 
achievement 
(in ha) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) = (3) - (4) 
Andhra Pradesh 6,938 1,433 1,272 161 
Arunachal Pradesh 46,742 0 5,314.39 -5,314.39 
Chhattisgarh 31,138 19,128 22,641.00 -3,513 
Haryana 67,562 1,301 7,422.50 -6,121.50 
Himachal Pradesh 21,459 0 1,299.00 -1,299 
Jammu & Kashmir 32,420 1,066 1,349.08 -283.08 
Karnataka 5,100 2,722 2,947.00 -225 
Kerala 22,960 12,297 7,926.85 4,370.15 
Madhya Pradesh 3,40,700 26,597 26,939.00 -342 
Maharashtra 6,975.40 5,223 3,586.76 1636.24 
Mizoram 29,893 19,643 19,642.94 0.06 
Odisha 2,198.56 20,711 17,761.56 2,949.44 
Punjab 18,994 6,568 7,168.00 -600 
Sikkim 16,698 6,567 6,611.85 -44.85 
Uttarakhand 1,23,973 14,836 13,438.00 1,398 
West Bengal 37,450 2,606 2,605.7 0.3 
Further, it was observed that in Arunachal Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh, no achievement was 
reported by the Ministry despite afforestation reported by the States. 
MoEF&CC (July 2025)  acknowledged the observation and stated that the variation in the 
achievement of targets was due to non-receipt of progress reports from the States. 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
52  
Recommendation No. 17: 
Efforts may be made to reconcile the differences in the figures of achievement reported by 
the States to the Ministry and to Audit so that a correct picture of progress made under GIM 
can be ascertained. 
 
4.3  Implementation of GIM activities under Sub Mission 1 
As can be seen from Table 9 above, the GIM activities were carried out mainly under Sub 
Mission 1 : Enhancing quality of forest cover and improving ecosystem services. The 
deficiencies observed under Sub Mission 1 are given in the subsequent paragraphs:  
4.3.1  Deficiencies observed under Sub Mission 1 (a): Moderately dense forest cover, but 
showing degradation  
This Sub Mission activity was to be implemented in Moderately Dense Forests (having density 
between 40 to 70 per cent ) showing degradation on account of recurrent fire, unregulated 
grazing, invasive species and shifting cultivation. Under SM 1 (a), the Assisted Natural 
Regeneration model was to be adopted in existing forests with activities like protection, fire 
management, regulated grazing, invasive species eradication, soil/moisture conservation, etc., 
to help the forest regenerate under natural conditions. Audit observations on the sampled 
plantations are reported below: 
i. Madhya Pradesh 
Para 16 of Chapter 4 of Plantation Guidelines 
2011 by State Forest Research Institute, 
Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh prescribed that a 
site having forest density of less than 
20 per cent should only be taken  up for 
plantation.  
During Joint Physical Verification (April to 
August 2024), it was observed that plantation 
of 4,06,555 saplings at a cost of ₹6.47 crore was carried out (2018-19 to 2023-24) in 13 sites 
in six Divisions65 of Madhya Pradesh under SM 1 (a) in areas that had forest density of more 
than 20 per cent. 
 
65 Narmadapuram, Obedullaganj, Sehore, South Balaghat, South Sagar and Umaria. 
 
Figure 8: Moderately dense forest (density ranging 
between 40 to 70 per cent) (Source: ISFR 2019) 


 Report No. 4 of 2026 
53 
It was also observed that the saplings were planted under the existing trees (The video 
recordings of audit findings during physical verification can be accessed by scanning the QR 
codes given below). 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Compartment No. 123 of 
Narmadapuram Forest Division, Madhya 
Pradesh 
 Figure 10: Compartment No. 308 of 
Umaria Forest Division, Madhya Pradesh 
 
  
Figure 11: Plantations under SM 1 (a) carried out in dense forests under existing trees in  
Narmadapuram and Umaria Forest Divisions in Madhya Pradesh 
SFDA Madhya Pradesh stated (July 2025) that supplementary planting, an accepted technique 
under the Assisted Natural Regeneration process , was adopted in these regions, as during the 
field survey, it was learnt that forest revival would not be possible only through protection 
measures. However, no supporting field records were furnished to Audit. Further, the reply is 
silent on the provisions of the Plantation Guidelines, according to which plantation could only 
be carried out in areas having less than 20 per cent density. 
ii. Chhattisgarh 
Technical sanction of 135.519 ha of Assisted Natural Regeneration work in Bilaspur Division, 
Chhattisgarh was accorded by DFO Bilaspur at a cost of ₹0.45 crore in June 2017. 
 


Report No. 4 of 2026 
54  
Table 12: Statement of expenditure of work in Bilaspur Division, Chhattisgarh 
Name of the place Compartment 
number 
Workable 
area as per 
project report 
(in ha) 
Proposed 
amount as per 
DFO Project 
Report 
(₹ in crore) 
Worked 
area (in ha) 
 
Expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Banka 47 RF 26.443 0.09 82.598 0.28 
Korbi   40 RF 28.114 0.09 143.026 0.48 
Khondra  26 RF 47 0.16 141.79 0.47 
Banka  45 RF 33.962 0.11 70 0.23 
Total 135.519 0.45 437.414 1.46 
Audit observed that despite having available area of 135.519 ha in the four compartments  in 
Bilaspur Forest Division, Assisted Natural Regeneration work was reported as executed on a 
much larger extent of 437.414 ha at a cost of ₹1.46 crore during 2017 -22. It is unclear how 
work was done in an area more than what was available.  
iii. Arunachal Pradesh: 
During Joint Physical Verification (May and July 2024), it was noticed that plantations were 
carried out under SM 1 (a) in a dense forest (as shown in the picture) at Russa -Chopsa under 
Longding Forest Division in Arunachal Pradesh. Another case was noticed at Taba Sora under 
Along Forest Division where plantations under SM 1 (a) were carried out within dense standing 
crop of paddy. 
 
Figure 12: Plantations under SM 1 (a) within dense 
vegetation area at Russa Chopsa, Longding Forest 
Division, Arunachal Pradesh (May 2024) 
 
Figure 13: Plantations under SM 1 (a) within dense 
standing crop at Taba Sora, Along Forest Division, 
Arunachal Pradesh (July 2024) 
 
Recommendation No. 18: 
The Ministry may develop a monitoring mechanism using technological tools to verify that  
no plantation activities are carried out in sites having moderately dense forest cover  where 
only improvement activities are to be undertaken.  


 Report No. 4 of 2026 
55 
Recommendation No. 19: 
The Ministry may arrange to conduct checks on sample basis on ground level to ensure that 
interventions are carried out on suitable sites. 
4.3.2 Deficiencies observed under Sub Mission 1 (b): Eco-restoration of open degraded 
forest 
Open degraded forests (with density between 
10 to 40 per cent) taken up for afforestation 
under this SM are classified into three types: 
i) Type A, with plenty of root stock, with little 
or no scope for planting, ii) Type B, with 
open blanks having limited root stock and iii) 
Type C, largely open areas with sparse 
undergrowth. Audit findings with regards to 
implementation of SM 1(b) Type A and B are given below: 
4.3.2.1  Irregularities observed in implementation of GIM under SM 1 (b) Type A and B 
Under Category A, closure to grazing on rotational basis 66, soil and moisture conservation 
works on ridge to valley basis67, cut back operations68 and very limited planting in gaps during 
second/third year are possible. Under Category B, regeneration of root stock and planting of  
indigenous grasses and shrubs, species of fuelwood, fodder, non -timber forest products were 
to be promoted. 
i. Uttarakhand 
With a view to achieving targets of 
Advance Soil Work under SM 1 (b) 
Type A, 60 ha (six works of 10 ha each) 
was given to Chakrata Forest Division, 
Uttarakhand during 2022 -23. The 
Division prepared an estimate of 
₹0.07 crore for 10 ha which included  
digging pits at the rat e of 500 pits per ha (₹11.42 per pit). Accordingly, 30,000 pits were dug 
 
66 Rotational grazing is a type of pasturing, whereby livestock are moved to one portion of the pasture, while the other portions rest. 
67 A soil conservation measure wherein structures are built to slow down and conserve water. 
68 Pruning and thinning of trees. 
Figure 14: Open forest (density ranging between 10 
to 40 per cent) (Source: ISFR 2019) 
Figure 15: A picture of a Checkdam (soil conservation 
measure) in Madhya Pradesh 


Report No. 4 of 2026 
56  
in all. However, in the following year, estimates were prepared for planting 200 trees per ha 
and 12,000 trees were planted as against 30,000 pits dug in the previous year leaving 
18,000 pits empty. Thus, the expenditure of ₹0.25 crore69 incurred on digging 18,000 pits along 
with the activities like site survey, clearing of vegetation, construction of inspection paths, 
contour trenches, etc., done was rendered wasteful as these pits were not utilised for plantation.  
Further, to corroborate the fact at ground level, a Joint Physical Verification (May 2024) at one 
of the plantation sites, i.e., Dabala Sagwa Tok in Chakrata, revealed that though the plantation 
journal showed plantation of 2,000 trees, only 30 to 40 saplings were found planted but the 
same had not survived. Further, some saplings were found dumped around the site. No 
responsibility was fixed on the designated person accountable for the faulty execution. The 
Range Officer, Rikhnad, Chakrata Division assured that the plantation would be carried out in 
the subsequent monsoon season. 
SFDA Uttarakhand asserted (July 2025) 
that the said plantation existed at the site 
as per the Inspection Report of SDO, 
Kalsi. This contradiction in response may 
be viewed in light of the assurance given 
by the Range Officer to Audit’s finding  
during the Joint Physical Verification. 
Further, the SFDA Uttarakhand stated that 
the excess pits dug were utilised for carrying out plantation activities under Harela Scheme of 
the State. However, the fact remains that supporting records, i.e., progress report of Harela 
Scheme entailing the number of trees planted in this landscape, the year in which the plantation 
was carried out and pictures of plantation with GPS coordinates were not furnished to Audit.  
ii. Odisha 
Plantation activity on 300 ha (2016-17 to 2022-23) was reported in five JFMCs70 of three FDAs 
of Bonai, Ghumsur South, Nabarangpur in Odisha under SM 1 (b) Type A and B. Based on 
plantation maps, Audit found that the areas where afforestation was carried out were dense 
forests with canopy density ranging from 40 to 70 per cent , rendering them ineligible for 
undertaking plantation activity. DFOs of Bonai, Ghumsur South and Nabarangpura, in their 
 
69 693020x6x18000/30000. 
70 Balia RF-100 ha, Gambhariguda-30 ha, Madangandapalli-30 ha, Mangaldori-65 ha and Lodi-75 ha. 
Figure 16: Saplings dumped at Dabala Sagwa Tok 
plantation site in Chakrata division, Uttarakhand 


 Report No. 4 of 2026 
57 
replies (August to September 2024), stated that the plantations were carried out in open areas 
found inside the forest, which were suitable for gap plantation. The reply may be viewed in the 
light of the fact that the boundaries of the areas where plantations were carried out lay in dense 
forests (as can be seen from the blue polygons in the pictures shown below), which according 
to the Forest Survey of India classification had densities ranging between 40 to 70 per cent. 
Further, the Joint Physical Verification of Balia, Bonai corroborated the fact that survival and 
growth of the plantation is not up to mark as the site was selected in a dense forest where 
canopy density was more than 90 per cent . DFO, Nabarangpura stated that the Audit 
observation on density would be further verified.  
 
Figure 17: Dense Forest of Gambhariguda in 
Ghumsur South Forest Division in Odisha as 
recorded in the Plantation Journal  
 
Figure 18: Dense Forest of Madanagandapali in 
Ghumsur South Forest Division in Odisha as 
recorded in the Plantation Journal  
iii. West Bengal 
Joint Physical Verification (April 2024) of Raibera plantation site under Nayagram Forest 
Range of West Bengal, revealed that interventions were executed (2022-23) in 30 ha of forest 
land covered by existing plantation of Sal trees at a cost of ₹0.12 crore . Out of 959 plants 
surveyed during Joint Physical Verification, only 212 plants survived (22.11 per cent) despite 
casualty plantation undertaken  by the Forest Department . Also, even after the lapse of two 
years, the surviving plants had attained an average height of only 22.42 cm as against minimum 
height of 75 cm 71 required at the time of planting. Wrong selection of site as well as 
procurement of saplings shorter  than the specified height attributed to the failure of the 
plantation. 
 
71 As per tender for procurement of two-year old seedling for Type A and B plantations. 


Report No. 4 of 2026 
58  
   
Figure 19: Plantations less than the tendered height 
at Raibera, West Bengal 
Figure 20: Existing Sal Forest at Raibera, West 
Bengal 
iv. Chhattisgarh 
Another instance was observed in Chhattisgarh where against the total plantation target of 
600 ha approved for FDA Kawardha under SM 1 (b) Type A and B (APO 2015-16), the Chief 
Conservator of Forest, Durg accorded technical sanction for plantation of 355 ha at a cost of 
₹1.91 crore. As per the working plan of Kawardha Forest Division (2014 -15 to 2023-24), the 
total area of compartment number 451 where interventions were to be carried out was 
246.71 ha. However, plantation activities under different schemes had already been carried out 
in 213 ha out of the above during the years 1982 to 2007 leaving only 33.71 ha 72 available for 
plantation. Despite the fact that only 33.71 ha of open area was available for plantation in 
compartment number 451, plantation was reported in 195 hectares (as shown in the Table 13 
below) at a cost of ₹1.50 crore during the period 2015 -20. Thus, plantation executed in 
161.29 ha73 and the corresponding expenditure of ₹1.24 crore74 on 33.71 ha is doubtful. 
Table 13: Details of plantation in compartment number 451 under different schemes 
Year of 
plantation 
Name of the Head Total Area of 
Compartment 
(ha) 
Area under 
which 
interventions 
already carried 
out (ha) 
Plantation 
Area 
(ha) 
Expenditure 
incurred 
(₹ in crore) 
2016-17 Mixed plantation 
(GIM) 1100 plants/ha 
 
 
 
 
246.71 
 
 
 
 
213 
55 0.30 
2016-17 Teak plantation 
(GIM) 2500 plants/ha 
50 0.29 
2016-17 Teak plantation 
(GIM) 2500 plants/ha 
20 0.21 
2018-19 Mixed plantation 
(ESIP) 
50 0.48 
 
72 Total area of compartment-Total plantation area in previous years=246.71-213=33.71 ha. 
73 195 ha-33.71 ha. 
74 (15024734/195)*161.2. 


 Report No. 4 of 2026 
59 
Year of 
plantation 
Name of the Head Total Area of 
Compartment 
(ha) 
Area under 
which 
interventions 
already carried 
out (ha) 
Plantation 
Area 
(ha) 
Expenditure 
incurred 
(₹ in crore) 
2020-21 Laghu Banopaj 
(Ecosystem Services 
Improvement 
Project) 
20 0.22 
 Total 246.71 213 195 1.50 
DFO Kawardha stated (May 2024) that plantation was executed after due survey and 
preparation of project report for the proposed site. However, no document in support of the 
survey was furnished to Audit. Further, this may be viewed in the light of the fact that plantation 
cannot be undertaken on area more than the area available for it. 
Recommendation No. 20: 
The Ministry may conduct test -checks to ascertain that the sites selected for plantation 
activities have sufficient space and need for plantation activity so as to prevent wastage of 
resources in terms of time, money and labour on unsuitable sites.  
4.3.3  Irregularities observed under Sub Mission 1 (c): Restoration of Grasslands 
The Mission Document of GIM considers grasslands as highly degraded ecosystems that are a 
resource for promoting animal husbandry. Plantation of native palatable species of grasses 
alone or in combination with shrubs/trees having fodder value could help re store such 
ecosystems. Deficiencies noticed in implementation of SM 1 (c) are elaborated below.: 
i. Madhya Pradesh 
Audit observed that as against the target of 4,020 ha under SM 1 (c) mentioned in the 
Perspective Plan of Madhya Pradesh, only 444 ha (2018 -19 to 2022 -23) was taken up for 
treatment under Barwani Forest Division. Further, during Joint Physical Verification  
(July 2024) of compartment RF 269 of Barwani Forest Division, it was found that although the 
Creation Work in 68 ha were carried out in 2019-20, the progress was almost nil as only sparse 
growth of grasses and vacant spaces were found on the site. Provision for construction of grass 
beds75 was made for only 0.5 ha out of a total of 68 ha, however, full achievement was reported.  
 
75 Forest areas reserved for fodder production. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
60  
 
Figure 21: Sparse growth of grasses in RF 269 of Barwani Division, Madhya Pradesh  
SFDA Madhya Pradesh stated (July 2025) that the shortfall was due to limited budget and the 
restoration of grasslands was achieved in other places under the Division. However, records in 
support of the response were not furnished to Audit. 
4.4  Implementation of GIM activities under Sub Missions 2, 3 and 4 
The maximum shortfall in achievement of targets was under Sub Missions 2, 3 and 4. This was 
largely attributable to the non-identification of unique landscapes for GIM interventions under 
Sub Mission 2, despite their existence in the States. Further, Audit  also observed deficient 
implementation of the Sub Missions as detailed below:  
4.4.1  Irregularities observed under Sub Mission 2 
The key highlight of the Green India Mission was to give a holistic view to ‘greening’ by 
emphasising on both protection and restoration of degraded ecosystems and habitat diversity. 
The ecosystems to be taken up for restoration included scrublands under S ub Mission 2 (b), 
critical ecosystems like seabuckthorn under Sub Mission 2 (c), ravines under Sub Mission 2 
(e) and abandoned mining areas under Sub Mission 2 (f). Certain instances noticed in Audit are 
highlighted below: 
4.4.1.1  Irregularities observed under Sub Mission 2 (b): Restoration of Scrublands 
i. Non-consideration of scrublands for restoration under Sub Mission 2 (b) 
Audit observed that under this Sub Mission, only seven States had set targets of 0.065 mha in 
their Perspective Plans. Further, despite the presence of significant area of scrublands 
amounting to 2.11 mha in eight other States (Annexure XXIII), no targets were set by these 
States under this Sub Mission. No efforts were made by the Ministry as well to get the States 
to include the aforesaid ecosystem for GIM interventions. SFDA Madhya Pradesh, (July 2025), 
stated that in view of available financial resources and immediate need of forest management, 
those areas were selected where decline in the quality of forests was high. Further, though 


 Report No. 4 of 2026 
61 
works under Sub Mission 2 (b) have not been separately marked under GIM, the same are being 
done in open forests. However, no supporting records for the same were furnished to Audit.  
ii. Plantation in Dense Forest rather than scrubland 
Plantation in highly degraded forest/non-forest areas with scrub vegetation recording less than 
10 per cent forest density were to be identified under this Sub Mission. 
 
Figure 22: Scrublands (density less than 10 per cent) 
(Source: ISFR 2019) 
Uttarakhand 
Audit during Joint Physical 
Verification noticed that 114 ha of 
land in 16 sites of six divisions that 
was taken up under SM 2 (b) for 
GIM interventions in 2018 -19 to 
2023-24 at a cost of ₹1.43 crore 
already had a dense forest cover with  
pine, oak, kachnar trees and did not require any greening interventions, as can be seen in the 
pictures. These plantations were to be done in scrublands. Thus, the forest department selected 
the sites without ascertaining the actual condition of the site and the need for greening 
interventions.  
SFDA Uttarakhand stated (July 2025) that the sites chosen had canopy density less than 40 per 
cent indicating towards site suitability for plantation activity. However, the fact remains that 
the sites under this Sub Mission should have a canopy density of less than 10 per cent and not 
less than 40 per cent. 
 
Figure 23: Interventions under SM 2 (b) carried out 
in dense forests in Kyard plantation site at Civil and 
Soyam, Pauri Division, Uttarakhand 
 
Figure 24: Interventions under SM 2 (b) carried 
out in dense forests in Siri Soyam Kalya Gaderi 
plantation at Uttarkashi Division, Uttarakhand 


Report No. 4 of 2026 
62  
4.4.1.2 Irregularities observed under SM 2 (c): Plantation of seabuckthorn 
The Mission Document of GIM envisaged planting of seabuckthorn (Leh berry) under Sub 
Mission 2 (c) in the States/UT of Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttarakhand and 
Sikkim. It was, however, observed that the though the areas were identified by the Sta tes, 
interventions under the Sub Mission could not be taken up as highlighted below: 
a) The Perspective Plan of Jammu & Kashmir, approved by the NEC in July 2019, 
identified 1,750 ha for planting seabuckthorn in Ladakh region. However, consequent 
to the bifurcation of the State of Jammu & Kashmir (October 2019), the NEC in 
June 2020 approved a revised Perspective Plan of the UT of Jammu & Kashmir. 
However, Audit observed that neither the Perspective Plan for the UT of Ladakh was 
submitted by SFDA nor did the Ministry make any efforts to obtain the same. As a 
result, plantation of seabuckthorn could not be carried out till date.  
b) In case of Himachal Pradesh, Audit observed that 1,622 ha was identified by the State 
in its Perspective Plan, but no interventions were taken up under Sub Mission 2 (c).  
c) In case of Uttarakhand, 1,000 ha was to be taken up for plantation of seabuckthorn as 
envisaged in the NEC approved Perspective Plan (May 2015). However, it was 
observed that no interventions under Sub Mission 2 (c) had been identified for funding 
in any of the APOs from the years 2018 to 2025. The State stated (July 2025) that no 
proposals were received from the concerned FDAs and the Perspective Plan would be 
revised after conducting ground truthing to identify areas for plantation of 
seabuckthorn. 
d) In case of Sikkim, as against the target of 270 ha set in the Perspective Plan, 
achievement of 104 ha was reported by the State as of March 2025. Although, the State 
in its reply (July 2025), stated that it has achieved the physical targets as per sanctioned 
provisions, the GIS Analysis of one plantation site (Denga 10 ha) by Indian Institute of 
Science, Bangalore (2024) revealed no change in vegetation.  
Therefore, plantation of seabuckthorn under this Sub Mission was neglected. 
4.4.1.3  Irregularities observed under SM 2 (e): Ravine Reclamation 
It was observed that only three States, namely, Odisha, Uttarakhand and West Bengal had set 
targets of only 0.0043 mha in their Perspective Plans. Despite the presence of significant area 
of ravines amounting to 0.38 mha in seven more States (Annexure XXIV) , no area was 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
63 
identified for GIM interventions. Further, no efforts were made by the Ministry to get the States 
to cover the aforesaid ecosystems under GIM. Audit also observed that the target of 2,061 ha 
shown by Uttarakhand in their Perspective Plan under Sub Mission 2 (e) was incorrect, as 
according to the Wasteland Atlas of India 2010, which was referred to by the State for their 
baseline data, there were no ravines in the State. SFDA Madhya Pradesh stated (July 2025) that 
for the conservation of ravine land, the works are being carried out from the financial resources 
available in other schemes. However, no supporting records were furnished to Audit. 
4.4.1.4 Irregularities observed under SM 2 (f): Restoration of abandoned mines  
i. Non-identification of abandoned mines under GIM 
With a view to reclaim and rehabilitate wastelands under mining areas, the Mission Document 
of GIM stressed on afforestation of abandoned mining sites. Although interventions on 
abandoned mining sites were carried out by Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka and West Bengal, no 
interventions were carried in four States of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and 
Uttarakhand despite availability of 21 abandoned mining sites (Annexure XXV) in the States. 
SFDA Uttarakhand stated  (July 2025)  that no proposals were received from the concerned 
FDAs, however, the Perspective Plan would be revised after conducting ground truthing to 
identify areas for this Sub Mission. 
MoEF&CC stated (July 2025) that the Forest Department is primarily responsible for 
undertaking plantations within the areas under its jurisdiction. However, the mining areas do 
not fall under the jurisdiction of the concerned Forest Range Officer. Moreover, the abandoned 
mining areas do not fall under the jurisdiction of the Forest Department.  
The reply may be viewed in the light of the fact that both the Mission Documents of GIM 
entailed that MoEF&CC was to work in tandem with the Ministry of Mines and Indian Bureau 
of Mines for afforestation of abandoned mines. Further, the States could have selected forest 
divisions having these mining areas for GIM interventions under this Sub Mission. 
MoEF&CC further stated that the specific landscapes/ecosystems mentioned in the observation 
are being catered under various specific schemes/programmes of the Central Government, 
State plans, etc., and that selection of intervention areas is the States’ prerogative with no role 
of the Ministry. The reply may be viewed in the light of the fact that if specific ecosystems are 
being catered under various specific schemes of the Central and State Government, the Ministry 
may consider taking them out of GIM and focus only on plantations in the remaining 
landscapes. Further, the selection of intervention areas might be the States’ prerogative, but the 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
64  
scrutiny of Perspective Plan and its subsequent approval rests with the Ministry. Therefore, it 
is the role of the Ministry to see whether the prescriptions under the Mission Document and 
Implementation Guidelines are followed by the States in their true spirit. 
Considering that there were several landscapes under GIM that were to be identified through 
the multi-tiered institutional mechanism at the State and the District Level, planning needed a 
more hands-on approach for the successful achievement of targets und er the numerous Sub 
Missions. 
ii. Deficient restoration of abandoned mining site 
The Perspective Plan of Shivpuri Forest Division of Madhya Pradesh (2016 -17 to 2020 -21) 
enunciated reclamation of old mining areas damaged by legal and illegal mining. Audit 
observed that as against the target of 270 ha to be taken up under SM 2 (f), only 17 ha76 was 
taken up for treatment during 2019-20 to 2022-23. Scrutiny of Detailed Project Reports of these 
compartments revealed that provision was made only for levelling the mined pits with debris. 
There was no provision for plantation and soil moisture conser vation works in the DPRs. 
During Joint Physical Verification (July 2024), it was observed that debris was only dumped 
over the mined pits, without any levelling and very few plants were visible as can be seen 
below: 
  
Figure 25: Compartment 298, Shivpuri Forest 
Division, Madhya Pradesh 
Figure 26: Compartment 299, Shivpuri Forest 
Division, Madhya Pradesh 
 
 
76 In five compartments-297, 298, 299, 301 and 309 of 2C3D2g2 and 2C3Dg5 L3 landscapes. 


 Report No. 4 of 2026 
65 
 
Figure 27: Compartment No. 298, Shivpuri Forest 
Division, Madhya Pradesh 
 
Figure 28: Compartment No. 299, Shivpuri Forest 
Division, Madhya Pradesh  
SFDA Madhya Pradesh  (July 2025), stated that only a small area could be taken up for 
interventions due to limited budget. It further stated that as this area was devoid of soil, it had 
to be collected from other regions for pit refilling for sowing seeds from which the growth  of 
grasses can be seen at some places of this area. The reply may be viewed in the light of the fact 
that debris brought for pit refilling was not levelled and was just dumped at the site . The 
plantation could only be taken up after levelling of soil at the site. 
Recommendation No. 21: 
Within the financial constraints, the Ministry should ensure coverage of diverse unique 
ecosystems so as to encompass both protection and restoration, besides increase in the forest 
cover. 
 
4.4.2  Irregularities observed under SM 4: Social and Agro-Forestry 
Non-forest lands, like marginal farming lands/fallow lands, non -agricultural rural lands like 
homesteads, school yards, office compounds, roadsides provide ample opportunity to increase 
forest cover and meet the needs for forest produce. 
The Sub Mission included three categories, i.e., 4 (a) Afforestation in farmer’s land, 4 (b) 
Shelterbelt plantations and 4 (c) Afforestation along the highways/rural roads/canals/tank 
bunds. Deficiencies observed in the activities undertaken in this Sub Mission have been 
detailed below. 
i. Haryana 
As per budgetary allocations by the PCCF, Haryana Forest Department for the year 2022 -23 
and the activities stipulated under Advance Work of Sub Mission 4 (c), 1,100 plants  per ha 
were to be planted by pit planting technique at a spacing of 3m x 3m. Audit observed that FDA, 


Report No. 4 of 2026 
66  
Sonipat achieved the physical targets of 91 ha under this Sub Mission by digging 45,500 pits 
(at the rate of 500/ha with a spacing of 4m x 2.5m) instead of 1,00,100 pits (at the rate of 
1,100/ha) resulting in a shortfall of 54,600 pits and subsequent plantation of trees. FDA, 
Haryana stated (June 2024) that the work was executed as per instructions issued in August 
2023 wherein besides the aforementioned instructions, another instruction for planting 500 tall 
plants/ha was also stipulated. The reply is not acceptable as the work was executed by the FDA 
in 2022-23 before the issue of the instructions of August 2023.  
ii. Mizoram 
In four L3 landscapes 77 in Mizoram, Audit observed that though funds amounting to ₹1.12 
crore were disbursed (2016 -17 to 2022 -23) to 141 farmers for Advance, Creation and 
Maintenance Work under SM 4 (a), the beneficiary wise land details, actual payee receipts, 
fund transfer details to beneficiaries’ bank accounts, date of fund disbursement and the period 
when activities were taken up were not furnished to Audit, in the absence of which the 
interventions carried out under the Sub Mission could not be vouchsafed. 
iii. Madhya Pradesh 
Instances were noticed in four FDAs78 of Madhya Pradesh, where the list of beneficiaries and 
essential records such as detailed project reports/plantation journals of interventions done under 
SM 4 (a) were not available with the forest department.  
SFDA Madhya Pradesh  stated (July 2025) that the necessary records were prepared at the 
regional level but could not be compiled due to time constraints. Timely availability of the 
records would be ensured henceforth.  
4.4.2.1  Non- maintenance of records relating to Nurseries  
Sub Mission 4 also envisaged supporting a program of nurseries for raising ‘quality seedlings’ 
to meet the demands of farmers and promotion of High Yielding Variety seeds. With a view to 
improve the survival rates of the plantations, a decision was taken i n the 1 st NEC meeting 
(May 2015) that a circular would be issued by the Ministry directing the States to use only 
certified seeds and saplings for the plantation works. However, Audit observed no circulars had 
been issued by the Ministry in this regard. Au dit noticed deficiencies with regard to non -
maintenance of records of nurseries as detailed below: 
 
77 Bhuban, Hmunnghak, Khawruhlian and Thentlang. 
78 South Sagar, Barwani, Sendhwa and South Seoni. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
67 
i. Maharashtra 
The Forest Division of Wadsa in Maharashtra  carried out plantation on 45 ha of land in 
compartment numbers 158 and 159 of Yerandi JFMC in July 2019. As per the Plantation 
Journal, out of 49,500 plants of different species planted, 37,250 were procured from 
Gothangaon Nursery and the remaining 12,250  plants were procured from Purada Nursery , 
incurring an expenditure of ₹0.33 crore. Though the records relating to the supply of saplings 
from these nurseries were not furnished by the Division, it furnished transport challans for 
9,336 saplings only, scrutiny of which revealed the following: 
• Challans containing only 900 saplings were issued during the period of plantation 
(July 2019) and those related to 1,600 saplings were issued after the date of plantation. 
• The transit challans in respect of Amaltas saplings showed that 600 saplings were 
transported to the site instead of 116 saplings actually planted as per the plantation 
register.  
• Challans for 6,836 saplings pertained to different plantation sites. 
Although SFDA Maharashtra stated (July 2025) that the nursery records maintained at Purada 
and Gothangaon nurseries were attached, Audit found no such records annexed with the reply. 
ii. Madhya Pradesh 
PCCF Madhya Pradesh (December 2018) had instructed the forest divisions to identify 
nurseries of the Research and Extension Division for procurement of saplings. However, in 
violation of the instructions of the PCCF, Audit observed that two divisions, name ly, South 
Sagar and South Panna incurred expenditure (2019-20 and  2023-24) amounting to ₹0.08 crore 
and ₹0.01 crore respectively for procurement of saplings from private nurseries of Amethi 
(Uttar Pradesh) and Harda (Madhya Pradesh) which were 458 km and 500 km away. It was 
further observed that the tendering process for purchases was not resorted to and non -
availability certificates were not obtained from nurseries of the Research and Extension 
Division. The SFDA, Madhya Pradesh stated (July 2025) that the plants were purchased from 
private nurseries as saplings of appropriate age were not available in the Research and 
Extension Divisions and that the tendering process was followed for the same. However, no 
supporting records were furnished and the reply is silent about the non-availability certificates 
being obtained from the Research Divisions. 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
68  
iii. Odisha 
Kharlikarni JFMC of Bolangir Division, Odisha incurred an expenditure of ₹0.13 crore towards 
raising 80,000 seedlings during 2019 -20 and 2020 -21, however, due to non -maintenance of 
nursery and seedling distribution registers, the expenditure was rendered doubtful.  
4.5  Preference to exotic plants over indigenous plants  
Native or indigenous trees support a wide variety of flora and fauna unique to their natural 
habitat. These tree species have evolved to thrive in their local soil and climatic conditions and 
thus require less water; maintenance as compared to non -native o nes. They help foster 
ecosystem resilience by maintaining the equilibrium among various species and protecting 
against invasive species. The Mission too emphasised on identification and propagation of 
indigenous species suitable to the local environment. 
i. In Andhra Pradesh, the forest department preferred plantation of Silver Oak, an 
Australian native, instead of indigenous plants in a total area of 447 ha in Paderu Division 
between 2015-16 and 2022 -23 under Sub Mission 1. Audit observed that MoEF&CC 
overlooked the fact that the specified Silver Oak was non -indigenous and approved the 
Annual Plan of Operations. As per the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, raising of 
silver oak trees proved disastrous to the coffee growing areas. As compared to the natural 
and mixed shade trees, the silver oak trees cause more radiation, emit higher temperature 
and reduce humidity in plantation. The trees extract large quantities of water, thereby 
reducing the water table. The observation has been noted (July 2025) by the State. 
ii. During Joint Physical Verification (March to July 2024), a total of 1,150 Akashmoni 
plants (Acacia auriculaeformis), an Australian native, were seen planted in five forest 
divisions in West Bengal in 2021-22 to 2022-23 under Sub Missions 1, 3 and 5. Acacia 
auriculaeformis is an invasive species that outcompetes native plants for resources such 
as light, water and nutrients and prevents their germination. 
iii. Similar instance was observed in Punjab, where a total of 16,929 Eucalyptus trees were 
grown under mixed plantation in three Forest Divisions of Dasuya, Garhshankar and 
SAS, Mohali during 2016 -17 to 2018 -19 under Sub Missions 1 and 2. Eucalyptus, an 
Australian native which besides depleting the water table and soil nutrients, also inhibits 
the growth of neighbouring plants. SFDA Punjab stated (July 2025), that the choice of 
species was in accordance with the preference of the farmers. However, the fact remains 
that exotic species were chosen for plantation under Sub Missions other that Sub 
Mission 4. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
69 
Thus, non-native species were given priority for plantation over native species by the States 
defeating the objective of GIM to restore native biodiverse species mix at the landscape level. 
Compensating forest cover by raising non-native and artificial plantations does not translate in 
compensating the forest benefits lost and might be detrimental to the existing ecosystem. 
MoEF&CC stated (September 2025) that native and mixed species plantations are the norm. 
However, the probabilities of trees like Eucalyptus, some species of Acacias, etc., having found 
way into certain plantations cannot be ruled out as these are maintained in forest nurseries 
especially for Social Forestry/Agro-Forestry purposes. The reply may be viewed in the light of 
the fact that the plantation of exotic species cited a bove was carried under Sub Missions 1, 2, 
3 and 5 and not under Sub Mission 4: Social  and Agro-Forestry. Further, the GIM Mission 
Document 2011 enunciates plantation of exotic and invasive species having adverse effects on 
both local biodiversity as well as the hydrological regime. 
Recommendation No. 22: 
The Ministry may consider randomly inspecting plantation sites to verify and curb the 
preference for exotic species over indigenous varieties.  
 
4.6  Improper maintenance of Plantation Journals 
A Plantation Journal is maintained for every plantation site and contains the entire history of 
the plantation in chronological order, from Advance to Maintenance Stage. It comprises of the 
location map, details like method of planting, size, geology, fencing, species raised, technique 
and spacing adopted, annual survival percentage, Maintenance Works and subsequent 
operations such as casualty replacements, weeding, etc.  
During the examination of records and Joint Physical Verification (March to September 2024), 
it was observed that Plantation Journals were maintained in 15 States/UT in 83 per cent sites, 
i.e., 556 out of 673 plantation sites 79, with the exception of Haryana , where no journals were 
found maintained. Out of the 5 56 Plantation Journals maintained, aspects like type of species 
planted, coordinates of the location, survival percentage, remarks of the Officer inspecting the 
site, etc., were not found recorded in 431 plantation journals (77.52 per cent) in these 15 States 
(Annexure XXVI).  
 
79 Out of 675 plantation sites visited during Joint Physical Verification, distribution of honey boxes and furniture was observed in two 
sites in Kerala, hence reporting is done for 673 plantation sites. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
70  
The lack of comprehensive periodic details in these Journals has an adverse impact on the 
assessment of survival status and quality of plantations. 
MoEF&CC stated that an advisory shall be issued to the States in this regard. 
4.7  Assessment of survival percentage of plantations under GIM 
As per the discussions held during the 6th NEC meeting in June 2020, the survival rate of plantation 
was to be considered as a criterion for measuring the outcome of afforestation activities in the 
States. In connection with this, the Forest Survey of India was to design methodology and 
technology for assessing survival percentage. However, Audit did not observe any such 
information having been disseminated to the States. Further, in the 9th NEC meeting held in July 
2023, the States were requested to prioritise the maintenance work and ensure at least 70 per cent 
survival. 
Joint Physical Verification of 559 plantation sites80 in the 16 States/UT revealed that there were 
95 sites (16.99 per cent) where survival was between 0 to 40 per cent, 180 sites (32.20 per cent) 
where survival was between 41 to less than 70 per cent and 284 sites (50.81 per cent) where 
survival was 70 per cent and above (Annexure XXVII). 
As no criteria for survival percentage of plantation was specified in the Implementation 
Guidelines of GIM 2014 for categorising it to be ‘successful’ or a ‘failure’, the States have used 
the plantation or Evaluation Code applicable to the State for specif ying the status of the 
plantation.  
 
 
 
 
80 Out of 675 plantation sites in 16 States/UT where Joint Physical Verification was carried out, 116 sites were not considered for 
assessment of survival percentage, reasons being that only Advance Work had been carried out/interventions were taken under SM 
1 (a) where plantation of saplings was not carried out/which were impenetrable due to weeds, etc. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
71 
Case Study: Poor survival percentage of GIM plantations in Maharashtra 
Maharashtra followed the Evaluation Code, 1969, under which the survival percentage of 
plantations is categorised as ‘successful plantation’ (>60 per cent ), ‘partially successful’ 
(33 to 60 per cent) and ‘failed plantations’ (<33 per cent). Out of 35 plantation sites visited 
by Audit, nine plantations were categorised as ‘successful’, eight plantations as ‘partially 
successful’ and 18 plantations as ‘failed’. 
Inadequate financial planning and management noticed at the PCCF level in Maharashtra 
resulted in poor survival percentage of the plants , ranging between zero to less than 10 (as 
illustrated below): 
Table 14: Low survival percentage of GIM plantations in Maharashtra 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Plantation 
Site (L3) 
Name of 
Division 
(L1) 
Area of 
plantation 
(Ha) 
Survival Percentage  Reasons furnished by 
division for less survival 
percentage As per 
division 
records (as 
in October 
2020 to 
2023) 
As per 
physical 
verification 
1 Goramba Nandurbar 110 50.00 0 
 
Due to non -payment of 
wages to the villagers 
who left their livestock 
for grazing on the 
plantation site. 
2 Valval Nandurbar 25 66.33 8.42 Due to grazing of cattle 
belonging to the tribals of 
the nearby village. 
3 Rayari Bhor 25 96 Less than 5 The protection work 
could not be carried out 
due to delay in release of 
funds.  
4 Yerandi Wadsa 45 61.20 Less than 10 The protection work 
could not be carried out 
due to delay in release of 
funds, which resulted in 
cattle grazing by the 
livestock of the nearby 
villages. 
 
 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
72  
 
Figure 29: Zero survival at Goramba Plantation site  
 
Figure 30: Poor survival (8.42 per cent) at Valval 
plantation site  
SFDA Maharashtra stated (July 2025) non-allocation of funds was the reason for poor survival. 
4.8  Improvement of ecosystem services including biodiversity, hydrological services 
and carbon sequestration 
The treatment of 2.8 mha of land was to result in improved ecosystem services including 
biodiversity, hydrological services and carbon sequestration81. Findings pertaining to adoption 
of non-indigenous species that have connotation of impacting the preserved biodiversity have 
been discussed in Para 4.5. Limitations with respect to other aspects of ecosystem services 
have been detailed below: 
4.8.1 Lack of Soil Moisture Conservation works 
Forests are vital for maintaining the hydrological cycle, regulating water flows, recharging 
aquifers and hence, have better availability as well as quality of water. The Mission Document 
of GIM 2011 envisaged taking up of Soil Moisture Conservation works like building check 
dams and contour trenching, etc., primarily under SM 1 and SM 2 (b). Realising the importance 
of this activity, assurance was given by MoEF&CC to requests made by States in the first 
National Executive Council meeting (May 2015) to set apart certain percentage of funds for 
Soil Moisture Conservation activities. Though no separate funding was given for these 
activities, the States carried out Soil Moisture Conservation through funds released for Advance 
work. Audit, however, observed: 
• Absence of Soil Moisture Conservation activities in 345 out of 472 plantation sites 
(73.09 per cent) in 12 States/UT82 implementing GIM (Annexure XXVIII). 
 
81  It is a process wherein the carbon dioxide from the atmosphere is captured and stored by the vegetation (forests and grasslands) and 
soil. 
82  Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, 
Odisha, , Punjab, Uttarakhand and West Bengal. 


 Report No. 4 of 2026 
73 
• Though Soil Moisture Conservation activities were considered in the Revised Mission 
Document 2021 as a separate component for funding under GIM (10 per cent of the 
total cost of plantation activities), no funds could be allocated for the Soil Moisture 
Conservation activities as the Revised Mission Document has not been adopted by the 
States. 
Absence of Soil Moisture Conservation works under GIM could lead to soil erosion, failed 
plantation, depletion of soil nutrients and complete desertification.  
While SFDA Andhra Pradesh noted (July 2025) the observation, SFDA Punjab stated that due 
to non-provision of funds, these works were not a part of the APOs. SFDA Kerala stated that 
FDAs carry out Soil Moisture Conservation works. However, the fact remains that it had not 
been carried out in the sites identified by Audit on the basis of Joint Physical Verification 
carried out alongwith the forest officials. 
MoEF&CC noted (September 2025) the observation. 
4.8.2 Non-assessment of carbon sequestration 
Carbon sequestration is a critical component in offsetting greenhouse gas emissions. As per the 
Cabinet Approval 2014 and Mission Document 2021, annual carbon sequestration was to be 
enhanced by 14 to 17  million tonnes of CO 2 equivalent and 2.5 to 3.0 billion tonnes of CO 2 
equivalent by 2030.  
The National Executive Council (NEC) in its meeting (October 2015) had also recommended 
that the States should calculate reduction in carbon emission and capture the expected outcome 
in terms of extent of area covered under plantation, carbon sequestered a nd biomass saved. 
However, Audit found that no follow up action for compliance with NEC’s recommendations 
was taken by the States, as of March 2025.  
Niti Aayog in its report on ‘Climate Change in Governance’ (September 2022) had observed 
that monitoring of carbon sequestration was not being done by most States.  Audit also 
observed that though the Mission, during the Audit period, managed to achieve afforestation in 
an area of 1,47,925.63  ha, no state except Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh 83 made an 
assessment of sequestered carbon during 2015-2025. Hence, due to non-assessment of carbon 
 
83 Assessment amounting to 0.21 million tonnes was done by Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh through the World Bank aided 
Ecosystem Services Improvement Project. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
74  
sequestration, effectiveness of GIM activities with regard to climate change could not be 
quantified to verify the effectiveness of the Mission.  
SFDA Maharashtra stated (July 2025) that carbon sequestration would be measured once the 
plantations mature and accumulate adequate biomass. The reply may be seen in light of the fact 
that according to a Forest Survey of India Report, although older trees have a higher overall 
carbon storage capacity due to their inc reased biomass, younger trees grow faster and absorb 
more carbon dioxide initially. Hence, carbon sequestration can be carried out at any stage of 
the plant and in the extant case should have been carried out as warranted under the Mission. 
MoEF&CC stated (July 2025) that the assessment of forest carbon stock is mandated to the 
Forest Survey of India, which publishes its findings in the India State of Forest Report 
biennially. However, the fact remains that the assessment made by FSI is for t he entire State 
and not for plantations carried out in selected areas under GIM. As such, the assessment of 
carbon sequestered by GIM plantations and interventions could not be known. 
Recommendation No. 23: 
The Ministry should make stringent efforts to monitor the carbon sequestered by the forests 
treated under GIM so that its contribution towards achieving the Nationally Determined 
Contribution is known, besides aiding climate change mitigation strategies. 
4.8.3 Livelihood improvement activity under GIM 
One of the objectives of GIM was to increase forest -based livelihood income of about 0.85 
million households living in and around the forests as per the Cabinet Approval in 2014. The 
Mission expected to substantially enhance forest-based biomass in the form of food, fuelwood, 
grass/fodder, timber, bamboo, cane and non -timber forest produce to h elp the community 
augment their livelihoods.  
Audit observed that though expenditure to the tune of ₹34.47 crore was reported under 
livelihood improvement activities by 14 States/UT 84 (Annexure XXIX), quantification on the 
number of households that benefitted was not carried out by seven states85. Out of the remaining 
seven, four States/UT 86, reported livelihood enhancement of 6,949 households. Three States, 
namely, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Odisha reported ‘nil’ figures. Further, no efforts were 
 
84 No expenditure was reported by West Bengal and this activity could not be carried out by Mizoram due to short funding. 
85 Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Sikkim. 
86 Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Punjab and Uttarakhand. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
75 
made by MoEF&CC to ascertain the number of households whose income was augmented 
under the Mission. MoEF&CC noted (September 2025) the observation. 
Thus, the achievement of the Objective of augmenting forest-based livelihood income of about 
0.85 million households living in and around the forests remained unfulfilled. 
4.9  Deficiencies in stipulation and approval of targets  
National Executive Council at MoEF&CC is vested with the function to approve the 
Perspective Plan and Annual Plan of Operation of each State before the release of funds for 
implementation of GIM activities. Audit observed shortcomings in approval of target s as 
discussed below: 
4.9.1  Non-uniform approach in stipulation of targets and non -execution of certain 
components of the plantation exercise under GIM 
MoEF&CC approves physical targets for all three components, i.e., Advance, Creation and 
Maintenance Works under various Sub -Missions. However, Audit observed inconsistencies 
regarding stipulation of targets under all three components under SM 1 (a) and SM 4 (a, b 
and c) in 4 out of 16 States/UT (as illustrated in the Table 15).  
Table 15: Details of components approved and unapproved under various Sub Missions  
Name of the 
State/UT 
Component for which targets were 
approved in the Perspective Plan 
Component for which targets were 
not approved in the Perspective Plan 
SM 1 (a): Enhancing quality of forest cover and improving ecosystem services; Moderately dense forest 
cover but showing degradation 
Maharashtra Only Creation and Maintenance Work Advance Work 
Jammu & Kashmir Only Advance Work Creation and Maintenance Work 
Haryana Only Creation Work  Advance and Maintenance Work 
SM 1 (b): Eco Restoration of Degraded Open Forest (Type A) 
Haryana Only Creation Work Advance and Maintenance Work 
SM 4: Agroforestry and Social Forestry 
Haryana Only Creation Work under SM 4 (a) Farmers 
land including current fallows  
Advance and Maintenance Work 
Sikkim Only Creation and Maintenance Work  under 
SM 4 (c) Highways/Rural Roads/Canals  
Advance Work 
Jammu & Kashmir Only Creation Work under SM 4 (a), (b) and 
(c) 
Advance and Maintenance Work 
As all three components were prerequisites for any plantation exercise to be complete and 
successful, the absence of any of them reduces the success rate of the plantation exercise.  
MoEF&CC stated (July 2025) that the annual targets are presented in the APOs and not the 
Perspective Plans. However, the fact remains that the consolidated abstract in the Perspective 
Plan of the State in its proposal contains tentative year wise targets for Advance, Creation and 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
76  
Maintenance under various Sub Missions. Also, the Ministry did not take notice of the States 
adopting non-uniform approach in allocating targets for all three components of the plantation 
cycle, i.e., Advance, Creation and Maintenance. 
4.9.2  Discrepancies in targets for different components 
The NEC approved the target of 17,197 ha Advance Work under SM 1 (b) Type B, SM 1 (b) 
Type C, SM 3 and SM 4 (c) under the Perspective Plan of Haryana, the target for Advance 
Work should become the target for Creation Work and Maintenance Work in the subsequent 
years. However, it was observed that the targets for Creation (14,176 ha) as well as 
Maintenance Work for three years (14,072.5 ha, 14,072.5 ha and 13,534 ha) were different from 
the Advance Work target, i.e.,17,197 ha as detailed in the table below: 
Table 16: Details of Sub Missions containing inconsistent targets 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Details of Sub Missions in which Advance Work 
approved in NEC (in ha) 
Details of Sub Missions in which 
creation work approved in NEC (in ha) 
Sub Mission SM 1 
(b) 
Type B 
SM 1 
(b) 
Type C 
SM 3 SM 4 
(c) 
Total SM 1 
(a) 
SM 1 
(b) 
Type A 
SM 4 
(a) 
SM 4 
(b) 
Total 
1 Advance 4803 5794 1665 4935 17197 0 0 0 0 0 
2 Creation 3469 4169 1603 4935 14176 14269 7348 17802 10946 50365 
3 Maintenance 
Year 1 
3403 4168.5 1566 4935 14072.5 0 0 0 9946 9946 
4 Maintenance 
Year 2 
3403 4168.5 1566 4935 14072.5 0 0 0 0 0 
5 Maintenance 
Year 3 
3387 3957 1526 4664 13534 0 0 0 0 0 
Additionally, for works done under SM 1 (a), SM 1 (b) Type A, SM 4 (a) and SM 4 (b), it was 
observed that the targets for Advance Work were missing and the targets for Creation were 
different from those of Maintenance Work for first year. Further, no targets were stipulated for 
Maintenance Work for the second and the third year. 
SFDA Haryana stated  (July 2025) that the figure of 14,176 ha taken as Creation was a 
typographical error. As for Sub Mission 4 (b), the Maintenance Work would be carried out in 
second and the third year. However, the fact remains that no targets for the same were stipulated 
in the Perspective Plan. 
4.9.3  Works under Advance, Creation and Maintenance carried out without targets in 
Perspective Plan 
i. Despite no targets set under SM 1 (b) Eco Restoration of Degraded Open Forest (Type 
A) in the approved Perspective Plan (2016 -17 to 2021 -22), Punjab State Forest 
Department carried out Advance (2,825 ha), Creation (2,225 ha) and Maintenance Work 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
77 
(1,825 ha) under the Sub -Mission at a total cost of ₹8.87 crore during the period 
2020-21 to 2024-25. SFDA Punjab stated (July 2025) that the plantation activities were 
carried out as per the approved APOs. However, the fact remains that the activities 
approved in the APOs did not flow from the Perspective Plan. 
ii. Though the  approved Perspective Plan of Jammu & Kashmir stipulated targets for 
Creation Work only under SM 4 Agro forestry and Social Forestry, Audit observed that 
the Department carried out Advance Work of 375 ha at the cost of ₹2 crore (2021-22 to 
2022-23) instead of approved Creation Work. 
Recommendation No. 24: 
The Ministry should ensure that the entire plantation exercise comprising of Advance, 
Creation and Maintenance Works approved for a site is completed by cross-verifying Annual 
Plan of Operations of subsequent years. It may also review the requirement of all three 
components for the different Sub Missions.  
4.9.4  Inconsistencies observed in approval of targets by NEC 
The Perspective Plans contain a consolidated abstract comprising of Sub Mission wise and year 
wise financial and physical targets of the proposed activities that are to be taken up in the 
identified landscapes in the States. The Perspective Plan and the An nual Plan of Operations 
based on the consolidated abstract are forwarded by States/UTs for approval by the National 
Executive Council. Audit, observed discrepancies in the proposals and approvals submitted by 
the States/UTs in their Perspective Plans: 
i. The Perspective Plan submitted by SFDA, Sikkim (2017 -27) entailed treatment of 
16,698 ha (comprising of increasing and improving the forest/tree cover of 15,460 ha of 
degraded forests lands and enhancing forest/tree cover by 1,238 ha in urban and peri-urban 
areas) at a cost of ₹157 crore. Audit, however, observed that NEC in January 2018 approved 
the Perspective Plan of Sikkim for achievement of  the physical targets of 2,01,768.45 ha 
in eight years at the cost of ₹157 crore.The scrutiny of the Perspective Plan also revealed 
that the target of 2,01,768.45 ha approved by the NEC in January 20 18 pertained to the 
total area of 25 L2 Landscapes of Sikkim selected for GIM interventions and not the actual 
area planned for GIM activities ( i.e., 16,698 ha) as proposed in the Perspective Plan 
submitted by the State. This led to approval of inflated targets for Sikkim and provision of 
misleading information to the stakeholders. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
78  
MoEF&CC stated (September 2025) that the Perspective Plan of Sikkim identified 
2,01,768.45 ha for 25 L2 landscapes, within which 16,698 ha were marked as L3 landscapes 
for actual Mission interventions. There was no inconsistency in the approved plan that 
covered a period upto 2024 –25. The reply may be viewed in the light of the fact that t he 
year-wise abstract of the Perspective Plan submitted by Sikkim contained the total targeted 
area of 16,698 ha instead of 2,01,768.45 ha as approved by the NEC and the s ame was 
overlooked by the Ministry.  
ii. A target of 96,212 ha (i.e., increasing the forest and tree cover by 77,500 ha and enhancing 
the forest/tree cover by 18,712 ha) pertaining to five forest divisions was approved by NEC 
for the State of Odisha in May 2015. Audit observed that these targets were taken from the 
study re port of Landscape Survey of Odisha instead of the Perspective Plan. This 
Landscape Survey Report did not contain the year wise and Sub Mission wise abstract as 
annexed in the Perspective Plan of other States. During the field au dit, the Abstract of 
2,198.56 ha for five years, i.e., from 2015-16 to 2019-20 pertaining to five forest divisions 
was furnished by the Ministry and the same was also shared by the Odisha Forest 
Department with the State Audit Team. Though the target of 2,198.56 ha was stated to have 
been approved as per the first release letter, it was not found approved by the NEC.  
Audit also observed that the targets of Advance Work of 13,251 ha pertaining to 16 forest 
divisions (as against the original five forest divisions identified) sent by Odisha in their 
APOs till 2024-25 were approved by the Ministry which were in excess by 11,052.44 ha87of 
the abstract of the Perspective Plan. Thus, the targets of 16 forest divisions were irregularly 
approved by the Ministry.  
MoEF&CC stated (September 2025) that the Perspective Plan submitted by the State 
covered a total area of 96,212 hectares for a period of 10 years (2015-16 to 2025- 26), under 
which the actual intervention area (L3 landscape) was 2,177.72 ha (against the me ntioned 
2198.56 ha) under the APO 2015-16. The Ministry has been following this approved plan 
for releasing funds. The reply may be viewed in the light of the fact that the targets as per  
the year -wise and Sub Mission wise abstract furnished by the Ministr y contained only 
2,198.56 ha and not 96,212 ha.  
iii. The plantation exercise under these Sub Missions entailed three essential components such 
as Advance Work in the first year (comprising of survey and mapping of the plantation area, 
 
87 13,251 ha–2,198.56 ha. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
79 
site preparation and raising of seedlings, soil moisture conservation work), Creation Work 
in the second year (comprising of plantation of seedlings including casualty replacement) 
and Maintenance Work for three years (comprising of weeding including casua lty 
replacement, pest control and watering). 
Audit observed that the total physical targets approved by NEC in case of 15 States 
pertained to the targets for Advance or Creation work only, i.e., Advance Work for the first 
year becomes Creation for the second year and Maintenance in the subsequent three years. 
The total targets were equivalent to the area to be treated under GIM in the state. Contrary 
to this, Audit observed that the Perspective P lan of Karnataka approved by MoEF&CC in 
May 2015 entailed a total target of 22,165 ha during 2015 -16 to 202 4-25, which was 
cumulative of targets pertaining to Advance (5,100 ha), Creation (4,815 ha) and 
Maintenance Work (12,250 ha) causing the physical targets to be inflated by 17,065 ha. The 
actual target for the State was 5,100 ha for 10 years , which was only 23 per cent of the 
wrongly approved target, i.e., 22,165 ha. 
Thus, absence of scrutiny, both at the level of the State as well as the Ministry, in stipulation of 
year wise and component wise targets led to different targets being approved by the NEC and 
those approved as per the APOs. 
Recommendation No. 25: 
The Ministry should ensure due diligence in reviewing the targets before submitting them 
for NEC’s approval. 
 
4.10  Other irregularities  
Audit also observed cases of misclassification in categorisation of work and non -operational 
carbon flux towers as given below: 
4.10.1  Misclassification of work done by Kerala FDAs  
Audit observed 73 cases of misclassification (as detailed in Annexure XXX) in categorisation 
of work in the selected JFMCs under 12 Divisions of Kerala , where work relating to fire 
protection, maintenance work of plantation, supply of gas connection, plantation work under 
various Sub Missions were taken as ‘Advance Work’; works related to fire protection, soil 
moisture conservation works, uprooting weeds, construction of school board, strengthening of 
local level institutions were taken as ‘Creation Work’. Also, landscapes where no work was 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
80  
taken up were also reported as ‘Creation Work’. Further, works relating to plantation, 
distribution of honey boxes, pressure cookers, gas connections were reported as ‘Maintenance 
Work’, even though they relate to creation and livelihood improvement sub-components. 
Table 17: Misclassification of work done by Kerala FDAs 
Sl. 
No. 
Type of work 
categorised by 
FDA/SFDA 
Total no. 
of cases 
No. of cases 
misclassified 
Type of Work to be categorised under 
1 Creation 51 4 Advance work 
27 Maintenance work 
3 Intervention of promoting alternative fuel 
11 No work was conducted during the period 
5 Strengthening of FDAs 
1 Not related to GIM 
2 Advance work 11 1 Creation Work 
9 Maintenance work 
1 Intervention of promoting alternative fuel 
3 Maintenance work 11 2 No work was conducted during the period 
1 Creation Work 
7 Intervention of promoting alternative fuel 
1 Livelihood Improvement 
Total 73 73 
 
Thus, misclassification resulted in an incorrect representation of the figures with respect to 
Creation, which is related to plantation.  
MoEF&CC, in its reply (July 2025), stated that the errors in misclassification of work 
undertaken by FDAs would be rectified. 
Recommendation No. 26: 
The Ministry may issue instructions to SFDA Kerala to look into the activities carried out 
under different components of the plantation work and classify them correctly for proper 
reporting of achievements made by the State under Advance, Creation and Main tenance 
Works.  
4.10.2  Irregularities observed in Ecosystem Services Improvement Project  
With a view to measure and monitor forest carbon stocks (one of the components under the 
Project) and build the capacity of State Forest Departments of Chhattisgarh and Madhya 
Pradesh in this regard, the Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (I CFRE) 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
81 
proposed (January 2020) to install carbon flux towers at Sonhat, Chhattisgarh and Khatpur, 
Madhya Pradesh.  
M/s Meatech Solutions LLP, Gurgaon, Haryana (lowest bidder), which had quoted ₹4.21 crore 
for supply, transportation and installation of two carbon flux towers with four years of extended 
warranty after expiry of one -year standard warranty and calibration charges of both systems 
for a duration of five years, was selected in June 2020. 
However, a Committee constituted (August 2020) for cost assessment of the 
maintenance/extended warranty and calibration of the flux tower suggested that as there was 
no precedence available for five years of maintenance contract of the flux towers installe d in 
Dehradun, the towers in the instant case may be purchased with one year standard warranty at 
a cost of ₹2.44 crore (inclusive of GST) along with one year extended warranty of ₹0.22 crore 
and GST at the rate of 5 per cent, i.e., ₹0.01 crore. Calibration of the sensors could be carried 
out on as and when required basis.  
It was noticed that concurrence was given only for procurement and installation of the towers 
with one year extended warranty at a cost of ₹2.67 crore. Thereafter, an expenditure, amounting 
to ₹0.70 crore was incurred on fencing the site of the flux towers, construction of a security 
hut, procurement of hardware and software associated with the functioning of the flux towers.  
Although two flux towers were successfully installed by M/s Meatech Solutions LLP at the 
approved sites in the two States in March 2021, ICFRE in November 2021 observed that the 
non-functioning of sensors installed on the flux towers resulted in erroneous readings 
necessitating their rectification. Inspection of the flux towers at both sites (January 2022) by 
the officials of ICFRE and M/s Meatech Solutions revealed the following: 
• CNR4 (Net radiometer) sensors at both locations were not functioning properly due to 
the presence of moisture inside the sensors. 
• The Photosynthetically Active Radiation sensors at both locations should be replaced if 
found defective. 
• Atmospheric Temperature and Relative Humidity Sensors were found defective at the 
flux tower installed in Chhattisgarh. 
Audit observed that though the CNR4 (Net radiometer) sensor and Atmospheric Temperature 
and Relative Humidity sensors were successfully installed in June 2022 at both the sites, the 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
82  
Photosynthetically Active Radiation sensor installed at the tower in Chhattisgarh was giving 
erroneous readings.  
Further, despite the fact that the flux towers were giving erroneous readings due to the 
non-functioning of the sensors as noticed during the period November 2021 to June 2022, 
ICFRE came up with its Report on the measurement of carbon flux (December 2022) that 
contained the readings of net ecosystem carbon dioxide exchange88 calculated during the period 
April 2021 to December 2022, raising doubts on the authenticity of the Report.  
On completion of the extended warranty period (April 2023), the requirement of calibration  
was felt for uninterrupted recording of data. The same was carried out by M/s Campbell 
Scientific India Pvt. Limited at the cost of ₹0.13 crore in July 2023. Audit, however, observed 
that due to the unavailability of sensors in their stock, the company could replace only eight 
out of 12 Atmospheric Temperature and Relative Humidity sensors that were to be installed at 
both the sites. Further, six more sensors (CNR4 - net radiometer and Photosynthetically Active 
Radiation) could not be calibrated at that time of the season as they were radiation sensors and 
required clear sky for the calibration task. 
 With a view to obtaining funds for operationalisation of the flux towers, ICFRE submitted a 
proposal to MoEF&CC (April 2023) but received no reply from the Ministry till July 2025. 
Audit observed that the calibration of the pending sensors could not be undertaken (July 2025) 
due to non-availability of funds with ICFRE. Hence, the flux towers were not operational as of 
July 2025. 
Further, it was informed that the flux towers at both the sites had not been handed over to the 
Forest Department as they did not possess the requisite scientific expertise and technical 
capacity necessary for their effective operation and are being maintained by ICFRE only. 
Thus, improper planning on the part of ICFRE regarding maintenance and up-keep of the flux 
towers led to idling of the infrastructure built for quantification of carbon sequestration despite 
incurring an expenditure of ₹3.50 crore. 
MoEF&CC, in its reply (July 2025) stated that the flux towers have been operationalised. 
However, the fact remains that the work related to replacement of the faulty sensors has still 
not been carried out due to paucity of funds with ICFRE. 
 
88 4.84 to 5.40 tonnes carbon per hectare per year in Madhya Pradesh and 4.09 to 4.45 tonnes carbon per hectare per year in 
Chhattisgarh. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
83 
Recommendation No. 27: 
Efforts may be made to operationalise the flux towers at the earliest to enable quantification 
of carbon sequestered by forests and prevent further idling of these infrastructural assets. 
 
4.11  Conclusion 
Though the Mission Document of GIM 2011 envisaged an ambitious target of treating 10 mha 
of land in the country (increase of forest cover and improvement in the quality of forest cover 
in 5 mha each) by 2021, the target of only 2.8 mha was approved by the Cabinet Committee of 
Economic Affairs in 2014 with an aim to achieve them by 2018. The Mission Document 2021 
which envisaged a new target of 25 mha to be achieved by 2030  remained unimplemented as 
its implementation guidelines were yet to be approved by th e Ministry. Though the Mission 
Document of 2021 claimed achievement of 11.22 mha under the Twenty Point Programme 
which included GIM, the achievement made under GIM alone was only 0.14793 mha , with 
94.72 per cent shortfall as against targets specified for it in  2014. 
Audit observed several deficiencies, both qualitative and quantitative, in the implementation 
of GIM, which impacted the effective translation of its objectives into tangible results.  
These included approval of wrong targets, adopting non -uniform approach in allocation of 
targets for the components of the plantation cycle, i.e., Advance, Creation and Maintenance 
and interventions being carried out in unapproved landscapes, thereby undermining the core 
principle of site -specific restoration. The lack of clarity in the selection of sites resulted in 
interventions being carried out in areas that either did not require intervention or where 
interventions were ecologically inappropriate. Cases of afforestation in dense natural forests, 
instead of focusing on degraded landscapes as intended for the restoration of abandoned mining 
areas and grasslands, reveal a stark disconnect between the stated objectives and on -ground 
implementation. 
Maintenance of records by the forest departments in support of funds disbursed to farmers 
(under Sub Mission - 4 Social and Agro Forestry) and supply/transportation of seeds and 
saplings were largely missing. Plantation journals, where maintained, were incom plete or 
lacked critical details such as geo-coordinates of the sites, species diversity and survival rates.  
Reliance on non-native species not only threatened the local biodiversity but contradicted the 
principles of ecological restoration. Efforts to ensure the long -term survival of plantations 
through Soil and Moisture Conservation and Maintenance Work were la rgely neglected, with 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
84  
such measures absent in over 73.09 per cent of sites visited. The Mission also could not deliver 
on its socio -economic objective of augmenting livelihood of 0.85 million households, with 
negligible progress made in quantifying household benefits, thus limiting its intended impact 
on forest-dependent communities. 
Inconsistencies such as the absence of carbon sequestration assessments for plantations 
undertaken under the Mission, along with variations in the reporting of target achievements, 
indicate a critical oversight in addressing the broader objectives of the Mission. 
GIM’s performance till date underscores the need for greater alignment between its stated 
objectives and on -ground execution. The Mission set out with commendable ambitions for 
ecological restoration but gaps in implementation need to be addressed and monitored to realise 
its full potential in the coming years. 
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
85 
Chapter V 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Monitoring plays an important role in the proper implementation of a scheme as it ensures 
prompt decision making, resolution of challenges, provision of feedback and aids course 
correction. The Mission Documents of GIM acknowledge Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) 
as a key programme management function with significant bearing on programme efficiency 
and effectiveness. 
5.1 Monitoring at different levels 
In the Implementation Guidelines (2014) of GIM, a four -level monitoring framework 
envisaged continuous tracking of the Mission’s performance and continuous measurement of 
expected results, i.e., outputs and outcomes. 
 
Figure 31: Four level monitoring under GIM 
The information/data collected periodically through these four levels of monitoring was to be 
transmitted to MoEF&CC for assessment of achievements made against expected results and 
for further improvement of the Mission’s performance. 
Further, in reply to the concerns raised by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Demands 
for Grants (2021-22) regarding non-existence of a mechanism for monitoring of afforestation 
activities undertaken in GIM, MoEF&CC stated (April 2021) that the progress of work under 
Level 1
On-ground self-
monitoring of the 
region by the Local 
Community, 
Implementing 
Organisation and 
the Forest 
Department.
Level 2
Field review of 
randomly selected 
sites by an external 
agency.
Level 3
Remote sensing 
based forest cover 
monitoring, 
supplemented by 
boundaries of areas 
covered under the 
Mission.
Level 4
Intensive 
monitoring of a few 
pilot areas to assess 
the impact and 
efficacy of different 
old and new 
practices.

Report No. 4 of 2026 
86  
GIM is being monitored through a comprehensive monitoring framework 89. However, Audit 
observed lack of monitoring at different levels and the deficiencies noticed in the 16 sampled 
States/UT are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
5.1.1 Level 1 Monitoring  
Under Level 1 Monitoring, on -ground self -monitoring of the region was required to be 
undertaken by the local community, implementing organisation and the Forest Department. 
Building community capacity to monitor carbon and other services was also envisaged  using 
lessons from pilot projects.  
Audit found that in 10 States/UT 90 out of 16 sampled States/UTs, local community, 
implementing organisation and the Forest Department did not carry out the prescribed 
on-ground self-monitoring of the region. In Chhattisgarh, 7 out of 10 FDAs stated that they had 
conducted the said monitoring but did not provide supporting documents, while records relating 
to Level 1 monitoring in West Bengal were not provided to Audit. 
While SFDA Andhra Pradesh noted (June 2025) the observation, SFDA Keral a, Uttarakhand 
and Madhya Pradesh stated (June/July 2025) that Level 1 monitoring was regularly conducted 
by the JFMCs/FDAs/SFDAs, local communities. However, copy of the monitoring reports was 
neither provided during the course of Audit nor later. Fu rther, SFDA Punjab apprised 
(March 2025) that insufficient monitoring of plantation activities was due to the lack of 
adequate funds. 
5.1.2 Level 2 Monitoring 
Level 2 Monitoring entails conducting a field review by an external agency 91  of randomly 
selected sites of GIM. Monitoring by third party and long-term monitoring of certain ecosystem 
services at selected sites had also been provided under Level 2. The Appraisal Committee 
chaired by Secretary MoEF&CC, while considering the Expend iture Finance Committee 
proposal for continuation of National Mission for a Green India, had also emphasised 
(June 2021) that third party evaluation and monitoring of activities under the Scheme should 
be done on a regular basis.  
 
 
89 Such as, on -ground self-monitoring by implementing agencies, field review by external agencies, KML files, photographs, Audit 
Reports and Annual Progress Reports, etc. 
90 Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh (four out of five FDAs), Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, 
Maharashtra, Mizoram, Odisha and Punjab. 
91 Identified and recommended by the respective SFDAs and appointed by the respective States. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
87 
Though the frequency for conducting this level of monitoring was not prescribed under the 
Implementation Guidelines of GIM, MoEF&CC, in its reply (April 2024), stated that the States 
which had completed their first plantation cycle had to carry out such monitoring. MoEF&CC 
further added that the aspects and areas defined under the Performance Monitoring Framework 
(Para 5.2) should have been looked into by external agencies while conducting field reviews.  
Audit found that seven States (Chhattisgarh, Karnataka92, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram, Odisha, 
Sikkim and Uttarakhand) had completed their first plantation cycle93, of which Sikkim had not 
conducted third party monitoring of randomly selected sites by external agencies, as of March 
2025. In case of West Bengal, it was observed that though the Creation Work was completed 
in 2021 -22, the third-party monitoring was conducted in July -August 2022 , i.e., before 
completion of its first plantation cycle. Thus, it was too early to assess the impact of the 
plantation and livelihood improvement activities carried out under GIM. 
SFDA Sikkim, in its reply (June 2025) stated that the process for hiring an external agency for 
third-party monitoring was currently under process. 
5.1.3 Level 3 Monitoring 
Under this level of monitoring, remote-sensing-based forest cover monitoring by Forest Survey 
of India, supplemented by boundaries of areas covered under the Mission was proposed. For 
this, the Mission Directorate was required to work in close collaboration with the Forest Survey 
of India, National Remote Sensing Agency and Indian Institute of Remote Sensing for 
developing a countrywide mosaic of high-resolution satellite images and overlaying polygons 
of areas taken up for interventions under the Mission t o help develop a centralised spatial 
database in the GIS domain.  
Audit found that as of May 2024, the Mission Directorate did not conduct this mandatory 
monitoring. The Mission Directorate, in its reply to Audit, stated that the Forest Survey of India 
was mandated to undertake this level of monitoring. The reply may be viewed in light of the 
fact that in the EFC meeting (August 2017), the Mission Directorate had assured that it would 
carry out Level 3 Monitoring through satellite imageries. It was only in May 2023 that the 
National Governing Council of GIM instructed that FSI should check and monitor the overall 
creation work done so far under GIM. 
 
92 Two out of three FDAs had conducted third party monitoring. 
93 Advance, Creation and Maintenance Works for three years. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
88  
5.1.4 Level 4 Monitoring 
The Implementation Guidelines of GIM stipulate that a few pilot areas will be intensively 
monitored to assess the impact and efficacy of different old and new practices in tandem, by 
the implementing agency, the Forest Department and a support organisation. In addition to 
growing stock and forest cover, oth er parameters will include monitoring environmental 
services and associated factors such as ground cover, soil condition, erosion and infiltration, 
run-off, groundwater levels to develop water budgets, as  well as the provision of locally 
relevant fuel wood, fodder, non -timber forest products and basic biodiversity analysis. Audit 
observed that during 2015-16 to 2024-25, 12 States/UT94, out of 16 sampled States/UT did not 
carry out Level 4 Monitoring.  
Further, in Chhattisgarh, out of the 10 test checked FDAs, six95 FDAs had not conducted Level 
4 Monitoring and three96 FDAs stated that Level 4 Monitoring was conducted with the help of 
the Forest Department and help groups, but no records were provided to Audit. Additionally, 
FDA Kawardha (Chhattisgarh) replied that this monitoring was not applicable at the Divisional 
level as it pertained to the Government of India.  
In their replies, SFDA Andhra Pradesh noted (June 2025) the facts, whereas SFDA Madhya 
Pradesh stated (June 2025) that Level 4 Monitoring was regularly conducted by the 
JFMCs/FDAs/SFDAs, local communities and field review by external agencies. However, no 
documentary evidence in support of their claim was provided. SFDA Maharashtra stated 
(June 2025) that survival percentage, growth parameters were observed twice in a year; 
observation with respect to other parameters were ocular in nature and mostly not qu antified. 
SFDA Uttarakhand apprised (July 2025) that the intensive monitoring (Level 4) by including 
all environment and ecosystem services related parameters in few selected pilot areas will be 
done after completion of the project and SFDA Punjab cited (March 2025) inadequate funding 
as a reason for insufficient monitoring of plantation activities. 
On the basis of the above facts, it can be concluded that monitoring of Mission activities at 
each of the four levels was inadequate and the State Forest Departments as well as the Mission 
Directorate did not conduct the mandatory periodical monitoring. Audit further observed that 
during the entire period of 2015 -16 to 2024-25, MoEF&CC also did not take stock of efforts 
made by the States with regard to monitoring activities prescribed under the Implementation 
 
94 Arunachal Pradesh,  Haryana, Himachal Pradesh , Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh , Maharashtra, 
Mizoram, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh and Punjab. 
95 Gariyaband, Katghora, Balrampur, Kondagon, Bilaspur and Bastar. 
96 Marwahi, Surguja and Surajpur. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
89 
Guidelines. The lack of monitoring led to not being able to  pinpoint the issues adversely 
impacting the success of the Mission and to loss of opportunity for appropriate course-
correction. Further, due to the absence of monitoring at all levels by responsible stakeholders, 
the expected output and outcome of the Mission could not be assessed by the Ministry during 
all these years. 
MoEF&CC in its reply on the M&E shortfalls pointed out by Audit, stated (July 2025) that the 
different levels proposed under the old Mission and also in the revised Mission do not mandate 
the monitoring to happen at all levels. 
The reply of the Ministry may be viewed in the light of the fact that  GIM Implementation 
Guidelines 2014 acknowledge M&E as a key programme management function with 
significant bearing on programme efficiency and effectiveness. Acknowledging the role of 
M&E in programme delivery, monitoring at four different levels was spel t out in the Mission 
Document.  
Recommendation No. 28: 
MoEF&CC should ensure that monitoring, as prescribed under the Implementation 
Guidelines, is carried out on a regular basis for continuous assessment of the performance 
of the Mission, so that corrective actions, if needed, may be made in time. 
 
5.2 Performance Monitoring Framework 
Para 6.7 of Implementation Guidelines of GIM stipulates that in consonance with the 
Government of India directives of adopting Results -Based Management for design and 
implementation of GIM, a Performance Monitoring Framework or Result Framework was to 
be the core of Monitoring and Evaluation system under GIM.  
This is the only mechanism that exists at the level of MoEF&CC to evaluate the achievement 
of outcomes of GIM activities. Under this Framework, MoEF&CC had prepared an indicative 
Performance Monitoring matrix  with indicators, some of which have been illustrated in the 
Table 18. 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
90  
Table 18: Performance Monitoring Framework 
Expected Result Responsible agency for monitoring 
(Periodicity) 
Forest/tree cover on Forest/ Non-Forest lands is enhanced in 
the Mission Target Area (MTA), the total area with its 
inclusions (scrubs, grasslands, etc.). 
Forest Survey of India (Biennial). 
Quality of forest cover and ecosystem services of forest/non-
forests is improved in moderately dense, open forests, 
degraded grassland and wetlands. 
Local Forest Department/local communities 
(Annual). 
Ecosystems are restored and forest cover is increased in 
scrub, shifting cultivation areas, cold deserts, mangroves, 
ravines and abandoned mining areas. 
Local Forest Department/local communities 
(Annual). 
Public forest/non-forest areas (taken up under the Mission) 
are managed by community institutions. 
Local Forest Department/local 
communities/facilitating NGO (Annual). 
Improvement in fuel -wood use efficiency and adoption of 
alternative energy devices by households. 
Local Forest Department/local 
communities/facilitating NGO (Annual). 
Forest/non-forest/based livelihood income for three million 
forest dependent households is enhanced in the Mission 
Target Area. 
External agency contracted for household 
survey (Biennial). 
Forest/non-forest based livelihoods of about three million 
houses living in and around forests are diversified. 
Local Forest Department/local 
communities/facilitating NGO (Annual). 
The data required for the Performance Monitoring Framework was to be obtained from the 
four-level monitoring system through responsible stakeholders as envisaged under the 
Implementation Guidelines. However, Audit observed that due to lack of monitoring at all the 
four levels, the Performance Monitoring Framework was not prepared by 15 SFDAs whereas, 
West Bengal did not provide any reply/records relating to preparation of said framework.  
Further, MoEF&CC also did not take any initiative for seeking this mandatory data from States.  
The absence of data related to the Performance Monitoring Framework significantly limited 
the ability of MoEF&CC to monitor and evaluate the success of the Mission.  
In their response forwarded through MoEF&CC, SFDA Andhra Pradesh and Punjab provided 
(March/June 2025) assurance for compliance. MoEF&CC stated that to streamline and 
strengthen the monitoring and evaluation process, it launched (June 2025) the National 
Afforestation Monitoring System Portal, which when operationalised, will enable generating 
performance monitoring reports on a real time basis. The Ministry also provided details of an 
internal assessment report on the impact of GIM during 2015 -20. However, the Report is 
limited to the assessment of change in forest cover, thereby lacking other important aspects of 
the Performance Monitoring Framework. Moreover, the National Afforestation Monitoring 
System portal, which was to be developed by December 2020, could be completed only in June 
2025 and is yet to be operationalised (September 2025). 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
91 
5.3 Creation of web-link on website for public access  
The Integrated Finance Division, MoEF&CC in September 2016 recommended that all SFDAs 
create/open a web-link on their website for public to access the details of activities taken up 
under the GIM including progress report on bridge plan activities, perspec tive plans, micro -
plans, quarterly statements of accounts and progress reports, annual progress reports along with 
photographs, geo-coordinates and maps of the plantation sites.  
However, the web -links were not created by 14 out of the 16 sampled States/UT despite 
instructions from the Ministry to comply with the same. Though, the State of Madhya Pradesh 
(July 2025) shared the web -links created for the said information, it was observed that the 
web-link was devoid of micro-plans, quarterly statements of accounts, progress reports, 
geo-coordinates, maps of the plantation sites, etc. Further, there was no records of any efforts 
made by MoEF&CC to ensure compliance by the States even after a lapse of more than eight 
years, thereby impeding the dissemination of information to the public and relevant 
stakeholders at large besides checking faulty reporting.  
Punjab and Andhra Pradesh acknowledged the observation. Kerala  stated that as the works 
under GIM had been completed in the State, the web -link had been removed. However, GIM 
activities are ongoing in the State. Uttarakhand stated that the web -link had been created but 
the same could not be accessed by Audit. 
Recommendation No. 29: 
The Ministry should ensure compliance with the instructions issued for creation of web-link, 
as the same can be used for monitoring the progress of GIM in the States as well as check 
faulty reporting besides maintaining transparency in dissemination of information to the 
stakeholders. 
 
5.4 Social Audit 
In addition to the four levels of monitoring prescribed under GIM Implementation Guidelines, 
social audit of the Mission activities was to be taken up at the village level by the Gram Sabha. 
The Mission was to learn from best practices of social audit, particularly the one designed for 
MGNREGS. Section 17 of MGNREGA empowers the Gram Sabha to undertake social audit 
of all the works carried out by the Gram Panchayat. It requires that the Gram Panchayat make 
available all relevant documents , including muster rolls, bills, vouchers, measurement book, 
copies of sanction orders and other connected books of account and papers to the Gram Sabha 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
92  
for the purpose. Taking a cue from M GNREGS, the Mission required that the Gram Sabha 
carry out social audit of all expenses incurred by the Committees constituted by the Gram 
Sabha/revamped JFMCs, the reports of which were to be shared in the public domain. 
However, it was observed that social audits were not co nducted by the Gram Sabhas in 14  
States/UT while in Mizoram and Uttarakhand  social audit was conducted by JFMCs 
intermittently. In the absence of social audit, the prime objective of ensuring public 
accountability and participation of the local community in the implementation of GIM was not 
achieved. 
MoEF&CC, while noting the Audit observation stated (September 2025) that social audits 
specifically had not been conducted under Green India Mission.  
MoEF&CC further forwarded the SFDAs’ replies in which SFDA Madhya Pradesh stated 
(June 2025) that in one97 FDA, social audit was not conducted while in 16 FDAs 98 works had 
been carried out with the participation of the Committee and approval of Gram Sabha, which 
was in line with the concept of social audit. SFDA Madhya Pradesh further added that the 
Green India Mission Guidelines lack a clear framework, implementa tion methodology and 
training for social audit, which was one of the reasons for non-compliance of social audit. The 
reply of SFDA Madhya Pradesh may be viewed in the light of the fact though works had been 
carried out with the participation of the Committee with the approval of Gram Sabha, yet Audit 
of all expenses incurred by the Committees  were  not conducted by the Gram Sabha of these 
FDAs. SFDA Kerala replied (June 2025) that the JFMCs, being a group of local communities, 
can be considered as Gram Sabha considering the prevailing scenario of the State. The reply of 
SFDA Kerala is not tenable as the JFMC does not include all members of the village and thus, 
is not equivalent to Gram Sabha. 
Recommendation No. 30: 
MoEF&CC should ensure that social audit is conducted by Gram Sabha so that participation 
of the local community in the implementation of GIM is ensured.  
 
 
 
 
 
97 FDA, namely, Seoni South. 
98 FDAs, namely, Satna, Shivpuri, Dhar, Raisen, Balaghat South, Jhabua, Sheopur, Umaria, Khandwa, Sagar South, Sendhwa, 
Narsinghpur, Barwani, Obedullaganj, Burhanpur and Jabalpur South. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
93 
5.5 Annual Report 
An Annual Report of a government scheme is an important document that provides a detailed 
account of the Scheme’s performance, achievements, output/outcome, challenges and future 
plans. These reports help ensure transparency, accountability, public awarene ss and 
engagement. 
The Implementation Guidelines of GIM provide that the National Governing Council  under 
the chairmanship of the Minister, MoEF&CC is to approve the Annual Report of the Mission. 
Further, State Level Executive Committee (SLEC) of each State to prepare its Annual Report 
of the State GIM.  
Audit, however, observe d that since implementation of GIM in 2015 -16 till 2024 -25, the 
Annual Report of GIM had not been prepared for any of the years.  Further, the Annual Report 
of State GIM was not prepared by 12 States/UT99 out of the sampled 16 States/UT.   
The non-preparation of Annual Reports by the States and the Ministry impeded access of all 
stakeholders, including the public, policymakers and oversight bodies, to detailed information 
about the Scheme’s progress. It further deprived the Government of India in making data-driven 
decisions for the continuation, expansion or modification of the Scheme. 
MoEF&CC stated (July/September 2025) that no separate Annual Reports for GIM have been 
brought out either by Directorate or the States.  It further added that the stipulated details for 
the progress are annually incorporated in its Annual Report. Ministry further stated that this 
shortfall will be addressed by the National Afforestation Management System portal launched 
in June 2025 through which the reports, annual reports, quarterly reports, etc., shall be 
generated at will through real time report generation. The uploading of the reports generated at 
various levels can be seen and cross-checked.  
The reply of the MoEF&CC that it provided updates on Mission activities in its Annual Report 
of the Ministry may be viewed in the light of the fact that the Annual Report of MoEF&CC is 
a wide-ranging Report on the Ministry’s activities. The prescribed Annual Reports of GIM 
would contain detailed information such as the outcome of activities, reasons for non -
attainment of targets and future plans to mitigate the challenges and issues impeding the 
achievement of objectives specific to GIM.  Further, the NAMS p ortal is yet to be 
operationalised as of September 2025. 
 
99 Andhra Pradesh , Arunachal Pradesh , Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Punjab, Sikkim and West Bengal. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
94  
5.6 Quarterly Progress Reports 
The sanction order for release of central share by MoEF&CC stipulates that a quarterly 
statement of accounts and progress of work carried out in the L3 level landscapes shall be 
submitted by each JFMC to the FDA, which in turn shall compile its own progres s report for 
onward submission to SFDA. The SFDA shall prepare a comprehensive Annual Report on the 
progress of works and utilisation of funds in respect of all L2 level landscapes and submit it to 
MoEF&CC after the end of the financial year. 
In 14 States/UT 100, it was observed that though the JFMCs/FDAs had not submitted these 
mandatory quarterly statements of accounts and progress reports to their reporting authority, 
SFDAs had prepared the comprehensive report on the progress of works and utilisation of funds 
for their State without the engagement of the JFMCs. All such cases are discussed in detail in 
Annexure XXXI. 
The non-submission of quarterly statements of accounts and progress reports by JFMCs/FDAs 
indicates a weak internal control mechanism, which can result in transmission of incorrect data 
being reported by the SFDA to the Ministry. This adversely affects the  reliability of the 
achievement reported by MoEF&CC with respect to GIM. 
MoEF&CC reiterated (July 2025) that this shortfall will be addressed by National Afforestation 
Management System portal launched in June 2025. The Ministry’s reply can be viewed in light 
of the fact that the National Afforestation Management System portal is yet to be 
operationalised. 
The Ministry further forwarded the response of SFDA Andhra Pradesh and Uttarakhand on this 
issue, which stated (June/July 2025) that necessary action is being initiated to avoid such lapses. 
Further, SFDA Madhya Pradesh stated (June 2025) that some forest divisions such as Dakshin 
Sagar, West Betul, Satna, Narmadapuram, Sehore and Shivpuri had sent quarterly and annual 
progress reports to the senior office from time to time. However, no documentary evidence was 
furnished to Audit. 
5.7 Validation of Programme/achievements reported under GIM by Audit  
Data validation is of utmost importance as it ensures the accuracy, consistency and reliability 
of data by identifying and preventing errors, which ultimately leads to better decision -making 
based on credible information and reduces the risk of inaccuracy, duplicity, thereby maintaining 
 
100 Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya 
Pradesh, Mizoram, Punjab, Uttarakhand, Sikkim and Maharashtra. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
95 
data integrity. The Mission Directorate had been obtaining the geo-coordinates along with geo-
referenced maps (KML file) for each landscape from the State Government where interventions 
have been carried out. A KML file of the plantation site helps users t o view the locations of 
afforestation as well as monitoring the progress of the work undertaken. However, Audit found 
that the GIM Directorate was not validating them for their completeness, correctness and 
accuracy. 
Audit attempted to independently validate and evaluate the performance reports under GIM by 
evaluating the area where GIM intervention were undertaken using a GPS device, by viewing 
the KMLs of plantation sites on Google Earth Pro and leveraging the services of IISc, Bangalore 
to conduct temporal analysis. The Audit findings in this respect are discussed below: 
5.7.1 Inflated achievements reported in KML files 
As per the data (KML files) provided by MoEF&CC to Audit, GIM interventions were carried 
out in a total area of 105 ha on 14 sites 101 of eight Divisions 102 of Uttarakhand during 2018 -
2023. Joint Physical Verification of these plantation sites was conducted by Audit Team with 
the State Forest Department officials wherein the entire boundary of the plantation site was 
treaded along to calculate the area of the  plantation site. This exercise disclosed that the 
interventions had been carried out in only 67.14 ha indicating that an excess intervention area 
of 37.86 ha was included in their Annual Progress Reports. This points towards laxity on the 
part of MoEF&CC in validating the achievements reported by SFDA.  
A few examples of such plantation sites are illustrated below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
101  (i) Dabala Sagwa Tok, (ii) Kandoi, (iii) Ratkot, (iv) Arkandie, (v) Kolinda (vi) Syoli -I, (vii) Naulana CN NO.-02, (viii) Sukri soyam, 
(ix) Tuniyar soyam, (x) JK, CN No. -16, Band Gota, (xi) Heritok soyam -02, (xii) Khaitradi soyam-01, (xiii) Ramnagar, (xiv) Gwad 
VP, Silmodi Tok. 
102  DFO, Chakrata, Civil &Soyam Pauri, Tehri, Soil Conservation Uttarkashi, Tehri Dam -1, Tehri Dam-2, Ramnagar and Kedarnath 
Wildlife. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
96  
 
 
Figure 32: Plantation site of Kandoi 
Name of the Division: Chakrata 
Plantation year: 2022-23 
As per Divisional record 
(Yellow): 10.0 ha 
As per JPV (Red): 1.75 ha 
Excess area reported: 8.25 ha 
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 33: Plantation site of Saskholi  
Name of the Division: 
Ramnagar 
Plantation year: 2022-23  
As per Divisional record 
(Yellow): 10.0 ha 
As per JPV (Red): 5.66 ha 
Excess area reported: 4.34 ha 
 
  
  
 
Figure 34: Plantation site of Naulana Compartment No.2 
Name of the Division:  
Tehri 
Plantation year: 2020-21  
As per Divisional record 
(Yellow): 10.0 ha 
As per JPV (Red): 7.53 ha 
Excess area reported: 2.47 ha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 Report No. 4 of 2026 
97 
Name of the Division:  
Tehri DAM-2, Uttarkashi 
 
Figure 35: Plantation site: of Khitradi Soyam-I 
Plantation year: 2023-24  
As per Divisional record 
(Yellow): 5.0 ha 
As per JPV (Red): 2.05 ha 
Excess area reported: 2.95 ha  
 
 
Name of the Division:  
C&S, Pauri  
Figure 36: Plantation site of Arkandie 
Plantation year: 2020-21 
As per Divisional record 
(Yellow): 5.00 ha 
As per JPV (Red): 1.90 ha 
Excess area reported: 3.1 ha  
MoEF&CC stated (September 2025) that in the Figure 32, the larger KML belonged to the L2 
landscape while the smaller one belonged to the L3 landscape and added that L3 landscape is 
situated within L2. The reply is not acceptable as both the KML files belong to the same 
plantation site where the KML shown in red colour was created by Audit by actually treading 
the boundary of the plantation site.  
5.7.2 Overlapping plantation sites 
Instances of overlapping of the plantation sites under GIM alone and with other schemes as 
noticed in Audit are shown below:   
5.7.2.1  Overlapping of plantation sites of GIM alone 
a) In Andhra Pradesh, scrutiny of KML files of plantation sites in Paderu District for the years 
2015-16 to 2022 -23 on Google Earth Pro revealed nine instances where the plantations 
undertaken by FDA Paderu in a given year overlapped with plantations in an area of 54.99 
ha in subsequent years. A few such instances are illustrated below: 


Report No. 4 of 2026 
98  
i. Plantations of Silver Oak were undertaken in the plantation sites of D. Gonduru JFMC 
(shown in red colour) of 10 ha and Karakaputtu JFMC (shown in blue colour) of 40 ha 
in 2015 and 2017 respectively. However, when both the KMLs of these plantation sites 
were viewed on Google Earth Pro, it was noticed that the plantation site of Karakaputtu 
JFMC of 40 ha completely overlapped the plantation site of D. Gonduru JFMC of 10 ha 
as shown in the figures below. 
Figure 37: Plantation Site: D.Gonduru  10 ha (2015) Figure 38: Plantation site: Karakaputtu 40 ha (2017) 
 
Figure 39: The D. Gonduru site was completely overlapped by the Karakaputtu JFMC site in Andhra 
Pradesh 
ii. In another instance, plantations were carried out in three sites, namely, Ganneruputtu 
JFMC (shown in pink colour) of 25 ha in the year 2021 and two sites of Kodapalli 
JFMC of 20 ha (shown in blue colour) and 25 ha (shown in green colour) in 2020. Audit 
observed that the plantation site of Ganneruputtu JFMC overlapped an area of 12.2 ha 
of two plantation sites of Kodapalli JFMC, where plantations had already been carried 
out in the previous year, i.e., 2020 (shown in the figures below). 


 Report No. 4 of 2026 
99 
Figure 40: Plantation Site: Ganneruputtu 25 ha (2021) 
 
Figure 41: Plantation Site: Kodapalli 20 ha (2020) Figure 42: Plantation Site: Kodapalli 25 ha (2020) 
 
Figure 43: The site at Ganneruputtu JFMC overlapping an area of 12.20 ha in two sites at Kodapalli 
JFMC, Andhra Pradesh 
These examples indicate that MoEF&CC lacked a system to check the KMLs of plantation 
sites that claimed excess achievement. 


Report No. 4 of 2026 
100  
MoEF&CC, in case of Andhra Pradesh, stated (September 2025) that the overlap observed is 
of KMLs of adjacent units due to improper calibration of GPS before field use.  However, the 
fact remains that calibration of GPS before field use is essential to maintain accuracy, reliability 
and data integrity. 
b) A total of eight instances103 were noticed where different plantation sites of GIM overlapped 
with one another in Uttarakhand. In one such instance, the KML files of four plantation sites, 
namely, Surdhar Tok (2019-20), Semya Chand Tok (2022-23), Diwalya Tok (2020-21) and 
Gahad Patata Tok (2022-23) under GIM in Dungmandargad L3 landscape in Uttarakhand 
overlapped with each other.  Uttarakhand stated (July 2025) that plantation carried out in 
GIM sites were adjacent but not exactly overlapping. However, the fact remains that 
overlapping is clearly evident from the KML files provided by the Forest Department itself.  
 
• Red Colour: Surdhar Tok plantation site 10 ha, Creation Work: 2019-20,  
• Yellow Colour: Semya Chank Tok plantation site 10 ha, Creation Work: 2022-23,  
• Green Colour: Diwalya Tok plantation site 10 ha, Creation Work: 2020-21,  
• Blue Colour: Gahad Patata Tok plantation site 10 ha, Creation Work: 2022-23. 
Figure 44: Overlapping of GIM plantation sites in Uttarakhand 
5.7.2.2  Overlapping of plantation sites of GIM with other afforestation schemes 
Audit further observed seven instances in Uttarakhand and one instance in Madhya Pradesh 
where GIM plantations overlapped with plantations executed under other schemes. 
a) Out of seven cases, Audit observed three cases 104 where the KML files of GIM 
plantation sites overlapped with KMLs of CAMPA plantation (one such case of FDA 
 
103 a. DFO, SC, Uttarkashi [(i. Bharkot JKCN 26A-II and JKCN 26B-II) and (ii. Gorsara Soyam-II and Dhaneti Soyam-II)], 
 b. Tehri DAM-1 [(i. Surdhar Tok, Semya Chank Tok, Diwalya Tok and Gahad Patata Tok), (ii. Jhadi Tok, Banj Dugadi Tok and 
Dhedichada Tok), (iii. Bhindiyar Name Tok and Chandi Name Tok), (iv. Nawebitta Tok and Pirulyani Tok), ( v. Nagchundi Name 
Tok and Palda Name Tok) and (vi. Gherdhar Tok and Sema Chadagd Tok)]. 
104 Civil and Soyam, Pauri (Gadoli), Soil Conservation, Uttarkashi (Jalkurgad Compartment No. 27A) and Soil Conservation, 
Lansdowne (Koli Gaon). 


 Report No. 4 of 2026 
101 
of Uttarakhand, namely, Soil Conservation Division, Uttarkashi, has been highlighted, 
where Advance Soil work (ASW) done in Jalkurgad Compartment No. 27 A under GIM 
in 2019-20 overlapped with the work done under CAMPA in 2022-23). The remaining 
four cases 105 pertained to the overlap of GIM sites with that of Namami Gange 
‘Bahuddeshiya Yojana’ (one such case of Tehri Dam -1 Division has been highlighted 
where creation work in Bhatkanda Soyam Kandapani Name Tok under GIM in 2019-20 
overlapped with the work done on a site under Namami Gange in 2023-24). 
 
Figure 45: Advance Soil Work carried out on 
plantation site of Jalkurgad Compartment No. 27A 
under GIM in 2019-20 (Yellow colour) overlapped with 
creation work done under CAMPA  in 2022 -23 (Red 
colour) at Soil Conservation Division, Uttarkashi. 
 
Figure 46: Creation work carried out on 
plantation site of Bhatkanda Soyam Kandapani 
Name Tok under GIM in 2019 -20 (Yellow colour) 
overlapping with creation work done under 
Namami Gange in 2023 -24 (Red colour) at Tehri 
Dam-1 
Uttarakhand stated (July 2025) that plantation under GIM and under other schemes 
were adjacent but not exactly overlapping. However, the fact remains that overlapping 
is clearly evident from the KML files provided by the Forest Department itself.  
b) A similar instance was noticed in Madhya Pradesh where Burhanpur Forest Division 
undertook plantation in 135 ha of compartment no. RF 312 (shown in red boundary) 
under GIM in the year 2022, incurring an expenditure of ₹ 0.58 crore. Audit observed 
that the plantation activities under various schemes (shown in the table) had already 
been carried out in 25 ha, 10 ha and 40 ha inside the 135 ha of compartment no. RF 312 
in previous years, i.e., 2011, 2012 and 2021 respectively. Thus, the achievement made 
by the Burhanpur Forest Division in compartment no. RF 312 was overstated by 75 ha.  
 
105 DFO, Tehri DAM-I (Bhatkanda Soyam), Kedarnath WL (Kundon Compartment No.1 and Kandarikhod Compartment No. 23) and 
Tehri DAM-2 (Kandla Ramola Bonga Soyam),   


Report No. 4 of 2026 
102  
Table 19: Details of plantations in Compartment No. RF 312 of Burhanpur Division, Madhya Pradesh 
Sl. 
No. 
Plantation 
year 
Area of 
plantation 
(in ha) 
Plantation Scheme Plantation 
ID 
1 2021 40 CAMPA (shown by yellow boundary) 119840 
2 2012 10 Working Plan Implementation (shown by blue elliptical 
polygon) 
10290 
3 2011 25 Working Plan Implementation (shown by blue square 
polygon) 
4114 
 
Figure 47: Plantations in Compartment No. RF 312 of Burhanpur Division, Madhya Pradesh 
 
Hence, the non -validation of the KML files by MoEF&CC resulted in the overstatement of 
claims made by the State with regard to the achievements made under GIM leading to 
inaccurate and unreliable information being disseminated to stakeholders.  
MoEF&CC stated (July 2025) that National Afforestation Management System Portal will 
minimise the discrepancies pointed out by Audit. 
5.7.3  Evaluation of performance of GIM through Geographic Information System 
(GIS) analysis of plantation sites by Indian Institute of Science (IISc) Bangalore  
In order to assess the performance of Green India Mission with respect to achievement of the 
envisaged outcomes, i.e., increase and improvement of forest cover, Audit leveraged Remote 


 Report No. 4 of 2026 
103 
Sensing and GIS technology. A sample of 170 plantation sites in nine States 106 covering an 
area of 1,397 ha (Annexure II) under Sub Missions 2 and 5 were analysed by Indian Institute 
of Science, Bangalore107 (technical expert engaged by Audit). The KML files of these selected 
sites were called for from the States through MoEF&CC and provided to the Expert for 
analysis.  
The temporal analysis of the spatial e xtent of vegetation  and the condition of vegetation 
(fragmentation of tree cover where change was observed) was undertaken for these 170 KMLs 
through the following protocol: 
• Temporal remote sensing data was used to assess the site condition before 
implementation of GIM interventions, during the implementation of GIM and post 
implementation period. The geo-referenced KML files of the plantation sites given by 
the Ministry were overlaid on temporal high -resolution data in the cloud platform 
Google Earth Engine for the period 2016 to 2024 procured from a public archive and 
pre-processed to rectify geometric and radiometric distortions. This data was then 
classified to generate lan d use maps, which were further confirmed through  ground 
validation by the State Audit Teams officials along with local forest officials to ensure 
accuracy. 
• Temporal Landsat data from 2016 to 2024 was used to identify land cover dynamics 
through the spatial extent of vegetation cover which was calculated using the 
Normalised Difference Vegetation Index. Random forest, an ensemble of tree -type 
machine learning classifier, was used for the land use classification. 
• The sites where significant changes (in the condition and extent) were noticed were 
considered for further spatial analyses – land cover assessment and condition 
assessment through fragmentation metrics to understand the improvement in condition 
of degraded forest patches through GIM. 
The GIS Analysis was restricted to Sub Mission 2: Ecosystem Restoration and Increase in 
Forest Cover and Sub Mission 5: Restoration of Wetlands, as they primarily involved 
afforestation activities for increasing forest cover rather than activities that imp rove forest 
cover, the latter being difficult to assess and establish causality. Additionally, a lot of emphasis 
 
106 Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Punjab, Sikkim and Uttarakhand. 
107 The report of IISc , Bangalore can be accessed through https://cag.gov.in/uploads/media/IISc -GIM-PA-DElhi-18UNE2025-
06944d8f973e472-52558110.pdf. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
104  
has been laid by this Scheme on restoration of degraded and critical forest ecosystems. An 
attempt was made to provide adequate representation of the various ecosystems covered under 
Sub Mission 2. 
The sample study for GIS Analysis restricted selection of sites to those where activities were 
undertaken till 2019 -20, as plantations carried out subsequently were too small and their 
reflectance resembled that of open areas or soil, even in the high spatial and spectral resolution 
remote sensing data.  
The Audit findings on the GIS Analysis of the 170 KML files have been detailed below: 
5.7.3.1  Non-validation of KML files 
• Eight KML files108 of Odisha and Kerala could not be analysed as they did not have proper 
boundaries drawn. 
• Nine KML files109 of Odisha pertained to plantation sites where activities had already been 
executed in the previous years leading to duplication of sites and over -reporting of 
achievement by 45 ha. 
• GIS Analysis of the remaining 153 KMLs 110 covering an area of 1,305 ha as reported by 
States to the Ministry showed that the actual area of these KMLs amounted to 1,807.01 ha 
(as calculated by Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore) leading to a variation of 502.01 ha. 
This indicates that the KML files drawn by the forest departments were inaccurate. Further, 
the area of the KML files reported by the States was not validated by the Ministry.  
5.7.3.2  Change in forest cover due to GIM interventions in the selected plantation sites  
Temporal analysis of 153 sites covering an area of 1,807.01 ha in nine States revealed changes 
in tree cover attributable to GIM interventions in KMLs of only 46 plantation sites in three 
States, namely, Odisha, Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh. The total K ML area of these 
46 plantation sites was 561.32 ha but GIM interventions were noticed in only 179.43 ha.  
 
 
108 Plantation sites of Barsupal 5 ha (2016 -17), Barsupal 5 ha (2017 -18), Kakudibhag 5 ha (2016 -17), Kakudibhag 5 ha (2017 -18), 
Sarion 5 ha (2016-17), Sarion 5 ha (2017-18) in Odisha and Kottakad 15 ha (2017-18) and Mannarkad 2 ha (2016-17) in Kerala. 
109 Plantation sites of P. Karakadana 2 ha, Bhanranali 5 ha, Kotabarena 5 ha (2016 -17), Kotabarena 5 ha (2017 -18), Sansailo 5 ha 
(2017-18), Sardeipur 5 ha (2017-18), Simlipatna 5 ha (2017-18), Sansailo 3 ha (2019-20) and Bhingira 10 ha in Odisha. 
110 (170-8-9)=153 sites. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
105 
Thus, plantation activities executed under GIM, between 2016 -17 to 2019-20, were observed 
in only 9.93 per cent of the total area of 1,807.01 ha (Annexure XXXII). Ground truthing of 
40 such sites was conducted by Audit in which findings of IISc were confirmed. 
5.7.3.3  Absence of change in the forest cover due to GIM interventions 
Out of the 153 sites that were analysed for temporal change, changes attributed to GIM 
interventions were not noticed in a total of 107 plantation sites during the intervention period 
(i.e., 2016-17 to 2019-20) till 2024. This clearly shows that plantation activities, if undertaken, 
did not result in tree cover in approximately 70 per cent  plantation sites. Thus, physical 
achievement in these plantation sites as claimed by the six States 111, amounting to 1245.69 ha 
was overstated as it was not supported by any scientific analysis. Since no sign of plantation 
activity was observed through remote sensing data and GIS analysis, the utilisation of funds to 
the tune of ₹2.57 crore on these works cannot be vouched for. 
Out of the 107  such plantation sites, ground -truthing exercise/Joint Physical Verification by 
Audit of six plantation sites112 in Uttarakhand (distinct from Joint Physical Verification of sites 
mentioned in Paras 4.3.2.1 and 4.4.1.1) was  carried out in June 2024 and July 2025. The 
exercise revealed deficiencies like drawing of inaccurate KMLs by the Uttarakhand Forest 
Department, plantation carried out under existing tree cover, non-adoption of uniform spacing 
and plantation of under-sized saplings due to which the plantation carried out was not visible 
in the temporal analysis done by IISc, Bangalore as detailed below: 
• Validation of KML Files of three sites113 of Uttarakhand (June 2024 and July 2025) revealed 
that the plantation sites as furnished to Audit by MoEF&CC were different from the sites 
shown by the Forest Department which poses doubt on the sanctity of data maintained by 
the Ministry. 
 
 
111 Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Punjab, Sikkim and Uttarakhand. 
112 Duduliya Manral Thanigaw and Rotapani of Ranikhet Forest Division, Shiling, Chama, Lafada and Kharahi Van Panchayat of 
Champawat Forest Division. 
113 Duduliya Manral Thanigaw and Rotapani of Ranikhet Forest Division, Shiling of Champawat Forest Division. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
106  
 
Figure 48: KML of Rotapani plantation site 
furnished by MoEF&CC has a yellow boundary, 
while the actual site of plantation has a red 
boundary. 
 
Figure 49: KML of Shiling plantation site has a 
red boundary, while the actual site of plantation is 
shown with yellow pegs. 
• The plantations in Duduliya Manral Thanigaw and Rotapani of Ranikhet Forest Division, 
Shiling, Kharahi and Lafada of Champawat Forest Division (Uttarakhand) were found to 
be scattered and done in areas having existing forest cover. 
 
Figure 50: Lafada plantation site covered with 
existing Pine trees. 
 
Figure 51: Rotapani plantation site having 
existing tree cover. 
• The plantation model adopted by Uttarakhand for all these sites was 1,100 plants per ha 
which entailed a spacing of 3m x 3m. However, Joint Physical Verification (June 2024 and 
July 2025) of the sites revealed non -adoption of uniform spacing between the pi ts due to 
which it was unlikely that a total of 49,500 saplings (as recorded in the plantation journals) 


 Report No. 4 of 2026 
107 
were planted at these sites. Also, the achievement of 50 ha against the same target, as shown 
in records of these sites, also seems doubtful. 
Figure 52: Non-uniform spacing noticed in Kharhi 
Plantation Site, Champawat, Uttarakhand. 
Figure 53: Non-uniform spacing noticed in Lafada 
Plantation Site, Champawat, Uttarakhand. 
• Although the Creation Work at these sites was carried out in the year 2019-20, the average 
height of the plants in all these sites ranged between one foot to two feet six inches, clearly 
indicating that the same had not resulted in a proper tree cover within the span of six years 
since the year of Creation. Plantations carried out on the sites of Kharahi, Duduliya Manral 
Thanigaw and Lafada were affected by forest fire and landslide. 
Figure 54: Burnt plants noticed in Duduliya Manral 
Thanigaw Plantation Site, Ranikhet, Uttarakhand. 
Figure 55: Plant less than 1 foot noticed in Rotapani 
Plantation Site, Ranikhet, Uttarakhand. 
• Plantation noticed in two sites, namely, Chama and Shiling of Champawat, Uttarakhand 
were found to be infested with weeds like Lantana and Kala Bassa. The plants seen in 
Chama were recently planted , as they had loose soil around them. Further, in Lafada 


Report No. 4 of 2026 
108  
plantation site, casualty replacements were noticed due to which the plants were shorter in 
height. This clearly indicated that the shorter height plantations seen at the sites did not 
pertain to the year of Creation, i.e., 2019-20. 
Figure 56: Shiling Plantation site, Uttarakhand, 
infested with Lantana. 
 
Figure 57: Recently executed plantation noticed 
in Chama Plantation site, Uttarakhand. 
DFO, Champawat, in his reply (July 2025), stated that blank areas were taken up for 
plantations and as per available records, the plantations were successful till Maintenance 
Work was carried out by the Forest Department. However, after the plantation sites were 
handed over to the respective communities (Van Panchayats), the success rates dropped. He 
also added that the plants could not attain the desired height due to biotic pr essures and 
because the saplings planted were not of good height due to unavaila bility of timely 
payments. 
The reply may be seen in the light of the fact that the Forest Department ha d shown 
utilisation of funds for Creation Works as well as Maintenance Works on these sites. The 
plantations in all these sites could not succeed in increasing  the forest cover to the 
desired levels due to wrong site selection, non -adoption of uniform spacing between the 
pits, plantation of under -sized saplings and lack of  Maintenance Works by the Forest 
Department. 
 
 
 


 Report No. 4 of 2026 
109 
5.7.3.4  Forest Fragmentation/Quality of Forest in the selected plantation sites 
The condition of the landscape (at chosen site) was assessed through fragmentation metrics 
calculated for each pixel, based on their fragmentation characteristics into five types114, namely, 
intact, perforated, edge, transition and patch that can be compared to the categorisation of 
forests (by Forest Survey of India) as very dense forests (intact forests), moderate dense forests 
(patch and transitional), etc. Decline of ‘intact’ forest cover shows degradation in a region. With 
afforestation initiatives, ‘patch’, ‘perforated’ or ‘transitional’ condition would change to ‘intact’ 
conditions with the improvements in the canopy cover.  
Out of 1,807.01 ha, GIM interventions in 179.43 ha helped in reducing the open area (non-tree 
cover) from 124.7 ha in the intervention year to 82.31 ha in 2024 (33.99 per cent ) and 
increasing the intact tree cover from 26.18 ha in the intervention year to 64.06 ha in 2024 
(59.13 per cent) (Annexure XXXIII). 
 
Figure 58: Consolidated statistics for condition of tree cover in locations where GIM interventions were 
carried out (Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Odisha)  
Thus, the GIS Analysis of 170 sites by IISc , Bangalore revealed deficiencies in the data with 
regard to accuracy with which the KMLs are drawn for sites where GIM was implemented, 
leading to a variation in the area of the plantation sites reported. The temporal analysis of GIM 
 
114 Intact: A large undisturbed forest area; Perforated: Small non -forest area inside the intact; Patch: A small forest surrounded by 
non-forest areas; Edge: Transition zone between forested and non-forested areas; Transition: Transitional category between patch 
and edge. 


Report No. 4 of 2026 
110  
interventions showed no change in the tree cover in 70 per cent of the sites, indicating false 
claims made by the States under the respective Sub Missions.  
Recommendation No. 31: 
To ensure reliable assessment and effective planning, the Ministry should consider adopting 
or leveraging GIS technology for validation of KML Files of the plantation sites, along with 
ground truthing of sites and maintain a central geospatial database of all sites to avoid 
duplication of sites. 
Recommendation No. 32: 
The Ministry may consider conducting periodical checks using GIS technology to track the 
progress of GIM and ensure accuracy and consistency of data. 
 
5.8  Conclusion 
A comprehensive four-level monitoring framework was envisaged as an integral component of 
GIM. However, Audit observed shortcomings in the monitoring system at all four levels, which 
led to the non -preparation and reporting of data against the indicators p rescribed under the 
Performance Monitoring Framework for assessment of outcomes of GIM.  
The absence of social audits, non-submission of quarterly progress reports and non-preparation 
of annual report of GIM limited the ability of SFDAs/GIM Directorate to monitor the progress 
and initiate corrective action.  
The absence of validation of KML files by MoEF&CC resulted in achievement under GIM, as 
reported by the States, being overstated, thereby leading to the dissemination of inaccurate and 
unreliable data to stakeholders.  
A GIS-based analysis of 153 plantation sites, spanning an area of 1807.01 ha, in nine States 
revealed that 70 per cent  of the areas showed no noticeable changes attributable to GIM 
interventions during the period 2016 -17 to 2019-20, as assessed up to 2024. Ground truthing 
confirmed limited plantation activity, further constrained by inappropriate site selection, 
inconsistent spacing of planting pits and the use of undersized saplings by the Forest 
Department. 
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
111 
Even in the 30 per cent sites, covering an area of 561.32 ha, interventions were noticed in only 
179.43 ha. Thus, plantation activities executed under GIM, between 2016-17 to 2019-20, have 
been dismal with only 9.93 per cent of the interventions noticed in the GIS analysis leading to 
changes in the tree cover up to 2024.  
Hence, without urgent corrective measures, it is unlikely that GIM would achieve its intended 
outcomes of increasing and improving the tree cover by 1 mha within the projected timeline 
of 2030. 
New Delhi 
Dated: 10 April 2026 
(Dr Kavita Prasad) 
Director General of Audit, Central Expenditure 
(Environment and Scientific Departments) 
Countersigned 
New Delhi 
Dated:  20 April 2026
(K. Sanjay Murthy) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


 Report No. 4 of 2026 
1 
Annexures 
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
113 
Annexure I 
(Refer Para 1.6.2) 
Details of the sampled L1, L2, L3 landscapes selected for Audit 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the State/UT Total sampled L3 
landscapes approved 
by C&AG HQ 
Total L2 
landscapes 
corresponding to 
the sampled L3 
Total number of L1 
landscapes 
1 Andhra Pradesh 12 1 1 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 29 5 1 
3 Chhattisgarh 25 10 1 
4 Haryana 30 9 2 
5 Himachal Pradesh 23 9 3 
6 Jammu & Kashmir 16 16 2 
7 Karnataka 15 3 3 
8 Kerala 30 12 7 
9 Madhya Pradesh 30 14 7 
10 Maharashtra 19 14 5 
11 Mizoram 21 8 1 
12 Odisha 30 24 16 
13 Punjab 30 20 1 
14 Sikkim 24 13 6 
15 Uttarakhand 27 13 5 
16 West Bengal 24 15 7  
Total 385 186 68 
 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
114  
 
Annexure II 
(Refer Paras 1.8 and 5.7.3) 
Summary of the plantation sites for GIS analysis 
 
SM 2(a) SM 2(b) SM 2(c) SM 2(f) SM 5 Total  
Name of the 
State 
Area 
of 
KMLs 
(in ha) 
Number 
of 
plantation 
sites 
Area of 
KMLs 
(in ha) 
Number 
of 
plantation 
sites 
Area 
of 
KMLs 
(in ha) 
Number 
of 
plantation 
sites 
Area 
of 
KMLs 
(in ha) 
Number 
of 
plantation 
sites 
Area 
of 
KMLs 
(in ha) 
Number 
of 
plantation 
sites 
Area 
of 
KMLs 
(in ha) 
Number 
of 
plantation 
sites 
Number 
of 
plantation 
sites 
selected 
for 
Ground 
Truthing 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
40 8 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 40 8 -- 
Chhattisgarh -- -- 60 4 -- -- -- -- -- -- 60 4 3 
Karnataka -- -- -- -- -- -- 20 1 -- -- 20 1 -- 
Kerala -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 20 4 20 4 -- 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
-- -- -- -- -- -- 22 6 13 3 35 9 5 
Odisha 390 49 320 37 90 5 -- -- -- -- 800 91 32 
Punjab -- -- 62 9 -- -- -- -- -- -- 62 9 -- 
Sikkim -- -- -- -- 10 1 -- -- -- -- 10 1 -- 
Uttarakhand -- -- 350 43 -- -- -- -- -- -- 350 43 6 
Total  430 57 792 93 100 6 42 7 33 7 1397 170 46 
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
115 
Annexure III 
(Refer Para 2.2.2) 
Composition of Committees under National Afforestation Programme (NAP) and Green 
India Mission (GIM) 
NAP (existing mechanism present in the States) GIM 
• National Level Steering Committee 
• State Level Steering Committee 
• SFDA (General Body and Executive Body) 
• FDA (General Body and Executive Body) 
• JFMC/EDC 
 
• National Governing Council 
• National Executive Council 
• Mission Directorate 
• State Steering Committee 
• Revamped SFDA 
• District Steering Committee 
• Revamped FDA 
• Cluster Level Committee 
Composition 
SFDA  Revamped SFDA 
General Body (NAP) General Body 
Chairperson: Principal Chief Conservator of Forests 
 
Members: Chairpersons and CEOs of Centrally 
sponsored afforestation schemes  
 
(i) Chief Minister or a Minister nominated by him, 
Chairperson 
(ii) Principal Secretary (Forests), Member 
(iii) PCCF, Member 
(iv) Chief Wildlife Warden, Member 
(v) Nodal Officer (Forest Conservation), Member 
(vi) Chairman, Executive Committee, all FDAs, 
Member 
(vii) Member Secretary, Executive Committee, all 
FDAs, Member 
(viii) Nodal Officer (State CAMPA), Member 
(ix) Representative of three eminent NGOs of the 
State, Member 
(x) Nodal Officer, GIM, Member Secretary 
Executive Body (NAP) State Level Executive Committee 
Chairperson: Principal Chief Conservator of Forests 
Member Secretary: CCF and Nodal Officer for NAP 
 
Members: 
• Officers not below the rank of CCF dealing with 
Development, Social Forestry and Protection to be 
nominated by the Chairperson 
• Director of Panchayati Raj and Tribal Welfare 
Departments, 
• Representatives of Revenue and Rural development 
Departments 
• Chairpersons of two FDAs and CEOs of two FDAs 
or any other scheme being implemented through 
SFDA, to be nominated by Chairperson on rotational 
basis for a period of two years. 
The Executive Body can co-opt other members as and 
when necessary. 
 
(i) Principal Secretary (Forests), Chairperson 
(ii) PCCF, Member 
(iii) Chief Wildlife Warden, Member 
(iv) Nodal Officer (Forest Conservation), Member 
(v) Chairman, Executive Committee of three FDAs, 
Member 
(vi) Member Secretary, Executive Committee of three 
FDAs, Member 
(vii) Nodal Officer (State CAMPA), Member 
(viii) Director, State Forest Research Institute, 
Member 
(ix) Two representatives of Scientific Institutions and 
Universities, Member 
(x) Representative of two eminent NGOs of the State, 
Member 
(xi) A representative from each of the Ministries of 
Finance, (Department of Expenditure); Science & 
Technology; Rural Development including NRLM, 
Agriculture, Tribal Affairs and Panchayati Raj of 
State Government, Members 
(xii) Nodal Officer, GIM, Member Secretary 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
116  
NAP (existing mechanism present in the States) GIM 
State Steering Committee (NAP) State Steering Committee 
(i) Chairperson: Chief Secretary 
(ii) Members (Official) 
(a) Secretary (Forests) 
(b) Secretaries in -charge of Environment, Rural 
Development, Revenue, Tribal Development, 
Irrigation, Panchayat, Public Health, Engineering and 
Education Departments 
(c) PCCF 
(d) Six Chairpersons/CEOs of Project Implementing 
agencies of Centrally sponsored afforestation schemes 
to be nominated by the PCCF 
(iii) Members (non-official) 
Six non-official representatives of village level Project 
Implementing Agencies of Centrally Sponsored 
afforestation schemes, by rotation for a period of two 
years and to be nominated by Member Secretary, State 
Level Steering Committee. 
(iv) Member Secretary  – Chief Conservator of 
forests & member Secretary of SFDA 
 
(i) Chief Secretary, Chairperson 
(ii) Principal Secretary (Forests), Member 
(iii) Principal Secretary (Finance), Member 
(iv) Principal Secretary (Planning), Member 
(v) Principal Secretary (Rural Development), 
Member 
(vi) Principal Secretary (Agriculture), Member 
(vii) Principal Secretary (Water Resources), Member 
(viii) Principal Secretary (Tribal affairs), Member 
(ix) Principal Secretary (Panchayati Raj Institutions), 
Member 
(x) PCCF, Member 
(xi) Chief Wildlife Warden, Member 
(xii) Nodal Officer (SAPCC), Member 
(xiii) Nodal Officer (Forest Conservation), Member 
(xiv) A representative of the Ministry of Environment 
and Forests, Member 
(xv) Two eminent NGO’s working in the field of 
Forest Conservation and livelihood to be nominated 
by the State Government for a period of 2 years at a 
time who shall be eligible for re -nomination, 
Members 
(xvi) Nodal Officer, Green India Mission, Member 
Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
117 
Annexure IV 
(Refer Paras 2.2.2 and 2.2.3) 
Frequency of meetings conducted by institutions at various levels 
Name of the 
Body/ 
Committee 
Prescribed 
Frequency 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Date of 
constitution of 
body 
Total no. 
of 
meetings 
as per 
prescribed 
frequency 
Meetings 
conducted up to 
March 2025 
State Forest 
Development 
Agency 
(General 
Body) 
At least 
once a year 
Andhra Pradesh Not revamped -- -- 
Arunachal Pradesh February 2017 8 No meetings held 
Chhattisgarh Not revamped -- -- 
Haryana January 2016 9 No meetings held 
Himachal Pradesh February 2017 8 No meetings held 
Jammu & Kashmir January 2023 2 No meetings held 
Karnataka Not revamped -- -- 
Kerala Not revamped -- -- 
Madhya Pradesh Not revamped -- -- 
Maharashtra Not revamped -- -- 
Mizoram November 2014 10 No meetings held 
Odisha Not revamped -- -- 
Punjab June 2016 9 No meetings held 
Sikkim Not revamped -- -- 
Uttarakhand October 2015 9 No meetings held 
West Bengal Not revamped -- -- 
State Forest 
Development 
Agency 
(Executive 
Committee) 
At least 
twice in a 
year 
Andhra Pradesh Not revamped -- -- 
Arunachal Pradesh February 2017 16 1 
Chhattisgarh Not revamped -- -- 
Haryana January 2016 18 2 
Himachal Pradesh February 2017 16 No meetings held 
Jammu & Kashmir January 2023 4 No meetings held 
Karnataka Not revamped -- -- 
Kerala Not revamped -- -- 
Madhya Pradesh Not revamped -- -- 
Maharashtra Not revamped -- -- 
Mizoram Not revamped -- -- 
Odisha Not revamped -- -- 
Punjab Not revamped -- -- 
Sikkim Not revamped -- -- 
Uttarakhand October 2015 19 6 
West Bengal Not revamped -- -- 
State 
Steering 
Committee 
At least 
once in six 
months 
Andhra Pradesh November 2017 14 No meetings held 
Arunachal Pradesh February 2017 16 2 
Chhattisgarh August 2015 19 1 
Haryana January 2016 18 2 
Himachal Pradesh February 2017 16 1 
Jammu & Kashmir January 2023 4 No meetings held 
Karnataka September 2017 15 No meetings held 
Kerala September 2015 19 1 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
118  
Name of the 
Body/ 
Committee 
Prescribed 
Frequency 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Date of 
constitution of 
body 
Total no. 
of 
meetings 
as per 
prescribed 
frequency 
Meetings 
conducted up to 
March 2025 
Madhya Pradesh August 2015 19 6 
Maharashtra April 2016 18 1 
Mizoram November 2014 20 7 
Odisha March 2017 16 1 
Punjab June 2016 17 5 
Sikkim December 2015 18 1 
Uttarakhand October 2015 19 No meetings held 
West Bengal Not constituted -- -- 
Forest 
Development 
Agency 
(General 
Body) 
At least 
twice in a 
year 
Andhra Pradesh Not revamped -- -- 
Arunachal Pradesh Not revamped in 2 
out of 5 FDAs 
-- -- 
Chhattisgarh Not revamped -- -- 
Haryana January 2016 18 for each 
division 
No meetings held 
Himachal Pradesh Not revamped -- -- 
Jammu & Kashmir Not revamped -- -- 
Karnataka Not revamped -- -- 
Kerala Not revamped -- -- 
Madhya Pradesh Not revamped in 
12 out of 14 FDAs 
-- -- 
Maharashtra Not revamped -- -- 
Mizoram Not revamped -- -- 
Odisha Not revamped -- -- 
Punjab Not revamped in 3 
out of 4 FDAs 
-- -- 
Sikkim Not revamped -- -- 
Uttarakhand October 2015 
 
19 for each 
Division 
No meetings held 
West Bengal Not revamped -- -- 
Forest 
Development 
Agency 
(Executive 
Committee) 
At least 
every 
quarter 
Andhra Pradesh Not revamped -- -- 
Arunachal Pradesh Not revamped in 3 
out of 5 FDAs 
-- -- 
Chhattisgarh Not revamped -- -- 
Haryana January 2016 36 for each 
Division 
No meetings held 
Himachal Pradesh Not revamped -- -- 
Jammu & Kashmir Not revamped -- -- 
Karnataka Not revamped -- -- 
Kerala Not revamped -- -- 
Madhya Pradesh Not revamped in 
12 out of 14 FDAs 
-- -- 
Maharashtra Not revamped -- -- 
Mizoram November 2014 41 for each 
Division. 
1 
Odisha Not revamped -- -- 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
119 
Name of the 
Body/ 
Committee 
Prescribed 
Frequency 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Date of 
constitution of 
body 
Total no. 
of 
meetings 
as per 
prescribed 
frequency 
Meetings 
conducted up to 
March 2025 
Punjab Not revamped in 3 
out of 4 FDAs 
-- -- 
Sikkim Not revamped -- -- 
Uttarakhand October 2015 
 
38 for each 
Division 
12 meetings in 09 
out of 12 
Divisions. 
West Bengal Not revamped -- -- 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
120  
Annexure V 
(Refer Para 2.5.1(i)) 
Vulnerability Status of Landscapes of Himachal Pradesh selected under GIM 
Himachal Pradesh  
Forest Division Sl. 
No. 
Name of the L3 
landscape 
Biogeographic zone Vulnerability Status 
Nurpur 1.  Jwali-122 Shiwalik Least Vulnerable 
Dharamshala 2.  Malan-I-118 Shiwalik Least Vulnerable 
3.  Malan-II- 119 Shiwalik Least Vulnerable 
4.  Kangra-128 Shiwalik Least Vulnerable 
5.  Shahpur- 129 Shiwalik Least Vulnerable 
Chopal 6.  Kanda-I-358 Western Himalaya Moderately Vulnerable 
7.  Kanda-I-367 Western Himalaya Moderately Vulnerable 
Kullu 8.  Naggar-217 North-Western Himalaya  Most Vulnerable 
Mandi 9.  Panasra-347 North-Western Himalaya  Most Vulnerable 
10.  Kataula-I-328 North-Western Himalaya  Most Vulnerable 
11.  Kataula-II-346 North-Western Himalaya  Most Vulnerable 
12.  Kataula-III-348 North-Western Himalaya  Most Vulnerable 
Nalagarh 13.  Kohu-3 Shiwalik Least Vulnerable 
14.  Ramshehar-436 Shiwalik Least Vulnerable 
15.  Ramshehar-440 Shiwalik Least Vulnerable 
16.  Nalagarh-438 Shiwalik Least Vulnerable 
Nachan 17.  Seraj-349 North-Western Himalaya Most Vulnerable 
Renukaji 18.  Renukaji-413 Western Himalaya Moderately Vulnerable 
19.  Nohra-416 Western Himalaya Moderately Vulnerable 
Dehra 20.  Jwalamukhi-93 Shiwalik Least Vulnerable 
21.  Dehra-90 Shiwalik Least Vulnerable 
Bharmour 22.  Swai-43 North-Western Himalaya  Most Vulnerable 
Pangi 23.  Killar-57 North- Western Himalaya Most Vulnerable 
Kinnaur 24.  Moorang-I-177 Western Himalaya Moderately Vulnerable 
25.  Moorang-II-180 Western Himalaya Moderately Vulnerable 
Una 26.  Bangana-443 Shiwalik Least Vulnerable 
27.  Bangana-447 Shiwalik Least Vulnerable 
28.  Ramgarh-441 Shiwalik Least Vulnerable 
29.  Ramgarh-446 Shiwalik Least Vulnerable 
 
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
121 
Annexure VI 
(Refer Para 2.5.1(ii)) 
Vulnerability Status of Landscapes of Andhra Pradesh selected under GIM 
Andhra Pradesh 
Sl. No. Name of the Circle Rank as per vulnerability 
1.  Anantapur 56 
2.  Kurnool 187 
3.  Guntur 477 
4.  Visakhapatnam 503 
5.  Warangal 512 
6.  Nizamabad 549 
7.  Khammam 559 
8.  WLM Eluru - 
9.  WLM Tirupathi - 
 
 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
122  
Annexure VII 
(Refer Para 2.5.1(iii)) 
Vulnerability Status of Landscapes of Madhya Pradesh selected under GIM 
Madhya Pradesh 
Sl.No. Name of the District Status of Vulnerability 
1.  Umaria Very High  
2.  South Panna Very High  
3.  Satna High 
4.  South Sagar High 
5.  Shivpuri High 
6.  Sheopur High 
7.  Dhar High 
8.  Sehore High 
9.  Badhwani High 
10.  Jhabua High 
11.  South Seoni Moderate 
12.  Raisen Moderate 
13.  North Betul Moderate 
14.   West Betul Moderate 
15.  Hoshangabad Low 
16.  Obedullaganj Missing from the Vulnerability profile  
17.   South Balaghat Missing from the Vulnerability profile  
18.  Sendhwa Missing from the Vulnerability profile  
 
 
 
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
123 
Annexure VIII 
(Refer Para 2.5.1(iv)) 
Vulnerability Status of Landscapes of Chhattisgarh selected under GIM 
Chhattisgarh 
Sl.No. Name of the District Status of Vulnerability 
1.  Kabeerdham (Kawardha) High  
2.  Korba (Katghora) High  
3.  Uttar Bastar (Kanker) High 
4.  Bastar High 
5.  Kondagaon High 
6.  Marwahi Moderate 
7.  Balrampur Moderate 
8.  Surguja Moderate 
9.  Bilaspur Moderate 
10.  Baloda Bazar Low 
11.  Ghariyaband Low 
 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
124  
Annexure IX 
(Refer Para 2.5.2) 
Usage of Old Baseline Data 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Date of 
submission 
of the 
Perspective 
Plan 
Date of 
approval 
of the 
Perspective 
Plan 
Old Baseline Data taken in the 
Perspective Plan 
Period by 
which the 
data was 
outdated 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
December 
2014 
May 2015 • District wise forest cover data was 
considered as per report of 1997 as 
baseline year instead of latest data. 
17 years 
• Population of SC/ST was based on 
2001 census. 
13 years 
2. Punjab December 
2014 
May 2015 • Population census of 2001 was used to 
show the total population in the state. 
13 years 
• Satellite data of Oct 2006 - Jan 2007 
was used to assess the forest cover. 
8 years 
• Various classes of forests depending 
upon canopy density pertained to the 
India State of Forest Report 2009. 
5 years 
3. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
April 2020 June 2020 • Data on wasteland estimation was 
based on the report of Land Use 
Statistics by the Ministry of 
Agriculture, 2005.  
15 years 
4. Haryana November 
2017 
August 
2021 
• Forest cover data from India State of 
Forest Report 2013. 
4 years 
• Vulnerability to climate change from 
India State of Forest Report 2013. 
4 years 
5. Maharashtra November 
2016 
January 
2018 
• National Wetlands Atlas of 
Maharashtra 2010. 
6 years 
• Potential Impacts of Future Climate 
Change on Water Resources in 
Maharashtra 2008 World Bank. 
8 years 
• Rainfall Data -1901 to 2003 13 years 
 
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
125 
Annexure X 
(Refer Para 3.4.2) 
Delay in release of funds by State Governments 
Sl. No. Name of the 
State/UT 
Delay Observed 
1.  Kerala Against the APO for 2015-16, the State Government of Kerala took 113 days 
in releasing its matching share of ₹6.10 crore t o SFDA. Similarly, it took 
1,252 days in releasing the matching share of ₹10.88 crore to SFDA against 
the APO of 2019-20. 
2.  Himachal Pradesh Against the APO of 2020-21, the Government of Himachal Pradesh released 
₹18.98 crore115 to SFDA with a delay ranging from 257 to 832 days. 
3.  Jammu & Kashmir The Government of Jammu & Kashmir released the Centre’s share of ₹25.73 
crore received from MoEF&CC in June 2020 to SFDA in March 2021. 
Consequently, the same could not be utilised during the year and got 
revalidated (June 2021) for next year. Audit observed that the State 
Government again delayed issuing the sanction order for drawal of funds, 
which was issued in October 2021. Thus, the funds were released to SFDA 
with a delay of 462 days116.  
4.  Uttarakhand During 2015 -16 to 2022 -23, MoEF&CC released a total sum of ₹80.35 
crore117 to the State Government of Uttarakhand as the Centre’s share. 
However, the State Government took six to 453 days in releasing the same to 
SFDA along with its matching share. 
5.  West Bengal State Government of West Bengal against the APO for the year 2019-20 took 
more than 365 days in releasing its matching share of ₹6.29 crore to SFDA.  
6.  Karnataka During 2015-16 to 2022-23, the Government of Karnataka released funds to 
SFDA with delays ranging from seven ( ₹0.45 crore)  to 370 days ( ₹0.72 
crore). 
7.  Punjab During 2015-16 to 2022-23, the State Government of Punjab released funds 
to SFDA with substantial delays ranging from 59 to 373 days. Audit further, 
noticed that in two years (2015-16 and 2017-18) the Central share amounting 
to ₹8.31 crore was not transferred to SFDA. 
8.  Sikkim During 2018-19 to 2022 -23, the State Government of Sikkim had released 
the funds to SFDA with delays of 35 to 235 days.  
9.  Maharashtra Against the APO of 2018-19, the State Government of Maharashtra released 
funds amounting to ₹17.17 crore118 to the SFDA with a delay of 206 days. 
10.  Arunachal Pradesh Centre share of ₹13.43 crore received against the APO of 2021 was released 
by the Government of Arunachal Pradesh with a delay of 164 days. 
11.  Andhra Pradesh During 2016 -17 to 2022 -23, the Government of Andhra Pradesh released 
funds received from MoEF&CC to SFDA with a delay of 34 to 154 days. 
12.  Mizoram Against the APO of 2022 -23, the State Government of Mizoram released 
funds amounting to ₹36.27 crore to SFDA with a delay of 84 days. 
13.  Haryana During the year 2021-22, the State Government released funds of ₹9.55 crore 
to SFDA with a delay of 25 days. 
 
115 Including State’s matching share. 
116 462 days=477 days (29.6.2020 to 18.10.2021) less 15 days. 
117 ₹20.21 crore, ₹27.89 crore, ₹15.40 crore and ₹16.85 crore in July 2015, July 2020, December 2021 and February 2023, respectively. 
118 ₹10.30 crore as Centre share and ₹6.87 crore as State share. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
126  
Annexure XI 
(Refer Para 3.4.3) 
Delay in release of funds by SFDAs 
Sl. No. Name of the 
State/UT Delay Observed 
1.  Uttarakhand During 2020 -21 to 2022 -23, the SFDA Uttarakhand released funds with 
delays ranging from three days (₹8.20 crore) to 219 days (₹1.21 crore) to 
FDAs. 
2.  Kerala During 2016 -17, SFDA Kerala took 330 days to release  funds of ₹2.11 
crore to FDAs. 
3.  Andhra Pradesh During 2018-19 to 2021 -22, SFDA Andhra Pradesh released funds to the 
FDAs with delays ranging from 458 days (₹4.50 crore) to 667 (₹0.33 crore) 
days. 
4.  Punjab Funds ranging between ₹1.83 crore and ₹6.22 crore were released by SFDA 
Punjab to five119 FDAs with delays of five to 223 days. 
5.  Mizoram During 2016-17 to 2022-23, SFDA Mizoram released funds to FDAs with 
delays of 27 days (₹13 crore) to 97 days (₹9 crore). 
6.  Karnataka During 2015 -16 to 2022 -23, there were delays ranging from three days 
(₹1.44 crore) to 52 days (₹2.11 crore) in release of funds by SFDA to FDAs. 
 
 
 
 
119 FDAs of Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar, Ropar, Garshankar, Dasuya and Hoshiarpur. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
127 
Annexure XII 
(Refer Para 3.4.4) 
Delay in release of funds by FDAs 
Sl. No. Name of the 
State/UT 
Delay Observed 
1.  Maharashtra Three120 FDAs released the funds to their JFMCs with delays ranging from 
35 to 418 days. 
2.  Arunachal Pradesh Five121 FDAs of Arunachal Pradesh released funds to their JFMCs with 
delays of 13 to 315 days. 
3.  Uttarakhand 12 FDAs of Uttarakhand released the funds to their JFMCs with delays 
ranging from one to 236 days. 
4.  Haryana Divisional Forest Officer (DFO) (T) Kaithal released the funds to JFMCs 
with delays ranging from 121 to 229 days.  
5.  Chhattisgarh Two122 divisions released funds to their JFMCs with delays of 159 to 221 
days. 
6.  Madhya Pradesh Two123 divisions of Madhya Pradesh transferred the funds amounting to 
₹8.36 crore to their JFMCs with delays ranging from nine to 173 days. 
7.  Jammu & Kashmir There was a delay ranging from 29 to 112 days in release of funds by nine 
FDAs124 to 13 JFMCs. 
8.  Mizoram Five FDAs of Mizoram contributed to delays ranging from one to more than 
30 days in releasing funds to their respective JFMCs. 
 
 
 
120 Wadsa, Pune and Sironcha. 
121 Longding, Yinkiong, Along, Bomdila and Tawang. 
122 Katghora and Bilaspur. 
123 Sehore and Narmadapuram. 
124 Rajouri (Lah and Sarotha), Doda (Koti), Bhaderwah (Badanoo and Phigsoo Jangalwar), Poonch (Taranwali), Mahore (Manjikote), 
Ramnagar (Bland), Billawar (Badnota and Thallohai), Basohli (Janu and Patrera) and Urban Forestry Srinagar (Dignibal). 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
128  
Annexure XIII 
(Refer Para 3.7) 
Issues related to financial decentralisation 
Sl. No. Name of the 
State/UT 
Audit Observations 
1.  Madhya Pradesh In eight Divisions 125, funds were not transferred to JFMCs for execution 
of work. During 2018-19 to 2022-23, payments amounting to ₹70.67 crore 
were made by the FDAs towards the works executed by them 
departmentally. This deprived the JFMCs of participation in managing the 
forest and the basic idea of inclusion of JFMCs could not be achieved. 
2.  Jammu & Kashmir 12 sampled FDAs126 procured material like fencing post, barbed wire and 
polybags worth ₹2.56 crore themselves, without involving JFMCs. 
3.  Arunachal Pradesh Two FDAs, namely Longding127 and Bomdila128, did not involve or release 
the earmarked funds to the concerned JFMCs, executing afforestation 
activities through their range offices and incurred an expenditure of ₹0.16 
crore on behalf of the JFMCs. 
4.  Himachal Pradesh In two FDAs, Chopal and Una, though the bank accounts were opened in 
the name of JFMCs, they were being operated by the Range Officer and 
Divisional Forest Officer, indicating that financial powers were not 
effectively devolved to JFMCs. 
5.  West Bengal Audit observed that the fund was decentralised up to the FDA level only. 
The role of JFMCs was limited to supply of labour for execution of 
afforestation activities proposed under GIM and there was no fund transfer 
to JFMCs from FDAs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
125 Barwani (₹4.90 crore), Burhanpur (₹3.24 crore), Satna (₹10.50 crore), Shivpuri (₹15.48 crore), South Balaghat (₹6.68 crore), South 
Panna (₹18.41 crore), South Sagar (₹6.77 crore) and Umaria (₹4.69 crore). 
126 FDAs - Doda: ₹0.61 crore, Bhaderwah: ₹0.36 crore, Poonch: ₹0.13 crore, Mahore: ₹0.09 crore, Ramnagar: ₹0.04 crore, Billawar: 
₹0.05 crore, Basohli:  ₹0.14 crore, Sindh:  ₹0.12 crore, Urban:  ₹0.08 crore, Kehmil:  ₹0.08 crore, Kamraj:  ₹0.27 crore and JV 
Baramulla: ₹0.59 crore. 
127 Executed creation work under Sub Mission 4(c) -Highways/rural roads/canals/tank bunds with a total expenditure of ₹0.06 crore 
through Forest Range under Kanubari. 
128 Expenditure of ₹0.09 crore on advance work (APO of 2021-22) was incurred through Nafra and Bomdila Forest Range. Similarly, 
₹0.01 crore (first instalment of APO of 2022-23) was incurred through Nafra Forest Range. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
129 
Annexure XIV 
(Refer Para 3.8.2(ii)) 
Irregular expenditure incurred by SFDAs/FDAs/JFMCs 
Sl. No. Name of the 
State/UT Irregularities Observed 
1.  Arunachal Pradesh Between December 2023 and January 2024, four FDAs 129 incurred an 
amount of ₹1.43 crore on the procurement of utensils, furniture, firewood, 
construction and maintenance of local community hall, school buildings, 
sheds and boundary walls, etc. 
2.  Odisha During 2015 -16 to 2022 -23, SFDA Odisha and its JFMCs incurred 
expenditure of ₹1.03 crore towards purchase of fuel, consultancy, hiring of 
security and celebration of V an Mahotsav/Utkal Diwas, construction of 
community hall, purchase of goods and services l ike utensils, 
entertainment articles, furniture, restoration of water body in the village, 
provision for spring-based water supply to the village, construction of dry 
yard, drilling of borewells, purchase of generator, etc. 
3.  Mizoram During 2016-17 and 2017 -18, 12 JFMCs incurred a total expenditure of 
₹0.45 crore irregularly on activities, viz., constructions of cemetery hut, 
footpath, information building, pavilion at volleyball court, etc. 
4.  Jammu & Kashmir In 2021-23, two FDAs 130 incurred an expenditure of ₹0.02 crore towards 
construction of bridle -path and upgradation of road, which were not 
covered under the Guidelines for livelihood enhancement activities issued 
by the Office of the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest.  
5.  Kerala During 2017-18 to 2022-23, five FDAs131 incurred an expenditure of ₹0.14 
crore toward purchase of furniture, air conditioners, construction of 
buildings and repair and maintenance of departmental vehicles, etc.  
6.  Himachal Pradesh In 2022 -23, FDA Una incurred a sum of ₹0.07 crore on installation of 
CCTV , organisation of Himachal Day, Independence Day, repair and 
maintenance works of division/range offices, purchase of furniture, etc. 
7.  Andhra Pradesh During 2016 -17, an amount of ₹0.06 crore was incurred towards 
renovation of Division and Forest Range Office, Paderu through funds 
released to eight132 JFMCs. 
8.  Sikkim In 2021-22, an expenditure of ₹0.04 crore was incurred towards renovation 
of Conference Hall at the Forest Secretariat of the Government of Sikkim 
from the funds received under GIM. 
 
 
 
129 FDAs, namely Longding, Yinkiong, Along and Bomdila. 
130 Bhaderwah and Poonch: ₹0.02 crore. 
131 FDAs, namely Malayattoor (₹0.07 crore), Marayooy (₹0.01 crore), Nilambur North (₹0.01 crore), Nilambur South (₹0.01 crore), 
Ranni (₹0.04 crore). 
132 JFMCs, namely Karakaputtu, D.Gonduru, Bokkelu, Kunchapalli, Iradapalli, Madulabandha, Chintagondi and Nereuduvalasa. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
130  
Annexure XV 
(Refer Para 3.9) 
Non-payment of wages through bank account 
Sl. No. Name of the State Audit observation 
1.  Andhra Pradesh An amount of ₹0.24 crore was paid to labourers in cash in 12 sampled JFMCs 
of FDA Paderu. 
2.  Karnataka 14 JFMCs of two FDAs, namely, Kalaburgi and Sirsi withdrew cash 
amounting to ₹3.65 crore133 for disbursal to labourers towards their wages. 
3.  Odisha In three134 FDAs, 25 JFMCs had withdrawn cash of ₹1.94 crore from bank 
and made payment in cash to daily labourers and suppliers.  
4.  Chhattisgarh Divisional Forest Officers of South Kondagaon and Marwahi made payment 
of ₹0.80 crore to workers in cash towards their wages. 
5.  Arunachal Pradesh Longding FDA made payments to labourers in cash. In Yingkiong and Along 
FDAs, funds were transferred to JFMCs’ joint account against the final bills 
submitted by the JFMCs through concerned Range Office and neither the 
amount paid to the daily labourers, nor the acknowledgement of money 
received by them was produced to Audit.  
6.  Madhya Pradesh JFMCs of Sendhwa Division withdrew (2019) funds amounting to ₹0.52 
crore in cash and booked the same as paid to the labourers/suppliers in their 
accounts. Test check of 42 vouchers of ₹0.08 crore disclosed that the 
signature or thumb impression of the recipients as token of receipt of money 
was not available on these vouchers. Further, in Umaria, Raisen and South 
Seoni Divisions, an amount of ₹0.63 crore135 was paid (2019-20 to 2022-23) 
in cash instead of through banks.  
In Burhanpur Division, payment (2021-22 and 2022-23) of ₹0.25 crore made 
to 1,445 labours deposited in the bank accounts of 301 labourers, who were 
engaged as intermediaries .  
Thus, the veracity of payment made to labourers could not be verified by 
Audit. 
7.  Mizoram In all five136 FDAs, labourers were paid wages in cash. 
8.  Uttarakhand Audit noticed that JFMCs were withdrawing cash and paying wages to the 
workers in cash. 
9.  West Bengal Three Divisions, viz., Kangsabati (South), Bankura (North) and Burdwan 
carried out plantation work at their level and made payment to labourers 
towards wages in cash. 
 
 
133 ₹2.58 crore in FDA Kalaburgi and ₹1.07 crore in FDA Sirsi. 
134 Kalahandi North, Kalahandi South and Ghumsur South. 
135 Umaria (₹0.24 crore), Raisen (₹0.15 crore) and South Seoni (₹0.24 crore). 
136 FDAs–Aizawl, Champhai, Darlawn, Kolasib and Thenzawl. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
131 
Annexure XVI 
(Refer Para 3.9) 
Engagement of contractors 
Sl. No. Name of the State Audit observations 
1.  Himachal Pradesh In four 137 selected FDAs, afforestation works amounting to ₹2.41  crore 
were carried out through middlemen, instead of engaging workers directly.  
2.  Odisha During 2019-20 to 2022 -23, JFMCs of two 138 FDAs engaged one or two 
labourers as intermediaries for the payment of wages of all labourers 
engaged in the works. It was observed that a total sum of ₹1.78 crore 
was paid in cash through intermediaries by these FDAs/JFMCs.  
Further, FDA Dhenkanal engaged labour service contractors to execute 
the plantation activities worth ₹0.21 crore during 2015 -16. 
3.  West Bengal In four 139 Divisions, tenders were invited for execution of advance and 
creation works,  instead of executing it through hiring labourers on 
prevailing State wage rates through JFMCs. 
 
 
137 Chopal, Mandi, Renuka ji and Una. 
138 Kalahandi South and Kalahandi North. 
139 Kangsabati (S), Jhargram, Kharagpur and Burdwan. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
132  
Annexure XVII 
(Refer Para 3.10) 
Non-maintenance of Annual Accounts 
Sl. No. Name of the State/UT Audit observations 
1.  Arunachal Pradesh Audit noticed that neither SFDA nor FDAs had prepared the Annual 
Accounts of any of the years. 
2.  Himachal Pradesh Neither SFDA nor sampled FDAs prepared their Annual Accounts for the 
years 2021-22 and 2022-23. As a result, the audit of annual accounts could 
not be conducted by a Chartered Accountant and UCs were submitted to 
MoEF&CC without Audit Reports. 
3.  Jammu & Kashmir SFDA Jammu & Kashmir did not prepare their Annual Accounts for the 
years 2021-22 and 2022-23.  
4.  Punjab The SFDA had not prepared the Annual Accounts in any of the years.  
Further, FDA Ropar, SAS Nagar, Garhshankar and Dasuya did not prepare 
annual accounts for the years 2018-19 to 2022-23, 2019-20 to 2022-23 and 
2015-16 to 2022-23, respectively. 
5.  Uttarakhand SFDA did not maintain Annual Accounts for GIM. 
6.  West Bengal No separate Annual Accounts for GIM were prepared by the SFDA or any 
of the FDAs or JFMCs. SFDA are preparing the Annual Accounts, 
involving all the schemes being implemented by them and the same was 
audited by empanelled Chartered Accountant. . 
7.  Chhattisgarh Annual Accounts for the periods 2021 -22 and 2022 -23 were not provided 
by SFDA to Audit. FDAs did not provide the Annual Accounts for 2015-16 
to 2022-23. 
8.  Haryana SFDA as well as FDAs did not maintain Annual Accounts for the year 
2022-23 for GIM. 
 
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
133 
Annexure XVIII 
(Refer Para 3.10) 
Instances of Audit not conducted of Annual Accounts 
Sl. No. Name of the State Audit observations 
1.  Andhra Pradesh Audit of Annual Accounts of SFDA was not conducted for the years 
2018-19 to 2022-23. Further, FDA, Paderu did not get its Annual Accounts 
audited for the year 2022-23. 
2.  Karnataka The audit of SFDA accounts was carried out upto the financial year 2016-
17. Thereafter, annual accounts for the subsequent years were not audited 
by Chartered Accountant.  
3.  Madhya Pradesh The audit of accounts of the SFDA for the years 2022-23 and 2023-24 was 
not carried out by CA. Further, audit of accounts (2018-19 to 2023-24) of 
five140 FDAs had also not been carried out by Chartered Accountant. 
 
 
 
140 Barwani, Burhanpur, Narmadapuram, South Sagar and Sendhwa. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
134  
Annexure XIX 
(Refer Para 3.11) 
Mismatch of expenditure amounts reported in UCs and subsidiary records 
Sl. No. Name of the State Audit observations 
1.  Andhra Pradesh Scrutiny of UC and Progress Report for the year 2016 -17 of SFDA 
revealed that an amount of ₹1.40 crore was reported as expenditure under 
UC, whereas in Progress Report the same was reported as ₹1.22 crore, 
leading to a difference in expenditure of ₹0.18 cr ore in these two sets of 
documents. 
2.  Haryana Statement of Expenditure provided by two FDAs, namely Ambala and 
Kaithal disclosed that a total expenditure of ₹0.34 crore141 was incurred by 
them during 2022-23, yet in their UCs for the year 2022 -23 they reported 
it as ₹1.37 crore142. 
In reply, Divisional Forest Officer (DFO), Ambala stated that at the time 
of submission of UC, works were in progress, therefore, UC of full amount 
was submitted to Headquarters. Further, DFO, Kaithal stated that unspent 
balance would be deposited in gover nment accounts for which 
communication was being made with the competent authority. 
3.  Kerala UC for the year 2020-21 submitted by SFDA to MoEF&CC disclosed that 
a total sum of ₹13.55 crore pertaining to unspent balance of the Centre’s 
share was lying with SFDA, as on 31 March 2021. 
However, in the UC for the year 2021 -22 against the available unspent 
balance of ₹13.55 crore, SFDA reported ₹8.13 crore only as the Centre’s 
share as on 1 April 2021 and the balance amount of unspent balance of 
₹5.42 crore was reported as the State share.  
Hence, the action of SFDA to appropriate fund from the unspent balance 
of the Central share and report it as the State share was irregular. 
4.  Maharashtra SFDA Maharashtra in its UC for 2018 -19 reported that against the 
available funds ₹17.17 crore, an expenditure of ₹12.75 crore was incurred 
during the year, leaving unspent balance of ₹4.42 crore as of March 2019. 
Audit found that out of ₹12.75 crore reported as utilised by SFDA during 
the year, a sum of ₹9.26 crore was released to five 143 FDAs during the 
year. Details of expenditure and UCs submitted by these FDAs disclosed 
that out of ₹9.26 crore, a sum of ₹0.29 crore only could be utilised by only 
one FDA during the year. However, all the five FDAs  reported full 
utilisation of fund of ₹9.26 crore received by them in their UCs for the 
year 2018-19. 
5.  Odisha In nine144 FDAs, mismatch in figures of fund utilised by them as reported 
in their Annual Progress Reports (2015 -16 to 2022 -23) and UCs was 
found. The UCs indicated that a total sum of ₹77.94 crore was utilised 
during these years, whereas financial achievement repor ted under Annual 
Progress Reports indicated it as ₹63.56 crore. 
6.  Uttarakhand SFDA in its UCs for the year 2015-16 to 2019-20 reported an expenditure 
of ₹22.23 crore. However, the records of the SFDA disclosed that 
expenditure of ₹22.75 crore was incurred during the period. Similarly in 
2020-21, the UCs showed an expenditure of ₹27. 48 crore, whereas the 
records of SFDA showed the same as ₹26.82 crore. 
 
 
 
141 Kaithal (₹0.11 crore) and Ambala (₹0.23 crore). 
142 Kaithal (₹1.08 crore) and Ambala (₹0.29 crore). 
143 FDAs, namely, Wadsa (₹1.37 crore), Sironcha (₹1.36 crore), Dahanu (₹2.05 crore), Bhor (₹1.12 crore), Pune (₹3.36 crore). 
144 Berhampur, Dhenkanal, Kalahandi North, Kalahandi South, Bonai, Ghumsur South, Sundargarh, Balangir and Rairangpur. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
135 
Annexure XX 
(Refer Para 3.12) 
Non-maintenance of separate bank accounts 
Sl. No. Name of the State Audit Observations 
1.  Chhattisgarh Two FDAs, namely, Katghora and Marwahi, opened their bank accounts 
for GIM in private banks. Further, 20 JFMCs of three 145 FDAs had also 
opened their bank account in a private bank.  
2.  Karnataka It was observed that till 2020 -21, the funds received under GIM were 
deposited by SFDA in a common bank account opened for all Central 
Government Schemes.  
3.  Maharashtra Till August 2021 SFDA did not open a separate interest-bearing bank 
account for the funds received under GIM. Further, fund amounting to 
₹1.91 crore released to eight146 JFMCs was deposited in the bank accounts 
of four147 other JFMCs. Due to deposition of GIM funds in the accounts 
of other JFMCs, these eight JFMCs could not exercise financial control 
over the activities taken up under GIM. 
4.  Odisha In two148 test checked FDAs, the funds received by FDAs and JFMCs were 
deposited in current accounts.  
5.  Punjab SFDA maintained funds in a common bank account, which was used for 
other schemes, leading to inter-mixing of funds.  
6.  Uttarakhand Out of 471 JFMCs, 98 JFMCs (21 per cent) did not open a separate bank 
account for GIM. These JFMCs received funds in the bank account opened 
for other schemes. 
 
 
 
145 Katghora (seven JFMCs), Bastar (eight JFMCs) and Kodagaon (five JFMCs). 
146 Yerandi, Maldugi, Chandagad, Chinegaon, Jambhulkheda, Pochade, Khunawada and Paraswadi. 
147 Gothangaon, Netali, Kosbad and Jamshet. 
148 Kalahandi North and Kalahandi South. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
136  
Annexure XXI 
(Refer Para 3.12) 
Non-remittance of interest 
Sl. No. Name of the State Audit Observations 
1.  Haryana Details of interest provided by three 149 FDAs disclosed that interest 
amounting ₹0.05 crore earned by 20 JFMCs 150 of these FDAs till March 
2024 had not been adjusted or refunded to SFDA Haryana. 
In reply, DFOs stated that amount of interest would be adjusted/deposited. 
2.  Odisha Interest amounting to ₹1.33 crore accrued to 316 JFMCs of 14 FDAs 151 
till March 2023 was neither refunded nor reported by them to their FDAs.  
3.  Punjab Against the interest of ₹0.39 crore  earned by SFDA during 2016 -17 to 
2022-23, a sum of ₹0.23 crore only was reported to MoEF&CC.  
Audit observed that FDA Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar had also earned 
interest of ₹0.02 crore during 2016-17 to 2022 -23 on GIM funds, but it 
did not report/refund the same to SFDA.  
4.  Uttarakhand In Uttarakhand, the JFMCs had not reported the interest earned by them 
on GIM funds. Consequently, the interest earned, if any, could not be 
accounted for. 
 
 
 
 
149 Kaithal, Jind and Morni. 
150 Jind (JFMCs-Julana, Ghimana, Naguran, Surbra, Nepewala, Bhana -Brahmnan), Kaithal (JFMCs-Nauch, Kharkara, Dhandota, 
Dubbal, Barot, Chandana, Siwan, Habri and Sanch) and Morni (JFMCs-Kalka, Pinjore, Panchkula, Morni and Raipur-Rani). 
151 FDAs, namely-Behrampur, Angul, Balangir, Balliguda, Koraput, Nayagarh, Rairangpur, Dhenkanal, Kalahandi North, Kalahandi 
South, Sundargarh, Bonai, Ghumsur South and Nabaranpur. 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
137 
Annexure XXII 
(Refer Para 4.1)  
States wise shortfall in achievement of targets under GIM 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Target as per 
Perspective 
Plan 
(in ha) 
Duration of 
Perspective Plan 
Achievement 
of Creation 
Work till 
March 2025 
as reported 
by States 
(in ha) 
Shortfall 
(in ha) 
Percentage 
shortfall 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) = (2) - (4) (6) = (5)/(2)*100 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
6,938 
 
(2015-16 to 
2020-21), (2018-19 
to 2025-26) 
1,272 5,666 81.67 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
46,742 2021-22 to 2025-26 5314.39 41,427.61 88.63 
Chhattisgarh 31,138 2015-16 to 2025-26 22,641 8,497.00 27.28 
Haryana 67,562 2021-22 to 2025-26 7,422.50 60,139.50 89.01 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
21,459 2017-18 to 2025-26 1,299 20,160.00 93.95 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
32,420 2020-21 to 2025-26 1,349.08 31,070.92 95.84 
Karnataka 5,100 
(22,165)* 
2015-16 to 2025-26 2,947 2,153.00 42.22 
Kerala 22,960 2015-16 to 2025-26 7,926.85 15,033.15 65.48 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
3,40,700 2017-18 to 2025-26 26,939 3,13,761.00 92.09 
Maharashtra 6,975.40 2017-18 to 2025-26 3,586.76 3,388.64 48.58 
Mizoram 29,893 2015-16 to 2025-26 19,642.94 10,250.06 34.29 
Odisha 13,251 
(96,212)* 
(2,198.56)** 
2015-16 to 2025-26 17,761.56 -4,510.56 0 
Punjab 18,994 2015-16 to 2025-26 7,168 11,826.00 62.26 
Sikkim 16,698 
(2,01,768.45)* 
2017-18 to 2026-27 6,611.85 10,086.15 60.40 
Uttarakhand 1,23,973 2015-16 to 2025-26 13,438 1,10,535.00 89.16 
West Bengal 37,450 2019-20 to 2025-26 2,605.70 34,844.30 93.04 
Total 8,22,253.40  1,47,925.63 6,74,327.77 82.01 
*Targets as approved by NEC  
** Targets as per Perspective Plan submitted by the State 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
138  
Annexure XXIII 
(Refer Para 4.4.1.1(i)) 
Area available under scrublands as per India State of Forest Report (ISFR) 
Sl.No. Name of the State Area of Scrublands (in km2) 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 10,768  km2 as per ISFR 2011 
2.  Arunachal Pradesh 122  km2 as per ISFR 2011 
3.  Haryana 151  km2 as per ISFR 2015 
4.  Karnataka 3,175  km2 as per ISFR 2011 
5.  Kerala 58  km2 as per ISFR 2011 
6.  Madhya Pradesh 6,383  km2 as per ISFR 2015 
7.  Sikkim 311  km2 as per ISFR 2015 
8.  West Bengal 133  km2 as per ISFR 2015 
 Total 21,100 km2 (2.11 mha) 
 
 
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
139 
Annexure XXIV 
(Refer Para 4.4.1.3) 
Area available under ravines as per Wasteland Atlas of India 2010 
Sl. No. Name of the State/UT Area of Ravines (in km2) 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 408.37 
2.  Chhattisgarh 142.90 
3.  Himachal Pradesh 174.75 
4.  Jammu & Kashmir 976.38 
5.  Madhya Pradesh 1502.06 
6.  Maharashtra 547.03 
7.  Punjab 82.12 
 Total 3,833.61  km2 (0.38 mha) 
 
 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
140  
Annexure XXV 
(Refer Para 4.4.1.4(i)) 
Details of the Abandoned Mining Sites in the States 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the State 
Name of the Mines Total number of 
abandoned 
mining sites 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
Borra Calcite mine, Budarayavalasa Lime Kanker mine, 
Dasari Ramanaidu Valasa-I Lime Kanker mine, 
Dasari Ramanaidu Valasa-II Lime Kanker mine, Korlam I quartz 
mine, Kunchagumadam Lime Kanker mine, Moutoor Feldspar mine, 
Palakandyaur Lime Kanker mine, Pedaba ntupalli Lime Kanker mine, 
Pullajipeta quartz mine, Regati V .U Lime Kanker mine and Sri 
Ramchandra Manganese Mine 
12 
2. Maharashtra Nawargaon II Kyanite mine, Pitichua Chromite Mine 2 
3. Odisha Bankiamunda Quartz mine, Domuhani Manganese mine, Naupara II 
Quartzite mine and Sargipalli Pb-Zn-Cu mine 
4 
4. Uttarakhand Durmala Rock Phosphate Mine, Maldeota Rock Phosphate Mine and 
Malla Limestone Mine 
3 
  Total 21 
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
141 
Annexure XXVI 
(Refer Para 4.6) 
Status of Plantation Journals maintained by the FDAs in the States 
Sl. No. Name of the 
State/UT 
No. of 
Plantation sites 
for which 
Journal should 
be maintained 
No. of 
Plantation 
Journal 
maintained  
Type of 
Species 
planted 
not 
recorded 
Coordinates 
of location 
not recorded 
Survival 
percentage of 
plants not 
recorded 
Type of the 
Soil in the 
Plantation 
area not 
recorded 
Remarks of 
the 
Inspecting 
Officer not 
recorded 
Spacing 
between 
plants 
were not 
recorded 
Maximum 
no. of 
journals 
where 
deficiency 
was observed 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 24 24 - - 12 24 18 - 24 
2.  Arunachal Pradesh 59 51 - - 51 - - - 51 
3.  Chhattisgarh 46 32 - - 6 - - 2 6 
4.  Haryana 49 0                                       No Journal was maintained  
5.  Himachal Pradesh 46 46 - - - - 38 - 38 
6.  Jammu & Kashmir 30 26 - - 20 - - - 20 
7.  Karnataka 30 27 3 2 26 - 17 - 26 
8.  Kerala 23 6                                          Journals are not updated 6 
9.  Madhya Pradesh 58 58                                          Journals are not updated 58 
10.  Maharashtra 35 21 - - 10 - - - 10 
11.  Mizoram 40 40 - 11 - 40 23 40 40 
12.  Odisha 48 42 6 - - - 42 - 42 
13.  Punjab 56 56 2 22 56 56 50 - 56 
14.  Sikkim 36 35 - 4 8 2 - - 8 
15.  Uttarakhand 51 50 - - - - 27 - 27 
16.  West Bengal 42 42 - - 19 - - - 19 
 Total 673 556 11 39 208 122 215  42 431 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
142  
Annexure XXVII 
(Refer Para 4.7) 
Range of survival percentage of GIM plantations  
Sl. 
No 
 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Total Plantation 
site where 
survival 
percentage could 
be ascertained 
Range of Survival percentage 
0 to 40 per cent 41 to less than 
70 per cent 
70 and above 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 24 13 4 7 
2.  Arunachal Pradesh 55 1 16 38 
3.  Chhattisgarh 37 1 1 35 
4.  Haryana 5 3 1 1 
5.  Himachal Pradesh 43 4 16 23 
6.  Jammu & Kashmir 27 4 12 11 
7.  Karnataka 26 1 4 21 
8.  Kerala 11 5 0 6 
9.  Madhya Pradesh 51 5 10 36 
10.  Maharashtra 35 18 15 2 
11.  Mizoram 36 5 7 24 
12.  Odisha 39 6 16 17 
13.  Punjab 45 7 23 15 
14.  Sikkim 34 1 17 16 
15.  Uttarakhand 49 17 28 4 
16.  West Bengal 42 4 10 28 
 Total 559 95 180 284 
 
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
143 
Annexure XXVIII 
(Refer Para 4.8.1) 
Soil moisture conservation activities  
Sl. No. Name of the State/UT Total sites for JPV where 
SMC was applicable  
SMC work not undertaken 
in sites 
1 Andhra Pradesh 24 12 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 59 59 
3 Chhattisgarh 46 42 
4 Himachal Pradesh 46 36 
5 Jammu & Kashmir 30 23 
6 Karnataka 22 18 
7 Kerala 23 14 
8 Maharashtra 35 35 
9 Odisha 38 18 
10 Punjab 56 54 
11 Uttarakhand 51 23 
12 West Bengal 42 11 
 Total 472 345 
 
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
144  
Annexure XXIX 
(Refer Para 4.8.3) 
Expenditure reported on livelihood activities 
Sl. No. Name of the State/UT Expenditure 
reported 
(₹ in crore) 
Number of Beneficiaries 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 0.02  
 
Numbers of beneficiaries not provided 2.  Arunachal Pradesh 2.14 
3.  Chhattisgarh 1.06 
4.  Kerala 2.75 
5.  Madhya Pradesh 5.31 
6.  Maharashtra 1.03 
7.  Sikkim 0.82 
8.  West Bengal 0 No expenditure reported under this component. 
9.  Mizoram 0 Activity not undertaken due to short funding. 
10.  Haryana 0.08 Nil 
11.  Himachal Pradesh 0.52 Nil 
12.  Jammu & Kashmir 2.76 1218 
13.  Karnataka 2.98 75 
14.  Odisha 3.95 Nil 
15.  Punjab 1.78 2084 
16.  Uttarakhand  9.27 3572 
 Total 34.47 6949 
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
145 
Annexure XXX 
(Refer Para 4.10.1) 
Misclassification of Works in Kerala 
Sl. No. L2 Landscape L3 Landscape Plantation site Year SM No. Area in 
Ha 
Works for which the 
funds were utilised 
Type of Work to be 
classified under 
A. Total cases wrongly categorised as ‘Advance Work’ by FDA/SFDA (11 cases)  
1 Marayoor Melady Melady 2018-19 SM-1 12 2000 miscellaneous 
plants were planted at 
the site as gap filling 
Creation 
2 Malayattoor Kappayam Kappayam 2016-17 SM-1 15 Fire protection  Maintenance 
3 Malayattoor Vellaramkuthu Vellaramkuthu 2020-21 SM-1 15.83 SMC work & Fire 
protection  
Maintenance 
4 Mankulam Pandiankudy Thankappanshed, 
Vattakulam thodu 
2016-17 SM-1 20 Fire protection  Maintenance 
5 Marayoor Kammalan kudy Kammalan kudy 2016-17 SM-2 150 Fire protection  Maintenance 
6 Marayoor Kavakkudy Kavakkudy 2016-17 SM-2 50 Uprooting obnoxious 
weeds in 12.5 hectares 
and creation of 250 
staggered trenches were 
done 
Maintenance 
7 Marayoor Kuthukallu kudy Kuthukallu kudy 2016-17 SM-2 44.5 Fire protection  Maintenance 
8 Marayoor Periya kudy Periya kudy 2016-17 SM-2 48.5 Fire protection  Maintenance 
9 Marayoor Puravayal kudy Puravayal kudy 2016-17 SM-4 50 Fire protection  Maintenance 
10 Ranni Velanplavu Velanplavu 2016-17 SM-1 5 Maintenance work of 
Chural plantation  
Maintenance 
11 Nilambur South Puncha Puncha 2018-19 SM-5 100 Supply of Gas 
connection to 
10 persons 
Promoting 
alternative fuel 
energy 
  

Report No. 4 of 2026 
146  
Sl. No. L2 Landscape L3 Landscape Plantation site Year SM No. Area in  
Ha 
Works for which the 
funds were utilised 
Type of Work to be 
classified under 
B. Total cases wrongly categorised as ‘Creation Work’ by FDA/SFDA (51 cases)  
1 Malayattoor Vellaramkuthu Boring kavala plot 
1&2 
2017-18 SM-1 15.83 Clearing of boundary 
lines, surveying with 
GPS, fixing boundary 
stones, uprooting 
lantana, etc., at Boaring 
Kavala-2.  
Advance Work 
2 Thiruvananthapuram Njaraneeli Njaraneeli 2017-18 SM-1 15 Preparing treatment 
plan 
Advance Work 
3 Konni Thalamanam Nalumukku 2016-17 SM-1 10 Fire protection  Maintenance 
4 Konni Thalamanam Nalumukku 2017-18 SM-1 10 SMC work & Fire 
protection  
Maintenance 
5 Konni Thalamanam Nalumukku 2019-20 SM-1 10 Fire protection  Maintenance 
6 Konni Thalamanam Nalumukku 2022-23 SM-1 10 SMC work & Fire 
protection  
Maintenance 
7 Marayoor Babu Nagar Babu Nagar 2017-18 SM-1 12 Fire protection  Maintenance 
8 Marayoor Babu Nagar Babu Nagar 2020-21 SM-2 40 Fire protection  Maintenance 
9 Marayoor Cherukulam Cherukulam 2020-21 SM-2 40 Fire protection  Maintenance 
10 Marayoor Indira Nagar Indira Nagar 2020-21 SM-2 40 Fire protection  Maintenance 
11 Marayoor Karsanadu Karsanadu 2020-21 SM-2 75 Fire protection  Maintenance 
12 Marayoor Kavakkudy Kavakkudy 2020-21 SM-2 40 Fire protection  Maintenance 
13 Marayoor Kuthukallu kudy Kuthukallu kudy 2020-21 SM-4 40 Fire protection  Maintenance 
14 Marayoor Melady Melady 2020-21 SM-2 40 Fire protection  Maintenance 
  

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
147 
Sl. No. L2 Landscape L3 Landscape Plantation site Year SM No. Area in 
Ha 
Works for which the 
funds were utilised 
Type of Work to be 
classified under 
B. Total cases wrongly categorised as ‘Creation Work’ by FDA/SFDA (51 cases)  
15 Marayoor Pallanadu Pallanadu 2020-21 SM-2 40 Uprooting obnoxious 
weeds in 7.5 ha and 
creation of 150 
staggered trenches were 
done.  
Maintenance 
16 Marayoor Periya kudy Periya kudy 2020-21 SM-2 40 Fire protection  Maintenance  
17 Marayoor Puravayal kudy Puravayal kudy 2020-21 SM-2 40 Fire protection  Maintenance 
18 Marayoor Theerthamala Theerthamala 2020-21 SM-2 10 Fire protection  Maintenance 
19 Nilambur North Pothukal Haritha 
VSS 
Pothukal Haritha 2016-17 SM-1 300 Fire protection & 
desilting check dam  
Maintenance 
20 Periyar (East) Mannakudy Il EDC Mannakudy Il EDC 2022-23 SM-3 1 Construction of School 
board, Shutter, etc. 
Not related to GIM 
21 Periyar (East) Paliyakudy Paliyakudy 2022-23 SM-4 2.73 Construction of 39.37 
cubic meter of retaining 
wall for trench using 
Dry rubble masonry  
Maintenance 
22 Periyar (East) Vallakkadavu V 
EDC 
Pachakkanam to 
10th mile 
2019-20 SM-1 2.7 Construction of 350 
waterholes at various 
households  
Advance  
23 Periyar (East) Vanchivayal colony Vanchivayal 
colony 
2022-23 SM-1 4.7 Eradication of exotic 
weeds  
Maintenance 
24 Ranni Velanplavu Velanplavu 2019-20 SM-1 5 Fire protection  Maintenance 
  

Report No. 4 of 2026 
148  
Sl. No. L2 Landscape L3 Landscape Plantation site Year SM No. Area in 
Ha 
Works for which the 
funds were utilised 
Type of Work to be 
classified under 
B. Total cases wrongly categorised as ‘Creation Work’ by FDA/SFDA (51 cases)  
25 Ranni Velanplavu Velanplavu 2022-23 SM-1 10 Clearing boundary line, 
fixing boundary stone 
and engaging fire gang 
at 10 Ha.  
Advance 
26 Thenmala Urukunnu 
Malavedar Colony 
VSS 
Urukunnu 2016-17 SM-1 10 Fire protection  Maintenance 
27 Thenmala Urukunnu 
Malavedar Colony 
VSS 
Urukunnu 2017-18 SM-1 10 SMC work & Fire 
protection  
Maintenance 
28 Thenmala Urukunnu 
Malavedar Colony 
VSS 
Urukunnu 2021-22 SM-1 10 SMC work & Fire 
protection  
Maintenance 
 
 
29 Thenmala Urukunnu 
Malavedar Colony 
VSS 
Urukunnu 2022-23 SM-1 10 SMC work & Fire 
protection 
Maintenance 
30 Thiruvananthapuram Njaraneeli Njaraneeli 2016-17 SM-1 5 Fire protection Maintenance 
31 Thiruvananthapuram Njaraneeli Njaraneeli 2019-20 SM-1 10 Fire protection Maintenance 
32 Thiruvananthapuram Njaraneeli Kallana 2022-23 SM-1 10 Fire protection  Maintenance 
33 Konni Thalamanam Nalumukku 2021-22 SM-1 10 Providing provisions to 
VSS local area families 
& school children’s. 
Strengthening of 
local level 
Institutions 
  

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
149 
Sl. No. L2 Landscape L3 Landscape Plantation site Year SM No. Area in 
Ha 
Works for which 
the funds were 
utilised 
Type of Work to be 
classified under 
B. Total cases wrongly categorised as ‘Creation Work’ by FDA/SFDA (51 cases)  
34 Mankulam Viripara Viripara 2022-23 SM-4 1 Distribution of 
Furniture to Anganwadi 
under the scheme of 
Supporting local level 
institutions.  
Strengthening of 
local level 
Institutions 
35 Mankulam Sevalkudy Sevalkudy 2022-23 SM-4 1 Distribution of 
Furniture to Anganwadi 
under the scheme of 
Supporting local level 
institutions.  
Strengthening of 
local level 
Institutions 
36 Palakkad Velanchery Velanchery 2017-18 SM-6 15 Supply of Gas 
connection. 
Promoting 
alternative fuel 
energy  
37 Periyar (East) Mannakudy Il EDC Mannakudy Il EDC 2022-23 SM-4 4.73 Distribution of solar 
lights 
Promoting 
alternative fuel 
energy  
38 Periyar (East) Paliyakudy Paliyakudy 2022-23 SM-5 3 VDVK Strengthening  Strengthening of 
local level 
Institutions 
39 Periyar (East) Vallakkadavu V 
EDC 
Vallakkadavu V 
EDC 
2022-23 SM-5 2 Strengthening of the 
Eco-Development 
Committee 
Strengthening of 
local level 
Institutions 
40 Thenmala Urukunnu 
Malavedar Colony 
VSS 
Urukunnu 2019-20 SM-1 10 Alternative fuel energy  Promoting 
alternative fuel 
energy  
41 Marayoor Cherukulam Cherukulam 2017-18 SM-1 52 No work during 
2017-18 
No Work done  
 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
150  
Sl. No. L2 Landscape L3 Landscape Plantation site Year SM No. Area in 
Ha 
Works for which 
the funds were 
utilised 
Type of Work to be 
classified under 
B. Total cases wrongly categorised as ‘Creation Work’ by FDA/SFDA (51 cases)  
42 Marayoor Kammalan kudy Kammalan kudy 2017-18 SM-1 12 No work during 
2017-18 
No Work done  
43 Marayoor Kammalan kudy Kammalan kudy 2020-21 SM-2 40 No work during 
2020-21 
No Work done  
44 Marayoor Karsanadu Karsanadu 2017-18 SM-1 108 No work during 
2017-18 
No Work done  
45 Marayoor Kavakkudy Kavakkudy 2017-18 SM-1 12 No work during 
2017-18 
No Work done  
46 Marayoor Kuthukallu kudy Kuthukallu kudy 2017-18 SM-1 12 No work during 
2017-18 
No Work done  
47 Marayoor Melady Melady 2017-18 SM-1 12 No work during 
2017-18 
No Work done  
48 Marayoor Melady Melady 2017-18 SM-1 50 No work during 
2017-18 
No Work done  
49 Marayoor Periya kudy Periya kudy 2017-18 SM-1 12 No work during 
2017-18 
No Work done  
50 Marayoor Puravayal kudy Puravayal kudy 2017-18 SM-1 10 No work during 
2017-18 
No Work done  
51 Marayoor Theertha-mala Theerthamala 2017-18 SM-1 100 No work during 
2017-18 
No Work done  
C. Total cases wrongly categorised as ‘Maintenance Work’ by FDA/SFDA (11 cases) 
1 Mankulam Kozhiyala-kudy Kozhiyila block 2020-21 SM-1   No work during 
2020-21 
No Work done  
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
151 
Sl. No. L2 Landscape L3 Landscape Plantation site Year SM No. Area in 
Ha 
Works for which the 
funds were utilised 
Type of Work to be 
classified under 
C. Total cases wrongly categorised as ‘Maintenance Work’ by FDA/SFDA (11 cases)  
2 Thenmala Urukunnu Malavedar 
Colony VSS 
Urukunnu 2020-21 SM-1   No work during 
2020-21 
No Work done  
3 Palakkad Velanchery Ayyappanamala  2017-18 SM-3   1500 miscellaneous 
seedlings were 
planted as gap filling  
Creation 
4 Mankulam Kozhiyala-kudy Kozhiyila block 2021-22 SM-1   100 Honey boxes 
were distributed 
among 18 
beneficiaries  
livelihood support to 
households  
5 Periyar (East) Mannakudy Il EDC Mannakudy  2018-19 SM-6   Supply of thermal 
cooker  
Promoting alternative 
fuel energy  
6 Periyar (East) Paliyakudy Paliyakudy 2018-19 SM-6   Supply of thermal 
cooker  
Promoting alternative 
fuel energy  
7 Periyar (East) Paliyakudy Paliyakudy 2022-23 SM-6   Supply of pressure 
cooker  
Promoting alternative 
fuel energy  
8 Periyar (East) Vallakkadavu V EDC Vallakkadavu 2018-19 SM-6   Supply of thermal 
cooker  
Promoting alternative 
fuel energy  
9 Periyar (East) Vallakkadavu V EDC Vallakkadavu V 
EDC 
2022-23 SM-6   Supply of thermal 
cooker  
Promoting alternative 
fuel energy  
  

Report No. 4 of 2026 
152  
Sl. No. L2 Landscape L3 Landscape Plantation site Year SM No. Area in 
Ha 
Works for which the 
funds were utilised 
Type of Work to be 
classified under 
C. Total cases wrongly categorised as ‘Maintenance Work’ by FDA/SFDA (11 cases)  
10 Periyar (East) Vanchivayal colony Vanchivayal colony 2018-19 SM-6   Supply of Gas 
connection  
Promoting alternative 
fuel energy  
11 Periyar (East) Vanchivayal colony Vanchivayal colony 2022-23 SM-6   Supply of rice cooker  Promoting alternative 
fuel energy  
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
153 
Annexure XXXI 
(Refer Para 5.6) 
Non-submission of Quarterly Progress Report by JFMCs 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Audit observations 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
12 selected JFMCs of FDA Paderu had not submitted quarterly statement of accounts 
and progress of works during 2015-16 to 2024-25. 
2.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
In all the five sampled FDAs, JFMCs did not report L3 level quarterly progress of 
the works to their FDAs. 
3.  Chhattisgarh Six152 Divisions of Chhattisgarh stated that the JFMCs had submitted quarterly 
statement of accounts and progress of works carried out by them. However, records 
relating to the same were not provided to Audit. Further, four153 Divisions stated that 
their JFMCs did not submit quarterly statement of accounts and progress of works 
carried out by them. 
4.  Haryana SFDA of Haryana stated that no such reporting of quarterly progress of work was 
done at the level of JFMCs and FDAs. 
5.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
There were no records which could disclose that all the selected FDAs/JFMCs had 
prepared and submitted quarterly statement of accounts and progress of works during 
2015-16 to 2024-25. 
6.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Six154 FDAs reported that they had submitted the quarterly statement of accounts 
and progress report to SFDA but did not provide the reports to Audit and two 155 
FDAs stated that they did not submit such quarterly reports. 
7.  Karnataka Quarterly progress reports were prepared at FDA level without involvement of 
JFMCs. 
8.  Kerala In eight selected 156 FDAs, none of the JFMC submitted quarterly statements of 
accounts and progress reports for work done in the L3 level landscapes to their FDAs. 
However, FDAs were preparing quarterly progress reports on the work carried out in 
their JFMCs and submitting them to the SFDA. 
9.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
JFMCs of 12 Forest Divisions157 did not prepare quarterly statement of accounts and 
progress reports at the L-3 landscape. 
10.  Mizoram Out of the 21 sampled158 JFMCs, none had reported the financial progress of L3 level 
landscape to FDAs during 2016-17 to 2024-25. 
11.  Punjab Sampled FDAs of Punjab could not provide any documentary evidence in support of 
quarterly progress reports received by them from their JFMCs during 2015 -16 to 
2024-25. 
12.  Uttarakhand Quarterly progress reports were not submitted by the L3 level to the L2 level. Instead, 
the L2 level obtained the necessary information from the Range office and sent it to 
the Nodal Office (SFDA) as and when required. 
13.  Sikkim Quarterly progress reports were not submitted by the L3 level to the L2 level. 
However, FDAs were submitting the quarterly reports to SFDA. 
14.  Maharashtra In nine 159 selected FDAs, none of the JFMC submitted quarterly statements of 
accounts and progress reports for work done in the L3 level landscapes to their FDAs. 
 
152 Kawardha, Gariyaband,,Balrampur, Marwahi, Bilaspur and Kondagaon. 
153 Katghora, Surguja, Surajpur and Bastar. 
154 Ramnagar, Poonch, Doda, HQ Dharmari, Billawar and Basohi. 
155 Rajouri and Bhadarwah. 
156 Thiruvananthapuram, Thenmala, Ranni, Kottayam, Malayattur, Mankulam, Marayoor and Nilambur North. 
157 Barwani, Balaghat South, Burhanpur, Narmadapuram, Raisen, Sagar South, Satna, Sehore, Sendhwa, Seoni South, Shivpuri and 
Umaria. 
158 Tlungvel, Sihphir Venglun, N. Lungleng, Lamchhip, Baktawng Chhuanthat, Durtlang North, Durtlang, Pawlrang, Vanchengpui, 
Kawlkulh, Chawngtlai, Dilzau, New Diakkawn, Thingdawl, Meidum, Bualpui, Bukpui, Thentlang, Buhban, Khawruhlian and 
Hmunnghak. 
159 Dahanu, Alibagh, Sironcha, Wadsa, Dhule, Nandurbar, West Nashik, Pune and Bhor. 

Report No. 4 of 2026 
154  
Annexure XXXII 
(Refer Para 5.7.3.2) 
State wise analysis in the improvement of tree cover in the Intervention area 
States 
Total area (ha) 
Intervention area (ha) 
(T1) 
Tree cover during 
Intervention (ha) (T2) 
Tree cover in 2024 
(ha) (T3) 
Likely Tree cover in 
2030 (ha) (T4) 
% Intervention  
% Tree cover at the 
time of intervention  
% Tree cover in 2024 
% Likely tree cover in 
2030  
% Improvement in 
Tree cover till 2024 
% Improvement 
likely tree cover in 
2030  
 
(T1/T) × 100 
(T2/T) × 100 
(T3/T) × 100 
(T4/T) × 100 
((T3-T2)/T) × 
100 
((T4-T2)/T) × 
100 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
51.2 
Calculations with respect to tree cover have not been done for these states as GIS analysis 
of KMLs showed no change in vegetation. 
Karnataka 22.78 
Kerala 11.29 
Punjab 114.41 
Uttarakhand 361.02 
Sikkim 9.99 
Chhattisgarh 71.73 13.59 4.63 6.85 6.88 18.95 6.45 9.55 9.59 3.09 3.14 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
35.03 7.85 0.13 0.52 1.20 22.41 0.37 1.48 3.43 1.11 3.05 
Odisha 1129.56  157.99 48.18 90.10  102.09 13.99 4.27 7.98 9.04 3.71 4.77 
Total 1807.01 179.43 52.94 97.47  110.17  9.93  2.93  5.39 6.10  2.46  3.17 
 
 
 
 

 Report No. 4 of 2026 
155 
Annexure XXXIII 
(Refer Para 5.7.3.4) 
Summary of condition/quality of Tree cover (due to interventions) using Fragmentation Metrics 
States 
Total area (ha)  
(T) 
Intervention area (ha) 
(T1) 
Intervention year 2024 
Non tree cover /Open 
Patch 
Transitional 
Edge 
Perforated 
Intact 
Non tree cover/Open 
Patch 
Transitional 
Edge 
Perforated 
Intact 
Andhra Pradesh 51.2 0 
Fragmentation analysis has not been done for these states as GIS analysis of KMLs showed no change in vegetation.  
Karnataka 22.78 0 
Kerala 11.29 0 
Punjab 114.41 0 
Uttarakhand 361.02 0 
Sikkim 9.99 0 
Chhattisgarh 71.73 13.59 8.93 0.47 1.28 0.13 2.01 0.74 6.7 0.51 1.12 0.19 2.5 2.54 
Madhya Pradesh 35.03 7.85 7.64 0.08 0.05 0 0 0 7.35 0.15 0.11 0.02 0.17 0.07 
Odisha 1129.56  157.99 108.13 1.83 5.81 2.27 12.84 25.44 68.26 1.62 5.52 2.7 16.79 61.45 
Total 1807.01 179.43 124.7 2.38 7.14 2.40 14.85 26.18 82.31 2.28 6.75 2.91 19.46 64.06 
 