Government of  Mizoram  —  Audit Report No. 2 of 2026
© COMPTROLLER  AND
AUDITOR  GENERAL  OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in2025
Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
For the year ended 31 March 2024
Government of Mizoram
Social, Economic and Revenue Sectors 
(Report No.2 of 2026)
https://cag.gov.in/ag/aizawl/en


2025


Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Social, Economic and Revenue Sectors 
for the year ended 31 March 2024
Government of Mizoram
(Report No.2 of 2026)

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Particulars Paragraph Page(s)
Preface - vii
Overview - ix
CHAPTER-I
SOCIAL SECTOR
Introduction 1.1 1
PERFORMANCE AUDIT
Social Welfare, Tribal Affairs, Women & Child Development Department
Performance Audit on Integrated Child Development Services 
(ICDS) Schemes
1.2 2
COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS
Higher & Technical Education Department
Irregular payments 1.3 40
School Education Department
Irregular payment 1.4 43
Excess payment 1.5 46
Urban Development And Poverty Alleviation Department
Idle expenditure 1.6 48
Local Administration Department
Irregular expenditure 1.7 52
CHAPTER-II
ECONOMIC SECTOR
Introduction 2.1 57
PERFORMANCE AUDIT
Rural Development Department
Performance Audit on the Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) in 
Mizoram
2.2 58
COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS
Horticulture Department
Irregular Parking of fund 2.3 97
Non-recovery of outstanding loan 2.4 98
CHAPTER-III
ECONOMIC SECTOR (STATE PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES) 
Functioning of State Public Sector Enterprises 3.1 101
CHAPTER-IV
REVENUE SECTOR
Trend of revenue receipts 4.1 117
Analysis of arrears of revenue 4.2 120

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Particulars Paragraph Page(s)
Arrears in assessment 4.3 120
Evasion of tax detected by the Department 4.4 121
Pendency of refund cases 4.5 121
Audit planning 4.6 122
Results of audit 4.7 122
Coverage of this Report 4.8 122
PERFORMANCE AUDIT
Environment, Forests and Climate Change Department
Performance Audit on Green India Mission 4.9 122
Transport Department
Performance Audit on Functioning of District Transport 
Offices
4.10 161
Taxation Department
Performance Audit on E-Way Bills System under Goods and 
Services Tax in Mizoram
4.11 189
COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPH
Taxation Department
Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Department’s Oversight 
on Goods and Services Tax Payments and Returns Filing” for 
the years 2018-19 to 2020-21 (DORF Phase-II)
4.12 210
Transport Department
Non-realisation of fitness fee and fine 4.13 227
CHAPTER-V
FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERV ATIONS
Non-submission of Action Taken Notes 5.1 231
Response to audit observations and compliance thereof by the 
Executive
5.2 231
Response of departments concerned to the draft audit 
paragraphs
5.3 232
Audit Committee Meetings 5.4 233

Table of Contents
iii
APPENDICES
Appendix No. Title Page(s)
Appendix - 1.1 Category-wise number of beneficiaries covered under 
SNP in the sampled ICDS Projects
235
Appendix - 1.2 Year-wise Quantity of supplementary nutrition supplied 
under ‘SNP’ in six sampled ICDS Projects
236
Appendix - 1.3 Year-wise quantity of ‘Locally Available Food’ supplied 
in four sampled ICDS Projects
238
Appendix - 1.4 Joint Physical Verification 239
Appendix - 1.5 Details of Salary in respect of Shri D. Purkayastha, 
Associate Professor (Chemistry Department) for the 
period from March 2017 to July 2024
240
Appendix - 1.6 Details of eight regular Professors whose salaries were 
deducted during their unauthorised absence and paid to 
their substitutes
243
Appendix - 1.7 Details of payment made to individuals designated 
as Assistant Professors who were not in the pay roll/ 
employment list
244
Appendix – 2.1 The district-wise and year-wise details of households and 
persons registered under MGNREGA during 2019-20
245
Appendix – 2.2 The district-wise and year-wise details of households and 
persons registered under MGNREGA during 2020-21
246
Appendix – 2.3 The district-wise and year-wise details of households and 
persons registered under MGNREGA during 2021-22
247
Appendix – 2.4 The district-wise and year-wise details of households and 
persons registered under MGNREGA during 2022-23
248
Appendix – 2.5 The district-wise and year-wise details of households and 
persons registered under MGNREGA during 2023-24
249
Appendix – 2.6 Inclusion of non-permissible works in sampled block and 
villages in Mamit District during 2019-20 to 2023-24
250
Appendix – 2.7 Inclusion of non-permissible works in sampled block and 
villages in Kolasib District during 2019-20 to 2023-24
251
Appendix – 2.8 Delays in release of the Central Share of fund 252
Appendix – 2.9 Delays in release of the State Matching Share of fund 254
Appendix - 3.1.1 Summarised financial position and working results 
of Government Companies as per their latest finalised 
accounts as on 30 September 2024
256
Appendix - 3.1.2 Statement showing Rate of Real Return on Government 
Investment
257
Appendix - 4.1 Statement showing the details of the targeted area as per 
Micro plan vis-a-vis total area of VFDC as per Landscape 
survey report
258

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
iv
APPENDICES
Appendix No. Title Page(s)
Appendix - 4.2 Statement showing FDAs-wise land survey report 259
Appendix - 4.3 Statement showing the number of meetings held at the 
State Level and District levels between 2015-16 and 
2022-23 for monitoring of GIM in Mizoram
260
Appendix - 4.4 Statement showing details of 12 Landscape where 
advance, creation and maintenance work in area not 
approved in Perspective Plan
261
Appendix - 4.5 Statement showing details of survival rate of plantation 
found during Joint Physical Verification
263
Appendix - 4.6 Statement showing shortfall in Creation work against 
Advance work carried out between 2016-17 and 2020-21 
under sub-mission 4(a): Farmers land including current 
fallows under FDA, Kolasib
264
Appendix - 4.7 Key Problem Areas 266
Appendix - 4.8 Statement showing generation of EWBs by Nil Filers of 
GST Returns
267
Appendix - 4.9 Statement showing EWBs generated after cancellation 
of registration of the GSTIN
271
Appendix - 4.10 Statement showing Generation of multiple EWBs on the 
strength of same/ similar invoices
280
Appendix - 4.11 Statement showing EWB used through risky/ invalid 
vehicle by taxpayer 
281
Appendix - 4.12 Statement showing GSTIN with EWBs high distance 
from PIN to PIN
282
Appendix – 4.13 Statement showing GSTIN with invalid PIN in EWB 282
Appendix – 4.14 Statement showing GSTIN with unreported EWBs 
by taxpayers with high distance from PIN to PIN and 
invalid PIN
283
Appendix – 4.15 Statement showing short declaration of EWB taxable 
value in GST returns
285
Appendix – 4.16 Statement showing high value EWBs generated within 6 
months of registration
287
Appendix – 4.17 Statement showing Mismatch between ITC available in 
GSTR-2A and amount credited in ECL (GSTR-3B)
288
Appendix – 4.18 Statement showing manual entry EWBs with records not 
found in online EWB system
289
Appendix – 4.19 Sample for Centralised Audit 291
Appendix – 4.20 Sample for Detailed Audit 294
Appendix – 4.21 Parameter-wise summary of deficiencies (ITC and Tax 
liability)
295

Table of Contents
v
APPENDICES
Appendix No. Title Page(s)
Appendix – 4.22 Parameter-wise summary of deficiencies (turnover 
mismatch)
296
Appendix – 4.23 Cases of recovery 297
Appendix – 4.24 Cases where ASMT-10 was issued 298
Appendix – 4.25 Cases where notice was issued 299
Appendix – 4.26 Cases under correspondence with taxpayer/ action yet to 
be initiated
301
Appendix – 4.27 Cases not acceptable to Audit (Rebuttal) 304
Appendix – 4.28 Cases of data entry errors 306
Appendix – 4.29 Action taken before issue of Audit Query 307
Appendix – 4.30 Valid explanations 308
Appendix – 4.31 ITC mismatch between GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B 313
Appendix – 4.32 ITC passed on without supplier remitting tax 314
Appendix – 4.33 Mismatch in ITC availed between annual returns and 
books of accounts (Table 12F of Form 9C)
315
Appendix – 4.34 Short payment of interest 316

PREFACE
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of Mizoram under Article 151 of the Constitution of 
India.
The Report contains significant results of the performance and compliance audits 
of the departments of the Government of Mizoram under the Social, Economic, 
and Revenue Sectors including Social Welfare, Tribal Affairs, Women & Child 
Development Department, School Education Department, Urban Development & 
Poverty Alleviation Department, Higher & Technical Education Department, Local 
Administration Department, Rural Development Department, Horticulture Department, 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change Department, Transport Department  and 
Taxation Department.
The cases mentioned in this Report are those which came to notice in the course of test 
audit of accounts for the year 2023-24, as well as those which came to notice in earlier 
years, but could not be dealt with in previous Reports. Matters relating to the period 
subsequent to 2023-24 have also been included, wherever necessary.
The audits have been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

c
Overview
OVERVIEW

d
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024

Overview
This Audit Report has been prepared in five Chapters. Chapters-I to IV deals with Social 
Sector, Economic Sector, Economic Sector (Public Sector Enterprises) and Revenue 
Sector respectively. Chapter-V deals with cases of follow up of Audit Reports.
The Report contains five Performance Audits (PAs) on “Integrated Child Development 
Services (ICDS) Schemes”, “Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) in Mizoram”, “Green India Mission”, 
“Functioning of District Transport Offices” and “E-Way Bills System under Goods and 
Services Tax in Mizoram” and nine Compliance Audit paragraphs including one Subject 
Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA). The draft audit findings included in this Report 
were sent to the Head of the Departments concerned with a request to furnish replies 
within four weeks. The views of the Department/ Government have been incorporated 
wherever received. The audit findings in respect of the PAs were also discussed in the 
Exit Conferences held with the representatives of the Government of Mizoram and 
their views were duly acknowledged in the Report. A synopsis of the important findings 
contained in the Report is presented below.
Chapter-I
Social Sector
Performance Audit
Performance Audit on Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) 
Schemes
Social Welfare, Tribal Affairs, Women & Child Development Department
ICDS was implemented with heavy reliance on digital applications in which d ata 
played a key role for planning as well as monitoring of the scheme. In Mizoram, the 
transition from ICDS-CAS to Poshan Tracker belatedly in April 2022, was poorly 
managed, leading to critical data loss and affecting the ability to monitor and evaluate 
ICDS implementation effectively. Persistent technical, connectivity and language-
related challenges further hindered real-time data entry, impacting the accuracy of 
beneficiary tracking and service delivery. Non-redressal of these long-standing issues 
indicate a need for stronger digital governance and stakeholder support in ICDS 
implementation . Due to non -availability of data on implementation of the scheme 
during the period 2018-19 to 2022-23, proper analysis could not be carried out to assess 
the impact of the scheme on child nutrition and health outcomes in the State. There 
was shortage of staff at critical levels such as District Programme Officers (DPO), 
Child Development Project Officers (CDPO) and Circle officers, which affected the 
planning process i.e., preparation of Annual Plans/ Annual Programme Implementation 

x
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Plans (APIPs)/ Convergence Action Plans (CAPs) as well as monitoring and review 
of scheme implementation. Physical and Financial targets were not specified in the 
CAPs and funds were not provided in the Budgets of the respective line Departments. 
There was lack of basic facilities such as electric connection, drinking water 
connection, etc. noticed in the physically verified Anganwadi Centres (AWCs). 
Supply of supplementary nutrition under Supplementary Nutrition Programme was 
not in conformity with the prescribed Nutrition Norm and item-wise requirements 
per beneficiary per day for 300 days in a year were not worked out. Nutrition supplied 
were not based on the nutrition requirements of beneficiaries but on the basis of the 
availability of funds and the rates quoted by the suppliers. Audit noticed improper 
storage and labelling of food items in the AWCs.
The State did not have adequate training facilities at the State and District levels for 
strengthening the capacity building and training of field functionaries. The Poshan 
Tracker platform also required upgradation to incorporate mechanisms for effective 
monitoring and feedback.
There was an increase in the prevalence of stunting, wasting and under-nutrition among 
children, as well as anaemia among women and children and the State did not adequately 
monitor or effectively address these issues despite multiple interventions.
Recommendations
The State Government may- 
(i) instruct the Department to strengthen data management and reporting 
systems by mandating real-time entry of service delivery data through the 
Poshan Tracker App, ensuring availability of compatible smartphones 
to all AWWs, conducting periodic data audits and integrating ICDS and 
NHM databases. The State Government may also instruct the Department 
to develop and implement a robust data governance strategy, including 
seamless migration of legacy data, offline-compatible data entry modules 
for remote areas, multilingual user interfaces, and periodic data validation 
protocols;
(ii) instruct the Department to adopt a bottom-up planning approach in the 
preparation of Convergence Action Plans (CAP). The State Government 
may also instruct the Department to specify the Physical and Financial 
targets and earmarked budget for all the interventions by the respective line 
departments;
(iii) ensure time-bound execution of infrastructure upgradation of the sanctioned 
1,600 Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) into Saksham AWCs by leveraging 
convergence with concerned line departments;

xi
Overview
(iv) direct the Department to establish a structured and demand-based procurement 
and feeding mechanism by: (a) preparing annual Supplementary Nutrition 
Programme (SNP) supply plans based on updated beneficiary data and 
nutrition norms under Poshan 2.0, (b) ensuring advance release of funds 
linked to feeding calendars, (c) instituting buffer stock provisions to prevent 
disruptions, and (d) monitoring nutrient delivery against norms through 
monthly calorie and protein gap analysis at the project level;
(v) take expeditious steps to operationalise the approved Anganwadi Workers 
Training Centre (AWTC) at Lunglei and establish a Middle Level Training 
Centre (MLTC) with prior approval of the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development; and
(vi) instruct the Department to identify the reasons for increase in prevalence of 
stunting, wasting and under nutrition among children and anaemia among 
women and children and address the issue on priority.
 (Paragraph 1.2)
Compliance Audit Paragraphs
Higher and Technical Education Department
The Department made an irregular salary payment of ₹ 3.88 crore to an Associate 
professor and eight regular professors who did not perform their official duty.
 (Paragraph 1.3)
School Education Department
The Department made irregular salary payment of ₹ 1.28 crore to three employees who 
did not perform their official duty.
 (Paragraph 1.4)
Due to negligence, the State Project Director, Samagra Shiksha made excess payment 
of ₹ 1.50 crore against supplier’s bill for free textbooks.
 (Paragraph 1.5)
Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation Department
The Department extended undue favour to the Consultant/ Contractor in violation 
of extant Rules and subsequently appropriated liability to pay excess expenditure of 
₹ 0.99 crore in the construction of Multi-Level Car Parking cum Multi-Utility Centre 
at Zodin, Aizawl. Further, delay in completion of the project has rendered the entire 
expenditure of ₹ 8.06 crore idle.
 (Paragraph 1.6)
Local Administration Department
The Department incurred an irregular expenditure of ₹ Six crore on unapproved 
technical designs, drawings, estimates, etc. and did not execute the approved items of 
work valued at ₹ 1.56 crore.
 (Paragraph 1.7)

xii
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II
Economic Sector
Performance Audit
Performance Audit on the Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) in Mizoram
Rural Development Department
The overall planning process was not satisfactory as the State Government did not 
conduct Baseline Survey to gather information on seasonal demand from each Job Card 
holder nor had it empanelled an expert institution to develop the survey framework. 
There were no consolidation of the village plans into Block and District plans with proper 
scrutiny for technical feasibility and admissibility of the works under the scheme. This 
resulted in inclusion of non-permissible works in the Annual Action Plans which were 
ultimately executed despite being in the negative list as per the Operational Guidelines. 
The absence of reliable database on natural resource restricts evidence-based planning 
and results in poorly targeted interventions. Poor financial management resulted in 
delays in release of funds and diversion of funds for other inadmissible purposes. 
Door-to-door surveys of households, to ensure enrolment of all the adult members 
willing to do unskilled manual work, was not done and the Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) plan was not prepared for proper dissemination of information. 
Comprehensive convergence with other line departments for pooling of resources, 
including technical knowhow was absent. Avenues for submission of application for 
demand for works through verbal mode, written application, telephonic call or through 
online mode were not provided to the Job Card Holders. There were delays in payment 
of wages to the Job Card holder. The State Quality Control and Monitoring Unit was 
not functional and there were shortfalls in conducting Social Audit. 
Recommendations
The State Government may-
(i) ensure that a baseline survey is conducted to ascertain the labour demand;
(ii) ensure monitoring and scrutiny of Annual Plans at the Block and District 
levels so that non-permissible works are not included in the Annual Plan;
(iii) ensure timely release of funds to the Implementing Agencies for 
implementation of the scheme;
(iv) ensure timely payment of wages to the job card holders and consider 
strengthening real-time fund flow monitoring and establishing a District-
level grievance redressal and escalation mechanism to address delays in 
wage disbursal and uphold worker entitlements;

xiii
Overview
(v) ensure conduct of door-to-door surveys so that no adult individuals who are 
ready to do unskilled labour are left out;
(vi) formulate and implement a comprehensive, multi-tiered IEC Action Plan 
covering State, District, Block, and Gram Panchayat levels, with clear 
timelines, responsibilities, and budget allocations under the administrative 
expenditure head; and
(vii) instruct the Department to strengthen the Social Audit mechanism through 
effective planning to ensure that the prescribed number of audits are 
conducted in accordance with the guidelines.
(Paragraph 2.2)
Compliance Audit Paragraphs
Horticulture Department
The Horticulture Department parked ₹ 1.66 crore in Civil Deposit and deprived the 
intended beneficiaries of the Scheme.
 (Paragraph 2.3)
The Horticulture Department could not recover the interest-free outstanding loan of 
₹ 85.00 lakh from two Societies, thereby defeating the objective of the Revolving Fund 
Scheme to provide timely liquidity support and facilitate smooth ginger marketing by 
ginger growers (farmers) within and outside the State.
 (Paragraph 2.4)
Chapter-III
Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)
Functioning of Public Sector Enterprises
As of 31 March 2024, the State of Mizoram had six State Public Sector Enterprises 
(SPSEs), the investment of the State Government (capital and long-term loans) was 
₹ 63.52 crore consisting of ₹ 54.07 crore (85.12 per cent) towards equity capital and 
₹ 9.45 crore (14.88 per cent) as long-term loans. The losses of two of these State Public 
Sector Enterprises (SPSEs) (accumulated losses of ₹ 31.23 crore) had completely 
eroded the State Government investment in paid-up capital (₹ 25.97 crore) as per their 
latest finalised accounts.
 (Paragraphs 3.1.1 and 3.1.2.1)
The State Government has provided budgetary support of ₹ 30.21 crore to three SPSEs 
in the form of grants during the year 2023-24 mainly to meet salary and other operating 
expenses.
 (Paragraph 3.1.4)

xiv
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
The paid-up capital and accumulated losses of six SPSEs as per their latest finalised 
accounts were ₹ 63.58 crore and ₹ 56.93 crore respectively as of 30 September 2024 as 
per their latest accounts. During 2023-24, the SPSEs incurred losses of ₹ 3.02 crore.
 (Paragraph 3.1.8.2)
Chapter-IV
Revenue Sector
Performance Audit
Performance Audit on “Green India Mission”
Environment, Forests and Climate Change Department
The objective of GIM in Mizoram was to enhance forest quality, rehabilitate wastelands, 
improve ecosystem services, boost forest-based livelihoods and increase carbon dioxide 
sequestration, while reducing open forest area. In Mizoram, the Green India Mission 
(GIM) is being implemented by the State Forest Development Agency (SFDA) under 
the Environment, Forests and Climate Change (EF&CC) Department. As per the State 
Perspective Plan approved in June 2016, an area of 29,893 hectares was targeted for 
treatment under four sub-missions/ interventions over a period of six years. Preparatory 
activities such as micro-planning and landscape surveys began in 2014-15, while 
implementation of four out of five sub-missions started in 2016-17 across 51 L3 Landscapes 
within eight identified L2 Landscapes under five Forest Divisions of the State.
Audit noticed a lack of coordination between the Forest Development Agencies (FDAs) 
and the District Planning Committee. District-wise requirement for implementation 
of the Green India Mission (GIM) in convergence with other schemes could not be 
formulated at the Planning stage. Proper assessment/ land survey for the actual 
treatment at the grassroots level was not carried out. Instances of delay in release of 
funds were observed at multiple levels-from the State Government to the State Forest 
Development Agency (SFDA), from the SFDA to the Forest Development Agencies 
(FDAs) and finally from the FDAs to the Village Forest Development Committees 
(VFDCs) thereby impeding the execution of GIM activities. Instead of transferring 
fund to 12 VFDCs, the FDA, Kolasib withdrew ₹ 9.07 crore in cash in violation of 
the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change sanction order rendering 
the transaction suspicious.  Physical achievement of Creation work over a six-year 
span-from 2016-17 to 2022-23 was 50.20 per cent against target. Payment of wages to 
labourers through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) was not implemented. There was no 
convergence with Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(MGNREGS) and Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning 
Authority (CAMPA) for implementation of GIM. Audit noticed doubtful expenditure 
on plantation in farmers’ land. The SFDA had not updated the information on GIM in 
the website of the Department since July 2017. Performance monitoring reports were 

xv
Overview
not prepared by the VFDCs in violation of the GIM implementation guidelines. Social 
Audits of Mission activities at Village level were not conducted regularly and none 
of the Social Audit Reports was available on the official website of the Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change Department, Government of Mizoram.
Recommendations
The Government may consider the following recommendations:
(i) Initiate steps to link Forest Development Agencies (FDAs) with District Planning 
Committees to formulate District-wise requirement for implementation of Green 
India Mission (GIM) in convergence with other schemes at the Planning stage, 
to ensure alignment of priorities and resources;
(ii) Ensure that all potential L3 Landscapes are identified through proper, verifiable 
surveys at the grassroots level before undertaking treatment activities, so that 
Micro plans and Perspective Plans are based on accurate and comprehensive 
field data;
(iii) Ensure timely release of funds at all levels to facilitate smooth execution of 
the Mission activities. Further, strictly adhere to GIM guidelines and ensure 
that all expenditures are aligned with the approved Annual Plan Operation 
(APO);
(iv) Implement Direct Benefit Transfer system to the maximum possible extent 
to ensure timely delivery of benefits directly to beneficiaries and prevent 
leakages. Necessary enabling measures such as proactive facilitation of 
bank account opening, use of mobile banking vans, and coordination with 
banking correspondents may be undertaken in collaboration with financial 
institutions;
(v) Ensure that all relevant information regarding GIM activities is regularly 
updated on the website of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
Department, Government of Mizoram. Enhancing public access to this 
information will promote transparency, encourage community engagement, 
and allow stakeholders to monitor progress effectively; and
(vi) All social audit reports should be uploaded to the official GIM portal and 
displayed at village notice boards for public access. 
 (Paragraph 4.9)
Performance Audit
Performance Audit on “Functioning of District Transport Offices”
Transport Department
The performance audit of the District Transport Offices in Mizoram revealed significant 
shortcomings in various aspects of their functioning. From irregularities in the issuance 

xvi
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
of licences to the ineffective enforcement of regulations, the audit findings paint a 
concerning picture of the transport administration in the state. In the three test checked 
DTOs, Learner’s Licence (LL) and Driving Licence (DL) issued were more than the 
number of applicants during the audit coverage period. Instances of issue of DLs to 
underage persons were also noticed. There was insufficient equipment in the driving 
schools which compromised the compliance of learner’s safety and quality of driving 
skills.
Fitness fee, grant/ renewal of fitness certificates and additional fee for each day of 
delay after the expiry of fitness certificates were realisable from 24,397 vehicles whose 
fitness certificates had expired. Audit noticed non-realisation of tax arrears and permit 
fees from blacklisted as well as non-blacklisted vehicles. The absence of annual tax 
collection assessments, real-time tracking, and a standard escalation protocol for 
defaulters had weakened revenue enforcement activities.
Audit observed significant deficiencies in the enforcement activities conducted in the 
sampled District Transport Offices (DTOs). DTOs had no predefined enforcement 
targets. Furthermore, the DTOs lacked proper record-keeping mechanisms to track the 
nature of offenses. 
Audit also noticed a significant shortage of staff in the Department. There was no 
specific sanctioned strength for each DTO. The Department did not prepare any 
strategic plan to assess its resources and staffing needs in response to the growing 
population and increasing vehicle registrations. Audit observed that the Department 
also did not hold any review meetings during the audit coverage period with a 
view to assess operational performance or regulatory compliance. The absence of 
any structured monitoring had resulted in weakened oversight and impaired the 
Department’s ability to respond effectively to operational and compliance risks. 
Recommendations
The Government may consider the following recommendations:
(i) Appropriate action should be taken to identify systemic lapses and take 
corrective measures. Further, the DTOs may maintain record/ register of 
list of applicants, date of sending of driving licence/ vehicle registration 
certificate for printing, date of receipt of smart cards/ DLs/ registration 
certificate to track their movement and to prevent loss or issue to the wrong 
persons;
(ii) Ensure maintenance of record/ register regarding action taken by all District 
Transport Offices against fitness defaulters and strictly clamp down on plying 
of vehicles with expired fitness Certificates;
(iii) Develop and deploy a rule-based auto-flagging system within the VAHAN 
database to trigger blacklisting or recovery action when arrears exceed defined 
thresholds or remain unpaid beyond specified timeframes;

xvii
Overview
(iv) Develop and implement a District-wise Enforcement Action Plan, which 
includes: (a) Monthly enforcement targets based on local traffic density and 
historical offence data, (b) Mandatory maintenance of offence registers, fine 
logs, vehicle seizure records, and duty rosters, and (c) Integration of all field-
level enforcement data with the e-challan system to ensure real-time monitoring 
and accountability;
(v) Assess workforce requirements and implement a phased recruitment plan to 
gradually fill vacancies. A training framework must be established to enhance 
staff skills in public grievance handling, digital services, and regulatory 
compliance, ensuring efficient service delivery; and
(vi) Develop a long-term strategic plan and conduct regular review meetings.
 (Paragraph 4.10)
Performance Audit
Performance Audit on “E-Way Bills System under Goods and Services 
Tax in Mizoram”
Taxation Department
The Performance Audit on Electronic Waybill (EWB) System under Goods and Service 
Tax (GST) was undertaken with the twin objectives of verifying the effectiveness of 
EWB mechanism in protecting revenue interest of the Government and the efficiency 
and effectiveness of Preventive/ Enforcement formation in enforcing the provisions 
relating to EWB system.
The existing departmental monitoring mechanism has substantial systemic risk 
exposures as taxpayers are being allowed to generate EWBs and continue with their 
respective businesses even though they are delinquent or non-compliant with the 
provisions of GST in filing of returns, discharging their tax liability and generating 
multiple EWBs with the same invoice. Inspite of technology and digitised data 
bolstering tax administration, the Department is not fully leveraging EWB data and 
is unable to detect taxpayers generating EWBs using invalid vehicles. Audit noticed 
generation of EWBs by cancelled taxpayers. The tax due in respect of EWBs generated 
by cancelled taxpayers were neither demanded by the Proper Officers nor deposited in 
Government exchequer by the taxpayers. The Proper Officers did not detect taxpayers 
who had generated EWBs for supply of goods but had not reported them in their returns 
(GSTR-1/ GSTR-3B) which resulted in non-realisation of tax, cess and interest.
The provisions relating to preventive measures and enforcement such as inspection, 
search, seizure and arrest are provided to serve as a deterrent for tax evasion as also to 
safeguard the Government’s legitimate dues. Audit also noticed that the organisational 
preparedness for preventive/ enforcement activities of the sole Preventive Unit was 
impaired by the non-adherence to the provisions of the Act and departmental circulars 

xviii
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
for EWB related enforcement activities. The Department was not adequately using 
the extensive analytical reports generated by NIC or other agencies for EWB related 
enforcement. Audit noticed lack of timely action by the Preventive Unit leading to 
non-booking of cases and subsequently non-imposition of tax and penalty on vehicles 
without EWBs whose invoice value were above the threshold.
Recommendations
The Government may consider the following recommendations:
	 Introduce a mechanism to prevent generation of EWBs by nil filers of returns 
and cancelled taxpayers. The Department may also streamline the available 
manpower for regular scrutiny of EWBs and cross-verification with returns and 
other relevant documents by the Proper Officers under appropriate Sections of 
the Act to minimise instances of unrealised tax from the taxpayers;
	 Notify the appropriate authorities about the weaknesses/ loopholes in the 
EWB Common Portal as well as the GST Common Portal where the system’s 
deficiencies are beyond its control/ powers to prevent exploitation of the 
system’s deficiencies in future. Also, it may ensure pro-active involvement of its 
personnel in mitigating the deficiencies through manual validation of system-
generated documents;
	 Utilise the provisions of the modes of recovery under MGST Act, 2017 and 
MGST Rules, 2017 to ensure full recovery from the tax defaulters after initiation 
of recovery proceedings;
	 Ensure that all the EWBs are verified along with other related documents 
by the jurisdictional authorities and appropriate action is initiated as per the 
provisions of the Act as necessary;
	 Initiate steps to strengthen the Preventive Unit at Data Collection Centre 
(DCC), Vairengte as per the provisions of the Act for interception of vehicles 
to the fullest extent. It may also develop a mechanism along with the necessary 
infrastructure to ensure that there is no delay in verification of EWBs at the 
DCC; and
	 Setup a dedicated team for verification of Analytics Reports on EWB to identify 
the high-risk taxpayers and share the information to the taxpayers’ Zones for 
use in the scrutiny of returns.
 (Paragraph 4.11)

xix
Overview
Compliance Audit Paragraphs
Subject Specific Compliance Audit on Department’s Oversight on Goods 
and Services Tax Payments and Returns Filing” for the years 2018-19 to 
2020-21 (DORF Phase-II)
Taxation Department
The Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) on Department’s Oversight on 
GST Payments and Returns Filing was undertaken with an objective of assessing 
the adequacy of the system in monitoring returns filing and tax payments by the 
taxpayers, extent of compliance and other departmental oversight functions. The 
audit was predominantly based on data analysis, which highlighted risk areas, red 
flags and in some cases, rule-based deviations and logical inconsistencies in GST 
returns filed for 2018-19 to 2020-21.
A review of the functions of three Zones disclosed that there was deficiency in oversight 
function of the Zones in monitoring recovery of tax liability.
In Centralised Audit, replies were received in all 148 cases of data inconsistencies/ 
mismatches identified. Upon analysing the responses of the Department, in two cases 
recovery was made, in 14 cases ASMT-10 were issued, in 41 cases notices were issued 
to the taxpayer, and in 29 cases, the Department is under correspondence with the 
taxpayers. Further, in seven cases, the replies were not tenable and suitable rebuttals 
were provided. In nine cases, the inconsistencies were due to data entry errors and in 
four cases, action was taken before being pointed out by Audit while the taxpayers’ 
clarifications in respect of 42 cases were accepted by Audit.
With regard to Detailed Audit of 15 sample taxpayers, granular records were not 
produced to Audit in all cases which significantly limited the scope of Audit.  
Non-compliance on seven major issues were observed viz., (i) ITC mismatch between 
GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B involving ₹  18.71 crore in 13 cases, (ii) ITC passed on 
without supplier remitting tax involving ₹  19.06 crore in 11 cases, (iii) Short payment 
of tax under RCM involving ₹ 0.10 crore in two cases, (iv) Mismatch in ITC availed 
between annual returns and books of accounts involving ₹ 3.67 crore in 9 cases,  
(v) Suppression of taxable value based on unbilled revenue declared in Table 5 of 
GSTR-9C in one case involving amount of ₹  1.54 crore, (vi) Mismatch in taxable 
turnover declared in GSTR-9C Table 7G in one case involving amount of ₹ 5.35 crore, 
and (vii) Short payment of interest by two taxpayers involving ₹ 0.05 crore.
During the Exit Conference, the Department stated that action in the form of audit 
assessments will be taken before the cases get time-barred in line with the audit 
observations. The Department also stated that interest on late filing of returns will be 
calculated as per existing rules at the time of audit assessment.

xx
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Recommendations:
The State Government may consider the following recommendations-
(i) while determining the correctness of returns filed, monitor the progress of 
recoveries made on scrutiny of such returns in the interest of revenue;
(ii) conduct similar data analysis (as conducted for Centralised Audit) of GST 
returns and other related data of all taxpayers to identify inconsistencies and 
take necessary steps to recover dues from the taxpayers wherever applicable; 
and
(iii) initiate timely remedial action for all compliance deviations/ mismatches 
pointed out through this report before they get time barred.
 (Paragraph 4.12)
Transport Department
2,977 Transport vehicles were plying without valid fitness certificates resulting in non-
realisation of renewal/ fitness fees of ₹ 19.35 lakh and fine of ₹ 35.17 crore.
 (Paragraph 4.13)
Chapter-V
Follow up of Audit Observations
A review of follow up action on submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) disclosed 
that there was pendency in respect of the Audit Reports for the years 2015-16 to 
2020-22.
 (Paragraph 5.1)
State Government had constituted (04 September 2013) Audit Committees to consider 
and take measures for timely response and speedy settlement of outstanding IRs/ 
paragraphs pending in various Departments.
However, no meetings of the Audit Committee took place during the year 2023-24.
 (Paragraph 5.4)

e
Overview
CHAPTER – I
SOCIAL SECTOR

f
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024

CHAPTER-I 
 
SOCIAL SECTOR 
 
1.1 Introduction 
This Chapter of the Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 deals with the findings 
on audit of State Government Departments under Social Sector. 
During 2023-24, against total budget provisions of ₹ 5,210.89 crore, a total expenditure of 
₹ 3,886.52 crore was incurred by 13 departments under the Social Sector. Department-
wise details of budget provision and expenditure incurred there-against are shown in 
Table-1.1. 
Table-1.1: Department-wise budget provision and expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Department Budget 
Allocation (BA) Expenditure Percentage of 
Expenditure to BA 
1. School Education 1,712.59 1,450.03 84.67 
2. Higher and Technical Education 320.71 247.78 77.26 
3. Sports and Youth Services 55.31 27.15 49.09 
4. Art and Culture 14.10 12.44 88.23 
5. Health and Family Welfare 968.50 643.51 66.44 
6. Public Health Engineering 651.74 390.10 59.86 
7. Information and Public Relation 14.30 13.78 96.36 
8. Labour, Employment, Skill 
Development and 
Entrepreneurship 
36.61 27.98 76.43 
9. Social Welfare 289.98 212.99 73.45 
10. Disaster Management and 
Rehabilitation 69.81 41.23 59.06 
11. Local Administration 218.11 66.87 30.66 
12. Personnel and Administrative 
Reforms 6.81 6.40 93.98 
13. Urban Development and Poverty 
Alleviation 852.32 746.26 87.56 
Total 5,210.89 3,886.52 74.58 
Source: Appropriation Accounts: 2023-24 
Barring Sports and Youth Services Department, Health and Family Welfare Department, 
Public Health Engineering Department, Disaster Management and Rehabilitation 
Department and Local Administration Department where the utilisations were around 
49.09 per cent, 66.44 per cent, 59.86 per cent , 59.06 per cent  and 30.66 per cent 
respectively, all other departments managed to utilise more than 70 per cent of the funds 
allocated to them. The overall savings under Social Sector was 25.42 per cent against the 
budget allocation. 
1.1.1 Planning and conduct of Audit 
Audit process commences with the assessment of risks for the various departments of 
the State Government. The risk criteria were the expenditure incurred, criticality/ 
complexity of activities, level of delegated financial powers, assessment of overall 
internal controls, etc. 

2
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
2 
After completion of audit of each unit, Inspection Reports (IRs) containing audit findings 
are issued to the Heads of the offices, with a copy to the next higher authority, with a 
request to furnish replies within four weeks of receipt of the IRs. On the basis of 
responses, audit findings are either settled or further action for compliance is advised. 
Significant audit observations arising out of these IRs are processed for inclusion in the 
Audit Report. The Audit Report is submitted to the Governor of the State under 
Article 151 of the Constitution of India for being tabled in the State Legislature. 
During 2023-24, Audit test-checked an expenditure of ₹ 6,621.16 crore, including funds 
related to previous years, of the State Government pertaining to Social Sector. This 
Chapter includes one Performance Audit Report and five Compliance Audit Paragraphs, 
as discussed in the following paragraphs. 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
 
Social Welfare, Tribal Affairs, Women & Child Development Department 
 
1.2 Performance Audit on Integrated Child Development Services Scheme 
 
1.2.1 Introduction 
The Integrated Child Development Services  (ICDS) Scheme, one of the world’s largest 
and most unique programme for early childhood development is a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme (CSS) launched on 02 October 1975 by the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development (MoWCD), Government of India (GoI). In Mizoram, the scheme was 
launched in 1978 at East Lungdar in Serchhip District. In July 2018, GoI renamed the 
ICDS as ‘Anganwadi Services’ and restructured it into ‘Umbrella ICDS’. In March 2018, 
POSHAN Abhiyaan (erstwhile National Nutrition Mission) was launched to achieve 
improvement in nutritional status of the beneficiaries in a time bound manner. In August 
2022, POSHAN Abhiyan and ICDS were re-structured as ‘Saksham Anganwadi and 
Poshan 2.0' (hereinafter called Poshan 2.0) for implementation during the Fifteenth 
Finance Commission period from 2021-22 to 2025-26. 
1.2.2 Organisational Structure 
ICDS was implemented by the erstwhile Social Welfare Department, Government of 
Mizoram (GoM). The Department was bifurcated (13 August 2018) into two Directorates 
viz., ‘Social Welfare & Tribal Affairs (SWTA)’ and ‘Women & Child Development 
(WCD)’. The Directorate of WCD was, however, established on 01 April 2020. The 
Department was renamed (05 October 2023) as Social Welfare & Tribal Affairs and 
Women & Child Development (SWTA & WCD) Department. The Directorate of WCD is 
responsible for all matters for the health, nutrition and welfare of Children and Women in 
the State. The schemes are implemented by District Programme Officers (DPOs) at the 
Districts, Child Development Project Officers (CDPOs) at the Projects, Circle Officers 
(COs)/ Supervisors at the Circles and Anganwadi Workers (AWWs)/ Anganwadi Helpers 
(AWHs) at Anganwadi Centres (AWCs). The organisational structure of the Department 
is given in Chart-1.1. 
 

3
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
3 
Chart-1.1: Organisational structure 
 
Source: Departmental records 
1.2.3 Audit Framework 
 
1.2.3.1 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted to assess whether: 
 Planning for identification and coverage of beneficiaries was comprehensive, the 
activities envisaged under various interventions were designed to meet the scheme 
objectives and inter-sectoral monitoring mechanism was robust; 
 The available physical, human and financial resources were optimally utilised and 
convergence with other related programmes was ensured to maximise the benefit of 
ICDS; 
 Effective awareness was created among the targeted beneficiaries under ICDS 
scheme; and 
 The delivery of services through ICDS was effective, efficient and economical in 
achieving the desired outcomes. 
  
Principal Secretary
Additional Secretary
Deputy Secretary
Under Secretary
Director (SWTA) Director (WCD)
Joint Director
Dy. Director (W) Dy. Director (ICDS)
DPOs
CDPOs
Circle Officer/ 
Supervisor
A W W s /  A W H s
Special Officer 
(Nutritionist)
Nutritionist
Dy. Director (Admin)

4
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
4 
1.2.3.2 Audit criteria 
The implementation of various components of ICDS scheme was evaluated with reference 
to the following criteria: 
 Scheme guidelines - ‘ICDS Mission - the Broad Framework for Implementation’ 
(the Broad Framework), National Nutrition Mission/ POSHAN Abhiyan, Saksham 
Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 (Poshan 2.0) Scheme for Adolescent Girls, etc.; 
 Operational Guidelines for Food Safety and Hygiene, Guidelines for Monitoring and 
Supervision, etc.; 
 General Financial Rules, 2017, National Food Security Act, 2013, Manual for 
Procurement of Goods, 2017, Competition Act, 2002, Mizoram Procurement Rules 
2020, Monitoring Mechanism instituted by GoI and GoM; and 
 Instructions/ Notifications issued by the Central and State Governments 
respectively. 
1.2.3.3 Scope and Methodology of Audit 
The scope of audit of various sub-schemes under the “Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 
2.0” (erstwhile ‘Umbrella ICDS’) was restricted to Anganwadi Services, Poshan Abhiyaan 
and Scheme for Adolescent Girls covering the period from 2018-19 to 2022-23. Out of 
eight districts1 in the State, three districts viz., Aizawl, Champhai and Siaha were selected 
based on the percentage of underweight children in the districts. Seven 2 ICDS Projects 
(40 per cent ) under the three sampled districts  and 70 AWCs (10 AWCs from each 
sampled Project) were selected on Simple random sampling without replacement 
(SRSWOR) basis. 700 beneficiaries (10 beneficiaries from each sampled AWCs) were 
selected for Beneficiary Survey. 
The Audit objectives, criteria and scope of the Performance Audit were discussed in an 
Entry Conference held on 23 November 2023 with the Secretary, SWTA & WCD 
Department. Audit involved examination of records of the Directorate of WCD at the State 
level, DPOs and CDPOs at the District and Project levels respectively and Anganwadi 
Centres (AWCs) at the grassroot level and information furnished by the National Health 
Mission (NHM) Mizoram on interventions taken up under NHM in convergence with 
ICDS. Joint Physical Verification and Beneficiary Survey of 690 beneficiaries from 
selected AWCs were conducted with the Departmental officials. Photographs duly 
authenticated by Departmental officials were used to support audit findings wherever 
necessary. The Audit findings were discussed in an Exit Conference held on 
17 December 2024 with the Commissioner and Secretary of SWTA & WCD, Government 
of Mizoram. The replies of the Government have been suitably incorporated in the Report. 
1.2.4 Acknowledgement 
The office of the Principal Accountant General, Mizoram acknowledges the co-operation 
extended by the SWTA & WCD Department , Director of WCD, DPOs/ CDPOs and 
 
1 The number of districts increased from eight to 11 with the creation of three new districts in 2019 
2 Two Projects each under Champhai and Siaha districts and three Projects under Aizawl District 

5
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
5 
AWWs/ AWHs, officials of the National Health Mission (NHM) and Health Centres at the 
districts in the conduct of the Performance Audit. 
During the Performance Audit, the following observations were made: 
Audit Findings 
 
Audit 
Objective-1: 
Whether planning for identification and coverage of beneficiaries 
was comprehensive, the activities envisaged under various 
interventions were designed to meet the scheme objectives and 
inter-sectoral monitoring mechanism was robust. 
 
1.2.5 Non-availability of data on scheme implementation 
During the period covered in Audit, ICDS was implemented under two schemes viz., 
(i) POSHAN Abhiyan/ National Nutrition Mission during 2018-19 to 2020-21 and 
(ii) Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 during 2021-22 to 2022-23. Two different digital 
platforms viz., ICDS-CAS (ICDS-Common Application Software) and Poshan Tracker  
applications were used in the implementation of POSHAN Abhiyan and Poshan 2.0 
respectively. Since March 2019, all physical registers, except Stock Register, were 
discontinued. Data captured in the digital applications were used for preparing the Annual 
Programme Implementation Plans (APIP) and for real-time monitoring and review of the 
schemes. 
POSHAN Abhiyan was implemented through ICDS-CAS, which was abruptly 
decommissioned by the Ministry, and became inaccessible since September 2020. No data 
was migrated from ICDS-CAS to the new application i.e., Poshan Tracker. Although 
MoWCD launched the Poshan Tracker on 05 March 2021, the portal shows records from 
April 2022 onwards only. Thus, data on implementation of ICDS during the period 2018-
19 to 2021-22 was not available for audit analysis. 
Poshan Tracker portal records for the month of April 2022 reflected the number of AWCs 
as 2,244 and eligible beneficiaries as 6,36,140 of which 22,159 beneficiaries were 
AADHAAR verified. No other data related to the scheme implementation was shown in 
the portal. The status of AWC Infrastructure during the year 2022-23 was not reflected at 
all in the portal. Monthly Report of AWCs also was available only from May 2022. 
Further, though Poshan Tracker does not capture data of anaemia among children, the 
National Family Health Survey  (NFHS)-5 report (2019-20) shows that 46 per cent of 
children were anaemic. Thus, it was observed that complete data on implementation of 
ICDS during the year 2022-23 was not captured in the Poshan Tracker. 
Further, many Anganwadi centres are located in remote areas with poor internet 
connectivity, making it difficult to upload data in real-time. Poshan Tracker application 
itself experiences technical issues like slow loading times, data synchronisation problems, 
causing frustration for users. The Chief Secretary, Government of Mizoram (GoM) 
communicated the issues/ challenges faced in Mizoram to the Ministry of Women & Child 
Development on 27 September 2021, which was reiterated by the 
Commissioner-cum-Secretary, GoM on 25 May 2023. The key challenges faced by 
AWWs in Mizoram, inter alia, were: 

6
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
6 
Language barriers: Poshan Tracker application supported only the languages listed in the 
Eighth Schedule of the Indian Constitution. AWWs, who speak Mizo exclusively, could 
not easily comprehend and effectively utilise the application. 
Connectivity challenges: Network issues were prevalent, leading to delays in receiving 
One-Time Passwords (OTPs) necessary for data entry. In many areas, especially in 
southern regions of the State, internet connectivity was so poor that data entry became 
nearly impossible. This resulted in prolonged data entry times and often led to not being 
synced or inaccurate data being reflected in the Poshan Tracker. 
Due to incompleteness of data on the implementation of ICDS schemes, effective analysis 
to assess the impact on child nutrition and health outcomes could not be carried out by 
Audit. 
The transition from ICDS-CAS to Poshan Tracker belatedly in April 2022, was poorly 
managed, leading to critical data loss and affecting the ability to monitor and evaluate 
ICDS implementation effectively. Persistent technical, connectivity and language-
related challenges further hindered real-time data entry, impacting the accuracy of 
beneficiary tracking and service delivery. Non-redressal of these long-standing issues 
indicates a need for stronger digital governance and stakeholder support in ICDS 
implementation. 
1.2.5.1 No records on survey and identification of beneficiaries 
The primarily targets of ICDS are (a) Children aged 0-6 years: This is the core target 
group as the Scheme focus is on early childhood development; and  
(b) Pregnant women and lactating mothers: This aims to improve maternal health and 
nutrition, which directly impacts child health. 
Household survey was stated to be conducted on an ongoing basis by AWWs/ AWHs for 
identification of eligible beneficiaries at the village level. Details were captured in the 
ICDS-CAS/ Poshan Tracker by the AWWs which was monitored at the Field level, Block 
level and at the State level by Supervisors, Poshan Coordinators and Consultants 
respectively. Audit observed that there was no consistency of data between Poshan Tracker 
portals. The total number of beneficiaries as per Poshan Tracker portal during 2022 was 
6,36,140 whereas as per Departmental records the number of beneficiaries under 
Supplementary Nutrition Programme (SNP) was 1,54,237. The year wise number of 
beneficiaries covered under SNP is shown in Table-1.2. 
Table-1.2: Beneficiaries covered under SNP (as per feeding instructions) 
Sl. No. Category of beneficiaries 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
1. Children (6 months -3 years) 65,584 62,674 52,840 57,201 46,778 
2. Severely Malnourished Children (6 months -3 years) 96 180 52 30 2,742 
3. Children (3 years -6 years) 62,493 63,099 48,552 64,089 59,437 
4. Severely Malnourished Children (3 years -6 years) 54 91 44 45 - 
5. Pregnant Women & Lactating Mothers (PW&LM) 24,366 24,808 20,518 28,384 14,597 
6. AWWs &  AWHs 4,488 4,488 4,488 4,488 4,488 
Tot a l 1,57,081 1,55,340 1,26,494 1,54,237 1,28,042 
Source: Reply furnished by the Directorate of WCD 

7
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
7 
The number of beneficiaries covered under the scheme decreased year after year, except 
during 2021-22. Further, as records related to household surveys and identification of 
beneficiaries were not maintained, Audit could not ascertain whether all the eligible 
beneficiaries were covered during 2018-23. 
 
1.2.5.2 No records on services delivered under ICDS 
Section 3.1 of Poshan 2.0 guidelines states that Anganwadi Services Scheme provides the 
following package of services in an integrated manner to eligible beneficiaries:  
(i) Supplementary Nutrition: 
The Directorate of WCD implemented SNP under which supplementary nutrition was 
provided to beneficiaries in the form of ‘Take Home Ration’ (THR) and ‘Hot Cooked 
Meals’ (HCM). Details of implementation of Supplementary Nutrition Programme (SNP) 
are given in Paragraph-1.2.6 of the report. 
(ii) Pre-school and non-formal education: 
As per the New Education Policy framework, the Directorate of WCD stated that the 
Department worked closely with the Education Department and provided non-formal Pre-
School Activities (PSE) and Early Child Care Education (ECCE) based on Incremental 
Learning Approach (ILA). Voluntary organisations/ NGOs were also involved in 
providing education and care services to young children at the AWCs on ECCE days. 
Nutrition and Health Education was imparted through monthly sessions, small group 
meetings of Mothers/ Mahila Mandals, community and home visits. 
(iii) Nutrition and Health Education, immunisation, etc.: 
Health education, immunisation, health check-up and referral services, etc., were provided 
under convergence of ICDS with National Health Mission. Under ICDS, growth 
monitoring, immunisation, etc., were conducted at the AWCs. The AWWs/ AWHs were 
assisted by Accredited Social Health Activists  ( ASHA)/ Auxiliary Nurse and Midwife 
(ANM) at the village level. During field audit, it was observed that infantometers, 
stadiometers, etc., were available in all the sampled AWCs. Health check-ups were 
conducted at the health centres. It was stated that basic health, nutrition and development 
information related to childcare and development, infant feeding practices, utilisation of 
health services, management of child diseases, family planning and environmental 
sanitation etc., were provided. Under National Health Mission (NHM), the following 
activities, inter alia, were taken up: 
The declining trend in ICDS beneficiary coverage, coupled with the lack of recorded 
reasons, raises concerns about gaps in the identification and enrolment process. The 
absence of household survey records suggests weaknesses in monitoring and 
accountability, potentially leading to the exclusion of eligible beneficiaries. Further, 
disruptions caused by the transition from ICDS-CAS to Poshan Tracker likely 
contributed to data inconsistencies. Strengthening data recording mechanisms, 
ensuring comprehensive household surveys, and addressing digital challenges are 
crucial for improving the reach and impact of ICDS in the future. 

8
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
8 
 Identification/ detection of malnutrition and under-nutrition, particularly wasting and 
stunting among children, through routine screening by dedicated Rashtriya Bal 
Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK) as well as testing for anaemia by dedicated Mobile 
Health Teams. 
 Mandatory tests for anaemia were conducted among all children visiting the District 
Early Intervention Centres established under RBSK. Prophylactic dose of Iron and 
Folic Acid (IFA) supplements was administered to all target age groups across the 
State throughout the year. 
 Bi-annual de-worming of all target age group was done through administration of 
Albendazole tablets. 
It was also observed that Convergence Action Plan (CAP) showing details of activities/ 
interventions was not prepared, as discussed in Paragraph 1.2.10. The Primary Health 
Centres, which implemented the schemes at grassroot levels, do not maintain a 
comprehensive list of beneficiaries specially covered under convergence with ICDS. The 
AWCs also did not maintain physical records of services received by ICDS beneficiaries 
under NHM. 
Audit observed that while certain health-related services such as growth monitoring, 
deworming, anaemia testing, and immunisation were carried out under convergence 
between ICDS and NHM, the absence of a documented CAP and non-maintenance of 
beneficiary-level service records by both AWCs and PHCs significantly hindered the 
assessment of convergence effectiveness. The lack of disaggregated, traceable data on 
health interventions delivered through convergent action points to a systemic deficiency 
in planning, coordination, and monitoring of inter-sectoral services. The abrupt transition 
from ICDS-CAS to Poshan Tracker, coupled with technical and logistical constraints, 
including lack of compatible smartphones, further disrupted scheme oversight and real-
time data capture. Consequently, Audit could not ascertain the extent to which the 
convergence objectives of improving child health and nutrition outcomes were achieved 
during the audit period. 
The Department while accepting the facts stated (17 December 2024) that under POSHAN 
Abhiyan, ICDS-CAS was introduced, and all the field functionaries were trained properly 
for operating the platform. Unfortunately, without prior intimation, the scheme and the 
digital platform were decommissioned. A new scheme Poshan 2.0 was launched and a new 
digital platform Poshan Tracker was introduced. Further, ‘Face Recognition System’ was 
launched by the Ministry to restrict access to the platform and for availing assistances 
under the schemes. Smartphones of specific specifications were recommended by the 
Ministry, which are yet to be supplied to the AWWs. These abrupt changes hampered data 
management as well as scheme monitoring during the transitional period. 
The reply does not adequately explain the Department’s inability to ensure continuity in 
monitoring and convergence during the critical implementation period. Further, due to the 
absence of data/ records for the audit period, Audit could not analyse the overall 
effectiveness of ICDS and NHM initiatives. 

9
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
9 
 
Recommendation: The Department may strengthen data management and reporting 
systems by mandating real-time entry of service delivery data through the Poshan 
Tracker App, ensuring availability of compatible smartphones to all AWWs, conducting 
periodic data audits and integrating ICDS and NHM databases. 
1.2.6 Implementation of Supplementary Nutrition Programme 
Clause 1.2 of the Broad Framework of ICDS states that ICDS beneficiaries would avail 
supplementary nutrition provision for 300 days in a year. The National Food Security 
(NFS) Act, 2013, lays down in Schedule-II, the standard for providing nutrition in the form 
of ‘Take Home Rations’ or nutritious ‘Hot Cooked Meal’ in accordance with the ICDS 
Scheme.  
Supplementary nutrition items viz., rice, wheat flour (Atta), masoor dal, groundnut, matar 
chana, high protein soya noodles, high protein soya biscuits, Energy Dense Fortified Food 
(EDFF), Vitamin ‘B’ Complex, calcium tablets, milk, sugar, edible oil and double fortified 
salt were provided under SNP in Mizoram. Procurements were made centrally by the 
Directorate of WCD through open tendering and as per recommendations of the State 
Purchase Advisory Board (SPAB). Food samples were tested at National Accreditation 
Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) accredited laboratories and 
Regional Institute of Paramedical and Nursing Studies (RIPANS), Aizawl. The Directorate 
of WCD has two central nutrition godowns3 at Aizawl and Lunglei from where food items 
were supplied to the ICDS Projects/ AWCs. In addition to the above items, locally 
available food items such as banana, papaya, orange, sticky rice, potatoes, beans, egg, 
bread, etc., were provided under locally available foods programme. The programme was 
implemented in 17 ICDS projects using one-third of the amounts sanctioned under SNP 
for each of the projects. 
The number of beneficiaries covered under SNP was captured in the digital platforms 
ICDS-CAS (2018-19 to 2020-21) and Poshan Tracker (2021-22 and 2022-23). However, 
beneficiary data captured in ICDS-CAS could no longer be accessed while data captured 
in Poshan Tracker was found unreliable due to incomplete data as discussed at 
Paragraph 1.2.5 of the report. Thus, the number of beneficiaries covered under SNP was 
 
3 Aizawl Nutrition Godown covers Aizawl, Saitual, Champhai, Khawzawl, Kolasib, Mamit and Serchhip 
districts while Lunglei Nutrition Godown covers Lunglei, Hnahthial, Lawngtlai and Siaha districts 
The ICDS-NHM convergence, though well-intended, suffered from weak 
documentation, inadequate planning and digital transition issues. The lack of 
maintenance of records at both AWCs and PHCs resulted in non-verifiability of 
beneficiary coverage and service delivery. Additionally, the abrupt decommissioning 
of ICDS-CAS and challenges with Poshan Tracker adoption disrupted data 
management, making it difficult to track programme outcomes. Moreover, there was 
no evidence of alternative mechanisms instituted during the transition period for 
tracking service delivery. Without addressing these fundamental monitoring and 
data integrity issues, the effectiveness of ICDS and NHM remains uncertain. 

10
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
10 
compiled from feeding instructions 4 issued by the Directorate of WCD, as given in 
Table-1.2 under Paragraph 1.2.5.1. 
Audit observed the following shortcomings in the implementation of SNP in the State: 
1.2.6.1 Feeding instructions not in conformity with Nutrition Norms 
Clause 3.2.1 ‘Nutrition Norms’ of Poshan 2.0 guidelines prescribes the quantity of nutrition 
(calorie and protein) to be provided per day to each category of beneficiary and clause 
3.2.2 ‘Cost Norms’ of the guidelines prescribes the cost of providing the nutrition per 
beneficiary per day, as shown in Table-1.3. 
Table-1.3: Nutrition Norms and Cost Norms 
Sl. 
No. Category Nutrition Norms Cost Norms 
(in ₹) Calories (K Cal) Protein (g) 
1. Children (6 months to 3 years) 500 12-15 8.00 
2. Children (3 years to 6 years) 500 12-15 8.00 
3. Malnourished children (6 months to 6 years) 800 20-25 12.00 
4. Adolescent Girls, Pregnant Women and 
Lactating Mother 600 18-20 9.50 
Source: Poshan 2.0 Guidelines 
Feeding Instructions were prepared by the Directorate of WCD which contained ‘Feeding 
Doses’ and ‘Feeding Days’ for each item of food. Estimation of fund requirement for each 
allotment was made as per the feeding instructions i.e., the lists of food items, quantities 
and rates of item were taken from the feeding instructions. Proposal for release of each 
allotment of fund was submitted to the State which released the funds accordingly. The 
feeding instructions were also issued to the Projects for supply/ distribution of nutrition to 
the beneficiaries. 
Scrutiny of the feeding instructions revealed that the daily ‘Feeding Doses’ of a food item 
varied from one allotment to another. The number of ‘Feeding Days’ and the total quantity 
of a food item supplied during a year also varied from year to year. Feeding instructions of 
EDFF for Children (3 to 6 years), showing the variations in feeding dose and feeding days 
per year, analysed in respect of Khawbung ICDS Project, is given in Table-1.4. 
Table-1.4: Allotment of EDFF to Children (3-6 years) 
Ye a r  Date of 
allotment 
Qty. 
(Kg) 
No. of 
Beneficiaries 
Daily Dose 
(Gm) 
Feeding 
Days 
2018-19 31-10-18 2,645 1,343 98.47 20 
Sub Total --- 2,645 --- --- 20 
2019-20 13-08-19 1,933 1,340 144.25 10 
23-03-20 580 1,340 144.28 03 
Sub Total --- 2,513 --- --- 13 
2020-21 11-06-20 958 830 144.23 08 
12-02-21 2,590 830 104.00 30 
Sub Total --- 3,548 --- --- 38 
2021-22 12-07-21 2,215 1,065 104.00 20 
23-02-22 1,249 1,201 104.00 10 
Sub Total --- 3,464 --- --- 30 
2022-23 --- --- 1,194 --- Nil 
Source: Departmental records. EDFF was not supplied during 2022-23 
 
4  Feeding instructions were prepared as per the actual number of beneficiaries present at the AWCs 

11
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
11 
As shown in Table-1.4 above, EDFF was not supplied during 2022-23 for 1,194 
beneficiaries. In the other years, the daily feeding dose ranged from 98.47 gram to 
144.28 gram per day per child, while the total feeding days ranged from 13 days during 
2019-20 to 38 days during 2020-21, as against the maximum prescribed number of 300 
days.  
It was observed that feeding instructions were not based on the nutrition requirements of 
beneficiaries. Due to preparation of feeding instructions on the basis of the availability of 
fund and at the rates quoted by the suppliers, the nutritional requirements of the 
beneficiaries were not met in the process. Thus, feeding instructions were found to be not 
conforming with the Nutrition Norms. 
The Department stated (17 December 2024) that feeding instructions were prepared based 
on fund position i.e., availability of fund. The Department’s efforts were to cover 300 
feeding days in all possible ways. However, as funds were not released as per requirement 
and APIP, there was shortfall in supply of nutrition. 
The core issue stems from prioritising budget constraints and supplier rates over nutritional 
needs of children and women, thereby compromising food quality and perpetuating 
malnutrition. This misallocation of public funds did not adequately address nutritional 
deficiencies, risking long-term health impacts such as stunted growth, weakened immunity 
and developmental delays. By neglecting dietary requirements, the programme 
undermines its goals of combating malnutrition, reducing its effectiveness and 
exacerbating vulnerabilities to disease. Such inefficiency wastes resources and was 
contradicts the ICDS purpose. 
 
Recommendation: The State Government may institute a standardised, need-based 
feeding plan aligned with Poshan 2.0 norms by: (i) preparing annual feeding calendars 
based on beneficiary entitlements, (ii) ensuring allocation of funds matches nutritional 
requirements, (iii) publicly disclosing feeding schedules and menus at AWCs, and 
(iv) conducting quarterly reviews to monitor compliance and address supply gaps 
promptly. 
 
 
 
 
The inability to align feeding instructions with prescribed nutrition norms under 
Poshan 2.0 resulted in non-achievement of the prescribed dietary intake for children 
and pregnant/ lactating mothers. The nutrition supply was dictated by financial 
constraints rather than beneficiary needs, leading to irregular feeding schedules and 
insufficient calorie/ protein intake. The absence of a standardised, need-based 
approach to feeding allocation and the complete lack of supply in 2022–23 highlight 
lapses in the implementation of the SNP. 

12
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
12 
1.2.6.2 Shortfall in supply of supplementary nutrition 
The year-wise quantities of food items supplied under SNP during 2018-19 to 2022-23, as 
recorded in the Stock Registers of Central Nutrition Godowns at Aizawl and Lunglei, are 
given in Table–1.5. 
Table-1.5: Supply of nutrition under SNP during 2018-19 to 2022-23 
Sl. 
No. 
Items Unit 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 Tot a l 
1. Calcium 
tablets 
Tin 59,660 14,280 8,424 22,695 9,210 1,14,269 
2. DF Salt Kg 1,12,200 69,900 1,29,828 1,12,200 67,650 4,91,778 
3. EDFF Kg 3,17,600 2,92,135 5,06,415 4,46,650 - 15,62,800 
4. Edible Oil Litre 1,36,569 80,698 31,623 - 22,298 2,71,188 
5. Groundnut Kg 2,42,944 1,47,701 2,38,669 1,38,508 94,669 8,62,491 
6. HP Biscuits Kg - 2,41,095 4,14,198 2,38,729 2,62,953 11,56,975 
7. HP Noodles Kg - 75,501 1,87,164 4,63,804 1,62,657 8,89,126 
8. Masoor Dal Kg 6,67,224 6,77,751 8,08,646 - - 21,53,621 
9. Matar Chana Kg 3,60,754 3,18,116 1,40,485 3,40,390 1,32,485 12,92,230 
10. Milk Litre - - - 1,64,794 2,32,290 3,97,084 
11. Multi 
Vitamin 
Tin 14,501 25,000 25,000 - - 64,501 
12. Sugar Kg 22,440 22,440 22,440 33,680 11,220 1,12,220 
13. Vitamin-B 
Complex 
Bottle 7,46,370 3,53,562 3,63,140 3,89,990 4,39,785 22,92,847 
14. Wheat Flour Kg 9,21,807 8,17,433 4,44,867 6,47,149 11,01,602 9,21,807 
Source: Departmental record 
As shown in Table–1.5 above, High Protein (HP) Biscuits and Noodles were not supplied 
during 2018-19, Edible Oil during 2021-22, EDFF during 2022-23 and Masoor Dal during 
2021-23. Further, there was wide variation in the year-wise quantity of food items supplied 
without corresponding variation in the number of beneficiaries. Analysis of the quantity of 
EDFF supplied under Khawbung ICDS project and the number of beneficiaries (Children 
of age group 3-6 years) covered revealed that variation in the quantity of EDFF supplied 
was not related to the number of beneficiaries covered, as depicted in Chart-1.2:  
Chart-1.2: Supply of EDFF vis-à-vis number of Children (3 to 6 years)  
 
               Source: Departmental records 
It can be seen from Chart-1.2 above that the quantity of food items supplied without 
factoring the increase/ decrease in the number of beneficiaries would adversely affect the 
nutritional value of food items supplied to each category of beneficiary. 
1 3 4 3 1 3 4 0
830 1 2 0 1 1 1 9 4
2 6 4 5 2 5 1 3
3 5 4 8 3 4 6 4
0
2 0 1 8 - 1 9 2 0 1 9 - 2 0 2 0 2 0 - 2 1 2 0 2 1 - 2 2 2 0 2 2 - 2 3
N u m b e r  o f  b e n e f i c i r i e sQuantity (Kg)

13
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
13 
The requirement vis-à-vis supply (in terms of calories and protein values) of nutrition, in 
six out of seven sampled 5 ICDS projects, was analysed in audit. The nutritional 
requirement as per the Nutrition Norms for 300 days in a year was calculated based on 
the number of beneficiaries covered in the seven sampled projects (as detailed in 
Appendix-1.1). The quantity of food supplied as per the Stock Registers (as detailed in 
Appendix-1.2) was calculated based on the ‘Nutritive Value of Indian Foods’ published 
by National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad. The quantity of food supplied under locally 
available food as per locally available Food Registers is given in Appendix-1.3. Audit 
analysis showing the shortfall in supply of supplementary nutrition is given in  
Table-1.6. 
Table-1.6: Requirements vis-à-vis supply of nutrition under SNP 
Particulars 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Kcal.6 Pro. Kcal. Pro. Kcal Pro. Kcal. Pro. Kcal Pro. 
Aibawk ICDS Project 
Requirement 4,087 10,364 4,356 11,084 2940.6 7,499 4,385 11,263 3,569 9,105 
Supply under 
SNP 2,695 8,181 3,178 10,676 3,598 13,167 2,196 7,546 3,206 9,932 
Supply of LA 
Foods 55 176 41 66 46 115 49 126 - - 
Total 
supply7 2,750 8,357 3,219 10,742 3,644 13,282 2,245 7,672 3,206 9,932 
Shortfall 1,337 2,007 1,137 342 -704 -5,783 2,140 3,591 363 -827 
Per cent 
shortfall 32.72 19.36 26.11 3.09 -23.93 -77.11 48.80 31.88 10.18 -9.08 
Aizawl ICDS Project 
Requirement 39,629 1,00,255 40,586 1,01,985 31,001 78,292 42,183 1,07,085 37,585 93,860 
Supply under 
SNP 28,977 87,149 32,965 1,14,253 25,374 76,890 26,006 85,998 25,809 74,115 
Supply of LA 
Foods 456 1053 510 1154 612 1357 738 1501 - - 
Total supply 29,433 88,202 33,475 1,15,407 25,986 78,247 26,744 87,499 25,809 74,115 
Shortfall 10,196 12,053 7,111 -13,422 5,015 45 15,439 19,586 11,776 19,745 
Per cent 
shortfall 25.73 12.02 17.52 -13.16 16.18 0.06 36.60 18.29 31.33 21.04 
Khawbung ICDS Project 
Requirement 6,671 16,690 5,009 12,798 3,860 9,905 4,776 12,182 4,411 11,120 
Supply under 
SNP 5,643 18,814 4,490 13,256 3,912 14,597 2,945 10,049 3,543 10,993 
Supply of LA 
Foods - - - - - - - - - - 
Total supply 5,643 18,814 4,490 13,256 3,912 14,597 2,945 10,049 3,543 10,993 
Shortfall 1,028 -2,124 519 -458 -52 -4,692 1,831 2,133 868 127 
Per cent 
shortfall 15.42 -12.73 10.37 -3.58 -1.34 -47.37 38.35 17.51 19.67 1.15 
Champhai ICDS Project 
Requirement 13,426 33,812 11,125 28,321 9,951 25,468 11,672 29,752 10,473 26,347 
Supply under 
SNP 10,348 33,365 10,601 35,735 9,507 34,940 6,755 22,289 8,522 26,185 
Supply of LA 
Foods 122 320 145 384 138 416 158 486     
Total supply 10,470 33,685 10,746 36,119 9,645 35,356 6,913 22,775 8,522 26,185 
Shortfall 2,956 127 379 -7,798 306 -9,888 4,759 6,977 1,951 162 
 
5 Out of the seven sampled ICDS Projects, complete data of supply made under SNP was not available for 
Darlawn ICDS Project and analysis was made on the remaining six projects 
6  (i) Kcal.=Calorie in ‘lakh Kcal’ ; (ii) Pro.= Protein in ‘Kg’ 
7 Quantity of food items supplied is multiplied with the Calorie/ Protein content per unit of the food item 
to get the Calorie and Protein values of food supplied 

14
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
14 
Particulars 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Kcal.6 Pro. Kcal. Pro. Kcal Pro. Kcal. Pro. Kcal Pro. 
Per cent 
shortfall 22.02 0.37 3.41 -27.54 3.07 -38.82 40.77 23.45 18.63 0.61 
Siaha ICDS Project 
Requirement 8,526 21,535 8,238 20,693 7,885 19,889 9,391 23,890 8,174 20,413 
Supply under 
SNP 3,326 8,205 3,681 12,344 4,941 17,655 2,835 8,928 3,825 10,085 
Supply of LA 
Foods 78 186 83 196 95 222 119 273 - - 
Total supply 3,404 8,391 3,764 12,540 5,036 17,877 2,954 9,201 3,825 10,085 
Shortfall 5,122 13,144 4,474 8,153 2,849 2,012 6,437 14,689 4,349 10,328 
Per cent 
shortfall 60.07 61.04 54.31 39.40 36.14 10.11 68.54 61.49 53.21 50.60 
Tuipang ICDS Project 
Requirement 6,703 16,945 6,319 16,038 5,858 14,771 6,718 17,161 5,881 14,692 
Supply under 
SNP 3,326 8,205 3,681 12,344 4,941 17,655 2,835 8,928 3,825 10,085 
Supply of LA 
Foods - - - - - - - - - - 
Total supply 3,326 8,205 3,681 12,344 4,941 17,655 2,835 8,928 3,825 10,085 
Shortfall 3,377 8,740 2,638 3,694 917 -2,884 3,883 8,233 2,056 4,607 
Per cent 
shortfall 50.37 51.58 41.75 23.03 15.66 -19.53 57.79 47.97 34.96 31.36 
Source: Departmental records 
As shown in Table-1.6 above, shortfall in supply of Calories ranged from 3.07 per cent 
during 2020-21 (Champhai ICDS Project) to 68.54 per cent during 2021-22 (Siaha ICDS 
Project) while shortfall in supply of Protein ranged from 0.37 per cent during 2019-20 
(Champhai ICDS Project) to 61.49 per cent during 2021-22 (Siaha ICDS Project).  
The Department replied (06 December 2024) that feeding instructions and number of 
feeding days is directly dependent on the fund position and procurement was done as per 
availability of fund released. 
Thus, it was observed that there was shortfall in supply of supplementary nutrition under 
SNP in Mizoram during the period covered in audit. 
The consistent shortfall in calories and protein puts beneficiaries, especially young 
children and pregnant/ lactating women, at a significantly increased risk of malnutrition. 
This can lead to stunted growth and development in children, weakened immune systems 
and increased susceptibility to infections, anaemia and other micronutrient deficiencies 
and adverse pregnancy outcomes.  
The core objective of ICDS is to improve the nutritional status of vulnerable populations. 
These shortfalls directly undermine the program's effectiveness in achieving this goal. 
Public funds are being spent on the ICDS programme, but due to the shortfalls in supply, 
the intended nutritional benefits are not being fully realised. 
 

15
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
15 
 
Recommendation: The Department may establish a structured and demand-based 
procurement and feeding mechanism by: (i) preparing annual SNP supply plans based 
on updated beneficiary data and nutrition norms under Poshan 2.0, (ii) ensuring 
advance release of funds linked to feeding calendars, (iii) instituting buffer stock 
provisions to prevent disruptions, and (iv) monitoring nutrient delivery against norms 
through monthly calorie and protein gap analysis at the project level.  
1.2.6.3 Abnormal increase in the rates of procurement of EDFF 
Rule 173 Clause (ix) of GFR, 2017 (as adopted by the Government of Mizoram) states 
that the specifications of the required goods should be clearly stated without any ambiguity 
so that the prospective bidders can send meaningful bids. As stated under Clause (xix) (c), 
rejection of all bids is justified when the bids’/ proposals’ prices are substantially higher 
than the updated cost estimate. Further, as per Clause (xx) (c), prices should be reasonable 
in comparison to market values. The Mizoram Public Procurement Rules, 2020 provides 
under Rule 37(1) that, bidding document shall contain, inter alia , schedule of 
requirements, specifications and allied technical details and price schedule. Further, the 
Competition Act, 2002 prohibits agreements that adversely affect competition, including 
bid-rigging or collusive bidding as outlined in Section 3(1)(d).  
Audit noticed that EDFF was procured centrally by the Directorate of WCD through open 
tendering. Suppliers and rates, Freight on Road  (FoR) for Aizawl and Lunglei were 
approved by the State Purchase Advisory Board (SPAB). The rate of procurement of EDFF 
was substantially increased during 2020-22 and further increased during 2022-23 with 
cumulative increase of 122 per cent and 124 per cent respectively for Aizawl and Lunglei, 
as shown in Table-1.7. 
Table-1.7: Rates of supply of EDFF 
Year  Name of supplier Rate per Kg Increase/ decrease 
per cent 
Aizawl Lunglei Aizawl Lunglei Aizawl Lunglei 
2018-19 Aasray Concept Foods Ltd., Guwahati 51.83 53.63 --- --- 
2019-20 Orion Health Foods Pvt. Ltd. Shillong 48.88 51.88 (-) 5.69 (-) 3.26 
2020-21 Rausheena Udyog 
Ltd. and Aasray 
Concept Foods Ltd. 
Guwahati 
M/s Orion 
Health Foods 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Shillong 
77.00 79.00 57.53 52.27 2021-22 
2022-23 Nutrikart, Zarkawt, Aizawl 115.00 120.00 49.35 51.90 
Source: Departmental records 
The inability to ensure consistent and adequate food supply under SNP severely 
impacted the intended nutritional benefits of Poshan 2.0. Large shortfalls in calorie 
and protein supply across multiple ICDS projects highlight systemic weaknesses in 
planning and implementation. The absence of a structured supply mechanism, 
non-alignment of supply with beneficiary numbers and irregular food distribution 
compromised the effectiveness of the SNP. 

16
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
16 
During the years 2019-23, the Director of WCD issued three Notice Inviting Tenders 
(NITs) for procurement of 888 MT of EDFF viz., on 14 January 2019 for 276 MT 8, on 
29 June 2020 for 276 MT and on 31 October 2022 for 336 MT9. Supplies were to be made 
in a phased manner for a period of at least one year. The NITs specified that EDFF should 
contain not less than 500 kcal Calorie and 15 gram Protein per 100 gram and should be 
fortified with micro-nutrients (Vitamins & minerals). 
During 2019-20, three firms10 responded to the NIT issued on 14 January 2019 in which 
the lowest bidder M/s Orion Health Foods Pvt. Ltd., Shillong was approved (3 June 2019) 
by the SPAB. The rate of supply of EDFF during 2019-20 was lesser than the previous 
year by 5.69 per cent for Aizawl and 3.26 per cent for Lunglei respectively. 
During 2020-21, the three firms responded to the NIT issued on 29 June 2020. Two firms 
viz., M/s Aasray Concept Foods Ltd., and M/s Rausheena Udyog Ltd., Guwahati submitted 
the same bid of ₹ 77.00 per Kg (L1) for Aizawl while M/s Orion Health Foods Pvt. Ltd., 
Shillong submitted bid of ₹ 79.00 per Kg (L-1) for Lunglei. Thus, all the three suppliers 
were approved (15 December 2020) by the SPAB and the supply was continued during 
2021-22 as well. The rate of supply of EDFF during 2020-21 was higher than the previous 
year 2019-20 by 57.53 per cent and 52.27 per cent for Aizawl and Lunglei respectively. 
During 2022-23, two firms viz., M/s Rausheena Udyog Ltd., Guwahati and M/s Nutrikart, 
Zarkawt, Aizawl responded to NIT issued on 31 October 2022. As recorded in the meeting 
minutes of the SPAB (16 March 2023), the sample furnished by M/s Rausheena Udyog 
Ltd., the lowest bidder, did not contain the minimum requirement of 500 kcal Calorie and 
15-gram Protein. Thus, M/s Nutrikart, Aizawl, the L-2 bidder, which quoted ₹ 115 per Kg 
and ₹ 120 per Kg for Aizawl and Lunglei respectively, was approved (05 April 2023) by 
the SPAB. The rate of supply of EDFF during 2022-23 was higher than the previous year 
2021-22 by 49.35 per cent for Aizawl and 51.90 per cent for Lunglei respectively. 
Comparison of the rates of supply EDFF during 2018-19 to 2022-23 with the cost per unit 
of its ingredients (raw material) viz., millets, sugar, pulses, etc., is given in Table-1.8.  
Table-1.8: Increase in rate of items  
Year 
EDFF Sugar M. Dal Jowar Bajra Ragi 
Rate PCI11 Rate PCI Rate PCI Rate PCI Rate PCI Rate PCI 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
2018-19 51.8  45  59  24.5  19.5  28.9  
2019-20 48.9 -5 45 0 69 17 25.7 5 20.0 3 31.5 9 
2020-21 77 57 45 0 72.6 5 26.4 3 21.5 7 32.95 5 
2021-22 77 0 45 0 72.6 0 27.6 5 22.5 5 33.77 3 
2022-23 115 49 50 11   29.9 8 23.5 4 35.78 6 
Source: Rates of EDFF, Sugar and M Dal are taken from supply orders for Aizawl and rates of millets 
(Jowar, Bajra and Ragi) are taken from the rates published by PIB 
 
8 14,000 cases of 12 x 01 Kg packets = 168 MT for Aizawl and 9,000 cases of 12 x 01 Kg packets =108 MT 
for Lunglei 
9 14,000 cases of 12 x 01 Kg packets = 168 MT for Aizawl and Lunglei each 
10 M/s Rausheena Udyog Ltd., Guwahati, M/s Aasray Concept Foods Ltd., Guwahati and M/s Orion Health 
Foods Pvt. Ltd. Shillong 
11 PCI= Per cent increase 

17
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
17 
As shown in Table-1.8 above, while the cost per unit of ingredients varied from zero to 
17 per cent, the rates of supply of EDFF varied from minus five to 57 per cent, which was 
abnormal.  
Scrutiny of tender documents revealed that the lists of ingredients (raw materials) and 
quantity per unit of EDFF were not specified in the NITs. Records of preparation of cost 
estimates and assessment of market values were also not found. The bidders also did not 
furnish such information, without which, the reasonableness of the rates quoted could not 
be verified. During 2020-21, all the three firms submitted their bids on the last day for 
submission of bids i.e., 28 July 2020. The financial bid of M/s Rausheena Udyog Ltd. was 
printed, while the other two firms submitted handwritten bids. Two firms 12 submitted the 
same bid (lowest) for Aizawl and the third firm 13 submitted the lowest bid for Lunglei, 
which led to the selection of all the three firms. This appears to be cartel formation among 
the bidders for controlling the supply rate of EDFF.  
While preparing the Comparative Statements, the Department did not highlight the 
substantial increases in rates vis-à-vis the previous year’s for evaluation by the SPAB. The 
SPAB also approved the rates without any observation on the reasons for the price 
increases. Non-observing and non-flagging of the substantial increase in rates precluded 
any possibility of negotiating with the L1 bidders. Consequently, the supply contracts were 
awarded without any effort to moderate the rates. The Department should have negotiated 
with the lowest bidder (L1) to reduce the rates further, which was not done. 
During the Exit Conference (17 December 2024), the Director, WCD stated that the 
Department realised the increase in rates only after being pointed out by Audit. It was also 
stated that though tenders were floated by the Directorate of WCD, selection of suppliers 
was made by the State Purchase Advisory Board (SPAB) and thus they had no control 
over the matter. 
Thus, the non-adherence to GFR provisions by the Department adversely affected the 
efficiency and economy of the procurement process. 
 
Recommendation: The Department may institute a system of quarterly nutrition audits 
at the ICDS project level to track actual delivery of calories and proteins against 
prescribed norms, and initiate corrective action through reallocation of resources, 
revision of feeding schedules, and real-time adjustment of procurement plans to ensure 
full coverage of all beneficiaries under the Supplementary Nutrition Programme (SNP). 
 
12 i.e., M/s Aasray Concept Foods Ltd., and M/s Rausheena Udyog Ltd. 
13 i.e., M/s Orion Health Foods Pvt. Ltd. 
The procurement of EDFF under ICDS suffered from severe lapses in transparency, 
cost justification, and competitive bidding. Lack of detailed specifications, 
unexplained price hikes, and possible cartel formation indicate serious deficiencies 
in procurement planning and oversight. Non-negotiation of rates or non-rejection of 
abnormally high bids resulted in excessive expenditure, raising concerns about 
financial prudence and accountability in ICDS procurement. 

18
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
18 
1.2.7 Inadequacies in monitoring of the scheme 
Chapter 2 of the guidelines for Monitoring & Supervision of ICDS states that ICDS 
Scheme envisages an inbuilt system of monitoring through regular reports and returns at 
various levels. Five-tier monitoring systems viz., National, State, District, Block and AWC 
levels have been put in place. 
Chapter 2 of Poshan 2.0 guidelines provides that the Chief Secretary of the State shall 
coordinate the activities of various departments through a State Level Steering Committee 
(SLSC) to ensure effective convergence between various schemes/ programs having 
bearing on nutrition and review the progress on regular basis. The CDPO who is 
responsible for administration and implementation of nutrition and ICDS projects shall 
carry out major responsibilities inter alia as follows: 
 Coordinate and evaluate deliveries in the District as a Key Performance Indicator of 
the District Magistrate/ Collector for nutritional improvement of beneficiaries, 
especially Severe and Moderate Acute Malnutrition children; 
 Conduct periodic monitoring, including surprise spot-checks, assessing the quality of 
pre-school delivery, etc., to ensure quality and undertake necessary course of 
correction; and 
 Ensure collation of monthly progress reports for the District and share with the State. 
Further, Clause 2.6 of Poshan 2.0 guidelines provides that Poshan Tracker will be used in 
monitoring of the scheme which will enable real-time monitoring and tracking of all 
AWCs, AWWs and beneficiaries on defined indicators and in generating data, providing 
feedback to Program Managers and documenting the impact of scheme on nutrition 
indicators. The States/ districts will be able to make effective and timely interventions 
based on the data from the Poshan Tracker, thereby facilitating continuous evaluation and 
the progress of different components. 
It was observed that SLSC was not constituted to review the progress of implementation 
of various schemes/ programs. During field audit of the sampled projects, the CDPO, 
Khawbung stated that proper monitoring could not be carried out on monthly basis due to 
shortage of staff. 
On scrutiny of Poshan Tracker data, it was found that there was no mechanism for 
monthly/ quarterly/ annual feedback in the application and Monthly Report was available 
only from May 2022 onwards. 
The Director of WCD stated (8 May 2024) that during 2018-19 to 2020-21, ICDS-CAS 
Dashboard was used as monitoring system at the State, District and ICDS Project levels. 
However, the application was decommissioned by the Ministry in 2020. Monthly Reports 
were submitted in a portal called Rapid Reporting System hosted by MoWCD. But this 
portal was decommissioned by the Ministry in February 2022. During 2021-22 and 
2022-23, Poshan Tracker Dashboard was used as monitoring system at the State, District 
and Project levels. 

19
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
19 
During the Exit Conference (17 December 2024), it was stated that the Poshan Tracker 
had significant challenges and had to undergo several upgrades since its inception. To 
address these issues, the Directorate engaged Lailan Consultancy Pvt. Ltd., Aizawl to 
develop a software solution aimed at improving data collection and maintenance under the 
ICDS. 
 
Recommendation: The Department may operationalise the State-Level Steering 
Committee (SLSC) and establish an integrated monitoring framework by mandating 
monthly reviews at all administrative levels, supported by a stable, state-managed digital 
platform developed in consultation with NIC or other accredited agencies, to ensure 
uninterrupted data flow, accountability, and evidence-based decision-making under 
Poshan 2.0. 
1.2.8 No proper planning for achievement of Sustainable Development Goals 
Clause 1.1 of Poshan 2.0 guidelines states that the achievement of the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG) lies at the forefront of this programme design. Poshan 2.0 shall 
contribute to the SDGs, specifically, SDG-2 on Zero Hunger and SDG-4 on Quality 
Education. 
As per information furnished by the Director of WCD, achievement of SDG on key 
indicators such as Maternity Benefits, Anaemia, Stunting and Underweight in children, 
etc., and progress made over the years are shown in Table-1.9. 
Table-1.9: Status of achievement of SDG 
Sl. No. Indicators 2021 2023 
1. Beneficiaries received Maternity Benefits 21,628 37,210 
2. Children who are Stunted 2.34 per cent 22.50 per cent 
3. Children (4-59 months) who are Anaemic No data No data 
4. Children (0-4 years) who are Underweight 1.51 per cent 1.10 per cent 
Source: Departmental reply and Poshan Tracker data 
It was observed that targets were not set by the Department with respect to  
SDG-2 on Zero Hunger and SDG-4 on Quality Education. Supplementary nutrition was 
provided to beneficiaries in the form of Take-Home Ration/ Hot Cooked Meals and Early 
Child Care Education (ECCE) was carried out in the AWCs. These two programs are 
linked with the SDG-2 and SDG-4 respectively. As tangible targets were not set by the 
Department, progress made towards achievement could not be assessed in audit. 
The Director stated (6 December 2024) that the State studies are being initiated to find out 
the root causes and for planning of tailored interventions for every ethnic tribal groups viz., 
study of Diet Diversity and Nutrition Outcomes among women and children in Mamit 
District. 
The absence of a State-Level Steering Committee, inadequate monitoring at the 
district level, and frequent disruptions in digital tracking systems severely impacted 
the effectiveness of ICDS and Poshan 2.0 monitoring mechanisms. The lack of 
comprehensive data hindered evidence-based decision-making. 

20
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
20 
 
Recommendation: The Department may develop and implement a robust data 
governance strategy, including seamless migration of legacy data, offline-compatible 
data entry modules for remote areas, multilingual user interfaces and periodic data 
validation protocols. 
 
 
1.2.9 Insufficiency of physical resources 
 
1.2.9.1 Insufficient number of AWCs 
As per guidelines for Monitoring & Supervision of ICDS, the Population Norms for 
Setting up Anganwadi Centres  were 400-800 per AWC in Rural/ Urban areas and  
300-800 per AWC in tribal/ riverine/ desert/ hilly and other difficult areas. 
As per Statistical Abstract of Mizoram 2021, the population of the State during the year 
2011 was 10.97 lakh. As per Economic Survey of Mizoram for the year 2014-15, all the 
sanctioned 2,244 AWCs were operational. The average coverage of beneficiaries in the 
State was 489 beneficiaries per AWC 14 as per population of 2011. As per information 
 
14 Total Population of Mizoram/ No of AWCs 
Audit Objective-2: 
The available physical, human and financial resources were 
optimally utilised and convergence with other related 
programmes was ensured to maximise the benefit of ICDS. 
The absence of specific targets for SDG-2 (Zero Hunger) and SDG-4 (Quality 
Education) undermined the ability to measure programme effectiveness. While 
maternity benefits showed improvement, the rise in stunting rates and missing 
anaemia data raise concerns about the actual nutritional impact of Poshan 2.0. 
Conclusion: 
The implementation of ICDS and Poshan 2.0 in Mizoram was marked by 
systemic weaknesses in planning, monitoring and service delivery. Despite 
substantial resource allocation, the absence of critical institutional 
mechanisms such as the State-Level Steering Committee, irregular 
convergence with health and education departments, and significant data 
gaps due to the abrupt transition between digital platforms hindered effective 
execution. Inconsistent distribution of supplementary nutrition, poor 
infrastructure in AWCs, inadequate training of frontline workers and limited 
community engagement further undermined the scheme’s objectives.  
Consequently, the programme fell short of achieving intended nutrition and 
development outcomes, compromising the well-being of its target 
beneficiaries - women, children and adolescent girls. Strengthening 
institutional oversight, restoring data integrity, and adopting a results-based, 
transparent implementation model are essential for improving impact. 

21
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
21 
provided by the Directorate of Economics and Statistics, the population of the State is 
expected to be 12.33 lakh by 2023 with coverage of 549 beneficiary per AWCs.  
Substantial increase in population in some villages and setting up of new settlements had 
necessitated the creation of additional AWCs. The Directorate of WCD had requested 
(11 October 2022) the Government of Mizoram, SW&TA Department for creation of 21 
additional AWCs under ‘Anganwadi on Demand’ provision. However, no additional 
AWC was created since 2014. During Joint Physical Verification (January to March 2024) 
of AWCs, the AWWs stated that they were already burdened with various responsibilities 
and the launch of Poshan Tracker coupled with lack of proper internet connectivity in the 
remote hilly regions, has added the task of data entry to their workload. Further, it was 
difficult for the AWWs/ AWHs to regularly cover all the additional households and 
beneficiaries within their jurisdictions as the population had increased over the years. 
During the Exit Conference (17 December 2024), Director, WCD stated that proposals of 
66 new Anganwadi Centers are being submitted to the Ministry for consideration under 
Dharti Aaba Janjatiya Gram Utharh Abhiyaan (DAJGUA). 
Thus, it was observed that though the population of the State increased over the years, no 
additional AWC was created after 2014 and the existing field functionaries had to bear the 
extra workload arising from population growth. 
Recommendation: The Department may consider conduct a geo-tagged needs 
assessment of population growth and settlement patterns to identify underserved areas 
and submit timely proposals for sanctioning new Anganwadi Centres. 
1.2.9.2 AWCs lacked basic infrastructure 
As per MoWCD instructions dated (10 March 2011), an AWC must have a separate sitting 
room for children/ women, separate kitchen, store for storing food items, child friendly 
toilets and space for playing of children (indoor and outdoor activities) with safe drinking 
water facilities. Paragraph 2.2.1(ii)(a) of the Broad Framework of ICDS also provides that 
AWCs should be child friendly having all relevant infrastructure and the space should be 
at least 600 sq. ft. Paragraph 7.1 of the Broad Framework further states that AWC building 
with three-four rooms is needed at the village level. As per Paragraph 3.12 of Poshan 2.0, 
for leveraging convergence for food and nutrition, Poshan Vatikas (nutri-gardens) shall be 
set up at or near AWCs. 
Audit conducted a Joint Physical Verification with the representatives of the Department 
(24 January to 21 March 2024) in which all the 70 sampled AWCs under seven ICDS 
The inability to create additional AWCs despite population growth and rising 
demand had strained existing infrastructure and human resources, reducing the 
efficiency of service delivery under ICDS. The State’s inaction on WCD’s request for 
additional AWCs under ‘Anganwadi on Demand’ has left several settlements 
underserved. Additionally, the increasing workload of AWWs, compounded by 
digital reporting challenges in remote areas, has negatively impacted their ability to 
effectively implement ICDS services. 

22
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
22 
Projects were covered. Beneficiary Survey was also conducted in which 690 beneficiaries 
(415 Children, 173 Pregnant Women & Lactating Mothers and 102 Adolescent Girls) were 
covered. 
It was found that most of the sampled AWCs had only one/ two rooms with attached 
kitchen against the Broad Framework norms of three/ four rooms with attached kitchen. 
There was no separate sitting room for children/ women and there was not enough space 
(600 sq. ft area as per Ministry guidelines) in all the 70 sampled AWCs. It was also found 
that the sampled AWCs lacked basic infrastructure/ facilities viz., electric connection 
(46 AWCs), water connection (8 AWCs), functional toilets (3 AWCs), etc., as has been 
given in Table-1.14 under Paragraph-1.2.10. Responses to questionnaire received from 
the beneficiaries were captured as given in Appendix-1.4. Shortcomings observed during 
the Joint Physical Verification, inter alia, were as follows: 
 PSE Kits, blackboard, playing equipment were not available in 17 sampled AWCs 
under Aizawl Urban, Aibawk, Champhai and Khawbung ICDS projects. Weighing 
scales were not in working condition in 19 sampled AWCs under Aizawl Urban, 
Aibawk, Champhai and Khawbung ICDS projects. 
 48 per cent of the of the surveyed parents on behalf of Children (0-6 years) stated 
that enough space was not available in the AWCs while 22 per cent stated that the 
AWC buildings were not in good condition; 
 67 per cent of the surveyed parents on behalf of Children (0-6 years) stated that 
electricity was not available in the AWCs; and 
 Mothers’ Committees played a commendable role in the maintenance of the AWCs. 
The AWWs/ AWHs relied solely on the Mothers’ Committees for requirements 
arising in the AWCs. The Mothers’ Committees voluntarily raised funds for 
maintenance of the AWCs. 
Photographs taken during the Joint Physical Verification (January to March 2024) are 
shown below: 
  
The approach road of Tuipang AWC, Tuipang ICDS 
Project was slippery during rainy seasons which was 
dangerous for children and pregnant women. 
Kanan-II AWC, Champhai ICDS Project did not 
have sufficient playing area outside the Centre. 


23
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
23 
  
Children making use of the little space available for 
playing at Bethel-I AWC, Champhai. 
Cabbages grown at AWC Khuangleng-III AWC, 
Khawbung. 
During the Exit Conference (17 December 2024), the Director, WCD stated that steps 
would be taken for providing all AWCs with basic infrastructure. Electricity will be 
provided through Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme by Power & Electricity 
Department to the greatest extent and those of the remote areas will be met from the Other 
Revenue Expenses of Poshan 2.0. Likewise, water supply in all AWCs in the rural areas 
will be covered through Jal Jeevan Mission by Public Health Engineering Department and 
urban areas will be covered through Other Revenue Expenses of POSHAN 2.0. Further, 
1,600 Anganwadi Centres are being approved for upgradation to Saksham Anganwadi 
Centre and will be equipped with smart television, reverse osmosis water filter, Poshan 
Vatikas and rainwater harvesting system. 
 
Recommendation: The State Government may ensure time-bound execution of 
infrastructure upgradation of the sanctioned 1,600 Anganwadi Centres into Saksham 
Anganwadi Centres by leveraging convergence with concerned line departments. 
1.2.9.3 Insufficient human resources 
There were 27 sanctioned posts under ICDS in Mizoram covering 27 ICDS Projects in 
eleven districts in Mizoram as given in the table below. As per the guidelines of the 
Ministry, DPO is in charge of District ICDS Cell while CDPO is in charge of Project Cell. 
During field audit, it was noted that the Department had shortage of field functionaries at 
critical levels which posed various challenges on the scheme implementation, as shown in 
Table-1.10 below:  
 
 
 
 
The infrastructure and basic facilities in AWCs remained grossly inadequate and did 
not meet ICDS norms and Poshan 2.0 guidelines. The lack of essential utilities, 
educational materials, and proper space undermines the effectiveness of the program 
in delivering quality early childhood care and nutrition. Furthermore, community-
driven maintenance efforts highlight the gaps in government support. 

24
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
24 
Table-1.10: Sanctioned Post vis-à-vis Posts held under ICDS as on 31 March 2023 
Sl. No. Name of Post Sanctioned Post Post Held Vacant Post 
1. District Programme Officer 7 3 4 
2. Child Development Project Officer 27 20 7 
3. Circle Officer 90 65 25 
4. Anganwadi Workers 2,244 2,244 0 
5. Anganwadi Helper 2,244 2,244 0 
Source: Departmental records 
As shown in Table-1.10 above, against the requirement of 11 DPOs for 11 Districts in the 
State, only seven posts were sanctioned out of which only three posts were filled. Besides, 
the posts of seven CDPOs and 25 Circle Officers (CO) were lying vacant. 
The Director of WCD stated that proposals for the recruitment of staff were submitted to 
the State Government. However, no response was received from the State Government. 
The vacant posts of DPOs/ CDPOs were covered up by other DPOs/ CDPOs/ COs, etc., 
who held them as additional charges. 
The Department stated (6 December 2024) that administrative and financial approval 
would be sought from both the Central and State Governments respectively. 
1.2.9.4 Inadequate training infrastructure 
The Broad Framework of ICDS (Annexure-XI) states that training is the most crucial 
element in ICDS, since the achievement of programme goals depends upon the 
effectiveness of frontline workers. At the State level, there are two categories of training 
centres viz., (i) Middle Level Training Centres (MLTCs) for Supervisors and Instructors 
of AWWs/ AWHs and (ii) Anganwadi Workers Training Centres (AWTCs) for AWWs 
and AWHs. Further, Annexure-IV of Poshan 2.0 guidelines states that training for 
Instructors would be given at the National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child 
Development (NIPCCD) while training such as Induction Training, Job Training, etc., for 
CDPOs/ Supervisors/ AWWs/ AWHs should be given in MLTC/ AWTCs. Those States 
which do not have AWTCs/ MLTCs would open them with the approval of the Ministry 
of WCD.  
The DPOs, CDPOs and Supervisors in Mizoram attended Job Training and Capacity 
Building Trainings conducted at NIPPCD, Guwahati. There was no Middle Level Training 
Centre in Mizoram. There was only one Anganwadi Workers Training Centre at Aizawl 
having capacity of 35 trainees per batch. Induction, on-job and refresher courses and 
training based on 21 modules of Incremental Learning Approach were imparted to AWWs/ 
AWHs. Details of training given at the AWTC Aizawl is given in Table-1.11. 
The acute shortage of key field functionaries, particularly DPOs, CDPOs, and Circle 
Officers, seriously impacted the planning, monitoring, and execution of ICDS in 
Mizoram. The burden of additional charges on existing staff weakened supervision 
and decision-making, affecting the quality and efficiency of service delivery. 

25
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
25 
Table-1.11: Training conducted at AWTC Aizawl 
Year Course No. of trainees Expenditure 
(₹ in lakh) 
2018-19 Job Training 315 25.76 Induction 180 
2019-20 Job Training 350 27.71 Induction 160 
2020-21 Job Training 280 19.68 Induction 160 
2021-22 --- Nil  Nil  
2022-23 --- Nil  Nil  
Total 1,445 73.15 
Source: Department’s reply 
During 2021-22 and 2022-23, no training was conducted for AWWs. As there was no 
institute in other districts, the entire field functionaries in the State depend on the training 
centre in Aizawl. Thus, there was insufficient training facilities/ infrastructure in the State. 
During scrutiny of records, it was observed that the Director, Social Welfare Department 
proposed (31 August 2009) to the Ministry for opening of new AWTC/ MLTC. The 
Ministry conveyed (9 June 2010) “in principle” approval of the competent authority for 
opening one AWTC at Lunglei. Formal approval would be subject to finalisation of a 
building by the State Government and further assessment by NIPCCD. It was stated that 
the NIPCCD officials had carried out assessment, but no further communication was 
received, either from the Ministry or the NIPCCD. Therefore, finalisation of AWTC 
building at Lunglei was put on hold.  
During the Exit Conference (17 December 2024), the Director, WCD stated that prior to 
Poshan 2.0, fund for training was released as per State Training Action Plan (STRAP). 
However, after the launch of Poshan 2.0, the focus of the Ministry has shifted to online 
training through Diksha Portal. It was further added that providing training at the AWTC 
has been continuing in the State to augment the online trainings provided by the Ministry. 
The impact of inadequate training infrastructure can be far-reaching. Without proper 
training, workers may rely on outdated information and practices, hindering their ability 
to provide the most effective services. It may lead to a lack of necessary skills in areas like 
growth monitoring and assessment, nutrition counselling and education, early childhood 
education techniques, health and hygiene promotion, community mobilisation and 
communication. Workers with limited training may struggle to implement interventions 
effectively, such as providing appropriate supplementary nutrition, conducting accurate 
health check-ups, or delivering engaging pre-school education. Lack of knowledge and 
skills can lead to missed opportunities for early detection and intervention of health 
problems, developmental delays, and nutritional deficiencies. Inadequate training can 
result in inconsistencies in the quality of services provided across different Anganwadi 
centres. Ineffective service delivery can negatively impact the health and nutrition status 
of children and women, potentially leading to increased malnutrition, illness, and 
developmental delays. 

26
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
26 
 
Recommendation: The State Government may take expeditious steps to operationalise 
the approved Anganwadi Workers Training Centre (AWTC) at Lunglei and establish a 
Middle Level Training Centre (MLTC) with prior approval of the Ministry of Women 
and Child Development. 
1.2.9.5 Non-release of funds as per approved Annual Programme Implementation 
Plan  
Paragraph 7.7 of the Broad Framework of ICDS provides that release of funds and fund 
flow mechanism under the ICDS Mission would be based on the State APIPs. Fund 
transfer will be channelled through the Consolidated Fund of the State. 
During 2018-19 to 2022-23, a total amount of ₹ 362.26 crore was approved in the APIP 
(Central Share of ₹ 326.03 crore and State Matching Share of ₹ 36.23 crore). MoWCD 
sanctioned Centre Share of ₹ 272.21 crore out of which the State released ₹ 295.49 crore 
along with the State Matching Share (SMS) of ₹ 32.20 crore, as given in Table-1.12. There 
was overall shortfall to the tune of ₹ 57.85 crore (CS of ₹ 53.83 crore and SMS of 
₹ 4.02 crore). 
Table-1.12: Release of fund under ICDS 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Approved in APIP Sanctioned 
by Ministry 
Opening 
Balance 
Fund released by State 
Centre 
Share 
State 
share 
Total Centre 
 Share 
State  
Share 
Fund 
Available 
Expen- 
diture 
Closing 
 Balance 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) 
2018-19 43.89 4.88 48.77 52.44 0.36 63.37 4.23 67.96 60.77 7.19 
2019-20 56.69 6.30 62.99 62.15 7.19 66.89 7.11 81.19 68.37 12.82 
2020-21 99.90 11.10 111.00 52.66 12.82 54.48 7.36 74.66 69.57 5.09 
2021-22 58.05 6.45 64.50 62.15 5.09 59.32 3.36 67.77 51.87 15.90 
2022-23 67.50 7.50 75.00 42.81 15.90 51.43 10.14 77.47 77.47 0.00 
Total 326.03 36.23 362.26 272.21   295.49 32.20 369.05 328.05  
Source: Departmental reply 
It was observed that there were discrepancies between the amounts sanctioned by the 
Ministry and the amounts released by the State Government to the Department. The Centre 
Share of funds released by the State exceeded the amounts sanctioned by the Ministry for 
each year during 2018-19 to 2022-23. The Director of WCD stated that due to late receipt 
of funds from the Ministry, all funds could not be released during the respective financial 
years by the State Government. Funds which could not be released during a financial year 
were released in the subsequent years. However, scheme-wise details of fund released 
during the year and the unspent balances released in the subsequent financial years were 
not maintained. It was stated that before bifurcation of the Department, all expenditures 
The training infrastructure in Mizoram was severely inadequate, hindering the 
capacity-building of frontline workers under ICDS. The non-establishment of an 
MLTC and additional AWTCs, despite the growing need, has weakened the skill 
development of AWWs and supervisors. The shift to online training under Poshan 
2.0, without robust on-ground training facilities, risks compromising service quality 
at AWCs. 

27
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
27 
were booked under the Social Welfare Department. After bifurcation (1 April 2020), all 
funds received by the Directorate were recorded in a cash book and no separate cash book/ 
account was maintained for each sub-scheme. It was only after the implementation of 
Public Financial Management System (PFMS) (during 2021-22) that Single Nodal Agency 
Accounts were created for each scheme. 
Further, it was observed that funds were not released by the Ministry as per APIP. For 
instance, during 2020-21, an amount of ₹ 22.15 crore was approved for construction of 
2,215 AWCs in the APIP which was, however, not released by the Ministry. 
On analysis of fund released under supplementary nutrition programme, it was found that 
the amounts approved in the APIP were not fully released with shortages ranging from 
27.14 per cent during 2019-20 to 46.40 per cent during 2022-23. Amount approved in the 
APIPs, and amount released to the Department during 2018-19 to 2022-23 is shown in 
Table-1.13. 
Table-1.13: Fund position under SNP 
(₹ in crore) 
Ye a r  
Amount approved in APIP Fund 
released 
by 
MoWCD 
Amount released by the State Per centage of 
Shortfall in 
release of fund 
{(4-8)/4} *100 
Centre 
(90%) 
State 
(10%) Tot a l Central 
Share 
State 
Share Tot a l 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
2018-19 22.43 2.49 24.92 17.85 15.79 1.76 17.55 29.57 
2019-20 24.67 2.74 27.41 20.42 17.58 2.39 19.97 27.14 
2020-21 27.13 3.02 30.15 22.88 18.80 2.95 21.75 27.86 
2021-22 22.88 2.54 25.42 18.63 14.52 1.03 15.55 38.83 
2022-23 20.64 2.29 22.93 11.44 9.70 2.59 12.29 46.40 
Tot a l 117.75 13.08 130.83 91.22 76.39 10.72 87.11 33.42 
Source: Departmental Reply 
As shown in Table-1.13 above, fund was not released by the Ministry under SNP as per 
the approved APIP. Further, funds released by the Ministry were not fully released to the 
Department during each financial year by the State, resulting in an overall shortfall to the 
tune of ₹ 14.83 crore (₹ 91.22 crore - ₹ 76.39 crore) for the five years period from 
2018-2023 due to the which there was shortfall in supply of nutrition as discussed in 
Paragraph 1.2.6.2. 
The Director of WCD stated that actual release of funds by the Ministry were typically 
lower than the approved APIP. After receipt of fund from the Ministry, the GoM released 
the funds along with the State’s shares to the Department as per the proposals submitted 
by the Directorate of WCD, which in turn, were based on availability of fund with the State 
Government. The Director further stated that non-release of fund for construction of 2,215 
AWCs as per APIP during 2020-21 was due to disruptions caused by COVID-19 
pandemic. 
 
The shortfall in fund releases by both the Ministry and the State Government, coupled 
with delays, irregular fund flow, and poor financial record-keeping, weakened the 
implementation of ICDS programs in Mizoram. The funding gap in SNP raises 
concerns about the adequacy of nutritional support for beneficiaries.  

28
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
28 
Recommendation: Government may institutionalise a system of scheme-wise financial 
tracking, including reconciliation of sanctions and actual releases. 
1.2.10 Deficiency in the preparation of convergence action plans 
A key pillar of the Poshan Abhiyan is to convergence all nutrition related schemes on the 
targeted population. Guidelines for Convergence Action Plan was issued by MoWCD on 
2 November 2018. Section 3.2 of the guidelines provides that Convergence Action Plan 
Committees should be formed at the State, District and Block levels, with a mandate to 
review progress, identify gaps and introduce effective interventions as required, based on 
specific targets. Section 5.1 ibid states that a bottom-up planning process will be adopted 
in the development of the Convergence Action Plan (CAP). The State Convergence Plan 
should be included in the APIP and approved by State Empowered Programme Committee 
(SEPC) before submission to MoWCD. The State Convergence Committee should 
indicate a roll-out plan, assign responsibilities to each department to avoid any overlapping 
or consequent shifting of responsibilities and ensure timely issue of sanctions by each 
Department.  
The State Convergence Committee was formed on 10 January 2019. The District 
Convergence Committees and Block Convergence Committees were formed 15 during 
26 July 2018 to 10 January 2019. The State CAPs were prepared only for three years16 viz., 
2019-20, 2020-21 and 2022-23. 
During field audit, records of assessment and preparation of Block CAPs were not found. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that physical and financial targets were not specified in the 
CAPs. It was also stated that budgets for convergence with ICDS were not allocated by 
the line Departments. Without year-wise physical and financial targets being incorporated, 
CAPs were found inadequate. 
During field audit, it was stated that requirements at the AWCs were submitted by the 
CDPOs to the DPOs in the Project Annual Status Report (PASR) . However, the AWWs 
were not aware whether the requirements were incorporated in the District/ State CAPs. 
The AWWs had to approach the Village Councils/ line department s to get the required 
facilities at the AWCs which, however, could not be provided due to non-availability of 
funds. Thus, it was observed that a bottom-up planning process was not fully adopted in 
the preparation of the CAPs. 
During Joint Physical Verification (January to March 2024), it was observed that the 
AWCs lacked basic infrastructure, implying that need-based plans were not prepared/ 
followed, as shown in Table-1.14. 
 
15 District and Block Convergence Committees were formed on 26 July 2018 (Aizawl, Champhai and 
Mamit districts), on 28 March 2018 (Lawngtlai and Siaha District) 10 January 2019 (Kolasib, Serchhip 
and Lunglei districts 
16  SCAP for the year 2021-22 was not prepared due to Covid pandemic 

29
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
29 
Table-1.14: Status of infrastructure in the sampled AWCs 
Sl. 
No. Name of Project 
No. of AWCs without facilities:  
(Out of 10 sampled AWCs per Project) AWCs 
needing 
repairs Electric 
connection 
Drinking Water 
connection 
Nutrition 
Garden 
Playing 
Area 
1. Aizawl Urban 2 0 9 8 2 
2. Aibawk 4 0 2 7 0 
3. Darlawn 9 0 8 6 2 
4. Champhai 6 3 6 9 6 
5. Khawbung 10 0 1 6 4 
6. Siaha 6 5 3 8 4 
7. Tuipang 9 0 3 5 5 
Total 46 8 32 49 23 
Source: Joint Physical Verification 
The Director of WCD stated (27 June 2024) that a Convergence Cell was constituted 
(14 June 2023) under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, SWTA & WCD to regulate the 
functioning of the Convergence Committees. It was also stated that targets were set in 
consultation with the line departments CAP for the year 2024-25. 
 
Recommendation: The Department may adopt a bottom-up planning approach in the 
preparation of Convergence Action Plans (CAP). The Department may also specify the 
Physical and Financial targets and earmarked budget for all the interventions by the 
respective line departments. 
1.2.10.1 Execution of works not included in the Convergence Action Plan 
In the State Convergence Action Plan, Rural Development Department was given the role 
of construction and maintenance of AWCs. The list of works proposed during 2018-19 to 
2022-23, however, were not included in the State/ District/ Block CAPs. 
During 2018-19, works for upgradation of 600 AWCs (₹ 12.00 crore17) were executed by 
the Directorate of WCD under Anganwadi Service (AWS) schemes. Again, during 2022-
23, repair/ renovation etc., works in 376 AWCs (₹ 11.09 crore) under 10 ICDS projects 
were executed by the erstwhile Social Welfare Department under Pradhan Mantri Adi 
Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAAGY). These works were not incorporated in the Convergence 
Action Plans and records related to execution of the works were not maintained by the 
Directorate of WCD.  
 
17 The works were sanctioned for the year 2017-18 @ ₹ 2.00 lakh per AWC 
The implementation of the Convergence Action Plan (CAP) under Poshan Abhiyan 
was ineffective due to gaps in planning, lack of financial commitment and 
non-implementation of a bottom-up approach. The absence of Block-level CAPs, 
non-inclusion of AWW inputs, and non-allocation of funds by line departments 
severely weakened the convergence effort. Without clear physical and financial 
targets, a defined budget, and structured accountability mechanisms, the intended 
benefits of the ICDS-NHM convergence could not be realized effectively. 

30
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
30 
Records related to selection and execution of works were not available for Audit 
verification. During Joint Physical Verification (January to March 2024), it was found that 
23 out of the 70 sampled AWCs needed urgent repairs (Table-1.14), which however, were 
not taken up under Convergence Action Plan. Proposals for repair work of the AWCs were 
not incorporated in the Annual Action Plan/ Convergence Action Plans for the years 2018-
19 to 2022-23. A comprehensive list of works executed under various schemes was also 
not maintained by the Directorate of WCD. It was doubtful that priority list of works was 
prepared and works were planned for execution, based on the urgency of requirements. 
Non-inclusion of the works in the CAPs and execution of the works by the Department 
other than the Rural Development Department was irregular.  
During the Exit Conference (17 December 2024), the Director, WCD stated that works for 
upgradation of 600 AWCs was sanctioned in 2017-18, prior to implementation of 
Convergence Action Plans. It was also stated that repair/ renovation works of 376 AWCs 
under PMAAGY were executed by the SW&TA Department and the WCD was not 
involved in the process. It was also added that the Directorate of WCD retained the role of 
‘repair and maintenance’ of AWCs while the role of ‘construction’ of AWCs was assigned 
to the Rural Development Department. 
The reply is not acceptable as works such as repair/ renovation of AWCs were executed 
by different Departments without proper coordination. Non maintenance of 
comprehensive list of works viz., construction, repair and upgradation of AWCs is fraught 
with the risk of overlapping claims of execution of works under various schemes in the 
future. 
The lack of planning, documentation, and coordination in the execution of AWC 
infrastructure works compromised the effectiveness of the ICDS infrastructure 
development. The irregular execution of works by departments other than the 
designated Rural Development Department further weakened accountability. 
Systematic planning, transparent prioritisation, and strict adherence to CAP 
guidelines are essential to ensure efficient utilisation of funds and timely 
infrastructure development at AWCs. 
1.2.11 Improper storage of food items 
Paragraph 5.1 under Chapter-3 of the operational guidelines for Food Safety and Hygiene 
in ICDS states that food materials should not be stored directly on the floor as it can absorb 
moisture and chances of contamination and spoilage increase. Shifting racks/ pallets 
should be used such that they are reasonably well above the floor level and away from the 
wall so as to facilitate effective cleaning and prevent harbouring of pests, insects or 
rodents. 
It was observed that food items were stored directly on the floor without using shifting 
racks/ pallets at Nutrition Godowns at Aizawl Urban, Champhai, Khawbung, Siaha and 
Tuipang ICDS Projects as shown in photographs below:  

31
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
31 
 
Nutrition kept directly on floor at Nutrition Godown 
of Siaha Urban ICDS Project. 
Nutrition kept directly on floor at Nutrition Godown 
of Khawbung Urban ICDS Project. 
Further, it was also observed that sufficient space and facilities for proper storage of food 
items in the AWCs were not available. Food items were stored in open racks thereby 
putting them at risk of contamination/ infestation by rodents. This lackadaisical attitude in 
storing the foods items may lead to serious medical emergencies for beneficiaries. 
 
Open, unsafe and improper food storage facility (next to 
toilet) at Zawngtetui, Khawbung ICDS Project. 
Food items were kept in the seating Hall of beneficiaries at 
Venghlui-I AWC, Aizawl Urban ICDS Project. 
During Joint Physical Verification (January to March 2024), the AWWs/ AWHs of all the 
sampled AWCs stated that funds were not provided for procuring storage facilities for the 
AWCs. As the Department did not provide funds, the AWWs/ AWHs had to approach the 
Village Councils and the Mothers’ Committees for such requirements.  
The Director, WCD stated (6 May 2024) that AWCs were constructed during 2003 and 
2006 with meagre amount of ₹ 1.25 lakh and ₹ 1.75 lakh respectively. There was no 
separate provision for construction of nutrition storage facilities. The AWCs, where 
Mothers’ Committees could not provide nutrition storage facilities had no option but to 
store the food items directly on the floor. 
The Department's response is not tenable because as per Poshan 2.0 scheme guidelines, 
fund should be provided to AWCs i.e., ₹ 2,000 per annum for Administrative expenses (to 
be utilised at AWC), ₹ 3,000 per annum for Maintenance of AWC building and ₹ 10,000 
once in five years for Equipment/ furniture, but such funding was not provided to all 70 
sampled Anganwadi centres during the period covered in audit. 
During the Exit Conference (17 December 2024) the Department stated that instructions 
were issued (December 2024) to all the AWCs to ensure compliance to guidelines for 
proper storage of food items. It was also stated that the village coordination committees 


32
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
32 
also play a crucial role in proper maintenance of AWCs including provisions for safe 
storage of food items. 
Recommendation: Sufficient fund may be allocated to the AWCs as per guidelines for 
construction of adequate storage facilities. Storage of food items may be done as per 
guidelines to prevent contamination, spoilage and wastage of resources. 
1.2.12 Improper packaging and labelling of food items 
Paragraph 4 under Chapter 4 of the operational guidelines for Food Safety and Hygiene 
for Supplementary Nutrition in ICDS states that the packaging materials of all food 
products should be such that it provides protection to prevent contamination and damage. 
Packaging material should be those which are permitted under the Food Safety and 
Standards Act & Regulations viz., containers made of plastic materials should conform to 
the Indian Standard Specifications. Further, packets should carry proper labelling and 
information such as batch number, date of packing, best before date, etc. 
During Audit, it was observed that the packaging materials of HP Soya Noodles and Wheat 
Flour (Atta) supplied by M/s ART Industry, Zuangtui, Aizawl, were very poor. It was 
observed that packaging materials having permitted specifications were not used in 
packaging of food items supplied under SNP. 
Labelling of basic information such as date of packing, date of expiry, best before date, 
etc., were not available on the packages of Wheat Flour (Atta), HP Soya Noodle, Neumix 
EDFF and Groundnut. As a result, it was doubtful that the quality of the food items 
conformed to the prescribed specifications. 
  
Torn package of HP Noodles. Manufacture, expiry dates were not printed. 
  
Expired toned milk at Hualngohmun AWC, Aibawk. Torn wheat flour bag at Thingsen AWC, Siaha. 
During Joint Physical Verification (February 2024) with the representatives of the 
Department, expired toned milk packets were found at Vengsang AWC-V and Kanan 


33
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
33 
AWC-II (Champhai ICDS Project), Leisenzo AWC-II under Khawbung ICDS Project), 
Hualngohmun AWC and Melriat AWC-II under Aibawk ICDS Project and food items 
were stored in torn packets in the AWCs.  
The Director, WCD stated (6 May 2024) that, so far, no complaint or grievance was 
received regarding children getting sick due to consumption of expired milk/ food items 
with no labelling. However, the Department will take steps wherever necessary to improve 
the labelling of the food items. 
The Department's response did not adequately address the risk that consumption of expired 
food items poses to the well-being of the beneficiaries. Proper food safety measures are 
essential, regardless of the absence of complaints as consumption of contaminated and 
substandard food items could have fatal consequences. The Department needs to 
proactively adopt food safety norms as prescribed. 
During the Exit Conference (17 December 2024), the Department stated that a Technical 
Committee was constituted in October 2024 to look into the matter to ensure supply of 
healthy food items. It was also stated that all suppliers are now instructed to provide a QR 
Code so that composition, manufacturing date, nutrition content could be tracked by 
AWWs and beneficiaries. It was further added that Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition 
Committee (VHSNC), Circle Officer and CDPO shall take necessary checks to prevent 
deterioration of food items on monthly basis as per Scheme Guidelines of Mission 
Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0. 
Non-compliance with prescribed packaging and labelling standards, along with the 
distribution of expired food items, poses serious health risks to ICDS beneficiaries. 
The Department’s passive approach to food safety is unacceptable, as substandard 
and expired food can have fatal consequences. 
Recommendation: The Department may stop procurement of items without proper 
labelling and those that do not fulfil the packaging standards. Food items may be 
distributed timely to prevent deterioration due to prolonged storage. 
1.2.13 Usage of white sugar as sweetening agent 
As per Paragraph 3.4 of Poshan 2.0 guidelines, white sugar should not be used and only 
jaggery should be used for sweetening. 
During Joint Physical Verification (January to March 2024), it was found that all the 70 
sampled AWCs were using white sugar as sweetening agent. Jaggery is considered a 
healthier alternative to sugar due to its less refined nature and retains some vitamins and 
minerals, such as iron, magnesium and potassium, which are usually lost during sugar 
refinement. Further, consuming white sugar since childhood could lead to obesity, high 
blood pressure and Type-2 diabetes which poses high risk of heart disease. 
The Department stated that there was no industry/ entrepreneur that could supply jaggery 
on a large scale. However, there was a plan for procuring jaggery through fund allocated 
for Locally Available foods and the Department was on the look out for local suppliers for 
the item. 

34
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
34 
 
Audit Objective-3: Whether effective awareness was created among the targeted 
beneficiaries under ICDS scheme. 
 
1.2.14 Information Education and Communication (IEC) Activities 
Clause 4 of Annexure-III of the Broad Framework states that Advocacy and Education & 
Communication would be used for promoting early child development, maternal & child 
care and nutrition for creating an enabling environment by the ICDS Mission. With the 
aim of enhancing the community participation and ownership in ICDS, the following 
advocacy and IEC activities would be carried out to achieve this vision: 
 Sensitisation and engagement of PRIs/ Mothers Committees/ SHGs on nutrition and 
child development; 
 Social mobilisation campaign in partnership with Song and Drama Division of 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting; 
 Use of mass media for awareness generation; 
 Awareness campaign/ village contact drives through local/ folk media; 
 Inter-Personal Communication (IPC); and 
 Voluntary action. 
As per the scheme guidelines for National Nutrition Mission (Clause 4.4.2.3) and Poshan 
2.0 (Annexure-II), the IEC activities would be carried out through print media, television, 
All India Radio and social media campaigns. 
Conclusion: 
The implementation of the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) 
in Mizoram suffered from systemic deficiencies in physical infrastructure, 
human resource availability, training capacity and financial management. 
Despite population growth, no new Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) were 
established post-2014, resulting in overburdened field functionaries and 
reduced outreach. A majority of AWCs lacked essential amenities such as 
adequate space, electricity, water, and sanitation, impairing service 
delivery. Acute shortages of key supervisory personnel and absence of 
adequate training infrastructure further impeded effective planning and 
monitoring. Moreover, persistent gaps in the release of funds against 
approved plans and non-adherence to prescribed packaging and food 
safety norms compromised the nutritional and health outcomes of 
beneficiaries. The absence of convergence in planning and lack of 
structured bottom-up inputs weakened the multi-sectoral approach 
envisaged under Poshan Abhiyaan. These deficiencies collectively 
undermined the objectives of ICDS in ensuring holistic early childhood 
care and nutrition. 

35
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
35 
IEC activities were taken up through the following strategies/ approaches: 
(a) Community-Based Approaches: 
The Department stated that house-to-house surveys were carried out by AWWs to raise 
awareness among the target group. Monthly sessions, small group meetings of mothers/ 
Mahila Mandals, ‘community home visits’ and ‘take home ration’ days, etc., were being 
held periodically for imparting nutrition, health and hygiene education to the beneficiaries. 
Mothers’ Committees in the villages played a commendable role in contributing funds, 
equipment, furniture, etc., in the implementation of ICDS. 
(b) Communication Channels: 
To assist the AWWs in the dissemination of information and awareness of beneficiaries, 
audio-visual and electronic media were used, demonstrations were used to explain 
complex information in a simple and engaging way. The Department stated that 
programmes and talk shows were organised in Doordarshan Kendra and All India Radio 
stations. Nutrition Awareness Campaigns were broadcast in the form of media scroll and 
advertisements in local cable networks viz., Zonet and LPS. Poshan Maah and Poshan 
Pakhwada were organised every year in the month of September and March respectively. 
Activities such as awareness drive in print media, television, All India Radio and social 
media were undertaken under Rashtriya Poshan Maah . During Poshan Pakhwada , 
activities such as webinars for prevention and management of anaemia, cooking 
competitions for women, etc., were organised. Social media and digital platforms were 
leveraged to disseminate information and engage with younger audiences. Video clips 
were uploaded on a YouTube channel and Instagram handle viz., “ Poshan Abhiyan 
Mizoram” for easy access by the beneficiaries. 
Details of activities, however, were not maintained in the Poshan Tracker. Expenditure 
incurred on IEC activities during 2018-19 to 2022-23 is shown in Table-1.15. 
Table- 1.15: Expenditure under IEC 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Year Expenditure incurred  
Anganwadi Services Poshan Abhiyan Total  
1. 2018-19 Record not available with the 
Directorate of WCD 
1.50 1.50 
2. 2019-20 1.52 1.52 
3. 2020-21 0 0.90 0.90 
4. 2021-22 0.10 0.20 0.30 
5. 2022-23 1.17 1.76 2.93 
Total 1.27 5.88 7.15 
Source: Departmental reply 
(c) Collaboration and Coordination: 
The Directorate of WCD in collaboration with the NHM and NGOs played an important 
role in organising orientation programmes at grassroot level for workers such as teachers, 
AWWs, ASHA and Health Workers. IEC materials were disseminated across public and 
private health facilities. Awareness generation was also done through public 
announcement system and various social media platforms, etc. Moreover, nutrition and 
health education training comprised of basic health, nutrition and development, infant 

36
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
36 
feeding practices, utilisation of health services, management of child diseases, family 
planning and environment sanitation were imparted to beneficiaries through monthly 
sessions, small group meetings of Mothers/ Mahila Mandals, community and home visits, 
THR days, etc. 
 
Recommendation: The Department may institute a robust documentation and reporting 
mechanism by mandating real-time entry of all IEC-related activities in the Poshan 
Tracker or a centralised MIS. 
Audit Objective-4: Whether the delivery of services through ICDS was effective, 
efficient and economical in achieving the desired outcomes 
 
1.2.15 Under achievement of target 
MoWCD issued (2 November 2018) guidelines for CAP in which targets were set to be 
covered under ICDS Mission by 2022 i.e., during three years from 2019-20 to 2021-22. 
As per the guidelines, the ICDS Mission aimed to bring down stunting in children (0 to 
6 years age group) from 38.40 per cent during 2015-16 to 25 per cent by 2022, to reduce 
anaemia among women and adolescent girls in the age group of 15-49 years and to reduce 
low birth weight. The primary goals of the POSHAN Abhiyan (ICDS Mission) as per 
paragraph 4.1 of the guidelines were as given in Table-1.16. 
Table-1.16: Primary objective of POSHAN Abhiyan 
Sl. 
No. Objective Target to be achieved by 2022  
@ annual target from 2019-20 
1. Prevent and reduce Stunting 
in children (0-6 years) By 6 per cent @ 2 per cent p.a. 
2. Prevent and reduce Under-nutrition 
in children (0-6 years) By 6 per cent @ 2 per cent p.a. 
3. 
Reduce the prevalence of Anaemia among: 
i. Children (6-59 months) By 9 per cent @ 3 per cent p.a. 
ii. Women and Adolescent Girls (15-49 years) By 9 per cent @ 3 per cent p.a. 
4. Reduce Low Birth Weight  By 6 per cent @ 2 per cent p.a. 
Source: Guidelines for Convergence Action Plan 
It was observed that achievements made during the period against the targets under Poshan 
Abhiyan (ICDS Mission) were not on record. The State had not prepared CAP for the year 
2021-22 without which it could not be ascertained whether the State achieved the target 
by 2022 as per guidelines issued by MoWCD. 
Conclusion: 
Although the Department undertook various IEC initiatives using mass media, 
digital platforms, and community-based approaches to enhance awareness 
under the ICDS Scheme, the absence of systematic documentation and data 
entry in the Poshan Tracker impeded the ability to evaluate outreach 
effectiveness. This shortcoming undermined evidence-based planning and 
course correction in communication strategy. 

37
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
37 
Further, achievements made during 2020-21 and 2022-23 were not shown in the State 
CAP. Indicators/ yardsticks to assess the outcome of the schemes were also not developed 
and there was no mechanism for monitoring the outcome against the yardsticks. Thus, 
targets vis-à-vis achievements during the period could not be analysed in audit. As per the 
State CAPs, the year-wise target and achievement in the State is given in Table-1.17. 
Table-1.17: Targets and achievement in respect of the years for which the State 
CAPs were prepared. 
Sl. 
No. Objectives 
2019-20 2020-21 2022-23 
Target 
(per cent) 
Actual 
(per cent) 
Target 
(per cent) 
Actual 
(per cent) 
Target 
(per cent) 
Actual 
(per cent) 
1. Reduce Stunting in children 
(0-6 years) 22.10 19.10 17.10 NA 25 NA 
2. Reduce Under-nutrition  
(Under-weight) children 6.00 4.00 2.00 NA 10 NA 
3. 
Reduce the prevalence of Anaemia among: 
(i) Children (6 to 59 month) 10.30 7.30 4.30 NA NA NA 
(ii) Adolescent Girls 15.80 6.00 4.00 NA 30 NA 
(iii) PW&LM NA 28 NA 
4. Reduce Low Birth Weight  0.00 5.00 3.00 NA 03 NA 
Source: Departmental records 
On comparison of State CAP 2019-20 with the National Family Health Survey   
(NFHS)-5, it was found that there were discrepancies between the two records on stunting, 
under-nutrition, anaemia, etc. The sources of data used in the State CAP were not available 
for verification. Thus, figures reported in the NFHS reports were considered in audit. On 
comparison of the NFHS-4 (2015-16) and NFHS-5 (2019-20) reports, it was found that 
prevalence of stunting, wasting and under nutrition among children and anaemia among 
women and children has increased in the State, as given in Table-1.18.  
Table-1.18: Status as per NFHS reports 
(Figures in per cent) 
Sl. No. Objectives NFHS-4 
(2015-16) 
NFHS-5 
(2019-20) 
1. Stunting in children (0-6 years) 28.10 28.90 
2. Wasting in children (0-6 years) 6.10 9.80 
3. Underweight in children (0-6 years) 12.00 12.70 
4. Malnutrition among women (15 to 49 years) 8.40 5.30 
5. 
Anaemia   
1) Children (6-59 months) 19.30 46.40 
2) Non pregnant women (15-49 years) 24.70 34.80 
3) Pregnant women (15-49 years) 27.00 34.00 
Source: NFHS Reports 
Increase in the percentage of anaemic children and women in the State, despite the various 
measures taken up under various schemes such as ICDS, NHM, etc., was a cause of 
concern. 
During the Exit Conference (17 December 2024), the Department stated that data for 
NFHS-5 was collected when Poshan 2.0 was in its initial stage of implementation. Progress 
made thereafter was reflected in the Poshan Tracker. However, data of the Poshan Tracker 
prior to 2023 was not reliable. It was further stated that anaemia testing kits were procured 

38
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
38 
by the Department and mass testing was conducted wherein progress (reduction in anaemia 
cases) has been noticed. 
The State could not track and document progress against POSHAN Abhiyan targets 
and nutrition indicators worsened despite multiple interventions. Data 
inconsistencies between State CAPs and NFHS reports raise concerns regarding 
transparency and the effectiveness of monitoring systems. The sharp rise in anaemia, 
stagnation in stunting, and increase in under nutrition highlight serious shortcomings 
in ICDS and NHM implementation. 
Recommendation: The Department may identify the reasons for increase in prevalence 
of stunting, wasting and under nutrition among children and anaemia among women 
and children and address the issue on priority. 
1.2.16 Conclusion 
ICDS was implemented with heavy reliance on digital applications in which data played a 
key role for planning as well as monitoring of the scheme. The transition from ICDS-CAS 
to Poshan Tracker belatedly in April 2022, was poorly managed, leading to critical data 
loss and affecting the ability to monitor and evaluate ICDS implementation effectively. 
Persistent technical, connectivity and language-related challenges further hindered real-
time data entry, impacting the accuracy of beneficiary tracking and service delivery. Non-
redressal of these long-standing issues indicates a need for stronger digital governance and 
stakeholder support in ICDS implementation . Due to non-availability of data on 
implementation of the scheme during the period 2018-19 to 2022-23, proper analysis could 
not be carried out to assess the impact of the scheme on child nutrition and health outcomes 
in the State. There was shortage of staff at critical levels such as District Programme 
Officers (DPO), Child Development Project Officers (CDPO) and Circle officers, which 
affected the planning process i.e., preparation of Annual Plans/ Annual Programme 
Implementation Plans (APIPs)/ Convergence Action Plans (CAPs) as well as monitoring 
and review of scheme implementation. Physical and Financial targets were not specified 
in the CAPs and funds were not provided in the Budgets of the respective line 
Departments. There was lack of basic facilities such as electric connection, drinking water 
connection, etc., noticed in the physically verified Anganwadi Centres (AWCs). Supply of 
supplementary nutrition under Supplementary Nutrition Programme was not in conformity 
with the prescribed Nutrition Norm and item-wise requirements per beneficiary per day 
for 300 days in a year were not worked out. Nutrition supplied were not based on the 
nutrition requirements of beneficiaries but on the basis of the availability of funds and the 
rates quoted by the suppliers. Audit noticed improper storage and labelling of food items 
in the AWCs. 
The State did not have adequate training facilities at the State and District levels for 
strengthening the capacity building and training of field functionaries. The Poshan Tracker 
platform also required upgradation to incorporate mechanisms for effective monitoring 
and feedback. 

39
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
39 
There was an increase in the prevalence of stunting, wasting and under-nutrition among 
children, as well as anaemia among women and children and the State did not adequately 
monitor or effectively address these issues despite multiple interventions. 
1.2.17 Recommendations 
The State Government may- 
(i) instruct the Department to strengthen data management and reporting systems by 
mandating real-time entry of service delivery data through the Poshan Tracker 
App, ensuring availability of compatible smartphones to all AWWs, conducting 
periodic data audits and integrating ICDS and NHM databases. The State 
Government may also instruct the Department to develop and implement a robust 
data governance strategy, including seamless migration of legacy data, offline-
compatible data entry modules for remote areas, multilingual user interfaces, and 
periodic data validation protocols; 
(ii) instruct the Department to adopt a bottom-up planning approach in the 
preparation of Convergence Action Plans (CAP). The State Government may also 
instruct the Department to specify the Physical and Financial targets and 
earmarked budget for all the interventions by the respective line departments; 
(iii) ensure time-bound execution of infrastructure upgradation of the sanctioned 
1,600 Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) into Saksham AWCs by leveraging 
convergence with concerned line departments; 
(iv) direct the Department to establish a structured and demand-based procurement 
and feeding mechanism by: (a) preparing annual Supplementary Nutritution 
Progrmme (SNP) supply plans based on updated beneficiary data and nutrition 
norms under Poshan 2.0, (b) ensuring advance release of funds linked to feeding 
calendars, (c) instituting buffer stock provisions to prevent disruptions, and (d) 
monitoring nutrient delivery against norms through monthly calorie and protein 
gap analysis at the project level; 
(v) take expeditious steps to operationalise the approved Anganwadi Workers 
Training Centre (AWTC) at Lunglei and establish a Middle Level Training 
Centre (MLTC) with prior approval of the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development; and 
(vi) instruct the Department to identify the reasons for increase in prevalence of 
stunting, wasting and under nutrition among children and anaemia among 
women and children and address the issue on priority. 
  

40
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
40 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS 
 
HIGHER & TECHNICAL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
 
1.3 Irregular payments 
 
The Department made an irregular salary payments of ₹ 3.88 crore to an Associate 
Professor and eight regular Professors who did not perform their official duty 
As per FR 17(1) of the Fundamental Rules and Supplementary Rules (FRSR), Part-I (as 
adopted by Government of Mizoram) an officer shall begin to draw the pay and allowances 
attached to his tenure of a post with effect from the date when he assumes the duties of 
that post, and shall cease to draw them as soon as he ceases to discharge those duties, 
provided that an officer who is absent from duty without any authority shall not be entitled 
to any pay and allowances during the period of such absence. 
A. Irregular Salary payment of ₹ 2.02 crore to an Associate Professor  
Test check (November 2022) of records of the Principal, Government Kolasib College, 
Kolasib under Higher and Technical Education Department, Government of Mizoram 
revealed that the salary of a regular employee18 was paid after deducting a certain sum and 
the deducted amount was paid to persons who were engaged to represent/ substitute the 
regular employee during the period of his unauthorised absence. As per information 
furnished (10 October 2024) by the Principal, Government Kolasib College, Kolasib a sum 
of ₹ 20,00019, ₹ 30,00020 and ₹ 50,000 21 were deducted and paid to the substitutes each 
month from the net salary of the regular employee from March 2017 to July 2024 (except 
for the month of February & March 2019) as detailed in Appendix-1.5. However, there 
was no record to indicate that the matter was reported to the higher authority by the College 
administration and there was no authorisation of the competent authority for engagement 
of the substitutes during the period of unauthorised absence. Thus, the regular employee 
was paid his salary even though he did not perform his duty in person and without any 
competent authorisation for his absence from duty to warrant the payment of his salary. 
Thus, the expenditure of ₹ 2.02 crore on the gross salary of the employee who did not 
perform his official duty was in contravention of FR 17(1) of FRSR and irregular. 
Further, as can be seen in Appendix-1.5, an amount of ₹ 25.80 lakh was paid out of the 
amount deducted from the salary of the Associate Professor to the persons who were not 
regular employees but who were hired to represent/ substitute the Associate Professor 
without any competent authorisation during the same period i.e., from March 2017 to 
July 2024. 
Thus, payment of salary to the Associate Professor who was on unauthorised absence and 
paying portions of his salary to persons hired as substitutes is in blatant violation of the 
principle of ‘No work, No Pay’ which is embodied under FR 17(1) of FRSR as ‘an officer 
 
18 Shri D. Purkayastha, Associate Professor 
19  Paid to Smt. Jacqueline Lalthlengliani, MSc (Chemistry) from March 2017 to January 2019 
20  Paid to Smt. Lalrammawii, MSc (Chemistry) from April 2019 to September 2023 
21  Paid to Shri Mathew G. Lalzawmliana from October 2023 to July 2024 

41
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
41 
who is absent from duty without any authority shall not be entitled to any pay and 
allowances during the period of such absence’. 
The matter was reported to the Department and Government in July 2024 and the State 
Government while agreeing to the Audit observation stated (14 October 2024) that 
preliminary inquiry was conducted by the Joint Director (Administration), Higher and 
Technical Education on 18 September 2024. It was also stated that as per the inquiry report, 
proxy engagement was resorted to in good faith for the benefit of the students of the 
Chemistry Department, as the Associate Professor who had an accident on 02 February 
2001 with a head injury could not perform his official duties regularly due to his health 
problem. Ultimately, engagement of proxy was arranged collectively on a verbal decision 
of the College Principal and the College Executive Committee without obtaining 
permission from the authority. The Government further stated that due to the collective 
decision of the previous and present Principals and the College Executive Committee, 
fixation of responsibility and initiating disciplinary proceedings against a particular 
Principal or members of the College Executive Committee appears not feasible. It was 
further stated that as a corrective measure the monthly salary of the Associate Professor 
was credited directly into his account and his voluntary retirement is under process at the 
Government level. 
The reply of the Government is, however, not tenable as the action of the College is in 
violation of the extant Rules and tantamount to provision of undue benefit to the Associate 
Professor who could have addressed his condition through other legally available means. 
Further, the reply was silent on the action taken to recover the irregular payment of his 
salary and whether the Associate Professor has resumed his official duty to warrant the 
direct crediting of his monthly salary into his Bank Account. 
B. Irregular salary payment of ₹ 1.86 crore to eight regular Professors  
A review was carried out of the records of the office of the Principal, Government Kolasib 
College, Kolasib.  The review revealed discrepancies of salary payments to eight regular 
Professors for the period from July 2019 to June 2022 between the net payable amounts 
recorded in the acquittance roll and the actual amounts disbursed as per the bank payment 
statements/ schedules. These short payments were made without any documented 
justification. 
In response, the Principal, Government Kolasib College stated (27 November 2024) that 
the short payment was due to deduction made at the rate of ₹ 15,000 per month from the 
salaries in respect of six Professors. Salaries of the other two Professors were deducted 
at the rate of ₹ 20,000 per month for their substitutes. Details of the substitutes was not 
provided to Audit. It was further stated that the amount deducted from their salaries were 
paid to his/ her substitutes in full every month. It was also added that the substitutes were 
paid in cash prior to August 2021. So, it can be concluded that the eight Professors drew 
gross salary of ₹ 1.86 crore without performing their duties and without any authorised 
leave as detailed in Appendix-1.6. However, there was no record of authorisation from 
any higher authority for the College Administration to engage substitutes, deduct the 
salaries of the eight Professors and make payment from the same to the substitutes.  

42
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
42 
A review of records revealed that the College Administration irregularly disbursed salary 
payments totalling ₹ 14.76 lakh to 11 individuals designated as Assistant Professors 
through their bank accounts, despite the fact that their names were not found in the 
College's official employment records or payroll. These payments were made for varying 
periods between August 2021 and October 2022 without any documented justification as 
detailed in Appendix-1.7. 
On this being pointed out, the College Administration stated (November 2022) in the exit 
conference that payment of salaries to the individuals who were not on the payroll were 
made based on the substitution arrangement made by the College against Professors who 
were on leave in the interest of the College and Students. It was, however, further stated 
that authorisation of the competent authority for engagement of the substitutes as well as 
sanction of leave were not obtained since no such leave was applied to the competent 
authority by the regular Professors. It was also stated that the amounts deducted from the 
salaries of the Professors engaging substitutes were transferred to the College Main 
Account and thereafter transferred to the bank account of the substitutes without any bill/ 
voucher or challan.  
The replies indicates that the College Administration deducted salaries from regular 
Professors who were absent without authorised leave and had not discharged their official 
duties. As the deducted amounts were first credited to the College's Main Account, it is 
evident that the engagement of substitutes was carried out with the full knowledge of the 
administration. However, the Audit could not establish a direct one-to-one correlation 
between the 11 individuals engaged as Assistant Professors and the absent regular 
Professors. Additionally, due to the non-availability of records, complete details regarding 
the engagement of substitutes for each Professor on unauthorised absence could not be 
verified. Furthermore, the specific amounts deducted for engaging substitutes could not be 
ascertained, as the deductions were not distinctly recorded. 
The matter was reported to the Department and Government in September 2024. The State 
Government, while agreeing with the Audit observation stated (18 October 2024) that, 
with the intention to institute appropriate disciplinary action, show cause notices had been 
issued to 10 officials including two retired officials 22 to seek their explanation as to why 
the Government should not initiate action to recover the salaries paid to them without 
performing their official duties, for remaining on unauthorised leave and for engaging 
substitutes. On further enquiry, the State Government, while providing a copy of the 
notices issued (18 October 2024) to 10 officials and their respective explanation/ reply, 
stated (02 December 2024) that the case is being processed in the Department for further 
necessary action. It was also intimated (12 December 2024) that the Government had 
decided to initiate Disciplinary Proceedings against the then two Principals (retired) of the 
College and the eight regular Professors under Rule 14 (procedure for imposing major 
penalties) of the Central Civil Service (Classification, Conduct and Appeal) Rules, 1965. 
However, the progress of the Disciplinary Proceedings has not been intimated (May 2025). 
 
22 Dr C. Lalmuankima, acting Principal during the period from 01 July 2017 to 31 July 2021 and 
Pu T. Zahmingliana, acting Principal during the period from 01 August 2021 to 30 May 2024 

43
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
43 
The findings highlight serious financial mismanagement within the College, including 
unauthorised salary payments, irregular deductions, and lack of documentation. This 
indicates weak internal controls in payroll management and fund utilisation. 
The engagement of substitutes and unauthorised salary payments to them violated 
government rules governing service conditions, salary disbursement, and leave sanctions.  
The initiation of disciplinary proceedings suggests that the implicated officials could face 
recovery of salaries, penalties, or even termination from service. This case underscores the 
need for a systemic audit of payroll and Human Resource practices across educational 
institutions in Mizoram. 
Recommendations:  
(i) The Department/ State Government should initiate action to recover the salaries 
paid to the employees who did not perform their official duties and were on 
unauthorised absence; 
(ii) The Department/ State Government should initiate appropriate disciplinary action 
against defaulting officials in a timely manner; and 
(iii) The College should implement a robust system for monitoring attendance, leave 
record and payroll management. It should ensure that all leave applications and 
approvals are documented and maintained. 
SCHOOL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
 
1.4 Irregular payment 
 
The Department made irregular salary payment of ₹ 1.28 crore to three employees 
who did not perform their official duty 
As per FR 17(1) of the Fundamental Rules and Supplementary Rules (FRSR), Part-I (as 
adopted by the Government of Mizoram) an officer shall begin to draw the pay and 
allowances attached to his tenure in a post with effect from the date when he assumes his 
duties in that post, and shall cease to draw them as soon as he ceases to discharge those 
duties. The rules provide that an officer who is absent from duty without any authority 
shall not be entitled to any pay and allowances during the period of such absence. 
Test check (March 2024) of the records of the Director, School Education, Aizawl under 
the School Education Department, Government of Mizoram revealed that salaries were 
paid to three regular employees, who did not perform their official duties, being on 
unauthorised absence during the period from January 2016 to September 2024. The 
details of the employees and the period of unauthorised absence are given in the 
Table - 1.19. 
 
 
 

44
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
44 
Table-1.19: Details of Government Employees drawing their salaries while on 
unauthorised absence 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Government Employees 
and their place of posting 
Designation and 
Pay level 
Unauthorised absence 
1. Asem Labanga Singh 23, Government 
Zohmun High School, Zohmun 
Teacher (level-10) From 01-01-2016 to 28-08-2024 
2. Thoudam Jadumani Singh 24, 
Government Sawleng High School, 
Sawleng 
Teacher (level-10) From 15-05-2023 to 20-09-2024 
3. Thiyam Ibochou Singh 25, Government 
Higher Secondary School, Siaha 
Lecturer (level-11) From 01-06-2023 to 11-04-2024 
Source: Departmental records 
It was also observed that proxies/ substitutes were engaged and increments were awarded 
in the month of July every year during the period of unauthorised absence. 
The Director, School Education stated (9 December 2024) that the State Government 
notified (19 June 2024) an Office Memorandum (OM) directing all Government 
employees engaging proxies/ substitutes to return to their respective posts within a period 
of 30 days. The notification directed that all Government servants failing to return to duty 
within the stipulated period would be treated as absence without authorisation. The 
Director further stated that in the case of Shri Asem Labanga Singh who joined duty on 29 
August 2024, the State Government decided (7 November 2024) to adjust the period from 
the date of issue of the OM up to the date of joining duty with Earned Leaved. On the other 
hand, in the case of Shri Thiyam Ibochou Singh, who joined duty on 12 April 2024 (prior 
to the OM notification), no leave was sanctioned. 
The District Education Officer, Aizawl also stated (12 March 2025) that Earned Leave of 
236 days and 265 days was sanctioned to Shri Asem Labanga Singh (joined duty on 29 
August 2024) and Shri Thoudam Jadumani Singh, (joined duty on 23 September 2024) 
respectively. However, no action had been taken regarding the period of unauthorised 
absence not covered by the sanctioned leave. 
Table-1.20 provides details of employees for whom no leave was sanctioned to regularise 
their period of unauthorised absence: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23  Shri Lalthangmawia, Zohmun is engaged to represent/ substitute him at the rate of ₹ 20,000 per month. 
However, effective date of engagement and payment details not available 
24  Shri Lalbiaknunga is engaged to represent/ substitute him since 15 May 2023. However, rate of 
remuneration and payment details not available 
25  Smt. Vanlalruati, is engaged to represent/ substitute him at the rate of ₹ 25,000 per month. However, 
effective date of engagement and payment details not available 

45
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
45 
Table-1.20: Statement showing Government Employees drawing their salaries 
while on unauthorised absence 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Government 
Employees and 
their place of 
posting 
Designatio
n and Pay 
level 
Period of 
Unauthorise
d absence 
between 
Number of 
days during 
unauthoris
ed absence 
Number of 
days Leave 
granted 
(calculated 
from first day 
of 
unauthorised 
absence) 
Number 
of days 
not 
covered 
by leave 
Number of 
completed 
Months and 
days not 
covered by 
Leave 
Gross salary 
drawn 
during 
unauthorise
d absence 
from duty26 
1. Asem Labanga 
Singh27, 
Government 
Zohmun High 
School, Zohmun 
Teacher 
(level-10) 
01.01.2016 
and 
28.08.2024 
3,163 236 
(01.01.2016 to 
23.08.2016 = 
236 days) 
2,927 96 months 5 
days from 
24.08.2016 
to 
28.08.2024 
1,01,41,990
2. Thoudam Jadumani 
Singh28, 
Government 
Sawleng High 
School, Sawleng 
Teacher 
(level-10) 
15.05.2023 
and 
20.09.2024 
495 265 
(15.05.2023 to 
03.02.2024 
=265 days) 
230 7 months 17 
days from 
04.02.2024 
to 
20.09.202429 
10,23,155
3. 
Thiyam Ibochou 
Singh30, 
Government Higher 
Secondary School, 
Siaha 
Lecturer 
(level-11) 
01.06.2023 
and 
11.04.2024 
316 -- 316 10 months 11 
days from 
01.06.2023 
to 
11.04.2024 
15,91,339
Total 3,974 501 3,473  1,27,56,484
Source: Departmental records 
Thus, three employees received regular salary payments despite not performing any 
official duties in person and without obtaining formal authorisation for their absence from 
the competent authority. Consequently, the expenditure of ₹ 1.28 crore incurred on their 
gross salaries was irregular and in contravention of Fundamental Rule 17(1) of the 
Fundamental Rules and Supplementary Rules (FRSR). 
The matter was referred to the Government (10 March 2025) for clarification regarding 
the treatment of the period of these employees’ unauthorised absence. The Government in 
its response (24 March 2025) stated that a final decision had not been taken. It was 
therefore evident that no action had been taken to recover the pay and allowances 
irregularly disbursed to the three employees during their unauthorised absence. 
Despite being aware of the irregularity, the Department did not take timely corrective 
action or initiate recovery of the irregular payments. The Government, as of March 2025, 
had not taken a final decision, reflecting administrative inaction. 
Further, the continuation of salary payments over multiple years without verification of 
physical attendance or leave sanction points to serious lapses in internal controls, payroll 
 
26  Fraction of the month is calculated by dividing the gross salary of the month by the number of days in 
that month and by multiplying the number of days on unauthorised absence 
27  Shri Lalthangmawia, Zohmun was engaged to represent/ substitute him at the rate of ₹ 20,000 per month. 
However, effective date of engagement and payment details not available 
28  Shri Lalbiaknunga was engaged to represent/ substitute him since 15 May 2023. However, rate of 
remuneration and payment details not available 
29  Saturday and Sunday on 21 and 22 September 2024 were excluded 
30  Smt. Vanlalruati, was engaged to represent/ substitute him at the rate of ₹ 25,000 per month. However, 
effective date of engagement and payment details not available 

46
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
46 
validation, and oversight by the Directorate of School Education and subordinate offices. 
Annual increments were granted during the period of unauthorised absence, aggravating 
the financial irregularity and further violating service rules. 
Thus, the payment of salaries to the tune of ₹ 1.28 crore to three employees who were on 
unauthorised absence and were engaging other individuals as their substitutes was in 
blatant violation of the principle of ‘No work, No Pay’ which is embodied under FR 17(1) 
of FRSR as ‘an officer who is absent from duty without any authority shall not be entitled 
to any pay and allowances during the period of such absence’. 
Recommendation: The Department/ Government should initiate action to recover 
salaries paid to the employees for the period of their unauthorised absence.  
SCHOOL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
 
1.5 Excess payment 
Due to negligence, the State Project Director, Samagra Shiksha made excess 
payment of ₹ 1.50 crore against supplier’s bill for free textbooks 
As per Rule 13 of Central Government Account (Receipts and Payments) Rule, 1983 
(adopted by the Mizoram Government), the following instructions shall be observed by all 
Government officers who are required to (a) receive Government dues and handle cash or 
(b) perform the functions of drawing and disbursing officers (with or without cheque 
drawing powers), or both: 
 Every such officer (referred to in this Rule as the Head of the Office) should maintain 
a cashbook; 
 All monetary transactions should be entered in the cash book as soon as they occur 
and attested by the Head of the Office in token of check; and 
 The cash book should be closed regularly and completely checked. The Head of the 
Office should verify the totalling of the cash book or have this done by some 
responsible subordinate other than the writer of the cash book and initial it as correct. 
The Public Financial Management System (PFMS) provides various stages of checks in 
bill processing by cheque Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDO) for e-payment in 
electronic/ digital payment. The DDO Maker of the bill feeds the information/ data into 
the system and then forwarded to the DDO Checker from where the bills move on to the 
PAO system. The bill passes through four layers in the PAO system before it is finally 
passed. From the Dealing Hand (DH), it moves to the AAO and then to the DDO (Admin) 
and finally digitally signed by the DDO (Admin)/ DDO Checker. 
Test check (May 2024) of records of the State Project Director, Samagra Shiksha 31, 
Mizoram under School Education Department revealed that the State Project Director, on 
the advice of the State Council of Educational Research and Training, placed 
(16 March 2022) Purchase/ Supply Order for textbooks, to be provided to the students as 
free distribution for the academic year 2022-23, at a total cost of ₹ 16.99 lakh with  
 
31 Mizoram School Education Mission Society 

47
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
47 
M/s Bhabani Offset and Imaging System Pvt. Ltd., Guwahati, Assam. Scrutiny of records 
revealed that the firm submitted (28 June 2022) a supply bill for ₹ 16.99 lakh for supply 
of 37,042 textbooks of five 32 different Subjects. The State Project Director, Samagra 
Shiksha sanctioned (05 July 2022) ₹ 16.99 lakh debitable to the account head of free 
textbook for the year 2021-22 and payable to the firm’s representative 33 through her 
personal Bank Account No. xxxxxxxxxx2975 by bank transfer. As per the entry made 
electronically in the cash book, ₹ 16.99 lakh was debited on 14 July 2022 i.e., seven days 
prior to the date of actual payment of 21 July 2022. 
Further scrutiny revealed that the Addl. State Project Director sent (20 July 2022) payment 
advice to the State Bank of India, Dawrpui Branch through PFMS for payment of 
₹ 166.99 lakh instead of the sanctioned amount of ₹ 16.99 lakh, purportedly due to clerical 
error. The amount was debited on 21 July 2022 resulting in excess payment of ₹ 1.50 crore 
(₹ 1.67 crore - ₹ 0.17 crore). 
The Society initiated corrective action to recover the excess payment of ₹ 1.50 crore after 
almost three months on 18 October 2022 when the Finance Controller wrote 
(18 October 2022) to Bandhan Bank, Aizawl Branch to freeze/ hold the Bank Account of 
the payee, with a copy to the account holder - the firm’s representative for information.  
The next formal effort to recover the money was made only after 18 months when the 
Society informed (01 May 2024) the firm’s representative that since the money had not 
been refunded despite continuous verbal communication, the latter was ‘informed’ to 
refund the excess payment of ₹ 1.50 crore along with the bank interest accrued thereon, 
within one week’s time, failing which, necessary legal action would be taken. It was further 
stated that non-compliance could also entail blacklisting of the firm from all future 
purchase or printing works of school textbooks in Mizoram. 
It is clearly evident that even though the internal control system was in place, negligence 
on the part of the concerned officials resulted in non-detection of a ‘clerical error’ that led 
to excess payment of ₹ 1.50 crore. It is also evident that there was negligence in recovering 
the money given that the first effort to recover the money was made almost three months 
after the transaction date and the next effort was made 18 months after the first. Further, 
the fact that the Society merely forwarded to the payee a copy of the first letter to the bank, 
instead of asking her to refund the excess payment, is another evidence of negligence on 
the part of the Society officials in safeguarding the interests of the Society. 
On this being pointed out, the State Project Director, Samagra Shiksha, while agreeing to 
the Audit observation, stated (22 May 2024) in the exit meeting that necessary legal action 
will be initiated immediately against the firm’s representative. However, even First 
Information Report (FIR), has not been filed against the defaulting supplier or the official 
concerned as of September 2024. 
Audit observed that due to weak internal control mechanisms such as errors in data entry 
and verification, inadequate review of payment advice and non-review and 
 
32 Math Magic 2 (MZ), Math Magic 3 (MZ), Jyotirmay 6, Jyotirmay 7 and Jyotirmay 8 
33 Smt. C. Lalhmangaihtluangi, Armed Veng, Aizawl 

48
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
48 
non-reconciliation of transactions in a timely manner, there was a delay in detecting the 
error and pursuing recovery of the money. Moreover, since the Society did not promptly 
communicate the financial discrepancies to the responsible parties and did not carry out 
immediate corrective recovery actions, the chances of recovery remain doubtful. 
The matter was reported to the Society, Department and Government in September 2024 
and the State Government while agreeing with the Audit observation stated 
(07 October 2024) that the excess payment was detected immediately after the day of 
making payment as the PFMS reflected the debit amount on the following day and the firm 
was promptly informed verbally. It was also stated that the Society desired to make good 
the excess payment without any formal letter as the firm was the existing supplier of 
School textbooks during that year and was in good terms with the Society.  Since the 
excess payment was not realised, the Society issued (23 September 2024) a legal notice to 
the firm’s representative through the Standing Counsel of the Society. In the legal notice, 
the firm’s representative was informed to refund the excess payment of ₹ 1.50 crore along 
with interest within a period of 15 days. It was also stated that in case of non-compliance 
with the legal notice, a lawsuit would be instituted in a court of law and the firm’s 
representative would be made liable to pay all the legal expenses incurred by the Society 
in this regard. 
However, the progress of the legal notice was not intimated to Audit. Further, the reply 
that the Society desired to make good the excess payment without any formal letter as the 
firm was the existing supplier of school textbooks and the firm was in good terms with the 
Society was untenable in view of the fact that the Society had forfeited the firm’s Security 
Deposit of ₹ 10.96 lakh for the year 2021-22 for non-completion of supply of textbooks. 
The Society had also recommended to the State Council of Educational Research and 
Training for blacklisting of the firm from future printing works on 14 February 2022. 
Therefore, the claim that the firm was in good terms with the Society in July 2022, barely 
a few months after recommending for the blacklisting of the firm is questionable and defies 
logic. The inaction on the part of the Society is thus due to negligence of the Society’s 
Officers. 
Thus, due to negligence in the processing of the bill for payment of the cost of school 
textbooks, the State Project Director, Samagra Shiksha, Mizoram made excess payment of 
₹ 1.50 crore. 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND POVERTY ALLEVIATION DEPARTMENT 
 
1.6 Idle expenditure 
The Department extended undue favour to the Consultant/ Contractor in violation 
of extant Rules and subsequently appropriated liability to pay excess expenditure 
of ₹ 0.99 crore in the construction of Multi-Level Car Parking cum Multi-Utility 
Centre at Zodin, Aizawl. Further, delay in completion of the project has rendered 
the entire expenditure of ₹ 8.06 crore idle 
As per Clause-1.3 of the Government of Mizoram, Finance Department’s Office 
Memorandum dated 06 December 2010, any Department desirous of engaging Consultants 

49
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
49 
shall mandatorily obtain prior permission from Finance Department i.e., before going 
ahead with any part of the work(s) for which the Consultant is to be engaged and no ex-
post facto permission will be granted. Also, as per Clause-4 of the Finance Department’s 
Notification dated 08 September 2016, a firm selected for preparation of Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) will not be allowed to execute and monitor the works for the DPR prepared 
by them, i.e., on Turnkey or Design-Build Consultant (DBC) basis. 
Test check (November-December 2021) of records of the Director, Urban Development 
and Poverty Alleviation (UD&PA) Department revealed that Government of Mizoram, 
UD&PA Department accorded (12 October 2017) administrative approval and expenditure 
sanction of ₹ 25 crore for construction of Multi-Level Car Parking cum Multi-Utility 
Centre at Zodin, Aizawl under New Economic Development Programme (NEDP) of the 
State during 2017-18. In the execution of the project, the following violations and 
shortcomings were observed: 
(a) Undue favour extended to the Consultant/ Contractor 
Scrutiny of records revealed that the Director, UD&PA prepared and forwarded 
(15 March 2016) the guidelines for a competition of Preliminary Architectural Design for 
construction of Multi-Level Car Parking cum Multi-Utility Centre at Zodin Complex, 
Aizawl to the State Government for information and necessary action. As per the 
guidelines, bona fide students of a teaching institution recognised by the Council of 
Architecture, architects and firms who are registered with the Council of Architecture 
under the Architects Act, 1972 were eligible for the competition for a cash prize of 
₹ One lakh for the winner. There was no provision for subsequent engagement of the 
winner as Consultant/ Contractor or whatsoever. The Department subsequently issued 
(25 April 2016) a press notice inviting all architects within Mizoram to participate in the 
competition. Six parties took part in the competition and M/s JMT Architects, Zarkawt, 
Aizawl was declared (08 July 2016) the winner of the competition of the Preliminary 
Architectural Design for construction of Multi-Level Car Parking cum Multi-Utility 
Centre at Zodin Complex, Aizawl. 
Thereafter, the Department, without inviting any Expression of Interest from any intending 
Consultant and without obtaining prior permission as per Finance Department’s Office 
Memorandum dated 06 December 2010, signed (11 September 2017) a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with the winner of the competition of the Preliminary Architectural 
Design i.e., M/s JMT Architects as Consultant to prepare the DPR for the construction of 
a Multi-Level Parking cum Multi Utility Centre at Zodin, Aizawl and to provide 
consultancy service for an amount of ₹ 45.00 lakh. The scope of work included preparation 
of design; site evaluation, analysis; design & site development; structural design; sanitary, 
plumbing, drainage, water supply and sewerage design; Electrical, electronic, 
communication systems and design; heating, ventilation & air conditioning design and 
other mechanical system; elevators, escalators, etc., fire detection, Fire protection and 
Security systems etc.; and periodic inspection and evaluation of construction works. 
Additionally, the Department again without inviting tender and in violation of Finance 
Department’s Notification dated 08 September 2016, also issued (21 September 2018) a 

50
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
50 
work order to the Consultant firm to execute the work of installation of the robotic car 
parking system for an amount of ₹ 8.95 crore as Contractor. An agreement was signed 
(25 September 2018) between the Department and firm. 
This action of the Department in awarding the Consultancy project as well as the project 
for installation of the robotic car parking system violated the Finance Department’s Office 
Memorandum dated 06 December 2010 and Notification dated 08 September 2016 and 
thus tantamount to extension of undue favour to the Consultant/ Contractor. 
(b) Liability to pay an excess expenditure of ₹ 0.99 crore in the installation of 
robotic car parking 
Scrutiny of records further revealed that the Consultant firm M/s JMT Architects prepared 
the DPR for installation of robotic car lifts at the rate of ₹ 7.96 lakh per car for parking 
113 cars worth ₹ 8.99 crore. Also, the Consultant requested (27 July 2018) the Department 
to issue work order for installation of fully automated car parking system manufactured by 
M/s Precision Automation & Robotics India Ltd. (PARI), Maharashtra. Accordingly, the 
Department issued (21 September 2018) the work order to the firm to complete the work 
as per design within 36 months from the issue of the work order i.e., to be completed by 
21 September 2021. An agreement was signed (25 September 2018) between the 
Department and the firm M/s JMT Architects for the installation of robotic car parking 
system for ₹ 8.95 crore without specifying the rate and the number of parking units to be 
installed.  
Consequently, the firm M/s JMT Architects purchased (10 June 2019) 100 numbers of 
mechanical parking equipment at a higher rate of ₹ 8.95 lakh per parking equipment worth 
₹ 8.95 crore from M/s Tianjin Zhengda General Steel Pipe Technology Co. Ltd, Tianjin, 
China instead of 113 numbers of robotic car parking system manufactured by PARI, 
without any approval for change in the quantity of the car parking system and for a 
different model/ make of the parking equipment from a different vendor/ manufacturer. 
There was no record on why the consultant purchased 100 parking equipment instead of 
their DPR’s quantity of 113 and the reason for purchasing this equipment from the Chinese 
firm instead of from the approved Indian firm - PARI. The Department stated 
(25 November 2024) that M/s JMT Architects submitted a revised/ final DPR on 
10 February 2022 to the Department incorporating the robotic car parking at ₹ 8.95 lakh 
per car for 100 cars worth ₹ 8.95 crore i.e., after a lapse of more than three years and four 
months from the date of issue of the work order, after more than two years eight months 
from the date of purchase of the equipment and more than four months from the stipulated 
date of completion. Ex-post-facto approval of the revised/ final DPR was accorded 
belatedly by the State Government on 3 August 2022 i.e., after three years one month from 
the date of purchase resulting in a liability to pay excess expenditure of ₹ 0.99 crore 
(₹ 8.95 lakh minus ₹ 7.96 lakh = ₹ 99,000 x 100). 
(c) Idle expenditure of ₹ 8.06 crore in the installation of robotic car parking 
Clause-2.11 of the agreement signed (25 September 2018) between the Department and 
M/s JMT Architects provides that installation of robotic car parking system should be 

51
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
51 
carried out within three to four months after receiving the materials at site and the project 
is to be completed as per design within 36 months from the date of issue of work order 
i.e., by 21 September 2021. 
The Department awarded a contract for the installation of a robotic car parking system for 
100 cars, with a total payable amount of ₹ 8.95 crore. As of November 2024, payments 
amounting to ₹ 8.06 crore had been released to the contractor, after accounting for 
statutory deductions such as Performance Guarantee, Security Deposit, and GST 
Deduction at Source, leaving an outstanding liability of ₹ 0.89 crore. 
According to the Department's response (11 December 2024), the materials and equipment 
for the robotic car parking system were delivered to the site in June 2019, and the physical 
installation was completed on 29 June 2024. However, the system remains untested and 
uncommissioned as of November 2024 due to the non-completion of power supply 
arrangements, including the installation of a transformer. This delay, attributed to 
inadequate coordination and deficient planning by the Department, has resulted in the 
non-utilisation of the asset for more than five years and five months since procurement 
and over three years and two months beyond the stipulated completion date of 
21 September 2021. Consequently, the entire expenditure of ₹ 8.06 crore remains 
unproductive, reflecting weaknesses in project planning and execution. 
The matter was reported to the Department and the Government in December 2024. The 
Government, while agreeing to the Audit observations, stated (17 January 2025) that the 
staff of the Department concerned had inadvertently submitted the draft DPR to Audit 
Party in which the cost of robotic car lift was ₹ 7.96 lakh per car for parking 113 cars. It 
was further stated that as per the approved and final DPR, the cost of robotic car lift is 
₹ 8.95 lakh per car for parking 100 cars and there was no excess expenditure in the 
installation of robotic car parking.  
The reply of the Government is not tenable as the DPR produced to Audit was the one 
based on which the work was executed and thus was not just a ‘draft’ DPR. The revised 
DPR was submitted by the Consultant/ Contractor only in February 2022 i.e., two months 
after Audit and four months after the scheduled completion date. Further, obtaining ex post 
facto approval belatedly from the Government in August 2022, after three years and one 
month from the date of procurement of the parking equipment, only confirmed that the 
DPR provided to Audit was the valid DPR based on which the work was executed. 
Thus, audit observed violation of government regulations in consultant engagement and 
project execution (i) in the engagement M/s JMT Architects as a Consultant; (ii) in the 
award of the contract for installation of the robotic car parking system to the same firm; 
and (iii) in the award of both consultancy services (₹ 45.00 lakh) and execution of the 
robotic parking system (₹ 8.95 crore) to the same entity without open competition. 
The Department incurred excess expenditure of ₹ 0.99 crore due to cost escalation as the 
initial DPR prepared by the Consultant specified a cost of ₹ 7.96 lakh per robotic car lift 
for 113 cars (₹ 8.99 crore). However, the firm was later awarded a contract for ₹ 8.95 crore 
for only 100 car lifts, increasing the unit cost to ₹ 8.95 lakh. The ex post facto approval to 

52
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
52 
the revised DPR obtained belatedly in August 2022 does not justify the additional cost 
burden, confirming an avoidable excess expenditure of ₹ 0.99 crore. 
The delay of over five years from procurement and the Multi-Level Car Parking cum 
Multi-Utility Centre remaining to be commissioned reflects serious deficiencies in project 
planning and coordination. This has rendered the expenditure of ₹ 8.06 crore idle. 
LOCAL ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT 
 
1.7 Irregular expenditure 
 
The Department incurred an irregular expenditure of ₹ Six crore on unapproved 
technical designs, drawings, estimates, etc. and did not execute the approved items 
of work valued at ₹1.56 crore 
Rule 161 of the General Financial Rules, 2017, (as adopted by the Government of 
Mizoram) provides that subject to exceptions incorporated under Rule 154, 155, 162 and 
166, invitation to tenders by advertisement should be used for procurement of goods of 
estimated value of ₹ 25 lakh and above. An organisation having its own website should 
also publish all its advertised tender enquiries on the website. Also, Clause 11 of the 
Central Public Works Department’s General Conditions of Contract (GCC), 2019 
stipulates that the contractor shall execute the whole and every part of the work in the most 
substantial and workmanlike manner both as regards materials and otherwise in every 
respect in strict accordance with the specifications and conform exactly, fully and 
faithfully to the design and drawings. Further, as per Clause 1.3 of the Government of 
Mizoram, Finance Department’s Office Memorandum dated 06 December 2010 regarding 
the guidelines for engagement of consultants, any Department desirous of engaging 
consultants shall mandatorily obtain prior permission from the Finance Department i.e., 
before going ahead with any part of the work(s) for which the consultant is to be engaged 
and no ex-post-facto permission will be granted for consultancy services rendered without 
the prior approval. 
Test check (October 2023) of the records of the Director, Local Administration 
Department (LAD) revealed that the Chief Engineer (Buildings), Mizoram Public Works 
Department (MPWD) approved (10 September 2018) the detailed project report (DPR) 
based on MPWD’s Schedule of Rate (SoR), 2013 for the construction of the Directorate 
office building, LAD for ₹ Six crore. LAD accorded Administrative Approval (05 October 
2018) and Expenditure Sanction (01 February 2019) for ₹ Six crore for the construction of 
Directorate office building under the New Economic Development Policy of the State for 
the year 2018-19 at the then New Secretariat Complex now renamed as Mizoram New 
Capital Complex. 
Audit observed the following violations in execution of the project: 
(a) Irregular execution of works without an open tender and without obtaining 
prior approval from the Finance Department 
As observed in the agenda note for the State Level Consultancy Evaluation Committee 
(SLCEC) meeting scheduled on 23 May 2019 for selection of consultancy firm for 

53
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
53 
construction of directorate office building, the Department directly invited (3 April 2019) 
restricted tender from the State-empanelled firms. This was done without inviting any 
Expression of Interest and without obtaining prior approval from the Finance Department. 
It was further observed that the Department recommended (16 April 2019) the selection 
of a private firm M/s Zothan Consultancy Services, Luangmual, Aizawl, as their financial 
bid of ₹ Six crore was the lowest amongst three valid financial bids. Thereafter, the 
Executive Engineer (LAD) issued the work order on 31 July 2019 at ₹ Six crore. The deed 
of agreement was signed on 6 August 2019 for construction of the Directorate office 
building of LAD. The contractor M/s Zothan Consultancy Services, Luangmual, Aizawl 
commenced the work on 15 December 2019 and completed it on 15 September 2023 at a 
cost of ₹ Six crore. 
The construction of the Directorate office building for the LAD, Mizoram, was executed 
in contravention of key financial and procedural rules, resulting in non-compliance with 
mandated norms for public procurement and consultancy engagement. Despite the 
estimated project cost of ₹ Six crore, the Department bypassed the required open tendering 
process and directly invited restricted tenders from empanelled firms, thereby violating 
Rule 161 of the General Financial Rules, 2017, which stipulates open advertisement-based 
tendering for procurements above ₹ 25 lakh. 
Furthermore, the Department did not obtain prior approval from the Finance Department 
before engaging consultancy services, contrary to Clause 1.3 of the State Finance 
Department’s Office Memorandum dated 6 December 2010. This not only undermined 
transparency and competitive bidding but also weakened financial oversight, setting a 
precedent for procedural irregularities in high-value public works. 
(b) Non-construction of the approved works worth ₹ 1.56 crore 
Scrutiny of records further revealed that surprisingly, the Executive Engineer, LAD issued 
(31 July 2019) a work order for the construction of the Directorate office building at 
₹ Six crore as per MPWD SoR 2019 34 instead of the approved MPWD SoR 2013. This 
work order, therefore, invalidated the DPR, structural/ technical designs, drawings, 
estimates, etc., approved by Chief Engineer (Buildings), MPWD. Further, the deed of 
agreement signed (6 August 2019) did not provide the scope of work, contract amount and 
the MPWD SoR to be used. It is merely stated in Clause 2.2 of the agreement that the 
Executing agency shall execute the works at the approved cost as per the approved 
technical designs and drawings. Further, as per Clause 2.11 of the agreement, the 
Executing agency shall be fully responsible for all acts or omissions committed in the 
name of the agency. 
As per the approved DPR estimate, the Directorate office building was to be constructed 
consisting of six stories i.e., basement35-1, ground, first to fourth/ terrace floors and a 
 
34  SOR 2019 was effective from 1 February 2019 
35  Basement in Mizoram generally refers to the floors of a building which are below road level (road in 
front of the building) 

54
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
54 
provision of passenger lift with a capacity of eight persons. Further, as per the structural 
drawing, the construction of the building was to be started from Basement-4.  
Scrutiny of records, however, revealed that in violation of Clause 2.2 of the agreement, the 
contractor prepared a revised estimate of ₹ Six crore (without drawings) based on 
SoR (2019), as per which the building was to be constructed for six stories starting from 
basement-3 to basement-1, ground and first to second floors. The contractor’s revised 
estimate did not provide for the construction of the third & fourth floors and the passenger 
lift with a capacity of eight persons. Also, records showing approval of the contractor’s 
revised estimate either from the Departmental Executive Engineer or the competent Chief 
Engineer of the Public Works Department were not available. Further, Audit observed that 
the Directorate office building was constructed as per the contractor’s unapproved revised 
estimate as evident from the Computerised Measurement Books (MB)/ bill of quantity and 
running bill. A photograph of the Directorate office building is placed below: 
  
Front view of the Directorate office building, LAD Rear view of the Directorate office building, LAD 
showing the basements 
Thus, the contractor did not construct the approved items of work worth ₹ 1.56 crore 36 as 
per the estimated plinth area (based on SoR 2013) by excluding the third & fourth floors 
and Passenger Lift without approval. This resulted in non-construction of the approved 
items of work worth ₹ 1.56 crore. 
The issuance of the work order based on an unapproved SoR (2019) instead of the 
sanctioned SoR (2013) undermined the integrity of the Chief Engineer’s approved DPR 
and estimates. The absence of critical details in the agreement reflected weak contract 
management and oversight, leaving room for deviations and ambiguities. The contractor's 
unilateral preparation and execution of a revised estimate without obtaining approval from 
the competent authority was a serious procedural violation. The omissions of key 
components such as the third and fourth floors and the passenger lift, coupled with 
deviations from the structural drawings, indicated non-compliance with the original 
project scope and objectives. The non-enforcement of Clause 2.2 of the agreement reflects 
 
36  Third Floor - ₹ 70.75 lakh plus Fourth/ Terrace floor - ₹ 43.18 lakh plus Passenger Lift - ₹ 42.00 lakh 


55
Chapter-I : Social SectorChapter-I: Social Sector 
55 
lack of monitoring and supervision by the Department, compromising accountability and 
quality control. 
(c) Construction of the Directorate office building without approved technical 
designs, drawings, estimates, etc. 
As stated in the preceding paragraphs, the Directorate office building was constructed as 
per the contractor’s unapproved revised estimate based on SoR 2019 at ₹ Six crore and not 
as per the approved DPR based on SoR 2013 in violation of Clause 2.2 of the agreement, 
thereby rendering the whole expenditure of ₹ Six crore irregular. 
The matter was reported to the Department and the Government in November 2024 and 
the State Government, while agreeing to the Audit observation stated (20 December 2024) 
that the Department has no intention of deviating from the provisions of the General 
Financial Rules but acted upon the instructions from the Government. The Government 
also agreed that the building was constructed based on the revised plan, design and 
estimate without technical approval from the competent authority of the MPWD. The 
Department, however, belatedly obtained ex post facto  administrative approval for the 
revised detailed estimate and drawing from the Government on 15 November 2023 i.e., 
two months after the date of completion of the building. 
The construction of the Directorate office building was executed in violation of the 
approved DPR and applicable financial and technical guidelines, leading to significant 
irregularities. 
The entire expenditure of ₹ Six crore incurred on the construction was irregular, as the 
building was constructed based on an unapproved revised estimate using SoR 2019 instead 
of the approved DPR based on SoR 2013, in contravention of Clause 2.2 of the agreement. 
The revised plan, design, and estimate were neither technically approved by the competent 
authority of MPWD nor aligned with the original DPR. This highlights serious lapses in 
adherence to established financial rules and technical procedures. 
The Department’s attempt to regularise the deviations by obtaining ex post facto  
administrative approval on 15 November 2023, two months after the completion of the 
building, further underscores its inadequate planning and oversight. 
The State Government has acknowledged that the construction was carried out based on 
revised plans and estimates without the requisite technical approval, attributing the 
deviations to instructions from the Government. While this acknowledgment provides 
transparency, it does not absolve the Department of its responsibility to ensure compliance 
with the General Financial Rules and other governing procedures. 

g
Chapter-I : Social Sector
CHAPTER – II
ECONOMIC SECTOR

h
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024

CHAPTER-II 
 
ECONOMIC SECTOR 
 
2.1 Introduction 
This Chapter of the Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 deals with the findings 
arising from audit of State Government Departments under Economic Sector. 
During 2023-24, against a total budgetary provision of ₹ 4,390.28 crore, an expenditure of 
₹ 3,400.82 crore was incurred by 16 departments under the Economic Sector.  
Department-wise details of budget provision and expenditure incurred are shown in 
Table-2.1. 
Table-2.1: Department-wise budget provision and expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Department 
Budget 
Allocation 
(BA) 
Expenditure 
Percentage 
of 
Expenditure 
to BA 
1. Planning and Programme Implementation 400.40 248.46 62.05 
2. Agriculture 302.89 220.91 72.93 
3. Horticulture 138.46 96.83 69.93 
4. Land Resources, Soil and Water 
Conservation 27.89 26.38 94.59 
5. Animal Husbandry and Veterinary 88.82 75.85 85.40 
6. Fisheries 26.52 26.01 98.08 
7. Co-operation 21.35 18.31 85.76 
8. Rural Development 587.60 349.65 59.50 
9. Commerce and Industries 68.70 63.01 91.72 
10. Sericulture 17.67 16.36 92.59 
11. Tourism 14.69 13.25 90.20 
12. Public Works 1,338.20 1,109.98 82.95 
13. Irrigation and Water Resources 99.85 25.20 25.24 
14. Information and Communication 
Technology 5.35 5.34 99.81 
15. Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs 341.37 263.90 77.31 
16. Power and Electricity 910.52 841.38 92.41 
Total 4,390.28 3,400.82 77.46 
Source: Appropriation Accounts: 2023-24 
Barring Planning and Programme Implementation Department, Horticulture Department, 
Rural Development Department and Irrigation and Water Resources  Department where 
the utilisations were 62.05 per cent , 69.93 per cent , 59.50 per cent  and 25.24 per cent 
respectively, all other Departments managed to utilise more than 70 per cent  of the funds 
allocated to them. The overall savings under Economic Sector was 22.54 per cent against 
the budget allocation. 
During 2023-24, an expenditure of ₹ 476.22 crore, including funds pertaining to previous 
years, of the State Government under Economic Sector were test checked in Audit. This 
Chapter includes one Performance Audit Report and two Compliance Audit Paragraphs, 
as discussed in the following paragraphs. 

58
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
58 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
2.2 Performance Audit on the Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) in Mizoram 
 
2.2.1 Overview of MGNREGA 
The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA), 2005 was enacted in 
September 2005, subsequently renamed as Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) in October 2009.  The mandate of the Act is to enhance the 
livelihood security of the households in rural areas by providing 100 days of guaranteed 
wage employment in a financial year to every household whose adult members 
volunteered to do unskilled manual work. 
The Act was notified in 200 districts in the first phase effective from February 2006 and 
then extended to an additional 130 districts in the financial year 2007-08. The remaining 
districts were notified under MGNREGA effective from April 2008. Thus, the MGNREGA 
covers the entire country with the exception of districts that have a 100 per cent urban 
population. In the State of Mizoram, all the 11 Districts are covered except for the Aizawl 
Municipal Corporation Areas. 
The rationale of the Act is based on combining the productive capacity of Villagers to 
build and nurture assets, along with alleviating the problems of chronic unemployment 
and poverty. The Act provides opportunities to develop rural infrastructure through 
watershed development, restoration of water bodies, activities aimed at forestry, land 
development, soil erosion and flood control, and construction of roads and institution 
facilities. 
2.2.2 Important aspects of implementation of MGNREGA 
The Seventy-third Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 which empowers the Panchayati 
Raj Institutions as a third-tier government is not applicable in Mizoram. However, the 
traditional Village Councils (VCs) governed by ‘Lushai Hills District (Village Councils) 
Act, 1953, have been constituted in all the eleven districts. The Village Employment 
Councils (VECs) is responsible for implementation of the scheme at the village level. 

59
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
59 
 
Overview of MGNREGS 
Planning and Execution of Works: 
As per Section 16(1) of the MGNREG Act, the Gram Panchayat (Village Employment 
Council in case of Mizoram) shall be responsible for identification of projects in the Gram 
Panchayat (village Council in Mizoram) area to be taken up under a Scheme as per the 
recommendations of the Gram Sabha and the Ward Sabhas and for executing and 
supervising such works. 
 A VEC may take up any project under a Scheme within the area of the Village 
Council (VC) as may be sanctioned by the Programme Officer. 
 Every VEC shall, after considering the recommendations of the Gram Sabha and the 
Ward Sabhas, prepare a development plan and maintain a shelf of possible works to 
be taken up under the Scheme as and when demand for work arises. 
M a j o r  e n t i t l e m e n t s  o f  t h e  MG N R E G S  S c h e m e  
 Right to a Job Card. 
 Right to demand and receive work within 15 days. 
 Right to unemployment Allowance. 
 Right to plan and prepare a Shelf of Projects. 
 Right to obtain work within a radius of five kilometres. 
 Right to worksite facilities. 
 Right to notified wage rate. 
 Right to receive wages within 15 days. 
 C o m p e n s a t i o n  f o r  d e l a y  i n  p a y m e n t  o f  w a g e s .  
 R i g h t  t o  t i m e - b o u n d  r e d r e s s a l  o f  g r i e v a n c e s  a n d  r i g h t  t o  c o n d u c t  c o n c u r r e n t  s o c i a l  a u d i t s  o f  
a l l  M G N R E G S  e x p e n d i t u r e .  

60
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
60 
 The VEC shall forward its proposals for the development projects including the 
order of priority between different works to the Programme Officer (PO) for scrutiny 
and preliminary approval prior to the commencement of the year in which it is 
proposed to be executed. 
 The PO shall allot at least 50 per cent of the works in terms of its cost under a 
Scheme to be implemented through the VECs. 
As per Sections 16(5) of the Act, at least 50 per cent of the works (by cost) must be 
executed by the VECs; other implementing agencies could include Forest/ Horticulture/ 
Panchayat Raj Engineering Departments, etc., as well as State Public Sector Undertakings 
(SPSUs) and Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs)/ Self Help Groups (SHGs) 
Funding: 
The fund flow process in MGNREGS is as below: 
 
Permissible Works, Expenditure Components, etc.: 
As per the Operational Guidelines, 2013 only those works can be taken up which results 
in creation of durable assets and strengthen livelihood resources of the rural poor. List of 
permitted works (in order of priority) is specified in Schedule-I to the Act. These include 
water conservation, land development, forestry/ horticulture, rural connectivity projects, 
etc. 
The Government of India (GoI) has also prepared guidelines for the ‘convergence’ of 
MGNREGA works with schemes/ activities of other Departments. 
Use of contractors is prohibited; as far as possible, tasks funded under the scheme shall be 
performed by using manual labour and not machines. 
The Ratio of unskilled wages to material costs (including semi-skilled or skilled wages) 
should be 60:40 (Paragraph 7.1.5 of Operational Guidelines, 2013). 
 
 


61
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
61 
Grievance Redressal:  
The State Government shall, by rules, determine appropriate grievance redressal 
mechanisms to ensure a responsive implementation process (Sections 17 and 19 of the 
Act). 
Novel Features of MGNREGS: Demand-Driven & Rights-Based Legal Guarantee 
Aspect What Makes it Novel 
Legal Entitlement Every rural household has the right to demand up 
to 100 days of guaranteed wage employment per 
financial year for unskilled manual work. This 
right is enforceable under the Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005. 
Demand-Driven Nature Unlike supply-driven schemes, work must be 
provided within 15 days of a demand. If not, the 
State Government must pay unemployment 
allowance. 
Accountability Mechanism Legal penalties and compensation provisions 
create accountability on the part of the State if 
entitlements are not met. 
Social Audits & Transparency Social audits by Gram Sabhas and proactive 
disclosure of information are institutionalised to 
prevent corruption and empower beneficiaries. 
2.2.3 Organisational Chart 
The organisational chart for implementation of MGNREGA in Mizoram is given in the 
following Chart: 
Chart-2.1: Organisational Chart of MNGREGA Implementation  
(Rural Development Department) 
 
Mizoram State Employment Guarantee Council 
State Commissioner/Secretary, Rural Development (MGNREGA) 
Level            Project Director, State Level Monitoring Cell an Internal Audit Cell 
 
D i s t r i c t 
L e v e l 
D e p u t y  C o m m i s s i o n e r  ( D i s t r i c t  P r o g r a m m e  C o o r d i n a t o r )  
Proj ect  Dire ct or , DRDO (Dist ri ct  Progr amm e  Officer) 
B l o c k 
L e v e l 
Bl ock  De vel opm en t Off icer  ( Progr am m e Officer) 
V i l l a g e 
L e v e l 
 P r e s i d e n t ,  V i l l a g e  E m p l o y m e n t  C o u n c i l  

62
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
62 
o f 
S a m p l i n g 
Source : MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 
2.2.4 Audit Objectives  
The Performance Audit was conducted to assess whether: 
 Planning process and financial management practices were adequately geared 
towards achieving the goals of the Act, while adhering to relevant rules and 
regulations; 
 Fair access to employment opportunities was achieved, as well as employment 
adequately generated, leading to social protection and livelihood security as 
envisaged; 
 Durable and useful assets were created and maintained in compliance with rules and 
regulations, while ensuring convergence with other programmes/ schemes; and 
 Appropriate and adequate monitoring, social audit and grievance redressal systems 
were in place and functioning as envisaged to achieve greater transparency and 
accountability. 
2.2.5 Audit Scope and Methodology 
Audit commenced with an Entry Conference (25 June 2024) with representatives of the 
State Government. Field Audit was carried out between July and August 2024, covering 
scrutiny of records/ documents at the State, District, Block and VEC levels for the period 
2019-20 to 2023-24. Joint Physical Verification of at least 10 Works and Surveys of at 
least 15 Beneficiaries were also carried out in each sampled village. The draft report and 
audit findings were discussed in the Exit Conference (20 January 2025) in which the 
Secretary, Rural Development Department and Deputy Secretary, Finance Department of 
Key stakeholders at various levels 
National Level   Central Employment Guarantee Council  
 Ministry of Rural Development  
 
State Level   State Government    
 
 
 State Employment Guarantee Council 
 Policy formulation, guidelines, 
and overall supervision of 
MGNREGA implementation. 
 Advises the State Government on 
MGNREGA implementation and 
policy matters. 
District Level   District Programme Coordinator  
 
 
 District Rural Development Office 
 Oversees the overall 
implementation of MGNREGA 
within the district. 
 Managing the technical aspects of 
MGNREGA projects. 
Block Level  Programme Officer  
 Block Panchayat  
 Coordinating MGNREGA 
activities within the block, 
including work allocation, 
monitoring and resolving 
grievances. 
Village Level  Village panchayat 
 Village Employment Council  
 Identifying works, managing Job 
Card holders, and overseeing the 
implementation of MGNREGA 
projects within the village. 
Civil Society  Civil Society Organisations 
 Self Help Groups  
 Awareness generation, capacity 
building, and social accountability. 

63
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
63 
the State Government were present, and the report was finalised after taking into 
consideration the replies of the State Government. 
2.2.6 Audit Criteria 
The Audit Criteria adopted for the Performance Audit were: 
 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, Operational 
Guidelines 2013, amendments thereto, and Rules issued under the Act; 
 Annual Master Circulars issued by the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD), GoI; 
 Mizoram State Mahatma Gandhi Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, 2014 (as 
notified by State Government); 
 Mizoram State Mahatma Gandhi Rural Employment Guarantee Fund Rules, 2014 (as 
notified by State Government); 
 Orders, Circulars and Instructions, Guidelines, etc., issued by Government of India 
and the State Government; 
 General Financial Rules, 2017; and 
 Mizoram Public Procurement Rules, 2020. 
2.2.7 Audit Sampling Model 
Two districts out of the 11 districts in the State were selected using the Stratified Random 
Sampling Method in Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis ( IDEA) software. Strata in 
the sampling method consist of two categories: Upper and Lower, based on the total 
expenditure of the district during the audit period. One district each from upper strata and 
lower strata were selected. Further, two blocks from each sampled district were also selected 
based on Stratified Random Sampling Method in IDEA software using expenditure as the 
criteria in both the cases. 
Four VECs from each sampled Block were selected. VECs were selected through 
Probability Proportional to Size without Replacement taking expenditure as criteria. 
Table-2.2: Sample size for selection of works 
Sl. 
No. 
No. of Districts 
covered in the 
State 
No. of 
Blocks 
covered  
Total No. of 
VECs 
covered in 
the State 
Minimum 
No. of 
works 
covered per 
VEC 
Min. No. of 
works covered 
in the State 
1. 2 (Mamit & Kolasib) 4 37 1638 10 160 
Due care was taken while selecting beneficiaries for survey to ensure coverage of all 
categories of beneficiaries (SC/ ST, BPL, women, disabled, Small and Marginal farmers). 
The Beneficiary Survey covered 240 beneficiaries (15 from each selected VEC). 
 
 
37  Mamit District: Zawlnuam & Kawrtethawveng, Kolasib District: Bilkhawthir & Thingdawl  
38  Kawrtethawveng Block VECs: i. Rajiv Nagar, ii. Thaidawr, iii. Mualthuam, iv. Khantlang Zawlnuam 
Block VECs: i. Kanhmun, ii. Kawrthah, iii. Bawrai iv. Bawngva Bilkhawthir Block VECs : i. Saiphai, ii. 
College Veng, iii. Vairengte III (I.O.C Veng), iv. Kolasib Tuitha Veng Thingdawl Block VECs: i. Lungdai, 
ii. Kawnpui North, iii. Serkhan, iv. Lungmuat 

64
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
64 
2.2.8 Impact Assessment 
We conducted Joint Physical Verification of at least 10 selected works in each VEC along 
with Departmental authorities (July and August 2024). We also conducted Beneficiary 
Survey among 240 beneficiaries from two Districts along with the Departmental 
authorities for impact analysis of the scheme. 
2.2.9 Acknowledgement 
The office of the Principal Accountant General, Mizoram acknowledges and appreciates 
the cooperation rendered by the Rural Development Department, the District Programme 
Coordinators, the Programme Officers and field functionaries including the Presidents and 
Members of the Village Employment Councils during this Performance Audit. 
2.2.10 Financial Sharing Pattern of MGNREGA 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act operates as a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme (CSS), with funding shared between the Central and State 
Governments. The financing structure outlined in Section 22 of the Act is as follows: 
Table-2.3: Key Components 
Expenditure Item Funded By 
Wages for unskilled manual labourers 100 per cent by Central Government 
Material cost and wages for skilled/ semi-skilled 
labour 75 per cent by Centre, 25 per cent by State 
Administrative expenses (including staff salaries) 75 per cent by Centre, 25 per cent by State 
Unemployment allowance (if due work is not provided) 100 per cent by State Government 
A Central Government shall meet the cost of the following: 
(i) Wages for Unskilled Workers:  The entire cost of wages for unskilled manual 
labourers. 
(ii)  Skilled and Semi-Skilled Workers: 75 per cent of the costs associated with materials 
and wages for skilled and semi-skilled workers. 
(iii) Administrative Expenses:  This includes salaries and allowances for Programme 
Officer (PO) and their support staff, as well as work site facilities, determined by the 
Central Government. 
(iv) Central Employment Guarantee Council (CEGC):  The administrative expenses 
incurred by the CEGC. 
B State Government shall meet the cost of the following: 
(i) Skilled and Semi-Skilled Workers: 25 per cent of the costs related to materials and 
wages for skilled and semi-skilled workers. 
(ii) Unemployment Allowance: If the State cannot provide wage employment within 
15 days of application, it is responsible for paying an unemployment allowance. 
(iii) State Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC): Administrative expenses of the 
SEGC. 

65
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
65 
This cost-sharing arrangement ensures that both levels of government play a crucial role 
in financing MGNREGA, promoting rural employment through a structured financial 
framework. 
The overall receipt and expenditure incurred for the implementation of MGNREGA during 
2019-2024 is given in Table-2.4. 
Table-2.4: Year-wise fund received and expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Fund Received 
Expenditure 
Percentage 
of 
expenditure 
Closing 
balance Opening 
balance GoI State Total 
2019-20 10.13 470.05  42.09 522.27 517.21  99.03 5.06  
2020-21 5.06 539.50 38.62 583.18 569.48 97.65 13.70 
2021-22 13.70 549.35  39.41 602.46 601.41 99.83 1.05  
2022-23 1.05 568.45 27.03 596.53 588.09 98.58 8.44 
2023-24 8.44 534.44 16.22 559.10 552.45 98.81 6.65 
Total 2,661.79 163.37  2,828.64   
Source: Departmental records 
Audit analysis of year-wise fund receipts and expenditure under MGNREGA for the period 
2019-20 to 2023-24 revealed that the total funds received amounted to ₹ 2,828.64 crore, 
of which ₹ 2,661.79 crore (94.1 per cent) was contributed by the Government of India and 
₹ 163.37 crore (5.9 per cent) by the State Government. The percentage of expenditure to 
available funds remained consistently high, ranging from 97.65 per cent in 2020-21 to 
99.83 per cent in 2021-22, indicating efficient fund utilisation. However, the State’s annual 
contribution showed a declining trend, from ₹ 42.09 crore in 2019-20 to ₹ 16.22 crore in 
2023-24, raising concerns regarding the State’s sustained financial commitment to the 
scheme. 
Further, the year-end closing balances exhibited volatility, dropping to as low as 
₹ 1.05 crore in 2021-22. Such thin year-end balances present a liquidity risk, potentially 
constraining the State's ability to meet sudden demand surges, ensure uninterrupted wage 
disbursements, or respond to delays in Central releases. The mismatch between fund 
availability and field-level needs could affect the timely implementation of works and 
erode beneficiary confidence. 
2.2.10.1 Number of Households (HH) and Persons registered under Job Card 
During 2019-20 to 2023-24, the number of households registered Job Cards issued under 
MGNREGA increased steadily from 2,00,635 during 2019-20 to 2,18,630 during 
2023 - 24. The overall number of households and persons registered, and the employments 
availed in the whole State and in sampled districts during 2019-20 to 2023-24 as per 
Management Information System (MIS) reports are given in Tables-2.5 and 2.6. 
Table-2.5: Overall number of households and persons registered in Job Cards 
and the employments availed in the whole State 
(A)  Job Card Registration Details (HH & Persons) 
Ye a r  Registered HH Registered 
Persons 
Job Cards 
Deleted (HH) 
Job Cards 
Included (HH) 
2019-20 2,00,635 2,45,275 6,607 11,584 
2020-21 2,07,562 2,33,943 9,896 15,782 

66
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
66 
Ye a r  Registered HH Registered 
Persons 
Job Cards 
Deleted (HH) 
Job Cards 
Included (HH) 
2021-22 2,08,802 2,30,008 8,580 8,610 
2022-23 2,14,612 2,41,358 4,213 8,392 
2023-24 2,18,630 2,47,430 5,107 7,644 
(B) Employment Demanded and Availed (HH & Persons) 
Ye a r  Employment Demanded (HH) Employment Offered (HH) Employment Availed (HH) 
2019-20 2,03,118 2,03,057 2,02,975 
2020-21 2,13,976 2,13,845 2,13,737 
2021-22 2,12,268 2,12,265 2,12,105 
2022-23 2,16,402 2,16,359 2,16,082 
2023-24 2,19,862 2,19,836 2,19,212 
Source: MIS Report as furnished by the Department. 
Table-2.6: Overall number of households and persons registered in Job Cards and 
the employments availed in the sampled districts 
Sl. 
No. 
District 
Year 
No. of Registered 
Household and 
persons 
No. of Job Card 
deleted in 
current YR 
No. of Job Card 
included in 
current YR 
Cumulative 
(HH) 
Employment 
demanded 
Employment 
offered 
Employment 
Availed 
House-
hold Persons House 
hold Persons House
-hold Persons Total House-
hold Persons House-
hold Persons House- 
hold Persons 
1. 
Kolasib 
2019-20 
19,400 23,403 587 3,198 1,149 1,281 19,400 19,899 20,384 19,893 20,378 19,855 20,334 
2. 
Mamit 
21,152 23,106 706 1,447 1,113 1,250 21,150 21,409 21,570 21,404 21,565 21,396 21,556 
3. 
Kolasib 
2020-21 
20,536 22,448 1,222 4,237 2,277 2,917 20,536 21,476 23,004 21,476 23,004 21,450 22,967 
4. 
M a m i t 
21,732 24,070 670 1,720 1,174 1332 21,731 22,110 22,273 22,110 22,273 22,106 22,266 
5. 
Kolasib 
2021-22 
20,372 21,545 901 2,510 704 1,068 20,372 20,583 20,971 20,583 20,971 20,543 20,931 
6. 
Mamit 
21,851 24,092 799 1,641 801 1,504 21,850 22,501 22,687 22,501 22,687 22,453 22,639 
7. 
Kolasib 
2022-23 
20,971 22,676 178 684 731 1,176 20,931 21,072 21,764 21,067 21,759 21,043 21,724 
8. 
Mamit 
22,378 24,612 606 1,320 985 1,214 22,378 22,801 23,218 22,798 23,215 22,793 23,205 
9. 
Kolasib 
2023-24 
21,223 23,481 206 997 422 838 21,183 21,196 21,771 21,192 21,767 21,173 21,705 
10. 
Mamit 
22,746 24,950 604 1,483 830 1,005 22,745 23,121 23,421 23,121 23,421 23,054 23,339 
Source: MIS Report as furnished by the Department 
The district-wise and year-wise details of households and persons registered under 
MGNREGA during 2019-20 to 2023-24 are given in Appendices-2.1 to 2.5. 
The reasons for the higher value in the number of households demanding, offered and 
availing employment as compared to the cumulative number of households, was because 
there was inclusion of the households whose Job Cards were deleted during the year but 
were given employment for a period during the same year before their Job Cards were 
deleted. The deletion of Job Card from the Registration Register was done when 
necessitated due to permanent change of residence or migration of the families holding the 
Job Card. 

67
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
67 
It is evident from the above Tables-2.5 and 2.6 that there are discrepancies in the figures 
as the cumulative number of households included in the Job Card should match with the 
total number of households in the beginning of the year minus the number of households 
deleted plus number of households added during the year. This indicated that the figures 
given in the Management Information System (MIS) report are not correct and not reliable.  
Audit noticed that no payment of wages was made to the Job Card holders after deletion 
of Job Cards. 
Scrutiny of MIS data for 2019-20 to 2023-24 revealed systemic inconsistencies in job card 
registration and employment records under MGNREGA. The reported household size, 
derived from the number of registered persons and households, remained abnormally low 
(1.10 to 1.22), well below the normative rural household average of 4-5, indicating 
probable data entry errors or misclassification. Year-on-year additions and deletions of job 
cards did not reconcile with cumulative household figures. For instance, during 2020-21, 
a net increase of 5,886 households was expected based on additions and deletions, 
however, the cumulative figure increased by 6,934, resulting in an unexplained 
discrepancy of 1,048 households. Similar discrepancies were observed across multiple 
years. 
Further, the employment demand, offer, and availed figures were nearly identical in all 
years (coverage >99.70 per cent), a pattern statistically improbable in large-scale demand-
driven programmes. This raises concerns of data fabrication or manual adjustment to 
portray administrative efficiency. 
These anomalies undermine the credibility of MIS as a reliable tool for performance 
monitoring and policy formulation. Audit recommends that the Department conduct an 
independent data validation exercise and reconcile MIS figures with field-level records to 
ensure data integrity and accountability. 
2.2.11 Rules framed by the State Government  
Section 32 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA), 2005 stipulates that the State Government may, through a notification and 
subject to prior publication, establish rules consistent with the Act and the regulations set 
forth by the Central Government to implement its provisions. 
 
  
Good Practice 
We observed that the State Government had framed all key regulations under 
MGNREGA, including the MGNREG Scheme Rules, the State Employment 
Guarantee Fund Rules, 2014, and specific rules for Grievance Redressal, 
Unemployment Allowance, Compensation for Delay in Wage Payment, and 
other operational aspects. 
These were in alignment with the national MGNREGA framework, ensuring 
conformity with its overarching guidelines and objectives. 

68
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
68 
Audit Snapshot  
 
 
Why did we do this audit? 
 To assess compliance with MGNREG 
Act & Guidelines 
 To verify fund management, 
planning, monitoring & employment 
generation.  
 To Evaluate transparency & delivery 
of guaranteed wage employment. 
 To evaluate whether durable assets 
were created and maintained. 
 
 
What did we find? 
o Lack of scrutiny of Annual Action 
Plans at the Block and District level 
resulted in execution of inadmissible 
works. 
o Delays in release of funds. 
o Inadequate IEC activities led to low 
awareness. 
o Large shortfall in social audits  
(31.12 - 81.69 per cent) 
o Weak monitoring, IEC, and grievance 
redressal.  
o Overall governance and oversight 
deficiencies undermined MGNREGA’s 
objective of ensuring rural livelihood 
security. 
 
Registered Households: 
2.19 lakh during 2023-24 
 
 
Unskilled Workers: 
2.47 lakh during 2023-24 
 
 
Average Employment Days: 100 
 
 
Total expenditure incurred: ₹ 2,828.64 
crore during 2019-20 to 2023-24 
 
 
What do we recommend? 
o Conduct baseline surveys to ascertain 
the labour demand. 
o Scrutinise Annual Action Plans at 
Block and District level so that non-
permissible works are not included. 
o Timely release of funds to avoid interest 
and timely implementation of the 
scheme.  
o Stop diversion of administrative funds. 
o Conduct annual door-to-door job card 
verification. 
o Ensure timely release of wages to job 
card holder. 
o Implement comprehensive IEC at all 
levels. 
o Make the State Quality Control and 
Monitoring Unit functional. 
o Strengthen the Social Audit Unit to 
ensure conduct of the required number 
of audits. 
 
 


69
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
69 
Audit Findings 
Audit Objective-wise findings are discussed below. 
 
2.2.12 Planning 
 
2.2.12.1 Non-conduct of survey for the planning of the scheme 
Paragraph 6.2(i) of the Operational Guidelines , 2013, mandates that a survey of Job Card 
holders must be conducted in every Gram Panchayat (GP) (Village Employment Council 
in case of Mizoram) to establish a baseline for assessing the demand for employment in 
that GP. This survey is intended to gather information on the seasonal labour demand from 
each Job Card holder. To facilitate this, expert institutions may be empanelled in each 
State to finalise the framework and methodology for pilot baseline surveys. Once the 
methodology is established, these institutions will train district teams to carry out the 
surveys. Additionally, leading Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) could assist in this 
process. 
During audit, it was noted that the State Government had not conducted any baseline 
survey to gather information on the seasonal labour demand from Job Card holders, nor 
had it empanelled any expert institution to develop the survey framework.  
The State Government while acknowledging the audit observations stated (January 2025) 
that these issues could be addressed during Rozgar Diwas, Gram Sabha meetings, and 
through multiple application channels (oral, written, telephonic and online submission) to 
gauge the employment demand. These methods will effectively capture the labour 
requirements, ensuring timely and demand driven employment generations. 
The State Government further recognised the importance of aligning with the prescribed 
guidelines and acknowledged that a formal survey could provide additional insights to 
enhance planning and implementation. The State Government also stated that they would 
examine the feasibility of empanelling expert institutions to develop the survey framework 
and methodology and to conduct training for district teams. 
The responses of the State Government are not tenable as a baseline survey is necessary 
for successful implementation of the scheme. Further, despite their own assertion that the 
scheme operates on a demand-driven basis, beneficiary surveys conducted by Audit 
revealed that none of the Job Card holders had made formal requests for work and instead, 
demands were submitted by VEC on behalf of the Job Card holders as discussed in 
Paragraph 2.2.14.4. 
The absence of a formal baseline survey to assess seasonal labour demand, as mandated 
under Paragraph 6.2(i) of the Operational Guidelines, 2013 undermined the quality and 
effectiveness of labour budget planning in the State. Without a structured and inclusive 
Audit Objective-1:  To assess whether the planning process and financial 
management practices were adequately geared towards 
achieving the goals of the Act while adhering to relevant 
rules and regulations 

70
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
70 
mechanism to capture employment demand from all Job Card holders, particularly during 
different agricultural and lean seasons, the planning process relied on informal and 
potentially inconsistent methods such as Rozgar Diwas, Gram Sabha inputs, and individual 
applications. This may have resulted in underestimation or misallocation of person-days 
and have not been adequately responsive to actual household needs.  
 
2.2.12.2 Preparation of Annual Development Plan/ Labour Budget not in line with 
the Act 
As outlined in Section 16(3) and (4) of the MGNREG Act, every Gram Panchayat is 
mandated to prepare a Development Plan and maintain a shelf of works, which must be 
forwarded to the Programme Officer (PO) for scrutiny and preliminary approval before 
the start of the fiscal year in which the projects are intended to be executed. The 
Development Plan serves as an Annual Work Plan which includes a list of projects for 
each village, complete with administrative and technical approvals, allowing for 
immediate initiation of works upon demand. As per Paragraph 6.3 of the Operational 
Guidelines, 2013 the projects to be taken up as part of the Labour Budget should emerge 
from an integrated plan for local development with focus on Natural Resource 
Management especially on a micro watershed basis so that sustainable livelihoods are 
created. Five steps suggested for preparation of the Plan include Identification of needs, 
Identification of Resource Envelope, Preparation of Draft Development Plan, Approval of 
Gram Sabha and Plan finalisation. 
In Mizoram, the process of preparation for the Development Plan is as follows: 
(i) The VECs convene annual meetings of the Gram Sabha (GS) to estimate labour 
demand and prioritise works for the upcoming financial year. 
(ii) Based on Gram Sabha recommendations, VECs prepare an Annual Action Plan 
(AAP) and submit it to the PO. This plan should detail existing work demands, 
previous years' demands, ongoing projects, proposed costs, anticipated expenses, 
and potential implementing agencies. 
(iii) The PO shall review individual Village Annual Plans for technical feasibility and 
compiles a consolidated Block Level proposal for submission to the District 
Programme Coordinator (DPC). 
(iv) The DPC shall evaluate all Block proposals and consolidate them into a District Plan 
that includes a block-wise shelf of projects with specified time frames, expected 
person-days generated, and total costs. This plan is then discussed and approved by 
the DPC. 
(v) The DPC shall also oversee the preparation of detailed technical estimates and 
project reports for each approved work, outlining technical specifications along with 
expected outputs and outcomes. 
Recommendation: The State Government may ensure that a baseline survey is 
conducted to ascertain the labour demand. 

71
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
71 
With reference to the prescribed process in the Operational Guidelines mentioned above, 
Audit observed significant deficiencies during the audit of records from two sampled 
districts (Mamit and Kolasib) covering four Blocks (Zawlnuam, Kawrtethawveng, 
Thingdawl, and Bilkhawthlir), and 16 Village Councils. 
A comparative summary of the norms prescribed and the practices observed are given in 
Table-2.7. 
Table-2.7: Prescribed norms and practices 
Step Norm Prescribed in MGNREGA 
Operational Guidelines 
Practice Observed in 
Mizoram 
1. Identification 
of Needs 
Conduct Gram Sabha meetings to 
prioritize community needs through 
participatory tools. Special attention 
to SC/ ST priorities. 
Presidents of 16 VCs claimed 
that meetings were held, but no 
minutes were available. 
2. Resource 
Mapping 
Identify available resources from 
other schemes and local sources in 
consultation with Panchayat or 
VECs. 
No evidence that resource 
envelopes were assessed or 
integrated during plan 
preparation. 
3. Preparation of 
Draft 
Development 
Plan 
Match identified needs with 
resources to prepare a 
comprehensive Development Plan, 
including a shelf of projects for 
MGNREGA. 
Annual Action Plans were 
prepared without project-wise 
detailing, land parcel IDs or 
timelines not available. No 
implementing agencies were 
identified. 
4. Technical 
Feasibility 
Review 
PO to consolidate village plans into 
a Block-level plan after technical 
scrutiny and submit to DPC. 
POs uploaded village plans 
directly into MIS without 
conducting technical scrutiny or 
preparing a Block-level plan. 
5. Approval at 
Gram Sabha 
and DPC Levels 
Development Plan including 
MGNREGA components to be 
approved in Gram Sabha and 
finalized in Gram Panchayat/ VEC 
meetings. 
DPCs did not consolidate or 
approve Annual District Plans. 
No documentation for 2019–24 
planning cycle. 
6. Community 
Awareness & 
Transparency 
Display of approved works in public 
places to ensure community 
awareness and transparency. 
Approved project lists in VC 
Houses were not displayed; 
publicity regarding planned 
works was minimal. 
Despite the Act's requirement for Gram Sabha meetings to approve development plans, 
there was no documentation confirming that such meetings to discuss and approve 
development plans were held in the 16 villages reviewed. Village Council Presidents, who 
are also Village Employment Council Presidents, claimed that meetings were convened to 
identify work types and approve AAPs. The AAPs are vital as they represent participatory 
planning outcomes. However, this essential activity was absent as there was no record of 
Gram Sabha’s minutes for approval of the AAPs. 
At the Block level, while village AAPs were collected and compiled, they were not 
scrutinised for technical feasibility or compliance with guidelines. The POs did not prepare 
consolidated Block Level proposals for the approval of the DPC. Instead, village plans 
were merely uploaded into the MIS. 

72
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
72 
At the District level, there was no documented AAPs for 2019-2024 that included a block-
wise shelf of projects detailing labour demand assessments or estimated costs. AAPs 
submitted by POs at Block levels lacked scrutiny for feasibility or compliance. 
All the village-level plans plot numbers or timelines for project execution were not 
specified. Additionally, in Annual Plans there was no identification of implementing 
agencies. 
There was minimal publicity regarding proposed works submitted by VECs; and not a 
single VEC ensured that the list of approved works were displayed in Village Council 
Houses for community awareness. 
The above findings indicate serious shortcomings in the formulation and preparation of 
Development Plans/ Annual Action Plans in Mamit and Kolasib districts from 2019-20 to 
2023-24. The implementation proceeded without approved plans at both Block and District 
levels; plans prepared were mere compilations from village level without adequate 
scrutiny for admissibility or technical feasibility. The absence of documented evidence 
confirming technical feasibility assessments further substantiates these audit observations. 
While acknowledging the audit observations regarding deficiency in preparation and 
scrutiny of AAPs as mandated under Section 16(3) & (4) of MGNREG Act, the State 
Government in its reply stated (January 2025) that efforts were made to prepare the AAPs 
as per the schedule prescribed by Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD). The VECs 
convened meetings to identify work to prioritise, and plans were compiled and uploaded 
in the MIS. However, the Government recognises the need for improvement in 
documentation and scrutiny processes to ensure compliance with guidelines.  
The reply of the State Government stating that all the Annual Plans were prepared as per 
the schedule prescribed by MoRD is not tenable. The VECs convening meetings to identify 
‘work to be prioritised’ in the annual plans and uploading the annual plans in the MIS were 
not the only procedures required. Other procedures such as scrutiny for technical 
feasibility, admissibility and demand assessments were also not followed. 
The absence of participatory planning, documentation, and technical scrutiny in the 
preparation of AAPs undermines the core principles of community ownership, 
transparency, and accountability. Without Gram Sabha approvals or public display of 
approved works, community oversight is weakened, increasing the risk of irrelevant or 
misaligned projects. The inability to assess technical feasibility or identify implementing 
agencies led to poor execution and resource inefficiency. Moreover, uploading unverified 
plans into the MIS compromises the integrity of programme monitoring and may conceal 
systemic non-compliance, potentially resulting in financial and operational irregularities. 
2.2.12.3 Inadmissible Expenditure 
As specified in Paragraph 7.3.1 of the Operational Guidelines, 2013, works such as 
boulders, pebbles, or shrub removal, as well as silt application are not permitted as 
standalone projects. These activities may only be conducted as part of broader initiatives 
aimed at transforming uncultivable and barren or fallow lands into cultivable areas through 
one-time land development efforts.  

73
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
73 
Furthermore, Paragraph 7.2.2 of the Operational Guidelines, 2013 indicates that if a State 
Government finds the existing list of permissible works inadequate for generating 
sufficient employment under MGNREGA, it may propose additional works that could 
enhance employment opportunities and contribute to the creation of durable assets and 
strengthen the livelihood resources of rural communities. These proposals must be 
submitted to the Central Government for review and approval. 
Audit examination of the AAPs from the two sampled districts revealed that several village 
AAPs included non-permissible boulder works related to retaining walls. The details of 
these non-permissible works are summarised in Appendices-2.6 and 2.7. 
The lack of thorough examination regarding the admissibility and technical feasibility of 
the AAPs at the Village level has led to inclusion of inadmissible works in the AAPs. 
Specifically, the Annual Action Plans submitted to the Government of India (GoI) for two 
sampled districts included non-permissible works resulting in inadmissible expenditure of 
₹ 0.59 crore. The inadmissible expenditure of ₹ 0.28 crore was for 23 works in Mamit 
District and ₹ 0.31 crore across 12 works in Kolasib District during 2019-20 and 2023-24.  
These works were shown as completed and executed through the VECs. Also, there was 
no indication of technical feasibility checks or justification aligning with permissible work 
criteria. 
The AAPs were submitted to the Government of India without proper scrutiny, enabling 
the uploading of non-permissible works into the MIS. 
The lack of scrutiny at the planning stage allowed inadmissible works to be executed and 
publicly funded, resulting in an avoidable expenditure of ₹ 0.59 crore. This not only 
undermines the intended objectives of MGNREGA which focus on generating 
employment through durable and livelihood-enhancing assets but also reflects systemic 
weaknesses in oversight and technical vetting. 
The State Government while acknowledging the audit observation regarding inclusion of 
non-permissible works in the annual plan, have assured its commitment to improve the 
planning, execution and monitoring process to prevent such oversight in the future and 
ensure compliance with the Operational Guidelines. 
 
2.2.12.4  Database not maintained by Block Resource Centres 
According to Paragraph 4.3.2 of the Operational Guidelines, 2013 a Block Resource 
Centre (BRC) will be set up as a resource and facilitation centre for knowledge inputs, 
capacity building and convergence. Existing resource organizations from the voluntary 
sector could be identified as BRC. The BRC will perform the following functions: 
(i) Technical Support:  Providing technical inputs for planning by leveraging a 
broader network of resource persons/ institutions. 
Recommendation: The State Government may ensure monitoring and scrutiny of 
Annual Plans at the Block and District level so that non-permissible works are not 
included in the Annual plan. 

74
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
74 
(ii) Data Management:  Maintaining a comprehensive database of local natural 
resources, such as groundwater, rainfall, and soil types, which are essential for effective 
planning. The BRC also facilitates access to maps and topographical sheets of each 
habitations for Cluster Facilitation Teams (CFTs).  
(iii) Convergence Facilitation: Ensuring convergence between MGNREGA and other 
government production-oriented schemes to address gap filling and value addition so that 
assets created under MGNREGA are productively used by the poor to enhance their 
income. 
Audit observed that while BRCs were established in each block, there was a significant 
deficiency in maintaining databases related to local natural resource endowments. 
Additionally, BRCs struggled to effectively facilitate convergence between MGNREGA 
and other production-oriented Government schemes, which limited opportunities for 
addressing gaps and adding value to existing programmes. 
The absence of reliable databases on natural resources restricts evidence-based planning 
and results in poorly targeted interventions. Furthermore, the BRCs’ inability to facilitate 
convergence weakens the integration of MGNREGA with other development schemes, 
leading to missed opportunities for income generation and long-term asset utility for rural 
communities. 
The State Government has acknowledged the audit observations regarding the deficiencies 
in the functioning of the BRCs. To address the identified gaps and strengthen the role of 
BRCs, the Government assured to undertake the following corrective measures: 
(i) Database Development and Resources Mapping; 
(ii) Capacity Building and Training; 
(iii) Convergence Action Plans; 
(iv) Monitoring and Evaluation; and 
(v) Awareness and outreach. 
 
2.2.12.5  Human Resource and Capacity Building Institution  
As envisaged in Paragraph 5 of Operational Guidelines, 2013, the capacity building and 
technical support for rural development officials at the State, District, and Block levels as 
well as for Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs) is crucial for effective implementation of 
Government rural development schemes, policies and plans. The successful execution of 
centrally sponsored programmes like MGNREGA involves intricate and multi-layered 
processes. Additionally, recent amendments to the MGNREG Act, 2005 have underscored 
Recommendation: The State Government may consider developing and 
operationalising a block-level digital database system within each BRC to 
systematically capture, update, and share information on local natural resources 
(e.g., soil, water, topography) and convergence activities. 

75
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
75 
the need to enhance capacity building among all stakeholders to achieve desired outcomes. 
To strengthen the capacity building infrastructure, several key aspects need to be ensured: 
(i) Adequate infrastructure at cutting-edge level of implementation; 
(ii) An institutionalised arrangement for involvement of Civil Society Organisations 
(CSOs) in training and support; 
(iii) Trainers need to have required practical experience from the field in the subjects 
they are imparting training on; 
(iv) Training to be linked to implementation experience and the context of 
implementation; 
(v) Development of relevant course content and quality training material; 
(vi) A certification system to ensure quality of training; and 
(vii) A minimum acceptable standard for human resource capabilities to be defined to 
bring parity to human resources deployed across diverse conditions. 
To facilitate this, a cascading network of capacity-building institutions should be 
established. States should assess fund requirements for capacity building and allocate 
specific funds from the administrative expense head. Each District must create a Training 
Action Plan tailored to cater to the requirements of each category of functionaries. 
The State Institute of Rural Development & Panchayati Raj Institution (SIRD&PRI) is 
tasked with MGNREGA Human Resource Development and capacity building. Training 
has been conducted on need basis from the Administrative Fund without prior assessments. 
Details of training imparted to MGNREGA staff in Mizoram during 2019-20 to 2023-24 
is given in Table-2.8. 
Table-2.8: Training imparted to MGNREGA staff at State Institute of Rural 
Development (SIRD) 
Sl. 
No. Year 
Number of staff 
employed under 
MGNREGA 
Number of staff assessed as 
requiring training on Human 
resource & Capacity building 
Number of staff 
trained 
1. 2019-20 773 357 357 
2. 2020-21 799 NIL NIL 
3. 2021-22 811 NIL NIL 
4. 2022-23 829 NIL NIL 
5. 2023-24 881 119 119 
Source: Reply of the Department 
From the above Table-2.8, it can be seen that training requirements were not assessed and 
no employees were imparted training during 2020-21 to 2022-23, however, 357 and 119 
staff were provided training during 2019-20 and 2023-24 respectively. Audit further 
observed the absence of a structured training calendar, training modules and prior 
assessment of requirements along with lack of training opportunities during the specified 
period except 2019-20 and 2023-24. 

76
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
76 
The lack of systematic assessment and consistent implementation of training programs for 
MGNREGA staff has critical implications for the effective implementation of the scheme. 
The absence of training from 2020-21 to 2022-23, despite increasing staff strength, 
suggests a neglect of continuous capacity development, which is essential for effective 
planning, implementation, and monitoring of MGNREGA works. This gap likely 
contributed to operational inefficiencies, non-compliance with guidelines, and weak 
convergence efforts observed during the same period. 
The State Government accepted (January 2025) the audit observations regarding the 
deficiencies in assessments, planning and implementation of capacity-building initiatives 
for MGNREGA staff. 
The State Government however clarified that Covid-19 pandemic severely disrupted all 
planned training activities from 2019-20 to 2022-23, making it challenging to conduct in-
person training sessions. While online training could have been explored, constraints such 
as limited digital infrastructure in rural areas and lack of technical know-how among 
stakeholders hindered this approached. 
The State Government further stated that training under MGNREGA was imparted 
primarily through the SIRD&PRI; however, efforts would be made to address emerging 
requirements through need-based training sessions. 
There was no upward consolidation of the village plan into Block and District plans with 
proper scrutiny for technical feasibility and admissibility of the works under the scheme. 
This resulted in inclusion of non-permissible works which are in the negative list as per 
the Operational Guidelines. The Block Resource Centres did not maintain the database for 
natural resource endowment ( viz., Groundwater, rainfall, soils, etc.). The State 
Government also did not ensure the convergence of MGNREGA and other 
production-oriented schemes of the Government for gap filling and value addition in the 
AAPs. The State Government did not prepare the training requirement, training modules 
or calendar for human resource development and capacity building. 
 
2.2.13  Deficiencies in Financial Management 
During the course of audit, deficiencies in financial management, especially with regard 
to delay in release of the State and Central Share and diversion of funds from the 
administrative component were observed, as discussed in the succeeding Paragraphs. 
Recommendation: The State Government may consider institutionalising an 
Annual Training Needs Assessment (TNA) and Training Action Plan (TAP) for 
MGNREGA staff at all levels, linked to performance gaps and scheme 
implementation priorities. This plan should include blended learning methods 
(in-person and digital), a calendar-based schedule, and be supported by a 
structured budget under the administrative expenditure head. 

77
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
77 
2.2.13.1 Delay in release of Central Share and State Share by the State Government 
As per the Government of India Sanction Orders for Material Components and 
Administrative Contingency, the State Government should transfer the fund along with 
State share to the State Employment Guarantee Fund within three days during 2019-20 to 
2020-21 and within 15 days during 2021-22 to 2023-24 from the date of receipt of these 
funds. In case of non-transfer beyond this period, the State Government would be liable to 
pay interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum for the period of delay beyond the 
specified period related to the funds released during 2019-20 to 2020-21. However, there 
is no provision of interest payment by the State Government for delayed release of funds 
beyond the specified time during 2021-22 to 2023-24. 
Audit observed that the State Government did not release the Central Share of Funds and 
the State share within three days from the date of receipt of funds from the Government of 
India. There were delays in release of the Central share of fund during 2019-20 to 
2022 - 24 ranging from 12 days to 345 days as given in Appendix-2.8. 
Similarly, the State Government did not release the State matching share within the 
stipulated period of three days. There were delays in release of the State Matching share 
for periods ranging from 53 days to 213 days as given in Appendix-2.9. 
The delay in release of Central and State share attracted a penal interest of ₹ 3.62 crore 
(Appendix-2.8) during 2019-20 to 2020-21 but this had not been paid by the State 
Government. 
Such delays disrupt the timely execution of planned works, affecting wage disbursement 
and employment generation for rural households who rely on the scheme for livelihood 
support. Secondly, the withholding of funds beyond the prescribed timeline violates the 
scheme’s financial discipline and accountability provisions, leading to non-compliance 
with Government of India guidelines.  
The State Government, while accepting (January 2025) the delay in the release of Central 
and State Shares as highlighted in the audit stated that the delays were due to factors 
beyond the control of the Rural Development Department. It stated that efforts were being 
made to streamline the fund release process through better coordination with the Finance 
Department to avoid such delays in the future. The matter regarding penal interest would 
be taken up with the concerned officials of the State Government for necessary action. The 
State Finance Department also stated (January 2025) that the delays in releasing of 
MGNREGA funds during 2019-20 to 2023-24 were ‘due to the financial crisis faced by 
the State, especially cash crunch in the exchequer’. 
 
2.2.13.2 Diversion of Administrative Funds of the Scheme 
As per Paragraph 12.5.6 of the Operation Guidelines, 2013, expenditure from the 
MGNREGA Administrative Fund is not permissible for payment of Salaries/ remuneration 
Recommendation: The State Government may ensure timely release of funds to 
the Implementing Agencies for timely implementation of the Scheme. 

78
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
78 
to functionaries already engaged by the Government/ PRIs/ any other implementing 
agency. 
During the course of Audit, it was observed that out of ₹ 16.82 crore released by the 
Central Government for meeting administrative expenses during 2022-23, an amount of 
₹ 1.30 crore was diverted by the State Rural Development Department to meet the salary 
of the then District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) employees without getting prior 
approval from the Government of India (GoI). The amount has not been recovered from 
DRDA as of January 2025. 
The State Government acknowledged (January 2025) that ₹ 1.30 crore was utilised to meet 
the salary requirements of DRDA employees due to urgent financial constraints, with the 
intention of recovering the amount in due course. They have also recognised that this 
utilisation does not align with MGNREGA guidelines. Efforts are already underway to 
refund/ recoup the diverted amount at the earliest, and necessary steps are being taken to 
prevent such occurrences in the future. 
The reply of the State Government is not tenable since diversion of MGNREGA for 
meeting fund requirements for other purposes is not permissible and against the spirit of 
the scheme. 
Conclusion 
There were significant lapses in financial management under MGNREGA, including 
persistent delays in the release of Central and State shares ranging up to 345 and 213 
days respectively which disrupted timely wage payments and scheme implementation, 
violating Government of India guidelines and attracting unpaid penal interest of 
₹ 3.62 crore. Additionally, the diversion of ₹ 1.30 crore from the administrative fund to 
pay salaries of DRDA employees, without prior approval from GoI, constituted a clear 
breach of Operational Guidelines, 2013 and undermined the integrity of scheme 
financing. These actions reflect poor fiscal discipline and weak internal controls, 
adversely affecting the efficiency of the programme. 
 
2.2.14 Access to employment opportunities and generation of employment 
 
2.2.14.1 No door-to-door survey conducted for registration 
As envisaged in Paragraph 3.1.1 of Operational Guidelines, 2013, there may be some 
households who did not seek registration earlier as they were not aware of their 
entitlements or were denied and therefore have not been registered. There would be 
another category of households who would like additional names to be entered on account 
of one or more members having become adult(s) There would be yet another category 
whose details were entered wrong in the MIS database.  
Audit Objective-2: To assess whether fair access to employment opportunities was 
achieved, as well as employment adequately generated, leading 
to social protection and livelihood security as envisaged 

79
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
79 
To ensure that the above mentioned three categories are registered, a door-to-door survey 
should be undertaken by each VEC every year to identify eligible households who have 
been missed out and wish to be registered. It needs to be ensured that this survey is held at 
that time of the year when people have not migrated to other areas in search of employment 
or for other reasons. The PO will lay down a schedule for this survey and ensure that all 
GPs in his/ her charge have done this survey. 
During the course of audit in the 16 sampled villages, it was observed that door to door 
survey to identify eligible households to be registered under the Act was not done. Besides, 
the names of newly eligible adults were not added, and corrections for Job Card holders 
whose details were incorrectly entered in the MIS database were also not made. 
While accepting the fact (January 2025) the State Government stated that door-to-door 
surveys were not conducted in the 16 sampled villages to identify eligible households for 
registration. Instead, information dissemination was carried out using Public 
Announcement Systems and traditional methods like 'Tlangau'39 or Public Crier to inform 
villagers. 
The State Government also recognised the limitations of these methods in ensuring 
comprehensive coverage of all eligible households, especially those who may not be at 
home/ in the village when the announcements are made. The State Government further 
stated that they will ensure compliance with guidelines by conducting annual door-to- door 
surveys in all Gram Panchayats (GPs) and updating the MIS database for new adult 
members and corrections in Job Card details. 
By not carrying out a door-to-door survey, it is likely that the State Government may have 
excluded eligible households. Families who were unaware of their rights or previously 
denied registration may continue to be left out, preventing them from accessing benefits 
to which they are entitled. Without a systematic survey, errors in the MIS database may 
persist, leading to incorrect records and potential difficulties in service delivery. Further, 
households which need to add newly eligible adults may struggle to update their records, 
affecting their ability to receive benefits. 
 
2.2.14.2 Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities not done 
As envisaged in Paragraph 5.4.2 of Operational Guidelines, 2013, the State should develop 
an Information Education and Communication (IEC) Plan on MGNREGA with focus on 
reaching out to the registered workers as well as other groups which could benefit from 
MGNREGA. The IEC plan should clearly indicate State, District, Block and local level 
activities. Creative mix of interpersonal communication (IPC) methods, mid media and 
 
39  ‘Tlangau’ is a traditional village crier who made all important public announcement on behalf of the Village 
administration like the Chief or Village Councils. He is usually hired by the village administration and paid 
annually by the public either in terms of paddy/rice or money and his annual rate to be paid by each family is 
fixed by the village administration 
Recommendation: The State Government may ensure conduct of door-to-door 
surveys so that no adult individuals who are ready to do unskilled labour are left 

80
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
80 
mass media need to be evolved to disseminate the chosen messages. Civil Society 
Organisations (CSO) can be engaged for support and strengthening of IEC activities to 
eventually ensure that wage seekers are able to secure their rights, entitlements, demand 
work and demand wage payments on time.  Cost effective media interventions like puppet 
shows, folk dance and songs, street plays focused group discussions, participatory games, 
wall writings, posters, notice boards, etc., can be used for dissemination of messages in 
rural areas.  
It was observed that the State Government did not prepare the IEC Action Plan since 2016. 
The IEC activities undertaken were in the form of media interventions such as telecast of 
documentary film at Door Darshan Kendra and local television networks, publication 
Operational Guidelines, 2013 in vernacular language only. There was no record to show 
dissemination of information through interpersonal communications such as puppet 
shows, folk dance and songs, street plays, focused group discussions, participatory games, 
etc., during 2019-20 to 2023-24. 
The absence of a structured IEC Action Plan and the minimal, limited-scope media 
interventions observed during 2019–20 to 2023–24 indicate serious non-compliance with 
the IEC mandate under Paragraph 5.4.2 of the Operational Guidelines, 2013. The State 
Government’s reliance solely on passive dissemination methods, such as telecasting films 
and publishing guidelines, without employing interpersonal communication tools like 
street plays, puppet shows, or focus group discussions, has significantly weakened 
grassroots awareness. This has likely contributed to poor understanding of entitlements 
among rural workers, reduced demand for work, and limited citizen participation in the 
programme.  
While accepting the audit observation, the State Government (January 2025) 
acknowledged that IEC activities can be funded from the administrative cost of the 
scheme. The State Government also assured that the formulation of a comprehensive IEC 
Action Plan and incorporate cost-effective media interventions to ensure widespread 
dissemination of information about MGNREGA entitlements and rights in alignment with 
the guidelines. 
 
2.2.14.3 Job Cards in the custody of the Village Employment Council 
As per Paragraph 3.1.5 (Box No. 3.4) of the Operational Guidelines, 2013, in order to 
ensure transparency and accountability, it must be ensured that the Job Card is always in 
the custody of the household to whom it is issued. If for any reason such as like updating 
of record, it is taken by the Project Implementing Agencies, it must be returned the same 
day after updates. Possession of Job Card by any other person, including functionaries and 
PRIs, without valid reason, shall be considered as a violation of the MGNREG Act and 
Recommendation: The State Government may formulate and implement a 
comprehensive, multi-tiered IEC Action Plan covering State, District, Block, and 
GP levels, with clear timelines, responsibilities, and budget allocations under the 
administrative expenditure head. 

81
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
81 
punishable under Section 25 of the Act , which states that whoever contravenes the 
provisions of this Act shall on conviction be liable to a fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees. 
During the course of beneficiary survey in all the 16 sampled villages, it was observed that 
all the Job Cards were in the custody of the VECs. There was no reason whatsoever on 
record as to why the Job Cards were in the custody of the VECs all the time during 2019 
to 2024. Also, keeping the Job Cards in the custody of the VECs denied the Job Card 
holders about information on their entitlements and also left them unaware of the 
correctness or otherwise of the entries made in the Job Cards. 
The State Government stated that the custody of Job Cards with VEC came to notice only 
after audit pointed this out. 
The State Government also took note of the violation highlighted and the concerns raised 
about lack of access to information by beneficiaries regarding their entitlements and entries 
made in their Job Cards. Moving forward, the State Government had issued clear 
instructions to concerned officials to immediately return Job Cards to the rightful holders 
and ensure that no permanent retention occurs, vide letter dated 22 January 2025 
Additionally, the State Government stated that awareness campaigns would be conducted 
to educate beneficiaries and officials on their rights and responsibilities related to Job 
Cards to promote transparency and accountability in compliance with Operational 
Guidelines, 2013. 
 
2.2.14.4 Formal request for works not done by Job Card holders  
As outlined in Clause 4.3 of Master Circular on MGNREGA, State Governments are 
mandated to put in place multiple mechanisms like oral application, written application, 
telephonic application, through Kiosk set up by the State Government and online 
application by which rural households can submit applications for demand for work at the 
Gram Panchayat, Block and District level. 
It was observed that there was no system in place for formal demand of work by job 
seekers/ Job Card holders. Instead, the demand for works were done by the VECs on behalf 
of the job seekers. This practice, while partly attributed to local constraints such as low 
literacy and lack of stationery, compromises transparency and restricts citizen participation 
in the scheme. 
The State Government accepted the observations and stated (January 2025) that the VECs 
have been facilitating group-based demands on behalf of job seekers due to practical 
difficulties faced by Job Card holders in rural areas, such as literacy barriers and lack of 
stationery resources. The State Government will henceforth adopt other options of oral 
applications, online and telephonic applications which could provide an alternative 
accessible option for job applications. The Government would strengthen awareness 
Recommendation: The Department may ensure that Job Cards are updated 
regularly and kept in the custody of the card holders. 

82
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
82 
campaign such as the use of digital platforms and kiosks for online applications including 
Capacity Building Programmes for training the beneficiaries. 
Going forward, the system for receiving work applications should necessarily include 
multiple access points such as POs, Gram Rozgar Sahayaks, VEC Members, Ward 
Members, Anganwadi Workers, Mates, Self Help Groups (SHGs), Village Organisations, 
Village Revenue Functionaries, Common Service Centres, Producer Groups under 
Deeendayal Antyodaya Yojana-National Rural Livelihood Mission, and MGNREGA 
Labour Groups. This inclusive, multi-actor approach is essential to uphold the rights of 
rural workers and strengthen the demand-based nature of the scheme. 
 
2.2.14.5 Periodical Updating of Job Cards not done 
As per Paragraph 3.1.5(xiv) and (xv) of Operational Guidelines, 2013 GPs will also 
undertake an annual updating exercise of Job Cards in the same manner as registration, the 
time for which should be fixed keeping in mind the work and migration season of the local 
workforce. Any modifications in the particulars of the household as entered at the time of 
registration will be simultaneously updated into Management Information System, following the 
same steps. Similarly, if for any reasons, a Job Card is to be cancelled, the Programme Officer, 
after independent verification of facts and giving the concerned person an opportunity to be 
heard, may direct the Gram Panchayat/ Village Employment Council to cancel such Job 
Cards. The list of all cancelled Job Cards will be made public and should be presented to the 
Gram Sabha. Information should accordingly be entered in the MIS. In the MIS, the Job Cards 
may, however, appear to have not been deleted, and an asterisk will appear against such cards 
meaning that the Job Card was issued earlier but is no more valid. 
During the course of the beneficiary survey in the 16 sampled villages, it was noticed that 
the signatures of the accountant were not available and payment details not made in Job 
Cards as shown Table-2.9 and Table-2.10 respectively. 
Table-2.9: No signature of the Accountant 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Village 
Name of RD Block Name of 
District 
Total No of 
beneficiaries 
surveyed 
Total Number 
of JCs without 
signature of 
Accountant 
1. Rajiv Nagar Kawtethawveng Mamit 17 17 
2. Mualthuam Kawrtethawveng Mamit 16 16 
3. Khantlang Kawrtethawveng Mamit 15 15 
4. Lundai Thingdawl Kolasib 15 15 
5. Serkhan Thingdawl Kolasib 18 18 
6. Lungmuat Thingdawl Kolasib 15 15 
Source: Beneficiary survey report 
Recommendation: The Department should establish a system for submission of 
work applications through prescribed modes, ensuring that Job Card holders are 
able to register their demand for employment in a timely and accessible manner. 

83
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
83 
Table-2.10: Entry for payment details not made in JCs 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Village 
Name of RD 
Block 
Name of 
District 
Total No of 
beneficiaries 
surveyed 
Total Number of 
JCs without details 
of payment entered 
in JC 
Year(s) 
1. Rajiv 
Nagar 
Kawrtethawveng Mamit 17 17 2021-22 & 
2022-23 
2. Saiphai Bilkhawthlir Kolasib 16 16 2022-23 
Source: Beneficiary survey report 
On further scrutiny of the payment details in the Bank Pass Books, it was observed that 
payments to the Job Card holders were fully made during the period, but the Job Cards 
were not updated. 
Audit of 16 sampled villages across Mamit and Kolasib districts revealed widespread non-
compliance with Paragraph 3.1.5(xiv) and (xv) of the Operational Guidelines, 2013 which 
mandate annual updating of Job Cards including signatures, beneficiary details, and 
payment records. Data showed that 96 Job Cards lacked the signature of the Accountant, 
and 33 Job Cards had no payment details entered for multiple financial years (2021-22 and 
2022–23), despite evidence of payment in beneficiaries’ bank passbooks. 
This non-updation of Job Cards undermines transparency and weakened the credibility of 
the MIS, which relies on accurate field-level records. Beneficiaries are denied access to 
up-to-date information on entitlements, wages earned, and work performed which are the 
key elements for ensuring accountability and facilitating social audits. Moreover, the 
absence of verification or deletion of obsolete Job Cards increases the risk of data inflation 
and potential misuse of funds. 
While accepting (January 2025) audit observations the State Government assured to take 
up the following activities immediately: 
i) Immediate instructions for Job Card updates; 
ii) Enhanced Monitoring System; and 
iii) Training and awareness Programmes.  
The State Government has not furnished further information on the action taken 
(May 2025). 
2.2.14.6 Wages not paid within the prescribed time 
As per Paragraph 8.8(ii) of Operational Guideline, 2013, to ensure timely payments to the 
workers for the work done, State shall fix up maximum time limits for each completing 
process resulting in payment of wages to the wage seekers, in such a way that each wage 
seeker gets the wage payments for the work done in the week by the end of the subsequent 
week. 
Also, as per Paragraph 8.8(iii) of Operational Guidelines, 2013, in case wages are paid 
beyond 15 days of work done, compensation as calculated under provisions of Payment of 
Wages Act, 1936 shall be paid along with wages without the worker having to file a claim 

84
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
84 
for compensation. It is clarified that this will not affect the individual’s rights and 
entitlements under the relevant Acts. 
During the course of the beneficiary survey and cross verification of Job Cards and bank 
statements in the sampled districts of Mamit and Kolasib, it was observed in Mamit 
District that there were delays in payments of wages beyond the stipulated period of 15 
days ranged between 11 and 80 days from the last day of completion of work as given in 
Table-2.11. 
Table-2.11: Delayed payment of wages in Mamit District: 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Name of 
village & 
District 
Job 
Card 
No. 
Period of 
work 
Wage 
amount 
(in ₹) 
Last due 
date of 
payment 
of wages 
Date of 
actual 
payment 
Delay in 
days 
1. Lalthangi Kawrthah, 
Mamit 
218-D 19/05/2020 
to 
03/06/2020 
3,150 18/06/2020 04/07/2020 19 
2. Lalthangi Kawrthah, 
Mamit 
-do- 13/06/2020 
to 
29/06/2020 
3,150 14/07/2020 08/08/2020 24 
3. Lalchunglura Kawrthah, 
Mamit 
407-D 22/08/2019 
to 
31/08/2019 
1,899 15/09/2019 04/12/2019 80 
4. Lalchunglura Kawrthah, 
Mamit 
-do- 20/09/2019 
to 
28/09/2019 
1,688 13/10/2019 13/12/2019 51 
5 Lalbiakvela Kawrthah, 
Mamit 
406-D 05/12/2023 
to 
16/12/2023 
2,739 31/12/2023 03/02/2024 34 
6. Lalhmuchhuaka Kawrthah, 
Mamit 
432-D 16/11/2022 
to 
23/11/2022 
1,631 08/12/2022 20/12/2022 12 
7. Niranjoy 
Chakma 
Khantlang, 
Mamit 
102-D 18/10/2021 
to 
26/10/2021 
932 10/11/2021 22/12/2021 41 
8. Niranjoy 
Chakma 
Khantlang, 
Mamit 
102-D 17/11/2021 
to 
21/11/2021 
932 06/12/2021 22/12/2021 15 
9. Banakumar 
Chakma 
Khantlang, 
Mamit 
11-D 18/10/2021 
to 
26/10/2021 
1,864 10/11/2021 22/12/2021 41 
10. Lalrama Thaidawr, 
Mamit 
 9/12/2019 to 
18/12/2019 
2,110 02.01.2020 05/03/2020 61 
11. Lalrama Thaidawr, 
Mamit 
 16/01/2020 
to 
29/01/2020 
2,532 13.02.2020 20/03/2020 33 
12. Lalrama Thaidawr, 
Mamit 
 20/02/2020 
to 
27/02/2020 
1,479 14.03.2020 07/04/2020 23 
13. Sulekha 
Chakma 
Rajiv Nagar, 
Mamit 
749-D 5/12/2023  
to  
6/12/2023 
2,739 01/01/2024 03/02/2024 32 
14. Kinendra Rajiv Nagar, 
Mamit 
599-D 16/08/2023 
to  
26/08/2023 
2,490 10/09/2023 21/09/2023 11 

85
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
85 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Name of 
village & 
District 
Job 
Card 
No. 
Period of 
work 
Wage 
amount 
(in ₹) 
Last due 
date of 
payment 
of wages 
Date of 
actual 
payment 
Delay in 
days 
15. Dhanabi Rajiv Nagar, 
Mamit 
1007 16/08/2023 
to 
26/08/2023 
2,490 10/09/2023 21/09/2023 11 
16. Dhanabi Rajiv Nagar, 
Mamit 
1007 12/01/2024 
to  
27/01/2024 
3,486 11/02/2024 25/03/2024 42 
17. Kusum Rajiv Nagar, 
Mamit 
175-D 16/08/2023 
to 
26/08/2023 
2,490 10/09/2023 21/09/2023 11 
18. Kinaram Rajiv Nagar, 
Mamit 
147-D 16/08/2023 
to 
26/08/2023 
2,490 10/09/2023 21/09/2023 11 
Source: Beneficiary survey report 
Audit observed that wage payments under MGNREGA in Mamit District were frequently 
delayed, ranging from 11 to 80 days beyond the permissible 15-day period, in violation of 
Paragraphs 8.8(ii) and 8.8(iii) of the Operational Guidelines, 2013. Despite the legal 
provision for automatic compensation for delayed payments, no evidence of such 
payments was found. The delays, recurring across several years and villages, indicate 
systemic inefficiencies in the wage disbursement process, including technical issues, poor 
fund flow coordination, and inadequate MIS oversight. The State Government’s 
explanation attributing delays to unspecified technical glitches was generic and 
insufficient, as it neither acknowledge nor address the root causes. These persistent delays 
undermine the core objective of MGNREGA to provide timely wage-based livelihood 
security to rural households. 
While accepting (January 2015) the fact, the State Government stated that the delays in 
payment of wages were caused by technical issues which had affected the timely payment 
of wages to workers. The State Government had assured to immediately rectify the 
technical glitches. However, the details of technical glitches were not specified in the 
Government’s reply.  
Though the State Government attributed the delays to technical glitches and assured 
corrective measures, the recurring nature of delays across multiple years and villages 
indicates systemic errors in fund flow mechanisms, MIS coordination, and system-level 
accountability. 
 
Recommendations: The State Government may consider strengthening real-time 
fund flow monitoring and establishing a District-level grievance redressal and 
escalation mechanism to ensure timely wage disbursal and uphold worker 
entitlements. 

86
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
86 
2.2.14.7 Social Security in terms of Insurance not provided to the Job Card holder 
As per Paragraph 8.9 of the Operational Guidelines, 2013 the workers are covered under 
the Janashree Bima Yojana (JBY) 40 implemented by Ministry of Finance. JBY provides 
life insurance coverage and disability benefits to rural people. 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) 41 has been extended to all Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA workers/ beneficiaries who have worked for more than 15 days in the preceding 
financial year. 
District Programme Coordinators and Programme Officers are required to make workers 
aware of these schemes. For RSBY a list of workers/ households that are entitled to this 
scheme is available in NREGASoft. This list should be downloaded and names of 
households that are already not covered under RSBY be shared with the nodal department 
in the State Government that is implementing RSBY. DPCs and POs should also help in 
enrolment for RSBY whenever enrolment takes place in respective district/ block. In 
Mizoram the Job Card holders were not insured under any of the Insurance schemes.  
Thus, due to lackadaisical attitude of the District Programme Coordinators and Programme 
Officers in creating awareness of the schemes among the Job Card holders, the workers 
were denied their rightful entitlement to avail the abovementioned insurance schemes of 
the Government of India. This omission deprived MGNREGA workers of essential life 
insurance, disability protection, and health coverage, thereby exposing vulnerable rural 
households to catastrophic financial risks in times of illness, injury or death. It reflected 
deficiencies in inter-departmental coordination, awareness generation and execution of 
mandated social protection measures. 
In reply, the State Government stated (February 2025) that efforts were made at the District 
and Block levels to guide eligible workers towards enrolment under alternative Social 
Security Schemes available in the State. 
The reply of the State Government is not tenable as there is no record to show that Job 
Card holders have availed the benefit of any insurance scheme available in the State. 
 
Conclusion: 
Door-to-door surveys of household to ensure registration of all the adult members who 
are willing to do unskilled manual works had not been done. Consequentially the 
possibility of entitled members being left out from the list of Job Card holders cannot be 
ruled out. This also reduces the possibility of making necessary corrections in case of 
wrong entries in the Job Cards or MIS. Under IEC activities there was no dissemination 
 
40  JBY has been merged with Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJBY) in 2015 
41  RSBY has been replaced with Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (ABPMJAY) in 
2018 
Recommendation: The Department may ensure that the DPCs and POs undertake 
structured awareness initiatives to sensitise workers about the available insurance/ social 
security schemes. 

87
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
87 
of information through interpersonal communications like puppet shows, folk dance 
and songs, street plays and other forms of activities. The lists of approved works were 
also not displayed in the Village Council House. Job Cards were not in the custody of 
the Job Card holders and periodical updating of Job Cards was not done. This denied 
the Job Card holders basic information such as the number of day-works they have been 
provided. Payment of wages were not made on time in Mamit District. 
 
2.2.15 Creation and maintenance of durable and useful assets 
 
2.2.15.1 Non-verifiable works 
Creation of durable assets and strengthening of rural livelihood base is an important 
objective under the MGNREGA. With an objective to improve the transparency and to 
enhance the visibility of the programme, the Ministry of Rural Development, Government 
of India has started implementation of GeoMGNREGA for geotagging of assets created 
under MGNREGA in partnership with the National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) of the 
Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) viz., BHUVAN since 11 December 2017. It 
follows a systematic creation of database on assets using technological interventions like 
mobile-based photo geo-tagging and a GIS based information system for online recording 
and monitoring. 
During the course of Joint Physical verification (July-August 2024) of works, it was 
observed that in three out of the 16 sampled villages in Mamit District, works such as 
roadside plantation, construction of irrigation canals, etc., were not traceable on ground as 
given below in Table-2.12. 
Table-2.12: List of non-verifiable works 
Sl. 
No. Name of work Year Name of 
Village 
Name of RD 
Block 
Name of 
District 
Value of 
work 
(₹ in crore) 
1. Roadside plantation 
from Jalata (Devi’s 
House) to BSF  
2020-21 Rajiv Nagar Kawrtethawveng Mamit 0.12 
2. Roadside plantation 2021-22 Rajiv Nagar Kawrtethawveng Mamit 0.02 
3. Roadside plantation 2021-22 Rajiv Nagar Kawrtethawveng Mamit 0.01 
4. Roadside plantation 2021-22 Rajiv Nagar Kawrtethawveng Mamit 0.01 
5. Construction of 
Irrigation Canal at 
Khantlang 
2019-20 Khantlang Kawrtethawveng Mamit 0.03 
6. Afforestation/ 
Roadside Plantation 
2019-20 Bawngva Zawlnuam Mamit 0.03 
Total 0.22 
Source: Joint Physical Verification Report 
The photographic evidence uploaded on the BHUVAN portal, meant to enhance 
transparency under the GeoMGNREGA system, was found to be misleading, showing 
images of bush clearance around naturally grown trees instead of plantations. The 
Audit Objective-3: To assess whether durable and useful assets were created and 
maintained in compliance with rules and regulations, while 
ensuring convergence with other programmes/ schemes. 

88
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
88 
payments were made without proper verification, without any monitoring for quality and 
without proper maintenance of records such as asset register to record the works claimed 
to have been implemented. 
 
Fig 3: Non -Verifiable Roadside Plantation at Bawngva, Mamit District. 
In reply (January 2025), the State Government stated that further investigations on the 
audit observations were made internally. With regards to roadside plantations (Sl. Nos. 
1 to 4 and 6 of Table-2.12), the Government accepted that roadside plantations were not 
actually done, rather, the naturally growing indigenous trees were conserved by clearing 
the nearby bushes and under-growths in the two sampled villages mentioned (Rajiv Nagar 
and Bawngva Villages). 
In connection with the ‘Construction of Irrigation Canal at Khantlang’ (Sl. No. 5 of 
Table-2.12), it was accepted that the construction of canal was not done, instead the work 
has been diverted as ‘Construction of Public Water Point’ by the Village Employment 
Council (VEC) without informing the higher authorities. 
However, the contention of the State Government is not acceptable as audit noticed that 
there were no naturally indigenous trees in the above-mentioned sites. 
The expenditure of ₹ 0.22 crore on unverifiable or unauthorised MGNREGA works 
reflects serious weaknesses in field-level execution, monitoring and accountability. The 
misreporting of physical works and manipulation of geotagged images undermines the 
credibility of the GeoMGNREGA platform and indicates possible misappropriation of 
public funds. The diversion of works without approval and lack of documentation also 
constitute violations of Operational Guidelines, 2013. 
 
2.2.15.2  Non-convergence  with other Programmes/ Schemes 
Creation of durable assets and securing livelihood of rural households through 
convergence of MGNREGA works with resources of other programmes/ schemes 
available with panchayats/ village councils and other line department is a critical feature 
of MGNREGA. Recognising this, the framework for such convergence has been outlined 
Recommendation: The State Government may ensure proper monitoring of 
execution of works so the permissible works relating to creation of durable assets 
and strengthening of the livelihood of rural population are executed. 

89
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
89 
in Paragraph 15 Operational Guidelines, 2013. The resources are not restricted to 
availability of funds but include technical expertise and knowhow that officials of the line 
departments may be endowed with.  
The modes of convergence that can help meet the objectives of MGNREGA in different 
ways are: 
(i) Funds may be made available from other schemes, to meet cost of an identifiable 
part of the project that could result in enhanced durability of assets created/ proposed 
using MGNREGA funds.  
(ii) Funds may be made available from other schemes as livelihood component for 
putting to use for livelihood, assets created/ proposed using MGNREGA funds.  
(iii) The third mode could be to provide for technical inputs from concerned departmental 
officials. The inputs could be either in the form of supervision by technical staff 
during work execution for improving the quality of assets created/ proposed or for 
capacity building for using assets under MGNREGA for livelihood. 
(iv) Yet another mode could be gap filling, meaning pooling together funds of 
MGNREGA and other schemes like Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF), Finance 
Commission, Rashtriya Krishi Vikash Yojana (RKVY), National Afforestation 
Programme (NAP), Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), National 
Horticulture Mission (NHM), Total Sanitation Scheme (TSC), Funds from the State 
Budget, etc., and deploying the pooled funds for creation of an asset. Wherever funds 
are pooled in, the non-negotiable principles applicable to the implementation of 
MGNREGA including social audit, would be applicable to the work as a whole. 
(v) A combination of two or more of the above modes is also possible. 
All initiatives of convergence will be within the parameters of MGNREGA, especially the 
need to design labour-intensive works and the need to ensure that there is a complete ban 
on contractors. 
During the course of audit, it was observed that the Annual Plans and Perspective Plans 
for implementation of MGNREGA did not envisage any convergence with other 
programmes or schemes. During execution also, there was no pooling of resources like 
funds and there were no technical inputs from other departments. The State Government 
did not add any new work to the list of permissible works. 
The State Government while accepting the audit observation stated (January 2025) that 
planning at the grassroots level was done based on actual requirements and approved by 
the Gram Sabha, the potential for pooling resources, technical expertise and additional 
funding from other schemes to enhance the durability of assets and livelihood outcomes 
has not yet been explored. The State Government stated that it would take necessary steps 
to integrate convergence with other relevant schemes in future plans to ensure the 
MGNREGA objectives were met more effectively and sustainably. 
 

90
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
90 
Conclusion: 
Due to lack of proper monitoring for quality, improper maintenance of records such as 
asset registers and payment without proper verification of the actual implementation of 
the projects/ works, some of the works could not be verified during Joint Physical 
Verification. Also, non-compliance with Operational Guidelines resulted in non-
convergence of the scheme with other Government programmes/ schemes. 
 
 
2.2.16 Quality Monitoring of works and Social Audit 
 
2.2.16.1 Absence of Quality Control and Monitoring of work under MGNREGA 
Optimum utilisation of scarce resources available in creating assets under MGNREGA and 
optimising outcome will be possible only when required quality management is carried 
out timely and systematically, so that the assets created are economical, durable and 
productive. To achieve this, it is to be ensured that selection of work, site, survey, planning, 
design, layout, execution, monitoring and follow up are as per the technical norms. 
Paragraph 14.7 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 envisage setting up of State Quality 
Monitoring Unit comprising of State Quality Monitors (SQM) for each District in the State 
and a Nodal Officer of the rank of at least Superintending Engineers who will function as 
the Director (QM) will coordinate the work of SQM. The Director (QM) should be 
independent of the implementation machineries. The inspection/ measurement and 
analysis of work with respect to technical aspect will be done by engaging separate SQM 
for each district. 
Also, as per Paragraph 7.12 of Annual Master Circular 2019-20, a quality monitoring cell 
should be constituted at the State and district level. The State Quality Monitoring Cell 
should have 10 to 15 technical officials empanelled from the cadre of retired Executive 
Engineer. The empanelled technical officials will work under the overall supervision and 
direction of Chief Engineer (CE)/ Superintending Engineer (SE) of the State. The 
empanelled technical officials will monitor & evaluate at least 10 per cent of the works 
executed under MGNREGA in each District of the State. The expenditure of these works 
should be at least ₹ 0.05 crore & above for Kutcha (Earth) works and ₹ 0.10 crore & above 
for the Pucca (masonry) works. 
Recommendation: The State Government may ensure that AAPs are prepared by 
duly considering convergence with technical inputs from related line departments, 
ensuring pooling of human, natural and financial resources in order to achieve the 
objective of providing jobs to the unskilled labour and to also create durable assets. 
Audit Objective-4: To assess whether appropriate and adequate monitoring, social 
audit and grievance redressal systems were in place and 
functioning as envisaged to achieve greater transparency and 
accountability. 

91
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
91 
The District Quality Monitoring (DQM) cell should have a panel of 10 to 15 technical 
officials in the cadre of retired Assistant Engineer and above, under EE/ SE. The Engineers 
will monitor and evaluate at least 10 per cent of the works executed under MGNREGA. 
The expenditure of these 10 per cent  works should be at least ₹ 0.03 crore & above for 
Kutcha (Earth) works and ₹ 0.05 crore & above for the Pucca (masonry) works.  
Monitoring of each work should be done in two stages i.e., during construction and after 
completion. 
Accordingly, the State Government notified the constitution of the ‘State Quality 
Monitoring Unit’ on 31 October 2013 which consists of an Executive Engineer (EE) of 
Rural Development (RD) Department as the Director along with one Assistant Engineer, 
one Works Manager and one Junior Engineer (JE), also from RD Department. 
During the course of the Audit, it was however noticed that the ‘State Quality Monitoring 
Unit’ had not been functioning till date and had not performed any task of inspection/ 
measurement and analysis of work with respect to technical aspect. Also, the State 
Government had not engaged separate SQMs for each district. Moreover, the Director of 
the State Quality Monitoring Unit was of the rank of an Executive Engineer and not in the 
rank of Superintending Engineer (SE) as prescribed. 
Thus, optimum utilisation of scarce resources in creating assets under MGNREGA was 
not ensured as the State Quality Monitoring Unit did not perform any monitoring and 
supervision works since its inception. 
While accepting (January 2025) the audit observation, the State Government 
acknowledged the lapse in the functioning of the State Quality Monitoring Unit. To ensure 
optimum utilisation of resources and creation of durable and productive assets under 
MGNREGA, the State Government assured that the State Quality Monitoring Unit will be 
strengthened with technical personnel appointed both at the state and district levels. 
Monitoring and inspection would be conducted rigorously during and after construction as 
per prescribed guidelines to ensure compliance with quality norms. 
 
2.2.16.2 Shortfall in conducting of social audit in sampled villages 
MGNREGA gives a central role to Social Audit as a continuous process of public vigilance 
involving potential beneficiaries and other stakeholders which covers verification of 11 
stages (Paragraph 11.2.1 of the Operational Guidelines 2005) of implementation right from 
registration of families to social audit in the Gram Sabha. As envisaged in Paragraph 
20.4(xvii) of Master Circular, the District Programme Co-ordinator shall ensure that social 
audits are done in all GPs once in six months and ensure follow up action on social audit 
reports. The Social Audit Unit (SAU) in Mizoram was created on 19 March 2012. 
Recommendation: Quality monitoring Unit must be strengthen at the State and 
District levels to ensure economical and effective execution of works and for 
creation of durable and productive assets in line with MGNREGA guidelines. 

92
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
92 
During the course of audit, it was observed that the Social Audit Unit of the State did not 
ensure the conduct of Social Audit once in every six months, as detailed below in 
Tables-2.13 & 2.14. 
Table-2.13: Short fall in conducting of Social Audit in sampled  
Villages in Mamit District 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the VC 
Ye a r No. of 
Social 
Audit 
due 
Social Audit 
conducted 
Shortfall in 
Social Audit 
Shortfall  
(in per cent) 
1. Rajiv Nagar 2019-2024 10 3 7 70 
2. Thaidawr 2019-2024 10 2 8 80 
3. Mualthuam 2019-2024 10 2 8 80 
4. Khangtlang 2019-2024 10 2 8 80 
5. Kanhmun 2019-2024 10 3 7 70 
6. Kwarthah 2019-2024 10 3 7 70 
7. Bawrai 2019-2024 10 3 7 70 
8. Bawngva 2019-2024 10 5 5 50 
Source: Department’s reply 
Table-2.14: Short fall in conducting of Social Audit in sampled  
Villages in Kolasib District 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the VC Ye a r No. of 
Social 
Audit due 
Social Audit 
conducted 
Short fall 
in Social 
Audit 
Shortfall 
(in per cent) 
1. Saiphai 2019-24 10 4 6 60 
2. College Veng 2019-24 10 5 5 50 
3. Vairengte III 
(I.O.C veng 
2019-24 10 5 5 50 
4. KolasibTuithaVeng 2019-24 10 3 7 70 
5. Lungdai 2019-24 10 5 5 50 
6. Kawnpui North 2019-24 10 5 5 50 
7. Serkhan 2019-24 10 5 5 50 
8. Lungmuat 2019-24 10 5 5 50 
Source: Department’s reply 
It was further observed that despite preparing its yearly plan of Social Audit, the SAU did 
not achieve it plan in any of the years during 2019-20 to 2023-24 as given in Table-2.15. 
Table-2.15: Achievement of Social Audit targets 
Sl. 
No. 
Financial 
Ye a r 
Total No. 
of Villages 
Total No. 
of villages 
planned 
for Social 
Unit 
Percentage of 
planned 
villages 
Total No. 
of Audited 
villages 
during the 
FY 
Percentage of 
Audited 
villages during 
the FY 
1. 2019-2020 874 822 94.05 per cent 506 57.89 per cent 
2. 2020-2021 874 455 52.06 per cent 455 52.06 per cent 
3. 2021-2022 874 515 58.92 per cent 272 31.12 per cent 
4. 2022-2023 874 610 69.79 per cent 714 81.69 per cent 
5. 2023-2024 874 803 91.88 per cent 316 36.16 per cent 
Source: Department’s reply 

93
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
93 
The above Table-2.15 indicates that the SAU did not achieve its target in the whole State, 
despite having sufficient manpower. 
While accepting the audit observation, the State Government stated (January 2025) the 
main reason for shortfall in conducting Social Audit during 2019-24 was due to 
insufficiency of funds. As for instance, the Social Audit Unit, Mizoram received three 
instalments of funds during 2023-24. The last installment was received late in March i.e., 
27 March 2024 and the fund could not be utilised within the financial year. Hence audit 
coverage was only 316 villages during 2023-24. However, the State Government stated 
that there was significant improvement in audit coverage during the current year 2024-25. 
All 874 villages in the State had been audited once and Mizoram had recorded 
100 per cent achievement for the first time since the establishment of the Social Audit Unit 
in Mizoram. 
Social audits are a key mechanism for ensuring community-level oversight of MGNREGA 
implementation. Non-conduct of social audits on a regular basis undermines transparency 
in wage payments, material procurement and  project execution. Without community 
scrutiny, there is a higher likelihood of financial irregularities such as ghost beneficiaries, 
inflated bills, non-existent works, and misutilisation of funds going undetected. Social 
audits also help beneficiaries understand their rights and entitlements. A shortfall in audits 
results in continued ignorance among workers about wage delays, work demand 
provisions, unemployment allowances, and compensation for delayed payments. 
A shortfall in conducting social audits under MGNREGA undermines accountability and 
community participation, increasing the risk of financial irregularities, misappropriation of 
funds and denial of worker entitlements. 
The important Social Audit Findings along with Action Taken of the sampled district are 
given in Table-2.16. 
Table-2.16: Statement showing social audit findings in Mamit and Kolasib districts 
during 2019-20 to 2023-24 and action taken 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Description of Main findings of social 
audit report for Mamit District  
Follow up action taken by the DRDO/ 
DPC on the social audit findings 
1. 
2019-20 
Job Card Holders are not aware of 
MGNREGA. 
More Awareness Campaigns organised 
through public meeting and Rozgar Diwas. 
2. Job Cards are not updated 
Action taken to updated Job Cards 
regularly. 
3. 2020-21 Photographs of the cardholders were 
missing on some Job Cards. 
All VECs were informed to take necessary 
action for the same. 
4. 
2021-22 
Citizen Information Board are not 
displayed 
All Executing agencies were instructed to 
display CIB in all the works. 
5. Some Job Card did not have signature of 
the holders 
Job Card holders were informed to give 
their signature and updated regularly. 
6. 2022-23 No First Aid facilities at the work site. Provision is made for First Aid facilities at 
the work site. 

94
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
94 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Description of Main findings of social 
audit report for Mamit District  
Follow up action taken by the DRDO/ 
DPC on the social audit findings 
7. 2023-24 Seven Bogus Job Cards in Thaidawr 
Village found at the time of Audit. 
These Bogus Job Cards are deleted and 
payments already made also recovered. 
8. 
2023-24 
Mates have not been trained properly. It is proposed to organise Training 
Programmes for all Mates in the district. 
9. Worksite facilities are not provided 
Order issued for all Gram panchayats to 
arrange worksite facilities viz., shade, 
drinking water at worksites as far as 
feasible. 
10. 
Job Card in the custody of Village 
Sarpanch/ VCP and full details of family 
member eligible for work under 
MGNREGA not noted in the Job Cards. 
Order issued to concerned officials for all 
Job Cards be in the custody of the Job Card 
Holders and full details of family members 
eligible for works under MGNREGA to be 
noted in the Job Cards. 
11. Citizen Information Boards are found to 
be missing. 
Order issued to all concerned officials to 
take necessary action in displaying Citizen 
Information Board properly and display 
wall paintings related to MGNREGA 
wherever possible. 
Source: Department’s reply 
Thus, the audit finding by the SAU substantiates the CAG’s audit findings in lapses in 
implementation of the MGNREGA in the State. 
 
2.2.16.3 Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
Rule 4 of the Mizoram Mahatma Gandhi Grievance Redressal Rules, 2014 envisages placing 
of complaint box in the office of the Programme Officer, Additional District Programme 
Coordinator or District Programme Coordinator and at the state level and complaints can 
also be submitted either in writing, through phone call and email (internet) or orally in 
person. 
It was observed in audit that complaint boxes were not placed in all the prescribed offices 
and dedicated phone numbers and e-mail IDs were also not made available to the Job Card 
holders except at the District and Block level. 
Consequently, the Programme Officer, Additional District Programme Coordinator or 
District Programme Coordinator did not receive any grievances/ complaints from the Job 
Card holders during 2019-20 to 2023-24 in the sampled districts and blocks by not providing 
avenues for lodging complaints to the Job Card holders, the department and the scheme 
functionaries were also deprived of the opportunity to obtain feedback on the quality of 
implementation of the scheme as a whole and this rendered correction/ modification of 
scheme-delivery methods not possible. 
While accepting the audit observation, the State Government acknowledged that complaint 
boxes have not been placed in all prescribed offices and dedicated phone numbers or e-mails 
Recommendation: Social Audit may be strengthen with proper planning to ensure 
conduct of the required number of audits. 

95
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
95 
IDs were not made available at the district or block level. It was further stated that steps 
would be taken to ensure compliance with the Mizoram Mahatma Gandhi Grievance 
Redressal Rules, 2014. 
The State Government established the State Quality and Monitoring unit which was not in 
line with the prescribed guidelines and was not even functional. There was substantial 
shortfall in the conduct of social audit in all the sampled Villages. Facilities such as 
dedicated phone numbers, e-mail IDs and complaint boxes for receiving grievances were 
also not provided. 
 
2.2.17 Conclusion 
The overall planning process was not satisfactory as the State Government did not conduct 
Baseline Survey to gather information on seasonal demand from each Job Card holder nor 
had it empanelled an expert institution to develop the survey framework. There were no 
consolidation of the village plans into Block and District plans with proper scrutiny for 
technical feasibility and admissibility of the works under the scheme. This resulted in 
inclusion of non-permissible works in the Annual Action Plans which were ultimately 
executed despite being in the negative list as per the Operational Guidelines. The absence 
of reliable database on natural resource restricts evidence-based planning and results in 
poorly targeted interventions. Poor financial management resulted in delays in release of 
funds and diversion of funds for other inadmissible purposes. Door-to-door surveys of 
households, to ensure enrolment of all the adult members willing to do unskilled manual 
work, was not done and the Information, Education and Communication (IEC) plan was 
not prepared for proper dissemination of information. Comprehensive convergence with 
other line departments for pooling of resources, including technical knowhow was absent. 
Avenues for submission of application for demand for works through verbal mode, written 
application, telephonic call or through online mode were not provided to the Job Card 
Holders. There were delays in payment of wages to the Job Card holder. The State Quality 
Control and Monitoring Unit was not functional and there were shortfalls in conducting 
Social Audit  
2.2.18 Recommendations 
The State Government may- 
(i) ensure that a baseline survey is conducted to ascertain the labour demand; 
(ii) scrutinise Annual Plans at Block and District levels so that non-permissible works 
are not included in the Annual Plan; 
(iii) ensure timely release of fund to the Implementing Agencies for implementation of 
the scheme; 
(iv) ensure timely payment of wages to the job card holders; 
Recommendation: Avenues for lodging complaints such as telephone number, 
email ID (internet) and complaint boxes may be made available to the Job Card 
holders. 

96
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
96 
(v) conduct door–to-door survey to identify eligible households and disseminate 
information through cost effective media intervention under Information, 
Education and Communication (IEC) activities to ensure widespread information 
of the Scheme; 
(vi) prepare and implement a comprehensive IEC Action Plan, incorporating 
interpersonal and local media communication methods to improve grassroots 
awareness and increase genuine demand for work; and 
(vii)  ensure timely and quality conduct of social audits through dedicated social audit 
units, with follow-up mechanisms to act on audit findings and enhance 
transparency and accountability at the Gram Panchayat level. 
  

97
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
97 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS  
 
HORTICULTURE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.3 Irregular Parking of fund 
The Horticulture Department parked ₹ 1.66 crore in Civil Deposit and deprived the 
intended beneficiaries of the Scheme 
The Horticulture Department prepared (2020) a project proposal for creation of Interest 
Subvention Scheme with a financial target of ₹ 1.66 crore under Agriculture & Allied 
Sectors. The Scheme aims to encourage production of crops, domestic animals, fish, post-
harvest development activities including processing to increase productivity and create 
confidence to farmers and entrepreneurs through Government intervention to mitigate the 
burden of poor loan recovery. The objectives of the scheme were to create access to credit, 
access to market, technology upgradation, ease of doing business and a sense of security 
for farmers and registered agri-entrepreneurs belonging to the Agriculture & Allied 
Sectors who actually availed agriculture loan by Interest Subvention up to eight per cent 
of the loan interest subject to maximum assistance of ₹ 2.50 lakh per beneficiary. 
The eligibility criteria of the Scheme, inter alia,  include all farmers and entrepreneurs 
belonging to Agriculture and Allied Sectors having valid farmers’ card issued by the line 
Department in respect of farmers (valid registration certificate issued by competent 
authority in the case of Entrepreneurs) and valid loan certificate with outstanding statement 
from a recognised Bank. Incremental term loan or fresh term loan or incremental or fresh 
working capital extended during the financial year 2021-22 would be eligible for coverage 
with a maximum upper ceiling for assistance at ₹ 2.50 lakh. Further, as per the project 
proposal, the proposed Nodal Agency, i.e., NABARD was to identify the beneficiaries, 
and selection was to be done by the line Department, NABARD and Banks concerned as 
per applications received from the loanees. 
Test check (October 2023) of the records of the Director, Horticulture Department, 
Government of Mizoram, revealed that the Director, Horticulture Department, submitted 
a proposal to the State Government (Horticulture Department) on 01 December 2020 
seeking sanction for the implementation of various schemes, including the Interest 
Subvention Scheme for Agriculture and Allied Sectors, involving an amount of 
₹ 1.66 crore under the Special Central Assistance to States for Capital Expenditure. The 
State Government accorded (23 February 2021) expenditure sanction of ₹ 1.66 crore for 
the Interest Subvention Scheme under Special Central Assistance to States under the Major 
Head ‘4401- Capital outlay on Crop Husbandry’. As per the technical cost break-up of the 
Scheme, assistance was targeted for 64 units (beneficiaries) with the upper ceiling of 
₹ 2.50 lakh per unit and the administrative cost @ 3.75 per cent for the project amounting 
to ₹ Six lakh. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that other than the eligibility criteria, the criteria for selection 
of the beneficiaries was not incorporated in the Scheme guidelines. It was also observed 
that the entire sanctioned amount of ₹ 1.66 crore was parked under the Major Head ‘8443-

98
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
98 
Civil Deposit’ since 26 March 2021 without any recorded reason and remained unutilised 
for more than three years and six months as of August 2024. 
The matter was reported to the Department and Government in September 2024 and the 
State Government while agreeing to the Audit observation stated (30 October 2024) that 
the Department had requested the State Government three times in September  2021, 
October 2022 and October 2024 to release the parked fund. It was also stated that 
NABARD did not provide any loan to farmers under Agriculture and Allied Sectors as 
NABARD schemes/ programmes are 100 per cent grant. The reply further stated that 
selection of the beneficiary can be made only after receipt of the fund. 
From the reply of the Government, it is evident that the expenditure sanction was made 
without any assessment of the actual requirement of funds. Also, since the sanctioned 
amount of ₹ 1.66 crore continues to be parked in Civil Deposit as of October 2024, the 
intended beneficiaries were deprived of the scheme and the capital expenditure of the 
Government for the year 2020-21 was inflated in the accounts of the Department. This act 
of the Department indicated poor coordination between the line Department & State 
Government and the mismanagement of public funds. 
 
2.4 Non-recovery of outstanding loan 
The Horticulture Department did not recover the interest-free outstanding loan of 
₹ 85.00 lakh from two Societies, thereby defeating the objective of the Revolving 
Fund Scheme to provide timely liquidity support and facilitate smooth ginger 
marketing by ginger growers (farmers) within and outside the State 
The objective of Revolving Fund Scheme under Ginger Marketing Support of the 
Government of Mizoram is to provide timely liquidity support to facilitate smooth ginger 
marketing by ginger growers (farmers) within and outside the State. 
As per the Operational Guidelines of the Scheme, revolving fund of ₹ 2.00 crore was 
allocated to the Horticulture Department, which would operate the fund through a 
dedicated bank account in Mizoram Cooperative Apex Bank. The liquidity support would 
be extended to eligible aggregators such as Mizoram Agricultural Marketing Solution 
(MAMSoL), entrepreneurs or any qualified entities working with farmers to facilitate 
receiving, sorting and dispatching ginger. The fund was to be interest-free. The revolving 
fund would facilitate timely payments to the farmers before actual realisation of payments 
from the buyers at designated destinations/ centres. 
Test check (October 2023) of records of the Director, Horticulture Department, 
Government of Mizoram revealed that agreements were signed between the Horticulture 
Department as the lender and two loanees/ aggregators viz., MAMSoL (signed on 
08 March 2019) and Mizoram Farmers’ Society (MIFAS) (signed on 19 March 2019). The 
key terms included:  
 MAMSoL would receive a loan of ₹ 1.00 crore while MIFAS would receive 
₹ 70 lakh in two instalments. The first instalment was to be disbursed to MAMSoL 
and MIFAS at the rate of ₹ 50.00 lakh and ₹ 35.00 lakh respectively; 

99
Chapter-II: Economic Sector
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
99 
 The total amount of the loan was to be fully repaid within 15 days after payment 
from ginger buyers was realised, or within six months from the release of the second 
installment, whichever came earlier. The loan was interest-free; 
 Default in repayment  within the stipulated time would lead to forfeiture of the 
mortgage and the Government could take further legal action; and 
 The aggregators also agreed to returns any unused portion of the loan if deemed 
necessary by the Department. 
Accordingly, the Horticulture Department disbursed the first instalment of the revolving 
fund to MAMSoL and MIFAS at the rate of ₹ 50.00 lakh and ₹ 35.00 lakh, respectively as 
detailed in Table-2.17. 
Table-2.17: Disbursement of first instalment 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Society Amount 
of loan 
sanctioned 
Amount released as first 
instalment 
Security of the loanee 
in the form of 
mortgage Amount Date 
1. Mizoram Agriculture 
Marketing Solution 
(MAMSoL) 
100.00 50.00 08.03.2019 Up to ₹ 200.00 lakh 
(Bank Guarantee) 
2. Mizoram Farmers 
Society (MIFAS) 70.00 35.00 26.03.2019 
₹ 71.23 lakh (Two Land 
Settlement Certificates 
valuing ₹ 18.83 lakh + 
₹ 52.40 lakh) 
Total 170.00 85.00    
MAMSoL secured a bank guarantee of up to ₹ 200.00 lakh, while MIFAS mortgaged land 
settlement certificates worth ₹ 71.23 lakh as security. 
Audit identified a key control weakness: the terms of the agreement did not specifically 
stipulate a scheduled due date for repayment of the loan. In the agreement with MIFAS, 
there was a clause which stated that MIFAS, the loanee, would submit all vouchers/ bills 
within 25 days from the release of the first instalment and the second instalment would be 
released only after this. No such clause was observed in the agreement with MAMSoL; 
here, the submission of bills was tied only to the release of the first instalment. 
Audit was unable to determine the due date for repayment of the loan as the Department 
did not disburse the second instalment of the loans to both loanees. Further, the loanees 
too did not inform the Department the date on which they received payment from ginger 
buyer(s). This oversight left the Department unable to track or enforce timely repayment. 
On 06 June 2019, the Technical Committee on Ginger Marketing42 in its meeting decided 
that only after recovery of the outstanding loan and submission of the vouchers, release of 
the second instalment will be considered. It also set 18 June 2019 as the repayment 
deadline. Despite repeated notices, including a final demand in February 2023, neither 
MAMSoL nor MIFAS repaid their loans. MIFAS requested an extension until April 2023, 
 
42 Constituted by the Government of Mizoram on 06 June 2018 to manage and monitor the revolving fund 
scheme of ₹ 200.00 lakh for ginger marketing 

100
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Chapter-II: Economic Sector 
100 
but MAMSoL did not respond. As of August 2024, the two loanees have not repaid their 
loans. 
Thus, the two loanees have not repaid their loans for more than four years and five months 
from the date of disbursement of the loan and the Department has not taken any action to 
forfeit/ liquidate the mortgages of the loanees. This inaction exposed the Department to a 
potential loss of ₹ 85.00 lakh. It also defeats the objectives of the Scheme to provide timely 
liquidity support to ginger growers (farmers) within and outside the State since the 
capacity of the Department to finance other farmers/ entities is weakened due to the 
locking up of capital of ₹ 85.00 lakh. 
The matter was reported to the Department and Government (September 2024) and the 
State Government while agreeing to the Audit observation initially merely endorsed 
(30 October 2024) the Directorate’s action of repeatedly reminding the two loanees to 
repay their outstanding loan, but later stated (29 November 2024) that “action is being 
taken and is yet to be finalised by the Government”. 
Thus, due to lack of pro-active measures from the Government, the Horticulture 
Department did not recover the interest-free outstanding loan of ₹ 85.00 lakh from two 
Societies, thereby defeating the objective of the Revolving Fund Scheme to provide timely 
liquidity support and facilitate smooth ginger marketing by ginger growers (farmers) 
within and outside the State. 
Recommendation: The Department should initiate immediate action to forfeit the 
mortgages of the loanees. 

CHAPTER – III
ECONOMIC SECTOR
(STATE PUBLIC SECTOR 
ENTERPRISES)

j
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024

 
CHAPTER-III 
 
ECONOMIC SECTOR 
(State Public Sector Enterprises) 
 
3.1 Functioning of State Public Sector Enterprises 
 
3.1.1 Introduction 
The State Public Sector Enterprises (SPSEs) consist of State Government Companies 
and Statutory Corporations. The SPSEs are established to carry out activities of 
commercial nature keeping in view the welfare of people and the State economy. As of 
31 March 2024, there were six SPSEs (all Government companies) in Mizoram as 
detailed in Table-3.1: 
Table-3.1: Total number of SPSEs as of 31 March 2024 
Type of SPSE Working SPSEs Non-working 
SPSEs Total 
Government Companies43 6 0 6 
Total 644 0 6 
None of these companies were listed on the stock exchange, which meant that the shares 
of the SPSEs could not be traded on the stock exchange. A Special Purpose Vehicle 
namely, Aizawl Smart City Limited (ASCL) was established by the State Government 
and registered (March 2018) under the Companies Act, 2013.  
3.1.2 Investment in SPSEs 
 
3.1.2.1 State Government’s investment in SPSEs 
The State’s investment in its SPSEs was by way of share capital/ loans and special 
financial support by way of grants.  
As of 31 March 2024, the investment by the Government of Mizoram (GoM) (capital 
and long-term loans) in six SPSEs was ₹ 53.57 crore45 as detailed in Table-3.2: 
Table-3.2: Details of State’s investment in SPSEs 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Equity Capital Long term Loans Total 
2023-24 54.07 9.45 63.52 
2019-20 53.94 9.45 63.39 
Source: Information furnished by SPSEs 
The State Government’s investment as of 31 March 2024 consisted of ₹ 54.07 crore 
(85.12 per cent) towards equity capital and ₹ 9.45 crore (14.88 per cent) in long-term 
loans as against ₹ 53.94 crore (85.09 per cent) towards equity capital and ₹ 9.45 crore 
 
43 Government Companies includes ‘Other Companies’ referred to in Section 139(5) and 139(7) of the 
Companies Act, 2013 
44  (1) Mizoram Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited (MAMCO) (2) Mizoram Food & Allied 
Industries Corporation Limited (MIFCO) (3) Zoram Infrastructure and Industrial Development 
Corporation Limited (ZIDCO) (4) Zoram Electronics Development Corporation Limited (ZENICS) 
(5) Mizoram Handloom and Handicrafts Development Corporation Limited (ZOHANDCO) (6) 
Aizawl Smart City Limited (ASCL) 
45 The figures of investment are provisional and as provided by the SPSEs as none of the six SPSEs had 
finalised their accounts for 2023-24 as of September 2024 

102
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
102 
(14.91 per cent) in long-term loans as of 31 March 2020. A graphical presentation of 
the State Government’s investment in SPSEs during the last five years (2019-20 to 
2023-24) has been given in Chart-3.1: 
Chart-3.1: State’s total investment in SPSEs 
Source: Information furnished by SPSEs 
As evident from Chart-3.1, the State Government’s investment in State Public Sector 
Enterprises (SPSEs) increased marginally by ₹ 0.13 crore (0.21 per cent ) from 
₹ 63.39 crore in 2019-20 to ₹ 63.52 crore in 2020-21 and remained unchanged through 
2023-24. This increase was on account of equity infusion in Mizoram Agriculture 
Marketing Corporation Limited (₹ 0.08 crore) and Aizawl Smart City Limited 
(₹ 0.05 crore), both linked to sectors of potential developmental importance. However, 
the limited scale and one-off nature of these investments do not reflect a consistent or 
strategic investment approach. The absence of further capital infusion over subsequent 
years indicates a conservative stance by the State Government toward equity 
participation in SPSEs. 
During 2023-24, all six SPSEs with direct State Government investment incurred losses 
totalling ₹ 3.02 crore. Furthermore, the accumulated losses of ₹ 31.23 crore in two 
SPSEs fully eroded the State’s investment of ₹ 25.97 crore in their paid-up capital. The 
Government has also not instituted any policy mandating minimum dividend payouts 
by SPSEs. 
Audit concludes that public funds invested in SPSEs are at risk due to continued 
financial losses and absence of returns. The lack of a performance-linked investment 
strategy and absence of a dividend policy have weakened financial discipline. The 
erosion of equity in two SPSEs raises serious concerns about their viability and poses 
a recurring fiscal burden on the State. 
3.1.2.2 Total Sector-wise investment in SPSEs 
Total investment of State Government and Other Stakeholders (Central Government, 
holding companies, Banks, Financial Institutions, etc.) in SPSEs across various key 
economic sectors for the period ending 31 March 2024 has been given in Table-3.3. 
63.39
63.52 63.52 63.52 63.52
5 2 . 4
5 2 . 6
5 2 . 8
5 3
5 3 . 2
5 3 . 4
5 3 . 6
5 3 . 8
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Investment (Capital and Long Term Loans)


103
Chapter-III :  Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)Chapter-III: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises 
103 
Table-3.3: Sector-wise details of total investments46 in SPSEs 
(₹ in crore) 
Sector 
Investment 
Total 
Equity 
State 
Govt. 
Equity 
Total 
Long-term 
loans 
State 
Govt. 
Loans 
Total 
Equity and 
Long-term 
Loans 
Sector wise 
Investment to 
total 
Investment  
(per cent) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) = (2) + (4) (7) 
Agricultural 
Marketing 
Sector 
SPSEs47 
26.05 24.69 Nil Nil 26.05 28.49 
Other SPSEs 37.61 29.38 27.78 9.45 65.39 71.51 
Total 63.66 54.07 27.78 9.45 91.44 100 
Source: Information as furnished by SPSEs 
As may be noticed from the Table-3.3 above, the Agricultural Marketing Sector SPSEs 
(only two) received as much as 28.49 per cent ( ₹ 26.05 crore) of total investment 
(₹ 91.44 crore). On the other hand, the remaining four SPSEs under Other Sectors 
(Financing, Manufacturing and Miscellaneous Sectors), received the balance 
71.51 per cent (₹ 65.39 crore) of total SPSE investment as on 31 March 2024. Further, 
the State Government had contributed 69.47 per cent (₹ 63.52 crore) of the total 
investment (₹ 91.44 crore) in the SPSEs as on 31 March 2024. 
The State Government’s investment strategy in SPSEs reflects a concentrated exposure 
to a small number of Agricultural Marketing entities, which received 28.49 per cent of 
total investment despite comprising only two enterprises. While this distribution may 
reflect developmental priorities, the limited number of SPSEs receiving large 
allocations underscores the need for periodic risk assessments. Furthermore, the State 
contributed nearly 70 per cent of total SPSE funding, indicating significant fiscal 
exposure. The sectoral distribution of investments suggests the need for a more 
balanced and risk-informed allocation strategy to enhance returns and minimise 
concentration risks. 
3.1.3 Reconciliation with Finance Accounts 
The figures in respect of equity and loans provided by the State Government as per the 
records of SPSEs should agree with the corresponding figures appearing in the Finance 
Accounts of the State. In case of differences in the figures, the SPSEs concerned and 
the Finance Department should carry out reconciliation of differences. The position in 
this regard as of 31 March 2024 is given in Table-3.4. 
 
 
46  The figures of investment are provisional and as provided by the SPSEs as none of the six SPSEs had 
finalised their accounts for 2023-24 as of September 2024 
47  Mizoram Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited and Mizoram Food & Allied Industries 
Corporation Limited 

104
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
104 
Table-3.4: Equity, loans, guarantees outstanding as per the Finance Accounts 
vis-à-vis records of SPSEs 
(₹ in crore) 
Outstanding in respect 
of 
Amount as per Finance 
Accounts 
Amount as per records 
of SPSEs Difference 
Equity 6.99 54.07 47.08 
Loans48 29.34 9.45 19.89 
Guarantee 19.24 39.78 20.54 
Source: State Finance Accounts 2023-24 and SPSEs’ records 
As evident from Table 3.4 above, there were significant and longstanding unreconciled 
differences in the figures of equity (₹ 47.08 crore), loans (₹ 19.89 crore) and guarantees 
outstanding (₹ 20.54 crore) between the State Government’s accounts and those 
maintained by the SPSEs. The differences in equity occurred in respect of all six SPSEs 
where State Government had made direct investment and reconciliation of these 
differences had been pending for several years. These discrepancies indicate systemic 
weaknesses in financial reconciliation and oversight.  
As regards the Loan figures, the Finance Department of the State Government allocates 
loans to various departments for specific sectoral purposes. The loan amounts are 
recorded in the Finance Accounts based on the sector they are allocated to. The 
departments receiving the loans then disburse the same to the SPSEs under their control. 
However, the actual SPSE-wise details of loans received by the SPSEs from the State 
Government/ departments concerned were not available in the State Finance Accounts. 
The discrepancies indicate that both the State Government's Finance Accounts and the 
SPSEs’ financial statements may not accurately reflect the true quantum of public 
investment and liabilities, compromising the credibility of reported figures. 
Unreconciled guarantees and investments may obscure the actual fiscal exposure of the 
State, affecting strategic decisions related to funding, restructuring, or disinvestment. 
The issue of non-reconciliation of investment figures of the State Government in SPSEs 
was taken up with the Commissioner, Finance Department, Government of Mizoram 
(28 February 2025). The Finance Commissioner had assured that the issue would be 
looked into and the respective Administrative Departments/ SPSEs would be asked to 
reconcile the discrepancy between the figures contained in the Finance Accounts with 
those in the accounts of the SPSEs as required. 
Recommendations: 
 The State Government may institutionalise a quarterly reconciliation 
mechanism between the Finance Department, Administrative Department 
concerned and SPSEs to reconcile figures of equity, loans, and guarantees; 
 The Finance Department may issue instructions to all departments concerned 
to maintain and report SPSE-wise loan disbursement details, and these 
should be incorporated into the Finance Accounts; and 
 
48 ‘Loans as per Finance Accounts’ represent the aggregate of the Loans and Advances given by the 
Government to ‘Public Sector and Other Undertakings’ as depicted under Statement 18 to the State 
Finance Accounts for 2023-24 

105
Chapter-III :  Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)Chapter-III: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises 
105 
 The State Government may institutionalise a reconciliation certificate 
mechanism and made mandatory for all SPSEs at the end of each financial 
year. 
3.1.4 Special support and guarantees to SPSEs during the year 
The State Government provides financial support to SPSEs in various forms through 
annual budgetary allocations. The details of budgetary outgo towards equity, loans and 
grants/ subsidies in respect of SPSEs for last three years ended 2023-24 are given in 
Table-3.5: 
Table-3.5: Details of budgetary support to SPSEs 
(₹ in crore) 
Source: As furnished by the SPSEs 
As may be noticed from Table-3.5, during 2021-24 the budgetary support provided by 
the State Government to SPSEs in the form of Grants/Subsidy showed an increasing 
trend and had increased by almost five-fold in the last three years from ₹ 6.22 crore 
(2021-22) to ₹ 30.21 crore (2023-24). During 2023-24, the State Government provided 
Grants/ subsidy of ₹ 30.21 crore to three SPSEs49 mainly to meet the salaries and other 
operating expenses, which were highest in the last three years. However, the State 
Government did not provide any financial support in the form of equity capital or long-
term loans to any of the SPSEs during the last three years (2021-22 to 2023-24). 
Government of Mizoram provides guarantees under the Mizoram Guarantee Act, 2011 
allowing SPSEs to secure long-term loans from Banks and other financial institutions. 
As on 31 March 2024, Guarantee commitments of ₹ 30.56 crore were outstanding 
against one SPSE (Zoram Infrastructure and Industrial Development Corporation 
Limited). 
During the period 2021-24, the State Government extended increasing financial support 
to SPSEs in the form of grants and subsidies, which rose nearly fivefold - from 
₹ 6.22 crore in 2021–22 to ₹ 30.21 crore in 2023–24 primarily to meet operational 
expenses such as salaries. However, no equity capital or long-term loans were provided 
during this period, indicating a shift in the nature of support from investment to 
 
49  Aizawl Smart City Limited (₹ 24.50 crore); Zoram Infrastructure & Industrial Development 
Corporation Limited (₹ 3.43 crore) and Mizoram Food & Allied Industries Corporation Limited 
(₹ 2.28 crore) 
Particulars 
2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
No. of 
SPSEs Amount No. of 
SPSEs Amount No. of 
SPSEs Amount 
Equity Capital outgo 
from budget - - - - - - 
Loans given from 
budget - - - - - - 
Grants/ subsidy 2 6.22 3 14.74 3 30.21 
Total Outgo 2 6.22 3 14.74 3 30.21 
Guarantees issued 
during the year - - - - - - 
Guarantee 
Commitment 
(Cumulative) 
1 30.56 1 30.56 1 30.56 

106
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
106 
sustenance. Despite the rising grant-based outflow, the State continued to hold 
significant financial exposure, with ₹ 54.07 crore in equity and ₹ 9.45 crore in loans as 
of 31 March 2024, and a cumulative guaranteed commitment of ₹ 30.56 crore 
concentrated in a single SPSE. This trend suggests increasing reliance of SPSEs on 
non-repayable support, raising concerns about their financial self-reliance, 
sustainability and also the effectiveness of oversight on fund utilisation. Furthermore, 
the State's significant exposure through cumulative guarantees and unreconciled 
investments highlights the need for stronger performance accountability and 
outcome-based fund monitoring. 
3.1.5 Accountability framework 
The audit of the financial statements of Government Companies in respect of financial 
years commencing on or after 01 April 2014 is governed by the provisions of Section 
139 and 143 of the Companies Act, 2013. The audit of a Company in respect of the 
financial years prior to 01 April 2014, continues to be governed by the Companies Act, 
1956. The new Act has brought about an expanded Regulatory Framework, wider 
management responsibility and higher professional accountability. 
3.1.5.1 Statutory Audit/ Supplementary Audit 
Statutory Auditors, appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG), 
audit the financial statements of a Government Company. In addition, the CAG 
conducts the supplementary audit of these financial statements under the provisions of 
Section 143(6) of the Companies Act, 2013. 
3.1.5.2 Role of Government and Legislature 
The State Government exercises control over the affairs of these SPSEs through its 
administrative departments. The Government appoints the Chief Executive and 
Directors on the Board of these SPSEs. 
The State Legislature also monitors the accounting and utilisation of Government 
investment in the SPSEs. For this purpose, the Annual Reports of the State Government 
Companies together with Statutory Auditors’ Reports and comments of the CAG 
thereon are required to be placed before the Legislature under Section 394 of the 
Companies Act, 2013. 
3.1.6 Arrears in finalisation of accounts 
The financial statements of the SPSEs for every financial year are required to be 
finalised within six months from the end of the relevant financial year i.e., by 
30 September in accordance with the provisions of Section 96(1), read with Section 
129(2) of the Companies Act, 2013 (Act). Failure to do so may attract penal provisions 
under Section 99 of the Act. As per the Act, the SPSE and every officer of the SPSE 
who is at default shall be punishable with a fine which may extend up to ₹ One lakh 
and in the case of a continuing default, with a further fine which may extend up to 
₹ 5,000 for every day during which such default continues. 

107
Chapter-III :  Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)Chapter-III: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises 
107 
Timely finalisation of financial statements is crucial for the State Government to 
evaluate the financial stability of the SPSEs and to prevent financial inaccuracies and 
mismanagement. Persistent delay in finalisation of financial statements poses 
significant risks, including the potential risk of undetected fraud and misappropriation 
of public funds besides violation of the provisions outlined in the Companies Act, 2013. 
Details of progress made by the working SPSEs in finalising their annual accounts for 
the period 2019-20 to 2023-24 are given in Table-3.6. 
Table-3.6: Position relating to finalisation of accounts of working SPSEs 
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Number of SPSEs 550 651 6 652 6 
Number of accounts finalised during 
current year 2 1 4 4 3 
Number of SPSEs with arrears in 
accounts 5 6 6 6 6 
Number of accounts in arrears 27 33 35 37 40 
Extent of arrears in years 1 to 10 2 to 11 1 to 12 2 to 13 1 to 14 
As may be noticed from Table-3.6, the number of SPSE-accounts in arrears had 
increased over the last five years.  It was further noticed that during the last five years 
(2019-20 to 2023-24), only five SPSEs could finalise a total of 14 accounts, leading to 
a gradual increase in the backlog of SPSE-accounts from 27 Accounts (2019-20) to 
40 Accounts (2023-24).  
During 2023-24, only two out of six working SPSEs were able to finalise three53 Annual 
Accounts. As of 30 September 2024, none of the SPSEs had prepared their accounts for 
2023-24. The oldest Accounts in arrears was since 2010-11 (14 Accounts), which 
related to Zoram Electronics Development Corporation Limited (Appendix-3.1.1). 
The administrative departments concerned have the responsibility to oversee the 
activities of these entities and to ensure that the accounts are finalised and adopted by 
the SPSEs within the stipulated timeline. 
The Principal Accountant General, Mizoram has been regularly pursuing with the Chief 
Secretary of Mizoram and the administrative departments concerned for liquidating the 
arrears of accounts of the SPSEs. However, the State Government and the SPSEs 
concerned could not address the issue effectively, so as to clear the pendency of 
accounts of the SPSEs in a time bound manner. 
This chronic delay indicates serious weaknesses in financial governance and 
accountability mechanisms. Non-compliance with statutory timelines exposes SPSEs 
and their officers to penal provisions under Section 99 of the Companies Act, 2013 and 
risks the State’s financial oversight. The continued non-finalisation of accounts raised 
 
50  One SPSE (Mizoram Mineral Development Corporation Limited) with backlog of four Accounts 
dissolved during 2019-20 
51  One new SPSE (Aizawl Smart City Limited) with backlog of two Accounts was added under CAG’s 
audit purview 
52  Zoram Electronics Development Corporation Limited (ZENICS) reconstitution order issued by the 
State Government on 31 March 2023 
53  Zoram Infrastructure & Industrial Development Corporation Limited (2021-22, 2022-23) & Mizoram 
Food and Allied Industries Corporation Limited (2019-20) 

108
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
108 
the risk of undetected fraud, misappropriation of public funds and misinformed 
decisions regarding budgetary support and guarantees. 
Furthermore, the administrative departments responsible for oversight did not enforce 
compliance, allowing arrears to accumulate year after year. This reflects inadequate 
monitoring, poor enforcement of reporting requirements, and a weak culture of 
accountability in SPSE management. 
Recommendations:  
The State Government may consider- 
 to direct all administrative departments to prepare and implement a 
time-bound action plan for clearance of backlog of accounts in SPSEs under 
their control, with priority accorded to the most delayed cases; 
 to establish a dedicated monitoring cell/ mechanism to oversee clearance of 
arrears in SPSE-accounts and set targets for individual SPSEs; 
 to ensure that vacancies in the Accounts departments of SPSEs are filled 
expeditiously with personnel possessing adequate domain knowledge and 
relevant experience; and 
 to organise structured and focused training programmes on statutory 
compliance, financial reporting and corporate governance for finance 
personnel of SPSEs as well as nodal officers in administrative departments. 
3.1.7 Investment by State Government in SPSEs whose accounts are in 
arrears 
Persistent delay in finalisation of accounts is fraught with the risk of fraud and leakage 
of public money apart from violation of the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013. 
Audit analysis revealed that Government of Mizoram had provided budgetary support 
aggregating to ₹ 65.80 crore by way of equity (₹ 0.21 crore) and grants (₹ 65.59 crore) 
to five SPSEs during the years for which these SPSEs had not finalised their accounts 
as shown in Table-3.7. 
Table-3.7: Investment by State Government in SPSEs having accounts in arrears 
as on 30 September 2024 
(₹ in crore) 
Source: Information as furnished by the SPSEs 
Sl. 
No. Name of SPSE 
Accounts 
finalised 
up to 
Accounts pending 
finalisation 
Budgetary support by State 
Government during the period 
of accounts in arrears 
Period Number Equity Grants 
1. Mizoram Agricultural Marketing 
Corporation Limited 2011-12 2012-13 to 
2023-24 12 0.21 4.02 
2. Zoram Infrastructure and Industrial 
Development Corporation Limited 2022-23 2023-24 01 - 3.43 
3. Zoram Electronics Development 
Corporation Limited 2009-10 2010-11 to 
2023-24 14 - 8.53 
4. Mizoram Food and Allied Industries 
Corporation Limited 2019-20 2020-21 to 
2023-24 04 - 9.44 
5. Aizawl Smart City Limited 2019-20 2020-21 to 
2023-24 04 - 40.17 
Total  0.21 65.59 

109
Chapter-III :  Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)Chapter-III: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises 
109 
As can be seen from Table-3.7, two SPSEs (serial no. 1 and 3) having the highest 
pendency of accounts (12 and 14 years) received Government investment aggregating 
to ₹ 12.76 crore by way of equity (₹ 0.21 crore) grants (₹ 12.55 crore) during the years 
for which their accounts were in arrears. In the absence of accounts and their subsequent 
audit, it could not be ascertained whether the investment made and the expenditure 
incurred there against have been properly accounted for and the purpose for which the 
amount was invested, had been achieved or not. 
Recommendation: The State Government may take special measures for expeditious 
clearance of arrears of accounts of the SPSEs. Until these accounts are brought up 
to date, the State Government may contemplate withholding the financial assistance 
to such companies. 
3.1.8 Performance of SPSEs as per their latest finalised accounts 
The financial position and working results of working SPSEs as per their latest finalised 
accounts as on 30 September 2024 are detailed in Appendix-3.1.1. Table-3.8 provides 
comparative details of working SPSEs’ turnover and Gross State Domestic Product 
(GSDP) for a period of five years ending 2023-24. 
Table-3.8: Details of working SPSEs turnover vis-a-vis State GDP 
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Turnover54 10.78 10.50 82.19 86.41 64.85 
GSDP55 24,990 23,923 26,695 30,690 35,579 
Percentage of Turnover to GSDP 0.04 0.04 0.31 0.28 0.18 
Source: GSDP figures rounded off to nearest ‘Rupees in crore’ 
As may be noticed from Table-3.8 above, the contribution of SPSE-turnover to GSDP 
of Mizoram during the last five years was negligible ranging between 0.04 per cent 
(2019-20) and 0.31 per cent (2021-22). The overall contribution of SPSE-turnover to 
the GDSP increased in 2022-23 from ₹ 10.50 crore (2020-21) to ₹ 86.41 crore 
(2022-23) mainly because of the growth of ₹ 71.69 crore (737.55 per cent ) in the 
turnover of one SPSE (Zoram Infrastructure and Industrial Development Corporation 
Limited) from ₹ 9.72 crore (2020-21) to ₹ 81.41 crore (2022-23). The decrease in 
turnover of this SPSE (Zoram Infrastructure and Industrial Development Corporation 
Limited) again to ₹ 64.57 crore (2023-24) caused a corresponding decrease in the 
overall SPSE-turnover to ₹ 64.85 crore in 2023-24.  
Thus, the financial performance of the SPSE sector is heavily reliant on this one entity, 
exposing the State’s public sector portfolio to a concentration risk. A downturn in that 
one SPSE can significantly distort overall sectoral performance, as seen in 2023-24 
when turnover dropped to ₹ 64.85 crore. Further, negligible contribution of SPSE-
turnover to GSDP indicates that SPSEs play a minimal role in the State’s economic 
output, raising concerns about the relevance, scale, and impact of public sector 
commercial activities in the region. 
 
54 Turnover of working SPSEs as per their latest finalised accounts 
55 Information furnished by the Directorate of Economics and Statistics, G oM 

110
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
110 
3.1.8.1 Key parameters 
Some other key parameters of SPSEs’ performance as per their latest finalised accounts 
up to the year 2023-24 as of 30 September of the respective years are given in 
Table-3.9. 
Table-3.9: Key Parameters of SPSEs 
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Debt56 27.78 27.78 27.78 27.78 27.78 
Turnover57 10.78 10.50 82.19 86.41 64.85 
Debt-Turnover Ratio (DTR) 2.58:1 2.65:1 0.34:1 0.32:1 0.43:1 
Interest Payments58 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 
Accumulated losses 54.89 55.18 56.28 57.64 56.93 
Source: Latest finalised accounts of SPSEs 
The debt of SPSEs remained unchanged at ₹ 27.78 crore from 2019-20 to 2023-24, 
while turnover increased sharply in 2021-22 and 2022-23 before declining in 2023-24. 
While debt stability may suggest prudence, the absence of new borrowings or capital 
restructuring may also indicate either cautious fiscal policy, constrained access to 
credit, or lack of active investment planning, though no definitive reason was recorded. 
SPSEs may be undercapitalised or lacking expansion plans, limiting their contribution 
to the economy. Interest payments recorded during the five years were disproportionate 
and meagre (₹ 0.02 crore) compared to the SPSE-Debts (₹ 27.78 crore). This was 
mainly due to non-provisioning towards interest liability by one SPSE (Zoram 
Infrastructure and Industrial Development Corporation Limited) against its borrowings 
(₹ 27.68 crore) during any of the five years for which no explanation was furnished. 
This raises questions about debt servicing norms, possible interest waivers, or 
accounting delays - highlighting lack of transparency in debt servicing practices and 
potential misstatement of liabilities. 
Accumulated losses rose from ₹ 54.89 crore in 2019-20 to ₹ 56.93 crore in 2023-24, 
reflecting operational inefficiencies across multiple SPSEs. The steady rise in losses 
despite turnover increases suggests structural issues in financial management, pricing, 
or cost recovery. Left unchecked, this could result in erosion of the SPSEs’ equity. 
Debt-Turnover Ratio 
A low debt-to-turnover ratio (DTR) demonstrates a good balance between debt and 
income. Conversely, a high DTR can be a signal of having too much of debt against the 
 
56  Long term loans (Debts) represent the SPSE borrowings with repayment tenure of more than three 
years. Hence, the short term borrowings of the SPSE (repayable within three years’ period) have been 
excluded and figures of debt accordingly modified 
57 Turnover of working SPSEs as per their latest finalised accounts as of 30 September of the respective 
year 
58  One SPSE (Zoram Infrastructure and Industrial Development Corporation Limited) had total ‘Long 
term borrowings (Unsecured)’ of ₹ 27.68 crore (GoM: ₹ 9.35 crore; Others: ₹ 18.33 crore) during all 
the five years (2019-20 to 2023-24) as per its latest finalised accounts. The SPSE, however, had not 
charged any interest liability against these borrowings in its Profit and Loss Account during any of 
the five years, for which no explanation has been furnished by the SPSE 

111
Chapter-III :  Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)Chapter-III: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises 
111 
income of SPSEs from core activities. Thus, the SPSEs having lower DTR are more 
likely to comfortably manage their debt servicing and repayments.  
The DTR dropped from 2.65:1 (2020-21) to 0.32:1 (2022-23), before marginally rising 
to 0.43:1 in 2023-24. These variations are a result of turnover fluctuations rather than 
active debt management. The volatility in DTR underscores operational inconsistency 
and over-reliance on a few revenue-generating SPSEs. This exposes the sector to fiscal 
and operational vulnerability in the event of underperformance by a single entity. 
SPSE Debt 
As shown in Table-3.9, SPSE-debts for the period from 2019-20 to 2023-24 remained 
constant at ₹ 27.78 crore, which pertained to two SPSEs 59. On the other hand, the 
SPSE-turnover increased significantly after 2020-21 mainly because of the growth of 
₹ 71.69 crore in the turnover of one SPSE (Zoram Infrastructure and Industrial 
Development Corporation Limited) from ₹ 9.72 crore (2020-21) to ₹ 81.41 crore 
(2022-23) as discussed under Paragraph 3.1.8 supra. As a result, the DTR of SPSEs 
had improved significantly from 2.65:1 (2020-21) to 0.34:1 (2021-22) and further to 
0.32:1 (2022-23), which indicated the comfortable position of the SPSEs for servicing 
their long-term debts as compared to previous years. During 2023-24, the DTR slightly 
deteriorated to 0.43:1 due to reduction in the SPSE-turnover from ₹ 86.41 crore 
(2022-23) to ₹ 64.85 crore (2023-24).  
Further, the accumulated losses of the SPSEs had shown a mixed trend during 2019-20 
to 2023-24 and had recorded a marginal increase of ₹ 2.04 crore (3.72 per cent) from 
₹ 54.89 crore (2019-20) to ₹ 56.93 crore (2023-24). 
3.1.8.2 Erosion of capital due to losses 
As per the latest finalised accounts of SPSEs on 30 September 2024 (Appendix-3.1.1), 
the paid-up capital and accumulated losses of six SPSEs were ₹ 63.58 crore and 
₹ 56.93 crore respectively. 
During 2023-24, the overall Return on Equity 60 (RoE) of three 61 out of four SPSEs 
having positive ‘Net worth’ was (-) 8.26 per cent62 due to the losses (₹ 0.98 crore) 
incurred by these SPSEs as per their latest finalised accounts (Appendix-3.1.1). The 
fourth SPSE63 operated on ‘no profit no loss basis’ as its losses were recouped from 
Government Grants. The ‘Net worth’ of the remaining two SPSEs was negative due to 
complete erosion of their paid-up capital (₹ 25.97 crore) by the accumulated losses 
(₹ 31.23 crore) as detailed in the Table-3.10. 
 
59  Zoram Infrastructure and Industrial Development Corporation Limited (₹ 27.68 crore) and Mizoram 
Handloom and Handicrafts Development Corporation Limited (₹ 0.10 crore) 
60 Return on Equity = Net Profit after taxes less preference dividend ÷ Shareholders’ Fund/ Equity; 
Where, Shareholders’ Fund/ Equity represents ‘Paid up Share Capital plus Free Reserves and Surplus 
minus Accumulated Loss minus Deferred Revenue Expenditure 
61 Zoram Infrastructure and Industrial Development Corporation Limited, Zoram Electronics 
Development Corporation Limited and Mizoram Handloom and Handicrafts Development 
Corporation Limited. 
62 Overall loss (₹ 0.98 crore) ÷Overall Shareholders’ Fund (₹ 11.86 crore) x 100 
63  Aizawl Smart City Limited 

112
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
112 
Table-3.10: SPSEs with complete erosion of paid-up capital 
(₹ in crore) 
Source: Latest finalised accounts of SPSEs. 
The consistent losses incurred by the above SPSEs have resulted in a significant 
depletion of public wealth, raising serious concerns. In light of this, it is imperative that 
the State Government re-evaluate the functioning of these SPSEs and take necessary 
measures to either enhance their financial viability or shut down their operations if 
deemed necessary. 
Analysis of the operational results of the SPSEs in Mizoram revealed that the SPSEs 
had incurred overall losses during all the previous years from 2019-20 to 2023-24. A 
graphical presentation of the overall losses incurred by the working SPSEs during 
2019-20 to 2023-24 as per their latest finalised accounts upto the year 2023-24 as on 
30 September of the respective years have been depicted in Chart-3.2: 
Chart-3.2: Overall losses (-) of SPSEs (all working) 
 
It may be seen from Chart-3.2 above that during the last five years, the SPSEs incurred 
overall losses ranging between ₹ 2.04 crore (2019-20) and ₹ 3.02 crore (2023-24). The 
SPSE-losses showed a deteriorating trend during four out of the last five years except 
during 2022-23 when the SPSE losses had decreased marginally from ₹ 2.77 crore 
(2021-22) to ₹ 2.63 crore (2022-23). The SPSE losses were highest during 2023-24 
(₹ 3.02 crore) in the last five years. More than 82 per cent (₹ 2.49 crore) of SPSE-losses 
was contributed by three SPSEs as detailed in Table-3.11. 
Table-3.11: Major Contributors to profits and losses of working SPSEs 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of SPSE Latest finalised 
accounts 
Profit (+)/ 
loss (-) 
Contributors to SPSE-losses 
Mizoram Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited 2011-12 (-) 1.63 
Zoram Infrastructure and Industrial Development Corporation Limited 2022-23 (-) 0.45 
Mizoram Food and Allied Industries Corporation Limited 2019-20 (-) 0.41 
Total - (-) 2.49 
-2 . 3 2
-2 . 7 7 - 2 . 6 3
- 3 . 0 2
- 2 . 0 4
- 4
- 2
0
2 0 1 9 - 2 0 2 0 2 0 - 2 1 2 0 2 1 - 2 2 2 0 2 2 - 2 3 2 0 2 3 - 2 4
O v e r a l l  p r o f i t / ( L o s s )  i n c u r r e d  b y  w o r k i n g  P S U s
Sl. 
No. Name of SPSE Latest finalised 
accounts 
Paid up 
capital 
Accumulated 
loss 
1. Mizoram Agricultural Marketing 
Corporation Limited 2011-12 5.97 8.54 
2. Mizoram Food and Allied Industries 
Corporation Limited 2019-20 20.00 22.69 
Total 25.97 31.23 

113
Chapter-III :  Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)Chapter-III: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises 
113 
The financial performance of SPSEs in Mizoram remains a matter of concern, with all 
entities reporting sustained losses and several showing signs of structural financial 
distress. As of 30 September 2024, two SPSEs had completely eroded their paid-up 
capital, and the overall Return on Equity for SPSEs with positive net worth was 
negative at (-) 8.26 per cent. Operating losses have persisted over five consecutive 
years, peaking at ₹ 3.02 crore in 2023-24, with over 82 per cent of the losses 
concentrated in just three SPSEs. 
The continued accumulation of losses, outdated accounts in key loss-making entities, 
and reliance on Government grants point to systemic inefficiencies and poor financial 
oversight. These trends raise significant concerns about the long-term viability of 
SPSEs and the potential for further erosion of public funds unless urgent corrective 
measures, including restructuring or divestment, are undertaken. 
3.1.8.3 Return on Capital Employed 
Return on Capital Employed (ROCE) is a profitability metric that measures the long-
term profitability and efficiency of the total capital employed by an entity. Companies 
create value when they generate returns on the Capital Employed. ROCE is an 
important decision metric for long term lenders. ROCE is calculated by dividing a 
Company’s Earnings before Interest and Taxes (EBIT) by the Capital Employed64. 
During 2023-24, the overall Capital Employed of six working SPSEs as per their latest 
finalised accounts as on 30 September 2024 stood at ₹ 34.43 crore. The ROCE of two 
SPSEs65 was, however, ‘not workable’ due to complete erosion of their capital 
employed by the accumulated losses while the ROCE of other three SPSEs 66 was 
‘negative’ due to the losses incurred by them during 2023-24. The remaining one SPSE 
(Aizawl Smart City Limited) had been operating on ‘no profit no loss’ basis as its losses 
were recouped from the Government Grants (Appendix-3.1.1). 
3.1.9 Return on Investment on the basis of Present Value of Investment 
The Rate of Real Return (RORR) measures the profitability and efficiency with which 
equity and similar non-interest-bearing capital have been employed, after adjusting 
them for their time value. To determine the RORR on Government Investment in the 
State SPSEs, the investment of State Government in the form of equity, interest free 
loans and grants/ subsidies given by the State Government for operational and 
management expenses less the disinvestments (if any), has been considered and indexed 
to their Present Value (PV) and summated. The RORR is then calculated by dividing 
the ‘profit after tax’ (PAT) of the SPSEs by the sum of the PV of Government 
investment. 
The State Government’s investment in SPSEs yielded negative returns in 2023–24, out 
of six directly funded SPSEs, five SPSEs incurring losses and one SPSE which 
 
64 Capital employed = Paid up share capital + free reserves and surplus + long term loans – accumulated 
losses - deferred revenue expenditure 
65  Mizoram Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited & Mizoram Food and Allied Industries 
Corporation Limited 
66 SPSEs at serial no. 3, 4 and 5 of Appendix-3.1.1 

114
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
114 
operating on a no-profit-no-loss basis (Appendix-3.1.1). The Rate of Real Return 
(RORR), which factors in the time value of money, indicated an erosion of 
1.02 per cent of the Present Value (PV) of Government investment. When measured on 
historical cost basis, the erosion was 2.24 per cent (Appendix-3.1.2). This persistent 
negative return reflected inefficient utilisation of public funds, with capital not 
generating commensurate economic or financial returns over time. The fact that the 
erosion persists even after adjusting for inflation underscores a systemic lack of 
profitability in State-owned enterprises. These trends raise concerns about the financial 
sustainability and strategic purpose of continued government investment in such 
entities and highlight the urgent need for a re-evaluation of their viability, performance 
monitoring mechanisms, and possible restructuring or divestment. 
3.1.10 Impact of Audit Comments on Annual Accounts of SPSEs 
During October 2023 to September 2024, two SPSEs viz., Zoram Infrastructure and 
Industrial Development Corporation Limited (ZIDCO) and Mizoram Food and Allied 
Industries Corporation Limited (MIFCO) submitted three Accounts for previous years. 
All three67 Accounts of these SPSEs were selected for supplementary audit and their 
audits were completed during 2023-24. The audit reports of statutory auditors appointed 
by the CAG and the supplementary audit of the CAG indicate that the quality of 
maintenance of accounts needs to be improved substantially. The details of aggregate 
money value of the comments of statutory auditors and CAG during last three years 
from 2021-22 to 2023-24 are given in Table-3.12. 
Table-3.12: Impact of audit comments on working Companies 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 
2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
No. of 
accounts Amount No. of 
accounts Amount No. of 
accounts Amount 
1. Decrease in profit - - - - 3 10.65 
2. Increase in loss 1 21.34 4 2.66 3 2.51 
3. Non-disclosure of material facts 2 2.61 1 1.65 2 7.69 
4. Errors of classification 3 14.87 4 15.22 1 2.43 
Source: As per latest finalised annual accounts of SPSEs. 
During 2023-24, CAG issued comments on all three accounts of Zoram Infrastructure 
and Industrial Development Corporation Limited (2021-22 and 2022-23) and Mizoram 
Food and Allied Industries Corporation Limited (2019-20). The statutory auditors had 
given qualified certificates on all the three Accounts of two SPSEs. 
Gist of some of the important comments of the statutory auditors and CAG in respect 
of accounts of above two SPSEs audited during the year are as under: 
 
 
 
67  Zoram Infrastructure and Industrial Development Corporation Limited (2021-22 & 2022-23) and 
Mizoram Food and Allied Industries Corporation Limited (2019-20) 

115
Chapter-III :  Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises)Chapter-III: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Enterprises 
115 
Zoram Infrastructure and Industrial Development Corporation Limited    
(2021-22) 
 The Company invested the Grant (₹ 2.43 crore) received (2020-21 & 2021-22) 
from North Eastern Council (NEC) under Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode 
on the specified purpose (setting up of Mechanized Brick Industry), by signing 
an agreement with a private party. On completion of the work (April 2022), the 
Company wrongly accounted the above investment under ‘Other Non-Current 
Assets–Security Deposit (Note-8)’ instead of ‘Non-Current Investment (Note-6)’. 
This resulted in overstatement of ‘Other Non-Current Assets and understatement 
of ‘Non-Current Investment’ by ₹ 2.43 crore each. 
 The Company did not depict the prior period interest income (₹ 0.10 crore) 
recovered during current year (2021-22) separately as ‘prior period income’ 
contrary to the requirement of Accounting Standard-5. 
Zoram Infrastructure and Industrial Development Corporation Limited  
(2022-23) 
 The Company established a Call Centre in Aizawl by forming a Joint venture 
with M/s Public Soft Corporation India (PSCI), New Delhi out of the Capital 
Grants of ₹ One crore received (2008) from Government of Mizoram and 
released the whole amount to M/s PSCI. The Call Centre was closed down 
(December 2009) after nine months of operation due to strike by the staff. The 
assets (mainly consisted of computers and furniture with depreciation rates of 
63.16 per cent and 25.89 per cent respectively) procured for the venture could not 
be disposed of even after ten years from the date of procurement due to pending 
ACB/ CBI case. As such, the depreciated value of the said assets would have been 
negligible or zero as on 31 March 2023. Hence, the above investment in Call 
Centre (₹ One crore) should have been written-off from the Annual Accounts, 
which was not done. 
This resulted in overstatement of Short-term Loans and Advances (Investment in Call 
Centre) and Other Reserves (Capital Grant for Call Centre) (Note-2) by ₹ One crore 
each. 
Mizoram Food and Allied Industries Corporation Limited (2019-20) 
 The Company paid ₹ 1.16 crore to M/s ESS DEE Enterprises (May-July 2019) as 
an advance for supply and installation of Plant and Machinery under an ongoing 
project namely, ‘Modernisation of Abattoir’ and accounted it as ‘Advance for 
capital works’ in the Balance Sheet. Since the supply of the plant and machinery 
has already been completed, the above advance should have been adjusted and 
accounted under ‘Capital Work in Progress – Modernisation of Abattoir’. This 
has resulted in overstatement of the head ‘Other non-current assets-Advance for 
capital works’ and understatement of ‘Capital Work in Progress’ by ₹ 1.16 crore 
each. 

116
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
116 
 Note 5 (Capital work-in-progress) to the Annual Accounts of the Company 
included the mobilisation advance of ₹ 0.13 crore paid (November 2019) towards 
construction and renovation works to be carried out at Pork & Poultry Processing 
Plant, Zemabawk under the ongoing project (Modernisation of Abattoir). Since 
the above works were yet to be completed, the advances paid there against should 
have been accounted under ‘Short term loans and Advances’. This resulted in 
overstatement of the head ‘Capital Work-in-Progress – Modernisation of 
Abattoir’ and understatement of ‘Short term loans and Advances’ by ₹ 0.13 crore 
each. 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER – IV
REVENUE SECTOR

CHAPTER-IV 
 
REVENUE SECTOR 
 
4.1 Trend of revenue receipts 
4.1.1 The tax and non-tax revenue raised by the Government of Mizoram during the year 
2023-24, State’s share of net proceeds of divisible Union taxes and duties and Grants-in-Aid 
from the Government of India (GoI) during the year and corresponding figures for the 
preceding four years are given in the following Table-4.1. 
Table-4.1: Trend of revenue receipts 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
1. 
Revenue raised by State Government 
Tax revenue 730.98 647.56 853.94 1,101.83 1,195.59 
Non-tax revenue 522.35 561.76 622.12 1,027.77 1,084.93 
Total 1,253.33 1,209.32 1,476.06 2,129.60 2,280.52 
2. 
Receipts from GoI 
State’s share of net proceeds of 
divisible Union taxes and duties 3,017.80 3,010.55 4,222.86 4,745.25 5,647.47 
Grants-in-Aid 5,387.13 3,520.80 3,460.82 3,407.22 3,486.06 
Total 8,404.93 6,531.35 7,683.68 8,152.47 9,133.53 
3. Total Revenue Receipts of 
State Government (1 + 2) 9,658.26 7,740.67 9,159.74 10,282.07 11,414.05 
4. Percentage of 1 to 3 12.98 15.62 16.11 20.71 19.98 
Source: Finance Accounts, of respective years 
The above table indicates that during the year 2023-24, revenue raised by the State 
Government (₹ 2,280.52 crore) was 19.98 per cent of its total revenue receipts. The balance 
receipts (₹ 9,133.53 crore) constituting 80.02 per cent of total receipts during 2023-24 were 
from GoI. 
4.1.2 Details of Budget Estimates (BEs) and tax revenue raised during the period from 
2019-20 to 2023-24 are given in the following Table-4.2. 
Table-4.2: Details of tax revenue 
(₹ in crore) 
Head of Accounts 
Year Percentage of 
increase (+)/ 
decrease (-) in 
2023-24 over 
2022-23 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual 
State Goods and 
Services Tax 355.03 532.22 504.0
0 457.91 538.0
0 632.34 598.0
0 904.20 865.00 969.11 (+) 7.18 
Taxes on Sales, 
Trade, etc. 150.06 117.61 81.00 113.66 95.00 150.75 115.0
2 112.94 120.00 125.93 (+) 11.50 
State Excise 5.00 2.72 1.00 0.96 1.00 1.79 1.00 1.89 1.80 2.57 (+) 35.98 
Taxes on 
Vehicles 27.06 40.66 32.27 29.01 34.35 27.90 34.95 41.32 42.56 46.17 (+) 11.74 
Land Revenue 11.00 9.05 15.00 20.74 18.00 13.04 19.00 9.56 19.50 10.14 (+) 6.07 
Stamps and 
Registration 
fees 
5.92 5.85 7.01 4.73 11.16 7.48 11.28 7.80 14.48 16.80 (+) 115.38 
Taxes on Goods 
and Passengers 2.75 7.44 6.40 4.85 5.03 5.39 5.03 7.99 5.96 8.47 (+) 6.01 
Other Taxes 16.87 15.43 15.01 15.70 17.46 15.25 17.02 16.12 15.00 16.40 (+) 6.28 
Total 573.69 730.98 661.69 647.56 720.00 853.94 801.30 1,101.82 1,084.30 1,195.59 (+) 8.51 
Source: Finance Accounts and Annual Financial Statement of respective years 

118
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
118 
State’s own tax revenue increased by 8.51 per cent in 2023-24 over 2022-23. Revenue 
receipts on account of Stamps and registration fees increased by ₹ Nine crore 
(115.38 per cent) in 2023-24 over 2022-23. Receipts on account of GST were ₹ 969.11 crore 
which registered an increase of ₹ 64.91 crore (7.18 per cent) over the previous year. 
The tax revenue on Vehicles registered an increase of ₹ 4.85 crore (11.74 per cent) in 
2023-24 over the previous year. Receipts from State Excise witnessed an increase of 
₹ 0.68 crore (35.98 per cent) over the previous year. Receipts from Taxes on Goods and 
Passengers witnessed an increase of ₹ 0.48 crore (6.01 per cent) over the previous year. 
4.1.2.1 State Goods and Services Tax 
Goods and Services Tax (GST) was implemented with effect from 01 July 2017 on supply 
of goods or services or both. GST is concurrently administered by the Union (Central GST) 
and the States (State GST) on supply within the State while Integrated Goods and Services 
Tax (IGST) is levied on inter-state supply of goods or services or both. 
The Central Goods and Services Tax (CGST) Act, 2017, the Mizoram State Goods and 
Services Tax Act, 2017 and the Integrated Goods and Service Tax Act, 2017 and allied Rules 
of all the three Acts are applicable in the State of Mizoram. 
Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN), a Non-Government Company set up by 
Government of India provides both front-end and back-end services to Mizoram being a 
Model-II State. Front-end services provided to taxpayers include registration, return filing, 
payment of tax, etc., while back-end services include approval of registration, taxpayer detail 
viewer, refund processing, MIS reports, etc. 
Implementation of GST necessitated smooth transitional provisions which enable migration 
of all existing businesses to the new regime. The transitional provisions have been 
specifically incorporated in all the three GST Acts/ Rules. 
4.1.2.1.1 Registrations under GST 
As per the GST Act, every taxpayer with turnover of above ₹ 40 lakh for sales of goods and 
₹ 20 lakh for providing services under the normal category states and for the special category 
states, ₹ 20 lakh and ₹ 10 lakh respectively, has to be registered under GST. Mizoram being 
a special category State, the threshold limit is ₹ 20 lakh and ₹ 10 lakh for sales of goods and 
providing services respectively. During transition period, the Department had to deal with 
migration of existing dealers as well as approval of new registrations. 
The category wise registrations under GST as of March 2024 have been given in Table-4.3. 
Table-4.3: Registered taxpayers under GST 
Types of Taxpayers Number of dealers Percentage of total 
Normal Taxpayers68 6,862 91.55 
Tax Deductors at source (TDS) 340 4.54 
Tax Collectors at source (TCS) 100 1.34 
Composition Taxpayers 189 2.52 
Input Service Distributors (ISD) 4 0.05 
Total Registrants 7,495 100 
Source: Information as provided by State Taxation Department 
 
68 Including casual taxpayers 

119
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
119 
The total registrations under GST in Mizoram as of March 2024 were 7,495 of which, normal 
taxpayers accounted for 91.55 per cent, tax deductors at source accounted for 4.54 per cent 
and others69 (including TCS, Composition taxpayers and ISD) accounted for 3.91 per cent. 
4.1.2.1.2 Division of Dealers between Central and State Government 
As per the recommendation70 of GST Council, administrative control of over 90 per cent of 
the dealers with turnover less than ₹ 1.50 crore shall vest with the State tax administration 
and 10 per cent with the Central tax administration. In respect of dealers with turnover of 
₹ 1.50 crore and above, the administrative control shall be divided in the ratio of 50 per cent 
each for the Central and State tax administration. The division of taxpayers as notified in 
Mizoram up to March 2024 is shown below. 
Table-4.4: Division of dealers between Centre and State Government 
Jurisdiction Number of dealers Total Turnover above ₹ 1.5 crore Turnover below ₹ 1.5 crore 
Centre  986 2,257 3,243 
State 127 5,365 5,492* 
Total 1,113 7,622 8,735** 
Source: Information as provided by State Taxation Department and CGST, Aizawl 
* Figures provided by the State Taxation Department includes both Centre and State. Reasons for variance 
in distribution of administrative control over the categories of taxpayers against the GST council’s 
recommendation have not been provided by the state government. 
** Reason for the difference in the total number of dealers at Table-5.3 and Table-5.4 could not be stated 
by the State Taxation Department. 
4.1.2.1.3 Filing of Returns under GST  
As per Mizoram Goods and Services Tax Rules 71, 2017 (MGST Rules, 2017), regular 
taxpayers were required to file monthly returns72 in GSTR-1, GSTR-2 and GSTR-3, whereas 
composition taxpayers were required to file quarterly returns in GSTR-4. However, the 
provisions of the rules could not be implemented due to issues relating to information 
technology infrastructure. Accordingly, filing of GSTR-2 and GSTR-3 were postponed and 
regular taxpayers are required to file GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B and composition dealers were 
to file GSTR-4 quarterly. 
The trends of filing of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B for the period from April 2023 to March 2024 
in Mizoram have been depicted in Table-4.5. 
Table-4.5: Filing pattern of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B 
Month GSTR-1 GSTR-3B 
April, 2023 5,461 3,202 
May, 2023 5,513 3,221 
June, 2023 6,501 3,771 
July, 2023 5,658 3,270 
August, 2023 5,730 3,320 
 
69 As of March 2024, there were no registrations under Corporation Taxpayers, Non-Resident Taxable Person 
(NRTP) and Online Information Database Access and Retrieval services (OIDAR) 
70 Circular dated 20 September 2017 
71 Rule 59, 60 and 61 
72 GSTR-1: containing outward supply, GSTR-2: Auto populated from GSTR-1 showing inward supply of 
the dealer and GSTR-3: Summarised details of outward and inward supplies of a dealer during the month 
along with amount of GST liability 

120
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
120 
Month GSTR-1 GSTR-3B 
September, 2023 6,692 3,870 
October, 2023 5,868 3,399 
November, 2023 5,923 3,406 
December, 2023 6,762 3,899 
January, 2024 5,947 3,409 
February, 2024 6,017 3,409 
March, 2024 6,852 3,791 
Total 72,924 41,967 
Source: Information as provided by State Taxation Department 
4.1.3 The details of non-tax revenue receipts during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24 are 
given in Table-4.6. 
Table-4.6: Details of non-tax revenue 
(₹ in crore) 
Source: Finance Accounts, Vol-II and Annual Financial Statement of respective years 
Non-tax revenue constituted between 5.41 per cent (2019-20) and 10 per cent (2022-23) of 
the total revenue receipts during the last five years (Table-4.1). During 2023-24, non-tax 
revenue recorded a growth of 5.56 per cent  over the previous year. There was a steady 
increase in non-tax revenue from ₹ 522.35 crore in 2019-20 to ₹ 1,084.93 crore in 2023-24 
with the major contributors being Power (₹ 577.27 crore), water Supply & Sanitation 
(₹ 77.19 crore) and Interest Receipts (₹ 15.45 crore). 
4.2 Analysis of arrears of revenue 
The arrears of revenue as of 31 March 2024 on some principal heads of revenue amounted 
to ₹ 52.92 crore, out of which ₹ 13.77 crore was outstanding for more than five years, as 
detailed in Table-4.7. 
Table-4.7: Arrears of revenue 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Head of revenue Total amount 
outstanding as of 
31 March 2024 
Amount outstanding for 
more than five years as of 
31 March 2024 
1. Taxes/ VAT on Sales, Trades, etc. 52.22 13.76 
2. Taxes on Professions, Trades, Callings and 
Employment, etc. 
0.19 0 
3. Taxes on Entertainment 0.51 0.01 
Total 52.92 13.77 
Source: Information furnished by the Taxation Department 
4.3 Arrears in assessment 
The details of cases pending at the beginning of the year, cases due for assessment, cases 
disposed off during the year and number of cases pending finalisation at the end of the year 
Head of account 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Percentage of 
increase (+)/ 
decrease (-) in 
2023-24 over 
2022-23 
BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual 
Power 300.00 373.61 330.00 398.01 625.00 401.90 587.00 741.34 620.00 577.27 (-) 22.13 
Water Supply & 
Sanitation 
50.00 48.32 60.00 54.65 65.00 54.84 70.00 65.11 72.00 77.19 (+) 18.55 
Interest receipt 25.96 32.84 50.27 19.12 53.07 41.83 58.38 50.19 46.01 15.45 (-) 69.22 
Others 82.06 67.58 142.80 89.98 109.19 123.55 121.05 171.13 158.98 415.02 (+) 142.51 
Total 458.02 522.35 583.07 561.76 852.26 622.12 836.43 1,027.77 896.99 1,084.93 (+) 5.56 

121
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
121 
as furnished by the Taxation Department in respect of Sales Tax, Motor Spirit Tax, Luxury 
Tax, Tax on Works Contracts and Professional Tax are shown in Table-4.8. 
Table-4.8: Arrears in assessments 
Head of account 
Opening 
balance as of 
01 April 2024 
New cases due 
for 
assessment 
during 
2023-24 
Total 
assessments 
due 
Cases 
disposed off 
during 
2023-24 
Closing 
balance as of 
31 March 2024 
Percentage 
of disposal 
0040-Taxes on Sales, 
Trades, etc. 5 Nil 5 Nil 5 0 
Taxes on Professions, 
Trades, Callings and 
Employment, etc. 
Nil 51,772 51,772 51,772 Nil 100 
Total 5 51,772 51,777 51,772 5 99.99 
Source: Information furnished by the Taxation Department 
It can be seen from the above table that out of 51,777 assessments due, the disposal was 
51,772 (99.99 per cent) during the year 2023-24. 
4.4 Evasion of tax detected by the Department 
The details of cases of tax evasion detected by the Taxation Department, cases finalised and 
demands for additional tax raised as reported by the Department are given in Table-4.9. 
Table-4.9: Evasion of tax 
Source: Information furnished by the Taxation Department 
4.5 Pendency of refund cases 
The details relating to the number of refund cases pending at the beginning of 2023-24, 
claims received during the year, refunds allowed during the year and the cases pending at 
the close of 2023-24 as reported by the Taxation Department are given in Table-4.10. 
Table-4.10: Details of pendency of refund cases 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars GST/ Sales Tax/ VAT 
No. of Cases Amount 
1. Claims outstanding at the beginning of the year 11 0.01 
2. Claims received during the year 23 11.05 
3. Refunds made during the year 18 10.92 
4. Refunds rejected during the year 1 0.03 
5. Balance outstanding at the end of year 15 0.11 
Source: Information furnished by the Taxation Department  
Thus, the number of cases pending at the close of the year increased from 11 to 15 cases. 
Name of 
tax/ duty 
Opening 
balance as of 
01 April 2023 
Cases 
detected 
during the 
year 
2023-24 
Total 
Cases in which assignments/ 
investigation completed and 
additional demand including 
penalty, etc., raised during 
2023-24 
Number of 
pending cases as 
of 31 March 2024 
No. of cases ₹ in crore 
Sales Tax/ VAT 0 0 0 0 0 0 
GST 40 696 736 658 6.67 78 
Total 40 696 736 658 6.67 78 

122
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
122 
4.6 Audit planning 
The unit offices are categorised into high, medium and low risk units according to their 
revenue position, past trends of audit observations and other parameters. The annual audit 
plan is prepared on the basis of risk analysis. The risk criteria involved scrutiny of budget 
speech, white paper on State finances, Reports of the Finance Commission, 
recommendations of the Taxation Reforms Committee, analysis of the revenue earnings, tax 
administration, etc. 
During the year 2023-24, there were 139 auditable units, of which 17 units were planned and 
18 units had been audited, which was 12.95 per cent of the total auditable units. 
4.7 Results of audit 
Position of local audit conducted during the year 
Records of 18 units of Environment, Forests & Climate Change, Transport, Geology & 
Mineral Resources and Land Revenue & Settlement Departments were test-checked during 
2023-24. Test check revealed non-deduction of licence fee, labour cess, short levy of royalty, 
non-levy of tax, etc., aggregating ₹ 167.69 crore in 31 out of 75 cases. Of these, there was 
no recovery made by the Departments concerned for the year 2023-24. 
4.8 Coverage of this Report 
This Chapter contain three Performance Audit Reports and one Subject Specific Compliance 
Audit Report and one Compliance Audit Paragraph involving a money value of 
₹ 35.36 crore. The Department/ State Government has accepted audit observations involving 
₹ 35.36 crore. However, no recovery was made. 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
 
 
ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE DEPARTMENT 
 
 
4.9 Performance Audit on Green India Mission 
 
4.9.1 Introduction 
The National Mission for a Green India, commonly known as Green India Mission (GIM), 
was launched by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in 2011, as one 
of the eight Missions under the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC). The 
mission aims at protecting; restoring and enhancing India’s diminishing forest cover and 
responding to climate change through a combination of adaptation and mitigation measures 
in 10 million hectares of land over a period of 10 years at a projected cost of ₹ 46,000 crores. 
The mission was approved by the Central Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) 
in February 2014 as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme73. 
In Mizoram, the Green India Mission (GIM) is being implemented by the State Forest 
Development Agency (SFDA) of the Environment, Forests & Climate Change (EF&CC) 
 
73  Centrally Sponsored Scheme provides the Central and State share at a ratio of 90: 10 for North Eastern 
and Special category states and 75: 25 for remaining states. The ratio for the remaining states was revised 
(October 2015) to 60: 40 

123
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
123 
Department. As per approved (29 June 2016) State Perspective Plan an area of 
29,893 hectares were targeted for treatment under four submissions/ interventions over a 
period of six years in Mizoram. Preparatory activities such as Micro planning, Landscape 
survey, etc., began in 2014-15 and the actual implementation of four 74 out of five sub-
missions started in 2016-17 across 51 L3 75 Landscapes within eight identified L2 76 
Landscapes under five Forest Divisions of the State. 
According to India State of Forest Report (ISFR), 2015, out of the total geographical area of 
21,081 sq km, Mizoram had a forest area of 18,748 sq km, of which, 12,752 sq km, 
constituting 68.02 per cent of total forest cover was open forest i.e., low canopy density. The 
prevalence of open forests in hilly terrain threatens the intricate relationships among various 
flora and fauna within the ecosystem. This issue is exacerbated by shifting cultivation 
practices in the State and other human activities. 
4.9.2 Objectives for implementation of Green India Mission (GIM) in Mizoram 
The objective of GIM in Mizoram was to enhance forest quality, rehabilitate wastelands, 
improve ecosystem services, boost forest-based livelihoods and increase carbon dioxide 
sequestration and reduce open forest area. 
As per the approved Perspective Plan, 29,893 hectares across eight L2 Landscapes were to 
be treated over six years (2016-17 to 2021-22) at an estimated cost of ₹ 348.26 crore, 
including the promotion of alternative fuel energy and related support activities, as detailed 
in Table-4.11. 
Table-4.11: Physical target and financial target as per approved Perspective Plan 
Sub-mission/ Intervention Category Type Physical target 
(Area in hectare) 
Financial target 
(₹ in lakh) 
SM-1: Enhancing quality of 
forest cover and improving 
ecosystem services 
(4.9 mha*) 
1(a): Moderately dense 
forest cover, but 
showing degradation  
Assisted Natural 
Regeneration (ANR) 
Without Plantation 
3,800 1,539.00 
1(b): Eco restoration of 
degraded open forests 
Type (A): 200 Plants/ 
hectare  4,700 2,030.00 
Type (B): 1,100 
Plants/ hectare 593 480.33 
Type (C): 2,500 
Plants/ hectare  6,000 8,100.00 
SM-2: Eco System 
restoration and increase in 
forest cover (1.8 mha) 
(a)-Rehabilitation of 
shifting cultivation areas 
1,100 plants/ hectare 
7,800 6,318.00 
SM-3: Enhancing tree cover 
in Urban & Peri- Urban areas 
(including institutional 
lands)-0.2 mha 
(a) Plantation in Urban 
& Peri - Urban areas  
2500/ Plants/ hectare 
800 2,160.00 
 
74  Sub-Mission 1 : Enhancing quality of forest cover and improving ecosystem services, Sub-Mission 2 : 
Eco-restoration and increase in forest cover, Sub-Mission 3: Enhancing tree cover in urban and peri-urban 
areas (including institutional land), Sub-Mission 4: Agroforestry and social forestry (increasing biomass 
and creating carbon sink, Sub-Mission 5: Restoration of Wetlands (0.10 million hectare) (not implemented 
in Mizoram) 
75   L3 Landscape: Working/ Implementation units (villages) within L2 level Landscape, usually micro 
watershed 
76  L2 Landscape: Operational units (usually a forest division) within level 1 Landscape i.e., State, usually 
milli-watershed 

124
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
124 
Sub-mission/ Intervention Category Type Physical target 
(Area in hectare) 
Financial target 
(₹ in lakh) 
SM-4: Enhancing tree cover 
in Urban & Peri- Urban areas 
(including institutional 
lands)-0.2 mha 
(a) Farmers Land 
including current 
fallows 
Farmer’s Land 
5,100 2,754.00 
(c) Highways/ Rural 
roads/ Canals/ Tank 
Bunds 
Road/ Canals/ Tank 
Bunds 1,100 2,079.00 
Total (A) 
 
 29,893 25,460.73 
(B) Promoting alternative fuel energy among 10,200 
households NA 336.60 
(C) Support activities77 NA 9,029.07 
Grand total (A)+(B)+(C) 34,826.40 
Source: Approved Perspective Plan of SFDA, Mizoram 
* mha=Million hectares 
However, according to ISFR 2023, the total forest area had decreased to 17,990.46 sq. km. 
The area under open forest also declined to 9,093.18 sq. km, constituting 50.54 per cent  of 
the total forest cover, compared to 2015. As such, following the implementation of GIM, the 
total open forest area decreased to 3,658.82 sq.km (12,752 sq.km minus 9,093.18 sq.km) as 
compared to 2015-16 constituting 28.69 per cent of open forest area 12,752 sq.km in 2023. 
4.9.3 Identification of Landscapes 
The planning process fosters a Landscape approach where Landscapes are identified at 
different levels (L1, L2 and L3) for the implementation of the various sub-missions under 
the Mission. 
Landscapes are identified using a combination of criteria such as projected vulnerability of 
critical habitats, corridors and potential of area for carbon sink. Once the criteria have been 
listed, various maps and spatial and attribute data sets are collected from different sources 
such as Forest Survey of India (FSI), Space Application Centres, State Departments, etc. At 
L1 level, broad Landscapes of interest/ importance are identified using Landforms or 
catchments as base layer. Next, forest cover and scrub layer are overlaid on the base map of 
landforms/ bio geographic units/ catchments to identify areas of interest under different 
density classes. States could identify one or more L1 areas for implementing the mission. 
 
77  Support Activities: 1. Research (₹ 515.95 lakh), 2. Publicity/ Media/ outreach activities (₹ 257.97 lakh) 
3. Monitoring and Evaluation (₹ 257.97 lakh) 4. Livelihood improvement activities (₹ 4,385.55 lakh) 
5. Strengthening local level institutions (₹ 1,289.87 lakh) 6. Strengthening FDs (₹ 1,289.87 lakh) 
7. Mission Organisation, operation and maintenance, contingencies and overheads (₹ 1,031.89 lakh) 
 
L1 Landscape: Broad Landscapes of importance, identified as large contiguous areas of 
forest and non-forest lands in a given landform/ catchment area, usually 
larger portions of the State. 
L2 Landscape: Operational units (usually a forest division) within level 1 Landscape, 
usually milli-watershed. 
L3 Landscape: Working/ Implementation units (villages) within level 2 Landscape, 
usually Micro watersheds. 

125
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
125 
Once the Landscapes at L1 are identified, delineation of L2 level is done by putting 
watershed78 boundaries (Milli or Micro watershed) on the map. The key criteria for 
prioritisation usually include forest and tree cover, vulnerability of forests to climate change, 
bio-diversity richness, wildlife corridors, along with the socio-economic criteria such as 
percentage of tribal population and incidence of poverty. Once data sets are obtained for 
different criteria, they are aggregated and combined in a way to provide a composite picture. 
Each criterion is assigned relative weight covering a range of 0-1, based on the specific 
requirement and priority of the state. The weighted values are then added to get a total score. 
After the identification of L2 operational units, the L3-actual working Units are identified 
taking into account the Micro-watershed/ village boundaries. 
4.9.4 Institutional mechanism involved at the State, Districts and Villages level  
The institutional structure for implementation of Green India Mission in the State is as 
under. 
 
  
 
78 Watershed is a geo-hydrological unit draining to a common point by a system of drains. It checks soil 
erosion, control run-off and increase infiltration of rainwater. According to size/ drainage/ shape, watershed 
can be categorised into Milli-watershed-1,000 to 10,000 hectare and Micro watershed-100 to 1,000 hectares 
 
S t a t e  S t e e r i n g  C o m m i t t e e  
C h i e f  S e c r e t a r y  ( C h a i r m a n )  
A d d l .  P C C F  ( M e m b e r  S e c r e t a r y ) 
S t a t e  F o r e s t  D e v e l o p m e n t  A g e n c y   
G e n e r a l  B o d y  
Minister of EF & CC (Chairperson) 
P r .  C h i e f  C o n s e r v a t o r  o f  F o r e s t s  ( M e m b e r  S e c r e t a r y ) 
E x e c u t i v e  C o m m i t t e e 
P r .  C h i e f  C o n s e r v a t o r  o f  F o r e s t s  ( C h a i r p e r s o n )  
A d d l .  P C C F  ( M e m b e r  S e c r e t a r y ) 
D i s t r i c t  S t e e r i n g  C o m m i t t e e   
D y .  C o m m i s s i o n e r  ( C h a i r p e r s o n )  
D i v i s i o n a l  F o r e s t  O f f i c e r  ( M e m b e r  S e c r e t a r y )  
F o r e s t  D e v e l o p m e n t  A g e n c y  
G e n e r a l  B o d y  
Conservator of Forests (Chairperson) 
D F O /  C E O  ( F D A )  ( M e m b e r  S e c r e t a r y 
E x e c u t i v e  B o d y  
P r .  C h i e f  C o n s e r v a t o r  o f  F o r e s t s  ( C h a i r p e r s o n )  
A d d l .  P C C F  ( M e m b e r  S e c r e t a r y 
V i l l a g e  F o r e s t  D e v e l o p m e n t  C o m m i t t e e  
R a n g e  O f f i c e r  ( C h a i r p e r s o n )  
B e a t  O f f i c e r  ( M e m b e r  S e c r e t a r y ) 


126
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
126 
The State Forest Development Agency (SFDA) is the apex body overseeing the 
implementation of the Mission at the State level, guided by the State Steering Committee 
(SSC) for high-level management and policy alignment. The Executive Body, led by the 
PCCF, manages state-level operations, while the General Body chaired by the EF&CC 
Minister, provides policy direction and decentralised governance. At the district level, the 
Forest Development Agency (FDA) linked with the District Planning Committee operates 
the Mission activities, with the District Steering Committee ensuring integration with other 
development programmes. The FDA Executive Committee manages daily operations, and 
the FDA General Body oversees district-level planning. At the village level, the Village 
Forest Development Committee (VFDC) executes Mission activities, ensuring community 
participation and local implementation. 
4.9.5 Audit objectives 
The Performance Audit was undertaken to assess whether: 
 Adequate institutional and coordination mechanism exists at the State Forest 
Development Agency (SFDA), Forest Development Agency (FDA) and Village Forest 
Development Committee (VFDC) level for planning and implementation of the GIM; 
 The objectives and the targets as stipulated under the Mission were achieved; 
 Funds for execution of the mission were released on time and were utilised properly 
for the intended purpose; and 
 Existing review and monitoring mechanism is effective and adequate in realization of 
quantifiable targets under each sub-mission. 
4.9.6 Audit Scope, Sample and methodology 
The Performance Audit covered the period from April 2015 to March 2023 involving 
scrutiny of records and other evidence available in SFDA, Mizoram, five 79 Forest 
Development Agencies (FDA) and 2180 Village Forest Development Committees (VFDCs) 
selected based on Simple Random Sampling without Replacement method through 
Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis (IDEA) software.  
In terms of sample selection, the entire State is categorised as L1 Landscape. Seven81, out of 
eight L2 Landscape corresponding to sampled L3 Landscapes, were selected. One82 L3.  
  
 
79  (1) FDA, Aizawl, (2) FDA, Champhai, (3) FDA Kolasib, (4) FDA Thenzawl and (5) FDA Darlawn 
80  1. Sihphir Venghlun 2. N. Lungleng 3. Lamchhip 4. Baktawng Chhuanhar 5. Durtlang Norht 6. Durtlang 
7. Buhban 8. Khawruhlian 9. Hmunnghak 10. Pawlrang 11. Vanchengpui 12. Kawlkulh 13. Chawngtlai 
14. Dilzau 15. New Diakkawn 16. Thingdawl 17. Meidum 18. Bualpui 19. Bukpui 20. Thentlang 
21. Tlungvel 
81  1. Aizawl 2. Champhai (Khawzawl) 3. Champhai (Kawlkulh) 4. Darlawn 5. Kolasib (Kawnpui & Bukpui) 
6. Kolasib (Kolasib & Bairabi) 7. Thenzawl (Serchhip) 
82   Tlungvel under L2 Landscape Aizawl 
 

127
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
127 
Landscape under category ‘A’ out of 6 and 2083 L3 Landscapes under Category ‘B’ out of 
60 were selected by adopting Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement (SRSWOR) 
method. 
The Performance Audit commenced with an Entry Conference (12 March 2024) with the 
representatives of the Environment, Forests and Climate Change (EF&CC) Department and 
Finance Department, Government of Mizoram wherein audit objectives, criteria, scope and 
methodology were discussed. The Audit process involved issuing audit requisitions, audit 
queries, examination of records and files at the SFDA, FDA and Village Forest Development 
Committee (VFDC) as well as conducting joint Physical verification of 40 plantation sites 
across 20 VFDCs to assess plantation survival rate. The findings were discussed during the 
Exit conference (18 December 2024) with the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests 
(PCCF), Mizoram and the Under Secretary, Finance Department and the report was finalised 
after incorporating feedback from the Department. 
4.9.7 Audit criteria 
The audit criteria were derived from the following sources: 
 National Forest Policy, 1988; 
 Mission Document for National Mission for a Green India (GIM), 2011 and 2021; 
 Implementation Guidelines of National Mission for a Green India (GIM), 2014; 
 Convergence Guidelines for Integrated Greening Interventions under the Mission; 
 Convergence Guidelines of the GIM with Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) and Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA); 
 SDG (Sustainable Development Goal) 15 indicators; and 
 Department records pertaining to funds released for implementation of the Perspective 
Plans and Review & Monitoring of the Mission activities. 
4.9.8 Acknowledgement 
The office of the Principal Accountant General, Mizoram acknowledges the cooperation and 
assistance extended by staffs/ members of the State Forest Development Agency, Forest 
Development Agencies (FDA) and Village Forest Development Committees (VFDC) during 
the course of the performance audit. 
 
 
 
83  L3 Landscape where more than one sub-mission was carried out: Aizawl L2 Landscape : 1. Sihphir 
Venglun 2. N. Lungleng 3. Lamchhip 4. Baktawng Chhuanthat 5. Durtlang North 6. Durtlang; Champhai 
(Kawlkulh) L2 Landscpe : 1. Pawlrang 2. Vanchengpui 3. Kawlkulh; Champhai (Khawzawl) L2 
Landscape: 1. Chawngtlai; Kolasib (Kolasib & Bairabi) L2 Landscape: 1. Dilzau 2. New Diakkawn 3. 
Thingdawl 4. Meidum; Kolasib (Kawnpui & Bukpui) L2 Landscpe -1. Bualpui 2. Bukpui; Thenzawl 
(Serchhip) L2 Landscape : Thentlang; Darlawn L2 Landscape : 1. Buhban 2. Khawruhlian 3. 
Hmunnghak 
 

128
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
128 
Audit findings 
The audit findings are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
4.9.9 Planning 
 
Audit Objective-1: To assess whether adequate institutional and coordination 
mechanism exists for planning and implementation of the mission 
 
4.9.9.1 Non-Linking of FDA with District Planning Committee (DPC) 
Paragraph 4.3 of the GIM implementation guidelines provides that revamped Forest 
Development Agencies (FDAs) will facilitate the Mission activities at the district level and 
should have explicit linkages with District Planning Committees. 
However, Audit observed that none of the five FDAs was linked with District Planning 
Committees. As a result, District-wise requirement for implementation of the GIM in 
convergence with other schemes could not be formulated at the Planning stage. 
The Department while agreeing to the Audit observation stated (January 2025) that FDAs 
will be informed to establish linkages with the District Planning Committees as required. 
 
4.9.9.2 Discrepancies between Landscape survey report and Micro plan data 
Identification of land for any sub-mission within a given L3 Landscape is essential for 
preparation of Micro plan and Perspective plan. Without this identification, the entire 
planning process is disrupted. A cross-examination of sub-mission wise areas identified for 
treatment in the Micro plan of seven sampled VFDCs against their respective Landscape 
survey reports revealed the following discrepancies: 
(i) Micro plan of New Diakkawn, Bualpui and Chawngtlai L3 Landscape indicated 
treatment area of 472 hectares, 1,230 hectares and 810-hectares respectively as 
detailed in Appendix-4.1. However, Landscape survey reports for these three areas 
were not available. 
(ii) Out of 300 hectares identified in the Landscape survey of Vanchengpui L3 Landscape, 
a total area of 415 hectares were targeted in the Micro plan for afforestation resulting 
in inclusion of 115 additional hectares beyond the actual area as per the Landscape 
survey report. 
(iii) Out of the total L3 Landscape survey of 826 hectares, 850 hectares and 1,650 hectares 
for Kawlkulh, Pawlrang and Thentlang respectively, Micro plan targeted for treatment 
of 465 hectares, 395 hectares and 930 hectares respectively resulting in inadequate 
coverage of the areas. Additionally, there was no sub-mission wise area break-up for 
these Landscapes in the survey report. 
Recommendation: The SFDA should initiate steps to link FDAs with District 
Planning Committees to formulate district-wise requirements for implementation of 
GIM in convergence with other schemes at the Planning stage, to ensure alignment 
of priorities and resources. 

129
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
129 
From the above, it is evident that L3 Landscape survey and the Micro Plan for the sampled 
seven Landscapes were not linked to each other and no proper assessment/ survey for the 
actual treatment at the grassroots level was carried out, thereby rendering the entire L1 
Perspective Plan aggregated data from 51 VFDCs doubtful. 
The SFDA, while agreeing to the Audit observation, stated (December 2024) that the Micro 
plan and Landscape survey reports pertain to approximately the same area of land. It was, 
further, added that while the Landscape survey was conducted manually, GIS mapping was 
utilised during the preparation of the Micro plan which allowed for the identification and 
incorporation of potential Landscapes into the plan resulting in a mismatch between the 
Landscape area and the Micro plan. 
Since all 51 L3 level landscapes in the Micro Plan were surveyed through GIS mapping. 
Expenditure of ₹ 48 lakh (Paragraph 4.9.9.3) on manual landscape survey conducted in 
these same 51 L3 landscapes during 2015-16 were redundant and did not provide any 
additional value. 
Audit concludes that the absence of a systematic linkage between L3 Landscape survey 
reports and Micro plans in the sampled seven VFDCs led to significant discrepancies in 
identified and treated areas with cases of both over-coverage (e.g., Vanchengpui, additional 
115 hectares) and under-coverage ( e.g., Kawlkulh, Pawlrang, Thentlang, shortfalls of 
hundreds of hectares), and in some cases, complete absence of survey reports (New 
Diakkawn, Bualpui, Chawngtlai) as discussed in Paragraph 4.9.9.3. Although the SFDA 
attributed these mismatches to differences between manual surveys and GIS-based mapping 
during Micro plan preparation, the fact remains that without harmonised, verifiable ground 
data, the aggregated L1 Perspective Plan (covering 51 VFDCs) was rendered unreliable, 
compromising the Mission’s ability to ensure need-based, area-specific, and 
evidence-backed treatment interventions. 
 
4.9.9.3 Missing land survey reports of 28 L3 Landscapes 
According to governing condition of the grant-in-aid sanction order (March 2014) for 
preparatory activities during 2013-14, the fund was to be utilised in accordance with the 
objectives outlined in the rules/ memorandum of SFDA, Government of Mizoram. 
The Annual Progress Report of the SFDA, Mizoram indicated that the entire sanctioned 
amount of ₹ 2.24 crore was expended during 2014-16 on outreach activities, Micro planning, 
Landscape surveys and Entry Point Activities (EPA). Out of this amount, ₹ 48 lakh was 
specifically utilised for conducting a Landscape survey of 51 L3 Landscape under eight L2 
Landscapes across five FDAs. However, only 23 out of the 51 L3 Landscape survey reports 
could be furnished to Audit, as given in Appendix-4.2.  
Recommendation: The SFDA may ensure that all potential L3 Landscapes identified 
through proper verifiable surveys at the grassroots level before undertaking treatment 
activities so that Micro Plans and Perspective Plans are based on accurate and 
comprehensive field data. 

130
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
130 
Due to the non-furnishing of survey reports for 28 remaining L3  Landscape, Audit could not 
verify the accuracy of the baseline data presented in their Micro plans. Among the available 
23 L3 Landscape survey reports, seven sampled land survey reports were available for Audit 
scrutiny, which revealed the following: 
 Non-compliance with GIM guidelines : Paragraph 7.1 of GIM document 2011 
provides that the preparatory phase of the Mission should be utilised inter alia for 
identification of Sub-Landscape/ area of mission intervention. However, none of the 
seven sampled L3 Landscape survey reports specified sub-mission wise area. 
 Incomplete Data Reporting: Though two survey reports (New Diakkawn and Bualpui) 
provided information such as village profile, socio-economic data and agriculture 
profile, they did not provide sub-mission wise areas. 
 Lack of comprehensive area data: Although Thentlang L3 Landscape survey reported 
an area of 1,650 hectares with sketch map, it did not provide sub-mission wise area. 
 Insufficient sub-Mission wise Breakup : Though, the survey report of Kawlkulh, 
Vanchengpui and Pawlrang L3 Landscapes indicated a total area of 826 hectares, 
300 hectares and 850 hectares respectively together with sketch map, the sub-mission-
wise area breakup was not specified. 
 Mis-reporting in Micro Plan : Khualen L3 Landscape survey reported an area of 
1,240 hectares with sketch map, however, the Micro plan was not prepared. Instead, 
the Micro plan for Chawngtlai L3 Landscape was prepared despite the fact that no 
survey was conducted for Chawngtlai. 
The Department  stated (December 2024) that an actual land survey was conducted as 
demonstrated by seven Landscape survey reports. However, some FDA records were not 
maintained and could not be traced during Audit. It was, further, added that most of the staff 
involved in the land survey had either retired or passed away, resulting in delay in production 
of records. The fact, however, remained that due to non-availability of 28 Landscape survey 
reports constituting 54.90 per cent of the total 51 Landscape survey reports, Audit could not 
verify the accuracy of the baseline data used to identify viable land for GIM activities. 
Audit concludes that the implementation of preparatory activities under the ₹  2.24 crore 
grant-in-aid, of which, ₹ 48 lakh was allocated specifically for conducting Landscape 
surveys across 51 L3 Landscapes, suffered from significant lapses in compliance and record-
keeping. As 28 out of 51 landscape survey reports (54.90 per cent) were not made available 
to Audit, Audit was unable to verify the baseline data supporting the Micro plans, rendering 
the foundation for area identification and sub-mission planning under the GIM unreliable. 
Even among the available survey reports, critical details such as sub-mission-wise area 
breakups were absent, violating Paragraph 7.1 of the GIM guidelines and undermining the 
intended objective of evidence-based land identification. 
Instances of misreporting, such as the preparation of Micro plans for areas without 
corresponding surveys, further exposed risks of misallocation and inefficiency. The 
Department’s inability to produce records, citing staff retirements or deaths, highlights weak 

131
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
131 
institutional controls and poor record management, posing systemic risks to accountability, 
financial stewardship, and future programme implementation. 
 
4.9.9.4 Multiple revisions in proposed L1 Perspective Plan led to delay in 
implementation of GIM activities 
GIM advisory 3.0 (January 2012) stipulated that the time frame for submission of the 
Perspective Plan was 28 February 2012. 
Senior Officers of the EF&CC Department held a meeting in March 2012 to discuss various 
issues and formulate suitable strategies for the preparation of Perspective Plan under GIM. 
The MoEF&CC released ₹ 2.24 crore for preparatory activities such as Landscape survey, 
preparation of Micro Plan, Entry Point activities,  etc., (March 2014) which were required 
for preparation of the Perspective Plan. 
However, the SFDA submitted the Perspective Plan to the MoEF&CC in July 2015 to cover 
a total treatment area of 48,753 hectares with an estimated cost of ₹ 451.38 crore without 
detailed rate of wages. Further, a revised Perspective Plan to cover a total treatment area of 
31,900 hectares, with an estimated cost of ₹ 302.49 crore, based on the wage rate of 
₹ 220 per day was resubmitted to the MoEF&CC in September 2015. With subsequent 
revision of wage rate to ₹ 270 per day in April 2016. The final revised plan of May 2016 
was based on the updated wage rate of ₹ 270 notified in April 2016. 
Another revised APO (2016-17) and Perspective Plan to cover a total treatment area of 
29,893 hectares was submitted on 10  May 2016 and approved by the MoEF&CC with an 
estimated cost of ₹ 348.26 crore for six years (from 2016-17 to 2021-22) in June 2016. 
Thus, due to delayed in released of preparatory funds and repeated revision of the 
Perspective Plan, there was a delay in the implementation of Mission and the project which 
was intended to be completed by March 2022 remained ongoing at the time of Audit 
(August 2024). Execution of GIM activities in areas not approved in the Perspective Plan 
due to deficient planning is incorporated in Paragraph 4.9.11.3. 
Thus, delayed release of preparatory funds and repeated revisions in the Perspective Plan 
due to inadequate initial planning and estimation, such as omission of wage rate data, 
resulted in delayed approval by the Ministry and subsequent postponement of the GIM 
rollout. As a result, the project that was originally scheduled for completion by March 2022 
remained incomplete even in August 2024. 
The Department stated (December 2024) that no advisory was received from MoEF&CC 
regarding timeframe for sub-mission of Perspective Plan. The reply of the Department is, 
however, not tenable as the Ministry issued advisory to all States regarding preparation of 
Recommendation: The Department may institute a digital centralised documentation 
and record management system for all preparatory activities, including landscape 
surveys and micro-planning reports, with mandatory geo-tagging and metadata 
protocols, to ensure verifiability, continuity across staff transitions, and adherence to 
GIM guidelines in future programme phases. 

132
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
132 
the Perspective Plan and the Government of Mizoram also submitted the Perspective Plan in 
2015 as per the Ministry’s instruction and this was also approved by the Ministry. 
 
4.9.9.5 Delay in submission of APOs led to delays in their approval  
The National Executive Council (NEC) set a timeline for submission of Annual Plan of 
Operations (APOs), namely, for APO 2020-21 by 10 February 2020 and for APO 2022-23 
by 30 December 2021. Details of submission of APOs by the SFDA to the MoEF&CC and 
their subsequent approval are given in Table-4.12. 
Table-4.12: Statement showing details of submission of APOs and their approval 
Sl. 
No. 
APO 
year 
Stipulated date of 
submission of 
APO 
Actual date of 
submission of APO 
by SFDA 
Delay in 
submission 
(In days) 
Date of 
approval 
Time taken for 
approval 
(In days) 
1. 2020-21 10-02-2020 26-02-2020 15 11-02-2021 351 
2. 2022-23 30-12-2021 
25-02-2022 
Revised submitted 
on 19-04-2022 
110 31-05-2022 4284 
Source: Proposed APO and approved APO of SFDA 
Thus, it is evident that SFDA, Mizoram submitted its APOs for the years 2020-21 and 
2022-23 with delays ranging from 15 to 110 days and subsequently there were delays in 
approval by 351 and 42 days respectively by the Ministry. These delays in both submission 
and approval adversely impacted the plantation activities resulting in non-achievement of 
the afforestation target of 29,893 hectare within the six years’ timeframe (from 2016-17 to 
2021-22) as outlined in the Perspective Plan. 
The Department while agreeing to the Audit observation stated (December 2024) that APOs 
were submitted to the Ministry after approval of the State Level Steering Committee. It also 
stated that sanction of fund was made by the Ministry well after approval of the APO. It was 
further stated that the delay in preparation of the APOs could be attributed to delay in release 
of fund by the State Government in the preceding years. 
Thus, delay in preparation of the APOs attributed to delay in release of fund and 
subsequently resulted in delayed execution of GIM activities. 
 
 
84  42 days is computed from 19 April 2022 to 31 May 2022 
Recommendation: The Department may strengthen its project planning 
mechanisms by instituting a system of cross-verification of cost estimates (including 
wage rates and unit rates) before submission of Perspective Plans to the Ministry. 
Timely compliance with advisories and structured vetting of project proposals may 
also be ensured to avoid delays in future externally supported missions. 
Recommendation: The SFDA may ensure timely submission of APOs each year to 
avoid late approval of APOs and consequent delay in release of fund so that Creation 
work could be taken up at the appropriate time i.e., during plantation season. 

133
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
133 
4.9.9.6 Non-preparation of collative APO 
Paragraph 4.1 of the Convergence Guidelines for Integrated Greening Interventions, issued 
by the MoEF&CC, Government of India (GoI), stipulates that the collative Annual Plan of 
Operation (APO) are intended to provide a clear roadmap for implementing afforestation 
activities to address vulnerable/ priority areas by integrating the targets and achievements of 
all afforestation schemes/ components executed in the State. The collative APO is expected 
to include scheme-wise targets along with Keyhole Markup Language (KML) files from 
other line departments to prevent duplication and ensure uniform coverage of priority areas. 
A Nodal Officer for afforestation in each State/ UT is tasked with preparing a single 
collective APO in consultation with the line departments. 
However, scrutiny of approved APOs relating to afforestation schemes such as GIM, 
CAMPA, Nagar VAN and National Bamboo Mission revealed that collative APOs 
integrating all afforestation schemes were not formulated in any of the years between 
2016-17 and 2022-23. Due to non-preparation of collative APOs, the intended purpose of 
the guidelines to prevent duplication of afforestation areas and ensure convergence of 
priority areas was not fulfilled.  
The Department stated (December 2024) that no convergence was incorporated into the APO 
as the APO was prepared in accordance with the approved Perspective Plan, which does not 
include provision for convergence. 
The reply of the Department is not tenable as the Convergence Guidelines for Integrated 
Greening Interventions requires that a single collative APO integrating all afforestation 
related schemes should be prepared at the State level so that duplication could be prevented 
and uniform convergence of priority areas may be ensured. 
Audit concludes that the Department’s inability to prepare collative APOs integrating all 
afforestation schemes, as mandated under Paragraph 4.1 of the Convergence Guidelines for 
Integrated Greening Interventions issued by MoEF&CC, undermined the core purpose of 
convergence, namely, preventing duplication of efforts, ensuring uniform targeting of 
priority and vulnerable areas and achieving synergistic ecological outcomes. 
Despite the Department’s claim that APOs were aligned only to the approved Perspective 
Plan, this approach disregarded the binding requirement to consolidate scheme-wise targets 
and incorporate KML files from all line departments into a single state-level APO. As a 
result, the State not only ran the risk of inefficient resource utilisation and fragmented 
afforestation efforts but also weakened its compliance with the norms and capacity to 
demonstrate coordinated progress under national afforestation priorities. 
 
Recommendation: The SFDA should initiate steps to prepare APOs integrating all 
afforestation related schemes to avoid duplication of afforestation areas and ensuring 
convergence of priority areas to prevent duplication of efforts and to promote 
convergence and uniform coverage of priority areas. 

134
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
134 
4.9.9.7 Shortfall in number of prescribed meetings of different Bodies and 
Committees 
According to Paragraph 4.6 of the GIM Implementation Guidelines, 2014, the General Body 
of the SFDA is required to meet annually, while the State Steering Committee (SSC) and the 
State Level Executive Committee (SLEC) are required to meet at least twice a year. At the 
district level, the General Body of the FDA should meet at least twice a year while the 
Executive Committee should meet quarterly. 
However, scrutiny of minutes of meetings from 2015 to 2023 revealed a significant shortfall 
in the number of meetings held vis-à-vis the number mandated by the GIM guidelines. 
Details of these shortfalls of meeting at the State and District levels are summarised in 
Table-4.13 and the year-wise details are shown in Appendix-4.3. 
Table-4.13: Statement showing the details of shortfall in conducting meeting during 
2015-16 to 2022-23 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Committee Required 
number of 
meetings in a 
year 
Actual 
number of 
meetings held 
Shortfall in 
number of 
meetings 
Shortfall 
(In per cent) 
1. SFDA (General Body) 8 0 8 100 
2. SSC 16 7 9 56.25 
3. SLEC 16 5 11 68.75 
4. Five FDAs 
(General Body) 
80 1 79 98.75 
5. Five FDAs 
(Executive Committee) 
160 1 159 99.37 
Source: Minutes of meeting of SSC, SLEC and Five FDAs 
From Table-4.13, Audit concluded that both the SFDA and the five FDAs in Mizoram did 
not comply with the meeting requirements prescribed under Paragraph 4.6 of the GIM 
Implementation Guidelines, 2014. 
Between 2015–16 and 2022–23, the SFDA General Body conducted no meetings (against 
eight mandated), and the General Body and Executive Committees of the five FDAs 
collectively held only two out of 240 required meetings, reflecting a shortfall of over 
98 per cent. This persistent lapse weakened institutional governance, strategic oversight, 
decision-making and the timely resolution of implementation challenges under the Mission. 
The Department while agreeing to the Audit observation, stated (December 2024) that in 
future meetings would be held in compliance with the GIM implementation guidelines, 
2014. 
The lack of coordination between the Forest Development Agencies (FDAs) and the District 
Planning Committee was a critical oversight, preventing the formulation of a district-wise 
strategy for integrating the Green India Mission (GIM) with other schemes during the 
planning phase. The absence of a thorough survey to assess the sub-mission-wise area 
requirements within the L3 landscape undermined the effective implementation of GIM. 
Furthermore, repeated revisions to the Perspective Plan significantly delayed the mission’s 
rollout, while the consistent tardiness in submitting Annual Plan of Operations (APOs) to 
the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) delayed approval 

135
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
135 
and fund release. The non-preparation of collative APOs was in violation of the 
‘Convergence Guidelines for Integrated Greening Intervention’. Additionally, the shortfall 
in the number of meetings to be held by various State and District-level Committees and 
Bodies led to poor coordination, reduced community engagement, delayed progress, 
weakened monitoring and missed opportunities for convergence. 
 
4.9.10 Funding Mechanism 
 
Audit Objective-2: To assess whether funds for the execution of the mission were 
released on time and was utilised properly for intended purpose 
 
 
4.9.10.1 Fund Flow Mechanism 
 
As per the GIM Implementation Guidelines 2014, cost sharing ratio under the Scheme is 
90 per cent Central Share and 10 per cent State Matching Share. 
4.9.10.2 Fund Receipt and expenditure 
Table-4.14: Overall financial snapshot (2015–16 to 2022–23) 
Category Value (₹ in crore) 
Total GoI Approved Outlay 388.99 
Total Funds Released (GoI + State) 154.54 
Funds from Other Sources 13.02 
Bank Interest 0.00 
Total Funds Available 167.57 
Total Expenditure Incurred 167.57 
Closing Balance 0.00 
The year-wise details of fund receipt and expenditure during the period 2015-16 to 2022-23 
are shown in Table-4.15. 
Recommendation: The Department may ensure that the State and District level 
Committees/ Bodies should hold meetings as mandated under GIM guidelines. 

136
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
136 
Table-4.15: Statement showing fund receipt, expenditure and closing balance during 
2015-16 and 2022-23 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Approved 
Outlay by 
GoI  
Fund released Fund 
from 
other 
sources 
Bank 
Interest 
if any  
Total fund 
available 
for the 
year 
Expenditure 
incurred Closing 
balance Central State Total 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) = (4) 
+(5) 
(7) (8) (9) = (6) 
+(7) +(8) 
(10) (11) = 
(9)-(10) 
2015-16 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
2016-17 0.00 49.97. 9.88. 1.11 10.99 0.00 0.00 10.99 10.99 0.00 
2017-18 0.00 71.62. 20.00 2.22 22.22 5.6585 0.00 27.88 27.88 0.00 
2018-19 0.00 66.88 22.36 0.00 22.36 3.8486 0.00 26.20 26.20 0.00 
2019-20 0.00 105.18 17.71 4.45 22.16 3.5387 0.00 25.69 25.69 0.00 
2020-21 0.00 21.89 3.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 0.00 
20221-22 0.00 48.74 29.86 3.65 33.51 0.00 0.00 33.51 33.51 0.00 
2022-23 0 24.71 36.27 4.03 40.30 0.00 0.00 40.30 40.30 0.00 
Total 388.99 139.08 15.46 154.54 13.02 0.00 167.57 167.57 0.00 
Source: Records of the SFDA, Mizoram 
For implementation of the Green India Mission (GIM) in Mizoram, approved outlays 
totalling ₹ 388.99 crore against the approved estimated cost of ₹348.26 crore as per approved 
Perspective Plan by Government of India and actual releases was ₹ 167.55 crore (including 
the State share, other sources and bank interest) over the period 2015-16 to 2022-23, the 
expenditure fully matched the available funds each year, leaving no reported closing 
balances. 
4.9.10.3 Delay in release of fund 
Audit noticed that there were delays in the release of funds from the State Government to 
the SFDA, from the SFDA to the FDAs and from the FDAs to the VFDCs as discussed in 
the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
85  FY 2017-18, ₹ 35.94 lakh from NEDP and ₹ 529.55 lakh from 14 th Finance Commission 
86  FY 2018-19, fund amounting to ₹ 383.89 lakh was from 14 th Finance Commission 
87  FY 2019-20, fund amounting to ₹ 353.05 lakh was from 14 th Finance Commission 
 
Pattern of Fund Releases 
 Initial Delay :  No funds were released in 2015–16 despite it being 
the starting year. 
 Low Releases in 2020–21 :  Only ₹ 3.00 crore released, possibly due to COVID-
19-related disruptions. 
 Spike in 2022–23 :  ₹ 40.30 crore received and spent, indicating a possible 
catch-up on delayed activities. 

137
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
137 
I Delay in release of Central share by State Government to SFDA 
As per the conditions governing grant of sanctions issued by the MoEF&CC, on receipt of 
funds from RBI, the State Government has to release the funds to the SFDA within 15 days 
from the date of issue of sanction.  
Audit observed that the State Government disbursed funds to the SFDA with delays ranging 
from 21 to 89 days as detailed in Table-4.16. 
Table-4.16: Delay in release of funds from State Government to SFDA 
(₹ in crore) 
Period 
of APO 
Instalment Amount Date of release/ 
sanction by 
MoEF&CC 
Stipulated date of 
release by State 
Government 
Actual date 
of release of 
fund 
Delay 
(In days) 
(1) (2) (4) (3) (5) (6) (7) = (6) – (5) 
2016-17 
1st 9.88 29-06-2016 14-07-2016 30-09-2016 78 
2nd 20.00 19-09-2017 04-10-2017 12-12-2017 69 
3rd 1.30 07-02-2019 22-02-2019 30-03-2019 36 
2017-18       
2018-19 1st 21.07 07-02-2019 22-02-2019 30-03-2019 36 
2019-20 1st 17.71 26-11-2019 11-12-2019 09-03-2020 89 
2020-21 1st 2.99 11-02-2021 26-02-2021 19-03-2021 21 
2nd 16.70 10-12-2021 25-12-2021 22-02-2022 59 
2021-22 1st 13.16 10-12-2021 25-12-2022 22-02-2022 59 
2nd 30.71 09-11-2022 24-11-2022 16-02-2023 84 
2022-23 1st 5.56 09-11-2022 24-11-2022 16-02-2023 84 
Source: Records of the SFDA, Mizoram 
The Department, while agreeing to the Audit observations during the Exit Conference stated 
(December 2014) that reason was due to delay in release of fund by the Finance Department.  
Audit concludes that the repeated delays, ranging from 21 to 89 days, in releasing funds from 
the State Government to the State Forest Development Agency (SFDA), despite the clear 
15 days’ timeline prescribed by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC), would have affected the timely execution of the Green India Mission (GIM) 
activities. These delays would not only have disrupted seasonal and time-sensitive 
operations, such as plantation works, but also increased the risk of underperformance and 
poor-quality outcomes.  
Moreover, such persistent non-compliance with sanction conditions reflects systemic 
weaknesses in interdepartmental coordination and financial process management.  
II Delay in release of State Matching Share by State Government to SFDA 
As per the Office Memorandum No. F. No1(13) PFMS/FCD/2020 dated 23 March 2021 of 
Ministry of Finance (PFMS Division), Government of India, the State share corresponding 
to the Central share should be released as early as possible but not later than 40 days from 
the release of the Central share.  
Audit observed that the State Government released the State share with delays ranging from 
49 to 65 days exceeding the maximum permissible limit of 40 days from the date of released 
of the Central share during 2021-23 as given in Table-4.17. 
  

138
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
138 
Table-4.17: Details of release of State share by State Government to SFDA during 
2016-17 to 2022-23 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Central share State share 
Delay exceeding 
40 days Date of sanction 
by MoEF&CC Amount 
Date of sanction 
by State 
Government 
Amount 
2016-17 29-06-2016 9.88 12-01-2017 and 
17-02-2017 1.1188 Prior to 2021-22 
there was no 
timeline for 
releasing of State 
share to SFDA. 
2017-18 19-09-2017 20.00 12-12-2017 2.22 
2018-19 07-02-2019 22.36 11-06-2019 2.48 
2019-20 26-11-2019 17.71 09-03-2020 1.97 
2020-21 11-02-2021 3.00 09-03-2022 0.33 
2021-22 10-12-2021 29.86 09-03-2022 3.32 49 
2022-23 09-11-2022 36.27 22-02-2023 4.03 65 
Total  139.08  15.46  
Source: Records of the SFDA, Mizoram 
The Department, while agreeing to the Audit observations and without commenting on the 
reason for the delay in the release of funds, stated (December 2024) that the Finance 
Department had been requested to comment on the issue . However, no comment from the 
Finance Department had been received (May 2025). 
The delayed release of the State share, ranging from 49 to 65 days, exceeding the 40-days 
limit prescribed under the Ministry of Finance guidelines.  
III Delay in release of fund by SFDA to FDAs 
As per the condition envisaged in the sanction orders of the MoEF&CC, the SFDA should 
release the funds to the FDAs within a period of seven days of receipt of funds from the State 
Government for carrying out GIM activities in different L2 Landscapes. 
Scrutiny of bank transactions of SFDA revealed that out of ₹ 167.57 crore released to five 
FDAs during 2016-17 to 2022-23, a sum of ₹ 88.61 crore was released to the five FDAs with 
delays ranging from two to 74 days as detailed in Table-4.18. 
Table-4.18: Statement showing delay in release of fund from SFDA to FDAs 
Year Total 
Amount 
released by 
SFDA to 
FDA 
(₹in crore)  
Amount 
released with 
delayed 
period from 
SFDA to 
FDA  
(₹ in crore) 
Date of 
released of 
fund by 
State 
Government 
to SFDA, 
Mizoram  
Date of 
fund 
released by 
SFDA To 
FDA 
Stipulated 
date of 
release of 
fund by 
SFDA to 
FDA 
Delay89  
(in days) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) = (5)-(6) 
2016-17 10.99 9.86 21-11-2016  09-12-2016  28-11-2016  11 
1.10 07-03-2017 16-03-2017 14-03-2017 2  
2017-18 27.88 12.99 05-01-2018 16-01-2018 12-01-2018 4  
7.12 05-01-2018 26-03-2018  12-01-2018 73 
1.87 05-01-2018 27-03-2018 12-01-2018 74 
2018-19 28.69 No delay in release of fund 
 
88  ₹ 1.11 crore = Out of ₹ 1.11 crore an amount of ₹ 1.08 crore was released by State Government to SFDA 
on 12-01-2017 and ₹ 0.03 crore was release to SFDA on 17-02-2017 
89  Delay is computed from the date indicated in the bank statements of SFDA to FDAs during 2016-2023 
 

139
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
139 
Year Total 
Amount 
released by 
SFDA to 
FDA 
(₹in crore)  
Amount 
released with 
delayed 
period from 
SFDA to 
FDA  
(₹ in crore) 
Date of 
released of 
fund by 
State 
Government 
to SFDA, 
Mizoram  
Date of 
fund 
released by 
SFDA To 
FDA 
Stipulated 
date of 
release of 
fund by 
SFDA to 
FDA 
Delay89  
(in days) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) = (5)-(6) 
2019-20 23.21 2.48 31-07-2019 03-09-2019 07-08-2019 27 
2020-21 2.99 19.58 31-03-2020 11-05-2020  07-04-2020 34  
0.10 31-03-2020 13-05-2020 07-04-2020 36 
2021-22 33.51 No delay in release of fund. 
2022-23 40.30 8.02 20-04-2022 12-05-2022 27-04-2022 15 
6.33 20-04-2022 07-05-2022 27-04-2022 10 
4.18 20-04-2022 06-05-2022  27-04-2022 9  
7.82 20-04-2022 06-05-2022  27-04-2022 9  
7.16 20-04-2022 10-05-2022 27-04-2022 30  
Total  167.57 88.61     
Source: Fund released order from SFDA to five FDAs 
Audit concludes that the State Forest Development Agency (SFDA), Mizoram, did not 
comply with the MoEF&CC’s stipulated requirement to release funds to the Forest 
Development Agencies (FDAs) within seven days of receiving funds from the State 
Government. It was noticed that ₹ 88.61 crore, out of a total of ₹ 167.57 crore were released 
to FDA during 2016-17 to 2022-23 after delays ranging from two to 74 days. 
The Department stated (December 2024) that the delay in release of fund ranged from 11 to 
36 days as per SFDA bank statement. The reply is not tenable as scrutiny of the Bank 
statement furnished by the Department revealed that the actual delay ranged from two to 
74 days. 
IV Delay in release of fund by FDAs to VFDCs 
As per condition envisaged in the sanction orders of the MoEF &CC, the FDAs should 
release the funds to VFDCs within a period of 15 days of receipt of funds from the SFDA 
for carrying out GIM activities in different L3 Landscapes. 
Scrutiny of bank statements of five FDAs during 2016-17 to 2022-23 revealed that 
₹ 36.66 crore was disbursed to the VFDCs under their jurisdiction with delays ranging from 
one to 41 days as detailed in Table-4.19. 
Table-4.19: Statement showing the delay in release of fund from FDAs to VFDCs 
Sl. No. FDA Amount (₹ in crore) Year Delay (In days) 
1. Aizawl 11.21 2016-17 to 2022-23 1 to 41 
2. Kolasib 11.90 2016-17 to 2021-22 1 to 34 
3. Champhai 3.22 2016-17 to 2022-23 5 to 26 
4. Darlawn 4.79 2016-17 to 2020-21 4 to 7 
5. Thenzawl 5.54 2016-17 to 2019-20 9 to 25 
Total  36.66   
Source: Fund release orders of five FDAs to their respective VFDC 
The Department stated (December 2024) that the respective FDAs would furnish the reply 
in this regard. However, replies from the FDAs have not been received (May 2025). 

140
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
140 
Audit concludes that the five Forest Development Agencies (FDAs) in Mizoram did not 
comply with the MoEF&CC’s stipulated condition to release funds to Village Forest 
Development Committees (VFDCs) within 15 days of receipt from the SFDA, as evidenced 
by delays ranging from one to 41 days in disbursing ₹ 36.66 crore between 2016-17 and 
2022-23.  
These cumulative delays in the release of funds by the State Government to SFDA and SFDA 
to FDAs and FDAs to VFDCs disrupted the planned, time-sensitive implementation of 
afforestation and plantation works, compromised the seasonal efficiency of interventions, 
and led to a risk of underperformance against mission objectives. Moreover, the consistent 
non-adherence to prescribed timelines reflects governance weaknesses, poor financial 
management and institutional inefficiency across all levels.  
 
4.9.10.4 Suspected misappropriation of ₹ 9.19 crore 
Paragraph 5.3 of GIM Implementation Guidelines, 2014 provides that the SFDA will 
devolve the fund to the concerned FDA in accordance with the approved Annual Plan of 
Operation (APO). The FDA will transfer the funds to the revamped Joint Forest Management 
Committees (JFMCs90) mandated by the Gram Sabha, which will implement the mission 
activities at the Village level. 
It was observed from the Bank statement of the SFDA that on 30 March 2023, SFDA 
transferred ₹ 9.19 crore to the FDA, Kolasib. According to the Work Programme for APO 
2021-22 and APO 2022-23, prepared by the FDA, Kolasib, ₹ 9.07 crore91 was designated for 
12 VFDCs, while ₹ 0.12 crore was allocated for Office Expenses (O.E). However, it was 
observed that instead of transferring ₹ 9.07 crore to the 12 VFDCs, the FDA, Kolasib, 
withdrew the entire amount in cash on 27 April 2023 in violation of the condition prescribed 
under paragraph 5.3 of GIM Implementation Guidelines, 2014. Further, there was no record 
showing the transfer/ payment of ₹ 9.07 crore to the 12 VFDCs or utilisation of the office 
expenses component of ₹ 0.12 crore.  
Further, the bank statements of the 12 VFDCs did not reflect credit of ₹ 9.07 crore in their 
bank accounts during 2022-23 and 2023-24. In the absence of evidence/ proof of transfer of 
funds to the VFDCs and also without any trail of the money withdrawn from the bank by 
FDA Kolasib, the amount is suspected to have been misappropriated. However, the physical 
and financial progress report as well as Utilisation Certificates claimed full utilisation of this 
amount for GIM activities by FDA Kolasib. 
The Department stated (January 2025) that the fund was released to the VFDCs and the 
documents regarding their utilisation were furnished. 
 
90  In Mizoram it is called Village Forest Development Committee (VFDC) 
91  1. Kawnpui N (₹ 0.62 crore), 2. Bualpui (₹ 0.86 crore), 3. Zanlawn (₹ 0.68 crore), 4. Bukpui (₹ 0.69 crore), 
5. Lungmuat (₹ 0.59 crore), 6. N. Chaltlang (₹ 0.79 crore), 7. N. Diakkawn (₹ 0.44 crore), 8. Thingdawl 
(₹ 0.81 crore), 9. Tumpui (₹ 0.78 crore) 10. Meidum (₹ 0.95 crore), 11. Pangbalkawn (₹ 0.94 crore) 
12. Dilzau (₹ 0.92 crore) 
Recommendation: The State Government may ensure timely release of funds at all 
levels to facilitate smooth execution of the Mission activities. 
 

141
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
141 
The reply of the Department is not tenable as there was neither any evidence/ record proving 
the disbursement of ₹ 9.07 crore by the FDA, Kolasib nor proof of receipt of ₹ 9.07 crore by 
the 12 VFDCs. Further, record showing expenditure of the office expenses component of 
₹ 0.12 crore at the FDA, Kolasib was also not available. Also, no voucher in support of the 
expenditure for the whole amount of ₹ 9.19 crore has been produced to Audit inspite of the 
written requests for their production. No contemporaneous records were furnished during 
audit. Any post-audit submission was neither verifiable nor consistent with the bank records. 
The fact that ₹ 9.07 crore did not reflect in the bank accounts of any of the 12 intended 
VFDCs strongly indicates suspected misappropriation of public funds. The Department’s 
claim of utilisation is unsupported and not tenable. 
 
4.9.10.5 Irregularities in submission of Utilisation Certificate to MoEF&CC 
According to Rule 238(2) of GFR, 2017, the Ministry or Department concerned should 
release any amount sanctioned for the subsequent financial year only after Utilisation 
Certificate (UC) in respect of Grants of the preceding financial year is submitted. Further, 
the governing condition of the sanction orders of MoEF&CC envisage that the SFDA shall 
furnish UC as per form GFR 19-A, giving unspent balance and interest accrued figures and 
stating the reasons for non-utilisation of funds, if any, along with request for the release of 
next instalment of the Grants-in-Aid. 
The details of UCs submitted by the SFDA to MoEF&CC during 2016-17 to 2022-23 is 
shown in the Table-4.20. 
Table-4.20: Statement showing the details of UCs submitted to MoEF&CC during 
2016-17 to 2022-23 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Source of 
fund Sanctioned amount Amount for which UC 
submitted 
Date of submission of 
UC 
2016-17 CS 9.88 9.88 15-02-2017 SMS 1.11 1.11 
2017-18 CS 20.00 20.00 28-06-2018 SMS 2.22 2.22 
2018-19 CS 22.36 22.36 11-07-2019 SMS 2.48 NIL 
2019-20 CS 17.71 17.71 15-09-2020 SMS 1.97  NIL 
2020-21 CS 2.99 2.99 12-10-2021 SMS 0.33 NIL 
2021-22 CS 29.86 29.86 21-09-2022 SMS 3.32  3.6592 
2022-23 CS 36.27 36.27 31-08-2023 SMS 4.03 4.03 
Source: Utilisation Certificate of the SFDA, Mizoram 
 
92  The total SMS of ₹ 3.65 crore comprises of two components: SMS of ₹ 0.33 crore for the year 2020-21 and 
SMS of ₹ 3.32 crore for the year 2021-22 
 
Recommendation: The State Government should initiate an investigation into the 
utilisation of the fund and take appropriate action. 

142
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
142 
Scrutiny of the Utilisation certificates revealed the following:  
(i) Non-incorporation of State Matching Share in UCs: As per the governing condition 
of the sanction order of MoEF&CC, the utilisation of State Matching Share (SMS) should 
be reflected in UC.  
However, scrutiny of UCs for the year 2018-19 and 2019-20 revealed that UCs reflected the 
Central Share of ₹ 22.36 crore and ₹ 17.71 crore respectively without including utilisation 
details for the State Share of ₹ 2.48 crore for the year 2018-19 and ₹ 1.97 crore for the year 
2019-20. 
The Department replied (December 2024) that the format of the UC as prescribed in GFR 
does not provide the option for sharing utilisation of SMS and as such SMS was not 
incorporated in the UC submitted for 2019-20.  
The reply of the Department is not tenable as the SFDA had already included State share of 
₹ 2.22 crore for the year 2017-18 in the UC and therefore GFR format was not a hindrance 
in incorporating and correctly delineating the State share.  
(ii) Incorrect UC for the year 2022-23 : Though the UC for the year 2022-23 reported 
(August 2023) full utilisation of the entire amount of ₹ 40.30 crore, it was observed that the 
amount of ₹ 40.30 crore was transferred to the five FDAs on 30 and 31 March 2023 only. 
Mere transfer of fund to the FDAs could not be treated as utilisation as the FDAs have to 
further transfer the funds to the VFDCs. Details of release of funds to the FDAs are given in 
the Table-4.21. 
Table-4.21: Details of Fund Released by SFDA, Mizoram to five FDAs during 2022-23 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. Name FDA Date of credit  Amount credited 
1. Aizawl 30-03-2023 6.89 
2. Champhai 31-03-2023 9.39 
3. Darlawn 31-03-2023 5.95 
4. Kolasib 30-03-2023 9.19 
5. Thenzawl 30-03-2023 8.88 
Total 40.30 
Source: Bank statement of the five FDAs 
As evident from the above table, SFDA released the money to the FDAs at the fag end of 
the financial year clearly indicating that utilisation of the fund by the VFDCs during that 
financial year was impossible and unrealistic.  
The Department replied (December 2024) that since the fund for 2022-23 was released in 
March 2023, the SFDA treated the entire release as expenditure. 
The reply is not tenable as merely devolving the fund of ₹ 40.30 crore to FDAs cannot be 
considered as utilisation when the entire fund remained unutilised and lying in the bank 
accounts of the five FDAs. 
Audit concludes that the State Forest Development Agency (SFDA), Mizoram, did not 
comply with both financial and performance reporting requirements under the Green India 
Mission (GIM), particularly for the year 2022-23. Despite reporting full utilisation of 
₹ 40.30 crore and claiming physical achievements across advance work, creation work, and 

143
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
143 
multi-year maintenance, audit scrutiny revealed that funds were only transferred to the five 
Forest Development Agencies (FDAs) on 30-31 March 2023. This would have left no 
realistic time for actual on-ground execution before the financial year closed. 
Furthermore, Utilisation Certificates (UCs) submitted to the Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) excluded required details such as the State Matching 
Share (SMS) in some years and incorrectly treated mere inter-agency fund transfers as 
“utilization.” 
 
4.9.10.6 Audit of Accounts of SFDA and FDA by Chartered Accountant  
As per condition envisaged in the sanction orders of the MoEF &CC, SFDA shall get audited 
the Accounts of the SFDA/ FDAs operating GIM by a reputed Chartered Accountant (CA) 
empanelled by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG). 
The SFDA and FDA-wise CA reports are given in Table-4.22. 
Table-4.22: SFDA and FDA-wise details of CA report for the period from 2016-17 to 
2022-23 
Sl. 
No. Name of Agency Period for which Accounts were audited by CA 
From To Total years 
1. SFDA, Mizoram 2016-17 2019-20 4 
2. FDA, Aizawl 2016-17 2022-23 7 
3. FDA, Kolasib 2016-17 2019-20 4 
4. FDA, Champhai  2016-17 2019-20 4 
5. FDA, Darlawn 2016-17 2019-20 4 
6. FDA, Thenzawl 2016-17 2022-23 7 
Source: CA report of the SFDA and five FDAs 
Audit observed the following irregularities in the audit of Accounts by the empanelled 
Chartered Accountants (CA): 
(i) The accounts of the SFDA were audited by the Chartered Accountant only for the four-
year period from 2016–17 to 2019–20, while the accounts for the subsequent three 
years from 2020–21 to 2022–23 remained unaudited. 
(ii) Out of the five FDAs, the Accounts of two FDAs, i.e., Aizawl and Thenzawl were 
audited by a CA for the year 2016-17 to 2022-23. However, the Accounts of three 
FDAs, i.e., Kolasib, Champhai and Darlawn were audited by CA only for four-year 
period from 2016-17 to 2019-20 years. The accounts of three years from 2020-21 to 
2022-23 of all the three FDAs remained unaudited. 
The Department replied (December 2024) that the Accounts of SFDA would be audited soon 
and the FDAs would be informed to get their balance accounts audited.  
Recommendation: The State Forest Development Agency (SFDA) should ensure that 
submission of correct Utilisation Certificates to promote reliability and transparency. 

144
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
144 
This lapse represents a significant gap in financial oversight, as annual external audits are a 
key control mechanism to verify proper use of public funds, ensure adherence to grant 
conditions, and detect irregularities or inefficiencies in scheme implementation. 
Delays in the release of funds were observed at multiple levels-from the State Government 
to the SFDA, from the SFDA to the FDAs and finally from the FDAs to the VFDCs thereby 
impeding the execution of GIM activities. These delays caused GIM activities to spill over 
into subsequent financial years. Financial reporting was compromised due to irregularities, 
including the omission of the State Matching share in Utilisation Certificates (UCs) and the 
submission of inaccurate UCs. Furthermore, the FDA in Kolasib withdrew ₹ 9.19 crore in 
cash, intended for 12 VFDCs, in violation of the MoEF&CC’s sanction order, with no 
evidence of disbursement to the VFDCs or details of the expenditure, rendering the 
transaction suspicious.  
 
4.9.11 Implementation of GIM activities 
 
Audit Objective-3: To assess whether the targets as stipulated under the mission were 
achieved 
 
4.9.11.1 Short achievement of creation works  over approved six-year period 
MoEF&CC approved (June 2016) the Perspective Plan of GIM for Mizoram with a 
comprehensive physical target of 29,893 hectares area across eight L2 Landscapes. The 
physical target of 29,893 hectares encompassing four sub-missions was planned to be 
achieved over six-years i.e., within the period from 2016-17 to 2021-22. The sub-mission 
(SM) wise physical target vis-à-vis achievement of Creation work as of 31 March 2022 as 
reported by the SFDA to the MoEF&CC is given in Table-4.23. 
Table-4.23: Physical targets vis-à-vis achievement of creation work  
as of 31 March 2022 
(Area in hectare) 
Sub-mission/ 
Intervention 
Creation works under the 
Category 
Target as per 
Perspective 
Plan  
Achievement 
against the 
targets 
Achievement  
(in per cent) 
SM-1: Enhancing 
quality of forest cover 
and improving 
ecosystem services  
(4.9 mha) 
1(a) Moderately dense forest 
cover, but showing 
degradation (ANR Without 
Plantation) 
3,800 3,003.74 79.05 
1(b) Eco restoration of 
degraded open forests Type 
(A) 200 Plants/ hectare  
4,700 2,097.80 44.63 
1(b) Eco restoration of 
degraded open forests Type 
(B) 1,100 Plants/ hectare  
593 294.60 49.68 
1(b) Eco restoration of 
degraded open forests Type 
(C) 2,500 Plants/ hectare 
6,000 1,768.40 29.47 
Recommendation: The Department should ensure that the accounts of the SFDA and 
FDAs are audited annually within a prescribed timeframe. 

145
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
145 
Sub-mission/ 
Intervention 
Creation works under the 
Category 
Target as per 
Perspective 
Plan  
Achievement 
against the 
targets 
Achievement  
(in per cent) 
SM-2: Eco System 
restoration and increase 
in forest cover (1.8 mha) 
(a) Rehabilitation of shifting 
cultivation areas 7,800 3,900 50.00 
SM-3: Enhancing tree 
cover in Urban & Peri- 
Urban areas (including 
institutional lands) -0.2 
mha 
(a) - Plantation in Urban & 
Peri - Urban areas 
2500/ Plants/ Ha 800 800 100.00 
SM-4: Agro- Forestry 
and Social Forestry 
(Increasing biomass & 
Creating carbon sink)-  
4(a) Farmers Land including 
current fallows 5,100 2,042.30 40.05 
4 (c) Highways/ Rural roads/ 
Canals/ Tank Bunds 1,100 1,100 100.00 
Total 29,893 15,006.84 50.20 
Source: Physical and financial progress report of SFDA, Mizoram under GIM 
It can be seen from the above table that against the total target of Creation work in 
29,893 hectares, the actual achievement over six years was 15,007 hectares which constitutes 
merely 50.20 per cent of the total target of 29,893 hectares as of 31 March 2022. Further, as 
of 31 March 2023 i.e., the achievement was 19,643 hectares, constituting 65.71 per cent  of 
total target even after a lapse of one year from the stipulated period of completion. Thus, the 
target for Creation work of 29, 893 hectare was not achieved. 
The Department stated (December 2024) that the Ministry funded only 65.71 per cent of 
physical target and works/ creation were executed accordingly. 
The reply is not tenable as it evident from Table-4.23, the achievement at the end of 
31 March 2022, the Annual Plan of Operation (APO) period, was only 15,007 hectare 
(50.20 per cent) as against the 19,643 hectare (65.71 per cent) claimed by the Department. 
The achievement claimed additionally i.e., (19,643 minus 15,007) 4,636 hectare was actually 
executed/ implemented in 2023-24 as discussed in the subsequent paragraph. Besides, the 
achievement reported by the SFDA to the MoEF&CC was doubtful since the figures did not 
flow from the ground level i.e., from the VFDC level as discussed in Paragraph 4.9.12.3. 
 
4.9.11.2  Incorrect reporting of physical and financial progress for the year 2022-23 
According to physical and financial progress report and UC submitted (31 August 2023) by 
the SFDA to the MoEF&CC, the physical achievement from utilisation of ₹ 40.30 crore 
(sanctioned in 2022-23) included Advance work on 1,000 hectares, Creation work on 
4,636 hectares, 1 st year Maintenance on 905.20 hectares, 2 nd year Maintenance on 
3,753.30 hectares and 3rd year Maintenance on 7,709.20 hectares as detailed in Table-4.24. 
Recommendation: The Department may ensure that physical progress reporting is 
aligned strictly with the approved APO period and is based on verifiable VFDC-level 
documentation. Mechanisms for independent verification may be instituted to ensure 
authenticity and timeliness of data reported to the Ministry. 

146
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
146 
Table-4.24: Statement showing component wise physical and financial achievement 
during 2022-23. 
(Physical achievement in hectare and financial achievement in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Component of 
work 
APO 2021-22 
(2nd instalment) 
APO 2022-23 
(1st instalment) 
Total Achievement 
Physical Financial Physical Financial Physical Financial 
1. Advance work 0.00 0.00 1000.00 318.09 1,000.00 318.09 
2. Creation work 4,636.10 2,040.05 0.00 0.00 4,636.00 2,040.05 
3. 1st year 
maintenance 
877.00 162.98 28.20 2.78 905.20 165.76 
4. 2nd year 
maintenance 
3,323.30 541.35 430.00 21.24 3,753.30 562.59 
5. 3rd year 
maintenance 
5,731.50 626.40 1,977.70 270.82 7,709.20 897.22 
6. Mission 
organization, 
operation and 
maintenance 
NA* 41.52 NA 4.77 NA 46.29 
Total 14,567.90 3,412.30 3,435.90 617.70  4,030.00 
Source: Physical and Financial progress report of the SFDA for the year 2022-23 
[*NA = Not applicable.] 
Audit scrutiny of SFDA’s physical and financial achievement report for 2022-23, 
cross-checked with SFDA bank statements, revealed discrepancies. The SFDA reported 
completion of significant activities such as Advance work on 1,000 hectares and Creation 
work on 4,636 hectares, despite the fact that ₹ 40.30 crore, which was purportedly utilised 
for these works, was disbursed only on 30-31 March 2023. Bank records and subsequent 
fund flow to VFDCs during 2023-24 confirm that execution of these works within the 
financial year was not feasible. Therefore, the achievements reported by SFDA lack of 
credibility, raise serious doubts about data integrity, and amount to misrepresentation of 
progress to the Ministry. 
 
4.9.11.3 Execution of GIM activities in areas not approved in Perspective Plan 
Paragraph 7(j) of the fund release order of approved APO for the financial year 2021-22 and 
2022-23 by MoEF&CC stipulates that there shall be no diversion of earmarked funds from 
one L2/ L3 Landscape to another one except in case of unavoidable circumstances and only 
with the prior approval of Mission Directorate.  
Further, paragraph 8(f) provides that saturation of the selected landscapes should be ensured 
sequentially starting with L3 Landscapes and progressing over L2 Landscapes and 
L1 Landscapes with the requisite interventions. 
According to approved Perspective plan, a total of 12 L3 Landscapes were approved under 
L2 Landscape Aizawl to cover treatment of 5,700 hectare area during 2016-17 to 2021-22. 
Scrutiny of the work programme for L2 Landscape Aizawl revealed that in addition to the 
Recommendation: The Department may institute a robust verification mechanism to 
ensure that physical and financial progress reported by implementing agencies is 
strictly based on actual execution supported by verifiable documentation. 

147
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
147 
approved 12 L3 Landscape, GIM activities were taken up in additional 12 L3 Landscapes as 
summarised in Table-4.25 covering an area of 844.50 hectare at the cost of ₹ 4.28 crore 
during 2022-23. Details of the 12 unapproved L3 Landscapes are given in Appendix-4.4. 
Table-4.25: Statement showing details of 12 unapproved L3 Landscape areas under 
Aizawl 
Sl. No. L3 Landscape Area in hectare 
1. Aibawk 57.00 
2. Baktawng Chhuanthar 116.00 
3. Hmawngkawn 62.80 
4. Lamchhip 128.00 
5. Lungdai 158.70 
6. Mualkhang 46.80 
7. Mualluangthu 75.00 
8. N. Lungleng 25.00 
9. Sateek 29.20 
10. Thiak 92.00 
11. Tlungvel 40.00 
12. Darlawng 14.00 
Total 844.50 
Source: Fund release order of the FDA, Aizawl to respective VFDCs 
The Department stated (September 2024) that due to insufficient land space in Aizawl Range 
to achieve the physical target, implementation of GIM outside Aizawl Range was necessary 
to achieve the target. Hence, there was no impact on approved 51 L3 Landscape since the 
target remained the same. Further, it was added that since there was no additional target, 
approval from the ministry was not required. 
The reply of the Department is not tenable as the Department did not explain why the issue 
of insufficient land space was not addressed at the time of L3 Landscape survey. This action 
was in violation of paragraph 8(f) of the approved APO, which prohibits selecting saturated 
L3 Landscape. Additionally, the Department’s expenditure of ₹ 4.28 crore on treatment of 
12 unapproved L3 Landscape totalling 844.50 hectares instead of the 12 approved 
L3 Landscape contravenes the conditions set under paragraph 7(j) of approved APO. 
Furthermore, the Department did not explain as to how 844.50 hectares were accommodated 
within the approved area of 5,700 hectares under FDA, Aizawl. 
 
4.9.11.4 Expenditure of ₹ 45.40 lakh on items of work not permitted 
Paragraph 9(m) of the fund release order (7 February 2019) for the APO 2018-19 by the 
MoEF&CC provides that there shall be no diversion of earmarked funds from one L2/ L3 
Landscape to another except in case of unavoidable circumstances and then, only with the 
Recommendation: The SFDA should ensure that prior to selection of landscapes for 
planning, L3 Landscapes requiring interventions are not saturated. This will facilitate 
smoother execution of GIM activities, preventing delays and inefficiencies in project 
implementation. 

148
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
148 
approval of GIM Directorate. Further, Paragraph 9(p) stipulates that SFDA shall submit non-
diversion and non-embezzlement certificate each time a request for release of grant is made 
to GIM Directorate. 
Under sub-mission 3-Enhancing tree cover in urban and peri-urban areas (including 
institutional lands), the SFDA released (10 May 2019) ₹ 64.80 lakh to FDA, Aizawl for 
material cost under Management93 intervention component for executing balance of advance 
works94 (2016-17) over 400-hectare area at the rate of ₹ 16,200 per hectare. 
The FDA, Aizawl stated that ₹ 64.80 lakh, was utilised across 12 VFDCs as detailed in the 
Table-4.26. Audit scrutiny of documents furnished by the VFDC, Aizawl revealed that out 
of the total amount of ₹ 64.80 lakh, ₹ 45.40 lakh (70.60 per cent) was utilised for various 
construction works and the remaining ₹ 19.40 lakh was utilised for plantation related 
activities such as marking and labelling of existing trees, fixing of signboard, distribution of 
gardening tools, organising environment awareness campaigns, etc. 
Table-4.26: Statement showing the details of expenditure of ₹ 45.40 lakh on 
construction works 
Category Location (VFDC) Item of Work Amount  
(₹ in lakh) 
Cemetery Huts Sihphir Cemetery Hut 3.39 
Sihphir Venghlun Cemetery Hut 4.00 
Muthi Cemetery Hut 3.39 
Chaltlang Cemetery Hut 4.00 
Information Buildings Durtlang Information Building 3.39 
Maubawk Information Building 4.00 
Retaining/Railing Works Durtlang North Footpath with railing 3.39 
Tanhril Railing, retaining wall and RCC pavement 4.00 
Zemabawk Retaining Wall 5.67 
Community/NGO 
Facilities 
Tlangnuam YMA (NGO) Office Workshop 3.39 
Melthum Extension of VFDC House 3.39 
Hlimen Pavilion at Mualzawl Volleyball Court 3.39 
Total 45.40 
Source: Cash book and voucher of VFDCs 
Audit observed that ₹ 45.40 lakh out of ₹ 64.80 lakh released to FDA Aizawl under Sub-
Mission 3 (SM-3) was spent on construction works such as cemetery huts, office extensions, 
retaining walls, and pavilions across 12 VFDCs. These expenditures were not related to 
afforestation or management interventions permissible under the Green India Mission. They 
were also not provided for in the approved APO. 
 
93  The Fund release order of SFDA did not explicitly mention the items of work to be taken up under 
Management Intervention covered under the Advance work. In response to audit query, the FDA, Aizawl 
also did not list out the items of work to be taken up under Management Intervention 
94  (i) Survey and demarcation including mapping, (ii) Area clearance by cutting grasses and maintenance, 
(iii) Fire line cutting, burning and maintenance, (iv) Clearance of sites for nursery, preparation of nursery 
bed, filling of poly bags, manuring shed and shed erection, (v) Treatment of sowing of seeds, and 
(vi) Weeding and watering 

149
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
149 
The Department stated (January 2025) that expenditure of ₹ 45.40 lakh should not be 
classified as a diversion, as these funds were used for the construction of the Entry Point 
Activity (EPA), which addresses the community needs. This initiative has strengthened the 
relationship between the FDA and the residents by focusing on community requirements. 
The Department’s justification that these were Entry Point Activities (EPA) is not 
acceptable, as such works require prior approval and inclusion in the APO, which was not 
evidenced. This constitutes misutilisation of funds in violation of Paragraphs 9(m) and 9(p) 
of the fund release order and undermines the intent and integrity of the scheme. The nature 
of expenditure completely different from the purpose for which funds had been earmarked 
and was thus tantamount to expenditure on non-permitted item of works.  
 
4.9.11.5 Non-implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer scheme  
MoEF&CC directed (December 2016) the State Governments to make payment of 
wages/ remuneration through the bank accounts of the recipients engaged in the 
implementation of the Mission activities in compliance with Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) 
scheme. 
The SFDA reported to the MoEF&CC (22 October 2019) that full implementation of Direct 
Benefit Transfer (DBT) was not feasible in several VFDCs due to the absence of banking 
facilities, attributable to their remoteness and poor power and internet connectivity. It also 
added that the labour class were not aware to open bank accounts for fear of undue delay in 
the processing of their small earnings. The SFDA further stated that despite the difficulties, 
attempt was being made to transfer the wages to the labourers’ bank accounts in the 
implementation of DBT. 
Scrutiny of muster roll register revealed that payment of wages to labourers in all the five 
selected FDAs were made in cash.  
The Department (January 2025) stated that DBT will be implemented henceforth.  
Audit concluded that the State Forest Development Agency (SFDA), Mizoram, did not 
implement the MoEF&CC directive of December 2016 mandating payment of wages 
through DBT to the bank accounts of labourers engaged under the GIM. Despite citing 
operational challenges such as limited banking access, poor connectivity, and low 
awareness, the SFDA continued to disburse wages entirely in cash across all five selected 
FDAs, as verified by muster roll scrutiny. This non-compliance not only violated DBT policy 
but also significantly increased the risk of fund leakages, misappropriation, and irregularities 
in wage disbursement. 
Recommendation: The Department may strictly adhere to GIM guidelines and ensure 
that all expenditures are aligned with the approved APO. Mechanisms for vetting EPA 
proposals and verifying their inclusion in the APO should be established. 

150
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
150 
 
4.9.11.6 Non-convergence of GIM with CAMPA and MGNREGS  
MoEF&CC and Rural Development Department, Government of India jointly issued 
(3 March 2015) guidelines for convergence of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) with GIM across all states. Also, MoEF&CC 
issued (May 2015) State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning 
Authority (CAMPA) and GIM convergence guidelines, mandating the implementation of 
the Green India Mission (GIM) and the CAMPA in a coordinated manner. 
Audit noticed that despite clear guidelines issued by the MoEF&CC and the Ministry of 
Rural Development in 2015 mandating convergence between the Green India Mission (GIM) 
and both MGNREGS and CAMPA, no such convergence was achieved in Mizoram. 
Examination of the Annual Plan of Operations (APOs) of GIM and CAMPA revealed no 
coordinated planning or implementation between the two schemes. Furthermore, the Rural 
Development Department confirmed that no convergence-related activities between 
MGNREGS and GIM were undertaken during the period 2016–17 to 2022–23. The absence 
of convergence undermined the potential for resource optimisation, improved coverage, and 
enhanced outcomes envisaged under the national policy framework. 
The Department while agreeing to the Audit observation stated (January 2025) that 
convergence guidelines will be adhered to. 
4.9.11.7 Low survival rate of plantation along Highways and Rural roads 
A Joint Physical Verification (JPV) of forty plantation sites were conducted by an audit team 
with officials of FDAs during 1 May to 31 July 2024 to assess the plantation survival rate.  
Out of forty plantation sites, seven sites falling under Sub Mission 4(c)-Highways and Rural 
Roads showed poor performance with survival rates ranging from 21.43 to 51.71 per cent. 
Details of plantation site-wise survival data is provided in Appendix-4.5.  
These findings point to inadequate planning, weak inter-agency convergence, and poor 
accountability mechanisms in safeguarding plantation investments under Sub-Mission 4(c). 
Consequently, the survival failure undermined the environmental and financial objectives of 
the Green India Mission in road-adjacent afforestation zones. 
The Department stated (December 2024) that due to development works like widening of 
roads and occurrence of landslides, survival rate of plantations under sub-mission 4(c) was 
low. However, audit noticed that there was no communication between the Divisional Forest 
Officers on construction/widening of roads and the user departments on the damaged 
plantations to confirm the Department’s claim. In the absence of documented inter-
Recommendation: The SFDA should implement Direct Benefit Transfer system to 
the maximum possible extent to ensure timely delivery of benefits directly to 
beneficiaries and prevent leakages. Necessary enabling measures such as proactive 
facilitation of bank account opening, use of mobile banking vans and coordination 
with banking correspondents in collaboration with financial institutions. 

151
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
151 
departmental communication or mitigation planning, the Department’s justification remains 
unsubstantiated. 
4.9.11.8 Plantation in farmers’ land  
Paragraph 7.1 of the GIM Implementation Guidelines, 2014, provides that the Mission 
accords considerable emphasis to the development of forests on private and farmers’ lands. 
Over the Mission period, about 3 million hectares of new forest and tree cover is envisaged 
on the farmers’ land. 
Scrutiny of records of the 21 sampled L3 Landscapes under seven sampled L2 Landscapes 
revealed that out of 21-L3 Landscape, plantation in farmers’ land under sub-mission 4(a) 
was taken up in 19-L3 Landscapes only. Further scrutiny revealed the following 
irregularities in the plantations on farmers land as below: 
Summary of Irregularities in Plantation on Farmers’ Land under Sub-Mission 4(a) 
A. Table-4.27: Narrative Summary of Findings 
Sl. 
No. 
Location (L3 
Landscape) 
FDA Key Irregularities Audit Observation 
1. Durtlang North Aizawl ₹ 5.50 lakh disbursed to 28 farmers 
(2021–23). Only eight received 
funds for Creation work; rest 20 only 
for Maintenance without prior 
stages. 
Department claimed 
Advance & Creation 
done in 2018–19, but no 
supporting documents 
were provided. 
2. Durtlang Aizawl ₹ 3.51 lakh given to 54 farmers for 
Maintenance only; no records of 
prior Advance/ Creation work. 
Actual afforestation 
doubtful due to absence 
of preparatory work 
details. 
3. Sihphir 
Venghlun 
Aizawl ₹ 3.99 lakh to 15 farmers (Creation), 
₹ 2.16 lakh to 49 farmers 
(Maintenance) in 2022 – 23. No 
records of Advance work. 
In absence of Advance 
work, all expenditure is 
considered doubtful. 
4. Baktawng 
Chhuanthar 
Aizawl ₹ 2.79 lakh paid to 55 farmers for 
Maintenance over 46 ha in 2022–23. 
No details of Advance/Creation. 
Additional ₹ 13.10 lakh paid without 
activity details. 
Payments made without 
prerequisite works or 
purpose; plantation 
authenticity doubtful. 
5. Thentlang Thenzawl ₹ 51.99 lakh disbursed between 
2016–17 and 2022–23 for 100 ha:  
Advance (₹ 13.50 lakh), Creation 
(₹ 17.89 lakh), Maintenance 
(₹ 20.60 lakh). 
No land, payee, or fund 
transfer details 
furnished; audit unable 
to verify 
implementation. 
6. Chawngtlai, 
Kawlkulh, 
Pawlrang, 
Vanchengpui 
Champhai ₹ 48.03 lakh disbursed to 134 
farmers for Creation & Maintenance 
(2019–20) across 156.20 ha. 
No earlier assistance for 
Advance work; Creation 
& Maintenance thus not 
supportable. 
7. Buhban, 
Hmunnghak, 
Khawruhlian 
Darlawn ₹ 59.57 lakh disbursed to 97 farmers 
for all three work stages across 200 
ha. 
Payment records 
(receipts, bank transfers, 
activity dates) not 
furnished despite exit 
conference assurance. 

152
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
152 
B. Detailed Tabular Data from FDAs 
Table-4.28: Disbursement of ₹ 48.03 lakh to 134 farmers under FDA Champhai 
Sl. 
No. 
L3 Landscape No. of 
Beneficiaries 
Area 
Covered (ha) 
Amount Disbursed 
(₹ in lakh) 
Activity 
1. Chawngtlai 43 43.20 17.20 Creation & Maintenance 
2. Kawlkulh 22 44.00 8.37 Creation & Maintenance 
3. Pawlrang 34 34.00 10.34 Creation & Maintenance 
4. Vanchengpui 35 35.00 12.12 Creation & Maintenance 
Total 134 156.20 48.03 
 
Table-4.29: Disbursement of ₹ 59.57 lakh to 97 beneficiaries under FDA Darlawn 
Sl. 
No. 
L3 
Landscape 
No. of 
Beneficiaries 
Total Area 
(ha) 
Amount Disbursed (₹ in 
lakh) 
1. Buhban 30 60 19.25 
2. Hmunnghak 35 60 18.12 
3. Khawruhlian 32 80 22.20 
Total 97 200 59.57 
The Green India Mission (GIM) guidelines emphasize afforestation on farmers’ lands under 
Sub-Mission 4(a), with Advance, Creation, and Maintenance works to be undertaken 
sequentially. Audit scrutiny of records across seven sampled FDAs revealed systemic 
irregularities in the execution of plantation works on farmers’ land. 
In multiple instances, including Durtlang North, Durtlang, Sihphir Venghlun, Baktawng 
Chhuanthar, Thentlang, Champhai, and Darlawn, financial assistance amounting to over 
₹ 1.70 crore was disbursed to farmers for Creation and Maintenance activities without 
evidence of preceding Advance work or actual plantation. Land ownership records, activity 
documentation, Actual Payee Receipts, and bank transfer details were either absent or not 
furnished. In some cases, such as at Baktawng Chhuanthar, funds were released without 
indicating the purpose of expenditure. Despite departmental claims during the Exit 
Conference, no documentary evidence was subsequently submitted. 
 
(i) Other deficiencies/ issues 
(a) Lack of Formal Agreements : It was observed that no formal agreements were 
executed with the farmers whose lands were brought under plantation activities. 
Recommendations: 
The Department may ensure that- 
 all FDAs maintain updated and verifiable records of landholding farmers, 
including GPS-tagged plots and Aadhaar-linked bank accounts; 
 release of funds must be conditional upon verified completion of prior stage 
activities, supported by photographic and geo-tagged evidence; and 
 disbursement should be accompanied by Actual Payee Receipts, fund transfer 
proof and a purpose-wise break-up. 

153
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
153 
During the exit conference, the Department stated (January 2025) that though no formal 
agreement was signed with the farmers, their consent was obtained in writing. 
(b) Advance work taken up without assessing farmers’ land in Tlungvel L3 
Landscape: During 2022-23 ₹ 3.58 lakh was spent for Advance work in 20 hectare area 
under Tlungvel L3 Landscape under FDA, Aizawl However, the details of farmers’ lands 
were not on record. This suggests that Advance work was taken up without assessing actual 
land availability or securing confirmed participation, rendering the expenditure premature 
and potentially unproductive. 
(c) Wasteful expenditure in six L3 Landscapes under FDA, Kolasib : As per 
information furnished by the FDA, Kolasib relating to execution of GIM activities on 
farmers’ lands during 2016-17 to 2020-21, total Advance work95 in 310.87 hectare area was 
taken up incurring expenditure of ₹ 73.21 lakh and against that Creation work 96 was taken 
up in 208.22 hectare area incurring ₹ 31.92 lakh in six sampled L3 Landscapes, the details 
of which are given in Appendix-4.6.  
Since the Advance work was carried out in 310.87 hectare area, the Creation work should 
have been carried out in the same area of land. As Creation work logically follows Advance 
work, the non-utilisation of preparatory works over 102.65 hectares resulted in wasteful 
expenditure of ₹ 24.17 lakh, defeating the very purpose of initial investment and resource 
mobilisation. 
These deficiencies point to a serious lapse in planning, beneficiary identification, and 
execution oversight, resulting in financial loss and inefficacy of the afforestation programme 
on private land. The absence of binding agreements, lack of field-level verification, and 
partial implementation of sequential activities undermine the credibility and sustainability 
of the intervention. 
4.9.11.9 Non-establishment of Research and Development (R&D) Centre under the 
Mission 
Paragraph 4.6 Annexure-IV(A)(III)) of the GIM implementation guidelines, 2014 provides 
that the Mission Directorate (SFDA) should coordinate pilot research projects related to 
activities envisaged in the Green India Mission document and disseminate such results for 
further improvement. 
Scrutiny of physical and financial progress report of L1 Landscape for the year from 2016-17 
to 2022-23 revealed that SFDA, Mizoram did not incur any expenditure on research projects 
under the Mission. Thus, due to non-establishment of Research and Development Centre the 
Department could not ensure the use of appropriate species.  
The Department, while agreeing to the Audit observation, stated (December 2024) that due 
to non-release of funds from the MoEF&CC for the research component, SFDA did not carry 
 
95  Advance work refers to the preparatory activities like site preparation, siteclearance - grasses and shrubs, 
Fire line cutting, burning, etc. 
96  Creation work involves the actual establishment of plantations activities such as planting saplings, sowing 
seeds, etc. 

154
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
154 
out any research on activities under GIM. The reply, however, was silent on whether any 
proposal for a research project had ever been made by the SFDA.  
Audit concluded that the State Forest Development Agency (SFDA), Mizoram, did not 
discharge its mandated responsibility under Paragraph 4.6 of the Green India Mission (GIM) 
Implementation Guidelines, 2014, which required coordination of pilot research projects and 
dissemination of findings to inform and improve Mission activities.  Despite the 
Department’s claim that no research was undertaken due to non-release of funds from 
MoEF&CC, the absence of any evidence that the SFDA proactively developed or submitted 
research proposals points to institutional inertia and lack of strategic initiative. 
4.9.11.10 Non-updation of  GIM information on website for public access 
The MoEF&CC, Government of India vide its Office Memorandum dated 19 August 2016 
directed the SFDA, Mizoram to create/ open a web-link on the website of the State Forest 
Department. The web-link will provide details of the activities taken up under GIM. A 
quarterly statement of accounts and progress of works carried out in each of the L3 level 
Landscapes shall be uploaded in the web-link. SFDA shall also upload a comprehensive 
Annual Report on the progress of works and utilisation of fund in respect of all L2 Level 
Landscapes in the web -link soon after the end of a financial year.  
The SFDA, Mizoram created a web link on the website (https://forest.mizoram.gov.in) of the 
Environment Forest and Climate Change Department, Government of Mizoram on 
06 June 2017. However, after posting the Quarterly Progress Reports for 2016-17 on 
25 July 2017, there were no further updates posted or uploads of quarterly accounts or 
progress reports as of September 2024. 
Thus, the SFDA did not upload the quarterly statement of accounts and progress of works 
carried out in each of the L3 level Landscapes and the Annual Report of all L2 Landscapes 
at the end of each financial year on the website resulting in lack of accessible information in 
the public domain. 
The Department, while agreeing to the Audit observation, stated (December 2024) that the 
requisite information/ data (on the website) will be updated/uploaded. However, website was 
not updated (May 2025). 
 
 
 
Physical achievement of Creation work over a six-year span-from 2016-17 to 2022-23 
amounted to a mere 15,007 hectares, constituting only 50.20 per cent  against the 
target of 29,893 hectares. GIM activities across 12 L3 Landscapes, covering 
844.50 hectares, were executed without approval in the Perspective Plan, exposing a 
fundamentally flawed and defective planning process.  
Payment of wages to labourers through DBT did not materialise. The GIM activities 
were not executed in convergence with CAMPA and MGNREGS, leaving execution 
expenses inflated.  

155
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Audit Objective-4: To assess whether existing review and monitoring mechanism is 
effective and adequate in the realisation of quantifiable targets 
under each sub-mission. 
 
4.9.12 Monitoring mechanism involved to assess the activities undertaken in GIM 
 
 
4.9.12.1 Non preparation of report on Performance Monitoring Framework (PMF)  
Paragraph 6.7 of GIM implementation guidelines, 2014 envisages that the Performance 
Monitoring Framework (PMF) or Result Framework (RF) would be at the loci of the 
Monitoring and Evaluation system. All the Monitoring and Evaluation imperatives in the 
mission needs to be aligned to PMF/RF and should respond to the PMF/ RF as indicated 
under Annexure-VI of GIM implantation guidelines, 2014. 
Under the Performance Monitoring Framework, Local Forest Development communities 97 
are required to annually assess- (i) whether the quality of forest cover & ecosystem services 
of forest and non-forest is improved in Moderately dense and Open Forests; (ii) whether 
Ecosystems are restored and forest cover is increased in Shifting cultivation areas; 
(iii)  whether public forest/ non-forest areas are managed by the community institutions; and 
(iv) whether efficient and alternative energy devices in place of fuelwood is adopted by the 
households.  
In response to audit queries, the FDAs replied that they had not prepared any performance 
monitoring reports in the form prescribed by under Annexure-VI or any other form 
prescribed by SFDA, Mizoram.  
Non-preparation of the performance monitoring reports was in violation of the GIM 
implementation guidelines. As a result, critical indicators such as the improvement in forest 
 
97  In Mizoram the Local Forest Development Committee is Village Forest Development Committee (VFDC) 
 
Recommendation: The SFDA should ensure that all relevant information regarding 
GIM activities is regularly updated on the website of the Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change Department, Government of Mizoram. The SFDA should further  
enhance public access to this information to promote transparency, encourage 
community engagement and allow stakeholders to monitor progress effectively. 
Joint Physical Verification (JPV) of Plantation sites showed a grim picture of survival 
of plants along Highways and Rural Roads (sub-mission 4(c)) which languished 
between a dismal 21.43 per cent and a mediocre 51.71 per cent.  
Furthermore, glaring inconsistencies between Advance work, Creation work and 
Maintenance work in case of plantations on farmers’ land (sub-mission 4(a)) cast 
serious doubts on the authenticity and effectiveness of GIM activities at the ground 
level.  

156
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
156 
quality and ecosystem services, restoration of shifting cultivation areas, community-led 
management of forest and non-forest areas, and the adoption of alternative energy devices 
in households were not assessed or documented. This reflects a serious lapse in compliance 
with GIM guidelines and a missed opportunity to evaluate and demonstrate impact at the 
community level. 
During the Exit conference, the Department stated (December 2024) that FDAs would be 
directed to devise PMFs. 
 
4.9.12.2 Social audit of VFDCs 
According to Paragraph 6.9 of the GIM Implementation Guidelines 2014, the Gram Sabha 
will regularly conduct a social audit of Mission activities at Village level in accordance with 
the provisions outlined in Section 17 of the National Rural Employment Guarantee (NREG) 
Act and the social audit report shall be made available in the public domain. 
Scrutiny of Social Audit Reports pertaining to the expenditure under Green India Mission 
(GIM) by the VFDC during 2016-17 to 2022-23 revealed the following:  
(I) Non-involvement of Gram Sabha in Social Audit : Paragraph 6.9 of the GIM 
implementation guidelines, 2014 envisages that the Gram Sabha will carry out social audit 
of all expenses incurred by the Committees constituted by the Gram Sabha.  
However, contrary to Paragraph 6.9 of the guidelines, it was observed from Social Audit 
Reports pertaining to GIM that the Village Council President alone or together with local 
NGOs viz., Young Mizo Association (YMA), Mizo Hmeichhia Insuihkhawm Pawl (MHIP) 
and Mizo Upa Pawl (MUP) conducted social audits of expenses incurred by the VFDCs in 
the execution of GIM at the L3 landscape level instead of the Social Audit conducted by the 
Gram Sabha. Due to non-conduct of social audit by the Gram Sabhas, the scope for 
individuals to scrutinise the implementation of GIM and compare official records with actual 
ground realities and to ensure that GIM was executed efficiently, transparently, and in 
alignment with the needs of the community, was limited. 
(II) Absence of regular social audit: Contrary to the requirement of regular social audit, 
it was observed from the Social Audit Reports of the sampled VFDCs that executed the GIM 
activities at L3 Landscape (village level) for the period from 2016-17 to 2022-23, the 
frequency of social audit was very irregular. The details of social audits conducted in 
sampled 21 VFDCs during 2016-17 to 2022-23 is shown under Table-4.30. 
Recommendations: 
 All FDAs may prepare annual performance monitoring reports in the format 
prescribed under Annexure-VI of the GIM guidelines; 
 Orientation and training may be provided to VFDCs and FDAs on the 
importance, methodology and documentation requirements  under the PMF; 
and 
 SFDA should institute a mechanism for regular review of PMF compliance 
and integrated into the fund release and evaluation cycle. 

157
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
157 
Table-4.30: VFDC-wise Social Audits Conducted (2016–17 to 2022–23) 
Sl. 
No. FDA VFDC 
Audit 
Period 
(From–To) 
Required 
Audits (7 yrs) 
Audits 
Conducted Shortfall 
1. Aizawl Sihphir 
Venghlun 
2016-17 to 
2018-19 7 3 4 
2. Aizawl Durtlang 2016-17 to 
2018-19 7 3 4 
3. Aizawl Durtlang North 2016-17 to 
2018-19 7 3 4 
4. Aizawl Lamchhip — 7 0 7 
5. Aizawl N. Lungleng — 7 0 7 
6. Aizawl Baktawng 
Chhuanthar 
— 7 0 7 
7. Aizawl Tlungvel — 7 0 7 
8. Darlawn Buhban 2016-17 to 
2019-20 7 4 3 
9. Darlawn Hmunnghak 2016-17 to 
2018-19 7 3 4 
10. Darlawn Khawruhlian 2016-17 to 
2019-20 7 4 3 
11. Champhai Kawlkulh 2016-17 to 
2019-20 7 4 3 
12. Champhai Pawlrang 2016-17 to 
2019-20 7 4 3 
13. Champhai Vanchengpui 2016-17 to 
2019-20 7 4 3 
14. Champhai Chawngtlai 2016-17 to 
2020-21 7 5 2 
15. Kolasib Bualpui 2019-20 7 1 6 
16. Kolasib Bukpui 2019-20 7 1 6 
17. Kolasib Dilzau 2019-20 7 1 6 
18. Kolasib New Diakkawn 2019-20 7 1 6 
19. Kolasib Thingdawl 2019-20 7 1 6 
20. Kolasib Medum 2019-20 7 1 6 
21. Thenzawl Thentlang 2016-17 to 
2018-19 7 3 4 
Source: Records of the respective VFDCs mentioned in column 3 of the table 
Note: Each VFDC was required to conduct one social audit per year. Total audits required over 7 
years = 7. 
It can be seen from Table-4.30 that out of 21 sampled VFDCs, the social audit of GIM 
expenditure incurred by the four VFDCs (Sl. No. 5 to 8) was not conducted at all during all 
the seven years. Further, in the case of balance 17 VFDCs, the shortfall in frequency of social 
audit ranged from two to six against seven required to be conducted.  
The Department stated (December 2024) that efforts will be made to increase the frequency 
of social audit.  
Absence of regular social audits of expenditure incurred under Green India Mission may 
result in lack of accountability, transparency and community engagement, jeopardizing the 
goals of greening India, combating climate change and supporting sustainable livelihoods. 

158
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
158 
Regular social audits will ensure that the mission stays on track and will deliver tangible 
benefits to both the environment and society. 
(III) Non sharing of Social Audit Reports in public domain : Paragraph 6.9 of the GIM 
implementation guidelines provides that the Social Audit Reports should be made available 
in the public domain. However, it was observed that none of the Social Audit Reports was 
found available in the official website of the Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
Department, Government of Mizoram. Due to non-sharing of Social Audit Reports in the 
public domain, the public remained in the dark about the true extent of afforestation achieved 
under GIM. 
 
4.9.12.3 Non-submission of physical and financial achievement report by VFDCs to 
FDAs 
As per the condition laid down in the sanction orders of MoEF&CC, each Village Forest 
Development Committee (VFDC) are to submit quarterly accounts and progress reports for 
L3 Landscapes to the Forest Development Agencies (FDAs). The FDAs are responsible for 
compiling these reports for submission to the State Forest Development Agency (SFDA), 
which then prepares an annual report on the physical progress and fund utilisation for all 
L2 Landscapes to be sent to MoEF&CC at the end of the financial year. 
Table-4.31: Status of submission of physical and financial achievement report 
Level Entity Reported Figures Actual Status Remarks 
VFDC 
(L3) 
12 VFDCs 
under FDA 
Kolasib 
No reports submitted to 
FDA 
No funds credited to 
VFDC bank accounts 
Indicates break in 
reporting and fund flow 
chain 
FDA 
(L2) 
FDA 
Kolasib 
Reported ₹ 9.19 crore 
progress for two L2 
landscapes to 
Conservator of Forest 
(13 Nov 2023) 
₹ 9.19 crore 
withdrawn in cash on 
27 Apr 2023; not 
transferred to 
VFDCs 
False reporting; violates 
fund disbursement 
norms 
SFDA 
(State) 
SFDA, 
Mizoram 
Reported total financial 
achievement of ₹ 40.30 
crore to MoEF&CC (31 
Aug 2023) 
Included ₹ 9.19 crore 
from FDA Kolasib, 
though it was not 
utilised at L3 level 
Misleading aggregation; 
data not grounded in 
actual implementation 
status 
 ₹ 9.19 crore (about 23 per cent of total ₹ 40.30 crore reported by SFDA) never reached 
implementation level. 
Recommendations: 
 Regular/ periodical social audits of VFDCs should be conducted by the Gram 
Sabha of the Village concerned;  
 A schedule of annual audits may be formalised and monitored by SDFA;  
 Continued release of GIM funds to VFDCs may be linked to timely submission 
of completed and community-validated social audit reports; and 
 All social audit reports should be uploaded to the official GIM portal and 
displayed at village notice boards for public access. 

159
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
159 
 None of the VFDCs submitted the required quarterly reports to their FDA. 
 The reporting chain from VFDC → FDA → SFDA → MoEF&CC is compromised at 
every level in this case. 
The lack of bottom-up reporting by VFDCs, compounded by top-down aggregation without 
verification, has compromised the credibility, completeness, and transparency of financial 
and physical progress reporting under GIM. This undermines the accountability framework 
of the programme and impairs the Ministry’s ability to assess actual implementation on the 
ground. 
Consequently, due to the non-reporting by VFDCs to FDAs, the accuracy of the 
comprehensive annual data reported by SFDA to MoEF&CC from 2016-17 to 2022-23 was 
doubtful. 
The Department stated (December 2024) that all the member Secretaries of VFDCs would 
be instructed to submit the physical and financial progress of L3 Landscape to their 
respective FDAs. 
 
4.9.12.4 Incorrect reporting of L2 Landscape and its data to MoEF&CC 
As per Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) letter dated 
27 April 2020, SFDA was required to submit the information relating to KML files 
containing information about afforestation sites under GIM. 
Accordingly, the SFDA provided the required information to MoEF&CC on 
9 September 2021. From the detailed report on Green India Mission plantation sites for the 
period from 2015-16 to 2020-21 available on the MoEF&CC website, it was observed that 
that while KML files of afforestation site of L2 Landscape Chalfilh was reported to the 
Ministry, this L2 Landscape does not appear in the approved Perspective Plan or in any APO. 
In contrast, Darlawn L2 Landscape was documented in both the Perspective plan and APOs.  
Thus, the SFDA, Mizoram provided incorrect information regarding L2 Landscapes to 
MoEF&CC which requires rectification. In response to an audit inquiry, SFDA stated that 
Chalfilh should be interpreted as Darlawn; however, this correction was not communicated 
to MoEF&CC, resulting in inaccurate information being publicly made available. 
The Department stated (December 2024) that corrective measures would be taken in this 
regard. However, no further reply had been received (May 2025). 
Recommendations: 
(i) VFDCs may be strictly directed to submit quarterly physical and financial 
reports in a standardised format, non-compliance of which would have 
warranted withholding of future fund releases; 
(ii) A state-level online portal may be developed for VFDCs to upload real-time 
progress data, linked to fund utilisation and geotagged outcomes; and 
(iii) FDAs may certify that all L2 reports submitted to SFDA are based on verified 
data received from L3 level. 

160
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
160 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.9.13 Conclusion 
Audit noticed a lack of coordination between the Forest Development Agencies (FDAs) and 
the District Planning Committee. District-wise requirement for implementation of the Green 
India Mission (GIM) in convergence with other schemes could not be formulated at the 
Planning stage. Proper assessment/ land survey for the actual treatment at the grassroots level 
was not carried out. Instances of delay in release of funds were observed at multiple levels-
from the State Government to the State Forest Development Agency (SFDA), from the 
SFDA to the Forest Development Agencies (FDAs) and finally from the FDAs to the Village 
Forest Development Committees (VFDCs) thereby impeding the execution of GIM 
activities. Instead of transferring fund to 12 VFDCs, the FDA, Kolasib withdrew ₹ 9.07 crore 
in cash in violation of the MoEF&CC’s sanction order rendering the transaction suspicious.  
Physical achievement of Creation work over a six-year span-from 2016-17 to 2022-23 was 
50.20 per cent against target. Payment of wages to labourers through Direct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT) was not implemented. There was no convergence with Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) and Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) for implementation of GIM. Audit noticed 
doubtful expenditure on plantation in farmers’ land. The SFDA had not updated the 
information on GIM in the website of the Department since July 2017. Performance 
monitoring reports were not prepared by the VFDCs in violation of the GIM implementation 
guidelines. Social Audits of Mission activities at Village level were not conducted regularly 
The Annual Performance Monitoring Framework (PMF) was not established at the Local 
Forest Development Committee level. Furthermore, it was observed that social audits were 
conducted by the Village Council President instead of the mandated authority i.e., the 
Gram Sabha. This deviation deprived the individual community members of the 
opportunity to scrutinise the execution of the GIM, compare official records with on-the-
ground realities and ensure that the mission was implemented efficiently, transparently 
and in alignment with the community's needs. Low frequency of social audits reduced the 
impact of accountability and transparency framework. Additionally, the non-availability 
to make social audit reports for public access exacerbated the lack of openness and 
hindered public oversight. 
The audit also found a significant gap in reporting mechanisms, as there was no consistent 
submission of physical and financial progress reports between the Village Forest 
Development Committee (VFDC) and the Forest Development Agency (FDA). This 
absence of reporting led to inaccurate assessments of the treatment and restoration efforts 
at landscape-level. Moreover, the submission of erroneous data to the funding agency 
pointed to a broader absence of an effective internal control mechanism at the State Forest 
Development Agency (SFDA) level, raising concerns about the reliability and integrity 
of the data. 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
160 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.9.13 Conclusion 
Audit noticed a lack of coordination between the Forest Development Agencies (FDAs) and 
the District Planning Committee. District-wise requirement for implementation of the Green 
India Mission (GIM) in convergence with other schemes could not be formulated at the 
Planning stage. Proper assessment/ land survey for the actual treatment at the grassroots level 
was not carried out. Instances of delay in release of funds were observed at multiple levels-
from the State Government to the State Forest Development Agency (SFDA), from the 
SFDA to the Forest Development Agencies (FDAs) and finally from the FDAs to the Village 
Forest Development Committees (VFDCs) thereby impeding the execution of GIM 
activities. Instead of transferring fund to 12 VFDCs, the FDA, Kolasib withdrew ₹ 9.07 crore 
in cash in violation of the MoEF&CC’s sanction order rendering the transaction suspicious.  
Physical achievement of Creation work over a six-year span-from 2016-17 to 2022-23 was 
50.20 per cent against target. Payment of wages to labourers through Direct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT) was not implemented. There was no convergence with Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) and Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) for implementation of GIM. Audit noticed 
doubtful expenditure on plantation in farmers’ land. The SFDA had not updated the 
information on GIM in the website of the Department since July 2017. Performance 
monitoring reports were not prepared by the VFDCs in violation of the GIM implementation 
guidelines. Social Audits of Mission activities at Village level were not conducted regularly 
The Annual Performance Monitoring Framework (PMF) was not established at the Local 
Forest Development Committee level. Furthermore, it was observed that social audits were 
conducted by the Village Council President instead of the mandated authority i.e., the 
Gram Sabha. This deviation deprived the individual community members of the 
opportunity to scrutinise the execution of the GIM, compare official records with on-the-
ground realities and ensure that the mission was implemented efficiently, transparently 
and in alignment with the community's needs. Low frequency of social audits reduced the 
impact of accountability and transparency framework. Additionally, the non-availability 
to make social audit reports for public access exacerbated the lack of openness and 
hindered public oversight. 
The audit also found a significant gap in reporting mechanisms, as there was no consistent 
submission of physical and financial progress reports between the Village Forest 
Development Committee (VFDC) and the Forest Development Agency (FDA). This 
absence of reporting led to inaccurate assessments of the treatment and restoration efforts 
at landscape-level. Moreover, the submission of erroneous data to the funding agency 
pointed to a broader absence of an effective internal control mechanism at the State Forest 
Development Agency (SFDA) level, raising concerns about the reliability and integrity 
of the data. 

161
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
161 
and none of the Social Audit Reports was available on the official website of the 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change Department, Government of Mizoram. 
4.9.14 Recommendations 
The Government may consider the following recommendations: 
(i) Initiate steps to link Forest Development Agencies (FDAs) with District Planning 
Committees to formulate District-wise requirement for implementation of Green 
India Mission (GIM) in convergence with other schemes at the Planning stage, to 
ensure alignment of priorities and resources; 
(ii) Ensure that all potential L3 Landscapes are identified through proper, verifiable 
surveys at the grassroots level before undertaking treatment activities, so that 
Micro plans and Perspective Plans are based on accurate and comprehensive field 
data; 
(iii) Ensure timely release of funds at all levels to facilitate smooth execution of the 
Mission activities. Further, strictly adhere to GIM guidelines and ensure that all 
expenditures are aligned with the approved Annual Plan Operation (APO); 
(iv) Implement Direct Benefit Transfer system to the maximum possible extent to 
ensure timely delivery of benefits directly to beneficiaries and prevent leakages. 
Necessary enabling measures such as proactive facilitation of bank account 
opening, use of mobile banking vans, and coordination with banking 
correspondents may be undertaken in collaboration with financial institutions; 
(v) Ensure that all relevant information regarding GIM activities is regularly updated 
on the website of Environment, Forest and Climate Change Department, 
Government of Mizoram. Enhancing public access to this information will 
promote transparency, encourage community engagement, and allow stakeholders 
to monitor progress effectively; and 
(vi) All social audit reports should be uploaded to the official GIM portal and displayed 
at village notice boards for public access. 
TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT 
 
4.10 Performance Audit on Functioning of District Transport Offices 
 
4.10.1 Introduction 
“Mechanically propelled vehicles including the principles on which taxes are to be levied” 
is under the concurrent list (Entry number 35 under list III) as per Schedule 7 of the Indian 
constitution. This means that both Centre and State have jurisdiction over rules, regulations 
and implementation of regulations relating to Motor Vehicles. In light of this, the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1988 was enacted by the Parliament which provides the rules regarding the 
issuing of licence to drivers of motor vehicles, issue of licence to conductors of stage 
carriages, registration of motor vehicles, issue of various types of permits, etc. As per 
Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, the Ministry of Road Transport, 
Government of India is responsible for formulation of broad policies relating to road 
transport and enforcement of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 

162
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
162 
1989. Rule 68 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 also mandated the establishment of State 
Transport Authorities across India. 
The State enacted the Mizoram Motor Vehicles Rules, 1995 as required by sub-section (1) 
of section 212 of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 which details the taxes, fees, etc., to be levied 
on motor vehicles. The major regulatory functions envisaged under the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988 and the taxation powers envisaged under the various State Acts are implemented by the 
District Transport Offices (DTOs) in Mizoram functioning under the Transport Department. 
The transport sector in Mizoram is primarily managed by the Transport Department, 
Government of Mizoram. The Department oversees various aspects of road transport, 
including vehicle registration, issuance of driving licences, collection of road taxes, and 
enforcement of road safety regulations. The state-run Mizoram State Transport (MST) 
operates passenger bus services within and outside the State, although its fleet has been 
reduced significantly due to privatisation policies. The Department administers the Motor 
Vehicles Taxation Act and oversees the functioning of the State Transport Authority and the 
Motor Vehicle Wing. Key responsibilities of the Department include: 
 Vehicle Registration: Issuing Registration Certificates (RC) for vehicles. 
 Driving Licences: Issuance, renewal and cancellation of driving licences. 
 Road Tax: Collection of road taxes 
 Road Safety: Enforcement of road safety regulations. 
 Public Transport: Management of state-run bus services through Mizoram State 
Transport (MST). 
As of 31 March 2024, there were nine DTOs98 in Mizoram. 
4.10.2 Organisational Structure 
Chart-4.1: Organisational Structure of Transport Department in Mizoram 
 
Source: Year Book of the Transport Department 2021 
 
98   i. Aizawl (Licencing), ii. Aizawl (Registering), iii. Lunglei, iv. Siaha, v. Champhai, vi. Kolasib 
vii. Serchhip, viii. Lawngtlai, and ix. Mamit 
 


163
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
163 
Secretary to the Government of Mizoram, Transport Department is the Administrative Head 
of the Department and the Director of Transport is the overall Executive Head of the 
Department, assisted by four Joint Directors. The Department has two important Wings, viz., 
Mizoram State Transport Wing (MST Wing) and the Motor Vehicle Wing (MV Wing). The 
MST Wing under Joint Director (Operation) operates passenger-bus services within and 
outside the State. The MV Wing executes enforcement of MV Acts and Rules including 
Licensing of Conductors/ Drivers, Registration of Vehicles and Collection of taxes/ fees/ 
fines, etc., and implementations of the Mizoram Passengers and Goods (Taxation) Acts, 
2005. The State Transport Authority (STA), a statutory body under the chairmanship of 
Secretary, Transport with the Director of Transport who acts as the Member Secretary takes 
up matters relating to fixation of fares and freights for Public Service Vehicles and issue of 
permits for various Public Service Vehicles. 
4.10.3 Audit Objectives 
The objective of the Performance Audit conducted was to assess whether DTOs: 
 Managed the issue, renewal and cancellation of licences effectively as per the Act/ 
Rules; 
 Implemented the regulation and control over registration and use of vehicles through 
registration, issuing permits and fitness certificates as per the Act/ Rules; 
 Efficiently assessed, levied, collected and remitted revenue (Motor vehicle taxes, fines, 
penalties, cess, etc., as per Act/ Rules) and took effective action on arrears; 
 Conducted enforcement activities effectively to ensure compliance with the Motor 
Vehicles Acts/ Rules with adequate follow up to deter violations; and 
 Have been provided with required manpower, equipment and other resources to 
discharge their functions and also to ensure public service delivery in a transparent and 
efficient manner. 
4.10.4 Audit Criteria 
The Audit criteria adopted for the Performance Audit included:  
 The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988; 
 Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989; 
 The Mizoram Motor Vehicles Rules, 1995; 
 The Mizoram Passenger & Goods (Taxation) Act, 2005; 
 The Mizoram Passenger & Goods (Taxation) Rules, 2006; 
 The Mizoram Vehicles (Taxation) (Amendment) Act, 2019; 
 The Mizoram Right to Public Service Act, 2015; 
 Department Manuals/ Rules/ Policies, etc.; and 
 Notifications/ Circulars issued by the Ministry of Road Transport, Government of India 
and the Mizoram Transport Department from time to time. 

164
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
164 
4.10.5 Audit Coverage & Methodology 
The Performance Audit on the Functioning of DTOs in Mizoram covering the period from 
2019-20 to 2023-24 was conducted between July 2024 and September 2024 through test 
check of records of the Director, Transport Department, STA and three District Transport 
Offices viz., Aizawl99, Serchhip and Mamit.  
Out of eleven districts, three districts of Aizawl, Serchhip and Mamit were selected based on 
Stratified random sampling method and audit was conducted by analysis of data in V AHAN 
platform. 
The Performance Audit commenced with an Entry Conference with officials from Transport 
Department and Finance Department on 21 June 2024 wherein the Audit Objectives, Audit 
Criteria and Scope of Audit were explained and suggestions as well as various attributes of 
the functioning of DTOs were discussed. 
The Audit findings were discussed in the Exit Conference (27 May 2025) with the 
Department/ Government in which Director of Transport, Deputy Secretary, Transport 
Department, Government of Mizoram along with other supporting staff were present and the 
report has been finalised after taking into consideration the replies of the Department/ 
Government. 
4.10.6 Acknowledgement 
The office of the Principal Accountant General, Mizoram places on record sincere 
acknowledgement of the cooperation rendered by the Department in the course of the audit. 
Audit Findings 
 
4.10.7 Excess issue of Learner’s Licence 
As per Section 8(5) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, no learner’s licence shall be issued to 
any applicant unless the applicant passes, to the satisfaction of the licensing authority, such 
tests as may be prescribed by the Central Government. In Mizoram, online Learner’s Licence 
(LL) application was launched on 1 November 2022.  
Audit analysis of the ‘Sarathi’ data dump during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24 revealed that 
out of 1,26,790 applicants, 1,23,631 applicants appeared for the LL test. However, 1,79,402 
number of LLs issued were higher than the number of LL applicants as shown in Table-4.32. 
 
 
 
 
 
99 DTO Aizawl (Licencing and Registering) taken as one DTO 
 
Audit Objective-1: Whether DTOs managed the issue, renewal and cancellation of 
licences effectively as per the Act/ Rules 

165
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
165 
Table-4.32: Details of LL issued year-wise during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24 
Year No. of LL applicants No. of LL 
issued 
No. of LL applicants 
who appeared for the 
test 
No. of LL 
issued in excess 
2019-20 23,175 34,309 22,452 11,857 
2020-21 21,908 32,388 21,369 11,019 
2021-22 19,730 28,060 19,259 8,801 
2022-23 31,178 43,722 30,307 13,415 
2023-24 30,799 40,923 30,244 10,679 
Total 1,26,790 1,79,402 1,23,631 55,771 
Source: Sarathi database 
In the sampled DTOs (Aizawl, Mamit and Serchhip) it has been noticed that out of 84,294 
applicants for LL test, 81,949 applicants appeared for the test. Further scrutiny, however, 
revealed that the sampled DTOs issued 1,22,348 LLs which was higher than the number of 
applicants who appeared for the LL test by 40,399 as shown in following Table-4.33. 
Table-4.33: Details of LLs issued during the period from 2019-20 to 2023-24 in the 
sampled DTOs 
District No. of LL 
applicants 
No. of LLs 
issued 
No. of LL applicants 
who appeared for the 
test 
No. of LLs 
issued in excess 
Aizawl 71,743 1,06,161 69,617 36,544 
Mamit 4,668 6,148 4,525 1,623 
Serchhip 7,883 10,039 7,807 2,232 
Total 84,294 1,22,348 81,949 40,399 
Source: Sarathi database. 
Analysis of data pertaining to the issuance of Learner’s Licences (LL) in Mizoram during 
the period 2019–20 to 2023–24 revealed serious procedural lapses. At the State level, 
1,79,402 LLs were issued against 1,23,631 applicants who actually appeared for the LL test, 
resulting in excess issuance of 55,771 LLs, representing 45.12 per cent over the number of 
test takers. 
A scrutiny of data from three sampled District Transport Offices, Aizawl, Mamit and 
Serchhip, further reinforced these concerns. These districts together accounted for 1,22,348 
LLs issued, despite only 81,949 applicants appearing for the test, resulting in an excess of 
40,399 LLs, or 49.27 per cent more than the number of test takers. The most significant 
irregularity was observed in Aizawl DTO, where 1,06,161 LLs were issued against 
69,617 test takers, indicating an excess of 36,544 LLs. 
These patterns suggested a systemic lapse in enforcing eligibility verification and raised 
serious concerns regarding data integrity, potential misuse and the credibility of the licensing 
system in the State. 
Given the magnitude of the irregularities and the legal requirement for test clearance prior 
to licence issuance, the matter assumes serious significance and may be inquired into by the 
department.  
The Government replied (30 May 2025) that as per direction of Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways, online LL application was introduced with effect from 01 November 2022 
and the process of application, conducting tests and issuing licences was now fully checked 

166
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
166 
and monitored by the system. Prior to this, issue of Learner’s Licence was manually done at 
the District Transport Offices. The excess issue of LLs was due to re-issue of expired LLs as 
well as LLs which expired during the application of Driving Licence. 
The Government’s reply is not acceptable since discrepancies related to application and issue 
of Learner’s Licence continue to occur even after the implementation of the online Sarathi 
system, i.e., 2023-24. 
Recommendation: Appropriate action should be taken to identify systemic lapses and 
implement corrective measures. 
4.10.8 Excess issue of Driving Licence (DL)  
DTOs act as ‘Licensing Authorities’ under Rule 3 of Mizoram Motor Vehicle Rules, 1995 for 
issuing Driving Licences and Rule 35 of Mizoram Motor Vehicle Rules, 1995 for issuing 
Conductor Licences. 
As per Section 9(7) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, when any application has been duly 
made to the appropriate licensing authority and the applicant has satisfied such authority of 
his competence to drive, the licensing authority shall issue the applicant a driving licence 
unless the applicant is for the time being disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving 
licence. 
The number of Driving Licences (DLs) and Conductor Licences (CLs) issued by the eight 
DTOs district-wise during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24 as shown in Table-4.34. 
Table–4.34: No. of DLs and CLs Issued district-wise during 2019-20 to 2023-24 
Name of the DTOs No. of DL issued No. of CL issued 
Aizawl 43,151 385 
Lunglei 6,599 10 
Siaha 3,224 03 
Champhai 6,906 04 
Kolasib 3,279 02 
Serchhip 5,263 02 
Lawngtlai 2,866 01 
Mamit 2,389 00 
Total 73,677 407 
Source: Sarathi database 
The number of DL and CL issued during 2019-20 to 2023-24 showed no regular trend but 
rather a fluctuating trajectory. There was no excess issue of CL during the audit period. 
An analysis of the ‘Sarathi’ data dump during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24, revealed that 
out of 67,994 applicants who applied for the test, 48,744 applicants appeared for it, but the 
number of DLs issued were 73,677, which was higher than number of DL applicants. The 
details of year wise DL applicants and issuance is shown in Table-4.35. 
 
 
 

167
Chapter-IV:  Revenue Sector
Chapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
167 
 
Table-4.35: Details of DLs issued year-wise during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24 
Year No. of DL 
applicants 
No. of DL 
issued 
No. of DL applicants who 
appeared for the test 
No. of DL issued in 
excess 
2019-20 02 12,798 833 11,965 
2020-21 00 10,496 813 9,683 
2021-22 15,987 14,014 11,697 2,317 
2022-23 29,946 21,792 21,096 696 
2023-24 22,059 14,577 14,305 272 
Total 67,994 73,677 48,744 24,933 
Source: Sarathi database 
The sampled DTOs showed that out of 46,975 applicants registering for the test, 34,696 
applicants appeared for the test. Further scrutiny revealed that the DTOs issued 50,803 DLs 
which was higher than the number of applicants who passed the test by 16,107 as shown in 
Table-4.36. 
Table-4.36: Details of DLs issued during the period from 2019-20 to  
2023-24 in the sampled DTOs 
District No. of DL 
applicants 
No. of DL applicants 
who appeared for 
the test 
No. of DL issued No. of DL issued 
in excess 
Aizawl 42,185 31,497 43,151 11,654 
Mamit 1,679 1,079 2,389 1,310 
Serchhip 3,111 2,120 5,263 3,143 
Total 46,975 34,696 50,803 16,107 
Source: Sarathi database 
In the absence of verifiable logs, system diagnostics or a reconciliation of duplicate licences 
or licences issued to same person across different categories of vehicles, the matter needs to 
be looked into as there was a risk of procedural lapses or oversight shortcomings. 
The Government stated (30 May 2025) that the excess issue of Driving Licence was due to 
back-log of non-Sarathi version Driving Licences, migration of Driving Licences from other 
Licencing authorities and Driving Licences issued by DTO under Rule 11100 of the Mizoram 
Motor Vehicles Rules, 1995. 
The Government’s reply is not acceptable as no data about clearance of backlog was 
provided to audit. Further, the excess related to application and issue of Driving’s Licence 
continued to occur even after the introduction (01 November 2022) of ‘Sarathi 4.0’. 
4.10.9 Driving Licences issued to underage persons 
As per Section 4 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, no person under the age of 18 years shall 
drive a motor vehicle in any public place. No LL or DL shall be issued to any person to drive 
 
100  Rule 11 of Mizoram Motor Vehicle Rules, 1995 states that Licensing Authority may grant a Driving License 
to any fit person residing within his jurisdiction at the time of application, who satisfies him that he is of 
good character, a competent driver and not disqualified for the time being from holding or obtaining a 
license. Similarly, the Licensing Authority may renew any license once granted anywhere in India 
 

168
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
168 
a vehicle of the class to which he has made an application unless he is eligible to drive that 
class of vehicle. To drive a motor vehicle other than a transport vehicle, the person must have 
completed 18 years of age and to drive a transport vehicle a person must have completed 
20 years of age. 
Analysis of ‘Sarathi’ data dump for the period 2019-20 to 2023-24 revealed that the DTO, 
Aizawl, Mamit and Serchhip issued 52 DLs to underage applicants as shown in Table-4.37. 
Table-4.37: DLs issued to underage applicants in sampled DTOs 
District DL issued to 
under 18 years 
DL issued to underage for 
transport vehicle for  
18 – 20 years 
DL issued during the period 
between 
Aizawl 03 32 03 June 2019 and  
18 January 2023 
Mamit 00 09 26 April 2019 and 08 July 2022 
Serchhip 00 08 03 April 2019 and  
08 August 2022 
Total 03 49 - 
*MMV/HMV=Medium Motor Vehicle/ Heavy Motor Vehicle 
Source: Sarathi database. 
The sample DTOs stated (February- April 2025) that there was a slight problem with the 
system in calculation of days at certain stages and the occurrence of such errors was 
supposed to be checked by the Sarathi software, based on which, the DTO approved the 
applications. It was further stated that with the introduction of ‘Sarathi 4.0’ such error does 
not seem to happen again. 
The replies are not tenable due to the following reasons: 
(i) The licensing authority is required to verify the age of applicants through supporting 
documents prior to approval of any DL. Sole reliance on the ‘Sarathi’ system, without 
manual verification of age proof, reflects a lapse in fulfilling the statutory 
responsibility under the Motor Vehicles Act. 
(ii) The reply lacks documentary evidence such as system error logs, bug reports, or audit 
trails to substantiate the claim of “system or data error.” In the absence of verifiable 
documentation, this remains an unproven assertion. 
(iii) DTOs Mamit and Serchhip claimed that the system automatically blocks underage 
applicants. However, audit found that 17 such licences were issued by these two offices 
alone. This contradiction suggests either a breakdown of system safeguards or manual 
override, neither of which was acknowledged. 
(iv) The statement that the issue “does not seem to happen again” with ‘Sarathi 4.0’ is not 
supported by any validation report. Further, there is no indication that a retrospective 
review was undertaken to identify and rectify earlier instances of such violations. 
The issue indicates deficiencies in internal controls and oversight within the licensing 
process. The deficiencies in system's design and lack of DTOs’ intervention resulted in the 
issuance of licences to ineligible applicants. The matter warrants a comprehensive review of 
all licences issued near the age eligibility cut-off and necessary corrective action, including 
revocation where appropriate.  

169
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
169 
The State Government stated (30 May 2025) that with the introduction of ‘Sarathi 4.0’ 
versions with effect from 01 November 2022 these kinds of issues are fully checked and 
monitored by the system and there is no chance of repeating this kind of issue in the future. 
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable as one driving licence was issued 
(18 January 2023) to a 19-year-old applicant under DTO, Aizawl to drive Transport 
Vehicle-Medium/ Heavy Motor Vehicle (Goods and Passenger). So, even after the 
introduction of ‘Sarathi 4.0’, issue of driving licence to under-age person remained 
unchecked. 
Recommendations: The Department should streamline the window for application of DL 
to ensure that no underage person can apply for DL through the portal. 
4.10.10 Inadequate Driving Test facilities 
As per Section 15(3) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1989 the applicant shall satisfy the person 
conducting the test that he/ she is competent to drive and hones skill for examination of all 
the required parameter of driving test as per the rule hereunder. 
Audit observed that in Aizawl the driving test was conducted on an average of 40 applicants 
per day and 15 applicants per hour. In Serchhip and Mamit, driving test was conducted 
depending on the availability of the applicants after one month from the date of issue of 
learner’s licence. Site inspection of the driving test area in Aizawl, Mamit and Serchhip was 
conducted with DTOs staff aimed at evaluating the functionality of driving tests. 
Joint Physical Inspection (07 August to 27August 2024) revealed several deficiencies in the 
infrastructure and processes related to driving tests across the districts. In Aizawl, driving 
tests were conducted within the Motor Vehicle Inspector's (MVI) vicinity, while in Mamit 
and Serchhip, they were conducted on public roads. None of these locations were specifically 
designated for testing, which posed significant safety risks and caused inefficiencies in 
administering the tests. Additionally, there were no proper barricades to separate the testing 
areas from other activities, further compromising safety for both applicants and others in the 
vicinity. 
There was no Automated Driving Test Track in Mizoram. As for the Automated Fitness 
Management System, construction of Inspection and Certification Centre was ongoing at the 
cost of ₹ 15.50 crore and due to Cyclone “Remal”, works were delayed and the proposal for 
the extension of completion date had been submitted to Central Institute of Road Transport 
(CIRT), Pune. 
4.10.11 Non-maintenance of records on issue of DL and Registration Certificate 
As per Department of Personnel and Administrative Reform, Government of Mizoram 
(Good Governance Cell)’s notification issued (18 November 2015) under Section 4 of the 
Mizoram Right to Public Services Act, 2015, DL with smart card and registration certificate 
with smart card are to be issued to the applicants within 15 days from the date of application.  
Test check of records of the DTOs of Serchhip and Mamit revealed that the office did not 
maintain any record/ register to record the details of receipt and issue of DLs/ vehicle 
registration certificates by the office. While DTO Aizawl maintain register for issue of DL 
and RC. DTO, Serchhip stated that a register is being maintain from 10 October 2024. The 

170
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
170 
DTO, Mamit stated (12 November 2024) that in future, a register would be maintained for 
this purpose. 
In the absence of historical tracking records, audit was unable to verify whether DLs and 
RCs were issued within the mandated 15-day period or delivered to the rightful applicants. 
This lack of documentation undermines both transparency and accountability and weakens 
internal controls necessary for monitoring compliance with service delivery norms. 
The findings point to systemic deficiencies in record-keeping and oversight, potentially 
resulting in delays and non-compliance with citizen service timelines as prescribed under 
the Right to Public Services framework. 
Recommendation: The DTOs may maintain records/ registers of list of applicants, date of 
dispatch of driving licences/ vehicle registration certificates for printing and the date of 
receipt of smart cards/ DLs/ registration certificates, to track their movement and to 
prevent loss or issue to the wrong persons. 
4.10.12 Insufficient equipment and apparatus in Driving Schools 
As per Rule 24(3) of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, the District Transport Officer 
(DTO) functions as the licensing authority for the establishment and renewal of Driving 
School licences. It is the responsibility of the DTO to ensure that applicants comply with 
prescribed norms, which include having the required infrastructure and equipment such as: 
 Adequate facilities for lectures and model demonstrations; 
 Instructional vehicles (excluding motorcycles) fitted with dual control to allow 
instructors to intervene, when necessary; 
 A road plan board with model signals and traffic charts; 
 An engine gearbox; 
 A puncture kit (tyre lever, wheel brace, jack, and tyre pressure gauge); 
 A driving instruction manual; 
 A collection of books on automotive mechanisms, road safety, and motor vehicle laws; 
and 
 A fully equipped first-aid box. 
In addition to scrutinising applications, the Department is responsible for conducting 
inspections prior to licensing, periodically monitoring compliance with infrastructure and 
safety standards, and cancelling licences in case of continued non-compliance. 
Audit observed that out of the three sampled DTOs, there was no Driving School under the 
jurisdiction of DTO, Mamit. Under DTO, Aizawl and DTO, Serchhip, there were 12 and 
01 driving school, respectively. Audit selected two driving schools (Siakeng and Aizawl 
Driving Schools) among twelve driving school under DTO Aizawl and the only available 
school, Merilyn Driving School, under DTO Serchhip. Audit observed that there were 
shortage of apparatus and equipment required as shown in Table-4.38. 
 
 

171
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
171 
Table-4.38: Availability of required Apparatus and Equipment in three driving schools 
Sl. 
No. 
Items to be checked in a 
Driving School 
Siakeng Driving School, 
Dinthar, Aizawl 
Aizawl Driving 
School, Aizawl 
Merilyn driving School, 
Serchhip, Mizoram 
1. A blackboard Yes Yes Yes 
2. A road plan board with necessary 
model signals and charts, No No No 
3. Traffic signs chart Yes Yes Yes 
4. Chart on automatic signals and 
signals given by traffic 
controllers where there are no 
automatic signals 
No No No 
5. A service chart depicting a 
detailed view of all the 
components of a motor vehicle 
No No No 
6. Engine gear box, 48 [brake shoe 
and drums] (except where the 
applicant desires to impart 
instruction in the driving of 
motorcycles only) 
No No No 
7. Puncture kit with tyre lever, 
wheel brace, jack and tyre 
pressure gauge 
yes No Yes 
8. Spanners (a set each of fix 
spanners, box spanners, pliers, 
screw drivers, screw spanners, 
and hammer) 
Yes No Yes 
9. Driving instructions manual Yes No Yes 
10. Benches and tables for trainees 
and work bench Yes Yes Yes 
11. Collection of books on 
automobile mechanism, driving, 
road safety, traffic regulations, 
laws relating to motor vehicles 
and related subjects 
No No Yes 
12. A fully equipped first-aid box for 
use in emergency at the premises Yes No No 
Further, out of four instruction vehicles in Aizawl, two vehicles at Aizawl Driving School 
were not fitted with dual control facility while only one out of the two instruction vehicles 
at Siakeng Driving School were fitted with dual control facility, putting the safety of the 
learners at risk. 
Audit examination of three driving schools under DTOs Aizawl and Serchhip revealed 
significant deficiencies in mandatory infrastructure and equipment required under Rule 
24(3) of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989. None of the schools assessed maintained 
the full set of prescribed instructional tools or vehicles with dual control systems, raising 
concerns over both regulatory compliance and learner safety. Due to inadequate 
infrastructure the quality in imparting driving skill and driving knowledge could have been 
compromised.  The deficiencies noticed in the driving Schools suggest the need for regular 
inspection of all licensed driving schools by the respective DTOs to ensure adherence to 
prescribed standards.  
The Government stated (30 May 2025) that Driving Schools would be re-inspected and those 
which are not in compliance with the rules will be given a chance to update their equipment 
and apparatus as per rules failing which the Driving School licence will be cancelled. 

172
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
172 
Recommendation: The Department should institutionalise a system of annual mandatory 
inspections of all licensed driving schools by the respective DTOs, with a standardised 
compliance checklist. Renewal of licences should be strictly conditional upon the 
availability and functionality of prescribed apparatus and infrastructure, and non-
compliant institutions should be issued time-bound improvement notices, non-compliance 
of which licences must be revoked. 
 
4.10.13 Vehicle Registration 
DTOs act as ‘Registering Authorities’ under Rule 53 of Mizoram Motor Vehicle Rules, 1995. 
They are responsible for registering Motor Vehicles including cars, motorcycles, commercial 
vehicles, etc. DTOs ensure that vehicles comply with safety emission standards before 
registration. A "transport vehicle" generally refers to any vehicle used to carry people or 
goods from one place to another. "Non-transport" refers to vehicles not primarily used for 
carrying passengers or goods for commercial purposes. The number of transport and 
non-transport vehicles registered in the eight DTOs of Mizoram during the period from 
2019-20 to 2023-24 as shown in Table-4.39. 
Table-4.39: Transport and Non-Transport 
Year Transport Non-Transport Total 
2019-20 4,123 21,546 25,669 
2020-21 3,487 28,051 31,538 
2021-22 3,805 18,333 22,138 
2022-23 6,967 42,268 49,235 
2023-24 3,857 26,405 30,262 
Grand Total 22,239 1,36,603 1,58,842 
Source: VAHAN Dashboard 
4.10.14 Vehicle without registration 
As per Section 43 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 notwithstanding anything contained in 
Section 40, the owner of a motor vehicle may apply to any registering authority or other 
prescribed authority to have the vehicle temporarily registered in the prescribed manner and 
to be issued in the prescribed manner of a temporary certificate of registration and a 
temporary registration mark. A registration made under this section shall be valid only for a 
period not exceeding one month and shall not be renewable. 
Audit analysis of V AHAN data dump relating to the period 2019-20 to 2023-24 revealed that 
out of total 984 temporary registrations of vehicles under the DTOs, Aizawl, Mamit and 
Serchhip, 26 vehicles under DTO Aizawl were not found to have valid registrations in the 
V AHAN database after their temporary registration expired, indicating a potential case of 
non-compliance. The details are shown in Table-4.40. 
  
Audit Objective-2: Whether DTOs implemented the regulation and control over 
registration and use of vehicles through registration, issuing 
permits and fitness certificates as per the Act/ Rules 

173
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
173 
Table–4.40: Temporary Registration of Vehicles for the period 2019-20 to 2023-24 
Sl. No. District Temporary Registration Issued Vehicles without Registration  
1. Aizawl 973 26 
2. Mamit 02 Nil 
3. Serchhip 09 Nil  
Total 984 26 
Source: VAHAN database 
As a result, it could not be ascertained that these 26 vehicles, whose temporary registrations 
expired have been plying without valid registration. 
DTO Aizawl admitted (3 February 2025) that no system was in place to track the conversion 
of temporary to permanent registration. The possibility that these vehicles may have been 
plying without valid registration underscores the need for a tracking mechanism and periodic 
reconciliation to ensure compliance with Section 43 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. The 
DTO, Aizawl, replied (3 February 2025) that the office did not pursue whether the vehicles 
have been registered or not after the temporary registrations were issued. 
The Government stated (30 May 2025) that Temporary Registration are generally issued to 
vehicles which are sold and supposed to be registered outside the State from which it is being 
sold for the purpose of movement of the vehicle from one state to another for registration 
purpose. It was further stated that registration of temporary vehicles is the responsibility of 
the vehicle owner and non-registration of Temporary Registered Vehicles seems to be 
negligence on the part of the vehicle owner. 
The reply, however, is not acceptable as the DTO, being the issuing Authority should also 
monitor that all vehicles with temporary registrations finally obtain valid registrations. 
Recommendation: There must be a centralised system in VAHAN portal to monitor that 
vehicles with temporary registration are registered finally. 
4.10.15 Issue of Permit 
As per Section 2(31) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, “permit” means a permit issued by a 
State or Regional Transport Authority or an authority prescribed in this behalf under this Act 
authorising the use of a motor vehicle as a transport vehicle. Further, as per Section 2(47) of 
the Act, “Transport vehicle” means a public service vehicle, a goods carriage, an educational 
institution bus or a private service vehicle. The Director of Transport, who is the Secretary 
of the State Transport Authority, is empowered to grant All India Permits to tourist vehicles 
and Interstate Permits to stage carriages and goods carriages as per the terms of the Interstate 
agreements. 
The year-wise number of permits granted by DTOs in the State during the last five years 
from 2019-20 to 2023-24 as shown in Table-4.41. 
Table-4.41: Issue of Permit 
Year Issue of new Permit 
2019-20 3,769 
2020-21 3,882 
2021-22 4,293 
2022-23 4,850 
2023-24 6,621 
Total 23,415 
Source: VAHAN Dashboard 

174
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
174 
The issues of non-realisation of Permit fees for the vehicles have been discussed at 
Paragraph 4.10.17. 
4.10.16 Expired Fitness Certificates 
As per Section 56 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 a transport vehicle shall not be deemed 
to be validly registered, unless it carries a certificate of fitness issued by prescribed authority. 
Rule 62 of CMV Rules, 1989 read with a Gazette Notification (November 2018) that the 
renewal of certificate of fitness in respect of transport vehicles shall be two years for vehicles 
up to eight years old and one year for vehicles older than eight years. Provided further that 
no fitness certification shall be required at the time of registration for new transport vehicles 
sold as fully built vehicles and such vehicles shall be deemed to be having certificate of 
fitness for a period of two years from the date of registration. 
Rule 81 of CMVR, 1989 read with a Gazette Notification (December 2016) provided that 
the fees which would be charged for conducting fitness and grant and renewal of fitness 
certificate for motor vehicles. Further an additional fee of fifty rupees for each day of delay 
after the expiry of fitness certificate shall be levied. The rules of renewal and fines is shown 
in Table-4.42. 
Table–4.42: MoRTH Fees and User Charges 
SI. 
No. Purpose Amount (₹) 
1. Conducting test of a vehicle for grant and renewal of certificate of fitness: 
 
    (i) Motorcycle 200.00 
    (ii) Three-wheeled or light motor vehicle or quadricycle 400.00 
    (iii) Medium or heavy motor vehicle 600.00 
    (iv) Others 200.00 
2. Grant or renewal of certificate of fitness for motor vehicle 200.00 
3. Additional fee for each day of delay after expiry of fitness certificate 50.00 
Data analysis of fitness table revealed that the fitness validity of 24,397 vehicles had expired. 
As such, an amount of ₹ 1.64 crore for conducting test for fitness and grant or renewal of 
Fitness Certificates of motor vehicles and ₹ 74.07 crore on account of Additional fee for each 
day of delay after the expiry of fitness certificates need to be realised from the vehicle 
owners. Detailed of calculation for fitness fee and additional fee for active vehicles registered 
in the state w.e.f. 01 April 2019 to 31 March 2024, as shown in Table-4.43. 
Table–4.43: Details of fitness fee and additional fee realisable 
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars No. of 
Defaulters Fitness Fee Due Additional 
Fitness Fee Due Total due 
Transport Department, Mizoram 24,397 1.64 74.07 75.71 
DTO, Aizawl 15,047 0.98 41.00 41.98 
DTO, Serchhip 1,094 0.08 3.54 3.62 
DTO, Mamit 759 0.05 2.65 2.70 
Total of Sampled DTOs 16,900 1.11 47.19 48.30 
Source: Vahan database 
It can be seen from the above table that ₹ 48.30 crore (including penalties) was due from 
16,900 vehicles in the sampled DTOs. 

175
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
175 
The DTOs stated that checking for non-renewal of Fitness Certificates for transport vehicles 
is carried out by the Enforcement Wing throughout the year but copies of fitness certificates 
were not maintained. Further, fitness test is conducted depending on the availability of the 
applicants. 
Further analysis of V AHAN data dump revealed that as of 31 March 2024 with regards to 
the fitness of Ambulances, out of 22 Ambulances in the State, the fitness certificate of 
17 Ambulances was valid, it was expired in case of four Ambulances and status of one 
Ambulance was not on record. As for 286 Educational Institutional Buses (EIB) in the State, 
the fitness certificate of 84 EIBs were valid while those of 136 EIBs expired, and the fitness 
status of 66 EIB was not on record. 
Plying of Ambulances and EIBs without fitness certificates poses great risk to the safety of 
patients and students and reflects the lack of enforcement of the MV Act on the part of the 
Transport Department. 
Due to the absence of a mechanism to track such records, audit could not cross-check and 
verify the number of vehicles with expired fitness certificates that were plying on the road, 
and whether these had been compounded 101 or their drivers fined by the enforcement 
authority.  
DTO, Aizawl, while agreeing to the Audit observation, stated (11 November 2024) that in 
future register/ files will be maintained, highlighting the date of compounding, vehicle 
registration number, date of expiry of fitness certificates, penalty/ fine imposed and for 
keeping track of repeated offenders as no other measure other than enforcement duty 
throughout the year is undertaken for checking fitness certificates of vehicles. It was further 
added that copies of fitness certificates will be kept in the office. 
DTO, Mamit while agreeing to the Audit observation, stated (12 November 2024) that due 
to the absence of a toll gate, details of the number of vehicles with expired fitness certificates 
plying on the road, along with details of compounding and fines imposed by the enforcement 
authority, could not be maintained. However, DTO, Mamit assured that a proper 
record-keeping mechanism would be implemented to document the cases of offenses and the 
actions taken. It also added copies of fitness certificates will be maintained in the office. The 
reply of the DTO, Mamit with regards to absence of Toll Gate is, however, not acceptable as 
toll gate is not a mechanism for checking/ Controlling of vehicles plying with expired fitness 
certificates. 
DTO, Serchhip, while agreeing to the Audit observation, stated (21 November 2024) that in 
future register/ files will be maintained and possible measures will be taken for checking of 
vehicles plying with expired fitness certificates. It was also stated that copies of fitness 
certificates will be maintained in the office. 
Regarding Ambulance and Educational Institutional Buses without fitness certificates, the 
Department stated (June 2025) that their level best efforts to enforce MV Acts/ Rules in letter 
 
101 compounded means that an offense has been settled by paying a prescribed fine instead of facing further 
legal proceedings 
 

176
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
176 
and spirit was tried but could not be achieved due to lack of enforcement staff and assured 
to issue Demand Notice to all defaulters to update their documents.  
 In the absence of a system to monitor, flag, and act upon expired fitness cases, the possibility 
of such vehicles remains in operation could not be rule out which can cause significant road 
safety risks. The issue is further compounded in the case of ambulances and educational 
institution buses, where non-renewal of fitness certificates directly endangers vulnerable 
populations such as patients and schoolchildren. 
The Government while accepting the above observation stated (30 May2025) that 
Demand Notice was issued to all the defaulters at regular intervals. However, audit 
could not ascertain the fact whether DTO collected any revenue on issue of fitness 
certificate as stated by Government due to non-availability of records/ documents 
against the Demand Notices. 
Audit noticed that 26 vehicles in the sampled DTOs were not found to have valid 
registrations in the V AHAN database after their temporary registration expired. Data analysis 
of fitness data revealed that the fitness validity of 24,397 vehicles had expired and an amount 
of ₹ 1.64 crore for conducting test for fitness and grant or renewal of fitness certificates and 
₹ 74.07 crore on account of Additional fee for each day of delay after the expiry of fitness 
certificates was realisable. 
Recommendation: The Department should ensure maintenance of records/ registers 
regarding action taken by all District transport officers against fitness defaulters and 
strictly clamp down on plying of vehicles with expired fitness certificates. 
 
4.10.17 Arrears of tax revenue from different types of vehicles 
Section 3 of the Mizoram Passengers and Goods (Taxation) Act, 2005 provides that there 
shall be levied, charged and paid to the Government a tax on all fares in respect of all 
passengers and goods carried in a taxable vehicle. 
Section 6 of the Act provides that if any owner fails, without reasonable cause, to submit any 
returns or pay the tax due according to such return within 15 days of the due date, the 
assessing authority may direct that such owner shall, by way of penalty, pay in addition to 
the amount of tax payable by him. 
Lump Sum Tax rates specified against each class of taxable vehicle vide Government of 
Mizoram Notification No. G.13010/1/2014-TRP dated 23 November 2015 as shown in 
Table-4.44.  
 
 
 
Audit Objective-3: To assess whether DTOs efficiently assessed, levied, collected and 
remitted revenue (Motor vehicle taxes, fines, penalties, cess, etc., 
as per Act/ Rules) and took effective action on arrears 

177
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
177 
Table-4.44: Tax rates of each class of taxable vehicle 
Sl. 
No. 
Class of Vehicles Annual Tax 
(in ₹) 
1. Authorized to carry 1 MT or less 1,400.00 
2. Authorised to carry exceeding 1 MT but not exceeding 4 MT 2,500.00 
3. Authorised to carry exceeding 4 MT but not exceeding 9 MT 3,000.00 
4. Authorised to carry exceeding 9 MT  3,000.00 
+300 for every addl. 1 MT 
5. Passenger carrying capacity of 3 passenger or less 450.00 
6. Passenger carrying capacity more than 3 passenger but not 
exceeding 6 persons 
650.00 
7. Passenger carrying capacity more than 6 passenger but not 
exceeding 12 persons 
950.00 
8. Passenger carrying capacity more than 12 passenger but not 
exceeding 20 persons 
1,500.00 
9. Passenger carrying capacity more than 20 passenger but not 
exceeding 30 persons 
2,000.00 
10. Passenger carrying capacity more than 30 persons 2,000.00 
+50.00 for every addl. one 
seat 
As per power conferred by Section 53 of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988, the Director, Transport 
Department issued circular (8 January 2020) to all the DTOs to issue Demand Notices to the 
owners of vehicles without valid registration including vehicles registered under 
Government Departments/ Corporations/ Paramilitary/ Autonomous District Councils which 
have completed 15 years to update documents of their vehicles register under Transport 
Department, Government of Mizoram. 
As per Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, Government of India Notification No. 
RT-11036/09/2023-MVL dated 02 January 2023, cases of vehicles related to theft, pending 
tax arrears, Government decision, vehicle destroyed, loan defaulter, vehicle confiscated, 
police case, court case and others should be flagged as “NOT TO BE TRANSACTED” on 
Vahan as blacklisting causes much distress to vehicles owners, especially in case of minor 
offences or wrongful blacklisting. 
(A) Arrears from Blacklisted Tax Defaulters 
Scrutiny of VAHAN Portal revealed substantial outstanding tax arrears, including fines, in 
the three sampled DTOs.  
(i) Tax arrears from blacklisted vehicles  
In the entire State, the total number of vehicles under blacklisted category were 1,101 during 
the period 2019-20 to 2023-24, with total tax arrears of ₹ 63.50 lakh and fine/ penalty of 
₹ 16.99 lakh involving total arrears of ₹ 80.49 lakh as shown in Table-4.45.  
Table-4.45102: Blacklisted Tax Defaulters for the period 2019-20 to 2023-24 
District 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Tax Arrear 
(₹ in lakh) 
Fine/ Penalty 
(₹ in lakh) 
Total 
(₹ in lakh) 
Aizawl 80 93 173 317 306 56.42 14.97 71.38 
Lunglei 00 00 02 12 17 0.81 0.16 0.97 
Siaha 00 00 01 05 02 0.59 0.08 0.67 
Champhai 00 00 01 07 04 0.57 0.17 0.74 
 
102  Table-4.45 is inclusive of Table-4.48 

178
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
178 
District 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Tax Arrear 
(₹ in lakh) 
Fine/ Penalty 
(₹ in lakh) 
Total 
(₹ in lakh) 
Kolasib 03 02 02 10 25 4.11 1.46 5.57 
Serchhip 00 00 02 14 08 0.48 0.05 0.53 
Lawngtlai 00 00 01 01 08 0.42 0.10 0.52 
Mamit 00 01 01 02 01 0.10 0.01 0.11 
Total 83 96 183 368 371 63.50 17 80.49 
Source: MIS Report (VAHAN) 
In the sample DTOs, the total number of vehicles under blacklisted category were 998 
(90.64 per cent of total blacklisted vehicles) during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24, with total 
tax arrears of ₹ 56.99 lakh and fine/ penalty of ₹ 15.03 lakh involving total arrears of 
₹ 72.02 lakh as shown in the following Table-4.46. 
Table-4.46: Blacklisted Tax Defaulters 
District Tax Type No. of 
defaulters 
Tax Arrear 
(in lakh) 
Fine/ Penalty 
(in lakh) 
Total 
(in lakh) 
All district Add. MV 01 0.03 NA 0.03 
Goods Tax 62 3.68 0.48 4.16 
MV 1,005 59.21 16.33 75.54 
Passenger Tax 33 0.58 0.18 0.76 
Total  1,101 63.50 16.99 80.49 
Sample DTO 
Aizawl Add. MV 01 0.03 NA 0.03 
Goods Tax 46 2.38 0.32 2.70 
MV 901 53.65 14.56 68.21 
Passenger Tax 21 0.36 0.09 0.45 
Sub-Total 969 56.42 14.97 71.38 
Mamit MV 04 0.08 0.00 0.08 
Passenger Tax 01 0.02 0.01 0.03 
Sub-Total 05 0.10 0.01 0.11 
Serchhip MV 20 0.43 0.04 0.47 
Passenger Tax 04 0.04 0.01 0.05 
Sub-Total 24 0.48 0.05 0.53 
Grand-Total 998 57.00 15.03 72.02 
Source: MIS Report (VAHAN) 
Table-4.47: Break-up of Tax details: 
Tax Type No. of Defaulters Tax Arrears  
(₹ in lakh) 
Fine/Penalty 
 (₹ in lakh) 
Total  
(₹ in lakh) 
Motor Vehicle Tax (MV) 1,005 59.21 16.33 75.54 
Goods Tax 62 3.68 0.48 4.16 
Passenger Tax 33 0.58 0.18 0.76 
Additional MV Tax 1 0.03 NA 0.03 
Audit analysis of blacklisted vehicle tax data for 2019-20 to 2023-24 revealed that tax arrears 
amounting to ₹ 80.49 lakh remained outstanding across 1,101 vehicles. A substantial 
proportion of these arrears, ₹ 71.38 lakh (88.68 per cent), originated from a single DTO 
(Aizawl), while 90.64 per  cent of all blacklisted vehicles were concentrated in just three 
sampled DTOs. The data further revealed that Motor Vehicle Tax alone accounted for 
₹ 75.54 lakh (93.85 per cent) of the total dues. 
The high concentration of arrears in one DTO, combined with the overwhelming share of 
MV tax defaults, indicates inadequate enforcement, weak recovery mechanisms, and poor 
monitoring of blacklisted vehicles at the DTO level, particularly in Aizawl. These 

179
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
179 
deficiencies in tax administration have revenue implications and reflect lapses in compliance 
enforcement under the Motor Vehicles Act. 
(ii) Non-realisation of Permit fee from black listed vehicles 
Further, in the State, the total number of blacklisted vehicles whose Permit Fees had not been 
realised were 170 during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24, with total tax arrears of ₹ 25.01 lakh 
and fine/ penalty of ₹ 8.62 lakh involving total arrears of ₹ 33.63 lakh. The DTO arrear wise 
is shown in Table-4.48.  
Table-4.48: Non-realisation of Permit Fee 
(₹ in lakh) 
District 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Tax 
Arrear 
Fine/ 
Penalty 
Total 
Aizawl 19 120 15 08 04 24.51 8.43 32.94 
Kolasib 00 03 00 00 00 0.40 0.15 0.55 
Serchhip 00 00 01 00 00 0.10 0.04 0.14 
Total 19 123 16 08 04 25.01 8.62 33.63 
Source: MIS Report (VAHAN) 
It can be seen from the above table that out of the three DTOs under which permit fees of 
blacklisted vehicles were due, two DTOs are from test checked DTOs under which permit 
fees of ₹ 33.08 lakh from 167 blacklisted vehicles were due. 
Conclusion: 
The absence of a dedicated monitoring and recovery mechanism appears to have contributed 
to the accumulation of arrears. Although blacklisting is a valid enforcement tool, its 
unstructured application without supporting follow-up action has not yielded effective 
recovery. The divergence between the Central Government's advisory to limit blacklisting 
for minor violations and the State’s circular mandating it for all long-pending defaults 
suggests a need for policy alignment. A focused effort to review recoverability of dues and 
strengthen enforcement mechanisms is necessary to protect revenue interests. 
Recommendation: The Transport Department should establish a structured mechanism 
to expedite the resolution of blacklisted cases by facilitating communication between 
vehicle owners and the respective authorities. 
(B)  Arrears from Non-Blacklisted Tax Defaulters 
(i) Tax arrears from non-blacklisted vehicles  
In the entire State, the total number of tax defaulter vehicles under non-blacklisted category 
were 13,155 during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24, with total tax arrears of ₹ 8.40 crore and 
fine/ penalty of ₹ 2.39 crore involving total arrears of ₹ 10.79 crore as shown in the following 
Table-4.49. 
 
 
 

180
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
180 
Table-4.49103: Non-Blacklisted Tax Defaulter for the period 2019-20 to 2023-24 
(₹ in lakh) 
District 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Tax 
Arrear 
Fine/ 
Penalty 
Total 
Aizawl 517 603 581 1085 3966 378.14 91.81 469.94 
Lunglei 104 142 150 290 648 88.83 27.98 116.81 
Siaha 52 61 109 118 258 40.81 12.87 53.68 
Champhai 110 161 247 251 587 104.77 35.12 139.90 
Kolasib 143 157 127 219 636 117.96 41.70 159.66 
Serchhip 48 72 79 150 356 34.15 7.39 41.54 
Lawngtlai 42 74 117 151 300 45.64 14.49 60.13 
Mamit 38 70 41 74 221 30.04 7.87 37.91 
Total 1,054 1,340 1,451 2,338 6,972 840.33 239.23 1,079.57 
Source: MIS Report (VAHAN) 
In the sample DTOs, the total number of vehicles under non-blacklisted category were 7,901 
(60.06 per cent of the total non-blacklisted vehicles) during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24, 
with total tax arrears of ₹ 4.42 crore and fines/penalties of ₹ 1.07 crore involving total arrears 
of ₹ 5.49 crore as shown in Table-4.50. 
Table-4.50: Non-Blacklisted Tax Defaulters 
(₹ in lakh) 
District Tax Type No. of 
defaulters Tax Arrear Fine/ Penalty Total 
All districts 
Add. MV 14 0.36 0.00 0.36 
Goods Tax 2,490 114.34 15.10 129.44 
MV 8,659 708.28 213.69 921.97 
Passenger Tax 1,992 17.35 10.44 27.79 
Total 13,155 840.33 239.23 1,079.57 
Sample DTO 
Aizawl 
Goods Tax 1,436 53.98 5.86 59.84 
MV 4,118 316.14 82.55 398.68 
Passenger Tax 1,198 8.02 3.40 11.42 
Sub-Total 6,752 378.14 91.81 469.94 
Mamit 
Add. MV 02 0.05 NA 0.05 
Goods Tax 85 3.24 0.38 3.62 
MV 306 26.16 7.27 33.43 
Passenger Tax 51 0.58 0.22 0.80 
Sub-Total 444 30.04 7.87 37.90 
Serchhip 
Goods Tax 135 4.86 0.52 5.38 
MV 477 28.50 6.55 35.05 
Passenger Tax 93 0.79 0.32 1.11 
Sub-Total 705 34.15 7.39 41.54 
Grand-Total 7,901 442.32 107.07 549.39 
Source: MIS Report (VAHAN) 
It can be seen from the above table that in Aizawl DTO an amount of ₹ 4.70 crore was 
outstanding out of the total outstanding of ₹ 10.80 crore which was 43.53 per cent of the 
total outstanding.  
Audit of tax arrears from non-blacklisted vehicles in Mizoram revealed that ₹10.79 crore 
remained unpaid across 13,155 vehicles during 2019–20 to 2023–24. Surprisingly, these 
non-blacklisted vehicles accounted for more than 93 per cent of total arrears (when 
compared to ₹ 0.80 crore from blacklisted vehicles), pointing to weaknesses in the 
identification and penalisation process. The concentration of arrears in Aizawl DTO 
 
103 Table-4.49 is inclusive of Table-4.51 

181
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
181 
(₹ 4.70 crore, 43.5 per cent ) further underlines the need for targeted scrutiny and better 
enforcement in high-density districts. The fact that defaulters were not flagged despite 
substantial outstanding dues indicates lapses in tax administration and monitoring. 
(ii)  Non-realisation of Permit fee from non-blacklisted vehicles 
Further, in the State, there were 3287 non-blacklisted vehicles whose Permit Fee were not 
realised during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24, with total tax arrears of ₹ 278.95 lakh and 
fine/ penalty of ₹ 84.89 lakh involving total arrears of ₹ 363.84 lakh. The DTO-wise arrear 
is shown in Table-4.51. 
Table-4.51: Non-Realisation of Permit Fee (Not Blacklisted) 
(₹ in lakh) 
District 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Tax 
Arrear 
Fine/ 
Penalty 
Total 
Aizawl 117 455 106 229 439 110.12 29.91 140.04 
Lunglei 41 190 55 58 109 42.15 14.14 56.28 
Siaha 07 80 15 43 39 13.62 3.92 17.53 
Champhai 25 143 50 89 122 36.60 12.87 49.48 
Kolasib 01 151 88 76 141 46.76 16.46 63.22 
Serchhip 6 105 19 33 54 13.57 3.25 16.82 
Lawngtlai 02 14 06 02 38 3.38 0.74 4.12 
Mamit 06 59 09 28 37 12.75 3.59 16.34 
Total 205 1,197 348 558 979 278.95 84.89 363.84 
Source: MIS Report (VAHAN) 
The Transport Department did not implement effective monitoring and enforcement 
mechanisms, leading to tax arrears (including penalties) of ₹ 80.49 lakh from 
1,101 blacklisted vehicles and ₹ 10.80 crore from 13,155 non-blacklisted vehicles in the 
State. Further, permit fee (including penalties) of ₹ 33.63 lakh from 170 blacklisted vehicles 
and ₹ 3.63 crore from 3,287 non-blacklisted vehicles were also outstanding. The Department 
did not conduct periodic assessments to identify defaulters or issue recovery notices and thus 
did not deter chronic defaulters. The reliance on sporadic enforcement checks without a 
structured recovery plan has significantly impacted revenue collection and undermined tax 
compliance. 
The sampled DTOs replied that no assessment for yearly collection of taxes had been done. 
But the enforcement duty checks vehicles plying and uses it to impound the defaulters. 
However, this ad hoc approach has not translated into measurable recovery. The absence of 
annual tax collection assessments, real-time tracking, and a standard escalation protocol for 
defaulters has weakened revenue enforcement activities. 
The Government while accepting the Audit observation stated (30 May 2025) that during 
collection of 15 years one-time tax, the Department does not face much issue regarding 
arrears on tax revenues. With the change in the mode of payment of tax was change to five 
or 10 or 15 years with effect from 27 May 2019 and this resulted in increase of tax defaulters. 
The Department, with its limited resources is trying its level best to recover arrears of tax 
revenues by serving demand notices to the defaulters as well as organising regular 
enforcement drives. However, no reply was received on non-realisation of permit fee. 
The reply of the Government is not acceptable as the change of mode of one-time tax was 
applicable to the vehicles w.e.f. 27 May 2019 that means vehicles which were registered on 

182
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
182 
or after this date had paid a five-year one-time tax, i.e., upto 26 May 2024 which is beyond 
the audit coverage period and not included in the para for calculating tax arrears. 
Audit noticed non-realisation of tax and Permit fees from Blacklisted as well as 
Non-blacklisted vehicles . In absence of annual tax collection assessments, real-time 
tracking, and a standard escalation protocol for defaulters has weakened revenue 
enforcement activities. 
Recommendation: The Department should develop and deploy a rule-based auto-flagging 
system within the VAHAN database to trigger blacklisting or recovery action when arrears 
exceed defined thresholds or remain unpaid beyond specified timeframes.  
 
4.10.18 Enforcement activities 
Section 200 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 outlines the composition of certain offenses. It 
allows for the compounding (settlement) of specified offenses by designated officers or 
authorities, either before or after the institution of prosecution. The State Government can 
determine the amount to be paid for such compounding and any community service required. 
If an offender is in custody and the offense is compounded, they will be discharged, and no 
further proceedings will be taken. Further, Rule 21 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 
empowered the licensing authority to disqualify hold of driving licence in respect of 
25 offences. 
Audit observed significant deficiencies in the enforcement activities conducted by the 
District Transport Offices (DTOs) of Aizawl, Serchhip and Mamit. The sampled DTOs had 
no predefined enforcement targets. Furthermore, the DTOs lacked proper record-keeping 
mechanisms to track the nature of offenses, imposition and collection of spot fines and 
actions taken concerning vehicle detention, seizure, confiscation and disposal. The absence 
of these records severely undermines the transparency and effectiveness of enforcement 
efforts. Moreover, Duty register of Inspector of Motor Vehicles was not maintained by the 
Mamit and Serchhip DTOs. 
DTO, Aizawl replied (11 November 2024) that the office does not have the infrastructure 
and manpower to monitor daily movement of vehicles. DTO, Serchhip replied 
(21 November 2024) that the district has low traffic movement and hence, target-based 
enforcement activities are not required. Further, all the test checked DTOs replied that in 
future, the records related to enforcement activities will be maintain. 
Out of three sample DTOs, DTO, Aizawl suspended/ cancelled driving licence due to 
personal matter, drunken driving, etc. 
Audit found serious flaws in how the DTOs of Aizawl, Serchhip and Mamit enforce traffic 
rules under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. These offices do not set clear targets for 
Audit Objective-4: To assess whether enforcement activities were effectively 
conducted by DTOs to ensure compliance with the motor 
vehicles Acts/ Rules with adequate follow up to deter 
violations 

183
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
183 
enforcement based on traffic patterns, vehicle movement or past trends of offenses. Without 
proper records of fines, offenses and actions taken, their efforts lack transparency and the 
effectiveness of their efforts was doubtful. 
In the absence of enforcement targets, duty registers, offence logs, or monitoring of traffic 
patterns, the effectiveness of enforcement efforts remains unsubstantiated. As a result, the 
Department lacks the means to assess, deter, or systematically address traffic violations. To 
make roads safer and ensure better enforcement of traffic rules, these offices need to adopt 
a more organized and data-driven approach. Setting clear targets based on traffic data and 
keeping detailed records will help them manage traffic violations more effectively and 
improve road safety in their areas. 
The Director, Transport Department stated (21 June 2024) that there was shortage of 
manpower in the Department which hampered the proper functioning of the Department. He 
also stated that the Police Department had been delegated with the power to enforce 
transports rules, imposition of fines, etc. He also added that e-challan system has been 
implemented to impose fine/ collection of taxes under MV Act.  
The Government stated (30 May 2025) that in order to strengthen the staff position under 
the various DTOs, proposal was made by the Department to the State Government for 
recruitment of eight Motor Vehicle Inspectors, 10 Enforcement Inspectors, 10 Upper 
Division Clerks and 15 Group D staff. However, Government did not furnish the date when 
the proposal was submitted and no further information on action taken on the proposal had 
been received (June 2025). 
Recommendations: 
The Transport Department should develop and implement a District-wise Enforcement 
Action Plan, which includes: 
(i) Monthly enforcement targets based on local traffic density and historical offence 
data; 
(ii) Mandatory maintenance of offence registers, fine logs, vehicle seizure records and 
duty rosters; and  
(iii)  Integration of all field-level enforcement data with the e-challan system to ensure 
real-time monitoring and accountability. 
4.10.19 Functioning of Emission Testing Centres 
A Pollution Under Control (PUC) certificate is a mandatory document for all vehicles in 
India, including cars and bikes, to ensure compliance with emission standards. It verifies that 
a vehicle's emissions are within permissible limits, demonstrating its contribution to air 
quality. A new car typically comes with a PUC certificate valid for one year, and subsequent 
renewals are valid for 6 months except for Bharat Stage – IV/ VI engine norms which has 
the subsequent validity of 12 months. 
Rule 115 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rule, 1989 prescribes that every motor vehicle other 
than motor cycles of engine capacity not exceeding 70 cc, manufactured prior to the first day 
of March 1990, shall be maintained in such condition and shall be so driven so as to comply 
with the standards prescribed in relation to emission of smoke, vapour, etc. Further, as per 

184
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
184 
Section 115(2) of Central Motor Vehicle Rules (CMVR), 1989 from, 1 st October, 2004104, 
every motor vehicle operating on Petrol/ CNG/ LPG shall comply with the idling emission 
standards for Carbon monoxide (CO) and Hydrocarbon (HC).  
In Mizoram, Emission Testing of Vehicles is managed by the Mizoram Pollution Control 
Board under the Environment, Forest and Climate Change Department. There are five 105 
Emission Testing Centres in the State – four centres in Aizawl, Aizawl District and one centre 
in Lunglei, Lunglei District. 
Test check of records of the three sampled DTOs revealed that the agency handling the 
emission test did not maintain records of the number of vehicles that did not clear emission 
tests and there was an absence of corresponding monitoring reports. Consequently, no data 
existed regarding the number of vehicles that did not clear emission tests and yet continued 
to operate in public areas within these districts. This undermines the objective of the PUC 
framework and allowed non-compliant vehicles to remain in use, posing public health and 
environmental risks. 
Audit examination of Emission Testing Centres (ETCs) in the sampled District Transport 
Offices (DTOs) revealed that no records were maintained regarding the number of vehicles 
that did not clear emission tests, nor were there any monitoring reports or follow-up actions 
to ensure compliance. As a result, the Transport Department could not ascertain the number 
of vehicles plying without valid Pollution Under Control (PUC) certificates. This 
significantly undermines the purpose of the PUC framework and poses a threat to public 
health and air quality. 
While the responsibility for conducting emission tests, rests with the Mizoram Pollution 
Control Board, the enforcement of roadworthiness and vehicle movement lies with the 
Transport Department. The absence of structured inter-agency coordination, including data 
sharing and compliance enforcement mechanisms, had resulted in operational silos, where 
non-compliance test data was not acted upon by enforcement authorities. This reflects 
inadequate departmental control and ineffective regulatory enforcement. In the absence of 
systematic tracking of non-compliance and follow-up action, vehicles potentially exceeding 
permissible emission levels may continue to ply unchecked, posing risks to air quality and 
public health. 
DTO, Aizawl and Serchhip replied that ETCs would be instructed to submit monthly reports 
of number of vehicles which passed or failed the emission tests and the same will be 
maintained in the office. 
The Government stated (30 May 2025) that due to shortage of manpower at the various 
DTOs, testing of vehicle emission is outsourced by the Department to private entrepreneurs. 
Further, the Department is taking steps to cover every district and remote corners of the State 
to upgrade these testing centres to the latest version 2.0 shortly, without specifying the date/ 
time. At present, there are 19 testing centre and five Mobile Van in the State. 
 
104 Sub-R. (2) substituted by G.S.R. 111(E), dated 10-2-2004 (w.e.f. 10-8-2004) and as corrected by vide 
G.S.R. 176(E), dated 5-3-2004 
105  1. New Secretariat Complex, Khatla, Aizawl 2. Bawngkawn, Khatla, Aizawl 3. Ngaizel, Aizawl 
4. Zemabawk, Aizawl and 5. Ramthar Veng, Lunglei 

185
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
185 
The fact, however, remained that due to non-maintenance of records on the number of 
vehicles that cleared the emission test, the number of vehicles plying on the road without 
pollution under control certificate could not be determined in Audit. This reflects the lack of 
Departmental control and oversight in monitoring the emissions test centres. 
Conclusion: 
Audit observed significant deficiencies in the enforcement activities conducted in the test 
checked District Transport Offices (DTOs). These DTOs had no predefined enforcement 
targets. Furthermore, the DTOs lacked proper record-keeping mechanisms to track the 
nature of offenses. Due to non-maintenance of records on the number of vehicles that cleared 
the emission test, the number of vehicles plying on the road without pollution under control 
certificate could not be determined in Audit. This undermines the objective of the PUC 
framework and allows non-compliant vehicles to remain in use, posing public health and 
environmental risks. 
Recommendations: 
The Department may- 
(i) consider in coordination with the Mizoram Pollution Control Board, establishing 
a real-time data sharing and monitoring system that track all vehicles undergoing 
emission tests, including pass/ fail status.  
(ii) mandate monthly reporting of test outcomes by all Emission Testing Centres and 
integrate this data with the DTOs’ enforcement systems to trigger follow-up actions 
such as vehicle recall, retesting, or suspension of registration for non-compliant 
vehicles. 
(iii) execute a formal MoU or coordination framework with the Mizoram Pollution 
Control Board to institutionalise roles, responsibilities and accountability for 
pollution control enforcement. 
 
4.10.20 Shortage of staff, lack of planning and monitoring 
Sanctioned strength in a department is very important as it determines the authorised number 
of employees and the resources allocated to a specific role. It's crucial for planning, 
budgeting, and ensuring adequate staffing to fulfil departmental responsibilities. 
(A) Staffing Shortages and Sanctioned Strength 
The Directorate of Transport currently operates with 683 sanctioned posts across the 
Department. However, 336 of these posts remain vacant, leaving only 348 positions filled. 
This severe staff shortage has significantly impacted the functioning of the nine DTOs. 
Audit Objective-5: To assess whether DTOs have been provided with required 
manpower, equipment and other resources to discharge the 
mandate as also to ensure public service delivery in a 
transparent and efficient manner 

186
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
186 
There was no specific sanctioned strength for each DTOs, and staffs are posted based on 
population and volume of works. Due to the absence of sanctioned strength data at the DTO 
level, the adequacy of staffing per office could not be assessed. The men-in-position in the 
sampled DTOs is as shown in Table-4.52. 
Table-4.52: Men-in-Position 
Particulars Sanctioned Strength Men-in-Position 
DTO (Registering), Aizawl Not available 28 
DTO (Licensing), Aizawl Not available 11 
DTO, Serchhip Not available 11 
DTO, Mamit Not available   9 
Additionally, the DTO of Mamit also holds the charge of Inspector of Motor Vehicles (IMV) 
in addition to his primary responsibilities. Assigning technical duties such as inspection to 
DTOs may compromise both administrative oversight and enforcement quality, indicating 
an urgent need for role clarity and adequate technical staffing. The shortage of personnel has 
placed a significant burden on existing staff, making it difficult to manage daily operations 
efficiently. The Department cited financial constraints as the primary reason for being unable 
to revise the sanctioned strength or implement Cadre Restructuring for technical positions 
such as Senior IMVs, IMVs, ADTOs, and DTOs. 
Audit could assess staffing adequacy only in four of the nine DTOs due to incomplete data. 
Audit observed that nearly 49 per cent of sanctioned posts in the Directorate of Transport 
remained vacant, severely impacting its capacity to deliver services. Instances of DTOs 
holding dual technical and administrative responsibilities indicated understaffing in critical 
roles. Despite evident strain on operations, the Department had not revised the sanctioned 
strength or implemented cadre restructuring. Without strategic manpower planning and 
technical cadre reinforcement, the Department’s ability to regulate, enforce, and deliver 
public services effectively will remain compromised. 
The Government stated (30 May 2025) that due to the absence of proper Recruitment Policy 
under the Government of Mizoram, filling up of vacant posts is very difficult. 
(B) Lack of Capacity Building and Training 
The Department did not have a dedicated training center, and no structured training plan 
existed for DTO staff. A review of records revealed that no training programs were 
conducted for staff, particularly in areas such as public grievance redressal, during the period 
2019-20 to 2023-24. 
The Department attributed this to staff shortages, stating that conducting training programs 
would disrupt daily operations. The justification is self-defeating: without training, staff 
capacity cannot improve, leading to continued inefficiencies that worsen operational strain. 
The absence of a dedicated training centre and a structured training plan reflects institutional 
neglect of staff development. The Department's justification that staff shortages hinder 
training is counterproductive, as capacity building is essential to improve operational 
efficiency and service quality. Audit observed no evidence of efforts to explore alternative, 
less disruptive forms of training. Without investment in skill enhancement, particularly in 

187
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
187 
areas such as grievance handling, e-governance, and enforcement, the Department risks 
continued inefficiencies and erosion of public trust. 
The Government stated (30 May 2025) that the shortage of staff not only impacts the 
functioning of DTOs but also effect the whole functioning of the Department and monitoring 
of the performance of various staffs under the Department is also very difficult. 
(C) Absence of Strategic Planning 
The Department has not developed a strategic roadmap to assess and plan for its staffing and 
infrastructure requirements in the context of rising population and vehicle registrations. 
In response to audit queries, the Directorate stated that due to staff shortages, it had been 
unable to develop a strategic roadmap. However, it assured that matters would be discussed 
with higher authorities if the need arises. 
The justification, that staff shortages have prevented such planning, reflects a circular logic, 
as strategic planning is essential to address precisely such challenges. Furthermore, the 
Department’s statement that such issues will be discussed with higher authorities only if the 
need arises suggests a passive response to evident service delivery pressures. A forward-
looking, data-driven strategy is essential to ensure sustainable operations and responsive 
public service delivery in the transport sector. 
The Government stated (30 May 2025) that though Administrative Training Institute of the 
State are conducting various trainings for the employees under the Government of Mizoram, 
the Department can send officers and staff to attend mandatory trainings only. The 
Department cannot spare staff and officers to attend trainings, other than mandatory training 
due to the shortage of staff. 
(D) Absence of Monitoring and Review Mechanism 
Audit observed that no review meetings were conducted by the Department during the 
2019-20 to 2023-24. 
The Directorate of Transport responded (22 November 2024) that it is making every effort 
to enhance public service delivery, regulatory compliance, and taxation functions. However, 
it cited that staff shortages as a major hurdle in establishing an effective monitoring 
mechanism. The Department assured that review meetings would be conducted as and when 
required. 
Thus, staff shortage significantly impacts the functioning of DTOs. This is evident from 
non-recovery of tax and penalty to the tune of ₹ 5.49 crore and, deficiencies in enforcement 
activities viz., checking of fitness certificates, keeping track of repeated offenders, impose 
of traffic rules and compounding of traffic offences as discussed in the preceding paragraph. 
While the Directorate cited staff shortages as a constraint, no interim or alternative 
mechanisms for periodic review were instituted. The Department’s assertion that reviews 
meetings will be held “as and when required” lacked specificity and did not reflect a sense 
of urgency. The absence of any structured monitoring had weakened oversight and impaired 
the Department’s ability to respond effectively to operational and compliance risks. 

188
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
188 
Thus, absence of test records showed a lack of internal control and oversight on the part of 
the Department. 
During the Exit Conference (27 May 2025) the Department highlighted the shortage of staff 
due to which the Department is unable to take up all the activities effectively. Further, the 
Government assured (30 May 2025) that the Department will try its level best to achieve 
service efficiency, regulatory compliance and public satisfaction. 
Conclusion: 
Audit noticed that out of 683 sanctioned posts 336 posts were vacant in the Department. 
There was no specific sanctioned strength for each DTOs and staffs are posted based on 
population and volume of works. Due to the absence of sanctioned strength data at the DTO 
level, the adequacy of staffing per office could not be assessed. The Department did not 
prepare strategic plan to assess its resources and staffing needs in response to the growing 
population and increasing vehicle registrations. Audit observed that the Department did not 
hold any review meetings between 2019-24 to assess operational performance or regulatory 
compliance. The absence of any structured monitoring has weakened oversight and impaired 
the Department’s ability to respond effectively to operational and compliance risks. 
Recommendations: 
The Department should- 
(i) assess workforce requirements and implement a phased recruitment plan to 
gradually fill vacancies. A training framework must be established to enhance staff 
skills in public grievance handling, digital services and regulatory compliance, 
ensuring efficient service delivery; and 
(ii) develop a long-term strategic plan and conduct regular review meetings. 
4.10.21 Conclusion 
The performance audit of the District Transport Offices in Mizoram revealed significant 
shortcomings in various aspects of their functioning. From irregularities in the issuance of 
licences to the ineffective enforcement of regulations, the audit findings paint a concerning 
picture of the transport administration in the state. In the three test checked DTOs, Learner’s 
Licence (LL) and Driving Licence (DL) issued were more than the number of applicants 
during the audit coverage period. Instances of issue of DLs to underage persons were also 
noticed. There was insufficient equipment in the driving schools which compromised the 
compliance of learner’s safety and quality of driving skills. 
Fitness fee, grant/ renewal of fitness certificates and additional fee for each day of delay after 
the expiry of fitness certificates were realisable from 24,397 vehicles whose fitness 
certificates had expired. Audit noticed non-realisation of tax arrears and permit fees from 
blacklisted as well as non-blacklisted vehicles . The absence of annual tax collection 
assessments, real-time tracking, and a standard escalation protocol for defaulters had 
weakened revenue enforcement activities. 
Audit observed significant deficiencies in the enforcement activities conducted in the 
sampled District Transport Offices (DTOs). DTOs had no predefined enforcement targets. 

189
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
189 
Furthermore, the DTOs lacked proper record-keeping mechanisms to track the nature of 
offenses.  
Audit also noticed a significant shortage of staff in the Department. There was no specific 
sanctioned strength for each DTO. The Department did not prepare any strategic plan to 
assess its resources and staffing needs in response to the growing population and increasing 
vehicle registrations. Audit observed that the Department also did not hold any review 
meetings during the audit coverage period with a view to assess operational performance or 
regulatory compliance. The absence of any structured monitoring had resulted in weakened 
oversight and impaired the Department’s ability to respond effectively to operational and 
compliance risks.  
4.10.22 Recommendations 
The Government may consider the following recommendations: 
(i) Appropriate action should be taken to identify systemic lapses and take corrective 
measures. Further, the DTOs may maintain record/ register of list of applicants, date 
of sending of driving licence/ vehicle registration certificate for printing, date of 
receipt of smart cards/ DLs/ registration certificate to track their movement and to 
prevent loss or issue to the wrong persons; 
(ii) Ensure maintenance of record/ register regarding action taken by all District 
Transport Offices against fitness defaulters and strictly clamp down on plying of 
vehicles with expired fitness Certificates; 
(iii) Develop and deploy a rule-based auto-flagging system within the VAHAN database 
to trigger blacklisting or recovery action when arrears exceed defined thresholds or 
remain unpaid beyond specified timeframes; 
(iv) Develop and implement a District-wise Enforcement Action Plan, which includes: 
(a) Monthly enforcement targets based on local traffic density and historical offence 
data, (b) Mandatory maintenance of offence registers, fine logs, vehicle seizure 
records, and duty rosters, and (c) Integration of all field-level enforcement data with 
the e-challan system to ensure real-time monitoring and accountability; 
(v) Assess workforce requirements and implement a phased recruitment plan to 
gradually fill vacancies. A training framework must be established to enhance staff 
skills in public grievance handling, digital services, and regulatory compliance, 
ensuring efficient service delivery; and 
(vi) Develop a long-term strategic plan and conduct regular review meetings. 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
 
TAXATION DEPARTMENT 
 
4.11 Performance Audit on E-Way Bills System under Goods and Services Tax 
in Mizoram 
 
4.11.1 Introduction to E-Way bills (EWB) 
Goods and Services Tax (GST) has been introduced with effect from 1 July 2017, subsuming 
a wide range of indirect taxes based on the paradigm of ‘One Nation One Tax’. One of the 

190
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
190 
intended objectives of the GST regime was to improve efficiency in the movement of goods 
and services by reducing process-related time delays. 
E-Way bill was a feature present even in pre-GST regimes wherein movement of goods was 
administered through manually governed (revenue) check posts. Specified goods entering a 
particular State was levied an ‘Entry Tax’ which has since been subsumed under GST. 
Electronic-Way bill (EWB) has been introduced under GST regime which is a shift from 
Government-monitored tax administration model to a self-reporting model by the taxpayer. 
EWB was introduced in Mizoram with effect from 1 April 2018 for all inter-State and from 
1 June 2018 for the intra-State movement of goods having value exceeding ₹ 50,000. Rule 
138 of the Mizoram GST (MGST) Rules, 2017 (as amended from time to time) provides for 
the EWB mechanism. 
Government’s key objective of EWB is to safeguard revenue. EWB is a document required 
for movement of goods and designed to capture details of goods, before being moved. 
Automation and standardisation of the entire process was intended to help check tax evasion 
and shore up GST collections. EWB is also designed to dissolve the non-trade barriers, so 
that transit time is reduced and supply chain efficiency improved. 
The information on the consignment is to be furnished prior to commencement of movement 
of goods and generation of EWB irrespective of whether the movement is in relation to 
supply or for reasons other than supply. 
4.11.2 Organisational Structure 
The office of the Commissioner of State Tax (CST), Mizoram under the Finance 
Department106, Government of Mizoram (GoM) is the apex body implementing the GST for 
State administered taxpayers across the State. The CST is the head of the State GST and 
assisted by two Additional Commissioners of State Tax, three Joint Commissioners of State 
Tax (JCsST) and two Deputy Commissioners of State Tax (DCsST). There are 11 Zonal 
Offices across the State headed by the DCsST, assisted by the Assistant Commissioners of 
State Tax (ACsST) and State Tax Officers (STOs), etc., in the enforcement of the GST. 
Three Zonal Offices 107 were also created (June 2023) headed by ACsST and assisted by 
Upper Division Clerks (UDCs) and Lower Division Clerks (LDCs). There is also one 
Preventive Unit called Data Collection Centre at Vairengte headed by ACST under the CST 
for verification of EWBs. 
4.11.3 Information Systems used for EWBs 
EWB Common Portal is managed by National Informatics Centre (NIC) and is integrated 
with the VAHAN108 system of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, so that vehicle 
registration number can be validated at the time of generating EWB. FASTag system has 
 
106 The Taxation Department was removed from the list of departments under the Government of Mizoram 
and allocated to the Finance Department vide Notification No. A. 46012/1/2022-GAD dated 23 August 
2024 
107 The Zonal Offices in the new districts of Khawzawl, Saitual and Hnahthial were established in June 2023 
vide Notification No. A.11013/5/2005-TAX dated 14 June 2023 
108 VAHAN is a computerised system developed by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in India, 
designed to facilitate various vehicle related services such as vehicle registration, vehicle permits, payment 
of vehicle taxes, etc. 

191
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
191 
been integrated with the EWB system with effect from 01 January 2021. On the EWB 
Common Portal, one-time registration of the taxpayer is required for the purpose of 
generation, extension, cancellation and rejection of EWBs. The Proper Officers can access 
the EWB Portal through two means viz., (i) Logging into EWB Common Portal through a 
web browser using the login credentials provided or (ii) Logging into the GST EWB System 
Mobile App. The functions performed by the Proper Officers are verification of EWBs, 
unblocking of EWBs, viewing and accessing MIS reports, etc. 
4.11.4 Processes involved in the EWB System 
The EWB system includes various processes such as the Enrolment of the required persons 
in the portal, Generation of EWB, Extension, Cancellation and Rejection of the generated 
EWBs, etc. The entire process flow of EWB system under GST is depicted in the Figure-1. 
  
The process involved in generation, cancellation and extension of EWBs and important 
terminologies used in the EWB System are discussed in the following paragraphs: 


192
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
192 
4.11.4.1 Enrolment in the Portal  
As per the provisions of Rule 138 of the MGST Rules, every person who causes movement 
of goods of consignment value exceeding the prescribed limit shall generate an EWB by 
providing required details in EWB-01. 
For generation of EWBs, GST Registered Persons, Transporters (GST Registered or 
Unregistered) and Citizens/ Unregistered persons are required to enrol themselves in the 
EWB portal by providing necessary details such as State, GST Identification Number 
(GSTIN), Legal Name, Permanent Account Number (PAN), Mobile Number, etc. The 
transporters who may not be registered under the GST but cause movement of goods for 
their clients need to enrol on the e-way bill portal and get 15-digit Unique Transporter ID. 
4.11.4.2 Generation of EWBs 
As per Rule 138 of the MGST Rules, EWB can be generated electronically by furnishing 
details in Part A (once submitted cannot be edited) of the Form GST EWB-01 by any of the 
following persons: 
 the Consignor 
 the Transporter 
 in the case of authorisation by the Consignor, or 
 if the Consignor is an unregistered person, 
 the Consignee 
Details of the consignments viz., GSTIN of Supplier, Place of Dispatch, GSTIN of Recipient, 
Place of delivery, Document Number, Document Date, Value of Goods, Harmonised System 
of Nomenclature (HSN) Code and reason for transportation are available in Part-A of the 
EWB-01 and in Part-B, Vehicle Number for consignment by road and Transport document 
number are provided. Furnishing details of vehicle number is not mandatory for intra-state/ 
Union Territory transactions with a distance upto 50 km when the goods are moved from 
premises of consignor to that of transporter or from the premises of transporter and that of 
consignee. Consolidated EWBs can be generated in Form GST EWB-02 in the case of 
multiple EWBs generated for the multiple consignments but transported in the single vehicle. 
4.11.4.3 Bill to Ship to Transactions 
In ‘Bill to Ship to’ transactions, three persons are involved viz., Supplier, Buyer and 
Recipient. The goods are purchased by the buyer and transported from the place of supplier 
to the place of recipient on behalf of the buyer. In these transactions, EWB can be generated 
either by the Supplier or by the Buyer. Buyer orders the Supplier to supply the Goods to the 
recipient on behalf of the Buyer. In this transaction, two supplies and two invoices are 
involved. 
4.11.4.4 Validity of EWBs 
As per Rule 138(10) of the MGST Rules, the validity of the EWB depends upon the distance 
and the type of shipment. Validity is calculated from the date on which the EWB has been 
generated (relevant date) and the period of validity shall commence from the midnight of the 
generation of EWB. 

193
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
193 
The validity period is one day for 200 km in respect of consignment other than over 
dimensional cargo and one additional day for every 200 km or part thereof with effect from 
01 January 2021. Before that date, validity period was one day for 100 km and one additional 
day for every 100 km or part thereof. In respect of over dimensional cargo, it is one day for 
20 km and one additional day for every 20 km or part thereof. 
4.11.4.5 Extension of EWBs 
As per Proviso-3 of the Rule 138(10) of the MGST Rules, the validity of the EWB can be 
extended by the transporter under circumstances of an exceptional nature where the goods 
cannot be transported within the original validity period of the EWB after updating the 
details in Part-B of form GST EWB-01, within eight hours from the time of its expiry. 
Further, in terms of Proviso-1 of the Rules ibid, the validity of EWB can be extended by the 
Commissioner for certain categories of specified goods on the recommendation of the 
Council. 
4.11.4.6 Cancellation of EWBs 
As per Rule 138(9) of the MGST Rules, where an EWB is generated, the same may be 
cancelled electronically on the common portal within 24 hours of generation. However, an 
EWB cannot be cancelled if it has been verified in-transit. 
4.11.4.7 Rejection of EWBs 
As per Rule 138(11) and (12) of the MGST Rules, the details of the EWB generated will be 
communicated electronically to the recipient, and he is required to communicate his 
acceptance or rejection of the goods being transported. If the recipient does not communicate 
his acceptance or rejection within 72 hours of the details being communicated to him or the 
time of delivery of goods whichever is earlier, the EWB shall be deemed to be accepted. 
4.11.5 Audit Objectives, Criteria, Scope and Sampling Methodology 
 
4.11.5.1 Audit Objectives 
This Performance Audit (PA) was done with the following audit objectives: 
 Whether the EWB mechanism is effective in protecting revenue interest of the 
Government; and 
 Whether the Preventive/ Enforcement activities of the Department in enforcing EWB 
provisions are efficient and effective. 
4.11.5.2 Audit Criteria 
The PA on EWB system under GST has been evaluated against the following audit criteria: 
 Mizoram Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (MGST Act); 
 Mizoram Goods and Services Tax Rules, 2017 (MGST Rules); 
 Notifications/ Circulars/ Instructions authorised by GST Council and issued by CBIC 
and Taxation Department, GoM from time to time; and 
 Advisories/ Standard Operating Procedures issued by NIC, CBIC and Taxation 
Department, GoM. 

194
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
194 
4.11.5.3 Audit Scope 
The EWB transactions of the persons registered in the EWB portal pertaining to the period 
between 1 April 2018 and 31 March 2022 were covered in the PA. An Entry Conference was 
held with the Deputy Secretary, Taxation Department on 8 August 2023 wherein the audit 
objectives, criteria, scope and sampling methodology were discussed. The audit was 
conducted between August 2023 and April 2024. The draft PA Report was forwarded to the 
Department on 12 September 2024, and the Exit Conference was held with the Department 
on 5 November 2024 wherein the findings, conclusion and recommendations of the PA were 
discussed. The views/ comments of the Department during the Exit Conference have been 
incorporated in the relevant paragraphs wherever applicable. 
Audit has done critical examination of the overall performance of EWB system in the GST 
regime with reference to the given audit objectives. The EWB data (generated) for the audit 
period was extracted from GSTN and analysed. The scope of audit also involved evaluation 
of the preventive functions of the Department with reference to EWBs, viz., interception of 
vehicles, verification of documents, inspection of goods and action taken thereof. The 
movement of conveyances by roadways alone have been considered in this Audit and 
Railway/ Airway/ Seaway EWBs have been excluded from the scope of this Audit.  
4.11.5.4 Audit Sampling Methodology 
A risk-based approach has been attempted in this PA as EWB generation under GST is a 
necessary condition that precedes any movement of goods subject to the threshold limit. 
The samples for Audit Objective-1 were evolved based on the Key Problem Areas (KPAs)/ 
Risk Dimensions identified. The KPAs that constrained revenue realisation for the 
Government are provided in Appendix-4.7. Under this Audit Objective-1, a total of 
80 EWBs pertaining to 26 taxpayers falling under five Zonal Offices109 were selected based 
on risk analysis and to cover all the KPAs relevant for Mizoram . Besides the 80 EWBs, 
another five EWBs relating to five consignors and five consignees having same PANs were 
also selected. Further, a larger set of samples based on two KPAs (shown in  Table-4.56 of 
Paragraph 4.11.7) were also selected to ascertain remedial action taken by the Department. 
Under Audit Objective-2, Audit evaluated the problems associated with enforcement/ 
preventive activities, viz., Operational Preparedness, Effectiveness of Anti-Evasion 
measures and Intra-Department and Inter-Department coordination. Under this Audit 
Objective-2, one Preventive Unit headed by ACST, being the only preventive unit set up in 
the State, was selected. 
4.11.5.5 Scope limitation due to non-production of documents 
Section 16 of the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of 
Service (CAG’s (DPC)) Act, 1971 lays down the audit mandate of the CAG regarding audit 
of receipts. Further, Section 18(2) of the CAG’s DPC Act, 1971 imposes a statutory duty on 
Offices/ Departments to comply with the requests for information in as complete a form as 
possible and with all reasonable expedition. 
 
109 DCST of Aizawl East Zone, DCST of Aizawl North Zone, DCST of Aizawl West Zone, DCST of 
Champhai Zone and DCST of Kolasib Zone 

195
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
195 
During this PA, Audit requisitioned information and records related to EWBs and GST 
returns for the period 2018-19 to 2021-22. Further, additional records of sampled taxpayers 
like invoices etc., to check outward supplies not supported by EWBs were also sought. 
Inspite of requisitions and follow up, the jurisdiction Zonal Office did not produce copies of 
invoices for sales declared under GSTR-1 pertaining to two taxpayers (GSTINs - 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxN and 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxE under DCST, Aizawl North Zone) out of five 
sampled taxpayers for the KPA “Whether taxpayers had generated disproportionate E-Way 
bills on inward supply”. 
The Department stated (November 2024) that though notices in form GST ASMT-10 were 
issued (March 2024) to the taxpayers, no reply from the taxpayers were received 
(March 2025). 
Audit findings 
Audit findings have been categorised under two broad perspectives, viz., (i) Effectiveness of 
EWB system in protecting the revenue and (ii) the shortfalls noticed in the enforcement 
functions of the Department. 
4.11.6 Effectiveness of EWB System in Protection of Revenue 
 
4.11.6.1 Number of EWBs generated by the taxpayers 
EWB is a document required for movement of goods and is designed to capture details of 
goods before being moved. The EWBs generated for outward supplies are supported by 
invoices and the invoice details are required to be reported in their GST returns. 
The total number of outward EWBs generated during the period from 2018-19 to 2021-22 is 
given in Table-4.53. 
Table-4.53: Total number of outward EWBs generated by the taxpayers for the 
period 2018-2022 
Year No. of EWBs generated No. of taxpayers 
2018-19 9,159 261 
2019-20 12,884 341 
2020-21 12,712 364 
2021-22 9,047 304 
Total 43,802 1,270 
Source: As per information available in GSTN 
4.11.6.2 Deficiencies and consequent revenue impact noticed in Audit 
Audit selected 26 taxpayers for conducting Substantive Audit 110. Table-4.54 below brings 
out the extent of deficiencies and consequent revenue impact noticed during the detailed 
scrutiny of sampled cases. 
 
 
 
 
110  Substantive Audit are cases to be pursued in detail for cause analysis and ascertain current developments 

196
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
196 
Table-4.54: Details of observations in sampled cases 
Sl. 
No. Key Problem Areas 
No. of taxpayers  
(a taxpayer may be 
involved under 
multiple KPAs) 
Amount (₹ in lakh) 
Assessable 
Value 
involved 
Tax Cess Interest 
1. Generation of EWBs by Nil-filers of 
GST Returns 
08 956.99 52.72 0 64.36 
2. Taxpayers who have generated 
EWB after effective date of 
cancellation 
03 124.37 22.54 2.75 15.15 
3. Generation of multiple EWBs on 
the strength of same/ similar 
Invoices 
02 278.68 5.72 0 0 
4. EWBs generated using risky/ 
invalid vehicles 
02 6,356.16 47.30 0 40.22 
5. EWB generated whose PIN code to 
PIN code distances are too high and 
using invalid PIN code 
04 69.88 5.14 0 3.66 
6. Short declaration of EWB taxable 
value in GST returns 
02 1,441.09 19.62 0 0 
7. High value EWBs generated within 
six months of registration 
01 1,408.09 0 0 0 
Total 22 10,635.26 153.04 2.75 123.39 
The audit observations under Audit Objective-1 pertain to 16 distinct taxpayers. The results 
of the analysis are enumerated below: 
4.11.6.2 (a) Generation of EWBs by the taxpayers who had filed Nil returns 
As per Sections 37 and 39 of MGST Act, 2017, read with Rules 59 and 61 of MGST Rules, 
2017, the taxpayers are required to furnish details of all their outward supplies for each 
calendar month in GSTR-1 and all inward and outward supplies along with tax or any other 
amount payable in GSTR-3B respectively. 
Further, Section 61 of the Act mandates the Proper Officer to scrutinise returns, assess tax 
liability and take suitable action in case of discrepancies or inconsistencies in the returns. 
The Proper Officer designated for this purpose is the Zonal Officer. 
Audit test checked 224 EWBs pertaining to 10 taxpayers falling under five Zonal 
Jurisdictions of the Commissionerate and it was observed that even though eight taxpayers 
had generated outward supplies of ₹ 956.99 lakh in 130 EWBs, they were not reported in 
both GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B. In the case of one taxpayer (GSTIN- 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD) 
under DCST, Kolasib Zone, the taxpayer paid tax of ₹ 22.77 lakh during February 2024 at 
the instance of Audit. However, interest amount of ₹ 21.65 lakh was not paid by the taxpayer. 
The filing of nil returns during the period in which the EWBs were generated resulted in 
non-discharge of tax liability of ₹ 117.08 lakh (including interest amount of ₹ 64.36 lakh) as 
on 1 May 2024 by the taxpayers. The details are shown in Appendix-4.8. 
On this being pointed out (May 2024), the Department stated (November 2024) that shortage 
of manpower to scrutinise all the taxpayers to detect the discrepancies and lack of proper 
mechanism of linking the EWB system and the GST network (GSTN) led to the 
discrepancies. The Department also stated that scrutiny is being done and notice for scrutiny 
of returns in GST ASMT-10 has been issued to the taxpayer (GSTIN - 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV) 
under Aizawl West Zone and notice for clarification has been served to the taxpayer 

197
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
197 
(GSTIN - 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx8) under Aizawl East Zone. Demand for payment of interest has 
been raised in FORM GST DRC-07 for the taxpayer (GSTIN - 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD) under 
Kolasib Zone to which the taxpayer replied that it intends to opt for amnesty under Section 
128A. The Department further stated that the functionality for availing amnesty under this 
amended section is still not incorporated in the GST portal and therefore the interest and 
penalty will be waived-off once the functionality for availing amnesty is incorporated. 
However, report on the action taken after issuing notice for scrutiny/ clarification has not 
been received (March 2025). Further, the contention of the Department to waive-off the 
interest in respect of the taxpayer under Kolasib Zone is not tenable as recovery of tax of 
₹ 22.77 lakh was already made at the instance of Audit and Section 128A is not yet adopted 
under Mizoram GST Act. Replies on the action initiated against the remaining five taxpayers 
were not received (March 2025). 
4.11.6.2 (b) Generation of EWBs by cancelled taxpayers 
As per Section 63 of the MGST Act, 2017, where a taxable person whose registration has 
been cancelled but was liable to pay tax, the Proper Officer may proceed to assess the tax 
liability of such taxable person to the best of his judgment. A cancelled taxpayer cannot 
generate EWBs, as he will be passing on ITC without filing of returns, resulting in 
non-payment of tax. 
Audit observed that 298 EWBs involving an assessable value of ₹ 124.37 lakh relating to 
three taxpayers falling under the jurisdiction of Aizawl West Zone and Aizawl East Zone 
were generated for outward supply after the effective date of cancellation of their GST 
registrations without discharging their tax liability. The respective Proper Officers of the 
Zones did not assess the tax liability under Section 63 of the MGST Act and thereby did not 
safeguard the revenue interest of the Government amounting to ₹ 40.44 lakh (including 
interest of ₹ 15.15 lakh and cess amount of ₹ 2.75 lakh) as on 01 May 2024. The details are 
shown in Appendix-4.9. 
Thus, due to system deficiency, the taxpayers could generate EWBs for outward supply even 
after the effective date of cancellation of registrations which needs to be addressed by the 
Department. 
On this being pointed out (May 2024), the Department stated (November 2024) that shortage 
of manpower to scrutinise all the taxpayers to detect the discrepancies and lack of proper 
mechanism of linking the EWB system and the GST network (GSTN) led to the 
discrepancies. The Department also stated that scrutiny is being done and notice for scrutiny 
of returns in GST ASMT-10 has been issued to the two taxpayers (GSTIN - 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC and 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxX) under Aizawl West Zone and notice for 
clarification has been served to the taxpayer (GSTIN - 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx8) under Aizawl 
East Zone. However, the status of action taken after notice/ clarification issued has not been 
intimated to Audit (March 2025). 
Recommendation: The Department may introduce a mechanism to prevent generation of 
EWBs by nil filers of returns and cancelled taxpayers. The Department may also 
streamline the available manpower for regular scrutiny of EWBs and cross-verification 

198
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
198 
with returns and other relevant documents by the Proper Officers under appropriate 
Section of the Act to minimise instances of unrealised tax from the taxpayers. 
4.11.6.2 (c) Generation of multiple EWBs on the strength of same/ similar invoices 
As per Rule 46(b) of MGST Rules, 2017, a tax invoice shall be issued by the registered 
person containing consecutive serial numbers, not exceeding sixteen characters, unique for 
a financial year. 
Further, as per Paragraph 5.1 of the User Manual issued by the NIC, the taxpayer while 
generating the EWB is required to enter the Document Number relating to the consignment. 
The Document Number entered should be unique. Invoice Number is the Document Number 
in respect of consignments relating to supplies. Hence, only one EWB is required to be 
generated based on each invoice. 
Audit test checked the sampled cases of two taxpayers falling under the DCST, Champhai 
Zone who had generated multiple EWBs with the support of a single invoice. Audit 
scrutinised the corresponding returns and observed that taxpayers used the same invoice to 
generate multiple EWBs for movement of goods having assessable value of ₹ 76.44 lakh. 
Though this resulted in multiple consignments, it was noticed that the taxpayers did not 
report any consignment or reported less consignments in their returns which led to non/ short 
discharge of tax liability.  Details of the taxpayers are shown in Table-4.55. 
Table-4.55: Details on multiple EWBs generated on similar invoice 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Zone 
GSTIN of the 
Taxpayer EWB No. EWB 
generated date 
Invoice No. and 
date 
Assessable Value 
(₹ in lakh) 
1. DCST, 
Champhai Zone 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxT 441003849964 17.04.2018 TI/02 15.04.2018 36.00 
891003763991 21.04.2018 TI/02 15.04.2018 36.00 
2. DCST, 
Champhai Zone 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx9 
881022239764 07.10.2018 BVFCL/M15/66 1.27 
861022239896 07.10.2018 BVFCL/M15/66 1.27 
841022239564 07.10.2018 BVFCL/M15/66 0.95 
801022239434 07.10.2018 BVFCL/M15/66 0.95 
Total 76.44 
This indicated lack of validation controls in the EWB Common Portal to restrict generation 
of multiple EWBs using the same/ similar invoices. 
On verification of returns, it was noticed that one taxpayer (GSTIN - 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxT) 
out of the above-mentioned two taxpayers generated seven EWBs during the relevant month 
with an assessable value of ₹ 274.27 lakh but filed GSTR-1 returns with an assessable value 
of ₹ 159.84 lakh only. The other taxpayer (GSTIN - 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx9) generated five 
EWBs with assessable value of ₹ 4.44 lakh but filed nil returns in the relevant month which 
resulted in non-realisation of tax liability of ₹ 5.72 lakh as shown in Appendix-4.10. The 
Department thereby did not safeguard the revenue interest of the Government. 
On this being pointed out (May 2024), the Department stated (June 2024 and November 
2024) that notice has been served to the concerned taxpayers on the matter. The Department 
also stated that it has no control over the EWB system to restrict generation of multiple EWB 
using the same/ similar invoices as this limitation arises from insufficient validation controls 
within the EWB Common Portal. Result of the notice issued and further action taken to 
recover the tax liabilities was not received (March 2025). 

199
Chapter-IV:  Revenue Sector
Chapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
199 
4.11.6.2 (d) Generation of EWBs for the transactions effected through risky vehicles 
As per Rule 138(2) of the MGST Rules, 2017, where the goods are transported by the 
registered person as a consignor, whether in his own conveyance or a hired one or a public 
conveyance, by road, the said person shall generate the EWB in FORM GST EWB-01 
electronically on the common portal after furnishing information in Part B of FORM GST 
EWB-01. Further, as per Rule 138(3) of MGST Rules, where the goods are handed over to 
a transporter for transportation by road, the registered person shall furnish the information 
relating to the transporter on the common portal and the EWB shall be generated by the 
transporter on the said portal on the basis of the information furnished by the registered 
person in Part A of FORM GST EWB-01. The vehicle number is required to be provided in 
Part-B of EWB-01. 
In March 2020, EWB portal has been integrated with the VAHAN system of the Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways, so that vehicle registration number can be validated at the 
time of generating EWB. 
As per Sections 37 and 39 of MGST Act, 2017, read with Rules 59 and 61 of MGST Rules, 
2017, taxpayers are required to furnish details of all their outward supplies for each calendar 
month in GSTR-1 and all inward and outward supplies along with tax or any other amount 
payable in GSTR-3B respectively. 
Audit observed that three111 taxpayers falling under three Zones had generated three EWBs 
involving assessable value of ₹ 53.48 lakh using invalid vehicles as modes of transportation. 
Though the EWB portal is integrated with the VAHAN system, it did not prevent  the 
generation of EWBs using the invalid vehicles. 
Further scrutiny of records revealed that out of the three taxpayers mentioned above, two 
taxpayers had unreported EWB having assessable value of ₹ 430.32 lakh resulting in 
unrealised tax of ₹ 87.52 lakh (including interest of ₹ 40.22 lakh) as on 1 May 2024 as shown 
in Appendix-4.11. The Department thereby did not safeguard  the revenue interest of the 
Government. 
On this being pointed out (May 2024), the Department stated (June 2024 and November 
2024) that notice was sent to taxpayer with GSTIN 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx6. However, result of 
the notice issued was not intimated to Audit (March 2025). The Department also stated that 
as EWB system is integrated with the VAHAN system, the prevention of generation of 
EWBs using invalid vehicles lies within the purview of the Transport Department. 
Reply in respect of taxpayer with GSTIN 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO under DCST, Aizawl North 
Zone was not received (March 2025). 
 
 
 
111  GSTIN - 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxR under DCST, Aizawl East Zone (Surrendered vehicle used in EWB), GSTIN 
- 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx6 under DCST, Champhai Zone and GSTIN - 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO under DCST, Aizawl 
North Zone (Vehicles with cancelled registrations used in EWB) 
 

200
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
200 
4.11.6.2 (e) EWBs generated in which the PIN code to PIN code distances were too 
high and EWBs generated using invalid PIN code 
The EWB portal has a system to auto calculate and display the estimated motorable distance 
between two PIN code areas. User is also allowed to enter the actual distance as per the 
movement of the goods. However, it would be limited to 10 per cent  beyond the auto 
calculated distance displayed. 
As per Sections 37 and 39 of MGST Act, 2017, read with Rules 59 and 61 of MGST Rules, 
2017, taxpayers are required to furnish details of all their outward supplies for each calendar 
month in GSTR-1 and all inward and outward supplies along with tax or any other amount 
payable in GSTR-3B respectively. 
Audit observed that two taxpayers falling under two DCST offices generated EWBs with 
excess distances ranging from 328 to 614 kilometres as compared to PIN code to PIN code 
distances between the places as shown in Appendix-4.12. It was further observed that the 
two taxpayers had three EWBs with assessable value of ₹ 36.65 lakh unreported in GSTR-1 
and GSTR-3B resulting in non-realisation of tax liability of ₹ 4.65 lakh (including interest 
amount of ₹ 2.37 lakh) as on 1 May 2024 as shown in Appendix-4.13. 
Audit also observed that in one sampled EWB pertaining to one taxpayer of DCST Champhai 
Zone, the Pin Code mentioned in the EWBs was valid but does not match with the address 
of place of dispatch of the goods. In case of another sampled EWB pertaining to one taxpayer 
of DCST Aizawl North Zone, the Pin Code mentioned in the EWB was invalid as shown in 
Appendix-4.14. It was further observed that the taxpayer (GSTIN- 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx4) under 
DCST, Champhai Zone had eight EWBs with assessable value of ₹ 33.23 lakh unreported 
in GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B resulting in non-realisation of tax liability of ₹ 4.15 lakh 
(including interest amount of ₹ 1.29 lakh) as on 1 May 2024 as shown in Appendix-4.13. 
This indicated lack of validation controls in the EWB Common Portal to restrict generation 
of EWBs with inflated/ excessive distances and invalid PIN codes and the Department did 
not protect the revenue interest of the Government. 
On this being pointed out (May 2024) the Department stated (June 2024 and 
November 2024) that proceedings for scrutiny under Section 61 of MGST Act, 2017 was 
initiated in the case of taxpayer with GSTIN 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO while in respect of 
taxpayers with GSTIN 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxM and 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx4, notices have been sent 
to the taxpayers. However, result of the notices issued as well as scrutiny of the returns was 
awaited (March 2025). The Department also stated that the difference in the PIN code to PIN 
code distance was the mistake of the taxpayer in not verifying/ incorporating the actual 
distance as he had generated EWBs first time. It was further stated that the invalid PIN code 
was a human error on the part of the taxpayer as the PIN code of Aizawl is 796001 and not 
796011. The reply of the Department in respect of Champhai Zone was not received 
(March 2025). 
Recommendation: The Department should notify the appropriate authorities about the 
weaknesses/ loopholes in the EWB Common Portal as well as the GST Common Portal 
where system’s deficiencies are beyond its control/ powers to prevent exploitation of 

201
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
201 
system’s deficiencies in future. Also, it may ensure pro-active involvement of its personnel 
in mitigating the deficiencies through manual validation of system-generated documents. 
4.11.6.2 (f) Short declaration of EWB taxable value in GST returns 
As per Sections 37 and 39 of MGST Act, 2017, read with Rules 59 and 61 of MGST Rules, 
2017, taxpayers are required to furnish details of all their outward supplies for each calendar 
month in GSTR-1 and all inward and outward supplies along with tax or any other amount 
payable in GSTR-3B respectively. 
Audit selected 17 EWBs (out of 80 sampled EWBs) for verification in respect of two 
taxpayers falling under DCST, Aizawl West Zone and DCST, Champhai Zone. During the 
year 2019-20, the taxpayers had generated 63 outward EWBs with the assessable value of 
goods amounting to ₹ 1,441.09 lakh having a tax effect of ₹ 72.05 lakh. However, on 
verification of returns, it was noticed that the taxpayer filed GSTR-1 returns with assessable 
value of ₹ 1,054.61 lakh only and discharged tax liability of ₹ 52.43 lakh only in GSTR-3B. 
This is in violation of the Act and Rules ibid. The Proper Officer also did not scrutinise 
returns and levy tax under Section 61(1) of the MGST Act, 2017. This resulted in 
non-realisation of tax liability of ₹ 19.62 lakh as shown in Appendix-4.15. The Department 
thereby did not safeguard the revenue interest of the Government. 
On this being pointed out (May 2024), the Department stated (June 2024) that in respect of 
taxpayer with GSTIN 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV, appropriate action under Section 61 of MGST 
Act, 2017 will be taken and progress of the case will be intimated while in respect of taxpayer 
with GSTIN 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxK, notice was sent to the taxpayer. However, action taken 
report/ progress of the case was not received by Audit (March 2025). 
4.11.6.2 (g) High value EWBs generated within six months of registration  
As per Sections 37 and 39 of MGST Act, 2017, read with Rules 59 and 61 of MGST Rules, 
2017, taxpayers are required to furnish details of all their outward supplies for each calendar 
month in GSTR-1 and all inward and outward supplies along with tax or any other amount 
payable in GSTR-3B respectively. 
Audit selected 14 EWBs (out of 80 sampled EWBs) for verification in respect of one 
taxpayer falling under the office of DCST, Champhai Zone. On verification, Audit noticed 
that the taxpayer had generated 44 outward EWBs within six months from the date of 
registration (25 January 2019) with assessable value of goods amounting to ₹ 1,408.09 lakh 
having a tax effect of ₹ 68.86 lakh. However, on verification of returns, it was noticed that 
the taxpayer filed GSTR-1 returns with assessable value of ₹ 896.11 lakh only and 
discharged tax liability of ₹ 44.80 lakh only in GSTR-3B. This is in violation of the Act and 
Rules ibid. The Proper Officer also did not scrutinise the returns and levy tax under Section 
61(1) of the MGST Act, 2017. The undischarged tax liability is shown in Appendix-4.16. 
The Department thereby did not safeguard the revenue interest of the Government. 
On this being pointed out (May 2024), the Department stated (June 2024) that notice was 
sent to the concerned taxpayer. However, result of the notice issued was not intimated to 
Audit (March 2025). 

202
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
202 
Recommendation: For recovery of tax dues, the Department may utilise the provisions112 
of the modes of recovery under MGST Act, 2017 and MGST Rules, 2017 to ensure full 
recovery from the tax defaulters after initiation113 of recovery proceedings. 
4.11.6.2 (h) Other issues 
(a) Mismatch between ITC available in GSTR-2A and credited in Electronic Credit 
Ledger (ECL) 
As per Section 16 of the MGST Act, 2017, every registered person shall be entitled to take 
credit of input tax credit (ITC) charged on any supply of goods or services or both to him 
which are used or intended to be used in the course or furtherance of his business and the 
said amount shall be credited to the electronic credit ledger of such person. Further, in terms 
of Sub-Section 2(c) of the said Section, the claim of ITC is subject to the condition, inter-
alia, that the tax charged in respect of such supply has been actually paid to the Government. 
Rule 60 of MGST Rules, 2017 provides that the details provided by the suppliers in GSTR-1 
will be auto-populated to the recipients of the goods in GSTR-2A to enable them to take 
ITC. 
During Audit, it was noticed that two taxpayers (GSTIN 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV and 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO) pertaining to two 114 DCST offices had availed ITC of ₹ 7.50 lakh and 
₹ 4,695.98 lakh through ECL during the audited period (2018-2022) respectively. 
Verification of GSTR-2A returns (detailed inward) in respect of the above two taxpayers for 
the particular year, revealed that the taxpayers (GSTIN 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV and 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO) were actually eligible for ITC of ₹ 1.14 lakh (during 2019-20) and 
₹ 4,108.28 lakh respectively. Thus, a mismatch of ₹ 594.06 lakh was observed in the ITC 
between GSTR-2A and ECL. However, the Proper Officer did not monitor credit mismatch 
in the ECL of the taxpayers and did not safeguard the revenue interest of the Government. 
The details are shown in the Appendix-4.17. The mismatch in ITC availed of ₹ 594.06 lakh 
as on 01 May 2024 are required to be recovered/ adjusted. 
On this being pointed out (May 2024), the Department stated (June 2024) that appropriate 
action under Section 61 of MGST Act, 2017 will be taken on the two taxpayers. It was further 
stated (November 2024) that notice for scrutiny in FORM GST ASMT-10 was issued to the 
taxpayer under DCST, Aizawl West Zone. However, the result of the scrutiny was not 
intimated to Audit (March 2025). 
4.11.7 Discrepancies identified through analysis of data of E-Way Bills 
Besides the 80 sampled EWBs selected under the Audit Objective-1, KPAs’ based samples 
were also selected from the database relating to EWBs of the taxpayers falling under the 
jurisdiction of CST, Mizoram. The data extracted under these KPAs were forwarded to the 
Department for considering further course of remedial action and summary report on action 
 
112  As per Section 79(1)(a-f) of MGST Act, 2017 read with Rule 143, 144, 145, 147, 155 and 156 of MGST 
Rules, 2017, the provisions for modes of recovery of tax dues include: Adjustments against refunds, 
detaining and selling goods, recovery from third parties, seizure of property, recovery through District 
Collector and Court recovery 
113  Section 78 of MGST Act, 2017 
114  DCST, Aizawl West Zone and DCST, Aizawl North Zone 

203
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
203 
taken was called for. Audit analysed data on EWBs generated during the period April 2018 
to March 2022 based on KPAs and observed discrepancies in tax compliance by the 
taxpayers. The details in Table-4.56 of observations from data analysis shared with the 
Department are discussed below: 
Table-4.56: Details of Observations from Data Analysis 
Sl. 
No. Nature of Observation No. of 
taxpayers 
No. of EWBs 
generated 
Assessable Value 
involved (₹ in lakh) 
(i). Generation of EWBs by non-filers of GST returns 
(including two Composite Taxpayers) 
33 411 6,556.01 
(ii). Generation of duplicate EWBs using duplicate invoices 10 40 345.53 
(i) Audit observed that 33 taxpayers (including two Composite taxpayers) had generated 
411 (including 17 EWBs by the Composite taxpayers) EWBs despite not filing 
relevant returns as mandated under Sections 10, 37 and 39 of the MGST Act, 2017, 
and restriction imposed under Rule 138E of MGST Rules, 2017, consecutively115 even 
beyond 01 December 2019 (the effective date of implementation of blocking 
functionality). This indicated weakness in application control in the EWB Common 
Portal and insufficient coordination between the EWB Common Portal and the GST 
Common Portal. 
On this being pointed out (May 2024), the Department stated (June 2024 and 
November 2024) that notice was issued to 22 taxpayers falling under DCST, Champhai Zone 
and to two taxpayers falling under DCST, Kolasib Zone. However, the status of action taken/ 
notice issued against the remaining 19 taxpayers was not received (March 2025). 
(ii) Audit observed that 10 taxpayers had generated 40 EWBs having an assessable value 
of ₹ 345.53 lakh using duplicate invoice numbers during the given financial year in 
contravention of the requirement of unique invoice number as stipulated in the rules. 
The number of such multiple EWBs generated ranged from two to five which were 
generated between 11 April 2018 and 13 December 2019. As the taxpayers effected 
multiple movement of goods using same invoice, there was a risk of under-reporting 
of outward supplies by them in their GSTR-1 and consequent short-payment of tax. 
On this being pointed out (May 2024), the Department stated (June 2024) that proceedings 
under Section 61 of MGST Act, 2017 has been initiated against two taxpayers falling under 
DCST, Aizawl North Zone, notice issued to five taxpayers falling under DCST, Champhai 
Zone and opportunity of being heard was to be given for further necessary action in respect 
of one taxpayer falling under DCST, Aizawl East Zone. 
Replies on the action initiated against the remaining two taxpayers were not received 
(March 2025). 
Recommendation: The Department may ensure that all the EWBs are verified along with 
other related documents by the jurisdictional authorities and appropriate action initiated, 
as per the provisions of the Act as necessary. 
 
115  Two consecutive tax periods for Composition taxpayers and two consecutive months for Normal 
Taxpayers 
 

204
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
204 
4.11.8 Enforcement Functions of the Department 
The EWB System was introduced to track the movement of goods having value exceeding 
₹ 50,000. The EWB system is a self-declaration model wherein, by way of a digital interface, 
the person involved in the movement of goods uploads the relevant information prior to the 
commencement of movement of goods and generates an authorisation for transportation of 
the said goods. The self-declaration model emphasises the need for a compliance verification 
mechanism which can be done through verification of EWBs. 
In Mizoram, the enforcement functions in respect of interception of vehicles and verification 
of documents, viz., EWBs, invoices, delivery challans, etc., are being done by one Preventive 
Unit headed by an ACST through one Data Collection Centre (DCC) at Vairengte, Kolasib 
District in northern Mizoram. 
Audit test checked records related to operational preparedness, effectiveness of anti-evasion 
measures and intra-Departmental coordination in monitoring EWB related transactions. 
Audit requisitioned information and records related to preventive activities of the Preventive 
Unit with reference to intercepted and booked cases of EWBs. During the audited period 
(2018-2022), the Department verified 2.19 lakh EWBs. The audit findings are enumerated 
as under: 
4.11.9 Operational Preparedness of the Department 
 
4.11.9.1 Dedicated Setup/ Unit 
A dedicated unit for EWB related enforcement activities like verification of EWBs during 
interception of vehicles and follow up action wherever required, utilising EWB Analytical 
Reports in planning the EWB verification, etc., will improve the efficiency of preventive 
functions. 
The Department notified, in December 2017116, the establishment of Data Collection Centres 
(DCCs) in Kolasib and Champhai districts. However, due to shortage of manpower, only 
one DCC at Vairengte, Kolasib District was established. Further, Audit observed that other 
than setting of DCC at Vairengte, there are no specific orders on the composition of 
inspection teams for dealing with EWB related enforcement activities. Also, an order was 
passed during February 2019 117 instructing all heads of Zonal Offices to conduct mobile 
checking of goods within their respective areas at least once a week. However, there is no 
record of setting up dedicated units in the Zonal Offices for conducting mobile checking of 
goods within their respective jurisdictions. 
On this being pointed out (May 2024), the Department stated (June 2024) that the order 
instructing all heads of Zonal Offices to conduct checking of goods within their respective 
areas at least once a week was discontinued as the establishment of the DCC was believed 
to be relieving the works of mobile checking units and necessary action will be taken in due 
course. 
 
116  No. D. 11029/1/02-TAX dated 29 December 2017 
117 No. G. 28042/142/2018-COMTAX dated 19 February 2019 

205
Chapter-IV:  Revenue Sector
Chapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
205 
4.11.9.2 Adequacy of manpower 
Against the sanctioned strength of 14 personnel for Vairengte DCC, there were 14 men-in-
position and there was no staff shortage during the audited period (2018-2022). However, at 
the time of Audit (February 2024), it was observed that there was shortage of two118 staff. 
The Department stated (June 2024) that it has initiated proposal for filling up of six vacant 
State Tax Officers’ posts across the State, including one State Tax Officer for Vairengte 
DCC. 
The Department may consider deploying manpower as per sanctioned strength. 
4.11.10 Effectiveness of Anti-Evasion Measures 
 
4.11.10.1 Targets and achievements 
The Department decided (December 2018) that a thorough checking of cargo of minimum 
three transport vehicles should be conducted daily w.e.f., January 2019; and penalty as per 
provisions of the MGST Act, 2017 should be imposed in case of infraction. 
The Department, however, did not fix specific targets for verification of EWBs. Nonetheless, 
as per information furnished119 by the Department, a total of 2.19 lakh EWBs were verified 
during the audited period and the number of cases booked under GST-EWB-03 Part B is Nil 
implying that no offence was found committed in the verified EWBs by the Department. 
Table-4.57: Preventive Units wise vehicles intercepted and booked cases 
(Amount in ₹) 
Jurisdiction 
(Commissionerate) 
Year Total No. of 
EWBs 
verified 
Total No. of cases booked 
(GST-EWB-03 PART B 
issued) 
Total amount 
involved  
(Tax + Penalty) 
Office of the 
Commissioner of 
State Tax 
2018-2019 15,005 0 0 
2019-2020 62,795 0 0 
2020-2021 67,646 0 0 
2021-2022 73,572 0 0 
Total 2,19,018 0 0 
On this being pointed out (August 2023), the Department stated (August 2023) that as the 
function of the DCC is to collect EWB data only, no cases were booked under GST Act and 
Rules. The reply is not tenable as the Department did not adhere to prescribed norms for 
checking of minimum three transport cargo vehicles. 
The Department further stated (June 2024) that it will take necessary action in the interest of 
revenue in due course. However, action taken by the Department has not been intimated to 
Audit as of March 2025. 
4.11.10.2 Non-adherence to the procedures in interception of vehicles 
Section 129(1) of the MGST Act, 2017, prescribes that if any person transports any goods 
or stores any goods while they are in transit in contravention of the provisions of this Act or 
the Rules, all such goods and conveyance shall be liable to detention or seizure, and they 
shall be released on payment of the applicable tax and penalty. 
 
118 One State Tax Officer and one Checker 
119 Letter No. G. 28042/139/2018-COMTAX dated 17 October 2022 

206
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
206 
The Department circulated 120 on 28 May 2018, the guidelines containing the procedure to 
intercept conveyances for inspection of goods in movement, detention, release and 
confiscation of such goods and conveyances. As per the guidelines, the proper officer may 
issue an order for physical verification/ inspection of the conveyance, goods and documents 
in FORM GST MOV-02 and prepare a report in PART-A of FORM GST EWB-03. On 
completion of the physical verification/ inspection, the proper officer shall prepare a report 
in FORM GST MOV-04 and record the final inspection report in PART-B of FORM GST 
EWB-03. Copy of this circular121 was also sent to the DCST, Kolasib in September 2018.  
The Department further decided (December 2018) that thorough checking of cargo of 
minimum three transport vehicles should be conducted daily w.e.f., January 2019; and 
penalty as per provisions of the MGST Act, 2017 should be imposed in case of infraction.  
However, during a Joint Physical Inspection of the Data Collection Centre (DCC) at 
Vairengte, it was observed (January 2024) that manual entries of EWBs and invoices of all 
goods carrying vehicles produced by the transporters were made at the data collection booth 
by the staff on duty, but there is no physical verification of goods being transported. 
The Department stated (June 2024) that it will take necessary action to adhere to the 
procedures on interception of vehicle in due course. However, action taken by the 
Department has not been intimated to Audit as of March 2025. 
4.11.10.3 Delay in actual verification of EWBs 
It was noticed (January 2024) during the Joint Physical Inspection of Vairengte DCC that 
the EWBs produced by the transporters were not verified on the spot. 
The verification of EWBs involve two steps in which the details such as vehicle number, 
name of taxpayer, type of goods, EWB number, value of goods and time of entry/ exit were 
manually entered in the registers maintained by the personnel on duty at the DCC booth. 
Subsequently, all records which were entered in the register during the last 24 hours 
(9:00 AM of the previous day to 9:00 AM on the present day) were cross verified online 
resulting in a delay of 24 hours in actual verification of the EWBs. 
On cross verification of records of the DCC at Vairengte relating to the audit period with the 
online EWBs, it was observed that there were 58 manual entries of EWBs with invoice value 
of ₹ 439.48 lakh in the registers maintained by the DCC, Vairengte which, however, were 
not found online. It was also observed that there is no record of further pursuance of such 
EWBs. The list of EWBs with no records found on the EWB system are given in 
Appendix-4.18. 
As a result of non-adherence to the procedures in interception of vehicles, non-checking of 
cargo and delay in actual verification of EWBs at Vairengte DCC, any discrepancy between 
the goods and documents is liable to remain undetected even though 2.19 lakh EWBs were 
verified during the audited period. 
 
120 Circular No. J. 21011/2/2018-TAX dated 28 May 2018 
121 Vide letter No. G. 28042/143/2018-COMTAX/35 dated 11 September 2018 

207
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
207 
The Department stated (June 2024) that it will take necessary action for better effective anti-
evasion measures in due course. However, action taken by the Department has not been 
intimated to Audit as of March 2025. 
Recommendation: The Department may initiate steps to strengthen the Preventive Unit at 
DCC, Vairengte as per the provisions of the Act for interception of vehicles to the fullest 
extent. It may also develop a mechanism along with necessary infrastructure to ensure 
that there is no delay in verification of EWBs at the DCC. 
4.11.10.4 Usage of Analytical Reports of NIC and other Agencies  
NIC generates Analytical Reports on EWB transactions and shares with the GST 
Departments under Centre and State formations. Audit examined the extent to which these 
reports were utilised by the Preventive Units under the CST, Mizoram for planning the 
verifications of EWBs. 
In response to an Audit query (August 2023), the Department stated (August 2023) that the 
analytical reports of NIC or any other analytical reports of other agencies have not been 
utilised for planning of interception of other vehicles. The Department also stated that the 
DCC at Vairengte is the only roadway border for importing almost cent per cent of all the 
goods from other states and the establishment of the DCC is ideal for intercepting EWBs. 
The reply of the Department is not acceptable as the setting up of the DCC at Vairengte does 
not preclude the Department from utilising the analytical reports of various agencies.  
Utilisation of the Analytical Reports would have helped in strengthening the anti-evasion 
measures adopted by the Department. 
On this being pointed out (May 2024), the Department stated (June 2024) that the 
Department plans to use EWB analytics in due course. Though the Department confirmed 
(February 2025) the availability of Analytical Reports of EWB transactions relating to the 
audited period in the EWB system developed by NIC but it is evident that utilisation of the 
Analytical Reports has not been affected. 
Recommendation: The Department may setup a dedicated team for verification of 
Analytics Reports on EWB to identify the high-risk taxpayers and share the information 
to the taxpayers’ Zones for use in the scrutiny of returns. 
4.11.11 Conclusion 
The Performance Audit on Electronic Waybill (EWB) System under Goods and Service Tax 
(GST) was undertaken with the twin objectives of verifying the effectiveness of EWB 
mechanism in protecting revenue interest of the Government and the efficiency and 
effectiveness of Preventive/ Enforcement formation in enforcing the provisions relating to 
EWB system. 
The existing departmental monitoring mechanism has substantial systemic risk exposures as 
taxpayers are being allowed to generate EWBs and continue with their respective businesses 
even though they are delinquent or non-compliant with the provisions of GST in filing of 
returns, discharging their tax liability and generating multiple EWBs with the same invoice. 
Inspite of technology and digitised data bolstering tax administration, the Department is not 
fully leveraging EWB data and is unable to detect taxpayers generating EWBs using invalid 

208
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
208 
vehicles. Audit noticed generation of EWBs by cancelled taxpayers. The tax due in respect 
of EWBs generated by cancelled taxpayers were neither demanded by the Proper Officers 
nor deposited in Government exchequer by the taxpayers. The Proper Officers failed to 
detect taxpayers who had generated EWBs for supply of goods but had not reported them in 
their returns (GSTR-1/ GSTR-3B) which resulted in non-realisation of tax, cess and interest. 
The provisions relating to preventive measures and enforcement such as inspection, search, 
seizure and arrest are provided to serve as a deterrent for tax evasion as also to safeguard the 
Government’s legitimate dues. Audit also noticed that the organisational preparedness for 
preventive/ enforcement activities of the sole Preventive Unit was impaired by the 
non-adherence to the provisions of the Act and departmental circulars for EWB related 
enforcement activities. The Department was not adequately using the extensive analytical 
reports generated by NIC or other agencies for EWB related enforcement. Audit noticed lack 
of timely action by the Preventive Unit leading to non-booking of cases and subsequently 
non-imposition of tax and penalty on vehicles without EWBs whose invoice value were 
above the threshold. 
4.11.12 Recommendations  
The Government may consider the following recommendations: 
(i) Introduce a mechanism to prevent generation of EWBs by nil filers of returns and 
cancelled taxpayers. The Department may also streamline the available manpower 
for regular scrutiny of EWBs and cross-verification with returns and other relevant 
documents by the Proper Officers under appropriate Sections of the Act to minimise 
instances of unrealised tax from the taxpayers; 
(ii) Notify the appropriate authorities about the weaknesses/ loopholes in the EWB 
Common Portal as well as the GST Common Portal where the system’s deficiencies 
are beyond its control/ powers to prevent exploitation of the system’s deficiencies in 
future. Also, it may ensure pro-active involvement of its personnel in mitigating the 
deficiencies through manual validation of system-generated documents; 
(iii) Utilise the provisions122 of the modes of recovery under MGST Act, 2017 and MGST 
Rules, 2017 to ensure full recovery from the tax defaulters after initiation 123 of 
recovery proceedings; 
(iv) Ensure that all the EWBs are verified along with other related documents by the 
jurisdictional authorities and appropriate action is initiated as per the provisions of 
the Act as necessary; 
(v) Initiate steps to strengthen the Preventive Unit at Data Collection Centre (DCC), 
Vairengte as per the provisions of the Act for interception of vehicles to the fullest 
 
122  As per Section 79(1)(a-f) of MGST Act, 2017 read with Rule 143, 144, 145, 147, 155 and 156 of MGST 
Rules, 2017, the provisions for modes of recovery of tax dues include: Adjustments against refunds, 
detaining and selling goods, recovery from third parties, seizure of property, recovery through District 
Collector and Court recovery 
123  Section 78 of MGST Act, 2017 

209
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
209 
extent. It may also develop a mechanism along with the necessary infrastructure to 
ensure that there is no delay in verification of EWBs at the DCC; and 
(vi) Setup a dedicated team for verification of Analytics Reports on EWB to identify the 
high-risk taxpayers and share the information to the taxpayers’ Zones for use in the 
scrutiny of returns. 
  

210
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
210 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS 
 
TAXATION DEPARTMENT 
 
4.12 Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Department’s Oversight on Goods 
and Services Tax Payments and Returns Filing” for the years 2018-19 to 
2020-21 (DORF Phase-II) 
 
4.12.1 Introduction 
Introduction of Goods and Services Tax (GST) has replaced multiple taxes levied and 
collected by the Centre and the States. GST, which came into effect from 01 July 2017, is a 
destination-based consumption tax on the supply of goods or services or both levied on every 
value addition. The Centre and States simultaneously levy GST on a common tax base. 
Central GST (CGST) and State GST (SGST)/ Union Territory GST (UTGST) are levied on 
intra-state supplies, and Integrated GST (IGST) is levied on inter-state supplies. 
Section 59 of the Mizoram Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (MGST Act) stipulates GST 
as a self-assessment-based tax, whereby the responsibility for calculating tax liability, 
discharging the computed tax liability and filing returns is vested with the taxpayer. The 
GST returns must be filed online regularly on the common GST portal, non-compliance of 
which attracted penalties. Even if the business has had no tax liability during a particular tax 
period, it must file a nil return mandatorily. Further, Section 61 of the MGST Act read with 
Rule 99 of the Mizoram Goods and Services Tax Rules, 2017 (MGST Rules) stipulate that 
the proper officer may scrutinise the return and related particulars furnished by the taxpayers, 
communicate discrepancies to the taxpayers and seek an explanation.  
This Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) was taken up as a continuation of the SSCA 
conducted during the year 2022-23 covering returns for the period 2017-18 (DORF Phase-I), 
considering the significance of the control mechanism envisaged for tax compliance and the 
oversight mechanism of the Taxation Department, Mizoram in this new tax regime. This 
SSCA covers returns for the period 2018-19 to 2020-21. 
4.12.2 Audit objectives 
This SSCA was taken up to assess: 
 Whether the rules and procedures were designed to secure an effective check on tax 
compliance and were being duly observed by taxpayers; and 
 Whether the scrutiny procedures and other compliance functions of the Zones were 
adequate and effective. 
4.12.3 Audit scope and methodology 
This SSCA was predominantly conducted based on data analysis, which highlighted risk 
areas and red flags pertaining to the period April 2018 to March 2021. Through data analysis, 
a set of 16 deviations were identified across the domains of input tax credit (ITC), discharge 
of tax liability, registration and returns filing. Such deviations were followed up through a 

211
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
211 
centralised audit124, whereby these deviations were communicated to the State departmental 
field formations and action taken by the jurisdictional formations on the identified deviations 
was ascertained without involving field visits. The centralised audit was supplemented by a 
detailed audit  involving field visits for verification of records available with the 
jurisdictional field formations. Returns and related attachments and information were 
accessed through the State GST Model-2 application - the back-end system of the State 
Taxation Department’s application as much as feasible to examine data/ documents relating 
to taxpayers (viz., registration, tax payment, returns and other departmental functions). The 
detailed audit also involved accessing relevant granular records from the taxpayers such as 
invoices through the respective field formations. This apart, compliance functions such as 
scrutiny of returns, action taken on non-filers and cancellation of registrations by the 
departmental formations were also reviewed in the selected Zones. 
The review of the scrutiny of returns by the Department and verification of taxpayers’ 
records covered the period from April 2018 to March 2021, while the audit of the functions 
of selected Zones covered the period from April 2020 to March 2021. This SSCA covered 
only the State administered taxpayers. The field audit was conducted from July 2023 to 
February 2024. 
Entry conference for this SSCA was held on 7 June 2023 with the Commissioner of State 
Tax, Mizoram in which the audit objectives, sample selection, audit scope and methodology 
were discussed. The exit conference was held on 19 September 2024 with the Joint Secretary, 
Finance and officials from the Taxation Department, in which the audit findings were 
discussed. The views/ comments of the Department expressed during the exit conference 
and the replies received on the draft report have been suitably incorporated in the relevant 
paragraphs. 
4.12.4 Audit sample 
A data-driven approach was adopted for planning and also to determine the nature and extent 
of the substantive audit. The sample for this SSCA comprises a sample for Zonal units for 
evaluating the compliance functions of the Zones; a set of deviations identified through data 
analysis for Centralised Audit that did not involve field visits; and a sample of taxpayers for 
Detailed Audit that involved field visits & scrutiny of taxpayers’ records at the departmental 
premises. 
This SSCA involved three distinct parts as under: 
Part – I  Centralised Audit 
The sample for Centralised Audit was selected by identification of high-value or high-risk 
deviations from rules and inconsistencies between returns through data analysis for 
evaluation of the adequacy and effectiveness of the scrutiny procedure of the Department. 
Accordingly, 148 sample cases involving 83 taxpayers were selected for Centralised Audit 
under this SSCA as detailed in Appendix-4.19. 
 
124 Centralised Audit did not involve seeking taxpayer’s granular records such as financial statements related 
ledger accounts, invoices, agreements, etc. 
 

212
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
212 
Part – II  Detailed Audit 
Detailed Audit was conducted by accessing taxpayers’ records through Zones for evaluation 
of the extent of tax compliance by taxpayers. The sample of taxpayers for Detailed Audit 
was selected on the basis of risk parameters such as ITC mismatch, four ratio based trend - 
ITC availed to tax paid, exemption to total turnover, IGST to CGST and SGST, credit notes 
to tax paid, ITC availed without payment of tax by suppliers, ITC availed after limitation 
period, unsettled liability, and evasion prone supplies. The 15 taxpayers selected for Detailed 
Audit comprised of Large125, Medium126 and Small127 strata of taxpayers as well as taxpayers 
selected randomly as detailed in Appendix-4.20. 
Part – III  Zonal Audit 
Three Zonal offices, viz., Aizawl South Zone, Lawngtlai Zone and Lunglei Zone out of total 
14128 Zonal offices were selected for Zonal Audit to evaluate their oversight functions. 
4.12.5 Audit criteria 
The source of audit criteria is derived from the provisions contained in the MGST Act, IGST 
Act and Rules made thereunder. In addition, the notifications and circulars issued by State 
Taxation Department relating to filing of returns, notifying the effective dates of filing of 
various returns, extending due dates for filing returns, rates of tax on goods and services, 
payment of tax, availing and utilising ITC, scrutiny of returns and oversight of tax 
compliance and Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) containing instructions to departmental 
officers on various aspects related to filing returns, scrutiny of returns, cancellation of 
registrations, etc., also formed part of the audit criteria. 
Audit findings 
The audit findings are categorised into the following three categories: 
 Audit findings from Zonal Audit 
 Audit findings from Centralised Audit 
 Audit findings from Detailed Audit 
4.12.6 Audit finding on Zonal Audit 
The observation below pertains to three Zones 129 relating to the period from April 2020 to 
March 2021. 
 
125 First category comprising large taxpayers – top 0.25 per cent of taxpayers based on turnover and Second 
category comprising the next set of large taxpayers – next 0.25 per cent of taxpayers based on turnover 
126 Third category comprising medium taxpayers – remaining taxpayers with a minimum turnover of 
₹ 7.5 crore 
127 Fourth category comprising the bottom most layer – remaining taxpayers with a minimum turnover of 
₹ 2.5 crore 
128  Aizawl East Zone, Aizawl North Zone, Aizawl South Zone, Aizawl West Zone, Champhai Zone, Kolasib 
Zone, Lunglei Zone, Lawngtlai Zone, Mamit Zone, Serchhip Zone, Siaha Zone, Hnahthial Zone, Saitual 
Zone, Khawzawl Zone 
129 Aizawl South Zone, Lawngtlai Zone, and Lunglei Zone 
 

213
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
213 
4.12.6.1 Scrutiny of returns 
As per Section 61 of the MGST Act various returns filed by the taxpayers have to be 
scrutinised by the proper officer to verify the correctness of the returns and suitable action 
has to be taken on any discrepancies or inconsistencies reflected in the returns. 
During Audit (October 2023) of the Dy. Commissioners of State Tax (DCST), Lunglei, 
Lawngtlai and Aizawl South Zones, it was found that during April 2020 to March 2021, the 
three Zones conducted scrutiny of returns pertaining to the period 2017-18 to 2020-21 
relating to 306 cases (44 cases in Lunglei Zone, 22 cases in Lawngtlai Zone and 240 cases 
in Aizawl South Zone), as stated by the Department, and, on detection of the discrepancies, 
had issued notice in form ASMT-10 in 151 cases (all 44 cases of Lunglei Zone, 20 cases of 
Lawngtlai Zone, and 87 cases of Aizawl South Zone). In Lunglei Zone, the Department had 
identified tax liability of ₹ 0.05 crore in seven cases out of which ₹ 0.004 crore was 
recovered from four cases. In Lawngtlai Zone, the Department had not determined tax 
liability during scrutiny, however, ₹ 0.002 crore was recovered from one case. While in 
Aizawl South Zone, the Department had determined tax liability of ₹ 0.08 crore in 14 cases 
and recovered ₹ 0.03 crore from four cases. 
However, the related MIS report was not made available to Audit, hence, the data provided 
by the Department could not be verified. 
Audit observed that the Department had not recovered the remaining tax liability of ₹ 0.10 
crore (₹ 0.04 crore from three cases in Lunglei Zone and ₹ 0.05 crore from 10 cases in 
Aizawl South Zone). 
The matter was conveyed to the Department (January 2024) and the Department stated 
(July 2024) that necessary action will be undertaken by them. 
Recommendation: The Department may, while determining the correctness of returns 
filed, monitor the progress of recoveries made on scrutiny of such returns, in the interest 
of revenue. 
4.12.7 Audit findings from Centralised Audit 
Audit analysed GST returns data pertaining to the period 2018-19 to 2020-21 as made 
available by Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN). Rule-based deviations and logical 
inconsistencies between GST returns filed by taxpayers were identified on a set of 
16 parameters, which can be broadly categorised into two domains - ITC and Tax payments. 
Out of the 15 prescribed GST returns 130, the following basic returns that apply to normal 
taxpayers were considered for the purpose of identifying deviations, inconsistencies and 
mismatches between GST returns/ data: 
 
130 GSTR-1, GSTR-2A, GSTR-2B, GSTR-3B, GSTR-4 (taxpayers under the Composition scheme), GSTR-5 
(non-resident taxable person), GSTR-5A (Non-resident OIDAR service providers), GSTR-6 (Input service 
distributor), GSTR-7 (taxpayers deducting TDS), GSTR-8 (E-commerce operator), GSTR-9 (Annual 
return), GSTR-10 (Final return), GSTR-11 (person having UIN and claiming a refund), CMP-08, and ITC-
04 (Statement to be filed by a principal/ job-worker about details of goods sent to/ received from a job-
worker) 
 

214
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
214 
 GSTR-1: monthly return furnished by all normal and casual registered taxpayers 
making outward supplies of goods and services or both and contains details of outward 
supplies of goods and services. 
 GSTR-3B: monthly summary return of outward supplies and ITC claimed, along with 
payment of tax by the taxpayer to be filed by all taxpayers except those specified under 
Section 39(1) of the Act. This is the return that populates the credit and debits in the 
Electronic Credit Ledger and debits in Electronic Cash Ledger. 
 GSTR-6: monthly return for Input Service Distributors (ISDs) providing the details of 
their distributed input tax credit and inward supplies. 
 GSTR-8: monthly return to be filed by the e-commerce operators who are required to 
deduct TCS (Tax collected at source) under GST, introduced in October 2018. 
 GSTR-9: annual return to be filed by all registered persons other than an ISD, Tax 
Deductor at Source/ Tax Collector at Source, Casual Taxable Person and Non-Resident 
taxpayer. This document contains the details of all supplies made and received under 
various tax heads (CGST, SGST and IGST) during the entire year along with turnover 
and audit details for the same. 
 GSTR-9C: annual audit form for all taxpayers having a turnover above ₹ 5 crore in a 
particular financial year. It is basically a reconciliation statement between the annual 
returns filed in GSTR-9 and the taxpayer's audited annual financial statements. 
 GSTR-2A: a system-generated statement of inward supplies for a recipient. It contains 
the details of all Business to Business (B2B) transactions of suppliers declared in their 
Form GSTR-1/5, ISD details from GSTR-6, details from GSTR-7 and GSTR-8 
respectively by the counterparty and import of goods from overseas on bill of entry. 
 GSTR-2B: It is a month-wise auto-drafted statement for regular taxpayers (whether or 
not opted into the quarterly return and monthly payment (QRMP) scheme) introduced 
on the GST portal providing eligible and ineligible ITC for each month, similar to 
GSTR-2A but remains constant or unchanged for a period. The statement was 
launched from the August 2020 tax period onwards. 
The pan-State analysis on the 16 identified parameters undertaken are summarised in tables 
below and results thereon are given in Table-4.58 and Table-4.59. 
Table-4.58: Parameters used for sample extraction 
Sl. 
No. Algorithm used Impact 
1. ITC available as per GSTR-2A with all its amendments was compared with 
the ITC availed in GSTR-3B in Table-4A (5) (accrued on domestic 
supplies) excluding the reversals in Table-4B (2) but including the ITC 
availed in the subsequent year from Table-8C of GSTR-9 and blocked 
credits. 
ITC mismatch between GSTR-
2A and GSTR-3B 
2. ITC available from GSTR-2A was compared with Table-8A of GSTR-9 
which captures ITC available from GSTR-2A (as an auto-populated non-
editable field) but excludes those entries in GSTR-2A where the supplier 
has not filed GSTR-1 by due date of its filing and also excludes the ITC for 
ITC passed on without supplier 
remitting tax 

215
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
215 
Sl. 
No. Algorithm used Impact 
the period during which the recipient taxpayer was under composition 
scheme.  
3. ITC availed through Table-4 of GSTR-3Bs pertaining to period 2018-19 to 
2020-21 filed after October of the following year.  
ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed 
after the cut-off period. 
4. ISD ITC availed in GSTR-9 Table-6G or GSTR-3B Table 4(A)(4) of 
recipient was compared with the sum of Table-5A, Table-8A, and Table-
9A of GSTR-6 of distributor GSTINs 
Incorrect availing of ISD credit 
5. RCM payments in GSTR-9 Table-4G (tax payable) were compared with 
ITC availed in GSTR-9 Table-6C, 6D and 6F (ITC availed). In cases where 
GSTR-9 was not available, RCM payment in GSTR-3B Table-3.1(d) was 
compared with GSTR-3B 4(A)(2) and 4A (3). Greater differences in GSTR-
9 and GSTR-3B considered where both were available. 
Short payment of tax under 
RCM versus ITC availed in 
GSTR-3B/ GSTR-9 
6. Positive figure in GSTR-9C Table-12F Mismatch of ITC availed 
between annual returns and 
books of accounts 
7. Positive figure in GSTR-9C Table-14T Reconciliation between ITC 
availed in annual returns with 
expenses in financial 
statements 
8. The greater tax liability between GSTR-1 (Tables-4 to 11), considering 
advances and amendments, and GSTR-9 (Tables- 4N, 10 and 11) was 
compared with tax paid details in GSTR-3B Tables-3.1(a) and 3.1(b). In 
cases where GSTR-9 was not available, GSTR-3B tax paid was compared 
with GSTR-1 liability. 
Unsettled liabilities 
9. GSTR-3B Table-3.1(a)+(b) was compared with tax liability declared in the 
e-way bills and cases where GSTR-3B tax liability are less than e-way bill 
tax liability is identified. 
Suppression of tax liability 
based on E-way bill 
verification 
10. Negative figure in GSTR-9C Table-9R Mismatch in tax paid between 
books of accounts and annual 
returns 
11. Taxpayers who have not filed GSTR-3B but have filed GSTR-1 or where 
GSTR-2A available, indicate taxpayers carrying on the business without 
discharging tax. 
GSTR-3B was not filed but 
GSTR-1 is available 
12. Interest calculated at the rate of 18 per cent on cash portion of tax payment 
on delayed filing of GSTR-3B vis-à-vis interest declared in GSTR-3B 
Short payment of interest 
Table-4.59: Parameters used for sample extraction 
Sl. 
No. 
Algorithm used Impact 
1. Table-3.1(a) of GSTR-3B was compared with Column 6 of 
Table - 9 of GSTR-2A. Cases where GSTR-3B values are less 
than that of GSTR-2A are identified. 
Under-declaration of taxable 
supplies by comparing TDS 
returns 
2. Unbilled revenue at the beginning of the year in GSTR-9C 
Table - 5B should tally with the unbilled revenue of the previous 
year GSTR-9C shown in Table-5H. Any mismatch indicates a 
suppression of taxable turnover. 
Suppression of taxable value 
based on unbilled revenue 
declared in GSTR-9C. 
3. Negative figure in GSTR-9C Table-7G Mismatch in taxable turnover 
declared in GSTR-9C Table 7G 
4. The composition taxpayers whose turnover on all India basis 
(Central and State jurisdiction) under all GSTINs of the same PAN 
have crossed the turnover limit of ₹ 50 lakh in 2018-19 and 
₹ 75 lakh in 2019-20 were identified 
Ineligible composition levy 

216
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
216 
The data analysis depicted number of deviations with high money values which point out 
lack of basic validation control that should have been built into the application software. For 
example, for suppression of tax liability based on E-way bill, the number of deviations were 
15 with money value of ₹ 27.86 crore, and under the ITC mismatch across the returns 
GSTRs-2A and 3B, the number of deviations were 18 with money value of ₹ 22.22 crore. 
These money value figures indicated that controls to input and validate data in GST system 
and EWB system are either not working properly or are entirely absent. 
4.12.7.1 Results of response received from Centralised Audit  
Based on the responses received from the Department on the audit queries (February 2024, 
July 2024 and September 2024) to the extent against which each of the 16 parameters were 
translated into compliance deviations/ inconsistencies, the position is summarised in the 
Appendix-4.21 and Appendix-4.22. 
4.12.7.2 Summary of Centralised Audit 
Audit noticed deviations from the provisions of the Act in 80 cases (Col. Nos. 4, 6, 8, and 
10 of Table 2(a)) involving mismatches of ITC/ tax liability of ₹ 74.45 crore (Col. Nos. 5, 7, 
9, and 11 of Table 2(a)) constituting 54.05 per cent of the 148 inconsistencies/ mismatches 
in data, for which the Department provided responses.  
In 43 cases (Col. Nos. 14, 16 and 18 of Table-2(a)), constituting 30.41 per cent, where the 
Department’s reply was acceptable to Audit, data entry errors by taxpayers comprised 
eight cases (Appendix-4.28), Department had proactively taken action in four cases 
(Appendix-4.29) and 31 cases (Appendix-4.30) had valid explanations. 
In six cases (Col. No. 20 of Table 2(a)), the Department reply is not acceptable to Audit and 
rebutted accordingly. 
Audit also noticed turnover-related mismatches (Table-2(b)) in 19 cases (Col. No. 2 of 
Table-2(b)) constituting 12.84 per cent of the 148 inconsistencies for which the Department 
provided responses. Of these, in 6 cases (Col. No. 4, 6, 8, and 10), the Department had 
initiated action on the audit observation. In 12 cases (Col. Nos. 14, 16 and 18), the 
Department’s reply was acceptable to Audit whereas in one case (Col. No. 20) the 
Department’s reply was not acceptable to Audit and rebutted accordingly. 
4.12.7.3 Analysis of causative factors 
Considering the Department’s response to all 148 data deviations/ inconsistencies, the 
factors that caused the deviations/ inconsistencies are as follows: 
(I). Deviations from GST Law and Rules   
Out of the 148 deviations summarised in Appendix-4.21 and Appendix-4.22, ₹ 0.71 crore 
was recovered from two cases, the Department had issued Form ASMT-10 in 14 cases, 
notice conveying discrepancies was issued to the taxpayers in 41 cases and was in 
correspondence with the respective taxpayers in 29 cases as detailed in Appendix-4.23 to 
Appendix-4.26. 

217
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
217 
Few illustrative cases are given below:  
(i) ITC mismatch between GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B 
In order to analyse the veracity of ITC availed, relevant data were extracted from GSTR-3B 
and GSTR-2A for the period 2018-19 to 2020-21, and the ITC paid as per suppliers’ details 
was matched with the ITC credit availed by the taxpayer.  
Audit observed in the case of GSTIN 1 xxxxxxxxxxxxxY under Aizawl North Zone that there 
was a mismatch of ₹ 3.65 crore and ₹ 0.25 crore during 2018-19 and 2019-20 respectively 
between GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B (ITC available as per GSTR-2A is ₹ 1.78 crore and ITC 
availed in GSTR-3B is ₹ 5.43 crore during 2018-19, and ITC available as per GSTR-2A is 
₹ 2.24 crore while ITC availed in GSTR-3B is ₹ 2.49 crore during 2019-20). This was 
communicated (July 2023) to the Department and the Department stated (March 2024) that 
ASMT-10 was issued to the taxpayer. The taxpayer’s reply was awaited (March 2025). 
(ii) ITC passed on without the supplier remitting tax 
In order to analyse the extent of compliance of ITC availment under Section 16(4) of the 
MGST Act, an attempt has been made to identify likely cases where the ITC would have 
been passed on by the taxpayer without remitting the tax.  
While GSTR-2A is generated based on the disclosures made by the suppliers in their 
GSTR-1, the Table-8A of the GSTR-9 is auto-populated (non-editable) from Tables 3, 4 , 5 
and 6 of the GSTR-2A (Tables-3 and 5 of the old GSTR-2A format) as available on 
31 October of the following financial year. Therefore, the following are not reflected in 
Table-8A: 
 GSTR-1/ 5 filed after the cut-off date (though details are available in GSTR-2A) as 
ITC availment is limited to GSTR-1/5 filed by the suppliers up to the tax period of 
September of the following financial year. 
 Supplies indicated as RCM in GSTR-1. 
 When the supplier has amended the GSTIN, credit is available to the amended 
GSTIN only. 
 Supplies pertaining to the period when the supplier was under the composition 
scheme. 
 Documents dated after the effective date of cancellation of the supplier. 
 Invoices, where the place of supply differs from the State of the recipient. 
It may also be noted that though the filing of GSTR-1 before filing of GSTR-3B was strictly 
implemented only from January 2022, it is quite probable that there are instances prior to 
this date where suppliers might not have filed GSTR-3B or filed GSTR-3B belatedly after 
filing GSTR-1, therefore, rendering the Input Tax Credit (ITC) derived from these returns 
ineligible. 
Audit observed in the case of GSTIN 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO under Aizawl South Zone that 
during the year 2019-20 the taxpayer had availed ITC of ₹ 0.92 crore without remitting tax 
(ITC available in GSTR-2A after amendments was ₹ 5.23 crore while GSTR-9 Table-8A 
was ₹ 4.31 crore). This was communicated (July 2023) to the Department and the 

218
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
218 
Department stated (March 2024) that intimation was sent to the taxpayer but the taxpayer 
declined to respond citing that Document Identification Number (DIN) was missing in the 
Department’s notice. Though CBIC circular No. 122/41/2019-GST dated 
05 November 2019 stated that all communication issued during an enquiry should contain a 
computer-generated DIN, the circular is intended specifically for CBIC and not applicable 
to State formations. The Department may again examine this and pursue the matter with the 
taxpayer. 
(iii) ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed after the cut-off period 
GST Act provides for availing of ITC only till the due date of furnishing GSTR-3B for the 
month of September following the end of the financial year to which such ITC pertains or 
furnishing of relevant Annual Return, whichever is earlier. Accordingly, if any GSTR-3B is 
furnished after such time, ITC availed therein becomes inadmissible.  
Audit observed in the case of GSTIN 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 under Aizawl West Zone that during 
the years 2018-19 and 2019-20 the taxpayer had availed ITC on GSTR-3B filed after the 
limitation period i.e., October 2019 for an amount of ₹ 2.61 crore and ₹ 2.22 crore 
respectively (GSTR-3B was belatedly filed in the months December 2018 up to 
February 2020). This was communicated (July 2023) to the Department and the Department 
stated (July 2024) that notice was issued to the taxpayer and their reply was awaited 
(March 2025). 
(iv) Short payment of tax under RCM versus ITC availed in GSTR-3B/ GSTR-9 
In order to analyse the veracity of tax paid under Reverse Charge Mechanism (RCM), the 
datasets in GSTR-3B and annual return in GSTR-9 pertaining to RCM was compared to 
check whether the tax has been discharged fully on the activities/ transactions under RCM.  
Audit observed in the case of GSTIN 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 under Aizawl South Zone that during 
the year 2019-20 there was short payment of tax under RCM for an amount of ₹ 0.14 crore. 
This was communicated (July 2023) to the Department and the Department stated 
(July 2024) that the taxpayer contends that the deviation amount should be ₹ 0.11 crore 
instead of ₹ 0.14 crore and assumed that they had claimed excess ITC of ₹ 0.11 crore in the 
month of February 2020 due to some clerical error or typo error and are ready to reverse the 
same. The Department may pursue the matter with the taxpayer. 
(v) Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and books of accounts 
To review the extent of identified mismatch in ITC availed figures reported in the Annual 
Return vis-à-vis the Financial Statements, the relevant datapoints pertaining to Table-12 of 
the GSTR-9C reconciliation statement submitted by the taxpayer as required under Rule 
80(3) of MGST Rules for the years 2018-19 to 2020-21 was analysed at data level. 
Table-12F of GSTR-9C captures the unreconciled ITC between the annual return GSTR-9 
and that declared in the Financial Statements for the year after the requisite adjustments. 
Table-12 deals with three aspects of ITC, i.e., ITC accounted in the books of accounts 
(Booked), ITC claimed in returns/ ECL (Availed), and ITC utilised for payment (Utilised). 
Though there is no restriction on utilising the ITC, the GST law imposes a restriction on the 
time period to avail the ITC. The unreconciled amount in Table-12F where the ITC claimed 

219
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
219 
in GSTR-9 is more than ITC availed in Financial Statements indicates excess availing of 
ITC. Since the taxpayer has been provided with an option to not disclose the granular details, 
only those cases where at least there is one entry in Table-12B to 12E have been considered. 
Audit observed in the case of GSTIN 1 xxxxxxxxxxxxx6 under Serchhip Zone that during the 
year 2018-19 there was mismatch of ₹ 0.38 crore in ITC availed between annual returns and 
financial statements. This was communicated (July 2023) to the Department and the 
Department stated (July 2024) that the taxpayer made voluntary payment through DRC-03 
on 18 January 2021 amounting ₹ 0.36 crore for the year 2018-19 but did not specify the 
reason for this voluntary payment. Further, the taxpayer mentioned in Table-13A of GSTR-
9C that “Unclaimed ITC claimed in next financial year, and extra ITC in CGST and SGST 
is reversed in 2020-21”. The Department contacted the taxpayer twice to clarify the reason 
for the payment but no compliance was received till date (March 2025). 
(vi) Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual returns with expenses in 
financial statements 
To review the extent of identified mismatch in ITC reported in the Annual Return vis-à-vis 
the Financial Statements, the relevant data points pertaining to Table 14 of the GSTR-9C 
reconciliation statement submitted by the taxpayer as required under Rule 80(3) of MGST 
Rules for the years 2018-19 to 2020-21 was analysed at data level. Since the taxpayer has 
been provided with an option to not disclose the granular details, only those cases where 
atleast one of the expenses is declared in Table 14 have been considered. 
The certified reconciliation statement submitted by the taxpayer as required under Rule 80(3) 
of MGST Rules in form GSTR-9C for the years 2018-19 to 2020-21 was analysed at data 
level to review the extent of identified mismatch in ITC declared in the Annual Return with 
the expenses reported in the Financial Statements. Table 14 deals with expenses incurred by 
the taxpayer, which can be in the form of inputs, capital goods or services. These goods/ 
services procured may be taxable or exempted and procured from registered (forward 
charge) or unregistered persons (reverse charge). Table 14 reconciles the expenses incurred 
with the ITC availed and any excess availing on account of ineligibility, blocked credits, and 
composition scheme is highlighted in Table 14T. 
Audit observed in the case of GSTIN 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 under Aizawl West Zone that during 
the year 2018-19 there was mismatch of ₹ 0.78 crore in ITC reported between annual returns 
and financial statements. The reason for un-reconciliation as stated by the taxpayer as per 
GSTR-9C was that “Difference is due to previous year input of ₹ 0.55 crore in IGST and 
₹ 0.12 crore in CGST and SGST each claimed in current year”. The Department had not 
provided relevant documents in support of the difference claimed by the taxpayer, hence 
could not be verified. This was communicated (July 2023) to the Department and the 
Department in their reply (March 2024) stated that notice was issued to the taxpayer and 
their reply was awaited (March 2025). 
(vii) Unsettled liabilities  
In order to analyse the undischarged tax liability, relevant data were extracted from GSTR-1 
and GSTR-9 for the years 2018-19 to 2020-21, and the tax payable in these returns was 
compared with the tax paid declared in GSTR-9. Where GSTR-9 was not available, a 

220
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
220 
comparison of tax payable between GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B was resorted to. The 
amendments and advance adjustments declared in GSTR-1 and 9 were also considered for 
this purpose. 
Audit observed in the case of GSTIN 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU under Aizawl West Zone that during 
the year 2020-21 there was an undischarged tax liability of ₹ 2.53 crore. This was 
communicated (July 2023) to the Department and the Department stated (March 2024) that 
notice was issued to the taxpayer and their reply was awaited (March 2025). 
(viii)  Suppression of tax liability based on E-way bill verification 
In order to analyse the extent of short-payment of tax, relevant data related to tax liability 
declared in GSTR-3B for the years 2018-19 to 2020-21 were compared with disclosures 
made in e-way bills. It may be noted that the deviation is only an indicator to lower tax 
declaration, at a minimum level, as an accurate comparison is not possible as besides such 
supplies, the taxpayer may also have other supplies which do not require the generation of 
e-way bills. 
Audit observed in the case of GSTIN 1 xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 under Aizawl East Zone that during 
the year 2020-21 there was suppression in tax liability in comparison with the e-way bill for 
an amount of ₹ 23.71 crore (GSTR-3B tax payable on other supplies is ₹ 4.47 crore while e-
way bill tax liability is ₹ 28.18 crore). This was communicated (July 2023) to the Department 
and the Department stated (July 2024) that the taxpayer is outside the jurisdiction of Aizawl 
East Zone and application for amendment of Zonal Office had been submitted to the GST 
Nodal Officer. The Department is requested to pursue the matter with the taxpayer as and 
when the correct Zonal Office is amended and intimate the results to the Audit. 
(ix)  Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and annual returns 
In order to review the extent of identified mismatch in tax paid reported in the Annual 
Returns vis-à-vis the Financial Statements, the relevant data points pertaining to Table 9 of 
the GSTR-9C reconciliation statement submitted by the taxpayers as required under Rule 
80(3) of MGST Rules for the years 2018-19 to 2020-21 was analysed at data level. 
Table 9 of form GSTR-9C attempts to reconcile the tax paid by segregating the turnover 
rate-wise and comparing it with the tax discharged as per annual return GSTR-9. The 
unreconciled amounts could potentially indicate tax levied at incorrect rates, incorrect 
depiction of taxable turnover as exempt or incorrect levy of CGST/ SGST/ IGST. There can 
also be situations wherein supplies/ tax declared, are reduced through amendments (net of 
debit notes/ credit notes) in respect of the transactions carried out in the subsequent year 
from April to September. In order to rule out the possibility of incorrect disclosure of the tax 
paid amount in GSTR-9C, the amount was also compared with actual tax payment details in 
GSTR-9. 
Audit observed in the case of GSTIN 1 xxxxxxxxxxxxxL under Aizawl East Zone that during 
the year 2020-21 there was a mismatch of ₹ 0.23 crore in tax paid between books of accounts 
and annual return. Further, the taxpayer stated in GSTR-9C that “Interest paid on delayed in 
raising the invoices under the head CGST of ₹ 0.03 crore and SGST of ₹ 0.03 crore, the 
company has inadvertently paid liability twice in GST returns with taxable value of 

221
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
221 
₹ 1.00 crore CGST of ₹ 0.09 crore and SGST of ₹ 0.09 crore”. The Department had not 
provided relevant documents in support of the difference claimed by the taxpayer, hence 
could not be verified. This was communicated (July 2023) to the Department and the 
Department in their reply (July 2024) stated that the taxpayer is outside the jurisdiction of 
Aizawl East Zone. The Department is requested to pursue the matter with the taxpayer 
through the concerned jurisdictional authority and intimate the results to the Audit. 
(x) GSTR-3B was not filed but GSTR-1 is available 
At the data level, Audit attempted to identify those taxpayers who have not filed GSTR-3B 
but have filed GSTR-1. GSTR-3B return is the instrument through which the liability can be 
offset, and ITC is credited in the ledger. The very availability of GSTR-1 and non-filing of 
GSTR-3B indicates that the taxpayers had undertaken/ carried on the business during the 
period but have not discharged their tax liability. It may also include cases of irregular 
passing on of ITC. All these cases, therefore, warrant investigation.  
Audit observed in the case of GSTIN 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD under Aizawl South Zone that 
during the year 2019-20 and 2020-21, the taxpayer had not filed GSTR-3B for the months 
of December 2019 up to September 2020 whereas GSTR-1 was available and the liability in 
GSTR-1 for the months, where GSTR-3B were not filed, amounted to total of ₹ 0.03 crore. 
This was communicated (July 2023) to the Department and the Department stated 
(July 2024) that the taxpayer was informed of the audit observation and was requested to 
address said observation with his own data set. The reply of the taxpayer was awaited 
(March 2025). 
(xi) Short payment of interest 
The extent of short payment of interest on account of delayed remittance of tax during 
2018-19 to 2020-21 was identified through the tax paid details in GSTR-3B and the date of 
filing of the GSTR-3B. The due date of filing of GSTR-3B for the respective months 
(including any extension provided) and the actual date of filing of GSTR-3B has been taken 
into account to work out the interest liability and only the net tax liability (cash component) 
has been considered to work out the interest payable. 
All the relaxations, and reduced rate of interest extended to the industries during the 
Covid-19 Phase-I from January to April 2020 and Phase II for March 2021 returns have been 
considered while working out the interest component. It may also be noted that the interest 
worked out is only minimum, as for the supplies made prior to the tax period and declared 
in the return for the said tax period, the interest has to be discharged on the entire tax 
component. Due to the non-availability of such bifurcation, the interest on such supplies 
have also been worked out only on the case component. 
Audit observed in the case of GSTIN 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD under Aizawl West Zone that during 
the years 2019-20 and 2020-21 the taxpayer had belatedly filed GSTR-3B and the interest 
liability worked out amounted to a total of ₹ 0.44 crore. This was communicated (July 2023) 
to the Department and the Department stated (March 2024) that the taxpayer claimed to have 
already paid the interest and forwarded the taxpayer’s documents showing closure of 
proceedings against the taxpayer discharged of short/ non-paid tax against contract receipts. 
The reply is not tenable as the interest liability is on account of delayed filing of GSTR-3B 

222
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
222 
and not related to contract receipts. Further, the delay in filing GSTR-3B was not limited to 
a single month and was filed belatedly for all 12 months during 2020-21, with the delay 
ranging from 136 days to 466 days. 
(xii) Under-declaration of taxable supplies by comparing TDS returns 
TDS and TCS details are declared in GSTR-7 and GSTR-8 respectively and communicated 
to the registered person in Table 9 of GSTR-2A. The cases where the taxable value declared 
on account of outward taxable supplies (other than zero rated, nil rated and exempted) in 
GSTR-3B were less than the net amount liable for TCS and TDS credit as per Table 9 of 
GSTR-2 have been identified. It may be noted that the deviation amount indicated may only 
be a fraction of non-disclosure, as exact comparison is not possible as the taxpayer may have 
other supplies which do not necessitate TDS recovery. Hence, Department is requested to 
examine all the transactions and not to limit checks to the deviation amount. 
Audit observed in the case of GSTIN 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC under Aizawl South Zone that during 
the years 2018-19 and 2019-20 there was suppression of taxable value identified through 
TDS declaration for an amount of ₹ 4.84 crore and ₹ 5.29 crore respectively. This was 
communicated (July 2023) to the Department and the Department in their reply stated 
(July 2024) that the taxpayer had purposely refused to cooperate with the Department. The 
Department is requested to assess and levy any tax liability before they get time barred. 
(II) Cases where Department’s reply is not acceptable to Audit 
Out of the 93 non-compliance cases, Department’s reply was not tenable in seven cases 
involving ₹ 11.09 crore. Details of these cases along with the Audit rebuttals are given in 
Appendix-4.27. An illustrative case is shown below: 
A case of under-declaration of taxable supplies by comparing TDS returns arose in respect 
of 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO under Aizawl South Zone for an amount of ₹ 5.52 crore. This was 
communicated to the Department (July 2023) and the Department, in their reply (July 2024) 
stated that they are unclear in the exact nature of the discrepancy and forwarded the 
taxpayer’s reply without any further comment. The Department is requested to examine all 
the transactions and not to limit checks to the deviation amount as this could be a case of 
non-disclosure and also that the taxpayer may have other supplies which do not necessitate 
TDS recovery. 
(III) Cases where Department’s reply is accepted by Audit 
Out of the 148 cases where replies were received from the Department, nine cases were due 
to data entry errors by the taxpayer as provided in Appendix-4.28. Action was taken before 
issue of audit query in four cases as provided in Appendix-4.29. The Department’s replies 
in respect of 42 cases were found acceptable due to valid explanations as provided in 
Appendix–4.30. 
Illustrative cases are given below: 
(a) Short payment of tax under RCM for an amount of ₹ 0.45  crore was observed in 
respect of 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB  under Lawngtlai Zone  during the years 2018-19 to 2020-21 
and communicated to the Department (July 2023). The Department stated (August 2023) in 
their reply that the taxpayer, while claiming ITC in their returns, had mistakenly made error 

223
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
223 
in filling up the “Inward supplies liable to Reverse Charge” in Table 4(A)(3) instead of filing 
up the “All other ITC” column due to which the deviation arose which on verification is 
acceptable to Audit. 
(b) Mismatch of ITC of ₹ 0.14 crore reported in Table 12F of GSTR-9C of 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxx8 under Aizawl North Zone for the period 2020-21 was noticed and 
communicated to the Department (July 2023). The Department in their reply stated (March 
2024) that the deviation amount was reversed in March 2022 before issue of audit query 
which on verification is acceptable to Audit. 
Recommendation: The Department may conduct similar data analysis (as conducted for 
Centralised Audit) of GST returns and other related data of all the taxpayers to identify 
inconsistencies and take necessary steps to recover dues from the taxpayers wherever 
applicable. 
4.12.8 Detailed Audit 
In a self-assessment regime, the onus of compliance with law is on the taxpayer. The role of 
the Department is to establish and maintain an efficient tax administration mechanism to 
provide oversight. With finite level of resources, for an effective tax administration, to ensure 
compliance with law and collection of revenue, an efficient governance mechanism is 
essential. An IT driven compliance model enables maintaining a non-discretionary regime 
of governance on scale and facilitates a targeted approach to enforce compliance. 
From an external audit perspective, Audit also focused on a data-driven risk-based approach. 
Thus, apart from identifying inconsistencies/ deviations in GST returns through data 
analysis, a detailed audit of GST returns was also conducted as a part of this review. A risk-
based sample of 15 taxpayers was selected for this part of the review.  
The methodology adopted was to initially conduct a desk review of GST returns and 
financial statements filed by the taxpayers as part of the GSTR-9C and other records 
available in the back-end system to identify potential risk areas, inconsistencies/ deviations 
and red flags. Desk review was carried out at the office of the Pr. Accountant General, 
Mizoram. Based on desk review results, detailed audit was conducted in the Taxation 
Department, Mizoram by requisitioning corresponding granular records of taxpayers such 
as financial ledgers, invoices, etc., to identify causative factors of the identified risks and to 
evaluate compliance by taxpayers. 
4.12.8.1 Scope limitation (non-production of records) 
During the desk review of taxpayers’ records available in the back-end system, Audit 
identified the risks related to excess ITC and tax liability mismatches for detailed 
examination. On the ITC dimension, the mismatches were to be identified by comparing 
GSTR-3B with GSTR-2A and GSTR-9, and the declarations made in Table 12 and Table 14 
of GSTR-9C. On the tax liability dimension, the mismatches were to be identified by 
comparing GSTR-3B with GSTR-1 and GSTR-9 and the declarations in Table 5, Table 7, 
and Table 9 of GSTR-9C. However, the Department did not produce the corresponding 
granular records such as the supplementary financial ledgers, invoices, agreement copies, 
etc., required for examining the causative factors for mismatches between the ITC and the 

224
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
224 
tax liability. Audit had requisitioned these granular records of the taxpayers through the 
respective Zones. Access to back-end system was provided but it could view only GSTR-3B, 
GSTR-9 and GSTR-9C. As such, detailed scrutiny could not be carried out in the absence of 
granular records. In all the observations, since additional Key Documents were not available, 
mismatches brought out in this report were identified through desk-review analysis. During 
the Exit Conference, the Pr. AG requested the departmental officers to assist audit teams in 
accessing granular records of taxpayers for Detailed Audit in future. The departmental 
officers assured that they would assist Audit as requested. 
Audit findings on Detailed Audit 
As brought out in the previous paragraphs, detailed audit involved a desk review of GST 
returns and other basic records to identify risks and red flags, which were followed up by 
field audit to identify the extent of non-compliance by taxpayers and action taken by the 
Department. Non-compliance by taxpayers at various stages ultimately impacts the veracity 
of returns filed, utilisation of ITC and discharge of tax payments. The audit findings are 
therefore categorised under (a) Utilisation of ITC, (b) Discharge of tax liability, and 
(c) Returns. 
4.12.8.2 Audit findings relating to Utilisation of Input Tax Credit 
Input Tax Credit (ITC) means the Goods and Services Tax (GST) paid by a taxable person 
on purchase of goods and/ or services that are used in the course or furtherance of business. 
To avoid cascading effect of taxes, credit of taxes paid on input supplies can be used to set-
off for payment of taxes on outward supplies. The audit findings on utilisation of input tax 
credit are brought out in Table-4.60. 
Table-4.60: Mismatches relating to utilisation of input tax credit 
Sl. 
No. 
Parameter No. of 
cases 
Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
Remarks 
1. ITC mismatch between GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B 
(The ITC available as per GSTR-2A with all its 
amendments was compared with the ITC availed in 
GSTR-3B in Table 4A(5) including 4(D) blocked 
credits and subsequent years from Table 8C of 
GSTR-9) 
(Appendix-4.31) 
13 18.71 The Department stated (July 2024) that 
ASMT-10 was issued in five cases, notice 
was served/ to be served in four cases, and 
action was yet to be taken in four cases 
(March 2025). 
2. ITC passed on without supplier remitting tax 
(Table 8A of GSTR-9 was compared with the ITC 
data reflected in GSTR-2As) 
(Appendix-4.32) 
11 19.06 In two cases, the reply of the Department 
was not acceptable to Audit, therefore, 
rebuttal was provided. In the remaining 
nine cases, action was yet to be taken by 
the Department (March 2025). 
3. Short payment of tax under RCM 
(Datasets in GSTR-3B and annual return GSTR-9 
pertaining to RCM was compared to check whether 
the tax has been discharged fully on the activities/ 
transactions under RCM. In cases where GSTR-9 was 
filed, the RCM payments in Table 4G was compared 
with ITC availed in Table 6C, 6D and 6F. In cases 
where GSTR-9 was not available, RCM payments in 
GSTR 3B Table 3.1(d) was compared with GSTR-3B 
4(A)(2) and 4A(3).) 
2131 0.10 The Department stated (April 2024) that 
notice was issued to the taxpayer, but their 
reply was awaited (March 2025). 
 
131  A taxpayer 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH under Aizawl East Zone for the years 2019-20 and 2020-21 with deviation 
amount of ₹ 0.05 crore and ₹ 0.05 crore respectively 

225
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
225 
Sl. 
No. 
Parameter No. of 
cases 
Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
Remarks 
4. Mismatch in ITC availed between annual returns 
and books of accounts 
(Positive figure in GSTR-9C Table 12F.) 
(Appendix–4.33) 
9 3.67 The Department stated (April 2024) that 
ASMT-10 was issued in five cases and 
notice was issued in four cases. Further 
reply of the taxpayers was awaited (March 
2025) 
4.12.8.3 Audit findings relating to Discharge of tax liability 
The audit findings pertaining to examination of the reconciliation statement (GSTR-9C) are 
given in Table-4.61. 
Table-4.61: Mismatches relating to discharge of tax liability 
Sl. 
No. 
Parameter No. 
of 
cases 
Amount 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Remarks 
1. Suppression of taxable value based on 
unbilled revenue declared in GSTR-9C. 
(Table 5B figures of GSTR-9C for the years 
2018-19 to 2019-20 which captures the 
unbilled revenue at the beginning of the 
financial year was compared with Table 5H 
of the previous GSTR-9C returns which 
captures the unbilled revenue of the end of the 
year to review the extent of identified 
mismatch in turnover declared in the Annual 
Return with the Financial Statements). 
1132 1.54 The Department stated (April 
2024) that ASMT-10 was 
issued to the taxpayer but 
reply of the taxpayer was 
awaited. The Department 
further stated (July 2024) that 
the taxpayer could not be 
contacted through phone or 
email provided on GST 
portal. Efforts may be taken 
to trace the taxpayer and 
pursue the case. 
2. Mismatch in taxable turnover declared in 
GSTR-9C Table 7G 
(Table 7G of the form GSTR-9C captures the 
unreconciled taxable turnover between the 
annual return GSTR-9 and that declared in the 
financial statement for the year after the 
requisite adjustments). 
1133 5.35 The Department stated (April 
2024) that ASMT-10 was 
issued to the taxpayer and 
they are examining the 
taxpayer’s reply. Further, in 
GSTR-9C Table 8 it was 
stated that “Unreconciled 
turnover of ₹ 5.35 crore is 
reported to be on account of 
Unbilled revenue written off 
during the year”. 
4.12.8.4 Filing of returns: Short payment of interest by taxpayers 
As per Section 50(1) of MGST Act read with Notification No. J. 21011/1/2017-TAX/ 
Vol-II (ii), dated 19 July 2017, the rate of interest on delayed payment of tax is 18 per cent. 
Also, as per State notification No. 31/2020-State Tax dated 05 May 2020, the relaxations 
and reduced rate of interest extended to the industries during the Covid-19 Phase-I from 
January to April 2020 and Phase-II for March 2021 returns have been considered while 
working out the interest component. 
 
132  A taxpayer 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO under Aizawl North Zone for  the years 2018-19 and 2019-20 
133  A taxpayer 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx0 under Aizawl North Zone for the year 2019-20 
 

226
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
226 
Out of the sample of 15 taxpayers, it was observed that two taxpayers had filed their returns 
with delay ranging from three to 85 days, for which these taxpayers were liable to pay 
₹ 0.05 crore as shown in Appendix-4.34. 
On this being pointed out (January 2024), the Department stated (April 2024) that ASMT-10 
was issued to one taxpayer while the other taxpayer stated (April 2024) that interest will be 
paid when intimated by the Department. Further reply in this regard was awaited 
(March 2025). 
Recommendation: The Department may initiate remedial action for all compliance 
deviations/ mismatches pointed out through this report, before they get time barred. 
4.12.9 Conclusion 
The Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) on Department’s Oversight on GST 
Payments and Returns Filing was undertaken with an objective of assessing the adequacy of 
the system in monitoring returns filing and tax payments by the taxpayers, extent of 
compliance and other departmental oversight functions. The audit was predominantly based 
on data analysis, which highlighted risk areas, red flags and in some cases, rule-based 
deviations and logical inconsistencies in GST returns filed for 2018-19 to 2020-21. 
A review of the functions of three Zones disclosed that there was deficiency in oversight 
function of the Zones in monitoring recovery of tax liability. 
In Centralised Audit, replies were received in all 148 cases of data inconsistencies/ 
mismatches identified. Upon analysing the responses of the Department, in two cases 
recovery was made, in 14 cases ASMT-10 were issued, in 41 cases notices were issued to 
the taxpayer, and in 29 cases, the Department is under correspondence with the taxpayers. 
Further, in seven cases, the replies were not tenable and suitable rebuttals were provided. In 
nine cases, the inconsistencies were due to data entry errors and in four cases, action was 
taken before being pointed out by Audit while the taxpayers’ clarifications in respect of 
42 cases were accepted by Audit. 
With regard to Detailed Audit of 15 sample taxpayers, granular records were not produced 
to Audit in all cases which significantly limited the scope of Audit. Non-compliance on 
seven major issues were observed viz., (i) ITC mismatch between GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B 
involving ₹ 18.71 crore in 13 cases, (ii) ITC passed on without supplier remitting tax 
involving ₹ 19.06 crore in 11 cases, (iii) Short payment of tax under RCM involving 
₹ 0.10 crore in two cases, (iv) Mismatch in ITC availed between annual returns and books 
of accounts involving ₹ 3.67 crore in 9 cases, (v) Suppression of taxable value based on 
unbilled revenue declared in Table 5 of GSTR-9C in one case involving amount of 
₹ 1.54 crore, (vi) Mismatch in taxable turnover declared in GSTR-9C Table 7G in one case 
involving amount of ₹ 5.35 crore, and (vii) Short payment of interest by two taxpayers 
involving ₹ 0.05 crore. 
During the Exit Conference, the Department stated that action in the form of audit 
assessments will be taken before the cases get time-barred in line with the audit observations. 
The Department also stated that interest on late filing of returns will be calculated as per 
existing rules at the time of audit assessment. 

227
Chapter-IV:  Revenue Sector
Chapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
227 
4.12.10 Recommendations 
The State Government may consider the following recommendations- 
(i) While determining the correctness of returns filed, monitor the progress of 
recoveries made on scrutiny of such returns in the interest of revenue; 
(ii) Conduct similar data analysis (as conducted for Centralised Audit) of GST returns 
and other related data of all taxpayers to identify inconsistencies and take necessary 
steps to recover dues from the taxpayers wherever applicable; and 
(iii) Initiate timely remedial action for all compliance deviations/ mismatches pointed 
out through this report before they get time barred. 
TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT 
 
4.13 Non-realisation of fitness fee and fine 
2,977 Transport vehicles were plying without valid fitness certificates resulting in 
non-realisation of renewal/ fitness fees of ₹ 19.35 lakh and fine of ₹ 35.17 crore 
Section 39 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, (as adopted Government of Mizoram) provides 
that no person shall drive any motor vehicle and no owner of a motor vehicle shall cause or 
permit the vehicle to be driven in any public place or in any other place unless the vehicle 
is registered and the certificate of registration of the vehicle has not been suspended or 
cancelled and the vehicle carries a registration mark displayed in the prescribed manner. 
Further, Section 56 of the Act, 1988 ibid provides that subject to the provisions of Section 
59 and Section 60, a transport vehicle shall not be deemed to be validly registered under 
Section 39 unless it carries a certificate of fitness issued by prescribed authority. As per the 
Central Motor Vehicles (Eight Amendment) Rules, 2022 notified (05 April 2022) the 
validity of certificate of fitness in respect of transport vehicles is two years for vehicles upto 
eight years old and one year for vehicles older than eight years. Also, as per serial no. 10 
and 11 of the Central Motor Vehicle (Twenty-second Amendment) Rules, 2016 notified 
(29 December 2016) the applicable fitness fee and fine to be realised as prescribed under 
Rule 62(2) of the Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 are given in Table-4.62 below: 
Table-4.62: Fees and fine payable on renewal of fitness certificate 
Sl. No. Particulars Amount 
1. Conduct of test for fitness of three-wheeler or light motor 
vehicles or quadricycle 
Manual ₹ 400 
2. Conduct of test for fitness of Medium or heavy motor vehicle Manual ₹ 600 
3. Grant or renewal of fitness certificate for motor vehicles ₹ 200 
4. Additional fee for each day of delay after expiry of certificate of 
fitness 
₹ 50 per day 
Test check (November 2022) of records of the District Transport Officer (DTO), Kolasib 
District, Kolasib revealed that based on the data extracted (29 November 2022) from the 
VAHAN system by the office of DTO, Kolasib regarding On Road Vehicle Registration 
Summary Report, Audit observed that the fitness of 2,977 transport vehicles expired as of 
29 November 2022. There was no record regarding the off-roading of these transport 
vehicles confirming that these vehicles were plying even after expiry of the fitness validity. 

228
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
228 
Audit analysis of the renewal of fitness certificate fee, conduct of test for fitness fee and the 
applicable fine payable by the defaulting transport vehicles revealed that a total amount of 
₹ 35.36 crore (renewal fee and fitness fee-₹ 0.19 crore + fine-₹ 35.17 crore) was not realised 
as tabulated in Table-4.63. 
Table-4.63: Number of defaulting vehicles and the realisable fitness fees and fine 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Category of 
transport vehicles 
No. of 
vehicles 
without 
fitness 
certificate 
Renewal fee plus 
Fitness fees 
realisable as of 29 
November 2022 
Fines 
realisable as 
of 29 
November 
2022 
Total 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) = (4) + (5) 
1. Three-wheeler and 
light transport 
vehicles 
2,233 2,233x600)=13.40 2,554.07 2,567.47 
2. Medium and heavy 
transport vehicle 
744 744x800=5.95 963.30 969.25 
Total 2,977 19.35 3,517.37 3,536.72 
Source: Based on data ‘on road vehicles registration summary report’ from Vahan system 
The break-up of the fitness defaulting transport vehicles in a year, five years, ten years and 
more than 10 years are shown in Table-4.64. 
Table-4.64: Break-up of defaulting vehicles in a year, five years, ten years and more 
than 10 years 
Sl. 
No. 
Category of 
transport vehicles 
No. of 
vehicles 
defaulting the 
fitness upto 
one year or 
365 days 
No. of vehicles 
defaulting the 
fitness between 
one year and five 
years or 366 and 
1,825 days 
No. of vehicles 
defaulting the 
fitness between 
five years and 
ten years or 
1,826 and 3,650 
days 
No. of vehicles 
defaulting the 
fitness more 
than ten years 
or 3,650 days 
Total 
1. 
Three-wheeler and 
light transport 
vehicles 
317 740 668 508 2,233 
2. Medium and heavy 
transport vehicle 50 271 206 217 744 
Total 367 1,011 874 725 2,977 
On this being pointed out, the DTO, Kolasib while agreeing to the Audit observation stated 
(21 February 2023) that demand notice to all defaulters were issued during January 2020 and 
January 2023. However, all the seven sample demand notices furnished to Audit shows that 
the demand notices issued were for renewal of registration and not related to payment of 
fitness fee and fine. 
The matter was reported to the Department and Government in October 2024 and the 
Government while agreeing to the Audit observation stated (14 November 2024) that the 
Department is taking necessary action to curb tax defaulters not only from District Transport 
offices, but also from the Directorate office by issuing demand notices to the owners of 
vehicle above 15 years old to renew their registration – renewal of registration includes 
updating of all documents including fitness fee and fines. It was also stated that Road Safety 
Week/ Month is usually conducted in the month of January/ February every year during 

229
Chapter-IV:  Revenue SectorChapter-IV: Revenue Sector 
229 
which no tolerance week/ month is regularly conducted with the Mizoram Police. It was, 
however, added that it is difficult to cover the whole area of Mizoram by the 40-enforcement 
staff even though enforcement drive is conducted regularly throughout the year. Further, the 
reply is silent on the action taken by the Department for recovery after the matter was pointed 
out by Audit. 
The audit observed a substantial non-realisation of ₹ 19.35 lakh in renewal/ fitness fees and 
₹ 35.17 crore in fines due to 2,977 transport vehicles operating without valid fitness 
certificates. This reflects a critical lapse in enforcement and revenue collection processes. 
Despite provisions under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, and Central Motor Vehicles Rules 
for mandatory fitness certification, enforcement efforts by the Transport Department, 
Mizoram, were inadequate. The issuance of demand notices primarily focused on 
registration renewal rather than fitness fee and fine recovery. 
The Department cited challenges such as limited enforcement staff and the vast geographical 
coverage of Mizoram, highlighting a systemic limitation in addressing compliance issues 
effectively. Also, while initiatives like Road Safety Week and enforcement drives exist, they 
have not been adequately leveraged to address fitness certification defaults comprehensively. 
Thus, 2,977 transport vehicles were plying without valid fitness certificate resulting in 
non-realisation of renewal/ fitness fees of ₹ 19.35 lakh and fine of ₹ 35.17 crore. 

CHAPTER – V
FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT 
OBSERV ATIONS

 
CHAPTER-V 
 
FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 
 
5.1 Non-submission of Action Taken Notes 
With a view to ensure accountability of the Executive in respect of all the issues dealt 
with in various Audit Reports, the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of Mizoram 
issued (May 2000) instructions for submission of suo moto Action Taken Notes (ATNs) 
on all paragraphs and reviews (Performance Audits) featured in the Audit Report within 
three months of its presentation to the Legislature. The PAC has provided six months’ 
time for submission of the ATNs on its recommendations. 
A review of follow-up action on the submission of ATNs disclosed that there was 
pendency in respect of the Audit Reports for the years 2015-16 to 2020-22. The Audit 
Report for the year 2022-23 was tabled in the State Legislature on 27 August 2025. 
5.2 Response to audit observations and compliance thereof by the 
Executive 
The Principal Accountant General (Audit) conducts periodical inspections of 
Government Departments to assess, on a test-check basis, whether proper financial 
records and accounting practices are being maintained according to established rules 
and procedures. These inspections result in the issuance of Inspection Reports (IRs), 
which are sent to the heads of the inspected offices and higher authorities. Government 
regulations mandate prompt action on IRs by the Executive, and the heads of offices 
and higher authorities are obligated to rectify any identified issues and report their 
compliance to the Principal Accountant General. The office of the Principal Accountant 
General also brings significant irregularities to the attention of the heads of departments. 
5.2.1 Outstanding Inspection Reports and Paragraphs 
Details of outstanding paragraphs pertaining to Social, General and Economic Sectors 
during the last five years are as shown in Table-5.1. 
Table-5.1: Number (cumulative) of outstanding paragraphs  
Year Social Sector General Sector Economic Sector 
2019-20 1,244 450 1,236 
2020-21 1,336 491 1,315 
2021-22 1,428 527 1,392 
2022-23 1,591 585 1,643 
2023-24 1,582134 616 1,760 
5.2.2 Revenue Sector 
As of June 2024, there were 210 pending IRs (Inspection Reports) totalling 
853 paragraphs with a money value of ₹ 366.07 crore pertaining to the Revenue Sector. 
The status of IRs for the past five years is outlined in Table-5.2. 
 
 
134  There was clearance of 77 paragraphs against an addition of 68 paragraphs in the Social Sector 

232
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
232 
Table-5.2: Details of outstanding IRs under the Revenue Sector 
Particulars June 2020 June 2021 June 2022 June 2023 June 2024 
Number of outstanding IRs 159 174 186 203 210 
Number of outstanding audit 
observations 611 666 719 810 853 
Amount involved (₹ in crore) 75.87 104.87 123.56 202.68 366.07 
5.2.2.1 Recovery of accepted cases 
Details of revenue paragraphs included in the Audit Reports of the last five years and 
those accepted by the Departments and amounts recovered are given in the following 
Table-5.3: 
Table-5.3: Details of Revenue Paragraphs included in the Audit Reports and 
recovery made thereagainst 
(₹ in crore) 
Year of 
Audit 
Report 
No. of 
paragraphs 
included 
Money value of 
the paragraphs 
No. of 
paragraphs 
accepted 
Money value 
of accepted 
paragraphs 
Amount 
recovered as 
on 
31 March 2024 
Cumulative 
position of 
recovery of 
accepted 
cases 
2017-18 3 2.06 3 2.05 0.15 0.15 
2018-19 5 10.54 4 4.07 0.37 0.52 
2019-20 5 2.45 5 2.45 0.44 0.96 
2020-22 4 2.29 4 2.29 -- 0.96 
2022-23 1 4.90 1 4.90 -- 0.96 
Total 18 22.24 17 15.76  0.96 
The above Table-5.3 shows that over the past five years, departments under the 
Revenue Sector have accepted 17 paragraphs with a money value of ₹ 15.76 crore, of 
which only ₹ 0.96 crore has been recovered as of 31 March 2024. 
The Departments need to evolve a strong mechanism to monitor and ensure recovery of 
accepted cases. 
5.3 Response of departments concerned to the draft audit paragraphs 
The draft audit paragraphs proposed for inclusion in the Report of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India are forwarded by the Principal Accountant General to the 
Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of the departments concerned, drawing their attention 
to audit findings with a request to send their response within four weeks. Non-receipt 
of replies from departments/ Government is invariably indicated at the end of such 
paragraphs included in the Audit Report. 
10 Compliance Audit paragraphs proposed to be included in the Audit Report for the 
year ended 31 March 2024 were sent to Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of the 
respective departments for their responses. Government response was received in 
respect of all the 10 draft paragraphs which have been incorporated at appropriate 
places. 
  

233
Chapter-V :  Follow up of Audit Observations
21 July 2026
24 July 2026
Chapter-V: Follow up of Audit Observations 
233 
5.4 Audit Committee Meetings 
The State Government had constituted (04 September 2013) an Audit Committee to 
consider and take measures for timely response and speedy settlement of outstanding 
IRs/ paragraphs pending in various Departments. 
However, no meetings of the Audit Committee took place during the year 2023-24. 
The Government may ensure that Audit Committee convenes regularly to review, 
discuss, settle and take action on audit observations. 
Aizawl  
The: 
(GAURAV KUMAR) 
Accountant General, Mizoram 
Countersigned 
New Delhi 
The: 
(K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 


s
Chapter-V :  Local Government
APPENDICES

t
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024

 
 
Appendix-1.1 
Category-wise number of beneficiaries covered under SNP in the sampled ICDS Projects 
(Reference: Paragraph-1.2.6.2) 
Sl. 
No. 
Project Category 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
1. Aizawl Urban ICDS 
Project 
Children 6m - 3 yrs 11,621 11,534 9,287 10,584 8,894 
SMNC 6m - 3 yrs - - - 04 482 
Children 3 - 6 yrs 9,083 10,430 7,056 11,025 11,458 
SMNC 3 - 6 yrs - 04 02 10 - 
Mothers 4,383 3,859 3,221 5,029 2,898 
AWWs & AWHs 380 380 380 380 380 
Sub-Total 25,467 26,207 19,946 27,032 24,112 
2. Aibawk ICDS Project Children 6m - 3 yrs 1,115 1,160 789 952 836 
SMNC 6m - 3 yrs - - - - 61 
Children 3 - 6 yrs  993 1,043 677 1,149 861 
SMNC 3 - 6 yrs - - 3 - - 
Mothers 414 484 308 585 387 
AWWs & AWHs 100 100 100 100 100 
Sub-Total 2,622 2,787 1,877 2,786 2,245 
3. Darlawn ICDS Project Children 6m - 3 yrs 1,863 1,355 935 1,603 1,235 
SMNC 6m - 3 yrs - - - - 98 
Children 3 - 6 yrs 1,818 1,065 757 2,071 1,628 
SMNC 3 - 6 yrs - - - - - 
Mothers 609 585 334 804 460 
AWWs & AWHs 166 166 166 166 166 
Sub-Total 4,456 3,171 2,192 4,644 3,587 
4. Khawbung ICDS 
Project 
Children 6m - 3 yrs 2,348 1,138 1,005 1,174 1,068 
SMNC 6m - 3 yrs - - 08 03 65 
Children 3 - 6 yrs 1,343 1,340 830 1,201 1,194 
SMNC 3 - 6 yrs - - 10 03 - 
Mothers 502 590 463 538 351 
AWWs & AWHs 128 128 128 128 128 
Sub-Total 4,321 3,196 2,444 3,047 2,806 
5. Champhai ICDS 
Project 
Children 6m - 3 yrs 3,228 3,367 2,814 2,995 2,646 
SMNC 6m - 3 yrs 04 - - 04 205 
Children 3 - 6 yrs 3,946 2,247 2,057 2,846 2,717 
SMNC 3 - 6 yrs 03 - - 01 - 
Mothers 1,311 1,342 1,309 1,450 916 
AWWs & AWHs 160 160 160 160 160 
Sub-Total 8,652 7,116 6,340 7,456 6,644 
6. Tuipang ICDS Project Children 6m - 3 yrs 1,614 1,561 1,640 1,496 1,230 
SMNC 6m - 3 yrs - - - - 219 
Children 3 - 6 yrs 1,902 1,682 1,473 1,828 1,757 
SMNC 3 - 6 yrs - - - - - 
Mothers 662 676 528 830 354 
AWWs & AWHs 132 132 132 132 132 
Sub-Total 4,310 4,051 3,773 4,286 3,692 
7. Saiha ICDS Project Children 6m - 3 yrs 2,140 2,392 2,016 2,172 1,784 
SMNC 6m - 3 yrs - 10 16 - 332 
Children 3 - 6 yrs 2,351 2,044 2,147 2,586 2,340 
SMNC 3 - 6 yrs - 14 - - - 
Mothers 874 728 770 1,132 542 
AWWs & AWHs 120 120 120 120 120 
Sub-Total 5,485 5,308 5,069 6,010 5,118 
Source: Reply of the Department. 
 
 
  

236
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
238 
Appendix-1.2 
Year-wise Quantity of supplementary nutrition supplied under 'SNP' in six sampled ICDS Projects  
(Reference: Paragraph Paragraph-1.2.6.2)  
Sl.  
No. 
Items Unit 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Aibawk ICDS Project 
1. Groundnut Kg 2,482 6,082 1,039 3,697 2,457 
2. Matar Chana Kg 5,232 6,476 3,226 3,951 4,743 
3. Edible Oil Ltr 576 2,822 697 469 386 
4. Vitamin-B Complex Btl 5,562 22,494 4,003 8,819 7,626 
5. Multi Vitamin Btl 318 595 385 - - 
6. Sugar Kg 255 1,500 250 750 500 
7. Calcium Tin 289 3,130 390 473 173 
8. DF Salt Kg 2,500 6,250 2,500 3,750 2,500 
9. EDFF Kg 8,369 3,801 7,588 5,291 3,028 
10. Wheat Flour Kg 9,614 10,793 24,690 10,097 15,553 
11. Maida Kg 805 - - - - 
12. Biscuits Kg 2,214 1,612 4,882 5,636 6,912 
13. Noodles Kg - - 3,469 6,624 3,777 
14. Milk Ltr - - - - 7,506 
15. Masoor Dal Kg 2,929 11,954 14,968 - - 
16. Rice  Kg 40,028 36,945 35,826 17,212 47,216 
Aizawl Urban ICDS Project 
1. Groundnut Kg 34,226 23,390 11,157 49,182 17,090 
2. Matar Chana Kg 50,388 52,079 34,412 45,429 23,885 
3. Edible Oil Ltr 20,630 13,105 9,976 - 4,018 
4. Vitamin-B Complex Btl 1,20,175 61,552 57,204 40,701 23,328 
5. Multi Vitamin Tin - - 3,401 - - 
6. Sugar Kg 1,900 1,900 1,900 2,850 950 
7. Calcium Tin 4,532 3,669 2,076 2,833 1,561 
8. DF Salt Kg 9,500 9,500 14,250 4,750 4,750 
9. EDFF Kg 52,254 62,564 63,692 1,24,558 - 
10. Wheat Flour Kg 1,59,397 2,39,146 86,230 99,680 1,38,753 
11. Maida Kg - - - - - 
12. Biscuits Kg - 24,021 66,511 31,205 49,000 
13. Noodles Kg - 12,813 22,026 72,924 18,745 
14. Milk Ltr - - - - - 
15. Masoor Dal Kg 59,697 1,07,918 - - - 
16. Rice  Kg 3,89,010 3,48,774 3,61,044 2,01,979 4,58,198 
Champhai ICDS Project 
1. Groundnut Kg 11,715 6,430 7,101 9,888 4,856 
2. Matar Chana Kg 14,278 14,321 11,070 12,578 6,841 
3. Edible Oil Ltr 5,278 3,559 1,585 - 1,133 
4. Vitamin-B Complex Btl 41,742 15,760 17,048 18,756 22,004 
5. Multi Vitamin Tin 553 1,252 1,387 - - 
6. Sugar Kg 800 800 2,800 1,200 400 
7. Calcium Tin 5,189 996 663 937 467 
8. DF Salt Kg 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 2,000 
9. EDFF Kg 17,685 13,491 21,421 22,872 - 
10. Wheat Flour Kg 62,335 57,062 30,417 33,351 51,200 
11. Maida Kg 2,029 - - - - 
12. Biscuits Kg - 6,582 21,347 8,364 21,347 
13. Noodles Kg - 3,516 7,076 20,852 8,710 
14. Milk Ltr 6,992 4,790 - 11,930 24,858 
15. Masoor Dal Kg 32,674 39,915 36,852 - - 
16. Rice  Kg 1,31,876 1,43,140 1,10,502 56,906 1,33,375 
# Data in respect of Darlawn ICDS Project not available. 
  

237
Appendices
Appendices 
239 
 
 
Sl.  
No. Items Unit 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Khawbung ICDS Project 
1. Groundnut Kg 9,823 3,443 1,916 4,485 2,068 
2. Matar Chana Kg 11,281 7,328 4,292 6,435 2,902 
3. Edible Oil Ltr 3,499 1,790 - - 485 
4. Vitamin-B Complex Btl 21,500 6,979 6,486 7,411 9,464 
5. Multi Vitamin Tin 237 598 581 - - 
6. Sugar Kg 640 640 640 1,600 320 
7. Calcium Tin 1,642 448 254 361 193 
8. DF Salt Kg 3,200 3,200 4,800 3,200 - 
9. EDFF Kg 8,783 6,279 10,966 9,460 - 
10. Wheat Flour Kg 31,335 25,629 12,362 13,492 21,700 
11. Maida Kg 1,051 - - - - 
12. Biscuits Kg - 4,076 9,607 5,299 8,936 
13. Noodles Kg - 2,100 3,561 9,389 4,979 
14. Milk Ltr - - - 4,875 10,349 
15. Masoor Dal Kg 18,081 3,598 14,834 - - 
16. Rice  Kg 65,568 65,986 44,989 21,647 52,638 
Siaha ICDS Project 
1. Groundnut Kg 2,152 11,743 - 5,535 1,677 
2. Matar Chana Kg 4,391 14,064 6,530 13,796 10,455 
3. Edible Oil Ltr 525 8,117 1,351 871 1,840 
4. Vitamin-B Complex Btl 21,783 28,805 4,690 26,089 9,355 
5. Multi Vitamin Tin - 1,081 - - - 
6. Sugar Kg - 930 - 900 630 
7. Calcium Tin - 743 371 1,295 1,101 
8. DF Salt Kg 3,300 4,500 - 3,000 1,500 
9. EDFF Kg 16,504 12,996 16,295 8,800 - 
10. Wheat Flour Kg 19,939 33,914 7,912 27,974 43,181 
11. Maida Kg - - - - - 
12. Biscuits Kg 4,190 5,418 10,810 18,234 6,831 
13. Noodles Kg 760 2,559 4,609 4,609 4,532 
14. Milk Ltr 77,695 - 9,618 9,618 5,180 
15. Masoor Dal Kg 20,655 23,037 25,872 7,747 3,534 
16. Rice Kg 77,466 76,045 84,820 39,626 1,06,690 
Tuipang ICDS Project 
1. Groundnut Kg 2,809 4,166 3,796 5,029 1,342 
2. Matar Chana Kg 4,944 5,439 5,783 6,843 3,650 
3. Edible Oil Ltr 3,491 2,269 648 - 625 
4. Vitamin-B Complex Btl 7,543 6,977 10,847 11,216 12,742 
5. Multi Vitamin Tin - 673 624 - - 
6. Sugar Kg 330 660 660 990 300 
7. Calcium Tin 1,629 - 391 534 271 
8. DF Salt Kg 3,300 1,650 4,950 2,150 500 
9. EDFF Kg - 5,707 16,039 12,615 - 
10. Wheat Flour Kg 7,607 - 2,790 13,296 15,924 
11. Maida Kg 1,484 - - - - 
12. Biscuits Kg - 3,584 9,130 696 4,243 
13. Noodles Kg - 1,963 5,002 2,860 4,739 
14. Milk Ltr - - - 6,858 1,800 
15. Masoor Dal Kg 4,473 16,888 20,049 - - 
16. Rice  Kg 65,834 55,589 64,089 28,692 74,809 
Source: Stock Registers maintained by CDPOs. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

238
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
240 
Appendix-1.3 
Year-wise quantity of 'Locally Available Food' supplied in four sampled ICDS Projects 
(Reference: Paragraph Paragraph-1.2.6.2) 
Sl.  
No. 
Item Unit 2017-18 2019-20 2020-21 2020-21 
Aibawk ICDS Project 
1. Potato Kg 2,235 2,200 2,000 1,600 
2. Banana Kg 1,075 1,466 800 1,200 
3. Orange Pcs - - 5,002 5,500 
4. Egg Pcs 9,317 - 5,572 7,131 
5. Bread Pcs - - 1,386 1,400 
6. Green Beans Kg - 616 - - 
7. Papaya Kg - 434 - - 
8. Milk Ltr 1,660 - - - 
Aizawl Urban ICDS Project 
1. Bread Pcs 15,670 14,500 16,500 16,500 
2. Banana Kg 13,058 10,064 15,000 20,000 
3. Orange Pcs 55,965 60,400 80,471 85,001 
4. Potato Kg 13,058 22,332 23,000 30,000 
5. Egg Pcs 45,709 45,710 55,000 50,733 
Champhai ICDS Project 
1. Banana Kg 1,709 1,981 1,800 1,875 
2. Potato Kg 2,136 2,520 2,249 2,599 
3. Orange Kg 1,710 1,981 1,800 1,875 
4. Bread Pcs 2,776 3,499 3,002 3,436 
5. Egg Pcs 12,183 14,600 22,770 27,602 
6. Green Beans Kg 1,461 1,716 1,501 1,711 
7. Sticky Rice Kg 1,429 1,716 1,501 1,711 
Siaha ICDS Project 
1. Banana Kg 1,717 1,792 2,051 3,073 
2. Papaya Kg 1,404 1,492 1,812 2,155 
3. Potato Kg 2,801 2,984 3,462 3,573 
4. Eggs Pcs 5,721 5,972 6,501 6,901 
5. Bread Pcs 4,266 4,476 5,101 7,086 
Source: Registers of ‘Locally Available Food’ maintained by CDPOs. 
  
2018-19 2021-22

239
AppendicesAppendices 
241 
Appendix-1.4 
Joint Physical Verification 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.2.9.2) 
Sl. 
No. Questions 
Replies 
Yes Per 
cent No Per 
cent 
(A) Children 415 
1. Is the AWC easily accessible? 415 100 0 0 
Is enough space available in AWC? 217 52 198 48 
Is the physical condition of building of AWC good? 323 78 92 22 
Is cleanliness maintained in AWC? 391 94 24 6 
Is the toilet(s) functioning and clean? 368 89 47 11 
Is clean drinking water available regularly? 345 83 79 19 
Is electricity available regularly? 130 31 276 67 
2. Were PSE Kits available in AWC? 403 97 12 3 
3. Whether the food served, HCM was as per the menu prescribed? 415 100 0 0 
4. Whether food was provided on all attendance days in AWC? 415 100 0 0 
5. Are regular health check-ups conducted at AWCs for your child?  407 98 8 2 
6. Has your child been vaccinated with the requisite vaccines as applicable according 
to the age of your child?  
415 100 0 0 
7. Have you been provided training by AWCs on health and nutrition related to 
childcare and development? 
409 99 6 1 
8. Are mother’s meetings arranged by AWWs on Nutrition and Health Education?  415 100 0 0 
9. If so, do you attend them regularly? 365 88 50 12 
(B) Pregnant Women and Lactating Mothers (PW&LM) 173 
1. Did you receive food items in the form of THR regularly? 162 94 11 6 
2. Do you know what are the GoI’s cost norms for providing THR and GoM’s 
prescribed quantity of ration to be provided per beneficiary? 
34 20 138 80 
3. Have you been vaccinated with the requisite vaccines as applicable? 171 99 6 3 
4. Were regular health check-ups conducted for you through AWCs? 171 99 2 1 
5. Have you been provided training by AWCs on health and nutrition related to 
childcare and development 
172 99 1 1 
6. Were mother’s meetings arranged by AWWs on Nutrition and Health Education? 172 99 1 1 
7. Were there regular home-visits by AWWs to check on your health? 172 99 1 1 
(C) Adolescent Girls 102 
1. Do you attend school? 90 88 12 12 
If No, are you a school drop out? 4 4 8 8 
2. Have you been informed on menstrual hygiene through AWCs? 102 100 0 0 
3. Have you attended awareness campaign conducted by AWC?  65 64 37 36 
4. Do you know about Sakhi or Saheli or Kishori Samooh in AWC? 60 59 42 41 
5. Have you ever received IFA or de-worming tablet from AWC? 68 67 34 33 
6. Did you ever receive ration under THR service through AWCs? 98 96 4 4 
7. Did the AWC provide awareness/ counselling on menstrual hygiene, overall health 
and nutrition? 
99 97 3 3 
8. Have you ever attended any skill development training? 52 51 50 49 
Source: Joint Physical Verification. 
 
 
  

240
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
242 
Appendix-1.5 
Details of Salary in respect of Shri D. Purkayastha, Associate Professor (Chemistry Department) for 
the period from March 2017 to July 2024 
(Reference: Paragraph-1.3 A) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Month and 
Year 
Gross 
Salary Net Salary 
Amount 
credited to the 
Account of the 
employee Shri 
D. Purkayastha 
Amount 
Paid to 
substitutes 
Name of the 
substitute engaged on 
Shri D. 
Purkayastha’s behalf 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
Mar-17 1,52,556 94,204 74,204 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Apr-17 1,52,556 94,204 74,204 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
May-17 1,55,053 96,701 76,701 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Jun-17 1,55,053 96,681 76,681 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Jul-17 1,59,678 1,00,188 80,188 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Aug-17 1,59,678 88,188 68,188 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Sep-17 1,59,678 87,563 67,563 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Oct-17 1,59,678 87,563 67,563 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Nov-17 1,61,607 89,492 69,492 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Dec-17 1,61,607 89,492 69,492 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Jan-18 1,61,607 90,117 70,117 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Feb-18 1,61,607 60,686 40,686 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Mar-18 1,61,607 90,117 70,117 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Apr-18 1,63,536 92,046 72,046 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
May-18 1,63,536 92,046 72,046 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Jun-18 1,63,536 92,046 72,046 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Jul-18 1,68,400 95,172 75,172 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Aug-18 1,68,400 95,172 75,172 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Sep-18 1,68,400 95,172 75,172 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Oct-18 1,68,400 93,127 73,127 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Nov-18 1,68,400 93,752 73,752 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Dec-18 2,03,938 1,62,528 1,42,528 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Jan-19 2,03,938 1,62,528 1,42,528 20,000 Jacqueline Lalthlengliani 
Feb-19 2,03,938 1,12,528 1,12,528 Nil - 
Mar-19 2,03,938 1,27,528 1,27,528 Nil - 
Apr-19 2,03,938 1,56,278 1,26,278 30,000 Lalrammawii 
May-19 2,03,938 1,56,278 1,26,278 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Jun-19 2,09,080 1,62,670 1,32,670 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Jul-19 2,15,200 1,68,790 1,38,790 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Aug-19 2,15,200 1,68,790 1,38,790 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Sep-19 2,15,200 1,68,790 1,38,790 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Oct-19 2,15,200 1,63,790 1,33,790 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Nov-19 2,24,025 1,63,790 1,33,790 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Dec-19 2,24,025 1,63,790 1,33,790 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Jan-20 2,24,025 1,63,790 1,33,790 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Feb-20 2,24,025 1,18,790 88,790 30,000 Lalrammawii 

241
AppendicesAppendices 
243 
Month and 
Year 
Gross 
Salary Net Salary 
Amount 
credited to the 
Account of the 
employee Shri 
D. Purkayastha 
Amount 
Paid to 
substitutes 
Name of the 
substitute engaged on 
Shri D. 
Purkayastha’s behalf 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
Mar-20 2,24,025 1,61,560 1,31,560 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Apr-20 2,24,025 1,56,574 1,26,574 30,000 Lalrammawii 
May-20 2,24,025 1,63,800 1,33,800 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Jun-20 2,24,025 1,30,196 1,00,196 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Jul-20 2,30,650 1,34,312 1,04,312 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Aug-20 2,30,650 2,02,514 1,72,514 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Sep-20 2,30,650 1,70,160 1,40,160 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Oct-20 2,30,650 1,66,960 1,36,960 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Nov-20 2,30,650 1,69,960 1,39,960 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Dec-20 2,30,650 1,69,960 1,39,960 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Jan-21 2,30,650 1,69,960 1,39,960 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Feb-21 2,30,650 1,19,506 89,506 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Mar-21 2,30,650 1,64,960 1,34,960 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Apr-21 2,30,650 1,64,960 1,34,960 30,000 Lalrammawii 
May-21 2,30,650 1,57,870 1,27,870 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Jun-21 2,30,650 1,63,710 1,33,710 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Jul-21 2,37,525 1,66,310 1,36,310 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Aug-21 2,37,525 1,67,560 1,37,560 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Sep-21 2,37,525 1,67,560 1,37,560 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Oct-21 2,37,525 1,67,560 1,37,560 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Nov-21 2,37,525 1,67,560 1,37,560 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Dec-21 2,37,525 1,67,560 1,37,560 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Jan-22 2,37,525 1,67,260 1,37,260 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Feb-22 2,37,525 1,51,406 1,21,406 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Mar-22 2,60,001 1,89,536 1,59,536 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Apr-22 2,60,001 1,90,236 1,60,236 30,000 Lalrammawii 
May-22 2,60,001 1,90,236 1,60,236 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Jun-22 2,60,001 1,90,236 1,60,236 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Jul-22 2,67,673 1,96,378 1,66,378 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Aug-22 2,67,673 1,96,378 1,66,378 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Sep-22 2,67,673 1,87,628 1,57,628 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Oct-22 2,67,673 1,87,628 1,57,628 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Nov-22 2,67,673 1,87,628 1,57,628 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Dec-22 2,67,673 1,87,628 1,57,628 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Jan-23 2,67,673 1,87,628 1,57,628 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Feb-23 2,67,673 1,66,107 1,36,107 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Mar-23 2,67,673 1,82,628 1,52,628 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Apr-23 2,75,389 1,90,344 1,60,344 30,000 Lalrammawii 
May-23 2,75,389 1,90,344 1,60,344 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Jun-23 2,75,389 1,90,344 1,60,344 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Jul-23 2,83,567 1,95,732 1,65,732 30,000 Lalrammawii 

242
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
244 
Month and 
Year 
Gross 
Salary Net Salary 
Amount 
credited to the 
Account of the 
employee Shri 
D. Purkayastha 
Amount 
Paid to 
substitutes 
Name of the 
substitute engaged on 
Shri D. 
Purkayastha’s behalf 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
Aug-23 2,83,567 1,98,232 1,68,232 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Sep-23 2,91,515 2,06,180 1,76,180 30,000 Lalrammawii 
Oct-23 2,91,515 2,06,180 1,56,180 50,000 Mathew G. Lalzawmliana 
Nov-23 2,91,515 2,06,180 1,56,180 50,000 Mathew G. Lalzawmliana 
Dec-23 2,91,515 1,96,180 1,46,180 50,000 Mathew G. Lalzawmliana 
Jan-24 2,91,515 1,96,180 1,46,180 50,000 Mathew G. Lalzawmliana 
Feb-24 2,91,515 2,09,630 1,59,630 50,000 Mathew G. Lalzawmliana 
Mar-24 2,91,515 2,01,180 1,51,180 50,000 Mathew G. Lalzawmliana 
Apr-24 2,91,515 2,01,180 1,51,180 50,000 Mathew G. Lalzawmliana 
May-24 2,91,515 2,01,180 1,51,180 50,000 Mathew G. Lalzawmliana 
Jun-24 2,91,515 2,01,180 1,51,180 50,000 Mathew G. Lalzawmliana 
Jul-24 3,00,215 2,07,080 1,57,080 50,000 Mathew G. Lalzawmliana 
To t a l 2,02,06,008 1,37,61,326 1,11,81,326 25,80,000  
 
  

243
AppendicesAppendices 
245 
Appendix-1.6 
Details of eight regular Professors whose salaries were deducted during their unauthorised absence 
and paid to their substitutes 
(Reference: Paragraph-1.3 B) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. No. Name & 
Designation 
Department Gross salary 
of the 
professors 
Period of 
unauthorised 
absence/ 
engagement of 
substitute 
No. of 
months 
Rate of 
payment 
made to 
substitutes 
per month 
Amount 
paid to 
substitutes 
1. Laldinpuii, 
Associate 
Professor 
Public 
Administration 
10,81,500 March 2020 to 
December 2020 
10 15,000 1,50,000 
2. K I Singh, 
Associate 
Professor 
Physics 14,25,150 July 2021 to 
December 2021 
6 20,000 1,20,000 
3. Janet 
Laltlansangi, 
Assistant 
Professor 
Geography 38,91,236 July 2019 to  
June 2022 
36 15,000 5,40,000 
4. Romuanpuii, 
Assistant 
Professor 
Chemistry 33,67,992 August 2019 to 
June 2022 
36 20,000 7,20,000 
5. Lalngaihmana
wmi, Assistant 
Professor 
Botany 24,04,123 June 2020 to  
June 2022 
25 15,000 3,75,000 
6. Lalengmawii, 
Assistant 
Professor 
Public 
Administration 
30,23,527 September 2019 
to March 2022 
31 15,000 4,65,000 
7. Lalhruaitluangi 
Sailo, Assistant 
Professor 
Education 25,34,855 July 2019 to June 
2021 
24 15,000 3,60,000 
8. Dr Tracy 
Lalduhawmi, 
Assistant 
Professor 
Public 
Administration 
8,54,600 May 2021 to 
January 2022 
9 15,000 1,35,000 
To t a l 1,85,82,983    28,65,000 
 
  

244
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
246 
Appendix-1.7 
Details of payment made to individuals designated as Assistant Professors who were not in  
the pay roll/ employment list 
(Reference: Paragraph-1.3 B) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name & 
Designation 
Bank Account 
No. 
Amount 
paid 
Months during 
which the 
amount was 
paid 
Rate of payment 
1. Lalhmangaiha 
Asstt. Professor 
20192254081 2,55,000 August 2021 to 
October 2022 
except June 2022 
₹ 15,000 from August 
2021 to December 2021 
and ₹ 20,000 from 
January 2022 to October 
2022 
2. Reuben 
Lalawmpuia, Asstt. 
Professor 
20195704210 75,000  August 2021 to 
December 2021 
₹ 15,000 for August 2021 
to December 2021 
3. Laldawngsangi, 
Asstt. Professor 
31026625752 1,95,000  August 2021 to 
June 2022 
₹ 15,000 from August 
2021 to December 2021 
and ₹ 20,000 from 
January 2022 to June 
2022 
4. K. Lalawmpuia 20081405447 95,000  August 2021 to 
January 2022 
₹ 15,000 from August 
2021 to December 2021 
and ₹ 20,000 for January 
2022 
5. Mathew 
Lalzawmliana, 
Asstt. Professor 
20197013753 1,76,000  August 2021 to 
June 2022 
₹ 20,000 from August 
2021 to June 2022  
6. Jesai L.B. Ralte, 
Asstt. Professor 
20195704673 1,15,000  August 2021 to 
February 2022 
₹ 15,000 from August 
2021 to December 2021 
and ₹ 20,000 for January 
2022 to February 2022 
7. K. Lalchhandami, 
Asstt. Professor 
34090608805 1,35,000  August 2021 to 
March 2022 
₹ 15,000 from August 
2021 to December 2021 
and ₹ 20,000 from 
January 2022 to March 
2022 
8. C. Lalrinchhana, 
Asstt. Professor 
37758313429 75,000  August 2021 to 
December 2021 
₹ 15,000 from August 
2021 to December 2021 
9. Lalramfela Ngurte, 
Asstt. Professor 
20195704481 1,00,000  August 2021 to 
December 2021 
₹ 20,000 from August 
2021 to December 2021 
10. Lalthasangi, Asstt. 
Professor (shown in 
the payment as 
Canara Bank) 
33621342059 1,95,000  August 2021 to 
June 2022 
₹ 15,000 from August 
2021 to December 2021 
and ₹ 20,000 from 
January 2022 to June 
2022 
11. Benjamin 
Lalduhsaka, Asstt. 
Professor 
20322686947 60,000 April 2022 to 
June 2022 
₹ 20,000 from April 2022 
to June 2022 
To t a l 14,76,000   
 

245
AppendicesAppendices 
247 
Appendix-2.1 
The district-wise and year-wise details of households and persons registered under MGNREGA during 2019-20 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.10.1) 
Sl. 
No. 
District No. of Registered No. of Job Card 
deleted in current YR 
No. of Job Card 
included in current YR 
Cumulative Employment 
demanded  
Employment offered Employment Availed 
Household Persons Household Persons Household Persons Total Household Persons Household Persons Household Persons 
1. Aizawl 27,455 36,034 1,548 5,741 1,443 2,738 27,455 28,287 30,390 28,280 30,383 28,268 30,371 
2. Champhai  29,744 32,307 1,837 5,102 1,811 1,930 29,744 30,779 30,960 30,779 30,960 30,760 30,936 
3. Kolasib 19,400 23,403 587 3,198 1,149 1,281 19,400 19,899 20,384 19,893 20,378 19,855 20,334 
4. Lawngtlai 33,119 41,007 941 3,580 2,182 3,835 33,111 32,931 34,403 32,931 34,402 32,926 34,397 
5. Lunglei 38,418 40,128 590 1,131 2,248 2,252 38,418 38,636 38,639 38,593 38,596 38,593 38,596 
6 Mamit 21,152 23,106 706 1,447 1,113 1,250 21,150 21,409 21,570 21,404 21,565 21,396 21,556 
7. Serchhip 15,042 24,413 179 7,138 507 773 15,042 14,997 15,261 14,997 15,261 14,997 15,261 
8. Siaha 16,305 24,877 219 3,908 1,131 1,481 16,305 16,180 16,680 16,180 16,680 16,180 16,680 
Source: MIS Report of MGNREGA 
  

246
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
248 
Appendix-2.2 
The district-wise and year-wise details of households and persons registered under MGNREGA during 2020-21 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.10.1) 
Sl. No. District No. of Registered No. of Job Card 
deleted in 
current YR 
No. of Job Card 
included in 
current YR 
Cumulative Employment 
demanded  
Employment 
offered 
Employment 
Availed 
1. Aizawl 22,235 27,427 370 2,486 2,467 3,071 22,235 22,237 23,719 22,206 23,688 22,198 
2. Champhai  17,370 18,259 1,014 1,860 1,216 1,220 17,370 18,104 18,108 18,086 18,090 18,086 
3. Hnahthial 7,098 8,072 8 14 352 352 7,097 7,100 7,100 7,100 7,100 7,100 
4. Khawzawl 8,435 9,015 778 1,301 826 847 8,435 9,178 9,205 9,178 9,205 9,178 
5. Kolasib 20,536 22,448 1,222 4,237 2,277 2,917 20,536 21,476 23,004 21,476 23,004 21,450 
6. Lawngtlai 34,976 36,862 1,309 8,155 2,869 7,313 34,976 35,562 38,603 35,562 38,603 35,561 
7. Lunglei 31,564 33,111 1,443 2,127 1,311 1,311 31,564 32,512 32,515 32,431 32,434 32,390 
8 Mamit 21,732 24,070 670 1,720 1,174 1,332 21,731 22,110 22,273 22,110 22,273 22,106 
9. Saitual 11,736 12,331 1,445 3,355 1,526 1,622 11,736 13,038 13,100 13,037 13,099 13,025 
10. Serchhip 15,190 22,073 724 3,563 539 708 15,189 15,410 15,447 15,410 15,447 15,394 
11. Siaha 16,690 20,275 913 6,243 1,225 3,529 16,690 17,249 19,880 17,249 19,880 17,249 
Source: MIS Report of MGNREGA 
  

247
AppendicesAppendices 
249 
Appendix-2.3 
The district-wise and year-wise details of households and persons registered under MGNREGA during 2021-22 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.10.1) 
Sl. No. District No. of Registered No. of Job Card 
deleted in 
current YR 
No. of Job Card 
included in 
current YR 
Cumulative Employment 
demanded  
Employment 
offered 
Employment 
Availed 
1. Aizawl 20,832 23,473 2,326 5,308 836 907 20,832 21,255 21,330 21,254 21,329 21,253 
2. Champhai  17,732 18,024 846 1,712 1,160 1,194 17,732 18,414 18,450 18,414 18,450 18,378 
3. Hnahthial 6,922 7,065 384 1,385 201 362 6,922 6,956 6,956 6,956 6,956 6,956 
4. Khawzawl 8,545 8,832 228 628 292 497 8,545 8,735 8,946 8,735 8,946 8,735 
5. Kolasib 20,372 21,545 901 2,510 704 1,068 20,372 20,583 20,971 20,583 20,971 20,543 
6. Lawngtlai 35,708 37,585 824 2,048 1,437 1,785 35,708 35,773 36,061 35,773 36,061 35,765 
7. Lunglei 31,840 32,511 1,832 3,469 1,527 1,529 31,839 32,968 32,970 32,966 32,968 32,954 
8. Mamit 21,851 24,092 799 1,641 801 1,504 21,850 22,501 22,687 22,501 22,687 22,453 
9. Saitual 12,092 13,315 160 430 428 521 12,092 12,133 12,212 12,133 12,212 12,123 
10. Serchhip 15,577 22,597 177 446 508 628 15,577 15,652 15,704 15,652 15,704 15,647 
11. Siaha 17,331 20,969 103 837 716 960 17,331 17,298 17,486 17,298 17,486 17,298 
Source: MIS Report of MGNREGA  

248
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
250 
Appendix-2.4 
The district-wise and year-wise details of households and persons registered under MGNREGA during 2022-23 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.10.1) 
Sl. 
No. 
District No. of 
Registered 
No. of Job Card 
deleted in 
current YR 
No. of Job 
Card included 
in current YR 
Cumulative Employment 
demanded  
Employment 
offered 
Employment 
Availed 
1. Aizawl 21,226 24,621 482 1,018 800 879 21,226 21,574 21,582 21,543 21,551 21,541 
2. Champhai  18,274 20,097 110 332 584 730 18,274 18,307 18,522 18,305 18,520 18,299 
3. Hnahthial 7,191 8,144 32 99 274 456 7,191 7,166 7,252 7,166 7,252 6,959 
4. Khawzawl 8,716 9,487 47 158 183 265 8,716 8,729 8,815 8,729 8,815 8,729 
5. Kolasib 20,971 22,676 178 684 731 1,176 20,931 21,072 21,764 21,067 21,759 21,043 
6. Lawngtlai 37,020 38,677 1,149 2,471 1,865 2,314 37,017 37,157 37,662 37,157 37,662 37,147 
7. Lunglei 32,530 34,222 985 1,475 1,295 1,331 32,495 33,048 33,080 33,047 33,079 33,046 
8. Mamit 22,378 24,612 606 1,320 985 1,214 22,378 22,801 23,218 22,798 23,215 22,793 
9. Saitual 12,193 12,934 429 1,462 417 641 12,193 12,490 12,906 12,490 12,906 12,474 
10. Serchhip 16,089 23,747 68 590 538 736 16,089 16,087 16,454 16,087 16,454 16,084 
11. Siaha 18,024 22,141 127 943 720 1,239 18,024 17,971 18,601 17,970 18,600 17,967 
Source: MIS Report of MGNREGA 
  

249
AppendicesAppendices 
251 
Appendix-2.5 
The district-wise and year-wise details of households and persons registered under MGNREGA during 2023-24 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.10.1) 
Sl. No. District No. of Registered No. of Job Card 
deleted in 
current YR 
No. of Job Card 
included in 
current YR 
Cumulative Employment 
demanded  
Employment 
offered 
Employment 
Availed 
1. Aizawl 21,479 25,798 985 2,214 1,060 1,323 21,470 22,041 22,163 22,041 22,163 22,027 
2. Champhai  18,597 19,840 586 1,994 742 1,638 18,597 18,815 19,714 18,801 19,694 18,785 
3. Hnahthial 7,371 8,469 25 761 172 687 7,370 7,339 7,880 7,339 7,880 7,049 
4. Khawzawl 8,794 9,313 293 800 300 587 8,794 8,976 9,236 8,976 9,236 8,970 
5. Kolasib 21,223 23,481 206 997 422 838 21,183 21,196 21,771 21,192 21,767 21,173 
6. Lawngtlai 37,990 39,812 636 1,525 1,390 1,854 37,990 37,930 38,334 37,930 38,334 37,901 
7. Lunglei 33,237 34,609 1,059 2,322 1,400 1,804 33,232 33,229 33,559 33,221 33,551 33,143 
8. Mamit 22,746 24,950 604 1,483 830 1,005 22,745 23,121 23,421 23,121 23,421 23,054 
9. Saitual 12,552 13,833 174 501 408 573 12,545 12,562 12,739 12,562 12,739 12,503 
10. Serchhip 16,272 23,853 367 1,521 496 1,155 16,272 16,311 16,780 16,311 16,779 16,281 
11. Siaha 18,369 23,472 172 1,434 424 1,199 18,368 18,342 19,238 18,342 19,238 18,326 
Source: MIS Report of MGNREGA 
 
 
 
Note: As evident from the above Appendices-2.1 to 2.5 , there are discrepancies in the figure i.e., cumulative number of households included in the Job Card 
should match with the total number of households in the beginning of the year minus the number of households deleted plus number of households added during 
the year but does not match. This indicated that the figures given in the MIS report are incorrect and not reliable. 
  

250
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
252 
Appendix-2.6 
Inclusion of non-permissible works in sampled block and villages in Mamit District during 2019-20 to 2023-24 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.12.3) 
Source: MIS Record in NREGA Soft  
Sl. 
No. 
Block 
Name 
VC 
Name 
Work Start 
Fin Year 
Work 
Status 
Work Code Work Name Agency 
Name 
Amount paid since inception 
(in ₹) 
Unskilled 
wage 
Material component 
inclusive of semi-
skilled and skilled 
wages 
1. Zawlnuam Kawrthah 2019-2020 Completed 2204001027/RC/30893 Retaining wall near Playground VEC 2,110 3,49,998 
2. Zawlnuam Kawrthah 2019-2020 Completed 2204001027/RC/32905 Constn. of R/ wall at 
Sangliankhuma house 
VEC 211 3,00,000 
3. Zawlnuam Kawrthah 2019-2020 Completed 2204001027/RC/32917 Constn. of R/Wall near indoor 
stadium 
VEC 211 3,00,000 
4. Kawrtethaw 
Veng 
Rajiv 
Nagar 
2020-2021 Completed 2204002021/AV/3530 Construction of Retaining Wall 
near Lalramthara House 
VEC 675 2,50,000 
5. Kawrtethaw 
Veng 
Rajiv 
Nagar 
2021-2022 Completed 2204002021/AV/GIS/6430 Construction of retaining wall 
near Library building 
VEC 3,029 2,30,000 
6. Zawlnuam Kawrthah 2021-2022 Completed 2204001027/AV/GIS/9516 Const. of Retaining wall at 
Zophei road 
VEC 932 3,00,000 
7. Zawlnuam Kanhmun 2022-2023 Completed 2204001038/AV/GIS/29478 Const. of retaining wall at 
approach road to St. Xavier 
School 
VEC 3,029 3,00,000 
8. Zawlnuam Bawrai 2023-2024 Completed 2204001034/LD/GIS/36375 Const. of stone spur/ retaining 
wall at Govt. PS 
VEC 3,237 2,00,000 
9. Zawlnuam Kawrthah 2023-2024 Completed 2204001027/LD/GIS/36509 Construction of retaining wall 
below Doctors Quarter to prevent 
landslide 
VEC 3,237 1,50,000 
10. Zawlnuam Kawrthah 2023-2024 Completed 2204001027/LD/GIS/39786 Retaining wall below SHG 
building 
VEC 747 2,00,000 
11. Zawlnuam Kawrthah 2023-2024 Completed 2204001027/LD/GIS/39791 Const. of Retaining wall near 
BCM Pastor quarters 
VEC 747 2,00,000 
Total 18,165 27,79,998 
Grand Total 27,98,163 

251
AppendicesAppendices 
253 
Appendix-2.7 
Inclusion of non-permissible works in sampled block and villages in Kolasib District during 2019-20 to 2023-24 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.12.3) 
Source: MIS Record in NREGA Soft  
Sl. 
No. 
Block Name VC Name Work Start 
Fin Year 
Work 
Status 
Work Code Work Name Agency 
Name 
Amount paid since inception (in ₹) 
Unskilled 
wage 
Material component 
inclusive of semi-
skilled and skilled 
wages 
1. Bilkhawthlir Saiphai 2019-2020 Completed 2205002012/FP/
23223 
Constn. of r wall (June) VEC 1,03,390 4,99,827 
2. Bilkhawthlir Saiphai 2019-2020 Completed 2205002012/FP/
23415 
Constn. of Retaining wall, 
near chhimveng 
presbyterian church 
VEC 31,650 84,943 
3. Bilkhawthlir Saiphai 2019-2020 Completed 2205002012/FP/
23766 
MC Constn. of R wall at 
near PCI, Face 2 
VEC 10,550 15,057 
4. Bilkhawthlir Saiphai 2020-2021 Completed 2205002012/FP/
23902 
R Wall Lianpuii In bul 
(May) 
VEC 94,500 2,00,000 
5. Bilkhawthlir College 
veng 
2021-2022 Completed 2205002029/LD/
28538 
Retaining Wall VEC 52,192 1,99,996 
6. Thingdawl Serkhan 2021-2022 Completed 2205001004/FP/
24469 
Constn. of R/Wall approach 
road to Model Veng 
VEC 39,144 3,00,000 
7. Thingdawl Serkhan 2021-2022 Completed 2205001004/FP/
24410 
Retaining wall at Model 
Road 
VEC 16,310 1,50,252 
8. Bilkhawthlir Saiphai 2022-2023 Completed 2205002012/AV/
GIS/18677 
Retaining wall ECFI church 
approach road Aug 2022 
VEC 1,86400 2,20,000 
9. Thingdawl Lungmuat 2022-2023 Completed 2205001006/FP/
GIS/18662 
Retaining wall near Primary 
School 
VEC 34,950 1,46,496 
10. Bilkhawthlir College 
veng 
2023-2024 Completed 2205002029/WC
/GIS/34805 
Pi Zaikungi in bula 
Retaining wall rem 8 days 
June 2023 College veng 
VEC 19,920 2,00,000 
11. Thingdawl Kawnpui 
North 
2023-2024 Completed 2205001012/LD/
GIS/34686 
Construction Of Retaining 
Wall at Govt. Primary 
School I 
VEC 1,05,576 3,49,986 
Total 6,94,582 23,66,557 
Grand Total 30,61,139 

252
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
254 
Appendix-2.8 
Delays in release of the Central Share of fund 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.13.1) 
Sl. 
No. 
Financial 
Year 
Sanction Order 
No. (GoI) 
Instal
ment 
Tranche Date of 
release by 
GoI 
Due date of 
release by 
GoM 
Actual 
date of 
release by 
GoM 
Amount (₹ in crore) 
released by the State 
Government 
Amount  
(in crore) 
Delay in 
fund 
release by 
GoM 
(delay in 
days) 
Interest 
Payable at 
12 per cent 
1st 
release 
2nd 
release 
3rd 
release 
1. 2019-20 J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI Sl.No.68 
1st 1st 05.08.2019 09.08.2019 15.10.2019 49.06   49.06 67 1.08 
2. 2019-20 J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI Sl.No.89 
2nd 1 st 23.10.2019 27.10.2019 19.03.2020 
& 
20.07.2020 
0.79 0.26  1.05 144 & 267 0.06 
 
3. 2019-20 J. 12028/2/ 2019-
RE-VI Sl. No.105 
3rd  1st  27.12.2019 31.12.2019 10.12.2020    0.14 345 0.02 
4. 2019-20 J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI Sl.No.146 
4th 1 st 11.02.2020 15.02.2020 02.12.2020    0.21 291 0.02 
5. 2019-20 J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI Sl.No.160 
1st 2nd 23.03.2020 27.03.2020 15.10.2020    5.06 202 0.34 
 Total 55.54  0.00 
6. 2020-21 J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI Sl.No.14 
1st 1st 07.04.2020 11.04.2020 22.05.2020 
& 
10.07.2020 
& 
28.11.2020 
22.63 22.00 0.08 44.71 41, 90 & 
231 
0.96 
7. 2020-21 J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI Sl.No.74 
2nd 1 st 13.11.2020 17.11.2020 04.02.2021    11.60 79 0.30 
8. 2020-21 J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI Sl.No.77 
3rd 1st 27.11.2020 01.12.2020 04.02.2021    11.83 65 0.25 
9. 2020-21 J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI Sl.No.114 
4th 1 st 05.03.2021 09.03.2021 04.06.2021    20.55 87 0.59 
Total 88.70  3.62 
    
    
    

253
AppendicesAppendices 
255 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Financial 
Year 
Sanction Order 
No. (GoI) 
Instal
ment 
Tranche Date of 
release by 
GoI 
Due date of 
release by 
GoM 
Actual 
date of 
release by 
GoM 
Amount (₹ in crore) 
released by the State 
Government 
Amount  
(in crore) 
Delay in 
fund 
release by 
GoM 
(delay in 
days) 
Interest 
Payable at 
12 per cent 
1st 
release 
2nd 
release 
3rd 
release 
10. 2021-22 J.12028/1/2021-RE-
VI Sl.No.19 
1st 1st 10.06.2021 26.06.2021 03.12.2021 
& 
28.02.2022 
& 
28.02.2022 
30.00 30.00 26.08 86.08 160, 247& 
247 
 
Total 86.08   
11. 2022-23 J.12028/1/2022-RE-
VI Sl.No.22 
1st 1st 02.09.2022 18.09.2022 22.11.2022    59.74 65  
12. 2022-23 J.12028/1/2022-RE-
VI Sl.No.61 
2nd 1 st 03.02.2023 19.02.2023 14.03.2023    58.85 23  
Total 118.59.   
13. 2023-24 J.12034/2/2023-RE-
VI Sl.No.29 
1st 1 st 28.08.2023 13.09.2023 25.09.2023 
& 
17.11.2023 
38.87 9.80  48.67 12 & 65  
14. 2023-24 J.12034/2/2023-RE-
VI Sl.No.87 
2nd 1st 27.03.2024 12.04.2024 01.05.2024    980 19  
Total 58.47   

254
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
256 
Appendix-2.9 
Delays in release of the State Matching Share of fund 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.13.1) 
Sl. 
No. 
Financial Year Sanction Order No. 
(GoI) 
Installment Tranche Date of 
release by 
GoI 
Due date of 
release by 
GoM 
Actual date of 
release by 
GoM 
SMS Amount  
(₹ in crore) 
Delay in 
fund release 
by GoM  
(No. of days) 
1. 2019-20 J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI Sl. No. 68 1st 1st 05.08.2019 09.08.2019 20.12.2019 511.096 133 
2. J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI Sl. No. 89 2nd 1st 23.10.2019 27.12.2019 10.03.2020 8.24947 74 
3. J-12028/2/2019-RE-
VI Sl. No. 105 3rd 1st 27.12.2019 31.12.2019 22.05.2020 1.49688 143 
4. J-12028/2/2019-RE-
VI Sl. No.146 4th 1st 11.02.2020 15.02.2020 22.05.2020 2.22608 97 
5. J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI Sl. No. 160 1st 2nd 23.03.2020 27.03.2020 21.05.2020 52.74463 55 
6. J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI, Sl. No. 18 
(NeFMS) 
1st 1st 08.04.2019  10.07.2019 1509.69  
7. J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI, Sl. No. 35 
(NeFMS) 
(FY 2019-2020) 
2nd 1st 09.05.2019  25.07.2019 425.77  
8. J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI, Sl. No. 68 
(NeFMS) 
(FY 2019-2020) 
3rd 1st 19.06.2019  20.12.2019 405.44  
9. J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI, Sl. No. 68 
(NeFMS) 
(FY 2019-2020) 
4th 1st 17.07.2019  20.12.2019 666.25566  

255
AppendicesAppendices 
257 
Sl. 
No. 
Financial Year Sanction Order No. 
(GoI) 
Installment Tranche Date of 
release by 
GoI 
Due date of 
release by 
GoM 
Actual date of 
release by 
GoM 
SMS Amount  
(₹ in crore) 
Delay in 
fund release 
by GoM  
(No. of days) 
10. J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI, Sl. No. 164 
(NeFMS) 
(FY 2019-2020) 
1st 2nd 02.12.2019  03.06.2020 560.69814  
11. J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI, Sl. No. 165 
(NeFMS) 
(FY 2019-2020) 
2nd 2nd 11.12.2019  03.06.2020 923.5699  
12. 2020-21 J.12028/2/2010-RE-
VI Sl.No.14 1st 1st 07.04.2020 11.04.2020 03.06.2020 1518.12 53 
13. J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI Sl. No.74 2nd 1st 13.11.2020 17.11.2020 02.02.2021 386.826 77 
14. J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI Sl. No. 77 3rd 1st 27.11.2020 01.12.2020 03.02.2021 394.333 64 
15. J.12028/2/2019-RE-
VI Sl. No. 114 4th 1st 05.03.2021 09.03.2021 08.10.2021 685.133 213 
16. J.12028/2/2020-RE-
VI Sl. No. 14 
(NeFMS) 
(FY 2020-2021) 
1st 1st 07.04.2020  11.02.2021 464.94  
17. 2021-22 J.12028/1/2021-RE-
VI Sl. No. 19 1st 1st 10.06.2021 26.06.2021 09.09.2021 2869.19 75 
18. 2022-23 J.12028/1/2022-RE-
VI Sl. No. 22 1st 1st 02.09.2022 18.09.2022 02.12.2022 1991.45 75 
19. J.12034/2/2023-RE-
/VI Sl. No. 61 2nd 1st 03.02.2023 19.02.2023 18.08.2023 1961.71 180 
20. 2023-24 J.12034/2/2023-RE-
VI Sl. No. 29 1st 1st 28.08.2023 13.09.2023 12.12.2023 1622.524 90 
 

256
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
258 
Appendix-3.1.1 
Summarised financial position and working results of Government Companies as per their latest finalised accounts as on 30 September 2024 
(Reference: Paragraphs-3.1.6, 3.1.8, 3.1.8.2, 3.1.8.3 and 3.1.9) 
(Figures in columns (5) to (12) are ₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Sector/ name of the 
Company 
Period of 
accounts 
Year in 
which 
accounts 
finalised 
Paid-up 
capital135 
Loans 
outstanding 
at the end 
of year 
Accumula
ted 
profit(+)/ 
loss(-) 
Turnover Net profit 
(+)/ loss (-) 
Net 
impact of 
Audit 
comments 
Capital 
employed136 
Return on 
capital 
employed137 
Percentage of 
return on 
capital 
employed 
Interest Net worth Manpower138 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) 
Working Government Companies 
SECTOR: AGRICULTURAL MARKETING 
1. 
Mizoram Agricultural 
Marketing Corporation 
Limited 
2011-12 2021-22 5.97 - (-) 8.54 - (-) 1.63 - (-) 2.57 (-)1.61 Not workable 0.02 (-) 2.57 15 
2. 
Mizoram Food and Allied 
Industries Corporation 
Limited  
2019-20 2023-24 20.00 - (-) 22.69 0.28 (-) 0.41 - (-) 2.69 (-)0.41 Not workable 0.00 (-) 2.69 25 
Sector Wise Total   25.97 - (-) 31.23 0.28 (-) 2.04 - (-) 5.26 (-)2.02 Not workable 0.02 (-) 5.26 40 
SECTOR: FINANCING 
3. 
Zoram Infrastructure and 
Industrial Development 
Corporation Limited 
2022-23 2023-24 20.33 27.68 (-) 12.77 64.57 (-) 0.45 - (+) 35.24 (-) 0.45 (-) 1.28 0.00 (+) 7.56 36 
Sector Wise Total   20.33 27.68 (-) 12.77 64.57 (-) 0.42 - (+) 35.24 (-) 0.45 (-) 1.28 0.00 (+) 7.56 36 
SECTOR: MANUFACTURING 
4. 
Zoram Electronics 
Development Corporation 
Limited 
2009-10 2016-17 7.23 - (-) 6.59 - (-) 0.24 - (+) 0.64 (-) 0.24 (-) 37.50 0.00 (+) 0.64 0 
Sector Wise Total   7.23 - (-) 6.59 0.00 (-) 0.24 - (+) 0.64 (-) 0.24 (-) 37.50 0.00 (+) 0.64 25 
SECTOR: MISCELLANEOUS 
5. 
Mizoram Handloom and 
Handicrafts Development 
Corporation Limited 
2018-19 2020-21 10.00 0.10 (-) 6.34 0.00 (-) 0.29 - (+) 3.76 (-) 0.29 (-) 7.71 0.00 (+) 3.66 15 
6. Aizawl Smart City 
Limited139 2019-20 2021-22 0.05 - - - - - (+) 0.05 - - 0.00 (+) 0.05 32 
Sector Wise Total   10.05 0.10 (-) 6.34 0.00 (-) 0.29 - (+) 3.81 (-) 0.29 (-) 7.71 0.00 (+) 3.71 47 
Grand Total   63.58 27.78 (-) 56.93 64.85 (-) 3.02 - (+) 34.43 (-) 3.00 (-) 8.71 0.02 (+) 6.65 140 
Source: Latest finalised Accounts of SPSEs 
 
135 Paid up capital includes ‘Share application money pending allotment’ (₹ 7.57 crore) in respect of Mizoram Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited (₹ 0.52 crore), Zoram 
Infrastructure and Industrial Development Corporation Limited (₹ GoM: ₹ 0.60 crore plus Others: ₹ 3.95 crore), Zoram Electronics Development Corporation Limited (₹ 2.46 crore) 
and Aizwl Smart City Limited (₹ 0.04 crore) 
136 Capital employed represents Shareholders’ fund plus long term borrowings 
137 Return on capital has been worked out by adding back the ‘interest’ charged to profit and loss account to the ‘net profit’ or ‘net loss’ for the year 
138  Including Temporary and Regular employees 
139  In respect of SPSE at serial no. 6, Net Losses for the year (₹ 0.60 crore) were recouped from the Government Grants. 
 

257
Appendices
Appendices 
259 
Appendix-3.1.2 
Statement showing Rate of Real Return on Government Investment 
(Reference: Paragraph-3.1.9) 
 (₹ in crore) 
Financial 
Year 
Present 
value of 
total 
investment 
at the 
beginning 
of the year 
Equity 
infused by 
the State 
Government 
during the 
year 
Net interest 
free loan 
given by 
the State 
Governmen
t during the 
year 
Interest 
free loan 
converted 
into 
equity 
during the 
year 
Grants/ subsidies 
given by the 
State 
Government for 
operational and 
administrative 
expenditure 
Disinvestment 
by the State 
Government 
during the 
year at face 
value 
Total 
investment 
during the 
year 
Total 
investment 
at the end 
of the year 
Average 
rate of 
interest 
(on 
Govern
ment 
borrowi
ngs) 
Present value 
of total 
investment at 
the end of the 
year 
Minimum 
expected 
return to 
recover cost 
of funds for 
the year 
Total earnings/ 
profit after tax 
(PAT) for the 
year* 
A B C D E F G 
H = 
C+D+E+F+
G 
I = B+H J K =  
I x (1+J/100) 
L =  
I x J/100 M 
Upto 2016-17 88.09 53.94 - - - - 53.94 142.03 5.20 149.42 7.39  
2017-18 149.42 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.17 0.00 5.17 154.59 4.84 162.07 7.48 0.08 
2018-19 162.07 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.54  0.00 4.54  166.61  5.04 175.01  8.40 -0.33 
2019-20 175.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.53 0.00 5.53 180.54 4.29 188.29 7.75 -2.04 
2020-21 188.29 0.13140 0.00 0.00 14.14 0.00 14.27 202.56 4.32 211.31 8.75 -2.32 
2021-22 211.31 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.22 0.00 6.22 217.53 4.41 227.12 9.59 -2.77 
2022-23 227.12 0.00 0.00 0.00 14.74 0.00 14.74 241.86 4.58 252.94 11.08 -2.63 
2023-24 252.94 0.00 0.00 0.00 30.21 0.00 30.21 283.15 5.05 297.45 14.30 -3.02 
Total:  54.07   80.55  134.62      
 
*  worked out in respect of six SPSEs where State Government made direct investment on the basis of profit/ loss as per their latest finalised accounts 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Total earnings/ loss in 2023-24 Investment by the State Government 
as per total of the column H above 
Return on State Government 
investment on the basis of 
historical value 
Present value of State Government 
investment at the end of 2023-24 
Real return on State Government 
investment considering the present 
value of investments 
A B C D E 
Value of column M of above table Total of the column H of above table A*100/B Value of column K of above table A*100/D 
2023-24 -3.02 134.62 -2.24 297.45 -1.02 
Source: Records furnished by SPSEs 
 
140  New Company viz., Aizawl Smart City Limited incorporated and investment amounting to ₹ 0.05 crore was added. ₹ 0.08 crore contributed to the equity capital of Mizoram Agriculture 
Marketing Corporation Limited during 2020-21. 
 
 

258
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
260 
Appendix-4.1 
Statement showing the details of the targeted area as per Micro plan vis-a-vis total area of VFDC as per Landscape survey report 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.9.9.2) 
(Area in hectare) 
Sl. 
No 
VFDC Sub-mission/ interventions wise area as per Micro plan of VFDCs Total area of 
VFDC as per 
Landscape 
survey 
Enhance quality of forest cover and 
improving ecosystem service 
[Sub Mission (SM) 1] 
Ecosystem 
restoration & 
increase in 
forest cover 
(SM 2) 
Enhancing 
tree cover 
in urban 
and peri-
urban 
areas 
(SM3) 
Agro forestry & Social 
forestry (increasing 
biomass & creating carbon 
sink) 
(SM4) 
Total targeted 
Area 
Category(a) 
(ANR) 
Category(b) Rehabilitation 
of shifting 
cultivation 
Farmer’s 
land 
including 
current 
fallows 
Highways/ 
rural roads Type 
(A) 
Type 
(B) 
Type 
(C) 
L2: Kolasib (Kolasib & Bairabi) 
1. New 
Diakkawn 
220 NIL NIL NIL 107 25 120 NIL 472 Not available 
L2: Kolasib (Kawnpui & Bukpui) 
2. Bualpui NIL NIL 830 NIL 250 50 100 NIL 1,230 Not available 
L2: Champhai (Khawzawl) 
3. Chawngtlai 100 120 50 155 210 NIL 145 30 810 Not available 
L2: Champhai (Kawlkulh) 
4. Kawlkulh 60 75 40 80 95 NIL 100 15 465 826 
5. Vanchengpui 60 75 40 90 95 NIL 50 5 415 300 
6. Pawlrang 60 65 30 80 95 NIL 50 15 395 850 
L2: Thenzawl (Serchhip) 
7. Thentlang 150 150 NIL 150 350 NIL 100 30 930 1,650 
Total 650 485 990 555 1202 75 665 95 4,717 3,626 

259
AppendicesAppendices 
261 
Appendix-4.2 
Statement showing FDAs-wise land survey report 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.9.9.3) 
(Figures in number) 
Sl. No. L2 Landscape Total Number of 
L3 Landscape 
No. of L3 Landscape 
for which Landscape 
survey report available 
No. of L3 Landscape for 
which Landscape survey 
report not available  
Sampled L3 Landscape for 
which survey report furnished. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1. Aizawl 12 0 12 None 
2. Kolasib  
(Kolasib & Bairabi) 
7 2141 5 New Diakkawn 
3. Kolasib  
(Kawnpui & Bukpui) 
5 1142 4 Bualpui 
4. Champhai (Khawzawl) 4 4143 0 Chawngtlai 
5. Champhai (Kawlkulh) 9 9144 0 1. Kawlkulh,  
2. Vanchengpui, 
3. Pawlrang 
6. Thenzawl 3 3145 0 None 
7. Thenzawl (Serchhip) 4 4146 0 Thentlang 
8. Darlawn 7 0 7 None 
Total 51 23 28 7 
Source: Approved Perspective Plan and L3 landscape survey report 
  
 
141 New Diakkawn, Tumpui  
142  Bualpui 
143  Hmuncheng, Arro, Vankal, Khuhlen 
144  Kawlkulh, Vanchengpui, Chhawrtui, puilo, Dulte, Hliappui, Changzawl, Saichal and Pawlrang 
145  Thenzawl North, East and West 
146  New Serchhip, Vanchengte, Thentlang and Chhiahtlang 

260
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
262 
Appendix-4.3 
Statement showing the number of meetings held at the State Level and District levels between 2015-16 and 2022-23  
for monitoring of GIM in Mizoram 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.9.9.7) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of Committee/body Periodicity of 
meeting in a 
year as per GIM 
guidelines 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Year wise meetings held at State level  
1. State Mission Director (General Body) 1 NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
2. State Steering committee 2 1 0 1 0 1 1 2 1 
3. State Level Executive Committee 2 1 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 
Year wise meetings held at FDA, Aizawl  
4. General body of FDA 2 NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL 1 NIL 
5. Executive Committee of FDA 4 NIL NIL NIL NIL 1 NIL NIL NIL 
Year wise meetings held at FDA, Kolasib 
6. General body of FDA 2 NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
7. Executive Committee of FDA 4 NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
Year wise meetings held at FDA, Champhai 
8. General body of FDA 2 NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
9. Executive Committee of FDA 4 NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
Year wise meetings held at FDA, Darlawn 
10. General body of FDA 2 NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
11. Executive Committee of FDA 4 NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
Year wise meetings held at FDA, Thenzawl 
12. General body of FDA 2 NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
13. Executive Committee of FDA 4 NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
  

261
AppendicesAppendices 
263 
Appendix-4.4 
Statement showing details of 12 Landscape where advance, creation and maintenance work  
in area not approved in Perspective Plan 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.9.11.3) 
Sl. 
No 
L3 Landscape Area 
covered 
Expenditure 
(Amount in ₹) 
Activity APO year  Execution year  Sub-Mission 
1. N. Lungleng  20 4,40,800.00  Creation work 2020-21 and 2021-22 2022-23 SM1(a)  
2. Lamchhip 20 4,40,800.00  Creation work 2020-21 and 2021-22 2022-23 SM1(a)  
3. Thiak 12 2,64,480.00  Creation work 2020-21 and 2021-22 2022-23 SM1(a)  
4. Mualkhang 20 4,40,800.00  Creation work 2020-21 and 2021-22 2022-23 SM1(a)  
5. Lungdai 45 22,09,500.00  Creation work 2020-21 and 2021-22 2022-23 SM 2(a) 
6. Hmawngkawn 62.8 30,83,480.00  Creation work 2020-21 and 2021-22 2022-23 SM 2(a) 
7. Aibawk 20 9,82,000.00  Creation work 2020-21 and 2021-22 2022-23 SM 2(a) 
8. Mualluangthu 50 24,55,000.00  Creation work 2020-21 and 2021-22 2022-23 SM 2(a) 
9. Lungdai 5 5,48,000.00  Creation work 2020-21 and 2021-22 2022-23 SM3(a) 
10. Mualluangthu 5 5,48,000.00  Creation work 2020-21 and 2021-22 2022-23 SM3(a) 
11. Aibawk 5 5,48,000.00  Creation work 2020-21 and 2021-22 2022-23 SM3(a) 
12. N. Lungleng 5 5,01,000.00  Creation work 2020-21 and 2021-22 2022-23 SM 4(C) 
13. Aibawk 8 8,01,600.00  Creation work 2020-21 and 2021-22 2022-23 SM 4(C) 
14. Mualluangthu 20 20,04,000.00  Creation work 2020-21 and 2021-22 2022-23 SM 4(C) 
15. Lamchhip 8 8,01,600.00  Creation work 2020-21 and 2021-22 2022-23 SM 4(C) 
16. Mualkhang 4 3,80,800.00  Creation work 2020-21 and 2021-22 2022-23 SM 4(C) 
17. Mualluangthu 50 7,98,000.00  1st year Maintenance 2021-22 and 2022-23 2022-23 SM2 (a) 
18. Mualluangthu 20 8,24,000.00  1st year Maintenance  2021-22 2022-23 SM4(C) 
19. Mualkhang 22.8 5,45,072.00  Creation work 2021-22 2022-23 SM 1(a)  
20. Lamchhip 60 12,99,600.00  Creation work 2021-22 2022-23 SM1(b) Type A 
21. Baktawng 
Chhuanthar 
40 8,66,400.00  Creation work 2021-22 2022-23 SM1(b) Type A 

262
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
264 
Sl. 
No 
L3 Landscape Area 
covered 
Expenditure 
(Amount in ₹) 
Activity APO year  Execution year  Sub-Mission 
22. Lungdai 50 35,97,000.00  Creation work  2021-22 and 2022-23 2022-23 SM1(b) Type C 
23. Baktawng 
Chhuanthar 
30 21,58,200.00  Creation work  2021-22 and 2022-23 2022-23 SM1(b) Type C 
24. Thiak 80 57,55,200.00  Creation work  2021-22 and 2022-23 2022-23 SM1(b) Type C 
25. Lamchhip 40 28,95,600.00  Creation work  2021-22 and 2022-23 2022-23 SM1(b) Type C 
26. Aibawk 24 8,13,600.00  Advance work  2021-22 and 2022-23 2022-23 SM1(b) Type C 
27. Hmawngkawn 34 8,48,640.00  Advance work  2022-23  2022-23 SM 2(a)  
28. Darlawng 14 3,99,000.00  Creation work 2021-22 and 2022-23 2022-23 SM 4(a)  
29. Baktawng 
Chhuanthar 
46 13,10,367.00  Creation work 2021-22 and 2022-23 2022-23 SM 4(a)  
30. Baktawng 
Chhuanthar 
28.2 2,78,616.00  1st year Maintenance  2021-22 and 2022-23 2022-23 SM 4(a)  
31. Sateek  9.2 2,62,200.00  Creation work 2021-22 and 2022-23 2022-23 SM 4(a)  
32. Tlungvel 20 3,58,000.00  Advance work 2021-22 and 2022-23 2022-23 SM 4(a)  
33. Lungdai 20 7,48,000.00  Advance work  2022-23 2022-23 SM 4(C ) 
34. Sateek  20 7,48,000.00  Advance work  2022-23 2022-23 SM 4(C ) 
35. Tlungvel 20 7,48,000.00  Advance work  2022-23 2022-23 SM 4(C ) 
36. Lungdai 38.7 11,02,950.00  Creation work  2021-22 2022-23 SM 4(a)  
Total  
 
4,28,06,305.00          
(Note: The total area of L3 Landscape is enumerated from creation work only to avoid duplicity of area under one L3 Landscape.) 
 

263
Appendices
Appendices 
265 
Appendix-4.5 
Statement showing details of survival rate of plantation found during Joint Physical Verification 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.9.11.7) 
Sl. 
No. 
Forest 
Division 
Agency 
(FDA) 
Village 
Forest 
Development 
Committee 
(VFDC) 
Plantation 
Site Area (ha) Plants Required / 
100 m² 
Plants Found / 100 
m² 
Survival Rate 
(%) Date of JPV 
1. Aizawl N. Lungleng Samtlang to 
N. Lungleng 
Road 
5.00 350 115 32.86 22-05-2024 
2. Kolasib Bualpui Tuikhawhthla 
to Zawngtah 
Kawn 
8.00 350 75 21.43 02-05-2024 
3. Kolasib New 
Diakkawn 
Saihapui 
Check Gate 
to Zero Point 
15.09 350 75 21.43 29-07-2024 
4. Champhai Vanchengpui Chhawrtui–
Vanchengpui 
Road 
5.00 350 154 44.00 01-05-2024 
5. Darlawn Buhban Buhban to 
Lungpher 10.00 350 148 42.29 24-05-2024 
6. Darlawn Khawruhlian Tuirini Road 40.00 350 181 51.71 23-05-2024 
7. Thenzawl Thentlang Tuikum to 
Thentlang 
Road 
30.00 350 162 46.29 05-06-2024 

264
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
266 
Appendix-4.6 
Statement showing shortfall in Creation work against Advance work carried out 
between 2016-17 and 2020-21 under sub-mission 4(a): Farmers land including 
current fallows under FDA, Kolasib 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.9.11.8(i)(c)) 
Sl. 
No 
L3 
Landscape 
Type of 
work 
Number 
of 
Farmers 
Total 
Area 
(In 
hectare) 
Rate of 
expenses 
per hectare  
(in ₹) 
Total 
expenditure  
(in ₹) 
Year 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) = (5) x (6) (8) 
1. L2 Landscape: Kolasib and Bairabi  
2. Dilzau Advance 28 15.68 7,509.00 1,17,741.12 2016-17 
3. 34.44 16,598.00 5,71,635.12 2017-18 
5. Total   50.12  6,89,376.24  
6. Creation 28 3.92 2,903.00 11,379.76 2017-18 
7. 15.96 11,456.00 1,82,837.76 2018-19 
8. 2.80 2,073.00 5,804.40 2019-20 
9. 10.36 7,586.00 78,590.96 2020-21 
10. Total   33.04  2,78,612.88  
11. Meidum Advance 26  15.60 8,087.00 1,26,157.20 2016-17 
12. 34.32 17,875.00 6,13,470.00 2017-18 
13. Total   49.92  7,39,627.20  
14. Creation 26 3.90 3,126.00 12,191.40 2017-18 
15. 15.86 12,337.00 1,95,664.82 2018-19 
16. 2.86 2,233.00 6,386.38.00 2019-20 
17. 10.40 8,170.00 84,968.00 2020-21 
18. Total   33.02  2,99,210.60  
19. Thingdawl Advance 19 15.39 11,065.00 1,70,290.35 2016-17 
20. 29.64 21,036.00 6,23,507.04 2017-18 
21. Total   45.03  7,93,797.39  
22. Creation 19 3.99 4,277.00 17,065.23 2017-18 
23. 15.77 16,882.00 2,66,229.14 2018-19 
24. 2.85 3,055.00 8,706.75 2019-20 
25. 10.45 11,180.00 1,16,831.00 2020-21 
26. Total   33.06  4,08,832.12  
27. New 
Diakkawn 
Advance 10 25.00 21,025.00 5,25,625.00 2016-17 
28. 25.00 46,475.00 11,61,875.00 2017-18 
29. Total   50.00  16,87,500.00  
30. Creation 10 4.00 8,127.00 32,508.00 2017-18 
31. 0.90 1,890.00 1,701.00 2018-19 
32. 14.90 30,186.00 4,49,771.40 2018-19 
33. 2.90 5,805.00 16,834.50 2019-20 
34. 10.50 21,245.00 2,23,072.50 2020-21 
35. Total   33.20  7,23,887.40  
36. L2 Landscape: Kawnpui and Bukpui  
37. Bualpui 
‘N’ 
Advance 15 18.00 12,260.00 2,20,680.00 2016-17 
38. 39.90 35,940.00 14,34,006.00 2017-18 
39. Total   57.90  16,54,686.00  
40. Creation 15 2.85 3,870.00 11,029.50 2017-18 
41. 18.90 25,704.00 4,85,805.60 2018-19 
42. 3.30 4,770.00 15,741.00 2019-20 
43. 12.90 17,454.00 2,25,156.60 2020-21 
44. Total   37.95  7,37,732.70  
45. Bukpui Advance 15 18.00 16,539.00 2,97,702.00 2016-17 
46. 39.90 36,560.33 14,58,757.17 2017-18 
47. Total   57.90  17,56,459.17  
48. Creation 15 2.85 4,644.00 13,235.40 2017-18 
49. 18.90 25,884.00 4,89,207.60 2018-19 

265
Appendices
Appendices 
267 
 
 
Sl. 
No 
L3 
Landscape 
Type of 
work 
Number 
of 
Farmers 
Total 
Area 
(In 
hectare) 
Rate of 
expenses 
per hectare  
(in ₹) 
Total 
expenditure  
(in ₹) 
Year 
50. 3.30 4,770.00 15,741.00 2019-20 
51. 12.90 17,454.00 2,25,256.60 2020-21 
52. Total   37.95  7,43,440.60  
Total Advance 113 310.87  73,21,446.00  
Creation 113 208.22  31,91,716.30  
Shortfall in Creation work against the 
Advance work 
102.65  24,17,558.39*  
*Total expenditure ₹ 73,21,446.00 on advance work executed ÷310.87 ha  
(Total area of advance work executed) = ₹ 23,551.47 x 102.65 ha  
(difference of advance work and creation work executed) = ₹ 24,17,558).  
 
 
 
 

266
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
268 
Appendix-4.7 
Key Problem Areas 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.11.5.4) 
(1) Composition taxpayers generating EWBs for inter-state supplies. 
(2)  Composition taxpayers generating EWBs for outward supplies exceeding threshold limit. 
(3) Taxpayers with only outward supplies supported by EWBs in any given year. 
(4)  Taxpayers who effect disproportionate outward supplies compared to inward supply 
(EWBs supported) in any given year. 
(5) Taxpayers who had generated EWBs using duplicate invoices. 
(6) Generation of EWBs by Nil Filers of Return. 
(7) Generation of EWBs by Returns Defaulters (Non-Filers). 
(8) Taxpayers who have generated EWBs after effective date of cancellation. 
(9) Taxpayers who have generated EWBs whose registration was subsequently cancelled. 
(10) Taxpayers who had generated EWBs and had cancelled subsequently. 
(11) Taxpayers who had generated EWBs and were subsequently rejected by the recipients. 
(12) Taxpayers who had generated disproportionate supplies supported by EWBs on the inward 
side compared to outward side in any given year. 
(13) Extension of EWBs by taxpayers. 
(14) EWBs generated using risky vehicles i.e., Two wheelers. 
(15) EWBs generated using theft vehicles. 
(16) High value of EWBs in first six months of registration. 
(17) EWBs using invalid Pin codes. 
(18) EWBs generated using suspended, scrapped, surrendered and cancelled vehicles. 
(19) E-Way Bills generated by defaulter list of MCA. 
(20) EWBs generated by income tax defaulters. 
(21) EWBs generated by DGARM-identified/ Other agencies-identified taxpayers. 
(22) EWBs generated by DGFT-blacklisted exporters. 
 

267
AppendicesAppendices 
 
 
Appendix-4.8 
Statement showing generation of EWBs by Nil Filers of GST Returns 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.11.6.2 (a)) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Jurisdicti
on 
Taxpayer’s 
GSTIN 
Date of 
registration 
If cancelled, 
date of 
cancellation 
Period of Nil 
return filed 
No. of 
EWBs 
EWB No. EWB 
Date 
Assessable 
value 
Tax 
Amount 
Interest 
leviable147 
Amount 
Remarks 
1. DCST, 
Aizawl 
West Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxx
xxxV 
01.07.2017 Active GSTR-1 and 3B: 
April, August, 
October, 
November, 
December 2019, 
January to March 
2020 
13 891079319773 27-11-2019 3,70,000 18,500 14,543 Notice in GST 
ASMT-10 issued to 
taxpayer (November 
2024) 
821079321412 30-11-2019 15,00,000 75,000 58,956 
821079319040 28-11-2019 15,00,000 75,000 58,956 
831079325420 27-11-2019 4,32,000 21,600 16,979 
831079322997 27-11-2019 13,28,000 66,400 52,196 
831079321882 05-12-2019 15,00,000 75,000 57,810 
811094661374 08-03-2020 22,00,000 1,10,000 79,851 
811095803889 17-03-2020 22,00,000 1,10,000 79,851 
821094661447 08-03-2020 22,00,000 1,10,000 79,851 
821094756631 09-03-2020 10,00,000 50,000 36,296 
861095805455 17-03-2020 22,00,000 1,10,000 79,851 
891094661550 08-03-2020 22,08,000 1,10,400 80,141 
811094661684 09-03-2020 9,00,000 45,000 32,666 
2. DCST, 
Aizawl 
North Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxx
xxxN 
17.01.2018 Active GSTR-1 and 3B: 
April to July 
2019, September 
to November 
2019 
3 821054431343 31-05-2019 1,51,503 27,271 23,898  
871084006934 30-12-2019 7,92,678 1,42,682 1,09,979 
841076366665 07-11-2019 28,28,033 5,09,046 4,00,152 
3. DCST, 
Champhai 
Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxx
xxxM 
12.05.2018 01.01.2019 
(On 
application 
of taxpayer) 
GSTR-1 and 3B: 
June to December 
2018, January to 
March 2019 
1 861028891827 30-11-2018 24,00,000 1,20,000 1,15,930  
4. DCST, 
Champhai 
Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxx
xxxK 
25.01.2019 01.10.2019 
(Suo-moto) 
GSTR-1 and 3B: 
April, June, 
August 2019 
(September 2019 
not filed) 
13 801056238759 14-06-2019 36,40,000 1,82,000 1,56,799  
811055376404 07-06-2019 25,90,000 1,29,500 1,11,569 
811056239403 14-06-2019 23,80,000 1,19,000 1,02,523 
811056241200 14-06-2019 33,60,000 1,68,000 1,44,738 
831054680315 02-06-2019 25,20,000 1,26,000 1,08,553 
851056240225 14-06-2019 22,40,000 1,12,000 96,492 
881056241764 14-06-2019 33,60,000 1,68,000 1,44,738 
891055237189 07-06-2019 37,80,000 1,89,000 1,62,830 
851065333699 20-08-2019 33,60,000 1,68,000 1,39,601 
801069627155 19-09-2019 33,60,000 1,68,000 1,37,116 
831069820555 20-09-2019 32,48,000 1,62,400 1,32,545 
 
147 As per Section 50(1) of MGST Act, 2017 and Notification No. J. 21011/1/2017-TAX/Vol-II(ii) dated 19 July 2017  

268
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
270 
Sl. 
No. 
Jurisdicti
on 
Taxpayer’s 
GSTIN 
Date of 
registration 
If cancelled, 
date of 
cancellation 
Period of Nil 
return filed 
No. of 
EWBs 
EWB No. EWB 
Date 
Assessable 
value 
Tax 
Amount 
Interest 
leviable147 
Amount 
Remarks 
851069627457 19-09-2019 33,60,000 1,68,000 1,37,116 
871069821125 20-09-2019 39,64,800 1,98,240 1,61,796 
5 DCST, 
Aizawl 
West Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxx
xxxC 
07.07.2017 01.11.2019 
(On 
application 
of taxpayer) 
GSTR-1:  
June, September 
2019 (April, 
May, July, 
August, October 
2019 not filed) 
GSTR-3B: 
April to October 
2019 
3 861047670405 14-04-2019 4,99,601 89,928 80,181  
831047670646 14-04-2019 5,02,016 90,363 80,569 
821047670081 14-04-2019 5,08,754 91,576 81,650 
6 DCST, 
Champhai 
Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxx
xxx9 
01.07.2017 Active GSTR-1: 
April to October 
2019 (January 
2019 not filed) 
GSTR-3B: 
April to August, 
October, 
December 2018, 
January 2019 
8 881022239764 07-10-2018 1,26,945 6,347 6,226  
861022239896 07-10-2018 1,26,945 6,347 6,226 
861021431208 01-10-2018 21,60,000 1,08,000 1,05,935 
841022239564 07-10-2018 95,268 4,763 4,672 
801022239434 07-10-2018 95,268 4,763 4,672 
881034155487 11-01-2019 36,16,800 1,80,840 1,69,177 
871034156180 11-01-2019 24,66,000 1,23,300 1,15,348 
861034163046 11-01-2019 24,98,880 1,24,944 1,16,886 
7 DCST, 
Kolasib 
Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxx
xxxD 
07.08.2017 Active GSTR-1 and 3B: 
December 2018, 
February 2019 
  4 811029177945 03-12-2018 50,88,400 0 8,70,844 Taxpayer paid tax 
escaped of ₹ 22,76,835 
using DRC-03 during 
February 2024. 
However, interest is 
not paid. 
Demand for payment 
of interest in GST 
DRC-07 issued 
(November 2024) 
831030330773 12-12-2018 19,51,331 0 3,27,975 
861030011301 10-12-2018 45,05,123 0 7,66,686 
871029179291 03-12-2018 11,64,511 0 1,99,298 
8 DCST, 
Aizawl East 
Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxx
xxx8 
12.02.2020 01.01.2021 
(on 
application 
of taxpayer) 
GSTR-1 and 3B: 
February to 
December 2020 
85 811093325765 29-02-2020 81,074 14,593 10,817 Notice for clarification 
issued to taxpayer 
(November 2024) 
821093326857 29-02-2020 68,587 12,346 9,151 
861091016655 15-02-2020 65,122 11,722 8,688 
861093322493 29-02-2020 64,607 11,629 8,620 
871093327628 29-02-2020 69,307 12,475 9,247 
881093323872 29-02-2020 80,131 14,424 10,691 
881093348156 29-02-2020 42,666 7,680 5,692 
801094561310 07-03-2020 43,493 7,829 5,683 
811094562204 07-03-2020 45,872 8,257 5,994 
811095964227 18-03-2020 75,384 13,569 9,850 
841094814287 10-03-2020 69,686 12,544 9,106 
841096244734 19-03-2020 70,389 12,670 9,197 
851096245686 19-03-2020 70,884 12,759 9,262 
881095129715 12-03-2020 57,366 10,326 7,496 

269
AppendicesAppendices 
271 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Jurisdicti
on 
Taxpayer’s 
GSTIN 
Date of 
registration 
If cancelled, 
date of 
cancellation 
Period of Nil 
return filed 
No. of 
EWBs 
EWB No. EWB 
Date 
Assessable 
value 
Tax 
Amount 
Interest 
leviable147 
Amount 
Remarks 
871101692012 07-06-2020 55,752 10,035 6,834 
881101691757 07-06-2020 51,589 9,286 6,324 
891101690942 07-06-2020 52,153 9,388 6,393 
891101691453 07-06-2020 53,717 9,669 6,585 
851126027884 19-11-2020 54,483 9,807 5,939 
871126026337 19-11-2020 54,780 9,860 5,971 
891126111460 20-11-2020 1,01,178 18,212 11,029 
801129435977 10-12-2020 40,577 7,304 4,311 
801130214972 15-12-2020 34,122 6,142 3,626 
801131002235 19-12-2020 35,759 6,437 3,800 
801131379407 21-12-2020 31,720 5,710 3,370 
801131874296 24-12-2020 32,043 5,768 3,405 
811129231448 09-12-2020 27,905 5,023 2,965 
811129414771 10-12-2020 59,024 10,624 6,272 
811130130808 14-12-2020 12,000 600 354 
811130430159 16-12-2020 36,472 6,565 3,875 
811130433385 16-12-2020 35,234 6,342 3,744 
811131311626 21-12-2020 32,277 5,810 3,430 
811131358313 21-12-2020 32,819 5,907 3,487 
811131573200 22-12-2020 33,281 5,991 3,536 
811131732281 23-12-2020 33,710 6,068 3,582 
811131791899 23-12-2020 32,578 5,864 3,462 
811132662297 29-12-2020 28,307 5,095 3,008 
811132980623 30-12-2020 28,070 5,053 2,983 
811132984906 30-12-2020 26,568 4,782 2,823 
821131001296 19-12-2020 34,594 6,227 3,676 
821131107242 19-12-2020 35,505 6,391 3,773 
821131310811 21-12-2020 31,390 5,650 3,335 
821131363790 21-12-2020 31,475 5,666 3,344 
821131489533 22-12-2020 32,644 5,876 3,469 
821131740331 23-12-2020 35,878 6,458 3,812 
821131793658 23-12-2020 32,485 5,847 3,452 
821132982536 30-12-2020 23,740 4,273 2,522 
831131738959 23-12-2020 33,974 6,115 3,610 
841129433887 10-12-2020 40,933 7,368 4,349 
841129782859 12-12-2020 39,105 7,039 4,155 
841131360490 21-12-2020 31,961 5,753 3,396 
841131487195 22-12-2020 32,472 5,845 3,450 
841131568359 22-12-2020 31,809 5,726 3,380 
841131570916 22-12-2020 33,977 6,116 3,610 
841131876210 24-12-2020 33,482 6,027 3,558 

270
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
272 
Sl. 
No. 
Jurisdicti
on 
Taxpayer’s 
GSTIN 
Date of 
registration 
If cancelled, 
date of 
cancellation 
Period of Nil 
return filed 
No. of 
EWBs 
EWB No. EWB 
Date 
Assessable 
value 
Tax 
Amount 
Interest 
leviable147 
Amount 
Remarks 
841132807871 29-12-2020 28,271 5,089 3,004 
851131298235 21-12-2020 29,423 5,296 3,126 
851131735633 23-12-2020 34,535 6,216 3,669 
851131879171 24-12-2020 38,653 6,958 4,107 
861129783069 12-12-2020 39,584 7,125 4,206 
861129893681 12-12-2020 35,638 6,415 3,787 
861131575173 22-12-2020 26,981 4,857 2,867 
871129784362 12-12-2020 14,000 700 413 
871129891688 12-12-2020 34,794 6,263 3,697 
871130218243 15-12-2020 37,620 6,772 3,997 
871130314471 15-12-2020 14,000 700 413 
871130431738 16-12-2020 53,922 9,706 5,729 
871131000425 19-12-2020 28,799 5,184 3,060 
871131370500 21-12-2020 44,427 7,997 4,721 
871131375240 21-12-2020 33,287 5,992 3,537 
871131485565 22-12-2020 34,485 6,207 3,664 
871131737297 23-12-2020 35,472 6,385 3,769 
871132989082 30-12-2020 12,000 600 354 
881128879563 06-12-2020 40,417 7,275 4,294 
881130030330 14-12-2020 34,779 6,260 3,695 
881130213915 15-12-2020 36,161 6,509 3,842 
881130312142 15-12-2020 33,399 6,012 3,549 
881131299732 21-12-2020 29,033 5,226 3,085 
881131483687 22-12-2020 33,769 6,078 3,588 
881131734105 23-12-2020 36,270 6,529 3,854 
881131877752 24-12-2020 30,403 5,473 3,230 
891129783802 12-12-2020 14,000 700 413 
891130031336 14-12-2020 37,754 6,796 4,011 
891131105078 19-12-2020 34,766 6,258 3,694 
891132883777 30-12-2020 27,756 4,996 2,949 
Total 130   9,56,99,364 52,72,326 64,36,484  

271
AppendicesAppendices 
273 
 
 
Appendix-4.9 
Statement showing EWBs generated after cancellation of registration of the GSTIN 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.11.6.2 (b)) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the Circle 
and Unit 
GSTIN of the 
Taxpayer 
Date of 
cancellation of 
registration 
EWB No EWB 
Generation 
Date 
Assessable 
value 
Tax 
Amount  
Cess 
Amount 
Interest 
leviable148  
Remarks 
1. DCST, 
Aizawl 
West Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC 01-11-2019 
(On application of 
taxpayer) 
831080177005 03-12-2019 12,66,235 2,27,922 - 1,75,681 Notice in GST 
ASMT-10 issued 
to taxpayer 
(November 2024) 
2. DCST, 
Aizawl 
West Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxX 31-01-2020 
(On application of 
taxpayer) 
891094152476 05-03-2020 1,71,864 48,122 2,74,982 2,34,547 Notice in GST 
ASMT-10 issued 
to taxpayer 
(November 2024) 
3. DCST, 
Aizawl East 
Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxx8 01-01-2021 
(On application of 
taxpayer) 
831133479944 02-01-2021 27,473 4,945 - 2,844 Notice for 
clarification 
issued to taxpayer 
(November 2024) 
831133677481 03-01-2021 14,000 700 - 403 
881134111008 06-01-2021 51,642 9,296 - 5,345 
821134911695 10-01-2021 31,138 5,605 - 3,223 
831134912000 10-01-2021 28,799 5,184 - 2,981 
831135190618 12-01-2021 33,403 6,013 - 3,457 
831135190931 12-01-2021 32,941 5,929 - 3,409 
851135193671 12-01-2021 62,964 11,334 - 6,517 
861135201344 12-01-2021 33,830 6,089 - 3,502 
861135275662 12-01-2021 33,630 6,053 - 3,481 
861135297653 12-01-2021 34,772 6,259 - 3,599 
871135191233 12-01-2021 34,304 6,175 - 3,551 
871135302905 12-01-2021 32,512 5,852 - 3,365 
881135299767 12-01-2021 34,713 6,248 - 3,593 
891135301292 12-01-2021 33,350 6,003 - 3,452 
801135455998 13-01-2021 49,619 8,931 - 5,136 
831135450921 13-01-2021 32,617 5,871 - 3,376 
851135512722 13-01-2021 31,475 5,666 - 3,258 
871135405121 13-01-2021 32,340 5,821 - 3,347 
891135449534 13-01-2021 32,759 5,897 - 3,391 
801135617048 14-01-2021 34,214 6,159 - 3,541 
 
148 As per Section 50(1) of MGST Act, 2017 and Notification No. J. 21011/1/2017-TAX/Vol-II(ii) dated 19.07.2017 

272
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
274 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the Circle 
and Unit 
GSTIN of the 
Taxpayer 
Date of 
cancellation of 
registration 
EWB No EWB 
Generation 
Date 
Assessable 
value 
Tax 
Amount  
Cess 
Amount 
Interest 
leviable148  
Remarks 
811135614620 14-01-2021 34,832 6,270 - 3,605 
831135618149 14-01-2021 41,929 7,547 - 4,340 
881135615893 14-01-2021 34,766 6,258 - 3,598 
801135802983 15-01-2021 39,432 7,098 - 4,081 
821135804451 15-01-2021 41,822 7,528 - 4,329 
821135832069 15-01-2021 31,350 5,643 - 3,245 
821135852380 15-01-2021 31,687 5,704 - 3,280 
851135853618 15-01-2021 31,637 5,695 - 3,275 
871135855409 15-01-2021 30,195 5,435 - 3,125 
881135830397 15-01-2021 31,317 5,637 - 3,241 
801135940973 16-01-2021 38,254 6,886 - 3,959 
801135963545 16-01-2021 36,359 6,545 - 3,763 
811135943876 16-01-2021 35,297 6,353 - 3,653 
811135946718 16-01-2021 30,924 5,566 - 3,201 
811135948941 16-01-2021 31,043 5,588 - 3,213 
811135964918 16-01-2021 32,644 5,876 - 3,379 
811135976447 16-01-2021 32,657 5,878 - 3,380 
811135977789 16-01-2021 33,686 6,063 - 3,487 
821135967176 16-01-2021 33,832 6,090 - 3,502 
831135945472 16-01-2021 30,370 5,467 - 3,143 
831135979369 16-01-2021 32,921 5,926 - 3,407 
841135966179 16-01-2021 35,739 6,433 - 3,699 
851135946103 16-01-2021 30,716 5,529 - 3,179 
861135944759 16-01-2021 32,310 5,816 - 3,344 
861135948128 16-01-2021 31,020 5,584 - 3,211 
861135959964 16-01-2021 28,486 5,127 - 2,948 
881135943187 16-01-2021 37,838 6,811 - 3,916 
881135975078 16-01-2021 33,759 6,077 - 3,494 
891135947405 16-01-2021 30,690 5,524 - 3,176 
831136273567 18-01-2021 32,993 5,939 - 3,415 
821136469259 19-01-2021 32,871 5,917 - 3,402 
831136469872 19-01-2021 31,779 5,720 - 3,289 
851136468495 19-01-2021 36,142 6,506 - 3,741 
801136611247 20-01-2021 36,039 6,487 - 3,730 
821136611032 20-01-2021 33,168 5,970 - 3,433 
871136611417 20-01-2021 34,531 6,216 - 3,574 
871136613299 20-01-2021 32,340 5,821 - 3,347 
811136912578 21-01-2021 37,703 6,787 - 3,902 
811136924528 21-01-2021 41,989 7,558 - 4,346 

273
AppendicesAppendices 
275 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the Circle 
and Unit 
GSTIN of the 
Taxpayer 
Date of 
cancellation of 
registration 
EWB No EWB 
Generation 
Date 
Assessable 
value 
Tax 
Amount  
Cess 
Amount 
Interest 
leviable148  
Remarks 
841136936733 21-01-2021 33,627 6,053 - 3,480 
851136889399 21-01-2021 28,956 5,212 - 2,997 
881136913527 21-01-2021 39,398 7,092 - 4,078 
891136888583 21-01-2021 29,898 5,382 - 3,095 
891136890281 21-01-2021 55,476 9,986 - 5,742 
891136937885 21-01-2021 34,637 6,235 - 3,585 
811137182956 22-01-2021 53,656 9,658 - 5,554 
851137063880 22-01-2021 32,908 5,923 - 3,406 
851137137635 22-01-2021 31,779 5,720 - 3,289 
861137138558 22-01-2021 40,095 7,217 - 4,150 
881137136743 22-01-2021 37,224 6,700 - 3,853 
861137273648 23-01-2021 35,294 6,353 - 3,653 
871137272495 23-01-2021 32,753 5,896 - 3,390 
891137273069 23-01-2021 35,076 6,314 - 3,630 
891137331073 23-01-2021 33,191 5,974 - 3,435 
801137628051 25-01-2021 34,485 6,207 - 3,569 
811137619649 25-01-2021 30,404 5,473 - 3,147 
841137618715 25-01-2021 30,258 5,446 - 3,132 
861137629304 25-01-2021 34,657 6,238 - 3,587 
871137616482 25-01-2021 27,862 5,015 - 2,884 
831137709777 26-01-2021 33,958 6,112 - 3,515 
811137901025 27-01-2021 38,218 6,879 - 3,956 
811137902284 27-01-2021 39,188 7,054 - 4,056 
831137903788 27-01-2021 32,567 5,862 - 3,371 
821138336089 29-01-2021 38,668 6,960 - 4,002 
811138571463 30-01-2021 32,446 5,840 - 3,358 
831138595753 30-01-2021 30,089 5,416 - 3,114 
841138576368 30-01-2021 27,796 5,003 - 2,877 
861138565979 30-01-2021 38,148 6,867 - 3,948 
861138583294 30-01-2021 34,068 6,132 - 3,526 
861138584057 30-01-2021 33,759 6,077 - 3,494 
871138594835 30-01-2021 29,987 5,398 - 3,104 
881138562525 30-01-2021 76,032 13,686 - 7,869 
891138577184 30-01-2021 33,700 6,066 - 3,488 
831138902403 01-02-2021 33,779 6,080 - 3,412 
831138956343 01-02-2021 32,840 5,911 - 3,317 

274
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
276 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the Circle 
and Unit 
GSTIN of the 
Taxpayer 
Date of 
cancellation of 
registration 
EWB No EWB 
Generation 
Date 
Assessable 
value 
Tax 
Amount  
Cess 
Amount 
Interest 
leviable148  
Remarks 
851138968865 01-02-2021 32,179 5,792 - 3,251 
871138957418 01-02-2021 32,756 5,896 - 3,309 
891138958136 01-02-2021 33,901 6,102 - 3,425 
841139122946 02-02-2021 30,363 5,465 - 3,067 
861139069847 02-02-2021 73,934 13,308 - 7,469  
871139099582 02-02-2021 65,973 11,875 - 6,664 
891139123759 02-02-2021 35,515 6,393 - 3,588 
811139332054 03-02-2021 30,858 5,554 - 3,117 
821139331195 03-02-2021 33,759 6,077 - 3,410 
821139332664 03-02-2021 32,300 5,814 - 3,263 
851139544130 04-02-2021 31,611 5,690 - 3,193 
881139592000 04-02-2021 32,179 5,792 - 3,251 
821139719937 05-02-2021 32,743 5,894 - 3,308 
831139720549 05-02-2021 41,663 7,499 - 4,209 
861139896245 06-02-2021 29,717 5,349 - 3,002 
871139896967 06-02-2021 30,485 5,487 - 3,080 
881139904784 06-02-2021 30,697 5,525 - 3,101 
801140141701 08-02-2021 30,671 5,521 - 3,098 
821140141637 08-02-2021 30,160 5,429 - 3,047 
841140285720 08-02-2021 35,181 6,333 - 3,554 
871140284883 08-02-2021 34,340 6,181 - 3,469 
841140472588 09-02-2021 32,666 5,880 - 3,300 
861140474465 09-02-2021 57,893 10,421 - 5,848 
871140347805 09-02-2021 65,783 11,841 - 6,645 
881140463258 09-02-2021 32,931 5,928 - 3,327 
841140570192 10-02-2021 32,186 5,794 - 3,251 
841140572804 10-02-2021 34,247 6,164 - 3,460 
851140688849 10-02-2021 28,006 5,041 - 2,829 
861140696973 10-02-2021 31,732 5,712 - 3,205 
881140573218 10-02-2021 34,353 6,184 - 3,470 
831140913138 11-02-2021 29,816 5,367 - 3,012 
861140851923 11-02-2021 31,911 5,744 - 3,224 
821141283660 13-02-2021 32,944 5,930 - 3,328 
861141283266 13-02-2021 32,036 5,766 - 3,236 
871141282844 13-02-2021 32,258 5,806 - 3,259 
801141810305 16-02-2021 32,960 5,933 - 3,330 
801141810884 16-02-2021 32,314 5,817 - 3,264 
831141813655 16-02-2021 30,383 5,469 - 3,069 
841141812473 16-02-2021 29,987 5,398 - 3,029 

275
AppendicesAppendices 
277 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the Circle 
and Unit 
GSTIN of the 
Taxpayer 
Date of 
cancellation of 
registration 
EWB No EWB 
Generation 
Date 
Assessable 
value 
Tax 
Amount  
Cess 
Amount 
Interest 
leviable148  
Remarks 
851141699767 16-02-2021 43,956 7,912 - 4,440 
891141784205 16-02-2021 43,697 7,865 - 4,414 
891141813088 16-02-2021 31,617 5,691 - 3,194 
881141983359 17-02-2021 29,505 5,311 - 2,981 
881141984282 17-02-2021 29,344 5,282 - 2,964  
801142360515 19-02-2021 35,723 6,430 - 3,609 
801142366005 19-02-2021 32,941 5,929 - 3,328 
811142361102 19-02-2021 35,884 6,459 - 3,625 
821142366478 19-02-2021 32,746 5,894 - 3,308 
831142452895 19-02-2021 58,425 10,516 - 5,902 
841142361635 19-02-2021 35,937 6,469 - 3,630 
891142429475 19-02-2021 30,802 5,544 - 3,112 
821142546041 20-02-2021 63,153 11,367 - 6,379 
831142549803 20-02-2021 35,808 6,445 - 3,617 
841142548407 20-02-2021 63,462 11,423 - 6,411 
881142547154 20-02-2021 64,895 11,681 - 6,555 
851142729948 21-02-2021 31,272 5,629 - 3,159 
891142743247 21-02-2021 63,291 11,392 - 6,393 
831143108124 23-02-2021 63,993 11,519 - 6,464 
841143036406 23-02-2021 32,588 5,866 - 3,292 
841143106527 23-02-2021 65,147 11,726 - 6,581 
821143383278 24-02-2021 32,776 5,900 - 3,311 
801143833483 26-02-2021 33,505 6,031 - 3,385 
801143834824 26-02-2021 32,960 5,933 - 3,330 
851143834126 26-02-2021 40,359 7,265 - 4,077 
871144074938 27-02-2021 30,383 5,469 - 3,069 
861144238362 28-02-2021 17,069 3,072 - 1,724 
861144266433 28-02-2021 32,947 5,930 - 3,328 
871144238761 28-02-2021 17,254 3,106 - 1,743 
881144239220 28-02-2021 17,258 3,106 - 1,743 
831144483752 01-03-2021 39,432 7,098 - 3,875 
831144484601 01-03-2021 29,439 5,299 - 2,893 
861144472535 01-03-2021 37,993 6,839 - 3,733 
871144473359 01-03-2021 33,851 6,093 - 3,326 
891144465365 01-03-2021 31,297 5,633 - 3,075 
801144636612 02-03-2021 35,841 6,451 - 3,522 

276
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
278 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the Circle 
and Unit 
GSTIN of the 
Taxpayer 
Date of 
cancellation of 
registration 
EWB No EWB 
Generation 
Date 
Assessable 
value 
Tax 
Amount  
Cess 
Amount 
Interest 
leviable148  
Remarks 
841144636205 02-03-2021 61,812 11,126 - 6,074 
881144637453 02-03-2021 31,964 5,754 - 3,141 
891144637018 02-03-2021 34,343 6,182 - 3,375 
831144893229 03-03-2021 63,188 11,374 - 6,209 
841144869971 03-03-2021 35,706 6,427 - 3,509 
841144871244 03-03-2021 29,987 5,398 - 2,947 
841144871893 03-03-2021 30,164 5,430 - 2,964 
861144870586 03-03-2021 33,396 6,011 - 3,282 
891144799657 03-03-2021 66,666 12,000 - 6,551 
891144894291 03-03-2021 31,571 5,683 - 3,102 
801145339103 05-03-2021 33,726 6,071 - 3,314 
801145340415 05-03-2021 42,841 7,711 - 4,210 
821145321700 05-03-2021 29,238 5,263 - 2,873 
821145339758 05-03-2021 40,266 7,248 - 3,957 
861145338520 05-03-2021 33,726 6,071 - 3,314 
871145322401 05-03-2021 29,314 5,277 - 2,881 
831145513962 06-03-2021 36,280 6,530 - 3,565 
881145513363 06-03-2021 42,669 7,680 - 4,193 
891145512701 06-03-2021 30,386 5,469 - 2,986 
881145661930 07-03-2021 35,782 6,441 - 3,516 
811145819215 08-03-2021 29,987 5,398 - 2,947 
831145819860 08-03-2021 30,297 5,453 - 2,977 
851145834939 08-03-2021 32,951 5,931 - 3,238 
861145834268 08-03-2021 34,033 6,126 - 3,344 
871145806666 08-03-2021 30,287 5,452 - 2,976 
821146031882 09-03-2021 64,598 11,628 - 6,348 
831146023796 09-03-2021 33,469 6,024 - 3,289 
831146032875 09-03-2021 65,295 11,753 - 6,416 
851146023002 09-03-2021 29,672 5,341 - 2,916 
871146024410 09-03-2021 31,700 5,706 - 3,115 
801146438409 11-03-2021 36,214 6,519 - 3,559 
841146361095 11-03-2021 61,755 11,116 - 6,068 
851146507311 11-03-2021 63,692 11,464 - 6,259 
861146437488 11-03-2021 37,686 6,783 - 3,703 
871146437973 11-03-2021 30,238 5,443 - 2,971 
871146438877 11-03-2021 34,891 6,280 - 3,429 
881146496498 11-03-2021 66,084 11,895 - 6,494 
821146684446 12-03-2021 29,400 5,292 - 2,889 
821146729974 12-03-2021 61,755 11,116 - 6,068 

277
AppendicesAppendices 
279 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the Circle 
and Unit 
GSTIN of the 
Taxpayer 
Date of 
cancellation of 
registration 
EWB No EWB 
Generation 
Date 
Assessable 
value 
Tax 
Amount  
Cess 
Amount 
Interest 
leviable148  
Remarks 
851146702370 12-03-2021 34,719 6,249 - 3,412 
861146702935 12-03-2021 41,831 7,530 - 4,111 
881146703583 12-03-2021 34,016 6,123 - 3,343 
891146682339 12-03-2021 62,283 11,211 - 6,120 
891146683431 12-03-2021 65,874 11,857 - 6,473 
891146685028 12-03-2021 28,063 5,051 - 2,758 
891146701580 12-03-2021 35,168 6,330 - 3,456 
811146907155 13-03-2021 31,571 5,683 - 3,102 
871146779440 13-03-2021 66,084 11,895 - 6,494 
881146936080 13-03-2021 32,363 5,825 - 3,180 
891146907878 13-03-2021 33,363 6,005 - 3,278 
851147014852 14-03-2021 34,756 6,256 - 3,415 
861147039704 14-03-2021 32,099 5,778 - 3,154 
891147015109 14-03-2021 31,416 5,655 - 3,087 
811147229285 15-03-2021 59,949 10,791 - 5,891 
831147238120 15-03-2021 61,391 11,050 - 6,033 
851147222033 15-03-2021 59,532 10,716 - 5,850 
881147238969 15-03-2021 32,908 5,923 - 3,234 
801147416123 16-03-2021 31,367 5,646 - 3,082 
801147429639 16-03-2021 29,422 5,296 - 2,891 
811147428811 16-03-2021 30,162 5,429 - 2,964 
821147473364 16-03-2021 36,076 6,494 - 3,545 
831147414324 16-03-2021 33,726 6,071 - 3,314 
851147413145 16-03-2021 29,799 5,364 - 2,928 
851147430298 16-03-2021 32,875 5,918 - 3,230 
881147472695 16-03-2021 30,766 5,538 - 3,023 
811147664402 17-03-2021 32,393 5,831 - 3,183 
841147652480 17-03-2021 33,812 6,086 - 3,323 
861147563274 17-03-2021 32,875 5,918 - 3,230 
861147651508 17-03-2021 30,162 5,429 - 2,964 
871147523338 17-03-2021 34,155 6,148 - 3,356 
881147665068 17-03-2021 31,611 5,690 - 3,106 
891147665678 17-03-2021 32,677 5,882 - 3,211 
821147880676 18-03-2021 60,407 10,873 - 5,936 
821147881484 18-03-2021 60,934 10,968 - 5,988 
821147900507 18-03-2021 33,812 6,086 - 3,323 

278
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
280 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the Circle 
and Unit 
GSTIN of the 
Taxpayer 
Date of 
cancellation of 
registration 
EWB No EWB 
Generation 
Date 
Assessable 
value 
Tax 
Amount  
Cess 
Amount 
Interest 
leviable148  
Remarks 
841147889567 18-03-2021 28,459 5,123 - 2,797 
881147888962 18-03-2021 29,987 5,398 - 2,947 
841148093716 19-03-2021 30,245 5,444 - 2,972 
871148093207 19-03-2021 28,251 5,085 - 2,776 
801148304661 20-03-2021 35,759 6,437 - 3,514 
821148306692 20-03-2021 30,812 5,546 - 3,028 
831148306059 20-03-2021 34,076 6,134 - 3,348 
881148305457 20-03-2021 29,984 5,397 - 2,946 
801148463199 21-03-2021 48,249 8,685 - 4,741 
821148463421 21-03-2021 29,981 5,397 - 2,946 
831148463002 21-03-2021 33,538 6,037 - 3,296 
871148462775 21-03-2021 36,175 6,512 - 3,555 
811148653412 22-03-2021 34,056 6,130 - 3,347 
861148670908 22-03-2021 32,888 5,920 - 3,232 
831148862337 23-03-2021 32,316 5,817 - 3,176 
851148878778 23-03-2021 30,033 5,406 - 2,951 
811149144494 24-03-2021 33,746 6,074 - 3,316 
841149143797 24-03-2021 30,020 5,404 - 2,950 
871149152945 24-03-2021 56,084 10,095 - 5,511 
801149367296 25-03-2021 17,789 3,202 - 1,748 
811149368627 25-03-2021 29,241 5,263 - 2,873 
851149385095 25-03-2021 72,113 12,980 - 7,086 
881149367919 25-03-2021 30,056 5,410 - 2,953 
891149370022 25-03-2021 34,987 6,298 - 3,438 
801149595095 26-03-2021 33,759 6,077 - 3,317 
821149595934 26-03-2021 34,650 6,237 - 3,405 
841149592720 26-03-2021 61,509 11,072 - 6,044 
841149593570 26-03-2021 64,296 11,573 - 6,318 
841149640706 26-03-2021 29,865 5,376 - 2,935 
851149626585 26-03-2021 31,070 5,593 - 3,053 
871149594387 26-03-2021 64,439 11,599 - 6,332 
871149596581 26-03-2021 40,359 7,265 - 3,966 
891149591892 26-03-2021 63,418 11,415 - 6,232 
821149736814 27-03-2021 62,450 11,241 - 6,137 
871149841803 27-03-2021 32,340 5,821 - 3,178 
881149842388 27-03-2021 35,267 6,348 - 3,466 
891149842956 27-03-2021 34,851 6,273 - 3,425 
851149962351 28-03-2021 35,838 6,451 - 3,522 
871149962133 28-03-2021 31,637 5,695 - 3,109 

279
Appendices
Appendices 
281 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the Circle 
and Unit 
GSTIN of the 
Taxpayer 
Date of 
cancellation of 
registration 
EWB No EWB 
Generation 
Date 
Assessable 
value 
Tax 
Amount  
Cess 
Amount 
Interest 
leviable148  
Remarks 
891149962254 28-03-2021 30,324 5,458 - 2,980 
811150014384 29-03-2021 29,037 5,227 - 2,853 
821150014163 29-03-2021 30,238 5,443 - 2,971 
821150014303 29-03-2021 28,106 5,059 - 2,762 
841150014817 29-03-2021 40,689 7,324 - 3,998 
861150014657 29-03-2021 31,865 5,736 - 3,131 
871150014481 29-03-2021 31,010 5,582 - 3,047 
871150014564 29-03-2021 32,201 5,796 - 3,164 
891150014742 29-03-2021 35,544 6,398 - 3,493 
861150161502 30-03-2021 30,888 5,560 - 3,035 
841150390634 31-03-2021 64,992 11,699 - 6,386 
Total 1,24,37,412 22,54,105 2,74,982 15,14,530  
 
  

280
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
282 
Appendix-4.10 
Statement showing Generation of multiple EWBs on the strength of same/ similar invoices 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.11.6.2 (c)) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Jurisdiction Taxpayer's 
GSTIN 
Sample EWB 
No. and date 
Invoice 
No. and 
date 
Relevant 
month 
EWBs during the month GSTR-1 during the 
month 
Tax paid 
in 
GSTR-3B 
Tax due Remarks 
No. of 
EWBs 
generated 
Assessable 
value 
Tax effect Assessable 
value 
Tax 
amount 
1. DCST, 
Champhai 
Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxT 441003849964 
17.04.2018 
T1/02 
15.04.2018 
Apr-18 7 2,74,24,000 13,71,200 1,59,84,000 7,99,200 7,99,200 5,72,000 Notice was 
served to the 
taxpayer 
(June 2024) 
891003763991 
21.04.2018 
T1/02 
15.04.2018 
2. DCST, 
Champhai 
Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxx9 881022239764 
07.10.2018 
BVFCL/M
15/66 
07.10.2018 
Oct-18 5 4,44,425 22,221 0 0 0 0 The revenue 
impact is 
included in 
Appendix-4.2 
-EWBs 
generated by 
Nil filers of 
returns. 
Notice was 
served to the 
taxpayer 
(June 2024) 
861022239896 
07.10.2018 
BVFCL/M
15/66 
07.10.2018 
841022239564 
07.10.2018 
BVFCL/M
15/66 
07.10.2018 
801022239434 
07.10.2018 
BVFCL/M
15/66 
07.10.2018 
Total 12 2,78,68,425 13,93,421 1,59,84,000 7,99,200 7,99,200 5,72,000  
 
 
  

281
AppendicesAppendices 
283 
 
 
Appendix-4.11 
Statement showing EWB used through risky/ invalid vehicle by taxpayer  
(Reference: Paragraph-4.11.6.2 (d)) 
Sl. 
No. 
Jurisdiction Taxpay
er’s 
GSTIN 
Date of 
registration
/ 
cancellation 
Year EWB GSTR-1 GSTR-3B Unreported 
assessable 
value 
(in ₹) 
Tax 
liability 
(in ₹) 
Interest 
leviable
149 
(in ₹) 
Remarks 
No. of 
outwar
d EWB 
Assessable 
Value 
(in ₹) 
Tax 
amount 
(in ₹) 
Assessable 
Value 
(in ₹) 
Tax amount 
(in ₹) 
Assessable 
Value 
(in ₹) 
Tax amount 
(in ₹) 
GSTR-3B 
1. DCST, 
Aizawl 
North Zone 
1xxxxxx
xxxxxxx
O 
01.07.2017 
Active 
2019-20 958 29,62,51,996 5,31,24,245 28,31,53,887 5,09,67,700 28,31,53,887 5,09,67,700 1,30,98,109 22,38,639 19,06,093  
2020-21 864 31,38,11,226 5,64,86,021 30,78,17,026 5,54,07,065 30,94,30,649 5,54,09,847 43,80,577 12,13,584 8,00,937  
2. DCST, 
Champhai 
Zone 
1xxxxxx
xxxxxxx
6 
29.08.2017 
Active 
2018-19 15 2,55,53,000 12,77,650 0 0 0 0 2,55,53,000 12,77,650 13,15,236 Notice sent 
to taxpayer 
(June 2024) 
Total 1837 63,56,16,222 11,08,87,916 59,09,70,913 10,63,74,765 59,25,84,536 10,63,77,547 4,30,31,686 47,29,873 40,22,266  
 
  
 
149 As per Section 50(1) of MGST Act, 2017 and Notification No. J. 21011/1/2017-TAX/Vol-II(ii) dated 19.07.2017  
 

282
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
284 
Appendix-4.12 
Statement showing GSTIN with EWBs high distance from PIN to PIN 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.11.6.2 (e)) 
Jurisdiction GSTIN of the 
taxpayer EWB No. 
Assessable 
Value 
(₹ in lakh) 
Dispatch 
address 
Delivery 
address 
Distance 
as per 
EWB 
Actual 
distance 
Excess 
distance 
DCST, 
Champhai 
Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxM 
851004864697 27.04 Champhai, 
Mizoram 
796321 
Karimganj, 
Assam 
788701 
1,000 
km 
386 km 614 km 
DCST, 
Aizawl 
North Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO 801008405129 6.32 Aizawl, 
Mizoram 
796001 
Noonmati, 
Assam 
781020 
805 km 477 km 328 km 
801008405989 6.32 Aizawl, 
Mizoram 
796001 
Noonmati, 
Assam 
781020 
805 km 477 km 328 km 
 
 
Appendix-4.13 
Statement showing GSTIN with invalid PIN in EWB 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.11.6.2 (e)) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Jurisdiction GSTIN of the 
taxpayer EWB No. 
Assessable 
Value 
(₹ in lakh) 
Dispatch 
address 
Delivery 
address Remarks 
DCST, 
Champhai 
Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxx4  891182657601 1.93 Vairengte, 
Mizoram 
796082 
Champhai, 
Mizoram 
796321 
796082 is 
Diakkawn, 
Kolasib 
Town, 
Kolasib 
District 
DCST, 
Aizawl 
North Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU 801017865637 0.69 Aizawl, 
Mizoram 
796011 
Guwahati, 
Assam 
781001 
796011 is 
invalid 
PIN code 

283
AppendicesAppendices 
285  
 
Appendix-4.14 
Statement showing GSTIN with unreported EWBs by taxpayers with high distance from PIN to PIN and invalid PIN 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.11.6.2 (e)) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Jurisdiction GSTIN of the 
taxpayer 
Year EWB GSTR-1 GSTR-3B Tax due Interest150 Remarks 
EWB No. and Date Assessable 
Value 
Tax 
amount 
Assessable 
Value 
Tax 
amount 
Assessable 
value 
Tax 
amount 
DCST, 
Champhai 
Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxM 2018-19 861028891827 24,00,000 1,20,000 - - - - - - The revenue 
impact is 
included in 
Appendix-4.2 - 
EWBs generated by 
Nil filers of returns 
30-11-2018 
DCST, 
Aizawl 
North Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO 2018-19 801008405129 6,32,549 1,13,959 - - - - 1,13,959 1,18,692 All transactions 
declared in 
GSTR1 and 3B 
are intra-state 
transactions 
attracting Central 
GST/ State GST 
while the EWBs 
mentioned here 
are inter-state 
transactions 
20-06-2018 
801008405989 6,32,549 1,13,859 - - - - 1,13,859 1,18,588 
20-06-2018 
DCST, 
Champhai 
Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxx4 2021-22 821152781108 4,00,424 72,076 - - - - 72,076 38,281 All EWBs 
generated are 
above the 
threshold value of 
₹ 50,000 whereas 
the transactions 
declared in 
GSTR-1 are all 
below the 
threshold value. 
Thus, the EWBs 
13-04-2021 
891182657601 1,72,182 30,993 - - - - 30,993 13,649 
05-10-2021 
851182226719 1,81,748 32,715 - - - - 32,715 14,407 
03-10-2021 
881183937046 80,975 14,575 - - - - 14,575 6,419 
12-10-2021 
 
150 As per Section 50(1) of MGST Act, 2017 and Notification No. J. 21011/1/2017-TAX/Vol-II(ii) dated 19.07.2017 

284
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
286 
Jurisdiction GSTIN of the 
taxpayer 
Year EWB GSTR-1 GSTR-3B Tax due Interest150 Remarks 
EWB No. and Date Assessable 
Value 
Tax 
amount 
Assessable 
Value 
Tax 
amount 
Assessable 
value 
Tax 
amount 
841183258169 87,203 15,697 - - - - 15,697 6,913 are undeclared in 
GSTR1 and 3B 08-10-2021 
861194685253 1,20,000 6,000 - - - - 6,000 2,462 
10-12-2021 
861194687457 21,60,000 1,08,000 - - - - 1,08,000 44,313 
10-12-2021 
801194683275 1,20,000 6,000 - - - - 6,000 2,462 
10-12-2021 
Total 69,87,630 6,33,874 - - - - 5,13,874 3,66,186 
 
 
 
  

285
AppendicesAppendices 
287 
 
 
Appendix-4.15 
Statement showing short declaration of EWB taxable value in GST returns 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.11.6.2 (f)) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the Circle 
and Unit 
GSTIN of 
the 
Taxpayer 
Sample EWB 
No. and Date of 
generation 
Sample 
EWB 
related 
to FY 
Total no. 
of 
Outward 
EWB 
generated 
Assessable 
value as per 
EWB 
Tax value 
as per 
EWB 
As per 
GSTR-1 
outward 
assessable 
value 
Tax 
value as 
per 
GSTR-1 
As per 
GSTR-3B 
outward 
assessable 
value 
Tax value 
as per 
GSTR-3B 
Tax 
liability not 
discharged 
Remarks 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) =  
(8)-(12) 
(14) 
1. DCST, 
Aizawl 
West 
Zone 
1xxxxxxx
xxxxxxV 
811095803889 
17-03-2020 
2019-20 27 2,73,16,400 13,65,820 1,58,50,000 7,92,500 1,52,67,500 7,63,375 6,02,445  
891094661550 
08-03-2020 
811094661374 
08-03-2020 
2. DCST, 
Champhai 
Zone 
1xxxxxxx
xxxxxxK 
801053562396 
26-05-2019 
2019-20 36 11,67,92,533 58,39,627 8,96,11,200 44,80,560 8,96,00,000 44,80,000 13,59,627 The revenue 
impact here 
is excluding 
those 
included in 
Appendix-4.
2 - EWBs 
generated by 
Nil filers of 
returns 
801056238759 
14-06-2019 
811053438748 
25-05-2019 
811055376404 
07-06-2019 
811056239403 
14-06-2019 
811056241200 
14-06-2019 
811059610254 
08-07-2019 
831054680315 
02-06-2019 
851051791629 
14-05-2019 
851056240225 
14-06-2019 

286
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
288 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the Circle 
and Unit 
GSTIN of 
the 
Taxpayer 
Sample EWB 
No. and Date of 
generation 
Sample 
EWB 
related 
to FY 
Total no. 
of 
Outward 
EWB 
generated 
Assessable 
value as per 
EWB 
Tax value 
as per 
EWB 
As per 
GSTR-1 
outward 
assessable 
value 
Tax 
value as 
per 
GSTR-1 
As per 
GSTR-3B 
outward 
assessable 
value 
Tax value 
as per 
GSTR-3B 
Tax 
liability not 
discharged 
Remarks 
861052323804 
17-05-2019 
881051311695 
10-05-2019 
881056241764 
14-06-2019 
891055237189 
07-06-2019 
Total 63 14,41,08,933 72,05,447 10,54,61,200 52,73,060 10,48,67,500 52,43,375 19,62,072  
 
  

287
AppendicesAppendices 
289 
 
 
Appendix-4.16 
Statement showing high value EWBs generated within 6 months of registration 
(Reference: Paragraph -4.11.6.2 (g)) 
Jurisdiction GSTIN of 
the 
Taxpayer 
Sample EWB 
No and Date 
Date of 
registration 
of taxpayer 
Outward EWB compared with GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B Tax 
liability not 
discharged 
(In ₹) 
Interest 
leviable 
(in ₹) 
Remarks 
No. of 
Outward 
EWB 
generated 
within 6 
months 
Assessable 
value as per 
EWB (In ₹) 
Tax value 
as per 
EWB  
(In ₹) 
As per 
GSTR-1 
outward 
assessable 
value  
(In ₹) 
Tax value 
as per 
GSTR-1 
(In ₹) 
As per 
GSTR-3B 
outward 
assessable 
value  
(In ₹) 
Tax value as 
per GSTR-
3B  
(In ₹) 
DCST, 
Champhai 
Zone 
1xxxxxxxx
xxxxxK 
801053562396 
26-05-2019 
25.01.2019 44 14,08,09,200 68,86,460 8,96,11,200 44,80,560 8,96,00,000 44,80,000 0 0 The revenue 
impact is 
included in 
Appendix-4.2 
– EWBs 
generated by 
Nil filers of 
returns and 
Appendix-4.7 - 
Short 
declaration of 
EWB taxable 
value in GST 
returns 
801056238759 
14-06-2019 
811053438748 
25-05-2019 
811055376404 
07-06-2019 
811056239403 
14-06-2019 
811056241200 
14-06-2019 
811059610254 
08-07-2019 
831054680315 
02-06-2019 
851051791629 
14-05-2019 
851056240225 
14-06-2019 
861052323804 
17-05-2019 
881051311695 
10-05-2019 
881056241764 
14-06-2019 
891055237189 
07-06-2019 
  

288
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
290 
Appendix-4.17 
Statement showing Mismatch between ITC available in GSTR-2A and amount credited in ECL (GSTR-3B) 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.11.6.2 (h)) 
(Amount in ₹) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. Jurisdiction Taxpayer’s 
GSTIN Year 
ITC value as per GSTR-2A Net ITC 
Available in 
ECL 
(GSTR-3B) 
Tax paid 
through 
ITC 
(GSTR-3B) 
Mismatch 
in ITC IGST Central 
GST State GST Total 
1. DCST, 
Aizawl West 
Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV 2018-19 27,856 0 0 27,856 0 0 0 
2019-20 1,13,913 0 0 1,13,913 7,71,935 7,50,311 6,36,398 
2020-21 2,14,438 0 0 2,14,438 4,945 0 0 
2021-22 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Sub-Total 3,56,207 0 0 3,56,207 7,76,880 7,50,311 6,36,398 
2. DCST, 
Aizawl 
North Zone 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO 2018-19 3,57,68,223 14,69,23,547 14,69,23,547 32,96,15,317 36,56,22,217 38,14,55,700 5,18,40,383 
2019-20 2,28,98,678 1,52,42,346 1,52,42,346 5,33,83,369 6,09,37,052 5,55,52,834 21,69,465 
2020-21 1,29,90,154 3,26,701 3,26,701 1,36,43,555 1,62,56,644 1,61,12,645 24,69,090 
2021-22 1,28,50,956 6,67,622 6,67,622 1,41,86,200 1,64,76,894 1,64,76,916 22,90,716 
Sub-Total 8,45,08,011 16,31,60,215 16,31,60,215 41,08,28,441 45,92,92,807 46,95,98,095 5,87,69,654 

289
Appendices
Appendices 
291 
 
 
Appendix-4.18 
Statement showing manual entry EWBs with records not found  
in online EWB system 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.11.10.3) 
Sl. No. Date E-way bill No. Amount  
(in ₹) 
1. 07/01/2021 892500140687 1,02,772 
2. 15/09/2021 341356320571 4,71,585 
3. 19/09/2021 79300683 2,34,720 
4. 21/09/2021 851179511375 2,27,900 
5. 29/09/2021 811180900981 1,48,760 
6. 02/10/2021 871181566145 3,19,200 
7. 06/10/2021 841182293849 3,17,465 
8. 08/10/2021 881162992512 2,40,960 
9. 08/10/2021 8234121180(C) 3,80,335 
10. 08/10/2021 881118325721 6,77,387 
11. 14/10/2021 841163962231 10,39,767 
12. 19/10/2021 851184522072 2,77,509 
13. 19/10/2021 821184769608 2,43,530 
14. 20/10/2021 811199306486 70,447 
15. 26/10/2021 811162606783 2,64,765 
16. 31/10/2021 8624474421(C) 9,92,943 
17. 31/10/2021 8524469255(C) 6,35,582 
18. 31/10/2021 71298588111(C) 1,84,403 
19. 01/11/2021 731218545046 9,85,941 
20. 01/11/2021 851187416421 1,48,899 
21. 01/11/2021 841207073590 17,22,134 
22. 03/11/2021 8424527362(C) 3,74,914 
23. 04/11/2021 881187782420 4,00,400 
24. 05/11/2021 861187945074 2,12,600 
25. 09/11/2021 8624588148(C) 7,21,264 
26. 09/11/2021 8424592786(C) 4,21,373 
27. 11/11/2021 811188899678 2,51,131 
28. 11/11/2021 3925353264 46,79,313 
29. 12/12/2021 8925092854 15,04,950 
30. 12/12/2021 891194856906 3,05,835 
31. 16/12/2021 891195663969 94,720 
32. 03/01/2022 8125524818(C) 19,79,799 
33. 08/01/2022 389395938666 11,28,174 
34. 08/01/2022 891199933093 1,67,165 
35. 08/01/2022 821200185995 2,11,411 
36. 08/01/2022 841200017531 8,02,670 
37. 09/01/2022 891262131856 96,000 
38. 14/01/2022 811201362906 6,61,216 
39. 14/01/2022 811201362906 7,57,040 
40. 18/01/2022 841206515080 61,13,378 
41. 19/01/2022 3226639130(C) 29,31,378 
42. 20/01/2022 841201822775 3,24,800 
43. 24/01/2022 8625903722(C) 3,66,434 

290
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
292 
Sl. No. Date E-way bill No. Amount  
(in ₹) 
44. 24/01/2022 821203079507 12,63,678 
45. 26/01/2022 88259522881 1,46,390 
46. 30/01/2022 891204166751 72,332 
47. 30/01/2022 851204492258 1,75,200 
48. 30/01/2022 8525955713(C) 13,84,797 
49. 30/01/2022 341202491776 5,58,138 
50. 01/02/2022 871204783528 29,28,000 
51. 01/02/2022 811205087483 2,14,760 
52. 01/02/2022 84120470357 1,42,000 
53. 03/02/2022 861205838106 6,55,500 
54. 03/02/2022 8012049411104 3,24,034 
55. 09/02/2022 20335952232(C) 5,97,861 
56. 14/02/2022 841207294942 4,19,779 
57. 24/03/2022 861215360946 1,27,440 
58. 24/03/2022 841215586992 7,45,300 
Total 4,39,48,178 
Note: (C) are composite e-Waybills

291
AppendicesAppendices 
293 
 
 
Appendix – 4.19 
Sample for Centralised Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.12.4 (I)) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of discrepancy 
ITC mismatch between GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B 
1. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxY Aizawl North Zone 2019-20 0.25 
2. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxY Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 3.65 
3. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 2.66 
4. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Aizawl North Zone 2019-20 0.08 
5. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxX Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 2.23 
6. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxG Aizawl North Zone 2020-21 2.05 
7. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxL Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 1.44 
8. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxL Aizawl North Zone 2020-21 0.51 
9. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 1.47 
10. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxS Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 0.98 
11. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxS Aizawl South Zone 2020-21 0.07 
12. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxS Aizawl South Zone 2019-20 0.81 
13. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxI Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 1.31 
14. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxI Aizawl West Zone 2019-20 1.31 
15. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxF Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 1.38 
16. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxF Aizawl West Zone 2019-20 0.21 
17. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl West Zone 2018-19 0.40 
18. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 1.41 
TOTAL 22.22 
ITC passed on without supplier remitting tax 
19. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl East Zone 2020-21 0.26 
20. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl East Zone 2019-20 0.42 
21. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Lunglei Zone 2019-20 0.002 
22. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Lunglei Zone 2020-21 0.77 
23. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx4 Champhai Zone 2019-20 0.0003 
24. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx4 Champhai Zone 2020-21 0.81 
25. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl South Zone 2019-20 0.92 
26. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Hnahthial Zone 2020-21 0.50 
TOTAL 3.68 
ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed after the cut-off period 
27. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl West Zone 2018-19 0.09 
28. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl West Zone 2019-20 0.29 
29. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 1.43 
30. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl East Zone 2018-19 0.75 
31. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC Kolasib Zone 2020-21 0.71 
32. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC Kolasib Zone 2019-20 0.13 
33. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx0 Kolasib Zone 2020-21 0.30 
34. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx0 Kolasib Zone 2019-20 0.26 
35. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 0.91 
36. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 0.88 
37. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 1.08 
38. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl West Zone 2019-20 2.22 
39. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl West Zone 2018-19 2.61 
40. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 0.14 
41. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 Aizawl West Zone 2018-19 0.35 
42. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Lunglei Zone 2018-19 0.48 
TOTAL 12.63 

292
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
294 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of discrepancy 
Incorrect availing of ISD credit 
43. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxL Aizawl East Zone 2018-19 0.03 
Short payment of tax under RCM versus ITC availed in GSTR-3B/ GSTR-9 
44. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 0.03 
45. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC Kolasib Zone 2018-19 0.03 
46. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC Kolasib Zone 2019-20 0.01 
47. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Kolasib Zone 2018-19 0.03 
48. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl South Zone 2020-21 3.88 
49. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx6 Aizawl South Zone 2019-20 0.03 
50. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 Aizawl South Zone 2019-20 0.14 
51. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxL Serchhip Zone 2018-19 0.05 
52. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Lawngtlai Zone 2020-21 0.17 
53. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Lawngtlai Zone 2018-19 0.14 
54. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Lawngtlai Zone 2019-20 0.14 
55. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxA Lawngtlai Zone 2019-20 0.03 
56. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx8 Lunglei Zone 2018-19 0.04 
TOTAL 4.72 
Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and books of accounts 
57. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxJ Aizawl East Zone 2019-20 0.27 
58. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxJ Aizawl East Zone 2020-21 0.02 
59. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxJ Aizawl East Zone 2018-19 0.12 
60. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxZ Aizawl North Zone 2020-21 0.16 
61. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx8 Aizawl North Zone 2020-21 0.14 
62. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx6 Serchhip Zone 2018-19 0.38 
63. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 0.10 
64. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxY Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 0.05 
TOTAL 1.24 
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual returns with expenses in financial 
statements 
65. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxG Aizawl North Zone 2020-21 0.24 
66. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 0.19 
67. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxA Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 0.20 
68. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 Aizawl West Zone 2018-19 0.79 
69. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Lunglei Zone 2018-19 0.20 
TOTAL 1.62 
Unsettled liabilities 
70. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxI Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 0.90 
71. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 0.71 
72. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC Aizawl East Zone 2020-21 0.50 
73. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl South Zone 2020-21 1.56 
74. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 1.06 
75. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Aizawl South Zone 2020-21 0.002 
76. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC Aizawl South Zone 2020-21 0.58 
77. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxY Aizawl West Zone 2018-19 1.00 
78. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 2.53 
79. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Lunglei Zone 2020-21 0.96 
80. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Lunglei Zone 2019-20 0.0001 
81. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx4 Lunglei Zone 2019-20 0.80 
TOTAL 10.60 
Suppression of tax liability based on E-way bill verification 
82. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl East Zone 2020-21 23.71 
83. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx8 Kolasib Zone 2019-20 0.20 
84. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxA Lawngtlai Zone 2019-20 0.82 
85. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxA Lawngtlai Zone 2020-21 0.01 
86. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Champhai Zone 2018-19 0.40 
87. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Champhai Zone 2020-21 0.33 

293
AppendicesAppendices 
295 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of discrepancy 
88. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxK Champhai Zone 2019-20 0.33 
89. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 0.24 
90. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Champhai Zone 2019-20 0.12 
91. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Champhai Zone 2020-21 0.11 
92. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Champhai Zone 2018-19 0.01 
93. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Aizawl West Zone 2019-20 0.16 
94. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Aizawl West Zone 2018-19 0.01 
95. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 0.01 
96. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Lawngtlai Zone 2019-20 1.40 
TOTAL 27.86 
Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and annual returns 
97. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxR Aizawl South Zone 2019-20 0.20 
98. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 0.27 
99. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl North Zone 2020-21 0.02 
100. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxL Aizawl East Zone 2020-21 0.23 
101. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 10.69 
102. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxR Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 0.001 
103. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxR Aizawl West Zone 2019-20 0.30 
TOTAL 11.71 
Under-declaration of taxable supplies by comparing TDS returns 
104. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxT Aizawl East Zone 2019-20 7.03 
105. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxT Aizawl East Zone 2018-19 1.03 
106. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxY Aizawl North Zone 2020-21 5.23 
107. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 5.52 
108. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC Aizawl South Zone 2019-20 5.29 
109. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 4.84 
110. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxF Aizawl West Zone 2018-19 6.64 
TOTAL 35.58 
Suppression of taxable value based on unbilled revenue declared in GSTR-9C 
111. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxQ Aizawl East Zone 2018-19 0.0002 
112. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx5 Aizawl South Zone 2020-21 0.19 
113. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxK Kolasib Zone 2018-19 0.29 
114. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxK Kolasib Zone 2019-20 0.04 
TOTAL 0.52 
Mismatch in taxable turnover declared in GSTR-9C Table 7G 
115. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxQ Lunglei Zone 2019-20 32.64 
116. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxQ Lunglei Zone 2018-19 22.37 
117. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl West Zone 2018-19 2.85 
118. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl West Zone 2019-20 21.08 
119. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxY Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 20.74 
120. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx9 Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 4.68 
121. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 7.67 
TOTAL 112.03 
Ineligible composition levy 
122. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Aizawl West Zone 2019-20 2.18 
GSTR-3B was not filed but GSTR-1 is available 
123. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Aizawl South Zone 2019-20 0.01 
124. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Aizawl South Zone 2020-21 0.02 
125. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 0.01 
TOTAL 0.04 
Short payment of interest 
126. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxR Aizawl East Zone 2019-20 0.08 
127. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxR Aizawl East Zone 2018-19 0.03 
128. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx6 Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 0.06 

294
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
296 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of discrepancy 
129. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx6 Aizawl West Zone 2019-20 0.04 
130. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx6 Aizawl West Zone 2018-19 0.12 
131. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 0.14 
132. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl West Zone 2019-20 0.27 
133. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl West Zone 2018-19 0.78 
134. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx1 Aizawl North Zone 2020-21 0.03 
135 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx1 Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 0.03 
136. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx1 Aizawl North Zone 2019-20 0.09 
137. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxL Kolasib Zone 2019-20 0.06 
138. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxL Kolasib Zone 2018-19 0.07 
139. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Champhai Zone 2018-19 0.37 
140. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Champhai Zone 2019-20 0.05 
141. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 0.13 
142. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl South Zone 2019-20 0.04 
143. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl South Zone 2020-21 0.03 
144. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 0.27 
145. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Aizawl West Zone 2019-20 0.17 
146. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl West Zone 2018-19 4.70 
147. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxG Siaha Zone 2019-20 0.007 
148. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxG Siaha Zone 2018-19 0.18 
TOTAL 7.75 
 
Appendix – 4.20 
Sample for Detailed Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.12.4 (II)) 
Sl. No. GSTIN Jurisdiction 
1. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl East Zone 
2. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Aizawl East Zone 
3. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Aizawl East Zone 
4. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Aizawl East Zone 
5. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxS Aizawl North Zone 
6. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 Aizawl North Zone 
7. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx6 Aizawl North Zone 
8. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl North Zone 
9. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx9 Aizawl North Zone 
10. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx0 Aizawl North Zone 
11. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl North Zone 
12. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx7 Aizawl South Zone 
13. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxY Aizawl West Zone 
14. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl West Zone 
15. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Kolasib Zone 

295
Appendices
Appendices 
297 
 
 
Appendix-4.21 
Parameter-wise summary of deficiencies (ITC and Tax liability) 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.12.7.1, 4.12.7.3(I)) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Dimension Total sample Accepted by Department and status of cases Department reply accepted by Audit Department’s 
reply not 
acceptable to 
Audit 
(Rebuttal) 
Recovery ASMT-10 
issued 
Any notice 
issued 
Under 
correspondence 
with taxpayers 
Total (Col. 12 
= 4+6+8+10 
and Col. 13 = 
5+7+9+11) 
Data entry 
errors 
Action taken 
before query 
Other valid 
explanations 
  No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) 
1. ITC mismatch between GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B 18 22.22 0 0 6 10.34 4 3.40 0 0 10 13.74 2 2.62 0 0 4 2.37 2 3.49 
2. ITC passed on without supplier remitting tax 8 3.68 0 0 0 0 3 1.31 1 0.92 4 2.23 0 0 0 0 4 1.45 0 0 
3. ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed after the cut-off 
period. 
16 12.63 0 0 0 0 4 2.29 12 10.34 16 12.63 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
4. Incorrect availing of ISD credit 1 0.03 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0.03 0 0 
5. Short payment of tax under RCM versus ITC 
availed in GSTR-3B/ GSTR-9 
13 4.72 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 4.10 4 4.10 5 0.51 0 0 4 0.11 0 0 
6. Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns 
and books of accounts 
8 1.24 0 0 0 0 1 0.16 1 0.38 2 0.54 0 0 2 0.24 4 0.46 0 0 
7. Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual 
returns with expenses in financial statements 
5 1.62 0 0 0 0 2 0.99 0 0 2 0.99 0 0 0 0 3 0.63 0 0 
8. Unsettled liabilities 12 10.60 1 0.71 1 0.9 2 3.53 3 1.88 7 7.02 0 0 1 0.002 4 3.58 0 0 
9. Suppression of tax liability based on E-way bill 
verification 
15 27.86 0 0 2 0.83 9 1.28 1 23.71 12 25.82 0 0 0 0 1 0.40 2 1.64 
10. Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts 
and annual returns 
7 11.71 1 0.001 0 0 0 0 1 0.23 2 0.23 1 10.69 1 0.30 3 0.49 0 0 
11. GSTR-3B was not filed but GSTR-1 is available 3 0.04 0 0 1 0.01 0 0 2 0.03 3 0.04 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
12. Short payment of interest 23 7.75 0 0 3 0.15 13 6.83 2 0.13 18 7.11 0 0 0 0 3 0.20 2 0.44 
 TOTAL 129 104.10 2 0.71 13 12.23 38 19.79 27 41.72 80 74.45 8 13.82 4 0.54 31 9.72 6 5.57 

296
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
298 
Appendix -4.22 
Parameter-wise summary of deficiencies (turnover mismatch) 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.12.7.1, 4.12.7.3(I)) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Dimension Total sample Accepted by Department and status of cases Department reply accepted by Audit Department’s 
reply not 
acceptable to 
Audit (Rebuttal) Recovery ASMT-10 issued Any notice issued 
Under 
correspondence 
with taxpayers 
Total (Col. 12 = 
4+6+8+10 and 
Col. 13 = 
5+7+9+11) 
Data entry errors Action taken 
before query 
Other valid 
explanations 
  No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) 
1 Under-
declaration of 
taxable 
supplies by 
comparing 
TDS returns 
7 35.58 0 0 1 5.23 2 8.06 2 10.13 5 23.42 0 0 0 0 1 6.64 1 5.52 
2 Suppression of 
taxable value 
based on 
unbilled 
revenue 
declared in 
GSTR-9C. 
4 0.52 0 0 0 0 1 0.29 0 0 1 0.29 0 0 0 0 3 0.23 0 0 
3 Mismatch in 
taxable 
turnover 
declared in 
GSTR-9C 
Table 7G 
7 112.03 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 7.67 0 0 6 104.36 0 0 
4 Ineligible 
composition 
levy 
1 2.18 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2.18 0 0 
 TOTAL 19 150.31 0 0 1 5.23 3 8.35 2 10.13 6 23.71 1 7.67 0 0 11 113.41 1 5.52 

297
AppendicesAppendices 
299 
 
 
Appendix – 4.23 
Cases of recovery 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.12.7.3 (I)) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of 
discrepancy 
Remarks/ replies 
Unsettled liabilities 
1. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Aizawl 
North Zone 
2018-19 0.71 The Department stated (July 
2024) that the mismatch was 
because of wrong declaration 
of B2C outward supplies in 
December 2018 which was 
subsequently amended in 
January 2018. Still, the 
mismatch between GSTR-1 
and GSTR-3B undischarged 
tax liability was paid through 
DRC-03. This was verified 
and found acceptable to Audit. 
Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and annual returns 
2. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxR Aizawl 
West Zone 
2020-21 0.001 The Department stated 
(September 2024) that the 
taxpayer had accepted the 
observation and had paid the 
deviation amount vide DRC-
03 dated 02.08.2024. This was 
verified and found acceptable 
to Audit. 

298
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
300 
Appendix – 4.24 
Cases where ASMT-10 was issued 
(Reference: Paragraph -4.12.7.3 (I)) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of 
discrepancy 
Remarks/ replies 
ITC mismatch between GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B 
1. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxY Aizawl 
North Zone 
2019-20 0.25 ASMT-10 dated 16.08.2023 issued to 
the taxpayer. 
2. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxY Aizawl 
North Zone 
2018-19 3.65 ASMT-10 dated 16.08.2023 issued to 
the taxpayer. 
3. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxX Aizawl 
North Zone 
2018-19 2.23 ASMT-10 issued to the taxpayer. 
4. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl 
North Zone 
2018-19 1.47 ASMT-10 issued to the taxpayer. 
5. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Aizawl 
North Zone 
2018-19 2.66 The Department stated (July 2024) 
that ASMT-10 was issued and the case 
is being examined by them. Further, 
the Department stated that the 
jurisdiction had been transferred to 
Aizawl East Zone. The Department is 
requested to pursue the matter through 
the concerned jurisdictional authority. 
6. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Aizawl 
North Zone 
2019-20 0.08 
Total 10.34  
Unsettled liabilities 
7. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxI Aizawl 
North Zone 
2018-19 0.90 ASMT-10 dated 17.08.2023 issued to 
the taxpayer. 
Suppression of tax liability based on E-way bill verification 
8. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxA Lawngtlai 
Zone 
2019-20 0.82 The Department stated (July 2024) 
that a detailed study was conducted 
and the taxpayer had outward taxable 
supplies as shown in e-waybill valued 
at ₹ 1,385.44 lakh during 2019-20 and 
₹ 23.42 lakh during 2020-21 for which 
he was liable to pay total tax of ₹ 69.27 
lakh and ₹ 1.17 lakh for the years 
2019-20 and 2020-21 respectively, 
while the taxpayer had filed NIL 
GSTR-3B returns for the two 
consecutive years. The Department 
had issued ASMT-10 dated 
08.07.2024 in this regard. 
9. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxA Lawngtlai 
Zone 
2020-21 0.01 
Total 0.83  
Under-declaration of taxable supplies by comparing TDS returns 
10. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxY Aizawl 
North Zone 
2020-21 5.23 ASMT-10 issued to the taxpayer. 
GSTR-3B was not filed but GSTR-1 is available 
11. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Aizawl 
North Zone 
2018-19 0.01 ASMT-10 issued to the taxpayer. 
Short payment of interest 
12. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx1 Aizawl 
North Zone 
2020-21 0.03 ASMT-10 issued to the taxpayer. 
13. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx1 Aizawl 
North Zone 
2018-19 0.03 ASMT-10 issued to the taxpayer. 
14. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx1 Aizawl 
North Zone 
2019-20 0.09 ASMT-10 issued to the taxpayer. 
Total 0.15  
 
  

299
AppendicesAppendices 
301 
 
 
Appendix – 4.25 
Cases where notice was issued 
(Reference: Paragraph -4.12.7.3 (I)) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of 
discrepancy 
Remarks/ replies 
ITC mismatch between GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B 
1. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxF Aizawl 
West Zone 
2020-21 1.38 Notice issued to the taxpayer. 
2. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxF Aizawl 
West Zone 
2019-20 0.21 Notice issued to the taxpayer. 
3. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl 
West Zone 
2018-19 0.40 Notice issued to the taxpayer. 
4. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl 
West Zone 
2020-21 1.41 Notice issued to the taxpayer. 
Total 3.40  
ITC passed on without supplier remitting tax 
5. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Hnahthial 
Zone 
2020-21 0.50 Notice dated 21.03.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
6. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx4 Champhai 
Zone 
2019-20 0.0003 Notice dated 26.06.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
7. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx4 Champhai 
Zone 
2020-21 0.81 Notice dated 26.06.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
Total 1.31  
ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed after the cut-off period. 
8. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Lunglei 
Zone 
2018-19 0.48 The Department stated (July 2024) that 
notice was served to the taxpayer and 
response was not received till date. 
Further, it was also stated that GST 
system must be hand in hand with the 
GST Act itself and thus there was no 
availment of limited ITC. However, no 
documentary evidence was found 
enclosed. 
9. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl 
West Zone 
2018-19 0.09 Notice dated 04.07.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
10. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl 
West Zone 
2019-20 0.29 Notice dated 04.07.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
11. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl 
West Zone 
2020-21 1.43 Notice dated 04.07.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
Total 2.29  
Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and books of accounts 
12. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxZ Aizawl 
North Zone 
2020-21 0.16 The Department stated (July 2024) that 
notice was issued dated 10.06.2024 in 
form GST ADT-01 to audit the taxpayer. 
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual returns with expenses in financial statements 
13. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxA Aizawl 
West Zone 
2020-21 0.20 Notice issued to the taxpayer. 
14. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 Aizawl 
West Zone 
2018-19 0.79 Notice issued to the taxpayer. 
Total 0.99  
Unsettled liabilities 
15. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxY Aizawl 
West Zone 
2018-19 1.00 Notice issued to the taxpayer. 
16. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl 
West Zone 
2020-21 2.53 Notice issued to the taxpayer. 
Total 3.53  

300
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
302 
Sl. No. GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of 
discrepancy 
Remarks/ replies 
Suppression of tax liability based on E-way bill verification 
17. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx8 Kolasib 
Zone 
2019-20 0.20 Notice dated 16.01.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
18. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Aizawl 
West Zone 
2019-20 0.16 Notice dated 18.03.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
19. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Aizawl 
West Zone 
2018-19 0.01 Notice dated 18.03.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
20. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Aizawl 
West Zone 
2020-21 0.01 Notice dated 18.03.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
21. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Champhai 
Zone 
2020-21 0.33 Notice dated 26.06.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
22. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxK Champhai 
Zone 
2019-20 0.33 Notice dated 26.06.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
23. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Champhai 
Zone 
2019-20 0.12 Notice dated 26.06.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
24. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Champhai 
Zone 
2020-21 0.11 Notice dated 26.06.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
25. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Champhai 
Zone 
2018-19 0.01 Notice dated 26.06.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
Total 1.28  
Under-declaration of taxable supplies by comparing TDS returns 
26. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxT Aizawl East 
Zone 
2019-20 7.03 Notice issued to the taxpayer. 
27. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxT Aizawl East 
Zone 
2018-19 1.03 
Total 8.06  
Suppression of taxable value based on unbilled revenue declared in GSTR-9C  
28. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxK Kolasib 
Zone 
2018-19 0.29 Notice dated 17.01.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
Short payment of interest 
29. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxR Aizawl East 
Zone 
2019-20 0.08 Notice dated 11.09.2023 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
30. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxR Aizawl East 
Zone 
2018-19 0.03 
31. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx6 Aizawl 
West Zone 
2020-21 0.06 Notice issued to the taxpayer. 
32. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx6 Aizawl 
West Zone 
2019-20 0.04 Notice issued to the taxpayer. 
33. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx6 Aizawl 
West Zone 
2018-19 0.12 Notice issued to the taxpayer. 
34. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl 
West Zone 
2020-21 0.14 Notice issued to the taxpayer. 
35. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl 
West Zone 
2019-20 0.27 Notice issued to the taxpayer. 
36. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl 
West Zone 
2018-19 0.78 Notice issued to the taxpayer. 
37. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl 
West Zone 
2018-19 4.70 Notice issued to the taxpayer. 
38. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Champhai 
Zone 
2018-19 0.37 Notice dated 26.06.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
39. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Champhai 
Zone 
2019-20 0.05 Notice dated 26.06.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
40. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxG Siaha Zone 2019-20 0.007 Notice dated 26.06.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
41. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxG Siaha Zone 2018-19 0.18 Notice dated 09.07.2024 issued to the 
taxpayer. 
Total 6.83  

301
Appendices
Appendices 
303 
 
Appendix – 4.26 
Cases under correspondence with taxpayer/ action yet to be initiated 
(Reference: Paragraph -4.12.7.3 (I)) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of 
discrepancy 
Remarks/ replies 
ITC passed on without supplier remitting tax 
1. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl South Zone 2019-20 0.92 The Department stated (July 2024) that the taxpayer had declined to respond to the 
Department’s notice citing missing Document Identification Number (DIN) on their 
communication body. Circular No. 122/41/2019-GST issued by CBIC states that all 
communication issued in the course of an enquiry should contain a computer-generated 
DIN. However, this circular appears to be intended specifically for CBIC and its officers 
and not applicable to state formations. The Department is requested to examine the audit 
query and pursue the matter with the taxpayer. 
ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed after the cut-off period 
2. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC Kolasib Zone 2020-21 0.71 The Department stated (July 2024) that the 53rd GST Council meeting held on June 2024 
recommends the time limit to avail ITC credit w.r.t. any invoice or debit note u/s 16(4) of 
GST Act through any GSTR-3B return filed upto 30.11.2021 may be deemed to be 
30.11.2021. However, notification in this regard is not found and the Department may 
pursue the matter with the taxpayer. 
3. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC Kolasib Zone 2019-20 0.13 
4. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx0 Kolasib Zone 2020-21 0.30 
5. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx0 Kolasib Zone 2019-20 0.26 
6. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 0.91 
7. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl West Zone 2019-20 2.22 
8. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl West Zone 2018-19 2.61 
9. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 0.14 
10. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 Aizawl West Zone 2018-19 0.35 
11. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl East Zone 2018-19 0.75 The Department stated (July 2024) that the 53rd GST Council meeting held on June 2024 
recommends the time limit to avail ITC credit w.r.t. any invoice or debit note u/s 16(4) of 
GST Act through any GSTR-3B return filed upto 30.11.2021 may be deemed to be 
30.11.2021. However, notification in this regard is not found and the Department may 
pursue the matter with the taxpayer. 
12. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 1.08 The Department stated (July 2024) that the 53rd GST Council meeting held on June 2024 
recommends the time limit to avail ITC credit w.r.t. any invoice or debit note u/s 16(4) of 
GST Act through any GSTR-3B return filed upto 30.11.2021 may be deemed to be 
30.11.2021. However, notification in this regard is not found and the Department may 
pursue the matter with the taxpayer. 
13. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 0.88 The Department stated (July 2024) that the 53rd GST Council meeting held on June 2024 
recommends the time limit to avail ITC credit w.r.t. any invoice or debit note u/s 16(4) of 
GST Act through any GSTR -3B return filed upto 30.11.2021 may be deemed to be 

302
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
304 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of 
discrepancy 
Remarks/ replies 
30.11.2021. However, notification in this regard is not found and the Department may 
pursue the matter with the taxpayer. 
Total 10.34  
Short payment of tax under RCM versus ITC availed in GSTR-3B/ GSTR-9 
14. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxL Serchhip Zone 2018-19 0.05 The Department in their reply (July 2024) stated that the taxpayer erroneously entered the 
deviation amount in the RCM column during November and December 2018 and that the 
same will be reversed at the time of filing GSTR-3B for the month of June 2024. The 
Department may pursue the matter with the taxpayer. 
15. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx6 Aizawl South Zone 2019-20 0.03 The Department stated (July 2024) that though the taxpayer was requested to cross-check 
their dataset and is yet to communicate a reply, thorough examination of GSTR-2A for 
the year 2019-20 had did not reveal any supply attracting reverse charge. The Department 
further stated that the entries in GSTR-3B were made in the wrong fields and was filed 
only from December 2019 by the taxpayer and could be a case of unintentional errors 
during their initial stage of filing returns. The Department may pursue the matter with the 
taxpayer. 
16. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 Aizawl South Zone 2019-20 0.14 The Department stated (July 2024) that the taxpayer contends that the deviation amount 
should be ₹ 11.14 lakh and assumed that they had claimed excess ITC of ₹ 11.14 lakh in 
the month of February 2020 due to some clerical error or typo error and are ready to 
reverse the same. The Department may pursue the matter with the taxpayer. 
17. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl South Zone 2020-21 3.88 The Department stated (July 2024) that the taxpayer had declined to respond to the 
Department’s notice citing missing Document Identification Number (DIN) on their 
communication body. Circular No. 122/41/2019-GST issued by CBIC states that all 
communication issued in the course of an enquiry should contain a computer-generated 
DIN. However, this circular appears to be intended specifically for CBIC and its officers 
and not applicable to state formations. The Department is requested to examine the audit 
query and pursue the matter with the taxpayer. 
Total 4.10  
Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and books of accounts 
18. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx6 Serchhip Zone 2018-19 0.38 The Department stated (July 2024) that the taxpayer had made voluntary payment through 
DRC-03 on 18 January 2021 amounting ₹ 35.59 lakh for the year 2018-19 but did not 
specify the reason for this voluntary payment. The Department contacted the taxpayer 
twice to clarify the reason for the payment but no compliance was received till date 
(March 2025). 
Unsettled liabilities 
19. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx4 Lunglei Zone 2019-20 0.80 The Department stated (July 2024) that the case is under scrutiny. 
20. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC Aizawl South Zone 2020-21 0.58 The Department stated (July 2024) that the taxpayer had purposely refused to cooperate 
with the Department. The Department is requested to assess and levy any tax liability 
before getting time-barred. 

303
Appendices
Appendices 
305 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of 
discrepancy 
Remarks/ replies 
21. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC Aizawl East Zone 2020-21 0.50 The Department stated (July 2024) that the taxpayer is outside the jurisdiction of Aizawl 
East Zone. The Department is requested to pursue the matter with the taxpayer through 
the concerned jurisdictional authority and intimate the results to Audit. 
Total 1.88  
Suppression of tax liability based on E-way bill verification 
22. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl East Zone 2020-21 23.71 The Department stated (July 2024) that the taxpayer is outside the jurisdiction of Aizawl 
East Zone. The Department is requested to pursue the matter with the taxpayer through 
the concerned jurisdictional authority and intimate the results to Audit. 
Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and annual returns 
23. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxL Aizawl East Zone 2020-21 0.23 The Department stated (July 2024) that the taxpayer is outside the jurisdiction of Aizawl 
East Zone. The Department is requested to pursue the matter with the taxpayer through 
the concerned jurisdictional authority and intimate the results to Audit. 
Under declaration of taxable supplies by comparing TDS returns 
24. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC Aizawl South Zone 2019-20 5.29 The Department stated (July 2024) that the taxpayer had purposely refused to cooperate 
with the Department. The Department is requested to assess and levy any tax liability 
before they get time-barred. 
25. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 4.84 
Total 10.13  
GSTR-3B was not filed but GSTR-1 is available 
26. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Aizawl South Zone 2019-20 0.01 The Department stated (July 2024) that the taxpayer was informed of the audit 
observation and was requested to address said observation with his own data set. Reply 
was awaited (March 2025) 
27. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Aizawl South Zone 2020-21 0.02 
Total 0.03  
Short payment of interest 
28. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxL Kolasib Zone 2019-20 0.06 The Department stated (July 2024) that demand was raised in DRC-07 u/s 73. Further, 
the Department also stated that the 53 rd GST Council Meeting held on 22 nd June 2024 
recommend waiver of interest and penalties issued u/s 73 for the years 2017-18, 2018-19 
and 2019-20. However, notification in this regard is not found and the Department may 
pursue the matter with the taxpayer. 
29. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxL Kolasib Zone 2018-19 0.07 
Total 0.13  

304
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
306 
Appendix – 4.27 
Cases not acceptable to Audit (Rebuttal) 
(Reference: Paragraph -4.12.7.3 (II)) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of 
discrepancy 
Remarks/ replies 
ITC mismatch between GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B 
1. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxL Aizawl North 
Zone 
2018-19 1.44 The Department forwarded (July 2024) the taxpayer’s 
reply without stating anything. However, the reply was not 
straightforward and the Department may re-examine the 
case. 
2. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxG Aizawl North 
Zone 
2020-21 2.05 The Department stated (March 2024) that ASMT-10 was 
issued and the taxpayer in their reply stated that ITC 
availed during 2020-21 includes ₹ 2.07 crore relating to the 
year 2019-20. Similarly, there was transaction amounting 
to ₹ 0.09 crore pertaining to the year 2020-21 on which ITC 
was availed during 2021-22. However, upon verification 
by Audit, the amount ₹ 2.07 crore and ₹ 0.09 crore were 
already considered and the deviation still stands. 
Total 3.49  
Suppression of tax liability based on E-way bill verification 
3. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 Aizawl South 
Zone 
2018-19 0.24 The taxpayer contends (July 2024) that the firm provides 
advisory and consultancy services to clients and has never 
effected movement or trading of tangible goods. He 
categorically denied utilizing e-waybills for movement of 
goods. The Department may clarify as to how the 
taxpayer’s e-waybill showed tax liability of ₹ 0.29 crore 
and intimate the results to the Audit. 
4. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Lawngtlai Zone 2019-20 1.40 The Department stated (March 2024) that the taxpayer had 
not filed returns and is not liable to be scrutinised u/s 61 
and also that in order to be assessed u/s 62 – assessment of 
non-filers of returns, there were technical issues involved 
since section 62 demands that the defaulter be served 
notice u/s 46 which could not be done by the proper officer. 
Moreover, the Department stated that the back-office 
system did not have records of non-filers up to October 
2020 and that no facility was available to initiate 
proceedings u/s 62 till October 2020.  The Department may 
clarify as to how the taxpayer’s e -waybill showed tax 

305
Appendices
Appendices 
307 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of 
discrepancy 
Remarks/ replies 
liability of ₹ 1.40 crore and intimate the results to the 
Audit. 
Total 1.64  
Under-declaration of taxable supplies by comparing TDS returns 
5. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl South 
Zone 
2018-19 5.52 The Department, in their reply (July 2024) stated that they 
are unclear in the exact nature of the discrepancy and 
forwarded the taxpayer’s reply without any further 
comment. The Department is requested to examine all the 
transactions and not to limit checks to the deviation amount 
as this could be a case of non-disclosure and also that the 
taxpayer may have other supplies which do not necessitate 
TDS recovery and intimate the results to Audit. 
Short payment of interest 
6. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 0.27 The Department stated (March 2024) that the taxpayer had 
already paid the interest. Further scrutiny revealed that the 
taxpayer had paid tax  only and not interest. Further, proof 
of payment of interest was not provided. 
7. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Aizawl West Zone 2019-20 0.17 
Total 0.44  
 

306
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
308 
Appendix – 4.28 
Cases of data entry errors 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.12.7.2, 4.12.7.3 (III)) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of 
discrepancy Remarks/ replies 
ITC mismatch between GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B 
1. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxI Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 1.31 The Department stated (September 2024) that ITC mismatch were due to clerical error. 
Due to typing mistake in GSTR-3B the taxpayer had entered ₹ 2.00 crore instead of ₹ 0.20 
crore in ITC due to which the mismatch arose. The taxpayer had corrected the same while 
filing annual return and excess ITC claimed was reversed for the year 2019-20. Further, 
same error was committed in ITC for the year 2020-21 and the same was reversed in 
GSTR-3B of September 2020. This was verified and found acceptable to Audit.  
2. 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxI Aizawl West Zone 2019-20 1.31 
TOTAL 2.62  
Short payment of tax under RCM versus ITC availed in GSTR-3B/ GSTR-9 
3. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Lawngtlai Zone 2020-21 0.17 The Department stated (August 2023) that the taxpayer while claiming ITC in their 
returns had mistakenly made error in filling up the “Inward supplies liable to Reverse 
Charge” in Table 4(A)(3) instead of filing up the “All other ITC” column. Hence, the 
issue on RCM does not arise. This was verified and found acceptable to Audit.  
4. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Lawngtlai Zone 2018-19 0.14 
5. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Lawngtlai Zone 2019-20 0.14 
6. 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxA Lawngtlai Zone 2019-20 0.03 
The Department stated (August 2023) that the taxpayer made a mistake while filing 
GSTR-3B for the month October 2019 where the taxpayer had filled up the “Inward 
supplies liable to Reverse Charge” instead of filing up the “All other ITC” column for the 
calculation of his tax payable due to which the deviation arises. Hence, the issue on RCM 
does not arise. This was verified and found acceptable to Audit. 
7. 
1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Kolasib Zone 2018-19 0.03 
The Department stated (July 2024) that this is a case of data entry error which the 
taxpayer, at the time of filing GSTR-3B, had erroneously filled in “inward supplies liable 
to Reverse charge” column instead of the column for “all other ITC”. Hence, the issue on 
RCM does not arise. This was verified and found acceptable to Audit. 
TOTAL 0.51  
Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and annual returns 
8. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Aizawl West Zone 
2020-21 10.69 
The Department stated (September 2024) that mismatch in their turnover was due to 
clerical error in GSTR-3B and GSTR-1  which was later reconciled  and that the correct 
turnover was ₹ 989.97 lakh and the consequent tax difference of ₹ 79.03 lakh was paid 
vide DRC-03. This was verified and found acceptable to Audit. 
Mismatch in taxable turnover declared in GSTR-9C Table 7G 
9. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Aizawl West Zone 
2020-21 7.67 
The Department stated (September 2024) that mismatch was due to clerical mistake at the 
time of reporting GSTR-3B and GSTR-1 and rectification was made in GSTR-9C 
therefore the corrected turnover was ₹ 9.90 crore. This was verified and found acceptable 
to Audit. 
 

307
AppendicesAppendices 
309 
 
 
Appendix – 4.29 
Action taken before issue of Audit Query 
(Reference: Paragraph -4.12.7.2, 4.12.7.3 (III)) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of 
discrepancy 
Remarks/ replies 
Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and books of accounts 
1. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx8 Aizawl 
North Zone 
2020-21 0.14 The deviation amount was reversed in 
March 2022 before issue of audit query. 
This was verified and found acceptable 
to Audit. 
2. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl West 
Zone 
2020-21 0.10 The Department stated (March 2024) 
that the unreconciled amount was on 
account of IGST excess claimed in 
GSTR-3B which was reversed vide 
DRC-03 dated 21.05.2021. This was 
verified and found acceptable to Audit. 
Total 0.24  
Unsettled liabilities 
3. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Aizawl 
South Zone 
2020-21 0.002 The taxpayer had paid the deviation 
amount vide DRC-03 dated 29.08.2022 
before issue of audit query. This was 
verified and found acceptable to Audit. 
Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and annual returns 
4. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxR Aizawl West 
Zone 
2019-20 0.30 The Department stated (September 
2024) that the taxpayer voluntarily paid 
₹ 38.75 lakh with interest of ₹ 0.42 lakh 
vide DRC-03 dated 07.05.2020 when 
the error was found out. Further, ₹ 4.82 
lakh along with interest of ₹ 0.27 lakh 
was paid vide DRC-03 dated 16.05.2020 
and had applied for refund of ₹ 13.53 
lakh which the Department had 
approved on 22.05.2020. This was 
verified and found acceptable to Audit. 
 

308
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
310 
Appendix – 4.30 
Valid explanations 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.12.7.2, 4.12.7.3 (III)) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of 
discrepancy 
Remarks/ replies 
ITC mismatch between GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B 
1. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxL Aizawl North Zone 2020-21 0.51 The Department forwarded (July 2024) the taxpayer’s reply. This was verified by Audit that 
during 2020-21, the corrected ITC as per GSTR-2A was ₹ 6.34 crore while ITC availed as 
per GSTR-3B was ₹ 5.15 crore as such excess ITC was not claimed. This was acceptable to 
Audit. 
2. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxS Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 0.98 The Department stated (July 2024) that the ITC availed in GSTR-3B during the financial 
years in question was within the limits of ITC auto-populated in GSTR-2A and that no excess 
ITC was availed during those periods. Upon verification by Audit, it was noticed that invoice 
pertaining to the previous deviation years availed in the deviation years so on and so forth 
were not considered due to which discrepancies arose. This was acceptable to Audit.  
3. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxS Aizawl South Zone 2020-21 0.07 
4. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxS Aizawl South Zone 2019-20 0.81 
Total 2.37  
ITC passed on without supplier remitting tax 
5. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Lunglei Zone 2019-20 0.002 The Department stated (March 2024) that as per their record total ITC availed as per GSTR-9 
was ₹ 42,88,903/- which is same as ITC available in Table 8A. Thus, there was no 
discrepancy in ITC availed and was acceptable to Audit. 
6. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Lunglei Zone 2020-21 0.77 The Department stated (March 2024) that as per their record total ITC availed as per GSTR-9 
was ₹ 80,03,043/- which is same as ITC available in Table 8A. This was verified by Audit 
and accepted that there was no discrepancy in ITC availed. 
7. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl East Zone 2020-21 0.26 The Department stated (July 2024) that the GST back-end system failed to auto-populate 
Table 8A of GSTR-9. The Department also stated that Table 8A of GSTR-9 from their end 
reflected that the taxpayer had ITC of ₹ 0.43 crore and ₹ 0.34 crore for the years 2019-20 and 
2020-21 respectively which upon verification by Audit was more than ITC availed as per 
GSTR-2A and was found acceptable. 
8. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl East Zone 2019-20 0.42 
Total 1.45  
Incorrect availing of ISD credit 
9. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxL Aizawl East Zone 2018-19 0.03 The taxpayer stated (July 2024) that they had claimed ₹ 0.15 crore as ISD credit under 
GSTR-3B Table 4B(2) for 2018-19, and the ISD tax credit reflecting in GSTR-2A of 2018-19 
was ₹ 0.12 crore from which the difference which is ₹ 0.03 crore pertained to ISD credit of 
2017-18 claimed in 2018-19. Thus, there was no excess ISD credit which was verified and 
found acceptable by Audit. 
Short payment of tax under RCM versus ITC availed in GSTR-3B/ GSTR-9 
10. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 0.03 The Department submitted (March 2024) the taxpayer’s clarification wherein it was stated 
that RCM tax payment as per GSTR-3B/GSTR-9 was ₹ 7,59,282/-, GSTR-3B RCM tax paid 
in March 2018 and ITC availed in April 2018 was ₹ 3,25,916, which on comparison with 

309
Appendices
Appendices 
311 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of 
discrepancy 
Remarks/ replies 
RCM ITC availed in 2018-19 as per GSTR-3B/ GSTR-9 (₹ 10,85,198/-) indicated no 
mismatch. This was verified and found acceptable to Audit. 
11. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx8 Lunglei Zone 2018-19 0.04 The Department stated (March 2024) that the returns filed by the taxpayer were checked 
thoroughly but no records of reverse charge were found which implied that no short payment 
of RCM was present and copy of GSTR-3B was attached which was acceptable to Audit. 
This was verified and found acceptable to Audit. 
12. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC Kolasib Zone 2018-19 0.03 The Department stated (July 2024) that they had cross-verified the taxpayer’s GSTR-3B and 
GSTR-9 for the years 2018-19 and 2019-20 and observed that the taxpayer’s tax payment 
under RCM in GSTR-3B tallies with the tax paid through cash as declared in GSTR-9. It was 
also stated that the dealer had made inadvertent error in not filling Table 6 (C&D) of GSTR-
9 and that this error of omission did not have an effect in the tax liability of the taxpayer and 
tax under RCM was fully discharged. This was verified and found acceptable to Audit. 
13. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxC Kolasib Zone 2019-20 0.01 
Total 0.11  
Mismatch of ITC availed between annual returns and books of accounts 
14. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxJ Aizawl East Zone 2019-20 0.27 The taxpayer stated (July 2024) that the corrected amount of deviations are ₹ 1.24 lakh, ₹ 3.37 
lakh and ₹ 0.27 lakh for the years 2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020-21 respectively, and that after 
cross-verification of GSTR-9, the variance was on account of timing difference in recording 
ITC availment and ITC reversal in books of accounts and GST returns, and that they had not 
availed any excess ITC. The reply is acceptable to Audit as per records furnished.  
15. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxJ Aizawl East Zone 2020-21 0.02 
16. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxJ Aizawl East Zone 2018-19 0.12 
17. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxY Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 0.05 The taxpayer contends that excess ITC erroneously claimed was rectified through payment 
made at the time of filing GSTR-3B for September 2019. The comparison sheet attached 
alongwith showed that ITC claimed in GSTR-3B was ₹ 13.39 lakh and accrued as per GSTR-
2A was ₹ 7.78 lakh resulting in excess ITC of ₹ 5.61 lakh. Out of the excess ITC, ₹ 5.75 lakh 
was reversed in September 2019 GSTR-3B. Moreover, DRC-03 dated 21.03.2024 for 
payment of interest against excess claim of ITC was also enclosed which is found acceptable 
by Audit. 
Total 0.46  
Reconciliation between ITC availed in annual returns with expenses in financial statements 
18. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Lunglei Zone 2018-19 0.20 The Department stated (March 2024) and quoted the taxpayer’s reply which stated that there 
was no such discrepancy in the reconciliation of unclaimed ITC, and that the deviation 
amount which was unclaimed in 2017-18 was claimed in the next year 2018-19 as stated in 
GSTR-9C. The case was acceptable to Audit. 
19. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxG Aizawl North Zone 2020-21 0.24 The Department stated (March 2024) that they had examined the taxpayer’s reply wherein 
the taxpayer stated that effort was made to reverse the excess ITC in the immediate 
succeeding financial year (GSTR-3B) which was however made short of ₹ 1,00,001/- due to 
inadvertence and had deposited the shortage of ITC reversal using DRC-03. 

310
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
312 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of 
discrepancy 
Remarks/ replies 
20. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 0.19 The Department forwarded (September 2024) the taxpayer’s clarification wherein the 
taxpayer stated that during the period they had purchased from abroad via Customs and had 
paid and filed GSTR-3B accordingly. However, due to their lack of knowledge they had not 
checked GSTR-2A whether claimed tax was reflected or not. The taxpayer had forwarded 
the invoice details of the deviation year for reference. The taxpayer is involved in 
construction services and the invoices shown purchases of machine apparatus and was found 
to be acceptable to Audit. 
Total 0.63  
Unsettled liabilities 
21. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Lunglei Zone 2020-21 0.96 The Department stated (August 2023) that they had checked all liability declared in GSTR-1 
and 3B and the discrepant amount did not match with Audit figures and that the actual amount 
were ₹ 914/- and ₹ 5.28/- for the two years respectively. The case was acceptable to Audit. 
22. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxP Lunglei Zone 2019-20 0.0001 
23. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl South Zone 2020-21 1.56 The taxpayer claimed (July 2024) that the discrepancy was solely due to an inadvertent filing 
mistake where incorrect figures were entered while filing GSTR-1 which resulted in 
inconsistencies between the data reported in GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B. However, the taxpayer 
claimed that the figures reported in GSTR-3B accurately reflect the tax liabilities and 
payments made by them. This was verified and found acceptable to Audit as the net liability 
was worked out which was same as tax paid i.e. ₹ 0.39 crore and deviation no longer arise. 
24. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 1.06 The taxpayer contends (July 2024) that GSTR-1 for June, September, December 2018 and 
March 2019 were amended in the months succeeding the return months thus downgrading 
the net liabilities and that post-amendment the actual tax liability was significantly reduced 
from ₹ 2.57 crore to ₹ 1.51 crore. This was verified by Audit and upon comparison with the 
net liability in GSTR-3B 6.1 it resulted in excess rather than short payment of tax.  
Total 3.58  
Suppression of tax liability based on E-way bill verification 
25. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Champhai Zone 2018-19 0.40 The taxpayer stated (July 2024) that upon scrutiny of the e-waybills of 2018-19 some of the 
e-waybills which were considered cancelled had remained uncancelled and the actual tax 
payable was ₹ 39.13 lakh which was paid while filing GSTR-3B of April 2019. This was 
verified by Audit and found acceptable. 
Mismatch in tax paid between books of accounts and returns 
26. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl North Zone 2020-21 0.02 The Department stated (March 2024) that ASMT-10 was issued and the taxpayer had 
discharged the entire tax liability during 2021. This was verified and acceptable to Audit.  
27. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxU Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 0.27 The taxpayer stated (July 2024) that an excess tax payment was made along with interest 
pertaining to the relevant tax period 2017-18 as stated in GSTR-9C and which was also 
reflected in GSTR-3B of April 2018. However, the total amount paid was declared as 
₹ 107.64 lakh instead of ₹ 152.40 lakh in column 9Q of GSTR-9C erroneously. Accordingly, 
the actual total tax payable was ₹ 134.64 lakh whereas the payment made was ₹ 152.40 lakh, 
the difference is pertaining to 2017-18. This was verified and acceptable to Audit. 

311
Appendices
Appendices 
313 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of 
discrepancy 
Remarks/ replies 
28. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxR Aizawl South Zone 2019-20 0.20 The taxpayer stated (July 2024) that the mismatch amount occurred due to confusion caused 
by clubbing together interest payments for two financial years in a single payment. GSTR-
9C submitted by the taxpayer stated the reason for mismatch as “being the unreconciled 
amount of ₹ 0.20 crore of IGST which is on account of interest paid vide DRC-03 dated 
09/10/2020. This was verified and acceptable to Audit. 
Total 0.49  
Under-declaration of taxable supplies by comparing TDS returns 
29. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxF Aizawl West Zone 2018-19 6.64 The taxpayer claimed through the Department (March 2024) that the mismatch was due to 
delays in releasing of bills by the state PWD and had enclosed necessary documents. This 
was verified and acceptable to Audit. 
Suppression of taxable value based on unbilled revenue declared in GSTR-9C 
30. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxQ Aizawl East Zone 2018-19 0.0002 The taxpayer stated (February 2024) that due to oversight the figure was missed to be reported 
both in Table 5B and Table 5O of GSTR-9C. It was further stated that during the year 2018-
19 outstanding premium provision was created for variable insurance premium under a/c 
code 152003 amounting to ₹ 2000/- and though there was a mistake in reporting the amount 
in Table 5B of GSTR-9C of 2018-19 it was on non-taxable item having no impact on GSTR-
9, GST liability is not short discharged. This was verified and acceptable to Audit. 
31. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx5 Aizawl South Zone 2020-21 0.19 The Department stated (July 2024) that in 2020-21 the unbilled revenue at the beginning 
should be ₹ 6.93 lakh. Upon further verification by Audit based on sample data, this was 
nullified by the unbilled revenue during 2018-19 and was found acceptable to Audit. 
32. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxK Kolasib Zone 2019-20 0.04 The taxpayer stated (July 2024) that they had made inadvertent errors in reconciliation (in 
Table 5) while filing GSTR-9C and had submitted manual revised GSTR-9C as facility for 
submission of the same was not available in GSTN portal. They further stated that taxable 
turnover figure remains the same and that there is no additional tax liability in this regard. In 
2019-20, the unbilled revenue at the end of 2018-19 and beginning of 2019-20 should be 
₹ 0.29 crore. This was found acceptable upon verification by Audit. 
Total 0.23  
Mismatch in taxable turnover declared in GSTR-9C Table 7G 
33. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxQ Lunglei Zone 2019-20 32.64 The Department stated (March 2024) that the taxpayer is a contractor who carries out business 
in different States and that the turnover shown in Balance Sheet/ Profit & Loss Account is 
combined turnover of 3 States i.e. ₹ 57.16 crore and that combined amount is shown in 
GSTR-9C. However, the tax paid in Mizoram is based on turnover of ₹ 2.15 crore which 
result in Null deviation in the State. This was verified and acceptable to Audit.  
34. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxQ Lunglei Zone 2018-19 22.37 
35. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx9 Aizawl West Zone 2020-21 4.68 The taxpayer claimed (March 2024) through the Department that the mismatch was due to 
clerical error where exempted turnover i.e. the deviation amount ₹ 4.68 crore was not shown 

312
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
314 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Period Value of 
discrepancy 
Remarks/ replies 
in GSTR-9 Table 5(D) which was later rectified and reconciled in GSTR-9C. This was 
verified and acceptable to Audit. 
36. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxY Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 20.74 The Department stated (July 2024) that Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP) has 
been initiated against the taxpayer and that an order of moratorium is in effect. This was 
verified and acceptable to Audit. 
37. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl West Zone 2018-19 2.85 The Department stated (September 2024) that mismatch in taxable turnover was due to the 
services which are not taxable under GST as the firm is engaged in the service provided for 
health care and hospitality services. The unreconciled differences ₹ 2.85 crore in 2018-19 
and ₹ 21.08 crore in 2019-20 were on account of exempt sales not shown in GSTR-9 but 
shown in Income Tax Audit. This was verified and acceptable to Audit. 
38. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx2 Aizawl West Zone 2019-20 21.08 
Total 104.36  
Ineligible composition levy 
39. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Aizawl West Zone 2019-20 2.18 The Department stated (March 2024) that due to unawareness/ ignorance the taxpayer had 
opted composition levy which was opted out since March 2020. This was verified and 
acceptable to Audit. 
Short payment of interest 
40. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl South Zone 2018-19 0.13 The Department stated (July 2024) that Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP) has 
been initiated against the taxpayer and that an order of moratorium is in effect. This was 
verified and acceptable to Audit. 
41. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl South Zone 2019-20 0.04 
42. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl South Zone 2020-21 0.03 
Total 0.20  
 

313
AppendicesAppendices 
315 
 
 
Appendix – 4.31 
ITC mismatch between GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.12.8.2) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Year Deviation 
Amount 
Remark/ replies 
1. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 9.49 The Department stated (July 
2024) that the taxpayer could not 
be contacted through phone or 
email provided on GST portal. 
Efforts may be taken to trace the 
taxpayer and pursue the case. 
2. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl North Zone 2019-20 2.78 
3. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx6 Aizawl North Zone 2019-20 0.33 The Department issued ASMT 10 
on 10.07.2024.  4. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx6 Aizawl North Zone 2020-21 0.11 
5. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 0.66 The Department stated (July 
2024) that notice will be issued. 
6. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 Aizawl North Zone 2019-20 0.97 The Department issued ASMT 10 
on 10.07.2024. 
7. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 0.83 The Department stated (July 
2024) that notice will be issued. 
8. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl North Zone 2019-20 0.76 The Department issued ASMT 10 
on 10.07.2024. 9. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl North Zone 2020-21 0.23 
10. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl East Zone 2018-19 0.08 The Department stated (April 
2024) that notice was issued and 
reply was awaited. 
11. Aizawl East Zone 2019-20 0.01 
12. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Kolasib Zone 2018-19 2.04 The Department stated (July 
2024) that upon verification of 
data the deviation amount should 
be ₹ 80.55 lakh and ₹ 35.50 lakh 
for the years 2018-19 and 2019-
20 respectively while the 
taxpayer submitted comparison 
of ITC availed as per GSTR-9 
and GSTR-2A which shows 
different set of values. The 
Department suggested that the 
case may be dropped and new 
case may be initiated by them. 
The Department may pursue the 
case. 
13. Kolasib Zone 2019-20 0.42 
Total 18.71  
 

314
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
316 
Appendix – 4.32 
ITC passed on without supplier remitting tax 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.12.8.2) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Year Deviation 
Amount 
Remark/ replies 
1. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 0.56 
The Department stated (July 2024) that in all three cases, one supplier under each case had 
not filed GSTR-3B and that notice would be issued once correctness of their statement was 
verified by Audit. The Department may issue notice as per their finding. 
2. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl North Zone 2020-21 0.53 
3. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl North Zone 2019-20 0.06 
4. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl North Zone 2018-19 16.80 The Department stated (July 2024) that the taxpayer could not be contacted through phone or 
email provided on GST portal. Efforts may be taken to trace the taxpayer and pursue the case. 5. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl North Zone 2019-20 0.35 
6. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 Aizawl North Zone 2019-20 
0.19 
The Department stated (July 2024) that a supplier had not filed GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B and 
that notice would be issued once correctness of their statement was verified by Audit. The 
Department may issue notice as per their finding. 
7. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 Aizawl North Zone 2020-21 
0.06 
The Department stated (July 2024) that some suppliers had not filed GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B 
and that notice would be issued once correctness of their statement was verified by Audit. 
The Department may issue notice as per their finding. 
8. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Kolasib Zone 2018-19 0.35 The Department requested (September 2024) to provide invoice wise or GSTN wise details 
of GSTR-2A related to this observation. The access to the backend GSTN is available with 
the Department and as such, the required details may be obtained by them from GSTN or 
from the taxpayers and may pursue the case. 
9. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxD Kolasib Zone 2019-20 0.13 
10. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl East Zone 2018-19 0.02 The Department stated (July 2024) that table 8A of GSTR-9 reflected that ITC available as 
per GSTR-2A was ₹ 19.67 lakh during 2018-19 and ₹ 37.85 lakh during 2020-21 which 
showed remittance of tax by the supplier. The Department may compare Table 8A of GSTR-
9 with ITC availed after amendments in GSTR-2A due to which the deviation arise and may 
pursue the matter. 
11. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl East Zone 2020-21 
0.01 
Total 19.06  
 

315
AppendicesAppendices 
317 
 
 
Appendix – 4.33 
Mismatch in ITC availed between annual returns and books of accounts  
(Table 12F of Form 9C) 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.12.8.2) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Jurisdiction Year Deviation 
Amount 
Remark/ replies 
1. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO Aizawl North 
Zone 
2018-19 0.30 The Department stated (April 
2024) that ASMT-10 was 
issued to the taxpayer and 
reply was awaited from them. 
The Department further stated 
(July 2024) that the taxpayer 
could not be contacted through 
phone or email provided on 
GST portal. Efforts may be 
taken to trace the taxpayer and 
pursue the case. 
2. 2019-20 1.46 
3. 2020-21 0.14 
4. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxH Aizawl East Zone 2018-19 0.01 The Department stated (April 
2024) that notice was issued 
and reply of the taxpayer was 
awaited. 
5. 2019-20 0.04 
6. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxV Aizawl East Zone 2018-19 0.84 The Department stated (April 
2024) that notice was issued 
and reply of the taxpayer was 
awaited. 
7. 2019-20 0.001 
8. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxx3 Aizawl North 
Zone 
2018-19 0.59 The Department stated (April 
2024) that 58,91,272 was 
Table 12C mismatch with 8C 
of GSTR-9. ASMT-10 was 
issued and reply of the 
taxpayer was awaited. 
9. 2020-21 0.29 The Department stated (April 
2024) that this was a case of 
short availment of ITC and 
ASMT-10 was issued and 
reply of the taxpayer was 
awaited. 
TOTAL 3.67  
 

316
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
318 
Appendix - 4.34 
Short payment of interest 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.12.8.4) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN Months 
where 
returns were 
delayed filed 
Filing dates Rate of 
interest 
Due date Tax paid in 
cash 
No. of 
days 
delayed 
Calculated 
interest 
Interest 
Payable 
Remarks 
1. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxO 
(Aizawl North 
Zone) 
Apr. 2019 24-06-2019 18 20-05-2019 9,33,963 35  16,120 16,120 The Department 
stated (July 2024) that 
ASMT 10 was issued 
vide ARN-
AD150124000154Y 
and that the taxpayer 
reply was awaited. 
2. Aug. 2019 21-10-2019 18 20-09-2019 1,27,31,520  31  1,94,635 1,94,635 
3. Jun. 2019 11-09-2019 18 20-07-2019 76,36,210  53  1,99,588 1,99,588 
4. Mar. 2020 08-05-2020  9 20-04-2020 2,92,18,490  3  21,614 21,614 
5. 1xxxxxxxxxxxxxB 
(Aizawl East 
Zone)  
Feb. 2019 27-03-2019 18 20-03-2019 1,90,064  7  656 656 The taxpayer stated 
(April 2024) that 
interest will be paid 
when intimated by the 
Department. Further 
reply in this regard 
was awaited. 
6. Jun. 2019 19-09-2019 18 20-07-2019 23,073  61  694 694 
7. Mar. 2020 14-07-2020 18 20-04-2020 12,09,056  85  50,681 50,681 
8. Nov. 2019 06-02-2020 18 20-12-2019 2,35,925  48  5,585 5,585 
9. Aug. 2020 06-12-2020 18 20-09-2020 1,35,980  77  5,164 5,164 
10. Dec. 2020 02-02-2021 18 20-01-2021 3,78,402  13  2,426 2,426 
11. Mar. 2021 06-05-2021 18 20-04-2021 14,00,854  16  11,053 11,053 
Total 5,08,216  
 
 
 

Government of  Mizoram  —  Audit Report No. 2 of 2026
© COMPTROLLER  AND
AUDITOR  GENERAL  OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in2025
Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
For the year ended 31 March 2024
Government of Mizoram
Social, Economic and Revenue Sectors 
(Report No.2 of 2026)
https://cag.gov.in/ag/aizawl/en
