© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in
Government of Nagaland
Report No. 1 of 2026
Report No. 1 of 2026 - Government of Nagaland
https://cag.gov.in/ag/nagaland/en
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Social (including Local Governments Audit),
Economic, General and Revenue Sectors
for the year ended 31 March 2024
 
(Civil and Commercial)


 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Social (including Local Governments Audit), 
Economic, General and Revenue Sectors 
for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Nagaland 
Report No. 3 of 2025 
(Civil and Commercial) 
 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Social (including Local Governments Audit), 
Economic, General and Revenue Sectors 
for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Nagaland 
Report No. 3 of 2025 
(Civil and Commercial) 
Report No. 1 of 2026

i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Particulars Reference to 
Paragraph (s) Page (s) 
Preface  vii 
Executive Summary  ix 
CHAPTER I – INTRODUCTION 
About this Report 1.1 1 
Profile of the Office of the Accountant General (Audit), 
Nagaland 1.2 1 
Planning and conduct of Audit 1.3 2 
Significant Audit Observations 1.4 2 
CHAPTER II 
PART – I 
SOCIAL SECTOR 
Introduction 2.1 5 
Performance Audit 
PUBLIC HEALTH ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT 
Jal Jeevan Mission  in Nagaland 2.2 7 
SOCIAL WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
Implementation of Integrated Child Development 
Services (ICDS) Scheme in Nagaland 
2.3 46 
Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
Excess payment without supply of materials 2.4 88 
MUNICIPAL AFFAIRS DEPARTMENT 
Undue benefit 2.5 93 
PART-II 
Local Governments Audit 
Functioning of Rural Local Bodies in the State 2.6.1 97 
Functioning of Urban Local Bodies in the State 2.6.2 97 
Organisational setup in the State Government and ULBs 2.6.3 98 
Functioning of ULBs 2.6.4 99 
Staffing pattern of ULBs 2.6.5 99 
Status of devolution of Funds, Functions and 
Functionaries to ULBs 2.6.6 99 
Audit arrangement 2.6.7 100 
Internal Audit 2.6.8 101 
Internal control mechanism in ULBs 2.6.9 101 
No Property Tax in the State 2.6.10 101 
Maintenance of Accounts 2.6.11 101 
CHAPTER III – ECONOMIC SECTOR 
Introduction 3.1 103 
Performance Audit 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme in Nagaland 3.2 105 

ii
Table of Contents
ii 
Particulars Reference to 
Paragraph (s) Page (s) 
TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT 
Functioning of Regional Transport Offices/ District  
Transport Offices in Nagaland 3.3 146 
Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
HORTICULTURE DEPARTMENT 
Undue favour to Contractor-cum-landowner 3.4 174 
PLANNING AND TRANSFORMATION DEPARTMENT 
Unauthorised utilisation of scheme fund 3.5 177 
TOURISM DEPARTMENT 
Irregular payment for unexecuted works 3.6 180 
TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT 
Unfruitful expenditure 3.7 184 
CHAPTER IV - GENERAL SECTOR 
Introduction 4.1 189 
Information Technology (IT) Audit 
FINANCE (TREASURIES AND ACCOUNTS) DEPARTMENT 
Treasury Computerisation in Nagaland 4.2 191 
Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
FINANCE (TREASURIES & ACCOUNTS) DEPARTMENT 
Fraudulent/ excess  drawal of money 4.3 213 
HOME (POLICE) DEPARTMENT  
Excess expenditure 4.4 216 
HOME (DISTRICT ADMINISTRATION) DEPARTMENT 
Misappropriation of fund 4.5 219 
CHAPTER V – REVENUE SECTOR 
Trend of revenue receipts 5.1.1 223 
Goods and Services Tax 5.1.2 225 
Analysis of arrears of revenue 5.1.3 228 
Arrears in assessments 5.1.4 229 
Pendency of Refund Cases 5.1.5 229 
Cases of evasion of tax detected by the Department 5.1.6 230 
Response of the Government/ Departments  towards  
Audit 5.1.7 230 
Analysis of the mechanism for dealing with the issues 
raised by Audit 5.1.8 232 
Recovery in cases accepted by the Departments 5.1.9 233 
Audit Planning 5.1.10 234 
Coverage of this chapter 5.1.11 234 
Subject Specific Compliance Audit 
FINANCE (TAXATION) DEPARTMENT 
Departments’ oversight on GST payments and Returns 
filing (Phase-II) in Nagaland 5.2 234 
CHAPTER VI – ECONOMIC SECTOR (PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES) 
Introduction 6.1.1 259 
Investment in PSEs 6.1.2 259 
Reconciliation with Finance Accounts 6.1.3 261 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
iii
iii 
Particulars Reference to 
Paragraph (s) Page (s) 
Accountability framework 6.1.4 262 
Arrears in finalisation of accounts 6.1.5 262 
Investment by State Government in PSEs whose 
accounts are in arrears 6.1.6 264 
Special support and guarantees to PSEs during the year 6.1.7 264 
Performance of PSEs as per their latest finalised 
accounts 6.1.8 265 
Return on Investment on basis of Present Value of 
Investment 6.1.9 268 
Impact of Audit Comments on Annual Accounts of 
PSEs 6.1.10 268 
Follow up action on Audit Reports 6.1.11 269 
CHAPTER VII 
FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 
Response of the Departments to the recommendations 
of the Public Accounts Committee 7.1 271 
Monitoring 7.2 271 
Outstanding Inspection Reports 7.3 271 
Departmental Audit Committee Meetings 7.4 272 
 
 
  

iv
Table of Contents
iv 
APPENDICES 
Appendix No. Particulars Page 
2.2.1 Statement showing details of progress report of 14 
projects implemented in the Urban Local Bodies of nine 
districts 
275 
2.2.2 Statement showing delay in release of fund 277 
2.2.3 Statement showing total amount incurred for procurement 
of GMS pipes and GPS tank from the supplier under JJM 
Scheme 
278 
2.2.4 Statement showing details of procurement of GMS Pipes 
during the years 2019-20 to 2023-24 
279 
2.2.5 Statement showing details of procurement of GPS Tanks 
during the years 2019-20 to 2023-24 
279 
2.2.6 Statement showing details of GMS Pipes and GPS Tanks 
transported on non-existent and low-Capacity Vehicles 
280 
2.2.7 Statement showing short execution of works by four PIUs 
under JJM 
299 
2.2.8 Statement showing details of availability of instruments 
in State Laboratory 
302 
2.2.9 Statement showing details of availability of instruments 
in four test-checked district laboratories 
303 
2.2.10 Statement showing details of water quality tests 
conducted in the selected district and designated State 
laboratories 
305 
2.2.11 Statement showing details of testing of water quality of 
the required parameters in the four District laboratories 
305 
2.2.12 Statement showing details of targets for testing of water 
sources in four selected districts using FTKs 
306 
2.2.13 Statement showing discrepancy of FHTCs provided 
between IMIS and actual execution and its monetary 
effect 
307 
2.3.1 Statement on receipt and expenditure of different 
sub-schemes under Anganwadi services 
309 
2.4.1 Statement showing Action Plan for NHM activities on 
matching State Share for Infrastructure Maintenance 
under NHM 
311 
2.4.2 Statement showing non-replacement of rejected 
medicines by M/s RS Pharma & Surgico, Dimapur 
311 
2.4.3 Statement showing short supply of hospital linens by 
M/s New Homescape, Dimapur 
312 
2.4.4 Statement showing short supply of nursing sundries by 
M/s JB Construction, Kohima 
312 
2.6.1 Statement showing 18 subjects listed in the 12 th Schedule 
of the Constitution of India 
313 
3.2.1 Statement showing Person Days (PDs) estimated and 
actual generation in the selected districts 
314 
3.2.2 Statement showing delay in release of fund 315 
3.2.3 (i) Average person days of employment provided per HHs 321 
3.2.3 (ii) Total No. of HHs provided 100 Days of employment 321 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
v
v 
Appendix No. Particulars Page 
3.2.4 Statement showing payment of wages under MGNREGA 
to Government employees in nine out of 21 selected 
VDBs 
322 
3.2.5 Statement showing non-execution in 10 out of 332 works 
in the four selected districts 
324 
3.2.6 Statement showing short execution in 51 out of 332 
works in the four selected districts 
325 
3.2.7 Statement showing execution of impermissible works in 
14 out of 332 works in the four selected districts 
329 
3.2.8 Statement showing execution of unfruitful expenditure 
and diversion of funds in 09 out of 332 works in the four 
selected districts 
330 
3.2.9 Statement showing various purchases above ₹25 lakh 331 
3.2.10 (a) Statement showing shortfall in conducting social audit 331 
3.2.10 (b) Statement showing observations pendency status in State 331 
3.6.1 Details of unexecuted works 332 
3.6.2 Details of unexecuted works 333 
4.3.1 Statement showing details of similar cases highlighted in 
the Audit Reports for year ended 31 March 2017 to 
31 March 2022. 
333 
4.3.2 Statement showing Department-wise list of double/ 
excess/ fraudulent  drawals 
333 
4.3.3 Statement showing excess drawal by inflating the net 
totals of pay bills 
334 
4.3.4 Statement showing double drawal of pay & allowances 
including arrears 
335 
4.3.5 Statement showing fraudulent inadmissible drawal of pay 
& allowances including arrears 
336 
4.3.6 Statement showing details of department-wise cases of 
irregularities highlighted in the Audit Reports for year 
ended 31 March 2017 to 31 March 2022 
340 
4.4.1 Comparative statement showing procurement of 
Commercial LPG Cylinder/ Refills  (2021-2023) at higher 
rates 
342 
5.2.1(A)(B) Statement showing details of audit sample for Centralised 
Audit, Detailed Audit and Audit of wards 
349 
(C) 351 
5.2.2 Statement showing deficiencies noticed in closed cases 352 
5.2.3 Statement showing deficiencies in non-finalised cases 352 
5.2.4 Statement showing cancelled registrations with effect 
from dates prior to the application dates 
360 
5.2.5 Statement showing delay in issuance of cancellation order 363 
5.2.6 Statement showing non-filling of GSTR-10 368 
5.2.7 Statement showing compliance deviations in respect of 
16 parameters 
373 
5.2.8 Statement showing cases accepted or action initiated by 
Department 
378 
5.2.9 Statement showing where Department’s response was 
rebutted 
381 
355
362
372
380
359
367
377

vi
Table of Contents
vi 
Appendix No. Particulars Page 
5.2.10 Statement showing Data Entry Errors 384 
5.2.11 Statement showing Department action taken before audit 
query 
384 
5.2.12 Statement showing short payment of interest on delayed 
payments 
385 
5.2.13 Statement showing lack of action on non -filers of GST 
returns 
387 
5.2.14 Statement showing Mismatch in Input Tax Credit claimed 
by taxpayers 
387 
6.1.1 Statement showing summarised financial results of 
Government Companies for the latest year for which 
accounts are finalised as on 30 September 2024 
388 
6.1.2 Statement showing Rate of Real Return on Government 
Investment 
390 
 
 
 
383
384
383
386
387
386
389

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
vii
vii 
1. This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been 
prepared for submission to the Governor of Nagaland under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India for being laid on the floor of the State Legislature. 
2. The Report contains significant results of the performance audit and 
compliance audit of the Departments of the Government of Nagaland under 
the Social (including Local Governments Audit), Economic, General and 
Revenue Sectors viz. Public Health Engineering, Social Welfare, Municipal 
Affairs, Health and Family Welfare, Transport, Rural Development, Nagaland 
State Transport, Horticulture, Planning and Transformation, Tourism, Finance 
(Treasuries and Accounts), Home (Police) and Home (District Administration) 
Departments. 
3. The cases mentioned in this Report are those which came to notice in the 
course of test audit during the year 2023-24 as well as those which came to 
notice in earlier years, but could not be reported in the previous Reports. 
Matters relating to the period subsequent to 2023-24 have also been included, 
wherever necessary. The Report has been finalised after considering the 
response of the Government Departments, wherever received. 
4. The audits have been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
5. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India containing the 
observations on State Finances is presented separately. 
PREFACE 

OVERVIEW

 
ix 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Chapter-I  
Introduction 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) relates to 
matters arising from the Performance Audits and test audit of transactions of various 
departments of the Government of Nagaland pertaining to Social, Economic, General 
and Revenue Sectors. The primary purpose of this Report is to bring to the notice of 
the State Legislature the significant results of audit. 
During 2023-24, the Principal Accountant General (Audit), Nagaland, planned for 
audit of 362 units out of a total of 1,186 units, after carrying out risk assessment and 
keeping in view the available manpower, of which 364 units were actually audited.  
This Report  contains four Performance Audits titled “ Jal Jeevan Mission in 
Nagaland”, “Implementation of  Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) 
Scheme in Nagaland ”, “ Implementation of  Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) ” in Nagaland , “ Functioning of 
Regional Transport Offices/District Transport Offices in Nagaland” , Information 
Technology (IT) Audit on  “Treasury Computerisation in Nagaland ” and 10 
compliance audit paragraphs which includes one Subject Specific Compliance Audit 
on “Department’s Oversight on GST payments and Return filing (Phase II) in 
Nagaland”. 
A synopsis of the important findings contained in the Report is given below. 
Chapter-II 
Part-I 
Social Sector 
 
Performance Audit 
 
Jal Jeevan Mission in Nagaland 
PUBLIC HEALTH ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT 
The Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM), a flagship scheme launched by the Prime Minister of 
India on 15 August 2019, aimed to provide potable water to rural areas through piped 
water supply. The mission’s goal was to ensure that by the end of 2024, each of the 
19 crore rural households in the country receives piped water supply through 
Functional Household Tap Connections (FHTCs). A Performance Audit on JJM in 
Nagaland was carried out covering the period from 2019-2024. 
 

x
Executive Summary Executive Summary 
x 
 
The significant findings of audit are highlighted below: 
 The Village Action Plans were prepared without conducting baseline surveys 
and none of the 34 test-checked habitations prepared VAPs incorporating 
information such as the history of water supply schemes implemented in the 
village, the infrastructure created and an assessment of the existing water 
supply infrastructure by the DWSM. 
 The number of FHTCs initially proposed for 34 villages in the four 
test-checked districts decreased from 16,400 to 16,288 in the finalised DPRs 
and was further reduced to 14,835 as reported in IMIS. 
 The supply order for materials was awarded without inviting tenders, 
resulting in an avoidable extra expenditure of ₹288.12 crore and a 
corresponding financial benefit to the supplier. 
 Delays in release of Central as well as State share by GoN to the Department 
ranging between 39 and 107 days (Central Share) and 10 and 255 days (State 
Share). 
 Three out of the five PIUs did not use any HGM Maps even though 
40 groundwater-based schemes were planned for implementation by these 
three PIUs. 
 An expenditure of ₹23.05 lakh was incurred on the construction of a deep 
tube well, iron removal plant and an RCC tank. When attempts were made to 
connect individual households from the tube wells, no water could be drawn. 
Both the tube well and the submersible pump remained idle and non-
functional. 
 There was shortfall ranging from 64 to 95 per cent in conducting laboratory 
tests over the last five years. The district laboratories of the four test-checked 
districts did not conduct tests for sulphate, total arsenic, fluoride, nitrate, total 
coliform bacteria, and E. coli or thermo tolerant coliform bacteria. While out 
of the target of 71,448 tests of water sources in the four test-checked districts 
through usage of FTKs, only 14,231 tests (19.92 per cent) were conducted. 
 Out of 34 test-checked WATSAN Committees, 30 had not opened any bank 
accounts for the deposit of community contributions towards the required 
five per cent of the capital cost. 
 10 villages out of 34 test-checked villages across the four test-checked 
districts, had conducted social audits. 
 VAPs were prepared without adequate participatory appraisal or demand 
assessment, contrary to the decentralised, demand-driven approach mandated 
in the JJM Guidelines. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
xi
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
xi 
 In four out of the five PIUs, IoT and GIS software were neither planned nor 
provided and that the real-time dashboard was also not utilised for planning 
and monitoring household tap connections. 
 Against the target to provide 16,288 FHTCs in 34 test-checked villages, the 
Department provided 8,251 FHTCs (50.66 per cent ) depriving 
5,851 households of the benefit of availing the scheme. The expenditure of 
₹21.57 crore against 5,851 households proved fictitious as the services were 
not provided. 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may: 
A. Strengthen Institutional Planning and Governance 
(i) Ensure mandatory baseline surveys and need assessments are conducted 
prior to the preparation of Village Action Plans (VAPs), and align 
projections with Census and verified household data. 
(ii) Empower GPs and VWSCs with training, tools, and supervision to prepare 
realistic, community-owned plans. 
B. Improve Procurement and Financial Transparency 
(iii) Discontinue nomination-based procurement. Adopt centralised e-tendering 
in line with JJM Guidelines and GFR provisions to ensure transparency and 
value for money. 
(iv) Adhere strictly to timelines for release of Central and State shares to prevent 
implementation delays. 
C. Ensure Functional and Sustainable Infrastructure 
(v) Mandate use of Hydro-Geo-Morphological (HGM) maps and smart sensors 
for better site selection, source sustainability, and daily monitoring of water 
drawal and distribution. 
(vi) Conduct third-party validation of all completed works to assess physical and 
functional status, with accountability for incomplete or non-functional 
systems. 
D. Strengthen Water Quality Monitoring 
(vii) Establish fully equipped and staffed laboratories at sub-division and district 
levels with microbiological testing facilities and standard protocols. 
(viii) Ensure 100 per cent source testing and FTK usage is achieved and recorded 
in WQMIS. Address manpower and connectivity gaps. 
E. Foster Community Ownership and Transparency 
(ix) Enforce collection and accounting of the five per cent capital cost and O&M 
contributions from beneficiaries through designated bank accounts. 
(x) Institutionalise regular social audits and ensure public display of water 
quality test results at Panchayat offices and public institutions. 
(xi) Intensify Information, Education & Communication (IEC) campaigns and 
participatory rural appraisal (PRA) activities to build local ownership and 
user awareness. 

xii
Executive Summary Executive Summary 
xii 
 
F. Monitoring and Accountability 
(xii) Operationalise the JJM dashboard across all PIUs and integrate it with 
local MIS for consistent real-time monitoring.  
(xiii) Conduct annual independent evaluation of scheme performance with 
feedback loops into future planning. 
 
Implementation of Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme 
in Nagaland 
SOCIAL WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
The Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme, was launched on 
02 October 1975 by the Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of 
India (GoI) aims to improve health, nutrition, and education of the targeted 
beneficiaries which included children up to the age of six years, pregnant and 
lactating mothers and adolescent girls aged 11-18 years. A Performance Audit on its 
implementation in Nagaland was conducted for the period 2018-19 to 2023-24. The 
significant findings of audit are highlighted below: 
 Nagaland has 3,980 functional AWCs, against a population of 19,78,502 
(2011 Census) and a projected population of 22,33,000 (2023), indicating 
that the number of AWCs is broadly adequate to meet the population-based 
requirement under the ICDS scheme as per prescribed norms, however, this 
did not ensure uniform access across all regions. 
 An expenditure of ₹2.81 crore for procurement of medicine kits during 
2018-2024 revealed serious lapses in inventory management, including 
non-maintenance of stock registers and untraceable distribution records. 
 An expenditure of ₹1.36 crore for the procurement of uniforms and badges 
during 2021-2024 revealed absence of documentation in stock registers and 
non-receipt of supplies by the majority of sampled CDPOs. 
 A standardised framework inclusive of input, output and outcome indicators 
for evidence-based monitoring was not formulated. Consequently, evaluation 
of the outcome-based indicators was not conducted at the district, block and 
village levels. 
 Out of 4,09,851 beneficiaries, only 1,13,619 beneficiaries (28 per cent) in the 
State are being monitored through Poshan tracker App to track the nutritional 
status and growth of women and children, enabling timely intervention to 
combat malnutrition. 
 The State failed to maintain reliable and comprehensive data on key 
nutritional indicators such as stunting, wasting, underweight, anaemia, and 
low birth weight. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
xiii
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
xiii 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may- 
(i) conduct geo-tagged mapping of all AWCs to identify and address 
infrastructure gaps such as toilets, kitchens, electricity and drinking water. 
(ii) implement real-time digital stock register and public disclosure of material 
distribution (e.g., food, kits) at all levels to ensure transparency and prevent 
misuse. 
(iii)  develop and adopt a unified monitoring framework with input, output, and 
outcome indicators for robust, real-time evaluation and accountability. 
(iv) upgrading digital infrastructure by replacing obsolete smartphones and 
conducting periodic training of Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) and 
supervisors to improve usage of Poshan Tracker and digital record-keeping. 
(v) leverage data from HMIS and Poshan Tracker to design targeted, 
area-specific interventions  for reducing malnutrition, supported by regular 
food quality testing. 
Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
Excess payment without supply of materials 
Infrastructure Maintenance fund of ₹3.85 crore was diverted to procure medicines, 
hospital linens and nursing sundries of which items worth ₹0.88 crore were short 
supplied or rejected. 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may- 
(i) ensure that NHM funds are utilised as per the Scheme guidelines. 
(ii) take necessary steps to recover the cost of short supplied or rejected supply 
items. 
(iii) fix responsibility on the officers/officials responsible for releasing the 
payment to the suppliers without verifying the quantity and quality of the 
supply items. 
(iv) incorporate enabling clause in all future contracts for obtaining security 
deposits against Performance Bank Guarantee and Liquidated Damages so 
as to safeguard its financial interests. 
MUNICIPAL AFFAIRS DEPARTMENT 
Undue benefit 
A Working Women Hostel was constructed by the Executive Engineer-II, Urban 
Engineering Wing, Directorate of Municipal Affairs, Nagaland, Kohima , for 
₹13.26 crore (GoI share: ₹8.31 crore; GoN share: ₹4.95 crore) on a private plot of 
land resulting in undue favour to the land owner to that extent. 

xiv
Executive Summary Executive Summary 
xiv 
 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may: 
(i) obtain ex-post-facto approval from the GoI for the subsequent changes 
made. 
(ii) take necessary steps to review the Memorandum of Agreement entered into 
with NAPO so as to safeguard the financial interest of the Government. 
(iii) ensure fixation of rent/hostel fees in a fair and transparent manner and 
extensive publicity of the Hostel for the benefit of the intended beneficiaries. 
Chapter-II 
Part-II 
Local Governments Audit 
Under Article 243M of the Constitution of India , the State of Nagaland is exempted 
from the provisions of the 73 rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992. Owing to its 
traditional local self-governing institutions in the form of Village Councils, Nagaland 
falls within this exemption. 
As of March 2021, there were 1,280 recognised villages in the State, each governed 
by the Nagaland Village and Tribal Council Act, 1978  (erstwhile Nagaland Village 
Council Act, 1978 ), which mandates the establishment of a Village Council in every 
recognised village. 
Under each Village Council, a  Village Development Board (VDB) is constituted. The 
VDBs, inter alia , facilitate State functionaries that assists in identifying 
developmental works, selecting scheme beneficiaries and facilitating the 
implementation of Government schemes, including Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
(CSSs). 
The general body of a VDB comprises of all permanent residents of the village, 
managed by a committee chosen by the Village Council, with a Secretary, appointed 
for a term of three years, oversees the day-to-day affairs of the VDB. The  Deputy 
Commissioner of the district acts as the  ex-officio Chairman of all VDBs within the 
district. 
Article 243Q of the Constitution of India grants constitutional status to Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs) for self-governance in urban areas, covering 18 subjects under the 
12th Schedule. In Nagaland, the ULBs are governed by the Nagaland Municipal Act, 
2023, comprising 03 Municipal Councils and 36 Town Councils. As per Census 2011, 
28.86 per cent of the State’s population (5.71 lakh) lived in urban areas, with an urban 
literacy rate of 89.62 per cent. 
The Nagaland Municipal (NM) Act, 2023 provides the statutory framework for the 
constitution, functioning and dissolution of ULBs, mandating them to perform 
obligatory functions such as urban planning, public health, sanitation, solid waste 
management, fire services, and urban forestry, with provision for additional functions 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
xv
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
xv 
as notified by the Government. Nagaland has 39 statutory towns  ( comprising 
03 Municipal Councils and 36 Town Councils) of which 25 have elected Councils 
supported by Chief Executive Officers/Executive Officers from the State Civil 
Services, while the remaining 14 towns in the eastern region are administered by 
Government-appointed officers in the absence of elected representatives. To 
strengthen governance, the Government has also issued guidelines recommending the 
formation of committees within newly constituted ULBs. 
No recruitment rules have been framed for ULBs, leading to staff being engaged on a 
contractual basis with Government approval, resulting in inconsistent staffing patterns 
across ULBs. 
In Nagaland, out of 18 functions listed in the 12 th Schedule, ULBs are fully 
responsible for only one, partially responsible for six and have no role in the 
remaining eleven, with limited revenue powers (no property tax) and absence of 
manpower policy restricting the ULBs to function as effective self-governing 
institutions. 
The State has not constituted a Directorate of Local Fund Audit or entrusted 
Technical Guidance & Support to the C&AG, and audits of ULBs are conducted by 
the C&AG under Section 14 of the DPC Act, 1971. In addition, no system of internal 
audit exists in ULBs in Nagaland as the NM Act, 2023 does not provide for it. ULBs 
lack an institutionalised internal control mechanism to ensure compliance with Acts, 
Rules and Bye-laws.  
The NM Act, 2023 excludes ULBs from levying property tax on land and buildings, 
leaving them heavily dependent on Government grants. The Municipal Accounts 
Code has not been prepared and ULBs currently follow a cash-based system and 
prepare only Receipt and Payment Statements. 
Chapter-III 
Economic Sector 
 
Performance Audit 
 
Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme in Nagaland 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) 
is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme under the Ministry of Rural Development, GoI 
implemented on a cost sharing basis between the GoI and the State Governments. The 
GoI enacted the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA), 2005, later 
renamed as the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA) in October 2009. MGNREGA provides a legal guarantee of at least 
100 days of wage employment in every financial year to rural household whose adult 
members are willing to do unskilled manual work at the minimum wage rate. A 

xvi
Executive Summary Executive Summary 
xvi 
 
Performance Audit of the Scheme was conducted covering the period from 2019-20 
to 2023-24. The significant findings of audit are highlighted below:  
 In 32 test-checked villages, the annual door-to-door survey was not 
conducted by the Programme Officers. Further, 24 Government employees 
were enrolled as unskilled workers under MGNREGA and ₹6.04 lakh was 
paid as wages to 19 Government employees. 
 The percentage of Aadhaar seeded and Aadhaar authenticated JC holders was 
51 and 43 per cent  respectively in the State and 47 and 39 per cent  
respectively in the four test-checked districts. 
 The Department did not prepare any IEC plan during 2019-2024. 
Additionally, no funds for IEC activities were received by the block offices 
and VDBs in the last five years and only limited IEC activities were 
conducted at the Directorate of RD, GoN. 
 The Department had not re-appoint SQM/DQM following their three-year 
term expiry (constituted in 2019). 
 Ten projects costing ₹2.87 crore stated to have been completed, did not exist 
physically and there was short execution of works in 51 projects amounting 
to ₹8.69 crore indicating possible misappropriation of funds to that extent. 
 The offices of Ombudsman were not functional in all the three test checked 
districts. Moreover, no Citizens’ Charter was prepared by the State 
Government during the audit period. 
 There was a shortfall in conducting 2,676 social audits (59 per cent) in the 
State during 2019-2024 against the target in the audit plan of 4,536 social 
audits. 
Recommendations: 
(i) An annual door-to-door survey should be institutionalised to include all 
eligible beneficiaries, remove ineligible persons (such as Government 
employees), and update Aadhaar-seeded job card records to eliminate 
authentication failures. 
(ii) The Department should take focused steps, including field-level data 
correction, additional Aadhaar enrolment centres, and coordination with 
banks to expedite 100 per cent ABPS coverage for wage payments to prevent 
delays and leakages. 
(iii) The State should develop an annual Information, Education and Communication 
(IEC) plan covering State, district, block, and village levels with clear 
timelines and targets to enhance worker awareness of their rights, 
entitlements, grievance mechanisms, and available mobile applications such 
as Janmanrega. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
xvii
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
xvii 
(iv) The State must reconstitute and operationalise State and District Quality 
Monitoring Units (SQM/DQM) as per guidelines to independently monitor at 
least 10 per cent of the works for quality assurance and compliance. 
(v) Dedicated technical staff must be appointed at village and block levels to 
ensure proper work measurement, adherence to sanctioned estimates, correct 
geo-location tagging, and validation of work execution as per approved 
specifications. 
(vi) The State should operationalise fully functional grievance redressal systems 
and conduct mandated biannual social audits in every Village Development 
Board (VDB), with independent verification, resolution of audit observations, 
and public disclosure of audit reports. 
Functioning of Regional Transport Offices/District Transport Offices 
in Nagaland 
TRANSPORT (MOTOR VEHICLES) DEPARTMENT 
The Motor Vehicles Department (MVD) under the Transport Department, GoN was 
established in the year 1963 on Nagaland attaining Statehood. The powers and 
functions of the Department are regulated under the provisions of the Motor Vehicles 
(MV) Act 1988, Central Motor Vehicles  (CMV) Rules 1989, the Nagaland MV Act, 
1967 and the MV Taxation Rules 1972. As on 31 March 2024, there are two Regional 
Transport Offices and six District Transport Offices that function under the MVD of 
the State. A Performance Audit of the Department was conducted covering the period 
from 2019-20 to 2023-24. The significant findings of audit are highlighted below:  
 6,292 out of 33,567 LLs were issued without conducting the mandatory tests 
in the three test-checked RTOs/ DTO. 
 There is no ATS in Nagaland to carry out the automatic testing of vehicles 
for the issuance of fitness certificates. The construction of an Inspection and 
Certification Centre at Chumukedima, proposed for conversion into an ATS, 
was under progress. 
 During 2019-2024, 8,633 vehicles registered in Nagaland defaulted on tax 
payments, resulting in cumulative outstanding dues of ₹9.03 crore.  
 Two RTOs - Kohima and Mokokchung under-imposed a penalty of 
₹23.41 lakh for overloading. 
 The provisions for imposing penalties for various motor vehicle related 
offences were not complied with by the three test-checked RTOs/DTO. 
 The VAHAN and SARATHI applications were operational across all 
RTOs/DTOs in Nagaland, however, an online payment gateway for citizen 
users had not been integrated. 

xviii
Executive Summary Executive Summary 
xviii 
 
 The GoN had signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with HDFC 
Bank to provide a payment gateway for e-challan and other online payments, 
this integration with the VAHAN application was still under development. 
Recommendations: 
(i) The Department should implement a mandatory digital testing system 
integrated with SARATHI, ensuring that all Learner’s License applicants 
undergo time-stamped, system-recorded tests. Manual issuance without 
records must be discontinued, and RTOs held accountable for compliance. 
(ii) The State Government may fast-track the establishment and 
operationalisation of Automated Testing Stations (ATS) at Chumukedima, 
Kohima, and Mokokchung, ensuring all fitness renewals comply with CMV 
Rules, 2022. Until ATS are fully functional, interim quality control measures 
must be implemented for manual fitness testing. 
(iii) The Department should implement an automated tracking and alert 
mechanism within VAHAN to notify vehicle owners before permit or fitness 
certificate expiry. Simultaneously, strengthen enforcement through e-challan 
systems and mandate field inspections backed by real-time data validation. 
(iv) The Department may develop and enforce a structured compounding 
protocol, including compulsory entry of Check Reports in VAHAN, seizure of 
documents or vehicles where required, and verification of compliance before 
closure of cases. Enforcement performance must be reviewed quarterly. 
(v) The Department should immediately finalise and operationalise the 
integration of the HDFC payment gateway with VAHAN and SARATHI. All 
citizen-facing services should mandate digital payment options to enhance 
convenience, reduce cash handling, and improve transparency. 
Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
 
HORTICULTURE DEPARTMENT 
Undue favour to Contractor-cum-landowner 
A Botanical Garden-cum-Recreational Park was created at Jalukie, Peren at a cost of 
₹2.87 crore on a privately owned land in violation of NEC guidelines. The facility 
remained idle for the last two years resulting in loss of potential revenue from its 
operation. 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may- 
(i) take necessary steps to review the ‘Deed of Land Donation’ and ensure that 
land records are updated to reflect the Government’s ownership, thereby 
safeguarding its interest. 
(ii) ensure that the assets/facilities created out of the project is utilised as 
envisaged in the Detailed Project Report. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
xix
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
xix 
PLANNING AND TRANSFORMATION DEPARTMENT 
Unauthorised utilisation of scheme fund 
Funds amounting to ₹6.14 crore meant for construction of Boys and Girls Hostels was 
unauthorisedly diverted for construction of a private school in violation of the 
Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas Karyakram (PMJVK) guidelines. 
Recommendations:  
The State Government may ensure that- 
(i) all future DPRs under PMJVK scheme includes complete details of project 
land and its intended usage. 
(ii) the assets created under Government sponsored projects are utilised for the 
intended purpose; and  
(iii) responsibility of the erring officials is fixed for unauthorised utilisation of the 
Scheme funding towards construction of a private school and action as per 
rules may be taken against them. 
TOURISM DEPARTMENT 
Irregular payment for unexecuted works 
The Executive Engineer, Directorate of Tourism, Nagaland, made an irregular 
payment of ₹0.43 crore to the contractor for unexecuted works based on fictitious 
entries in the Measurement Books (MBs) and Running Account Bills. 
Recommendations:  
The State Government may- 
(i) initiate action against the contractor for submitting bills without execution of 
works and take steps to recover the excess amount paid to the contractor. 
(ii) fix responsibility on and take action against the erring officers for making 
false entries in the MBs and failure to cross check the correctness of 
Contractor’s bill before release of payment. 
TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT 
Unfruitful expenditure 
The project “Conversion of NST Central Workshop into a Bus Station, Night 
Parking-cum-marketing Complex in Dimapur”  remained incomplete even after a 
lapse of more than six years after incurring an expenditure of ₹10.61 crore. Moreover, 
the State Government had to bear an additional ₹16.64 crore burden without 
achieving the intended transport or revenue benefits. 
Recommendation: 
The State Government may earmark resources to complete the balance portion of the 
incomplete work so that the objective of the project is fulfilled without further delay. 

xx
Executive Summary Executive Summary 
xx 
 
Chapter-IV 
General sector 
 
Information Technology (IT) Audit  
 
Treasury Computerisation in Nagaland 
 
TREASURIES AND ACCOUNTS DEPARTMENT 
The Ministry of Finance (MoF), GoI notified (July 2010) the implementation of 
Treasury Computerisation (TC) Mission Mode Project (MMP) under the National 
e-Governance Plan (NeGP). This initiative aimed to enhance efficiency, reduce costs, 
eliminate redundancies and modernise public expenditure management practices. The 
TC was designed to streamline budgeting processes, enhance cash flow management, 
facilitate real-time account reconciliation, strengthen the Management Information 
System (MIS), improve accuracy and timeliness in account preparation, enhance 
transparency in public delivery systems and elevate financial management quality in 
States and Union Territories (UTs). A Performance Audit of the implementation of 
TC was conducted covering the period from 2018-19 to 2023-24. The significant 
findings of audit are highlighted below: 
 The rollout of TreasuryNet system was delayed due to delay in selecting 
vendor for application development, resulting in the timelines stipulated in 
the DPR not being achieved. The Department had not adopted project 
management tools to monitor the progress of completion of individual tasks 
for the project with respect to the critical path for the project and had not 
maintained a risk register to list and identify risks and mitigation measures. 
 Failure to complete the stipulated milestones resulted in project 
implementation delays, causing the State Government to miss out on Central 
assistance of ₹2.84 crore. 
 Out of 13 modules, five modules were not implemented. Moreover, the 
implemented modules did not incorporate all the business rules and features 
outlined in the DPR. As a result, key application controls required in the 
lifecycle of the financial management process - from budget to accounts - 
have not yet been implemented in the TreasuryNet application. 
 The database contained several discrepancies, indicating inadequate mapping 
of rules, logical access controls and validation controls.  
 Training needs analysis was not conducted, and required numbers of IT 
personnel were not available in the Treasuries and Sub-Treasuries. 
 Neither the State Government nor the Department submitted any progress 
report to the PSC throughout the project's implementation. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
xxi
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
xxi 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may- 
(i) adopt project management tools to identify the list of individual tasks to be 
completed, persons responsible for each task, sequential dependencies 
among tasks and the impact of delays on the critical path for the project 
timelines. 
(ii) direct the Department to undertake a comprehensive review of its project 
governance mechanism, to identify and address the root causes for delays 
and adopt standard controls such as maintenance of risk register, periodic 
meetings of governance Committee(s) and periodic reports on progress in 
implementation of projects. 
(iii) instruct the Department to prioritise the completion of all modules of 
TreasuryNet along with key functionalities and application controls. 
(iv) instruct the Department to implement application controls for budget 
management and expenditure control. 
(v) instruct the Department to take steps to conduct training needs analysis to 
provide the required training for Treasury Computerisation and deploy IT 
support staff in the Treasuries and Sub-Treasuries. 
(vi) strengthen the monitoring mechanism to ensure that the PSC meets at 
prescribed frequencies to review the progress of implementation, to analyse 
risks and reasons for delay, and to follow up on action taken on its previous 
decisions. 
Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
 
FINANCE (TREASURIES & ACCOUNTS) DEPARTMENT 
Fraudulent/excess drawal of money 
The failure of the Drawing and Disbursing Officers and Treasury Officers to exercise 
prescribed checks resulted in fraudulent/double/excess drawal of ₹0.88 crore, out of 
which ₹0.24 crore was pending to be recovered. 
Recommendations:  
The State Government may- 
(i) take steps to recover the amount misappropriated immediately from the 
concerned employees/DDOs/TOs with penal interest. 
(ii) investigate the matter and take appropriate action against the delinquent 
officers for the criminal offense of fraudulent withdrawal/theft of public 
money. 
(iii) initiate steps to strengthen the internal control mechanism in all departments 
to prevent recurrence of fraudulent drawals. 

xxii
Executive Summary Executive Summary 
xxii 
 
(iv) refer the cases to the State Lokayukta for further investigation. 
(v) direct all the departments to adhere to the recommendations made by the 
State PAC and ensure their strict compliance. 
HOME (POLICE) DEPARTMENT  
Excess expenditure 
Engaging an unlicensed Supplier for procurement of Commercial Liquefied 
Petroleum Gas cylinders/refills without following the tendering process in violation of 
the applicable Regulations by the Director General of Police, Nagaland resulted in an 
excess expenditure of ₹3.46 crore. 
Recommendations:  
The State Government may- 
(i) follow the prescribed tendering process for procurements and strengthen the 
internal control mechanism to promote transparency and compliance with 
procurement norms. 
(ii) fix responsibility on the officials concerned for non-compliance of LPG 
(Regulation of Supply and Distribution) Order, 2000, leading to the financial 
loss to State Exchequer. 
HOME (DISTRICT ADMINISTRATION) DEPARTMENT  
Misappropriation of fund 
The Deputy Commissioner of Phek District misappropriated ₹17.56 lakh from the 
Government funds meant for land acquisition towards development of Sub-Jail in 
Pfutsero. 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may- 
(i) conduct departmental enquiry to fix responsibility on the erring officials for 
the unauthorised expenditure and recover the amount from the officials 
concerned. 
(ii) ensure execution of the Sale Deed at the earliest to establish the ownership 
of the land acquired.  
Chapter-V 
Revenue Sector 
 
Subject Specific Compliance Audit 
 
Department’s oversight on GST payments and Return filing (Phase II) in 
Nagaland 
FINANCE (TAXATION) DEPARTMENT 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
xxiii 
Goods and Services Tax (GST) came into effect from 01 July 2017 replacing multiple 
taxes levied and collected by the Centre and States. GST is a destination-based 
consumption tax on the supply of goods or services or both levied on every value 
addition. The Centre and States simultaneously levy GST on a common tax base. 
Central GST (CGST) and State GST (SGST)/Union Territory GST (UTGST) are 
levied on intra-State supplies, and Integrated GST (IGST) is levied on inter-State 
supplies. A Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) was taken up considering the 
significance of the control mechanism envisaged for tax compliance and the oversight 
mechanism of the Commissioner of Taxes (Department), GoN in this new tax regime.  
Audit revealed shortcomings in tax administration such as deficiencies in closed, non-
finalised cases, cancellation of registration, ITC mismatch, short payment of tax and 
interest, turnover mismatches and errors in data entry were noticed. Audit has 
recommended corrective actions to address the shortcomings noticed. 
Recommendations:  
The Department may- 
(i) ensure time-bound compliance to the detailed procedures for scrutiny of 
returns. 
(ii) take prompt steps to conduct internal audit under Section 65 of the NGST Act 
so that action could be initiated against the defaulters before time-barring of 
cases. 
(iii) initiate action against late- filers and non-filers by assessing the tax liability 
through invoking of the ASMT-13 best judgment assessment order. 
(iv) adhere to the Rules regarding the cancellation process to ensure that final 
returns in GSTR-10 are filed and the tax liability is discharged. 
(v) ensure taxpayers’ compliance to the deviations arising from non-adherence 
to the NGST Act and rules. 
(vi) instruct the departmental units to ensure timely and complete production of 
records to Audit. 
(vii) ensure remedial action for all the compliance deviations before they get time 
barred. 
Chapter VI 
Economic Sector (Public Sector Enterprises) 
As of 31 March 2024, the State of Nagaland had seven Public Sector Enterprises 
(five working Government companies and two non-working companies) wherein the 
investment of the State Government (equity capital and long-term loans) in the seven 
PSEs was ₹36.94 crore, consisting of ₹36.67 crore towards equity capital and 
₹0.27 crore towards long term loans. As on 31 March 2024, the combined investment 
of the State Government and other stakeholders in the seven PSEs was ₹123.15 crore. 
The combined investment was highest in the Finance sector PSEs (₹82.61 crore) 
followed by Miscellaneous Sector PSEs (₹19.51 crore). 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
xxiii
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
xxiii 
Goods and Services Tax (GST) came into effect from 01 July 2017 replacing multiple 
taxes levied and collected by the Centre and States. GST is a destination-based 
consumption tax on the supply of goods or services or both levied on every value 
addition. The Centre and States simultaneously levy GST on a common tax base. 
Central GST (CGST) and State GST (SGST)/Union Territory GST (UTGST) are 
levied on intra-State supplies, and Integrated GST (IGST) is levied on inter-State 
supplies. A Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) was taken up considering the 
significance of the control mechanism envisaged for tax compliance and the oversight 
mechanism of the Commissioner of Taxes (Department), GoN in this new tax regime.  
Audit revealed shortcomings in tax administration such as deficiencies in closed, non-
finalised cases, cancellation of registration, ITC mismatch, short payment of tax and 
interest, turnover mismatches and errors in data entry were noticed. Audit has 
recommended corrective actions to address the shortcomings noticed. 
Recommendations:  
The Department may- 
(i) ensure time-bound compliance to the detailed procedures for scrutiny of 
returns. 
(ii) take prompt steps to conduct internal audit under Section 65 of the NGST Act 
so that action could be initiated against the defaulters before time-barring of 
cases. 
(iii) initiate action against late- filers and non-filers by assessing the tax liability 
through invoking of the ASMT-13 best judgment assessment order. 
(iv) adhere to the Rules regarding the cancellation process to ensure that final 
returns in GSTR-10 are filed and the tax liability is discharged. 
(v) ensure taxpayers’ compliance to the deviations arising from non-adherence 
to the NGST Act and rules. 
(vi) instruct the departmental units to ensure timely and complete production of 
records to Audit. 
(vii) ensure remedial action for all the compliance deviations before they get time 
barred. 
Chapter VI 
Economic Sector (Public Sector Enterprises) 
As of 31 March 2024, the State of Nagaland had seven Public Sector Enterprises 
(five working Government companies and two non-working companies) wherein the 
investment of the State Government (equity capital and long-term loans) in the seven 
PSEs was ₹36.94 crore, consisting of ₹36.67 crore towards equity capital and 
₹0.27 crore towards long term loans. As on 31 March 2024, the combined investment 
of the State Government and other stakeholders in the seven PSEs was ₹123.15 crore. 
The combined investment was highest in the Finance sector PSEs (₹82.61 crore) 
followed by Miscellaneous Sector PSEs (₹19.51 crore). 

xxiv
Executive Summary Executive Summary 
xxiv 
 
 As on 30 September 2024, a total of 15 Accounts pertaining to all five 
working PSEs were in arrears for the periods ranging between one to six 
years.  
 During 2023-2024, the State Government had provided budgetary support in 
the form of grants/subsidy of ₹89.07 crore to five working PSEs. 
 As on 30 September 2024, the turnover of the working PSEs stood at 
₹6.03 crore during 2023-2024. The accumulated losses (₹91.92 crore) of two 
working PSEs viz. Nagaland Industrial Development Corporation Ltd. and 
Nagaland Hotels and Tourism Development Corporation Ltd. had completely 
eroded their paid-up capital (₹25.55 crore) as per their latest finalised 
accounts. 

CHAPTER-I
INTRODUCTION

Chapter I: Introduction 
1 
CHAPTER I 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 About this Report 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) relates to 
matters arising from the performance audits and test audit of transactions of various 
departments of the Government of Nagaland (GoN) pertaining to Social (including 
Local Government Audit), Economic, General and Revenue Sectors. 
The primary purpose of this Report is to bring to the notice of the State Legislature, 
significant results of audit. Auditing standards require that the materiality level for 
reporting should be commensurate with the nature, volume and magnitude of 
transactions. The findings of audit are expected to enable the Executive to take 
corrective action, to frame appropriate policies as well as to issue directives that will 
lead to improved financial management and contribute to better governance.  
This chapter, in addition to explaining the planning and coverage of audit, provides a 
synopsis of significant instances of non-compliance with applicable laws, rules, 
regulations, various orders and instructions issued by competent authorities.  
1.2 Profile of the Office of the Accountant General (Audit), Nagaland  
The Office of the Accountant General, Nagaland, Kohima was established on 17 
December 1974. Following a restructuring of cadres in 1984, the audit functions were 
entrusted to the office of the Accountant General (Audit), Nagaland and the Accounts 
and Entitlement functions were entrusted to the Accountant General (A&E), 
Nagaland. 
Under the directions of C&AG, the Office of the Accountant General (Audit), 
Nagaland conducts audit of Government departments, Public Sector Enterprises, 
Autonomous Bodies and other Institutions 1  under Social, Economic, General and 
Revenue Sectors, which are spread all over the State. The Accountant General (Audit) 
is assisted by one Senior Deputy Accountant General. 
The authority of audit is derived from Article 149 and 151 of the Constitution of India 
and the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1971 (C&AG’s (DPC) Act). Under Section 13 of the C&AG’s (DPC) 
Act, the Office of the Accountant General (Audit) has been entrusted with the audit of 
all expenditure incurred from the Consolidated Fund of the GoN. This office conducts 
audit of revenue receipts of the GoN under Section 16 of the C&AG’s (DPC) Act. 
This office also conducts supplementary audit of the Balance Sheet of all State 
Government companies under Section 143 (6) (a) of the Companies Act, 2013.  This 
office is responsible for audit of accounts of autonomous bodies and authorities 
falling under Sections 14, 15, 19 (2), 19 (3) and 20 (1) of the C&AG’s (DPC) Act.  
                                                                 
1 Audit of World Bank assisted projects, Asian Development Bank assisted projects etc. 

2
Chapter I: Introduction Chapter I: Introduction 
2 
The C&AG prescribes the principles and methodologies for various audits in the 
Auditing Standards and the Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2020. 
1.3 Planning and conduct of Audit  
The audit process commences with the assessment of risk of the departments based on 
the expenditure incurred, criticality/complexity of activities, priority accorded for the 
activity by the Government, level of delegated financial powers, assessment of 
internal controls, concerns of stakeholders and previous audit findings .  Based on this 
risk assessment, the frequency and extent of audit are decided and an annual audit 
plan is formulated to conduct audit. 
After completion of each audit, an Inspection Report (IR) containing audit findings is 
issued to the Head of the unit with a request to furnish replies within one month of 
receipt of the IR.  Wherever replies are received, audit findings are either settled or 
further action for compliance is advised. Significant audit observations pointed out in 
these IRs, which require attention at the highest level in the Government, are 
processed for inclusion in the Audit Report.  The Audit Report is submitted to the 
Governor of Nagaland under Article 151 of the Constitution of India for causing it to 
be laid on the Table of the State Legislature. 
The Audit Plan is prepared in such a manner that it fits into the long term and short 
term goals of audit in consonance with the overall “Vision and Mission” of the 
Supreme Audit Institution of India.  It is prepared after carrying out a risk assessment 
and keeping in view the available manpower.  Elements of the Audit Quality 
Management Framework (AQMF) viz. materiality, inputs from Voucher Level 
Computerisation (VLC), financial size of the units, data from various e-governance 
initiatives taken by Government, flagship programme undertaken by auditees, press 
reports/electronic media coverage, expected audit impact and continuous 
improvement based on past experience are taken into account to the extent possible 
while framing the plan.  A sector-wise analysis of Government spending, investment 
policy of the Government in infrastructure development, industrialisation and 
socio-economic activities along with due consideration of the possible audit impact 
are taken into account in prioritising auditee units for preparing the audit plan. 
Considering the availability of resources, focus is given to areas of high financial risk 
rather than thinly spreading out the available resources across the Government 
activities. The aim is to have a better socio-economic impact and add value to 
governance.  
Out of 1,186 units, 362 units were planned for audit during 2023-24 after carrying out 
a risk assessment and keeping in view the available manpower, of which 364 units 
were actually audited during 2023-24. 
1.4 Significant Audit Observations 
During the year 2023-24, the State Government incurred an expenditure of 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
3
Chapter I: Introduction 
3 
₹13,590.11 crore2 against the budget provision of ₹15,482.96 crore 3 under Social,  
Economic and General Sectors.  Sector-wise budget estimates and expenditure are 
depicted in Charts 1.1 and 1.2.  
Source: Appropriation Accounts, 2023-24 
This Report, inter alia, contains four Performance Audits v i z ., “Jal Jeevan Mission in 
Nagaland”, “Implementation of Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) 
Scheme in Nagaland”, “Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme in Nagaland” and “Functioning of Regional 
Transport Offices/District Transport Offices in Nagaland”. The Compliance Audit 
consists of one Subject Specific Compliance Audit v i z . “Department’s Oversight on 
GST Payments and Return filing (Phase II) in Nagaland” and major findings of audit 
from test check of the transactions of 323 units 4  involving an expenditure of 
₹18,087.35 crore 5  under Social, Economic and General Sectors. The Report also 
contains an Information Technology (IT) Audit on “Treasury Computerisation in 
Nagaland”. Significant audit findings are discussed in the respective chapters. 
                                                                 
2  Social: ₹4,828.16 crore; Economic: ₹5,179.95 crore; General: ₹3,582.00 crore 
3  Social: ₹5,453.71 crore; Economic: ₹6,231.53 crore; General: ₹3,797.72 crore 
4  Social: 101 units; Economic: 141 units; General: 81 units 
5  Social: ₹4,665.55 crore; Economic: ₹8,411.28 crore; General: ₹5,010.52 crore  
₹ 5 , 4 5 3
₹ 6 , 2 3 2
₹ 3 , 7 9 8
Ch art 1.1: Sector-wise Budget 
Estimates (₹ in crore)
S o c i a l  S e c t o rEc on om ic S ect or
G e n e r a l  S e c t o r
₹ 4 , 8 2 8
₹ 5 , 1 8 0
₹3,582
Chart  1.2: Sector-wise 
expenditure (₹ in crore)
S oci a l Se ct o r E c o n o m i c  S e c t o r
Genera l  Se ct or

CHAPTER-II
SOCIAL SECTOR
(including Local Government Audit)

PART-I
Performance and Compliance Audits
on Departments under Social Sector

 
 
CHAPTER – II  
PART-I 
 
SOCIAL SECTOR 
 
2.1 Introduction 
This chapter of the Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 deals with the 
findings on audit of the State Government units under Social Sector. 
During 2023-24, total budget allocation of the State Government in the Departments 
under Social Sector was ₹5,453.69 crore against which actual expenditure incurred 
was ₹4,828.14 crore (89 per cent) . The Department-wise details of Budget 
Allocations and Expenditure incurred during 2023-24, are shown in Heatmap 2.1.1. 
H e a t m a p  2 . 1 . 1 :  D e t a i l s  o f  D e p a r t m e n t - w i s e  B u d g e t  A l l o c a t i o n s  a n d  E x p e n d i t u r e  d u r i n g  2 0 2 3 - 2 4 . 
( ₹  i n  c r o r e )  
 
Source: Appropriation Accounts, 2023-24  
 
 
CHAPTER – II  
PART-I 
 
SOCIAL SECTOR 
 
2.1 Introduction 
This chapter of the Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 deals with the 
findings on audit of the State Government units under Social Sector. 
During 2023-24, total budget allocation of the State Government in the Departments 
under Social Sector was ₹5,453.69 crore against which actual expenditure incurred 
was ₹4,828.14 crore (89 per cent) . The Department-wise details of Budget 
Allocations and Expenditure incurred during 2023-24, are shown in Heatmap 2.1.1. 
H e a t m a p  2 . 1 . 1 :  D e t a i l s  o f  D e p a r t m e n t - w i s e  B u d g e t  A l l o c a t i o n s  a n d  E x p e n d i t u r e  d u r i n g  2 0 2 3 - 2 4 . 
( ₹  i n  c r o r e )  
 
Source: Appropriation Accounts, 2023-24  


6
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
6 
 
Key Insights 
1. Overall Financial Performance 
 Total Budget: ₹5,453.69 crore 
 Total Expenditure: ₹4,828.14 crore (89 per cent utilisation) 
 Unspent Funds: ₹625.55 crore 
2. High Utilisation  
 Youth Resources & Sports  spent 116 per cent of allocation - suggests 
either supplementary grants or expenditure beyond approved limits. 
 Municipal Affairs (100 per cent ), Information & Public Relations  
(99 per cent), and Water Supply & Sanitation (98 per cent) achieved near-
full utilisation. 
 High utilisation is generally positive but over-expenditure warrants scrutiny. 
3. Low Utilisation/Underperformance 
 Employment & Craftsmen Training : 54  per cent utilisation - weakest 
performer, signalling significant implementation delays. 
 SCERT: 62 per cent utilisation - poor capital fund absorption. 
 Higher Education : 65 per cent utilisation - large unspent amount in both 
percentage and ₹ terms. 
4. Major Unspent Amounts (in ₹ terms) 
 School Education:  despite high allocation (₹2,239.87 crore) and decent 
utilisation (88 per cent), still has large unspent funds in absolute terms. 
 Higher Education  and Health & Family Welfare  each have over 
₹100 crore unspent. 
 This indicates that large departments, even with high utilisation percentages, 
can have significant leftover funds due to scale. 
5. Capital vs Revenue Trends 
 Infrastructure-heavy departments like Urban Development and Municipal 
Affairs show strong capital utilisation (>95 per cent). 
 Education-related departments (Higher Education, SCERT) lag in capital 
expenditure, suggesting project delays. 
 
2.1.1 Planning and Conduct of Audit 
Audit process starts with the assessment of risks faced by various Departments of the 
Government based on expenditure incurred, criticality/complexity of activities, level 
of delegated financial powers and assessment of overall internal controls. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
7
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
7 
 
Audit was conducted in 101 units of five Departments involving an expenditure of 
₹4,665.55 crore (including expenditure of previous years audited during the year 
during 2023-24) under the Social Sector. 
After completion of audit of each unit, Inspection Reports containing audit findings 
were issued to the Heads of Departments for taking appropriate remedial measures on 
the audit findings. The Departments were requested to furnish replies to the audit 
findings within one month of the receipt of Inspection Reports. Wherever replies were 
received, audit findings were reviewed and either settled or further action for 
compliance was advised. Important audit observations arising out of the Inspection 
Reports were processed for inclusion in the C&AG’s Audit Report, which is 
submitted to the Governor of the State under Article 151 of the Constitution of India, 
for laying before the State Legislature. 
This Chapter contains audit observations on two Performance Audits viz. “Jal Jeevan 
Mission in Nagaland” and “Implementation of Integrated Child Development 
Services Scheme in Nagaland” and two compliance audit paragraphs. 
Performance Audit 
 
PUBLIC HEALTH ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT 
 
2.2 Jal Jeevan Mission in Nagaland 
 
Profile 
Nagaland's topography is predominantly mountainous, with most villages located on 
hilltops. As a result, gravity-fed systems are the primary source of water supply across 
the State. However, in certain plain areas of Dimapur, Mokokchung, Mon, Wokha, 
and Peren districts, alternative sources such as ground water exploration are available. 
In some villages where neither gravity-fed systems nor ground water exploration are 
feasible, water is supplied through pumping. Out of the 34 villages covered in the four 
sampled districts, 15 villages sourced their water through gravity, 13 villages relied on 
groundwater exploration, 05 villages used pumping systems and 01 village depended 
on rainwater harvesting.  
As of August 2019, Nagaland reported coverage of 13,882 Functional Household Tap 
Connection (FHTC). By March 2024, against the actual target of 3,63,829 households 
a total of 3,23,616 households was reported to be provided with tap connections, 
representing an achievement of 88.95 per cent. The achievement in the four sampled 
districts was reported as 82,212 households (93.44 per cent ) against the target to 
cover 87,987 households. 
  

8
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
8 
 
Aud it Snap shot  
 
 
Why did we do this audit? 
 Efficient institutional framework is in place 
for planning, implementation and post 
o p e r a t i o n a l  m a n a g e m e n t  o f  t h e  s c h e m e s ; 
 F i n a n c i a l  r e s o u r c e s  h a v e  b e e n  e m p l o y e d  i n  
a n  e c o n o m i c  a n d  e f f i c i e n t  m a n n e r ;   
 Assets created through the programme are 
s u s t a i n a b l e  f o r  t h e  n e x t  t w o  t o  t h r e e  d e c a d e s  
and do not compromise water security for 
f u t u r e  g e n e r a t i o n s ;  a n d 
 Programme objectives (output and 
outcomes) have been achieved successfully. 
 
What did we find? 
 The Village Action Plans were prepared without 
conducting basic surveys. 
 T h e  s u p p l y  o r d e r  f o r  m a t e r i a l s  w a s  a w a r d e d  
without inviting tenders in contravention of 
f i n a n c i a l  r u l e s  a n d  s c h e m e  g u i d e l i n e s .  
 The Department reported transportation of pipes 
by engaging non-existent vehicles or vehicles 
w h i c h  d o  n o t  h a v e  t h e  d e s i g n  c a p a c i t y  t o  
t r a n s p o r t  t h e  m a t e r i a l s .   
 D i s c r e p a n c i e s  i n  t a r g e t  a n d  a c h i e v e m e n t  i n  
providing FHTCs in 34 test-checked villages. 
 W e a k  M o n i t o r i n g  s y s t e m . 
 
T a r g e t e d  F H T C- 3,63,829 
 
A c h i e v e m e n t  o f  F H T C- 3,23,616 
 
T o t a l  e x p e n d i t u r e  i n c u r r e d :  ₹ 1 , 3 7 6 . 3 3  c r o r e   
o u t  o f  ₹ 1 , 4 1 6 . 0 8 
 
What do we recommend? 
 Ensure mandatory baseline surveys and assess 
t h e  n e e d s  p r i o r  t o  p r e p a r a t i o n  o f  V i l l a g e  A c t i o n  
P l a n s .  
 Discontinue nomination-based procurement and 
a d o p t  c e n t r a l i s e d  e - t e n d e r i n g  i n  l i n e  w i t h  J J M  
Guidelines and GFR provisions. 
 Mandate use of Hydro-Geo-Morphological 
(H GM) maps and smart sensors f or  better site 
s e l e c t i o n ,  s o u r c e  s u s t a i n a b i l i t y ,  a n d  d a i l y  
monitoring of water drawal and distribution. 
 Conduct annual independent evaluation of 
scheme performance with feedback loops into 
future planning. 
A  P e r f o r m a n c e  A u d i t  o n  J a l  J e e v a n  M i s s i o n  i n  N a g a l a n d  w a s  c a r r i e d  o u t  c o v e r i n g  t h e  
period from 2019-2024. The Performance Audit brought out the following significant 
findings. 
Highlights 
 The Village Action Plans were prepared without conducting baseline surveys 
and none of the 34 test-checked habitations prepared VAPs incorporating 
information such as the history of water supply schemes implemented in the 
village, the infrastructure created and an assessment of the existing water 
supply infrastructure by the DWSM. 
Paragraph 2.2.8.1 
 The number of Functional Household Tap Connections initially proposed for 
34 villages in the four test-checked districts decreased from 16,400 to 16,288 
in the finalised DPRs and were further reduced to 14,835 as reported in 
IMIS. 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
9 
 
Paragraph 2.2.8.2 
 VAPs were prepared without adequate participatory appraisal or demand 
assessment, contrary to the decentralised, demand-driven approach mandated 
in the JJM Guidelines. 
Paragraph 2.2.8.4 
 In four out of the five PIUs, IoT and GIS software were neither planned nor 
provided and that the real-time dashboard was also not utilised for planning 
and monitoring household tap connections. 
Paragraph 2.2.8.5 
 Three out of the five PIUs did not use any HGM Maps even though 
40 groundwater-based schemes were planned for implementation by these 
three PIUs. 
Paragraph 2.2.8.6 
 An expenditure of ₹23.05 lakh was incurred on the construction of a deep 
tube well, iron removal plant and an RCC tank. When attempts were made to 
connect individual households from the tube wells, no water could be drawn. 
Both the tube well and the submersible pump remained idle and 
non-functional. 
Paragraph 2.2.8.6 
 Delays in release of Central as well as State share by GoN to the Department 
ranging between 39 and 107 days (Central Share) and 10 and 255 days 
(State Share). 
Paragraph 2.2.9.1 
 The supply order for materials was awarded without inviting tenders, 
resulting in an avoidable extra expenditure of ₹288.12 crore and a 
corresponding financial benefit to the supplier. 
Paragraph 2.2.10.1 
 The Department reported transportation of 13,67,421 metres of GMS pipes 
and 17 GPS tanks involving an amount of ₹50.97 crore by engaging 
31 non-existent vehicles and 28 other vehicles which did not have the design 
capacity to transport the materials. 
Paragraph 2.2.10.3 
 There was shortfall ranging from 64 to 95 per cent in conducting laboratory 
tests over the last five years. The district laboratories of the four test-checked 
districts did not conduct tests for sulphate, total arsenic, fluoride, nitrate, 
total coliform bacteria, and E. coli or thermo tolerant coliform bacteria. 
While out of the target of 71,448 tests of water sources in the four test-
checked districts through usage of FTKs, only 14,231 tests (19.92 per cent) 
were conducted. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
9
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
9 
 
Paragraph 2.2.8.2 
 VAPs were prepared without adequate participatory appraisal or demand 
assessment, contrary to the decentralised, demand-driven approach mandated 
in the JJM Guidelines. 
Paragraph 2.2.8.4 
 In four out of the five PIUs, IoT and GIS software were neither planned nor 
provided and that the real-time dashboard was also not utilised for planning 
and monitoring household tap connections. 
Paragraph 2.2.8.5 
 Three out of the five PIUs did not use any HGM Maps even though 
40 groundwater-based schemes were planned for implementation by these 
three PIUs. 
Paragraph 2.2.8.6 
 An expenditure of ₹23.05 lakh was incurred on the construction of a deep 
tube well, iron removal plant and an RCC tank. When attempts were made to 
connect individual households from the tube wells, no water could be drawn. 
Both the tube well and the submersible pump remained idle and 
non-functional. 
Paragraph 2.2.8.6 
 Delays in release of Central as well as State share by GoN to the Department 
ranging between 39 and 107 days (Central Share) and 10 and 255 days 
(State Share). 
Paragraph 2.2.9.1 
 The supply order for materials was awarded without inviting tenders, 
resulting in an avoidable extra expenditure of ₹288.12 crore and a 
corresponding financial benefit to the supplier. 
Paragraph 2.2.10.1 
 The Department reported transportation of 13,67,421 metres of GMS pipes 
and 17 GPS tanks involving an amount of ₹50.97 crore by engaging 
31 non-existent vehicles and 28 other vehicles which did not have the design 
capacity to transport the materials. 
Paragraph 2.2.10.3 
 There was shortfall ranging from 64 to 95 per cent in conducting laboratory 
tests over the last five years. The district laboratories of the four test-checked 
districts did not conduct tests for sulphate, total arsenic, fluoride, nitrate, 
total coliform bacteria, and E. coli or thermo tolerant coliform bacteria. 
While out of the target of 71,448 tests of water sources in the four test-
checked districts through usage of FTKs, only 14,231 tests (19.92 per cent) 
were conducted. 
Chapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
10 
 
Paragraph 2.2.10.8 
 Out of 34 test-checked WATSAN Committees, 30 had not opened any bank 
accounts for the deposit of community contributions towards the required 
five per cent of the capital cost. 
Paragraph 2.2.10.12 
 Against the target to provide 16,288  FHTCs in 34 test-checked villages, the 
Department provided 8,251 FHTCs (50.66 per cent) depriving 
5,851 households of the benefit of availing the scheme. The expenditure of 
₹21.57 crore against 5,851 households proved fictitious as the services were 
n o t  p r o v i d e d . 
Paragraph 2.2.11.1 
 10 villages out of 34 test-checked villages across the four test-checked 
districts, had conducted social audits. 
Paragraph 2.2.11.4 
2.2.1 Introduction 
The Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM), a flagship scheme launched by the Prime Minister of 
India on 15 August 2019, aimed to provide potable water to rural areas through piped 
water supply. The Mission’s goal was to ensure that by the end of 2024, each of the 
19 crore rural households in the country received piped water supply through FHTCs. 
FHTCs were required to meet three key features/conditions: 
 provide water in adequate quantity, at least 55 litres per capita per day (lpcd); 
 ensure the water meets prescribed quality standards, of BIS:10500; and  
 guarantee a regular supply, meaning continuous availability over the long 
t e r m .  
2.2.2 Organisational set-up  
The organisational set up for implementation of JJM in the State is shown in  
C h a r t  2 . 2 . 1 .  
Chart 2.2.1: Organogram of the Department 
 

10
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social Sector
Chapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
10 
 
Paragraph 2.2.10.8 
 Out of 34 test-checked WATSAN Committees, 30 had not opened any bank 
accounts for the deposit of community contributions towards the required 
five per cent of the capital cost. 
Paragraph 2.2.10.12 
 Against the target to provide 16,288  FHTCs in 34 test-checked villages, the 
Department provided 8,251 FHTCs (50.66 per cent) depriving 
5,851 households of the benefit of availing the scheme. The expenditure of 
₹21.57 crore against 5,851 households proved fictitious as the services were 
n o t  p r o v i d e d . 
Paragraph 2.2.11.1 
 10 villages out of 34 test-checked villages across the four test-checked 
districts, had conducted social audits. 
Paragraph 2.2.11.4 
2.2.1 Introduction 
The Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM), a flagship scheme launched by the Prime Minister of 
India on 15 August 2019, aimed to provide potable water to rural areas through piped 
water supply. The Mission’s goal was to ensure that by the end of 2024, each of the 
19 crore rural households in the country received piped water supply through FHTCs. 
FHTCs were required to meet three key features/conditions: 
 provide water in adequate quantity, at least 55 litres per capita per day (lpcd); 
 ensure the water meets prescribed quality standards, of BIS:10500; and  
 guarantee a regular supply, meaning continuous availability over the long 
t e r m .  
2.2.2 Organisational set-up  
The organisational set up for implementation of JJM in the State is shown in  
C h a r t  2 . 2 . 1 .  
Chart 2.2.1: Organogram of the Department 
 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
11 
 
Source: Departmental records 
2.2.2.1 Institutional Mechanism  
Paragraph 1 of the JJM Operational Guidelines, 2019 stipulates that proper planning, 
strategising and implementing water supply systems including development of proper 
institutional mechanism at all levels is essential for JJM implementation. The JJM is a 
time bound programme with the objective to provide FHTCs to all Households (HHs) 
within March 2024. To achieve this objective, a robust institutional mechanism and 
proper detailed planning is essential. Institutional mechanism existing in the State for 
implementation of JJM is discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2.2.2.2 State Water and Sanitation Mission  
As per Paragraph 5.2 of the JJM Operational Guidelines, 2019, each State is required 
to constitute a State Water and Sanitation Mission (SWSM) which is the State level 
institution responsible for implementation of JJM in the State. The SWSM is to be 
headed by the Chief Secretary with the Principal Secretary/Secretary in-charge of 
PHE&WS Department as Mission Director in the State.  The SWSM shall comprise 
of two committees viz. Apex Committee and Executive Committee.  
The Government of Nagaland (GoN) constituted the SWSM in January 2020 under 
the JJM. The SWSM is headed by the Chief Secretary to the GoN as Chairman, with 
the Principal Secretary, Public Health Engineering Department (PHED) as the 
Mission Director, the Chief Engineer, PHED as Member Secretary and twelve 1 
officials from allied Departments as Members. The main function of the SWSM is to 
provide operational and policy guidance to the implementing Department (PHED). 
2.2.2.3 State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee 
Paragraph 5.2 of the JJM Operational Guidelines, 2019 provides for setting up of a 
State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee (SLSSC) for approval of schemes.  
The GoN constituted the SLSSC under JJM in January 2019, with the Chief Secretary 
as Chairperson, the Chief Engineer, PHED as Member Secretary and ten 2 officials 
from allied Departments as Members.  The main function of the SLSSC is to approve 
the Annual Action Plan of JJM and to review its implementation. 
2.2.2.4 District Water and Sanitation Mission 
Paragraph 5.3 of the JJM Operational Guidelines, 2019 stipulates that, at the district 
level, the District Water and Sanitation Mission (DWSM) is responsible for overall 
implementation of JJM. The DWSM will be headed by the Deputy Commissioner/ 
                                                
1 Development Commissioner, Finance Secretary, AHOD-School Education, AHOD-Health & 
Family Welfare, AHOD-Rural Development, AHOD-Water Resources, AHOD-Land Resources, 
AHOD-Soil & Water Conservation, AHOD-Social Welfare, Director-WSSO (PHED), Shri Achu 
Chang- Dolen Thangjam Society, Tuensang and Shri Y. Nuklu Phom-Lemsachenlok, 
Yaongyimchen, Longleng. 
2 Representative from the Department of School Education, Finance Department, Planning and 
Coordination, Health & Family Welfare, Rural Development, Water Resources, Soil & Water 
Conservation, Social Welfare, Director-WSSO (PHED) and Superintending Engineers, M&I.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
11
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
11 
 
Source: Departmental records 
2.2.2.1 Institutional Mechanism  
Paragraph 1 of the JJM Operational Guidelines, 2019 stipulates that proper planning, 
strategising and implementing water supply systems including development of proper 
institutional mechanism at all levels is essential for JJM implementation. The JJM is a 
time bound programme with the objective to provide FHTCs to all Households (HHs) 
within March 2024. To achieve this objective, a robust institutional mechanism and 
proper detailed planning is essential. Institutional mechanism existing in the State for 
implementation of JJM is discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2.2.2.2 State Water and Sanitation Mission  
As per Paragraph 5.2 of the JJM Operational Guidelines, 2019, each State is required 
to constitute a State Water and Sanitation Mission (SWSM) which is the State level 
institution responsible for implementation of JJM in the State. The SWSM is to be 
headed by the Chief Secretary with the Principal Secretary/Secretary in-charge of 
PHE&WS Department as Mission Director in the State.  The SWSM shall comprise 
of two committees viz. Apex Committee and Executive Committee.  
The Government of Nagaland (GoN) constituted the SWSM in January 2020 under 
the JJM. The SWSM is headed by the Chief Secretary to the GoN as Chairman, with 
the Principal Secretary, Public Health Engineering Department (PHED) as the 
Mission Director, the Chief Engineer, PHED as Member Secretary and twelve 1 
officials from allied Departments as Members. The main function of the SWSM is to 
provide operational and policy guidance to the implementing Department (PHED). 
2.2.2.3 State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee 
Paragraph 5.2 of the JJM Operational Guidelines, 2019 provides for setting up of a 
State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee (SLSSC) for approval of schemes.  
The GoN constituted the SLSSC under JJM in January 2019, with the Chief Secretary 
as Chairperson, the Chief Engineer, PHED as Member Secretary and ten 2 officials 
from allied Departments as Members.  The main function of the SLSSC is to approve 
the Annual Action Plan of JJM and to review its implementation. 
2.2.2.4 District Water and Sanitation Mission 
Paragraph 5.3 of the JJM Operational Guidelines, 2019 stipulates that, at the district 
level, the District Water and Sanitation Mission (DWSM) is responsible for overall 
implementation of JJM. The DWSM will be headed by the Deputy Commissioner/ 
                                                
1 Development Commissioner, Finance Secretary, AHOD-School Education, AHOD-Health & 
Family Welfare, AHOD-Rural Development, AHOD-Water Resources, AHOD-Land Resources, 
AHOD-Soil & Water Conservation, AHOD-Social Welfare, Director-WSSO (PHED), Shri Achu 
Chang- Dolen Thangjam Society, Tuensang and Shri Y. Nuklu Phom-Lemsachenlok, 
Yaongyimchen, Longleng. 
2 Representative from the Department of School Education, Finance Department, Planning and 
Coordination, Health & Family Welfare, Rural Development, Water Resources, Soil & Water 
Conservation, Social Welfare, Director-WSSO (PHED) and Superintending Engineers, M&I.  

12
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
12 
 
District Collector (DC) as Chairman, with the Executive Engineer (EE), PHE &WS 
division, as Member Secretary.  
Audit observed that the DWSM was not constituted in all the test-checked four 
districts of the State. It was, however, observed that in February 2020, the PHED had 
requested the Principal Secretary and Home Commissioner, Nagaland to revamp the 
DWSMs in the districts, with the DC as the head, the EE, PHED as Member Secretary 
and nine3 officials from allied Departments as Members, to facilitate the roll out the 
JJM Plan 2019-20. 
2.2.2.5 Village Water and Sanitation Committees 
Paragraph 5.4 of the JJM Operational Guidelines, 2019 stipulates that the community 
will play a lead role in planning, implementation, management, Operation and 
Maintenance (O&M) of in-village water supply infrastructure thereby leading to 
FHTCs to every rural household. The willingness of community, reflected through 
Gram Sabha resolution and community contribution, will be the foremost criterion for 
planning of water supply system in villages. Gram Sabha  will decide whether GP or 
its subcommittee i.e. VWSC, will carry out the responsibilities of water supply 
management in the village. VWSC may be headed by Sarpanch/Up-Sarpanch/GP 
member/traditional village head/senior village leader as the Gram Sabha may decide.  
Audit observed that prior to the JJM implementation, the State Government through 
the Communitisation Rules, 2003 constituted the Water and Sanitation (WATSAN) 
Committee in 2006 to participate in drinking water supply and sanitation activities. 
These WATSAN Committees functioned as VWSCs and no separate notification was 
issued for creation of VWSCs in the State. 
2.2.3 Audit Objectives 
The Audit objectives of the Performance Audit were to assess whether:  
 Efficient institutional framework is in place for planning, implementation 
and post operational management of the schemes; 
 Financial resources have been employed in an economic and efficient 
manner; 
 Assets created through the programme are sustainable for the next two to 
three decades and do not compromise water security for future generations; 
and 
 Programme objectives (output and outcomes) have been achieved 
successfully. 
2.2.4 Audit Criteria 
The Audit findings were benchmarked against the following criteria: 
                                                
3 District Planning Officer, Project Director- Rural Development, Divisional Forest Officer, District 
Medical Officer, District Education Officer, Executive Engineer-Water Resources, Project Officer-
Land Resources, District Agriculture/Soil &Water Conservation Officer and District Information 
Public Relation Officer. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
13
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
13 
 
 Operational Guidelines for Implementation of JJM; 
 Margdarshika for Gram Panchayat & VWSC to Provide Safe Drinking Water 
in Rural Households; 
 Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance Framework; 
 SDG obligations and Standard Operating Procedure for WASH standards; 
 General Financial Rules (GFR), 2017;  
 Orders issued by the State Government facilitating implementation of JJM; 
 Provisions of State Specific Procurement Rules; and 
 Orders issued by the State Government pertaining to devolution of powers as 
envisaged in the 73rd Amendment Act of the Constitution of India. 
2.2.5 Audit Scope and Methodology 
In Nagaland, the JJM is implemented by the PHED. However, in terms of the 
recommendations of the Fifteenth Finance Commission (XV FC), funds were 
provided to the Rural Development (RD) Department for implementation of the JJM 
in 116 villages. The Performance Audit therefore involved examination of records for 
the period 2019-20 to 2023-24 of the Chief Engineer, PHED-cum-Member Secretary, 
SLSSC, Project Implementing Units (PIUs), test-checked DWSMs, and various 
villages and VWSCs. A beneficiary survey (493) was also conducted to assess the 
satisfaction level of the beneficiaries. An Entry Conference was held (May 2024)  with 
the Principal Secretary, PHED-cum-Mission Director, SWSM and other 
representatives from the PHED and RD Department wherein the audit objectives, 
criteria and scope were discussed. The audit findings and recommendations were 
discussed with the Principal Secretary of the PHED during the Exit Conference 
(November 2024). Replies of the Departments concerned and of the Government are 
suitably incorporated in the Report. 
2.2.6 Audit Sampling 
Four4 out of 11 districts were selected through stratified random sampling using the 
IDEA software. From these four selected districts, nine 5 out of 21 blocks and 34 out 
of 577 habitations/villages were selected through simple random sampling using the 
IDEA software. The sampled blocks and habitations included six blocks and six 
habitations where the scheme was implemented by the RD Department.  
2.2.7 Acknowledgement  
The Office of the Accountant General (Audit), Nagaland acknowledges the co-
operation extended by the PHED, Nagaland in providing necessary information and 
records during audit. 
 
 
                                                
4  Longleng, Dimapur, Wokha and Kiphire 
5 Sampled Blocks -  Longleng District : Longleng and Sakshi ; Dimapur District : Chumukedima, 
Niuland and Medziphema ; Wokha District: Sanis, and Wokha  and Kiphire District : Kiphire and 
Pungro 

14
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
14 
 
Audit Findings 
 
2.2.8 Audit Objective: Whether efficient institutional framework is in place for 
planning, implementation and post operational 
management of the schemes? 
 
2.2.8.1 Preparation of Village Action Plans without conducting baseline 
surveys 
Paragraph 2.3 of the Margdarshika for Gram Panchayat (GP) & Village Water & 
Sanitation Committee (VWSC) stated that based on the basic surveys, resource 
mapping and the felt needs of the rural community, the DWSM, PHED and 
Implementation Support Agencies (ISA) would assist the GP or its sub-committee i.e., 
VWSC in preparing a Village Action Plan (VAP). Further, Paragraph 3.6.1 of the JJM 
Operational Guidelines stated that the VAP would include: 
 History of water supply/availability in the village; 
 Current availability of water in water source (yield measured) and its 
long-term sustainability; 
 Need assessment of water required in the village and the available resources; 
 Number of existing FHTCs and number of FHTCs yet to be provided in all 
habitations; and 
 Ensuring availability of land in favour of GP and/or its sub-committee, i.e., 
VWSC/Paani Samiti/User Group for construction of in-village water supply 
infrastructure. 
The VAP will be approved in the Gram Sabha, when 80 per cent  of the village 
community present in the meeting agrees to the prepared plan. The VAP will then be 
submitted to the DWSM for further action. Technical approval will be accorded by 
the PHED/RWS Department/Board. The VAP should also contain detailed 
information such as history of completed and ongoing rural water supply, 
infrastructure created under erstwhile National Rural Drinking Water Programme 
(NRDWP) for retrofitting compliant with JJM. 
Audit observed that in violation of the scheme guidelines, none of the PIUs conducted 
a baseline survey to assess the actual number of households or determine the number 
of households to be covered. Failure to conduct baseline surveys prior to preparing the 
VAPs undermined the core planning principles of the JJM. Without reliable 
household-level data, the VAPs could not accurately assess water supply needs, 
existing infrastructure, or sustainability concerns - leading to a high risk of under-or 
over-provisioning, inefficient use of funds, and unsustainable implementation, as 
discussed under Paragraph 2.2.8.2. 
During the period, 558 6 VAPs were prepared and included in DAPs. Scrutiny of the 
VAPs revealed the following: 
                                                
6  Kiphire:111, Longleng: 52, Wokha: 155 and Dimapur: 240  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
15
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
15 
 
(i) Critical information in the VAP 
A u d i t  o b s e r v e d  t h a t  n o n e  o f  t h e  3 4  t e s t - c h e c k e d  h a b i t a t i o n s  p r e p a r e d  V A P s  t h a t  
i n c o r p o r a t e d  i n f o r m a t i o n  s u c h  a s  t h e  h i s t o r y  o f  w a t e r  s u p p l y  s c h e m e s  i m p l e m e n t e d  i n  
t h e  v i l l a g e ,  t h e  i n f r a s t r u c t u r e  c r e a t e d  a n d  a n  a s s e s s m e n t  o f  t h e  e x i s t i n g  w a t e r  s u p p l y  
infrastructure by the DWSM. Audit further observed that 32 out of the 34 habitations 
had existing water supply infrastructure such as diversion weir, sedimentation tank, 
de-silting tank, main reservoir and slow sand filter.  
Audit observed that in none of the 34 habitations tested, the VAPs included critical 
planning data such as history of earlier water supply schemes, existing infrastructure, 
or an assessment of their functionality: contravening the JJM Operational Guidelines 
(Paragraph 3.6.1). Despite the presence of infrastructure in 32 habitations, the 
D e t a i l e d  P r o j e c t  R e p o r t s  ( D P R s )  w e r e  p r e p a r e d  w i t h o u t  r e f e r e n c e  t o  t h e s e  a s s e t s ,  
leading to the risk of redundancy and avoidable expenditure. Joint Physical 
Verification (JPV) confirmed that assets created under previous programmes (e . g . , 
NRDWP) were lying idle and unused. Few instances of existing infrastructure are 
shown in the Photograph-2.2.1.  
Photograph-2.2.1 
A s s e t s  c r e a t e d  u n d e r  e r s t w h i l e  
NRDWP lying idle at Sukhato 
V i l l a g e  u n d e r  D i m a p u r  D i s t r i c t  
( P h o t o g r a p h  t a k e n  o n  
0 8  O c t o b e r  2 0 2 4 )  
Existing pond created in 2014 not 
considered under JJM at Niroyo 
village (Wokha District) (Photograph 
taken on 01 August 2024) 
A s s e t s  c r e a t e d  u n d e r  e r s t w h i l e  
NRDWP lying idle at Shaki 
V i l l a g e  u n d e r  W o k h a  D i s t r i c t  
(Photograph taken on 
08 February 2024) 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that the community prepared 
the VAPs with technical support from the Department and that it had considered the 
existing infrastructure while preparing the DPR in order to reduce project costs. 
The State Government contended that the VAPs were community-prepared with 
technical support and that existing infrastructure was considered in DPRs to reduce 
costs. However, this reply is not acceptable. As evident from the Photograph-2.2.1 
and JPV conducted by Audit, the assets such as reservoirs and treatment tanks were 
left idle, and no documentary evidence was available to demonstrate their inclusion in 
technical or financial planning. This contradicts the Government’s claim and indicates 
a  s y s t e m i c  f a i l u r e  t o  i n t e g r a t e  p a s t  i n v e s t m e n t s  i n t o  n e w  s c h e m e  p l a n n i n g ,  
undermining both cost-efficiency and sustainability. 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
15 
 
(i) Critical information in the VAP 
A u d i t  o b s e r v e d  t h a t  n o n e  o f  t h e  3 4  t e s t - c h e c k e d  h a b i t a t i o n s  p r e p a r e d  V A P s  t h a t  
i n c o r p o r a t e d  i n f o r m a t i o n  s u c h  a s  t h e  h i s t o r y  o f  w a t e r  s u p p l y  s c h e m e s  i m p l e m e n t e d  i n  
t h e  v i l l a g e ,  t h e  i n f r a s t r u c t u r e  c r e a t e d  a n d  a n  a s s e s s m e n t  o f  t h e  e x i s t i n g  w a t e r  s u p p l y  
infrastructure by the DWSM. Audit further observed that 32 out of the 34 habitations 
had existing water supply infrastructure such as diversion weir, sedimentation tank, 
de-silting tank, main reservoir and slow sand filter.  
Audit observed that in none of the 34 habitations tested, the VAPs included critical 
planning data such as history of earlier water supply schemes, existing infrastructure, 
or an assessment of their functionality: contravening the JJM Operational Guidelines 
(Paragraph 3.6.1). Despite the presence of infrastructure in 32 habitations, the 
D e t a i l e d  P r o j e c t  R e p o r t s  ( D P R s )  w e r e  p r e p a r e d  w i t h o u t  r e f e r e n c e  t o  t h e s e  a s s e t s ,  
leading to the risk of redundancy and avoidable expenditure. Joint Physical 
Verification (JPV) confirmed that assets created under previous programmes (e . g . , 
NRDWP) were lying idle and unused. Few instances of existing infrastructure are 
shown in the Photograph-2.2.1.  
Photograph-2.2.1 
A s s e t s  c r e a t e d  u n d e r  e r s t w h i l e  
NRDWP lying idle at Sukhato 
V i l l a g e  u n d e r  D i m a p u r  D i s t r i c t  
( P h o t o g r a p h  t a k e n  o n  
0 8  O c t o b e r  2 0 2 4 )  
Existing pond created in 2014 not 
considered under JJM at Niroyo 
village (Wokha District) (Photograph 
taken on 01 August 2024) 
A s s e t s  c r e a t e d  u n d e r  e r s t w h i l e  
NRDWP lying idle at Shaki 
V i l l a g e  u n d e r  W o k h a  D i s t r i c t  
(Photograph taken on 
08 February 2024) 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that the community prepared 
the VAPs with technical support from the Department and that it had considered the 
existing infrastructure while preparing the DPR in order to reduce project costs. 
The State Government contended that the VAPs were community-prepared with 
technical support and that existing infrastructure was considered in DPRs to reduce 
costs. However, this reply is not acceptable. As evident from the Photograph-2.2.1 
and JPV conducted by Audit, the assets such as reservoirs and treatment tanks were 
left idle, and no documentary evidence was available to demonstrate their inclusion in 
technical or financial planning. This contradicts the Government’s claim and indicates 
a  s y s t e m i c  f a i l u r e  t o  i n t e g r a t e  p a s t  i n v e s t m e n t s  i n t o  n e w  s c h e m e  p l a n n i n g ,  
undermining both cost-efficiency and sustainability. 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
15 
 
(i) Critical information in the VAP 
A u d i t  o b s e r v e d  t h a t  n o n e  o f  t h e  3 4  t e s t - c h e c k e d  h a b i t a t i o n s  p r e p a r e d  V A P s  t h a t  
i n c o r p o r a t e d  i n f o r m a t i o n  s u c h  a s  t h e  h i s t o r y  o f  w a t e r  s u p p l y  s c h e m e s  i m p l e m e n t e d  i n  
t h e  v i l l a g e ,  t h e  i n f r a s t r u c t u r e  c r e a t e d  a n d  a n  a s s e s s m e n t  o f  t h e  e x i s t i n g  w a t e r  s u p p l y  
infrastructure by the DWSM. Audit further observed that 32 out of the 34 habitations 
had existing water supply infrastructure such as diversion weir, sedimentation tank, 
de-silting tank, main reservoir and slow sand filter.  
Audit observed that in none of the 34 habitations tested, the VAPs included critical 
planning data such as history of earlier water supply schemes, existing infrastructure, 
or an assessment of their functionality: contravening the JJM Operational Guidelines 
(Paragraph 3.6.1). Despite the presence of infrastructure in 32 habitations, the 
D e t a i l e d  P r o j e c t  R e p o r t s  ( D P R s )  w e r e  p r e p a r e d  w i t h o u t  r e f e r e n c e  t o  t h e s e  a s s e t s ,  
leading to the risk of redundancy and avoidable expenditure. Joint Physical 
Verification (JPV) confirmed that assets created under previous programmes (e . g . , 
NRDWP) were lying idle and unused. Few instances of existing infrastructure are 
shown in the Photograph-2.2.1.  
Photograph-2.2.1 
A s s e t s  c r e a t e d  u n d e r  e r s t w h i l e  
NRDWP lying idle at Sukhato 
V i l l a g e  u n d e r  D i m a p u r  D i s t r i c t  
( P h o t o g r a p h  t a k e n  o n  
0 8  O c t o b e r  2 0 2 4 )  
Existing pond created in 2014 not 
considered under JJM at Niroyo 
village (Wokha District) (Photograph 
taken on 01 August 2024) 
A s s e t s  c r e a t e d  u n d e r  e r s t w h i l e  
NRDWP lying idle at Shaki 
V i l l a g e  u n d e r  W o k h a  D i s t r i c t  
(Photograph taken on 
08 February 2024) 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that the community prepared 
the VAPs with technical support from the Department and that it had considered the 
existing infrastructure while preparing the DPR in order to reduce project costs. 
The State Government contended that the VAPs were community-prepared with 
technical support and that existing infrastructure was considered in DPRs to reduce 
costs. However, this reply is not acceptable. As evident from the Photograph-2.2.1 
and JPV conducted by Audit, the assets such as reservoirs and treatment tanks were 
left idle, and no documentary evidence was available to demonstrate their inclusion in 
technical or financial planning. This contradicts the Government’s claim and indicates 
a  s y s t e m i c  f a i l u r e  t o  i n t e g r a t e  p a s t  i n v e s t m e n t s  i n t o  n e w  s c h e m e  p l a n n i n g ,  
undermining both cost-efficiency and sustainability. 


16
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
16 
 
(ii) Inflated reporting of households/beneficiaries 
Audit noted that in the four test-checked districts, the VAPs prepared during 
January-June 2020 projected a rural population of 6,19,986, compared to 4,12,669 
recorded in the 2011 Census - an increase of 50.24 per cent over nine years. This level 
of population growth appears significantly higher than expected, particularly in the 
context of Nagaland recording a negative decadal population growth rate 
(-0.47 per cent) from 2001 to 2011. The abnormal projection raises concern about the 
reliability of the planning data and suggests that the absence of updated baseline 
surveys may have led to overestimation of beneficiaries, affecting the integrity of 
project costing and fund allocation under JJM. 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that population and 
household projections in the VAPs were based on available Census data and that the 
village authority inputs and decadal growth rate was carefully analysed using methods 
such as arithmetical progression, geometric increase and incremental increase 
methods to ensure realistic projections and to prevent any overestimation in future 
fund requisition. However, this reply does not sufficiently address the anomaly of a 
50 per cent  increase in a State with a historically declining population trend. 
Moreover, the failure to conduct household-level baseline surveys undermines the 
accuracy of these projections. Without empirical validation, such estimates risk 
inflating scheme costs and misrepresenting service coverage needs. 
2.2.8.2 Authenticity of Data of Census coded revenue villages 
Paragraph 3.6.1 of the JJM Operational Guidelines states that the DWSM will be 
responsible for preparation and finalisation of the District Action Plan (DAP). The 
DAP would include strategic plan for FHTC to all rural households by 2024 and the 
timeline for all the activities identified for FHTCs coverage. Paragraph 3.6.1 also 
specifies that the DAP should be approved by the Mission Director of the SWSM. 
Audit observed discrepancies between the numbers of FHTCs projected to be 
provided as per VAP, IMIS and the records of the District Administration (DA) 
showing the tax paying households/revenue households7 as shown in Table 2.2.1. 
Table 2.2.1: Discrepancies in records as per VAP, DPR, DA records 
Source: Departmental records 
                                                
7  A “revenue household” is a family unit recognised in the official village records used for taxation, 
landholding, census, and administrative purposes. The primary source is the village revenue register 
or “household register” maintained by the revenue department. 
District 
No. of villages 
considered from 
the test checked 
village 
No. of FHTCs 
required as per VAP 
No. of 
FHTCs 
as per 
DPR 
No. of 
FHTCs 
projection 
in IMIS 
No. of household 
as per DA records 
Kiphire 5 2,352 2,321 2,316 2,835 
Longleng 8 4,406 4,234 2,754 4,737 
Dimapur 15 6,827 6,929 6,963 7,931 
Wokha 6 2,815 2,804 2,802 3,193 
Total 16,400 16,288 14,835 18,696 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
17
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
17 
 
From Table 2.2.1, it can be seen that the FHTCs projected in the VAPs for the four 
test-checked districts was 16,400, the number of FHTCs projected in the DPR was 
16,288 and the number of households obtained from the four DA was 18,696.  
It was further observed from the IMIS that the FHTCs projected was 14,835. Audit 
observed that the reason for these discrepancies was due to non-conduct of basic 
survey to assess the actual number of households and lack of coordination between 
the PIUs and the DWSM. Audit further observed that in two 8 out of the four test- 
checked districts, the DAPs prepared by the PIUs were not approved by the DWSM 
headed by the Deputy Commissioner 9 of the districts thereby contravening Paragraph 
3.6.1 of the scheme guidelines. Due to these inconsistent projections, Audit was 
unable to establish the actual number of FHTCs required and assess the actual 
achievement of the target. 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that the variations in the 
number of FHTCs was primarily due to data source differences and the evolving 
nature of household records. It was also stated that the DAPs were developed based 
on the VAP data and approved by the Deputy Commissioners of the districts. 
The reply is not acceptable as none of the four selected PIUs conducted baseline 
surveys to verify the actual number of households but instead relied solely on the 
VAPs prepared by the village authorities. Moreover, two of the DAPs were not 
approved by the respective Deputy Commissioners. 
2.2.8.3 Implementation in Urban Local Bodies 
Chapter 1 of the JJM Operational Guidelines states that the scheme was launched with 
the aim of providing FHTCs to every rural household by 2024. The programme 
focussed on assisting, empowering and facilitating states in planning of participatory 
rural water supply strategy for ensuring potable drinking water security on a 
long-term basis to every rural household and public institution at affordable service 
delivery charges leading to improvement in living standards of rural communities. 
Audit observed that in 2019-20 and 2020-21, the SLSSC approved 14 projects at an 
estimated cost of ₹30.67 crore for 14 Urban Local Bodies 10 (ULBs) across nine 
districts. Audit also observed that as on March 2024, 13 projects were completed 
while one project was on-going, as detailed in Appendix-2.2.1 f o r  w h i c h  a n  
expenditure of ₹30.10 crore was incurred. Implementation of the JJM scheme in non-
entitled ULBs not only violated the scheme guidelines along with the irregular 
expenditure of ₹30.10 crore but also resulted in diversion of benefits to ineligible 
beneficiaries. This also raises concerns about lack of proper planning and monitoring 
by the SLSSC. 
                                                
8 Dimapur and Longleng. 
9  As per Paragraph 5.3 of the Operational Guidelines of JJM, at the district level, DWSM is 
responsible for overall implementation of JJM. DWSM will be headed by Deputy Commissioner/ 
District Collector (DC). 
10 Out of 109 villages covered in 2019-20, one was ULB while in 2020-21 out of 266 villages, 13 
were ULBs. 

18
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
18 
 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that prior to 2022-23, except 
for district headquarters, all minor towns were included under rural water supply and 
reflected in the Ministry’s IMIS database. However, following the introduction of 
AMRUT 2.0, no additional ULBs were included under JJM. 
The reply is not acceptable. While minor towns may have been historically treated as 
rural for water supply, records indicate that the 14 towns were officially notified as 
ULBs prior to the approval and execution of the projects under JJM. Inclusion of such 
areas under JJM violated the eligibility norms defined in the Operational Guidelines, 
irrespective of IMIS classification, which is not a substitute for legal notification. This 
resulted in misapplication of ₹30.10 crore and points to a failure in institutional 
oversight by the SLSSC. 
2.2.8.4 FHTCs not demand driven 
Chapter 1 of the JJM Operational Guidelines stated that the implementation of the 
Scheme would be decentralised, demand-driven and community-managed so as to 
instil a 'sense of ownership' among the local community, create an environment of 
trust and bring in transparency leading to better implementation and the long-term 
O&M of water supply systems. Paragraph 6.1 of the Guidelines further stated that 
PHED and/or the Implementation Support Agency would undertake demand 
assessment, introduce JJM using various Information, Education and Communication 
(IEC) tools and carryout participatory rural appraisal (PRA) activities to enable the 
community to decide the type of in-village water supply infrastructure/scheme. 
Interview of 493 beneficiaries (June-August 2024) in 34 test-checked villages of four 
districts, however, showed that 119 beneficiaries in Dimapur and Kiphire Districts 
had their own ring well or tube wells and therefore did not require tap water supply 
from PHED. The responses of 119 out of 493 interviewed beneficiaries in Dimapur 
and Kiphire districts indicated that they had adequate private water sources and did 
not perceive a need for FHTCs. This suggests that VAPs were prepared without 
adequate participatory appraisal or demand assessment, contrary to the decentralised, 
demand-driven approach mandated in the JJM Guidelines. This compromises 
effective community engagement and may result in underutilised infrastructure.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that the Department is undertaking more intensive IECs and regular PRA 
activities to instil a ‘sense of ownership’ among the local community. 
However, the State Government’s reply did not address the core audit finding that 
VAPs were prepared without adequate demand assessment through PRA, as required 
by the JJM Guidelines. The conduct of IEC activities alone could not be considered a 
substitute for participatory planning. The inclusion of households who did not require 
FHTCs indicated a deviation from the decentralised and demand-driven approach 
envisaged under the Scheme. This undermined community ownership and could have 
affected the long-term sustainability of the water supply infrastructure.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
19
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
19 
 
2.2.8.5 Technology in Planning & Monitoring 
Paragraph 8.4 of the JJM Operational Guidelines states that with the advent of smart 
technologies, it is possible to have real-time centralised and continuous monitoring 
through use of Internet of Things (IoT) and Geographic Information System (GIS). 
Use of data analytics will enable analysing data collected from rural areas to be used 
for various purposes by the utilities for smart management and better services which 
could be helpful for policy level interventions required for welfare measures. Further, 
a real time dashboard is to be used to constantly monitor the functionality of 
household tap connections. 
Audit observed that in four out of the five PIUs, IoT and GIS software were neither 
planned nor provided and that the real-time dashboard was also not utilised for 
planning and monitoring household tap connections. As a result, centralised and 
continuous real-time monitoring was not effectively implemented and therefore the 
intended purpose of utilising the data collected from rural areas for various objectives 
remained unfulfilled. Audit further observed that due to non-utilisation of the 
dashboard, the ability to analyse and leverage this data for informed decision-making 
and enhanced service provision was not realised. This shortfall hindered efforts to 
improve water supply management, leading to missed opportunities for more efficient 
and responsive services in rural areas.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that the Department was actively collaborating with the Department of GIS and 
Remote Sensing to prepare GIS maps for ULBs, planning to extend this mapping to 
cover all rural water infrastructure created under JJM and that IoT initiatives were 
launched in Kohima, Niuland, Peren and Phek on a pilot basis. 
While the Department acknowledges the need for GIS mapping and IoT-based 
monitoring, the reply is not acceptable. The initiative cited pertained to ULBs, which 
were outside the purview of JJM, a scheme endeavoured especially to rural 
communities. Moreover, the IoT pilot projects launched in Kohima, Niuland, Peren, 
and Phek were not related to the four PIUs covered during audit, and hence, did not 
address the core issue of non-implementation in the test checked areas. As per the 
JJM Guidelines, there was a clear requirement for proactive planning and integration 
of digital technologies from the outset. The absence of such systems had hindered 
data-driven governance and deprived the mission of critical analytics essential for 
improving service delivery and ensuring long-term sustainability. 
2.2.8.6 Wasteful expenditure on HGM Maps 
Paragraph 8.4.1 of the JJM Operational Guidelines stated that with the support from 
DDWS, the National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), Hyderabad has prepared 
Hydro-Geo-Morphological (HGM) Maps (4,898 Nos.) in 1:50,000 scale for the 
country which can be used to determine the probable location of ground water 
availability and also the locations for recharge of the aquifers. Use of these maps 

20
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
20 
 
along with geo-physical studies helps to cut down the failure of the bore wells/tube 
wells and also help in in-situ dilution of certain chemical contaminants. 
Audit observed that three 11 out of the five PIUs did not use any HGM Maps even 
though 40 groundwater-based schemes were planned for implementation by these 
three PIUs. Audit observed that non-usage of HGM maps for determining the location 
of ground water availability contributed to issues such as drying of water pumps in 
Longleng District. For example, the work “ Providing Drinking Water Supply with 
FHTC by Ground Water Exploration System in Hamlikong village under 
Longleng District ” involving an amount of ₹45.18 lakh was taken up under JJM. 
Examination of records showed that an expenditure of ₹23.05 lakh was incurred on 
the construction of a deep tube well, iron removal plant and an RCC tank. When 
attempts were made (December 2023) to connect individual households from the tube 
wells, no water could be drawn. Audit further observed that both the tube well and the 
submersible pump remained idle and non-functional. Moreover, the MIS report 
indicated that 101 out of 141 households were connected to a pipeline and marked as 
completed. In absence of the functional tube wells, the beneficiaries were dependent 
on the nearby small water spring. The  Photograph-2.2.2 depicts the idle and non-
functional tube well and submersible pump. 
Photograph-2.2.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Incomplete RCC tank and iron removal plant at 
Hamlikong village, Longleng District. 
Non-Functional Column and delivery pipes sans 
submersible pump at Hamlikong village, Longleng 
District. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that the Department will verify all the projects highlighted in the Audit 
observation and initiate remedial measures wherever feasible. 
The State Government’s acceptance of the observation and intention to verify the 
projects is noted. However, the reply does not address the core audit finding that the 
planning process failed to incorporate mandatory hydro-technical safeguards (HGM 
mapping), despite these being available nationally. The case of Hamlikong village 
illustrates the serious consequences of this lapse, where infrastructure was created at 
significant cost, yet failed to deliver water due to poorly sited tube wells. 
                                                
11  EE, Kiphire Division-1, EE, Longleng Division-13 and EE, Wokha Division-26. 


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
21
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
21 
 
Additionally, the reporting of household coverage in MIS despite non-functional 
infrastructure highlights a systemic failure in monitoring and verification protocols. 
2.2.9  Audit Objective: Whether financial resources have been employed in an 
economic and efficient manner? 
The fund allocated by Government of India for implementation of the JJM in 
Nagaland, contribution of the State Government and expenditure incurred during 
2019-2024 is shown in Table 2.2.2. 
Table 2.2.2: Statement showing fund allocation and expenditure for JJM  
Year 
Opening 
Balance 
Fund received 
during the year Misc. 
Receipt 
(Bank 
Interest 
and other 
receipts) 
Total 
available 
during 
the year 
Expenditure 
incurred during the 
year 
Interest 
remitted 
during the 
year 
Closing Balance 
G o I  s h a r e  
I n t e r e s t  
G o I  s h a r e  
G o N  s h a r e  
G o I  s h a r e  
G o N  s h a r e  
G o I  s h a r e  
( 9 0  p e r  c e n t)  
G o N  s h a r e  
( 1 0  p e r  c e n t)  
G o I  s h a r e  
I n t e r e s t  
T o t a l  
2019-20 0.00 0.00 58.4412 4.67 0.00 63.11 25.49 4.67 0.00 0.00 32.95 0.00 32.95 
2020-21 32.95 0.00 85.57 10.00 0.00 128.52 90.00 10.00 0.00 0.00 28.52 0.00 28.52 
2021-22 28.52 0.00 333.61 27.88 0.40 390.41 345.14 27.88 0.00 0.00 17.00 0.40 17.39 
2022-23 17.00 0.40 484.28 52.71 0.71 555.09 481.71 52.71 0.36 0.04 19.57 0.71 20.28 
2023-24 19.57 0.71 314.90 44.02 0.71 379.90 294.71 44.02 1.09 0.12 39.75 0.20 39.95 
Total 1,276.80 139.28 1.82  1,237.05 139.28 1.45 0.16 - - - 
Source: Departmental records 
As can be seen from Table 2.2.2 , the Department received ₹1,416.08 crore, out of 
which an amount of ₹1,376.33 crore was expended during 2019-2024. The year-wise 
breakup of the budget and expenditure is shown in Charts 2.2.2 and 2.2.3 
respectively. 
 
                                                
12 There was an inadmissible amount of ₹1.95 crore in erstwhile NRDWP which was pointed out by 
audit and GoI accepted the observation and directed the State Government to recoup the amount 
and release it to PHED for utilisation under JJM. Therefore, the amount is included as receipt as 
Central share under JJM. 
 
63.11
9 5 . 5 7
3 6 1 . 4 9
536.99
3 5 8 . 9 2
0
1 0 0
2 0 0
3 0 0
4 0 0
5 0 0
6 0 0
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
C h a r t  2 . 2 . 2 :  F u n d  r e c e i v e d  b y  N a g a l a n d  
F u n d  r e c e i v e d  ( ₹  i n  c r o r e )
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
21 
 
Additionally, the reporting of household coverage in MIS despite non-functional 
infrastructure highlights a systemic failure in monitoring and verification protocols. 
2.2.9  Audit Objective: Whether financial resources have been employed in an 
economic and efficient manner? 
The fund allocated by Government of India for implementation of the JJM in 
Nagaland, contribution of the State Government and expenditure incurred during 
2019-2024 is shown in Table 2.2.2. 
Table 2.2.2: Statement showing fund allocation and expenditure for JJM  
Year 
Opening 
Balance 
Fund received 
during the year Misc. 
Receipt 
(Bank 
Interest 
and other 
receipts) 
Total 
available 
during 
the year 
Expenditure 
incurred during the 
year 
Interest 
remitted 
during the 
year 
Closing Balance 
G o I  s h a r e  
I n t e r e s t  
G o I  s h a r e  
G o N  s h a r e  
G o I  s h a r e  
G o N  s h a r e  
G o I  s h a r e  
( 9 0  p e r  c e n t)  
G o N  s h a r e  
( 1 0  p e r  c e n t)  
G o I  s h a r e  
I n t e r e s t  
T o t a l  
2019-20 0.00 0.00 58.4412 4.67 0.00 63.11 25.49 4.67 0.00 0.00 32.95 0.00 32.95 
2020-21 32.95 0.00 85.57 10.00 0.00 128.52 90.00 10.00 0.00 0.00 28.52 0.00 28.52 
2021-22 28.52 0.00 333.61 27.88 0.40 390.41 345.14 27.88 0.00 0.00 17.00 0.40 17.39 
2022-23 17.00 0.40 484.28 52.71 0.71 555.09 481.71 52.71 0.36 0.04 19.57 0.71 20.28 
2023-24 19.57 0.71 314.90 44.02 0.71 379.90 294.71 44.02 1.09 0.12 39.75 0.20 39.95 
Total 1,276.80 139.28 1.82  1,237.05 139.28 1.45 0.16 - - - 
Source: Departmental records 
As can be seen from Table 2.2.2 , the Department received ₹1,416.08 crore, out of 
which an amount of ₹1,376.33 crore was expended during 2019-2024. The year-wise 
breakup of the budget and expenditure is shown in Charts 2.2.2 and 2.2.3 
respectively. 
 
                                                
12 There was an inadmissible amount of ₹1.95 crore in erstwhile NRDWP which was pointed out by 
audit and GoI accepted the observation and directed the State Government to recoup the amount 
and release it to PHED for utilisation under JJM. Therefore, the amount is included as receipt as 
Central share under JJM. 
 
63.11
9 5 . 5 7
3 6 1 . 4 9
536.99
3 5 8 . 9 2
0
1 0 0
2 0 0
3 0 0
4 0 0
5 0 0
6 0 0
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
C h a r t  2 . 2 . 2 :  F u n d  r e c e i v e d  b y  N a g a l a n d  
F u n d  r e c e i v e d  ( ₹  i n  c r o r e )
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
21 
 
Additionally, the reporting of household coverage in MIS despite non-functional 
infrastructure highlights a systemic failure in monitoring and verification protocols. 
2.2.9  Audit Objective: Whether financial resources have been employed in an 
economic and efficient manner? 
The fund allocated by Government of India for implementation of the JJM in 
Nagaland, contribution of the State Government and expenditure incurred during 
2019-2024 is shown in Table 2.2.2. 
Table 2.2.2: Statement showing fund allocation and expenditure for JJM  
Year 
Opening 
Balance 
Fund received 
during the year Misc. 
Receipt 
(Bank 
Interest 
and other 
receipts) 
Total 
available 
during 
the year 
Expenditure 
incurred during the 
year 
Interest 
remitted 
during the 
year 
Closing Balance 
G o I  s h a r e  
I n t e r e s t  
G o I  s h a r e  
G o N  s h a r e  
G o I  s h a r e  
G o N  s h a r e  
G o I  s h a r e  
( 9 0  p e r  c e n t)  
G o N  s h a r e  
( 1 0  p e r  c e n t)  
G o I  s h a r e  
I n t e r e s t  
T o t a l  
2019-20 0.00 0.00 58.4412 4.67 0.00 63.11 25.49 4.67 0.00 0.00 32.95 0.00 32.95 
2020-21 32.95 0.00 85.57 10.00 0.00 128.52 90.00 10.00 0.00 0.00 28.52 0.00 28.52 
2021-22 28.52 0.00 333.61 27.88 0.40 390.41 345.14 27.88 0.00 0.00 17.00 0.40 17.39 
2022-23 17.00 0.40 484.28 52.71 0.71 555.09 481.71 52.71 0.36 0.04 19.57 0.71 20.28 
2023-24 19.57 0.71 314.90 44.02 0.71 379.90 294.71 44.02 1.09 0.12 39.75 0.20 39.95 
Total 1,276.80 139.28 1.82  1,237.05 139.28 1.45 0.16 - - - 
Source: Departmental records 
As can be seen from Table 2.2.2 , the Department received ₹1,416.08 crore, out of 
which an amount of ₹1,376.33 crore was expended during 2019-2024. The year-wise 
breakup of the budget and expenditure is shown in Charts 2.2.2 and 2.2.3 
respectively. 
 
                                                
12 There was an inadmissible amount of ₹1.95 crore in erstwhile NRDWP which was pointed out by 
audit and GoI accepted the observation and directed the State Government to recoup the amount 
and release it to PHED for utilisation under JJM. Therefore, the amount is included as receipt as 
Central share under JJM. 
 
63.11
9 5 . 5 7
3 6 1 . 4 9
5 3 6 . 9 9
3 5 8 . 9 2
0
1 0 0
2 0 0
3 0 0
4 0 0
5 0 0
6 0 0
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
C h a r t  2 . 2 . 2 :  F u n d  r e c e i v e d  b y  N a g a l a n d  
F u n d  r e c e i v e d  ( ₹  i n  c r o r e )

22
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
22 
 
 
Source: Departmental records 
In addition to the above funds, Nagaland also received (November 2020 and 
September 2021) a tied fund of ₹40.60 crore from the XV FC for the implementation 
of JJM by the RD Department in 116 villages. As per records made available to audit, 
the entire expenditure of ₹40.60 crore has been utilised to provide drinking water to 
116 villages by the RD Department. 
2.2.9.1 Delay in release of fund  
As per the sanction order of the Ministry of Jal Shakti, GoI, the State Government 
was to ensure the release/transfer of the sanctioned amount to the Nodal Account of 
the implementing agency of the JJM along with State matching share within 15 days 
from the date of receipt of the funds. Examination of records however showed delays 
in release of Central as well as State share by GoN to the Department ranging 
between 39 and 107 days (Central Share) and 10 and 255 days (State Share) as shown 
in Appendix-2.2.2. Audit observed that these delays were due to non-compliance with 
the Ministry’s sanction orders thereby, impacting the timely implementation and 
effectiveness.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that the delays in fund release to the Department was due to the process of 
completing various formalities and that the issue of delays in releasing the State Share 
has since been addressed. 
The reply is not acceptable because the Ministry’s sanction order requires transfer of 
funds to the implementing agency within 15 days of receipt. The audit observed 
delays well beyond this limit for both Central and State shares, ranging up to 255 
days. Merely citing “various formalities” does not justify this deviation from binding 
financial conditions. Further, the reply does not provide any documentary evidence to 
substantiate the claim that the issue has been addressed or to show that delays have 
not recurred in subsequent releases. Delayed fund flow compromises planning, 
contractor mobilisation, and timely execution of works under a time-bound mission. 
30.16
1 0 0 . 0 0
3 7 3 . 0 2
5 3 4 . 4 2
3 3 8 . 7 3
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
C h a r t  2 . 2 . 3 :  E x p e n d i t u r e  i n c u r r e d  b y  N a g a l a n d  
E x p e n d i t u r e  ( ₹  i n  c r o r e )

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
23
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
23 
 
2.2.10 Audit Objective: Whether assets created through the programme are 
sustainable for the next two to three decades and do not 
compromise water security for future generations? 
 
2.2.10.1 Award of supply without tendering  
Rule 144 of the GFR, 2017, states that every authority delegated with the financial 
powers of procuring goods in public interest should have the responsibility and 
accountability for bringing efficiency, economy and transparency in matters relating 
to public procurement and for fair and equitable treatment of suppliers and promotion 
of competition in public procurement. Further, Rule 161 (i) of the GFR, 2017 states 
that subject to exceptions incorporated under Rule 154, 155, 162 and 166, invitation 
to tender by advertisement should be used for procurement of goods of estimated 
value of ₹25 lakh and above. Advertisement in such cases should be given on the 
Central Public Procurement Portal (CPPP) at www.eprocure.gov.in and on GeM. An 
organisation having its own website should also publish all its advertised tender 
enquiries on the website. Further, Paragraph 3.5 (xxxvii) of the Strategy of the JJM 
Guidelines also stated that for executing the programme expeditiously, there would be 
a need for executing agencies to carry out in-village infrastructure work for which 
centralised e-tendering mechanism would be adopted to discover best rates, best 
agencies and speed up the implementation.  
Examination of records showed that the Department awarded (between January 2020 
to May 2023) supply orders for procurement of 2,37,72,586 metres of Galvanised 
Mild Steel (GMS) pipes and Galvanised Pressed Steel (GPS) tank amounting to 
₹888.1013 crore to a supplier 14 on nomination basis, without inviting tenders on the 
basis of a Government order 15 of June 2018. The decision to award the contract to the 
supplier was not transparent or fair, as it bypassed an open, competitive tendering 
process, undermining fair competition and correct price discovery violating both the 
GFR provisions and the scheme guidelines. Audit further observed that the 
Department paid ₹863.43  crore (2019-2024) for 2,37,72,586 metres of GMS pipes 
and ₹24.67 crore (2020-24) for 1,213 GPS tanks to the supplier based on the 
supplier's tax invoices ( Appendix-2.2.3). However, Audit scrutiny showed that the 
supplier procured the GMS pipes at a cost of ₹481.43  crore from M/s Indus Tubes, 
Delhi and GPS tanks for ₹14.01  crore from M/s Dhariwal Steel (P) Ltd, Kolkata, 
totalling ₹599.9816 crore. By engaging the supplier instead of directly procuring from 
the manufacturers, the Department incurred an avoidable extra expenditure of 
₹288.1217 crore, resulting in a corresponding financial benefit to the supplier.  
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that the approved supply rates 
under JJM were finalised through a tendering process published in a national 
                                                
13  ₹863.43 crore (GMS pipes) + ₹24.67 crore (GPS tanks) = ₹888.10 crore. 
14  M/s Peseyie Construction, Kohima. 
15  No. PHE/SECY/2018-2019 dated 20 June 2018. 
16   ₹481.43 crore + ₹14.01 crore=₹495.44 crore. Then, ₹495.44 crore + ₹89.18 crore (18 per cent GST 
of ₹495.44 crore) + ₹15.36 crore (Freight charges) = ₹599.98 crore. 
17  ₹888.10 crore - ₹599.98 crore = ₹288.12 crore. 

24
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
24 
 
newspaper (January 2007) and subsequently revised (July 2012) due to increased raw 
material prices and changes in CST and NST/VAT rates. Based on these rates, DPRs 
for all the JJM schemes were prepared, which were vetted and approved by the 
Ministry through the Annual Action Plan and subsequently approved by the SLSSC. 
It was also stated that the State Government had authorised (June 2018) the supplier 
for supply of drinking water supply materials and SBM (G) Programme.  
The State Government’s reply is not acceptable on the following grounds. First, the 
cited supply rates of 2007 and their revision in 2012 predate the launch of JJM (2019) 
and do not meet the procurement transparency and competitiveness required under the 
GFR 2017 or JJM guidelines. Second, approval of DPRs by the Ministry or SLSSC 
pertains to scheme planning and does not revoke the requirement for competitive 
tendering. Third, the Government order of 2018 authorising the supplier for drinking 
water materials predates JJM and cannot be used to justify ₹888 crore worth of 
procurement without advertisement or e-tendering. The failure to follow Rule 144 and 
Rule 161 of the GFR, as well as JJM’s e-procurement mandate, resulted in 
non-transparent procurement and avoidable extra expenditure of ₹288.12 crore, 
conferring undue financial benefit to an intermediary. 
2.2.10.2 Avoidable excess expenditure 
Rule 173 of the GFR, 2017 states that all Government purchases should be made in a 
transparent, competitive and fair manner, to secure best value for money. As per the 
condition of the supply order issued by the PHED, Nagaland, the materials were to be 
delivered at Freight on Road (FOR) Store, Dimapur. Examination of the records 
showed that the supplier procured the materials valued at ₹863.43 crore from M/s 
Indus Tubes, Delhi. To assess the reasonableness of the rates allowed to the supplier, 
Audit cross verified the rates approved by GoN with the tendered rates approved by 
the neighbouring State of Manipur which showed that the rates allowed by GoN were 
18 to 58 per cent  higher than the tendered approved rates of Manipur as shown in 
Table 2.2.3. 
Table 2.2.3: Statement showing comparison of rate of GMS pipes between Nagaland and 
Manipur 
(Amount in ₹) 
Size of 
pipes 
(medium) 
Rate allowed 
by Manipur  
Rate allowed 
by Nagaland  Difference Excess in 
Percentage 
Total pipe 
procured in 
metre 
Excess over 
Manipur 
15 mm 154.95 203.64 48.69 31.42 1,30,15,992 63,37,48,650 
25 mm 289.17 454.26 165.09 57.09 50,66,490 83,64,26,834 
32 mm  353.78 489.29 135.51 38.30 19,84,003 26,88,52,247 
40 mm 411.99 644.52 232.53 56.44 19,64,341 45,67,68,213 
50 mm  599.27 707.07 107.80 17.99 11,84,495 12,76,88,561 
65 mm  765.21 963.64 198.43 25.93 4,41,365 8,75,80,057 
80 mm  993.31 1,571.24 577.93 58.18 1,13,700 6,57,10,641 
100 mm 1,475.00 1,742.72 267.72 18.15 2,200 5,88,984 
Total 2,37,72,586 2,47,73,64,187 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
25 
 
Source: Department’s records and PHED, Manipur 
As may be seen from Table 2.2.3, the PHED procured 2,37,72,586 metres of GMS 
pipes at rates higher than the rate of Manipur resulting in avoidable excess 
expenditure of ₹247.74 crore. Incidentally, National Highway 29, which passes 
through Daboka, Dimapur and Kohima, serves as the primary route for transporting 
goods to Imphal, the capital of Manipur. Given that Imphal is located approximately 
205 km beyond Dimapur, it is reasonable to conclude that prices in Dimapur should 
logically be lower than those in Imphal due to the shorter transportation distance. 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that the Department has been 
procuring GMS pipes from Government approved manufacturer for implementation 
of all water supply schemes funded under GoI and GoN.  The State Government 
further stated that it has no knowledge of the pipe rates of sister States, such as 
Manipur, as each State adopts its own unique Government approved rates and thus 
excess expenditure on the procurement of water supply materials by the Department 
does not arise. The reply is not acceptable as correct price discovery was not achieved 
as the supply order was awarded on nomination basis in violation of GFR provisions 
as discussed in Paragraph 2.2.10.1. The reply is also not acceptable as the 
Department should have ensured price reasonableness and secured best value for 
money as prescribed by Rule 173 of the GFR, 2017. 
2.2.10.3 Distribution and lifting of GMS pipes  
Section 39 of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 states that no person shall drive any motor 
vehicle and no owner of a motor vehicle shall cause or permit the vehicle to be driven 
in any public place or in any other place unless the vehicle is registered and the 
certificate of registration of the vehicle has not been suspended or cancelled and the 
vehicle carries a registration mark displayed in the prescribed manner. Section 66 of 
the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 Act also provides that no owner of a motor vehicle shall 
use or permit the use of the vehicle as a transport vehicle in any public place whether 
or not, such vehicle is actually carrying any passengers or goods save in accordance 
with the conditions of a permit granted or countersigned by a Regional or State 
Transport Authority or any prescribed authority authorising him the use of the vehicle 
in that place in the manner in which the vehicle is being used. 
Examination of records showed that the Department issued 36 supply orders to the 
supplier for supply of GPS tanks and GMS pipes of various specifications  as detailed 
in Appendices- 2.2.4 and 2.2.5. As per the terms and conditions of the supply orders, 
the materials were to be delivered to the PHED Store Division in Dimapur, subject to 
acceptance by the Material Inspection Board. Further examination of records showed 
that the Material Inspection Board authenticated the receipt of the materials in full and 
subsequently, the Department released the total amount of ₹888.10 crore (May 2024) 
to the supplier18. Records also indicated that the materials were fully distributed to all 
districts. 
                                                
18  The payment was made after deducting statutory deduction of GST @ 2 per cent. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
25
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
25 
 
Source: Department’s records and PHED, Manipur 
As may be seen from Table 2.2.3, the PHED procured 2,37,72,586 metres of GMS 
pipes at rates higher than the rate of Manipur resulting in avoidable excess 
expenditure of ₹247.74 crore. Incidentally, National Highway 29, which passes 
through Daboka, Dimapur and Kohima, serves as the primary route for transporting 
goods to Imphal, the capital of Manipur. Given that Imphal is located approximately 
205 km beyond Dimapur, it is reasonable to conclude that prices in Dimapur should 
logically be lower than those in Imphal due to the shorter transportation distance. 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that the Department has been 
procuring GMS pipes from Government approved manufacturer for implementation 
of all water supply schemes funded under GoI and GoN.  The State Government 
further stated that it has no knowledge of the pipe rates of sister States, such as 
Manipur, as each State adopts its own unique Government approved rates and thus 
excess expenditure on the procurement of water supply materials by the Department 
does not arise. The reply is not acceptable as correct price discovery was not achieved 
as the supply order was awarded on nomination basis in violation of GFR provisions 
as discussed in Paragraph 2.2.10.1. The reply is also not acceptable as the 
Department should have ensured price reasonableness and secured best value for 
money as prescribed by Rule 173 of the GFR, 2017. 
2.2.10.3 Distribution and lifting of GMS pipes  
Section 39 of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 states that no person shall drive any motor 
vehicle and no owner of a motor vehicle shall cause or permit the vehicle to be driven 
in any public place or in any other place unless the vehicle is registered and the 
certificate of registration of the vehicle has not been suspended or cancelled and the 
vehicle carries a registration mark displayed in the prescribed manner. Section 66 of 
the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 Act also provides that no owner of a motor vehicle shall 
use or permit the use of the vehicle as a transport vehicle in any public place whether 
or not, such vehicle is actually carrying any passengers or goods save in accordance 
with the conditions of a permit granted or countersigned by a Regional or State 
Transport Authority or any prescribed authority authorising him the use of the vehicle 
in that place in the manner in which the vehicle is being used. 
Examination of records showed that the Department issued 36 supply orders to the 
supplier for supply of GPS tanks and GMS pipes of various specifications  as detailed 
in Appendices- 2.2.4 and 2.2.5. As per the terms and conditions of the supply orders, 
the materials were to be delivered to the PHED Store Division in Dimapur, subject to 
acceptance by the Material Inspection Board. Further examination of records showed 
that the Material Inspection Board authenticated the receipt of the materials in full and 
subsequently, the Department released the total amount of ₹888.10 crore (May 2024) 
to the supplier18. Records also indicated that the materials were fully distributed to all 
districts. 
                                                
18  The payment was made after deducting statutory deduction of GST @ 2 per cent. 

26
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
26 
 
To verify the transportation of the materials from the Store Division to the 13 PIUs 
across the State, Audit cross verified the transport challans issued by the Store 
Division, Dimapur to the PIUs with the records of the Transport Department and the 
data from the VAHAN19 database. This cross-verification exercise showed that out of 
the 293 vehicles used for transporting the materials to the 13 PIUs across the State, 31 
were non-existent, 15 were Light Goods Vehicle (LGV), five were Light Motor 
Vehicles (LMV), three were two-wheelers, one was a three-wheeler and the 
remaining four were various other types of vehicles not designed for transporting 
GMS pipes and GPS tanks. Details of the vehicles are shown in Table 2.2.4. 
Table 2.2.4: Details showing the types of vehicles where materials were transported 
Sl. 
No 
Types of Vehicles/Remarks of 
Transport Department 
records 
Total 
number of 
vehicles   
Carriage 
capacity 
of the 
vehicles 
(in Kg) 
Weight of 
pipes* in MT 
Length of 
pipes* 
Frequency 
of 
transport 
(in trips) 
1 
Details not found in the 
VAHAN database and Transport 
Department, Nagaland 
31 0 1,064.85 5,18,543 140 
2 Agricultural tractor 1 0 8.21 1,350 1 
4 Excavator 2 0 40.15 17,458 5 
5 Light Goods Vehicle (LGV) 15 1015 1,308.4 6,49,909 176 
6 Light Motor Vehicle (LMV) 5 480 34.64 11,364 5 
7 Motor cycle/scooter 3 0 207.51 1,14,193 27 
8 Tanker 1 0 77.29 48,460 10 
9 Three wheeler 1 0 16.34 6,144 2 
Total 59   2,757.39 13,67,421 366 
Source: Transport Department and VAHAN 
* 15, 25, 32, 40, 50, 65 & 80 mm 
As may be seen from Table 2.2.4, out of 59 vehicles, 31 vehicles did not exist and the 
remaining 29 vehicles lacked the capacity to carry load of 13,67,421 metres of GMS 
pipes and 17 GPS tanks valued at ₹50.97 crore ( Appendix-2.2.6). Thus, the 
Department's claims appeared doubtful. Further, as these items could not have been 
delivered to the 13 PIUs, the implementation of the scheme was bound to be 
adversely affected. Additionally, audit could not vouch safe the veracity of the claim 
that the entire materials issued by the Store Division was distributed to the villages, as 
the WATSAN Committees did not maintain any records indicating the actual quantity 
received and the number of pipes utilised. 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that the registration number 
of the engaged vehicles were recorded on the transport challan as per the registration 
displayed on the vehicles but that errors occurred during the entry process. It was also 
stated that following the Audit observation, verification calls were made to the 
concerned drivers to ascertain the correct registration numbers and authenticate those 
                                                
19  VAHAN software enables the process of RTO/DTO/MLO/SDM involving vehicle registration, 
fitness, taxes, permits and enforcement to get computerised. 
Chapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
26 
 
To verify the transportation of the materials from the Store Division to the 13 PIUs 
across the State, Audit cross verified the transport challans issued by the Store 
Division, Dimapur to the PIUs with the records of the Transport Department and the 
data from the VAHAN19 database. This cross-verification exercise showed that out of 
the 293 vehicles used for transporting the materials to the 13 PIUs across the State, 31 
were non-existent, 15 were Light Goods Vehicle (LGV), five were Light Motor 
Vehicles (LMV), three were two-wheelers, one was a three-wheeler and the 
remaining four were various other types of vehicles not designed for transporting 
GMS pipes and GPS tanks. Details of the vehicles are shown in Table 2.2.4. 
Table 2.2.4: Details showing the types of vehicles where materials were transported 
Sl. 
No 
Types of Vehicles/Remarks of 
Transport Department 
records 
Total 
number of 
vehicles   
Carriage 
capacity 
of the 
vehicles 
(in Kg) 
Weight of 
pipes* in MT 
Length of 
pipes* 
Frequency 
of 
transport 
(in trips) 
1 
Details not found in the 
VAHAN database and Transport 
Department, Nagaland 
31 0 1,064.85 5,18,543 140 
2 Agricultural tractor 1 0 8.21 1,350 1 
4 Excavator 2 0 40.15 17,458 5 
5 Light Goods Vehicle (LGV) 15 1015 1,308.4 6,49,909 176 
6 Light Motor Vehicle (LMV) 5 480 34.64 11,364 5 
7 Motor cycle/scooter 3 0 207.51 1,14,193 27 
8 Tanker 1 0 77.29 48,460 10 
9 Three wheeler 1 0 16.34 6,144 2 
Total 59   2,757.39 13,67,421 366 
Source: Transport Department and VAHAN 
* 15, 25, 32, 40, 50, 65 & 80 mm 
As may be seen from Table 2.2.4, out of 59 vehicles, 31 vehicles did not exist and the 
remaining 29 vehicles lacked the capacity to carry load of 13,67,421 metres of GMS 
pipes and 17 GPS tanks valued at ₹50.97 crore ( Appendix-2.2.6). Thus, the 
Department's claims appeared doubtful. Further, as these items could not have been 
delivered to the 13 PIUs, the implementation of the scheme was bound to be 
adversely affected. Additionally, audit could not vouch safe the veracity of the claim 
that the entire materials issued by the Store Division was distributed to the villages, as 
the WATSAN Committees did not maintain any records indicating the actual quantity 
received and the number of pipes utilised. 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that the registration number 
of the engaged vehicles were recorded on the transport challan as per the registration 
displayed on the vehicles but that errors occurred during the entry process. It was also 
stated that following the Audit observation, verification calls were made to the 
concerned drivers to ascertain the correct registration numbers and authenticate those 
                                                
19  VAHAN software enables the process of RTO/DTO/MLO/SDM involving vehicle registration, 
fitness, taxes, permits and enforcement to get computerised. 
Chapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
26 
 
To verify the transportation of the materials from the Store Division to the 13 PIUs 
across the State, Audit cross verified the transport challans issued by the Store 
Division, Dimapur to the PIUs with the records of the Transport Department and the 
data from the VAHAN19 database. This cross-verification exercise showed that out of 
the 293 vehicles used for transporting the materials to the 13 PIUs across the State, 31 
were non-existent, 15 were Light Goods Vehicle (LGV), five were Light Motor 
Vehicles (LMV), three were two-wheelers, one was a three-wheeler and the 
remaining four were various other types of vehicles not designed for transporting 
GMS pipes and GPS tanks. Details of the vehicles are shown in Table 2.2.4. 
Table 2.2.4: Details showing the types of vehicles where materials were transported 
Sl. 
No 
Types of Vehicles/Remarks of 
Transport Department 
records 
Total 
number of 
vehicles   
Carriage 
capacity 
of the 
vehicles 
(in Kg) 
Weight of 
pipes* in MT 
Length of 
pipes* 
Frequency 
of 
transport 
(in trips) 
1 
Details not found in the 
VAHAN database and Transport 
Department, Nagaland 
31 0 1,064.85 5,18,543 140 
2 Agricultural tractor 1 0 8.21 1,350 1 
4 Excavator 2 0 40.15 17,458 5 
5 Light Goods Vehicle (LGV) 15 1015 1,308.4 6,49,909 176 
6 Light Motor Vehicle (LMV) 5 480 34.64 11,364 5 
7 Motor cycle/scooter 3 0 207.51 1,14,193 27 
8 Tanker 1 0 77.29 48,460 10 
9 Three wheeler 1 0 16.34 6,144 2 
Total 59   2,757.39 13,67,421 366 
Source: Transport Department and VAHAN 
* 15, 25, 32, 40, 50, 65 & 80 mm 
As may be seen from Table 2.2.4, out of 59 vehicles, 31 vehicles did not exist and the 
remaining 29 vehicles lacked the capacity to carry load of 13,67,421 metres of GMS 
pipes and 17 GPS tanks valued at ₹50.97 crore ( Appendix-2.2.6). Thus, the 
Department's claims appeared doubtful. Further, as these items could not have been 
delivered to the 13 PIUs, the implementation of the scheme was bound to be 
adversely affected. Additionally, audit could not vouch safe the veracity of the claim 
that the entire materials issued by the Store Division was distributed to the villages, as 
the WATSAN Committees did not maintain any records indicating the actual quantity 
received and the number of pipes utilised. 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that the registration number 
of the engaged vehicles were recorded on the transport challan as per the registration 
displayed on the vehicles but that errors occurred during the entry process. It was also 
stated that following the Audit observation, verification calls were made to the 
concerned drivers to ascertain the correct registration numbers and authenticate those 
                                                
19  VAHAN software enables the process of RTO/DTO/MLO/SDM involving vehicle registration, 
fitness, taxes, permits and enforcement to get computerised. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
27
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
27 
 
not found in VAHAN. It was further stated that it was purely an inadvertent error in 
the vehicle registration entry.  
The State Government’s response is not acceptable for reasons explained ahead. The 
use of registration numbers of non-existent or inappropriate vehicles was consistently 
recorded not only in transport challans but also in corresponding gate pass challans, 
indicating that these were not mere clerical errors but systemic lapses in logistics 
documentation. Further, vehicles such as motorcycles, LMVs, and tractors are 
physically incapable of transporting the volume and type of materials in question. 
Post-audit verification through phone calls does not constitute verifiable or auditable 
evidence and cannot validate the genuineness of material delivery. The 
inconsistencies cast doubt on the authenticity of material distribution and may 
indicate irregularities in the physical movement of goods under the scheme. 
2.2.10.4 Irregular stock management  
Rule 211 (i) of the GFR, 2017 states that the Officer-in-charge of stores shall maintain 
suitable item-wise lists and accounts and prepare accurate returns in respect of the 
goods and materials in his charge making it possible at any point of time to check the 
actual balances with the book balances. For implementation of JJM in Nagaland, a 
total of 2,37,72,586 metres GMS pipes of varying specifications were required, of 
which 2,37,72,586 metres valued at ₹863.43 crore was purchased. Examination of the 
Stock records showed that all the pipes have been issued to the PIUs. A Joint Physical 
Verification (JPV) conducted in July 2024, however, showed that 5,14,440 metres of 
pipes of six different specifications were still in stock at the Central Store in Dimapur 
as shown in Table 2.2.5. 
Table 2.2.5: Statement showing GMS pipes lying in the stockyard 
Sl. 
No. 
Specification of 
pipe 
Number of 
pipes 
Length of 
pipes 
(metre) 
Issue Rate 
(per metre)  
Amount 
(in ₹) 
1 15 mm 45,000 2,70,000 203.64   5,49,82,800  
2 25 mm 19,000 1,14,000 454.26   5,17,85,640  
3 32 mm 10,500 63,000 489.29   3,08,25,270  
4 40 mm 10,000 60,000 644.52   3,86,71,200  
5 50 mm   1,040   6,240 707.07      44,12,117  
6 65 mm     200   1,200 963.64      11,56,368  
Total 85,740 5,14,440 - 18,18,33,395  
Source: Departmental records 
As may be seen from Table 2.2.5, GMS pipes valued at ₹18.18 crore were still in the 
store, despite the Department’s claim that the pipes had been fully distributed to the 
PIUs. This discrepancy indicates that the stock records were not maintained as per the 
provisions of the GFR and that the Department’s declaration of 91.30 per cent 
achievement (as of 24 July 2024) is misleading. Photographic evidence of GMS pipes 
lying at Central Store, Dimapur is shown in the Photograph-2.2.3. 
 

28
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social Sector
Chapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
28 
 
Photograph-2.2.3 
  
  
Photographs: GMS pipes lying at stock in the Central Store, Dimapur  
The Department’s claim of full distribution of GMS pipes to PIUs was found to be 
incorrect, as 5.14 lakh metres of pipes valued at ₹18.18 crore remained in the Central 
Store at Dimapur as of July 2024. This discrepancy indicates serious deficiencies in 
stock management practices, violating Rule 211(i) of the GFR, 2017. The 
Department’s declaration of achievement was based on inaccurate reporting, 
undermining transparency and the credibility of physical and financial progress 
claims. 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that although allotment orders 
were issued, physical lifting of pipes was temporarily slowed down due to heavy 


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
29
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
29 
 
monsoon. It was also stated that lifting of the pipes was in progress and that it was 
expected to be completed soon.  
The reply of the State Government is silent about the stock which was recorded as 
issued despite its physical presence in the store. The State Government’s reply 
attributes the presence of stock to delays caused by monsoon, the Department’s own 
stock entry records, transport challans, and gate passes confirm that lifting of the 
pipes had been completed by June 2024. This contradiction between physical 
verification and official documentation points to unreliable stock management and 
misreporting of scheme progress. Moreover, while the monsoon and its associated 
delay is predictable in the North East (NE), the Department did not make any 
contingency provision for the monsoon while planning for logistics. Further, the 
explanation does not account for the misleading certification of material movement 
nor does it reconcile book balances with physical stock, as mandated under Rule 
211(i) of the GFR. 
2.2.10.5 Short execution of civil works 
Paragraph 325 of the Nagaland Public Works Department Code (NPWDC) states that 
the Measurement Book (MB) is a most important record, since it is the basis of all 
accounts of quantities whether of work done by the daily labour or by piece or by 
contract, or of materials received. The MBs must be an original record of the actual 
measurements of works done or materials received recorded at the site of work. 
Further, Paragraph 341 of the NPWDC stipulated that before the bill is prepared, 
entries in the MB relating to the description and quantities of work or supplies should 
be scrutinised by the SDO and the calculation of and “contents or area” should be 
checked under his supervision. 
Scrutiny of the project estimates, Running Account (RA) bills and MBs showed that 
four out of five PIUs incurred an expenditure of ₹4.27 crore for construction of 
diversion weirs, sedimentation tanks, slow sand filters, RCC main reservoirs, RCC 
sub-reservoirs and brick masonry tanks in 11 habitations. Scrutiny of the records 
further showed that these works were executed by the WATSAN Committee and 
contractors. To ascertain the actual execution of these works, a JPV was conducted 
(June-August 2024) which showed that there was short execution of various items of 
work in these habitations amounting to ₹2.53 crore, as detailed in Appendix-2.2.7. 
Despite the shortfall in work executed by the WATSAN, the PIUs released the full 
payment to WATSAN committee resulting in excess payment of ₹2.53 crore. 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that payments were made to 
the WATSAN Committee/vendors/contractors after obtaining completion report from 
Third Party Inspection Agencies duly countersigned by the respective Deputy 
Commissioner of the district. 
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable on the following grounds. Audit 
findings are based on physical verification (JPV), which revealed that infrastructure 
created under JJM schemes was of lesser size and capacity than specified in the 

30
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
30 
 
DPRs, despite full payment being released. The reliance on Third Party Inspection 
Agency reports and Deputy Commissioners’ countersignatures cannot justify or 
validate excess payments in cases where actual ground measurements contradict 
certified reports. This indicates serious lapses either in inspection quality or in 
verification procedures and raises concerns regarding the effectiveness of oversight 
and accountability mechanisms. The Department has not initiated any recovery or 
corrective action, despite financial loss to the public exchequer. 
2.2.10.6 Centralised tendering  
Paragraph 5.4 (iv) of the JJM Operational Guidelines states that the GP and/or its 
sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/Paani Samiti/User Group would procure construction 
services/goods/materials from agencies/vendors as finalised by the SWSM through 
centralised item rate tendering. As the districts of Dimapur, Chumukedima and 
Niuland are located in the plains of the State, the primary source of water is limited to 
deep tube wells. Examination of records showed that the WATSAN Committee of the 
test-checked villages of these three districts constructed 52 deep tube wells in nine 
habitations as shown in Table 2.2.6. 
Table 2.2.6: Statement showing details of deep tube wells constructed 
Sl. 
No. Name of the district Name of the Village No. of Deep Tube wells 
1. 
Chumukedima 
Thilixu Village 9 
2. Unity Village (Sugar Mill) 12 
3. Zani 2 
4. Phaipijang 3 
5. Diphupar ‘A’ 18 
6. 
Niuland 
New Showuba 4 
7. Sukhato 1 
8. Hevikhe 2 
9. Medziphema Pherima ‘A’ 1 
Total 52 
Source: Departmental records 
Audit observed that the PIUs of these three districts, in violation of the prescribed 
guidelines, did not adopt the centralised item rate tendering to engage experts and 
machinery for the construction of 52 deep tube wells. Audit further observed that the 
work orders were issued to the WATSAN, however, there were no records to prove 
that specialised machineries or experts were engaged for execution of these works. 
Though the wells were reported to be functional, the DPR prescribed depths of 90 to 
170 metres and the non-utilisation of specialised equipment and technical expertise 
casts doubt on the manner of their construction. 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that no separate tendering 
system for selecting the firms was adopted and that the respective WATSAN 
Committee engaged professionals for the installation of deep tube well under 
supervision by the PIUs.  
The State Government's reply is not acceptable because as per JJM Guidelines, 
procurement for works such as deep tube well construction must be done through 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
31
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
31 
 
centralised item rate tendering to ensure transparency, competitive pricing, and 
technical quality. The Department not only failed to follow this process but also could 
not produce any documentation to substantiate the engagement of qualified 
professionals or the use of specialised machinery. In view of the technical complexity 
of drilling wells up to 170 metres deep, the absence of such records raises serious 
doubts about the authenticity and quality of execution. Moreover, mere supervision 
does not validate whether the execution met the technical specifications or whether 
qualified vendors were engaged. 
2.2.10.7 Inadequate infrastructure for monitoring water quality  
As per Paragraph 5.1.4 of the Drinking Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance 
(DWQMS) Framework, the drinking water quality testing laboratories at sub 
divisional/block levels are the core agencies to test water quality parameters of local 
importance. The sub-division/block level laboratory Chemist is responsible for Water 
Quality Monitoring & Surveillance (WQMS) activities at the respective sub-division/ 
block level. The sub-division/block level laboratory Chemist-in-charge is to report to 
the Chemist-in-charge of the district laboratory for water quality, with an information 
copy marked to the engineer-in-charge for rural water supply. Further, Paragraph 10.1 
(i) of the JJM Operational Guidelines, stipulates that sub-division/block laboratory 
will test 100 per cent  water sources under its jurisdiction; once for chemical 
parameters and twice for bacteriological parameters (pre and post monsoon) in a year, 
covering all water sources of a block for at least 13 basic water quality parameters. 
The Suggestive lists of instruments required for the State and district laboratories are 
incorporated in Annexure VI under sub-clause (xiv) of Paragraph 6.2 of the DWQMS 
Framework. 
Examination of records showed the following deficiencies: 
 Laboratories at block-levels were not established in any of the test-checked 
PIUs. As a result, monitoring of water quality crucial for ensuring the quality 
of water supplied to the communities was not done at the block levels. 
 The State Laboratory (a National Accreditation Board for Testing and 
Calibration Laboratories (NABL) accredited laboratory) required 
43 instruments of which only 21 instruments were partially available 
(Appendix-2.2.8). Further, in the four test-checked district laboratories, out 
of 35 instruments required, only eight instruments were available 
(Appendix-2.2.9). As a result, these laboratories were not equipped with all 
the necessary instruments required to conduct bacteriological and chemical 
tests at the State and district levels. 
The absence of well-equipped laboratories impeded the ability to detect waterborne 
diseases thereby compromising public health and safety. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that all district laboratories are accredited by the NABL but laboratories were 
yet to be established at the sub-division/block level. It was also stated that there was 
no provision for microbiological testing facilities in the district laboratories and that 

32
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
32 
 
Microbiological testing for E.coli and total coliform was done at the State 
microbiology testing laboratory, Dimapur through Membrane Filtration Technique 
(MFT) twice a year. It was further stated that five women FTK users in all the villages 
were trained for water quality monitoring and surveillance activities, once for 
chemical and twice for bacteriological parameters through the use of H2S vial strip 
test (pre and post monsoon) and that surveillance is done at the village level while 
monitoring is done by the District laboratory in compliance with the framework.  
The State Government’s reply is not acceptable because while NABL accreditation of 
district laboratories is claimed, this claim is undermined by the admitted lack of 
essential instruments, including those required for microbiological testing. Moreover, 
the absence of sub-division/block level laboratories violates Paragraph 10.1(i) of the 
JJM Guidelines, which mandates localised and comprehensive testing coverage. 
Relying on centralised microbiological testing at Dimapur twice a year and basic 
FTK-based village testing does not meet the frequency, scope, or scientific rigour 
required under the Drinking Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance (DWQMS) 
Framework. The reply, in effect, confirms the audit observation that the current 
infrastructure is inadequate for ensuring safe drinking water in the State. 
2.2.10.8 Inadequate tests conducted in the laboratories 
Paragraph 10.1 (ii) & (iii) of the JJM Operational Guidelines states that district 
laboratories would test 250 water sources/samples per month ( i.e., 3,000 in a year as 
per the target of roster available on Department/National Mission IMIS) covering all 
sources randomly spread geographically including the positively tested samples 
referred by the sub-division/block laboratory/mobile laboratory on 13 basic water 
quality parameters. Further, the State Laboratory would test at least five per cent of 
the total drinking water samples across all district level laboratories with random and 
uniform geographical spread including positively tested samples referred by district/ 
sub-division/block/mobile laboratory. While Paragraph 6.3.6 of the DWQMS 
Framework states that GPs and/or their sub-committee must ensure 100 per cent  
testing of drinking water sources, including private sources, and water supply at 
schools, anganwadi centres under their jurisdiction through the use of Field Testing 
Kits (FTKs) at least once in a month. The monthly test results are to be uploaded on 
the WQMIS portal. 
Audit observed shortfall in conducting test as discussed below: 
 There was shortfall ranging from 64 to 95 per cent in conducting laboratory 
tests over the last five years as shown in Appendix-2.2.10.   
 The district laboratories of the four test-checked districts did not conduct 
tests for sulphate, total arsenic, fluoride, nitrate, total coliform bacteria, and 
E. coli or thermo tolerant coliform bacteria as shown in Appendix-2.2.11. 
 Out of the target of 71,448 tests of water sources in the four test-checked 
districts through usage of FTKs, only 14,231 tests (19.92 per cent ) were 
conducted as shown in Appendix-2.2.12.  Such low compliance indicates that 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
33
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
33 
 
the required extent of water quality testing was not carried out, limiting 
assurance on safe drinking water. 
Though Audit observed significant shortfalls in tests conducted, Audit also observed 
that the water test results from the State Laboratory and test-checked district 
laboratories did not indicate the presence of major waterborne diseases. This suggests 
that the water supplied was potable. However, the testing limitations may still pose 
potential risks, as some water quality issues might not have been fully detected.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that targeted number of testing per month was not practicable to achieve each 
month due to shortage of manpower and other logistical problems. Besides, COVID-
19 lockdown hindered the testing during 2020-2022. The shortfall in the FTK test 
results was attributed to several challenges like poor network connectivity, migration 
of trained FTK personal from respective villages and difficulties in updating the 
WQMIS portal.  
The State Government’s reply is not acceptable. While COVID-19 and issues with 
transport, equipment or staffing may have temporarily affected testing, the observed 
shortfall spans a five-year period, that is, not only during the COVID-19 period, but 
also in later years. The failure to conduct tests for critical contaminants such as 
fluoride, nitrate, and coliform bacteria poses significant risks to public health and 
violates JJM and DWQMS protocols. The systemic issues, such as unavailability of 
manpower and inability to retain or retrain FTK users, point to weak implementation 
planning and inadequate institutional support. Excuses related to network connectivity 
do not absolve the duty to collect and report water quality data, especially when field 
testing and manual record-keeping could be integrated. Therefore, the reply only 
reinforces the audit's conclusion that current water quality surveillance mechanisms 
are unreliable and may mask potential threats to safe drinking water. 
2.2.10.9 Dissemination of test results 
Paragraph 6.5 (iii) of the DWQMS Framework, states that all drinking water quality 
testing laboratories in the State are to maintain proper records of all details related to 
stock of chemical/consumables, instruments/equipment, sampling and analysis. The 
instrument/equipment is to be properly labelled and test reports made accessible to the 
concerned officials and to the concerned GP and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ 
Pani Samiti/User Group for taking up corrective action. The test results may also be 
displayed on GP notice board or at other suitable public place. 
Interviews of members of the WATSAN Committees of the test-checked villages 
showed that the results of water testing conducted in the laboratory were not 
displayed to 13 out of the 34 habitations test-checked. Audit also independently 
observed that the results of the water testing were not displayed in any of the 
Panchayat offices within the villages, indicating that the general public remain 
unaware of the testing outcomes. The absence of communication regarding display of 

34
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
34 
 
the test results undermines transparency and hinders community awareness about 
water quality and safety. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that the Department had instructed all the villages to display water test reports 
in the public institutions such as Gram Panchayats, schools, Anganwadi centres and 
Health centres to promote transparency and raise awareness of water quality during 
Swachh Jal Se Suraksha Campaign and FTK training sessions. The Department 
further assured to continue to take further necessary action to disseminate the test 
results. 
2.2.10.10 Monitoring of water supplied  
As per Paragraph 11.1 of the JJM Operational Guidelines, in Single Village Scheme 
and piped water supply with stand posts, it was necessary to have sensors to measure 
water drawn every day from different sources, water level in the bore-well in case of 
ground water based scheme and of switching on and off of pumps on the basis of 
overflow sensors in the storage tanks. The Guidelines further stipulated that 
Management Information System (MIS) should be developed for capturing the data 
collected through sensors and analysing them. It is important to have same data 
capturing formats and protocols across the States for data handling consistency. The 
States can also tweak the existing MIS, if they have, to meet the data consistency 
requirements. 
Audit observed that no measures were taken to use sensors or develop an MIS for 
monitoring water supply in four out of the five test-checked PIUs. In the absence of 
the sensors and the MIS, these four PIUs were unable to measure the volume of water 
drawn daily from different sources, resulting in inefficiencies and difficulties in 
managing water resources effectively. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that the Department had, on pilot basis, initiated IoTs 20 (Internet of Things) in 
four districts namely Phek, Niuland, Peren and Kohima and assured to consider 
installing IoTs in the remaining districts in a phased manner. 
The fact, however, remains that water quality testing through FTKs was grossly 
inadequate and unless IoT systems are scaled up across all districts, assurance 
regarding the safety of drinking water cannot be ensured. 
2.2.10.11 Manpower Management 
Paragraph 4.3 (iii) (b) of the DWQMS Framework states that States should decouple 
the functions of water service delivery and water quality testing to develop trust, 
transparency and accountability. A Drinking Water Quality Commissionerate is to be 
                                                
20 IoT-enabled sensors are installed in water sources (wells, pipelines, treatment plants) for real-time 
monitoring. These sensors continuously measure parameters such as pH, turbidity, temperature, 
TDS (Total Dissolved Solids), chlorine, iron, fluoride and arsenic, and transmit the data instantly to 
a central dashboard. The system also reduces dependence on manual FTKs. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
35
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
35 
 
constituted to decouple the functions. The States may designate the Chief Chemist to 
oversee the functioning of laboratories, water quality testing, monitoring and 
surveillance at all levels. Further, Paragraph 5.1.2.1(ii) of the DWQMS Framework 
stated that SWSN should nominate Chief Chemist of the Drinking Water Quality 
Commissionerate as a member of the executive committee of SWSM. The suggestive 
guidelines for staff required for various levels of laboratories as determined in 
Paragraph 5.2 of the DWQMS Framework and the available manpower in the 
Laboratories are shown in Table 2.2.7. 
Table 2.2.7A: Manpower Shortfall in State-Level Laboratories  
Designation Manpower Required Manpower Available Shortage 
Chief Chemist /Chief 
Analyst 1 0 1 
Senior Chemist/Senior 
Analyst 1 0 1 
Chemist/Water 
Analyst 2 1 1 
Microbiologist/ 
Bacteriologist 1 1 0 
Laboratory Assistant 3 1 2 
Data Entry Operator 2 0 2 
Lab Attendant 2 4 +2 
Field Assistant 
(need-based) 2 0 2 
 
Table 2.2.7B: Manpower Shortfall District-Level Laboratories   
(Cumulative for four test-checked districts) 
Designation Manpower Required Manpower Available Shortage 
Chemist/Water 
Analyst 
4 4 0 
Microbiologist 4 0 4 
Laboratory Assistant 8 0 8 
Data Entry Operator 4 0 4 
Lab Attendant 4 4 0 
Field Assistant 8 0 8 
Source: Departmental records 
As can be seen from Tables 2.2.7A and 2.2.7B , except for two categories of 
employees, the State laboratories were operating without the prescribed manpower. 
There were shortages in the cadres of Chief Chemist/Water Analyst, Senior Chemist/ 
Water Analyst/Microbiologist, Chemist/Water Analyst, Laboratory Assistant, Data 
Entry Operator and Field Assistant in the laboratories of all the four test-checked 
districts. This shortage of personnel both in the State and District Laboratories 
hindered the efficiency and effectiveness of the laboratories in conducting necessary 
tests which in turn affected the effective monitoring of water quality.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that except for the State Chemist, 11 District chemists and two microbiologists 
sanctioned at the State Laboratory were engaged and paid fixed monthly honorarium 
under the support activity fund of JJM. It was also stated that the Department has 
initiated efforts for the creation of the sanctioned posts, but that these are yet to 
materialise. 

36
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
36 
 
The State Government’s reply, while acknowledging the shortfall, does not fully 
address the core issue. Engagement of chemists and microbiologists on an honorarium 
basis is a temporary solution and does not ensure the continuity, quality, and 
accountability required for rigorous water quality monitoring. Moreover, the reply is 
silent on the shortage of other key support staff (lab assistants, field assistants, and 
data entry operators), who are essential for sample collection, testing, and data 
management. The continued absence of sanctioned positions and lack of permanent 
staff undermine the State’s ability to sustain water quality surveillance as required 
under the DWQMS Framework. 
2.2.10.12 Community Contribution  
P a r a g r a p h s  6 . 1 . 2  a n d  7 . 1 1  o f  t h e  J J M  O p e r a t i o n a l  G u i d e l i n e s  s t a t e s  t h a t  f o r  i n - v i l l a g e  
piped water supply infrastructure and related source development in the North-Eastern 
States implemented by GP and/or its sub-committee, the beneficiaries will contribute 
f i v e  per cent  of the capital cost in the form of cash and/ or kind and/ or labour. 
F u r t h e r ,  a s  p e r  P a r a g r a p h  6 . 1 . 4  o f  t h e  J J M  O p e r a t i o n a l  G u i d e l i n e s ,  t h e  b e n e f i c i a r i e s  
shall also make contribution to meet the recurring charges at the rate prescribed by the 
respective village community. While Paragraph 5.4 (vii) of the JJM Operational 
Guidelines stipulated that the GP and/or its sub-committee will open bank account/use 
existing account of the GP for community contribution and for depositing O&M 
service charge. In case an existing account is being used, it should be ensured that a 
separate ledger is maintained for community contributions.  
E x a m i n a t i o n  o f  r e c o r d s  f o l l o w e d  b y  i n t e r v i e w s  w i t h  t h e  C h a i r m a n  o f  t h e  W A T S A N  
Committee showed that out of 34 test-checked WATSAN Committees, 30 had not 
opened any bank accounts for the deposit of community contributions towards the 
required five p e r  c e n t of the capital cost.   
 
Audit further observed that these 30 WATSAN Committees had also not collected 
contribution towards the O&M service charge.  Failure to collect recurring costs may 
lead to a decline in service delivery and poor upkeep of the assets created.  
W A T S A N s  
with Bank A/C
1 2  p er  ce nt
W A T S A N s  
wit ho ut A/ C
88 p e r  c e n t
C h a r t  2 . 2 . 4 :  B a n k  A c c o u n t  S t a t u s  I n  T e s t - c h e c k e d  
WATSANS

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
37
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
37 
 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that community contributions were typically made in cash, kind or labour. It 
w a s  a l s o  s t a t e d  t h a t  v e r i f i c a t i o n  w o u l d  b e  c o n d u c t e d  a c r o s s  a l l  v i l l a g e s  a n d  i n  c a s e s  
where cash contributions are involved, the Department will direct the WATSANs to 
maintain bank accounts and that necessary step will be taken to establish regular 
monitoring and auditing. 
The claim of the State Government on community contributions were made in kind or 
through labour could not be substantiated due to the absence of supporting 
documentation or valuation records. Further, the JJM Guidelines explicitly mandate 
the maintenance of bank accounts or separate ledgers to record such contributions, an 
obligation that was not fulfilled by 30 out of 34 WATSAN Committees. Assurances 
of future verification and monitoring do not address the underlying systemic failure to 
institutionalise community participation and ensure financial transparency, as required 
under the JJM framework. 
2.2.10.13 Suspected Fraudulent payment in construction of recharge 
s t r u c t u r e s  
As per sub-clause (iii) of Chapter 1 of the Introductory Para of the JJM Operational 
G u i d e l i n e s ,  s o u r c e  s u s t a i n a b i l i t y  m e a s u r e s  s u c h  a s  a q u i f e r  r e c h a r g e ,  r a i n  w a t e r  
h a r v e s t i n g ,  i n c r e a s e d  s t o r a g e  c a p a c i t y  o f  w a t e r  b o d i e s ,  r e s e r v o i r s  a n d  d e - s i l t i n g  m a y  
be taken to improve the lifespan of water supply systems. Examination of the records 
showed that in two test-checked villages, 30 recharge structures valued at ₹7.50 lakh 
w e r e  p r o j e c t e d  i n  t h e  D P R .  S c r u t i n y  o f  t h e  M e a s u r e m e n t  B o o k s  ( M B s )  s h o w e d  t h a t  
the measurements recorded in the MBs were authenticated by the Sub-Divisional 
Officer (SDO) and the Executive Engineer (EE). Based on the authentication, these 
recharge structures were constructed and full payments made to the WATSAN 
Committees. A JPV conducted in June 2024, however, showed that contrary to the 
measurements recorded in the MBs, 20 recharge structures valued at ₹Five lakh were 
not constructed in two selected villages as shown in Chart 2.2.5. 
 
Source: Joint Physical Verification 
1 2 10
2 0 . 5
18
0
1 8
4.5
3 0
1 0
2 0
5
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
P l a n n e d C o n s t r u c t e d N o t  C o n s t r u c t e dA m o u n t  N o t  A c c o u n t e d  F o r  
( ₹  l a k h )
C h a r t  2 . 2 . 5 :  C o n s t r u c t i o n  o f  R e c h a r g e  S t r u c t u r e s  i n  T w o  S e l e c t e d  V i l l a g e s  
Unity Village
 D i p h u p a r  ‘ A ’
T o t a l

38
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
38 
 
The false recording and subsequent authentication of such measurements in MBs 
indicate deliberate misrepresentation of facts by the officials concerned. These 
falsified entries facilitated release of payments without actual execution of 
corresponding works, resulting in suspected fraudulent expenditure. Despite the 
absence or shortfall in execution, the authentication by the SDO and EE, enabling 
payment from Government funds. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that steps would be taken to ensure the construction of the remaining recharge 
structures as per the DPRs. 
The reply is not acceptable as it does not address the failure in supervisory oversight 
that led to the release of full payment for incomplete works. The assurance of future 
construction does not regularise the irregular expenditure of ₹Five lakh incurred for 
non-existent assets.  
2.2.11 Audit Objective: Whether programme objectives (output and outcomes) have 
been achieved successfully. 
 
2.2.11.1 Progress of Household Connections in the State  
Paragraphs 3.3 and 3.6 of the JJM Operational Guidelines states that the broad 
objectives of the Mission were to ensure that every rural household has a FHTC by 
2024 to provide drinking water in adequate quantity (minimum 55 lpcd) of prescribed 
quality (BIS:10500) on regular basis. Further, Paragraph 7.1 of the JJM Operational 
Guidelines stipulates that the fund requirement for capital expenditure for JJM has to 
be arrived at on the basis of the remaining households to be provided with FHTCs as 
per the 'per household cost'.  
Scrutiny of records showed that for the 34 test-checked villages of the four test-
checked districts, 16,288 FHTCs were proposed in the DPRs at a cost of ₹61.14 crore. 
Budgetary provisions were then made based on this proposed number of FHTCs and 
the full amount released to the implementing units. Audit observed that though funds 
for 16,288 FHTCs were released to the PIUs, the Department reported installation of 
14,102 FHTCs in the JJM IMIS (March 2024). Interview of the Chairmen/Secretaries 
of the WATSAN Committees in turn showed that only 8,251 (50.66 per cent) FHTCs 
were actually provided in the 34 test-checked villages. Audit also conducted a survey 
of 493 beneficiaries of the 34 test-checked villages in which 89 beneficiaries stated 
that FHTCs were provided on sharing basis as discussed below: 
 46 respondents stated that one connection was provided for two households; 
 21 respondents stated that one connection was provided for three households; 
 21 respondents stated that one connection was shared between five 
households; and 
 One respondent stated that one connection was shared by six households. 
Photographic evidence of FHTCs shared with multiple households is shown in 
Photograph-2.2.4. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
39
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
39 
 
Photograph-2.2.4 
  
Showing provision of FHTC on the road side for 
sharing of households at Pangti village, Wokha 
district. 
Showing provision of FHTC on the road side for 
sharing at Kiphire village, Kiphire district. 
Chart 2.2.6: Comparative number of FHTC Count 
 
Source: Departmental records and IMIS data 
Thus, not only were beneficiaries deprived of the benefits of FHTCs, but reporting in 
the JJM IMIS was erroneous and expenditure of ₹21.57 crore on the purported 
construction of 5,851 FHTCs (Appendix-2.2.13) fictitious.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that out of 34 villages, JJM in six villages is implemented by the RD 
Department and in the other 28 villages, JJM is implemented by PHED and that the 
Scheme in 18 villages was still on-going and yet to be certified. It was also stated that 
steps would be taken to reconcile discrepancies between the reported and actual 
FHTCs provided and ensure that the remaining households are provided FHTCs as 
per the DPR under PHED covered villages.  


40
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
40 
 
The reply is not acceptable. Premature reporting of completed FHTCs in the JJM 
IMIS, without field validation or certification, points to systemic lapses in monitoring 
and data accuracy. The distinction between PHED and RD implementation does not 
address the core issue of over-reporting. The audit finding of 5,851 unverified or non-
functional connections involving an expenditure of ₹21.57 crore remains unaddressed. 
The State Government should fix responsibility on the officials concerned for 
over-reporting of FHTCs and the resultant unverified or non-functional connections 
involving an expenditure of ₹21.57 crore. A comprehensive verification of the 
reported connections should be conducted and appropriate action should be initiated 
against those responsible. Further, a robust monitoring mechanism should be 
instituted to ensure accuracy in reporting and avoid such lapses in future. 
2.2.11.2 Insufficient water supply  
Paragraph 3.4 (v) of the JJM Operational Guidelines states that one of the main 
objectives of the Mission is to provide FHTCs at minimum service level of 55 lpcd. 
Further, Paragraph 3.2 (i) of the JJM Operational Guidelines states that the Mission is 
aimed at assisting, empowering and facilitating States in planning of participatory 
rural water supply strategy for ensuring potable drinking water security on long-term 
basis to every rural household and public institution, viz. GP buildings, Schools, 
Anganwadi Centres, Health Centres and Wellness Centres. 
Audit observed that in seven out of the 34 test-checked villages, though an amount of 
₹10.83 crore was incurred reportedly for providing FHTCs to 3,045 households, no 
individual pipelines were laid and connected to the households thereby depriving the 
benefit of tap water supply to those households. To assess the extent of coverage of 
the JJM, Audit conducted a survey (June-August 2024) of 493 beneficiaries in which: 
 382 respondents stated that they received four buckets of water per day; 
 74 respondents stated that they received less than four buckets of water per 
day; and 
 37 respondents stated that regular supply of water has not commenced. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
41
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
41 
 
 
Despite incurring an expenditure of ₹10.83 crore, the intended household tap 
connections in seven test-checked villages were non-functional due to non-laying of 
pipelines. Field survey further revealed that a significant number of beneficiaries were 
either receiving water far below the prescribed norm of 55 litres per capita per day or 
had not received any regular water supply. This indicates that the objectives of the 
Mission, ensuring functional household tap connections and providing adequate 
quantity of potable water, were not achieved in the test-checked areas. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that immediate corrective measures would be taken to complete the pending 
work in the seven villages. With regard to the quantity of water supplied, the 
D e p a r t m e n t  s t a t e d  t h a t  d u e  t o  s e l e c t i o n  o f  ‘ l o w  h a n g i n g  f r u i t s ’  o f  c o s t  e f f e c t i v e  
sources, climate change, huge fluctuations in dry and monsoon seasons, source water 
discharge, deforestation, various man-made and natural factors, source sustainability 
was a major issue that needs to be addressed.  
The reply is not acceptable. While the Department attributes inadequate supply to 
natural and design factors, it fails to explain why DPRs were sanctioned and 
implemented without ensuring source sustainability. Further, release of funds despite 
non-laying of pipelines and premature reporting of FHTCs as completed indicate 
serious lapses in planning, implementation, and supervision. 
2.2.11.3 Progress of FHTC provided in public institutions  
Paragraph 3.2 (i) of the JJM Operational Guidelines stated that the Mission is was 
aimed at assisting, empowering and facilitating States in planning of participatory 
rural water supply strategy for ensuring potable drinking water security on long-term 
basis to every rural household and public institutions, v i z . GP buildings, Schools, 
A n g a n w a d i  C e n t r e s ,  H e a l t h  C e n t r e s  a n d  W e l l n e s s  C e n t r e s . 
7 7
15
8
Chart 2.2.7: Coverage of JJM in respect of 493 Beneficiaries 
( i n  p e r  c e n t)  
≥ 4  b u c k e t s< 4  b u c k e t sN o  s u p p l y

42
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
42 
 
Audit observed that in the three test-checked districts all public institutions were 
provided water supply. However, five test-checked villages of Dimapur district, all 
the public institutions had not been provided FHTCs (June 2024) as shown in Table 
2.2.8. 
Table 2.2.8: Details of FHTC in public institutions in Dimapur Districts 
Sl. 
No. Village 
Number of Public 
Institutions in the 
Village 
Number of Public 
Institutions in the Village 
where FHTC is provided 
No. of Public 
Institutions where 
FHTC not provided 
1. Thilixu village 5 0 5 
2. Unity Village 7 5 2 
3. Diphupar ‘A’ 25 11 14 
4. Zuheshe 4 3 1 
5. Hevikhe 4 3 1 
Total 23 
Source: Department records and JPV 
 
As may be seen from Table 2.2.8, despite incurring an expenditure of ₹10.83 crore, 
the intended household tap connections in seven test-checked villages were non-
functional due to non-laying of pipelines. Field survey further revealed that a 
significant number of beneficiaries were either receiving water far below the 
prescribed norm of 55 lpcd or had not received any regular water supply. This 
indicates that the objectives of the Mission which was to ensure functional household 
tap connections and to provide adequate quantity of potable water were not achieved 
in the test-checked areas.  
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that water supply to public 
institutions such as schools, Anganwadi Centres and community buildings was to be 
covered under the XV FC tied grants implemented by the RD Department.  
The reply is not acceptable since the estimation for connection of FHTC to public 
institutions, such as schools and Anganwadi Centres, was already included in the 
approved DPRs of villages under JJM and the work should have been done. 
2.2.11.4 Non-conduct of Social audit 
-1
1
3
5
7
9
1 1
1 3
1 5
T h i l i x u U n i t y  V i l l a g e D i p h u p a r  ‘ A ’ Z u h e s h e H e v i k h e
C h a r t  2 . 2 . 8 :  F H T C s  P r o v i d e d  i n  P u b l i c  I n s t i t u t i o n s
W i t h  F H T C sWithout FHTCs

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
43
Chapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
42 
 
Audit observed that in the three test-checked districts all public institutions were 
provided water supply. However, five test-checked villages of Dimapur district, all 
the public institutions had not been provided FHTCs (June 2024) as shown in Table 
2.2.8. 
Table 2.2.8: Details of FHTC in public institutions in Dimapur Districts 
Sl. 
No. Village 
Number of Public 
Institutions in the 
Village 
Number of Public 
Institutions in the Village 
where FHTC is provided 
No. of Public 
Institutions where 
FHTC not provided 
1. Thilixu village 5 0 5 
2. Unity Village 7 5 2 
3. Diphupar ‘A’ 25 11 14 
4. Zuheshe 4 3 1 
5. Hevikhe 4 3 1 
Total 23 
Source: Department records and JPV 
 
As may be seen from Table 2.2.8, despite incurring an expenditure of ₹10.83 crore, 
the intended household tap connections in seven test-checked villages were non-
functional due to non-laying of pipelines. Field survey further revealed that a 
significant number of beneficiaries were either receiving water far below the 
prescribed norm of 55 lpcd or had not received any regular water supply. This 
indicates that the objectives of the Mission which was to ensure functional household 
tap connections and to provide adequate quantity of potable water were not achieved 
in the test-checked areas.  
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that water supply to public 
institutions such as schools, Anganwadi Centres and community buildings was to be 
covered under the XV FC tied grants implemented by the RD Department.  
The reply is not acceptable since the estimation for connection of FHTC to public 
institutions, such as schools and Anganwadi Centres, was already included in the 
approved DPRs of villages under JJM and the work should have been done. 
2.2.11.4 Non-conduct of Social audit 
-1
1
3
5
7
9
1 1
1 3
1 5
T h i l i x u U n i t y  V i l l a g e D i p h u p a r  ‘ A ’ Z u h e s h e H e v i k h e
C h a r t  2 . 2 . 8 :  F H T C s  P r o v i d e d  i n  P u b l i c  I n s t i t u t i o n s
W i t h  F H T C sWithout FHTCs
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
43 
 
Paragraph 5.4 (Clause xviii) of the JJM Operational Guidelines states that the GP and/ 
or its sub-committee, will undertake social audit. Further, Section 5 of the Handbook 
of Gram Panchayats states that social audit will be carried out by the GP or VWSC to 
ensure transparency, inclusivity and accountability in the management of water 
resources in the village by following the steps listed: 
 Place key issues for discussion in the Gram Sabha; 
 Facilitate and ensure active participation; 
 Inclusion of SCs, STs and poor households; 
 Display key information publicly;  
 Maintain key documents; and  
 Prepare a citizen’s charter. 
Interviews of WATSAN Committee Chairpersons showed that, out of 34 test-checked 
villages across the four test-checked districts, only 10 villages had conducted social 
audits. Audit also observed that in the villages where social audits were carried out, 
no reports were prepared regarding the social audits conducted. In the absence of 
records of social audit conducted, Audit could not ascertain whether issues related to 
coverage, quality, sustainability, impact, O&M and user satisfaction were examined 
and publicly discussed in any of the social audits of the test-checked villages. The 
failure to institutionalise regular, documented social audits undermines accountability, 
citizen engagement, and the transparent implementation of the JJM. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that social audit would be conducted for the remaining villages and an 
evaluation study of JJM implementation in the State will also be undertaken. 
However, the reply was silent on the maintaining proper documentation of discussions 
held during the social audits. 
The reply is not acceptable. Social audit is a mandatory requirement under the JJM 
Guidelines and the GP Handbook for ensuring transparency, accountability, and 
inclusive participation at the grassroots level. The absence of documented social 
audits in 24 out of 34 test-checked villages, and lack of reports even in those where 
audits were claimed to be conducted, reflects systemic weaknesses in community 
oversight. Promises of future action do not address this failure in institutional 
accountability. 
2.2.11.5 Grievances Redressal 
Paragraph 3.6.2 (JJM Operational Guidelines) stipulated that the State may create an 
independent regulatory body for the water supply sector that would decide the terms 
and conditions for the water supply service provision by various agencies, tariff fixing 
and monitoring its collection and resolving the disputes and would also act as a water 
supply ombudsman so that any aggrieved user can approach it for redressal of her/his 
grievances. 
The Department established (January 2022) a Grievances Redressal Cell and Helpline 
Solution. This system aimed to provide an organised framework for receiving, 

44
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
44 
 
addressing and resolving customer enquiries, complaints, disputes and grievances 
related to water and sanitation services. Citizens can lodge their complaints, queries 
and grievances by calling the dedicated helpline at Toll-free Number-1800-345-3853 
or dedicated incoming number-03862-237535. 
Details report of Grievances Redressal cases raised and settled under JJM during 
January 2022 to March 24 are detailed below: 
Number of cases raised Number of settled case Number of cases pending settlement 
20 20 0 
2.2.12 Conclusion 
The JJM was launched with the objective of providing potable water of prescribed 
quality to rural areas through Functional Household Tap Connections. This 
Performance Audit however showed multiple shortcomings, raising serious concerns 
about the scheme's successful implementation and effective outcomes. VAPs were 
prepared without conducting required baseline surveys and data maintained by the 
Department was inconsistent and unreliable as exemplified by the inflated population 
figure. The procurement process was flawed and arbitrary leading to substantial 
financial losses to the Government. Materials were shown to have been transported by 
non-existent vehicles and vehicles without the designed capacity to transport pipes 
and tanks. In the test-checked villages, only 50.66 per cent  of the households have 
been provided FHTCs. The laboratories meant for conducting biological and chemical 
tests were functioning without the required instruments.  
The State Government’s replies, though accepting many audit observations, often 
relied on future assurances and did not fully address the underlying lapses in policy 
implementation, institutional oversight, and fiduciary responsibility. Unless these 
issues are urgently and comprehensively addressed, the long-term goals of JJM may 
remain unfulfilled, putting at risk both infrastructure sustainability and community 
trust. 
Thus, the objective of the JJM to provide adequate amount of portable water on which 
an expenditure of ₹1,416.93 crore had been incurred during the period under review, 
was not fully achieved. 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
45
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
45 
 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may: 
A. Strengthen Institutional Planning and Governance 
(i) Ensure mandatory baseline surveys and need assessments are 
conducted prior to the preparation of Village Action Plans (VAPs) and 
align projections with Census and verified household data. 
(ii) Empower GPs and VWSCs with training, tools, and supervision to 
prepare realistic, community-owned plans. 
B. Improve Procurement and Financial Transparency 
(iii) Discontinue nomination-based procurement. Adopt centralised e-
tendering in line with JJM Guidelines and GFR provisions to ensure 
transparency and value for money. 
(iv) Adhere strictly to timelines for release of Central and State shares to 
prevent implementation delays. 
C. Ensure Functional and Sustainable Infrastructure 
(v) Mandate use of Hydro-Geo-Morphological (HGM) maps and smart 
sensors for better site selection, source sustainability, and daily 
monitoring of water drawal and distribution. 
(vi) Conduct third-party validation of all completed works to assess physical 
and functional status, with accountability for incomplete or non-
functional systems. 
D. Strengthen Water Quality Monitoring 
(vii) Establish fully equipped and staffed laboratories at sub-division and 
district levels with microbiological testing facilities and standard 
protocols. 
(viii) Ensure 100 per cent source testing and FTK usage is achieved and 
recorded in WQMIS. Address manpower and connectivity gaps. 
E. Foster Community Ownership and Transparency 
(ix) Enforce collection and accounting of the 5 per cent capital cost and 
O&M contributions from beneficiaries through designated bank 
accounts. 
(x) Institutionalise regular social audits and ensure public display of water 
quality test results at Panchayat offices and public institutions. 
(xi) Intensify Information, Education & Communication (IEC) campaigns 
and participatory rural appraisal (PRA) activities to build local 
ownership and user awareness. 
F. Monitoring and Accountability 
(xii) Operationalise the JJM dashboard across all PIUs and integrate it with 
local MIS for consistent real-time monitoring. 
(xiii) Conduct annual independent evaluation of scheme performance with 
feedback loops into future planning. 
  

46
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
46 
 
SOCIAL WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.3 Implementation of Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) 
Scheme in Nagaland 
 
Aud it Snap shot 
 
 
W h y  d i d  w e  d o  t h i s  a u d i t ? 
 T o  c h e c k  i f  t h e  S c h e m e  w a s  i m p l e m e n t e d  a s  p e r  
policies, rules, and guidelines. 
 T o  a s s e s s  i f  a l l o c a t e d  f u n d s  w e r e  u s e d  
e c o n o m i c a l l y ,  e f f i c i e n t l y ,  a n d  e f f e c t i v e l y .  
 T o  e x a m i n e  i f  s e r v i c e s  w e r e  i n s t i t u t i o n a l i s e d  a n d  
s t r u c t u r e s  s t r e n g t h e n e d  a t  a l l  l e v e l s .  
 T o  v e r i f y  i f  t h e  S c h e m e  i m p r o v e d  o u t c o m e s  f o r  
children, adolescent girls, and mothers. 
 T o  a s s e s s  c o n v e r g e n c e ,  p u b l i c  a w a r e n e s s ,  a n d  
m o n i t o r i n g  s y s t e m s  u n d e r  t h e  S c h e m e .  
 T o  d e t e r m i n e  w h e t h e r  t h e  i n t e n d e d  o u t c o m e s  o f  
t h e  S c h e m e  w e r e  a c t u a l l y  a c h i e v e d . 
 
What did we find? 
 N o  h o u s e h o l d  s u r v e y  w a s  c o n d u c t e d ,  s o  
the total number of eligible beneficiaries 
was unknown. 
 A a d h a a r  s e e d i n g  w a s  m i n i m a l  d e s p i t e  
s p e n d i n g  ₹ 3 . 4 3  c r o r e  f o r  t h e  p u r p o s e .  
 I n a d e q u a c y  o f  i n f r a s t r u c t u r e  a c r o s s  a l l  
t e s t - c h e c k e d  4 6  A W C s .  
 ₹ 2 . 4 5  c r o r e  w a s  p a i d  t o  a  s u p p l i e r  a g a i n s t  
the short-delivery of 119.71 MT of food 
items. 
 C h i l d r e n  w e r e  d e n i e d  E C C E  b e n e f i t s  d u e  
to unavailability of pre-school kits and 
b o o k s  i n  4 1  o u t  o f  4 6  ( 8 9  per c e n t )  t e s t -
checked AWCs. 
 Only 28 p e r  c e n t o f  b e n e f i c i a r i e s  w e r e  
monitored through Poshan Tracker App 
d e s p i t e  w i d e  c o v e r a g e . 
👩👧 
Registered Beneficiaries: 5.48 lakh 
🏠 
Operational Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) :  3,980 
📊 
Total expenditure incurred: ₹1,191.55 crore  
 
What do we recommend? 
 T o  d e v e l o p  a n d  a p p l y  a  u n i f i e d  s e t  o f  
indicators for real-time monitoring and 
evaluation. 
 T o  a c t i v a t e  a n d  e n s u r e  r e g u l a r  m e e t i n g s  o f  
c o m m i t t e e s  a t  a l l  a d m i n i s t r a t i v e  l e v e l s .  
 To enforce mandatory growth, anaemia, 
and birth weight tracking with regular 
audits. 
 T o  i m p l e m e n t  t r a i n i n g  a n d  a c c o u n t a b i l i t y  
s y s t e m s  f o r  A W W s  a n d  S u p e r v i s o r s .  
 To use HMIS and Poshan Tracker data for 
targeted, data-driven nutrition 
i n t e r v e n t i o n s. 
Source: NFHS-4 and NFHS-5  
A Performance Audit (PA) on the “Implementation of Integrated Child Development 
Services (ICDS) Scheme” was carried out covering the period from 2018-19 to 
2023-24. The Performance Audit brought out the following significant findings. 
 per cent)  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
47
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
47 
 
Highlights 
 The Department did not have information on the total number of eligible 
beneficiaries in the State as no household survey was conducted. 
Paragraph 2.3.11.1 
 Nagaland has 3,980 functional AWCs, against a population of 19,78,502 (2011 
Census) and a projected population of 22,33,000 (2023), indicating that the 
number of AWCs is broadly adequate to meet the population-based 
requirement under the ICDS scheme as per prescribed norms, however, this 
did not ensure uniform access across all regions. 
Paragraph 2.3.13.1 
 Inadequacy of infrastructure viz. lack of prescribed space of 600 sq. feet, 
kitchen, check-up/examination room, space for outdoor activities, safe & 
storage facility, and sanitary block required for  waste disposal across all test-
checked 46 AWCs. 
Paragraph 2.3.13.2 
 An expenditure of ₹2.81 crore for procurement of medicine kits during 
2018-2024 revealed serious lapses in inventory management, including 
non-maintenance of stock registers and untraceable distribution records. 
Paragraph 2.3.13.3 
 An expenditure of ₹1.36 crore for the procurement of uniforms and badges 
during 2021-2024 revealed absence of documentation in stock registers and 
non-receipt of supplies by the majority of sampled CDPOs. 
Paragraph 2.3.13.4 
 Aadhaar seeding of beneficiaries was minimal (14.51 per cent) out of 5,47,228 
ICDS beneficiaries despite incurring an expenditure of ₹3.43 crore for this 
purpose. 
Paragraph 2.3.13.5 
 The Department paid ₹2.45 crore to the supplier against the short-delivery of 
119.71 MT of food items to nine test-checked CDPOs. 
Paragraph 2.3.13.8 
 The benefit of Early Childhood Care and Education was denied to the children 
in the AWCs as pre-school kits and age specific books were not available in 41 
out of 46 (89 per cent) test-checked AWCs. 
Paragraph 2.3.13.9 
 Out of 4,09,851 beneficiaries, only 1,13,619 beneficiaries (28 per cent) in the 
State are being monitored through Poshan Tracker App to track the 
nutritional status and growth of women and children, enabling timely 
intervention to combat malnutrition. 
Paragraph 2.3.15.2 
 A standardised framework inclusive of input, output and outcome indicators 
for evidence-based monitoring was not formulated. Consequently, evaluation 

48
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
48 
 
of the outcome-based indicators was not conducted at the district, block and 
village levels. 
Paragraph 2.3.16.1 
 The State failed to maintain reliable and comprehensive data on key 
nutritional indicators such as stunting, wasting, underweight, anaemia, and 
low birth weight. 
Paragraphs 2.3.16.2 & 2.3.16.3 
2.3.1 Introduction 
The Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme was launched on 
02 October 1975 by the Ministry of Women and Child Development (MoWCD), 
Government of India (GoI), to improve the health, nutrition and education of the 
targeted beneficiaries which included children up to the age of six years, Pregnant and 
Lactating Mothers (P&LMs) and Adolescent Girls (AGs) aged 11-18 years. As per 
the notification (February 2009) of the MoWCD, all children below six years of age, 
pregnant women and lactating mothers are eligible for availing the services of the 
Scheme.  Below Poverty Line (BPL) status was not a criterion for registration of 
beneficiaries under the ICDS. The Scheme is implemented by MoWCD at the 
National level and Social Welfare (SW) Department of the Government of Nagaland 
(GoN) at the State level.  In 2017, the GoI also launched the National Nutritional 
Mission (NNM), which was later renamed (2018) as “Poshan Abhiyan”, to augment 
the nutritional requirements of the targeted beneficiaries in a time-bound manner. 
‘Saksham Anganwadi 21 and Poshan 2.0’ was launched in 2022, wherein three 
schemes - Anganwadi Services, Scheme for Adolescent Girls and Poshan Abhiyaan 
were re-aligned under Poshan 2.0 for maximising nutritional outcomes. The ICDS 
Scheme was being implemented in the State since 1975. 
2.3.2 Objectives of the ICDS Scheme 
The objectives of the ICDS Scheme were to: 
 Improve the nutritional and health status of children aged up to six years; 
 Lay the foundation for the proper psychological, physical and social 
development of the child; 
 Reduce the incidence of mortality, morbidity, malnutrition and school 
dropout; 
 Achieve effective co-ordination of policy and implementation amongst 
various departments to promote child development; and 
                                                
21  Saksham Anganwadi is a Government of India initiative, launched in 2021, under the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development (MWCD) aimed at strengthening and upgrading Anganwadi 
Centres (AWCs) to improve the delivery of services under the Integrated Child Development 
Services (ICDS) scheme. 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
49
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
49 
 
 Enhance the capability of the mother to look after the normal health and 
nutritional needs of the child through proper nutrition and health education. 
2.3.3 Targeted beneficiaries and services provided under the ICDS Scheme 
The objectives of the Scheme were to be achieved through a package of six services 
by the MoWCD and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), GoI 
through the SW Department and the Health and Family Welfare (H&FW) Department 
of the State, as given in Table 2.3.1. 
Table 2.3.1: Services, target groups and service providers under the ICDS Scheme 
SI. 
No. 
Services Target Groups Service provided at the State 
level 
1. Supplementary 
Nutrition 
Programme (SNP) 
Children below the age of six years, 
P&LMs and AGs of age 11-18 years 
SW Department through 
Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) 
2. Pre-School (non-
formal) Education 
(PSE) 
Children (aged three to six years) SW Department through AWCs 
3. Nutrition and 
Health Education 
(NHE) 
Women (aged 15 - 45 years) and 
Adolescent Girls of age 11 - 18 years 
• Nutrition Education: 
SW Department through AWCs 
• Health Education: 
H&FW Department through 
Auxiliary Nurse Midwife 
(ANM)/Medical Officer (MO) 
4. Immunisation  Children below six years and P&LMs SW Department through ANM/ 
MO in coordination with AWCs. 
5. Health check-ups Children below six years, P&LMs 
and AGs of age 11-18 years 
SW Department through ANM/ 
MO in coordination with AWCs. 
6. Referral services Children below six years, P&LMs 
and AGs of age 11-18 years  
SW Department through ANM/ 
MO in coordination with AWCs. 
Source: ICDS Scheme guidelines 
The latter three services - immunisation, health check-ups and referral services - are 
offered to Scheme beneficiaries by the H&FW Department at AWCs during the 
monthly organised "Village Health and Nutrition Day (VHND)”. Auxiliary Nurse 
Midwife (ANM) and Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) visit the AWCs and 
conduct activities related to immunisation, health check-ups and referrals. 
2.3.4 Organisational structure 
The Secretary of the SW Department, GoN is responsible for the overall 
implementation of the ICDS Scheme in the State. The Secretary, SW Department, is 
assisted by the Director, ICDS, SW Department, who is the implementing and 
coordinating officer of the Scheme. 
The organisational structure of the SW Department and the H&FW Department at 
various levels for the implementation of the ICDS Scheme is given in Chart 2.3.1. 

50
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
50 
 
Chart 2.3.1A: The organisational structure of the SW Department at the various levels for the 
implementation of the ICDS Scheme 
Chart 2.3.1B: The organisational structure of the H&FW Department at the various levels for 
the implementation of the ICDS Scheme 
 
Source: Departmental records 
Se cr e tary ,  SW Depa rtm ent
D i r e c t o r  ( I C D S )
J t. Di re cto r ( ICDS)
Di st ri ct  P rog ram  Of f icer
C h i l d  D e v e l o p m e n t  P r o j e c t  O f f i c e r s
Anganwadi Workers 
Anaganwadi Helpers
S e c r e t a r y ,  H e a l t h  &  F a m i l y  W e l f a r e  D e p a r t m e n t
M e dic al Of f ice rs . C om m uni ty H eal t h Centr es , 
P r i m a r y  H e a l t h  C e n t r e s
A u x i l i a r y  N u r s e  M i d w i v e s  ( A N M s )
A c c e r e d i t e d  S o c i a l  H e a l t h  A c t i v i s t  ( A S H A )  
w orke rs  
State Level 
District Level 
Block Level 
AWCs 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
51
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
51 
 
2.3.4.1 Institutional Mechanism of ICDS 
A. State Level 
Paragraphs 5.2 to 5.5 of the ICDS Mission - Broad Framework for Implementation 
(October 2012) stipulates that the State Mission Steering Group (SMSG) and the State 
Empowered Programme Committee (SEPC) under the chairpersonship of the Chief 
Minister and Chief Secretary respectively shall be set up to provide leadership, policy 
support and guidance for effective implementation of ICDS. Further, the functions 
under the State ICDS Mission would be carried out through the State Child 
Development Society (SCDS) headed by a State Mission Director. 
The Director of SW Department, GoN is responsible for the implementation of 
policies and programmes in the State and is assisted by a Project Director, who 
oversees the implementation of the activities of the Poshan Abhiyaan. 
B.  District Level 
At the District level, the District Programme Officer (DPO) acts as the Nodal Officer 
and is assisted by the Child Development Project Officers (CDPOs) in the blocks. 
Audit, however, observed that the DPOs were left out in the chain of distribution of, 
Medicine Kits, Uniforms and SNP food items which led to discrepancies as discussed 
in Paragraphs 2.3.13.3, 2.3.13.4 and 2.3.13.8. 
C. Block level 
At the block level, each ICDS project is under the charge of a CDPO assisted by 
Supervisors for the implementation of the scheme. 
D. Village Level 
At the village level, the Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committees (VHSNC) 
were one of the major platforms of convergent action at the grassroots levels with 
representation from different sectors. The VHSNC would be responsible for all 
activities to facilitate decision making at the AWC level. Further, Paragraph 2.2.1 (xii) 
of the Broad Framework for Implementation states that the VHSNCs would be 
actively engaged in the management and supervision of the ICDS programme at the 
village and local levels.  
E. AWC Level 
The AWW assisted by a Helper, looks after the delivery of services and activities of 
ICDS at the Anganwadi Centre. The AWWs also conduct regular health and nutrition 
education in the centres and home visits are carried out regularly. 
Audit observed that the SMSG and SEPC were constituted; however, documented 
records of meetings convened and of policy support and guidance extended to the 
Department were not available. Audit also observed that the State did not constitute 
the SCDS, as a result, the scheme was implemented by the Directorate of SW 
Department. Audit further observed that there were no documented records of 
VHSNCs activities on convergence of different sectors, management and supervision 

52
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
52 
 
of health and nutrition at the village level. These deficiencies in institutional oversight 
are indicative of systemic weaknesses in leadership, inter-departmental convergence, 
and decentralised planning mechanisms, which are critical components for the 
effective implementation of the ICDS scheme. 
On this being pointed out, the Government stated (June 2024) that the formation of 
the SCDS was under process and that the VHSNCs were not under the Department’s 
administrative control and thus were not involved in managing and supervising the 
ICDS. It was further stated (October 2024) that meeting of the SEPC was held once in 
2013. The reply of the Government is indicative of the fact that implementation of the 
scheme lacked the institutional support, guidance and supervision as prescribed by the 
guidelines.  
The Government’s reply is not acceptable. The prolonged delay in constituting the 
SCDS, despite being mandated under the ICDS Mission Framework since 2012, 
reflects a lack of institutional readiness to operationalise mission-mode 
implementation. The assertion that VHSNCs are outside the Department’s control 
does not absolve the implementing agency of its responsibility to coordinate 
convergence activities at the village level as envisaged in Paragraph 2.2.1(xii) of the 
Broad Framework for Implementation. Moreover, convening a single meeting of the 
SEPC in 2013, with no documented evidence of follow-up policy guidance, indicates 
that the State-level bodies set up for strategic oversight and programme steering were 
effectively non-functional. These deficiencies compromised institutional 
accountability and undermined the integrated, community-based design of the ICDS 
scheme. 
2.3.5 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted to assess whether: 
 the scheme was planned for implementation in accordance with the 
prescribed policy, rules and guidelines. 
 the funds allocated under the Scheme were utilised economically, efficiently 
and effectively to achieve Scheme objectives. 
 the scheme managed to institutionalise essential services effectively, 
economically and efficiently and strengthen structures at all levels ensuring 
children of the best possible start to life and improve health and well-being 
of Adolescent Girls as well as pregnant and lactating mothers. 
 the ICDS has enhanced capacities at all levels and ensured convergence with 
the other related programs and scheme so as to maximise the impact and 
outcomes of ICDS. 
 there existed a mechanism for raising public awareness and participation, 
creation of knowledge base for child development services and robust system 
for appropriate inter-sectoral monitoring of the scheme at all levels. 
 the outcomes as envisaged in Scheme Guidelines were actually achieved. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
53
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
53 
 
2.3.6 Audit criteria 
The audit findings were benchmarked against the following criteria: 
 Scheme Guidelines/instructions issued by MoWCD, GoI;  
 General Financial Rules (GFR), 2017:  
 Department’s Perspective, Annual Action and Annual Programme 
Implementation Plans; 
 National Food Security Act, 2013; 
 Standards fixed by the National Institute of Public Co-operation and Child 
Development (NIPCCD) for infrastructure of ICDS projects and training 
programmes;  
 Instructions issued by GoN, prescribed norms for staffing and skill 
upgradation; 
 Nagaland Public Works Department Code (NPWDC); and 
 Monitoring mechanism instituted by the GoI and GoN. 
2.3.7 Scope of Audit  
The PA was conducted during June 2023 to May 2024 covering the period from 
2018-19 to 2023-24. Records of the Directorate of Social Welfare and four out of nine 
DPOs, nine out of 60 CDPOs and 46 out of 3,980 AWCs were examined.  Beneficiary 
survey of 208 beneficiaries in 46 AWCs under the four test-checked districts was 
conducted during the Audit. 
2.3.8 Audit sampling  
The district offices/institutions responsible for implementation of the scheme were 
sampled using Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement (SRSWOR) as 
follows: 
 Districts: Out of 11 districts22 in Nagaland, four districts23 (36.36 per cent) were 
test-checked.  
 CDPOs24: Of the four test-checked districts, 40 per cent  CDPOs from each 
district were test-checked i.e. nine CDPOs out of 60 CDPOs in the State. 
 AWCs25: Of the nine test-checked CDPOs, five AWCs or five per cent  of 
AWCs, whichever is higher, were test-checked, totalling 46 AWCs.  
                                                
22 Six new districts were created out of the existing 11 districts, hence at present; there are 17 districts 
in Nagaland. The Department, however, was yet to create functionary units for the new districts. 
Hence, sampling was performed considering the number of districts as 11 viz. Dimapur, Kiphire, 
Kohima, Longleng, Mokokchung, Mon, Peren, Phek, Tuensang, Wokha and Zunheboto. 
23  Dimapur, Kohima, Peren and Tuensang. 
24  Number of CDPOs: Dimapur - six , Kohima -five, Peren -five and Tuensang – eight. 
25  Number of AWCs: CDPO, Chiephobozou (05 out of 64), CDPO, Kohima Tribal (05 out of 106), 
CDPO, Longkhim (05 out of 61), CDPO, Sangsangnyu (05 out of 92), CDPO, Chare (05 out of 42), 
CDPO, Medziphema (05 out of 60), CDPO, Dimapur Urban (06 out of 129), CDPO, Jalukie (05 out 
of 95) and CDPO, Peren (05 out of 49). 

54
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
54 
 
 Beneficiaries: A total of 208 beneficiaries present during the Audit team’s visit 
to the 46 test-checked AWCs were interviewed. 
2.3.9 Audit approach and methodology  
The PA commenced with an Entry Conference (05 June 2023) with the Secretary to 
the GoN, SW Department along with the Departmental officers 26 wherein audit 
objectives, criteria, scope and methodology were discussed. The audit methodology 
included examination of records and issue of requisition/questionnaires. Joint Physical 
Verification (JPV) during August - September 2024 was also carried out by Audit 
with department officials on assets and infrastructure created under the Scheme. The 
draft Report was forwarded to the State Government on 07 June 2024 and an Exit 
Conference was held on 22 July 2024 with the Secretary of the Department and 
Departmental officers 27. The replies and comments of the State 
Government/Department are suitably incorporated in the Report. 
2.3.10 Acknowledgement 
The Office of the Accountant General (Audit), Nagaland acknowledges the assistance 
and co-operation extended by the SW Department and the H&FW Department during 
the conduct of Audit. 
Audit findings 
 
2.3.11 Audit Objective: Whether the Scheme was planned for implementation in 
accordance with the prescribed policy, rules and 
guidelines? 
 
2.3.11.1 Database of beneficiaries 
Paragraph 4.4 of the ICDS Mission - Broad Framework for Implementation stipulates 
conduct of household surveys and village micro planning exercises involving AWWs, 
ASHAs, community/women’s groups, VHSNCs and Panchayati Raj Institutions.  
Further, Paragraph 4.2 of the Manual for District-Level Functionaries, 2017 stipulates 
that CDPOs should ensure coverage of all the eligible beneficiaries and preparation of 
a project report containing all the necessary/relevant baseline information.  
Audit observed that the Department did not conduct household surveys. As a result, 
the Department did not possess information on the total number of eligible 
beneficiaries posing the risk of eligible beneficiaries in the entire State not getting the 
nutritional and health benefits provided by the Scheme. In the absence of verifiable 
beneficiary data, the Department cannot ensure comprehensive outreach or equitable 
service delivery under ICDS.  
The State Government in its reply stated (June 2024) that household surveys were 
conducted during home visits but that records were not maintained. The evidence 
                                                
26  Director, Deputy Director, Registrar and Superintendent of the SW Department. 
27  Deputy Secretary, Director, Deputy Director, Superintendent and Accountant of the 
SW Department. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
55
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
55 
 
supporting the claim of the Government that household surveys were conducted was 
not documented. Moreover, while home visits under ICDS aimed at improving 
maternal and child health through direct and personalised interaction at beneficiary 
households, the number of eligible beneficiaries in the State could not be determined. 
The State Government’s reply is not acceptable. The reply admits that no records were 
maintained to substantiate the claim that household surveys were conducted during 
home visits. The ICDS Mission Framework and the Manual for District-Level 
Functionaries explicitly require the preparation and documentation of comprehensive 
baseline data on all eligible beneficiaries through formal household surveys and 
village micro-planning. Home visits, while an integral part of service delivery, cannot 
substitute for a documented and systematic enumeration of beneficiaries. In the 
absence of such records, the Department cannot demonstrate that all eligible 
individuals were identified and covered under the scheme, thereby undermining the 
objective of universal coverage and effective targeting of nutritional and health 
interventions. 
2.3.11.2 Preparation of Annual Project Implementation Plan 
Paragraph 6 of the ICDS Mission - Broad Framework for Implementation stipulates 
preparation and submission of the Annual Project Implementation Plan (APIP) to 
MoWCD, GoI emphasising a community-driven, decentralised planning approach 
through State and District Child Development Plans. Audit observed that while the 
APIP were prepared, they were done so without a bottom-up, decentralised and 
participatory planning process as requirements from the district, projects and village 
level were not accounted.  Audit further observed that the APIPs were prepared at the 
Directorate level in anticipation of the requirement. This approach undermined the 
objective of community-led planning envisioned under the ICDS Mission Framework 
and reduced the responsiveness of project design to actual field-level requirements. 
The State Government did not offer any comments on the Audit observation. 
However, the absence of a decentralised planning approach in the preparation of the 
APIPs constitutes a significant deviation from Paragraph 6 of the ICDS Mission - 
Broad Framework for Implementation, which mandates a community-driven, bottom-
up planning process. Preparing APIPs at the Directorate level without consulting 
district, project, and village-level stakeholders compromises the participatory spirit of 
the scheme and results in top-down planning that may not reflect ground-level needs. 
Such practice weakens the alignment of scheme components with local requirements 
and may adversely affect the effectiveness and targeting of service delivery under 
ICDS. 
2.3.12 Audit Objective: Whether the funds allocated under the Scheme were 
utilised economically, efficiently and effectively to achieve 
Scheme objectives? 
 
2.3.12.1 Financial Management 
Chapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
56 
 
The fund flow mechanism for funds under the ICDS scheme is as given in Chart 
2.3.2. 
Chart 2.3.2: Funds-flow process 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
In the North Eastern Region, “ Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 ” which is an 
integration of Anganwadi Services (ICDS), Poshan Abhiyaan and Scheme for 
Adolescent Girls is implemented on a fund sharing pattern in the ratio of 90:10 
between the Centre and the State Governments. The State Government submits APIP 
to the GoI, subsequently; GoI releases funds to the State on the basis of the approved 
APIP for onward transfer to the implementing Department. In addition to CSS, the 
State Government was also implementing Wheat Based Nutrition Programme 
(WBNP), a State Sector Scheme.  
Audit observed that during 2018-2024, total funds released under ICDS (excluding 
WBNP) were ₹1,196.41 crore 28 against which the Department utilised 
₹1,191.55 crore29. Audit further observed that the Department utilised ₹44.00 crore 
out of ₹44.01 crore released by GoN during 2018-2024 under WBNP. Details of 
allocation and expenditure under different sub-schemes during 2018-2024 are shown 
in Appendix 2.3.1.  Audit observations are summarised below:  
 There were persistent savings under Supplementary Nutrition Programme 
(11 to 35 per cent), a sub-scheme of Anganwadi Services  and Poshan 
Abhiyaan thereby resulting in reduced nutritional support to intended 
beneficiaries as discussed in Paragraph 2.3.16.2. 
 There was short release of fund by GoI in training (14.19 per cent ), 
Upgradation of AWC to Saksham Anganwadi (23.48 per cent) and Uniform 
for AWWs and AWHs (32.92 per cent ) against the approved APIP. The 
short release of funds by GoI led to delays and shortfalls in training, 
                                                
28  Central share ₹1,103.57 crore and State share ₹92.84 crore 
29  Anganwadi Services (₹1,050.61 crore) + Poshan Abhiyaan (₹94.80 crore) + Scheme for Adolescent 
girls (₹46.15 crore) 

56
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social Sector
Chapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
56 
 
The fund flow mechanism for funds under the ICDS scheme is as given in Chart 
2.3.2. 
Chart 2.3.2: Funds-flow process 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
In the North Eastern Region, “ Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 ” which is an 
integration of Anganwadi Services (ICDS), Poshan Abhiyaan and Scheme for 
Adolescent Girls is implemented on a fund sharing pattern in the ratio of 90:10 
between the Centre and the State Governments. The State Government submits APIP 
to the GoI, subsequently; GoI releases funds to the State on the basis of the approved 
APIP for onward transfer to the implementing Department. In addition to CSS, the 
State Government was also implementing Wheat Based Nutrition Programme 
(WBNP), a State Sector Scheme.  
Audit observed that during 2018-2024, total funds released under ICDS (excluding 
WBNP) were ₹1,196.41 crore 28 against which the Department utilised 
₹1,191.55 crore29. Audit further observed that the Department utilised ₹44.00 crore 
out of ₹44.01 crore released by GoN during 2018-2024 under WBNP. Details of 
allocation and expenditure under different sub-schemes during 2018-2024 are shown 
in Appendix 2.3.1.  Audit observations are summarised below:  
 There were persistent savings under Supplementary Nutrition Programme 
(11 to 35 per cent), a sub-scheme of Anganwadi Services  and Poshan 
Abhiyaan thereby resulting in reduced nutritional support to intended 
beneficiaries as discussed in Paragraph 2.3.16.2. 
 There was short release of fund by GoI in training (14.19 per cent ), 
Upgradation of AWC to Saksham Anganwadi (23.48 per cent) and Uniform 
for AWWs and AWHs (32.92 per cent ) against the approved APIP. The 
short release of funds by GoI led to delays and shortfalls in training, 
                                                
28  Central share ₹1,103.57 crore and State share ₹92.84 crore 
29  Anganwadi Services (₹1,050.61 crore) + Poshan Abhiyaan (₹94.80 crore) + Scheme for Adolescent 
girls (₹46.15 crore) 
Chapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
56 
 
The fund flow mechanism for funds under the ICDS scheme is as given in Chart 
2.3.2. 
Chart 2.3.2: Funds-flow process 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
In the North Eastern Region, “ Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 ” which is an 
integration of Anganwadi Services (ICDS), Poshan Abhiyaan and Scheme for 
Adolescent Girls is implemented on a fund sharing pattern in the ratio of 90:10 
between the Centre and the State Governments. The State Government submits APIP 
to the GoI, subsequently; GoI releases funds to the State on the basis of the approved 
APIP for onward transfer to the implementing Department. In addition to CSS, the 
State Government was also implementing Wheat Based Nutrition Programme 
(WBNP), a State Sector Scheme.  
Audit observed that during 2018-2024, total funds released under ICDS (excluding 
WBNP) were ₹1,196.41 crore 28 against which the Department utilised 
₹1,191.55 crore29. Audit further observed that the Department utilised ₹44.00 crore 
out of ₹44.01 crore released by GoN during 2018-2024 under WBNP. Details of 
allocation and expenditure under different sub-schemes during 2018-2024 are shown 
in Appendix 2.3.1.  Audit observations are summarised below:  
 There were persistent savings under Supplementary Nutrition Programme 
(11 to 35 per cent), a sub-scheme of Anganwadi Services  and Poshan 
Abhiyaan thereby resulting in reduced nutritional support to intended 
beneficiaries as discussed in Paragraph 2.3.16.2. 
 There was short release of fund by GoI in training (14.19 per cent ), 
Upgradation of AWC to Saksham Anganwadi (23.48 per cent) and Uniform 
for AWWs and AWHs (32.92 per cent ) against the approved APIP. The 
short release of funds by GoI led to delays and shortfalls in training, 
                                                
28  Central share ₹1,103.57 crore and State share ₹92.84 crore 
29  Anganwadi Services (₹1,050.61 crore) + Poshan Abhiyaan (₹94.80 crore) + Scheme for Adolescent 
girls (₹46.15 crore) 


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
57
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
57 
 
infrastructure upgradation and discrepancies in provision of uniforms as 
discussed in Paragraphs 2.3.13.7, 2.3.13.2 and 2.3.13.4 respectively. 
 The Department's expenditure reports exceeded the figures in the Annual 
Accounts by 19 to 74 per cent each year. 
Despite substantial Central and State funding under Saksham Anganwadi and 
Poshan 2.0, implementation was adversely affected due to persistent savings, short 
releases by GoI, and inconsistent expenditure reporting, resulting in diminished 
programme efficacy and potential understatement of unutilised funds.  
A. Short-release of State share 
Sanction orders of MoWCD, GoI stipulate that the State Government should 
contribute its matching share in the ratio of 90:10 between the Centre and the State for 
effective implementation of the Scheme. Audit observed that there was short release 
of matching State share by GoN as shown in Table 2.3.2. 
Table 2.3.2: Short release of State share 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl.  
No. Year GoI Release 
(90 per cent) 
State Share supposed to 
be released (10 per cent)  
State Share 
released by GoN 
(10 per cent) 
Short-release 
of State share 
(A) ICDS (SNP) 
1 2018-19 82.31 9.15 2.11 7.04 
2 2019-20 73.90 8.21 6.73 1.48 
3 2020-21 82.33 9.15 11.51 -2.37 
4 2021-22 82.33 9.15 9.15 0.00 
5 2022-23 89.18 9.91 6.86 3.05 
Sub-Total (A) 45.56 36.36 9.20 
(B) ICDS (General) 
6 2018-19 37.21 4.13 0.00 4.13 
7 2019-20 77.26 8.58 0.00 8.58 
8 2020-21 56.92 6.32 7.44 (-)1.12 
9 2021-22 72.32 8.04 3.85 4.19 
10 2022-23 83.46 9.27 9.27 0.00 
Sub-Total (B) 36.35 20.56 15.79 
(C) Poshan Abhiyaan 
11 2020-21 15.50 1.72 0.97 0.75 
Sub-Total (C) 1.72 0.97 0.75 
Grand Total (A to C) 83.64 57.89 25.74 
Source: Departmental records 
It can be seen from Table 2.3.2 that during 2018-2023, GoN released ₹36.36 crore 
(79.80 per cent) only against its due share of ₹45.56 crore resulting in short release of 
₹9.20 crore under ICDS (SNP). Similarly, GoN released ₹20.56 crore (56.56 per cent) 
only against its due share of ₹36.35 crore under ICDS (General). Further, there was 
short release of ₹0.75 crore during 2020-21 under Poshan Abhiyaan. For the year 
2023-24, there was no short release under any of the schemes. The State 
Government’s persistent short release of its mandatory share under ICDS and Poshan 
Abhiyaan between 2018-2023, totalling ₹9.95 crore, reflects systemic budgetary 
shortfalls and lack of financial prioritisation. This deviation from the mandated 90:10 

58
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social Sector
Chapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
58 
 
fund-sharing norm undermined the effective implementation of nutrition and welfare 
schemes, reducing outreach and impact for intended beneficiaries. The shortfall 
indicates a recurring issue of non-compliance with scheme guidelines and weak 
financial governance at the State levels. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (June 2024) that 
the matter would be brought to the notice of the State Finance Department. 
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable. Merely forwarding the issue to 
the Finance Department does not address the systemic failure in timely and adequate 
budgeting for critical welfare schemes. Despite clear guidelines under the ICDS 
framework and repeated instances of under-release, no concrete corrective mechanism 
or accountability structure was proposed. This continued pattern of short release 
indicates institutional weaknesses in fiscal planning and a lack of ownership over 
essential child and maternal nutrition schemes. 
2.3.12.2 Conclusion 
The implementation of the ICDS scheme in Nagaland during 2018-2024 suffered 
from systemic weaknesses in infrastructure development, service delivery, 
convergence mechanisms, inventory management, financial propriety, and 
accountability. Despite substantial Central and State funding, the audit found 
widespread deficiencies in infrastructure at AWCs, irregularities in procurement and 
distribution of critical supplies (including nutrition, medicines, and uniforms), 
inadequate capacity building of field functionaries, poor utilisation of Aadhaar 
enrolment infrastructure, and failure to institutionalise effective convergence with the 
H&FW Department. These gaps severely compromised the core objectives of the 
ICDS Mission, to provide a strong foundation for child development, ensure maternal 
health, and address malnutrition in an integrated and sustainable manner. 
2.3.13 Audit Objective: Whether the Scheme managed to institutionalise 
essential services effectively, economically and 
efficiently and strengthen structures at all levels 
ensuring children of the best possible start to life and 
improve health and well-being of Adolescent Girls as 
well as pregnant and lactating mothers? 
2.3.13.1 Adequacy of AWCs  
The ICDS Scheme Guidelines for Monitoring & Supervision envisage one AWC is to 
be set up for every 300–800 population in tribal, hilly and other difficult areas. Audit 
observed that Nagaland has 3,980 functional AWCs, against a population of 
19,78,502 (2011 Census) and a projected population of 22,33,000 (2023), indicating 
that the number of AWCs is broadly adequate to meet the population-based 
requirement under the ICDS scheme as per prescribed norms, however, this did not 
ensure uniform access across all regions. Audit is of the view that the Department 
may consider undertaking geo-tagged mapping of AWCs to identify and address 
localised shortfalls and ensure equitable and effective service delivery, particularly in 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
59 
 
remote and underserved areas.  
JPV of the 46 test-checked AWCs showed significant deficiencies in the 
infrastructure and facilities of these centres, as detailed in subsequent paragraphs. 
2.3.13.2 Inadequate infrastructure at the 46 test-checked AWCs 
The GoI instructions (March 2011) envisage that an AWC must have separate sitting 
room for children/women, kitchen, storeroom for storing food items, child friendly 
toilets, drinking water facility and space for playing. Further, Paragraphs 2.3 to 2.5 of 
the Operational Guideline of Food Safety and Hygiene for Supplementary Nutrition 
under ICDS mandated that an AWC should have child friendly toilets and water 
supply facilities, adequate supply of potable water with appropriate facilities for its 
storage, distribution for processing and cooking food and adequate drainage and waste 
disposal systems and facilities. Audit observed that out of the 3,980 operational 
AWCs, 2,425 AWCs were functioning in their own building, 394 AWCs were co-
located in schools, 199 AWCs in Panchayat buildings and 962 AWCs were 
functioning in a rented building. During JPV (August-September 2023) of 46 AWCs30 
in the four test-checked districts, Audit observed that the Department failed to provide 
the following infrastructural requirements: 
(i)  Absence of or non-functional AWC Building 
 There were no AWCs at Tuophema F (under CDPO, Chiephobozou) and 
Angangba E (under CDPO, Longkhim). 
 Two AWCs31 were non-functional under CDPO Peren. 
(ii)  Adequacy of space and basic facilities  
 All the 46 AWCs did not have prescribed space of 600 square feet, kitchen, 
Check-up/Examination room, Counselling room, space for outdoor activities, 
safe and adequate storage facility and sanitary block required for waste 
disposal.  
 Baby weighing scales were not available in 37 AWCs. 
 Growth Chart was not available in 43 AWCs. 
 Water storage container was not available in 41 AWCs. 
 Electricity was not available in 38 AWCs. 
 Drinking water and toilet facilities were not available in 45 AWCs. 
(iii) Incomplete implementation of sanctioned projects for toilets and drinking 
water facilities 
GoI sanctioned (March 2019 to October 2022) an amount of ₹3.01 crore 32 for 
construction of child friendly toilets in 1,264 AWCs and for providing drinking water 
                                                
30   Infrastructure status of AWCs: own building-23, AWW’s house-08, Panchayat Hall/Community 
building-08, temporarily housed -03, no centre -02 and non-functional -02. 
31   Mpai New and Peren Village I in Peren. 
32   MoWCD, GoI’s 
 i. Sanction Order CD-II-14/7/2017-CD-II Dated 31 October 2022 released an amount of 
₹136.51 lakh for provision of toilet facility in 632 AWWs  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
59
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
59 
 
remote and underserved areas.  
JPV of the 46 test-checked AWCs showed significant deficiencies in the 
infrastructure and facilities of these centres, as detailed in subsequent paragraphs. 
2.3.13.2 Inadequate infrastructure at the 46 test-checked AWCs 
The GoI instructions (March 2011) envisage that an AWC must have separate sitting 
room for children/women, kitchen, storeroom for storing food items, child friendly 
toilets, drinking water facility and space for playing. Further, Paragraphs 2.3 to 2.5 of 
the Operational Guideline of Food Safety and Hygiene for Supplementary Nutrition 
under ICDS mandated that an AWC should have child friendly toilets and water 
supply facilities, adequate supply of potable water with appropriate facilities for its 
storage, distribution for processing and cooking food and adequate drainage and waste 
disposal systems and facilities. Audit observed that out of the 3,980 operational 
AWCs, 2,425 AWCs were functioning in their own building, 394 AWCs were co-
located in schools, 199 AWCs in Panchayat buildings and 962 AWCs were 
functioning in a rented building. During JPV (August-September 2023) of 46 AWCs30 
in the four test-checked districts, Audit observed that the Department failed to provide 
the following infrastructural requirements: 
(i)  Absence of or non-functional AWC Building 
 There were no AWCs at Tuophema F (under CDPO, Chiephobozou) and 
Angangba E (under CDPO, Longkhim). 
 Two AWCs31 were non-functional under CDPO Peren. 
(ii)  Adequacy of space and basic facilities  
 All the 46 AWCs did not have prescribed space of 600 square feet, kitchen, 
Check-up/Examination room, Counselling room, space for outdoor activities, 
safe and adequate storage facility and sanitary block required for waste 
disposal.  
 Baby weighing scales were not available in 37 AWCs. 
 Growth Chart was not available in 43 AWCs. 
 Water storage container was not available in 41 AWCs. 
 Electricity was not available in 38 AWCs. 
 Drinking water and toilet facilities were not available in 45 AWCs. 
(iii) Incomplete implementation of sanctioned projects for toilets and drinking 
water facilities 
GoI sanctioned (March 2019 to October 2022) an amount of ₹3.01 crore 32 for 
construction of child friendly toilets in 1,264 AWCs and for providing drinking water 
                                                
30   Infrastructure status of AWCs: own building-23, AWW’s house-08, Panchayat Hall/Community 
building-08, temporarily housed -03, no centre -02 and non-functional -02. 
31   Mpai New and Peren Village I in Peren. 
32   MoWCD, GoI’s 
 i. Sanction Order CD-II-14/7/2017-CD-II Dated 31 October 2022 released an amount of 
₹136.51 lakh for provision of toilet facility in 632 AWWs  

60
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
60 
 
facilities in 1,069 AWCs. JPV showed that six AWCs 33, where the construction of 
toilet and drinking water facilities were stated to be provided, lacked toilet and 
drinking water facilities. Thus, despite clear infrastructure norms and Central funding 
support, implementation remained deficient due to weak convergence mechanisms, 
inadequate planning, and delayed fund release by partnering Departments. These 
systemic lapses compromised the quality of service delivery and denied intended 
beneficiaries access to basic health and nutrition services. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (October 2024) 
that poor infrastructure is a matter of concern and assured that efforts are underway to 
identify and prioritise the infrastructural gaps. It was further stated that convergence 
with other Departments will help address and improve AWC infrastructure. 
The reply is general and does not address the core issues highlighted by Audit. 
Despite the availability of Central assistance and the presence of convergence 
committees, the failure to ensure basic infrastructure at AWCs reflects a lack of 
coordinated planning, ineffective inter-departmental convergence and weak 
monitoring mechanisms. The absence of a clear action plan, timelines, or 
accountability for stalled construction and non-functional facilities further undermines 
service delivery to women and children.  
2.3.13.3 Irregularities in procurement and distribution of medicine kits 
Annexure III, Clause 3(ii) of the ICDS Mission - Broad Framework for 
Implementation stipulated provision of medicine kits for every AWC every year 
containing basic medicines for controlling common ailments such as fever, cold, 
cough, worm infestation and basic equipment for first aid. Further, Rule 208 of the 
GFR, 2017, inter alia, stated that details of the material received should be entered in 
the appropriate stock register. Audit observed that during 2018-24, the Department 
procured medicine kits on four occasions incurring an expenditure of ₹2.81 crore 34. 
Audit, however, observed the following irregularities in these purchases: 
 The medicine kits procured during 2020-2022 were not supported by 
delivery challans. Further, in violation of Rule 208 of the GFR, 2017, the 
Directorate, the test-checked CDPOs and AWCs did not maintain stock 
registers to account for the medicine kits. Thus, Audit could not ascertain the 
actual date of delivery of these medicine kits to the nine test-checked CDPOs 
for further distribution to AWCs. However, JPV (August-September 2023) 
of the test-checked 46 AWCs showed non-availability of medicine kits in 36 
AWCs.  
                                                                                                                                       
      ii. Sanction order No. CD-II-14/4/2019-CD-II Dated: 31 March 2020 released ₹117.22 lakh for 
provision of toilet facility in of 632 AWWs and drinking water in 544 AWWs, and 
     iii. Sanction order No. CD-II-14/7/2017-CD-II (e-43648) Dated: 01 March 2019 released 
₹47.25 lakh for providing drinking water facilities in 525 AWWs.  
33  Kevijau C and Rio colony (CDPO (U), Dimapur), Old Tsadang C and Alisopor (CDPO Chare), Old 
Medical A1 (CDPO Sangsangyu), Rusoma A (CDPO Kohima Tribal) 
34  Bill No. 405 dated 31/03/2021 for ₹60.00 lakh, bill No. 196 dated 05/10/2021 for ₹59.70 lakh, bill 
No. 412 dated 27/03/2023 for ₹1.07 crore and bill No 43 dated 15/05/2023 for ₹0.54 crore. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
61
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
61 
 
 The medicine kits worth ₹1.07 crore procured in 2022-23 which were sent to 
the test-checked CDPOs were not received by eight test-checked CDPOs35.  
Despite incurring an expenditure of ₹2.81 crore for procurement of medicine kits 
during 2018-2024, Audit observed serious lapses in inventory management, including 
non-maintenance of stock registers and untraceable distribution records. The absence 
of internal controls and monitoring mechanisms resulted in non-availability of 
medicine kits at 36 out of 46 test-checked AWCs, and non-receipt of kits worth ₹1.07 
crore by eight test-checked CDPOs. These deficiencies led to the denial of basic first-
aid and health support services to the target beneficiaries, defeating the objective of 
this essential health intervention under the ICDS scheme. 
The Government in its reply stated (October 2024) that medicine kits procured during 
2020-2022 were distributed to AWCs and were exhausted during Audit inspection 
carried out in 2023. It was further stated that an amount of ₹1.07 crore was sanctioned 
by the State Government in 2022-23 for procurement of medicine kits and that the 
same was procured and distributed during 2023-24.  
The reply of the Government is not acceptable. In the absence of stock registers at the 
Directorate, CDPO, and AWC levels, the claim regarding distribution and utilisation 
of medicine kits remains unsubstantiated. Further, certifications issued by CDPOs 
regarding non-receipt of kits between 2020 and 2023 contradict the Department’s 
assertion. Audit maintains that the absence of requisite documentation and effective 
monitoring led to ineffective utilisation of funds amounting to ₹2.27 crore, resulting 
in the denial of basic healthcare services to the target beneficiaries. 
2.3.13.4  Non-delivery of uniforms for AWWs and AWHs  
Annexure XVIII of the ICDS Mission - Broad Framework for Implementation 
envisages provision of uniform and name badge to each AWWs and AWHs with a 
view to recognising their role and give them an “identity”. As per norms, two sarees/ 
uniform set at ₹300 each per year are admissible to workers and helpers. Further, Rule 
208 of the GFR, 2017, inter alia, states that details of the material received should be 
entered in the appropriate stock register. During 2018-19 to 2023-24, GoI sanctioned 
₹1.35 crore36 for the procurement of uniforms and badges. Audit observed that the 
Directorate after procuring did not record the details of the receipt and distribution of 
the procured uniforms and badges in the stock register, however, the payment was 
made through Bills without ascertaining the actual delivery of the materials. Audit 
further observed that: 
 In 2021-22, ₹0.64 crore was spent to procure 8,994 uniforms 37, but six out of 
nine test-checked CDPOs did not receive uniforms for AWWs/AWHs. 
                                                
35  CDPO Chiephobozou, CDPO Kohima Tribal, CDPO Longkhim, CDPO Sangsangnyu, CDPO 
Chare, CDPO Medziphema, CDPO Dimapur Urban and CDPO Peren. 
36  2021-22 (₹63.68 lakh), 2022-23 (₹71.64 lakh) & 2023-24 (nil) 
37   Payment of an amount of ₹0.64 crore was made (October 2021) to M/s Alim Enterprise, Dimapur 

62
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
62 
 
 In 2023-24, ₹0.72 crore 38 was utilised for procuring 7,000 uniforms and 
5,129 badges; however, none of the nine test-checked CDPOs received these 
items. 
Despite incurring an expenditure of ₹1.36 crore for the procurement of uniforms and 
badges during 2021-22 and 2023-24, Audit observed the absence of documentation in 
stock registers and non-receipt of supplies by the majority of sampled CDPOs. The 
Directorate’s failure to maintain basic inventory records in violation of Rule 208 of 
the GFR, 2017, combined with field-level evidence of non-delivery, indicates 
financial irregularity and potential misappropriation, undermining accountability, 
transparency, and the intended recognition of field functionaries under the ICDS 
Scheme.  
The State Government in its reply stated (June 2024) that there was pendency in 
supply of procured uniforms and cited Covid-19 pandemic and change of AWWs for 
the delay in distribution of uniforms. It was further stated that uniforms procured 
during 2020-21 were distributed to the AWWs and AWHs and that procurements 
made during 2023-24, are now being distributed. The Government also assured that 
updated stock registers would be furnished for audit verification once the distribution 
was completed.  
The State Government’s reply is not acceptable. Audit observed that none of the nine 
test-checked CDPOs received uniforms or badges during 2021-22 and 2023-24, and 
no documentary evidence, such as updated stock registers or distribution records, was 
produced to substantiate the claims of procurement or dispatch. The absence of such 
documentation, combined with field-level certification of non-receipt, strongly 
indicates lapses in inventory control and raises concerns regarding financial 
accountability and the actual utilisation of ₹1.36 crore. The invocation of pandemic-
related delays is not acceptable, as procurements were made in two separate years 
with no subsequent follow-through, even after restrictions had eased. 
2.3.13.5 Inefficient utilisation of Aadhaar Enrolment kits  
Paragraph 2.6 of the “Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0” guidelines stipulated that 
all the beneficiaries should be Aadhaar seeded to ensure last mile tracking and 
delivery of services. It further stipulated that States/UTs should make effort to enrol 
beneficiaries at the AWC itself. 
Audit observed that during 2018-2024, the Department procured 222 39 Aadhaar 
Enrolment kits (AEKs) amounting to ₹3.43 crore, out of which only 62 AEKs were 
distributed to CDPOs. Audit also observed that, out of the 62 AEKs distributed 40, 
only four out of nine test-checked CDPOs received one kit each. Audit further 
                                                
38  to address the backlog of 2022-23, payment of ₹0.72 crore was made (May 2023) to M/s Jupiter 
Enterprises, Dimapur 
39  No. of AEKs = 162 procured in June 2019 + 60 procured on July 2023= 222 
40 For the procurement of 162 AEKs the distribution date was not recorded in the register. While for 
the second procurement of 60 AEKs, the items were issued between 16/02/2024 and 21/03/2024.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
63
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
63 
 
observed that three out of the four test-checked CDPOs did not utilise the AEKs for 
Aadhaar enrolment. These shortcomings resulted in Aadhaar seeding of only 14.51 
per cent beneficiaries 41 in the State as of March 2024. These deficiencies indicate 
ineffective planning, delayed coordination with UIDAI for training, and inadequate 
operational readiness, which compromised the goal of universal Aadhaar-linked 
service delivery under the scheme. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (June 2024) that 
there were delays in providing training to the operators (Supervisors) by UIDAI due 
to the Covid-19 pandemic and constant upgradation of the machine/software. It was 
also stated (October 2024) that efforts would be made to complete the distribution of 
the remaining AEKs and that 43 department employees were certified as 
Operators-cum-Aadhaar Supervisors and therefore it is expected that the majority of 
the beneficiaries would be covered by the end of this financial year.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable. The Department failed to ensure 
timely distribution and operationalisation of AEKs despite clear guidelines under the 
scheme and substantial expenditure incurred. The reasons cited, namely, delays in 
training and software upgrades, do not justify the extended period of underutilisation 
spanning several years. Moreover, the Department did not furnish any evidence of 
contingency planning or interim measures to ensure Aadhaar seeding of beneficiaries 
during this period. The assurance of future action cannot substitute for the lack of 
timely implementation, which adversely affected service delivery and excluded a 
significant portion of beneficiaries from the intended benefits of Aadhaar-linked 
entitlements. 
2.3.13.6 Training and capacity building of field functionaries 
Annexure 4 of the Final Saksham and Poshan 2.0 guidelines envisaged that at the 
beginning of each financial year, assessment of existing capacity for each of the three 
tiers of frontline workers should be carried out at State level to identify the themes 
and topics for the training. The areas of capacity building included Capacity Building 
- Ante-natal and Post-natal care practices, Infant and Young Child Care and Feeding 
Practices, Growth Monitoring, Supplementary Nutrition, Basics of Nutrition and 
Regional Meal Plans, Poshan Vatikas, Poshan Tracker, Pre-school Education, 
Convergence, and Soft Skill knowledge- organising effective home visits, community 
based events and Jan Andolans, counselling, behaviour change communication, 
planning and time management, processes for quality testing of Take Home Ration 
(THR).  
Audit observed that during the period 2018-2024, the Department did not make any 
assessment and had not set any targets for conducting trainings. Audit further 
observed  
 
 
                                                
41 ICDS beneficiaries as per MPR of March 2024 is 5,47,228.  

64
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social Sector
Chapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
64 
 
 
that the State Programme Management Unit (SPMU) conducted 11 trainings 42 under 
Rashtriya Poshan Abhiyaan during 2019-2023. However, except for Poshan Tracker 
training, the sessions did not cover the themes and topics prescribed in the guidelines 
and the absence of a comprehensive training plan on key themes undermined the 
intended capacity building and skill enhancement of frontline workers, thereby 
limiting their effectiveness in delivering key nutrition, health, and behavioural change 
interventions at the grassroots level. 
The State Government in its reply stated (June 2024) that trainings were conducted on 
need basis and hence comprehensive training plan was not prepared. The State 
Government also forwarded the attendance sheet of seven out of 11 trainings 
conducted by the SPMU during 2020-2024.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable as it was not in conformity with 
the Scheme guidelines which require the Department to assess the existing capacity of 
frontline workers at each of the three tiers at the State level and identify training 
themes and topics at the beginning of each financial year. The conduct of sporadic 
trainings without a structured assessment or alignment to guideline-mandated themes 
does not meet the intended objectives of systematic capacity building. The attendance 
records furnished did not establish the content or coverage of essential skill domains. 
In the absence of a targeted and measurable training framework, the efforts made by 
the Department fall short of ensuring effective service delivery through adequately 
trained personnel. 
2.3.13.7 Deficiencies in training implementation    
Annexure XI of the ICDS Mission - Broad Framework for Implementation stipulated 
that at the State level, Middle Level Training Centres (MLTCs) were to be engaged 
for training of supervisors and instructors of AWWs/AWHs and Anganwadi Workers 
                                                
42  Utilisation certificates, Actual Payment records and Food bills relating to the conduct of the 
trainings were furnished. 
1. ICDS -CAS Refresher Training for helpdesk (2019-20) - 18 to 19 September 2020,  
2. Training on e-ILA for Poshan Coordinators - 2019-20),  
3. NSS Training -2019-20, 
4. e-ILA Training -2019-20,  
5. Training on ICDS CAS - 2020-21, 
6. Training on Governance Dashboard -2020-21, 
7. Orientation training conducted for different communities - 14 to19 February 2024. 
8. Workshop for DWO/DPO/CDPO/Supervisors/Inspector/AWTC Instructor and State level 
coordination meeting on Poshan Abhiyaan for District and Block Coordinators - 12 to 
13 February 2023 
9. Orientation of church leader, Community elders & Youth leaders on importance of Good 
Nutrition and Balanced Diet. Seminar on Poshan Abhiyaan for District and Block Coordinators – 
19 September 2023. 
10. POSHAN Tracker Training and State level coordination meeting on Poshan Abhiyaan for 
District and Block Coordinators - 13 & 14 February 2024, and 
11. Orientation program for communities – 27 February 2024 to 06 March 2024.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
65
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
65 
 
Training Centres (AWTCs) were to be engaged for training of AWWs/AWHs. Audit 
observed that there was only one training centre in the State i.e., AWTC, Diphupar 
and trainings 43 were conducted during 2018-2020 but no training was conducted 
during 2020-2024 due to non-allocation of funds. The absence of training activities at 
the State’s only training centre for AWWs and AWHs from 2020 to 2024 due to 
non-allocation of funds undermined the capacity building of frontline workers, 
adversely affecting growth monitoring and malnutrition management as discussed in 
Paragraph 2.3.16.2.  
The State Government did not offer comments on the Audit observation. 
2.3.13.8 Supplementary Nutrition Programme 
The Supplementary Nutrition Programme (SNP) aimed to improve the health and 
nutrition status of children aged six months to six years (6m – 6y), Adolescent Girls 
(AGs) aged 11 to 18 years 44 and Pregnant Women and Lactating Mothers (P&LMs). 
The details of enrolled beneficiaries under the various categories are given in 
Table 2.3.3. 
Table2.3.3: Details of beneficiaries enrolled during the period from 2018-19 to 2023-24 
Sl. 
No. Category 
Number of beneficiaries enrolled during the period from 2018-19 to  
2023-24 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
1. Children aged 
6m - 6y 
3,19,762 3,19,766 3,19,389 3,50,412 3,68,722 3,69,371 
2. P&LMs 46,165 51,180 50953 40,115 41,296 41,387 
3. Severely 
Malnourished 
296 271 269 248 244 234 
4. AGs* 7,320 7,320 7,320 7,629 1,37,377 1,37,377 
Total   3,73,543   3,78,537   3,77,931   3,98,404  5,47,639  5,48,369 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
* Nutrition for Adolescent girls is covered under Scheme for Adolescent girls. 
From Table 2.3.3 above, it can be seen that: 
(i) Children aged 6m–6y: The number of beneficiaries showed a steady increase 
over time, with a notable rise post 2020-21. 
(ii) P&LMs: The number of beneficiaries fluctuated slightly, with a dip in 2021-
22 but overall stable. 
(iii) Severely Malnourished: The number of beneficiaries displayed a decreasing 
trend, but extremely low numbers may indicate under-identification or 
reporting issues. 
(iv) AGs: There was a dramatic increase in the number of beneficiaries from 7,000 
to 1.37 lakh in 2022-23, probably due to change in coverage under the Scheme 
for AGs. 
                                                
43  Five Job Training course (JTC) and one Orientation for AWHs during 2018 -19 and six JTC and 
one Orientation for AWHs during 2019-20. 
44  Under Poshan 2.0, the SAG was revised from 11-14 years (as per SAG Administrative Guidelines, 
2018) and the targeted beneficiaries were revised to Adolescent Girls in the age group of 14 to 
18 years. 

66
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
66 
 
(v) Total beneficiaries: The total beneficiaries increased from 3.7 lakh (2018-22) 
to over 5.4 lakh in 2022–24 primarily due to expanded adolescent girl 
enrolment. 
The SNP cost norms for beneficiaries 45 under the ICDS Mission are revised time to 
time46. The discrepancies noticed in the implementation of SNP are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
A. Excess expenditure on short supply of SNP food items  
The terms and conditions of the supply order for supply of SNP items mandated the 
suppliers47 to deliver food items 48 strictly as per the specifications endorsed by the 
Department. Audit observed that against 619.71 MT of five food items 49 shown as 
supplied to the nine test-checked CDPOs, only 499.99 MT was certified as received 
by the CDPOs, resulting in short receipt of 119.71 MT 50 amounting to ₹2.45 crore in 
respect of 10 supply bills during 2018-2024. The failure to ensure delivery of 
quantities as per supply orders reflects weak contract enforcement, inadequate 
verification mechanisms, and ineffective oversight of procurement processes, thereby 
impacting the integrity of the Supplementary Nutrition Programme.  
The State Government in its reply stated (October 2024) that the Department 
conducted a thorough review of records and found no discrepancies in the quantity of 
item supplied.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable as Audit observation is based on 
documentary evidence of physical receipt records maintained and certified by the nine 
test-checked CDPOs. The Department’s assertion of no discrepancies contradicts the 
verified field-level data. In the absence of stock registers or acknowledgement 
receipts substantiating full delivery, the short supply of 119.71 MT remains 
unaccounted for. The reply also failed to address the issue of excess payment based 
on unverified quantities, raising concerns over financial propriety and lapses in supply 
chain accountability.  
B. Wheat Based Nutrition Programme under SNP 
Wheat Based Nutrition Programme (WBNP) was a State Sector scheme which 
followed the norms of SNP or of the nutrition component of the ICDS. Central 
                                                
45  Children (6-72 months), Severely malnourished children (6-72 months), Pregnant women and 
Nursing mothers and AGs (14-18 years) 
46  (1.) w.e.f. 2012 cost norms (i) Children (6-72 months) –₹6, (ii) Severely malnourished children 
(6-72 months) – ₹9 and (iii) Pregnant women and Nursing mothers – ₹7 (2.) w.e.f.  August 2022 
i) Children (6-72 months) –₹8, (ii) Severely malnourished children (6-72 months) – ₹12 and 
(iii) Pregnant women & Nursing mothers and AGs (14-18 years) – ₹9.50 
47 M/s Ponthungo Enterprises, M/s Abhinav Food Product, M/s Yetovi Enterprises, M/s Rausheena 
Udyog Ltd., M/s Surho Tribal Welfare and M/s Continental Milkose India Ltd. 
48  Micro nutrient fortified biscuit, cornflakes, Abhinav Biscuit, Marie Biscuit, Protein Rich Rice, 
Instant Daliya, Surho Kheer Mix and Kichidi 
49  Micronutrient Fortified Biscuit, Cornflakes, Energy Fortified Soya Biscuit, Surho Kheer Mix and 
Kichidi. 
50 1 kg = 0.001 Metric Ton (MT) 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
67
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
67 
 
assistance for the programme consists of supply of subsidised rice and wheat to the 
State. The agreement between the Department and the supplier 51 (selected and 
approved by GoN) provided that the supplier should take delivery of food grains on 
behalf of the Department by depositing its own funds to the Food Corporation of India 
(FCI) and should transport and deliver to the consignee within a period of two months 
from the date of lifting the food grains from the FCI. During 2018-2024, an amount of 
₹44.00 core was sanctioned and paid to the suppliers against implementation of 
WBNP. Audit observed the following irregularities in the supply and delivery process 
of rice under WBNP: 
(i) Short lifting of rice under WBNP: During 2018-2023, the Department issued 
order for supply of 75,460 MT of rice under ICDS projects. Audit analysis of the 
release and lifting orders/issue report of FCI showed that only 70,180 MT out of 
75,460 MT of rice was lifted resulting in short lifting of 5,280 MT of rice. Audit, 
however, observed that an amount of ₹1.95 crore 52 was paid to the supplier against 
the quantity (5,280 MT) which was not actually lifted from FCI. 
(ii) Short delivery of rice under WBNP: Examination of records showed that during 
2018-2023, the supplier claimed an amount of ₹4.25 crore 53 as reimbursement for 
delivery of 11,482 MT rice to the nine test-checked CDPOs and full payment was 
made to the supplier. Audit, however, observed that there was short supply of 
3,633 MT of rice valued at ₹1.34 crore.  
Audit observed that these discrepancies in the supply chain was due to the 
Department’s failure to verify the actual quantity of rice lifted from the FCI and 
delivered to the CDPOs. These lapses point to serious weaknesses in the 
Department’s contract enforcement and supply chain verification, leading to excess 
expenditure and probable diversion or misappropriation of subsidised food grains.  
The State Government in its reply stated (June 2024) that the discrepancy regarding 
short-lifting of rice was due to non-maintenance of proper records at block levels. The 
State Government further stated (October 2024) that the Department conducted a 
thorough review of records which found no discrepancies in the quantity of item 
supplied.  
The reply is not acceptable as Audit findings are based on verifiable documentation, 
including FCI Issue Reports that confirm the short lifting of 5,280 MT of rice and 
certified records from the test-checked CDPOs indicating a delivery shortfall of 
3,633 MT. The Department’s internal review lacked credibility in the absence of 
supporting evidence contradicting the third-party and field-verified records. The 
justification citing poor recordkeeping at the block level only underscored the 
systemic deficiencies in supply chain monitoring. The discrepancies reflected a failure 
                                                
51 M/s Encore Enterprises selected at the Government level during the period covered by Audit 
52  ₹370 x 52,800 = ₹1.95 crore (₹2.00 crore approx.) 
53 ₹370 x 1,14,824  quintal 

68
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
68 
 
of oversight and raised concerns of financial impropriety in the implementation of the 
WBNP. 
C. Take-Home Ration, morning snacks and Hot Cooked Meal (HCM) 
The Supplementary Nutrition (SN) is delivered through two modalities – Hot-Cooked 
Meal (HCM) and Take-Home Ration (THR) – containing required nutrition norms. 
Paragraph 3.3 of the Mission Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 Guidelines 
stipulated that all pregnant and lactating mothers, children in the age group of 
6-36 months, Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM) children and adolescent girls 
(14-18 years) were entitled to receive THR and children in the age group of 3-6 years 
were entitled to receive HCM and morning snacks under the Anganwadi Services 
from the AWCs. HCMs were cooked and served to children aged 3-6 years at AWCs 
in the form of breakfast and lunch during Early Childhood Care and Education 
(ECCE) sessions, while THR was distributed to children aged 6 month-3 years, AGs 
and P&LMs in the form of premixes54 consisting of fortified food grains.  
Audit observed that while THR was provided to the beneficiaries in all the test-
checked AWCs, morning snacks (biscuits) were provided in only six out of the 46 
test-checked AWCs during the period covered by audit. Audit also observed that 
during the audit period, HCM was not provided in any of the 46 AWCs thereby 
depriving the targeted beneficiaries of the intended nutritional benefits. Audit further 
observed that no records were maintained at the AWCs to document the receipt, 
consumption and distribution of food items including THR, HCM and morning 
snacks.  
The State Government in its reply stated (June 2024) that HCM in the form of Surho 
kheer mix or khichidi and biscuits as morning snacks were served to children in the 
age group of 3-6 years who attended the AWCs. It was further stated that records of 
consumption and distribution at the AWC levels were not maintained as these were 
monitored through Poshan Tracker app.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable as the Audit findings are based 
on direct verification through test-check of 46 AWCs and field interviews with 
AWWs, who confirmed that HCMs were not served and morning snacks were not 
provided in 40 AWCs. The Department’s claim of monitoring via the Poshan Tracker 
app was not substantiated with verifiable data during audit. Further, digital monitoring 
does not obviate the requirement for physical registers; particularly where service 
delivery is absent and field-level functionaries deny the provision of entitlements. The 
absence of HCM and morning snacks not only violated the scheme norms but also 
undermined the objectives of early childhood nutrition and care. 
                                                
54  THR Premixes are in powder form and can be used to prepare a variety of dishes by beneficiaries at 
their homes. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
69
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
69 
 
2.3.13.9 Early Childhood Care and Development 
Paragraph 2.2.1(v) of the ICDS Mission - Broad Framework for Implementation 
stipulated that strengthening early childhood care and education was a core service of 
the AWCs with dedicated four hours of early childhood education sessions followed 
by supplementary nutrition, growth monitoring and other related interventions. 
Developing and implementing activity-based child centres and age-appropriate 
curricula aiming at all round development of children and monthly fixed Village Early 
Childhood Care and Education Day were also to be ensured.  
Audit observed that age specific books/syllabus  was not prepared by the Department. 
Audit also observed that sufficient and safe space was not available for conducting 
activities in all the 46 test-checked AWCs. Audit further observed that though an 
expenditure of ₹4.05 crore 55 was incurred for procurement of pre-school education 
(PSE) kits during 2021-2024, the Directorate did not maintain records of their receipt 
and distribution. Audit further observed that the two suppliers engaged for the supply 
of PSE kits were not registered for the provision of such items and had charged an 
excess amount of ₹14.45 lakh as Goods and Services Tax (GST). JPV conducted 
during August to September 2023, showed non-availability of PSE kits in 41 out of 46 
test-checked (89.13 per cent ) AWCs. The absence of age-specific curricula, 
inadequate infrastructure, and non-availability of PSE kits in most of the test-checked 
AWCs undermined the ICDS objective of laying a strong foundation for the proper 
psychological, physical, and social development of the child. These systemic lapses 
compromised the quality of ECCE services envisaged under the ICDS Mission and 
impeded the holistic development of children in the 3-6 year age group. 
The State Government in its reply stated (June 2024) that Activity Books were issued 
from time to time with approval from the Ministry. It was further stated that records 
for the period 2018-2023 could not be traced and that procurement for 2023-2024 
could not be made timely.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable as there were no records of PSE 
kits being procured and delivered to AWCs during 2018-2023. The assertion that 
activity books were issued “from time to time” was not supported by any 
documentary evidence, nor were stock registers or distribution lists produced. The 
mere inability to trace records for 2018-23 and the delayed procurement for 2023-24 
confirmed weak inventory control and planning rather than negating the audit finding. 
In the absence of verifiable proof of curriculum development, kit distribution, or 
adequate learning space, the deficiencies highlighted by Audit remain un-addressed. 
                                                
55 ₹1,19,40,000 vide Bill no. 197 dated 08/10/2021, ₹1,79,09,953- vide Bill No 412 dated 27/03/2023 
and ₹1,07,46,000 (backlog of 2022-2023) vide Bill No 42 dated 15/05/2023 

70
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
70 
 
2.3.13.10      Immunisation  
Under the Universal Immunisation Programme (UIP), GoI provides vaccination to 
prevent 11 vaccine preventable diseases 56. As per UIP, a child is fully immunised if 
he/she has received all due vaccines as per the national immunisation schedule within 
the first year. Immunisation in the villages is carried out by the H&FW Department, 
GoN in convergence with Anganwadi services.  
The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) 57 had recommended that the Department 
should improve the efficiency of AWWs so as to enable them to their best potential to 
minimise the immunisation gap. Though the Department acknowledged the 
recommendation for compliance, Audit found no documented records on child 
immunisation, with data instead sourced from the H&FW Department. The status of 
immunisation in the State is shown in Chart 2.3.3. 
 
Source: Data provided by H&FW Department 
It can be seen from Chart 2.3.3  that during 2018-2024, there was a significant 
shortfall in full immunisation of children aged 0-1 year ranging from 37 to 46 per 
cent, which compromised the ICDS core objective of improving the health status of 
children. Audit observed that the shortfall was due to the Department’s inability to 
ensure effective convergence with the H&FW Department. Despite recommendations 
from the PAC to enhance the role of AWWs in immunisation support, the Department 
failed to maintain any immunisation-related documentation or ensure effective 
convergence with the H&FW Department. This lack of coordination adversely 
impacted the achievement of ICDS objectives in improving child health and reducing 
preventable diseases in early childhood. 
                                                
56 Diphtheria, Pertussis, Tetanus, Polio, Measles, severe form of Childhood Tuberculosis and 
Hepatitis B and meningitis & pneumonia, Rubella & Rotavirus Diarrhoea in sampled States and 
Japanese Encephalitis in endemic districts 
57  103 rd Report of the Public Accounts Committee (2011-2012) on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the observation/Recommendations contained in the 95 th Report of the Public 
Accounts on the C&AG Report of India 2005-06 recommendation No.1.2.15 Para 3.2.18 
(Immunisation) of AR. 
0
1 0 , 0 0 0
2 0 , 0 0 0
3 0 , 0 0 0
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Chart 2.3.3: Status of Immunisation in the State (0-1 year)
T a r g e t  ( n u m b e r  o f  c h i l d r e n  0 - 1  y e a r  o l d )
Number of fully immunised children
S h o r t  f a l l  i n  i m m u n i s a t i o n

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
71
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
71 
 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (June 2024) that 
immunisations are carried out by the H&FW Department but that efforts are being 
made for better convergence and outreach.  
The reply of the State Government, while acknowledging that immunisation is carried 
out by the H&FW Department, did not address the critical role envisaged for AWWs 
under the ICDS Framework in facilitating convergence and outreach. The absence of 
documentation and coordinated field-level engagement reflects inadequate follow-up 
on PAC recommendations and poor institutional linkage between the implementing 
departments. The persistent immunisation shortfall highlights the consequences of 
fragmented service delivery and the need for a structured mechanism for joint 
monitoring and accountability. 
2.3.13.11 Health check-up 
Paragraph 2.2.1(iii) of the ICDS Mission - Broad Framework for Implementation 
stipulates that health check-up of PLM should be provided by ANM and PHC staff at 
the AWCs. Audit observed that the Social Welfare Department did not maintain 
records on health check-ups carried out in AWCs because of which Audit could not 
ascertain the delivery of health services to PLM from the AWCs record. However, 
information obtained from the H&FW Department, GoN showed a considerable gap in 
health check-up services as shown in Table 2.3.4. 
Table 2.3.4: Status of ante-natal care (ANC) and post-natal care  
Year 
No. of 
PW58 
registered 
for ANC 
PW 
receiving 
ANC 
Percentage of 
PW receiving 
ANC 
Total 
number of 
reported 
deliveries 
Number of 
women 
receiving post-
partum check 
ups 
Percentage 
women 
getting post-
partum 
check up 
2018-19 37,402 8,151 22 19,690 11,917 61 
2019-20 39,235 8,838 23 20,619 11,473 56 
2020-21 33,105 5,124 15 16,467 11,503 70 
2021-22 33,272 6,484 19 16,564 10,852 66 
2022-23 33689 8873 26 18,454 12,866 70 
2023-24 27,280 8,283 30 19,426 10,616 55 
Source: HMIS Data provided by H&FW Department 
                                                
58  Pregnant Women 

72
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
72 
 
 
As can be seen from Table 2.3.4, Audit observed that the Social Welfare Department 
did not maintain any records of health check-up services delivered through AWCs, in 
violation of the ICDS Mission guidelines. Analysis of HMIS data from the H&FW 
Department revealed that only 15 to 30 per cent  of registered pregnant women 
received ante-natal care during 2018-2024, and post-natal care coverage also declined 
over time. These findings reflect serious shortcomings in the convergence mechanism 
between the Social Welfare Department and the H&FW Department, adversely 
affecting the delivery of essential maternal healthcare services. 
In reply, the State Government stated (June 2024) that health check-ups are carried 
out by H&FW Department, but that efforts would be made to improve convergence. 
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable. While acknowledging that health 
check-up services are provided by the H&FW Department, it fails to address the 
ICDS guideline requirement for convergence and monitoring at the AWC level. The 
absence of AWC-level records on health service delivery reflects a systemic failure to 
institutionalise inter-departmental coordination. The lack of documentation and 
declining coverage indicators underscore a gap in service delivery planning and 
accountability. 
2.3.13.12 Irregularities in selection of suppliers/contractors  
The Nagaland State e-Procurement and Tendering Policy, 2017 stipulates that the 
Government Departments/Agencies should call open tenders for construction/supply 
works through e-procurement in the State portal for construction/civil works worth 
₹One crore and above and supply works worth ₹20.00 lakh and above. Further, 
Paragraph 291 of the Nagaland Public Works Department Code (NPWDC) stipulated 
that sealed tenders should invariably be invited in the most open and public manner 
possible, by advertisement in the Government Gazette or the press, or by public 
0
1 0 , 0 0 0
2 0 , 0 0 0
3 0 , 0 0 0
4 0 , 0 0 0
5 0 , 0 0 0
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Chart 2.3.4 : Status of ante-natal care (ANC) and post-natal care
N o .  o f  P W [ 1 ]  r e g i s t e r e d  f o r  A N C
P W  r e c e i v i n g  A N C
P e r c e n t a g e  o f  P W  r e c e i v i n g  A N C
T o t a l  n u m b e r  o f  r e p o r t e d  d e l i v e r i e s
Number of women receiving post-partum check ups

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
73
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
73 
 
notice. Audit observed that Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) 59 for ‘Up-gradation of 
Anganwadi Houses at Dimapur and Kohima’ estimated at ₹3.44 crore (March 2021) 
was not floated in the State Portal in contravention of the GoN notification. 
Audit observed procedural lapses in the execution of civil works under the ICDS 
scheme. Despite the mandate for e-tendering and open public advertisement as per the 
Nagaland State e-Procurement Policy and NPWDC, the Department failed to publish 
the tender for construction works worth ₹3.44 crore on the designated State Portal. 
These lapses led to non-competitive procurement, raising concerns over fairness, 
efficiency, and financial transparency in public contracting. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (June 2024) that, 
the possibilities of procurement of materials and selection of contractors for civil 
works through e-tendering in line with provisions of the GFR would be explored. 
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable. The assurance to explore future 
compliance with e-tendering provisions does not address the prolonged and recurring 
violations of existing procurement norms over a six-year period. The continued 
procurement from the same set of suppliers without fresh competitive bidding 
undermined transparency and equitable access to Government contracts. The failure 
to advertise high-value civil works on the State e-Procurement Portal, as required by 
policy, reflected systemic disregard for established procurement protocols and 
contributed to procedural irregularities and potential financial inefficiencies. 
2.3.13.13 Conclusion 
The implementation of the ICDS in Nagaland during 2018-2024 suffered from 
systemic weaknesses in infrastructure development, service delivery, convergence 
mechanisms, inventory management, financial propriety, and accountability. Despite 
substantial Central and State funding, the Audit found widespread deficiencies in 
infrastructure at AWCs, irregularities in procurement and distribution of critical 
supplies (including nutrition, medicines, and uniforms), inadequate capacity building 
of field functionaries, poor utilisation of Aadhaar enrolment infrastructure, and failure 
to institutionalise effective convergence with the H&FW Department. These gaps 
severely compromised the core objectives of the ICDS Mission - to provide a strong 
foundation for child development, ensure maternal health, and address malnutrition in 
an integrated and sustainable manner. 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may consider- 
(i) carrying out geo-tagged mapping of all AWCs to assess infrastructure 
gaps (toilets, kitchens, learning space, drinking water and electricity).  
(ii) mandating real-time entry of receipt and distribution of all materials 
                                                
59  By Executive Engineer, PWD Housing Division No-II Kohima, the executing agency for all civil 
works undertaken by the Department 

74
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
74 
 
(e.g., food items, uniforms, medicine kits, PSE kits) in standardised 
digital stock registers at Directorate, CDPO, and AWC levels. Quarterly 
distribution data on the Department’s website may be published in order 
to promote transparency and deter misuse. 
(iii)  developing an annual training calendar based on a State-level 
assessment of frontline workers' skill gaps, aligned to ICDS thematic 
domains, with outcome-based monitoring of training effectiveness. 
(iv)  establishing a monitoring cell to track Aadhaar-seeding coverage and 
troubleshoot operational bottlenecks. 
(v) institutionalising convergence protocols with the Health& Family 
Welfare Department including shared planning, joint monitoring, and 
data exchange protocols for immunisation and maternal health services.  
 
2.3.14 Audit Objective: Whether the ICDS has enhanced capacities at all levels 
and ensured convergence with other related programs 
and schemes so as to maximise the impact and outcomes 
of ICDS? 
 
2.3.14.1 Nutrition and Health Education 
Nutrition, Health and Education (NHE) was a key element of the work of the AWWs 
which formed part of behaviour change communication (BCC) strategy. The long-
term objective of NHE was capacity-building of women in the age group of 15-45 
years so that they can look after their own health, nutrition and development needs as 
well as that of their children and families. To achieve the objective, the AWWs along 
with ASHA/ANMs should conduct activities like home visits, demonstration course, 
films and slides shows and mothers meetings. Monthly mothers’ meeting was to 
educate the mothers on improving the child caring practices, feeding, health and 
hygiene and psychological development.   
Audit observed that there were no documented records indicating the conduct of 
demonstration course, films, slide shows and mothers’ meetings. Regarding home 
visits, analysis of data available in Poshan Tracker for the period from May 2022 to 
March 2024 showed that there was shortage in home visits conducted by AWWs 
ranging from 48.77 to 62.56 per cent in the four test checked districts as shown in 
Chart 2.3.5.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
75
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
75 
 
 
Source: Departmental figure- Extracted from Poshan tracker  
These deficiencies indicate weak implementation of the core educational component 
of ICDS, thereby undermining the goal of empowering women to manage their own 
health and that of their children through informed practices. 
The State Government in its reply stated (June 2024) that the ICDS-CAS software 
was used by the functionaries to upload data from 2018-2021 only and that from 
2022, Poshan Tracker App was used for the same purpose. It was further stated that 
the shortfall in the data regarding home-visits was due to internet connectivity issues 
and obsolete smartphones. 
The reply is not acceptable as it does not address the core issue of non-performance 
and lacked evidence of alternative documentation or remedial action despite known 
technical constraints. In the absence of any documented efforts, either digitally or 
manually, the shortfall could not be attributed solely to technological constraints. The 
reply also failed to address the complete absence of educational activities, such as 
demonstrations and mothers’ meetings, which are critical for behaviour change 
communication and maternal empowerment under ICDS. 
2.3.14.2 Jan Andolan 
Paragraph 4.1 of the Mission Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 Guidelines 
stipulated that Abhiyaan focus on converting the agenda of improving nutrition into a 
Jan Andolan through involvement of different Departments, PRIs/Villages/ 
Organisations/SHGs/volunteers and ensuring wide public participation. Further, 
Chapter IV (1) of the Jan Andolan Guidelines stated that a comprehensive Jan 
Andolan Plan was to be developed at State/District level covering ten themes 60. Audit 
observed that the Jan Andolan Plan was not developed at the State/District level. 
Audit further observed that record of activities carried out during the Jan Andolan 
programmes were not documented and therefore Audit could not analyse the type of 
activities carried out to achieve the objective of fostering community participation in 
                                                
60 (i) Ante natal check-up/diet of pregnant woman (ii) Optimal breastfeeding (iii) Complementary 
food & feeding (iv) Full immunisation & Vitamin A supplementation (v) Growth monitoring and  
promotion (vi) Anaemia prevention in children/adolescent girls/women (vii) Food fortification & 
micronutrient (viii) Diarrhoea management (ix) Girls education, diet & right age at marriage 
(x) Hygiene, sanitation & safe drinking water 
6 2 . 5 6
48.77 54.38 5 4 . 9 85 5 . 7 6 5 5 . 7 6 5 5 . 7 6 5 5 . 7 6
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
Dimapur Kohima Peren Tuensang
Percentage  of  Home visits
Chart 2.3.5: Home visits conducted                                 ( i n  p e r  c e n t)
A v e r a g eS t a t e

76
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
76 
 
improving health and nutrition levels of targeted population. Therefore, the absence of 
Jan Andolan Plan undermined the decentralised approach envisaged under the Jan 
Andolan strategy, thereby diluting the impact of convergence efforts aimed at 
improving nutrition outcomes. 
The State Government in its reply stated (June 2024) that the State was following the 
Guidelines of the MoWCD for conducting activities under Jan Andolan and that it 
was in the process of developing a Jan Andolan Plan for the State and district levels.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable. While it states that activities 
were conducted in accordance with the MoWCD guidelines and that a Jan Andolan 
Plan is under preparation, no documentary evidence was furnished to substantiate the 
conduct of any such activities during the audit period. The absence of both planning 
documents and activity records reflects non-implementation of a key strategic 
component of Poshan 2.0 and indicates a significant gap in community mobilisation 
and participatory governance. The assertion that planning is underway does not justify 
the prolonged inaction and failure to institutionalise the Jan Andolan approach during 
the audit period. 
2.3.14.3 Conclusion 
The Audit found that the ICDS in Nagaland failed to effectively implement two key 
components viz. Nutrition and Health Education (NHE) and Jan Andolan, which are 
critical for behavioural change, community participation and convergence-driven 
nutrition outcomes. The absence of documented educational outreach, coupled with 
significant shortfalls in home visits and the complete non-preparation of a Jan 
Andolan Plan at both State and district levels, indicates systemic weaknesses in 
planning, implementation, and monitoring. These deficiencies undermined the 
intended decentralised and participatory approach of the ICDS Mission, limiting its 
ability to empower women and promote health and nutrition awareness at the 
grassroots level. 
 
 
 
Recommendations:  
The State Government may consider- 
(i) ensuring that activities related to all ten prescribed themes of the Jan 
Andolan Plan are mapped to specific outcomes with clear responsibilities 
assigned at each tier: State, district, block, and AWC levels. 
(ii) establishing standard templates for recording mothers’ meetings, 
demonstrations, health talks, and film shows at AWC level. These should 
be maintained both manually and digitally, with periodic audits to ensure 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
77
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
77 
 
compliance. 
(iii)  in light of technical limitations, introducing a dual reporting mechanism 
(manual and digital) for home visits. 
(iv) ensuring replacement of obsolete smartphones and implement offline 
functionality in the Poshan Tracker to accommodate poor internet 
connectivity in remote regions. This should be complemented by regular 
training and IT support for Anganwadi Workers. 
(v) creating a publicly accessible dashboard that shows the Jan Andolan and 
Nutrition and Health Education activities carried out at the State, district, 
block, and village levels.  
 
2.3.15 Audit Objective: Whether there existed a mechanism for raising public 
awareness and participation, creation of knowledge base 
for child development services and robust system for 
appropriate inter-sectorial monitoring of the scheme at all 
levels. 
2.3.15.1 Inadequate monitoring of the Scheme 
Paragraph 8(iv) of the ICDS Mission - Broad Framework for Implementation 
envisaged monitoring system at the National/State/District/Block/Anganwadi levels 
through monitoring committees called National Level Monitoring and Review 
Committee (NLMRC), State Level Monitoring and Review Committee (SLMRC), 
District Level Monitoring and Review Committee (DLMRC), Block Level 
Monitoring Committee (BLMC) and Anganwadi Level Monitoring and Support 
Committee (ALMSC). Further, the ICDS Scheme Guidelines for monitoring and 
supervision of Scheme stipulated that a minimum of 50 per cent AWCs inspections 
should be carried out by Supervisors in a month, inspection of 100 per cent AWCs in 
a quarter by CDPOs and a minimum of 10 per cent AWCs in a year by DPOs. The 
PAC61 recommended that the Department make every effort to adhere strictly to the 
scheme guidelines and to initiate effective monitoring and supervision. The 
Department acknowledged the recommendation and assured strict compliance in the 
future.  
However, Audit observed that while SLMRC, DLMRC, BLMC and ALMSC were 
constituted, there were no documented records to verify whether monitoring was 
conducted by these committees or by the field officers. In the absence of monitoring 
mechanism, effective implementation of the Scheme could not be achieved as 
indicated by the irregularities/deficiencies discussed in the Paragraphs 2.3.11.1, 
2.3.13.3 to 2.3.13.5, 2.3.13.8, 2.3.13.9 and 2.3.14.1. 
                                                
61  103rd Report of the PAC (2011-2012) on the Action Taken by the Government on the observation/ 
Recommendations contained in the 95 th Report of the Public Accounts on the C&AG Report of 
India 2005-06 Recommendation No.1.2.27 Para 3.2.27 (Monitoring and Evaluation) of AR. 

78
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
78 
 
The State Government stated (June 2024) that field functionaries covered the required 
supervisory visits though such visits were not documented. The reply of the State 
Government is not acceptable as there was no record of monitoring carried out by 
committees at various levels and of inspections conducted by the field officers. In the 
absence of verifiable records, the Audit maintains that mandated monitoring activities 
were not carried out as per the ICDS guidelines. This lack of documentation not only 
undermines transparency and accountability but also weakens corrective feedback 
mechanisms essential for ensuring service quality and compliance. 
2.3.15.2 Inadequacies in monitoring through Real Time Monitoring 
Applications  
The Common Application Software (CAS) was an Information and Communication 
Technology-Real Time Monitoring system introduced after launching of NNM. It 
functioned through a mobile application at the level of AWWs and Sector Supervisor 
and a comprehensive web-based dashboard at Block/District/State/National levels, 
providing real time information about service delivery. After CAS was discontinued, 
Poshan Tracker was introduced (March 2021) with the same objective of real time 
monitoring of services delivered under Anganwadi activities. Audit observed that the 
backup data of the CAS could not be retrieved by the Department, which resulted in 
inability to analyse service delivery up to March 2021. Audit also observed that only 
1,13,619 beneficiaries (28 per cent) out of the total 4,09,851 beneficiaries in the State 
were uploaded and monitored through Poshan Tracker App. These deficiencies point 
to a weak transition strategy between digital platforms and poor technological 
integration at the field level, undermining transparency, accountability, and 
evidence-based decision-making in scheme implementation. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government cited (June 2024) poor 
internet connectivity, technological backwardness of AWWs in using smart phones 
and issue of outdated and obsolete smart phones for shortfall in uploading the details 
of beneficiaries.  
While the reply above acknowledges the constraints of internet connectivity, limited 
digital literacy among AWWs, and outdated smartphones, no mitigating measures or 
phased adaptation strategy is presented to bridge these challenges. The inability to 
preserve CAS data reflects inadequate data governance practices, and the low 
beneficiary coverage in the Poshan Tracker indicates systemic gaps in implementation 
and support. These lapses compromise the integrity of real-time service monitoring, a 
core reform under the National Nutrition Mission. 
2.3.15.3 Quality of food supplied under ICDS 
Paragraph 3.10 of the Mission Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 Guidelines 
stipulates that supplementary nutrition should conform to the standard laid down 
under the provisions of the Food Safety Standard Act, 2006 to ensure consistent 
quality and nutritive value. Further, Paragraph 2.3 also envisaged that the District 
Administration should also conduct periodic monitoring, including surprise spot-

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
79
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
79 
 
checks and collection of samples for quality testing of supplementary nutrition (THR 
and HCM). 
The Department had assured the PAC 62 that testing of food items was conducted 
regularly at a testing facility in the H&FW Department in Kohima and Foodstuffs 
Quality Testing Report was furnished. However, Audit observed that during 
2018-2024, the Department had sent samples of food provided under SNP on three 
occasions to the Regional Food Testing Laboratory (RFTL), Kolkata. While the report 
on two of the three samples was returned with normal acceptable quality,  the third 
sample (August 2022) could not be verified as the Food and Nutritional Board, 
MoWCD had closed (April 2022) the RFTL at Kolkata. Audit further observed that 
after the closure of the RFTL, the Department did not make any alternative 
arrangements for quality checks. Audit also observed that the District Administrations 
did not conduct periodic monitoring to ensure the quality and standard of food 
provided under SNP in the test-checked districts and that both the Department and the 
District Administrations did not take measures to ensure that quality food items were 
supplied under SNP. The absence of alternative quality check mechanisms following 
the closure of RFTL in Kolkata, coupled with inaction by both the Department and 
District Administration, resulted in a systemic failure to ensure the quality and 
standard of food supplied under SNP.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (June 2024) that 
in future, quality checks of food items would be carried out at frequent intervals. It 
was further stated (October 2024) that the Department planned to send samples for 
testing at the food testing laboratory established by the H&FW Department in 
Kohima.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable. The assurance of future 
compliance did not address the audit finding that no alternative arrangements were 
made for nearly two years following the closure of the RFTL. The absence of 
documented efforts to identify or engage accredited laboratories for food testing 
reflects a lack of proactive planning and accountability. Moreover, the failure of 
District Administrations to conduct surprise checks and sample testing, as required 
under Paragraph 2.3 of the guidelines, indicates administrative neglect in safeguarding 
the quality of food supplied under SNP. The proposed engagement of a local 
laboratory, while welcome, did not mitigate the systemic oversight during the audit 
period. 
2.3.15.4 Shortfall in conduct of Village Health and Nutrition Day 
Paragraph 3.5.7.2 of the NMM Administrative Guideline stipulates that every village 
shall earmark a fixed date of every month for conduct of Village Health and Nutrition 
Day (VHND), where participation of Health and Nutrition functionaries (ASHA, 
                                                
62  103rd Report of the PAC (2011-2012) on the Action Taken by the Government on the observation/ 
Recommendations contained in the 95 th Report of the Public Accounts on the C&AG Report of 
India 2005-06 Recommendation No.1.2.11 Para 3.2.16 (Purchase of food stuffs without quality 
assurance) of AR. 

80
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
80 
 
AWW and AWH) along with sanitation and PRI workers should be ensured. Audit 
observed that the Department did not maintain records of observation of monthly 
VHND and there was limited convergence, therefore, Audit captured the Health 
Management Information System (HMIS) data. Examination of the HMIS of H&FW 
Department, GoN showed that during 2018-2024, there were shortfalls in conduct of 
VHND in the four test-checked districts ranging from 65 to 77 per cent as shown in 
Chart 2.3.6.  
 
Source: HMIS of DHFW, Nagaland  
Audit further observed that the reason for the shortfall in conducting VHND was due 
to inadequate collaboration between the AWCs and ASHAs, despite explicit 
provisions in the NNM guidelines mandating joint participation in VHNDs. The 
Department's failure to maintain records further reflects weak institutional 
accountability and monitoring. The shortfall in VHNDs undermined the platform’s 
intended role in delivering essential health, nutrition, and sanitation services at the 
village level.  
In reply, the State Government stated (June 2024) that VHND are conducted as per 
the Guidelines of National Health Mission and that the Department was only one of 
the stakeholders in the event.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable as the scheme guidelines 
mandated effective convergence of the AWWs and ASHAs. While the Department 
has stated that VHNDs are conducted in line with NHM guidelines and that it is only 
one of the stakeholders, this response does not absolve it of its responsibilities under 
the ICDS framework and the National Nutrition Mission. The guidelines clearly 
assign joint responsibility to AWWs and ASHAs to ensure convergence and 
implementation. In the absence of documentary evidence or performance monitoring 
records, the Department’s claim lacks credibility. The continued shortfall points to 
systemic lapses in planning, coordination, and oversight at the grassroots level.  
2.3.15.5 Conclusion 
Audit findings reveal systemic gaps in the monitoring and implementation framework 
of ICDS under the Mission Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 in Nagaland. While 
3 7 , 7 2 8
3 1 , 2 4 8
18,720
3 2 , 9 7 6
1 3 , 2 3 0
7 , 2 5 8 5,491 7 , 9 1 0
24,498 2 3 , 9 9 0
1 3 , 2 2 9
25,066
65%
7 7 %
71%
76%
55%
60%
65%
70%
75%
80%
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
D i m a p u r K o h i m a P e r e n T u e n s a n g
S h o r t f a l l  P e r c e n t a g e
VHND Numbers
Chart 2.3.6: Percentage of shortfall in conduct of VHND against the target 
i n  s e l e c t e d  d i s t r i c t s .
T a r g e t A c h i e v e m e n t Shortfall p e r c e n t a g e

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
81
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
81 
 
institutional structures like monitoring committees were formally constituted, there 
was a lack of documented evidence of their functioning. Digital platforms like Poshan 
Tracker faced poor integration and uptake, weakening real-time service monitoring. 
Absence of robust quality checks for supplementary nutrition, weak inter-
departmental convergence for activities like VHND, and inadequate documentation 
reflect an overall failure to establish an effective mechanism for public participation, 
data-driven decision-making, and inter-sectoral accountability in delivering child 
development services. 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may consider- 
(i) institutionalising mandatory documentation of field inspections and 
monitoring committee meetings at all levels using a standardised digital 
template linked to Poshan Tracker. 
(ii) upgrading digital infrastructure by replacing obsolete smartphones and 
conducting periodic training of AWWs and supervisors to improve usage of 
Poshan Tracker and digital record-keeping. 
(iii)  operationalising partnerships with local NABL-accredited food testing 
labs and mandate quarterly sample testing of THR and HCM across 
districts. 
(iv) setting up a joint review mechanism with the Health & Family Welfare 
Department to ensure regular and documented conduct of VHNDs, with 
monthly reporting at the block level. 
(v) developing a publicly accessible dashboard showing performance 
indicators—beneficiary coverage, quality testing results, VHNDs held, 
inspections done—to ensure transparency and citizen oversight. 
 
2.3.16 Audit Objective: Whether the outcomes as envisaged in the Scheme 
Guidelines actually achieved. 
 
2.3.16.1 Development of outcome indicators and evaluation of outcomes  
The ICDS Mission - Broad Framework for Implementation underscores the need for a 
standardised framework inclusive of input, output and outcome indicators for 
evidence-based monitoring. At the State Level, the Chief Secretary is required to 
coordinate the activities of various Departments through the State Level Steering 
Committee to ensure effective convergence between various schemes/programs 
having bearing on nutrition and review the progress made regarding Nutritional 
Indicators on a regular basis. Further, the district manual of ICDS envisages 
evaluation of the outcome-based indicators at the district, block and village level.  
Audit observed that the Department did not formulate a standardised framework 
inclusive of input, output and outcome indicators for evidence-based monitoring. 

82
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
82 
 
Audit also observed that the State Level Steering Committee was non-functional, due 
to which review of the nutritional status of beneficiaries could not be carried out. 
Audit further observed that evaluation of the outcome-based indicators was not 
conducted at the district, block and village levels. The absence of outcome indicators, 
combined with lack of periodic monitoring and scheme implementation evaluations 
resulted in the scheme falling short of the targets outlined in the NNM Guidelines 
despite considerable resource allocation.  
The State Government did not offer comments on the Audit observation. 
2.3.16.2 Nutritional status of children 
The National Nutrition Mission aims to achieve improvement in nutritional status of 
different beneficiary groups in a time bound manner with specific measurable targets. 
It sought to reduce stunting and under-nutrition (underweight prevalence) in children 
aged 0-6 years by six  per cent  at a rate of two per cent annually. The mission also 
targeted a reduction in the prevalence of anaemia by nine  per cent  at a rate of three  
per cent annually among young children aged 6-59 months, as well as among women 
and adolescent girls aged 15-49 years. Additionally, it aims to reduce the incidence of 
low birth weight (LBW) by six  per cent  at a rate of two  per cent  annually. Audit 
observed the following deficiencies in nutritional status of children in the State: 
(i)     Stunting in children  
Children are defined as 'stunted' if they are low height-for-age. Stunting is caused by 
frequent illness, poor health, or malnutrition. Paragraph 3.1 (vii) of the Mission 
Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 Guidelines emphasises growth measurement i.e., 
length/height and weight in the age group of 6 months to 6 years every month. Efforts 
shall be made for 100 per cent measurement of the children.  
Audit observed that records of growth measurement for the period from April 2018 to 
April 2022 were not available either with the AWCs of the four test-checked districts 
or with the Department. However, analysis of the available growth measurement data 
for the period from May 2022 to March 2024 showed that growth measurement of 
children varied from 0.17 to 60.29 per cent during these 23 months. 
 As per guidelines (Paragraph 3.1 (vii), Poshan 2.0), all children aged 6 
months to 6 years must be measured monthly for growth (length/height and 
weight). 
 However, no records of growth measurement were found for the period April 
2018 to April 2022 in any of the four test-checked districts. 
 For May 2022 to March 2024, available data showed that only 0.17 to 
60.29 per cent of children were measured—falling far short of the 100 per 
cent target.  
 Audit further observed that the prevalence of stunting in the State averaged 
27 per cent.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
83
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
83 
 
Audit also observed that as per the National Family Health Survey (NFHS-4 and 
NFHS-5), stunting was reduced from 32.70 (NFHS-4) to 28.60 per cent (NFHS-5). 
This achievement places Nagaland ahead of the National average (35.50 per cent) and 
Assam (35.30 per cent ) but still behind States like Manipur (23.40 per cent ) and 
Sikkim (22.30 per cent).  
(ii)     Wasting and Underweight in children 
Wasting or low weight-for-height index is a measure of acute under-nutrition and 
represents failure to receive adequate nutrition. Underweight described the nutritional 
status of a child with reference to weight-for-age.  
Audit observed that the data of wasting in children for the period 2018-2022 was not 
available with the Department. However, analysis of data regarding underweight 
prevalence furnished by the Department for the period from May 2022 to March 2024 
showed a decrease in underweight prevalence from 7.33 per cent  in May 2022 to 
5.09 per cent in March 2024.  
A comparison of wasting and underweight prevalence in the age group of zero to 
five years of NFHS-5 (2019-21) with NFHS-4 (2015-16) showed that the State faces a 
growing concern in wasting  which surged from 11.30 (NFHS-4) to 19.10  per cent 
(NFHS-5), nearing the National average of 19.30 per cent.  
This rise highlights acute malnutrition challenges in the State. Nagaland's wasting 
rates now surpass Mizoram (9.80 per cent ) and Manipur (9.90 per cent) though 
slightly better than Assam (21.70 per cent ) and Tripura (18.20 per cent ). A 
comparative representation of weight-for-age index vis-à-vis the national average and 
the other North-Eastern States is as shown in Chart 2.3.7. 
 
Source: NFHS-4 and NFHS-5 
Audit observed that while the State demonstrated a positive trend in reducing the 
prevalence of underweight children between May 2022 and March 2024, the sharp 
increase in wasting rates from NFHS-4 to NFHS-5 is a matter of concern. The surge 
in wasting to 19.10 per cent , near the National average, indicates worsening acute 
malnutrition and reflects shortfalls in timely interventions related to health, sanitation, 
and food security. The absence of departmental data on wasting for a significant 
2 1 . 0 0
11.30
6 . 8 0
6 . 1 0
17.00
1 5 . 3 0
14.20
16.80
19.30
19.10
9 . 9 0
9 . 8 0
21.70
12.10
1 3 . 7 0
18.20
3 5 . 8 0
16.70
1 3 . 8 0
12.00
29.80
2 8 . 9 0
14.20
2 4 . 1 0
32.10
26.90
13.30
1 2 . 7 0
32.80
2 6 . 6 0
13.10
2 5 . 6 0
0 . 0 0
5 . 0 0
1 0 . 0 0
1 5 . 0 0
2 0 . 0 0
2 5 . 0 0
3 0 . 0 0
3 5 . 0 0
4 0 . 0 0
N a t i o n a l N a g a l a n d M a n i p u r M i z o r a m A s s a m M e g h a l a y a S i k k i m T r i p u r a
Chart 2.3.7:Comparison of selected outcome indicators during NFHS-4 and 
N F H S - 5  o f  N a g a l a n d ,  N a t i o n a l  a n d  N E  S t a t e s
N F H S  4  ( W a s t i n g )N F H S  5  ( W a s t i n g )N F H S  4  ( U n d e r w e i g h t )NFHS 5 (Underweight)

84
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
84 
 
period (2018–2022) points to serious gaps in monitoring and evidence-based 
planning. 
(iii) Low birth weight in infants 
Low birth weight (LBW) is defined by the World Health Organisation (WHO 63) as 
weight at birth less than 2,500 grams which can be a consequence of preterm birth or 
due to small size for gestational age or both. LBW infants are more susceptible for 
neonatal deaths. The Department could not furnish the data on prevalence of LBW in 
infants, therefore, HMIS data was captured. An analysis of the HMIS showed that 
during 2018-2024, the average prevalence of LBW in infants was four per cent as 
shown in Table 2.3.5.  
Table 2.3.5:  Prevalence of Low Birth Weight in Nagaland  
Year No. of New born weighed 
at birth 
No. of New born having weight 
less than 2.5 kg Percentage 
I II III IV (III/II*100) 
2018-19 19,253 806 4.19 
2019-20 20,076 883 4.40 
2020-21 15,751 601 3.82 
2021-22 16,016 554 3.46 
2022-23 17,974 773 4.30 
2023-24 18,900 740 3.92 
Average 4.0 
Source: HMIS, H&FW Department, Nagaland 
It can be seen from Table 2.3.5 that low birth weight rate of Nagaland is four per cent 
which is lower than the National percentage (NFHS-4: 18 per cent  and 
NFHS-5: 18.24 per cent).  
Audit observed that issues of poor growth monitoring, rising wasting rates and 
under-nutrition were compounded by short delivery of SNP food items 
(Paragraphs 2.3.13.8) and, weakening the effectiveness of nutrition interventions. 
These gaps hindered in addressing malnutrition indicators - stunting, wasting, 
underweight, and low birth weight and in achieving the core ICDS objective of 
improving child health. 
The State Government in its reply stated (June 2024) that AWWs were advised to 
conduct regular growth monitoring, home visits and also to provide Health & 
Nutrition Education.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable. While the Department claimed 
that AWWs were instructed to conduct growth monitoring and community outreach, 
no records or monitoring reports were furnished to substantiate the claim. Moreover, 
the Department failed to maintain direct records on the prevalence of low birth 
weight, relying instead on secondary HMIS data. The absence of primary data, 
compounded by systemic nutritional delivery gaps, undermines the Department’s 
                                                
63 Under definitions of Operational Guidelines for programme Managers & Service provider on 
“Kangaroo Mother Care & And optimal feeding of Low-Birth-Weight Infants (September 2014)” 
Child Health Division, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
85
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
85 
 
ability to ensure data reliability and address the broader objectives of the ICDS 
scheme. 
2.3.16.3 Prevalence of Anaemia 
Anaemia occurs when red blood cells (RBCs) cannot meet the body’s oxygen needs 
due to insufficient haemoglobin (Hb), a protein that facilitates oxygen transport. 
Anaemia impairs cognitive and motor development in children, reduces work capacity 
in adults, and poses risks during pregnancy, including low birth weight and 
prematurity. The Department did not furnish data on prevalence of Anaemia in the 
State in respect of children and pregnant mother, therefore, HMIS data is captured. 
Analysis of HMIS data showed that during 2018-2024, the percentage of anaemic 
cases among pregnant women (PW) ranged from 13  to 36 per cent as shown in 
Table 2.3.6. 
Table 2.3.6: Anaemic cases with reference to total number of PW registered for ANC 
Year 
Total number of 
pregnant women 
registered for ANC 
Four or more 
ANC check 
up 
Percentage getting 
four or more ANC 
check-up 
No. of PW 
having 
anaemia 
Percentage of 
PW having 
anaemia 
2018-19 37,402 3,253 8.70 4,891 13 
2019-20 39,235 8,838 22.53 8,669 22 
2020-21 33,105 5,124 15.49 5,237 16 
2021-22 34,272 6,484 18.92 5,970 17 
2022-23 33,689 8,872 26.34 7,890 23 
2023-24 27,280 8,283 30.36 9,739 36 
Source: HMIS, H&FW Department, Nagaland 
Audit observed that the Department's failure to maintain data on anaemia prevalence 
among children and pregnant women, coupled with anaemia rates of 13 to 36 per cent 
among pregnant women, highlights inadequate monitoring and aggravates risks to 
child development, maternal health and pregnancy outcomes. 
The State Government in its reply stated (June 2024) that AWWs were advised to 
carry out regular home visits and to provide Health & Nutrition Education to pregnant 
women, lactating mothers and Adolescent Girls. The State Government did not 
furnish reply for the increasing trend of anaemic cases among pregnant women in the 
State. 
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable because while the Department 
claimed that frontline workers were advised to conduct outreach and counselling, no 
documentary evidence was furnished to support this. Further, the Department failed to 
maintain primary data on anaemia prevalence and did not address the audit finding 
regarding the increasing trend of anaemia among pregnant women as per HMIS data. 
The lack of targeted interventions and monitoring mechanisms undermined the 
objective of improving maternal health outcomes under the ICDS scheme. 
2.3.16.4 Conclusion 
The ICDS Scheme in Nagaland fell significantly short of achieving its intended 
nutritional outcomes due to the absence of a standardised monitoring framework, non-
functional steering and review committees, and systemic gaps in data collection and 
programme evaluation. Despite measurable national targets under the National 

86
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
86 
 
Nutrition Mission, the State failed to maintain reliable and comprehensive data on key 
nutritional indicators such as stunting, wasting, underweight, anaemia, and low birth 
weight thereby compromising evidence-based decision-making and mid-course 
correction. The State's reliance on secondary data in the absence of primary records, 
coupled with weak monitoring by AWWs and health staff, hindered effective 
targeting and delivery of nutrition interventions. 
Recommendations: 
The Government may consider-  
(i) developing and implementing a unified framework of input, output, and 
outcome indicators in line with the ICDS Mission Guidelines to enable 
robust, real-time monitoring and evidence-based evaluation. 
(ii) activating the State Level Steering Committee and ensuring regular 
functioning of District, Block, and Village-level monitoring committees to 
review nutritional indicators and guide coordinated convergence efforts. 
(iii) ensuring mandatory recording of growth measurement, anaemia 
prevalence, and low birth weight through AWCs and health facilities, 
backed by regular audits to improve data quality and reliability. 
(iv) instituting periodic training and measurable accountability protocols for 
AWWs and Supervisors to ensure consistent growth monitoring, home 
visits, and nutrition education, with documentary evidence. 
(v) utilising HMIS and Poshan Tracker data to design area-specific, data-
driven interventions addressing high rates of wasting and anaemia, with a 
quarterly review mechanism to track improvements. 
2.3.17 Beneficiary Survey 
In October 2023, Audit surveyed 208 beneficiaries present during visits to AWCs in 
four out of nine DPOs, nine out of 60 CDPOs and 46 out of 3,980 AWCs. The survey 
aimed to assess beneficiaries’ experience regarding the functioning of AWCs and the 
quality of ICDS services provided. Important findings of the beneficiary survey are as 
follows: 
 136 beneficiaries (65 per cent) stated that against the minimum requirement 
of 21 days for AWCs to remain open in a month, AWCs were open for only 
two to five days in a month. 
 45 beneficiaries (22 per cent ) stated that there were no pre-school kits 
available in the respective AWCs. 
 62 beneficiaries (30 per cent) stated that against the norms of 300 days in a 
year, THR distribution varied from two to 36 times in a year indicating huge 
discrepancy in the allocation of THR across the AWCs. 
 182 beneficiaries (90 per cent) stated that Health check-up and vaccination 
was not done.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
87
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
87 
 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (June 2024) that 
the shortcomings indicated by the beneficiary survey would be used as a tool for the 
overall improvement in implementation of the Scheme in the State. 
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable. While the Department 
acknowledged the audit findings and indicated that survey results would be used for 
improvement, it failed to outline any concrete steps to rectify the deficiencies 
observed. In particular, the reported functioning of AWCs for only two to five days 
per month and near-total absence of health services undermines the fundamental 
objectives of the ICDS scheme. The reply did not address the irregularities in THR 
distribution and absence of pre-school kits, nor did it provide a roadmap for service 
restoration or accountability. 
2.3.18 Impact analysis 
Audit identified key implementation challenges impacting the achievement of core 
ICDS objectives: 
 Despite a reduction in stunting, irregular growth monitoring, increased 
wasting rates and inconsistent data on low birth weight and anaemia 
undermined efforts in improving child health. The persistence of acute 
malnutrition and rising anaemia among pregnant women showed gaps in 
achieving the ICDS goal of healthy early childhood development. 
 The absence of age-specific curriculum, inadequate activity space, and non-
availability of pre-school education kits in most AWCs hindered the ICDS 
objective of supporting children’s psychological, physical, and social 
development. 
 The Department’s failure to conduct key NHE activities, limited home visits, 
and rising anaemia rates (13–36  per cent ) highlighted a lapse in enhancing 
mothers' capacity to manage health and nutrition, thus undermining a core 
ICDS objective. 
2.3.19 Conclusion 
The Performance Audit on implementation of ICDS scheme in Nagaland was 
conducted to assess the efficiency and effectiveness of planning, financial 
management, service delivery, convergence programs, monitoring, impact and 
outcomes. This Performance Audit showed significant shortcomings in scheme 
implementation. The Department lacked crucial data on eligible beneficiaries due to 
the non-conduct of household surveys. Financial management suffered as APIPs were 
prepared without a bottom up approach.  
Basic infrastructure such as toilets and drinking water were absent in 97.83 per cent of 
test-checked AWCs. Operational gaps were evident, as uniforms for AWWs and 
AWHs were not provided annually and minimal Aadhaar seeding occurred. Further, 
there was no analysis of the calorific value or quality of food items distributed and 
food items were short delivered despite payments compromising nutritional 

88
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
88 
 
objectives. Service delivery was hampered by the lack of ECCE resources such as PSE 
kits and age-specific books, while monitoring and evaluation mechanisms were 
inadequate, with shortfalls in conducting VHNDs and the absence of outcome 
indicators for evidence-based tracking. There was rising rates of wasting and 
underweight among children, failure to meet targets for reducing low birth weight by 
two per cent annually and increasing cases of anaemia among pregnant women. 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may consider to- 
(i) conduct geo-tagged mapping of all AWCs to identify and address 
infrastructure gaps such as toilets, kitchens, electricity and drinking water. 
(ii) implement real-time digital stock register and public disclosure of material 
distribution (e.g., food, kits) at all levels to ensure transparency and 
prevent misuse. 
(iii) develop and adopt a unified monitoring framework with input, output, and 
outcome indicators for robust, real-time evaluation and accountability. 
(iv) upgrade the digital infrastructure by replacing obsolete smartphones and 
conducting periodic training of AWWs and supervisors to improve usage of 
Poshan Tracker and digital record-keeping. 
(v) leverage data from HMIS and Poshan Tracker to design targeted, 
area-specific interventions for reducing malnutrition, supported by regular 
food quality testing. 
 
Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
 
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.4 Excess payment without supply of materials 
 
2.4.1 Introduction 
The National Health Mission (NHM) was launched by the Government of India (GoI) 
in 2013 by subsuming the National Rural Health Mission and the National Urban 
Health Mission. The aim of the NHM was to provide universal access to equitable, 
affordable and quality health care services that are accountable and responsive to the 
needs of the people. The Directorate of Health and Family Welfare (DH&FW), 
Nagaland is responsible for formulating and implementing health policies, ensuring 
effective healthcare service delivery and strengthening the State’s health 
infrastructure. State Governments in North-Eastern and Special Category States 
(including Nagaland) were to contribute 10 per cent of the implementation cost (25 
per cent in case of other States) towards the matching State share of NHM. 
2.4.2 Institutional procurement arrangement 
The Health and Family Welfare Department, Government of Nagaland (GoN) 
constituted (June 2021) a departmental Procurement Board for effective planning and 
management of the procurement of drugs, diagnostics, other health sector goods and 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
89
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
89 
 
all matters pertaining to procurement system. The departmental  Procurement Board 
was broadly responsible for assessing the requirements, preparation/advertisement 
and evaluation of the tender document, contract awarding and quality assurance . The 
departmental Procurement Board endorses a copy of the work/supply order, along 
with relevant documents, to the departmental Verification Board, which was 
responsible to ensure the quality related aspects of the items supplied and had full 
right to reject any items that did not meet the required specification. 
2.4.3 Audit scope and methodology 
A compliance audit on the accounts of the Principal Director (PD), DH&FW, 
Nagaland for the period from April 2022 to December 2023 was conducted in 
January 2024. An entry meeting was held on 08 January 2024 with the Department 
representatives, followed by issue of audit requisition, examination of records and 
issue of audit observations. An exit meeting was held on 13 February 2024 with the 
Department representatives to discuss the audit findings. The Department’s replies 
have been duly incorporated in the report. 
2.4.4 Audit findings 
 
i.  Unauthorised diversion of fund 
Under the NHM, the GoI provides financial support to the States under six financing 
components, namely, (i) NRHM-RCH Flexi pool, (ii) NUHM Flexi pool, (iii) Flexible 
pool for Communicable disease, (iv) Flexible pool for Non-communicable diseases 
including Injury and Trauma, (v) Infrastructure Maintenance and (vi) Family Welfare 
Central Sector component. Of the above six components, the financial support 
provided to States under Infrastructure Maintenance was meant to meet the salary 
requirement of regular staffs engaged in implementing Family Welfare Programmes.  
Based on the Action Plan (Appendix 2.4.1 ) submitted (June 2022) by the Mission 
Director, NHM, Nagaland for NHM activities, the PD, DH&FW sought (June 2022) 
approval from the State Government for utilisation of the matching State share of 
₹3.85 crore for Infrastructure Maintenance under NHM during 2021-22, which was 
sanctioned by GoN in August 2022.  
Audit however, observed that the fund (₹3.85 crore) sanctioned under NHM was 
irregularly diverted towards procurement of medicines, hospital linens and nursing 
sundries instead of the activities approved by GoN ( Appendix 2.4.1 ) under 
Infrastructure Maintenance  in violation of GoN sanction and NHM guidelines. It 
was further observed that the items procured by diverting the NHM fund, were not 
even requisitioned/indented by the District-level health units. 
In reply, the State Government stated (October 2024) that medicines, hospital linens 
and nursing sundries were procured based on the decision taken (August 2022) during 
a meeting chaired by the Minister, H&FW, GoN. The reply is not acceptable, as the 
Infrastructure Maintenance fund was intended to meet the salaries of regular staffs 
engaged in implementing Family Welfare Programmes and diversion of these funds 
for other purposes was against the spirit of the NHM. 

90
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
90 
 
ii. Faulty procurement process 
Rule 144 of the General Financial Rules (GFR), 2017, states that every authority 
delegated with the financial powers of procuring goods in public interest shall have 
the responsibility and accountability to bring efficiency, economy and transparency in 
matters relating to public procurement and for fair and equitable treatment of 
suppliers and promotion of competition in public procurement. Additionally, Rule 161 
of the GFR, 2017, inter alia, states that invitation to tenders by advertisement should 
be used for procurement of goods of estimated value of ₹25 lakh and above.  
As pointed out under paragraph (i) supra, the funds (₹3.85 crore) sanctioned under 
Infrastructure Maintenance component were diverted towards procurement of 
medicines, hospital linens and nursing sundries. Audit observed that while inviting 
tenders for the above procurements, no advertisement was given for inviting the 
tenders but the Notice Inviting Tenders (NIT) was simply displayed on the Notice 
board of the office of the Directorate in violation of Rule 161 of the GFR, 2017. The 
Department thereafter issued the Supply order to the lowest bidder based on three 
quotations received in response to the NIT. Due to this faulty tendering and supplier 
selection, the procurement process was vitiated affecting transparency, fairness and 
correct price discovery. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2025) that the fund allocated under 
Family Welfare Programmes was meagre and insufficient to meet the high 
advertisement cost. It was further stated that, due to anticipated delays in tender 
finalisation and legal issue, the Department opted for publicity through notice board 
which was transparent. The reply is not acceptable, as the procurement process 
adopted was not consistent with the provisions of the GFR, 2017. 
iii. Short Supply of Materials 
Rule 208 of the GFR, 2017, states that all materials shall be counted, measured or 
weighed and subjected to visual inspection at the time of receipt to ensure that the 
quantities are correct, the quality is according to the required specifications and there 
is no damage or deficiency in the materials. Details of the material so received should 
thereafter be entered in the appropriate stock register. Further, the officer-in charge of 
stores should certify the actual receipt of material and proper recording of the material 
received in the appropriate stock registers. Rule 171 of the GFR, 2017, further 
stipulated that to ensure due performance of the contract, Performance Security to the 
extent of 05 to 10 per cent of the value of the contract should be obtained from the 
successful bidder awarded the contract. Besides, Rule 225 (xvi) of the GFR, 2017 
states that all contracts shall contain an enabling provision for recovery of liquidated 
damages for any defaults on the part of the supplier/contractor.  
The Department placed (October 2022) supply orders on three suppliers for 
procurement of medicines, hospital linens and nursing sundries at an aggregate value 
of ₹3.85 crore as per the details given in Table 2.4.1. 
Table 2.4.1: Details of supply orders 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
91
Chapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
90 
 
ii. Faulty procurement process 
Rule 144 of the General Financial Rules (GFR), 2017, states that every authority 
delegated with the financial powers of procuring goods in public interest shall have 
the responsibility and accountability to bring efficiency, economy and transparency in 
matters relating to public procurement and for fair and equitable treatment of 
suppliers and promotion of competition in public procurement. Additionally, Rule 161 
of the GFR, 2017, inter alia, states that invitation to tenders by advertisement should 
be used for procurement of goods of estimated value of ₹25 lakh and above.  
As pointed out under paragraph (i) supra, the funds (₹3.85 crore) sanctioned under 
Infrastructure Maintenance component were diverted towards procurement of 
medicines, hospital linens and nursing sundries. Audit observed that while inviting 
tenders for the above procurements, no advertisement was given for inviting the 
tenders but the Notice Inviting Tenders (NIT) was simply displayed on the Notice 
board of the office of the Directorate in violation of Rule 161 of the GFR, 2017. The 
Department thereafter issued the Supply order to the lowest bidder based on three 
quotations received in response to the NIT. Due to this faulty tendering and supplier 
selection, the procurement process was vitiated affecting transparency, fairness and 
correct price discovery. 
In reply, the State Government stated (March 2025) that the fund allocated under 
Family Welfare Programmes was meagre and insufficient to meet the high 
advertisement cost. It was further stated that, due to anticipated delays in tender 
finalisation and legal issue, the Department opted for publicity through notice board 
which was transparent. The reply is not acceptable, as the procurement process 
adopted was not consistent with the provisions of the GFR, 2017. 
iii. Short Supply of Materials 
Rule 208 of the GFR, 2017, states that all materials shall be counted, measured or 
weighed and subjected to visual inspection at the time of receipt to ensure that the 
quantities are correct, the quality is according to the required specifications and there 
is no damage or deficiency in the materials. Details of the material so received should 
thereafter be entered in the appropriate stock register. Further, the officer-in charge of 
stores should certify the actual receipt of material and proper recording of the material 
received in the appropriate stock registers. Rule 171 of the GFR, 2017, further 
stipulated that to ensure due performance of the contract, Performance Security to the 
extent of 05 to 10 per cent of the value of the contract should be obtained from the 
successful bidder awarded the contract. Besides, Rule 225 (xvi) of the GFR, 2017 
states that all contracts shall contain an enabling provision for recovery of liquidated 
damages for any defaults on the part of the supplier/contractor.  
The Department placed (October 2022) supply orders on three suppliers for 
procurement of medicines, hospital linens and nursing sundries at an aggregate value 
of ₹3.85 crore as per the details given in Table 2.4.1. 
Table 2.4.1: Details of supply orders 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
91 
 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Name of supplier Items Supply order date Amount paid  
1. M/s RS Pharma & 
Surgico, Dimapur 
Medicines 
27/10/2022 
2,20,00,000 
2. M/s New Homescape, 
Dimapur 
Hospital 
linens 
80,00,000 
3. M/s JB Construction, 
Kohima 
Nursing 
sundries 
85,10,000 
Total 3,85,10,000 
Source: Department records 
To ascertain the actual receipt of materials, a Joint Physical Verification (JPV) of the 
Department Store at Kohima was conducted (January 2024) by Audit and the 
Departmental officials. The results of the JPV revealed the following: 
 Rejection (November 2023) of the medicines valuing ₹14.36 lakh by the 
departmental Verification Board and non-replacement of the rejected 
supplies by the Supplier (serial no. 1 of Table 2.4.1) (Appendix 2.4.2). 
 Short supply of hospital linens valued at ₹28.70 lakh by the Supplier 
(Sl. No. 2 of Table 2.4.1) (Appendix 2.4.3). 
 Short supply of nursing sundries valued at ₹45.36 lakh by the Supplier 
(Sl. No. 3 of Table 2.4.1) (Appendix 2.4.4). 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that the Department had released (December 2022) 
full payment of ₹3.85 crore to the Suppliers against supply of the above items without 
verifying the quality and quantity of the stores received in violation of Rule 208 of 
the GFR, 2017. Further, the Department did not obtain any assurance from the 
Suppliers regarding the availability of the items to be supplied while quoting the 
rates, which ultimately favoured the suppliers. Thus, due to release of payment 
without confirming the quality and quantity of the supply items, the Department 
could neither recover the cost of the rejected/short-supplied items (₹0.88 crore) nor 
effectively insist upon the Suppliers to make good the rejected/short-supplied 
quantities of material. This led to overpayment of ₹0.88 crore to Suppliers against 
rejected/short-supplied items. 
In April 2024, the Department informed that the Suppliers had made good the 
short-supplied items (March-April 2024) and requested the Audit to verify the same. 
Accordingly, Audit re-examined the relevant records on 22 May 2024, and observed 
that: 
 delivery challans, e-way bills and transportation challans of the items 
purported to have been received were not on record; 
 entries made in the Stock Register for the purported receipt of materials were 
not authenticated by the Officer in-charge of the Departmental Store 
contrary to the requirements of Rule 208 of the GFR, 2017; and 
 there was no enabling clause in the contract/supply agreements for obtaining 
the security towards Performance Bank Guarantee and Liquidated Damages 

92
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
92 
 
so as to ensure due performance of the contract as per the requirements of 
Rules 171 and 225 (xvi) of the GFR, 2017. 
Thus, due to release of the entire payments to the Suppliers without verifying the 
quantity and quality of the supply items procured and absence of the enabling clause 
to obtain security against performance guarantee/liquidated damage, the Department 
could not take any effective action against the Suppliers for making good the cost of 
rejected/short supplied of items valuing ₹0.88 crore. 
In reply, the State Government stated (October 2024) that the suppliers delivered the 
balance hospital linens on 28 March 2024, nursing sundries on 10 April 2024, and 
replaced the rejected medicines on 17 May 2024. It was further stated that these 
deliveries were verified by the departmental Verification Board during April-May 
2024 and that, the stock registers produced during the JPV were not authenticated as 
the supplied items had not yet been issued. 
The contention of the State Government was not found to be convincing considering 
the inconsistencies noticed in their reply during the cross-check (November 2024) 
with the records of the Commissioner of State Tax (CST), Nagaland as detailed 
below: 
 The supplier, M/s RS Pharma and Surgico, Dimapur 64 (Sl. No. 1 of 
Table 2.4.1) did not supply four out of six rejected medicines worth 
₹5.68 lakh65, during May 2024 contrary to the contention of the reply; and 
 The other two suppliers 66 (Sl. No. 2 & 3 of Table 2.4.1) had not supplied 
any item of hospital linens and nursing sundries to the PD, DH&FW, 
Nagaland67, during the period from April 2023 to April 2024 as wrongly 
claimed in the reply.  
The results of the cross-verification of the Government’s reply with the records of 
CST, Nagaland discussed above indicated that the suppliers submitted fabricated 
challans and the Department made full payments without actual receipt of materials. 
Further, the reply for not authenticating stock register due to non-issuance of any 
material is also not acceptable as Rule 208 of the GFR, 2017 mandates entry of 
material received in the appropriate stock register, regardless of their issuance status. 
2.4.5 Conclusion 
The Department violated NHM guidelines by diverting ₹3.85 crore meant for 
Infrastructure Maintenance  for procuring medicines, hospital linens and nursing 
sundries of which items worth ₹0.88 crore were short supplied or rejected. The 
Department also failed to comply with Rule 144, 161 and 208 of the GFR, 2017, in 
                                                
64 GSTIN-13ASPPA0562Q3ZI 
65 Paracetamol Syrup 125 mg (₹2.10 lakh) + Diclofenac Sodium Gel (₹0.22 lakh) + Ampicillin Cap 
250 mg (₹2.76 lakh) + Ranitidine HCL Tablet 150 mg (₹0.60 lakh) 
66 M/s New Homescape, Dimapur (GSTIN-13ALWPT3236E4ZT) and M/s JB Construction, Kohima 
(GSTIN 13ECRPB7957L1ZZ)  
67 GSTIN-13SHLD04295E1DC 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
93
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
93 
 
tendering, supplier selection and authentication of items received which 
compromised the entire procurement process.  
Recommendations: 
The State Government may- 
(i) ensure that NHM funds are utilised as per the Scheme guidelines. 
(ii) take necessary steps to recover the cost of short supplied or rejected supply 
items. 
(iii) fix responsibility on the officers/officials responsible for releasing the 
payment to the suppliers without verifying the quantity and quality of the 
supply items. 
(iv) incorporate enabling clause in all future contracts for obtaining security 
deposits against Performance Bank Guarantee and Liquidated Damages so 
as to safeguard its financial interests. 
 
MUNICIPAL AFFAIRS DEPARTMENT 
 
2.5 Undue benefit 
 
Executive Engineer-II, Urban Engineering Wing, Directorate of Municipal 
Affairs, Nagaland, Kohima  constructed a Working Women Hostel on a 
privately owned land resulted in undue benefit of ₹13.26 crore to the land 
owner. 
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA 68), Government of India (GoI) 
introduced the Scheme “10 per cent  Lumpsum Provision for the benefit of North 
Eastern Region, including Sikkim”. The broad objective of the scheme is to ensure 
speedy development of infrastructure in the North Eastern Region including Sikkim 
by increasing the flow of budgetary financing for new infrastructure projects/schemes 
in the region. Paragraph 8 (ix) of the Operational Guidelines of the Scheme states that 
before submitting project proposals to the Ministry, the State Government should 
confirm that encumbrance-free land is available for the proposed project and that the 
land will be made physically available to the implementing agency as soon as the 
project is sanctioned. 
The Government of Nagaland (GoN) submitted (September 2014) a proposal to the 
MoHUA, GoI for Construction of Working Women Hostel in Dimapur, 
Nagaland. Dimapur city, being the commercial capital was a suitable location for the 
project considering its convenient location for working women and therefore, having 
potential of high occupancy for the proposed hostel. As per the proposal, a G+3 hostel 
building69 of 50 seat capacity was to be constructed on a plot of land to be donated to 
the State Government by the Northern Angami Public Organisation (NAPO), a 
Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO). In the Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
submitted to the GoI, the GoN had stated that the land would be handed over to the 
                                                
68  Formerly Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 
69 Ground plus three floors  

94
Chapter II: (Part – I) Social SectorChapter – II (Part – I) Social Sector 
 
94 
 
implementing Department free from all encumbrances upon sanction of the project. It 
was also stated that NAPO will take the responsibility of Operation and Maintenance 
(O&M) of the Hostel and that a Committee would be constituted by the Municipal 
Affairs Department (MAD) for fixation of rent/hostel fees. 
The MoHUA approved (March 2015) the project at an estimated cost of ₹9.68 crore 
on a 90:10 sharing pattern between the Central (₹8.31 crore) and State (₹1.37 crore) 
Governments. Accordingly, GoI released its share of ₹8.31 crore in three 
instalments70 as Grant-in-Aid to the GoN. In turn, the GoN released (November 2016 
to June 2020) ₹9.68 crore (GoI share ₹8.31 crore and GoN share ₹1.37 crore) to the 
MAD for implementation of the project. 
The Department invited tender (June 2016) and the work was awarded 
(September 2016) to M/s K. C. Angami and Sons Consortium, Kohima for ₹7.28 
crore with a stipulation to complete the work by September 2018. Subsequently, the 
project cost was revised and a revised work order was issued (April 2022) for a 
revised project cost of ₹11.37 crore. Accordingly, the GoN released (April 2022) an 
amount of ₹3.58 crore to the MAD towards the enhanced project (₹1.69 crore) and 
additional cost of ₹1.89 crore towards electrification (internal and external), 
Consultancy charges, Contingency, Quality control and additional site development 
works. The work commenced in September 2016, was completed in October 2022 at a 
total cost of ₹11.37 crore and the entire payment (₹11.37 crore) against the project 
works was also released to the contractor in 18 Running Account (RA) bills. The 
newly constructed Working Women Hostel was inaugurated in November 2022. 
Scrutiny of records of the Executive Engineer-II, Urban Engineering Wing, 
Directorate of Municipal Affairs, Nagaland, Kohima revealed the following: 
(i) The DPR submitted (September 2014) by the GoN to GoI based on which the 
project was approved (March 2015), envisaged that the Women Hostel under 
the project would be constructed on a plot of land donated by NAPO to the GoN 
and NAPO would be assigned only with the responsibility of Operation and 
Maintenance (O&M) of the Hostel.  
Audit observed that after approval (March 2015) of the project, the GoN entered 
into (May 2017) a Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) with NAPO, which 
provided that after completion of the project, the project asset (Women Hostel) 
would be handed over to NAPO for operation on ‘own, operate and maintain’ 
basis with sole and absolute ownership of the project land without any 
interference of the GoN. The terms of the MoA were not consistent with the 
stipulations made in the DPR based on which the GoI had approved the project.  
(ii)  Further, as per the MoA entered into (May 2017) between the GoN and NAPO, 
the State’s 10 per cent matching share of the project (₹1.37 crore) was to be 
borne by NAPO. Audit, however, observed that contrary to the MoA provisions, 
                                                
70 1 st instalment 30/03/2016 (₹2.77  crore); 2 nd instalment 21/02/2019 (₹2.77  crore) and 3 rd & final 
instalment 23/10/2019 (₹2.77 crore) 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
95
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
95 
 
the GoN not only contributed the State matching share of ₹1.37 crore but also 
invested an additional fund of ₹3.58 crore in the project.  
(iii)  The DPR of the project provided for constitution of a Committee by the 
Department for fixation of rent/hostel fee. Audit observed that no such 
committee was constituted by the Government contrary to the stipulations made 
in the DPR. The Hostel building also remained idle even after more than one 
year of its inauguration (November 2022) due to lack of adequate efforts to 
publicise its functioning through print and electronic media. 
Thus, the GoN utilised the Government funds of ₹13.26 crore (GoI: ₹8.31 crore; 
GoN: ₹4.95 crore) on construction of a Working Women Hostel on a private plot of 
land over which the GoN had no ownership rights, leading to undue favour to the land 
owner (NAPO) to that extent. 
While accepting the facts, the State Government stated (September 2024) that a 
“Supplementary Agreement” was signed (June 2024) between the GoN and NAPO, 
which provided for reserving 30 per cent of the project revenue towards O&M and 
balance in equal proportion (35 per cent  each) for  GoN and NAPO . It was further 
added that on completion of this revenue-sharing arrangement, which would last for 
15 years (since July 2024), the ownership of the hostel would be transferred to NAPO. 
It was also assured that to oversee the O&M of the hostel, a Committee comprising 
representatives from the MAD, NAPO and the Dimapur Municipal Council would be 
constituted. 
The reply is not acceptable, as the project was approved by the GoI based on the 
assurance in the DPR that the Women’s Hostel would be constructed on land donated 
by NAPO to the State Government. However, the State Government did not obtain 
ex-post-facto approval from the GoI for the subsequent changes to the 
conditions/arrangements agreed at the approval stage of the project. Besides, the 
revenue-sharing model adopted by the GoN allows NAPO to receive 35 per cent of 
the project revenue generated and grants ownership of the project building (after 15 
years) constructed out of the Government funding of ₹13.26 crore. 
Recommendations:  
The State Government may- 
(i) obtain ex-post-facto approval from the GoI for the subsequent changes 
made. 
(ii) take necessary steps to review the Memorandum of Agreement entered into 
with NAPO so as to safeguard the financial interest of the Government. 
(iii) ensure fixation of rent/hostel fees in a fair and transparent manner and 
extensive publicity of the Hostel for the benefit of the intended beneficiaries. 
 

PART-II
Local Governments Audit

 
 
CHAPTER – II (PART-II) 
SOCIAL SECTOR (LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AUDIT) 
 
An overview of Local Bodies in Nagaland 
 
2.6.1 Functioning of Rural Local Bodies in the State 
Under Article 243M of the Constitution of India, the State of Nagaland is exempted 
from the provisions of the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992. Nagaland, given 
its traditional local bodies in the form of Village Councils, falls under this exemption. 
As of March 2021, there are 1,280 recognised villages in Nagaland, each governed by 
the Nagaland Village and Tribal Council Act, 1978 (erstwhile Nagaland Village 
Council Act, 1978) which mandates the establishment of a Village Council in every 
recognised village. Under each Village Council, there exists a Village Development 
Board (VDB). The VDBs, inter alia, facilitate the State functionaries responsible for 
implementing Government schemes including Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) 
by identifying the developmental works to be taken up in their respective villages and 
aid in the identification of scheme beneficiaries.  All permanent residents of the 
village, with a management committee chosen by the Village Council form the 
general body of the VDB. A secretary, selected for a period of three years, oversees 
the affairs of the VDB. The Deputy Commissioner of the district functions as the 
ex-officio chairman of all VDBs in the district. 
2.6.2 Functioning of Urban Local Bodies in the State 
Article 243Q of the Constitution of India envisioned creation of Local Self 
Government for the urban population, granting constitutional status to Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs) to carry out governance functions. The amendment empowered ULBs 
to function efficiently and effectively as autonomous entities, to deliver civic services 
and ensuring economic development and social justice, with regard to 18 subjects 
listed in the 12th Schedule of the Constitution of India (Appendix 2.6.1). In Nagaland, 
the ULBs consist of Municipal Councils and Town Councils. The legislative 
framework for the conduct of business of the ULBs is governed by the Nagaland 
Municipal (NM) Act, 2023 1, which was enacted to replace the earlier Municipal Act 
of 2001. There are 39 ULBs in the State: 03 Municipal Councils and 36 Town 
Councils as of March 2024. 
Statistics relating to the urban population of the State, as per Census 2011, are shown 
in Table 2.6.1: 
Table 2.6.1: Important statistics of the State (Urban areas) 
Sl. No. Indicator Value 
1. Total Population of the State (in lakh) 19.78 
2. Population in urban areas (in lakh) 5.71 
3. Urban population (in per cent) 28.86 
4. Overall Population density (persons per Sq.km.)  119 
5. Urban Sex Ratio (per thousand) 908 
                                                
1  Notified by the Government on Nagaland on 09 November 2023 

98
Chapter II: Social Sector (Local Governments Audit)Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
98 
S l .  N o . I n d i c a t o r V a l u e 
6. U r b a n  L i t e r a c y  R a t e 89.62 
Source: Census, 2011 
2.6.3 Organisational setup in the State Government and ULBs 
The administrative control of the ULBs in Nagaland lies with the Municipal Affairs 
Department, headed by the Commissioner and Secretary to the Government of 
Nagaland (GoN). The Directorate of Municipal Affairs is responsible for 
administering, facilitating, coordinating and monitoring the activities of ULBs. The 
first election for the ULBs was conducted in 2004. The GoN, however, dissolved the 
elected bodies in 2009 and since then ULBs have been administered by Government 
appointed administrators.   After a lapse of 20 years, the ULB elections were held on 
26 June 2024, in all the three Municipal Councils and 22 out of 36 Town Councils2.     
Chart 2.6.1 (i): Organogram of ULBs in Nagaland 
 
  
    
   d d    
 
   
 
 
Chart 2.6.1 (ii): ULBs Elected Body Structure 
   
 
 
 
   
                                                              
 
 
 
                                                
2  Election was not conducted in 14 Town Councils across six Districts as the Eastern Nagaland 
People’s Organisation had demanded separate administrative set-up. 
W a r d  C o u n c i l l o r s  
Direct orat e of  Mu ni ci pal  Aff airs 
M u ni c ipa l C ou nc il s 
 T o w n  C o u n c i l s  
No min a ted M emb ers 
GoN (Commissioner and Secretary) 
M u n i c i p a l  C o u n c i l / T o w n  C o u n c i l  
C h a i r p e r s o n  
De p ut y Cha ir p er s on 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
99
Chapter – II Social Sector (Local Governments Audit) 
 
99 
2.6.4 Functioning of ULBs  
The NM Act, 2023 provides the statutory framework for the constitution, functioning, 
and dissolution of ULBs in the State. As per Sections 61 and 63 of the NM Act, 2023, 
ULBs are mandated to perform a range of obligatory functions, subject to availability 
of financial resources. These include urban planning, public health, sanitation, solid 
waste management, fire services and urban forestry. In addition, Section 62 of the NM 
Act, 2023 states that the Government may assign additional functions to a Municipal 
Council through notification, depending on the Council’s financial resources and 
organisational capacity relating to any other matters in the 12 th Schedule to the 
Constitution of India. 
The ULBs in Nagaland are divided into two distinct categories viz. Municipal 
Councils and Town Councils. Of the 39 3 statutory towns in the State, 25 4 have 
conducted elections and are governed by elected Councillors. These elected bodies are 
supported in their functioning by Chief Executive Officers or Executive Officers 
drawn from the State Civil Services. To support effective functioning, the 
Government has issued general advisories and guidelines recommending the 
formation of committees within the newly constituted ULBs. However, the remaining 
14 towns, primarily located in the eastern region of Nagaland, had not participated in 
the electoral process. These ULBs are administered by Government-appointed 
administrative officers in the absence of elected representatives.  
2.6.5 Staffing pattern of ULBs  
Section 76(2) of the NM Act, 2023 states that the GoN may, in consultation with 
ULBs, make rules for regulating the method of recruitment, qualifications required for 
recruitment, the conditions of service, discipline and control of employees, their 
duties and functions and their classification into different categories on the basis of 
their duties and responsibilities and scale of pay for such posts. Till date, no 
recruitment rules have been framed for appointment of employees to ULBs. 
Consequently, the ULBs engage staffs on a contractual basis, based on local 
requirements and with the prior approval of the Government. Thus, the absence of any 
approved staffing pattern resulted in variation of the staff strength in ULBs. 
2.6.6 Status of devolution of Funds, Functions and Functionaries to ULBs 
The 74 th Constitutional (Amendment) Act, 1992, empowers the ULBs to perform 
functions related to 18 subjects listed in the 12 th Schedule. Both the Central Finance 
Commission (CFC) and the State Finance Commission (SFC) have emphasised the 
need for complete transfer of the 3Fs (funds, functions and functionaries) related to 
these 18 subjects, to the ULBs for meaningful devolution. 
In Nagaland, however, the extent of devolution remains limited. Out of the 
18 functions, ULBs were solely responsible for one function, partially responsible for 
six and had no role in the remaining 11 functions as detailed in Table 2.6.2. 
                                                
3  Municipal Councils: 03and Town Councils: 36 
4  Municipal Councils: 03and Town Councils: 36  

100
Chapter II: Social Sector (Local Governments Audit)Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
100 
Table 2.6.2: Status of devolution of 18 subjects to the ULBs 
Sl. 
No. 
Subjects Status of 
devolution to 
ULBs 
1 Urban planning including town planning. Not devolved 
2 Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings. Not devolved 
3 Planning for economic and social development. Not devolved 
4 Roads and bridges. Not devolved 
5 Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial 
purposes. 
Not devolved 
6 Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste 
management. 
Fully devolved 
7 Fire services. Not devolved 
8 Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion 
of ecological aspects. 
Not devolved 
9 Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, 
including the handicapped and mentally retarded. 
Not devolved 
10 Slum improvement and upgradation. Partially assigned 
11 Urban poverty alleviation. Partially assigned 
12 Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, 
gardens, playgrounds. 
Partially assigned 
13 Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects. Not devolved 
14 Burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds; 
and electric crematoriums. 
Partially assigned 
15 Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals. Not devolved 
16 Vital statistics include registration of births and deaths. Not devolved 
17 Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus 
stops and public conveniences. 
Partially assigned 
18 Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries. Partially assigned 
Source: Departmental records  
The remaining 11 subjects are discharged by various Government Departments, viz. 
Public Health Engineering Department (Water supply); Fire & Emergency Services 
Department (Fire services); Public Works Department (Roads and Bridges), among 
others. Further, effective implementation of devolved functions also requires adequate 
financial support. In Nagaland, ULBs generate revenue through sanitation fees, trade 
licences, permit fees, and rent from municipal properties. However, ULBs are not 
empowered to levy property tax, a key revenue source, due to its exclusion from the 
NM Act, 2023. Consequently, ULBs in the State have limited financial autonomy and 
remain reliant on the Government to meet their expenditure obligations. Also, 
effective devolution of functionaries is essential for efficient service delivery by 
ULBs. However, as discussed in Paragraph 2.6.5 , the absence of a structured 
manpower policy has impeded the ability of the ULBs in discharging their mandated 
functions under the 12th Schedule of the Constitution of India. Thus, the 3Fs are yet to 
be completely devolved to the ULBs, limiting their ability to function as effective 
self-governing institutions. 
2.6.7 Audit arrangement 
The GoN has not constituted the Directorate of Local Fund Audit and thus has not 
entrusted the Technical Guidance & Support to the C&AG. The audit of ULBs is 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
101
Chapter – II Social Sector (Local Governments Audit) 
 
101 
conducted by the C&AG under Section 14 of the C&AG’s Duties, Powers and 
Conditions of Service (DPC) Act, 1971. 
2.6.8 Internal Audit 
Internal Audit is an important instrument for examining and evaluating the level of 
compliance with rules and procedures, as envisaged in the relevant Acts and 
Financial/Accounting Rules, so as to provide independent assurance to management 
on the adequacy of the risk management and internal control framework in the ULBs. 
The system of Internal Audit has not been introduced in the ULBs in Nagaland as 
there is no provision for Internal Audit in the relevant Municipal Act. 
2.6.9 Internal control mechanism in ULBs 
The internal control mechanism is an integral function of an organisation, which helps 
it to discharge its activities effectively to achieve its objectives. It is intended to 
provide reasonable assurance of proper enforcement of Acts, Rules and Bye-laws 
minimising the risk of errors and irregularities. In Nagaland, however, no mechanism 
was instituted till date. 
2.6.10 No Property Tax in the State 
Section 124 of the NM Act, 2023, states that ULBs may levy various taxes and fees to 
raise its revenue. In term of the same Section, however, this power can be exercised 
by the ULBs only with the previous sanction of the GoN. The GoN, however, 
excluded the authority of ULBs to levy taxes on land and buildings from the NM Act, 
2023 which is one of the main source of municipal revenue. This decision may make 
ULB’s entirely dependent on external grants from the Central and State Governments, 
thereby undermining the essence of the third tier of Government to function as an 
independent entity. 
2.6.11 Maintenance of Accounts 
Section 109 of the NM Act, 2023 states that the GoN shall prepare and maintain 
Municipal Accounts Code containing all the financing matters related to ULBs. 
Further, Section 116 of the NM Act, 2023 states that ULBs must submit their audited 
accounts to the GoN. However, the Municipal Account Code has not been prepared. 
Presently, ULBs in the State follow the cash-based accounting system and prepare 
Receipt and Payment Statements. 
 

CHAPTER-III
ECONOMIC SECTOR

CHAPTER - III 
 
ECONOMIC SECTOR 
 
3.1 Introduction  
This chapter of the Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 deals with audit 
observations on the working of the State Government Departments under Economic 
Sector. 
During 2023-24, total budget allocation of the State Government in the Departments 
under Economic Sector was ₹6,231.53  crore against which actual expenditure 
incurred was ₹5,180.53  crore (83 per cent ). The Department-wise details of Budget 
Allocations and Expenditure incurred during 2023-24, are shown in Heatmap 3.1.1. 
Heatmap 3.1.1: Details of Department-wise Budget Allocations and Expenditure during 2023-24.  
(₹ in crore) 
 
Source: Appropriation Accounts, 2023-24 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
ECONOMIC SECTOR 
 
3.1 Introduction  
This chapter of the Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 deals with audit 
observations on the working of the State Government Departments under Economic 
Sector. 
During 2023-24, total budget allocation of the State Government in the Departments 
under Economic Sector was ₹6,231.53  crore against which actual expenditure 
incurred was ₹5,180.53  crore (83 per cent ). The Department-wise details of Budget 
Allocations and Expenditure incurred during 2023-24, are shown in Heatmap 3.1.1. 
Heatmap 3.1.1: Details of Department-wise Budget Allocations and Expenditure during 2023-24.  
(₹ in crore) 
 
Source: Appropriation Accounts, 2023-24 
 


104
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
104 
 
Key Insights 
1. Revenue Allocation vs Expenditure 
 Rural Development  had the highest allocation (₹1,572 crore) but actual expenditure 
was only ₹1,006 crore (64 per cent utilisation), reflecting significant under-spending. 
 Power sector shows efficient utilisation (₹790 crore allocation vs ₹772 crore 
expenditure – 98 per cent). 
 Roads & Bridges also absorbed most of its allocation (₹439 crore allocated, ₹388 crore 
spent – 88 per cent). 
 Agriculture (₹463 crore allocation) appears smaller in expenditure footprint, indicating 
either delays or unreported spending. 
2. Capital Allocation vs Expenditure 
 Roads & Bridges is the dominant sector, with ₹799.5 crore allocation and ₹879.4 crore 
expenditure – overspending above allocation (110 per cent).  
 This indicates either additional fund infusion or cost overruns. 
 Planning & Coordination had ₹353.90 crore allocated, but actual expenditure is much 
lower (₹159.93 crore) in relative terms, pointing to execution delays in terms of Capital 
Expenditure.  
 Water Resources and Industries & Commerce  received capital allocations, but 
expenditure is modest, again suggesting under-utilisation. 
3. Efficiency Insights 
 Power stands out as the best-performing sector with almost full utilisation of its 
revenue allocation. 
 Rural Development is a concern area, with a utilisation gap of nearly ₹566 crore on the 
revenue side. 
 Roads & Bridges is absorbing massive funds in both capital and revenue sides, even 
exceeding its capital allocation, making it the single most investment-heavy sector. 
4. Sectoral Priorities 
 Rural Development (Revenue)  and Roads & Bridges (Capital)  dominate their 
respective categories. 
 Other sectors like Agriculture, Water Resources and Industries & Commerce  are 
much smaller in both allocation and expenditure, reflecting secondary priority. 
5. Overall Pattern 
 Capital investments are tilted heavily towards infrastructure (roads, planning, 
resources). 
 Revenue side spending shows a stronger focus on Rural Development and Power , 
though utilisation in rural schemes lags significantly. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
105
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
105 
 
Audit was conducted in 141 units of nine Departments involving an expenditure of 
₹8,411.28 crore (including expenditure of previous years audited during the year) 
during 2023-24 under the Economic Sector. 
This chapter contains audit observations on two Performance Audits viz. 
“Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
in Nagaland” and “Functioning of Regional Transport Offices/District Transport 
Offices in Nagaland” and four compliance audit paragraphs. 
Performance Audit 
 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
3.2 Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme in Nagaland 
A Performance Audit on the “Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme in Nagaland” was carried out covering the period 
from 2019-20 to 2023-24. This Performance Audit brought out the following 
significant findings. 
Highlights 
 The State Government accumulated liability of ₹22.37 crore as penal interest 
for delayed release of funds to the State Employment Guarantee Council 
during 2019-2021. 
Paragraph 3.2.8.5 
 There was shortfall in release of State matching share of ₹104.39 crore 
during 2019-2023. 
Paragraph 3.2.8.6 
 An amount of ₹29.53 crore was diverted for salaries of functionaries already 
engaged by the State Government and for purchase of vehicle and repairs. 
Paragraph 3.2.8.7 
 The State generated an average of 46 days of employment per household 
against the entitled 100 days during 2019-2024 due to Job Card holders 
being unaware of their rights to demand for 100 days of wage employment.  
Paragraph 3.2.9.1 
 In 32 test-checked villages, the annual door-to-door survey was not 
conducted by the Programme Officers. Further, 24 Government employees 
were enrolled as unskilled workers under MGNREGA and ₹6.04 lakh was 
paid as wages to 19 Government employees. 
Paragraphs 3.2.9.3 & 3.2.9.4 
 The percentage of Aadhaar seeded and Aadhaar authenticated JC holders 
were 51 and 43 per cent respectively in the State and 47 and 39 per cent 
respectively in the four test-checked districts. 
Paragraph 3.2.9.6 
 The Department did not prepare any IEC plan during 2019-2024. 
Additionally, no funds for IEC activities were received by the block offices 

106
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
106 
 
and VDBs in the last five years and only limited IEC activities were 
conducted at the Directorate of RD, GoN. 
Paragraph 3.2.9.11 
 Ten projects costing ₹2.87 crore stated to have been completed, did not exist 
physically and there was short execution of works in 51 projects amounting 
to ₹8.69 crore indicating possible misappropriation of funds to that extent. 
Paragraph 3.2.10.1 
 There was a shortfall in conducting 2,676 social audits (59 per cent) in the 
State during 2019-2024 against the target in the audit plan of 4,536 social 
audits. 
Paragraph 3.2.11.2 
 The offices of Ombudsman were not functional in all the three test checked 
districts. Moreover, no Citizens’ Charter was prepared by the State 
Government during the audit period. 
Paragraph 3.2.11.4 and 3.2.11.7 
 The Department had not re-appoint SQM/DQM following their three-year 
term expiry (constituted in 2019). 
Paragraph 3.2.11.6 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
107
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
107 
 
A u d i t  S n a p s h o t  
 
Why did we do this audit? 
 To assess compliance with MGNREG Act 
and Guidelines. 
 To verify fund management, planning, 
monitoring and employment generation.  
 To evaluate transparency and delivery of 
guaranteed wage employment. 
 
What did we find? 
 Only 46 average employment days provided 
vs.  1 0 0 - d a y  g u a r a n t e e . 
 Delays in release of funds and shortfalls in 
State matching share disrupted execution. 
 A cu t e sh o r t ag e o f  G r am Rozg ar  Sah a yak s  
( G RS)  an d  m at es at  vi l l ag e l ev el . 
 I n a d e q u a t e  I E C  a c t i v i t i e s  l e d  t o  l o w  
aw ar en es s. 
 Large shortfall in social audits (59 p er cent) . 
 Weak monitoring, IEC and grievance 
r edr es s al .   
 O v er al l  gov er n an ce an d  o ver s i gh t  f ail ur es  
undermined MGNREGA’s objective of 
ensuring rural livelihood security. 
 
Registered Households - 4.71 lakh 
 
Reg i st ered  Wor k er s - 8.37 lakh 
 
Average Employment Days – 46 days 
 
Total expenditure incurred:  ₹3,288.36 crore  
 
W h a t  d o  w e  r e c o m m e n d ?  
 Co n d uct  b as el i n e su r ve ys  an d  pr ep ar e vi l la ge 
development plans. 
 Timely release of SEGF funds to avoid interest.  
 Stop diversion of administrative funds. 
 Follow GFR, 2017 for procurements above ₹25 
l a k h .   
 A p p o i n t  G R S  a n d  M a t e s  a t  v i l l a g e  l e v e l .   
 Conduct annual door-to-door job card 
verification.  
 A c h i e v e  1 0 0  per cent A ad haar  B ased  Pa ym en t  
S yst em  cov er a g e.  
 Implement comprehensive IEC at all levels.  
 R e s t o r e  i n d e p e n d e n t  S Q M / D Q M  q u a l i t y  
m o n i t o r i n g .  
 Conduct biannual social audits & publish 
Ci t i zens ' C h ar t er . 
 
3.2.1 I n t r o d u c t i o n  
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) 
is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme under the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD), 
Government of India (GoI) implemented on a cost sharing basis between the GoI and 
the State Governments 1. The GoI enacted the National Rural Employment Guarantee 
                                                
1  G o I  w i l l  b e a r  1 0 0  p e r  c e n t of wages of unskilled manual workers and 75 p e r  c e n t of the cost of 
m a t e r i a l  a n d  t h e  S t a t e  G o v e r n m e n t  w i l l  b e a r  t h e  r e m a i n i n g  2 5  p e r  c e n t.  
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
107 
 
A u d i t  S n a p s h o t  
 
Why did we do this audit? 
 To assess compliance with MGNREG Act 
and Guidelines. 
 To verify fund management, planning, 
monitoring and employment generation.  
 To evaluate transparency and delivery of 
guaranteed wage employment. 
 
What did we find? 
 Only 46 average employment days provided 
vs.  1 0 0 - d a y  g u a r a n t e e . 
 Delays in release of funds and shortfalls in 
State matching share disrupted execution. 
 Acut e shor t ag e of Gram Rozgar  Saha yak s 
( G RS)  and  mates at vi ll age level . 
 I n a d e q u a t e  I E C  a c t i v i t i e s  l e d  t o  l o w  
aw ar en es s. 
 Large shortfall in social audits (59 p er cent) . 
 Weak monitoring, IEC and grievance 
r edr essal .   
 Ov erall  gov er n an ce and  oversi ght f ail ur es 
undermined MGNREGA’s objective of 
ensuring rural livelihood security. 
 
Registered Households - 4.71 lakh 
 
Regi st ered Work ers - 8.37 lakh 
 
Average Employment Days – 46 days 
 
Total expenditure incurred:  ₹3,288.36 crore  
 
W h a t  d o  w e  r e c o m m e n d ?  
 Con duct b aseli ne sur ve ys  and  pr ep ar e vi lla ge 
development plans. 
 Timely release of SEGF funds to avoid interest.  
 Stop diversion of administrative funds. 
 Follow GFR, 2017 for procurements above ₹25 
l a k h .   
 A p p o i n t  G R S  a n d  M a t e s  a t  v i l l a g e  l e v e l .   
 Conduct annual door-to-door job card 
verification.  
 A c h i e v e  1 0 0  per cent Aadhaar  B ased Pa yment  
S yst em cover a ge.  
 Implement comprehensive IEC at all levels.  
 R e s t o r e  i n d e p e n d e n t  S Q M / D Q M  q u a l i t y  
m o n i t o r i n g .  
 Conduct biannual social audits & publish 
Cit izens ' C h arter . 
 
3.2.1 I n t r o d u c t i o n  
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) 
is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme under the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD), 
Government of India (GoI) implemented on a cost sharing basis between the GoI and 
the State Governments 1. The GoI enacted the National Rural Employment Guarantee 
                                                
1  G o I  w i l l  b e a r  1 0 0  p e r  c e n t of wages of unskilled manual workers and 75 p e r  c e n t of the cost of 
m a t e r i a l  a n d  t h e  S t a t e  G o v e r n m e n t  w i l l  b e a r  t h e  r e m a i n i n g  2 5  p e r  c e n t.  

108
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
108 
 
Act (NREGA), 2005, later renamed as the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) in October 2009. 
An overview of MGNREGS is shown below: 
 
MGNREGA provided a legal guarantee of at least 100 days of wage employment in 
every financial year to a rural household whose adult members are willing to do 
unskilled manual work at the minimum wage rate.  
Novel Features of MGNREGS: Demand-Driven and Rights-Based Legal 
Guarantee 
Aspect What Makes it Novel 
Legal 
Entitlement 
Every rural household has the right to demand up to 100 days of guaranteed 
wage employment per financial year for unskilled manual work. This right is 
enforceable under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act, 2005. 
Demand-
Driven Nature 
Unlike supply-driven schemes, work must be provided within 15 days of a 
demand. If not, the State Government must pay unemployment allowance. 
Accountability 
Mechanism 
Legal penalties and compensation provisions create accountability on the 
part of the State if entitlements are not met. 
Social Audits 
& 
Transparency 
Social audits by Gram Sabhas and proactive disclosure of information are 
institutionalised to prevent corruption and empower beneficiaries. 
 
Chapter – III Economic Sector 
 
108 
 
Act (NREGA), 2005, later renamed as the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) in October 2009. 
An overview of MGNREGS is shown below: 
 
MGNREGA provided a legal guarantee of at least 100 days of wage employment in 
every financial year to a rural household whose adult members are willing to do 
unskilled manual work at the minimum wage rate.  
Novel Features of MGNREGS: Demand-Driven and Rights-Based Legal 
Guarantee 
Aspect What Makes it Novel 
Legal 
Entitlement 
Every rural household has the right to demand up to 100 days of guaranteed 
wage employment per financial year for unskilled manual work. This right is 
enforceable under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act, 2005. 
Demand-
Driven Nature 
Unlike supply-driven schemes, work must be provided within 15 days of a 
demand. If not, the State Government must pay unemployment allowance. 
Accountability 
Mechanism 
Legal penalties and compensation provisions create accountability on the 
part of the State if entitlements are not met. 
Social Audits 
& 
Transparency 
Social audits by Gram Sabhas and proactive disclosure of information are 
institutionalised to prevent corruption and empower beneficiaries. 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
109
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
109 
 
The rights and entitlements of MGNREGS workers are shown below: 
Major entitlements of the MGNREGS Scheme 
 Right to a Job Card. 
 Right to demand and receive work within 15 days. 
 Right to unemployment Allowance. 
 Right to plan and prepare a Shelf of Projects. 
 Right to obtain work within a radius of five kilometres. 
 Right to worksite facilities. 
 Right to notified wage rate. 
 Right to receive wages within 15 days. 
 Compensation for delay in payment of wages. 
 Right to time-bound redressal of grievances and right to conduct concurrent social audits of 
all MGNREGS expenditure. 
The Rural Development (RD) Department is the project implementing agency in the 
State. As per Paragraph 6.10 of MGNREGS Operational Guidelines, 2013, the Gram 
Sabha (GS) shall approve the Annual Plan of Gram Panchayat (GP) and submit the 
same to the Programme Officer (PO) at Block level. In Nagaland, the role of the GS is 
performed by the Village Development Board (VDB). The Block Office consolidates 
the works proposed by all VDBs under its jurisdiction and submits the consolidated 
plan to the District Office for preparation of the State Labour budget. The Labour 
budget submitted by the RD Department is then approved by the Empowered 
Committee of MoRD, GoI. 
3.2.2 Organisational set up  
At the State level, the RD Department is the nodal agency for the implementation of 
the scheme. A State Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC) to advise the State 
Government on the implementation of the scheme was set up in the year 2007. At the 
district level, the Project Director (PD), District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) 
is designated as the District Programme Coordinator (DPC) who is assisted by 
Programme Officer (PO) for administering the scheme implementation. At the block 
level, the Block Development Officer (BDO) is designated as Programme Officer 
(PO) for overseeing the scheme. Junior Programme Coordinator and other officials 
assist the BDO. Finally, the VDB which functions under the traditional Village 
Council is the project implementing agency for MGNREGA at the grassroots level. 
Key stakeholders at various levels 
National Level 
 Central Employment 
Guarantee Council  
 
 Ministry of Rural 
Development  
 Overall monitoring and provide 
advice to the Central 
Government. 
 Policy formulation, providing 
financial and technical support 
to States, monitoring and 
evaluation of the Scheme. 
State Level 
 State Government 
 
 State Employment Guarantee 
Council  
 Policy formulation, guidelines 
and overall supervision of 
MGNREGA implementation. 
 Advises the State Government 
on MGNREGA implementation 
and policy matters. 

110
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
110 
 
K e y  s t a k e h o l d e r s  a t  v a r i o u s  l e v e l s  
D i s t r i c t  L e v e l  
 D i s t r i c t  P r o g r a m m e  
C o o r d i n a t o r   
 
 District Rural Development 
O f f i c e  
 O v e r s e e s  t h e  o v e r a l l  
i m p l e m e n t a t i o n  o f  M G N R E G A  
within the district. 
 M a n a g i n g  t h e  t e c h n i c a l  a s p e c t s  
o f  M G N R E G A  p r o j e c t s .  
Block Level 
 P rogramme Officer  
 Block Panchayat  
 C o o r d i n a t i n g  M G N R E G A  
activities within the block, 
including work allocation, 
monitoring and resolving 
g r i e v a n c e s .  
V i l l a g e  L e v e l  
 V i l l a g e  P a n c h a y a t  
 Village Employment Council  
 I d e n t i f y i n g  w o r k s ,  m a n a g i n g  
J o b  C a r d  h o l d e r s ,  a n d  
overseeing the implementation 
o f  M G N R E G A  p r o j e c t s  w i t h i n  
the village. 
C i v i l  S o c i e t y 
 C i v i l  S o c i e t y  O r g a n i s a t i o n s  
 Self Help Groups  
 A w a r e n e s s  g e n e r a t i o n ,  c a p a c i t y  
building, and social 
accountability. 
 
The organogram for implementation of the scheme at different levels is shown in 
C h a r t  3 . 2 . 1:  
C h a r t - 3 . 2 . 1 :  O r g a n i s a t i o n  s t r u c t u r e  f o r  i m p l e m e n t a t i o n  o f  M G N R E G S
 
Source: Departmental records 
 
3.2.3 Audit Objectives  
T h e  A u d i t  o b j e c t i v e s  w e r e  t o  a s s e s s  w h e t h e r :  
 P l a n n i n g  p r o c e s s  a n d  f i n a n c i a l  m a n a g e m e n t  p r a c t i c e s  w e r e  a d e q u a t e l y  
geared towards achieving the goals of the Act, while adhering to relevant 
rules and regulations; 
 Fair access to employment opportunities was achieved, as well as 
employment adequately generated, leading to social protection and 
livelihood security as envisaged; 
 
S t a t e  
L ev e l
•Nagaland State Employment Guarantee Council 
•C o m m i s s i o n e r  a n d  S e c r e t a r y ,  R u r a l  D e v e l o p m e n t  ( C o m m i s s i o n e r ,  M G N R E G A )
•Director, Rural Development (Addl. Commissioner/ State Programme Coordinator)
D i s t r i c t  
L ev e l
•Project Director, DRDO (District Programme Coordinator)
B l o c k  
L ev e l
•B l o c k  D e v e l o p m e n t  O f f i c e r  ( P r o g r a m m e  O f f i c e r )
Village 
L ev e l
•Secretary, Village Development Board

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
111
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
111 
 
 Durable and useful assets were created and maintained in compliance with 
rules and regulations, while ensuring convergence with other programmes/ 
schemes; and 
 Appropriate and adequate monitoring, social audit and grievance redressal 
systems were in place and functioning as envisaged to achieve greater 
transparency and accountability. 
3.2.4 Audit Criteria  
The Audit findings were benchmarked against the following criteria: 
 MGNREG Act, 2005 and Operational Guidelines, 2013 issued under the Act; 
 Annual Master Circulars2 (AMCs) issued by the MoRD, GoI; 
 Nagaland Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme Rules, 2005; 
 General Financial Rules (GFR), 2017, relevant orders, instructions, minutes 
of committee meetings issued by the MoRD, GoI and the State Government; 
 Nagaland Public Works Department (NPWD) Schedule of Rates, 2016. 
3.2.5 Audit Scope and Methodology 
An entry conference was held on 16 May 2024 with the Joint Secretary to the 
Government of Nagaland (GoN), RD Department, wherein the audit objectives, 
criteria, scope and methodology were discussed. The Performance Audit (PA) covered 
the period from 2019-20 to 2023-24 and involved test-check of records, data analysis, 
joint physical verification (JPV) of works and survey of beneficiaries of the scheme. 
An exit conference was held on 18 November 2024 with the Commissioner and 
Secretary, RD Department and other departmental officials 3, wherein the audit 
findings were discussed. The State Government’s replies had been appropriately 
incorporated in the Report. 
3.2.6  Audit Sampling and selection 
Out of 16 districts in the State, four 4 districts were selected for test-check. Further, 
eight5  blocks (from each district two blocks) and 32 villages (from each block four 
villages) were selected. The method used for selection was stratified random sampling 
and probability proportional to size without replacement. Besides, 323 beneficiaries 
(minimum 10 beneficiaries in each of the 32 selected villages) were randomly selected 
for beneficiary survey.  
3.2.7 Acknowledgement  
Audit acknowledges the co-operation extended by the RD Department, test-checked 
District Programme Coordinators (DPCs), Programme Officers (POs) and VDBs 
                                                
2  Annual Master Circulars are comprehensive documents issued by the MoRD each year. They 
provide detail guidelines and instructions for implementing the MGNREGA scheme, covering 
various aspects like planning, execution, financial management and monitoring of works. 
3 Director and Rural Development Officer of RD Department 
4  Dimapur, Mokokchung, Phek and Zunheboto 
5  Dimapur (Aghunaqa & Chumukedima), Mokokchung (Longchem & Mangkolemba), Phek (Phek & 
Sekzruzu) and Zunheboto (Akuluto & Ghathashi) 
Chapter – III Economic Sector 
 
112 
 
during the conduct of the Performance Audit.  
Audit Findings 
3.2.8 Audit Objective: Whether planning process and financial management 
practices were adequately geared towards achieving the 
goals of the Act, while adhering to relevant rules and 
regulations? 
 
3.2.8.1 Failure to conduct mandatory Baseline Survey for planning under 
MGNREGS  
Paragraph 6.2 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 stated that a survey of 
job card (JC) holders was to be mandatorily conducted in every Gram Panchayat (GP) 
in order to prepare a baseline data to assess the quantum and timing of demand for 
employment in the village. The paragraph further recommended that expert 
institutions may be empanelled separately in each State to finalise the framework and 
methodology for the pilots for the baseline survey and train teams from each District 
to conduct the surveys. 
Audit observed that during 2019-2024, the Department did not empanel expert 
institutions and did not conduct a baseline survey. Audit further observed that the 
absence of baseline survey data resulted in non-preparation of the development plan 
and preparation of an improbable labour budget as discussed in Paragraphs 3.2.8.2 
and 3.2.8.3 respectively.  
The scheme guidelines provided that expert institutions may be empanelled separately 
in each State to provide technical and professional support in planning, design, and 
implementation. However, empanelment of expert institutions was not mandatory 
under the guidelines. Audit observed that while the State Government did not 
empanel expert institutions during the period covered, this did not constitute a 
violation of scheme provisions per se. Nevertheless, the absence of empanelled expert 
institutions resulted in limited access to technical expertise, which contributed to 
deficiencies in the preparation of realistic Development Plans, labour budget 
estimation, and project execution, as discussed in preceding paragraphs. 
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that the Agricultural Finance 
Corporation, Guwahati and the National Institute of Rural Development were engaged 
to carry out a baseline survey up to 2016 and that the same data was utilised in 
preparation of yearly labour budget. It was further stated that due to short receipt of 
the administrative expenses fund from the Ministry and tight timelines, the 
Department could not engage experts to conduct the baseline survey post 2016. 
As per Paragraph 6.2 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013, a baseline 
survey was to be mandatorily conducted in every GP to assess the quantum and 
timing of demand for employment. This survey was intended to be a periodic and 
dynamic exercise aligned with actual field conditions. The use of data collected upto 
2016 does not satisfy this requirement for the audit period 2019-2024. The reliance on 
pre-2016 data during 2019-2024 undermines the accuracy of labour demand 

112
Chapter III: Economic Sector
Chapter – III Economic Sector 
 
112 
 
during the conduct of the Performance Audit.  
Audit Findings 
3.2.8 Audit Objective: Whether planning process and financial management 
practices were adequately geared towards achieving the 
goals of the Act, while adhering to relevant rules and 
regulations? 
 
3.2.8.1 Failure to conduct mandatory Baseline Survey for planning under 
MGNREGS  
Paragraph 6.2 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 stated that a survey of 
job card (JC) holders was to be mandatorily conducted in every Gram Panchayat (GP) 
in order to prepare a baseline data to assess the quantum and timing of demand for 
employment in the village. The paragraph further recommended that expert 
institutions may be empanelled separately in each State to finalise the framework and 
methodology for the pilots for the baseline survey and train teams from each District 
to conduct the surveys. 
Audit observed that during 2019-2024, the Department did not empanel expert 
institutions and did not conduct a baseline survey. Audit further observed that the 
absence of baseline survey data resulted in non-preparation of the development plan 
and preparation of an improbable labour budget as discussed in Paragraphs 3.2.8.2 
and 3.2.8.3 respectively.  
The scheme guidelines provided that expert institutions may be empanelled separately 
in each State to provide technical and professional support in planning, design, and 
implementation. However, empanelment of expert institutions was not mandatory 
under the guidelines. Audit observed that while the State Government did not 
empanel expert institutions during the period covered, this did not constitute a 
violation of scheme provisions per se. Nevertheless, the absence of empanelled expert 
institutions resulted in limited access to technical expertise, which contributed to 
deficiencies in the preparation of realistic Development Plans, labour budget 
estimation, and project execution, as discussed in preceding paragraphs. 
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that the Agricultural Finance 
Corporation, Guwahati and the National Institute of Rural Development were engaged 
to carry out a baseline survey up to 2016 and that the same data was utilised in 
preparation of yearly labour budget. It was further stated that due to short receipt of 
the administrative expenses fund from the Ministry and tight timelines, the 
Department could not engage experts to conduct the baseline survey post 2016. 
As per Paragraph 6.2 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013, a baseline 
survey was to be mandatorily conducted in every GP to assess the quantum and 
timing of demand for employment. This survey was intended to be a periodic and 
dynamic exercise aligned with actual field conditions. The use of data collected upto 
2016 does not satisfy this requirement for the audit period 2019-2024. The reliance on 
pre-2016 data during 2019-2024 undermines the accuracy of labour demand 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
113
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
113 
 
estimation. Factors such as changes in population, migration patterns, new job card 
registrations, and evolving work preferences directly affect the employment demand 
and necessitate updated surveys. The absence of empanelled expert institutions may 
have contributed to the non-conduct of baseline surveys, but it did not absolve the 
Department from its responsibility to ensure that updated baseline data was prepared 
through its own administrative mechanisms. 
The Department’s claim of insufficient administrative funds does not justify deviation 
from mandatory provisions as an amount of ₹29.53 crore was diverted from 
administrative expenses towards impermissible items of expenditure 
(Paragraph 3.2.8.7). The responsibility to ensure appropriate allocation and 
utilisation of administrative expenses rests with the implementing authority to ensure 
core planning functions like baseline survey are not compromised. 
The non-conduct of updated baseline surveys led to deficiencies in preparation of 
realistic Development Plans and labour budgets, as already brought out in 
Paragraphs 3.2.8.2 and 3.2.8.3. This directly affected the overall effectiveness and 
credibility of MGNREGA implementation in the State. 
3.2.8.2 Non-preparation of Development Plan at village level 
Section 16 (3) & (4) of the MGNREG Act states that every GP shall, after considering 
the recommendations of the Gram Sabha and the Ward Sabhas, prepare a 
Development Plan and maintain a shelf of possible works to be taken up under the 
Scheme as and when demand for works arises. The Gram Panchayat shall forward its 
proposals for the development projects including the order of priority between 
different works to the Programme Officer for scrutiny and preliminary approval prior 
to the commencement of the year in which it is proposed to be executed.  Further, 
Paragraph 6.1.3 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 provides that DPC 
has to ensure strict adherence to the principles of bottom-up approach from planning 
to approval of the selected shelf of projects by each of the Gram Sabhas in the district.   
Audit observed that during 2019-2024, the Development Plan was not prepared at the 
village level and instead a list of works identified in the Gram Sabha meeting was 
submitted to the Block office. Audit further observed that the reason for non-
preparation of Development Plan was lack of baseline survey data and technical staff 
at the village level. In the absence of a Development Plan, there is a significant risk 
that the identified projects may not be aligned with the actual labour demand or the 
specific needs of the community, as the required planning and technical assessments 
were not conducted by VDBs. Audit also observed that non-preparation of 
Development Plan resulted in execution of impermissible works, unfruitful works and 
diversion of works as discussed in Paragraphs 3.2.10.2 and 3.2.10.3. 
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that the list of works to be 
taken up in the following year was discussed and approved in the village Gram Sabha 
meeting and was then submitted to the Block office for preparation of estimates and 
uploading in NREGASoft MIS. It was also stated that lack of GRS and technical staff 

114
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
114 
 
at village level led to non-preparation of comprehensive Development Plan at village 
level.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable as the bottom-up approach of 
planning required each VDB to prepare a comprehensive Development Plan as 
envisaged in the Scheme Guidelines.  The “list of works” approach followed by GPs 
falls short of statutory compliance as it is an ad hoc approach. The reply was also not 
acceptable as non-appointment of key functionaries at the village level was due to the 
fact that administrative expenses fund component was not provided to the VDBs to 
pay the salaries as discussed in Paragraph 3.2.9.2. 
3.2.8.3 Shortfall in estimation, projection and generation of person days 
As per the Guidelines for “Planning for Works and preparation of Labour Budget” 
issued by the MoRD, GoI, the State Government was to prepare a realistic budget. 
Labour Budget (LB) was an estimation of the anticipated demand for unskilled 
manual work and was based on the amount of total expenditure to be incurred while 
generating a person day wage employment including cost for wages, materials and 
administrative expenses. The year-wise number of estimated person days at block/ 
district level, projected person days submitted by the Department to the MoRD, 
approved person days by GoI, actual person days generated at village level and the 
shortfall thereof is shown in Table 3.2.1. 
Table 3.2.1A: Labour Budget - Estimation, Projection, Approval and Actual Generation 
of Person Days  
(Figures in lakh Person Days) 
Year Estimated PDs Projected PDs GoI Approved PDs Actual PDs Generated 
2019-20 417.48 417.48 125.50 138.48 
2020-21 410.95 410.95 200.00 180.11 
2021-22 369.53 212.88 200.00 192.58 
2022-23 419.42 300.00 200.00 196.83 
2023-24 504.07 300.00 191.00 178.73 
Source: Departmental records 
Table 3.2.1 B: Shortfall in Person Days Generation (Absolute & Percentage Terms) 
(Figures in lakh Person Days) 
Year 
Absolute 
Shortfall vs 
Estimate 
Shortfall vs 
Estimate 
(in per cent) 
Absolute 
Shortfall vs 
Projection 
Shortfall vs 
Projection (in 
per cent) 
Absolute 
Shortfall vs 
Approval 
Shortfall vs 
Approval in 
(in per cent) 
2019-20 278.99 67 278.99 67 (-)12.98 -10 
2020-21 230.83 56 230.83 56 19.89 10 
2021-22 176.95 48 20.29 10 07.42 04 
2022-23 222.59 53 103.17 34 03.17 02 
2023-24 325.34 65 121.27 40 12.27 06 
Source: Departmental records 
As may be seen from Table 3.2.1, there was wide variation in person days estimation 
and projection against person days generated in the State. During 2019-2024, the 
shortfall in person days generated against the estimation ranged between 48 and 
67 per cent. Similarly, the shortfall in person days generated against projection ranged 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
115
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
115 
 
between 10 and 67 per cent. In the test-checked districts, the shortfall in person days 
generated against estimation of the districts/blocks ranged between 37 and 46 per cent 
(Appendix-3.2.1). Audit observed that the shortfall in actual generation of person days 
was due to inadequate planning (discussed in Paragraphs 3.2.8.1  and 3.2.8.2) and 
delay in utilisation of funds by the State Government as discussed in 
Paragraph 3.2.8.5. Thus, the labour budget submitted by the Department to the 
MoRD was not realistic in the absence of baseline survey and Development Plan. The 
mismatch between projections and actual generation undermined the credibility and 
accuracy of future labour budgeting exercises, thereby impacting scheme outcomes.  
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that the number of person 
days generated was determined by the GoI approved labour budget.  
The reply is not acceptable as the State Government should have taken steps to 
prepare a realistic labour budget based on baseline survey and Development Plan.  
The reply essentially passes responsibility to the MoRD saying GoI sanctioned only a 
certain number of person-days. However, the State’s responsibility lies in furnishing 
accurate estimates through proper demand assessment at GP/Block level which forms 
the basis for the MoRD approval. Further, the State is legally bound to follow bottom-
up demand estimation as per MGNREGA Act and guidelines.  
3.2.8.4 Funding Pattern 
MGNREGS is a Centrally sponsored demand driven employment scheme 
implemented on a cost sharing basis between GoI and State Government. Under 
MGNREGS, the GoI was to bear 100 per cent of wages of unskilled manual workers 
and 75 per cent  of the cost of material including wages of skilled and semi-skilled 
workers and the State Government was to bear the remaining 25 per cent. The State 
Government also had to bear expenditure on delayed payment of the wages 6 t o  t h e  
workers, unemployment allowance 7 and administrative expenses of the State 
Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC). 
Table 3.2.2: Key Components of MGNREGA funding  
Expenditure Item Funded by 
Wages for unskilled manual labourers 100 per cent by Centre 
Material cost and wages for skilled/semi-skilled labour 75 per cent by Centre, 25 per cent by 
State 
Administrative expenses (including staff salaries) 75 per cent by Centre, 25 per cent by 
State 
Unemployment allowance (if due work is not provided) 100 per cent by State  
                                                
6  MGNREGA workers are entitled to receive delay compensation at a rate of 0.05 per cent  of the 
unpaid wages per day for the duration of the delay beyond the sixteenth day of the closure of the 
MR. 
7  MGNREGA workers are entitled to receive unemployment allowance if employment is not 
provided within fifteen days of receipt of his/her application seeking employment.  

116
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
116 
 
The fund flow under MGNREGS is shown below: 
  
The funds released and expenditure incurred during 2019-2024 are shown in 
Table 3.2.3. 
Table 3.2.3: Grant received vis-à-vis expenditure incurred during 2019-20 to 2023-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Fund Release Interest/ 
Misc. 
receipts 
Total Fund 
Available 
Total 
Expenditure 
Closing 
Balance GoI share  State share 
1 2 3 4 5 6=2+3+4+5 7 8=6-7 
2019-20 156.93 330.45 39.21 2.50 529.09 464.98 64.11 
2020-21 64.11 483.82 0 1.63 549.56 466.24 83.32 
2021-22 83.32 597.48 43.57 0.83 725.20 515.13 210.07 
2022-23 210.07 857.52 69.67 4.00 1,141.26 932.75 208.51 
2023-24 208.51 643.72 80.81 0.94 933.98 909.26 24.72 
Total 2,912.99 233.26 9.90 - 3,288.36 - 
Source: Information furnished by the Rural Development Department, GoN 
The audit analysis of fund flow and utilisation under MGNREGS during 2019-2024 
revealed systemic deficiencies in financial planning and fund management. Despite 
substantial releases from the GoI, there were recurring instances of significant unspent 
balances at the end of each financial year, peaking at ₹210.07 crore (29 per cent of 
total available funds) in 2021-22, indicating delays in fund utilisation and weak 
absorption capacity at the State level. The irregular contribution of State share, 
including nil contribution in 2020-21, reflects non-adherence to the prescribed cost-
sharing norms of the Scheme. 
The substantial variations in year-wise fund releases and closing balances further 
point to deficient labour demand estimation, poor preparation of realistic labour 
budgets, and inadequate planning at the village level, as already brought out in earlier 
audit findings. The persistent underutilisation of available funds not only undermined 
the intended objectives of timely employment generation under the scheme but would 
also have adversely affected the financial efficiency and credibility of the labour 
budgeting process in the State. 
Chapter – III Economic Sector 
 
116 
 
The fund flow under MGNREGS is shown below: 
  
The funds released and expenditure incurred during 2019-2024 are shown in 
Table 3.2.3. 
Table 3.2.3: Grant received vis-à-vis expenditure incurred during 2019-20 to 2023-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Fund Release Interest/ 
Misc. 
receipts 
Total Fund 
Available 
Total 
Expenditure 
Closing 
Balance GoI share  State share 
1 2 3 4 5 6=2+3+4+5 7 8=6-7 
2019-20 156.93 330.45 39.21 2.50 529.09 464.98 64.11 
2020-21 64.11 483.82 0 1.63 549.56 466.24 83.32 
2021-22 83.32 597.48 43.57 0.83 725.20 515.13 210.07 
2022-23 210.07 857.52 69.67 4.00 1,141.26 932.75 208.51 
2023-24 208.51 643.72 80.81 0.94 933.98 909.26 24.72 
Total 2,912.99 233.26 9.90 - 3,288.36 - 
Source: Information furnished by the Rural Development Department, GoN 
The audit analysis of fund flow and utilisation under MGNREGS during 2019-2024 
revealed systemic deficiencies in financial planning and fund management. Despite 
substantial releases from the GoI, there were recurring instances of significant unspent 
balances at the end of each financial year, peaking at ₹210.07 crore (29 per cent of 
total available funds) in 2021-22, indicating delays in fund utilisation and weak 
absorption capacity at the State level. The irregular contribution of State share, 
including nil contribution in 2020-21, reflects non-adherence to the prescribed cost-
sharing norms of the Scheme. 
The substantial variations in year-wise fund releases and closing balances further 
point to deficient labour demand estimation, poor preparation of realistic labour 
budgets, and inadequate planning at the village level, as already brought out in earlier 
audit findings. The persistent underutilisation of available funds not only undermined 
the intended objectives of timely employment generation under the scheme but would 
also have adversely affected the financial efficiency and credibility of the labour 
budgeting process in the State. 
Chapter – III Economic Sector 
 
116 
 
The fund flow under MGNREGS is shown below: 
  
The funds released and expenditure incurred during 2019-2024 are shown in 
Table 3.2.3. 
Table 3.2.3: Grant received vis-à-vis expenditure incurred during 2019-20 to 2023-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Fund Release Interest/ 
Misc. 
receipts 
Total Fund 
Available 
Total 
Expenditure 
Closing 
Balance GoI share  State share 
1 2 3 4 5 6=2+3+4+5 7 8=6-7 
2019-20 156.93 330.45 39.21 2.50 529.09 464.98 64.11 
2020-21 64.11 483.82 0 1.63 549.56 466.24 83.32 
2021-22 83.32 597.48 43.57 0.83 725.20 515.13 210.07 
2022-23 210.07 857.52 69.67 4.00 1,141.26 932.75 208.51 
2023-24 208.51 643.72 80.81 0.94 933.98 909.26 24.72 
Total 2,912.99 233.26 9.90 - 3,288.36 - 
Source: Information furnished by the Rural Development Department, GoN 
The audit analysis of fund flow and utilisation under MGNREGS during 2019-2024 
revealed systemic deficiencies in financial planning and fund management. Despite 
substantial releases from the GoI, there were recurring instances of significant unspent 
balances at the end of each financial year, peaking at ₹210.07 crore (29 per cent of 
total available funds) in 2021-22, indicating delays in fund utilisation and weak 
absorption capacity at the State level. The irregular contribution of State share, 
including nil contribution in 2020-21, reflects non-adherence to the prescribed cost-
sharing norms of the Scheme. 
The substantial variations in year-wise fund releases and closing balances further 
point to deficient labour demand estimation, poor preparation of realistic labour 
budgets, and inadequate planning at the village level, as already brought out in earlier 
audit findings. The persistent underutilisation of available funds not only undermined 
the intended objectives of timely employment generation under the scheme but would 
also have adversely affected the financial efficiency and credibility of the labour 
budgeting process in the State. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
117
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
117 
 
Audit also observed that interest earnings on idle funds were not proportionate to the 
magnitude of unspent balances, indicating weaknesses in fund management practices. 
Audit findings on financial management are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
3.2.8.5 Delay in release of funds  
Paragraph 2 of the sanction letters issued by the GoI states that the State Government 
is required to transfer these funds along with the State share to the State Employment 
Guarantee Fund (SEGF) for programme implementation within three days positively 
from the date of receipt of these funds (for 2019-20 to 2021-22) and 15 days from the 
receipt of Central funds in the State Treasury (for 2022-23 to 2023-24). Besides the 
State Government is liable to pay interest at 12 per cent (for 2019-20 to 2020-21) for 
any delay beyond the specified period. Audit observed that the State Government 
released an amount of ₹1,710.34 crore to the SEGF/PIA with delays ranging from 
04 to 238 days. The details of delay in release of funds are given in Appendix-3.2.2 
and summarised in Table 3.2.4. 
Table 3.2.4: Delay in release of funds from GoN to SEGF/PIA 
(₹ in crore) 
Financial 
Year 
Delay Period 
(Days) 
Amount of Grant 
Released (₹ crore) 
Penal Interest 
Applicable 
Interest Amount 
(₹ crore) 
2019-20 41 to 238 370.10 Yes 8.33 
2020-21 44 to 160 483.82 Yes 14.04 
2021-22 43 307.33 No NA 
2022-23 22 to 25 334.06 No NA 
2023-24 4 to 80 215.03 No NA 
Total  - 1,710. 34  - 22.37 
Source: Departmental records 
As can be seen from Table 3.2.4 , the State Government was liable to pay penal 
interest of ₹22.37 crore for delay in release of funds during 2019-20 and 2020-21. 
Moreover, the delay in release of funds by the State Government resulted in delay of 
fund utilisation which in turn deprived the State Government of the opportunity to 
avail more funds to achieve 100 days of employment, besides leading to the undue 
creation of an interest liability of ₹22.37 crore. The reasons for persistent delays in 
release of funds by the State Government were neither on record nor stated to Audit. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (December 2024) 
that it had noted the Audit observation and the matter would be pursued for timely 
release of fund. 
3.2.8.6 Shortfall in release of State matching share 
As per funding pattern of the scheme, the State Government was to bear 25 per cent 
of the cost of materials including wages for skilled and semi-skilled labour. Further, 
Paragraph 2.4.2 (vii) of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013, stated that it 
was the responsibility of the State Government to ensure that the State share of the 
MGNREGS budget was provisioned for and released to SEGF in the beginning of the 
financial year so that it could be used as a revolving fund. The year-wise release of 
State matching share by the State Government was shown in Table 3.2.5. 

118
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
118 
 
Table 3.2.5: Shortfall in release of State share 
(₹ in crore) 
Sanction 
Year 
State 
share due 
Actual 
release 
Shortfall 
amount Shortfall against 
2019-20 43.20 39.65 3.55 1st tranche - 4th instalment, 2nd tranche – 1st instalment 
2020-21 53.76 43.57 10.19 1st tranche – 1st instalment (backlog) 
2021-22 91.98 45.99 45.99 1st tranche – 1st instalment (backlog) 
2022-23 82.75 38.09 44.66 1st tranche – 1st instalment (backlog) 
2023-24* 66.40 66.40 0  
Total 338.09 233.70 104.39  
Source: Data of Rural Development Department, GoN *   as on 31 March 2024 
Audit observed persistent shortfall in release of State matching share for 
implementation of MGNREGS during 2019-2024. Against the total obligation of 
₹338.09 crore, the State Government released only ₹233.70 crore (69 per cent ), 
resulting in cumulative short release of ₹104.39 crore (31 per cent ). The consistent 
under-provisioning and delayed release of State share directly affected the 
implementation of works, particularly the material component envisaged in the labour 
budget. 
The short release of State share not only restricted the scope and timely execution of 
approved works but also undermined the capacity of the Programme Implementing 
Agencies to plan, procure and execute material-intensive activities as per approved 
labour budgets. As the material component constitutes a significant portion of asset 
creation and durable livelihood infrastructure under MGNREGS, such funding gaps 
adversely impacted the quality and sustainability of works taken up during the period. 
Furthermore, the recurring shortfall reflects weak financial planning and poor 
adherence to scheme guidelines, which mandate provisioning of State share at the 
beginning of the financial year to ensure smooth and uninterrupted fund flow. The 
delays in releasing matching share also contributed to overall fund parking, inefficient 
fund utilisation, and reduced employment generation capacity, as discussed in 
succeeding audit findings. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (December 2024) 
that the matter had been taken up and the State matching share of 2023-24 had been 
released in full.  
3.2.8.7 Irregular utilisation of Administrative Expenses Fund 
Section 22(1)(c) of the MGNREG Act read with Paragraph 12.5.2 of the MGNREGA 
Operational Guidelines, 2013 states that the Central Government will provide up to 
six per cent  of the total expenditure on MGNREGA in a financial year as 
administrative expenses for capacity building, IEC activities, MIS, quality 
management, setting up of a grievance redressal system, operational expenses, social 
audit, worksite facilities, ex-gratia payment on death/disablement and medical 
treatment of Job Card holders during the course of work. Further, Paragraph 12.5.6 of 
the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 specifies that expenses relating to 
purchase/repair of old vehicles, civil works and salaries/remuneration of functionaries 
already engaged by the Government are not allowed to be made from administrative 
expenses. Audit, however, observed that an amount of ₹29.53 crore under 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
119
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
119 
 
administrative expenses component was incorrectly utilised towards vehicle purchases 
(₹2.14 crore), vehicle repairs (₹0.27 crore), payment of staff salaries/honorarium of 
DRDA (₹26.26 crore) and honorarium for MIS coordinators of PMAY-G (₹0.86 
crore) as shown in Table 3.2.6. 
Table 3.2.6: Irregular utilisation of Administrative Expenses Fund 
(₹ in lakh) 
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Total 
Purchase of vehicles 26.16 61.95 119.12 5.15 1.28 213.66 
Repair of vehicles 2.23 0 2.30 20.60 2.37 27.50 
DRDA salaries 761.77 880.68 467.45 516.24 0 2,626.14 
PMAY-G salaries 41.82 43.96 0 0 0 85.78 
Total 2,953.08 
Source: Purchase vouchers and CA reports 
The diversion of scheme fund intended for administrative purposes resulted in 
reduction of funds available for planning, IEC, quality management, appointment of 
key functionaries at village level and setting up of a grievance redressal system. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (December 2024) 
that the Department resorted to purchase of vehicles because hiring of vehicles was 
not economical as hiring charge of a vehicle for 1-2 years exceeds the cost of new 
vehicle. It was further stated that the fund was temporarily transferred to meet the 
salary of DRDA staff on loan basis which would be recovered. Under PMAY-G, a 
temporary loan was advanced from MGNREGA fund to tide over the shortfall in 
release of administrative funds and ₹20 lakh has been recovered.  
Though the State Government accepted the Audit observation, the rationale for 
purchase of vehicles and advancing loan from administrative expenses component 
was not acceptable.  As per Paragraph 12.5.6 of MGNREGA Operational Guidelines 
2013, administrative expenses fund shall not be utilised for purchase or maintenance 
of vehicles, payment of salaries to existing Government staff, or funding any 
expenditure of other schemes. The State Government's argument that hiring vehicles 
would be costlier, or that expenditures were incurred as temporary loans, does not 
override the mandatory scheme provisions which strictly define permissible uses of 
administrative funds. 
The claim that salaries of DRDA and PMAY-G staff were temporarily paid out of 
MGNREGA administrative fund as recoverable advances is not acceptable. 
Utilisation of the scheme funds for purposes outside the approved administrative 
components constitutes misutilisation at the point of diversion itself, regardless of 
whether subsequent recovery is affected or not. Diversion of ₹29.53 crore from 
administrative funds reduced the financial resources available for core management 
functions such as planning, monitoring, grievance redressal, IEC activities, and 
technical quality control, thereby weakening the programme management systems 
essential for effective implementation of MGNREGA. 
Repeated diversion of administrative funds across multiple years demonstrates 
systemic lapses in financial management, weak internal controls, and non-adherence 
Chapter – III Economic Sector 
 
120 
 
to statutory fund utilisation norms. 
3.2.8.8 Non-remittance of interest  
Paragraph 5 of the scheme sanction letters issued by the MoRD, GoI stipulates 
observance of Rule 230 (8) of the GFR, 2017 for refund of interest receipts to the 
Consolidated Fund of India (CFI). Further, Paragraph 12.3.1 of the MGNREGA 
Operational Guidelines, 2013, states that interest accruing on account of MGNREGA 
funds should be a part of the SEGF and shall be spent only as per instructions of the 
Central Government.  
Audit observed that interest earned on scheme funds for the period 2019-20 and 
2020-21 amounting to ₹3.77 crore 8 was not remitted to the CFI and was instead 
utilised as part of the Scheme fund. 
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that the interest earned was 
automatically added in the Scheme funds and utilised as there was no specific 
instruction from the Ministry for refund.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable as Paragraph 5 of scheme 
sanction letters issued by MoRD, GoI stipulates refund of interest receipts to the CFI 
and there was no instruction from the Ministry for utilisation of these interest receipt 
funds by the Department. The irregular retention and utilisation of interest earnings 
reflect non-compliance with mandatory fund flow requirements under the 
MGNREGA financial management framework. 
Recommendations:  
The State Government may ensure that- 
(i) development plans are prepared to adopt a bottom-up approach in 
preparing a realistic Labour Budget to achieve minimum 100 days of wage 
employment to every rural household in a year. 
(ii) matching State share and GoI scheme funds are released to the 
implementing agency without delay. 
(iii) scheme fund is not diverted towards inadmissible expenditure. 
 
3.2.9 Audit Objective: Whether fair access to employment opportunities was 
achieved, as well as employment adequately generated, 
leading to social protection and livelihood security as 
envisaged? 
 
3.2.9.1 Low number of employment days generated 
Section 3(1) of the MGNREG Act provided a legal guarantee of at least 100 days of 
wage employment in every financial year to every rural household (HH) whose adult 
members were willing to do unskilled manual work at the minimum wage rate. The 
total number of registered Households, Workers and Job Cards issued during 
2019-2024 is given in Table 3.2.7. 
                                                
8  ₹2.30 crore (2019-20) + ₹1.47 crore (2020-21) 

120
Chapter III: Economic Sector
Chapter – III Economic Sector 
 
120 
 
to statutory fund utilisation norms. 
3.2.8.8 Non-remittance of interest  
Paragraph 5 of the scheme sanction letters issued by the MoRD, GoI stipulates 
observance of Rule 230 (8) of the GFR, 2017 for refund of interest receipts to the 
Consolidated Fund of India (CFI). Further, Paragraph 12.3.1 of the MGNREGA 
Operational Guidelines, 2013, states that interest accruing on account of MGNREGA 
funds should be a part of the SEGF and shall be spent only as per instructions of the 
Central Government.  
Audit observed that interest earned on scheme funds for the period 2019-20 and 
2020-21 amounting to ₹3.77 crore 8 was not remitted to the CFI and was instead 
utilised as part of the Scheme fund. 
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that the interest earned was 
automatically added in the Scheme funds and utilised as there was no specific 
instruction from the Ministry for refund.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable as Paragraph 5 of scheme 
sanction letters issued by MoRD, GoI stipulates refund of interest receipts to the CFI 
and there was no instruction from the Ministry for utilisation of these interest receipt 
funds by the Department. The irregular retention and utilisation of interest earnings 
reflect non-compliance with mandatory fund flow requirements under the 
MGNREGA financial management framework. 
Recommendations:  
The State Government may ensure that- 
(i) development plans are prepared to adopt a bottom-up approach in 
preparing a realistic Labour Budget to achieve minimum 100 days of wage 
employment to every rural household in a year. 
(ii) matching State share and GoI scheme funds are released to the 
implementing agency without delay. 
(iii) scheme fund is not diverted towards inadmissible expenditure. 
 
3.2.9 Audit Objective: Whether fair access to employment opportunities was 
achieved, as well as employment adequately generated, 
leading to social protection and livelihood security as 
envisaged? 
 
3.2.9.1 Low number of employment days generated 
Section 3(1) of the MGNREG Act provided a legal guarantee of at least 100 days of 
wage employment in every financial year to every rural household (HH) whose adult 
members were willing to do unskilled manual work at the minimum wage rate. The 
total number of registered Households, Workers and Job Cards issued during 
2019-2024 is given in Table 3.2.7. 
                                                
8  ₹2.30 crore (2019-20) + ₹1.47 crore (2020-21) 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
121
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
121 
 
Table 3.2.7: Year wise total Registered Households, Job Cards and Registered Workers  
Year Total Registered 
Households Total Job Cards issued Total Registered 
Workers 
2019-20 4,36,793 4,36,346 7,33,997 
2020-21 4,47,824 4,47,593 7,45,705 
2021-22 4,56,704 4,56,154 7,73,326 
2022-23 4,65,864 4,64,709 7,93,819 
2023-24 4,71,418 4,70,464 8,37,030 
Source: Departmental reply and MIS Report as on December 2024 
As can be seen in table above, a total of 4,36,793 households were registered under 
the scheme with 7,33,997 registered workers during the year 2019-20. The number of 
registered households had increased to 4,71,418, with 8,37,030 registered workers 
during 2023-24. 
Audit observed that during the period from 2019-2024, an average of 46 days 9 of 
employment was generated for registered HHs in the State ( Appendix 3.2.3 (i) ). 
Further, the number of HHs receiving 100 days of employment was very low ranging 
from 17 HHs in 2021-22 to 289 HHs in 2023-24 (Appendix 3.2.3 (ii)). The failure to 
generate sufficient person-days of employment and to enable a larger number of 
households to access their full entitlements under MGNREGA reflects weaknesses in 
awareness generation, demand registration, and planning processes at the field level. 
The legal guarantee of up to 100 days of wage employment under Section 3 of the Act 
was not fully realised due to institutional and administrative deficiencies, as also 
corroborated by field verification where 86 per cent  of surveyed beneficiaries 
expressed willingness to work for more days than actually provided. 
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that the guarantee of 100 days 
was the maximum permissible figure and not a mandatory allocation figure to the 
State and that it provided employment according to the approved labour budget from 
GoI. It was further stated that because of less demand and other factors beyond the 
control of the Department, the State had not achieved the person days approved by 
GoI. It was also stated that directives had been issued to sensitise beneficiaries on 
their rights and entitlements. 
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable as the MGNREGA explicitly 
aims to provide a legal guarantee of upto 100 days of wage employment and as 280 
(86 per cent) of the 323 beneficiaries surveyed in 32 test-checked villages responded 
that they were willing to work for more number of days than the employment offered 
by the VDB in last five years. Further, the contention of “less demand” is contradicted 
by the broader employment scenario in the State. As per the Periodic Labour Force 
Survey published by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, GoI, 
the unemployment rate in Nagaland for individuals aged 15 years and above 
fluctuated between 7.10 10 and 25.70 per cent  during the period. The high 
                                                
9  Dimapur (37 days), Mokokchung (47 days), Phek (42 days) and Zunheboto (37 days) 
10 Unemployment rate in Nagaland: 25.70 per cent (2019-20),19.20 per cent (2020-21), 9.10 per cent 
(2021-22), 4.30 per cent (2022-23) and 7.10 per cent (2023-24) 

122
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
122 
 
unemployment rate coupled with the survey findings clearly indicates that adequate 
demand for wage employment under MGNREGA existed, and hence the argument of 
“less demand” cannot be accepted. Moreover, all beneficiaries surveyed were not 
aware of their right to demand for work under the Scheme as discussed in Paragraph 
3.2.9.11. 
3.2.9.2 Lack of key functionaries at village level 
Paragraph 4.1 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 stipulated deployment 
of one Gram Rozgar Sahayak (GRS) or Employment Guarantee Assistant in each GP 
who would assist the GP in executing MGNREGA works. The GRS was responsible 
for overseeing the process of registration/distribution of Job Cards, filing job 
applications and maintenance of all MGNREGS-related registers at the GP level. 
Further, a mate or worksite supervisor was required for each work-site to record 
attendance and take initial measurement of work, which is validated by Technical 
Assistant/Junior Engineer.  
Audit observed that the GRS and mates were not employed in any of the 32 test-
checked villages. Audit further observed that the reason for non-employment of key 
functionaries at the village level was due to administrative expenses component not 
being provided to the VDBs to pay their salaries. The non-deployment of GRSs and 
mates in the test-checked villages represented a critical structural deficiency in 
MGNREGA’s implementation framework. Despite the Operational Guidelines 
mandating deployment since 2013, the State Government failed to appoint these key 
functionaries for more than a decade, thereby impairing the delivery of core scheme 
activities such as registration, job card management, demand processing, worksite 
supervision, and measurement recording. The delayed deployment of 1,328 mates at a 
later stage does not mitigate the prolonged period of non-compliance observed during 
the audit period 2019-2024. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (December 2024) 
that due to short receipts of administrative expenses fund from GoI, key functionaries 
were not deployed in the villages. The Department, however, added that recently 
1,328 mates have been placed in the villages to assist the VDBs in smooth 
implementation of the scheme. 
The reply of the State Government should be seen in the context of a significant time 
period of more than a decade having elapsed after the notification of the Operational 
Guidelines in 2013 and the State Government having failed to appoint the key 
functionaries of the Scheme in the VDBs. Further, the justification on short receipt of 
fund is not acceptable as an amount of ₹29.53 crore was diverted from administrative 
expenses towards impermissible items of expenditure (Paragraph 3.2.8.7). 
3.2.9.3 Non-conduct of door to door survey 
Paragraph 3.1.1 (ii) of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013, states that a 
door-to-door survey should be undertaken by each GP every year to identify eligible 
households who have been missed out and wish to be registered under the Act. The 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
123
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
123 
 
application register for Job Card (JC) holders is also required to ensure an accurate 
record of registered households. 
Audit observed that the annual door-to-door survey was not conducted by the POs in 
the 32 test-checked villages. Audit further observed that the application register 
required for registration of JC holders was also not maintained. The failure to conduct 
annual door-to-door surveys and maintain job card application registers represents a 
critical compliance lapse that undermined the core principle of universal access to 
guaranteed employment under MGNREGA. The absence of proactive identification 
and registration processes could have led to the exclusion of eligible households, 
under-reporting of employment demand, and sub-optimal implementation of the 
scheme during the audit period. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (December 2024) 
that directives had been issued to POs for compulsory maintenance of application 
register and to conduct annual door-to-door survey. 
3.2.9.4 Government employees registered as Job Card holders 
Paragraph 1.4(v) of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 states that 
MGNREGA aims to provide rural employment to the marginalised section of the 
population. 
Audit observed that in the 32 test-checked villages, 24 Government employees were 
enrolled as unskilled workers under MGNREGA and ₹6.04 lakh was paid as wages to 
19 Government employees ( Appendix-3.2.4). The enrolment of Government 
employees as MGNREGA beneficiaries undermined the scheme’s intent, as it 
diverted funds meant to support marginalised and economically vulnerable 
communities. MGNREGA guidelines prohibit wage payments to individuals already 
in regular Government service. The irregular payments occurred due to absence of 
verification controls while issuing Job Cards and failure to cross-check registration 
data with the State Government’s Personnel Information Management System 
(PIMS). The inclusion of ineligible beneficiaries reflects serious lapses in scheme 
oversight and financial management, resulting in mis-utilisation of public funds. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (December 2024) 
that directives had been issued to the POs for identification and cancellation of Job 
Cards of the Government employees. 
3.2.9.5 Custody of Job Cards 
Paragraph 3.1.5(iv) of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 states that Job 
Card must always be in the custody of the household to whom it is issued and if for 
any reason, it is taken by implementing agencies, it should be returned on the same 
day after the updates. Further, the Job Cards found in the possession of any Panchayat 
or MGNREGA functionary, without a valid reason, will be considered as an offence 
punishable under Section 25 of the MGNREG Act. 

124
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
124 
 
During beneficiary survey conducted by Audit, 280 out of 323 beneficiaries surveyed 
(87 per cent) stated that their Job Cards were kept in the VDB offices. Further, the 
beneficiaries reported that the primary reason for keeping Job Cards in VDB offices 
was to avoid the risk of loss or improper handling. The widespread retention of Job 
Cards by VDB offices led to Job Cards without signature of Head of Household in 50 
out of 323 beneficiaries surveyed. Such widespread retention of Job Cards constitutes 
a serious violation of Paragraph 3.1.5(iv) of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 
2013 and Section 25 of the MGNREG Act. The Job Card is a legal document which 
enables beneficiaries to demand work, record employment details, and verify 
payments received. Retaining Job Cards at the VDB office deprives beneficiaries of 
independent access to their legal entitlements, compromises transparency in wage 
payments, increases the risk of manipulation of records, and undermines the demand-
driven design of the scheme. The systemic nature of this practice reflects weak field-
level monitoring and failure to enforce basic scheme safeguards.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (December 2024) 
that directives have been issued to DPCs and POs for necessary corrective action.  
The State Government’s post-audit corrective instructions, while noted, do not 
address the persistent non-compliance during the audit period. 
3.2.9.6 Slow progress in Aadhaar Based Payment System (ABPS) 
GoI introduced Aadhaar-based payment system (ABPS) to facilitate direct transfer of 
wages to the unskilled workers' bank accounts for efficient process of wage 
distribution. The ABPS is a method of disbursing payments to MGNREGA workers 
using their Aadhaar number as their financial address. Further, GoI had advised the 
State Government to bring all beneficiaries into the ABPS platform by 31 December 
2023. In addition, GoI (February 2016) directed the State Government to expedite the 
process of Aadhaar enrolment of the MGNREGA workers and seeding the same into 
their bank accounts by organising camps at the block or GP level. Audit observed that 
as of September 2024, the percentage of Aadhaar seeded and Aadhaar authenticated 11 
JC holders was 51 per cent and 43 per cent respectively in the State and 47 per cent 
and 39 per cent respectively in the four test-checked districts as shown in Table 3.2.8: 
Table 3.2.8: Status of Aadhaar seeding and authentication of MGNREGA workers as on 
September 2024 
Particulars Total number 
of workers 
Aadhaar 
seeded 
Percentage 
of Aadhaar 
seeded 
Aadhaar 
Authenticated 
Percentage of 
Aadhaar 
authenticated 
Eligible for 
ABPS 
State 5,78,247 2,92,842 51 2,50,725 43 1,81,306 
Dimapur 1,00,483 40,627 40 32,297 32 22,660 
Mokokchung 43,388 31,724 73 30,184 70 21,802 
                                                
11  Regulation 2(C) of the AADHAAR (Authentication) Regulations, 2016 defines the AADHAAR 
authentication as the process by which the AADHAAR number along with demographic 
information or biometric information of an individual is submitted to the Central Identities Data 
Repository for its verification and such Repository verifies the corrections, or the lack thereof, on 
the basis of information available with it. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
125
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
125 
 
Particulars Total number 
of workers 
Aadhaar 
seeded 
Percentage 
of Aadhaar 
seeded 
Aadhaar 
Authenticated 
Percentage of 
Aadhaar 
authenticated 
Eligible for 
ABPS 
Phek 49,667 25,450 51 19,348 39 12,064 
Zunheboto 50,363 17,376 35 13,648 27 9,796 
Total of 
test-checked 
districts 
2,43,901 1,15,177 47 95,477 39 66,322 
Source: Departmental reply and MIS as on September 2024 
The slow progress in adoption of ABPS reflects persistent weaknesses in field-level 
data management, inadequate Aadhaar seeding and authentication processes, limited 
banking infrastructure in rural areas, and poor coordination with enrolment and 
banking agencies. Despite GoI’s target of universal ABPS coverage by December 
2023, the State was unable to ensure full migration to the platform, thereby 
compromising the efficiency, transparency, and accountability of MGNREGA wage 
disbursements. The implementation gaps observed remain a significant systemic issue 
requiring institutional corrective measures. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (December 2024) 
that the main reasons for non-achievement of 100 per cent  ABPS were location of 
Aadhaar enrolment centres at district and few sub-division headquarters, mismatch in 
job card details seeded in NREGASoft MIS with Aadhaar, 23 unbanked rural blocks 
out of total 74 blocks and location of bank branches in urban/semi-urban areas. 
3.2.9.7 Non-provision of unemployment allowance 
Section 7(3) of the MGNREG Act states that the State Government is liable to pay 
unemployment allowance to the household concerned if an applicant is not provided 
employment within fifteen days of receipt of his/her application seeking employment. 
Audit observed that the State had no provision for unemployment allowance and all 
323 beneficiaries surveyed were unaware of their entitlement to unemployment 
allowances. Moreover, the State Government had notified Nagaland MGNREGS 
Payment of Unemployment Allowance Rules, 2023 on 17 February 2023. Reasons for 
non-allocation of unemployment allowance by the Department were neither on record 
nor stated to Audit. The State Government’s failure to establish an effective 
mechanism for payment of unemployment allowance under Section 7(3) of 
MGNREG Act deprived eligible workers of their statutory entitlement in cases where 
employment was not provided within fifteen days of demand. Despite notifying the 
Nagaland MGNREGS Payment of Unemployment Allowance Rules only in February 
2023, no unemployment allowance had been paid during the audit period. Audit 
further observed that the absence of any claims for unemployment allowance was not 
indicative of absence of demand, but rather a direct consequence of weak Information, 
Education and Communication (IEC) efforts by the State, resulting in low awareness 
levels among workers regarding their entitlements. The persistent non-allocation of 
funds for unemployment allowance reflects systemic lapses in compliance with 
statutory obligations and deficiencies in institutional arrangements necessary to 
operationalise this provision of the Act. 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
125 
 
Particulars Total number 
of workers 
Aadhaar 
seeded 
Percentage 
of Aadhaar 
seeded 
Aadhaar 
Authenticated 
Percentage of 
Aadhaar 
authenticated 
Eligible for 
ABPS 
Phek 49,667 25,450 51 19,348 39 12,064 
Zunheboto 50,363 17,376 35 13,648 27 9,796 
Total of 
test-checked 
districts 
2,43,901 1,15,177 47 95,477 39 66,322 
Source: Departmental reply and MIS as on September 2024 
The slow progress in adoption of ABPS reflects persistent weaknesses in field-level 
data management, inadequate Aadhaar seeding and authentication processes, limited 
banking infrastructure in rural areas, and poor coordination with enrolment and 
banking agencies. Despite GoI’s target of universal ABPS coverage by December 
2023, the State was unable to ensure full migration to the platform, thereby 
compromising the efficiency, transparency, and accountability of MGNREGA wage 
disbursements. The implementation gaps observed remain a significant systemic issue 
requiring institutional corrective measures. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (December 2024) 
that the main reasons for non-achievement of 100 per cent  ABPS were location of 
Aadhaar enrolment centres at district and few sub-division headquarters, mismatch in 
job card details seeded in NREGASoft MIS with Aadhaar, 23 unbanked rural blocks 
out of total 74 blocks and location of bank branches in urban/semi-urban areas. 
3.2.9.7 Non-provision of unemployment allowance 
Section 7(3) of the MGNREG Act states that the State Government is liable to pay 
unemployment allowance to the household concerned if an applicant is not provided 
employment within fifteen days of receipt of his/her application seeking employment. 
Audit observed that the State had no provision for unemployment allowance and all 
323 beneficiaries surveyed were unaware of their entitlement to unemployment 
allowances. Moreover, the State Government had notified Nagaland MGNREGS 
Payment of Unemployment Allowance Rules, 2023 on 17 February 2023. Reasons for 
non-allocation of unemployment allowance by the Department were neither on record 
nor stated to Audit. The State Government’s failure to establish an effective 
mechanism for payment of unemployment allowance under Section 7(3) of 
MGNREG Act deprived eligible workers of their statutory entitlement in cases where 
employment was not provided within fifteen days of demand. Despite notifying the 
Nagaland MGNREGS Payment of Unemployment Allowance Rules only in February 
2023, no unemployment allowance had been paid during the audit period. Audit 
further observed that the absence of any claims for unemployment allowance was not 
indicative of absence of demand, but rather a direct consequence of weak Information, 
Education and Communication (IEC) efforts by the State, resulting in low awareness 
levels among workers regarding their entitlements. The persistent non-allocation of 
funds for unemployment allowance reflects systemic lapses in compliance with 
statutory obligations and deficiencies in institutional arrangements necessary to 
operationalise this provision of the Act. 

126
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
126 
 
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that unemployment allowance 
was not paid as there was no demand from Job Card holders. The reply is not 
acceptable since the lack of demand for unemployment allowance is a consequence of 
the workers' lack of awareness of their entitlement, which in turn reflected the less 
than effective IEC activities conducted by the State Government to increase 
awareness regarding the unemployment allowance. 
3.2.9.8 Non-coverage of workers under JBY and RSBY 
Paragraph 8.9 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 stipulates that 
MGNREGA workers are eligible for coverage under two insurance schemes 12 i.e., the 
Janashree Bima Yojana (JBY) and Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY).  The 
JBY, implemented by the Ministry of Finance provides life coverage and disability 
benefits to rural people. RSBY is a health insurance scheme implemented by the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment extended to all MGNREGA workers who have 
worked for more than 15 days in the preceding financial year. Under JBY, 
beneficiaries have to contribute ₹100 per annum as premium and while beneficiaries 
have to contribute ₹30 per annum as registration or renewal fee under RSBY. 
Audit observed that none of the households were covered under JBY and only 22 out 
of 4,72,942 households in the State were covered under RSBY. Audit observed that 
despite the eligibility of MGNREGA workers for insurance coverage under the JBY 
and RSBY as per Paragraph 8.9 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013, no 
meaningful coverage was achieved even after a decade of the guidelines coming into 
effect. The negligible level of coverage, with no household covered under JBY and 
only 22 households under RSBY, reflects systemic failures in institutional 
arrangements, lack of administrative initiative, and weak IEC efforts to create 
awareness among beneficiaries. The non-coverage of workers deprived them of 
critical financial risk protection against illness, disability, or death, thereby defeating 
one of the key social security objectives embedded in the MGNREGA framework. 
The Department’s post-audit instructions to initiate corrective measures do not offset 
the persistent non-compliance observed during the audit period. 
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that directives had been 
issued to DPCs and POs for wide publicity and to extend coverage of the insurance 
scheme to eligible beneficiaries. The reply is not acceptable since a significant time 
period had lapse after the notification of the Operational Guidelines in 2013 and the 
coverage of the insurance schemes remained negligible. 
3.2.9.9 Non-adoption of NREGSoft in work estimation 
Paragraph 7.7.1 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 states that payments 
to workers based on work valuated using Schedule of Rates (SoRs) appropriate for a 
contactor-led and machine-based system of work execution will lead to underpayment 
                                                
12  The two types of insurance provided under social security exclusively for MGNREGS workers are:  
(i) JBY which provides life coverage and disability benefits to rural people. and  
(ii) RSBY which has been extended to all MGNREGA workers/beneficiaries who have worked for 
more than 15 days in the preceding financial year. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
127
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
127 
 
of unskilled wages. Further, Paragraph 7.8.1 of the MGNREGA Operational 
Guidelines, 2013 states that work estimates should be generated from the NREGSoft 
with the help of back-end standard template which is designed for each type of work. 
Audit observed that the estimates for works were prepared basing on the SoR of 
Nagaland Public Works Department (NPWD) due to lack of a functional Time and 
Motion System (TMS) module in the live server of the SECURE13 Software. The non-
compliance with the MGNREGA guidelines by using NPWD’s SoR instead of 
estimates generated through NREGSoft led to inaccurate valuations of work. 
The continued reliance on NPWD’s SoR for preparation of work estimates, in 
contravention of Paragraphs 7.7.1 and 7.8.1 of MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 
2013, resulted in systemic deviation from the prescribed estimation methodology 
under MGNREGA. As the NPWD SoR is designed for mechanised and contractor-led 
execution, its application in MGNREGA’s unskilled manual work framework risks 
undervaluing the quantum of work executed by labourers and may potentially lead to 
underpayment of wages to beneficiaries. The State Government's failure to 
operationalise the TMS module in the NREGSoft system for several years reflects 
weak institutional arrangements and delayed compliance with scheme provisions, 
undermining accurate estimation, financial integrity, and wage protection under the 
scheme. The subsequent approval of the TMS study in December 2022 does not offset 
the prolonged non-compliance during the audit period. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (December 2024) 
that TMS study was carried out and the report was approved (December 2022) by the 
State Government and pending with the MoRD for enabling in the live server.   
3.2.9.10 Non-installation of Citizen Information Board 
Paragraph 7.10.1 (V) of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 states that the 
Citizen Information Board (CIB) with MGNREGA logo must be set up containing 
essential information, details of work, estimates, rate at which each of these have been 
estimated, work status, quantities of materials that are to be used, basic dimensions of 
the work, person-days that will be generated, rate at which workers will be paid and 
amount of work to be done for this to be paid, expected benefit from the work etc. 
The details must be displayed on the Citizen Information Board and at the public 
place in the GP. 
Paragraph 25(a) of Schedule I of MGNREGA stipulated installation of durable 
Citizen Information Board (CIB) displaying details of work such as cost and quantity 
of labour and material used at every worksite of the scheme. Further, the MoRD 
developed a suggestive framework and instructed (April 2017) all States and UTs to 
adopt a standardised CIB design made of cement and concrete to ensure durability 
and uniformity. The pro-active disclosure of information at the worksite through the 
suggestive framework for CIB for each work was reiterated in Paragraph 10.5 of the 
AMCs issued by GoI from time to time. During the JPV of works executed across 
                                                
13  Software for Estimate Calculation Using Rural Rate for Employment 

128
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
128 
 
eight test-checked blocks, Audit observed that out of 332 worksites, only 164 had 
CIBs made of cement and concrete. In the remaining 168 worksites, temporary metal 
signboards were installed, which displayed limited information regarding the projects 
as shown in Table 3.2.9. 
Table 3.2.9: Installation of CIB at scheme worksites 
District Block No. of 
VDBs 
No. of works 
selected for JPV 
Concrete CIB 
installed 
Temporary 
CIB installed 
Dimapur Chumukedima 4 43 41 2 
Aqhunaqa 4 40 0 40 
Mokokchung Mangkolemba 4 68 68 0 
Longchem 4 36 23 13 
Zunheboto Ghathashi 4 36 0 36 
Akuluto 4 27 18 9 
Phek Phek 4 41 0 41 
Sekhruzou 4 41 14 27 
Total 32 332 164 168 
Source: JPV report 
The deviation from prescribed norms for installation of CIBs at MGNREGA 
worksites reflects non-compliance with GoI directives for standardised concrete-based 
CIBs. The continued use of temporary metal signboards at 168 out of 332 worksites 
compromises the durability, visibility, and completeness of information available to 
the public regarding project cost, labour engagement, and material utilisation. This 
weakens the transparency framework of MGNREGA, reduces citizen oversight, and 
undermines one of the core design features intended to promote community-level 
accountability under the scheme. The State Government’s post-audit assurance of 
corrective action does not address the persistent non-compliance observed during the 
audit period. 
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that the Audit observation had 
been noted for compliance and that necessary directives had been issued to POs for 
installation and replacement of temporary metal signboards with concrete CIBs. 
3.2.9.11 Inadequate Information, Education and Communication activities 
Paragraph 5.4.2 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 states that all States 
should develop an Information, Education and Communication (IEC) plan of the 
scheme with focus on reaching out to the registered workers as well as other groups 
which could benefit from the scheme. The IEC plan should clearly indicate State, 
district, block and local level activities. Further, Paragraph 5.5 of the said Guidelines 
highlights the activities to be taken up under IEC such as project initiation meetings, 
use of help lines and rural common service centres, wall paintings, door to door 
contact programme, interactive sessions and quiz competitions on MGNREGS in 
schools and colleges. While Paragraph 12.5.2 of the said Guidelines states that at least 
two-thirds of the administrative expense should be spent at the block-level and below. 
Panchayats, in accordance with their needs and requirements may utilise the 
administrative expenses for approved activities. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
129
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
129 
 
Audit observed that the Department did not prepare any IEC plan during 2019-2024. 
Audit further observed that no funds for IEC activities were received by the block 
o f f i c e s  a n d  V D B s  i n  t h e  l a s t  f i v e  y e a r s  a n d  o n l y  l i m i t e d  I E C  a c t i v i t i e s  s u c h  a s  w a l l  
paintings and printing of pamphlets were conducted at the Directorate of RD, GoN.  
The reason for the non-preparation of IEC plan was because the Department 
conducted IEC activities as per need basis and did not rely on a structured IEC plan. 
The Department’s failure to develop an IEC plan in all probability would hinder the 
scheme’s outreach and effectiveness, particularly in informing workers about their 
rights and opportunities as observed in beneficiary survey of 323 beneficiaries in 32 
t e s t - c h e c k e d  v i l l a g e s  a s  s t a t e d  b e l o w :  
 
Audit observed that the absence of a structured IEC plan during 2019-2024 reflects 
persistent non-compliance with Paragraph 5.4.2 of the MGNREGA Operational 
Guidelines, 2013. Limited centralised IEC activities conducted at the Directorate level 
were insufficient to meet the scheme’s requirements for decentralised outreach at 
State, district, block, and GP levels. The lack of a structured IEC framework 
significantly impaired the scheme’s ability to inform workers about their entitlements, 
as evidenced by the audit’s beneficiary survey where a substantial proportion of 
w o r k e r s  r e m a i n e d  u n a w a r e  o f  t h e i r  l e g a l  r i g h t s  t o  g u a r a n t e e d  e m p l o y m e n t ,  a p p l i c a b l e  
wage rates, unemployment allowances, demand registration process, worksite 
facilities, grievance redressal mechanisms, and citizen-centric monitoring tools such 
as Janmanrega. The Department’s reliance on ad-hoc IEC actions and post-audit 
justifications failed to address systemic information gaps that directly undermined 
b e n e f i c i a r y  a c c e s s ,  d e m a n d  g e n e r a t i o n ,  a n d  o v e r a l l  e f f e c t i v e n e s s  o f  M G N R E G A  
i m p l e m e n t a t i o n  i n  t h e  S t a t e .  
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that in earlier years (2014-15) 
the State prepared annual IEC plans for MGNREGS. It was further stated that the 
M i n i s t r y  I E C  c a l e n d a r  f o r  i m p l e m e n t a t i o n  o f  a c t i v i t i e s  w a s  c i r c u l a t e d  f o r  c o m p l i a n c e  
and that the Department had organised activities as per timelines and reports 
submitted to the Ministry. The reply is not acceptable since it did not align with the 


130
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
130 
 
requirements specified in the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, which envisaged a 
structured and pre-planned IEC strategy. 
 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may ensure that- 
(i) minimum 100 days of wage employment is provided to every desiring rural 
household in a year. 
(ii) at least one third of the fund allocation under administrative expenses 
reaches Block/Village level to appoint key functionaries at the village level. 
(iii) an annual door-to-door survey is conducted to provide opportunities to 
eligible beneficiaries for enrolment as MGNREGS workers. 
(iv) periodic verification of Job Cards is conducted to remove ineligible 
beneficiaries.  
(v) Job Cards are periodically updated with full name as recorded in Aadhaar 
card to expedite Aadhaar seeding and prevent authentication failure.  
(vi) standardised cement and concrete CIBs are installed in every worksite of 
the scheme. 
(vii) the Department develop and implement an annual IEC plan by including 
specific activities and targets at the State, district, block, and village levels. 
 
3.2.10 Audit Objective: Whether durable and useful assets were created and 
maintained in compliance with rules and regulations, 
while ensuring convergence with other schemes? 
Paragraph 1.2 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 stated that creation of 
durable assets and strengthening the livelihood source of the rural poor was an 
important objective of the Scheme. Audit observed that a total of 513 works were 
executed during 2019-2024 in the 32 test-checked VDBs under eight blocks in four 
districts, at a cost of ₹106.75 crore. A JPV of 332 completed works out of 513 works 
amounting to ₹75.54 crore was conducted in these villages and outcomes are detailed 
in Appendix-3.2.5 to 3.2.7 and summarised in Table 3.2.10. 
Table 3.2.10: Statement showing summary of JPV of works in 32 villages 
(₹ in lakh) 
District Block 
No. 
of 
VDBs 
No. of 
works 
selected 
for JPV 
Unexecuted 
works 
Short executed 
works 
Impermissible 
works executed 
No. Cost No. Cost No. Cost 
Dimapur Chumukedima 4 43 - - 16 440.64 - - 
Aqhunaqa 4 40 1 11.22 13 113.83 - - 
Mokokchung Mangkolemba 4 68 - - - - 28 653.87 
Longchem 4 36 1 11.42 4 63.01 - - 
Zunheboto Ghathashi 4 36 - - 4 119.72 - - 
Akuluto 4 27 - - 7 63.23 2 57.60 
Phek Phek 4 41 5 182.45 1 31.87 1 183.90 
Sekhruzu 4 41 3 81.61 6 37.13 7 60.59 
Total 32 332 10 286.70 51 869.43 38 955.96 
Source: JPV reports 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
131
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
131 
 
As may be seen from Table 3.2.10, 10 sanctioned works amounting to ₹2.87 crore 
remained unexecuted while 51 works amounting to ₹8.69 crore were short executed 
despite payments being made and works reported as completed. The payments were 
released to the VDBs after certification of completion by the concerned BDOs and 
JEs/SOs. In turn the State Government submitted UCs to the Ministry based on the 
reported payments made/expenditure incurred. Further, the VDBs executed 14 
impermissible works amounting to ₹9.56 crore, which were outside the purview of the 
Guidelines. The magnitude and nature of these deficiencies reflect systemic lapses in 
work selection, technical supervision, measurement verification, and financial 
oversight, resulting in irregular expenditure of ₹21.12 crore and undermining the 
creation of durable and permissible assets as mandated under the scheme. 
Significant findings noticed during JPV are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
3.2.10.1 Unexecuted and short execution of works 
Paragraph 7.13.1 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 states that all 
measurements of work done shall be recorded in the measurement book (MB) duly 
authorised and issued by the competent authority. Further, Paragraph 7.13.5 of the 
Guidelines states that measurements recorded in MBs by Overseer/Junior Engineer 
should be checked by an authority higher than the measurement officer which is 
crucial for effective monitoring and ensuring quality of MGNREGS works. JPV of 
332 works in the 32 test-checked villages showed that 10 sanctioned works remained 
unexecuted amounting to ₹2.87 crore (Appendix-3.2.5), while 51 works were short 
executed, amounting to ₹8.69 crore (Appendix-3.2.6), despite payments being made 
and recorded in MBs. Instances of unexecuted and short execution of works are 
highlighted in the Chart 3.2.2. 
 
0 % 1 0 % 2 0 % 3 0 % 4 0 % 5 0 % 6 0 % 7 0 % 8 0 % 9 0 % 1 0 0 %
S o y a b e a n  p l a n t a ti o n
Retaining wall, Chumukedima-A
Landslide protection wall, Lozaphuhu
F o o t s t e p s ,  L a z a m i
Road widening, Chumukedima
R e t a i n i n g  w a l l ,  L a k h u n i
Chart 3.2.2: Summary of 332 works in 32 test-checked villages
S a n c t i o n e d  A m o u n t  ( ₹  l a k h )F i n a n c i a l  I r r e g u l a r i t y  ( ₹  l a k h )

132
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
132 
 
Table 3.2.11: Statement showing instances of unexecuted works  
Sl. No. Audit finding  Photographic evidence 
Unexecuted works 
1 Name of work: Soyabean plantation in Chozuba 
Village during 2023-24 (DP/23841) 
Block: Phek 
Estimated cost: ₹73.39 lakh 
Actual cost: ₹72.44 lakh 
Schedule date of completion:12.12.2023 
Actual date of completion:12.12.2023 
Date of payment: 22.02.2024 
During JPV, Audit could not find soyabean saplings 
which indicated non-execution of work. In reply, the 
State Government stated (December 2024) that the 
VDB in its resolution agreed to divert the cultivation 
of soyabean towards cultivation of kiwi. The reply 
was not acceptable as all Cash memos, MBs and cash 
book showed fictitious purchase of soyabean seeds 
and the payment released accordingly. Further, JPV 
with the Department representatives and VDB in July 
2024 revealed that full grown kiwi tree was already 
planted at the geotagged location which is also not 
acceptable as the work was reported as completed 
only in December 2023. Photograph 3.2.1: Non plantation of 
Soyabean in Chozuba village 
Table 3.2.12: Statement showing instances of short execution of works  
Sl. No. Audit finding  Photographic evidence 
Short execution of works 
1 Name of work: Construction of retaining wall at 
Chumukedima ‘A’ Village during 2020-21 
(RP/19264) 
Block: Chumukedima 
Estimated cost: ₹53.29 lakh  
Actual cost: ₹53.25 lakh 
Schedule date of completion: NA 
Actual date of completion:11.06.2020 
Date of payment: NA 
Audit observed that there was short execution of 
earthwork and soiling with stone amounting 
₹35.05 lakh. In reply, the State Government stated 
(December 2024) that the work was executed at two 
locations. The reply was not acceptable as the 
Department representatives and VDB had jointly 
certified during JPV that the work was executed at 
the verified geo tagged site. Photograph 3.2.2: Construction of 
retaining wall, Chumukedima-A 


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
133
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
133 
 
Sl. No. A u d i t  fi n d i n g   Photographic evidence 
2  N a m e  o f  w o r k :  C o n s t r u c t i o n  o f  l a n d s l i d e  
p r o t e c t i o n  w a l l  b e l o w  V e s u t a ’ s  R e s i d e n c e  a t  
Lozaphuhu village during 2022-23 (LD/13992) 
B l o c k :  P h e k  
Estimated cost: ₹38.11 lakh 
Actual cost: ₹37.86 lakh 
S c h e d u l e  d a t e  o f  c o m p l e t i o n :  N A  
Actual date of completion:09.10.2023 
Date of  p ay ment : NA  
A u d i t  o b s e r v e d  t h a t  t h e r e  w a s  s h o r t  e x e c u t i o n  i n  
earthwork, rubble masonry and backfilling behind 
t h e  w a l l  w i t h  g r a n u l a r  m a t e r i a l s  a m o u n t i n g  t o  
₹31.87 lakh. In reply, the State Government stated 
(December 2024) that the reasons behind short 
e x e c u t i o n  w a s  h i g h  c o s t  o f  t h e  m a t e r i a l s  i n  r e m o t e  
villages and execution of work by VDB without 
t e c h n i c a l  e x p e r t i s e .  T h e  r e p l y  w a s  n o t  a c c e p t a b l e  a s  
t h e  w o r k  s h o u l d  h a v e  b e e n  e x e c u t e d  a s  p e r  
e s t i m a t e s  p r e p a r e d  b y  t h e  B l o c k  o f f i c e .  Photograph 3.2.3: Construction of 
protection wall, Lozaphuhu 
3  N a m e  o f  w o r k :  C o n s t r u c t i o n  o f  r o a d  w i d e n i n g  
and soiling at Chumukedima village during 
2022-23 (RC/29649) 
B l o c k :  C h u m u k e d i m a  
Estimated cost: ₹56.38 lakh 
Actual cost: ₹56.36 lakh 
S c h e d u l e  d a t e  o f  c o m p l e t i o n :  N A  
A c t u a l  d a t e  o f  c o m p l e t i o n :  2 7 . 0 6 . 2 0 2 2  
Date of  p ay ment : NA  
A u d i t  o b s e r v e d  t h a t  t h e r e  w a s  s h o r t  e x e c u t i o n  i n  
WBM Grading-III amounting ₹28.48 lakh. In reply, 
t h e  S t a t e  G o v e r n m e n t  s t a t e d  ( D e c e m b e r  2 0 2 4 )  t h a t  
t h e  w o r k  w a s  e x e c u t e d  a t  t h e  g i v e n  l o c a t i o n  u s i n g  
WBM Grading-II measuring L-1590 m on the 
r e q u e s t  o f  V D B  a n d  t h e  r e m a i n i n g  f u n d  w a s  u t i l i s e d  
for road widening and soiling of adjacent village 
road measuring 1,300 m based on resolution of 
g e n e r a l  b o d y  m e e t i n g  o f  t h e  v i l l a g e .  T h e  r e p l y  w a s  
n o t  a c c e p t a b l e  a s  t h e  D e p a r t m e n t  r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s  
and VDB had jointly certified during JPV that the 
work was executed at the verified geo tagged site. 
Photograph 3.2.4: Road widening and 
s o i l i n g ,  
Chumukedima-A 


134
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
134 
 
Sl. No. Audit finding  Photographic evidence 
4 Name of work: Construction of retaining wall at 
Lakhuni Village during 2022-23 (LD/14113) 
Block: Longchem 
Estimated cost: ₹35.85 lakh 
Actual cost: ₹35.85 lakh 
Schedule date of completion: NA 
Actual date of completion: 16.06.2022 
Date of payment: NA 
Audit observed that 70 m against the estimate of 
350 m in length was executed resulting in short 
execution of 280 m in length amounting to ₹28.68 
lakh. In reply, the State Government stated 
(December 2024) that the work was executed at five 
different locations. The reply was not acceptable as 
the Department representatives and VDB had 
jointly certified during JPV that the work was 
executed at the verified geo tagged site. Photograph 3.2.5: Construction of 
retaining wall, Lakhuni 
The irregularities highlighted in Table 3.2.11 and 3.2.12  reflects systemic lapses in 
technical supervision, worksite monitoring, adherence to geo-tagging protocols, and 
compliance with approved work estimates, resulting in financial mismanagement and 
dilution of scheme objectives. 
3.2.10.2 Execution of impermissible works 
Paragraph 4(1) of Schedule I of the MGNREGA stipulates the list of permissible 
works that can be taken up under the Scheme. Further, Paragraph 7.2.2 of the 
MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 states that if the State Government 
believes that the current list of permissible works is not proving adequate to generate 
sufficient employment, the State Government should draw up a proposal of such 
works to be sent to the Ministry for approval. In addition, Paragraph 7.3.10 of the 
Guidelines stipulates that States must seek clearance from the Ministry whenever 
there is any doubt about an activity being permissible or not. Audit observed that out 
of 332 works in 32 test-checked villages taken up during 2019-2024, 14 works were 
impermissible (Appendix-3.2.7).  
Summary of expenditure on impermissible works 
Type of Impermissible Work No. of Works Total Amount (₹ lakh) 
Panchayat building constructions (beyond ceiling) 2 431.82 
Bridge construction 1 375.00 
Livestock distribution (piglets/chicks) 3 48.42 
Total (sampled works) 6 855.24  


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
135
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
135 
 
A few instances of such works are highlighted in Table 3.2.13. 
Table 3.2.13: Statement showing instances of execution of impermissible works  
Impermissible works 
Sl. 
No. Audit findings Photographic evidence 
1 Construction of Panchayat buildings were taken up 
in the test-checked VDBs in Khar village (2019-20 
and 2020-21) and Phek village (2020-21, 2021-22 
and 2022-23) at a cost of ₹247.92 lakh and 
₹183.90 lakh respectively which are beyond the 
permissible ceiling limit of ₹20 lakh as per 
Paragraph 6.7.4 of Annual Master Circular of 
2021-22 issued by MoRD. 
Photograph 3.2.6: Construction of Multi-Complex 
Community Hall in Khar village 
2 Construction of bridge on Tsuong river was 
undertaken by VDB of Changki village during 
2019-2021 amounting to ₹375 lakh which is not 
permissible under MGNREGS. 
Photograph 3.2.7: Construction of bridge on 
Tsuong river in Changki  
3 Three VDBs under Sekruzu Block distributed 
chicks and piglets to individual household 
beneficiaries amounting to ₹48.42 lakh during 
2020-21 and 2022-23. The VDBs proposed and 
executed these impermissible works without 
adhering to the Scheme guidelines.  
 
Photograph 3.2.8: Piglet distributed in Chozu Basa 
The execution of impermissible works listed in Table 3.2.13 was not referred to the 
Ministry for seeking their clearance regarding their permissibility under MGNREGS.  
Audit observed that 14 impermissible works were executed under MGNREGA in the 
test-checked villages during 2019–24 in violation of Paragraph 4(1) of Schedule I and 
Paragraphs 7.2.2 and 7.3.10 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines. These 
included construction of Panchayat buildings exceeding the permissible cost ceiling, 
bridge construction, and distribution of livestock to individual households, 
collectively involving an irregular expenditure of ₹9.56 crore. Execution of such 
inadmissible works reflects serious weaknesses in scheme planning, administrative 
oversight, and adherence to scheme guidelines, leading to mis-utilisation of scheme 
funds. 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
135 
 
A few instances of such works are highlighted in Table 3.2.13. 
Table 3.2.13: Statement showing instances of execution of impermissible works  
Impermissible works 
Sl. 
No. Audit findings Photographic evidence 
1 Construction of Panchayat buildings were taken up 
in the test-checked VDBs in Khar village (2019-20 
and 2020-21) and Phek village (2020-21, 2021-22 
and 2022-23) at a cost of ₹247.92 lakh and 
₹183.90 lakh respectively which are beyond the 
permissible ceiling limit of ₹20 lakh as per 
Paragraph 6.7.4 of Annual Master Circular of 
2021-22 issued by MoRD. 
Photograph 3.2.6: Construction of Multi-Complex 
Community Hall in Khar village 
2 Construction of bridge on Tsuong river was 
undertaken by VDB of Changki village during 
2019-2021 amounting to ₹375 lakh which is not 
permissible under MGNREGS. 
Photograph 3.2.7: Construction of bridge on 
Tsuong river in Changki  
3 Three VDBs under Sekruzu Block distributed 
chicks and piglets to individual household 
beneficiaries amounting to ₹48.42 lakh during 
2020-21 and 2022-23. The VDBs proposed and 
executed these impermissible works without 
adhering to the Scheme guidelines.  
 
Photograph 3.2.8: Piglet distributed in Chozu Basa 
The execution of impermissible works listed in Table 3.2.13 was not referred to the 
Ministry for seeking their clearance regarding their permissibility under MGNREGS.  
Audit observed that 14 impermissible works were executed under MGNREGA in the 
test-checked villages during 2019–24 in violation of Paragraph 4(1) of Schedule I and 
Paragraphs 7.2.2 and 7.3.10 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines. These 
included construction of Panchayat buildings exceeding the permissible cost ceiling, 
bridge construction, and distribution of livestock to individual households, 
collectively involving an irregular expenditure of ₹9.56 crore. Execution of such 
inadmissible works reflects serious weaknesses in scheme planning, administrative 
oversight, and adherence to scheme guidelines, leading to mis-utilisation of scheme 
funds. 

136
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
136 
 
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that permissible works list 
provided by the Ministry had a limited applicability in Nagaland and therefore, works 
were taken up as per the immediate community needs which were not currently 
permissible but generate additional employment and strengthen livelihood resource 
base of rural poor. It was further stated that necessary directives had been issued to 
DPCs and POs to refuse proposal of impermissible works from VDBs. The reply 
proved the audit contention that inadmissible works were executed under 
MGNREGS. 
3.2.10.3 Unfruitful expenditure and diversion of funds 
Paragraph 14.1 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 places importance 
on quality and durability of assets created as the proper implementation of the Scheme 
has the potential to transform rural areas by creating durable assets that would not 
only enhance the livelihood security of rural poor but also result in substantial 
infrastructural development in rural areas. Further, Paragraph 6.8 of the said 
Guidelines states that all the works approved under District Annual Development Plan 
shall be accorded administrative sanctions by the DPC or as per norms set by State 
Government. In parallel, the DPC will coordinate the preparation of detailed technical 
estimates and sanctions. Only works that are accorded administrative and technical 
sanctions will become available for allocation. The Public Accounts Committee 
(PAC), Nagaland in its Report (2018-19) recommended that the RD Department, GoN 
should take approval of the competent authority and maintain a register on the 
deviation of plan/projects so as to avert deviation in future projects highlighted in the 
C&AG Audit Report (2011-12). 
During the JPV (June and July 2024) of works in the 32 test-checked villages, Audit 
observed that the VDBs had executed three works costing ₹16 lakh, which were 
non-functional and therefore rendered the expenditure unfruitful. Audit further 
observed that six works amounting to ₹101.13 lakh were diverted to other works not 
included in the original sanction, as detailed in Appendix-3.2.8. The inability to create 
durable assets not only resulted in unfruitful expenditure but also undermined the 
long-term goals of MGNREGA to improve rural infrastructure and enhance livelihood 
security. Further, the diversion of funds indicated deficiencies in planning, execution, 
and monitoring phases of project implementation. These deficiencies reflect 
weaknesses in the planning, technical supervision, and monitoring frameworks at both 
the implementing agency and oversight levels. The Department’s post-audit assurance 
of corrective action does not mitigate the systemic non-compliance observed during 
the audit period. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (December 2024) 
that necessary directions had been issued to DPCs and POs for corrective action. 
Notably, this assurance had already been reiterated in the Action Taken Note 
submitted in response to the PAC’s recommendation. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
137
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
137 
 
3.2.10.4 Non-compliance to General Financial Rules on procurement  
Rule 161 of the GFR 14, 2017 states that advertised tender should be called for the 
procurement of goods 15 valuing ₹25 lakh and above. Further, Rule 173 of the GFR, 
2017 states that purchases should be made in a transparent, competitive and fair 
manner to secure best value for money. In addition, the State Government directed 
(July 2017) all Government Departments to call for bids through open tenders through 
e-procurement for supply works of ₹20 lakh and above. 
Audit observed that purchases valuing ₹25 lakh and above amounting to ₹6.23 crore 
(2019-20 to 2022-23) were made from the scheme’s administrative expenses fund 
without calling for tenders as shown in Appendix-3.2.9.  
Audit observed the following significant issues in these procurements: 
 Multiple job card printing orders were placed with the same vendor (M/s NV 
Press) on closely spaced dates in December 2022, each slightly exceeding 
₹25 lakh, suggesting possible splitting of tenders to remain below higher 
sanction thresholds and competitive bidding requirements. 
 MIS Room setup was executed twice within a span of less than two years 
from different vendors for providing goods (M/s Temptation, Dimapur) and 
services (M/s Infinity World, Guwahati) amounting to ₹0.55 crore and ₹0.57 
crore respectively.  
 A large procurement of ₹3.51 crore was incurred in 2022-23 for worksite 
tents was awarded to M/s Komorebi Supply based on the request of the firm 
without competitive tendering, rate reasonableness assessments, or technical 
justification supporting the scale of this procurement. 
Audit further noted that these purchases were debited to the Administrative Expenses 
Fund, which under Paragraph 12.5.6 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines 
prohibits such high-value asset creation expenditures under administrative heads. 
The recurring pattern of fragmented procurements, absence of competitive tendering 
records, and diversion of administrative funds for asset creation indicate 
non-compliance with the GFR provisions and MGNREGA scheme norms, leading to 
the risk of financial irregularities, lack of transparency, and inefficient utilisation of 
scheme funds. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (December 2024) 
that the purchases were in view of exigent situation and smooth implementation of the 
scheme and assured compliance to provisions of the GFR, 2017 in future purchases. 
The fact, however, remains that these actions were in clear violation of the provisions 
of the GFR, 2017 and MGNREGA Operational Guidelines and cannot be justified 
retrospectively on the grounds of urgency. 
                                                
14  which is followed by GoN 
15  Rule 143 of the GFR, 2017 states that the term ‘goods’ also includes works and services which are 
incidental or consequential to the supply of such goods, such as, transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training and maintenance.  

138
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
138 
 
3.2.10.5 Non-installation of electronic items in the MIS Room 
Rule 21 of the GFR, 2017 states that every officer incurring or authorising 
expenditure from public moneys should be guided by high standards of financial 
propriety. Every officer should also enforce financial order and strict economy and 
see that all relevant financial rules and regulations are observed, by his own office and 
by subordinate disbursing officers. Audit observed that the works for setting up of a 
MIS training-cum-monitoring video conference room exclusively for MGNREGS 
were awarded to M/s Infinity World, Guwahati and M/s Temptation at a total cost of 
₹1.13 crore. JPV conducted in June 2024 showed non-installation of items as detailed 
in Table 3.2.14. 
Table 3.2.14: Shortfall in supply and installation of equipment  
Source: Department records and physical verification. 
As may be seen from Table 3.2.14 , the supplier failed to fully supply and install 
equipment worth ₹14.18 lakh, resulting in incomplete establishment of the MIS 
training-cum-monitoring room despite full payment. The absence of these key 
components compromised the functional effectiveness of the MIS facility. The 
Department’s failure to produce any records of initial installation, repair requests, or 
disposal orders indicates lapses in financial propriety, internal controls, and asset 
management, in violation of Rule 21 of the GFR, 2017 and established procurement 
principles. 
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that the above items were 
installed initially but removed for repairs due to technical snag and thereafter declared 
beyond repair. 
The reply of the State Government was not acceptable as there was no record 
indicating that the items were sent for repairs. 
3.2.10.6 Irregular procurement of material by the VDBs 
Paragraph 7.1.7 of the Annual Master Circular of MGNREGS 2019-20 states that if 
some items are to be used across the entire block e.g., bricks, reinforcement bars, then 
the requirement from each GP for the entire financial year may be aggregated at the 
Block level. It further states that the Block officer shall call a tender for such 
aggregated items so that materials are procured at competitive rates and economies of 
scale were achieved. The Block officer shall then approve the vendors along with 
rates for procurement of the aggregated items and in all such cases; the GPs may 
procure the material at approved rates through approved vendors. 
Sl. 
No. 
Particulars 
(Date of payment) 
Project Cost 
(in ₹) Short supply of items Quantity 
(in nos.) 
Shortfall 
(in ₹) 
1 M/s Infinity World 
Guwahati (30.04.2019) 
55,46,000 Projector Ben Q 1 1,28,000 
IP Phone (₹98,700 each)  4 3,94,800 
2 M/s Temptation, 
Dimapur (19.12.2020) 
57,35,810 Wireless Antenna PTP 
Devices (₹4,47,500 each) 
2 8,95,000 
Total 1,12,81,810 - - 14,17,800 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
139
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
139 
 
Audit observed that materials like bricks, cement and steel were purchased by the 
VDBs directly from suppliers without calling for quotations/tenders.  By not adhering 
to the Master Circular, the scheme missed out on securing materials at competitive 
rates, leading to inefficiencies and possibly higher costs. The direct procurement of 
materials without a proper tendering process undermined transparency and 
accountability in the utilisation of public funds.  
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that it had declared VDBs as 
a vendor and as such Block officers were compelled to issue work orders to VDBs for 
execution of Scheme works. The reply was not acceptable as the State Government 
cannot supersede the Centrally mandated instructions that are designed to ensure 
financial propriety and cost-efficiency. 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may ensure that- 
(i) works reported as completed should be verified through field inspections 
to avoid non-execution and short execution of works.  
(ii) clarification regarding the incorporation of works not specified in the 
schedule of permissible works is sought from the Ministry and necessary 
approvals are obtained before sanctioning of such works. 
(iii) there is creation of durable assets and unfruitful expenditure is avoided 
by ensuring that funds sanctioned for approved projects are not diverted 
to other works.  
(iv) provisions of the GFR, 2017 on procurement are strictly observed. 
(v) materials required for scheme works in villages are procured at 
competitive rates by adopting tendering process at the Block level. 
 
3.2.11 Audit Objective: Whether appropriate and adequate monitoring, social 
audit and grievance redressal systems were in place and 
functioning as envisaged to achieve greater transparency 
and accountability? 
 
3.2.11.1 State Employment Guarantee Council 
Section 12 of the MGNREG Act stipulates that every State Government should set up 
a State Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC). The SEGC is responsible for 
advising the State Government on the implementation, evaluation and monitoring of 
the scheme and for preparing an Annual Report on MGNREGA to be presented to the 
State Legislature. Further, the SEGC should convene at least one meeting annually to 
discuss the progress of the Scheme in the State. The PAC in its Report (2018-19) 
recommended the RD Department, GoN to submit separate Annual Report of SEGC 
to the Committee on the shortfall highlighted in the C&AG Report (2011-12). 
Audit observed that though the State Government had constituted (March 2008) the 
SEGC headed by the Chief Minister as the Chairman. The SEGC was reconstituted 
(June 2016) with the Minister, RD Department as the Chairman. During the audit 

140
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
140 
 
period, the SEGC did not prepare the Annual Report on MGNREGA for presentation 
to the State Legislature in contravention of the directions issued by the PAC. Audit 
further observed that during 2019-20 to 2023-24, meeting of the SEGC was convened 
only on three occasions (February 2021, March 2022 and December 2022) against the 
minimum requirement of five meetings. As such, the SEGC failed to fulfil its 
responsibilities of advising the State Government on the implementation of the 
scheme. The failure to ensure regular functioning of the SEGC reflects serious 
deficiencies in institutional oversight, monitoring, and advisory mechanisms that are 
critical for the effective implementation and evaluation of MGNREGA in the State. 
The Department’s post-audit assurances of future compliance do not mitigate the 
prolonged statutory non-compliance observed during the audit period. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (December 2024) 
that the SEGC meetings are held on need basis and the observation on non-
submission of Annual Report to the State Legislature has been noted for compliance.  
3.2.11.2 Shortfall in Social Audit and pending observations 
Section 17 of the MGNREG Act stipulates conduct of ‘Social Audit’ as a means of 
continuous public vigilance. The basic objective of social audit is to ensure public 
accountability in the implementation of projects, laws and policies. Additionally, 
Section 3(1) of the MGNREGA Audit of Schemes Rules, 2011 states that social audit 
should be conducted in each GP at least twice a year. The PAC in its Report (2018-
19) recommended the RD Department, GoN to conduct regular Social Audit so as to 
ensure transparency and public accountability in the implementation of project 
highlighted in the C&AG Audit Report (2011-12). 
Audit observed that the Social Audit Unit (SAU) prepared an annual social audit plan 
aiming to cover each VDB once a year, contrary to the requirement of biannual audits 
(i.e. two such audits in a year). Audit further observed that there was a shortfall in 
conducting 2,676 social audits (59 per cent) in the State during 2019-2024 against the 
target in the audit plan of 4,536 social audits, details are given in Appendix-3.2.10.  
 
0
200
400
600
800
1 , 0 0 0
1 , 2 0 0
1 , 4 0 0
2 0 1 9 - 2 0 2 0 2 0 - 2 1 2 0 2 1 - 2 2 2 0 2 2 - 2 3 2 0 2 3 - 2 4
Chart 3.2.3: Shortfall in conducting social aud it
T o t a l  G P s  i n  t h e  S t a t e No. of GPs planned for Social Audit
Social Audit Conducted S h o r t f a l l  i n  S o c i a l  A u d i t

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
141
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
141 
 
Audit also observed that no social audit was conducted during 2020-21 in the 32 
test-checked VDBs, while in the remaining four years, the shortfall ranged from 44 to 
75 per cent . Further, against 16,290 audit observations raised by SAU in the State 
during 2019-2024, corrective measures were taken only against 10,661 social audit 
observations as shown in Appendix-3.2.10.  Similarly, in the 32 test-checked VDBs, 
SAU raised 426 audit observations during 2019-2024 with 90 outstanding 
observations (21 per cent). Inadequate social audits undermine the accountability and 
transparency objectives of MGNREGA, allowing potential irregularities in the 
Scheme’s implementation to persist. Additionally, the incomplete follow-up on social 
audit observations suggests that issues identified during audits may not be adequately 
addressed, limiting the impact of the social audit process. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (December 2024) 
that paucity of funds and unfavourable climatic conditions for travel were the reasons 
for shortfall in conduct of social audit. It was further stated that necessary directions 
had been issued to POs for settlement of social audit observations. 
The reply of the State Government was not acceptable as the mandatory provisions 
under Section 17 of the MGNREG Act and Section 3(1) of the MGNREGA Audit of 
Schemes Rules, 2011 require regular biannual social audits to ensure continuous 
public oversight. Constraints such as limited funds or climatic conditions should have 
been anticipated and factored into the State’s annual social audit planning and 
budgeting processes. Further, despite the PAC’s recommendations, the persistent 
shortfall over multiple years reflects systemic weaknesses in administrative planning, 
fund management, and compliance with statutory obligations. 
3.2.11.3 Concurrent Social Audit 
Paragraph 25(b) of Schedule I of the MGNREG Act mandates conduct of concurrent 
social audits to ensure transparency and accountability. The provision states that self-
help groups, village social auditors, Village Monitoring Committees (VMCs), and 
other village-level organisations have had the right to inspect all records of works and 
expenditures in the village on a fixed day each week. The VMCs are required to 
submit a signed report of their observations to the POs. 
Audit observed that concurrent social audits were not conducted in the test-checked 
blocks and VMCs which are responsible for ensuring continuous oversight of 
MGNREGA activities, were not formed. The Department’s failure to establish VMCs 
and conduct concurrent social audits undermined the transparency and accountability 
mechanisms necessary for the effective implementation of the Scheme as provided 
under the MGNREGA guidelines. 
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that the Village Council 
members visited the work site to monitor and ensure proper implementation of works 
by VDBs. It was further stated that, necessary directions had been given for formation 
of Village Monitoring Committee for concurrent social audit.  

142
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
142 
 
3.2.11.4 Functioning of  Ombudsman 
Paragraph 13.14 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 states that the State 
Government must establish the office of an Ombudsman in all districts for expeditious 
redressal of grievances regarding implementation of the scheme. The main duties of 
the Ombudsman were to submit monthly and annual reports, highlighting action to be 
taken against erring MGNREGA functionaries and summarise report of cases 
disposed by ombudsman to SEGC. 
Audit observed that the State Government appointed Ombudsmen for all districts to 
address the complaints against the Village Councils/VDBs elected members and staff. 
Audit, however, observed that in three test-checked districts, the offices of 
Ombudsman were not functional, as they had neither submitted monthly/annual 
reports to higher authorities nor summary reports to the SEGC. The failure to operate 
Ombudsman offices undermines the grievance redressal mechanism of MGNREGA's 
accountability framework. 
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that a workshop had been 
organised for all appointed Ombudspersons to discuss their roles and functions. It was 
further stated that instructions had been issued to district implementing agencies to 
ensure proper functioning of Ombudsperson as per the MoRD guidelines. The reply 
of the State Government was not acceptable as non-functionality of the Ombudsman 
offices persisted over a long period of time, suggesting that the State Government 
failed to address the issue in a timely manner. 
3.2.11.5 Functioning of Vigilance Cell 
Paragraphs 13.6.2, 13.6.3 and 13.6.4 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 
prescribe the constitution of a Vigilance Cell at the State level headed by a Chief 
Vigilance Officer (CVO), a District Vigilance Cell at the district level and the 
Vigilance and Monitoring Committee at the local level. These cells were required to 
be set-up for receiving complaints about the implementation of the scheme, for 
conducting regular field visits to detect irregularities, for taking suo-moto action based 
on reports appearing in the media and for interaction with workers. 
Audit observed that the State Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committee was 
constituted (December 2009), however, a CVO was not appointed and as such no 
activities were conducted, indicating the Committee’s non-functionality. Audit further 
observed that the absence of a functioning CVO and complaint management system 
contributed to the inactivity of the Vigilance Cell. 
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that, in the absence of any 
substantial complaints the Committee had not undertaken any field visits. The reply 
was not acceptable as the State Government failed to appoint CVO at the State level 
as mandated by the Scheme guidelines.  
3.2.11.6 State and District Quality Monitors 
Paragraph 14.10.4 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 stipulates that the 
State Quality Monitor (SQM) will inspect at least five per cent works while they are 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
143
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
143 
 
still in progress, so as to assess asset quality aspects. Further, as per Paragraph 7.12.1 
of the Annual Master Circular 2019-20, the SQM and District Quality Monitors 
(DQM) were required to evaluate at least 10 per cent of the works executed under the 
Scheme. The expenses on SQMU will be borne out of funds provided by the Central 
Government to meet administrative expenses for MGNREGA. 
Audit observed that though the State and District Quality Monitoring Cells were 
constituted (November/December 2019), no inspections were conducted during the 
progress or completion of works to verify quality or authenticity. Audit further 
observed that the Department had not reappointed SQM/DQM following their three-
year term expiry. The absence of independent quality verification deprived the 
scheme of an essential oversight mechanism to ensure asset quality and scheme 
integrity. The Department’s practice of assigning quality inspections to Programme 
Officers, who are part of the implementing hierarchy, is not a valid substitute for 
independent monitoring. This reflects systemic governance failure in quality 
assurance despite availability of administrative funds earmarked for this purpose 
under the scheme. 
In reply, the State Government stated (December 2024) that the SQM and DQM were 
constituted, but due to fund constraints, the regular monitoring of works had been 
entrusted to concern POs. The reply of the State Government was not acceptable as it 
failed to comply with the scheme operational guidelines for constitution of SQM/ 
DQM. The guidelines require independent monitoring by SQM/DQM, funded from 
the administrative expenses provided by the Central Government. The delegation of 
quality monitoring responsibilities to Programme Officers, who are directly involved 
in scheme execution, compromises objectivity, independence, and integrity of the 
quality monitoring process. The State’s failure to reappoint SQM/DQM after the 
expiry of their tenure reflects systemic non-compliance with scheme quality assurance 
mechanisms. 
3.2.11.7 Non-preparation of Citizens’ Charter  
Paragraph 13.12.1 of the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2013 states that the 
Citizens’ Charter shall cover all aspects of the duties of Panchayats and officials 
under the Act. It should describe the specific steps involved in implementing the 
provisions of the Act and lay down the minimum service levels mandated by these 
provisions on the Panchayats and the officers concerned. 
Audit observed that no Citizens’ Charter was prepared by the State Government 
during the audit period. The lack of a Citizens’ Charter indicated the absence of the 
State’s commitment to adhere to the MGNREGA guidelines. Without the Citizens’ 
Charter, beneficiaries were deprived of critical information regarding their legal 
entitlements, procedural steps for work allocation, grievance redressal mechanisms, 
and the performance obligations of implementing authorities. This undermined the 
rights-based framework of the Scheme and weakened institutional accountability at all 
levels of implementation. 

144
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
144 
 
While accepting the audit observation, the Government stated (December 2024) that 
the Audit observation was duly noted for compliance and necessary action would be 
taken to prepare the Citizen’s Charter. 
3.2.11.8 NMMS application 
National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) App was introduced (May 2021) by the 
MoRD, GoI, to ensure more transparency in the implementation of the scheme. 
Subsequently, attendance through NMMS app was made mandatory from January 
2023 by the Ministry. Through NMMS app, the attendance of workers/job-card 
holders was to be captured at the worksite with geo-tagged time stamped photographs 
of the workers. 
Audit, however, observed that NMMS app was not implemented in any of the 32 
test-checked villages. Audit further observed that internet connectivity issues in the 
interior places of the State posed a major challenge in implementation of the NMMS 
app. Audit observed that despite the Ministry’s instructions making NMMS App-
based attendance mandatory from January 2023, the State Government failed to 
implement the system in the 32 test-checked villages during 2023-24. As of 2024-25, 
the App was operational in only 116 villages, indicating limited and delayed adoption. 
The non-implementation of NMMS deprived the Scheme of a critical transparency 
mechanism intended to capture real-time, geo-tagged, time-stamped attendance and 
prevent manipulation of work records. The continued absence of full-scale 
implementation reflects systemic weaknesses in digital infrastructure, institutional 
preparedness, and administrative oversight, thereby undermining transparency, 
accountability, and accuracy in wage disbursement processes envisaged under 
MGNREGA. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (December 2024) 
that trainings had been imparted to District and Block officials on NMMS app usage. 
It was further stated that in current financial year 2024-25, the said app was being 
used in 116 villages and the same shall be gradually extended to all villages in the 
State. 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may ensure that- 
(i) SEGC holds regular meeting for effective monitoring of the Scheme and 
submits annual reports to the State Legislature to enhance accountability 
and transparency. 
(ii) Social audits are conducted in all VDBs and steps may be taken for prompt 
disposal of outstanding audit observations.  
(iii) Vigilance and Quality Monitoring Committees may be strengthened to 
enhance the quality control and monitoring mechanism of the Scheme 
implementation. 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
145
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
145 
 
3.2.12 Conclusion 
The Performance Audit was conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of planning, 
financial management, execution, monitoring mechanisms and the overall impact of 
the Scheme on improving rural livelihood security. The audit showed some 
shortcomings in various aspects of implementation. Over the past five years, the State 
failed to provide the mandated minimum of 100 days of wage employment, primarily 
due to improper demand assessment and the preparation of unrealistic labour budgets. 
Financial management issues were also prevalent, with delays in releasing funds to 
implementing agencies and shortfalls in the State's matching share, which adversely 
affected the Scheme's execution. Instances of fund diversion from administrative 
expenses and non-compliance with the GFR in procurement were also observed, 
further undermining efficiency. At the operational level, a shortage of key personnel, 
such as GRS and mates at the village level, along with inadequate IEC activities, 
contributed to low levels of awareness among beneficiaries about their rights as 
exemplified by Job Cards being in the custody of VDBs instead of the beneficiaries.  
Moreover, in the 32 test-checked villages, several irregularities were observed which 
included unexecuted works, incomplete projects and execution of impermissible 
works. These shortcomings were primarily attributable to inadequate planning and 
oversight, shortage of key functionaries such as GRS and mates at the village level, 
and insufficient monitoring during project execution. The monitoring mechanisms 
envisaged under the Scheme, such as social audits, vigilance systems and quality 
control measures, were found to be inadequately functioning. Additionally, the SEGC 
failed to prepare and present annual reports on MGNREGA to the State Legislature, 
thereby weakening the accountability of the Executive to the Legislature. These 
deficiencies collectively highlight inefficiencies in the Scheme's implementation, 
undermining its objective of ensuring rural livelihood security. 
Summary of Recommendations: 
(i) An annual door-to-door survey was not conducted by the Programme 
Officers should be institutionalised to include all eligible beneficiaries, 
remove ineligible persons (such as Government employees), and update 
Aadhaar-seeded job card records to eliminate authentication failures. 
(ii) The Department should take focused steps, including field-level data 
correction, additional Aadhaar enrolment centres, and coordination with 
banks to expedite 100 per cent ABPS coverage for wage payments to 
prevent delays and leakages. 
(iii) The State should develop an annual IEC plan covering State, district, 
block, and village levels with clear timelines and targets to enhance worker 
awareness of their rights, entitlements, grievance mechanisms, and 
available mobile applications such as Janmanrega. 
(iv) The State must reconstitute and operationalise State and District Quality 
Monitoring Units (SQM/DQM) as per guidelines to independently monitor 

146
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
146 
 
at least 10 per cent of the works for quality assurance and compliance. 
(v) Dedicated technical staff must be appointed at village and block levels to 
ensure proper work measurement, adherence to sanctioned estimates, 
correct geo-location tagging, and validation of work execution as per 
approved specifications. 
(vi) The State must reconstitute and operationalise State and District Quality 
Monitoring Units (SQM/DQM) as per guidelines to independently monitor 
at least 10 per cent of the works for quality assurance and compliance. 
(vii) The State should operationalise fully functional grievance redressal 
systems and conduct mandated biannual social audits in every VDB, with 
independent verification, resolution of audit observations, and public 
disclosure of audit reports. 
 
TRANSPORT (MOTOR VEHICLES) DEPARTMENT 
 
3.3 Functioning of Regional Transport Offices/District Transport Offices  
A Performance Audit of the “Functioning of Regional Transport Offices/District 
Transport Offices” was carried out covering the period from 2018-19 to 2023-24. The 
performance audit brought out the following significant findings. 
Highlights 
 6,292 out of 33,567 LLs were issued without conducting the mandatory tests 
in the three test-checked RTOs/DTO. 
Paragraph 3.3.8.1 
 Out of 1,490 chassis numbers that were assigned to multiple vehicles in 
VAHAN database, 903 chassis number were found to be issued with No 
Objection Certificates (NOCs), while the remaining 587 chassis numbers 
were assigned to multiple vehicles without obtaining NOCs. 
Paragraph 3.3.9.1 
 Ownership of 146 out of 1,152 Government auctioned vehicles had not been 
transferred to the buyer’s name, indicating that the buyers failed to apply to 
the registering authority for ownership transfer. 
Paragraph 3.3.9.4 
 As on 31 March 2024, 4,864 transport vehicles are plying with expired 
permits.  
Paragraph 3.3.9.5 
 There is no ATS in Nagaland to carry out the automatic testing of vehicles 
for the issuance of fitness certificates. The construction of an Inspection and 
Certification Centre at Chumukedima, proposed for conversion into an ATS, 
was under progress. 
Paragraph 3.3.9.10 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
147
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
147 
 
 During 2019-2024, 8,633 vehicles registered in Nagaland defaulted on tax 
payments, resulting in cumulative outstanding dues of ₹9.03 crore.  
Paragraph 3.3.10.1 
 A Road safety cess amounting to ₹34.54 crore collected by the Department 
was not transferred to the Nagaland Road Safety Fund for utilisation 
towards road safety functions. 
Paragraph 3.3.10.2 
 Two RTOs Kohima and Mokokchung under-imposed a penalty of ₹23.41 lakh 
for overloading. 
Paragraph 3.3.11.2 
 The provisions for imposing penalties for various motor vehicle related 
offences were not complied with by the three test-checked RTOs/DTO. 
Paragraph 3.3.11.3 
 The VAHAN and SARATHI applications were operational across all 
RTOs/DTOs in Nagaland, however, an online payment gateway for citizen 
users had not been integrated. 
Paragraph 3.3.12.2 
 The GoN had signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with HDFC 
Bank to provide a payment gateway for e-challan and other online payments, 
this integration with the VAHAN application was still under development. 
Paragraph 3.3.12.2 
 The absence of operational DTOs in 50 per cent of the districts (08 out of 
16 districts) compromises the Department's ability to enforce vehicle 
regulations, conduct safety inspections, manage road safety and deliver 
public services effectively. 
Paragraph 3.3.12.3 
3.3.1 Introduction  
The regulation and taxation of mechanically propelled vehicles fall under the 
Concurrent List (Entry 35 under List III) of the 7 th Schedule of the Constitution of 
India. This provision grants both the Central and State Governments jurisdiction over 
rules, regulations, and their implementation related to motor vehicles. The Motor 
Vehicles Act (MV Act), 1988, enacted by Parliament, covers various aspects such as 
grant of driver and conductor licenses, vehicle registration and various permits. The 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH), Government of India (GoI) 
formulates policies and enforces this Act, alongside the Central Motor Vehicles Rules 
(CMV Rules), 1989. Vehicle taxation also listed in the Concurrent List of the 
Constitution of India, is covered under the State List (Entry 57 under List II).  
Nagaland has enacted the Nagaland Motor Vehicle Taxation Act, 1967, and the 
Nagaland Passengers & Goods Taxation Act, 1967, which specify taxes and fees for 
vehicles in the State. In order to have National and State Registers 16 of motor vehicles 
                                                
16  Section 26 and 63 of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 read with Rule 23 and 75 of the Central Motor 
Vehicle Rules 1989. 

148
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
148 
 
and driving licenses issued respectively and for providing valuable data to the Centre, 
the State Government implemented the ‘VAHAN’ and ‘SARATHI’ application 
systems developed by the National Informatics Centre (NIC).  
The Motor Vehicles Department (MVD) under the Transport Department, 
Government of Nagaland (GoN) was established in the year 1963 on Nagaland 
attaining Statehood. The powers and functions of the Department are regulated under 
the provisions of the MV Act 1988, CMV Rules 1989, the Nagaland Motor Vehicles 
Act, 1967 and the Motor Vehicles Taxation Rules, 1972. As on 31 March 2024, there 
are two Regional Transport Offices and six District Transport Offices that function 
under the MVD of the State. 
The MVD, GoN uses the VAHAN application for registration/renewal of registration 
of vehicles, transfer of ownership, change of address, issue of NOC certificate, 
issue/renewal of fitness certificates, issue/renewal of permits and collection of taxes 
and penalties. Similarly, the Department is using the SARATHI application for issue 
of learners driving license, issue/renewal of permanent driving license and collection 
of fees. VAHAN and SARATHI applications were adopted and implemented in 
Nagaland since 2008. 
3.3.2 Organisational Set-up 
The Transport Commissioner (TC) heads the MV Department under the 
administrative control of the Commissioner and Secretary to the GoN, Transport 
Department. At the Transport Commissionerate, the TC is assisted by one Additional 
TC, one Joint TC, two Deputy TC and one Assistant TC. At the district level, the 
Regional Transport Officer (RTO) at Kohima and Mokokchung and District Transport 
Officers (DTO) at Mon, Tuensang, Wokha, Dimapur, Phek and Zunheboto are the 
eight Registering and Licensing Offices in the State. To strictly enforce the MV Acts 
and Rules, the Department also have the Enforcement wing comprising of Assistant 
RTO (Enforcement), Enforcement Inspectors, Assistant Enforcement Inspectors and 
Motor Vehicle Checkers under the eight RTO/DTOs. 
The organogram of the Department is depicted in Chart 3.3.1. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
149
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
149 
 
Chart 3.3.1: Organogram of the Department 
 
Source: Department’s record 
(RTO: Regional Transport Officer, DTO: District Transport Officer, ARTO-G: Assistant Regional 
Transport Officer - General), ARTO-E: Assistant Regional Transport Officer – Enforcement, MVI: 
Motor Vehicle Inspector, EI: Enforcement Inspector, AEI: Assistant Enforcement Inspector, MVC: 
Motor Vehicle Checker) 
3.3.3 Audit objectives 
The Audit objectives were to assess whether: 
 The RTOs/DTOs managed the issue, renewal and cancellation of licenses 
effectively as per the Act/Rules; 
 The regulation and control over registration and use of vehicles through 
registration, issuing permits and fitness certificates was implemented by 
RTOs/DTOs as per the Act/Rules; 
 The RTOs/DTOs efficiently assessed, levied, collected and remitted revenue 
(Motor vehicle taxes, fines, penalties and cess, as per Act/Rules) and took 
effective action on arrears; 
 The enforcement activities were effectively conducted by RTOs/DTOs to 
ensure compliance with the motor vehicles Acts/Rules with adequate follow 
up to deter violations; and 
 The RTOs/DTOs have been provided with required manpower, equipment, 
and other resources to discharge their functions and also to ensure public 
service delivery in a transparent and efficient manner.  
 


150
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
150 
 
3.3.4 Audit criteria 
The Audit findings were benchmarked against the following criteria: 
1. The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. 
2. The Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989. 
3. The Nagaland Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1967. 
4. The Nagaland Passengers and Goods Taxation Act, 1967. 
5. The Nagaland Road Safety Authority Act, 2013. 
6. Notifications and circulars issued by GoN from time to time. 
7. Notifications issued by the MoRTH, GoI from time to time. 
3.3.5 Scope and methodology of Audit 
The Performance Audit was conducted between May 2024 and August 2024, covering 
the period from 2019-20 to 2023-24. An Entry Conference was held with the Joint 
Secretary, Transport Department, GoN and other officers from the Department on 
16 May 2024, in which the audit objectives, scope and methodology of audit, were 
discussed. Records of the Transport Commissionerate and RTOs/DTOs were 
examined besides extraction of data of VAHAN and SARATHI application and 
analysis thereof. An Exit Conference was held on 27 November 2024 with the Deputy 
Secretary, Transport Department, GoN, and officers from the MV Department 
wherein the Audit observations were discussed. Replies of the Department as well as 
the State Government are suitably incorporated in the Report. 
3.3.6 Audit sampling and units selected for audit 
The Audit covered the Office of the Transport Commissioner, Nagaland, Kohima 
along with two Regional Transport Offices (Kohima and Mokokchung), and one 
District Transport Office (Tuensang). Three out of eight RTOs/DTOs were selected 
by random sampling based on the revenue data, transaction (VAHAN) and application 
(SARATHI) data and vehicle registration (transport and non-transport) data for five 
years (2019-20 to 2023-24). 
3.3.7 Statistical data of the Department 
The statistical data of the MV Department consists of revenue collected and 
expenditure incurred in the State during 2019-2024, number of transactions in 
VAHAN, number of vehicles registered in VAHAN and  number of applications in 
SARATHI during the five-years’ period from 2019-2024 in respect of the sampled 
DTOs/RTOs, are given in Tables 3.3.1 to 3.3.4. 
Table 3.3.1: Revenue collected and Expenditure incurred by MV Department 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Revenue collected Expenditure incurred 
2019-20 132.02 13.20 
2020-21 108.91 13.24 
2021-22 162.47 15.29 
2022-23 209.22 15.61 
2023-24 221.10 17.26 
Total 833.72 74.60 
Source: Finance Accounts of respective years 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
151
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
151 
 
Table 3.3.2: Number of transactions in VAHAN 
Name of DTO/RTO 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Total 
DTO Dimapur 33,536 27,323 36,597 42,270 51,877 1,91,603 
RTO Kohima 2,24,014 1,32,050 1,63,602 1,74,556 1,86,986 8,81,208 
RTO Mokokchung 31,402 14,076 18,282 17,354 15,891 97,005 
DTO Mon 4,348 2,247 2,339 2,177 6,063 17,174 
DTO Phek 2,254 1,457 3,935 9,087 3,257 19,990 
DTO Tuensang 2,106 2,365 6,481 6,946 3,470 21,368 
DTO Wokha 2,734 1,306 1,904 1,988 1,549 9,481 
DTO Zunheboto 700 348 2,257 989 4,257 8,551 
Total 3,01,094 1,81,172 2,35,397 2,55,367 2,73,350 12,46,380 
Source: VAHAN dashboard as on 28 November 2024 
Table 3.3.3: Number of applications in SARATHI 
Name of DTO/RTO 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Total 
DTO Dimapur 2,532 15,892 33,731 26,148 25,039 1,03,342 
RTO Kohima 6,379 4,377 8,125 8,897 8,550 36,328 
RTO Mokokchung 678 3,327 4,219 4,520 3,797 16,541 
DTO Mon 986 2,203 3,061 2,777 2,860 11,887 
DTO Phek 709 1,753 2,627 2,209 2,419 9,717 
DTO Tuensang 1,093 2,160 3,671 4,020 3,581 14,525 
DTO Wokha 1,658 1,735 3,135 3,132 2,933 12,593 
DTO Zunheboto 328 1,120 2,048 2,044 1,956 7,496 
Total 14,363 32,567 60,617 53,747 51,135 2,12,429 
Source: SARATHI dashboard as on 28 November 2024 
Table 3.3.4: Number of vehicles registered 
Name of DTO/RTO 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Total 
DTO Dimapur 10,694 8,978 10,679 12,098 13,028 55,477 
RTO Kohima 14,958 5,310 9,477 12,777 13,911 56,433 
RTO Mokokchung 607 477 579 610 829 3,102 
DTO Mon 558 246 194 179 207 1,384 
DTO Phek 123 107 116 133 145 624 
DTO Tuensang 196 100 96 104 83 579 
DTO Wokha 238 221 225 227 203 1,114 
DTO Zunheboto 110 76 72 55 271 584 
Total 27,484 15,515 21,438 26,183 28,677 1,19,297 
Source: VAHAN dashboard as on 28 November 2024 
Audit findings 
 
3.3.8 Audit Objective: Whether the RTOs/DTOs managed the issue, renewal and 
cancellation of licenses effectively as per the Act/Rules? 
 
3.3.8.1 Issue of Learner’s License without conducting tests 
Section 8(6) of the MV Act 1988 states that when an application has been duly made 
to the appropriate licensing authority and the applicant has satisfied such authority of 
his physical fitness and has passed to the satisfaction of the licensing authority the test 
referred, the licensing authority shall issue the applicant a Learner’s License (LL). 
Section 9(3) further states that Driving License (DL) shall be issued if the applicant 
passes such test as may be prescribed by the Central Government. During the Audit 
period, a total of 1,14,770 LLs were issued in the State. An analysis of data pertaining 
to driving tests conducted by the licensing authorities revealed that 6,292 out of 

152
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
152 
 
33,567 LLs were issued without conducting the mandatory tests during the period 
2019-20 to 2023-24 in the three test-checked RTOs/DTO, as shown in Table 3.3.5. 
Table 3.3.5: LLs issued without conducting tests 
Name of RTO/DTO LL Issued LL Issued without Test 
RTO Kohima 16,665 2,321 
RTO Mokokchung 8,616 2,298 
DTO Tuensang 8,286 1,673 
Total 33,567 6,292 
Source: SARATHI database 
Further analysis revealed that of the 27,275 LL reportedly issued after conducting 
tests, the tests time was recorded as 00:00 hours  in the database. This anomaly 
indicates that the actual test time was not recorded. The audit findings revealed 
systemic weaknesses in the LL issuance process in the State, characterised both by the 
issuance of LLs without mandatory tests and by the failure to record essential data 
such as test timings. The practice of issuing 6,292 LLs without conducting tests, and 
the absence of recorded test timings for 27,275 LLs, demonstrates significant lapses in 
compliance with the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. These lapses 
undermine the reliability of the licensing process and compromise road safety by 
potentially allowing unqualified individuals to operate vehicles. The continued 
reliance on manual processes, coupled with the lack of integration between testing 
and digital records, reflects deficiencies not merely at an operational level but within 
the overall governance framework of the licensing system. Unless robust measures, 
including the adoption of online testing modules and stringent monitoring 
mechanisms, are promptly implemented, these systemic gaps will persist, posing on-
going risks to public safety and eroding confidence in the regulatory framework. 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that the physical fitness of an 
applicant is self-certified in a self-declaration under Form-2 as prescribed under Rule 
10 of the CMV Rules 1989. The State Government further stated that since online 
tutorial and test are yet to be adopted, manual tests are being conducted. It was also 
stated that as the tests are conducted manually, the application auto records the test 
time as ‘00:00’ hours as default. The State Government also assured that it shall 
undertake the process of customisation of module to conduct online tutorial and test 
as prescribed under the rules for strict compliance with the requirement to conduct 
mandatory test before issuing Learner’s License.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable for the following reasons: 
1. Non-furnishing of records : The State’s assertion that manual tests were 
conducted is unsubstantiated, as no documentary evidence ( e.g., attendance 
sheets, test logs, assessment forms) of such tests was produced to Audit. 
2. Inadequate justification of data anomaly : The explanation that the 
SARATHI system auto-records “00:00” as test time in the case of manual 
tests highlights a serious procedural and data integrity issue. In the absence 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
153
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
153 
 
of alternate verifiable evidence, this anomaly casts doubt on whether the tests 
were conducted at all. 
3. Violation of statutory provisions : Issuance of LLs without documented 
evidence of having conducted the mandatory test is a clear non-compliance 
with Sections 8(6) and 9(3) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. 
4. Failure to implement mandated reforms : While the State has assured 
future adoption of online tutorial and testing, the continued issuance of LLs 
without ensuring legal compliance up to 2023-24 undermines both regulatory 
enforcement and road safety objectives. 
Therefore, the reply does not address the core audit concern-systemic failure to ensure 
transparent, test-based issuance of Learner’s Licenses - and cannot be accepted. 
Recommendation:  
The Department may enforce strict compliance with the requirement to conduct 
mandatory online tests before issuing Learner’s Licenses. 
 
3.3.8.2 Inadequate infrastructure for conducting driving tests  
Rule 15 of the CMV Rules, 1989 stipulates that applicants for driving licenses must 
demonstrate physical fitness and competence to drive through a comprehensive 
driving test. This test should assess various skills such as vehicle control, mirror 
adjustment, gear shifting, signalling and emergency stopping, and should be 
conducted on properly designed test lanes, tracks, or markings. Audit observed that 
driving tests in RTO, Kohima and DTO, Tuensang were conducted on public roads, 
while in RTO, Mokokchung, the tests were conducted within the office premises. 
Audit, however, observed that none of these places had the designated lanes, test 
tracks, or standard road markings necessary to facilitate a comprehensive and 
structured assessment of driving skills. The absence of adequate infrastructure 
compromises the quality, uniformity and thoroughness of the driving tests, increasing 
the risk of drivers being awarded licenses without a complete evaluation of their 
driving competence. While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government 
stated (November 2024) that owing to lack of infrastructure, driving tests were being 
conducted on available public roads and that the Department was pursuing the 
upgradation of infrastructure and establishment of Driving Training Centre in six 
districts. The contention of the State Government to upgrade infrastructure and 
establish DTCs in six districts, though indicative of ongoing efforts to improve, did 
not however, justify the continued non-compliance with established safety and 
regulatory standards. 
The continued practice of conducting driving tests without the required infrastructure 
including standard test tracks, designated lanes, and proper markings, constitutes a 
clear and persistent non-compliance with Rule 15 of the Central Motor Vehicles 
Rules, 1989. While the State Government has acknowledged the issue and expressed 
intent to upgrade infrastructure, the absence of a structured testing environment 
reflects a systemic failure to uphold minimum standards for evaluating driving 

154
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
154 
 
competence. The intent to improve does not absolve the Department of its 
responsibility to comply with existing statutory requirements. Delays in addressing 
these issues could result in significant disruptions or safety concerns. 
Recommendations: 
The Department may- 
(i) take immediate action to prevent escalation of risks and to maintain 
operational stability.  
(ii) establish standardised driving test infrastructure at all RTOs and DTOs, 
including designated test lanes, marked test tracks and appropriate 
markings, to ensure that driving tests are conducted in a controlled and 
uniform environment, in line with the national standards and best 
practices. 
 
3.3.9 Audit Objective: Whether regulation and control over registration and use 
of vehicles through registration, issuing permits and 
fitness certificates was implemented by RTOs/DTOs as 
per the Act/Rules? 
 
3.3.9.1  Irregularities in Vehicle Registration Records 
Rule 47 of the CMV Rules, 1989 states that an application for registration of a motor 
vehicle shall be made in Form 20 to the registering authority within a period of seven 
days from the date of taking delivery of such vehicle, excluding the period of journey. 
Further, Rule 49 states that every registering authority shall keep in Form 24 a 
permanent register of motor vehicles registered by it under section 41 and of motor 
vehicles of other States for which new registration marks are assigned by it under 
sub-section (2) of section 47 and shall also enter in such record under the respective 
registration numbers, all changes made with reference to the provisions of these rules. 
As per applicable rules, every vehicle registered with a RTO must have a unique 
chassis number and engine number, both of which are verified during the registration 
process. However, an analysis of vehicle registration data revealed that there were 
instances where the same chassis number (1,490) and engine number (2,104) were 
assigned to multiple vehicles across all the eight RTO/DTOs in the State, as shown in 
Table 3.3.6.  
Table 3.3.6: Instances of multiple assignments of chassis and engine number  
Frequency of Duplicate Assignments Chassis Numbers Engine Numbers 
Assigned Twice 1,468 2,035 
Assigned Thrice 22 64 
Assigned Four Times 0* 5 
Assigned Five Times 0* 6 
Assigned Seven/Nine/Eleven Times 0* 1 
Source: VAHAN data 
* No of occurrence of assigning same chassis number four times and above  
Out of 1,490 chassis numbers, it was observed in Audit that 903 chassis numbers were 
associated with the vehicles that had been issued a NOC.  The remaining 587 chassis 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
155
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
155 
 
numbers were assigned to multiple vehicles without obtaining NOC. Further, test 
check with vehicle registration data from the State of Assam revealed 556 vehicles 
registered in both Nagaland and Assam, shared the same chassis and engine numbers. 
Verification of these vehicle registration numbers with NOC issued by the Nagaland 
State revealed that only 166 vehicles were issued NOC and the remaining 390 
vehicles had no record of an NOC being issued from Nagaland for registration in 
another State. These discrepancies suggest a serious lapse in the verification and data 
entry process, and raise the risk of fraudulent registrations, duplication of vehicle 
identities and compromise of vehicle traceability. 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that the same chassis and 
engine numbers were assigned to multiple vehicles due to legacy data (pre-VAHAN), 
conversion/reassignment of vehicles and issue of NOC manually prior to VAHAN 
4.0. It was further stated that the flaws that were prevalent prior to VAHAN 4.0 were 
being rectified in the current application to make the system more stringent in making 
the registration process error free.  
While Audit partially accepts the reply regarding legacy data issue, the reasons cited 
by the State Government for conversion/reassignment of vehicles and issue of NOC 
manually are not acceptable. The foundational requirement of any registration system, 
viz., accurate, unique, verifiable details and error-free information irrespective of the 
mode or timing of data entry must remain uncompromised. The continued presence of 
such discrepancies reflects insufficient controls during the registration process. 
Recommendations: 
The Department may-  
(i) implement stringent verification protocols and validation checks during vehicle 
registration to ensure that the same chassis and engine numbers are not assigned 
to multiple vehicles. 
(ii) conduct a systematic review and cleaning of legacy data and digitally reconcile past 
No Objection Certificates to uphold the integrity of the vehicle registration 
database. 
 
3.3.9.2 Weak validation controls in Temporary and permanent vehicle 
registration  
Section 43 of the MV Act, 1988 states that the owner of a vehicle may apply to any 
registering authority or other prescribed authority to have the vehicle temporarily 
registered in the prescribed manner and for the issue in the prescribed manner of a 
temporary certificate of registration and a temporary registration mark. A registration 
made under this section shall be valid only for a period not exceeding one month, and 
shall not be renewable. An analysis of vehicle registration data for the period 2019-20 
to 2023-24 revealed that 11,174 vehicles with temporary registrations were granted 
permanent registration after the expiry of the stipulated 30-day period, with delays 
ranging from 01 to 1,518 days. Audit also observed that 830 temporary registered 

156
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
156 
 
vehicles17, initially earmarked for permanent registration at RTO, Kohima; RTO, 
Mokokchung; and DTO, Tuensang, were eventually permanently registered in other 
RTOs/DTOs. This contravenes the intended flow of registration and reflects lapses in 
system controls. The core issue was found to be weak validation controls in the 
vehicle registration system. Moreover, the system did not enforce restrictions to 
ensure that permanent registration occurred only at the RTO/DTO initially designated 
during the issuance of the Temporary Registration Certificate (TRC). Details are 
shown in the Table 3.3.7. 
Table 3.3.7: Statement showing temporary registration of vehicles 
RTO/DTO 
Number of vehicles 
Temporary 
Registered 
Permanent 
Registration made 
after 30 Days 
Percentage 
delayed  
(in per cent) 
Registered 
at Other 
RTOs 
Kohima 48,023 5,274 11 778 
Mokokchung 2,699 759 28 33 
Tuensang 353 151 43 19 
Source: VAHAN data 
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that, for vehicles whose 
TRCs were expired, registrations were granted with realisation of penalty fees on 
daily basis from the date of expiry of the TRC. Audit attempted to calculate the 
penalty fees realised from 11,174 vehicles and observed that only 7,308 vehicles paid 
the penalty fees amounting to ₹48.95 lakh and the remaining 3,866 vehicles did not 
pay the penalty fees. It was further stated that no registration of vehicles can be made 
in other RTO/DTO other than as specified in the TRC unless the issuing authority of 
TRC, through the process of modification to suit the need of the applicant, change the 
name of the authority where it is desired to be permanently registered. 
The reply is not acceptable as it fails to address the root cause: the registration system 
allowed deviations without enforcing traceable modifications. In the absence of 
systemic checks, allowing post-facto justification of changes undermines the integrity 
of the registration process and defeats the purpose of earmarking an RTO at the 
temporary registration stage. 
Recommendation:  
The Department may strengthen validation and control mechanisms in the vehicle 
registration system to enforce adherence to not exceeding one month validity of 
temporary registration and restrict permanent registration to only the RTO/DTO 
specified in the original TRC, unless formally amended with traceable 
documentation. 
 
3.3.9.3 Delay in renewal of Registration Certificates 
As per Schedule II(C) of the Nagaland Motor Vehicles Taxation (3 rd Amendment) 
Act, 2009, on expiration of the 15 years of life of a vehicle, further renewal of the 
registration of a vehicle for a period of five years shall be obtained by paying one-
                                                
17  RTO Kohima=778, RTO Mokokchung=33 and DTO Tuensang=19 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
157
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
157 
 
time tax at the rate of two per cent of the original cost of the vehicle. Data analysis of 
renewal of Registration Certificates (RC) of vehicles revealed that during 2019-2024, 
RCs of 7,565 vehicles were renewed with delays ranging from 01 to 8,975 days out of 
which 5,217 18 vehicles belonged to the three test-checked RTOs/DTO. Results of 
detailed analysis of 10 such vehicles selected randomly are given in Table 3.3.8. 
Table 3.3.8: Detail analysis of delay in RC renewal cases 
Vehicle No. Date of 
Purchase 
Tax 
Expired on 
Tax Paid 
After 
Gap 
(Years) 
Tax Paid 
For Remarks 
NL01CA3186 08/08/1996 30/04/1997 28/09/2020 24 2020–2025 Renewal after 25 years. Tax 
paid after a long delay. 
NL018450 15/04/1995 31/03/2000 06/09/2019 19 2000–2020 Huge gap in tax payment. 
NL02C0137 30/04/2002 30/04/2007 31/03/2022 15 2007–2027 Significant lapse in 
compliance. 
NL054274 05/01/1998 31/12/2005 21/10/2019 13 2006–2020 Tax paid after 13 years. 
NL074003 11/07/2006 10/07/2011 20/10/2022 11 2011–2026 Long delay in tax renewal. 
NL012814 01/11/1996 01/11/2015 04/04/2022 6 2015–2025 Moderate delay. 
NL080613 26/04/1944 31/03/2011 05/08/2021 10 2011–2024 Extremely outdated vehicle. 
NL01C0132 14/11/1975 31/03/2012 24/11/2021 9 2012–2022 Tax gap not justified. 
NL01H1673 19/01/1998 31/12/2012 01/06/2022 9 2013–2027 Late tax for a long period. 
NL02C2286 25/07/2006 31/05/2011 14/10/2019 8 2011–2026 Delay evident. 
Source: VAHAN database 
Audit observed that the reason for the delays in renewing vehicles’ RCs was due to 
the ineffective enforcement of registration renewal timelines by the Department. The 
delayed renewal of RC undermines compliance with the Nagaland Motor Vehicles 
Taxation (3rd Amendment) Act, 2009.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that a late fee for delay in renewal of vehicle RC was levied as per rules and 
automated alert system was in place for alerting the mobile number of vehicle owners 
before the expiry of RC. It was further stated that enforcement personnel were 
deployed for checking vehicle documents including tax validity and the process for 
introducing e-challan had been initiated.  
While acknowledging the reply, the audit maintains that enforcement was still weak, 
as evidenced by the volume and scale of delays. However, the existence of such a 
high number of delayed cases despite automated alerts and penalties indicates 
ineffective enforcement and follow-up. The Department may consider time-bound 
compliance tracking and monthly reconciliation to ensure timely renewal and improve 
revenue realisation. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may strengthen the enforcement wing by instituting regular 
compliance checks, levying applicable penalties in all delay cases, and expediting 
the implementation of the e-challan system.  
 
3.3.9.4 Re-assignment of vehicle registration on transfer of ownership 
                                                
18 RTO, Kohima: 2,417 vehicles, RTO, Mokokchung: 2,466 vehicles and DTO, Tuensang: 334 
vehicles 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
157 
 
time tax at the rate of two per cent of the original cost of the vehicle. Data analysis of 
renewal of Registration Certificates (RC) of vehicles revealed that during 2019-2024, 
RCs of 7,565 vehicles were renewed with delays ranging from 01 to 8,975 days out of 
which 5,217 18 vehicles belonged to the three test-checked RTOs/DTO. Results of 
detailed analysis of 10 such vehicles selected randomly are given in Table 3.3.8. 
Table 3.3.8: Detail analysis of delay in RC renewal cases 
Vehicle No. Date of 
Purchase 
Tax 
Expired on 
Tax Paid 
After 
Gap 
(Years) 
Tax Paid 
For Remarks 
NL01CA3186 08/08/1996 30/04/1997 28/09/2020 24 2020–2025 Renewal after 25 years. Tax 
paid after a long delay. 
NL018450 15/04/1995 31/03/2000 06/09/2019 19 2000–2020 Huge gap in tax payment. 
NL02C0137 30/04/2002 30/04/2007 31/03/2022 15 2007–2027 Significant lapse in 
compliance. 
NL054274 05/01/1998 31/12/2005 21/10/2019 13 2006–2020 Tax paid after 13 years. 
NL074003 11/07/2006 10/07/2011 20/10/2022 11 2011–2026 Long delay in tax renewal. 
NL012814 01/11/1996 01/11/2015 04/04/2022 6 2015–2025 Moderate delay. 
NL080613 26/04/1944 31/03/2011 05/08/2021 10 2011–2024 Extremely outdated vehicle. 
NL01C0132 14/11/1975 31/03/2012 24/11/2021 9 2012–2022 Tax gap not justified. 
NL01H1673 19/01/1998 31/12/2012 01/06/2022 9 2013–2027 Late tax for a long period. 
NL02C2286 25/07/2006 31/05/2011 14/10/2019 8 2011–2026 Delay evident. 
Source: VAHAN database 
Audit observed that the reason for the delays in renewing vehicles’ RCs was due to 
the ineffective enforcement of registration renewal timelines by the Department. The 
delayed renewal of RC undermines compliance with the Nagaland Motor Vehicles 
Taxation (3rd Amendment) Act, 2009.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that a late fee for delay in renewal of vehicle RC was levied as per rules and 
automated alert system was in place for alerting the mobile number of vehicle owners 
before the expiry of RC. It was further stated that enforcement personnel were 
deployed for checking vehicle documents including tax validity and the process for 
introducing e-challan had been initiated.  
While acknowledging the reply, the audit maintains that enforcement was still weak, 
as evidenced by the volume and scale of delays. However, the existence of such a 
high number of delayed cases despite automated alerts and penalties indicates 
ineffective enforcement and follow-up. The Department may consider time-bound 
compliance tracking and monthly reconciliation to ensure timely renewal and improve 
revenue realisation. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may strengthen the enforcement wing by instituting regular 
compliance checks, levying applicable penalties in all delay cases, and expediting 
the implementation of the e-challan system.  
 
3.3.9.4 Re-assignment of vehicle registration on transfer of ownership 
                                                
18 RTO, Kohima: 2,417 vehicles, RTO, Mokokchung: 2,466 vehicles and DTO, Tuensang: 334 
vehicles 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
157 
 
time tax at the rate of two per cent of the original cost of the vehicle. Data analysis of 
renewal of Registration Certificates (RC) of vehicles revealed that during 2019-2024, 
RCs of 7,565 vehicles were renewed with delays ranging from 01 to 8,975 days out of 
which 5,217 18 vehicles belonged to the three test-checked RTOs/DTO. Results of 
detailed analysis of 10 such vehicles selected randomly are given in Table 3.3.8. 
Table 3.3.8: Detail analysis of delay in RC renewal cases 
Vehicle No. Date of 
Purchase 
Tax 
Expired on 
Tax Paid 
After 
Gap 
(Years) 
Tax Paid 
For Remarks 
NL01CA3186 08/08/1996 30/04/1997 28/09/2020 24 2020–2025 Renewal after 25 years. Tax 
paid after a long delay. 
NL018450 15/04/1995 31/03/2000 06/09/2019 19 2000–2020 Huge gap in tax payment. 
NL02C0137 30/04/2002 30/04/2007 31/03/2022 15 2007–2027 Significant lapse in 
compliance. 
NL054274 05/01/1998 31/12/2005 21/10/2019 13 2006–2020 Tax paid after 13 years. 
NL074003 11/07/2006 10/07/2011 20/10/2022 11 2011–2026 Long delay in tax renewal. 
NL012814 01/11/1996 01/11/2015 04/04/2022 6 2015–2025 Moderate delay. 
NL080613 26/04/1944 31/03/2011 05/08/2021 10 2011–2024 Extremely outdated vehicle. 
NL01C0132 14/11/1975 31/03/2012 24/11/2021 9 2012–2022 Tax gap not justified. 
NL01H1673 19/01/1998 31/12/2012 01/06/2022 9 2013–2027 Late tax for a long period. 
NL02C2286 25/07/2006 31/05/2011 14/10/2019 8 2011–2026 Delay evident. 
Source: VAHAN database 
Audit observed that the reason for the delays in renewing vehicles’ RCs was due to 
the ineffective enforcement of registration renewal timelines by the Department. The 
delayed renewal of RC undermines compliance with the Nagaland Motor Vehicles 
Taxation (3rd Amendment) Act, 2009.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that a late fee for delay in renewal of vehicle RC was levied as per rules and 
automated alert system was in place for alerting the mobile number of vehicle owners 
before the expiry of RC. It was further stated that enforcement personnel were 
deployed for checking vehicle documents including tax validity and the process for 
introducing e-challan had been initiated.  
While acknowledging the reply, the audit maintains that enforcement was still weak, 
as evidenced by the volume and scale of delays. However, the existence of such a 
high number of delayed cases despite automated alerts and penalties indicates 
ineffective enforcement and follow-up. The Department may consider time-bound 
compliance tracking and monthly reconciliation to ensure timely renewal and improve 
revenue realisation. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may strengthen the enforcement wing by instituting regular 
compliance checks, levying applicable penalties in all delay cases, and expediting 
the implementation of the e-challan system.  
 
3.3.9.4 Re-assignment of vehicle registration on transfer of ownership 
                                                
18 RTO, Kohima: 2,417 vehicles, RTO, Mokokchung: 2,466 vehicles and DTO, Tuensang: 334 
vehicles 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
157 
 
time tax at the rate of two per cent of the original cost of the vehicle. Data analysis of 
renewal of Registration Certificates (RC) of vehicles revealed that during 2019-2024, 
RCs of 7,565 vehicles were renewed with delays ranging from 01 to 8,975 days out of 
which 5,217 18 vehicles belonged to the three test-checked RTOs/DTO. Results of 
detailed analysis of 10 such vehicles selected randomly are given in Table 3.3.8. 
Table 3.3.8: Detail analysis of delay in RC renewal cases 
Vehicle No. Date of 
Purchase 
Tax 
Expired on 
Tax Paid 
After 
Gap 
(Years) 
Tax Paid 
For Remarks 
NL01CA3186 08/08/1996 30/04/1997 28/09/2020 24 2020–2025 Renewal after 25 years. Tax 
paid after a long delay. 
NL018450 15/04/1995 31/03/2000 06/09/2019 19 2000–2020 Huge gap in tax payment. 
NL02C0137 30/04/2002 30/04/2007 31/03/2022 15 2007–2027 Significant lapse in 
compliance. 
NL054274 05/01/1998 31/12/2005 21/10/2019 13 2006–2020 Tax paid after 13 years. 
NL074003 11/07/2006 10/07/2011 20/10/2022 11 2011–2026 Long delay in tax renewal. 
NL012814 01/11/1996 01/11/2015 04/04/2022 6 2015–2025 Moderate delay. 
NL080613 26/04/1944 31/03/2011 05/08/2021 10 2011–2024 Extremely outdated vehicle. 
NL01C0132 14/11/1975 31/03/2012 24/11/2021 9 2012–2022 Tax gap not justified. 
NL01H1673 19/01/1998 31/12/2012 01/06/2022 9 2013–2027 Late tax for a long period. 
NL02C2286 25/07/2006 31/05/2011 14/10/2019 8 2011–2026 Delay evident. 
Source: VAHAN database 
Audit observed that the reason for the delays in renewing vehicles’ RCs was due to 
the ineffective enforcement of registration renewal timelines by the Department. The 
delayed renewal of RC undermines compliance with the Nagaland Motor Vehicles 
Taxation (3rd Amendment) Act, 2009.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that a late fee for delay in renewal of vehicle RC was levied as per rules and 
automated alert system was in place for alerting the mobile number of vehicle owners 
before the expiry of RC. It was further stated that enforcement personnel were 
deployed for checking vehicle documents including tax validity and the process for 
introducing e-challan had been initiated.  
While acknowledging the reply, the audit maintains that enforcement was still weak, 
as evidenced by the volume and scale of delays. However, the existence of such a 
high number of delayed cases despite automated alerts and penalties indicates 
ineffective enforcement and follow-up. The Department may consider time-bound 
compliance tracking and monthly reconciliation to ensure timely renewal and improve 
revenue realisation. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may strengthen the enforcement wing by instituting regular 
compliance checks, levying applicable penalties in all delay cases, and expediting 
the implementation of the e-challan system.  
 
3.3.9.4 Re-assignment of vehicle registration on transfer of ownership 
                                                
18 RTO, Kohima: 2,417 vehicles, RTO, Mokokchung: 2,466 vehicles and DTO, Tuensang: 334 
vehicles 
Chapter – III Economic Sector 
 
158 
 
Section 50 of the MV Act, 1988 states that, the person succeeding to the possession of 
the vehicle or, as the case may be, who has purchased or acquired the motor vehicle, 
shall make an application for the purpose of transferring the ownership of the vehicle 
in his name, to the registering authority in whose jurisdiction he has the residence or 
place of business where the vehicle is normally kept. Further, Rule 57 of the CMV 
Rules, 1989 states that the person who has acquired or purchased a motor vehicle at a 
public auction conducted by or on behalf of the Central Government or a State 
Government shall make an application in Form 32 within thirty days of taking 
possession of the vehicle to the registering authority. Audit observed that during 
2019-20 to 2023-24, a total of 1,152 Government vehicles were auctioned to various 
individuals by different Departments of GoN.  
However, upon verification of the VAHAN database (May to August 2024), it was 
observed that the ownership transfers of 146 vehicles had not been completed with 
delays ranging from one to six years, indicating that the transferees failed to apply to 
the registering authority as required. The failure to ensure transfer of ownership for 
the 146 auctioned Government vehicles constitutes a breach of statutory requirements 
under the MV Act, 1988 and undermines regulatory oversight. It may also expose the 
State to potential legal liabilities and misuse of vehicles whose ownership remains in 
the Government’s name.  
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that Government vehicles 
older than 15 years were mandatorily scrapped and therefore not re-assigned. It was, 
further, stated that vehicles which were not road worthy were auctioned on scrap basis 
and were also not re-assigned.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable, since only two out of the 
146 vehicles were older than 15 years at the time of auction, and there was no 
documentary evidence to substantiate that the remaining vehicles were auctioned as 
scrap. In the absence of such classification, the onus of enforcing the transfer of 
ownership remains with the Department as per the MV Act. 
Recommendation: 
The State Government may ensure that auction notices explicitly include 
statutory requirements for ownership transfer, and that purchasers are required 
to submit Form 32 within the stipulated 30 days. It may also establish a 
monitoring mechanism to track post-auction compliance and take timely action 
in case of default. 
 
3.3.9.5  Transport vehicles with expired permits 
Section 66 of the MV Act, 1988 states that no owner of a motor vehicle shall use or 
permit the use of the vehicle as a transport vehicle in any public place whether or not 
such vehicle is actually carrying any passengers or goods save in accordance with the 
conditions of a permit granted or countersigned by a Regional or State Transport 
Authority. Further, Section 81 states that a permit other than a temporary permit 

158
Chapter III: Economic Sector
Chapter – III Economic Sector 
 
158 
 
Section 50 of the MV Act, 1988 states that, the person succeeding to the possession of 
the vehicle or, as the case may be, who has purchased or acquired the motor vehicle, 
shall make an application for the purpose of transferring the ownership of the vehicle 
in his name, to the registering authority in whose jurisdiction he has the residence or 
place of business where the vehicle is normally kept. Further, Rule 57 of the CMV 
Rules, 1989 states that the person who has acquired or purchased a motor vehicle at a 
public auction conducted by or on behalf of the Central Government or a State 
Government shall make an application in Form 32 within thirty days of taking 
possession of the vehicle to the registering authority. Audit observed that during 
2019-20 to 2023-24, a total of 1,152 Government vehicles were auctioned to various 
individuals by different Departments of GoN.  
However, upon verification of the VAHAN database (May to August 2024), it was 
observed that the ownership transfers of 146 vehicles had not been completed with 
delays ranging from one to six years, indicating that the transferees failed to apply to 
the registering authority as required. The failure to ensure transfer of ownership for 
the 146 auctioned Government vehicles constitutes a breach of statutory requirements 
under the MV Act, 1988 and undermines regulatory oversight. It may also expose the 
State to potential legal liabilities and misuse of vehicles whose ownership remains in 
the Government’s name.  
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that Government vehicles 
older than 15 years were mandatorily scrapped and therefore not re-assigned. It was, 
further, stated that vehicles which were not road worthy were auctioned on scrap basis 
and were also not re-assigned.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable, since only two out of the 
146 vehicles were older than 15 years at the time of auction, and there was no 
documentary evidence to substantiate that the remaining vehicles were auctioned as 
scrap. In the absence of such classification, the onus of enforcing the transfer of 
ownership remains with the Department as per the MV Act. 
Recommendation: 
The State Government may ensure that auction notices explicitly include 
statutory requirements for ownership transfer, and that purchasers are required 
to submit Form 32 within the stipulated 30 days. It may also establish a 
monitoring mechanism to track post-auction compliance and take timely action 
in case of default. 
 
3.3.9.5  Transport vehicles with expired permits 
Section 66 of the MV Act, 1988 states that no owner of a motor vehicle shall use or 
permit the use of the vehicle as a transport vehicle in any public place whether or not 
such vehicle is actually carrying any passengers or goods save in accordance with the 
conditions of a permit granted or countersigned by a Regional or State Transport 
Authority. Further, Section 81 states that a permit other than a temporary permit 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
159
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
159 
 
issued under Section 87 or a special permit issued under sub-section (8) of Section 88 
shall be effective for a period of five years.  
Data analysis of records of permit issued revealed that as on 31 March 2024, 
4,864 transport vehicles were plying with expired permits. Of these, 3,586 pertained 
to National Permits, 639 to Contract Carriage Permits, 365 to Goods Permits, 251 to 
Tourist Permits and 23 to Stage Carriage Permits. Audit observed that the continued 
operation of vehicles with expired permits was due to insufficient monitoring and 
enforcement mechanisms by the Department, which led to a lack of timely renewal of 
permits. The continued operation of 4,864 transport vehicles with expired permits, in 
contravention of Section 66 of the MV Act, 1988, reflects systemic lapses in 
monitoring and enforcement by the Department. This situation poses significant risks 
to road safety, revenue loss, and undermines the credibility of transport regulations. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that acute manpower shortage was one of the main reasons for the inability to 
effectively enforce the provisions of the Act and Rules. 
The reply of the State Government, attributing the issue to manpower shortage, is not 
acceptable. While staffing constraints may impact field enforcement, the Department 
has not demonstrated efforts to leverage available digital systems for monitoring 
permit expiry, issuing automated reminders, or restricting renewals of other services 
for vehicles with expired permits. These are low-cost, high-impact solutions that 
could have mitigated the enforcement gap. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may implement stringent monitoring mechanisms, including 
automated alerts for permit expirations, and strengthen enforcement actions to 
ensure that vehicles do not operate without valid permits. 
 
3.3.9.6  Non-renewal of national permit authorisations 
Section 81 of the MV Act, 1988 states that a permit other than a temporary permit 
issued under Section 87 or a special permit issued under sub-section (8) of Section 88 
shall be effective from the date of issuance or renewal thereof for a period of five 
years. Further, Rule 87 of the CMV Rules, 1989 states that an application for the grant 
of an authorisation for a national permit shall be made in Form 46 and shall be 
accompanied by a fee of ₹1,000 per annum in the form of a bank draft. Every 
authorisation shall be granted in Form 23-A, in case the certificate of registration is 
issued on Smart Card or shall be granted in Form 47, in case the authorisation is in 
paper document subject to the payment of a consolidated fees of ₹15,000 per annum 
to be deposited in the national permit account for the permit granted to operate 
throughout the territory of India.  
Data analysis of the authorisation of national permits revealed that 4,437 vehicles, 
which had obtained national permits valid for five years, did not renew the required 
annual authorisation. Failure to renew national permit authorisation in a timely 

160
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
160 
 
manner not only constitutes non-compliance with statutory provisions but also 
resulted in a revenue loss of ₹1.81 crore as annual authorisation fees and ₹29.04 crore 
as annual consolidated fees during the period 2019-2024. This reflected significant 
gaps in the enforcement and monitoring processes, contributing to continued non-
compliance by permit holders.  
In reply, the State Government stated (November 2024) that, it was not mandatory for 
a vehicle to avail a national permit and authorisation.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable. While obtaining a national 
permit is optional, renewing the annual authorisation is mandatory once a national 
permit has been granted, as per Rule 87 of the CMV Rules, 1989. The Department’s 
failure to track and enforce this requirement enabled widespread non-compliance and 
significant revenue loss. The absence of a system to monitor and alert permit holders 
contributed directly to the scale of this lapse. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may implement an automated tracking and notification system 
which cross-verifies national permit data with annual authorisation renewals 
and triggers reminders and enforcement actions for non-compliant vehicles. 
 
3.3.9.7  Vehicles plying with expired fitness certificate 
Section 56 of the MV Act, 1988 states that a transport vehicle shall not be deemed to 
be validly registered, unless it carries a certificate of fitness in such form containing 
such particulars and information as may be prescribed by the Central Government, 
issued by the prescribed authorities, or by an authorised testing station mentioned to 
the effect that the vehicle complies with all the requirements of the Act and the rules 
made thereunder. An analysis of the database related to the issuance of fitness 
certificates showed that, as of March 2024, the fitness certificates of 1,22,886 
transport vehicles had expired but had not been renewed, of which 85,248 vehicles 
were from the three test-checked RTOs/DTO 19. An age-wise analysis of expired 
fitness certificates, based on vehicle registration period, as shown in Chart 3.3.2. 
                                                
19  RTO Kohima = 39,242; RTO Mokokchung = 33,791; DTO Tuensang = 12,215 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
161
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
161 
 
C h a r t  3 . 3 . 2 :  A g e - w i s e  a n a l y s i s  o f  e x p i r e d  f i t n e s s  c e r t i f i c a t e s  
  
S o u r c e :  V A H A N  d a t a b a s e  
Note: “Nil” registration date refers to records where vehicle registration data was missing from the 
VAHAN database. 
Audit observed that the reason for the failure to renew fitness certificates was due to 
weak enforcement and monitoring mechanisms by the Department. The continued 
operation of 1.23 lakh transport vehicles without valid fitness certificates, including 
over 85,000 from just three RTOs/DTO, constitutes a significant violation of Section 
56 of the MV Act and compromises public road safety. The age profile of these 
vehicles further highlights the risk, with nearly 80,000 vehicles aged between 11 to 20 
years – which is the period when vehicle condition typically deteriorates. This reflects 
systemic enforcement gaps and inadequate monitoring of roadworthiness compliance.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that, due to manual and random checking, there were limitations in covering all 
vehicles. It was also stated that the introduction of e-challan will empower the 
enforcement personnel to conduct more effective checks of vehicle documents, 
including the validity of fitness certificates. 
The State Government’s reply is not acceptable. While introduction of e-challan is a 
positive step, it does not address the core issue of allowing vehicles with expired 
fitness certificates to continue plying for years. Given that over 1.23 lakh vehicles 
lacked valid fitness certification, relying on manual checks alone is insufficient. 
Moreover, the presence of vehicles with “Nil” registration dates indicates serious 
deficiencies in database validation and oversight. A robust enforcement framework, 
backed by real-time data analytics and automated alerts, is critical to ensure road 
s a f e t y  a n d  r e g u l a t o r y  c o m p l i a n c e .  
2 6 , 0 3 4
7 9 , 5 9 1
1 1 , 3 3 7
1,529
 355
 4 9
 1 3
 3 , 9 7 8
F i t nes s Cer tif ic ate Expir ed

162
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
162 
 
Recommendation: 
The Department may strengthen its enforcement mechanisms to ensure the timely 
renewal of fitness certificates, so that only road worthy vehicles are allowed to ply. 
 
3.3.9.8 Renewal of fitness certificate beyond validity period 
As per the CMV (Eight Amendment) Rules, 2022, renewal of certificate of fitness in 
respect of transport vehicles shall be two years for vehicles up to eight years old and 
one year for vehicles older than eight years old.  
Data analysis of the database relating to the issuance of fitness certificates showed 
that, during the period 2022-23 to 2023-24, fitness certificates were renewed for more 
than one year for 41 transport vehicles 20 that were older than eight years, in 
contravention of the provisions of the CMV Rules. The issuance of fitness certificates 
with validity periods exceeding the permissible limit under the CMV Rules, 2022 for 
vehicles older than eight years reflects a systemic failure to adhere to regulatory 
norms. Such deviations compromise the periodic assessment of vehicle 
roadworthiness and pose a direct risk to road safety. This also undermines the 
enforcement framework intended to ensure that ageing transport vehicles meet 
minimum safety standards. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that fitness certificates were auto-generated once the data was entered. It was, 
further, stated that the matter would be taken up with the application developer to 
rectify such lapses. 
Reliance on auto-generation of certificates without appropriate system-level 
validation reflects inadequate application controls. Fitness validity should be 
governed strictly by the CMV Rules, irrespective of system limitations. The fact that 
41 certificates were issued in contravention of the prescribed one-year limit for older 
vehicles points to a lapse in both regulatory oversight and IT governance. 
Rectification at the software level must be prioritised, but it should be accompanied 
by interim manual checks to prevent further violations and safeguard public safety. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may strictly enforce the rules regarding the renewal period of 
fitness certificates for vehicles older than eight years. 
 
3.3.9.9 Unusual number of fitness tests conducted per day 
Rule 62 of the CMV Rules, 1989 states that the renewal of a fitness certificate shall be 
made only after the Inspecting Officer or an authorised testing station has carried out 
the tests specified in the rule. Analysis of the database relating to fitness testing 
revealed that, during 2019-20 to 2023-24, a total of 1,18,860 fitness tests 21 were 
conducted across the three test-checked RTOs/DTO. Further analysis revealed that the 
                                                
20  Kohima = 34, Mokokchung = 2, Zunheboto = 2 and Dimapur = 3 
21  RTO Kohima = 1,06,372; RTO Mokokchung =10,552; DTO Tuensang = 1,936 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
163
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
163 
 
maximum number of fitness tests conducted in a single day was 1,055 in RTO, 
Kohima, 141 in RTO, Mokokchung and 30 in DTO, Tuensang, while the average 
number of fitness tests conducted per day was 94 in RTO, Kohima, 11 in RTO, 
Mokokchung and 04 in DTO, Tuensang. 
During joint inspections with Department officials, it was observed that a full manual 
fitness test of a vehicle typically takes 10 to 15 minutes. Therefore, the recording of 
1,055 fitness tests as conducted in a single day at RTO, Kohima appears unreasonably 
high, given the required thoroughness and time commitment for the fitness testing 
process. It is, therefore, concluded that either the tests were not thoroughly conducted 
or the records were inaccurately maintained. Thus, failure to adhere to proper fitness 
testing procedures compromises road safety, as vehicles may be certified as fit 
without undergoing the necessary inspections.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that tests were conducted manually on different dates, but the application 
captures the date of data entry as the inspection date, which may differ from the actual 
physical date of inspection.  
The reply of the State Government reflects serious deficiencies in record-keeping 
practices and the absence of time stamped, verifiable documentation of actual 
physical inspections. Unless rectified, this data integrity issue compromises the audit 
trail and allows circumvention of mandated safety protocols. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may enhance its monitoring mechanisms to ensure compliance 
with the required testing procedures for the renewal of fitness certificates. 
 
3.3.9.10 Absence of automated testing stations in Nagaland 
Section 56 of the MV Act, 1988 states that a transport vehicle shall not be deemed to 
be validly registered, unless it carries a certificate of fitness in such form containing 
such particulars and information as may be prescribed by the Central Government, 
issued by the prescribed authority, or by an Authorised Testing Station to the effect 
that the vehicle complies for the time being with all the requirements of the Act and 
the rules made thereunder. Further, as per the CMV (Eight Amendment) Rules 2022, 
renewal of certificate of fitness in respect of transport vehicles shall be done 
mandatorily only through an Automated Testing Stations (ATS). Audit observed that 
there is no ATS in Nagaland to carry out the automatic testing of vehicles for the 
issuance of fitness certificates. Audit also observed that the construction of an 
Inspection and Certification Centre at Chumukedima, proposed for conversion into an 
ATS, was under progress. Further, Audit observed that the Department’s proposal 
(February 2024) to the GoN for the establishment of additional ATS facilities at 
Kohima and Mokokchung was awaiting approval. The absence of operational ATS in 
the State indicated that fitness certificate renewals for transport vehicles were not 
being conducted in compliance with the CMV (Eighth Amendment) Rules, 2022.  

164
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
164 
 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that in addition to the ongoing construction of the ATS at Chumukedima, it was 
pursuing the establishment of two more ATS facilities at Kohima and Mokokchung 
with funding from the MoRTH. The reply is not acceptable as the MV Act, 1988, read 
with the CMV (Eighth Amendment) Rules, 2022, mandates that renewal of fitness 
certificates for transport vehicles shall be carried out exclusively through ATS. In the 
absence of any operational ATS in the State, all fitness certificate renewals are 
currently being undertaken in contravention of the prescribed Rules, thereby 
compromising the statutory mandate and undermining vehicle safety standards. 
Further, the reply lacks a committed timeline for the operationalisation of the 
Chumukedima ATS and does not indicate any interim mechanism or approval from 
the competent authority for continuing manual testing. 
Recommendation: 
The State Government may expedite the completion and operationalisation of the 
Inspection and Certification Centre at Chumukedima  as an ATS and prioritise the 
approval and establishment of ATS facilities at Kohima and Mokokchung. 
 
3.3.10 Audit Objective: Whether RTOs/DTOs efficiently assessed, levied, collected 
and remitted revenue (Motor vehicle taxes, fines, 
penalties and cess, as per Act/Rules) and took effective 
action on arrears? 
 
3.3.10.1 Outstanding tax defaulting arrears  
As per Section 4 of the Nagaland Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1967, no motor 
vehicles shall be used unless the owner thereof has paid in respect of it a tax at the 
appropriate rate specified in the schedule to the Act. Further, Section 16 of the Act 
stipulates that when any person without any reasonable cause fails or refuses to pay 
the tax, the licensing officer may forward to the Deputy Commissioner a certificate 
over his signature specifying the amount of tax due from such person, and the Deputy 
Commissioner on receipt of such certificate, shall proceed to recover such tax 
including such penalty as he may deem fit not exceeding one half of the annual tax. In 
addition, Section 3 of the Nagaland Passengers and Goods Taxation Act, 1967 states 
that there shall be levied, charged and paid to the State Government a tax on all fares 
in respect of all passengers and goods carried in a taxable vehicle. And Section 9 of 
the Nagaland Passengers and Goods Taxation Act, 1967 stipulates that, if the 
prescribed authority is satisfied that any owner is liable to pay tax under the 
provisions of this Act, in respect of any period but has failed to pay the tax, the said 
authority may after giving the owner a reasonable opportunity of being heard, assess 
the amount of tax, if any, due from the owner and also direct that the owner shall pay 
in the prescribed manner, by way of penalty, a sum not exceeding one and a half time 
the amount of tax. 
Data analysis of records relating to tax arrears revealed that, as of 31 August 2024, a 
total of 8,633 vehicles registered during 2019-2024 had defaulted on tax payments 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
165
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
165 
 
amounting to ₹9.03 crore 22. The failure to recover outstanding taxes resulted in a 
substantial revenue loss for the State Government, thereby undermining the 
effectiveness of the Motor Vehicles and the Passengers and Goods Taxation Acts.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that it was in the process of determining the actual number of on-road/off-road 
vehicles out of the total number of vehicles registered in the State. It was, further, 
stated that once the records of unused/off-road vehicles were archived, the number of 
tax defaulters was expected to be significantly reduced. The State Government also 
informed that an SMS alert system had been activated to notify vehicle owners upon 
expiry of tax paid validity period, and that the registering authorities were issuing 
demand notices periodically. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may strengthen its tax collection and monitoring mechanisms, 
including the implementation of automated systems for tracking tax defaulters. The 
Department may also take immediate steps to recover the outstanding dues through 
stringent enforcement of the legal provisions for tax recovery and penalties. 
 
3.3.10.2  Non-transfer of cess fund to the Nagaland Road Safety Fund 
Section 10 of the Nagaland Road Safety Authority Act, 2013 states that there shall be 
levied and collected a one-time cess for the purposes of this Act on every motor 
vehicle used or kept use in the State at the rate of 0.50 per cent of the basic cost of the 
vehicle. The proceeds of the cess levied and collected under this Act  by the 
Government together with fines, interest and fees recovered thereunder shall first be 
credited to the Consolidated Fund of the State and after deducting the expenses of 
collection and recovery, as determined by the Government, the remaining amount 
shall, under appropriation duly made by law in this behalf, be entered into and 
transferred to the Fund. Further, Section 11 of the Nagaland Road Safety Authority 
Act, 2013 states that there shall be establishment of Fund to be called the" Nagaland 
Road Safety Fund" and there shall be credited to the Fund the amount transferred 
under Section 10 and 50 per cent  of the compounding fee collected by the 
Department. 
Audit observed that while the GoN notified the establishment of the Nagaland Road 
Safety Fund (NRSF) in August 2022 and implemented its provisions from 
October 2022, cess amounting to ₹34.54 crore collected during 2022-23 to 2023-24 
had not been transferred to the NRSF. Similarly, 50 per cent of ₹0.52 crore collected 
during the same period as compounding fees for violations of various provisions of 
the MV Act was also not transferred to the NRSF. The non-transfer of cess and 
compounding fees to the NRSF resulted in delays in utilising these funds for their 
intended purpose of enhancing road safety in the State.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that ₹5.00 crore had been transferred to the NRSF during 2024-25, and that the 
                                                
22  Goods tax=₹2.01 crore, MV tax= ₹6.33 crore and Passenger tax= ₹0.69 crore 

166
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
166 
 
release of 50 per cent of the compounding fees was likely to occur soon. However, 
the transfer of funds had not occurred as of July 2025. 
Recommendation: 
The State Government may immediately transfer the accumulated road safety cess 
and 50 per cent of the compounding fees to the Nagaland Road Safety Fund. 
 
3.3.11 Audit Objective: Whether enforcement activities were effectively conducted 
by RTOs/DTOs to ensure compliance with the Motor 
Vehicles Acts/Rules with adequate follow up to deter 
violations? 
 
3.3.11.1 Non-implementation of electronic monitoring systems 
Section 136A of the MV Act, 1988 states that the State Government shall ensure 
electronic monitoring and enforcement of road safety on national highways, state 
highways, roads or in any urban city within a State which has a population up to such 
limits as may be prescribed by the Central Government. Further, as per Section 136A 
(2) of the MV Act, 1988, the Central Government shall make rules for the electronic 
monitoring and enforcement of road safety including speed cameras, closed-circuit 
television cameras, speed guns, body wearable cameras and such other technology. 
Audit observed that the Department did not implement electronic monitoring and 
enforcement of road safety in the State, as the use of speed cameras, closed-circuit 
television cameras, speed guns, body-worn cameras, and other such technology had 
not been installed. Audit, further, observed that the non-implementation of electronic 
monitoring and enforcement of road safety was primarily due to the failure of the 
Department to submit a proposal to the GoN for allocation of funds for the necessary 
technological infrastructure.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that the Department would submit a proposal for an Integrated Road Safety 
Project for the State of Nagaland. 
Recommendation: 
The State Government may allocate funds and take necessary action to implement 
electronic monitoring systems in the State. 
 
3.3.11.2  Short collection of penalties for offenses as per the MV Act 
Section 113 of the MV Act, 1988, empowers the State Government to prescribe 
conditions for the issuance of permits and restrict the use of vehicles if the unladen or 
laden weight exceeds the specified limits in the vehicle's certificate of registration. 
Further, Section 194 stipulates that any violation of Section 113, such as driving with 
excess load, shall result in a fine of ₹20,000, with an additional ₹2,000 per tonne of 
excess load. The vehicle owner is also liable for charges for off-loading the excess 
load. Audit observed that during 2019-2020 to 2023-2024, enforcement personnel in 
RTO, Kohima and RTO, Mokokchung booked 24 and 105 cases respectively under 
Section 194 for overloading. Audit, however, observed that there was short realisation 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
167
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
167 
 
of penalty by the enforcement personnel under Section 194 of the MV Act, as shown 
in Table 3.3.9. 
Table 3.3.9: Short penalty amount realised under Section 194 of the MV Act 
(Amount in ₹) 
Name of RTO/DTO Financial Year Actual penalty  Penalty realised Short realisation 
(A) RTO, Kohima 
2019-20 40,000 2,000 38,000 
2020-21 0 0 0 
2021-22 3,60,000 21,500 3,38,500 
2022-23 20,000 1,000 19,000 
2023-24 60,000 6,000 54,000 
Sub-Total (A) 4,80,000 30,500 4,49,500 
(B) RTO, 
Mokokchung 
2019-20 0 0 0 
2020-21 0 0 0 
2021-22 12,40,000 1,61,000 10,79,000 
2022-23 8,60,000 47,000 8,13,000 
2023-24 0 0 0 
Sub-Total (B) 21,00,000 2,08,000 18,92,000 
Grand Total 25,80,000 2,38,500 23,41,500 
Source: Departmental records 
It can be seen from the Table 3.3.9 above that against the actual penalty amount of 
₹25.80 lakh, the enforcement personnel imposed a penalty of ₹2.39 lakh. Thus, there 
was a short penalty realisation of ₹23.41 lakh. Failure to levy penalties as per the 
MV Act resulted in a revenue loss of ₹23.41 lakh. 
The State Government in its reply, stated (November 2024) that the State had only 
one weighbridge and that the enforcement personnel were compelled to check the 
load of the vehicles through bills and physical observation. The State Government 
further added that the Department was in the process of installing six weighbridges 
across the State.  
The State Government’s justification regarding lack of weighbridges does not absolve 
the responsibility to levy minimum statutory penalties as per Section 194 of the MV 
Act. Absence of appropriate infrastructure should have led to more rigorous 
compensatory mechanisms or temporary procedures rather than significant under-
realisation. The reply also remains silent on the quantifiable loss of ₹23.41 lakh, 
reflecting lack of internal accountability. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may take immediate steps to enforce the penalty provisions under 
Section 194 of the MV Act to prevent future revenue losses. 
 
3.3.11.3 Inadequate enforcement mechanism 
Chapter XIII of the MV Act, 1988 outlines the penalties for various motor vehicle-
related offences, the compounding of certain offences, and the procedures for 
enforcement. This chapter also mandates that penalties for offences, such as 
overloading and driving without proper documentation, must be recorded and 
enforced by RTOs/DTOs. Further, Section 194, 206 and 207 of the MV Act 1988 also 
requires that in case of compounded offences, records must be properly maintained, 

168
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
168 
 
and actions such as vehicle seizure, registration suspension, and offloading of 
overloaded vehicles should be taken as per legal requirements. Audit observed that 
the provisions for imposing penalties for various motor vehicle related offences were 
not complied with by the three test-checked RTOs/DTO, as summarised below: 
 Offences recorded in the Check Report (CR) were not entered into the 
VAHAN application against the vehicles involved. 
 For compounded offences where fines were collected, the RTOs/DTO did 
not obtain proper compliance proof or supporting documents to verify that 
the fines were settled in accordance with the law. 
 In cases of overloading, no vehicles were offloaded before being released, 
contravening the provisions of the Act. 
 Vehicles liable to be seized due to offences were not impounded, citing lack 
of infrastructure and parking space. 
 In cases where vehicles were not seized, registration certificates, permits, and 
other issued documents were also not confiscated, as required by law. 
 No follow-up action was taken on the CRs issued, and registered owners of 
the offending vehicles were not pursued for compliance. 
The non-compliance with statutory requirements for enforcing motor vehicle penalties 
in the three test-checked RTOs/DTO indicated significant lapses in enforcement, 
documentation, and follow-up procedures. While accepting the Audit observation, the 
State Government stated (October 2024) that it had taken serious note of the 
deficiencies in the maintenance of compounding records and assured that lapses in the 
enforcement documentation would be addressed in earnest. 
The reply of the State Government is only partially acceptable. While it acknowledges 
deficiencies, it does not address the root causes of persistent non-compliance, 
including failure to offload overloaded vehicles, seize documents, or follow up on 
check reports as mandated under Sections 194, 206, and 207 of the MV Act. The 
assurance of future compliance, without evidence of systemic reform or corrective 
action, is inadequate to address the serious lapses observed. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may ensure that all offences are recorded in the VAHAN 
application and that proper documentation is obtained for compounded offences. 
 
3.3.11.4  Vehicles with expired Pollution Under Control Certificate 
Section 158 of the MV Act, 1988 states that any person driving a motor vehicle in any 
public place shall, on being so required by a police officer in uniform authorised in 
this behalf by the State Government, produce the Pollution Under Control Certificate 
(PUCC). Further, Section 190 states that any person who drives or causes or allows to 
be driven, in any public place a motor vehicle, which violates the standards prescribed 
in relation to road safety, control of noise and air-pollution, shall be punishable. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
169
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
169 
 
Analysis of the PUCCs issued showed that, as on 31 March 2024, the PUCCs of 
58,128 vehicles had expired, out of which 32,628 vehicles23 belonged to the three test-
checked RTOs/DTO. Further analysis showed that the number of PUCC tests 
conducted per day across all RTOs/DTOs varied significantly, ranging from 01 to 
9,150 tests. Notably, in the three test-checked RTOs/DTO, the maximum number of 
PUCC tests conducted in a single day was 3,915 in RTO, Kohima, 383 in RTO, 
Mokokchung, and 84 in DTO, Tuensang. The average number of PUCC tests 
conducted per day was 67 in RTO, Kohima, 09 in RTO, Mokokchung and 02 in DTO, 
Tuensang. 
Audit observed that the high number of vehicles operating with expired PUCCs was 
due to the Department's inadequate enforcement of PUCC issuance and renewal, as 
evidenced by the large number of expired certificates and inconsistent testing 
practices across RTOs/DTOs.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that until 10 June 2024, pollution testing and PUCC issuance was carried out 
manually, and the data were entered into the system/application collectively on a 
single day. This resulted in the application showing an unusually high number of tests 
conducted on a single day. The State Government further stated that the pollution 
testing machines had not been integrated with the VAHAN application earlier, but 
had since been integrated, enabling uniform online testing and issuance of PUCCs by 
all the registering and licensing authorities. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may strengthen monitoring mechanisms to ensure the timely 
renewal of PUCCs. Further, a uniform system for conducting PUCC tests across all 
RTOs/DTO may be implemented to ensure consistency and compliance. 
 
3.3.12  Audit Objective: Whether RTOs/DTOs have been provided with required 
manpower, equipment, and other resources to discharge 
the mandate as also to ensure public service delivery in a 
transparent and efficient manner? 
 
3.3.12.1  Non-implementation of refunds 
Section 7 of the Nagaland Motor Vehicle Taxation Act, 1967 states that if someone 
has paid motor vehicle tax and proves to the licensing officer that the vehicle's 
registration or renewal has been refused or cancelled, they are entitled to a refund.  
Further, Section 8 states that if a person proves that their vehicle has not been used for 
a continuous period of at least three months, they can receive a remission of tax.  
Audit observed that the Department lacked an established mechanism to process and 
issue refunds for motor vehicle taxes, as required under Sections 7 and 8 of the 
Nagaland Motor Vehicle Taxation Act, 1967.  
Audit observed that despite the MoRTH directive (January 2024), instructing the 
Department to ensure refunds as per the provisions of the State Motor Vehicle 
                                                
23  RTO Kohima = 25,684; RTO Mokokchung = 6,059; DTO Tuensang = 885 

170
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
170 
 
Taxation Act, no system had been set up to process such claims. Audit concludes that 
the Department’s failure to establish a mechanism for processing tax refunds and 
remissions, despite clear statutory provisions and instructions from the MoRTH, 
resulted in the denial of legitimate entitlements to vehicle owners and reflected a 
significant compliance and service delivery gap. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that the matter was under consideration by the Finance Department. 
Recommendation: 
The State Government may expedite creating a separate head of account for 
motor vehicle tax refunds and establish a robust mechanism for processing and 
disbursing refunds in a timely and transparent manner. 
 
3.3.12.2 Non-integration of online payment gateway 
The MoRTH has introduced the VAHAN and SARATHI applications to digitise 
vehicle and driver-related services. The advantages of these applications include 
facilitating online services for vehicle registration, permit issuance, fitness 
certificates, and driving licenses to reducing the need for physical visits to RTOs/ 
DTOs and enabling online payments through integrated payment gateways. Audit 
observed that although the VAHAN and SARATHI applications were operational 
across all RTOs/DTOs in Nagaland, an online payment gateway for citizen users had 
not been integrated. Audit further observed that although the GoN had signed a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with HDFC Bank to provide a payment 
gateway for e-challan and other online payments, this integration with the VAHAN 
application was still under development. As a result, key citizen-centric services such 
as online payments for vehicle registration, license issuance, and e-challans remained 
inaccessible, defeating the objective of reducing reliance on physical visits to 
RTOs/DTOs and limiting transparency, efficiency, and convenience envisaged under 
the national digitisation initiative led by the MoRTH.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (October 2024) 
that the payment gateway had since been integrated in the registering and the 
licensing offices, however, citizen services were yet to be made accessible to 
applicants and service seekers. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may expedite the integration of the payment gateway with the 
VAHAN application to ensure that citizens can access complete online services. 
 
3.3.12.3 Shortage of RTOs/DTOs 
The GoN issued a notification (July 2018) stating that, with the upgradation, 
re-designation and creation of new posts, the Department shall reorganise the staffing 
pattern, deployment and posting in the Commissionerate and the 11 district offices. 
Accordingly, the remaining three District Transport Offices in Kiphire, Longleng and 
Peren districts shall function with immediate effect with the staffing pattern of a DTO, 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
171
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
171 
 
along with one staff member each for the posts of Motor Vehicle Officer, Road Safety 
& Enforcement Officer, Motor Vehicle Inspector, Road Safety & Enforcement 
Inspector, Assistant Road Safety & Enforcement Inspector and Motor Vehicle 
Checker. Audit observed that, as of March 2024, the three District Transport Offices 
in Kiphire, Longleng and Peren districts were yet to become operational. Audit also 
observed that DTOs had not yet been established in five newly created districts 24. The 
absence of operational DTOs in 50 per cent  of the districts (08 out of 16 districts) 
compromises the Department's capacity to enforce vehicle regulations, conduct safety 
inspections, manage road safety, and deliver public services effectively.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that the creation of new ministerial posts was not pursued due to a blanket ban 
on creation of new posts by the State Government. As a result, the DTOs in the then 
newly created three districts could not be established. 
Recommendation: 
The State Government may prioritise the establishment of DTOs in the remaining 
districts. 
 
3.3.12.4 Inadequate infrastructure facilities in RTO Kohima 
As per the Handbook of Planning of Office Buildings, February 2013 issued by 
CPWD, an office building must have flexible and technologically-advanced working 
environments that are safe, healthy, comfortable, durable, aesthetically-pleasing, and 
accessible. It must be able to accommodate the specific space and equipment needs of 
the tenant. Special attention should be made to the selection of interior finishes and art 
installations, particularly in entry spaces, conference rooms and other areas with 
public access. Audit observed that out of a total number of 1,19,289 vehicles 
registered during 2019-20 to 2023-24, 56,433 vehicles constituting 47 per cent were 
registered in RTO, Kohima. Audit also observed that there was an increase of 76 per 
cent in vehicle registration at RTO, Kohima over the last 10 years (January 2014 to 
December 2023). Audit, however, observed that the office of the RTO, Kohima was 
functioning in a private rented building, with limited space and inadequate 
infrastructure. The office lacked essential facilities such as separate areas for 
enforcement personnel, public toilets, lounges, waiting rooms, public queuing areas, 
drinking water facilities and storage for files and records. Moreover, the absence of 
fitness testing, pollution control and driving test facilities had resulted in these tests 
being conducted on public roads, posing safety risks. Inadequate infrastructure at 
RTO, Kohima not only hampered the efficiency of the office staff but also caused 
inconvenience to the public visiting the office for availing the services of the 
Department.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (November 
2024) that it had approved the construction of a new building for RTO, Kohima and 
that the deficiencies pointed out in the Audit observation had been incorporated in the 
                                                
24 July 2020 (Noklak), December 2021 (Chumukedima, Niuland and Tseminyu) and January 2022 
(Shamator). 

172
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
172 
 
DPR. The State Government further stated that the District Transport Office at 
Zunheboto was also functioning in a rented premise which lacked essential 
infrastructure and facilities necessary for effective public service delivery. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may seek to secure a more suitable office location with planning 
for adequate infrastructure, ensuring compliance with safety and accessibility 
standards, and enhancing the overall working environment for both employees and 
members of the public. 
 
3.3.13 Conclusion 
The Performance Audit on the functioning of RTOs/DTOs were conducted to assess 
the efficiency, compliance and effectiveness of systems related to vehicle licensing, 
registration and regulation. This Performance Audit revealed significant shortcomings 
across several critical areas. The procedures for issuing driving licenses were found to 
be deficient, raising serious concerns regarding road safety, as the existing system 
may allow unqualified individuals to obtain licences. The vehicle registration process 
suffered from procedural delays and system weakness, undermining compliance with 
the Motor Vehicles Act and Central Motor Vehicle Rules. There were notable lapses 
in the enforcement of mandatory requirements, such as vehicle fitness certification, 
permits and Pollution Under Control Certificates (PUCC). These lapses posed risks to 
both safety and environmental standards. A substantial amount of tax arrears was 
observed, highlighting serious lapses in revenue collection and enforcement. The 
continued accumulation of outstanding dues points to systemic weaknesses that 
allowed non-compliance to go unchecked. The Audit also found that the infrastructure 
at RTOs/DTO was inadequate, affecting the quality and timeliness of public service 
delivery. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
173
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
173 
 
Summary of recommendations: 
(i) The Department should implement a mandatory digital testing system 
integrated with SARATHI, ensuring that all Learner’s License applicants 
undergo time-stamped, system-recorded tests. Manual issuance without 
records must be discontinued, and RTOs held accountable for compliance. 
(ii) The State Government may fast-track the establishment and 
operationalisation of Automated Testing Stations (ATS) at Chumukedima, 
Kohima, and Mokokchung, ensuring all fitness renewals comply with 
CMV Rules, 2022. Until ATS are fully functional, interim quality control 
measures must be implemented for manual fitness testing. 
(iii) The Department should implement an automated tracking and alert 
mechanism within VAHAN to notify vehicle owners before permit or 
fitness certificate expiry. Simultaneously, strengthen enforcement through 
e-challan systems and mandate field inspections backed by real-time data 
validation. 
(iv) The Department may develop and enforce a structured compounding 
protocol, including compulsory entry of Check Reports in VAHAN, seizure 
of documents or vehicles where required, and verification of compliance 
before closure of cases. Enforcement performance must be reviewed 
quarterly. 
(v) The Department should immediately finalise and operationalise the 
integration of the HDFC payment gateway with VAHAN and SARATHI. 
All citizen-facing services should mandate digital payment options to 
enhance convenience, reduce cash handling, and improve transparency. 
 
  

174
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
174 
 
Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
 
HORTICULTURE DEPARTMENT 
 
3.4 Undue favour to Contractor-cum-landowner 
 
The Horticulture Department extended undue favour to the 
Contractor-cum-landowner by creating the project assets worth ₹2.87 crore on a 
private plot of land owned by the Contractor besides allowing the project works 
to deviate from the approved DPR without the concurrence of the NEC in 
violation of the NEC guidelines. 
The North Eastern Council (NEC) guidelines, 2015, stipulate that for projects (NEC 
funded) requiring construction of physical assets, the State Government shall furnish 
valid land document for establishing ownership or possession of land by the entity 
concerned through long term lease ( Paragraph 18.7). Further, the State Government 
shall ensure proper upkeep, maintenance and operation of the assets/facilities created 
out of the project ( Paragraph 18.10 ). Any deviation from the approved DPR, if 
required at all, shall be made only with the prior approval of NEC ( Paragraph 19.2). 
The Finance Department, Government of Nagaland (GoN) had also instructed (March 
2014) all Departments to ensure that before executing any agreement on behalf of the 
State Government involving responsibilities and obligations, a copy of the draft 
agreement be endorsed to the Finance Department for review and concurrence. 
The NEC approved (April 2017) the project “ Creation of Botanical 
Garden-cum-Recreational Park at Jalukie, Peren ” at a cost of ₹2.87 crore on a 
90:10 sharing basis between the Central (₹2.58 crore) and State (₹0.29 crore) 
Governments, with a stipulation to complete the project within two years (March 
2019) from the date of approval (April 2017) of the project. The objectives of the 
project were to promote recreational facilities, ex situ  conservation 25 and 
multiplication of threatened and endemic plants, rehabilitate the natural and 
endangered germplasm 26 and also promote eco-tourism and improve the economy 
through generation of revenue/employment avenues. As per the approved Detailed 
Project Report (DPR), the components of project works included creation of various 
facilities such as, Reception, Amphitheatre, Watch tower, Gazebo, Laboratory, Fence, 
Retaining wall, Quarters, Public toilet, Septic tank, Green House, Park and 
Horticultural Works. The DPR envisaged ensured availability of the project land as 
the intended beneficiaries of the project were willing to donate the same for the 
project. 
The NEC released its share of ₹2.58 crore in two instalments 27 (April 2017 and 
August 2020) as Grant-in-Aid to the State Government for creation of capital assets. 
                                                
25  Ex situ  conservation means conserving components of biodiversity outside their natural habitats. It involves 
maintaining and breeding endangered species of plants and animals in controlled conditions away from their 
original ecosystems 
26 Germplasm is the term used to describe the seeds, plants, or plant parts useful in crop breeding, research and 
conservation efforts 
27 ₹1.03 crore on 21  April 2017 and ₹1.55 crore on 25 August 2020 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
175
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
175 
 
In turn, GoN released (November 2017 to March 2021) total funding of ₹2.87 crore 
(NEC/GoI share: ₹2.58 crore and GoN share: ₹0.29 crore) to the Horticulture 
Department for implementation of the project. After inviting (July-August 2017) the 
tenders, the Executive Engineer, Public Works Department (Housing) Division-III, 
Directorate of Horticulture, Nagaland awarded (August 2017) the civil works to M/s 
Gaihiak Riamei & Co, Peren (Contractor) at a contract value of ₹1.69 crore with 
stipulation to complete the works by December 2018.  Later, the work order was 
revised (June 2022) providing for several additional works (internal water supply and 
sanitary installation, internal electrification) and cost escalation on civil works at an 
enhanced project cost of ₹2.87 crore. The project works commenced in August 2017, 
were completed in July 2022 and the entire payments (₹2.87 crore) were also 
released28 to the Contractor. 
In this connection, following observations are made: 
 As observed from the records of the Director, Horticulture Department, GoN, 
the State Government did not submit any valid land document to the NEC to 
establish the ownership or possession (through long term lease) of the 
proposed project site by the State Government as required under the NEC 
guidelines ( Paragraph 18.7). The NEC, however, sanctioned (April 2017) 
the project and released (April 2017 and August 2020) the project funding 
based on the assurance given in the DPR regarding availability of the project 
land from the intended beneficiaries of the project, who were willing to 
donate the required land to the State Government for project implementation. 
 After the approval (April 2017) of the project by the NEC, the Horticulture 
Department, GoN signed (December 2017) a bipartite Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with the Contractor to provide a piece of land (area: 
32 Ha) owned by the Contractor for implementation of the project. The 
Department, however, did not obtain prior concurrence of the State Finance 
Department before signing the MoU in violation of GoN instructions issued 
(March 2014) in the matter. 
 The terms of the MoU fully authorised the Contractor to own, operate and 
manage the Botanical Garden-cum-Recreational Park to be created on the 
said private land besides retaining the ownership of the land so provided for 
all purposes.  This was a clear violation of the NEC guidelines (Paragraph 
18.7) regarding holding the ownership or possession of the project land by 
the State Government through execution of a long-term lease agreement  with 
the landowner.  
 The NEC guidelines require the State Government to ensure proper upkeep, 
maintenance and operation of the assets/facilities created out of the project 
(Paragraph 18.10) . Contrary to this, however, the MoU provided the 
Contractor with the sole rights to undertake income generating activities on 
                                                
28  December 2017, February 2019 and August 2022 

176
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
176 
 
the assets created under the project and manage all incomes generated from 
such activities, which was not in consonance with the provisions of the NEC 
guidelines.  
 The Contractor-cum-landowner had executed certain unauthorised works 
(such as, Guest House, Swimming Pool and Gate) in deviation to the designs 
and specifications outlined in the DPR approved by the NEC.  To regularise 
the above deviations in the project specifications, the Department submitted 
(May 2022) a revised DPR 29 to the State Government with revised project 
cost of ₹2.87 crore, which was approved (May 2022) by the State 
Government. The revised DPR had omitted few essential project components 
(such as, Reception, Laboratory, Park, Public Toilet and Horticultural 
Works) originally approved by the NEC under the project. However, while 
approving (May 2022) the revised DPR, the State Government did not 
forward the same to the NEC for concurrence/approval, indicating a lapse on 
part of the State Government in complying with NEC guidelines.   
Thus, the facts narrated above are evident of extending the undue favour to the 
Contractor-cum-landowner by creating the project assets worth ₹2.87 crore on a 
private plot of land owned by the Contractor besides allowing the project works to 
deviate from the approved DPR without the concurrence of the NEC in violation of 
the NEC guidelines. 
The State Government in its initial reply (April 2024) accepted the facts and assured 
that it would suitably rectify the MoU signed with the landowner. In its subsequent 
reply (July 2024), the Department stated that as per State Government norms, a 
survey of the land measuring 35 acres was conducted by the Land Records and 
Survey Department and a ‘Deed of Land Donation’ to the Department was executed 
with the landowner in June 2024. The Department also stated that the facility so 
created would be leased out to the interested parties under the terms and conditions as 
deemed fit to generate revenue.  
The reply is not acceptable in view of the fact that the Deed of Land Donation 
executed between the Department and the landowner lacked several details relating to 
the land donated, including the survey number, dimensions and the area of the 
donated land which were essential for identification and establishing the land 
ownership in the Department’s favour. Further, the mutation of the land donated was 
not transferred in favour of the Department or State Government to safeguard the 
project assets.  
Thus, creation of Botanical Garden-cum-Recreational Park on a privately owned land 
resulted in undue benefit of ₹2.87 crore to the landowner/contractor. Besides, the 
Department’s laxity in implementing the project as per the NEC guidelines led to the 
                                                
29 Technical approval of the revised DPR was accorded by the Office of the Chief Engineer, Public 
Works Department (Housing) Nagaland in March 2022  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
177
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
177 
 
facility, created at a cost of ₹2.87 crore, lying idle for the last two years and loss of 
potential revenue from its operation. 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may- 
(i) take necessary steps to review the ‘Deed of Land Donation’ and ensure that 
land records are updated to reflect the Government’s ownership on the 
project land, thereby safeguarding its interest. 
(ii) ensure that the assets/facilities created out of the project are utilised as 
envisaged in the Detailed Project Report. 
 
PLANNING AND TRANSFORMATION DEPARTMENT 
 
3.5 Unauthorised utilisation of scheme fund 
 
Scheme funding amounting to ₹6.14 crore meant for construction of Boys and 
Girls Hostels was un-authorisedly utilised for construction of a private school in 
violation of the Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas Karyakram guidelines. 
The Ministry of Minority Affairs (MoMA), Government of India (GoI) introduced 
(April 2018) the Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas Karyakram (PMJVK) Scheme with the 
aim of improving the socio-economic conditions of minorities 30 and providing basic 
amenities to them for improving quality of life of the people and reducing imbalances 
in the identified minority concentration areas (MCA). The projects funded under 
PMJVK would relate to creation of infrastructure mainly in the sectors of education, 
health and skill development. The Guidelines of the PMJVK Scheme had the 
following important provisions: 
 The land for construction of infrastructure in MCA shall be provided by 
States including the Panchayat land. Based on local need, however, the 
project proposed on land of notified Minority Communities offered by 
respective authority, free of any lease amount/nominal amount, for a 
particular period on lease basis would also be considered (Paragraph 7.1); 
 The State concerned would submit the complete details of project land and 
other information/details required for geo-tagging of the project asset along 
with the project proposal (Paragraph 7.3); and 
 The State Government concerned shall disseminate the information through 
print/electronic media to ensure that the details of the developmental scheme 
reach the ultimate beneficiaries (Paragraph 18).  
The Government of Nagaland (GoN) submitted (October 2019) a Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) to the MoMA, GoI, for “ Construction of Hostel for Boys and Girls 
                                                
30  At present six communities namely Muslims, Sikhs, Christians, Buddhists, Zoroastrians (Parsis) 
and Jains have been notified as Minority Communities under Section 2(c) of the National 
Commission for Minorities Act, 1992 

178
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
178 
 
at Vihokhu village, Niuland, Nagaland” under the PMJVK scheme.  The project 
proposal entailed construction of two separate G+2 hostel building 31 – one each for 
Boys and Girls – with a capacity of 54 beds in each, to be implemented by the 
Executive Engineer, Planning and Transformation Department (Minority Affairs 
Cell), GoN.  
The MoMA, GoI approved (December 2019) the project at an estimated cost of 
₹6.14 crore on a 90:10 sharing pattern between the Central (₹5.53 crore) and State 
(₹0.61 crore) Governments. Accordingly, GoI released (December 2019 and August 
2021) its share of ₹5.53 crore 32 to the GoN. In turn, the GoN released (January 2020 
to March 2022) ₹6.14 crore (GoI share ₹5.53 crore and GoN share ₹0.61 crore) to the 
Department for project implementation. The Department awarded (January 2020) the 
work to Shri Pukhashe (Contractor I) for ₹6.14 crore with a stipulation to complete 
the work by January 2022. The Contractor commenced (January 2020) the project 
works but transferred (August 2022), the project execution rights to another 
contractor, Shri Peter Rio (Contractor II), through a power of attorney for construction 
of the hostel buildings at Vihokhu, Dimapur. The work was finally completed 33 in 
May 2023 and the entire payment (₹6.14 crore) was also released to the Contractor II. 
Subsequently, the GoN signed (19 June 2023) a Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) with Ms. Akaholi Sema (School Proprietor), the proprietor of ‘ Vitoyi 
Memorial School, Vihokhu’ in the premises of which the hostel buildings were 
constructed, authorising the School Proprietor to maintain and manage the hostel as 
per guidelines and norms formulated by the Central and State Governments. 
Examination of records of the Department/Minority Affairs Cell of GoN revealed the 
following: 
 The DPR submitted (October 2019) for the project to GoI, had no specific 
details of the project land on which the project assets (hostel buildings) were 
to be created/constructed. Despite this, however, the MoMA/GoI sanctioned 
and released (December 2019/August 2021) the project funding contrary to 
the provisions of the Scheme guidelines (Paragraphs 7.1 and 7.3); 
 The results of a joint physical verification (JPV) conducted (August 2023) by 
Audit and the Departmental officials to ascertain the actual execution of 
project works revealed that both the hostel buildings were located inside the 
compound of the private school ( Vitoyi Memorial School, Vihokhu ) owned 
by the School Proprietor. Further, no other building existed in the School 
compound (other than the hostel buildings) that could be utilised to operate a 
School to justify the utilisation of the hostel buildings constructed under the 
project for their intended purpose. 
 Examination of the records (June 2024) of the Sub-Divisional Education 
Officer, Niuland further revealed that although the private School ( Vitoyi 
                                                
31  Ground floor + two floors above 
32  27 December 2019 (1st instalment: ₹ 2.76  crore) and 18 August 2021 (2nd instalment: ₹ 2.77 crore)  
33  GPS coordinates: Latitude 25°86'79"N Longitude 93°85'99"E 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
179
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
179 
 
Memorial School, Vihokhu) where the hostel buildings were constructed, had 
enrolled 48 and 64 students (pre-school to eighth grade) during the academic 
years 2023 and 2024 respectively, the School on record, did not have a hostel 
facility.   
The narration as above evidently establishes the fact that that while submitting the 
project proposal to GoI, the Department failed to sense and take timely corrective 
action against the fraudulent act of the private party (School Proprietor) for irregularly 
setting up a private school out of the PMJVK Scheme funding meant to construct two 
hostel buildings. The audit contention is further corroborated with the fact that the 
Department had neither disseminated the information regarding creation of the hostel 
facilities through print and electronic media as required under the Scheme guidelines 
(Paragraph 18), nor formulated any guidelines/norms for regulation of the hostels as 
stipulated under the MoU signed (June 2023) with the School Proprietor. 
Thus, public funds amounting to ₹6.14 crore, meant for creation of Government-
managed hostel infrastructure for minority students, were diverted to serve a private 
educational institution, in violation of PMJVK guidelines. The absence of land 
disclosure, lack of regulatory oversight, and irregular MoU execution reflect serious 
lapses in planning, due diligence, and accountability. 
In reply, the State Government stated (July 2024) that the Boys and Girls Hostels at 
Vihokhu was constructed on a land purchased by Shri Peter Rio (Contractor II), and a 
MoU was signed (14 June 2023) between the State Government and the Contractor II, 
designating the State Government as the sole owner of the hostels. It was further 
stated that Regulatory Modalities for running of hostels constructed under the PMJVK 
Scheme were issued (July 2024) and a “Show Cause Notice” was served (July 2024) 
to the School Proprietor (owner of Vitoyi Memorial School, Vihokhu) for violation of 
the MoU signed (19 June 2023) with the Department. Subsequently, an eviction 
notice was also issued (August 2024) to the School Proprietor to vacate the occupied 
hostel buildings.  
The reply confirms the audit contention regarding unauthorised use of the Hostel 
buildings constructed under the PMJVK Scheme for running a private school owned 
by the School Proprietor (Ms. Akaholi Sema) in violation of the PMJVK guidelines. 
No comments were, however, offered in the reply on missing information/details 
relating to the project land in the DPR. 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may ensure that- 
(i) all future DPRs under PMJVK scheme include complete details of project 
land and its intended usage. 
(ii) the assets created under Government sponsored projects are utilised for the 
intended purpose; and  
(iii) responsibility of the erring officials is fixed for unauthorised utilisation of 
the Scheme funding towards construction of a private school and action as 
per rules may be taken against them. 

180
Chapter III: Economic Sector
Chapter – III Economic Sector 
 
180 
 
 
TOURISM DEPARTMENT 
 
3.6  Irregular payment for unexecuted works 
  
The Executive Engineer, Directorate of Tourism, Nagaland made an excess 
payment of ₹0.43 crore to the Contractor for unexecuted works based on false 
bills and entries in the Measurement Books in deviation from the standard 
procedures. 
The Nagaland Public Works Department (NPWD) Code has the following important 
provisions on the execution of the departmental works: 
 The measurement of works done or materials received should be recorded in 
the Measurement Book (MB) at the work site and every payment should be 
based on actual measurement recorded in MBs (Paragraph 325); 
 Before the bill of the contractor is prepared, entries in the MB relating to the 
description and quantities of work or supplies should be scrutinised by the 
Sub-Divisional Officer (SDO) concerned (Paragraph 341); and  
 The Executive Engineer (EE) would be overall responsible for efficient 
execution and measurements of all the works within his Division 
(Paragraph 101). 
With regard to the Departmental charges 34 (DC) recoverable by GoN on the capital 
works executed under the schemes sponsored by the Government of India (GoI)/other 
Agencies, GoN had decided (November 2005) that recovery of such DC, can be 
waived/reduced if there  are justified reasons and if such condition is imposed by the 
Sponsoring Authority such as GoI or any International Agency sponsored works. 
The North Eastern Council (NEC)/GoI approved (December 2017) the project  
“Construction of Tourist Lodge at Jalukie, Peren, Nagaland” at a cost of 
₹2.95 crore on a 90:10 sharing basis between the Central (₹2.66 crore) and State 
(₹0.29 crore) Governments. The project cost approved by the NEC, however, did not 
have any provision for payment of DC. Further, as per the NEC guidelines, 2015, the 
State Government was responsible to ensure proper upkeep, maintenance and 
operation of the assets/facilities created out of the project (Paragraph 18.10). 
The project aimed to provide cost-effective and sustainable tourist facilities, support 
local tourism, create employment opportunities and generate revenue for the State 
Government. The approved scope of works included site levelling and approach road, 
construction of building 35, water supply and sanitary installations, rain water 
harvesting, generator shed, security fencing, parking lot and electrification.  
                                                
34   Departmental Charges (13 per cent ) are recovered from all construction works of capital nature 
with a view to adjusting the supervision cost incurred by the Government in the form of 
establishment charges and Tools & plants, which are in general met from the non-plan budget 
provision under the respective Demand for Grant 
35  Ground floor, first floor, second floor, third floor and headroom 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
181
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
181 
 
The NEC also accorded (December 2017) the Administrative Approval (AA) for the 
project with the following specific conditions: 
 Utilisation of the project funds only for the purpose  for which they were 
approved; 
 Release of the project funds to the Implementing Agency within one month 
of the receipt from the NEC; and 
 Completion of the project in all respects within three years from the date of 
the AA (i.e. by December 2020).  
The NEC released (December 2017 to May 2021) its share of ₹2.66 crore 36 in three 
instalments to the State. In turn, the GoN released (March 2018 to August 2023) the 
funds aggregating to ₹2.92 crore (NEC share ₹2.66 crore and GoN share ₹0.26 
crore37) to the Tourism Department for implementation of the project.  
After inviting (September 2020) the tenders, the EE, Directorate of Tourism, 
Nagaland awarded (September 2020) the civil works of the project to M/s. K. Albert 
Tsopoe & Sons, Kohima (Civil Contractor) for a contract value of ₹2.60 crore with a 
stipulation to complete the work within three years (by September 2023). The work 
commenced in October 2020 and on completion (November 2022) of the work, the 
entire payment (₹2.60 crore) was released to the Civil Contractor in four Running 
Account (RA) bills38. Simultaneously, the site development work of the project under 
contingencies charges, which was awarded (October 2020) to M/s T. Asu 
Construction (Site Contractor) was also completed (October 2020) and the full 
payment of ₹0.05 crore was also released to the Site Contractor in two RA bills. 
Subsequently, the electrification work of the project was awarded (March 2024) to 
M/s Ketoupuzo Lhoushe, Kohima (Electrification Contractor) for ₹27.47 lakh with a 
stipulation to complete the work within three months (by June 2024). The 
electrification work commenced in March 2024 and on completion (June 2024) of the 
work, the entire payment of ₹27.47 lakh was also released to the Electrification 
Contractor in one RA bill. 
Delay in execution of the project works 
Scrutiny of records of the Executive Engineer, Directorate of Tourism, Nagaland 
revealed the following: 
 The Department had invited (September 2020) the NIT for civil works of the 
project after a gap of 33 months, following the NEC's approval (December 
2017) due to an ongoing land dispute over the site proposed for construction 
of the Tourist Lodge under the project. This highlights the failure of the 
Department to ensure an ‘encumbrance free land’ before taking up the 
                                                
36  1 st instalment ₹1.06 crore dated 28/12/2017, 2 nd instalment ₹1.06 crore dated 22/12/2020 and 
3rd instalment ₹0.54 crore dated 11/05/2021. 
37  Short released of State share was due to deduction (March 2021) of Departmental Charges of 
₹3.39 lakh by the Finance Department, GoN 
38  1 st RA Bill for ₹0.77 crore dated 07/12/2020, 2 nd RA Bill for ₹0.68 crore dated 07/04/2021, 3 rd RA 
Bill for ₹0.58 crore dated 29/10/2021 and 4th RA Bill for ₹0.57 crore dated 29/11/2022 

182
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
182 
 
project, which was a pre-requisite for the timely and successful completion 
of the project. Audit noticed that this delay was one of the major factors that 
delayed the release of funds to the project implementing Department, which 
correspondingly delayed the completion of the project. 
 As per the AA and project cost approval accorded (December 2017) by the 
NEC, there was no provision for deduction of any DC by the GoN. Contrary 
to the NEC’s approval, however, the Finance Department, GoN, had 
irregularly deducted an amount of ₹33.92 lakh from the project funding 
provided by the NEC (₹30.53 lakh) and GoN (₹3.39 lakh) towards DC. This 
irregular deduction of DC by the Finance Department, GoN had hampered 
the work of electrification due to shortage of funds. Audit observed that the 
civil works were shown as fully completed in November 2022, even though 
electrical works had not been undertaken. Due to the delay in the restoration 
of the deducted NEC share until August 2023, the tendering of electrification 
work was also delayed, and the work could only be awarded in March 2024. 
The electrification was finally completed in June 2024, 20 months after the 
completion of the civil works (November 2022). This contributed towards 
the time overrun of 42 months in overall completion (June 2024) of the 
project works from the NEC’s stipulated date of completion (December 
2020). 
Results of the Joint Physical Verification (JPV) of the project works 
To ascertain the actual execution of the works, a Joint Physical Verification (JPV) of 
the project works was conducted (June 2023) by Audit along with the Departmental 
officials. The results of the JPV revealed that 32 items of civil works valued at 
₹0.77 crore against which the payment was already released, were not executed 
(details in Appendix-3.6.1). In response, the Department after taking corrective action 
had provided (March 2024) a project completion certificate along with updated 
photographic evidence of the completed works for verification.  
To verify the Department’s claims and ascertain the updated status of project works, a 
follow-up JPV was conducted (May 2024) by Audit with the representatives of the 
Department. The results of follow-up JPV, however, revealed that 10 items out of 
32 short-executed items of civil works valued at ₹0.43 crore were still not executed as 
detailed in Appendix-3.6.2.  However, execution of the balance 22 items worth 
₹0.34 lakh (₹0.77 crore minus ₹0.43 crore) by the Department at the instance of Audit 
is confirmed. Thus, out of ₹0.77 crore worth of initially unexecuted works, items 
worth ₹0.34 crore were subsequently completed for civil works, while items worth 
₹0.43 crore remain unexecuted as of May 2024.  
Audit observed that, to facilitate the payment of the Civil Contractor’s bills, the SDO 
fictitiously updated the MB before actual execution of the work by recording the 
incomplete works as ‘executed’ in the MBs. This indicated failure of the SDO in 
properly securitising the entries made in the MB relating to the description/quantities 
of the works so as to ensure correctness of the Civil Contractor’s bills. Further, the EE 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
183
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
183 
 
also failed to check the correctness of the quantities executed before passing the 
Contractor’s bills for payment contrary to the requirements of the NPWD Code 
(Paragraph 341, Paragraph 101 ). Thus, both the SDO and the EE failed in 
discharging their oversight duties as prescribed under the NPWD Code. 
As a result, the Department made an excess payment of ₹0.43 crore to the Civil 
Contractor for unexecuted works based on false bills and entries in the MBs in 
deviation from the standard procedures. 
In reply, the State Government stated (July 2024) that: 
 instead of applying plaster of paris putty, higher-grade paint quality was used 
and completed at the same cost. 
 in order to provide proper ventilation system and to avoid safety hazards 
such as toxic fumes, overheating and risk of fire, the Generator shed with 
steel structure, Dyna sheet roofing and cement concrete flooring was 
constructed.  
 the fund meant for Rain Water Harvesting was utilised to construct a Ring 
Well, connected to overhead Sintex tanks with all necessary piping and that 
the Security fencing, Approach road and Parking lot have been completed as 
per specification. 
The reply is not acceptable in view of the fact that the audit observations are based on 
the findings of the follow-up JPV conducted (May 2024) by Audit in the presence of 
the representatives of the Department. All the referenced items were marked as 
‘executed’ in the MBs and RA Bills, but were physically found unexecuted during the 
follow-up JPV in May 2024. Thus, out of ₹0.77 crore worth of initially unexecuted 
civil works, items worth ₹0.34 crore were subsequently completed, while items worth 
₹0.43 crore remain unexecuted as of May 2024. Moreover, substitution of approved 
items ( e.g., plaster of paris putty with paint, rainwater harvesting with a ring well) 
without formal approval from the funding agency constitutes deviation from the 
sanctioned scope and violates Paragraph 18.10 of NEC Guidelines 2015. Thus, the 
payments made for these unexecuted or un-authorisedly substituted works remain 
irregular. 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may- 
(i) initiate action against the contractor for submitting bills without actual 
execution of project works and take steps to recover the excess amount 
paid. 
(ii)  fix responsibility on and take action against the erring officers for making 
false entries in the MB and failure to cross check the correctness of the 
Contractor’s bill before release of payment. 
 
  

184
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
184 
 
TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT 
 
3.7 Unfruitful expenditure 
 
The project “Converting the NST Central Workshop into a Bus Station, Night 
Parking-cum-Marketing Complex” in Dimapur remained incomplete even after 
a lapse of more than six years due to poor planning, delayed fund releases and 
failure to obtain GoI approval for changes. Despite spending ₹10.61 crore, key 
facilities remain non-functional, leaving the State to bear an additional 
₹16.64 crore burden without achieving the intended transport or revenue 
benefits. 
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (Ministry/MoHUA 39), Government of 
India (GoI) introduced the Scheme ‘10 per cent Lumpsum Provision for the benefit of 
North Eastern Region, including Sikkim ’ (Scheme) in 2001-02. The broad objective 
of the scheme was to ensure speedy development of infrastructure in NER (including 
Sikkim) by increasing the flow of budgetary financing for new infrastructure projects/ 
schemes in the region. The Operational Guidelines of the Scheme had the following 
important provisions: 
 multi-utility Centre projects located at a central place were among the critical 
components admissible under the Scheme (Paragraph 4 (vi));  
 before submitting the project proposals to the Ministry, the State Government 
concerned must confirm availability of the ‘encumbrance-free land’ for the 
proposed project and assure physical availability of the project land to the 
project implementing agency immediately on sanction of the project 
(Paragraph 8 (ix));  
 in case of any change in the scope of the project due to any unavoidable 
circumstances, the State Government concerned must obtain the advance 
approval of the Ministry/GoI to the revised Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
before further execution of the project works (Paragraph 8 (x)); and 
 cost escalation of sanctioned projects, for any reasons, shall be met by the 
State Government concerned (Paragraph 10 (viii)).  
Dimapur city is connected to other districts of the State and neighbouring Assam by a 
rural bus service that terminates at isolated locations, causing inconvenience to 
travellers and traffic congestion. To address the issue, the Nagaland State Transport 
(NST) submitted (August 2010) a proposal to the State Government for establishment 
of a common terminal for rural and short-distance services. This proposal aimed to 
improve the quality of life for urban poor and low-income groups by providing 
essential passenger amenities and integrated public facilities, such as marketing 
spaces for selling agricultural products, parking, and affordable lodging. The 
proposal, which was expected to generate an annual revenue of ₹1.29 crore, had the 
following two components of works  
                                                
39 Formerly Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
185
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
185 
 
i. Shifting of the NST Central Workshop, Khermahal, Dimapur to Inter-State 
Truck Terminus (ISTT), Purana Bazar, Dimapur (Component I), and  
ii. Conversion of the NST Central Workshop into a Bus Station, Night Parking-
cum-Marketing Complex (Component II).  
The Government of Nagaland (GoN) accorded (September 2010) the administrative 
approval for both the components. For Component I , which was to be funded 
through State’s own resources, the Department submitted (August 2010 to June 2018) 
three cost estimates aggregating to ₹5.20 crore to the GoN in August 2010 (₹2.24 
crore), October 2011 (₹1.00 crore) and June 2018 (₹1.96 crore); against which, GoN 
released (March 2011/September 2012) an amount aggregating to ₹3.00 crore 40 
(57.69 per cent) under State Plan, which was fully utilised (December 2012) by the 
Department. 
In October 2013, GoN submitted a DPR for estimated project cost of ₹50.00 crore to 
the Ministry for funding the Component II of the project with planned execution of 
the project in two phases involving the cost of ₹24.87 crore (phase I) and ₹24.98 crore 
(phase II). The Ministry/GoI approved (September 2014) the phase I of the 
Component II at a cost of ₹24.87 crore on a 90:10 sharing basis between the Central 
(₹22.38 crore) and the State (₹2.49 crore) Government, with a stipulation to complete 
the project within three years from the date of release of the first instalment. However, 
no reasons were found on record for GoI’s partial approval to the project cost ( viz. 
phase I: ₹24.87 crore) as against the cost of ₹50.00 crore proposed for both the phases 
of the project (Component II).  
After a delay of six-month following GoI’s approval (September 2014), the 
Department invited (March 2015) tenders for implementation of the project works 
under phase I ( Component II). This delay occurred  due to an ongoing conflict 
between the ‘Urban Development’ and ‘Transport’ Departments over project 
implementation responsibilities, which was resolved (March 2015) and the Transport 
Department was designated as the project implementing authority. Based on the 
tendering, the civil works contract was awarded (March 2015) to M/s Naagaamii 
Tech, Dimapur (Contractor), at a contract value of ₹19.13 crore, with stipulation to 
complete the work within 24 months (by February 2017).  
The delay in the tendering and award of work order by the GoN had cascading effects 
on release of funds by GoI for the project ( Component II). Audit observed that the 
GoI, after almost two years of according the approval (September 2014) for the 
project, released (June 2016) the first instalment (₹5.74 crore) towards its share of the 
project cost to the GoN. Audit observed that the GoN released (December 2020) the 
GoI’s funding (₹5.74 crore 41) to the Department after keeping the funds idle under 
civil deposits for more than four years  of its receipt (June 2016). Further, the GoN 
released the State’s corresponding share of the project cost (₹2.49 crore) to the 
Department after delay of another eight months in August 2021. As of June 2024, the 
                                                
40 Including Departmental Charges of ₹0.37 crore deducted at source by the State Finance Department 
41 the entire amount was kept in Civil Deposit since March 2017 and withdrawn in December 2020 

186
Chapter III: Economic SectorChapter – III Economic Sector 
 
186 
 
Department utilised an amount of ₹7.61 crore (92.47 per cent) out of the total fund of 
₹8.23 crore (GoI share: ₹5.74 crore; State’s share: ₹2.49 crore), with physical work 
progress at 33 per cent. No major physical progress occurred between 2016 and 2020, 
as the Department had not received either the State share or issued the revised work 
order. 
Meanwhile, based on the request (February 2020) of the Contractor for revision of the 
cost estimates42 to compensate for the cost escalation, the GoN approved (November 
2020) the revised DPR for ₹24.87 crore and a revised work order for civil works was 
issued (November 2020) to the Contractor for ₹18.08 crore (₹13.91 crore for civil 
works+ ₹4.17 crore being 30 per cent  cost escalation on civil works). Further, to 
compensate for the cost escalation, the revised DPR also curtailed the work scope of 
constructing two ‘three-storey buildings’ (Bus terminus and Market complex 
buildings) approved under the original DPR, to one ‘three-storey building’ (Bus 
Terminus-cum-Market Complex).  
Audit observed that despite the significant changes in the cost, scope, and design of 
the project (Component II), the Department did not submit the revised DPR to the 
GoI for concurrence/approval in violation to the Scheme Guidelines ( refer 
Paragraphs 8 (x)  and 10 (viii)). Non-submission of the revised DPR to the GoI was 
attributed to the time constraints, as the project had to commence immediately to 
secure the remaining Central funding, before the Scheme’s closure in March 2021.  
As regards the Component I (Shifting of the NST Central Workshop, Khermahal, to 
ISTT, Purana Bazar)  of the project, Audit 
observed that even after more than 12 years of 
release (March 2011/September 2012) of the 
project funding (₹3.00 crore) by the GoN, the 
Department was unable to proceed with the 
planned relocation of the NST Central 
Workshop. The Department attributed the delay 
to release of inadequate funding (₹3.00 crore out 
of sanctioned amount of ₹5.20 crore) by the 
GoN, which was insufficient to complete the 
works. Since execution of the project works 
under Component II depended upon completion of the works under  Component I, 
the project as a whole (Components I & II) remained incomplete for more than 14 
years of submission (August 2010) of the project proposal by the Nagaland State 
Transport Department to the GoN. Though the ₹3.00 crore released for Component I 
was fully spent by December 2012, the component remained functionally incomplete, 
rendering the expenditure ineffective. 
                                                
42  For revision of the cost estimate from originally approved rates of Nagaland Public Works 
Department (NPWD) (Schedule of Rates (SoR), 2013) to the prevailing NPWD SoR 2016 with 
30 per cent enhancement to bring the rate at par to the current year 2020.  
P h o t o g r a p h  o f  t h e  i n c o m p l e t e  b u i l d i n g  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
187
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
187 
 
Audit further observed that when the GoN approached (March 2021) GoI for release 
of the subsequent instalment of the project funding, the GoN was informed (June 
2021) that the Scheme was co-terminus with the recommendations of the 14 th Finance 
Commission and all the projects funded under the Scheme should be completed/ 
closed by 31 March 2021. As the Scheme was closed in March 2021, and GoI funding 
for the project had stopped, the State Government had an additional financial 
obligation of ₹16.64 crore43 to complete the existing project from its own source.  
Thus, the project (Components I & II) suffered from inadequate planning and 
implementation, leading to significant delays at various stages and resultant cost 
escalation. The inadequacy of the initial funding released by the GoN for the required 
infrastructural development at ISTT, Purana Bazar (Component I)  hindered the 
relocation process and delayed the project (Component II) funded by GoI. The 
delays, which necessitated for cost escalation and the lack of communication with GoI 
about revised project plans, indicated inefficient management and oversight by the 
Department. As a result, the prime objective of the scheme/project to develop a city 
bus transport system for Dimapur city remains unachieved even after spending a total 
expenditure of ₹10.61 crore 44 on the project rendering the expenditure unfruitful. 
Non-completion of the project also resulted in loss of potential annual revenue of 
₹1.29 crore projected in the DPR of the project. Further, with the closure of the 
funding scheme and the cessation of GoI support, the State Government now faced a 
financial burden of at least ₹16.64 crore to complete the project.  
While accepting the facts on fund constraints, the State Government stated (May 
2024) that the Government is making efforts to find out ways and means to make 
available the required fund to the Department for early completion of the project. The 
reply was indicative of the Government’s failure to address the planning, execution 
and oversight shortcomings that contributed to these issues.  
Recommendation: 
The State Government may earmark resources to complete the balance portion of 
the incomplete work so that the objective of the project is fulfilled without further 
delay.  
 
                                                
43 Total project cost (₹24.87 crore) minus funds released ₹8.23 crore (GoI ₹5.74 crore + GoN 
₹2.49 crore) 
44 ₹3.00 crore + ₹7.61 crore 

CHAPTER-IV
GENERAL SECTOR

CHAPTER - IV 
 
GENERAL SECTOR 
 
4 . 1   I n t r o d u c t i o n  
This chapter of the Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 deals with the 
audit observations relating to the State Government Departments under General 
Sector. 
During 2023-24, total budget allocation of the State Government in the Departments 
under General Sector was ₹3,797.73  crore against which actual expenditure incurred 
was ₹3,581.55  crore (94 p e r  c e n t ). The Department-wise details of Budget 
Allocations and Expenditure incurred during 2023-24, are shown in Heatmap 4.1.1. 
Heatmap 4.1.1 Details of Department-wise Budget Allocations and Expenditure during 2023-24 
( ₹  i n  c r o r e )  
 
Source: Appropriation Accounts, 2023-24 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
GENERAL SECTOR 
 
4 . 1   I n t r o d u c t i o n  
This chapter of the Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 deals with the 
audit observations relating to the State Government Departments under General 
Sector. 
During 2023-24, total budget allocation of the State Government in the Departments 
under General Sector was ₹3,797.73  crore against which actual expenditure incurred 
was ₹3,581.55  crore (94 p e r  c e n t ). The Department-wise details of Budget 
Allocations and Expenditure incurred during 2023-24, are shown in Heatmap 4.1.1. 
Heatmap 4.1.1 Details of Department-wise Budget Allocations and Expenditure during 2023-24 
( ₹  i n  c r o r e )  
 
Source: Appropriation Accounts, 2023-24 


190
Chapter IV: General SectorChapter IV-General Sector 
 
190 
 
Key Insights 
1. Revenue Allocation vs Expenditure 
 Police dominate the revenue side with ₹1,822 crore allocated and ₹1,754 crore spent – 
96 per cent utilisation, reflecting strong absorption capacity. 
 Civil Secretariat  is the second highest with ₹308 crore allocated, but utilisation is at 
87 per cent, leaving a gap of ₹15 crore. 
 Most smaller departments such as Council of Ministers , Head of States , Home 
Guards, Election, Prison, Parliamentary Affairs  and Printing & Stationery  show 
near full or full utilisation. 
 Relief & Rehabilitation  is an exception with only 66 per cent utilisation, the weakest 
among the departments. 
2. Capital Allocation vs Expenditure 
 Police Engineering Project  received a large capital allocation (₹145 crore), but actual 
expenditure was only ₹112 crore (77 per cent utilisation), showing execution delays. 
 Civil Secretariat also received ₹179 crore for capital works, but only ₹129 crore was 
spent (72 per cent utilisation). 
 Public Works (Housing) got ₹74 crore allocation, but spent only ₹43 crore ( 58 per cent 
utilisation), reflecting possible project hold-ups. 
 Law & Justice  stands out as an outlier, with capital expenditure exceeding allocation 
(₹42 crore allocation vs ₹94 crore expenditure, 226 per cent of allocation). 
3. Efficiency Insights 
 Overall utilisation is strong at 94 per cent  (₹3,798 crore allocated vs ₹3,582 crore 
spent). 
 Law & Justice overspending raises red flags for possible budgeting inaccuracies or 
unforeseen liabilities. 
4. Sectoral Priorities 
 Security and administration dominate : Police, Civil Secretariat, District 
Administration and Public Works (Housing) together absorb the largest share of 
allocations. 
 Infrastructure-related allocations (Civil Secretariat, Housing, Police Engineering Project) 
are heavily tilted towards capital expenditure. 
5. Overall Pattern 
 Revenue expenditure is highly concentrated in the Police and Civil Secretariat , with 
most other departments running small, steady allocations. 
 Capital allocations are narrower in scope, focusing mainly on Police Engineering, Civil 
Secretariat and Housing. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
191
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
191 
 
Audit was conducted in 81 units of 10 Departments involving an expenditure of 
₹5,010.52 crore (including expenditure of previous years audited during the year) 
during 2023-24 under the General Sector. 
This chapter contains the audit observations in respect of Information Technology 
Audit on “Treasury Computerisation in Nagaland” and three compliance audit 
paragraphs. 
Information Technology (IT) Audit 
 
FINANCE (TREASURIES & ACCOUNTS) DEPARTMENT 
 
4.2 Treasury Computerisation in Nagaland 
 
4.2.1 Introduction  
The Department of Treasuries and Accounts (DTA), Government of Nagaland (GoN), 
is responsible for the administration and enforcement of financial rules and 
regulations across all Government Departments. Its role extends to maintaining 
financial discipline through the Accounts Officers deployed at Directorates, Works 
Divisions and Treasuries. The DTA also conducts internal audits of State Government 
Departments, Local Bodies and Private Institutions receiving Government grants. 
Additionally, the DTA assists all Departments in the proper maintenance of service 
records and accounts.  
As a pivotal player in fiscal management, the DTA regulates and controls the budget 
and expenditure of the State Government through its officers deployed at different 
levels. It also undertakes the responsibility of streamlining the accounting system and 
maintaining State financial records. All financial transactions including receipts, 
payments and disbursement of pensionary benefits to retirees are processed through 
the network of Treasuries and Sub-Treasuries. The DTA is also tasked with the initial 
accounting of State Government receipts and payments.  
Highlights 
 The rollout of Treasury Net system was delayed due to delay in selecting 
vendor for application development, resulting in the timelines stipulated in 
the DPR not being achieved. The Department had not adopted project 
management tools to monitor the progress of completion of individual tasks 
for the project with respect to the critical path for the project and had not 
maintained a risk register to list and identify risks and mitigation measures. 
Paragraph 4.2.9.1 
 Failure to complete the stipulated milestones resulted in project 
implementation delays, causing the State Government to miss out on Central 
assistance of ₹2.84 crore. 
Paragraph 4.2.9.2 
 The in-house development of the application carried significant software 
engineering risks and dependency risks (on key Government personnel with 
no formal knowledge transfer mechanism or documentation) which could 

192
Chapter IV: General SectorChapter IV-General Sector 
 
192 
 
have been mitigated through professional industry standards for general 
controls for domains such as documentation, change management, user 
access management, incident response management, information security 
management, master data management, maintenance and Service Level 
management. 
Paragraph 4.2.9.3 
 Out of 13 modules, five modules were not implemented. Moreover, the 
implemented modules did not incorporate all the business rules and features 
outlined in the DPR. As a result, key application controls required in the 
lifecycle of the financial management process- from budget to accounts- have 
not yet been implemented in the TreasuryNet application. 
Paragraph 4.2.10 
 The database contained several discrepancies, indicating inadequate 
mapping of rules, logical access controls and validation controls.  
Paragraph 4.2.11 
 The Department did not formulate and adopt a formal Policy for Business 
Continuity and Disaster Recovery planning. 
Paragraph 4.2.12 
 Training needs analysis was not conducted, and required numbers of IT 
personnel were not available in the Treasuries and Sub-Treasuries.  
Paragraph 4.2.13 
 Neither the State Government nor the Department submitted any progress 
report to the PSC throughout the project's implementation. 
Paragraph 4.2.14 
4.2.2 Treasury Computerisation 
The Ministry of Finance (MoF), Government of India (GoI) notified (July 2010) the 
implementation of Treasury Computerisation (TC) Mission Mode Project (MMP) 
under the National e-Governance Plan (NeGP). This initiative aimed to enhance 
efficiency, reduce costs, eliminate redundancies and modernise public expenditure 
management practices. The TC was designed to streamline budgeting processes, 
enhance cash flow management, facilitate real-time account reconciliation, strengthen 
the Management Information System (MIS), improve accuracy and timeliness in 
account preparation, enhance transparency in public delivery systems and elevate 
financial management quality in States and Union Territories (UTs). The Ministry 
approved a set of deliverables for TC, including business process reengineering, 
standardised data exchange formats, modules for budgeting, accounts, personnel 
management, payroll, pension, receipt, fund management, virtual Treasury, banking 
interface, C&AG interface, financial data warehouse, e-status enquiry and e-audit. 
The Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS), an extension of the TC 
Project, is a unique application software package tailored to the specific Information 
Technology (IT) platforms, hardware/software, processes and requirements of the 
respective States. As part of the NeGP, IFMS enables online real-time management, 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
193
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
1 9 3 
 
monitoring, and control of fund allocations and financial transactions across different 
departments and subordinate offices of the State Governments. It emphasises a single 
point data capture to ensure the integrity and correctness of information. 
The Government of Nagaland (GoN) engaged (March 2012) M/s. Wipro Consultancy 
S e r v i c e s  ( W C S )  a s  t h e  P r o j e c t  M a n a g e m e n t  C o n s u l t a n t  ( P M C )  f o r  t h e  S c h e m e .  T h e  
Treasury application software, TreasuryNet, developed by the National Informatics 
Centre (NIC) in Pune was the adopted software. NIC, Nagaland was appointed 
(February 2015) as the Application Customisation/Development Partner with support 
from NIC Manipur. From 2015-16 to 2021-22, the Department used the TreasuryNet 
software of NIC and from 2022-23, the Department transitioned to a new TreasuryNet 
application developed in-house which was initially an offline application with a 
decentralised data server. From 2023-24, the application shifted to online mode, with 
functionality for budget, receipt, payment, compilation, and reporting to the 
Accountant General (AG). The workflows in the system for three key processes are 
s h o w n  i n  C h a r t s  4 . 2 . 1  t o  4 . 2 . 3.  
Chart 4.2.1: Budget module work flow 
 
S o u r c e : T r e a s u r y N e t  s y s t e m  w o r k f l o w  
Chart 4.2.2: Bill payment module work flow 
 
B u d g e t  a p p r o v a l  b y  
S t a t e  L e g i s l a t u r e  
(manually)
P l a c e m e n t  o f  b u d g e t  i n  t h e  
s y s t e m  b y  F i n a n c e  
D e p a r t m e n t  ( o n l i n e )  
D D O  w i s e  s u b -
allocation by Heads of 
D e p a r t m e n t s  ( o n l i n e )
Approval by DTA (online) 
a f t e r  v e r i f i c a t i o n  o f  m a n u a l  
a u t h e n t i c a t e d  c o p y  f r o m  
F i n a n c e  D e p a r t m e n t
Allocation made available 
t o  T r e a s u r i e s  &  S u b -
T r e a s u r i e s  f o r  e x p e n d i t u r e
DDO 
m a n u a l l y  
s u b m i t s  
physical bill
Bill clerk 
enters bill 
details in the 
s y s t e m
T r e a s u r y  
A c c o u n t a n t  
verifies and 
s u b m i t s  t o  
T r e a s u r y  
O f f i c e r
T r e a s u r y  
Officer 
a p p r o v e s  t h e  
bill
P a y m e n t  via
C M P ,  S B I
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
1 9 3 
 
monitoring, and control of fund allocations and financial transactions across different 
departments and subordinate offices of the State Governments. It emphasises a single 
point data capture to ensure the integrity and correctness of information. 
The Government of Nagaland (GoN) engaged (March 2012) M/s. Wipro Consultancy 
S e r v i c e s  ( W C S )  a s  t h e  P r o j e c t  M a n a g e m e n t  C o n s u l t a n t  ( P M C )  f o r  t h e  S c h e m e .  T h e  
Treasury application software, TreasuryNet, developed by the National Informatics 
Centre (NIC) in Pune was the adopted software. NIC, Nagaland was appointed 
(February 2015) as the Application Customisation/Development Partner with support 
from NIC Manipur. From 2015-16 to 2021-22, the Department used the TreasuryNet 
software of NIC and from 2022-23, the Department transitioned to a new TreasuryNet 
application developed in-house which was initially an offline application with a 
decentralised data server. From 2023-24, the application shifted to online mode, with 
functionality for budget, receipt, payment, compilation, and reporting to the 
Accountant General (AG). The workflows in the system for three key processes are 
s h o w n  i n  C h a r t s  4 . 2 . 1  t o  4 . 2 . 3.  
Chart 4.2.1: Budget module work flow 
 
S o u r c e : T r e a s u r y N e t  s y s t e m  w o r k f l o w  
Chart 4.2.2: Bill payment module work flow 
 
B u d g e t  a p p r o v a l  b y  
S t a t e  L e g i s l a t u r e  
(manually)
P l a c e m e n t  o f  b u d g e t  i n  t h e  
s y s t e m  b y  F i n a n c e  
D e p a r t m e n t  ( o n l i n e )  
D D O  w i s e  s u b -
allocation by Heads of 
D e p a r t m e n t s  ( o n l i n e )
Approval by DTA (online) 
a f t e r  v e r i f i c a t i o n  o f  m a n u a l  
a u t h e n t i c a t e d  c o p y  f r o m  
F i n a n c e  D e p a r t m e n t
Allocation made available 
t o  T r e a s u r i e s  &  S u b -
T r e a s u r i e s  f o r  e x p e n d i t u r e
DDO 
m a n u a l l y  
s u b m i t s  
physical bill
Bill clerk 
enters bill 
details in the 
s y s t e m
T r e a s u r y  
A c c o u n t a n t  
verifies and 
s u b m i t s  t o  
T r e a s u r y  
O f f i c e r
T r e a s u r y  
Officer 
a p p r o v e s  t h e  
bill
P a y m e n t  via
C M P ,  S B I
Chapter IV-General Sector 
 
194 
 
S o u r c e :  T r e a s u r y N e t  s y s t e m  w o r k f l o w  
Chart 4.2.3: Receipt module work flow 
 
S o u r c e :  T r e a s u r y N e t  s y s t e m  w o r k f l o w  
4.2.3 Organisational set-up 
T h e  F i n a n c e  D e p a r t m e n t  ( F D ) ,  h e a d e d  b y  t h e  F i n a n c e  C o m m i s s i o n e r ,  e x e r c i s e s  
administrative control and supervisory authority over the DTA. The Principal 
Director, who heads the Directorate, assists the Finance Commissioner. The 
Directorate comprises eight Wings- Civil Entitlement, Computerisation, Internal 
Audit, Training, Civil Accounts, Works Accounts, Treasuries and Sub-Treasuries and 
Monitoring Cell. There are 12 Treasuries and 10 Sub-Treasuries, which are 
distributed across the 16 districts of Nagaland. 
The organogram of the Department is shown in C h a r t  4 . 2 . 4 . 
Chart 4.2.4: Organogram 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Departmental records 
4.2.4 Funding pattern and allotment of funds 
The Mission Mode Project for IFMS was instituted as a State Plan Scheme with 
financial support to the North Eastern States in the ratio of 90:10 (Central: State). 
Funds were disbursed as Additional Central Assistance (ACA). For Nagaland, the 
MoF, GoI approved ₹5.26 crore as the total project cost with Central share of ₹4.73 
crore and State share of ₹0.53 crore. The MoF, however, released (2011-12) 
₹1.89 crore only and the State Government released (2015-16) State share of ₹0.27 
D e p o s i t o r  
s u b m i t s  
p h y s i c a l  
challan
C h a l l a n  r e c e i p t  c l e r k  
e n t e r s  t h e  c h a l l a n  
details in the system 
a n d  g e n e r a t e s  
t r a n s a c t i o n  n u m b e r
D e p o s i t o r  r e m i t s  
t h e  a m o u n t  
t h r o u g h  
d e s i g n a t e d  b a n k s  
m a n u a l l y
O n  r e c e i p t  o f  
b a n k  s c r o l l ,  t h e  
a m o u n t  i s  
v e r i f i e d  a n d  
compiled in the 
s y s t e m
F i n a n c e  C o m m i s s i o n e r ,  F i n a n c e  D e p a r t m e n t ,  G o N
P r i n c i p a l  D i r e c t o r ,  D T A
D i re ct o r ( I ) D i re ct o r ( I I )
T r e a s u r i e s  &  S u b - T r e a s u r i e s ,  C i v i l  
entitlement (NPS & payslip), 
C o m p u t e r i s a t i o n ,  I n t e r n a l  A u d i t ,  T r a i n i n g ,  
Civil Accounts, Works Accounts, 
Monitoring Cell 

194
Chapter IV: General Sector
Chapter IV-General Sector 
 
194 
 
S o u r c e :  T r e a s u r y N e t  s y s t e m  w o r k f l o w  
Chart 4.2.3: Receipt module work flow 
 
S o u r c e :  T r e a s u r y N e t  s y s t e m  w o r k f l o w  
4.2.3 Organisational set-up 
T h e  F i n a n c e  D e p a r t m e n t  ( F D ) ,  h e a d e d  b y  t h e  F i n a n c e  C o m m i s s i o n e r ,  e x e r c i s e s  
administrative control and supervisory authority over the DTA. The Principal 
Director, who heads the Directorate, assists the Finance Commissioner. The 
Directorate comprises eight Wings- Civil Entitlement, Computerisation, Internal 
Audit, Training, Civil Accounts, Works Accounts, Treasuries and Sub-Treasuries and 
Monitoring Cell. There are 12 Treasuries and 10 Sub-Treasuries, which are 
distributed across the 16 districts of Nagaland. 
The organogram of the Department is shown in C h a r t  4 . 2 . 4 . 
Chart 4.2.4: Organogram 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Departmental records 
4.2.4 Funding pattern and allotment of funds 
The Mission Mode Project for IFMS was instituted as a State Plan Scheme with 
financial support to the North Eastern States in the ratio of 90:10 (Central: State). 
Funds were disbursed as Additional Central Assistance (ACA). For Nagaland, the 
MoF, GoI approved ₹5.26 crore as the total project cost with Central share of ₹4.73 
crore and State share of ₹0.53 crore. The MoF, however, released (2011-12) 
₹1.89 crore only and the State Government released (2015-16) State share of ₹0.27 
D e p o s i t o r  
s u b m i t s  
p h y s i c a l  
challan
C h a l l a n  r e c e i p t  c l e r k  
e n t e r s  t h e  c h a l l a n  
details in the system 
a n d  g e n e r a t e s  
t r a n s a c t i o n  n u m b e r
D e p o s i t o r  r e m i t s  
t h e  a m o u n t  
t h r o u g h  
d e s i g n a t e d  b a n k s  
m a n u a l l y
O n  r e c e i p t  o f  
b a n k  s c r o l l ,  t h e  
a m o u n t  i s  
v e r i f i e d  a n d  
compiled in the 
s y s t e m
F i n a n c e  C o m m i s s i o n e r ,  F i n a n c e  D e p a r t m e n t ,  G o N
P r i n c i p a l  D i r e c t o r ,  D T A
Di re ct or ( I) Di re ct or ( II)
T r e a s u r i e s  &  S u b - T r e a s u r i e s ,  C i v i l  
entitlement (NPS & payslip), 
C o m p u t e r i s a t i o n ,  I n t e r n a l  A u d i t ,  T r a i n i n g ,  
Civil Accounts, Works Accounts, 
Monitoring Cell 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
195
Chapter IV-General Sector 
 
194 
 
S o u r c e :  T r e a s u r y N e t  s y s t e m  w o r k f l o w  
Chart 4.2.3: Receipt module work flow 
 
S o u r c e :  T r e a s u r y N e t  s y s t e m  w o r k f l o w  
4.2.3 Organisational set-up 
T h e  F i n a n c e  D e p a r t m e n t  ( F D ) ,  h e a d e d  b y  t h e  F i n a n c e  C o m m i s s i o n e r ,  e x e r c i s e s  
administrative control and supervisory authority over the DTA. The Principal 
Director, who heads the Directorate, assists the Finance Commissioner. The 
Directorate comprises eight Wings- Civil Entitlement, Computerisation, Internal 
Audit, Training, Civil Accounts, Works Accounts, Treasuries and Sub-Treasuries and 
Monitoring Cell. There are 12 Treasuries and 10 Sub-Treasuries, which are 
distributed across the 16 districts of Nagaland. 
The organogram of the Department is shown in C h a r t  4 . 2 . 4 . 
Chart 4.2.4: Organogram 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Departmental records 
4.2.4 Funding pattern and allotment of funds 
The Mission Mode Project for IFMS was instituted as a State Plan Scheme with 
financial support to the North Eastern States in the ratio of 90:10 (Central: State). 
Funds were disbursed as Additional Central Assistance (ACA). For Nagaland, the 
MoF, GoI approved ₹5.26 crore as the total project cost with Central share of ₹4.73 
crore and State share of ₹0.53 crore. The MoF, however, released (2011-12) 
₹1.89 crore only and the State Government released (2015-16) State share of ₹0.27 
D e p o s i t o r  
s u b m i t s  
p h y s i c a l  
challan
C h a l l a n  r e c e i p t  c l e r k  
e n t e r s  t h e  c h a l l a n  
details in the system 
a n d  g e n e r a t e s  
t r a n s a c t i o n  n u m b e r
D e p o s i t o r  r e m i t s  
t h e  a m o u n t  
t h r o u g h  
d e s i g n a t e d  b a n k s  
m a n u a l l y
O n  r e c e i p t  o f  
b a n k  s c r o l l ,  t h e  
a m o u n t  i s  
v e r i f i e d  a n d  
compiled in the 
s y s t e m
F i n a n c e  C o m m i s s i o n e r ,  F i n a n c e  D e p a r t m e n t ,  G o N
P r i n c i p a l  D i r e c t o r ,  D T A
Di re ct or ( I) Di re ct or ( II)
T r e a s u r i e s  &  S u b - T r e a s u r i e s ,  C i v i l  
entitlement (NPS & payslip), 
C o m p u t e r i s a t i o n ,  I n t e r n a l  A u d i t ,  T r a i n i n g ,  
Civil Accounts, Works Accounts, 
Monitoring Cell 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
195 
 
crore only. Of the total funds received amounting to ₹2.16 crore, the Department 
expended ₹2.13 crore leaving a balance of ₹0.03 crore as of March 2024. Apart from 
the sanctioned funds, the GoN also allocated funds from State's own resources 
amounting to ₹4.88 crore during 2018-19 to 2023-24. 
4.2.5 Audit objectives 
The IT Audit was conducted to assess whether: 
 Treasury Computerisation was implemented with efficient planning, proper 
financial management and effective human resource management. 
 Treasury Computerisation has onboarded all treasury functions and relevant 
financial rules in the computerised environment with adequate IT controls to 
ensure authenticity of data and data security. 
 Internal controls and monitoring mechanisms were adequate and effective. 
 
4.2.6 Audit criteria 
The Audit findings were benchmarked against the following criteria: 
• GoI MMP Treasury Computerisation, NeGP Scheme Guidelines; 
• The Central Treasury Rules; 
• The Receipt & Payment Rules, 1983; 
• The General Financial Rules (GFR), 2017; 
• The Government Accounting Rules; and 
• Orders, Circulars and Office Memorandum issued by GoI and GoN from 
time to time. 
4.2.7 Scope and methodology of Audit 
The IT Audit covered the period from 2018-19 to 2023-24. An Entry Conference was 
held with the Department on 23 June 2023. Records of the Directorate of Treasuries 
and Accounts and District Treasuries and Sub-Treasuries on project implementation 
were examined besides extraction of data and analysis thereof. Findings and 
recommendations of the IT Audit was discussed with the Department during the Exit 
Conference on 12 August 2024.  Replies of the Department as well as the State 
Government are suitably incorporated in the Report. 
4.2.8 Audit sampling and units selected for audit 
The IT Audit covered the Directorate of Treasuries and Accounts along with Kohima 
North Treasury and Kohima South Treasury. The other 10 Treasuries in the State 
were stratified into two categories viz., high volume transaction Treasuries 1 (above 
₹2,000 crore annually) and low volume transaction Treasuries 2 (below ₹2,000 crore 
annually) based on the transactions carried out during the last five years (2018-23). 
From the high volume transactions Treasuries, two Treasuries (Dimapur and 
Mokokchung) were selected and from the low volume transactions Treasuries, one 
                                                
1  Dimapur, Mokokchung, Mon, Tuensang, and Zunheboto 
2  Chümoukedima, Kiphire, Peren, Phek and Wokha 

196
Chapter IV: General SectorChapter IV-General Sector 
 
196 
 
Treasury (Phek) was selected on the basis of random sampling. All five Sub-
Treasuries3 under the selected District Treasuries were selected. 
Audit findings 
 
4.2.9 Project management and implementation 
 
4.2.9.1  Delay in project rollout 
Chapter 10 of the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Treasury Computerisation under 
NeGP in Nagaland specifies the timeline4 for various stages of the project. As per this 
timeline, the rollout of the application across the State was envisaged to be completed 
within 24 months of the project commencement date. Further, Clause 11.1 of the 
Master Business Agreement (MBA) between the Department and the Project 
Management Consultant (PMC) states that the agreement will be effective from the 
project commencement date (May 2012) for a period of 24 months ( i.e. up to May 
2014). The PMC was required to complete the rollout, including operations, 
management and handholding within this stipulated timeline. Payments to the PMC 
were to be made milestone-wise, based on the progress of the project. 
Audit observed that the Department engaged (March 2012) M/s Wipro Consultancy 
Services as the PMC for the project at a cost of ₹1.19 crore. The project commenced 
in May 2012, with a planned rollout by May 2014. Audit, however, observed that the 
pilot rollout could only be achieved in May 2015, with a delay of 15 months from the 
original timeline of February 2014. Subsequent rollouts in other Treasuries/ 
Sub-Treasuries also missed the May 2014 timeline as shown in Table 4.2.1: 
Table 4.2.1: Details of project go-live in the Treasuries/Sub-Treasuries 
Sl. No. Computerised w.e.f. Treasuries/Sub-Treasuries 
1. February 2017 Mangkolemba 
2. October 2017 Kohima South, Dimapur and Mokokchung 
3. February 2018 Changtongya and Tseminyu 
4. February 2019 Wokha, Phek, Zunheboto, Aghunato, Pfutsero and Baghty 
5. July 2019 Tuensang, Kiphire and Longleng 
6. October 2019 Mon, Peren, Aboi and Chozuba 
7. July 2022 Chümoukedima (New Treasury) 
Source: Departmental reply 
Audit further observed that the delay in the rollout of the project was due to the delay 
in selection of the Application Developer (NIC) which could be achieved only in 
February 2015 as against the stipulated timeline of November 2012. The delay in 
selection of the Application Developer not only resulted in significant timeline 
                                                
3   Tseminyu under Kohima North; Chozuba and Pfutsero under Phek; Changtongya and Mangkolemba under 
Mokokchung. 
4  
Sl. No. Activity/Module Timeline 
1. Initiation and vendor selection phase T+180 days (6 months) 
2. Application Development Phase T+390 days (13 months) 
3. Pilot roll out of the application  T+630 days (21 months) 
4. Infrastructure installation and roll out phase T+720 days (24 months) 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
197
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
197 
 
deviations but also led to short release of GoI funds and partial implementation of 
project modules, thereby delaying the benefits of the Treasury Computerisation as 
discussed in Paragraphs 4.2.9.2 and 4.2.10.  
The Department had not adopted project management tools to monitor the progress of 
completion of individual tasks for the project with respect to the critical path for the 
project and had not maintained a risk register to list and identify risks and mitigation 
measures. 
While accepting (July 2024) the Audit observation, the State Government stated that 
the delay in the selection of the Application Developer was because the State was not 
ready with the budget codification. It was further stated that the codification was only 
up to the Minor Head of Account level and that computerisation could not proceed 
without review of the proper Heads of Account at all levels. The reply of the State 
Government indicated that preparatory work for commencement of computerisation 
had taken much longer than planned as per the contractual timelines. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may adopt project management tools to identify the list of 
individual tasks to be completed, persons responsible for each task, sequential 
dependencies among tasks and the impact of delays on the critical path for the 
project timelines. 
 
4.2.9.2 Short receipt of Central assistance and delay in release of State share 
Paragraph 8 of the MMP (TC) Scheme Guidelines states that the project would be 
implemented as a State Plan Scheme under NeGP, with 90 per cent financial support 
to the North Eastern States. Funds would be released as Central Assistance to the 
designated State agency in three instalments of 40 per cent,  30 per cent  and 30 
per cent each, subject to satisfactory receipt of Utilisation Certificates. In turn, 
Paragraph 9 of the MMP (TC) Scheme Guidelines states that the States are required to 
complete their project within three years, with any residual components allowed to 
spill over into the fourth year. The release of instalments is based on achieving the 
stipulated milestones outlined in the project guidelines. 
Audit observed that the Department received an amount of ₹2.16 crore out of the total 
approved cost of ₹5.26 crore for project implementation during 2011-12 to 2015-16. 
Details of receipt and expenditure of Central and State shares are shown in Table 
4.2.2. 
Table 4.2.2: Year-wise receipt and expenditure incurred 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year Receipt Expenditure 
Central Share State Share Total Central Share State Share Total 
2011-12 189.00 0 189.00 0 0 0 
2012-13 0 0 0 23.74 0 23.74 
2013-14 0 0 0 11.86 0 11.86 
2014-15 0 0 0 103.84 0 103.84 
2015-16 0 27.00 27.00 46.15 27.07 73.22 
Chapter IV-General Sector 
 
198 
 
Total 189.00 27.00 216.00 185.59 27.07 212.66 
Source: Departmental records 
As can be seen from Table 4.2.2 above, the GoN received (March 2012) ₹1.89 crore 
out of the total Central share of ₹4.73 crore 5 resulting in short receipt of ₹2.84 crore. 
On its part, the GoN released its share of ₹0.27 crore in May 2015 and March 2016 
only, with a delay exceeding three years. Audit observed that the Department incurred 
an expenditure of ₹2.13 crore6 against the total receipt of ₹2.16 crore with an unspent 
balance of ₹0.03 crore as of March 2024. Audit further observed that the reason for 
short receipt of Central assistance was because of the Department’s failure to 
complete activities as per the stipulated timelines as discussed in Paragraph 4.2.9.1. 
As a result, the State Government had to subsequently bear the cost of implementation 
for this application on its own, even though funding from GoI had been available for 
the stipulated period. 
In reply, the State Government stated (July 2024) that the State received ₹1.89 crore 
as first instalment, however, subsequent instalments were not released despite the 
Government writing to the Ministry. It was further stated that there was a change in 
the funding policy under e-Governance during 2014. The response was not tenable, as 
the short release of GoI funds was because the project was not completed within the 
Ministry’s stipulated timeline of three years.  
Recommendation: 
The Department may undertake a comprehensive review of its project governance 
mechanism, to identify and address the root causes for delays and adopt standard 
controls such as maintenance of risk register, periodic meetings of governance 
Committee(s) and periodic reports on progress in implementation of projects. 
 
4.2.9.3  Transition to in-house developed TreasuryNet system 
As per Annexure-I of the MMP (TC) Scheme Guidelines, project proposals should be 
prepared with defined project objectives, outcomes envisaged, details of proposed 
business model and business process re-engineering. Further, for the development of 
any IT project, it is essential to document the requirements and segment them into 
phases based on the project's needs. This documentation includes preparing a Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) and a User Requirement Specifications (URS) that outlines the 
project scope, objectives, functionalities, and technical specifications.  
Audit observed that due to the obsolete system technology of NIC TreasuryNet 
system, developed at a cost of ₹2.03 crore and the absence of GoI funding in view of 
delays during 2012-15, the Department implemented an in-house TreasuryNet 
application software and migrated to it in April 2022. Audit further observed that the 
                                                
5  GoI approved ₹5.26 crore as project cost with Central share of ₹4.73 crore and State share of 
₹0.53 crore 
6  Payments released to the PMC (₹128.23 lakh), NIC (₹74.67 lakh) and for hardware purchases 
(₹9.76 lakh). 

198
Chapter IV: General Sector
Chapter IV-General Sector 
 
198 
 
Total 189.00 27.00 216.00 185.59 27.07 212.66 
Source: Departmental records 
As can be seen from Table 4.2.2 above, the GoN received (March 2012) ₹1.89 crore 
out of the total Central share of ₹4.73 crore 5 resulting in short receipt of ₹2.84 crore. 
On its part, the GoN released its share of ₹0.27 crore in May 2015 and March 2016 
only, with a delay exceeding three years. Audit observed that the Department incurred 
an expenditure of ₹2.13 crore6 against the total receipt of ₹2.16 crore with an unspent 
balance of ₹0.03 crore as of March 2024. Audit further observed that the reason for 
short receipt of Central assistance was because of the Department’s failure to 
complete activities as per the stipulated timelines as discussed in Paragraph 4.2.9.1. 
As a result, the State Government had to subsequently bear the cost of implementation 
for this application on its own, even though funding from GoI had been available for 
the stipulated period. 
In reply, the State Government stated (July 2024) that the State received ₹1.89 crore 
as first instalment, however, subsequent instalments were not released despite the 
Government writing to the Ministry. It was further stated that there was a change in 
the funding policy under e-Governance during 2014. The response was not tenable, as 
the short release of GoI funds was because the project was not completed within the 
Ministry’s stipulated timeline of three years.  
Recommendation: 
The Department may undertake a comprehensive review of its project governance 
mechanism, to identify and address the root causes for delays and adopt standard 
controls such as maintenance of risk register, periodic meetings of governance 
Committee(s) and periodic reports on progress in implementation of projects. 
 
4.2.9.3  Transition to in-house developed TreasuryNet system 
As per Annexure-I of the MMP (TC) Scheme Guidelines, project proposals should be 
prepared with defined project objectives, outcomes envisaged, details of proposed 
business model and business process re-engineering. Further, for the development of 
any IT project, it is essential to document the requirements and segment them into 
phases based on the project's needs. This documentation includes preparing a Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) and a User Requirement Specifications (URS) that outlines the 
project scope, objectives, functionalities, and technical specifications.  
Audit observed that due to the obsolete system technology of NIC TreasuryNet 
system, developed at a cost of ₹2.03 crore and the absence of GoI funding in view of 
delays during 2012-15, the Department implemented an in-house TreasuryNet 
application software and migrated to it in April 2022. Audit further observed that the 
                                                
5  GoI approved ₹5.26 crore as project cost with Central share of ₹4.73 crore and State share of 
₹0.53 crore 
6  Payments released to the PMC (₹128.23 lakh), NIC (₹74.67 lakh) and for hardware purchases 
(₹9.76 lakh). 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
199
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
199 
 
application was developed considering the broad objectives outlined in the DPR 
prepared by the PMC, with implementation based on priorities identified by the DTA 
and the Finance Department. 
However, Audit observed the following process deficiencies in the development of 
the in-house application- 
 DPR and URS documents had not been updated to reflect a true and fair view 
of implementation of the in-house application. 
 Timelines for phase-wise implementation of various modules were not 
specified. 
Absence of DPR, URS and clear timelines for phase-wise module implementation 
resulted in significant risks to achievement of project objectives and deliverables on 
time. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (July 2024) that 
the existing application had been developed in-house guided by Senior Officers of the 
Department, which had saved time and reduced costs. It was also stated that the 
development of the new TreasuryNet system was broadly guided by the objectives of 
the DPR prepared by Wipro in consultation with the DTA, Finance Department and 
Information Technology & Communication Department, Government of Nagaland. It 
was further stated that the implementation was based on the priority identified by the 
DTA and the Finance Department. The response was not tenable, as the in-house 
development of the application carried significant software engineering risks and 
dependency risks (on key Government personnel with no formal knowledge transfer 
mechanism or documentation) which could have been mitigated through professional 
industry standards for general controls for domains such as documentation, change 
management, user access management, incident response management, information 
security management, master data management, maintenance and Service Level 
management. In the absence of professional involvement and inadequate 
documentation on these domains, Audit was unable to derive assurance that these 
controls had been implemented and associated risks had been mitigated for the in-
house TreasuryNet application. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may prepare documentation for DPR, URS and different domains 
such as changes made, incidents resolved, information security patches deployed, 
user access rights and service levels for the in-house application, so that the future 
maintenance and further enhancements may be taken up by a professional firm 
using industry-best practices. 
 
4.2.9.4  Shortfalls in IT hardware 
Paragraph 13.2.1 of the DPR for Treasury Computerisation under NeGP in Nagaland 
states that hardware cost, including networking hardware, pertains to the cost to be 
incurred towards procurement of new hardware equipment for meeting the IT 

200
Chapter IV: General SectorChapter IV-General Sector 
 
200 
 
requirement of the Department across the Directorate, Treasuries and Sub-Treasuries. 
For successful implementation of the Treasury Computerisation project, it was 
essential that sufficient hardware be provided to organisational units. The IT hardware 
requirement and actual availability (as of April 2024) in the sampled Treasuries and 
Sub-Treasuries are shown in Table 4.2.3. 
Table 4.2.3: IT hardware requirement and availability in the sampled Treasuries and Sub-
Treasuries, as of April 2024. 
(in numbers) 
Treasury/  
Sub-Treasury 
Desktop UPS Generator Laptop 
Req* Av* Sh* Req Av Sh Req Av Sh Req Av Sh 
Kohima North - - - - - - - - - 3 0 3 
Kohima South  24 16 8 - - - - - - 3 0 3 
Tseminyu    7   5 2 - - - - - - 1 0 1 
Dimapur  17 13 4 - - - - - - 4 0 4 
Changtongya    8   5 3 1 0 1 1 0 1 2 0 2 
Phek  15 11 4 - - - - - - - - - 
Pfutsero    8   7 1 - - - - - - - - - 
Chozuba    5   3 2 - - - - - - 1 0 1 
Mokokchung  20 18 2 - - - - - - 1 0 1 
Total 104 78 26 1 0 1 1 0 1 15 0 15 
*Req=Requirement, Av=Availability, Sh=Shortage 
Source: Reply of the Department 
As can be seen from Table 4.2.3  above, there were shortfalls of desktops, laptops, 
UPS and generators in the sampled Treasuries and Sub-Treasuries, which affected the 
smooth functioning of treasury operations . Audit observed that the reason for the 
shortage in IT hardware was because the Department did not assess the IT hardware 
requirement for submission to the State Government for fund allocation.  
In reply, the State Government stated (July 2024) that the purchase of IT hardware 
was done with minimum requirements, due to funds constraints. The response was not 
acceptable, as the Department had neither assessed the IT hardware requirements nor 
submitted proposals for phased procurement to the State Government for fund 
allocation for the purchase of IT hardware. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may assess the IT hardware requirement and submit the 
requirement to the State Government for fund allocation in a phased manner with 
clear timelines. 
 
4.2.10 Incomplete implementation of key functionalities and missing 
application controls  
Paragraph 8 of the DPR for Treasury Computerisation under NeGP in Nagaland states 
that the application should be developed to include various modules covering the 
entire functionalities of the Treasury and that data digitisation of all the current and 
past records of the Treasury will be done so that any data can be fetched at any point 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
201
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
201 
 
of time. As per Paragraph 8.1.2 of the DPR, the proposed application was to consist of 
13 modules covering all the functionalities of the Department.  
The actual status of implementation of the 13 modules as of March 2024 is shown in 
Table 4.2.4: 
Table 4.2.4: Statement showing status of module implementation as of March 2024 
Sl. 
No. Module Description Status 
1. 
Treasury 
Receipts Module 
(TRM) 
The TRM will provide depositors with the 
provision to deposit money online or through 
agency banks. It will also allow banks to collect 
receipts in cash on behalf of the State Government 
and deposit the same online in the State Treasury. 
The TRM currently does not 
have the provision for 
depositors or banks to login 
directly to TRM and deposit 
money online. 
2. 
Financial Data 
Warehouse 
Module 
(FDWM) 
FDWM will  maintain e -record of valuables in 
strong room such as Government stationery 
procurement, material storage, stamps selling and 
returns of valuables. 
Not implemented. 
3. 
Fund 
Management 
Module (FMM) 
FMM is an integrated fund management system 
that will handle all State’s fund transaction where, 
the claimant such as an employee or Government 
department will submit their claims/invoices to the 
office concerned. The office will enter these into 
the Office Accounting System and the HOO/DDO 
will further validate them, after which the office 
will prepare the bills and clear payments 
electronically. 
The FMM currently does not 
have the provision for online 
submission of claims and 
validation by DDOs. 
Physical bills are submitted 
by DDOs and bill details are 
entered by Treasury staff for 
approval by Treasury 
Officer through FMM and 
payments made 
electronically. 
4. 
Accounts 
Maintenance 
and Compilation 
Module 
(AMCM) 
AMCM will compile and maintain Accounts. All 
expenditure details under different heads will be 
captured. As data is entered, AMCM will 
automatically generate reports. AMCM  will 
embed various checks and balances, which will 
help in monitoring the bills to ensure that 
expenditures are entered under the appropriate 
heads. 
Implemented. 
5. Internal Audit 
(e-Audit) 
Internal Audit (e -Audit) module will incorporate 
the Electronic Audit Management System. 
Not implemented. 
6. E-status enquiry 
E-Status enquiry module will enable citizens to 
enquire with DDOs and banks to check the status 
of pensions, debt, debentures allotment, cheques 
and challans. 
Not implemented. 
7. 
Personnel 
Management 
and Payroll 
Module (PMPM) 
PMPM will capture all processes related to the 
employee lifecycle such as manpower planning 
and cadre management, leave management, 
payroll processing, employee entitlement and 
employee resignation, retirement or death. 
Not implemented. 
8. 
Pension 
Management 
Information 
System (PMIS) 
PMIS module is a pension management  module 
that will capture processes after the employee exits 
from service. 
P M I S  i s  p artially 
implemented from 2024-25 
with the provision for data 
capturing of pensioner’s 
information only. 
9. 
Budgeting 
Module (BM) 
(Planning and 
Budgeting) 
The BM will integrate planning, budgeting and 
execution activities to ensure efficient and 
systematic planning and budgeting. 
BM is currently limited to 
placement of budget in the 
module after being passed 
by the Legislature and the 
Finance Department make 
allocations. Currently, there 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
201 
 
of time. As per Paragraph 8.1.2 of the DPR, the proposed application was to consist of 
13 modules covering all the functionalities of the Department.  
The actual status of implementation of the 13 modules as of March 2024 is shown in 
Table 4.2.4: 
Table 4.2.4: Statement showing status of module implementation as of March 2024 
Sl. 
No. Module Description Status 
1. 
Treasury 
Receipts Module 
(TRM) 
The TRM will provide depositors with the 
provision to deposit money online or through 
agency banks. It will also allow banks to collect 
receipts in cash on behalf of the State Government 
and deposit the same online in the State Treasury. 
The TRM currently does not 
have the provision for 
depositors or banks to login 
directly to TRM and deposit 
money online. 
2. 
Financial Data 
Warehouse 
Module 
(FDWM) 
FDWM will  maintain e -record of valuables in 
strong room such as Government stationery 
procurement, material storage, stamps selling and 
returns of valuables. 
Not implemented. 
3. 
Fund 
Management 
Module (FMM) 
FMM is an integrated fund management system 
that will handle all State’s fund transaction where, 
the claimant such as an employee or Government 
department will submit their claims/invoices to the 
office concerned. The office will enter these into 
the Office Accounting System and the HOO/DDO 
will further validate them, after which the office 
will prepare the bills and clear payments 
electronically. 
The FMM currently does not 
have the provision for online 
submission of claims and 
validation by DDOs. 
Physical bills are submitted 
by DDOs and bill details are 
entered by Treasury staff for 
approval by Treasury 
Officer through FMM and 
payments made 
electronically. 
4. 
Accounts 
Maintenance 
and Compilation 
Module 
(AMCM) 
AMCM will compile and maintain Accounts. All 
expenditure details under different heads will be 
captured. As data is entered, AMCM will 
automatically generate reports. AMCM  will 
embed various checks and balances, which will 
help in monitoring the bills to ensure that 
expenditures are entered under the appropriate 
heads. 
Implemented. 
5. Internal Audit 
(e-Audit) 
Internal Audit (e -Audit) module will incorporate 
the Electronic Audit Management System. 
Not implemented. 
6. E-status enquiry 
E-Status enquiry module will enable citizens to 
enquire with DDOs and banks to check the status 
of pensions, debt, debentures allotment, cheques 
and challans. 
Not implemented. 
7. 
Personnel 
Management 
and Payroll 
Module (PMPM) 
PMPM will capture all processes related to the 
employee lifecycle such as manpower planning 
and cadre management, leave management, 
payroll processing, employee entitlement and 
employee resignation, retirement or death. 
Not implemented. 
8. 
Pension 
Management 
Information 
System (PMIS) 
PMIS module is a pension management  module 
that will capture processes after the employee exits 
from service. 
P M I S  i s  p artially 
implemented from 2024-25 
with the provision for data 
capturing of pensioner’s 
information only. 
9. 
Budgeting 
Module (BM) 
(Planning and 
Budgeting) 
The BM will integrate planning, budgeting and 
execution activities to ensure efficient and 
systematic planning and budgeting. 
BM is currently limited to 
placement of budget in the 
module after being passed 
by the Legislature and the 
Finance Department make 
allocations. Currently, there 

202
Chapter IV: General SectorChapter IV-General Sector 
 
202 
 
Sl. 
No. Module Description Status 
is no provision for capturing 
sanction order and 
subsequent linking with the 
bills passed by the Treasury. 
10. Virtual Treasury 
Module (VTM) 
VTM will provide an interface for the uploading 
of reconciliation data received from State Bank of 
India as part of Cyber Treasury initiative. 
Not implemented. 
11. 
Banking 
Interface 
Module (BIM) 
BIM will enable electronic capture of receipt as 
well as payment data from the commercial banks 
authorised to do Government business, as well as 
from the RBI. 
The TreasuryNet system is 
currently linked with SBI-
Cash Management Product 
(CMP) for electronic 
payment only. There is no 
provision for electronic 
capturing of receipts. 
12. CAG Interface 
Module (CIM) 
CIM will establish linkages with the Accountant 
General’s (AG) office and allow exchange of 
voucher level data electronically thus providing an 
efficient means for reconciling accounting 
transactions. Further, the module will enable 
compilation of accounts, so that monthly/annual 
accounts are available promptly. 
CIM is currently limited to 
providing access to AG 
office for downloading of 
voucher level data. 
13. MIS Reports 
MIS module will generate reports that  will assist 
Departments for effective monitoring of 
transactions carried out in the TreasuryNet system. 
MIS reports generated from 
the TreasuryNet are 
currently limited to the 
implemented modules only. 
Source: Department records 
As can be seen from Table 4.2.4 above, the Department has not implemented 05 of 
the 13 modules and in the eight implemented modules, all the features envisaged in 
the DPR are not yet incorporated. Audit observed that the non-implementation of the 
five modules and partial incorporation of features into the implemented modules was 
due to inadequate project planning, resource constraints, technical challenges and 
changes in project requirements over time. This partial implementation created a gap 
between the features outlined in the DPR and the actual implementation of modules 
resulting in essential functionalities like e-challan and online remittances of the 
Treasury not being covered.  
In reply, the Government stated (July 2024) that the Department had implemented 
receipt module, payment module, compilation module, pension payment module, 
budget sub-allocation module and SBI-CMP module based on the priorities identified.  
The response was not tenable, as the following key functionalities and application 
controls across the financial management process - from budget to accounts - have not 
yet been implemented. 
i. Budget Management- 
1. Preparation of budget estimates and submission by all Departments 
through the system, with required data fields (such as Department Name, 
DDO Code, Head of Account, Scheme Code, Amount, Justification/ 
Remarks). 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
203
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
203 
 
2. Review of budget estimates submitted by all Departments by 
Department of Treasuries and Accounts through the system, with 
inclusion/exclusion of line items and increase/decrease of amount in 
each line item recorded. 
3. Maintenance of data trail in the system to track the budget estimates and 
the actual allotment of budget estimates approved by the Legislative 
Assembly for a new financial year. 
4. Mapping in the system to prevent loading of allotment of budget 
estimates under different Heads of Account to unrelated Departments 
(for example, budget allotment under MH 2202-01-111 Sarva Shiksha 
Abhiyan should not be permitted to be loaded to Industries Department). 
5. Processing of re-appropriations through the system, in compliance with 
business rules (as per delegation of powers and only across the permitted 
Heads of Account). 
6. Processing of surrenders through the system, in compliance with 
business rules (for example, surrender amount cannot exceed available 
budget amount). 
ii. Sanction Orders Management- 
1. Provision for generation of all the types of Sanction Orders specified in 
the Treasury Rules with all the key data fields to be entered for each type 
of Sanction Order. 
2. Application controls to ensure that Sanction Order can be generated in 
the system by a user only as per delegation of powers (based on 
sanctioned amount and type of expenditure). 
3. Mapping in the system to ensure that Sanction Order types can only be 
generated under the permissible Heads of Account for those types of 
Sanction Orders (for example, Sanction Order of type Grants-in-Aid 
should not be permitted under Capital Section Heads of Account, as it 
would violate Indian Government Accounting Standard 2). 
4. Application controls to prevent generation of Sanction Order under a 
Head of Account under which budget allotment for that user is not 
available. 
5. Application controls to prevent generation of Sanction Order under a 
Head of Account where sanctioned amount exceeds available budget 
amount ( i.e., the system should keep track of available budget amount 
for a new Sanction Order, after deducting previous sanctioned amounts 
under that Head of Account). 
6. Application control to prevent cancellation of Sanction Order after a Bill 
has been passed using that Sanction Order as the underlying basis for 
drawal of funds. 
7. Provision for recording terms and conditions for each type of Sanction 
Order (such as date for submission of UCs, names and codes of DDO(s) 

204
Chapter IV: General SectorChapter IV-General Sector 
 
204 
 
authorised to draw the sanctioned amount(s), specific conditions from 
Scheme guidelines/conditional Grants-in-Aid). 
8. Application controls to prevent direct specification of payment 
beneficiary for the funds to be drawn in the Sanction Order, if details of 
the payment beneficiary have not been previously entered as master 
data. 
9. Application controls to prevent modification of the bank account details 
of payment beneficiary in the Sanction Order, instead of modifying the 
same in the master data, through a defined process for master data 
management. 
iii. Bills processing by DDOs and DTOs- 
1. Provision for generation of all the types of Bills specified in the Treasury 
Rules with all the key data fields to be entered for each type of Bill. 
2. Mapping and restricting the permissible combinations of Sanction Order 
types and Bill types (for example, Contingent Expenditure Bill cannot be 
passed by linking to a Grants-in-Aid Sanction Order). 
3. Application controls to prevent Bills to be generated in the system and 
passed, without linking to a Sanction Order Number in the system. 
4. Application controls to prevent Bills to be passed by linking to Sanction 
Orders from previous years. 
5. Application controls to prevent Bills to be passed by linking to a 
Sanction Order against which Bills have been previously drawn for the 
entire sanctioned amount. 
6. Application controls to prevent Bills to be generated and passed with 
Bill amount exceeding the available balance of the sanctioned amount in 
the linked Sanction Order ( i.e. the system should keep track of available 
sanctioned amount for a new Bill, after deducting previous Bills passed 
which were linked to that Sanction Order). 
7. Application controls to auto-populate key data fields from the linked 
Sanction Order at the time of generation of Bills (such as Head of 
Account and payment beneficiary). 
8. Provision for review of master data for payment beneficiaries, to ensure 
that there is a clear trail of details of Departmental users who have 
verified the name of payment beneficiary, bank account number, IFSC 
with an uploaded copy of the bank pass book. 
9. Application controls for validating data entered into key fields in case of 
Bill types for Scheme expenditure and Grants-in-Aid, corresponding to 
the checks to be exercised by the DDO and DTO as per the Treasury 
Code. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
205
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
205 
 
10. Application controls for validating data entered into key fields for Pay 
and Allowances for serving State Government employees and Pension 
for retired employees. 
iv. Utilisation Certificates, adjustment of Abstract Contingent Bills and 
Personal Deposit Accounts- 
1. Functionality for monitoring the submission of Utilisation Certificates. 
2. Application controls for submission of UCs on time and Sanction 
Order-wise (UCs should not be submitted Scheme-wise or Head of 
Account-wise, they have to be submitted Sanction Order-wise by each 
entity responsible for end utilisation of funds). 
3. Generation of MIS Reports on correct status of outstanding UCs and 
prevent further release of Grants-in-Aid in such a scenario, in 
compliance with the extant Rules. 
4. Functionality for submission of Detailed Contingent (DC) Bills for 
adjustment of Abstract Contingent (AC) Bills previously drawn. 
5. Application controls for submission of DC Bills against each AC Bill 
(DC Bills should not be submitted Scheme-wise or Head of 
Account-wise, they have to be submitted AC Bill-wise by each entity 
responsible for end utilisation of funds). 
6. Generation of MIS Reports on correct status of unadjusted AC Bills and 
prevent further drawal of AC Bills in such a scenario, in compliance 
with the extant Rules. 
7. Functionality for accounting receipts into and payments out of Personal 
Deposit (PD) Accounts. 
8. Application controls in place to ensure compliance with Rule provisions 
regarding refund of inoperative PD Account balances. 
9. Provision to track the status of PD Account balances and generation of 
timely alerts on inoperative PD Accounts whose balances are to be 
refunded at the end of the financial year. 
v. There is no integration of TreasuryNet with Works Accounting System 
and Human Resources Management System of the State Government. 
In the absence of these key functionalities and application controls, the full benefits of 
implementing the TreasuryNet application had not yet been realised, since the burden 
of compliance was still being borne by individual users and had not shifted to the 
system as intended. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may prioritise the completion of all modules of TreasuryNet 
along with key functionalities and application controls. 
 
4.2.11 Data discrepancies due to deficient application controls 

206
Chapter IV: General Sector
Chapter IV-General Sector 
 
206 
 
The TC project aims to make the budgeting processes more efficient, improve cash 
flow management, promote real time reconciliation of accounts, strengthen MIS, 
improve accuracy and timeliness of accounts preparation, promote transparency and 
efficiency in public delivery systems and better financial management along with 
improved governance quality. To achieve this, it is crucial to incorporate master data 
and transaction data with adequate application controls to ensure accurate record 
keeping as per rules. The results of analysis of the data in the TreasuryNet application 
are described below. 
4.2.11.1  Discrepancies in data related to budget management 
After the Budget is passed and the Appropriation Bill is enacted, the administrative 
departments, in consultation with the Finance Department, allocate the Appropriation 
against each head of account (HoA) to the Controlling Officers (COs). The COs are 
then to ensure that expenditure under each unit does not exceed the appropriation. 
Subsequently, the COs allocates the appropriation to DDOs, who are responsible for 
making expenditure within the released amount.  
Data analysis of the table ‘budget_centralbudgetmaster’ revealed the following 
discrepancies: 
 During 2022-23 and 2023-24, there were 2,180 budget entries with negative 
amount totalling ₹1,842.14 crore, which was due to lack of functionality for 
re-appropriations without effecting such negative entries. 
 During 2023-24, there were 2,485 budget entries amounting to ₹2,450.47 crore 
entered without sanction orders in the system. 
 During 2023-24, seven DDOs exceeded their allocated budgets totalling 
₹47.28 lakh, as per the ‘payment_budgetexpenditure’ table. 
Audit observed that these deficiencies were due to inadequate budget management 
and expenditure controls within the system resulting in erroneous financial 
accounting. In reply, the State Government stated (July 2024) that the negative 
amount was required for budget re-appropriation and adjustment with the placement 
amount approved by the Finance Department. It was also stated that ‘sanction order’ 
field was an optional field since ‘drawal authority number’ field is a unique 
mandatory field for each budget used to identify a particular budget order. It was 
further stated that the excess expenditure of ₹47.28 lakh by seven DDOs was because 
the revised sub-allocation was made after the expenditure was incurred by four 
DDOs, wrong booking of one DDO, shifting of one DDO from Kohima North 
Treasury to Kohima South Treasury and double negative entry of ₹5.00 lakh for one 
DDO. 
The response indicated the need to prioritise the implementation of necessary 
application controls for the budget management processes, to ensure compliance with 
extant rules.  
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
205 
 
10. Application controls for validating data entered into key fields for Pay 
and Allowances for serving State Government employees and Pension 
for retired employees. 
iv. Utilisation Certificates, adjustment of Abstract Contingent Bills and 
Personal Deposit Accounts- 
1. Functionality for monitoring the submission of Utilisation Certificates. 
2. Application controls for submission of UCs on time and Sanction 
Order-wise (UCs should not be submitted Scheme-wise or Head of 
Account-wise, they have to be submitted Sanction Order-wise by each 
entity responsible for end utilisation of funds). 
3. Generation of MIS Reports on correct status of outstanding UCs and 
prevent further release of Grants-in-Aid in such a scenario, in 
compliance with the extant Rules. 
4. Functionality for submission of Detailed Contingent (DC) Bills for 
adjustment of Abstract Contingent (AC) Bills previously drawn. 
5. Application controls for submission of DC Bills against each AC Bill 
(DC Bills should not be submitted Scheme-wise or Head of 
Account-wise, they have to be submitted AC Bill-wise by each entity 
responsible for end utilisation of funds). 
6. Generation of MIS Reports on correct status of unadjusted AC Bills and 
prevent further drawal of AC Bills in such a scenario, in compliance 
with the extant Rules. 
7. Functionality for accounting receipts into and payments out of Personal 
Deposit (PD) Accounts. 
8. Application controls in place to ensure compliance with Rule provisions 
regarding refund of inoperative PD Account balances. 
9. Provision to track the status of PD Account balances and generation of 
timely alerts on inoperative PD Accounts whose balances are to be 
refunded at the end of the financial year. 
v. There is no integration of TreasuryNet with Works Accounting System 
and Human Resources Management System of the State Government. 
In the absence of these key functionalities and application controls, the full benefits of 
implementing the TreasuryNet application had not yet been realised, since the burden 
of compliance was still being borne by individual users and had not shifted to the 
system as intended. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may prioritise the completion of all modules of TreasuryNet 
along with key functionalities and application controls. 
 
4.2.11 Data discrepancies due to deficient application controls 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
207
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
207 
 
Recommendation: 
The Department may implement application controls for budget management and 
expenditure control. 
 
4.2.11.2 Discrepancies in data related to adjustment of Abstract Contingent 
bills 
Rule 118 of the Receipt and Payment Rules, 1983 states that a certificate shall be 
attached to every abstract contingent bill (AC bill) to the effect that the detailed 
contingent bills (DC bill) is submitted to the controlling officer in respect of abstract 
contingent bills drawn during the month previous to that in which the bill in question 
is presented for payment. On no account may an abstract contingent bill be cashed 
without this certificate.  
Audit observed that there was no provision in the TreasuryNet system to verify 
pending DC bills when accepting the AC bills. Audit also observed that the reason for 
the absence of provision to verify pending DC bill was because Rule 118 of Receipt 
and Payment Rules, 1983 was not mapped in the application system. Data analysis of 
the ‘payment_cmpbillmaster’ table revealed that 294 AC bills were drawn during 
2022-24 amounting to ₹426.23 crore. However, these 294 AC bills were processed 
without verification of pending DC bills in the system. The absence of a provision and 
adequate mapping in the TreasuryNet system resulted in the failure to verify pending 
DC bills and monitor their submission.  
In reply, the State Government stated (July 2024) that the functionality for verifying 
AC bills with DC bills was not incorporated in the TreasuryNet system since detailed 
countersigned contingent bills were submitted by the Departments directly to the AG 
Office without routing through Treasuries. The Department also opined that 
Treasuries can be advised to insist on the certificate from the AG before passing new 
AC bills. The reply was not acceptable as Rule 118 of the Receipt and Payment Rules 
clearly outline the monitoring of AC bills and of the necessity of this Rule being 
incorporated into the TreasuryNet system to ensure compliance and proper monitoring 
of AC bills. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may take immediate measures to map Rule 118 of Receipt and 
Payment Rules, 1983 on abstract contingent bills into the TreasuryNet system. 
 
4.2.11.3 Discrepancies in data related to user access management 
User access management is crucial for prevention or detection of unauthorised 
viewing and modification of data. User access management is implemented through 
individual login-identifiers and passwords for user authentication, to ensure 
accountability for user activities.  

208
Chapter IV: General SectorChapter IV-General Sector 
 
208 
 
Analysis of database under the category of administrator and authentication revealed 
that: 
 In the table ‘administrator_centralusers’, which captures details of all system 
users, one user had ‘NA’ username and ‘NA’ Designation, with user type 
listed as ‘MONITORING’. Further, 81 HODs had been assigned the 
designation of ‘Admin Operator’ instead of actual designations. 
 In the table ‘administrator_operators’, which captures the details of all 
system operators, 14 names of operators are recorded with the names 
dispatch (4), challan (1), bill receipt (2), compilation (4) and bill clerk (3). 
 In the table ‘auth_user’, which captures status and login details of users, 
577 active users did not have first name and last name recorded in the 
database. 
 Functionality for biometric based authentication and digital signature 
certificates had not been implemented. 
These discrepancies indicated absence of proper user authentication and access 
controls in the system, which posed material risks to information security. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the State Government stated (July 2024) that 
the system would be updated to rectify the discrepancies observed by Audit. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may take immediate measures to strengthen user access 
management for the TreasuryNet system. 
 
4.2.11.4 Discrepancies in transaction data 
Analysis of the transactions data for expenditure and receipts in the system revealed 
the following discrepancies: 
 In the table ‘payment_billmaster’, which captures all the payment bill details 
of each DDO including Department’s bill numbers, 681 out of 802 records 
have a ‘0’ value as the Department’s bill number during 2023-24. 
 In the table ‘receipt_finalreceiptmaster’, which captures details of 
remittances of the depositors, there were two records of remittance with 
negative amount and 58 records with zero remittance amount during 2023-
24.  
 In the table ‘payment_cmpbillmaster’, which captures details of online 
payment, three bills of Grants-in-Aid were booked under the Major Head 
‘8011’ (Insurance and pension fund) during 2023-24. 
 In the table ‘payment_finalgpfdetails’, which captures details of GPF 
withdrawal by Government employees, multiple withdrawals from the same 
GPF account ranging from five to nine times were observed in 97 GPF 
account numbers. 
 In the table ‘receipt_finalreceiptmaster’, which captures details of 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
209
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
209 
 
remittances of the depositors, the authorised date of receipts was earlier than 
the data entry date in 98 cases ranging from 01 to 407 days and, in 357 cases, 
authorisation occurred after a delay ranging from 30 to 374 days. 
 In the table ‘payment_billcorrectionhistory’, which captures bill detail 
correction requested by system users, 249 out of 461 bill correction requests 
still showed ‘processing’ status, with request ranging from May 2023 to 
April 2024. 
 
 In the table ‘payment_finalbilltrack’, which captures the details of bill 
processing, 93 bills were authorised before the receipt of bill ranging from 01 
to 365 days and 2,184 bills were authorised after a delay ranging from 30 to 
349 days. 
 In the table ‘payment_objectedbills’, which captures the details of objected 
bills including the reasons for objection, the reason for objection in 501 out 
of 2,943 rejected bills contained invalid descriptions 7, which reflected 
absence of validation controls.  
 In the table ‘receipt_receiptcorrectionhistory’, which captures receipt challan 
details correction requested by system users, the status of 36 out of 38 receipt 
correction cases showed ‘processing’, while only two cases were marked as 
‘closed’. 
The above discrepancies indicated the deficiencies in validation controls in the 
TreasuryNet application for processing transactions data.  
While accepting the Audit observations, the Government stated (July 2024) that 
rectifications in the system would be carried out. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may take immediate measures to strengthen validation controls for 
transactions within the TreasuryNet system. 
 
4.2.12 Absence of Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity Plans 
Paragraph 7.1 of the MMP (TC) Scheme Guidelines stipulates implementation of 
adequate and secure network infrastructure, disaster recovery and business continuity 
plan to ensure that the system runs even in the case of power outages, natural disasters 
and cyber-attacks. Further, Guidelines on Information Security Practices for 
Government Entities by Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-in), 
Ministry of Electronics and IT, GoI stipulates formulation of security policies and 
procedures for building cyber resiliency, prepare, test and implement business 
continuity plan and disaster recovery plan. 
Examination of this function for the TreasuryNet system revealed the following 
discrepancies: 
                                                
7   ‘r’, ‘w’, ‘RE’, ‘mis’, ‘wr’, ‘lll’, ‘wron’, ‘retr’, ‘tempo’and ‘thtt’. 

210
Chapter IV: General SectorChapter IV-General Sector 
 
210 
 
 The Department had not formulated and adopted a policy for safeguarding IT 
assets, software and data. 
 Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity plans had not been formulated. 
As a result, Recovery Point Objective and Recovery Time Objective had not 
been defined, data back-ups had not been taken and Disaster Recovery Drills 
had not been conducted at periodic intervals. In the absence of these controls, 
Audit was unable to derive assurance on the adequacy of measures for 
Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity for the TreasuryNet application, 
in the event of business disruptions. 
 The process for migration from the NIC legacy system to the new 
TreasuryNet system had not been documented and there was no assurance on 
the completeness and correctness of data migrated from the legacy system. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the Government stated (July 2024) that it will 
work on the issues observed by Audit.  
Recommendation: 
The Department may promptly formulate and adopt an IT security policy, including 
business continuity and disaster recovery plans. 
 
4.2.13 Inadequate measures for capacity building 
Paragraph 9.2 of the DPR for Treasury Computerisation under NeGP in Nagaland 
envisages capacity building through basic computer and application training. As per 
the DPR, basic computer training is meant to acquaint and make aware the 
Government officials of the basic function and nature of computers and its 
application. Further, as per the DPR, the application training is meant for providing an 
in-depth training on the usage and handling of the application for Government official 
at different levels.  
Audit observed that the Department did not conduct training needs analysis to identify 
skills and knowledge gaps among employees for utilising the TreasuryNet system.  
Audit further observed that assessment of number of IT staff required and actually in 
position to provide technical support in Treasuries/Sub-Treasuries had not been 
carried out.  
In reply, the Government stated (July 2024) that training was conducted whenever a 
new module of the application was implemented. It was also stated that the 
Department’s Training Institute at Dimapur imparts general and IT trainings for new 
recruits and for in-service employees. The response was not tenable, since training 
needs analysis had not been carried out and technical support staff was not available 
in the test-checked Treasuries and Sub-Treasuries. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
211
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
211 
 
Recommendation: 
The Department may take steps to conduct training needs analysis to provide the 
required training for Treasury Computerisation and deploy IT support staff in the 
Treasuries and Sub-Treasuries. 
 
4.2.14 Deficiencies in monitoring mechanism for the TreasuryNet application 
Paragraph 10 of the MMP (TC) Scheme Guidelines states that quarterly progress 
reports must be submitted by each State Government to the Programme Steering 
Committee (PSC) to monitor the Scheme's progress periodically. Audit observed that 
neither the State Government nor the Department submitted any progress report to the 
PSC throughout the project's implementation. The failure to submit progress reports 
indicated significant deficiencies in monitoring which contributed to overall project 
delays and partial module implementation.  
The State Government accepted (July 2024) the Audit observation and stated that 
steps would be taken to strengthen the monitoring mechanism in the Department. 
Recommendation: 
The State Government may strengthen the monitoring mechanism to ensure that 
the PSC meets at prescribed frequencies to review the progress of implementation, 
to analyse risks and reasons for delay, and to follow up on action taken on its 
previous decisions.  
 
4.2.15 Conclusion 
The Audit was conducted to assess the governance mechanism adopted and the 
general and application controls implemented for the in-house developed TreasuryNet 
application. 
There were deficiencies in the governance mechanism, as evidenced by the absence of 
reviews conducted by the Programme Steering Committee and the significant delays 
in deployment of modules and functionalities of the application, which had resulted in 
the loss of Central assistance for this project. 
There were deficiencies in the general controls adopted for the application, with 
inadequate provisions for documentation, change management, information security 
management, disaster recovery management, incident response management and 
maintenance management. The absence of a professional software development 
firm/partner following best practices as per industry norms and the current 
dependence on key Government employees are major risk areas, since they may 
impact future maintenance and enhancement requirements. 
There were deficiencies in key functionalities and application controls in the 
TreasuryNet system as implemented currently, such as absence of validation controls 
in data fields; absence of mapping between permissible Heads of Accounts, Sanction 

212
Chapter IV: General SectorChapter IV-General Sector 
 
212 
 
Order types and Bill types; tracking available budget balances for Sanction Orders 
and available sanctioned amounts for Bills; and monitoring pendency of Utilisation 
Certificates, Abstract Contingency Bills and inoperative Personal Deposit Accounts. 
There was no integration of the TreasuryNet application with other applications for 
the Works Accounts and Human Resources Management functions of the State 
Government. 
The State Government may consider implementing the specific Recommendations 
made in this Report, to address the above deficiencies.  
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
213
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
213 
 
Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
 
FINANCE (TREASURIES & ACCOUNTS) DEPARTMENT 
 
4.3 Fraudulent/excess drawal of money 
 
Failure of the Drawing and Disbursing Officers and Treasury Officers to 
exercise prescribed checks resulted in fraudulent/double/excess drawal of 
₹0.88 crore out of which ₹0.24 crore was pending to be recovered. 
The issue of fraudulent/excess drawal by the Drawing and Disbursing Officers 
(DDOs), through the manipulation of pay and allowances bills was highlighted in the 
previous Audit Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) of India. 
Details of these cases in the Audit Reports for the year ended 31 March 2017 to 
31 March 2022 is provided in Appendix-4.3.1. 
The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) Reports/Recommendations are the principal 
medium through which the Legislature enforces financial accountability of the 
Executive to the Legislature and it is appropriate that they elicit a timely response 
from the concerned departments in the form of Action Taken Notes (ATNs). The 
State PAC discussed four paragraphs on fraudulent/excess drawals of money by 
DDOs/Treasury Officers (TOs) reflected in the Audit Reports of the C&AG of India 
for the years 2014-15 to 2016-17 and made8 the following recommendations:  
 The Department should furnish the latest report on the recovery. 
 The Department should take disciplinary action against the defaulting DDOs 
for presenting false bills and the TOs for passing bills without following the 
prescribed checks. 
As per the instructions contained in the PAC Reports, the Departments concerned 
should submit the ATNs on the recommendations of the PAC within two months from 
the date of laying such Reports in the Legislature. However, contrary to the above 
stipulation, however, Departments concerned of the State Government (total: 15 9) 
failed to submit the ATNs on the recommendations made by the PAC.  
Non-compliance with the instructions of PAC and non-submissions of ATNs on the 
recommendations of the PAC by the Government Departments concerned resulted in 
further irregularities as discussed below. 
Rule 66, Sub-clause 3 of the Central Government Accounts (Receipts and Payments) 
Rules, 1983, as adopted by the Government of Nagaland (GoN), prescribes that 
                                                
8  The C&AG Audit Reports 2014-15 and 2015-16: PAC adopted the recommendation on 
16 December 2020 and the report was presented to the House on 15 February 2021 
 The C&AG Audit Report 2016-17: PAC adopted the recommendation on 20 July 2021 and the 
report was presented to the House on 05 August 2021 
9  Departments: 1. Rural Development, 2. School Education, 3. Health & Family Welfare, 
4. Agriculture, 5. Home, 6. Land Records & Survey, 7. Economics & Statistics , 8. Information & 
Public Relations, 9. Veterinary & Animal Husbandry, 10. Industries & Commerce, 11. Social 
Welfare, 12. Sericulture, Fisheries & Aquatic Resources, 13. Nagaland State Transport, 
14. Employment, Skill Development & Entrepreneurship and 15. Public Works Department. 

214
Chapter IV: General SectorChapter IV-General Sector 
 
214 
 
entries in all money columns of the pay bills are to be totalled separately under each 
section and parts, to arrive at the total entitlements as well as net payable after 
statutory deductions. Section-wise totalling of the pay bills must be checked by the 
DDO himself or by some responsible official other than the person preparing the bill.  
Further, Rule 276 of the Central Treasury Rules (CTR), as adopted by the GoN, states 
that while drawing any arrear bill, the DDO shall record certificates on the arrear bill 
under his dated signature to the effect that (i) no part of the amount claimed has been 
drawn previously; and (ii) a note of the arrear claim has been made in the office copy 
of the bill or the pay bill register for the period to which the claim pertains. While 
Rule 23 of the CTR prescribes that the TO shall obtain sufficient information as to the 
nature of every payment he is making and shall not accept a claim which does not 
formally present that information unless there are valid reasons which he shall record 
in writing for omitting to enquire it. Rule 24 further states that the TO may correct an 
arithmetical inaccuracy or an obvious mistake in any bill presented to him for 
payment. 
Test check (April 2017 to October 2023) of pay bill vouchers of various Departments 
submitted by the TOs to the Principal Accountant General (A&E), Nagaland 
pertaining to the period from 2016-17 to 2019-20 revealed that 13 DDOs from nine 
Departments (Appendix-4.3.2) had fraudulently drawn ₹87.73 lakh. This amount was 
misappropriated through inflated net totals in pay bills, double drawals, and 
fraudulent claims of pay and allowances, including arrears, in violation of the 
prescribed Financial Rules.  
On this being pointed out by audit (October 2024), the Departments recovered and 
deposited ₹63.66  lakh into the Government Account (as of December 2024). 
However, no report on disciplinary action initiated against the defaulting officials was 
furnished. Details of the modus operandi  of the misappropriation are outlined in 
Table 4.3.1. 
Table 4.3.1: Cases of excess/fraudulent drawals 
Nature of 
Objections Audit observations Action Taken by Departments 
concerned 
Excess drawal 
by altering the 
net total 
figure of pay 
bills. 
The District Soil and Water Conservation 
Officer, Zunheboto, drew funds of ₹11.35 lakh 
in four pay bills between December 2018 and 
February 2019 by irregularly altering the actual 
‘net total figure’ of ₹9.65 lakh. This had 
resulted in an excess drawal of ₹1.70 lakh as 
detailed in Appendix-4.3.3. 
On this being pointed out, the DDO 
recovered an amount of ₹1.70 lakh 
(October 2022) and deposited it into 
the Government account.  
Double 
drawal of pay 
and 
allowances 
including 
arrears. 
Two DDOs from two Departments 10 
fraudulently drew funds (June 2018 to February 
2019) aggregating to ₹6.57 lakh in two bills for 
pay and allowances, which had already been 
drawn in regular bills. This resulted in a double 
drawal of ₹6.57 lakh, as detailed in 
Appendix-4.3.4. 
On this being pointed out, the two 
DDOs have recovered an amount of 
₹6.57 lakh (February 2023 to October 
2024) and deposited it into the 
Government account. 
                                                
10  Home (Police) and School Education Departments 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
215
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
215 
 
Nature of 
Objections Audit observations Action Taken by Departments 
concerned 
Fraudulent/ 
inadmissible 
drawal of pay 
and 
allowances 
including 
arrears. 
11 DDOs from seven Departments 11 
fraudulently drew (February 2017 to March 
2020) funds aggregating to ₹79.46 lakh in 43 
arrear bills by preparing fictitious 'Due and 
drawn' statements for employees who were not 
entitled to draw arrears, as detailed in 
Appendix-4.3.5. 
On this being pointed out, nine DDOs 
have recovered an amount of 
₹55.39 lakh (July 2019 to 
October 2024) and deposited it into the 
Government account. The remaining 
balance of ₹24.07 lakh is yet to be 
recovered (December 2024). 
The above instances of excess/double/fraudulent drawal of funds by the DDOs of nine 
Departments indicated a serious failure on the part of the DDOs as well as TOs of the 
respective Departments in exercising the required control and checks as prescribed 
under the applicable Rules and Procedures.  
Audit further observed that out of a total number of 138 cases (amount involved: 
₹19.28 crore) of fraudulent/excess drawal by the DDOs reported in the C&AG of 
India’s Audit Reports for the years from 2016-17 to 2021-22, 59 cases (amount 
involved: ₹13.68 crore) pertained to four Departments 12 of the State Government as 
detailed in Appendix-4.3.6.  
In all the cases mentioned above, the DDOs prepared the pay bills/arrear bills and 
presented the same to the Government Treasuries without ensuring accuracy of the 
arithmetic calculations and availability of the required certificates (Non-Drawal 
Certificates). The TOs also failed to conduct the essential mandatory checks before 
authorising the payments against these bills. The failure of the DDOs and TOs to 
comply with the relevant provisions of the CTR and Receipt and Payment Rules, 
while preparing and authorising the bills for payment, was indicative of possible 
collusion of these officials in the fraudulent drawals. 
Thus, due to the failure of the Departments concerned to comply with the instructions 
of the PAC, the objective of ensuring financial accountability of the Executive to the 
Legislature remained unfulfilled, besides allowing the financial malpractices to 
persist. The reply from the Government was awaited (June 2025). 
  
                                                
11  Rural Development, Finance, Public Health Engineering, Urban Development, Employment, Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship, School Education and Fisheries & Aquatic Resources 
Departments. 
12   39 cases in School Education (amount: ₹6.04 crore); 06 cases in Health and Family Welfare 
(amount: ₹3.56 crore); 08 cases in Home (Police) (amount: ₹3.25 crore) and 06 cases in Veterinary 
& Animal Husbandry (amount: ₹0.83 crore) 

216
Chapter IV: General SectorChapter IV-General Sector 
 
216 
 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may- 
(i) take steps to recover the amount misappropriated immediately from the 
employees/DDOs/TOs concerned with penal interest. 
(ii) investigate the matter and take appropriate action against the delinquent 
officers for the criminal offense of fraudulent withdrawal/theft of public 
money. 
(iii) initiate steps to strengthen the internal control mechanism in all 
departments to prevent recurrence of fraudulent drawals. 
(iv) refer the cases to the State Lokayukta for further investigation. 
(v) direct all the departments to adhere to the recommendations made by the 
State PAC and ensure their strict compliance. 
 
HOME (POLICE) DEPARTMENT  
 
4.4 Excess expenditure 
 
The Director General of Police, Nagaland procured Commercial Liquefied 
Petroleum Gas cylinders/refills from an unlicensed supplier without following 
the prescribed tendering process, in violation of applicable regulations, which 
resulted in excess expenditure of ₹3.46 crore. 
Rule 136 (1)(vi) of the General Financial Rules (GFR), 2017 states that no works 
shall be commenced, or liability incurred in connection with it until tenders are 
invited and processed in accordance with rules. In terms of Central Vigilance 
Commission (CVC) Order dated 23 July 2007, tendering process or public auction is a 
basic requirement for the award of contract by any Government agency. The order 
reiterated that equal right should be provided to all interested parties and no contract 
work should be awarded on nomination basis as it tantamount to a breach of Article 
14 of the Constitution guaranteeing right to equality. 
The supply, distribution and pricing of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) is regulated 
by the LPG (Regulation of Supply and Distribution) Order, 2000 (LPG Regulation 
Order, 2000) . Regulation 6 of this Order states that no person, other than a 
Government Oil Company, a parallel marketer or a distributor shall be engaged in the 
business of selling LPG to the consumers. Further, Regulation 2(e) of this Order, 
defines “distributor” as a person, firm, association of persons, company, institution, 
organisation or a co-operative society appointed by a Government Oil Company or 
parallel marketer and engaged in the business of purchase, sale, or storage for sale of 
LPG in cylinders to consumers on the basis of an agreement with a Government Oil 
Company or a parallel marketer. While,  Regulation 2 (b) of this Order, defines 
“consumer” as a registered person, firm, company, institution, association of persons, 
co-operative society or organisation, who has been granted LPG connection or supply, 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
217
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
217 
 
either in bulk or in cylinder, by a distributor or a Government Oil Company or a 
parallel marketer. Furthermore, Regulation 9 (d) of the Order states that the price of 
LPG is fixed by the Government Oil Companies13. 
Examination of records (February 2024) of the Director General of Police, Nagaland 
revealed that the Government of Nagaland (GoN) awarded (March 2018) the work 
order to M/s Bokavi Chishi, Dimapur 14 (Supplier) for the supply of wet ration items, 
including firewood, to the Nagaland Armed Police (NAP)/Indian Reserve (IR) units/ 
companies deployed in Delhi for a period of seven years up to March 2024.  Based on 
the GoN’s decision (March 2019) to replace the use of firewood in all the NAP/IR 
units with the LPG, the Supplier (M/s Bokavi Chishi) was instructed to supply LPG in 
lieu of the firewood and their contract period was also extended up to March 2024. 
Over the three years from 2021-22 to 2023-24, the Supplier delivered a total 14,651 of 
commercial LPG cylinders/refills (19 Kgs) for the NAP/IR personnel 15 deployed in 
Delhi and submitted bills amounting to ₹6.15 crore for the cost of these supplies. The 
Home Department (Police) released 16 ₹4.06 crore for 9,731 Commercial LPG 
cylinders/refills delivered during the first two years (2021-2023). They carried 
forward the balance dues of ₹2.09 crore for 4,920 commercial LPG cylinders/refills 
supplied during 2023-24, to the next financial year due to the shortfall in the annual 
ration budget. The balance payment (₹2.09 crore) was also released to the Supplier in 
February 2025. 
In this connection, the following observations are made: 
 The Supplier (M/s Bokavi Chishi), who was part of the Government 
approved panel of suppliers for 2017-18, was awarded (March 2018) the 
work order for supply of the ‘wet ration items’ for 2018-19 on the grounds of 
‘urgency’, without following the tendering process. This was in violation of 
the provisions of the GFR, 2017 as well as the orders of the CVC on the 
issue. 
 The GoN further extended the supply contract of the Supplier up to March 
2024 without inviting fresh global tenders. This action of the GoN deprived 
the Department of the benefits of competitive and transparent bidding 
besides potentially compromising both cost efficiency and quality of the 
supply items. 
 The work order for the supply of LPG cylinders for the personnel deployed 
in Delhi was awarded to the Supplier (M/s Bokavi Chishi), completely 
ignoring the fact that the supplier did not hold a valid licence to supply LPG 
in Delhi. 
                                                
13  Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) and 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (BPCL) 
14  The firm (M/s Bokavi Chishi, Dimapur) was part of the Government approved panel of suppliers 
for 2017-18. 
15  1 st NAP, 2nd NAP, 3rd NAP, 4th NAP, 5th NAP, 7th NAP and 8th NAP 
16  August 2022, October 2022, November 2022, March 2023 and August 2023 

218
Chapter IV: General SectorChapter IV-General Sector 
 
218 
 
 Further, in terms of Regulations 2 (b) and 2 (e) of the LPG Regulation Order, 
2000, the Supplier (M/s Bokavi Chishi) falls under the definition of a 
“Consumer” and not a “Distributor” of LPG. As such, the firm was not 
authorised to supply LPG. Audit observed that to execute the supply order, 
the Supplier (M/s Bokavi Chishi) procured the LPG items from a Distributor 
of Indane Cooking Gas (M/s C. Lal & Sons (Gas), New Delhi). 
 As per Regulation 9(d) of the LPG Regulation Order, 2000, the price of LPG 
is determined by Government Oil Companies. However, the work contract 
for supplying LPG items was awarded to the supplier at rates that were 62 to 
189 per cent  higher than the rates (including handling and transportation 
charges) fixed by Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), a Government Oil 
Company. Thus, the Department incurred avoidable financial loss of 
₹3.46 crore (details in  Appendix-4.4.1)  on the supply of LPG items 
(14,651 commercial LPG cylinders/refills) effected through the Supplier 
(M/s Bokavi Chishi) during the period of three years from April 2021 to 
March 2024. 
 Audit further observed that, while placing the supply order with the Supplier 
(M/s Bokavi Chishi), the Department did not consult IOCL or its Delhi-based 
distributors to explore the possibility of directly supplying commercial LPG 
cylinders to Nagaland Police units stationed in Delhi.  
The Department procured commercial LPG cylinders/refills from an unlicensed 
supplier at rates significantly higher than those fixed by IOCL, thereby violating 
Regulations 2, 6, and 9(d) of the LPG (Regulation of Supply and Distribution) Order, 
2000. This action led to an avoidable excess expenditure of ₹3.46 crore. Further, the 
procedural deficiencies in the selection/continued engagement of the Supplier 
(M/s Bokavi Chishi) without following the prescribed tendering procedure highlights 
ineffective internal controls and monitoring mechanism in the Department. 
On this being pointed out (August 2024), the Government stated (September 2024) 
that LPG was made available to those Armed Units/Coys17 deployed outside the State, 
such as in Delhi, for practical reasons and non-availability of firewood. M/s Bokavi 
Chishi, Dimapur, engaged the services of M/s C. Lal & Sons (Gas), an authorised 
LPG distributor of Indian Oil, to fulfil the requirements of Group “D” Wet Ration 
item of the NAP Coys posted in Delhi. It was also stated that the extension of supply 
for Dry, Wet and CPR Ration items to NAP/IR Battalions for the year 2024-25 was 
cancelled in March 2024 and the State Government approved (March 2024) a monthly 
allocation of ₹2,500 per eligible police personnel for purchase of rations with effect 
from April 2024. 
The reply was not acceptable, as the procurement of commercial LPG cylinders/ 
refills was awarded to a Supplier not holding a valid licence to supply LPG, which 
                                                
17 ‘Coys’ is an abbreviation for Company. It refers to a unit within a larger military organization, often 
composed of multiple platoons.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
219
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
219 
 
was in violation of the LPG (Regulation of Supply and Distribution) Order, 2000. 
Moreover, engaging the Supplier without following the open tendering process 
violated standard procurement procedures and caused substantial financial loss to the 
State Exchequer due to payment of higher rates than admissible for the procured 
items.  
Recommendations: 
The State Government may- 
(i) follow the prescribed tendering process for procurements and strengthen 
the internal control mechanism to promote transparency and compliance 
with procurement norms; and 
(ii) fix responsibility on the officials concerned for non-compliance of LPG 
(Regulation of Supply and Distribution) Order, 2000, leading to the 
financial loss to the State Exchequer. 
 
HOME (DISTRICT ADMINISTRATION) DEPARTMENT  
 
4.5 Misappropriation of fund 
 
The Deputy Commissioner of Phek District misappropriated ₹17.56 lakh from 
the Government funds meant for land acquisition towards development of 
Sub-Jail in Pfutsero. 
In Nagaland, the process of land acquisition for Government’s developmental 
activities and compensation to the landowners is regulated by provisions of “The 
Nagaland Land Requisition and Acquisition Act, 1964”. Section 11 (1) of the Act 
states that whenever any land is acquired, there shall be paid compensation the 
amount of which shall be determined by the Collector of the District. The Land 
Revenue Department, Government of Nagaland (GoN), also instructed (February 
1994) all Departments, Government Institutions, District Administrations, and other 
entities involved in land acquisition to obtain copies of acquisition documents, deeds 
of transfer and agreements entered into with original landowners related to acquired 
land for which compensation had been paid. Further, the GoN constituted (June 2006) 
the State Land Acquisition Authority (SLAA) under the Planning and Transformation 
Department18 (P&TD), GoN, to examine all the proposals for land acquisition to 
decide the area of land to be acquired and approve land compensation rates. 
Examination of records (September 2023) of the Deputy Commissioner (DC), Phek 
revealed that the Additional Deputy Commissioner (ADC), Pfutsero, Phek signed 
(June 2021) an agreement with the representatives 19 of Kupa Clan of Kami village for 
acquisition of land measuring five acres (2,17,800 sq.ft.) situated at Reku area under 
Pfutsero Sub-Division for the development of a Sub-Jail at Pfutsero. As per the 
agreement, the landowners agreed to sell five acres of land at the rate of ₹20 per sq. ft. 
                                                
18 Planning and Co-ordination Department was renamed as Planning and Transformation Department 
vide Cabinet approval No.CAB-1/14/2023 dated 09 March 2023 
19 Represented by Shri Neilhi Kupa, Clan Chairman and Shri Wetezu Kupa, Clan Secretary 

220
Chapter IV: General SectorChapter IV-General Sector 
 
220 
 
The agreement also stipulated that a Sale Deed would be executed at the time of 
payment of the compensation amount by the State Government. The SLAA thereafter 
approved (February 2022) the acquisition of five acres of the land at ₹20 per sq. ft. for 
a total amount of ₹43.56 lakh. The GoN sanctioned an amount of ₹43.56 lakh in 
September 2022 and the P&TD, GoN released (September 2022) ₹43.56 lakh 20 to the 
DC, Phek for payment of land compensation to the landowners. The land 
compensation amount was to be transferred to the landowners. 
Audit observed that in October 2022, Shri Wetezu Kupa, an individual landowner 
from Kami village, offered to sell five acres of land situated at a nearby location 
(Tsukozhe21) for the development of a Sub-Jail at cheaper rate of ₹12 per sq. ft. as an 
alternative of the site (Pfutsero) approved (February 2022) by the SLAA for 
development of the Sub-Jail. The land owner (Shri Wetezu Kupa) had also signed (28 
October 2022) an ‘Undertaking’ (Affidavit registration No. 1890 dated 28 October 
2022) in this regard before the Judicial Magistrate First Class, Pfutsero, which was 
also countersigned (November 2022) by the DC, Phek. In November 2022 itself, the 
DC, Phek released the full payment of ₹ 26.00 lakh 22 to the land owner (Shri Wetezu 
Kupa) for the purchase of five acres of land at new location at the agreed rate of ₹12 
per sq.ft.  
In this connection, the following observations are made: 
 As per the original proposal approved (February 2022) by the SLAA, the 
Sub-Jail was to be developed on a plot of land (five acre) owned by Kupa 
Clan of Kami village situated at Reku area under Pfutsero Sub-Division, 
which was to be acquired at the rate of ₹20 per sq. ft. While changing the 
location for the proposed Sub-jail, however, the DC, Phek, did not submit 
any revised proposal for land acquisition/cost for approval of the SLAA/ 
GoN; in violation of the laid down procedure for acquisition of land. 
 The DC, Phek had released (November 2022) full payment (₹26.00 lakh) to 
the land owner (Shri Wetezu Kupa) towards acquisition of five acre land 
without execution of the ‘Sale Deed’ for purchase/acquisition of land in 
violation of the instructions issued (February 1994) by the Land Revenue 
Department, GoN. 
 Further, while releasing (November 2022) the payment (₹26.00 lakh) to the 
individual land owner (Shri Wetezu Kupa), the DC, Phek had irregularly 
utilised the funding (₹43.56 lakh) released (September 2022) by the GoN 
towards acquisition of land originally approved (February 2022) by SLAA 
for development of Sub-Jail without obtaining the approval of the GoN/ 
SLAA.  
                                                
20 Vide cheque No 318259 dated 17/09/2022 
21 The area is also called as Reku, which was situated near Horticulture Farm in Pfutsero town.  
22 Vide Cheque No. 172004 dated 03/11/2022  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
221
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024  
 
221 
 
 Further, the DC, Phek had withdrawn 23 (November 2022) the balance 
unutilised amount (₹17.56 lakh) in cash instead of refunding/depositing the 
same into State Government Account. No supporting vouchers for the 
utilisation of balance amount (₹17.56 lakh) by the DC, Phek were found on 
records. 
Thus, the facts stated above indicated that the DC, Phek had misappropriated the 
unutilised Government funds of ₹17.56 lakh intended for acquisition of land for 
development of a Sub-Jail at Pfutsero, resulting in a direct financial loss to the State 
Exchequer. Moreover, as the Sale Deed for the land had not been executed, the 
completion of the project may be delayed, affecting the development of prison 
infrastructure in the area. The actions of the DC in deviating from the SLAA approval 
were unauthorised and could undermine public trust and participation in future land 
acquisition efforts. 
In reply, the Government stated (August 2024) that the additional amount of 
₹17.56 lakh was released (November 2022) to the landowner through cash payment 
and also furnished receipt voucher of ₹17.56 lakh signed by Shri Huvesiyi, UDA, DC 
Phek in support of the payment made. In a separate reply, the DC, Phek stated 
(October 2024) that, the Undertaking/Affidavit signed by the individual land owner 
(Shri Wetezu Kupa) was declared ‘null and void’. It was further added that the 
agreement entered into (June 2021) between Kupa Clan and ADC, Pfutsero, was 
accepted whereby it was decided to acquire the plot of land at ₹20 per sq.ft. 
The reply of the Government was not acceptable as based on the Undertaking/ 
Affidavit signed (28 October 2022) by the individual land owner, full payment 
(₹26.00 lakh) was released towards acquisition of the alternative land offered by the 
land owner. The receipt voucher towards payment of ₹17.56 lakh to the land owner 
(Shri Wetezu Kupa) also appears to be fictitious in view of the fact that the landowner 
had denied receipt of the said amount and also that the ‘Sale Deed’ for acquisition of 
land for development of the Sub-Jail was still pending to be executed. 
Recommendations: 
The State Government may- 
(i) conduct departmental enquiry to fix responsibility on the erring officials 
for the unauthorised expenditure and recover the amount from the officials 
concerned. 
(ii) ensure execution of the Sale Deed at the earliest to establish the ownership 
of the land acquired.  
 
                                                
23  Withdrawn by Shri Huvesiyi, Upper Divisional Assistant (UDA) of the establishment of DC, Phek. 

CHAPTER-V
REVENUE SECTOR

CHAPTER-V 
 
REVENUE SECTOR 
 
5.1 General 
 
5.1.1 Trend of revenue receipts 
The tax and non-tax revenue raised by the GoN during the financial year 2023-24, the 
State’s share of net proceeds of divisible Union taxes and duties assigned to the State 
and Grants-in-Aid received from the GoI during the year and the corresponding 
figures for the preceding four years are shown in Table 5.1.1. 
Table 5.1.1: Trends of revenue receipts 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
1. 
Revenue raised by the State Government 
 Tax Revenue 958.23 1,022.74 1,300.89 1,461.88 1,598.09 
 Non-Tax Revenue 339.29 242.60 303.58 478.41 677.85 
Total 1,297.52 1,265.34 1,604.47 1,940.29 2,275.94 
2. 
Receipts from the GoI 
 Share of net proceeds of 
divisible Union Taxes 
and Duties 
3,267.08 3,409.25 4,875.46 5,400.19 6,426.82 
 Grants-in-Aid 6,858.69 6,752.84 6,971.21 6,758.78 7,452.37 
Total 10,125.77 10,162.09 11,846.67 12,158.97 13,879.19 
3. 
Total revenue receipts of 
the State Government 
(Sl. No. 1 and 2) 
11,423.29 11,427.43 13,451.14 14,099.26 16,155.13 
4. Percentage of 1 to 3 11 11 12 14 14 
Source: Finance Accounts of the respective years 
The above table indicates that during the year 2023-24, the revenue raised by the State 
Government (₹2,275.94 crore) was 14 per cent  of its total revenue receipts. The 
balance 86 per cent of the receipts during 2023-24 was from the GoI. 
The details of tax revenue raised against the Budget Estimates (BEs) during the period 
2019-24 are shown in Table 5.1.2. 
Table 5.1.2: Details of the Tax Revenue against the Budget Estimates (BEs) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. Head of 
revenue 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Percentage of 
2023-24 over 
2022-23 BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals 
1. 
State Goods 
and Services 
Tax 
340.37 613.22 541.25 663.81 726.72 830.34 957.65 959.09 1,075.00 1,063.04 11 
2. 
Other Taxes 
on Income 
and 
Expenditure 
37.50 30.64 37.50 31.24 37.50 30.50 32.94 30.13 32.94 29.98 0 
3. Land Revenue 0.81 1.04 1.20 1.09 1.25 1.23 0.85 1.09 1.38 1.34 23 
4. 
Stamps and 
Registration 
Fees 2.64 2.79 3.10 2.25 3.10 3.39 3.10 3.43 3.15 4.22 23 
CHAPTER-V 
 
REVENUE SECTOR 
 
5.1 General 
 
5.1.1 Trend of revenue receipts 
The tax and non-tax revenue raised by the GoN during the financial year 2023-24, the 
State’s share of net proceeds of divisible Union taxes and duties assigned to the State 
and Grants-in-Aid received from the GoI during the year and the corresponding 
figures for the preceding four years are shown in Table 5.1.1. 
Table 5.1.1: Trends of revenue receipts 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
1. 
Revenue raised by the State Government 
 Tax Revenue 958.23 1,022.74 1,300.89 1,461.88 1,598.09 
 Non-Tax Revenue 339.29 242.60 303.58 478.41 677.85 
Total 1,297.52 1,265.34 1,604.47 1,940.29 2,275.94 
2. 
Receipts from the GoI 
 Share of net proceeds of 
divisible Union Taxes 
and Duties 
3,267.08 3,409.25 4,875.46 5,400.19 6,426.82 
 Grants-in-Aid 6,858.69 6,752.84 6,971.21 6,758.78 7,452.37 
Total 10,125.77 10,162.09 11,846.67 12,158.97 13,879.19 
3. 
Total revenue receipts of 
the State Government 
(Sl. No. 1 and 2) 
11,423.29 11,427.43 13,451.14 14,099.26 16,155.13 
4. Percentage of 1 to 3 11 11 12 14 14 
Source: Finance Accounts of the respective years 
The above table indicates that during the year 2023-24, the revenue raised by the State 
Government (₹2,275.94 crore) was 14 per cent  of its total revenue receipts. The 
balance 86 per cent of the receipts during 2023-24 was from the GoI. 
The details of tax revenue raised against the Budget Estimates (BEs) during the period 
2019-24 are shown in Table 5.1.2. 
Table 5.1.2: Details of the Tax Revenue against the Budget Estimates (BEs) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. Head of 
revenue 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Percentage of 
2023-24 over 
2022-23 BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals 
1. 
State Goods 
and Services 
Tax 
340.37 613.22 541.25 663.81 726.72 830.34 957.65 959.09 1,075.00 1,063.04 11 
2. 
Other Taxes 
on Income 
and 
Expenditure 
37.50 30.64 37.50 31.24 37.50 30.50 32.94 30.13 32.94 29.98 0 
3. Land Revenue 0.81 1.04 1.20 1.09 1.25 1.23 0.85 1.09 1.38 1.34 23 
4. 
Stamps and 
Registration 
Fees 2.64 2.79 3.10 2.25 3.10 3.39 3.10 3.43 3.15 4.22 23 

224
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
224 
 
Sl. No. Head of 
revenue 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Percentage of 
2023-24 over 
2022-23 BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals 
5. State Excise 5.10 3.24 5.50 4.54 5.50 3.32 3.20 4.40 3.25 4.55 3 
6. 
Taxes on 
Sales, Trade 
etc. 
252.89 175.15 265.50 205.50 325.00 261.87 280.00 246.55 290.00 265.97 8 
7. Taxes on 
vehicles 121.04 113.93 131.72 93.29 145.00 141.04 115.00 187.64 135.00 198.48 6 
8. 
Taxes on 
Goods and 
Passengers 
18.91 18.09 25.00 15.62 25.00 21.43 20.00 21.58 22.00 22.62 5 
9. 
Taxes on 
Duties and 
Electricity 
0.09 0.08 0.11 5.40 0.10 7.77 4.75 7.97 7.00 7.90 (-)1 
10. 
Other Taxes 
and Duties on 
Commodities 
and Services 
0.80 0.05 0.25 0.00 2.45 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0 
Total 
(Own Tax Revenue) 780.15 958.23 1,011.13 1,022.74 1,271.62 1,300.89 1,417.49 1,461.88 1,569.72 1,598.10 9 
Source: Budget documents and Finance Accounts of the respective years 
Key insights:  
 During 2023-24, Goods and Services Tax (GST) collection of the State 
increased by 11 per cent from ₹959.09 crore in 2022-23 to ₹1,063.04 crore in 
2023-24.  
 Both ‘Land Revenue’ and ‘Stamps and Registration Fees’ increased by 
23 per cent from ₹1.09 crore and ₹3.43 crore in 2022-23 to ₹1.34 crore and 
₹4.22 crore respectively in 2023-24.  
 Tax revenue under ‘State Excise’, ‘Taxes on vehicles’, ‘Taxes on Goods and 
Passengers’ and ‘Taxes on Sales and Trade’, observed a growth of three per 
cent, six per cent, five per cent and eight per cent respectively from previous 
year.  
 There was decrease in revenue under ‘Taxes on Duties and Electricity’ by 
one per cent compared to the previous year.  
Thus, the trend in the State’s tax revenue indicates overall growth, with GST 
continuing to be the single largest contributor.  
Details of the Non-tax revenue against the BEs raised during the period 2019-24 are 
shown in Table 5.1.3. 
Table 5.1.3: Details of Non-Tax Revenue against the BEs raised during 2019-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Head of 
revenue 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Percentage 
of 2023-24 
over 
2022-23 
BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals Actuals 
1. Interest 
Receipts 7.95 5.73 8.50 4.55 7.00 5.10 3.25 7.13 5.50 15.68 120 
2. 
Miscellaneous 
General 
Services 
23.50 22.18 21.00 21.45 24.50 19.34 11.10 28.70 2.00 31.80 11 
Chapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
224 
 
Sl. No. Head of 
revenue 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Percentage of 
2023-24 over 
2022-23 BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals 
5. State Excise 5.10 3.24 5.50 4.54 5.50 3.32 3.20 4.40 3.25 4.55 3 
6. 
Taxes on 
Sales, Trade 
etc. 
252.89 175.15 265.50 205.50 325.00 261.87 280.00 246.55 290.00 265.97 8 
7. Taxes on 
vehicles 121.04 113.93 131.72 93.29 145.00 141.04 115.00 187.64 135.00 198.48 6 
8. 
Taxes on 
Goods and 
Passengers 
18.91 18.09 25.00 15.62 25.00 21.43 20.00 21.58 22.00 22.62 5 
9. 
Taxes on 
Duties and 
Electricity 
0.09 0.08 0.11 5.40 0.10 7.77 4.75 7.97 7.00 7.90 (-)1 
10. 
Other Taxes 
and Duties on 
Commodities 
and Services 
0.80 0.05 0.25 0.00 2.45 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0 
Total 
(Own Tax Revenue) 780.15 958.23 1,011.13 1,022.74 1,271.62 1,300.89 1,417.49 1,461.88 1,569.72 1,598.10 9 
Source: Budget documents and Finance Accounts of the respective years 
Key insights:  
 During 2023-24, Goods and Services Tax (GST) collection of the State 
increased by 11 per cent from ₹959.09 crore in 2022-23 to ₹1,063.04 crore in 
2023-24.  
 Both ‘Land Revenue’ and ‘Stamps and Registration Fees’ increased by 
23 per cent from ₹1.09 crore and ₹3.43 crore in 2022-23 to ₹1.34 crore and 
₹4.22 crore respectively in 2023-24.  
 Tax revenue under ‘State Excise’, ‘Taxes on vehicles’, ‘Taxes on Goods and 
Passengers’ and ‘Taxes on Sales and Trade’, observed a growth of three per 
cent, six per cent, five per cent and eight per cent respectively from previous 
year.  
 There was decrease in revenue under ‘Taxes on Duties and Electricity’ by 
one per cent compared to the previous year.  
Thus, the trend in the State’s tax revenue indicates overall growth, with GST 
continuing to be the single largest contributor.  
Details of the Non-tax revenue against the BEs raised during the period 2019-24 are 
shown in Table 5.1.3. 
Table 5.1.3: Details of Non-Tax Revenue against the BEs raised during 2019-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Head of 
revenue 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Percentage 
of 2023-24 
over 
2022-23 
BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals Actuals 
1. Interest 
Receipts 7.95 5.73 8.50 4.55 7.00 5.10 3.25 7.13 5.50 15.68 120 
2. 
Miscellaneous 
General 
Services 
23.50 22.18 21.00 21.45 24.50 19.34 11.10 28.70 2.00 31.80 11 
Chapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
224 
 
Sl. No. Head of 
revenue 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Percentage of 
2023-24 over 
2022-23 BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals 
5. State Excise 5.10 3.24 5.50 4.54 5.50 3.32 3.20 4.40 3.25 4.55 3 
6. 
Taxes on 
Sales, Trade 
etc. 
252.89 175.15 265.50 205.50 325.00 261.87 280.00 246.55 290.00 265.97 8 
7. Taxes on 
vehicles 121.04 113.93 131.72 93.29 145.00 141.04 115.00 187.64 135.00 198.48 6 
8. 
Taxes on 
Goods and 
Passengers 
18.91 18.09 25.00 15.62 25.00 21.43 20.00 21.58 22.00 22.62 5 
9. 
Taxes on 
Duties and 
Electricity 
0.09 0.08 0.11 5.40 0.10 7.77 4.75 7.97 7.00 7.90 (-)1 
10. 
Other Taxes 
and Duties on 
Commodities 
and Services 
0.80 0.05 0.25 0.00 2.45 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0 
Total 
(Own Tax Revenue) 780.15 958.23 1,011.13 1,022.74 1,271.62 1,300.89 1,417.49 1,461.88 1,569.72 1,598.10 9 
Source: Budget documents and Finance Accounts of the respective years 
Key insights:  
 During 2023-24, Goods and Services Tax (GST) collection of the State 
increased by 11 per cent from ₹959.09 crore in 2022-23 to ₹1,063.04 crore in 
2023-24.  
 Both ‘Land Revenue’ and ‘Stamps and Registration Fees’ increased by 
23 per cent from ₹1.09 crore and ₹3.43 crore in 2022-23 to ₹1.34 crore and 
₹4.22 crore respectively in 2023-24.  
 Tax revenue under ‘State Excise’, ‘Taxes on vehicles’, ‘Taxes on Goods and 
Passengers’ and ‘Taxes on Sales and Trade’, observed a growth of three per 
cent, six per cent, five per cent and eight per cent respectively from previous 
year.  
 There was decrease in revenue under ‘Taxes on Duties and Electricity’ by 
one per cent compared to the previous year.  
Thus, the trend in the State’s tax revenue indicates overall growth, with GST 
continuing to be the single largest contributor.  
Details of the Non-tax revenue against the BEs raised during the period 2019-24 are 
shown in Table 5.1.3. 
Table 5.1.3: Details of Non-Tax Revenue against the BEs raised during 2019-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Head of 
revenue 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Percentage 
of 2023-24 
over 
2022-23 
BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals Actuals 
1. Interest 
Receipts 7.95 5.73 8.50 4.55 7.00 5.10 3.25 7.13 5.50 15.68 120 
2. 
Miscellaneous 
General 
Services 
23.50 22.18 21.00 21.45 24.50 19.34 11.10 28.70 2.00 31.80 11 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
225
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
225 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Head of 
revenue 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Percentage 
of 2023-24 
over 
2022-23 
BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals Actuals 
3. Power 160.00 159.31 175.00 171.42 185.00 211.92 225.00 286.35 310.00 282.78 (-) 1 
4. Road 
Transport 8.50 8.43 8.90 3.24 9.00 5.45 5.10 7.92 6.80 8.91 13 
5. Forestry and 
Wildlife 11.00 13.72 12.50 11.55 14.25 19.07 15.00 26.60 20.00 30.81 16 
6. Housing 6.70 6.40 6.80 7.11 7.50 7.71 6.55 13.43 10.50 15.46 15 
7. Co-operation 0.10 1.41 2.25 3.03 1.65 1.80 1.90 0.25 1.90 0.13 (-) 48 
8. Roads and 
Bridges 1.40 0.73 1.62 0.51 0.75 1.17 0.80 0.63 0.50 1.23 95 
9. 
Other 
Administrative 
Services 
6.75 2.86 7.00 1.87 6.00 3.45 1.30 4.48 2.10 6.29 40 
10. Others 103.12 118.51 28.66 17.87 27.76 28.57 20.67 102.92 21.53 284.76 177 
Total  
(Non-Tax Revenue) 329.02 339.29 272.23 242.60 283.41 303.58 290.67 478.41 380.83 677.85 41.69 
Source: Budget documents and Finance Accounts of the respective years 
Key insights:  
 The revenue receipts under the head ‘Interest Receipts’ increased by 
₹8.55 crore from ₹7.13 crore during 2022-23 to ₹15.68 crore during 2023-24 
due to increase in ‘Minor Heads: 800- Other receipts, 195- Interests from 
Co-operative Societies and 110- Interest realised on investment of Cash 
balances’. 
 The revenue receipts under the head ‘Road and Bridges’ increased by 
95 per cent, from ₹0.63 crore to ₹1.23 crore. 
 Similarly, revenue receipts under the head ‘Other Administrative Services’ 
rose by 40 per cent, from ₹4.48 crore to ₹6.29 crore.  
 The revenue receipts under the head ‘Co-operation’ decreased by 48 per cent 
from ₹0.25 crore to ₹0.13 crore due to decrease in ‘Minor Head: 800-Other 
Receipts’. 
Non-Tax Revenue exhibited an increasing trend from the year 2020-21 onwards. The 
power sector continuing to remain the single largest contributor. 
5.1.2 Goods and Services Tax 
Goods and Services Tax (GST) was implemented with effect from 01 July 2017 on 
supply of goods or services or both. GST is concurrently administered by the Union 
(Central GST) and the States (State GST) on supply within the State while Integrated 
Goods and Services Tax (IGST) is levied on inter-State supply of goods or services or 
both. 
The Central Goods and Services Tax (CGST) Act 2017, the Nagaland State Goods 
and Services Tax (NGST) Act 2017 and the Integrated Goods and Services Tax 
(IGST) Act 2017 and allied Rules of all the three Acts are applicable in the State of 
Nagaland. 
Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN), a non-Government Company set up by 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
225 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Head of 
revenue 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Percentage 
of 2023-24 
over 
2022-23 
BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals BEs Actuals Actuals 
3. Power 160.00 159.31 175.00 171.42 185.00 211.92 225.00 286.35 310.00 282.78 (-) 1 
4. Road 
Transport 8.50 8.43 8.90 3.24 9.00 5.45 5.10 7.92 6.80 8.91 13 
5. Forestry and 
Wildlife 11.00 13.72 12.50 11.55 14.25 19.07 15.00 26.60 20.00 30.81 16 
6. Housing 6.70 6.40 6.80 7.11 7.50 7.71 6.55 13.43 10.50 15.46 15 
7. Co-operation 0.10 1.41 2.25 3.03 1.65 1.80 1.90 0.25 1.90 0.13 (-) 48 
8. Roads and 
Bridges 1.40 0.73 1.62 0.51 0.75 1.17 0.80 0.63 0.50 1.23 95 
9. 
Other 
Administrative 
Services 
6.75 2.86 7.00 1.87 6.00 3.45 1.30 4.48 2.10 6.29 40 
10. Others 103.12 118.51 28.66 17.87 27.76 28.57 20.67 102.92 21.53 284.76 177 
Total  
(Non-Tax Revenue) 329.02 339.29 272.23 242.60 283.41 303.58 290.67 478.41 380.83 677.85 41.69 
Source: Budget documents and Finance Accounts of the respective years 
Key insights:  
 The revenue receipts under the head ‘Interest Receipts’ increased by 
₹8.55 crore from ₹7.13 crore during 2022-23 to ₹15.68 crore during 2023-24 
due to increase in ‘Minor Heads: 800- Other receipts, 195- Interests from 
Co-operative Societies and 110- Interest realised on investment of Cash 
balances’. 
 The revenue receipts under the head ‘Road and Bridges’ increased by 
95 per cent, from ₹0.63 crore to ₹1.23 crore. 
 Similarly, revenue receipts under the head ‘Other Administrative Services’ 
rose by 40 per cent, from ₹4.48 crore to ₹6.29 crore.  
 The revenue receipts under the head ‘Co-operation’ decreased by 48 per cent 
from ₹0.25 crore to ₹0.13 crore due to decrease in ‘Minor Head: 800-Other 
Receipts’. 
Non-Tax Revenue exhibited an increasing trend from the year 2020-21 onwards. The 
power sector continuing to remain the single largest contributor. 
5.1.2 Goods and Services Tax 
Goods and Services Tax (GST) was implemented with effect from 01 July 2017 on 
supply of goods or services or both. GST is concurrently administered by the Union 
(Central GST) and the States (State GST) on supply within the State while Integrated 
Goods and Services Tax (IGST) is levied on inter-State supply of goods or services or 
both. 
The Central Goods and Services Tax (CGST) Act 2017, the Nagaland State Goods 
and Services Tax (NGST) Act 2017 and the Integrated Goods and Services Tax 
(IGST) Act 2017 and allied Rules of all the three Acts are applicable in the State of 
Nagaland. 
Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN), a non-Government Company set up by 

226
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
226 
 
Government of India provides both front-end and back-end services to Nagaland 
being a Model-II State. Front-end services provided to taxpayers include registration, 
return filing, and payment of tax, while back-end services include approval of 
registration, taxpayer detail viewer, refund processing and MIS reports. 
Implementation of GST necessitated smooth transitional provisions which enable 
migration of all existing businesses to the new regime. The transitional provisions 
have been specifically incorporated in all the three GST Acts/Rules. 
5.1.2.1 GST Registrations  
As per Section 22 of the GST Act 2017 every supplier is liable to be registered under 
GST if their aggregate turnover exceeds ₹10 1 lakh in any financial year. This 
threshold was enhanced 2 (01 April 2019) to ₹20 lakh in respect of dealers dealing 
with sale of goods. The category wise registrations under GST as on March 2024 is 
shown in Table 5.1.4. 
Table 5.1.4: Registered taxpayers under GST 
Types of Taxpayers Number of dealers Percentage of total 
Normal Taxpayers 8,202 77 
Composition Taxpayers 1,961 18 
Tax Deductors at Source (TDS) 361 3 
Tax Collectors at Source (TCS) 110 1 
Input Service Distributors (ISD) 3 0.03 
Others (Casual, NRTP, OIDAR) 0 0 
Total Registrants 10,637 - 
Source: Information provided by State Taxation Department 
The total registrations under GST in Nagaland as on March 2024 was 10,637 of 
which, normal taxpayers accounted for 77 per cent, TDS accounted for three per cent 
and others (including TCS, composition taxpayers and ISD) accounted for 
19.03 per cent. 
5.1.2.2 State GST Revenue 
The comparison of budget estimates and the corresponding actual collection of GST 
during the period from 2018-19 to 2023-24 are shown in Table 5.1.5. 
Table 5.1.5: Revenue from GST during 2018-19 to 2023-24 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Budget Estimate (BE) Revised Estimate (RE) Actuals 
State GST State GST State GST 
2018-19 250.00 301.21 469.64 
2019-20 340.37 491.36 613.22 
2020-21 541.25 462.94 663.81 
2021-22 726.72 895.00 830.34 
2022-23 957.65 975.00 959.09 
2023-24 1,075.00 1,112.54 1,063.04 
Source: Budget documents and Finance Accounts of the respective years 
It could be seen from the above table that the actual collection of revenue from State 
GST during 2018-19 to 2020-21 was more than the target as projected in the revised 
                                                             
1  Special category States 
2  Vide Notification No.10/2019-Central Tax dated 7 March 2019 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
227
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
227 
 
estimates whereas State GST collection during 2021-22 to 2023-24 was short of the 
target as projected in the revised estimates for the respective years. 
5.1.2.3 Trends of Integrated GST apportionment to the State 
IGST collected will be apportioned between the Centre and the State where the goods 
or services are consumed. The revenue will be apportioned to the Centre at the CGST 
rate, and the remaining amount will be apportioned to the consuming State. The 
trends of IGST apportionment to the State are shown in Table 5.1.6. 
Table 5.1.6: Integrated Goods and Services Tax 
(₹ in crore) 
IGST component 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
I G S T  a p p o r t i o n e d  t o  t h e  State 
as per Section 17 of IGST Act, 
2017 
331.41 457.98 451.65 617.57 720.50 751.90 
IGST provisionally/ ad-hoc 
apportioned to the State 41.78 10.56 24.33 25.30 15.71 11.30 
Source: Information provided by the Department 
5.1.2.4 GST Return filing pattern 
The filing of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B returns is mandated under Section 37 and 39(1) 
of the NGST Act. The system envisages that both the returns are linked to enable the 
assessing officer to accurately assess the tax dues of the dealer, for a particular month. 
The trends of filing of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B as on 31 March 2024 for the period 
from April 2023 to March 2024, as compiled from the information furnished by the 
Department, is depicted in the following Table 5.1.7. 
Table 5.1.7: Filing pattern of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B  
Return Type GSTR-1 GSTR-3B 
Month 
Due 
for 
filing 
Return 
filed 
Return 
filing 
per cent 
Due 
for 
filing 
Returns filed 
as on the last 
day of the 
report period 
Return 
filing 
per cent 
Returns 
filed by 
due date 
Per cent 
filed by due 
date 
April 2023 6,830 6,107 89 6,830 6,098 89 
Data not 
available 
Data not 
available 
May 2023 6,915 6,185 89 6,915 6,173 89 
June 2023 
(Monthly  & 
Quarterly) 
8,244 7,437 90 8,244 7,416 90 
July 2023 6,984 6,208 89 6,984 6,204 89 
August 2023 7,036 6,268 89 7,036 6,264 89 
September 2023 
(Monthly  & 
Quarterly) 
8,335 7,439 89 8,335 7,459 89 
October 2023 7,047 6,246 87 7,047 6,226 88 
November 2023 7,108 6,246 88 7,108 6,227 88 
December  2023 
(Monthly  & 
Quarterly) 
8,450 7,432 88 8,450 7,423 88 
January 2024 7,125 6,124 86 7,125 6,087 85 
February 2024 7,108 5,994 84 7,108 5,936 84 
March 2024 
(Monthly & 
Quarterly) 
8,509 6,394 75 8,509 6,143 72 
Source: Information provided by Department 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
227 
 
estimates whereas State GST collection during 2021-22 to 2023-24 was short of the 
target as projected in the revised estimates for the respective years. 
5.1.2.3 Trends of Integrated GST apportionment to the State 
IGST collected will be apportioned between the Centre and the State where the goods 
or services are consumed. The revenue will be apportioned to the Centre at the CGST 
rate, and the remaining amount will be apportioned to the consuming State. The 
trends of IGST apportionment to the State are shown in Table 5.1.6. 
Table 5.1.6: Integrated Goods and Services Tax 
(₹ in crore) 
IGST component 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
I G S T  a p p o r t i o n e d  t o  t h e  State 
as per Section 17 of IGST Act, 
2017 
331.41 457.98 451.65 617.57 720.50 751.90 
IGST provisionally/ ad-hoc 
apportioned to the State 41.78 10.56 24.33 25.30 15.71 11.30 
Source: Information provided by the Department 
5.1.2.4 GST Return filing pattern 
The filing of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B returns is mandated under Section 37 and 39(1) 
of the NGST Act. The system envisages that both the returns are linked to enable the 
assessing officer to accurately assess the tax dues of the dealer, for a particular month. 
The trends of filing of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B as on 31 March 2024 for the period 
from April 2023 to March 2024, as compiled from the information furnished by the 
Department, is depicted in the following Table 5.1.7. 
Table 5.1.7: Filing pattern of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B  
Return Type GSTR-1 GSTR-3B 
Month 
Due 
for 
filing 
Return 
filed 
Return 
filing 
per cent 
Due 
for 
filing 
Returns filed 
as on the last 
day of the 
report period 
Return 
filing 
per cent 
Returns 
filed by 
due date 
Per cent 
filed by due 
date 
April 2023 6,830 6,107 89 6,830 6,098 89 
Data not 
available 
Data not 
available 
May 2023 6,915 6,185 89 6,915 6,173 89 
June 2023 
(Monthly  & 
Quarterly) 
8,244 7,437 90 8,244 7,416 90 
July 2023 6,984 6,208 89 6,984 6,204 89 
August 2023 7,036 6,268 89 7,036 6,264 89 
September 2023 
(Monthly  & 
Quarterly) 
8,335 7,439 89 8,335 7,459 89 
October 2023 7,047 6,246 87 7,047 6,226 88 
November 2023 7,108 6,246 88 7,108 6,227 88 
December  2023 
(Monthly  & 
Quarterly) 
8,450 7,432 88 8,450 7,423 88 
January 2024 7,125 6,124 86 7,125 6,087 85 
February 2024 7,108 5,994 84 7,108 5,936 84 
March 2024 
(Monthly & 
Quarterly) 
8,509 6,394 75 8,509 6,143 72 
Source: Information provided by Department 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
227 
 
estimates whereas State GST collection during 2021-22 to 2023-24 was short of the 
target as projected in the revised estimates for the respective years. 
5.1.2.3 Trends of Integrated GST apportionment to the State 
IGST collected will be apportioned between the Centre and the State where the goods 
or services are consumed. The revenue will be apportioned to the Centre at the CGST 
rate, and the remaining amount will be apportioned to the consuming State. The 
trends of IGST apportionment to the State are shown in Table 5.1.6. 
Table 5.1.6: Integrated Goods and Services Tax 
(₹ in crore) 
IGST component 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
I G S T  a p p o r t i o n e d  t o  t h e  State 
as per Section 17 of IGST Act, 
2017 
331.41 457.98 451.65 617.57 720.50 751.90 
IGST provisionally/ ad-hoc 
apportioned to the State 41.78 10.56 24.33 25.30 15.71 11.30 
Source: Information provided by the Department 
5.1.2.4 GST Return filing pattern 
The filing of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B returns is mandated under Section 37 and 39(1) 
of the NGST Act. The system envisages that both the returns are linked to enable the 
assessing officer to accurately assess the tax dues of the dealer, for a particular month. 
The trends of filing of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B as on 31 March 2024 for the period 
from April 2023 to March 2024, as compiled from the information furnished by the 
Department, is depicted in the following Table 5.1.7. 
Table 5.1.7: Filing pattern of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B  
Return Type GSTR-1 GSTR-3B 
Month 
Due 
for 
filing 
Return 
filed 
Return 
filing 
per cent 
Due 
for 
filing 
Returns filed 
as on the last 
day of the 
report period 
Return 
filing 
per cent 
Returns 
filed by 
due date 
Per cent 
filed by due 
date 
April 2023 6,830 6,107 89 6,830 6,098 89 
Data not 
available 
Data not 
available 
May 2023 6,915 6,185 89 6,915 6,173 89 
June 2023 
(Monthly  & 
Quarterly) 
8,244 7,437 90 8,244 7,416 90 
July 2023 6,984 6,208 89 6,984 6,204 89 
August 2023 7,036 6,268 89 7,036 6,264 89 
September 2023 
(Monthly  & 
Quarterly) 
8,335 7,439 89 8,335 7,459 89 
October 2023 7,047 6,246 87 7,047 6,226 88 
November 2023 7,108 6,246 88 7,108 6,227 88 
December  2023 
(Monthly  & 
Quarterly) 
8,450 7,432 88 8,450 7,423 88 
January 2024 7,125 6,124 86 7,125 6,087 85 
February 2024 7,108 5,994 84 7,108 5,936 84 
March 2024 
(Monthly & 
Quarterly) 
8,509 6,394 75 8,509 6,143 72 
Source: Information provided by Department 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
227 
 
estimates whereas State GST collection during 2021-22 to 2023-24 was short of the 
target as projected in the revised estimates for the respective years. 
5.1.2.3 Trends of Integrated GST apportionment to the State 
IGST collected will be apportioned between the Centre and the State where the goods 
or services are consumed. The revenue will be apportioned to the Centre at the CGST 
rate, and the remaining amount will be apportioned to the consuming State. The 
trends of IGST apportionment to the State are shown in Table 5.1.6. 
Table 5.1.6: Integrated Goods and Services Tax 
(₹ in crore) 
IGST component 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
I G S T  a p p o r t i o n e d  t o  t h e  State 
as per Section 17 of IGST Act, 
2017 
331.41 457.98 451.65 617.57 720.50 751.90 
IGST provisionally/ ad-hoc 
apportioned to the State 41.78 10.56 24.33 25.30 15.71 11.30 
Source: Information provided by the Department 
5.1.2.4 GST Return filing pattern 
The filing of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B returns is mandated under Section 37 and 39(1) 
of the NGST Act. The system envisages that both the returns are linked to enable the 
assessing officer to accurately assess the tax dues of the dealer, for a particular month. 
The trends of filing of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B as on 31 March 2024 for the period 
from April 2023 to March 2024, as compiled from the information furnished by the 
Department, is depicted in the following Table 5.1.7. 
Table 5.1.7: Filing pattern of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B  
Return Type GSTR-1 GSTR-3B 
Month 
Due 
for 
filing 
Return 
filed 
Return 
filing 
per cent 
Due 
for 
filing 
Returns filed 
as on the last 
day of the 
report period 
Return 
filing 
per cent 
Returns 
filed by 
due date 
Per cent 
filed by due 
date 
April 2023 6,830 6,107 89 6,830 6,098 89 
Data not 
available 
Data not 
available 
May 2023 6,915 6,185 89 6,915 6,173 89 
June 2023 
(Monthly  & 
Quarterly) 
8,244 7,437 90 8,244 7,416 90 
July 2023 6,984 6,208 89 6,984 6,204 89 
August 2023 7,036 6,268 89 7,036 6,264 89 
September 2023 
(Monthly  & 
Quarterly) 
8,335 7,439 89 8,335 7,459 89 
October 2023 7,047 6,246 87 7,047 6,226 88 
November 2023 7,108 6,246 88 7,108 6,227 88 
December  2023 
(Monthly  & 
Quarterly) 
8,450 7,432 88 8,450 7,423 88 
January 2024 7,125 6,124 86 7,125 6,087 85 
February 2024 7,108 5,994 84 7,108 5,936 84 
March 2024 
(Monthly & 
Quarterly) 
8,509 6,394 75 8,509 6,143 72 
Source: Information provided by Department 

228
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
228 
 
Here are some key insights from Table 5.1.7: 
1. Overall Filing Trends 
 Filing percentages for both GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B mostly stayed in the 
84-90 per cent  range throughout April 2023 to February 2024, indicating 
high compliance. However, there was a significant drop in March 2024, 
when GSTR-1 compliance fell to 75 per cent and GSTR-3B compliance fell 
to 72 per cent. 
 The filing patterns for GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B were closely linked, as both 
return types showed similar monthly filing percentages across the year. 
2. Notable Monthly Observations 
 The highest filing compliance was recorded in June 2023, when both 
GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B achieved 90 per cent filing rates. 
 The lowest filing compliance occurred in March 2024, which saw a sharp 
drop of about 15 percentage points from the June 2023 peak. 
 Filing rates gradually declined from October 2023, when compliance was in 
the 87 - 88 per cent range, to February 2024, when compliance had reduced 
to 84 per cent. 
3. Filing by Due Date 
 Data on returns filed by the due date was generally unavailable for most 
months, with only partial data available for GSTR-3B. 
 The available GSTR-3B data shows that on-time compliance was slightly 
lower than total compliance, indicating that some taxpayers filed after the 
due date. 
 The lack of comprehensive data on timely filing makes it difficult to analyse 
patterns of delayed filing behaviour. 
4. Compliance Gaps and Risk Areas 
 In most months, 10–16 per cent of registered taxpayers did not file returns at 
all. 
 The sharp decline in March 2024 filing rates could indicate seasonal 
compliance lapses, taxpayer fatigue, or gaps in enforcement measures. 
 Without timely filing data for most months, it is not possible to fully assess 
the risk of revenue leakage or the extent of penalties from late return filing. 
5.1.3 Analysis of arrears of revenue  
The arrears of revenue as on 31 March 2024 on some principal heads of revenue 
amounted to ₹5.45 crore out of which ₹2.52 crore was outstanding for more than 
five years as shown in Table 5.1.8. 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
229
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
229 
 
Table 5.1.8: Arrears of revenue 
(₹ in crore) 
Source: Departmental figures 
As on 31 March 2024, arrears of ₹5.45 crore were pending with the departmental 
authorities of which recovery of ₹2.52 crore was pending for more than five years.  
Recommendation: 
The Department should review the arrears and take action for recovery in 
accordance with the law. 
 
5.1.4 Arrears in assessments 
The details of cases pending at the beginning of the year, cases becoming due for 
assessment, cases disposed of during the year and number of cases pending for 
finalisation at the end of the year as furnished by the Sales Tax Department in respect 
of Sales Tax/VAT on Sales, Trades, etc. as shown in Table 5.1.9. 
Table 5.1.9: Arrears in assessments 
Head of 
Revenue 
Opening 
Balance of 
arrears in 
assessment as 
on 
01 April 2023 
New 
cases due 
for 
assessme
nt during 
2023-24 
Total 
assessment 
due 
Cases 
disposed-off 
during 
2023-24 
Balance at the 
end of 
31 March 2024 
Percentage 
of cases 
disposed to 
the total 
assessment 
due 
(in number) (in per cent) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 (5 to 4) 
Taxes/VAT 
on Sales, 
Trades, etc. 
548 110 658 555 103 84 
Source: Departmental figures 
The arrears in assessment decreased by 81 per cent from 548 to 103 cases with the 
addition of 110 cases, which became due for assessment during 2023-24 and 
555 cases were disposed-off (84 per cent of the total assessment due) during the year. 
5.1.5  Pendency of Refund Cases 
The number of refund cases under Sales Tax/NVAT and State GST pending at the 
beginning of the year 2023-24, claims received during the year, refunds allowed 
during the year and the cases pending at the close of the year 2023-24 as reported by 
the Department as shown in Table 5.1.10. 
Sl. No. Head of revenue 
Total Amount 
outstanding as on 
31 March 2024 
Amount outstanding for 
more than five years as on 
31 March 2024 
1. Nagaland Value Added Tax 0.91 0.61 
2. Petroleum Tax 3.87 1.24 
3. Central Sales Tax 0.41 0.41 
4. Purchase Tax 0.00 0.00 
5. Professional Tax 0.03 0.03 
6. Nagaland Sales Tax 0.23 0.23 
7. GST 0.00 0.00 
Total 5.45 2.52 
State Taxes Department in respect

230
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
230 
 
Table 5.1.10: Details of pendency of refund cases 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 
Sales Tax/VAT State GST 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
1. Claims outstanding at the beginning of 
the year - - 44 4.65 
2. Claims received during the year - - 46 7.01 
3. Refunds made during the year - - 75 7.54 
4. Refunds rejected during the year - - 03 1.02 
5. Balance outstanding at the end of the 
year - - 12 3.10 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
As can be seen from Table 5.1.10  above, out of the total 90 pending refund cases 
valued at ₹11.66 crore under the State GST, 75 cases valued at ₹7.54 crore 
(65 per cent) were refunded and three cases valued at ₹1.02 crore were rejected. Out 
of the 75 refund cases settled during the year, the Department made an interest 
payment of ₹15.00 for one case. The balance 12 cases involving ₹3.10 crore 
(27 per cent) under the State GST were yet to be refunded as of March 2024. 
Under Section 56 of the NGST Act, the Taxation Department is liable to pay interest 
at the rate of six per cent per annum, if any tax ordered to be refunded to the applicant 
is not refunded within 60 days from the date of receipt of application. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may expedite the pendency of refund cases to avoid the interest 
payment. 
 
5.1.6 Cases of evasion of tax detected by the Department 
The details of cases of evasion of tax detected by the Department, cases finalised and 
the demands for additional tax raised were requisitioned (July 2024) from the 
Commissioner of State Taxes, Nagaland, Dimapur. The Commissioner of State Taxes, 
Nagaland, Dimapur replied (August 2024) that no evasion of tax was detected. 
5.1.7 Response of the Government/Departments towards Audit 
The Accountant General (Audit), Nagaland conducts periodical inspection of the 
Government departments to test-check the transactions and verify the maintenance of 
important accounts and other records as prescribed in the rules and procedures. These 
inspections are followed up with the Inspection Reports (IRs) incorporating 
irregularities detected during the inspection and which are not settled on the spot, are 
issued to the Heads of the Offices inspected with copies to the next higher authorities 
for taking prompt corrective action. The Heads of the Offices/Departments are 
required to promptly comply with the observations contained in the IRs, rectify the 
defects, omissions and report compliance through initial reply to the Accountant 
General (Audit) within one month from the date of issue of the IRs. Serious financial 
irregularities are reported to the Heads of the Department and the Government for 
response. If replies to such serious and important audit observations are not found 
acceptable/convincing, these are included in the Report of the Comptroller and 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
231 
 
Auditor General (C&AG) of India. 
IRs issued upto March 2024 revealed that 329 paragraphs involving ₹2,320.25 crore 
relating to 60 IRs remained outstanding. Such details along with the corresponding 
figures for the preceding two years are shown in Table 5.1.11. 
Table 5.1.11: Details of outstanding audit observations 
Particulars March 2022 March 2023 March 2024 
Number of outstanding IRs 91 94 60 
Number of outstanding audit observations 392 402 329 
Amount involved (₹ in crore) 408.93 411.36 2,320.25 
Source: IRs of Revenue Sector 
5.1.7.1 Outstanding Inspection Reports and Audit Observations 
The Department-wise details of the IRs and audit observations outstanding as on 
31 March 2024 and the amount involved are shown in Table 5.1.12. 
Table 5.1.12: Department-wise details of IRs and audit observations outstanding 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Department Name of Receipts 
No. of 
outstanding 
IRs 
No. of 
Outstanding 
Audit 
Observations 
Money 
Value 
involved  
(₹ in crore) 
1. 
Finance 
Taxes/VAT on Sales, Trade, 
etc. 26 219 168.23 
2. Miscellaneous General 
Services/Lottery 04 22 2,140.49 
3. Transport Taxes on Vehicles/Taxes on 
Goods & Passengers 28 70 11.51 
4. Forests & 
Environment Forest & Wildlife 02 18 0.02 
Total 60 329 2,320.25 
Source: IRs of Revenue Sector 
The pendency of IR due to non-receipt of replies was indicative of the fact that the 
Heads of Offices/Departments had not initiated action to rectify the defects, omissions 
and irregularities pointed out by the Accountant General (Audit) in the IRs. 
Recommendation: 
The State Government may consider putting in place an effective system for prompt 
and appropriate response to audit observations. 
 
5.1.7.2 Departmental Audit Committee meetings 
In order to expedite settlement of the outstanding audit observations contained in the 
IRs, Departmental Audit Committees are constituted by the State Government. These 
Committees are chaired by the Secretaries of the Administrative Departments 
concerned and attended by the officers concerned of the State Government and 
officers of the Accountant General (Audit), Nagaland. The Audit Committees need to 
meet regularly in order to expedite clearance of the outstanding audit observations. 
During 2023-24, no Audit Committee meeting was convened during the period to 
clear the outstanding audit observations. 
Recommendation: 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
231
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
231 
 
Auditor General (C&AG) of India. 
IRs issued upto March 2024 revealed that 329 paragraphs involving ₹2,320.25 crore 
relating to 60 IRs remained outstanding. Such details along with the corresponding 
figures for the preceding two years are shown in Table 5.1.11. 
Table 5.1.11: Details of outstanding audit observations 
Particulars March 2022 March 2023 March 2024 
Number of outstanding IRs 91 94 60 
Number of outstanding audit observations 392 402 329 
Amount involved (₹ in crore) 408.93 411.36 2,320.25 
Source: IRs of Revenue Sector 
5.1.7.1 Outstanding Inspection Reports and Audit Observations 
The Department-wise details of the IRs and audit observations outstanding as on 
31 March 2024 and the amount involved are shown in Table 5.1.12. 
Table 5.1.12: Department-wise details of IRs and audit observations outstanding 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Department Name of Receipts 
No. of 
outstanding 
IRs 
No. of 
Outstanding 
Audit 
Observations 
Money 
Value 
involved  
(₹ in crore) 
1. 
Finance 
Taxes/VAT on Sales, Trade, 
etc. 26 219 168.23 
2. Miscellaneous General 
Services/Lottery 04 22 2,140.49 
3. Transport Taxes on Vehicles/Taxes on 
Goods & Passengers 28 70 11.51 
4. Forests & 
Environment Forest & Wildlife 02 18 0.02 
Total 60 329 2,320.25 
Source: IRs of Revenue Sector 
The pendency of IR due to non-receipt of replies was indicative of the fact that the 
Heads of Offices/Departments had not initiated action to rectify the defects, omissions 
and irregularities pointed out by the Accountant General (Audit) in the IRs. 
Recommendation: 
The State Government may consider putting in place an effective system for prompt 
and appropriate response to audit observations. 
 
5.1.7.2 Departmental Audit Committee meetings 
In order to expedite settlement of the outstanding audit observations contained in the 
IRs, Departmental Audit Committees are constituted by the State Government. These 
Committees are chaired by the Secretaries of the Administrative Departments 
concerned and attended by the officers concerned of the State Government and 
officers of the Accountant General (Audit), Nagaland. The Audit Committees need to 
meet regularly in order to expedite clearance of the outstanding audit observations. 
During 2023-24, no Audit Committee meeting was convened during the period to 
clear the outstanding audit observations. 
Recommendation: 
Chapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
232 
 
The State Government may ensure holding of regular meetings of the Audit 
Committees for ensuring effective remedial action on the audit observations. 
 
5.1.7.3 Follow up on the Audit Reports-summarised position 
The internal working system of the Public Accounts Committee (PAC), notified in 
December 2002, laid down that after the presentation of the Report of the C&AG in 
the Legislative Assembly, the departments shall initiate action on the audit paragraphs 
and the action taken explanatory notes thereon should be submitted by the 
Government within three months of tabling the Report, for consideration of the 
Committee. In spite of these provisions, the explanatory notes on audit paragraphs of 
the Reports were being delayed inordinately. 
Nineteen paragraphs3, two Performance Audits4 and one Subject Specific Compliance 
Audit5 (SSCA) included in the Reports of the C&AG on the Revenue Sector of the 
GoN for the years 31 March 2016 to 31 March 2022 were placed before the State 
Legislative Assembly between March 2017 and September 2023. 
PAC discussed (during June 2023 to December 2023) eight paragraphs 6 pertaining to 
the Reports of the years March 2019 and March 2020. Of these, two paragraphs were 
dropped following the Department’s reply. The PAC recommended two paragraphs 
for dropping and gave recommendations for the remaining four paragraphs which are 
pending presentation in the State Legislative Assembly . The Departments did not 
furnish suo-moto explanatory notes to the Principal Accountant General (Audit) 
through the Nagaland Legislative Assembly Secretariat in respect of 
paragraphs/reviews which appeared in the Audit Reports. 
During 2023-24, seven PAC meetings were held, however, no Action Taken Note was 
received. 
5.1.8 Analysis of the mechanism for dealing with the issues raised by Audit 
To analyse the system of addressing the issues highlighted in the IRs/Audit Reports 
by the Departments/Government, the action taken on the paragraphs and performance 
audits included in the Audit Reports of the last 10 years for Taxation Department was 
evaluated. The succeeding Paragraphs 5.1.8.1 and 5.1.9  discuss the performance of 
Taxation Department in dealing with the cases detected in the course of local audit 
conducted and also the cases included in the Audit Reports for the years 2018-19 to 
2023-24. 
                                                             
3 Three paragraphs of Audit Report 2015-16, three paragraphs of Audit Report 2016-17, three 
paragraphs of Audit Report 2017-18, two paragraphs of Audit Report 2018-19, five paragraphs 
of Audit Report 2019-20 and three paragraphs of Audit Report 2020-22. 
4 Two Performance Audits in Audit Report 2015-16 viz. Nagaland State Lotteries and 
Computerisation of Motor Vehicle Department. 
5 One SSCA in Audit Report 2019-20 viz. Processing of refund claims under Goods and Service 
Tax. 
6 Two paragraphs from Audit Report of 2018-19 and six paragraphs from Audit Report 2019-20.  

232
Chapter V: Revenue Sector
Chapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
232 
 
The State Government may ensure holding of regular meetings of the Audit 
Committees for ensuring effective remedial action on the audit observations. 
 
5.1.7.3 Follow up on the Audit Reports-summarised position 
The internal working system of the Public Accounts Committee (PAC), notified in 
December 2002, laid down that after the presentation of the Report of the C&AG in 
the Legislative Assembly, the departments shall initiate action on the audit paragraphs 
and the action taken explanatory notes thereon should be submitted by the 
Government within three months of tabling the Report, for consideration of the 
Committee. In spite of these provisions, the explanatory notes on audit paragraphs of 
the Reports were being delayed inordinately. 
Nineteen paragraphs3, two Performance Audits4 and one Subject Specific Compliance 
Audit5 (SSCA) included in the Reports of the C&AG on the Revenue Sector of the 
GoN for the years 31 March 2016 to 31 March 2022 were placed before the State 
Legislative Assembly between March 2017 and September 2023. 
PAC discussed (during June 2023 to December 2023) eight paragraphs 6 pertaining to 
the Reports of the years March 2019 and March 2020. Of these, two paragraphs were 
dropped following the Department’s reply. The PAC recommended two paragraphs 
for dropping and gave recommendations for the remaining four paragraphs which are 
pending presentation in the State Legislative Assembly . The Departments did not 
furnish suo-moto explanatory notes to the Principal Accountant General (Audit) 
through the Nagaland Legislative Assembly Secretariat in respect of 
paragraphs/reviews which appeared in the Audit Reports. 
During 2023-24, seven PAC meetings were held, however, no Action Taken Note was 
received. 
5.1.8 Analysis of the mechanism for dealing with the issues raised by Audit 
To analyse the system of addressing the issues highlighted in the IRs/Audit Reports 
by the Departments/Government, the action taken on the paragraphs and performance 
audits included in the Audit Reports of the last 10 years for Taxation Department was 
evaluated. The succeeding Paragraphs 5.1.8.1 and 5.1.9  discuss the performance of 
Taxation Department in dealing with the cases detected in the course of local audit 
conducted and also the cases included in the Audit Reports for the years 2018-19 to 
2023-24. 
                                                             
3 Three paragraphs of Audit Report 2015-16, three paragraphs of Audit Report 2016-17, three 
paragraphs of Audit Report 2017-18, two paragraphs of Audit Report 2018-19, five paragraphs 
of Audit Report 2019-20 and three paragraphs of Audit Report 2020-22. 
4 Two Performance Audits in Audit Report 2015-16 viz. Nagaland State Lotteries and 
Computerisation of Motor Vehicle Department. 
5 One SSCA in Audit Report 2019-20 viz. Processing of refund claims under Goods and Service 
Tax. 
6 Two paragraphs from Audit Report of 2018-19 and six paragraphs from Audit Report 2019-20.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
233
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
233 
 
5.1.8.1 Position of Inspection Reports 
The summarised position of IRs issued during the last five years and their status as on 
31 March 2024 are shown in Table 5.1.13. 
Table 5.1.13: Position of Inspection Reports 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Opening Balance Addition during the year Clearance during the year Closing Balance 
IR Para
s 
Money 
Value IR Paras Money 
Value IR Paras Money 
Value IR Paras Money 
Value 
2019-20 78 318 376.96 12 65 40.83 6 21 12.73 84 362 405.06 
2020-21 84 362 405.06 2 11 3.03 2 20 11.17 84 353 396.92 
2021-22 84 353 396.92 7 46 17.78 0 7 5.77 91 392 408.93 
2022-23 91 392 408.93 3 15 3.92 0 5 1.48 94 402 411.37 
2023-24 117 402 411.36 10 61 2,144.12 67 134 235.23 60 329 2,320.25 
Source: IRs of Revenue Sector 
It is evident from the above table that against 78 outstanding IRs with 318 paragraphs 
as on 01 April 2019, the number of outstanding IRs decreased to 60 with 
329 paragraphs at the end of March 2024. 
Recommendation: 
The Department needs to take adequate steps to settle the outstanding IRs to avoid 
accumulation of the IRs and paragraphs. 
5.1.9 Recovery in cases accepted by the Departments 
The position of paragraphs included in the C&AG’s Audit Reports of the last three 
years, those accepted by the Departments and the amounts recovered are shown in 
Table 5.1.14. 
Table 5.1.14: Position of recovery of accepted cases 
(₹ in crore) 
Year of 
Audit 
Report 
Number of 
paragraphs 
included 
Money value 
of the 
paragraphs 
Number of 
paragraphs 
accepted 
Money value of 
accepted 
paragraphs 
Amount 
recovered 
during the year 
2018-19 2 21.02 0   0.00 0.00 
2019-20 5 31.42 0   0.00 0.00 
2020-22 3 25.61 1   7.47 2.48 
Total    7.47 2.48 
Source: Previous C&AG Reports 
Note: Audit Report for 2022-23 and 2023-24 not yet presented in the State Legislative Assembly. 
From the above table, it may be seen that during the last three years, the Department 
accepted paragraphs with an amount of ₹7.47 crore, against which ₹2.48 crore 
(33 per cent) was recovered. Thus, it is evident that recovery progress, even in 
accepted cases, remained slow over the past three years. 
Recommendation: 
The State Government may direct the Department to expedite the recovery of the 
dues involved in the accepted cases. 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
233 
 
5.1.8.1 Position of Inspection Reports 
The summarised position of IRs issued during the last five years and their status as on 
31 March 2024 are shown in Table 5.1.13. 
Table 5.1.13: Position of Inspection Reports 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Opening Balance Addition during the year Clearance during the year Closing Balance 
IR Para
s 
Money 
Value IR Paras Money 
Value IR Paras Money 
Value IR Paras Money 
Value 
2019-20 78 318 376.96 12 65 40.83 6 21 12.73 84 362 405.06 
2020-21 84 362 405.06 2 11 3.03 2 20 11.17 84 353 396.92 
2021-22 84 353 396.92 7 46 17.78 0 7 5.77 91 392 408.93 
2022-23 91 392 408.93 3 15 3.92 0 5 1.48 94 402 411.37 
2023-24 117 402 411.36 10 61 2,144.12 67 134 235.23 60 329 2,320.25 
Source: IRs of Revenue Sector 
It is evident from the above table that against 78 outstanding IRs with 318 paragraphs 
as on 01 April 2019, the number of outstanding IRs decreased to 60 with 
329 paragraphs at the end of March 2024. 
Recommendation: 
The Department needs to take adequate steps to settle the outstanding IRs to avoid 
accumulation of the IRs and paragraphs. 
5.1.9 Recovery in cases accepted by the Departments 
The position of paragraphs included in the C&AG’s Audit Reports of the last three 
years, those accepted by the Departments and the amounts recovered are shown in 
Table 5.1.14. 
Table 5.1.14: Position of recovery of accepted cases 
(₹ in crore) 
Year of 
Audit 
Report 
Number of 
paragraphs 
included 
Money value 
of the 
paragraphs 
Number of 
paragraphs 
accepted 
Money value of 
accepted 
paragraphs 
Amount 
recovered 
during the year 
2018-19 2 21.02 0   0.00 0.00 
2019-20 5 31.42 0   0.00 0.00 
2020-22 3 25.61 1   7.47 2.48 
Total    7.47 2.48 
Source: Previous C&AG Reports 
Note: Audit Report for 2022-23 and 2023-24 not yet presented in the State Legislative Assembly. 
From the above table, it may be seen that during the last three years, the Department 
accepted paragraphs with an amount of ₹7.47 crore, against which ₹2.48 crore 
(33 per cent) was recovered. Thus, it is evident that recovery progress, even in 
accepted cases, remained slow over the past three years. 
Recommendation: 
The State Government may direct the Department to expedite the recovery of the 
dues involved in the accepted cases. 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
233 
 
5.1.8.1 Position of Inspection Reports 
The summarised position of IRs issued during the last five years and their status as on 
31 March 2024 are shown in Table 5.1.13. 
Table 5.1.13: Position of Inspection Reports 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Opening Balance Addition during the year Clearance during the year Closing Balance 
IR Para
s 
Money 
Value IR Paras Money 
Value IR Paras Money 
Value IR Paras Money 
Value 
2019-20 78 318 376.96 12 65 40.83 6 21 12.73 84 362 405.06 
2020-21 84 362 405.06 2 11 3.03 2 20 11.17 84 353 396.92 
2021-22 84 353 396.92 7 46 17.78 0 7 5.77 91 392 408.93 
2022-23 91 392 408.93 3 15 3.92 0 5 1.48 94 402 411.37 
2023-24 117 402 411.36 10 61 2,144.12 67 134 235.23 60 329 2,320.25 
Source: IRs of Revenue Sector 
It is evident from the above table that against 78 outstanding IRs with 318 paragraphs 
as on 01 April 2019, the number of outstanding IRs decreased to 60 with 
329 paragraphs at the end of March 2024. 
Recommendation: 
The Department needs to take adequate steps to settle the outstanding IRs to avoid 
accumulation of the IRs and paragraphs. 
5.1.9 Recovery in cases accepted by the Departments 
The position of paragraphs included in the C&AG’s Audit Reports of the last three 
years, those accepted by the Departments and the amounts recovered are shown in 
Table 5.1.14. 
Table 5.1.14: Position of recovery of accepted cases 
(₹ in crore) 
Year of 
Audit 
Report 
Number of 
paragraphs 
included 
Money value 
of the 
paragraphs 
Number of 
paragraphs 
accepted 
Money value of 
accepted 
paragraphs 
Amount 
recovered 
during the year 
2018-19 2 21.02 0   0.00 0.00 
2019-20 5 31.42 0   0.00 0.00 
2020-22 3 25.61 1   7.47 2.48 
Total    7.47 2.48 
Source: Previous C&AG Reports 
Note: Audit Report for 2022-23 and 2023-24 not yet presented in the State Legislative Assembly. 
From the above table, it may be seen that during the last three years, the Department 
accepted paragraphs with an amount of ₹7.47 crore, against which ₹2.48 crore 
(33 per cent) was recovered. Thus, it is evident that recovery progress, even in 
accepted cases, remained slow over the past three years. 
Recommendation: 
The State Government may direct the Department to expedite the recovery of the 
dues involved in the accepted cases. 

234
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
234 
 
5.1.9.1 Action taken on recommendations accepted by Government 
The draft Reports of the Performance Audits (PAs) conducted by the Accountant 
General (Audit) are forwarded to the departments concerned/Government to furnish 
their replies. These PAs are also discussed during the exit conference and views of 
departments/Government are taken into account while finalising PAs for inclusion in 
C&AG Audit Reports. Besides, audit also makes recommendations against some 
specific issues brought out in the paragraphs wherever felt appropriate. 
No PA on Revenue Sector was conducted during 2016-17 to 2022-24. 
5.1.10 Audit Planning 
The offices under various departments are, for the purpose of audit, categorised into 
high, medium and low risk units according to their revenue position, past trends of 
audit observations and other parameters. The annual audit plan is prepared on the 
basis of risk analysis which inter alia include critical issues in Government revenues 
and tax administration i.e., budget speech, white paper on State Finances, Reports of 
the Finance Commission (State & Central), recommendations of the Taxation 
Reforms Committee, statistical analysis of revenue earnings during the past five 
years, factors of tax administration, audit coverage and its impact during past 
five-years. 
Out of 22 auditable units, 12 auditee units were planned for audit during 2023-24. Out 
of which, a Subject Specific Compliance Audit on Departments’ oversight on GST 
payments and Return filing (Phase-II) in Nagaland was conducted during 2023-24. 
5.1.11 Coverage of this chapter 
This chapter contains a Subject Specific Compliance Audit Paragraph on 
Departments’ oversight on GST payments and Return filing (Phase-II) in Nagaland. 
Subject Specific Compliance Audit 
 
FINANCE (TAXATION) DEPARTMENT 
 
5.2 Departments’ oversight on GST payments and Return filing (Phase-II) 
in Nagaland 
 
5.2.1 Introduction 
Goods and Service Tax (GST)  came into effect from 01  July 2017 replacing multiple 
taxes levied and collected by the Centre and States. GST is a destination-based 
consumption tax on the supply of goods or services or both levied on every value 
addition. The Centre and States simultaneously levy GST on a common tax base. 
Central GST (CGST) and State GST (SGST)/Union Territory GST (UTGST) are 
levied on intra-State supplies, and Integrated GST (IGST) is levied on inter-State 
supplies. 
Section 59 of the Nagaland GST (NGST) Act, 2017 stipulates GST as a 
self-assessment based tax, whereby the responsibility for calculating tax liability, 
discharging the computed tax liability and filing returns is vested with the taxpayer. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
235
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
235 
 
The GST returns must be filed online regularly on the common GST portal, failing 
w h i c h  p e n a l t i e s  w i l l  b e  p a y a b l e .  E v e n  i f  t h e  b u s i n e s s  h a s  h a d  n o  t a x  l i a b i l i t y  d u r i n g  a  
particular tax period, it must file a ‘Nil’ return mandatorily. Further, Section 61 of the 
N G S T  A c t  r e a d  w i t h  R u l e  9 9  o f  t h e  N a g a l a n d  G o o d s  a n d  S e r v i c e  T a x  R u l e s  ( N G S T  
Rules), 2017 stipulate that the proper officer may scrutinise the return and related 
particulars furnished by taxpayers, communicate discrepancies to the taxpayers and 
seek an explanation. 
This Subject Specific Compliance Audit (SSCA) was taken up considering the 
significance of the control mechanism envisaged for tax compliance and the oversight 
mechanism of the Commissioner of Taxes (Department), Government of Nagaland in 
t his new tax regi me. 
5.2.2 Organisational set up 
T h e  C o m m i s s i o n e r  o f  S t a t e  T a x e s  i s  t h e  h e a d  o f  t h e  S t a t e  T a x e s  D e p a r t m e n t .  H e  
exercises overall control and supervision of the entire tax administration in the State. 
The Commissioner is assisted by one Special Commissioner, two Additional 
Commissioner and three Joint Commissioners in the Directorate. For efficient tax 
administration, the State is also divided into three Zones each headed by a Deputy 
C o m m i s s i o n e r  o f  S t a t e  T a x e s .  T h e  o r g a n o g r a m  o f  t h e  S t a t e  T a x e s  D e p a r t m e n t ,  
Nagaland under GST regime is shown in Chart 5.2.1.  
Chart 5.2.1: Organogram 
 
Source: Departmental records 
5.2.3 Audit objectives 
This audit was oriented towards providing assurance on the adequacy and 
effectiveness of systems and procedures adopted by the State Taxes Department with 
respect to tax compliance under GST regime with the following audit objectives to 
seek an assurance on: 
Commissioner of State Taxes
S p e c i a l  C o m m i s s i o n e r
Additional Commissioner I & II
J o i n t  C o m m i s s i o n e r  o f  S t a t e  T a x e s  I ,  I I  
&  I I I
D e p u t y  C o m m i s s i o n e r  o f  S t a t e  
T a x e s ,  D i m a p u r
A s s i s t a n t  C o m m i s s i o n e r  o f  S t a t e  T a x e s ,  
D i m a p u r  W a r d s  A ,  B ,  C ,  D ,  E  &  F ,  
P e r e n  a n d  M o n
D e p u t y  C o m m i s s i o n e r  o f  S t a t e  
T a x e s ,  K o h i m a
Assistant Commissioner of State 
T a x e s ,  K o h i m a  W a r d s  A ,  B  &  C ,  
P h e k  a n d  W o k h a
D e p u t y  C o m m i s s i o n e r  o f  S t a t e  
T a x e s ,  M o k o k c h u n g
Assistant Commissioner of 
S t a t e  T a x e s ,  M o k o k c h u n g  
W a r d s  A ,  B  &  C  a n d  
Z u n h e b o t o

236
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
236 
 
(i) Whether the rules and procedures were designed to secure an effective check 
on tax compliance and were being duly observed by taxpayers; and 
(ii) Whether the scrutiny procedures, internal audit and other compliance 
functions of the Departmental field formations were adequate and effective. 
5.2.4 Audit methodology and scope 
This SSCA was conducted based on data analysis, which highlighted risk areas and 
red flags pertaining to the period from April 2018 to March 2021.  Through data 
analysis, a set of 16 deviations were identified across the domains of input tax credit 
(ITC), discharge of tax liability, registration and return filing. Such deviations were 
followed up through a Centralised Audit (Limited Audit) 7, whereby these deviations 
were communicated to the relevant State departmental field formations and action 
taken by the jurisdictional formations on the identified deviations was ascertained 
without involving field visits. The Centralised Audit was supplemented by a Detailed 
Audit involving field visits for verification of records available with the jurisdictional 
field formations. Returns and related attachments and information were accessed 
through the State GST Portal as much as feasible to examine data/documents relating 
to taxpayers (viz. registration, tax payment, returns and other departmental functions).  
The Detailed Audit also involved accessing relevant granular records from the 
taxpayers such as invoices through the respective field formations. Besides, 
compliance functions of the departmental formations such as scrutiny of returns, 
action on late-filers and non-filers, cancellation of registration and internal audit were 
also reviewed in selected charges.  
The review of the scrutiny of returns by the Department and verification of taxpayers’ 
records covered the period from April 2018 to March 2021, while the audit of the 
functions of four selected Wards covered the period 2020-21. The SSCA covered only 
the State administered taxpayers. The field audit was conducted from July 2023 to 
November 2023. 
The entry conference of this SSCA was held on 14 July 2023 with the Department in 
which the audit objectives, sample selection, audit scope and methodology were 
discussed. The exit conference was held on 10 July 2024 with the Department in 
which the audit findings were discussed. The replies received from the Department 
have been suitably incorporated in the relevant paragraphs. 
5.2.5 Audit Sample  
A data-driven approach was adopted for planning as also to determine the nature and 
extent of substantive audit. The sample for this SSCA comprised a set of deviations 
identified through data analysis for Centralised Audit that did not involve field visits; 
a sample of taxpayers for Detailed Audit that involved field visits and scrutiny of 
taxpayer’s records at Departmental premises; and a sample of Wards for evaluating 
the compliance functions of the Wards. 
                                                             
7   Centralised Audit did not involve seeking taxpayer’s granular records such as financial statements 
related ledger accounts, invoices and agreements.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
237
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
237 
 
There were three distinct parts of this SSCA as under: 
(i) Part I- Audit of Wards 
For the purpose of evaluation of oversight functions, four Wards 8 with jurisdiction 
over highest number of selected samples for Detailed Audit excluding those Wards 
which were covered for audit during Phase -I Audit were considered as the sample for 
audit of Wards. 
(ii) Part II- Centralised Audit 
The sample for Centralised Audit was selected by identification of high-value or 
high-risk deviations from rules and inconsistencies between returns through data 
analysis for evaluation of the adequacy and effectiveness of the scrutiny procedure of 
the State Taxes Department. Accordingly, a sample of 88 taxpayers pertaining to 
13 Wards were selected for Centralised Audit under this SSCA.  
(iii) Part III- Detailed Audit 
Audit was conducted by accessing taxpayers’ records through Wards for evaluation of 
the extent of tax compliance by taxpayers. The sample of taxpayers for Detailed Audit 
was selected on the basis of risk parameters such as Excess ITC, Tax Liability 
mismatch, Disproportionate exempted turnover to total turnover and Irregular ITC 
reversal. The 15 taxpayers selected for Detailed Audit comprised of Large (L1 9 and 
L210), Medium11 and Small12  strata taxpayers as well as taxpayers selected randomly. 
The details of audit sample for Centralised Audit, Detailed Audit and Audit of Wards 
are brought out in Appendix-5.2.1. 
5.2.6 Audit criteria 
The source of audit criteria comprised the provisions contained in the NGST Act, 
IGST Act, 2017 and Rules made thereunder.  In addition, the notifications and 
circulars issued by the State Taxes Department relating to filing of returns, rates of tax 
on goods and services, payment of tax, availing and utilising ITC, scrutiny of returns 
and oversight of tax compliance also formed part of the audit criteria. 
5.2.7  Audit findings  
The audit findings are categorised into the following three categories: 
 Oversight on Wards functions (Audit of Wards) 
 Centralised Audit (Limited Audit) 
 Detailed Audit 
                                                             
8 Kohima Ward A, Wokha, Dimapur Ward C and Dimapur Ward D 
9 Top 0.25 per cent of taxpayers based on turnover. 
10 Next 0.25 per cent of taxpayers based on turnover 
11 Taxpayers with a minimum turnover of ₹7.50 crore  
12 remaining taxpayers with a minimum turnover of ₹2.50 crore  

238
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
238 
 
5.2.8 Oversight on Ward functions– Audit of Wards  
The role of Wards is to provide oversight for ensuring compliance by taxpayers in 
respect of accuracy of the taxable value declared, calculation and payment of tax 
liabilities, filing of returns, ensuring compliance of GST Act. For evaluating the 
functions of the charges, the audit areas include (i) effectiveness of scrutiny of 
returns, (ii) effectiveness of internal audit, (iii) action on late-filers and non-filers and 
(iv) cancellation of registration. The detailed findings are portrayed in the following 
paragraphs. 
5.2.8.1 Effectiveness of scrutiny of returns 
Section 61 of the NGST Act, 2017, read with Rule 99, stipulates that the Proper 
Officer may scrutinise the return and related particulars furnished by the taxpayers to 
verify the correctness of the returns and information. Discrepancies noticed, if any, 
are to be communicated to the taxpayer for seeking their explanation. If the 
explanation offered is found acceptable by the Proper Officer, the proceeding shall be 
dropped, the taxpayer shall be informed accordingly and no further action in the 
matter shall be taken. However, if the taxpayer does not furnish a satisfactory 
explanation within 30 days of being informed (extendable by the Proper Officer) or 
does not take any corrective measures, the Proper Officer may initiate appropriate 
action, including the issue of demand notices under Section 73 or Section 74 of the 
Act. With a view to assessing whether due process was followed in the scrutiny of 
returns, Audit examined all the 106 cases of scrutiny conducted by the four selected 
Wards and observed the following irregularities: 
 Deficiencies noticed in closed cases: Out of 106 cases where returns were 
scrutinised by the Proper Officers in the four selected Wards, there were 
24 cases which were closed by the Department. Audit scrutiny of these 
24 closed cases revealed that in two cases, the tax liability was partially 
discharged by the taxpayers and in eight  other cases, interest was not paid or 
partly paid as shown in Appendix-5.2.2.  The observation was communicated 
(October 2023) to the Department. No reply was provided to the Audit 
observation (October 2024). 
 Deficiencies in non-finalised cases: During 2020-21, the Proper Officers 
scrutinised 106 cases and issued ASMT-10 13 in the four selected Wards. It 
was noticed that 82 cases were not finalised by the Department. Audit 
scrutiny of these non-finalised cases revealed that 13 cases had no 
discrepancies and that replies in 69 other cases had not been submitted by 
the taxpayers even after a lapse of 1,126 to 1,273 days from the date of 
issue of ASMT-10. Audit further observed that the Proper Officers had, 
however, not determined the tax and other dues under Section 73 or Section 
74 of the Act. The tax/ITC implication in these cases was ₹7.75 crore as 
                                                             
13  Conveying discrepancies in Returns filed by Taxpayers and seeking explanations to be submitted on 
the date specified in the notice 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
239
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
239 
 
shown in Appendix-5.2.3. On this being pointed out (October 2023), the 
Department stated (July 2024) that the Proper Officers had recovered 
₹0.17 crore in seven cases. The Department may take necessary steps to 
ascertain and recover the tax and other dues on the remaining cases.  
Recommendation: 
The Department may ensure a time-bound compliance to the detailed 
procedures for scrutiny of returns. 
 
5.2.8.2 Effectiveness of Internal Audit  
Section 65 of the NGST Act, 2017, stipulates that the Commissioner or any officer 
authorised by him, by way of a general or a specific order, may undertake audit of any 
registered person for such period, at such frequency and in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  Further, Section 2 (13) of the NGST Act defines “Audit” as the 
examination of records, returns and other documents maintained or furnished by the 
registered person under this Act or the Rules made thereunder or under any other law 
for the time being in force to verify the correctness of turnover declared, taxes paid, 
refund claimed and input tax credit availed, and to assess his compliance with the 
provisions of this Act or the Rules made thereunder. 
Information regarding conduct of internal audit, guidelines and mechanism devised by 
the State Taxes Department for internal audit during the period 2020-21 was sought 
for by Audit (August 2023). In reply (September 2023), the Department stated that 
internal audit has not commenced. The reply was despite the issue being highlighted 
during GST Phase-I audit where the Department stated that the process of 
commencement of internal audit was underway. Since audit of registered person is a 
core compliance function of the Department in the era of self-assessment, there is a 
need for strict compliance to the provision of Section 65 of the NGST Act. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may take prompt steps to conduct internal audit under Section 65 
of the NGST Act so that action could be initiated against the defaulters before 
time-barring of cases. 
 
5.2.8.3 Action on late-filers and non-filers 
Section 46 of the NGST Act, 2017, read with Rule 68 of the NGST Rules, 2017 
requires issuance of a notice in Form GSTR-3A to taxpayers who fail to furnish 
returns (GSTR-1, GSTR-3B). Taxpayers who have been served notice under the 
above Act/Rules are required to furnish their returns within fifteen days of receipt of 
the notice. Further, Section 62 of the NGST Act stipulates that where a registered 
person fails to furnish his return even after the service of notice, the Proper Officer 
may proceed to assess the tax liability of the said person to the best of his judgement 
in ASMT-13 (best judgement assessment order). Audit accessed the profile of 
taxpayers and returns filed by taxpayers of the four selected Wards during 2020-21 
from the GST portal. There were 10,638 GSTR-3B returns filed by due date, 

240
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
240 
 
3,141 GSTR-3B returns not filed and 8,659 GSTR-3B returns filed after due date. The 
irregularities observed by Audit during examination are given below: 
(i) Notice in GSTR-3As was issued in 1,376 14 out of 3,141 cases of GSTR-3B 
non-filers. The Proper Officers had, however, not assessed the tax liability of 
the non-filers by invoking the best judgement assessment procedure. On this 
being pointed out, the Department replied (September 2023) that GSTR-3A 
notice was system generated 15 and sent directly to taxpayers through their 
portals. However, despite this automated intimation, Audit observed that returns 
were not filed (upto May 2024) even after a lapse of 485 to 683 days.  
(ii) The Department did not initiate any action on the remaining 1,765 non-filers by 
issuing GSTR-3A and best judgement orders in ASMT-13 16. The Department 
accepted (September 2023) the Audit observation. Subsequently, while 
reiterating acceptance (July 2024), the Department stated that those dealers who 
had not filed their returns even after notice being served and 
suspension/cancellation of registration, were non-functional taxpayers. The 
reply is not acceptable as the Department, did not furnish any documentary 
evidence to substantiate that the dealers were non-functional taxpayers. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may initiate action against late-filers and non-filers by assessing 
the tax liability through invoking of the ASMT-13 best judgment assessment order. 
 
5.2.8.4 Cancellation of Registration 
In the four Wards selected for audit, there were 76 cases of cancellation during 
2020-21 of which 31 cases were suo-moto cancellations and 45 cases were cancelled 
on request by the taxpayers. Audit observations regarding cancellation of taxpayer 
registrations are as follows: 
 Date of cancellation prior to date of application: Rule 20 of the NGST 
Rules, 2017 read with Circular No. 04/2018-GST dated 26 October 2018 
provides that the taxpayer applying for cancellation of registration shall 
submit the application in Form GST REG-16 on the GST portal within a 
period of 30 days of the “occurrence of the event warranting the 
cancellation”. The circular also specifies that the order for cancellation 
should be issued in Form GST REG-19 with the effective date of 
cancellation being the same as the date from which the applicant has sought 
cancellation in Form GST REG-16. In any case the effective date should not 
be a date earlier than the date of application for the same. Scrutiny of records 
revealed that 26 out of 45 cases of cancellation on taxpayers’ request was 
                                                             
14   Notices issued since November 2020 
15   Commenced since November 2020 
16  Order in best judgement assessment initiated by the Department if a tax payer (GST registered 
entities) fails to file returns within prescribed time limit. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
241
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
241 
 
cancelled with effect from dates prior to the date of application of the 
taxpayer as shown in Appendix-5.2.4. While accepting the Audit 
observation, the Department stated (July 2024) that the effective date of 
cancellation was mistakenly approved from dates prior to the date of 
application of the taxpayer. 
 Delay in issuance of cancellation order: Rule 22 of the NGST Rules, 2017 
states that cancellation order in Form REG-19 is to be issued within 30 days 
from the date of application made by the taxpayers or date of reply to 
REG-17 in case of suo-moto cancellation. Rule 22(3) of the NGST Rules, 
2017 provides that where a person who has submitted an application for 
cancellation of his registration is no longer liable to be registered, the 
Department shall issue an order in Form GST REG-19, within a period of 
thirty days from the date of application or, as the case may be, the date of the 
reply to any show cause issued, cancel the registration with effect from a date 
to be determined by Department and notify the taxable person, directing him 
to pay arrears of any tax, interest or penalty including the amount liable to be 
paid under sub-section (5) of Section 29. Audit observed that in 27 out of 
76 cases of cancellation, there were delays in issuance of Form REG-19 17 
ranging from 01 to 833 days as shown in Appendix-5.2.5. Audit further 
observed that the reason for delay in cancellation was because the 
Department did not monitor the cancellation process. While accepting the 
Audit observation, the Department stated (July 2024) that the Proper Officers 
overlooked the given timeframe since the notices were system generated 
leading to delays in cancellation.  
 Reason for dropping of proceedings for cancellation not in GSTN 
Portal: The provisions of Rule 22(4) of the NGST Rules, 2017 regulate the 
issuance of orders in Form GST REG-20 for dropping the proceedings of 
GST registration cancellation process. Audit observed that in 31 suo-moto 
cases under four Wards, four cases of proceedings for cancellation of 
Registration were revoked after issue of Form REG-17 on the basis of the 
reply given by the taxpayers.  Audit could, however, not examine whether 
the dropping of proceedings was done as per the relevant provisions of the 
NGST Rules as Form REG-20 was not available in the GST portal. In reply, 
the Department stated (July 2024) that the dealers’ registration was revoked 
or proceedings dropped only after the dealer filed his GST returns along with 
an application for revocation. The reply is not acceptable as the Department 
should issue orders in Form GST REG-20 to drop the proceedings of the 
GST registration cancellation process. 
 Follow-up action on non-filing of GSTR-10: As per Section 45 of the 
NGST Act, 2017, GSTR-10 has to be filed by the taxpayer within three 
months of the effective date of cancellation or the date of order of 
                                                             
17  Order of cancellation 

242
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
242 
 
cancellation, whichever is later. The last date for furnishing of GSTR-10 by 
those taxpayers whose registration has been cancelled on or before 
30 September 2018 was extended 18 till 31 December 2018. Further, as per 
Section 46 of the NGST Act, 2017, GSTR-3A has to be issued to the 
taxpayer, where GSTR-10 has not been filed.  If the taxpayer still fails to file 
the final return within 15 days of the receipt of notice, an assessment order in 
Form ASMT-13 under Section 62 of the NGST Act read with Rule 100 of 
the NGST Rules shall have to be issued to determine the liability of the 
taxpayer under sub-section (5) of Section 29 ( i.e., debit ITC equivalent to 
inputs, and inputs contained in semi-finished and finished goods held in 
stock or capital goods or the output tax payable on such goods whichever is 
higher). If the taxpayer files the final return within 30 days of the date of 
service of the order ASMT-13, then the said order shall be deemed to have 
been withdrawn. However, the liability for payment of interest and late fee 
shall continue.  If the said return remains unfurnished within the statutory 
period of 30 days from the issuance of order ASMT-13, then the Department 
may initiate proceedings under Section 78 and recovery under Section 79 of 
the NGST Act. 
As mentioned in Paragraph 5.2.8.4  above, there were 76 cases of cancellation of 
registration during 2020-21. Audit observed that GSTR-10 was filed in only 12 out of 
these 76 cases as shown in Appendix-5.2.6. Audit also observed that the Department 
had no information/reports to track the filing of GSTR-10 by the taxpayers and thus 
recovery proceedings of tax liability could not be initiated by the Wards. Audit further 
observed that best judgement orders in ASMT-13 were also not issued by the 
Department as a result of which tax liability, if any, could not be recovered. The 
observation was communicated to the Department in October 2023. In reply, the 
Department stated (December 2023) that most of the taxpayers were yet to file their 
final return in GSTR-10 as they were unaware that it must be filed within three 
months from the date of cancellation. The reply is not acceptable as the Department 
should have issued notices and initiate proceeding under Section 46 of the NGST Act 
for recovery of the tax due. 
Recommendation: 
The Department may adhere to the rules regarding the cancellation process to 
ensure that final returns in GSTR-10 are filed and the tax liability is discharged. 
 
5.2.9 Centralised Audit 
Audit analysed GST returns pertaining to April 2018 to March 2021 as made 
available by GSTN. Rule-based deviations and logical inconsistencies between GST 
returns filed by taxpayers were identified on a set of 16 risk parameters, which can be 
broadly categorised into two domains - ITC and tax payments. Out of the 
                                                             
18   Notification No F.NO.FIN/REV-3/GST/1/08(Pt-1)(V ol-1)/297 dated 26 October 2018. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
243
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
243 
 
13 prescribed GST returns 19, the following basic returns that apply to normal 
taxpayers were considered for the purpose of identifying deviations, inconsistencies 
and mismatches between GST returns/data: 
 GSTR-1: Monthly return furnished by all normal and casual registered 
taxpayers making outward supplies of goods and services or both and 
contains details of outward supplies of goods and services. 
 GSTR-3B: Monthly summary return of outward supplies and input tax credit 
claimed, along with payment of tax by the taxpayer to be filed by all 
taxpayers except those specified under Section 39(1) of the Act. This is the 
return that populates the credit and debits in the Electronic Credit Ledger and 
debits in Electronic Cash Ledger. 
 GSTR-9: Annual return to be filed by all registered persons other than an 
Input Service Distributor (ISD), Tax Deductor at Source/Tax Collector at 
Source, Casual Taxable Person and Non-Resident taxpayer. This document 
contains the details of all supplies made and received under various tax heads 
(CGST, SGST and IGST) during the entire year along with turnover and 
audit details for the same. 
 GSTR-9C: Annual audit form for all taxpayers having a turnover above 
₹Five crore in a particular financial year. It is basically a reconciliation 
statement between the annual returns filed in GSTR-9 and the taxpayer's 
audited annual financial statements. 
 GSTR-2A: A system-generated statement of inward supplies for a recipient. 
It contains the details of all B2B transactions of suppliers declared in their 
Form GSTR-1/5, ISD details from GSTR-6, details from GSTR-7 and 
GSTR-8 respectively by the counterparty and import of goods from overseas 
on bill of entry, as received from ICEGATE Portal of Indian Customs. 
5.2.9.1 Audit findings based on Data Analysis 
The data analysis pertaining to State jurisdiction on the 16 identified parameters and 
extent of deviations/inconsistencies observed are summarised in Tables – 5.2.1A and 
5.2.1B. 
Table –5.2.1A: Details of Data Analysis undertaken 
Sl. No. Algorithm used Impact 
Domain: ITC 
1. 
ITC available as per GSTR -2A with all its 
amendments was compared with the ITC availed in 
GSTR-3B in Table 4A (5) (accrued on domestic 
supplies) excluding the reversals in Table 4B(2) but 
including the ITC availed in the subsequent year 
from Table 8C of GSTR-9 and blocked credits. 
 
ITC mismatch between GSTR -2A and 
GSTR-3B 
                                                             
19  GSTR-1, GSTR-3B, GSTR-4 (taxpayers under the Composition scheme), GSTR-5 (non-resident taxable 
person), GSTR-5A (Non-resident OIDAR service providers), GSTR-6 (Input service distributor), GSTR-7 
(taxpayers deducting TDS), GSTR-8 (E-commerce operator), GSTR-9 (Annual Return), GSTR-10 (Final 
return), GSTR-11 (person having UIN and claiming a refund), CMP-08, and ITC-04 (Statement to be filed 
by a principal/job-worker about details of goods sent to/received from a job-worker) 

244
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
244 
 
Sl. No. Algorithm used Impact 
2. 
ITC available from GSTR -2A was compared with 
Table 8A of GSTR-9 which captures ITC available 
from GSTR-2A (as an auto-populated non-editable 
field) but excludes those entries in GSTR-2A where 
the supplier has not filed GSTR-1 by due date of its 
filing and also excludes the ITC for the period during 
which the recipient taxpayer was under composition 
scheme. 
ITC passed on without supplier remitting 
tax 
3. 
ITC availed through Table 4 of GSTR-3Bs 
pertaining to period 2018-19 to 2020-21 filed after 
October of the following year 
ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed after the cut-
off period. 
4. 
ISD ITC availed in GSTR -9 Table 6G or GSTR -3B 
Table 4(A)(4) of recipient was compared with the 
sum of Table 5A, Table 8A, and Table 9A of 
GSTR-6 of distributor GSTINs 
Incorrect availing of ISD credit 
Domain: Annual Return and financial statements (FS)  
5. 
Positive figure in GSTR -9C Table 12F and 
examination of reasons provided in Table 13 for 
mismatch 
Mismatch of ITC availed between Annual 
returns and Books of accounts 
6. Positive figure in GSTR-9C Table 14T and 
examination of reasons provided in Table 15 for 
mismatch 
Reconciliation between ITC availed in 
Annual returns with expenses in financial 
statements 
7. 
Negative figure in GSTR -9C Table 9R and 
examination of reasons provided in Table 10 for 
mismatch 
Mismatch in tax paid between books of 
accounts and returns 
Domain: Tax and Interest payment 
8. 
RCM payments in GSTR-9 Table 4G (tax payable) 
were compared with ITC availed in GSTR-9 
Table 6C, 6D and 6F (ITC availed). In cases where 
GSTR-9 was not available, RCM payment in 
GSTR-3B Table 3.1(d) was compared with 
GSTR-3B 4(A)(2) and 4A(3). Greater of difference 
in GSTR-9 and GSTR-3B considered where both 
were available 
Short payment of tax under RCM versus 
ITC availed in GSTR-3B/GSTR-9  
9. 
The greater of tax liability between GSTR -1 (Tables 
4 to 11), considering advances and amendments, and 
GSTR-9 (Tables 4N, 10 and 11) was compared with 
tax paid details in GSTR-3B Tables 3.1(a) and 
3.1(b). In cases where GSTR-9 was not available, 
GSTR-3B tax paid was compared with GSTR-1 
liability. 
Unsettled liabilities 
10. 
GSTR-3B Table 3.1(a)+(b) was compared with tax 
liability declared in the e-way bills and cases where 
GSTR-3B are less than e-way bills are identified. 
Suppression of tax liability based on E-way 
bill verification 
11. 
The composition taxpayers whose turnover on all 
India basis (Central and State jurisdiction) under all 
GSTINs of the same PAN have crossed the turnover 
limit of ₹1.00 crore in 2018-19 and ₹1.50 crore in 
2019-20 were identified. 
Ineligible composition levy 
12. 
Taxpayers who have not filed GSTR -3B but have 
filed GSTR-1 or where GSTR-2A available, 
indicating taxpayers carrying on the business without 
discharging tax 
GSTR-3B was not filed but GSTR -1 is 
available 
13. 
Interest calculated at the rate of 18 per cent on cash 
portion of tax payment on delayed filing of GSTR-
3B vis-à-vis interest declared in GSTR-3B 
Short payment of interest 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
245
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
245 
 
Table-5.2.1B: Details of Data Analysis undertaken (Turnover mismatch) 
Sl. 
No. Algorithm used Impact 
14. 
Table 3.1(a) of GSTR-3B was compared with Column 6 of 
Table 9 of GSTR-2A. Cases where GSTR-3B values are less than 
that of GSTR-2A are identified. 
Under-declaration of taxable 
supplies by comparing TDS 
returns 
15. 
Unbilled revenue at the beginning of the year in GSTR -9C Table 
5B should tally with the unbilled revenue of the previous 
GSTR-9C shown in Table 5H. Any mismatch indicates 
suppression of taxable turnover. 
Suppression of taxable value 
based on unbilled revenue 
declared in GSTR-9C 
16. Negative figure in GSTR-9C Table 7G and examination of 
reasons provided in Table 8 for mismatch 
Mismatch in taxable turnover 
declared in GSTR-9C Table 7G 
Audit selected a sample of 88 cases from amongst top deviations/inconsistencies in 
each of the 16 parameters for the year 2018-19 to 2020-21. Audit observations were 
issued to the respective wards between July 2023 and August 2023 without further 
scrutiny of taxpayers’ records. The audit check in these cases was limited to 
verifying the Department’s action on the identified deviations/mismatches. 
5.2.9.2 Summary of deficiencies noticed during Centralised Audit 
Based on responses received in 88 cases of audit queries, the extent of compliance 
deviations in respect of the 16 parameters is summarised in Appendix-5.2.7. 
Audit observed deviations from the provisions of NGST Act in 88 cases involving 
mismatch amounting to ₹84.61 20 crore comprising of tax amount mismatches in 
82 cases (93.18 per cent) and turnover mismatches in six cases (6.82 per cent). The 
Department provided responses in all the 88 cases. 
The Department made recovery in five cases of tax mismatch involving ₹0.16 crore 
and ASMT-10 notices were issued in 53 21 cases involving ₹56.53 crore. The 
Department reply in 1122 cases involving ₹ 20.55 crore was not acceptable to audit. 
The reply of the Department in 19 cases, constituting 21.59 per cent  of the audit 
sample of 88 cases, amounting to ₹20.98 crore was acceptable to Audit. Out of these 
19 cases, five 23 cases amounting to ₹3.03 crore were due to data entry errors by the 
taxpayers, five cases amounting to ₹3.10 crore involved proactive action taken by the 
Department and the remaining nine 24 cases amounting to ₹14.85 crore had valid 
explanations for the deviations.  
A few high value illustrative are given below: 
(A) ITC Mismatch 
(i) ITC mismatch between GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B: GSTR-2A is a purchase 
related dynamic tax return that is automatically generated for each business by the 
GST portal, whereas GSTR-3B is a monthly return in which summary of outward 
                                                             
20   excluding six cases of turnover mismatch amounting to ₹16.11 crore 
21   including one case of turnover mismatch amounting to ₹3.07 crore 
22   Including three cases of turnover mismatch amounting to ₹9.90 crore 
23   Including one case of turnover mismatch amounting to ₹1.77 crore 
24   Including two cases of turnover mismatch amounting to ₹3.14 crore 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
245 
 
Table-5.2.1B: Details of Data Analysis undertaken (Turnover mismatch) 
Sl. 
No. Algorithm used Impact 
14. 
Table 3.1(a) of GSTR-3B was compared with Column 6 of 
Table 9 of GSTR-2A. Cases where GSTR-3B values are less than 
that of GSTR-2A are identified. 
Under-declaration of taxable 
supplies by comparing TDS 
returns 
15. 
Unbilled revenue at the beginning of the year in GSTR -9C Table 
5B should tally with the unbilled revenue of the previous 
GSTR-9C shown in Table 5H. Any mismatch indicates 
suppression of taxable turnover. 
Suppression of taxable value 
based on unbilled revenue 
declared in GSTR-9C 
16. Negative figure in GSTR-9C Table 7G and examination of 
reasons provided in Table 8 for mismatch 
Mismatch in taxable turnover 
declared in GSTR-9C Table 7G 
Audit selected a sample of 88 cases from amongst top deviations/inconsistencies in 
each of the 16 parameters for the year 2018-19 to 2020-21. Audit observations were 
issued to the respective wards between July 2023 and August 2023 without further 
scrutiny of taxpayers’ records. The audit check in these cases was limited to 
verifying the Department’s action on the identified deviations/mismatches. 
5.2.9.2 Summary of deficiencies noticed during Centralised Audit 
Based on responses received in 88 cases of audit queries, the extent of compliance 
deviations in respect of the 16 parameters is summarised in Appendix-5.2.7. 
Audit observed deviations from the provisions of NGST Act in 88 cases involving 
mismatch amounting to ₹84.61 20 crore comprising of tax amount mismatches in 
82 cases (93.18 per cent) and turnover mismatches in six cases (6.82 per cent). The 
Department provided responses in all the 88 cases. 
The Department made recovery in five cases of tax mismatch involving ₹0.16 crore 
and ASMT-10 notices were issued in 53 21 cases involving ₹56.53 crore. The 
Department reply in 1122 cases involving ₹ 20.55 crore was not acceptable to audit. 
The reply of the Department in 19 cases, constituting 21.59 per cent  of the audit 
sample of 88 cases, amounting to ₹20.98 crore was acceptable to Audit. Out of these 
19 cases, five 23 cases amounting to ₹3.03 crore were due to data entry errors by the 
taxpayers, five cases amounting to ₹3.10 crore involved proactive action taken by the 
Department and the remaining nine 24 cases amounting to ₹14.85 crore had valid 
explanations for the deviations.  
A few high value illustrative are given below: 
(A) ITC Mismatch 
(i) ITC mismatch between GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B: GSTR-2A is a purchase 
related dynamic tax return that is automatically generated for each business by the 
GST portal, whereas GSTR-3B is a monthly return in which summary of outward 
                                                             
20   excluding six cases of turnover mismatch amounting to ₹16.11 crore 
21   including one case of turnover mismatch amounting to ₹3.07 crore 
22   Including three cases of turnover mismatch amounting to ₹9.90 crore 
23   Including one case of turnover mismatch amounting to ₹1.77 crore 
24   Including two cases of turnover mismatch amounting to ₹3.14 crore 

246
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
246 
 
supplies along with ITC declared and payment of tax are self-declared by the 
taxpayer. 
To analyse the veracity of ITC utilisation, relevant data were extracted from 
GSTR-3B and GSTR-2A for the period 2018-19 to 2020-21, and the ITC paid as per 
suppliers’ details was matched with the ITC credit availed by the taxpayer. The 
methodology adopted was to compare the ITC available as per GSTR-2A with all its 
amendments and the ITC availed in GSTR-3B in Table 4A (5) 25, 4D (1) and Table 8C 
of GSTR-9.  
A taxpayer (1XXXXXXXXXXXXXV)  under Ward D, Dimapur availed ITC of 
₹20.53 crore in GSTR-3Bs during 2018-19 to 2020-21, against the available ITC of 
₹15.36 crore as per GSTR-2A. This resulted in mismatch of ITC of ₹5.17 crore. On 
this being pointed out (October 2023), the Department replied (July 2024) that the 
amount shown under Table 8C of GSTR-9 was the amount booked for availing ITC in 
the preceding year and not for the current year. The reply of the Department is not 
acceptable as the amount of mismatch is arrived at by Audit after considering the 
amount under Table 8C of GSTR-9. Further reply is awaited (October 2024). 
(ii) ITC passed on without supplier remitting tax: In order to analyse the extent 
of compliance of ITC availment under Section 16(4) of the NGST Act, 2017 an 
attempt has been made to identify likely cases where the ITC would have been passed 
on by the taxpayer without the actual remitting the tax. For this purpose, the relevant 
data from GSTR-9 particularly pertaining to Table 8A of GSTR-9 was compared with 
the ITC data reflected in GSTR-2As. 
A taxpayer  (1XXXXXXXXXXXXX7) under Ward C, Dimapur availed ITC of 
₹6.97 crore under GSTR-2A against the admissible ITC of ₹5.64 crore shown under 
Table 8A of GSTR-9 for 2018-21. This resulted in availing of ineligible ITC of 
₹1.33 crore. 
On this being pointed out (October 2023) by Audit, the Department stated (July 2024) 
that notice under Section 61 (in form ASMT-10) was issued to taxpayer to explain the 
reasons for discrepancies. Further reply is awaited (October 2024). 
(iii) ITC availed in GSTR-3B filed after the cut-off period: As per Section 
16(4) of the NGST Act, 2017 a registered person shall not be entitled to take ITC in 
respect of any invoice or debit note for supply of goods or services or both after the 
due date of furnishing GSTR-3B for the month of September following the end of the 
financial year to which such ITC pertains or furnishing of relevant Annual Return, 
whichever is earlier. Accordingly, if any GSTR-3B is furnished after such time, ITC 
availed therein becomes inadmissible. In order to review the extent of excess/ 
irregular ITC availed on this account, the ITC availed through Table 4 of GSTR-3Bs 
pertaining to 2018-19 to 2020-21 filed by the taxpayer beyond the due dates of 
September GSTR-3B return of the following year, were identified at data level. 
                                                             
25  All other eligible ITC  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
247
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
247 
 
A taxpayer (1XXXXXXXXXXXXU) under Ward E, Dimapur availed ₹10.52 crore 
as ITC in GSTR-3Bs filed after the limitation period for 11 months during 2018-19, 
which was inadmissible. On this being pointed out (October 2023) by Audit, the 
Department stated (July 2024) that notice under Section 61 (in form ASMT-10) was 
issued to taxpayer to explain the reasons for discrepancies. Further reply is awaited 
(October 2024). 
(iv) Incorrect availing of ISD credit: To analyse whether the ITC availed by the 
taxpayer is in excess of that transferred by the Input Service Distributor (ISD), ITC 
availed as declared in the returns of the taxpayer was compared with the ITC 
transferred by the ISD in their GSTR-6. The methodology adopted was to compare 
Table 6G26 of GSTR-9 or Table 4(A)(4) 27 of STR-3B of the recipient taxpayers under 
the jurisdiction of this State with the sum of Table 5A28, Table 8A29 and Table 9A30 of 
GSTR-6 of the respective ISD. 
A taxpayer (1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2), under Mon Unit availed ITC under ISD 
mechanism amounting to ₹44.77 lakh as per Table 6G and 7H of GSTR-9 against the 
actual amount of ₹20.32 lakh distributed by the ISD distributor as per tables 5(A) and 
8(A) of GSTR 6. This resulted in excess availing of ITC under ISD mechanism of 
₹0.24 crore. On this being pointed out (October 2023) by Audit, the Department 
stated (July 2024) that notice under Section 61 (in form ASMT-10) was issued to 
taxpayer to explain the reasons for discrepancies. Further reply is awaited 
(October 2024). 
(B) Annual Return and Financial Statements  
(v)  Mismatch of ITC availed between Annual returns and Books of accounts:  
Table 12 of GSTR-9C reconciles ITC declared in Annual Return (GSTR-9) with ITC 
availed as per audited Annual Financial Statement or Books of Accounts. Table 12 (F) 
deals with unreconciled ITC.  
The certified reconciliation statement submitted by the taxpayer as required under the 
Rule 80(3) of the NGST Rules in form GSTR-9C for the years 2018-19 to 2020-21 
were analysed at data level to review the extent of identified mismatch in ITC 
declared in the Annual Return with the Financial Statements.  
A tax payer (1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY) under Ward F, Dimapur had availed ITC of 
₹1.70 crore as per Table 12 (E) of GSTR-9C against ITC of ₹1.56 crore available as 
per Table 12 (D) of GSTR-9C. As such, there was mismatch in availment of ITC 
amounting to ₹0.14 crore between Annual Return and Financial Statements (as 
mentioned in Table 12F 31 of form GSTR-9C). Reconciliation statement in respect of 
                                                             
26  ITC received from ISD. 
27   Inward supplies from ISD. 
28   Distribution of the amounts of eligible ITC for the tax period. 
29   Distribution of input tax credit (Plus/Minus).  
30   Redistribution of ITC distributed to a wrong recipient. 
31  Taxpayer in table 12F of GSTR 9C for the year 2019-20 showed reason as follow:- The amount 
reflecting in table 12f is on account of input of FY 2019-20 reversed in FY 2020-21 and 
FY 2019-20 input availed in FY 20-21. 

248
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
248 
 
Table 12F was not found uploaded, though the taxpayer had mentioned in the remarks 
column under Table 5.2.3.  
On this being pointed out (October 2023) by Audit, the Department stated (July 2024) 
that notice under Section 61 (in form ASMT-10) was issued to taxpayer to explain the 
reasons for discrepancies. Further reply is awaited (October 2024). 
(vi)  Reconciliation between ITC availed in Annual Returns with expenses in 
Financial Statements:  Table 14 of GSTR-9C reconciles ITC declared in Annual 
Return (GSTR-9) with ITC availed on expenses as per audited Annual Financial 
Statement or Books of Accounts. Table 14T of GSTR-9C deals with unreconciled 
ITC. 
The certified reconciliation statement submitted by the taxpayer as required under the 
Rule 80(3) of NGST Rules in form GSTR-9C for the years 2018-19 and 2020-21 was 
analysed at data level to review the extent of identified mismatch in ITC declared in 
the Annual Return with the expenses reported in the Financial Statements.  
In case of a taxpayer (1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB), under Wokha unit, Audit observed 
that during the years 2018-19 and 2020-21, there was unreconciled ITC of 
₹ 0.23 crore between the Annual Return and Books of Account as per certified 
reconciliation statement submitted by tax payer in Table 14T of form GSTR-9C. 
There was no clarity in the reason for unreconciled ITC given at Table 15A of 
GSTR 9C. 
On this being pointed out (October 2023) by Audit, the Department stated (July 2024) 
that notice under Section 61 (in form ASMT-10) was issued to taxpayer to explain the 
reasons for discrepancies. Further reply is awaited (October 2024). 
(C) Tax and Interest payment 
(vii) Short payment of tax under RCM versus ITC availed in GSTR-3B/ 
GSTR-9:  Short payment of tax under RCM was analysed by comparing the datasets 
pertaining to GSTR-3B and annual return GSTR-9 to check whether the tax has been 
discharged fully on the activities transactions under RCM. RCM payments in 
Table 3.1(d) of GSTR-3B/Table 4G of GSTR-9 was compared with ITC availed in 
Table no. 6C, 6D and 6F of GSTR-9. A top case is discussed below: 
A taxpayer(1XXXXXXXXXXXXX1) under Ward C, Dimapur paid only ₹0.03 core 
in Table 4G of GSTR-9 against ₹1.08 crore availed in Table 6C and 6D during 
2019-20 as RCM ITC. This resulted in short payment of tax under RCM- ITC 
amounting to ₹1.05 crore. On this being pointed out (October 2023), the Department 
stated (February 2024) that notice had been issued. Further reply is awaited 
(October 2024). 
(viii) Unsettled liabilities:  GSTR-1 depicts the monthly details of outward supplies 
of Goods or Services. Outward supply is also assessed by the taxpayer and mentioned 
in Annual Return GSTR-9 in the relevant columns. Further, taxable value and tax paid 
thereof is also shown in GSTR-3B.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
249
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
249 
 
To analyse the undischarged tax liability, the greater of tax liability between GSTR-1 
(Tables 4 to 11), considering advances and amendments, and GSTR-9 (Tables 4N, 10 
and 11) was compared with tax paid details in GSTR-3B Tables 3.1(a) and 3.1(b). In 
cases where GSTR-9 was not available, GSTR-3B tax paid was compared with 
GSTR-1 liability. 
A taxpayer (1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC) under Ward E, Dimapur discharged a tax 
liability of ₹9.60 crore through GSTR-3B against a tax liability of ₹11.10 crore 
declared in GSTR-1/GSTR-9 during 2018-20, resulting in short payment of tax of 
₹1.50 crore. On this being pointed out (October 2023), the Department stated 
(February 2024) that notice had been issued. Further reply is awaited (October 2024). 
(ix) Suppression of tax liability based on E-way bill verification:  To analyse the 
extent of short payment of tax, relevant data on tax liability declared in Tables 3.1(a) 
and 3.1(b) of GSTR-3B for the period 2018-19 to 2020-21 were compared with the 
disclosures made in E-Waybills.  
A taxpayer (1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2) under Mon unit, declared tax liability of 
₹67.42 crore in GSTR-3B against a tax liability of ₹71.10 crore shown in E-waybill 
during 2018-19 and 2020-21, leading to short payment of GST amounting to 
₹3.68 crore. 
On this being pointed out (October 2023) by Audit, the Department stated (July 2024) 
that notice under Section 61 (in form ASMT-10) was issued to taxpayer to explain the 
reasons for discrepancies. Further reply is awaited (October 2024). 
(x) GSTR-3B not filed but GSTR-1 is available:  As per Rule 61(2) of the 
NGST Rules, 2017 every registered person required to furnish return shall, subject to 
the provision of Section 49, discharge his liability towards tax, interest, penalty, fees 
or any other amount payable under the Act by debiting the electronic cash ledger or 
electronic credit ledger and include the details in the return in Form GSTR-3B. Effort 
was made through data analysis to identify those taxpayers who had not filed GSTR-
3B but had filed GSTR-1 or whose GSTR-2A was available. The very availability of 
GSTR-1 and GSTR-2A and non-filing of GSTR-3B indicates that the taxpayers had 
undertaken/carried on the business during the period but have not discharged their tax 
liability. It may also include cases of irregular passing on of ITC. 
A taxpayer (1XXXXXXXXXXXXXO) under Mon unit, did not file GSTR-3B for 
three months during 2019-21 despite being liable to pay tax of ₹0.33 crore as per 
GSTR-1. On this being pointed out (October 2023), the Department stated (July 2024) 
that the taxpayer discharged tax liability by filing returns for February 2020 and 
May 2020 on 14 September 2023. The reply was, however, silent on the return of 
March 2020 wherein the taxpayer had a liability of ₹0.14 crore. 
(xi) Short payment of interest: As per Section 50(1) of the NGST Act, 2017, 
every person who is liable to pay tax in accordance with the provisions of this Act or 
the Rules made thereunder, but fails to pay the tax or any part thereof to the 
Government within the period prescribed, shall for the period for which the tax or any 

250
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
250 
 
part thereof remains unpaid, pay, on his own, interest at such rate, not exceeding 
18 per cent. Further, the State Government notified the rate of interest 32 on delayed 
payment at 18 per cent. The penal interest is payable only if cash ledger balance is 
utilised to pay taxes.  The extent of short payment of interest on account of delayed 
remittance of tax during 2018-19 to 2020-21 was identified using the tax paid details 
in GSTR-3B and the date of filing of GSTR-3B. Only the net tax liability (cash 
component) has been considered to work out the interest payable. 
A taxpayer (1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU) , under Ward E, Dimapur delayed filing of 
GSTR-B returns for nine months during 2018-20 by 175 to 675 days. The short 
payment of interest of ₹1.30 crore on account of delayed tax payment of ₹4.36 crore 
during 2018-20 was communicated to the Department (October 2023). In reply, the 
Department stated (February 2024) that notice had been issued to the taxpayer. 
Further reply is awaited (October 2024). 
(D) Turnover Mismatches 
 
(xii) Under-declaration of taxable supplies by comparing TDS returns: Tax 
Deducted at Source (TDS) and Tax Collected at Source (TCS) details are declared in 
GSTR-7 and GSTR-8 respectively, and communicated to the registered person in 
Table 9 of GSTR-2A. Cases were identified where the taxable value declared for 
outward taxable supplies (excluding zero rated, nil rated and exempted) in GSTR-3B 
were less than the net amount liable for TCS and TDS credit as per Table 9 of 
GSTR-2A. 
A taxpayer (1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL) under Ward A, Dimapur declared a taxable 
value of ₹36.67 crore in GSTR-3B for 2019-20 against a taxable value of ₹55.87 crore 
based on TDS/TCS statement. The short declaration of taxable value of ₹36.67 crore 
resulted in short payment of GST amounting to ₹3.07 crore33. 
In reply, the Department stated (July 2024), that the difference was due to 
non-inclusion of the amount in the return for March 2019 and the deductor declaring 
invoice value as turnover while uploading TDS details, which included GST, instead 
of the taxable value. The reply of the Department is not acceptable as Audit observed 
that the difference was due to non-declaration TDS turnover during April and 
May 2019 and short declaration during June 2019 and September 2019 and the reply 
was not supported with invoices. Further reply is awaited (October 2024). 
(xiii) Suppression of taxable value based on unbilled revenue declared in 
GSTR-9C: In order to review the extent of identified mismatch in taxable turnover 
reported in the Annual Return vis-à-vis the Financial Statement, the relevant data 
points pertaining to Table 5 of the GSTR-9C reconciliation statement pertaining to 
disclosures of unbilled revenue submitted by the taxpayer as required under NGST 
Rules, 2017 for the years 2018-19 to 2020-21 was analysed at data level.  
                                                             
32  Notification No. F.NO.FIN/REV-3/GST/1/08(Pt-1)’V’ dated 06 July 2017 
33   TDS is calculated at 16 per cent (18 per cent - 2 per cent (already deducted)) 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
251
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
251 
 
Table 5B figures of GSTR-9C for the years 2018-19 to 2020-21 which captures the 
unbilled revenue at the beginning of the financial year was compared with Table 5H of 
the previous GSTR-9C returns which captures the unbilled revenue of the end of the 
year to review the extent of identified mismatch in turnover declared in the Annual 
Return with the Financial Statements.  
In case of a tax payer  (1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9) under Ward D, Dimapur, 
comparison of Table 5B with Table 5H of Annual Return (GSTR 9C) for 2018-19 to 
2020-21 showed a mismatch in unbilled revenue of ₹1.61 crore. 
On this being pointed out (October 2023) by Audit, the Department forwarded 
(February 2024) reply of the taxpayer to Audit and reply is not acceptable as the 
mismatch turnover (unbilled revenue) was not declared in GSTR-9C Table 5(O).  
5.2.9.3 Centralised Audit- Reasons for mismatches/deviations noticed  
Considering the response of the Department to 88 mismatches pointed by Audit, 
reasons for mismatch/deviations were identified as (a) Deviation from GST law and 
rules, (b) Data entry errors, and (c) Action taken before issues of queries.  These 
reasons along with relevant observations are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs: 
A. Deviation from GST law and rules-accepted or action initiated by 
Department 
Out of the 88 deviations summarised in Paragraph 5.2.9.2, the Department accepted 
the audit observations or initiated action in 58 cases involving mismatches amounting 
to ₹56.69 34 crore. Out of these cases, the Department has recovered ₹0.16 crore in 
five cases issued notice in Form ASMT-10 in 53 cases 35 for ₹56.53 crore. Details are 
given in Appendix-5.2.8.  
Illustrative case: ITC mismatch between GSTR-2A and GSTR-3B   
A taxpayer (1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY)  under Ward E, Dimapur availed ITC of 
₹18.20 crore in GSTR-3B during 2018-20 against the available ITC of ₹15.01 crore in 
GSTR-2A. This resulted in excess ITC claim of ₹3.19 crore. On this being pointed 
out, the Department stated (February 2024) that notice had been issued. Further reply 
is awaited (October 2024). 
B. Cases where Department’s reply was not acceptable to Audit 
The Department did not accept 11 out of 88 deviations pointed out by Audit. In these 
11 cases, the Department’s reason for not accepting the audit observations was not 
acceptable to Audit. Details of these cases along with the audit rebuttal are featured in 
Appendix –5.2.9.   
                                                             
34  Including one case of turnover mismatch amounting to ₹3.07 crore 
35  Including one case of turnover mismatch amounting to ₹3.07 crore  

252
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
252 
 
Illustrative case: Under-declaration of taxable supplies by comparing TDS 
returns   
A taxpayer (1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC) under Ward D, Dimapur received a TDS 
amount of ₹0.13 crore in GSTR-2A against a taxable value of ₹6.71 crore during 
February 2019. However, the taxpayer did not file GSTR-3B, resulting in an 
undischarged tax liability of ₹1.07 crore 36. On this being pointed out (October 2023), 
the Department replied (July 2024) that the taxpayer received payment for work 
executed for the Chief Engineer (R&B), Public Works Department, Nagaland on a 
DPR prepared based on SOR 2016, where there was no provision for GST. It was also 
stated that the taxpayer had requested the Chief Engineer to release the GST 
component, as TDS on GST was deducted by the Chief Engineer. The reply is not 
acceptable as the taxpayer was liable to pay tax on the taxable turnover of work done, 
by obtaining the GST component sanctioned by the concerned Department.  
C. Cases of data entry errors by taxpayers 
There were data entry errors in five cases constituting 5.68 per cent  of the total 
88 responses received from the Department.  These data entry errors did not have any 
revenue implication. Details of these cases are given in Appendix-5.2.10. 
Illustrative case: Under Reverse Charge Mechanism (RCM) 
A taxpayer (1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH) under Ward A, Kohima  reported ₹0.70 crore 
as ITC under RCM in Table 4A(3) of GSTR-3B during May 2019 to February 2020 
without discharging the tax liability in Table 3.1(d) of GSTR-3B or in Table 4(G) of 
GSTR-9. Thus, there was a short payment of tax of ₹0.70 crore. 
On this being pointed out (October 2023), the Department stated (July 2024) that the 
amount was wrongly shown under Table 4(A)(3) of GSTR-3B instead of 
Table 4 (A)(5). Audit cross examined the entries in GSTR-2A of both the dealers and 
found that the reply of the Department was correct as the taxpayers were not in receipt 
of any RCM supplies. 
D. Cases where action was taken before issue of Audit Queries  
The Department had already taken action in five cases constituting 5.68 per cent of 
the 88 responses received as detailed in Appendix-5.2.11. One illustrative case is 
discussed below: 
A tax payer (1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW) under Ward E, Dimapur availed ITC of 
₹2.80 crore in GSTR-3B against the available ITC of ₹0.30 crore as per GSTR-2A 
during 2018-19. This resulted in excess availing of ITC of ₹2.50 crore.  
On this being pointed out (October 2023), the Department replied (February 2024) 
that excess ITC had been reversed by the taxpayer in January 2019. The reply was 
found to be correct. 
 
                                                             
36  18 per cent of ₹6.71 crore = ₹1.20 crore - ₹0.13 crore (TDS)  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
253
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
253 
 
Recommendation: 
The Department may ensure taxpayers’ compliance to the deviations arising from 
non-adherence to the NGST Act and Rules. 
 
5.2.9.4 Detailed Audit of GST returns 
In a self-assessment regime, the onus of compliance with the law is on the taxpayer. 
The role of the Department is to establish and maintain an efficient tax administration 
mechanism to provide oversight. For an effective tax administration to ensure 
compliance with law and collection of revenue, an efficient governance mechanism is 
essential. An IT driven compliance model enables maintaining a non-discretionary 
regime of governance on scale and facilitates a targeted approach to enforce 
compliance. 
From an external audit perspective, Audit also focused on a data-driven risk-based 
approach. Thus, apart from identifying inconsistencies/deviations in GST returns 
through pan-State data analysis, a detailed audit of GST returns was also conducted as 
a part of this SSCA. A risk-based sample of 15 taxpayers was selected for this part of 
the SSCA. The methodology adopted was to initially conduct a desk review of GST 
returns and financial statements filed by the taxpayers as part of the GSTR-9C and 
other records available in the back-end system to identify potential risk areas, 
inconsistencies/deviations and red flags. Based on the results of desk review, Detailed 
Audit was conducted by requisitioning corresponding granular records from the 
Department such as financial ledgers and invoices to identify causative factors of the 
identified risks and to evaluate compliance by taxpayers. 
A. Scope Limitation-Non-production of records 
During the desk review of taxpayers’ records available in the back-end system, Audit 
identified the risks related to excess ITC and tax liability mismatches for detailed 
examination. On the ITC dimension, the mismatches were identified by comparing 
GSTR-3B with GSTR-2A and GSTR-9, and the declarations made in Table 12 and 14 
of GSTR-9C. On the tax liability dimension, the mismatches were identified by 
comparing GSTR-3B with GSTR-1 and GSTR-9 and the declarations in Table 5, 
Table 7, and Table 9 of GSTR-9C. However, in 10 out of 15 sampled cases 
(66.67 per cent), the Department did not produce the corresponding granular records 
such as the tax invoices, financial ledgers and credit & debit notes required for 
examining the causative factors for mismatches of ITC and tax liability, though 
requisitioned by audit through the respective Wards. In the absence of these records, 
the audit findings were restricted to the information available in the returns filed by 
the taxpayer.  
During the Exit Conference, the Special Commissioner of State Taxes stated that 
granular records are not available with the Proper Officers/Department. It was further 
stated that, although the Proper Officers requisitioned these records from the 
taxpayers, the records are yet to be produced.  

254
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
254 
 
The jurisdiction wise non-production of records is summarised in Table 5.2.2. 
Table – 5.2.2: Non-Production of Records 
Jurisdictional formation 
Sample Non-production 
Number 
of 
taxpayers 
Number 
of 
taxpayers 
Amount of mismatch  
(₹ in crore) 
Dimapur ward A 4 4 55.62 
Dimapur ward C 2 2 0.78 
Dimapur ward D 1 1 0.61 
Dimapur ward E 4 2 4.08 
Kohima Ward A 2 1 11.69 
Mokokchung Ward A 1 - 0 
Wokha 1 - 0 
Total 15 10 72.78 
 
Recommendation: 
The Department may instruct the departmental units to ensure timely and 
complete production of records to Audit. 
 
B. Detailed Audit-Audit findings 
 
As brought out in the previous paragraphs, detailed audit involved a desk review of 
GST returns and other basic records to identify risks and red flags, which were 
followed up by field audit to identify the extent of non-compliance by taxpayers and 
action taken by the departmental field formations. Non-compliance by taxpayers at 
various stages ultimately impacts the veracity of returns filed, utilisation of ITC and 
discharge of tax payments. The audit findings are categorised under a) Returns 
b) Utilisation of ITC and c) Other findings. Category-wise observations are discussed 
below: 
 
1. Return 
 
(i) Non-payment of interest on delayed payment 
As per Section 50(1) of the NGST Act, 2017, every person who is liable to pay tax in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act or the Rules made thereunder, but fails to 
pay the tax or any part thereof to the Government within the period prescribed, shall 
for the period for which the tax or any part thereof remains unpaid, pay, on his own, 
interest at such rate, not exceeding 18 per cent. Further, the State Government notified 
the rate of interest 37 on delayed payment at 18 per cent. The penal interest is payable 
only if cash ledger balance is utilised to pay taxes. 
Scrutiny of GSTR-3B returns of 15 taxpayers for the period from 2018-19 to 2020-21 
revealed that two taxpayers had filed their returns with delay of 07 to 271 days, for 
which these taxpayers were liable to pay 0.14 crore as shown in Appendix-5.2.12. 
                                                             
37  Notification No. F.NO.FIN/REV-3/GST/1/08(Pt-1)’V’ dated 06 July 2017 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
255
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
255 
 
On this being pointed out (October 2023), the Department stated (February 2024) that 
notice had been issued to the taxpayer for clearance of liabilities. Further reply is 
awaited (October 2024). 
(ii) Non-filing of Annual Return (GSTR-9) and Reconciliation Statement 
(GSTR-9C) 
Rule 80 of the NGST Rules, 2017, envisages that every registered person whose 
aggregate turnover during a financial year exceeds two crore rupees shall get his 
accounts audited by a Chartered Accountant and furnish a copy of the audited annual 
accounts and a reconciliation statement, duly certified, in Form GSTR-9C along with 
annual return filed in Form GSTR- 9. Further, Section 46 of the NGST Act, 2017, 
read with Rule 68 of the NGST Rules, 2017, stipulates issue of a notice in Form 
GSTR-3A followed by issue of an assessment order in Form ASMT-13, if the 
taxpayer fails to file return within fifteen days of notice. A summary of such order 
should be uploaded in the system in Form DRC-07. Filing of returns is related to 
payment of tax as the due date for both the actions are the same, which implies risk of 
non-payment of tax/penalty in the case of non-filers. 
Audit observed that out of 15 taxpayers selected for Detailed Audit, two taxpayers 
filed GSTR-9 return without filing the Annual GST Reconciliation statement in 
GSTR-9C while one taxpayer did not file GSTR-9 and GSTR-9C even though the 
taxable value of outward supplies ranged from ₹6.70 crore to ₹151.19 crore during 
2019-20 to 2020-21. List of these taxpayers are shown in Appendix 5.2.13. 
On this being pointed out, the Department stated (July 2024) that those two taxpayers 
had filed GSTR-9C on 16 April 2024 and 15 June 2024.  
2.  Mismatches related to ITC 
Input Tax Credit means the Goods and Services Tax paid by a taxable person on 
purchase of goods and/or services that are used in the course or furtherance of 
business. To avoid cascading effect of taxes, credit of taxes paid on input supplies can 
be used to set-off for payment of taxes on outward supplies. 
Section 16 and 17 of the NGST Act, 2017 prescribe the eligibility and conditions to 
avail ITC. Credit of CGST cannot be used for payment of SGST/UTGST and credit of 
SGST/UTGST cannot be utilised for payment of CGST. Rule 36 to 45 of the NGST 
Rules, 2017 prescribes the procedures for availing and reversal of ITC. 
Audit analysed the dataset of GSTR-2A in respect of selected taxpayers along with 
datasets of GSTR-3B, GSTR-9 and GSTR-9C filed by the taxpayers and noticed 
mismatches of input tax credit among returns. Audit could not examine mismatches in 
detail since relevant granular records were not produced by the Department.  
Audit observed 26 instances of ITC related mismatches, amounting to ₹85.62 crore 
out of 15 sampled cases examined. The deficiencies were due to availing ITC 
irregularly, availing ineligible ITC and availing of ITC without supplier remitting tax. 
Hence, these cases remain as mismatches. The details of mismatches in input tax 

256
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
256 
 
credit noticed by Audit are given in Table 5.2.3. Dimension-wise details are given in 
Appendix 5.2.14. 
Table No. 5.2.3 – Mismatch in Input Tax Credit claimed by taxpayers 
Sl. 
No Algorithm 
Amount 
involved  
(₹ in crore)/ 
Number of 
mismatches 
Remarks/Replies 
1 
GSTR-2A vs GSTR-3B 
ITC available as per GSTR-2A (with all its 
amendments) was compared with the ITC availed 
in GSTR-3B {Table 4A(5) for domestic supplies) 
after considering (i) reversal of ITC (Others 
pertaining to Table 4B(2)) and (ii) ITC availed in 
the subsequent year (Table 8© of GSTR-9) 
33.29 
(10) 
On these cases being pointed out 
(October 2023), the Department stated 
(February 2024) that notice was issued to 
the taxpayers to explain the reason for 
mismatch. Further reply is awaited  
(October 2024). 
2 
ITC availed without supplier remitting tax 
ITC available from GSTR-2A was compared with 
Table 8A of GSTR-9 which captures ITC 
available from GSTR-2A (as an auto-populated 
non-editable field) but excludes those entries in 
GSTR-2A where the supplier has not filed GSTR-
1 by due date of its filing and  also excludes the 
ITC for the period during which the recipient 
taxpayer was under composition scheme. 
37.45 
(7) 
On these cases being pointed out 
(October 2023), the Department stated 
(February 2024) that notice was issued to 
the taxpayers to explain the reason for 
mismatch. Further reply is awaited  
(October 2024). 
3 
ITC availed after cut-off period 
ITC availed through Table 4 of GSTR-3Bs 
pertaining to period 2018-19 to 2020-21 filed 
after October of the following year. 
1.88 
(1) 
On this being pointed out (October 2023), 
the Department stated (February 2024) 
that notice was issued to the taxpayers to 
explain the reason for mismatch. Further 
reply is awaited (October 2024). 
4 
Positive figure in GSTR-9C Table 12 F 
Higher amount of ITC claimed than credit that is 
due when compared between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR-9C) 
0.16 
(2) 
On these cases being pointed out 
(October 2023), the Department stated 
(February 2024) that notice was issued to 
the taxpayers to explain the reason for 
mismatch. Further reply is awaited  
(October 2024). 
Total 72.78 
(20) - 
 
Recommendation: 
The Department may ensure remedial action for all the compliance deviations 
before they get time barred. 
 
5.2.10 Conclusion 
The SSCA on Department Oversight on GST Payments and Return Filing Phase–II 
was undertaken in the context of varying trend of return filing and continued data 
inconsistencies with an objective of assessing the adequacy of the system in 
monitoring return filing and tax payments, extent of compliance and other 
departmental oversight functions.  
This SSCA was predominantly based on data analysis, which highlighted risk areas, 
red flags and in some cases, rule-based deviations and logical inconsistencies in GST 
returns filed during the period 2018-19 to 2020-21. The SSCA entailed assessing the 
Chapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
256 
 
credit noticed by Audit are given in Table 5.2.3. Dimension-wise details are given in 
Appendix 5.2.14. 
Table No. 5.2.3 – Mismatch in Input Tax Credit claimed by taxpayers 
Sl. 
No Algorithm 
Amount 
involved  
(₹ in crore)/ 
Number of 
mismatches 
Remarks/Replies 
1 
GSTR-2A vs GSTR-3B 
ITC available as per GSTR-2A (with all its 
amendments) was compared with the ITC availed 
in GSTR-3B {Table 4A(5) for domestic supplies) 
after considering (i) reversal of ITC (Others 
pertaining to Table 4B(2)) and (ii) ITC availed in 
the subsequent year (Table 8© of GSTR-9) 
33.29 
(10) 
On these cases being pointed out 
(October 2023), the Department stated 
(February 2024) that notice was issued to 
the taxpayers to explain the reason for 
mismatch. Further reply is awaited  
(October 2024). 
2 
ITC availed without supplier remitting tax 
ITC available from GSTR-2A was compared with 
Table 8A of GSTR-9 which captures ITC 
available from GSTR-2A (as an auto-populated 
non-editable field) but excludes those entries in 
GSTR-2A where the supplier has not filed GSTR-
1 by due date of its filing and  also excludes the 
ITC for the period during which the recipient 
taxpayer was under composition scheme. 
37.45 
(7) 
On these cases being pointed out 
(October 2023), the Department stated 
(February 2024) that notice was issued to 
the taxpayers to explain the reason for 
mismatch. Further reply is awaited  
(October 2024). 
3 
ITC availed after cut-off period 
ITC availed through Table 4 of GSTR-3Bs 
pertaining to period 2018-19 to 2020-21 filed 
after October of the following year. 
1.88 
(1) 
On this being pointed out (October 2023), 
the Department stated (February 2024) 
that notice was issued to the taxpayers to 
explain the reason for mismatch. Further 
reply is awaited (October 2024). 
4 
Positive figure in GSTR-9C Table 12 F 
Higher amount of ITC claimed than credit that is 
due when compared between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR-9C) 
0.16 
(2) 
On these cases being pointed out 
(October 2023), the Department stated 
(February 2024) that notice was issued to 
the taxpayers to explain the reason for 
mismatch. Further reply is awaited  
(October 2024). 
Total 72.78 
(20) - 
 
Recommendation: 
The Department may ensure remedial action for all the compliance deviations 
before they get time barred. 
 
5.2.10 Conclusion 
The SSCA on Department Oversight on GST Payments and Return Filing Phase–II 
was undertaken in the context of varying trend of return filing and continued data 
inconsistencies with an objective of assessing the adequacy of the system in 
monitoring return filing and tax payments, extent of compliance and other 
departmental oversight functions.  
This SSCA was predominantly based on data analysis, which highlighted risk areas, 
red flags and in some cases, rule-based deviations and logical inconsistencies in GST 
returns filed during the period 2018-19 to 2020-21. The SSCA entailed assessing the 
Chapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
256 
 
credit noticed by Audit are given in Table 5.2.3. Dimension-wise details are given in 
Appendix 5.2.14. 
Table No. 5.2.3 – Mismatch in Input Tax Credit claimed by taxpayers 
Sl. 
No Algorithm 
Amount 
involved  
(₹ in crore)/ 
Number of 
mismatches 
Remarks/Replies 
1 
GSTR-2A vs GSTR-3B 
ITC available as per GSTR-2A (with all its 
amendments) was compared with the ITC availed 
in GSTR-3B {Table 4A(5) for domestic supplies) 
after considering (i) reversal of ITC (Others 
pertaining to Table 4B(2)) and (ii) ITC availed in 
the subsequent year (Table 8© of GSTR-9) 
33.29 
(10) 
On these cases being pointed out 
(October 2023), the Department stated 
(February 2024) that notice was issued to 
the taxpayers to explain the reason for 
mismatch. Further reply is awaited  
(October 2024). 
2 
ITC availed without supplier remitting tax 
ITC available from GSTR-2A was compared with 
Table 8A of GSTR-9 which captures ITC 
available from GSTR-2A (as an auto-populated 
non-editable field) but excludes those entries in 
GSTR-2A where the supplier has not filed GSTR-
1 by due date of its filing and  also excludes the 
ITC for the period during which the recipient 
taxpayer was under composition scheme. 
37.45 
(7) 
On these cases being pointed out 
(October 2023), the Department stated 
(February 2024) that notice was issued to 
the taxpayers to explain the reason for 
mismatch. Further reply is awaited  
(October 2024). 
3 
ITC availed after cut-off period 
ITC availed through Table 4 of GSTR-3Bs 
pertaining to period 2018-19 to 2020-21 filed 
after October of the following year. 
1.88 
(1) 
On this being pointed out (October 2023), 
the Department stated (February 2024) 
that notice was issued to the taxpayers to 
explain the reason for mismatch. Further 
reply is awaited (October 2024). 
4 
Positive figure in GSTR-9C Table 12 F 
Higher amount of ITC claimed than credit that is 
due when compared between annual return and 
financial statements (Table 12F of GSTR-9C) 
0.16 
(2) 
On these cases being pointed out 
(October 2023), the Department stated 
(February 2024) that notice was issued to 
the taxpayers to explain the reason for 
mismatch. Further reply is awaited  
(October 2024). 
Total 72.78 
(20) - 
 
Recommendation: 
The Department may ensure remedial action for all the compliance deviations 
before they get time barred. 
 
5.2.10 Conclusion 
The SSCA on Department Oversight on GST Payments and Return Filing Phase–II 
was undertaken in the context of varying trend of return filing and continued data 
inconsistencies with an objective of assessing the adequacy of the system in 
monitoring return filing and tax payments, extent of compliance and other 
departmental oversight functions.  
This SSCA was predominantly based on data analysis, which highlighted risk areas, 
red flags and in some cases, rule-based deviations and logical inconsistencies in GST 
returns filed during the period 2018-19 to 2020-21. The SSCA entailed assessing the 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
257
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
257 
 
oversight functions of State Jurisdictional formation at two levels – at the data level 
through global data queries and at the functional level with a deeper detailed audit 
both of the Wards and of the GST returns, which involved accessing taxpayer records. 
The audit sample therefore comprised four Wards, 88 high value inconsistencies 
across 16 parameters selected through global queries and 15 taxpayers selected on risk 
assessment for detailed audit of GST returns for the years 2018-19 to 2020-21. 
A review of the functions of four Wards disclosed that there were deficiencies in 
oversight functions of Wards such as monitoring of return filing, scrutiny of returns, 
conduct of Internal Audit and cancellation of registration. 
Further, out of the 88 high value data inconsistencies identified by Audit, the 
Department responded to all 88  cases with a revenue implication of ₹84.61 crore 38. 
The Department reply in 19 cases amounting to ₹20.98 crore were acceptable to audit. 
Departmental action is pending in responses in 64 cases which has an identified risk 
exposure of ₹74.0139 crore. 
Detailed audit of GST returns also suggested significant non-compliance. At the 
outset, essential records such as financial statements, and granular records such as 
supplementary financial ledgers, invoices and agreement copies were not produced, 
which constituted a significant scope limitation. These cases represent potential risk 
exposure towards identified mismatches in ITC availment and tax payments. Out of 
the 15 cases that were audited either fully or partially, Audit observed 20 compliance 
deficiencies consisting of mismatches of ₹72.78 crore for which Departmental action 
is pending. 
Considering the significant rate of compliance deficiencies, the Department must 
initiate remedial measures before they get time barred. From a systemic perspective, 
the Department needs to strengthen the institutional mechanism in the Wards to 
establish and maintain effective oversight on return filing, scrutiny of returns, 
Internal Audit and cancellation of registrations. The Department may also consider 
introducing additional validation controls in GST returns to improve taxpayer 
compliance and to facilitate scrutiny of returns. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
38 Excludes turnover mismatch of ₹16.11 crore 
39 Excludes turnover mismatch of ₹3.07 crore  

258
Chapter V: Revenue SectorChapter – V Revenue Sector 
 
258 
 
Summary of recommendations: 
The Department may- 
(i) ensure time-bound compliance to the detailed procedures for scrutiny of 
returns. 
(ii) take prompt steps to conduct internal audit under Section 65 of the NGST 
Act so that action could be initiated against the defaulters before 
time-barring of cases. 
(iii) initiate action against late-filers and non-filers by assessing the tax 
liability through invoking of the ASMT-13 best judgment assessment 
order. 
(iv) adhere to the rules regarding the cancellation process to ensure that final 
returns in GSTR-10 are filed and the tax liability is discharged. 
(v) ensure taxpayers’ compliance to the deviations arising from 
non-adherence to the NGST Act and rules. 
(vi) instruct the departmental units to ensure timely and complete production 
of records to Audit. 
(vii) ensure remedial action for all the compliance deviations before they get 
time barred. 
 

CHAPTER-VI
ECONOMIC SECTOR
(PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES)

 
 
CHAPTER-VI 
 
ECONOMIC SECTOR (PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES) 
 
6.1.1 Introduction 
As of 31 March 2024, there were seven Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs)1 in Nagaland 
as shown in Table 6.1.1. 
Table 6.1.1: Total number of PSEs as on 31 March 2024 
Type of PSEs Working PSEs Non-working PSEs Total 
Government Companies2 5 2 7 
Statutory Corporations Nil Nil Nil 
Total 5 2 7 
Source: Information furnished by PSEs 
None of these companies are listed on the stock exchange which means that the shares 
of the PSEs cannot be traded on the stock exchange. During the year 2023-24, no new 
PSE was incorporated and no existing PSE was closed down. 
6.1.2 Investment in PSEs 
The investments in PSEs include the investments made by the State Government and 
Others (including the Central Government, Holding Companies, Banks and Financial 
Institutions). The State Government’s stake in these PSEs is mainly of three types: 
 Share Capital and Loans:  In addition to the share capital contribution, the 
State Government also provides financial assistance by way of loans to the 
PSEs from time to time. 
 Special Financial Support:  The State Government provides budgetary 
support by way of grants and subsidies to the PSEs as and when required. 
 Guarantees: The State Government also guarantees the repayment of loans 
with interest availed by the PSEs from Financial Institutions (FIs). 
As on 31 March 2023 and 31 March 2024, the total investment in seven PSEs was 
₹122.54 crore and ₹123.15 crore3 respectively as per details shown in Table 6.1.2. 
Table 6.1.2: Details of total investment in seven PSEs 4 as on 31 March 2023 and 31 March 2024 
(₹ in crore) 
Source: Information furnished by PSEs 
* Others include Central Government, Holding Companies and Banks/FIs. 
                                                             
1 All Government Companies 
2 Government Companies include ‘Other companies’ referred to in Section 139(5) and 139(7) of the Companies 
Act 2013 
3 Investment figures are provisional and as per the information provided by the PSEs, none of the seven PSEs 
has finalised accounts for 2023-24 as of September 2024 
4 Due to non-availability of latest information (for 2023-24) from two non-working PSEs, investment (equity & 
loans) figures of these two PSEs adopted from their latest finalised accounts. 
Particulars 2022-23 2023-24 
Equity Capital Long term Loans Total Equity Capital Long term Loans Total 
State Government 36.67 0.27 36.94 36.67 0.27 36.94 
Others*  8.21 77.39 85.60 8.31 77.90 86.21 
Total 44.88 77.66 122.54 44.98 78.17 123.15 
 
 
CHAPTER-VI 
 
ECONOMIC SECTOR (PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES) 
 
6.1.1 Introduction 
As of 31 March 2024, there were seven Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs)1 in Nagaland 
as shown in Table 6.1.1. 
Table 6.1.1: Total number of PSEs as on 31 March 2024 
Type of PSEs Working PSEs Non-working PSEs Total 
Government Companies2 5 2 7 
Statutory Corporations Nil Nil Nil 
Total 5 2 7 
Source: Information furnished by PSEs 
None of these companies are listed on the stock exchange which means that the shares 
of the PSEs cannot be traded on the stock exchange. During the year 2023-24, no new 
PSE was incorporated and no existing PSE was closed down. 
6.1.2 Investment in PSEs 
The investments in PSEs include the investments made by the State Government and 
Others (including the Central Government, Holding Companies, Banks and Financial 
Institutions). The State Government’s stake in these PSEs is mainly of three types: 
 Share Capital and Loans:  In addition to the share capital contribution, the 
State Government also provides financial assistance by way of loans to the 
PSEs from time to time. 
 Special Financial Support:  The State Government provides budgetary 
support by way of grants and subsidies to the PSEs as and when required. 
 Guarantees: The State Government also guarantees the repayment of loans 
with interest availed by the PSEs from Financial Institutions (FIs). 
As on 31 March 2023 and 31 March 2024, the total investment in seven PSEs was 
₹122.54 crore and ₹123.15 crore3 respectively as per details shown in Table 6.1.2. 
Table 6.1.2: Details of total investment in seven PSEs 4 as on 31 March 2023 and 31 March 2024 
(₹ in crore) 
Source: Information furnished by PSEs 
* Others include Central Government, Holding Companies and Banks/FIs. 
                                                             
1 All Government Companies 
2 Government Companies include ‘Other companies’ referred to in Section 139(5) and 139(7) of the Companies 
Act 2013 
3 Investment figures are provisional and as per the information provided by the PSEs, none of the seven PSEs 
has finalised accounts for 2023-24 as of September 2024 
4 Due to non-availability of latest information (for 2023-24) from two non-working PSEs, investment (equity & 
loans) figures of these two PSEs adopted from their latest finalised accounts. 
Particulars 2022-23 2023-24 
Equity Capital Long term Loans Total Equity Capital Long term Loans Total 
State Government 36.67 0.27 36.94 36.67 0.27 36.94 
Others*  8.21 77.39 85.60 8.31 77.90 86.21 
Total 44.88 77.66 122.54 44.98 78.17 123.15 
 
 
CHAPTER-VI 
 
ECONOMIC SECTOR (PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES) 
 
6.1.1 Introduction 
As of 31 March 2024, there were seven Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs)1 in Nagaland 
as shown in Table 6.1.1. 
Table 6.1.1: Total number of PSEs as on 31 March 2024 
Type of PSEs Working PSEs Non-working PSEs Total 
Government Companies2 5 2 7 
Statutory Corporations Nil Nil Nil 
Total 5 2 7 
Source: Information furnished by PSEs 
None of these companies are listed on the stock exchange which means that the shares 
of the PSEs cannot be traded on the stock exchange. During the year 2023-24, no new 
PSE was incorporated and no existing PSE was closed down. 
6.1.2 Investment in PSEs 
The investments in PSEs include the investments made by the State Government and 
Others (including the Central Government, Holding Companies, Banks and Financial 
Institutions). The State Government’s stake in these PSEs is mainly of three types: 
 Share Capital and Loans:  In addition to the share capital contribution, the 
State Government also provides financial assistance by way of loans to the 
PSEs from time to time. 
 Special Financial Support:  The State Government provides budgetary 
support by way of grants and subsidies to the PSEs as and when required. 
 Guarantees: The State Government also guarantees the repayment of loans 
with interest availed by the PSEs from Financial Institutions (FIs). 
As on 31 March 2023 and 31 March 2024, the total investment in seven PSEs was 
₹122.54 crore and ₹123.15 crore3 respectively as per details shown in Table 6.1.2. 
Table 6.1.2: Details of total investment in seven PSEs 4 as on 31 March 2023 and 31 March 2024 
(₹ in crore) 
Source: Information furnished by PSEs 
* Others include Central Government, Holding Companies and Banks/FIs. 
                                                             
1 All Government Companies 
2 Government Companies include ‘Other companies’ referred to in Section 139(5) and 139(7) of the Companies 
Act 2013 
3 Investment figures are provisional and as per the information provided by the PSEs, none of the seven PSEs 
has finalised accounts for 2023-24 as of September 2024 
4 Due to non-availability of latest information (for 2023-24) from two non-working PSEs, investment (equity & 
loans) figures of these two PSEs adopted from their latest finalised accounts. 
Particulars 2022-23 2023-24 
Equity Capital Long term Loans Total Equity Capital Long term Loans Total 
State Government 36.67 0.27 36.94 36.67 0.27 36.94 
Others*  8.21 77.39 85.60 8.31 77.90 86.21 
Total 44.88 77.66 122.54 44.98 78.17 123.15 

260
Chapter VI: Economic SectorChapter – VI Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 
260 
The total investment as on 31 March 2024 consisted of 36.52 per cent towards capital 
and 63.48 per cent  in long-term loans. The investment in 2023-24 increased by 
₹0.61 crore from 2022-23 mainly due to increase in the long term loans of Nagaland 
Industrial Development Corporation Limited. The investment increased by 
3.86 per cent (₹4.58 crore) from ₹118.57 crore in 2019-20 to ₹123.15 crore in 
2023-24 as shown in Chart 6.1.1 below: 
Chart 6.1.1: Total investment in PSEs 
 
Source: Information furnished by PSEs 
Further, it can be seen from Table 6.1.2 above that, around 30 per cent (₹36.94 crore) 
of the total investment (₹123.15 crore) in PSEs as on 31 March 2024 was contributed 
by the State Government. However, there was no recorded information about the 
existence of any specific policy of the State Government regarding payment of 
minimum dividend by the PSEs. During 2023-24, out of five  working PSEs, only 
two PSEs - Nagaland State Mineral Development Corporation Limited and Kohima 
Smart City Development Limited recorded book profit of ₹0.90 crore and ₹0.02 crore 
respectively as per the latest finalised accounts (Appendix 6.1.1) . However, no 
dividend was declared by these PSEs. 
6.1.2.1 Sector-wise investment in PSEs 
The total investment by the State Government and Others (Central Government, 
Holding Companies, Banks and Financial Institutions) in various important sectors at 
the end of 31 March 2020 and 31 March 2024 is shown in Table 6.1.3. 
Table 6.1.3: Sector-wise investment in PSEs as on 31 March 2024 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of Sector Year of investment 
2019-20 2023-24 
Finance 77.57 82.61 
Manufacturing 10.68 15.42 
Service 10.97 5.61 
Miscellaneous 19.35 19.51 
Total 118.57 123.15 
Source: Information furnished by PSEs 
11 8. 57
1 1 9 . 3 0
1 1 8 . 5 9
1 2 2 . 5 412 3. 15
116.00
117.00
118.00
119.00
120.00
121.00
122.00
123.00
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
₹  i n  c r o r e  
Investment (Capital and Long term loans)

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
261
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
261 
As can be seen from Table 6.1.3 above, the thrust of PSE investment during 2019-20 
and 2023-24 was in the Finance sector 5, which increased by 6.50 per cent from 
₹77.57 crore (2019-20) to ₹82.61 crore (2023-24).  The share of this Sector in overall 
investment increased by 1.66 per cent during 2023-24 (67.08 per cent ) from 
65.42 per cent during 2019-20. 
6.1.3 Reconciliation with Finance Accounts 
The figures in respect of equity, loans and guarantees outstanding as per the records 
of PSEs should agree with the figures appearing in the Finance Accounts of the State.  
In case the figures do not agree, the Finance Department and the PSEs concerned 
should carry out a reconciliation of the differences. The position in this regard as on 
31 March 2024 is shown in Table 6.1.4. 
Table 6.1.4: Variation between Finance Accounts and records of PSEs 
(₹ in crore) 
Outstanding in respect of Amount as per  Difference Finance Accounts Records of PSEs6 
Equity 125.95 36.67 89.28 
Loans7 0.48 0.27 0.21 
Guarantees 67.81 91.11 23.30 
Source: As per the State Finance Accounts, 2023-24 and information furnished by PSEs  
From Table 6.1.4  above, it can be seen that as on 31 March 2024, there were 
unreconciled differences in the figures of equity (₹89.28 crore) and guarantees 
(₹23.30 crore) as per the two sets of records. The differences in the figures of equity 
occurred in respect of all the PSEs while differences in the figures of guarantee relate 
to two PSEs8.  
Though the Finance Department, Government of Nagaland as well as the PSEs 
concerned were apprised about the differences, impressing upon the need for early 
reconciliation, no progress was noticed in this regard. The Committee on Public 
Undertakings (COPU) meeting held (22 August 2024) directed the Finance 
Department to take up the reconciliation with the related PSEs at the earliest. 
Recommendations:  
(i) The State Government should establish a structured mechanism with 
defined timelines for periodic reconciliation of financial records 
between the Finance Department and the Public Sector Enterprises 
(PSEs). 
(ii) A dedicated nodal officer should be appointed both in the Finance 
Department and in each PSE to ensure timely reconciliation of 
outstanding figures and address discrepancies, with quarterly reports 
                                                             
5  Finance Sector included only one PSE (Nagaland Industrial Development Corporation Limited) 
6  Information as provided by PSEs and includes only the investment made by the State Government 
7 In the State Finance Accounts, 2023-24, the loan figures appear sector-wise and not PSE-wise, 
hence, the figures of the State Government loans provided to PSEs are not available in Finance 
Accounts 
8  Serial no. A1, A4 and B7 of Appendix 6.1.1 

262
Chapter VI: Economic SectorChapter – VI Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 
262 
submitted to the Finance Department and reviewed by a competent 
authority. 
 
6.1.4 Accountability framework 
The audit of the financial statements of a Company in respect of financial years 
commencing on or after 01 April 2014 is governed by the provisions of the 
Companies Act, 2013 and audit of the financial statements in respect of financial 
years that commenced prior to 01 April 2014 continue to be governed by the 
Companies Act, 1956. The new Act has brought about increased regulatory 
framework, wider management responsibility and higher professional accountability. 
6.1.4.1 Statutory Audit/Supplementary Audit 
Statutory Auditors appointed by the C&AG audits the financial statements of a 
Government Company. In addition, C&AG conducts the supplementary audit of these 
financial statements under the provisions of Section 143(6) of the Companies 
Act, 2013. 
6.1.4.2 Role of Government and Legislature 
The State Government exercises control over the affairs of these PSEs through its 
administrative departments. The Government appoints the Chief Executives and 
Directors on the Board of these PSEs. The State Legislature also monitors the 
accounting and utilisation of Government investment in the PSEs. For this purpose, 
the Annual Reports of the State Government Companies together with the Statutory 
Auditors’ Reports and comments of the C&AG thereon are required to be placed 
before the Legislature under Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013.  
6.1.5 Arrears in finalisation of accounts 
The financial statements of the companies are required to be finalised within six 
months after the end of the financial year i.e. by 30 September in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 96(1) of the Companies Act, 2013. Failure to do so may attract 
penal provisions under Section 99 of the Companies Act, 2013. As per the Companies 
Act, 2013, the SPSE and every officer of the SPSE who is at default shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend up to ₹one lakh and in the case of continuing 
default, with a further fine which may extend upto ₹5,000 for every day during which 
such default continues. 
Moreover, timely finalisation of accounts is important for the State Government to 
assess the financial health of the PSEs and to avoid financial misappropriation and 
mismanagement. Persistent delay in finalisation of accounts is fraught with the risk of 
fraud and leakage of public money going undetected apart from violation of the 
provision of the Companies Act, 2013. 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
263
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
263 
Table 6.1.5 below provides the details of progress made by the five working PSEs 9 in 
finalisation of their annual accounts as on 30 September 2024. 
Table 6.1.5: Position relating to finalisation of accounts of working PSEs 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
1. Number of Working PSEs 5 410 511 5 5 
2. Number of accounts finalised 
during the year 2 14 3 3 7 
3. Number of accounts in arrears 21 912 1513 17 15 
4. Number of Working PSEs with 
arrears in accounts 5 4 5 5 5 
5. Extent of arrears  
(nos. in years) 1 to 10 1 to 3 1 to 5 1 to 6 1 to 6 
Source: Department records 
As can be seen from Table 6.1.5 above, the extent of arrears of working PSE-
accounts has shown a mixed trend during last five years (2019-20 to 2023-24). The 
arrears of accounts were lowest during 2020-21 (nine accounts) due to finalisation of 
highest number of accounts (14 Accounts) by the PSEs during that year. As on 
30 September 2024, total 15 Accounts pertaining to all five working PSEs were in 
arrears for the periods ranging between one to six years.  
The administrative departments, which have the responsibility of overseeing the 
activities of the PSEs, have to ensure that the PSEs finalise and adopt their accounts 
within the stipulated period. The Principal Accountant General (Audit), Nagaland had 
been pursuing with the administrative departments to clear the arrears of accounts of 
the defaulting PSEs. The COPU meeting held on 22 August 2024 also impressed upon 
the Finance Department to take up the finalisation of accounts in arrear in the related 
PSEs at the earliest. However, the State Government and the PSEs concerned could 
not clear the pendency of accounts of the PSEs in a time-bound manner. 
Recommendation:  
The State Government may develop a time-bound roadmap with clear milestones 
to clear the backlog of accounts, prioritising the oldest pending accounts first. A 
nodal officer should be designated within each administrative department and 
PSE to monitor progress and ensure accountability 
 
                                                             
9 As on 30 September 2024, Nagaland Handloom & Handicraft Development Limited finalised its 
accounts upto 2019-20, Nagaland Hotels and Tourism Development Corporation Limited finalised 
upto 2021-22, Nagaland State Mineral Development Corporation Limited upto 2021-22, Nagaland 
Industrial Development Corporation Limited upto 2022-23 and Kohima Smart City Development 
Limited finalised upto 2017-18. 
10 Nagaland Industrial Raw Material Supply Corporation Ltd (NIRMSCL) became non-working.  
11 Includes Kohima Smart City Development Ltd (KSCDL) incorporated on 24 March 2017. 
12 Does not include two Accounts on NIRMSCL which became non-working.  
13 Includes Accounts of KSCDL since 2017-18. 

264
Chapter VI: Economic SectorChapter – VI Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 
264 
6.1.6 Investment by State Government in PSEs whose accounts are in arrears 
The State Government provided budgetary support aggregating to ₹159.90 crore by 
way of grants to five PSEs during the years for which the accounts of these SPSEs 
had not been finalised as detailed in Table 6.1.6.  
Table 6.1.6: State Government investment in SPSEs with pending accounts as on 30 September 
2024 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of SPSE 
Accounts 
finalised 
upto 
Accounts 
pending 
finalisation 
Investment by State 
Government during the period 
of accounts in arrears 
Equity Loans Grants 
1. Nagaland Industrial 
Development Corporation Ltd. 2022-23 2023-24 0 0 0.80 
2. Nagaland State Mineral 
Development Corporation Ltd 2021-22 2022-23 to 
2023-24 0 0 26.71 
3. Nagaland Hotels and Tourism 
Development Corporation Ltd. 2021-22 2022-23 to 
2023-24 0 0 11.50 
4. 
Nagaland Handloom & 
Handicrafts Development 
Corporation., Ltd. 
2019-20 2020-21 to 
2023-24 0 0 47.75 
5. Kohima Smart City 
Development Ltd. 2017-18 2018-19 to 
2023-24 0 0 73.14 
Total 0 0 159.90 
Source: Department records 
In the absence of accounts and their subsequent audit, it cannot be verified if the 
investments made and the expenditure incurred have been properly accounted for and 
whether the purpose for which the amount was invested, was achieved or not. 
Recommendations: 
The Government may consider- 
(i) setting up a special cell under the Finance Department with a Nodal 
Officer to oversee the expeditious clearance of arrears of accounts of 
PSEs. 
(ii) outsourcing the work relating to preparation of accounts and take 
punitive action against company heads responsible for arrears of 
accounts. 
(iii) stop providing further financial assistance to such companies until the 
accounts are made as current as possible. 
 
6.1.7 Special support and guarantees to PSEs during the year 
The State Government provides financial support to PSEs in various forms through 
annual budgetary allocations. The details of budgetary outgo towards equity, loans 
and grants/subsidies in respect of working PSEs for three years are shown in Table 
6.1.7. 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
265
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
265 
Table 6.1.7: Details of budgetary support to PSEs 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 
2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
No. of 
PSEs Amount No. of 
PSEs Amount No. of 
PSEs Amount 
1. Equity Capital outgo from budget 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
2. Loans given from budget 1 4.28 1 0.69 0 0.00 
3. Grants/Subsidy from budget 4 28.30 5 49.54 5 89.07 
Total Outgo (1+2+3) 32.58  50.23  89.07 
4. Guarantees issued 1 4.28 0 0.00 0 0.00 
5. Guarantee Commitment 1 15.00 2 88.00 2 88.00 
Source: Information furnished by PSEs  
It can be seen from Table 6.1.7 above that as compared to the previous year (2022-
23), the budgetary outgo to PSEs during 2023-24 increased significantly by ₹38.84 
crore mainly due to increase in Government grant provided to Kohima Smart City 
Development Limited (₹33.14 crore) during 2023-24. However, no budgetary support 
was provided to any SPSEs in the form of equity or loans during the previous two 
years. 
The State Government also guarantees the repayment of loans (with interest) availed 
by the PSEs from Banks/Financial Institutions subject to the prescribed limits and 
payment of guarantee fee of one per cent of the guarantee amount by the PSEs 
concerned. The State Government guarantee amounting to ₹88.00 crore remained 
outstanding during last two years against the borrowings of two SPSEs14.  None of the 
two SPSEs, however, had paid any guarantee fee to the State Government in absence 
of any demand from the State Government. 
6.1.8 Performance of PSEs as per their latest finalised accounts 
The financial position and working results of working PSEs as per their latest 
finalised accounts are detailed in Appendix 6.1.1. The comparative details of working 
PSE turnover and State GDP (GSDP) for five years ending 2023-24 are shown in 
Table 6.1.8. 
Table 6.1.8: Details of working PSEs turnover vis-à-vis SGDP 
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Turnover 6.78 6.52 6.05 5.92 6.03 
GSDP 29,716 29,832 32,265 37,150 41,887 
Percentage of Turnover to SGDP 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01 
 Source: Turnover as per the latest finalised accounts of working PSEs and GSDP as per the 
information published by the Directorate of Economics & Statistics, GoN  
A ratio of PSE-turnover to GSDP shows the extent of PSE activities in the State 
economy.  It can be seen from Table 6.1.8 above that during the last five years 
(2019-2024), the GSDP had grown by 40.96 per cent while the turnover of PSEs 
during the corresponding period had decreased by 11.06 per cent .  As a result, the 
contribution of PSE-turnover to GSDP, has registered an overall decrease from 0.02 
per cent (2019-20) to 0.01 per cent (2023-24).  
                                                             
14  Nagaland Industrial Development Corporation Limited (₹73.00 crore) and Nagaland Handloom & 
Handicrafts Development Corporation Limited (₹15.00 crore)  

266
Chapter VI: Economic SectorChapter – VI Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 
266 
6.1.8.1 Key parameters 
Some other key parameters of PSEs performance as per their latest finalised accounts 
of the respective year are shown in Table 6.1.9. 
Table 6.1.9: Key Parameters of working PSEs 
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Debt 73.72 71.63 71.85 84.74 72.38 
Turnover15 6.78 6.52 6.05 5.92 6.03 
Debt/Turnover Ratio 10.87:1 10.99:1 11.88:1 14.31:1 12.00:1 
Interest Payments16 2.06 1.61 1.09 0.86 0.73 
Accumulated Profits/(Losses) (68.62) (67.75) (73.33) (96.96) (90.48) 
Source: Latest finalised Accounts of PSEs 
Debt-Turnover Ratio 
A low debt-to-turnover ratio (DTR) demonstrates a good balance between debt and 
income. Conversely, a high DTR can be a sign of having too much debt against the 
income of PSEs from core activities. Thus, the PSEs having lower DTR are more 
likely to successfully manage their debt servicing and repayments. 
PSE Debt 
It can be seen from Table 6.1.9 above that during the period of five years (2019-24), 
the PSE debt had been more than 10 times of their turnover indicating acute 
difficulties in repayment and servicing of debts by the PSEs. The DTR of working 
PSEs was highest (14.31:1) during 2022-23 and improved marginally to 12.00:1 
during the current year (2023-24). However, the DTR position of working SPSEs 
remained critical during all the five years under reference causing high pressure on 
the PSEs in servicing their debts by way of interest liability.  
6.1.8.2 Erosion of capital due to losses 
The paid-up capital and overall accumulated losses of five working PSEs as per their 
latest finalised accounts were ₹35.24 crore and ₹90.48 crore 17 respectively 
(Appendix 6.1.1).  
The accumulated losses (₹91.92 crore) of two working PSEs had completely eroded 
their paid-up capital (₹25.55 crore) as per their latest finalised accounts as shown in 
Table 6.1.10. 
Table 6.1.10: PSEs with erosion of paid-up capital 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of PSE Latest finalised 
accounts 
Paid up 
capital 
Accumulated 
losses 
Nagaland Industrial Development Corporation 
Limited 2022-23 23.20 65.11 
                                                             
15  Turnover of working PSEs as per the latest finalised accounts as on 30 September of the respective 
year 
16 Interest payments of working PSEs as per the latest finalised accounts as of 30 September of the 
respective year 
17 Comprising accumulated losses (₹98.23 crore) of three working PSEs (Sl. No. A1, A3 and A4 of 
Appendix 6.1.1) and accumulated profits (₹7.75 crore) of other two working PSEs (Sl. No. A2 and 
A5 of Appendix 6.1.1). 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
267
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
267 
- 6 . 0 3 - 6 . 3 0 -5.84
- 7 . 9 5
- 5 . 7 0
- 1 0 . 0 0
- 8 . 0 0
- 6 . 0 0
- 4 . 0 0
- 2 . 0 0
0 . 0 0
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
overall losses incurred during the year by working SPSEs
Name of PSE Latest finalised 
accounts 
Paid up 
capital 
Accumulated 
losses 
Nagaland Hotels and Tourism Development 
Corporation Limited 2021-22 2.35 26.81 
Total -- 25.55 91.92 
Source: Latest finalised Accounts of the PSEs 
The Return on Equity (ROE) 18 of above two PSEs was not workable due to complete 
erosion of their equity capital. ROE in respect of other two PSEs 19 was positive. The 
ROE of the remaining PSE (Nagaland Handloom & Handicrafts Development 
Corporation Ltd.) was negative. 
The overall position of the aggregate losses incurred by working PSEs during 2019-20 
to 2023-24 is shown in Chart 6.1.2. 
Chart 6.1.2: Losses of working PSEs 
Source: Latest finalised accounts of the PSEs as on 30 September of the respective years  
As can be seen from Chart 6.1.2, the losses of working PSEs during last five years 
ranged between ₹5.70 crore (2023-24) and ₹7.95 crore (2022-23). During the current 
year (2023-24), the PSE-losses were at the lowest at ₹5.70 crore mainly due to 
decrease in the loss of one SPSE (Nagaland Hotels and Tourism Development 
Corporation Limited) by ₹2.67 crore during 2023-24 as compared to 2022-23. 
However, the PSEs mostly remained dependent on the State Government Grants to 
meet their salary and employee-related expenditure in the absence of adequate income 
from their core operations. 
Persistent financial distress in PSEs indicates the need for urgent restructuring and 
better financial management.  The failure to finalise accounts in a timely manner 
weakens financial governance and leads to unreliable financial reporting. Heavy 
reliance on Government support instead of self-sufficiency highlights the need for 
performance-based funding. Stronger monitoring by administrative departments is 
essential to ensure timely compliance with financial reporting norms. 
                                                             
18 ROE = (Net Profit after taxes minus preference dividend) ÷ Shareholders’ Fund/Equity; Where, 
Shareholders’ Fund/Equity = Paid up Share Capital  plus Free Reserves and Surplus minus 
Accumulated Loss minus Deferred Revenue Expenditure 
19 Nagaland State Mineral Development Corporation Ltd (9.65 per cent ) and Kohima Smart City 
Development Ltd (16.67 per cent). 

268
Chapter VI: Economic SectorChapter – VI Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 
268 
6.1.9 Return on Investment on the basis of Present Value of Investment 
The Rate of Real Return (RORR) measures the profitability and efficiency with which 
equity and similar non-interest bearing capital have been employed, after adjusting 
them for their time value. To determine the RORR on Government investment in the 
State PSEs, the investment of State Government in the form of equity, interest-free 
loans and grants/subsidies given by the State Government for operational and 
management expenses less the disinvestments (if any), has been considered and 
indexed to their Present Value (PV) and summated. The RORR is then calculated by 
dividing the ‘profit after tax’ (PAT) of the PSEs by the sum of the PV of Government 
investment. 
During 2023-24, as per their latest finalised accounts, three PSEs where the State 
Government had made direct investment, incurred losses and two PSEs (Nagaland 
State Mineral Development Corporation Limited and Kohima Smart City 
Development Limited), had shown aggregate profit of ₹0.92 crore. On the basis of 
return on historical value, the State Government’s investment in the PSEs had eroded 
by (-)1.58 per cent during 2023-24. As per the RORR where the PV of investment is 
considered, the State Government investment eroded by (-)0.76 per cent as shown in 
Appendix 6.1.2.  This difference in the percentage of investment erosion was on 
account of the adjustment made in the investment amount for time value of money. 
6.1.10 Impact of Audit Comments on Annual Accounts of PSEs 
During October 2023 to September 2024, four working Companies forwarded 
seven audited accounts to the Principal Accountant General (Audit), Nagaland. Of 
these, five accounts were issued a Non-Review Certificate and two accounts were 
selected for audit. The Statutory Auditors had given qualified certificate to 
four accounts. The details of aggregate money value of comments of C&AG during 
the last three years is shown in Table 6.1.11. 
Table 6.1.11: Impact of audit comments on working Companies 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 
2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
No. of 
Accounts Amount No. of 
Accounts Amount No. of 
Accounts Amount 
1. Increase in loss 1 1.67 1 10.99 - - 
2. Decrease in loss - - - - 1 0.45 
3. Decrease in profit 0 0 1 0.06 0 0 
4. Errors of 
classification  - - - - 1 0.36 
Total  1.67  11.05  0.81 
Source: Comments on Accounts issued to PSEs by C&AG 
From Table 6.1.11, it can be seen that the money value of comments of the C&AG of 
India during last three years ranged between ₹11.05 crore (2022-23) and ₹0.81 crore 
(2023-24) indicating deficiencies with the requirements of ‘Generally Accepted 
Accounting Principles’ (GAAP) and Accounting Standards (AS) by the PSEs. 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
269
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
269 
 
6.1.11 Follow up action on Audit Reports 
 
6.1.11.1 Submission of Explanatory notes 
The Report of the C&AG represents the culmination of the process of audit scrutiny. 
It is, therefore, necessary that they elicit appropriate and timely response from the 
executive. The administrative departments concerned are required to submit the 
explanatory notes to paragraphs/performance audits included in the Audit Reports of 
the C&AG after their presentation to the Legislature, without waiting for any 
questionnaires from the COPU. However, the Finance Department, Government of 
Nagaland had not issued any specific instructions in this regard. 
The State Audit Reports for the years from 2013-14 to 2021-22 have already been 
placed in the State Legislature. These included four compliance audit paragraphs 20 
and one performance audit 21 on PSEs in these Reports.  As per the status available as 
on 30 September 2024, no explanatory notes were pending to be received from the 
administrative departments concerned against these compliance audit paragraphs. 
6.1.11.2 Discussion of Audit Reports by COPU 
The status as on 30 September 2024, of Performance Audits and audit paragraphs on 
the State PSEs that appeared in State Audit Reports and had been discussed by the 
COPU was as under: 
Table 6.1.12: Details of performance audits and paragraphs featured in the State Audit Reports 
and their discussion held in the COPU 
Period of Audit Report 
Number of reviews/paragraphs as on September 2024 
Paragraphs appeared in Audit 
Report Paragraphs discussed 
2013-14 1 1 
2014-16 0 - 
2016-17 1 1 
2017-18 0 - 
2018-19 2 2 
2019-20  0 - 
2020-22 1 1 
Total 5 5 
Source: Audit Reports of the respective years 
During the period 2013-14 to 2023-24, five paragraphs relating to PSEs had featured 
in the State Audit Reports which were also discussed in COPU. However, no ATN 
was received (July 2025). 
 
                                                             
20  One compliance audit paragraph appeared in each of the State Audit Report for the year 2013-14 
and 2016-17 and two paragraph appeared in 2018-19 
21 One performance audit on  Kohima Smart City Mission appeared in the C&AG Audit Report for 
2020-22 

CHAPTER-VII
FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT 
OBSERVATIONS

CHAPTER - VII 
 
FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 
 
7.1 Response of the Departments to the recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee 
The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) Reports/recommendations are the principal 
medium by which the Legislature enforces financial accountability of the Executive to 
the Legislature and it is appropriate that they elicit timely response from the 
departments concerned in the form of Action Taken Notes (ATNs). As per PAC 
Reports of the State of Nagaland, the departments concerned were required to submit 
the ATNs on the recommendations of the PAC within three months from the date of 
laying of the Reports of the PAC to the Legislature. 
As of March 2024, out of 2,145 recommendations made by the PAC during the period 
from 1990-91 to 2023-24, 1,217 ATNs on the recommendations had been submitted 
to the PAC and discussed. 
7.2 Monitoring 
The State Level Audit and Accounts Committee was formed (June 2008) under the 
Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary to monitor the follow up action on audit related 
matters and corrective action on the findings reported by Audit. The Committee was 
also to review and oversee the working of the Departmental Audit and Accounts 
Committee and also to hold meetings once in six months. During 2023-24, no State 
Level Audit and Accounts Committee meeting was convened. 
7.3 Outstanding Inspection Reports 
The Accountant General (Audit), Nagaland conducts periodic inspection of the 
Government departments to test-check the transactions and verify the maintenance of 
important accounts and other records as prescribed under the rules and procedures. 
These inspections are followed up with the issuance of Inspection Reports (IRs) 
incorporating irregularities noticed during the inspection and not settled on the spot. 
The IRs are issued to the Heads of the Offices inspected with copies to the higher 
authorities for taking corrective action. 
  

272
Chapter VII: Follow Up of Audit ObservationsChapter – VII Follow Up of Audit Observations 
 
272 
 
The Heads of the Offices/Government are required to comply with the observations 
contained in the IRs, rectify the defects, omissions and report compliance through 
initial reply to the Accountant General (Audit) within one month from the date of 
issue of the IRs. Serious irregularities are reported to the Heads of the Departments 
and the Government. 
As of March 2024, 1,665 IRs containing major paragraphs issued from 1997-98 
onwards were pending for settlement. The large pendency of IRs was indicative of an 
absence of adequate action to rectify the defects, omissions and irregularities pointed 
out through the IRs by the Heads of the Offices and Heads of the Departments. 
Recommendation: 
The Government may look into the matter and consider streamlining the system to 
ensure timely response to audit observations. Action may be taken against the 
officials who fail to send replies to IRs/paragraphs as per the prescribed time 
schedule and the losses/outstanding advances/overpayments may be recovered in 
a time-bound manner. 
7.4  Departmental Audit Committee Meetings 
In order to expedite the settlement of the outstanding audit observations contained in 
the IRs, Departmental Audit Committees had been constituted by the Government.  
Departmental Audit Committees are chaired by the Secretaries of the Departments 
concerned and their meetings are attended by the officers concerned of the State 
Government and officers from the office of the Accountant General (Audit), 
Nagaland. 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
273
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
273 
 
During 2023-24, no Audit Committee Meeting was convened to clear the outstanding 
audit observations. The Government needs to ensure that such meetings are held at 
regular intervals to take necessary action. 
 
 
Kohima 
The 
(VARUN AHLUWALIA) 
Accountant General (Audit), 
Nagaland 
Countersigned 
 
New Delhi  
The 
(K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
273 
 
During 2023-24, no Audit Committee Meeting was convened to clear the outstanding 
audit observations. The Government needs to ensure that such meetings are held at 
regular intervals to take necessary action. 
 
 
Kohima 
The 
(VARUN AHLUWALIA) 
Accountant General (Audit), 
Nagaland 
Countersigned 
 
New Delhi  
The 
(K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
273 
 
During 2023-24, no Audit Committee Meeting was convened to clear the outstanding 
audit observations. The Government needs to ensure that such meetings are held at 
regular intervals to take necessary action. 
 
 
Kohima 
The 
(VARUN AHLUWALIA) 
Accountant General (Audit), 
Nagaland 
Countersigned 
 
New Delhi  
The 
(K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
273 
 
During 2023-24, no Audit Committee Meeting was convened to clear the outstanding 
audit observations. The Government needs to ensure that such meetings are held at 
regular intervals to take necessary action. 
 
 
Kohima 
The 
(VARUN AHLUWALIA) 
Accountant General (Audit), 
Nagaland 
Countersigned 
 
New Delhi  
The 
(K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
27 February 2026
27 February 2026

APPENDICES

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
275 
Appendix-2.2.1 
Statement showing details of Progress report of 14 projects implemented in the Urban Local Bodies of nine districts 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.8.3) 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Scheme 
ULB 
notification 
date 
Name of 
district Year Estimated 
Cost 
Central 
Share 
State 
Share 
Financial 
Status 
Physical 
Progress 
1 Augmentation of drinking water supply by Gravity System and 
Retrofitting with FHTC under JJM to Pfutsero Town under Phek 
District. 
01.09.2003 Phek 2020-21 567.00 510.30 56.70 510.00 Incomplete 
2 Augmentation of drinking water supply by Gravity System and 
Retrofitting with FHTC under JJM to Mangkolemba Town under 
Mokokchung District. 
18.08.2016 Mokokchung 2020-21 383.61 345.25 38.36 383.61 Completed 
3 Augmentation of drinking water supply by Gravity System and 
Retrofitting with FHTC under JJM to Tizit Town under Mon 
District. 
18.08.2016 Mon 2020-21 519.47 467.52 51.95 519.47 Completed 
4 Retrofitting of drinking water supply with FHTC under JJM to Aboi 
Hq under Mon District. 
10.09.2015 Mon 2020-21 93.30 83.97 9.33 93.30 Completed 
5 Augmentation of drinking water supply by Rain Water Harvesting 
System and Retrofitting with FHTC under JJM to Tamlu Town 
under Longleng District. 
06.09.2019 Longleng 2020-21 142.02 127.82 14.20 142.02 Completed 
6 Augmentation of drinking water supply by Gravity System and 
Retrofitting with FHTC under JJM to Seyochung Town under 
Kiphire District. 
06.09.2019 Kiphire 2020-21 107.63 96.87 10.76 107.63 Completed 
7 Retrofitting of drinking water supply with FHTC under JJM to 
Chozuba Hq under Phek District. 
18.08.2016 Phek 2020-21 119.36 107.42 11.94 119.36 Completed 
8 Retrofitting of drinking water supply by Gravity System with FHTC 
under JJM to Naginimora Town under Mon District. 
04.07.2003 Mon 2020-21 121.24 109.12 12.12 121.24 Completed 
9 Retrofitting of drinking water supply by Gravity System with FHTC 
under JJM to Longkhim Hq under Tuensang District. 
18.08.2016 Tuensang 2020-21 68.77 61.89 6.88 68.77 Completed 
10 Augmentation of drinking water supply by Gravity System and 
Retrofitting with FHTC under JJM to Tseminyu Old Town under 
Kohima District. 
01.09.2003 Kohima 2020-21 128.95 116.06 12.90 128.95 Completed 
11 Augmentation of drinking water supply by Ground Water 
Exploration System and Retrofitting with FHTC under JJM to 
Chiephobozou under Kohima District. 
06.09.2019 Kohima 2020-21 159.14 143.23 15.91 159.14 Completed 

276
AppendicesAppendices 
 
276 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Scheme 
ULB 
notification 
date 
Name of 
district Year Estimated 
Cost 
Central 
Share 
State 
Share 
Financial 
Status 
Physical 
Progress 
12 Retrofitting of drinking water supply with FHTC under JJM to 
Niuland under Dimapur District. 
06.09.2019 Dimapur 2020-21 95.57 86.01 9.56 95.57 Completed 
13 Augmentation and Retrofitting of drinking water supply by Gravity 
System with FHTC under JJM to Satakha Town under Zunheboto 
District. 
06.09.2019 Zunheboto 2019-20 242.57 218.31 24.26 242.57 Completed 
14 Augmentation of drinking water supply by Gravity System and 
Retrofitting with FHTC under JJM to Aghunato Town under 
Zunheboto District. 
06.09.2019 Zunheboto 2020-21 318.78 286.90 31.88 318.78 Completed 
Total  3,067.41 2,760.67 306.74 3,010.41 - 
Source: Departmental records 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
277
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
277 
Appendix-2.2.2 
Statement showing delay in release of fund 
 (Reference: Paragraph 2.2.9.1) 
(₹ in crore) 
Central Share State Share 
Date of 
release by 
GoI 
Amount  Date of release 
by GoN 
Amount  Period of 
delay  
(in days)  
Date of release 
by GoN 
Amount  Period of 
delay  
(in days)  
06-11-2019       23.54  15-01-2020     23.54  55 10-02-2020        2.62  81 
19-03-2020       32.95  19-05-2020     32.95  46 01-10-2020        3.66  181 
01-06-2020       28.52  01-10-2020     28.52  107 01-10-2020        3.17  107 
23-10-2020       28.52  16-12-2020     28.52  39 26-03-2021        3.17  139 
15-03-2021       28.52  04-06-2021     28.52  66 10-12-2021        3.17  255 
13-05-2021     111.20  31-08-2021   111.20  95 10-12-2021      12.36  196 
31-12-2021     111.20  Directly deposited to Escrow A/c 17-03-2022      12.36  61 
17-03-2022     111.20  Directly deposited to Escrow A/c 12-05-2022      12.36  41 
17-06-2022     121.07  Directly deposited to Escrow A/c 11-08-2022      13.45  40 
23-08-2022     121.07  Directly deposited to Escrow A/c 17-10-2022      13.45  40 
07-12-2022     121.07  Directly deposited to Escrow A/c 18-03-2023      13.45  86 
24-03-2023     121.07  Directly deposited to Escrow A/c 11-05-2023      13.45  33 
19-06-2023       91.72  Directly deposited to Escrow A/c 05-09-2023      10.19  63 
18-09-2023       91.72  Directly deposited to Escrow A/c 28-11-2023      10.19  56 
09-01-2024       91.72  Directly deposited to Escrow A/c 03-02-2024      10.19  10 
13-03-2024       39.75  Directly deposited to Escrow A/c 29-04-2024        4.42  32 
Source: Departmental records 

278
AppendicesAppendices 
 
278 
 
Appendix-2.2.3 
Statement showing total amount incurred for procurement of GMS pipes and GPS tank from the supplier under JJM Scheme 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.10.1) 
 
Procurement of GMS Pipes from the supplier during the years 2019-20 to 2023-24 
Year Specification 15mm 25mm 32mm 40mm 50mm 65mm 80mm 100mm 
2019-20 Qty. (mtr)  2,97,416.00 2,76,463.60 1,31,050.00 1,12,505.60 97,170.00 34,605.00 0 0 
Amount (₹)  5,13,28,053.28 10,64,30,192.09 5,43,39,882.50 6,14,50,558.72 5,82,25,235.70 2,82,59,827.20 0 0 
2020-21 Qty. (mtr)  35,67,379.00 11,14,590.00 4,37,730.00 3,80,716.00 2,33,705.20 96,000.00 3,500.00 2,200.00 
Amount (₹)  61,56,58,267.82 42,90,83,712.30 18,15,04,744.50 20,79,47,079.20 14,00,38,492.89 7,83,97,440.00 46,60,460.00 32,49,136.00 
2021-22 Qty. (mtr)  50,72,112.00 18,53,043.00 7,58,440.00 7,96,920.00 5,05,020.00 1,82,250.00 17,200.00 0 
Amount (₹)  87,53,45,088.96 71,33,65,963.71 31,44,87,146.00 43,52,77,704.00 30,26,13,034.20 14,88,32,640.00 2,29,02,832.00 0 
2022-23 Qty. (mtr) 38,59,657.00 16,12,378.00 5,30,433.00 6,64,490.00 3,16,800.00 1,28,510.00 93,000.00 0 
Amount (₹)  66,60,99,605.06 62,07,17,158.66 21,99,44,043.45 36,29,44,438.00 18,98,29,728.00 10,49,46,406.40 12,38,35,080.00 0 
2023-24 Qty. (mtr)  2,19,428.00 2,10,015.00 1,26,350.00 9,710.00 31,800.00 0 0 0 
Amount (₹)  37,86,8884.24 8,08,49,474.55 5,23,91,027.50 53,03,602.00 1,90,54,878.00 0.00 0 0 
Total Qty. (mtr) 1,30,15,992 50,66,489.60 19,84,003 19,64,341.60 11,84,495.20 4,41,365 1,13,700 2,200 
Total Amount paid (₹) 2,24,62,99,899 1,95,04,46,501 82,26,66,844 1,07,29,23,382 70,97,61,368.80 36,04,36,313.60 15,13,98,372 32,49,136 
Total Amount incurred for procurement of GMS pipes during 2019-20 to 2023-24 7,31,71,81,816.93  
Add 18 per cent GST 1,31,70,92,727.05  
Grand Total Amount (including GST) 863,42,74,542 (round off) 
Source: Departmental records 
Procurement of GPS Tanks from the supplier during the years 2020-21 to 2023-24 
  
Year 
Quantity of GPS Tanks procured (Nos.) Amount incurred for procurement of GPS Tank (₹) 
1,950 litres 7,800 litres 1,950 litres 7,800 litres Total Add  
18 per cent GST 
Grand Total 
2020-21 79 120 1,07,97,120.39 2,46,86,498.40 3,54,83,618.79 63,87,051.38 4,18,70,670 
2021-22 249 188 3,40,31,430.09 3,86,75,514.16 7,27,06,944.25 1,30,87,249.97 8,57,94,194 
2022-23 254 314 3,47,14,792.14 6,45,96,337.48 9,93,11,129.62 1,78,76,003.33 11,71,87,133 
2023-24 4 5 5,46,689.64 10,28,604.10 15,75,293.74 2,83,552.87 18,58,847 
Total 586 627 8,00,90,032.26 12,89,86,954.14 20,90,76,986.40 3,76,33,857.55     24,67,10,844  
Source: Departmental records 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
279
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
279 
 
Appendix-2.2.4 
Statement showing details of procurement of GMS Pipes during the years 2019-20 to 2023-24 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.10.3) 
 
Year wise details 
of supply order 
issued 
Quantity of GMS Pipes procured (in metres) 
Year No. 15mm 25mm 32mm 40mm 50mm 65mm 80mm 100mm 
2019-20 05 2,97,416 2,76,463.60 1,31,050 1,12,505.60 97,170 34,605 0 0 
2020-21 11 35,67,379 11,14,590 4,37,730 3,80,716 2,33,705.20 96,000 3,500 2,200 
2021-22 05 50,72,112 18,53,043 7,58,440 7,96,920 5,05,020 1,82,250 17,200 0 
2022-23 04 38,59,657 16,12,378 5,30,433 6,64,490 3,16,800 1,28,510 93,000 0 
2023-24 01 2,19,428 2,10,015 1,26,350 9,710 31,800 0 0 0 
Total 26 1,30,15,992 50,66,489.60 19,84,003 19,64,341.60 11,84,495.20 4,41,365 1,13,700 2,200 
Source: Departmental records 
 
Appendix-2.2.5 
 Statement showing details of procurement of GPS Tanks during the years 2019-20 to 2023-24 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.10.3) 
 
Year wise 
details of 
supply order 
issued 
Quantity of GPS 
Tanks procured 
(Nos.) 
Amount incurred for procurement of GPS Tank (₹) 
Year No. 1,950 
litres 
7,800 
litres 
1,950 litres 7,800 litres Total Add 18% 
GST 
Grand Total 
2019-20 04* 112 123 1,53,07,309.92 2,53,03,660.86 4,06,10,970.78 73,09,974.74 4,79,20,946 
2020-21 06 79 120 1,07,97,120.39 2,46,86,498.40 3,54,83,618.79 63,87,051.38 4,18,70,670 
2021-22 02 249 188 3,40,31,430.09 3,86,75,514.16 7,27,06,944.25 1,30,87,249.97 8,57,94,194 
2022-23 01 254 314 3,47,14,792.14 6,45,96,337.48 9,93,11,129.62 1,78,76,003.33 11,71,87,133 
2023-24 01 4 5 5,46,689.64 10,28,604.10 15,75,293.74 2,83,552.87 18,58,847 
Total 14 698 750 9,53,97,342 15,42,90,615 24,96,87,957 4,49,43,832 29,46,31,791 
*Supply Orders issued directly to the manufacturer M/s Dhariwal Steel Private Limited 
Source: Departmental records 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

280
AppendicesAppendices 
 
280 
 
Appendix-2.2.6 
Statement showing the details of GMS Pipes & GPS Tanks transported on non-existent and low-Capacity Vehicles 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.10.3) 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
1 MON/S/03 25.02.2020 AS04J 
1475 M-Cycle/scooter 0 0 2,598 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2 MON/S/05 25.02.2020 NL07A 
0048 LGV 0 0 932 1,410 0 0 0 0 0 
3 MON/S/07 25.02.2020 NL05D 
9441 
D series not 
Utilised 0 0 0 1,100 0 570 0 0 0 
4 MON/S/10 25.02.2020 NL08 
0104 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 0 1,152 0 0 0 
5 MON/S/09 27.10.2020 NL07D 
9441 
D series not 
Utilised 6,138 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
6 MON/S/10 27.10.2020 NL07A 
0048 LGV 6,138 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
7 MON/S/12 28.10.2020 AS04J 
1475 M-Cycle/scooter 0 3,090 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
8 MON/S/15 28.10.2020 NL08 
0104 
Details not in 
Database 0 3,090 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
9 MON/S/24 02.12.2020 NL08 
0104 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 0 1,110 0 0 0 
10 MON/S/16 22.03.2021 NL07A 
9737 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,422 0 0 0 0 
11 MON/S/07 30.07.2021 NL02A 
3231 
Details not in 
Database 5,856 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
12 MON/S/07 03.10.2021 MN03T 
0312 
Details not in 
VAHAN 0 4,020 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
13 MON/S/08 03.10.2021 NL07A 
3779 LGV 0 4,020 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
14 MON/S/09 03.10.2021 NL07A 
7281 LGV 0 4,020 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
15 MON/S/21 03.10.2021 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 0 1,450 0 0 0 
16 MON/S/01 14.10.2022 NL05D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 7,230 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
17 MON/S/11 14.10.2022 AS01N 
7176 
Not Found in 
VAHAN 0 3,630 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
18 MON/S/24 25.02.2022 NL01CC 
0551 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 1,680 0 0 0 0 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
281
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
281 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
19 MON/S/40 25.02.2022 NL01C 
8070 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 0 1,301 0 0 0 
20 MON/S/10 08.04.2022 NL05G 
1874 LGV 6,516 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
21 MON/S/12 08.04.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 3,258 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
22 MON/S/14 08.04.2022 NL01A 
6202 
Details not in 
Database 0 3,258 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
23 MON/S/02 10.06.2022 NL07A 
3702 LGV 5,775 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
24 MON/S/13 20.07.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 0 2,298 0 0 0 0 0 
25 MON/S/32 28.07.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,620 0 0 0 0 
26 MON/S/43 03.08.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 0 0 0 0 942 0 0 
27 MON/S/71 06.08.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,620 0 0 0 0 
28 MON/S/82 09.08.2022 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 0 0 1,254 0 0 0 
29 MON/S/87 09.08.2022 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 0 1,254 0 0 0 
30 MON/S/01 09.09.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 6,390 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
31 MON/S/41 30.09.2022 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,752 0 0 0 0 
32 MON/S/46 30.09.2022 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 0 1,362 0 0 0 
33 MON/S/56 06.10.2022 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 0 0 1,362 0 0 0 
34 MON/S/61 06.10.2022 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 0 1,362 0 0 0 
35 MON/S/88 12.10.2022 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,755 0 0 0 0 
36 MON/S/93 12.10.2022 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 1,754 0 0 0 0 
37 MON/S/28 17.01.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 2,256 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
38 MON/S/52 20.01.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 4,380 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

282
AppendicesAppendices 
 
282 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
39 MON/S/81 02.02.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 2,256 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
40 MON/S/88 06.02.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 2,256 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
41 MON/S/93 06.02.2023 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 2,256 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
42 MON/S/1 07.04.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 4,608 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
43 MON/S/17 07.04.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 0 0 1,692 0 0 0 
44 MON/S/22 07.04.2023 NL01D 
0521 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 0 1,692 0 0 0 
45 MON/S/31 15.04.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 3,102 0 0 0 0 0 
46 MON/S/36 15.04.2023 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 3,102 0 0 0 0 0 
47 MON/S/54 24.04.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 0 0 2,172 0 0 0 0 
48 MON/S/70 24.04.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 0 0 1,692 0 0 0 
49 MON/S/75 24.04.2023 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 0 1,692 0 0 0 
50 MON/S/87 27.04.2023 AS09C 
7216 
Details not in 
VAHAN 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,266 0 0 
51 MON/S/90 27.04.2023 AS01GL 
8767 
Details not in 
VAHAN 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,266 0 0 
52 MON/S/110 29.04.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 0 0 0 1,692 0 0 0 
53 MON/S/137 03.05.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 0 0 1,692 0 0 0 
54 MON/S/142 03.05.2023 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,266 0 0 
55 MON/S/159 04.05.2023 AS05AC 
9466 
Details not in 
VAHAN 0 0 0 0 0 1,692 0 0 0 
56 MON/S/188 05.05.2023 NL01H 
2245 Motor Car 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,266 0 0 
57 MON/S/194 05.05.2023 AS09C 
7216 
Details not in 
VAHAN 0 4,423 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 
58 MON/S/37 16.08.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 0 2,232 0 0 0 0 0 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
283
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
283 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
59 MON/S/58 23.08.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 6,450 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
60 MON/S/82 30.08.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,560 0 0 0 0 
61 MON/S/92 05.09.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,560 0 0 0 0 
62 MON/S/95 05.09.2023 NL07A 
3737 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 1,560 0 0 0 0 
63 MON/S/41 17.10.2023 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 7,440 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
64 MON/S/80 27.10.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,800 0 0 0 0 
65 MON/S/12 11.12.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 3,810 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
66 MON/S/28 17.12.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 2,563 0 0 0 0 0 
67 MON/S/33 17.12.2023 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 1,800 0 0 0 0 
68 MON/S/35 09.02.2024 NL07A 
0254 LGV 7,440 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
69 MON/S/40 09.02.2024 AS05D 
6641 M-Cycle/scooter  7,440 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
70 MON/S/50 12.02.2024 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 3,828 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
71 MON/S/66 14.02.2024 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 3,828 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
72 MON/S/71 14.02.2024 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 3,828 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
73 MON/S/2 11.03.2024 AS05AC 
9466 
Details not in 
VAHAN 9,442 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
74 MON/S/7 27.05.2024 NL07A 
9053 LGV 7,950 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
75 KMA(U)/S/ 
12 15.02.2022 NL07A 
9372 LGV 0 0 0 0 184 0 1,224 0 0 
76 MKG/S/06 09.03.2020 NL07A 
0048 LGV 0 3,120 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
77 MKG/S/08 09.03.2020 NL05D 
9441 
D series not 
Utilised 0 0 2,520 0 0 0 0 0 0 
78 MKG/S/05 20.07.2020 NL07A 
0048 LGV 4,125 1,080 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

284
AppendicesAppendices 
 
284 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
79 MKG/S/07 20.07.2020 NL05D 
9441 
D series not 
Utilised 0 0 2,550 0 0 0 0 0 0 
80 MKG/S/10 20.07.2020 NL08 
0104 NA 0 3,150 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
81 MKG/S/19 12.03.2021 NL07A 
9739 LGV 0 3,150 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
82 MKG/S/22 12.03.2021 NL05D 
9441 
D series not 
Utilised 0 540 2,000 0 0 0 0 0 0 
83 MKG/S/26 12.03.2021 NL08 
3124 LMV 0 0 0 2,142 0 0 0 0 0 
84 MKG/S/04 14.04.2021 NL08 
0104 NA 6,696 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
85 MKG/S/06 05.10.2021 NL01A 
3686 
Details not in 
Database 0 3,660 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
86 MKG/S/07 05.10.2021 NL01A 
6202 
Details not in 
Database 0 3,660 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
87 MKG/S/11 05.10.2021 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 2,976 0 0 0 0 0 0 
88 MKG/S/13 05.10.2021 NL07A 
1056 LGV 0 702 2,408 0 0 0 0 0 0 
89 MKG/S/24 18.10.2021 AS01D 
7162 
Details not in 
VAHAN 7,326 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
90 MKG/S/26 18.10.2021 NL07A 
0048 LGV 1,951 2,670 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
91 MKG/S/29 18.10.2021 AS04J 
1475 M-Cycle/scooter 0 0 0 0 1,710 0 0 0 0 
92 MKG/S/06 16.02.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 7,260 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
93 MKG/S/08 16.02.2022 NL01A 
6202 
Details not in 
Database 7,260 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
94 MKG/S/15 16.02.2022 AS04J 
1475 M-Cycle/scooter 0 3,630 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
95 MKG/S/21 16.02.2022 NL07A 
3481 Tanker 0 0 0 2,500 0 0 0 0 0 
96 MKG/S/6 30.03.2022 AS01N 
3906 M-Cycle/scooter 5,380 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
97 MKG/S/7 31.03.2022 NL05D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 6,420 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
98 MKG/S/19 31.03.2022 AS01D 
4001 
Details not in 
VAHAN 0 3,210 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
285
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
285 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
99 MKG/S/20 31.03.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 3,210 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
100 MKG/S/22 31.03.2022 NL01A 
6202 
Details not in 
Database 3,510 0 0 1,000 0 0 0 0 0 
101 MKG/S/01 19.07.2022 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 6,900 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
102 MKG/S/06 19.07.2022 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 3,552 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
103 MKG/S/29 29.07.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 2,802 0 0 0 0 0 0 
104 MKG/S/05 19.09.2022 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 3,480 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
105 MKG/S/58 13.10.2022 NL01A 
1317 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 1,590 0 690 0 0 0 0 
106 MKG/S/01 15.11.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 8,100 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
107 MKG/S/43 18.01.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 1,800 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
108 MKG/S/56 24.01.2023 NL02C 
3362 LMV 3,498 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
109 MKG/S/72 24.01.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 1,800 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
110 MKG/S/77 24.01.2023 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 1,800 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
111 MKG/S/98 30.01.2023 NL07A 
9372 LGV 3,498 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
112 MKG/S/100 30.01.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 3,498 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
113 MKG/S/112 01.02.2023 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 3,498 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
114 MKG/S/149 03.02.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 1,800 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
115 MKG/S/25 05.04.2023 NL01A 
8375 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 2,538 0 0 0 0 0 0 
116 MKG/S/38 18.04.2023 AS09C 
7216 
Details not in 
VAHAN 0 0 0 2,166 0 0 0 0 0 
117 MKG/S/51 25.04.2023 NL02C 
8070 LMV 0 0 0 0 1,518 0 0 0 0 
118 MKG/S/78 04.09.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 6,268 0 0 210 0 0 0 0 0 

286
AppendicesAppendices 
 
286 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
119 MKG/S/10 05.10.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 2,530 2,250 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
120 MKG/S/17 12.10.2023 AS11DC 
7778 
Three wheeler 
(passenger) 0 3,552 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
121 MKG/S/35 12.10.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 3,552 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
122 MKG/S/45 26.10.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 3,552 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
123 WKA/S/05 17.11.2020 NL08 
0104 NA 390 2,850 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
124 WKA/S/09 13.07.2021 NL07A 
9739 LGV 6,012 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
125 WKA/S/01 09.10.2021 NL07A 
7281 LGV 7,800 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
126 WKA/S/02 09.10.2021 NL07A 
3779 LGV 7,800 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
127 WKA/S/03 09.10.2021 MN03T 
0312 
Details not in 
VAHAN 7,800 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
128 WKA/S/12 09.10.2021 NL07A 
0048 LGV 0 3,900 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
129 WKA/S/15 09.10.2021 AS04J 
1475 M-Cycle/scooter 0 0 3,168 0 0 0 0 0 0 
130 WKA/S/37 22.10.2021 AS01N 
3906 
Hero Honda 
Splendor 7,800 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
131 WKA/S/60 26.10.2021 AS04J 
1475 M-Cycle/scooter 0 4,062 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
132 WKA/S/13 23.02.2022 NL07A 
9372 LGV 0 3,582 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
133 WKA/S/21 23.02.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 0 2,457 1,662 0 0 0 0 
134 WKA/S/23 23.02.2022 NL01A 
6202 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 1,662 0 0 0 0 
135 WKA/S/33 01.03.2022 NL07A 
3481 Tanker 7,164 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
136 WKA/S/34 01.03.2022 NL07A 
1420 NA 7,164 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
137 WKA/S/39 01.03.2022 NL05D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 89 3,540 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
138 WKA/S/47 01.03.2022 ML07B 
9287 Excavator 0 0 0 2,458 0 0 0 0 0 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
287
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
287 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
139 WKA/S/04 28.03.2022 NL07A 
9287 
Details not in 
Database 6,684 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
140 WKA/S/01 05.04.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 6,684 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
141 WKA/S/03 05.04.2022 NL01A 
6202 
Details not in 
Database 6,684 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
142 WKA/S/08 05.04.2022 AS04J 
1475 M-Cycle/scooter 6,684 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
143 WKA/S/12 05.04.2022 NL07A 
3481 Tanker 6,684 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
144 WKA/S/21 14.04.2022 NL01A 
6202 
Details not in 
Database 0 3,342 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
145 WKA/S/26 14.04.2022 AS04J 
1475 M-Cycle/scooter 0 3,342 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
146 WKA/S/30 14.04.2022 NL07A 
3481 Tanker 0 3,342 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
147 WKA/S/25 23.07.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,730 0 0 0 0 
148 WKA/S/09 21.09.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 4,056 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
149 WKA/S/10 11.01.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 3,492 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
150 WKA/S/14 10.04.2023 AS05AC 
9466 
Details not in 
VAHAN 0 3,366 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
151 WKA/S/19 10.04.2023 AS09DC 
1560 
Details not in 
VAHAN 0 0 2,658 0 0 0 0 0 0 
152 WKA/S/05 05.08.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 5,910 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
153 WKA/S/10 05.08.2023 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 5,910 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
154 WKA/S/28 17.08.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 5,910 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
155 WKA/S/33 17.08.2023 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 5,910 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
156 WKA/S/03 09.10.2023 AS09DC 
1560 
Details not in 
VAHAN 5,436 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
157 Long/S/08 16.07.2021 MN03T 
0312 
Details not in 
VAHAN 6,042 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
158 Long/S/10 30.09.2021 AS01N 
3906 M-Cycle/scooter 0 3,810 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

288
AppendicesAppendices 
 
288 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
159 Long/S/05 21.02.2022 ML07B 
9287 Excavator 0 3,666 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
160 Long/S/02 12.09.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 3,978 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
161 Long/S/01 17.09.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 7,266 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
162 Long/S/14 17.09.2022 AS01AC 
3274 
Agriculture 
Tractor 0 0 0 0 0 1,350 0 0 0 
163 Long/S/17 17.09.2022 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 0 0 1,350 0 0 0 
164 Long/S/03 09.01.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 3,636 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
165 Long/S/08 09.01.2023 NL01D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 1,872 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
166 Long/S/10 13.04.2023 NL07A 
1937 LGV 0 0 2,850 0 0 0 0 0 0 
167 Long/S/14 13.04.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 0 1,685 0 0 0 0 0 
168 Long/S/11 08.08.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 2,070 2,718 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
169 DMP(R)/S/08/
issued  21.08.2020 NL08 
0104 N/A 0 3,300 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
170 DMP(R)/S/11/
issued  24.02.2021 NL05O 
2595 
Details not in 
VAHAN 5,802 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
171 DMP(R)/S/01/
issued 02.07.2021 MN03T 
0312 
Not Found in 
VAHAN 6,456 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
172 Issued Peren 
(S)  17.02.2021 NL08 
0104 N/A 4,500 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
173 PRN/S/04/ 
issued  17.02.2021 MN03T 
0312 
Not Found in 
VAHAN 0 2,940 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
174 PRN/S/04/ 
issued 22.07.2021 NL07C 
3654 LMV 0 2,940 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
175 PRN/S/18/ 
issued 07.04.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 3,696 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
176 PRN/S/27/ 
issued 07.04.2022 NL05D 
1521 
Details not in 
VAHAN 7,380 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
177 Issued 
PRN/S/41 02.08.2022 NL07AA 
9372 N/A 0 0 0 0 1,770 0 0 0 0 
178 Issued 
PRN/S/43 02.08.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,770 0 0 0 0 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
289
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
289 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
179 PRN/S/20/ 
issue 24.09.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 0 2,478 0 0 0 0 0 
180 PRN/S/70/ 
issue 07.10.2022 NL07A 
0252 LGV 0 0 0 2,478 0 0 0 0 0 
181 PRN/S/25/ 
issue 13.01.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 2,292 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
182 PRN/S/22/ 
issue 22.08.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 8,172 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
183 PRN/S/11/ 
issue 06.10.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 3,000 0 0 0 0 0 0 
184 PK/S/06/ 
issued 03.03.2020 NL07D 
9441 
D-series not 
utilised 0 414 2,184 0 0 0 0 0 0 
185 PK/S/15/ 
issued 13.03.2020 NL08 
0104 N/A 0 0 0 0 1,440 0 0 0 0 
186 PK/S/25/ 
issued 17.03.2020 NL08 
0104 N/A 0 0 0 0 0 1,136 0 0 0 
187 PK/S/23/ 
issued 10.09.2020 NL07D 
9441 
D-series not 
utilised 0 0 0 0 1,470 0 0 0 0 
188 PK/S/09/ 
issued 07.11.2020 AS04J 
1475 M-Cycle/scooter 6,150 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
189 PK/S/13/ 
issued 09.11.2020 NL07A 
0048 LGV 2,730 1,700 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
190 PK/S/14/ 
issued 09.11.2020 NL05O 
2595 
Details not in 
VAHAN 6,150 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
191 PK/S/01/ 
issued 04.12.2020 AS04J 
1475 M-Cycle/scooter 0 600 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 
192 PK/S/05/ 
issued 05.03.2021 MN03T 
0312 
Not Found in 
VAHAN 0 2,712 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
193 PK/S/03/ 
issued 20.04.2021 NL07A 
0048 LGV 5,670 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
194 PK/S/15/ 
issued 11.10.2021 AS01N 
3906 M-Cycle/scooter 0 0 0 2,622 0 0 0 0 0 
195 PHK/S/27/ 
issued 23.10.2021 AS01D 
7162 
Details not in 
VAHAN 7,680 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
196 PHK/S/29/ 
issued 23.10.2021 NL07A 
0048 LGV 7,680 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
197 PHK/S/32/ 
issued 23.10.2021 AS04J 
1475 M-Cycle/scooter 1,291 3,192 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
198 PHK/S/44/ 
issued 23.10.2021 MN03T 
0312 
Not Found in 
VAHAN 0 0 0 2,622 0 0 0 0 0 

290
AppendicesAppendices 
 
290 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
199 PHK/S/45/ 
issued 23.10.2021 NL07A 
3779 LGV 0 0 0 1,184 990 0 0 0 0 
200 PHK/S/46/ 
issued 23.10.2021 NL07A 
7281 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,795 0 0 0 0 
201 PHK/S/18/ 
issued 18.02.2022 NL07A 
9372 LGV 0 1,800 0 0 840 0 0 0 0 
202 PHK/S/33/issu
ed 28.02.2022 NL07A 
3702 LGV 7,188 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
203 PHK/S/35/issu
ed 28.02.2022 NL07A 
9372 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,674 0 0 0 0 
204 PHK/S/36/ 
issued 28.02.2022 NL07A 
4160 N/A 0 0 0 0 1,674 0 0 0 0 
205 PHK/S/43/ 
issued 28.02.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,647 0 0 0 0 
206 PHK/S/45/ 
issued 28.02.2022 NL01A 
6202 
Details not  in 
Database 0 0 0 0 0 1,296 0 0 0 
207 PHK/S/50/ 
issued 28.02.2022 NL07A 
1327 N/A 0 0 0 0 0 1,296 0 0 0 
208 PHK/S/52/ 
issued 28.02.2022 AS04J 
1475 M-Cycle/scooter 0 0 0 0 0 1,296 0 0 0 
209 PHK/S/65/ 
issued 02.03.2022 NL07A 
9372 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,675 0 0 0 0 
210 Phek/S/01 28.03.2022 NL05D 
1521 
Details not  in 
VAHAN 7,800 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
211 Phek/S/03 22.07.2022 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 3,492 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
212 Phek/S/27 30.07.2022 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 2,760 0 0 0 0 0 0 
213 Phk/S/03 22.09.2022 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 163 3,660 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
214 Phk/S/07 10.01.2023 NL07AA 
6614 N/A 3,570 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
215 Phk/S/09 14.04.2023 NL05A 
9548 
Details not in 
VAHAN 0 3,450 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
216 Phk/S/15 14.04.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 2,724 0 0 0 0 0 0 
217 Phk/S/36 20.04.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 0 186 1,500 0 0 0 0 
218 Phk/S/10 09.08.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 7,056 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
291
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
291 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
219 Phk/S/15 07.10.2023 AS05AC 
9466 
Not Found in 
VAHAN 0 0 0 0 1,780 0 0 0 0 
220 Issued Dmr(u) 
5/27 11.01.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 5,460 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
221 Issued Dmr(u) 
5/138 20.01.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 5,460 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
222 Issued Dmr(u) 
5/251 31.01.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 5,460 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
223 Issued Dmr(u) 
5/299 09.02.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 2,808 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
224 Issued Dmr(u) 
5/384 13.02.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 2,808 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
225 Dmp/U/S/38  29.03.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 1 
226 KPR/S/01/ 
Issued 19.02.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 7,188 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
227 KPR/S/62/ 
Issued 20.04.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 6,618 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
228 KPR/S/08/ 
Issued 18.07.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 2,850 0 0 0 0 0 0 
229 TSG/S/52/ 
Issued 25.10.2021 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 0 2,262 0 0 0 0 0 
230 TSG/S/29 03.03.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 7,200 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
231 TSG/S/53/ 
Issued 13.04.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 3,259 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
232 Issued 
TSG/S/10 21.07.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 2,790 0 0 0 0 0 0 
233 TSG/S/50/ 
Issued 29.09.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,908 0 0 0 0 
234 TSG/S/11/ 
Issued 04.08.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 4,110 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
235 TSG/S/33/ 
Issued 13.10.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 3,048 0 0 0 0 0 0 
236 Zbto/S/55/ 
Issued 05.10.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 3,102   0 0 0 0 0 
237 Zbto/S/75/ 
Issued 11.10.2022 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 512 2,208 0 0 0 0 0 
238 Zbto/S/24/ 
Issued 06.01.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 2,220 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

292
AppendicesAppendices 
 
292 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
239 Zbto/S/96 
Issued 01.05.2023 NL02L 
3362 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,476 0 0 0 0 
240 Issued Dmr(u) 
5/156 23.01.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 5,460 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
241 Issued Dmr(u) 
5/283 08.02.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 5,460 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
242 Issued Dmr(u) 
5/368 11.02.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 2,808 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
243 Dmp/U/S/22 29.03.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 1 
244 TSG/S/06/ 
Issued 04.04.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 6,510 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
245 TSG/S/31/ 
Issued 13.04.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 6,510 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
246 TSG/S/18/ 
Issued 20.09.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,908 0 0 0 0 
247 TSG/S/34/ 
Issued 29.09.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 3,186 0 0 0 0 0 0 
248 TSG/S/64 04.10.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,908 0 0 0 0 
249 TSG/S/06/ 
Issued 14.08.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 7,992 0 0 0   0 0 0 0 
250 TSG/S/10/ 
Issued 26.09.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 954 810 0 0 0 0 0 
251 Zbto/S/23/ 
Issued 30.03.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 2,760 0 0 0 0 0 0 
252 Zbto/S/66 18.04.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 2,760 0 0 0 0 0 0 
253 Zbto/S/10/ 
Issued 09.06.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 6,546 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
254 Zbto/S/13/ 
Issued 16.07.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 0 2,334 0 0 0 0 0 
255 Zbto/S/68/ 
Issued 05.08.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,638 0 0 0 0 
256 Zbto/S/10/ 
Issued 16.09.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 0 3,102 0 0 0 0 0 0 
257 ZBTO/S/08/ 
Issued 06.01.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 4,320 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
258 Zbto/S/10/ 06.04.2023 NL07A LGV 0 3,138 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
293
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
293 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
Issued 0254 
259 Zbto/S/10/ 
Issued 03.08.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 6,722 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
260 Zbto/S//15/ 
Issued 04.10.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 3,792 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
261 Zbto/S/48/Issu
ed 25.10.2023 NL07A 
0254 LGV 0 3,792 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
262 Issued Dmr(u) 
5/267 31.01.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 5,460 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
263 Issued Dmr(u) 
5/315 09.02.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 2,808 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
264 Issued Dmr(u) 
5/400 14.02.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 2,808 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
265 Dmp/U/S/ 58/ 
Issued 30.03.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 1 
266 KPR/S/36/ 
issued 26.07.2022 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 2,419 0 0 0 0 0 
267 issued 
Tsg/S/51 04.08.2022 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 2,376 0 0 0 0 0 
268 TSG/S/9 
issued 12.01.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 4,095 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
269 Zbto/S/36/ 
issued 26.09.2022 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,860 0 0 0 0 
270 Zbto/S/30/ 
Issued 19.01.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 2,220   0 0 0 0 0 0 
271 Zbto/S/39/ 
Issued 24.08.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 2,730 0 0 0 0 0 0 
272 Zbto/S/34/ 
Issued 16.10.2023 NL07AA 
0805 LGV 0 0 0 2,550 0 0 0 0 0 
273 KPR/S/09/ 
issued 27.02.2021 NL07A 
9739 LGV 0 0 2,430 0 0 0 0 0 0 
274 KPR/S/41/ 
issued 20.10.2021 NL07A 
3779 LGV 0 0 3,095 0 0 0 0 0 0 
275 TSG/S/78/ 
Issued 28.10.2021 NL07A 
3779 LGV 6,618 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
276 KMA(R)/ 
S/19/issued 06.08.2021 NL07A 
3779 LGV 5,969 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
277 KPR/S/42/ 
issued 20.10.2021 NL07A 
7281 LGV 0 0 3,094 0 0 0 0 0 0 

294
AppendicesAppendices 
 
294 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
278 TSG/S/79/ 
Issued 28.10.2021 NL07A 
7281 LGV 6,281 180 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
279 KPR/S/16/ 
issued 19.02.2022 NL07A 
3481 Tanker 0 0 2,922 0 0 0 0 0 0 
280 KPR/S/06/ 
issued 01.04.2022 NL07A 
3481 Tanker 6,612 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
281 KPR/S/32/ 
issued 11.04.2022 NL07A 
3481 Tanker 6,180 0 172 0 0 0 0 0 0 
282 KPR/S/73/ 
issued 20.04.2022 NL07A 
3481 Tanker 6,618 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
283 KMA(R)/S/ 
35/issued 24.02.2022 NL07A 
3481 Tanker 0 3,570 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
284 KPR/S/22/ 
issued 19.02.2022 NL05D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 2,460 0 0 0 0 0 
285 TSG/S/02/ 
issued 17.02.2022 NL05D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 7,200 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
286 TSG/S/50 
issued 03.03.2022 NL05D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 2,466 0 0 0 0 0 
287 TSG/S/60 05.03.2022 NL05D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 7,200 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
288 TSG/S/15 04.04.2022 NL05D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 3,258 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
289 TSG/S/40 
issued 13.04.2022 NL05D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 6,510 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
290 Zbto/S/75/ 
Issued 18.04.2022 NL05D 
1521 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 2,760 0 0 0 0 0 0 
291 KPR/S/60/ 
issued 20.04.2022 NL05G 
1874 LGV 1,170 2,720 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
292 TSG/S/26 
issued 04.04.2022 NL05G 
1874 LGV 4,620 0 770 0 0 0 0 0 0 
293 TSG/S/51 
issued 13.04.2022 NL05G 
1874 LGV 0 3,259 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
294 TSG/S/06/ 
Issued 18.02.2020 NL07A 
0048 LGV 0 0 0 0 1,488 0 0 0 0 
295 ZBT/S/02/ 
issued 06.05.2020 NL07A 
0048 LGV 0 0 0 758 1,038 0 0 0 0 
296 ZBT/S/17/ 
issued 08.09.2020 NL07A 
0048 LGV 0 0 0 2,190 0 0 0 0 0 
297 Zbto/S/05/ 02.11.2020 NL07A LGV 7,500 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
295
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
295 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
issued 0048 
298 Zbto/S/20/ 
issued 03.12.2020 NL07A 
0048 LGV 0 0 0 2,060 330 0 0 0 0 
299 Zbto/S/07/ 
issued 01.10.2021 NL07A 
0048 LGV 0 4,218 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
300 TSG/S/06/ 
Issued 21.06.2021 NL02A 
3231 Not Available 6,402 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
301 Zbto/S/05/ 
issued 25.06.2021 NL02A 
3231 Not Available 6,240 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
302 TSG/S/15/ 
Issued 11.08.2021 NL07A 
9737 LGV 6,402 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
303 TSG/S/11/ 
Issued 28.09.2021 NL01A 
3686 
Details not in 
Database 0 3,300 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
304 TSG/S/38/ 
Issued 21.10.2021 NL01A 
3686 
Details not in 
Database 0 3,300 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
305 TSG/S/62/ 
Issued 25.10.2021 NL01A 
3686 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 2,688 0 0 0 0 0 0 
306 KMA(R)/S/ 
24/issued 14.10.2021 NL01A 
3686 
Details not in 
Database 0 3,330 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
307 TSG/S/18/Issu
ed 28.09.2021 NL07A 
1056 LGV 0 0 0 2,262 0 0 0 0 0 
308 TSG/S/45/ 
Issued 21.10.2021 NL07A 
1056 LGV 0 0 2,688 0 0 0 0 0 0 
309 TSG/S/69/ 
Issued 25.10.2021 NL07A 
1056 LGV 6,618 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
310 KMA(R)/S/ 
31/issued 14.10.2021 NL07A 
1056 LGV 0 0 2,706 0 0 0 0 0 0 
311 TSG/S/74 
Issued 10.10.2022 NL07A 
0252 LGV 0 0 0 2,677 0 0 0 0 0 
312 KMA(R)/S/ 
07/issued 21.11.2020 NL08 
0104 Not Available 6,210 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
313 Zbto/S/25/ 
issued 18.09.2020 NL08 
0104 Not Available 0 0 0 2,190 0 0 0 0 0 
314 Zbto/S/15/ 
issued 05.11.2020 NL08 
0104 Not Available 0 3,788 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
315 KMA(R)/S/ 
71/issued 04.03.2022 NL01CC 
0551 
Details not in 
Database 3,418 0 0 1,170 0 0 0 0 0 
316 TSG/S/05/ 
Issued 18.02.2020 NL07D 
9441 
D series not 
Utilised 0 0 0 0 1,488 0 0 0 0 

296
Appendices
Appendices 
 
296 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
317 ZBT/S/01/ 
Issued 06.05.2020 NL07D 
9441 
D series not 
Utilised 0 0 0 2,292 0 0 0 0 0 
318 ZBTO/S/08/ 
issued 14.07.2020 NL07D 
9441 
D series not 
Utilised 0 0 2,610 0 0 0 0 0 0 
319 ZBTO/S/11/ 
issued 05.11.2020 NL07D 
9441 
D series not 
Utilised 0 0 800 1,890 0 0 0 0 0 
320 Zbto/S/74/ 
issued 18.04.2022 NL07A 
1420 Not Available 0 0 2,760 0 0 0 0 0 0 
321 TSG/S/07/ 
Issued 18.02.2020 NL05O 
2595 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 1,244 0 0 1 0 
322 TSG/S/03/ 
Issued 14.04.2021 AS01D 
7162 Not found 6,673 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
323 TSG/S/12 28.09.2021 NL01A 
6202 
Details not in 
Database 0 3,300 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
324 TSG/S/39 21.10.2021 NL01A 
6202 
Details not in 
Database 0 3,300 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
325 TSG/S/63 25.10.2021 NL01A 
6202 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 2,688 0 0 0 0 0 0 
326 TSG/S/31 03.03.2022 NL01A 
6202 
Details not in 
Database 7,200 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
327 TSG/S/77 28.10.2021 MN03T 
0312 Not found 6,618 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
328 TSG/S/86 28.10.2021 AS01N 
3906 
M-Cycle/ 
scooter 0 3,190 90 0 0 0 0 0 0 
329 TSG/S/05/ 
Issued 17.02.2022 AS25D 
6907 Not found 7,200 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
330 TSG/S/38 03.03.2022 AS04J 
1475 M-Cycle/scooter 7,200 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
331 TSG/S/44 03.03.2022 NL07A 
3481 Tanker 0 0 1,376 1,320 0 0 0 0 0 
332 TSG/S/52 05.03.2022 ML07B 
9287 Excavator 0 0 0 0 0 1,302 0 0 0 
333 TSG/S/24 11.04.2023 AS09C 
7216 Not found 0 0 0 2,244 0 0 0 0 0 
334 TSG/S/12 10.12.2023 AS09C 
7216 Not found 0 0 3,048 0 0 0 0 0 0 
335 TSG/S/40 18.10.2023 AS05AC 
9466 Not found 0 3,858 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
336 TSG/S/45 18.10.2023 AS09DC 
1560 Not found 0 3,858 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
297
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
297 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
337 TSG/S/68 21.10.2023 AS11DC 
7778 
Three-wheeler 
(passenger) 0 0 0 2,592 0 0 0 0 0 
338 KPR/S/02 21.11.2020 NL05O 
2595 
Details not in 
Database 260 1,250 0 0 780 0 0 0 0 
339 KPR/S/10 07.10.2021 AS01N 
3906 M-Cycle/scooter 0 1,902 1,560 0 0 0 0 0 0 
340 KPR/S/29 20.10.2021 AS01N 
3906 M-Cycle/scooter 0 0 0 0 1,776 0 0 0 0 
341 KPR/S/40 20.10.2021 MN03T 
0312 Not found 0 0 3,095 0 0 0 0 0 0 
342 KPR/S/03 19.02.2022 NL01A 
6202 
Details not in 
Database 7,188 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
343 KPR/S/10 19.02.2022 AS04J 
1475 
M-Cycle/ 
scooter 1,750 2,700 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
344 KPR/S/20 31.03.2022 NL07A 
0254 LGV 8,790 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
345 KPR/S/02 01.04.2022 AS04J 
1475 
M-Cycle/ 
scooter 6,612 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
346 KPR/S/28 11.04.2022 AS04J 
1475 
M-Cycle/ 
scooter 0 0 2,688 0 0 0 0 0 0 
347 KPR/S/64 20.04.2022 NL01A 
6202 
Details not in 
database 6,618 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
348 KPR/S/69  20.04.2022 AS04J 
1475 M-Cycle/scooter 6,618 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
349 KMA/R/S/ 29 24.02.2022 AS04J 
1475 M-Cycle/scooter 7,140 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
350 KMA/R/S/ 49 24.02.2022 ML07B 
9287 Excavator 0 0 2,892 0 0 0 0 0 0 
351 KMA/R/S/ 67 04.03.2022 ML07B 
9287 Excavator 7,140 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
352 KMA/R/S/ 25  14.10.2021 NL01A 
6202 
Details not in 
Database 0 3,330 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
353 Zbto/S/03 06.05.2020 NL05O 
2595 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 1,562 0 0 0 0 
354 Zbto/S/18 08.09.2020 NL05O 
2595 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 2,190 0 0 0 0 0 
355 Zbto/S/06 02.11.2020 NL05O 
2595 
Details not in 
Database 7,500 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
356 Zbto/S/13 05.11.2020 NL05O 
2595 
Details not in 
Database 0 3,788 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

298
AppendicesAppendices 
 
298 
 
Sl. 
No. Challan No. Date Vehicle 
No. 
Make/ Model of 
vehicle 15 mm 25 mm 32 mm 40 mm 50 mm 65 mm 80 mm GPS 7800 GPS 
1950 
357 Zbto/S/21 03.12.2020 NL05O 
2595 
Details not in 
Database 0 0 0 0 1,740 0 0 0 0 
358 Zbto/S/05 01.10.2021 AS01D 
7162 Not found 4,796 1,830 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
359 Zbto/S/10 01.10.2021 AS04J 
1475 M-Cycle/scooter 0 0 1,392 1,710 0 0 0 0 0 
360 Zbto/S/13 30.03.2022 AS01D 
7778 Not found 0 3,402 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
361 Zbto/S/28 17.04.2023 AS05AC 
9466 Not found 0 0 2,472 0 0 0 0 0 0 
362 Zbto/S/33 17.04.2023 AS09DC 
1560 Not found 0 0 2,472 0 0 0 0 0 0 
363 Zbto/S/52 26.04.2023 AS05AC 
9466 Not found 0 0 2,472 0 0 0 0 0 0 
364 Zbto/S/57 26.04.2023 AS09DC 
1560 Not found 0 0 2,472 0 0 0 0 0 0 
365 Zbto/S/57 31.10.2023 AS05AC 
9466 Not found 0 0 0 2,550 0 0 0 0 0 
366 Zbto/S/61  31.10.2023 AS09DC 
1560 Not found 0 3,760 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total 7,22,272 3,11,253 1,28,264 91,975 73,380 33,047 7,230 14 3 
Issue rate of GMS Pipes & GPS Tanks 204 454 489 645 707 964 1,571 2,42,751 1,61,273 
Total 14,73,43,488 14,13,08,862 6,27,21,096 5,93,23,875 5,18,79,660 3,18,57,308 1,13,58,330 33,98,514 4,83,819 
Grand Total 50,96,74,952 
Source: VAHAN database and Transport Department records 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
299
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
299 
 
Appendix- 2.2.7 
Statement showing short execution of works by four PIUs under JJM 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.10.5) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the 
Habitation 
As per DPR As per JVP Difference 
(5-9) 
Cost 
(10 x 8) Nos 
Total 
difference 
(11 x 12) 
Particulars Nos. Volume 
(LxBxH) Unit cost Total cost 
(4x6) Cost per m3 Volume 
(LxBxH) 
    
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
1 Pangti Sedimentation 
tank 
1 55.44 6,97,539 6,97,539 12,582 5.95 49.49 6,22,663 1 6,22,663 
Slow Sand Filter 1 478.50 13,82,511 13,82,511 2,889 20.40 458.10 13,23,559 1 13,23,559 
Main Reservoir 1 291.09 23,65,612 23,65,612 8,127 113.35 177.74 14,44,422 1 14,44,422 
Sub-Reservoir 4 59.64 6,69,893 26,79,574 11,232 34.01 25.64 2,87,944 4 11,51,775 
Clear Water 
Tank  
6 24.15 2,61,750 15,70,499 10,839 10.20 13.95 1,51,177 6 9,07,060 
Brick Masonry 
Tank  
21 9.94 1,36,090 28,57,885 13,690 2.27 7.67 1,05,053 21 22,06,103 
security fencing  
(460 m) 
1 460 m 13,29,483 13,29,483 2,890 60 m 400 m 11,56,000  11,56,000 
2 Longtsung Slow Sand 
Filter  
1 145.83 8,76,076 8,76,076 6,007 58.94 86.89 5,21,978 1 5,21,978 
RCC tank at 
Source  
1 105.63 12,20,757 12,20,757 11,557 58.94 46.68 5,39,510 1 5,39,510 
Security fencing  
(310 m)  
1 310 m 12,62,176 12,62,176 4,072 60 m 250 m 10,18,000  10,18,000 
3 Old 
Changsu 
Main Reservoir 1 272.25 24,59,739 24,59,739 9,035 91.82 180.43 16,30,185 1 16,30,185 
RCC Sub 
Reservoir 
3 49.92 6,96,548 20,89,645 13,952 28.34 21.58 3,01,155 3 9,03,465 
Brick Masonry 
Tank 
12 7.06 1,41,505 16,98,057 20,055 3.19 3.87 77,569 12 9,30,830 
Security fencing  
(210 m) 
1 210 m 6,31,088 6,31,088 3,005 80 m 130 m 3,90,650  3,90,650 

300
AppendicesAppendices 
 
300 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the 
Habitation 
As per DPR As per JVP Difference 
(5-9) 
Cost 
(10 x 8) Nos 
Total 
difference 
(11 x 12) 
Particulars Nos. Volume 
(LxBxH) Unit cost Total cost 
(4x6) Cost per m3 Volume 
(LxBxH) 
    
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
4 Niroyo Clear Water 
Tank  
1 59.64 6,96,549 6,96,549 11,679 0.00 59.64 6,96,549 1 6,96,549 
Main Reservoir  1 59.64 6,96,549 6,96,549 11,679 33.16 26.49 3,09,330 1 3,09,330 
Sub-Reservoir  2 30.00 4,98,337 9,96,674 16,611 11.56 18.44 3,06,275 2 6,12,551 
Brick Masonry 
Tank  
6 7.06 1,41,505 8,49,029 20,055 3.54 3.51 70,465 6 4,22,791 
5 Pherima A Construction of 
DTW  
(150 m)  
1 150 m 9,87,500 9,87,500  100 m 50 m 1,99,500 1 1,99,500 
6 Yachem Main Reservoir  1 123.79 9,45,600 9,45,600 7,639 38.68 85.10 6,50,107 1 6,50,107 
RCC Sub 
Reservoir  
4 31.20 3,84,700 15,38,800 12,330 15.30 15.90 1,96,014 4 7,84,056 
7 Bhumnyu 
(Mongnyu) 
RCC Tank  4 123.79 9,45,600 37,82,400 7,639 50.78 73.00 5,57,671 4 22,30,683 
Rougening 
Filter  
4 4.00 60,000 2,40,000 15,000 3.00 1.00 15,000 1 15,000 
Sub-Reservoir  3 31.20 3,84,700 11,34,100 12,330 17.00 14.20 1,75,049 3 5,25,146 
Brick Masonry 
Tank  
12 7.06 1,13,700 15,91,800 16,114 2.83 4.22 68,035 12 8,16,424 
PVC Half round 
pipe of 100 mm 
for rain gutters 
(288 m)  
1 288 m 3,45,600 3,45,600 1,200 0.00 288 m 3,45,600 1 3,45,600 
8 Sakshi Main Reservoir  1 59.64 5,38,500 5,38,500 9,029 24.48 35.16 3,17,436 1 3,17,436 
Sub-Reservoir  2 37.63 3,84,700 7,69,400 10,225 17.00 20.62 2,10,850 2 4,21,699 
Brick Masonry 
Tank  
9 7.06 1,13,700 10,23,300 16,114 2.83 4.22 68,035 9 6,12,318 
9 Yongpang Main Reservoir  1 75.00 5,38,500 5,38,500 7,180 19.84 55.16 3,96,070 1 3,96,070 
Sub-Reservoir  1 35.48 3,84,700 3,84,700 10,844 17.68 17.79 1,92,938 1 1,92,938 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
301
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
301 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the 
Habitation 
As per DPR As per JVP Difference 
(5-9) 
Cost 
(10 x 8) Nos 
Total 
difference 
(11 x 12) 
Particulars Nos. Volume 
(LxBxH) Unit cost Total cost 
(4x6) Cost per m3 Volume 
(LxBxH) 
    
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
10 Chomi 
village 
Main Reservoir  1 31.20 8,57,881 8,57,881 27,496 30.61 0.59 16,341 1 16,341 
Brick Masonry 
Tank  
8 7.94 2,09,098 16,72,786 26,341 2.83 5.10 1,34,450 8 10,75,601 
Total 4,27,10,316 - - - - - 2,53,86,343 
Source: Departmental records 

302
AppendicesAppendices 
 
302 
 
Appendix-2.2.8 
Statement showing details of availability of instruments in State Laboratory 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.10.7) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Instrument Required in 
State Lab 
Total Qty. 
available in 
State Lab 
Shortage 
1 pH meter (both laboratory based and portable type) Yes 2 0 
2 TDS/ Conductivity meter (both laboratory based and potable 
type) 
Yes 1 0 
3 Nephelometer (Turbidimeter) Yes 1 0 
4 Digital balance Yes 2 0 
5 UV- Visible spectrophotometer Yes - 1 
6 Refrigerator Yes (2 Nos.) 3 Excess 1 
7 Water still Yes - 1 
8 Voltage stabilizer/ Inverters 3 Nos. - 3 
9 Hot Plate 2 Nos. 1 1 
10 Heating mantle Yes - 1 
11 Water bath Yes 1 0 
12 Hot air oven 4 Nos. 1 3 
13 Bacteriological incubator 2 Nos 1 1 
14 Autoclave 2 Nos. 1 1 
15 Magnetic Stirrer 2 Nos. 1 1 
16 Microscope Yes 1 0 
17 Vacuum pump Yes 1 0 
18 Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS) with electrode 
lamp 
Yes - 1 
19 Inductively coupled plasma - optical emission spectrometry 
(ICP-OES)/ mass spectrometry (MS) 
Yes - 1 
20 UV laminar Air flow chamber for bacteriological analysis  Yes 1 0 
21 Plate count and colony counter Yes 1 0 
22 Arsenic Testing Instrumentation (portable) Yes 1 0 
23 Hydride generator with all accessories Yes - 1 
24 DO meter Yes - 1 
25 Cool box with icepacks Yes - 1 
26 Specific Ion meter along with electrodes (for Fluoride) Yes - 1 
27 Fume coup board Yes - 1 
28 GC-MS/HPLC/LC-MS Yes - 1 
29 Auto burette and auto pipette Yes 1 0 
30 Uranium analyser Yes - 1 
31 Thermometers Yes 1 0 
32 Single Stage distillation apparatus Yes 1 0 
33 Double distillation Apparatus/ Ultrapure Water Purification 
System to provide type I/type II water for sophisticated 
instruments 
Yes 1 0 
34 Argon, Nitrogen, Hydrogen Helium & Oxygen Gas Cylinders 
(To be used with AAS/ Advanced Spectrophotometer)/ICP-
MS/ OES 
Yes - 1 
35 Kjeldal distillation apparatus Yes - 1 
36 Pressure Pump Yes - 1 
37 Membrane Filtration Yes 1 0 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
303
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
303 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Instrument Required in 
State Lab 
Total Qty. 
available in 
State Lab 
Shortage 
38 PCR machine Yes - 1 
39 Deep freezer (-20 deg c) Yes - 1 
40 Micropipette Yes - 1 
41 Centrifuge Yes - 1 
42 Redflux Apparatus/COD digester Yes - 1 
43 Ion Chromatograph Yes - 1 
Source: Information supplied by the Department 
 
Appendix-2.2.9 
Statement showing details of availability of instruments in four test-checked district laboratories 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.10.7) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Instrument 
Required 
in 
District 
Labs 
Kiphire Longleng Wokha Dimapur 
Total 
Qty. 
available 
in Dist. 
Labs 
Shortage 
1 pH meter (both 
laboratory based and 
portable type) 
Yes 1 2 1 2 6 0 
2 TDS/ Conductivity 
meter (both laboratory 
based and potable type) 
Yes 1 3 1 2 7 0 
3 Nephelometer 
(Turbidimeter) 
Yes 1 1 1 1 4 0 
4 Digital balance Yes 1 2 1 2 6 0 
5 UV- Visible 
spectrophotometer 
Yes 0 0 0 1 1 3 
6 Refrigerator Yes 2 2 1 2 7 0 
7 Water still Yes 0 1 1 0 2 2 
8 Voltage stabilizer/ 
Inverters 
2 Nos.  1 1 1 1 4 4 
9 Hot Plate 1 No.  1 1 1 1 4 0 
10 Heating mantle Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
11 Water bath Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
12 Hot air oven 2 Nos. 1 1 1 1 4 4 
13 Bacteriological 
incubator 
2 Nos. 0 0 0 0 0 8 
14 Autoclave 1 No.  0 0 0 0 0 4 
15 Magnetic Stirrer 1 No.  0 1 0 0 1 3 
16 Microscope Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
17 Vacuum pump Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
18 UV laminar Air flow 
chamber for 
bacteriological analysis 
Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
19 Plate count and colony 
counter 
Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 

304
AppendicesAppendices 
 
304 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Instrument 
Required 
in 
District 
Labs 
Kiphire Longleng Wokha Dimapur 
Total 
Qty. 
available 
in Dist. 
Labs 
Shortage 
20 Arsenic Testing 
Instrumentation 
(portable) 
Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
21 Hydride generator with 
all accessories 
Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
22 DO meter Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
23 Cool box with icepacks Yes 1 1 1 1 4 0 
24 Specific Ion meter along 
with electrodes (for 
Fluoride) 
Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
25 Fume coup board Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
26 Auto burette and auto 
pipette 
Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
27 Thermometers Yes 1 5 1 7 14 0 
28 Single Stage distillation 
apparatus 
Yes 0 0 0 1 1 3 
29 Double distillation 
Apparatus/ Ultrapure 
Water Purification 
System to provide type 
I/type II water for 
sophisticated 
instruments 
Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
30 Argon, Nitrogen, 
Hydrogen Helium & 
Oxygen Gas Cylinders 
(To be used with AAS/ 
Advanced 
Spectrophotometer)/ICP-
MS/ OES 
Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
31 Kjeldal distillation 
apparatus 
Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
32 Pressure Pump Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
33 Membrane Filtration Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
34 Centrifuge Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
35 Redflux Apparatus/COD 
digester 
Yes 0 0 0 0 0 4 
Source: Information supplied by the Department 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
305
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
305 
 
Appendix-2.2.10 
Statement showing details of water quality tests conducted in the selected district and designated 
State laboratories 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.10.8) 
  
Year No. of 
selected1 
laboratori
es 
Tests 
required to 
be 
conducted 
by 
laboratories 
Tests 
actually 
conducted 
by the 
district 
laboratories 
Shortfall 
(figure in 
parenthesis 
indicates 
percentage) 
Tests 
required 
to be 
conducted 
by State 
laboratory 
Tests 
actually 
conducted 
by State 
laboratory 
Shortfall 
(per 
cent) 
2019-20 4 12,000 6422 11,358 (95) 32 0 32 (100) 
2020-21 4 12,000 796 11,204 (93) 40 0 40 (100) 
2021-22 4 12,000 1,305 10,695 (89) 65 80 - 
2022-23 4 12,000 4,250 7,750  (64) 212 186 26 (12) 
2023-24 4 12,000 3,778 8,222(68) 189 96 93 (49) 
Source: Departmental records 
Appendix-2.2.11 
Statement showing details of testing of water quality of the required parameters in the four District 
laboratories 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.10.8) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Parameters No. of test-checked laboratories which conducted tests on 
the required parameter 
No. of 
laboratories 
which had not 
conducted 
tests 
Kiphire Longleng Wokha Dimapur Total 
1 pH value Yes Yes Yes Yes 4 0 
2 Total dissolved 
solids 
Yes Yes Yes Yes 4 0 
3 Turbidity Yes Yes Yes Yes 4 0 
4 Chloride Yes Yes Yes Yes 4 0 
5 Total alkalinity Yes Yes Yes Yes 4 0 
6 Total hardness Yes Yes Yes Yes 4 0 
7 Sulphate No No No No 0 4 
8 Iron Yes Yes Yes Yes 4 0 
9 Total arsenic No No No No 0 4 
10 Fluoride No Yes Yes Yes 3 1 
11 Nitrate No Yes Yes Yes 3 1 
12 Total coliform 
bacteria 
No No No No 0 4 
13 E.coli or 
thermotolerant 
coliform bacteria 
No No Yes No 1 3 
Source: Information supplied by the department 
                                                
1   Kiphire District Lab, Longleng District Lab, Wokha District Lab and Dimapur District Lab 
2  Test conducted in respect of  Kiphire District Lab was not available for the period 2019-20 

306
Appendices
Appendices 
 
306 
 
 
Appendix-2.2.12 
Statement showing details of targets for testing of water sources in four selected districts using FTKs 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.10.8) 
 
Year Total number of sources in 
four selected districts 
Targets of Tests Total number of 
Tests conducted 
Shortfall  
(per cent) 
2019-20 8543 10,248 401 9,847(96) 
2020-21 1,024 12,288 687 11,601(94) 
2021-22 1,286 15,432 2,339 13,093(84) 
2022-23 1,394 16,728 6,802 9,926(59) 
2023-24 1,396 16,752 4,002 12,750(76) 
Total 71,448 14,231 57,217(82) 
Source: Departmental records 
 
                                                
3  Total number of sources and No. of Tests conducted in respect of Kiphire District Lab was not available for 
the year 2019-20 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
307
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
307 
Appendix-2.2.13 
Statement showing discrepancy of FHTCs provided between IMIS and actual execution and its monetary effect 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.11.1) 
 
Sl. 
No. District Block Village Name 
/Habitation 
Project 
cost 
No. of 
FHTC 
required 
in DPR 
Present 
status 
(IMIS) 
(Sept 
2024) 
Number of 
FHTC 
provided 
during JPV 
Cost per 
FHTC 
(5/6) 
Number 
of Short 
execution 
of FHTC 
(7-8) 
Cost of 
short 
execution 
cost (9x10) 
(₹ in lakh) 
Present 
Status 
(September 
2024) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
1 Dimapur Chumukedima Thilixu Village 696.92 1,181 1,153 881 0.59 272 160.48 On-going 
2 Unity Village 
(Sugar Mill) 
510.10 1,027 850 850 0.50 0 0.00 On-going 
3 Zani 86.89 225 255 192 0.39 63 24.57 On-going 
4 Phaipijang 120.32 247 247 240 0.49 7 3.43 Completed 
5 Paglapahar (New 
Chumukedima) 
88.32 157 130 96 0.56 34 19.04 On-going 
6 Diphupar "A" 807.21 2,476 1,530 648 0.33 882 291.06 On-going 
7 Aoyim 17.47 80 80 32 0.22 48 10.56 Completed 
8 Niuland New Showuba 129.54 205 194 194 0.63 0 0.00 On-going 
9 Zuheshe 36.80 72 72 20 0.51 52 26.52 Completed 
10 Sukhato 32.57 56 51 51 0.58 0 0.00 Completed 
11 Hevikhe 65.46 90 45 45 0.73 0 0.00 On-going 
12 Medziphema Ruzaphema 208.38 366 366 150 0.57 216 123.12 Completed 
13 Medziphema 
Village 
166.66 343 339 110 0.49 229 112.21 Completed 
14 Pherima -A 44.47 125 66 66 0.36 0 0.00 On-going 
15 Piphema - A 56.49 279 235 180 0.20 55 11.00 On-going 
16 Longleng Longleng Yachem 305.95 724 724 504 0.42 220 92.40 100 phy 

308
AppendicesAppendices 
 
308 
 
Sl. 
No. District Block Village Name 
/Habitation 
Project 
cost 
No. of 
FHTC 
required 
in DPR 
Present 
status 
(IMIS) 
(Sept 
2024) 
Number of 
FHTC 
provided 
during JPV 
Cost per 
FHTC 
(5/6) 
Number 
of Short 
execution 
of FHTC 
(7-8) 
Cost of 
short 
execution 
cost (9x10) 
(₹ in lakh) 
Present 
Status 
(September 
2024) 
17 Bhumnyu 
(Mongnyu) 
220.14 994 702 504 0.22 198 43.56 Completed 
18 Oushok 38.71 102 80 0 0.38 80 30.40 On-going 
19 Hamlikong 45.18 141 101 0 0.32 101 32.32 On-going 
20 Hukpang 75.77 517 517 150 0.15 367 55.05 On-going 
21 Sakshi Sakshi 168.12 535 355 240 0.31 115 35.65 Completed 
22 Yongpang Village 113.80 413  342 250 0.28 92 25.76 Completed 
23 Pongo 118.25 808  550 550 0.15 0 0.00 On-going 
24 Kiphire Kiphire Anatongre 125.40 688 688 688 0.18 0 0.00 Completed 
25 Kiphire Village 161.75 481 481 222 0.34 259 88.06 Completed 
26 Kesitong 58.42 350 350 177 0.17 173 29.41 On-going 
27 Pungro Phuvkiu (Chomi) 205.60 553 553 338 0.37 215 79.55 Completed 
28 Sangkumti 187.22 249 244 244 0.75 0 0.00 Completed 
29 Wokha Wokha Changsu Old 
Village 
322.46 566  565 205 0.57 360 205.20 On-going 
30 Niroyo 132.58 199  198 105 0.67 93 62.31 On-going 
31 Riphyim Old 
Village 
70.20 484 484 0 0.15 484 72.60 On-going 
32 Sanis Pangti 463.10 1,200 1,200 115 0.39 1085 423.15 100 phy 
33 Longtsung 177.84 268 268 134 0.66 134 88.44 On-going 
34 Meshangpen 55.84 87 87 70 0.64 17 10.88 Completed 
Total 6,113.93 16,288 14,102 8,251 
 
5,851 2,157.00 
 
              Say     ₹2 1 . 5 7  c r o r e   
Source: Departmental records
--

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
309
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
309 
Appendix: 2.3.1 
Statement on receipts and expenditure of different sub-schemes under Anganwadi services during 
2018-2024 
(Reference Paragraph 2.3.12.1) 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year Unspent balance 
of previous year 
Amount 
released 
by GoI 
State share 
released by 
GoN 
Total Expenditure Unspent 
balance 
Percentage 
of savings 
A. ICDS General 
2018-19 0 3,721.00 0 3,721.00 3,721.00 0.00  
2019-20 0 7,725.91 0 7,725.91 7,725.91 0.00  
2020-21 0 6,688.44 744.16 7,432.60 7,432.60 0.00  
2021-22 0 7,232.43 384.52 7,616.95 7,616.95 0.00  
2022-23 0 8,346.43 927.38 9,273.81 9,273.81 0.00  
2023-24 0 10,113.00 1,123.66 11,236.66 11,204.20 32.46  
Total  43,827.21 3,179.72 47,006.93 46,974.47   
B. Supplementary Nutrition programme (SNP) 
2018-19 2,351.33 8,231.20 210.79 10,793.32 7,043.61 3,749.71 34.74 
2019-20 3,749.71 7,390.27 673.00 11,812.98 10,488.64 1,324.34 11.21 
2020-21 1,324.34 8,232.90 1151.27 10,708.51 8,650.40 2,058.11 19.22 
2021-22 2,058.11 8,232.75 914.75 11,205.61 9,147.49 2,058.12 18.37 
2022-23 2,058.12 8,918.17 686.08 11,662.37 8,918.88 2,743.49 23.52 
2023-24 2,743.49 9,732.94 1157.19 13,633.62 10,686.33 2,947.29 21.62 
Total  50,738.23 4,793.08 57,882.64 54,935.35  -- 
C. ICDS Training  
2018-19 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2019-20 0 17.02 0 17.02 17.02 0  
2020-21 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2021-22 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2022-23 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2023-24 0 23.40 2.60 26.00 0 26.00  
Total  40.42 2.60 43.02 17.02   
D. ICDS Construction budget  
i. Upgradation of AWC 
2018-19 2,318.40 0 0 2,318.40 1,518.40 800.00  
2019-20 800.00 0 0 800.00 800.00 0  
2020-21 0 381.60 42.40 424.00 424.00 0  
2021-22 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2022-23 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2023-24 0 266.40 0 266.40 0 266.40  
Total  648.00 42.40 3,008.80 2,742.40   
ii. Upgradation of AWC to Saksham Anganwadi 
2018-19 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2019-20 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2020-21 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2021-22 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2022-23 0 72.14 8.02 80.16 80.16 0  
2023-24 0 44.10 4.90 49.00 0 49.00  
Total  116.24 12.92 129.16 80.16   
iii. Construction of Toilet facilities at AWC 
2018-19 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2019-20 0 68.26 0 68.26 68.26 0  
2020-21 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2021-22 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2022-23 0 136.51 0 136.51 136.51 0  
2023-24 0 707.94 78.66 786.60 0 786.60  

310
AppendicesAppendices 
 
310 
 
Year Unspent balance 
of previous year 
Amount 
released 
by GoI 
State share 
released by 
GoN 
Total Expenditure Unspent 
balance 
Percentage 
of savings 
Total 0 912.71 78.66 991.37 204.77 786.60  
iv. Construction of Drinking water facilities at AWC 
2018-19 0 47.25 5.25 52.50 52.50 0  
2019-20 0 54.40 0 54.40 54.40 0  
2020-21 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2021-22 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2022-23 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2023-24 0 204.26 22.70 226.96 0 226.96  
Total  305.91 27.95 333.86 106.90   
E. Poshan Abhiyaan 
2018-19 163.74 1,251.97 0 1,415.71 856.13 559.58 39.53 
2019-20 559.58 2,298.17 0 2,857.75 2,227.38 630.37 22.06 
2020-21 630.37 1,550.11 289.84 2,470.32 2,155.75 314.57 12.73 
2021-22 314.57 1,461.30 115.31 1,891.18 1,891.18 0 0.00 
2022-23 0 943.69 259.04 1,202.73 1,202.73 0 0.00 
2023-24 0 1,946.89 183.48 2,130.37 1,146.79 983.58 46.17 
Total  9,452.13 847.67 10,463.54 9,479.96   
F. Scheme for Adolescent Girls (SAG) 
2018-19 0 125.09 13.9 138.99 138.99 0  
2019-20 0 248.9 27.65 276.55 276.55 0  
2020-21 0 187.76 20.86 208.62 208.62 0  
2021-22 0 154.97 17.22 172.19 172.19 0  
2022-23 0 28.16 3.13 31.29 31.29 0  
2023-24 0 3,571.28 215.89 3,787.17 3,787.17 0  
Total  4,316.16 298.65 4,614.81 4,614.81   
 
G. Statement showing budget and expenditure for WBNP 
(Amount in ₹) 
Financial 
Year 
Instalment Opening 
Balance 
Fund 
sanctioned 
Expenditure Closing 
Balance 
2018-19 1st and 2nd of 2018-19 Nil 5,82,98,542 5,82,98,542 Nil 
2019-20 3rd and 4th of 2018-19 Nil 5,82,99,000 5,82,99,000 Nil 
2020-21 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
2021-22 
3rd and 4th of 2019-20 Nil 5,06,26,000 5,06,26,000 Nil 
1st, 2nd ,3rd and 4th of 2020-21 Nil 7,19,43,000 7,19,43,000  
2022-23 1st and 2nd of 2019-20 Nil 5,83,99,000 5,82,98,542 1,00,458 1st, 2nd ,3rd and 4th of 2021-22 Nil 7,01,76,000 7,01,76,000 
2023-24 1st, 2nd ,3rd and 4th of 2022-23 1,00,458 7,23,21,000 7,23,21,000 1,00,458 
Source: Departmental records 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
311
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
311 
 
Appendix-2.4.1 
Statement showing Action Plan for NHM activities on matching State Share for Infrastructure 
Maintenance under NHM 
(Reference Paragraph 2.4.4) 
 
Codes Strategy/Activities Amount (in ₹) 
 A.1 Maternal Health  
2.3.1.1.1 A.1.2.1 Outreach camps 75,00,000 
2.3.1.1.2 A.1.2.2 Monthly Village Health and Nutrition Days 85,00,000 
 A.1.3 Janani Suraksha Yojana/JSY  
1.2.1.1 A.1.3.1 Home Deliveries 30,00,000 
1.2.1.2 A.1.3.2 Institutional deliveries  
1.2.1.2.1 A.1.3.2.a Rural 95,00,000 
1.2.1.2.3 A.1.3.2.c C Sections 95,00,000 
 A.1.6 JSSK- Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram  
1.1.1.2 A.1.6.3 Diet services for JSSK beneficiaries (3 days for normal delivery and 7 
days for Ceasarean) 5,10,111 
Total 3,85,10,111 
Source: Departmental records 
 
Appendix-2.4.2 
Statement showing non-replacement of rejected medicines by M/s RS Pharma & Surgico, Dimapur 
(Reference Paragraph 2.4.4) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
As per supply order Rejected stores for 
replacement by  
Name of Drugs Dosage 
Form Strength Unit/ 
packing Rate Quantity Amount Quantity Amount 
1. Paracetamol Tab 500mg 1x10 10.4 30,000 3,12,000 0 0 
2. Paracetamol Syrup 125mg/5ml 60ml 21 20,000 4,20,000 10,000 2,10,000 
3. Diclofenac sodium SR.Tab 50mg 1x10 21.5 20,000 4,30,000 0 0 
4. Diclofenac Sodium Gel 1%w/w 30gm 
tube 32 10,000 3,20,000 680 21,760 
5. Ibuprofen Tab 400mg 1x10 10 22,460 2,24,600 0 0 
6. Ampicillin Cap 250mg 1x10 27.6 20,000 5,52,000 10,000 2,76,000 
7. Ampicillin Cap 500mg 1x10 52.4 20,000 10,48,000 0 0 
8. Amoxicillin Cap 250mg 1x10 30.4 20,000 6,08,000 0 0 
9. Amoxicillin Cap 500mg 1x10 67.2 20,000 13,44,000 0 0 
10. Amoxicillin Dry Syp. 125mg/5ml 60ml 37.8 10,000 3,78,000 5,000 1,89,000 
11. Trimethoprim & 
Sulphamethazole Tab 80 + 400mg 1x10 6 15,000 90,000 0 0 
12. Ofloxacin Tab 200mg 1x10 60.3 15,000 9,04,500 0 0 
13. Azithromycin Tab 250mg 1x6 67.98 20,000 13,59,600 0 0 
14. Azithromycin Tab 500mg 1x3 67.95 20,000 13,59,000 10,000 6,79,500 
15. Doxycylline  HCL Tab 100mg 1x10 10.4 14,000 1,45,600 0 0 
16. Metronidazole Tab 400mg 1x10 11.81 15,000 1,77,150 0 0 
17. Cefixime Tab 100mg 1x10 84.9 15,000 12,73,500 0 0 
18. Cefixime Tab 200mg 1x10 124.2 15,000 18,63,000 0 0 
19. Amoxicillin + Clavulanic 
acid Tab 300+75 mg 1x10 125 20,000 25,00,000 0 0 
20. Ornidazole Tab 500mg 1x10 48 15,000 7,20,000 0 0 
21. Ranitidine HCL Tab 150mg 1x15 8 15,000 1,20,000 7,500 60,000 
22. Omeprazole Cap 20mg 1x15 49.95 20,000 9,99,000 0 0 
23. Domperidone Tab 10mg 1x10 24.9 15,000 3,73,500 0 0 
24. Vit C + Zinc Cap Zinc+Vit 1x10 64.34 18,000 11,58,120 0 0 
25. Cetirizine Hydrochloride Tab 10mg 1x10 19.9 17,000 3,38,300 0 0 
26. Pheneramine Maleate Tab 25mg 1x10 4 20,000 80,000 0 0 
27. Ciprofloxacin Eye/Ear 
Drops 0.3%w/v 5ml Vial 7.75 15,000 1,16,250 0 0 

312
AppendicesAppendices 
 
312 
 
Sl. 
No. 
As per supply order Rejected stores for 
replacement by  
Name of Drugs Dosage 
Form Strength Unit/ 
packing Rate Quantity Amount Quantity Amount 
28. Mupirocin oint. Ointment 2% 5 gm 75.8 8,000 6,06,400 0 0 
29. ORS powder 21gm Sachet 24.9 14,000 3,48,600 0 0 
30. Amlodipine Tab 5mg 1x10 35.06 8,000 2,80,480 0 0 
31. Amlodipine Tab 10mg 1x10 55.55 8,000 4,44,400 0 0 
32. Telmisartan Tab 40 mg 1x10 107.96 8,000 8,63,680 0 0 
33. Metformin Tab 500mg 1x10 19.26 8,000 1,54,080 0 0 
34. Glimiperide Tab 1 mg 1x10 11.03 8,000 88,240 0 0 
Total 538,460 2,20,00,000 43,180 14,36,260 
Source: Department records 
Appendix 2.4.3 
Statement showing short supply of hospital linens by M/s New Homescape, Dimapur 
(Reference Paragraph 2.4.4) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. No. 
As per supply order Short supply 
Items Specification Packing 
(No.) Rate  Quantity Amount Quantity Amount 
1. White Hand Towel (soft 
Cotton) 75 cm X 30 cm 1 90 4,000 3,60,000 1,200 1,08,000 
2. Bed Sheet white 
(Stitched Border) 225 cm X 135 cm 1 300 4,000 12,00,000 1,590 4,77,000 
3. Pillow 75 cm X 45 cm 1 550 2,000 11,00,000 650 3,57,500 
4. Pillow Cover 75 cm X 45 cm 1 100 4,000 4,00,000 2,400 2,40,000 
5. Blanket (Mink Thick) 250 cm X 150 cm 1 1,500 1,800 27,00,000 540 8,10,000 
6. Dunlop Mattress 36 “ X 78”X 3” 1 5,500 350 19,25,000 131 7,20,500 
7. Macintosh sheet (90cm 
x 1 meter) 90cm x 1 meter 1 200 450 90,000 225 45,000 
8. PVC apron 24 x 36 inch 1 250 900 2,25,000 450 1,12,500 
Total 80,00,000 7,186 28,70,500 
Source: Department records 
Appendix-2.4.4 
Statement showing short supply of nursing sundries  by M/s JB Construction, Kohima 
(Reference Paragraph 2.4.4) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
As per supply order Short supply 
Name of Items Specification Rate Quantity  Amount Quantity Amount 
1. Gauze Cloth 90 x 16.5 mtr ₹425/ than 6,500 than 27,62,500 4,460 18,95,500 
2. R/Bandage 5cm x 5 mtrs ₹70/ Dozen 4,500 Dozen 3,15,000 2,250 1,57,500 
3. R/ Bandage 7.5cm x5 mtrs ₹85/Dozen 4,500Dozen 3,82,500 2,250 1,91,250 
4. R/Bandage 10cm x 5 mtrs ₹110/ Dozen 4,500 Dozen 4,95,000 2,220 2,44,200 
5. R/Bandage 15cm x 5 mtrs ₹150/Dozen 4,500 Dozen 6,75,000 2,250 3,37,500 
6. Crepe 
Bandage 7.5cm x 4 mtrs ₹150/Roll 4,500 6,75,000 2,834 4,25,100 
7. Crepe 
Bandage 10cm X 4mtrs ₹180/Roll 4,500 8,10,000 2,148 3,86,640 
8. Cotton 500 Grms ₹250/Roll 5,100 12,75,000 2,850 7,12,500 
9. Cotton roll 100 grms ₹50/Roll 5,320 2,66,000 3,720 1,86,000 
10. G. Dress 20 cm ₹120/- 3,500 4,20,000 0 0 
11. G. Dress 15cm ₹75/- 3,500 2,62,500 0 0 
12. G. Dress 10 cm ₹49/- 3,500 1,71,500 0 0 
Total 85,10,000 24,982 45,36,190 
Source: Department records 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
313
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
313 
 
Appendix-2.6.1 
Statement showing 18 subjects listed in the 12th Schedule of the Constitution of India 
(Reference Paragraph 2.6.2) 
Sl No. Subject 
1. Urban planning including town planning. 
2. Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings. 
3. Planning for economic and social development. 
4. Roads and bridges. 
5. Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes. 
6. Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste management.  
7. Fire services. 
8. Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of 
ecological aspects. 
9. Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, 
including the handicapped and mentally retarded. 
10. Slum improvement and upgradation. 
11. Urban poverty alleviation. 
12. Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, 
gardens, playgrounds. 
13. Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects 
14. Burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds and  
electric crematoriums. 
15. Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals. 
16. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths. 
17. Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus 
stops and public conveniences. 
18. Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries 
 
  

314
AppendicesAppendices 
 
314 
 
Appendix-3.2.1 
Statement showing Person Days (PDs) estimated and actual generation in the test-checked districts 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.8.3) 
 
Year Estimated Generated Excess/ 
Shortfall Generated 
Percentage of 
short generation 
DIMAPUR 
2019-20 21,45,084 21,32,531 12,553  
2020-21 34,10,183 31,06,352 3,03,831  
2021-22 70,89,200 33,21,489 37,67,711  
2022-23 69,98,700 30,34,680 39,64,020  
2023-24 66,64,700 25,29,510 41,35,190  
Total 2,63,07,867 1,41,24,562 1,21,83,305 46 
MOKOKCHUNG 
2019-20 10,43,090 14,32,556 -3,89,466  
2020-21 16,63,748 16,77,353 -13,605  
2021-22 35,73,100 17,63,222 18,09,878  
2022-23 35,45,500 18,74,720 16,70,780  
2023-24 35,72,600 16,95,430 18,77,170  
Total 1,33,98,038 84,43,281 49,54,757 37 
PHEK 
2019-20 9,99,288 14,27,783 -4,28,495  
2020-21 15,88,746 13,77,344 2,11,402  
2021-22 35,57,900 14,81,023 20,76,877  
2022-23 37,56,800 17,16,827 20,39,973  
2023-24 38,18,800 16,18,749 22,00,051  
Total 1,37,21,534 76,21,726 60,99,808 44 
ZUNHEBOTO 
2019-20 10,33,844 11,64,363 -1,30,519  
2020-21 16,04,530 13,15,500 2,89,030  
2021-22 33,31,900 15,49,959 17,81,941  
2022-23 33,31,900 16,12,978 17,18,922  
2023-24 33,31,751 13,37,681 19,94,070  
Total 1,26,33,925 69,80,481 56,53,444 45 
Source: Departmental records 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
315
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
315 
 
Appendix-3.2.2 
Statement showing delay in release of fund 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.8.5) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Receipt of funds by State Government from GoI 
(MoRD) 
Release of funds by State 
Government to the 
implementing Department 
Details of release of State 
Share Date of 
Withdrawal 
from Civil 
Deposit (CD) 
Delay 
in 
release 
of GoI 
Share 
(in 
days) 
Delay 
in 
release 
of 
State 
Share 
(in 
days) 
Interest on 
delay in 
release of 
GOI share 
Interest on 
delay in 
release of 
State share 
Sanction 
no. and 
date 
Particulars Amount Sanction 
no. and date Amount 
Drawal 
Authority No./ 
Limit No. 
Amount 
2019-20 
F.No.J-
11060/19/2
019-
MGNREG
A(RE-III) 
Sl. No.3 
dated 
08.04.2019 
1st Instalment of 1st 
Tranche of Central 
Assistance for 
financial year 2019-20 
(Wages, Material & 
Admin) 
2,42,75,77,000 NO.RD/MG
NREGA-
SEGF-
35/2014 
Dated 
Kohima, the 
22.05.2019 
2,42,75,77,000 15 of 2019-20 
dated 
07.12.2019 
(1st & 2nd 
instalment of 
1st Tranche 
2019-20) & 
3rd Instalment 
2018-19 
36,93,26,000  41 238 3,27,22,408 2,88,98,495 
F.No.J-
11060/19/2
019-
MGNREG
A(RE-III) 
Sl. No.62 
dated 
05.08.2019 
2nd Instalment of 1st 
Tranche of Central 
Assistance for 
financial year 2019-20 
((Materials and Admin 
Component) 
31,33,03,000 NO.RD/MG
NREGA-
SEGF-
35/2014 
Dated 
Kohima, the 
05.11.2019 
31,33,03,000    89 121 91,67,332 0 
F.No.J-
11060/19/2
019-
MGNREG
A(RE-III) 
Sl. No.82 
dated 
3rd Instalment of 1st 
Tranche of Central 
Assistance for 
financial year 2019-20 
(Materials and Admin 
Component) 
24,44,95,000 NO.RD/MG
NREGA-
SEGF-
35/2014 
Dated 
Kohima, the 
20.12.2019 
24,44,95,000 18 of 2019-20 
dated 
01.02.2020 
(State 
matching share 
during FY 
2019-20 
2,71,66,000  56 99 45,01,387 8,84,197 

316
AppendicesAppendices 
 
316 
 
Receipt of funds by State Government from GoI 
(MoRD) 
Release of funds by State 
Government to the 
implementing Department 
Details of release of State 
Share Date of 
Withdrawal 
from Civil 
Deposit (CD) 
Delay 
in 
release 
of GoI 
Share 
(in 
days) 
Delay 
in 
release 
of 
State 
Share 
(in 
days) 
Interest on 
delay in 
release of 
GOI share 
Interest on 
delay in 
release of 
State share 
Sanction 
no. and 
date 
Particulars Amount Sanction 
no. and date Amount 
Drawal 
Authority No./ 
Limit No. 
Amount 
22.10.2019 against 3rd 
instalment of 
1st Trench of 
Central share 
released by 
GoI) 
F.No.J-
11060/19/2
019-
MGNREG
A(RE-III) 
Sl. No.154 
dated 
26.02.2020 
4th  Instalment of 1st 
Tranche of Central 
Assistance for 
financial year 2019-20 
(Wages, Materials and 
Admin Component) 
18,29,80,000 Drawal limit 
No. 33 of 
2019-20 
Dated 
30.03.2020 
(Transfer 
Credit to 
Civil 
Deposit) 
18,29,80,000   08.05.2020 68  40,90,731 0 
F.No.J-
11060/19/2
019-
MGNREG
A(RE-III) 
Sl. No.156 
dated 
23.03.2020 
1st Instalment of 2nd 
Tranche of Central 
Assistance for 
financial year 2019-20 
(Wages, Materials and 
Admin Component) 
13,61,15,000 Drawal limit 
No. 33 of 
2019-20 
Dated 
30.03.2020 
(Transfer 
Credit to 
Civil 
Deposit) 
13,61,15,000   08.05.2020 68  30,43,009 0 
Total 3,30,44,70,000    39,64,92,000    5,35,24,867 2,97,82,692 
 Fund Interest           
GOI 3,30,44,70,000 5,35,24,867         
GON 39,64,92,000 2,97,82,692          
Total 3,70,09,62,000 8,33,07,559           
Source: Departmental records 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
317
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
317 
 
2020-21 
(Amount in ₹) 
Receipt of funds by State Government from GoI (MoRD)        Release of funds by State 
Government to the 
implementing Department 
Details of release of State 
Share 
Date of 
Withdra
wal from 
Civil 
Deposit 
(CD) 
Delay 
in 
release 
of GoI 
Share 
(in 
days) 
Delay in 
release 
of State 
Share 
(in 
days) 
Interest on 
delay in 
release of 
GOI share 
Interest 
on delay 
in 
release 
of State 
share 
Sanction no. and 
date  
Particulars Amount Sanction no. 
and date  
Amount Drawal 
Authority 
No./ Limit 
No. 
Amount  
F. No. J-
11060/14/2020-
MGNREGA(RE-
III) Sl. No.16 
Dated 07.04.2020 
1st instalment of 1st 
Tranche of Central 
Assistance for financial 
year 2020-21 (Wages, 
Material and Admin 
Component 
3,27,58,62,000 NO.RD/MGN
REGA-SEGF-
35/2014 Dated 
Kohima, the 
21.05.2020 
1,91,12,00,000    44  2,76,46,948 0 
   NO.RD/MGN
REGA-SEGF-
35/2014 Dated 
Kohima, the 
14.07.2020 
1,36,46,62,000    97  4,35,19,632 0 
F. No. J-
11060/14/2020-
MGNREGA(RE-
III) Sl. No.57      
Dated 19.10.2020 
2nd instalment of 1st 
Tranche of Central 
Assistance for financial 
year 2020-21 (Wages, 
Material and Admin 
Component 
1,56,23,52,000 NO.RD,MGN
REGA-
SECF/17/2018 
Dated 
Kohima, the 
16.02.2021 
93,74,00,000    118  3,63,65,984 0 
   Dated Kohima 
the 30.03.2021 
62,49,52,000    160  3,28,74,187 0 
Total 4,83,82,14,000   4,83,82,14,000       14,04,06,751 0 
 Fund Interest           
GOI 4,83,82,14,000 14,04,06,751          
GON 0 0          
Total 4,83,82,14,000 14,04,06,751          
Source: Departmental records 
 

318
AppendicesAppendices 
 
318 
 
2021-22 
(Amount in ₹) 
Receipt of funds by State Government from GoI 
(MoRD) 
Release of funds by 
State Government to 
the implementing 
Department 
Details of release of State Share Date of 
Withdr
awal 
from 
Civil 
Deposit 
(CD) 
Delay in 
release of 
GoI Share 
(in days) 
Delay in 
release 
of State 
Share 
(in days) 
Delay in 
Submission 
of UCs 
Sanction 
no. and 
date  
Particulars Amount Sanction 
no. and 
date  
Amount Drawal 
Authority No. / 
Limit No. 
Amount  
F. No. J-
11060/09/2
021-
MGNRG
A (RE-III) 
Sl. No.31 
Dated 
21.09.2021 
1st Instalment of 1st 
Tranche of Central 
Assistance for financial 
year 2021-22 towards 
Material and Admin 
Contingency ( 
247,86,18,000 = 
Pending Liabilities for 
FY 2020-21, Material 
= 7,70,76,000 and 
Admin Contingency = 
8,18,52,500) 
2,63,75,46,500 NO.RD/
MGNRE
GA-
SEGF/17
/2018 
Dated 
Kohima, 
the 
05.11.20
21 
2637546500 2 of 2021-22 
Dated Kohima, 
the 04.06.2021 
(State matching 
share against 
central assistance 
pertaining to 
2020-21) 
29,99,86,000  43 Nil  
     5 of 2021-22 
Dated Kohima, 
the 12.08.2021 
(State matching 
share against 
central assistance 
pertaining to 
2020-21) 
13,57,42,000   Nil  
Total 2,63,75,46,500    43,57,28,000     
 Fund Interest          
GOI 2,63,75,46,500 Not applicable         
GON 43,57,28,000 Not applicable         
Total 3,07,32,74,500 0         
Source: Departmental records 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
319
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
319 
 
2022-23 
(Amount in ₹) 
Receipt of funds by State Government from GoI 
(MoRD) 
Release of funds by State 
Government to the 
implementing Department 
Details of release of State Share 
Date of 
Withdr
awal 
from 
Civil 
Deposit 
(CD) 
Delay 
in 
release 
of GoI 
Share 
(in 
days) 
Delay in 
release 
of State 
Share 
(in days) 
Delay in 
Submissi
on of 
UCs 
Sanction 
no. and 
date 
Particulars Amount Sanction no. 
and date Amount Drawal Authority No. / 
Limit No. Amount 
File No.J-
11060/10/2
022-RE-
III Sl. No. 
31 Date : 
05.09.2022 
1st Instalment of 
1st Tranche of 
Central Assistance 
for financial year 
2022-23 (Material 
=205,00,82,000, 
Admin 
Contingency = 
8,07,01,000)  
2,13,07,83,000 NO.RD/MG
NREGA-
SEGF/17/20
18(pt.1) 
Dated 
Kohima, the 
12.10.2022 
2130783000 1 of 2022-23 dated 
Kohima the 05.04.2022 
(State matching share for 
clearing liabilities-material 
component for FY 2020-
21 & 2021-22) 
45,99,49,000   22 Nil   
File No.J-
11060/10/2
022-RE-
III Sl. No. 
31 Date : 
25.03.2023 
2nd Instalment of 
1st Tranche of 
Central Assistance 
for Financial year 
2022-23 (Material 
= 43,23,78,000, 
Admin = 
8,07,02,000) 
51,30,80,000 04.05.2023 513080000 27 of 2022-23 Dated 
Kohima, the 28.03.2023 
(State matching share 
against 1st instalment of 1st 
Trench for central 
assistance during 2022-23) 
23,67,54,000   25 Nil   
Total 2,64,38,63,000       69,67,03,000         
  Fund Interest          
GOI 2,64,38,63,000 Not applicable         
GON 69,67,03,000 Not applicable         
Total 3,34,05,66,000 0         
Source: Departmental records 
 
 
 
 

320
Appendices
Appendices 
 
320 
 
2023-24 
(Amount in ₹) 
Receipt of funds by State Government from GoI (MoRD) 
Release of funds by 
State Government to 
the implementing 
Department 
Details of release of State Share 
Date of 
Withdraw
al from 
Civil 
Deposit 
(CD) 
Delay 
in 
release 
of GoI 
Share 
(in 
days) 
Delay 
in 
release 
of 
State 
Share 
(in 
days) 
Delay 
in 
Sub
missi
on of 
UCs 
Sanction no. and 
date Particulars Amount 
Sanction 
no. and 
date 
Amount Drawal Authority 
No. / Limit No. Amount 
File No.J-
11060/12/2023-
RE-III Sl. No.17  
Dated 
06.07.2023 
1st Instalment of 1st Tranche of 
Central Assistance for Financial 
year 2023-24 (Material & 
Administrative Contingency) 
(Material = 174,92,25,000 and 
Admin Contingency=7,99,85,000 
1,82,92,10,000 14.08.2023   7 of 2023-24 Dated 
10.08.2023  
(State matching share 
against 1st instalment 
of 1st Trench of central 
assistance 2023-24) 
58,30,75,000   24 35    
     4 of 2023-24 Dated 
01.05.2023 
(2nd instalment of 1st 
Trench State share for 
material component 
for 2022-23) 
14,41,26,000     
File No.J-
11060/12/2023-
RE-III Sl. No.52 
Dated 
25.01.2024 
2nd Instalment of 1st Tranche of 
Central Assistance for financial 
year 2023-24 (Material 
Component) 
24,26,74,000   27 of 2023-24 Dated 
16.02.2024 
8,08,91,333   80 21    
File No. J-
11060/12/2023-
RE-III Sl. No. 75 
Dated 
11.03.2024 
2nd instalment of 1st Tranche of 
Central Assistance for financial 
year 2023-24 (Administrative 
Contingency) 
7,83,91,000 30.03.2024     4   
Total 2,15,02,75,000         
 Fund Interest  
*Position as on 30 September 2024 
GOI 2,15,02,75,000 Not applicable 
GON 0 Not applicable 
Total 2,15,02,75,000 0 
Source: Departmental records 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
321
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
321 
Appendix 3.2.3 (i) 
Average person days of employment provided per HHs 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.9.1) 
 
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
State  NA 46 47 47 44 
Dimapur 29 41 44 40 33 
Mokokchung 40 47 49 51 47 
Phek 41 39 41 46 42 
Zunheboto 31 35 41 43 35 
 Source: Departmental reply 
 
Appendix 3.2.3 (ii) 
Total No. of HHs provided 100 Days of employment  
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.9.1) 
 
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
State  NA 48 17 72 289 
Dimapur 0 0 0 0 0 
Mokokchung 0 0 0 20 0 
Phek 0 0 0 1 0 
Zunheboto 0 0 0 0 10 
Source: Departmental reply 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

322
Appendices Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
322 
Appendix-3.2.4 
Statement showing payment of wages under MGNREGA to Government employees in nine out of 21 selected VDBs 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.9.4) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Data as per MGNREGA Aadhaar 
number 
Data as per PIMS  
Wages 
paid (₹) Block VDB Registration No. Name of 
applicant Emp. code Name Date of 
joining Department 
1 Chumuk
edima 
Chumu A NL-08-003-048-048/701287 Abel xxxxxxxx3140 POL16347 Abel Vera 01-02-2006 Civil Police 21,228 
2 Diphupar NL-08-003-006-006/900751 Sunjemyenla xxxxxxxx5340 PRI01422 Ayenla Alem 01-09-2015 Jails (Prison) 0 
3 Diphupar NL-08-003-006-006/900751 Suyemeren xxxxxxxx6826 PWD06403 Soyimeren Changkeri 09-01-2013 PWD (Roads 
&Bridges) 
0 
4 Diphupar NL-08-003-006-006/901021 Vilalhounuo xxxxxxxx7363 EXC00510 Vilalhounuo Belho 09-05-2016 State Excise 0 
5 Diphupar NL-08-003-006-006/901032 S.Betovi Swu xxxxxxxx2652 MED02749 Betovi Sema 24-08-1990 Health  & 
Family 
Welfare 
(H&FW) 
18,715 
6 Diphupar NL-08-003-006-006/901785 Akala B Longchar xxxxxxxx9766 PWD20519 B. Akala Longchar 02-06-2017 PWD 
(Mechanical) 
9,840 
7 Diphupar NL-08-003-006-006/902363 Aseno xxxxxxxx1317 MED02979 Aseno Lotha 29-06-2004 H & FW 0 
8 Akuluto Maromi NL-03-001-022-022/79 Kanito xxxxxxxx4359 HOR00217 C Kanito Sumi 27-11-2003 Horticulture 9,600 
9 Sutemi NL-03-001-031-031/124 Bokaho Chophy xxxxxxxx4964 POW01761 Bokaho Chophy 03-06-2009 Power 18,188 
10 Longche
m 
Lakhuni NL-05-003-001-001/213 Tangmetemba xxxxxxxx4316 NFS00357 Tangmetemba 01-12-2012 Fire & 
Emergency 
Services 
50,713 
11 Lakhuni NL-05-003-001-001/274 Benjongwati xxxxxxxx1788 PWD02403 Benjong Wati Ao 03-11-2011 PWD (R&B) 44,105 
12 Lakhuni NL-05-003-001-001/328 Imtitola xxxxxxxx7710 PWD13508 Atola Jamir 01-05-2013 PWD (M) 3,072 
13 Saringyim NL-05-003-008-008/8 Aoyanger xxxxxxxx9083 T4-
UDV00023 
Aoyanger 26-08-2021 Municipal 
Affairs 
24,632 
14 Mangko
lemba 
Changki NL-05-006-001-001/1045 Chamikumba xxxxxxxx9109 MED12350 Chamikumba 19-05-2016 H & FW 35,605 
15 Changki NL-05-006-001-001/155 Pangjungtemsu xxxxxxxx9251 PHE02104 Pangjung 10-01-2013 Public Health 
Engineering 
Department 
58,878 
16 Changki NL-05-006-001-001/224 Anungla xxxxxxxx1519 POW02597 Anungla 01-03-2015 Power 58,538 
17 Changki NL-05-006-001-001/765 Bendangkumba xxxxxxxx6218 T5-
VET00011 
Bendangkumba 08-12-2017 Animal 
Husbandry & 
Veterinary 
Sciences 
13,790 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
323
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
323 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Data as per MGNREGA Aadhaar 
number 
Data as per PIMS  
Wages 
paid (₹) Block VDB Registration No. Name of 
applicant Emp. code Name Date of 
joining Department 
18 Changki NL-05-006-001-001/863 Asemwati xxxxxxxx5408 POW01627 Asemwati 28-07-2004 Power 13,329 
19 Changki NL-05-006-001-001/915 Arenlong xxxxxxxx1807 MED12743 Arenlong 04-06-2019 H & FW 0 
20 Khar NL-05-006-002-002/531 Tiajungla xxxxxxxx2203 POW01034 A. Tiajungla 21-04-1994 Power 39,165 
21 Khar NL-05-006-002-002/542 C Wati Ao xxxxxxxx4458 PWD00299 C.Wati 03-12-2012 PWD 
(National 
Highways) 
48,237 
22 Khar NL-05-006-002-002/642 Yunenkaba xxxxxxxx7632 POL11271 Akaba Ao 01-04-2001 Civil Police 37,653 
23 Khar NL-05-006-002-002/714 Artong xxxxxxxx9076 TAX00214 Artong 04-02-2008 Taxes 46,089 
24 Mongchen NL-05-006-003-003/40 Limatoshi xxxxxxxx1328 ADM01935 Limatoshi 01-10-2011 District 
Administration. 
52,184 
Total wages paid 6,03,561 
Source: Departmental records 
 

324
AppendicesAppendices 
 
324 
 
Appendix – 3.2.5 
Statement showing non-execution in 10 out of 332 works in the four selected districts 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.10 and 3.2.10.1) 
 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
District Block VDB Year Name of work Work 
code 
Work Cost Finding of JPV Unexecuted 
Amount 
1 Phek Sekruzu Thuvopisu 2021-22 Drainage FP/19448 6,02,292 Work not found executed. 6,02,292 
2 Phek Sekruzu Chozu Basa 2021-22 Construction of VDB 
hall 
AV/14748 3,14,184 Work not found executed. 3,14,184 
3 Phek Sekruzu Chozuba 2023-24 Horticulture 
(Soyabean) 
DP/23841 72,44,160 Soyabean sapling not planted at 
the site. 
72,44,160 
4 Mokokchung Longchem Lakhuni 2023-24 Improvement of 
internal road 
RC/33092 11,42,400 Work not found executed. 11,42,400 
5 Dimapur Aghunaqa Vikheto 2023-24 Betel nut plantation DP/24006 11,22,252 Betelnut saplings not planted at 
the site. 
11,22,252 
6 Phek Phek Lozaphuhu 2021-22 Construction of Farm 
Pond at Uzalu (Cepi)  
FR/2274 27,70,180 Work not found executed. 27,70,180 
7 Phek Phek Lozaphuhu 2021-22 Tree Plantation at 
Shushu  
DP/17112 26,80,800 Work not found executed. 26,80,800 
8 Phek Phek Lozaphuhu 2022-23 Construction of farm 
pond at Kocheru  
FR/2525 56,02,728 Work not found executed. 56,02,728 
9 Phek Phek Old Phek 2022-23 Land development at 
Village 
LD/13997 43,31,056 Work not found executed. 43,31,056 
10 Phek Phek Old Phek 2023-24 Nullah Treatment for 
different Khel at Phek 
Village  
FP/20420 28,60,032 Work not found executed. 28,60,032 
Total 2,86,70,084   2,86,70,084 
Source: JPV reports 
 
 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
325
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
325 
 
Appendix – 3.2.6 
Statement showing short execution in 51 out of 332 works in the four selected districts 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.10 and 3.2.10.1) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. District Block VDB Year Name of work Work 
code Work Cost Finding of JPV 
Short 
executed 
amount 
1 Dimapur Chumukedima Chumukedima-A 2020-21 Construction of 
drainage  
FP/18944 15,99,000 Short execution of earthwork and thick 
soiling with approved quantity of 
stone.                  
6,78,548 
2 Dimapur Chumukedima Chumukedima-A 2020-21 Repair & Renovation 
of Approach Road  
RC/25832 52,14,000 Short execution in WBM Grading-II & 
III.                                  
18,48,721 
3 Dimapur Chumukedima Chumukedima-A 2020-21 Construction of 
retaining wall  
RP/19264 53,25,000 Short execution of earthwork and thick 
soiling with approved quantity of 
stone.                   
35,04,694 
4 Dimapur Chumukedima Chumukedima-A 2021-22 Construction of 
Drainage at 
Chumukedima A  
FP/19541 81,26,000 Short execution of earthwork and thick 
soiling with approved quantity of 
stone.                   
74,70,777 
5 Dimapur Chumukedima Chumukedima-A 2022-23 Chumukedima-A 
Sarovar      
WC/16364 54,94,000 Short execution of boulder apron in 
wire crates.  
52,74,308 
6 Dimapur Chumukedima Chumukedima-A 2022-23 Road widening and 
soiling 
RC/29649 56,36,000 Short execution in WBM Grading-III.                               28,48,283 
7 Dimapur Chumukedima Chumukedima- A 2022-23 Improvement of Agri 
link road 
RC/29614 55,91,185 Size boulder procured for WBM works 
were not executed. 
9,60,000 
8 Dimapur Chumukedima Diphupar 2020-21 Earth cutting and 
construction of 
drainage  
FP/18956 75,54,000 Short execution of earthwork in 
excavation.     
50,60,180 
9 Dimapur Chumukedima Diphupar 2020-21 Construction of Soil 
protection at 
Diphupar  
FP/18957 45,35,000 Short execution in earthwork, soiling, 
PCC, Coursed rubble masonry and 
backfilling behind the wall with 
granular materials.                                       
29,39,388 
10 Dimapur Chumukedima Diphupar 2022-23 Construction of 
Drainage at Diphupar 
Village  
FP/19952 79,64,000 Short execution in earthwork, dry 
Brick on edge flooring, PCC and brick 
work.  
45,18,185 
11 Dimapur Chumukedima Diphupar 2022-23 Water harvesting 
pond at Diphupar 
village  
WC/15578 41,50,000 Only two water harvesting ponds were 
constructed against three to be 
constructed.                                             
13,83,814 

326
AppendicesAppendices 
 
326 
 
Sl. 
No. District Block VDB Year Name of work Work 
code Work Cost Finding of JPV 
Short 
executed 
amount 
12 Dimapur Chumukedima Diphupar 2022-23 Soil protection wall 
at Diphupar  
FP/20410 40,26,000 Short execution in Earthwork, Dry 
Brick on edge flooring, PCC, Coursed 
rubble masonry with hard rock in 
cement mortar and backfilling behind 
the wall with granular materials.  
16,80,203 
13 Dimapur Chumukedima Diphupar 2021-22 Construction of 
village link Road 
RC/28041 1,30,04,321 L-2000 metre and B-3.75 metre 
executed out of 2640 metre and B-3.75. 
22,38,240 
14 Dimapur Chumukedima Diphupar 2022-23 Construction of Rain 
water harvesting tank 
WC/15577 38,32,198 Only two out of five Rain Water 
harvesting tanks executed. 
22,99,319 
15 Dimapur Chumukedima Tenyiphe II 2021-22 Construction of Ring 
well 
WC/15342 8,72,868 One out of five ring-wells constructed.  6,98,294 
16 Dimapur Chumukedima Tenyiphe II 2022-23 Construction of Ring 
well 
WC/15703 9,91,396 One out of three ring-wells 
constructed.  
6,60,931 
17 Dimapur Aghunaqa Kikheyi 2020-21 Const. of piggery 
shelter 
AV/11062 1,68,210 Two out of five piggery units not 
constructed. 
67,284 
18 Dimapur Aghunaqa Kikheyi 2021-22 Const. of piggery 
shelter 
IF/15608 16,41,016 42 out of 48 piggery units not 
constructed. 
14,35,889 
19 Dimapur Aghunaqa Kikheyi 2021-22 Renovation of 
approach road 
RC/28261 2,81,085 No WBM and bituminous works. 2,00,451 
20 Dimapur Aghunaqa Kikheyi 2021-22 Const. of farm pond WC/15032 2,01,819 No PCC in foundation and plinth. 1,28,624 
21 Dimapur Aghunaqa Kikheyi 2022-23 Renovation of Agri 
link road 
RC/30437 4,04,246 No WBM and bituminous works. 2,88,133 
22 Dimapur Aghunaqa Pihekhu 2019-20 Const. of Hume Pipe 
Culvert 
FP/18337 6,70,761 Two out of three culverts not 
constructed. 
4,47,174 
23 Dimapur Aghunaqa Pihekhu 2021-22 Const. of approach 
road 
RC/28187 7,10,051 No WBM and bituminous works. 5,11,691 
24 Dimapur Aghunaqa Pihekhu 2021-22 Construction of 
Irrigation Channel 
IC/4941 13,34,691 Earth excavation without RCC works. 12,82,678 
25 Dimapur Aghunaqa Pihekhu 2021-22 Const. of culvert RC/28188 29,05,028 10 out of 13 culverts not constructed. 22,34,637 
26 Dimapur Aghunaqa Pihekhu 2022-23 Renovation of Agri 
link road 
RC/30460 6,95,240 No WBM and bituminous works. 5,01,718 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
327
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
327 
 
Sl. 
No. District Block VDB Year Name of work Work 
code Work Cost Finding of JPV 
Short 
executed 
amount 
27 Dimapur Aghunaqa Pihekhu 2022-23 Renovation of 
approach road 
RC/30458 21,07,426 No WBM and bituminous works. 15,17,183 
28 Dimapur Aghunaqa Yetoho 2019-20 Construction of HP 
Culvert 
FP/18348 4,08,536 Only one HP executed out of two HP. 2,04,268 
29 Dimapur Aghunaqa Yetoho 2021-22 Construction of 
culvert 
RC/28556 27,76,776 Only one culvert executed out of 
thirteen culverts. 
25,63,178 
30 Phek Sekruzu Thuvopisu 2020-21 Irrigation canal IC/4796 13,42,135 Cement concrete work not executed. 12,69,343 
31 Phek Sekruzu Thuvopisu 2020-21 Terrace LD/12530 17,86,840 ₹3.10 lakh incurred for purchase of 
sand, cement and stone not found at 
site. 
3,10,000 
32 Phek Sekruzu Thuvopisu 2020-21 Const. of Village 
circular road 
RC/25878 10,23,291 ₹ 2.75 lakh incurred for purchase of 
sand, cement and stone not found at 
site 
2,75,158 
33 Phek Sekruzu Thuvopisu 2022-23 Phudzukhu sarovar WC/16493 20,07,000 Masonry and cement works not 
executed. 
5,06,888 
34 Phek Sekruzu Chozu Basa 2022-23 Farm Pond WC/15581 13,13,788 Random rubble masonry with hard 
stone in foundation and plinth 
including levelling up with cement not 
executed. 
3,07,204 
35 Phek Sekruzu Chozuba 2022-23 Farm Pond WC/16062 50,89,245 Random rubble masonry with hard 
stone in foundation and plinth 
including levelling up with cement not 
found at site. 
10,44,496 
36 Phek Phek Lozaphuhu 2022-23 Construction of 
landslide protection 
wall at village 
(Below Vesuta 
Residence) 
LD/13992 37,86,150 Short execution in Earthwork, Rubble 
Masonry providing and backfilling 
behind the wall with granular 
materials.  
31,86,635 
37 Zunheboto Akuluto Litta Old 2020-21 Water tanks WC/12185 34,47,417 One out of three tanks not executed and 
double representation of material cost 
in estimates by ₹13.79 lakh. 
20,68,450 
38 Zunheboto Akuluto Litta Old 2021-22 Plantation DP/17394 39,33,941 18,350 out 19,350 saplings not planted 
(₹80 per sapling). 
14,68,000 

328
AppendicesAppendices 
 
328 
 
Sl. 
No. District Block VDB Year Name of work Work 
code Work Cost Finding of JPV 
Short 
executed 
amount 
39 Zunheboto Akuluto Litta Old 2022-23 Agri link road from 
Patizu to Yemukha 
RC/30663 19,60,962 WBM work not executed. 7,97,706 
40 Zunheboto Akuluto Mukhami 2020-21 Sector tanks WC/12186 12,31,367 One out of two tanks not executed and 
double representation of material cost 
in estimates by ₹4.93 lakh 
8,61,957 
41 Zunheboto Akuluto Mukhami 2021-22 Tree plantation DP/17400 17,86,094 5,095 out of 7,095 saplings not planted 
at site (₹80 per sapling). 
4,07,600 
42 Zunheboto Akuluto Mukhami 2022-23 Maintenance of Agri 
link road from vill to 
Avialazuye 
LD/13983 6,86,868 WBM work not executed. 5,20,143 
43 Zunheboto Akuluto Morami 2022-23 Maintenance Agri 
link road  
LD/13972 12,18,897 Water Bound Macadam not executed. 1,99,426 
44 Zunheboto Ghathashi Lazami 2020-21 Construction of 
Drainage  
LD/12010 1,27,60,248 Short execution of earthwork and 
providing and laying in position 
cement concrete. 
41,74,508 
45 Zunheboto  Ghathashi Kitami 2020-21 Construction of 
Drainage  
LD/12366 76,93,000 Short execution of earthwork and 
providing and laying in position 
cement concrete 
32,59,327 
46 Zunheboto Ghathashi Ghokimi 2021-22 Renovation of 
Traditional Water 
Bodies  
WH/642 46,29,321 Short execution of earthwork and thick 
soiling with approved quantity of 
stone. 
23,69,149 
47 Zunheboto Ghathashi Ghokimi 2021-22 Renovation of 
Traditional Water 
Bodies  
WH/643 27,77,369 Short execution of earthwork and thick 
soiling with approved quantity of 
stone. 
21,68,856 
48 Mokokchung Longchem Lakhuni 2020-21 Renovation of 
traditional water 
bodies (2 nos) 
WH/616 32,39,679 One out of two water bodies not 
executed. 
16,19,840 
49 Mokokchung Longchem Lakhuni 2022-23 Construction of 
retaining wall 
LD/14113 35,85,340 280m out of 350m length was short 
executed. 
28,68,273 
50 Mokokchung Longchem Saringyim 2019-20 Road side tree 
plantation 
DP/13681 8,73,600 3,456 out of 4,156 saplings not planted 
(₹193.38 per sapling for purchase and 
planting). 
6,68,321 
51 Mokokchung Longchem Saringyim 2021-22 Construction of 
Fishery pond 
FR/2482 22,51,139 Cement concrete with bricks work not 
executed. 
11,44,550 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
329
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
329 
 
Sl. 
No. District Block VDB Year Name of work Work 
code Work Cost Finding of JPV 
Short 
executed 
amount 
Total 16,66,43,544   8,69,42,623 
  Source: JPV reports 
Appendix – 3.2.7 
Statement showing execution of impermissible works in 14 out of 332 works in the four selected districts 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.10 and 3.2.10.2) 
 
 (Amount in ₹) 
Sl.  
No. 
District Block VDB Year Name of work Work code Work Cost Finding of JPV 
1 Phek Sekruzu Runguzu Nawe 2020-21 Poultry AV/14561 4,92,745 No durable assets created  
(Chicks distributed to individual HHs). 
2 Phek Sekruzu Runguzu Nawe 2020-21 Piggery IF/15450 6,91,191 No durable assets created 
(Piglets distributed to individual HHs). 
3 Phek Sekruzu Runguzu Nawe 2021-22 Jungle clearance DP/19022 12,16,880 Impermissible work. 
4 Phek Sekruzu Thuvopisu 2020-21 Poultry AV/14555 11,16,775 No durable assets created  
(Chicks distributed to individual HHs). 
5 Phek Sekruzu Thuvopisu 2022-23 Piggery AV/15398 21,14,560 No durable assets created  
(Piglets distributed to individual HHs). 
6 Phek Sekruzu Chozu Basa 2020-21 Piggery AV/14550 1,28,125 No durable assets created 
 (Piglets distributed to individual HHs). 
7 Phek Sekruzu Chozu Basa 2020-21 Piggery IF/15443 2,98,958 No durable assets created  
(Piglets distributed to individual HHs). 
8 Phek Phek Phek  2022-23 VDB office Multiple IDs 1,83,90,000 Construction beyond ceiling of ₹20 lakh. 
9 Zunheboto Akuluto Morami 2021-22 Pineapple plantation DP/17399 37,60,457 Impermissible work. 
10 Zunheboto Akuluto Sutemi 2020-21 Coffee Plantation  DP/15659 19,99,433 Impermissible work. 
11 Mokokchung Mangkolemba Changki 2019-21 Bridge construction Multiple IDs 3,75,31,874 Impermissible work. 
12 Mokokchung Mangkolemba Khar 2019-21 Multi-complex Multiple IDs 2,47,92,273 Construction beyond ceiling of ₹20 lakh. 
13 Mokokchung Mangkolemba Khar 2023-24 Coffee Plantation DP/25463 18,17,527 Impermissible work. 
14 Mokokchung Mangkolemba Khar 2023-24 Coffee Plantation DP/25311 12,45,172 Impermissible work. 
Total 9,55,95,970   
Source: JPV reports 

330
Appendices
Appendices 
 
330 
 
Appendix – 3.2.8 
Statement showing execution of unfruitful expenditure and diversion of funds in 9 out of 332 works in the four selected districts 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.10.3) 
 
(Amount in ₹) 
Unfruitful works 
Sl.  
No. 
District Block VDB Year Name of work Work code Work Cost Finding of JPV 
1 Dimapur Aghunaqa Kikheyi 2022-23 Construction of 
fishery pond WC/15751 1,53,792 Constructed pond has no water 
2 Zunheboto Akuluto Mukhami 2019-20 Water reservoir tank WC/10910 8,48,000 Water tank demolished for church 
construction 
3 Phek Phek Kizari 2020-21 Water Conservation 
and water harvesting  WC/11995 5,97,740 No visible water retention in the water 
harvesting area 
Total 15,99,532  
Source: JPV reports 
Diverted works 
Sl.  
No. 
District Block VDB Year Name of work Work code Work Cost Finding of JPV 
1 Dimapur Aghunaqa Pihekhu 2020-21 Construction of rain 
water harvesting tanks WC/11975 9,96,538 Diverted to construction of pond 
2 Phek Sekruzu Runguzu Nawe 2020-21 Sanitation (toilet) RS/10997 4,92,680 Diverted to construction of retaining wall 
3 Phek Sekruzu Runguzu Nawe 2022-23 Horticulture (Banana) DP/19533 5,57,960 Diverted to plantation of persimmon and 
turmeric 
4 Phek Sekruzu Runguzu Nawe 2023-24 Horticulture (ginger) DP/24069 18,27,840 Diverted to plantation of persimmon and 
kiwi 
5 Phek Sekruzu Thuvopisu 2023-24 Traditional well WC/16870 55,16,000 Diverted to  construct retaining walls 
6 Mokokchung Longchem Yajang A 2020-21 Construction of 
retaining wall LD/12575 7,21,736 Diverted to Monolith construction  
Total 1,01,12,754  
Source: JPV reports 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
331
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
331 
Appendix – 3.2.9 
Statement showing various purchases above ₹25 lakh during 2019-2023 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.10.4) 
 
Sl. No. Date Particulars Purchases  Amount (in ₹) 
1 01.04.19 M/s Infinity World Setting up of MIS room  55,46,000 
2 22.07.19 M/s New AV Printing Press Printing of Job Cards 26,50,000 
3 16.12.20 M/s Temptation Setting up of MIS room  57,35,810 
4 23.11.22 M/s Komorebi Supply Tent for worksite amenities  3,51,35,100 
5 17.12.22 M/s NV Press Printing of Job Cards 52,50,000 
6 17.12.22 M/s Mahabir Art Printers Printing of Job Cards 29,50,000 
7 19.12.22 M/s NV Press Printing of Job Cards 25,00,000 
8 22.12.22 M/s NV Press Printing of Job Cards 25,00,000 
Total 6,22,66,910 
Source: Department records. 
Appendix – 3.2.10 
(a) Statement showing shortfall in conducting social audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.11.2) 
 
Year Total GPs 
in the State 
No. of GPs planned 
for Social Audit 
Social Audit 
Conducted 
Shortfall in 
Social Audit 
Percentage 
(in per cent) 
2019-20 1,270 879 484 395 45 
2020-21 1,270 637 52 585 92 
2021-22 1,272 978 127 851 87 
2022-23 1,273 768 390 378 49 
2023-24 1,275 1,274 807 467 37 
Total 4,536 1,860 2,676 - 
Source: Departmental data 
 
(b) Statement showing Social audit observations pendency status in State 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.11.2) 
 
Year Social audit 
observations raised 
Social audit 
Observations settled 
Outstanding Social 
audit observations 
Percentage 
(in per cent) 
2019–20 6,486 5,200 1,286 20 
2020–21 495 314 181 37 
2021–22 1,165 993 172 15 
2022–23 3,343 2,577 766 23 
2023–24 4,801 1,577 3,224 67 
Total 16,290 10,661 5,629 - 
Source: Departmental data 

332
Appendices Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
332 
Appendix-3.6.1 
Details of unexecuted works 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.6) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Particulars  Items of works  Unit Quantity Rate  Amount paid for 
unexecuted works  
i ii iii iv v vi (iv x v) 
1. 
Ground 
floor 
Marble stone flooring  Sqm 88.80 4,537.11 4,02,895.37 
2. Marble stone skirting Sqm 11.14 4,537.11 50,543.41 
3. Providing and fixing hand rail by welding etc.  Kg 128.93 320.96 41,381.37 
4. Providing and applying plaster of paris putty  Sqm 732.54 691.05 5,06,221.77 
5. Finishing walls with Delux multi surface 
paint  Sqm 732.54 179.02 1,31,139.31 
6. Finishing walls with textured exterior paints Sqm 206.74 268.68 55,546.90 
7. 
1st floor 
Marble stone flooring  Sqm 97.07 4,537.11 4,40,417.27 
8. Marble chips skirting Sqm 8.41 4,537.11 38,157.10 
9. Providing and fixing hand rail by welding etc.  Kg 128.93 320.96 41,381.37 
10. Providing and applying plaster of paris putty  Sqm 977.30 691.05 6,75,363.17 
11. Finishing walls with Delux multi surface 
paint  Sqm 977.30 179.02 1,74,956.25 
12. Finishing walls with textured exterior paints Sqm 261.97 268.68 70,386.10 
13. 
2 Floor 
Marble stone flooring  Sqm 102.92 4,537.11 4,66,959.36 
14. Marble chips Skirting Sqm 8.84 4,537.11 40,108.05 
15. Providing and fixing hand rail by welding etc.  Kg 128.93 320.96 41,381.37 
16. Providing and applying plaster of paris putty  Sqm 882.83 691.05 6,10,079.67 
17. Finishing walls with Delux multi surface 
paint  Sqm 882.83 179.02 1,58,044.23 
18. Finishing walls with textured exterior paints Sqm 277.69 268.68 74,609.75 
19. 
3 floor 
Marble stone flooring  Sqm 102.92 4,537.11 4,66,959.36 
20. Marble chips Skirting Sqm 8.84 4,537.11 40,108.05 
21. Providing and fixing hand rail by welding etc.  Kg 128.93 320.96 41,381.37 
22. Providing and applying plaster of paris putty  Sqm 882.82 691.05 6,10,072.76 
23. Finishing walls with Delux multi surface 
paint  Sqm 882.82 179.02 1,58,042.44 
24. Finishing walls with textured exterior paints Sqm 277.69 268.68 74,609.75 
25. 
Head 
Room 
Providing and applying plaster of paris putty  Sqm 57.11 691.05 39,465.87 
26. Finishing walls with Delux multi surface 
paint  Sqm 57.11 179.63 10,258.67 
27. Finishing walls with textured exterior paints  Sqm 208.22 268.68 55,944.55 
28. Construction of Generator shed 3,14,940.00 
29. Construction of Security Fencing 6,13,300.00 
30. Construction of parking lot 3,83,930.00 
31. Rain Water Harvesting 2,21,893.00 
32. Approach Road 6,35,532.00 
Total 76,86,009.64 
   Source: Departmental records and JPV report 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
333
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
333 
 
Appendix-3.6.2 
Details of unexecuted works 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.6) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Items of works Unit Quantity Rate  
Amount paid 
for  unexecuted 
works  
i ii iii iv v vi (iv x v) 
1. 
Providing and applying plaster of paris putty 
Ground floor Sqm 732.54 691.05 5,06,221.77 
2. 1st floor Sqm 977.30 691.05 6,75,363.17 
3. 2 Floor Sqm 882.83 691.05 6,10,079.67 
4. 3 floor Sqm 882.82 691.05 6,10,072.76 
5. Head Room Sqm 57.11 691.05 39,465.87 
6. Construction of Generator shed  
(RCC works in columns, Brick works, Cement plaster & painting works) 2,67,901.00 
7. Construction of Security Fencing  (Cost of chain link) 3,43,952.00 
8. Construction of parking lot 3,83,930.00 
9. Rain Water Harvesting 2,21,893.00 
10. Approach Road 6,35,532.00 
Total 42,94,411.24 
Source: Departmental records and JPV report 
Appendix-4.3.1 
Statement showing details of similar cases highlighted in the Audit Reports for year ended 31 March 2017 
to 31 March 2022 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Year of Audit Report Paragraph 
Reference Particulars Money 
Value 
1. Audit Report for the Year ended 31 March 2022 4.3 Fraudulent/ excess drawal of money 2.26 
2. Audit Report for the Year ended 31 March 2020 4.2 Fraudulent/ excess drawal of money 2.78 
3. Audit Report for the Year ended 31 March 2019 
2.4 Fraudulent/ excess drawal of money 5.16 
2.5 Fraudulent/ excess drawal of money and 
submission of fake challans by DDOs 0.45 
4. Audit Report for the Year ended 31 March 2018 5.4 Fraudulent/ double/ excess drawal by 
28 DDOs 7.36 
5. Audit Report for the Year ended 31 March 2017 5.4 Fraudulent/excess drawal by 12 DDOs 1.72 
Source: C&AG Audit Reports of respective years 
Appendix-4.3.2 
Statement showing Department-wise list of double/ excess/ fraudulent drawals 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3) 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. Department No. of 
DDO 
Amount 
of 
objection 
Amount 
recovered 
Amount to 
be 
recovered 
1. Rural Development 1 4.58 4.58 0.00 
2. Finance 1 2.30 2.30 0.00 
3. Soil & Water Conservation   1 1.70 1.70 0.00 
4. Public Health Engineering 1 17.65 17.65 0.00 
5. Home (Police) 1 4.39 4.39 0.00 
6. Urban Development 2 15.12 0.82 14.30 
7. Employment, Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship 2 8.32 3.60 4.72 
8. School Education 3 28.62 28.62 0.00 
9. Fisheries & Aquatic Resources 1 5.05 0.00 5.05 
Total 13 87.73 63.66 24.07 
Source: Departmental records
Money 
Value

334
Appendices
Appendices 
 
334 
 
Appendix-4.3.3 
Statement showing excess drawal by inflating the net totals of pay bills 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Department DDO Admissible 
Amount 
Amount 
Drawn 
Excess 
Amount 
Drawn 
Recovered 
Amount 
(with month & 
year of recovery) 
Outstanding 
Amount Remarks 
1. Soil & Water 
Conservation 
District Soil & 
Water 
Conservation 
Officer, 
Zunheboto 
9,65,209 11,35,209 1,70,000 1,70,000 
(October 2022) 0 
The District Soil & Water Conservation Officer, 
Zunheboto drew ₹1,70,000 by inflating the net total of 
the pay and allowances for the month of December 2018 
to March 2019 in respect of 12 employees vide four Bill 
viz. TV No. 3 of 10/01/2019, TV No. 1 of 4/02/2019, 
TV No.9 of 7/03/2019 and TV No. 8 of 05/04/2019. 
Total 9,65,209 11,35,209 1,70,000 1,70,000 0 -- 
Source: Departmental records 
 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
335
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
335 
 
Appendix-4.3.4 
Statement showing double drawal of pay & allowances including arrears  
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Department DDO Double Amount 
Drawn 
Recovered Amount 
(with Month and 
year of recovery) 
Outstanding 
Amount Remarks 
1. Home (Police) 
Commandant, 12 
NAP (IR) Battalion, 
Chingtok 
4,38,503 
4,38,503 
(January 2023 and 
February 2023) 
0 
The Commandant, 12 NAP (IR) Battalion, Chingtok fictitiously 
drew ₹4,38,503 as pay and allowances for the month of January 
2019 and February 2019 in respect of 17 employees vide Bill 
No.159 dated 25/02/2019 (TV No.81 of 01/03/2019) although 
they had already drawn their pay as per their entitlement vide Bill 
No.148 dated 27/01/2019 (TV No.95 of 01/02/2019). 
2. School 
Education 
Sub-Divisional 
Education Officer, 
Mon 
2,18,257 
2,18,257  
(June 2024 and 
October 2024) 
0 
The Sub-Divisional Education Officer, Mon fictitiously drew 
₹2,18,257 as pay and allowance for the month of June 2018 vide 
Bill No. 84 dated 15/06/2018 (TV No.59 of 6/07/2018) in respect 
of seven under graduate Hindi teachers although the employees 
had already drawn their pay and allowances as per their 
entitlement vide Bill No. 73 dated 15/06/2018 (TV No.48 of 
6/07/2018). 
Total 6,56,760 6,56,760 0 - 
Source: Departmental records 
  

336
AppendicesAppendices 
 
336 
 
Appendix-4.3.5 
Statement showing fraudulent inadmissible drawal of pay & allowances including arrears  
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Department DDO 
Amount 
Drawn 
fraudulently 
Recovered 
Amount (with 
Month and year 
of recovery) 
Outstanding 
Amount Remarks 
1. Rural Development 
Block 
Development 
Officer, 
Changpang, 
Wokha 
4,57,531 4,57,531 
(February 2023) 0 
The Block Development Officer, Changpang, Wokha fictitiously 
drew ₹4,57,531 as less  drawn pay arrear for the period ranging 
from  January 2014 to December 2016  in respect of eight 
employees vide Bill No. 21 (TV No.20 of 30/07/2019), 22 (TV 
No.21 of 30/07/2019 ) , 23 (TV No.22 of 30/07/2019), 24 (TV 
No.23 of 30/07/2019), 25 (TV No.24 of 30/07/2019), 26 (TV No.25 
of 30/07/2019), 27 (TV No.26 of 30/07/2019), 28 (TV No.27 of 
30/07/2019), 29 (TV No.29 of 30/07/2019), 30 (TV No.29 of 
30/072019), 31 (TV No.30 of 30/07/2019), 32 (TV No.31 of 
30/07/2019), 33 (TV No.32 of 30/07/2019), 34 (TV No.33 of 
30/07/2019), 35 (TV No.34 of 30/07/2019), 36 (TV No.35 of 
30/07/2019), 37 (TV No.36 of 30/07/2019), 38 (TV No.37 of 
30/07/2019) and 39 (TV No.38 of 30/07/2019) although they had 
already drawn their pay  as per their entitlement. 
2. Finance 
Sub-Treasury 
Officer, 
Aghunato 
2,30,059 2,30,059 
(March 2023) 0 
The Sub-Treasury Officer, Aghunato, fictitiously drew ₹2,30,059 as 
DA arrear for the period ranging from November 2013 to 
November 2019 in respect of eight employees vide Bill No. 43 (TV 
No.9 of 05/03/2020) and 42 (TV No.10 of 05/03/2020). 
3. Public Health 
Engineering 
Executive 
Engineer, PHED 
Division, 
Zunheboto 
17,65,468 17,65,468 
(June 2022) 0 
The Executive Engineer, PHED Division, Zunheboto fictitiously 
drew ₹17,65,468 as pay and allowances for the month of May 2017 
to October 2017 in respect of eight contract staff vide two Bill viz. 
TV No.4 of 14/02/2019 and TV No.4 of 19/03/2019. 
4. Urban Development 
District Urban 
Development 
Officer, Wokha 
5,24,288 15,200 
(August 2021) 5,09,088 
The District Urban Development Officer, fictitiously drew 
₹5,24,288 as less drawn DA arrears for the month of July 2010 to 
June 2016 in respect of six employees vide three Bill viz. TV No.5 
of 27/02/2017, TV No.6 of 27/02/2017 and TV No.7 of 27/02/2017. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
337
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
337 
 
Sl. 
No. Department DDO 
Amount 
Drawn 
fraudulently 
Recovered 
Amount (with 
Month and year 
of recovery) 
Outstanding 
Amount Remarks 
5. Urban Development 
Director, Urban 
Development, 
Kohima 
9,88,060 
66,600 
(July 2019 and 
August 2021) 
9,21,460 
The Director, Urban Development, Nagaland, Kohima fictitiously 
drew ₹9,88,060 as DA arrears for the month of January 2012 to 
October 2012 in respect of 66 employees vide Bill No.154 dated 
20/03/2018 (TV No.47 of 21/03/2018), 155 dated 20/03/2018 (TV 
No.48 of 21/03/2018), 156 dated 20/03/2018 (TV No.49 of 
21/03/2018), 157 dated 20/03/2018 (TV No.50 of 21/03/2018) and 
158 dated 20/03/2018 (TV No.51 of 21/03/2018). 
6. 
Employment, Skill 
Development & 
Entrepreneurship 
District 
Employment 
Officer, Wokha 
2,89,774 
2,65,000 
(September 2020, 
December 2020, 
January 2022, 
February 2022, 
March 2022, June 
2022, April 2023, 
May 2024, 
October 2024) 
24,774 
The District Employment Officer, Wokha fictitiously drew 
₹2,89,774 as less drawn arrear of pay and allowances for the period 
ranging from April 2010 to November 2016 in respect of nine 
employees vide Bill No.59 (TV No.16 of 20/03/2017) and Bill 
No.60 (TV No.17 of 20/3/2017). 
7. 
Employment, Skill 
Development & 
Entrepreneurship 
District 
Employment 
Officer, 
Zunheboto 
5,41,724 
95,000 
(May 2022 to 
September 2024) 
 
4,46,724 
The District Employment Officer, Zunheboto fictitiously drew 
₹5,41,724 as pay and allowances for the period ranging from May 
2018 to February 2019 in respect of four contract and substitute 
employees vide Bill No.94 dated 20/02/2019 (TV No.14 of 
07/03/2019) and Bill No.95 dated 20/02/2019 (TV No.15 of 
07/03/2019). 
8. School Education 
Sub-Divisional 
Education 
Officer, Tobu 
17,85,290 
17,85,290 
(May 2023, 
October 2023,  
September 2023, 
March 2024 and 
July 2024) 
0 
The Sub-Divisional Education Officer, Tobu fictitiously drew 
₹17,85,290 as pay and allowances for the month of February 2019 
and March 2019 in respect of 14 employees vide Bill No. 223 dated 
22/01/2019 (TV No.114 dated 21/02/2019) and Bill No.248 dated 
19/02/2019 (TV No.139 dated 26/03/2019) although the employees 
name were not reflected in any of the pay Bills maintained by the 
establishment. 

338
AppendicesAppendices 
 
338 
 
Sl. 
No. Department DDO 
Amount 
Drawn 
fraudulently 
Recovered 
Amount (with 
Month and year 
of recovery) 
Outstanding 
Amount Remarks 
9. School Education 
Sub-Divisional 
Education 
Officer, Aboi 
6,00,952 6,00,952 
(May 2024) 0 
The Sub-Divisional Education Officer, Aboi fictitiously drew 
₹1,31,997 as ADA arrear for the month of January 2018 to 
September 2018 vide Bill No.184 (TV No.135 of 27/11/2018) in 
respect of 41 teachers although the officials had already drawn their 
pay as per their entitlement vide Bill No. 141 (TV No.135 of 
20.10.2018) and 142 (TV No.136 of 20/10/2018). 
Further, the SDEO Aboi fictitiously drew ₹4,68,955 as less drawn 
increment arrear for the month of July 2017 to November 2017 vide 
Bill No. 62 (TV No.195 of 31/12/2018) in respect of 27 CSS Hindi 
teacher although the officials had already drawn their pay as per 
their entitlement vide Bill No.77 (TV No. 226 of 31/3/2018) and 
Bill No.78 (TV No. 227 of 31/3/2018). 
10. School Education 
Sub-Divisional 
Education 
Officer, Mon 
2,57,970 2,57,970 
(June 2024) 0 
The Sub-Divisional Education Officer, Mon fictitiously drew 
₹2,57,970 as ADA arrear for the month of January 2018 to 
September 2018 in respect of 76 teachers vide Bill No.180 (TV 
No.49 of 02/11/2018). However, the teachers are fixed pay 
employees and drawing their entitled pay as per Bill No. 141 dated 
19/09/2018 (TV No.67 of 5/10/2018) and 140 dated 19/09/2018 
(TV No.66 of 5/10/2018). 
11. Fisheries & Aquatic 
Resources 
Sub-Divisional 
Fishery Officer, 
Kiphire 
5,04,705 0 5,04,705 
The Sub-Divisional Fishery Officer, Kiphire fictitiously drew 
₹1,03,541 as less drawn HRA arrear for the month of December 
2014 to February 2017 in respect of five employees vide B i l l  N o .  
40 dated nil (TV No.7 of 30/03/2017). However, the employees had 
already drawn their pay and allowances as per their entitlement vide 
Bill No. 32 (TV No.1 of 6/01/2017) and 33 (TV No.2 of 6/01/2017) 
The Sub-Divisional Fishery Officer, Kiphire also drew ₹1,00,900 as 
less drawn pay arrear for the month of December 2014 to March 
2017 in respect of six employees vide Bill No. 41 (TV No.5 of 
30/03/2017). However, the employees had already drawn their pay 
and allowances as per their entitlement vide Bill No. 32 (TV No.1 
of 6/01/2017) and 33 (TV No.2 0f 06/01/2017). 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
339
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
339 
 
Sl. 
No. Department DDO 
Amount 
Drawn 
fraudulently 
Recovered 
Amount (with 
Month and year 
of recovery) 
Outstanding 
Amount Remarks 
Further, The Sub -Divisional Fishery Officer, Kiphire fictitiously 
drew ₹3,00,264 as less drawn HRA arrear for the month of January 
2018 to February 2019 in respect of nine employees vide Bill No. 
63 (TV No.7 of 26/03/2019). However, the employees had already 
drawn their pay and allowances as per their entitlement vide Bill 
No. 45 (TV No.3 of 6/12/2018), 44 (TV No.2 of 6/12/2018) and 43 
(TV No.1 of 6/12/2018). 
Total 79,45,821 55,39,070 24,06,751 - 
Source: Departmental records 
 

340
AppendicesAppendices 
 
340 
 
Appendix-4.3.6 
Statement showing details of department-wise cases of irregularities highlighted in the Audit Reports for year ended 31 March 2017 to 31 March 2022  
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3) 
Sl. 
No. Department 
AR for year ended  
31 March 2017 
AR for year ended 
31 March 2018 
AR for year ended 
31 March 2019 
AR for year ended 
31 March 2020 
AR for year ended 
31 March 2022 Total 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) No. of 
DDOs 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of 
DDOs 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of 
DDOs 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of 
DDOs 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of 
DDOs 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
1. Agriculture  - - 5 18.22 2 3.24 1 2.51 1 45.42 69.39 
2. Art and Culture - - 1 1.22 1 7.32 - - 1 1.96 10.50 
3. Cooperation  - - 1 6.29 1 15.73 2 6.04 - - 28.06 
4. 
Department of 
Information and 
Public Relations 
- - - - 2 9.81 - - - - 9.81 
5. District 
Administration 1 1.89 - - - - - - - - 1.89 
6. Economics & 
Statistics - - - -     1 2.83 - - 2.83 
7. 
Employment, 
Skill 
Development & 
Entrepreneurshi
p 
- - 3 6.58 3 31.15 1 4.18 1 1.94 43.85 
8. Evaluation - - - - - - 1 22.46 - - 22.46 
9. Excise and 
Prohibition  - - - - 3 19.67 4 23.61 - - 43.28 
10. 
Finance 
Department 
(Taxation)  
- - - - 1 3.43 1 1.52 - - 4.95 
11. 
Finance 
Department 
(Treasuries & 
Accounts)  
- - 2 6.75 2 21.84 - - - - 28.59 
12. 
Fisheries and 
Aquatic 
Resources 
- - 1 5.56 - - 1 1.68 - - 7.24 
13. Health & 
Family Welfare - - 4 344 - - - - 2 11.88 355.88 
14. Home (Police)  1 39.28 2 125.37 3 155.93 1 3.19 1 1.33 325.10 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
341
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
341 
 
Sl. 
No. Department 
AR for year ended  
31 March 2017 
AR for year ended 
31 March 2018 
AR for year ended 
31 March 2019 
AR for year ended 
31 March 2020 
AR for year ended 
31 March 2022 Total 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) No. of 
DDOs 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of 
DDOs 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of 
DDOs 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of 
DDOs 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of 
DDOs 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
15. Home (Prisons)  1 6.53 - - 1 9.79 - - 1 13 29.32 
16. Horticulture  - - - - 1 1.62 -  - - - 1.62 
17. Industries and 
Commerce  - - - - 6 28.69 1 6.67 1 10.12 45.48 
18. Labour& 
Employment - - - - - - 1 7.31 - - 7.31 
19. Land Records & 
Survey - - - - - - 1 2.5 - - 2.50 
20. Law & Justice - - - - - - 1 13.87 - - 13.87 
21. Motor Vehicles  - - - - 1 2.27 - - - - 2.27 
22. Nagaland State 
Transport 1 0.58 - - - - - - - - 0.58 
23. Power  - - - - 1 1.91 - - - - 1.91 
24. 
Public Health 
Engineering 
(PHED)  
- - - - 1 11.99 - - 1 36.08 48.07 
25. 
Public Works 
Department 
(Mechanical)  
- - - - 1 8 1 17.15 1 16.36 41.51 
26. 
Public Works 
Department 
(Road & 
Bridges)  
- - - - 1 15.42 - - - - 15.42 
27. Rural 
Development 1 2.58 2 4.53 - - 1 2.83 - - 9.94 
28. School 
Education  5 106.45 17 206.37 7 96.03 6 134.95 4 60.29 604.09 
29. Social Welfare - - - - - - - - 1 0.86 0.86 
30. Soil & Water 
Conservation  - - 1 8.66 1 12.59 - -     21.25 
31. Treasuries and 
Accounts - - - - - - - - 2 6.23 6.23 
32. Water 
Resources  - - - - 1 23.81 - - - - 23.81 

342
AppendicesAppendices 
 
342 
 
Sl. 
No. Department 
AR for year ended  
31 March 2017 
AR for year ended 
31 March 2018 
AR for year ended 
31 March 2019 
AR for year ended 
31 March 2020 
AR for year ended 
31 March 2022 Total 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) No. of 
DDOs 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of 
DDOs 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of 
DDOs 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of 
DDOs 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
No. of 
DDOs 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
33. 
Youth 
Resources and 
Sports  
- - - - 1 15.69 - - - - 15.69 
34. 
Veterinary and 
Animal 
Husbandry  
2 14.19 1 2.96 1 20.1 1 24.78 1 20.1 82.13 
Total 12 171.5 40 736.51 42 516.03 26 278.08 18 225.57 1927.69 
Source: C&AG Audit Reports of respective years 
 
Appendix-4.4.1 
Comparative statement showing procurement of Commercial LPG Cylinder/Refills (2021-2023) at higher rates 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.4) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Bill No. 
and date 
Supply for the 
month of 
Name of the 
Battalion 
Rate per 
cylinder/ refill 
(including 18% 
GST) 
Number of 
cylinder/ 
refill 
 (in Nos.) 
Total bill amount 
passed for payment 
IOC rate for 
the month 
(including 
GST) 
Rate in excess 
of IOCL rate 
per cylinder/ 
refill 
Total amount paid to 
supplier in excess of 
IOCL rate 
i ii iii iv v vi vii viii (iv-vii) ix (v*viii) 
894 of 
20/08/2022 
April 2021 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,641.00 2,616.44 2,35,479.60 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,641.00 2,616.44 2,35,479.60 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,641.00 2,616.44 2,35,479.60 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 1,641.00 2,181.93 1,96,373.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 45 1,89,189.90 1,641.00 2,563.22 1,15,344.90 
May 2021 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,595.50 2,661.94 2,44,898.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 1,595.50 2,661.94 2,47,560.42 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,595.50 2,661.94 2,44,898.48 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 1,595.50 2,227.43 2,00,468.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 46 1,93,394.12 1,595.50 2,608.72 1,20,001.12 
June 2021 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,473.50 2,783.94 2,50,554.60 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,473.50 2,783.94 2,50,554.60 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,473.50 2,783.94 2,50,554.60 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 1,473.50 2,349.43 2,11,448.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 45 1,89,189.90 1,473.50 2,730.72 1,22,882.40 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
343
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
343 
 
Bill No. 
and date 
Supply for the 
month of 
Name of the 
Battalion 
Rate per 
cylinder/ refill 
(including 18% 
GST) 
Number of 
cylinder/ 
refill 
 (in Nos.) 
Total bill amount 
passed for payment 
IOC rate for 
the month 
(including 
GST) 
Rate in excess 
of IOCL rate 
per cylinder/ 
refill 
Total amount paid to 
supplier in excess of 
IOCL rate 
i ii iii iv v vi vii viii (iv-vii) ix (v*viii) 
1061 of 
12/10/2022 
July 2021 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,550.00 2,707.44 2,49,084.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 1,550.00 2,707.44 2,51,791.92 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,550.00 2,707.44 2,49,084.48 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 1,550.00 2,272.93 2,04,563.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 46 1,93,394.12 1,550.00 2,654.22 1,22,094.12 
August 2021 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,623.00 2,634.44 2,42,368.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 1,623.00 2,634.44 2,45,002.92 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,623.00 2,634.44 2,42,368.48 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 1,623.00 2,199.93 1,97,993.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 46 1,93,394.12 1,623.00 2,581.22 1,18,736.12 
September 
2021 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,693.00 2,564.44 2,30,799.60 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,693.00 2,564.44 2,30,799.60 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,693.00 2,564.44 2,30,799.60 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 1,693.00 2,129.93 1,91,693.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 45 1,89,189.90 1,693.00 2,511.22 1,13,004.90 
1132 of 
22/11/ 2022 
October 2021 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,736.50 2,520.94 2,31,926.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 1,736.50 2,520.94 2,34,447.42 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,736.50 2,520.94 2,31,926.48 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 1,736.50 2,086.43 1,87,778.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 46 1,93,394.12 1,736.50 2,467.72 1,13,515.12 
November 
2021 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 2,000.50 2,256.94 2,03,124.60 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 2,000.50 2,256.94 2,03,124.60 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 2,000.50 2,256.94 2,03,124.60 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 2,000.50 1,822.43 1,64,018.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 45 1,89,189.90 2,000.50 2,203.72 99,167.40 
December 
2021 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 2,101.00 2,156.44 1,98,392.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 2,101.00 2,156.44 2,00,548.92 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 2,101.00 2,156.44 1,98,392.48 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 2,101.00 1,721.93 1,54,973.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 46 1,93,394.12 2,101.00 2,103.22 96,748.12 

344
AppendicesAppendices 
 
344 
 
Bill No. 
and date 
Supply for the 
month of 
Name of the 
Battalion 
Rate per 
cylinder/ refill 
(including 18% 
GST) 
Number of 
cylinder/ 
refill 
 (in Nos.) 
Total bill amount 
passed for payment 
IOC rate for 
the month 
(including 
GST) 
Rate in excess 
of IOCL rate 
per cylinder/ 
refill 
Total amount paid to 
supplier in excess of 
IOCL rate 
i ii iii iv v vi vii viii (iv-vii) ix (v*viii) 
1696 of 
30/03/2023 
January 2022 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,998.50 2,258.94 2,07,822.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,998.50 2,258.94 2,07,822.48 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 1,998.50 1,824.43 1,64,198.70 
February 2022 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 84 3,57,624.96 1,907.00 2,350.44 1,97,436.96 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 84 3,57,624.96 1,907.00 2,350.44 1,97,436.96 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,907.00 2,350.44 2,11,539.60 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 1,907.00 1,915.93 1,72,433.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 42 1,76,577.24 1,907.00 2,297.22 96,483.24 
March 2022 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 2,012.00 2,245.44 2,06,580.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 2,012.00 2,245.44 2,08,825.92 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 2,012.00 2,245.44 2,06,580.48 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 2,012.00 1,810.93 1,62,983.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 46 1,93,394.12 2,012.00 2,192.22 1,00,842.12 
April 2022 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 2,253.00 2,004.44 1,80,399.60 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 2,253.00 2,004.44 1,80,399.60 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 2,253.00 2,004.44 1,80,399.60 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 2,253.00 1,569.93 1,41,293.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 45 1,89,189.90 2,253.00 1,951.22 87,804.90 
May 2022 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 2,355.50 1,901.94 1,74,978.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 2,355.50 1,901.94 1,76,880.42 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 94 4,00,199.36 2,355.50 1,901.94 1,78,782.36 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 2,355.50 1,467.43 1,32,068.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 46 1,93,394.12 2,355.50 1,848.72 85,041.12 
June 2022 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 2,219.00 2,038.44 1,83,459.60 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 2,219.00 2,038.44 1,83,459.60 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 2,219.00 2,038.44 1,83,459.60 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 2,219.00 1,603.93 1,44,353.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 45 1,89,189.90 2,219.00 1,985.22 89,334.90 
July 2022 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 2,021.00 2,236.44 2,05,752.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 2,021.00 2,236.44 2,07,988.92 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 94 4,00,199.36 2,021.00 2,236.44 2,10,225.36 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 2,021.00 1,801.93 1,62,173.70 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
345
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
345 
 
Bill No. 
and date 
Supply for the 
month of 
Name of the 
Battalion 
Rate per 
cylinder/ refill 
(including 18% 
GST) 
Number of 
cylinder/ 
refill 
 (in Nos.) 
Total bill amount 
passed for payment 
IOC rate for 
the month 
(including 
GST) 
Rate in excess 
of IOCL rate 
per cylinder/ 
refill 
Total amount paid to 
supplier in excess of 
IOCL rate 
i ii iii iv v vi vii viii (iv-vii) ix (v*viii) 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 46 1,93,394.12 2,021.00 2,183.22 1,00,428.12 
August 2022 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,976.50 2,280.94 2,09,846.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 1,976.50 2,280.94 2,12,127.42 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,976.50 2,280.94 2,09,846.48 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 1,976.50 1,846.43 1,66,178.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 46 1,93,394.12 1,976.50 2,227.72 1,02,475.12 
675 of 
19/08/2023 
September 
2022 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,885.00 2,372.44 2,13,519.60 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,885.00 2,372.44 2,13,519.60 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,885.00 2,372.44 2,13,519.60 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 1,885.00 1,937.93 1,74,413.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 45 1,89,189.90 1,885.00 2,319.22 1,04,364.90 
October 2022 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,859.50 2,397.94 2,20,610.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 1,859.50 2,397.94 2,23,008.42 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 1,859.50 2,397.94 2,23,008.42 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 90 3,44,063.70 1,859.50 1,963.43 1,76,708.70 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 46 1,93,394.12 1,859.50 2,344.72 1,07,857.12 
November 
2022 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,744.00 2,513.44 2,26,209.60 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 105 4,47,031.20 1,744.00 2,513.44 2,63,911.20 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 105 4,47,031.20 1,744.00 2,513.44 2,63,911.20 
  4,257.44 45 1,91,584.80 1,744.00 2,513.44 1,13,104.80 
5th NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,744.00 2,513.44 2,26,209.60 
7th  NAP 3,822.93 15 57,343.95 1,744.00 2,078.93 31,183.95 
8th  NAP 4,204.22 7 29,429.54 1,744.00 2,460.22 17,221.54 
December 
2022 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,744.00 2,513.44 2,31,236.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 1,744.00 2,513.44 2,33,749.92 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,744.00 2,513.44 2,31,236.48 
4th  NAP 4,257.44 46 1,95,842.24 1,744.00 2,513.44 1,15,618.24 
5th  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,744.00 2,513.44 2,31,236.48 
January  2023 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,769.00 2,488.44 2,28,936.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 1,769.00 2,488.44 2,31,424.92 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 1,769.00 2,488.44 2,31,424.92 
4th  NAP 4,257.44 46 1,95,842.24 1,769.00 2,488.44 1,14,468.24 

346
AppendicesAppendices 
 
346 
 
Bill No. 
and date 
Supply for the 
month of 
Name of the 
Battalion 
Rate per 
cylinder/ refill 
(including 18% 
GST) 
Number of 
cylinder/ 
refill 
 (in Nos.) 
Total bill amount 
passed for payment 
IOC rate for 
the month 
(including 
GST) 
Rate in excess 
of IOCL rate 
per cylinder/ 
refill 
Total amount paid to 
supplier in excess of 
IOCL rate 
i ii iii iv v vi vii viii (iv-vii) ix (v*viii) 
5th  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,769.00 2,488.44 2,28,936.48 
February 2023 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 84 3,57,624.96 1,769.00 2,488.44 2,09,028.96 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 84 3,57,624.96 1,769.00 2,488.44 2,09,028.96 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 1,769.00 2,488.44 2,31,424.92 
4th  NAP 4,257.44 45 1,91,584.80 1,769.00 2,488.44 1,11,979.80 
5th  NAP 4,257.44 88 3,74,654.72 1,769.00 2,488.44 2,18,982.72 
March 2023 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 2,119.50 2,137.94 1,96,690.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 2,119.50 2,137.94 1,98,828.42 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 2,119.50 2,137.94 1,96,690.48 
4th  NAP 4,257.44 46 1,95,842.24 2,119.50 2,137.94 98,345.24 
5th  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 2,119.50 2,137.94 1,96,690.48 
1331 of 
17/02/2025 
April 2023 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 2,028.00 2,229.44 2,00,649.60 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 2,028.00 2,229.44 2,00,649.60 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 2,028.00 2,229.44 2,00,649.60 
4th  NAP 4,257.44 45 1,91,584.80 2,028.00 2,229.44 1,00,324.80 
5th  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 2,028.00 2,229.44 2,00,649.60 
May 2023 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,856.50 2,400.94 2,20,886.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 1,856.50 2,400.94 2,23,287.42 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,856.50 2,400.94 2,20,886.48 
4th  NAP 4,257.44 46 1,95,842.24 1,856.50 2,400.94 1,10,443.24 
5th  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,856.50 2,400.94 2,20,886.48 
June 2023 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,773.00 2,484.44 2,23,599.60 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,773.00 2,484.44 2,23,599.60 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,773.00 2,484.44 2,23,599.60 
4th  NAP 4,257.44 45 1,91,584.80 1,773.00 2,484.44 1,11,799.80 
5th  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,773.00 2,484.44 2,23,599.60 
July 2023 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,773.00 2,484.44 2,28,568.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 1,773.00 2,484.44 2,31,052.92 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,773.00 2,484.44 2,28,568.48 
4th  NAP 4,257.44 46 1,95,842.24 1,773.00 2,484.44 1,14,284.24 
5th  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,773.00 2,484.44 2,28,568.48 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
347
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
347 
 
Bill No. 
and date 
Supply for the 
month of 
Name of the 
Battalion 
Rate per 
cylinder/ refill 
(including 18% 
GST) 
Number of 
cylinder/ 
refill 
 (in Nos.) 
Total bill amount 
passed for payment 
IOC rate for 
the month 
(including 
GST) 
Rate in excess 
of IOCL rate 
per cylinder/ 
refill 
Total amount paid to 
supplier in excess of 
IOCL rate 
i ii iii iv v vi vii viii (iv-vii) ix (v*viii) 
August 2023 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,680.00 2,577.44 2,37,124.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 1,680.00 2,577.44 2,39,701.92 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,680.00 2,577.44 2,37,124.48 
4th  NAP 4,257.44 46 1,95,842.24 1,680.00 2,577.44 1,18,562.24 
5th  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,680.00 2,577.44 2,37,124.48 
September 
2023 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,522.50 2,734.94 2,46,144.60 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,522.50 2,734.94 2,46,144.60 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,522.50 2,734.94 2,46,144.60 
4th  NAP 4,257.44 45 1,91,584.80 1,522.50 2,734.94 1,23,072.30 
5th  NAP 4,257.44 91 3,87,427.04 1,522.50 2,734.94 2,48,879.54 
October 2023 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,731.50 2,525.94 2,32,386.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 1,731.50 2,525.94 2,34,912.42 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,731.50 2,525.94 2,32,386.48 
4th  NAP 4,257.44 46 1,95,842.24 1,731.50 2,525.94 1,16,193.24 
5th  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,731.50 2,525.94 2,32,386.48 
November 
2023 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,775.50 2,481.94 2,23,374.60 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,775.50 2,481.94 2,23,374.60 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,775.50 2,481.94 2,23,374.60 
4th  NAP 4,257.44 45 1,91,584.80 1,775.50 2,481.94 1,11,687.30 
5th  NAP 4,257.44 91 3,87,427.04 1,775.50 2,481.94 2,25,856.54 
December 
2023 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,757.00 2,500.44 2,30,040.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,757.00 2,500.44 2,25,039.60 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,757.00 2,500.44 2,30,040.48 
4th  NAP 4,257.44 46 1,95,842.24 1,757.00 2,500.44 1,15,020.24 
5th  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,757.00 2,500.44 2,30,040.48 
January 2024 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,755.50 2,501.94 2,30,178.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 93 3,95,941.92 1,755.50 2,501.94 2,32,680.42 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,755.50 2,501.94 2,30,178.48 
4th  NAP 4,257.44 46 1,95,842.24 1,755.50 2,501.94 1,15,089.24 
5th  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,755.50 2,501.94 2,30,178.48 

348
Appendices
Appendices 
 
348 
 
Bill No. 
and date 
Supply for the 
month of 
Name of the 
Battalion 
Rate per 
cylinder/ refill 
(including 18% 
GST) 
Number of 
cylinder/ 
refill 
 (in Nos.) 
Total bill amount 
passed for payment 
IOC rate for 
the month 
(including 
GST) 
Rate in excess 
of IOCL rate 
per cylinder/ 
refill 
Total amount paid to 
supplier in excess of 
IOCL rate 
i ii iii iv v vi vii viii (iv-vii) ix (v*viii) 
February 2024 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 86 3,66,139.84 1,769.50 2,487.94 2,13,962.84 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 87 3,70,397.28 1,769.50 2,487.94 2,16,450.78 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 90 3,83,169.60 1,769.50 2,487.94 2,23,914.60 
4th  NAP 4,257.44 43 1,83,069.92 1,769.50 2,487.94 1,06,981.42 
5th  NAP 4,257.44 91 3,87,427.04 1,769.50 2,487.94 2,26,402.54 
March 2024 
1st  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,795.00 2,462.44 2,26,544.48 
2nd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,795.00 2,462.44 2,26,544.48 
3rd  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,795.00 2,462.44 2,26,544.48 
4th  NAP 4,257.44 46 1,95,842.24 1,795.00 2,462.44 1,13,272.24 
5th  NAP 4,257.44 92 3,91,684.48 1,795.00 2,462.44 2,26,544.48 
Total 14,651 6,15,82,370.41 - - 3,46,39,920.91 
Source: Department records and Indian Oil Corporation Limited notified Commercial (19 Kgs) LPG rates 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
349
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
349 
 
Appendix-5.2.1  
Statement showing details of audit sample for Centralised Audit, Detailed Audit and Audit of wards 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.5) 
(A) 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(B) 
 
Sl. No. Audit Dimension GSTIN Ward 
Amount of 
deviation/ 
mismatch  
(in ₹) 
1 
Mismatch in availing of 
ITC – GSTR-2A vs 
GSTR-3B 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX7 Ward C, Dimapur 93,85,677 
2 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXZ Ward A, Dimapur 2,41,52,494 
3 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXV Ward D, Dimapur 5,17,77,288 
4 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS Ward A, Dimapur 1,56,00,793 
5 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH Ward A, Dimapur 1,52,09,407 
6 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY Ward E, Dimapur 3,18,53,489 
7 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC Ward D, Dimapur 3,02,59,656 
8 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB Ward A, Dimapur 2,76,38,482 
9 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXR Ward B, Dimapur 2,56,74,278 
10 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW Ward E, Dimapur 2,49,80,926 
11 
Mismatch in availing of 
ITC – Under Reverse 
Charge Mechanism 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXZ Ward A, Dimapur 6,36,657 
12 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH Ward C, Dimapur 1,90,403 
13 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9 Ward D, Dimapur 1,91,558 
14 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXV Ward A, Dimapur 45,34,112 
15 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH Ward A, Kohima 70,93,923 
16 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT Tuensang unit 4,45,040 
17 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS Ward A, Dimapur 1,68,240 
18 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI Mon unit 3,73,878 
19 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX1 Ward C, Dimapur 1,05,26,140 
20 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU Wok ha  1,78,370 
21 Mismatch in availing of 
ITC – ISD credit 
incorrectly availed by the 
recipients 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 Mon unit 24,44,469 
22 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP Ward A, Dimapur 4,34,462 
23 Mismatch in Annual 
Return and Financial 
Statements (FS) – 
Positive figure in GSTR-
9C Table 12F 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI Ward E, Dimapur 1,82,589 
24 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 Ward A, Dimapur 5,36,811 
25 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY Ward F, Dimapur 14,25,871 
26 Mismatch in Annual 
Return and Financial 
Statements (FS) – 
Positive figure in GSTR-
9C Table 14T 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH Ward B, Dimapur 16,00,492 
27 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP Ward B, Dimapur 12,67,310 
28 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB Wok ha  23,49,514 
29 
ITC availed after cut-off 
period 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS Ward E, Dimapur 1,60,18,431 
30 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU Ward E, Dimapur 10,52,24,991 
31 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX4 Ward D, Dimapur 90,95,068 
32 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX7 Ward A, Dimapur 1,12,48,733 
33 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXO Ward C, Dimapur 2,34,49,245 
34 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX5 Ward A, Dimapur 1,97,45,891 
35 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX0 Ward B, Kohima 1,95,43,106 
Ward Audit 
Sl. No. Type of GST Audit Jurisdiction 
1 Ward Audit Kohima Ward A 
2 Ward Audit  Wokha unit 
3 Ward Audit Dimapur Ward C 
4 Ward Audit  Dimapur Ward D 

350
AppendicesAppendices 
 
350 
 
Sl. No. Audit Dimension GSTIN Ward 
Amount of 
deviation/ 
mismatch  
(in ₹) 
36 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXK Ward B, Kohima 1,00,44,677 
37 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX1 Ward A, Kohima 1,30,82,066 
38 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC Ward E, Dimapur 6,42,16,830 
39 
ITC availed without 
supplier remitting tax 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX7 Ward C, Dimapur 1,33,34,306 
40 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 Ward E, Dimapur 99,35,294 
41 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB Ward A, Dimapur 10,43,189 
42 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH Tuensang unit 6,35,188 
43 
Short payment of interest 
on delayed payments 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXR Ward B, Dimapur 70,28,077 
44 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU Ward E, Dimapur 1,30,39,181 
45 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX7 Ward B, Dimapur 18,86,293 
46 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXE Ward B, Dimapur 75,99,654 
47 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC Ward B, Dimapur 53,51,215 
48 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG Ward B, Kohima 27,27,397 
49 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX3 Ward D, Dimapur 19,94,933 
50 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP Ward A, Dimapur 19,10,812 
51 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXO Mon unit 21,62,006 
52 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC Ward E, Dimapur 73,65,069 
53 
Tax not remitted due to 
GSTR-3B not filed 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX5 Ward A, Dimapur 9,80,027 
54 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG Wok ha 22,78,080 
55 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXO Mon unit 33,58,549 
56 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB Ward A, Mokokchung 4,21,296 
57 
Suppression of tax 
liability (Eway-bill) 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 Mon unit 3,68,23,505 
58 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG Ward A, Dimapur 21,26,497 
59 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXJ Ward B, Dimapur 23,99,381 
60 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG Wok ha 27,16,560 
61 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 Ward A, Dimapur 16,91,192 
62 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH Wok ha 28,34,477 
63 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 Ward E. Dimapur 39,27,502 
64 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 Ward B, Mokokchung 22,86,760 
65 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXF Ward C, Dimapur 12,99,322 
66 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW Mon unit 56,18,819 
67 
Tax short-paid 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC Ward E, Dimapur 1,49,60,400 
68 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 Ward A, Dimapur 57,73,361 
69 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC Ward D, Dimapur 1,25,69,899 
70 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP Ward A, Dimapur 1,33,46,549 
71 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX1 Ward D, Dimapur 41,954 
72 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL Ward B, Mokokchung 77,32,896 
73 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB Ward A, Dimapur 7,01,556 
74 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW Ward A, Dimapur 1,62,84,674 
75 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL Ward B, Dimapur 2,32,46,320 
76 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX7 Ward E, Dimapur 60,446 
77 Mismatch in Annual 
Return and Financial 
Statements (FS) – 
Negative figure in GSTR-
9C Table 9R 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP Ward B, Dimapur 14,09,092 
78 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXR Ward B, Dimapur 17,852 
79 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT Ward A, Kohima 9,81,545 
80 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB Wok ha 18,60,501 
81 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX7 Ward B, Kohima 18,38,895 
82 Suppression of taxable 
value (Unbilled Revenue)  1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9 Ward D, Dimapur 1,61,43,246 
83 
Mismatch in Annual 
Return and Financial 
Statements (FS)  - 
Negative figure in GSTR-
9C Table 7G 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9 Ward A, Dimapur 68,49,258 
84 Under declaration of 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 Ward E, Dimapur 2,45,81,064 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
351
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
351 
 
Sl. No. Audit Dimension GSTIN Ward 
Amount of 
deviation/ 
mismatch  
(in ₹) 
85 taxable supplies by 
comparing TDS returns 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL Ward A, Dimapur 3,07,00,000 
86 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC Ward D, Dimapur 6,71,23,263 
87 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP Ward C, Kohima 1,57,81,666 
88 Ineligible composition 
levy 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX B Ward A, Dimapur 1,77,30,000 
Tot al  100,72,90,385 
Total (₹ in crore) 100.72 
 (C) 
Detailed Audit 
Sl. No GSTIN Ward 
Total amount of 
deviation/ mismatch 
(in ₹) 
1 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXE Dimapur Ward A 38,96,47,712 
2 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXO Dimapur Ward A 4,17,90,000 
3 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX6 Dimapur Ward A 7,51,99,937 
4 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL Dimapur Ward A 4,95,27,276 
5 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXK Dimapur, Ward C 39,59,523 
6 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH Dimapur, Ward C 38,51,706 
7 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 Dimapur, Ward D 61,34,867 
8 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 Dimapur Ward E 3,72,94,824 
9 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX5 Dimapur Ward E 0.00 
10 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXA Dimapur Ward E 35,71,614 
11 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM Dimapur Ward E 0.00 
12 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS Kohima Ward A 11,68,96,748 
13 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXD Kohima Ward A 0.00 
14 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI Wok ha  0.00 
15 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX6 Mokokchung 
Ward A 0.00 
Tot al 72,78,74,207 
Total (₹ in crore) 72.78 
 

352
AppendicesAppendices 
 
352 
 
Appendix-5.2.2 
Statement showing deficiencies noticed in closed cases 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.8.1) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN/ 
Temp ID/ 
UIN 
Notice 
Ref. No. 
Notice 
Date 
Ta x  
period 
(From) 
Month, 
Ye a r  
Ta x 
period 
( To) 
Month, 
Year 
Amount 
3B_2A R1_R3B 
TDS/ 
work 
contract/ 
short 
payment 
Interest 
and 
penalty 
ASMT 11 ASMT 12 DRC Interest Amount 
due 
Interest 
due (in ₹) 
Audit 
comment 
1. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXM 
ZD13112 
0000017K 04/11/2020 Jul-17 Mar-18  4,16,075  148,208 22/10/2021 22/10/2021 4,16,076  0 1,48,208 
Dropped but 
interest not 
paid 
2. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXM 
ZD13032 
1000192F 23/03/2021 Apr-19 Mar-20   14,64,598 484,075 23/08/2021 23/08/2021 14,64,598  0 4,84,075 
Dropped but 
interest not 
paid 
3. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXF 
ZD13112 
0000032S 12/11/2020 Mar-19 Mar-19  3,39,372  91,850 20/09/2021 30/09/2021 3,39,372  0 91,850 
Dropped but 
interest not 
paid 
4. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXI 
ZD13112 
00000899 27/11/2020 Jul-17 Mar-18   19,052 8,545 23/12/2020 02/09/2021 19,052  0 8,545 
Dropped but 
interest not 
paid 
5. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXC 
ZD131120 
000026L 09/11/2020 Jul-17 Mar-18  2,16,374  97,090 21/12/2021 21/12/2021 2,16,374  0 97,090 
Dropped but 
interest not 
paid 
6. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXC 
ZD131120 
000027J 09/11/2020 Apr-18 Mar-19  4,01,532  113,058 21/12/2021 21/12/2021 1,49,560  0 1,13,058 
Dropped but 
interest not 
paid 
7. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXV 
ZD130121 
000041S 14/01/2021 Apr-18 Mar-19  26,468  6,890 20/09/2021 30/09/2021 26,468  0 6,890 
Dropped but 
interest not 
paid 
8. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXC 
ZD131120 
000015O 04/11/2020 Dec-17 Dec-17   59,878 48,340 30/09/2021 01/10/2021 59,878  0  
Dropped but 
interest not 
paid 
9. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXX 
ZD130121 
000036J 14/01/2021 Apr-18 Mar-19  1,14,473    12/10/2021 41,528  58,137  
Dropped 
however 
₹0.58 lakh is 
outstanding 
10. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXX2 
ZD130321 
000135F 18/03/2021 Jul-20 Sep-20 33,90,758   225,720 10/05/2021 13/08/2021 3,31,976  18,00,943 2,25,720 
Dropped 
however, 
₹18 lakh is 
outstanding 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
353
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
353 
 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN/ 
Temp ID/ 
UIN 
Notice 
Ref. No. 
Notice 
Date 
Ta x  
period 
(From) 
Month, 
Ye a r  
Ta x 
period 
( To) 
Month, 
Year 
Amount 
3B_2A R1_R3B 
TDS/ 
work 
contract/ 
short 
payment 
Interest 
and 
penalty 
ASMT 11 ASMT 12 DRC Interest Amount 
due 
Interest 
due (in ₹) 
Audit 
comment 
11. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXS 
ZD130321 
000134H 18/03/2021 Jul-20 Sep-20 40,472   1,260 30/09/2021 10/10/2021 20,236 630 0  
No excess 
ITC 
12. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXF 
ZD131020 
0050789 27/10/2020 Apr-18 Mar-19  40,30,290   27/06/2022 28/06/2022 4,42,712 16,230 0  
No excess 
ITC 
13. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXM 
ZD13032 
1000046E 08/03/2021 Jul-17 Mar-18 18,28,566    03/04/2021 02/11/2022   0  Dropped 
14. 
XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXQ 
ZD13022 
1000255D 23/02/2021 Jul-17 Mar-18 1,89,415 21,225   20/10/2021 02/11/2022   0  Dropped 
15. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXX2 
ZD13012 
1000008I 07/01/2021 Apr-19 Mar-20     12/07/2022 02/08/2022   0  Dropped 
16. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXX2 
ZD130121 
000007K 07/01/2021 Apr-18 Mar-19     12/07/2022 02/08/2022   0  Dropped 
17. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXX9 
ZD130121 
000039D 14/01/2021 Apr-18 Mar-19   28,76,478 822,747  15/09/2021   0  dropped 
18. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXX9 
ZD130121 
000040U 14/01/2021 Apr-19 Mar-20   77,02,148 721,620 12/02/2021 03/09/2021   0  dropped 
19. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXJ 
ZD13012 
1000035L 14/01/2021 Mar-19 Mar-19   19,148 4,718 30/04/2021 17/07/2021 19,148 4,718 0  dropped 
20. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXM 
ZD131220 
000010W 02/12/2020 Jul-17 Mar-18   26,676 12,220 10/02/2021 15/03/2021 26,676 12,220 0  dropped 
21. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXL 
ZD131220 
000011U 02/12/2020 Jul-17 Mar-18   1,80,604 82,770 30/09/2021 01/10/2021   0  dropped 
22. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXT 
ZD131120 
000090Q 27/11/2020 Jul-17 Mar-18  3,58,653   28/12/2020 15/03/2021   0  dropped 

354
Appendices
Appendices 
 
354 
 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTIN/ 
Temp ID/ 
UIN 
Notice 
Ref. No. 
Notice 
Date 
Ta x  
period 
(From) 
Month, 
Ye a r  
Ta x 
period 
( To) 
Month, 
Year 
Amount 
3B_2A R1_R3B 
TDS/ 
work 
contract/ 
short 
payment 
Interest 
and 
penalty 
ASMT 11 ASMT 12 DRC Interest Amount 
due 
Interest 
due (in ₹) 
Audit 
comment 
23. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXX4 
ZD131220 
000012S 02/12/2020 Jul-17 Mar-18   32,612 12,896 10/02/2021 15/03/2021 32,612 12,896 0  dropped 
24. 
1XXXXX
XXXXX
XXX8 
ZD130121 
000034N 14/01/2021 Dec-18 Jan-19   85,99,731   21/09/2021 85,99,731  0  dropped 
To t a l  1859080 1175436  
Total (₹ in crore) 0.18 0.11  
Source: GSTN Back Office data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
355
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
355 
 
Appendix-5.2.3 
Statement showing deficiencies in non-finalised cases 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.8.1) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
GSTI N/  Tem p 
ID/ UIN 
Notice Ref. 
No. Notice Date 
Delay 
in days 
as on  
30-4-
2024) 
Ta x  
period 
(From) 
Month
, Y ear 
Ta x  
period 
 (To) 
Month, 
Ye a r  
Amount 
3B_2A 
R1_R3
B 
TDS/ 
work 
contract/ 
short 
payment 
Interest 
and 
penalty 
ASMT11 ASMT
12 DRC Interest 
Amount due 
as per GST 
Back Office 
portal (in ₹) 
Interest 
due (in ₹) 
Recovere
d through 
DRC 
Non finalised cases 
1. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXR 
ZD1302210
00246C 
23/02/2021 1162 Apr-18 Mar-19 4,04,799       11/03/2021       3,86,437     
2. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXE 
ZD1302210
002488 
23/02/2021 1162 Apr-18 Mar-19 1,20,867       31/03/2021       1,20,867     
3. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXM 
ZD1302210
00250N 
23/02/2021 1162 Apr-18 Mar-19 3,82,966       23/08/2022       3,82,966     
4. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXX 
ZD1302210
002579 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 1,20,707       11/03/2021   947   7,93,397    
5. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXL 
ZD1302210
002595 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 63,549       26/02/2021       63,549     
6. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXJ 
ZD1302210
002686 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 1,17,367       10/03/2021       1,22,010     
7. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXP 
ZD1302210
00270L 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 1,04,590       10/03/2021       11,757     
8. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXX6 
ZD1302210
00272H 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 1,05,134       03/05/2023   6,452 1,161 97,521    
9. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXI 
ZD1302210
002769 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 1,70,836       23/02/2021       1,70,845     
10. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXX0 
ZD1303210
00008E 
01/03/2021 1156 Apr-18 Mar-19 8,39,643       10/08/2022       5,404   
 
11. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXJ 
ZD1302210
002397 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 35,55,985       21/03/2021   39,46,651   0     
12. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXP 
ZD1302210
00253H 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 2,30,51,058       22/03/2021       2,30,51,058     
13. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXL 
ZD1303210
00006I 
01/03/2021 1156 Jul-17 Mar-18 14,354       25/08/2022       12,533    12,533 
14. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXX3 
ZD1302210
00271J 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 5,39,105       01/10/2022       5,39,105   5,39,105 
15. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXV 
ZD1303210
00009C 
01/03/2021 1156 Jul-17 Mar-18 35,60,159       18/03/2021       1,47,307     
16. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXV 
ZD1303210
00011R 
01/03/2021 1156 Jul-17 Mar-18 26,615       01/03/2021       26,615     
17. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXH 
ZD1302210
00194D 
22/02/2021 1163 Apr-18 Mar-19 16,64,685       17/08/2022       16,10,334   
3,56,600 
18. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXT 
ZD1302210
00266A 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 4,55,235       16/08/2022       4,55,235    4,55,235 

356
AppendicesAppendices 
 
356 
 
19. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXU 
ZD1302210
00264E 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 4,35,248       22/04/2021       3,31,349    
20. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXH 
ZD1302210
00245E 
23/02/2021 1162 Apr-18 Mar-19 16,64,685       17/08/2022       16,10,334    
21. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXX0 
ZD1302210
00241M 
23/02/2021 1162 Apr-18 Mar-19 2,85,750 4,14,14
1 
    17/08/2022       6,32,527   
 
22. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXX1 
ZD1302210
00172J 
22/02/2021 1163 Apr-18 Mar-19 17,35,700               17,35,700     
23. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXH 
ZD1302210
001787 
22/02/2021 1163 Apr-18 Mar-19 31,604               31,604     
24. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXX 
ZD1302210
00186A 
22/02/2021 1163 Apr-18 Mar-19 11,082               11,082     
25. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXJ 
ZD1302210
00190L 
22/02/2021 1163 Apr-18 Mar-19 26,698               26,698     
26. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXQ 
ZD1302210
00192H 
22/02/2021 1163 Apr-18 Mar-19 75,914               75,914     
27. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXW 
ZD1302210
001977 
22/02/2021 1163 Apr-18 Mar-19 54,641               49,809     
28. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXY 
ZD1302210
00244G 
23/02/2021 1162 Apr-18 Mar-19 1,81,131               1,77,623     
29. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXQ 
ZD1302210
00254F 
23/02/2021 1162 Apr-18 Mar-19 17,52,217               9,49,336     
30. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXX 
ZD1302210
00261K 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 1,49,974               2,980     
31. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXH 
ZD1302210
00265C 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 25,34,233               11,62,479     
32. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXH 
ZD1302210
002678 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 99,008               1,23,484     
33. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXC 
ZD1302210
00274D 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 73,501               1,95,063     
34. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXD 
ZD1302210
002785 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 12,71,457 10,06,8
33 
            16,85,595     
35. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXD 
ZD1302210
00280K 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 1,96,601               4,15,853     
36. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXX6 
ZD1302210
00323I 
25/02/2021 1160 Jul-17 Mar-18 6,632               6,632     
37. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXS 
ZD1302210
00324G 
25/02/2021 1160 Jul-17 Mar-18 16,717               21,078     
38. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXK 
ZD1302210
00325E 
25/02/2021 1160 Jul-17 Mar-18 979               979     
39. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXX1 
ZD1302210
00326C 
25/02/2021 1160 Jul-17 Mar-18 8,077               8,077     
40. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXW 
ZD1302210
003288 
25/02/2021 1160 Jul-17 Mar-18 11,314               11,314     
41. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXR 
ZD1302210
003296 
25/02/2021 1160 Apr-18 Mar-19 258               258     

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
357
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
357 
 
42. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXX4 
ZD1302210
00331L 
25/02/2021 1160 Apr-18 Mar-19 7,124               7,124     
43. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXI 
ZD1302210
00332J 
25/02/2021 1160 Apr-18 Mar-19 47,746               47,746     
44. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXC 
ZD1302210
00333H 
25/02/2021 1160 Apr-18 Mar-19 36,608               36,608     
45. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXX4 
ZD1311200
00016M 
04/11/2020 1273 Jul-17 Mar-18   44,99,0
34 
  2019,016         44,99,034 2019,016   
46. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXG 
ZD1303210
00143I 
20/03/2021 1137 Apr-18 Mar-19     66,996 26,994         66,996 26,994   
47. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXL 
ZD1303210
001876 
23/03/2021 1134 Apr-19 Mar-20     4,47,948 1,04,273         4,47,948 1,04,273   
48. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXL 
ZD1303210
001892 
23/03/2021 1134 Apr-20 Mar-21     3,04,213 69,672         3,04,213 69,672   
49. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXL 
ZD1303210
00191H 
23/03/2021 1134 Apr-18 Mar-19     77,570 27,816         77,570 27,816   
50. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXD 
ZD1301210
00037H 
14/01/2021 1202 Jul-18 Mar-19     1,06,542 29,212         1,06,542 29,212   
51. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXD 
ZD1301210
00038F 
14/01/2021 1202 Apr-19 Mar-20     1,32,022 31,070         1,32,022 31,070   
52. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXZ 
ZD1312200
00014O 
02/12/2020 1245 Jul-17 Mar-18     50,698 20,150         50,698 20,150   
53. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXZ 
ZD1312200
00015M 
02/12/2020 1245 Apr-18 Mar-19     20,516 4,940         20,516 4,940   
54. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXT 
ZD1302210
00142M 
22/02/2021 1163 Jul-17 Mar-18     1,60,714 84,135         1,60,714 84,135   
55. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXS 
ZD1302210
002967 
24/02/2021 1161 Apr-19 Mar-20     62,202 16,650         62,202 16,650   
56. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXX6 
ZD1302210
00273F 
23/02/2021 1162 Apr-18 Mar-19 3,22,198               3,14,698   3,14,698 
57. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXK 
ZD1302210
00275B 
23/02/2021 1162 Apr-18 Mar-19 7,22,067               4,11,993     
58. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXV 
ZD1302210
00282G 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 52,84,145               52,84,103     
59. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXG 
ZD1302210
002876 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 13,620               13,620     
60. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXC 
ZD1303210
00007G 
01/03/2021 1156 Jul-17 Mar-18 13,643               13,643     
61. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXX8 
ZD1303210
00010T 
01/03/2021 1156 Jul-17 Mar-18 89,47,491               89,31,052     
62. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXT 
ZD1303210
00012P 
01/03/2021 1156 Jul-17 Mar-18 21,536               21,536     
63. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXP 
ZD1303210
00047C 
08/03/2021 1149 Jul-17 Mar-18 1,81,650               1,81,650     
64. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXX1 
ZD1302210
002694 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 9,19,251 28,304             919,251     

358
AppendicesAppendices 
 
358 
 
Source: GSTN Back Office data  
65. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXR 
ZD1302210
00260M 
23/02/2021 1162 Apr-18 Mar-19 2,64,831               43,315   43,315 
66. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXU 
ZD1302210
00256B 
23/02/2021 1162 Apr-18 Mar-19 54,91,749 14,00,4
22 
            1,85,56,966     
67. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXU 
ZD1302210
00251L 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 1,67,762 21,345             1,89,107     
68. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXX9 
ZD1302210
002496 
23/02/2021 1162 Apr-18 Mar-19 7,26,974               7,26,974     
69. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXH 
ZD1302210
00247A 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 3,54,137 18,222             3,72,359   20,819 
                         Total 7,75,18,050    17,42,308 
             Total (₹ in crore) 7.75  0.17 
No discrepancies cases 
70. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXX 
ZD1302210
00175D 
22/02/2021 1163 Apr-18 Mar-19 58,971               0   No excess 
ITC 
71. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXU 
ZD1302210
00182I 
22/02/2021 1163 Apr-18 Mar-19 8,347               0   No excess 
ITC 
72. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXX9 
ZD1302210
00252J 
23/02/2021 1162 Apr-18 Mar-19 60,75,170               0   No excess 
ITC 
73. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXI 
ZD1302210
002587 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 1,13,197               0   No excess 
ITC 
74. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXI 
ZD1302210
002793 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 10,47,307 31,63,6
78 
            0   No excess 
ITC 
75. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXQ 
ZD1302210
00281I 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 15,62,942       09/03/2021       0   No excess 
ITC 
76. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXD 
ZD1303210
00231L 
31/03/2021 1126 Apr-20 Mar-21 3,97,179               0   No excess 
ITC 
77. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXL 
ZD1303210
00232J 
31/03/2021 1126 Apr-20 Mar-21 34,55,810               0   No excess 
ITC 
78. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXY 
ZD1303210
00233H 
31/03/2021 1126 Apr-20 Mar-21 1,23,38,075               0   No excess 
ITC 
79. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXX6 
ZD1303210
00048A 
08/03/2021 1149 Apr-18 Mar-19 2,56,253 1,75,47
0 
            0   No excess 
ITC 
80. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXC 
ZD1302210
00262I 
23/02/2021 1162 Jul-17 Mar-18 1,84,045               0   No excess 
ITC 
81. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXW 
ZD1302210
00242K 
23/02/2021 1162 Apr-18 Mar-19 2,50,32,685               0   No excess 
ITC 
82. 1XXXXXXX
XXXXXXJ 
ZD1302210
00243I 
23/02/2021 1162 Apr-18 Mar-19 1,30,671       30/08/2022   1,33,023   0   Recovered 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
359
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
359 
 
 
Appendix-5.2.4 
Statement showing cancelled registrations with effect from dates prior to the application dates 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.8.4) 
 
Sl. No. Ward GSTIN/UIN Date of 
Registration 
Date of 
Initiation 
of Notice 
Reason of Cancellation 
Date of 
Filing 
Application 
Date of 
Effect of 
Cancellation 
Order 
prior 
application 
1. Dimapur 
Wa r d  C  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH 02/08/2017 NA Discontinuation/Closure 
of Business 11/6/2020 11/06/2020 0 
2. Dimapur 
Wa r d  C  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB 28/08/2020 NA Others 20/02/2021 01/02/2021 -19 
3. Dimapur 
Wa r d  C  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS 01/07/2017 NA Discontinuation/Closure 
of Business 05/10/2020 10/08/2019 -422 
4. Dimapur 
Wa r d  C  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 28/08/2017 NA Others 16/06/2020 01/04/2020 -76 
5. Dimapur 
Wa r d  C  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9 01/07/2017 NA Discontinuation/Closure 
of Business 20/1/2021 18/01/2021 -2 
6. Dimapur 
Wa r d  C  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM 22/07/2017 NA Discontinuation/Closure 
of Business 16/5/2020 16/05/2020 0 
7. Dimapur 
Wa r d  C  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 01/07/2017 NA Discontinuation/Closure 
of Business 18/3/2020 18/03/2020 0 
8. Dimapur 
Wa r d  C  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX0 01/07/2017 NA Discontinuation/Closure 
of Business 03/10/2018 30/09/2018 -3 
9. Dimapur 
Wa r d  D  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY 01/07/2020 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 12/08/2020 12/08/2020 0 
10. Dimapur 
Wa r d  D  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX0 01/03/2019 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 11/08/2020 31/03/2020 -133 
11. Dimapur 
Wa r d  D  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX3 01/07/2017 NA Others 31/08/2020 01/04/2020 -152 
12. Dimapur 
Wa r d  D  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXV 04/02/2020 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 21/10/2020 30/09/2020 -21 
13. Dimapur 
Wa r d  D  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXQ 19/12/2020 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 04/03/2021 04/03/2021 0 
14. Dimapur 
Wa r d  D  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM 18/11/2019 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 01/08/2020 30/06/2020 -32 

360
AppendicesAppendices 
 
360 
 
Sl. No. Ward GSTIN/UIN Date of 
Registration 
Date of 
Initiation 
of Notice 
Reason of Cancellation 
Date of 
Filing 
Application 
Date of 
Effect of 
Cancellation 
Order 
prior 
application 
15. Dimapur 
Wa r d  D  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXE 24/08/2017 NA Death of Sole Proprietor 03/02/2021 01/01/2021 -33 
16. Dimapur 
Wa r d  D  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX0 03/08/2018 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 30/01/2021 01/12/2020 -60 
17. Dimapur 
Wa r d  D  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9 01/07/2017 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 14/03/2020 28/02/2020 -15 
18. Dimapur 
Wa r d  D  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS 14/08/2019 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 20/07/2020 20/07/2020 0 
19. Dimapur 
Wa r d  D  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXA 20/11/2017 NA Others 15/07/2020 30/06/2020 -15 
20. Dimapur 
Wa r d  D  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXD 11/09/2018 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 27/11/2020 01/04/2019 -606 
21. Dimapur 
Wa r d  D  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX5 01/07/2017 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 
28/11/2020 31/03/2020 -242 
22. Dimapur 
Wa r d  D  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXF 13/07/2017 13/07/20
20 
Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 
10/01/2020 01/11/2018 -435 
23. Dimapur 
Wa r d  D  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW 01/07/2017 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 
11/06/2019 11/06/2019 0 
24. Kohima 
Wa r d  A  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 01/07/2017 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 
18/03/2021 01/07/2020 -260 
25. Kohima 
Wa r d  A  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXX 25/10/2017 NA Others 05/01/2021 05/01/2021 0 
26. Kohima 
Wa r d  A  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 19/02/2021 NA Others 27/02/2021 19/02/2021 -8 
27. Kohima 
Wa r d  A  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY 28/09/2020 NA Others 27/03/2021 28/02/2021 -27 
28. Kohima 
Wa r d  A  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX3 17/04/2019 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 
25/06/2020 25/06/2020 0 
29. Kohima 
Wa r d  A  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH 01/07/2017 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 
06/10/2020 06/10/2020 0 
30. Kohima 
Wa r d  A  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX7 20/07/2017 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 
30/08/2020 31/07/2020 -30 
31. Kohima 
Wa r d  A  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 06/11/2019 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 
19/10/2020 31/07/2020 -80 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
361
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
361 
 
Sl. No. Ward GSTIN/UIN Date of 
Registration 
Date of 
Initiation 
of Notice 
Reason of Cancellation 
Date of 
Filing 
Application 
Date of 
Effect of 
Cancellation 
Order 
prior 
application 
32. Kohima 
Wa r d  A  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 26/09/2019 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 
22/12/2020 22/12/2020 0 
33. Kohima 
Wa r d  A  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXZ 01/07/2017 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 
20/01/2021 20/01/2021 0 
34. Kohima 
Wa r d  A  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXJ 23/08/2019 NA Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 
28/09/2020 28/09/2020 0 
35. Kohima 
Wa r d  A  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG 19/12/2020 NA Others 19/12/2020 19/12/2020 0 
36. Kohima 
Wa r d  A  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 14/08/2017 30/05/20
20 
Others 22/05/2020 30/04/2020 -22 
37. Kohima 
Wa r d  A  
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC 22/09/2017 10/11/2020 Discontinuance of 
business/ Closure 
20/10/2020 20/10/2020 0 
38. Wokha 
Unit 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 05/11/2020 NA Discontinuation/Closure 
of Business 
11/11/2020 11/11/2020 0 
39. Wokha 
Unit 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXQ 26/11/2019 NA Discontinuation/Closure 
of Business 
28/1/2021 01/01/2021 -27 
40. Wokha 
Unit 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP 15/07/2017 NA Others 25/01/2021 25/01/2021 0 
41. Wokha 
Unit 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC 16/07/2019 NA Discontinuation/Closure 
of Business 
20/5/2020 20/05/2020 0 
42. Wokha 
Unit 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXV 01/09/2020 NA Ceased to be liable to 
pay tax 
23/12/2020 23/12/2020 0 
43. Wokha 
Unit 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY 01/07/2017 NA Discontinuation/Closure 
of Business 
20/11/2020 31/03/2020 -234 
44. Wokha 
Unit 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU 04/05/2018 NA Change in constitution 
of business 
24/08/2020 31/07/2020 -24 
45. Wokha 
Unit 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXX 06/02/2018 NA Discontinuation/Closure 
of Business 
28/6/2020 31/03/2020 -89 
Tot al 26 negative 
cases 
Source: GSTN Back Office data  
  

362
AppendicesAppendices 
 
362 
 
Appendix – 5.2.5 
Statement showing delay in issuance of cancellation order 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.8.4) 
Sl. 
No. Name of Ward GSTIN/ UIN 
Date of 
Registra-
tion 
Date of 
Initiatio
n of 
Notice 
Date of 
Filing 
Applica-
tion 
Reason of Cancellation Date of 
Order 
Date of 
Effect of 
Cancella-
tion 
Actual order 
(30 days from 
Application) 
Delay 
order in 
days 
Suo-moto cancellation 
1 Dimapur Ward C 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XR 29/8/2019 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  16/6/2020 16/6/2020 17/4/2020 60 
2 Dimapur Ward C 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XN 01/7/2017 17/3/2020 17/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  16/6/2020 16/6/2020 16/4/2020 61 
3 Dimapur Ward C 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XD 01/7/2017 17/3/2020 17/3/2020 Non-Compliance of provisions of law 03/11/2020 03/11/2020 16/4/2020 201 
4 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XM 01/7/2017 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 17/4/2020 41 
5 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XY 01/7/2017 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 17/4/2020 41 
6 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XA 01/7/2017 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 17/4/2020 41 
7 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X9 01/7/2017 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 17/4/2020 41 
8 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XK 01/7/2017 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 17/4/2020 41 
9 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XM 01/7/2017 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 17/4/2020 41 
10 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XC 01/7/2017 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 17/4/2020 41 
11 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XI 01/7/2017 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 17/4/2020 41 
12 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XE 
15/12/201
7 17/3/2020 17/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 16/4/2020 42 
13 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XV 14/7/2017 15/11/2020 15/11/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  24/11/2020 24/11/2020 15/12/2020 -21 
14 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X5 14/9/2017 29/9/2020 29/9/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  09/10/2020 09/10/2020 29/10/2020 -20 
15 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XF 14/9/2017 17/7/2020 17/7/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  28/7/2020 28/7/2020 16/8/2020 -19 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
363
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
363 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of Ward GSTIN/ UIN 
Date of 
Registra-
tion 
Date of 
Initiatio
n of 
Notice 
Date of 
Filing 
Applica-
tion 
Reason of Cancellation Date of 
Order 
Date of 
Effect of 
Cancella-
tion 
Actual order 
(30 days from 
Application) 
Delay 
order in 
days 
16 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X4 21/7/2017 15/8/2020 15/8/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  26/8/2020 26/8/2020 14/9/2020 -19 
17 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XA 15/9/2017 15/8/2020 15/8/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  26/8/2020 26/8/2020 14/9/2020 -19 
18 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XZ 01/11/2017 15/8/2020 15/8/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  26/8/2020 26/8/2020 14/9/2020 -19 
19 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XF 01/3/2018 15/8/2020 15/8/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  26/8/2020 26/8/2020 14/9/2020 -19 
20 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XV 11/7/2018 10/9/2020 10/9/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  21/9/2020 21/9/2020 10/10/2020 -19 
21 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X8 01/8/2018 11/9/2020 11/9/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  22/9/2020 22/9/2020 11/10/2020 -19 
22 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XR 01/7/2018 10/12/2020 10/12/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  21/12/2020 21/12/2020 09/1/2021 -19 
23 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X8 01/7/2017 16/7/2020 16/7/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  28/7/2020 28/7/2020 15/8/2020 -18 
24 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X3 01/7/2017 18/3/2021 18/3/2021 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  30/3/2021 30/3/2021 17/4/2021 -18 
25 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X1 01/7/2017 18/3/2021 18/3/2021 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  30/3/2021 30/3/2021 17/4/2021 -18 
26 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X4 09/8/2017 20/11/2020 20/11/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  03/12/2020 03/12/2020 20/12/2020 -17 
27 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XR 01/4/2018 22/2/2021 22/2/2021 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  07/3/2021 07/3/2021 
24/3/2021 -17 
28 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X7 03/6/2019 22/2/2021 22/2/2021 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  07/3/2021 07/3/2021 
24/3/2021 -17 
29 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XK 30/7/2018 07/9/2020 07/9/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  21/9/2020 21/9/2020 
07/10/2020 -16 
30 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XG 08/3/2019 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  06/4/2020 06/4/2020 17/4/2020 -11 
31 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XU 01/7/2017 21/12/2020 21/12/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than 
paying tax u/s 10,  11/1/2021 11/1/2021 20/1/2021 -9 
Sub-total 12 positive 
cases 

364
AppendicesAppendices 
 
364 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of Ward GSTIN/ UIN 
Date of 
Registra-
tion 
Date of 
Initiatio
n of 
Notice 
Date of 
Filing 
Applica-
tion 
Reason of Cancellation Date of 
Order 
Date of 
Effect of 
Cancella-
tion 
Actual order 
(30 days from 
Application) 
Delay 
order in 
days 
Cancelled on request by the taxpayers 
32 Dimapur Ward C 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XH 02/8/2017 NA 11/6/2020 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 16/6/2020 11/6/2020 11/7/2020 -25.00 
33 Dimapur Ward C 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XB 28/8/2020 NA 20/2/2021 Others 26/2/2021 01/2/2021 22/3/2021 -24.00 
34 Dimapur Ward C 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XS 01/7/2017 NA 05/10/2020 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 13/10/2020 10/8/2019 04/11/2020 -22.00 
35 Dimapur Ward C 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XL 28/8/2017 NA 16/6/2020 Others 03/7/2020 01/4/2020 16/7/2020 -13.00 
36 Dimapur Ward C 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X9 01/7/2017 NA 20/1/2021 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 08/2/2021 18/1/2021 19/2/2021 -11.00 
37 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XY 01/7/2020 NA 12/8/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 20/8/2020 12/8/2020 11/9/2020 -22.00 
38 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X0 01/3/2019 NA 11/8/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 20/8/2020 31/3/2020 10/9/2020 -21.00 
39 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X3 01/7/2017 NA 31/8/2020 Others 11/9/2020 01/4/2020 30/9/2020 -19.00 
40 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XV 04/2/2020 NA 21/10/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 03/11/2020 30/9/2020 20/11/2020 -17.00 
41 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XQ 
19/12/202
0 NA 04/3/2021 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 19/3/2021 04/3/2021 03/4/2021 -15.00 
42 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XM 18/11/2019 NA 01/8/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 20/8/2020 30/6/2020 31/8/2020 -11.00 
43 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XE 24/8/2017 NA 03/2/2021 Death of Sole Proprietor 26/2/2021 01/1/2021 05/3/2021 -7.00 
44 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X0 03/8/2018 NA 30/1/2021 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 26/2/2021 01/12/2020 01/3/2021 -3.00 
45 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X9 01/7/2017 NA 14/3/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 13/4/2020 28/2/2020 13/4/2020 0.00 
46 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XL 01/7/2017 NA 18/3/2021 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 19/3/2021 01/7/2020 17/4/2021 -29.00 
47 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XX 
25/10/201
7 NA 05/1/2021 Others 07/1/2021 05/1/2021 04/2/2021 -28.00 
48 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XT 19/2/2021 NA 27/2/2021 Others 01/3/2021 19/2/2021 29/3/2021 -28.00 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
365
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
365 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of Ward GSTIN/ UIN 
Date of 
Registra-
tion 
Date of 
Initiatio
n of 
Notice 
Date of 
Filing 
Applica-
tion 
Reason of Cancellation Date of 
Order 
Date of 
Effect of 
Cancella-
tion 
Actual order 
(30 days from 
Application) 
Delay 
order in 
days 
49 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XY 28/9/2020 NA 27/3/2021 Others 30/3/2021 28/2/2021 26/4/2021 -27.00 
50 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X3 17/4/2019 NA 25/6/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 29/6/2020 25/6/2020 25/7/2020 -26.00 
51 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XH 01/7/2017 NA 06/10/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 12/10/2020 06/10/2020 05/11/2020 -24.00 
52 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X7 20/7/2017 NA 30/8/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 07/9/2020 31/7/2020 29/9/2020 -22.00 
53 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XL 06/11/2019 NA 19/10/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 27/10/2020 31/7/2020 18/11/2020 -22.00 
54 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X2 26/9/2019 NA 22/12/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 31/12/2020 22/12/2020 21/1/2021 -21.00 
55 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XZ 01/7/2017 NA 20/1/2021 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 29/1/2021 20/1/2021 19/2/2021 -21.00 
56 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XJ 23/8/2019 NA 28/9/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 08/10/2020 28/9/2020 28/10/2020 -20.00 
57 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XG 
19/12/202
0 NA 19/12/2020 Others 29/12/2020 19/12/2020 18/1/2021 -20.00 
58 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XL 14/8/2017 30/5/202
0 22/5/2020 Others 09/6/2020 30/4/2020 21/6/2020 -12.00 
59 Wokha Unit 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XL 05/11/2020 NA 11/11/2020 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 12/11/2020 11/11/2020 11/12/2020 -29.00 
60 Wokha Unit 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XQ 26/11/2019 NA 28/1/2021 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 03/2/2021 01/1/2021 27/2/2021 -24.00 
61 Wokha Unit 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XP 15/7/2017 NA 25/1/2021 Others 03/2/2021 25/1/2021 24/2/2021 -21.00 
62 Wokha Unit 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XC 16/7/2019 NA 20/5/2020 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 24/6/2020 20/5/2020 19/6/2020 5.00 
63 Wokha Unit 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XV 01/9/2020 NA 23/12/2020 Ceased to be liable to pay tax 03/2/2021 23/12/2020 22/1/2021 12.00 
64 Wokha Unit 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XY 01/7/2017 NA 20/11/2020 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 03/2/2021 31/3/2020 20/12/2020 45.00 
65 Wokha Unit 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XU 04/5/2018 NA 24/8/2020 Change in constitution of business 
leading to  17/11/2020 31/7/2020 23/9/2020 55.00 
66 Wokha Unit 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XX 06/2/2018 NA 28/6/2020 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 17/11/2020 31/3/2020 28/7/2020 112.00 

366
AppendicesAppendices 
 
366 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of Ward GSTIN/ UIN 
Date of 
Registra-
tion 
Date of 
Initiatio
n of 
Notice 
Date of 
Filing 
Applica-
tion 
Reason of Cancellation Date of 
Order 
Date of 
Effect of 
Cancella-
tion 
Actual order 
(30 days from 
Application) 
Delay 
order in 
days 
67 Dimapur Ward C 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XM 22/7/2017 NA 16/5/2020 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 01/10/2020 16/5/2020 15/6/2020 108.00 
68 Dimapur Ward C 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XL 01/7/2017 NA 18/3/2020 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 01/10/2020 18/3/2020 17/4/2020 167.00 
69 Dimapur Ward C 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X0 01/7/2017 NA 03/10/2018 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 12/2/2021 30/9/2018 02/11/2018 833.00 
70 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XS 14/8/2019 NA 20/7/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 20/8/2020 20/7/2020 19/8/2020 1.00 
71 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XA 20/11/2017 NA 15/7/2020 Others 20/8/2020 30/6/2020 14/8/2020 6.00 
72 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XD 11/9/2018 NA 27/11/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 12/1/2021 01/4/2019 27/12/2020 16.00 
73 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
X5 01/7/2017 NA 28/11/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 19/3/2021 31/3/2020 28/12/2020 81.00 
74 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XF 13/7/2017 13/7/202
0 10/1/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 23/7/2020 01/11/2018 09/2/2020 165.00 
75 Dimapur Ward D 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XW 01/7/2017 NA 11/6/2019 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 08/9/2020 11/6/2019 11/7/2019 425.00 
76 Kohima Ward A 1XXXXXXXXXXXX
XC 22/9/2017 10/11/2020 20/10/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 21/11/2020 20/10/2020 19/11/2020 2.00 
Sub total 15 positive 
cases 
Total 27 positive 
cases 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
367
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
367 
 
Appendix – 5.2.6 
Statement showing non-filling of GSTR-10 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.8.4) 
Sl. No. Name of Ward GSTIN/UIN Date of 
Registration 
Date of 
Initiation 
of Notice 
Date of 
Filing 
Application 
Reason of Cancellation Date of 
Order 
Date of 
Effect of 
Cancellation 
Date of 
GSTR 10 
filed 
Sou-moto cancellation 
1 Dimapur Ward 
C 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXR 29/8/2019 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  16/6/2020 16/6/2020 ----- 
2 Dimapur Ward 
C 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXN 01/7/2017 17/3/2020 17/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  16/6/2020 16/6/2020 ----- 
3 Dimapur Ward 
C 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXD 01/7/2017 17/3/2020 17/3/2020 Non Compliance of provisions of law 03/11/2020 03/11/2020 ----- 
4 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM 01/7/2017 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 17/12/2020 
5 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY 01/7/2017 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 ----- 
6 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXA 01/7/2017 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 ----- 
7 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9 01/7/2017 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 ----- 
8 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXK 01/7/2017 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 ----- 
9 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM 01/7/2017 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 ----- 
10 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC 01/7/2017 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 ----- 
11 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI 01/7/2017 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 ----- 
12 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXE 15/12/2017 17/3/2020 17/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  28/5/2020 28/5/2020 ----- 
13 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXV 14/7/2017 15/11/2020 15/11/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  24/11/2020 24/11/2020 ----- 
14 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX5 14/9/2017 29/9/2020 29/9/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  09/10/2020 09/10/2020 ----- 
15 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXF 14/9/2017 17/7/2020 17/7/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  28/7/2020 28/7/2020 ----- 

368
AppendicesAppendices 
 
368 
 
Sl. No. Name of Ward GSTIN/UIN Date of 
Registration 
Date of 
Initiation 
of Notice 
Date of 
Filing 
Application 
Reason of Cancellation Date of 
Order 
Date of 
Effect of 
Cancellation 
Date of 
GSTR 10 
filed 
16 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX4 21/7/2017 15/8/2020 15/8/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  26/8/2020 26/8/2020 ----- 
17 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXA 15/9/2017 15/8/2020 15/8/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  26/8/2020 26/8/2020 ----- 
18 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXZ 01/11/2017 15/8/2020 15/8/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  26/8/2020 26/8/2020 ----- 
19 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXF 01/3/2018 15/8/2020 15/8/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  26/8/2020 26/8/2020 ----- 
20 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXV 11/7/2018 10/9/2020 10/9/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  21/9/2020 21/9/2020 ----- 
21 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 01/8/2018 11/9/2020 11/9/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  22/9/2020 22/9/2020 ----- 
22 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXR 01/7/2018 10/12/2020 10/12/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  21/12/2020 21/12/2020 16/03/2023 
23 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 01/7/2017 16/7/2020 16/7/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  28/7/2020 28/7/2020 ----- 
24 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX3 01/7/2017 18/3/2021 18/3/2021 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  30/3/2021 30/3/2021 ----- 
25 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX1 01/7/2017 18/3/2021 18/3/2021 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  30/3/2021 30/3/2021 ----- 
26 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX4 09/8/2017 20/11/2020 20/11/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  03/12/2020 03/12/2020 ----- 
27 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXR 01/4/2018 22/2/2021 22/2/2021 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  07/3/2021 07/3/2021 ----- 
28 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX7 03/6/2019 22/2/2021 22/2/2021 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  07/3/2021 07/3/2021 ----- 
29 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXK 30/7/2018 07/9/2020 07/9/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  21/9/2020 21/9/2020 10/04/2023 
30 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG 08/3/2019 18/3/2020 18/3/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  06/4/2020 06/4/2020 ----- 
31 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU 01/7/2017 21/12/2020 21/12/2020 Section 29(2)(c)- Person, other than paying 
tax u/s 10,  11/1/2021 11/1/2021 ----- 
Sub total 3 nos 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
369
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
369 
 
Sl. No. Name of Ward GSTIN/UIN Date of 
Registration 
Date of 
Initiation 
of Notice 
Date of 
Filing 
Application 
Reason of Cancellation Date of 
Order 
Date of 
Effect of 
Cancellation 
Date of 
GSTR 10 
filed 
Cancelled on request by the taxpayers 
32 Dimapur Ward 
C 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH 02/8/2017 NA 11/6/2020 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 16/6/2020 11/6/2020  ----- 
33 Dimapur Ward 
C 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB 28/8/2020 NA 20/2/2021 Others 26/2/2021 01/2/2021 01/03/2021 
34 Dimapur Ward 
C 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS 01/7/2017 NA 05/10/2020 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 13/10/2020 10/8/2019 ----- 
35 Dimapur Ward 
C 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 28/8/2017 NA 16/6/2020 Others 03/7/2020 01/4/2020 ----- 
36 Dimapur Ward 
C 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9 01/7/2017 NA 20/1/2021 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 08/2/2021 18/1/2021 09/04/2021 
37 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY 01/7/2020 NA 12/8/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 20/8/2020 12/8/2020 ----- 
38 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX0 01/3/2019 NA 11/8/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 20/8/2020 31/3/2020 24/08/2020 
39 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX3 01/7/2017 NA 31/8/2020 Others 11/9/2020 01/4/2020 ----- 
40 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXV 04/2/2020 NA 21/10/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 03/11/2020 30/9/2020 14/11/2020 
41 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXQ 19/12/2020 NA 04/3/2021 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 19/3/2021 04/3/2021 ----- 
42 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM 18/11/2019 NA 01/8/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 20/8/2020 30/6/2020 ----- 
43 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXE 24/8/2017 NA 03/2/2021 Death of Sole Proprietor 26/2/2021 01/1/2021 ----- 
44 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX0 03/8/2018 NA 30/1/2021 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 26/2/2021 01/12/2020 ----- 
45 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9 01/7/2017 NA 14/3/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 13/4/2020 28/2/2020 25/05/2020 
46 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 01/7/2017 NA 18/3/2021 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 19/3/2021 01/7/2020 ----- 
47 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXX 25/10/2017 NA 05/1/2021 Others 07/1/2021 05/1/2021 ----- 

370
AppendicesAppendices 
 
370 
 
Sl. No. Name of Ward GSTIN/UIN Date of 
Registration 
Date of 
Initiation 
of Notice 
Date of 
Filing 
Application 
Reason of Cancellation Date of 
Order 
Date of 
Effect of 
Cancellation 
Date of 
GSTR 10 
filed 
48 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT 19/2/2021 NA 27/2/2021 Others 01/3/2021 19/2/2021 ----- 
49 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY 28/9/2020 NA 27/3/2021 Others 30/3/2021 28/2/2021 ----- 
50 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX3 17/4/2019 NA 25/6/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 29/6/2020 25/6/2020 ----- 
51 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH 01/7/2017 NA 06/10/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 12/10/2020 06/10/2020 ----- 
52 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX7 20/7/2017 NA 30/8/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 07/9/2020 31/7/2020 11/10/2020 
53 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 06/11/2019 NA 19/10/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 27/10/2020 31/7/2020 ----- 
54 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 26/9/2019 NA 22/12/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 31/12/2020 22/12/2020 ----- 
55 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXZ 01/7/2017 NA 20/1/2021 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 29/1/2021 20/1/2021 ----- 
56 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXJ 23/8/2019 NA 28/9/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 08/10/2020 28/9/2020 ----- 
57 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG 19/12/2020 NA 19/12/2020 Others 29/12/2020 19/12/2020 ----- 
58 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 14/8/2017 30/5/2020 22/5/2020 Others 09/6/2020 30/4/2020 23/07/2020 
59 Wokha Unit 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 05/11/2020 NA 11/11/2020 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 12/11/2020 11/11/2020 ----- 
60 Wokha Unit 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXQ 26/11/2019 NA 28/1/2021 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 03/2/2021 01/1/2021 ----- 
61 Wokha Unit 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP 15/7/2017 NA 25/1/2021 Others 03/2/2021 25/1/2021 ----- 
62 Wokha Unit 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC 16/7/2019 NA 20/5/2020 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 24/6/2020 20/5/2020 ----- 
63 Wokha Unit 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXV 01/9/2020 NA 23/12/2020 Ceased to be liable to pay tax 03/2/2021 23/12/2020 ----- 
64 Wokha Unit 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY 01/7/2017 NA 20/11/2020 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 03/2/2021 31/3/2020 ----- 
65 Wokha Unit 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU 04/5/2018 NA 24/8/2020 Change in constitution of business leading 
to  17/11/2020 31/7/2020 ----- 
66 Wokha Unit 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXX 06/2/2018 NA 28/6/2020 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 17/11/2020 31/3/2020 ----- 
67 Dimapur Ward 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXM 22/7/2017 NA 16/5/2020 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 01/10/2020 16/5/2020 09/10/2020 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
371
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
371 
 
Sl. No. Name of Ward GSTIN/UIN Date of 
Registration 
Date of 
Initiation 
of Notice 
Date of 
Filing 
Application 
Reason of Cancellation Date of 
Order 
Date of 
Effect of 
Cancellation 
Date of 
GSTR 10 
filed 
C 
68 Dimapur Ward 
C 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL 01/7/2017 NA 18/3/2020 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 01/10/2020 18/3/2020 10/10/2020 
69 Dimapur Ward 
C 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX0 01/7/2017 NA 03/10/2018 Discontinuation/Closure of Business 12/2/2021 30/9/2018 ----- 
70 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS 14/8/2019 NA 20/7/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 20/8/2020 20/7/2020 ----- 
71 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXA 20/11/2017 NA 15/7/2020 Others 20/8/2020 30/6/2020 ----- 
72 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXD 11/9/2018 NA 27/11/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 12/1/2021 01/4/2019 ----- 
73 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX5 01/7/2017 NA 28/11/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 19/3/2021 31/3/2020 ----- 
74 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXF 13/7/2017 13/7/2020 10/1/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 23/7/2020 01/11/2018 ----- 
75 Dimapur Ward 
D 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW 01/7/2017 NA 11/6/2019 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 08/9/2020 11/6/2019 ----- 
76 Kohima Ward 
A 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC 22/9/2017 10/11/2020 20/10/2020 Discontinuance of business/ Closure of 
business 21/11/2020 20/10/2020 ----- 
Sub total 9 nos 
Tot al 12 nos 
 
 

372
AppendicesAppendices 
 
372 
 
Appendix – 5.2.7 
Statement showing compliance deviations in respect of 16 parameters 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.9.2) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No 
Audit 
Dimension GSTIN 
Cases where reply 
received 
Accepted by Dept. including cases 
where action is yet to be initiated Department reply accepted by Audit Department's reply 
not acceptable to 
Audit (Rebuttal) Recovered ASMT-10 Data entry errors Action taken 
before query 
Other valid 
explanations 
Total accepted 
cases by audit. 
No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount No Amt 
ITC 
mismatch 
between 
GSTR-2A 
and GSTR-
3B 
Domain: ITC 
1 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX7 
1 93,85,677 0 0 1 93,85,677 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXZ 1 2,41,52,494 0 0 1 2,41,52,494 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
3 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXV 1 5,17,77,288 0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 5,17,77,288 
4 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXS 1 1,56,00,793 0 0 1 1,56,00,793 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
5 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXH 1 1,52,09,407 0 0 1 1,52,09,407 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
6 
1XXXXXX 
XXXXXXXY 1 3,18,53,489 0 0 1 3,18,53,489 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
7 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXC 1 3,02,59,656 0 0 1 71,85,096 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
8 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXB 1 2,76,38,482 0 0 1 2,76,38,482 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
9 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXR 1 2,56,74,278 0 0 1 2,56,74,278 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
10 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXW 1 2,49,80,926 0  0  0 0  0 0  1 2,49,80,926 0 0  1 2,49,80,926 0  0 
11 ITC passed 
on without 
supplier 
remitting 
tax 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX7 1 1,33,34,306 0 0 1 1,33,34,306 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
12 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX2 1 99,35,294 0 0 1 99,35,294 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
13 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXB 1 10,43,189 0 0 1 10,43,189 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
14 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXH 1 6,35,188 1 6,35,188 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
15 ITC availed 
in GSTR-
3B filed 
after the 
cut-off 
period. 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXS 1 1,60,18,431 0 0 1 1,60,18,431 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
16 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXU 1 10,52,24,991 0 0 1 10,52,24,991 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
17 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX4 1 90,95,068 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 90,95,068 
18 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX7 1 1,12,48,733 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1,12,48,733 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
373
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
373 
 
Sl. 
No 
Audit 
Dimension GSTIN 
Cases where reply 
received 
Accepted by Dept. including cases 
where action is yet to be initiated Department reply accepted by Audit Department's reply 
not acceptable to 
Audit (Rebuttal) Recovered ASMT-10 Data entry errors Action taken 
before query 
Other valid 
explanations 
Total accepted 
cases by audit. 
No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount No Amt 
19 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXO 1 2,34,49,245 0 0 1 2,34,49,245 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  0 
20 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX5 1 1,97,45,891 0 0 1 1,97,45,891 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
21 
1XXXXXXXX 
XXXXX0 1 1,95,43,106 0 0 1 1,95,43,106 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
22 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXK 1 1,00,44,677 0 0 1 1,00,44,677 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
23 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX1 1 1,30,82,066 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1,30,82,066 
24 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXC 1 6,42,16,830  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 6,42,16,830 1 6,42,16,830  0 0 
25 Incorrect 
availing of 
ISD credit 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX2 1 24,44,469 0 0 1 24,44,469 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
26 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXP 1 4,34,462 0 0 1 4,34,462 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
 Domain: Annual Return and financial statements (FS) 
27 
Mismatch 
of ITC 
availed 
between 
Annual 
returns and 
Books of 
accounts 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXI 1 1,82,589  1 1,82,589 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  0 0  
28 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX8 1 5,36,811 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 536811 
29 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXY 1 14,25,871 0 0 1 14,25,871 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
30 
Reconciliati
on between 
ITC availed 
in Annual 
returns with 
expenses in 
financial 
statements 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXH 1 16,00,492 0 0 1 16,00,492 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
31 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXP 1 12,67,310 0 0 1 12,67,310 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
32 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXB 1 23,49,514 0 0 1 23,49,514 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
33 Mismatch 
in tax paid 
between 
books of 
accounts 
and returns 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXP 1 14,09,092 0 0 0 0 0 0  1 14,09,092 0 0 1 14,09,092 0 0 
34 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXR 1 17,852 0 0 0 0 1 17,852 0 0 0 0 1 17,852 0 0 
35 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXT 1 9,81,545 0 0 0 0 1 9,81,545 0 0 0 0 1 9,81,545 0 0 
36 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXB 1 18,60,501 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 18,60,501 1 18,60,501 0 0 
37 1XXXXXXX 1 18,38,895 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 18,38,895 1 18,38,895 0 0 

374
AppendicesAppendices 
 
374 
 
Sl. 
No 
Audit 
Dimension GSTIN 
Cases where reply 
received 
Accepted by Dept. including cases 
where action is yet to be initiated Department reply accepted by Audit Department's reply 
not acceptable to 
Audit (Rebuttal) Recovered ASMT-10 Data entry errors Action taken 
before query 
Other valid 
explanations 
Total accepted 
cases by audit. 
No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount No Amt 
XXXXXX7 
Domain: Tax and Interest payment 
38 
Short 
payment of 
tax under 
RCM 
versus ITC 
availed in 
GSTR-3B/ 
GSTR-9 
1XXXXXXXX 
XXXXXZ 1 6,36,657 0 0 1 6,36,657 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
39 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXH 1 1,90,403 0 0 1 1,90,403 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
40 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX9 1 1,91,558 0 0 0 0 0 0  1 1,91,558 0 0 1 1,91,558 0  0 
41 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXV 1 45,34,112 0 0 0 0 1 45,34,112 0   0 0 1 45,34,112 0  0 
42 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXH 1 70,93,923 0 0 0 0 1 70,93,923 0   0 0 1 70,93,923 0  0 
43 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXT 1 4,45,040 0 0 0 0 0 0  1 4,45,040 0 0 1 4,45,040 0  0 
44 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXS 1 1,68,240 0 0 1 1,68,240 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
45 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXI 1 3,73,878 0 0 1 3,73,878 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
46 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX1 1 1,05,26,140 0 0 1 1,05,26,140 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
47 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXU 1 1,78,370 0 0 1 1,78,370 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
48 
Unsettled 
liabilities 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXC 1 1,49,60,400 0 0 1 1,49,60,400 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
49 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX8 1 57,73,361 0 0 1 57,73,361 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
50 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXC 1 1,25,69,899 0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1,25,69,899 
51 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXP 1 1,33,46,549 0 0 1 1,33,46,549 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
52 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX1 1 41,954 1 41,954   0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
53 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXL 1 77,32,896 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 77,32,896 
54 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXB 1  7,01,556 1 7,01,556 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
55 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXW 1 1,62,84,674 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1,62,84,674 1 1,62,84,674   0 
56 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXL 1 2,32,46,320 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2,32,46,320 1 2,32,46,320   0 
57 
1XXXXXX 
XXXXXXX7 1  60,446 1 60,446 0 0   0   0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
375
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
375 
 
Sl. 
No 
Audit 
Dimension GSTIN 
Cases where reply 
received 
Accepted by Dept. including cases 
where action is yet to be initiated Department reply accepted by Audit Department's reply 
not acceptable to 
Audit (Rebuttal) Recovered ASMT-10 Data entry errors Action taken 
before query 
Other valid 
explanations 
Total accepted 
cases by audit. 
No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount No Amt 
58 
Suppression 
of tax 
liability 
based on E-
way bill 
verification 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX2 1 3,68,23,505 0 0 1 3,68,23,505 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
59 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXG 1 21,26,497 0 0 1 21,26,497 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
60 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXJ 1 23,99,381 0 0 1 23,99,381 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
61 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXG 1 27,16,560 0 0 1 27,16,560 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
62 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX8 1 16,91,192 0 0 1 16,91,192 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
63 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXH 1 28,34,477 0 0 1 28,34,477 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
64 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX2 1 39,27,502 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 39,27,502 0 0  1 39,27,502 0  0 
65 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX2 1 22,86,760 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  1 22,86,760 1 22,86,760 0  0 
66 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXF 1 12,99,322 0 0 1 12,99,322 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
67 
1XXXXXXXX 
XXXXXW 1 56,18,819 0 0 1 56,18,819 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
68 
Compositio
n taxpayers 
also 
availing e-
commerce 
facility 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX B 1 1,77,30,000  0 0 0 0 1 1,77,30,000 0 0 0 0 1 1,77,30,000 0 0  
69 
GSTR-3B 
was not 
filed but 
GSTR-1 is 
available 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX5 1 9,80,027 0 0 1 9,80,027 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
70 
1XXXXXX 
XXXXXXXG 1 22,78,080 0 0 1 22,78,080 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
71 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXO 1 33,58,549 0 0 1 14,28,439 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
72 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXB 1 4,21,296 0 0  0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 4,21,296 
73 
Short 
payment of 
interest  
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXR 1 70,28,077 0 0 1 70,28,077 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
74 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXU 1 1,30,39,181 0 0 1 1,30,39,181 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
75 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX7 1 18,86,293 0 0 1 18,86,293 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
76 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXE 1 75,99,654 0 0 1 75,99,654 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

376
AppendicesAppendices 
 
376 
 
Sl. 
No 
Audit 
Dimension GSTIN 
Cases where reply 
received 
Accepted by Dept. including cases 
where action is yet to be initiated Department reply accepted by Audit Department's reply 
not acceptable to 
Audit (Rebuttal) Recovered ASMT-10 Data entry errors Action taken 
before query 
Other valid 
explanations 
Total accepted 
cases by audit. 
No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amt. No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount No Amt 
77 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXC 1 53,51,215 0 0 1 53,51,215 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
78 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXG 1 27,27,397 0 0 1 27,27,397 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
79 
1XXXXXX 
XXXXXXX3 1 19,94,933 0 0 1 19,94,933 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
80 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXP 1 19,10,812 0 0 1 19,10,812 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
81 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXO 1 21,62,006 0 0 1 21,62,006 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
82 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXC 1 73,65,069 0  0 0  0  0 0  0 0  1 73,65,069 1 73,65,069  0 0 
Sub total 82 84,61,11,888 5 16,21,733 52 53,46,10,829 5 3,03,57,432 5 3,09,54,118 7 11,70,99,049 17 17,84,10,599 8 10,64,64,057 
Turnover mismatch 
83 
Under-
declaration 
of taxable 
supplies by 
comparing 
TDS 
returns 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX2 1 2,45,81,064 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2,45,81,064 1 2,45,81,064 0 0 
84 
 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXL 1 3,07,00,000 0 0 1 3,07,00,000 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
85 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXC 1 6,71,23,263 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 6,71,23,263 
86 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXXP 1 1,57,81,666 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1,57,81,666 
87 
Suppression 
of taxable 
value 
(Unbilled 
Revenue)  
1XXXXXX 
XXXXXXX9 1 1,61,43,246 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1,61,43,246 
88 
Negative 
figure in 
GSTR-9C 
Table 7G 
1XXXXXXX 
XXXXXX9 1 68,49,258 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 68,49,258 1 68,49,258 0 0 
Sub total 6 16,11,78,497 0 0 1 3,07,00,000 0 0 0 0 2 3,14,30,322 2 3,14,30,322 3 9,90,48,175 
Grand Total 88 100,72,90,385 5 16,21,733 53 56,53,10,829 5 3,03,57,432 5 3,09,54,118 9 14,85,29,371 19 20,98,40,921 11 20,55,12,232 
Grand Total (₹ in crore) - 100.73  0.16  56.53  3.04  3.10  14.85  20.98  20.55 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
377
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
377 
 
Appendix – 5.2.8  
Statement showing cases accepted or action initiated by Department.  
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.9.3) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Audit Dimension GSTIN Ward 
Recovered ASMT-10 
Tot al Accepted by Dept. including cases where 
action is yet to be initiated 
No. Amount No. Amount No Amount 
GSTR-2A vs GSTR-3B 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX7 Ward C, Dimapur 0 0 1 93,85,677 1 93,85,677 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXZ Ward A, Dimapur 0 0 1 2,41,52,494 1 2,41,52,494 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS Ward A, Dimapur 0 0 1 1,56,00,793 1 1,56,00,793 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH Ward A, Dimapur 0 0 1 1,52,09,407 1 1,52,09,407 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY Ward E, Dimapur 0 0 1 3,18,53,489 1 3,18,53,489 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC Ward D, Dimapur 0 0 1 71,85,096 1 71,85,096 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB Ward A, Dimapur 0 0 1 2,76,38,482 1 2,76,38,482 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXR Ward B, Dimapur 0 0 1 2,56,74,278 1 2,56,74,278 
Under RCM 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXZ Ward A, Dimapur 0 0 1 6,36,657 1 6,36,657 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH Ward C, Dimapur 0 0 1 1,90,403 1 1,90,403 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS Ward A, Dimapur 0 0 1 1,68,240 1 1,68,240 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI Mon unit 0 0 1 3,73,878 1 3,73,878 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX1 Ward C, Dimapur 0 0 1 1,05,26,140 1 1,05,26,140 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU Wok ha  0 0 1 1,78,370 1 1,78,370 
ISD credit incorrectly 
availed by the 
recipients 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 Mon unit 0 0 1 24,44,469 1 24,44,469 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP Ward A, Dimapur 0 0 1 4,34,462 1 4,34,462 
ITC availed after cut-
off period 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS Ward E, Dimapur 0 0 1 1,60,18,431 1 1,60,18,431 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU Ward E, Dimapur 0 0 1 10,52,24,991 1 10,52,24,991 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXO Ward C, Dimapur 0 0 1 2,34,49,245 1 2,34,49,245 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX5 Ward A, Dimapur 0 0 1 1,97,45,891 1 1,97,45,891 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX0 Ward B, Kohima 0 0 1 1,95,43,106 1 1,95,43,106 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXK Ward B, Kohima 0 0 1 1,00,44,677 1 1,00,44,677 
ITC availed without 
supplier remitting tax 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX7 Ward C, Dimapur 0 0 1 1,33,34,306 1 1,33,34,306 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 Ward E, Dimapur 0 0 1 99,35,294 1 99,35,294 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB Ward A, Dimapur 0 0 1 10,43,189 1 10,43,189 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH Tuensang unit 1 6,35,188 0 0 1 6,35,188 
Positive figure in 
GSTR-9C Table 12F 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXI Ward E, Dimapur  1 1,82,589 0 0 1 1,82,589 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXY Ward F, Dimapur 0 0 1 14,25,871 1 14,25,871 

378
AppendicesAppendices 
 
378 
 
Audit Dimension GSTIN Ward 
Recovered ASMT-10 
Tot al Accepted by Dept. including cases where 
action is yet to be initiated 
No. Amount No. Amount No Amount 
Positive figure in 
GSTR-9C Table 14T 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH Ward B, Dimapur 0 0 1 16,00,492 1 16,00,492 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP Ward B, Dimapur 0 0 1 12,67,310 1 12,67,310 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB Wok ha  0 0 1 23,49,514 1 23,49,514 
Short payment of 
interest on delayed 
payments 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXR Ward B, Dimapur 0 0 1 70,28,077 1 70,28,077 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXU Ward E, Dimapur 0 0 1 1,30,39,181 1 1,30,39,181 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX7 Ward B, Dimapur 0 0 1 18,86,293 1 18,86,293 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXE Ward B, Dimapur 0 0 1 75,99,654 1 75,99,654 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC Ward B, Dimapur 0 0 1 53,51,215 1 53,51,215 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG Ward B, Kohima 0 0 1 27,27,397 1 27,27,397 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX3 Ward D, Dimapur 0 0 1 19,94,933 1 19,94,933 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP Ward A, Dimapur 0 0 1 19,10,812 1 19,10,812 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXO Mon unit 0 0 1 21,62,006 1 21,62,006 
Tax not remitted due to 
GSTR-3B not filed 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX5 Ward A, Dimapur 0 0 1 9,80,027 1 9,80,027 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG Wok ha 0 0 1 22,78,080 1 22,78,080 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXO Mon unit 0 0 1 14,28,439 1 14,28,439 
Suppression of tax 
liability (Eway-bill) 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 Mon unit 0 0 1 3,68,23,505 1 3,68,23,505 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG Ward A, Dimapur 0 0 1 21,26,497 1 21,26,497 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXJ Ward B, Dimapur 0 0 1 23,99,381 1 23,99,381 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXG Wok ha  0 0 1 27,16,560 1 27,16,560 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 Ward A, Dimapur 0 0 1 16,91,192 1 16,91,192 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH Wok ha  0 0 1 28,34,477 1 28,34,477 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXF Ward C, Dimapur 0 0 1 12,99,322 1 12,99,322 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW Mon unit 0 0 1 56,18,819 1 56,18,819 
Tax short-paid 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC Ward E, Dimapur 0 0 1 1,49,60,400 1 1,49,60,400 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 Ward A, Dimapur 0 0 1 57,73,361 1 57,73,361 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP Ward A, Dimapur 0 0 1 1,33,46,549 1 1,33,46,549 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX1 Ward D, Dimapur 1 41,954 0 0 1 41,954 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB Ward A, Dimapur 1 7,01,556 0 0 1 7,01,556 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX7 Ward E, Dimapur 1 60,446 0 0 1 60,446 
Sub total 5 16,21,733 52 53,46,10,829 57 53,62,32,562 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
379
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
379 
 
Audit Dimension GSTIN Ward 
Recovered ASMT-10 
Tot al Accepted by Dept. including cases where 
action is yet to be initiated 
No. Amount No. Amount No Amount 
Under declaration of 
taxable supplies by 
comparing TDS returns 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL Ward A, Dimapur 0 0 1 3,07,00,000 1 3,07,00,000 
Sub total 0 0 1 3,07,00,000 1 3,07,00,000 
Grand Total 5 16,21,733 53 56,53,10,829 58 56,69,32,562 
Grand Total (₹ in crore)  0.16  56.53 - 56.69 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

380
Appendices
Appendices 
 
380 
 
 
Appendix-5.2.9  
Statement showing where Department’s response was rebutted 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.9.3) 
 
Sl. No. Audit 
Dimension GSTN Ward 
Mismatch 
Amount  
(in ₹) 
Department Reply Reply Rebuttal 
1.  
Under 
declaration 
of taxable 
supplies by 
comparing 
TDS returns 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC W ard D, 
Dimapur 6,71,23,263 
In reply the department stated that the DPR for the 
said project was prepared based on Nagaland SoR 
of Roads and Bridges 2016 where there was no 
provision for payment of GST. The taxpayer had 
also written to the Chief Engineer R&B for 
reimbursement of the differential amount. 
The reply is not acceptable as the 
liability of payment of GST lies with the 
Taxpayer. 
2.  
Mismatch in 
availing of 
ITC - 
GSTR-2A v 
GSTR-3B 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXV W ard D, 
Dimapur 5,17,77,288 
In reply, the department stated that no discrepancy 
in R2A and ITC availed as per summary 
Comparison 
Reply is not acceptable as summary 
comparison table considers only the ITC 
available as per GSTR 2A and availed in 
GSTR 3B during the current year and 
Audit calculation is made on the basis of 
algorithm given in Table 1 of paragraph 
8.1 which is the right method as per 
NGST Act/ Rules. 
3.  Unbilled 
revenue 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9 W ard D, 
Dimapur 1,61,43,246 
The Department in reply stated that the unbilled 
revenue was reported under Table 5(O) 
The Department didn’t provide a proper 
reply on the basis of the taxpayer reply 
and forwarded (Feb 2024) to Audit. The 
reply is also unacceptable as the 
mismatch turnover was not declared in 
GSTR-9C Table 5(O). 
4.  
Under 
declaration 
of taxable 
supplies by 
comparing 
TDS returns 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXP Wa r d  C ,  
Kohima 1,57,81,666 
In reply the Department stated that TDS credit was 
declared in monthly GSTR 3B return of Sep 2019 
and Aug 2019. However, the tax was paid at lower 
rate of tax 5% in Aug 2019 and 8.86% in Sep 2019 
due to non-release of remaining GST by the Public 
Works Department for whom the work was 
executed. 
The reply is not acceptable as the 
liability of payment of GST lies with the 
Taxpayer. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
381
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
381 
 
Sl. No. Audit 
Dimension GSTN Ward 
Mismatch 
Amount  
(in ₹) 
Department Reply Reply Rebuttal 
5.  
Mismatch in 
availing of 
ITC - ITC 
availed in 
GSTR 3B 
after cut-off 
period 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX1 Wa r d  A,  
Kohima 1,30,82,066 
The PO dropped the proceedings initiated under 
Section 61 of the NGST Act, stating that the 
taxpayer had filed the GSTR 3B and GSTR 9 
availing the Amnesty scheme and ITC used was 
available as per the books of accounts for the 
relevant period. 
The Amnesty Scheme was introduced to 
encourage the non-filers to file Monthly / 
Annual Returns and for regulating the 
rate of late fee charged from them. 
Therefore, the action of the PO is against 
the NGST Act. The PO also failed to 
protect the revenue interest of the 
Government.   
6.  Tax short-
paid 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXC W ard D, 
Dimapur 1,25,69,899 
In reply, the department stated that the DPR for the 
said project was prepared on the basis of SoR 
(Roads and Bridges) 2016, where there was no 
provision for GST. The taxpayer had also written to 
the Chief Engineer R&B for reimbursement of the 
differential amount. 
 The reply is not acceptable as the 
liability of payment of GST lies with the 
Taxpayer. 
7.  
Mismatch in 
availing of 
ITC - ITC 
availed in 
GSTR 3B 
after cut-off 
period 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX7 Wa r d  A,  
Dimapur 1,12,48,733 
Though the department forwarded the reply 
received from the TP , which stated that the 
interpretation of the provision under section 16(4) 
made by the department is wrong and to drop the 
proceedings or to keep the proceedings in abeyance 
till section 16(4) of the NGST act is interpreted by 
the judiciary, the views of the department had not 
been furnished. 
The Department needs to give proper 
reply on the basis of the reply of the 
Taxpayer. 
8.  
Mismatch in 
availing of 
ITC - ITC 
availed in 
GSTR 3B 
after cut-off 
period 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX4 W ard D, 
Dimapur 90,95,068 
Though the department forwarded the reply 
received from the TP , which stated that the 
interpretation of the provision under section 16(4) 
made by the department is wrong and to drop the 
proceedings or to keep the proceedings in abeyance 
till section 16(4) of the NGST act is interpreted by 
the judiciary, the views of the department had not 
been furnished. 
The Department needs to give proper 
reply on the basis of the reply of the 
taxpayer 
9.  Tax short-
paid 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL Wa r d  B ,  
Mokokchung 77,32,896 
In reply, the PO sated (Sept 2023) that the notice 
was issued to the firm through E-mail and speed 
post, however the same was not delivered as the 
addressee was not found. The PO also furnished a 
copy of the inspection report of the CSTO, 
The reply of the PO is not acceptable as 
the address for communication 
mentioned in the letter and the E-mail 
address was different from the contact 
person available in the profile of the 

382
AppendicesAppendices 
 
382 
 
Sl. No. Audit 
Dimension GSTN Ward 
Mismatch 
Amount  
(in ₹) 
Department Reply Reply Rebuttal 
Mokokchung which Taxpayer. Further the PO also did not 
take any action required as per the NGST 
ACT. 
10.  
Mismatch in 
Annual 
Return and 
Financial 
Statements 
(FS) - 
Positive 
figure 
inGSTR9C 
Table 12 F 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 Wa r d A,  
Dimapur 
 
5,36,811 
In reply, the department stated that the difference is 
due to ITC booked of 86424 in FY 17-18 but 
claimed in 2018-19, ITC booked of 693442 in FY 
2018-19 but claimed in 2019-20 and ITC reversed 
of 70207 in GSTR 9 of 2018-19. 
Reply of the department is not found 
correct as per GSTR 9 return pertaining 
to the mentioned periods. 
11.  
Tax not 
remitted due 
to GSTR-3B 
not filed 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB Wa r d A,  
Mokokchung 
  
4,21,296 
The department stated in reply stated that notice 
was issued to email address given in the 
Registration certificate, the reply is awaited. 
However, the business was no longer found in 
existence during inspection by CSTO. 
The reply of the PO is not acceptable as 
PO did not take any action required as 
per the NGST ACT. 
   Total 20,55,12,232   
Source: Departmental records 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
383
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
383 
 
Appendix-5.2.10 
Statement showing Data Entry Errors 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.9.3) 
  
Sl. No. GSTIN Audit Dimension Ward Amount (in ₹) 
1. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH Mismatch in availing of ITC – Under 
Reverse Charge Mechanism 
Ward A, Kohima 70,93,923 
2. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXV Mismatch in availing of ITC – Under 
Reverse Charge Mechanism 
Ward A, Dimapur 45,34,112 
3. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXR Mismatch in Annual Return and 
Financial Statements (FS) -  Negative 
figure in GSTR-9C Table 9R 
Ward B, Dimapur 17,852 
4. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT Mismatch in Annual Return and 
Financial Statements (FS) -  Negative 
figure in GSTR-9C Table 9R 
Ward A, Kohima 9,81,545 
5. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXB Ineligible composition levy due to 
incorrect turnover 
Ward A, Dimapur 1,77,30,000 
Tot al 3,03,57,432 
Total (₹ in crore) 3.03 
Source: Departmental records 
 
 
Appendix-5.2.11 
Statement showing Department action taken before audit query 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.9.3) 
 
Source: Departmental records 
 
Sl. 
No. GSTIN Audit Dimension Ward Amount  
(in ₹) 
1. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXW Mismatch in availing of ITC – GSTR-
2A vs GSTR3B Ward E, Dimapur 2,49,80,928 
2. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX P 
Mismatch in Annual Return and 
Financial Statements (FS) - Negative 
figure in GSTR-9C Table 9R 
Ward B, Dimapur 14,09,092 
3. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 Eway-bill Ward E. Dimapur 39,27,502 
4. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX9 Mismatch in availing of ITC – Under 
Reverse Charge Mechanism Ward D, Dimapur 1,91,558 
5. 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXT Mismatch in availing of ITC – Under 
Reverse Charge Mechanism Tuensang unit 4,45,040 
Tot al 3,09,54,118 
Total (₹ in crore) 3.09 

384
AppendicesAppendices 
 
384 
 
Appendix – 5.2.12 
Statement showing short payment of interest on delayed payments 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.9.4) 
(Amount in ₹) 
Ye a r  GSTN 
Months 
where filing 
of GSTR 3B 
returns were 
delayed 
Filing 
dates 
Numbe
r of 
days 
delayed 
Cash payment in monthly return 
Total tax 
paid in cash 
18 per cent 
Interest 
liability 
Interest 
paid 
Balance 
payable CGST NGST IGST 
IGST 
(Reverse 
Charge) 
2018-19 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX
6 
Ward A, Dimapur 
Dec-18 18/10/2019 271 13,82,604 13,82,604 
 0  0 27,65,208 3,69,553 1,63,640 2,05,913 
Feb-19 15/11/2019 245 0 0 0 4,23,600 4,23,600 51,180 0 51,180 
Mar-19 15/11/2019 240 0 0 0 4,19,000 4,19,000 49,591 0 49,591 
2019-20 
Apr-19 29/11/2019 209 0 0 0 49,49,848 49,49,848 5,10,173 0 5,10,173 
Jun-19 29/11/2019 101 0 0 0 11,10,332 11,10,332 55,304 0 55,304 
Aug-19 29/11/2019 70 0 0 0 12,18,230 12,18,230 42,054 0 42,054 
Sep-19 29/11/2019 40 0 0 0 39,70,039 39,70,039 78,313 0 78,313 
Oct-19 18/12/2019 28 0 0 0 24,89,220 24,89,220 34,372 0 34,372 
2020-21 Jun-20 13/11/2020 116 13,45,398 13,45,398 0 0 26,90,796 1,53,928 0 1,53,928 
Jul-20 13/11/2020 85 25,94,084 25,95,884 0 0 51,89,968 2,17,552 0 2,17,552 
        Sub-total 2,52,26,241 15,62,020 1,63,640 13,98,380 
2018-19 
1XXXXXXXXXXXXX
K 
Ward C Dimapur  
Apr-18 
09/06/2018 20 5,256 2,61,960 0 0 2,67,216 2,636 0 2,636 
May-18 27/06/2018 7 1,86,127 1,86,127 
2,38,12
8 
37,800 6,48,182 2,238 0 2,238 
Aug-18 20/10/2018 30 0 0 0 71,583 71,583 1,059 0 1,059 
Nov-18 16/01/2019 27 0 0 0 99,659 99,659 1,327 0 1,327 
Dec-18 13/04/2019 83 0 0 0 1,18,025 1,18,025 4,831 0 4,831 
Jan-19 19/04/2019 58 0 0 0 51,350 51,350 1,469 0 1,469 
2019-20 
May-19 18/07/2019 28 0 0 0 87,573 87,573 1,209 0 1,209 
Jun-19 10/10/2019 82 54,031 2,15,132   1,13,702 3,82,865 15,482 0 15,482 
Jul-19 11/11/2019 83 0 0 0 1,32,900 1,32,900 5,440 0 5,440 
Aug-19 28/11/2019 69 0  0 95,650 
95,650 3,255 0 3,255 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
385
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
385 
 
Ye a r  GSTN 
Months 
where filing 
of GSTR 3B 
returns were 
delayed 
Filing 
dates 
Numbe
r of 
days 
delayed 
Cash payment in monthly return 
Total tax 
paid in cash 
18 per cent 
Interest 
liability 
Interest 
paid 
Balance 
payable CGST NGST IGST 
IGST 
(Reverse 
Charge) 
Sep-19 30/11/2019 41 0 0 0 1,04,542 1,04,542 2,114 0 2,114 
Oct-19 17/12/2019 27 0 2,00,040 0 25,550 2,25,590 3,004 0 3,004 
Jan-20 29/02/2020 9 0 1,74,883 0 52,900 2,27,783 1,011 0 1,011 
Mar-20 20/10/2020 50 0 0 0 74,800 74,800 1,844 0 1,844 
2020-21 Aug-20 18/11/2020 59 0 0 0 39,250 39,250 1,142 0 1,142 
Sub total 48,061 48,061 48,061 48,061 
Total  2,52,74,302 16,10,081 2,11,701 14,46,441 
Total (₹ in crore) 2.52 0.16 0.02 0.14 
Source: Departmental records 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

386
AppendicesAppendices 
 
386 
 
Appendix-5.2.13 
Statement showing lack of action on non-filers of GST returns 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.9.4) 
  
Sl. 
No GSTIN Ye a r  
Value of 
Outward 
Taxable 
Supplies as 
per GSTR 9 
Value of 
Outward 
Taxable 
Supplies as 
per GSTR 
3B Table 3.1 
Tot al  amo unt 
 in ₹ 
Non-filing of 
GSTR 9 and 9C 
1 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 2019-20 6,69,85,338 - 6,69,85,338 GSTR 9C not filed 
2020-21 6,85,89,461 - 6,85,89,461 GSTR 9C not filed 
2 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX6 2020-21 1,51,19,53,604 - 1,51,19,53,604 GSTR 9C not filed 
3 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXA 2020-21 - 18,47,01,046 18,47,01,046 GSTR 9 and 9C not 
filed 
Tot al  1,64,75,28,403 18,47,01,046 1,83,22,29,449  
Total (in crore) 164.75 18.47 183.22  
Source: Departmental records 
Appendix-5.2.14 
Statement showing Mismatch in Input Tax Credit claimed by taxpayers 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.9.4) 
 
Sl. 
No GSTIN Ward 
Mismatch in availing of ITC Mismatch 
in Annual 
Return 
and 
Financial 
Statements 
(FS) - 
Positive 
figure in 
GSTR-9C 
Table 12F 
Total amount GSTR 2A vs 
GSTR-3B 
ITC availed 
without 
supplier 
remitting 
tax 
ITC availed 
after cut-off 
period 
1 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXE Dimapur Ward A 14,19,67,569 24,76,80,143 0 0 38,96,47,712 
2 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXO Dimapur Ward A 57,06,293 3,60,83,707 0 0 4,17,90,000 
3 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX6 Dimapur Ward A 34,18,104 5,22,19,644 1,87,86,872 7,75,317 7,51,99,937 
4 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXL Dimapur Ward A 4,95,27,276 0 0 0 4,95,27,276 
5 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXK Dimapur, W ard C 19,82,109 10,91,535 0 8,85,879 39,59,523 
6 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXH Dimapur, W ard C 38,51,706 0 0 0 38,51,706 
7 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX8 D i m a p u r,  Wa r d D 59,29,271 2,05,596 0 0 61,34,867 
8 1XXXXXXXXXXXXX2 Dimapur Ward E 55,75,288 3,17,19,536 0 0 3,72,94,824 
9 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXA Dimapur Ward E 35,71,614 0 0 0 35,71,614 
10 1XXXXXXXXXXXXXS Kohima Ward A 11,14,17,515 54,79,233 0 0 11,68,96,748 
Tot al  33,29,46,745 37,44,79,394 1,87,86,872 16,61,196 72,78,74,207 
Total (₹ in crore) 33.29 37.44 1.87 0.16 72.78 
Source: Departmental records 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
387
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
387 
 
Appendix-6.1.1 
Statement showing summarised financial results of Government Companies for the latest year for which accounts are finalised as on 30 September 2024  
(Reference: Paragraphs 6.1.2, 6.1.8 and 6.1.8.2)  
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Sector & Name of the 
Company 
Period of 
accounts 
Year in 
which 
finalized 
Earnings 
before 
interest and 
taxes 
(EBIT)  
Net 
Profit/ 
Loss  
Turn 
over 
Impact of 
accounts 
comments 
Paid up 
Capital 
Accumula-
ted 
Profit(+)/ 
Loss(-) 
Free 
Reserves 
& 
Surplus 
Long 
Term 
Loans 
outstand-
ing 
Capital 
Employ- 
ed @ 
Return 
on 
Capital 
Employ- 
ed # 
Percentage 
of return on 
Capital 
Employed 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
A. Working Government Companies 
FINANCE 
1 
Nagaland Industrial 
Development Corporation 
Ltd. 
2022-23 2023-24 -5.36 -5.75 1.47 - 23.20 -65.11 0 59.45 17.54 -5.36 -30.56 
  Sector-wise total     -5.36 -5.75 1.47   23.20 -65.11 0 59.45 17.54 -5.36 -30.56 
MANUFACTURING   
2 
Nagaland State Mineral 
Development Corporation 
Ltd. 
2021-22 2023-24 0.90 0.90 0.72 - 1.60 7.73 0 0 9.33 0.90 9.65 
  Sector-wise total     0.90 0.90 0.72 - 1.60 7.73 0 0 9.33 0.90 9.65 
SERVICES   
3 
Nagaland Hotels and 
Tourism Development 
Corporation Ltd. 
2021-22 2023-24 -0.17 -0.17 3.62 - 2.354 -26.81 0 4.12 -20.34 -0.17 Not 
workable 
  Sector-wise total     -0.17 -0.17 3.62 - 2.35 -26.81 0 4.12 -20.34 -0.17 Not 
workable 
                                                
4  Paid up capital of the Company (serial no. A3) includes ‘Share application money pending allotment’ of ₹1.53 crore shown in the Annual Accounts under ‘Reserve & 
Surplus (Schedule B)’. 
 

388
AppendicesAppendices 
 
388 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Sector & Name of the 
Company 
Period of 
accounts 
Year in 
which 
finalized 
Earnings 
before 
interest and 
taxes 
(EBIT)  
Net 
Profit/ 
Loss  
Turn 
over 
Impact of 
accounts 
comments 
Paid up 
Capital 
Accumula-
ted 
Profit(+)/ 
Loss(-) 
Free 
Reserves 
& 
Surplus 
Long 
Term 
Loans 
outstand-
ing 
Capital 
Employ- 
ed @ 
Return 
on 
Capital 
Employ- 
ed # 
Percentage 
of return on 
Capital 
Employed 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
MISCELLANEOUS   
4 
Nagaland Handloom & 
Handicrafts Development 
Corporation Ltd. 
2019-20 2022-23 -0.36 -0.70 0.22 - 7.995 -6.31 0 8.81 10.49 -0.36 -3.43 
5 Kohima Smart City 
Development Ltd. 2017-18 2023-24 0.02 0.02 0 - 0.10 0.02 0 0 0.12 0.02 16.67 
  Sector-wise total     -0.34 -0.68 0.22 - 8.09 -6.29 0.00 8.81 10.61 -0.34 -3.20 
  
Total A (All sector wise 
working Government 
Companies) 
    -4.97 -5.70 6.03 - 35.24 -90.48 0.00 72.38 17.14 -4.97 -29.00 
B. Non-working Companies   
MANUFACTURING   
6 
Nagaland Industrial Raw 
Materials Supply 
Corporation Ltd. 
2018-19 2020-21 0.29 0.29 0 - 1.236 -0.93 0 0.04 0.34 0.29 85.29 
Sector-wise total     0.29 0.29 0 - 1.23 -0.93 0 0.04 0.34 0.29 85.29 
7 Nagaland Sugar Mills 
Company Ltd. 2001-02 2017-18 -0.07 -0.07 0 - 8.51 -15.10 0 4.04 -2.55 -0.07 Not 
workable 
Sector-wise total     -0.07 -0.07 0 - 8.51 -15.10 0 4.04 -2.55 -0.07 Not 
workable 
Total B (All sector wise non-
working Government Companies)     0.22 0.22 0 - 9.74 -16.03 0 4.08 -2.21 0.22 Not 
workable 
Grand Total (A+B)     -4.75 -5.48 6.03 - 44.98 -106.51 0 76.46 14.93 -4.74 -31.75 
#  Return on Capital Employed has been worked out by adding back the interest charged to Profit and Loss account to net profit/Loss figure.  
@ Capital employed represents shareholders’ fund plus long-term borrowing.  
                                                
5  Paid up capital of the Company (serial no. A4) includes ‘Share application money pending allotment’ of ₹7.16 crore 
6  Paid up capital of the Company (serial no. B6) includes ‘Share application money pending allotment’ of ₹1.13 crore shown in the Annual Accounts under ‘Current 
Liabilities’.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024
389
Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2024 
 
389 
 
 
Appendix –6.1.2  
Statement showing Rate of Real Return on Government Investment 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.1.9) 
(₹ in crore) 
Financial 
Year 
Present 
value of 
total 
investment 
at the 
beginning 
of the year 
Equity infused by 
the State 
Government 
during the year 
Interest 
free loan 
converted 
into 
equity 
during 
the year 
Grants/ 
subsidies given 
by the State 
Government 
for operational 
and 
administrative 
expenditure 
Total 
investment 
during the 
year 
Total 
investment 
at the end 
of the year 
Average rate of 
interest 
Present 
value of 
total 
investment 
at the end 
of the year 
Minimum 
expected 
return to 
recover 
cost of 
funds for 
the year 
Total 
earnings/ 
profit 
after tax 
(PAT) for 
the year* 
A B C D E F=C+D+E G=B+F H I={G x 
(1+H/100)} J=I-G K 
Upto 
2012-13 100.78 32.00 0 0 32.00 132.78 6.34 141.20 8.42   
2013-14 141.20 4.25 0 16 20.25 161.45 6.25 171.54 10.09 0.5 
2014-15 171.54 0 0 10.66 10.66 182.20 6.81 194.61 12.41 -3.35 
2015-16 194.61 0 0.08 16.25 16.33 210.94 6.95 225.60 14.66 -4.5 
2016-17 225.60 0 0 18.9 18.9 244.50 6.87 261.29 16.80 -8.05 
2017-18 261.29 0.42 0 24.04 24.46 285.75 6.79 305.16 19.40 -4.5 
2018-19 305.16 0 0 25.04 25.04 330.20 7.14 353.77 23.58 -2.62 
2019-20 353.77 0 0 24.49 24.49 378.26 7.16 405.35 27.08 -6.03 
2020-21 405.35 0 0 26.76 26.76 432.11 6.68 460.97 28.86 -6.3 
2021-22 460.97 0 0 28.3 28.3 489.27 6.81 522.59 33.32 -6.21 
2022-23 522.59 0 0 29.54 29.54 552.13 6.73 589.29 37.16 -7.73 
2023-24 589.29 0 0 89.07 89.07 678.36 6.33 721.30 42.94 -5.48 
Total - 36.67  0.08 309.05 345.80 - - - - - 
Source: Information provided by the SPSEs 
 
 
                                                
 
 

390
AppendicesAppendices 
 
390 
 
Year 
Total earnings/ 
loss in 2022-23 
Investment by the State 
Government as per total of the 
column F above 
Return on State Government 
investment on the basis of 
historical value 
Present value of State 
Government investment at the 
end of 2022-23 
Real return on State Government 
investment considering the present 
value of investments 
A B C D E 
Value of column 
K of above table 
Total of the column F of above 
table 
A*100/B Value of column I of above 
table 
A*100/D 
2022-23 -5.48 345.80 -1.58 721.30 -0.76 
 
 
 

© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in
Government of Nagaland
Report No. 1 of 2026
Report No. 1 of 2026 - Government of Nagaland
https://cag.gov.in/ag/nagaland/en
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Social (including Local Governments Audit),
Economic, General and Revenue Sectors
for the year ended 31 March 2024
 
(Civil and Commercial)
