  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 
Performance Audit of  
‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
Government of Tamil Nadu 
Report No. 10 of 2025 
(Civil) 
 


Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Audit on  
‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Tamil Nadu 
Report No. 10 of 2025 
(Civil) 

 
 i
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraph  Page 
Preface v 
Executive Summary vii 
CHAPTER I - INTRODUCTION 
Jal Jeevan Mission - Broad objectives 1.1 1 
Organisation Structure 1.2 1 
Audit Objectives 1.3 2 
Audit Criteria 1.4 2 
Audit Scope and Methodology 1.5 3 
Components of JJM in Tamil Nadu and their 
Implementing Agencies 
1.6 4 
Status of works taken up under JJM 1.7 5 
Acknowledgement 1.8 6 
Report Structure 1.9 6 
CHAPTER II - INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK AND PLANNING 
Institutional framework under Jal Jeevan Mission 2.1 7 
Functioning of the Village Water and Sanitation 
Committee 
2.2 7 
Deficiencies in preparation of Village Action Plans 2.3 8 
Functioning of District Water and Sanitation 
Mission 
2.4 9 
Issues in Planning of works under JJM 2.5 10 
  

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’  
 ii 
 Paragraph  Page 
CHAPTER III - IMPLEMENTATION OF JAL JEEVAN MISSION 
Introduction 3.1 17 
Coverage of FHTCs 3.2 18 
Variations in households data 3.3 18 
Implementation of Projects 3.4 19 
Discrepancies in Tendering and Contract 
Management 
3.5 20 
Execution of works under JJM by TWAD Board 3.6 22 
Execution of in-village components by RD&PR 
Department 
3.7 26 
Infrastructure not put to use 3.8 27 
Construction of excess storage structures 3.9 28 
CHAPTER IV - FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Introduction 4.1 31 
Short collection of community contribution  
under JJM 
4.2 32 
Short collection of water charges 4.3 33 
Other issues 4.4 33 
CHAPTER V - WATER QUALITY MONITORING AND 
SURVEILLANCE 
Introduction 5.1 35 
Lack of adequate infrastructure and equipment for 
Water Quality Testing 
5.2 36 
Testing of water sources and parameters 5.3 39 
Non-utilisation of Field Testing Kits 5.4 40 
Non-functional Reverse Osmosis plants 5.5 41 
  

Table of Contents  
 iii 
 Paragraph  Page 
CHAPTER VI - POST OPERATION MANAGEMENT, MONITORING 
AND EVALUATION 
Issues in Monitoring 6.1 43 
Implementation of IEC Activities under JJM 6.2 45 
Geo-Tagging of assets 6.3 46 
Linking of FHTC with Aadhaar 6.4 47 
Non-conduct of Social Audit under JJM 6.5 47 
Improper maintenance of Completed works 6.6 47 
CHAPTER VII - OUTPUT AND OUTCOME FRAMEWORK OF  
JAL JEEVAN MISSION 
Introduction 7.1 49 
Non-achievement of Primary Output 7.2 49 
Outcomes of JJM 7.3 53 
  

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’  
 iv
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix 
No. 
Details Page 
No. 
1.1 Details of selected Districts, Blocks and Village Panchayats 59 
1.2 Status of TWAD Works in selected District 61 
2.1 Details of FHTCs proposed and provided in Theni District 62 
3.1 Number of FHTCs in JJM dashboard vis-à-vis number of 
assessments as per VP tax portal for ‘Har Ghar Jal’ certified 
VPs 
63 
3.2 Package-wise Work Specifications for Survey and Levelling 
work 
65 
3.3 Number of in-village works sanctioned under 
JJM/Convergence during 2020-24 
66 
4.1 Delay in Release of Centre and State Share to ‘Single Nodal 
Account’ 
67 
5.1 Details of available infrastructure and shortfall in 
laboratories 
68 
5.2 Shortfall of equipment in laboratories of selected districts 69 
6.1 Excess expenditure on account of incorrect application of 
the rates for pipes 
71 
6.2 DPR charges incorrectly included as part of the works 
expenditure 
72 
7.1 Details of FHTCs installed outside the house in selected 
districts 
79 
 Glossary of Abbreviations 80 
 

 
P R E F A C E  
  
This Report for the year ended March 2024 has been 
prepared for submission to the Governor of Tamil Nadu 
under Article 151(2) of the Constitution of India, for 
being laid before the State Legislature. 
The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India contains the results of Performance Audit of  
‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ in Tamil Nadu. 
The instances mentioned in the Report are those, which 
came to notice during test audit for the period 2019-24 as 
well as those which came to notice in earlier years but 
could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports.  
The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the 
Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
v 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 

 
vii 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) was launched in August 2019 with the vision viz., 
‘Every rural household has drinking water supply in adequate quantity 
(minimum 55 litres per capita per day (lpcd)) of prescribed quality on regular 
and long-term basis at affordable service delivery charges leading to 
improvement in living standards of rural communities’. JJM is a decentralised 
and community-managed programme.  
Some of the broad objectives of the Mission are (i) to provide Functional 
Household Tap Connection (FHTC) to every rural household, Schools, 
Anganwadi centres and other public buildings, (ii) to prioritise provision of 
FHTCs in quality affected areas, etc., (iii) to monitor functionality of tap 
connections and to ensure voluntary ownership through local community 
contribution, (iv) to assist in ensuring sustainability of water supply system 
including source, infrastructure, Operation and Maintenance (O&M) and (v) to 
bring awareness on various aspects such as significance of safe drinking water.  
Whenever a particular Administrative Unit viz., Village Panchayat (VP)/ 
Block/District achieves 100 per cent coverage in providing FHTCs, the Unit is 
termed as having achieved ‘Har Ghar Jal’ (HGJ) status.  
For every household, JJM funding is provided for one tap out of three delivery 
points (taps), viz. kitchen, washing & bathing area and toilet. The Centre-State 
funding pattern for implementation of the Mission is 50:50 for Coverage  
i.e., infrastructure in terms of FHTCs provided to rural households and 60:40 
for Support Activities including Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
(WQM&S). Community contribution of up to 10 per cent of the capital cost in 
cash and/or kind or labour is collected from households for in-village piped 
water supply infrastructure and the remaining cost will be shared in the above 
mentioned ratio. 
In Tamil Nadu, the implementation of JJM is done by the Tamil Nadu Water 
Supply and Drainage (TWAD) Board for water supply schemes that cater to 
multiple villages/Schemes. In cases where the scheme caters to a single VP or 
if the source is available within the VP, then the implementing agency is the 
Rural Development and Panchayat Raj (RD&PR) Department.  
Considering the importance of the mission in ensuring piped water supply in 
rural areas, CAG took up this Performance Audit covering the activities during 
2019-2024 in six selected districts.  The objectives of the Audit was to assess 
whether the institutional framework for planning and implementation of the 
scheme was effective in achieving the desired objective, funds were utilised 
economically and assets created and water security are sustainable. 
Major Audit findings 
Out of 1.25 crore households in the State, only 21.76 lakh households  
(17.37 per cent) had tap water connections at the start of the Mission. At the 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’  
 
viii 
time of Audit (2024), the achievement was 1.05 crore (83.94 per cent ) with  
10 districts recording 100 per cent  achievement in coverage. However, we 
noticed that 50 per cent  rural households in the selected districts that were 
provided with tap connections were not supplied with sufficient quantity  
(55 lpcd) of water. A majority of FHTCs provided (96 per cent) were outside 
the house in contravention of the Guidelines.  
Audit noticed that no baseline survey was conducted to confirm need 
assessments for inclusion in the Village Action Plan and the District Water and 
Sanitation Mission did not conduct the prescribed number of meetings during 
2019-24 which impacted the implementation of the scheme.  Test-check of JJM 
works sanctioned in Ramanathapuram District revealed that in one selected 
block, out of 12 works taken up in September 2021, eight were cancelled prior 
to commencement. The remaining four works were halted subsequently due to 
objections raised by the local community. In another instance, despite requests 
from the local community not to construct open wells as the groundwater in the 
designated area was salty and non-potable, three open wells were constructed. 
These wells ultimately remained unused by the Village Panchayat. 
The in-village components were not taken up in synchronisation with the works 
executed by TWAD Board resulting in infrastructure created not being used 
owing to non-completion of source works, non-availability of water sources, 
etc. There were lapses in tendering procedure for JJM works. Issues were 
noticed in execution of works by TWAD Board such as delays in site 
identification, non-obtaining of permissions from line departments and delayed 
execution, etc. In respect of works executed by RD&PR Department, no penalty 
was levied for the delayed execution. Due to defective planning, water storage 
structures were constructed in habitations that had already attained sufficiency, 
instead of places with shortage. 
With regard to the supply of the prescribed minimum quantity (55 lpcd) of water 
under JJM, we noticed that in the test-checked districts, none of the habitations 
in Nagapattinam district were supplied with 55 lpcd of water. Although 
Coimbatore district reported 100 per cent  achievement in providing FHTCs, 
only 8.67 per cent of its habitations were supplied with water in accordance 
with the prescribed quantity norms.  
We also noticed that (i) four district water testing laboratories functioned 
without NABL accreditation; (ii) infrastructure and equipment were found to be 
lacking in all the 18 laboratories (including State laboratory) at various levels 
across the selected districts; (iii) Water quality testing for all the 13 prescribed 
parameters was not adequately done by TWAD Board ; (iv) there was no 
mechanism for referring samples that tested positive for contaminants to higher 
level laboratories and (v) Field Testing Kits were not utilised in any of the 
selected districts.  
We collected water samples from 43 habitations randomly selected across  
six districts and had them tested in TWAD’s District Water Testing 

 Executive Summary 
 
 ix
Laboratories. Of these, five samples from habitations in Coimbatore district and 
two samples from Ramanathapuram district did not meet the prescribed water 
quality guidelines (BIS 10500:2012 drinking water standards). During  
Joint Physical Verification in certain habitations of Viluppuram, 
Ramanathapuram and Theni, beneficiaries also expressed that the water 
supplied was not potable. 
There was variance in the data on number of households as per JJM dashboard 
and the number of property tax assessments as per VP Tax portal. About  
67 per cent  of the community contribution were yet to be collected.  
Non-assessment and non-collection of water connection charges were also 
noticed, which would place an additional burden on the Operation and 
Maintenance of the asset.  Inadequate monitoring and follow-up regarding 
maintenance of the Reverse Osmosis plants led to 55 per cent of the installed 
RO plants non-functional in three districts viz., Ramanathapuram, Viluppuram 
and Salem, leading to non-achievement of the intended objective of providing 
safe drinking water to the targeted habitations. 
Lapses in monitoring and verification processes of Third Party Inspection 
Agencies (TPIAs) were noticed. The Scrutiny Reports used by the TPIA was 
incomplete. Audit noticed that Information, Education, and Communication 
(IEC) materials remained undistributed/unused in the districts, despite a lapse 
of more than six months since their receipt. Geo-tagging of assets and linking 
of FHTCs with Aadhaar were incomplete. Social audit was not conducted in 
any of the six selected districts.  
We conclude that though the State could achieve FHTC coverage of 84 per cent 
to the rural population, 50 per cent  of the rural population were yet to get  
55 lpcd. There was lack of synchronisation in taking up works resulting in  
non-utilisation of assets created. Further, four District Laboratories were 
functioning without NABL accreditation, testing was not conducted for the  
prescribed parameters and  mechanism to take up the samples that tested 
positive for contaminants, to next level for further testing was not in place.  
Implementation of works was also affected with issues like delayed execution, 
defective planning etc. All the beneficiaries were not assessed for Water charges 
resulting in additional burden to the VPs on the O&M cost. We also noticed 
lapses in monitoring and verification processes of Third Party Inspection 
Agencies.  
What we recommend? 
Audit have made the following recommendations: 
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK AND PLANNING 
 The Government should direct the implementing agencies to take up 
works only after need assessments and should also ensure that 
estimates are prepared after taking into account the actual 
requirements. 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’  
 
x 
 The Government should ensure effective synchronisation in works 
executed by the implementing agencies so as to avoid delays in 
utilisation of assets created in the in-village components. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF JAL JEEV AN MISSION 
 The Government should direct the Department to update in a time 
bound manner, the household data in the IMIS portal so as to ensure 
complete coverage in all districts. 
 The Government should fix responsibility for the lapses in tender 
procedures and direct the Implementing agencies to ensure adherence 
to the relevant Act and Rules. 
 The Government must direct the TWAD Board to ensure that all the 
necessary approvals have been obtained before commencement of 
works so that all the water supply works under JJM are executed 
without delay. 
 The Government should direct the Department to rectify the 
deficiencies in the execution of work so as to ensure proper utilisation 
of all assets created, at the earliest for achievement of the intended 
objective. 
 The Government should ensure that storage infrastructure are created 
only in needy habitations to avoid idling of the assets created besides 
optimum utilisation of valuable resources. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
 The Government should ensure that the requisite community 
contributions as per the Operational Guidelines are collected from the 
beneficiaries. 
 The Government should ensure that water charges be assessed and 
collected from all the beneficiaries so as to augment the revenue 
source of the VPs. 
W ATER QUALITY MONITORING AND SURVEILLANCE 
 The Government must ensure renewal of accreditation of the water 
testing laboratories at the earliest. 
 The Government should ensure that all equipment are purchased to 
make the laboratories fully functional at the earliest for 
comprehensive water testing in order to take timely remedial action. 
 The Government must direct the implementing agencies to ensure 
optimum utilisation of the Field Testing Kits by conducting tests and 
recording the same. 
 The Government should direct the Department to ensure the 
functionality of Reverse Osmosis Plants created for providing 
potable water. 

 Executive Summary 
 
 xi
POST OPERATION MANAGEMENT, MONITORING AND 
EV ALUATION 
 The Government should direct the Department to ensure that 
payments are released to contractors only on receipt of verification 
Reports, complete in all aspects, from the Third Party Inspection 
Agencies. 
 The Government should ensure strict adherence to the Mission 
Guidelines in the conduct of social audit and for geo-tagging of 
assets. 
OUTPUT AND OUTCOME FRAMEWORK OF JAL JEEV AN MISSION 
 The Government should take steps to bring in all the schools and 
Anganwadi centres within the purview of JJM so as to provide 
FHTCs to all of them.   
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
 

1 
CHAPTER I! 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 Jal Jeevan Mission - Broad objectives 
Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) was launched in August 2019 with the vision viz., 
‘Every rural household has drinking water supply in adequate quantity of 
prescribed quality on regular and long-term basis at affordable service delivery 
charges leading to improvement in living standards of rural communities’.  
JJM is a decentralised, demand-driven and community-managed programme.  
Some of the broad objectives of the Mission are: 
 to provide Functional Household Tap Connection (FHTC) to every 
rural household and to Schools, anganwadi centres, Gram Panchayat 
buildings, Health centres, wellness centres and community buildings. 
 to prioritise provision of FHTCs in quality affected areas, villages in 
drought prone and desert areas, Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana  
villages, etc. 
 to monitor functionality of tap connections and to promote and ensure 
voluntary ownership among local community by way of 
contribution1.  
 to assist in ensuring sustainability of water supply system, i.e. water 
source, water supply infrastructure, and funds for regular Operation 
and Maintenance (O&M).  
 to bring awareness on various aspects and significance of safe 
drinking water and involvement of stakeholders in manner that make 
water everyone’s business. 
1.2 Organisation Structure  
The organisation structure for implementation of JJM in Tamil Nadu is given in 
Exhibit 1.1 . At the State level, the Principal Secretary to Government, 
Municipal Administration and Water Supply Department, is the Nodal Officer 
and the Managing Director, Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage (TWAD) 
Board, is the Mission Director of JJM in Tamil Nadu. 
                                         
! Abbreviations used in this Report are listed in the Glossary at Page 80. 
1 In cash, kind and/or labour and voluntary labour ( shramdaan). 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
2 
Exhibit 1.1: Institutional mechanism for the implementation of JJM  
1.3  Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted to ascertain whether 
 Programme objectives (output and outcomes) have been achieved 
successfully. 
 Efficient institutional framework is in place for planning, 
implementation, and post operational management of the scheme. 
 Financial resources have been employed in an economic and efficient 
manner; and 
 Assets created through the programme are sustainable for the next 
two to three decades and do not compromise water security for future 
generations. 
1.4 Audit Criteria 
The main sources of audit criteria were: 
 Operational Guidelines for implementation of JJM issued by 
Government of India (GoI) and Government of Tamil Nadu (GoTN); 
 Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance Framework; 
 Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation 
Manual 2005; 
 Codes, Manual and Rules issued by GoTN; 
Village Water and 
Sanitation 
Committee 
(VWSC) 
District Water 
and Sanitation 
Mission (DWSM) 
State Water and 
Sanitation 
Mission (SWSM) 
State Nodal Officer: Principal Secretary to Government of 
Tamil Nadu
Rural Development & Panchayat Raj  (RD&PR) Department (upto 04-02-2022) &
Municipal Administration and Water Supply  (MA&WS) Department 
(from February 2022) 
Mission Director, JJM 
(Managing Director, Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage 
(TWAD) Board, Chennai)
TWAD Board
(Multi Village Schemes)
Executive Engineers 
(Districts)
Director of Rural Development
(Single Village Schemes)
Additional Collector/Project 
Director, District Rural 
Development Agency (DRDA)
Block Development 
Officer (VP)
Village Panchayats (VPs)

Chapter I - Introduction 
3 
 State specific guidelines and all orders issued by the State 
Government facilitating implementation of JJM in Tamil Nadu; 
 Provisions of ‘Tamil Nadu Transparency in Tenders Act, 1998’ and  
‘The Tamil Nadu Transparency in Tenders Rules, 2000’ made 
thereunder.  
1.5  Audit Scope and Methodology 
There are 37 District Panchayats (one each for 37 districts excluding Chennai),  
388 Panchayat Unions (Blocks) and 12,525 VPs in Tamil Nadu. Of the  
37 districts, Audit sampled six districts as given in Table 1.1. 
Table 1.1: Sample Selection for the Performance Audit on JJM 
Level Audit Sampling 
District 
Districts were divided into three categories - high, average and low 
performing districts in terms of number of tap connections provided up to  
30 June 2024 and two districts from each strata were selected ( Exhibit 1.2). 
Block In each selected district, two Blocks were selected based on random 
sampling. 
Village Panchayat In each selected block, 5 VPs were selected on random sampling. 
(Source: Approved Guidelines) 
The details of selected districts, Blocks and VPs are given in Appendix 1.1.  
The audit was conducted by scrutiny of records 
at the Secretariat of RD&PR  and MA&WS 
departments of GoTN, TWAD Board, DRDAs 
and TWAD divisions in the six selected 
districts, Blocks and VPs. In addition, Audit 
also conducted Joint Physical Verification 
(JPV) with Departmental officials, Focused 
Group Discussion (FGD) with stakeholders in 
each Block and Beneficiary Survey in the 
selected VPs.  
The Performance Audit was conducted 
covering a period of 2019-2024.  An Entry 
Conference was held with the Principal 
Secretary to GoTN, MA&WS Department on 
25 July 2024 where the Audit objectives, 
criteria and scope of Audit were explained.  
An Exit Conference was held with the Principal Secretary to Government, 
MA&WS Department on 10 March 2025 to discuss the Audit findings.  
The responses given by the audited entities were considered and suitably 
incorporated in this report.  
Exhibit 1.2: Districts selected for PA 
 


Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
4 
1.6 Components of JJM in Tamil Nadu and their Implementing 
Agencies  
In order to achieve the goal of ensuring water supply to rural households, 
Government of Tamil Nadu (GoTN) issued ‘Operational Guidelines for the 
implementation of JJM’ in June 2020 which was further revised in August 2022. 
The components supported under JJM are given below: 
 Development of in-village piped water supply infrastructure to 
provide tap water connection to every household. This includes 
source augmentation, storage, distribution line and household tap 
connections. 
 Development of reliable drinking water source (Single Village 
Scheme (SVS)2 and Multi Village Scheme (MVS)/Combined Water 
Supply Scheme (CWSS) 3) and/or augmentation of existing water 
sources to provide long term sustainability of water supply system. 
 Retrofitting of completed and on-going SVS/MVS (CWSS) wherever 
feasible to provide FHTCs at a minimum service level of 55 lpcd4. 
 Support activities: Information, Education and Communication 
(IEC) among local communities, training, development of utilities, 
third party inspection, water quality laboratories, water quality 
testing and surveillance, etc. 
The implementing agencies in Tamil Nadu for the various components of JJM 
are as below: 
In-village 
infrastructure 
: Rural Development and Panchayat Raj (RD&PR) 
Department 
MVS (CWSS) : Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage (TWAD) 
Board 
Maintenance : In-village components by the Village Panchayat 
(VP) and CWSS by TWAD Board 
Support Activities : TW AD Board, RD&PR Department, Self Help 
Groups etc. 
 
                                         
2  A scheme to provide water supply to one/more than one or all habitations in a village 
panchayat, if the source is available within the habitation/village panchayat. The JJM 
Operational Guidelines defines habitation as a group of minimum 20 households 
and/or 100 persons. 
3   Multi Village Scheme is called as Combined Water Supply Scheme in Tamil Nadu 
wherein water supply is provided to cover more than one local body, i.e, more than one 
village panchayat. 
4  Litre per capita per day. 

Chapter I - Introduction 
5 
1.7 Status of works taken up under JJM 
The MVS/CWSS works sanctioned in the State and taken up by TWAD board 
during 2019-24 and the connected in-village component of these works along 
with the SVS works executed by the RD&PR Department and the status of these 
works as of December 2024 are given in Table 1.2. 
Table 1.2:  JJM works pending at State level 
MVS (CWSS) works - Implementing agency - TWAD Board 
Year Number of works  
Sanctioned Completed Pending 
2020-21 10 9 1 
2021-22 5 3 2 
2022-23 86 62 24 
2023-245 0 0 0 
In-village component of the above mentioned MVS (CWSS) works - 
Implementing agency - RD&PR Department 
NEW MVS 7,993 5,525 2,468 
MVS Retrofitting 2,654 2,654 0 
SVS works - Implementing agency - RD&PR Department 
2020-21 15,164 15,164 0 
2022-23 3,244 3,244 0 
2023-24 1,301 722 579 
(Source: TW AD Board and RD&PR Department) 
The number of works executed by TWAD Board and RD&PR Department 
during 2019-24 in the selected districts and the status of these works as of 
December 2024 is given in Table 1.3. 
  
                                         
5  No new work was sanctioned in the year 2023-24 by TWAD Board and the works 
sanctioned earlier were still under execution. 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
6 
Table 1.3: Status of JJM works executed in selected districts 
(In numbers) 
District Works executed by TWAD Board Works executed by RD&PR 
Department 
Sanctioned Completed Pending Sanctioned Completed Pending 
Coimbatore 1 1 0 1,196 1,196 0 
Nagapattinam 1 0 1 517 326 191 
Ramanathapuram 2 0 2 1,565 408 1,157 
Salem 5 3 2 2,570 2,553 17 
Theni 0 0 0 452 452 0 
Viluppuram 1 1 0 457 457 0 
Total 10 5 5 6,757 5,392 1,365 
(Source: TWAD Board and RD&PR Department) 
In the selected districts, TWAD executed 10 major works during 2020-24.  
The status of these works as of December 2024 are given in Appendix 1.2. 
1.8 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation extended by the Departments and all 
audited entities including TWAD Board in conduct of this Performance Audit. 
1.9 Report Structure 
The audit findings are grouped under the following Chapters: 
  Chapter II :  Institutional Framework and Planning 
  Chapter III :  Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
  Chapter IV :  Financial Management 
  Chapter V :  Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
  Chapter VI :  Post Operation Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 
  Chapter VII :  Output and Outcome Framework of Jal Jeevan Mission 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
INSTITUTIONAL 
FRAMEWORK AND 
PLANNING 
 

7 
CHAPTER II 
 
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK AND PLANNING 
Due to non-conduct of the Village Water and Sanitation Committee 
(VWSC)  meetings, the Village Action Plans were formulated without any 
need assessment which impacted the implementation of scheme. The 
District Water and Sanitation Mission in the selected districts did not 
conduct the prescribed number of meetings during 2019-24. No baseline 
survey was conducted to confirm the actual requirements of the VPs 
resulting in cancellation of works. Lack of synchronisation in the works 
executed by the implementing agencies viz., TWAD Board and RD&PR 
Department was noticed. 
2.1 Institutional framework under Jal Jeevan Mission 
The Operational Guidelines of JJM laid emphasis on strategised planning to 
implement the various components aimed at providing FHTCs to all rural 
households.  Action plans at Village, District and State levels, specifying the 
modalities for implementation, activities to be taken up, output to be achieved 
etc., were to be prepared and finalised as detailed in Exhibit 2.1.  
Exhibit 2.1: Stages in planning in JJM 
The Annual Action Plan (AAP) emerges from the SAP, detailing physical and 
financial targets for the year and is approved by the Department of Drinking 
Water and Sanitation (DDWS), GoI. The planning strategy was also reiterated 
in the State specific guidelines for JJM.  
2.2 Functioning of the Village Water and Sanitation Committee 
The Village Action Plan (V AP) is a comprehensive document addressing a 
village's needs, including provision of FHTCs for all rural households. As per 
JJM guidelines, V APs are to be prepared by the Gram Panchayat or its  
sub-committees, such as the Village Water and Sanitation Committee (VWSC), 
based on baseline surveys and community needs. The V AP outlines fund 
requirements, timelines, greywater treatment, reuse plans and surveillance 
Village Action Plan (VAP)
To be prepared by VWSC
based on baseline survey,
resource mapping and
needs of Village
Community and to be
approved by Gram sabha
of the Village.
District Action Plan (DAP) 
To be finalised by DWSM
by aggregating all VAPs
and further analysis on
timelines, water sources,
maintenance and financial
aspects, etc.
State Action Plan (SAP)
To be finalised by SWSM
by aggregating all DAPs
and inclusion of aspects on
priorities to be accorded,
ensuring functionality of
FHTCs, convergence of
activities and funds etc.

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
8 
activities. All drinking water-related works in the village have to follow the VAP 
for coordination and efficiency. 
In Tamil Nadu, GoTN issued orders (July 2005) establishing various 
Committees for VPs, including ‘Development Committee’.  Post the 
implementation of JJM, GoTN issued orders in March 2020 stating that the said 
‘Development Committee’ would also act as the VWSC for JJM 
implementation, for managing water supply schemes, planning, execution, and 
maintenance of the infrastructure created as well as preparing the V AP for 
addressing water availability, quality, and FHTC needs. 
 To an Audit questionnaire on the formation of VWSCs in the selected 
VPs, 52 of the 60 selected VPs stated that the VWSCs were formed 
in their VPs.  
 Audit scrutiny of records revealed that in Viluppuram District, the 
VWSC were established in the ten sampled VPs during 2021-22. 
However, each of the committees in these villages has held only one 
meeting (i.e., at the time of formation). On this being pointed out, the 
Block Development Officers (BDOs) of selected Blocks replied that 
action will be taken to monitor the members of the respective 
committee to conduct the meeting periodically. 
 In Ramanathapuram District, VWSC was formed only in 2023, and, 
no meetings were conducted after its formation. 
 Similar issues were noticed in the selected VPs of Salem District, 
wherein it was observed that the VWSCs were non-functional. 
Due to non-conduct of the VWSC meetings, the VAPs were formulated without 
any need assessment or baseline survey, which impacted the implementation of 
scheme. 
2.3  Deficiencies in preparation of Village Action Plans  
As per the JJM Dashboard data for Tamil Nadu, Village Action Plan (VAP) was 
prepared for 11,558 VPs (92.29 per cent) against the total of 12,525 VPs in the 
State. In the sampled districts, test-check of nine V APs revealed the following: 
 Figures relating to population, number of households and 
corresponding water requirement did not align with the water sources 
in any of the nine villages. 
 Grey-water management (in terms of soak pits/ waste stabilization 
pond) was overlooked in the action plans. 
 Three1 out of the nine V AP documents did not adhere to the 
prescribed format of the Operational Guidelines and none of the V AP 
documents were properly signed2.  
                                         
1  Gohilapuram, Nagayagoundanpatty and Sillamarathupatti. 
2  By chairperson, Public Health Engineering Department /Rural Water Supply official 
& Implementation Support Agency representative. 

Chapter II - Institutional Framework and Planning  
9 
 Although all the nine villages declared that resource mapping and 
social mapping were done, the maps were not attached to the VAP. 
 In one village viz., Gohilapuram of Theni district, while community 
contribution was incorporated in the V AP, during JPV it was noticed 
that villagers were unwilling to contribute towards the project cost 
which resulted in the cancellation of proposed works. 
 The other selected VPs did not formulate any comprehensive VAP 
and merely projected the information uploaded in the portal as the 
V AP for implementation of JJM in the Village. 
The last mile work execution (in-village components) and SVS are the 
responsibilities of the VPs. In the absence of a comprehensive baseline survey 
and need assessments, the VAPs formulated did not reflect the actual 
requirements, which in turn impacted the execution of works as discussed in 
Paragraph 2.5.1. 
2.4  Functioning of District Water and Sanitation Mission  
As per the JJM Operational Guidelines of GoI, the District Water and Sanitation 
Mission (DWSM) in the Districts are responsible for the preparation, 
finalisation and implementation of District Action Plans (DAPs), based on 
which the State Action Plan is consolidated. The DWSM also monitors and 
evaluates the physical and financial performance of the district in JJM, apart 
from grievance redressal.  
GoTN issued orders (March 2020) constituting DWSM in all districts with the 
District Collector as Chairman. This was amended (April 2020) and a District 
level Project Management Unit (PMU) was set up with the Project Director, 
DRDA as the head.  
The JJM Operational Guidelines stipulates that the DWSM will convene 
monthly meetings to consider and accord Administrative approval for in-village 
water supply schemes, grey water management, etc. Mission Director,  
TWAD stated (October 2024) that DAPs were formulated for all the 37 districts 
in the State (excluding Chennai) and had been included in the State Action Plan 
(SAP). However, Audit scrutiny revealed that none of the six selected districts 
had conducted the mandated 12 meetings per year  during the years 2019-20 to 
2023-24. The details of meetings held are detailed in Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1: Details of DWSM meetings conducted in selected districts 
District Date of 
formation 
Number of Meetings 
conducted 
Date(s) of Meeting(s) 
Coimbatore 12-05-2020 3 Details not furnished 
Nagapattinam 22-04-2020 2 22-04-2020 and 17-03-2022 
Ramanathapuram 20-03-2020 2 25-02-2021 and 04-03-2022  
Salem 06-04-2020 4 09-02-2021, 26-02-2021,  
07-03-2022 and 06-05-2022 
Theni 28-04-2020 1 13-01-2022 
Viluppuram 30-04-2020 3 21-09-2020, 27-11-2021 and  
07-11-2022 
(Source: DRDA Records) 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
10 
Audit observed that non-conduct of regular meetings indicated poor monitoring 
at the District Level.  
2.4.1 Functioning of the State Water and Sanitation Mission  
As per the GoI Operational Guidelines, the State Water and Sanitation Mission 
(SWSM) is a state level institution provided with necessary powers for 
successful implementation of JJM.  The SWSM would have an Apex Committee 
and an Executive Committee. 
The Apex Committee would be headed by the Chief Secretary of the State with 
Secretaries in-charge of Rural Water Supply, Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj, Primary Education, Health, Finance, Planning, Information and 
Public Relations and a Government of India representative as members.  
The Apex Committee shall provide policy guidance, be responsible for the 
overall planning, strategizing and implementation of JJM in the State and be 
responsible for finalisation of State Action Plan to provide FHTC to every rural 
household by 2024 among other things.  
As per the details furnished by the Mission Director, TWAD Board, the State 
Action Plan for Tamil Nadu was finalised during October 2021 based on the 
DAPs from 37 districts and was approved by GoI in November 2021. The SAP 
was prepared to saturate all rural households by providing FHTCs in Tamil 
Nadu with 99 numbers of retrofitting CWSS, 78 numbers of new MVS and SVS 
where local sources were sustainable.  
The GoI guidelines stipulate that Apex Committee would meet at least twice a 
year and if possible, quarterly. However, Audit noticed that the Apex Committee 
in Tamil Nadu had not met even once during the year 2023-24.  Review of 
minutes of the meetings conducted revealed that there was no formal 
mechanism such as documented action taken reports, timelines for 
implementation, review of previous decisions etc.  These deficiencies indicate 
the lack of continuous monitoring and resultant delays in completion of the 
projects.   
2.5 Issues in Planning of works under JJM 
TWAD Board is entrusted with the development of Water Supply and Sewerage 
facilities in the State of Tamil Nadu, except Chennai Metropolitan Development 
Areas. Apart from this, maintenance of major CWSS/MVS works is also its 
responsibility. The responsibility for development of in-village infrastructure 
under the scheme rests with RD&PR Department.   
The GoTN guidelines on JJM states that planning must be based on the water 
demand and potential of water availability. If the ground water was of prescribed 
quality and could meet the demand for next 30 years, SVS/Retrofitting Schemes 
were to be proposed and where sufficient groundwater was not available, MVS 
were to be proposed. Audit observations in planning are discussed in the 
following paragraphs. 
  

Chapter II - Institutional Framework and Planning  
11 
2.5.1 Planning of works executed by RD&PR Department 
The V AP is a comprehensive document addressing a village's needs, including 
provision of FHTCs for all rural households. All drinking water-related works 
in the village have to follow the V AP for coordination and efficiency. The 
following deficiencies were noticed in planning of JJM works in the VPs. 
2.5.1.1 Works executed without need assessment - Ramanathapuram 
In the test-checked VPs, Audit noticed that VWSC was formed only in the year 
2023 after a lapse of three years.  Further, neither the regular committee 
meetings were held nor a survey conducted to assess the actual village-level 
requirements.  As a result of this, there was misalignment with the needs of the 
community as discussed below: 
 In July 2020, DRDA, Ramanathapuram, sanctioned ₹3.51 crore for  
12 works for Periyapattinam VP in Thiruppullani Block and Work 
orders were issued in September 2021. However, out of the  
12 sanctioned works, only four were initiated, while the remaining 
eight were cancelled prior to commencement. The expenditure on 
these works is given in Table 2.2. 
Table 2.2: Details of works in Thiruppullani Block 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. No. Name of Work Estimate Expenditure 
1 Providing FHTC, pumping main line, construction of  
30,000 litre OHT and extension of pipeline at 
Mutharayarnagar village in Periyapattinam VP 
18.60 3.88 
2 Providing FHTC, pumping main line and extension 
of pipeline at Karuchankundu village in 
Periyapattinam VP 
8.48 7.36 
3 Providing FHTC, pumping main line, construction of  
30,000 litre OHT and extension of pipeline at 
Mangamapuram village in Periyapattinam VP 
31.29 7.56 
4 Providing FHTC, pumping main line, construction of  
30,000 litre OHT and extension of pipeline at South 
Kudiyiruppu village in Periyapattinam VP 
21.50 6.67 
 Total 79.87 25.47 
(Source: DRDA, Ramanathapuram) 
The four works were subsequently halted due to objections from the 
local community stating that JJM was not required as their village was 
already having access to potable water. Thus, due to absence of VWSC, 
the works were taken up without need assessment.  Government replied 
(July 2025) that the works were taken up only after proper analysis of 
V AP. However, during execution, the people of the village were against 
the scheme and were not convinced even after peace committee 
meetings which resulted in cancellation of the works. The reply pointed 
to the fact that there were deficiencies in the planning of works in V AP. 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
12 
  In July 2020, DRDA, Ramanathapuram, sanctioned ₹95.82 lakh for 
the works of construction of three openwells for Thinaikulam VP in 
Thiruppullani Block. During JPV in Thiruppullani Block in 
September 2024, 
Audit noticed that all 
the three wells were 
not put to use after 
construction 
(Exhibit 2.2 ).The 
Secretary, 
Thinaikulam VP 
stated that at the time 
of commencement of work, the local residents had requested the 
Department not to proceed with digging the well in the designated 
area as the groundwater in the area was salty and non-potable and 
would render the project unsuitable for their needs. Despite the above, 
the well was constructed but remained unused by the VP due to the 
non-potable nature of the water. Government also stated (July 2025) 
that Mission Director will pursue in taking action against the erring 
officials for not finding suitable source of potable water supply. 
Thus, as JJM is a community managed Mission, the failure in ensuring 
participatory planning, culminating in misalignment with the actual needs of the 
community resulted in non-achievement of objective besides unfruitful 
expenditure on construction of borewells and wasteful expenditure on the halted 
works. 
2.5.1.2  Improper estimate of FHTCs requirement - Theni 
Theni district was one of the ‘ Har Ghar Jal’ reported districts of Tamil Nadu. 
Audit test-checked the records relating to 18 works sanctioned by DRDA, Theni 
under JJM in 2020-21. These works included providing FHTCs to households 
in two 3 Blocks. In the approved estimates for these works, it was proposed to 
provide 4,339 FHTCs. However, upon execution, only 1,723 connections were 
actually provided, amounting to just 40 per cent of the target outlined in the 
estimates. The details of the FHTCs proposed in the estimates and the FHTCs 
actually provided are given in Appendix 2.1. 
Audit cross-verified the JJM dashboard data for the works taken up in these 
habitations and it was noticed that both the coverage of habitations in both the 
blocks were shown as 100 per cent in the dashboard. Also, as per the dashboard 
data, no other works were taken up in these habitations indicating that the actual 
requirement of FHTCs in these blocks were only 1,723 whereas the proposal 
was for 4,339 FHTCs. A complete baseline survey of available connections 
during the preparation of V AP would have aided in identification of existing tap 
connections. This omission led to the overestimation of the actual number of 
                                         
3 Periyakulam and Uthamapalayam Blocks.  
Exhibit 2.2: Open well at Thinaikulam VP  
not used 
 


Chapter II - Institutional Framework and Planning  
13 
FHTCs required in the village, directly impacting the accuracy of estimates and 
the subsequent execution of work under JJM. 
Government replied (April 2025) that many beneficiaries showed interest to use 
their own source and as such FHTC was provided to the remaining households. 
Further, it was also replied that more number of illegal connections had to be 
regularised while executing the FHTC works. The reply indicated the fact that 
the actual requirement of FHTCs and the availability of tap connections were 
not taken into account before proposing the works.  
2.5.1.3  Works taken up without survey - Coimbatore 
As per the details furnished by DRDA, Coimbatore, out of 1,074 in-village 
works sanctioned in the District during 2020-24, 945 works were completed and 
the pendency was stated as 129 works as of January 2025. A scrutiny of records 
revealed that all the pending 129 works were cancelled vide the proceedings of 
the District Collector, Coimbatore. Audit noticed that six of these works were 
cancelled based on the request of BDO(VP) and on the grounds that FHTCs 
were already available in the households proposed to be covered under these 
works. This indicated that no survey or planning was done before proposal of 
works. 
2.5.1.4  Incorrect estimation of requirement - Nagapattinam 
Audit test-checked the estimates and Completion Reports of three works in 
Nagapattinam District which revealed variations between estimates and the 
actual execution as given in Table 2.3.  
Table 2.3:  Discrepancies in the number of proposed and installed FHTCs  
in Nagapattinam District 
Habitation Extension of pipeline (EPL)  
(in metres) 
Number of FHTCs 
Proposed  Executed (increase in 
 per cent) 
Proposed Installed Not installed 
(in per cent) 
Mela pudhupalli 
Therkku, Pudupalli VP 
3,900 4,704 (20.62) 218 181 37 (16.97) 
Keela pudhupalli 
V adakku, Pudupalli VP 
4,700 5,311 (13.00) 192 155 37 (19.27) 
Pootchi Theru,  
Pirathaba ramapuram VP 
4,050 5,005 (23.58) 259 189 70 (27.00) 
(Source: Compiled by Audit) 
Audit noticed that, the length of the pipeline was increased between  
13 per cent and 24 per cent of the estimated length. However, in order to keep 
the expenditure within the estimate, the provision of FHTCs was reduced. Audit 
noticed similar issue during review of the completion reports for  
thirteen works executed in Thalanayar and Keelaiyur Blocks during 2023-24 
where the extension of pipeline exceeded the approved estimate and the increase 
in pipeline length ranged between 6.35 per cent  and 32.49 per cent  of the 
estimated length. 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
14 
Government replied (April 2025) that as the houses are geographically 
scattered, estimates were prepared approximately and the works were 
completed within the estimates. The reply is not acceptable since, the VP is a 
small area and the local terrain should have been properly analysed, mapped 
and the requirement of the correct length of the pipeline should have been 
estimated. Failure to do so has denied FHTCs to households.   
Recommendation 1: The Government should direct the implementing 
agencies to take up works only after need assessments and should also 
ensure that estimates are prepared after taking into account the actual 
requirements. 
2.5.2 Planning of works executed by TWAD Board 
Test-check of executed works in the selected districts revealed deficiencies in 
planning as discussed in the following paragraphs. 
2.5.2.1 Lack of synchronisation in planning - Ramanathapuram District 
Consequent to launch of JJM, the following schemes/works were sanctioned for 
Ramanathapuram District under JJM to meet the projected requirement of rural 
habitations for the year 2050 at the rate of 55 lpcd: 
 In-village works: Under AAP 2020-21, provision of FHTCs through 
165 in-village component works (June 2020) at an estimated cost of 
₹32.93 crore. 
 Retrofitting of existing Ramanathapuram CWSS : Under  
AAP 2022-23, retrofitting of existing CWSS at a cost of ₹574.42 crore 
was taken up (July 2022) with target for completion by October 2024. 
As TWAD Board and RD&PR Department are involved in the execution of 
works, proper planning and synchronisation of scheme components by these 
departments would ensure that the intended objectives of JJM are achieved. 
However, Audit noticed that: 
 Despite reiteration in Operational Guidelines of GoTN to prioritise 
proposal for MVS in case of non-availability of sufficient 
groundwater, in-village works were proposed and taken up in AAP 
2020-21 before finalisation of source augmentation works 
(CWSS/MVS) which were taken up only in AAP 2022-23. 
 As of May 2025, the retrofitting work of existing CWSS was under 
progress while the assets under in-village components were 
completed by February 2023. Thus, the infrastructure developed 
under the 165 in-village works remains largely unused.   
 During JPV , test check of three Over Head Tanks (OHTs) and  
12 sumps constructed in the Thiruvadanai Block revealed that seven 
sumps were not receiving water and water was not pumped to the 
OHTs. In the remaining five sumps water was supplied from local 
source only once in a week.  BDO (VP) stated that the infrastructure 
would be put to use once the TWAD Board works were completed.  

Chapter II - Institutional Framework and Planning  
15 
Thus, failure of the sanctioning authority to assess the availability of water for 
the district or the progress of source creation work before sanctioning the  
in-village components indicated poor planning and non-synchronisation of 
head-works and in-village component. 
The Government replied (April 2025) that all the works of retrofitting in 
Ramanathapuram CWSS would be completed by September 2025 and the delay 
was due to interlinking of new pipes without affecting the regular supply to the 
public. Further, it was also replied that in-village components are being used 
with the water quantity supplied through CWSS. 
Recommendation 2: The Government should ensure effective 
synchronisation in works executed by the implementing agencies so as to 
avoid delays in utilisation of assets created in the in-village components.  
2.5.2.2 Improper planning of works - Coimbatore District 
In Coimbatore District, the ‘CWSS to 295 habitations’ scheme providing water 
supply to the rural habitations was commissioned in 2005 and maintained by 
the TWAD Board since February 2006. Under this CWSS, treated surface water 
sourced from the Aliyar River was pumped through two alignments -  
Alignment I serving 165 habitations and Alignment II serving 130 habitations. 
The total length of the pipeline was 426.36 km. 
On account of road widening work by National Highways Authority, the Main 
Pumping lines and its branches spanning a length of 15.5 kilometres were 
damaged disrupting water supply to 130 habitations served by Alignment II.  
To ensure uninterrupted water supply, GoTN accorded (April 2022) 
Administrative approval for ₹47.37 crore 4 for retrofitting work under JJM in 
2021-22 to replace the damaged pipes. The work was completed in March 2024. 
TWAD Board reported (September 2024) that regular water supply was 
restored. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that the habitations in Kinathukkadavu Block were 
receiving only 2.969 Million Litre per Day (MLD) in 2024, against the 
earmarked quantity of 5.084 MLD. Moreover, this was a significant drop from 
the quantity of 4.367 MLD received by these habitations in 2022 before the 
retrofitting work. During JPV (September 2024 and March 2025) numerous 
leaks and bursts were observed (Exhibit 2.3) in the main pumping lines which 
affected the quantity of water supplied. Further, scrutiny of the maintenance 
records on TWAD Board revealed that leaks and bursts were present in the 
pipeline system. 
  
                                         
4  ₹9.53 crore for TWAD component and ₹38.70 crore for RD&PR component.  

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
16 
Exhibit 2.3: Water Stagnation due to leaks in pipelines 
  
Incidentally, it was noticed that a Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the work 
of immediate replacement of pipes for a length of 28.27 km was prepared 
(November 2024) at an estimated cost of ₹51 crore, on account of leaks and 
bursts in the pumping line due to ageing of pipes (as they were laid before  
20 years) and its wear and tear. 
In this regard, Audit observed the following: 
 TWAD Board failed to comprehensively identify the leaks and bursts 
in the pipeline while planning for the retrofitting work in 2022.  
The proposal focussed only on the extent of pipeline damaged by road 
widening works.  
 On account of compartmentalised handling of issues, leakage 
continued to plague the pipeline and consequent water supply.  
 Due to lack of holistic planning, the habitations in the tail-end block 
of the scheme received reduced quantity of water even after the 
completion of works. Moreover, these habitations had received a 
comparatively higher supply before the retrofitting work. 
Thus, deficiency in planning led to ineffective implementation of the scheme as 
the issue of leakage in pipes continued to affect the supply lines leading to 
deprivation of adequate quantity of water supply to the tail-end beneficiaries. 
The Government replied (April 2025) that the designated quantity would be 
supplied to all habitations including the tail-end habitations once the work of 
replacement of pipes and pump sets was complete. Thus, even after six years of 
JJM and expenditure on retrofitting works, sufficient water supply could not be 
ensured. 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
IMPLEMENTATION OF 
JAL JEEV AN MISSION 
 

17 
CHAPTER III 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF JAL JEEV AN MISSION 
Variations were noticed in the number of households as per the  
JJM Dashboard and as per the ‘VP Tax Portal’ of the Department for 
assessment of Property Tax. As a result, veracity of achievement 
percentage for FHTCs shown in the JJM dashboard could not be 
established. Implementation of works by TW AD Board was affected due 
to delay in site identification, non-obtaining of permissions from line 
departments and delayed execution besides lapses in tendering procedure. 
Further, assets created in VPs were not put to use owing to non-completion 
of TWAD Board works, non-availability of water sources etc. In respect of 
works executed by RD&PR Department, no penalty was levied for delayed 
execution.  
3.1 Introduction 
JJM focused on piped water as the only means of delivering potable water in 
rural areas, marking a significant shift in the approach to erstwhile rural water 
supply schemes.  The Mission has been extended up to 2028. JJM Operational 
Guidelines specifies a tap connection as ‘FHTC’ when it fulfils the following 
three criteria: 
Adequate Quantity : Ensuring supply of a minimum of 55 lpcd 
Regular Supply : Supply is continuous and sustainable in the long term 
Prescribed Quality : Water provided meets the drinking water standards1 
Besides rural households, provision of FHTCs to Schools, Anganwadi centres, 
Gram Panchayat building, health centres, wellness centres and community 
buildings was also envisaged in JJM. Whenever a particular Administrative Unit 
viz., VP/Block/District completes the stages in providing FHTCs (Exhibit 3.1), 
the Unit is termed as having achieved ‘Har Ghar Jal’ (HGJ) status. 
Exhibit 3.1: Three stages for ‘Har Ghar Jal’ declaration process 
(Source: JJM dashboard) 
                                         
1  BIS: 10500:2012. 
The households that are provided with tap water connection are noted in JJM IMIS after
verification of name and Aadhaar number of head of household. Once all households of the village
are noted in JJM IMIS, the villages acquires status of village with 100per centtap water connection.
'Reported' means water supply department of State/ UT has confirmed that water is being supplied
through taps to all households, schools andAnganwadi Centers in that administrative unit.
'Certified' means that the Gram Sabha has passed the resolution after ascertaining the claim of
water supply department that all the households, schools andAnganwadi Centers are getting the tap
water supply in village. This is carried out after the water supply department provided the
certificate to Gram Panchayat declaring that all households are provided with tap water supply.

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
18 
3.2 Coverage of FHTCs 
At the launch of JJM i.e. 15 August 2019, Tamil Nadu had 21.76 lakh rural 
households with tap connections. This accounted for only 17.37 per cent   
(1.25 crore) of the total rural households in the State. As per the data provided 
in JJM Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) Dashboard, the 
State exhibited an overall achievement of providing FHTCs to 83.94 per cent 
(1.05 crore out of 1.25 crore) of rural households as of 2024 ( Exhibit 3.2) .  
Further, 100 per cent coverage was achieved in 10 districts2. 
Exhibit 3.2: Achievement in coverage of FHTCs under JJM during 2019-24  
     
(Source: JJM dashboard) 
  The achievement of the State in providing FHTCs has 
improved from 17.37 per cent to 83.94 per cent during 2019-24.  
 In selected districts, as against the initial status of  
1.19 per cent of households with FHTCs, Viluppuram district 
recorded an achievement of 82.86 per cent in June 2024. 
Audit analysed the achievement of the selected districts reported in the JJM 
portal against the criteria for FHTC viz., adequate quantity, regular supply and 
prescribed quality and the discrepancies noticed are detailed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
3.3 Variations in households data 
The core objective of JJM is to provide FHTCs to every rural household. As of 
April 2025, as per JJM dashboard, all the VPs in 13 and six districts had 
achieved ‘Har Ghar Jal’ Reported and Certified status respectively. 
Audit cross verified the data available in the JJM dashboard with the number 
of assessment as per the ‘VP Tax portal’ which is relied upon by the VPs for 
assessment and levy of property tax, water charges etc. The details of number 
                                         
2  Ariyalur, Coimbatore, Cuddalore, Kanchipuram, Kanniyakumari, Ranipet,  
The Nilgiris, Theni, Tiruvallur and V ellore. 
August 2019 June 2024 


 Chapter III - Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
19 
of households in the selected districts as per the two data sets are given in  
Table 3.1.  
Table 3.1:  Number of households as per JJM and VP Tax portal 
District Total 
Households 
as per JJM 
portal 
Households with 
Tap connection 
(as of  
November 2024) 
Households 
as per VP 
Tax portal 
for 2024-25 
Percentage of FHTC  
JJM 
portal 
VP Tax 
portal 
Coimbatore 3,72,578 3,72,578 5,13,985 100.00 72.49 
Nagapattinam 1,57,116 89,438 2,03,446 56.92 43.96 
Ramanathapuram 3,33,279 1,11,024 4,24,073 33.31 26.18 
Salem 6,46,114 5,65,111 7,46,427 87.46 75.71 
Theni 1,85,013 1,85,013 2,36,911 100.00 78.09 
Viluppuram 4,38,570 4,11,750 4,34,960 93.88 94.66 
(Source: JJM dashboard and VP Tax portal data furnished by DRD) 
From Table 3.1, it was seen that there was variance between the two sets of 
data relating to number of households. Further, out of the 60 selected VPs,  
28 VPs were granted ‘ Har Ghar Jal ’ status during the Audit period. Scrutiny 
revealed that, the number of FHTCs provided in these VPs was lesser than the 
households as per the ‘VP Tax portal’ indicating discrepancies in data adopted 
in two portals resulting in Audit not able to establish the veracity of 
achievement percentage shown in the JJM dashboard (Appendix 3.1). 
Government replied (April 2025) that the households in rural areas varied with 
time and as the households in IMIS data (updated up to June 2022) have been 
provided with FHTCs, it has been declared as ‘ Har Ghar Jal’. The reply only 
indicated the fact that updation in IMIS portal is not real-time and VPs are to 
be certified ‘Har Ghar Jal’ based on the provision of FHTCs to all households 
in the VPs as per the actual number of households at the time of certification.  
Recommendation 3: The Government should direct the Department to 
update in a time bound manner, the household data in the IMIS portal 
so as to ensure complete coverage in all districts. 
 
3.4   Implementation of Projects 
According to JJM Operational Guidelines issued by GoTN, the RD&PR 
Department executes projects within individual VPs, while the TWAD Board 
is responsible for larger-scale projects that encompass multiple 
Blocks/Districts.  Table 3.2 below outlines the number of works carried out by 
the RD&PR Department during 2020-24 in six selected districts, along with the 
status of works and their associated financial implications. 
  

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
20 
Table 3.2: Year-wise works carried out by RD&PR Department 
Year Number of works Amount  (₹ in crore) 
Sanctioned Completed Pending Sanctioned Expenditure 
SVS Works 
2020-21 2,913 2,913 0 356.91 314.98 
2022-23 369 369 0 106.04 85.16 
2023-24 129 112 17 31.73 8.75 
In-village component connected with TWAD Board works 
NEW MVS 1,864 516 1,348 190.91 48.99 
MVS Retro fitting 1,482 1,482 0 139.00 106.17 
Total 6,757 5,392 1,365 824.59 564.05 
(Source: Details furnished by RD&PR Department) 
 
 All the SVS Works taken up by the Department during  
2020-21 and 2022-23 were completed and there was no 
pendency.  
Further, in respect of MVS, out of 10 works valuing ₹5,595.47 crore taken up 
by TWAD Board during 2020-21 to 2023-24 in the selected districts, five works 
relating to 2022-23 are still pending.  
Audit observations based on scrutiny of execution of works by both RD&PR 
Department and TWAD Board and records maintained by the implementing 
agencies are discussed in the following paragraphs.  
3.5 Discrepancies in Tendering and Contract Management 
 
3.5.1 Splitting up of work to avoid tender transparency requirements 
In order to ensure transparency, competitive pricing, and accountability, GoTN 
revised (August 2017) the financial norms for advertising Notice Inviting 
Tenders in newspapers as detailed in Table 3.3. 
Table 3.3:  Financial norms for advertising 
Value of Procurement Newspapers in which to be published 
Above ₹10 lakh and up to ₹25 lakh One Tamil daily - District edition 
Above ₹25 lakh and up to ₹3 crore One English daily and one Tamil daily  -  
all editions in the State 
(Source: Government Orders) 
Under JJM works, the work of providing new MVS 3 in Ramanathapuram 
District was taken up by TWAD Board during 2021-22. Tenders for surveying 
and levelling works to aid in preparation of the Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
for the new MVS, at an estimated cost of ₹1.74 crore was initiated in January 
2022.  The works were split up into ten packages (between ₹12.70 lakh and 
₹24.33 lakh) and the same was finalised in February 2022 (Appendix 3.2).  
In this regard, Audit observed that in spite of the scope of work being similar, 
the works were split up into smaller contracts to avoid the tender transparency 
thresholds and it was also not published in the newspaper as per the norms. 
                                         
3  4 Municipalities, 7 Town Panchayats and 2,189 rural habitations. 


 Chapter III - Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
21 
Further, based on the classification of soil as ‘ordinary soil’ in the survey and 
levelling work, the DPR was finalised. However, during execution the soil 
classification was reassessed as ‘including ordinary soil, soft disintegrated rock, 
Dense Medium Rock not requiring blasting and Dense Medium Rock requiring 
control blasting’ resulting in excess expenditure. The issue is further discussed 
in Paragraph 3.6.1 (b). 
The Government stated (April 2025) the non-availability of contractors due to 
COVID-19 outbreak and the urgency of work as reasons for splitting up of 
tender. It was further stated that all the reports were completed as per the 
agreement. The reply is not acceptable as adherence to tender conditions is 
mandatory and the finalisation of tender was done after the COVID-19 
outbreak.  
3.5.2 Lack of transparency in tender procedure 
As per the proceedings (November 2023) of the District collector cum 
Chairman, DRDA, Ramanathapuram District, an amount of ₹45.68 lakh was 
allocated to the 11 Blocks of the district for printing of hoardings, posters and 
pamphlets towards IEC activities. Scrutiny of records in the two 4 selected 
blocks revealed that the quotations submitted by vendors lacked dates and were 
not countersigned by the Tender Inviting Authority. Further, no records were 
furnished to Audit to substantiate that the BDOs had called for quotations5 from 
the Suppliers in the first place. These lapses indicated violation of the provisions 
of the Tamil Nadu Transparency in Tender Act / Rules besides raising concerns 
about the validity and authenticity of the tender process.  
The BDO (VP) replied (September 2024) that proper tender conditions would 
be followed hereafter. Government replied (July 2025) that invitations were sent 
to three selected vendors in both the blocks and that due to documentary lapses 
in some of the works signing procedures would have been missed out by the 
Tender Inviting Authority. The reply is contradictory to the earlier reply of the 
BDO and the documentary evidence in support of the reply was not furnished. 
3.5.3  Non-compliance of Agreement procedures 
As per GoTN Operational Guidelines, a tripartite agreement must be executed 
between VP, DWSM and Implementing Agency before commencement of 
work.  
 Scrutiny of records relating to Nagapattinam during 2019-24 
revealed that in 39 out of 104 works, no contractual agreement was 
executed with the respective contractors and in 47 works taken up by 
four contractor, the signatures of VP authorities were not available in 
the agreements.  
Government replied (July 2025) that tripartite agreement has been 
executed for all JJM works in Thirumarugal Block. The reply is not 
acceptable as the cases pointed out in Audit included works executed 
in the Thirumarugal Block also and no documentary evidence was 
furnished by the Government in support of the above reply.  Further, 
                                         
4  Thiruppullani and Thiruvadanai Blocks. 
5  As per Rule 8 of the Tamil Nadu Transparency in Tender Rules, 2000, Notices Inviting 
 Tenders and decisions on tenders in all cases, where the value of the procurement 
 exceeds ₹10 lakh and is below ₹25 lakh, shall be published. 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
22 
the current reply is in contradiction to the earlier reply given in  
April 2025 wherein it was stated that all tender conditions would be 
strictly followed in future and necessary instructions were issued. 
 Further, out of 340 in-village works executed in Ramanathapuram 
during 2023-24, Audit test checked 44 works in which it was noticed 
that agreement was not executed in 16 works and in the remaining  
28 works, agreement was entered into only after the completion of 
the works. Government endorsed (July 2025) the reply of Mission 
Director, JJM (June 2025) that due to documentary lapses in some of 
the works signing procedures was missed out by the Tender Inviting 
Authority and that all the works were completed successfully without 
any financial and legal issues. Government also stated (July 2025) 
that Mission Director will pursue in taking action for the lapses of 
non-compliance of agreement procedures against the erring officials.  
 Audit also noticed that the agreement with the assigned Third Party 
Inspection Agencies as per JJM Operational Guidelines was not 
executed by Ramanathapuram and Sivagangai Divisions of TW AD 
Board. As a result, the TPIA functioned without a contract agreement 
between the concerned authorities that outlined the terms of service, 
roles, and responsibilities.  Government replied (July 2025) that the 
agreement was since concluded in February 2025 and the delay in 
concluding the agreement was because the Third Party Inspection 
Agency did not provide the necessary security deposit on time.  
As the agreement would serve as a legally binding document, these procedural 
lapses not only undermine the integrity of the contract management process but 
also expose the Department to potential legal and financial risks.  
Recommendation 4: The Government should fix responsibility for the 
lapses in tender procedures and direct the Implementing agencies to 
ensure adherence to the relevant Act and Rules. 
3.6 Execution of works under JJM by TWAD Board  
 
3.6.1 Ramanathapuram New Multi Village Scheme 
GoTN accorded (December 2022) administrative approval for New MVS under 
JJM in Ramanathapuram district to ensure a minimum of 55 lpcd of water 
supply at a cost of ₹4,187.84 crore. The project area was made as two systems  
viz., Systems 1 and 2 encompassing Ramanathapuram and Dindigul districts 
respectively with river Cauvery as the source. System 1 was divided into four 
packages having components like Headworks 6, Zonal Balancing Reservoir 7  
(ZBR), Service Reservoirs (OHT), Master Balancing Reservoir, Gravity Main, 
Feeder main, etc., and the work orders were issued in March/April 2023, with a 
target completion period of 18 months. As of May 2025, the percentage of 
completion of works ranged between 81 per cent and 90 per cent only, even 
                                         
6  A civil engineering term for any structure at the head or diversion point of a waterway.  
7  These are typically smaller than main balancing reservoirs and are located within a 
specific zone of a water distribution system. They are used to regulate water pressure 
and distribution within that zone. 

 Chapter III - Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
23 
after six/seven months from the target date of completion.  The factors which 
contributed to the delay are discussed in succeeding paragraphs.  
(a) Procedural delays  
Work order for construction of intake well 
(Exhibit 3.3 ) under Head works  
component of Package I was issued in 
April 2023 before the actual possession of 
site, in violation of TWAD Board 
instructions (February 2011) and the site 
was handed over to the contractor only in 
June 2023.  As a result, the work began in July 2023 only.  
Similarly, in Package III, the Master 
Balancing Reservoir (Exhibit 3.4) location 
was changed four 8 times from April 2023 
up to October 2023. Further, due to public 
objection, the construction was delayed 
and commenced only in May 2024.  
Government replied (April 2025) that 
necessary notice has been issued to the 
contractor to speed up the work and stated that the work would be completed 
before September 2025. The reply is not acceptable since Work order was issued 
before finalisation of site in violation of instructions. 
In addition, there was delay (ranging between 93 days to 411 days from the date 
of Agreement - April 2023)  in providing drawings for the Head works, Water 
Treatment Plant, etc., by TWAD Board to the contractor. These were handed 
over between July 2023 and June 2024. Government replied  
(April 2025) that the design and drawings for headworks and Water treatment 
plant were handed over to contractor during agreement stage itself, for ZBRs 
and OHTs by December 2023 and  other drawings after April 2024. The fact 
remains that delayed finalization of drawings impacted the completion of works. 
(b) Incorrect classification of soil & execution of additional items 
without approval of the Board 
Proper soil classification is essential for designing and construction of 
infrastructure for water supply schemes. Incorrect soil classification affects 
excavation techniques, foundation design, and pipe-laying methodologies.  
As discussed in Paragraph 3.5.1, the tender for survey and levelling works for 
identification of soil classification for New MVS work in Ramanathapuram was 
done in February 2022. Scrutiny of records revealed that the soil classification 
for earthwork was taken as ‘Ordinary soil’ in the sanctioned DPR. The 
contractor stated (July 2023) that presence of hard rock was noticed in certain 
areas during execution, which required controlled blasting for excavation.  
In view of this, an addendum to the agreement incorporating the supplementary 
item for excavation of hard rock was sought for by the contractor.  
                                         
8  Initially proposed at Ganapathipalayam but was subsequently changed (July 2023) to 
Aatukulam, then to Navinipatti (August 2023), and finally to Thumbaipatti in the  
first week of October 2023. 
Exhibit 3.4: Master Balancing Reservoir  
at Thumbaipatti VP 
Exhibit 3.3: Intake Well 
Ramanathapuram MVS 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
24 
Subsequently, the soil was reclassified (as per TWAD Board instructions) as 
ordinary soil, soft disintegrated rock, Dense Medium Rock not requiring 
blasting and Dense Medium Rock requiring control blasting.  Accordingly, an 
additional amount of ₹36.70 crore was approved (July 2023/March 2024) by the 
Chief Engineer (CE), Madurai. 
As the value of the additional items exceeded ₹50 lakh, prior approval from the 
Technical Committee was required before execution. Audit observed that, the 
additional works were carried out without obtaining approval for the same, 
which was in violation of the delegation of financial powers. Further, the delay 
was compounded due to obtaining approval from District Collector for blasting 
activities.  
Government replied (April 2025) that after completion of all the packages, 
additional/substituted items of executed works will be submitted by the 
concerned executing division to TWAD Board Head Office for approval. The 
reply is not acceptable since the changes exceeded the delegation of power 
(more than ₹50 lakh) which required the approval of the Tender Committee and 
the same was not done. Further, the reply is silent about the action taken for the 
submission of incorrect soil classification in the DPR. 
(c) Delay in obtaining approvals from line department 
As per TWAD Board’s instructions (February 2011), prior approval from the 
relevant line departments must be obtained before commencing a project.  
The New MVS included works related to laying of pipelines along the road in 
National Highways 9 (NH) for which prior approval of the concerned 
Department, i.e., Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, GoI was required. 
In this regard, Audit observed that, while the agreement for new MVS was 
finalised in April 2023, the request for permission for laying of pipelines was 
submitted to the Regional Office, National Highways Chennai only in July 2023 
in violation of instructions (February 2011). After much deliberations and the 
decision of the National Highways to widen the Highway (four-laning), TWAD 
Board was advised (September 2024) to lay the water pipeline along an 
alternative route as the existing road width was insufficient to accommodate 
both the pipeline and proposed road widening.  
This resulted in completion of only 
62 per cent  of the pipeline laying 
work (October 2024), though  
82 per cent  of the pipes were 
procured, which was noticed, during 
JPV , as stored along the roadside at 
multiple locations (Exhibit 3.5). 
Government replied (April 2025) that the approval from NHAI was yet to be 
received and the contractor has been requested to lay the pipeline in the feasible 
reaches.  The reply is not tenable since, the work was taken up without firming 
up the site and as such the expenditure incurred till date remained unfruitful. 
                                         
9  Package II - permission sought for 100.134 Km in NH 32, 85 and 87; Package IV - 
permission sought for 64.187 Km in Paramakudi - Ramanathapuram and  
Ramanathapuram - Mandapam NH. 
Exhibit 3.5: Pipes for JJM works lying on 
roadside 

 Chapter III - Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
25 
(d) Construction of ZBR and Service Reservoirs  
The package-wise number of ZBR and 
service reservoirs taken up and status of 
works as of May 2025 are detailed in 
Table 3.4.  
Though the target for completion of the 
New MVS work was October 2024, it 
was noticed that only 36 per cent  of 
ZBRs were completed as of May 2025. 
Further, during JPV of the works, it was also observed that the construction of 
headworks, establishment of Water Treatment Plant, laying of pipelines and 
Over Head Tanks works were also not completed as per agreed milestones. 
Government replied (April 2025) that sufficient skilled labour was not available. 
It was also stated that notice has been issued to the contractor to complete the 
balance works within the time period. Audit observed that delay in the 
completion of reservoirs affected the availability of water storage capacity for 
effective water distribution, which in turn affected the overall achievement in 
JJM as only 31 per cent of the households were covered as of June 2024. 
3.6.2 Delay in execution of Retrofitting work of CWSS in Salem 
District 
GoTN accorded Administrative Sanction (July 2022) for ₹85.63 crore10 towards 
retrofitting work of the existing 11 scheme (from June 2003) in Salem District, 
to enhance the service levels from 40 lpcd to 55 lpcd. To achieve this, the 
additional requirement for the ultimate stage target year of 2054 was assessed 
as 5.166 MLD (Million Litres per day).  
The work order was issued in August 2023, with a targeted completion period 
of 12 months (August 2024). However, as of March 2025, the work remained 
incomplete. Based on JPV and the records furnished to Audit, the factors 
contributing to the delay are detailed below. 
(a) Delay in obtaining approvals from line departments  
One12 of the pipeline sections covering  
1.4 km, remained incomplete due to delays 
in obtaining approval from the Highways 
Department. Although TWAD requested 
permission to lay pipes in November 2022, 
the Highways Department has yet to decide 
whether the pipes should be laid on the 
right or left side, and the approval is still pending. As a result, the pipeline for 
this stretch has not been laid to date ( Exhibit 3.6), with pipes stored along the 
                                         
10  TWAD Board - implementation of source-to-overhead tank components at a cost of 
₹43.53 crore; RD&PR Department - execution of in-village components including the 
distribution system and FHTCs at a cost of ₹42.10 crore.  
11  Combined Water Supply Scheme (CWSS) for 136 fluoride-affected habitations and 
512 wayside habitations in Kadayampatty and three other unions in Salem District’.  
12  Pipeline between Thindamangalam BPT and Thimirikottai Pirivu in Omalur Union.  
T able 3.4:  Status of progress  
Particulars ZBR Service Reservoirs 
(In numbers) 
Completed 35 596 
Under progress 62 164 
Not started 0 64 
Total 97 824 
(Source: Details furnished by TWAD) 
Exhibit 3.6: Pipes not laid pending 
clearance 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
26 
roadside at multiple locations, awaiting clearance from the Tamil Nadu Road 
Sector Project. 
(b) Incomplete pipeline installation 
One of the key components was the laying of a 5.6 km MS pipeline. However, 
as of March 2025, only 4.2 km has been supplied and installed, while the 
remaining 1.4 km of MS pipeline was yet to be laid due to non-availability of 
MS pipes. Thus, non-firming up of MS pipes before the commencement of the 
project contributed to the delay in completion of the project. Thus, the 
significant delays hindered the scheme's objective of supply of 55 lpcd of water 
to these habitations. 
Recommendation 5: The Government must direct the TWAD Board to 
ensure that all the necessary approvals have been obtained before 
commencement of works so that all the water supply works under JJM 
are executed without delay. 
 
3.7 Execution of in-village components by RD&PR Department 
The district wise number of sanctioned in-village works for the period 2020-24 
in six selected Districts is given in Appendix 3.3.  
3.7.1 Delay in completion of work 
As per the general conditions of Contract, penalty will be levied and collected 
from the contractor for delay in completion of work. In case of delay beyond  
60 days, the work order issued should be cancelled, security deposit forfeited, 
and the contractor blacklisted and penalised. 
Audit observed that in four 13 districts, out of 4,261 works, there was delay in 
completion in respect of 4,010 works, the delay ranged between 30 days and 
1,380 days. Though, the delay warranted, besides levy of penalty, cancellation, 
blacklisting, etc., no action was taken in this regard. Further, the delay in 
execution of in-village works affected the last mile service delivery and 
ultimately impacted the achievement of objective of JJM. 
Government replied (April 2025) that fine of ₹16.47 lakh has been imposed in  
786 works relating to Coimbatore district.  No specific reply has been given in 
respect of the remaining three districts.  The reply is silent about levy of penalty 
in respect of the remaining three districts and also in respect of all the works in 
Coimbatore that were delayed. Further, it was also silent on the action taken on 
the defaulting contractors. 
3.7.2  Non-adherence to TWAD norms in construction of OHTs  
In respect of construction of OHTs, staging height 14 is crucial to ensure 
minimum residual pressure for water supply. The norms followed by  
TW AD Board stipulates that staging height of 12 metre is required for OHTs 
with capacity of 30,000 litres and above. 
                                         
13  Coimbatore, Salem, Theni and Viluppuram. 
14  Height of staging is the difference between the lowest supply level of tank and the 
average ground level at the tank site. 

 Chapter III - Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
27 
Test check of four OHTs constructed (May/July 2022) by RD&PR Department 
in three 15 VPs of Coimbatore District revealed that though the capacity was 
30,000/60,000 litres, the staging height as per TPIA report ranged between  
6 metre and 9.1 metre. This is in violation of the above said norms.  Inadequate 
staging height of these OHTs would affect the minimum residual pressure 
required for sustained supply of water till the tail end habitation.  
3.8 Infrastructure not put to use 
  
Ramanathapuram District  
During JPV (September 2024) in Ramanathapuram District, Audit noticed that 
although construction of OHTs was completed, water was not stored in them 
due to non-connection with the CWSS/MVS feeder or local bore well.  Further, 
the distribution pipelines with FHTCs were not connected with OHTs.   
In reply, Additional Collector/Project Director of DRDA, Ramanathapuram 
stated (September 2024) that (i) Water from own source (bore wells) depends 
on monsoon (ii) Once CWSS/MVS works were completed, it would be possible 
to ensure supply of 55 lpcd drinking water and (iii) all infrastructure would 
effectively be put up into use after completion of retrofitting and New MVS 
scheme works.  
Thus, the intended benefits of providing a sustainable and adequate water 
supply to every household was not achieved, leaving residents to seek 
alternative and costly sources of drinking water.  
Viluppuram District 
The District Collector, Viluppuram accorded administrative sanction  
(August 2020) for construction of five 16 Borewells for Vikravandi Block at an 
estimated cost of ₹73.48 lakh. During JPV (September 2024), Audit observed 
that in Kuthampoondi VP, out of two borewells, one borewell was lying idle for 
over 24 months due to the absence of essential provisions such as motor and 
pump room and  all the three borewells of Kayathur VP created under JJM 
remained idle. Non-utilisation of the above assets denied the public of the 
purpose of construction of borewells. 
Government replied (April 2025) that water from the bore wells have been sent 
for water test in TWAD laboratory and based on the report, necessary action 
would be taken to utilise the bore well. The reply is not tenable since the water 
quality testing should have been done before taking up the work.  
Theni District 
The District Collector/Chairman, DRDA, Theni accorded administrative 
sanction (August 2020) for the work of ‘Providing water supply to 
Sillamarathupatty village from existing infiltration well to ground level sump’ 
for Bodinayakkanur Block at an estimated cost of ₹1.30 crore and the work was 
completed in November 2022. During JPV , Audit observed that water was not 
being pumped from the infiltration well as planned but rather from a local 
borewell source. The reasons for the same was not available on record. 
                                         
15  Thekkampatti, Rasichettipalayam and V adhambacheri.  
16  Two Borewells at Kuthampoondi VP and three Borewells at Kayathur VP . 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
28 
Consequently, the failure to supply water from the infiltration well to the sump 
rendered the incurred expenditure of ₹1.30 crore ineffective. 
In response to the audit query, the District Rural Development Agency stated 
(September 2024) that under JJM work, a 40 HP motor was provided. However, 
there was no sufficient water for the above motor capacity. The pumping main 
pipes also got burst due to the high-capacity motor.  It was also stated that the 
motor capacity was since reduced to 20 HP and trial runs were in progress.  
Government replied (April 2025) that work for an additional sump to utilise the 
water supply from infiltration well will be completed.  The reply is not tenable 
since in case of insufficient water in the existing source after utilising reduced 
capacity of motor, alternative source should be looked into and not construction 
of additional sump.  
Recommendation 6: The Government should direct the Department to 
rectify the deficiencies in the execution of work so as to ensure proper 
utilisation of all assets created, at the earliest for achievement of the 
intended objective. 
 
3.9 Construction of excess storage structures 
The GoTN Operational Guidelines for implementation of JJM has provided 
detailed instructions with regards to proposal and sanctioning for construction 
of storage structures such as Over Head Tanks (OHTs) and Ground Level 
Reservoirs (GLRs). Accordingly, the following assessments were to be made: 
 New storage structures may be proposed only when necessary, based 
on the additional requirements identified. 
 Need for an OHT is determined by evaluating the daily total water 
demand of the selected habitation for the ultimate design period. 
 The capacity of the OHT should be designed to meet 50 per cent of 
the total daily demand, allowing the supply to be managed with  
two fillings per day, ensuring efficient use of funds. 
Director, RD&PR Department had identified (2015) several VPs having storage 
structures exceeding the required capacity due to taking up of construction 
under different schemes.  Consequently, instructions were issued (April 2015) 
that additional OHTs should not be built if they result in excess water storage 
structures, as this would lead to wasteful expenditure. Further, prior approval 
had to be obtained from the District Collector, along with a clear justification 
for the requirement wherever construction of an additional OHT was deemed 
necessary. 
(a) Ramanathapuram District 
Audit analysed the data in the DRDA’s report detailing the population and the 
available storage structures in each habitation as of 01 April 2023, against the 
daily water requirements and storage needs projected for the ultimate design 
period of 2053. The adequacy of water storage structures in 2,306 habitations 
in the district pre and post JJM and other schemes during 2020-24 are given in 
Table 3.5. 
  

 Chapter III - Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission 
29 
Table 3.5: Adequacy of water storage structures in the habitations of Ramanathapuram 
Capacity of existing 
storage structures in 
habitations 
Prior to 
commencement of 
JJM 
After creation of 
structures during 
2020-24 
Percentage of 
increase (+)/ 
decrease (-) 
Excess  363 655 80.44 
Adequate 487 729 49.69 
No storage structure/Short 
of requirement 
1,456 922 (-) 36.68 
(Source: Audit analysis of the capacity of storage structures furnished by RD&PR department) 
A total of 943 OHTs were constructed in the district during the said period. 
From Table 3.5, it can be seen that, habitations having excess storage even 
before commencement of JJM were provided with additional OHTs even when 
there were habitations with shortage. Further, in 830 habitations out of  
1,456 that did not have any storage structure prior to commencement of JJM, 
430 (out of 922 habitations) continued to remain in the same state. The details 
of additional OHTs provided to habitations under JJM and other schemes 
during 2020-24 is given in Exhibit 3.7. 
 
(Source: Audit analysis of OHTs sanctioned to habitations) 
From Exhibit 3.7, it is seen that 105 out of 487 habitations (21.56 per cent) 
which had adequate water storage structures and 92 out of 363 habitations  
(25.34 per cent ) which had excess water storage structures prior to 
commencement of JJM were provided with additional OHTs.  Further, more 
than one OHT was sanctioned to 12 out of 92 habitations that already had 
excess storage structures.  
(b) Salem District  
In respect of Salem District, 
Audit reviewed (March 2025) 
the available storage 
structures as per the DRDA’s 
Report as of April 2023 
against the daily water 
requirements and projected 
storage needs for the ultimate 
design period of 2053.  It was 
noticed that out of  
5,109 habitations in Salem 
District, while 530 habitations 
(10.39 per cent ) lacked storage structures entirely, 2,772 habitations  
(54 per cent) had storage capacities exceeding their requirements (Exhibit 3.8). 
530
(11 per cent) 628
(12 per cent)
1,179 
(23 per cent)
2,772 
(54 per 
cent)
Exhibit 3.8: Habitations with Storage 
Structures availability in Salem District 
No storage structure
 Shortage of storage structures
Adequate storage structure
 Excess of requirement
0 200 400 600 800
Water storage structures were adequate
No storage structure/Short of requirement
Available storage structure is in excess of
requirement
105
655
92
Exhibit 3.7: Habitations provided with additional OHTs

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
30 
The District Collector, Salem granted Administrative Sanction (June 2022) for 
construction of 26 OHTs and 15,031 FHTCs to Kaveripuram and Kolathur 
Union at a cost of ₹19.98 crore. Audit conducted JPV (March 2025) of the 
OHTs constructed and observed the following: 
 Water was not being supplied to the newly constructed OHTs at 
three17 habitations. 
 The 26 OHTs were constructed by RD&PR Department under JJM 
without any prior intimation to TWAD.  
 Additional OHTs were 
also constructed 
alongside existing OHTs  
(Exhibit 3.9).  
 The TWAD officials also 
stated that water could be 
supplied to the new OHTs 
from the CWSS only after 
replacing the pump set 
with a suitable type and capacity and upgrading the pipelines with the 
appropriate diameter.  
Audit observed that (i) the reasons for not supplying water to OHTs and the 
reasons for utilising different type of pipelines, as against the standard 
specifications were not on record (ii) the construction of OHTs could have been 
avoided and utilised in habitations having shortage of storage structures  
(under-served areas) indicating inadequate planning and resource 
mismanagement besides underutilization of the created assets.    
Government replied (July 2025) that the staging height and age of OHTs were 
also considered before arriving at the requirement. Once after completion of 
new MVS and Retrofitting works of existing CWSS in Ramanathapuram, the 
OHTs which are aged more than 20 years will be subjected to demolition and 
the remaining OHT will meet the ultimate demand population for the district. 
The reply is not tenable since the above procedure should have been considered 
only after construction of OHTs in habitations where there is no such 
infrastructure.  
Recommendation 7: The Government should ensure that storage 
infrastructure are created only in needy habitations to avoid idling of the 
assets created besides optimum utilisation of valuable resources. 
 
                                         
17  Chettipatti Colony, Kanavaikadu and Melmolaporaiyur Blocks.  
Exhibit 3.9: Newly constructed OHT 
adjacent to existing OHT at Kolathur Block 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCIAL 
MANAGEMENT 
 

31 
CHAPTER IV 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Audit noticed that only 33 per cent of the community contribution, being 
a pre-requisite for taking water supply scheme, has been collected in the 
selected districts. There was non-assessment and short-collection of 
water connection charges. Other issues like delayed release of funds, 
diversion of Earnest Money Deposit amount collected and  
non-remittance of Labour Welfare Fund were noticed.  
4.1  Introduction  
As per GoI’s Operational Guidelines for implementation of JJM, the  
Centre-State funding pattern for implementation of the scheme is 50:50 for 
Coverage i.e., infrastructure in terms of FHTCs provided to rural households 
and 60:40 for Support Activities including Water Quality Monitoring and 
Surveillance (WQM&S). Till 2022-23, the Centre’s share were credited to the 
State Government through the Public Financial Management System portal. 
Thereafter, the State was required to release or transfer the sanctioned amount 
to the ‘Single Nodal Account’ (SNA) of the scheme maintained by Mission 
Director, along with the matching State share, within 15 days of receipt.  
From January 2023, both the Centre and State’s share of funds were directly 
released to the SNA. All payments were made by the implementing agencies 
through the portal by using the SNA.  
The details of funds received and expenditure incurred under JJM in Tamil Nadu 
for the period 2019-2024 are given in Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1: Receipt and expenditure of JJM funds at State level 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Opening 
Balance 
(OB) 
Receipt Total 
Receipt 
Expenditure Total 
Expen-
diture 
Closing 
Balance 
Central State Interest Central State Interest 
amount 
remitted 
2019-20 11.761 373.10 184.83 3.54 573.23 99.97 99.13 0  199.10 374.13 
2020-21 374.13 688.08 664.87 14.00 1,741.08 577.87 387.23 0  965.10 775.98 
2021-22 775.98 630.71 826.30 22.35 2,255.34 467.25 506.68 0  973.93 1,281.41 
2022-23 1,281.41 872.96 849.54 31.40 3,035.31 604.00 676.14 10.27  1,290.40 1,744.91 
2023-24 1,744.91 2,617.10 2,556.03 36.54 6,954.58 2,620.71 2,614.95 67.94  5,303.60 1,650.98 
(Source:  TWAD Board, Chennai) 
4.1.1  Delayed release of Central Assistance  
Audit scrutiny of records revealed that, during the mission period upto 2022-23, 
the GoI share funds received by the State Government were released to the SNA 
with delays ranging from 6 to 104 days beyond the stipulated transfer date. 
                                         
1  OB taken from erstwhile National Rural Drinking Water Programme.  

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
32 
Further, delays ranging from 14 to 313 days were noticed in the release of 
State’s share to SNA. The details of delays in release of funds is given in  
Appendix 4.1. Mission Director, JJM replied (February 2025) that normally the 
State’s share was released on time and that the delay stated was due to 
administrative reason. Audit observed that, though there was delay in release of 
funds, the progress of the works under JJM was not affected for want of funds. 
4.2 Short collection of community contribution under JJM 
JJM operational Guidelines of GoI stipulates that recovery of user charges and 
full O&M will form the cornerstone of the long-term sustainability of the 
Mission. The State specific Guidelines issued in 2020 and 2022 reiterated the 
same by stating that the VPs were responsible for O&M of the in-village 
components of the Mission. The community contribution for in-village piped 
water supply infrastructure and related source development should be collected 
before commencement of the work from households in VPs as detailed below: 
 Five per cent of the capital cost in cash and/or kind and/or labour in 
hilly and forested areas and habitations/VPs having more than  
50 per cent SCs and/or STs population; 
 10 per cent of the capital cost in cash and/or kind and or labour in 
other habitations/VPs. 
Willingness of the community and contribution under JJM is mandated from at 
least 80 per cent households of the village as a pre-requisite for taking up water 
supply schemes. As of July to October 2024, the community contribution 
amount due, collected and the balance to be collected from beneficiaries in the 
selected Districts and Blocks are detailed in Table 4.2. 
Table 4.2: Status of community contribution 
(₹ in crore) 
District District level Selected Blocks 
Due Collected Balance 
(in per cent) 
Due Collected Balance 
(in per cent) 
Coimbatore 6.46 5.50 0.96 (15) 1.38 0.96 0.42 (31) 
Nagapattinam 3.37 0 3.37 (100) 0.92 0 0.92 (100) 
Ramanathapuram 7.75 1.84 5.91 (76) 1.54 0.60 0.93 (61) 
Salem 28.26 5.01 23.25 (82) 2.87 0.61 2.27 (79) 
Theni 16.31 3.27 13.04 (80) 3.42 0.90 2.52 (74) 
Viluppuram 10.08 8.39 1.69 (17) 1.05 0.98 0.07 (7) 
Total 72.23 24.01 48.21 (67) 11.18 4.05 7.13 (64) 
(Source: Data obtained from DRDAs)  
As seen from Table 4.2, against ₹72.23 crore due as community contribution in 
the six selected districts, the collection was only ₹24.01 crore (33 per cent ).  
In selected Blocks, as against ₹11.18 crore to be collected as community 
contribution, the VPs collected only ₹4.05 crore (36 per cent ). Further, no 
community contribution was collected in Nagapattinam District. 
Government replied (April 2025) that the balance amount would be collected at 
the earliest. However, the fact remains that the Operational Guidelines were not 
followed in ensuring the collection of community contribution before execution 
of works. 

Chapter IV - Financial Management 
33 
Recommendation 8: The Government should ensure that the requisite 
community contributions as per the Operational Guidelines are collected 
from the beneficiaries.  
 
4.3 Short collection of water charges 
One of the essential criteria for hassle free O&M of water supply schemes was 
cost recovery and proper financing policy which would increase the financial 
viability and sustainability of implementing agencies. Collection of water tariff 
was also emphasised in the State specific operational guidelines for JJM. 
Accordingly, the VPs must collect minimum water tariff amount 2 of  
₹30 per month.   
In this context, the data regarding number of water connections provided as of 
November 2024 and the water charges assessment conducted by VPs during 
2024-25 were obtained from the JJM portal and the VP tax portal respectively. 
The details are given in the Table 4.3. 
From Table 4.3 it was seen 
that, JJM dashboard’s data 
on number of FHTCs 
provided was higher than 
the number of assessments 
of water charges in the five 
districts indicating that a 
significant number of 
households having FHTCs 
were not assessed for water 
connection charges. This resulted in substantial short collection of revenue. 
The non-assessment and short-collection of water connection charges placed an 
additional burden on the Operation and Maintenance of the Mission, besides 
revenue loss to the implementing agency. 
Government replied (April 2025) that action is being taken to bring all 
households for assessment of water connections. The reply points to the fact 
that effective measures were not taken to ensure collection of water charges for 
the in-village water supply. 
Recommendation 9: The Government should ensure that water charges 
be assessed and collected from all the beneficiaries so as to augment the 
revenue source of the VPs. 
4.4 Other issues  
Other district-specific issues on financial management noticed in the selected 
districts are detailed below. 
                                         
2  As per G.O.No.260, RD&PR Department dated 09 December 1998.  
Table 4.3:  Details of non-assessed connections 
District FHTC provided as 
per JJM Dashboard 
Water charges 
assessed 
Coimbatore 3,72,578 3,07,075 
Ramanathapuram 1,11,024  21,313 
Salem 5,65,111 2,64,994 
Theni 1,85,013 76,296 
Viluppuram 3,87,786 1,39,598 
* Details not furnished for Nagapattinam District 
(Source: Data compiled by Audit) 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
34 
4.4.1 Diversion of JJM funds to DRDA Administrative Account 
A review of the cash books of DRDA, Theni revealed that an amount of  
₹3.23 crore pertaining to the Earnest Money Deposit (EMD)/Security deposit 
received from contractors for works under the JJM, were diverted to the DRDA 
Administrative Account between 2019-20 and 2023-24. The EMD amount is to 
be refunded to the contractors upon completion of the work. Instead, Audit 
noticed that the amount was diverted and utilised for routine administrative 
expenses.  
On being pointed out, Assistant Project Officer, DRDA, Theni replied  
(September 2024) that since 2016-17, no funds were received from the 
Government to cover staff salaries and administrative expenses. Hence, the said 
amount was transferred to the DRDA’s Administrative Account. Government 
replied (July 2025) that the amount pertaining to EMD and Additional Security 
Deposit for JJM works 2020-21 and 2022-23 was ₹1.25 crore, of which  
₹30.55 lakh was released to contractor thus far and the balance would be 
refunded on request from the contractor. The reply is however silent about 
diversion of funds for payment of salaries and Administrative Expenses.  
4.4.2 No uniformity in collection of Community Contribution - Theni 
A review of deposit collections in the Uthamapalayam and Bodinayakannur 
blocks of Theni District revealed that, the community contribution collected 
from 305 households for providing FHTCs under JJM ranged between ₹650 to  
₹3,000 both within and across various habitations. However, no reason was 
provided for the variation in amount collected within the same district.  
Government replied (July 2025) that since collection of community contribution 
is purely based on the capital cost and number of households in the habitations/ 
VPs, the variation in the community contribution collected varies within the 
same district. The reply is not tenable as variations were noticed within the same 
habitations also. 
4.4.3 Non-remittance of Labour Welfare Fund deductions - 
Nagapattinam 
A review of payments made to the Contractors for the works in respect of JJM 
in Nagapattinam District revealed that though one per cent of Invoice amount 
was deducted as Labour Welfare Fund (LWF) from the bills the same was not 
remitted to the LWF account by three Blocks of Nagapattinam District as given 
in Table 4.4.  
Government replied  
(April 2025) that 
necessary action is being 
taken to remit the Labour 
Welfare Fund amount to 
the LWF account. The fact 
remains that these lapses 
point to ineffective 
monitoring in financial 
progress of works under JJM.  
Table 4.4:  Non-remittance of LWF into Labour 
Board accounts 
Block Amount of LWF deducted and kept 
in the accounts of the blocks (in ₹) 
Keelaiyur 7,13,384 
Nagapattinam 4,83,379 
Thirumarugal 3,64,087 
Total 15,60,850 
(Source: Data furnished by DRDA) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
WATER QUALITY 
MONITORING AND 
SURVEILLANCE 
 

35 
CHAPTER V 
 
W ATER QUALITY MONITORING AND SURVEILLANCE 
The water testing laboratories functioned without any mechanism for 
referring positively tested samples to higher level laboratories. Further, 
four District laboratories in the selected districts functioned without 
NABL accreditation. The infrastructure and equipment were found to be 
lacking in all the 18 laboratories (including State laboratory) at various 
levels across the selected districts. The water quality testing conducted 
by TW AD Board divisions was inadequate as all the 13 prescribed 
parameters were not tested. N o water quality tests were conducted by 
using Field Testing Kits in any of the selected districts. 
 
5.1 Introduction 
The Operational Guidelines of JJM issued by GoI prescribes Water Quality 
Monitoring and Surveillance (WQM&S) for ensuring the quality of water 
supplied through FHTCs. These activities involve testing of water samples 
collected from water sources by Department in water quality testing 
laboratories, Surveillance using Field Test Kits (FTKs) by community, sanitary 
inspection, etc. Up to two per cent of JJM funds of the State are to be allocated 
for WQM&S which is done as per the Uniform Drinking Water Quality 
Monitoring Protocol 1 (UDWQMP). The WQM&S framework is described in 
Exhibit 5.1. 
Exhibit 5.1: Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance framework  
GoTN Operation Guidelines stipulate that the District Water and Sanitation 
Mission (DWSM) is responsible for monitoring water quality. The funds 
allocated towards WQM&S under JJM are intended for monitoring and 
surveillance of water quality at the field level in habitations, as well as for 
establishing and upgrading water quality testing laboratories at the State, 
District and Sub-district levels. The fund allocation and utilisation for WQM&S 
during 2020-24 are detailed in the Exhibit 5.2. 
                                         
1  Issued by the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Government of India, in 
February 2013. 
Water Quality 
Monitoring
Laboratory and field testing 
of water samples collected 
from water sources and 
FHTCs 
Done by agency responsible 
for rural water supply 
i.e. TWAD Board
Water Quality 
Surveillance
A regular activity using 
Field Testing Kits (FTKs)
Done by VWSC, Self Help 
Groups (SHGs), etc.

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
36 
(Source: Details furnished by TWAD Board) 
5.2 Lack of adequate infrastructure and equipment for Water 
Quality Testing 
Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation’s 
(CPHEEO) Manual 2005, stipulates that the agency operating the water supply 
system is primarily responsible for ensuring that the water supplied meets 
quality standards. This requires regular physical, chemical and bacteriological 
testing of water samples. In Tamil Nadu, the RD&PR Department and the 
TWAD Board are responsible for monitoring water quality. The details of 
District, sub-district and Block level laboratories in the six selected districts are 
given in Table 5.1. 
Table 5.1:  Details of laboratories established in six selected districts 
District Total blocks in 
the district 
District 
laboratory 
Sub-district 
laboratories 
Block 
laboratories 
Coimbatore 12 1 1 1 
Nagapattinam 6 1 0 0 
Ramanathapuram 11 1 1 1 
Salem 20 1 3 1 
Theni 8 1 0 1 
Viluppuram 13 1 1 1 
Total 70 6 6 5 
(Source: Details furnished by TW AD Board divisions) 
5.2.1  Absence of reporting mechanism to higher laboratories 
As per the JJM Operational guidelines, the broad guidelines for undertaking 
testing of sources/samples at different level are given as Exhibit 5.3. 
  
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
29.99
95.64
25
54.54
6.11
16.97
28.93
39.96
Exhibit 5.2: Fund allocation and utilisation for WQM&S
Allocation Expenditure
(₹ in crore)

Chapter V - Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
 
37 
Exhibit 5.3: Guidelines for testing of water samples 
As given in Exhibit 5.3, the block/sub-division laboratories are required to refer 
positive tested samples to the District laboratory which was to test all sources 
taken as per random geographical spread including the positive tested samples 
referred by the subdivision. However, Audit observed that the district 
laboratories did not function as per their intended role, but were rather operating 
as Block laboratories covering few specific blocks. This was in contravention 
of the roles envisaged as per the guidelines.  
For instance, in Ramanathapuram district, three laboratories were operational 
one each at District, Sub-district and Block level. However, the jurisdiction of 
the District laboratory was restricted to only four blocks (Table 5.2).  
Table 5.2:  Details of allocation of blocks to laboratories in Ramanathapuram district  
Name of Laboratory Jurisdiction 
District laboratory,  Ramanathapuram Bogalur, Ramanathapuram, R.S.Mangalam, 
Thiruvadanai 
Sub-district laboratory, Paramakudi Kadaladi, Kamuthi, Mudukulathur, Paramakudi 
Block level laboratory, Uchipuli, Mandapam Mandapam, Nainarkovil, Thiruppullani 
(Source: RWS Division, TW AD Board, Ramanathapuram) 
Government replied (April 2025) that the same number of manpower were 
engaged for District, Sub-district and Block level laboratories. Hence, 
jurisdiction were fixed evenly. The reply is not tenable since the district 
laboratory is functioning as a block laboratory which consequently resulted in 
the district devoid of certain higher functions performed through it. 
5.2.2  Laboratories functioning without accreditation 
The JJM Operational Guidelines issued by GoI stipulates that drinking water 
quality testing laboratories should be accredited under IS/ISO/IEC 17025 for 
basic water quality parameters, with gradual upgrades to other parameters based 
on local conditions. The GoTN Operational Guidelines also mandates that the 
TWAD Board should take necessary steps to obtain National Accreditation 
Sub-
division/
Block 
laboratory
• Test 100 per cent water sources under its
jurisdiction.
• Chemical parameters (once a year) and
bacteriological parameters (twice a year) tested.
• Positive tested samples will be referred to the
district laboratory.
District 
laboratory
• Test 250 water sources/samples per month.
• All sources taken as per random
geographical spread including the positively
tested samples referred by the subdivision/
block laboratory.
• Positive tested samples referred to the State
laboratory.
State 
laboratory
• Test at least five per cent of the
total drinking water samples
across all district level
laboratories with random and
uniform geographical spread.
• Test Positive samples referred by
district/sub-division/block.

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
38 
Board for Testing and Callibration Laboratories (NABL) accreditation for all 
District-level Water testing laboratories in a phased manner.  The status of 
accreditation in six selected districts is given in Table 5.3. 
Table 5.3:  Details of accreditation obtained by laboratories 
District NABL accreditation 
validity until 
Lab functioning without renewal of 
NABL accreditation (November 2024) 
Coimbatore 30/01/2024 10 months 
Nagapattinam 21/04/2024 7 months 
Ramanathapuram 23/02/2024 9 months 
Salem 31/07/2026 Not Applicable 
Theni 21/04/2024 7 months 
Viluppuram 11/09/2026 Not Applicable 
(Source: Records furnished by TW AD Board Divisions) 
As of November 2024, four out of six district water testing laboratories in the 
six selected districts have been operating without NABL accreditation for 
periods ranging from seven to ten months. 
Government replied (April 2025) that necessary action has been taken to renew 
the accreditation. However, the fact remains that the laboratories continued to 
function without renewal of accreditation which was in contravention of the GoI 
and GoTN guidelines.  
Recommendation 10: The Government must ensure renewal of 
accreditation of the water testing laboratories at the earliest. 
5.2.3 Lack of Equipment/Infrastructure in laboratories 
As per the CPHEEO Manual, Water quality testing laboratory is the backbone 
of water quality surveillance. A well-located and well-equipped analytical 
laboratory with competent staff is very essential to evaluate the efficiency of 
water utility services in terms of water quality.    
(i) Infrastructure 
The details of infrastructure available and shortfall in the State laboratory and 
17 laboratories established in the selected districts are given in Appendix 5.1. 
The infrastructure and other equipment/instruments, recommended by the 
UDWQMP were found to be lacking in the 17 established laboratories at various 
levels across the six selected districts. 
(ii) Equipment/Instruments 
Significant shortfalls concerning equipment/instruments required for effective 
water quality testing were observed in the State laboratory and across all  
17 established water testing laboratories in the six selected districts as detailed 
in Appendix 5.2.  
Audit noticed that, in spite of the mandate to ensure proper infrastructure and 
fully equipped facilities for comprehensive water quality monitoring, the 
laboratories were found lacking in essential testing equipment, tools and other 
supporting infrastructure at both district and sub-district levels to perform 
bacteriological and chemical tests effectively, as recommended by the 

Chapter V - Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
 
39 
UDWQMP and outlined in the Operational Guidelines. These deficiencies 
included critical testing instruments, reagents, and supporting facilities 
necessary for accurately detecting and analysing key water quality parameters 
such as chemical contaminants (arsenic, fluoride, nitrate, etc.) and 
bacteriological indicators (E.coli, coliform bacteria, etc.).  
Government replied (April 2025) that the details of essential equipment, tools 
and other supporting infrastructure are collected and tender works for the same 
are under process. The reply is not acceptable since funds were available for 
purchase of equipment despite which the laboratories functioned with shortage 
of infrastructure and equipment.   
5.3 Testing of water sources and parameters 
The details of testing of water sources done in six selected districts during  
2019-24 by TWAD Board laboratories and their results are given in Table 5.4. 
Table 5.4:  Details of number of water sources tested 
District 
Number of 
water 
sources 
Number of 
tests 
conducted 
Number of sources with contaminants 
above permissible limit 
Bacteriological  Chemical 
Coimbatore 6,243 15,702 0 0 
Nagapattinam 1,561 21,847 2 36 
Ramanathapuram 5,013 65,001 5 843 
Salem 32,916 99,855 64 275 
Theni 5,920 18,500 0 0 
Viluppuram 11,207 10,280 0 0 
Total 62,860 2,31,185 71 1,154 
(Source: Details furnished by TWAD Board divisions) 
 Audit observed that the Block and VP level officials were also not 
aware of the issue of contamination as they did not maintain any 
record in this regard. 
 Further, Audit tested 43 water samples in selected districts and found 
that the test results of all the five water samples taken in Coimbatore 
District and two samples taken in Ramanathapuram District were 
found not of potable quality.  
Government replied (April 2025) that villages that were affected with water 
contamination of chemical and bacteriological parameters were provided with 
CWSS scheme with river water sources. Thus, the reply indicates the lack of 
action to restore the water source with proper rectificatory action in case of 
presence of contaminants. Further, the reply was silent on the mandatory testing 
to be done.  
 The JJM Operational Guidelines issued by GoI prescribes a list of  
13 basic water quality parameters 2 to be tested along with the 
acceptable limit for each and the permissible limit in the absence of 
                                         
2 pH value, Total dissolved solids, Turbidity, Chloride, Total alkalinity, Total hardness, 
Sulphate, Iron, Total arsenic, Fluoride, Nitrate, Total coliform bacteria, E.coli or 
Thermotolerant coliform bacteria. 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
40 
alternate source. Scrutiny of the test results received indicated that 
test for arsenic, a chemical contaminant and one of the 13 basic 
parameters that poses serious health risks, was not conducted in any 
of the tested samples.  
 For bacteriological contamination, only faecal coliform testing was 
performed instead of total Coliform and E.coli or Thermotolerant 
Coliform bacteria, which is the standard parameter. 
 Thus, the water quality testing conducted by TWAD Board divisions 
was incomplete as the water quality testing was not done adequately 
for all the 13 prescribed parameters which impacted the accuracy and 
reliability of the test results, resulting in potential health risks 
undetected. 
Government replied (April 2025) that there was no arsenic contamination in 
drinking water in Tamil Nadu as it is geo-genic in nature. The reply is not 
acceptable since it accounted for natural sources of contamination (geo-genic) 
only but was silent on other sources like industry/factory contamination, one of 
the reason based on which testing this parameter was also made mandatory. 
Recommendation 11: The Government should ensure that all 
equipments are purchased to make the laboratories fully functional at 
the earliest for comprehensive water testing in order to take timely 
remedial action.  
5.4  Non-utilisation of Field Testing Kits   
The Operational Guidelines of GoI mandates that VWSCs must ensure water 
quality testing using Field Test Kits (FTKs). The tests were to be conducted by 
trained member of Self Help Groups and the results must be updated on the 
JJM-WQMIS web portal. GoTN Operational Guidelines stipulates that the test 
results must be reported to the Village Panchayat Secretary, who would maintain 
a water quality register. The BDO(VP) must cross-verify 5 per cent  of VPs 
monthly, ensuring tests are conducted every 15 days and recorded. The details 
of FTKs distributed to the selected districts for the period 2019-24 are as given 
in the Table 5.5. 
Table 5.5: Details of FTKs supplied to districts (year-wise) 
District Coim-
batore 
Naga-
pattinam 
Ramana-
thapuram 
Salem Theni Vilup-
puram 
Number of Blocks 12 6 11 20 8 13 
Number of VPs 228 193 429 385 130 688 
FTKs 
supplied 
2019-20 0 0 0 0 130 688 
2020-21 228 0 0 385 130 688 
2021-22 228 193 429 0 130 688 
2022-23 228 0 429 385 130 688 
2023-24 228 0 0 385 130 688 
(Source: Details furnished by TWAD Board Divisions) 
Audit observed that, there was no uniformity in the distribution of FTKs as only 
three out of six selected districts reported to have received FTKs during  
2020-24.  The reasons for non-uniformity in supply of FTKs was not furnished. 

Chapter V - Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
 
41 
Further, Audit observed that despite the 
distribution of FTKs and training 
provided to SHGs, no water quality tests 
were conducted by these trained 
members in any of the selected districts. 
It was further confirmed during the JPV 
in selected blocks and VPs that the FTKs 
were in unopened condition indicating 
complete non-utilisation of the kits as 
shown in Exhibit 5.4. 
Key provisions such as maintenance of FTK registers, periodic verification by 
the BDO and local monitoring were not implemented. Consequently, the 
intended community-level water quality surveillance, as outlined in the 
Operational Guidelines, was not done. Furthermore, FTKs have a shelf life of 
one year and since almost all of them were not used.  This rendered the 
procurement of the kits as wasteful. 
Government replied (April 2025) that during 2019-21, FTKs were not 
assembled due to non-availability of funds.  During 2021-24, FTKs were 
supplied through contractors for packing and transporting from State level water 
testing laboratory. It was further stated that every year 5 SHG members in each 
VP were trained for using FTKs and 24.08 lakh tests were conducted. The reply 
is not acceptable as there was no shortage of funds under WQM&S and hence, 
uniform procurement and distribution of FTKs could have been ensured. 
Further, in the test-checked districts no tests were conducted utilising FTKs.  
Recommendation 12: The Government must direct the implementing 
agencies to ensure optimum utilisation of the Field Testing Kits by 
conducting tests and recording the same. 
5.5 Non-functional Reverse Osmosis plants 
Section 110 of the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994, stipulated that it was the 
duty of VPs to provide safe drinking water in rural areas. JJM Operational 
Guidelines of GoI stipulated that supply of potable water in quality affected 
areas must be accorded priority and Community Water Purification Plant could 
be installed towards this effort. It further stated that the choice of technology is 
left to States to ensure that such systems have robust post installation O&M 
systems and safe disposal of residue so that they continue to function as per 
prescribed standards. 
GoTN accorded permission to install Reverse Osmosis (RO) plants in rural 
areas to overcome problems related to water quality in locations with  
non-potable, salty, or brackish water. As per the details furnished by the 
DRDAs, 130, 46 and 121 RO plants were installed in Ramanathapuram, 
Viluppuram and Salem respectively during 2019-21 and the status of 
functionality of these RO plants is given in Exhibit 5.5. 
Exhibit 5.4: Unutilised Field Test Kit 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
42 
As seen from Exhibit 5.5, the non-functional ROs ranged from 43.8 per cent to 
65.4 per cent in the test checked Districts. Some of the non-functional RO plants 
test checked in Audit during JPV in September 2024 are given in Exhibit 5.6. 
Exhibit 5.6: Non-functional RO plants in test-checked blocks of Ramanathapuram  
 
Kallur VP,  
Thiruvadanai Block 
Puthupatinam VP, 
Thiruvadanai Block 
Vellamarichchukkatti VP, 
Thiruppullani Block 
Further, the date of installation of RO plant and the date from which the  
RO plant became non-functional was not documented. The absence of such 
crucial details, indicate gaps in record-keeping and documentation process. This 
not only hinders effective monitoring and maintenance of the RO plants but also 
raises concerns about the overall management and accountability in the 
implementation of the project. As a result, the intended objective of supplying 
safe drinking water to the rural population was not achieved. 
Government replied (April 2025) that orders were issued to rectify the defective 
RO plants in Viluppuram district utilising the General funds of the VPs and 
Panchayat Union as a onetime measure to make them operational. No specific 
reply was received in respect of the other districts. The reply points to the fact 
that the objective of installation of RO plants could not be fully achieved and  
there was lack of monitoring.  
Recommendation 13: The Government should direct the Department to 
ensure the functionality of Reverse Osmosis Plants created for providing 
potable water. 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Ramanathapuram Villupuram Salem
21 5 0
24
14
68
85
27
53
Number of RO Plants
Exhibit 5.5: Status of functionality of RO plants
Details not known Functional Not functional

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
POST OPERATION 
MANAGEMENT, 
MONITORING AND 
EV ALUATION 
 

43 
CHAPTER VI 
 
POST OPERATION MANAGEMENT, MONITORING AND 
EV ALUATION 
Lapses in monitoring and verification processes of Third Party 
Inspection Agencies were noticed. In test-checked vouchers of completed 
works, issues like payments released without TPIA reports, incomplete 
scrutiny reports and discrepancies between TPIA report and completion 
report for the works executed, etc., were noticed. IEC materials 
remained undistributed/unused in the districts, despite a lapse of more 
than six months since their receipt. Geo-tagging of assets and linking of 
FHTCs with Aadhaar were incomplete. Social audit was not conducted 
in any of the six selected districts.  
 
6.1 Issues in Monitoring 
6.1.1 Lapses in Monitoring by the Third Party Inspection Agencies 
The State specific Guidelines for implementation of JJM specifies that the State 
Water and Sanitation Mission (SWSM) must empanel Third Party Inspection 
Agencies (TPIAs) to check the quality of work executed by the implementing 
agencies, quality of materials used for construction and quality of machinery 
installed in each of the scheme. It was further stated that payments shall be made 
to the contractor only after verification and recommendation by the TPIA and 
VP President.  
The TPIA reports contain two parts. Format A of the TPIA Report contains the 
work information to be filled up by the executing departments such as total 
number of households, the number of FHTCs provided as of 01-04-2020, the 
funding pattern, etc.  Format B of the TPIA report used by the Inspecting Officer 
contains details of inapplicable items, material tests (e.g. steel, cement and 
concrete cube tests) reports, critical parameters for OHTs such as water tightness 
& interconnection of pipes and the number of FHTCs provided. 
Some of the deficiencies noticed by Audit in the test-check of vouchers in 
selected districts as detailed in Table 6.1. 
  

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
44 
Table 6.1: Discrepancies in TPIA certification in test-check of vouchers in selected districts 
(₹ in crore) 
District Works without 
TPIA 
certificates 
Works with 
incomplete  
Format B 
Works having 
discrepancy in 
FHTC numbers 
Works without 
FHTC numbers 
OHT works 
with unverified 
water tightness 
No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount 
Coimbatore 8 6.24 32 2.44 4 0.15 1 0.06 1 0.09 
Ramanathapuram 20 2.61  61 7.58 10 1.51 NA NA NA NA 
Salem 2 0.72 NA1 NA 31 4.30 NA NA NA NA 
Theni 2 0.40 NA NA 2 0.92 1 0.30 NA NA 
Viluppuram 4 0.71 NA NA NA NA 2 0.57 2 0.52 
(Source: Test-check of DRDA payment vouchers) 
Government endorsed (July 2025) the DRDA’s reply for Ramanathapuram that 
the absence of TPIA report in some items was due to documentary lapses. 
Government also stated (July 2025) that Mission Director will pursue in taking 
action for the improper monitoring of TPIA Report, not conducting material test 
against the erring official and TPIA concerned. 
Other issues 
 GoTN Operational Guidelines stipulated that if any defects were 
identified by TPIA, they must be rectified and re-verified by both 
TPIA and VP president before approval of payment. It was observed 
that for 29 works in Thirumarugal Block of Nagapattinam District, 
corrective measures suggested (April/May 2024) by the TPIA were 
stated to have been carried out by the BDO(VP). However, these 
works were not re-verified by the TPIA to confirm their execution. 
Despite this, the payments were made to the contractors. Government 
replied (July 2025) that the TPIA has been instructed to re-verify the 
works carried out. 
 A review of the Completion Reports (April 2024) and Measurement 
Books for 11 works in three Blocks2, as detailed in the Appendix 6.1, 
indicated that 25mm PVC pipes were used for FHTCs. Whereas, the 
TPIA Report stated that 20mm pipes were used. However, the bills 
were processed for the rates applicable to 25mm PVC pipes. As a 
result of the incorrect application of the rate of 25mm pipe  
(₹43.25 per metre) instead of 20 mm pipe (₹25.30 per metre), an 
overpayment of ₹1.58 lakh3 was made to the contractor. Government 
replied (April 2025) that the differential cost of ₹1.58 lakh will be 
recovered from the concerned contractor. The reply points to the fact 
that payment was made without rectifying the discrepancies pointed 
in TPIA report. 
                                         
1  NA- Not available. 
2  Keelaiyur, Thalanayar and Thirumarugal Blocks. 
3  For 8,855.20 metres of 25mm PVC pipe at ₹43.25 per metre instead of 20mm pipe at 
₹25.30 per metre. 

Chapter VI - Post Operation Management, Monitoring and Evaluation  
45 
Recommendation 14: The Government should direct the Department to 
ensure that payments are released to contractors only on receipt of 
verification Reports, complete in all aspects, from the Third Party 
Inspection Agencies. 
6.1.2 Discrepancies in payment for preparation of Detailed Project 
Report  
As per GoTN Operational Guidelines, Detailed Project Report shall be prepared 
for the works approved in the Village Action Plan (V AP)/District Action Plan 
(DAP)/State Action Plan (SAP). 
It was observed that the DRDA, Ramanathapuram did not appoint any 
consultant for DPR preparation, despite a provision being made in the estimate. 
Consequently, all estimates for the year 2020-21 were prepared departmentally. 
However, scrutiny of Completion Reports (CR) and final bill payments revealed 
that DPR charges amounting to ₹17.17 lakh, as detailed in Appendix 6.2, were 
incorrectly included as part of the works expenditure and paid to the contractors. 
Government replied (July 2025) that the inclusion of DPR Charges in the final 
bill paid to contractor was a procedural oversight and that recovery order will 
be issued and the inadmissible expenditure of ₹17.17 lakh would be collected 
from the contractor. Government also stated (July 2025) that Mission Director 
will pursue in taking action for the lapses of non-compliance of agreement 
procedures against the erring officials. 
6.2 Implementation of IEC Activities under JJM 
Information, Education, and Communication (IEC) activities are integral to the 
support activities under JJM. These activities aim to educate user groups on 
topics such as water conservation, rainwater harvesting, micro-irrigation, 
maintenance of assets, greywater management etc. As per the GoTN 
Operational Guidelines, IEC activities were to be carried out by various 
agencies viz., TWAD Board, State Institute of Rural Development and 
Panchayat Raj (SIRD&PR), DWSM, Tamil Nadu Corporation for Development 
of Women (TNCDW), etc. 
A test check of the IEC activities in the selected districts was conducted to 
identify the implementation and effectiveness of these activities. Audit noticed 
that an amount of ₹13.86 crore was allocated by the Mission Director, JJM for 
IEC activities in 2023-24, specifically for printing and fixing hoardings, posters, 
and distributing pamphlets.  Scrutiny of records in Thirumarugal block in 
Nagapattinam and Thiruppullani and Thiruvadanai Blocks in Ramanathapuram 
revealed that IEC materials such as hoardings, posters, and pamphlets were 
received from contractors in January and March 2024, respectively at an 
expenditure of ₹3.76 lakh and ₹8.46 lakh. However, as of September 2024, these 
IEC materials remained undistributed/unused in the districts, despite a lapse of 
more than six months since their receipt (Exhibit 6.1). 
  

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
46 
Exhibit 6.1: IEC materials kept undistributed 
Nagapattinam District  Ramanathapuram District 
In the Focussed Group Discussion held (September 2024) by Audit in the 
selected blocks in Ramanathapuram District, it was noticed that the local 
population was unaware of the various components of JJM. During the 
Beneficiary survey conducted by Audit, beneficiaries totalling 794 out of 1,427 
(55 per cent) surveyed responded that they were unaware of any IEC activity.  
Thus, the non-distribution of IEC material procured impacted the outreach and 
awareness efforts intended under JJM. 
Government replied (April 2025) that IEC materials have now been distributed 
through self-help groups and water and sanitation committee members. It was 
also stated that awareness programme is continuously given to public. The reply 
is not tenable since lack of monitoring in ensuring distribution of IEC materials 
impacted the objective of awareness activities. 
6.3 Geo-tagging of assets 
As per the Operational Guidelines issued by GoI, States must geo-tag all water 
supply scheme assets, including infrastructure like greywater treatment plants, 
source sustainability structures etc., to ensure transparency and effective 
monitoring. The same has been reiterated in State Specific Operational 
Guidelines issued by GoTN. 
Further, JJM Operational Guidelines mandates that the JJM IMIS should 
capture data of every FHTC, including physical progress, geo-tagging, 
expenditure details, functionality status etc. This data should be publicly 
accessible for social audits and oversight.  
In Nagapattinam and Ramanathapuram districts, 517 and 1,175 works 
respectively were sanctioned under JJM convergence funds through the 
RD&PR Department. Out of these, 133 and 764 works respectively were 
completed. However, the assets created under these completed works were not 
geo-tagged. Further, geo-tagging of works undertaken by TWAD Board was not 
complete as of September 2024. 
During Exit conference (March 2025), the Engineering Director, TWAD Board 
stated that the geo-tagging work is under progress and 88 per cent has been 
completed. Government replied (April 2025) that in Nagapattinam district there 
is no own source pending for geo-tagging and that there was technical error 


Chapter VI - Post Operation Management, Monitoring and Evaluation  
47 
regarding geo-tagging with field user login which would be sorted out shortly. 
Non-completion of geo-tagging affects monitoring as the details of assets 
created for water supply are not effectively mapped. 
6.4 Linking of FHTC with Aadhaar 
JJM Operational Guidelines of GoI and GoTN specifies that FHTCs should be 
linked with the Aadhaar number of the head of the households, subject to 
statutory provisions, for targeted delivery and monitoring. In Ramanathapuram 
and Viluppuram districts, 1,33,882 and 1,01,471 FHTCs respectively were 
undertaken under JJM and convergence schemes. However, the linking task 
remained incomplete as only 1,08,258 and 99,771 FHTCs respectively were 
linked with Aadhaar numbers. Government replied (April 2025) that linking of 
FHTC with Aadhaar has since been completed. The reply is not acceptable 
since, as per the JJM dashboard data, only 72 per cent of the FHTCs have been 
tagged with the beneficiaries even as of June 2025. 
6.5 Non-conduct of Social Audit under JJM 
JJM Operational Guidelines of GoI stipulates that Gram Panchayats and 
VWSCs are required to conduct social audits of the JJM scheme. Social audits 
help institutionalise community participation, enhancing transparency and 
ensuring that the scheme's benefits reach the intended beneficiaries. This 
requirement was also reiterated in the State specific guidelines. 
Audit noticed that Social audit has not been conducted so far in any of the  
six selected districts. Government replied (April 2025) that a Third Party Audit 
was done by SWSM. However, no details was furnished for the same. The reply 
is not tenable since non-conduct of social audit indicated non-compliance with 
the Mission Guidelines. 
Recommendation 15:  
The Government should ensure strict adherence to the Mission 
Guidelines in the conduct of social audit and for geo-tagging of assets. 
6.6  Improper maintenance of completed works 
GoTN sanctioned (February 2021) a new Water Supply Scheme for Yercaud 
Union in Salem District  at a cost of ₹12.70 crore. The scheme included the 
construction of six open wells, one aerator, two ground-level sumps and  
six OHTs. The work order was issued by TWAD Board in January 2022 
following tender process. The work commenced in February 2022 and was 
completed in February 2023. After the one-year maintenance period, the scheme 
was handed over to the local body for further upkeep in March 2024. 
During the Joint Physical Verification (JPV) of the Water Supply Scheme in 
March 2025, it was noticed that there was a decline in pumping efficiency which 
had led to increased turbidity in the water. Consequently, water from the new 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
48 
openwells was supplied once every three days, while the overall water supply 
is being maintained through other existing local sources. 
The Assistant Executive Engineer (AEE) stated that the decline in pumping 
efficiency was due to lack of pump set maintenance and absence of desilting of 
well. Audit further noticed that the pumping logbook records detailing water 
transfer from the well to the sump and from the sump to the OHTs was not 
maintained. Audit observed that, in the absence of the records, it was not 
possible to monitor the consistent water supply in the scheme.  
On being pointed out, the AEE replied (March 2025) that the BDO has been 
informed to carry out the necessary maintenance to ensure a consistent water 
supply. The BDO further assured that all relevant records will be maintained 
going forward. Lack of proper maintenance of records indicated deficiencies in 
monitoring of the completed schemes.   

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VII 
OUTPUT AND OUTCOME 
FRAMEWORK OF  
JAL JEEV AN MISSION 
 

49 
CHAPTER VII 
 
OUTPUT AND OUTCOME FRAMEWORK OF  
JAL JEEV AN MISSION 
The progress in providing FHTCs to rural households in water quality 
affected areas was less resulting in disparity of water supply across 
districts. The rural households in the selected districts that were 
provided with tap connections did not receive sufficient quantity of 
water. Also quality issues in the water supply were noticed. A majority of 
FHTCs provided were outside the house in contravention to the 
guidelines which prescribed provision of FHTC within the house.  
7.1  Introduction  
Jal Jeevan Mission’s primary output is providing all rural households with a 
Functional Household Tap Connection by 2024. The mission period was further 
extended up to 2028 in February 2025. In parallel, the Mission also strives to 
achieve four key measurable outcomes viz., (i) improved health conditions of 
rural communities, (ii) reduction in drudgery faced by women and girls and 
empowerment of women, (iii) reduced school dropout rates of upper primary 
level girls and (iv) increase in employment opportunities for rural communities.  
7.2  Non-achievement of Primary Output  
7.2.1 FHTCs not provided 
One of the broad objectives of the JJM is ‘to prioritise provision of FHTCs in 
quality affected areas, villages in drought prone and desert areas etc.’ by  
March 2021. Of the selected districts, the ground water of the entire districts of 
Nagapattinam and Ramanathapuram were not suitable for drinking purpose and 
was classified as brackish and saline in nature.  Yet, it was noticed that the 
progress in these districts was much lower compared to other districts and the 
achievement in providing FHTCs to these districts stood at 46 per cent and  
31 per cent respectively, as of June 2024. It is pertinent to note that even after a 
lapse of four years after launch of the scheme, these districts could not register 
the desired progress in ensuring coverage of rural households under JJM.  
Theni District has been reported as ‘Har Ghar Jal’. However, during JPV, Audit 
noticed (March 2025) that in Agamalai VP, none of the 1,622 households were 
provided with FHTC. The population depended on either natural water source 
(aquifers, river falls etc.) or public taps. 
In the beneficiary survey involving 1,427 respondents, 147 respondents stated 
that they were not provided with FHTCs under the scheme, out of which  
143 belonged to Nagapattinam and Ramanathapuram Districts.  
Government replied (July 2025) that in Ramanathapuram and Nagapattinam 
districts the three major MVS were under implementation. Upon completion, 
the balance FHTCs in Ramanathapuram and Nagapattinam districts will be 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
50 
provided for saturation of the districts. The reply indicated the fact that 
saturation was not achieved even after five years of roll out of JJM.  
7.2.2 Insufficient and Irregular supply of water in FHTCs 
JJM Operational guidelines mandates that a minimum of 55 lpcd of water is 
required to be supplied through every tap connection provided. To ensure the 
same, Audit obtained records of the water supplied to habitations 1 during  
2019-24 in the selected districts and the details are given in Table 7.1. 
Table 7.1: Quantity of water supplied to habitations during 2019-24  
Districts Number of 
habitations 
Quantity of water supplied  Percentage of habitations 
supplied with the required 
quantity  Less than  
55 lpcd 
55 lpcd  
or above 
Coimbatore 1,200 1,096 104 8.67 
Nagapattinam 980 980 0 0 
Salem 5,109 1,901 3,208 62.79 
Theni 607 0 607 100 
Viluppuram 2,284 1,191 1,093 47.85 
Ramanathapuram 2,306 2,269 37 1.60 
Total 12,486 7,437 5,049 40.44 
(Source: Concerned DRDAs/TWAD Board) 
From Table 7.1 it was seen that none of the habitations in Nagapattinam District 
were supplied with 55 lpcd of water. Though Coimbatore District had reported 
100 per cent  achievement in providing FHTCs, it was noticed that only  
8.67 per cent  of habitations were supplied with quantity of water as per the 
prescribed norms.  
Further, Audit enquiry regarding the water supplied to FHTCs, FGDs, JPVs 
(August/September 2024) and beneficiary survey revealed that shortfall in 
supply of water as detailed below: 
 In Nagapattinam, three2 selected VPs of Vedaranyam block could not 
supply 55 lpcd of water. Of these, the water supplied in Kodiyakkarai 
VP was as low as 17 lpcd.   
 In Ramanathapuram, all 10 selected VPs reported that water was not 
supplied in required quantity and supply was made only once in  
four to seven days thereby forcing the public to buy water. 
 In Salem, the beneficiaries who participated in FGD stated that water 
was supplied once in three days. 
  
                                         
1  As per JJM Operational Guidelines, habitation is defined as a group of minimum  
20 households and/or 100 persons.  
2  Kodiyakkarai, Marudhur North and Mollaikarai VPs. 

Chapter VII - Output and Outcome Framework of Jal Jeevan Mission 
 
51 
 In Coimbatore, none of the VPs in Kinathukadavu block received 
regular supply of water as the supply from the ‘CWSS  
295 habitations scheme’ was inadequate, which is further commented 
in Paragraph 2.5.2.2.   
The above observations 
were further substantiated 
during beneficiary survey 
by 346 beneficiaries (out 
of 1,280 provided with 
FHTCs) that they did not 
receive sufficient quantity 
of water ( Exhibit 7.1 ). 
Also, 98 beneficiaries 
stated that they did not 
receive water on a daily 
basis. Of these,  
88 beneficiaries belonged 
to Coimbatore District.  
Government replied (April 2025) that after completion of Retrofitting works 
and New MVS works in Ramanathapuram and Nagapattinam districts, water 
will be supplied at 55 lpcd to all the habitations in the districts. The reply is not 
tenable as the fact remained that the objective of supplying a minimum of  
55 lpcd was not achieved even after five years of roll out of JJM. 
 
7.2.3 Non-supply of water as per prescribed quality parameters 
As per the JJM Operational Guidelines, the water supplied must meet the  
BIS:10500:2012 drinking water standards concerning bacteriological 
parameters. During field visit, Audit collected water samples from  
43 habitations 3 randomly selected in six districts and got them tested in TWAD 
Board’s District Water Testing Laboratories, wherein all five samples taken at 
habitations of Coimbatore District and two samples pertaining to 
Ramanathapuram District did not meet the above Guidelines.  The issues 
noticed in testing of water quality are discussed in Paragraph 5.3. 
Further, Audit questionnaire through beneficiary survey and FGDs in the 
selected districts revealed that 209 out of the 1,280 beneficiaries provided with 
FHTCs expressed dissatisfaction4 on the quality of water received by them.  Out 
of the above 209 beneficiaries, 123 beneficiaries belonged to Ramanathapuram 
District. 
Quality issues were noticed during JPV in some habitations of the selected 
districts such as Viluppuram, Ramanathapuram and Theni as beneficiaries 
expressed that the water supplied was not potable.   
                                         
3  Coimbatore - 5; Nagapattinam - 3; Ramanathapuram - 13; Salem - 8; Theni - 4 and 
Viluppuram - 10. 
4  Coimbatore - 25; Nagapattinam - 14; Ramanathapuram - 123; Salem - 4 and  
Viluppuram - 43. 
161
76
84
4 21
Exhibit 7.1: Beneficiaries reporting insufficient 
quantity of water through FHTCs
Coimbatore Nagapattinam Ramanathapuram
Salem Villupuram

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
52 
Government replied (April 2025) that quality issues in Ramanathapuram 
District was on account of ground water quality issues and after completion of 
New MVS and CWSS works implemented by TWAD, uniform quality and 
quantity of drinking water would be supplied. However, the reply was silent on 
the deficient quality of water noticed in Coimbatore and Theni districts. 
7.2.4 Other issues in coverage of FHTCs 
7.2.4.1 Incorrect location of FHTC delivery points in households 
JJM Operational Guidelines envisaged that FHTC may be provided to every 
household with JJM funding for one tap out of three delivery points (taps) viz. 
kitchen, washing & bathing area and toilet. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that, as of September 2024, out of 2,69,645 FHTCs 
provided in the selected districts, 2,59,613 FHTCs (96 per cent)  were  installed 
outside the beneficiary’s house in contravention of the guidelines. The details 
are given in Appendix 7.1 . This position was corroborated during JPV 
conducted across 12 selected blocks in selected districts (Exhibit 7.2).  
Exhibit 7.2: FHTC provided in open space without concrete stand post 
 
 
This deviation from the guidelines not only fails to provide the intended benefit 
to the people at large but also leaves these connections outside the house 
vulnerable to civic problems. 
Government replied (April 2025) that the tap connections were provided outside 
the households due to (i) lack of space to install taps, (ii) beneficiaries’ request 
and (iii) ease of usage on account of small size of rural houses. The reply is not 
tenable as installation of taps at open and vulnerable points affect the safety and 
maintenance of the asset created. 
7.2.4.2 Water tap connections to schools and Anganwadi centres 
As per Para 3.3 of JJM Operational Guidelines, one of the objectives of JJM is 
to provide functional tap connection to Schools, Anganwadi centres,  
GP buildings, Health centres, wellness centres and community buildings.  
The details of JJM tap connections of schools and Anganwadi centres in the 
State, as of November 2024 is given in Table 7.2. 
  


Chapter VII - Output and Outcome Framework of Jal Jeevan Mission 
 
53 
Table 7.2: JJM tap connections of schools and Anganwadi centres as of November 2024 
 
Tamil Nadu Selected districts 
Rural 
Schools 
Provided with 
FHTCs Rural Schools Provided with 
FHTCs 
Rural Schools 38,855 38,848 6,340 6,339 
Anganwadi Centres 40,242 40,191 6,628 6,624 
(Source: JJM Dashboard) 
From Table 7.2, it was seen that nearly all the rural schools and Anganwadi 
centres have been provided with FHTCs as per the data uploaded in JJM 
dashboard. Whereas, during test-check of rural schools in JPV , Audit noticed 
that two rural schools and one Anganwadi centre of Salem District 5 were not 
provided with FHTCs though JJM dashboard indicated provision of tap 
connections to them.  
Further, Mission Director reported in October 2024 that 1,626 Panchayat Union 
Schools and 6,444 Anganwadis in the State have not yet been provided with 
water tap connections. Out of these, 1,564 Anganwadis belong to the six 
selected districts. This was contradictory to the data uploaded in Dashboard. 
Government replied (April 2025) that in respect of three selected districts viz., 
Nagapattinam, Ramanathapuram and Viluppuram, the BDOs/VP presidents 
have been instructed to provide pipe connections immediately. It was also stated 
that all rural schools and Anganwadis in the remaining three selected districts 
have now been provided with tap connection. The reply indicated that the 
information uploaded in JJM dashboard was not accurate. 
Recommendation 16: The Government should take steps to bring in all 
the schools and Anganwadi centres within the purview of JJM so as to 
provide FHTCs to all of them.   
7.3 Outcomes of JJM 
7.3.1  Sustainable Development Goal - 6 
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) framework is a unique articulation 
of public interest on a global scale wherein the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development was adopted by 193 members of the United Nations General 
Assembly in 2015. At the core of this 2030 Agenda are the 17 Global Goals and 
their 169 targets driven by the principle of ‘Leaving no One Behind (LNOB)’.  
The SDG Global Target 6 - Clean water and Sanitation - calls for access to safe 
and affordable drinking water, sanitation facilities and hygiene for all by 2030. 
                                         
5  Government Panchayat Union Primary School in Kaveripuram VP and Government 
Panchayat Union Primary School and Anganwadi (in same campus) of Navapatti VP 
in Kolathur Block.  

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
54 
In particular, Target 6.1 of SDG-6 aims to achieve universal and equitable access 
to safe and affordable drinking water for all by 2030. 
The GoI has also aligned itself with the global commitment to sustainable 
development to achieve the 2030 Agenda and the target is to provide piped water 
connection under Jal Jeevan Mission. In order to achieve the SDG-6 goal, GoI 
implements various 6 programmes and initiatives including JJM. The 
performance of the State under SDG-6 is given in Table 7.3. 
As per NITI Aayog’s SDG 
India Index 2023-24,  
81.87 per cent  of rural 
households in Tamil Nadu are 
getting safe and adequate 
drinking water within 
premises through Piped Water 
Supply.  
7.3.2  Achievement in Key measurable Outcomes of JJM 
In order to ensure socio-economic wellbeing of rural households, JJM strives to 
achieve the four key measurable outcomes as stated in Paragraph 7.1. To assess 
the progress, Audit conducted beneficiary survey, JPVs and FGDs wherein the 
achievements in outcomes were discussed.  
  During FGDs in the selected VPs, beneficiaries stated 
that there was significant reduction in women’s 
hardships wherever water was provided to their 
homes.  
 The members of community such as school 
headmasters, health inspectors and Village nurses 
also stated that their children could spend time 
learning in school. 
7.3.2.1  Reduced dropout of upper primary school girls 
In the beneficiary survey conducted by Audit, 1,280 beneficiaries stated that 
they were provided with FHTCs. None of the beneficiaries reported drop-out of 
school going girls in their households, both in the ‘classes 1 to 5’ group and 
‘classes 6 to 8’ group. Audit obtained the data on drop-out of School Going 
Children in the primary and middle school level. It was noticed that the  
drop-out rate at these level was negligible (in the range of 0.01 per cent  to  
                                         
6  (a) Swachh Bharat Mission; (b) AMRUT 2.0 Scheme; (c) PM Krishi Sinchayee Yojna 
(PMKSY); (d) Mission Amrit Sarovar; (e) Jal Shakti Abhiyan; (f) Atal Bhujal Yojana; 
(g) National River Conservation Programme (NRCP); (h) Namami Gange - Integrated 
Ganga Conservation Mission and (i) National Perspective Plan (NPP).  
Table 7.3: Performance of Tamil Nadu under SDG-6 
Year / 
Period 
SDG-6 score Ranking amongst 
the States  India Tamil Nadu 
2018 63 66 9 
2019-20 88 90 8 
2020-21 83 87 11 
2023-24 83 87 11 


Chapter VII - Output and Outcome Framework of Jal Jeevan Mission 
 
55 
0.2 per cent ) in all the selected districts owing to the initiatives of the State 
Government in Education Sector.  
7.3.2.2  Reduced drudgery of women 
In the FGDs held in the two selected blocks of Ramanathapuram District, the 
representatives of rural communities stated that women had to collect water 
from distant areas (ranging from 500 metre to 1 kilo metre) and added that the 
burden would be alleviated only if potable water was supplied to doorsteps.  
Thus, even after four years of the 
roll out of JJM, 
Ramanathapuram district had 
not recorded progress in 
achievement of FHTCs and 
lagged in achievement of one the 
key outcomes viz., reduction in 
drudgery faced by women 
Exhibit 7.3.   
The response of 1,280 beneficiaries provided with FHTCs during the survey 
conducted by Audit is given in Exhibit 7.4. 
 
7.3.2.3 Increased employment opportunities 
The Beneficiary Survey revealed that the beneficiaries of the scheme did not 
perceive a significant impact on their employment opportunities on account of 
provision of FHTCs to their households. While 41 per cent of the beneficiaries 
reported an increase in employment opportunities on account of increased time 
availability, 58 per cent  felt no change in the employment opportunities 
(Exhibit 7.5). 
  
Exhibit 7.3: Kadambur VP - water brought 
from outside of the habitation in push carts 
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400
Have the problems of women reduced due to
quality water reaching their homes?
Is it saving time and labour?
Feeling of safety from crime and wild animals
1,120
995
603
158
10
20
2
275
657
Exhibit 7.4: Reduction in drudgery of women
Yes No Not answered

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
56 
7.3.2.4  Reduced waterborne diseases and healthy rural communities 
Of the key measurable outcomes, the reduction in waterborne diseases is vital 
for the long term development of the rural communities. As measurable 
improvement in this aspect can be attributed to a variety of factors including 
robust health care system with focus on preventive health care measures, 
awareness initiatives and proper sewage/waste disposal, correlating the 
reduction in waterborne diseases with provision of FHTCs alone cannot be 
conclusively established. In the beneficiary survey, while admitting that they 
could not recollect the frequency of waterborne diseases before the start of the 
Scheme, 594 beneficiaries (46.40 per cent ) felt that there was reduction in  
water-borne diseases like vomiting, diarrhoea, jaundice, cholera etc. due to the 
provision of giving quality water to homes through JJM. 
Audit compared the data on the water-borne diseases in the selected districts 
and the State provided by the Directorate of Public Health and Preventive 
Medicine against the progress of provision of FHTCs in the districts at the start 
of the Mission period (2019-20) and at the end of 2023-24.  
Table 7.4: Data on prevalence of water-borne diseases vis-à-vis FHTCs provided in 
selected districts. 
District Total number of people 
affected 
Percentage of FHTCs provided  
(JJM Dashboard data) 
2019-20 2023-24 2019-20 2023-24 
Coimbatore 0 2,355 39.65 100 
Nagapattinam 625 1,233 5.20 38.05 
Ramanathapuram 580 7,329 9.80 28.23 
Salem 12 3,405 7.52 80.20 
Theni 0 3,052 24.31 100 
Viluppuram 2,886 13,096 1.05 81.17 
State Total 28,548 1,12,884 15 82 
(Source: Data furnished by Directorate of Public Health and Preventive Medicine and  
JJM Dashboard) 
Yes - 522
(41 per cent)
No - 741
(58 per cent)
Can't say - 4
(0 per cent)
Not answered - 13
(1 per cent)
Exhibit 7.5: Whether employment opportunities in the village had 
increased due to providing of FHTC

Chapter VII - Output and Outcome Framework of Jal Jeevan Mission 
 
57 
From Table 7.4, it was observed that there was no reduction in the number of 
people affected with water-borne diseases even in districts with high 
achievement in provision of FHTCs. Though the increase in the water-borne 
diseases could be due to a variety of factors including improved reporting 
practices, providing water of prescribed quality through FHTCs would aid in 
ensuring better health standards in the State in the long-term. 
Government replied (July 2025) that in Ramanathapuram, since there was no 
potable local source of water, the entire district was completely dependent on 
the new MVS and Retrofitting of existing CWSS works which were under 
progress. On completion, it would be possible to achieve all the key measurable 
outcomes.  
 
         (FREDERICK SYIEMLIEH) 
Chennai  Principal Accountant General (Audit-I), 
The 14 January 2026                        Tamil Nadu  
  
Countersigned 
 
                         (K. SANJAY MURTHY) 
New Delhi                Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
The 27 January 2026 
 


 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 

 
59 
Appendix 1.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.5; Page 3) 
Details of selected Districts, Blocks and Village Panchayats 
Sl. 
No. 
District  Sl. 
No. 
Block  Sl. 
No. 
Village Panchayat  
1 Coimbatore 
1 Karamadai 
1 Bellapalayam 
2 Chikkadasampalayam 
3 Chinnakallipatty 
4 Nellithurai 
5 Tholampalayam 
2 Kinathukadavu 
6 Devanampalayam 
7 Kappalankarai 
8 Kuthiralayampalayam 
9 Solavampalayam 
10 Vadapudur 
2 Nagapattinam 
3 Thirumarugal 
11 Adalaiyur 
12 Kottarakudi 
13 Kottur 
14 Thirupayathankudi 
15 Vazhkudi 
4 Vedaranyam 
16 Ayyakaranpulam  
17 Kodiakarai 
18 Maruthur North 
19 Moolaikarai 
18 Pushpavanam 
3 Ramanathapuram 
5 Tiruppullani 
21 Kalimankundu 
22 Landhai 
23 Regunathapuram 
24 Utharavai 
25 Vannankundu 
6 Tiruvadanai 
26 Arasathur 
27 Kadambur 
28 Karumozhi 
29 Oriyur 
30 Paganoor 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
60 
Sl. 
No. District  Sl. 
No. Block  Sl. 
No. 
Village Panchayat  
4 Salem 
7 Kolathur 
31 Chithirapattipudur 
32 Kaveri Puram 
33 Kolnaickanpatti 
34 Navapatti 
35 Pannavadi  
8 Peddanaickenpalayam 
36 Kalarampatty 
37 Ottapatty 
38 Thennampillaiyur 
39 Vadugathampatty 
40 Vellapatty 
5 Theni 
9 Bodinayakkanur 
41 Ahamalai 
42 Anaikaraipatti 
43 Kamarajapuram 
44 Kodagangipatti 
45 Sillamarathupatti 
10 Uttamapalaiyam 
46 Gohilapuram 
47 Lakshminaickenpatty 
48 Nagayagoundanpatty 
49 Pallavarayanpatty 
50 U.Ammapatty 
6 Viluppuram 
11 Gingee 
51 Chinnaponnampoondi 
52 Gangavaram 
53 Manalapadi 
54 Meledayalam 
55 Palapattu 
12 Vikravandi 
56 Asoor 
57 Ayyur Agaram 
58 Kayathur 
59 Kutham poondi 
60 Mundiyampakkam 
 

Appendices  
61 
Appendix 1.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.7; Page 6) 
Status of TWAD Works in selected District 
Scheme  District Work Order 
date 
Expected 
Date of 
Completion 
Date of 
Completion 
Completed works 
CWSS to 295 rural habitations in Pollachi North, Pollachi 
South and Kinathukadavu unions in Coimbatore district 
Coimbatore 28-09-2022 16-07-2023 31-03-2024 
CWSS to Alapakkam and 21 rural habitations in 
Marakkanam union of Viluppuram district 
Viluppuram 24-06-2022 03-01-2023 July 2023 
CWSS to Kaveripuram and 141 rural habitations in Kolathur 
union of Salem District 
Salem 03-11-2022 06-11-2023 31-03-2024 
Water Supply Scheme to Yercaud and 8 other habitations in 
Yercaud Panchayat of Yercaud Union in Salem district 
Salem 12-01-2022 February  
2023 
February 2023 
Providing additional infrastructure in retrofitting of existing 
CWSS to Iruppali, 236 fluoride affected habitations and 1237 
wayside habitations of Salem district. 
Salem 02-12-2022 30-12-2023 31-10-2024 
Ongoing works 
Scheme  District Work Order 
date 
Expected 
Date of 
Completion 
Status of 
progress 
(in per cent) 
Retrofitting of existing CWSS to 136 Fluoride affected 
habitations and 604 way side habitations in Kadayampatty 
and 3 other unions of Salem district. 
Salem 28-08-2023 31-12-2024  90 
Retrofitting of existing CWSS to Sankari TP, Thevur TP and 
245 rural habitations in Sankari union of Salem district. 
Salem 07-02-2023 31-12-2024  98 
Retrofitting of existing Ramnad CWSS covering  
5 Municipalities 11 Town Panchayats and 3,163 rural 
habitations in Ramanathapuram, Sivagangai and Pudukottai 
district. 
Ramanatha
-puram 
P I - 03-11-2023  
P II- 08-04-2023  
November 
2024 
October 2024 
P I  - 40 
P II - 79 
Combined Water Supply Scheme to 2 municipalities, 5 town 
panchayats and 2,306 rural habitations in 11 panchayat 
unions in Ramanathapuram district and Oddanchatram 
municipality, Keeranur and Neikkarapatty town panchayat 
and 1,422 rural habitations in 7 unions 
Ramanatha
-puram & 
Dindigul 
P I - 08-04-2023 P 
II - 31-03-2023 P 
III-31-03-2023 P 
IV- 31-03-2023 October 2024 
(As of 
September 2024) 
P I   - 53 
P II  - 70 
P III - 63 
P IV - 66 
Combined Water Supply Scheme to Nagapattinam 
Municipality, Thittachery, Velankanni, Kilvelur, Thalainayar 
Town panchayats and 980 rural habitations in Nagapattinam, 
Thirumarugal, Kilvelur, Keelaiyur, Thalainayar and 
Vedaranyam unions in Nagapattinam District. 
Naga-
pattinam 
P I  - 31-03-2023 
P II - 24-04-2023 
P III-24-04-2023 
P IV- 24-04-2023 
P V - 22-02-2024 
P I   - Jan 2025 
P II  - Dec 24 
P III - Nov 24 
P IV - Nov 24 
P V  - June 25 
(As of 
September 2024) 
P I   - 74 
P II  - 79 
P III - 77 
P IV - 76 
P V  - 22 
* P- Package 
(Source: Details furnished by TWAD Divisions) 
 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
62 
Appendix 2.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.5.1.2; Page 12) 
Details of FHTCs proposed and provided in Theni District 
Sl. 
No. 
VP Block Number of 
FHTCs 
proposed 
Number of 
FHTCs 
provided 
1 Melasindalacheri Uthamapalayam 502 247 
2 Anna Nagar,Endapuli Periyakulam 160 0 
3 MGR Nagar,Endapulai Periyakulam 69 37 
4 J.K Colony,Endapuli Periyakulam 178 45 
5 E.Vel Nagar,Endapuli Periyakulam 207 69 
6 Arokiamathanagar,Endapuli Periyakulam 320 139 
7 Kalaignar colony,Endapuli Periyakulam 100 0 
8 Alagarnaickenpatti,Endapuli Periyakulam 111 66 
9 Arulananthapuram,Endapuli Periyakulam 125 40 
10 E.Kamatchipuram,Endapuli Periyakulam 290 113 
11 E.Puthukottai,Endapuli Periyakulam 244 212 
12 E.Puthupatty,Endapuli Periyakulam 230 130 
13 Endapuli Periyakulam 380 178 
14 Irulaiamman Nagar Periyakulam 12 12 
15 Mel Endapuli Periyakulam 31 31 
16 Murugumalai,Endapuli Periyakulam 145 104 
17 Nehru Nagar,Endapuli Periyakulam 205 160 
18 Unchampatti Theni 1,030 140 
Total 4,339 1,723 
 
 

Appendices  
63 
Appendix 3.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3; Page 19)  
Number of FHTCs in JJM dashboard vis-à-vis number of assessments as per VP Tax portal 
for ‘Har Ghar Jal’ certified VPs 
District Block VP If Har Ghar 
Jal 
Certified? 
Number of 
Households 
provided 
FHTCs 
Gram Sabha 
resolution 
date 
Number of 
FHTCs as per 
JJM dashboard 
As on 01/04/23 
Number of tap 
connections 
provided 
under JJM 
Tax portal 
Coimbatore Karamadai Bellapalayam yes 30 26/01/2024 2,533 2,533 4,481 
Coimbatore Karamadai Chikkadasam palayam yes 12,300 26/01/2024 8,012 8,012 9,575 
Coimbatore Karamadai Chinnakalli patty Yes 1,775 26/01/2024 1,531 1,531 1,758 
Coimbatore Karamadai Nellithurai Yes 900 26/01/2024 900 900 968 
Coimbatore Karamadai Tholam palayam Yes 2,210 26/01/2024 2,210 2,210 2,748 
Coimbatore Kinathukadavu Devanam palayam Yes Not Available Unsigned 825 825 938 
Coimbatore Kinathukadavu Kappalan karai Yes 1,411 26/01/2024 1,411 1,411 1,771 
Coimbatore Kinathukadavu Kuthiralayam palayam Yes 403 26/01/2023 362 362 404 
Coimbatore Kinathukadavu Solavam palayam Yes 2,335 26/01/2024 1,268 1,268 2,477 
Coimbatore Kinathukadavu V adapudur Yes 1,455 26/01/2023 1,455 1,455 2,319 
Salem Kolathur ChithiraPatti Pudur Yes Not Available 15/08/2023 3,382 3,382 2,277 
Salem Kolathur Kaveri Puram Yes 4,577  Not Available 6,858 6,858 4,932 
Salem Kolathur Kolnaickan Patti Yes Not Available Not Available 2,129 2,129 2,335 
  

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
64 
District Block VP If Har Ghar 
Jal 
Certified? 
Number of 
Households 
provided 
FHTCs 
Gram Sabha 
resolution 
date 
Number of 
FHTCs as per 
JJM dashboard 
As on 01/04/23 
Number of tap 
connections 
provided 
under JJM 
Tax portal 
Salem Kolathur Navapatti Yes 2,854 (taken 
from GS 
resolution) 
Not Available 
3,014 3,014 2,998 
Salem Peddanaicken 
palayam 
Thennam pillaiyur Yes 474  (taken 
from GS 
resolution) 
15/08/2023 
474 474 438 
Salem Peddanaicken 
palayam 
V adugatham patty Yes 383 (taken from 
GS resolution) 
Not Available 383 383 439 
Theni Bodinayakkanur Kamaraja puram Yes Not Available 05/08/2022 3,115 3,115 815 
Theni Uttamapalaiyam Gohilapuram Yes 1,385  02/10/2024 1,385 1,385 1,479 
Theni Uttamapalaiyam Lakshmi naickenpatty Yes 1,189 02/10/2024 2,241 2,241 1,686 
Viluppuram Gingee Chinnaponnam poondi Yes 172 22/03/2022 172 172 186 
Viluppuram Gingee Manalapadi Yes 499 22/03/2022 480 480 459 
Viluppuram Gingee Meledayalam Yes 423 10/08/2022 423 423 374 
Viluppuram Gingee Palapattu Yes 570 10/08/2022 570 570 528 
Viluppuram Vikravandi Asoor Yes 914 01/11/2023 1,426 1,426 803 
Viluppuram Vikravandi Ayyur Agaram Yes 1,522 02/10/2024 1,545 1,545 1,512 
Viluppuram Vikravandi Kayathur Yes Not Available 03/08/2022 433 433 436 
Viluppuram Vikravandi Kutham poondi Yes Not Available 01/11/2022 425 425 432 
Viluppuram Vikravandi Mundiyam pakkam Yes 436  02/10/2024 1,059 1,059 1,152 
 

Appendices  
65 
Appendix 3.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.5.1; Page 20) 
Package-wise Work Specifications for Survey and Levelling work 
Sl. 
No. 
Package Estimate  
(₹ in lakh) 
Expenditure 
(₹ in lakh) 
1 Surveying and levelling works for Providing New MVS through JJM 
with River Cauvery as source for Transmission Main in Ramanathapuram 
District- Package I 
18.89 17.57 
2 Surveying and levelling works for Providing New MVS through JJM 
with River Cauvery as source for Kalayarkoil to Thondi and 
Thiruvadanai in Ramanathapuram District- Package II 
22.16 19.94 
3 Surveying and levelling works for Providing New MVS through JJM 
with River Cauvery as source for R.S,Mangalam union in 
Ramanathapuram District- Package III 
20.35 18.41 
4 Surveying and levelling works for Providing New MVS through JJM 
with River Cauvery as source for Nainarkoil and Bogalur union in 
Ramanathapuram District- Package IV 
16.59 15.96 
5 Surveying and levelling works for Providing New MVS through JJM 
with River Cauvery as source for Ramanathapuram union, Keelakarai 
MPTY and Thirupullani Union in Ramanathapuram District- Package V  
24.33 18.73 
6 Surveying and levelling works for Providing New MVS through JJM 
with River Cauvery as source for Rameswaram MPTY , Mandapam TP 
and Mandapam Union in Ramanathapuram District- Package VI 
16.59 16.01 
7 Surveying and levelling works for Providing New MVS through JJM 
with River Cauvery as source for Paramakudi MPTY and Paramakudi 
Union in Ramanathapuram District- Package VII 
13.27 12.77 
8 Surveying and levelling works for Providing New MVS through JJM 
with River Cauvery as source for Muthukulathur Union and 
Muthukulathur TP in Ramanathapuram District- Package VIII 
14.02 13.50 
9 Surveying and levelling works for Providing New MVS through JJM 
with River Cauvery as source for Sayalkudi TP and Kadaladi Union in 
Ramanathapuram District- Package IX 
14.73 5.75 
10 Surveying and levelling works for Providing New MVS through JJM 
with River Cauvery as source for Kamuthi TP, Abiramam TP and 
Kamuthi Union in Ramanathapuram District- Package X 
12.70 6.20 
   Total 173.63 144.84 
 
  

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
66 
Appendix 3.3  
(Reference: Paragraph 3.7; Page 26)  
Number of in-village works sanctioned under JJM/Convergence during 2020-24  
Name of the work Coim- 
batore 
Naga- 
pattinam 
Ramanatha- 
puram 
Salem Theni Vilup- 
puram 
JJM 2020-21 1072 0 165 1143 220 313 
JJM 2022-23 2 0 0 0 232 135 
SVS 2023-24 0 0 0 129 0 0 
MVS- in-village 0 517 1343 4 0 0 
Retrofitting in-village 122 0 57 1294 0 9 
Convergence 2020-21 665 580 223 528 82 700 
Convergence 2021-22 561 309 57 484 264 790 
Convergence 2022-23 627 275 198 546 0 631 
Convergence 2023-24 4 0 86 438 0 940 
 

Appendices  
67 
Appendix 4.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.1; Page 32) 
Delay in release of Centre and State’s share to ‘Single Nodal Account’ 
Year Central share released by Ministry of Jal Shakthi Central share released by GoTN GoTN share release particulars 
Sanction order Date of 
release 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
GO 
(D) 
No. 
Date Amount  
(₹ in 
lakh) 
Delay 
in 
days 
due (₹ in 
lakh) 
GO 
No. 
Date Amount 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
Delay 
in days 
2019-20 
G 11011/5/2019-Water-I/16 28-08-2019 15,144.61 433 29-10-2019 15,144.61 47 15,144.61 490 17-12-2019 15,144.61 96 
G 11020/8/2020-JJM-1-DDWS/48 19-02-2020 22,049.23 121 23-03-2020 22,049.23 18 21,534.73 393 16-11-2020 21,534.73 257 
G 11044/5/2019-WQ/9 27-03-2020 116.10 184 27-05-2020 116.10 46 146.28 70 18-02-2021 146.28  313 
2020-21 
G 11011/1/2020-JJM-I-DDWS/13 01-06-2020 246.29 263 07-08-2020 246.29 52 240.54 71 18-02-2021 240.54 247 
G 11011/1/2020-JJM-I-DDWS/44 
25-11-2020 
22,689.80  439 16-12-2020 14,578.88 6       0 
25-11-2020 456 28-12-2020 8,110.92 18 22,164.36 456 28-12-2020 22,164.36 18 
W 11020/8/2020-JJM-I-DDWS/65 29-01-2021 246.29 43 09-02-2021 246.29 - 
22,400.92 43 09-02-2021 22,400.92 
- 
W 11020/8/2020-JJM-I-DDWS/65 29-01-2021 8,147.65 43 09-02-2021 8,147.65 - 
W 11020/8/2020-JJM-I-DDWS/65 29-01-2021 14,542.16 43 09-02-2021 14,542.16 - 
W 11020/8/2020-JJM-I-DDWS/77  
22-02-2021 
22,936.09  114 26-02-2021 21,527.50 - 22,400.92 127 21-10-2021 22,400.92 226 
22-02-2021 77 21-06-2021 1,408.58 104       - 
WQ-11031/8/2020-WQ-DDWS 10-03-2021 227.36 69 21-05-2021 227.36 57 227.36 69 21-05-2021 227.36 57 
2021-22 G 11011/1/2020-JJM-I-DDWS-Part 1 /11 13-05-2021 61,435.36 104 26-08-2021 61,435.36 90 60,001.87 128 22-10-2021 60,001.87 147 
2022-23 W 11020/8/2020-JJM-I-DDWS/44 11-01-2023 87,296.12 
 
0 84,954.03 15 09-02-2023 84,954.03 14 
2023-24 
W 11020/8/2020-JJM-I-DDWS/87 31-08-2023 87,236.50 0 85,200.98 130 14-09-2023 85,200.98 - 
W 11020/8/2020-JJM-I-DDWS/ 08-01-2024 87,236.50 0 85,200.98 4 23-01-2024 85,200.98 - 
W 11020/8/2020-JJM-I-DDWS/98 11-03-2024 87,236.50 0 85,200.98 54 15-03-2024 85,200.98 - 
2024-25 
W 11020/8/2020-JJM-I-DDWS/18 19-07-2024 36,583.35 0 35,729.74 98 01-08-2024 35,729.74 - 
W 11020/8/2020-JJM-I-DDWS/30 03-09-2024 36,583.35 0 35,729.74       - 
From 2022-23, the Centre’s share was directly credited to the JJM Escrow Account (SNA Account).  
 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
68 
Appendix 5.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.3 (i); Page 38) 
Details of available infrastructure and shortfall in laboratories 
Sl. 
No. 
Type of infrastructure/ 
equipment 
Number of 
laboratories 
having required 
infrastructure 
Number of Laboratories1  not 
having required infrastructure 
In numbers In per cent 
1 Total space (at least 25 sq.mt) 4 14 78 
2 Computers 17 1  6 
3 Internet facility 14 4  22 
4 UPS 5 13  72 
5 Invertors  5 13  72 
6 Printer 12 6  33 
7 Telephone facility 5 13  72 
8 Fax 1 17 94 
9 Air conditioner 18 0 0 
10 Fume Hood 2 16 89 
11 Gas connection 9 9 50 
(Source: Details furnished by TWAD Board divisions) 
 
  
                                           
1  These figures include six districts and 11 sub-district laboratories.  

Appendices  
69 
Appendix 5.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.3 (ii); Page 38) 
Shortfall of equipment in laboratories of selected districts 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Equipment Required Laboratories (in numbers) 
Having 
required 
equipment 
Not having required 
equipment  
(in per cent) 
1 pH meter 18 0 
2 TDS/ Conductivity meter 18 0 
3 Nephelometer (Turbidimeter) 17 1 (5.55) 
4 Digital Balance 18 0 
5 UV- Visible spectrometer# 7 0 
6 Refrigerator 18 0 
7 Water Still 13 5 (38.46) 
8 V oltage stabilizer/ Inverters 9 9 (50) 
9 Hot Plate 17 1 (5.55) 
10 Heating mantle 3 15 (83.33) 
11 Water bath 17 1 (5.55) 
12 Hot air oven 18 0 
13 Bacteriological incubator 18 0 
14 Autoclave 9 9 (50) 
15 Magnetic stirrer 4 14 (77.77) 
16 Microscope# 3 4 (57.14) 
17 Vacuum pump 9 9 (50) 
18 Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS) with 
electrode lamp$ 
1 0 
19 Inductively coupled plasma- optical emission 
spectrometry (ICP-OES)/mass spectrometry (MS) $ 
0 1 (100) 
20 UV laminar Air flow chamber for bacteriological analysis 12 6 (33.33) 
21 Plate count and colony counter 12 6 (33.33) 
22 Arsenic Testing Instrumentation (portable)# 1 6 (85.71) 
23 Hydride generator with all accessories $ 0 1 (100) 
24 DO meter 2 16 (88.89) 
25 Cool box with icepacks 8 10 (55.55) 
  

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
70 
Sl. 
No. 
Equipment Required Laboratories (in numbers) 
Having 
required 
equipment  
Not having required 
equipment 
(in per cent) 
26 Specific Ion meter along with electrodes (for Fluoride) 2 16 (88.88) 
27 Fume coup board 1 17 (94.44) 
28 GC-MS / HPLC/ LC-MS$ 0 1 (100) 
29 Auto burette and auto pipette 0 18 (100) 
30 Uranium analyser$ 0 1 (100) 
31 Thermometers 17 1 (5.55) 
32 Single Stage distillation apparatus 6 12 (66.67) 
33 
Double distillation Apparatus/Ultrapure Water 
Purification System to provide type I/type II water for 
sophisticated instruments 
0 18 (100) 
34 
Argon, Nitrogen, Hydrogen Helium & Oxygen Gas 
Cylinders (To be used with AAS/ Advanced 
Spectrophotometer)/ICP-MS/ OES # 
1 6 (85.71) 
35 Kjeldal distillation apparatus# 1 6 (85.71) 
36 Pressure Pump# 1 6 (85.71) 
37 Membrane filtration 15 3 (16.67) 
38 PCR machine$ 0 1 (100) 
39 Deep freezer (-20 degrees C)$ 0 1 (100) 
40 Micropipette$ 0 1 (100) 
41 Centrifuge# 2 5 (71.43) 
42 Redflux Apparatus/ COD digester$ 1 0 
43 Ion Chromatograph$ 0 1 (100) 
#  Not applicable for sub-division/block laboratory 
$ Applicable only for State laboratory  
 

Appendices  
71 
Appendix 6.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.1.1; Page 44) 
Excess expenditure on account of incorrect application of the rates for pipes 
Block Thalanayar Keelaiyur Thiru 
marugal 
Excess 
Amount  
(in ₹) Village Panchayat Naluvedhapathy Kovilpathu Vettaikkaraniruppu Pudupalli Prathaba 
rama 
puram 
Polagam 
Habitation Naidu 
Street 
Mookachi 
Theru 
Nalu 
vedha 
pathy 
Y athavar 
Street 
Mela 
kadu 
Therkku 
Salli kulam 
Kandiyan 
kadu 
Mela 
puthu palli 
Therkku 
Keela 
pudu palli 
Vadakku 
Poochi 
theru 
Kuthap 
pattar 
Thoppu 
FHTC Estimated 
(Numbers) 108 234 86 121 118 144 96 218 192 259 45 
  
  
  
FHTC Completed 
(Numbers) 108 234 86 121 118 144 96 181 155 189 66 
FHTC PVC pipe length as 
per Bill (metre) 324 702 309.6 435.6 436 1,152 768 1,448 1,240 1,512 528 
PVC Pipe (25mm) rate per 
meter as per bill (₹) 43.25 43.25 43.25 43.25 43.25 43 43 43 43 43.2 43 
PVC Pipe (25mm) total 
cost as per bill per work (₹) 14,013.00 30,361.50 13,390.20 18,839.70 18,857.00 49,536.00 33,024.00 62,264.00 53,320 65,318.40 22,704.00 3,81,627.80 
PVC Pipe (20mm) cost per 
work @ ₹25.30/m  (₹) 8,197.20 17,760.60 7,832.88 11,020.68 11,030.80 29,145.60 19,430.40 36,634.40 31,372 38,253.60 13,358.40 2,24,036.60 
Excess expenditure (₹) 5,815.80 12,600.90 5,557.32 7,819.02 7,826.20 20,390.40 13,593.60 25,629.60 21,948 27,064.80 9,345.60 1,57,591.00 
 
 

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’  
72 
Appendix 6.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.1.2; Page 45) 
DPR charges incorrectly included as part of the works expenditure 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the work Estimate cost 
DPR Charges paid to the 
contractor  
As per 
Estimate As per CR 
1 Providing Extension of pipeline with  FHTC at 
Kattoorani Village in Peravoor Panchayat  37.33 0.488 0.488 
2 Construction of 60,000 lit Capacity of OHT Tank at 
Kattoorani Village in Peravoor Panchayat  22.32 0.292 0.292 
3 
Construction of 30,000 lit Capacity Of OHT Tank and 
Providing Extension of pipeline with  FHTC at MGR 
Nagar in Peravoor Panchayat  
33.45 0.437 0.437 
4 Providing Extension  of Pipeline work at  
Peyanvalasai  in Therkkutharavai  Panchayat          7.61 0.099 0.099 
5 Providing Extension of pipeline with  FHTC to South 
side of Athiyuthu village in Athiyuthu Panchayat  42.18 0.552 0.552 
6 Providing Extension of pipeline with  FHTC to North 
side of Athiyuthu village in Athiyuthu Panchayat  39.93 0.522 0.522 
7 Providing Extension of pipeline with  FHTC at 
Kovilkarai  village in Athiyuthu Panchayat  12.84 0.168 0.168 
8 
Construction Of 30,000 lit Capacity Of OHT tank and 
Providing Extension of pipeline with  FHTC at 
Eraniyanvalasai village in Athiyuthu Panchayat  
35.14 0.000 0.000 
9 Providing EPL with FHTC at Avarenthal  4.20 0.055 0.043 
10 Providing EPL with FHTC at Chithaloor 6.84 0.090 0.090 
11 Providing EPL with FHTC at Nettanenthal 4.35 0.057 0.051 
12 Providing EPL with FHTC at Pulichavayal 4.43 0.057 0.057 
  

Appendices  
 
73 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the work Estimate cost 
 
DPR Charges paid to the 
contractor 
As per 
Estimate As per CR 
13 
Construction of 30,000 litre OHT and Providing 
Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
Keezhamankundu in Thamaraikulam panchayat 
(2,750 m) 
28.86 0.378 0.378 
14 
Construction of 60000 litres OHT sump and 
Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
Melamankundu in Thamaraikulam panchayat  
(1,300 m) 
22.21 0.291 0.291 
15 
Construction of 30,000 Lit OHT Tank and extension 
of pipeline with FHTC  at Thargavalasai in 
Enmanankondan  panchayat 
30.27 0.396 0.396 
16 
Construction of 30,000 Lit OHT Tank  and providing 
extension of pipeline with FHTC  at Enmanamkondan 
in Enmanankondan  panchayat 
31.48 0.412 0.412 
17 
Construction of 30,000 litres OHT and Providing 
Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at Thuthivalasai in 
Enmanankondan Panchayat (5,500m) 
46.98 0.615 0.615 
18 Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
samythoppu (1,900 m) 9.56 0.125 0.125 
19 
Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
Krishnapuram colony in Alagankulam Panchayat 
(1,800 m) 
7.85 0.102 0.102 
20 Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
Aththanvalavu in Valantharavai Panchayat (580 m) 2.83 0.036 0.036 
21 
Construction of 10,000 Lit OHT Tank  and providing 
extension of pipeline with FHTC at Keerippoorvalasai 
in Valantharavai Panchayat 
10.36 0.135 0.135 
22 
Construction of 10,000 Lit OHT Tank  and providing 
extension of pipeline with FHTC at Alam in 
Valantharavai Panchayat 
6.80 0.089 0.089 
23 
Construction of 10,000 litres OHT and Providing 
Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at Vadakkuvalasai 
in Rettaiyoorani Panchayat (360 m) 
7.34 0.096 0.096 
  

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
74 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the work Estimate cost 
 
DPR Charges paid to the 
contractor 
As per 
Estimate As per CR 
24 Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at  
Ilaingaimedu in Kuyavankudi Panchayat (530 m) 3.10 0.040 0.040 
25 Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
Aranganvalasai  in Kuyavankudi Panchayat (650 m) 3.43 0.044 0.044 
26 Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at AD 
colony in Kuyavankudi Panchayat (120 m) 2.54 0.033 0.033 
27 Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
Kuppanivalasai  in Kuyavankudi Panchayat (550 m) 4.89 0.063 0.063 
28 
Construction of 10,000 Lit OHT Tank and providing 
extension of pipeline with FHTC at Samayanvalasai 
in Kuyavankudi Panchayat 
12.29 0.160 0.160 
29 
Construction of 10,000 litres OHT and Providing 
Extension of Pipelinewith FHTC at Muniyanvalasai  
in Kuyavankudi Panchayat (400 m) 
20.33 0.266 0.266 
30 Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
Muttanvalasai in Keelanagachi Panchayat (1,400 m) 6.01 0.078 0.074 
31 Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
Naduvalasai in Keelanagachi Panchayat (1,250 m) 5.80 0.075 0.075 
32 
Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
Kattakaravalasai in Keelanagachi Panchayat  
(2,800 m) 
9.60 0.125 0.117 
33 Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
Thoppuvalasai in Keelanagachi Panchayat (820 m) 5.76 0.075 0.072 
34 
Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
Vathiyarkudieruppu in Keelanagachi Panchayat 
(3,300 m) 
12.28 0.160 0.146 
35 
Construction of 10,000 Lit OHT Tank and providing 
pipeline extension with FHTC at Annanagar in 
Keelanagachi Panchayat 
11.50 0.150 0.069 
  

Appendices  
 
75 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the work Estimate cost 
DPR Charges paid to the 
contractor 
As per 
Estimate As per CR 
36 
Construction of 60,000 litre OHT Sump and providing 
pipeline extension with FHTC at Thoppukattuvalasai 
in Keelanagachi panchayat 
15.46 0.202 0.182 
37 
Construction of 10,000 litres OHT and Providing 
Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at Panavaikootam 
in Keelanagachi Panchayat (5,000 m) 
33.16 0.434 0.362 
38 Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
Kadukaivalasai in Manankudi Panchayat (800 m) 6.03 0.078 0.078 
39 Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
Kunduthi in Pudumadam Panchayat (650 m) 5.45 0.071 0.071 
40 Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
Thenkadarkarai in vedalai Panchayat (1,200 m) 7.48 0.084 0.084 
41 Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
Annanagar Pamban  Panchayat  (650 m) 3.83 0.050 0.050 
42 Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC at 
Pananthoppu Pamban  Panchayat  (900 m) 7.38 0.096 0.096 
43 
Construction of 10,000 lit OHT and Providing 
Extension of Pipeline with FHTC 143 nos at 
Thenpoduvakudi 
22.18 0.288 0.288 
44 
Construction of 10,000 lit OHT and Providing 
Extension of Pipeline with FHTC 7 nos at 
Vagaiyendhal 
5.69 0.073 0.073 
45 Providing Extension of Pipeline Construction of 
10,000 lit OHT with FHTC 48nos at Idaiyathur 8.61 0.111 0.109 
46 Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC 6 nos at 
Nanduppatti 1.58 0.019 0.019 
47 Providing Extension of Pipeline with FHTC 10 nos at 
Kulasekara alvarpuram 1.79 0.022 0.021 
  

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
76 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the work Estimate cost 
 
DPR Charges paid to the 
contractor 
As per 
Estimate As per CR 
48 
Construction of Open Well and 30,000 litre OHT, 
Pump room, Pumping main line and Extension of 
Pipeline(1,500 m) with functional house hold 
connections at Silayappan Valasai 
33.74 0.441 0.441 
49 
Providing Pumping main line and Extension of 
Pipeline(1,500 m) with functional house hold 
connections at Nadar Kudiyirippu 
8.06 0.105 0.105 
50 
Construction of 30,000 litre OHT, Pumping main line 
and Extension of Pipeline(1,500 m) with functional 
house hold connections at Kaakayan Valasai 
16.18 0.211 0.211 
51 Construction of 10,000 lit. OHT & providing FHTC 14.55 0.135 0.135 
52 Construction of 10,000 lit. OHT & providing FHTC 14.82 0.194 0.194 
53 Providing FHTC  16.70 0.200 0.200 
54 Providing FHTC, 150 dia bore well and 10,000 lit. 
OHT (2 Nos.) 29.53 0.367 0.280 
55 Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line, Construction 
of 30,000 Litre OHT and Extension of Pipe Line 40.48 0.530 0.530 
56 Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line and Extension 
of Pipe Line 7.26 0.094 0.094 
57 Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line, Construction 
of 30,000 Litre OHT and Extension of Pipe Line 23.18 0.303 0.303 
58 Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line and Extension 
of Pipe Line 10.81 0.141 0.136 
59 Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line, Construction 
of 30,000 Litre OHT and Extension of Pipe Line 24.82 0.303 0.303 
60 
Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line, 30,000 Lit. 
OHT and Extension of Pipeline at Sathankulam in 
Kuyavankudi Panchayat 
36.82 0.482 0.482 
61 
Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line,30,000 Lit 
OHT and Extension of Pipeline at Akkamadam in 
Pamban Panchayat 
36.75 0.481 0.481 
  

Appendices  
 
77 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the work Estimate cost 
 
DPR Charges paid to the 
contractor 
As per 
Estimate As per CR 
62 
Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line, 10,000 Lit. 
OHT and Extension of Pipeline at Muthrayan nagar in 
Valantharavai Panchayat 
10.70 0.139 0.132 
63 
Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line, Bore Well and 
Extension of Pipeline at Munusuvalasai in 
Valantharavai Panchayat 
29.02 0.388 0.388 
64 
Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line, Bore Well and 
Extension of Pipeline at Ammankovil in 
Valantharavai Panchayat 
33.67 0.440 0.440 
65 
Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line, 10,000 Lit. 
OHT and Extension of Pipeline at Kenikaraivalasai in 
Keelanagachi Panchayat 
15.51 0.203 0.203 
66 
Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line, 30,000 Lit. 
OHT and Extension of Pipeline at Kalkinatruvalasai 
in Keelanagachi Panchayat 
34.06 0.446 0.446 
67 Providing FHTC and Extension of Pipeline at 
Bharathinagar in Alagankulam Panchayat 25.73 0.337 0.337 
68 
Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line and Extension 
of Pipeline at Nochivadi in Thangachimadam 
Panchayat 
12.07 0.158 0.158 
69 
Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line, 30,000 Lit. 
OHT  and Extension of Pipeline at Ammapattinam in 
Pudumadam Panchayat 
33.68 0.441 0.441 
70 Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line and Extension 
of Pipeline at Madasamykovil in Therbogi Panchayat 19.78 0.258 0.258 
71 
Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line and Extension 
of Pipeline at Nallathambivalasai in Therbogi 
Panchayat 
15.33 0.200 0.200 
  

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
78 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the work Estimate cost 
 
DPR Charges paid to the 
contractor 
 
As per 
Estimate As per CR 
72 
Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line, Bore Well and 
Extension of Pipeline at Polayan nagar in 
Valantharavai Panchayat 
28.40 0.371 0.366 
73 
Providing FHTC, borewell, Pumping main Line and 
Extension of Pipeline at Therkoor Colony in 
Valantharavai panchayat 
30.30 0.396 0.381 
74 
Providing FHTC, Pumping main Line, 10,000 Lit. 
OHT and Extension of Pipeline at Seelivalasai in 
Valantharavai panchayat 
10.89 0.142 0.142 
75 Providing Extension of Pipeline and 10,000 lit OHT 
at Muttanvalasai in keelanagazhi Panchayat 7.73 0.808 0.808 
76 Providing Extension of Pipeline and 10,000 lit OHT 
at Naduvalasai in keelanagazhi Panchayat 7.73 0.101 0.101 
77 Providing Extension of Pipeline and 10,000 lit OHT 
at thoppuvalasai in keelanagazhi Panchayat 13.23 0.173 0.173 
78 Providing Extension of Pipeline and 10,000 lit OHT 
at Vathiyar kudieruppu in keelanagazhi Panchayat 9.46 0.124 0.124 
79 Providing Extension of Pipeline and 10,000 lit OHT 
at thoppukattuvalasai in Keelanagachi panchayat. 7.73 0.101 0.101 
   Total   17.504 17.171 
 
  

Appendices  
 
79 
Appendix 7.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 7.2.4.1; Page 52) 
Details of FHTCs installed outside the house in selected districts 
District Name of the Block Number of FHTCs 
provided under JJM 
Number of FHTCs 
installed outside 
 the house 
Coimbatore 
Karamadai 50,128 50,128 
Kinathukadavu 23,223 23,223 
Nagapattinam 
Thirumarugal  9,050 9,050 
Vedaranyam  15,532 15,532 
Ramanathapuram 
Thiruppulani 14,817 14,817 
Thiruvadanai 8,120 8,120 
Salem 
Kolathur 23,630 23,630 
Peddanaikenpalayam 22,300 22,300 
Theni 
Bodinayakanur 24,847 22,491 
Uthamapalayam 16,435 14,896 
Viluppuram 
Gingee 32,287 29,071 
Vikravandi 29,276 26,355 
Total 2,69,645 2,59,613 
(Source: Details furnished by DRDAs) 
 
  

Performance Audit on ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ 
 
80 
Glossary of Abbreviations 
Abbreviations Full Form 
AAP Annual Action Plan 
AEE Assistant Executive Engineer 
BDOs Block Development Officers 
CE Chief Engineer 
CPHEEO Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation 
CR Completion Reports 
CWSS Combined Water Supply Scheme 
DAP District Action Plan 
DDWS Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DRDAs District Rural Development Agencies  
DWSM District Water and Sanitation Mission 
EMD Earnest Money Deposit 
EPL Extension of Pipe Line length 
FGD Focused Group Discussion 
FHTC Functional Household Tap Connection 
FTKs Field Test Kits 
GLRs Ground Level Reservoirs 
GoI Government of India 
GoTN Government of Tamil Nadu 
HGJ Har Ghar Jal 
IEC Information, Education and Communication 
IMIS Integrated Management Information System 
JJM Jal Jeevan Mission 
JPV Joint Physical Verification 
LoA Letter of Acceptance 
LWF Labour Welfare Fund 
MA&WS Department Municipal Administration and Water Supply Department 

Appendices  
 
81 
Abbreviations Full Form 
MVS Multi Village Scheme 
NABL National Accreditation Board for Testing and Callibration 
Laboratories 
NH National Highways 
O&M Operation and Maintenance 
OHTs Over Head Tanks 
RD&PR Department Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department 
RO Reverse Osmosis 
SAP State Action Plan 
SHGs Self Help Groups 
SLSSC State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee 
SNA Single Nodal Account 
SVS Single Village Scheme 
SWSM State Water and Sanitation Mission 
TPIAs Third Party Inspection Agencies 
TWAD Board Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage Board 
UDWQMP Uniform Drinking Water Quality Monitoring Protocol 
V AP Village Action Plan 
VP Village Panchayat 
VWSC Village Water and Sanitation Committee 
WQM&S Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
ZBR Zonal Balancing Reservoir 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://www.cag.gov.in/ag1/tamil-nadu/en 
