  vii
Preface 
1 This Report has been prepared for submission to the Governor 
under Article 151 of the Constitution. 
2 The Chapters I and II of this Report deal with the findings of 
performance audit and audit of transactions in the various 
departments including the Public Works and Irrigation 
Departments, audit of Auto nomous Bodies. The Chapter-III 
deals with Integrated Audit of a Government department. 
3 The Report containing the observations arising out of audit of 
Statutory Corporations, Boards and Government Companies 
and the Report containing such observations on Revenue 
Receipts are presented separately. 
4 The cases mentioned in the Report are among those which 
came to notice in the course of test audit of accounts during 
the year 2008-09 as well as those which had come to notice in 
earlier years but could not be dealt with in previous Reports; 
matters relating to the period subsequent to 2008-09 have also 
been included wherever necessary. 
 
  

  
 
This Report includes three Chapters comprising five reviews and eighteen 
paragraphs dealing with the results of performance audit of selected schemes/ 
programmes, integrated audit of a Government department as well as audit of 
the financial transactions of the Government and Autonomous Bodies under 
Government. 
The audit has been conducted in accordance with the Auditing Standards 
prescribed for the Indian Audit and Accounts Department. Audit samples have 
been drawn based on statistical sampli ng methods as well as on judgemental 
basis. Audit conclusions have been drawn and recommendations made, taking 
into consideration the views of the Government. 
A summary of the audit comments on the performance of the Government in 
implementation of certain programmes and schemes, as well as integrated 
audit of Finance Department and transaction audit findings is given below: 
1. National Rural Health Mission 
Government of India launched the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) in 
April 2005 throughout the country for providing accessible, affordable, effective 
and reliable healthcare facilities in the rural areas. The implementation of the 
NRHM suffered in the State mainly due to lack of comprehensive planning 
and absence of adequate monitoring mechanism. The programme was 
implemented in the State without conducting facility surveys and there was no 
Perspective Plan for the whole Mission period 2005-12. The State Government 
did not pay adequate attention for creation/strengthening of infrastructure 
facilities in the Health Centres despite availability of funds. The physical 
infrastructure available in the health centres was far below the desired level 
prescribed in Indian Public Health Standards and majority of the test checked 
Community Health Centres (CHCs) and Primary Health Centres (PHCs) lacked 
basic infrastructure facilities. The M obile Medical Units were functioning 
without essential equipment/Medical Officers in all the eight test checked 
districts. The implementation of Reproductive and Child Health Scheme 
suffered in the areas of institutional delivery care, antenatal care, etc. The 
objective of converging all the National Disease Control Programmes 
remained unachieved. Implementation of the Programme by the NGOs was 
not adequately monitored. Due to lack of adequate monitoring mechanism the 
planning process did not receive regular inputs on the nature and direction of 
required future interventions. 
[Paragraph 1.1] 
2. Functioning of Osmania University 
Osmania University, established in the year 1918, manages 11 faculties 
encompassing 52 departments, eight campus colleges, and 988 affiliated 
colleges besides Centre for Distance E ducation. The University failed to 
adhere to the codal provisions while appointing various posts of staff 
Overview 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 x
including the Finance Officer. Financial management in the University was 
deficient. Cash books were either not maintained or were not properly 
maintained by the University as well as the campus and constituent colleges. 
There was no assurance that all demand drafts remitted into banks were 
credited to University account. Collec tion of prescribed tuition fees and 
examination fees was not ensured. Excess/inadmissible payments were made to 
University teaching staff in implementation of UGC scales. Advances given to 
Principals and various departmental officers of the University were 
outstanding due to non-adjustment. The Finance Branch failed to ensure 
correct remittances of amounts due to University account by Colleges and 
Hostels. Annual Reports were perfuncto ry and did not highlight areas of 
concern. Certain courses conducted by the University did not attract enough 
candidates leading to low enrolment. There was no assurance that works were 
properly executed as no quality control checks were ensured by the University 
Buildings Division. Estate management was poor. The University failed to 
protect its lands from encroachers. Physical verification of stores and stock 
was not carried out in most of the departments. Physical verification of the 
library books in the Central Library/Seminar Libraries was also not done. 
Internal audit of the University departments was not conducted during the 
five-year period 2004-09 and as such there was no assurance to the University 
management that the rules and procedures were complied with by the 
department. 
[Paragraph 1.2] 
3. Third Party Quality Control/ Assurance (TPQC) in execution 
of irrigation projects 
Government has been engaging outside agencies for checking the quality of 
irrigation projects as a part of Third Party Quality Control/Assurance (TPQC) 
arrangement. The TPQC system suffers fro m an inherent deficiency as it does 
not envisage presence of departmental e ngineers at the time of collection of 
samples and at the time of carrying out testing and analysis of the samples 
collected. Audit also noticed deficiencies such as faulty empanelment for 
engaging TPQC firms, engagement of firms which did not have experience in 
quality control of irrigation projects, inadequacies in agreements, modification 
of tender conditions thereby passing undue benefit to firms, non-enforcement 
of the agreement conditions, etc. Also, the EPC firms did not take prompt 
action on the deficiencies pointed out by the TPQC firms. Checking of quality 
of projects works is too critical a function to be outsourced completely to 
independent third party agencies without the quality inspection team having 
any representative of the Government. Monitoring during execution of the 
project assumes considerable significan ce. There is no substitute for hundred 
per cent departmental supervision of these agencies. The agencies can only 
assist the departmental engineers in discharging this important task. 
[Paragraph 1.3] 

Overview 
 xi
4. Accelerated Irrigati on Benefit Programme  
The Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Prog ramme (AIBP) was launched by the 
Government of India (GOI), during 1996-97, to provide assistance to the States 
for accelerating the implementation of major and medium irrigation projects, 
costing more than Rs 1,000 crore, which were beyond the resource capability 
of the States and to complete on-going major/medium irrigation projects 
which were in advanced stage of completion. Minor irrigation schemes were 
subsequently introduced from the year 1999-2000. Prioritisation for funding 
the Projects under AIBP was not done in a systematic manner by computing 
the cost of balance works to be executed in each project. Although land 
acquisition is a time consuming process and of uncertain duration, the projects 
were awarded without prior acquisition of land and this resulted in majority of 
the projects, on which substantial expenditure has been incurred, getting 
stalled mid-way and non-creation of envisaged irrigation potential. These two 
lapses resulted in the basic objective of accelerated irrigation benefits not 
being achieved due to blocking of funds on projects stalled due to non-
completion of land acquisition and inadequate funding, due to resources being 
spread thinly on too many projects. Awarding of projects on a fixed price basis 
without firming up quantity of works to be executed and not having payments 
linked to quantity of works executed resulted in undue benefits to the 
contractors. Monitoring of the projects was absent during the first ten year 
period i.e. from 1996-97 to 2005-06. No mechanism existed for evaluation of 
the projects assisted under AIBP to assess creation and utilisation of envisaged 
irrigation potential. 
[Paragraph 1.4] 
5. Integrated Audit of Finance Department 
Finance Department is mainly responsible for the overall management of the 
State finances which includes mobilisation of resources and collection of 
revenues and other financial resources , budgeting and allocation of funds to 
meet the demands of expenditure, spending of resources on specified objectives 
and monitor funds utilisation. Integr ated Audit of Finance Department 
revealed that weaknesses and system lapses existed in the Department, in the 
area of preparation of budget, releas e of funds, compliance with Public 
Finance Accountability norms, asset and contract management. Adequate 
internal controls did not exist with the Finance Department in areas of 
watching compliance of instructions by  other administrative departments. Tax 
recovery mechanism was not effective. The State Government resorted to sale 
of lands for revenue mobilisation. The returns on investments in Commercial 
Enterprises were poor. There were chronic arrears in preparation of Proforma 
Accounts by the Departmentally Managed Government Undertakings.  
Monitoring by the Finance Department was also ineffective in the areas of 
submission of Explanatory Notes to C&AG Audit Paras, Action Taken Notes 
(ATNs) to Public Accounts Committee Recommendations, settlement of paras 
of AG’s Inspection Reports by other administrative departments. Functioning 
of the Directorates of the Finance Department and their district offices was 
also deficient. Audit noticed lapses such as, accumulation of stamps with 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 xii
Director of Treasuries and Accounts; i rregular transfer to Civil deposits, non-
renewal of bank guarantees in Director of Works Accounts; huge arrears of 
cost of realisable audit fee, non/delayed submission of Audit Reports to 
Legislature by Director of State Audit, etc. Due to the absence of internal audit 
there was no assurance to the management that the departmental rules, 
regulations and procedures were being complied with. 
[Paragraph 3.1] 
Transaction Audit Findings 
The audit of financial transactions, subjected to test-check, in various departments 
of the Government and their field formations revealed instances of losses, 
excess payments, wasteful/infructuous expenditure, etc. of Rs 842 crore as 
mentioned below: 
• Excess payments, wasteful/infructuous expenditure amounting to Rs 118.38 
crore in Consumer Affairs, Food and Civil Supplies Department (Rs 106.88 
crore), Municipal Administration and Urban Development Department  
(Rs 0.84 crore), Information Technology and Communications Department 
(Rs 6.36 crore) and Irrigation and Command Area Development Department 
(Rs 4.30 crore). 
• Violations of contractual obligations and undue favour to contractors 
amounting to Rs 643.37 crore in General Administration (Information and 
Public Relations) Department (Rs 34 crore), Information Technology and 
Communications and Revenue Departments (Rs 165.75 crore), Infrastructure 
and Investments (Ports-I) Department (Rs 387.52 crore), Irrigation and 
Command Area Development Department (Rs 51.79 crore), Revenue and 
Infrastructure and Investment (Ports-I) Department (Rs 0.31 crore) and Youth 
Advancement, Tourism & Culture (Youth Services) Department (Rs 4 crore). 
• Idle investments/blocking up of funds, etc. amounting to Rs 8.28 crore in 
Irrigation and Command Area Developm ent Department (Rs 5.48 crore) 
and Youth Advancement, Tourism and Culture (Youth Services) Department 
(Rs 2.80 crore). 
• Ineffective utilisation of the reports of the Vigilance and Enforcement 
Department, irregularities in implementation of MPLAD Scheme (Rs 70.29 
crore) by Planning Department and un-authorised utilisation of Government 
receipts (Rs 1.76 crore) by the Distri ct Collector, Visakhapatnam (Revenue 
Department).  

Overview 
 xiii
Some of the major findings are summarised below: 
(i) The iris based methodology as adopted and operated for issue of ration 
cards on which an expenditure of Rs 106.88 crore has been incurred 
(up to March 2009) was inappropriate. 
[Paragraph 2.1.1] 
(ii) Lack of in-depth project appraisal at the initial stage led to a Unifie-X 
Gateway Project set up at a cost of Rs 6.36 crore being shelved. 
[Paragraph 2.1.3] 
(iii) Failure to firm up specifications before award of works and delay in 
approval of the revised estimates resulted in non-completion of the 
Vontimitta lift irrigation scheme in Kadapa District even after ten years 
and the expenditure of Rs 2.24 crore incurred thereon remained 
unfruitful. 
[Paragraph 2.1.4] 
(iv) Government violated the norms in releasing advertisements to 
newspapers and failed to observe economy principles and disregarded 
propriety requirements resulting in additional/avoidable expenditure of 
Rs 34 crore. 
[Paragraph 2.2.1]  
(v) Government passed on undue benefit of Rs 165.75 crore to a private 
firm in allotment of 50 acres of land in Visakhapatnam District. Also 
the land was allotted to the party without giving wide publicity 
prescribing the starting date and last date for receipt of applications.  
[Paragraph 2.2.2]  
(vi) The contract for development of Po rt at location ‘Gilakaladinne’ near 
Machilipatnam (Krishna District) was given to a party which did not 
initially submit bid for that location.  Government is saddled with the 
payment of Rs 335 crore as against ‘nil’ investment initially 
contemplated. The award of work involving the payment was violative 
of the NIT conditions. 
[Paragraph 2.2.3]  
(vii) Government passed on undue benefit of Rs 52.52 crore to a Company 
entrusted with operations of the Kakinada Port as it failed to ensure 
compliance of agreement clauses and also by modifying the agreement 
clauses post award. 
[Paragraph 2.2.4]  

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 xiv
(viii) Incorrect decision to reject bids in the first call for modernisation of 
Pennar Delta System resulted in avoidable extra expenditure of  
Rs 49.11 crore besides delaying im proved irrigation facilities to the 
farmers. 
[Paragraph 2.2.5]  
(ix) Failure to place order within the validity period of the first tender call 
for the ‘Sangambanda Balancing Reservoir Project’ in Mahboobnagar 
District resulted in placement of order on the same contractor in the 
second call for an additional value of Rs 2.68 crore. 
[Paragraph 2.2.6]  
(x) Excavation of canal and distributaries under Somasila Project without 
obtaining prior clearance from Forest  Department resulted in idle 
investment of Rs 5.48 crore. 
[Paragraph 2.3.1]  
(xi) As of January 2009, 2966 action taken reports (ATRs) on the Vigilance 
& Enforcement (V&E) reports were pending for one to twelve years 
from various administrative departments.  
[Paragraph 2.4.1]  
(xii) Irregularities like non-completion of  works, diversions, irregular 
payments, etc. involving Rs 70.29 crore in implementation of MPLAD 
Scheme denied the envisaged benefits to the people at large. 
[Paragraph 2.4.2]  
(xiii) District Collector, Visakhapatnam, besides keeping the deposit amount 
received from land indenting agencies outside the Government 
account, unauthorisedly spent the interest amount of Rs 1.76 crore 
accrued thereon for office expenditure, expenditure on VIP visits, etc. 
[Paragraph 2.4.3]  

 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
This chapter contains performance audit of National Rural Health Mission 
(1.1), Functioning of Osmania University (1.2), Third Party Quality Control/ 
Assurance in execution of irrigation pr ojects (1.3) and Accelerated Irrigation 
Benefit Programme (1.4). 
HEALTH, MEDICAL AND FAMILY WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
1.1 National Rural Health Mission   
Highlights 
Government of India launched the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) in April 2005 
throughout the country for providing acce ssible, affordable, effective and reliable 
healthcare facilities in the rural areas. The programme was launched in Andhra Pradesh 
without conducting facility survey and without the preparation of perspective plan by the 
District Health Societies (DHS). The State Government did not pay adequate attention for 
creation/strengthening of infrastructure facilities in the Health Centres despite availability 
of funds. Majority of the test checked Community Health Cente rs (CHCs) and Primary 
Health Centers (PHCs) lacked the basic infrastructure facilities. The Mobile Medical 
Units were functioning without essential equipment/Medical Officers in all the eight test 
checked districts. The implementation of Reproductive and Child Health Scheme suffered 
in the areas of institutional delivery care, antenatal care, etc. The functioning of Rogi 
Kalyan Samithis was deficient and the coverage under Immunization Programme was 
inadequate. Monitoring of the Programme was poor. 
As against the GOI releases of Rs 1,603 crore under the Programme 
during the 4-year period 2005-09, Rs 1,505 crore were utilised leaving  
21 to 29 per cent of the available funds remaining unspent. State Health 
Society (SHS) and all the District Health Societies (DHS) did not maintain 
the accounts in the prescribed format envisaged in the guidelines. In all 
the eight DHSs, cash book and other initial records were not also properly 
maintained. 
[Paragraphs 1.1.6.1 and 1.1.6.3] 
Facility surveys intended for identifying the healthcare needs of the people 
were not conducted in the State. Perspective Plan for the whole mission 
period 2005-12 was not prepared by DHS and the SHS. 
[Paragraphs 1.1.7.1 and 1.1.7.2] 
There was a shortfall in setting up of 387 Community Health Centres 
(CHCs), 464 Primary Health Centres (PHCs) in rural areas of the State.  
In tribal areas the shortfall was 63 CHCs, 63 PHCs and 303 Sub-Centres 
with adverse implications with regar d to accessibility of rural/tribal 
population to comprehensive primary healthcare. 
[Paragraph 1.1.8.1] 
CHAPTER I 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 2
Adequate attention was not paid by the State Government for strengthening 
of infrastructure in the Health Centres. Construction of 44 CEMONC 
Centers remained incomplete even two years after taking them up while 
the works of 30 centres were yet to be taken up despite availability of 
funds. The Physical infrastructure available at the existing centres  
was far below the desired level envi saged in Indian Public Health 
Standards. Majority of the CHCs/PHCs test checked lacked even the basic 
infrastructure facilities. Mobile Medical Units were functioning without 
essential equipment/Medical Officers.  
[Paragraphs 1.1.8.2 and 1.1.8.3] 
The implementation of Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) programme 
suffered from deficiencies in the areas of institutional delivery care, 
antenatal care, 24x7 delivery services and the Medical Termination of 
Pregnancy. The State was yet to evaluate the prevalent rate of Infant 
Mortality Rate, Maternal Mortality Ra te and Total Fertility Rate after 
launching of NRHM. 
[Paragraph 1.1.9.1] 
The objective of converging various National Disease Control Programmes 
remained unachieved. Thus, the planning process was deficient. The 
achievement of cataract operations in Government Hospitals was far 
below the prescribed target of 50 per cent. No survey was conducted after 
launch of NRHM to identify areas of iodine deficiency disorders.   
[Paragraphs 1.1.7, 1.1.9.5 and 1.1.9.6] 
Monitoring Committees under Rogi Kalyan Samithis (RKS) were not 
formed in 46 per cent of CHCs and 67 per cent of PHCs test checked. Even 
in the CHCs/PHCs where RKSs were formed their functioning was found 
to be deficient. There was significant shortfall (up to 39 per cent) in the 
Immunization Programme (Second stage of 10-16 age group).   
[Paragraphs 1.1.9.2 and 1.1.9.4] 
Implementation of the schemes by th e NGOs was very poor, attributable 
to poor monitoring by the Department. The entire amount of Rs 7 crore 
released to eight municipal corporatio ns for establishing First Referral 
Units (FRUs) remained unspent.  
[Paragraph 1.1.9.7] 
Financial management was deficient. There were significant variations 
(short receipt of GOI release: Rs 168 crore) between the figures of release 
as per the records of GOI and those stat ed to have been received by the 
State Health Society (SHS) which remained unreconciled (March 2009). 
Test-check revealed cases of avoidable extra expenditure on procurement 
of Vaccine/bed nets, wasteful expenditure, ineligible payments and diversion 
of programme funds amounting to Rs 23.36 crore in the eight districts 
alone. 
[Paragraphs 1.1.6.2 and 1.1.10] 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 3
The Programme suffered from lack of adequate monitoring mechanism.  
This resulted in the planning pro cess not receiving regular inputs on 
nature and direction of required fu ture interventions. The Computer-
based Management Information System intended for use of network for 
Integrated Disease Surveillance Project was defunct since 2005.  
[Paragraph 1.1.11] 
1.1.1 Introduction 
In April 2005, Government of India (GOI) launched the National Rural Health 
Mission (NRHM) throughout the country with special focus on 18 States 
including Andhra Pradesh. The Mission aimed at providing accessible, 
affordable, effective and reliable healthcare facilities in the rural areas. The 
Mission also aimed at an architectural correction
1 in the healthcare delivery 
system by converging seven other stand alone existing National Disease 
Control Programmes (NDCP 2) of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
The new components of the NRHM include bridging the gaps in healthcare 
facilities, facilitating decentralised planning in health sector and addressing the 
issue of health in the context of the sector-wise approach encompassing 
sanitation, hygiene and nutrition as basic determinants of good health by seeking 
convergence of related social sector departments like Women Development 
and Child Welfare, Panchayat Raj, etc. 
In Andhra Pradesh the Mission was operationalised with effect from 
September 2005 through the formation of the State Health Society (SHS) in 
December 2005. 
The objectives of the Mission for 2005-12 are: 
(i) Access to integrated  comprehensive primary healthcare 
(ii) Prevention and control of communicable and non-communicable diseases 
including locally endemic diseases 
(iii) Reduction of infant and maternal mortality rate 
(iv) Population stabilisation, control, gender and demographic imbalances  
1.1.2 Organisational Set-up  
At the State level the scheme is implemented through State Health Mission 
(SHM) headed by Chief Minister. The State Programme Management Support 
Unit (SPMSU) headed by the Mission Director acts as Secretariat to the SHM 
and State Health Society (SHS). The governing body of the Mission headed by 
                                                
 
1 Modification or remedial measures in the healthcare delivery system 
2 Reproductive and Child Health (RCH)-II, National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme 
(NVBDCP), Revised National Tuberculosis Control Programme (RNTCP), National Leprosy 
Eradication Programme (NLEP), National Blindness Control Programmes (NBCP), 
Integrated Disease Surveillance Project (IDS P) and National Iodine Deficiency Disease 
Control Programme (NIDDCP)  

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 4
Principal Secretary, Health, Medical and Family Welfare Department is 
entrusted with the task of scrutiny a nd approval of the annual State plans; 
monitoring the status of the follow-up action on decision of SHM, etc.; review 
of expenditure and implementation; approval of the accounts of the district 
and other implementing agencies and execution of approved action plans 
including release of funds for the programme. The Commissioner of Family 
Welfare (CFW) is the Member Secretary of the State Health Society. 
At the district level, the District Health Society (DHS) is headed by District 
Collector. District Medical & Health  Officer (DM&HO) as head of the 
Executive Committee is responsible for planning, monitoring, evaluation, 
accounting, database management and release of funds to health centres. The 
implementation of various national disease control programmes is supervised 
by the Additional Directors.  
As of March 2009 there were 167 Community Health Centres
3 (CHCs), 1,570 
Primary Health Centres 4 (headed by Medical Officer-in-Charge) and 12,522 
Sub-centres in the State for providing healthcare services to the rural population. 
1.1.3 Audit objectives 
The performance audit had the following objectives: 
• Whether planning was designed at State, district and village levels to 
effectively meet the mission objectives  for ensuring accessible, effective 
and reliable healthcare to rural population; 
• Whether public spending on health sector over the years 2005-09 increased 
to the desired level and assessment, release of funds in the decentralised 
set up and utilisation of funds released and accounting thereof was 
adequate; 
• Whether the Mission achieved capacity building and strengthening of 
physical and human infrastructure at different levels as planned and 
targeted; 
• Whether the systems and procedures of procurement and equipment were 
cost effective and efficient; and 
• Whether the performance indicators a nd targets fixed specially in respect 
of reproductive and child healthcare , immunization and disease control 
programmes were achieved. 
                                                 
3 For a population of 1.20 lakh in rural and 0.80 lakh in tribal, there should be one CHC with a 
minimum 30 bedded accommodation and one operation theatre. In addition to two regular 
medical officers, there should be specialist services in surgery, gynaecology and paediatrics  
4 For a population of 0.30 lakh in rural areas and 0.20 lakh in tribal areas, there should be one 
PHC with a minimum six bedded accommodation and two medical officers 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 5
1.1.4 Audit criteria 
The audit was conducted with reference to records maintained for 
implementation of NRHM. The audit criteria adopted were: 
• GOI guidelines on the scheme and instructions issued from time to time; 
• State Programme Implementation Plan (PIP) approved by GOI; and 
• Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS) for up-gradation of CHCs/PHCs. 
1.1.5 Scope and Methodology of Audit 
The performance audit was conducted (March – August 2008 and February - 
March 2009 and May 2009)) covering the period from 2005-06 to 2008-09 by 
test check of records in the Mission Commissionerate, eight DHSs 5 (out of 23) 
along with 24 (out of 167) CHCs, 48 (out of 1,570) PHCs and 96 (out of 
12,522) Sub-centres. The selection of sample was based on Simple Random 
Sampling without Replacement method. The details are given in Appendix-1.1. 
The percentage of expenditure covere d in sample districts ranged from  
11 to 32 per cent during 2005-09. An entry conference was held (May 2008) 
with the Mission Commissionerate, wherein audit objectives and criteria were 
explained. The exit conference was conducted in January 2009 with the 
Additional Director, NRHM and the Programme Officers. Replies of the 
Government have been considered and incorporated while finalising the 
Performance Audit review. The results of the Performance Audit are discussed 
in the succeeding paragraphs.  
Audit findings 
1.1.6 Release and utilisation of funds, accounting and auditing 
arrangements  
1.1.6.1 Financial outlay and expenditure 
The Programme was fully funded by GOI during the years 2005-06 and  
2006-07. From the year 2007-08 onwards, the funding was to be in the ratio of 
85:15. During the period 2005-09 GOI released Rs 1,603.12 crore and with an 
inclusion of opening balance of Rs 17.53 crore relating to RCH-I programme 
which was under implementation prior to 2005-06 the total funds available 
with the State Government were Rs 1,620.65 crore. As against this, the 
expenditure was Rs 1,505.06 crore leaving Rs 115.59 crore unspent. The year 
wise details are given in Table-1. 
                                                
 
5Adilabad, Khammam, Krishna, Kurnool, Nellore, Vizianagaram, Karimnagar and Kadapa 
Twenty one to 
twenty nine per cent 
of available funds 
remained unutilised 
every year during 
2005-09 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 6
      Table-1                             (Rupees in crore) 
 
Year Opening 
Balance 
GOI Releases$ 
Grant-in-Aid 
Expenditure* Closing Balance 
 
Unspent Balance 
Percentage 
2005-06 17.53 255.85 214.31 59.07 22 
2006-07 59.07 425.39 381.22 103.24 21 
2007-08 103.24 556.96 470.39 189.81 29 
2008-09 189.81 364.92 439.14 115.59 21 
Total  1603.12 1505.06   
$These amounts are based on the records maintained by SHS and are less than the 
releases made by GOI as detailed in para 1.1.6.2  
*Release to districts shown as expenditure: Rs 1,095.44 crore, Expenditure incurred 
at State level by SHS: Rs 409.62 crore 
Thus, every year 21 to 29 per cent of the available funds remained unutilised 
in the bank accounts 6 while several gaps/shortfalls were noticed by Audit in 
creation/strengthening of infrastructure in the implementation of various 
schemes under NRHM as discussed in paras 1.1.8.1 to 1.1.8.3. 
Audit also observed that the State did not contribute its share of 15 per cent 
during the year 2007-08 and 2008-09 7.  The deficiencies in utilisation of funds 
are discussed in para 1.1.10. 
1.1.6.2 Discrepancies in figures relating to receipt of funds 
There were significant variations (shor t receipt by SHS: Rs 168.23 crore to 
end of March 2008) between the releases made by GOI and the funds received 
by SHS as detailed in Table-2.  
Table-2                    (Rupees in crore)  
 
Year Funds released to SHS 
(GOI figures)* 
Funds stated to have 
been received by SHS 
Difference
2005-06 383.90 255.85 128.05 
2006-07 424.70 425.39 0.69 
2007-08 597.83 556.96 40.87 
2008-09 Not available 364.92 - 
Source: Information provided by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, GOI 
Similarly, substantial variations (amount involved: Rs 11.49 crore) were also 
noticed between the figures of releases by SHS and those received by DHS in 
all the eight sampled districts. The district-wise details are given in Appendix-1.2. 
                                                 
6 ICICI Bank, a private entity benefited immensely from such large funds being maintained in 
SB accounts 
7 The amounts released and paid under the State sponsored schemes like Sukhibhava, Family 
Planning incentives and Rural Emergency Health Transport Service were shown as State 
share but as these schemes were in vogue prior to introduction of NRHM, the expenditure on 
these schemes can not be construed as contribution to NRHM 
Huge variations 
were noticed 
between the figures 
of releases by GOI 
and those received 
by SHS 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 7
Government in its reply (June 2009) stated that the variations were due to 
release of the funds  to Director of Health directly by Government of India 
who in turn was releasing to the Programme Officers at district level and the 
accounts being rendered by the Progra mme Officers to the Ministry through 
Director of Health. It was also stated that Chartered Accountants were instructed 
to take action to reconcile the discrepancies. 
1.1.6.3 Accounting and auditing arrangements 
The accounts of the SHS and DHS are based on commercial accounting 
system with a provision for certification by a Chartered Accountant. For 
ensuring accountability for expenditure incurred from Government funds, two 
kinds of audit are carried out (i) Cer tification of accounts which merely 
confines itself to whether accounts prepared are backed by vouchers (ii) the 
transaction audit to ascertain whether the utilisation of funds is in conformity 
with the principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness and propriety 
including equality of opportunity for executing works or providing services. 
The present arrangements are confined to activity (i) and there is no assurance 
with regard to conformity with vital conditions which are scrutinised in 
activity (ii). 
The following deficiencies were noticed  in maintenance of books of accounts 
in DHS and SHS: 
1.1.6.4 Non-maintenance of accounts in double entry system 
Though prescribed, the accounts at State and district level were not maintained 
in double entry system leading to non-drawing up of trial balance. Ledger, 
journal were also not maintained. 
1.1.6.5  Non-maintenance of initial records at District Health Societies   
In all the DHSs test checked, cash books and other initial records were not 
maintained properly and were not closed periodically due to which the DHSs 
were not able to ascertain the balance available with them on any given day. 
For this purpose, they were relying on statements furnished by the banks in 
which the scheme funds were deposited. The accounts of the scheme were not 
also certified at district level by CA though prescribed in the guidelines. 
Reconciliation of SHS/DHSs figures with banks was also not being done as 
initial records at district level were not maintained properly. 
1.1.7 Planning for Implementation of the Mission  
The NRHM is aimed at decentralised planning and implementing arrangements 
to ensure need based and community owned district health action plan which 
would form the basis for intervention in the health sector. The guidelines 
envisaged household survey, facility surv ey, preparation of perspective plan 
for the entire Mission period (2005-12), annual action plan, and the Project 
Implementation Plan (PIP). Scrutiny of the records revealed that household 
survey was completed in 21 districts (i.e. except Adilabad and East Godavari) 
in the State. There were deficiencies in the planning process, as follows: 
Planning process 
was deficient. The 
objective of 
converging various 
National Disease 
Control 
Programmes 
remained 
unachieved 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 8
1.1.7.1 Perspective plans for the Mission period  
NRHM guidelines envisage preparation of perspective plans for the entire 
Mission period (2005-2012) outlining the year-wise resources and activity 
needs of the district. The annual plan was to be based on availability and 
prioritisation exercise. 
DHSs in the State have not prepared the perspective plan for the entire 
Mission period. Thus, the requirement and availability of resources and 
physical and financial targets remained un-assessed. In fact, the funds earmarked 
for preparation of Perspective Plan were diverted by DM & HOs for other 
purposes (Para 1.1.10 refers). 
1.1.7.2 Facility Survey 
In order to set up a benchmark for quality service and utilisation and identify 
input needs, Facility Survey (Specia list service, manpower, investigating 
facilities, equipment and other infrastructure, etc.) was to be conducted in each 
facility i.e., CHC, PHC, and Sub-centres. These surveys were to provide critical 
information in terms of gaps in infrastructure and human resource which needed 
to be addressed through planning process.   
No Facility Survey was however, conducted in the State. At a belated stage in 
April 2008, this was entrusted to Indian Institute of Health and Family Welfare 
requiring to be completed by October 2008 at a cost of Rs 46.50 lakh.  No 
progress was noticed as of May 2009. Thus, the programme was implemented 
during the period 2005-09 without the benefit of facility survey. Due to  
non-conduct of facility survey, deficiencies in specialist services, manpower 
services and infrastructure facilities were not identified. 
1.1.7.3 Preparation of Project Implementation Plan (PIP)  
PIP for the State was to be prepared annually by the SHS by aggregating the 
annual District Health Action Plan of each district. The National Programme  
Co-ordination Committee (NPCC) at the Ministry under the Chairmanship of 
the National Mission Director was to evaluate the PIP. 
After incorporation of the feedback of  the NPCC the PIP was to be approved 
by the Secretary, Ministry of H&FW. The directives issued by the NPCC were 
to be complied with by the SHS. 
The SHS had no details of PIPs for the two year period 2005-07.  
Audit observed that except DHS, Vizianagaram, the district health action plan 
was not prepared by any DHS in the State. This indicated that the PIPs were 
prepared without considering the DHAPs and the programme was implemented 
in an adhoc manner and is not need based. While approving (August 2007) the 
PIP in respect of 2007-08 NPCC gave the following directives: 
• Provision of 10 per cent increase in budgetary outlay per year by the State 
• Utilisation of not exceeding 25 per cent  of funds for strengthening of 
infrastructure  

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 9
• Drawing a monitoring plan for NRHM in consultation with National 
Health State Resource Centre (NHSRC)  
• Construction of new CHCs and PHCs 
It was observed that none of the above directives were complied with by the 
State Health Society (SHS) as of June  2009. Non-establishment of new CHCs 
and PHCs after launching NRHM had the adverse implications on delivery of 
healthcare to the targeted population (Para 1.1.8.1 also refers). Government 
replied (June 2009) that monitoring plan in consultation with NHSRC is under 
process. Government did not offer spec ific remarks on the other directives 
issued by NPCC.  
1.1.8 Infrastructure and Capacity Building 
The mandate of NRHM stipulates creation of infrastructure/buildings for 
health centres and strengthening the existing ones for improving accessibility 
and quality of healthcare services. Adequate attention was not paid by the 
State Government for creation/strengt hening of physical infrastructure in 
CHCs/PHCs/Sub-centres as discussed in Paras 1.1.8.1 to 1.1.8.4 below: 
1.1.8.1 Shortfall in number of Health Centres 
NRHM framework seeks to provide one Sub Centre for 5,000 population 
(3,000 in tribal areas), one Primary Health Centre for 30,000 population 
(20,000 in tribal/desert areas) and one Community Health Centre for 1,00,000 
population (80,000 in tribal/desert areas).   
For the rural population of 554.01 lakh (Census 2001) in the State, there was a 
shortage of 387 CHCs and 464 PHCs. For tribal population of 50.24 lakh the 
shortage was 63 CHCs, 63 PHCs and 30 3 Sub-Centres. Audit observed that 
during the entire period 2005-09 i.e., after launching the NRHM no new CHCs 
or PHCs had come up in the State despite specific directive by the Ministry to 
propose the setting up of new CHCs, PHCs through PIPs from the year  
2007-08. Government in its reply (June 2009) stated that construction of 250 
Sub-centres would be taken up (outlay: Rs 36 crore) in 2009-10. 
Non-setting up of the required number of  health centres as per the population 
norms defeated the objective of the pr ogramme with adverse implication on 
the accessibility of health facilities to rural/tribal population. 
1.1.8.2 Inadequate physical infrastructure at health centres  
The framework for implementation of the Mission has set the target of providing 
certain guaranteed services at Sub-centres, PHCs and CHCs. To achieve this, 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, GOI has formulated the Indian 
Public Health Standards (IPHS) for diffe rent levels of health centres for 
ensuring availability of facilities.  
Audit scrutiny revealed that even the basic infrastructure was not available in 
any of the health centres test checked (CHCs: 24, PHCs: 48, Sub centres: 96) 
as follows: 
In rural areas there 
was a shortage of 
387 CHCs and 464 
PHCs.  In tribal 
areas the shortage 
was 63 CHCs, 63 
PHCs and 303 Sub-
Centres No new health 
centres had come 
up after launching 
NRHM in 2005-06, 
defeating the 
objective of 
accessibility of 
healthcare to rural/ 
tribal population 
The physical 
infrastructure at 
health centres was 
inadequate and far 
below the desired 
level envisaged in 
Indian Public 
Health Standards. 
Majority of CHCs/ 
PHCs test checked 
lacked basic 
infrastructure 
facilities 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 10
Item/ subject and requirement Audit findings 
Operation Theatres  
According to IPHS norms major 
equipments are necessary to make an 
Operation Theatre (OT) functional. 
Important equipments were not available in CHCs as  
mentioned below: 
Nature of equipment Number of CHCs (out of 
24 CHCs test checked) 
 where equipment was not 
available 
Boyles apparatus to provide artificial 
respiration 
11 
Cardiac Monitors 21 
Ventilators Verticals  19 
High Pressure sterilizers 2/3 capacity drum 15 
Shadow less lamps pedestal for minor OT 11 
Gloves and dusting machines 7 
Nitrous Oxide Cylinders 12 
EMO machines for surgery 21 
Defibrillators  23 
Horizontal High Pressure Sterilizers 15 
Shadow Less Lamp Ceiling Tract Monitors 9 
OT Care/Fumigation Apparatus 9 
Oxygen Cylinder 660 litres for one 
Boyles apparatus 
7 
Hydraulic Operation Table 11 
Due to non-availability of important/essential equipment in 
Operation Theatres in the CHCs (supposed to be First Referral 
Unit) the targeted people in rura l areas were deprived of quality 
surgical treatment. Government accepted the audit observations. 
CEMONC Centre8 
The objective was to provide life saving 
emergency care to mother and child and 
was designed to have 4 Obstetricians, one 
Paediatrician, and one Anaesthetist with 
Blood Storage Centre. 
• As of March 2008 out of 329 and 546 sanctioned posts of 
Gynaecologists and Staff Nurses respectively, 183 (56 per 
cent) and 428 (78 per cent) posts were vacant.  
• In Adilabad, Khammam, Krishna and Nellore Districts 
the CEMONC Centres were not functioning due to 
non-availability of Specialist doctors viz., Gynaecologist, 
Paediatrician and Anaesthetist. In the absence of doctors the 
Staff Nurses could not attend to emergency cases like 
caesarean, blood transfusion, administering anaesthesia. 
Government in its reply (June 2009) attributed the vacancies 
to experienced specialist doct ors not generally willing to 
work at rural centres even after offering better remuneration. 
                                                 
8 Comprehensive Emergency Obstetric and Neo-natal Care 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 11
Emergency Services 
The Mission provides for 24 hours 
emergency services for management of 
injuries and accident fi rst aid, stabilisation 
of patients before referral, dog/snake/ 
scorpion bite cases, etc. by posting 3 staff 
nurses at PHCs. 
Out of the 48 PHCs emergency se rvices were available only in 
18 PHCs. Lack of services in other PHCs was due to non-
availability of the staff. 
Diagnostic Services 
Mission provides for essential lab services 
at PHCs/CHCs level for routine urine, 
stool and blood test, blood grouping, 
bleeding time, clotting time, diagnostic for 
RTI/STD, Sputum testing for TB, Blood 
Smears examination for Malaria Parasites, 
rapid test for pregnancy/ malaria and RPR 
for Syphilis/Yarn. 
• In all the 48 PHCs test checked  lab services were available 
partially only. 
• In 24 CHCs and 48 PHCs though equipment for lab tests 
were present diagnostic services were not carried out due to 
absence of Technician/Reagents/Electricity.  
• In 3 CHCs and 15 PHCs facilities for diagnostic services 
were non-functional due to non-availability of lab technicians. 
Labour Room 
The frame work of the implementation of 
the scheme provides for facility of labour 
room for safe delivery at PHC and CHC. 
Labour rooms were available in 37 out of 48 PHCs test checked.  
Radiological/X Ray services In 10 out of 24 test checked CHCs, X-ray facilities were not 
available. 
Blood storage facilities Due to lack of equipment/staff, Blood storage facilities were not 
available in the 12 CHCs (out of 24) test checked. 
Basic infrastructure 
Basic facilities such as buildings, vehicles, 
utilities, labour rooms, OTs, etc. at CHCs, 
PHCs and Sub-centres level are to be 
provided as per IPHS norms. 
• 3 PHCs were functioning in private buildings. 
• In 38 PHCs and 11 CHCs no vehicle/ambulance were provided. 
• In 85 Sub-centres, 11 PHCs and 2 CHCs, there were no 
separate utilities for men and women. 
• In 8 PHCs and 1 CHC, out-patient department (OPD) rooms 
were not present. In 14 PHCs Operation theatres were not 
present. 
• In 9 PHCs Labour rooms were not functional. 
• In 10 CHCs Waiting Rooms were not available. 
• In 21 PHCs and 12 CHCs no standby power supply/ 
generator was available. 
• In 89 Sub-centres, 31 PHCs and 9 CHCs telephone 
connections were not available. 
• In 26 PHCs and 21 CHCs computers were not available.  

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 12
• In 82 Sub-centres the accommo dation facilities for doctors 
were not available. 
• Residential quarters were not available for 34 medical 
officers and 32 staff nurses at PH C level. In 16 CHCs partial 
accommodation only was provided to medical officers. 
AYUSH services 
One of the objectives of the NRHM 
was to revive AYUSH (Ayurvedic, Unani, 
Siddha and Homoeopathy) services through 
revitalising local traditions, by providing 
an AYUSH doctor at PHCs and by 
establishing AYUSH clinics at CHC.   
Out of 48 PHCs and 24 CHCs test-checked no AYUSH 
practitioner was provided in 41 PHCs and in all the CHCs 
either through regular posting or through contractual 
appointment. This would adversely affect the objective of 
providing AYUSH services at the health centres under NRHM. 
Government replied (June 2009) that although notification was 
issued in April 2008 for recru iting doctors, there was no 
response. 
Mobile Medical Units (MMUs) 
To make healthcare available at the door 
steps of the public in the rural areas, 
Mobile Medical Units were to be provided 
for providing outreach service.   
• 93 MMUs were launched in 23 districts in 2005-06. Of 
these, only 50 MMUs are functional in 17 districts as of May 
2009; 43 MMUs were closed reportedly due to poor 
performance and lack of Medical Officers and equipments. 
• In all the 8 test checked districts MMUs were not provided 
with required equipments and hence were non-functional.  
• The equipment viz., Ultra Sound ECG, BP Apparatus, Lab 
equipment were not available in the MMUs.  Interventions 
like RTI/STI, Blood smear, EC G investigatio n like Urine, 
Blood, Sputum were not carried out in MMUs. 
• In Krishna District MMUs were providing services in areas 
where accessibility to the h ealthcare centre was not a 
problem, leaving the remote/outreach areas un-covered.   
• In Adilabad, Nellore and Vizianagaram the MMUs were 
providing only curative services i.e., administering medicines 
for fever, cold etc., ignoring preventive and diagnostic 
services. In Adilabad, Krishna and Vizianagaram, MMUs 
were providing healthcare servic es in outreach areas without 
a Medical Officer. Government while accepting the audit 
points stated (June 2009) that the equipment could not be 
supplied promptly due to lengthy procurement tender process. 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 13
1.1.8.3 Construction of Health Centres 
The building works taken up for construction during 2005-09 under NRHM 
are given in Table-3.  
Table-3                                                                                                                                                                    (Rupees in crore)  
 
Type of building Number 
proposed  
to be 
constructed 
Estimated/ 
Sanctioned 
cost 
Amount 
released 
Expenditure 
incurred up to 
February 2009 
Number 
completed 
Number 
of  
works in 
progress 
No. of  
completed 
works 
handed over 
No. of 
works not 
taken up 
CEMONC9 Centres 151 88.49 31.62 40.35 77 44 51 30 10 
Paediatric and 
Maternal ward at 
SVRR Hospital
11, 
Tirupati 
1 12.50 5.00 4.23 - 1 - - 
Birth waiting 
homes 
38 4.05 1.76 1.57 26 7 - 5 
Maternal and child 
health control room 
1 0.11 0.11 NA NA 1 - - 
The following were observed: 
• Even though funds were released, 44 CEMONC centres remained 
incomplete. Construction of 30 CEMONC centres was not taken up due to 
site disputes and lack of response from bidders. Construction of 12 birth 
waiting rooms (all in tribal areas) also remained incomplete. 
• The Paediatric and Maternal ward at SVRR Hospital, Tirupati still remained 
incomplete even after two years of its sanction and release of funds 
(pending completion of works the ward was inaugurated in February 2009) 
• The Commissioner did not ensure establishment of Maternal and child 
health control room despite specific provision of funds, which were lying 
with APHMHIDC. Government replied (June 2009) that it had introduced 
104 toll free 24X7 call centre service to provide Health Information 
Helpline in the State. The amount (Rs 11.50 lakh) was however, not yet 
remitted back to the NRHM account by APHMHIDC.   
The delay in completion of civil works led to denial of intended benefit to the 
beneficiaries besides escalation in construction cost. 
1.1.8.4 Manpower 
Provision of manpower is a key component of delivery of health services. The 
Mission aimed to provide adequate medical and other manpower at different 
health centres. The details of sanctioned strength vis-à-vis men in position and 
the vacancy position in the Medical and Health Department as of September 
2008 are given in the Appendix-1.3
. 
                                                 
9 Comprehensive Emergency Obstetric and Neo-natal Care 
10 Vizianagaram-3, Visakhapatnam-6, West Godavari-2, Krishna-2, Chittoor-1, Anantapur-2, 
Kurnool-2, Mahboobnagar-2, Ranga Reddy-2, Nalgonda-2, Medak-1, Nizamabad-2, 
Warangal-1, Khammam-1, Adilabad-1 
11Sri Venkateswara Ramnarain Ruia Government General Hospital 
Huge shortage of 
manpower in key 
areas had adverse 
implication on 
providing reliable 
and quality medical 
services to rural 
population 
Construction of 44 
CEMONC Centres 
remained 
incomplete and 
works of 30 centres 
were not taken up 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 14
Shortfall was noticed in the key functions of Civil Surgeon Specialist (46),  
Dy. Civil Surgeon (120), Civil Assistant Surgeon (1,279), Non-Medical 
Supervisor (104), Non-Medical Assistan t (660), Sr. Entomologist (14), Staff 
Nurses (865), Community Health Officer (201). The huge shortfall in 
manpower had wide ranging inter-health centre variations, with adverse 
implications on providing reliable and quality medical services to the targeted 
population in rural areas. 
1.1.9 Implementation of schemes 
1.1.9.1 Reproductive and Child Healthcare (RCH) 
NRHM aimed to provide an overarching umbrella to the national level health 
and family welfare programmes including (a) Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY),  
(b) Immunization routine and Pulse Polio (c) National Vector Borne Disease 
Control Programme (NVBDCP), (d) Revised RNTCP (e) NPCB, NLEP and 
IDSP.  
Audit observed the following deficiencies in the implementation of RCH 
scheme: 
Item/Subject and requirement Audit findings 
Milestones 
NRHM prescribed national targets for 
reducing Infant Mortality Rate (IMR), 
Maternal Mortality Rate (MMR) and 
Total Fertility Rate (TFR). 
 
The State also prescribed specific targets/intermediate goals/outcomes/ 
milestones by adopting the Contraceptive Prevalence Rate as indicator 
to measure the effectiveness of the implementation of activities of 
Family Welfare Programme for the Mission period 2005-12 as 
indicated below: 
Particulars 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Infant Mortality 
Rate (IMR) per 
1000 live births 
56 50 45 40 35 30 
Maternal 
Mortality Rate 
(MMR) per 
100000 live 
births 
195 176 157 138 119 100 
Total Fertility 
Rate (TFR) 
1.80 1.74 1.68 1.62 1.56 1.50 
However, the State did not evaluate the prevalent rate of IMR, MMR 
and TFR for the years 2005-06 to 2007-08. No bench marks were 
prescribed to measure the achievement with regard to accessible, 
affordable, accountable, effectiv e and reliable healthcare. No 
mechanism also existed to measure the impact of the programme. 
Antenatal care 
To reduce MMR, NRHM aims for safe 
motherhood which was to be achieved 
by registering all pregnant women 
before they attain 12 weeks of pregnancy, 
The following basic information was not maintained in all the CHCs, 
PHCs and Sub-centres test checked. 
(i) Micro birth plan at the PHCs level (in Adilabad, Kurnool, 
Karimnagar and Nellore Districts). 
The implementation 
of RCH programme 
suffered from 
deficiencies in the 
areas of 
institutional 
delivery care, 
antenatal care, 
delivery services 
24x7 and MTP 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 15
provision of four antenatal checkups, 
issue of ninety or more Iron Folic Acid 
(IFA) tablets, administering two doses 
of TT, advising the correct diet and 
vitamin supplements and in cases of 
complication referring them to more 
specialised gynaecological care. 
(ii) Details of registration of pregnant women (in Adilabad District).  
(iii) Systematic records of checkups. 
 
Institutional Delivery Care 
Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) was 
started during 2005-06 with an objective 
to encourage pregnant women for 
Institutional delivery in Government/ 
Private institutions which contributes to 
reduction of maternal mortality and 
infant mortality. 
To encourage institutional delivery, the Centrally sponsored Janani 
Suraksha Yojana (JSY) scheme provides all pregnant women in low 
performing States and BPL pregnant women in high performing 
States a cash compensation of Rs 700 for undergoing institutional 
delivery irrespective of their age and number of previous children 
with them. Of the total deliveries  of 15.12 lakh, 15.01 lakh, 15.13 
lakh and 15.59 lakh during 2005-09, the status of institutional 
delivery in the State was 12.55 lakh, 12.77 lakh 13.33 lakh and 14.20 
lakh constituting 83, 85, 88 and 91 per cent of targets. 
In Vizianagaram District there was a delay of five months in payment 
of compensation to 1475 beneficiaries involving Rs 13.80 lakh due to 
non-release of State matching share of Rs 300 per delivery under 
Sukhibhava scheme. 
Delivery Services 24x7 
Under RCH-I, the State Government 
launched a strategy in March 1996 to 
make Emergency Maternal Healthcare 
Services available round the clock to 
the people in Rural Public Health 
Institutions, where at least a Staff Nurse 
and MPHA(F) was to be available 24 
hrs a day and 7 days a week to provide 
normal delivery service. These PHCs 
have been authorised to obtain the 
services of Gynaecologist and a 
Paediatrician on a ‘per–call’ payment 
basis from the private sector, if 
specialists are not available. 
Out of total 1570 PHCs in the State only 800 PHCs (29 out of 48 
PHCs in the sampled districts) had the facility of 24x7 delivery 
services.   
Audit observed that these PHCs we re not catering to the services 
satisfactorily due to non-availability of Gynaecologist and 
Paediatrician, required number of staff Nurses (3) and Labour room 
etc. 
 
Essential Obstetric Care In 14 out of 24 CHCs test checked the emergency obstetric care 
including caesarean facility was not available due to absence of 
specialists in obstetrics and gynaecology, anaesthesia though 
required as per IPHS norms and non-functional operation theatre, 
lack of adequate infrastructure, supporting staff, blood storage 
facility etc. 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 16
Medical Termination of Pregnancy 
(MTP)  
Medical Termination of Pregnancy is 
permitted in certain conditions under 
the MTP Act, 1971. 
Enhancing number and quality of f acilities for MTP is an important 
component of the programme. The programme envisaged need based 
training to medical officers and nurses, provision of equipment and 
operation theatre and MTP kits at District Hospitals, CHCs and 
PHCs.   
It was observed that none of the 24 CHCs and 48 PHCs test checked 
in the six districts had the facilities of MTP.   
Government while accepting the above audit observations promised to take 
remedial action. 
1.1.9.2 Rogi Kalyan Samithis (RKS) 
NRHM guidelines envisaged constitution of RKSs with the representatives of 
legislature, health officials and leading members of the community and PRI 
Representatives, to be registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860 for 
healthcare centres up to PHC level. Aud it observed the following deficiencies 
in implementation of RKSs: 
• Out of 19 District Hospitals, 167 CHCs and 1,570 PHCs in the State, RKSs 
were not constituted in one CHC and 54 PHCs to end of 2007-08. 
• A monitoring committee has to be constituted by RKS to collect patient’s 
feed back and complaints if any, for taking remedial action. In eight 
District Hospitals, 24 CHCs and 48 PHCs test checked monitoring 
committees were not constituted in 11 CHCs (46 per cent) and 32 PHCs 
(67 per cent). 
• In eight District Hospitals, 17 CHCs and 21 PHCs no report on patients’ 
feed back and complaints on presence and conduct of healthcare personnel 
was submitted to DMHO/Collector. Thus, the monitoring mechanism for 
redressal of complaints was rendered ineffective.  
• The source of funds for RKSs was to be in the ratio of 1:1:3 (Internal: 
through own resources, donations, levy of user charges; State and Central). 
However, neither the grants were received from the State Government nor 
the RKSs have generated the internal resources during 2007-08. This 
would adversely affect the viability of the long term goal of community 
ownership of the health centres through RKSs.  
Government did not offer specific remarks on the above audit observations. 
1.1.9.3 Family planning 
The RCH II has launched a number of initiatives under the family planning 
component to achieve the goal of population stability through reduction of 
total fertility rate by 2012. The family planning includes terminal method to 
control total fertility rate and spacing methods to improve couple protection ratio.  
Functioning of Rogi 
Kalyan Samithis 
was found to be 
deficient. RKSs 
were yet to be 
formed in one CHC 
and 54 PHCs 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 17
The target and achievements in various terminal methods in the State is 
indicated in Appendix-1.4.   The following observations are made: 
Item/subject Audit findings 
Vasectomy The proportion of vasectomy to the total sterilization was very low ranging from 3.53 
per cent to 4.25 per cent of the targets during 2005-09.   
Tubectomy The proportion of tubectomy to the total sterilization ranged from 79.51 per cent to 
84.63 per cent and this is a manifestation of the gender imbalance that plagues the 
programme. The proportion of vasectomy has not increased even after the launch of 
the non-scalpel vasectomy. 
In Krishna, Kurnool and Nellore Districts, vasectomy operations constituted a meagre 
0.03 to 2.86 percentage of total sterilizations.   
Laparoscopic 
tubetcomy 
While female sterilization is the most ad opted method, the programme emphasises 
laparoscopic tubetcomy as preferable to co nventional tubetcomy. The performance of 
laparoscopic tubetcomy was low at 11.79 per cent of total female sterilizations.   
No specific remarks were offered by the Government on the above points. 
1.1.9.4 Immunization 
Vaccines like BCG, OPD, TT, DPT, DT and measles under universal 
immunization programme were envisaged under RCH programme. 
Immunization strengthening project was aimed at achieving complete 
vaccination of 80 per cent  infants by strengthening routine immunization to 
realise the desired reduction in infant morbidity and mortality rate.  
Audit scrutiny revealed that immunization of children between 0 and 1 age 
group ranged from 93 per cent  to 101 per cent  during the period 2005-09. 
However, shortfall was noticed up to 39 per cent  in respect of second 
immunization (age group 10-16 years) as shown in Table-4.  
 Table-4                                                                                                                                        (Number in lakh) 
DT TT (10) TT (16) Year 
Target 
 
Achieve-
ment 
Percen-
tage 
Target 
 
Achieve-
ment 
Percen- 
tage 
Target 
 
Achieve-
ment 
Percen-
tage 
2005-06 14.63 13.49 92.20 19.20 12.83 66.82 18.40 11.15 60.59 
2006-07 17.80 12.76 71.68 20.23 12.32 60.89 17.00 10.34 60.82 
2007-08 18.17 14.09 77.54 20.65 13.17 63.77 17.35 11.37 65.53 
2008-09 18.23 12.06 66.15 20.72 12.57 60.66 17.40 10.87 62.47 
Government attributed (June 2009) the shortfall in second immunization of 
children (above 5 years) to the children not being available in their homes due 
to admission in schools and migrati on in some cases. The reply is not 
acceptable as both the targets and achievements were inclusive of the number 
of children covered under School Immunization Programme. 
Huge shortfalls (up 
to 39 per cent) were 
noticed in respect of 
second 
immunization (age 
group 10-16 years) 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 18
1.1.9.5 National Programme for Control of Blindness (NPCB) 
The NPCB aimed to reduce prevalen ce of blindness cases to 0.8 per cent   
(the prevalent rate of blind is 1.84 per cent ) by arranging cataract surgeries  
(46 lakh by 2012), and collection of donated eye balls and by arranging school 
eye screening and free distribution of eye spectacles and creation of donation 
centres and eye-banks and strengthening of infrastructure by way of supply of 
equipment and training of eye surgeons and nurses. 
Fifty per cent of the total Cataract Operations (catops) were to be performed 
by the Government Hospitals as envisaged in the guidelines. However, the 
achievement in Government hospitals ranged from 15 to 18 per cent of total 
catops as shown in Table-5. 
Table-5 
Break-up of catops Number of catops 
conducted Government sector NGOs Private practitioners 
and others 
Year 
Target Achievement Number Percentage Number Percentage Number Percentage
2005-06 460000 513508 92431 18 205403 40 215674 42 
2006-07 460000 510705 83615 16 239055 47 188035 37 
2007-08 500000 547899 98622 18 219160 40 230117 42 
2008-09 550000 582318 89773 15 276622 48 215923 37 
Total 1970000 2154430 364441  940240  849749  
The programme contemplated that cataract operations performed in eye camps 
should be in the range of 20 per cent as it was felt that greater reliance on the 
camp methodology could be counter productive. It was however, observed that 
catops performed through camp approach far exceeded the prescribed 
percentages as shown in Table-6. Government attributed (June 2009) the poor 
achievement of catops in Government inst itutions to non-availability of the 
posts of eye surgeons and operation theatres in area hospitals/district hospitals/ 
CHCs and also non-availability of Para-Medical Ophthalmic Assistants (PMOA) 
posts in 350 PHCs (out of 1570). It wa s stated that Director of Health was 
instructed in February 2009 to ou tsource the services of 100 PMOAs. 
Government did not however, indicate the steps taken/proposed to be taken 
with regard to recruitment of eye surgeons. 
Table-6 
No. of catops performed Year 
Total In camps No. of Camps 
Percentage of 
catops in Camps 
2005-06 513508 143558 2266 27.95 
2006-07 510705 159279 2728 31.18 
2007-08 547899 203621 3401 37.16 
2008-09 582318 213941 3713 36.70 
The achievement of 
Catops in 
Government 
hospitals was far 
below the 
prescribed target of 
50 per cent 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 19
1.1.9.6      National Iodine Deficiency Disorder Control Programme 
(NIDDCP) 
The NIDDCP aims to control iodine deficiency disorder (IDD) through 
production and distribution of iodised salt, analysis of salt samples and 
analysis of urinary iodine excretion etc.  
The NIDDCP was launched in the State during 1962.  During 1986 to 2003, 
14 out of 23 districts were surveyed fo r locating areas of IDD and all these 
districts were identified as areas endemic to IDD. No survey was however, 
conducted during the period 2005-09. 
The number of iodine salt samples analysed during 2005-06, 2006-07, 2007-08 
and 2008-09 is given in Table-7.  
Table-7 
Year No. of samples tested Less than 15 PPM* More than 15 PPM* 
2005-06 810656 394567 409124 
2006-07 612413 218292 324126 
2007-08 735617 256818 325692 
2008-09 658364 223564 309247 
  * Parts Per Million (PPM) 
No action was however, taken on the analysis of Urinary iodine excretion 
(May 2009). Government while accepting the audit point attributed this to 
non-availability of qualified lab tech nicians and necessary equipment with 
Director of Health. The information with regard to patients with Iodine 
Deficiency Disorders was not available with the SHS or with the Additional 
Director, NIDDCP. 
1.1.9.7 Poor implementation of schemes by NGOs 
There were in all 87 NGOs
12 (including the Municipal Corporations) in the 
State which received assistance under the programme. The table below shows 
the position of funds released to th e NGOs by the SHS during the period  
2005-09 and utilisation of the grants by them.  It was observed that none of the 
NGOs have implemented the programme during the years 2005-06 and  
2006-07. Although the NGOs stated to have spent Rs 5.96 crore (out of Rs 20.69 
crore released) during 2007-08, UCs were  submitted only to the extent of  
Rs 1.14 crore as detailed in Table-8.  
  Table-8                                                                   (Rupees in crore) 
Year Grant-in-aid released to 
NGO during the year 
Expenditure 
incurred by NGO 
Amount for which UC 
furnished by the NGOs 
2005-06 2.25 Nil Nil 
2006-07 11.10 Nil Nil 
2007-08 7.33 5.96 1.14 
2008-09 NIL NIL --- 
Total 20.69 5.96 1.14 
                                                 
12Releases to municipal corporations are categorised as releases to NGOs 
No survey was 
conducted after 
launching NRHM 
to identify areas of 
iodine deficiency 
disorder 
Implementation of 
schemes by the 
NGOs was poor.  
The entire amount 
of Rs 7.01 crore 
released to 
municipal 
corporations for 
establishing First 
Referral Units 
remained unspent 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 20
Further Rs 7.01 crore was released (2005- 09) to Municipal Corporations viz., 
Kakinada (Rs 82.71 lakh), Guntur (Rs 91.01 lakh), Nellore (Rs 73.90 lakh), 
Tirupati (Rs 81.86 lakh), Kadapa (Rs 113.03 lakh), Kurnool (Rs 152.95 lakh), 
Warangal (Rs 87.61 lakh), Ranga Re ddy District (Rs 18.11 lakh) for 
establishment of First Referral Units (FRUs), to meet medical requirements of 
urban slum people especially for women and children. However, the municipal 
corporations failed to utilise these amounts. The Commissioner had asked 
(December 2008) the municipal corporations to refund the money to SHS 
account. Government in its reply stated  (June 2009) that out of Rs 7.01 crore 
pointed out by Audit, a sum of Rs 2.30 crore was refunded by the Municipal 
Corporations and the balance Rs 4.71 crore was outstanding. 
1.1.10 Deficiencies in  utilisation of funds 
Scrutiny revealed avoidable extra expenditure in procurement of vaccine  
(Rs 7.91 crore), procurement of bed nets (Rs 2.51 crore), ineligible payment of 
incentives to pregnant women (Rs 5.22 crore), wasteful expenditure in 
provision of free bus passes (Rs 0.52 crore) and diversion of NRHM funds of 
Rs 7.20 crore for other purposes, totalling to Rs 23.36 crore as per the 
following details.  
Nature of 
deficiency/ 
irregularity 
Audit findings 
Avoidable extra 
expenditure in 
procurement of 
JE Vaccine 
The CFW procured (April 2007) 17.50 lakh doses of Mouse Brain JE Vaccine from 
M/s Vabio Tech, Vietnam at Rs 38 per dose and another batch of 3.50 lakh doses 
from Central Research Institute, Kasauli at  Rs 55.42 per dose. Scrutiny of records 
revealed that a similar vaccine viz., SA-14-14-2A, of China make was available at 
Rs 12 per dose from M/s Hindusthan Latex Ltd. Further, it was observed from the 
technical committee recommendations that it was a single dose giving protection for 
10 years, whereas Mouse Brain JE Vaccine was costlier and has to be administered 
three times (1
st phase – 1 st and 2 nd dose in a fortnight and Booster dose – after six 
months in 2 nd phase). Thus, due to procuring Mouse Brain JE Vaccine instead of a 
similar and cheaper vaccine ignoring the recommendations of the technical committee, 
the department had to incur an extra expendi ture of Rs 7.91 crore in procurement of 
21 lakh doses of the vaccine. 
Avoidable extra 
expenditure in 
procurement of 
Mosquito Bed 
Nets 
 
As a preventive measure it was decided to procure mosquito bed nets. APHMHIDC 
was entrusted with the procurement task wh ich did not invite tenders and procured 
(November 2007) two lakh bed nets at a cost of Rs 240 per bed net. When tenders 
were called for the subsequent procurement in May 2008 the price per net was Rs 69 
which was far lower. Thus, due to non-adopting competitive bidding procedure an 
avoidable extra expenditure of Rs 2.51 crore was incurred.  
Audit also observed that the expenditure on procurement of bed nets had no approval 
of the Ministry (Point below also refers). 
Cases of avoidable 
extra expenditure/ 
ineligible payments/ 
wasteful 
expenditure and 
diversion of NRHM 
funds amounting to 
Rs 23.36 crore were 
noticed  

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 21
Incurring of 
expenditure 
without approval 
of NPCC
  
 
The State Government decided (May 2007) to procure 5 lakh mosquito bed nets for 
tribal population and the CFW requested the NPCC, MOHFW, GOI for allotment of 
Rs 10.15 crore in PIP for 2007-08 for meeting the expenditure. However, even prior 
to receipt of funds, the CFW released (May 2007) Rs 4.90 crore in favour of MD, 
APHMHIDC to procure 5 lakh mosquito bed nets from M/s APCO. Accordingly the 
MD, APHMHIDC procured 2 lakh bed nets @ Rs 240 per bed net (deficiencies in 
procurement enlisted above) and rendered a bi ll for Rs 4.90 crore. The expenditure of 
Rs 4.90 crore incurred in procurement of bed nets had no approval of the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, GOI. 
Ineligible 
payment of 
incentives 
To promote institutional deliveries among Rural BPL women, Government fixed 
(November 2005) cash incentive of Rs 700. Though this facility was not applicable to 
urban areas prior to April 2006, incentive was paid to 38,065 women in urban areas 
for this period resulting in ineligible paym ent of Rs 2.66 crore. Further, due to 
payment of incentive of Rs 700 instead of Rs 600 to 1,15,068 and 1,40,942 
beneficiaries during the years 2006-07 and 2007-08, there was an excess payment of 
Rs 2.56 crore to the beneficiaries in urban areas.   
Wasteful 
expenditure in 
provision of bus 
passes
 
For providing free travel passes for 3 round trips to 8 lakh BPL pregnant women at 
nearest health centres for health check-up /referral services, the department paid 
Rs 3.10 crore (Rs 1.55 crore each in the year 2006-07 and 2007-08). The cost of each 
bus pass was Rs 19.36. The passes were to be distributed through PHCs/Sub-centres 
to the beneficiaries. During 2007-08, out of 8.00 lakh passes given to 23 DHSs, 
distribution details for only 5,29,670 passes have been received by SHS.  The balance 
of 2,70,330 passes valued Rs 52.33 lakh remained undistributed with DHSs. Thus, the 
expenditure was rendered wasteful. Besides,  the benefit of bus passes was denied to 
the intended beneficiaries. Distribution details for 8.00 lakh passes issued during the 
year 2006-07 were not made available to Audit. Government did not give specific 
reply with regard to non-distribution of 2.70 lakh bus passes valuing Rs 52.33 lakh. 
Diversion of 
NRHM funds 
 
For preparation of Perspective Plan for th e districts for the entire Mission period 
2005-12, the CFW released (2006-07) Rs 2.30 crore to 23 DM&HOs at Rs 10 lakh 
per district. Audit observed that th e DM&HOs, without the approval of the 
Government, diverted the entire amount towards control of epidemic of Dengue and 
Chickungunia, the expenditure on which should have been met from out of the State 
funds. The diversion has resulted in non-preparation of the perspective plan for the 
districts with adverse implications on the assessment of year-wise data on the needs 
of the districts and the resources as well. (Para 1.1.7 also refers). Government in its 
reply sought to justify the diversion of NRHM funds stating that it was done in public 
interest to overcome health emergencies.  The contention is not acceptable as the 
expenditure on this account should have been met from the regular budget of the 
Health Department. The diversion has resulted in critical component of preparation of 
Perspective Plan of NRHM getting badly affected. 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 22
1.1.11 Monitoring 
NRHM guidelines prescribe formation of Monitoring and Planning Committees 
at State, District, Block and PHC level so as to ensure regular community base 
monitoring of activities and facilitate relevant inputs for planning. Audit 
observed the following deficiencies in monitoring of the activities under the 
programme at various levels: 
Item/subject and requirement Audit findings 
Computerisation and Management 
Information System 
NRHM guidelines envisaged development of 
computer based Management Information 
System (MIS) at DHS up to Block level and 
use of network for Integrated Disease 
Surveillance Project for furnishing the MIS 
report to Union Ministry on monthly basis 
through DHS/SHS. 
The Department provided (April 2003) from State funds 
computers to 23 DHSs and 1387 PHCs and these were 
connected through MIS network under Family Welfare and 
Health Information Management System (FHIMS) with an 
outlay of Rs 21.87 crore.  
Scrutiny revealed that the MIS remained defunct since June 
2005. Out of 1,387 computers procured, Computers were 
installed in 1,359 PHCs (January 2009). These were not used 
effectively for the intended purpose as the usage was restricted 
to data entry in 447 PHCs and generation of reports without 
networking in 273 PHCs. Further, 183 PHCs which were set 
up during the year 2004-05 i.e., before launch of the NRHM 
were not provided with computers (March 2009). Government 
did not offer specific remarks on the audit observation. 
Adequacy and Efficacy of Community 
Participation  
“Communitisation” of planning,  
implementation and monitoring through 
participation of representatives of PRIs, NGOs 
and community based organisations at each 
level is envisaged in NRHM. 
Health Monitoring and Planning Committee was not 
constituted at State level and no action was initiated to 
establish community based mon itoring through the people’s 
representatives, local body  representatives, NGOs and 
Community Based Organisations. 
It was observed that in none of the 24 CHCs, 48 PHCs, and 96 
Sub-centres were the planning and monitoring committees 
formed. 
Non-establishment of State Health System 
Resource Centre 
As per the NRHM guidelines a State Health System Resource 
Centre (SHSRC) was to be established in each State to provide 
technical support to the Mission with an annual corpus fund of 
Rupees one crore in a large State and Rs 50 lakh in a small 
State.  
Though an amount of Rs 1 crore was released by GOI during 
2007-08, the SHSRC had not been established as of March 
2009. 
Public Report on Health 
As per NRHM guidelines each district is 
required to publish a Public Report on Health 
annually.   
Out of 23 districts, one district (Vizianagaram) published 
reports annually.  
In the absence of public reports on health by the DHSs the 
information and direction of de velopment taking place in the 
districts was not readily available. 
The programme 
suffered from 
inadequate 
monitoring 
mechanism  

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 23
While accepting the above audit points, Government stated that efforts are 
being made for establishment of SHSRC, and DM & HOs are being instructed 
to ensure compliance on the audit observations. In the absence of adequate 
monitoring mechanism, the planning process did not receive regular inputs on 
the nature and direction of required future interventions. 
1.1.12 Constraints and achievements 
The basic constraint in underutilisation of funds during the period 2005-09 and 
under-achievement of the targets as explained by the Health, Medical and 
Family Welfare Department was that the programme was new. Despite this 
constraint the following were the achievements: 
• 70,700 Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs) have been selected 
and positioned in all the habitations across the State through the Gram 
Panchayat Health Committees to act as health resource person of first 
resort. Their presence ensures wide coverage of all Mother and Child 
Health (MCH) Services. 
• Out of 1,570 PHCs, 800 PHCs have been converted as 24 Hours MCH 
centres to provide round the clock services to promote institutional 
deliveries with basic emergency obstetric care. 
• Out of 151 CEMONC centers proposed to be established to provide life 
saving emergency care, 77 have been established and functioning. 
• There was increase in the institutional deliveries as a percentage of total 
deliveries from 83 per cent  to 91 per cent  during 2005-09 i.e., after 
introduction of NRHM. 
• Rogi Kalyan Samithis (RKS) have been established in 166 CHCs, 1,516 
PHCs and 19 district Hospitals (out of 167 CHCs, 1,570 PHCs and 19 
district Hospitals) which led to improvement in up-gradation of Health 
Services. 
• Village Health and Sanitation Committees (VHSC) have been established 
in all 21,916 villages with Panchayat Sarpanchas as Chairman and Ward 
members, Angan Wadi Workers and ASHAs to ensure optimal use of 
Health Services in the village. 
• Rural Emergency Health Transportation Scheme (108) was introduced to 
provide emergency health transportation of the public in the Rural areas of 
the State especially for emergencies relating to pregnant women, infant/ 
children. 802 Ambulances are in operation covering 1.3 to 1.5 lakh 
population. 
• Significant achievements have been made in administering Iron Folic Acid 
tablets to the pregnant women. 
• Hundred per cent  achievements were made in first immunization of 
Tetanus Toxoid and Pulse Polio. 
• During the four year period 2005-09 achievement of Cataract Operations 
was 100 per cent. 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 24
1.1.13 Conclusions 
The implementation of the NRHM in the State suffered mainly due to lack of 
comprehensive planning and absence of adequate monitoring mechanism. The 
programme was implemented in the St ate without conducting facility surveys 
and there was no Perspective Plan for the whole Mission period 2005-12. 
Twenty one to twenty nine per cent of the available funds remained unspent 
during 2005-09. No new Community Health Centers (CHCs) and Primary 
Health Centers (PHCs) were set up in the State after launch of the NRHM and 
the State Government did not pay adequate attention for creation/strengthening 
of infrastructure. The physical infrastructure available in the health centres was 
far below the desired level prescribed in Indian Public Health Standards and 
majority of the test checked CHCs and PHCs lacked basic infrastructure 
facilities. The Mobile Medical Units were functioning without essential 
equipment/Medical Officers in all the eight test checked districts. The 
implementation of healthcare services like institutional delivery care, antenatal 
care, 24x7 delivery services and the Medi cal Termination of Pregnancy etc. 
under RCH Programme was far from satisfactory. Functioning of Rogi Kalyan 
Samithis was deficient. There were shortfalls (up to 39 per cent ) in the 
immunization programme (second stage/10-16 years). The objective of 
converging all the National Disease Control Programmes remained unachieved. 
Implementation of the Programme by the NGOs was not adequately 
monitored. Due to lack of adequate monitoring mechanism the planning 
process did not receive regular inputs on the nature and direction of required 
future interventions. 
1.1.14 Recommendations 
¾ Facility surveys should be conducted to identify the gaps in infrastructure 
and human resources. 
¾ The number of Health Centres should be increased as per NRHM norms in 
all the districts so as to improve the accessibility of healthcare to rural and 
tribal population. 
¾ Government should take immediate steps to provide adequate infrastructure 
at all health centres as per IPHS norms. 
¾ Required number of doctors and other paramedical staff should be 
positioned in all the Health Centres fo r providing quality services to rural 
population. 
¾ Essential equipment and Medical Officers should be provided to all the 
Mobile Medical Units to make them fully functional for treatment and 
diagnosis.  
¾ Emphasis may be given to increased number of institutional deliveries to 
reduce maternal and infant mortality. All the eligible children should be 
covered under Immunization programme. 
¾ Rogi Kalyan Samithis need to be strengthened by constituting monitoring 
committees at the different levels of Health Centres. 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 25
¾ The Commissioner should take immediat e steps to reconcile the figures of 
releases by GOI and those credited by banks to SHS account and resolve 
the issue of short receipts in SHS account.  Similar exercise needs to be 
undertaken in respect of releases to the DHSs by SHS. 
¾ Government need to evaluate the prevalent rate of IMR, MMR and TFR to 
measure the impact of the programme. 
¾ Adequate monitoring mechanism may be evolved by ensuring community 
participation and generation of public reports on health.   
The above audit observations were discu ssed in the exit conference held in 
January 2009 with the Additional Director, NRHM and all the Programme 
Officers.  The recommendations of audit were accepted. 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 26
HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
1.2 Functioning of Osmania University 
Highlights 
Osmania University, established in the year 1918, manages 11 faculties encompassing 52 
departments, eight campus colleges, and 988 affiliated colleges besides Centre for 
Distance Education. Performance Audit of th e University revealed that Financial Rules 
were not complied with. Annual Reports were perfunctory. Certain courses offered by the 
University did not attract enough candidates leading to low enrolment. Little progress was 
seen in Research projects. Quality Control checks were not ensured in the execution of 
works. Estate management was poor. Hostels were overcrowded. Audit noticed deficiencies/ 
shortcomings in maintenance of cash books, handling of demand drafts, besides non/short 
collection of tuition fee, inadmissible/excess payments to teaching staff, etc. Physical 
verification of library books in the Central Li brary as well as Seminar libraries (for each 
department) was not done. Internal Audit was absent in the University. 
The University failed to adhere to the codal provisions while appointing 
staff to various posts including Finance Officer.   
[Paragraph 1.2.7] 
Financial management was deficient. Cash books were either not 
maintained or were not properly maintained as per the codal provisions.  
Audit noticed deficiencies/shortcomi ngs in handling of demand drafts 
besides non/short collection of various advances/dues (Rs 5.18 crore), 
inadmissible/excess payments (Rs 2.36 crore), etc. Advances amounting to 
Rs 66.86 lakh given to Principals and various departments/offices 
remained unadjusted in the books of the University. 
[Paragraphs 1.2.6.3 to 1.2.6.6] 
Annual Reports were perfunctory and did not include essential information 
which could be of use to the Academic Senate. It was observed that certain 
courses being offered were having low or nil enrolment.  
[Paragraphs 1.2.8.1 and 1.2.8.2] 
Courses offered by the Centre for Distance Education elicited poor 
response from the students indicating that they did not meet the needs of 
the industry/sectors having employment potential. The very objective of 
increasing the access to higher education was not achieved.  
[Paragraph 1.2.8.2] 
During the five-year period 2004-09 seven patents were obtained from 130 
research projects completed at an outlay of Rs 12.07 crore. No research 
activities were conducted in 17 departments. No control mechanism also 
existed for monitoring of the participation of the teaching staff in the 
international seminars.  
[Paragraphs 1.2.8.6, 1.2.8.8 and 1.2.12] 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 27
Estate management was deficient. The University neither maintained 
proper database of lands/estates nor had an effective survey mechanism 
to protect the lands from encroachments. The University also failed to 
evict the encroachers for several years. There were also cases of pilferage 
of electricity by the unauthorised dwellers and the University is saddled 
with the problem of avoidable payment of electricity consumption charges 
of about Rs 14 lakh per annum. A number of quarters continued to have 
defective/malfunctioning meters without immediate replacement. 
[Paragraphs 1.2.9.1 and 1.2.9.2] 
There was no assurance that works valued Rs 44.17 crore were properly 
executed as the quality control checks have not been exercised. Audit 
noticed several procedural irregularities in respect of works executed by 
the University Buildings Division. 
[Paragraph 1.2.10] 
There was overcrowding in hostels. Th e number of occupants was far in 
excess (up to 167 per cent) of the original capacity. 
[Paragraph 1.2.9.3] 
Internal Audit was absent in the University and as such there was no 
assurance to the University management that the Rules and procedures 
were complied with. Physical verification of stores and stock was not done 
in most of the departments. Physical verification in the Central as well as 
Seminar Libraries (for each department) was not done during the five-
year period 2004-09.  
[Paragraphs 1.2.11.1, 1.2.11.3 and 1.2.11.4] 
1.2.1 Introduction 
Osmania University (University) was established in the year 1918 and was 
governed up to 1958 by a Farman issued by H.E.H Nizam VII. Consequent on 
formation of State of Andhra Pradesh, the University was governed by 
Osmania University Act 1958. Subsequently, Act IX of 1959 was passed. Now 
the University is governed by the Andhra Pradesh Universities Act, 1991 (Act 
No. 4 of 1991) which came into force in January 1991. 
The jurisdiction of the University is spread over six districts 13 of the State. The 
University has 11 major faculties 14 encompassing 52 academic departments 
offering 88 Post-Graduate courses, ni ne engineering undergraduate courses 
and several diploma and certificate courses being pursued by 2.98 lakh 
students and 1,242 research scholars (April 2009). It has eight campus 
colleges including Colleges of Engineering and Technology (with autonomous 
status), five constituent colleges, six District Post-Graduate colleges and 988 
affiliated colleges under its management. The Centre for Distance Education 
(CDE) provides distance education in various courses. 
                                                
 
13 Hyderabad, Ranga Reddy, Nizamabad, Medak, Nalgonda and Mahboobnagar 
14 Arts, Social Sciences, Commerce, Business Management, Engineering, Law, Education, 
Science, Technology, Informatics and Oriental Languages 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 28
The goals of the University are (a) to provide for instruction and training in 
such branches of learning as it may think fit, (b) to make provisions for 
research extension programme and for the advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge, (c) to institute, take over and maintain colleges and hostels, (d) to 
establish, maintain and manage or to affiliate Autonomous  colleges and PG 
Centres in any part of the University area outside University campus, (e) to 
affiliate or recognise colleges and institutions and to withdraw such affiliation 
or recognition, (f) to fix fees and to demand and receive such fees and other 
charges as may be prescribed, (g) to supervise and control the conduct and 
discipline of the students of the Univer sity. As of March 2009, the University 
had 762 faculty and 3,272 administrative and other staff.  
1.2.2 Organisational set-up 
The University affairs are guided and conducted by a Vice Chancellor (VC), 
Executive Council (EC), Academic Senate and a Board of Studies. Joint 
Registrar (Finance) is the head of Finance wing. The Director of State Audit is 
the Statutory Auditor for the University. 
1.2.3 Audit objectives 
The objectives of the performance audit were to assess whether: 
• financial management resulted in economic, efficient and effective utilisation 
of resources; 
• administration of the University was effective; 
• academic programmes, distance education, research activities undertaken, 
etc. were effective in achieving the intended objectives of the University;  
• management of estates/assets and supporting services was adequate and 
fulfilled the needs of the University;  
• Building works were executed economically and buildings were put to 
proper and effective use; and 
• proper monitoring systems were in place and were effective. 
1.2.4 Audit criteria 
The following criteria were adopted for the performance audit: 
• Andhra Pradesh Universities Act, 1991, Orders of the University Grants 
Commission (UGC), Ministry of Human Resource Development, Minutes 
of Executive Council meetings and Financial Committee meetings; 
• Orders of the College Development Council (CDC), instructions contained 
in GOs issued from time to time, Budget Estimates, AP Financial Code, 
General Financial Rules and Treasury Rules; 
• Resolutions made in the Academic Senate/Executive Council and Board of 
Studies; 
• Lease agreements relating to estate and assets;  
• AP Public Works Departmental Code; and 
• Monitoring systems prescribed by the University/Government. 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 29
1.2.5 Scope and methodology of audit  
Audit of the University is conducted under the provisions of Section 14 of  
C & AG’s DPC Act, 1971. The performance audit of the University was 
conducted (February – May 2009) covering the period 2004-05 to 2008-09. 
Records of all the institutions such as Administrative Office, all the eight campus 
colleges including College of Engineering, all the five constituent colleges and 
100 (out of 988) affiliated colleges, CDE and various departments of the 
University viz., University Press, Central Library, Hostels, Health Centre, 
University Buildings Division and two
15 (out of eight) District PG colleges 
(Bhiknoor in Nizamabad District and Mahboobnagar) were test checked.   
An entry conference was conducted (February 2009) with the Additional 
Secretary, Higher Education, Officer on Special Duty, Registrar and Joint 
Registrar (Finance) of the University . Audit objectives and the methodology 
of audit were explained to them. An exit conference was also held (August 
2009) with the officers of the Univ ersity, AP State Council of Higher 
Education and the Government in which most of the audit observations were 
discussed and accepted by the officers of the University, AP State Council of 
Higher Education and the Government. The recommendations were also 
accepted. The replies of the University have been taken into account while 
arriving at the audit conclusions. The results of the Performance Audit review 
are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Audit findings 
1.2.6 Financial Management  
The University is mainly financed through block grants (Plan and Non-plan) 
(65 per cent ) from State Government, grants received from UGC and other 
Central Government organisations like All India Council for Technical 
Education (AICTE), Council for Scientif ic and Industrial Research (CSIR), 
Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), Indian Council for 
Agricultural Research (ICAR), Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), etc. 
The University also generates its own income by way of fees from students, 
sale of publications, sale of study material, processing fee, lease rents, etc. 
1.2.6.1 Budget and Expenditure 
The average
16 annual outlay of the University was Rs 130.67 crore. During the 
five year period 2004-05 to 2008-09, the University received Rs 654.36 crore 
towards block grant and other incomes, against which an amount of 
Rs 663.35crore17  was spent. About 23 per cent of the budget is being spent for 
meeting salaries of teaching faculty fo llowed by non-teaching staff salaries 
(24.59 per cent), pensions (19.39 per cent), contingencies (7.65 per cent) and 
maintenance (2.33 per cent). The year-wise and source-wise details of income 
and expenditure are given in Appendix-1.5. 
                                                 
15 being the oldest and the biggest among the District PG Colleges respectively 
16 For five-year period 2004-09 
17 The excess was met from internal sources i.e. from tuition fee, affiliation fee, examination 
fee, etc. 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 30
Audit noticed certain shortcomings in  preparation of Annual Accounts, in 
maintenance of cash books, system lapses in handling of demand drafts, and 
non/short collection of tuition fee and examination fee, inadmissible/excess 
payments, non-reconciliation with banks as discussed below: 
1.2.6.2 Non-preparation of Income and Expenditure Account and 
Balance Sheet 
The Annual Accounts of the University were prepared up to the year 2007-08 
and the audit of annual accounts by the Director of State Audit was completed 
up to the year 2007-08. It was observed that the preparation of annual accounts 
relating to the University finances contained deficiencies as discussed below: 
The University was preparing every year only a Receipts and Payments 
account, which was not covering all the receipts and payments in respect of 
university campus and constituent colleges, District PG centres and Directorates. 
In the absence of Income and Expenditure Account and Balance Sheet the 
details of pre-paid expenses and outstanding advances etc., could not be 
ascertained. 
Due to non-preparation of consolidated ac counts a true and fair picture of the 
University was not reflected in the annual accounts. 
 1.2.6.3  Maintenance of cash books 
The University was maintaining 121 bank accounts with various nationalised 
banks. The accounts were not computeris ed. Consequently the University was 
not in a position to readily know the balances at any point of time. Periodical 
reconciliation of cash book balances with banks was not being carried out. The 
maintenance of cash books in respect of  these accounts as  well as those 
relating to constituent colleges was deficient as detailed in Table-1.  
 Table-1 
Subject Audit Findings 
Postings on the 
Receipt side of the 
Cash book 
As per codal provisions, the DDs/Cash shou ld soon after their receipt be posted 
in the cash book and then sent to bank for credit. Scrutiny revealed that 
DDs/Cash received by the University were not being posted in the cash book 
immediately after their receipt; instead the receipts as reflected in the bank 
statements were taken as receipts and entered in the cash book, which indicated 
that the credits given by the banks to University accounts were accepted without 
verification and the University wholly re lied on the credits shown in the bank 
statements by the banks. Further, the receipt entries made based on bank 
statements lacked details as to the DD numbers, leaving little scope for 
identifying the nature of receipt entered in the cash book.   
Maintenance of 
multiple cash 
books 
Scrutiny revealed that different cash books were maintained for receipts and 
expenditure separately in CDE. Simila rly, Directorate of Admission wing was 
maintaining separate cash books for admission fee and establishment transactions. 
 
Cash books were 
either not 
maintained or were 
not properly 
maintained as per 
the codal provisions 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 31
However, where it was mandatory to main tain separate cash books, in Civil, 
Mechanical, Electronics and Communication Engineering, and Computer Science 
Engineering Departments of the University this stipulation was not being adhered 
to and as a result the transactions pertaining to UGC and non-UGC grants could 
not be segregated. 
Revalidation/ 
cancellation of 
time barred 
cheques 
The University Fund Account was showing (as of December 2008) 197 time 
barred cheques (cheques issued but not presented for payment) amounting to 
Rs 13.91 lakh which need to be revalid ated/cancelled. The earliest time barred 
cheque was pertaining to the period May 2003. Since the amounts of time barred 
cheques were not written back in the book s for a long period, the expenditure of 
the University got inflated to that extent. This indicates absence of proper 
mechanism for accountal of valuables. 
Closing of cash 
books 
As per the codal provisions, cash books should be closed regularly and at the end 
of each financial year. The cash books maintained by the Department of Bio-
chemistry, CDE, Model High School and Di rectorate of Infrastructure were not 
closed periodically. As a result, the ba lances available under the respective 
accounts were not ascertainable besides leaving no scope for reconciliation. 
Reconciliation As per codal provisions, the cash book figures should be reconciled with bank 
statements monthly and at the end of each year. Audit observed that reconciliation 
of cash book figures with bank statements was not being done in the Model High 
School, University Press and University Library. In the absence of reconciliation, 
the correctness or otherwise of the amounts credited to banks was not ensured. It 
was observed that University Account was showing a minus balance of Rs 2.22 
crore under the nomenclature ‘differences  in the opening balance between the 
cash book and bank pass book’ for years together. The University however, 
failed to get the discrepanc y reconciled and to make necessary adjustments to 
that extent. Also, in the absence of reconciliation, the grant-wise receipts and 
expenditure particulars viz., block grant, UGC, etc were not ascertainable and as 
such detection of frauds, defalcation, if any was also not possible. 
1.2.6.4 Delay in remittance of DDs/Cash into banks  
As per codal provisions, the DDs/Cash  should soon after their receipt be 
remitted into bank for credit. Test-check of the records of the various 
University colleges
18  and University Guest house revealed that DDs/Cash 
worth Rs 96.66 lakh received (2005-07) by them were remitted into banks 
with a delay ranging from 10 to 195 days. There were instances of returning of 
DDs by the various banks on the ground that those were time barred. Delay in 
sending the DDs/Cash to bank resulted in loss of interest to the University. 
                                                 
18  PG College, Secunderabad, Women’s College and Nizam College, Hyderabad and 
Academic Audit Cell 
Belated remittance 
of DDs/Cash into 
banks resulted in 
loss of interest 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 32
It was also observed that three DDs (of Rs 17,350 each) amounting to  
Rs 0.52 lakh remitted by the Director, District PG Colleges during December 
2000 were not yet credited (Reasons not known to the University) by the 
bank19 as of May 2009. The University failed to take action to realise the 
amounts for credit to the University Account.  
1.2.6.5  Excess/Inadmissible payments 
Scrutiny of establishment claims and payments made to various firms 
disclosed excess/inadmissible payments amounting to Rs 2.36 crore as 
detailed in Table-2.  
Table-2 
Subject Audit Findings 
Implementation 
of APUGC Scales, 
1996 
While implementing APUGC Scales 1996, 126 members of teaching 
staff who were already given the benefit of advance increments in 
APUGC Scales, 1986, for acquiring Ph. D qualification were again allowed 
advance increments for the second time. The UGC and APSCHE
20 also 
expressed concern at such lapses. There was excess payment of Rs 1.10 
crore towards advance increments (exc luding all allowances thereon) to 
the teaching staff up to March 2009  with a recurring similar excess 
payment of Rs 1.06 lakh per month. The excess payment needs to be 
recovered. 
Encashment of 
Earned Leave 
while in service 
All the vacation teaching staff were irregularly allowed encashment of 
earned leave (surrender leave) while in service although they were not 
eligible for such facility. This resu lted in inadmissible payment to the 
extent of Rs 1.26 crore. The University authorities admitted (May 2009) 
the lapse and stated that the encashmen t of earned leave to teachers while 
in service would be stopped.  
Non-deduction of 
TDS from 
advertisement 
firms 
Tax should be deducted at source (TDS) at the prescribed rates before 
making payments to the contractors/firms. However, the University in 
violation of these codal provisions made payments to the advertisement 
agencies during 2001-07 without however, deducting the TDS amounting 
to Rs 6.53 lakh.  
1.2.6.6  Non/short collection of University revenues/dues  
Scrutiny revealed that there was non/short realisation of University dues viz., 
tuition fee, mess charges, electricity and water consumption charges from 
students, reimbursement of tuition fee by the Government, outstanding advances 
from the University staff and recoupment of excess expenditure on research 
projects to the extent of Rs 5.18 crore as detailed in Table-3. 
                                                 
19 State Bank of Hyderabad, Osmania University branch 
20 Andhra Pradesh State Council of Higher Education 
Excess/inadmissible 
payments of Rs 2.36 
crore were made to 
University staff  
There was non/ 
short collection of 
various revenues/ 
dues amounting to 
Rs 5.18 crore by the 
University  

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 33
Table-3 
Subject Audit findings 
Collection of 
tuition fee from 
students 
 
Candidates seeking admission into various courses offered by the University 
were required to pay tuition fee as  prescribed by it on the due dates 
mentioned in the prospectus, along w ith late fee in case of delayed 
payments. It was observed that no effective mechanism existed in the 
University to collect the amount of tuition fee due from the students within 
the prescribed due dates and at least before they left the University. As of 
March 2009, the University was yet to collect Rs 99.41 lakh
21 from the 
students towards tution fee pertaining to the period 2003-09.  
Reimbursement 
of tuition fee by 
the Government 
Tuition fee in respect of Scheduled Ca ste (SC) and Scheduled Tribe (ST) 
students is to be reimbursed by the Social Welfare and Tribal Welfare 
Departments. However, there was no effective pursuance on the part of the 
University to get the tuition fee pertaining to SC/ST students reimbursed 
from the Government. As of March 2009 an amount of Rs 1.50 crore
22 was 
yet to be received by the University for the period 2003-09.  
Mess charges 
 
The University maintains hostels for its students and the Chief Warden is 
responsible for recovery of hostel dues from the University hostels’ inmates.  
All boarders are required to clear their monthly mess charges/bills regularly 
at the end of each academic course, and to clear all hostel dues. In respect of 
boarders getting scholarships, the dues  are to be settled on receipt of 
scholarships and from others, the dues are to be collected from individuals.  
Scrutiny revealed that, as of March 2009, an amount of Rs 3.19 crore being 
the mess charges for the years 2003-09 remained to be collected from the 
boarders.  
Remittance of 
electricity and 
water charges 
collected from 
boarders by the 
hostel authorities 
 
As per the existing orders of the University, the Hostel authorities are 
responsible for collection of electricity  and water charges from the boarders 
and remit the same to the University account. It was observed that although 
the electricity and water charges were being collected from the boarders, the 
amounts had not been remitted to the Un iversity account periodically by the 
wardens. The University also did not have any mechanism to ensure 
periodical collection of charges by the wardens in full and their correct 
remittance into University account even though the charges were 
periodically being borne by the University itself. As of March 2009, as 
against Rs 65.67 lakh an amount of Rs 32.99 lakh being the electricity and 
water charges collected from the boarders during the period 2003-09 was 
not yet remitted by the wardens/principals. 
                                                 
21 2003-04 (Rs 1.83 lakh), 2004-05 (Rs 3.35 lakh), 2005-06 (Rs 3.64 lakh), 2006-07 (Rs 4.92 
lakh),  2007-08 (Rs 40.63 lakh) and 2008-09 (Rs 45.04 lakh) 
22  2003-04 (Rs 12.93 lakh), 2004-05 (Rs 11.98 lakh), 2005-06 (Rs 10.95 lakh), 2006-07  
( Rs 12.58 lakh), 2007-08 (Rs 18.26 lakh) and 2008-09 (Rs 83.55 lakh) 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 34
Advances given 
to the University 
staff 
AP Financial Code prescribes that the advances given for specific purposes 
should be adjusted by detailed bills and vouchers as soon as possible and 
second advance could only be drawn when the first advance is adjusted.  
Scrutiny revealed that advances of Rs 66.86 lakh given to the University 
staff for specific purposes remained unadjusted in the books of five 
departments (
CDE, Examination wing, UGC grants wing, University 
Press and University Guest House)  of the University as of March 2009. 
The consolidated year-wise details are given below:  
Year 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 Total 
Outstanding 
advances  
(Rs in lakh) 
25.78 11.86 13.80 10.47 0.89 4.06 66.86 
It was observed that periodic review of advances was not conducted to 
ensure the receipt of goods/pending services. There was no evidence of any 
punitive action being taken by the University for non-submission of the 
adjustment bills by the staff. The absence of a system to monitor the 
settlement of outstanding advances is also indicative of poor internal controls. 
Recoupment of 
excess 
expenditure on 
projects  
The research projects conducted by the University are funded either by the 
UGC or by other organisations. The excess expenditure incurred by the 
University on these projects over and above the released grants were to be 
recouped by obtaining reimbursement from the funding agencies.  
It was observed that an excess expenditure (up to March 2009) of Rs 1.67 
crore incurred over and above the released grants for the UGC sponsored 
research projects was yet to be got regularised/recouped by the University as 
of April 2009. 
Further, the University failed to regularise/recoup the expenditure amounting 
to Rs 22.89 lakh incurred on various research projects (commenced prior to 
2003-04) over and above the grant released by 16 funding agencies.  
The University authorities accepted the audit point and assured to take 
necessary steps to get the amounts reimbursed from the funding agencies. 
1.2.6.7 Diversion of funds  
The following case of diversion of funds was noticed:  
  Table-4 
Stipulation of the grant Diversion of funds  
The State Government sanctioned an amount of 
Rs 3 crore being foundation grant to the 
University in 1962 with a stipulation that the 
University should utilise the interest accrued on 
the investment of the said grant for starting new 
PG courses in Science, Engineering & Technology 
and Social Sciences and for carrying out research 
activities, etc. 
The University diverted an amount of 
Rs 74.10 lakh being the accrued interest on 
investment for various purposes such as 
construction works, loans and advances to 
University staff, unforeseen expenditure, etc. 
which was contrary to the stipulation of the 
grant which was meant for unique purpose.  

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 35
1.2.6.8 National Service Scheme – Non-observance of guidelines  
National Service Scheme (NSS) was started to establish a meaningful linkage 
between the campus and the community, to understand the community in 
which they work, identify the needs and problems of the community and 
involve them in problem solving process, and to develop among them a sense 
of social and civic responsibility. NS S receives funds from Central and State 
Governments in the ratio 7:5 and also from HIV/AIDS/Special Camp 
programme advances, etc. GOI guidelines on NSS stipulate that the unspent 
balances at the end of each financial year would lapse. The colleges/research 
institutes which obtained NSS funds are required to submit accounts of funds 
received and UCs within a period of one month after closing of that financial 
year. Scrutiny revealed that there were unspent balances of Rs 73.59 lakh 
(March 2009) which accumulated over the five year period 2004-09. 
It was also noticed that (i) as of March 2009 UCs for Rs 12.64 lakh were still 
pending from 34 colleges being recipients of NSS funds for their activities 
during 2003-08 and (ii) NSS funds of Rs  12.68 lakh were diverted (September 
2004) towards purchase of a vehicle co ntrary to the instructions of NSS 
guidelines which prohibit purchase of vehicles from NSS grants. 
1.2.7 Establishment matters 
The deficiencies/shortcomings noticed in the administration of the University 
are discussed in the following Table-5.  
Table-5 
Nature of irregularity/ 
deficiency 
Audit findings 
Appointment of 
Finance Officer 
without obtaining 
panel from the 
Government in 
contravention of 
provisions of the Act  
Notwithstanding the stipulation in th e AP Universities Act that Finance 
Officer of the University should be from out of a panel of three officers 
obtained from Education Department of the State Government the 
University appointed one of the Joint Registrars as Finance Officer 
without obtaining the panel from the Government.   
PAC recommended (September 1991) in its sixth report of IX Legislative 
Assembly that a Finance Officer of the rank of Accountant General drawn 
from Indian Audit and Accounts Serv ices should be appointed by the 
University as was being done by the University of Hyderabad. However, 
this recommendation has not been implemented (March 2009) and the 
University Officer who was not drawn from Treasury and Accounts 
Department was continuing to hold the post of Finance Officer. The 
University replied (June 2009) that Government would be approached in 
the matter. 
NSS guidelines 
about utilisation of 
scheme funds and 
submission of UCs 
were not being 
adhered to   
The University 
failed to adhere to 
the codal provisions 
while appointing 
staff to various 
posts including 
Finance Officer  

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 36
Unauthorised 
deployment of 
employees on 
temporary basis 
 
According to the provisions of Section 3(2) no temporary appointments 
shall be made whether full time or part time without prior permission of 
Government. Scrutiny revealed that the University was making 
appointments of full time or part time employees on temporary basis 
without obtaining prior approval from the Government. During the period 
2004-09 an expenditure of Rs 9.93 crore (i.e. around Rs 2 crore on an 
average per year) was met towards wages/salaries of temporary staff from 
the block grant without any approval from the Government. 
Non-filling up of 
various posts of the 
University on regular 
basis 
 
Government (July 2004) ordered to dispense with the services of all 
retired officers/officials with immedi ate effect. Scrutiny revealed that the 
University has been appointing retired officers/officials in the University 
(colleges, Registrar’s Office, Universi ty Library, Health Centre, Estate 
Wing, etc.) on temporary/adhoc basis in contravention of the Government’s 
instructions.  
Excess deployment of 
non-teaching staff 
The Rangachari Committee appointed by the Government prescribed a 
ratio of 1:1.2 for teaching and non- teaching staff for the Universities. 
However, the University did not main tain the prescribed staff strength 
thereby violating the norms of the committee. It was observed that the 
existing ratio between teaching and non-teaching staff
23 was far in excess 
of the established norms as detailed below: 
Year 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 
Teaching 1106 1060 1008 981 762 
Non- teaching 3089 2988 3003 2918 2510 
Despite this, the University was continuing to recruit non-teaching staff on 
contract/part-time basis.  
1.2.8 Academic activities 
The main objectives of the University are to impart instructions in various 
branches of learning, undertake resear ch, disseminate knowledge, conduct 
examinations and grant and confer degrees, diplomas and other academic 
distinctions. The University offers gr aduate and post-graduate courses in 
campus colleges, Centre for Distance Education and affiliated colleges in 
different disciplines. The average cost of education per student per annum was 
Rs 0.75 lakh (2008-09)
24. The cost of imparting education for each discipline 
was not being computed. Deficiencies/shortcomings noticed in conduct of 
academic activities are discussed in Paras 1.2.8.1 to 1.2.8.9. 
                                                 
23 excluding the staff working on contract basis, part-time and as consultants 
24 Expenditure in 2008-09 (Rs 138.07 crore)/number of students (18,305) in campus, 
constituent colleges and district PG colleges 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 37
1.2.8.1 Annual Report  
 Section 22 of AP Universities Act, 1991, requires the University to prepare an 
Annual Report of the University and send it to the Academic Senate for its 
consideration and further transmission to the State Government for information 
along with a copy of their resolution thereon, if any. 
The Annual Report of the University is expected to provide essential 
information on important activities relating to academic and establishment 
matters.  But the Annual Reports of the University for the years covered by the 
review (2004-09) did not contain vital information on the number of students 
appeared, passed and the success rate of students in respect of many faculties 
both in degree and Post graduate courses offered by the University. The 
number of students who passed in the final year exams was also not shown for 
22 (out of 52) departments in the campus/constituent and affiliated colleges 
and Centre for Distance Education. The reports also do not depict a uniform 
pattern in the data in all the years. This was mainly attributable to lack of 
effective coordination between various departments and poor monitoring of 
various programmes/projects and other activities taken up by the University. 
The University while admitting the deficiencies assured that these would be 
taken care of while preparing the reports in future. 
Thus, the Annual Reports did not give comprehensive and complete information 
which could be of use to the Academic Senate to review the performance of 
the University. It was observed that cert ain courses being offered were having 
low or nil enrolment as discussed further in Para 1.2.8.2. 
1.2.8.2 Low enrolment of students against intake capacity 
University Campus Colleges 
The enrolment showed a decreasing trend in certain courses offered by the 
University in College of Engineering and the other Campus colleges as 
detailed in Table-6.  
 Table-6 
Number of students enrolled   Name of the course(s) No. of 
seats 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
M.E. Civil (Structure Engineering) 25 20 20 21 11 9 
M.E. Civil (HMWM) 25 - - - 1 3 
M.E. EEE (Drives & Control) 25 25 11 18 24 24 
M.E. Mech. (Automation &  Robotics) 18 14 11 15 13 14 
M.E. Mech. (Turbo Machinery) 25 25 20 13 20 22 
The enrolment in the above Engineering courses and in particular M.E. Civil 
(Structure Engineering) and in M.E. Civil (HMWM) was very poor in 2008-09. 
No remedial action was taken. The University attributed the low enrolment to 
the circumstances beyond their control. There is a need to increase the 
attractiveness of the courses offered so that more students would enroll. 
Annual Reports 
were perfunctory 
and did not include 
essential 
information  
The enrolment 
showed a declining 
trend in certain 
Engineering and 
non-technical 
courses offered by 
colleges/CDE 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 38
Centre for Distance Education  
The courses offered by the CDE elicited poor response and enrolment in certain 
courses was also gradually decreasing from year to year as detailed in Table-7.  
Table-7 
Name of the course 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09
B.A Maths &  Statistics Nil 114 90 68 69 
B.A Language 79 54 55 31 32 
Bioinformatics 8 13 Nil Nil NA 
M.A Philosophy 67 76 65 54 53 
M.A Sanskrit 88 66 53 53 47 
M.A Urdu 123 84 83 83 73 
M.A PPM 341 272 258 208 183 
M.A Psychology  241 113 86 86 85 
M.Com 3268 3270 2368 1992 1528 
M.Sc Maths 3278 2627 1500 1025 782 
PDC 77 57 18 18 NA 
The low enrolment of students in courses offered by CDE could be attributed 
to (i) the inadequate measures to revitalise the courses so as to attract better 
response for the courses offered; (ii) non-revision of syllabus of the courses 
offered by the University (while introducing the new PG courses also) so as to 
reflect the need of industry/sectors having huge employment potential; and 
(iii) absence of proper system to obtain feed back from the students to assess 
the utility of the courses in learning education through distance mode.  
Distance education basically caters to those sections of society who are not 
able to attend regular University courses. The University failed to attract the 
students over the years and the very objective of increasing the access to 
higher education was not being achieved. The infrastructure by way of 
buildings and faculty costs money. Low intake of students also indicates 
inadequate capacity utilisation and poor quality of teaching. The University 
needs to take suitable action to improve the intake of students. The University 
attributed the low enrolment to offering of the same courses through distance 
education by other universities of the State. There is a need to increase the 
attractiveness of the students. 
1.2.8.3 Training programmes by Academic Staff College 
The Academic Staff College (ASC) was established to help teaching faculty in 
the University/affiliated colleges to update their knowledge in their chosen 
field of expertise. It was observed that there was decreasing trend in the 
number of participants (up to 16 per cent) to the training programmes though 
there was increasing trend (up to 40 per cent) in the expenditure incurred on 
each participant during 2005-08 as detailed in Table-8. 
Courses offered by 
CDE did not reflect 
the need of 
industry/sectors 
having employment 
potential 
ASC failed to 
ensure optimum 
participation level 
per programme so 
as to achieve 
optimum utilisation 
of expenditure 
thereon 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 39
Table-8 
Expenditure incurred on 
training programmes 
(Rs) 
Year Number of 
courses 
conducted 
Required 
number of 
participants 
Actual number 
of participants 
(decrease %) 
Total Per trainee 
(increase %) 
2005-06 17 680        636   8,412         13  
2006-07 15 600 572 (10) 8,759 15 (15) 
2007-08 13 520 481 (16) 10,308 21 (40) 
2008-09 18 720 575 (20) 7,550 --- 
The ASC failed to ensure optimum participation level per programme so as to 
achieve optimum utilisation of expenditu re being incurred on each training 
programme.   
1.2.8.4 Declaration of PG results by CDE 
The University was to conduct examinations and announce results within a 
period of 15-60 days from the scheduled date of last paper of the examinations. 
It was however, observed that during 2003-08 the CDE released the results of 
different PG courses with delays ranging from 44 days to as high as 96 days as 
detailed in Table-9.  
 Table-9 
Year 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 
M.A., M.Com and M.Sc. 
Delay (days) 60 93 62 92 96 
M.B.A* 
Delay (days) - 44 64 75 90 
           *Course offered from 2004-05 
Long delays were noticed in release of  examination results by the CDE every 
year. The University attributed the delay to existence of double valuation 
system for answer scripts and assured th at necessary steps would be taken to 
reduce the delays in declaring results by engaging more number of examiners. 
1.2.8.5 Furnishing of incorrect information for performance evaluation 
The AP State Council for Higher Education (APSCHE) prescribed unified 
system of performance parameters for Un iversities to assess their functioning 
and evaluate performance of the Universities. It was observed that the 
University officials did not furnish (2007) correct information pertaining to 
hostel accommodation, participation of teaching staff in international seminars, 
number of teaching staff, Ph.Ds awarded, number of research papers published, 
number of seminars/conferences organised by the departments to APSCHE, 
obviously with a view to seeking to get good ranking in performance 
evaluation. The Committee which was constituted for prior verification of 
genuineness of information being submitted to APSCHE also failed to 
properly verify such information before submission to APSCHE. 
There were delays 
in releasing 
examination results 
by CDE  
Incorrect 
information was 
furnished to 
APSCHE with a 
view to seeking 
good ranking in 
performance 
evaluation 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 40
1.2.8.6 Research Projects 
The University has ‘Development Centr e’ and ‘UGC Affairs Centre’ which 
facilitate and monitor research programmes of various departments. The 
University receives research funding from various national agencies for its 
research activities. The University had 82 per cent of the faculty with Ph.D. as 
the highest qualification and four per cent of the faculty with M.Phil. During 
the period 2004-09, 130 research projects (57-UGC funded and 73 non-UGC 
funded) were completed after incurring a total expenditure of Rs 12.07 crore 
(UGC grant: Rs 2.78 crore and non-UGC gr ants: Rs 9.29 crore). Further, 89 
research projects were in progress with  a total outlay of Rs 14.89 crore. The 
following are the audit observations: 
• No research activities were conducted in 17 departments including Computer 
Science Engineering, ECE, etc.  
• While submitting UCs in respect of the completed projects the unutilised 
balances were to be refunded to the funding agencies. It was however, 
noticed that an amount of Rs 52.89 lakh was not yet refunded to the 
funding agencies; of which Rs 25.14 lakh in respect of 69 projects 
pertained to the years prior to 2003-04. The details of balances were also 
not available in the accounts. 
1.2.8.7 Delay in submission of Dissertations/theses  
As per the University norms the normal duration of M.Phil course is 36 
months for all candidates. For Ph.D. the du ration is five year s for all full time 
scholars and six years for part time scholars including extended period. Audit 
noticed that large number of scholars have not submitted their dissertation/ 
theses reports within even the extended time frame. The percentage of persons 
completing the M.Phil and Ph.D. programmes was low (17 per cent ) when 
compared to enrolment. Delayed submissi on of dissertations/theses resulted in 
delayed submission of reports and th e continued usage of the existing 
infrastructure facilities by the same set of students. There is a need to ensure 
that the students complete the M.Phil within the period of 36 months. Two 
advantages would accrue from such a measure. Firstly the existing infrastructure 
gets released for utilisation by new st udents. Secondly more students would 
undertake M.Phil courses once a trend is set that one does not have to spend 
more than three years for getting an M.Phil qualification. The University did 
not furnish specific reasons for the delay in submission of dissertations/theses. 
However, the University stated that time frame has since been fixed from the 
current year. 
1.2.8.8 Participation of teaching st aff in the international seminars 
The University was to nominate the teaching staff for various international 
seminars with the assistance of UGC and various funding agencies. It was 
observed that the University had no pre-defined policy to depute personnel to 
international seminars especially with regard to the eligibility criteria for the 
purpose such as relevance to the field of study, minimum leftover service after 
attending the seminar. The University had no proper mechanism to monitor 
the foreign travel of personnel attending the international seminars. The 
During the five year 
period 130 research 
projects were 
completed at an 
outlay of  
Rs 12.07 crore. No 
research activities 
were conducted in 
as many as 17 
departments  Delayed submission 
of dissertations/ 
theses has adverse 
implications due to 
continued usage of 
infrastructural 
facilities by the 
same set of students 
No control 
mechanism existed 
for monitoring 
participation of the 
teaching staff in the 
international 
seminars 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 41
University did not maintain any database in this regard. In the absence of 
proper mechanism the number of international seminars a person is entitled to 
and has actually attended in his official tenure could not be verified. The 
University could not ensure that the same official would not visit the same 
country repeatedly.  
The University while furnishing the information to Audit stated that 14 
teaching officials attended (2006-07) international seminars whereas while 
furnishing the details in this regard to APSCHE for purpose of assessing the 
performance of the University it was stated  as 111. This also indicates lack of 
data consistency due to improper monitoring mechanism of the University in 
this regard.  
1.2.8.9 Equipment not returned by Researchers 
One of the conditions of the grants (including UGC grant) was that the 
equipment used on research projects shou ld be returned to the laboratories 
after completion of the projects for their utilisation on the new research 
projects. Scrutiny revealed that there was no centralised database containing 
the details of equipment being procured under different projects, the status of 
the equipment, its life time and its utility. No entries were made in the stock 
registers of the respective departments in respect of equipment procured by the 
researchers.  
A test-check of three departments (Botany, Microbiology and Physics) 
revealed that equipment worth Rs 35.38 lakh procured by the researchers was 
not yet returned to the laboratories as of April 2009 even after completion of 
the research projects. This indicates ineffective monitoring of research 
equipment by the University. 
1.2.9 Estate management  and support services 
Estate wing is headed by Estate Officer who is inter alia responsible for the 
upkeep/control of the University properties. For effective estate management 
the estate wing is required to maintain database regarding ownership details of 
lands/assets of the University, leases of  lands, collection of rentals, etc. The 
University was allotted 1,627 acres of land by the then Nizam Government; of 
which the University sold 28.21 acres of land and leased out an extent of 
181.72 acres of land to 23 organisations/agencies for various educational 
activities. Besides, three acres of land was allotted to Municipal Corporation 
of Hyderabad for road widening.  
1.2.9.1 Poor Estate management  
Audit observed the following deficiencies/shortcomings with regard to the 
Estate management: 
• The University was not maintaining any proper database relating to its 
lands/Estates. In respect of the lands l eased out to 17 agencies (out of 23 
agencies) the University did not execute lease agreements.  
There was no 
proper database/ 
documentation 
regarding 
University lands/ 
estate. Estate 
management was 
poor 
Equipment worth 
Rs 35.38 lakh was 
not returned by 
researchers even 
after completion of 
the projects 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 42
• The University is in a prime location and the value of land is high. There 
was no system of regular inspection of the lands belonging to the 
University to prevent encroachments from coming up. Consequently, there 
were huge encroachments of the University lands and about 1,200 semi-
permanent dwelling units have sprouted in the University area.  
• Due to failure of the University to safeguard its lands, certain lands 
encroached upon had to be regularised by the Government. While doing so 
Government promised to the University that alternative land to the extent 
of 35.8 acres at another place (Gachibowli) would be allotted to the 
University but possession was yet to be given as of May 2009.  
• The nominal rent fixed for lands leased out were not being revised for 
several decades resulting in undue benefit to these parties and the University 
was deprived of the much needed add itional revenue. Most of the lease 
periods ranged from 25 years to 99 years with nominal lease rent of Rs 1 per 
annum. The University replied that action would be taken to revise the lease 
agreements by taking legal opinion.  
1.2.9.2 Power consumpt ion of the University 
The following observations are made: 
• The University was provided with 5 High Tension (HT) power connections 
with a contracted minimum demand (CMD) ranging from 250 to 750 
KVA @ Rs 195 per KVA from AP Central Power Distribution Company 
Limited (APCPDCL) with a contractual agreement that consumption 
charges would be the maximum demand recorded during a particular 
month or 80 per cent of CMD which ever is high. 
It was observed that even though the consumption of power by the 
University was far less
25 than the CMD, it did not get the CMD reduced. 
Failure to do so resulted in the University incurring avoidable payment of 
Rs 67.91 lakh towards electricity consumption charges during 2004-09 
with a recurring liability of about Rs 13.58 lakh every year. 
• As discussed in Para 1.2.9.1 supra 
encroachers constructed about 1200 semi-
permanent dwelling units which spread over 
the University area. The encroachers were 
illegally drawing electricity for their 
household purposes from the University 
HT lines. As per the Consultant who was 
engaged by the University as an advisor on 
electricity consumption, the electricity 
charges approximately amounting to Rs 1.50 
lakh per month were being paid by the 
University towards electricity consumption 
of the encroachers.  
                                                
 
25 ranging from 90 KVA to 387 KVA 
There was 
avoidable 
expenditure of  
Rs 67.91 lakh 
during 2004-09 
(with similar 
recurring 
expenditure of 
about 
Rs 14 lakh every 
year) on power 
consumption 
charges 
The University 
failed to prevent 
electricity pilferage 
thereby incurring a 
recurring monthly 
liability of Rs 1.50 
lakh  


Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 43
• The University had 398 staff quarters in its campus and each quarter has 
a separate electric connection. Of these, 164 quarters were with defective/ 
malfunctioning meters. The University failed to immediately replace 
them. These quarters are being charged on adhoc basis resulting in the 
extra consumption being borne by the University. 
The above deficiencies contributed to considerable loss of revenue to the 
University.  
1.2.9.3 Inadequate hostel accommodation 
Hostel accommodation was provided to the campus students of the University. 
The maintenance of hostel buildings is  done by the University Buildings 
Division. Scrutiny showed that there was overcrowding in hostels (as of May 
2009) as the number of occupants was far in excess (up to 167 per cent) of the 
original capacity as detailed in Table-10.  
 Table-10 
Name of the Hostel Original 
Capacity 
Occupancy  Excess 
(Percentage) 
Overcrowding in University Women’s 
Hostel 
Hostel-A 297 466 169   (57) 
Hostel-B 320 595 275   (86) 
Hostel-C 254 465 211   (83) 
Hostel-D 274 566 292 (107) 
Hostel-E-II 345 521 176   (51) 
Hostel-E-I 268 398 130   (49) 
B.Ed Hostel 119 179 60   (50) 
New PG Hostel 108 198 90   (83) 
 
NRSH  168 216 48   (29)  
Old PG Hostel 90 226 136 (151) 
Manjira 102 212 110 (108) 
CHW-I 449 787 338   (75) 
CHW-II 378 747 369   (98) 
CHW-III 320 717 397 (124) 
Koti College 116 310 194 (167) 
Nizam College 208 507 299 (144) 
PGC, Secunderabad 180 225 45   (25) 
  
Overcrowding of hostels is neither conducive for study nor for hygienic living 
and the existing infrastructure had to be shared by more number of students.  
Further, there were also press reports stating that there were many cases of 
unauthorised persons staying in both men and women’s hostels since a long 
time adding to the woes of the students. There was no mechanism to prevent 
unauthorised persons staying in hostels. The University accepted the audit 
point and attributed the overcrowding to increase in number of boarders every 
year. The University also stated that steps were being taken to extend the 
existing hostels and to construct new hostels. 
Students were 
accommodated in 
the hostels far 
beyond their 
original capacities 
exceeding up to 167 
per cent 
164 out of 398 
quarters were with 
defective/ 
malfunctioning 
meters without 
immediate 
replacement 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 44
1.2.9.4 University Printing Press 
The University had its own Printing Press with the strength of 88 working 
staff including 48 technical staff. The Un iversity was however, outsourcing its 
printing works on the plea that the University Press was not being well 
equipped with modern state of the art technology. It was observed that the 
various printing works including printing of answer sheets were got executed  
(2003-08) through private printing units incurring an expenditure of Rs 7.48 
crore26.  
The Committee constituted by the University  to evaluate the printing cost of 
answer sheets opined (September 2006) that the University could save at least 
Rs 15 lakh per annum if the printing process was entrusted to University 
Printing Press itself by modernising it with one-time expenditure of about  
Rs 60 lakh which would be off-set within four years. Although it was decided 
(September 2008) to purchase new machinery, it had not been procured as of 
August 2009 and the University did not implement the suggestions of the 
Committee. Instead, the University was continuing the outsourcing of its 
printing works while restricting the engagement of the establishment of the 
Press (with annual expenditure of Rs one  crore on salaries and contingencies) 
to the minor works only. The University authorities accepted the audit point 
and assured modernisation of the Press.
 
1.2.10 University Buildings Division  
The University has a Buildings Division for executing construction works and 
maintenance works of existing colleges and administrative buildings, hostels, 
residential quarters and internal roads, etc. Audit noticed the following 
deficiencies in the construc tion activities of the University Buildings Division 
as detailed in Table-11.  
 Table-11 
Item/Subject Audit Findings 
Quality control In order to ensure good quality of wo rks, Government directed (November 
2006) all the authorities of the Univer sities to provide all the information 
relating to estimates, tender agreements  and other relevant information/data 
available with them or available with other persons in this regard to the 
Quality Control Wing of the respective area of Roads & Buildings (R&B) 
Department as well as to Advisor to Government, R&B Department, by 
transferring the amount at 0.5 per cent  of the University estimates to the 
Quality Control Circle of R&B Department. It was however, noticed that, 
during the five-year period 2004-09, the University authorities had not 
referred any work to quality control wing of R&B Department. Thus, there 
was no assurance that the works valued Rs 44.17 crore were properly 
executed as Quality control checks were not ensured by the University. 
                                                 
262003-04 (Rs 0.67 crore), 2004-05 (Rs 1 crore) , 2005-06 (Rs 1.10 crore), 2006-07 (Rs 1.63 
crore) and 2007-08 (Rs 3.08 crore) 
The University 
failed to undertake 
modernisation of its 
Printing Press while 
the printing works 
were outsourced. 
This resulted in the 
printing 
establishment (at an 
annual outlay of  
Rs 1 crore) being 
kept almost idle  
There was no 
assurance that 
works valued  
Rs 44.17 crore were 
properly executed 
as quality control 
checks were not 
ensured by the 
University 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 45
Incorrect preparation 
of estimates 
It was noticed that the University Bu ildings Division adopted incorrect and 
rates higher than those mentioned in Standard Schedule of Rates (SSRs) 
while preparing estimates for the cons truction works of Central Facilities 
Complex building (Estimated cost: Rs 3.50 crore) and the construction 
works of Girls Hostel building for Engineering and Technology students 
(Estimated cost: Rs 3.28 crore) at University Campus and the payment to 
the contractors was also made accordingly. Thus, an excess expenditure of 
Rs 6.20 lakh was incurred towards construction works due to adoption of 
rates higher than SSRs while preparing estimates as detailed in Appendix-1.6
. 
Statutory violations VAT @ 4 per cent  and TDS @ 2.24 per cent  was not recovered before 
making of payment to the contractors resulting in loss to the Government 
and consequent undue benefit to the contractors. The amount involved was 
Rs 6.24 lakh. 
As per Sales Tax Act 19 of 2000, Sales Tax (12 per cent up to April 2005 
and 12.5 per cent thereafter) should be collected on the cost of tender forms 
collected from the contractors. It was observed that Sales Tax at the 
prescribed rates was not collected from the contractors during the period 
2003-08 to the extent of Rs 3.57 lakh which resulted in loss of revenue to 
the Government.  
1.2.11 Monitoring systems 
1.2.11.1 Absence of Internal Audit 
Internal Audit examines and evaluates the level of compliance with the 
departmental rules and procedures and provides reasonable assurance to the 
management on the adequacy of the existing internal controls. The primary 
function of Internal Audit is to ensure accuracy of the accounts and correct 
statement of financial transactions of the University. 
It was observed that though an Internal Audit Wing existed with a complement 
of three staff members headed by Deputy Registrar, internal audit of none of 
the departments of the University was conducted during the five-year period 
2004-09. In the absence of Internal Audit, there was no assurance to the 
University management that the rules and procedures were being complied 
with by various departments of the University. 
1.2.11.2 Absence of follow-up of NAAC recommendations  
The National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) in its peer report 
observed (February 2008) that there had been institutional weaknesses like 
absence of inter-disciplinary teaching and research programmes, lack of 
specific efforts to bring about national visibility of faculty and their research 
outputs, limited upkeep and maintenance of student laboratories and their 
amenities and lack of effective use of IT enabled teaching and learning 
services available in the University, etc.  It also advised that (i) the Tutor-ward 
system that exists in the University needs to be strengthened, (ii) training to be 
No internal audit 
was conducted in 
the departments of 
the University 
during 2004-09 
Necessary follow-up 
action on the NAAC 
recommendations 
was not taken by 
the University 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 46
provided to the faculty to enable them to use diverse teaching methods,  
(iii) augment resources through consultancy, (iv) ICT based automation of 
Administration, Finance and Examination divisions need to be expedited as a 
total solution, etc. Audit observed that necessary follow-up action on the 
recommendation of the Committee was not yet taken as of May 2009. 
1.2.11.3 Stores and Stock 
Scrutiny of stock registers relating to stores revealed the following deficiencies: 
• The maintenance of Stores and Stock accounts in the University was very 
poor. The stock Registers were not being regularly maintained and updated 
periodically. Many items were not even being entered in the stock registers. 
The University Guest House did not maintain any stock registers for stores 
during the five-year period 2004-09. 
• Physical verification of stores, stoc k, furniture and equipment was not 
conducted in most of the departments in the University. 
• Idle equipment (Computers and peripherals) pertaining to the University 
Library and damaged/old furniture were dumped in Chief Warden’s Office 
and Guest House. 
The University accepted the audit point and assured to carry out necessary 
measures for periodical physical verificat ion of stock and stores and disposal 
of unserviceable articles. 
1.2.11.4 Non-conducting of physical verification of library books 
The University has a Centralised Library to cater to the needs of the students 
and faculty. During the period 2007-08 an expenditure of Rs 30.30 lakh was 
incurred towards purchase of books and publications for the Library. The 
following observations are made: 
• The amount spent on purchase of library books when compared to the total 
expenditure of the University was very meagre. The University was 
incurring only 0.22 per cent (on an average) of its expenditure on 
maintenance of the Library. While the cost of education per student in the 
University was more than Rs 75,000 per annum, the cost of providing 
library facilities per student stood at Rs 165 per annum.  
• The Library had no proper system of monitoring the issue of the library 
books to students and the faculty and their prompt return; thereby the 
faculty and the students were continuing to retain the books borrowed 
from the Library for years together.  
• The physical verification of Seminar Libraries (for each department) of the 
University was not conducted periodically. Even though there were 
standing instructions from the Government that complete physical 
verification was to be done in the a lternative years (where loss of books 
was more than five out of every 1,000 books) sample physical verification 
only was done in the alternative years in the Central Library. 
Maintenance of 
stores and stock 
accounts was poor. 
Physical 
verification of 
stores and stock 
was not done in 
most of the 
departments of the 
University 
The University 
spent a meagre 
amount on 
providing library 
facilities to the 
students. Physical 
verification of 
library books was 
not done at 
periodical intervals 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 47
Thus, there was no assurance that, in the absence of physical verification, 
there was no loss/theft of valuable books. 
1.2.11.5 Huge pendency of post-audit objections 
As per Annual Audit Report of the Director of State Audit for the year 2005-06, 
5,515 audit objections were pending for period since 1995-96 and up to 2005-06. 
Besides, 194 Inspection Report (IR) paras
27 of the Accountant General were 
also outstanding as of March 2009. This indicated non-responsiveness of the 
University for taking remedial action on the objections raised and less of 
opportunity for improving financial discipline.  
1.2.12  Constraints and achievements  
The block grant released by the State Government is meant for meeting the 
expenditure on account of salaries, pensi on and contingencies.  In the recent 
past the State Government has not released the budgeted/sanctioned block 
grant in full. The block grant released is not sufficient even to meet the 
expenditure on account of salaries resu lting in the University having to tap 
internal sources to meet this expenditure. The following were the achievements 
of the University: 
• The Osmania University was the first University in the State to go in for 
accredition of NAAC in the year 2001 and achieve the highest rating of 
five stars. It went in for reaccred ition this year and was accorded the 
highest A grade by NAAC. 
• The campus colleges of Engineering and Technology were conferred with 
Autonomous status. The constituent colleges viz., College for Women, 
Nizam college and PG College, Secunderabad were also conferred with 
autonomous status. The faculty of Management has been recognised by the 
Business Today as one of the best in terms of number of Ph.Ds awarded. 
• Grant of Centre for Advanced Study (CAS) at national level was awarded 
to Department of Communication and Journalism, (C&J) the first ever 
Department of C&J in the country to have been conferred with CAS status. 
This is the fifth department in the University being conferred with CAS 
status. The other four being Political Science, Genetics, Astronomy and 
Linguistics. 
• The College for Women and Nizam College were granted “College with 
potential for excellence status”. Centre of excellence in Microwave 
Engineering at University College of Engineering was launched. Value 
Added courses in Medical Transcripti on, Health Care and Banking were 
launched.   
• The University could attract more than 800 foreign students from 65 
countries to join different courses. On account of research activities 
conducted in various departments, out of 130 projects completed at an 
outlay of Rs 12.07 crore the University generated seven patents (during the 
review period). 
                                                
 
27up to 2003-04: 120, 2004-05: 10; 2005-06: 41 and 2006-07: 23 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 48
• More than 90 per cent students are from rural areas, 80 per cent belong to 
SC, ST, OBC and minorities who are given exemption and are in receipt of 
scholarships. The release of scholarsh ips by Government is not regular 
leading to huge amounts of tuition fee and mess charges remaining to be 
received by the University.  
• The NSS wing of the University has the largest number of NSS volunteers 
(60,505) from its colleges. The NSS unit of the University bagged the 
Indira Gandhi National NSS award for its outstanding performance and 
contribution to nation building. 
• The University received INTACH Heritage awards for Arts College, 
Women’s college Darbar Hall and other University buildings. 
1.2.13 Conclusions 
The University failed to adhere to the codal provisions while appointing 
various posts of staff including the Fina nce Officer. Financial management in 
the University was deficient. Cash books were either not maintained or were 
not properly maintained by the University as well as the campus/constituent 
colleges. There was no assurance that all demand drafts remitted into banks 
were credited to University account. Coll ection of prescribed tuition fees and 
examination fees was not ensured. Excess/inadmissible payments were made to 
University teaching staff in implementation of UGC scales. Advances given to 
Principals and various departmental officers of the University were 
outstanding due to non-adjustment. The Finance Branch failed to ensure 
correct remittances of amounts due to University account by Colleges and 
Hostels. Annual Reports were perfuncto ry and did not highlight areas of 
concern. Certain courses conducted by the University did not attract enough 
candidates leading to low enrolment. There was no assurance that works were 
properly executed as no Quality control checks were ensured by the University 
Buildings Division. Estate management was poor. The University failed to 
protect its lands from encroachers. There were cases of pilferage of electricity 
due to which the University is saddled with the problem of unnecessary 
payment of electricity charges. Physical  verification of stores and stock was 
not carried out in most of the Departments. Physical verification of the library 
books in the Central Library/Seminar Libraries was also not done. Internal 
audit of the University departments was not conducted during the five-year 
period 2004-09 and as such there was no assurance to the University 
management that the rules and procedures were complied with by the 
departments. 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 49
1.2.14 Recommendations 
¾ Appointment of Finance Officer as stipulated in AP Universities Act and 
also keeping in view the recommendations of Public Accounts Committee 
should be considered. 
¾ The University should ensure proper maintenance of computerised cash 
books by all the departments/constituent colleges. The receipts and 
expenditure transactions should be invariably posted in the same cash 
book. Reconciliation with bank statements should be carried out invariably 
for all bank accounts. Delays in remittance of Demand Drafts should be 
avoided. 
¾ The annual accounts should be computer ised with income and expenditure 
account and balance sheet. 
¾ Annual Reports prepared should cont ain comprehensive and complete 
information which could be of use to Academic Senate. The University 
should review and identify new course s that would appeal to prospective 
students. 
¾ The Centre for Distance Education should assess the reasons for low 
enrolment and take suitable steps for improvement. 
¾ Outstanding advances should be adjusted promptly before the close of the 
financial year.  
¾ The University Buildings Division should ensure quality control checks in 
execution of works. 
¾ The University lands should be safeguarded from encroachments by 
providing proper security personnel and executing pucka lease agreements 
in case of leased lands to avoid litigation. The land records and its usage 
should also be computerised. 
¾ The University should take immediate steps for providing sufficient 
accommodation to all the boarders. 
¾ The Buildings Division (Electrical wing) of the University should check 
theft of electricity to avoid payment of electricity charges. 
¾ Physical verification of library books and stores and stock should be 
carried out periodically and action taken to dispose off old/obsolete books/ 
stores items. 
The above observations were reported to  Government in June 2009; reply had 
not been received (August 2009). 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 50
IRRIGATION AND COMMAND AREA DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT (Projects Wing) 
1.3 Third Party Quality Control/Assurance (TPQC) in 
execution of irrigation projects 
1.3.1 Introduction 
The I&CAD Department has a separate quality control wing. In November 
2004, Government decided to engage outside agencies for checking the quality 
of irrigation projects as a part of Third Party Quality Control/Assurance 
(TPQC) arrangement. The department entrusted (October 2005 to March 2008) 
41 TPQC packages worth Rs 167.97 crore
28 to 10 firms to cover 232 package 
works worth Rs 33,800.29 crore entrusted on Engineering, Procurement and 
Construction (EPC) turnkey basis. The TPQC works were entrusted by the 
Superintending Engineers of the respective circles after evaluation of the bids 
submitted by the empanelled firms for each package by a committee 
comprising (1) Commissioner, Commissionerate of tenders (2) Engineer in 
Chief (Irrigation) (3) Deputy Financial Advisor, Finance (W&P) and (4) Chief 
Engineer of concerned project. 
Audit conducted a test-check of TPQC system covering 14 TPQC packages
29 
involving an expenditure of Rs 46.35 crore by scrutinising records of Secretary, 
I&CAD Department (Reforms), four Superintending Engineers30 covering four 
packages31 and Executive Engineer, Special Designs Division No.4, Hyderabad 
(identified as centralised division for making payments to all TPQC firms) 
(November 2008). Replies of the Government have been taken into account 
while finalising the report. The findi ngs of audit are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
Audit findings 
1.3.2 Empanelment 
1.3.2.1 Award of marks 
The empanelment of 18 firms, which were selected in two phases viz., 
expression of interest and tenderi ng process, took place through the 
Government Orders of June 2005. In the first phase (November 2004) 16 out 
of 32 firms were selected and two firm s were selected in the second phase 
(May 2005). Seven firms which got less than 60 marks in the first phase were 
included in the empanelled list and there was no cut off mark. A firm
32, which 
                                                 
28 Expenditure to end of November 2008 was Rs 113.33 crore 
29 Package No(s). 2, 3, 8, 10, 16, 23, 24, 27, 32, 36, 37, TPQC-1, AVRHNSS and GLIP 
selected on the basis of high agreement values and covering all the 10 TPQC agencies 
engaged by the Government 
30  AMRP Circle No. II, G.V. Gudem, Nalgonda; Pulichintala Project Circle, Jaggiahpet; 
Construction circle, Ongole; TGP Circle, Srikalahasthi 
31 Package Nos. 3 (Rs 1.96 crore), 8 (Rs 3.58 crore), 10 (Rs 1.43 crore) and 24 (Rs 5.71 crore) 
32 TUV Suddeutschland India 
The whole process 
of empanelment 
was itself faulty  

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 51
got ‘zero’ marks for senior and junior level technical personnel, in-house 
testing and field testing facilities, got only 3 marks (for Non-destructive 
testing equipment facility) in the first phase. The firm however, got 76 marks 
in the second phase against the cut off marks of 70 due to change in 
parameters. The firm got 10 marks each for track record of proven experience 
in similar field, association with institutions of the standards of IIT, minimum 
5 works of similar nature worth Rs 50 crore and annual turnover of Rs 5 crore. 
It also got 22.5 marks for manpower. It got 14 marks for some other parameters.  
The Government replied (August 2009) that the firm
32 did not furnish the 
relevant documents at the time of “expression of interest” but produced it in 
the second phase viz., tendering and accordingly got qualified. The reply is 
silent whether the non-submission of documents was due to non-possession of 
the required qualification prescribed for the first phase. The reply also 
overlooks the fact that the parameters  were significantly changed which 
enabled the party to get such a high rating. 
1.3.2.2 Parameters for selection of firms 
The Government stipulated availability of technical personnel at senior and 
junior level, test facilities (in-house, field and non-destructive testing 
equipment), previous experience in sim ilar quality contract works as basic 
parameters for selection of firms for em panelment in the first phase. It was, 
however, observed that no minimum marks were stipulated for each parameter 
separately leading to 16 out of the 18 firms being empanelled in the first phase. 
The following deficiencies were also noticed: 
Parameter Audit findings 
Availability of junior level 
technical personnel with QC 
experience 
Two firms 33 , which did not possess junior level technical 
personnel with quality control experience, were included in the 
list of empanelled firms. 
Availability of field testing 
facilities 
Four firms34, which did not have any field testing facilities, were 
also included in the list of empanelled firms. Out of these four 
firms, seven TPQC packages valuing Rs 26.12 crore dealing with 
quality control aspects pertaining to 36 EPC packages (value: 
Rs 5,229.29 crore) were entrusted to GHERZI Eastern limited. 
Availability of Non-Destructive 
Testing (NDT) Equipment 
Six firms35, which did not have Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) 
equipment like Rebound hammers, Ultrasonic equipment, 
Nuclear gauges, Magnetic crack detectors, etc. were empanelled.  
Out of these six, GHERZI Eastern limited itself was entrusted 
with seven TPQC packages as mentioned above against item 2. 
                                                 
33 Aarvee associates & architects and Wilbur Smith associates private limited 
34 GHERZI Eastern limited, MDP consultants, Tahal consulting engineers and Ernico (India) 
private limited 
35 Engineers India Limited, C.C. Patel and Associates private limited, Aarvee associates and 
architects, GHERZI Eastern limited, Ernico (India) private limited and NAG infrastructure 
consulting engineers private limited 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 52
Previous experience in similar 
quality control works 
Three firms 36, which did not have any previous experience in 
similar quality contract works, were also empanelled. This was 
also in contravention of the clauses 1(a) and 1(c) of the notice 
inviting pre-qualification bids for empanelment. One firm (NAC) 
was entrusted with two TPQC packages valuing Rs 6.36 crore 
pertaining to seven EPC packages (Value: Rs 1,117.30 crore). 
Association with professors of 
accredited institutions of the 
standard of IIT 
No marks were stipulated for this parameter in the first phase.  
None of the firms entrusted with TPQC contracts were 
associated with a professor of any IIT institute. 
The Government stipulated that only empanelled firms should be eligible for 
participating in the tenders. However,  nine TPQC packages valuing Rs 25.05 
crore (Appendix-1.7) covering 46 EPC packages (val ue: Rs 4,318 crore) were 
entrusted to four firms 37  which were not in the empanelled list. Of these, 
Engineering Staff College of India (ESC I), which failed to qualify for the 
empanelment, was entrusted with two TPQC packages valuing Rs 6.20 crore 
covering 8 EPC package works (value: Rs 1,089 crore).   
Thus, the very objective of empanelment of firms for conducting TPQC works 
was defeated.  
The Government replied that the firm s were exempted from fulfilment of 
some of the clauses/conditions on the ground that they would acquire these 
qualifications subsequently. The reply does not say why this exemption was 
extended to only selected parties. Further, the entrustment of the sensitive item 
of checking the quality of projects worth several thousands of crores to parties 
which did not have the requisite experience is detrimental to Government’s 
interest. 
1.3.3 Tendering process 
Audit observed inconsistencies in the tendering process as narrated below: 
• In package No. AVR HNSS, partner of an empanelled Joint venture (JV) 
firm was considered for entrustment of TPQC Package-AVRHNSS based 
on the experience as a JV firm. Ho wever, both the pa rtner firms were 
earlier disqualified on the same grounds in another TPQC package (Tunnel 
I and Tunnel II of Veligonda project).  
• TPQC contracts of major irrigation projects like Aliminati Madhava Reddy 
Project, Pulichintala project, Komaram Bhim project, Palemvagu project, 
Kinnerasani project (packages 3, 37 and 10) were entrusted to an 
unempanelled firm which did not have experience in quality assurance of 
irrigation projects. 
                                                
 
36 National Academy of Construction (NAC), Becon Society Franchise, C.C.Patel and 
associates private limited 
37 Engineering Staff College of India, Hyderabad; M/s VAS consultants, Hyderabad;  
M/s National Consultancy for planning and engineering, Hyderabad; Indian Registrar of 
Shipping, Hyderabad 
Inconsistencies 
were noticed in the 
tendering process  

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 53
• In package 24, tenders were compared excluding service tax component 
while all tenders for all the other packages were compared with service tax 
component. 
• In the same package 24, several bid conditions were amended after 
conclusion of agreements like deletion of retention money clause, change 
in payment methodology, number of establishment of mobile laboratories. 
Issuing amendments to tender cond itions after entrustment indicating 
vitiation of tender process and undue favouritism to the party. 
• In packages 16 and 17, firms’ financial proposal (C1 form), summary of 
cost (C2) and the agreement value were different fro m one another for 
reasons not on record.  
• In respect of packages 21 and 22, the Internal Bench Mark (IBM) values 
were higher than the sanctioned estimates. This was statedly due to higher 
number of mobile labs. 
Thus, the tendering process was defective. The Government did not offer 
specific remarks on the audit observations. 
1.3.4 Delay in/non-entrustment 
The process of quality assurance begins well before commencement of actual 
execution and includes review of designs, plans and specifications for 
constructability and operability. In respect of 40 EPC projects costing  
Rs 10,962.79 crore, the TPQC works were entrusted to firms with delays 
ranging from 12 to 36 months after entrustment of the original execution of 
works. 
Audit also observed that no TPQC firm was engaged for quality control in 
respect of tunnel work with tunnel boring machine (TBM) in Aliminati 
Madhava Reddy project (EPC package-value: Rs 1,925 crore). 
The Government did not offer specific remarks on the audit observations. 
1.3.5 Deficiencies in agreements 
Scrutiny of agreements revealed shortcomings with regard to quality assurance 
as described below: 
Item Audit findings 
Analysis of designs By the time the TPQC agreements were concluded many of the EPC packages were 
already under execution.  However, the department provided for “Analysis of 
design” in the TPQC agreements, which proved to be redundant. If the scope of the 
work to TPQC agencies had accordingly been modified the savings to the 
department would have been Rs 2.75 crore ( Appendix-1.8
). The Government 
replied that though TPQC might not see a few designs, it would be able to 
contribute significantly towards the majority of the designs which would be 
There were delays 
of 12 to 36 months 
in engagement of 
TPQC firms after 
entrustment of 
original execution 
of works 
Shortcomings with 
regard to quality 
assurance were 
noticed in the 
agreements  

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 54
finalised during the course of execution in the larger interest of the projects. The 
fact however, remains that there was no proportionate recovery for designs not seen 
by the TPQC. 
Payment schedule Several agreements did not prescribe a sp ecific payment schedule for payment of 
bills. Even in cases, where specific payment schedule was prescribed, it was 
revised frequently for reasons not on reco rd (Package No.2 covering Thotapalli, 
Peddagedda, Tarakarama Theertha Sagar and Janjhavathi projects). 
Absence/ 
Inadequacy of 
security measures 
It was prescribed that the EMDs of TP QC firms would be returned on completion 
of 24 months after lapse of agreement period without linking it to the defects 
liability period of EPC packages. 
In several agreements there was no clause relating to deduction of retention money 
from the running bills. As a result, the department could not take penal action 
against the firms which withdrew from the TPQC activity midway or against the 
firms which were not willing to extend the contract period in case of extension of 
EPC package execution. 
1.3.6 Control and Coordination 
The Government decided (March 2006) that all the payments pertaining to 
TPQC firms be centralised with the En gineer in Chief (Irrigation) (ENC). 
Accordingly the ENC identified Special Designs Division No.4, Hyderabad 
for that purpose. The performance of th e division suffered from the following 
shortcomings: 
• The Executive Engineer, Special Designs Division No.4, Hyderabad (EE, 
SDD-4), did not monitor the quality checking of work done by the TPQC 
firms before releasing payments on the presumption that the quality 
checking works done by the TPQC firms were being monitored by the 
field engineers of the EPC packages concerned. The field engineers were 
not able to furnish records in support of such supervision. 
• The EE, SDD-4 had no information about whether any of the field 
engineers of the EPC packages were accompanying TPQC firms while 
collecting samples or conducting tests.  
• The EE, SDD-4 had also no information regarding the quality tests being 
conducted by the EPC firms and whether the TPQC firms were verifying 
ten per cent of those tests independently. 
• The Engineers in charge of the EPC packages were not certifying the 
invoices/bills raised by the TPQC firms directly on the EE, SDD-4 on 
monthly basis.  
• The monthly test reports furnished by the TPQC firms were also not being 
regularly certified by the Engineers in charge. 
Thus, the Special Division which was entrusted with the task of payment 
control did not discharge its functions effectively. 
The control by the 
Special Designs 
Division was 
ineffective 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 55
The Government stated (August 2009) that it was decided to pay the TPQC 
agencies directly for ensuring their i ndependence from the field engineers. It 
was also stated that three new posts of Chief Engineers for quality control had 
been created (October 2008) for coordination and better monitoring. The 
contention of the Government is not acceptable. The field engineers represent 
the department/Government and TPQC agencies are private parties. It is the 
field engineers by virtue of being on the work spot who will be in a position to 
make a proper assessment of the quality of work done by the TPQC agencies.  
Cutting out such an important wing of the engineering department was 
detrimental to Government interest. 
Non-existence of agreement between EPC agency and TPQC firm:  There 
was no proper coordination between EPC agencies and TPQC firms. There 
were several instances of non-cooperation by EPC firms with the TPQC firms 
viz., non-submission of Quality Management Plans (QMP), non-submission of 
drawings before commencement of works, non-furnishing of approved designs 
for analysis, non-intimation of concrete work schedules, non-furnishing of 
details and reports of tests conducted by EPC firms to TPQC firms for 
secondary tests, non-submission of corrective action reports (CARs) on the 
defects pointed out by the TPQC firms. The Government replied that the EPC 
agreements stipulate “checks by departmental engineers or any other 
organisation and the contractor shall exte nd test facilities to them also”.  
However, in practice the EPC agencies failed to fulfill their obligation stipulated 
in this clause.  Government by its own admission confirmed that due to non-
cooperation by the EPC agencies it had to reiterate the instructions. 
1.3.7 Quality assurance aspects 
Audit scrutiny revealed lacunae in the process of quality assurance by the 
TPQC agencies as narrated below: 
Requirement Audit findings 
Quality Management Plan(QMP) 
Review of contractor’s 
QMP 
(i) In package 16, the EPC firm did not furnish QMP to the TPQC as of 
August 2008. 
(ii) In package 23, the EPC firm did not furnish QMP as of December 2008. 
(iii) In Package 24, the TPQC firm did not review (i) designs and 
specifications in respect of 6 out of 8 EPC packages, (ii) QMP in 
respect of 7 packages and (iii) calibration for 7 packages. 
Quality testing equipment and material testing 
Quality Testing Equipment (i) The EE, SDD-4, during inspection observed non-availability of key 
equipment like Non-Destructive Te sting (NDT) equipment, Concrete 
core cutter and U.T.M., Hydraulic pr essure tester, Insitu permeability 
test apparatus, PH meter, Hydrometer, etc. (Package No.2, 10, 11). 
(ii) In package 23, the firm carried out required tests in other engineering 
colleges and universities which was to be done in the TPQC lab. 
Quality assurance 
suffered from 
several lacunae 
mainly on account 
of laxity of 
departmental 
engineers 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 56
Material testing (i) In packages 8 and 10 concreting plan was not being intimated to 
TPQC firms. The EPC agencies were executing concreting works at 
night hours without giving prior inti mation to TPQC firms. This has 
serious implications given that the supervision of quality of concreting 
is an activity involving concurrent collection of samples. 
(ii) In package 10, the TPQC firm was testing cement concrete cubes 
manually which did not reflect true values, which was stated to be 
subsequently rectified. 
(iii) In package 10, the EPC firm was not maintaining sufficient stack of 
materials despite being repeatedly mentioned in the monthly reports. 
Thus, the arrangements for testing materials before they are put to use 
by the EPC contractor were inadequate. 
(iv) In package 23, the EPC firms did not involve the TPQC firm while 
conducting QC tests of material brought to site.  
Calibration 
TPQC firms were to 
conduct calibration of 
EPC firm’s equipment  
In package 11, the TPQC firm did not conduct calibration of the equipment 
even after one and half years after entering into contract. 
Presence of departmental engineers at the time of sampling and analysis 
Presence of departmental 
engineers 
In package No.24 TPQC firm (LASA- VAS) complained (July 2006) that 
only work inspector was available at the work spot during the inspections 
and departmental engineers (AE/AEE/D EE) were not available even while 
executing major structures. The firm also represented that no technical 
representative or engineer on behalf of EPC firm was present.  
In package 27 also, work inspectors were signing the daily test reports on 
behalf of the department indicating th at the departmental engineers were 
not being present while collection of samples or analysis of the samples 
collected. 
Superintending Engineer, SSLC & SB circle, Nellore, communicated (October 
2006) to the agreement concluding au thority i.e., Superintending Engineer, 
Telugu Ganga Project Circle, that, even after eleven months the TPQC firm 
did not have reliable machinery for ch ecking the concrete structures. It was 
however, observed that the contract period was extended after completion of 
the agreement period apart from entrustment of additional works to the same 
firm. 
Thus, the monitoring of quality of the projects suffered from several lacunae. 
The Government did not offer specific remarks on the audit observations. 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 57
1.3.8 Corrective action on TPQC reports 
Scrutiny of the corrective action reports (CARs) revealed the following: 
• In Packages 3 to 10, corrective ac tion was not taken immediately on the 
observations made by the TPQC firms.  
• In package 32, there were no reports of corrective action.  
• In package 23, TPQC firm was not involved while taking corrective action. 
• In packages 8 and 10, the suggestions of TPQC firm are repetitive in 
nature regarding honey combing, improper vibrations, insufficient metal 
stack, improper curing etc. This indicates that the EPC firm did not pay 
proper attention to the repeated remarks of the TPQC firm.  
Thus, the departmental engineers failed to ensure corrective action on the 
deficiencies pointed out by TPQC firms. Audit further observed that there was 
no system to get the quality certified by the TPQC firm after corrective action 
as pointed out by the TPQC firms was taken by EPC firms. The Government 
did not offer specific remarks on the audit observations. 
1.3.9 Checks of samples by outside laboratories 
The TPQC contracts envisage that 10 per cent of tests are to be got checked by 
an outside laboratory (NCCB and APERL) (cost to be borne by TPQC firm) 
once in three months to give an assuranc e that proper testing and analysis is 
being done by EPC/TPQC firms. It was however, observed that the 
Superintending Engineers concerned of AMRP Circle II, G.V. Gudem, 
Pulichintala Project Circle, Jaggiahpe t and Telugu Ganga Project circle, 
Srikalahasthi, were unable to furnish records relating to conducting of such an 
exercise. The Government did not offer specific remarks on the audit 
observations. 
1.3.10 Deployment of qualified staff 
Agreements with the TPQC firms stipulate that the firms have to engage on 
their rolls qualified and experienced staff for quality control. The following 
observations are made: 
• The TPQC firm of package 3 (pertaining to Aliminati Madhava Reddy 
Project) engaged specialists in “Transport Planning”, “Transport 
engineering” which were not relate d to quality control in Irrigation 
Projects. Audit also observed that some of the staff engaged by TPQC 
firms did not have experience in quality control aspects. 
• All the agreements stipulated that the firms should submit curriculum vitae 
(CV) of the field staff engaged by the TPQC firms. Audit observed that in 
majority of the cases either the CVs were not submitted (Package 32) or 
did not contain full particulars (Packages No.37 and AVR HNSS). 
Departmental 
engineers were 
unable to furnish 
records relating to 
checking of samples 
by outside labs 
Departmental 
engineers failed to 
ensure corrective 
action on the 
deficiencies pointed 
out by TPQC firms 
Deployment of 
experienced staff 
for quality control 
was not given due 
importance 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 58
• The TPQC firms were replacing their key personnel, scaling down the 
manpower without prior approval of the agreement concluding authority in 
contravention to the stipulations of the agreement and without any 
instructions to that effect from the Engineers in charge (Packages No. 2, 10) 
which would have an adverse effect on the continuity of quality assurance. 
The above deficiencies indicated that deployment of experienced staff was not 
given due importance. The Government did not offer specific remarks on the 
audit observations. 
1.3.11 Inspections by profes sors of premier institutes 
The agreements stipulated that TPQC firms would invite professors from the 
premier institutes of standards of IIT once in three months for quality 
assurance of the irrigation works. In packages 3, 11, 15, 18, 19, 39, 43, 49, 
TPQC-1 and AVRHNSS, audit observed that some of the firms had not 
furnished the reports of the inspections  conducted by professors of such 
premier institutes. Instead of getting the tests conducted by the professors of 
institutions with standards of IIT, the fi rms got the tests done by professors of 
local universities. There were shortfalls in the number of visits of professors. 
In package 27, there was also an instance where such inspections were all 
carried out on a single day. The Government did not offer specific remarks on 
the audit observations. 
1.3.12 Construction of central laboratory buildings 
All the agreements stipulated that th e TPQC consultant should construct a 
central laboratory at a location suggested by the department. The land was to 
be handed over to the consultant by the department and the consultant was to 
hand over the laboratory with infrastructure to the department at the end of the 
contract period.  The following deficiencies were noticed: 
• No time frame was stipulated for cons truction of central laboratory in the 
agreements. In respect of 18 TPQC packages, the firms did not construct 
central laboratories as of December 2008 statedly due to non-handing over 
of land by the department. No deductions were, however, made towards 
non-construction/provision of central laboratories from the agreement 
value. The cost of construction/provision for central laboratories as per the 
agreements in these 18 packages was Rs 7.66 crore (Appendix-1.8
). 
• Firms were allowed to function from elsewhere without establishment of 
laboratories. While one firm operated laboratory in a rented building 
(package 3), another firm established central laboratory in government 
quarters (package No.24). In package 23, the firm operated its mobile 
laboratory from that of the EPC firm with adverse implications on the 
quality assurance of those projects. 
• The plinth area of central laboratory, even in the cases where it was 
constructed with some delay was less than the stipulated 400 square meters 
(packages 2, 10 and 11). 
The clause relating 
to construction of 
central laboratory 
buildings by the 
TPQC firms was 
not enforced 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 59
• In package 36, the department did not take over (December 2008), though 
envisaged in the agreement, the ce ntral laboratory from the TPQC firm 
even after the original agreement period elapsed in May 2008. 
• The agreement of the package 3 stipulated contradictory clauses for 
establishment of central laboratory along  with infrastructure at firm's own 
cost on the land provided by the department as well as central laboratory 
building rent of Rs 12 lakh at a rate of Rs 40,000 per month. The EE, 
SDD-4 paid Rs10.90 lakh as of December 2008 towards rent. The building 
was constructed by the firm after the contract period, which was over by 
September 2008. Infrastructure and other amenities were yet to be provided 
by the firm and as such the building could not be put to use by the 
department as of February 2009. 
Thus, the department failed to enforce the clause relating to construction of 
central laboratory buildings by TPQC firms. The Government did not offer 
specific remarks on the audit observations. 
1.3.13 Vulnerability assessment of departmental reliance on 
TPQC firms for quality assurance 
In case of detection of wrong certification by the TPQC firm, the damage 
cannot be rectified as the value of contracts awarded to TPQC firms is 
negligible part of the total value of the EPC works, the quality of which is to 
be monitored/ensured. Even detection of such wrong certification is difficult. 
In TPQC package 11, pertaining to EPC package No.23 of Handri Neeva 
Sujala Sravanthi project, the TPQC firm
38  had given (in 2006) a quality 
assurance certificate for work which wa s yet to be executed. It was only the 
public watchfulness and outcry that en sured detection of such lack of 
supervision on the part of the TPQC firm.  
Audit observed that no penal action was taken against the firm for incorrect 
certification except recovery of the amount from the firm on prorata basis. 
Instead of blacklisting the firm, the firm was allowed to continue certification 
of quality in respect of other works/packages.  
This clearly indicates that total reliance on an outside agency for the critical 
function of quality control is fraught with adverse implications as the system 
does not envisage presence of department al engineers at the time of collection 
of samples and at the time of carrying out testing and analysis of the samples 
collected. Engagement of TPQC firms do es not guarantee first rate assurance 
of quality work done by EPC firms. 
The Government replied that hundred per cent  departmental supervision 
would not be feasible. The reply overlooks the fact that non-critical functions 
can be outsourced but not critical functions such as quality of irrigation 
projects worth several thousands of crores. The engagement of TPQC agencies 
can only be used to augment the strength of each quality inspection team.  The 
                                                
 
38 LASA-VAS 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 60
deployment of TPQC agency is justifiable to the limited extent that all the 
members of a quality inspection team need not be from Government but no 
quality inspection team should be without any departmental engineer.  There 
has to be hundred per cent  supervision of the inspection work by a 
departmental engineer at the time of colle ction of samples as well as analysis 
of samples.   
1.3.14 Dilution of departmental quality control 
Government stipulated (December 2005) that the TPQC firm should give 
quality control certificate for each work bill executed by the EPC firm. The 
payments were being made to the EPC agencies even without the certification 
by the departmental engineers entrusted with quality control. As a result the 
EPC agencies were not paying proper attention to the observations made by 
the departmental quality control staff. Audit observed in package 10 that in a 
large number of cases corrective action reports had not been received for 
nearly one year for the observations made by the departmental quality control 
staff. The Government did not offer specific remarks on the audit observations. 
1.3.15 Action on deficiencies in  quality detected by the TPQC 
firms 
A few cases relating to serious deficiencies pointed out by the TPQC firms are 
illustrated below: 
• In TPQC package 10 (Pulichintala project) the firm pointed out that for 
blocks 2 to 9 foundation stage load cells required for assessing load 
bearing capacity etc., were not installed for further studies. 
• Hydraulic pressure tests for pipes we re conducted only for five minutes 
instead of stipulated two hours (NIT, Warangal report for package 38). 
• Flakiness and elongation index of coarse aggregate available at site for 
concreting was 58.3 per cent instead of stipulated maximum of 30 per cent 
despite being objected earlier by NIT, Warangal (package 38). 
• Vertical reinforcements of Pump Ho use III were terminated abruptly 
instead of bending the bars (NIT, Warangal report for package 38). 
• The EPC firms were not assessing the safe bearing capacity of foundation 
soils (Package 23). 
• The EPC firms were not executing the work as per approved drawing 
(Package 23). For instance, laying of pipeline (Pushkara and Venktanagaram 
Lift Irrigation Schemes) and thrust blocks (VNPS) is one of the examples. 
• Adequate importance was not given to items like Water Cement Ratio, 
Back filling, Removal of form work and curing, etc. (package 23). 
• Hydrostatic pressure test was not bei ng done even at the time of final bill 
(package 23). 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 61
• The eligibility for qualifying for payment in respect of distributaries for 
discharges between 100 C/s and 10 C/s and in respect of minors and sub-
minors was not being followed (package 23). 
Details of remedial action taken on th e above deficiencies were not readily 
available with the department.  The Government did not offer specific remarks 
on the audit observations.
 
1.3.16 Payment during extended period 
Activities like land acquisition, forest clearance, etc., are time consuming and 
the time required to complete these activities cannot be estimated with any 
degree of certainty. Award of work without executing components of uncertain 
duration is beset with the following problems: 
(i) The TPQC agency being paid the full amount regardless of the quantum of 
work done by the executing agency during the period of contract with the 
TPQC agency 
(ii) Additional costs for deployment during the extended period 
These issues were ignored in award of projects scrutinised by Audit leading to 
delay in execution of projects.  
As payment to TPQC parties are linked to the duration of the projects for 
which they were engaged, the above deficiencies led to extra expenditure of 
Rs 21.79 crore beyond the agreement peri ods of TPQC contracts. The details 
are given in Appendix 1.9. The Government did not offer specific remarks on 
the audit observations. 
1.3.17 Improper payment methodology 
The department did not stipulate a definite payment schedule method or 
invoice/bill procedure for the TPQC packages. Many of the invoices raised 
contained details of the expenditure incurred by the firms like personnel on 
rolls/salaries, miscellaneous expenditure, equipment expenditure, reporting 
expenditure, software reimbursement expenditure, etc., instead of the quality 
checks being performed or services rendered by them. As a result, the linkage 
between the payments made to the firms and services rendered by them could 
not be established. 
Audit also observed in package 36 that the costs of various items
39  in 
supplemental agreements were much higher than that in original due to 
increase in remunerative costs component. The Government did not offer 
specific remarks on the audit observations. 
                                                 
39 Testing of Input materials and analysis, Insitu tests and analysis, and Tests on finished 
products and analysis 
Payments made 
beyond the 
agreement periods 
of TPQC contracts 
led to extra 
expenditure 
amounting to  
Rs 21.79 crore  

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 62
1.3.18 Force Majeure 
The agreements stipulate that during the period of extension as a result of 
force majeure, the consultant shall be entitled to reimbursement of additional 
costs reasonably and necessarily incurred by them during such period for the 
purposes of the services and in reactivating the service after the end of such 
period. 
Audit found that the remunerative and miscellaneous components pertaining 
to analysis of design, establishment of laboratories, testing of input materials 
and analysis, insitu tests and analys is, and tests of finished product and 
analysis costing Rs 10.74 crore ( Appendix-1.8
) were also included in the 
supplemental agreements concluded fo r extensions of time, which were 
already included in the original agreements. The Government did not offer 
specific remarks on the audit observations. 
1.3.19 Conclusions 
The TPQC system suffers from an inherent deficiency as it does not envisage 
presence of departmental engineers at the time of collection of samples and at 
the time of carrying out testing and analysis of the samples collected. Audit 
also noticed deficiencies such as faulty empanelment for engaging TPQC 
firms, engagement of firms which did not have experience in quality control of 
irrigation projects, inadequacies in agreements, modification of tender 
conditions thereby passing undue benefit to firms, non-enforcement of the 
agreement conditions, etc. Also, the EPC firms did not take prompt action on 
the deficiencies pointed out by the TPQC firms. 
Checking of quality of projects work s is too critical a function to be 
outsourced completely to independent third party agencies without any quality 
inspection team having no representation of the Government. Monitoring 
during execution of the project assumes considerable significance. There is no 
substitute for hundred per cent  departmental supervision of these agencies. 
The agencies can only assist the departmental engineers in discharging this 
important task. 
1.3.20 Recommendations 
¾ There is urgent need to strengthen the quality checking and monitoring 
wing in the department itself. The engagement of TPQC agencies can only 
be used to augment the strength of each quality inspection team. The 
deployment of TPQC agencies is justifiable to the limited extent that all 
the members of the quality inspection team need not be from Government 
but no quality inspection team should be without a departmental engineer.  
There has to be hundred per cent supervision of the inspection work by the 
departmental engineer at the time of sampling and analysis of samples.  
¾ Engagement of TPQC firms should not be after award of the EPC work 
and needs to be properly synchronised. Entrustment of TPQC may be 
considered for each irrigation package at the time of entrustment of 
Remunerative and 
miscellaneous 
components such as 
establishment of 
lab, etc. involving 
value of Rs 10.74 
crore which were 
already included in 
the original 
agreements were 
also included in 
supplemental 
agreements  

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 63
package itself so as to avoid finalisation of designs, drawings, and 
execution of work without involvement of TPQC firms. 
¾ The department needs to initiate action for empanelment of more number 
of TPQC firms for better competition as in majority of tenders finalised 
there were single tenders.  
¾ The Department should ensure prompt corrective action on the 
observations of TPQC agencies before making payments to EPC agencies. 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 64
IRRIGATION AND COMMAND AREA DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT (Projects Wing) 
1.4 Accelerated Irrigati on Benefit Programme 
1.4.1 Introduction 
The Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Prog ramme (AIBP) was launched by the 
Government of India (GOI), during 1996-97, to provide assistance to the States 
for accelerating the implementation of major40 and medium41 irrigation projects, 
costing more than Rs 1,000 crore, which were beyond the resource capability 
of the States and to complete on-going major/medium irrigation projects 
which were in advanced stage of completion. The monetary limit of cost of the 
project was relaxed to Rs 500 crore in March 1997. Minor irrigation
42 (MI) 
schemes were subsequently introduced from the year 1999-2000.   
The main objectives of AIBP are:  
• To accelerate the completion of on-going major and medium irrigation 
projects; and 
• To realise bulk benefits from the completed projects. 
In Andhra Pradesh, 30 Major/Medium Irrigation Projects and 67 MI  schemes 
were identified under AIBP. GOI released an assistance of Rs 2,762.42 crore for 
the 30 identified major and medium projects ( Appendix-1.10) up to the year  
2008-09. For 67 MI schemes ( Appendix-1.11) a sum of Rs 161.46 crore was 
released by GOI during the period from 2006-07 to 2008-09. 
At State level, the Chief Engineers of the respective projects are the Project 
Implementing Authotities (PIAs). The PIAs carry out the activities under the 
overall supervision of the Principal Secretary, I&CAD. 
1.4.2  Audit objectives 
The performance audit had the following objectives: 
• Whether planning for new project and prioritisation for funding the  
on-going projects were done as per prescribed procedures and guidelines; 
• Whether individual projects were executed in an economic, efficient and 
effective manner; 
• Whether the Rehabilitation and Resett lement (R&R) works were carried 
out as contemplated;  
• Whether the  potential created was utilised fully;  
• Whether the programme achieved its objectives of speedy completion of 
projects; 
                                                 
40 Projects that create irrigation potential greater than 10,000 hectares of cultivable command 
area (CCA) 
41 Projects that create irrigation potential greater than 2,000 ha and less than 10,000 ha of CCA 
42 Projects that create irrigation potential less than 2,000 ha of CCA 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 65
• Whether the monitoring mechanism was adequate and effective; and 
• Whether there was adequate and effective mechanism for evaluation of 
projects including assessment of achievement of the desired Benefit Cost 
(BC) Ratio. 
1.4.3 Scope and Methodology of Audit 
Audit conducted (July 2008 to March 2009) a review of AIBP projects 
implemented in Andhra Pradesh covering 10 out of 30 Major/Medium Projects 
(five major
43, five medium 44 projects) which received Central Assistance of  
Rs 937.30 crore and 14 out of 67 MI schemes which received Central 
assistance of Rs 37.70 crore. The details are given in Appendix-1.12. Selection of 
the Projects was done based on Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement 
Method (SRSWOR). For the MI schemes it was also ensured that at least two 
geographical regions of the State were  covered. An entry conference was 
conducted (25 June, 2008) with the Chief Engineer (CE), Major & Medium 
Irrigation and CE, Central Water Commiss ion (CWC) and the audit objectives 
were explained.  The review covered the implementation of the programme 
during the period from 2004-05 to 2008-09. As the scheme was launched in 
1996-97, transactions relating to the programme prior to April 2004 were also 
taken into consideration and included in the report for continuity, wherever 
necessary. Exit conference was also conducted (December 2008) with the 
Principal Secretary, I&CAD, CE, Major & Medium Irrigation, CE, Minor 
Irrigation and CE, CWC. Replies of th e Government were considered and 
incorporated while finalising the Performance Audit review. The results of the 
review are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Financial outlay  
The Financial outlay in respect of eight (incomplete) out of ten* major and 
medium projects for the years 2004-05 to 2008-09 is as shown in Table-1.  
Table-1 
Physical Target and 
Achievement 
Central 
Assistance 
received 
Budget provision 
(both Central and 
State share) 
Expenditure 
incurred 
S.No. Name of the Project 
(Rs in crore) 
Target Achievement 
1 Gundlakamma Reservoir Project 99.35 597.50 380.85 100% 80% 
2 Komaram Bhim Project 110.25 955.80 170.69 100% 23% 
3 Pushkara Lift Irrigation Sc heme 47.08 599.00 279.49 100% 63% 
4 Ralivagu Project  6.71 65.60 36.90 100% 48% 
5 Somasila Project 164.53 635.24 217.20 100% 35% 
6 Thotapally Barrage Project 75.09 569.50 327.35 100% 54% 
7 Veligallu Reservoir Project 62.34 194.37 59.08 100% 98% 
8 Yerrakaluva Reservoir Project 28.46 55.78 54.68 100% -NA- 
*Alisagar Lift Irrigation Scheme and Sriram Sagar Project Stage-I were already completed                         NA: Not available 
                                                 
43Alisagar Lift Irrigation Scheme, Nizamabad; Gundlakamma Reservoir Project, Prakasam; 
Pushkara Lift Irrigation, East Godavari; Somasila Project, Nellore and Sriram Sagar Project 
Stage-I, Karimnagar 
44Komaram Bhim Project, Adilabad; Ralivagu Project, Adilabad; Thotapalli Barrage Project, 
Vizianagaram; Veligallu Reservoir Project, Kadapa and Yerrakaluva Project, West Godavari 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 66
The year-wise details of the Budget provision vis-à-vis, the expenditure are 
furnished in Appendix-1.13. 
1.4.4 Planning  
1.4.4.1 Preparation of PPR 45 and DPR46 
The State Government is required to prepare a preliminary report of the 
proposed projects after carrying out necessary survey and investigation 
irrespective of whether the project is funded through State Plans or from 
AIBP. In respect of major projects, PPRs are to be submitted to CE, CWC, 
New Delhi. In respect of medium projects, the reports are to be submitted to 
respective regional offices of the CWC under intimation to CE (PAO), CWC.   
For Minor schemes, DPRs approved by the State Technical Advisory 
Committee are to be forwarded to the Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR) 
for approval on the basis of Benefit Cost (BC) Ratio and development cost. 
The preliminary reports are to be submitted to CWC at State level and if found 
acceptable ‘in principle’ consent is given to State Government for preparation 
of DPR. 
It was observed that no PPRs and DPRs were prepared by the respective 
project implementing authorities for an y of the selected Minor Irrigation (MI) 
schemes. Further, as per the guidelines, BC ratio for all irrigation schemes to 
be funded under AIBP shall be more than one
47. In many of the MI schemes, 
such scheme - wise calculations were not done. Instead, a mere certificate was 
issued by the I & CAD Department stating that the BC ratio in respect of all 
MI Schemes was more than one. Scrutiny, however, disclosed that in the 
formation of new tank across Maddileru Vagu, Gani (V) (Kurnool District) the 
BC ratio was nearly 0.25. 
The MoWR merely accepted the certificate with regard to BC ratio without 
checking the detailed calculations in supp ort of the BC ratio as these were not 
furnished by the State Government.   
1.4.4.2 Prioritisation of Projects 
The year-wise releases of funds by GOI were as shown in Table-2.  
Table-2 
Year Amount released 
(Rupees in crore)   
Year Amount released 
(Rupees in crore)   
1996-97 to 2001-02 630.62 2005-06 311.38 
2002-03 33.19 2006-07 843.42 
2003-04 205.53 2007-08 576.85 
2004-05 87.55 2008-09 235.34 
Grand Total 2923.88 
Note: GOI changed the nature of AIBP assistance from loan to grant from 2005-06 
                                                 
45 Preliminary Project Report 
46 Detailed Project Report 
47 If BC ratio of a project is less than one, it implies that the benefit derived from the project is 
less than the cost of the project 
PPR and DPR were 
not prepared for 
any of the Minor 
Irrigation Schemes 
Prioritisation for 
funding the projects 
under AIBP was 
not done in a 
systematic manner 
by computing the 
cost of balance 
works to be 
executed in each 
project 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 67
Audit scrutiny revealed the following: 
Major and Medium Projects 
One of the key objectives of AIBP was to correct the situation of huge public 
investments in irrigation projects lyin g dormant / incomplete for several years 
for one reason or the other. The funds provided may not be adequate to 
complete all on-going projects. Therefor e the deployment of funds required 
prioritisation by (i) Computing the cost of balance works to be executed in 
each project; and (ii) funding those projects first which require minimal 
finance to bring them to completion. Such an exercise would have facilitated 
selection of projects in such a manner as to complete them at an accelerated 
pace with available funds. The selection of projects was not done in such a 
systematic manner. The State Government failed to properly estimate the cost 
of balance works for inclusion in AIBP. 
Government stated (July 2009) that only those projects which are eligible as 
per AIBP guidelines were considered for AIBP assistance.  The reply does not 
answer the specific audit observation with regard to the prioritisation based on 
criteria mentioned by Audit. 
Consequently, out of the 30 projects taken up under AIBP from 1996-97 to 
2006-07, so far eight projects were completed over a period of 14 years.  
Despite higher assistance from 2005-06 onwards, there was failure to get 
accelerated irrigation benefits due to the faulty prioritisation of projects to be 
executed. Out of 11 major/medium projects taken up prior to 2005-06 only six 
projects
48 had been completed and five are still in execution stage as of March 
2009, as shown in Table-3.  
Table-3 
Name of the 
project 
Year of 
sanction 
Scheduled date 
of completion 
Expenditure 
(Rs in crore) 
Somasila 1997-98 June 2001 217.20 
Kanpur Canal 2000-01 October 2003 0.44 
Gundlavagu 2000-01 2003 6.68 
Yerrakaluva 2000-01 2003 54.68 
Maddigedda 2000-01 2003 4.50 
• Even in the case of completed projects, the projects were completed with 
delays which ranged up to five years as shown in Appendix-1.14.  
• From 2005-06 onwards, 19 more major/medium projects (details are in 
Appendix-1.15) were taken up. In addition, 67 Minor Irrigation schemes 
were also taken up. Except two majo r projects (Ali Sagar Lift Irrigation 
scheme (LIS) and Guthpa LIS which were included under AIBP in  
2006-07), no other project/scheme was completed as of March 2009.  
                                                 
48  Cheyyeru (Annamayya), Madduvalasa, Nagarjuna Sagar Project, Priya Darsini Jurala 
Project, Sri Ram Sagar Project (Stage-I) and Vamsadhara (Phase I of Stage-II) 
Out of the 19 
major/medium 
projects taken up 
after 2005-06, except 
two projects, no 
other project was 
completed. Thus, 
assistance under 
AIBP has not been 
effectively used to 
accomplish the 
objective of 
completion of 
irrigation projects 
Out of 11 
major/medium 
projects taken up 
prior to 2005-06 only 
six projects had been 
completed and five 
are still in
 execution 
stage 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 68
Thus, the grant released during the years 2005-06 to 2008-09 amounting to 
Rs 1,966.99 crore (Rs 593.81 crore in th e selected projects as discussed in 
para 1.4.4.3 below) largely remained blocked in incomplete projects. 
The AIBP is not a scheme to bestow capital grants to States of capital 
investment, but to redeem past capital investments in irrigation, which were 
idling for want of completion. The programme however, was not confined to 
only to truly last mile projects by the State Government as the funds were used 
for other on-going projects also. This le d to wasteful and wasted investment 
and in continued idleness of dormant i rrigation assets. This also resulted in 
large part of investments made becoming ineffective or sub-optimal as brought 
out above. 
Government stated (July 2009) that it does not consider the investment on 
irrigation projects as wasteful and wasted investment nor did it prolong 
idleness of dormant irrigation assets. But the fact remains that the targeted 
results have not been achieved in almost all the projects taken up under AIBP.  
The incomplete assets do not give benefits to the people for the expenditure 
incurred. Early completion of projects by proper planning would have resulted 
in early benefits to the people. 
Minor Irrigation schemes 
GOI sanctioned 61 MI schemes (GOI share: 90 per cent) in 2006-07 in Phase-I 
(of these 14 were selected for test check) and six MI schemes in 2008-09 in 
Phase-II under AIBP. Out of the 14 sampled MI schemes, only two schemes
49 
were physically completed, but completion reports have not been submitted 
(March 2009). Though water was impounded in the tanks, no water was 
released to the fields due to non-construction of field channels by the Water 
Users Associations, even after lapse of one year of completion of the schemes.  
Thus, there was lack of coordination between the department and the Users to 
ensure that the field channels were ready by the time the works are completed.  
In other two MI schemes (in Kurnool Dist rict), the tenders were not finalised 
as of March 2009 as detailed in Table-4.  
Table-4 
Name of the MI Scheme/ 
Contemplated ayacut 
Date of administrative 
approval 
Date of 
technical 
sanction 
Status of tender process as of 
March 2009 
Formation of new tank 
across Maddileru vagu, 
Ghani (V), Kurnool 
District - 260 acres 
6-2-2007 
(Revised administrative 
approval on 1-12-2008) 
16-2-2009 The opening of tenders was postponed 
twice. Due to technical problems 
(non-visibility) with regard to 
e-procurement platform the tenders 
were not finalised. 
Formation of new tank 
across Chandravanka near 
Chinnabodhanam (V), 
Kurnool District -350 acres 
6-2-2007 
 
13-2-2009 The opening of tenders was postponed 
twice. Due to technical problems 
(non-visibility) with regard to 
e-procurement platform the tenders 
were not finalised. 
                                                 
49Formation of new tanks at Nambala, Thugeda Villages of Adibalad District (estimated cost: 
Rs 0.81 crore and Rs 1.11 crore) 
Out of 14 MI 
schemes test-
checked, only two 
were physically 
completed.  Water 
was however, not 
released to the 
fields due to non- 
construction of field 
channels 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 69
The reasons advanced by the Executive Engineer are not convincing as there 
has been no total breakdown of the e-procurement platform since the same 
was being used for tenders in other projects. 
In the case of formation of new tank across Chandravanka near 
Chinnabodhanam Village, audit also observed that there was overlapping of 
the Telugu Ganga Project distributory as per the original designs which caused 
the delay in tender process on account of change of designs so as to exclude 
the overlapping ayacut.  
1.4.4.3 Award of work without prior completion of the activities of 
uncertain duration 
There are two approaches for execution of projects. 
Approach (A): Award of work along with components of uncertain duration.  
The adverse effect is that the time gap between the investments and the 
accrual of benefits is very large leading to lower growth rate of economy.  
This is the common mistake committed. 
Approach (B):  Complete components of uncertain duration in advance and 
then only award the work. The time gap between investments and the accrual 
of benefits will be short leading to speedy growth rate of economy. 
Land acquisition is a complex and tedious  process where the time required for 
completing the work cannot be assessed with any degree of certainity.  
Starting of projects without acquiring land in advance is beset with the risk of 
adverse consequences of escalation in payments to contractors due to extended 
period of execution and blockage of funds in incomplete projects which were 
held up due to land acquisition problems. 
Government stated (July 2009) that as the land acquisition work was entrusted 
to revenue authorities, PIAs cannot be held responsible for the delay. The 
reply is not acceptable, as the basic audit observation related to award of work 
without acquiring the land in advance which is inherently of uncertain 
duration resulting in enormous sums being blocked in incomplete assets 
without any benefit to the people. These funds could have been utilised 
elsewhere for early completion of works not taken up for want of funds. 
In irrigation projects, it is not the commercial rate of return but the Economic 
Rate of Return (ERR) which is used as the criterion for measuring the benefits 
accruing from the projects.   
As illustrated in the Appendix-1.16
, for faster growth rate of economy, the 
allocation of funds or investments should be only for projects where the 
activities of uncertain durations like land acquisition, obtaining of environmental 
clearances etc., are completed before incurring any expenditure. 
There are basically two adverse effects from award of work without executing 
components of uncertain duration: 
Award of work along 
with components of 
uncertain duration 
led to eight out of ten 
sampled projects 
(AIBP assistance;  
Rs 593.81 crore) 
taken up getting 
adversely affected.  
The amount 
remained blocked 
resulting in the 
envisaged irrigation 
potential not being 
achieved 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 70
• The contractor gets benefit by way of retaining mobilisation advance for 
longer periods by having to pay only on simple interest basis and further 
benefit by waival of even this interest in some cases. 
• The time gap between investments and the accrual of benefits becomes 
very long leading to lower growth rate of economy. 
The conceptual frame work used in audit analysis in this regard in project 
management and to achieve speedy growth rate of economy is detailed in 
Appendix-1.16. 
In the State, eight out of the ten sampled irrigation projects taken up have been 
adversely affected due to starting of projects without acquiring land in 
advance as detailed in Table-5.  
 Table-5 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Project Year of 
Sanction 
AIBP 
assistance  
(Rs in crore) 
Scheduled date of 
completion 
Physical status 
(Percentage) of 
work 
1 Somasila Project 1997-98 164.53 June 2001 35 
2 Yerrakaluva Reservoir Project 2000-01 28.46 March 2004 Not completed 
(physical status 
not furnished) 
3 Pushkara Lift Irrigation Scheme 2006-07 47.08 September 2006 63 
4 Ralivagu Project 2006-07 6.71 March 2007 48 
5 Gundlakamma Reservoir 
Project 
2005-06 99.35 May 2007 80 
6 Veligallu Reservoir Project 2006-07 62.34 September 2007 98 
7 Komaram Bhim Project 2006-07 110.25 March 2008 23 
8 Thotapalli Barrage Project 2005-06 75.09 March 2008 54 
For all the projects, the scheduled date of completion was over and especially 
the projects at Sl. No.1 to 4 have been badly delayed. With the present pace of 
progress, it is unlikely that the projects at  Sl. No. (1), (2), (3), (4), (7) and (8) 
will be completed in the near future. 
Consequently, AIBP assistance to the extent of Rs 593.81 crore in eight of the 
ten selected projects largely remained blocked in incomplete projects resulting 
in the objective of accelerated pace of completion of the projects not being 
achieved even after lapse of several years due to delay in acquisition of land.  
1.4.4.4 Non-release of funds to th e Project Implementing Authorities 
(PIAs) 
As per the guidelines the Central assistance along with State’s share has to be 
released to the Project implementing authorities. The payment control had 
been with the PAOs since 2002-03 in the State and due to issue of instructions 
by the Government not to make payments on account of freezing of funds 
there were delays in payment of work bills. For instance, during the period 
between December 2008 and March 2009, the AIBP work bills amounting to  

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 71
Rs 7.05 crore 50 were not paid in three out of the 24 projects/schemes as of 
March 2009.  This resulted in hampering the progress of works.  
Government while admitting the deficiency stated (July 2009) that payments 
for work bills could not be made during the period from December 2008 to 
March 2009.  As these funds were provided by the Government of India, the 
same should have been released promptly. 
1.4.5 Award of works 
Deficiencies in Agreement conditions 
Scrutiny of the contract agreements relating to the 10 selected projects 
revealed the following system deficiencies: 
• Although the contracts were awarded on a fixed price basis, scope of work 
was not precisely defined. In three 51 out of the ten projects, the scope of 
work was altered subsequently during execution. Government in reply 
(July 2009) stated that keeping in view the various constraints in 
implementation of irrigation projects, EPC system was introduced wherein 
contractor was given freedom while executing the work without changing 
the scope of the work.  It was further stated that the scope of the work was 
not altered in any medium irrigation projects. The reply is not acceptable.  
Change of designs after award of work results in change in quantities of 
work to be executed. There was no clause safeguarding the Government 
interest with regard to reduction in the payments, if less quantities of work 
were executed due to award of work on fixed price basis. As regards the 
medium irrigation projects, the reply is incorrect as the length of the canal 
was reduced in Thotapalli Barrage Project, a medium irrigation project.    
• Instead of fixation of the milestones by the I&CAD Department, the 
contractors were allowed to propose their own milestones for completion 
of the projects. Further, the contract ors were allowed to submit revised 
milestones in case of delay in completion/non-execution of work as per the 
original milestones submitted by them  earlier. Governme nt stated (July 
2009) that the contractors were a llowed to draw milestones/Revised 
milestones as the delays caused were beyond their control like land 
acquisition and R&R. The fact however , remains that the contractors were 
allowed to draw up their own milestones even at the initial stage of work. 
• Liquidated damages (LD) clause is effective only when the work awarded 
consists of components of certain dura tion.  Non-acquisition of land prior 
to award of work resulted in making the LD clause ineffective.  
Consequently, LD clause incorporated in the agreements could not be 
invoked due to non-acquisition of land in advance by the Department even 
though the projects were not completed as per schedule. 
                                                
 
50 Pushkara Lift Irrigation Project, East Godavari District: Rs 6.14 crore, Formation of new 
tank across local vanka near vayalpad, Chittoor District: Rs 0.65 crore and Formation of 
Reservoir across Isukagedda, Visakhapatnam District: Rs 0.26 crore 
51Thotapally Reservoir Project, Pushkara Lift Irrigation Scheme, Gundlakamma Reservoir 
Project 
Audit scrutiny of 
the contract 
agreements 
revealed 
deficiencies 
resulting in undue 
benefits to the 
contractors  

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 72
Government stated (July 2009) that delays occurred on account of land 
acquisition, R&R and forest clearance.  The fact remains that mere 
incorporation of LD clause does not ensure timely completion of project 
unless components of uncertain durati on are executed prior to award of 
work. 
• As the contracts were awarded on a fixed price basis there was no clause in 
the agreement for payment of price escalation. The contractors were, 
however, paid price escalation on the basis of Government memos.  
Government stated (July 2009) that due to contractors’ requests, certain 
clauses relating to payment of bills were relaxed. The fact remains that the 
amounts towards price escalation were paid to the contractors which was 
violative of tender conditions.  If pric e escalation clause was incorporated, 
Government would have got the benefit of reduction in prices. 
The above deficiencies in the contract agreements led to the contractors 
reaping undue benefits on several counts (as discussed in Para 1.4.7.1) besides 
leading to delays in completion of the projects. 
1.4.6 Implementation of Projects  
Scrutiny revealed lapses in implementation of the Projects, mainly attributable 
to poor monitoring, as discussed below project-wise: 
Nature of the audit 
observation 
Audit findings 
 
Abnormal delay in 
submission of forest 
land proposal 
Khomaram Bhim Project (Adilabad District) 
The original date for completion of the project was March 2007. But the proposals 
for acquiring the forest land of 12.54 Ha required for this Project, were submitted by 
the State Government for forest clearance, only in July 2008. Forest clearance is still 
awaited as of April 2009 resulting in consequential delays in execution of the project. 
Government stated (July 2009) that due to some legal problems, it was delayed. The 
fact remains that there was delay in submission of proposals. 
Non-submission of 
utilisation 
certificate  
Ralivagu project (Adilabad District) 
The State Government is required to su bmit utilisation certificate (UC) to CWC 
under the countersignature of Secretary leve l authority for assistance received in a 
year. The UC in respect of the project ha d not been submitted to CWC as of March 
2009 for the Central assistance of Rs 6.71 crore received in the year 2006-07. 
Government confirming the audit observ ation stated (July 2009) that UC was 
received and under submission to GOI. 
Incorrect 
completion report 
Sriram Sagar Project Stage-I (Karimnagar District) 
The State Government wrongly submitted completion report to CWC in November 
2004, though 26 works costing Rs 283.06 crore taken up under AIBP were not 
completed. The CWC authorities, however, accepted the completion report without 
any checking. 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 73
 Somasila Project (Nellore District) 
The Project implementing authorities were  forced to submit completion report due 
to insistence by the State Government to include a new project in place of this 
project though contemplated ayacut was not created. 
Government stated (July 2009) that in respect of SRSP-I and Somasila Project, 
completion reports were submitted as the central funds were utilised.  The fact 
remains that the projects were incomplete and CRs were incorrect as these are 
different from utilisation certificates. 
1.4.7 Execution of works 
1.4.7.1 Deficiencies in execution of works 
Scrutiny revealed deficiencies in execution of works, leading to extra burden/ 
avoidable expenditure, unproductive outlay and improper quality control 
checks, etc. involving money value of Rs 104.69 crore. Further, due to system 
deficiencies like entrustment of work w ith variable scope on fixed price basis 
and non-adherence to agreement clauses, etc. undue benefits were passed on to 
the contractors amounting to Rs 8.86 crore. The details are as follows: 
Nature of the audit 
observation 
Audit findings 
 
Overlapping of 
ayacut 
Pushkara Lift Irrigation Scheme  
The ayacut of 73,318 Hectares contempl ated under ‘Pushkara’ project was already 
covered and contemplated under Polavaram project. Further, the canal works of both the 
projects were taken up in the year 2004-05 with a gap of six months. Hence, if the 
Polavaram project is completed, the head works i.e., pump house, regulators etc. of 
Pushkara project costing Rs 101.49 crore will be redundant. 
Government stated (July 2009) that the head works will be utilised in other proposed LI 
schemes. 
The fact remains that there is overlapping of ayacut and the pump house machinery will 
become redundant. 
Improper planning Gundlakamma Reservoir Project  
Some ‘Minors’ were completed (estimation of distributaries: Rs 50 crore) at the tail end 
without completing the work in the middl e and beginning because of land acquisition 
problems.  
Any expenditure on the tail end of a minor does not serve the purpose unless the 
beginning and middle portion are completed first. In the instant case no expenditure 
should have been incurred on the tail end portion till the land acquisition problems had 
been sorted out for completion of the beginning and the middle portions. 
Government stated (July 2009) that for early completion of the projects, the contractor 
executed the works wherever land is acquired.  This is another illustration of incurring 
expenditure without executing components of uncertain duration before award of work 
resulting in money being blocked in incomplete assets. 
Deficiencies in 
execution of works 
led to extra burden/ 
unproductive 
outlay amounting to 
Rs 104.69 crore in 
the test-checked 
projects alone. 
Undue benefits 
amounting to  
Rs 8.86 crore were 
also passed on to 
the contractors 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 74
Unproductive 
outlay 
Construction of multipurpose checkdam across Musi river near A.varam (V) 
(Prakasam District) 
An anicut with two lift irrigation schemes was taken up (2006-07) under a MI Scheme 
with AIBP grant for an agreement value of Rs 3.74 crore. The contractor stopped 
(October 2006) the work after completion of the anicut (expenditure Rs 1.97 crore) but 
without constructing the lifts because the payment of Rs 0.55 crore for extra cyclone 
damage works executed by him during March 2006 to October 2006 was not paid. There 
has been delay in completion of balance wo rk as the tender pro cess was still underway 
and the work remains unresumed as of March 2009.  
Thus, no irrigation potential was created and no water could be lifted to the 
contemplated ayacuts and the expenditure of Rs 1.97 crore incurred on anicut without 
the lifts remains blocked.  
No reply was received from Government with regard to this audit observation. 
Third Party Quality 
Control (TPQC) 
agreement  after 
completion of 
substantial portion 
of work 
Gundlakamma Reservoir Project  
The Project works of Package II (agreement value: Rs 212.49 crore) were commenced 
in November 2004 and payments amounting to Rs 43.87 crore were made to the 
contractor from November 2004 to August 2006. It was, however, observed that an 
agreement was concluded with a TPQC firm in August 2006, i.e. after execution of 
works valuing Rs 43.87 crore, inter alia, to check the quality of all civil works of 
Package II. In the absence of collection of sample material concurrent with execution of 
work by contractor, the entrustment of quality checks of all the civil works to a TPQC 
firm after the execution of the same would serve no purpose.  
This casts doubts about the benefits de rived from the engageme nt of TPQC firm 
(expenditure: Rs 1.23 crore) and also the quality of the project construction work as 
substantial portion of the work (Rs 43.87 crore) was already completed.  
Government stated (July 2009) that the TP QC agency satisfactorily performed quality 
control checks on completed works also. The reply is not acceptable as the quality 
checks have to be done concurrently during execution of the project which were not 
done for a period of two years. 
Delay in execution 
of Rehabilitation  & 
Resettlement works 
Khomaram Bhim Project (Adilabad District) 
As per National Policy (2003) on Rehabilitati on and Resettlement of project affected 
families, the rehabilitation and resettlement benefits viz., house sites, agriculture wages, 
etc. shall be extended to all the project affected families. Further, in su ch rehabilitation 
colonies basic amenities like roads, electric ity, drinking water, etc. shall be provided. 
Though the possession of the lands for construction of the project was taken prior to 
March 2005, such Rehabilitation and Resettlement works have not been completed as of 
March 2009. 
Veligallu Reservoir Project (Kadapa District) 
Though the possession of the lands for construction of project was taken prior to July 
2003, Rehabilitation and Resettlement works were not completed as of March 2009. 
Government confirmed that these works were not completed.  

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 75
Thotapalli Barrage Project  
As per basic parameters of the agreement th e length of the canal to be excavated is 
52.45 Km. Though the length of the canal to  be executed has reduced to 48.88 Km the 
award of work on fixed price basis without any clause for proportionate reduction in 
payment led to undue benefit to the contractor to  the extent of Rs 8.16 crore, as this was 
a fixed price contract.  
Government stated (July 2009) that while there was reduction in the length of the canal, 
the quantities have increased due to increase  in total number of CM & CD works and 
concrete quantities of CM & CD works (M3) . The audit observation basically is a 
comment on the non-incorporation of a clause with regard to reduction in payment, if 
less quantities of works are executed. Financia l figures were not furnished in support of 
its contention that no benefit has accrued to th e contractor due to reduction in length of 
the canal i.e., the reduction in length of canal has been completely offset by the increase 
in items mentioned above. 
Sri Khomaram Bhim Project 
As per the agreement, the contractor is requi red to maintain the project for a period of 
two years after completion.  A provision of two per cent was made in the IBM estimate.  
There should have been a specific clau se in the agreement to retain two per cent of the 
payment made towards maintena nce cost and release this amount after satisfactory 
completion of maintenance period. No such clause was incorporated in the agreement 
leading to advance payments for work not done. Government confirmed the absence of 
such a clause in the agreement. 
Undue benefit to 
the contractors  
 
 
Pushkara Lift Irrigation Scheme 
An amount of Rs 0.70 crore was paid towards electrical charges by the department. As 
electrical charges are to be met by the contractor as per the agreement conditions, this 
resulted in undue benefit to the contractor. 
Government stated (July 2009) that there is no condition in the agreement that the 
agency has to pay the current consumption ch arges. The reply is factually incorrect as 
the agreement clause clearly stipulates that no separate payment towards O&M expenses 
will be made to the contractor by the employ er and the bid price quoted by the bidder 
shall be inclusive of all these expenses. Further, the facilities e.g., accommodation, 
transport, electricity, water etc., are to be provided to the deployed manpower by the 
contractor only. 
Diversion of funds Yerrakaluwa Project 
As per guidelines, repair works are not to be met from AIBP assistance. Scrutiny 
revealed that an amount of Rs 1.21 crore was spent on repair works which was met from 
AIBP assistance.  
Government stated (July 2009) that re-sectioning of canals and other modernisation 
works were taken up.  The reply confirms the audit observation as these items are in the 
nature of repair works.   

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 76
1.4.7.2 Creation of Irrigation Potential (IP) 
The main purpose of AIBP is to crea te irrigation potential. GOI fixed year-
wise targets for creation of irrigation potential for each of the major/medium 
projects.  It was noticed that, in the eight out of the ten sampled Projects, the 
shortfall in creation of IP was as high as 100 per cent in one project and it was 
ranging from 6 to as high as 95 per cent  in the seven projects, due to non-
completion of canal works to full extent, as shown in Table-6.  
Table-6 
Name of the project Target fixed 
 (in hectares)  
up to March 2009 
Target achieved  
(in hectares) up to 
March 2009 
Shortfall in 
achievement 
(in hectares) 
Percentage 
of shortfall 
Gundlakamma Reservoir Project 
(Prakasam District) 
32,400 16,188 16,212 50 
Khomaram Bhim Project 
(Adilabad District) 
9,915 NIL 9,915 100 
Pushkara Lift Irrigation Scheme 
(East Godavari District) 
71,184 34,841 36,343 51 
Ralivagu Project  
(Adilabad District) 
2,428 1,012 1,416 58 
Somasila Project  
(Nellore District) 
38,475 34,660 3,815 10 
SRSP (Stage-I) 
(Karimnagar District) 
1,36,960 1,28,869 8,091 6 
Thotapalli Barrage Project 
(Vizianagaram District) 
74,463 4,047 70,416 95 
Yerrakaluva Reservoir Project 
(West Godavari District) 
6,961 5,060 1,901 27 
Thus, the objective of creating adequate  and targeted irrigation potential was 
not achieved despite the projects being included under AIBP since 1996-97.   
Further, even in respect of the projects where the irrigation potential is stated 
to have been created, no supporting ay acut registers, water release schedules, 
etc., were maintained by the Water Users Associations.  Thus, the irrigation 
potential stated to have been created and utilised could not be verified. 
1.4.8 Joint physical verification of works 
During joint physical verification 52  conducted by Audit with the Project 
Implementing Authorities, the following deficiencies were noticed: 
• Any project which does not cater to the requirements of the fields enroute 
is vulnerable to unauthorised utilisa tion of water. Due to not addressing 
this issue it was observed that ayacutdars whose fields were not 
contemplated for use of water resorted to unauthorised utilisation with 
adverse implications for the tail end users.  
• Due to non-clearance of tunga (bushes) in the canals, the flow of water 
was obstructed.  
                                                 
52 Gundlakamma Project (Prakasam District) and Somasila Project (Nellore District) 
The targeted 
irrigation potential 
has not been 
achieved for eight 
(out of the ten) 
sampled projects 
(shortfall: up to 95 
per cent) 
In respect of the 
projects where the 
irrigation potential 
is stated to have 
been created, no 
supporting ayacut 
registers, water 
release schedules 
were maintained by 
the Water Users 
Associations 

Chapter I - Performance Reviews 
 77
1.4.9 Monitoring 
AIBP was started during the year 1996- 97. The monitoring of the projects 
was, however, entrusted to the Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) belatedly 
during the year 2006-07. Thus, there was no effective monitoring of the 
projects for a period of ten years i.e. from 1996-97 to 2005-06 wherein Central 
assistance of Rs 1,268.27 crore besides State’s share was spent. 
Further, GOI, through Central Water Commission entered into an agreement  
(February 2007) with the National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad, for 
applying remote sensing technology to  monitor the progress of project 
works/IP creation in respect of six projects
53 in the State along with projects of 
other States without the need for making field visits. But, no such monitoring 
was done in the State through Remote Sensing Technology as of June 2009. 
1.4.10 Conclusions 
Prioritisation for funding the Projects under AIBP was not done in a 
systematic manner by computing the cost of balance works to be executed in 
each Project. Although land acquisition is a time consuming process and of 
uncertain duration, the Projects were awarded without prior acquisition of land 
and this resulted in majority of the Projects on which substantial expenditure 
has been incurred getting stalled mi d-way and non-creation of envisaged 
irrigation potential. These two lapses resulted in the basic objective of 
accelerated irrigation benefits not bei ng derived due to blocking of funds on 
projects stalled due to non-completion of land acquisition and inadequate 
funding, due to resources being spread thinly on too many projects.  Awarding 
of projects on a fixed price basis without firming up quantity of work to be 
executed and not having payments linked to quantity of work executed 
resulted in undue benefits to the contr actors. Monitoring of the Projects was 
absent during the first ten year period i.e. from 1996-97 to 2005-06. No 
mechanism existed for evaluation of the projects assisted under AIBP to assess 
creation and utilisation of envisaged irrigation potential.   
1.4.11 Recommendations 
¾ Government should ensure that activities of uncertain duration like land 
acquisition, environmental clearance are taken up before incurring any 
expenditure on a project.  
¾ The availing of AIBP assistance should be in confirmity with the basic 
principles of meeting works expenditure  of identified ‘last mile’ irrigation 
projects.  
¾ Emphasis should be on deriving acce lerated irrigation benefits and not 
taking up of too many projects by spreading the available funds thinly.  
                                                
 
53 Sri Ram Sagar Project (Stage-I), Priya Darshi ni Jurala Project, Somasila Project, 
Gundlakamma project, Sri Ram Sagar Project (Stage-II) and Nagarjuna Sagar Project 
Monitoring of the 
Projects was not 
effective during the 
first ten year period 
(1996-97 to 2005-06) 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 78
¾ When the quantities of work to be executed have not been firmed up it 
would be in the interest of the Government to link payments to quantities 
executed rather than awarding works on fixed price basis despite scope of 
work expressed in quantities not being precisely determined.   
The above audit observations were discussed and accepted by the CE, Major 
and Medium and the CE, Minor Irrigation in the Exit conference held in  
December 2008. 

 
 
 
 
AUDIT OF TRANSACTIONS 
2.1 Excess payment; wasteful/infructuous expenditure 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD & CIVIL SUPPLIES 
DEPARTMENT 
2.1.1 Issue of Iris based Ration Cards 
The Iris based methodology as adopted and operated for issue of ration 
cards on which an expenditure of Rs  106.88 crore has been incurred  
(up to March 2009) was inappropriate. 
Government launched (June 2005) the project for issue of ration cards using 
‘Iris Biometric technology’ by discarding the traditional system of ‘door to 
door’ enquiry by an official team. For this purpose, 1,800 Designated 
Photographic Locations (DPLs) were established across the State. The 
Government instructions stipulated cap turing iris images of beneficiaries, 
digital family photographs and applicants’ details with the help of iris cameras 
positioned at DPL centres. A ration card with unique number is then generated 
for issue to the head of the family. 
Software Development for the project was executed through Andhra Pradesh 
Technology Services Limited (APTSL). Iris personal licences (for 8 crore 
population) that include implementation support service period of nine years 
was acquired (June 2005) from M/s Labcal Biometric Technologies Private 
Limited, Hyderabad, a representative of LG Electronics, USA through global 
tender. 
To the end of January 2009, 2.17 crore ration cards covering population of 
7.77 crore (average family size: 3.58) were issued. Of this, 1.78 crore cards 
related to Below Poverty Line families (BPL) (population: 6.34 crore). In 
order to cover the remaining families, transfer of cards from one place to 
another, modifications in the existing cards, conversion of cards on account of 
increase in income ceiling limits
1, 100 permanent DPL centres were established 
(duly phasing out the 1,800 centres) in the State, one each in 81 Revenue 
Divisions and 19 Metropolitan cities/municipal corporations. The cost of the 
project to the end of March 20092 amounted to Rs 106.88 crore3. 
Audit scrutinised (March 2009) the records relating to the implementation of 
the project in the office of the Commissioner of Civil Supplies.   
                                                 
1 Rs 20,000 to Rs 60,000 (Rural areas); Rs 24,000 to Rs 75,000 (urban areas)  
2 This does not include the committed liability for the year 2008-09 as the payments for the 
year 2008-09 were yet to be made 
3 APTSL: Rs 15.99 crore; Computer Service Providers (CSPs): Rs 56.79 crore;  
Misc.: Rs 11.78 crore; amount yet to be paid to CSPs: Rs 22.32 crore 
CHAPTER II 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 80
Audit carried out an analysis to ascertai n as to what extent the ‘Iris Bio-metric 
technology’ was effective in ensuring that bogus ration cards are not issued. 
The following observations are made: 
Vulnerability concerns Audit observations 
Issue of multiple cards to 
members of the same 
family 
Iris based technology is useful to establish the identity of an individual. The 
basic principle is that each individual has a unique iris. One important 
application where this is relevant is verification of the individual’s identity at 
the immigration counter at the airport. 
The primary focus of issue of a ration card is not the individual but family as a 
unit because the entitlements are linked to ‘family’. Accordingly, the primary 
concern is to ensure issue of not more than one card per family. 
As per the existing rules, each member of a family is entitled to 4 Kg of rice 
per month subject to upper limit of 20 Kg. In case of sugar/dals, the 
entitlement is 1 Kg per card. For example, if a family consists of 10 members, 
the family can obtain more than one card. The iris technology cannot 
establish the family relationship from the iris image of individuals to prevent 
issue of more than one card to members of a family. This is the inherent 
limitation in iris technology as far as  issue of ration ca rds is concerned. 
Given this limitation, iris technology adopted by the department does not 
restrict the issue of multiple cards to members within ‘the same family’ 
from the same DPL centre. Capturing iris image is easier part of the system. 
The more complex and significant part is the iris pattern recognition system. 
Before issue of ration card two essential controls are required.  
(i) No issue of ration card if iris images of the family members included in 
the ration card are not captured. 
(ii) Verifying the present iris images captured with the iris images already 
captured at the current DPL centre or any other DPL centre to prevent 
issue of duplicate cards.  
Due to the absence of these controls, the issue of cards at other centres is also 
not prevented.  
Government while admitting that there were cases of issuance of multiple 
cards to the members of the same family  attributed (June 2009) this to the 
DPL centres working only as stand alone centres which prevented validating 
iris image against the State-wide iris data. 
Issue of cards with 
fictitious addresses 
Iris technology offers no superior safeguard against the traditional method of 
issue of ration cards as far as this aspect is concerned.  
Address is a vital segment of information. Audit observed that in a large 
number of cases the ‘address field’ had no valid information as it was filled 
with invalid data like ‘OOO’ and some of them were blank. This clearly 
establishes that there is no control to prevent issue of ration cards without 
information relating to address being captured.  

Chapter II – Audit of Transactions 
 81
The objective of the project is to do away with door-to-door verification.  
Scrutiny however, revealed that this objective had not been achieved as the 
iris technology could not prevent issue of duplicate (bogus) cards. In a large 
number of cases the department had to resort (January 2007) to verification 
of particulars by door-to-door visits with the help of the district administration.  
Government while accepting that there were instances of issue of cards with 
fictitious addresses stated that the deficiencies would be rectified during the 
proposed intensive door-to-door verification. The reply is not acceptable. 
When the iris technology was adopted for issue of ration cards, the envisaged 
benefit was that door-to-door verification could be dispensed with. Thus, this 
objective of adopting iris technology has been defeated. 
Issue of cards to families 
which do not satisfy 
income criteria 
The new iris technology did not offer any solution better than the conventional 
method with regard to the risk of issuing cards to families who do not satisfy 
the income criteria. Government sought to justify this by stating that biometric 
technologies cannot offer solutions to wrong declarations of income by the 
applicants. The Government’s reply only confirms the audit observation. 
Cards issued without Iris 
Image (Null-Iris cards) 
The basic requirement for issue of iris based ration card is to capture iris 
images of all the family members. Scrutiny revealed that in the State as whole, 
25.27 lakh iris cards covering a population of 1.06 crore were issued without 
the capture of iris image of even a single family member of the card holder. 
The subsidy involved in these cards was Rs 269.21 crore for the year 2008-09 
alone which is a significant part of  the total subsidy of Rs 1,681 crore (to end 
of February 2009). Government replied (June 2009) that cases of generation of 
null iris cards by the incharges of DPL centres by misusing the provisions 
were found and that penalties were bei ng levied on the service providers for 
these deficiencies. The reply is not ac ceptable. The system as adopted and 
operated lacked basic and vital control for prevention of issue of ration cards 
without capture of critical data such as iris images. 
Iris Database:  The main objective of adoption of the iris technology was to 
prevent issue of more than one card to a family. The iris technology as 
adopted and operated cannot prevent issue of more than one card to a family at 
any DPL centre. There is inherent technological limitation to establish the 
family relationship by comparing the iris images of the family members. 
Further, since the data of iris images captured at various DPL centres are not 
available in an integrated database with an arrangement to access the same 
from each DPL centre the issue of further cards to the members of the same 
family at other DPL centres is also not prevented. 
Thus, the Government lost sight of the fact that the issue of ration cards is not 
individual based but the focus is a family as a unit as the entitlements are 
linked to the family and that the iris technology is useful for establishing the 
bonafides of an individual. 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 82
Thus, the methodology of iris based issue of ration cards as adopted and 
operated which involved an expenditure of Rs 106.88 crore was inappropriate 
as it offers no solutions superior to the conventional method with regard to the 
vulnerability concerns mentioned above.  
MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION AND URBAN 
DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
(Hyderabad Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board) 
2.1.2 Excess payment to the contractors  
Incorrect regulation of payments for earthwork excavation involving 
blasting component resulted in exce ss payment to the contractors to the 
extent of Rs 83.77 lakh which needs to be recovered. 
Hyderabad Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board (Board), awarded 
contract of “Krishna Drinking Water Supply Project – Phase II” to four different 
contractors in four packages. 
As per para 4(II) of preamble to SSR 2004-05 and Note (2) thereto read with 
Government Memo of May 2004, for earthwork excavation for laying pipelines 
in restricted places where the depth is less than 1.5 times the width, an extra 
75 per cent  on the rate of earthwork is allowed. However, the above extra 
percentage in respect of excavation in restricted places is not to be allowed for 
items involving blasting component which may be taken as 1/3 of the cost. In 
other words, for excavation involving blasting component the extra percentage 
of 75 per cent  is to be allowed after deduction of 1/3 rate towards blasting 
component. 
Audit scrutiny (August and September 2008) of the records of the General 
Managers (Engineering), Project Division III, Proj ect Division V and Project 
Division VI of the Board revealed that the rate for earthwork excavation 
involving blasting as per SSR 2004-05 was Rs 96.72/cum. The Divisions V & 
VI while making payments towards earthwork excavation in areas where the 
depth is less than 1.5 times the width, allowed the extra 75 per cent on the full 
rate of the earthwork instead of on 2/3 rate in violation of existing provisions. 
As against the rate of Rs 151/cum to be allowed the Divisions allowed  
Rs 176.10/cum. A total quantity of 3,58,946.47 cum of earthwork involving 
blasting was executed in the three packages. Thus, the Divisions 4 V and VI 
made an excess payment of Rs 83.77 lakh to the contractors in the three 
packages
5 on earthwork as follows: 
                                                 
4 Project Division III had applied the correct rate while making payment 
5 Package I – M/s NCC-SMC-IVRCL (JV) at 7.02 per cent less than estimated contract value 
(ECV); Package II – M/s TAIPPL-IHP-KCCPL-BRCPL (JV) at 7.07 per cent less than ECV;  
Package III – M/s L&T Ltd at 7 per cent less than ECV 

Chapter II – Audit of Transactions 
 83
 (Rupees in lakh) 
Package Quantity of earthwork 
executed where blasting is 
involved (cubic metres) 
Amount  
paid (at the rate of  
Rs 176.10/cum) 
Amount admissible 
(at the rate of  
Rs 151.00/cum) 
Excess 
payment to 
contractors 
I 208332.12 341.12 292.50 48.62 
II 67659.31 110.72 94.94 15.78 
III 82955.04 135.86 116.49 19.37 
Total 358946.47    587.70 503.93 83.77 
The excess payment of Rs 83.77 lakh needs to be recovered from the contractors. 
The matter was reported to Government in March 2009 (also reminded in May 
2009); reply had not been received (August 2009). 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND COMMUNICATIONS 
DEPARTMENT (Electronically Deliverable Services) 
2.1.3 Unifie-X Gateway Project 
Lack of in-depth project appraisal at  the initial stage led to a Unifie-X 
Gateway Project setup at a cost of  Rs 6.36 crore being shelved. 
The State Government as part of its IT  initiatives took up a project named 
‘Unifie-X Gateway Project’ in March 2004.  The project was felt necessary as 
different service providers like eSeva, AP Online, RAJiv, etc. have to access 
different databases separately, liaise with the departmental officials and enter 
into Service Level Agreement (SLA) with each Government Department in 
the absence of a Gateway. 
M/s Intel Solutions Services Ltd., Bangalore was engaged to provide the 
services for designing, developing, integrating, testing, deploying and 
development of connectors as per the specifications laid down by a consultant
6 
to the Department of IT&C. M/s. Ram Informatics Lt d., Hyderabad was 
engaged in April 2006 for migration of eSeva services to Unifie-X Gateway 
and maintenance of application server. A total amount of Rs 6.36 crore  
(Rs 5.43 crore for creation of Unifie-X Gateway and consultation + Rs 0.93 
crore for development of Software) wa s spent on the project implementation 
from March 2004 to December 2007. The Project was, however shelved in 
December 2007. 
During the course of audit scrutiny of the office of the Commissioner, 
Electronically Deliverable Services (EDS) in January 2009 audit evaluated the 
merits/demerits of shelving the project. Audit examination revealed that the 
following benefits accrued from the project: 
                                                
 
6M/s Hasselfree, consultant to Department of IT&C for the project 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 84
Schematic diagram of existing system: 
Schematic diagram of Gateway System: 
• Department can give a single access permission to the Gateway, which 
ensures data integrity, security and management. 
• A point of integration between service seekers and service providers is 
facilitated.  The service providers need not approach various Government 
Departments. 
• A standardised, secure and reliable conduit of message transfer between 
service seekers and service providers is facilitated. 
• As there is a single point of access for common services, an efficient fault 
tolerant mechanism with alternate routings can be put in place. 
The project functioned from July 2005 to December 2007. HMWS&SB
7 , 
APCPDCL8, RTC9, BSNL10, etc. were provided conn ectivity through Unifie-X 
Gateway and more than 1.6 lakh number of transactions have taken place up to 
January 2007 (as per reports available up to January 2007). 
                                                 
7 Hyderabad Metropolitan Water Supply & Sewerage Board  
8 AP Central Power Distribution Company Limited 
9 Road Transport Corporation 
10 Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
Other services 
Unifie-X Gateway eSeva
AP Online 
RAJiv
Others
Municipal taxes 
Water Board 
Electricity charges 
AP Online eSeva RAJiv Others 
Municipal Corporations Electricity Departments Water Boards 

Chapter II – Audit of Transactions 
 85
The reasons cited by the Government for shelving the project in December 
2007 and the audit remarks are tabulated below: 
Reasons cited by the Government Audit remarks 
The design makes a single point 
failure. 
Any integrated system suffers from these 
kind of vulnerabilities/risks. If this was 
considered as an unacceptable risk, the 
project should not have been taken up in the 
first place. 
Scalability of Unifie-X Gateway 
was designed with augmenting the 
infrastructure, which requires 
additional investments. 
Any up-gradation of a system requires 
additional investment. 
The processes require continuous 
support. 
Any IT system requires support. 
The reasons advanced for shelving the project lack substance and if these were 
considered to be bonafide problems, the initial investment should have been 
avoided altogether. Thus, lack of indepth project appraisal at the initial stage 
led to the project setup at a cost of Rs 6.36 crore being shelved. 
The matter was reported to Government in July 2009; reply had not been 
received (August 2009). 
IRRIGATION AND COMMAND AREA DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT (Irrigation Wing)  
2.1.4 Incomplete lift irrigation project 
Failure to firm up specifications before award of works and delay in 
approval of the revised estimates re sulted in non-completion of the 
Vontimitta lift irrigation scheme in Kadapa District even after ten years 
and the expenditure of Rs 2.24 crore incurred thereon remained unfruitful. 
With a view to providing irrigation facility to 493 acres in Vontimitta Mandal 
of Kadapa District, Government accorded (March 1999) administrative 
approval for a lift irrigation scheme on Pennar River to feed Vontimitta Tank. 
Chief Engineer, Minor Irrigation accord ed technical sanction (April 1999) for 
Rs 3.16 crore. Various components of th e scheme were entrusted to different 
agencies for completion by the end of 2004. Audit observed that, the scheme 
has not been put into operation even after ten years from March 1999 due to 
failure of the department to complete some of the major components, as 
follows: 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 86
Component/Sub-work Deficiency noticed 
Name of the work: 
Construction of pressure main from 
sump well to cistern at the head of 
gravity channel. 
Agreement: 22 SE/2003-04  
dated 12 December 2003 
Agreement value: Rs 96.49 lakh 
Expenditure: Rs 1.18 lakh 
Work was entrusted without firm ing up the specifications of 
the pipes in advance. Initially non-pressure (NP) pipes were 
proposed for gravity mains. After award of work, the 
department realised that the NP class pipes were not suitable 
and changed (March 2004) their classification to MS (Mild 
Steel) and concrete pressure pipes. Meanwhile, the contractor 
stopped the work pending approval of the revised estimate 
with revised designs. The revised estimate was approved only 
in May 2006.The contractor did not take up the work and 
the work was terminated. 
The department has again changed (March 2004 and May 
2008) the specifications of the pressure mains to GI pipes 
and that of gravity mains to MS pipes. The cost of the work 
has increased by Rs 3.63 crore and the revised estimate is yet 
to be approved. 
Name of the work: 
Excavation of supply channel 
including CM & CD works 
Agreement: 1 SE/1999-2000  
dated 03 June 1999 
Agreement value: Rs 96.70 lakh 
Expenditure: Rs 102.24 lakh 
The work was taken up under 'Janmabhoomi' programme, 
even before construction of infiltration wells, collection 
sump, pressure mains etc. In June 2004, Government 
decided to discontinue the 'Janmabhoomi' programme and 
the contract was closed after executing work costing 
Rs 1.02 crore. The balance work, estimated to cost Rs 0.26 
crore, has not been taken up so far. 
Name of the work: 
Supply and erection of Machinery 
Agreement: 2 SE/2004-05  
dated 22 May 2004 
Agreement value: Rs 28.01 lakh 
Expenditure: Rs 28.59 lakh 
The contractor supplied nine HP motors and the cable. The 
motors were not installed. The utility of the cable is doubtful 
as the department has now proposed to use 25 sq. mm. cable 
instead of 16 sq. mm. already procured. It was further 
observed that a cable costing Rs 2 lakh was stolen and an 
enquiry was on. The balance work of installation of motors 
and laying of cables, now estimated to cost Rs 33 lakh, has 
not been taken up so far.  
It is clear that the department failed to properly investigate the site conditions 
and to finalise the appropriate specifi cation of pipes for pressure mains and 
gravity mains before commencing the wo rk. This led to alteration of initial 
designs in March 2004 and again in May 2008. 
Laying of pressure mains and gravity mains and installation of motors is 
essential for pumping water from the infiltration wells to the sump well and 
from sump well to the Vontimitta Tank for releasing water to the ayacut. Non 
completion of these core items left the scheme incomplete. 
The revised estimate for the balance works has not yet been approved. As per 
the latest estimate the total cost of the scheme has increased by Rs 4.48 crore 

Chapter II – Audit of Transactions 
 87
(Revised cost of Rs 7.64 crore minus Original cost of Rs 3.16 crore). Thus, due 
to failure of the department to firm up the specifications before award of the 
works and delay in approval of the revised estimates resulted in non-
completion of the scheme till date. The expenditure of Rs 2.24 crore 11 incurred 
during 1999-2005 remained unfruitful and the objective of providing irrigation 
facility to 493 acres of the poor and marginal farmers remained unfulfilled 
even after ten years. 
Government replied (May 2009) that th e specifications of the works were 
changed as per the suggestions of the technical experts to suit the requirements 
of the scheme as per the site conditions and that the revised estimate was 
under examination of the Government. 
The requirements of the scheme and the specifications should have been 
assessed properly before commencing the work. Further, abnormal delay in 
approval of revised estimates and taking up the balance works indicates lack 
of seriousness in the expeditious completion of the scheme. 
IRRIGATION & COMMAND AREA DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT (Projects Wing) 
2.1.5 Excess payment due to improper fixation of market value of 
land 
Adoption of market rates of lands in contravention of Land Acquisition 
Act provisions resulted in excess payment of Rs 2.06 crore. 
As per Section 23 of Land Acquisition (LA) Act, the key parameters for 
fixation of market value of land to be acquired shall be (i) market value of 
land prevailing on the date of publication of notification and (ii) the sale value 
of lands in the vicinity of the land proposed to be acquired. 
Special Collector (LA), Sripadasagar Project (SSP), Hyderabad acquired 
554.27 acres of land during 2006-08 in the limits of Potyala village for 
submergence under SSP (Yellampally). Th e market value of the land in the 
village ranged between Rs 0.30 lakh to Rs 0.60 lakh per acre as per registered 
sale particulars. Instead of adopting these values, the sale values of lands of 
neighbouring Murmoor village, which ranged from Rs 0.46 lakh to Rs 0.82 
lakh per acre were taken into consideration for fixation of market value of land 
in Potyala village and awards were passed accordingly on the plea that the 
value of lands in the same village under acquisition were under-assessed to 
avoid stamp duty and registration fee and as such the transactions were not 
considered.  
                                                
 
11Including: Rs 61.25 lakh on construction of infiltration wells, Rs 17.01 lakh on power supply 
arrangements, Rs 6.00 lakh on land acquisition, Rs 0.60 lakh on inspection track,  
Rs 4.69 lakh on erection of transformers, Rs 2.62 lakh on switch room 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 88
The reasons put forth are basically a plea to give higher compensation to land 
owners. The procedure followed in adopting values of neighbouring village 
Murmoor instead of Potyala village is not in accordance with the laid down 
procedure. The LA Act does not provide for deviation from the stipulated 
procedure. The values as recorded in the transactions have to be considered as 
market values. If these were understated, the Registration Department should 
not have registered them. If the transaction values are ignored on the logic of 
understatement to avoid payment of higher registration fee, such an 
interpretation can lead to excessive land compensation and is also not in 
consonance with LA Act. 
Thus, the method followed was in contravention of the provisions of the LA 
Act and resulted in excess payment of Rs 2.06 crore. 
The matter was reported to Government (March 2009); reply had not been 
received (August 2009). 
2.2 Violation of contractual obligations, undue favour to 
contractors and avoidable expenditure 
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION  
(Information and Public Relations) DEPARTMENT 
2.2.1 Violation of rules, etc.  in releasing advertisements 
Government violated the norms in releasing advertisements to newspapers 
and failed to observe economy principles and disregarded propriety 
requirements resulting in additional/avoidable expenditure of Rs 34 crore. 
Empanelment of newspapers 
Release of advertisements by the Special Commissioner, Information and 
Public Relations (CIPR) is covered under the Government orders of July 1984, 
May 1989, July 1992 and January 1994. 
The expenditure incurred by the Government on ‘Advertisements’ during the 
years 2007-08 and 2008-09 was scrutinised in Audit. Apart from compliance 
with rules and regulations, Audit examined whether the expenditure meets the 
requirement of transparency, propriety and Article 14 (equality before law) 
and Article 16 (equality of opportunity) of the Constitution. 
As per Government orders (May 1989), advertisements were to be released 
only to those newspapers with a minimu m paid circulation of 5,000 copies 
having uninterrupted and regular publication for a period of six months.  
Audit scrutiny revealed that during 2007-09, two newspapers of vernacular 
press were added to the empanelment list. In both the cases, Government, in 
violation of the norms laid down, empanelled two newspapers before completion 

Chapter II – Audit of Transactions 
 89
of six months from the date of la unching of these newspapers and gave 
advertisements as detailed below: 
Name of the 
Newspaper 
Date of  
launching 
Date of 
empanelment 
Value of advertisement 
(Rs in crore) 
P1 22-10-2007 27-12-2007 0.81 
P2 23-03-2008 25-04-2008 6.90 
Even prior to their empanelment, sixteen display advertisements worth 
Rs 91.45 lakh were released to the two newspapers (P1: 9/Rs 31.79 lakh 
during October 2007 and March 2008; P2: 7/Rs 59.66 lakh during March 2008 
and June 2008). 
Government replied (July 2009) that it gave exemption of six months 
continuous period of publication as they were launched with heavy circulation. 
The Government waived the condition with regard to six months period by 
way of ‘relaxing’ the condition. The period of stipulation of six months is vital 
as it tests the capacity of the newspaper to survive on its own for at least six 
months without Government support. 
Release of advertisement on rotation basis 
As per Government orders (May 1989), a dvertisements were to be issued to 
small and big newspapers on rotation basis by maintaining a roster. It was, 
however, noticed that rotation principle was not followed for release of 
advertisements. The department attributed (February 2009) the non-following 
of the roster system to urgency requirements. ‘Rotation’ principle was important 
to ensure equality of opportunity to all the parties. The plea of urgency was 
basically to favour selected parties to the detriment of other parties.  
Economy in space/expenditure 
Economy of space is the fundamental criterion for controlling the expenditure. 
The advertisement should be restricted to the minimum size required for 
communicating the message. However, the following were observed: 
• In 29 out of 32 display advertisements scrutinised in audit, it was noticed 
that advertisements were released without observing the principle of 
economy of space. Comparison of sizes of the same advertisement in 
different newspapers revealed that, nine newspapers  were favoured with 
larger size advertisements indicating non-observance of economy and 
undue benefits to a few favoured newspapers. Additional expenditure 
incurred on advertisements in sizes higher than the minimum size required 
worked out to Rs 10.41 crore. 
• In 11 out of 97 release orders issued during 2007-08 and in 21 out of 134 
release orders issued during 2008-09,  advertisements were issued to 
various newspapers for insertion at selective spots which are charged at 
rates higher than the normal rates resulting in avoidable expenditure of  
Rs 23.61 crore. 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 90
Government while admitting the lapse sought to justify it by stating that bigger 
advertisements were given to newspapers having higher circulation. The party 
P2 was able to come up with high circ ulation right from inception as the six 
months limit was waived and business worth Rs 6.90 crore was given to it in a 
span of just six months. In fact, the party was assured of support even before 
empanelment. Non-following of the rules given resulted in the party P2 being 
favoured and business denied to the other parties. 
Compliance with propriety requirements 
Canons of financial propriety require that public money shall not be utilised 
for the benefit of a particular person or section of the community. Conclusions 
about compliance with requirement is arrived at by scrutinising the contents of 
the advertisement. The expenditure on advertisements highlighting the 
achievements of the Government of its departments increased from Rs 18.75 
crore in 2004-05 to Rs 55.04 crore in 2007-08 and Rs 81.07 crore (up to 
January 2009) in 2008-09. 
Advertisements on behalf of Government Companies/Corporations 
The department of Information and Public Relations (I&PR) is the nodal 
agency for release of advertisements. It was observed that I&PR issued 
advertisements on behalf of Government companies and corporations without 
ensuring whether they had funds available to meet the cost of advertisements. 
Consequently, these organisations expressed funds constraints resulting in the 
expenditure being borne by the Government ultimately. 
Scheme/Subject to which the 
advertisement relates to 
Name of Organisation on behalf 
of which the advertisement was 
released 
Date of insertion of 
advertisement 
Cost 
involved 
(Rs in lakh)
Indiramma Gruhapravesalu AP Sate Housing Corporation 9 October 2007 and 
22 October 2007 
78.07  
Water supply to Hyderabad  Hyderabad Metropolitan Water 
Supply and Sewerage Board 
14 November 2008 15.44  
Indira Kranthi Patham Society for Elimination of Rural 
Poverty 
17 July 2008 6.70  
Amalgamation of BHPV 
industry   
Commissioner, Industries and 
Commerce Department 
10 May 2008 206.00  
The Government in its reply stated that it did not matter who paid the money 
as the expenditure was to be finally borne by the Government. The reply is not 
acceptable. The non-availability of funds  with the Companies/Corporations 
indicates that this was not a normal item of expenditure and was also substantial 
in nature making it unaffordable to be met from their regular budgets. 

Chapter II – Audit of Transactions 
 91
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND COMMUNICATIONS 
AND REVENUE DEPARTMENTS 
2.2.2 Undue benefit to a Company in allotment of land 
Government passed on undue benefit of Rs 165.75 crore to a private firm 
in allotment of 50 acres of land.  
Government in Information Technology and Communications (IT&C) 
Department declared (March 2005) Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) Policy and offered to alienate land for developing 
Information Technology (IT).   
Government allotted (December 2008) 50 acres of land belonging to the 
Police department (25 acres), and Visakhapatnam Urban Development 
Authority (25 acres) in the Kapuluppada village of Visakhapatnam District to 
M/s Satyam Computers Limited (Compa ny) on the basis of an application 
received from the firm. As ascertained by the Department from the District 
Collector, the prevailing value realised through auction varied from Rs 4.00 
crore to Rs 4.55 crore per acre.  
Audit scrutinised (February 2009) the records relating to allotment of land by 
the Revenue Department and found that the Revenue Department allotted the 
land 
(i) without giving wide publicity prescribing the starting date and last date for 
receipt of applications 
(ii) by not selecting the allottees in a fair manner from the applications so 
received. 
Thus, the transaction was violative of the Constitutional provisions of equality 
of opportunity and did not meet the requirement of transparency. 
As per the conditions of the allotment of land for IT policy stipulated  
by Government in IT& C Department, the Company selected was entitled to 
0.30 acres of land for every 100 jobs created at concessional price and no 
concession was applicable to areas allotted in excess of this limit. The 
Company was therefore entitled to a rebate of Rs 5 crore or 7.5 acres
12 of land 
at concessional price (which was fixed by the Government at Rs 10 lakh per 
acre for such allotments) and market value of the land was payable for the 
remaining land. However, as against 7.5 acres of land entitled at concessional 
rate of Rs 10 lakh per acre, Government allotted 50 acres of land at a 
concessional price of Rs 10 lakh per acre. As against Rs 170 crore (Rs 4 crore 
X 42.5 acres) payable, the Company paid a meagre amount of Rs 4.25 crore 
(42.5 acres X Rs 10 lakh) towards cost of the land allotted in excess (i.e. 42.5 
acres) of the limit prescribed in ICT policy. 
                                                
 
12Rs 20,000 X 2,500 jobs (promised by the Company) or 0.30 acres of land X 2500/100  
whichever is less 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 92
Thus, allotment of land in excess of the limits prescribed in ICT policy 
resulted in an undue benefit of at least Rs 165.75 crore13 to the Company. 
Government (in Revenue Department) in its reply stated (June 2009) that the 
land was allotted to the Company at concessional price of Rs 10 lakh per acre 
as decided by Government (in IT&C Department) in the year 2005. The reply 
overlooks the fact that Company was entitled to only 7.5 acres of land at 
concessional price (Rs 10 lakh per acre) and the remaining 42.5 acres of land 
should have been charged at the prevailing market value. Failure to do so 
resulted in undue benefit of Rs 165.75 crore to the Company.   
INFRASTRUCTURE & INVESTMENT (PORTS -I) 
DEPARTMENT 
2.2.3 Deficiencies in award of work relating to development of 
Machilipatnam Port 
The contract for development of Port  at location ‘Gilakaladinne’ near 
Machilipatnam of Krishna District was given to a party which did not 
initially submit bid for that location. Government is saddled with the 
payment of Rs 335 crore as against ‘nil’ investment initially contemplated. 
The State Government decided to develop all weather, deep water multipurpose 
port at Machilipatnam. In response to the call of expression of interest 
(September 2005) nine firms responded, out of which five were short-listed for 
issue of bid documents. After issue of bids and a pre-bid meeting, only one 
party, a consortium of four companies (Consortium) which included M/s Maytas 
Infrastructure Pvt. Limited, submitted the bid for development of the port at 
‘Gogileru’. The work was entrusted to the Consortium in January 2007 on 
‘Build, Own, Operate and Transfer’ basis.  Subsequently, after finalisation of 
the bid and after entrustment of the work Government decided (January 2008) 
to develop the port at ‘Gilakaladinne’. The Consortium demanded (January 
2008) a payment of Rs 335 crore for change in the location and this was 
agreed to (January 2008) by the Government. Director of Ports also handed 
over (September 2008) Government land to the extent of 412.57 acres
14.  
Audit observed the following deficiencies with regard to award of work: 
Pre-bid meeting was held on 12 January 2006. Given that the work involved 
was a complex task of construction of deep water port adequate time was 
required for the bidders to prepare their detailed estimates. The last date for 
submission was fixed as 20 February 2006 and piece-meal extensions were 
given from time to time up to 29 March 2006 initially and up to 22 April 2006 
by which time only one bid was received. No further extensions were given to 
elicit bids from other parties to obtain competitive offers. Stipulation of 
                                                
 
13(50 – 7.5) acres X Rs 4.00 crore = Rs 170.0 0 crore – amount received Rs 4.25 crore =  
 Rs 165.75 crore 
14Out of 6262 acres of land offered by Government in RFP document 

Chapter II – Audit of Transactions 
 93
submission of financial bids simultaneous ly with technical bids has the merit 
that the parties at this stage do not have knowledge of how many parties will 
be participating. This minimises the chances of collusion.  Such a procedure 
was not adopted. 
At the time of calling for tenders, the Government had not made up its mind as 
to the location to develop the Port. Yet, it failed to insist on submission of 
financial bids for both the locations. This was necessary so as to get the bids 
for both the locations through the competitive bid route and not after the price 
bids are opened. In the instant case, although Government specified in the NIT 
that the contractors quote bids for development of port at either of the 
locations – ‘Gogileru’ and ‘Gilakaladinne’, the Government did not insist on 
submission of financial bid for ‘Gilakaladinne’ before opening the bid. The 
additional cost of Rs 335 crore claimed by the Consortium suffers from a 
major deficiency of vitiating the tender process in that the port was to be 
developed on a revenue sharing basis with zero investment by the 
Government. The acceptance of bid from the firm was objectionable as it did 
not submit any bid originally for ‘Gilakaladinne’. If the undertaking of 
development of the port at the alternative location was to be made by financial 
contribution from Government then this would have been a major departure 
from the conditions initially stipulated while calling bids. Fresh bids should 
have been called as per the prescribed procedures.  
The agreement clause (No. 3.6) facilitated the Consortium to raise loans not 
based on their financial capability but by mortgaging Government land and 
future revenue streams from the port activities. This was tantamount to 
Government standing guarantee for loans raised by a private party as 
Government land has been mortgaged. The contractual provision is beset with 
the risk of the party diverting the funds raised by mortgaging Government 
assets. 
Audit also carried out a vulnerability assessment of the revenue sharing 
arrangement. The gross income can be a dversely affected by understatement 
of revenue. The revenue is collected by the operator throughout the year. This 
requires that a Government representative be associated with this revenue 
collection throughout the period of operation on 24X7 basis to ensure that all 
the revenue collected by the operator is brought into books of accounts. The 
contract does not stipulate such a requirement and the omission can be 
considered as a major flaw providing an avenue to the operator to understate 
the revenue realised. 
Although the stipulated date of financial closure elapsed on 21 April 2009 the 
Consortium was yet to fulfill the conditions prescribed (clause 3.2) and 
commence the work as of June 2009. 
The Government stated (April 2009) that M/s MAYTAS submitted the proposal 
for development of the Port at Gogileru near Machilipatnam with an estimated 
cost of Rs 1,255 crore. Due to representations received from the public it was 
decided to develop the Port at Gilakaladinne and not at Gogileru. MAYTAS 
sought payment of Rs 335 crore for development of the Port at the new 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 94
location. It further stated that the payment of additional costs to the firm was 
certified by M/s WAPCOS 15 (India) Limited, New Delhi. The reply is not 
acceptable. From the point of view of safeguarding Government’s interest, 
competitive bidding procedure is prescribed. The benefit of calling for bids 
accrues only when sufficient number of pa rties participate in the bids and give 
their quotations. To ensure that enough number of people participate what was 
required was uninterrupted period of sufficiently long duration given the 
complexity of the project to be executed. Fixation of short duration for 
submission of bids and piecemeal extensions of again short duration deters 
potential bidders from making their own assessment of the magnitude of work 
for submission of price bid. In this case , piecemeal extensions  were given till 
the firm MAYTAS submitted price bid. Participation of only a single party has 
gone against the very basic principle of participation of sufficient number of 
parties and competitive bidding. Once MAYTAS did not submit a financial 
bid for the other location at ‘Gilakaladinne’ it has to be treated at par with 
other firms which did not submit any price bid. Since no bids were received 
from any of the parties for the location ‘Gilakaladinne’ fresh bids should have 
been called giving adequate time in the initial stage itself instead of giving 
piecemeal extensions of short duration as was done earlier. The award of work 
involving payment (Rs 335 crore) was violative of the NIT conditions which 
stipulated no payment by Government. 
2.2.4 Implementation of agreements relating to construction and 
operation of Kakinada Port 
Government passed on undue benefit of Rs 52.52 crore to a Company 
entrusted with operations of the Kakinada Port as it failed to ensure 
compliance of agreement clauses an d also by modifying the agreement 
clauses.  
Government developed (1996-97) a deep-w ater port at Kakinada with three 
berths at a cost of Rs 293 crore a nd entrusted (March 1999) the work of 
operating the existing three berths, deve lopment and operation of one more 
berth and management of common facilities of the entire Kakinada port to 
International Seaports Pvt. Ltd. (Company) on ‘Build, Operate, Maintain, Share 
and Transfer’ basis. The duration of the contract was initially for 20 years. 
Audit scrutiny (January and February 2009) of implementation of the agreements 
between the State Government and the Company revealed the following 
deficiencies: 
Short collection of Lease Charges 
As per clause 7.2 of the agreement, the lease charges shall be payable from the 
date of handing over of land at the existing rates. 
                                                
 
15Water And Power Consultancy Services 

Chapter II – Audit of Transactions 
 95
The Government order of January 1994 regulates the computation of lease 
rentals. The steps involved are as follows: 
Step (1) Ascertain the registered market value at the time of handing over of 
the land 
Step (2) Reduce this land value to 40.30 per cent 
Step (3) Fix lease rent at 6 per cent of the reduced registered market value as 
computed in step (2). 
Step (4) Increase lease rental every three years on the base rent fixed in step (3) 
above. 
The lease charges shall be payable from the date of handing over of the land at 
the rates existing. The lease charges in respect of reclaimed lands shall be as 
follows: 
Period of lease Lease charges 
First 5 years 25 per cent  
Next 5 years 50 per cent 
Next 5 years 75 per cent 
Next 5 years and beyond 100 per cent 
Accordingly, Audit computed the rate payable by the party for different pieces 
of land as given in Appendix-2.1. It was observed that the rates charged were 
far below these rates resulting in an undue benefit of Rs 3.52 crore to the party. 
The lease rent was fixed on the basis of lease rents prevailing in 1994 and 
extrapolating these figures by increasing them by 15 per cent every three years.  
The correct procedure would have been to adopt the registration value of land 
pertaining to the date of handing over of the land for the purpose of 
computation of lease rental. This was not done. 
Short collection of Government’s share of operational income 
As per clause 7.3 of the agreement, the Company shall share the income with 
the State Government on percentage sharing basis for various years as given in 
column (3) of Table 1 (Appendix-2.2
). If for the years, amounts worked out on 
the basis of these percentages in column (3) are less than the minimum 
guarantee share amounts (MGA) stipulated in column (2) the Company shall 
pay the MGA. 
For the years 1999-2000 and 2000-01, the Government collected an amount of 
Rs 27 crore towards MGA as per the agreement.  
For the next three years i.e., 2001-02 to 2003-04 amount receivable was Rs 60 
crore, i.e. the MGA fixed. As agains t this, the Company paid Rs 26.60 crore 
only. In 2003, the amounts stipulated in column (2) of Table-1 ( Appendix-2.2) 
were revised as shown in column (2) of Table-2 (Appendix-2.2). The underlying 
principles in this modification were: 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 96
(i) Adoption of amount already received for the years 2001-02 to 2003-04 as 
MGA legitimising the short collection. 
(ii) The short collection in the years 2001-02 to 2003-04 was to be compensated 
by MGA higher than originally stipulated so that the net present value of 
the total MGA amount discounted at a rate of 12 per cent  remained the 
same. 
This resulted in further short collection of MGA of Rs 15.60 crore for the 
years 2004-05 to 2006-07 as compared to wh at was initially stipulated in the 
agreement. For the year 2007-08 the amount paid i.e., Rs 30.50 crore as 
revenue shareable as per column (3) of Table-2 of Appendix-2.2 was more 
than MGA (column 2) of Table-2 (Appendix-2.2). The clause relating to MGA 
was deleted (January 2009) from the year 2008-09 onwards. 
Thus, the reduction of MGA for the period 2001-02 to 2006-07 and 
subsequent deletion of clause from th e year 2008-09 relating to MGA after 
finalisation of selection process and during operation of the contract was 
detrimental to the Government interest. This only vitiated the sanctity of the 
tendering procedure resulting in undue benefit of Rs 49 crore
16 to the Company 
for the period 2001-07. 
The total undue benefit passed on to the Company in the collection of lease 
rentals (Rs 3.52 crore) and Government’s share of revenue income (Rs 49 crore) 
amounted to Rs 52.52 crore as of March 2009. Apart from this the benefit will 
continue to accrue during the remaining years of the agreement. 
Government in its reply (June 2009) stated that the lease charges were 
computed as per the Government order of 1994. It was also stated that there 
was rescheduling of un-escalated MGA and from the year 2009 the Government 
took decision to delete the MGA clause. The reply is not acceptable. The 
Government order of January 1994 was not correctly applied. While computing 
the lease rentals the latest registration value of the land was not adopted 
resulting in short collection of revenue.  As regards the sharing of operational 
income, the stipulation of MGA was an important condition of the original 
agreement having substantial implication for the State Government to ensure 
that they get a minimum return from the investment made in the project. Any 
modification of this clause was violative of the sanctity of the original 
agreement and the terms and conditions on which the work was awarded. 
                                                
 
16Rs 33.40 crore for 2001-02 to 2003-04; Rs 15.60 crore for 2004-05 to 2006-07 

Chapter II – Audit of Transactions 
 97
IRRIGATION AND COMMAND AREA DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT (Irrigation Wing) 
2.2.5 Avoidable extra expenditure due to inappropriate rejection of 
bids initially received 
Incorrect decision to reject bids in the first call resulted in avoidable extra 
expenditure of Rs 49.11 crore besides delaying improved irrigation 
facilities to the farmers.  
Government accorded (May 2006) administrative approval for modernisation 
of Pennar Delta System at a cost of Rs 340.50 crore. The works were divided 
into different packages. 
Tenders were invited (August 2006) for the package works viz., ‘Package 34 – 
Kanigiri Reservoir and its canal system’, ‘Package 35 – Survepalli canal 
system’ and ‘Package 40 – Jaffer Saheb canal system’ and the bids received 
were as follows: 
   
(Rs in crore) 
Package 
No. 
Name of the Party Value of bid 
received 
Estimate  
(IBM Value) 
Percentage 
variation 
34 A. Prabhakar Reddy & Co. 57.28 55.88  2.513 
35 P. Venku Reddy,  
Sri Durga Chambers, Hyderabad 
57.25 57.54 (-) 0.50 
40 P. Venku Reddy,  
Sri Durga Chambers, Hyderabad 
39.90 40.72 (-) 2.00 
The bids received were very close to the Internal Bench Mark (IBM) value 
and within the upper ceiling limit of 5 per cent  prescribed by Government. 
Despite this the bids were not accept ed (March 2007) on the plea that only 
single bids were received. 
When bids were reinvited, the respons e was poor and could be finalised only 
after repeated attempts as detailed be low leading to extra expenditure of  
Rs 49.11 crore.  
         (Rs in crore) 
Package 
No. 
Name of the party Tender call 
number 
Agreement value 
(Date) 
Lowest bid 
in 1st call 
Extra 
expenditure 
34 M/s. G.V.R Constructions Pvt. 
Ltd., Hyderabad 
6th call 76.89  
(19 May 2008) 
57.28 19.61 
35 M/s. G.S.R. & Co., Hyderabad 5th call 80.40  
(25 April 2008) 
57.25 23.15 
40 M/s. Engineering Projects 
(India) Ltd., Hyderabad 
3rd call 46.25  
(4 February 2008) 
39.90  6.35 
Total 203.54 154.43 49.11 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 98
Non-acceptance of the initial bids received  earlier resulted in those parties not 
taking part in further bidding process. 
The initial rejection of bids on the basi s that only single bids were received 
was inappropriate given that the values quoted were close to the IBM value 
and resulted in avoidable extra expenditure of Rs 49.11 crore. In fact, the 
subsequent award of work for the three packages were also on the basis of 
single bids. The delayed award of works (May, April and February of 2008) 
deprived the farmers of the benefit of early realisation of improved irrigation 
facilities. 
The matter was reported to Government in February 2009; reply had not been 
received (August 2009). 
IRRIGATION AND COMMAND AREA DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT (Projects Wing) 
2.2.6 Avoidable extra expenditure due to non-finalisation of tenders 
within validity period  
Failure to place order within the valid ity period of the first tender call 
resulted in placement of order on the same contractor in the second call 
for an additional value of Rs 2.68 crore. 
Government accorded (July 1998 and January 2004) administrative approval 
for the 'Sangambanda Balancing Reservoir Project in Mahboobnagar District'.  
Construction of earth dam, spillway and canals of the project was completed 
by August 2006 at a cost of Rs 50 crore. The department invited tenders in 
January 2006 for the balance component of work 'Supply and erection of 
radial gates, hoist arrangements and stoplog gates to the spillway'. The bid 
evaluation committee recommended (March 2006) for acceptance of the single 
bid received with a quoted price of Rs 10.89 crore. The Government finalised 
the bid (February 2007) after a delay of more than ten months. The contractor 
backed out on the plea that the tender validity period of six months (up to 
September 2006) has expired and the rates of materials and labour have 
increased. When tenders were invited again the same contractor emerged as 
the lowest bidder but the bid value was Rs 13.57 crore, which was Rs 2.68 
crore more than the price quoted by hi m in the earlier tender call. The work 
was entrusted to the contractor in September 2007. 
Thus, non finalisation of tenders in the first call within the validity period 
resulted in avoidable extra expenditure of  Rs 2.68 crore. Besides, due to delay 
of nearly 18 months in entrustment of  the work, the dam and canals already 
constructed with an expenditure of Rs 50 crore were not put to use and there 
was delay in realising the objective of pr oviding irrigation facilities to the 
targeted ayacut of 15,900 acres.  
The matter was reported to Government in March 2009; reply had not been 
received (August 2009). 

Chapter II – Audit of Transactions 
 99
 REVENUE AND TRANSPORT, ROADS & BUILDINGS  
(R&B Wing) DEPARTMENTS 
2.2.7 Undue benefit to a firm in formation of 40 feet wide road 
Government conferred undue favour to a firm by allotting a valuable 
piece of land in exchange for disputed land of smaller size. Change in 
alignment of road resulted in Rs 31 lakh already incurred becoming 
wasteful.  
As a part of the process for development of deep water port at Gangavaram 
(Visakhapatnam District) the EE (R&B) Division, Marripalem, Visakhapatnam 
(EE), requisitioned (March 2007) three acres of land in Yarada for formation 
of 40 ft. connectivity road from Hilltop road to Fish Landing Centre. 
When the draft notification and declar ations for acquisition of land were 
published (June 2007) in the News Papers, M/s Brook Fields & Resorts Pvt. 
Ltd., Visakhapatnam represented (June 2007) that the alignment of the road 
proposed by the EE was passing through the land purchased by them, 
rendering other part of their land wasteful and, therefore, suggested alternative 
alignment along the boundary of their land. The firm offered to give 2.10 acres 
of their land required for the road in the alternative alignment in exchange of 
another piece of Government land admeasuring 3.00 acres. This request was 
acceded to and the orders were issued by the Government permitting 
allotment
17 of land to the firm despite obje ctions by Special Deputy Collector, 
Land Acquisition, SEZ-I, Visakhapatnam (LAO). This was a clear favour to 
the firm and detrimental to the Government in view of the following:  
• The land offered by the firm was in the hilly track and the ownership was 
under dispute as the ownership of the land offered by the firm was not 
conferred on the original enjoyers from whom the firm claimed to have 
purchased the land as opined by the LAO. 
• The Government land has commercial value for development of resorts 
business at the beach.   
• The EE had already incurred an amount of Rs 30 lakh towards development 
of kutcha road falling in the original alignment.  
Thus, the action of the Government in al lotting a piece of 3.00 acres of land to 
the firm in exchange of a disputed land of a smaller size not only resulted in 
conferring undue favour to the firm but the expenditure of Rs 30 lakh 
(incurred by the EE) on the development of kutcha road and another Rs 1 lakh 
(incurred by the LAO) for publication of DN and DD was also rendered 
wasteful due to change in alignment of the road. 
The matter was reported to Government in March 2009; reply had not been 
received (August 2009). 
                                                
 
17 information regarding the date of actual handing over of the land to the firm awaited from 
the department 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 100
YOUTH ADVANCEMENT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
(Youth Services) DEPARTMENT 
2.2.8 Commencement of work of Multipurpose Cultural Centre 
without ensuring sufficient funds 
The Multipurpose cultural centre at Hyderabad though conceived in 
December 2003 had not come up as of February 2009 mainly due to 
taking up of the project without ensuring in advance availability of funds.  
This resulted in the objective of pr omotion of culture not being achieved. 
The delay also led to cost escalation of about Rs 4 crore.  
Government of In dia (GOI) released 18  (October 2004) Rs one crore for 
construction of  ‘Multipurpose Cultura l Centre (MPCC)’ at Kavuri Hills in 
Hyderabad under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for promotion of culture. 
The objectives for construction of MPCC are (i) Coordination of functions of 
various cultural fields, (ii) Protection, Preservation of Classical and Folk Art 
Forms, Art and Architecture and (iii) Li brary, indoor and open air theatres for 
performances, etc. The estimated cost of the project was Rs 6 crore to be 
shared by GOI and the State Government on 1:1 basis. The Director, State 
Gallery of Fine Arts was to monitor the project under supervision of the 
Director of Culture.   
The work was entrusted (February 2005) to a contractor at an estimated 
contract value of Rs 4.39 crore with a stipulation to complete it within 12 
months of handing over the site. The site was handed over to the contractor in 
April 2005 and the work was scheduled to be completed by April 2006. The 
construction of the MPCC building had not been completed (expenditure 
incurred as of March 2009: Rs 1.79 crore) and the work was stopped (July 
2006) midway by the contractor at a stag e where a mere structure with slab of 
ground floor was laid and pillars erected for first floor. 
Audit scrutiny (February 2008) of the records in the office of the Director of 
Culture revealed the following: 
• The work was taken up by the Director, State Gallery of Fine Arts without 
ensuring availability of adequate funds for the project. GOI released Rs 1 
crore as part of its share in October 2004 itself. The State Government 
delayed the release of its share till the year 2006. The State Government 
released Rs 34 lakh in June 2006, i.e., after the scheduled date of 
completion of April 2006, Rs 50 lakh in June 2007 and another Rs 50 lakh 
in February 2008. Further, the amount of Rs 34 lakh released in June 2006 
lapsed as the amount was not utilised on account of non-preferring of the 
bill in time by the Director, State Gallery of Fine Arts. This resulted in the 
contractor stopping (July 2006) the work for want of prompt payments.  
                                                
 
18The State Government accorded administrative sanction for Rs 6 crore in December 2003 

Chapter II – Audit of Transactions 
 101
• The contractor expressed his inability to resume the work unless his 
demands for revision of cost, compensation of losses suffered by him and 
prompt payment on completion of works were agreed to and the contractor 
was advised (January 2009) to submit revised estimates for the balance 
work as per SSR 2008-09. The cost of balance works at SSR 2008-09 was 
estimated at Rs 6.36 crore (yet to be approved by the department). 
Given that the scheduled period of completion of construction of the building 
was only one year, the Director should have ensured advance receipt of full 
funds required for the project by the time of commencement of the work in 
April 2005. Failure to do so resulted in the contractor backing out for want of 
prompt payments and the MPCC building remains incomplete even after four 
years of the release of funds by GOI. The objectives envisaged for promotion 
of culture also remained unachieved. The inordinate delay also resulted in cost 
escalation of about Rs 4 crore on the project.  
Government in its reply (June 2009), while accepting the above audit points, 
stated that efforts would be made to complete the project at the earliest. 
2.3 Idle investments/idle establis hments/blocking of funds/delays 
in commissioning of equipment;  diversion/misutilisation of 
funds 
IRRIGATION AND COMMAND AREA DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT (Projects Wing) 
2.3.1 Execution of work without obtaining prior clearance from 
Forest Department 
Excavation of canal and distributar ies under Somasila Project without 
obtaining prior clearance from Fores t Department resulted in idle 
investment of Rs 5.48 crore. 
According to Section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 as amended in 
1988, prior approval of the Central Government is required for use of forest 
land or any portion thereof for non-forest purpose. 
The South Feeder Channel (SFC), one of the three main canals under the 
Somasila Project in Nellore District, runs for a length of 74.725 KM and was 
intended for creation of 25,000 acres of dry and 16,000 acres of wet ayacut 
through its 45 distributaries. At KM 58.720 of the SFC, an aqueduct was 
required to be constructed at Yeturu village in Chejerla Mandal of Nellore 
District. Part of the canal from KM 58.600 to 58.800 and from KM 70.500 to 
71.950 including aqueduct at KM 58.720 fell in forest land. Irrigation facilities 
required to be provided for land beyond KM 58.720 was 5,500 acres and this 
was possible only if the aqueduct was constructed. As this location falls under 
forest area, approval of Central Government was a pre-requisite for construction 
of the aqueduct. The execution of work beyond KM 58.720 required forest 
clearance.  

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 102
Audit scrutiny revealed that without obtaining forest clearance in advance, 
which is mandatory as per the Act, the department went ahead with the 
excavation of entire length of canal and 41 distributaries which includes works 
beyond KM 58.720 valuing Rs 5.48 crore executed between 1989-90 and 
2004-05. The forest clearance for construction of the aqueduct has not been 
received so far and the aqueduct at KM 58.720 has not been constructed as of 
date (January 2009). Due to non-completion of the aqueduct, water was not 
being released beyond KM 58.720.  
Thus, undertaking excavation of canal wi thout obtaining forest clearance has 
resulted in blockage of funds to the tune of Rs 5.48 crore. Besides, the 
intended benefit of providing irrigation facilities to the ay acut of 5,500 acres 
has not been achieved so far. 
The matter was reported to Government in February 2009; reply had not been 
received (August 2009). 
YOUTH ADVANCEMENT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
(Youth Services) DEPARTMENT 
2.3.2 Non-implementation of a Tourism Project 
Taking up of a tourism project in Visakhapatnam without ensuring the 
suitability of land and without firmin g up suitable drawings and designs 
attributable to non-involvement of APTDC at initial stage has led to non-
starting of the work even after two years besides blocking of funds of  
Rs 2.80 crore with APTDC. 
Government of India (GOI) sanctioned (December 2006) Rs 3.50 crore for 
establishment of a Dutch village at Bheemili 19 and Thotlakonda beach circuit, 
in Visakhapatnam District, to depict past history of Dutch settlements, religious 
monuments spanning different eras, for attracting international tourists. The 
Dutch village was to include the components (1) A visitor centre-cum-
restaurant, (2) Dutch Museum, (3) Dutch flavour to buildings and (4) Recreation 
of the Dutch lifestyle. GOI released (December 2006) an amount of Rs 2.80 
crore towards first instalment with a condition that funds should not be kept 
unutilised for more than six months and that the project should be 
commissioned within 24 months i.e., by December 2008. 
Audit scrutiny (February 2008) of the re cords of Tourist Information Officer, 
Visakhapatnam, revealed that the tourism project did not take off and the 
entire amount was lying unutilised with the AP Tourism Development 
Corporation (APTDC)
20, and as of February 2009, detailed drawings, designs 
and the estimates were not ready. 
                                                 
19 Bheemili is a coastal town with Dutch heritage 
20 in the savings bank account of the APTDC with IDBI 

Chapter II – Audit of Transactions 
 103
It was observed that the land 21 originally selected was not suitable. It was not 
directly accessible from the Dutch cemete ry and not suitable to connect to the 
theme of Dutch village. There is no record to show that APTDC which 
executes tourism projects was involved in  preparation of initial proposals of 
the project. Non-selection of a suitable land for the project could be attributed 
to this deficiency. There was also initial delay of one and half years in release 
of funds to APTDC by the Director, Tourism.   
The Director, Tourism, in reply (July 2009), while confirming the audit 
observation stated that the site wa s under finalisation for Bheemili Dutch 
village and final drawings and estimates were under preparation for the beach 
circuit. 
Thus, submission of proposals to GOI without ensuring the suitability of land 
and without firming up the drawings and designs, etc. for the project has 
resulted in non-utilisation of funds with in the stipulated time of two years 
besides blocking up of Rs 2.80 crore. 
The matter was reported to Government in April 2009 (also reminded in June 
2009); reply had not been received (August 2009). 
2.4 Regularity issues and others 
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT 
2.4.1 Lack of follow-up action by the Government departments on 
Vigilance Reports  
As of January 2009, 2966 action taken reports (ATRs) were pending for 
one to twelve years from various administrative departments on the 
Vigilance & Enforcement (V&E) reports.  
Vigilance & Enforcement (V&E) Department was established in the year 1985 
under the administrative control of the Director General, Vigilance & 
Enforcement. The department conducts enquiries into the complaints/petitions, 
etc. received from the citizens. The department also takes up suo moto enquiries, 
verification of engineering/development works after gathering primary evidence 
through its field units located region-wise 22 . The Headquarters Task Force 
comprising the four wings23 scrutinises the reports received from the field units 
and sends final reports to the various administrative departments of the 
Government and the Heads of Departments concerned through the Vigilance 
Commission for taking action on the recommendations made by it. The annual 
budget of the V&E Department is around Rs 18 crore (2008-09).  
                                                
 
21 The Buddhist site of Thotlakonda measuring about 120 acres  
22 Designated as Regional Vigilance & Enforcement Officers 
23 Development Works, Engineering, Natural Resources and Revenue 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 104
Audit scrutiny (January/March 2009) of the records of the Director General, 
V&E Department revealed the following: 
• As of January 2009, 2966 action taken reports 24  (ATRs) were pending 
from various administrative departments on the reports issued by the V&E 
Department. The year-wise details are given in Appendix-2.3
. 
• Of these 1,987 reports were pending for 3 to 12 years.  
• No action was initiated by the admini strative departments on 757 reports 
(26 per cent ) or no information was available with V&E regarding the 
action initiated, if any. Of these, 257 reports were pending for 3 to 12 
years. 
• In 2,209 cases, action though initiated was not complete. Again, of these, 
1,730 reports pertain to 3 to 12 years old. 
• The following five departments topped the list (with regard to huge pendency) 
of departments from whom the ATRs were pending: 
Total No. of reports 
pending as of  
January 2009 
No. of reports on which 
action was initiated but not 
completed 
No. of reports on which 
action yet to be initiated 
Department 
Total > 3 years Total > 3 years Total > 3 years 
Municipal Administration and 
Urban Development 
496 355 401 334 95 21 
Revenue 455 264 359 247 96 17 
Panchayati Raj and Rural 
Development 
321 238 228 189 93 49 
Irrigation & Command Area 
Development 
275 182 226 162 49 20 
Agriculture & Co-operation 185 117 125 102 60 15 
Total 1732 1156 1339 1034 393 122 
Audit observed that neither the Government nor the V&E Department fixed any 
time frame for submission of ATRs by the administrative departments resulting 
in huge pendency of V&E reports with the various administrative departments.  
Non-submission of ATRs by the administrative departments for several years 
is a matter of serious concern. An eff ective utilisation of the V&E Department 
has the potential to yield benefits to Government several times the budget  
(Rs 18 crore) of V&E Department. However, the reports produced through 
laborious efforts of V&E Department have not been properly utilised by the 
Government. This had adverse implications by way of the officials involved 
getting promotions in the meanwhile or retiring besides diluting the deterent 
effect on erring officials.  
The matter was reported to Government in March 2009 (also reminded in 
April 2009); reply had not been received (August 2009). 
                                                
 
24 1997 (5 reports); 1998 (7); 1999 (19); 2000 (28); 2001 (105); 2002 (133); 2003 (227); 2004 
(396); 2005 (618); 2006 (449); 2007 (466), 2008 (492) and 2009 (21) 

Chapter II – Audit of Transactions 
 105
PLANNING DEPARTMENT  
2.4.2 Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme 
Irregularities like non-completion of works, diversions, irregular 
payments, etc. involving Rs 70.29 crore in implementation of MPLAD 
Scheme denied the envisaged benefits to the people at large.  
The “Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS)” 
was designed to enable the Members of Parliament (MPs) to recommend 
works for provision of certain basic facilities with emphasis on the creation of 
durable community assets in their constituencies. The scheme is fully funded 
by Government of India. The District Collector is the Nodal officer at the 
district level and the works are executed by District Rural Development 
Agency (DRDA), District Water Management Agency (DWMA) and Chief 
Planning Officer of the district. 
Scrutiny of the transactions of MPLAD Scheme and accounts of six
25 Chief 
Planning Officers (CPOs) (comprising 26 18 MPs) for the period 2003-04 to 
2008-09 revealed the following deficiencies: 
Incomplete works 
As per the scheme guidelines the works taken up under the scheme should 
generally be completed within one year. In the six districts, out of 7,940 works 
sanctioned during 2003-04 to 2006-07 (estimated cost: Rs 142.63 crore), only 
5,283 works (estimated cost: Rs 89.57 crore) were completed leaving a balance 
of 2,657 works (33 per cent) (estimated cost: Rs 53.06 crore) (some of them 
taken up 5 years ago) not yet completed as detailed in Appendix-2.4
. The 
expenditure already incurred on these works amounted to Rs 9.07 crore. 
Locking up of funds 
Further, 1360 works (17 per cent ) sanctioned during the years 2003-04 to 
2006-07 costing Rs 23.37 crore were not even started resulting in locking up 
of funds of Rs 12.86 crore27 already released to the executing agencies. Details 
are given in Appendix-2.5. There was no justification in keeping the moneys 
unutilised with the executing agencies when the works could not even be 
started for several years. The Chief Planni ng Officers attributed the delays to 
site disputes and technical problems, etc. Therefore, without acquisition of 
land, sanctions should not have been accorded.  
                                                 
25Vizianagaram, West Godavari, Krishna, Guntur, Prakasam and Medak 
26Lok Sabha: Bobbili, Eluru, Narsapuram, Vijayawada, Machilipatnam, Narsaraopet, Guntur, 
Tenali, Ongole, Bapatla, Siddipet and Medak 
   Rajyasabha: West Godavari, Krishna-I&II, Guntur-I&II and Medak 
27Information regarding the amounts released not furnished by the CPOs in respect of 216 works 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 106
Execution of inadmissible works 
In all the six districts 33 inadmissible works (estimating Rs 0.38 crore 28) viz., 
repairs of roads, buildings and tank bunds which were prohibited under the 
scheme were sanctioned for execution during 2003-04 to 2008-09. Although 
initially recommended by the MP, it was the duty of the District Collector to 
bring it to the notice of the MP that the works were inadmissible so that the 
MP could recommend alternative works. The CPOs assured that the guidelines 
would be kept in view while issuing the sanctions in future. 
Irregular retention of balance funds of retired Rajya Sabha Members 
As per the scheme guidelines, in respect of elected Members of Rajya Sabha 
the balance funds (funds not committed for the recommended and sanctioned 
works) left in the nodal district by the predecessor Members in a particular 
State were to be equally distributed by the State Government among the 
successor elected Rajya Sabha Members in that State. In respect of nominated 
Members of Rajya Sabha, the balance funds were to be distributed amongst 
the successor nominated Members of Rajya Sabha. It was however, observed 
that, an amount of Rs 0.75 crore bei ng the unspent balances in respect of 
retired Members of Rajya Sabha were i rregularly retained by the CPOs for 
over two to fourteen years in the five nodal districts, thereby violating the 
scheme guidelines. Details are given in Appendix-2.6
. 
Non-remittance of unutilised balances and interest 
The CPOs failed to obtain the unut ilised amount of Rs 1.04 crore (West 
Godavari: Rs 0.51 crore, Guntur: Rs 0. 03 crore, Krishna: Rs 0.25 crore, 
Prakasam: Rs 0.12 crore and Medak: Rs 0.13 crore) and accrued interest 
thereon in respect of completed works from the implementing agencies as of 
January 2009.  
Parking of MPLADS funds in private banks 
As per guidelines, MPLADS funds receiv ed by the district authority (from 
GOI) and the Implementing Agencies (fro m the district authority) shall be 
kept only in a nationalised bank. Contrary to this, in five out of the six districts 
and 4 implementing agencies
29 in three districts, the accounts were opened in 
private banks. 
Non-furnishing of Utilisation Certificates by the Executing Agencies 
Similarly, the implementing agencies are required to send utilisation certificates 
(UCs) to the district authority within one month of completion of works. 
Scrutiny revealed that UCs aggregating Rs 3.85 crore were not received by the 
district authorities as detailed in Appendix-2.7
. 
                                                 
28Vizianagaram: 1 work Rs 0.02 crore, West Goda vari: 2 works Rs 0.02 crore, Krishna: 18 
works Rs 0.16crore, Guntur: 8 works Rs 0.12 crore, Prakasam: 4 works Rs 0.06 crore 
29EEs, PR, Eluru, Machilipatnam, Narasaraopet and Guntur 

Chapter II – Audit of Transactions 
 107
Non-transfer of assets to user agencies 
As per the guidelines, on completion of the work, the district authority and the 
implementing agency shall maintain asset register containing the details of 
assets created and their transfer to the user agencies. The CPOs in all the six 
districts except Krishna, did not mainta in any such records. Though the assets 
were to be transferred to the user agencies, there was no record to show that 
assets were transferred to user agencies in all the six districts. During the 
period from 2003-04 to 2008-09, 7375 works were completed at a cost of  
Rs 130.21 crore in the six districts.  
Other points of interest 
(i) Though prescribed in the guidelines and also directed by the sanctioning 
authority, MP-wise cash books/bank accounts were not maintained by 
the Executing agencies
30. Further, CPOs in Vizianagaram, West Godavari, 
Krishna, Guntur and Medak Districts opened/operated more than one 
account (two to five) per MP in violation of the guidelines. 
(ii) As per guidelines, funds can be converged with other scheme funds for 
execution of eligible works, which are otherwise permissible subject to 
the condition that the use of funds from MPLADS results in completion 
of the work. The funds from MPLADS are to be released only towards 
the end and the funds from other sources should be used first. 
It was, however, observed that an amount of Rs 0.30 crore in Guntur  
(Rs 0.10 crore) and Prakasam (Rs 0.20 crore) Districts was released 
(October 2007 and June 2008) without ensuring the release/incurring of 
funds from other sources. Those works were not completed as of January 
2009. 
(iii) As per guidelines, the balance funds (funds not committed for the 
recommended works) left by the predecessor MP in a Lok Sabha 
Constituency would be passed on to the successor MP from that 
constituency. Scrutiny revealed that an amount of Rs 1.90 crore was not 
passed on to the successor MPs
31 in two districts (Vizianagaram: Rs 0.27 
crore; West Godavari: Rs 1.63 crore) and left unspent as of January 2009. 
Due to this, the present MPs could not recommend the works to that 
extent. 
(iv) It was noticed that, in Krishna District, during the year 2006-07, 14 
works at an estimated cost of Rs 0.33 crore, were recommended by 
officer incharge of MP (LS), Machilipatnam, and the same were 
sanctioned by the District Collector, without insisting upon the 
recommendation by the MP concerned. 
                                                 
30 EEs PR, Vizianagaram, Siddipet, Medak and Sangareddy; Rural Electrical Cooperative 
Society, Cheepurapalli; Municipal Commissioners, Bapatla, Mangalagiri and Tenali; EE, 
Irrigation, Tenali; EE, Rural Water Supply, Podili and EE, R&B, Ongole 
31Bobbili (LS): Rs 0.27 crore; Eluru (LS): Rs 0.31 crore; Narsapuram (LS): Rs 1.32 crore 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 108
(v) Though specifically prescribed in the guidelines, the CPOs in all the six 
districts had not obtained the undertakings from the user agencies for 
operation, upkeep and maintenance of the proposed asset, which was 
required to be obtained before execution of the works. 
(vi) As per guidelines, the State Government is required to make arrangements 
for training of district officers concerned who are dealing with 
implementation of the scheme.  It was noticed that, in all the six districts, 
no training was imparted to the district officers dealing with 
implementation of the scheme with adverse implications on the 
implementation of the scheme. 
Poor Monitoring 
Guidelines stipulated that the district authority shall visit and inspect at least 
10 per cent  of works under implementation every year. The CPOs of 
Vizianagaram and Medak have reported that the district authorities had not 
conducted the inspection of the works. Although the CPOs of West Godavari, 
Krishna, Guntur and Prakasam had conducted inspections during the period 
2003-04 to 2008-09 no records were however maintained. Thus, monitoring 
by CPOs was poor in all the six districts and consequently there is no 
assurance that the works are properly executed. The irregularities/lapses 
discussed above show that there is no proper accounting and monitoring 
system for effective implementation and to watch the progress of the scheme. 
Thus, the monetary value of various irregularities/deficiencies in the 
implementation of MPLAD Scheme mean t for benefitting people at large 
worked out to Rs 70.29 crore.  
The CPOs concerned while accepting the audit points promised to take 
immediate remedial action on the audit observations. Governments’ reply had 
not been received (August 2009).  
REVENUE DEPARTMENT 
2.4.3 Unauthorised utilisation of G overnment receipts in violation of 
codal provisions 
District Collector, Visakhapatnam, besides keeping the deposit amount 
received from land indenting agenc ies outside the Government account, 
unauthorisedly spent the interest amount of Rs 1.76 crore accrued thereon 
for office expenditure, expenditure on VIP visits, etc.  
Financial Rules 32  stipulate that all moneys received by or tendered to 
Government servants in their official capacity should be paid in full into the 
treasury without undue delay. Further, such moneys should not be appropriated 
to meet departmental expenditure or otherwise kept apart from the Government 
account. AP Land Acquisition rules as also the AP Financial Code stipulated 
                                                 
32Rule 7(1) of AP Treasury Code (Vol.I) 

Chapter II – Audit of Transactions 
 109
that all amounts rendered by the requisitioning department should be deposited 
in treasury under ‘8443 Civil Deposits’. Payment to awardees has to be made 
by way of bills presented to Treasury.  
Audit scrutiny revealed (June 2008) that the District Collector, Visakhapatnam 
(DC), contrary to Financial Rules/Codal provisions, invested the deposit 
amounts which were received from the land indenting agencies towards 
compensation for land acquisition, in Fixed Deposit Receipts (FDRs) in 
various banks. The interest earned on these FDRs was also deposited in 
Savings Bank Accounts
33. The DC also appropriated (September 2006 to May 
2008) the interest amount to the extent of Rs 1.76 crore to meet various 
departmental expenditure as detailed in the following table: 
(Rs in lakh) 
Renovation, repairs to the office buildings/structure; provision 
of infrastructure facilities in the office 
39.95 
Expenditure on account of VIP visits 36.27 
Arrangement of Medical & Health Exhibition 30.00 
Office expenditure including electrical and telephone bills, 
hire charges on rented vehicles, etc. 
20.09 
Payment to ‘Apathbandhu’ 20.00 
Improvement of facilities to IAS Officers Association 10.00 
Payment to ‘Red Cross’ 10.00 
Office furniture, etc. 5.30 
Miscellaneous expenditure 4.21 
Total expenditure 175.82 
The expenditure on the above items was to be met from the regular budget 
under the respective heads of account. 
Thus, neither the receipts nor the e xpenditure were accounted for in the 
Government account by the DC and the expenditure was also completely 
without any legislative sanction. Thus, the action of the DC was a clear violation 
of codal provisions. 
The matter was reported to Government in March 2009 (also reminded in 
April 2009); reply had not been received (August 2009). 
                                                 
33Union Bank of India, Gitam Branch and Siripuram Branch respectively 

 
INTEGRATED AUDIT 
FINANCE DEPARTMENT 
3.1 Integrated Audit of  Finance Department 
Highlights 
Finance Department is mainly responsible for the overall management of the State 
finances which includes mobilisation of reso urces and collection of revenues and other 
financial resources, budgeting and allocation of funds to meet the demands of expenditure, 
spending of resources on specified objectives and monitor funds utilisation. Integrated 
Audit of Finance Department revealed that we aknesses and system lapses existed in the 
Department, in the areas of preparation of budget, release of funds, compliance with 
Public Finance Accountability norms and asset and contract management. Functioning of 
all the Directorates of the Finance Department including their district offices test checked 
was deficient. Internal audit in the department including the directorates was inadequate. 
Budget Estimates (BEs) were unrealistic in all the years 2006-07 to 2008-09. 
There was either huge overestimation or underestimation.   
[Paragraph 3.1.6.1] 
Timely release of funds to user departments was not ensured adversely 
affecting the implementation of schemes/programmes. About 33 to 49 per 
cent of the anticipated savings were not surrendered by spending 
departments during 2006-07 and 2007-08.  Supplementary grants of  
Rs 2,591 crore were unnecessary during the years 2006-07 and 2007-08 and 
expenditure of Rs 276 crore was incurred without the budget provision.  
[Paragraphs 3.1.6.3, 3.1.6.4, 3.1.6.5 and 3.1.6.6] 
The tax recovery mechanism was not effective and the State Government 
resorted to sale of lands for revenue mobilisation. Arrears of revenue 
accumulated to Rs 2,413 crore as of March 2008; of this, Rs 862 crore  
(36 per cent) was outstanding for more than five years. Further, as against 
the value of Audit observations of Rs 472.30 crore with regard to under- 
assessment, etc. a meagre 2.59 per cent  (Rs 12.23 crore) was recovered. 
The cost of collection of tax was higher as compared to all India average. 
[Paragraphs 3.1.7.1, 3.1.7.3, 3.1.7.4 and 3.1.7.5] 
Accountability obligations such as timely adjustment of abstract 
contingent (AC) bills, reconciliation of receipts and expenditure figures, 
submission of utilisation certificates by Local Bodies and others and 
Accounts by autonomous bodies, etc. were largely violated by various 
departments indicating lack of effective controls with the Finance 
Department. Adequate controls did not also exist with the Finance 
CHAPTER III 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31March 2009 
 112
Department to ensure obtaining of financial concurrence by all departments 
before issue of orders involving financial commitments.  
[Paragraphs 3.1.7.8 and 3.1.8.1] 
Functioning of all the Directorates  of the Finance Department was 
deficient. Audit noticed lapses such as, accumulation of stamps with 
Director of Treasuries and Accounts, irregular transfer to Civil deposits, 
non-renewal of bank guarantees in Director of Works Accounts, poor 
recovery of surcharge amounts, huge arrears of cost of realisable audit 
fee, non/delayed submission of Audit Reports to Legislature by Director 
of State Audit, etc. Asset and Contract management was also poor in all 
the directorates. Scrutiny of records of the district offices also revealed 
the weak internal controls.  
[Paragraphs 3.1.7.10, 3.1.9 and 3.1.10.5] 
The return on investments made by the Government in various 
Commercial Enterprises was poor. There were chronic arrears in 
preparation of Proforma Accounts by Departmentally Managed 
Government Undertakings. Andhra Pradesh Government Life Insurance 
under the control of Finance Department compiled Proforma Accounts 
up to 2001-02 only. 
[Paragraphs 3.1.7.7 and 3.1.8.3] 
Excess expenditure of Rs 13,254.20 crore incurred in the years 1997-98 to 
2007-08 remains to be regularised. 
[Paragraph 3.1.6.9] 
Monitoring by Finance Department was poor with regard to submission 
of Explanatory Notes to Audit Paras, Action Taken Reports to Public 
Accounts Committee recommendations, settlement of Accountant General’s 
inspection report (IR) Paras, etc. by the administrative departments. 
[Paragraph 3.1.10.3] 
Utilisation of funds provided for training was poor in almost all the 
Directorates under the Finance Department. Training courses with 
outdated modules were continued. There were huge vacancies in key 
areas in the Directorates of Treasuries and Accounts and Pay and 
Accounts Office, Hyderabad, adversely affecting the pre-audit functions. 
[Paragraphs 3.1.11 and 3.1.11.2] 
In the absence of internal audit, there was no assurance to the management 
that the departmental rules, regulations and procedures were being 
complied with.  
[Paragraph 3.1.10.1] 

Chapter III – Integrated Audit 
 113
3.1.1  Introduction 
Finance Department is responsible for the overall management of the State 
finances which includes mobilisation of  resources and collection of revenues 
and other financial resources, budgeting and allocation of funds to meet the 
demands of expenditure, spending of resources on specified objectives and 
monitor funds utilisation. 
3.1.2  Organisational set-up 
Principal Secretary to Government is the head of the Finance Department. He 
is assisted by four Secretaries and six heads (Directors) of departments. The 
Secretaries look after Fiscal Policy, Institutional Finance, Works and Projects 
and Resource Mobilisation. 
At the Directorate level, Director of Treasuries and Accounts (DTA), Pay and 
Accounts Officer, Hyderabad (PAO-H),  Director of Insurance (DOI), 
Commissioner of Small Savings and St ate Lotteries (CSS) and Director of 
State Audit (DSA) report to the Secretary (Fiscal Policy). Director of Works 
Accounts (DWA) reports to Secretar y (Works and Projects). All these 
Directors have separate and specific functions assigned to them. Organisational 
Chart of the Department is given in Appendix-3.1. 
3.1.3  Audit objectives 
The Performance Audit had the following objectives: 
• Whether formulation of the budget was as per the provisions of A.P. 
Budget Manual; 
• Whether budgeting and expenditure controls were adequate and effective 
and whether adherence to AP Treasury Code, AP Finance Code and other 
manuals is ensured; 
• Whether mobilisation of resources was sufficient to implement various 
schemes and whether Government succeeded in tapping all possible 
avenues; 
• Whether all accountability obligations were fulfilled; and  
• Whether functioning of internal control mechanism in the department 
including internal audit was effective. 
3.1.4 Audit criteria 
The following criteria were adopted for the Performance Audit: 
• AP Budget Manual, Document on Budgetary Procedures, Budget Release 
Orders, Treasury Control Orders; 
• AP Secretariat Office Manual; 
• AP Treasury Code, AP Financial Code; 
• AP Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (APFRBM)Act, 2005; 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31March 2009 
 114
• Recommendations of Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC); 
• Orders of Finance Department for re lease of funds to ascertain whether 
funds were being released in time and other executive instructions issued 
to all departments from time to time; and 
• Website of the Finance Department (www.apfinance.gov.in) and AP 
Government Portal (www.aponline.gov.in). 
3.1.5  Scope and methodology of audit 
Integrated audit of the Finance Department was conducted during February to 
June 2009 by test-check of records in the Finance Department in Secretariat, 
all the six Directorates located in Hyderabad and district offices in six
1 out of 
23 districts. The selection of districts was done on Simple Random Sampling 
without Replacement method. The results of the Performance audit are 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Audit findings 
3.1.6  Financial Management 
Financial Management with regard to budgetary practices, expenditure 
controls and mobilisation of resource s was deficient as discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
3.1.6.1  Budgetary process  
Funds are provided to Finance Department under Grant No. IX: Fiscal 
Administration, Planning, Surveys and Statistics for meeting expenditure 
under Fiscal Services, Pensions and Other Retirement Benefits, Debt Servicing 
and Loans and Advances besides meeting establishment expenditure. Budget 
allotment vis-à-vis the expenditure dur ing 2006-09 was as given in Table-1. 
Major Head-wise details are given in Appendix-3.2.  
Table-1                    (Rupees in crore) 
Year Budget 
allotment 
Expenditure Extent of 
overestimation 
(saving) 
2006-07 19496.37 16278.57 3217.80 
2007-08 23130.33 19408.64 3721.69 
2008-09 23525.75 19242.99 4282.76 
It is seen from the above table that in all the three years there was overestimation 
of funds by more than 15 per cent. 
                                                 
1Adilabad, Anantapur, East Godavari, Guntur, Nellore and Nizamabad districts 
In all the three 
years there was 
overestimation of 
funds (saving)  
by more than  
15 per cent 

Chapter III – Integrated Audit 
 115
Persistent savings were noticed under ‘2049 Interest Payments (Charged)’ 
indicating overestimation. These savings registered a high of Rs 1,039.91 crore 
during 2007-08 but reduced marginally to Rs 927.84 crore during 2008-09. 
Similarly, there was overestimation of requirements to the extent of 40 to 49 
per cent under the head ‘6003 - Internal Debt of the State Government’. Under 
the head ‘Pension and other retirement benefits’ while there was under-
estimation to the extent of Rs 211 crore and Rs 168 crore in the years 2006-07 
and 2007-08 respectively, there was overestimation of Rs 100 crore in the year 
2008-09 (Para 3.1.6.8 refers).  
Government attributed saving to non-availment of Ways and Means advances, 
receipt of fewer amounts of loans than  anticipated and less accumulation of 
funds under General Provident Fund. The reasons given by the Government 
are not acceptable. The expenditure under above three heads is a committed 
expenditure. But these have been consis tently showing huge variation. This 
indicates bad financial management. 
3.1.6.2  Delayed submission of Budget Estimates 
Audit observed that within the Finance Department, except the Directorate of 
Insurance, none of the Directorates submitted the budget proposals by scheduled 
dates and the delays ranged from 18 to as high as 83 days during the years 
2006-07 to 2008-09. The Directorate-wise and year-wise details are given in 
Appendix-3.3
. It was also seen that Control Registers to watch receipt of 
proposals from the unit/district offices were also not maintained in any of the 
Directorates.  
Finance Department did not furnish the information with regard to dates of 
submission of BEs to it by the other administrative departments. 
3.1.6.3  Timeliness in release of funds to user departments 
For effective implementation of the schemes/programmes, the Finance 
Department is required to ensure timely release of funds through the quarterly 
budget release orders. This facilitates smooth progress of expenditure 
throughout the year.  Audit noticed the following: 
• In the years 2006-07 and 2007-08, 40 and 45 per cent  of the total 
expenditure was incurred by the spending departments in the months of 
March 2007 (Rs 20,480.85 crore) and March 2008 (Rs 29,900.39 crore) 
respectively. 
• For the year 2008-09, Audit reviewed the releases made by the Finance 
Department during the last week of March. It was observed that significant 
portion of the funds of second quarte r/instalment of the year 2008-09 was 
released in the last week of Marc h 2009 thus causing inconvenience to 
user departments in meeting the annual targets besides adversely affecting 
the implementation of several Plan and Non-plan schemes as shown in the 
Table-2. 
Timeliness in 
release of funds to 
user departments 
was not ensured 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31March 2009 
 116
Table-2                                  (Rupees in crore) 
Name of the Scheme  
(Plan/Non-plan) 
Total 
Provision
Released in the last 
week of March 
Release pertains to 
quarter/instalment
APMIP– RIDF (Plan) 50.00 25.00 Second 
Welfare of SC/ST/OBCs-cost of 
ration/diet charges (Plan) 
38.00 19.00 Second 
Centralised purchase of drugs and 
Medicines (Non-plan) 
171.94 85.97 Second 
Government Hostels 20.00 10.00 Second 
Per capita  and Seigniorage grant to 
ZPs and MPs 
129.09 36.18 Third 
Note: The above list is only illustrative and not exhaustive 
3.1.6.4  Surrender of savings 
According to Para 20.1 of AP Budget Manual, spending departments are 
required to surrender the grants/appropriations or portions thereof to the 
Finance Department, as and when the savings are anticipated. Saving of  
Rs 6,980.45 crore (2006-07: Rs 3,172.69 crore and 2007-08: Rs 3,807.76 
crore) equivalent to 33 per cent and 49 per cent of the anticipated savings in 
36 grants and appropriations 2 including that of Finance Department was not 
surrendered by the spending departments as shown in the Table-3.  
Table-3               (Rupees in crore) 
Year Anticipated savings Amount of saving not 
surrendered (Percentage) 
2006-07 9736.35 3172.69 (33) 
2007-08 7820.72 3807.76 (49) 
Total 17557.07 6980.45 (40) 
Further, surrender of savings on the last  day of the financial year increased 
from 67 per cent  (Rs 7,455 crore) in the year 2006-07 to 73 per cent   
(Rs 9,692.30 crore) in the year 2007-08.  
The deficiencies pointed out in Paras 3.1.6.3 and 3.1.6.4 have adverse 
implications on the overall State economy and fiscal position. A few 
departments kept the unutilised funds with themselves depriving the other 
needy departments.  
                                                 
2 2006-07: I, II, III, IV, V, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII, XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII, XIX, XX, XXI, XXII, 
XXIII, XXIV, XXV, XXVI, XXVII, XXVIII, XXIX, XXX, XXXI, XXXII, XXXIII, 
XXXIV, XXXV, XXXVI, XXXVII, XXXVIII, XXXIX and XL  
   2007-08:  I, II, III, IV, V, VI, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII, XIV, XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII, XIX, XX, 
XXI, XXII, XXIII, XXIV, XXV, XXVI, XXVII, XXVIII, XXIX, XXX, XXXI, XXXIII, 
XXXIV, XXXV, XXXVI, XXXVII, XXXVIII and XL 
About 33 to 49  
per cent of the 
anticipated savings 
were not 
surrendered by 
spending 
departments 

Chapter III – Integrated Audit 
 117
This indicates a need to introduce an effective mechanism such as having an 
independent representative of Finance Department in each department to 
ensure financial discipline. 
3.1.6.5  Unnecessary supplementary grants and injudicious  
re-appropriations 
Item/requirement Audit observation 
Budgetary discipline 
in obtaining 
supplementary grants 
In 24 grants/appropriations, supplementary grant of Rs 1,584.79 crore was 
unnecessary during the year 2006-07 as the expenditure did not exceed 
even the original provision. 
Similarly, during 2007-08, supplementary grant of Rs 1,006.30 crore in 
respect of 32 grants/appropriations was provided although the expenditure 
did not exceed even the original provision. 
Injudicious  
re-appropriations 
Re-appropriation of funds was injudici ous as it was either excessive or 
resulted in savings, by over Rs 5 crore in each case, in respect of 56 heads 
of account in the year 2006-07 and 52 heads in 2007-08. 
Further, in respect of 230 heads of account re-appropriations amounting to 
Rs 1,021.43 crore were made during 2007-08 without original and 
supplementary provisions. 
3.1.6.6  Expenditure without provision 
As per the provisions of Para 20.3.1 of AP Budget Manual, expenditure should 
not be incurred on a scheme or service without provision of funds therefor. 
Audit noticed that expenditure of Rs 276.06 crore was incurred under 18 heads 
of account (10 grants) without provision of funds during 2006-07 (Rs 125.19 
crore) and 2007-08 (Rs 150.87 crore). 
3.1.6.7  Provision of funds for vacant posts 
As per the provisions of Para 16.14 of AP Budget Manual, estimates should be 
framed on the basis of the expenditure likely to be incurred in the coming year 
on officers and subordinates likely to be on duty and the actual salary likely to 
be drawn by them, irrespective of the sanctioned strength. Audit noticed that 
in the year 2007-08 the entire provision of Rs 22.44 crore made for vacant 
posts was surrendered during March 2008.  
3.1.6.8  Actuarial valuation of pension liabilities 
Andhra Pradesh Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (APFRBM) 
Act, 2005 provides for preparation of Medium Term Fiscal Policy Statement 
which inter alia includes the estimated yearly pension liabilities worked out 
on actuarial basis for the next ten years.  
Expenditure of  
Rs 276 crore was 
incurred without 
the Budget 
provision 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31March 2009 
 118
Audit noticed that the State Government did not work out the yearly pension 
liabilities on actuarial basis. There wa s underestimation of requirement in 
2006-07 and 2007-08 and overestimation in the year 2008-09 as shown in 
Table-4.  
Table-4                                                                          (Rupees in crore)  
Year Budget 
Estimate 
Supplementary 
grant 
Total grant Actual 
expenditure 
Variation 
Excess (+) 
Saving (-) 
2006-07 3934.03 8.00 3942.03 4152.81 210.78 
2007-08 4524.13 400.03 4924.16 5092.13 167.97 
2008-09 5202.75 416.22 5618.97 5518.46 (-) 100.51 
Thus, there is a need to work out pe nsion liabilities on actuarial basis in 
compliance with the provisions of APFRBM Act.  
3.1.6.9  Non-regularisation of excess over grant/appropriation 
As per Article 205 of the Constitution of India, it is mandatory for a State 
Government to get the excess over a grant/appropriation regularised by the 
State Legislature. However, the excess expenditure amounting to Rs 13,254.20 
crore for the years 1997-98 to 2007-08 remains to be regularised. Year-wise 
details are given in Appendix-3.4
.                                                                                           
3.1.7  Mobilisation of resource s and collection of revenue 
3.1.7.1  Dependence on sale of lands for revenue mobilisation 
During 2006-09, Government targeted to muster funds aggregating Rs 24,450 
crore. Against this estimate, it  could raise Rs 10,578 crore (44 per cent ) 
leaving a gap of Rs 13,872 crore. Of this, revenue realised during 2008-09 was 
Rs 2,131 crore (18 per cent  of the estimate). The percentage of actuals to 
Budget Estimates under Capital Account decelerated to 65.51 from 99.48 and 
98.51 during 2007-08 and 2006-07 respectively. Simultaneously, Revenue 
Expenditure registered a growth from Rs 39,648.83 crore (2006-07) to  
Rs 58,624.76 crore (2007-08). The year-wise details are given in the Table-5. 
 
  Table-5        (Rupees in crore) 
Year Budget 
Estimate 
Actual revenue 
realised 
Shortfall 
(Percentage) 
2006-07 3050.00 1889.32 1160.68 (38) 
2007-08 9400.00 6557.71 2842.29 (30) 
2008-09 12000.00 2131.00 9869.00 (82) 
Total 24450.00 10578.03 13871.97 (56) 
Excess expenditure 
of Rs 13,254.20 
crore incurred in 
the years 1997-98 to 
2007-08 remains to 
be regularised 
State Government 
resorted to sale of 
lands for revenue 
mobilisation 

Chapter III – Integrated Audit 
 119
Such a dependence on sale of land would have been appropriate in 
extraordinary circumstances and that too after exhausting other avenues such 
as collection of tax arrears and tightening leakage of revenue. Since the 
revenue from lands is highly dependent on market conditions, budget itself is 
vulnerable to the external conditions. 
3.1.7.2  Grants-in-aid from GOI 
TFC recommended inter alia  Grants-in-aid of Rs 1,828.00 crore during the 
period 2005-10 to local bodies. Monitoring by Finance Department with 
regard to utilisation of TFC grants was ineffective resulting in non-release of 
further grants by GOI as discussed below: 
• It was observed that due to non-submission of UCs for the grant of  
Rs 43.75 crore received under State specific needs 3 for 2006-07, 
subsequent instalments of grants for the years 2007-08 and 2008-09 were 
not released by GOI as of November 2008.   
• Youth Advancement, Tourism and Culture Department did not utilise the 
entire release of Rs 20 crore intended for Heritage Conservation activities.  
• Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) utilis ed Rs 653.74 crore during 2005-09 
(November 2008) against the receipt of Rs 795.90 crore and Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs) spent Rs 150.18 cror e against the release of Rs 187.57 
crore. In all, Rs 179.55 crore was awaiting utilisation in local bodies. 
Further, five instalments of grants (two for RLBs and three for ULBs) 
were awaiting release due to non-submission of UCs. 
3.1.7.3  Arrears of revenue 
Audit noticed that there were arrears of revenue amounting to Rs 2,412.71 
crore realisable by Government as of March 2008. Of this, Rs 861.78 crore  
(36 per cent) was outstanding for more than fi ve years. These arrears mainly 
persisted in the areas of Taxes on vehi cles, receipts under sugarcane and taxes 
and duties on electricity. Government did not furnish to Audit the position of 
arrears of revenue as at March 2008 in  respect of Commercial Taxes, State 
Excise, Registration and other departments despite constant pursuance.  
3.1.7.4 Short collection of tax 
Finance Department being the custodian of the State finances, is required to 
formulate measures/procedures to ensure proper collection of revenue. Mention 
was made in the C&AG’s Audit Reports (Revenue Receipts) for the years 
2005-08 pointing out the underassessment/non/short levy of taxes/loss of 
revenue, failure to raise demands, etc. involving money value of Rs 472.30 
crore, during 2005-06 to 2007-08. Although the audit observations were 
accepted by the Government, a meagre 2.59 per cent (Rs 12.23 crore) was 
recovered as of October 2008. Details are given in Table-6. 
                                                
 
3(1)Drinking water supply to fluoride affected areas and (2) Improving Socio-economic 
condition of people living in remote areas 
Absorption of 
Twelfth Finance 
Commission grants 
was poor which 
resulted in non-
release of further 
grants by GOI. 
Monitoring by 
Finance 
Department was 
ineffective  
Tax recovery of a 
meagre 2.59 per 
cent of value of 
accepted audit 
observations on 
short recovery 
indicated 
lackadaisical 
approach of the 
Government 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31March 2009 
 120
Table -6                  (Rupees in crore) 
Year of  
Audit Report 
Total money 
value 
Accepted by the 
Government  
(money value) 
Recovery made 
(percentage) 
2005-06 189.69 49.60 4.45 (0.89) 
2006-07 401.59 245.39 3.42 (1.39) 
2007-08 443.46 177.31 4.36 (2.46) 
Total 1034.74 472.30 12.23 (2.59) 
Poor recovery indicated lackadaisical approach of the Government towards its 
commitment made to Audit to recover the taxes, etc. aggregating Rs 460.07 
crore during 2005-08. 
3.1.7.5 High Cost of tax collection 
The percentage of cost of collection of  Sales Tax, State Excise and Taxes on 
Vehicles during 2005-07 was higher as compared to the All India average as 
shown in the Table-7.  
Table -7                              
Gross 
collection 
Expenditure 
on collection 
of revenue 
Revenue Head Year 
(Rupees in crore) 
Percentage of cost 
of  collection to 
gross collection 
All India 
average 
percentage 
2005-06 12,541.61 145.86 1.16 0.91 
2006-07 15,461.08 166.07 1.07 0.82 
Sales Tax 
2007-08 19,026.49 175.73 0.92 NA 
2005-06 2,684.57 138.75 5.17 3.40 
2006-07 3,436.63 165.78 4.82 3.30 
State Excise 
2007-08 4,040.69 162.24 4.02 NA 
2005-06 1,355.74 48.30 3.56 2.67 
2006-07 1,364.74 55.43 4.06 2.47 
Taxes on vehicles 
2007-08 1,603.80 62.46 3.89 NA 
NA: Not Available 
3.1.7.6  Lack of effective follow-up action with regard to evasion of 
VAT 
During the period 2005 to 2008 Vigilance and Enforcement (V&E) Directorate 
detected cases of tax evasion (VAT) aggregating Rs 19 crore in the raids 
conducted in Hyderabad and at other places in the State. The V&E Directorate 
reportedly brought this matter to the notice of the Government and recommended 
adoption of scientific measures for collect ion of tax to be paid by builders and 
others and take stringent measures against the defaulters.  
Steps taken on the reported findings of V&E Directorate were not furnished by 
the Finance Department. It is also pertinent to point out that periodical review 
meetings held in Finance Department with regard to monitoring the collection 
of revenues and mobilisation of resources did not take cognisance of this vital 
aspect. 
The cost of 
collection of tax was 
higher as compared 
to all India average 
There was lack of 
effective follow-up 
action on Vigilance 
and Enforcement 
reports on tax 
evasion  

Chapter III – Integrated Audit 
 121
3.1.7.7  Return on investments in Commercial Enterprises 
The earnings on investments in Commercial Enterprises are characterised by 
poor returns. There was a drop in earnings during 2007-08 to the extent of  
Rs 35.45 crore as compared to the year 2006-07. Government Companies 
accounted for Rs 34.67 crore (98 per cent) as detailed in Table-8.  
Table-8                                      (Rupees in crore) 
2006-07 2007-08 Nature of concern 
(Number) 
Investment Dividend/interest 
received Investment Dividend/interest 
received 
Fall in 
earnings 
 
Statutory 
Corporations (4) 
984.86 1.52 984.86 0.76 4 0.76 
Government 
Companies (51) 
3613.02 45.77 3651.32 11.10 5 34.67 
Joint Stock 
Companies (37) 
34.07 - 44.09 - - 
 
Co-operative Banks 
and Societies6 (80) 
1144.22 0.11 1251.14 0.09 0.02 
Total (172) 5776.17 47.40 5931.41 11.95 35.45 
Finance Department needs to take effective measures with regard to the 
investments in such Commercial concerns which do not give considerable 
returns so as to protect the Government interest. 
3.1.7.8  Absence of financial conc urrence to remission of stamp duty 
Rule 11 of the Andhra Pradesh Government Business Rules and Secretariat 
Instructions specifies that no department should, without previous consultation 
of the Finance Department, authorise any order which would affect the 
finances of the State and involve relinquishment of revenue. In violation of the 
rules, the Revenue Department, without the concurrence of the Finance 
Department, issued orders in January 2009 7 for remission of Stamp Duty 
payable under the Indian Stamp Act 1899 on flats/apartments by 5 per cent8 
and the remission was applicable for two years i.e. from 1 January 2009 to  
31 December 2010. Although the order evidently has financial implication in 
the form of reduced revenue, the Revenue department did not obtain 
mandatory concurrence of the Finance Department. While accepting the audit 
observation, the Finance Department did not, indicate any measures/steps 
taken/proposed to be taken to avoid non-compliance of the instructions of the 
Finance Department by other departments in future.  
                                                
 
4 Declared by Andhra Pradesh State Warehousing Corporation Ltd 
5 Singareni Colleries Company Limited declared dividend of Rs 10.63 crore and Andhra 
Pradesh State Seeds Development Corporation  Rs 0.47 crore 
6 An amount of Rs 78.79 crore was invested in Cooperative Sugar Factories during 2007-08 
7 G.O.Ms.No.01 Revenue (Registration-I) Department, dated 1 January 2009 
8 to flats/apartments measuring up to 1,200 Sft or below including common area excluding 
parking area 
There was very  
poor return from 
investments in 
Commercial 
Enter
prises  
Orders for 
remission of Stamp 
Duty were issued  
by Revenue 
Department 
without obtaining 
the mandatory 
concurrence  
of Finance 
Department. This 
indicated lack of 
adequate controls 
with the Finance 
Department 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31March 2009 
 122
3.1.7.9  Off-budget borrowings 
State Government continued to resort to off-budget borrowings which were 
raised upon the security of the Conso lidated Fund of the State during 2006-09 
as indicated in the Table-9.  
Table-9                                                           (Rupees in crore) 
Year Source through which 
borrowed Amount borrowed 
2006-07 APWRDC 9 
AP TRANSCO 
AP TRANSCO(PFC) 
600.00 
500.00 
299.00 
2007-08 AP TRANSCO 125.00 
2008-09 AP TRANSCO 350.00 
Total 1874.00 
Government has been encouraging public utilities like APTRANSCO to raise 
funds to meet its promises/obligations made to public which turned out to be a 
committed liability to the Government as the Government only has been 
repaying the loans, etc. raised in the form of Off-budget borrowings. This also 
indicates lack of concern for legislative approval.  
During the three year period 2006-09, Government paid interest of Rs 1,019.15 
crore on these borrowings. 
3.1.7.10 Non-recovery of cost of audit 
Section 4 of the A.P State Audit Act, 1989 enables the Director of State Audit 
to conduct audit in respect of any local authority or any other authority 
specified therein and to recover the cost of audit  in respect of such authorities 
as may be specified by the Government by order subject to such rules as may 
be made in this behalf.  
The un-realised audit fee accumulated to Rs 21.72 crore as of July 2009. 
Details of major defaulting institutions are furnished in the Table-10.  
 Table-10                                                                                      (Rupees in crore) 
Name of the Organisation Realisable Audit fee 
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams 6.08 
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowment Institutions 8.03 
Agricultural Market Committees 1.69 
Universities 2.35 
Andhra Pradesh Housing Board 1.81 
Andhra Pradesh Residential Educational Institutions Society 1.48 
                                                 
9Andhra Pradesh Water Resource Development Corporation 
Government 
continued to  
resort to off budget 
borrowings  
Unrealised Audit 
fee accumulated to 
Rs 21.72 crore  

Chapter III – Integrated Audit 
 123
It was also observed that the procedure for calculation of cost of audit was 
prescribed in May 1969 and no further instructions were issued thereafter 
despite several changes in the composition of audit teams with the induction of 
Audit Officers and Asst. Audit Officers (AAOs) which was not anticipated 
earlier while issuing the G.O. ibid. 
3.1.8  Accountability obligations 
3.1.8.1  Compliance to the inst ructions issued in GO No. 507 
Government prescribed norms for Public Finance Accountability before 
release and drawal of funds through the Government (in Finance Department) 
orders10 of April 2002. As per these norms, drawal of further funds is 
admissible by the Treasury/PAO only when the DDO/Head of the Department 
(HOD) furnishes compliance in the form  of certificate regarding (i) detailed 
contingent bills for the amounts drawn on Abstract Contingent bills,  
(ii) reconciliation of accounts between the DDOs and Treasury Officers,  
(iii) submission  of Statement of Expenditure and Utilisation Certificates  for 
earlier drawals, (iv) recovery of loans, advances, taxes, etc due to be paid back 
to Government, (v) clearance of pendenc y relating to finalisation of annual 
accounts of local bodies and statutory audit and (vi) replies to pending audit 
paras.  Further instructions of the Finance Department issued in October 2003 
also stressed the need for maintenance of registers in respect of expenditure 
control, re-appropriations and supplementary estimates and reconciliation. 
Audit however, observed that these exhaus tive orders/instructions issued by 
Government were largely ignored by DDOs/HODs, as discussed below: 
Subject/Requirement Audit findings 
Huge number of Abstract 
Contingent Bills awaiting 
adjustment 
Monies are drawn on Abstract 
Contingent (AC) bills, where 
monies are required in advance 
and yet the exact amount required 
for the purpose cannot be 
specifically calculated.  
As of March 2009, 1.23 lakh AC bills aggregating Rs 806.06 crore
11 
were awaiting adjustment in respect of all departments. 
Test-check of records revealed that AC bills for an aggregate 12 value of 
Rs 449.65 crore were awaiting adjustme nt with Director of Treasuries 
and Accounts 13, Director of Works Accounts 14 and PAO (H) as of 
March 2009. Further, district treasury officers and others did not 
maintain the control registers to watch adjustment. 
 
 
                                                 
10 vide GO Ms. No. 507 dated 10 April 2002 
11Up to 2002-03: 82,226 bills – Rs 222.44 crore; 2003-04 to 2008-09: 41,173 bills –  
  Rs 583.62 crore 
12 DTA – Rs 164.46 crore, DWA – Rs 7.00 crore and PAO (H) – Rs 278.19 crore 
13DTA: Adilabad – Rs 18.62 crore; Anantapur – Rs 17.85 crore; East Godavari –  
Rs 38.36 crore; Guntur – Rs 35.74 crore; Nellore – Rs 37.28 crore and Nizamabad –  
Rs 16.61 crore 
14 PAO (W): Anantapur – Rs 21.10 lakh; Guntur – Rs 675.00 lakh and Nellore – Rs 4.15 lakh 
Compliance  
of Finance 
Department’s 
instructions of 
April 2002 by all 
departments was 
not watched 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31March 2009 
 124
AC bills are required to be 
adjusted within one month from 
the date of drawal by submission 
of Detailed Contingent (DC)  
bills, to account for the funds  
utilised. AC bills are charged as 
expenditure. 
Thus, to the extent that these AC 
bills have not been adjusted by the 
submission of DC bills confirming 
actual expenditure, expenditure is 
over-stated or unaccounted for in 
the accounts. Government ordered 
(April 2002) for simplification of 
the process which provided that 
the maximum number of pending 
AC bills could never exceed two.  
The 
above items included the following: 
(i) AP Public Service Commission has 430 bills (Rs 5.08 crore) 
pending with it. 
(ii) In Social Welfare Department, DC bills for value of Rs 201.97 
crore were still pending in respect of 70 AC bills. 
Further, District Treasury, Adilabad drew an amount of Rs 28 lakh on 
AC bills in the month of June 2009 after completion of the event 
(General Elections 2009). 
Those officials who have drawn money on AC bills should have no 
hesitation in submitting details of b ills for expenditure if these were 
legitimate items of expenditure. No n-submission of details within the 
stipulated period raises a strong suspicion about the bonafides of the 
expenditure incurred. The appropriate course of action would therefore, 
be to proceed against officials treating
 the non-submission of DC bills 
as a case of unauthorised expenditure. 
Lack of concern for 
reconciliation of expenditure 
figures 
Government ordered (October 
2003) that all the DDOs should 
reconcile figures of expenditure 
with those booked in Treasury/ 
PAO on or before 20th of each 
month for the expenditure in 
previous month.  
 
 
As of June 2008 expenditure of Rs 55,159.98 crore incurred by 29 
departments remained un-reconciled. Of this, the expenditure of 
Rs 16,710.25 crore pertained to Finance and Planning Departments 
during the year 2007-08 which also remained un-reconciled. 
As against 591 reconciliation certificates due, from Finance Department 
(Secretariat) and Directorates under its control, during 2003-04 to 
2008-09 (December 2008), only 47 certificates were received by AG 
leaving 544 certificates covering se veral periods. Non-reconciliation 
accounted for 92 per cent. Details are given in Table-11. HOD-wise and 
year-wise details of non-reconciliation are given in Appendix-3.5
. 
Table-11 
Number of Reconciliation Certificates  
Due  Received  Outstanding (Per cent) 
Secretariat 
Department 
420 12 408 (97) 
Directorates 171 35 136 (80) 
Total 591 47 544 (92) 
DSA did not maintain the control register to watch reconciliation.  
Finance Department while agreeing that they did not have details of 
outstanding reconciliations from HODs, stated (July 2009) that all 
Secretariat Departments were being addressed to ensure early completion 
of reconciliation by HODs.
 

Chapter III – Integrated Audit 
 125
Adjustment of Personal Deposit 
Accounts 
As per the extant instructions, 
balances available in personal 
deposit (PD) accounts are to be 
lapsed at the end of the year  
or after completion of the 
applicable period. 
 
Results of study
15 of 24 PD accounts conducted by the DSA revealed 
the status of the balances available in PD accounts and those lapsable as 
at the end of March 2006, 2007 and 2008 as given in the Table-12.  
Table-12                  (Rupees in crore) 
 Balance  Lapsable amount 
continued to be retained 
As on 31.03.2006 210.43 92.80 
As on 31.03.2007 257.90 56.70 
As on 31.03.2008 481.61                   143.99* 
Note: List of 24 PD Accounts is given in Appendix-3.6 
       *Of this, Rs 100.25 crore pertained to AP Health, Medical, 
Housing and Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited 
Lapses such as drawal of funds and their investment in fixed deposits, 
arrears in reconciliation with bank/tr easury, operation of several bank 
accounts, absence of internal audit and unspent balances in schemes 
continued to persist as disclosed in the study. 
State Government disbursed an amount of Rs 39,110 crore as grants and 
loans to local bodies and other institutions during 2005-08. 
Of the 2,989 utilisation certificates  (UCs) due in respect of grants 
aggregating Rs 600.35 crore paid up to 30 September 2006, 2,944 UCs 
for an amount of Rs 560.72 crore were outstanding as of 31 August 
2008 from eight departments
16. 
Non-submission of 
UCs/Accounts by local bodies/ 
autonomous bodies 
 
There were arrears in submission of accounts for audit (by the 
Accountant General) from 392 Autonomous Bodies to the extent of 
1,296 accounts (June 2009). 
The above deficiencies indicated failure of reporting mechanism and non-
fulfilment of accountability obligations of the Government. 
3.1.8.2  Overpayment of Pension/Family Pension 
Audit noticed from the test-check of records that 13 District Treasuries 17, 296 
Sub-Treasuries18 and six Pension Payment Offices 19 under the control of DTA 
made an aggregate overpayment of Pension/Family pension of  Rs 1.60 crore 
(2006-07: Rs 0.41 crore, 2007-08: Rs 0.57 crore and 2008-09: Rs 0.62 crore) 
indicating the need to prevent such overpayment. Details of overpayments are 
given in Appendix-3.7
.  
                                                 
15 as per the orders of the Finance Department 
16 School Education; Revenue, Registration and Relief ; Tribal Welfare; Social Welfare; Panchayat Raj; 
Rural Development; Municipal Administration and Urban Development and Animal Husbandry 
17 2006-07: Guntur, Khammam, Karimnagar, Nizamabad and Prakasam 
    2007-08: Krishna and Medak 
2008-09: Adilabad, Khammam, Kurnool, Rangareddy, Srikakulam and Visakhapatnam 
18 95 in 2006-07, 128 in 2007-08 and 73 in 2008-09 
19 2006-07: Tarnaka, Motigally,Punjagutta and Chandrayangutta 
    2007-08: Motigally, Punjagutta, Narayanguda, Malakpet and Chandrayangutta 
DTOs/STOs made 
excess payment of 
pension aggregating 
Rs 1.60 crore 
indicating the need 
to prevent such 
overpayment 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31March 2009 
 126
3.1.8.3 Submission of accounts by Government Undertakings  
The Departmentally Managed Government Undertakings (DMGUs) that were 
set up with activities of quasi-commercial nature are required to prepare and 
submit the annual accounts in the prescribed format (Proforma Accounts) 
showing the results of the financial operations so as to enable the Government 
to make an assessment of their functioning. 
• DMGUs have not been preparing Proforma Accounts annually and there 
were chronic arrears as shown in Appendix-3.8
. 
• Andhra Pradesh Government Life Insurance (APGLI) run by the Director 
of Insurance a DMGU under the administrative control of the Finance 
Department prepared its accounts only up to the year 2001-02. This causes 
delay in declaration of bonus to its subscribers. 
3.1.9 Directorate spec ific observations 
Audit noticed lapses in functioning of all the Directorates as discussed below 
Directorate-wise: 
3.1.9.1  Director of State Audit (DSA) 
The primary function of the DSA is to  conduct audit of accounts of rural and 
urban local bodies and other institutions in the State and submit consolidated 
audit report to the State Legislature in accordance with the provisions of State 
Audit Act, 1989.  
Subject Audit observation 
Poor recovery of 
surcharge20 
amounts 
 
Although equipped with the authority to issue surcharge proceedings, DSA 
unnecessarily referred (September 2006 to October 2008) 21 cases of serious 
irregularities (Rs 13.78 crore) to the St ate Government in respect of various 
municipalities. Belatedly, the Finance Depart ment directed only in December 2008 
to initiate further action as per the State Audit Rules. Thus, in the process, since 
valuable time was lost, currency of th e objections was lost and serving of the 
surcharge notices also became difficul t and the whole process resulted in non-
recovery of surcharged amounts of Rs 13.78 crore (January 2009). 
Non-receipt of 
annual accounts 
from local bodies 
As of August 2008, 464 annual audits were pending due to non-furnishing of the 
annual accounts by the Municipal Corporations and Municipal Councils. Rural Local 
Bodies have not been furnishing annual accounts by due dates. As a result, audit by 
the DSA was held up. 
Format of 
accounts of 
Universities not 
prescribed 
Universities have been compiling only Receipts and Payments Accounts and 
Balance Sheets were not prepared. As a re sult, comprehensive financial position is 
not known. DSA did not prescribe the uniform format of accounts for the Universities.  
                                                 
20Recovery from a person liable for the loss, waste, misappropriation or other property 
belonging to local authority 
Functioning of 
Directorates was 
deficient. Various 
lapses were noticed 
by Audit  

Chapter III – Integrated Audit 
 127
Arrears in 
collection of 
Pension 
Contributions and 
Leave Salary 
Contributions 
As of January 2009, about 170 employees of DSA were continued to be on 
deputation on Foreign Service terms with various employers. The foreign employers 
were to remit pension contribution (PC) and leave salary contribution (LSC) in 
respect of the employees who have been wo rking with them. As of March 2008, an 
aggregate amount of Rs 50.57 lakh (PC: Rs 32.44 lakh and LSC: Rs 18.13 lakh) was 
due from foreign employers, earliest period being 1987. 
Un-invested 
amounts under 
Charitable 
Endowment Fund 
As per the provisions of the Functionary Manual of the Department, DSA is the ex-
officio Treasurer of Charitable Endowments in the State. The cash balance as per 
cash book was Rs 80 lakh as of January 2009. Despite having huge cash balances it 
was not invested in deposits. The DSA did not also approach the Government 
seeking instructions for investment in fr esh Government securities/bonds, issued for 
investing the idle cash balance. DSA admitted the lapse. 
Improper 
Contract 
Management 
Anantapur, Guntur and Nellore District Audit Officers made payment of rent of 
office buildings without the support of the valid and subsisting lease deeds. 
Car hire charges were being paid without conclusion of agreements, non-submission 
of trip sheets, etc. Income Tax at applic able rates was not being deducted from the 
payments made to the supplier of vehicles. 
Delayed 
submission of 
Audit Reports 
State Audit Reports for the years 1989-90 to 1997-98 were presented to the State 
Legislature in March 2008 and those for the years 1998-99 to 2004-05 were 
presented in December 2008 with delays up to as high as 17 years. Preparation of 
Audit Reports does not serve the desired purpose unless they are submitted to the 
Legislature in time. 
3.1.9.2 Director of Treasuries and Accounts (DTA) 
DTA is entrusted with the task of con ducting financial transactions of the 
Government, payment of pensions, exercising treasury control and conducting 
pre-audit. 
Subject Audit observation 
Accumulation of 
stamps 
 
Stamps valuing Rs 166.43 crore 21 (Share transfer, Special adhesive, Court Fee 
papers, Court Fee labels, A.P.A.W.F. and Insurance), which had no demand since 
May 1996 have been lying idle with DTOs awaiting instructions of DTA. 
Non-disposal of 
spoiled stamps 
Stamps worth Rs 10.82 lakh were lying for over three years in the district treasuries 
of Anantapur (Rs 10.12 lakh) and Nellore (Rs 0.70 lakh) for want of orders of 
destruction from DTA. 
GPF of Class IV 
Employees 
Value of unposted Credits (Rs 4.56 crore) and Debits (Rs 74.19 lakh) in relevant 
accounts has been increasing. Due to non-posting of debits the accounts balances 
were inflated. Annual account slips were issued without the details of missing 
credits. 
                                                 
21Anantapur : Rs 4.68 crore; Guntur: Rs 157.03 crore and Nellore:  Rs 4.72 crore 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31March 2009 
 128
Non-
reimbursement of 
Railway pension 
Railway Pensions aggregating Rs 81.70 lakh disbursed up to the year 2005 and 
claimed for reimbursement by three
22 district treasuries were pending for want of 
reimbursement as of May 2009. 
Non-submission of 
vouchers 
Audit noticed23 that 271 vouchers for an amount of Rs 5.08 crore up to March 2008 
were still not received by AG  from Treasuries despite re gular correspondence with 
Deputy Directors (DD) concerned (Earliest period of voucher pertained to the year 
1989-90 from Warangal District). 
3.1.9.3 Director of Works Accounts 
Secretary, Finance (WP) is responsible for overall administration of PAO 
(Works) organisation. PAOs are mainly responsible for cent per cent pre-audit 
of works and other bills, scrutiny of estimates and agreements, disbursement 
of payments and compilation and acc ounting of transactions conducted by 
them. 
Subject Audit observation 
Transfer of funds 
to Civil Deposits 
to avoid lapse of 
Grant 
As per the provisions of Para 20.2.2 of AP Budget Manual, savings should not be 
utilised to cover the expenditure of ensuing years. However, the department resorted 
to transfer of funds amounting to Rs 13 69.73 crore in respect of land acquisition 
payments towards the close of the years 2006-07 to 2008-09 to Public Account head 
8342/8443-Deposits to meet the expenditure of subsequent years. Audit noticed that 
these amounts were transferred to Deposits to avoid lapse of balance funds available 
under the grant violating prescribed financ ial procedures. The PAOs stated (March 
2009) that transfer of funds were made as per the orders of Government. Of the 
amounts so transferred, Rs 543.21 crore
24 still remained unspent as of March 2009 
for periods ranging between 12 to 24 months. 
Outstanding 
balances under 
Suspense heads of 
account 
Suspense heads of account (MPWA, Purc hase, Stock, Workshop Suspense and 
CSS) are transitory heads. As per Paras 7.10.1 to 7.10.19 of PAO Manual, the 
balances pending under various suspense  heads of account require proper and 
immediate adjustment to the final head of account by the PAO. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that outstanding  balances amounting to Rs 31.04 crore
25 
under various suspense heads of account in  respect of engineering divisions under 
the payment control of test checked PAOs  were awaiting cleara nce (March 2009). 
The department replied (March 2009) th at the matter would be pursued with 
concerned divisions for early clearance of balances. 
 
                                                 
22 Anantapur (Rs 23.01 lakh), East Godavari (Rs 53.45 lakh) and Nellore (Rs 5.24 lakh) 
23 during compilation of accounts by AG 
24JDWA Dowlaiswaram: Rs 110.29 crore, PAO Anantapur: Rs 9.07 crore, APAO 
Dowlaiswaram: Rs 213.58 crore, PAO Guntur: Rs 29.74 crore, PAO SP Nellore: Rs 25.00 
crore, PAO Nirmal: Rs 128.53 crore and PAO Nizamabad: Rs 27.00 crore 
25MPWA: Rs 12.22 crore; Purchase: Rs 10.57 crore; Stock: Rs 3.90 crore; Workshop 
suspense: Rs 4.32 crore and CSS: Rs 0.03 crore 

Chapter III – Integrated Audit 
 129
Outstanding 
balances under 
Schedule of 
Settlement with 
Treasury (SST) 
As per Paras 11.14.1 and 11.17.3 of PAO Manual, the PAOs should periodically 
reconcile the outstanding balances unde r SST with treasuries and divisions 
concerned. The PAOs should bestow pers onal attention on this aspect for early 
clearance and settlement of existing balances under both remittance and payments. 
It was observed that balances were outstanding (May 2009) under both remittances 
and cheques for SST amounting to Rs 248.37 crore in six
26 PAOs. The PAOs 
assured to carry out reconciliation and settle the said balances. 
Non-renewal of 
Bank Guarantees 
 
PAOs are responsible for safe custod y and monitoring the validity of Bank 
Guarantees (BGs) obtained in lieu of EM D, Performance security and security 
against Mobilisation advances etc. These BGs are to be got revalidated/renewed 
before their expiry till due performance of the contract. Audit observed that lapsed 
BGs worth Rs 12.93 crore were yet to be revalidated by three27 PAOs (March 2009).
Non-realisation of 
forfeited amount 
 
Executive Engineer, Godavari Head Works Division, Dowlaiswaram  forwarded 
(July 2006) three pay orders  for Rs 44.01 lakh towards EMD in respect of bidders 
who did not participate in the auction for “collection of toll tax on SAC Barrage” to 
APAO, Dowlaiswaram for forfeiture and crediting the amount to Government 
account.  The value of the above pay orders had not been realised even as of May 
2009 as these were found (August 2006) fraudulent and a police case was stated to 
be lodged.  The matter was under police investigation (May 2009). 
Pre-audit Audit noticed that an amount of Rs 11.94 crore towards IT, VAT, Cess, etc. was not 
recovered/short recovered from work bills  of engineering departments under the 
payment control of six 28 PAOs/APAOs. This shows that the pre-audit by the PAOs/ 
APAOs was ineffective.  
3.1.9.4 Commissioner of Small Savings and State Lotteries 
The main objective of the Small Savings Department is to create awareness 
among the people and encourage citizens to invest in small savings schemes 
for their own benefit and for the benefit of the State.  
Subject Audit observation 
Delays in release 
of incentives to 
NSS Agents 
CSS disbursed Rs 379.01 crore as subsidy to NSS Agents during 2004-05 to 2008-09, 
leaving a balance of Rs 40.65 crore as of February 2009. As per the extant 
instructions in force, NSS agents are to submit their incentive claims within six 
months from the date of receipt of commission.  Audit however, noticed that of the 
amount of Rs 49.49 crore disbursed during the year 2008-09, Rs 7.99 crore 
pertained to the year 2008-09 and the balance Rs 41.50 crore related to the incentive 
amount of earlier years. There was non-achievement of net targets
29 during the years 
2007-08 and 2008-09. 
                                                 
26Anantapur: Rs 32.86 crore; Dowlaiswaram: Rs 83.71 crore; Guntur: Rs 94.62 crore; Nellore: 
Rs 13.89 crore: Nirmal: Rs 10.04 crore and Nizamabad: Rs 13.25 crore 
27 Guntur :Rs 0.38 crore; Nirmal : Rs 5.58 crore and  Nizamabad : Rs 6.97 crore 
28 Anantapur: Rs 4.36 crore;  Dowlaiswaram: Rs 3.35 crore; Guntur: Rs 20.00 lakh;  Nellore: 
Rs 87.00 lakh; Nizamabad: Rs 1.27 crore and Nirmal: Rs 1.89 crore 
29 Net Target is difference between total funds mobilised minus payments made during the year 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31March 2009 
 130
 
Incorrect 
utilisation of 
district 
incentive funds 
Against the release of Rs 135.00 crore, CSS received UCs only for Rs 80.55 lakh 
from district offices. Collectors of Anantapur, East Godavari, Nellore and Nizamabad 
Districts diverted funds of Rs 1.97 crore for ineligible purposes.  
Thus, objectives set by Government for utilisation of district incentive funds for 
mobilisation of resources were not fully achieved.   
Inadequate action 
against delinquent 
NSS agents 
 
Central Government provided Extension Agencies for giving satisfactory service to 
the investing public and also with a view to provide service at the doorstep of the 
investors. Mandal Revenue Officer/Mandal Development Officer is the appointing 
authority of Agents. The Agents so appointe d have to furnish prescribed security in 
the form of cash or bank guarantee or a fidelity guarantee policy with Life Insurance 
Corporation of India or personal securities  for appointment as Agent. Departmental 
Manual of the Small Savings and State Lotteries provided that the appointing 
authority should take suo moto  prompt action in cases of misappropriation of 
investor’s money by the Agents and take st eps to recover the losses from them or 
their sureties besides  initiating  criminal action. 
There were fraudulent drawals of moneys deposited by public amounting to 
Rs 55.73 lakh by NSS agents in the districts of Adilabad (Rs 13.00 lakh), Anantapur 
(Rs 30.78 lakh) and Nellore (Rs 11.95 lakh). Action was yet to be taken against 
delinquent agents. 
Inspection of 
district offices 
CSS did not visit any of the unit offices in  districts despite complaints of alleged 
fraudulent drawal of investors’ funds by the Small Savings Agents in Adilabad, 
Anantapur, Nellore, etc. 
3.1.9.5 Director of Insurance (DOI) 
The main function of DOI is administration of Andhra Pradesh Government 
Life Insurance (APGLI). The main object ive of APGLI is to ensure protection 
to the families of deceased Government employees and to augment the 
resources at the time of retirement. APGLI has been issuing endowment 
policies which mature on the date of superannuation of the policy holders 
concerned. As of March 2008, fund balance was Rs 1539.22 crore.  This fund 
is incorporated in Part-III Public Account under ‘8011 Insurance and Pension 
Funds’. There were deficiencies in maintenance of accounts.  
Subject Audit observation 
Amounts lying in 
suspense  
 
Audit noticed that part of the premium pa id by subscribers against their policies 
remains un-credited to respective accounts due to quoting incorrect policy numbers, 
etc.  Such un-credited amounts up to the year 2008-09 aggregated to Rs 249 crore. 
Earliest period of the suspense amount dated back to 1975-76. 
Belated issue of 
Account slips 
APGLI Manual prescribes that account slips to the subscribers of APGLI should be 
issued by 30th September of the succeeding year. Audit noticed that account slips 
for the year 2006-07 only were issued as of March 2009. Further, slips were sent by 
post and no acknowledgments were on record about the receipt/issue of slips in the 
District Insurance Offices.  

Chapter III – Integrated Audit 
 131
Overstatement of 
Insurance Fund 
and minus 
balances 
As of March 2009, the balance under Group Insurance Scheme stood at 
Rs 449 crore. Audit noticed that most of the district treasuries were clubbing 
schedules of Insurance Fund and Savings Fund and as a result balance under 
Insurance Fund got overstated. 
In respect of Group Insurance Scheme of Panchayat Raj employees, minus balances 
continued to persist during the three year period. No amount was credited towards 
interest and the closing balance as of March 2009 stood at Rs (-) 38.20 crore.  
Similarly, in respect of Family Benefit Fund, minus balances aggregated to 
Rs 111.16 crore as of March 2009.  
Declaration of 
bonus 
Bonus for the triennium ended March 1999 was declared only in June 2006 after a 
delay of six years. Bonus for the triennium ended March 2002 was yet to be 
declared (March 2009). 
Improper Asset 
Management 
There were arrears in collection of rent  from tenant departments aggregating 
Rs 1.48 crore as of March 2009. 
Instances of loss of currency of lease deeds, non-conclusion of lease deeds were 
noticed in Anantapur and Nellore District Offices. 
3.1.10 Internal Control Mechanism 
3.1.10.1  Internal Audit  
Government constituted (November 2003) State Level Internal Audit Committee 
and Internal Audit Wing at Secretariat level in Finance Department with one 
Joint Secretary/Deputy Secretary, three Deputy Directors/Asst. Directors from 
Treasuries/PAO(PW)/State Audit. The Internal Audit Wing at Secretariat 
comprises a section consisting of one Section Officer, two Assistant Section 
Officers (ASO), and four Data Pro cessing Officers. A Chartered Accountant 
was also appointed by CGG 30 on tenure basis for strengthening the Internal 
Audit as a mechanism for monitoring and evaluation of internal controls. 
Secretary (FP) is the Head of Internal Audit Wing. Government ordered (July 
2004) for renaming the Central Checking Cells functioning in District 
Treasuries as Internal Audit Cells.  
Except the checking of pay fixation in the Revised Pay Scales, 2005, the 
Internal Audit wing of the Finance Department did not conduct the internal 
audit of either any wing within the Finance Department or any Directorate of 
the Finance Department. In the Directorates also Internal Audit wings were 
not existing.  
The following further observations are made: 
• While noting that Internal Audit was not effective, Government ordered 
(June 2005 and July 2007), to start the conduct of Internal Audit in 
Collegiate Education and School Education Department through DSA. 
Although, DSA conducted the audit and issued reports, compliance has not 
been watched. 
                                                
 
30Centre for Good Governance 
In the absence of 
internal audit  
there was no 
assurance to the 
management that 
the departmental 
rules, regulations 
and procedures  
were being  
complied with   

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31March 2009 
 132
• Government received grant of Rs 1.72 crore (equivalent to USD 430,000) 
in September 2006 inter alia for establishing the Internal Audit Wing in 
Finance Department. Audit noticed that the expenditure up to August 2008 
was a meagre Rs 20.79 lakh constituting 12 per cent  of the project cost 
indicating tardy implementation of the World Bank Project. 
In the absence of internal audit, there was no assurance to the management that 
the departmental rules, regulations and procedures were being complied with.  
Government while agreeing that the internal audit was not effective attributed 
(April 2009) it to shortage of manpower.   
3.1.10.2 High Power Committee (Shakdher Committee) 
recommendations  
Government of Andhra Pradesh accepted  the recommendations of the High 
Powered Committee known as Shakdher  Committee,  set up to improve the 
responsiveness to audit observations. The details of recommendations made 
and accepted by the Government are given in Appendix-3.9
. Government did 
not however, furnish the action plan drawn for implementation of the accepted 
recommendations (June 2009).  
3.1.10.3 Explanatory notes to C&AG audit Paras and Action Taken 
Notes on PAC recommendations 
The Finance Department is the nodal ag ency to coordinate/ensure submission 
of explanatory notes (ENs) on audit paragraphs and reviews included in the 
C&AG Audit Reports within three months and Action Taken Notes (ATNs) 
on the PAC recommendations within six months. The Finance Department is 
also the nodal agency to ensure prompt response to the Inspection Reports 
issued by the Accountant General (AG) to ensure remedial action in 
compliance with the prescribed rules an d procedures and accountability of the 
deficiencies and lapses noticed during inspection and proper functioning of 
Audit Committees.  
Subject Audit observation 
ENs and ATNs  
 
The following is the status of non-receipt of ENs and ATNs as of July 2009: 
• 22 departments had not submitted explanatory notes in respect of 152 paragraphs/ 
reviews which featured in the Audit Repo rts for the years 1996-97 to 2007-08. 
These included two ENs in respect of Para Nos. 4.1.1 and 4.2.2 titled 'Failure of 
Treasury Officers in  exercising checks while admi tting Bills’ (Treasuries) and 
'Payment of excess/inadmissible claims on  foreign travel' (PAO, AP, Hyderabad) 
included in the Audit Report 2006-07 against Finance Department.  
• ATNs for 424 recommendations were also due. Of these, 222 ATNs were due 
from Irrigation and Command Area Development Department alone.  
• The Department-wise and Audit Report-wise details are given in Appendix-3.10. 
 
Monitoring by 
Finance Department 
with regard to 
submission of ENs  
to Audit Paras, 
ATNs to PAC 
recommendations, 
settlement of AG’s 
IR Paras was poor 

Chapter III – Integrated Audit 
 133
IRs/Paragraphs  The status of pendency of IRs/Paragraphs as at the end of June 2007, June 2008 and 
June 2009 is detailed below: 
Table-13 
Pending as at the end of  
June 2007 June 2008 June 2009 
Number of IRs 12647 13669 11600 
Number of Paragraphs 43482 47345 43267 
The year-wise and department-wise break-up of these IRs and paragraphs is 
indicated in Appendix-3.11
. Lack of action on audit IRs and Paras has adverse 
implication of continuation of financial irregularities and loss to Government. 
Audit Committee 
meetings 
The status of audit committee meetings held during 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09 is 
discussed below: 
• The Apex level State Audit and Accounts  Committee met only once during each 
year 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09 against the two meetings stipulated. 
• As against 31 departments, State Leve l Departmental Audit Committee meetings 
were conducted in 23 department s during 2006-07, in 8 departments 31 during 
2007-08 and only in 4 departments32 during 2008-09. 
• No State Level Departmental Audit and Accounts Committee meeting was held 
since reconstitution of the Committees in June 2004 in respect of 20 Departments.   
Action on reports 
of ACB, Vigilance 
cases, etc. 
Action on 371 cases (January 2009) pertaining to Anti Corruption Bureau (ACB) 
(28), Court cases (110), AP Administrative Tribunal (190) and disciplinary cases 
(43) in the Directorate of Treasuries and Accounts was inadequate. 
3.1.10.4  Non-authentication of Manuals 
Dr. Marri Channa Reddy Human Resource Development Institute of Andhra 
Pradesh compiled Departmental and Functionary manuals for all the 
Directorates of Finance Department.  Audit found these manuals do not have 
official authority and hence lack sanctity. This has been the status for over five 
years. 
DSA while accepting the audit point did not give reasons for not obtaining the 
Government’s approval for these manuals. 
                                                 
31Environment, Forests, Science & Technology, Finance (three), Irrigation & Command Area 
Development, Tribal Welfare, Information Technology & Communication; Labour, 
Employment & Training; Municipal Administration & Urban Development, and Panchayat 
Raj & Rural Development Departments 
32Finance, Labour, Employment & Training, Municipal Administration and Urban 
Development and Tribal Welfare Departments 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31March 2009 
 134
3.1.10.5 Internal Controls in District Offices 
Deficiencies noticed in the internal controls in District Offices of the 
Directorates of Treasuries and Acc ounts, Works Accounts, Insurance and 
State Audit are detailed below: 
Office Audit observation 
District offices of 
Directorate of 
State Audit (DSA) 
 
• Non-maintenance of Treasury Bill Register, non-preparation of Bank Reconciliation 
Statements, non-reconciliation of expenditu re figures with District Treasury, 
incomplete maintenance of cash book and absence of closings, not obtaining 
attestation of entries in Service book s from the employees, non-maintenance of 
Budget Control Register, etc were noticed.  
• Guard files of important instructions were not maintained by district audit offices. 
• DSA conducted inspection of District Offices and others and issued 868 observations 
during 2007-09. All the 868 observations raised by DSA remained un-settled as of 
January 2009. 
• Poor progress in issue of Special Letters was noticed. 
• There were arrears in receipt of Audit fee. 
• Registers including Audit fee and Comp rehensive Demand Register were not 
maintained. 
• Irregularities were noticed in processing of pension cases of Class-IV employees.  
• There was no follow up action on the huge pendency of Audit Report Paras. The 
due dates in issue of Audit Reports were also not adhered to in all the district 
offices. 
District offices of 
Director of 
Treasuries and 
Accounts 
• Audit noticed that Watch registers for Certificates of Acceptance of Balances 
(CABs) and reconciliation with DDOs (Drawing and Disbursing Officers) were 
not maintained in district treasuries test-checked. 
• Records that were ripe for destruction were not identified and consequently no 
record was destroyed in all the treasuries test-checked.  
District offices of 
Director of Works 
Accounts 
• No statutory inspections were conducted since inception of the Directorate.  
• Audit noticed that PAO Objection Book, Calendar of Returns, PW Deposits 
Registers, and Cadre Strength Register we re not maintained in all the PAOs test-
checked. 
District offices of 
Director of 
Insurance 
• In all the district insurance offices te st-checked, Audit noticed non-posting of 
schedule amounts to respective accounts and huge balances under suspense 
account, non-receipt of schedules from district treasury and non-conducting 
periodical review of cases. 
• District Insurance Offices are maintaining database of all the subscribers utilising 
software, namely ‘Automatic Insurance Management System (AIMS)’ that was 
supplied and controlled by the Directorate. Audit noticed that (i) no user/ 
Functionary manual of the software was pr ovided to the District offices and that 

Chapter III – Integrated Audit 
 135
there was no provision for ‘DDO code’ and the month of premium. Further, there 
was no provision in AIMS to generate report on ‘financial year-wise new business 
achieved’, (ii) District insurance offices were unaware of the security policy of the 
department, (iii) there is no mechanism available in District Insurance Offices to 
have back-up of the data as every thing is  controlled centrally, (iv) there is no 
mechanism in place to work off-line in case of emergency and at times of break-
down of net work and connectivity problems associated with the  Servers set up in 
district Collectorates and (v) no shelf life was fixed for the files kept in district 
insurance offices.  
• Periodicity of preservation of records was not prescribed. 
3.1.11 Manpower management 
Finance Department has the sanctioned strength of 6372 posts. Of these, ASOs 
(134), Shroffs (319), STOs (595), Senior Accountants/Senior Auditors (1990), 
Junior Accountants/Junior Auditors (826), Auditors (335), Divisional Accounts 
Officers (327), Senior Assistants (416)  and Junior Assistants (182) represent 
the bulk of the manpower. 
3.1.11.1 Vacancies in key areas 
Finance Department has a critical role in all aspects relating to Government’s 
finances. Any shortage of personnel has a deleterious effect on safeguarding 
the finances. But there were vacancies in key areas as detailed below: 
• In Finance Department in Secretariat, there were 70 vacancies in the cadre 
of ASO due to non-availability of feeder cadre. 
• In DTA, there existed 505 vacancies in the cadre of Senior/Junior 
Accountant although this cadre is the backbone for the functioning of 
Treasuries and Accounts Department.                 
• Similarly, in PAO (Hyderabad), there were 147 vacancies in the cadre of 
Auditor. Vacancies in key areas adversely affect the pre-audit function of 
the PAO.  
3.1.11.2 Training 
Audit noticed that DTA did not utilise the entire allotment for training during 
2005-06, 2006-07 and 2008-09; expenditure in 2007-08 was a meagre  
Rs 49.89 lakh (8 per cent) as against the allotment of Rs 5.84 crore. Position 
of utilisation in other Directorates also remained the same as shown in  
Table-14.  
Table-14                    (Rupees in lakh) 
Directorate Budget 
allotment 
Expenditure Un-utilised 
balance 
DTA 583.84 49.89 533.95 
DOI 7.05 0.87 6.18 
)H (PAO  1.23 0.23 1.00 
Utilisation of  
funds provided for 
training was poor  
in almost all the 
Directorates under 
the Finance 
Department 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31March 2009 
 136
Further, Finance Department did not formulate any training policy, although 
their staff carry out technical and non-routine functions.  
Audit also noticed that newly recruited AAOs in the Directorate of State Audit 
were being trained as per the training plan approved as far back as in 1989.  
The above points indicate lack of importance given to training by the Finance 
Department. 
3.1.11.3  Payments to outsourcing agencies 
Government issued (December 2006) specific guidelines for implementation 
of functions under outsourcing. Proper mechanism was not in place for 
ensuring remittance of service tax collected by the firms, accounting of ESI, 
EPF recoveries and employer’s share to the departments concerned in respect 
of the outsourced staff as discussed below: 
• DOI engaged three outsourcing agencies 33  for supply of 88 Data Entry 
Operators (DEOs), 12 Attenders and 23 Sweeper-cum-Night Watchmen 
during the period 2006-09 and incurred an aggregate expenditure of Rs 2.00 
crore. The firms had executed agreements for one year from September 
2006 to August 2007 and the same were extended up to July 2008. Their 
engagement was continued without subsisting contracts due to absence of 
instructions from Government.        
• Audit also observed that Contract/Agency firms have been charging 
commission/agency charges at varying rates of the bill amount. Agency 
firms have not been submitting details of remittances made to the 
concerned Government departments (EPF and ESI) while preferring 
claims for the subsequent months despite the stipulation to that extent.     
• Payments to outsourced agencies were made up to November 2007 by 
DTA and thereafter this function was delegated to Deputy Directors (DDs) 
of District Treasuries. There was thus no scope for verification of 
remittance particulars of EPF, ESI, etc as the agreements were not 
available with the district treasuries but with the DTA.   
• Service Tax Registration numbers of the agencies were also not verified by 
the DDs beforehand and no such numbers were indicated on the invoices 
although it is mandatory as per Rule 4A of Service Tax Rules, 1994.        
3.1.12        Government Website 
3.1.12.1  Non-hosting of quarterly reports on the Web 
Government has been preparing quarterly reports on the compliance made by 
the Government to the APFRBM Act, 2005. Audit observed that the quarterly 
reports were not being posted on the website in the recent past and latest/last 
report available in the web pertained to the quarter ended June 2007.   
                                                
 
33 M/s  Srinivasa Outsourcing Services Pvt. Ltd, Hyderabad, M/s Sri Sai Infotech, Hyderabad 
and M/s Jyothi Computers Services, Hyderabad 
Proper mechanism 
was not in place in 
Finance Department 
for conclusion of 
agreements with 
outsourcing 
agencies, etc. 

Chapter III – Integrated Audit 
 137
3.1.12.2 Uploading incomplete Gove rnment Orders on the website 
On perusal of Government Orders (GOs) posted on AP Government Website 
“www.ap.gov.in/goir” during March 2009, it was observed that some GOs 
were incomplete and did not contain data such as the name of the issuing 
authority, number, date, unit of measur ement, etc. Details are given in the 
Appendix-3.12
.  
3.1.13 Constraints and achievements  
Audit has not been able to ascertain the constraints faced by the Finance 
Department as no reply was received for the audit observations. The following 
were the achievements of the Finance Department: 
• The Finance Department piloted the APFRBM Act, 2005 to ensure 
prudence in fiscal management and to maintain fiscal stability in the State. 
• The Finance Department prepared Fiscal Correction Path for the 
Government indicating the milestones of outcome indicators with target 
dates of implementation keeping in view the fiscal targets laid down in the 
APFRBM Act and Rules made thereunder. 
• The Finance Department accorded priority to asset formation in annual 
budgets with emphasis on capital outlay. The major beneficiary sectors are 
Irrigation and Flood Control and Trans port. The increasing trends in 
capital expenditure as reflected by its increasing ratio with reference to 
total expenditure and GSDP as well as a significant proportion of Non-
salary component of Revenue expenditur e (net of subsidies) indicates an 
improvement in quality of expenditure during the period 2006-08.  
• The State finances have shown Revenue surplus for the second 
consecutive year although it declined from Rs 2807 crore in 2006-07 to  
Rs 159 crore in the year 2007-08. 
• Due to good fiscal performance State Government received debt relief of 
Rs 1,186.31 crore and Rs 703.08 crore during 2006-07 and 2007-08 
respectively from Central Government under Debt Consolidation and 
Relief Facility (a scheme formulated by Central Government in pursuance 
of the recommendations of the TFC for fiscal consolidation and 
elimination of revenue deficit of the States). 
• The Finance Department did not resort to Ways and Means Advances for 
the successive fourth year (during 2007-08) due to better management of 
cash balances. 
• Despite a steep fall in revenue surplus and a sharp increase in fiscal deficit 
during the year 2007-08, an increase of two per cent  in Balance from 
Current Revenue (BCR) (Rs 8,503 crore) over that of 2006-07 indicates 
that funds were available with the State Government for creation of assets 
and to meet other development needs of the State. 
• The existing manual accounting procedures have been computerised and 
the daily accounts from sub-Treasury to the District Treasury are 
computerised. As a result, monitoring of State finances has become 
possible on a day-to-day basis.  

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31March 2009 
 138
3.1.14   Conclusions 
The objective of the Finance Department is overall management of the State’s 
finances including mobilisation of res ources and collection of revenues and 
other financial resources. The financial management was deficient. Audit 
noticed huge variations in BEs and the actual expenditure, unnecessary 
supplementary grants, non-surrender of  anticipated savings, expenditure 
without provision, etc. Accountability obligations were largely ignored by 
DDOs/HODs. Adequate internal controls did not exist with the Finance 
Department in areas of watching compliance of instructions by other 
administrative departments. The return on investments in Commercial 
Enterprises was poor. There were chronic arrears in preparation of Proforma 
Accounts by Departmentally Managed Government Undertakings. Monitoring 
by Finance Department was also ineffe ctive with regard to submission  
of Explanatory Notes to Audit Paras, Action Taken Reports to PAC 
recommendations, settlement of AG’s IR Paras by other administrative 
departments. Functioning of all the Directorates under the control of Finance 
Department was deficient. Audit noticed lapses such as, accumulation of 
stamps with DTA; irregular transfer to Civil deposits, non-renewal of bank 
guarantees in DWA; huge arrears of cost of realisable audit fee, non/delayed 
submission of Audit Reports to Legislature by DSA, etc. Audit also noticed 
weak internal controls in their district offices. Tax recovery mechanism was not 
effective and the Government resorted to sale of lands for revenue mobilisation. 
In the absence of effective internal audit, there was no assurance to the 
management on the adequacy of the internal controls in the Department. 
3.1.15 Recommendations 
¾ Government should put in place an effective mechanism such as having an 
independent representative of Finance Department in each Department to 
ensure financial discipline and to prepare realistic budget and avoid 
unnecessary supplementary grants, non-surrender of anticipated savings. 
Timely release of funds at prescribed intervals to user departments should 
be ensured for smooth flow of expenditure. 
¾ Finance Department should ensure strict compliance of its own instructions 
in GO Ms. No. 507 dated 10 April 2002 to honour Public Finance 
Accountability norms viz. timely adjustment of abstract contingent bills, 
reconciliation of receipts and expenditure figures by all departments, 
submission of accounts by autonomous bodies, etc. 
¾ Government should gear up its machinery to ensure realisation of tax 
revenue which was in arrears. Immedi ate steps should also be taken to 
effect recovery of tax pointed out by Audit and accepted by Government. 
¾ Finance Department should ensure expeditious submission by all 
departments of Explanatory Notes to Audit paras and Action Taken Notes 
on PAC recommendations and timely and proper response to the 
Inspection Reports of AG. Finance Department should also ensure 
conducting of Audit Committee Meetings in all the departments regularly 

Chapter III – Integrated Audit 
 139
for speedy settlement of pending IRs and paras and effect recoveries 
pointed out in the IRs promptly.  
¾ Finance Department should take effective steps for expeditious furnishing 
of Explanatory Notes and Action Taken Notes to PAG for vetting for 
regularisation of excess expenditure in the years 2004-05 to 2007-08. 
¾ Finance Department should ensure proper internal controls in all the 
Directorates and the district offices as  well. Director of Insurance needs to 
take early steps to clear the balance lying in suspense account. Director of 
State Audit is to expedite the submission of Audit Reports to Legislature 
without delay to serve the desired purpose.  
¾ Finance Department should bring out ways to minimise avoidable 
expenditure in significant expenditure items of budgets and streamline 
revenue collection mechanism in areas which form part of sizeable budget. 
¾ Internal Audit in Finance Department including all the directorates is to be 
strengthened to derive the benefit of  this important tool for financial 
management. 
The above audit observations were reported to the Government in  
August 2009; their reply has not been received. 
Hyderabad 
The 
 (G. N. SUNDER RAJA) 
Principal Accountant General (Civil Audit) 
Andhra Pradesh 
 
 
      Countersigned 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
The 
(VINOD RAI) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 

Appendices 
 141
Appendix-1.1 
(Reference to paragraph 1.1.5 page 5) 
List of Districts, CHCs, PHCs and Sub-Centres selected for Test Check 
District CHC/Block PHC Sub-centre 
Logisa Marupalli 
Madhupada 
K.dabalu Kothavalasa 
Denduru 
Pakki Pakki 
Sivadavalasa 
Psr puram Peddamajjipalem 
Vasadi 
Nkr puram Vepada 
C. Dungada 
Viyyampeta 
Vizianagaram Saluru 
Bobbili 
S.Kota 
Viyyampeta 
Thummakapalli 
Kondapalli-II Kondapalli 
Guntupalli-III 
Unguturu Unguturu 
Telaprolu-II 
Kruthivennu Kruthivennu 
Matlam 
Puligadda Koduru 
Koduru-II 
Sirivada Veeravalli 
Bandarugudem 
Chinnagollapalem 
Krishna Mylavaram 
Nandigama 
Vuyyuru 
Lakshmipuram 
Nidamarru 
Kalavalapudi Guttikonda Varipalli 
Venkatagiri-I 
Mallam-I Mallam 
Mallam-II 
Cherlapalli Manubolu 
Kommalapudi 
Korutla Mypadu 
Somarajupally 
Ayyavaripally Seetharamapuram 
Gundupally 
Chowkicherla 
Nellore Atmakur 
Rapur 
Sullurpeta 
Yellayapalem 
Mudivarthi 
Cementnagar-I Bethamcherla 
Cementnagar-II 
Petnikota Kolimigundla 
Bellum 
Chakarajuvemula Kothapalli 
W.kothapalli 
Amakathadu Krishnagiri 
Yerukulacheruvu 
Akumalla Perisomula 
Kavala 
Devanabanda 
Kurnool Atmakur 
Dhone 
Pattikonda 
Puchakayalamada 
Dudekonda 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 142
District CHC/Block PHC Sub-centre 
Ada Ada 
Ankusapur 
Parapally Lakshmanachanda 
Vellamal 
Chintakunta Lonevally 
Dabba 
Gillada Vemanapally 
Vemanapally 
Gambiraopet Wankidi 
Pangidimadra 
Kondapur 
Adilabad Chennur 
Luxetipet 
Sirpur 
Pittabongaram 
Walagonda 
Uppaka Pinapaka 
Thoggudem 
Kolluru Jeediguppa 
Pocharam 
Utukuru Kamepally 
Mucherla 
Karmankonda Kutur 
Marrigudem 
Ravikampadu Chandrugonda 
Ayyanapalem 
Kudumuru 
Khammam Penuballi 
Sattupalli 
Yellandu 
Chintakani 
Prodduturu 
Kothapalli-1 Kothapalli 
Asifnagar 
Kallepalli Bejjanki 
Begampet 
Molungur Kesavapatnam 
Metpally 
Vennampally Saidapur 
Bommakal 
Thimmapur Yellareddypet 
Venkatapur 
Chegyam 
Karimnagar Pedapally 
Jammikunta 
Sultanabad 
Velgatur 
Pathagudur 
Malepadu Chilmakur 
Chirrajupally 
Ambavaram Vallur 
Peddaputha 
Kolumalapally CK Dinne 
Bodeddulapalli 
TV Puram Thottigaripally 
Badvel-III 
B. Kothapalli Khajipet 
Ravulapally 
Brahmanapally 
Kadapa Kamalapuram 
Proddutur 
Siddavatam 
Gopavaram 
Sastrinagar 

Appendices 
 143
Appendix-1.2 
(Reference to paragraph 1.1.6.2 page 6) 
Variation between SHS and DHS figures (NRHM) in respect of test checked districts 
 (Rupees in lakh) 
District Year Funds released to 
DHS by SHS 
Funds received 
by DHS 
Difference 
2005-06 263.95 226.95 (-) 37.00 
2006-07 843.66 858.48 14.82 
2007-08 1008.68 1019.83 11.15 
Vizianagaram 
2008-09 784.87 811.74 26.87 
2005-06 282.68 221.60 (-) 61.08 
2006-07 894.65 879.01 (-) 15.64 
2007-08 954.64 876.55 (-) 78.09 
Krishna 
2008-09 957.88 961.13 3.25 
2005-06 223.39 173.92 (-) 49.47 
2006-07 819.43 579.27 (-) 240.16 
2007-08 743.53 765.69 22.16 
Nellore 
2008-09 666.45 712.05 45.60 
2005-06 282.40 233.72 (-) 48.68 
2006-07 1046.27 898.19 (-) 148.08 
2007-08 1032.12 1058.86 26.74 
Kurnool 
2008-09 1131.13 951.75 (-) 179.38 
2005-06 246.91 197.54 (-) 49.37 
2006-07 782.59 762.31 (-) 20.28 
2007-08 920.69 1071.94 151.25 
Adilabad 
2008-09 669.11 691.89 22.78 
2005-06 248.24 210.93 (-) 37.31 
2006-07 849.18 833.79 (-) 15.39 
2007-08 985.53 1000.10 14.57 
Khammam 
2008-09 707.26 714.84 7.58 
2005-06 247.92 217.45 (-) 30.47 
2006-07 901.39 875.63 (-) 25.76 
2007-08 952.48 736.05 (-) 216.43 
Kadapa 
2008-09 854.92 900.20 45.28 
2005-06 261.56 NIL (-) 261.56 
2006-07 905.82 789.04 (-) 116.78 
2007-08 1031.35 834.39 (-) 196.96 
Karimnagar 
2008-09 731.31 1017.78 286.47 
Total 23231.99 22082.62 (-) 1149.37 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 144
Appendix -1.3 
(Reference to paragraph 1.1.8.4 page 13) 
Sanctioned strength of Medical and Health Department as of September 2008 
Sanctioned  strength Vacancy Sl. 
No 
Cadre 
Permanent Temporary Super-
numorary 
Total 
Existing 
Regular Out- 
sourcing 
1 Civil Asst Surgeon 60 13 - 73 69 4 - 
2 Civil Surgeon Specialist 10 166 - 176 130 46 - 
3 Deputy Civil Surgeon 157 126 - 283 163 120 - 
4 Civil Asst. Surgeon 1530 1886 200 3616 2337 1279 182 
5 Dental Asst Surgeon 18 172 - 190 165 25 1 
6 Sr. Entomologist 22 5 - 27 13 14 - 
7.  Statistical officer 68 - - 68 63 5 - 
8.  Dy. Statistical officer 50 20 - 70 49 21 - 
9. Statistician 78 40 - 118 90 28 - 
10 Biologist 7 2 - 9 9 - - 
11. Physiotherapist 51 52 - 103 92 11 - 
12 Paramedical officer 23 - - 23 20 3 - 
13. Dy P.M.O/Non medical 
supervisor 
285 181 - 466 362 104 - 
14. Pharmacy Supervisor 22 - - 22 16 6 - 
15.  Head Nurse 10 144 - 154 123 31 - 
16 Ophthalmic  Asst 131 183 - 314 278 36 16 
17 A.P.M.O/N.M.A 1480 680 - 2160 1500 660 - 
18 M.P.H.E.O 1112 396 - 1508 1096 412 - 
19 Staff Nurse 1437 1075 - 2512 1647 865 150 
20 H.E.O 23 - - 23 21 2 - 
21 Health Educator 150 - - 150 109 41 - 
22 MPHS(M) 1973 772 - 2745 2120 625 - 
23 PH Nurse 22 7 - 29 20 9 - 
24 Pharmacist Gr II 1211 580 - 1791 1494 297 336 
25 MPHA (M) 3902 3553 - 7455 5797 1658 2943 
26 ANM - - - - 11572 - - 
27 MPHA (F) 774 1251 - 2025 1814 211 75 
28 Radiographer 75 124 - 199 107 92 - 
29 Lab technician Gr II 1550 289 - 1839 1418 421 278 
30 C.H.O 337 169 - 506 305 201 - 
31 Refractionist - 1 - 1 1 - - 
32 Dark room Asst 54 125 - 179 84 95 - 
33 Lab-Attendant 35 10 - 45 39 6 - 
 

Appendices 
 145
Appendix-1.4 
(Reference to paragraph 1.1.9.3 page 17) 
Number of sterilizations conducted during 2005-06 to 2008-09 
Break-up of operations Year Target Achievement Percentage 
Vasectomy Tubectomy Laparoscopy 
2005-06 800000 745117 93.14 26542 630664 87911 
2006-07 800000 769253 96.16 27221 630955 111077 
2007-08 800000 711748 89.00 27285 573718 110745 
2008-09 790000 700273 88.64 29763 556811 113699 
Appendix-1.5 
(Reference to paragraph 1.2.6.1 page 29) 
Statement showing the receipts and expenditure of the University during the period 2004-09 
(Rupees in crore) 
Receipts Expenditure Year 
Block 
grant 
Internal 
Sources 
UGC 
Grant 
Non-UGC 
Grants 
Total University
Funds 
UGC Non-
UGC 
Total 
2004-05 67.32 21.09 7.73 6.35 10 2.49 88.71 6.23 5.64 100.58 
2005-06 71.70 24.76 6.45 5.32 10 8.23 96.45 6.99 6.26 109.70 
2006-07 93.20 21.86 19.49 5.40 13 9.95 115.06 19.79 4.34 139.19 
2007-08 93.25 33.38 22.57 8.43 15 7.63 126.63 21.38 9.78 157.79 
2008-09* 98.44 31.18 11.60 4.84 14 6.06 138.07 11.59 6.43 156.09 
Total  423.91 132.27 67.84 30.34 654.36 564.92 65.98 32.45 663.35 
*Estimated figures (Accounts yet to be prepared) 
Appendix-1.6 
(Reference to paragraph 1.2.10 page 45) 
Incorrect preparation of estimates 
Name of the work Standard 
Schedule of 
Rates (SSR) 
per Cum (Rs) 
Rates 
adopted per 
Cum (Rs) 
Difference 
of rates per 
Cum (Rs) 
Quantity of 
work done 
(in Cum) 
Excess 
expenditure 
(Rs) 
Construction of Girls hostel building for Engineering and Technology Students at University campus 
Filling of basement 
with carted earth 
134.32 208.52 74.20 978.96 72,639 
Refilling of foundation 
with excavated earth 
10.11 28.54 18.43 1,546.19 28,496 
Coursed rubble stone 
masonry 
1,858.60 1,936.27 77.67 559.53 43,459 
Total excess expenditure 1,44,594 
Construction of a Building for Central Facilities Complex 
Filling with carted 
gravel in trenches 
155 189.85 34.85 11,993.61 4,17,977 
Filling foundation with 
excavated earth 
9.24 26.33 17.09 928.68 15,871 
Coursed rubble stone 
masonry 
1,632.49 1,670.25 37.76 1,112 41,989 
Total excess expenditure 4,75,837 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 146
Appendix-1.7 
 (Reference to paragraph 1.3.2.2 page 52) 
TPQC works entrusted to firms other than empanelled 
TPQC 
Package 
No. 
Name of the firm Value of TPQC 
agreement  
(Rs in crore) 
No. of EPC  
packages/ 
agreements 
EPC Package 
Numbers 
Value of EPC 
agreements 
(Rs in crore) 
20 Engineering Staff 
College of India 
3.338 3 ISRMC 5,6,7 673.36 
23 Engineering Staff 
College of India 
2.858 5 Pushkara & 
Venkatanagram 
415.65 
AVR 
HNSS 
M/s VAS  Consultants, 
Hyderabad 
4.415 14 52 to 65 807.12 
10 M/s NCPE, Hyderabad 1.416 2 Civil & Hydro 268 
3 M/s NCPE, Hyderabad 1.967 6 77 to 81 235.63 
M/s NCPE, Hyderabad 4.076 8 7 to 12, 19 to 20 716.69 37 
 supplemental 1.226       
12 M/s NCPE, Hyderabad 2.57 7 52 to 58 427.35 
36 Indian Register of 
Shipping, Hyderabad 
3.186 1 Bhima Lift 1 & 2 774.902 
   25.052 46   4318.702 
Appendix-1.8 
(Reference to paragraphs 1.3.5, 1.3.12 and 1.3.18 pages 53, 58 and 62) 
Amount included towards analysis of designs in original agreement, extra expenditure for analysis of 
design, testing of input materials etc in supplemental agreements pertaining to extension of time 
 (In Rupees) 
TPQC 
Package 
No. 
Amount for 
Design Analysis 
as per Original 
Agreement 
Amount for Design 
Analysis as per 
Supplementary 
Agreement 
Testing of 
input 
materials 
and analysis 
Insitu tests 
and 
analysis 
Tests of 
finished 
product and 
analysis 
Amount 
for central 
laboratory 
building 
1 459847     8641168 
2 465304   
3 320000   
4 1110000   
5 1110000 254320 614200 668880 561070 
8 393567   
9 432922   591680 
10 244000   
11 846000 741922 824330 3469527 998399 
12 460000   
15 575000   
16 1200000   
17 1200000   
18 476200 376998 4581052 9363048 286102 
19 476200 376998 4581052 9363048 286102 
20 1050000   5705000 
21 113289   11750592 
22 437083   1200000 
23 1000000 486090 2330967 2141355 2418460 5369364 
24 553300 753093 5372093 4017093 3655093 0 

Appendices 
 147
25 305125   
26 330862   
27 453197   
28 444734   
32 1170000   
33 1050000   
34 1340791   
35 3193336   
36 240000 0 2023498 1425000 1282500 
37 264000 482400 6390263 4044780 3797102 
38 1095000 360000 1044000 7915900 7836000 
39 735000   12216304 
40 295453   909325 
41 770473   2600000 
42 150000   2700000 
43 0   
44 100000   
49 1490000   8160000 
TPQC-1 108921   11719868 
GLIP 515000 191460 8822004 456825 2781528 
AVR 
HNSS 
523000     5037501 
  27497604 4023281 36583459 42865456 23902356 76600802 
Appendix-1.9 
(Reference to paragraph 1.3.16 page 61) 
Financial commitment due to extension of time 
TPQC 
Package 
No. 
Date of 
Original 
Agreement 
No. of 
months 
Supplemental 
Agreement No & 
Date 
No. of 
months for 
which EOT 
is accorded 
Value of 
Supplement
ary 
Agreement 
EPC Package 
No. 
Agreement 
Concluding 
authority 
Original 
EPC 
agreement 
valid up to 
Original 
TPQC 
agreement 
valid up to 
7/07-08, 25.01.08 3 3249534 ISLMC 1,2,3 SE, ISLMC, 
Tuni 
10/07-08,29.03.08 3 3358817 ISLMC 1,2,3 SE, ISLMC, 
Tuni 
21 02.12.2005 24 
19/08-09, 14.11.08 9 9713134 ISLMC 1,2,3 SE, ISLMC, 
Tuni 
19.03.2007, 
16.03.2007, 
18.03.2007 
01.12.2007 
3/08-09, 28.05.08 2 2864658 ISLMC 5,6,7 SE, ISLMC, 
Tuni 
20 28.04.2006 24 
7/08-09, 10.10.08 4 5194292 ISLMC 5,6,7 SE, ISLMC, 
Tuni 
22.10.2006, 
19.10.2006, 
24.10.2006 
27.04.2008 
1/07-08, 3.11.07 4 5091704 ISRMC 1,2,3 SE, ISRMC, 
Eluru 
1/07-08, 05.02.08 3 3818778 ISRMC 1,2,3 SE, ISRMC, 
Eluru 
18 13.11.2005 24 
5/08-09, 14.08.08 4 5091704 ISRMC 1,2,3 SE, ISRMC, 
Eluru 
20.10.2006, 
19.10.2006, 
22.10.2006 
12.11.2007 
6/07-08, 25.01.08 3 4742162 ISLMC 4,5,6,7 SE, ISLMC, 
Tuni 
3/08-09,15.04.08 3 4876994 ISLMC 4,5,6,7 SE, ISLMC, 
Tuni 
22 10.12.2005 24 
16/08-09, 23.10.08 12 19481568 ISLMC 4,5,6,7 SE, ISLMC, 
Tuni 
22.03.2007, 
22.03.2007, 
22.03.2007, 
22.03.2007 
09.12.2007 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 148
3/07-08, 13.02.08 6 14918961 TGP 9,10,11, 
39,40 & 
Somasila 94, 
95, 96 
SE, TGP, 
SKHT 
24 27.10.2005 24 
3/08-09, 21.8.08 12 26864265 TGP 9,10,11, 
39,40 & Somasila 
94, 95, 96 
SE, TGP, 
SKHT 
20.09.2007, 
21.08.2008, 
30.09.2007, 
27.09.2007, 
06.09.2007, 
22.03.2007, 
24.03.2007 
26.10.2007 
4 24.10.2005 24 56/07-08 14 14660627 JLIS 98 to 109  SE, PJP, 
Gadwal 
  23.10.2007 
5/07-08,22.02.08 5 6289720 RLIS 13 to 22 SE, RBLISP, 
Pebbair 
5 17.10.2005 24 
2/08-09, 17.07.08 9 7724200 RLIS 13 to 22 SE, RBLISP, 
Pebbair 
  16.10.2007 
33 06.03.2006 24 01/08-09, 14.07.08 6 8064000 MGLIS 28, 29, 
30 
SE, MG&JLIS, 
MBNR 
    
23/07-08, 19.02.08 6 12266160 7, 8, 20 of 
KMM and 10, 
11, 12, 18, 19 
of ADB 
SE, Med, 
Bellampally 
30/07-08, 29.03.08 5 9613662 7, 8, 20 of 
KMM and 10, 
11, 12, 18, 19 
of ADB 
SE, Med, 
Bellampally 
37 10.03.2006 18 
14/08-09, 25.10.08 8 16381327 7, 8, 20 of 
KMM and 10, 
11, 12, 18, 19 
of ADB 
SE, Med, 
Bellampally 
  16.10.2007 
1/07-08, 31.12.07 6 2932596 Alisagar & 
Guthpa Civil & 
Mech 
SE, NSLI, NZB 25 17.01.2006 18 
2/07-08, 09.05.07 3 1466298 Alisagar & 
Guthpa Civil & 
Mech 
SE, NSLI, NZB 
  16.07.2007 
GLIP 06.01.2006 30 07/2008-09 12 16639797 GLIS Civil & 
Mech 
SE, GLIS, WGL   05.07.2008 
36 03.05.2006 24 4/2008-09 11 12682039 RLIS Lift I & II SE, RLIS, 
Pebbair 
  02.05.2008 
 217986997  
Appendix-1.10 
 (Reference to paragraph 1.4.1 page 64) 
Central Assistance for the 30 Major and Medium Projects taken 
up under AIBP up to March 2009 
Sl. No. Name of the Project/Scheme (Rs in crore) 
1 Sriram Sagar (Stage-I) 327.17 
2 Cheyyeru (Annamayya) 25.33 
3 Jurala 245.19 
4 Somasila  164.53 
5 Nagarjunasagar  77.14 
6 Madduvalasa  66.80 
7 Gundlavagu  4.01 
8 Maddigedda  3.79 
9 Kanpur Canal  1.92 

Appendices 
 149
10 Yerrakaluva  28.46 
11 Vamsadhara Ph.I 37.12 
12 Flood Flow Canal of SRSP 308.40 
13 Sriram Sagar Project –II 74.27 
14 Tadipudi LIS 48.22 
15 Pushkara LIS 47.08 
16 Ralivagu 6.71 
17 Gollavagu 60.47 
18 Mathadivagu 28.35 
19 Peddavagu 50.63 
20 Gundlakamma Reservoir 99.35 
21 Veligallu Reservoir 62.34 
22 Ali Sagar LIS  16.37 
23 J.Chokkarao LIS 703.13 
24 A.R.Guthpa LIS 17.50 
25 Nilwai 18.40 
26 Khomaram Bhim 110.25 
27 Thotapalli Barrage 75.09 
28 Tarakarama Thirtha Sagaram Project 33.00 
29 Swarnamukhi Medium Irrigation Project 11.86 
30 Palemvagu 9.54 
Total 2762.42 
Appendix-1.11 
(Reference to paragraph 1.4.1 page 64) 
Central Assistance for the 67 MI Schemes taken up under AIBP up to March 2009 
Sl. No. Name of the Project/Scheme (Rs in lakh) 
1 Formation of new tank across Ka nkilavorre near Marrigudem(V) 
Mancherial(M) Adilabad District 
168.30 
2 Formation of new tank across Loca l Stream near Nandulapalli (V), 
Nannel(M), Adilabad District 
131.40 
3 Formation of new tank across branch of Bokkalavagu near 
Nandulapalli(V) Nannel(M) Adilabad District 
172.80 
4 Formation of new tank across Medaramvagu near Medaram (V), 
Mandamarri(M) Adilabad District 
171.90 
5 Formation of new tank across Chalamala vagu near Konampet 
(V), Nannel(M) Adilabad District 
532.80 
6 Formation of new tank across lo cal stream near Pardhi (V) 
Kowthala(M) Adilabad District 
177.30 
7 Formation of new tank across Te kumatla vagu near Tekumatla(V), 
Jaipur (M), Adilabad District 
478.80 
8 Formation of new tank across Peddavagu near Kazipally(V), 
Jaipur(M) Adilabad District 
342.00 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 150
9 Formation of new tank across Lo cal stream near Aregudem(V), 
Kagaznagar(M) Adilabad District 
229.50 
10 Formation of Reservoir across Gangapur vagu, near Nambala (V), 
Rebbena(M), Adilabad District 
297.27 
11 Formation of new tank across local stream, near Doddigudem(V), 
Kasipet(M), Adilabad District 
108.90 
12 Formation of new tank across local stream near Mamidigudem(V) 
Kasipet(M), Adilabad District 
126.00 
13 Formation of new tank across local stream near Pollampally(V), 
Jaipur(M), Adilabad District 
98.10 
14 Formation of new tank across Palamaduguvagu near 
Kusnapally(V), Nannel(M), Adilabad District 
165.24 
15 Formation of new tank across local stream, near Alugaon(V), 
Kotapally(M), Adilabad District 
125.10 
16 Formation of new tank across local stream near Balapalli(V), 
Kotapally(M), Adilabad District 
265.50 
17 Formation of new tank across local stream near 
Korishalagudem(V), Kasipet(M), Adilabad District 
288.00 
18 Formation of new tank across local stream near Varipet(V), 
Kasipet(M), Adilabad District 
352.80 
19 Formation of new tank across local stream near Buggagudem(V), 
Kasipet(M), Adilabad District 
208.80 
20 Formation of new tank across local stream near Kushanapally(V), 
Nannel(M), Adilabad District 
133.64 
21 Formation of new tank across local stream near Rampur(V), 
Kotapally(M), Adilabad District 
383.04 
22 Formation of new tank across local stream near Pulimadugu(V), 
Utnoor (M), Adilabad District 
197.73 
23 Formation of new tank across lo cal stream near Pendaruguda(V), 
Utnoor(M), Adilabad District 
267.30 
24 Formation of new tank across local stream near Wadoni(V), 
Utnoor(M), Adilabad District 
200.97 
25 Formation of new tank across local stream near Rajulaguda(V), 
Utnoor(M), Adilabad District 
133.34 
26 Formation of new tank across local stream near Puskaloddivagu 
near Laxmipur(V), Indravelly(M), Adilabad District 
122.22 
27 Formation of new tank across local stream near Babejeri(V), 
Narnoor (M), Adilabad District 
111.06 
28 Formation of new tank across local stream near Mahagaon(V), 
Narnoor(M), Adilabad District 
109.62 
29 Formation of new tank across local stream near Banargondi(V), 
Adilabad District 
106.02 
30 Formation of new tank across local stream near Seethagondi(V), 
Gundihatnoor(M), Adilabad District 
355.50 
31 Formation of new tank across lo cal stream near Shambuguda(V), 
Gundihatnoor(M), Adilabad District 
210.15 
32 Formation of Kajjeria Reservoi r in Kajjeria(V), Talamadugu(M), 
Adilabad District 
405.00 

Appendices 
 151
33 Formation of new tank across Therinala near Yapalguda(V), 
Adilabad District 
234.00 
34 Formation of new tank across Pangri vagu near Pangri(V), 
Bhainsa (M), Adilabad District 
237.60 
35 Formation of MI Tank (Pathacheruvu) at Gulmadugu(V), 
Kuntala(M), Adilabad District 
133.65 
36 Formation of new tank across lo cal stream near Burkapalli(V), 
Tamsi(M), Adilabad District 
87.03 
37 Formation of new tank across local stream near Guda Rampur(V), 
Jainath(M), Adilabad District 
91.35 
38 Formation of new tank across Chouti Vorrey near Kajjarla(V), 
Thalamadugu(M), Adilabad District 
171.90 
39 Formation of new tank across local stream near Buthi(V), 
Bazaratnoor(M), Adilabad District 
621.00 
40 Formation of new tank across lo cal stream near Pippaladari(V), 
Boath(M), Adilabad District 
109.80 
41 Formation of new tank across local stream near Wadegaon(V), 
Thamsi(M) Adilabad District 
85.86 
42 Formation of new tank across local stream near Palsi(V), 
Thalamadugu(M), Adilabad District 
200.70 
43 Formation of new tank across local stream near Lalgadh(V), 
Thalamadugu(M), Adilabad District 
90.27 
44 Formation of new tank across local stream near Bondidi(V), 
Neeredigonda(M), Adilabad District 
171.63 
45 Formation of new tank across local stream near Masala(V), 
Bela(M), Adilabad District 
218.79 
46 Formation of Reservoir across Bikkivagu near Karjibheempur(V), 
Bheemini(M), Adilabad District 
553.50 
47 Formation of new tank across Mongalivorrey near Nambala(V), 
Rebenna(M), Adilabad District 
72.90 
48 Formation of new tank across Rechini Regadi Vorrey near 
Thugeda(V), Rebenna(M), Adilabad District 
100.17 
49 Formation of Reservoir across  local stream near Movad(V), 
Asifabad (M), Adilabad District 
360.00 
50 Formation of Reservoir across Isukagedda near Buchavvapalem, 
Devarapally(M), Visakhapatnam District 
252.00 
51 Formation of new tank across local vanka near Vayalpadu(V), 
Chittoor District 
342.00 
52 Formation of new tank across Maddileru vagu near Ghani (V), 
Gadivemula(M) Kurnool District 
276.30 
53 Formation of new MI tank across Chandravanka near 
Chinnabodhanam(V), Chagalamarri(M), Kurnool District 
247.50 
54 Formation of MI tank across loca l stream near Jakkanalapally(V), 
Midjill(M), Mahaboobnagar District 
94.50 
55 Raising of FRL of Thipparthy vagu project near Gangannapalem, 
Thipparthy (M), Nalgonda District 
120.68 
56 Extension of FC from Guniyadiganni cheruvu to feed oora 
cheruvu, Voligonda(V), Atmakur Mandal, Nalgonda District 
829.80 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 152
57 Extension of FC from Guniyadiganni cheruvu, Phahilwampur in 
Voligonda(V), Mothkur (M), Nalgonda District 
470.70 
58 Construction of pickup anicut across Musi River near 
Muppavaram(V), Kondepi (M), Prakasam District 
123.93 
59 Construction of Multipurpose checkdam across Musi River near 
Ananthavaram (V), Tangutur (M), Prakasam District 
661.50 
60 Construction of anicut cum road across Manneru river at 
Baddipudi donka near Machevagu, Kandukur(M), Prakasam 
District 
275.78 
61 Raising FPL and improvements to Valluru tank of Valluru (V), 
Tangutur(M), Prakasam District 
774.00 
62 Restoration Regulgandi vagu project near Kunavaram H/o 
Samithisingaram(V), Manuguru(M), Khammam District 
109.57 
63 Formation of new tank across Pothulavagu near Asupaka (V), 
Aswaraopet(M), Khammam District 
145.80 
64 Formation of new tank across posampally vagu near Pagideru(V), 
Manuguru (M), Khammam District 
275.22 
65 Formation of new tank across Pullathogub near Regalla (V), 
Pinapaka(M), Khammam District 
217.23 
66 Pogonda Reservoir across Byneru river near Chintalagudem (V), 
Buttavagudem(M), West Godavari District 
2169.00 
67 Construction of pick up anicut across Gundlakamma river near 
Velamavaripalem(V), Ballikurava(M), Prakasam District 
Excavation of feeder channel to Bhavanasi tank of Gopalapuram 
(V) of Addanki (M) and raising FTL of Bhavanasi tank for 
creating additional irrigation potential  
2195.90 
Total 20297.66 
(Actually received = Rs 161.46 crore) 
Appendix-1.12 
(Reference to paragraph 1.4.3 page 65) 
Details of Projects/Schemes selected in audit  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Project Grant released 
up to 2008-09 
(Rs  in crore) 
Sample-A  (Projects taken up during 2003-04 to 2008-09) 
1 Veligallu Reservoir Project, Kadapa  (Medium) 62.33 
2 Thotapalli Barrage Project, Vizianagaram (Medium) 75.09 
3 Alisagar Lift Irrigation Scheme, Nizamabad (Major) 16.37 
4 Khomaram Bhim Project, Adilabad (Medium) 110.25 
5 Ralivagu Project, Adilabad  (Medium) 6.70 
6 Pushkara Lift Irrigation Scheme, East Godavari (Major) 47.08 
7 Gundlakamma Reservoir Project, Prakasam (Major) 99.33 

Appendices 
 153
Sample-B  (Projects taken up during 1996-97 to 2002-03) 
8 Yerrakaluva Project, West Godavari (Medium) 28.46 
9 Sriram Sagar Project Stage-I, Karimnagar (Major) 327.17 
10 Somasila Project, Nellore (Major) 164.52 
Total 937.30 
Sample-C (MI schemes taken up in 2006-07)        (Rs in lakh) 
1 Formation of new tank across Mongalivorrey near Nambala, 
Adilabad District 
72.90 
2 Formation of new tank Rechini Ragadi near Rebbana (V)  
Adilabad District 
100.17 
3 Formation of new tank across Kankilavorre near Marrigudem (V) 
Adilabad District  
168.30 
4 Formation of new tank across local stream near Nandulapalli (V) 
Adilabad District 
131.40 
5 Formation of new tank across branch of Bokkalavagu  near 
Nandulapalli (V)  Adilabad District 
172.80 
6 Formation of new tank across Mearamvagu near Medaram (V) 
Adilabad District 
171.90 
7 Construction of pick up anicut across Musi river near Muppavaram 
(V) Prakasam District 
123.93 
8 Construction of multipurpose checkdam across Musi river near 
Ananthavaram (V) Prakasam District 
661.50 
9 Construction of  anicut cum road across Maneru River near 
Machavaram (V) Prakasam District 
275.78 
10 Raising FTL & improvements to Valleru Tank near Valeru (V) 
Prakasam District 
774.00 
11 Formation of Reservoir across Isukagedda (V), Visakhapatnam District 252.00 
12 Formation of New Tank across Local vanka near vayalpad, Chittoor 
District 
342.00 
13 Formation of new tank across maddileru vagu, Gani(V), Kurnool District 276.30 
14 Formation of new tank across Chandravanka near 
Chinnabodanam(V), Kurnool District 
247.50 
Total 3770.48 
  

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 154
Appendix-1.13 
(Reference to paragraph 1.4.3 page 66) 
 
Year-wise details of the Budget provision vis-à-vis the expenditure on major and medium 
projects during the period from 2004-05 to 2008-09 (AIBP) 
  (Rs in crore) 
Budget Provision 
Expenditure 
Name of the Project 
2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
Gundlakamma Reservoir Project 22.50  
25.63 
30.00 
69.45 
225.00 
210.67 
200.00 
132.85 
120.00 
NA 
Komaram Bhim Project 1.50  
11.00 
58.00 
61.41 
126.00 
39.70 
105.00 
101.53 
67.80 
NA 
Pushkara Lift Irrigation Scheme 49.00  
48.07 
200.00 
137.83 
100.00 
90.51 
160.00 
95.31 
90.00 
NA 
Ralivagu Project 0.50  
1.40 
5.00 
8.42 
35.00 
31.13 
20.00 
2.52 
5.10 
NA 
Somasila Project 106.01  
61.75 
48.64 
30.26 
150.00 
112.32 
140.59 
126.56 
190.00 
NA 
Thotapally Barriage Project 88.91  
112.01 
85.59 
40.22 
165.00 
31.38 
145.00 
122.52 
85.00 
NA 
Veligallu Reservoir Project 30.00  
27.27 
75.37 
84.09 
55.00 
34.22 
15.00 
8.69 
19.00 
NA 
Yerrakaluva Reservoir Project 21.00  
13.93 
18.00 
10.00 
2.00 
4.57 
9.78 
7.73 
5.00 
NA 
NA: Not available  
Appendix-1.14 
(Reference to paragraph 1.4.4.2 page 67) 
Projects which were completed (AIBP) 
Name of the Project 
 
Year of sanction 
under AIBP 
Date of 
completion 
Time taken Delay 
Cheyyeru (Annamayya) 1996-97 2002-03 6 years 2 years 
Madduvalasa 1998-99 2003-04 5 years 1 year 
NSP 1998-99 2005-06 7 years 3 years 
Priya Darsini Jurala Project 1997-98 2005-06 8 years 4 years 
SRSP Stage-I 1996-97 2005-06 9 years 5 years 
Vamsadhara Phase-I of stage-II 2002-03 2007-08 5 years 1 year 
 

Appendices 
 155
Appendix-1.15 
(Reference to paragraph 1.4.4.2 page 67) 
 Details of AIBP Assistance released for 19 projects taken up after 2004-05 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Project Grant released up to 2008-09 
(Rs in crore) 
1 Flood Flow Canal of SRSP 308.40 
2 Sriramsagar Project-II 74.26 
3 Tadipudi LIS 48.22 
4 Pushkara LIS 47.08 
5 Ralivagu 6.70 
6 Gollavagu 60.47 
7 Mathadivagu 28.35 
8 Peddavagu 50.62 
9 Gundlakamma Reservoir 99.33 
10 Veligallu Reservoir 62.33 
11 Alisagar LIS 16.37 
12 J.Chokkarao LIS 703.13 
13 A.R.Guthpa LIS 17.50 
14 Nilwai 18.40 
15 Khomaram Bhim 110.25 
16 Thotapalli Barrage 75.09 
17 Tarakarama Thirtha Sagaram Project 33.06 
18 Swarnamukhi Project 11.86 
19 Palemvagu 9.53 
Appendix-1.16 
(Reference to paragraph 1.4.4.3 pages 69 and 70) 
Economic Rate of Return in respect of irrigation projects and Conceptual 
framework used in audit analysis 
(I)  Economic Rate of Return in respect of irrigation projects  
There are two approaches for execution of projects. 
Approach (A):- Award of work along with components of uncertain duration.  
The adverse effect is that the time gap between the investments and the 
accrual of benefits is very large leading to lower growth rate of economy.  
This is the common mistake committed. 
Approach (B):- Complete components of uncertain duration in advance and 
then only award the work.  The time gap between investments and the accrual 
of benefits will be short leading to speedy growth rate of economy. 
• In irrigation projects, it is not the commercial rate of return but the 
Economic Rate of Return (ERR) which is used as the criterion for 
measuring the benefits accruing from the projects.  Consider two projects 
A, B where the ERR is 10% in both the projects and project cost of each is 
Rs1,500 crore with period of completion of three years excluding the time 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 156
required for land acquisition/obtaining statutory clearances. On completion 
the ERR would be Rs 150 crore per year. 
Project-A Project-B 
Year Investment 
(Rs in crore) 
Return 
(Rs in crore) 
Year Investment 
(Rs in crore) 
Return 
(Rs in crore) 
1 500 -- 1 500 -- 
2 500 -- 2 500 -- 
3 -- -- 3 500 -- 
4 -- -- 4 -- 150 
5 -- -- 5 -- 150 
6 -- -- 6 -- 150 
7 -- -- 7 -- 150 
8 -- -- 8 -- 150 
9 -- -- 9 -- 150 
10 -- -- 10 -- 150 
11 500 -- 11 -- 150 
12 -- 150 12 -- 150 
• In Project ‘A’ Programme Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) 
Chart has not been used as an effective tool for decision making (please 
see Section-II below) leading to awar d of work without prior completion 
of the activities of uncertain duration such as land acquisition, obtaining of 
environmental clearances, etc. Consequently Project ‘A’ gets stalled after 
year 2 for want of forest clearance/non-acquisition of land. The return 
from this project only accrues from year 12. 
• In Project ‘B’ PERT Chart has been effectively used as a decision making 
tool not to incur any expenditure prior to completion of activities of 
uncertain duration like land acquisition, obtaining of environmental 
clearances, etc. The return from this projects accrues from year 4 leading 
to speedy growth rate of economy due to multiplier effect. 
In the above illustration the cost escalation for the balance works in year 11 
for the Project ‘A’ has not been considered.  But in practice starting a project 
without prior acquisition of land may lead to escalation in payments to the 
contractors due to extended period of execution. 
For faster growth rate of economy, the allocation of funds or investments 
should be only for projects of cate gory ‘B’ where we have a clean PERT 
Chart. 
There are basically two adverse effects from award of work without executing 
components of uncertain duration: 
(i) The contractor gets benefit by way of retaining mobilisation advance for 
longer periods by having to pay only on simple interest basis and further 
benefit by waival of even this interest in some cases. 
(ii) The time gap between investments and the accrual of benefits becomes 
very long leading to lower growth rate of economy.  

Appendices 
 157
(II)  Conceptual framework used in audit analysis 
(i) A PERT chart involves determination of the duration of the whole project 
based on time taken for each component of the project. 
(ii) If the project consists of any component of uncertain duration like 
acquisition of land or obtaining of Forest clearance, the duration assigned 
for that task would be ‘X’. Consequently the duration of the project would 
be ‘T’ or ‘X’ where ‘T’ is the time required to execute the component of 
projects excluding the uncertain component. 
(iii) Such an exercise would reveal that the project duration also becomes 
uncertain. 
(iv) The remedy lies in executing tasks of uncertain duration prior to award of 
work.   
Thus PERT chart is a decision making tool to decide which components of 
work (of uncertain duration) should be executed prior to award of work. 
Illustration: 
Consider a project consists of five act ivities including land acquisition/forest 
clearance (activity five). 
Activity Duration 
1 3 years 
2 < 3 years 
3 < 3 years 
4 < 3 years 
5 X years 
Duration of the Project 
Activity one has the target period of three years, activities two to four have 
duration less than three years, activity five has duration of ‘X’ years. The 
duration of the project would be three years or ‘X’ years whichever is 
longer indicating unclear PERT chart. The duration of the project is thus 
uncertain. 
Remedy: To clean up the PERT Chart so as to have a definite time frame for 
completion of the project the remedy lies in removing the component with 
duration ‘X’. This would lead to the decision that activities of uncertain 
duration ‘X’ like obtaining forest clearance, land acquisition etc., should be 
taken up before award of work to avoid risk of huge funds being blocked in 
incomplete projects as the PPRs and DPRs, based on which the Ministry of 
Water Resources gives clearances, do not mention such duration. 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 158
Appendix-2.1 
(Reference to paragraph 2.2.4 page 95) 
Statements showing the short collection of lease rentals from KSPL, Kakinada 
Table 1: The lands on which concession on lease rent was applicable 
(Rupees in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Period Lease rent applicable
(Rupees per yard/per 
annum) 
No. of days Lease rent 
to be raised 
Demand 
raised and 
collected 
Short 
Collection
For 114.39 acres or  553648 square yards (Reclaimed lands handed over on 01 August 2002) 
1 13-12-05 to 
15-04-07 
9.4325$ 489 69.96 27.32 42.64 
2 16-04-07 to 
31-03-09 
18.865# 715 204.60 76.54 128.06 
Total 274.56 103.86 170.70 
Table 2: The lands on which full rate of lease rent was applicable 
For 43.45 acres or 210298 square yards  (Handed over on 31 January 2004) 
1 13-12-05 to 
02-01-06 
37.73 21 4.56 1.60 2.96 
2 03-01-06 to 
02-01-09 
37.73 1095 238.04 95.97 142.07 
 Total 242.60 97.57 145.03 
For 8.98 acres or 43463.2 square yards (Handed over on 03 February 2005) 
1 13-12-05 to 
02-02-06 
37.73 51 2.29 0.80 1.49 
2 03-02-06 to 
02-02-09 
37.73 1095 49.19 19.88 29.31 
Total 51.48 20.68 30.80 
For 1.62 acres or 7839.24 square yards (Handed over on 03 February 2005) 
1 13-12-05 to 
02-02-06 
37.73 51 0.41 0.15 0.26 
2 03-02-06 to 
02-02-09 
37.73 1095 8.87 3.59 5.28 
Total 9.28 3.72 5.56 
Grand Total (Table 1 + Table 2) 352.09 
$ At 25 per cent of Rs 37.73 as per Row 2 of Table 1 above being the rent to be revised as per 
new registration value of Rs 1520 as on 13.12.2005 
# At 50 per cent of Rs 37.73 Row 3 of Table 1 above being the rent to be revised as per new 
registration value of Rs 1520 as on 13.12.2005 

Appendices 
 159
Appendix-2.2 
(Reference to paragraph 2.2.4 pages 95 and 96) 
Table 1: Statement showing the Minimum Guaranteed Amounts to be received  
from the Company as per original agreement (as per Table of 7.1 of the agreement) 
Period Minimum Guaranteed 
share amounts  
(Rupees in crore) 
Percentage of income to be paid 
to Government as share by the 
Company 
(1) (2) (3) 
1999-2000 11 20 per cent 
2000-01 16 20 per cent 
2001-02 20 20 per cent 
2002-03 20 20 per cent 
2003-04 20 20 per cent 
2004-05 25 22 per cent 
2005-06 25 22 per cent 
2006-07 25 22 per cent 
2007-08 to 2018-19 25 22 per cent 
Table 2: Statement showing the Minimum Guaranteed Amounts to be received from 
the Company as per revised agreement (as per Table 7.1 of supplemental agreement) 
Period Minimum Guaranteed share 
amounts  
(Rupees in crore) 
Percentage of income to be paid to 
Government as share by the 
Company 
(1)    (2) (3) 
1999-2000 11 20 per cent 
2000-01 16 20 per cent 
2001-02 4.50 20 per cent 
2002-03 7.75 20 per cent 
2003-04 14.29 20 per cent 
2004-05 16.22 22 per cent 
2005-06 17.90 22 per cent 
2006-07 22.12 22 per cent 
2007-08 28.93 22 per cent 
2008-09 29.49 22 per cent 
2009-10 31.72 22 per cent 
2010-11 41.87 22 per cent 
2011-12 42.19 22 per cent 
2012-13 42.19 22 per cent 
2013-14 42.18 22 per cent 
2014-15 42.54 22 per cent 
2015-16 42.54 22 per cent 
2016-17 41.37 22 per cent 
2017-18 41.46 22 per cent 
2018-19 41.46 22 per cent 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 160
Appendix-2.3 
(Reference to paragraph 2.4.1 page 104) 
Year-wise details of pending Action Taken Reports on the Vigilance & Enforcement Reports as on 31 January 2009 
ABABABAB AB A B A B A B A B A B A B A B A B A B
Municipal 
Admi ni stration & 
Urban Development
3 5 3 93 3 11 3 34 3 91 5 64 9 44 6 1 4 4 5 2 5 2 2 4 6 3 401 95 496
Revenue 3 2 1 1 27 5 58 5 102 2 57 1 65 17 47 52 10 359 96 455
Panchayat Raj & Rural 
Developme nt
2 1 11 1 20 5 33 5 36 3 51 12 35 23 29 20 10 22 2 228 93 321
Irriga tion & Command 
Area Development 
1 2 62 52 2 77 2 75 3 42 6 0 2 3 1 1 1 3 3 1 8 226 49 275
Agriculture & 
Cooperation
1 2 31 11 2 64 4 75 2 2 4 2 2 5 2 1 1 9 1 125 60 185
Industries & Comme rce 4 5 1 8 14 1 26 7 20 4 31 5 14 15 5 14 127 47 174
Roads & Buildings 1 2 3 14 2 11 1 17 1 13 4 21 2 16 3 12 3 14 5 124 21 145
FCS & CA 1 5 23 22 14 1 10 5 4 36 2 78 45 123
EFS & T 1 2 11 10 12 2 14 15 15 2 11 7 1 91 12 103
Secondary Education 1 2 1 1 11 19 11 12 8 3 11 58 22 80
Social Welfare 1 2 1 1 1 1 4 1 11 1 25 4 3 3 9 4 7 56 23 79
Health, Medical & 
Family Welfare
2 3 2 2 4 6 51 9 1 8 11644 44 24 68
T r i b a l  W e l f a r e 1 3 1 753 86 4 1 4 4 5 5 1 46 12 58
H o m e 3 1 13 66 3 1 6 4 2 1 2 18 30 48
H o u s i n g 221 77 48 6 5 4 36 10 46
E n e r g y 1 1 1 3 2 4 7 2 6 17322 31 11 42
CCT 1 1 1 3 11 8 3 2 2 16 16 32
Women Devt, D 
Welfare & Chi ld 
Welfare
11 21 3 42 8 2 2 1 2 2 4 23 12 35
Highe r Education 1 1 1 1 3 7 2 2 5 5 2 19 11 30
T r a n s p o r t 1 3 7 3 2 2114 15 9 24
AHDD & F 1 2 1 9 1 4 3 2 1 17 7 24
G A D 1 1 2 1 2 2 2 1 2 414 91 4 2 3
Finance 1 1 1 1 2 2 4 4 4 1 81 3 2 1
Y A  &  T C 1 1 1 5 3 3 314 12 10 22
B C  W e l f a r e 1 1 1 11 62 4 15 2 17
Minorities 48 2 1 14 1 15
LET & F 12 3 3 3 2 10 4 14
Finance & Planning 11 1 2 14 5
Information Technology 
& Communication
12 12 3
Technical Edcation 1 01 1
Irriga tion & Project s 1 01 1
Rural Water Supply 1 10 1
TOTAL 5 0 7 0 16 3 22 6 88 17 109 24 195 32 346 50 561 57 381 68 275 191 204 288 0 21 2209 757 2966
Depart ment
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2009 2008 Total 
G.Total
2004 2005 2006 2007
 
A: Number of ATRs on which action has been initiated by the department but not completed 
B: Number of ATRs on which no action has been initiated by the department or information 
regarding action initiated by the department is not available with V&E Department 

Appendices 
 161
Appendix-2.4 
(Reference to paragraph 2.4.2 page 105) 
Statement showing district-wise, year-wise works sanctioned, works completed and works not completed 
under MPLAD Scheme 
Works sanctioned Works completed Works not completed CPO Year 
No of 
works 
Estimated 
cost 
(Rs in lakh) 
No of 
works 
Estimated 
cost 
(Rs in lakh) 
No of 
works 
Estimated 
cost 
(Rs in lakh) 
2003-04 428 344.88 345 268.44 83 76.44 
2004-05 146 223.08 128 190.38 18 32.70 
2005-06 218 212.50 135 138.37 83 74.14 
Vizianagaram 
2006-07 173 250.50 59 32.56 114 217.94 
2003-04 370 606.57 368 600.32 2 6.25 
2004-05 283 771.35 262 745.36 21 25.99 
2005-06 184 563.77 143 491.67 41 72.10 
West Godavari 
2006-07 233 566.37 153 376.02 80 190.35 
2003-04 483 685.47 467 667.74 16 17.72 
2004-05 407 405.35 367 349.63 40 55.71 
2005-06 346 642.66 288 530.58 58 112.10 
Krishna 
2006-07 226 407.39 181 343.52 45 63.86 
2003-04 659 1080.99 438 719.64 221 361.35 
2004-05 560 993.90 312 561.81 248 432.09 
2005-06 449 974.74 169 350.45 280 624.29 
Guntur 
2006-07 473 1042.89 182 380.35 291 662.54 
2003-04 227 398.45 169 276.47 58 121.98 
2004-05 232 273.22 218 259.70 14 13.52 
2005-06 420 625.15 287 380.70 133 244.45 
Prakasam 
2006-07 225 412.90 140 240.77 85 172.13 
2003-04 361 727.49 185 404.16 176 323.32 
2004-05 327 770.21 133 292.55 194 477.67 
2005-06 232 592.16 63 144.75 169 447.41 
Medak 
2006-07 278 691.39 91 210.85 187 480.54 
Total 7940 14263.39 5283 8956.79 2657 5306.59 
 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 162
Appendix-2.5 
(Reference to paragraph 2.4.2 page 105) 
Statement showing district-wise, year-wise works in progress, expenditure incurred thereon and works 
not commenced, amounts released for them under MPLAD Scheme 
Works sanctioned but not completed 
Works-in-progress Not commenced 
CPO Year 
No of 
works 
Estimated 
cost 
(Rs in lakh) 
Expenditure 
incurred 
(Rs in lakh) 
No of 
works 
Estimated 
cost 
(Rs in lakh) 
Amount 
released 
(Rs in lakh) 
2003-04 71 68.10 2.41 12 8.34 1.60 
2004-05 18 32.70 12.02 NIL NIL NIL 
2005-06 82 73.79 26.88 1 0.35 NIL 
Vizianagaram 
2006-07 107 213.34 75.97 7 4.56 NIL 
2003-04 2 6.25 NIL NIL NIL NIL 
2004-05 7 9.29 2.78 14 16.69 4.97 
2005-06 17 34.80 4.44 24 37.30 15.92 
West Godavari 
2006-07 31 113.90 32.43 49 76.45 35.48 
2003-04 9 11.55 2.95 7 6.18 0.79 
2004-05 15 25.83 17.46 25 29.89 15.36 
2005-06 5 10.82 2.35 53 101.28 36.54 
Krishna 
2006-07 1 1.80 NIL 44 62.06 17.45 
2003-04 4 15.45 0.30 217 345.90 173.02 
2004-05 55 139.67 21.66 193 292.42 269.63 
2005-06 55 203.00 37.67 225 421.29 374.21 
Guntur 
2006-07 86 221.37 50.02 205 441.17 341.50 
2003-04 20 35.82 1.86 38 86.16 NA 
2004-05 3 6.50 3.17 11 7.02 NA 
2005-06 41 99.33 10.46 92 145.12 NA 
Prakasam 
2006-07 10 33.08 11.69 75 139.05 NA 
2003-04 108 208.01 8.85 68 115.31 NIL 
2004-05 194 477.67 135.38 NIL NIL NIL 
2005-06 169 447.41 53.10 NIL NIL NIL 
Medak 
2006-07 187 480.54 57.62 NIL NIL NIL 
Total 1297 2970.02 571.47 1360 2336.54 1286.47 
NA: Not available 

Appendices 
 163
Appendix-2.6 
(Reference to paragraph 2.4.2 page 106) 
Statement showing unauthorised retention of unspent balances (under MPLAD Scheme) 
of retired Rajya Sabha Members 
S. 
No. 
Name of Nodal 
district 
Name of MP(RS) Date/Year of 
retirement 
Amount 
(Rupees in lakh) 
1. Vizianagaram Sri V.Kishore Chandra 
S.Deo (1994-2000) 
2000  5.08 
Sri Y.Narayanaswamy 02.4.2000 8.34 
P.Upendra 30.3.1996 8.23 
2. West Godavari 
Sri A.S.Chowdary 02.4.1998 4.14 
Sri N.R.Dasari 02.4.2004 36.52 3. Krishna 
Sri K.Rammohan Rao 02.4.2006 4.69 
4. Guntur Sri Y.Venkat Rao 02.4.2004 5.26 
Sri Pragada Kotaiah 09.4.1996 2.78 5. Prakasam 
Sri D.Venkateswara Rao 09.4.2002 0.71 
Total: 75.75 
 
Appendix-2.7 
(Reference to paragraph 2.4.2 page 106) 
 
Statement showing non-furnishing of UCs by the executing agencies during the period 
from 2003-04 to 2008-09 
   (Rupees in lakh) 
Name of the CPO 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 Total 
Vizianagaram 60.47 20.67 53.34 55.31 41.18 - 230.97
Guntur 57.41 24.84 13.76 5.88 5.88 - 107.77
Prakasam - 5.21 28.85 - 12.49 - 46.55
Total 117.88 50.72 95.95 61.19 59.55 - 385.29
 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 164
Appendix-3.1 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1.2 page 113) 
Organisational Chart of Finance Department 
 
Principal 
Secretary 
Secretary  
(Fiscal Policy) 
 
Secretary  
(Works & Projects)
 
Secretary  
(Resource Mobilisation 
 and  
Expenditure Control) 
Secretary  
(Institutional Finance) 
DTA 
DSA 
PAO 
CSS 
DOI
 
DWA 
 

Appendices 
 165
Appendix-3.2 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1.6.1 page 114) 
Funds utilised under Grant No. IX Fiscal Administration, Planning, Surveys and Statistics during the period  
2006-07 to 2008-2009 
        (Rupees in crore) 
Year 
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
Major Head 
Budget Expenditure Variation Budget Expenditure Variation Budget Expenditure Variation 
2047 Other 
Fiscal Services 
96.65 89.17 (-) 7.48 96.96 63.09 (-) 33.87 55.06 54.49 (-) 0.57
2048 
Appropriation 
for Reduction 
or Avoidance of 
Debt 
213.49 213.49 0 277.11 377.11 100.00 419.50 419.50 0
2049 Interest 
Payments 
(Charged) 
7983.18 7280.30 (-) 702.88 8628.63 7588.72 (-) 1039.91 8984.96 8057.12 (-) 927.84
2052 Secretariat 
General 
Services 
32.93 36.72 3.79 999.13 981.17 (-) 17.96 507.43 21.00 (-) 486.43
2054 Treasury 
and Accounts 
Administration 
145.77 124.51 (-) 21.26 153.66 143.14 (-) 10.52 163.32 143.76 (-) 19.56
2059 Public 
Works 
0.088 0.004 (-) 0.084 7.09 0.54 (-) 6.55 1.09 0.53 (-) 0.56
2070 Other 
Administrative 
Services 
127.00 27.00 (-)100.00 153.00 53.00 (-) 100.00 138.61 81.60 (-) 57.01
2071 Pension 
and Other 
Retirement 
Benefits 
3942.03 4152.81 210.78 4924.16 5092.13 167.97 5618.97 5518.46 (-)100.51
2075 
Miscellaneous 
General 
Services 
0.17 0.19 0.02 0.23 0.21 (-) 0.02 0.15 0.15 0
2235 Social 
Security and 
Welfare 
16.31 27.97 11.66 18.19 20.35 2.16 18.87 20.85 1.98
6003 Internal 
Debt of the 
State 
Government 
(Charged) 
6002.98 3062.53 (-) 2940.45 6935.83 4041.07 (-) 2894.76 6695.83 4044.75 (-) 2651.08
6004 Loans and 
Advances from 
Central 
Government 
824.18 1190.19 366.01 814.75 952.42 137.67 800.37 788.37 (-) 12.00
7610 Loans to 
Government 
Servants, etc. 
111.59 73.69 (-) 37.90 121.59 95.69 (-) 25.90 121.59 92.41 (-) 29.18
Total 19496.368 16278.574 (-) 3217.794 23130.33 19408.64 (-) 3721.69 23525.75 19242.99 4282.76
 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 166
Appendix-3.3 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1.6.2 page 115) 
Delays in submission of Budget Estimates to the Government by the Directorates of Finance Department 
DSA DTA DWA CSS Year Due date 
Date of 
sub-
mission 
Delay 
(days) 
Date of 
sub-
mission 
Delay 
(days) 
Date of 
sub-
mission 
Delay 
(days) 
Date of 
sub-
mission 
Delay 
(days) 
2006-07 15-10-05 NA NA NA NA NA NA 21-12-05 66 
2007-08 15-10-06 NA NA NA NA 23-11-06 38 29-12-06 74 
2008-09 15-10-07 NA NA 27-11-07 42 21-11-07 36 15-11-07 30 
2009-10 15-10-08 NA 20 NA NA 07-01-09 83 03-11-08 18 
Note: Information was not furnished by the Director of State Audit (Control Registers were not maintained) 
Appendix-3.4 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1.6.9 page 118) 
Year-wise details of excess expenditure requiring regularisation 
Year No. of grants/ 
appropriations 
Amount  
(Rupees in crore) 
1997-98 32 405.12 
1998-99 35 310.63 
1999-00 27 846.31 
2000-01 21 414.29 
2001-02 22 427.69 
2002-03 15 546.25 
2003-04 36 9303.24 
2004-05 06 14.83 
2005-06 13 585.82 
2006-07 08 198.72 
2007-08 10 201.30 
Total 225 13,254.20 
 

Appendices 
 167
Appendix-3.5 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1.8.1 page 124) 
Non-reconciliation of expenditure figures during the years 2006-07 to 2008-09 in respect of  
Grant No. IX - Fiscal Administration, Planning, Surveys and Statistics (Major head-wise) 
Year-wise details Name of the HOD Major 
Head 
Number of 
Reconciliation 
certificates (RCs) due
Number of RCs 
outstanding Year Number of 
RCs pending 
2006-07 12 
2007-08 12 
Small Savings 2047 33 33 
2008-09 9 
2003-04 12 
2004-05 12 
2005-06 12 
2006-07 12 
2007-08 12 
Finance 2049 69 69 
2008-09 9 
2004-05 12 
2005-06 3 
2006-07 12 
2007-08 12 
Project Wing Secretariat 
Department 
2052 57 48  
2008-09 9 
2004-05 12 
2005-06 12 
2006-07 12 
2007-08 12 
Finance HOD 2052 57 57 
2008-09 9 
2004-05 12 
2005-06 12 
2006-07 12 
2007-08 12 
Finance, Secretariat 
Department 
2052 57 57 
2008-09 9 
2005-06 12 
2006-07 12 
2007-08 12 
Director of Works 
Accounts 
2054 45 45 
2008-09 9 
2005-06 4 
2006-07 1 
PAO, Hyderabad 2054 33 11 
2008-09 6 
2007-08 6 State Audit 2054 21 8 
2008-09 2 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 168
2007-08 12 Treasuries and Accounts 2054 21 21 
2008-09 9 
Life Insurance 
Department 
2059 9 9 2008-09 9 
Treasuries & Accounts 2059 9 9 2008-09 9 
2005-06 9 
2006-07 12 
Finance 2070 33 30 
2008-09 9 
2004-05 12 
2005-06 12 
2006-07 12 
2007-08 12 
Finance 2071 57 57 
2008-09 9 
2004-05 12 
2005-06 12 
2006-07 12 
2007-08 12 
Finance 2075 57 57 
2008-09 9 
Finance 2235 9 9 2008-09 9 
Finance 6003 12 12 2005-06 12 
Finance 6004 12 12 2005-06 12 
Total 591 544   
Appendix-3.6 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1.8.1 page 125) 
Personal Deposit Accounts (checked by the Directorate of State Audit) where lapsable amounts were 
reported 
Name of the Department PD A/c No. and Bank Name 
Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation,  
Hyderabad 
176 (old 5/308) SBH, Hyderabad  / 8449-120-17 
Andhra Pradesh State Financial Corporation, Hyderabad GA-8, SBH, Hyderabad 
AP Society for Training and Employment Promotion, 
Hyderabad 
GA-42, SBH, Hyderabad / 8449-120-17 
Commissioner of Industries 8/444 (GA 37) SBH, Hyderabad / 8449-120-101 
Director of Medical Education GA-238, SBH, Hyderabad 
Andhra Pradesh Vaidya Vidhana Parishad GA-36, SBH, Hyderabad 
Andhra Pradesh Health Medical Housing & Infrastructure 
Development Corporation 
GA-213, SBH, Hyderabad 
Commissioner of Technical Education 275, SBH, Hyderabad 
Director, MNJ Institute of Oncology, Hyderabad GA-49, SBH, Hyderabad 
Andhra Pradesh State Council of Higher Education, 
Hyderabad 
219, SBH, Hyderabad 

Appendices 
 169
Andhra Pradesh Khadi & Village Industries Board, 
Hyderabad 
6, (old 124) – SBH, Hyderabad 
Director of Intermediate Education, Hyderabad GA-206, SBH, Hyderabad / 8443-103-01 
Andhra Pradesh Science Center, Office of the Principal 
Chief Conservator of Forests, Hyderabad 
214 (old 9/35), SBH, Hyderabad / 8449-120-72 
Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences (NIMS), 
Hyderabad 
286 - SBH, Hyderabad 
Andhra Pradesh Toddy Tappers Co-operative Finance 
Corporation Ltd., Hyderabad  
225 – SBH, Hyderabad / 8449-120-96 
Water and Land Management Training and Research 
Institute, Hyderabad  
GA-79, SBH, Hyderabad / 8449-120-95 
Dravidian University, Kuppam 8448-110-41, Andhra Bank, Kuppam 
Sri Krishnadevaraya University, Anantapur 8448, SBI, Anantapur 
Acharya Nagarjuna University, Guntur 8448-110-20, SBI, Guntur 
Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupati 8448-110-18 Andhra Bank, SVU, Tirupati 
Andhra University, Visakhapatnam 9631, SBI, VSP 
Sri Padmavathi Mahila Viswa Vidyalayam, Tirupati 8448-110-12, SBI, Tirupati 
Kakatiya University, Warangal 169, SBH, Hanmakonda, Warangal 
Commissioner & Director of Municipal Administration, 
Hyderabad 
1/43 (GA No.5), SBH, Hyderabad / 8443-106 
Appendix-3.7 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1.8.2 page 125) 
Cases of overpayment of pension/family pension 
(Rupees in lakh) 
Nature of objection 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
Inadmissible dearness relief on pension to compassionate 
appointees 
13.70 29.01 -- 
Irregular sanction of dearness relief -- -- 27.10 
Enhanced family pension beyond time limit 10.74 13.26 11.26 
Incorrect computation of Pension and Relief consequent 
on revision of pay scales of State Government employees 
during 1999 and 2005 
  4.95  3.63 5.73 
Non-reduction/short reduction of Commuted value of 
pension 
--  3.63 0.62 
Incorrect restoration of commuted portion -- -- 0.26 
Excess payment due to payment of interim relief -- -- 1.93 
Excess payment due to non-recovery of anticipatory 
pension  
--  1.20 -- 
Excess payment due to payment of full share -- -- 5.07 
Irregular payment of financial assistance -- -- 5.97 
Incorrect raising of political pension -- -- 2.91 
Inadmissible payment of Service Pension to Family 
Pensioner 
--  1.90 -- 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 170
Family Pension to ineligible family members --  3.71 1.59 
Payment of pension arrears without recovery of the 
pension contributions already credited 
2.98  0.57 -- 
Fraudulent drawal of pensionary benefits 6.15 -- -- 
Drawal of pension arrears twice 0.78 -- -- 
Payment of full family pension to more than one surviving 
widow 
0.72 -- -- 
Payment of two service pensions to the same pensioner 0.55 -- -- 
Payment of pension due to irregular weightage 0.08 -- -- 
Total 40.65 56.91 62.44 
Grand Total  160.00 
Appendix-3.8 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1.8.3 page 126) 
Status of receipt of Proforma accounts by Government from Departmentally managed commercial and quasi-
commercial undertakings up to 31 March 2009  
Name of the Undertaking Latest year of accounts 
finalised 
Excess of 
expenditure over 
income (-)/ income 
over expenditure 
(+) (Rs) 
Accumulated 
loss (Rs) 
Total 
Government 
Capital (Rs) 
Animal Husbandry and Fisheries
Fishnet Making Plant, TB 
Dam 
2004-05 (-) 22,42,686 409,88,183 2,69,63,980* 
Ice cum Cold Storage Plant, 
TB Dam 
2004-05 7,85,585 Nil 11,68,200 # 
Fish Seed Farm Accounts are awaited since 
inception from 1963-64 
--- --- --- 
Education
AP Government Text Book 
Press, Hyderabad 
Revised accounts from 1978-79 
to 1985-86 and accounts from 
1986-87 to 2000-01 were 
received on 11-08-2004 and the 
same were not certified and 
returned to Management on  
28-07-05 due to non production 
of supporting Registers/ Records 
for verification of accounts 
--- --- --- 
Finance 
AP Government Life 
Insurance,  Hyderabad 
2001-02 780,46,35,524  Nil ---  
Home
Government Central Press, 
Hyderabad 
Accounts are awaited from 
1969-70.  Revised accounts are 
awaited from 1967-68 
--- --- --- 

Appendices 
 171
Government Regional Press, 
Kurnool 
Accounts are awaited from 
1971-72 
--- --- --- 
Government Regional Press, 
Vijayawada 
Accounts are awaited from 
1983-84 
--- --- --- 
Revenue
Government Distillery, 
Narayanguda, Hyderabad 
Revised accounts for 1992-93 & 
1993-94 are awaited.  (The Unit 
stopped production with effect 
from 1-10-1993). 
--- --- --- 
*Fishnet making Plant, TB Dam and Ice cum Cold Storage, TB Dam are joint ventures between Government 
of Andhra Pradesh and Government of Karnataka 
#Provisional comments for the years 2005-06 and 2006-07 were issued and the accounts were under revision 
Appendix-3.9 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1.10.2 page 132) 
Accepted recommendations of High Power Committee 
S. 
No. 
Recommendation of the Committee Reference and date of acceptance 
1 Para 5.1 
Evaluation of the performance of Audit committees by the 
Government in consultation with Accountant General.  
U.O. Note No.23810/206/PAC/93-1 
dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
2 Para 5.11  
Assignment of important role to Finance Department in 
monitoring Government’s response to Audit and the 
PAC/COPU. 
U.O. Note No.23810/206/PAC/93-1 
dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
3. Para 5.12  
Appointment of a designated officer within each Government 
Department and organisation who will be responsible for 
monitoring the follow-up action in such contexts.   
U.O. Note No.23810/206/PAC/93-1 
dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
4. Para 5.13 
Constitution of a Monitoring Committee at the highest 
level in each department for regular review at the higher 
levels, consisting of the Secretary and Head of the 
Department and the Finance Secretary for the Government, 
an Apex Committee chaired by the Chief Secretary, with 
the Finance Secretary as a permanent member and selected 
number of officers heading Government Departments, 
Autonomous Bodies and Public Sector Undertakings as 
Members for specified term by rotation.  These panels 
must be purely internal ones. 
U.O. Note No.23810/206/PAC/93-1 
dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
5 Para 5.14  
The internal monitoring at the highest levels should not be 
merely in quantitative terms, but must also be considered 
with the quality of the action as envisaged. 
U.O.Note No.23810/206/PAC/93-1 
dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 172
6 Para 5.2  
All State Governments may review the question of timely 
response of Government to the draft Paras and draft 
reviews proposed for inclus ion in the C&AG’s Audit 
Reports. 
U.O. Note No.23810-C/200/PAC/93-
2 dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
7 Para 5.3:   
There is a tradition at the Centre that important draft 
paragraphs and reviews are usually discussed by 
Government officers at senior levels with the respective 
Principal Audit Officers.  Such a practice may be adopted 
in all States as an essential feature of Governments’ 
response to audit. 
U.O. Note No.23810-C/200/PAC/93-
2 dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
8 Para 5.15   
Certain High level Accounts Committees (with the 
Finance Secretary, Accountant General and the concerned 
Department Secretary) have been set up in most of the 
States since 1991, to monitor the prompt submission of 
initial accounts of the Government Departments and to 
ensure their timely reconciliation.  The progress achieved 
so far would need to be stepped up further in several States. 
U.O. Note No.23810-C/200/PAC/93-
3 dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
9 Para 5.16  
Strict enforcement of discipline is called for particularly in 
the matter of submission of initial Accounts by the 
Treasuries as well as public works and forest divisions. 
U.O. Note No.23810-C/200/PAC/93-
3 dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
10 Para 5.17   
It is necessary to liquidate the heavy accumulated arrears 
in the accounts of the State Government autonomous 
bodies and public sector undertakings as well as in the 
appointment of Chartered Accountants as Auditors of the 
PSUs. All aspects of this question may be studied by an 
appropriate technical panel, to  find pragmatic solutions to 
the related problems. 
U.O. Note No.23810-C/200/PAC/93-
3 dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
11 Para 5.18  
Steps may be taken in all States to introduce efficient 
internal audit systems, or to strengthen the existing ones.  
The Finance Department (and the Bureau of Public 
Enterprises wherever it exists) may take the necessary 
initiatives in this regard, an d the Accountant General may 
also be consulted. 
U.O. Note No.23810-C/200/PAC/93-
4 dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
12 Para 5.19  
Substantial excess expenditure or savings vis-à-vis budget 
grants have become a nearly universal phenomenon in the 
States, indicating a continuing weakness of the financial 
management. The State Govern ment may take adequate 
remedial steps to set right the deficiencies in the system. 
U.O. Note No.23810-C/200/PAC/93-
5 dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 

Appendices 
 173
13 Para 5.21 
In several States there are hand books or guard files which 
consolidate the procedures and related instructions issued 
by Government in regard to response to Audit.  Such 
compilation may be made in a ll States and their contents 
may be updated from time to time. 
U.O. Note No.23810-C/200/PAC/93-
6 dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
14 Para 5.22 
The existing regulations in regard to the response of 
Government to Audit and the PAC/COPU may be 
reviewed, to ensure that they are adequate. Such a review 
may be undertaken by the Governments in all States, in 
consultation with the respec tive Accountants General and 
particularly in the light of the recommendations contained 
in this report (4.70). 
U.O. Note No.23810-C/200/PAC/93-
6 dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
15 Para 5.36  
Timely submission of initial accounts by Treasuries as 
well as Public Works and Forest divisions. This calls for 
determined effort not only on the part of Audit but on the 
part of State Governments in ensuing that the initial 
accounts are submitted in time and Departments respond 
promptly to audit queries and references and in printing 
the audit reports and Finance and Appropriation Accounts.  
U.O. Note No.23810-C/200/PAC/93-
7 dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
16 Para 5.45  
A Status Report in regard to Governments response to 
Audit as well as the PAC/COPU may figure clearly and 
prominently and the performance budget of various 
departments prepared by the State Government for 
consideration by the respective Legislatures. 
U.O. Note No.23810-C/200/PAC/93-
8 dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
17 Para 5.46   
Parliament has recently decided that subject committees 
may be appointed to discuss matters relating to ministries/ 
departments, particularly in the context of their annual 
budgets. Such committees, if and when they are constituted 
in the States, can be another useful forum in which 
relevant matters emerging from the Audit Reports can be 
raised meaningfully.  
U.O. Note No.23810-C/200/PAC/93-
8 dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
18 Para 5.48   
The mutual response among the executive, legislature and 
audit will ultimately depend on a proper awareness and 
appreciation of the problem by all concerned. Occasional 
discussions on the related issues may be organised among 
officers of Government departments and organisations and 
audit officers at all levels as well as members of the 
Legislature. 
U.O. Note No.23810-C/200/PAC/93-
9 dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
19 Para 5.49   
Symposia/Seminars on this subject may be organised 
occasionally whenever possible with a view to creating a 
wider and deeper awareness of the issues, problems and 
possible solutions. 
U.O. Note No.23810-C/200/PAC/93-
9 dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 174
20 Para 5.50   
Whenever Comptroller and Auditor General makes 
official visits to the States he may be invited to address 
appropriated forums.  
U.O. Note No.23810-C/200/PAC/93-
9 dated 03-11-1993 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
21 Para 5.7   
The time frame prescribed for the State Governments 
submitting Action Taken Notes (ATNs) to the PAC/COPU 
in respect of their recommendations may be uniformly 
adopted as six months, as at the Centre. 
U.O. Note No.1576-A/32/PAC/95, 
dated 17-05-1995 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
22 Para 5.8   
Such ATNs may also be routed through the Finance 
Department and copies thereof may invariably be endorsed 
to the AG who may forward his comments, if any, to the 
Committee. 
U.O. Note No.1576-A/32/PAC/95, 
dated 17-05-1995 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
23 Para 5.9  
A vigilant monitoring mechanism may be introduced in 
the Legislature Secretariat in the States for watching the 
implementation of the above provisions. 
U.O. Note No.1576-A/32/PAC/95, 
dated 17-05-1995 of Finance & 
Planning (FW.PAC) Department 
Appendix-3.10 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1.10.3 page 132) 
Number of paragraphs in respect of which Explanatory Notes had not been received for specific 
paras from Government (as of August 2009) 
A. Audit Reports for the years 1996-97 to 2000-01 
Department 1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 2000-01 Total 
Environment, Forests, Science and 
Technology 1 0 0 0 0 1 
Labour, Employment, Training 
and Factories 0 0 0 1 0 1 
Planning 0 0 0 1 0 1 
Revenue 0 1 1 0 0 2 
Total 1 1 1 2 0 5 
 

Appendices 
 175
B. Audit Reports for the years 2001-02 to 2007-08 
Department 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 Total 
 Agriculture and Co-operation  0 3 0 0 0 1 2 6 
Animal Husbandry & Fisheries  0 1 1 0 0 1 0 3 
Environment, Forest, Science and 
Technology 
0     1 1 0 1 0 3 6 
Finance  0 0 0 0 0 2 0 2 
General Administration 0 0 1 0 0 0 2 3 
Health, Medical& Family Welfare 1 4 4 3 2 1 4 19 
Higher Education 0 0 0 0 3 2 1 6 
Home  0 0 1 0 1 1 0 3 
Housing 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 
Irrigation & Command Area 
Development 
2 1 0 0 5 6 9 23 
Labour, Employment, Training 
and Factories 
0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 
Municipal Administration and 
Urban Development  
0 0 1 2 3 3 2 11 
Panchayati Raj  0 1 1 3 1 1 2 9 
Planning 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 2 
Revenue  2 3 0 1 2 1 1 10 
Rural Development 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 2 
School Education 3 1 2 1 2 1 2 12 
Social Welfare 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 
Transport, Roads and Buildings 0 0 2 0 0 4 7 13 
Tribal welfare 0 2 0 0 0 3 2 7 
Women Development, Child and 
Disabled Welfare 
0 0 1 0 1 2 0 4 
Youth Advancement, Tourism 
and Culture 
0 0 0 0 1 2 0 3 
Total 8 17 16 13 22 33 38 147 
  
1996-97     Environment, Forests, Science and Technology: 1 
1997-98     Revenue:1 
1998-99     Revenue: 1 
1999-2000 Labour, Employment, Training and Factories: 1 
                  Planning: 1 
Total:        147+5=152 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 176
 C.     Status of ATNs not received 
Department ATNs Not Received 
Agriculture 22 
Animal Husbandry 4 
EFST 2 
Finance 3 
GAD 13 
HMFW 26 
Higher Education 8 
Home 2 
Housing 0 
Industries & Commerce 3 
I&CAD 222 
LETF 2 
MAUD 4 
Panchayati Raj 12 
Planning 0 
Revenue 40 
Rural Development 6 
School Education 35 
Social Welfare 9 
TRBD 4 
Tribal Welfare 4 
Women Development, CDW 1 
Youth Advancement, TAC 2 
Total 424 
 
Appendix-3.11 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1.10.3 page 133) 
  A.     Year-wise break-up of outstanding Inspection Reports and Paragraphs (30 June 2009) 
Number of outstanding Number for which even first 
replies have not been received 
Year 
IRs Paragraphs IRs Paragraphs 
2004-05 and earlier years 4239 12013 8 94 
2005-06 1430 4477 3 55 
2006-07 1735 6396 16 80 
2007-08 2266 10043 741 2886 
2008-09 1930 10338 644 4536 
Total 11600 43267 1412 7651 

Appendices 
 177
B.     Department-wise details of outstanding Inspection Reports and Paragraphs as on 30 June 2009 
Number of 
Outstanding 
Number for which 
even first replies 
have not been 
received 
Department 
IRs Paragraphs 
Earliest 
year of the 
outstanding 
IRs 
IRs Paragraphs 
Earliest year of 
the report for 
which first 
replies have not 
been received 
Agriculture and Cooperation 473 1775 1999-00 85 495 2000-01 
Animal Husbandry, Dairy Development and Fisheries 198 626 1999-00 61 232 2007-08 
Backward Classes Welfare 90 334 2003-04 15 109 2004-05 
Education (Higher Education) 1516 6301 1999-00 139 964 2008-09 
Education (School Education) 417 2717 2000-01 49 709 2007-08 
Energy 3 7 2007-08 2 6 2008-09 
Environment, Forests, Science and Technology 270 747 1999-00 15 86 2004-05 
Finance  1406 3454 1986-87 44 98 2007-08 
Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs 124 335 2003-04 52 180 2007-08 
General Administration 119 403 2003-04 43 184 2007-08 
Health, Medical and Family Welfare 926 5442 1999-00 79 1034 2002-03 
Home 258 1066 2003-04 20 163 2008-09 
Housing 14 143 1999-00 3 7 2008-09 
Industries and Commerce 166 582 2000-01 33 90 2006-07 
Information Technology and Communications 5 27 2002-03 1 14 2008-09 
I& C. A D. (Project Wing) 658 1696 1996-97 11 28 2007-08 
I& C. A D. (Irrigation Wing) 963 2683 1996-97 23 97 2008-09 
Labour, Employment, Training & Factories 341 859 1999-00 32 89 2007-08 
Law 337 684 2003-04 17 35 2006-07 
Legislature 3 21 2003-04 0 0      --- 
Minorities Welfare 17 51 2003-04 2 9 2007-08 
Municipal Administration and Urban Development 213 976 1996-97 26 136 2008-09 
Panchayat Raj   52 313 1999-00 2 162 2007-08 
Rural Development 136 1670 1999-00 9 151 2008-09 
Planning 46 180 2003-04 14 71 2008-09 
Public Enterprises 4 6 2003-04 1 1 2008-09 
Revenue 1335 3592 1999-00 516 1617 2007-08 
Social Welfare 188 1686 1999-00 20 220 2003-04 
Tribal Welfare 187 1346 1999-00 19 175 2001-02 
Transport, Roads and Buildings 483 1253 1996-97 19 60 2008-09 
Women Development, Child and Disabled Welfare 482 1601 1999-00 25 172 2006-07 
Youth Advancement, Tourism and Culture 170 691 1999-00 35 257 2007-08 
Total 11600 43267  1412 7651  

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 178
Appendix-3.12 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1.12.2 page 137) 
Incomplete Government Orders uploaded to the website 
Government Order Particulars 
GOs without GO number 
Date 26-03-2009 (EXPR. MA & UD & EFS & T) BRO for Rs 5.00 crore to the Commissioner 
and Director of Municipal Administration A.P., 
Hyderabad (Plan Schemes) 
GOs without GO number and date  
(Expr. H.E.) BRO for Rs 7.50 lakh to the Commissioner of 
Collegiate Education, AP, Hyderabad 
(Non-plan). 
GOs without GO No. and Authority which issued GO 
Date 26-03-2009 (Expr. MA&UD & EFS&T) BRO for Rs 11.26 lakh to the Principal Chief 
Conservator of Forests, AP, Hyderabad (Plan 
Schemes) 
Date 27-12-2008 (Expr. MA&UD & EFS&T) BRO for Rs 3.71 lakh to the Director of Town 
& Country Planning, Hyderabad (Plan Scheme)
Date 31-03-2009 (Expr. MA&UD & EFS&T) BRO for Rs 44.82 lakh to the Member 
Secretary, APCOST, AP, Hyderabad (Non-
plan) 
Date 26-03-2009 (Exp. A&C) BRO for Rs 3.54 lakh to the Commissioner of 
Horticulture, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad 
(Plan)  
GOs without GO number, Date and Authority which issued GO 
(Expr. MA&UD & EFS&T) BRO for Rs 35.00 lakh to the Member 
Secretary, APCOST, AP, Hyderabad (Plan 
Schemes) 
(Expr. MA&UD & EFS&T) BRO for Rs 625.63 lakh to the Engineer-in-
Chief (Public Health), Hyderabad (Plan 
Schemes) 
GO without unit of measurement 
GO Rt No.1906, dated 31-03-2009  
(Expr. GAD-II) 
BRO for 120.07 (89.07 and 31.00) to the 
Director of Culture, Hyderabad (Plan Schemes) 
– Unit of measurement  was not mentioned in 
the GO 
The above list is only illustrative and not exhaustive 
 

Glossary 
 179
Glossary 
AB                        : Autonomous Body 
AC Bill : Abstract Contingent Bill 
ACB : Anti Corruption Bureau 
AICTE : All India Council for Technical Education  
AIDS : Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome 
APAT : Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal 
APFRBM Act : Andhra Pradesh Fisc al Responsibility and Budget 
Management Act, 2005 
APHMHIDC : Andhra Pradesh Health Medical and Housing 
Infrastructure Development Corporation 
APSCHE : Andhra Pradesh State Council of Higher 
Education 
APUGC Scales : Andhra Pradesh University Grants Commission 
Scales 
ASC : Academic Staff College 
ATN : Action Taken Note 
AYUSH : Ayurvedic, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy 
BRO : Budget Release Order 
CAB : Certificate of Acceptance of Balances 
CATOPS : Cataract Operations 
CDC : College Development Council 
CDE : Centre for Distance Education 
CEMONC : Comprehensive Emergency Obstetric and 
Neonatal Care 
CGG : Centre for Good Governance 
CHC : Community Health Centre 
CMD : Contracted Minimum Demand 
CSIR : Council for Scientific and Industrial Research 
CSS : Commissioner of Small Savings and State 
Lotteries 
CWC : Central Water Commission 
DC Bill : Detailed Contingent Bill 
DD : Deputy Director 
DDO : Drawing and Disbursing Officer 
DDs : Demand Drafts 
DEC : Distance Education Council 
DEO : Data Entry Operator 
DHS : District Health Society 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 180
DM&HO : District Medical and Health Officer 
DMGU : Departmentally Managed Government 
Undertaking 
DOI : Director of Insurance 
DPR : Detailed Project Report 
Dr. MCRHRD 
Institute 
: Dr. Marri Chenna Reddy Human Resource 
Development Institute 
DRDA : District Rural Development Agency 
DRDO : Defence Research and Development Organisation 
DSA : Director of State Audit 
DTA : Director of Treasuries and Accounts 
DTO : District Treasury Office 
DWA : Director of Works Accounts 
EC  : Executive Council 
ECE : Electronics & Communication Engineering 
EEE : Electrical & Electronics Engineering 
EMD : Earnest Money Deposit 
EN : Explanatory Note 
EPF : Employees Provident Fund 
ESI : Employees State Insurance 
FWHIS : Family Welfare Health Information System 
GOI : Government of India 
GOs : Government Orders 
HIV : Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
HMWM : Hydromechanics & Water Management 
HOD : Head of the Department 
HT : High Tension 
ICAR : Indian Council fo r Agricultural Research 
IDD : Iodine Deficiency Disease 
IDSP : Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme  
IFA : Iron Folic Acid 
IGNOU : Indira Gandhi National Open University 
IMR : Infant Mortality Rate 
IPHS : Indian Public Health Standards 
IR : Inspection Report 
ISRO : Indian Space Research Organisation 
IT : Income Tax 
JDWA : Joint Director of Works Accounts 

Glossary 
 181
JE : Japanese Encephalitis 
JSY : Janani Suraksha Yojana 
LIS : Lift Irrigation Scheme 
M.Phil : Master of Philosophy 
MBA : Master of Business Administration 
ME : Mechanical Engineering 
MMR : Maternal Mortality Rate 
MMU : Mobile Medical Unit 
MOH&FW : Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MP : Mandal Parishad 
MPHA(F) : Multi Purpose Health Assistant (Female) 
MPWA : Miscellaneous Public Works Advance 
MTP : Medical Termination of Pregnancy 
NDCP : National Disease Control Programme 
NGO : Non-Government Organisation 
NIDCP : National Iodine Deficiency Control Programme 
NLEP : National Leprosy Eradication Programme 
NPCC : National Programme Coordination Committee 
NPCB : National Programme for Control of Blindness 
NRHM : National Rural Health Mission 
NSS : National Service Scheme 
NSS : National Saving Scheme 
NVBDCP : National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme 
OBC : Other Backward Class 
PAC : Public Accounts Committee 
PAO : Pay and Accounts Officer 
PD A/cs : Personal Deposit Accounts 
PDC : Pre Degree Course 
Ph.D : Doctorate in Philosophy  
PHC : Primary Health Centre 
PIP : Project Implementation Plan 
PMOA : Para Medical Ophthalmic Assistant 
PPM : Public & Personnel Management 
PPR : Preliminary Project Report 
RCH : Reproductive Child Health 
RKS : Rogi Kalyan Samithi 
RLBs : Rural Local Bodies 

Audit Report (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 182
RNTCP : Revised National Tuberculosis Control 
Programme 
RTI : Respiratory Track Infection 
SC : Sub-Centre/ Scheduled Caste 
SHM : State Health Mission 
SHS : State Health Society 
SHSRC : State Health System Resource Centre 
SIM : Self Instruction Mode 
SPMSU : State Programme Management Support Unit 
ST : Schedule Tribe 
STD : Sexually Transmitted Disease 
STI : Sexually Transmitted Infection 
TB : Tuberculosis 
TDS : Tax Deducted at Source 
TFC : Twelfth Finance Commission 
TFR : Total Fertility Rate 
UC : Utilisation Certificate 
UGC : University Grants Commission 
ULBs : Urban Local Bodies 
VAT : Value Added Tax 
VC : Vice Chancellor 
ZGS : Zilla Granthalaya Samstha 
ZP : Zilla Parishad 
ZSS : Zilla Saksharata Samithi 
 