Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Union Government (Commercial)
No. 21 of 2015
(Compliance Audit Observations)
Volume I


Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
for the year ended March 2014 
Union Government (Commercial) 
No. 21 of 2015 
(Compliance Audit Observations) 
Volume I 

i
CHAPTER/ 
PARAGRAPH 
SUBJECT PSU PAGE 
NO.
 PREFACE  v 
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  vii 
Chapter I DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY 
1.1 Procurement contracts Bharatiya Nabhikiya 
Vidyut Nigam Limited 
1
1.2 Contract management Uranium Corporation of 
India Limited 
6
1.3 Procurement contracts Nuclear Power 
Corporation of India 
Limited 
13
Chapter II MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
2.1 Allotment of land for setting up and 
operations of flying clubs 
Airports Authority of 
India
23
2.2 Disregard of provisions of 
Shareholders Agreement by MoCA 
and AAI resulted in additional 
burden on the travelling public in the 
form of Development Fee in IGI 
Airport, Delhi 
Airports Authority of 
India
30
2.3 Loss due to failure in taking timely 
action as per approved credit policy 
Airports Authority of 
India
35
2.4 Non-recovery of cost of manpower 
and absence of provision to 
safeguard AAI's interests 
Airports Authority of 
India
37
2.5 Unfruitful expenditure due to 
imprudent acquisition of aircraft on 
dry lease  
Air India Charters 
Limited 
38
2.6 Avoidable expenditure on ferry 
flights to Mumbai for maintenance 
Air India Charters 
Limited 
41
2.7 Review of implementation of 
Passenger Reservation System and 
RAMCO Inventory System 
Air India Limited 43 
2.8 Avoidable expenditure due to under-
utilisation of own simulators 
Air India Limited and Air 
India Charters Limited 
56
Chapter III MINISTRY OF COAL 
3.1 Avoidable payment of penal interest Bharat Coking Coal 
Limited
61
CONTENTS

ii
3.2 Wasteful Expenditure on 
Procurement of Two Road Header 
Machines 
Bharat Coking Coal 
Limited 
63
3.3 Operational Performance of 
Dankuni Coal Complex 
South Eastern Coalfields 
Limited 
66
3.4 Irregular payment towards 
encashment of Half Pay 
Leave/Earned Leave/Sick Leave  
Coal India Limited and 
its Subsidiaries 
79
Chapter IV MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
4.1 Trading Activities of Agro 
Commodities 
MMTC Limited, PEC 
Limited and the State 
Trading Corporation of 
India Limited 
81
4.2 Irregular payment of bonus  Neelachal Ispat Nigam 
Limited 
89
4.3 Non-compliance to the directions of 
Government of India for export of 
rice to African Countries
PEC Limited, MMTC 
Limited and the State 
Trading Corporation of 
India Limited  
90
4.4 Non recovery of dues due to 
operational lapses in Post Shipment 
Finance
The State Trading 
Corporation of India 
Limited 
92
4.5 Unfruitful expenditure at Spices 
Park, Chhindwara, Madhya Pradesh 
STCL Limited 99
Chapter V MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION 
5.1 Lack of transparency in awarding 
Strategic Alliance Management 
contracts
Central Warehousing 
Corporation
101
5.2 Loss due to non-availing of 
concessional railway freight 
Food Corporation of 
India
104
5.3 Excess payment of mandi labour 
charges 
Food Corporation of 
India
106
5.4 Excess payment of interest Food Corporation of 
India
108
5.5 Avoidable payment of terminal 
charges 
Food Corporation of 
India
109
Chapter VI MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN REGION 
6.1 Misappropriation of cash North Eastern Regional 
Agricultural Marketing 
Corporation Limited 
111

iii
Chapter VII MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES - 
INSURANCE DIVISION) 
7.1 Fund Management and Financing  India Infrastructure 
Finance Company 
Limited 
113
7.2 Failure of MCX-SX to safeguard its 
interests 
MCX Stock Exchange 
Limited 
129
7.3 Infructuous expenditure due to 
printing of fresh bank notes bearing 
the signature of former Governor of 
RBI
Security Printing and 
Minting Corporation of 
India Limited 
135
7.4 Co-insurance business with private 
general insurance companies 
The New India 
Assurance Company 
Limited 
136
Chapter VIII IRREGULARITIES IN PAYMENT OF ENTITLEMENTS 
AND RECOVERIES BY CPSEs AT THE INSTANCE OF 
AUDIT
8.1 Irregular payment of allowances and 
perks beyond admissible ceiling 
Airports Authority of 
India, Coal India Limited 
and its Subsidiaries 
142
8.2 Recoveries at the instance of audit The New India 
Assurance Company 
Limited, General 
Insurance Corporation of 
India Limited, United 
India Insurance Company 
Limited, Export Credit 
Guarantee Corporation of 
India Limited, The State 
Trading Corporation of 
India Limited, Coal India 
Limited and Food 
Corporation of India 
145
Chapter IX Follow up on Audit Reports  146 
 Appendix I  151 
 Appendix II  154 
 Annexures  156 

v
1. The accounts of Government Companies set up under the provisions of the 
Companies Act (including Companies deemed to be Government Companies as per the 
provisions of the Companies Act) are audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India (CAG) under the provisions of Section 619 of the Companies Act, 1956. The 
accounts certified by the Statutory Auditors (Chartered Accountants) appointed by the 
CAG under the Companies Act are subject to the supplementary audit by CAG whose 
comments supplement the reports of the Statutory Auditors.  In addition, these companies 
are also subject to test audit by CAG. 
2. The statutes governing some Corporations and Authorities require their accounts 
to be audited by CAG. In respect of five such Corporations viz. Airport Authority of 
India, National Highways Authority of India, Inland Waterways Authority of India, Food 
Corporation of India and Damodar Valley Corporation, the relevant statutes designate 
CAG as their sole auditor. In respect of one Corporation viz. Central Warehousing 
Corporation, CAG has the right to conduct supplementary and test audit after audit has 
been conducted by the Chartered Accountants appointed under the statute governing the 
Corporation.
3. Reports in relation to the accounts of a Government Company or Corporation are 
submitted to the Government by CAG under the provisions of Section 19-A of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971, 
as amended in 1984. 
4. The Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014 has been prepared in two 
volumes. This is Volume I of the Audit Report and contains 31 individual audit 
observations relating to 28 PSUs under the control of seven Ministries/Departments. 
Volume II contains 37 individual audit observations pertaining to 18 PSUs under the 
control of seven Ministries/Departments. Instances mentioned in this Report are among 
those which came to notice in the course of audit during 2013-14 as well as those which 
came to notice in earlier years. Results of audit of transactions subsequent to March 2014 
in a few cases have also been mentioned. 
5. All references to ‘Companies/Corporations or PSUs’ in this Report may be 
construed to refer to ‘Central Government Companies/Corporations’ unless the context 
suggests otherwise. 
6. The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
PREFACE

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
vii
I Introduction
1. This Report includes important audit findings noticed as a result of test check of 
accounts of records of Central Government Companies and Corporations 
conducted by the officers of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India under 
Section 619(3) of the Companies Act, 1956 or the statutes governing the particular 
Corporations.
2. The Report contains 31 individual observations relating to 28 PSUs under 7 
Ministries/Departments. The draft observations were forwarded to the Secretaries 
of the concerned Ministries/Departments under whose administrative control the
PSUs are working to give them an opportunity to furnish their replies/comments
in each case within a period of six weeks. Replies to 15 observations were not 
received even as this Report was being finalised. Earlier, the draft observations 
were sent to the Managements of the PSUs concerned, whose replies have been 
suitable incorporated in the report.
3. The paragraphs included in this Report relate to the PSUs under the administrative
control of the following Ministries/Departments of the Government of India:
Ministry/Department (Number of 
PSUs involved 
Number of 
paragraphs
Number of paragraphs 
in respect of which
Ministry/Department’s
reply was awaited
1.   Atomic Energy 
      (BHAVINI, NPCIL and UCIL)
3 1 
2.   Civil Aviation 
      (AAI, AICL, ACIL and AIL)
8 7 
3.   Coal 
      (BCCL and SECL)
3 1 
4.   Commerce and Industry 
      (NINL, MMTC, PEC, STC and
STCL)
5 1 
5.  Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
      Distribution 
      (CWC and FCI)
5 1 
6.   Development of North Eastern
      Region 
      (NERAMAC)
1 0 
7.   Finance 
      (IIFCL, MCX-SX, NIAC and
SPMCIL)
4 2 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
viii
8.  Irregularities in payment of
     entitlements by CPSEs
     (CIL, MCL, ECL, NCL, WCL,
     CCL and CMPDIL) 
2 2 
Total 31 15
4. Total financial implication of audit observations is ` 6,179.35 crore. 
5. Individual Audit observations in this Report are broadly of the following nature: 
 Non-compliance with rules, directives, procedure, terms and conditions of 
the contract etc. involving ` 4,931.56 crore in 16 paras. 
 Non safeguarding of financial interest of organisations involving ` 808.29
crore in nine paras. 
 Defective/deficient planning involving ` 432.37 crore in three paras. 
 Inadequate/deficient monitoring involving ` 1.41 lakh in one para. 
 Non-realisation/partial realisation of objectives involving ` 7.13 crore in 
two paras. 
6. The Report also contains a para relating to recoveries of ` 56.60 crore made by 
seven PSUs at the instance of Audit.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
ix
II   Highlights of some significant paras included in the Report are given below: 
Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) and Airports Authority of India (AAI) failed to bring
to the notice of Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) the provisions of 
Shareholders Agreement which mandated affirmative vote of AAI till AAI held 10 per
cent equity shares in Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL), in respect of special
resolution under the Companies Act, 1956 and Reserved Board Matters. This led to levy 
of Development Fee by DIAL, resulting in additional burden on the travelling public of 
` 3,415.35 crore out of which an amount of ` 2,841 crore has been collected upto March 
2014 and the balance will be collected upto April 2016.
(Para 2.2)
Trade in agro commodities by the State Trading Corporation of India Limited (STC), 
PEC Limited and MMTC Limited highlighted mismanagement, possible fraud, 
negligence and absence of financial prudence. As the entire activity of identifying 
supplier, buyer, storage, arranging for shipment, etc. was performed by the associates 
which are private parties, it is a moot point whether these would qualify to be termed as
‘trading activity’. In fact, the three CPSEs failed to assess credit worthiness of associates
and have been involved in providing finance to risky ventures without adequate 
safeguards. Resultantly, they suffered losses because of inadequate security against the 
amount financed and they were also not able to secure the pledged stock safely. 
Inordinate delays in disposal of un-lifted material and in taking decision to invoke the 
'risk sale' clause as also release of stock on the basis of PDCs indicated culpability on the
part of the Management. Though each CPSE has Government nominees on the Board of 
Directors, nothing came to notice to show that they had effectively protected the interests
of the Government by insisting on adequate safeguards. 
(Para 4.1) 
The MCX Stock Exchange Limited (the Company) was incorporated on 14 August, 2008. 
Multi Commodity Exchange of India Limited (MCX) and Financial Technologies (India)
Limited (FTIL) were its promoters. The Company had entered into long term agreements
with its related party FTIL that entailed various restrictive clauses as well as high costs. 
Further, the PSU Banks had 67 per cent shareholding as on 31 March 2010 and had their 
nominees on the Board of the Company during 30 April 2010 to 20 September 2012. 
These nominees of PSU banks on the Board of the Company did not review these 
unfavourable agreements and failed to protect the interests of the banks they represented. 
Despite present action by new management, by way of suspension of various agreements
with FTIL, the liability due to restrictive clauses in these agreements would continue as
only interim action to suspend only a few agreements has been taken (January 2015). 
(Para 7.2) 
India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (Company) conducted its operations of 
borrowing funds and lending the same for various infrastructure projects under SIFTI. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
x
Audit observed that funds borrowed by the Company were not based on detailed working 
of requirements and resulted in excess borrowings. Moreover, funds were borrowed at 
higher cost upto ` 37.56 crore by issuing bonds for 25 years’ tenor 1 instead of 15 years’
and 20 years’ tenor. Besides, the borrowing from LIC was done at higher than prevailing 
market rates incurring extra cost of ` 21.57 crore. 
Audit further observed that under lending operations the Company 
• Compromised on compliance of guidelines regarding appraisal of the loan 
proposal by the lead bank, obtaining guarantee for recovery of loan from lead 
bank and failed to protect its financial interests.
• Was likely to suffer a loss of ` 8.11 crore due to absence of standard operating 
procedures to safeguard its interests against quitting of lead/other lenders of the
consortium.
• Lost business opportunity to the extent of ` 1,064.94 crore in 13 loans by not
agreeing to finance the cost overruns, though the loans were restructured by the 
Company after having ensured their financial viability.
Despite having been modified a number of times, both the Refinance scheme and the 
Takeout finance scheme remained unattractive.
 (Para 7.1)
Air India Charters Limited (Company) renewed dry lease of four aircraft disregarding the 
rationale for acquisition of 18 new aircraft, shortage of crew and loss making routes 
which led to unfruitful expenditure of ` 405.83 crore between March 2011 and May 2014 
towards lease related charges.
(Para 2.5)
Lapses in implementation of post shipment finance scheme by STC led to non-recovery 
of dues of ` 347.70 crore. Discounting of export documents of dubious legality conceded
by EXIM Bank, were also noticed besides infructuous expenditure on insurance premium 
of ` 17.07 crore. 
 (Para 4.4)
AAI did not take action as per its credit policy and allowed M/s Kingfisher Airlines 
Limited to continue its operations on credit basis even after withdrawal of the credit 
facility. AAI also did not act timely on the advice of MoCA to take all legal means beside
encashing bank guarantee of the airlines. This resulted in loss of revenue of ` 172.69
crore apart from loss of interest of ` 117.03 crore (up to February 2014). 
(Para 2.3)
There was inordinate delay in formulation of a policy regarding levy of airport charges 
and allotment of land to flying clubs and the attempt of framing policy in 2007, did not
bear any result even till August 2014. In the absence of timely action and mechanism to 
verify the eligibility under Category I or II flying clubs, which were involved in other 
commercial activities and also otherwise not entitled to avail the benefits of concessional
rates, these continued to enjoy the same. Further, in the absence of any agreement with
the parties, most of the flying clubs raised disputes regarding rates and did not clear their 
1 Implies tenure or period of loan or bond as used by the Company in its records.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
xi
dues. Moreover, AAI suffered losses due to delay in identification of sites and issue of 
required clearances.
(Para 2.1)
Dankuni Coal Complex (DCC) was established at a cost of ` 147 crore in 1990 as a unit 
of Coal India Limited (CIL) based on the recommendations of the Fuel Policy
Committee, 1974 of Government of India (GOI), and the Working Group Nos. 9 and 10 
of the Planning Commission (1974). Later, CIL handed over DCC to South Eastern 
Coalfields Limited (SECL) for running the plant on operating lease basis in April 1995 
and renewed the lease subsequently at an annual lease rent of ` 7.50 crore followed by 
further renewal of lease w.e.f. 1 April 2010 at ` 1 per annum.
Audit observed that DCC did not operate efficiently since inception so as to achieve 
financial viability. DCC did not take effective measures to control environmental 
pollution. The Unit has been sustaining substantial loss ( ` 650.97 crore as on 31 March 
2014). Audit examination revealed:- 
• Operation far below installed capacity as there was no capital infusion for 
revival/capital rehabilitation of the plant
• Outdated technology 
• Poor offtake of gas by customer
• Non-remunerative price obtained from customer
• Poor sale of by-products
• Absence of marketing strategy.
Neither DCC, nor SECL or CIL took any coordinated and productive steps to address the 
core issues pointed out above which would have helped DCC to get its financial health 
restored.
(Para 3.3)
Audit reviewed activities and other matters relating to execution of purchase orders in
Bharatiya Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Limited (BHAVINI). Audit examination revealed 
that:
• As BHAVINI had entrusted (December 2003) all the activities to CMM, NPCIL 
pertaining to its procurement contracts, it had paid ` 46.07 crore till March 2014, 
as service charges excluding taxes.
• BHAVINI had not formulated an independent procurement manual so far
(November 2014) and procurement manual of NPCIL was being followed on the 
grounds that the same was found adequate and comprehensive. 
• No timeline was prescribed for various stages of the procurement processes such
as for placement of purchase orders after receipt of indents and for receipt of 
materials after placement of purchase orders. There was delay in the placement of 
100 purchase orders (76 per cent) out of a sample of 131 Purchase orders selected 
for audit. The delay ranged from one day to 1092 days with a median delay of 158 
days.
• Norms with regard to mode of tendering were not strictly followed. Out of 131 
purchase orders, in 125 purchase orders the value exceeded ` 50 lakh each for

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
xii
which only public tenders were to be called. However, public tenders were called 
only in 71 cases (57 per cent).
• Though BHAVINI had set up its own CMM division in May 2004, the same had
not yet taken over the activities from NPCIL due to lack of in-house expertise in 
the matter.
(Para 1.1) 
Audit reviewed the policy framework of Uranium Corporation of India Limited (UCIL)
for managing different types of contracts, the tendering system and the post-contract 
management. Audit observed that: 
• UCIL had no works contract manual for contract finalization, delegation of
powers, post-contract management, etc. 
• UCIL was required to commence e-procurement in respect of all procurements in
excess of ` 10 lakh from the month of May 2013. The Company went about 
implementation of e-procurement in a haphazard manner with inadequate 
preparatory work and assigned (April 2014) the job to M/s ITI which was in 
progress (January 2015).
• There were delays at various stages of purchase order finalisation process as 
compared to the time limits prescribed in its purchase manual. Delay was noticed 
in 59 to 83 per cent cases selected for audit which was in the range of one to 768 
days.
• Though UCIL had prescribed a norm of 180 days in its purchase manual for 
finalising public tender, it did not lay down any timeline for finalisation of works 
contracts. Audit observed that there were delays ranging from 12 to 541 days in 
finalisation of 16 out of 29 works contracts selected for Audit. 
• UCIL evaluated performance of vendors and classified them as 'Excellent', 'Very
Good' and 'Good'. However, there was no ‘Poor’ rating. Further, the entire
exercise of vendor rating proved futile as these were not considered at the time of 
placement of purchase orders.
 (Para 1.2)
A review of procurement contracts in Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited
(NPCIL) revealed that it did not:
• make proper assessment of the available material before floating tenders for 
manufacture of steam generators for Kakrapar Atomic Power Project - 3&4. As a 
result, material valuing ` 17.51 crore, which could be issued to the suppliers as 
free issue material (FIM), remained blocked in its inventory; 
• ensure economy in the tendering process as it had incurred additional expenditure
of `6.01 crore due to non-consideration of the impact of local taxes during 
evaluation of bids and non-placement of purchase order on a supplier within the 
validity period of his price bid and subsequent placement of order on a different
supplier at a higher price; and 
• prescribe any time frame for completion of tendering procedure after receipt of an 
indent due to which the completion dates stipulated in the contracts did not match
with the desired dates of delivery given in the indents. 
(Para 1.3) 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
xiii
There are co-insurance arrangements between the PSU insurance companies and the 
private insurance companies. Under co-insurance, one Company (known as the “lead 
insurer”) underwrites the insurance business and shares a part of that business with other 
public/private insurance business.
Significant audit findings in the Co-insurance arrangements entered into by New India 
Assurance Company with the private insurance companies are as under:
• Company has no specific policy or guidelines for co-insurance business where 
role of the lead insurance Company and that of the client are significant in 
determining the terms and conditions of the insurance contract.
• The Company assumed risk without recording the most vital information like
Incurred Claims Ratio and details of the risk such as location of the risk, total
exposure, break up of Sum Insured etc. 
• Risk inspection was not carried out by the Company nor was the Inspection report
of the lead insurer obtained before acceptance of the risk. The Company paid an 
amount of ` 21.78 crore in settlement of 6 out of 25 such claims. 
• Justification notes with the approval of the Competent Authority, for the 
acceptance of the risk, were not available in 38 cases reviewed by Audit and 12 
out of them were having Sum Insured (SI) exceeding ` 500 crore. 
• Co-insurance risk was accepted at a rate lower than that quoted by the Company at 
the time of participation in the tender for 100 per cent  share in nine out of 38 
cases. The difference in premium amounted to ` 2.02 crore and the Company
settled 3 claims for ` 2.27 crore. 
 (Para 7.4)
Review of implementation of Passenger Reservation and inventory system in Air India
Limited, Mumbai revealed the following:-
• Lack of (i) integrated single IT platform and (ii) required linking to Finance 
Module with manual interventions due to absence of automated interfaces 
resulting in the underlying risk to data integrity. 
• Pricing, despite being the key element of Passenger Reservation System, was out 
of scope of the system. The risk of manual errors (either intentional or un-
intentional) could not be ruled out. 
• System design deficiencies and lacunae in customization resulted in un-reconciled 
revenue of ` 136.84 crore and long outstanding debts of ` 113.94 crore. 
• Lack of in-built relational integrity between related data resulted in a situation
whereby the system allowed purchases without proper user requests, purchase 
quantity exceeding the requirement and materials received before placing orders. 
• Non mapping of business rules in the system resulted in accounting ` 5.35 crore 
as revenue contrary to its Accounting Policy and blocking of bookings under 
higher priced tickets in companion free scheme.
(Para 2.7)

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
xiv
10 CPSEs did not adhere to the DPE guidelines with respect to payment of allowances 
and perks to its employees by restricting the same within the maximum ceiling of 50 per
cent and made irregular payment of ` 573.10 crore for the years 2007-08 to 2013-14.
(Para 8.1) 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
1
10.05
Bharatiya Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Limited 
1.1 Procurement contracts  
1.1.1  Introduction 
The Government of India (GOI) approved (September 2003) setting up of a Prototype 
Fast Breeder Reactor (PFBR) at Kalpakkam, Tamil Nadu at an estimated cost of ` 3492 
crore. The GOI also approved (September 2003) formation of a Special Purpose Vehicle 
(SPV) under the Companies Act, 1956 for implementation of the PFBR project. 
Accordingly, Bharatiya Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Limited (BHAVINI) was formed 
(October 2003) by the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) as a public limited company 
for constructing the PFBR with a capacity of 500 megawatt electrical (MWe).  
1.1.2 Procurement system in BHAVINI 
All the activities pertaining to purchase contracts, namely, processing of indents, 
tendering, commercial evaluation of the bids, finalisation and placement of purchase 
orders and all other matters pertaining to execution of purchase contracts had been 
entrusted by BHAVINI to Contract and Material Management unit of Nuclear Power 
Corporation of India Limited (CMM, NPCIL). The services of CMM, NPCIL for 
processing of all large value purchase contracts for PFBR had been availed on service 
charges at the rate of 1.75 per cent up to a cumulative total purchase order value of not 
more than ` 1,000 crore and at one per cent of the value thereafter, plus service tax and 
other statutory levies as applicable. The terms of payment of the service charges 
stipulated payment of 50 per cent of services charges upon placement of purchase order 
and that of remaining 50 per cent upon receipt of items.  
1.1.3 Audit scope, objectives and methodology 
The procurement activities of BHAVINI were reviewed to assess whether: 
• BHAVINI was able to develop necessary expertise to carry out procurement 
activities independently; 
• the procurement system had laid down appropriate timelines for completing 
various stages of procurement in order to ensure timely placement of purchase 
orders and receipt of materials; and  
• the prescribed guidelines for tendering and procurement were duly adhered to by 
BHAVINI.
Out of a total of 4,647 purchase orders placed by BHAVINI up to 31 March 2013, 131 
purchase orders valuing ` 2,259.99 crore were selected for audit which represented 73 per
cent of the total purchase orders value ( ` 3,110.59 crore) up to March 2014. The audit 
CHAPTER I: DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
2
was conducted during July 2013 to September 2013 and covered the period up to 2012-
13. Subsequently, audit observations were further updated during 2014. 
1.1.4 Audit findings 
The PFBR project was to be completed within seven years of sanction i.e., by September 
2010 at an estimated cost of ` 3,492 crore. However, the project could not be completed 
on time and therefore, the GOI approved (April 2012) extension of completion schedule 
of the project by four years up to September 2014 with date of commencement of 
commercial operations as 31 March 2015. Besides, the GOI also approved (April 2012) 
proposal (May 2009) of BHAVINI for revision in cost of the project to ` 5,677 crore. The 
reasons for time and cost overruns in the project were attributed by the Management to 
factors such as delay in obtaining Government sanctions, damages due to tsunami, 
significant increases in prices of raw materials and labour rates, changes in designs and 
specifications, impact of taxes and duties, etc. Audit, however, observed that in addition 
to the aforesaid factors, inability of BHAVINI to develop in-house expertise for 
undertaking procurement activities independently and deficiencies in the existing 
procurement system and procedures of BHAVINI were also responsible for delay in 
completion of the project and cost overruns. These deficiencies are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs.
1.1.4.1 Over-dependence on NPCIL for procurement 
(a) Outsourcing of procurement function to NPCIL 
BHAVINI had entrusted (December 2003) all the activities pertaining to its procurement 
contracts to the Contracts and Material Management (CMM) division of NPCIL. Further, 
BHAVINI approved (July 2004 and August 2005) a proposal for payment of service 
charges to CMM, NPCIL for processing of various purchase contracts for PFBR 
components at 1.75 per cent of the purchase order value up to a cumulative total value of 
` 1,000 crore and one per cent of the purchase order value thereafter, exclusive of service 
tax and statutory levies, as applicable. BHAVINI had paid ` 46.07 crore to CMM, NPCIL 
till March 2014, as service charges excluding taxes, on purchase orders valuing 
` 2,759.16 crore. Audit observed that though BHAVINI had set up its own CMM 
division in May 2004, the same had not yet taken over the activities from NPCIL due to 
lack of in-house expertise in the matter. 
The Management stated (October 2013) that service contract was placed with NPCIL to 
process high value contracts as NPCIL had an established set up in the nuclear sector. All 
decisions of procurement were taken by competent authorities in BHAVINI and CMM, 
NPCIL was working only as an executing agency.  
The fact, however, remains that by entrusting NPCIL with the entire gamut of activities 
relating to procurement such as processing of indents, tendering, evaluation of bids, price 
negotiations, placement of orders, etc., BHAVINI virtually transferred full control to 
NPCIL and decision-making by BHAVINI in procurement related matters became a mere 
formality.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
3
DAE stated (December 2013) that BHAVINI had created its own CMM wing and all 
purchase orders were being placed internally which was evident from the fact that out of 
4647 orders up to 31.03.2013, 4528 orders were placed by BHAVINI internally without 
taking assistance of NPCIL. Only 119 orders were placed by NPCIL. 
The reply is not acceptable as out of total 4647 purchase orders valuing ` 3,110.59 crore 
placed by BHAVINI up to March 2013, 4528 orders amounting to ` 526.81 crore (17 per
cent) only were processed by BHAVINI itself. This indicates that BHAVINI processed 
only small value orders and was entirely dependent on NPCIL for high value 
procurement. 
(b) Adoption of procurement manual of NPCIL 
BHAVINI has not formulated an independent procurement manual so far (November 
2014). Instead, the procurement manual of NPCIL was followed by BHAVINI on the 
grounds that the same was found adequate and comprehensive. Audit, however, observed 
that as BHAVINI was formed as a Special Purpose Vehicle for fast breeder reactor 
projects, it needed to develop its own procurement manual. 
DAE stated (December 2013) that a committee had already been constituted (June 2013) 
to review the procurement manual and BHAVINI would soon have its own manual for 
procurement. However, the Management confirmed (December 2014) that the manual 
was still under finalisation. 
1.1.4.2 Deficiencies in procurement system 
(a)  Absence of timeframe for different procurement stages 
Audit observed that no timeline was prescribed for various stages of the procurement 
process such as for placement of purchase orders after receipt of indents and for receipt of 
materials after placement of purchase orders. As a result, there were undue delays in 
placement of orders and receipt of materials. In absence of any laid down timeline in 
NPCIL procurement manual for placement of orders, Audit made an assessment of delay 
in placement of purchase orders with reference to the time frame
♣  of 180 days, 90 days 
and 60 days in case of public, limited and single tenders respectively. The result of the 
audit assessment is summarised in the following table: 
Table 1 
Delay in placement of purchase orders 
Mode of 
tender
Total cases 
selected for 
audit
Number of cases 
where delay in 
placement of POs 
was observed 
Percentage of 
cases where delay 
in placement of 
POs was observed 
Range of 
delay
(days)
Median
delay
(days)
Public 75 60 80 3 to 1092 213 
Limited 33 26 79 1 to 826 115 
Single 23 14 61 4 to 350 130 
Total 131 100 76 1 to 1092 158 
                                                           
♣ The time limits of 180 days, 90 days and 60 days for placement of purchase orders in case of public 
tender, limited tender and single tender respectively as prescribed in the purchase manual of Uranium 
Corporation of India Limited, which is also in the administrative control of the DAE, were adopted. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
4
As may be seen from the above table, out of 131 purchase orders selected for audit, there 
was a delay in the placement of 100 purchase orders (76 per cent). The delay ranged from 
one day to 1092 days with a median delay of 158 days. The median delay in case of 
public, limited and single tenders worked out to 213 days, 115 days and 130 days 
respectively. 
Audit observed that no uniform timeline had been prescribed for receipt of materials after 
placement of purchase orders. Instead, different delivery periods were fixed in different 
purchase orders. However, actual receipt of materials did not conform to the delivery 
period mentioned in the purchase orders. Test check of 25 purchase orders revealed that 
there was a delay ranging from 5 months to 55 months in receipt of ordered 
materials/components. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Management stated (October 2013) that delays 
were taking place from tender to supply of material due to complexities involved in the 
first of its kind reactor, technical deliberations and price negotiations. DAE endorsed 
(December 2013) the reply of the Management. 
(b) Non-adherence to prescribed mode of tendering 
BHAVINI had outsourced (December 2003) its major procurement activities to NPCIL. 
Besides, BHAVINI had also developed its own CMM group and adopted procurement 
manual of NPCIL for undertaking procurement activities. Audit observed that norms laid 
down in the procurement manual of NPCIL with regard to mode of tendering were not 
strictly followed by BHAVINI. As per norms laid down in the procurement manual, in 
case of purchase order valuing more than ` 50 lakh, open/public tender was to be called. 
The mode could be changed with proper justification into limited tender with approval 
from competent authority. However, it was observed that even for high value purchases 
valuing more than ` 50 crore, public tenders were not calle d and instead limited tenders 
and even single tenders were invited. The mode of tendering adopted for procurement in 
the 131 cases selected for audit was as shown in table 2 below: 
Table 2 
Mode of tendering adopted by BHAVINI 
(` in crore) 
Value of purchase 
order 
Public tender Limited tender Single tender Total 
No. Value No. Value No. Value No. Value 
Above ` 50 crore 6 882.55 2 162.26 3 411.31 11 1456.12 
` 5 crore to ` 50 crore 22 339.96 13 237.70 7 90.65 42 668.31 
`1 crore to `5 crore 21 73.82 0 0 6 26.27 27 100.09 
` 50 lakh to ` 1 crore 22 16.88 17 12.16 6 5.11 45 34.15 
Sub-total (A) 71 1313.21 32 412.12 22 533.34 125 2258.67 
Below ` 50 lakh  (B) 4 0.78 1 0.11 1 0.43 6 1.32 
Grand total (A+B) 75 1313.99 33 412.23 23 533.77 131 2259.99 
As may be seen from the above table, out of 131 purchase orders, in 125 orders the value 
exceeded ` 50 lakh each for which only public tenders were to be called. However, public 
tenders were called only in 71 cases (57 per cent) and limited and single tenders were 
called in 54 cases (43 per cent). On the contrary, out of 6 purchase orders valuing less 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
5
than ` 50 lakh, public tenders were called in 4 cases (67 per cent) and limited and single 
tenders were called in 2 cases (33 per cent). This indicates that the tendering was done in 
an arbitrary manner without giving consideration to the guidelines laid down in the 
procurement manual. Thus, the tendering system failed to ensure transparency and 
effective competition. 
The Management stated (October 2013) that limited tender was primarily followed for 
complex components owing to limited skilled industry available in the country. It was felt 
scientifically prudent to go with the time-tested experienced players as most of the 
nuclear and reactor components were being done for the first time. Public tender had been 
adopted for all components in the conventional system. Single tender was resorted to for 
specific jobs which could not be made in a competitive bidding method and where there 
was only single source. 
The reply is not acceptable as the guidelines given in the procurement manual had 
classified the mode of tendering on the basis of value of purchase order and not on the 
type of items to be purchased. BHAVINI needed to carry out extensive market research to 
locate new vendors and to bring in competition instead of awarding the contracts to 
known suppliers only. 
While endorsing the reply of the Management, DAE stated (December 2013) that the 
decisions on mode of tender had been taken by the appropriate authority as defined in the 
manual. Public tender dispensation had been given in all the tenders wherever the 
estimated value of indent was more than ` 50 lakh, by the respective approving authority. 
Thereby, the guidelines of procurement manual were followed in all cases. 
The reply is not acceptable as deviations from the prescribed mode of tender on the basis 
of approval by the competent authority needed to be an exception and not common 
occurrences. However, the reply of DAE and the above audit analysis indicate that the 
guidelines given in the procurement manual on the mode of tendering were frequently 
violated.
Conclusion
NPCIL was associated with the construction, commissioning and operation of Fast 
Breeder Reactor Project at Kalpakkam on the directive of the Government of India. 
However, BHAVINI had outsourced all the activities pertaining to the procurement 
contracts to NPCIL against payment of service charges. Though BHAVINI had set-
up its own CMM division in May 2004, the same had not yet taken over the activities 
from NPCIL due to lack of in-house expertise in the matter . Besides, BHAVINI did 
not formulate its own procurement manual and followed the manual of NPCIL. No 
timelines were prescribed in the procurement manual for various stages in the 
procurement process due to which there were delays ranging up to 1092 days in the 
placement of purchase orders after receipt of indents. The guidelines prescribed in 
the procurement manual in respect of the mode of tendering were not strictly 
adhered to which prevented BHAVINI from ensuring transparency and competition 
in the tendering process. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
6
Audit recommendations and responses of DAE 
Recommendations of Audit Response of DAE 
In view of the aforesaid findings, it is 
recommended that BHAVINI may 
consider:
The recommendations given by Audit are 
solicited. 
¾ developing in-house expertise for 
undertaking procurement activities 
independently in an efficient and cost-
effective manner. 
¾ In-house expertise has been developed 
to take up the future projects. 
¾ formulating its own procurement 
manual and laying down norms for 
each stage of procurement. 
¾ Separate procurement manual will be 
made for BHAVINI. A committee has 
been constituted for this purpose in 
June 2013 and working on it actively. 
¾ adhering strictly to the guidelines 
framed in the procurement manual in 
order to minimise time and cost 
overruns.
¾ BHAVINI will continue to make all 
out efforts to adhere to the guidelines 
in the procurement manual. 
DAE has accepted the second and third recommendation made by Audit. In respect of the 
first recommendation, the response of DAE is not acceptable in view of the fact that 
BHAVINI processed only small value orders and was entirely dependent on NPCIL for 
high value procurement (refer para 4.1.1), which indicates that development of in-house 
expertise to carry out procurement activities independently was yet to be achieved. 
Uranium Corporation of India Limited 
1.2 Contract Management  
1.2.1    Introduction 
Uranium Corporation of India Limited (UCIL/Company) was incorporated on 4 October 
1967 as a public sector enterprise under the administrative control of the Department of 
Atomic Energy (DAE) with the objectives of mining ore and processing the same for 
production of Uranium concentrate. The entire production of Uranium concentrate by the 
Company is purchased by the DAE. The Company has its Corporate office at Jaduguda, 
District East Singbhum, Jharkhand. It has seven mines and two processing plants in 
Jharkhand State.
1.2.2 Scope of audit 
Audit examined the procedures governing finalization of works/procurement contracts by 
the Company, tendering process, placement of purchase orders and execution of 
contracts. A period of four years from 2010-11 to 2013-14 was covered in audit.
1.2.3 Audit objectives 
Audit was conducted to assess whether:
• the Company had a well-defined policy framework for managing different types 
of contracts and the same was duly adhered to; 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
7
• the tendering system was transparent and ensured efficiency, economy, 
effectiveness and fair competition; and 
• the post-contract management was effective so as to ensure compliance to the 
agreed terms and conditions of the contracts. 
1.2.4 Audit criteria 
Audit criteria were derived from the following: 
• Purchase manual of the Company; 
• Terms and conditions of the contracts/ purchase orders; and 
• Minutes of the meetings of Board of Directors and its sub-committees. 
1.2.5 Audit methodology and sample size 
Audit was conducted on the basis of examination of records relating to 
works/procurement contracts entered into by the Company, collection of information 
through questionnaires and audit requisitions, verification of replies of the Management 
to the preliminary audit enquiries and discussion with the Management. The purchase 
orders and works contracts finalised during 2010-11 to 2013-14 for the activities in 
Jharkhand State were selected for audit. 
Out of the 18001 purchase orders (POs) and 1921 works contracts valuing ` 1308.63
crore finalized by the Company during the period 2010-11 to 2013-14, a sample of 160 
POs/contracts (131 POs and 29 works contracts) with aggregate value of ` 494.81 crore 
was selected for audit. The sample was selected on the basis of stratified random 
sampling method and consisted of 18 contracts/POs valuing more than ` 5 crore, 46 
contracts/POs from those valuing in the range of `1 crore to ` 5 crore and 96 
contracts/POs from those valuing less than ` one crore. The selected sample thus 
represented 37.8 per cent of the total contract value. 
1.2.6 Audit findings 
1.2.6.1 Policy framework for Contract Management 
(a) Absence of works contract manual 
The activities of the Company have increased manifold since its incorporation in 1967, 
yet no ‘Works Contract Manual’ was prepared to lay down the guidelines for contract 
finalisation and execution, delegation of powers, post-contract management, etc. in order 
to ensure that the best practices, system and procedures were followed uniformly by all 
the units of the Company. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Management stated (May 2014/January 2015) 
that the review of the manual was at final stage and it was likely to be placed in the Board 
of Directors’ meeting to be held during fourth quarter of 2014-15. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
8
(b) Delay in commencement of e-procurement 
The Ministry of Finance instructed (March 2012) that all the Ministries/ Departments of 
the Central Government, their attached and subordinate offices may commence e-
procurement in respect of all procurements with estimated value of ` 10 lakh or more in a 
phased manner. As per the time schedule prescribed by the Ministry of Finance, the 
Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) and its attached subordinate offices were required 
to commence e-procurement from the month of December 2012 and May 2013 
respectively. The Board of Directors (BOD) of the Company decided (December 2012) to 
float public tender for awarding the contract for implementation of e-procurement. The 
purchase department of the Company, however, issued (January 2013) limited tender 
enquiry to three vendors without making any assessment of the scope and specifications 
of work. Due to incomplete details, response to the limited tender enquiry was received 
only from one vendor. The Company, therefore, decided (July 2013) to cancel the limited 
tender and float public tender containing full details in order to ensure better participation. 
While the procedural formalities for public tendering were in progress, the Company 
decided (November 2013) to explore the possibility of adopting e-tendering and e-
procurement services offered by another agency, namely, M/s ITI which was already 
offering its services to DAE. Accordingly, the Company assigned (April 2014) the job of 
implementation of e-procurement which was in progress (January 2015).
Audit observed that non-assessment of the requirements and specifications of work and 
issue of limited tender enquiry delayed the commencement of implementation of e-
procurement besides violating the decision of the BOD to float public tender in the 
beginning itself.
While accepting the audit observation, Management stated (January 2015) that many of 
the units/ departments under DAE had availed services of ITI in implementing e-
procurement to maintain uniformity. 
The fact, however, remains that the Company went about the implementation of e-
procurement in a haphazard manner with inadequate preparatory work leading to 
inordinate delay as against the targeted time of implementation i.e. May 2013. 
(c) Non-adherence to time schedule for finalising purchase orders 
Audit observed delays at various stages of purchase order finalisation process as 
compared to the time limits prescribed in its purchase manual. The following table depicts 
the time taken by the Company in issuing purchase enquiries and placing purchase orders 
after receipt of purchase requisitions during the period 2010-11 to 2013-14:
Stage of 
procurement Mode of 
tender
Time
limit
(days)
No. of 
cases
examined 
No. of 
delayed
cases 
Percentage
of delayed 
cases 
Delay
range
(days)
Median
Delay
(days)
Time taken for 
placement of 
purchase orders 
after receipt of 
Public
tender 180 47 39 83 
1 to 
768 121 
Limited 
Tender 90 67 57 85 
8 to 
522 73 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
9
purchase
requisition
Single
Tender 60 17 10 59 
11 to 
116 54 
Time taken for 
the issue  of 
purchase
enquiries after  
receipt of 
purchase
requisition
Public
tender 30 47 30 64 
4 to 
757 60 
Limited 
Tender 15 67 52 78 
1 to 
280 55 
As may be seen from the table, there was a median delay of 60 days and 55 days in issue 
of purchase enquiries for public tender and limited tender respectively. Further, the 
median delay in placement of purchase orders in case of public, limited and single tender 
was 121 days, 73 days and 54 days respectively. 
Thus, out of the sample of 131 purchase orders selected for audit, there was delay in 
placement of 106 purchase orders with a median delay of 80 days. Audit observed that the 
delays in consolidation of purchase requisition, deciding the mode of tender, opening of 
bids and negotiations with the suppliers contributed to the overall delay in the placement 
of purchase orders by the Company. 
Management stated (May 2014/January 2015) that efforts were being made to achieve 
placement of purchase orders as per the time schedule prescribed in the purchase manual. 
(d) Absence of norms for finalization of works contracts 
In order to avoid time and cost overrun, it is necessary that the contracts are finalized 
within reasonable time. To this end, a definite time schedule needs to be followed for 
completion of different stages in the finalisation of contracts. Audit observed that though 
the Company had prescribed a norm of 180 days in its purchase manual for finalising 
public tender, it did not lay down any timelines for finalisation of works contracts. 
Considering the norm of 180 days prescribed for finalising public tender, Audit observed 
that there was a delay ranging from 12 days to 541 days in finalisation of 16 out of 29 
work contracts selected for Audit. The major reasons for the delay were revisions in cost 
estimates and scope of work, delayed provision of budget for works, refloating of tenders 
due to poor response, repeated changes in notice inviting tenders (NIT) before issue, etc. 
Management stated (July 2013/May 2014 and January 2015) that the timelines for 
finalisation of the tender would be covered in the Works Contract Manual which was 
under draft stage and likely to be adopted soon.
(e) Non-realisation of EPF dues from contractors  
As per Section 30(2) and (3) of the Employees Provident Fund Scheme, 1952, the 
contractors are required to pay to the principal employer (viz. Company) Employees 
Provident Fund (EPF) dues recovered from the employees engaged by him together with 
an equal amount of his contribution and administrative charges. Upon receipt of the EPF 
contributions from the contractors, the principal employer has to remit the same to the 
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner. Further, as per section 36-B of the Scheme, 
every contractor shall, within seven days of the close of every month, submit to the 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
10 
principal employer a statement showing the recoveries of contributions in respect of 
employees employed by or through him. For ensuring necessary compliance in this 
regard, the work orders issued by the Company to the contractors also contained a clause 
to this effect.  
A test check of the running account bills in case of 8 work orders revealed that the 
contractors did not remit the EPF dues amounting to `1.34 crore to the Company. 
However, the Company neither deducted the EPF dues from the contractors’ bills nor 
obtained from them any proof of payment of EPF dues to the Regional Provident Fund 
Commissioner.  
Management stated (May 2014) that instructions had been issued (May 2014) to the 
concerned officers for ensuring compliance to the statutory regulations. The Management 
further stated that in larger contracts, the Company was ensuring deposit of EPF with the 
statutory agency and was collecting the necessary documents. 
The fact, however, remains that in case of the 8 works orders commented upon by Audit, 
the Company did not ensure deposit of EPF dues. Besides, compliance to statutory 
provisions was required in all cases of contracts irrespective of their value. 
(f) Redundant exercise of vendor rating 
The Company evaluated the performance of vendors on the basis of three parameters viz. 
right quality, right quantity and right delivery and accordingly assigned a numerical rating 
to the vendors. Based on the numerical ratings, the vendors were classified as Excellent, 
Very good and Good. Audit, however, observed that there was no ‘Poor’ rating for 
unsatisfactory performance and the vendors with zero numerical rating were also 
classified as ‘Good’. Besides, the vendor ratings were done separately by each unit of the 
Company due to which vendors for the same item were evaluated differently by different 
units. Further, the entire exercise of vendor rating was futile as the ratings were not 
considered at the time of placement of purchase orders. Audit also observed that different 
vendors existed for the same items at different units due to absence of common 
codification in the vendor database of the Company. 
Management stated (July 2013) that the vendor evaluation system developed by Tata 
Consultancy Services was adopted (April 2012) on trial and the system would be 
updated/corrected in due course of time based on the experience of this trial. Management 
further stated (January 2015) that the efforts to develop common codification of material 
were underway which would also effect vendor codification thereby improving the 
vendor rating system. 
1.2.6.2 Tendering system 
(a) Non-monitoring of credentials of the bidders 
The Company issued (October 2010) a public tender for purchase of High carbon steel 
grinding rod. Only two bidders viz. M/s Chandi Steel Industries Limited and M/s Balaji 
Ispat Udyog submitted their offers. Audit observed that these two parties were associates 
of each other and were having their registered offices at the same place. As the two 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
11 
bidders were inter-related parties, this was practically a single bidder submitting two bids 
and therefore the tender should have been cancelled and re-floated. However, the 
Company evaluated the bids separately which indicates that there was lack of monitoring 
in respect of the credentials of the bidders by the Company. 
Management stated (May 2014/January 2015) that the procurement had been done from 
the lowest bidder through public tendering and as per the records available with the 
Company, the bidders were two different companies having separate registration and 
licences. 
The reply is not acceptable as the financial statements of the bidders clearly indicated that 
the two bidders were inter-related. The Company, therefore, needed to exercise due 
diligence before awarding the contract. 
(b) Excess expenditure on advertisement at higher than prescribed rates
As per clause 3 of the New Advertisement Policy (effective from 2 October 2007) of the 
Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP), all Central Government 
Ministries/ Departments/attached and subordinate offices/field offices shall route their 
advertisements through DAVP. PSUs, Autonomous bodies and Societies of Government 
of India may issue all advertisements directly at DAVP rates to empanelled newspapers. 
Audit, however, observed that the Company did not ask the newspaper publishers to 
accept DAVP rates for printing its advertisements/NITs. Instead, the Company violated 
the above directions and got its advertisements published through M/s Ridge Advertising 
and Marketing Consultants, Ranchi at commercial rates which were much higher than the 
DAVP rates. This resulted in extra expenditure of ` 6.22 crore on publishing of 
advertisements during the period February 2012 to October 2013.
Management stated (May 2014/January 2015) that clause 3 of the new Advertisement 
Policy of DAVP did not make it mandatory for the PSUs to rely solely on DAVP. 
Further, DAVP rates for advertisements were not made available to the PSUs by the 
Media House owners as the Indian Newspaper Society (INS) had issued (August 2005 
and July 2006) circulars communicating that the advertisements from PSUs would be 
accepted only on commercial rates and not on DAVP rates. 
The reply is not acceptable since it was mandatory, as per the new Advertisement Policy, 
for all PSUs to issue advertisements to the empanelled newspapers at DAVP rates. As the 
Advertisement Policy of DAVP did not mention about any exemption to the PSUs in this 
regard, the contention of Management is not tenable. Further, the New Advertisement 
Policy was effective from October 2007 i.e. after the issue of the above stated circulars by 
INS and therefore the policy had an overriding effect on these circulars. Moreover, the 
sixth Rate Structure Committee, taking cognizance of the non-compliance of new 
Advertisement Policy by many PSUs, recommended that the Government may issue a 
communication to all Ministries to advise PSUs, Autonomous Bodies and Societies under 
their administrative control to release their advertisements at the rate which is not higher 
than the DAVP rates.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
12 
1.2.6.3 Post-contract management 
(a) Non-invoking of risk purchase clause 
As per clause 11.3 of the purchase manual of the Company, any delay in effecting 
supplies by the supplier would call for invoking the penalty clause, procurement of those 
materials at the cost of the defaulting party and cancellation of the order ultimately with 
the approval of the competent authority. Audit, however, observed that in case of 
following two purchase orders where the supplier had defaulted in supplies of common 
salt at Jaduguda and Turamdih units of the Company, the aforesaid provisions were not 
adhered to by the Company: 
Sl.
No.
PO
Number
PO Date Name of the supplier Quantity 
ordered
(MT)
Quantity
supplied
(MT)
1. 2084 07.02.2012 M/s Mangalam 
Enterprises
2500 288.83 
2. 9701 07.02.2012 M/s Mangalam 
Enterprises
2500 Nil 
Audit further observed that the defaulted quantity of 4711.17 MT was procured from 
three other suppliers at an extra cost of ` 28.44 lakh. However, the cost was not recovered 
from the defaulting supplier in terms of the above clause of the purchase manual.  
While accepting the audit observation, the Management stated (July 2013) that a proposal 
had been initiated for forfeiture of security deposit against order of Jaduguda which was 
likely to be finalized soon. As the party had neither deposited security deposit nor made 
any supply against order for Turamdih, the Company did not have any recovery measure 
against the default made by the supplier. An effective system to monitor purchase orders 
and implementation of post contract penalties would be kept in the revised version of 
purchase manual. 
Though the Company forfeited (October 2013) security deposit of ` 3.41 lakh, however, 
no action was taken by the Management as per the risk purchase clause to recover balance 
amount of ` 25.03 lakh. 
Conclusion
The Company had not prepared a works contract manual even after 47 years of its 
formation to lay down the guidelines for contract finalisation and execution. There 
were delays with a median delay of 80 days in placement of purchase orders after 
receipt of purchase requisitions. The Company, though, had a system for assessing 
performance of vendors and rating them accordingly but this was not being done in 
a centralised manner leading to different ratings for the same item. Besides, vendor 
ratings were not considered at the time of placement of purchase orders. The clause 
in the purchase manual with regard to risk purchase was also not strictly followed 
by the Company. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
13 
The implementation of the audit observations which have been accepted by the 
Management will be followed up in subsequent audit. 
Recommendations of audit and response of the Management 
In view of the aforesaid findings, it is recommended that the Company may consider: 
Recommendations of Audit Reply of the Management (January 2015) 
¾  Formulating a comprehensive works 
contract manual laying down 
guidelines and time schedule for 
various activities in contract 
finalisation and execution. 
¾ The works contract manual has been 
formulated by the Company and is 
under finalisation for putting up before 
the Board of Directors.
¾ Developing a centralised vendor 
rating system for assessment of 
performance of vendors and utilizing 
such information for deciding on the 
award of future contracts. 
¾ The vendor rating system is under trial 
stage and once the rationalization of 
uniform material coding is introduced, 
the assessment of performance of 
vendor will be done uniformly. 
¾ Adhering strictly to the timelines 
prescribed for placement of purchase 
orders and other provisions of the 
purchase manual. 
¾ Efforts are being made to adhere to the 
timeline prescribed in the purchase 
manual for placement of purchase 
order in most practicable manner. 
The matter was reported to the Department of Atomic Energy in December 2014; their 
reply was awaited (March 2015). 
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited
1.3 Procurement Contracts 
1.3.1 Introduction 
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (Company) is a wholly owned Central 
Government Company incorporated on 17 September 1987 under the administrative 
control of Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) with the objective of operating atomic 
power stations and implementing the atomic power projects for generation of electricity 
in pursuance of the schemes and programmes of the Government of India under the 
Atomic Energy Act, 1962. The Company is responsible for design, construction, 
commissioning and operation of nuclear power reactors. The mission of the Company is 
to develop nuclear power technology and to produce nuclear power as a safe, 
environmentally benign and economically viable source of electrical energy to meet the 
increasing electricity needs of the country. The Company is presently operating 20 
nuclear power plants under seven atomic power stations with a total installed capacity of 
5680 mega-watt electrical (MWe).  
1.3.2 Organisational set-up for procurement activities 
NPCIL has a separate unit under the control of Executive Director, Contract and 
Materials Management (C&MM) which is responsible for catering to the needs of 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
14 
operating stations and also of ongoing projects in terms of procurement of machinery, 
materials and equipments based on requirements by sites/stations and Procurement 
Directorate. High value contracts ( ` 5 crore and above) for procurement including those 
for major power projects are entered into by C&MM, Mumbai unit. The C&MM units 
located at seven♦  sites also enter into contracts as per financial powers delegated to them 
under NPCIL Headquarters instructions (July 2011). The Company does not have a 
manual on Contract Management. However, the codified instructions on procedures to be 
followed for entering into procurement contracts have been prescribed by NPCIL 
Headquarters through delegation of financial powers issued from time to time. 
1.3.3 Audit Objectives 
The audit was conducted during July 2013 to September 2013 to assess whether: 
• the requirements were properly assessed before floating the tenders; 
• tendering process ensured transparency, economy and competitiveness; and 
• contractual terms and conditions were duly complied with and the contracts were 
executed within the schedule time. 
1.3.4 Audit criteria 
Audit criteria were derived from the following: 
• Circulars/ instructions of NPCIL Headquarters on procurement of materials; 
• Terms and conditions of tender documents and purchase orders/contracts; 
• Delegation of financial powers; 
• Milestones projected in the detailed project reports for major projects; and 
• Policy/directions of Government of India on mega power projects. 
1.3.5 Scope of Audit and sample size 
Audit assessed the adequacy of the procurement systems and procedures in ensuring 
economy, transparency and competitiveness in procurement of materials. Audit also 
examined the extent of compliance to the instructions/guidelines laid down by the 
Company for procurement activities and fulfillm ent of contractual obligations by the 
Company. The records maintained by the CMM unit at Mumbai were examined in audit. 
Out of a total of 177 contracts entered into by the Company upto the year 2012-13, a 
sample of 33 contracts was selected on the basis of stratified random sampling method as 
detailed below: 
Particulars Range of value 
of contracts  
Number of 
contracts 
Money value of 
contracts 
(` in crore) 
Percentage of 
Selection of contracts 
in terms of 
Total Selected Total Selected Number Value 
Ongoing 
contracts 
including 
Less than ` 30 
crore 
78 8 1173.79 181.46 10 15 
` 30 crore to 24 2 937.79 88.96 8 9 
                                                           
♦  Tarapur (Maharashtra), Rawatbhata  (Rajasthan), Kalpakkam (Tamil Nadu), Narora (Uttar Pradesh), 
Kakrapar (Gujarat), Kaiga (Karnataka) and Kudankulam (Tamil Nadu) 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
15 
contracts 
entered into 
prior to 
2010-11 
` 50 crore 
More than ` 50 
crore 
56 17 14969.70 6829.28 30 46 
Contracts 
completed 
during  
2010-11 to 
2012-13 
Less than ` 30 
crore 
14 1 221.56 12.47 7 6 
` 30 crore 
to ` 50 crore 
1 1 30.00 30.00 100 100 
More than ` 50 
crore
4 4 360.07 360.07 100 100 
Total  177 33 17692.91 7502.24 19 42 
The selection of contracts for audit was done with a view to ensure greater coverage of 
contracts having relatively high value and of those which were completed during the three 
years ended on 31 March 2013. The selected contracts were entered in respect of four 
ongoing projects viz. Kakrapar Atomic Power Project- units 3 and 4, Gujarat (KAPP 3 & 
4) and Rajasthan Atomic Power Project-units 7 and 8, Rajasthan (RAPP 7 & 8); and four 
completed projects viz. Rajasthan Atomic Power Project- units 5 and 6, Rajasthan (RAPP 
5 & 6) and Kaiga Atomic Power Project-units 3 and 4, Karnataka (Kaiga 3 & 4). 
1.3.6 Audit findings  
The audit findings have been classified under three major heads viz. Pre-tendering 
requirements, tendering and award of contracts, and execution of contracts, as discussed 
in succeeding paragraphs. 
1.3.6.1 Pre-tendering requirements 
(a) Improper estimation of requirement of materials 
The Company placed (March 2009) purchase orders on M/s Larsen & Toubro Limited 
(L&T) and Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) for manufacture and supply of four 
steam generators each for KAPP 3 and KAPP 4 respectively. The value of purchase 
orders for each of the two manufacturers was ` 345 crore. Besides, the Company also 
supplied free issue material (FIM
♥ ) valuing ` 16.65 crore to each of them. 
Both the manufacturers expressed (March 2010) difficulties in procuring certain materials 
and welding consumables required for fabrication of the steam generators and they had 
requested the Company to issue those items so that the work could be expedited. 
Accordingly, the CMM wing forwarded (March 2010) the list of 75 items that could be 
issued as additional FIM from its stores to the manufacturers and requested them to 
intimate their requirements. The Contractors, M/s L&T and M/s BHEL intimated 
(March/April 2010) the requirement of 40 items and 26 items respectively to the 
Company and requested for issue of these items as additional FIM. However, the wing 
eventually decided (July 2010) to issue only three items to each of them and the 
remaining material valuing ` 17.51 crore was retained by the Company in its stores. The 
                                                           
♥  Free issue material (FIM) is the surplus material  remaining in the inventory of NPCIL from the 
previous procurements and is issued to the contractors in the subsequent purchase orders by adjusting 
their cost in the value of purchase orders. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
16 
reasons for issue of only three items each to the two manufacturers against their 
requirements of 40 and 26 items were not found on record. 
Audit observed that as per the Company's instructions (July 2004) the indenting officer 
should refer to the list of usable surplus stock items for their possible use before raising 
an indent. Though the Company had issued certain items as FIM while placing the 
purchase orders on the parties, the aforesaid instructions were not followed scrupulously 
as significant quantity of certain other items were also available with the Company which 
were neither included in the list of original FIM nor were given as additional FIM even 
after being demanded by the manufacturers. This resulted in unwarranted blocking of 
material worth `17.51 crore in the inventory which also entailed increased carrying cost. 
The Management stated (October 2013) that as the tender was divided between BHEL 
and L&T, it was a considered decision that the items/materials that could be issued 
equally to both the manufacturers were included in the list of FIM while preparing the 
estimates for the tender. As majority of the items pointed out by Audit were not sufficient 
to be divided equally between the two manufacturers, the same were not included in the 
list of FIM.  
The reply of the Management is not acceptable as it was evident from the list of surplus 
items not included in the tender, that these were available in sufficient numbers and could 
have been divided between the two bidders. Moreover, the instructions of the Company's 
Headquarters (about referring to the list of surplus items before raising indent) did not put 
any restrictions in case of division of order. Thus, it was not binding on the Company to 
divide the surplus items equally between the two manufacturers.  
The Management further stated (January 2015) that though the Company's instructions 
did not put any restrictions in case of division of order, the indenting officer while 
deciding the items to be issued as FIM at tender stage considered equal availability of 
items for Steam Generator before giving it to the manufacturers. Further, additional FIM 
demanded by the manufacturers could not be issued as it was not feasible to ascertain the 
market prices of these materials. These materials would be considered for issue as FIM in 
future projects with due consideration to economy. 
The reply confirms the audit observation that whole of the surplus material was not 
considered for FIM at the tender stage in contravention to the Company's instructions 
(July 2004). Further, the contention of the Management that additional FIM could not be 
issued due to non-feasibility of ascertaining their market price is not acceptable since cost 
of additional FIM was fixed by the Company after considering the market price and the 
same was duly intimated to the parties at the time of offering (March 2010) the list of 
additional FIM. 
1.3.6.2 Tendering and award of contracts 
(a) Non-consideration of tax element during evaluation of bids 
The Company floated (July 2009) a two-part public tender for manufacture and supply of 
End shield assemblies and components for KAPP 3 & 4 and RAPP 7. In respect of 
KAPP-4, two bidders, viz. M/s Larsen & Toubro Limited (L&T) and M/s Walchandnagar 
Industries Limited (WIL) were found (December 2009) to be qualified after techno-

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
17 
commercial evaluation. After evaluation of price bids, the Company placed (March 2010) 
the purchase order on L&T who had been found to be the L1 bidder. 
Audit observed that of the two technically qualified bidders, L&T was subject to higher 
Value Added Tax rate of 12.5 per cent as both the KAPP site as well as L&T’s unit at 
Hazira were situated in Gujarat, whereas WIL was subject to a lower rate of 2 per cent on 
account of Central Sales Tax. Audit further observed that though the basic price inclusive 
of transportation ( ` 60.25 crore) quoted by L&T was lesser than that quoted by WIL        
(` 62.50 crore), the price inclusive of taxes quoted by L&T ( ` 68.36 crore) was higher 
than that quoted by WIL ( ` 63.84 crore). However, while evaluating the price bids of the 
two bidders, the Company did not consider tax element for comparison of prices. The 
non-inclusion of tax element in price bid evaluation resulted in selection of L&T as L1 
bidder and consequent placement of purchase order with additional commitment of ` 4.52
crore (` 68.36 crore minus ` 63.84 crore). 
The Management stated (February 2012) that in case of project procurement, where fiscal 
concessions are applicable, bid evaluation criteria were indicated in tender documents 
which provided that the price bid evaluation would be done on the total of summary 
prices (i.e., ex-works price, transportation and transit insurance). The Management also 
added (May 2012) that as per instructions (May 1999) of the Ministry of Power, sales tax, 
local levies and octroi shall not be considered for the purpose of evaluation of bids for 
capital goods supplied to Mega Power Projects under deemed export status. 
The Management further stated (January 2015) that in case of nuclear power projects, the 
deemed export benefits are available in case of competitive bidding as opposed to 
International competitive bidding (ICB) vide paras 8.2(j) and 8.4.7 of Foreign Trade 
Policy 2009-14. 
The reply of the management is not acceptable as the Foreign Trade Policy 2009-14 
extended the status of Deemed Exports to the supply of goods to nuclear power projects 
through competitive bidding also as opposed to ICB provided the goods were 
manufactured in India. Benefits listed under the Foreign Trade Policy 2009-14 to be 
extended under the deemed exports were (a) Advance Authorization, (b) Deemed Export 
Drawback, and (c) Exemption from terminal excise duty.  Further, as per the Ministry of 
Power’s instructions (May 1999) read with DPE guidelines (August 1997), sales tax, local 
levies and octroi shall not be considered for the purpose of evaluation of bids only in 
respect of international competitive bidding. Since the tender was floated for manufacture 
and supply of End Shield assemblies inviting domestic manufacturers to bid, extending 
benefits under the Ministry of Power's Office Memorandum of May 1999 applicable to 
international competitive bidding was not justified. 
(b) Failure to place purchase order within price validity period 
The Company floated (May 2010) a two part public tender for procurement of 2000 
modules of Phosphor Bronze Wire Mesh
♦  for use in KAPP 3 & 4 and RAPP 7 & 8 
                                                           
♦ Phosphor Bronze Wire Mesh is used as internal packing  material for distilla tion columns in nuclear 
power projects. Distillation columns are required for upgradation of isotopic purity of heavy water (used 
in nuclear reactor) from the downgraded heavy water. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
18 
projects. In response to the tender, the Company received bids from five bidders. Based 
on the technical evaluation (July 2010), all the five bidders were found technically 
qualified, but they were capable of meeting only part of the requirement of the above 
projects. Therefore, based on the recommendations of the evaluation committee, all the 
five bidders were technically approved (July 2010) to deliver the quantity as per their 
assessed capacities, as shown below: 
Sl.
No.
Name of the Bidders Price per 
module quoted 
by the bidder 
(`)
Position of 
the bidder 
Number of 
modules
recommended to 
be ordered 
1 M/s Haver Standard India Private. 
Limited (HSIL) 
80,000 L1 1000 
2 M/s Evergreen Technologies 
Private. Limited, Mumbai (ETPL)
1,00,884 L2 500 
3 M/s Paper Machine Wire 
Industries (PAMWI) 
1,02,500 L3 600 
4 M/s Three Gee Engineers Private. 
Limited 
1,33,525 L4 250 
5 M/s Champion Manufacturing 
Company, Hyderabad 
2,10,000 L5 250 
It was further decided that the order would be placed on L1 bidder for their maximum 
proposed quantity followed by L2 and so on till the total requirement was met. During 
price bid evaluation (September 2010), M/s HSIL which had quoted the price of ` 80,000 
per module emerged as L1 bidder. As L1 was eligible for only 1000 modules against the 
total requirement of 2000 modules, the Company asked L2 and L3 bidders to match the 
price of L1. M/s ETPL (L2) expressed their inability to match L1 price but agreed to 
reduce their quoted price of ` 1,00,884 per module to ` 90,796 per module. M/s PAMWI 
(L3) agreed to match L1 price of ` 80,000 per module. A committee meeting was held 
(September 2010) wherein it was recommended to place the purchase orders (PO) for the 
first 1500 modules on M/s HSIL (L1) and M/s PAMWI (L3) at L1 price and to include an 
option in their purchase orders for increasing the PO quantity by the remaining quantity 
(500 modules) after one year on the same unit rate and other commercial terms and 
conditions prevailing in their POs, if their performance was found satisfactory during one 
year. Further, if the above condition was not acceptable to the parties, order would be 
placed on M/s ETPL for the remaining 500 Modules at their negotiated price. 
Accordingly, POs were placed (October 2010) on M/s HSIL (1000 modules) and M/s 
PAMWI (500 modules) at a price of ` 80,000 per module. Subsequent to the placement of 
POs, the Company requested (25 October 2010) the bidders to inform whether they 
agreed for supplying additional quantity of 500 modules after one year at the price of 
` 80,000 per module. The replies from the parties were received by the Company on 8 
November 2010 wherein they had expressed their inability to supply additional quantities 
at the same rate. On 30 November 2010, the Company requested M/s ETPL to extend the 
validity of their offer upto 20 December 2010, though the same had already expired on 29 
November 2010. However, M/s ETPL refused (2 December 2010) to extend the validity 
of their offer. The Company, therefore, issued (January 2011) a single part limited tender 
to the above five bidders and based on the evaluation of bids, placed (May 2011) an order 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
19 
on M/s Three Gee Engineers (L1) for supply of the balance 500 modules at a price of  
` 1,06,525 per module. 
Audit observed that though the Company had received intimations from M/s HSIL and 
M/s PAMWI on 8 November 2010 regarding their inability to supply additional 500 
modules, the Company did not place the PO on M/s ETPL within the price validity period 
viz., upto 29 November 2010 at their negotiated price of ` 90,796 per module. Thus, the 
non-placement of PO within the price validity period at the lower price of ` 90,796 per 
module and subsequent placement at a higher price of ` 1,06,525 per module resulted in 
additional expenditure to the extent of ` 1.49 crore (including taxes, duties and 
transportation). 
 The Management stated (October 2013/January 2015) that the time taken was only for 
correspondence with M/s HSIL and M/s PAMWI to get additional supplies at the same 
price. Upon refusal by both the parties, option to place the order for balance quantity on 
M/s ETPL was exercised and letter dated 30 November 2010 was sent seeking extension 
of the validity of their offers at the negotiated price to which they did not agree. 
The reply was not tenable as M/s HSIL and M/s PAMWI had conveyed their inability to 
supply the additional quantity at the same rate on 8 November 2010. Therefore, 
considering the fact that the offer of M/s ETPL was valid only up to 29 November 2010, 
timely action should have been taken to place the order for the balance 500 modules on 
M/s ETPL instead of placing it at a higher rate on M/s Three Gee Engineers.
(c) Time limit for completion of tendering procedure not laid down 
Audit observed that the Company did not prescribe any time limit for completion of 
tendering procedure and placement of purchase order after receipt of an indent. A review 
of the time taken in finalisation of contracts revealed that the time gap from the date of 
indent to the date of award of contract ranged between 3 months to 20 months due to 
which the completion dates stipulated in the contracts awarded did not conform to the 
desired dates of delivery as given in the indents.
The Management stated (January 2015) that recommendations for time limits of different 
activities involved from receipt of indent to placement of purchase order had been 
submitted to competent authority and were under process for approval. 
(d) High variance between cost estimates and actual value of contracts
As per NPCIL instructions (July 2011) on ‘Delegation of Financial Powers’, while 
working out the estimated cost of an item all prevailing cost elements thereof as well as 
market conditions such as inflation, recession, competition etc. as on the date of indent 
should be taken into consideration so that the estimated cost so worked out is comparable 
with the market price, with the given specification/quality of product.
A review of the 33 contracts selected for audit revealed that there was wide variation in 
estimates made and the final values of the contracts entered into by the Company. The 
variance of actual values as against the estimates ranged from 0.28 per cent to 78 per cent

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
20 
on the lower side and 6 per cent to 71 per cent on the higher side. Thus, the purpose of 
the estimation of costs was not fully achieved.  
The Management stated (November 2013) that estimates were made on the basis of 
engineering judgment, variation in the market, segment bidders, type of industry and 
many other factors. Due to those factors, a variation of 10 per cent to 20 per cent was 
expected with respect to estimated cost.  
However, as the variation in 16 cases was more than 20 per cent, Audit is of the view that 
the cost estimation needs to be more realistic. 
In response, the Management further stated (January 2015) that the concerned sections 
had been advised to take due care while preparing estimates. 
1.3.6.3 Execution of contracts 
(a) Avoidable payment of compensation due to non-release of work front
The Company placed (September 2002) four purchase orders on the erstwhile M/s BSES 
(now M/s Reliance Infrastructure Limited (RIL)) for supply, erection and commissioning 
of electrical system package for KAIGA 3 & 4 and RAPP 5 & 6 as per the following 
details:
Sl.
No.
PO
No
Project Item Value (`) Contractual  date  of 
completion 
1 6043 KAIGA- 3&4 Supply 95,34,48,652 KAIGA-3 - 30.06.2006 
KAIGA-4 - 31.12.2006 2 6044 KAIGA- 3&4 Erection & 
Commissioning 
10,19,13,173 
3 6039 RAPP- 5&6 Supply 86,17,42,223 RAPP-5 - 30.03.2007 
RAPP-6 - 30.09.2007 4 6040 RAPP- 5&6 Erection & 
Commissioning 
9,54,82,289 
The work in respect of all the four projects was delayed as the Company could not release 
the work front to M/s RIL on time. Besides, the delay was also caused by non-availability 
of adequate manpower and other inputs by the Company. As the delay was entirely 
attributable to the Company, the Board of Directors (BOD) decided (March 2009) to 
extend the delivery dates in respect of KAIGA-3 and KAIGA-4 upto 6 May 2007 and 31 
October 2008 respectively without levy of liquidated damages. Further, the BOD also 
approved (March 2009) payment of ` 1.60 crore to M/s RIL as compensation towards 
extended stay at work site for a period of 10 months and bank commission charges and 
insurance premium for the same period. Similarly, the BOD approved (February 2011) 
extension in delivery period for RAPP 5 and RAPP 6 upto 15 January 2009 and 12 October 
2009 without levy of liquidated damages and also approved payment of ` 1.75 crore to M/s 
RIL as compensation for extended stay, bank charges and insurance premium. Thus, due to 
non-release of work front in time and non-supply of adequate manpower and other inputs, 
the Company incurred avoidable expenditure of ` 3.35 crore towards compensation paid to 
M/s RIL. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Management stated (November 2013) that delay 
in release of the work fronts was due to delay in civil works. As the delays were 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
21 
attributable to the Company, the review committee recommended the compensation 
payable to M/s RIL. The Management further stated (January 2015) that the concerned 
sections had been advised to take appropriate action in this regard in future. 
(b) Delay in execution of contracts and consequential effect on completion of 
projects
The detailed project reports (DPRs) approved for RAPP 7 & 8 (December 2008) and 
KAPP 3 & 4 (January 2009) projected the milestones for completion of various stages of 
the projects. As against the milestones projected, the actual/expected time for completion 
of significant stages of the projects was as follows: 
Milestone Completion date as per DPR Actual/ expected date of completion* 
KAPP3 KAPP4# RAPP7 RAPP8^ KAPP3 KAPP4# RAPP7 RAPP8^ 
First pour of 
concrete
December 
2009
June
2010
December 
2010
June
2011
November
2010
March 
2011
July 
2011
September 
2011
Reactor first 
criticality 
December 
2014
June
2015
December 
2015
June
2016
November
2015
March 
2016
July 
2016
September 
2016
Commence
ment of 
commercial 
operation 
June
2015
December 
2015
June
2016
December 
2016
May 
2016
September 
2016
January 
2017
March 
2017
* Date of first pour of concrete is the actual date. Dates for subsequent stages are expected dates worked out on the 
basis of date of first pour of concrete. 
# As per DPR, the activities of KAPP 4 would follow with a phasing of six months from those of KAPP 3. 
^ As per DPR, the activities of RAPP 8 would follow with a phasing of six months from those of RAPP 7. 
A review of 27 ongoing procurement contracts pertaining to the under-construction 
KAPP 3 & 4 and RAPP 7 & 8 projects revealed that in respect of 17 contracts, there was 
a delay ranging from 2 months to 24 months as compared to the contractual dates of 
completion. The delay in execution of the contracts would adversely affect the 
completion of the project with resultant loss of revenue.   
The Management furnished (October 2013) the purchase order-wise reasons for the delay. 
It was observed from the reply that the project schedule of KAPP 3 & 4 would be delayed 
by 18 to 23 months and that of RAPP 7 & 8 by 15 to 20 months on account of delay in 
supply of End shields with reference to the contractual delivery dates (CDD) and the 
Master Control Network (MCN).  It was also observed that in some cases, the 
Management justified the delay by stating that the delays in case of individual POs were 
expected to be lesser than project delay. 
Audit, however, is of the view that as the delays in completion of the contracts would 
result in not only cost overrun but delayed generation of electricity and also loss of 
revenue. Vigorous efforts are required to be made by the Management to analyse the 
reasons for the delays and take remedial action promptly to ensure timely completion of 
the projects. 
In response, the Management stated (January 2015) that the concerned sections had been 
advised to take appropriate action in this matter for future. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
22 
The Department of Atomic Energy endorsed (February 2015) the views of the 
Management. 
Conclusion
The Company did not make proper assessment of available material before floating 
tenders for manufacture of steam generators for KAPP 3&4 projects. As a result, 
material valuing 
`17.51 crore, which could be issued to the suppliers as free issue 
material (FIM), remained unutilised in the inventory with consequential increased 
carrying cost. The Company did not ensure economy in the tendering process as it 
did not take into consideration the impact of local taxes during evaluation of bids 
which resulted in additional expenditure of 
`4.52 crore. Further, non-placement of 
purchase order on a supplier within the validity period of price bid and subsequent 
release of order on a different supplier at a higher price resulted in extra 
expenditure of 
` 1.49 crore. The Company had not prescribed any time frame for 
completion of tendering procedure after receipt of an indent which led to mis-match 
between the desired dates of delivery given in the indents and the completion dates 
stipulated in the contracts. Besides, delays ranging from 2 months to 24 months were 
noticed in the execution of 27 ongoing procurement contracts selected for audit.
Recommendations of Audit and response of the Management 
In view of the aforesaid audit findings, the recommendations made by Audit and the 
response received from the Management are as follows: 
Audit Recommendations Response of the Management 
¾ The Company should make proper 
assessments of materials available in 
the inventory before floating the 
tenders and supply such materials to 
the contractors with due consideration 
to economy. 
¾ The usable materials will be 
considered for issue as fresh issue 
material in future projects with due 
consideration to economy. 
¾ The Company should lay down a 
specific time frame for completion of 
each stage in the tendering process 
after receipt of an indent. 
¾ The recommendations for time limits 
of different activities involved from 
receipt of indent to placement of 
purchase order have been submitted to 
competent authority and are under the 
process of approval. 
¾ The Company should ensure strict 
compliance to the terms and 
conditions of the contracts. 
¾ The concerned sections in NPCIL 
have been advised to take appropriate 
action in this matter in future. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
23 
CHAPTER II: MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
Airports Authority of India 
2.1 Allotment of land for setting up and operations of flying clubs 
2.1.1 Introduction 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) was formed by merger of International Airports 
Authority of India and National Airports Authority and came into existence on 1 April 
1995 with the enactment of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994. Section 11 of the 
Act envisaged that AAI in the discharge of its functions under the Act shall act on 
business principles. Till formation of AAI, Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 
allotted land and hangar spaces to various flying schools/clubs/academies to impart 
training and other aviation related activities. This work was taken over by AAI from 
1995.
Till 2007, AAI did not have a defined policy for levying charges on flying schools/ flying 
clubs. In February 2007, AAI decided to classify flying clubs into two categories which 
are as follows: 
Category I: - Flying clubs/flying training organization registered as educational societies 
and operating on ‘no profit no loss’ basis to be charged nominal rates i.e. @ 10  per cent
of the normal rates. 
Category II: - All other flying clubs/institutions to be charged at normal AAI rates for 
various services.
There were 32 flying clubs/schools situated at various airports, under the control of AAI, 
in India (March 2014). The scope of audit was limited to the review of records at the AAI 
Corporate Office and examination of records at five regional headquarters Chennai 
(Southern), Mumbai (Western), Delhi (Northern), Kolkata (Eastern and North Eastern) 
and Hyderabad for a period of three years ended 31 March 2013; however, the data given 
in the para has been updated upto 31 March 2014.
Audit was carried out with the objective to assess efficiency of AAI in framing and 
reviewing policy for fixation of charges to be levied on flying clubs and its effective 
implementation. 
2.1.2 Audit Findings 
2.1.2.1 Failure to allot land for setting-up of flying clubs:  
Board of Directors (Board) of AAI accorded (21 February 2007) 'in principle' approval 
for allotment of land for setting up of Flying Schools/ Aircraft Maintenance Workshops at 
different airports by calling Expression of Interest (EOI) subject to availability of land. In 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
24 
March 2007, AAI invited ‘Expression of Interest’ for setting up of flying schools/aircraft 
maintenance workshops at 31 airports after confirmation from the Regional Offices 
regarding availability of requisite area of land. A committee was constituted which 
invited tenders in phases for setting up of flying schools. The AAI Board accorded 
(November 2007) its approval to allot minimum one acre and at the most 2.5 acres of land 
subject to availability at each of the airports. Some of the important bidding parameters 
were as follows: 
(i) Not more than one site will be allotted to a successful bidder even if the bidder 
becomes successful at more than one airport. 
(ii) In case either or both of the sites are not available at a particular airport, due to 
any reason whatsoever, the successful bidder shall have no right for any claim. 
(iii) The lease of land shall be for a period of 5 years extendable by another 5 years on 
mutually agreed terms and conditions.  
Audit observed lapses in allotment of land for setting up of flying clubs in the following 
cases:
(a)  Ludhiana Airport:  The successful bidder M/s. Bird Consultancy Services Private 
Limited (BCS) quoted a minimum guaranteed royalty of ` 23.25 crore for five years apart 
from the required license fee. The bidder was offered (November 2007) a choice between 
two sites, measuring 1 acre each. Based on their requirement, M/s BCS requested 
(November 2007) AAI for an allotment of 2.5 acres of land. AAI, therefore, offered 
(December 2007) two sites one of 2.5 acres (approx) and the other of 1 acre, with the 
condition that M/s BCS would relocate the flying club at their own cost if it became 
necessary to do so for the envisaged development of Ludhiana Airport. In response M/s. 
BCS requested (January 2008) AAI to make an alternate arrangement for land allotment. 
AAI, however, without considering the same, allotted (July 2009) land measuring approx. 
2.5 acres to M/s BCS. M/s BCS, however, turned down the conditional offer and final 
award of tender did not take place. As of August, 2014 the envisaged development of 
Ludhiana airport has not materialized. Thus, allotment of land to the successful bidder on 
a condition not acceptable to the bidder resulted in loss of opportunity to AAI to earn 
revenue in the form of minimum guaranteed royalty amounting to ` 23.25 crore apart 
from the license fee. 
(b)  Nadirgul Airport:  Due to delay on the part of AAI to identify suitable land, the 
successful bidder (July 2007) M/s Guru Nanak Educational Trust could be allotted land 
only in July 2009. The party, however, declined to accept the allotment due to undue 
delay. Thus non identification of the site before calling bids and inordinate delay in 
allotment of land to successful bidder resulted in revenue loss of ` 2.44 crore to AAI in 
the form of minimum guaranteed royalty apart from the license fee. 
The Management confirmed the facts (December 2013) relating to non-allotment of land 
at Ludhiana and Nadirgul airports and stated that policy on flying schools was under 
formulation which would take care of all these issues in future. The above said policy is 
yet to be formulated (August 2014).

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
25 
(c)  Behala Airport: Due to delay in identification of the site by AAI, the successful 
bidder M/s Trans Bharat Aviation (P) Limited (TBA) was allotted land in June 2009 i.e. 
after six months from the date of selection (December 2008). The no objection certificate 
(NOC) for construction of hangar was issued by AAI only in July 2010 by which time the 
approval obtained by TBA from DGCA for setting up of flying institute was on the verge 
of expiry (August 2010). As DGCA denied further extension to TBA, the flying institute 
could not be set up. This resulted in revenue loss of ` 4.21 crore to AAI in the form of 
minimum guaranteed royalty quoted by TBA apart from the license fee. 
Though the Management confirmed the facts (November 2013), no comments were 
offered for delay in issuance of NOC. 
(d)  Khajuraho Airport: M/s. Falcon Aviation Academy (FAA) was given formal 
allotment letter in November 2009 i.e. after a lapse of almost one year after the date of 
selection (December 2008). M/s. FAA expressed its inability to complete the formalities 
till 21 January 2010. The AAI, however, decided to forfeit the EMD of the party and to 
call for fresh tenders. So far (March 2014), the land has not been allotted to any flying 
club. Thus, due to an inordinate delay in issuing formal allotment letter, AAI lost an 
opportunity to earn revenue of ` 1.65 crore for five years in the form of minimum 
guaranteed royalty quoted by FAA apart from the license fee. 
The Management confirmed the facts (November 2013); however, no comments were 
offered on delay in identification of the site by AAI. 
It emerges from the above mentioned cases that AAI did not have an efficient system in 
place for identification of sites before inviting bids for setting up flying schools at various 
airports. There were unreasonable delays in allotment of land to successful bidders 
leading to loss of revenue for AAI both in the form of royalty quoted by bidders and the 
license fee which could have been earned from these flying schools.
2.1.2.2  Absence of monitoring credentials of flying clubs 
Pursuant to AAI’s decision of February 2007 regarding charges to be recovered from 
flying clubs, a list of 28 flying clubs falling under category I and 13 under category II was 
circulated to all airports in April 2007. All flying clubs covered under category I were 
required to produce a current valid certificate in support of their credentials for availing 
the benefits of levy of nominal rates, failing which, following course of action was to be 
taken:
• 90 days notice to be issued to such flying clubs to stop operations and surrender 
land and hangar space occupied by them after clearing outstanding dues. 
• License fee be charged from such flying club on normal rates plus 13  per cent of 
the gross turnover (GTO) for all activities carried out by them at the respective 
airport.
• In case of non compliance with the above, occupation of land and hangar space by 
the flying clubs was to be treated as unauthorized and necessary action was to be 
taken for eviction. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
26 
Audit observed that AAI initiated, only in January 2010, the process of verification of the 
credentials for eligibility of category I, though the categorization of the clubs was decided 
in February 2007. Thus, due to delay on the part of AAI in executing its decisions, the 
following four Flying Clubs were able to evade normal rates for AAI services which 
resulted in revenue loss to AAI:
(a)  Delhi Flying Club (DFC):   DFC was established in 1957 at Safdarjung Airport
and placed (February 2007) in category I. Last agreement with DFC was entered in 1982 
for a period of five years, i.e. up to 31 March 1987. Thereafter, the agreement was not 
renewed. DFC was not carrying out any flying training/flying related activity since 
January 2002. Further, in compliance of instructions issued by AAI in January 2010 for 
verification of the credentia ls for eligibility of category I, DFC also failed to furnish any 
credentials in support of their categorization under category I. AAI was also aware that 
since October 2007 DFC was letting out allotted land/buildings for commercial purposes 
such as, operating IGNOU study centre, conducting interviews for air hostesses and 
religious/marriage functions etc.  
Audit scrutiny revealed that no bills were raised by AAI to charge applicable license fee 
plus 13 per cent  of Gross Turn Over (penal rates) and neither any eviction proceedings 
were initiated against DFC which had not paid even its outstanding dues as per category I 
rates and an amount of ` 7.54 crore was recoverable as of March 2014. Had AAI raised 
bills as per normal rates, the outstanding amount would have increased to ` 19.26 crore 
(February 2007 to March 2014). 
(b)   Bombay Flying Club (BFC) : BFC established at Juhu Airport, Mumbai in 1931 
and was placed in category I by AAI. BFC which was a company under the Companies 
Act, 1913 till March 2011, was carrying out commercial activities other than flying 
training and was also   not   operating on ‘no profit no loss’ basis.  In March 2011, BFC 
was   converted   to   a society registered under Societies Act, 1860. However, AAI took 
no action to verify and ensure whether BFC was eligible for privileges under category I 
and whether the Club was operating on ‘no profit no loss’ basis. Moreover, from 2008-09 
onwards BFC had not paid its outstanding dues even as per category I rates and an 
amount of ` 3.60 crore was recoverable as of March 2014. BFC filed Writ Petition No. 
858 of 2012 before High Court, Bombay, against levy of charges by AAI. The Court in its 
interim order directed BFC to pay ` 2.50 lakh per month with effect from 01-4-2012.  
AAI informed (February 2014) Audit that in compliance with court order, BFC paid three 
installments totaling ` 7.50 lakh and thereafter, in compliance with MoCA instructions 
(09 October 2012), AAI decided (November 2012) to keep the order of recovery of 
outstanding dues from Category-I Flying Club in abeyance till further orders. Audit is of 
view that had AAI raised bills as per normal rates, the outstanding amount would have 
increased to ` 36.86 crore (February 2007 to March 2014). 
(c)  Madhya Pradesh flying club (MPFC), Bhopal:  MPFC was established at 
Bhopal Airport in 1986 and was placed in category I by AAI. MPFC utilized the premises 
allotted to them for commercial purposes such as parking/maintenance of aircraft of 
private agencies. Audit observed that AAI neither raised bills at penal rates nor did they 
initiate eviction proceedings against MPFC. Resultantly AAI failed to raise bills 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
27 
amounting to ` 0.81 crore (from 2008-09 to 2013-14) on account of differential between 
normal and nominal rates. 
(d)  Madhya Pradesh flying club (MPFC), Indore: MPFC was established at Indore 
Airport in 1961 and was placed in category I by AAI. Audit observed that the club, which 
was registered as a company under the Companies Act 1913, was carrying out 
commercial activities other than flight training and hence was not eligible to be placed in 
category I. However, neither bills at penal rates were raised by AAI nor eviction 
proceedings initiated against MPFC, Indore. MPFC, Indore had not paid even its 
outstanding dues as per category I rates and an amount of ` 0.80 crore was recoverable 
from it as of March 2014. Had AAI raised the bills as per normal rates outstanding 
amount would have increased to ` 9.10 crore (from 2008-09 to 2013-14). 
2.1.2.3 Non realization of dues. 
(a)  Due to absence of any agreement with flying clubs
AAI issued a circular (May 2007) to all its Airport Directors to review and renew 'land 
license' agreements with flying clubs and clarified that any occupation beyond the valid 
agreement period would amount to unauthorized occupation, which was to be dealt with 
as per penal provisions. It was incumbent upon AAI to enter into fresh agreements with 
the parties occupying land/space at various AAI airports, but no such efforts were made 
by AAI. In the absence of agreements, realization of dues outstanding against such parties 
could not be enforced. Airport Directors/Regional Offices had not taken action to renew 
the land license agreements. Details of outstanding dues from flying clubs at various AAI 
airports, not realized in absence of a legally binding agreement were as follows:
Airport Name of the Party Date of 
Land
Allotment
Last Agreement 
entered 
Amount due 
as on March 
2014 
Safdarjung  Delhi Flying Club April 1957  1982 for 5 years `  7.54 crore
Begumpet  M/s Andhra Pradesh 
Aviation Academy 
August
1969
1982 for 5 years `  2.24 crore
Amritsar  Amritsar Aviation Club 1962  Up to 1994 `  0.37 crore
Jaipur  Rajasthan Flying Club April 1966 1966 `  5.77 crore
Guwahati  Assam Flying Club May 1958 No agreement till 
date
`  1.11 crore
Kanpur  U. P Flying Training 
Instt. (upto April 2012, as 
party surrendered the land 
without clearing dues). 
1952 No records 
available
` 9.57 crore
Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) advised (09 October 2012) AAI to place the issue of 
recovery of dues from category-I flying clubs before AAI Board and keep the order of 
recovery of charges in terms of AAI Board resolution of 2007 in abeyance, till 
finalization of the policy of the Ministry regarding prescribing the eligibility criteria for 
flying clubs for availing facility of nominal rates for various charges payable to AAI. 
Accordingly, AAI instructed (November 2012) all airports to keep recoveries from 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
28 
category I flying clubs in abeyance till further orders. Audit scrutiny revealed that as of 
August 2014, the said policy has not been finalized by MoCA.
Audit also observed that due to lapses on the part of AAI in renewal of land license 
agreements, some flying clubs were in occupation of land in excess of allotment as 
follows:  
(b)  Salem Airport 
(i) M/s International Aviation Academy Private Limited (IAAP) was allotted land in July 
2009 at Salem airport and paid the license fee for the first and second year and royalty for 
the first year in advance. However, due to delay in commencement of operations in view 
of pending approval from DGCA, it could not clear its dues thereafter. IAAP also did not 
honour the interim orders (December 2011) of Madras High Court to deposit an amount 
of ` 50 lakh within a period of six weeks. IAAP started flying activities from 2012. Audit 
observed that neither was IAAP evicted nor the dues realized and an amount of ` 11.71
crore was outstanding (March 2014) against the club. 
(ii) M/s. Kohinoor Educational Services Private Limited (KESP) was allotted land at 
Salem airport in March 2009 and started flying activities from June 2010. KESP, did not 
meet its contractual obligations in terms of payments. However, no action to realize dues 
from KESP was taken nor any eviction orders issued by AAI. An amount of ` 11.76 crore 
was outstanding (March 2014) against KESP. 
The Management while confirming the above facts (November 2013 & March 2014) 
stated that eviction proceedings had been started against both clubs.
The fact, however, remains that both clubs continue to occupy AAI land without clearing 
their dues. 
(c)  Kolkata Airport 
M/s Multiple Manpower Development Private Limited (MMDPL), Kolkata was allotted 
hangar space (510.20 sqm.), built up space (42.73 sqm) and paved land (2700 sqm) for a 
period of one year from 5 December 2006 for flying training activities at Behala civil 
aerodrome. The above contract was extended up to 31 December 2008 on the same terms 
and conditions, except royalty, which was enhanced from 12 to 13  per cent  of the total 
revenue proceeds.  
Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) was called for by AAI (November 2008) for establishing 
flying schools on AAI airports. As per the NIT, “those private flying clubs on AAI land 
whose license had expired and those whose license is still valid may be allowed to take 
part in the tender and in the event of their not being successful in the tender they would 
Airport Name of the Party Area (in sq. mtrs.)
Allotted Actually occupied Unauthorized 
occupation
Safdarjung  Delhi Flying Club 3124 6168.33 3044.33 
Begumpet  M/s Andhra Pradesh 
Aviation Academy 
454.42 5593.32 5138.90 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
29 
have to vacate the existing premises and hand over the same to AAI”. MMDPL did not 
participate in the bid but requested (June 2009) that their contract may be extended for a 
period of 5 years. MMDPL also agreed to pay royalty equivalent to that quoted by the 
successful bidder and license fee for the space under their occupation. Accordingly, AAI 
allotted (January 2009) the area to MMDPL for a period of five years. MMDPL, 
however, disputed the calculation of license fee at a higher rate and refused to enter into 
an agreement and continued to occupy the space unauthorisedly without making any 
payment.     
AAI initiated (February 2011) eviction proceedings and passed an eviction order (July 
2011) directing MMDPL to pay arrears for the period December 2006 to December 2010 
amounting to ` 2.46 crore. Thereafter, MMDPL approached the Airport Appellate 
Tribunal which dismissed the appeal (February 2013). MMDPL finally approached (July 
2013) AAI for execution of fresh agreement and waiver of arrears of license fee and 
royalty from 01.01.2009. Later on, AAI initiated legal action against MMDPL in June 
2014. An amount of ` 8.43 crore was outstanding (May 2014) against MMDPL.
(d)  Safdarjung Airport, New Delhi
DGCA had allotted land measuring 825.25 sqm to M/s Delhi Gliding Club at Safdarjung 
Airport, New Delhi. However, records relating to allotment were not available with AAI 
and no agreement in this regards was found on record. Flying activities were closed at 
Safdarjung airport since January 2002.
Audit observed that though Delhi Gliding Club had closed glider flying activities more 
than 11 years ago, AAI did not take action to realize outstanding dues amounting to  
` 2.48 crore (March 2014) or to get the premises vacated by the club.  
2.1.2.4   Aero Club of India
Aero Club of India (ACI), an apex body of over 22 flying/ gliding clubs and other aero 
sports organizations was allotted (1984) land measuring 1617.10 sqm at Safdarjung 
Airport for a period of 30 years with effect from 19 September 1983  at a nominal license 
fee of ` 1/- per annum. As per terms of agreement (December 1984) the land license fee 
was subject to revision. Though AAI raised the bills at revised rates (2007) 
retrospectively from 1986 onwards, it could not realize dues and ` 2.77 crore were 
outstanding against ACI as on 31 March 2014. However, AAI did not take action either to 
realize dues or to evict ACI from the premises.  
As lease of ACI expired on 18 September 2013, ACI requested (July 2013) MoCA to 
extend the lease for another 99 years on the existing terms and conditions. Though such 
extension  was not in line with the policy of AAI, MoCA proposed to approve extension 
of lease period by another 30 years from 19 September 2013 at a license fee of ` 1/- per 
annum and forwarded the case to AAI. Board of AAI in 157
th meeting (December 2013) 
accorded approval to the proposal of MoCA, considering it as a special case and 
forwarded (February 2014 the case to MoCA for obtaining approval of the competent 
authority. ACI was still in unauthorized occupation of the space without clearing the dues 
(August 2014).

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
30 
Conclusion
There was inordinate delay in formulation of a policy regarding levy of airport 
charges and allotment of land to flying clubs and the attempt of framing policy in 
2007, did not bear any result even till August 2014. In the absence of timely action 
and mechanism to verify the eligibility under Category I or II, flying clubs which 
were involved in other commercial activities and also otherwise not entitled to avail 
the benefits of concessional rates continued to enjoy the same. Further, in absence of 
any agreement with the parties, most of the flying clubs raised disputes regarding 
rates and did not clear their dues. Moreover, AAI suffered losses due to delay in 
identification of sites and issuance of required clearances. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in January 2014; their reply was awaited (March 
2015).
2.2 Disregard of provisions of Shareholders Agreement by MoCA and AAI resulted 
in additional burden on the travelling public in the form of Development Fee in 
IGI Airport, Delhi 
MoCA and AAI failed to bring to the notice of AERA the provisions of Shareholders 
Agreement which mandated affirmative vote of AAI till such time AAI held 10 per
cent equity shares in DIAL, in respect of special resolution under the Companies 
Act, 1956 and Reserved Board Matters. This led to levy of Development Fee by 
DIAL, resulting in additional burden on the travelling public of ` 3415.35 crore.
The Government of India (GoI), in its Order dated 9 February 2009, granted approval to 
Delhi International Airport Private Limited (DIAL)♥  for levy of Development Fee (DF) at 
the rate of ` 200 per embarking domestic passenger and ` 1300 per embarking 
international passenger, inclusive of all applicable taxes under section 22 A of the AAI 
Act, 1994, purely on an ad-hoc basis, for a period of 36 months with effect from 1 March 
2009. One of the conditions of approval was that the final determination of the levy be 
made by GoI/Regulator after adequate consultation with users. 
The Regulator (Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India–AERA) after taking 
into consideration the revised final project cost informed by DIAL as ` 12,857 crore (as 
against ` 8,975 crore projected to the Ministry in October 2009), sought responses from 
stakeholders in its Consultation Paper of 21 April 2011. Airports Authority of India (AAI) 
in their submission dated 12 May 2011 before AERA stated that it was not in a position to 
make any further contribution towards equity. Further, DIAL too represented to AERA 
that as AAI have expressed inability to contribute further equity, it will not be possible to 
raise further equity without diluting the equity of AAI /breach of the trigger Debt-Equity 
Ratio.
Considering the above, the AERA permitted (14 November 2011) DIAL to levy DF at the 
rate of ` 200 per embarking domestic passenger and ` 1300 per embarking international 
                                                           
♥  A Joint Venture Company (JVC) incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956.  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
31 
passenger (exclusive of statutory levies, if any) to bridge the funding gap. The levy 
commenced with effect from 1 December 2011.  
While determining the levy of DF, AERA observed “Clause 3.3.1 read with clause 3.3.3.3 
of the Shareholders Agreement (SHA) would seem to indicate that the private participants 
are obliged to acquire the equity shares, offered to AAI at the time of further 
capitalization and which it does not subscribe”. AERA also stated, “however, irrespective 
of the position whether other promoters can bring in further equity or not, in case they are 
presumed to be able to bring such equity, the same will lead to reduction in equity stake 
of AAI below the current 26 per cent  level. Keeping in view of the provisions of the 
Companies Act, it will fundamentally alter the special position of AAI in the JVC, i.e. 
DIAL. The Authority feels that such fundamental alteration, at least at this stage, does not 
appear to be in public interest in as much as AAI is lessor of the airport and ought to have 
a special position in DIAL”.
Audit observed that AAI/MoCA
∗ did not bring to the notice of AERA, clause 6.1.1 as 
also clause 5.11.1, 5.12.1 and 5.13.2 of the SHA, emphasising the rights of AAI with 
respect to Reserved Board Matters and Reserved Shareholders Matters even when it holds 
at least 10 per cent  of the equity capital of DIAL, thereby affirming AAI’s rights in 
respect of special resolution under the Companies Act, 1956 and Reserved Board Matters.
Clause 5.13.2 and clause 6.1.1 of the SHA are reproduced below: 
Clause 5.13.2: A resolution of the Board of Directors shall be adopted by the affirmative 
vote of the simple majority of the Directors present at a meeting at which a quorum of the 
Board of Directors is present. Provided, however, that as long as AAI along with the AAI 
Nominees, in the aggregate, holds not less than ten (10) per cent of equity share of the 
JVC, any decision in relation to the Reserved Board Matters shall be considered as passed 
by a majority vote necessarily requiring the affirmative vote of the Directors nominated 
by AAI.
Clause 6.1.1: till such time as AAI along with AAI Nominees, in the aggregate hold at 
least ten (10) per cent Equity Shares in the JVC, the JVC (or any of its Directors, officers, 
agents or representatives) shall not give effect to any decision or resolution in respect of 
the Reserved Shareholders Matters, unless the same is approved by the affirmative vote of 
AAI.
The SHA defines ‘Reserved Shareholders Matters’ as “any shareholder resolution 
requiring the consent of not less than three-fourths (75 per cent ) of the shareholders 
voting (special resolution) under the provisions of the Companies Act”. Therefore, it is 
seen that the SHA specifically protects the special position of AAI in the JVC till such 
point as AAI holds at least 10 per cent of the equity shares of DIAL and as such the rights 
of AAI would not be affected to any extent as per the provisions of the Companies Act 
even in case its equity was brought below 26 per cent. Similarly, clause 5.11.1, 5.12.1 and 
5.13.2 further strengthen the position of AAI in the JVC by way of making it necessary 
for AAI nominee to be present to constitute quorum for Board meetings, bestowing upon 
AAI the right to nominate a member on any committee/sub-committee constituted by the 
                                                           
∗ Ministry of Civil Aviation 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
32 
Board and making it mandatory for any decision in re lation to ‘Reserved Board Matters’ 
to require the affirmative vote of AAI nominee Directors on the Board till such time as 
AAI holds 10 per cent of the equity in the JVC. 
As the equity contribution of AAI in DIAL was ` 637 crore, by pegging AAI share 
holding at 10 per cent the other shareholders of DIAL could have contributed capital to 
the extent of ` 5733 crore (90 per cent of total paid up capital of ` 6370 crore) without 
affecting any of the rights of AAI either under the provisions of Companies Act 1956 or 
under the SHA. As the other shareholders of DIAL had contributed only ` 1813 crore 
towards the share capital of DIAL, the said shareholders could have brought in additional 
capital of ` 3920 crore to maintain the required debt-equity ratio and bridge the funding 
gap, thereby obviating the need to levy DF on the travelling public. 
The Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) is responsible for formulation of national policies 
and programmes for the development and regulation of the Civil Aviation sector in the 
country and it exercises administrative control over affiliated Public Sector Undertakings 
such as the Airports Authority of India. As per MoCA, its Vision is to “enable the people 
to have access to safe, secure, sustainable and affordable air connectivity services with 
World-Class Civil Aviation Infrastructure”. As such, MoCA/AAI are responsible for 
protecting the interest of the public at large and in this capacity, it was incumbent upon 
them to bring to the notice of AERA, the relevant provisions of SHA which would have 
provided for infusion of equity by the shareholders other than AAI to bridge the funding 
gap.
This failure on the part of MoCA/AAI led to levy of Development Fee amounting to  
` 3415.35 crore out of which ` 2841 crore has been collected upto March 2014 and the 
balance amount will be collected upto April 2016. 
MoCA replied (May 2014) as under: 
(a) AAI required funds for execution of projects at Chennai and Kolkata airports and 
upgradation of various facilities at select airports, as such it informed AERA 
about its inability to make any further contribution towards equity. AAI also 
indicated that the JVC i.e. DIAL could still maintain the trigger debt-equity ratio 
in terms of clause 3.3.1 of the Shareholders Agreement by way of infusion of 
funds in such form and quantity by the private participants without diluting equity 
shareholding.
(b) AERA, while determining DF had considered all other means of bridging the 
funding gap for the Delhi airport project and had felt that it was not in public 
interest that the lessor of the Delhi airport, i.e. AAI, should have its shareholding 
reduced below 26 per cent. It was also felt by AERA that being a public sector 
undertaking, AAI would ensure greater support passenger interest. Hence, in order 
to have a balance between passengers interest safeguarding, the AERA had 
determined the amount of DF in respect of DIAL, keeping the AAI’s equity share 
at 26 per cent.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
33 
(c) While determining DF, AERA had a reference to OMDA as well as the 
Shareholders Agreement in respect of DIAL. The Reserved Shareholders Matters 
mentioned in clause 6.1.1 of SHA and detailed under Schedule-4, did not cover 
many matters of operational as well financial nature and significance. 
(d) Prior to issue of order in the matter of review of levy of DF at Delhi airport, 
AERA had enquired from the private participants as well as AAI regarding the 
amount of equity/any other means of finance that they plan to employ for bridging 
the funding gap. At that stage the DIAL expressed its inability to infuse any 
further equity. AAI indicated that it was in a position to infuse ` 93 crore in the 
JVC. Infusion of additional equity by a shareholder can be done upon a cash call 
by the Company. However, DIAL has not made any cash call till date (May 
2014).
(e) While determining aeronautical tariffs in respect of Delhi airport, the amount of 
DF gets reduced from the Regulatory Asset Base (RAB
♦ ). Thus the asset value on 
which DIAL is entitled for a fair rate of return stands diminished by the amount of 
DF. AERA has not allowed any depreciation on such DF funded assets. Hence, to 
that extent, burden on the travelling public through aeronautical tariffs, has been 
reduced permanently for all times to come through reduction of RAB on account 
of DF. 
(f) If AERA had not determined any DF and in case DIAL was also unable to infuse 
any additional equity, then there would have remained a funding gap for the 
project which would have impacted the timely investment in improvement of 
infrastructure/facilities in respect of Delhi airport and would also have resulted in 
the airport becoming economically unviable.  
Reply of the Ministry is not acceptable in view of the following: 
(a) Proposal of AAI was contradictory as infusion of debt would have affected the 
debt-equity ratio while infusion of equity would have diluted the equity 
shareholding. As such the proposal of AAI was practicably not feasible. 
(b) Reply confirms that Ministry/AAI did not take cognizance of clause 6.1.1 of SHA 
which stipulates that AAI’s affirmative vote is the deciding factor for all 
‘Reserved Shareholders Matters’ irrespective of the quorum present and voting. 
Thus as per clause 6.1.1 till AAI holds 10 per cent of the equity in the JVC no 
decision or resolution on ‘Reserved Shareholders Matters’ can be given effect to 
unless it is approved by the affirmative vote of AAI. Effectively, this ensures all 
the rights and privileges of a shareholder holding 26 per cent  or more equity. 
AAI/Ministry failed to bring up before the AERA the special protection given to 
AAI by clause 6.1.1of SHA. 
                                                           
♦  Regulatory Asset Base (RAB) refers to  aeronautical assets and any investments made for the 
performance of Reserved Activities, owned by J VC but does not includ e CWIP, working capital, 
penalties, Liquidated Damages. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
34 
Further, as per Clause 3.3.3.1 of SHA, AAI shall have option to subscribe for any 
subsequent capitalisation of JVC or otherwise. Clause 3.3.3.3 of SHA binds/ 
obliges the private participants to acquire /subscribe for the shares not opted by 
AAI. Thus decision of AAI /MoCA not allowing dilution of equity below 26 per
cent gave opportunity to the private participant to escape their 
obligation/responsibility under the SHA to raise additional equity/debt for the 
project.
(c) The Ministry’s reply while making mention of ‘many matters of operational as 
well financial nature’ does not spell out such matters in specific terms. However, 
matters requiring Special Resolution as per Companies Act 1956 are exhaustive 
and cover all aspects of operational and financial nature. Therefore, Schedule 3 
and 4 of SHA indicating Reserved Board Matters and Reserved Shareholders 
Matters (both require Special Resolution), respectively, and matters requiring 
Special Resolution as per Companies Act 1956 provide complete protection to 
AAI in financial, operational as also all im portant matters relating to the JVC. 
Hence reply is not acceptable. 
(d) DIAL’s expressing inability to infuse any further equity indicated its intention of 
running the airport with minimal ownership funds. However, no action has been 
taken by MoCA/AAI on DIAL for non compliance to clause 3.3.1 and 3.3.2 of 
SHA. 
(e) MoCA did not provide any details or calculations to support their contention that 
burden on the travelling public through aeronautical tariffs, has been reduced 
permanently for all times to come through reduction of RAB on account of DF. 
The AERA, in their tariff order No. 3/2012-13 dated 24-4-2012 has worked out 
Net Target Aero Revenue of ` 7660.90 crore for Ist control period of five years 
(2010 to 2014) considering the element of DF reduced from the RAB. Audit 
worked out the Net Target Aero Revenue of ` 8638.06 crore approx. by using the 
same data as used by AERA but without considering the element of DF. It may be 
seen that if no DF would have been levied, the additional burden (during Ist 
control period) on the travelling public through aeronautical tariff would have 
been an increase of ` 977.16 crore approx. ( ` 8638.06 crore minus ` 7660.90 
crore) i.e. ` 195.43 crore approx. per year. With passenger traffic at about 35 
million during 2011-12, per passenger increase in aeronautical charges would be 
around ` 55 approx. only as against the DF of ` 100/ ` 600 being levied 
presently
♦ . With the increase in traffic in the coming years the burden on this 
account would have been negligible (projected traffic at 37 million for 2013-14).  
The reply of the Ministry is at variance with its Press Note dated 16 October 2012, 
which stated that if funding gap was met in terms of equity infusion and 
proportionate raising of loans by the airport promoter including AAI, the Airport 
Development Fee could stand abolished.  
                                                           
♦ AERA revised with effect from 01.01.2013 the rate of Development Fee in respectof IGI Airport, New 
Delhi as ` 100/- per embarking domestic passenger and ` 600/- per embarking international passenger 
vide Order No. 30/2012-13 dated 28.12.2012 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
35 
(f) The fact that the special position of AAI in the JVC would remain unchanged 
even if its equity was diluted to 10 per cent was never brought to the notice of 
AERA by MoCA/ AAI.
2.3 Loss due to failure in taking timely action as per approved credit policy 
AAI did not take action as per credit policy and allowed M/s Kingfisher Airlines 
Limited to continue its operations on credit basis even after withdrawal of the credit 
facility. AAI also did not act timely on the advice of MoCA to take all legal means 
beside encashing bank guarantee of the airline. This resulted in loss of revenue of 
` 172.69 crore apart from loss of interest of ` 117.03 crore (up to February 2014).
Airports Authority of India (AAI) provides aeronautical 1 and non-aeronautical 2 services 
at various civil airports in the country for which it charges fees and rent from an airline 
availing such services. As per credit policy of AAI, approved in 2007, bills are raised on 
fortnightly basis, and a credit period of 15 days, from the date of receipt of bills, is 
allowed to an airline subject to a security deposit equivalent to two months' billing of the 
airline. The credit policy further stipulated levy of interest at the rate of 12 per cent per
annum on delayed payments. 
M/s Kingfisher Airlines Limited (KFA) informed (13 April 2005) AAI, that they were 
scheduled to commence operations from 9 May 2005 and requested for grant of credit 
facilities for Route Navigation Facility Charges (RNFC), Terminal Navigation Landing 
Charges (TNLC), Landing and Parking Charges, Passenger Service Fees and other 
charges levied by AAI from time to time. AAI conveyed (28 April 2005) approval of 
credit facility to KFA subject to submission of a bank guarantee of ` five crore from a 
scheduled bank, in favour of AAI, towards security deposit. KFA deposited on 5 May 
2005, the requisite bank guarantee and commenced its operations with effect from 9 May 
2005.
KFA was persistently defaulting in making payments to AAI. Dues from the airline 
accumulated to ` 4.81 crore (against security deposit of ` 5 crore) up to 31 December 
2005. The position of outstanding dues worsened after KFA took over, in June 2007, 
another airline, viz. Deccan Aviation. AAI took up the issue of pending recovery with 
KFA from time to time but the position did not improve. AAI informed (02 August 2007) 
MoCA that against guarantees of ` 25.70 crore available with them, outstanding dues 
against KFA had reached ` 36 crore. Ministry in response (5 September 2007) advised 
AAI to resort to all legal means beside encashing the bank guarantee (BG) of KFA. 
MoCA gave identical directions in August 2008 and October 2008, but AAI continued the 
credit facility to KFA till 31 May 2011, when the bank guarantee of ` 100 crore was 
encashed and AAI put operations of KFA on Cash & Carry basis with effect from 1 June 
2011. Even after adjusting the proceeds of the BG, an amount of ` 217.31 crore remained 
outstanding as on 31 May 2011. In the meantime, the outstanding dues against KFA 
remained always in excess of the amount of security deposit held by AAI.
                                                           
1 Aeronautical services means the facilities and services necessary for safe and efficient operations of the 
airport, movement and parking of aircrafts etc. 
2 Non-aeronautical services are related to passenger services at an airport. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
36 
Inspite of repeated commitments, KFA failed to clear the outstanding dues. AAI filed a 
suit against KFA in April 2012, at 63 rd Court, Andheri, Mumbai, under Negotiable 
Instruments Act, 1881, for bouncing of cheques amounting to ` 136.22 crore. Director 
General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) initially suspended (October 2012) the license for 
operations of KFA and thereafter, cancelled the same in December 2012. Considering that 
the probability of recovery of dues was very low because of (i) stopping of commercial 
operations by KFA due to withdrawal of its flying permit/license by DGCA and (ii) in 
case of winding up of KFA, priority for payment would be last since AAI's debts were 
unsecured; AAI had written off, during year 2013-14, dues of KFA amounting to `
172.69 crore. AAI had also filed (March 2014) a civil recovery suit before the High Court 
of Bombay for an amount of ` 294.57 crore (including interest up to 28 February 2014). 
Audit examination revealed that:  
(a) AAI failed to take timely action against KFA for not adhering to the credit policy. 
KFA continuously defaulted in making timely payments and the amount of 
outstanding dues was more than the available security deposit during majority of 
the period of operations of KFA. AAI, however, encashed (May 2011) the 
available BG and put (with effect from 1 June 2011) KFA’s operations on cash 
and carry basis, only after more than 5 years of default. Even after withdrawal of 
credit facility with effect from 1 June 2011, KFA was allowed to operate on credit 
basis leading to accumulation of huge outstanding dues against KFA.  
(b) MoCA failed to enforce execution of its own directions by AAI. Chairman, AAI 
had turned down the request made by CEO, KFA, in a meeting held on 18 
November 2008, for allowing a considerable time for settlement of overdues, on 
the ground that all other private airlines were settling their dues, and special 
treatment only for Kingfisher Airlines was not possible. Scrutiny of minutes of 
146
th meeting of Board of Directors (which included representative/s from 
MoCA) held on 15 December 2011, however, revealed that: 
(i) Contrary to the aforesaid stand taken by Chairman, AAI, MoCA/AAI, 
accepted the commitments made by CEO, KFA, for payment of overdues 
and allowed, as a very special case, KFA to continue the operations of the 
airline. Subsequently, the KFA failed to fulfill their commitments. 
(ii) On the proposal to file a suit in the Court of Law for recovery of dues and 
for attachment of aircrafts of KFA for recovery of outstanding dues, no 
specific directions were given by the Board of AAI. 
Thus, despite being aware that KFA was a willful defaulter, MoCA and AAI, both 
allowed the operations of the airlines to continue even beyond withdrawal of credit 
facility and did not take timely action to recover the mounting dues.  
AAI replied (October 2014) that they had exercised all measures and controls along with 
invoking all legal aspects to realise the dues. It further stated, that MoCA was also 
informed of the process of liquidation of outstanding dues from time to time and various 
measures as suggested were also taken to realise the dues. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
37 
Reply does not absolve AAI of its failure in taking action as per provisions of credit 
policy and allowing KFA to continue its operations even after withdrawal of the credit 
facility. AAI also did not take timely action as advised by MoCA. This amounted to 
extending undue favour to KFA which resulted in loss of revenue of ` 172.69 crore apart 
from loss of interest of ` 117.03 crore (up to February 2014). Further, MoCA also failed 
to enforce its directives and diluted its stand by allowing KFA to continue operations. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 
2.4 Non-recovery of cost of manpower and absence of provision to safeguard AAI's 
interests 
As per JV agreement signed with Maharashtra Airport Development Company 
Limited (MADC), AAI deployed its manpower at Multi Modal International 
Passenger and Cargo Hub Airport at Nagpur (MIHAN) for Operation Support 
Period (OSP) of five years from 2009-10 to 2013-14 against payment of manpower 
cost by MIHAN India Limited (MIL). Against manpower cost of ` 64.99 crore 
incurred by AAI, MIL has paid an amount of ` 9.09 crore so far (January 2015). 
AAI also did not include any clause in the JV agreement to mitigate the financial 
risk in the event of non-absorption of AAI employees by the JV partner.
Airports Authority of India (AAI) signed (18 December 2006) a Memorandum of 
Understanding with Maharashtra Airport Development Company (MADC) to establish a 
Joint Venture Company (JVC), MIHAN India Limited (MIL ♠ ) for development and 
operation of Nagpur International Airport for a period of 30 years. The MoU inter alia 
contained a provision that "the terms and conditions of the AAI staff working with the 
JVC shall be same as is being done in the case of Mumbai and Delhi Airports. The 
arrangement will be for five years and at the end of this period, the JVC shall absorb 100 
per cent  of the staff ". The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was ratified by the 
Board of Directors of AAI and subsequently, Ministry of Civil Aviation  ( MoCA) 
approved transfer of Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar International Airport, Nagpur to the JVC.
As per Clause 15.2 of the Joint Venture Agreement "as on date of transfer of Nagpur 
Airport to the JVC, all employees working at Nagpur airport (except the CNS/ATM 
personnel and related support staff) would be placed at the disposal of the JVC for a 
period of five years on the same terms & conditions of employment with AAI. At the end 
of the five years' period, all such employees shall be absorbed by the JVC on such terms 
& conditions which shall not be inferior to their existing terms & conditions which they 
are already enjoying as employees of AAI”. After expiry of initial period of five years on 
6 August 2014, the period was further extended up to 30 November 2014 and thereafter 
up to 31 March 2015.
Audit observed that:
(i) With airport operations being handed over to a JV, AAI employees became 
surplus. With a view to mitigate such situation, AAI had inserted a provision in 
                                                           
♠  Multi Modal International Passenger and Cargo Hub Airport at Nagpur managed by MIHAN India 
Limited wherein AAI and MADC were having 49 per cent and 51 per cent equity, respectively. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
38 
the OMDA whereby DIAL/MIAL had committed to pay retirement compensation 
in case AAI employees were not absorbed by the new operators. It was noticed 
that no such obligation was placed on MIL in the absence of which AAI would be 
burdened with the liability of employees who do not get absorbed under MIL.
(ii) As on the date of transfer of Airport to MIL, 155 employees were at disposal of 
MIL. These employees are working presently with MIL but till date (March 2015) 
MIL has not finalized its HR Policy and Rules and Regulations for inviting offer 
of absorption. In absence of an offer from MIL, AAI was not in a position to 
obtain willingness of its employees to get absorbed in MIL.   
(iii) AAI has incurred an expenditure of ` 64.99 crore towards staff cost for the 
employees who are with MIL, for the period from August 2009 to January 2015. 
An amount of ` 55.90 crore (January 2015) is still outstanding against MIL on 
this account.
AAI stated (April 2014) that the outstanding dues were being consistently pursued with 
MIL.  It further stated (March 2015) that MIL was finalising its HR policy which would 
be available soon and further action in the matter would be taken only on receipt of 
proposal from MIL.
The reply has to be viewed in the context of a meagre reimbursement of staff cost of 
` 9.09 crore (March 2015) by MIL. AAI is silent on the issue as to how it proposes to 
deal with the financial liability of employees in the event of their non-absorption in MIL.
The matter was reported to the Ministry in November 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 
Air India Charters Limited 
2.5 Unfruitful expenditure due to imprudent acquisition of aircraft on dry lease  
Air India Charters Limited renewed dry lease 1 of four aircraft disregarding the 
rationale for acquisition of 18 new aircraft, shortage of crew and loss making routes 
which led to unfruitful expenditure of ` 405.83 crore between March 2011 to May 
2014 towards lease related charges. 
Air India Charters Limited (Company) launched low cost operations in April 2005 with a 
fleet of three aircraft obtained (April 2005) on dry lease for a period of five years expiring 
by April - July 2010. Subsequently, the Company acquired 18 aircraft (new aircraft) 
between December 2006 and December 2009 on finance lease
2 backed by a guarantee by 
the Government of India (GOI). During the same period (2006-07 to 2009-10), AICL also 
                                                           
1 Dry lease: A dry lease is a cancellable lease at the discretion of lessor; the lessee being allowed to use 
the asset during the lease period by paying lease rental and maintenance reserve as per the lease 
agreement.  The asset in case of dry lease should be returned to the lessor in the agreed working 
condition. 
2 Finance lease: Finance lease is essentially a financial loan to own the assets and lessee has the right to 
utilize the asset throughout its useful life while the lessor reta ins only legal rights over it during the 
lease period. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
39 
acquired four more aircraft on dry lease expiring by March – May 2011.  As on March 
2010, the Company, thus, had a fleet of 25 aircraft. 
The Company returned the three aircraft taken on dry lease in April 2005 on expiry of 
their lease term in April-July 2010. Besides, an aircraft of the Company was lost in an 
accident in May 2010. Thus, by August 2010, the Company had a fleet of 21 aircraft. The 
dry lease of another four aircraft was also due for expiry in March – May 2011. While 
deliberating the proposal for renewal of lease these four aircraft, the Board of Directors of 
Company (Board) felt (October 2010) that returning the aircraft might be a better option 
in view of aircraft utilisation of 10 hours per day against 12 to 14 hours per day expected 
from the brand new fleet, cancellation of flights due to non-availability of crew, loss 
making routes and idling of 4 out of 21 aircraft for maintenance/stand by. Hence, the 
Company felt that returning the dry leased aircraft would enable better utilisation of 
remaining flights and savings on cost.   
However, the Company approved (January 2011) renewal of dry lease of the four aircraft 
on the ground of (i) critical reviews from the local press on withdrawal of flights from 
Kerala, (ii) demand from elected representatives from Kerala, (iii) upward trend in airline 
industry and (iv) proposed aircraft utilization of 10.9 hours/day and 11.2 hours/day in 
Winter 2011 and Summer 2012 respectively along with operating surplus.  Accordingly, 
dry lease of the four aircraft was continued for three more years up to March/May 2014.  
Subsequently, the lease was not renewed and presently (January 2015) AICL has a fleet 
of 17 aircraft. 
With regard to dry lease of four aircraft in 2006-10 and their continuation for additional 
three years during 2011-14, Audit observed the following: 
• Acquisition of 18 aircraft was approved (June 2004) by the Company and the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation (December 2005) to replace the aircraft taken on dry 
lease. In fact, the Company/Ministry had decided that in case Boeing was able to 
commence deliveries of aircraft earlier than winter 2006/07, the number of aircraft 
to be taken on dry lease would be reduced accordingly. Hence, dry lease of four 
aircraft should have been terminated in tandem with receipt of aircraft on finance 
lease and certainly on expiry of the lease period in March - May 2011.  This was 
also supported by the minutes of Board, which recognised (October 2010) the 
economy of issues against renewal of dry lease and proposed for return.
• The project report for acquisition of 18 aircraft had been approved (June 
2004/December 2005) with a condition to achieve increased aircraft utilisation of 
12.7 hours per aircraft per day. This utilisation level was not achieved by the 
Company. After approval to the renewal of dry lease for four aircraft in January 
2011, significantly lower flight utilization of 10.5 to 11.0 hour per day was 
targeted by the Company in March 2011. The average daily utilization of flight 
hours/ block time {(ADU (FH)
1 and ADU (BT)} 2 was around 8.53 hours/ 9.85 
hours during 2009-10. This reduced to 8.03 hours/ 9.25 hours in 2010-11 and 
further reduced to 7.73 hours/8.75 hours by 2013-14. Thus, even the reduced 
                                                           
1 ADU(FH): Average Daily Utilisation (Flight Hours) 
2 ADU(BT): Average Daily Utilisation (Block Time) 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
40 
targets for aircraft utilisation as envisaged by the Company in March 2011 were 
not achieved. In fact, the utilisation levels fell consistently bringing to question the 
rationale for continuance of dry lease of the four aircraft after the expiry of their 
lease period in March 2011 even as the low level of aircraft utilisation added to 
the losses of the Company. 
Thus, renewal of dry lease of four aircraft till May 2014 without factoring in shortage of 
crew, loss making routes and pay-load restrictions was against the rationale of acquisition 
of 18 new aircraft and led to unfruitful expenditure of USD 76.39 million
1 ( ` 405.83
crore) between March 2011 and May 2014 towards lease rentals, contribution to 
maintenance reserves and re-delivery charges. 
The Company, in reply, attributed (October 2014) the under utilisation of aircraft to non-
availability of pilots due to (i) resignation of expatriate pilots during 2011-12;  
(ii) implementation of Civil Aviation Requirement (CAR) on Flight and Duty Time 
Limitations for crew effective from February 2012; (iii) pilot 'strike' during May 2012; 
and (iv) difficulty in recruiting fresh pilots due to unattractive salary and base of 
operation being non-metro stations. 
The reply is not tenable in view of the following: 
• The Board felt (October 2010) that in order to achieve better utilisation, returning 
the aircraft might be a better option in the prevalent situation such as shortage of 
crew, loss making routes, payload restrictions etc. The Company was well aware 
of the crisis of crew shortage but it still went ahead with the renewal of lease 
which was not only against normal prudence but also violated the objective of 
acquiring the new aircraft as envisaged in the feasibility report for acquisition of 
the new aircraft.
• As regards time limitations imposed under CAR effective from February 2012, 
ADU (FH)/ ADU (BT) during 2012-13 was 6.53/7.43 hours respectively.  
However, this could have been better managed had the Company not renewed the 
dry lease of four aircraft. After discontinuance of dry lease of the four aircraft 
between March and May 2014, ADU (FH)/ADU (BT) during from April 2014 to 
December 2014 improved from 7.73/8.75 hours in 2013-14 to 9.31 hours/10.58 
hours during 2014-15 (upto December 2014).  
• Further RASK
2 and CASK3, the key performance indicators for operations during 
2012-13 to 2014-15 (upto December 2014) of AICL are tabulated below: 
Year RASK CASK 
2012-13 ` 2.51 ` 2.48 
2013-14 ` 2.80 ` 2.45 
2014-15 (upto December 2014) ` 3.24 ` 2.14 
                                                           
1 Includes Lease rentals for the period April 2010 to  May 2014 - USD 64.38 million, Contribution to 
Maintenance Reserve, net of actual expend iture recouped – USD 4.51 millio n and Redelivery charges 
on termination of lease – USD 7.50 million. 
2 RASK – Revenue per available seat kilometre. 
3 CASK – Cost per available seat kilometre.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
41 
As can be seen from the table above, revenue earned per kilometre rose sharply even as 
the operating cost per kilometre fell during 2014-15. This was on account of, inter alia,
reduction in number of aircraft. 
Thus, the Company ended up incurring unfruitful expenditure of ` 405.83 crore between 
March 2011 and May 2014 on lease related charges on account of improper renewal of 
dry lease of four aircraft. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 
2.6 Avoidable expenditure on ferry flights to Mumbai for maintenance 
Air India Charters Limited (AICL) delayed establishment of hangar project at 
Thiruvananthapuram and consequently performed the flight maintenance at 
Mumbai, resulting in avoidable expenditure of ` 18.07 crore.
With a view to (a) overcoming constraint of space and difficulties relating to ground 
movement of aircraft at Mumbai and (b) reducing expenditure on ferrying ‘maintenance 
flights’ to Mumbai, Air India Limited (AIL) decided in November 2004 to establish a 
hangar at Thiruvananthapuram for carrying out major ‘C’ checks, structural repairs of B-
737 aircraft to be operated by its subsidiary viz. Air India Charters Limited (AICL) and 
other narrow body aircraft owned by AIL as well as undertaking third party maintenance 
work at the facility. AIL had anticipated that engine overhaul, replacement of landing 
gears, APU overhaul, structural repair of aircraft and components would continue to be 
carried out at Mumbai for which estimated three flights per week to and from Mumbai 
would continue and, thus, establishment of hangar at Thiruvananthapuram would reduce 
number of ‘maintenance flights’ from 18 to three per week. 
AICL launched a low cost airline with B-737 aircraft in 2005 under the brand name Air 
India Express. It operates its flights from Southern India. As no maintenance facility was 
available in the South, it had to ferry flights to Mumbai for maintenance of its fleet.  
As per internal arrangement between AIL and AICL, it was decided (2008) that civil 
construction work for the hangar would be done by AIL and equipment would be 
procured and commissioned by AICL. Land for the hangar was allotted free of cost to 
AIL by the Kerala State Government in November 2005 subject to the condition that AIL 
should start physical construction before November 2006. However, construction works 
were delayed due to delayed payment to contractors resulting in repeated demobilization 
and remobilization of work force and inter-dep endence of works of multiple contractors 
as against the initial idea of having a single contractor for most of the work.   
The civil construction work was finally completed by AIL in June 2012 after incurring an 
expenditure of ` 78.16 crore. Clearances/approvals from Thiruvananthapuram Municipal 
Corporation for occupancy, Pollution Board, Department of Factories and Boilers, Fire 
Department, etc. necessary for full-fledged operation of the hangar were obtained only by 
September 2012. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
42 
The cost of the equipment required for the hangar was estimated by AICL at ` 21 crore1,
against which procurement activity was initiated as early as 2008. Against this, equipment 
(58 items) worth ` 4.99 crore only has been procured till date (January 2015). AICL did 
not place orders for equipment valuing ` 10 crore
2(149 items) due to delay in construction 
of the hangar and space constraints. AICL decided to stop purchasing further equipment 
till the hangar jobs were completed. AICL has not procured the remaining equipment till 
January 2015.
The hangar was partially commissioned in January 2013 to carry out 'C'-checks and phase 
checks. The shop activities (wheel shop, brake shop, pressure vessel shop and structural 
repair facility) except battery shop had been partially commissioned by May 2014. 
Audit observed the following:
• The intended equipment (estimated cost of ` 21 crore) had not been procured by 
the Company. Equipment worth ` 4.99 crore alone were purchased with which 
some shops were partially operated.  
• Even among the equipment valued at ` 4.99 crore, equipment (32 items) worth 
` 2.72 crore had been commissioned since 2012, 19 items worth ` 1.12 crore 
(pertaining to wheel, brake and pressure vessel shops were commissioned only in 
May 2014) and 7 items worth ` 1.15 crore (pertaining to hot bonding and system 
shops) were either not commissioned or were to be transferred to 
Thiruvananthapuram from Mumbai.  
• Even after incurring an expenditure of ` 83.14 crore on the hangar project by AIL 
and AICL over 2007-14, AICL had to ferry all ‘maintenance flights’ to Mumbai 
till January 2013 owing to tardy implementation of the hangar facilities.
• Despite partial commissioning, the number of ‘maintenance flights’ to Mumbai 
registered an increase of 12 per cent in 2013-14
3, defeating the very objective of 
establishing the hangar at Thiruvananthapuram in order to overcome the constraint 
of space and difficulties relating to ground movement of aircraft at Mumbai. 
• The Company ferried 2522 flights to Mumbai for maintenance during October 
2011 to September 2014 (2011-12: 671 flights, 2012-13: 771 flights, 2013-14: 866 
flights and 2014-15: 214 flights) against envisaged ferrying of 468 flights (156 
flights per year) to Mumbai for major maintenance. 
• Most of the shops so far commissioned were partial and the desired objective of 
setting up the hangar could not be achieved. The avoidable operating cost incurred 
on account of ferrying maintenance flights to Mumbai from October 2011
4
worked out to ` 18.07 crore considering the operating cost, revenue earned 
                                                           
1 Estimates were based on 2007 prices 
2 Hot bonding shop (30 items ), Structural Shop (77 items), Weld ing Shop (13 items) and Machine Shop 
(29 items) and the remaining amounts was required for development, modification of different shops.  
3From 771 in 2012-13 to 866 in 2013-14. 
4 As parallel taxi was ready from September 2011, the loss worked out from October 2011. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
43 
including cargo and excess baggage • and scheduled maintenance of 3 flights per 
week to Mumbai during October 2011 to September 2014. 
Thus, even after incurring an expenditure of ` 83.14 crore on the hangar project by AIL 
and AICL over 2007-14, the Company had to ferry all ‘maintenance flights’ to Mumbai 
till March 2013 thereby incurring a loss of ` 18.07 crore. 
AICL stated (October 2014) that: 
The delay in commissioning the hangar was attributable to delays caused in vacating the 
plot i.e. rubber factory, boundary dispute with Airports Authority of India (AAI), 
obtaining approvals from various authorities and delay in executing the work by the 
contractors. AICL added that there was greater potential to generate traffic in longer 
routes than operating in shorter routes within Southern region which commenced 
subsequent to implementation of the hangar at Thiruvananthapuram. 
Reply of AICL is not acceptable in view of the following:
• There was no mention of hindrances by AICL when its representatives visited the 
site in March 2005. Soon after laying the foundation stone (November 2006), the 
Company undertook the construction work, which indicated that hindrances did 
not impact the construction work.   
• The defunct rubber factory was outside the allotted land and the boundary dispute 
with AAI towards construction of ta xi track did not affect the hangar construction 
as is evident from internal notes (April 2008) of AIL Project Committee, which 
stated that the construction work at the project site was proceeding as per plan. 
Furthermore, pending settlement of boundary dispute and compensation of land, 
the project was declared as ‘completed’ by the project committee in 
February 2012. 
• The fact remains that it was AIL’s inability to efficiently plan and execute the 
work through a single contractor by providing necessary resources on time and 
ready the site as planned that contributed to the delays. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in November 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 
Air India Limited 
2.7 Review of implementation of Passenger Reservation System and RAMCO 
Inventory System 
2.7.1 Introduction 
Passenger Reservation System and RAMCO inventory system are two of the significant 
information systems in use in Air India Limited (Company). Both information systems are 
presently functional (PRS since February 2011 and RAMCO since May/ November 2012).  
                                                           
• Five per cent of Total passenger revenue of ` 239.93 crore.  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
44 
Passenger Reservation System: Passenger Reservation System (PRS), end-to-end 
software, is outsourced to the ‘Society for Information Telecommunication Agency’ 
(SITA) and the servers (main and backup) are located at Atlanta, USA.  The estimated 
cost of the project was US$ 185.925 million ( ` 860 crore) spread over 10 years. The 
system was implemented in February 2011. 
The PRS system aims at automating the reservation, ticketing, boarding and baggage 
functions for Air India.  It consists of the following three major functions:  
• Reservation system  which covers booking of tickets through various 
modes (Website, authorized agents, AI’s booking windows or through other 
portals) 
• Departure Control system  (DCS) which covers activities related to baggage and 
boarding.
• Frequent Flier Program (FFP) which is a reward programme for passengers. 
RAMCO: Implementation of RAMCO system for Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul 
(MRO) activities was initiated (May 2010) at a cost of ` 50 crore to meet primary 
requirements of quality control and technical services, line maintenance, inventory 
management of the combined fleets for the Company and its subsidiaries. The system was 
implemented in May and November 2012 in Mumbai and New Delhi respectively. It 
covers the following activities: 
• Procurement process  including planning, purchase, receipt of material and 
settlement of bills.
• Inventory Management which comprises of classification, issue, receipt, return 
and adjustments of inventory, physical verification. 
• Repairs and maintenance based on MRO requirements.
Besides being core functional areas, the information from PRS and RAMCO systems are 
incorporated into the SAP system for financial accounting.  
2.7.2 Audit Objectives and scope 
Audit was conducted to review performance of the Company in implementing PRS and 
RAMCO systems to seek assurance on the following: 
• Whether objectives of the two information systems have been achieved; 
• Whether the business rules of the Company have been effectively mapped in two 
information systems; and 
• Whether the two information systems have been efficiently integrated with SAP 
financials.
Transactions for the period 2011-12 to 2013-14 were covered in the audit. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
45 
2.7.3 Audit Criteria 
Audit criteria was derived from Corporate Rules, Government guidelines, amendment 
parameters, best practices  and System Controls envisaged in the systems in the  
respective agreements with Vendors. 
2.7.4 Audit findings 
2.7.4.1 Passenger Reservation System (PRS) - Non finalisation of service level 
agreement (SLA) with vendor 
The vendor (SITA) had agreed to a Service Level Agreement (SLA) for monitoring the 
system performance in its bid. However, the SLA is yet to be finalized and adopted (June 
2014) on account of difference between the Company and SITA regarding methodology 
for measuring performance. Pending resolution of this dispute, the vendor, SITA reports 
on key performance parameters (uptime and response time) as per its proposed SLA using 
its own methodology for Passenger Service System (PSS), Internet Booking Engine (IBE) 
and Frequent Flyer Programme (FFP). 
Audit noticed that while response time of 1.50 seconds has been achieved, the system 
availability and uptime, as worked out by the vendor, has been consistently below the 
SLA benchmark of 99.97  per cent ; the service availability at times went down to 99.35 
per cent in 2011-12, 99.16 per cent in 2012-13 and 99.41 per cent in 2013-14.
The Company agreed with the observation. In the Exit Conference (12 November 2014), 
the Company informed that penalties were being levied on the vendor in line with the 
agreement for disruptions and outages. 
The Company needs to take necessary steps to improve the uptime of PSS as this not only 
impacted its revenue but also affected its reputation. 
2.7.4.2 Delay in uploading pricing decisions 
For booking and ticketing through PRS, information on pricing, flight schedules, routes 
and seats availability are essential inputs. While routes and flight schedules were fed into 
the system by the Company directly, the pricing information was worked out manually by 
the Company and transmitted to a vendor. The vendor codified these changes and 
uploaded it into the Airline Tariff Publishing Company’s (ATPCO) system (a common 
system for all airlines) which made it available globally. The PRS got the pricing input 
from ATPCO. 
The agreement with the vendor codifying and uploading prices stipulated that requests 
with priority ‘1’, being TOP PRIORITY, should be distributed within 4 hours, those with 
priority ‘2’ should be distributed within 8 hours and requests with priority level ‘3’ should 
be distributed within 24 hours. 
During April 2012 to May 2014, the Company made 5,017 price revision requests to the 
vendor. Audit noticed delays of more than one day in 1,876 price revisions (37 per cent
cases). Delay of more than 30 days was noticed in 19 cases including a delay of 82 days in 
a single case. Of the 1,876 cases of delay, 100 were Priority 1 cases, i.e. where the time 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
46 
period prescribed for uploading the revised prices was 4 hours. Even here, around 30 per
cent requests were delayed by more than 5 days. 
The Company is a price follower in the market and reacts to the market in fixing its price 
and giving special fare offers. Unless such changes in fares were quickly implemented, 
they would not have the desired impact on revenue, as by then prospective customers 
might have already booked with competitors. The delay in uploading the pricing decisions 
would be detrimental to the airline’s business. 
It was noticed that PRS had a tool which allowed uploading of pricing information 
directly rather than be routed through a vendor. This had not been acquired by the 
Company. Manual intervention by a third party (the vendor) also increased the risk of 
errors in data entry. Audit noticed an instance of incorrect data entry by the vendor in 
uploading the price revision. The fuel component in the pricing was incorrectly 
discontinued for an hour on 19 February 2013. The omission resulted in a loss of ` 34.48
lakh for the single hour. Thus, the manual intervention exposed the Company to an 
additional degree of risk. 
The Company replied (November 2014) that a Committee was being constituted to 
evaluate acquisition of ‘Pricing Tool’. In the Exit Conference, the Company accepted the 
concern and replied that the process was on for acquiring PRS pricing tool, to rectify this 
problem.  
While appreciating the efforts of the Company for expediting price changes and ensuring 
accuracy, the critical concern regarding errors and delays in manual intervention would 
remain so long as the key element of pricing remains outside the scope of PRS. 
2.7.4.3 Non adherence to credit policy led to accumulation of outstanding dues 
The Company offered credit sales to various agents and entered into agreements with them 
for promoting regional sales. The Company had a policy of terminating the contracts for 
credit sales with the defaulting agents, at any time on expiry of 30 days after the Company 
issued notice to the defaulter. The process of appointment and termination of credit 
contracts, sales reporting and monitoring of the remittance were not under the purview of 
PRS. The Company manually performed these functions and transmitted the termination 
requests appropriately to the vendor. 
Audit found that there was an accumulation of outstanding dues of ` 113.94 crore from 
various agents for a period exceeding three years. No action had been initiated to block 
these defaulting agencies or to realize these amounts from defaulting agents. The 
defaulters continued to sell tickets through PRS, thereby further adding to the dues.
The Company replied (November 2014) that necessary action had been initiated to collect 
the dues. Alongside efforts to collect outstanding dues, action should also be taken to map 
the management policy correctly in PRS, thereby blocking further transactions from 
defaulting agents. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
47 
2.7.4.4 Incomplete mapping of Business policy on Companion Free Scheme
There were three classes of travel - the first, business and economy class. Within each 
class, however, there were various classification of tickets based on ‘Reservation Booking 
Designator’ (RBD). Typically there were three RBDs in first class, six RBDs in business 
class and 16 RBDs in economy class. The fare difference in tickets of different RBDs 
within the same class could be considerable (for example, the fare in ‘Z’ RBD in business 
class for AI 101-Mumbai-New York on 6 February, 2015 was 63 per cent of ‘C’ RBD in 
the same class). 
The Company offered ‘Companion Free Scheme’ as a promotional measure valid on full 
IATA fares on all Ex-India international points (except SAARC) wherein the companion 
of the passenger was allowed to travel free of cost
1, if the passenger had booked tickets 
under IATA full fare. The scheme specified RBDs for companion ticket depending on the 
RBD of the paid ticket in each class of travel. 
The information on passenger travels availing CFS from January 2012 to December 2013 
was reviewed and it was observed that in all 42 cases, the RBD of the free ticket was 
higher than the RBD specified in the scheme. This resulted in higher RBDs being blocked 
for sale, thereby decreasing potential for revenue sale. 
The Company replied (November 2014) that there was no provision in PRS to restrict the 
RBD for CFS tickets. 
The contention of the Company that PRS did not have the provision of booking tickets in 
specific RBDs was incorrect. At present all staff tickets were booked in specific RBDs 
and, therefore, it would be technically possible to restrict RBDs for CFS cases also which 
would safeguard the revenue interests of the Company. 
2.7.4.5 Irregularities in Departure Control Services of PRS 
As per the IATA requirements, boarding passes should be issued to passengers during 
check-in before boarding, with unique consecutive numbers for the leg of travel and in 
accordance with aircraft capacity. These boarding passes should also be linked to PNR 
and ticket numbers. It was, however, observed that boarding passes without numbers and 
without reference to PNR and ticket numbers were being generated by the PRS. Though 
PRS could block issuance of such boarding passes, this control had not been activated by 
the Company. 
The Company informed that such boarding passes were meant for the crew in order to 
facilitate their entry into the aircraft, when their regular entry passes were unavailable. 
Audit is of the opinion that this practice engendered a significant degree of risk to airport 
security and had a potential for misuse. As the system allowed printing of boarding passes 
without reference to PNR/ticket numbers, any intentional manipulation to allow boarding 
for unauthorised person, could not be ruled out. There had been media reports
2 on seizure 
                                                           
1 Excluding duties and taxes  
2Times of India of 22 August 2013 titled, “CBI to probe fake LTC claims racket involving govt, PSUs.” 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
48 
of blank boarding passes in the LTC scam. Such risks could have been avoided by 
employing stringent validation controls in the PRS system.   
The Company replied (November 2014) that DCS had now been modified to disable 
acceptance of passengers without associating PNR and e-tickets.  The compliance would 
be watched in audit. 
2.7.4.6 Incomplete controls to block violation of Free Baggage Allowance (FBA) policy
The Company offered FBA based on travelling sector and class of journey.  The rules in 
this regard were amended by the Company from time to time as mandated by IATA. As 
per the baggage policy, in domestic sector, 35 kgs of FBA was allowed for passengers 
travelling in Executive class and 20-15 kgs is available for Economy class. 
In order to ensure mapping of the appropriate baggage rules in PRS, Audit analysed the 
data for one year (2013-14) on Delhi-Mumbai route in the domestic sector. It was noticed 
that out of 20,735 passengers who travelled during this period in this sector by AI 605 
flight, baggage in excess of norms was allowed for 2,055 passengers. It was seen that in 
one instance, baggage upto 201 kgs was allowed against a single ticket, without noting it 
as excess. 
Similar uncharged/ unreported excess baggage was noted on international route Delhi - 
New York also during test check. The system accepted baggage of upto 224 kgs against a 
single ticket without noting it as excess baggage. The baggage report generated from the 
system for the flight for the month of May 2014 also did not report any excess baggage. 
The PRS system had the provision for building in the control regarding baggage limits 
which had not been activated by the Company. Implementation of the business rule, thus, 
was left to the discretion of the booking counter staff, who manually confirmed FBA 
based on number of passengers under same check-in and charged for the excess baggage if 
any.
The Company agreed with audit concern and stated (November 2014) that ‘automated 
baggage rule’ was under implementation. 
2.7.4.7 Contact details of FFP members 
For maintaining customer relationship, vital contact details of members, such as mail 
address, business/home address, contact numbers, should be obtained by the Company 
from the members. However, audit analysis of data on frequent flyer members, revealed 
incomplete information in some crucial fields like contact numbers (1,04,129 cases), 
Home and Business address (9,545 cases) and e-mail address (13,498 cases) with the 
Company. This stymied the efforts of the Company in providing services to its FFP 
members.  
The Company replied (November 2014) that improvements to data capture are in progress 
and the system is being upgraded. Further progress will be watched in audit. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
49 
2.7.4.8 Non-automation of Frequent Flyer miles updation 
An analysis of implementation of FFP policy by the Company indicated that there were 
instances where the mileage points earned were not automatically updated into the PRS. 
This resulted in missing miles, resulting in  dissatisfaction to the customers and members 
constantly approaching the Company for updating the missing mileage points. 
While this could be due to omission or incorrect membership identity provided by the 
passenger, it was frequently on account of slippages by the airline: 
• incorrect entry made by the airline staff at reservation or check-in level; 
• omission in closing the flight preventing entries from departure control system 
into FFP; and 
• non-matching of names between FFP membership and tickets. 
The Company replied (November 2014) that onus to provide correct information was with 
members and also claimed that the success rate of automatic credits into the system was 
85 per cent.
Reply is not convincing as success rate of automatic credits claimed by the Company was 
limited to the data which DCS could pass into FFP and not on the overall FFP miles 
earned.
2.7.5 RAMCO inventory system 
2.7.5.1 Planning and acquisition of RAMCO system 
(a) Delay in implementation 
The Company's Board approved (November 2007) the capital expenditure of ` 27 crore 
towards implementation of RAMCO systems for MRO with a plan to complete the 
implementation in 18 months.  There was a delay of more than 2 years in the tendering 
procedure. Owing to non-adherence of commercial procedure, the Company had to re-
tender after CVC adversely commented on the tendering process. 
Board re-approved (May 2010) the revised capital expenditure of ` 50 crore with 
anticipated completion by November 2011 resulting in additional cost of ` 23 crore.  The 
system was implemented only in May 2012 (in Mumbai) and November 2012 (in New 
Delhi) with a delay of 6 months to 1 year. 
(b) Incomplete implementation 
Despite pending application changes on shop and line maintenance, Engineering change 
management, Hangar maintenance and shop maintenance, the ‘Go live’ was declared.  
This necessitated additional payment of ` 69.18 lakh (which was likely to increase further 
with future expenditure till the completion of agreed tasks) to the vendor for further 
changes in the system.  Further, the vendor had committed for integration with Oracle 
Financials in its bidding document. With implementation of SAP Financials, the 
requirement was now for integration with SAP. However, integration of RAMCO and 
SAP systems is not covered in the contracted scope of work. The integration of RAMCO 
with SAP has not been achieved till date (January 2015). 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
50 
The Company stated (November 2014) that the roll out into production was on hold due to 
taxation issues♣  in RAMCO. The reply is not tenable in view of the fact that ‘Go live’ was 
declared before completion resulting in payment for any subsequent 
changes/implementation thereof. Moreover, the current RAMCO version implemented in 
the Company does not support integration with SAP. The Company would have to 
implement a higher version involving additional cost to achieve such integration. 
2.7.5.2 Lack of segregation of duties 
(a) Purchase orders (PO) and repair orders (RO) 
Purchase Orders and Repair Orders issued from RAMCO system from May 2012 till 
June 2014 were analyzed in Audit. It was observed that out of 44,178 orders worth 
` 5,449.21 crore issued during this period, 7,171 orders constituting 16 per cent of the 
orders, amounting to ` 136.04 crore, were created and approved by same user.  It was also 
noticed that the system allows the same user who initiated and approved the order to 
receive the material. Four such instances where a single user initiated, approved and 
received the materials were noticed in Audit. Lack of segregation of duties and 
responsibilities left the system vulnerable besides rendering it non-compliant to the 
business rules of the Company as recorded in their Purchase Procedure manual. 
The Company replied (November 2014) that user roles and authorizations were well 
defined in the system but due to shortage of staff the same had not been implemented 
completely. 
Audit is of the opinion that circumventing segregation of duties in a computerized system 
due to shortage of staff compromised internal controls and suitable corrective steps were 
needed to be taken by the Company. 
(b) Stock corrections 
Stock corrections (changes in quantity or attributes of the material) were made in 
RAMCO inventory system manually based on periodical physical verification as well as 
changes in classification of the inventories. The related accounting entries (debit or credit 
adjustment entries) in the inventory register were carried out automatically by RAMCO 
system. 
Audit analysis of the stock corrections for the period May 2012 to June 2014 revealed that 
a total 18,471 correction entries had been entered manually or passed automatically in the 
system. These corrections led to reduction in stock worth ` 50.19 crore in the inventory 
register. Out of these 18,471 corrections, 16,378 corrections were carried out manually 
during this period based on physical verification. Ninety-eight per cent of these 
corrections (16,152 corrections) had been initiated and authorized by the same user 
identity in contravention of the duties and responsibilities as stipulated in the Company’s 
manuals. 
                                                           
♣  Taxation issue due to establishment of Air India Engineering Services Limited (AIESL) as a separate 
entity and any inventory movement across the Company and its subsidiaries attracts taxes 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
51 
RAMCO system had made 2,093 automatic corrections in the inventory register during 
the same period.  Variances were observed between the manual changes entered and their 
corresponding debit/credit adjustments passed by the system, indicating lacunae in the in-
built system logic.  
The incorrect assignment of segregation of duties coupled with the faulty system logic 
were the kind of significant risks that need to be addressed. An incorrect correction entry 
passed in the system affects the stock position, impacts inventory valuation and could 
result in wasteful procurement despite availability of stock. 
The Company replied (November 2014) that the system had the capability to define 
authorization levels as per financial delegation and it was being implemented now. The 
corrective steps taken by the Company would be watched in Audit. 
2.7.5.3 Inventory purchased in excess of the requirement 
The Purchase Procedure manual and policy guidelines of the Company described the 
sequence of events for procurement. Effective control over procurement would imply that 
the material(s) ordered were in line with th e requirement and that the material(s) received 
were as per order. Undue purchases as well as short receipts compromise the financial 
interests of the Company. 
Audit analyzed all the 27,485 PRs and their subsequent POs placed during the period May 
2012 to June 2014 and found that in 10 per cent (2,835) of POs, the quantity ordered by 
the purchase department was more than the quantity requested by the user department. 
The Company (November 2014) attributed it to minimum order quantity (MOQ), to avail 
price benefits and for combining multiple requests into a single order.  It is, however, 
noticed that RAMCO system did not document MOQ for materials nor was the 
consolidation of multiple requests apparent in the system. Maintenance of a master file 
with MOQ details, reorder levels etc., and linking it with actual procurement would enable 
the Company to better reap the benefits of automation. Besides, linking cases where 
purchase requests have been combined would improve the transparency of the system. 
2.7.5.4 Discrepancies in intra stock transfers and receipts 
RAMCO inventory system was a combined system for the Company and its subsidiaries. 
Intra and Inter Company transfer of stock, therefore, was inbuilt into the system. Such 
transfers should be carried out with appropriate accounting of the stock movement and 
stock closing, to enable proper accounting of the same. 
Audit analyzed the stock transfers during May 2012 to August 2012 and noticed that 
3,547 stock transfer orders were issued for transferring 22,394 units of inventory worth 
` 36.55 crore. Stock transfer orders, stock issued and received did not match as seen 
below:
Stock transfer orders Stock issued Stock received 
22,394 units 21,628 units 18,366 units 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
52 
As the above recorded status related to December 2014, i.e. after two years of issue of 
transfer orders and subsequent actions in May-August 2012, stock was not expected to be 
in transit. The significant difference (15 per cent), between the stock issued and received, 
was a matter of concern. The differences occurred in 208 stock transfer orders with the 
quantity transferred recorded as 3,364 units by the transferor unit while the corresponding 
quantity received was only 102 units, raising doubts on the location of the balance 3,262 
units transferred during the limited three month period alone. 
Audit also noticed that in case of 95 stock transfer orders issued during May – August 
2012, the order had been treated differently by the transferor and the transferee. While the 
order had been designated ‘closed’ at the transferring end signifying its completion, the 
corresponding status recorded at the receiving end was either ‘partially received’ or ‘not 
received’. The opposite situation was also noticed where only partial transfer had been 
recorded at the transferring end while the receiving end depicted the material as having 
been ‘Completely Received’. This raises doubts on the integrity of the inventory register 
and left scope for the possibility of additional un-authorized transfers. 
The Company replied (December 2014) that the audit analysis pertained to the migration 
period.  The Company further stated that the stock transfers were three dimensional with 
three variables such as stock transfer order, stock transfer issues and stock transfer 
receipts, and hence, the transactions should be viewed with keeping transfer order and 
issue constant and receipts as variable. 
Reply is not acceptable since audit analysis of the stock transfers during September 2013 
also revealed similar discrepancies.   
Suitable corrective steps are needed to be taken by the Company as these discrepancies 
could significantly affect the inventory accounting of the Company. 
2.7.5.5 Improper inventory valuation 
During migration of inventory from earlier inventory systems of Air India and erstwhile 
Indian Airlines Limited, inventory held in stock, serviceable ( ` 256.46 crore) and 
unserviceable ( ` 527.37 crore), without applicable weighted average cost in the earlier 
system were migrated with the latest weighted average costs.  Similarly, old inventory 
(` 57.76 crore) was brought back to stock by adopting latest weighted average rate. This 
altered the inventory position following migration. This had also been commented by the 
Statutory Auditors while auditing the accounts of 2012-13. 
The Company replied (November 2014) that though the legacy data was updated and 
cleansed to some extent, it was not completed and to certain extent necessary correction 
entries were carried out during 2013-14.  The reply is not tenable since this had resulted in 
overvaluation of inventory, contrary to the Accounting Policy of the Company as well as 
Accountant Standard 2. 
2.7.5.6 Incomplete inventory migration 
During migration, the system was programmed to take the date of migration as date of last 
movement for opening balances, thereby impacting classification of inventory as non-
moving/ slow moving.  This resulted in continued dependency on the legacy system. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
53 
The Company stated (November 2014) that due to lack of fields to capture last movement 
date, RAMCO had updated the non-moving flag based on legacy data.
The reply confirmed the Company’s continued dependence on the legacy system. 
2.7.5.7 Improper stock position of Companies 
The Company implemented a single inventory system (RAMCO) to optimally utilize the 
inventory across the Company and its subsidiaries. There was a mis-match between the 
physical stock of spares inventory held in RAMCO against the Company and against its 
subsidiaries vis-a-vis the closing stock inventory accounted for as on 31 March 2013, in 
the books of respective companies, as given below: 
(
`  in crore) 
Company RAMCO Accounts variation
Air India NB 716.42 740.96 24.54
Air India WB 447.11 421.26 -25.85
AICL 74.56 76.17 1.61
CD 9.54 9.23 -0.31
TOTAL -0.01
The Company stated (October/November, 2014) that precision of accounting was being 
maintained on a global basis and attributed the variation to changes in the part account 
group.
Reply is not acceptable as the part account group was coded for aircraft model, the type of 
inventory and were uniquely identifiable with the corresponding company through the 
company code available in the system.  During any movement of inventory among the 
companies, the system should automatically update the concerned fields. Non-
reconciliation of company-wise (Holding Company and the Subsidiaries) inventory 
indicated that the segregation possible through unique company codes had not been 
utilised by the Company. 
The Company, agreeing with the observation, replied (November 2014) that the vendor 
had been approached to provide system executable accounting reports for finalizing the 
accounts for the year 2013-14 and also to provide monthly accounting entries tallying with 
the year-end summary. However, the issue was yet to be addressed as was evident from 
the continuance of discrepancies in the 2013-14 accounts:- 
 (
`  in crore) 
Company Inventory sy stem Accounts variation
Air India NB 1995.72 1971.07 -24.65
Air India WB 775.03 790.19 15.16
AICL 177.18 186.75 9.57
CD 30.85 31.31 0.46
TOTAL -0.54

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
54 
Suitable remedial action is needed to be taken by the Company to ensure that correct 
inventory position against the respective companies could be depicted, thus maintaining 
the integrity of accounts of the Company as well as its subsidiaries. 
2.7.6 Integration issues 
2.7.
6.1 Non-integration of PRS and RAMCO with financial accounting system 
Both PRS and RAMCO systems provided essential data for preparing the financial 
statements of the Company. However, they did not have a direct interface with SAP 
Financials.
PRS generated the revenue information on passenger reservations and departures which 
was the major component of revenue of the Company. PRS system, however, did not 
have a direct interface with the SAP financial module and the information was 
transmitted from PRS via Kale revenue accounting system. Significant problems 
regarding functioning of Kale revenue accounting system had been noticed which 
impacted the financial statements of the airlines. 
RAMCO provides the inventory details which needed to be incorporated in SAP for 
financial accounting. In the absence of an automatic interface with SAP, information was 
manually entered into SAP. During the year 2012-13 alone, 82,630 manual entries to the 
extent of ` 1,14,747.76 crore were passed into SAP Financials impacting several 
accounting heads such as inventory and its related provisions ( ` 974.73 crore), Fixed 
Assets and Depreciation ( ` 250.99 crore), Revenue From Cargo, Passenger, Mail, GSA 
(` 125.26 crore) and Travel Expenditure, Passenger Amenities and Hire Charges 
(` 1082.60 crore). Such large volumes of manual entries into SAP enhanced risk of errors 
and omissions. 
The Company, agreeing (November 2014) with the audit observation, stated that non-
integration of systems necessitated passing of manual entries in the system, apart from 
rectifications which necessarily needed to be passed manually. The Company also assured 
Audit that integration of RAMCO with SAP would be carried out in the next phase.
While the progress would be watched in Audit, the Company could have avoided such 
integration by implementing an integrated system from the start as such a system was 
available even then. 
2.7.
6.2  Interface of passenger revenue with Financial Accounting 
Accounting Policy of the Company on revenue recognition was in line with Accounting 
Standard 9 which stipulated that passenger revenue was to be recognised when 
transportation service was provided i.e. on flown basis during an accounting year. 
The data relating to passenger revenue processed by Kale consultants and reservations 
made for the month of March 2013 was analysed in Audit. It was observed that in 5,804 
cases, date of travel was either prior to or subsequent to the accounting year 2012-13 and, 
hence, ought not to have been considered for revenue accounting for 2012-13. Besides, 
date of travel recorded in the revenue data processed by Kale consultants was inconsistent 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
55 
with the ticket details as well as the actual flight details recorded in the PRS (as confirmed 
through a test check of some cases vis-à-vis the PRS system). 
Audit noticed that the discrepancy occurred due to an error of Kale consultants. While 
Kale consultants had sourced the data from PRS, they had wrongly used the date field 
from the ‘remarks’ column rather than the ‘date flown’. As a result, SAP Financials 
overstated the revenue for 2012-13 by ` 5.37 crore
• for travel beyond the accounting 
period, contrary to the policy of the Company. 
The Company replied (July 2014) that as per standard industry practice, revenue was 
recognized based on the actual date of travel, considering the start of such flights that may 
cover more than a day. The Company also stated that the difference in travel dates were 
due to change of travel date by the passenger.
The argument of journeys starting on more than a day is not acceptable as Audit observed 
difference of more than 6 months in travel dates. In 926 instances the difference between 
the two dates was more than 2 days and went upto 365 days. 
What is of concern is that the discrepancy had continued to affect revenue accounting 
even in 2013-14 as Kale consultants continued to use incorrect dates of travel. In 1305 
cases, the date of travel was prior to date of issue of tickets indicated a flaw in revenue 
accounting.
2.7.6.3 Inconsistency in Revenue Accounting reports 
The Company was dependent on Kale Consultants for its revenue accounting as well as 
for generating MIS reports. Considerable differences were observed in the information 
received as MIS vis-à-vis revenue accounting information. The revenue recognized in the 
SAP Financials, as sourced from Kale consultants, for the year 2012-13 was ` 12,557.15
crore. During the same period, MIS reports provided by the same agency indicated a much 
lower revenue earned as ` 12,420.31 crore.
The difference of ` 136.84 crore generated from the two systems had not been reconciled. 
It is pertinent to note that amount of revenue earned as per MIS reports was lower than the 
final revenue recognized even though the MIS reports included an element of provisional 
revenue to cater to omission of any bookings 'not flown' into revenue accounting during 
the generation of MIS reports.  The inconsistency in revenue earnings between the MIS 
reports and SAP accounting needed to be corrected.
Reply of the Company was still awaited (March 2015). 
2.7.6.4 Retrieval of sales data – Productivity Linked Bonus (PLB) 
Productivity Linked Bonus (PLB) is paid by the Company to eligible agents based on 
international flown revenue generated by them. The Company depends upon Kale 
Consultants for this information as the PRS does not have necessary provisions for data 
                                                           
• Against the total revenue of `  12,557.15 crore 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
56 
extraction.  Based on the data provided by Kale Consultants, qualified agents were offered 
PLB for 2012-13 by the Company.  
Subsequently (October 2012), the Company realized that the data provided by the 
Consultant included tickets issued by them on other carriers as well. The revised data 
revealed that 22 agents earlier qualified were ineligible for PLB as they had not achieved 
the minimum productivity slabs.   
The Company replied (November 2014) that since no reports were available in PRS, PLB 
was paid based on the reports obtained from outsourced vendor and assured that due care 
would be taken to randomly check the data to safeguard its financial interests. 
Conclusion
Failure on the part of the Company to design and activate necessary controls in the 
Passenger Reservation System and the Inventory System, inappropriate 
customization, lack of validations in line with business processes and improper data 
migration resulted in the Company not achieving the full potential of the automated 
systems. The Company resorted to manual interventions and had a high degree of 
dependence on multiple vendors. Lack of an integrated system coupled with the 
manual interventions and weak security controls exposed the system to the risk of 
manipulations, unauthorized use and unreliability of data. 
Air India Limited and Air India Charters Limited 
2.8 Avoidable expenditure due to under-utilisation of own simulators 
Air India Limited and its subsidiary viz. Air India Charters Limited failed to 
optimally utilize its own simulators for want of proper planning and maintenance, 
which resulted in avoidable expenditure of ` 8.47 crore during July 2009 to March 
2014 on purchase of simulator slots at third parties' simulators for training the 
pilots.
As a part of the aircraft purchase agreements entered into by Air India Limited (AIL) and 
its subsidiary Air India Charters Limited (AICL) with M/s Boeing, USA in January 2009, 
the supplier (M/s Boeing, USA) agreed to provide simulators for B-777 aircraft to AIL 
and B-737-800 aircraft to AICL for training the pilots. The market price of the B-777 and 
B-737-800 simulators provided free of cost was ` 64.43 crore and ` 44 crore respectively. 
While the simulator for B-737-800 aircraft was installed in February 2007, simulator for 
B-777 aircraft was installed in December 2009.
AIL and AICL had been purchasing slots on B-777 and B-737-800 simulators from third 
parties for training their pilots for these aircraft. With the installation of own simulators, it 
was expected that the airlines would not be required to purchase simulator slots from third 
parties, thereby saving on costs and also hire out the spare capacity of simulators to third 
parties for earning revenue.
As per AIL, a simulator can be used optimally for 20 hours a day. Normally, a simulator 
session lasts for four hours and five sessions can be planned in a day.  The remaining four 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
57 
hours are kept for preventive maintenance. Thus, available hours on a simulator in a year 
are 7300.
Audit examination revealed that: 
(i) Both the airlines planned utilization of lesser number of hours than the available 
capacity of the simulator. Actual utilisation was even less than the planned number of 
hours. Due to the gap between available capacity and actual utilisation, coupled with time 
lost in breakdown of the simulators (apart from the allowance of four hours per day for 
their maintenance), both the companies resorted to purchase of simulator slots from third 
parties. The available, planned, utilised and number of hours for which the simulators of 
third parties were hired by both the airlines during 2009-10 to 2013-14 is tabulated below: 
Year Available 
capacity
(Hours) at 
the rate of 
20 hours 
per day 
Planned 
(Hours) 
Percentage 
of available 
capacity
planned 
Utilised
Hours 
Percentage 
of 
available 
capacity
utilised
Usage of simulator of 
third parties (Hours) 
B-777 of AIL 
2009-10* 1800 856 48 826 46 230 
2010-11 7300 5739 79 5196 71 939 
2011-12 7320 6627 91 5884 80 730 
2012-13  7300 6124 84 5039 69 1224 
2013-14 7300 5146 70 4286 83 36 
Total: 31020 24492 - 21231 - 3159 
B-737-800 of AICL 
2009-10# 5680 3803 67 3597 63 361 
2010-11 7300 5402 74 4616 63 418 
2011-12 7320 6281 86 5437 74 20 
2012-13  7300 5349 73 4076 56 0 
2013-14 7300 4998 68 4389 88 0 
Total: 34900 25833 - 22115 - 799 
* January 2010 to March 2010 #July 2009 to March 2010 
Thus, the simulators were never planned for utilization for more than 91 per cent of their 
available capacity. While actual utilisation remained consistently lower than plan, the 
highest utilisation being 88 per cent of plan. 
(ii) Considering an allowance of 6,204 hours ♠  for preventive maintenance, AIL 
should have planned the simulators for 31,020 hours from January 2010 to March 2014. 
However, the airline planned it for 24,558 hours. Thus, there was significant gap of 6,462 
hours between available and planned capacity of the simulators. Actual utilisation was 
further less by 3,363 hours than the planned hours. The gap was mainly due to 
unserviceable simulator, 'pull out'/ 'no show' of crew/instructors, which indicated deficient 
preventive maintenance during the inbuilt allowance for 6,204 hours, defective planning 
and management on the part of the airline. As a result of reduction in number of B-777 
aircraft from 20 in (2009-10) to 15 (2013-14) due to sale and grounding of aircraft, the 
                                                           
♠  At the rate of 4 hours per day. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
58 
training requirement for the related crew had reduced which increased the prospects of 
hiring out the simulator to other parties for earning revenue. However, AIL failed to take 
any initiative for hiring out the spare capacity (6,462 hours) to third parties.
(iii) Similarly, in the case of simulator available with AICL, the airline planned its 
simulator's utilisation for 25,833 hours, against the available hours of 34,900, thus, 
leaving a gap of 9,067 hours, in addition to 6,980 hours available for maintenance during 
July 2009 to March 2014. The airlines actually utilised the simulator for 22,115 hours 
with a further gap of 3,718 hours. In addition to 6,980 hours available for 
repairs/maintenance of the simulator, it remained unserviceable for 2,734 hours. For the 
gap of 9,067 hours between the available and planned capacity of the simulator, AICL 
also did not explore possibility of hiring out the simulator to third parties for earning 
revenue.
(iv) Instead of utilising the optimum capacity of their own simulators, both the airlines 
had purchased simulator slots for 3,958 hours from third parties viz. Jet Airways in 
Mumbai, Egypt Air Training Centre in Cairo and Emirates CAE Flight Training in 
Bangaluru during the same period (2009-10 to 2013-14) by incurring an avoidable 
expenditure of ` 8.47 crore. 
AIL replied (February and November 2014) that: 
• Available hours on the simulator cannot be utilised unless the requirement of the 
training days equals the same. This requires careful scheduling of crew and 
training of officers. If for any reason, any one of the above is 'out of sync', it will 
result in non-utilisation and the hours would lapse on that count.
• Mostly urgency for time bound refresher course and training for pilot proficiency 
check/instrument rating was dictated by Director General of Civil Aviation 
(DGCA). 
• Induction of new aircraft and launch of line-operations puts immense strain on the 
training department. A total of 20 (Nos.) B-777 aircraft were inducted between 
2007 and 2010. To ensure adequate utilisation of aircraft, it was considered better 
to train pilots at a higher and quicker rate using other simulator facilities. Also due 
to induction of B-787 aircraft, replacement pilots had to be trained. 
• In house infrastructure, including simulators should be utilised to optimum 
capacity to ensure minimum cost of training. However, this also should be 
supported by adequate number of instructors. In the absence of sufficient numbers 
of instructors, it would not be possible to train large number of pilots within a 
limited period of time. Also AIL's attempts to recruit instructors have 
borne limited success.  
• It was not financially viable to keep a large pool of instructors employed, since 
training was a cyclical phenomenon. That was also the reason that during peak 
times, it was prudent to hire outside simulators and complete training tasks within 
restricted time frames. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
59 
The reply is not acceptable in view of the following: 
• The contention that induction of 20 B-777 aircraft put the AIL's training 
department under pressure and it led to outsourcing of training is not convincing 
as the very purpose of installing B-777 simulator in December 2009 at Mumbai 
was to impart training on regular basis to B-777 pilots as AIL was going to 
procure these aircraft. 
• The argument of inadequate instructors is not established as AIL deployed its own 
instructors on Jet Airways simulator for training its pilots. 
• Though the requirements of training as well as vacancies in 'flight instructor' cadre 
were well known to AIL, these posts were advertised for recruitment during April 
2009 to January 2013. The airline advertised only 6 posts in February 2013, out of 
the shortfall of 74.
• In an airline such as AIL operating several types of aircraft, training is an ongoing 
process and not cyclical. Durations for Conversion Training
1, Recurrency 
Training2 and Line Training 3 are well defined by DGCA and fully within the 
knowledge of the AIL and, therefore, could be planned in advance.
• Outside simulator facility was used continuously and not exceptionally. Inability 
to coordinate between its own departments to ensure optimal utilisation of own 
simulator facility for fulfilling training requirements indicated the need for 
improvement in planning and management of training needs. 
AICL replied (November 2014) that: 
Under-utilisation of B-737-800 simulator was due to shortage of instructors and  
un-serviceability of the simulator due to various factors such as computer problems, 
shortage of spares, maintenance of air-conditioner, power fluctuations. AICL added that 
while the simulator was under service, training at outsourced party was resorted to, since 
training of pilots is a continuous critical function and non-adherence to it would lead to 
idling of pilots as well as under utilisation of aircraft. However, AICL assured that all 
efforts were being made to cut down on the use of outside simulator. 
Reply of AICL substantiates the audit concern that simulators were not maintained 
properly for optimal utilisation despite an allowance of four hours per day towards 
preventive maintenance. Moreover, in contradiction to the reply regarding cutting down 
external simulator usage, audit observed that a tender had been floated on 27 October 
2014 to invite bids from parties offering their simulators for wet/dry B-737-800 simulator 
for imparting training to AICL's pilots, which indicated that AICL was again planning for 
outsourcing simulator training. 
Replies of AIL and AICL did not state specific reasons for planning the simulators for 
substantially less number of hours than their available capacity and raise serious concerns 
about the entire planning process for acquiring the simulators.  
                                                           
1 For imparting training to pilots on a particular aircraft type.  
2 For validation of licences of pilots.  
3 For imparting training to qualified pilots on flying mode.  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
60 
Thus, while their own simulators of the two airlines remained under-utilised due to lack 
of proper planning and maintenance, simulator slots were being  purchased and the pilots 
were being sent for training to third party simulators which resulted in avoidable 
expenditure of ` 8.47 crore.
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
61 
CHAPTER III: MINISTRY OF COAL 
Bharat Coking Coal Limited 
3.1 Avoidable payment of penal interest 
Bharat Coking Coal Limited repeatedly failed to pay the deployment charges of 
Central Industrial Security Force in time and consequently incurred avoidable 
payment of penal interest to the tune of ` 16.84 crore for delayed payment of dues 
for the period March 2005 to July 2013.
Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL), a subsidiary of Coal India Limited (CIL) is a 
Central Public Sector Undertaking engaged in mining of coal and allied activities. BCCL 
deploys Central Industrial Security Force (CISF - a Central Para Military Force under the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India), on payment of deployment charges 
which include salary, allowances and other expenses, to meet the security requirement of 
its various coal mining projects located in Jharkhand and West Bengal. The deployment 
of CISF is governed by the guidelines of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), CISF 
Induction and Policy Manual 2000 and Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) signed 
between CISF and BCCL from time to time. 
MHA issued guidelines in May 2005 underlining the need for timely payment and 
recovery of cost of induction of CISF in PSUs. As per the above guidelines, penal interest 
would be levied if a PSU defaulted in payment of monthly dues by more than one month 
at the rate of 2 per cent above the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) as decided by Reserve Bank 
of India from time to time. The interest would be levied with effect from 1 April 2005 on 
PSUs where CISF had been inducted and also in cases where existing strength of CISF 
was augmented on or after 20 August 1993. In case of PSUs where induction/ 
augmentation had taken place prior to 20 August 1993, interest at the above rate would be 
charged with effect from 1 April 2005, if they failed to clear the outstanding dues 
accumulated upto March 2005 within three months from the date of notice for payment. 
These guidelines were brought to the notice of all concerned for recovery of interest in 
case of default in payment. 
Audit examination (July 2014) revealed that BCCL repeatedly defaulted in making 
payment of monthly dues towards salaries and other expenses of CISF personnel 
deployed at various locations. Delays in payment after due date ranged between 1 and 
415 days. Consequently, through demand letters between August 2009 and October 2013, 
CISF made a claim of ` 16.84 crore as penal interest for delayed payment of monthly 
dues to its personnel for the period March 2005 to July 2013. However, BCCL did not 
agree to make such payment and represented (August 2013) to MHA for waiver of the 
above claim of CISF. Representation of BCCL was turned down by MHA in November 
2013 on the ground that “the charging of penal interest in case of default/delayed payment 
was an integrated part of the terms and conditions of CISF deployment and hence, it was 
not possible to exempt the penal interest.” The Board of Directors of BCCL finally 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
62 
decided (January 2014) to make the payment of penal interest and accordingly, BCCL 
made a payment of ` 16.84 crore as penal interest to CISF in March 2014.
While accepting the audit contentions, BCCL stated (December 2014) that: 
• Salaries and other expenses of CISF were based upon the MOU signed between 
BCCL and CISF from time to time and the same was a contractual liability of the 
Company.  
• The then BCCL Management had managed their funds judiciously when there 
was financial crisis for discharging its liabilities.  
• Being a BIFR company, BCCL had to move as per BIFR plan and only statutory 
payment, and expenditure which was the most important component to maintain 
the production level and to avoid industrial unrest, got priority.
• Since BCCL operated in a highly accident prone mining condition, in the event of 
occurrence of any such contingencies as well as precautionary measures, the fixed 
deposits of the Company were kept intact to meet such contingent requirement.   
The contention of BCCL was not convincing as: 
• The representation of BCCL for waiver of penal interest was duly considered and 
rejected by MHA. Further, safeguarding property of the Company through CISF 
was a critical issue for the organization and as such expenses on CISF should have 
been considered an obligatory expenditure of BCCL.
• Salaries and wages of BCCL’s own employees which stood in the range of 
` 1751.52 crore and ` 4465.65 crore during 2005-06 to 2013-14 were never 
defaulted.
• Except suffering loss in 2007-08 and 2008-09, BCCL made an annual average 
profit of `868.98 crore during the same period and was also regular in making 
repayment of loan to CIL at the rate of ` 20 crore per month.  
• At the request of BCCL, CIL had provided assistance of ` 60 crore as interest 
bearing loan @ 6.5  per cent  for meeting CISF dues of BCCL in March 2005.  
However, no further persuasion thereafter for seeking assistance of CIL (carrying 
lower rate of interest) was made by BCCL.  
Thus, due to delayed payment of CISF dues by BCCL without adhering to the guidelines 
of MHA resulted in an avoidable outgo of funds on account of penal interest to the tune 
of `16.84 crore for the period from March 2005 to July 2013  to CISF. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in January 2015; their reply was awaited  (March 
2015).

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
63 
3.2 Wasteful expenditure on procurement of Two Road Header Machines
Bharat Coking Coal Limited had made payment to a foreign supplier for 
procurement of two Road Header machines which were not in conformity with NIT 
specifications. The machines were not approved by DGMS for operation in the coal 
mines though the same were under field trials for a considerable period. 
Expenditure incurred on procurement amounting to ` 11.16 crore became wasteful. 
Road Header machine is used in the underground mines of coal companies for excavation 
of coal and development of roads for the purpose of preparation of panel in mining. 
Specifications of the machine should conform to the mining conditions for operation in 
underground mines. Approval of Director General of Mine Safety (DGMS) is mandatory 
for safe mining which is accorded to supplier on successful completion of field trial and 
satisfactory performance reports of the machine during field tests in actual mining 
conditions monitored by DGMS.
Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL) invited (June 2006) a Global Tender for 
procurement of two Road Header machines for its Moonidih Project of Western Jharia 
Area.  In response, four firms submitted their offer but none of them was found 
technically qualified. A fresh tender was invited in April 2008. As per the pre-bid meeting 
(March 2008) held with the prospective bidders, some modifications were made in NIT 
which, inter alia, included that the machine should be approved by DGMS, India and if 
any bidder had neither valid DGMS approval nor field trial permission, they had to obtain 
field trial permission for use of the machine in the mines of BCCL well in advance before 
despatch of the same. Further, in case of imported supplies, 80 per cent  value of each 
machine would be paid against Letter of Credit (LC) which would be opened after receipt 
of authenticated copy of valid approval or field trial permission accorded by DGMS along 
with the relevant despatch documents. 
In response to the above NIT (April 2008), only two offers were received, out of which 
one offer was not qualified for technical scrutiny which was thus, carried out for only one 
offer  received from a foreign firm (Supplier). During evaluation of the offer, the Supplier 
categorically stated (October 2008) that the main equipment did not have DGMS 
approval for use in underground mines in India and it was assured that they would take 
necessary DGMS approval before its use and also necessary field trial permission would 
be obtained before despatch from the country of origin. Based on the clarifications 
received, the offer of the Supplier was accepted by the Tender Committee and the same 
was approved (July 2009) by BCCL Board on single tender basis for ` 22.94 crore
1 . As 
per the supply orders issued (July 2009), the two Road Header machines were received 
and unloaded at Moonidih Project on 28 July 2011 and BCCL made a payment of ` 11.16 
crore2  during the period July 2011 to September 2012 for procurement of the two 
machines, out of which ` 8.49 crore was paid to the Supplier and its agent on 11 July 
2011 and 21 July 2011 respectively. 
                                                           
1 comprising value of two machines, agency commission, spares cost for three years, duties and taxes, 
commission, installation and training charges including service tax 
2 included 80per cent value of two ma chines and agency commission of ` 7.79 crore and ` 0.70 crore 
respectively, custom duty of ` 2.52 crore, ocean freight of ` 0.12 crore and ` 0.03 crore for escort 
charges, bedding charges, handling charges and insurance. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
64 
Examination in audit revealed that: 
• At the time of commissioning of the Road Header machines, the General Manager 
of Moonidih project refused (December 2011) to accept the machines on the 
ground that the height of the Road Header machines was not as per the 
specification of supply orders; this fact was also established during joint 
inspection carried out (December 2011) in presence of the Supplier. 
• The Supplier admitted (April 2012) that if the machines were not found 
acceptable, the same should be sent back to their workshop at China at the cost of 
BCCL for making suitable modification to the height but obtaining DGMS 
approval thereafter would be the sole responsibility of BCCL. However, the 
conditions imposed by the Supplier were not found acceptable to the Committee 
constituted (April 2012) for the purpose in BCCL to settle the dispute. 
• The Committee finally opined that if the Supplier ensured suitability of the 
machine for operation in mines where the seam thickness ranged from 1.9 metre 
to 2.9 metre, the payment already made to the Supplier would not go waste. 
Though the Supplier agreed to the above condition, the Road Header machines 
were yet to obtain DGMS approval and were under field trial till date (July 2014) 
despite lapse of three years since their receipt in Moonidih Project.
• As per clause No. 17 of NIT, BCCL had the option to conduct inspection and test 
at the premises of the Supplier at the point of delivery before shipment to detect 
non-compliance of any specification. The above clause also permitted the 
purchaser to conduct inspection on arrival at site which would be considered 
'final'. As BCCL had not conducted pre-inspection at Supplier’s end, it lost the 
opportunity to detect non-compliance of height specification before despatch and 
consequently to avoid release of payment of 80 per cent of the value of the two 
machines, agency commission and related expenditure which was made prior to 
delivery of machines at project site. Major payment on FOB
♦  value of the 
machines had already been made to the Supplier and hence inspection at 
Moonidih Project and detection of defects afterwards did not protect the financial 
interest of BCCL. It was a situation of fait accompli for BCCL to accept the 
defective machines. 
• Though the Supplier agreed to take back the machines to their workshop at China 
for necessary modification, BCCL did not succeed in pursuing the Supplier to 
make necessary arrangements to meet specification requirements, free of cost, as 
per the conditions under Clause No. 17 of NIT.
• Performance bank guarantee of ` 2.29 crore accepted from the Supplier was not 
sufficient to recover the amount ( ` 11.16 crore) which was paid before the 
delivery of the two Road Header machines, which subsequently found defective.  
                                                           
♦  Free on Board - indicates the passing of ownership and risks to the buyer at the port of shipment upon 
payment for the cost of goods which includes mari ne freight transport, insurance, unloading and cost 
of transportation from the arrival port to the final destination etc. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
65 
• Experiencing the above, BCCL Board had decided that in future purchases, a 
clause relating to submission of additional  bank guarantee equivalent to LC 
payment before opening the LC would be incorporated in NIT so that in case of 
any rejection, cost of LC opening amount could be recovered immediately. This 
decision was dictated by hindsight. 
While accepting the audit observations, BCCL stated (April 2014) that: 
• The advertised Global Tender was floated for procurement of two Road Header 
machines from proven manufacturers, i.e., the machine produced by the 
manufacturer was already put in use either in India or abroad with satisfactory 
performance.  Payment terms in NIT were made on the basis of provisions of 
purchase manual of Coal India Limited taking into consideration the proven-ness 
of the manufactured goods. In case of procurement of plant and machinery from 
manufacturer of proven nature, inspection is done after commissioning of the 
same at site. Pre-despatch inspection at manufacturer’s site was not mandatory as 
per NIT and supply order. 
• Since DGMS approval was mandatory for use of such machines in underground 
coal mines in India, clause relating to “Field Trial permission of DGMS” was 
incorporated before delivery of the machines from foreign port for safeguarding 
the interest of BCCL. 
• Ownership of machines was transferred to BCCL immediately as they were 
shipped on FOB basis. Had the request of the Supplier to send the machine back 
to their workshop at China been agreed to, the ownership of the Road Headers 
was required to be re-transferred in the name of the Supplier and in that case 
BCCL would have been at much higher risk as 80 per cent of the FOB price of the 
machines (` 11.16 crore) had already been paid and also goods not being in the 
custody of BCCL, it would have resulted into unavoidable situations.
• The terms of NIT and bank guarantee stipulation were made as per the purchase 
manual. Since such instances were not experienced in the past and the issue did 
not emerge during pre-bid meeting, provision of bank guarantee equivalent to 80 
per cent of FOB value in the contract was not conceived.
Ministry re-iterated (December 2014) the views of the management furnished in April 
2014.
The contention of BCCL/Ministry is not acceptable in view of the following: 
• As per chapter – IX, clause 9.3 of the Purchase Manual of Coal India Limited, 80 
per cent  payment may be considered for supply of equipment for the suppliers 
whose equipment  were considered proven for supplies to CIL and its subsidiaries 
and to be accepted only for regular supply orders placed for the proven equipment. 
The Road Header machines supplied by the foreign firm were only having the 
field trial permission which was provisional in nature and did not have final 
approval of DGMS for operation in the coal mines in India. As such, the 
interpretation of ‘proven manufacturer’ made by the BCCL in the instant case was 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
66 
not appropriate. Proper and timely due diligence in framing terms and conditions 
of the NIT would have avoided the incident. 
• Though final approval of DGMS was mandatory for use of machine in the mines, 
the terms and conditions set in NIT for payment to Supplier without ensuring 
DGMS approval were against the financial interest of BCCL. Release of 80 per
cent payment to the Supplier based on the field trial permission was thus 
imprudent.  
• BCCL had itself admitted that the ownership of the machines was transferred to it 
as soon as machines were shipped on FOB basis and there was risk in sending the 
machines back to Supplier. It is obvious that pre-despatch inspection and adequate 
provision of bank guarantee equivalent to 80 per cent of FOB value could have 
protected the financial interests of BCCL. 
• The fact remains that Road Header machines were still lying inoperative 
(November 2014) since May/June 2013 for want of compliance with various 
observations of DGMS. The machines were under field trial even after a lapse of 
three years since their receipt. 
Thus due to inept contract management, BCCL had to incur a wasteful expenditure of 
` 11.16 crore on procurement of two Road Header machines that were lying idle for more 
than 3 years with little prospects of their gainful utilization.
South Eastern Coalfields Limited 
3.3 Operational Performance of Dankuni Coal Complex 
3.3.1 The Dankuni Coal Complex (DCC) was established at a cost of ` 147 crore in 
1990 as a unit of Coal India Limited (CIL) based on the recommendations of the Fuel 
Policy Committee, 1974 of Government of India (GOI), and the Working Group No. 9 
and 10 of the Planning Commission (1974). Later, CIL handed over DCC to South 
Eastern Coalfields Limited (SECL) for running the plant on operating lease basis in April 
1995 and renewed lease subsequently at an annual lease rent of ` 7.50 crore followed by 
further renewal of lease w.e.f. 01.04.2010 at Re. 1 per annum.
3.3.1.2 The objective of setting up  DCC, a low temperature carbonization (LTC) plant, 
was to produce environment friendly coal gas
1/coke/tar and other coal derived by-product 
chemicals from non-coking coal for domestic and industrial use. The Plant includes Coal 
Handling Plant for crushing and screening coal into coal fines and obtaining sized coal, 
Retort Plant for heating up coal to produce coal gas, Gas Cleaning Plant for cleaning coal 
gas and separating tar, light oil and other impurities from the gas and a Gas Holder for 
storing gas. There are other utilities like the Gas Compressor for compressing and cooling 
the gas for taking out further impurities and the Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP
2) for 
treatment of the toxic effluents. 
                                                           
1 Coal gas/town gas is a flammable gaseous fuel made by the destructive distillation of coal. 
2 ETP is a plant designed to treat the effluent comi ng from different areas of the plant out of production 
process.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
67 
3.3.1.3 An attempt was made in Audit to assess whether the Unit operated efficiently and 
economically while fulfilling the objective for which the Unit was established and 
included an examination whether: 
• the targeted level of production was achieved;
• the equipment was properly maintained and utilised; 
• effective marketing mechanism existed; 
• proper pricing of products was ensured; 
• regular review of the state of the plant was done; and 
• environmental requirements were fulfilled.    
3.3.1.4 Audit reviewed the accounts and records of DCC pertaining to last five years ie. 
from 2009-10 to 2013-14. Recommendations of the Fuel Policy Committee (1974) of 
GOI, recommendations from the Working Group No. 9 and 10 of the Planning 
Commission (1974), projections in the Feasibility Study on the unit, revised cost estimate 
for the unit, decisions of the Boards of CIL and SECL for the approval of various agenda 
items w.r.t. functioning of DCC, and reports submitted by external agencies on various 
functional areas of the unit were studied in Audit.
3.3.2 Audit Findings 
3.3.2.1 Analysis of the operating results of DCC for the five years ended 31 March 2014 
(Annexure-I) revealed that contributions from operations were in the range of only 18 
per cent to 27 per cent of the income from sales proceeds. This could recover the fixed 
cost to the extent, at an average of 70 per cent only. As a result, contribution failed to 
recover even the fixed cost of the unit, approximately in the range of ` 5 crore to ` 31 
crore during 2009-10 to 2013-14, which led to enhancement of operating loss to the equal 
extent during the same period.  
3.3.2.2  The expenditure of DCC for the period 2009-10 to 2013-14 relating to pay and 
allowances, maintenance charges, plant running expenses and town administration 
expenses was as depicted under:        
(
` In Lakh)
Year Pay and 
allowances 
Maintenance
Charges
Plant
running
Exp. 
Establish
ment
Exp. 
Town 
Admn.
Exp. 
Exec Non-
Exec
Capital Revenue 
2009-10 743.89 2129.19 - 423.74 11378.27 1157.80 30.00 
2010-11 675.52 2406.15 - 486.75 11979.54 356.83 30.42 
2011-12 729.62 3214.68 - 496.22 15151.97 392.69 47.18 
2012-13 810.13 3543.30 - 724.51 12822.94 534.93 73.09 
2013-14 810.85 4007.69 19.01 764.99 14735.79 600.35 95.85 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
68 
From the above it transpires that despite sustaining substantial amount of loss, DCC could 
not adopt any conscious cost saving measures with a view to reducing annual financial 
deficit. While revenue expenditure on salaries and maintenance was on the rise, there was 
no capital expenditure on plants.
SECL contended (February 2015) that DCC always incurred bare minimum expenditure 
which was essential to run the plant with safety measures.  
However, it was noticed that establishment expenses and town administration expenses 
were on an increasing trend which implied that no effective cost cutting measures were 
implemented by the management. 
The accumulated loss of DCC stood at ` 650.97 crore as on 31 March 2014.  The reasons 
for the loss can be traced to the issues as follows: 
3.3.2.3 Under utilisation of plant capacity
Considering installed capacity of 1,500 tpd (ton per day) throughput of coal for 365 days 
in a year, i.e. 547500 MT coal in a year, the percentage utilised out of available 
throughput capacity (328500 MT) of DCC was in the range of 22 per cent to 51 per cent
and, on the other hand, percentage utilized out of installed capacity was in the range of 13 
per cent to 30 per cent in the last five years ended on 31 March 2014 (Annexure-II).
Chart 1 
Capacity utilization at DCC during 2009-10 to 2013-14
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
500000
600000
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
Installed
capacity [Coal 
(MT)]
Available
capacity [Coal 
(MT)]
Utilized
capacity [Coal 
(MT)]

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
69 
The target for production of coal gas and coke 
were fixed below the level of available 
capacity. Moreover, gas, coke and coke fines, 
the major products of DCC, were produced 
below the target fixed during the last five years 
ended on 31 March 2014, as projected in 
Chart 2, 3 and 4.
Chart 2 
Production of coal gas during 2009-10 to 
2013-14 ( in Nm
3)
Chart 3 
Production of coke during 2009-10 to 2013-
14 ( in MT) 
Chart 4 
Production of coke fines during 2009-10 to 
2013-14 ( in MT) 
It is seen in Audit that only a portion of the available capacity for coal gas and coke was 
planned as production target (in the range of 35-56 per cent  and 56-75 per cent
respectively). Moreover, under performance against target was as high as 40 per cent for 
coal gas, 47 per cent for coke and 57 per cent for coke fines. This has resulted in  loss of 
potential production to the extent of 5,81,35,249 normal cubic meter ♠  (Nm 3) coal gas, 
45,771 MT coke and 1,11,862 MT coke fines with an opportunity of earning potential 
revenue of ` 24.69 crore, ` 43.10 crore and ` 39.75 crore respectively during 2009-10 to 
2013-14. Details are indicated in Annexure-III.
                                                           
♠  Normal cubic meter is the metric expression of gas volume at standard conditions and it is usually 
defined as being measured at 0 °C and 1 atmosphere of pressure. 
0
20000000
40000000
60000000
80000000
10000000
12000000
Available capacity
Production Target
Production Actual
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
Available capacity
Production Target
Production Actual
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
Available
capacity
Production
Target
Production
Actual

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
70 
Audit observed that the reason for underperformance in all areas of production was 
endemic to DCC since inception of the plant. Though established in 1990, CIL had 
decided (1995) to hand over the unit to SECL on rent as the plant had not been able to 
achieve financial viability and was beset with problems such as low capacity utilisation, 
low off-take of coke and gas and sourcing of raw materials. By 2000, the plant had 
already completed the normal life of a chemical plant of its kind and needed renovation. 
However, SECL could not accomplish the attempted capital rehabilitation for DCC till 
date. High landed cost of coal and consequential high cost of production of gas coupled 
with non-remunerative price of gas and failure of marketing of by-products resulted in 
continuing accumulated losses, as detailed in the subsequent paragraphs. 
3.3.2.4 Delay in capital rehabilitation of the Plant 
DCC was commissioned in May 1990. The normal life of a chemical plant like DCC is 
envisaged to be ten years only. CIL had expressed its desire to lease out or sell DCC and 
the Ministry of Coal accorded the approval (December 2000) for the same.  
After a delay of almost seven years, a meeting was held on 26 June 2007 under the 
Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Commerce & Industry, Govt. of West Bengal with 
the representatives of CIL, Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) and 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, GoI for finding a way out for revival of DCC. 
Accordingly, CIL Board in its 235
th meeting (25 September 2007) accorded the approval 
for entering into a Joint Venture (JV) by CIL (23 per cent share) with HPCL (51 per cent
share) and Govt. of West Bengal (26 per cent share) for DCC.
However, in due course Govt. of West Bengal expressed their unwillingness to take part 
in the JV due to its financial crunch. Thereafter, HPCL appointed M/s SBI Capital 
Markets Limited (SBI CAPS) to carry out a detailed study of financial, legal, accounting 
and tax due diligence as well as valuation of DCC. SBI CAPS recommended that 
(November 2008) ` 69.03 crore was required for land purchase or ` 63.68 crore for land 
lease option by HPCL for acquiring 51 per cent stake in DCC. DCC would enter into a 
formal agreement with Greater Calcutta Gas Supply Corporation Limited (GCGSC), a 
Government of West Bengal undertaking and the sole distributer of coal gas in and 
around Kolkata for adequate supply of coal gas, on an ‘arms-length’ basis. CIL/SECL 
would execute the deed of transfer for transferring the land presently under the possession 
of DCC to the proposed JV with proper title and free of any encumbrances. CIL/SECL 
would obtain the revalidation/ renewal of all the relevant certificates/ consents/ approvals 
required from various statutory authorities in order to ensure smooth operations of the 
plant.
CIL Board considered (December 2008) the revised JV proposal with equity participation 
of HPCL (51 per cent) and CIL (49 per cent) along with due diligence report prepared by 
SBI CAPS. After more deliberations and setting up of a subcommittee, CIL held a 
meeting (April 2009) with HPCL and SBI CAPS, where HPCL expressed eagerness to 
complete the formation of JV and also establish Gas Distribution Pipelines network 
before emergence of any new player/competitor to capture the virgin gas market in West 
Bengal. HPCL also requested CIL for immediate decision and execution of draft 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) at the earliest for formation of the proposed JV. 
Agenda papers for Board meetings of CIL that were made available to Audit for the 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
71 
period 2009-10 to 2013-14 revealed no progress in the matter and nothing affirmative 
could be ascertained from the reply (November 2013) furnished by  SECL. 
Meanwhile, in January 2005, DCC submitted a capital rebuilding scheme to SECL which 
envisaged augmentation of production capacity of gas to the extent of 4,50,000 Nm 3 per 
day planned to be achieved under three phases with proposed total capital investment of 
` 58.83 crore. Later, DCC twice re-submitted modified revival plans, in 2005 and 2012 
which were not supported by cost benefit analysis. 
Revival plan for rebuilding of Retort Benches and enhancement of gas production to the 
extent of 2,75,000 Nm 3 in phased manner, involving capital investment of ` 54.17 crore 
in DCC, was submitted (June 2012) in SECL Board. It was seen in Audit that during 
2009-10 to 2013-14, SECL and CIL held 43 and 58 Board Meetings respectively. No 
concrete decision regarding rehabilitation of the plant was taken as seen from test check 
of records.
SECL management stated (November 2013/January 2014) that the revival plan worth 
`54.17 crore had been  under consideration and further action would be taken only after 
revision of price of co-products like coke, coke-fines, de-hydrated tar, etc and disposal of 
piled-up stock of these products. Further, in February 2015, it was stated that SECL was 
contemplating comprehensive capital rehabilitation and drawing out a roadmap for it in 
the form of upgradation of technology/adoption of new technologies. 
The fact, however, remains that SECL as controlling authority of DCC failed to take any 
action so far to implement the revival plan which was necessary to bring DCC into 
economic health. 
3.3.2.5 Procurement of poor quality coal at higher landed cost 
As per the Feasibility Report (September 1977) of the unit, coal was proposed to be 
purchased from the collieries
1 of Eastern Coalfields Limited (ECL) as coal from these 
collieries was considered to be conducive to the Plant in terms of ash content, volatile 
matter and moisture. DCC, therefore, used to procure raw coal from ECL since inception.  
In April 1995, DCC was handed over to SECL by CIL on operating lease basis since it 
had not achieved financial viability. CIL specified a need to identify adequate quantity of 
appropriate coal from alternative sources and endorsed sourcing coal from collieries
2 of 
SECL while handing the unit over.
However, contrary to the purpose envisaged, on test check of records it was noticed that 
coal received from different collieries of SECL included coal fines and stones, which 
could not be fed into the Retort Plant. Further, procured coal, especially from Bhatgaon 
and Amlai area of SECL contained higher moisture and  ash leading to lower calorific 
value
3 of the products. 
                                                           
1  JK Nagar, New Kenda and Sripur colliery 
2 West Chirimiri, Korba, Baikanthpur, Amlai, Bishrampur, Jamuna & Kotma, Bhatgaon and Hasdeo. 
3 Calorific Value is the amount of heat produced by the complete combustion of a material or a 
fuel.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
72 
Audit observed that DCC had to incur average railway freight for G4 & G5 (ROM) coal 
as high as ` 1440 per MT during 2009-10 to 2013-14, resulting in high landed cost of coal 
at DCC (as high as ` 5283 per MT during 2009-10 to 2013-14), as collieries of SECL are 
situated more than 800 kms from DCC. Thus, Audit had pointed out (August 2013) that 
during the period, 20-37 per cent of the landed cost of coal was towards railway freight as 
indicated in the table under: 
Year
     (1) 
Landed cost of coal per 
mt including freight (`)
(2)
Freight charges per mt 
(`)
(3)
per cent  of Freight 
charges over Total 
landed cost of coal 
(4)=(3/2)*100 
2009-10 2930.65 1102.18 37.60 
2010-11 3319.59 1097.58 33.06 
2011-12 5282.73 1091.60 20.67 
2012-13 4334.71 1292.39 29.81 
2013-14 4581.04 1441.56 31.47 
While accepting the contention of Audit, SECL stated (November 2013) that DCC had 
already started procuring coal from ECL (Raniganj) since September 2013 to bring down 
the landed cost of coal. SECL worked out the difference in cost between coal procured 
from ECL and SECL to be in the range of ` 1000 per MT approximately.  
Thus, it was only after the issue was flagged in Audit (August 2013), that DCC started 
procuring coal from ECL since September 2013 while continuing to procure coal from 
SECL too. DCC, therefore, lost the opportunity of potential savings in railway freight of `
138.45 crore during 2009-10 to 2013-14 ( Annexure-IV) by not procuring coal entirely 
from ECL. It was further seen that upto March 2014, DCC had been able to prevent loss 
of  revenue to the tune of ` 10.50 crore on account of freight charges only by procuring 
coal from ECL since September 2013.  
3.3.2.6 Absence of a formal agreement between DCC and GCGSC leading to non-   
remunerative pricing of coal gas 
DCC commenced its commercial production in May 1990. MoU was signed (May 1990) 
between DCC and GCGSC for supply of gas indicating therein the price offered by 
GCGSC. Accordingly, price of coal gas was fixed at ` 8.50 per therm
1  excluding sales 
tax and the same was applicable for a promotional period of one year only. It was also 
decided that the price would be reviewed jointly amongst GCGSC, DCC, representatives 
of Govt. of West Bengal and GoI after six months of commencement of supply of gas. 
However, with a view to fetching remunerative price for coal gas, the then CMD, CIL, 
suggested (April 1979) a price escalation formula
2 which was duly accepted (May 1979) 
by the Govt. of West Bengal. The MoU was valid for a promotional period of only one 
year, i.e. upto April 1991. No further MoU was entered into between the parties 
                                                           
1 unit of heat energy approximately the energy equivalent of burning 100 cubic heat of natural gas 
2 Pf = Pi{ 0.35 + 0.4*Cf / Ci + 0.1*Ef / Ei + 0.05*Lf / Li + 0.1*Chf / Chi }; where C stands for Coal, E stands 
for Power, L stands for Wages and Ch stands for Chemical prices. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
73 
thereafter. Though GCGSC is the only distributor of DCC produced coal gas, there is no 
legal agreement in existence between the two parties. Hence, business between the parties 
was carried out without any valid agreement. Though GCGSC proposed (December 
2003) to enter into a legally enforceable agreement, DCC abstained from taking any 
initiative (December 2003) in this direction, and rather emphasised on immediate revision 
of coal gas price. There was no concrete decision on the part of DCC towards reframing 
of MoU or entering into a legal agreement with GCGSC (till December 2014). 
However, it would appear that DCC could have been in a better position had it accepted 
the proposal (December 2003) offered by GCGSC for drafting a legally enforceable 
agreement covering every aspect mutually beneficial to both the parties. 
As far as CIL is concerned, it only participated in a meeting (18.03.2004) where 
representatives of DCC, SECL and Govt. of West Bengal were also present. CIL showed 
its concern for non-remunerative price of coal gas for DCC but at the same time declared 
that it (CIL) was not in a position to substantially invest in DCC’s revival. Further, no 
effective role of CIL in regard to DCC was found on record. 
Audit observed that the price of coal gas has been revised and fixed solely by the 
Government of West Bengal from time to time unilaterally only after series of requests 
from DCC that the same was not remunerative enough as depicted under: 
Year & Month  Prices of coal 
gas per therm
(in
`)
Cost of production 
of coal gas per 
therm (in 
`)
Upto:   1996 July  8.50 - 
w.e.f:   1996 August 9.50 - 
     1997 November 11.50 - 
     1999 November 13.00 - 
     2000 September 14.00 - 
     2002 February  15.40 - 
     2004 January  17.00 - 
     2004 October  19.19 - 
     2006 February 22.00 - 
     2008 January 25.00 47 
     2010 April 30.00 47 
     2010 November  33.00 62 
     2011 September 38.00 91/93 
     2014 January 45 to 85 
(progressive)
81
It would be observed that in 18 years, price of coal gas had increased only around 500 per 
cent. In the meanwhile, within a span of six (6) years, the per therm cost of production of 
coal gas at DCC went up by almost 200 per cent, being ` 47 in 2009-10, ` 62 in 2010-11, 
` 93 in 2011-12, ` 91 in 2012-13 and ` 81 in 2013-14, which was not matched by the 
prices allowed. Thus, DCC had to bear loss during 2009-10 to 2013-14 arising out of 
dispatch of gas to GCGSC to the tune of ` 112.83 crore (Annexure-V). There was, as 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
74 
such, insufficient incentive for DCC to enhance its production as more production would 
have meant more loss. 
However, after the issue was flagged in Audit (August 2013), the price of coal gas has 
been increased (December 2013) to ` 45 per therm with progressive increase in rate with 
increase in demand, upto a maximum of ` 85 per therm w.e.f. January 2014. It was 
further noticed that even after the price was revised in 2014, the per therm cost of 
production of coal gas was `81 in 2013-14. Therefore, in spite of the continuing 
accumulated loss, the company was able to earn additional revenue of `3.33 crore from 
January 2014 to December 2014 as a result of the latest price revision giving it partial 
relief. But this price revision was also not sufficient to cover the gap between the cost and 
the sales price.
It is pertinent to mention that GCGSC charged prices as high as `51/ therm, ` 110/ therm 
and ` 100/ therm, retaining margins of ` 25/ therm, ` 55/ therm and ` 54/ therm from 
Domestic, Commercial and Industrial consumers, respectively, during 2009-10 to 2013-
14 (Annexure-VI).  
DCC while accepting the facts, stated (August 2013) that though price of gas was 
reviewed by GCGSC from time to time, the specific formula-based review of the price 
was never done jointly by DCC, GCGSC, Government of West Bengal and Government 
of India.
Though the matter of fetching remunerative price of coal gas was regularly taken up in 
the meetings and discussions with GCGSC and SECL, it was not taken up with CIL and 
GOI. However, on being pointed out (August 2013) by Audit, the issue was taken up with 
the Government of West Bengal only in December 2013.  
Thus, scrutiny of records made available in Audit revealed that DCC/SECL did not make 
any serious effort to escalate the issue to the level of CIL and Government of India earlier 
than August 2013 so as to fetch remunerative price for coal gas though the same was 
incumbent on the part of DCC for its survival.  
3.3.2.7 Low offtake of gas against committed demand by a single customer and 
consequent flaring of gas leading to loss 
Feasibility Report (September 1977) of DCC indicated that Government of West Bengal 
would arrange for uniform offtake of coal gas.  Later, GCGSC, a Government of West 
Bengal undertaking became the sole customer of DCC coal gas with the finalization of 
MoU (1990) which was to be valid for a promotional period of one year. GCGSC was 
only to distribute the same to the ultimate consumers in industrial, commercial and 
domestic sector in and around Kolkata. GCGSC set up a PRS
♣  inside the Plant area of 
DCC for drawing coal gas for distribution. 
The position of production, supply vis-à-vis loss of coal gas for last five years ended on 
31 March 2014 was as follows:
                                                           
♣  Pressure Reducing Station (PRS) is set up alongside gas pipelines to filter out ingresses of solids and 
liquids and to control the gas pressure to bring up the same to the contractual specifications for delivery.  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
75 
                 (In Lakh Nm3)
Year Production Supply Gas loss due to flaring 
and venting 
2009-10 578.42 549.47 28.94 
2010-11 579.80 557.87 21.93 
2011-12 418.34 413.80 4.56 
2012-13 363.01 358.27 4.71 
2013-14 451.61 440.28 11.35 
TOTAL 2391.18 2319.69 71.49 
In this regard, Audit observed that GCGSC did not draw gas against committed demand 
in several occasions (December 2008, March 2009, January and February 2014) which 
led to the flaring and venting of coal gas to the extent of 71.49 Lakh Nm
3 during the 
period 2009-10 to 2013-14. This also created environmental problems leading to 
complaints by local people. DCC stated (September 2013) that gas production is based 
on demand of GCGSC being the sole distributor of gas. Thus, when GCGSC’s demand 
fluctuated, especially during the weekends and holidays and GCGSC did not alert DCC 
about the low demand well in advance, DCC could not control the production which, in 
turn, resulted in flaring of gas. 
The fact, however, remains that DCC /SECL management had never done a detailed 
techno-economic feasibility study including a strategy for direct marketing of gas based 
on proposed demand of coal gas by prospective customers . Also, a scientific marketing 
strategy for the products of DCC needed to be adopted at the earliest to prevent wasteful 
flaring of gas and enhance its customer base to ensure its commercial viability. 
3.3.2.8   Unsuccessful modernisation efforts
DCC uses the ‘Continuous Vertical Retort’ supplied by M/s Woodall-Duckham Limited, 
United Kingdom (UK) since inception.  
It was noticed in Audit that formation of a Joint Venture (JV) between Gas Authority of 
India Limited (GAIL) and CIL was proposed (September 2011) by GAIL for setting up a 
coal based synthetic natural gas (SNG) production facility by utilizing the existing 
facilities at DCC for enhancing production of coal gas with advanced technology. Even, 
on recommendation of the Government of West Bengal, Ministry of Coal, Government of 
India directed CIL to examine the proposal of aforementioned JV floated by GAIL. 
However, no action was initiated by GAIL in this regard in view of the following 
uncertainties: 
• The plant, being a very old one, was to be replaced with a new one, but land for 
the new unit was not available. 
• The existing system was not considered suitable for SNG. 
Further, it was also noticed that CIL advised (August 2012) SECL to invite an open 
Expression of Interest (EOI) for upgradation of the plant and to select one from the 
interested parties. But, no further step was taken by SECL in this regard.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
76 
SECL, in their reply, (November 2013 and January 2014) did not offer any comment on 
the above observation of Audit. 
However, at the behest of SECL (October 2013) DCC took up the matter with  Central 
Institute of Mining and Fuel Research, Dhanbad (CIMFR) with a view to exploring new 
initiatives for modernization. In this regard CIMFR suggested (July 2014) that before 
taking up the work of technological upgradation and modification, it would be prudent to 
opt for detailed technical assessments and marketing analysis. No further development in 
this regard was observed by Audit (February 2015) from DCC/SECL management and 
modernization efforts remained unfruitful. 
3.3.2.9 Low yield of by-products coupled with poor dispatch 
During the process of operation, DCC produces various by-products like coke, coke fines, 
coal fines, coal tar, ammonium sulphate and light oil which are obtained as by-products 
while producing coal gas so as to effectively utilize the raw coal. The yield of the by-
products from one tonne of coal as per the pre-operational (1976) norms as well as the 
latest available (July 2011) norms fixed by SECL vis-à-vis actual production is indicated 
below:
Year Coal
consum
ption
( in
Thous-
and
MT)
Coke Coal Tar Light Oil 
Norms
1976
(660
kg)
(in
Thous-
and
MT)
Norms
2011
(670 kg) 
(in
Thous-
and
MT)
Actual
 ( in  
Thousa
nd
MT)
Norms
1976
(40 kg) 
( in
Thous-
and
MT)
Norms
2011
(55 kg) 
( in
Thous-
and
MT)
Actual
( in
Thous-
and
MT)
Nor
ms
1976
(----)
Norms
2011
(3.6
Litre)  
(in
Thous-
and
Ltr.) 
Actual
(Ltr.) 
(in
Thous-
and
Ltr.) 
2009-10 346.82 228.90 232.37 25.78 13.87 19.08 8.75 - 1.25 0.34
2010-11 319.70 211.00 214.20 26.36 12.79 17.58 7.87 - 1.15 0.33
2011-12 263.50 173.91 176.55 27.57 10.54 14.49 5.29 - 0.95 0.31
2012-13 260.23 171.75 174.36 23.47 10.41 14.31 4.44 - 0.94 0.22
2013-14 297.28 196.21 199.18 26.47 11.89 16.35 3.66 - 1.07 0.28
Total 981.77 996.66 129.65 59.5 81.81 30.01 - 5.36 1.48 
From the above, it is evident that production of by-products was far below both pre-
operational and latest available norms.  
Records revealed that even though production was below the norms, revenue generated 
through sale of by-products constituted a substantial amount of revenue realised out of 
total sale of all products. This was as high as 74 per cent  (2009-10) of the total sale 
proceeds of DCC in the last five years ended on 31 March 2014 (Annexure-VII).
In the light of the above, Audit observed that during the concerned period, as yield of by-
products, particularly coke, coal tar and light oil was far below the norms, DCC suffered  
loss of opportunity to earn revenue valuing ` 663.26 crore (867005 mt), ` 188.10 crore 
(51813 mt) and  ` 9.48 crore (3879 kl) respectively (Annexure-VIII). 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
77 
It is also pertinent to note that effective marketing by DCC would have helped it to  
recover a portion of its loss. However, in the absence of competitive rates, DCC could not 
insist on the customers for regular lifting even by lowering the prices of products and 
offering rebate.
Therefore, though there was potentiality of earning revenue on sale of by-products, DCC 
could not tap that as it did not augment coal gas production. Even the produced by-
products were accumulating as stock on year to year basis (Annexure-IX) which can be 
seen from the graphs given below: 
Year-wise position of closing stock of coke and 
coal tar 
Year-wise position of closing stock of 
ammonium sulphate and light oil.  
Audit observed that DCC neither explored the possibility of getting new buyers nor 
insisted on the existing customers to lift products regularly resulting in huge accumulation 
of stocks. DCC attributed (September 2013) the reason for low off take of by-products to 
poor demand on account of low fixed carbon content of products coupled with higher 
price.
Thus, in the absence of quality control as mentioned above as well as a professional and 
innovative marketing strategy, DCC was deprived of benefits from liquidation of 
accumulated stock of by-products.   
3.3.2.10 Faulty effluent discharging system resulting environmental pollution 
While issuing environmental clearance, the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF), 
Government of India stipulated (April 1989) that the regulations made by the West 
Bengal Pollution Control Board (WBPCB) must be adhered to rigorously. Hence, as a 
measure to control environmental pollution, DCC commissioned (1990) an Effluent 
Treatment Plant (ETP) of 1000 cubic meter (m
3)/ day capacity. During the operation at 
8940.02
4692.24
17760.45
37204.76
61054.77
3783.83
4577.36
4860.39
5051.26
6430.03
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
80000
2009-10 2010-11 2011- 12 2012-13 2013-14
Coal
Tar
(MT)
Coke
(MT)
11.44
17.59
8.02
3.55
4.314.45
0.8 0.8 0.8
11.85
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
Light
Oil
(KL)
Amm
onim
um
Sulp
hate
(MT)

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
78 
DCC, toxic chemical wastes are generated, which needed prior treatment through ETP, 
before disposing of the same to Dankuni Canal and thereafter to the Ganges.
However, ETP set up by DCC was inadequate to treat its effluents as per pollution control 
norms of WBPCB. Inspite of denial of consent to operate by WBPCB several times (in 
2003, 2004 and 2005) and notice from the Hon’ble Kolkata High Court (October 2004), 
early steps on urgent basis were not taken by DCC in this direction. This ultimately 
resulted in non-issuance of consent to operate and a notice for closure (July 2010) by 
WBPCB.   
Audit observed (February 2015) that though the requisite statutory charges ( ` 6.50 lakh 
towards consent to operate  for the period 2013-15, ` 35,328 quarterly towards water cess 
and ` 7,800 towards collection and analysis of effluents) are being regularly collected by 
the State (WB) environment body, the closure notice had not yet been revoked. 
It was also noticed that National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI), 
Nagpur suggested (January 2010) construction of a new ETP of 1300 M
3/day capacity for 
upgradation at an estimated cost of ` 3.92 crore (approx.), later revised at ` 7.09 crore. 
SECL Board also accorded approval to the same (June 2011). While tender prepared by 
CMPDI was floated in December 2011, it could not be finalized (February 2015). Thus, 
there was lack of action and commitment on the part of DCC/SECL in improving the 
situation towards adhering to statutory requirements.  
In reply, SECL stated (November 2013) that the updated cost-estimate of new ETP was 
under preparation in consultation with CMPDIL and NEERI. It was further admitted 
(February 2015) by SECL that exceptionally long time is taken for scrutinizing the 
technical and commercial aspects of tender papers as offered by the parties for this 
“never-done-before-item” and therefore could not be further taken up with the 
Government of West Bengal, GCGSC, WBPCB and the like. 
The Ministry stated (February 2015) that initiatives were being taken to address the issues 
raised by Audit.
Conclusion
DCC was established to produce coal gas, coke, coal tar and other chemicals from 
low temperature carbonization of non-coking coal with a view to producing 
environment friendly coal gas and coke for domestic and industrial use. Audit, 
however, observed that since inception DCC did not operate efficiently to achieve 
financial viability. The Unit has been sustaining substantial loss as it operated far 
below its installed capacity in the absence of capital infusion towards revival/capital 
rehabilitation of the plant coupled with outdated technology, poor offtake of gas by 
customer, non-remunerative price fixed by customer, poor sale of by-products and 
absence of marketing strategy. Moreover, DCC did not take effective measures to 
control environmental pollution. Thus, neither DCC, nor SECL or CIL took any 
coordinated and productive steps to address the core issues pointed out above which 
would have helped DCC to get its financial health restored. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
79 
Recommendations 
 In view of the above, Audit recommends that: 
¾ SECL/CIL may guide DCC for putting in  place well defined cost cutting 
measures which may also be monitored periodically.  
¾ SECL/CIL may take up the issue of pricing of coal gas with Government of 
West Bengal and Ministry of Coal to ensure reasonable fixation of price which 
would help DCC/SECL in gainful recovery of cost. 
¾ DCC may enter into a formal agreement with GCGSC, West Bengal with a view 
to fetching remunerative price of coal gas and also explore adding alternative 
consumers.
¾ SECL/ CIL may assist and guide DCC in putting in place professional/ 
innovative marketing strategy for liquidating accumulated stock of by-products. 
¾ DCC/ SECL may expedite the process of commissioning new ETP, with the aim 
of making operations environment-friendly. 
Coal India Limited and its Subsidiaries 
3.4 Irregular payment towards encashment of Half Pay Leave/Earned Leave/Sick 
Leave
Encashment of half pay leave/sick leave/earned leave in deviation from DPE 
guidelines, resulted in irregular payment of ` 75.29 crore.
In line with the Department of Personnel & Training, GOI guidelines (October 1997) 
enhancing the ceiling for accumulation of Earned Leave (EL) to 300 days for Central 
Government employees, DPE allowed (August 2005) enhanced accumulation of EL up to 
300 days for the employees of CPSEs.  On a reference made by the Ministry of Shipping, 
DPE clarified to all the CPSEs on 26 October 2010 that employees of CPSEs were not 
permitted to accumulate EL for more than 300 days and CPSEs are not permitted to 
encash leave beyond 300 days at the time of retirement of its employees. 
In September 2008, GOI allowed consideration of both EL and Half Pay Leave (HPL) for 
encashment for Central Government employees with effect from January 2006, subject to 
a limit of 300 days for both kind of leave taken together. In a further clarification of 17 
July 2012, DPE referred to its instructions of April 1987 and reiterated that on retirement 
for CPSEs employees, EL and HPL could be considered for encashment subject to an 
overall limit of 300 days and that cash equivalent payable for HPL would be equal to 
leave salary as admissible for half pay plus dearness allowance and commutation of HPL 
would not be permissible to make up the shortfall in case EL to the credit of a CPSE 
employee was less than  300 days.  Further, GOI guidelines do not permit encashment of 
sick leave, which has been reiterated by GOI in December 2012 and February 2014 also. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
80 
Audit observed that the following CPSEs deviated from the DPE guidelines and made 
irregular payment of ` 75.29 crore to their employees towards HPL/EL encashment on 
superannuation/separation over and above the ceiling of 300 days. 
Sl.
No.
Name of CPSE Period ` in 
crore
1. Coal India Limited including North Eastern 
Coalfields Limited 
2009-10
 to
2013-14
5.57
Mahanadi Coalfields Limited 4.92 
Eastern Coalfields Limited 11.86 
Northern Coalfields Limited 6.07 
Western Coalfields Limited 10.15 
South Eastern Coalfields Limited including 
Dankuni Coal Complex 
10.44
Bharat Coking Coal Limited 5.46 
Central Coalfields Limited 15.26 
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute 
Limited 
5.56
Total 75.29 
CIL in reply stated (October 2014) that the guidelines issued by DPE were advisory in 
nature as clarified in the DPE’s office memorandum dated 08 April 1991. Government of 
India conferred Maharatna status on CIL with the delegation of power to structure and 
implement schemes related to personnel and human resource management and training.  
Therefore, there was no violation of the overall policy of Government of India in the 
matter of leave provisions for the executives of CIL. 
Reply is not acceptable as leave encashment beyond the overall policy of GOI was not 
permitted as per DPE instructions of April 1987. Further, DPE’s circular of 26 October 
2010 clarified that CPSEs were not permitted to encash leave beyond the overall ceiling 
of 300 days.  In another clarification issued in July 2012, referring to instructions of April 
1987, DPE reiterated that EL and HPL could be considered for encashment on 
superannuation subject to overall limit of 300 days. Moreover, clarification issued by 
DPE in July 2012 specifically disallowed encashment of sick leave. Further, the 
contention that even in GoI service, commuted leave is encashable as a good health 
reward is not factually correct as in GoI Service, only leave on half pay (HPL) is 
permitted to be encashed to the extent the encashment of Earned Leave at superannuation 
falls short of prescribed ceiling of 300 days and HPL is not allowed to be commuted for 
the purpose of encashment.   
Therefore, encashment of HPL to employees on retirement/separation beyond the overall 
ceiling of 300 days was in violation of DPE guidelines and was, thus, irregular. 
The matter was reported (November 2014) to the Ministry of Coal in respect of irregular 
payment in CIL, their reply was awaited (March 2015). 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
81 
CHAPTER IV: MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
MMTC Limited, PEC Limited and the State Trading Corporation of India Limited  
4.1 Trading Activities of Agro Commodities 
4.1.1 Introduction  
MMTC Limited (MMTC), The State Trading Corporation of India Limited (STC) and 
PEC Limited (PEC) are trading companies under Ministry of Commerce & Industry 
(MoCI). All the three companies undertake import, export and domestic trade by 
extending financial assistance to their business associates for a fixed trading margin.  
Audit reviewed the trading activities of agro commodities where dues were 
recoverable/written off as on March 2013 in MMTC, STC and PEC to identify the causes 
of specific failures in their operations leading to loss.  
4.1.2 Audit Findings 
4.1.2.1 Unauthorized lifting of agro commodities by the private associates  
As per the business model followed, the trading companies extend pre-shipment credit
♣
to the associates against export orders received by them or in the case of import of 
commodities on behalf of associates, arrange buyers credit to discharge the import 
liability and subsequently recover the amount.  In both the scenarios the goods remained 
pledged to the trading company till payment is received. The associate is responsible for 
arranging for foreign buyer/seller and also for ensuring payment. In the following cases it 
was seen that the PSUs continued trade with associates in spite of outstanding dues. It 
was also noted that the PSUs failed to saf eguard their assets pledged to them. This 
resulted in the PSUs incurring heavy losses. 
                                                           
♣  Pre-shipment financing {either on Letter of Credit (LC) or Do cuments against Payment (DP) terms of 
payments} is made available before goods are shippe d (usually against a confirmed order) to help an 
Associate to fulfil an export order. In LC basis, buyers establish LC in favour of trading PSU. In case of 
DP terms of payment, buyer remits stipulated percent (10-20per cent) as advance payment to trading 
PSU. Associate starts the process of domestic procure ment and approaches trading PSU for release of 
pre-shipment finance. The Associate submits Surveyor's report of pre-shipment insp ection for quantity 
and quality of the commodity proposed to be exported. Based on Surveyor report and only after the 
procured cargo reaches the port of shipment in th e custody of Cargo Handling Agent (CHA), who 
issues a "Trust Deed" in favour of trading PSU for the 100 per cent cargo, trading PSU releases 
finance to the associate. Associate ships the procured cargo and submits the documents to trading PSU 
for negotiation through Bank, in ca se of  LC and in case of DP terms of payment the documents are 
sent to overseas buyers for collection through the Bank of trading PSU. On receipt of payment from 
foreign buyers in the account of trading PSU, the trading  PSU, after adjusting its trading margin, 
advance made to associate, Bank charges and applic able interest etc. releases the balance amount to 
associate. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
82 
4.1.2.2 Export of maize, sugar and other agricultural commodities
STC extended pre-shipment credit for export of agricultural commodities by M/s. Mehak 
Feeds Industry [now Mehak Overseas Private Limited (MOPL)] during the period 2006-
07 to 2009-10. However, due to backing out by foreign buyers, non-acceptance of cargo 
on account of fall in international prices, demurrage charges at the destination port, etc. 
STC/MOPL could not recover the dues. Resultantly, an amount of ` 44.59 crore was 
outstanding as on October 2010 against MOPL. Subsequently (October 2010) STC again 
extended financial support to MOPL for export of maize. But in this trade also, STC 
could not recover the dues of ` 22.03 crore from MOPL. Physical verification of Indian 
Yellow Maize stocks procured by MOPL for export and kept in godowns at Kakinada, 
Kolkata, Nasik and Navi Mumbai, conducted by STC in March/April 2013, revealed that 
no stock was available in the godowns.
Audit observed that though MOPL was a persistent defaulter, STC extended pre-shipment 
credit beyond October 2010. Resultantly, ` 22.03 crore was added to recoverable from 
MOPL. Though STC was entitled to encash the Post Dated Cheques (PDCs) in the event 
of default by MOPL, STC failed to encash the available PDCs on the date of default. 
Subsequently the PDCs were dishonoured on presentation in February 2013.  As a result, 
STC could not recover outstanding dues of ` 91.51 crore (including interest of ` 15.65 
crore and overdue commission charged by SBI ` 9.24 crore) from MOPL (March 2014). 
The associate was absconding (since July 2012).
Management in its reply (November 2013) accepted the facts and stated that legal action 
for recovery of dues was initiated by the branch and provisions in the accounts for 
doubtful debts had been made during 2013-14 for ` 91.51 crore.
4.1.2.3 Import of Canadian Yellow Peas (CYP) 
STC entered into an agreement (June 2010) and imported 27500 MT of CYP on behalf of 
M/s Prime Impex Limited (PIL) which was stored at different sheds of Kolkata Port 
Trust.  STC arranged buyers credit and payment of ` 36.72 crore was made to foreign 
supplier.  As PIL did not make the payment, STC decided to invoke risk and cost clause 
and conducted physical verification of stock on 17 January 2011 in the presence of PIL's 
representatives, CHA and Surveyor and full stock was found available in different sheds. 
STC invited tenders and allotted 2500 MTs to bidders but Cargo Handling Agent (CHA) 
was not effecting the delivery. STC on 03 March 2011 learnt that the stocks were lifted 
by the associate in connivance with the CHA and the surveyor.
Audit observed that as per the agreement the goods were to remain hypothecated and 
pledged to STC, till final payment by PIL. Further, clause 5 of the agreement provided 
that CHA was to be appointed by STC. However, in contravention of the agreement, 
CHA was appointed by PIL; resultantly PIL in connivance with CHA lifted the stock 
unauthorizedly. Further, STC neither obtained any security against the amount financed 
nor took steps to secure the pledged stock safely. Against the outstanding dues of ` 36.01 
crore (March 2011), STC could recover only ` 2.34 crore by encashing security deposit/ 
available credit balance and balance recoverable from the associate was ` 33.67 crore, 
which was written off by STC (May 2012). 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
83 
Management accepted (March 2014) the audit observation and stated that FIR has been 
lodged against associate, CHA, surveyor and others for unauthorized lifting of stock. It 
has also initiated arbitration and legal action and in order to avoid such situations in the 
future, steps are being taken to revise the modus operandi.  
4.1.2.4 Export of rice bran
STC entered into three agreements on 25-9-2007, 27-11-2007 and 5-12-2007 with M/s. 
Saraf Impex Private Limited (SIPL) for financing export of aggregate quantity of 12000 
MTs of deoiled rice bran from October 2007 to February 2008. Against the total quantity 
procured, SIPL exported 5970 MTs and defaulted in exporting balance quantity of 6430 
MT (March 2010). The balance quantity valuing ` 3.05 crore was stored by STC in a 
private warehouse. STC assigned the work of assessing the stock and its quality to a 
Surveyor, whose survey report (December 2010) revealed that stock was available only to 
the extent of 985.8 MT against 6430 MT reported previously, the differential stock of 
5444.20 MT having been lifted by SIPL without the knowledge of STC.  Further, post 
dated cheques (PDCs) furnished by SIPL were dishonoured for which a legal case was 
filed by STC. Audit observed that STC neither obtained any security against the amount 
financed nor was it able to secure the pledged stock.  STC made a provision (June 2013) 
of ` 3.49 crore in the accounts against the amount recoverable from SIPL.   
Management replied (March 2014) that it filed a legal case against SIPL and on the basis 
of court order an amount of ` 78 lakh was recovered (February 2014) but thereafter the 
party stopped making payment. It was further stated that the company was in the process 
of filing arbitration case against SIPL to recover the balance dues of ` 2.71 crore.
The reply is not tenable as the management failed to protect its financial interest and 
could not recover the balance dues of ` 2.71 crore even after lapse of more than four 
years and the recovery of which has become doubtful.  
4.1.2.5 Import of CYP in PEC Limited
PEC entered into five agreements between 8 September 2008 and 3 September 2010 with 
M/s Prime Impex Limited (PIL) for import of 102500 MT of CYP and opened Letters of 
Credit (LCs) during September 2008 to September 2010. As per the agreements, the 
goods, at the risk and cost of Associate were to be pledged to PEC and were to be 
released only on authorization/written instructions of PEC. An independent surveyor was 
also to be appointed by PEC who was to be present at the time of each release. Against 
the total imported quantity of 102100 MTs, as per surveyor report dated 21 February 
2011, PIL lifted only 34395 MTs. As PEC observed shortages in the last week of 
February 2011 a physical verification was conducted on 4 March 2011 which revealed 
that almost the entire stock leaving a balance of 7975.314 MT had been unauthorisedly 
removed by PIL. CHA admitted that they released the balance quantity merely on the 
verbal assurance/ confirmation by PIL that they had obtained the de-pledge order from 
PEC.   

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
84 
Audit observed that associate was required to lift the material before the expiry of usance1
period, failing which PEC was at liberty to sell the goods at the risk and cost of the 
associate. However, though there was delay in lifting the stock by PIL, PEC failed to 
invoke the said clause.  PEC also failed to ensure day to day supervision and monitoring 
of the pledged stock and PIL in connivance with the CHA and Surveyor lifted the stock of 
59729.686 MT of CYP. Resultantly recovery of ` 121.33
2 crore (including overdue 
interest) (November 2013) became doubtful. Moreover, the claim lodged had also been 
denied by the insurance company on the ground that the cargo was removed 
unauthorizedly by the party.
Management replied (March 2014) that all the relevant files had been seized and after 
investigation the CBI-EOW Kolkata filed charge sheet in CBI court at Kolkata.  PEC had 
also written off the losses of ` 81.73 crore.
4.1.3 Acceptance of security in variance with accepted trade practices 
4.1.3.1 Allowing lifting of material on the basis of PDCs
PEC sold 118519 MT of imported wheat to M/s. Sree Laxmi Trading Corporation 
(SLTC) on High Sea Sales
3 basis (agreement entered between September 2006 and 
January 2007) which was pledged in favour of PEC. Release of the pledged stocks to 
associate was to be done against 100 per cent payment of cost of goods, PEC’s service 
charges and other expenses as per clause 16 of the Associateship Agreement. However, 
the lifting of wheat was very slow and 67343.801 MT of stock was lying with PEC (21 
January 2010). Audit observed that contrary to the aforesaid clause, PEC within one day 
of request by SLTC (30 March 2010), permitted (31 March 2010) to lift the balance stock 
valuing ` 61.63 crore against PDCs of ` 51.00 crore. PEC issued delivery orders on 31 
March 2010 against which SLTC took the delivery of entire material.  Though four other 
cheques issued by the associate of ` 2 crore each dated 30 March 2010 were available but 
PEC could not present these cheques before issuing delivery orders on 31 March 2010 
and subsequently on presentation between 20 April 2010 and 28 September 2010 all the 
four cheques were dishonoured.  The PDCs of ` 51 crore were also dishonored by the 
bank on presentation in June 2011 as the bank account of the party was closed on 1 
November 2010.  Thus, failure to ensure the recovery of cost before issuing delivery 
order led to a situation where recovery of ` 58.35 crore became doubtful (March 2014).  
Management replied (March 2014) that it had initiated legal proceedings against SLTC 
and also invoked arbitration clause with Indian Arbitration Council.  
4.1.3.2 Non-recovery of interest and service charges
PEC entered (17 November 2009) into an agreement with M/s PBR Impex for 
procurement of paddy with a financial assistance limit of ` 50 crore. The associate had to 
                                                           
1 Period for which buyers credit is arranged, usually 120 days. 
2 Booked in accounts only ` 81.73 crore.  
3 High Seas Sales (HSS) is a sale carried out by the carrier document consignee to another buyer while 
the goods are yet on high seas or after their dispatch fr om the port of origin and before their arrival at 
the port of destination.  HSS agreement should be signed after dispatch of goods from origin and prior 
to their arrival at destination port.   

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
85 
pay interest @ 10.5 per cent on the amount financed and the applicable service charges. 
The financial limit was enhanced (December 2009) to ` 70 crore.  PEC provided financial 
assistance to the tune of ` 72.70 crore (November 2009 to February 2010) to M/s PBR 
towards procurement of 32761.65 MT of paddy.  Though the entire stock was to be lifted 
by December 2010 but even after lapse of more than three years the party lifted 32523.40 
MT up to March 2014. Instead of recovering interest and service charges on the amount 
financed to the party in terms of the agreement, PEC decided to raise the claim on these 
accounts only after realization of principal amount. Resultantly, an amount of ` 13.13
crore was recoverable from M/s PBR, as on 31 March 2014, against which stock of only 
` 0.64 crore was available with PEC.
Management replied (March 2014) that Company was holding un-lifted stock valuing 
` 0.64 crore and PDCs for more than the outstanding amount towards interest cost.   
The reply is not tenable as the PDCs available against the security of balance recoverable 
amount were later on dishonoured in August/September 2014, for which PEC has initiated 
legal action. As no security is available with the Company, chances of realisation of dues 
of ` 12.49 crore (March 2014) have become doubtful.   
4.1.3.3 Export of sugar in STC  
STC entered (March 2007) into back-to-back contract with M/s PKS Limited, Kolkata for 
export of sugar to various countries. As per agreement, STC made 100 per cent payments 
towards cost of sugar (rake-wise) to Sugar Mills after getting 15 per cent payment from 
M/s PKS Limited and its request for release of payment to specific sugar mill. After 
exporting the consignment and receipt of export proceeds, STC was to release balance 
payment to PKS after recovering its trade margin, interest and other bank charges. PKS 
deposited post dated cheques (PDCs) of 110 per cent value of export order plus interest 
against amount financed by STC which could be encashed by STC, in case of any failure 
on the part of M/s PKS.  Due to drop in international prices, buyers did not lift the goods 
at the port of discharge in time and resultantly PKS sold the consignment at discounted 
rates. STC had financed ` 182.04 crore till 2009-10 to M/s PKS against which STC could 
recover ` 164.33 crore leaving balance outstanding of ` 20.89 crore (including interest up 
to 31 March 2011).  Further, cheques presented by STC for payment were dishonoured by 
banks.
Besides initiating legal action under Negotiable Instruments Act, STC invoked Personal 
and Corporate Guarantees furnished by PKS. As a result of legal action, Kolkata High 
Court appointed a Receiver who took possession of about 1.07 lakh MT Iron Ore stock 
lying at Gua, Jharkhand belonging to PKS Limited, which was hypothecated by M/s PKS 
to STC, in lieu of outstandings of STC, and covered the outstanding amount. 
Audit observed that as per agreement payment of consignment was to be made by foreign 
buyer on sight LC basis and funds disbursed by STC were to be liquidated by PKS within 
30 days from released date. However in the instant case, though outstanding dues were of 
2008-09 and default on the part of foreign buyer was clear, but STC failed to take timely 
action. The available PDCs were deposited only on 22 February 2011 and were 
dishonoured by the bank.  As a result, the recovery of ` 20.89 crore became doubtful.   

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
86 
Management in its reply (April 2014) stated that it had initiated legal action under Section 
138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act and also under Section 9 of Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act for recovery of outstanding dues. It had also invoked personal and 
corporate guarantee.  Further, as per the directions of Kolkata High Court a receiver was 
appointed for possession of 1.07 lakh MT of iron ore stock of PKS and the matter was 
referred to Indian Council of Arbitration (ICA), Delhi, which was pending. STC had also 
written off in 2012-13 total dues of ` 20.89 crore outstanding against M/s PKS.
The reply is not tenable as the management while writing off of outstanding dues admitted 
the fact that it would be difficult to sell the iron ore stock due to numerous restrictions on 
export/movement of iron ore from mines. Thus, failure to take timely action as per the 
provisions of the agreement, resulted in loss of ` 20.89 crore to STC.
4.1.4 Non-lifting of stock  
4.1.4.1 Import of crude palm oil
PEC imported (July 2012) 2999.766 MT of Crude Palm Oil (CPO) for M/s Mihijam 
Vanaspati Limited (MVL).  MVL had to lift the CPO within usance period of 180 days.  
Though usance period was extended twice for 90 days each and lifting period was 
extended for 60 days but still MVL could not lift the entire material and a balance of 
2385.766 MTs remained in stock (July 2013). The surveyor’s report (21 October 2013) 
revealed that stock of only 2333.341 MT was available. PEC also noticed (July 2013) that 
due to prolonged storage the stock might not be fit for human consumption. The PDCs of 
` 5.47 crore were dishonoured (September 2013). Audit observed that PEC failed to 
secure its financial interest for ` 15.45 crore and was also at risk of losing the pledged 
stock due to constant deterioration of the quality. Further, PEC failed to reconcile the 
difference of 52.425 MTs in the stock of CPO.
Management replied (June 2014) that PEC is taking all necessary steps to safeguard its 
interests and was also exploring opportunity to auction the cargo at the right time. PEC 
has also filed a court case against MVL for dishonour of cheque.
4.1.4.2 Blocking of funds due to non-lifting of pulses
M/s. R. Piyarelall Import & Export Limited (RPIEL) associated regularly with PEC for 
import of agro products and on 31 March 2010 there were outstanding dues of ` 114.53 
crore against the associate. Despite this, PEC again entered into agreements with RPIEL 
for import of pulses between August 2010 and February 2011. Audit observed that neither 
did the associate lift the entire stock nor did he pay the entire cost prior to payment of 
foreign LCs. PEC, however, failed to sell the stock at the risk and cost of the associate to 
recover the dues.
Management replied (June 2014) that the party was in financial crunch and had requested 
time for settling the dues and was liquidating the stock in lots on daily basis. RPIEL had 
also provided documents for mortgaging a property valuing ` 35 crore towards collateral 
security for outstanding dues.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
87 
However, the fact remains that PEC failed to take action as per the agreement even after 
more than three years of default which led to blocking of funds of ` 80.74 crore (February 
2013).
4.1.4.3 Supply of pulses to Govt. of West Bengal
On the request (July 2009 and August 2009) of Department of Food and Supplies (DoFS), 
Government of West Bengal,  MMTC offered (12 August 2009) to supply 5000 MTs of 
red lentils and 1000 MT of moong beans at a value of ` 25.72 crore and ` 5.03 crore 
respectively. DoFS confirmed the offer (13 August 2009) and assured to submit bank 
guarantee within 1-2 days. MMTC informed (16 September 2009) DoFS that the entire 
consignment of moong beans had sailed and the consignment of red lentils was also 
expected to be shipped shortly and requested to release bank guarantees. However, DoFS 
did not provide the BG and vide letter dated 24 September 2009 informed MMTC of their 
decision to cancel the import of pulses.   
Audit observed that, though execution of contract by MMTC was subject to 100 per cent
financial bank guarantee from DoFS, but it executed the contract without ensuring the 
receipt of bank guarantees. Subsequently, the material was sold in open market at a loss 
of ` 11.37 crore.
Management confirmed (March 2014) the facts and figures contained in the audit 
observation.
4.1.4.4 Delay in disposal of cotton waste
MMTC entered into an MOU (November 2009) with M/s Suchetan Export Private 
Limited (SEPL) for procurement of cotton waste from local suppliers for 100 per cent
back-to-back sale.  Accordingly, MMTC procured 1042.101 MT of cotton waste in 
November 2009 and 102.059 MT in the year 2010-11. As per terms of the MOU, the 
cotton waste was to be lifted within 120 days by making payment to MMTC. As SEPL 
failed to liquidate the entire stock within the stipulated period, the balance stock of 607.20 
MT (July 2012), was sold at risk and cost of SEPL in August and November 2012, i.e., 
after a delay of more than two years. The amount recoverable from SEPL on account of 
price differential and interest cost after adjusting available EMD was ` 1.33 crore.
Audit observed that delay in decision to invoke the 'risk and cost' sale clause and failure 
to ensure adequate financial security resulted in non-recovery of ` 1.33 crore.
Management in its reply (July 2014) stated that MMTC had PDCs of ` 1.50 crore but the 
same were dishonoured on presentation for which a criminal case was filed against the 
party.
4.1.4.5 Loss due to sale on risk and cost basis
MMTC entered into contracts (2010-11) for sale of pulses (Lemon Toor and Toor 
Malawi) on ex-godown basis with three associates. Though all three associates did not lift 
the quantity within the prescribed time limit, MMTC did not obtain additional EMD to 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
88 
cover mark-to-market losses as per the agreements and sold the un-lifted quantity on risk 
and cost basis, resulting in loss of ` 3.401 crore (July 2014).
Management accepted (July 2014) the facts and stated that EMD of all the three parties 
were forfeited and arbitration proceeding initiated for recovery of dues of ` 3.40 crore.
4.1.4.6 Non-lifting of imported Yellow Peas in STC 
STC imported pulses (2008-09 and 2009-10) on behalf of M/s R. Piyarelall Import & 
Export Limited (RPIEL). The stock was pledged to STC and the same was to be lifted on 
cash and carry basis within a period of 120 days. RPIEL was slow in lifting of the 
imported stock since beginning and also not co-operating in physical verification of stock. 
Ultimately, RPIEL failed to lift 21927.59 MT Yellow Peas (September 2013). In spite of 
this, STC did not take action to dispose of the material at the risk and cost of the party. 
The cheques given by RPIEL were also dishonoured on presentation (December 2012). 
Resultantly, an amount of ` 131.61 crore was outstanding against RPIEL (February 
2014), out of which STC had already written off ` 75.26 crore.
Management replied (March 2014) that legal action had been initiated against RPEIL 
under Section 138 of Negotiable Instrument Act to recover the outstanding dues. 
4.1.5 Unfruitful results of decree passed by Arbitration/Courts  
A review of records relating to arbitration and court cases in MMTC revealed that in 
three
2 cases even though the arbitration awards/High Court orders were in favour of  
MMTC but as the parties were either declared sick or filed an appeal against arbitration 
award, MMTC could not realize its dues of ` 12.63 crore3.
Management in its reply (July 2014) stated that the claims in two cases (M/s Varuna Agro
Proteins and M/s Surya Agro) were pending before the official liquidator, while in one 
case (M/s Priyanka Overseas Limited) the matter was pending before the Delhi High 
Court.
Reply of the management is factual and as the matter is pending before liquidator/court, 
the chance of recovery of dues of ` 12.63 crore is remote. Failure to recover dues inspite 
of court orders only buttresses the audit point of highly risky nature of activity.
Conclusion
Trade in agro commodities by the three CPSEs highlights mismanagement, possible 
fraud, negligence and absence of financial prudence. As the entire activity of 
identifying supplier, buyer, storage, arranging for shipment, etc. was performed by 
the associates which are private parties, it is a moot point whether these would 
qualify to be termed as ‘trading activity’. In fact, the three CPSEs failed to assess 
the credit worthiness of associates and have been involved in providing finance to 
                                                           
1 M/s Badri - ` 1.12 crore, M/s R. Piyarelall - ` 0.93 crore and M/s Balaji - ` 1.35 crore 
2 M/s Varuna Agro Proteins, M/s Surya Agro Oil and M/s Priyanka Overseas Limited. 
3 M/s Varuna Agro Proteins ` 7.36 crore, M/s Surya Agro Oil ` 3.37 crore and M/s Priyanka Overseas 
Limited ` 1.90 crore

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
89 
highly risky ventures without adequate safeguards. Resultantly, they suffered losses 
because of inadequate security against the amount financed and they were also not 
able to secure the pledged stock safely. Inordinate delays in disposal of un-lifted 
material and in taking decision to invoke the 'risk sale' clause as also release of stock 
on the basis of PDCs indicated culpability on the part of the Management. Though 
each CPSE has Government nominees on the Board of Directors, nothing came to 
notice to show that they had effectively protected the interests of the Government by 
insisting on adequate safeguards.
Ministry of Commerce & Industry in its reply (September 2014) stated that as the issues 
related to commercial activities of CPSEs, they had no further comments in the matter. 
Neelachal Ispat Nigam Limited 
4.2 Irregular payment of bonus  
An irregular payment of bonus amounting to ` 7.03 crore was made to the 
employees in deviation from the approved Annual Performance Linked Reward 
Scheme of the Company 
Neelachal Ispat Nigam Limited (Company) introduced (September 2006) an Annual 
Performance Linked Reward Scheme (APLRS) for its employees for a period of three 
years beginning 2005-06 which was extended thereafter. The scheme replaced the then 
existing system of payment of ex-gratia in lieu of annual bonus and was based on 
fulfilment of targets with respect to the budgeted pig iron production, oven pushing and 
techno-economic factors for coke rate having weightages of 35 per cent, 35 per cent and 
30 per cent respectively. The first two parameters were to have an earning potential only 
on achievement of at least 80 per cent performance. The amount payable per employee in 
a year depended on the sum total of earni ngs from the above three parameters multiplied 
by a profitability factor to be decided by the management based on net profit for the year. 
The total potential for payment under the scheme (including all the three parameters) on 
100 per cent fulfilment was stipulated at ` 8000 per employee. The scheme also had an 
additional earning potential of one per cent  for every five per cent  increase in 
performance over 100 per cent performance level for all three parameters.  
Audit examination revealed that in spite of incurring loss for 2010-11 and 2012-13 when 
related profitability factor became ‘zero’, the Company disbursed bonus amounting to 
` 4.52 crore. Further, computation of bonus for 2008-09 to 2011-12 included earnings 
from the first two parameters though the minimum required performance level of 80 per
cent was not achieved. The computation for 2006-07 also included earnings of more than 
100 per cent from its third parameter, though the scheme did not contemplate any such 
earning potential for individual parameters. This resulted in an excess payment of bonus 
amounting to ` 2.51 crore for 2006-07 to 2011-12 (except 2010-11).
It was also observed that payment of bonus relating to 2006-07 to 2012-13 exceeded the 
stipulated amount of ` 8000 per employee, though 100 per cent performance level was 
never achieved for all the three parameters. Further, the scheme lacked clarity in 
determining the profitability factor with respect to the net profit earned each year which 
was completely unrelated to the level of net profit earned. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
90 
The Company stated (October 2014) that the profitability factor was decided in 
consideration of profit earned in the previous year, expectation of employees and 
practices followed in neighbouring industries. It was also stated that under the prevailing 
scheme, in the year the Company incurred losses, the profitability factor was ‘one’ and 
hence employees were entitled to bonus payment for the components under production 
and productivity only. Also, considering general expectations of the employees, 
prevailing payment to employees during Puja time in neighbouring industries as well as 
in SAIL and in other units of public sector, relaxation and deviations were considered. 
The above contention is not acceptable in view of the fact that in the years the company 
incurred losses, the profitability factor was ‘zero’, and not ‘one’, as claimed by the 
management. As such, there should not have been any earnings under the scheme in the 
years when losses were incurred. Further, oth er factors like expectation of the employees 
were beyond the scope of the approved scheme. Moreover, Department of Public 
Enterprises had stopped (November 1997) payment of reward to employees of CPSEs 
which was beyond the scope of any approved scheme. 
Thus, the Company made an irregular payment of bonus amounting to ` 7.03 crore
• in 
deviation from its approved Annual Performance Linked Reward Scheme. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry (November 2014); their reply was awaited                
(March 2015). 
PEC Limited, MMTC Limited and the State Trading Corporation of India Limited  
4.3 Non-compliance to the directions of Government of India for export of rice to 
African Countries
PEC Limited, MMTC Limited and The State Trading Corporation of India Limited, 
while exporting rice to African Countries, failed to get the directions of Government 
of India complied with by their 'Associates'; resultantly, associates directly 
negotiated with foreign countries and earned huge profits, which otherwise could 
have been earned by these CPSEs.
Ministry of Commerce & Industry (MoCI), Department of Commerce allowed export of 
non-basmati rice to the African countries, namely Comoros and Mauritius in January 
2008 through MMTC Limited, Republic of Sierra Leone in March 2008 through PEC 
Limited, and Madagascar and Ghana in January 2008 and October 2008, respectively, 
through The State Trading Corporation of India Limited (STC). Export of rice was 
subject to conditions stipulated by Director General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) 
notifications dated 24-01-2008 that the CPSEs would (i) undertake the exports in 
consultation with Department of Food and Public Distribution (DFPD); (ii) buy rice from 
the market from those rice mills who had already delivered levy rice to STC/State 
Agencies, and (iii) ensure that the price paid for procurement of rice was as close to the 
MSP/levy price as possible so as not to disturb the procurement operations within the 
country.
                                                           
• ` 4.52 crore + ` 2.51 crore 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
91 
Audit observed that the CPSEs did not adhere to the aforesaid conditions. The 
'Associates' were also selected in a non transparent manner without inviting bids1 and in 
most of the cases governments of African countries nominated Indian suppliers to carry 
out the export of rice. The 'Associates' (suppliers) made direct negotiations with the State 
agencies/buyers in these countries and fixed export price of the rice ranging between 
USD 430 PMT to USD 684 PMT against the Minimum Support Price (MSP)
2 of rice 
USD 329.52 PMT as may be seen from the details given below:  
Name of 
PSU 
Country 
exported 
to
Quantity 
awarded 
(in MTs) 
Name of 
Associate 
Quantity 
exported  
(in MT) 
Export
Rate/MT
(in USD) 
PSU’s 
Margin/MT  
(in USD) 
Margin 
retained by 
Associate in 
excess of MSP 
of rice  
USD
329.52/MT 
(in USD) 
PEC Republic 
of Sierra 
Leone 
40000 Shivnath Rai 
Harnarain 
Ltd. (SRHL) 
22047.5 430 5 95.48 
17952.5 470 5 135.48 
MMTC Mauritius 9000 LMJ 
International 
Limited. 
9000 455 87 38.48 
Comoros 25000 SRHL 25000 495 14 Contract 
cancelled.
SRHL 3100 640 10 300.48 
Emmsons 
International 
Limited. 
2700 640 10 300.48
Amira 
Foods India 
Ltd. (AFIL) 
2700 640 10 300.48
STC Ghana 15000 AFIL 15000 684 10.26 344.22 
Madagas
car
50000 Jayamjay 
Export
50000 410-420 1.5 per cent Contract 
cancelled.
SRHL 45000 450 6.75 113.73 
SRHL 5000 458 6.87 121.61 
Thus, while the associates enjoyed profit margins in the range of USD 38.48 PMT to 
USD 344.22 PMT, the CPSEs earned a meagre margin ranging from USD 5-10 PMT 
(except in case of export made by MMTC to Mauritius where it was USD 87/MT). 
Further, though the rice was to be procured from those rice mills which had already 
delivered levy rice to STC/State Agencies, the CPSEs neither ensured that procurement 
was made from such mills nor obtained any certificate from the associates, except in the 
case of export to Ghana.   
                                                           
1 Except in case of export made by MMTC to Mauritius 
2 Rate of rice procured by 'Associates' in 2008-09 was not available. As such the rate of rice has been 
derived on the basis of rates of MSP of paddy and other charges for Custom Milled Rice delivered to 
the Food Corporation of India for Central Pool  during the Kharif Marketing Season 2008-09 in 
respect of Government of Uttar Pradesh and its agencies vide Government of India, Department of 
Food and Public Distribution circular No. 192(23)/2008-FC.A/Cs dated 4 November 2008, as under: 
Rate of Raw Rice (Grade-A) = ` 1512.84/qtl. or ` 15128.40/MT or USD 329.52/MT (considering  
1 USD=` 45.91) 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
92 
CPSEs also did not obtain approval of the respective Boards of Directors before 
execution of rice export though the ceiling of contract in all cases had exceeded the limit 
prescribed in their Delegation of Powers (DoP).
CPSEs replied (MMTC: January 2014, STC: May 2014 and PEC: June 2014) as under: 
 Associates were nominated by the concerned foreign governments which also 
settled the price and commercial terms with them directly. The associates 
procured the rice from those mills that had already discharged their levy 
obligations and exports were made on 'back to back' basis. Also, no funds of the 
CPSEs were involved and there was no loss in these transactions.
 The export price was summation of pre-shipment activities, ocean freight, etc. and 
was considered appropriate due to risky nature of trade with African countries.  
 The trade transactions were approved as per the Delegation of Powers by the 
Committee of Management/Directors (COM/COD) comprising CMD and all 
functional Directors. Moreover, the minutes of SPCOD/FMCOD 
♦  were 
submitted to Board on quarterly basis. 
Ministry of Commerce & Industry (MoCI) while endorsing replies of the three CPSEs 
stated (September 2014) that after examining the records of export of rice to African 
countries, three private sector firms involved in these transactions were blacklisted and 
debarred from all further transactions with CPSEs of the Department of Commerce for a 
period of four years. An advisory was also issued to other Ministries/Departments to 
abstain from doing business with these firms. Further, on the advice of Central Vigilance 
Commission, departmental enquiries were held by three separate Additional Secretary 
level officers of the MoCI. On the basis of the enquiry reports, the Disciplinary Authority 
awarded punishment to nine officials of the CPSEs. MoCI further stated that to prevent 
recurrence of such a situation in future, remedial action has been taken by the Ministry 
through issue of detailed guidelines. 
Reply given by CPSEs is not acceptable as they had not adhered to the conditions for 
export of rice stipulated by DGFT. Impact of guidelines of the Ministry, to prevent 
recurrence of such incidents will be assessed in future audits.  
The State Trading Corporation of India Limited 
4.4 Non recovery of dues due to operational lapses in Post Shipment Finance 
Lapses in implementation of post shipment finance scheme led to non-recovery of 
dues of ` 446.29 crore. Discounting of export documents of dubious legality 
conceded by EXIM Bank, were also noticed besides infructuous expenditure on 
insurance premium of ` 17.07 crore.
                                                           
♦  SPCOD – Sale Purchase Committee of Directors; FMCOD – Functional Management Committee of 
Directors 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
93 
4.4.1 Credit Linked Insurance Scheme 
4.4.1.1 The Committee of Management (COM)1 of the State Trading Corporation of India 
Limited (STC) approved (September 2005), post shipment finance (PSF) 2 under Credit 
Linked Insurance Scheme (CLIS) for export and import operations. As per the approved 
scheme, the Associate was to export the goods on STC’s account and submit export 
documents, which were to be routed through the Lender Bank i.e. HSBC for discounting
3.
HSBC was not to have any recourse against STC up to a loss of ` 50 crore per annum. 
The Associate would be paid on 'Document against Acceptance' (DA)4 basis and payment 
from foreign buyer was expected to be realised within 90 to 180 days. The terms and 
conditions of the trade were to be as per ‘Business Credit Shield’ Policy of M/s New 
India Assurance Company (NIA) (May 2005).  
4.4.1.2 While Mumbai branch of STC had initially proposed to source post shipment 
finance (PSF) from HSBC, STC also considered subsequent proposals from Export-
Import Bank of India (EXIM Bank) and ABN AMRO and selected EXIM Bank as its 
Lender Bank through an agreement in January 2006, for PSF for agricultural commodities 
and other products, with a credit limit of USD 50 million. EXIM Bank was to discount 
export bills at 90 per cent of invoice value. Repayment was to be made within 180 days 
from the date of disbursement or out of export proceeds, whichever was earlier.   
In a significant departure from the arrangement offered by HSBC as indicated in para 1.1 
above, STC was responsible for all operational risks under insurance policy and EXIM 
Bank had full recourse to STC. Thus loss due to defaults by foreign buyers in repayment 
of dues not covered by insurance was to be borne by STC. Funding was restricted to 
transactions covered under insurance policy and buyer's limit as specified therein. 
4.4.1.3 STC took credit insurance policy (November 2005) from NIA up to November 
2006 under which NIA was to decide revolving credit limit of foreign buyers. Fresh 
receivables would remain uninsured in case of debts older than 60 days from the foreign 
buyer. STC was to promptly inform NIA when a debt was partially or wholly unpaid 
beyond 30 days and furnish details of buyers making late payments by more than 30 days. 
Maximum liability of NIA was 30 times the premium paid and maximum term of 
payment was 180 days from the invoice date. Subsequently, STC took (June 2006) 
another credit insurance policy from ICICI Lombard up to June 2007, with terms and 
conditions similar to NIA policy, except that the maximum liability was enhanced to 50 
times premium paid.   
                                                           
1 Committee of Management comprised of Chairman & Ma naging Director, all functional Directors and 
Executive Director (Vigilance). 
2 Post shipment finance is a kind of loan provided by a financial inst itution to an exporter or seller 
against a shipment that has already been made. PSF is granted fr om the date of extending the credit 
after shipment of the goods to the stipulated date of realisation of the export proceeds. 
3 Cashing or trading a bill of exchange at less tha n its par value and before its maturity date. The Bank 
then presents the Bill to the borrower's customer on the due date of the Bill and collects the total 
amount. 
4 An arrangement in which an exporter instructs a bank to hand over shipping and title documents to an 
importer, only if the importer accepts the accompanying bill of exchange or draft by signing it.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
94 
4.4.1.4 As per contractual agreements executed by STC (February 2006 to July 2009) 
with its 'Associates', out of 90 per cent discounted bill value received from EXIM Bank, 
STC would retain 1.5 per cent  as trading margin and 5 per cent  towards incidentals. 
While 83.5 per cent  of invoice value was to be released against post dated cheques 
(PDCs) obtained from the 'Associates', the remaining 10 per cent was to be released after 
receipt of final payment from foreign buyers by Lender Bank and its release to STC.
Exports made under CLIS by STC during 2005-06 to 2009-10 amounted to ` 1565.13 
crore. STC did not realize its dues fully from the foreign buyers. Resultantly, EXIM Bank 
converted (December 2010) outstanding dues of ` 397.17 crore (including interest) into 
Working Capital Term Loan (WCTL). 
4.4.2 Audit findings
Audit reviewed PSF transactions during 2005-06 to 2009-10, relating to eight
♣  Associates 
with outstanding dues amounting to ` 347.70 crore (excluding interest on overdue 
receivable). The information/data on the basis of which the audit findings have been 
arrived at was compiled by audit and was referred to STC for confirmation in October 
2013. Though STC confirmed (December 2013) the financial data, it expressed its 
inability to confirm the outstanding/recoverable amounts against exports under CLIS. 
However, as on 31 March 2014, STC had made a provision of ` 446.29 crore against net 
receivables under CLIS. 
Lapses noticed in Audit are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
4.4.2.1 Failure to safeguard interest of STC 
Agreements entered into with the Associates did not include any provision to obtain Bank 
Guarantees etc., for safeguarding the financial interests of STC. Even in agreements 
where a few safeguards were provided, the same were not enforced. Illustratively, a 
clause for recovery of PSF disbursed to Associates in case of buyers’ default in making 
remittances included in agreements with M/s Masumi and M/s Ushma was not enforced 
and a similar clause was missing in agreements with other Associates.  
Further, as per agreements with Associates, payment from foreign buyers was required to 
be remitted to STC within 180 days and 90/120 days respectively from the bill of 
lading/airway bill date. While the default in payment by foreign buyers was seen in 71.43
per cent transactions in 2005-06, it was more than 99 per cent in transactions entered into 
during 2006-07 to 2009-10. Though default in making payments by foreign buyers was a 
major risk, STC did not enter into any agreement with the foreign buyers to safeguard its 
financial interests. 
STC stated (September 2014) that it had safeguarded its interests by way of legal 
provisions in the agreements which enabled it to take legal action against defaulter 
                                                           
♣  M/s: (i) Masumi ` 45.70 crore, (ii) Bonito Impex ` 85.02 crore, (iii) Ushma ` 157.74 crore, (iv)Vidyut 
` 3.97 crore, (v) Ganesh ` 5.00 crore, (vi) Indo Bonito ` 1.80 crore, (vii) Shalimar ` 22.00 crore and 
(viii) Space ` 26.47 crore (in case of M/s. Space, PSF was obtained from EXIM Bank as well as 
Standard Chartered Bank).

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
95 
Associates including M/s Masumi and M/s Ushma. STC also justified not entering into 
agreement with foreign buyers on the ground that export orders were received from the 
buyers, which were backed by agreements with STC's Associates. 
The reply does not consider the fact that legal action is resorted to as the last recourse and 
is a long and cumbersome process with uncertain outcome. The point remains that 
safeguards, such as Bank Guarantees etc, which would have precluded legal action were 
not part of the agreements.  
4.4.2.2 Acceptance of full risk by STC by deviating from approved Scheme 
As per CLIS, Lender Bank (HSBC) would not have recourse against STC in case of 
default by foreign buyers. However, deviating from the approved scheme, STC selected 
EXIM Bank as the Lender Bank primarily to avail credit facility of USD 300 million and 
assumed liability of full recourse but did not devise a mechanism to safeguard its 
financial interests against default by the foreign buyers.
STC stated (September 2014) that EXIM Bank was preferred as it was under the same 
administrative Ministry. It further stated that business was carried out through EXIM 
Bank and not with HSBC since as per agreement, entire responsibility for repatriation of 
export proceeds was of the Associates. 
The reply ignores the fact that in case of default by foreign buyer/Associate, STC was 
liable to settle the liability of Lender Bank.
4.4.2.3 Failure to comply with the requirements of insurance policies  
(a) In respect of two foreign buyers (M/s Mohammed Hamza and M/s Naif Kingdom) 
of M/s Masumi, though no credit limit was sanctioned by insurance companies, 
STC went ahead and traded with them.
STC replied (September 2014) that PSF was availed from Standard Chartered 
Bank  (SCB) in the case of M/s Masumi’s foreign buyers whose limits were 
sanctioned by insurance companies. 
The reply is not acceptable as the list of buyers in the agreement with SCB (June 2008) 
indicating credit limits approved by SCB, did not include the said two parties. 
(b) In order to safeguard financial interests of STC, outstanding dues of foreign 
buyers should not have been allowed to exceed the credit limits sanctioned by 
insurance companies. Audit scrutiny revealed that out of total 42 foreign buyers to 
whom exports were made, in respect of 25 buyers, the outstanding dues exceeded 
the sanctioned limit. This indicated ineffective monitoring of CLIS by STC. 
STC stated (September 2014) that they had stopped further transactions with 
overseas buyers on noticing the same. The reply does not deny that there was 
weakness in monitoring in STC.  
(c) STC failed to comply with the conditions in the insurance policies designed to 
control default in payment by foreign buyers as shown in Tables 1 & 2:

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
96 
Table 1: Non-compliance with terms of insurance policy with NIA 
Details of Transactions Policy-1 Policy-2 Policy-3 
Total Transactions 33 71 49
Less: Records relating to transactions no t available/provided by 
STC
7 Nil Nil
Less: Cases where date on which payment was to be received from 
foreign supplier is not available with STC
Nil 17 07
Transactions for which records were available 26 54 42
Transactions with delayed payments by buyers 25 52 42
Transactions which were not covered by  insurance as debt due for 
more than 60 days were not reported to NIA
11 24 31
Transactions where STC failed to comply with condition of 
notifying NIA of non-payment by buyer beyond 30 days
15 37 39
Transactions with default exceeding six months ‘Protracted Default’ Nil Nil 15
Transactions where STC failed to comply with condition of 
notifying consistent non-payment beyond 30 days by the buyer in 
the last 12 months
13 43 39
Table 2: Non-compliance with terms of insurance policy with ICICI Lombard 
Details of Transactions Policy-1 Policy-2 Policy-3 & 
4
Total Transactions 394 413 23
Less: Cases where date on which payment was to be received from 
foreign supplier is not available with STC
100 350 23
Transactions for which records are available 294 63 0
Transactions with delayed payments by buyers 292 63 0
Transactions with default exceeding four months ‘Protracted 
Default’
128 21 0
Transactions where STC failed to comply with condition of 
notifying consistent non-payment by buyer with least possible delay
349 163 23
STC stated (September 2014) that departmental proceedings and CBI inquiries were 
going on against the delinquent officials.
4.4.2.4 Mismanagement of credit insurance policies
(a) STC had taken credit insurance policies from NIA and ICICI Lombard paying a 
total premium of ` 17.07 crore for the period November 2005 to February 2010. 
As per the terms and conditions of the policy, STC was required to file various 
declarations periodically, viz. insurable turnover and overdue payments, etc. 
However, due to failure in complying with these conditions, STC could not lodge 
the claims with the insurance companies. Further, insurance policy taken in 
February 2009 from NIA with Maximum Loss Liability (MLL) of ` 250 crore 
required quarterly payment of premium of ` 1.04 crore. STC did not pay the 4
th
instalment due in November 2009. Resultantly, the policy was rendered 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
97 
inoperative. Thus, the amount of insurance premium paid to NIA in the previous 
three instalments totalling to ` 3.13 crore♥  was rendered wasteful. 
Here also, STC stated (September 2014) that the departmental proceedings and CBI 
inquiries were ongoing against the delinquent officials.
 (b) Insurance policies taken by STC restricted the loss recoverable by it to the 
Maximum Loss Level (MLL) i.e. 30-60 and 50 times of premium paid in case of 
NIA and ICICI Lombard, respectively. Though MLL had remained lower than the 
dues in default, no remedial measures were taken by STC to revise the insurance 
premium to increase MLL. This was in spite of the fact that as per agreement, the 
insurance premium was recoverable from the Associates. 
STC stated (September 2014) that as MLL remained less than the loss recoverable from 
the insurance companies, it had initiated action against STC's officials responsible for the 
same. CBI enquiries were also on going. 
4.4.2.5 Renewal of credit limit without assessment of its benefits 
Recovery of dues from buyers was not satisfactory from the very first year of operation of 
CLIS, as there were delays/defaults in 102 out of 103 transactions as on 31 January 2007. 
Operational/ financial prudence required an analysis of transactions of the previous year 
before renewal of the credit, STC renewed the credit of USD 50 million from EXIM Bank 
in February 2007 without such analysis. In the above stated 102 cases where receipt of 
payment from buyers was delayed, no correspondence with EXIM Bank or with the 
insurance companies was available. 
STC stated (September 2014) that buyers were making payments through EXIM Bank 
which was aware of the situation. 
Reply does not explain how renewal of credit limits without assessment of performance 
of foreign buyers could be considered a prudent financial decision. 
4.4.2.6 Discounting of export documents of dubious legality with EXIM Bank
Due to continued default in payment by foreign buyers, by 31 March 2009 the credit 
advanced by EXIM Bank, had to be graded as a ‘Non Performing Asset’ (NPA). In order 
to avoid NPA situation, STC submitted to EXIM Bank, photocopies of 28 invoices 
purportedly evidencing export of 'cut and polished' diamonds undertaken by M/s Ushma 
valuing USD 14.48 million. EXIM Bank discounted these bills and adjusted the amount 
against their dues. However, STC actually received only 18 shipping documents worth 
` 73.64 crore after a long gap in May 2009. Again on 30 June 2009, to avoid NPA 
situation, STC submitted another batch of export documents evidencing export of 'cut and 
polished' diamonds by M/s Ushma, M/s Indo Bonito and M/s Masumi, which were 
discounted and adjusted by EXIM Bank against the dues towards credit under CLIS. 
                                                           
♥  This is included in the total premium of ` 17.07 crore paid to insurance companies as mentioned in 
para 2.4(a).  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
98 
However, despite repeated demands by EXIM Bank, STC did not provide the Bills of 
Exchange duly accepted by respective foreign buyers.  
Adjustment of CLIS overdues as mentioned above was questionable as the diamond 
export documents purportedly evidencing exports of ` 385.73 crore were of dubious 
legality as no buyers' acceptance of the Bills of Exchange was ever received in respect of 
the said export documents.  
STC accepted (September 2014) that diamond shipping documents were submitted to 
EXIM Bank against which STC did not avail any credit from the latter. It further stated 
that departmental proceedings and CBI inquiries were on against their officials who had 
handled the jewellery, 'cut and polished' diamonds documents to EXIM Bank, without 
buyers’ acceptance when transactions were on Documents against Acceptance (DA) 
payment terms.  
4.4.2.7 Non formulation of guidelines 
CLIS being a new business model required guidelines for its effective formulation and 
implementation which was not done. STC replied (September 2014) that business was 
carried out as per the drill/terms contained in the COM note and also agreement signed 
between STC and Associates.
Reply is not tenable as the COM note/agreements did not include any safeguards to 
protect financial interests of STC. The reply also contradicts the fact mentioned  in the 
report given in June 2009 by a committee formed by STC to review CLIS, which stated 
that no drill/line of action was formulated for operations under the scheme.  
4.4.2.8 Reply of Ministry of Commerce & Industry 
Ministry endorsed (June 2014) the reply given by STC and also intimated that a criminal 
complaint was lodged with CBI, Mumbai and the matter was under investigation. CBI 
had registered cases against business Associates and their executives, insurance 
consultants and three officials of STC. Disciplinary action had also been initiated by STC 
against its seven officials.
Conclusion
STC was negligent in safeguarding its interests while entering into a new business 
scheme leading to huge losses. STC’s failure to comply with the conditions of credit 
insurance policies rendered it unable to recover trade losses from insurance 
companies. The corporate office of STC camouflaged the outstanding dues by 
allowing adjustment thereof by EXIM Bank against shipping documents for 
jewellery/diamond export, the legitimacy of which was doubtful. 
Lapses in the PSF scheme, brought out above, could have been rectified during the 
course of its implementation by undertaking a critical review and putting in place 
adequate safeguards, which would have avoided non-recovery of dues of 
` 446.29 
crore apart from infructuous expenditure of ` 17.07 crore on insurance premium. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
99 
The Ministry is advised to review and correct deficiencies in monitoring and control 
of business activities of STC by its Corporate Office/Board of Directors, without 
necessarily awaiting results of disciplinary action and CBI investigation.
STCL Limited  
4.5 Unfruitful expenditure at Spices Park, Chhindwara, Madhya Pradesh 
Unfruitful expenditure of  ` 7.13 crore on establishment of Steam Sterilization Unit 
and Grinding and Packing Unit at Spices Park, Chhindwara, Madhya Pradesh
STCL Limited (Company), a Government of India Undertaking and subsidiary of The 
STC of India Limited, headquartered at Bangalore intended (March 2008) to establish a 
Steam Sterilization Unit (SSU) and Grinding and Packing Unit (GPU) at Spices Park, 
Chhindwara, Madhya Pradesh. These two units were to carry out the functions of 
cleaning, fumigation, grading, grinding, processing and packing of spices. The main 
objectives of setting up these two units was to ensure high quality of processed spices, 
reduce use of pesticides and other contaminants and thus comply with international food 
safety standards and quality specifications, promote marketing of branded spices directly 
to consumers in the international market, ensure higher returns for spice farmers through 
value addition in processing, enhance production of spices and help exporters to earn 
valuable foreign exchange. The project cost for setting up the two units was estimated at            
` 8.04 crore, including cost of land, building, plant and machinery, power, water, 
preliminary and pre operation expenses, working capital, furniture and contingency. It 
was proposed that the above project cost would be financed by the Company to the extent 
of ` 1 crore, while the remaining ` 7.04 crore would be allocated by Government of India 
(GoI) under the ASIDE (Assistance to States for Developing Export Infrastructure and 
Allied Activities) scheme.  
Accordingly, the Company submitted a project proposal for establishment of the above 
two units and requested (March 2008) Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Ministry) for 
sanction of funds amounting to ` 7.04 crore, along with duly filled application, including 
detailed project report on technical feasibility and economic viability. In response, the 
Ministry sanctioned (August 2008) only ` 6.29 crore for the above project, with the 
instruction that GoI would not be releasing any more funds and remaining ` 1.75 crore of 
the total estimated project cost of ` 8.04 crore would have to be met by the Company. 
Cost escalation, if any, would also have to be borne by the latter. The sanction letter also 
specified that utilization certificate for the amount sanctioned would have to be furnished 
by March 2010 and that a penal clause be built into the contract with the implementing 
agency so that the project was not delayed. 
While importing required plant and machinery for the two above units, the Company  
availed (November 2008) concessional customs duty of three per cent under the Export 
Promotion Capital Goods (EPCG) scheme and thereby saved ` 1.21 crore. As per the 
EPCG scheme, the Company would be liable to export products valued at eight times the 
duty saved within eight years, failing which it would have to forfeit EPCG bond of ` 3.77
crore deposited with Customs authorities.  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
100 
The Company submitted (March 2010) a utilization certificate for ` 6.29 crore to the 
Ministry, along with an assurance that the project was virtually fully completed, that civil 
and mechanical works were completed and that final testing and commissioning of the 
two units were in progress. It was further mentioned that the total expenditure incurred to 
that date (March 2010) was ` 7.23 crore. In addition, the Company incurred ` 0.30 crore 
towards commissioning of the two units. The Company forfeited the bank guarantee 
(Euro 59000 equivalent to ` 0.40 crore) of equipment supplier (M/s Steam Lab, 
Germany) for non fulfilment of contractual obligations.  Thereby, the total expenditure 
incurred stood at ` 7.13 crore.
Audit examination revealed that though the two units in the project were commissioned               
(October 2010), the Company did not operate them on its own, as it faced acute financial 
crises. Accordingly, the Company leased out (March 2012) the use of the two units to M/s 
RDM Care (India) Private Limited i.e. after 18 months of non operation of the 
commissioned units. However, just nine months later (January 2013), the lease agreement 
with the private firm was terminated at the request of the latter. Subsequently, eight 
months later (September 2013), the two units were leased out to M/s A-Tech Engineering 
and Management.  
The Company stated (September 2014) that the two units were not operated as intended 
and there was no export either by the Company or through its lessees. No commercial 
production had been carried out. However, efforts were being made to operate the Steam 
Sterilisation Unit. Ministry endorsed (January 2015) the views of the company. 
The reply of the Company/Ministry needs to be viewed against the fact that none of the 
objectives stated at the time of establishing the two units was achieved, defeating the 
purpose of bringing about improvement in the quality of spice processing. Thus, the 
Company’s inability to operate its two units at Spices Park, even after lapse of 48 months 
since they were commissioned, either on its own or through lessees to achieve the 
intended objectives, resulted in unfruitful expenditure of ` 7.13 crore (including ` 6.29 
crore from GoI) as in September 2014. In addition, there is the further possibility that the 
EPCG bond of ` 3.77 crore deposited with Customs authorities would be forfeited, if the 
Company failed to ensure adequate value of exports from the two units in compliance 
with the provisions of EPCG scheme.  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
101 
CHAPTER V: MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
Central Warehousing Corporation  
5.1 Lack of transparency in awarding Strategic Alliance Management contracts  
Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) did not adhere to the CVC guidelines 
and mandated tendering procedure while entering into Strategic Alliance 
Management agreements for operation of two of its container freight stations in the 
West Zone. Deficiency in the contract resulted in undue benefit to one of the 
contractors to the tune of ` 6.79 crore.
CWC, in addition to operating its warehouses, also operates Container Freight Stations 
(CFSs) throughout the country, where composite services for containerized movement of 
import/export cargo are provided. Some of these CFSs are operated through Strategic 
Alliance Management and Operation/Operators (SAMOs) whereby private firms operate 
the CFSs at a fixed fee and additional variable fee, payable to CWC, depending on the 
storage quantity.
The Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) guidelines (May 2006) state that all works 
awarded on nomination basis should be brought to the notice of the Board of the 
respective PSU for scrutiny and vetting post facto. CWC’s delegation of powers of July 
2000 envisaged that in case of award of contract by negotiation, without calling for 
tenders in emergent cases, reasons are to be recorded in writing and the cases in excess of 
`20 lakh each are to be reported to the Board of Directors.  
The CVC guidelines (July 2007), while referring to a Supreme Court of India judgment
♥ ,
state that tendering process or public auction is a basic requirement for award of contract 
by any Government agency as any other method, especially award of contract on 
nomination basis would amount to a breach of Article 14 of the Constitution guaranteeing 
right to equality, which implies right to equality to all interested parties. 
However, in rare and exceptional cases, for instance during natural calamities and 
emergencies declared by the Government, where the procurement is possible from a 
single source only, where the supplier or contractor has exclusive rights in respect of 
goods or services and no reasonable alternative or substitute exists, where the auction was 
held on several days but there were no bidder or the bid offered was too low, etc., this 
normal rule may be departed from and such contract may be awarded through 'private 
negotiations'.    
Audit observed that in two cases, discussed below, CWC did not follow the mandated 
procedure of awarding SAMO contracts:  
                                                           
♥ Nagar Nigam, Meerut Vs A1 Faheem Meat Export Private Limited [arising out of SLP(civil) No. 10174 
of 2006] 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
102 
(i) In case of a contract of CFS at Impex Park, Navi Mumbai, CWC awarded 
(September 2006) the contract to M/s ZIM Integrated Shipping Services Limited 
and M/s ZIM Integrated Shipping Services (India) Private Limited (jointly as 
ZIM), on nomination basis without going for open competitive bidding, at the rate 
of ` 4.50 crore per annum with escalation of 5 per cent per annum  on 
compoundable basis. Though awarding of contract to ZIM was placed before the 
Executive Committee in their meeting (November 2006) for ratification, bringing 
this to the notice of the Board of Directors could not be discerned from the 
records made available to audit. As such, it could not be ascertained whether 
mandated provisions of CVC guidelines (May 2006) and CWC's delegation of 
power (July 2000) were adhered to.  Further, it was seen that when the CWC 
decided to opt for price discovery through open tender (July 2012) after the 
contract with ZIM was over (February 2012), the contract awarded to M/s Total 
Transport Systems Private Limited (October 2012) was significantly higher at 
` 11.03 crore, which was 88 per cent more than what was paid by ZIM to CWC 
(`5.87 crore) in the immediately preceding year 2011-12.
Audit further noticed that though in other contracts for similar CFSs the standard 
provision was for a fixed fee and a minimum guarantee amount of variable fee for storage 
units, in case of ZIM the condition was different whereby variable fee was payable only 
in respect of storage units handled beyond 15,000 Twenty Equivalent Units
♠  (TEUs).  
This caused undue benefit to the firm to the tune of ` 5.14 crore over the period from 
2006-07 to 2011-12 (upto February 2012). Moreover, reimbursement of cost recovery 
charges of Customs staff was also not included in this agreement with ZIM though it was 
a standard clause in other similar agreements. This resulted in further undue benefit to the 
firm to the tune of ` 1.65 crore for the period from 2006-07 to 2010-11.  
Thus, CWC not only awarded contract to ZIM in a non-transparent manner but also gave 
undue benefit of `6.79 crore to the contractor by having non-standard conditions in the 
contract.
The Ministry stated (March 2015) that decision to give the facility to M/s ZIM was taken 
after repeated failure of tenders for enter ing into Strategic Alliance for this facility and 
the contract was not awarded by nomination as the agreement was for 100 per cent 
reservation whereby there was no need to either issue the tender or fix the reserve price. It 
further stated that the rates of M/s Tota l Transport Systems Private Limited of 2012 
should not be compared with rates of earlier contract entered into six year ago in 2006 
with M/s ZIM and that no undue benefit was given to M/s ZIM. It also stated that there 
was no violation of CVC guidelines.
The reply of the Ministry is not acceptable in view of the following facts: 
The terms and conditions for the contract entered with M/s ZIM, stated to be on 100 per
cent reservation basis, are similar to Strategic Alliance Management operations of CFSs 
whereby the Corporation receives fixed lease amount every year as well as predetermined 
amount (per TEU basis) to earn marginal profit. Thus, the contract was de facto awarded 
                                                           
♠  One TEU being equivalent to 20 fo ot container. The containe r measuring more than 20 foot is to be 
treated as two TEUs. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
103 
to M/s ZIM on a nomination basis, a fact which was not brought before the Board of 
Directors for approval as required. Moreover, undue benefit was given to M/s ZIM due to 
non-inclusion of standard provisions of minimum guaranteed amount of variable fee and 
reimbursement of cost recovery charges of Customs staff. Further, audit has compared the 
rates the Corporation had fetched in October 2012 with the rates the Corporation got from 
M/s ZIM in the immediate preceding year i.e., 2011-12 and not with those of six year ago 
as stated by the Corporation.
(ii)  The Corporation entered into a SAMO agreement on 22 January 2008 with M/s 
Hind Terminal Private Limited (HTPL) for utilizing CFS, Mundra, Gujarat for a 
period of two years with an option to extend it by another one year.
The proposal for expression of interest was stated to have been sent by the 
Corporation’s Regional Manager, Ahmedabad, through e-mail (7 November 
2007) to six-seven parties whose selection criteria were not on record. A generic 
expression of interest without any financial figure was received on 13 November 
2007 only from one party namely HTPL. The management entered into an 
agreement (January 2008) with HTPL at a fixed fee of ` 3 crore per annum and         
` 210 per TEU for a minimum of 24000 TEUs.  As no reserve price was fixed to 
evaluate the bids, the reasonability of  the rates in the contract entered into by the 
Corporation with HTPL could not be vouchsafed in audit. Further, the 
Management did not report this proposal to the Board of Directors as was 
required. The contract with HTPL was extended in March 2010 for a further 
period of one year at a fixed amount of ` 3.60 crore per annum with additional 
warehousing charges of ` 250 per TEU for a minimum guarantee of 30000 TEUs, 
adding to ` 4.35 crore per annum.
Audit further observed that when the Corporation went in for price discovery for CFS, 
Mundra through open competitive bidding (July 2011) it fetched a rate of ` 6.12 crore 
per annum, which was 41 per cent higher than the minimum rate of ` 4.35 crore payable 
by HTPL in the previous year 2011-12.
The Management stated (August 2014) that the contract was awarded to HTPL keeping in 
view the circumstances prevailing in the trade and citing dearth of business due to fear of 
competition. However, reply of the Management is not acceptable as proposal for 
awarding contract to HTPL at CFS, Mundra was not brought to the notice of the Board of 
Directors as envisaged in CVC guidelines.
The Ministry stated (March 2015) that the selection criteria was on records as the 
communication was sent to top users of Mundra International Container Terminal and as 
the contract was finalized on 100 per cent  reservation basis there was no need to either 
fix reserve price or float a tender for the same. It further stated that the market conditions 
were recorded by the Regional Office level committee on 30 November 2007 and 
Corporate Office level in January 2008. 
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable as tendering process is a basic requirement of 
award of a contract by any Government agency (CVC guidelines of July 2007). 
Moreover, the market conditions were recorded for the first time on 30 November 2007 
whereas the proposal for expression of interest was sent by Regional Office Ahmedabad 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
104 
through email on 7 November 2007. Thus, clearly the process for utilizing CFS Mundra 
had already started even before the market conditions were taken on records by the 
Corporation.
Thus, the process adopted by the Corporation to award the contracts was in violation of 
CVC guidelines and against the mandated tendering procedure in both the above cases.
Food Corporation of India 
5.2 Loss due to non-availing of concessional railway freight 
Food Corporation of India failed to avail the benefit of concessional railway freight 
in terms of the agreement entered into with a private developer-cum-operator which 
resulted in loss of ` 27.23 crore. 
Food Corporation of India (FCI) entered (June 2005) into two service agreements with a 
private developer-cum-operator (DCO) viz. M/s Adani Agri Logistics Limited (AALL) 
on ‘build, own and operate’ basis for integrated storage and bulk handling and 
transportation of foodgrains between base depots
1 and field depots 2 of FCI in Circuit-1 3
and Circuit-24. In consideration of the services provided by the DCO, FCI was required to 
pay storage-cum-handling charges to the DCO in accordance with the terms of the service 
agreements. The commissioning of the project and commencement of commercial 
operations of the facilities was to be accomplished by the DCO within 36 months from 
the date of execution of the agreements. The agreements were to be operative for a period 
of 20 years from the date of commencement of operations. 
The terms and conditions of the service agreements, inter alia, provided that the DCO 
would develop, procure and own at its cost special bulk foodgrains wagons and lease 
them to the Indian Railways for the duration of the service period under the Railways’ 
Own Your Wagon Scheme (OYWS). Further, the DCO and FCI would jointly negotiate 
with the Indian Railways the station to station railway freight rates or general rebate in 
freight charges for rail transportation between base depots and field depots. The DCO 
would enter into an appropriate OYWS agreement with the Indian Railways, the draft of 
which would be approved by FCI. The railway freight so negotiated and finalised would 
be paid by the DCO to the Railways and be reimbursed by FCI to the DCO. 
The service agreements with DCO were entered into by FCI after getting a cost-benefit 
analysis carried out (June 2003) by RITES Limited
5 (Consultant). The cost-benefit 
analysis was done by the Consultant on the assumption that a freight concession of 22.5 
per cent on the normal tariff would be granted by the Railways under OYWS as per the 
                                                           
1 Base depot refers to the depot located in the foodgrains producing area. 
2 Field depot refers to the depot located in the distribution/consuming area. 
3 Circuit refers to a set of facilities forming a chain, comp rising base depot and field depots. Circuit-1 
consisted of base depot at Moga (Punjab) and field depots at Chennai, Coimbatore and Bengaluru. 
4 Circuit-2 consisted of base depot at Kaithal (Haryana)  and field depots at Navi Mumbai (Maharashtra) 
and Hooghly (West Bengal). 
5 RITES Limited is a multi disciplinaryconsultancy organisation in the fields of transport, infrastructure 
and related technologies. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
105 
then existing practice. Based on this assumption, the Consultant concluded that the 
project of bulk handling, storage and transportation of foodgrains would be financially 
remunerative for FCI. Thus, the underlying premise for entering into the service 
agreements by FCI was the expected savings that would accrue to FCI on account of 
rebate in railway freight charges.  
Audit observed that during the period of 36 months provided under the service 
agreements for operationalisation of the project, the FCI/DCO did not negotiate and 
finalise the rebate in freight to be granted by the Indian Railways under OYWS. 
Meanwhile, the Ministry of Railways introduced (April 2008) a new liberalised wagon 
investment scheme (LWIS) superseding OYWS. Under LWIS, concession of 15 per cent 
in the railway freight was admissible only to the end-users i.e. consumers or producers of 
goods. Thus, the DCO, being a logistic company, became ineligible for the rebate. 
However, despite the fact that the rebate in railway freight was no longer admissible to 
the DCO, FCI allowed the DCO to commence transportation of foodgrains between base 
depots and field depots in Circuit-1 and Circuit-2 from November 2008 and October 2008 
respectively and made payment of freight charges at normal tariff rates. The Ministry of 
Railways did not agree (May 2009) to grant any rebate to FCI under LWIS even after 
pursuance of the matter since the rebate under LWIS was not available to a logistic 
company. Audit further observed that LWIS provided that the customers who had already 
invested in wagons or had obtained approval of the Ministry of Railways under any 
earlier wagon investment scheme including OYWS shall have the option to continue as 
per the terms and conditions of that particular scheme. Thus, had FCI/DCO ensured that 
the rebate in railway freight was negotiated and finalised with the Railways in time, the 
admissibility of rebate would have continued under LWIS at least to the extent of 15 per
cent of the normal freight.  
The DCO moved a quantity of 5,04,928 metric tons (MT) and 4,82,310 MT of foodgrains 
in Circuit-1 and Circuit-2 respectively since operationalisation of the project on which 
expenditure of ` 107.70 crore and ` 73.86 crore respectively were incurred by FCI till 
May 2014 on account of basic railway freight. The loss suffered by FCI due to non-
admissibility of concessional freight at the rate of 15 per cent of basic freight, therefore, 
worked out to ` 27.23 crore. 
Thus, failure of FCI and the DCO in obtaining approval of the Ministry of Railways for 
grant of rebate in freight under OYWS and allowing the DCO by FCI to commence 
transportation of foodgrains at normal freight rates resulted in loss of ` 27.23 crore. 
Further, as the service agreements with the DCO were operative for a period of 20 years 
from the date of commencement of operations, the non-admissibility of rebate in railway 
freight would result in recurring loss to FCI over this period thereby defeating the very 
purpose of venturing into bulk handling, storage and movement of foodgrains.  
The Regional office, Haryana of FCI stated (January 2014) that the issue was taken up 
(May 2008) by the DCO as well as FCI Headquarters (May/June 2008) with the Railways 
to get rebate in freight under LWIS but the Railways denied (May 2009) to grant any 
rebate. Further, the Zonal office of FCI stated (March 2014) that the Railways was having 
complete monopoly over its operations and whatever they did was almost final. The 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
106 
pursuance by field offices of FCI with the Railways was a futile exercise and the matter 
was taken up with FCI Headquarters for appropriate action. 
The Management reply is not tenable as there was a time lag of 36 months in 
operationalisation of the project from the date of agreements (June 2005) during which 
FCI/DCO failed to come to favourable terms with the Railways in respect of rebate in 
railway freight under OYWS despite the freight concession being the basis of financial 
viability of the scheme. Such rebate granted under OYWS would be admissible even after 
introduction of LWIS. The contention of the Management that the Railways denied any 
rebate is not acceptable since the matter was taken up by FCI with the Railways only in 
May/June 2008 i.e. after OYWS was superseded by LWIS under which the DCO became 
ineligible for the rebate. 
FCI stated (January 2015) that it was incomprehensible to forecast closure of the rebate 
scheme (OYWS) and FCI had no mechanism available for anticipating or pre-empting 
this move on part of the Railways. Further, the DCO had started taking up the matter with 
the Railway Board in July 2007 itself and requested Railways to notify the concessional 
freight. Ministry of Railways did not respond to it till May 2008 and then only the matter 
was taken up by FCI with the Railways. However, the Railway Board informed (May 
2009) that the request of FCI had not been agreed to. Further, the movement of 
foodgrains was started at the normal freight rates in order to fulfil the PDS requirements 
and on the assumption that the decision on rebate in freight, whenever decided, would be 
made applicable from retrospective date. The Ministry endorsed (January 2015) the reply 
of FCI Headquarters. 
The reply of FCI/Ministry is not acceptable because of the fact that even though it was 
the joint responsibility of DCO and FCI to negotiate and finalise the rebate in railway 
freight, FCI took up the matter with the Railways only in May 2008, almost 3 years after 
the agreement between two parties when OYWS had already been superseded by LWIS 
under which the rebate was not available. Before May 2008, it was only the DCO which 
was taking up the matter with the Railways. Moreover, the assumption made by FCI that 
the decision on rebate in freight would be made applicable from retrospective date is not 
backed by any assurance from the Railways to that effect. Further, while taking into 
account the fact that FCI commenced the movement of foodgrains at normal freight rates 
in order to fulfil PDS requirements, it is observed that non-finalisation of rebate in 
railway freight would result in continuing loss to the exchequer over the 20-year period of 
the service agreements entered into by FCI with the DCO. FCI Management should have 
taken up the matter with the Railways before operationalisation of the long-term project 
which was not done leading to the recurring loss. 
5.3 Excess payment of mandi labour charges 
Food Corporation of India made excess payment of 
` 16.96 crore to the Government 
of Uttar Pradesh and its agencies during the years 2010-11 and 2011-12 due to 
reimbursement of inadmissible elements as part of mandi labour charges on 
procurement of wheat. 
The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Ministry) conveyed 
(April 2010 and June 2011) the provisional rates of procurement incidentals to be paid by 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
107 
Food Corporation of India (FCI) to the Government of Uttar Pradesh and its agencies for 
procurement of wheat for the Central Pool during the Rabi Marketing Seasons (RMS) 
2010-11 and 2011-12 respectively. These provisional incidentals included a sum of 
` 10.91 per quintal for each of the two RMS on account of mandi labour charges to be 
paid for handling of wheat in mandi. 
As per the guidelines for submission of incidental claims by the State 
government/agencies as issued (September 2010) by the Ministry, mandi labour charges 
are the charges incurred in the mandis/markets for engaging the labour to perform various 
activities like cleaning grains, filling in the bags, weighing, stitching, labeling, stacking, 
loading in truck, etc. The guidelines further clarified that the expenditure incurred for 
making arrangement for lights, drinking water, temporary sheds are not included in the 
cost of mandi labour charges as these are part of the services provided by the marketing 
committees for which separate market fee is paid.  
Audit, however, observed that the provisional rate ( ` 10.91 per quintal) of mandi labour 
charges fixed for RMS 2010-11 and 2011-12 included inadmissible elements viz. 
arrangements at purchase centre for tent ( ` 1.90 per quintal), drinking water ( ` 0.50 per 
quintal) and petromax ( ` 1.00 per quintal). As the expenditure on these elements was 
already included in ‘mandi charges’, these were to be excluded from the mandi labour 
charges. Thus, the expenditure on inadmissible elements aggregating ` 3.40 per quintal 
were reimbursed by FCI to the Government of Uttar Pradesh and its agencies as part of 
mandi labour charges. During RMS 2010-11 and 2011-12, FCI Uttar Pradesh region 
procured 498.81 lakh quintals of wheat on which the excess reimbursement of mandi 
labour charges at the rate of ` 3.40 per quintal worked out to ` 16.96 crore. 
Thus, the Ministry violated its own guidelines by including such elements in the mandi 
labour charges which were already paid under other heads of expenditure in the 
provisional cost sheet. Further, as FCI was also aware of these guidelines as well as the 
fact that mandi labour charges were to be paid only in respect of handling of wheat in 
mandi, it was necessary on the part of FCI to take up the matter with the Ministry for 
removal of overlapping elements from the mandi labour charges before releasing the 
payment on this account to the State Government/State Government Agencies. The 
Ministry, in turn, should have excluded the inadmissible elements from mandi labour 
charges. Thus, failure to exercise due diligence by FCI resulted in excess payment of 
` 16.96 crore.
The Management stated (August 2013) that since there was no bifurcation of mandi 
labour charges, FCI was not aware about the overlapping elements and the 
reimbursement had been made to the State Government Agencies under the cost sheet 
determined by the Ministry. The Ministry elaborated (December 2014) on the procedure 
for working out the mandi labour charges by indexing the final or provisional rates of the 
previous year with the Consumer Price Index. It further added that in case of Uttar 
Pradesh, mandi labour charges of `10.91 per quintal were allowed accordingly during 
2010-11 and 2011-12 and further stated that FCI was being advised to ensure payment 
after thorough check of claim and ensuring no overlapping of claims.          
The reply of the Management is not acceptable as being nodal agency for implementing 
food policy of the Government of India, FCI should have ensured compliance of the 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
108 
Guidelines for State Governments/Agencies for Submission of Incidental Claims. As 
such, FCI was bound to verify the admissibility of the components of mandi labour 
charges before making reimbursement. Further, the Ministry did not furnish specific reply 
regarding admissibility of components of mandi labour charges and also remained silent 
on recovery of excess payment from the Government of Uttar Pradesh.
5.4 Excess payment of interest  
Food Corporation of India made excess payment of interest of 
` 5.22 crore due to 
ineffective monitoring and lack of internal checks on the cash credit   
Food Corporation of India (FCI) entered (June 1989) into an agreement for cash credit 
facility from a consortium of banks led by State Bank of India (SBI) for financing its day-
to-day operations. As per procedure under cash credit facility, the branches of banks 
maintaining cash credit accounts of FCI Regional/District Offices were required to 
transfer the net debit or credit balances to FCI Zonal cash credit accounts invariably 
before end of the day’s transactions through auto sweep facility. Further, the branches of 
banks maintaining FCI Zonal cash credit account would have to transfer any credit 
balance or debit balance exceeding the overnight limit to the centralised cash credit 
account maintained in Industrial Finance Branch (IFB) of State Bank of India, New 
Delhi. The interest on the credits availed by FCI would be calculated on daily balance and 
would be charged to FCI on quarterly basis. 
During test check of records relating to cash credit accounts of FCI Zonal Office (East), 
Regional Office Ranchi (Jharkhand) and nine District Offices
♥ , Audit observed the 
following:
• The daily transfer of all credit balances in the cash credit account of 
Regional/District Offices to the Zonal cash credit account would ensure 
adjustment of all credit balances against debit balances and payment of interest on 
the net outstanding balance. However, there were instances of delayed transfer of 
credit balances by the bank branches in respect of FCI Regional Office, Ranchi 
(Jharkhand) and nine District Offices during the period 2008-09 to 2013-14. This 
resulted in excess payment of interest on cash credit account by FCI to the tune of 
` 5.02 crore. This excess payment of interest, however, remained undetected until 
it was brought to the notice of FCI by Audit, which indicated ineffective 
monitoring and absence of necessary control by the former over the cash credit 
facility. 
• There was no mechanism at the FCI Zonal Office (East), Kolkata to check the 
accuracy of interest charged by the bank on the daily balance in the cash credit 
account. Audit detected (June 2013) that the bank had charged excess interest on 
cash credit account of FCI Zonal Office (East), Kolkata to the tune of ` 19.45 lakh 
(August 2012: ` 18.73 lakh, February 2013: ` 0.28 lakh and March 2013: ` 0.44
lakh). After the excess payment of interest was pointed out by Audit, FCI claimed 
(July 2013) this amount from the bank.    
                                                           
♥  24-Parganas, Durgapur, Port Depot, Ranchi, Gaya, Chhapra, Muzaffarpur, Patna and Bhubaneswar.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
109 
Thus, due to ineffective monitoring and lack of internal checks over cash credit facility, 
FCI incurred excess payment of interest amounting to ` 5.22 crore. 
The Management stated (December 2014) that after persuasion with SBI, the excess 
interest of ` 19.45 lakh was received back (October 2014). As regards the excess interest 
due to delayed transfer of credit balances of cash credit accounts by the bank branches at 
FCI Regional/District Offices to the FCI Zonal cash credit account, persuasion for its 
refund was being made.  
The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, Department of Food 
and Public Distribution (Ministry) stated (December 2014) that it had asked FCI to send 
quarterly report for instances of delayed transfer of credit balances. The Ministry further 
stated (January 2015) that after due persuasion with the SBI for the refund of excess 
interest, the bank had principally agreed to the claim of FCI and issued instructions to its 
concerned branches to settle the same.  
Audit observed that IFB of SBI, New Delhi had forwarded (October 2014) the FCI’s 
claims for refund of interest due to delay in transferring the credit balances to respective 
bank branches with the request to verify and arrange to settle the same. However, refund 
of the excess interest was awaited (January 2015). 
5.5 Avoidable payment of terminal charges 
FCI paid to the Railways non-leviable destination terminal charges amounting to 
`
5.01 crore in respect of its own sidings from July 2007 to March 2013 
Food Corporation of India (FCI) moves foodgrains from procuring States to deficit States 
by rail. In addition to the normal freight charges, the Ministry of Railways introduced 
(May 2007) levy of terminal charge of ` 10 per tonne per terminal with effect from 1 July 
2007 for movement of goods on Railways owned terminals and sidings. These terminal 
charges were leviable on loading/ unloading terminals, independently and separately, on 
the basis of chargeable weight at the time of issue of Railway Receipt (RR). The rate of 
terminal charge was enhanced (January 2008) by the Ministry of Railways to ` 20 per 
tonne per terminal with effect from 1 February 2008. 
A total of 102 railway sidings
1 were owned by FCI all over the country out of which the 
records of 53 railway sidings 2 were test checked in Audit. It was observed that out of 
these 53 railway sidings, in case of 41 3 sidings, the RRs raised for the foodgrains 
consignments also included destination terminal charges amounting to ` 5.01 crore which 
were paid by FCI along with freight charges to the Railways during the period July 2007 
to March 2013. As these sidings were owned by FCI and not by the Railways, the 
destination terminal charges were not leviable in these cases. Audit observed that the 
monthly movement plan prepared by FCI Headquarters clearly indicated whether there 
                                                           
1 The 102 owned sidings of FCI  consisted of 19 sidings in East zone, 6 sidings in North-East zone, 15 
sidings in West zone, 25 sidings in North zone and 37 sidings in South zone. 
2 These 53 sidings consisted of 19 sidings of East zo ne, 8 sidings of North zone and 26 sidings of South 
zone.
3 These 41 sidings consisted of 19 sidings of East zone, 6 sidings of North zone and 16 sidings of South 
zone.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
110 
was FCI owned siding at the destination terminal and thus there was no ambiguity about 
the ownership of railway sidings at the destination. Therefore, the destination terminal 
charges of ` 5.01 crore were not required to be paid at all in such cases. However, FCI 
did not verify the RRs with regard to the ownership of sidings at the destination end, 
before making payments to the Railways. This resulted in avoidable payment of railway 
freight by FCI to the extent of ` 5.01 crore during the period July 2007 to March 2013 
(Annexure-X).
While accepting the audit observation, the Management stated (May 2013) that claims for 
refund of the wrongfully paid terminal charges were lodged with the Railways by the 
dispatching regions. Further, with effect from 1 April 2013, the Railways had stopped 
levying terminal charges even for its own railheads. 
The Management further stated (December 2014) that a reply to the audit para would be 
sent upon receipt of necessary information from the concerned zonal/regional offices of 
FCI. The final reply of the Management was awaited (January 2015). 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in September 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
111 
CHAPTER VI: MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH 
EASTERN REGION 
North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited 
6.1 Misappropriation of cash 
Poor internal controls and non-observance of the bank operation mandate resulted 
in fraudulent withdrawal of ` 1.41 lakh from the bank accounts of North Eastern 
Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited. 
North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited (Company) 
maintained current accounts with several banks such as State Bank of India, New 
Guwahati (SBI) and Union Bank of India, Guwahti (UBI) and withdrew cash from the 
current accounts through cheques drawn on self for making petty payments during the 
course of its day-to-day operations. Test check of records pertaining to the period from 
April 2010 to March 2013 revealed that four cash withdrawals aggregating ` 1.41 lakh 
were made during April 2010 to June 2010. These included one withdrawal of ` 41,000 
(12 April 2010) from the Company’s account with SBI and three withdrawals of ` 30,000 
(06 May 2010), ` 50,000 (17 May 2010) and ` 20,000 (03 June 2010) from its account 
with UBI. 
Audit observed (November 2013) that the entries for the above four cash withdrawals 
were not recorded in the cash book. The requisite entries in the cheque issue register were 
also not recorded in respect of all the withdrawals, except that for ` 41,000. Besides, there 
was no system of preparing monthly statements showing reconciliation between bank 
statements and cash book, due to which the cash withdrawals of ` 1.41 lakh remained 
undetected during the period from June 2010 to November 2013. The bank reconciliation 
statements for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 were not available in the records of the 
Company; hence Audit could not verify as to how unaccounted withdrawal of ` 1.41 lakh 
was dealt with and reconciled by the Management. Audit further observed that the 
Statutory Auditor of the Company had reported (August 2012) that the latter had not 
prepared any comprehensive accounting manual laying down the rules for financial 
accounting and delegation of financial powers, etc. 
Further, as per the bank operation mandate of the Company, the cheques issued in the 
name of the Company should be signed by two authorised signatories viz. the Managing 
Director (MD) and the General Manager (Finance and Accounts) (GM-F&A). Audit, 
however, observed that the self cheque for withdrawal of ` 41,000 was issued (31 March 
2010) under the joint authorisation of the then GM (F&A) and the then MD while those 
for the other three withdrawals of ` 1 lakh were issued under the single authorisation of 
the then GM (F&A) only. It was further noticed  that in respect of the three withdrawals 
amounting to ` 1 lakh made during May 2010 and June 2010, the then GM (F&A) had 
requested the bank to clear the cheques under his signature only on the ground that the 
other signatory i.e. the then MD was out of station for official work. The Management, 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
112 
however, confirmed (November 2013) that the then MD was available in the office on 17 
May 2010 i.e. on the date of withdrawal of ` 50,000.
Thus, not recording entries of daily cash withdrawals in the cash book and poor internal 
controls such as issue of cheques without entering in cheque issue register, non-
preparation of monthly bank reconciliation statements, non-observance of the bank 
operation mandate by the Management resulted in misappropriation of cash to the extent 
of ` 1.41 lakh. No disciplinary action was taken by the Company against the delinquent 
official.
On being pointed out (November 2013) by Audit, the Management stated (March 2014) 
that a notice for recovery was sent (February 2014) by the Company to the then GM 
(F&A) wherein he was asked to deposit a sum of ` one lakh along with interest at the rate 
of 28 per cent per annum from the date of withdrawal to the date of deposit. The then GM 
refunded (February 2014) the amount of ` one lakh to the Company and requested for 
waiver of interest. The Management further stated (April 2014) that a notice had been 
issued to the then GM to repay the balance amount of ` 41,000 together with interest on 
the total amount of ` 1.41 lakh at the rate of 14.5 per cent per annum from the date of 
withdrawal of money. However, the latter refused (May 2014) to repay the amount and 
stated that the same was drawn by the then cashier for specific purposes as mentioned in 
the cheque issue register. 
Audit, however, observed that the Company did not take any further action for recovery 
of the balance amount of ` 41,000. Further, the rate of recoverable penal interest was 
reduced from 28 per cent per annum to 14.5 per cent per annum without recording any 
justification for the same. On being enquired , the Management stated (July 2014) that the 
decision was taken by the former MD and no reasons were available on record for that 
decision.
Thus, poor internal controls over cash and bank transactions resulted in fraudulent 
withdrawal and misappropriation of cash to the extent of ` 1.41 lakh. Although an amount 
of ` 1 lakh has been recovered at the instance of audit, the remaining amount of ` 41,000
along with penal interest on the total amount of ` 1.41 lakh was still pending for recovery 
(July 2014).
The Ministry, in its interim reply, stated (November 2014) that it did not accept the 
comments received from the Company in the matter and had sought pending action on 
inquiry outcomes and inquiry report from the Company. The Ministry would submit reply 
to Audit on receipt of a satisfactory report from the Company. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
113 
CHAPTER VII: MINISTRY OF FINANCE
India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited 
7.1 Fund Management and Financing
7.1.1 Introduction
India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (the Company) was incorporated in 
January 2006 as a wholly-owned company of the Government of India under the 
Companies Act, 1956 to provide long term finance to viable infrastructure projects 
under ‘Scheme for Financing Viable Infrastructure Projects through a Special Purpose 
Vehicle called India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (SIFTI)’. It extends 
financial assistance to the sectors included in the harmonized list of infrastructure sub-
sectors approved by the Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure on 1 st March 2012 viz. 
transport, energy, etc mainly for projects under Public Private Partnership.  
7.1.2 Financial highlights 
Details of fund mobilization and disbursement by the Company during the three years 
ended March 2014 are summarized below: 
 (` in crore) 
Mobilisation 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
Bonds 0 5041.32 7176.21
Bilateral/ Multilateral borrowings 1033.74 1079.57 907.45
Domestic Loan 0 1000 0
Total mobilisation 1033.74 7120.89 8083.66
Disbursements
Direct Lending 4191.00 5138.00 3774.00
Refinance  668.00 250.00 1838.00
Takeout Finance Scheme 560.00 2018.00 893.00
Total  disbursements 5419.00 7406.00 6505.00
7.1.3 Audit objectives 
Audit was carried out to assess:  
• Whether funds were raised after proper financial planning commensurate with the 
business requirement; 
• Whether due diligence was ensured before borrowing; 
• Whether controls relating to sanction and disbursement of loans were sound, 
effective and adequate to cover the risk of lending; 
• Whether adequate monitoring mechanism existed to ensure timely recovery of 
dues; and 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
114 
• Effectiveness and efficiency in utilization of funds.
7.1.4 Audit criteria  
The performance of the Company was assessed against the following audit criteria: 
• Scheme for Financing Viable Infrastructure Pr ojects through a Special Purpose 
Vehicle called India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (SIFTI); 
• The internal guidelines/policies/procedures of the Company relating to 
mobilization of fund, sanction of projects, disbursement and recovery; 
• Agenda & Minutes of the meetings of Board of Directors, Audit Committee and 
other Internal Committees of the Company; 
• Best practices followed in the Industry; and 
• Resource plan and Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)/Statement of Intent 
(SOI) targets of the Company. 
7.1.5 Scope of Audit and sample 
Audit examined the system of fund mobiliza tion and disbursement followed by the 
Company during the period 2011-12 to 2013-14.  The audit sample was selected based on 
Stratified Random Sampling Method using IDEA package from the total funds raised and 
disbursements made as indicated below:  
Number of total borrowings during 2011-12 to 2013-14 and sample selected for audit 
Amount raised `1000 crore 
or more 
`500-1000 
crore
`100-500 
crore
Less
than
`100 
crore
Total
Bonds (Number of cases) 3 7 15 14 39 
Bilateral/ Multilateral borrowings 
(Number of tranches) 
0 0 7 127 134 
Domestic loan  (Number of cases) 1 - - - 1 
Total  (Number of cases) 4 7 22 141 174 
Percentage selection 100 50 40 0   
No. of cases in sample 4 4 9 0 17 
Overall selection percentage out of total population 10 
Number of total projects sanctioned during 2011-12 to 2013-14 and sample selected for audit 
Particulars `1000 crore or 
more 
`500-
1000 
crore 
`200-
500 
crore 
`100-200 
crore 
Less
than 
`100 
crore 
Total 
Direct lending (Number of 
Projects) 
0 1 19 26 58 104 
Refinance Scheme  (Number of 
Projects) 
1 2 2 0 0 5 
Takeout Finance Scheme  (Number 
of Projects) 
0 3 7 9 13 32 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
115 
Total  (Number of Projects) 1 6 28 35 71 141 
 percentage selection 100 50 35 25 15 
No. of cases in sample 1 3 10 9 11 34 
Overall selection percentage of total population 24 
7.1.6 Audit findings 
7.1.6.1 Achievement of targets as per Statement of Intent (SOI) set by Ministry of 
Finance
Based on the inputs from the Company, annual targets for resource mobilization and 
disbursement by the Company are approved by the Ministry of Finance (Ministry) in the 
form of Statement of Intent (SOI). Actual performance of the Company as against the 
targets approved by the Ministry during 2011-14 was as under: 
(
` in crore) 
Sl.
No. 
Parameters 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 
Targets Achievements Targets Achieveme
nts 
Targets Achievem
ents 
1 Resources 1 6500.00 3297.00 11635.00 8803.00 Not 
fixed 
Not fixed 
2 Share of resources 
raised without 
sovereign
guarantee 
Not fixed Not fixed Not fixed Not fixed 62 per 
cent
77 per 
cent
3 Disbursements 
under: 
            
(a) Refinance 0.00 668.00 2000.00 250.00 2500.00 1838.00 
(b) Takeout 5400.00 560.00 4000.00 2018.00 3500.00 893.00 
(c) Direct Lending 6100.00 4191.00 6800.00 5138.00 5500.00 3774.00 
4 Net Profit 2 462.00 547.00 725.00 787.00 1050.00 646.00 
5 Return on 
Average Assets 
(ROA) 
1.27  1.90  per cent 1.90  per 
cent
2.18 per 
cent
2.80 per 
cent
1.48 per 
cent
It was noticed that: 
• targets for resource mobilisation remained under-achieved during 2011-12 and 
2012-13.
• disbursements made under different schemes also fell short of the given targets 
ranging between 42.14 per cent to 52.88 per cent.
• both Net profit and Return on Average Assets exhibited significant decline during 
2013-14 over the targets for the year. 
                                                           
1 Targets for resources for 2011-12 & 2012-13 were de fined in terms of amount excluding capital, 
whereas the same for 2013-14 were as a percentage of resources raised without government guarantee 
to total resources raised. 
2 Net Profit and corresponding ROA target till 2012-13 was for Net Profit available for Distribution and 
subsequently for 2013-14 these were for Net Profit (after Taxes). 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
116 
Reasons for downfall in the performance of the Company have been elaborated in the 
following paragraphs. 
7.1.6.2 Deficient Fund Planning 
The Company formulated its Annual Resource Raising Plan (ARRP) to estimate the 
requirement of funds mainly based on the following:  
(i) Cumulative amount of sanctions and disbursements as at the end of the respective 
previous years, 
(ii) Expected amount of loan to be disbursed under different schemes of the 
Company, 
(iii) Funds available at the beginning of the year, 
(iv) Funds to be kept liquid,
(v) Funds to be borrowed / raised and 
(vi) Loan repayment and servicing 
However, an examination of the system of estimation of projected fund requirements by 
the Company disclosed the following inadequacies: 
(i) Detailed workings of fund requirements on account of expected loans to be 
disbursed under different schemes of the Company and funds expected to be raised 
through borrowings were not found in records of the Company and the same were also 
not provided to Audit despite specific request (19 March 2015). Accordingly, Audit made 
an attempt to assess the effectiveness of the projections made by the Company with 
reference to actual results. It was observed that th ere were significant variations between 
the amount of actual and projected borrowings and disbursements as shown below: 
(
` in crore) 
Particulars 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
Projected
borrowings
7053.00 11700.00 14600.00
Actual borrowings 1033.74 7120.89 8083.66
Projected
disbursements 
10000.00 10000.00 11900.00
Actual
disbursements 
4409.22 6229.00 5459.85
 (ii) The Company considered net cumulative sanctions at the end of previous year for 
assessing the fund requirements for 2011-12 whereas gross amount of cumulative 
sanctions was considered for assessing fund requirements for 2012-13 and 2013-14. Net 
sanctions represented the amount of  loans allocated to Company (in case of consortium 
finance the amount is finally allocated to each lender by the consortium) related to 
projects which had achieved financial closure and gross sanctions included amounts 
sanctioned by the Company even for the projects where financial closure was yet to be 
achieved. There were significant differences in the amount of net and gross sanctions for 
2012-13 and 2013-14 as detailed below: 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
117 
(` in crore) 
Year Amount of cumulative Gross 
sanctions at the end of previous 
year
Amount of cumulative net sanctions 
at the end of previous year 
2012-13 40373 32278 
2013-14 51887  38841 
Due to consideration of gross sanctions instead of net sanctions, the fund requirements 
assessed by the Company turned out to be higher than the actual requirements and the 
Company was saddled with surplus funds at the end of the year as shown below: 
(
` in crore) 
Particulars March 2012 March 2013 March 2014 
Projected liquidity as assessed by 
the Company 
5000.00 3000.00 4200.00 
Actual liquidity represented by Total 
Fixed Deposits-Total Overdrafts 
5370.50 7945.49 11141.55 
Difference being excess  actual 
liquidity than planned 
370.50 4945.49 6941.55 
Thus, due to deficient assessment of fund requirements, the Company landed in a 
situation of surplus funds compared to actual requirements which progressively increased 
over the years. 
The Company/Ministry stated (January/March 2015) that the Company prepares Annual 
Resource Raising Plan (ARRP) on the basis of the latest SOI available which was based 
on information regarding expected disbursement and fund raising for the same 
considering the liquidity requirements of the Company. Credit Department, Corporate 
Planning Department and Resource and Treasury Department(s) analyzed past 
achievements of sanctions, disbursements etc, focus on future business activities and 
market conditions for projecting disbursements and borrowing required by the Company.  
It was also mentioned that financial projections though might carry element of 
subjectivity, were not made arbitrarily. Further, the Company also tries to raise funds at 
appropriate cost through tax free bonds which requires Government approval and takes 
time.  
The fact remains that the Company was not maintaining detailed workings of expected 
disbursements and borrowings with their tentative time schedule based on past experience 
and was not consistent in considering net sanctions instead of gross sanctions for 
assessing fund requirements resulting in a situation where it found itself with 
progressively increasing surplus resources.
7.1.6.3 Management of Fund 
(a) Holding excess unutilised funds 
As indicated in the paragraph 7.1.6.2 above, the Company was having progressively 
increasing funds over the years due to inadequacies in the assessment of fund 
requirements. The surplus available funds were parked in fixed deposits (FDs) which 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
118 
extended for a period upto one year. For meeting its temporary fund requirements, it was 
taking overdraft against such FDs as and when the need arose.  Outstanding balance of 
FDs and overdraft against FDs as on 31 March 2012, 2013 and 2014 were as under: 
(
` in crore) 
As on Balance of total FDs Balance of overdraft raised against 
FDs
31 March 2012 8114.18 2743.69
31 March 2013 9429.34 1483.86
31 March 2014 13225.47 2083.92
As seen from the above, the Company borrowed funds in excess of requirements and 
parked the same under fixed deposits against the spirit of the main objective of the 
Company to channelize funds in infrastructure projects.  The Company availed overdraft 
against fixed deposits for all purposes including disbursements.   
The Company/Ministry stated (August 2014/January 2015/March 2015) that actual 
timing and quantum of disbursement in infra sector is highly unpredictable due to long 
gestation period and unexpected delay which might happen during the course of the 
project.  Sixty projects funded by the Company had suffered average delay of 15 months 
from COD proposed at the time of appraisal. Hence the resources raised by the Company 
till the time of disbursement were parked in FDs with PSU banks as bank provided a risk 
free investment with high security, at yield higher than other investment opportunities 
available to the Company like Government Securities (G Sec.) etc. Further, the Company 
would not want to get into compelling situation to raise funds at prohibitive costs. 
Therefore, it borrowed for longer tenures to meet requirement of funds, for long term 
infrastructure projects, while meeting short term requirement of funds from overdraft of 
bank deposits. 
The replies are to be viewed against the fact that parking of funds in FDs was not the core 
business of the Company. The Company needs to put in place a well documented system 
and standard operating procedure after considering the requirements of stakeholders to 
assess the requirements of funds and to channelize them in the infrastructure as per its 
main objective.  
7.1.6.4 Borrowings 
Examination of the selected cases of borrowings revealed the following instances of 
borrowing at cost that was higher than the prevailing rates or other options available to 
the Company: 
(a) Issue of Taxable Bonds 
The Company decided (4 July 2012) to raise ` 2000 crore through long term bonds in 
tranches for tenors
♣  of 15, 20, 25 and 30 years during 2012-13.  Since the available 
amount of credit rating was ` 1109.04 crore only, the Company invited (11 July 2012) 
bids for a bond issue of ` 1100 crore from top 15 arrangers for 20, 25 and 30 years’ tenor 
                                                           
♣  Implies tenure or period of loan or bond as used by the Company in its records. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
119 
bonds.  In response to the above, 12 arrangers submitted their bids (10 for 25 years’ 
bonds and 11 for 30 years’ bonds), which were opened on 17 July 2012. Audit observed 
that:
(i) Board of Directors (Board) had passed the resolution to raise the fund for tenor of 
15, 20, 25 and 30 years; however, the Company did not call for the bids for 15 
year tenor bonds without recording any reasons therefor.  G-Sec rates (semi-
annualized) prevailing as on coupon fixation date (i.e. 20 July 2012) for a tenor of 
15 years was 0.2385 per cent lower (i.e., 8.5369 minus 8.2984) than that for the 
25 years’ tenor.  In such a scenario, raising fund through bonds with 15 years’ 
tenor was more advantageous.  Thus, not raising bonds for 15 years as per the 
decision of Board, saddled the Company with an avoidable burden of extra 
interest cost to the tune of ` 37.56 crore in 15 years @ ` 2.5043 crore p.a. 
(ii) The Company without recording any reasons, did not raise fund through 20 years’ 
tenor bonds though it had called for and received bids for a total sum of ` 1100 
crore.  The semi-annualised G-Sec rates and the quoted spread, taken together for 
20 years tenor bonds, was 0.0905 per cent  lower than that for 25 years’ tenor 
bonds.  The Company could have raised fund for 20 years’ tenor instead of 25 
years and avoided the extra interest cost amounting to ` 19.01 crore ( i.e., 0.0905 
per cent p.a. x `1,050 crore x 20 years). 
The Company stated (January 2015) that they were in the business of financing long term 
infrastructure projects for which long term funds are required. Further, DFS
♠  had advised 
(March 2012) the Company to raise resources for a longer tenor of 15-20 years and above 
so that the development of bond market takes place.  Since, there were many 15 year 
bonds already in the market; a benchmark (with actively traded bonds) for 15 year tenor 
already existed.  By issuing these bonds, a benchmark for 25 and 30 years was created for 
future long tenor bond issuances by the Company and other Corporates and a benefit of 
this shall be reaped by the entire country in the future. This effort by the Company was 
also praised by the Ministry.  Considering the Company's long term funds requirement 
and DFS’ advice, preference was given to raise funds with a longer tenor i.e. 30 years, 25 
years and 20 years. Accordingly, at the time of book-building, first the bids for longer 
tenor bonds were allotted and the entire issue size/ rating limit of ` 1,100 crore was 
exhausted by 25 year tenor bonds. Also, it is not possible to ascertain the coupon rates 
based just on the benchmark G-Sec yield as the final coupon depends upon the spread 
over the G-Sec yield which is arrived at after the book-building process. 
The fact, however, remains that: 
(i) The Company, did not adhere to the approval of the Board and directions of the 
Ministry, and did not invite bids for 15 years’ tenor bonds to explore the expected 
coupon rates.  Further, comparison of G-Sec rates for 15 years’ tenor bonds and 
25 years’ tenor bonds reflected an extra burden towards interest cost of 
` 37.56
crore over 15 years. Further, comparison of spread for 15 years bonds was not 
possible as the Company did not invite the bids for these bonds.
                                                           
♠  Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
120 
(ii) Out of bids received for ` 690 crore for 30 years' tenor, the Company issued 
bonds for only ` 50 crore. Therefore, even the stated criteria of first priority to 
long tenor bonds was also not followed by the Company.
(b) Raising loan from LIC 
The Company requested (24 February 2012) Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC) to 
provide indicative term sheet for ` 1000 crore debt/bond for a tenor of 15 years fully 
backed by Government of India.  
Though the Company had a balance of ` 8114.25 crore in FDs as of 21 March 2012, it 
requested (21 March 2012) LIC to provide long term debt of ` 1000 crore backed by GoI 
guarantee for 15 years’ period taking the plea that the funds were required within the 
same financial year urgently for onward lending to inf rastructure projects.  LIC agreed 
(29 March 2012) to grant the Company a Rupee Term Loan of `1000 crore.  The loan 
agreement was signed on 30 March 2012 and the loan was drawn on 28 May 2012. 
Having entered into an agreement with LIC the Company had no other option but to draw 
the loan at an interest rate of 9.36 per cent p.a. plus guarantee fee to GOI @ 0.25 per cent
p.a. i.e. making the effective cost of the borrowing as 9.61 per cent  against the then 
prevailing AAA rates of 9.45 per cent for 15 years as per Reuters screen as on 28 May 
2012. Even after considering the likely bond issue expenses of approximately 0.24 per
cent•, the extra avoidable cost of the borrowing from LIC at higher rate of 0.16 per cent
(i.e. 9.61 per cent  less 9.45 per cent), worked out to ` 21.57 crore (i.e., ` 1000 crore x 15 
years x 0.16/100 less bond issue expenses of ` 2.43 crore).  Moreover, though the 
borrowing was planned to be made within 2011-12 on an urgent basis, the same was 
deferred till end of May 2012 without recording any reasons therefor. 
The Company/Ministry stated (August 2014/January 2015/March 2015) that keeping in 
view the high volatile conditions of the bonds market, the Company deferred the drawl of 
loan till May 2012, but since turbulent market conditions were not observed to cease in 
near term, and GOI guarantee was approved for the same, the Company raised the fund 
from LIC at the appropriate time as per the then market conditions. The Company also 
indicated the instances of bond issues at similar rates by Power Finance Corporation 
Limited (in April 2011 for 10 years @ 9.18 per cent ), Indian Railway Finance 
Corporation Limited (in May 2011 for 20 years @ 9.47 per cent ) and Rural 
Electrification Corporation Limited (in June 2012 for 10 years @ 9.35 per cent i.e.85 
basis points over G-Sec rates). 
The replies substantiated the fact that the funds were borrowed without assessing actual 
requirements and at rates higher than prevailing rates. As regards bond issues by other 
CPSEs quoted by the Company, the same were not comparable as the bonds of Power 
Finance Corporation Limited and Indian Railway Finance Corporation Limited were of 
10 year and 20 year tenors, and were issued more than one year ago, whereas, the replies 
of the Company/Ministry in respect of the bond issue of Rural Electrification Corporation 
                                                           
• Based on the bond issue expenses of ` 12.52 crore incurred by the Company on issue of secured and 
unsecured bonds aggregating ` 5142.28 crore during 2012-13 which works out to 0.24 per cent. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
121 
Limited supports the audit observation as the same was raised at a rate of interest lower 
by 0.26 per cent than the rate at which the Company had borrowed the funds from LIC 
(i.e., 9.61 per cent effective rate). 
7.1.6.5 Analysis of lending schemes of Company 
The Company has been providing finance to different infrastructure projects under four 
different schemes viz. SIFTI, refinance, take out finance and credit enhancement scheme.  
The audit findings in respect of these lending schemes were as under: 
(a) SIFTI 
As already indicated in paragraph 7.1.1, the Company was incorporated to provide long 
term finance to viable projects under SIFTI. However, Ministry conveyed (24 October 
2011) that the Company might be brought under the regulatory oversight of RBI by 
registering it as a Non-Banking Financial Company – Infrastructure Finance Company 
(NBFC-IFC).  The Company was registered with RBI in September 2013. Accordingly,
the Company after September 2013 was required to follow two set of guidelines viz.
SIFTI and RBI guidelines. 
Requirements of SIFTI restricted the Company from sanctioning the loans:  
• To borrowers other than through a consortium,  
• Beyond 20 per cent of total project cost,
• having average maturity lesser than 10 years, and
• to projects falling under sectors not covered in SIFTI.
Audit came across nine instances where projects involving proposed loan amount of 
` 3098.36 crore were not approved by the Company on account of above restrictive 
clauses of SIFTI. The Company stated (January 2015) that they had taken up the matter 
regarding limitation of provisions of SIFTI with the Ministry.
The Ministry stated (March 2015) that they had approved (4 March 2015) modifications 
in SIFTI enabling the Company to lend: 
• Under multiple banking arrangement instead of consortium; 
• Upto 40 per cent of the total project cost; and 
• To projects having average maturity of less than 10 years in case of flexible 
structuring.  
Audit appreciates the action taken by the Ministry. However, the modifications only 
partially address the restrictive clauses because: 
• The Company would still not be able to finance projects as a sole lender and 
beyond 40 per cent cap in otherwise eligible cases; and  
• The scope of SIFTI was not reviewed to examine the possibility of inclusion of 
other sectors to make it broadbased and attractive. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
122 
(i) Non-compliance of SIFTI guidelines in respect of loan sanctioned for KMP 
Expressway
The project for construction of 135 km stretch of access controlled and elevated Kundli-
Manesar-Palwal Expressway was awarded (31 January 2006) by Haryana State Industrial 
and Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited (HSIIDC), the Concessioning 
Authority, to KMP Expressways Limited (KMP) for a concession period of 23 years and 
9 months.  The scheduled commercial operation date of the project was 1 July 2009. 
Due to change in the composition of KMP, writ petitions were filed (May 2006) by the 
initial constituents of KMP viz. Madhucon Projects Limited and Gammon India Limited 
for quashing the award of project.  After dismissal (March/April 2008) of the petitions, an 
appeal and a special leave petition filed by Madhucon Projects Limited and Gammon 
India Limited with the Supreme Court of India, were also dismissed in May 2008 and 
June 2008 respectively. 
Without waiting for the final outcome of the above disputes, a loan of ` 380 crore was 
approved (11 December 2006) by the Company, part financing the project having the 
total project cost of ` 1915 crore.
Audit observed that the loan was sanctioned despite the fact that the stipulated conditions 
of the then prevailing SIFTI guidelines of the Company were not fully complied with viz.,
(i) the appraisal was not done by the lead bank (Para 6.1 of SIFTI) and (ii) no guarantee 
from lead bank was obtained for recovery of loan (Para 7.6 of SIFTI). 
As the developer had failed to execute the project, the substitution clause of the 
agreement was invoked, the earlier developer was removed and the efforts were made by 
Consessioning authority for locating a new developer (April 2014). 
Thus, the Company compromised on compliance of SIFTI guidelines and failed to protect 
its own financial interests. The loan of ` 135.25 crore (outstanding amount as on April 
2014) extended to the borrower ultimately became a non-performing asset for the 
Company. 
The Company stated (August 2014) that all the decisions had been taken in line with the 
Lead and other Lenders in the Consortium as per the SIFTI and added that the 
Information Memorandum was prepared and circulated by SBI Caps and all the 
participating Lenders had sanctioned loan on that basis.  Further, in infrastructure loans, 
lead lender also take care of the recovery on beh alf of all the participating Lenders in the 
Consortium. 
The Ministry added (March 2015) that the project was being re-tendered without taking 
into consideration lenders’ dues and in view of this lenders had filed intervener 
application in the Supreme Court for protecting their interests. 
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that IDBI Bank was the lead lender in this 
consortium and appraisal was required to be done by them and not by SBI Caps as per 
SIFTI guidelines. Further IDBI Bank did not guarantee recovery of loan through them in 
this case.  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
123 
(ii) Term loan assistance to Srinivasa Gayithri Resource Recovery Limited. 
Srinivasa Gayithri Resource Recovery Limited, the concessionaire, was awarded a 
‘waste to energy project’ by Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike, the Concessioning 
Authority, on Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis.  For part financing the project, the 
Company, sanctioned (May 2007) a term loan assistance of ` 14 crore to Srinivasa 
Gayithri Resource Recovery Limited, the borrower, in consortium with Indian Bank 
(Lead Bank) and Oriental Bank of Commerce (OBC) on the basis of the appraisal done 
by the lead bank.  The scheduled Commercial Operation Date (COD) was March 2010 
which was rescheduled multiple times, for the first time upto December 2010 and latest 
upto March 2013. 
The lead bank informed (9 April 2014) the Company that it had assigned its share in the 
project to one M/s Edelweiss Asset Reconstruction Company Limited (EARCL).  The 
Company requested (21 April 2014/ 25 August 2014) the Indian Bank (the erstwhile lead 
bank) to hold a Joint Lenders Meeting and to inform the terms and conditions of the 
transfer of their stake to EARCL.  Meanwhile, the Concessioning Authority, informed 
(16 August 2014) the Company that since the concessionaire had not been able to 
operationalize the project and neither had taken any convincing steps to remedy the 
default as per the concession agreement, they were considering terminating the said 
agreement.  
Finally, the consortium meeting was held on 10 September 2014, which was attended 
only by the Indian Bank and the Company wherein the latter learnt that the other member 
of the consortium i.e., OBC had also sold its stake to EARCL.  A copy of the Assignment 
Agreement entered into with EARCL was circulated in the meeting which revealed that 
for a consideration of ` 18.50 crore, the share of Indian Bank against the overdue amount 
of ` 29.45 crore was transferred to EARCL resulting into sacrifice @ 37.18 per cent.  The 
Indian Bank also informed that since the asset had been assigned to EARCL, no 
conclusive decision could be taken in that meeting and they had no role to play and 
further action if any, could be taken by EARCL and the Company only.  Lately, the 
Company also requested (17 September 2014) EARCL for taking over of its share of loan 
(totalling to ` 21.80 crore as on August 2014) on similar lines as of the other consortium 
members. 
Audit observed that: 
• Common Loan Agreement did not contain any clause prohibiting the consortium 
members from quitting / assigning their stake to a third party.  There was no 
standard operating procedure in the Company to ensure continued commitment of 
lead lender through insertion of such clause in the common loan agreement.  
• The Company was left with the option of either continuing with the existing 
project which was not progressing or to transfer its share to EARCL bearing a loss 
of ` 8.11 crore (i.e. ` 21.80 x 37.18 per cent). 
The Company/Ministry stated (January/March 2015) that they had already informed 
Department of Financial Services vide their letters 30 September 2014 and 23 December 
2014 of the unilateral action taken by the Lead Bank under Consortium Arrangement and 
highlighted that to protec t the spirit of consortium it was desirable that Lead 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
124 
Bank/Syndicator maintained their share in the debt and did not exit the consortium. The 
Company added that the possibility of incorporating a ‘tag-along’ clause in future 
agreements to safeguard the interest of the Company was being explored. The Company 
is also parallely exploring other options to maximize recovery and exit from the account. 
The replies substantiate absence of standard operating procedures in the Company to 
safeguard its interests against quitting of lead/other lenders of the consortium. 
(iii) Non-funding of cost overrun
On examination of the records relating to selected cases of restructured loans, it was seen 
that the Company had been declining to fund cost overrun in the projects of direct lending 
taking different pleas viz., (i) the Company was not authorized to fund cost overrun under 
SIFTI, or (ii) the internal guidelines of the Company did not permit funding of cost 
overrun.
As per the credit policy of the Company, restructuring of loan account is done after 
establishing the financial viability and reasonable certainty of repayment from the 
borrower as per the terms of restructuring package. While the projects are assessed viable 
by the Company in terms of the restructuring packages approved by it, the Company did 
not find it appropriate to finance the cost overruns on such restructured packages without 
any recorded reasons. The system needs to be examined so that the business opportunities 
for financing do not get lost in case of restructured projects which are otherwise viable. 
Audit observed that while restructuring the loans, the Company did not agree to finance 
cost overruns without any documented reasons in 13 cases involving a business 
opportunity of ` 1064.94 crore.
The Company stated (January 2015) that they generally had not been financing cost 
overrun in the projects. SIFTI, however, has not barred the Company from funding cost 
overrun. The matter was discussed at the MIC meeting held on 22
nd September 2014. It 
was observed that most of the infrastruc ture projects were currently facing cost overrun. 
It was also observed that such cost overruns were funded invariably by existing lenders 
on pro-rata basis. Non-participation by the Company in which it was a member of 
consortium might result in non-release of funds by other lenders, putting the project in 
jeopardy. This also went against the spirit of consortium lending and had already resulted 
in bitter complaints from other lend ers. DFS (Department of Finance Services), Ministry 
of Finance vide letter dated 3
rd November, 2014, had urged the Company to participate in 
cost overrun and sanction additional funding/ priority loan, which would resurrect the 
infrastructure projects facing difficulties. The Company should also participate in the 
CDR
♠  forum by becoming regular member and sanction re-structuring packages in line 
with members of banks, involving revision in interest rate, additional funding, re-
structuring of existing liabilities and repayment period. In view of the foregoing, the 
Company had reviewed the matter at its MIC meeting held on December 16, 2014 and 
decided to participate in the cost-overruns, wherever necessary.
The Company/Ministry (January/March 2015) accepted the audit observation. 
                                                           
♠  Corporate Debt Restructuring 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
125 
(b) Refinance Scheme 
As per the lending terms of SIFTI, the Company could fund viable infrastructure projects 
through Refinance to banks and Financial Institutions towards loans granted by them with 
tenor exceeding 10 years.  In February 2009 ( i.e., nearly three years after approval of 
SIFTI), Government of India (GOI) defined the modus operandi  for refinance by 
approving the Refinance Scheme and permitted the Company to raise ` 10,000 crore 
through tax free bonds in tranches.  The Company adopted the Refinance Scheme in 
February 2009.  Salient features of the Refinance Scheme were as under: 
• Refinance would be made available to new projects in road and port sectors only 
for which bids were submitted on or after 31.01.2009; 
• The Company would provide refinance up to 60 per cent of the loans provided by 
the individual banks to infrastructure projects in roads and port sectors; and 
• The banks would not charge more than 2.5 per cent  over and above the rate 
charged by the Company. 
The Company informed (26 October 2009) the Empowered Committee (EC) that the 
restrictions of the Refinance Scheme viz., providing finance in the projects (a) which 
pertained to road and port sectors only, and (b) for which bids were submitted on or after 
31 January 2009, had collectively constrained the disbursement under the scheme, and the 
Company could not utilize `10,000 crore raised in January/March 2009 i.e. for more than 
six months.  Despite piecemeal relaxations by EC permitting the Company to extend 
refinance to Public Financial institutions in addition to banks (December 2009), 
relaxation in the restrictions relating to rate of interest and road and port sectors (March 
2011) the Company could utilise only ` 6256 crore since inception of scheme in 2009 to 
March 2014 for the Refinance Scheme.
The Company/Ministry stated (January/March 2015) that though certain covenants have 
been modified suitably over a period of time to make the Refinance scheme more 
attractive, the important factor, which determines the attractiveness of the scheme, viz. 
the Rate of Interest (RoI) offered by the Company under Refinance scheme was not 
attractive enough to expand the scheme to the desired level.  The Company had been 
raising the funds by issue of bonds or raising resources from multi-lateral/bilateral
agencies. The total cost of funds after considering the hedging of foreign currency lines 
of credit works out to be on-par with the costs of funds of mobilizing resources by issue 
of bonds.  As the other banks, Financial Institutions/NBFCs also had access to the bonds 
markets, the USP
♣  of Refinance scheme offered by the Company had been blunted. 
The replies substantiate the audit observation that the Refinance scheme was largely 
unsuccessful.
(i) Irregular sanctions under Refinance Scheme 
The Company under the Refinance Scheme sanctioned loans to Rural Electrification 
Corporation Limited (REC), Power Finance Corporation Limited (PFC) and 
                                                           
♣ Unique Selling Proposition

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
126 
Infrastructure Development Finance Company Limited (IDFC) in deviation with the 
terms of the scheme after obtaining approval from the EC ( Annexure-XI).  Audit 
observed that: 
• The Company curtailed the tenor of the loans sanctioned to REC, PFC and IDFC 
under the refinance Scheme from the stipulated minimum tenor of 10 years to 
upto 1 year in 9 out of 10 cases against the spirit of the refinance scheme. 
• The Company did not fulfill the main objective of Refinance Scheme by linking 
the date of maturity of such loans with that of the tax free bonds under which 
funds for the refinance scheme were raised by the Company. 
• Due to inclusion of pre-payment clause in deviation of the scheme, the Company 
had to accept the pre-payment of the loan amounting to ` 1195 crore on 10 
September 2014 (i.e., interest reset date) from REC.
The Company/Ministry stated (January/March 2015) that the USP of the scheme viz. the 
Rate of Interest (RoI) offered by the Company under Re-finance Scheme was not 
attractive enough to expand the scheme to the desired level.  As the other banks, 
FIs/NBFCs also had access to cheaper sources of funds like deposits, the bonds markets, 
etc., the USP of re-finance scheme offered by the Company has been blunted.  Further, 
the interest rate was to be reset every year. It was normal commercial practice to stipulate 
Annual Reset for longer tenor loans. REC had chosen to repay the loan on the reset date, 
as it could mobilize the funds at more competitive rates than that offered by the 
Company. 
(c) Takeout Finance Scheme  
With the objectives to boost the availability of longer tenor debt finance for infrastructure 
projects and to address the sectoral/ group / entity exposure issues and asset-liability 
mismatch concerns of lenders, the Com pany submitted the Takeout Finance Scheme 
before the EC for its approval, which was approved by EC in January 2010 (10
th
meeting).  The scheme was implemented from 16 April 2010. The salient features of the 
Scheme were as follows: 
• The eligible entities were the scheduled commercial banks or any other 
participating entities who had extended loans under the Common Loan Agreement 
to the Borrower. 
• The projects should have achieved financial closure and have a residual debt tenor 
of at least 6 years. 
• The extent of takeout finance on the outstanding amount of loan of a lender from 
whom the loan is to be taken over on the scheduled date of occurrence of takeout 
was 75 per cent.  However, the total takeout amount could not exceed 50 per cent
of the total residual loan of the infrastructure project. 
Despite multiple modifications having been made in various clauses of the Scheme to 
make it more attractive business growth under the scheme was not good as seen from the 
following:
• Since introduction of Takeout Finance Scheme in 2010, the Company sanctioned 
61 projects amounting to ` 11,348.21 crore till March 2014 out of which 28 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
127 
projects (45.90 per cent ) wherein total amount sanctioned of ` 4864.35 crore 
(42.86 per cent) was involved were cancelled subsequently. 
• Out of remaining 33 projects, disbursement of ` 3870.76 crore was made in 23 
projects against sanctioned amount of ` 4120.30 crore, and in 10 projects, wherein 
loan of ` 2363.56 crore was sanctioned upto March 2014, no disbursement was 
made (June 2014). 
The Company stated (January 2015) that major reason for cancellation of sanctions made 
under Takeout Finance Scheme was refusals on the part of existing lenders to furnish 
NOC for takeout finance. Further, in certain cases, the existing lenders themselves had 
come forward to reduce the rate of interest in line with the interest rates offered under 
takeout finance by the Company, which discouraged the borrowers to avail takeout 
financing from the Company. Though the Company's rate of interest under Takeout 
Finance Scheme and Re-finance scheme are generally lower than the interest rates offered 
under direct finance scheme, the impediments to the Takeout Finance Scheme were being 
created by the existing lenders with a view to retain projects which have become 
operational thereby overcome major risk viz. the implementation risks. The Ministry 
further informed (March 2015) that ` 1851.98 crore had since been disbursed in six cases 
and in balance four cases, the Company was continuously pursuing with borrowers. 
(d) Credit Enhancement Scheme 
The Company approved (18 August 2011) the ‘Outline – Credit Enhancement Scheme’ 
for viable infrastructure projects.  Under the scheme, the Company was required to 
extend the credit enhancement in the form of guarantee to commercially viable 
infrastructure projects up to ` 4000 crore, wherein the projects had minimum rating of 
BBB any credit rating agency, and had achieved the Commercial operation date. 
Audit observed that though the first pilot project had been approved by the Ministry of 
Finance in September 2012, the Company had not funded any project up to September 
2014 under this scheme. 
The Company stated (January 2015) that while they had given in-principle approval to a 
few transactions under this pilot scheme, no bond issue availing the Company guarantee 
had taken place mainly due to the prevailing market conditions.  The Ministry added 
(March 2015) that Regular Credit Enhancement Scheme had since been approved in 
March 2015. 
The replies to paras 7.1.6.5 (b) (i), 7.1.6.5 (c) and 7.1.6.5 (d) need to be viewed against 
the fact that not a single bond issue had taken place under Credit Enhancement Scheme  
even after lapse of more than three years since the scheme was launched. The results of 
Regular Credit Enhancement Scheme of March 2015, in terms of its attractiveness, 
popularity and performance, can only be known after a reasonable period of time. 
Refinance and Takeout Finance Schemes also remained largely unsuccessful. Therefore, 
there is a need for the Company to critically revisit the two schemes mentioned above 
considering the market trends, prevailing rate of interest, publicity requirements and other 
financial terms to make them attractive to borrowers. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
128 
7.1.7 Monitoring 
7.1.7.1 Non-adherence to the directions of BOD
Review of the agenda and minutes of the meetings of the Board of Directors revealed the 
following:
(i) The Company noticed (23 October 2012) that as per audited standalone financials 
for the quarter ended 30 June 2012, the Company had suffered diminution in the 
Net Present Value of restructured assets by ` 4.42 crore.  The Board of Directors 
advised that valuable lessons should be learnt from experiences gained from 
problems/impediments/issues leading to restructuring of accounts and the same 
should be incorporated as checklist points for future reference and guidance. 
In the same meeting, the Board also desired that cumulative cost overrun in respect of 
restructured accounts should also be placed before the Board.  Audit did not find any such 
information having been placed before the Board till date (September 2014). 
(ii) While approving its Standalone Financial Statements for the Quarter ended 30 
June 2013, the issue of restructuring was again deliberated by the BOD (29 July 
2013) when it was observed that in most of the restructured accounts, the 
Company had sanctioned loans without availability of land in road projects and 
without Fuel Supply Agreement (FSA) and/or Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) 
in power projects. Consequently, there was inordinate delay in implementation of 
projects entailing requirement to make huge provisions. The Board also advised 
the Company to ensure that these critical requirements were not compromised in 
future. 
Audit observed that, even after the direction of the Board, the Company continued to 
sanction
♦ loans without ascertaining the availability of required land in full and 
availability of FSA/PPA in violation of the directions of the Board.
The Company stated (January 2015) that the aspects advised by the Board of Directors 
were meticulously followed during sanction as well as monitoring stages.  The position 
on cumulative cost overrun in respect of restructured accounts would be placed in 
subsequent meeting of the Board of Directors.  It was further submitted that the Company 
did not carry out original appraisal and adopted the appraisal memorandum prepared by 
the Lead Bank or FIs.  However, stipulating the same as pre-commitment conditions 
might result in inordinate delay in financial closure and the Company might lose its edge 
in the market and potential business. 
As the Board had taken a well considered decision to ensure availability of land and 
signed PPA/FSA before sanction of loan by the Company, it was desirable for the 
Company to present to the Board the problems being faced by it in implementation of 
their directions and to obtain the guidance of the Board on this issue.
                                                           
♦  Five loans were sanctioned under di rect lending scheme without availab ility of entire land or signing 
of PPA/FSA in May 2014. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
129 
The Ministry stated (March 2015) that as per Board directives, conditions pertaining to 
availability of adequate land, FSA and PPA are to be stipulated as pre-disbursement 
conditions and the Company was following the same. 
The reply of the Ministry is not correct because the Board had directed (29 July 2013) the 
Company to ensure availability of land and critical requirements of FSA and PPA while 
sanctioning loans i.e. as pre-sanction conditions and not as pre-disbursement conditions. 
Moreover, no further directive of Board to modify their directive of 29 July 2013 was 
provided by the Company to Audit.   
Conclusion
Inadequacies in assessment of requirement of funds led to the Company facing a 
situation of progressively increasing surplus liquidity remaining parked in fixed 
deposits with banks which was not the core business of the Company. The Company 
was also unable to achieve its lending targets partly due to unattractive lending 
schemes and partly due to restrictive clauses of its Special Purpose Vehicle. As 
regards raising of funds, there were instances where the Company did not explore 
possibilities of cheaper finance available to it. Audit also observed deficiencies in the 
processing of loan appraisals, sanctions and monitoring. 
Recommendations 
The Company may: 
¾ Assess fund requirements on a realistic basis and maintain detailed workings with 
documented reasons in support of assessment of requirement of funds.
¾ Critically review the lending schemes considering the market trends, prevailing rate 
of interest, publicity requirement and other financial terms to make them attractive 
to the borrowers and ensure accelerated flow of funds in infrastructure sector. 
¾ Consider inclusion of a ‘tag-along’ clause for lead lender in the common loan 
agreements in ‘consortium lending’ to ensure that the lead lender stays committed 
to the consortium and the financial interests of the Company are safeguarded. 
MCX Stock Exchange Limited 
7.2 Failure of MCX-SX to safeguard its interests 
Review of agreements signed by MCX Stock Exchange Limited and Liquidity 
Enhancement Scheme implemented by the Company. 
The MCX Stock Exchange Limited (the Company) was incorporated on 14 August, 2008. 
Multi Commodity Exchange of India Limited (MCX) and Financial Technologies (India) 
Limited (FTIL) were its promoters. The Company, upon incorporation in August 2008 
had three Directors on the Board.  Two Directors were from MCX and one Director was 
from FTIL who was also Chairman of the Company i.e. MCX-SX (October 2008 to 
September 2009). Thereafter, representatives from FTIL on the Board increased to two 
with the induction of Shri Jignesh Shah as Vice Chairman. Shri Joseph Massey, who 
worked as MD of MCX, joined as Director of the Company in August 2008 and was 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
130 
appointed as MD & CEO of the Company from June 2009. Shri Jignesh Shah joined the 
Board of Directors of the Company in October 2008.  Both continued until they resigned 
in October 2013 consequent to the show cause notice issued by Forward Market 
Commission (FMC) directing them to show cause why they should not be declared not to 
be ‘fit and proper’ to be Directors in MCX due to eruption of payment crisis in NSEL.  
MCX-SX started its operations from October 2008. In order to operationalise its 
activities, the Company entered into a series of agreements with FTIL for procurement of 
software, maintenance services, rendering personnel support services, sharing of services, 
leasing of accommodation and so on during August 2008 to September 2013. The 
agreements with FTIL were signed during the tenure of Shri Joseph Massey as 
Director/MD & CEO. The Company entered into 161 Agreements with different entities, 
of which audit examined all the 30 Agreements entered into with FTIL, being related 
party agreements. 
Audit scrutiny revealed the following: 
7.2.1 Restrictive clauses in agreements in favour of FTIL:  
The Company entered into long term agreements with FTIL for its Exchange operations 
which included purchase and maintenance of DOME and CnS software, ODIN Software 
licenses, Development and maintenance of Alert Management Software (AMS) and 
Service Provider Point of Presence (POP) i.e. network infrastructure service. These 
agreements had restrictive clauses that were against the interests of the Company which 
made exit from the agreements by way of termination and finding alternate vendor 
difficult for the Company. MCX-SX made a total payment of ` 303.75 crore to FTIL 
during 2008-09 to 2013-14 which amounted to 52 per cent of the total expenditure of the 
Company.  
Some of the major restrictive clauses in the agreements were as under: 
• The Company could not use any other software or introduce a new version of any 
hardware without the consent of FTIL and all hardware was to be of the kind that 
FTIL agreed to support.
• There was no clause of penalty or compensation in terms of delay in deliverable in 
any of the agreements entered with FTIL. 
• The Company could not obtain similar services from any other service provider 
during the term of these agreements unless mutually agreed. 
• The initial tenure of the purchase of DOME & CnS agreement was 33 years 
effective from August 2008 which would automatically stand renewed for further 
block of 33 years. With an addendum (November 2012), the tenure was changed 
to the effect that the agreement would be automatically renewed for a further 
block of 33 years and the total duration of agreement became 99 years which is 
beyond normal comprehension of standard agreements. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
131 
• Under the agreement for ODIN software license, FTIL would charge the 
Company for trading members’ licenses for a minimum period of three months 
being the lock in period. Even if a member disassociated himself from the 
exchange during lock-in-period, MCX-SX was not entitled to reduce the number 
of software licenses.  
• The agreement for ODIN software license provided for minimum monthly 
commitment, of ` 35 lakhs for first year, ` 50 lakhs and ` 60 lakhs per segment 
respectively for second and third year. The basis of the minimum monthly 
commitment or the extent of actual for providing ODIN licences was not on 
record.
• In case of premature rescission of the agreement for DOME and CnS, Alert 
Management Software (AMS) license, Service provider Point of Presence etc. 
MCX-SX had to make payments to FTIL for the remaining term of the agreement. 
The AMS agreement further contained a clause for payment of penalty @ 50 per 
cent of the AMC charges payable in the event of premature rescission.
The charges payable to FTIL in case of termination were as under: 
Name of agreement Total amount payable (
` in crore)
DOME and CnS 324
AMS 90
Service Provider Point of Presence and co-
location 
16.58
From the above, it is clear that the agreements with FTIL were not on ‘arm length’ basis 
but on ‘arm child’ basis as the influence of the elder party was significant. The conditions 
in the agreements made the Company dependent on FTIL with no reasonable route of exit 
from the agreement.  
The Company stated (December 2014) that the new management had initiated a review to 
establish the reasonableness of charges for simila r line of business. Renegotiation of the 
commercial terms of the agreements with FTIL was in progress. Some agreements were 
suspended partially.
Reply establishes the fact that the terms of agreement with FTIL unduly favored FTIL 
and did not safeguard the interests of MCX-SX. 
7.2.2 Defective assessment of requirements:  
The Company entered into two agreements for Co-Location services (January 2013) to 
avail the space at FTIL’s data center for hosting and offer co-location services to its 
trading members and service agreements for Web Services and Cost sharing 
arrangements for utilizing the services of personnel from FTIL for various activities and 
also for sharing the cost of infrastructure, computer peripheral, hardware, software etc. 
(effective from August 2008 / February 2009). Fees was payable in advance on yearly 
basis. The Company paid ` 6.40 crore for hiring 32 full racks for Co-location services for 
2013. The requirement was reduced to 16 full racks in December 2013 and the Company 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
132 
paid `3.20 crore for 2014. The Company paid FTIL a total of ` 6.42 crore towards web 
services and cost sharing.  
Audit observed that the Company projected its requirement at higher level without 
flexibility for downward reduction and could not fully utilize the capacity available in 
respect of Co-location services. The Company did not conduct an independent review of 
the terms and conditions of the agreements in terms of the requirement of facilities, 
deployment of manpower, the rates and the tenure of the agreement etc. Also, FTIL was 
not responsible for any delay in the delivery of the deliverables, under the agreement.  
Thus the terms of agreement were loaded in FTIL’s favour. Further, audit could not 
satisfy itself of the details of actual availment of  services by the Company from FTIL, in 
the absence of records. 
The Company stated (January 2015) that the agreement for service provider POP & Co-
location services were made by erstwhile management and the new management has 
suspended the Co-location services agreement from 1 July 2014. The activity has been 
shifted to the Data Centre in the new premises and is being managed by the Company and 
services are being availed on actual basis.
The suspension of agreement is in line with the audit contention and is only an interim 
measure which does not relieve the Company from its liabilities.  
7.2.3 Non-review of Liquidity Enhancement Scheme despite fall in business volume 
and the accumulated losses 
SEBI introduced ‘Liquidity Enhancement Scheme (LES)’ from 2 June 2011 to enhance 
liquidity of illiquid securities in equity derivative segment (EDS) and extended it to 
Equity Capital Market (ECM) in February 2013. MCX-SX having commenced trade in 
ECM and EDS in the same month, without waiting for the performance of the members 
enrolled, introduced the scheme immediately. The Company additionally introduced an 
‘Additional Incentive scheme’ for a period from March 2013 to June 2013 with specific 
cash rewards in each category.  
During the period of operation of the scheme only 51 new members were admitted to the 
exchange. Also the volume of trade in the exchange in ECM increased from ` 27.18 crore 
(March 2013) to ` 2972 crore (June 2013) and then declined continuously upto ` 416 
crore (March 2014). The volume of trade in EDS increased from ` 7707.22 crore (March 
2013) to ` 32685.58 crore (July 2013) and then declined continuously upto ` 1280.19 
crore (March 2014). The scheme envisaged incentive payment for any performance of 
trade on the exchange, without incentivizing volume of trade above a certain level or any 
focus on illiquid stocks. 
Audit observed that as the Company was faced with difficulty in volume growth coupled 
with heavy operating expenditure, it should have reviewed the performance of its 
members before introduction of such scheme as the scheme envisaged payment of 
incentive even for normal performance. The Company discontinued the scheme on 10
April 2014 during which period, it had already paid a total incentive of ` 43.30 crore. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
133 
The Company replied (August/December 2014) that the scheme was introduced with the 
approval of its Board of Directors and the operation of the scheme was reported to the 
Board periodically. Further, in view of reducing the operating costs and to initiate steps 
for revival of the exchange, LES was discontinued in April 2014. 
The reply supports the audit observation that the introduction of the scheme entailed high 
operating cost and was not beneficial to the Company and had to be ultimately 
discontinued.
7.2.4 Infrastructure and Personnel issues:  
(a) Imprudent decision to acquire office accommodation on lease at Bandra Kurla 
Complex (BKC) Mumbai resulting in avoidable expenditure of 
` 13.79 crore 
The Company entered into an agreement (May 2013) with M/s. BKC Properties Private 
Limited for taking the premises (15000 sq. ft) at Vibgyor Tower, BKC, Bandra (East), 
Mumbai on lease for a period of five years (60 months) effective from 15 March 2013. 
The Company paid (May 2013) a refundable interest free security deposit of ` 4 crore. 
The rent payable for the accommodation was ` 44.48 lakh per month in addition to 
maintenance charges. The property was on lease to FTIL before being taken up by MCX-
SX and the assets left over by FTIL were purchased by the Company for ` 2.63 crore. 
Thus, the Company paid ` 13.796 crore (August 2014) towards Deposit ( ` 4 crore), 
license fee, maintenance charges and car parking charges ( ` 7.16 crore) and towards used 
assets from FTIL without assessing the necessity for additional space. 
In this regard, audit observed the following: 
• The Company committed itself for occupation for 5 years in March 2013 itself by 
signing the term sheet even before the Management Committee of the Board of 
Directors approved the proposal in May 2013. 
• The space at BKC was not fully occupied till August 2014 and therefore was only 
partially utilized during March 2013 to July 2014.
• There was no valuation report/justification available on record for the leftover 
assets purchased from FTIL. The assets are being depreciated at the book rate 
obtained from FTIL. 
• The agreement contained a lock-in period of 36 months. Therefore, license fee 
had to be paid for a minimum period of 36 months irrespective of actual 
utilization of the premises. Thus, the Company committed itself to payment of 
license fee alone, to the extent of `16.01 crore (` 44.48 lakh x 36 months). 
The Company stated (December 2014) that the new premise was fully occupied from 
August 2014. 
(b) Outsourcing the functions of Personnel, Administration and Procurement  
The Company entered (26 December 2008) into Memorandum of Understanding with 
FTIL for availing Management and other support services effective from October 2008 at 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
134 
monthly service charges of ` 35 lakh. The scope of agreement was later revised to ` 15 
lakh per month (effective April 2011). 
Audit observed the following: 
• The initial MoU gave FTIL the right to take decisions in respect of critical areas 
like business strategy, strategic recommendations to the business team, review of 
product performance, review of requirements for expansion and enhancement of 
capacity etc. This made the Company vulnerable and dependent on FTIL and 
compromised the confidentiality of its operations.  
• The Company did not recruit its own personnel or attempt to outsource through 
tender mechanism. 
• Additionally, Exchange specific services viz. Auditor, Business Analyst etc. were 
availed through exchange of correspondence with the approval of MD & CEO and 
were not backed by any formal agreement or approval of the Board. An amount of 
` 14.36 crore on this account was paid during the three years period ending 31 
March 2014.
• The reasonability of the rate of payments, confirmation of deliveries and 
requirement for continuation of these resources was not on record and could not 
be verified. 
The Company stated (December 2014) that the services as per the MoU have been 
discontinued by the new management and all these functions are now been carried out by 
the Company itself.  
(c)      Payment of gratuity to MD &CEO on resignation 
Shri Joseph Massey joined the Company as MD & CEO from 1
st June 2009 and through 
agreements (June 2010 and March 2013) his tenure was extended for a further period of 
three years each. He resigned on 9 October 2013 as a fallout of the show cause notice 
issued by FMC declaring him as not ‘fit and proper’ person to hold any post in any 
Exchange.
Audit observed that the Company paid gratuity of ` 53.31 lakh to Sh. Massey for 
rendering total service of 11 years which included his earlier service in MCX. As Sh 
Massey was not transferred from MCX to MCX-SX and rather joined the Company upon 
resignation from the former, as per the Group Gratuity Policy, his service in MCX-SX 
alone was to be counted for payment of gratuity. Further, as he rendered less than 5 years 
of service in MCX-SX, he was not entitled to payment of gratuity at all. Thus, the 
payment of gratuity amount of ` 53.31 lakh was not in order.
The Company stated (August 2014) that it has sought legal opinion on the issue which is 
still awaited.  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
135 
Conclusion
MCX-SX had entered into long term agreements with its related party FTIL that 
entailed various restrictive clauses as well as high costs. Further, the PSU Banks had 
67 per cent shareholding as on 31 March 2010 and had their nominees on the Board 
of the Company during 30 April 2010 to 20 September 2012. These nominees of PSU 
banks on the Board of MCX-SX did not review these unfavourable agreements and 
failed to protect the interests of the banks they represented. Despite present action 
by new management, by way of suspension of various agreements with FTIL, the 
liability due to restrictive clauses in these agreements would continue as only 
interim action to suspend only a few agreements has been taken (January 2015). 
The matter was reported (September 2014) to the Ministry; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 
Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited 
7.3 Infructuous expenditure due to printing of fresh bank notes bearing the 
signature of former Governor of RBI
Security Printing and Minting Corporation Limited continued printing bank notes 
with the signature of former Governor of RBI even in 2014 though the then 
Governor had completed his tenure in September 2013 and thereby incurred an 
infructuous expenditure of ` 36.69 crore.
Bharatiya Reserve Bank Note Mudran Private Limited (BRBNMPL) is the nominated 
agency of Reserve Bank of India (RBI) for issuing the designs/printing plates with the 
approved signature of Governor of RBI to Security Printing and Minting Corporation of 
India Limited (the Company). Dr. D. Subbarao was the Governor of Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI) from 5 September 2008 to 4 September 2013 and Dr. Raghuram G. Rajan 
assumed office from 4 September 2013. BRBNMPL intimated  Bank Note Press (BNP), 
Dewas (Madhya Pradesh), a unit of the Company, vide letter dated 14 September 2013 
that approval of RBI to specimen note of ` 10 denomination  with signature of new 
Governor was received and requested BNP to collect security material to start regular 
bank note printing. BRBNMPL also intimated (17 October 2013) BNP the approval of 
machine proof of ` 50, ` 100 and ` 500 denomination bank notes incorporating the 
signature of new Governor and asked BNP to furnish details for preparation of Nickel 
Altos.  
Audit examination revealed that RBI had advised (September 2008) (at the time of 
change of charge of the then RBI Governor in that year) that all the bank note printing 
presses may start printing bank notes bearing the signature of new Governor in all 
denominations w.e.f. 1 January of 2009. Accordingly, at the time of change-over of RBI 
Governor in 2013, BNP, Dewas should have followed the same instruction and started 
printing bank notes with the signature of new Governor of RBI w.e.f. 1 January 2014.  
While Currency Note Press, Nashik, another unit of the Company, followed this 
procedure, BNP did not incorporate the signature of new RBI Governor w.e.f. 1 January 
2014 but continued printing bank notes with the signature of former RBI Governor till 25 
February 2014. BNP printed 372 million pieces (mpcs) bank notes during January to 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
136 
February 2014 and remitted 146 mpcs to various regional offices of RBI which intimated 
(25 February 2014) that printing of notes with the signature of former Governor of RBI 
was not in order and directed the Company not to remit such notes forthwith. Audit 
examination revealed that 226.48
♥  mpcs of bank notes of ` 20, ` 100 and ` 500 
denomination costing ` 36.69 crore were still lying at BNP store (March 2015) and the 
chances of lifting of these notes by RBI were very remote as these notes were printed in 
2014 carrying the signature of former Governor, who had completed his tenure in 
September 2013. 
The Company stated (February 2015) that: 
(i) Bank notes, which were printed between 1 January and 25 February 2014 were 
not rejected by RBI; 
(ii) BNP, Dewas had supplied 146  mpcs bank notes to RBI valued at ` 38  crore in 
2013-14 and the payment for the same had already been released by RBI; and 
(iii) According to press release issued by RBI on 4 March 2014, these bank notes were 
legal tender. Part of these bank notes had already been issued by RBI to the Public 
being valid legal tender. Further, the bank notes in stock would be despatched as 
soon as instruction was received from RBI. 
The reply is to be viewed in the light of fact that RBI had categorically asked the 
Company in February 2014 itself to stop sending such bank notes which were not in 
order. Further, RBI did not issue any delivery schedule for lifting of these bank notes 
even after lapse of more than one year. Moreover, RBI did not respond to request of the 
Company made in June/December 2014 so far (February 2015). Accordingly, the chances 
of lifting of these notes by RBI were bleak.
Thus, the expenditure of ` 36.69 crore, being cost of production of 226.48 mpcs bank 
notes bearing the signature of former RBI Governor with 2014 as the year of printing had 
become infructuous.  
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015).
The New India Assurance Company Limited 
7.4 Co-insurance business with private general insurance companies
7.4.1 Introduction 
The insurance market was opened by the IRDA (Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority) in August 2000 to private insurance companies, thus ending the monopoly of 
PSU general insurance companies. There are co-insurance arrangements between the 
PSU insurance companies and the private insurance companies. Under co-insurance, one 
                                                           
♥  60.82 Mpcs intaglio printed, 21.17 Mpcs numbered printed, 41.49 Mpcs bundled and 103.00 Mpcs 
Packed. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
137 
company (known as the "lead insurer") underwrites the insurance business and shares a 
part of that business with other public/private insurance business. The premium is shared 
by these companies and the claims, if any, are also made good by them. The following 
flow chart explains the co-insurance process. As can be seen, the insured plays a 
prominent role in selecting the lead insurer and the co-insurance share of each co-insurer 
as well. The insurance companies resort to co-insurance arrangements in order to spread 
risk emanating from underwriting mega risk/high risk policies.
Co-insurance process flow chart
Seeks insurance policy through tender/requests 
for quote/co-insurance offer 
Submit offer 
Selects lead insurer and coinsurers 
During the period April 2012 to March 2013, New India Assurance Company Ltd (the 
company) assumed 968 co-insurance incoming businesses, where private general insurers 
were the leaders, for a total premium income of ` 135.94 crore.  Audit reviewed 38 cases 
pertaining to the Mumbai Regional offices of the company out of 968 cases for the year 
2012-13. These 38 cases registered a premium income of ` 69.80 crore (51.35 per cent of 
the total premium) and incurred a claim of ` 23.46 crore (33 per cent on the premium of `
69.80 crore). Of the 38 test checked cases, 20 cases belonged to Fire class of business, 5 
cases pertained to Engineering, 8 cases to Marine, 4 cases to Health and 1 to 
Miscellaneous (Public liability) class of business.
Audit scrutiny focused on whether the company had underwriting norms for co-insurance 
in place and whether these norms were followed consistently.  Audit also looked into the 
safeguarding of financial interests by the company while entering into the co-insurance 
arrangements with the private insurance companies. The audit findings are stated below: 
7.4.2 Underwriting Policy/Guidelines 
The company put in place the revised underwriting policy (November 2007) which 
prescribed the general underwriting principles (self -sustainability), underwriting limits of 
officials, the authorities to decide the limits etc. This did not cover co-insurance 
arrangements. The Company has not yet framed specific guidelines for its co-insurance 
business.
Client/Insured 
General 
Insurance 
companies 
Policy issued by lead insurer
Flow Chart

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
138 
Ministry has stated in its reply (March 2015) that, the underwriting guidelines adopted by 
the company are applicable to the incoming coinsurance. However, in view of the nature 
of co-insurance business wherein role of the lead insurance Company and that of the 
client in determining the terms and conditions of the insurance contract, is significant, 
specific guidelines for this area of business are essential. 
7.4.3 Inadequate Risk and Client Profile 
Prudent and sound underwriting warranted that an underwriter maintained a risk profile 
and client profile which influenced the underwriter in deciding whether to accept or reject 
the risk. A prudent judgment was made by the underwriter by analyzing the existing loss 
record and future risk exposure. Hence in order to assess the prudency of underwriting 
co-insurance business, the Audit test checked whether the Company recorded the most 
vital information such as Incurred Claims Ratio of the risk in the previous three years, 
Average Combined Ratio on the risk in previous three years and details of risk such as the 
location of the risk, total exposure, break up of Sum Insured, the project report, annual 
reports, risk inspection reports, mode of conveyance in the case of marine cargo business 
etc., as relevant to the case before acceptance of the risk. It was observed that in only 3 
out of the 38 cases basic details in respect of risk and client profile were maintained by 
the Company. 
The Underwriting guidelines (Brokers policy-HO:FTD:9-12, dated 30
th July 2012) 
directed that for proper evaluation of risks/proposals, finalizing prudent terms and rates 
and mitigating the probability of any bad underwriting, the mandatory submission of 
minimum 3 years premium and claims experience by the brokers was to be ensured. 
Audit noticed that in 19 out of 38 cases the Incurr ed Claims Ratio which is the most vital 
information in decision making was not available. In 7 out of these 19 cases, claims for 
an amount of ` 3.03 crore were settled. Thus the company assumed risk without assessing 
the gravity of risk. 
Ministry stated in its reply (March 2015), that Company has instructed (August 2014) the 
operating offices to file all such details while accepting incoming co-insurance business. 
The company issued a circular based on the audit observation. However, the company 
needs to make a policy, on the issue of Co-insurance. 
7.4.4 Inadequacies in Risk Assessment and Approval 
The company vide its Board note dated December 2007, laid down a broad framework 
for classification of risks, rating of risks, rating pattern of risk, merit rating or scoring of 
risks and acceptance limits of risks for the operating offices.
Risk Inspection is one of the tools of risk assessment followed in Insurance Industry. 
Further, the IRDA instructions (December 2007) also stated that individual rated risks, 
i.e., risks above a certain limit of Sum Insured (as per the product classification of the 
underwriting policy) were to be rated based on the Inspection report.
Audit observed that in none of the 25 fire and Engineering cases, risk inspection was 
carried out by the company itself or the Inspection report of the lead insurer obtained 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
139 
before acceptance of the risk. It was seen that of these 25 cases the Company settled 6 
claims for an amount of ` 21.78 crore. 
Audit observed that none of the 38 cases had justification notes for acceptance, duly 
approved by the Competent Authority. It was observed that though 12 out 38 risks were 
of Sum Insured (SI) exceeding ` 500 crore, the laid down procedure in respect of risk 
inspection was not followed. 
Ministry stated in its reply (March 2015), that the Company has instructed the operating 
offices to adhere to the procedure for acceptance of incoming co-insurance specially with 
reference to collection of data along with incurred claims ratio for the last three years and 
fire fighting and inbuilt safety measures.  
7.4.5 Acceptance of Risk at Lesser Rate under Co-insurance 
Audit observed in 9 out of 38 cases coinsurance shares was accepted at a rate lower than 
that quoted by the Company at the time of participation in the tender for 100  per cent
share in these nine cases.  The lower premium amounted to ` 2.02 crore in these nine 
cases. Of these 9 cases Company settled 3 claims of ` 2.27 crore. The percentage of 
under quote exceeded 15 per cent in 5 cases resulting in total under quote of premium by 
` 1.48 crore.
Ministry has stated in its reply (March 2015) that the co-insurance share is accepted only 
after proper assessment and evaluation of the risk. Due diligence is also observed while 
accepting coinsurance share. Further, the premium rates are based on certain assumptions 
as perceived by the underwriter.
However, as the Company did not provide any justification for accepting the same risk 
subsequently at a lesser rate and in the absence of guidelines, the acceptable range of 
variance could not be verified. 
7.4.6 Inconsistencies in the policies of the company and the lender 
The Public sector general insurance companies and private sector general insurance 
companies entered into Coinsurance agreement on 20 February 2009 which provided that 
as soon as the policy was issued by the leader a certified true policy copy was to be made 
available to the co-insurers.  
Audit observed that in all the 38  cases, the company did not collect a copy of the original 
policy issued by the Lead insurers. At the instance of Audit, the company obtained the 
copy from the lead insurers and inconsistencies were noticed in 6 out of the 38 cases. A 
comparison of the significant inconsistencies is cited below:
Sl.
No
Insured / Leader Particulars 
1 Deepak Fertilizers 
(12140144125100000003)
(Leader Bajaj Allianz General) 
The company policy copy showed sum  
insured (SI) at ` 3000 crore whereas 
leaders policy showed SI at ` 300 crore. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
140 
2 Deepak Fertilizers 
(12140144125100000002)
(Leader Bajaj Allianz General 
Insurance) 
The company policy copy showed SI at 
` 5.72 crore whereas leaders policy 
showed SI at ` 10.35 crore. 
3 Tinplate  
(12140244125800000001)
(Leader: TATA AIG General 
Insurance) 
SI in the leader's policy copy was 
` 2,62,45,738 whereas it was  
` 2,64,81,358 in the company's copy, i.e., 
it was higher by ` 2.36 lakh. 
The company policy copy showed 100  per 
cent premium at ` 37,735 whereas the 
leader's policy copy showed it at ` 37,400. 
4 Gallant Metals Ltd 
(11280011120600000001)
(Leader: ICICI Lombard) 
Leader's policy showed SI of ` 396.75 
crore whereas company policy showed SI 
of ` 356.75 crore. 
The company policy showed premium of 
` 40,02,145 whereas Leader’s policy 
showed a premium of ` 40,04,984. 
5 AES Solar Ltd 
(12050011120600000004)
(Leader: TATA AIG General) 
Sum insured for MLOP and FLOP under 
Business Interruption insurance section 
was Nil in the company's policy copy 
whereas it was ` 31 crore in leader's policy 
copy.
6 Deepak Fertilizers 
(12140144111120100000025)
(Leader: Bajaj Allianz) 
The company's policy copy showed 
premium at ` 2.154 crore and SI at 
` 2705.90 crore whereas the leader’s 
policy showed premium at ` 2.146 crore 
and SI at ` 2410.32 crore. 
Ministry has stated in its reply (March 2015) that, though the lead insurers are required to 
share policy copies, sometime the Company do not get the same. To book the premium 
the underwriting office indexes the coinsurance share by inputting the available 
information. 
7.4.7 Inadequacies in the Underwriting Software (CWISS) 
The company has developed a software called CWISS (Centralised Web based Insurance 
System Solution) to facilitate its insurance activ ities. Current year's policy issued by the 
company carries the previous year's policy number if the company has 100 per cent share 
in the policy (non co-insurance policy). However, if a policy under co-insurance is 
renewed, the previous year's policy number is not indicated. As this facility would enable 
the company in obtaining the previous history of the risk, CWISS needs to have this 
functionality.
Ministry has stated in its reply (March 2015) that the service provider is in the process of 
devising a workflow whereby this can be put to production. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
141 
Conclusion
The Company needs to address the issues of obtaining risk profile and client profile 
before acceptance of co-insurance contracts. Detailed justification for accepting co-
insurance at lesser rate than higher rate quoted for 100  per cent  share should be 
recorded. Copies of co-insurance contracts should necessarily be obtained from the 
lead insurer to rule out possible inconsistencies. 
Audit holds the view that the system and procedures adopted by the company in 
accepting the co-insurance business need review and improvement. 
Ministry replied that the Company had noted the discrepancies pointed out by audit and 
assured remedial measures to streamline the procedures. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
142 
CHAPTER VIII- IRREGULARITIES IN PAYMENT OF 
ENTITLEMENTS AND RECOVERIES BY CPSEs AT THE 
INSTANCE OF AUDIT
8.  Following significant instances of irregularities in payment of various entitlements and 
allowances to the employees of CPSEs were noticed in audit:  
Airports Authority of India, Coal India Limited and its Subsidiaries 
8.1 Irregular payment of allowances and perks beyond admissible ceiling  
Non-adherence to guidelines of Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) regarding 
grant of allowances and perks to executives to a maximum ceiling of 50 per cent
resulted into irregular payment of ` 543.77 crore and ` 29.33 crore to the employees 
of AAI and CIL respectively. 
The Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) issued (November 2008) guidelines on 
revision of scales of pay in Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSE) effective from 01 
January 2007. The guidelines further stated that in respect of other allowances/perks, 
‘The Board of Directors would decide on the allowances and perks admissible to the 
different categories of the executives subject to a maximum ceiling
1 of 50 per cent of the 
basic pay. Instead of having a fixed set of allowances, the CPSEs may follow ‘Cafeteria 
Approach’ allowing the executives to choose from a set of perks and allowances’. 
A. Audit observed that beside the payment of perks and allowances under the cafeteria 
approach, Airports Authority of India (AAI) was also paying perks and allowances in the 
form of Rating Allowance, Proficiency Allowance and Medical Allowance
2 to its 
employees over and above the ceiling of 50 per cent and other exempted allowances in 
contravention of the directions 3 issued by DPE on the same. Further, though AAI 
discussed this matter in the meeting of Manpower Advisory Board held in May/July 2012 
and decided to refer the matter to MoCA for seeking the Cabinet approval specifying the 
objectives and reasons, but till date (February 2014) the approval of Cabinet was not 
accorded. 
                                                           
1 The following allowances would be outside the purview of ceiling of 50 per cent of the Basic Pay:  
(i) North-East Allowance limited to 12 .5 per cent of Basic Pay.  
(ii) Allowance for Underground  Mines limited to 15 per cent of Basic Pay.  
(iii) Special Allowance up to  10 per cent of Basic Pay for serving in the difficult and far flung areas as 
approved by concerned Ministries in consultation with Department of Public Enterprises from time 
to time.  
(iv) Non-Practicing Allowance limited to 25 per cent of Basic Pay for Medical Officers.  
2 Rating allowance to executives of Air Traffic Controllers, Proficiency Allowance to CNS executives 
and Medical Allowance to all employees 
3 DPE OM dated 26 November 2008, OM dated 2 April 2009, OM dated 1 June 2011, OM dated 29 June 
2012 and OM dated 11 June 2013  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
143 
AAI stated (July 2013) that payment of allowances over and above the 50 per cent
prescribed by DPE were a legacy issue in AAI. It was also stated that these allowances 
were being paid for specialized jobs which the ATC/CNS and other executives performed 
for which they had acquired special technical skills. Further, these allowances were being 
paid prior to the wage revision effected by DPE, i.e., 01 January 2007. The management 
also decided (January 2014) to submit the issue to Cabinet for approval.
The reply is not tenable as the DPE guidelines categorically states that no 
allowances/benefits/perks other than those mentioned in DPE OM dated 26 November 
2008 was admissible outside the 50 per cent ceiling. Further, AAI has not obtained the 
approval of the Cabinet till date. 
Resultantly, the payment of allowance and perks amounting to 
` 543.77 crore made 
during the period from 2007-08 to 2013-14 in the form of Rating Allowance, Proficiency 
Allowance and Medical Allowance was in contravention of DPE guidelines. 
B. Audit observed that the subsidiaries of Coal India Limited (CIL) unduly allowed either 
allowances for cooking gas or provided free LPG cylinder to its executives over and 
above the ceiling of 50 per cent  of basic pay, deviating from the DPE guidelines and 
accordingly extra payment was made to the executives over the years except by MCL, 
CMPDIL and SECL where benefit of gas allowance was discontinued in 2012, 2014 and 
2015 respectively.
Audit further observed that there was no uniformity in the practice of allowing the benefit 
of Gas Allowance /LPG cylinder to the executives across the coal subsidiaries under the 
same Holding Company (CIL). In some coal subsidiaries, viz BCCL, NCL, WCL, MCL, 
SECL and ECL, gas allowance/LPG facility was allowed to the executives working at 
Subsidiary Headquarters as well as in area offices, while in other coal subsidiaries (CCL 
and CMPDIL), the same was not allowed to the executives working at subsidiary 
headquarters. The Holding Company, CIL, however, did not allow gas allowance to the 
executives working at its Head Office. Even as regards the compliance of DPE 
guidelines, there was no common approach towards discontinuing the benefit of gas 
allowance/LPG facility in the coal subsidiaries under CIL as MCL, SECL and CMPDIL 
had already discontinued gas allowance/facility but othe r subsidiaries of CIL are still 
continuing the same. 
Based on the records examined in Audit in respect of Coal India Limited and its 
subsidiaries, an irregular payment of `29.33 crore to their executives was observed during 
2009-10 to 2013-14 as given below: 
Sl.
No.
Name of CPSEs Irregular Payment 
on account of LPG 
allowance/facility  
(
` in crore) 
1. North Eastern Coalfields Limited (NECL) under control 
of Coal India Limited  
0.18
2. Mahanadi Coalfields Limited 0.81
3. Northern Coalfields Limited 4.76
4. South Eastern Coalfields Limited 10.56

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
144 
5. Western Coalfields Limited 4.63
6. Central Coalfields Limited 2.64
7. Bharat Coking Coal Limited 2.90
8. Eastern Coalfields Limited 2.73
9. Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited 0.12
Total 29.33
CIL stated (November 2014) that: 
• The supply of free coal to all employees including executives for domestic use 
had been in vogue in collieries of CIL subsidiary companies since pre-
nationalization era and the practice was continued after nationalization of coal 
companies. 
• Since the practice of free supply of coal had been contributing to health hazards, 
environmental pollution etc. in the coalfield areas and also due to escalation of the 
price of coal, substitution of LPG cylinder with coal supply had become a 
necessity and was cost effective to the company. Hence, the supply of free coal 
was discontinued and one LPG cylinder per month per employee was provided in 
its place. 
• The supply of free coal or LPG cylinder in its place to executives had never been 
a component of pay and perks of any of the executive pay revisions since 
1973/1975 and thus it could not be considered as perks or allowance. Therefore, 
the supply of LPG cylinder in lieu of the domestic supply of coal did not violate 
the DPE guidelines on perks and allowance. 
The subsidiaries of CIL viz., WCL, CCL, ECL and BCCL offered 
(September/October/November 2014/February 2015) the same views in line with the 
Holding Company (CIL). NCL stated (November 2014) that supply of one LPG cylinder 
free of cost was not included in the list of perks as provided in cafeteria approach. 
CMPDIL, MCL and SECL, however, stated (September 2014/ January 2015/ February 
2015) that the present practice of reimbursement to executives for LPG had been 
discontinued.
The above contentions are not acceptable in view of the following: 
• DPE guidelines dated 26 November 2008 categorically stated that no allowances 
and perks would be admissible to the executives over and above the maximum 
ceiling of 50 per cent  of the Basic Pay. Further, Gas Allowance did not come 
within the purview of four allowances which were specifically kept by DPE 
outside the purview of the above 50 per cent ceiling. 
• CIL had itself admitted that the supply of free co al or LPG cylinder in its place to 
executives had never been a component of pay and perks of any of the executive 
pay revisions. As such, extending benefit of LPG allowance or facility is not 
regular and is in violation of DPE guidelines. Further, free supply of LPG cylinder 
to the executives for domestic cooking should have been considered as one of the 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
145 
components of Perks as per definition of ‘Perquisites’ in terms of Section 17(2) of 
the Income Tax Act, 1961. 
• The DPE Office Memorandum dated 1 June 2011, 29 June 2012 and 11 June 2013 
directed all the ministries/departments for strict compliance of the relevant 
provision and decided that no other allowance or perks would be kept outside the 
50 per cent ceiling except the four that have been provided in the DPE OM dated 
26 November 2008. 
• MCL, one of the subsidiaries of CIL, had already issued instructions (July 2012) 
to ensure that no other payment was made to any executive on account of any 
allowance/benefit/perks outside the prescribed 50 per cent ceiling in pursuance of 
the DPE directives and accordingly stopped payment of LPG allowance. CMPDIL 
and SECL have also accepted to discontinue the practice of reimbursement to 
executives for LPG. However, the other subsidiaries of CIL are still continuing 
the practice of allowing gas allowance/facility to their executives though they are 
under the same Holding Company (CIL). 
The matter was reported to the Ministry of Civil Aviation (August 2014) and Ministry of 
Coal (November 2014); their response in respect of AAI and CIL and its subsidiaries was 
awaited (March 2015). 
The New India Assurance Company Limited, General Insurance Corporation of 
India Limited, United India Insurance Company Limited, Export Credit Guarantee 
Corporation of India Limited, The State Trading Corporation of India Limited, 
Coal India Limited and Food Corporation of India  
8.2 Recoveries at the instance of audit
In 22 cases pertaining to seven CPSEs, audit pointed out an amount of ` 58.59 crore that 
was due for recovery. The management of CPSEs had recovered an amount of ` 56.60 
crore (97 per cent) during the period 2013-14 as detailed in Appendix-I.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
146 
CHAPTER IX 
Follow-up on Audit Reports (Commercial)  
Audit Reports of the CAG represent the culmination of the process of scrutiny of 
accounts and records maintained in various offices and departments of CPSEs. It is, 
therefore, necessary that appropriate and timely response is received from the executive 
on the audit findings included in the Audit Reports. 
The Lok Sabha Secretariat requested (July 1985) all the Ministries to furnish notes (duly 
vetted by Audit) indicating remedial/corrective action taken by them on various 
paragraphs/appraisals contained in the Audit Reports (Commercial) of the CAG as laid on 
the table of both the Houses of Parliament. Such notes were required to be submitted even 
in respect of paragraphs/appraisals which were not selected by the Committee on Public 
Sector Undertakings (COPU) for detailed examination. The COPU in its Second Report 
(1998-99-Twelfth Lok Sabha), while reiterating the above instructions, recommended: 
• setting up of a monitoring cell in each Ministry for monitoring the submission of 
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) in respect of Audit Reports (Commercial) on 
individual Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs); 
• setting up of a monitoring cell in Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) for 
monitoring the submission of ATNs in respect of Reports containing paras 
relating to a number of PSUs under different Ministries; and 
• submission to the Committee, within six months from the date of presentation of 
the relevant Audit Reports, the follow up ATNs duly vetted by Audit in respect of 
all Reports of the CAG presented to Parliament. 
In the meeting of the Committee of Secretaries (June 2010) it was decided to make 
special efforts to clear the pending ATNs/ATRs on CAG Audit Paras and PAC 
recommendations within the following three months. While conveying this decision (July 
2010), the Ministry of Finance recommended institutional mechanism to expedite action 
in the future. 
While reviewing the follow up action taken by the Government on the above 
recommendations, the COPU in its First Report (1999-2000-Thirteenth Lok Sabha) 
reiterated its earlier recommendations that the DPE should set up a separate monitoring 
cell in the DPE itself to monitor the follow-up action taken by various 
Ministries/Departments on the observations contained in the Audit Reports (Commercial) 
on individual undertakings. DPE informed (March 2015) that a separate monitoring cell 
had been set up to monitor the follow up on submission of ATNs by the concerned 
administrative Ministries/Department. DPE also informed that they had also requested all 
the concerned departments having jurisdiction over CPSEs to set up Monitoring Cells in 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
147 
their department. Three monitoring meetings were also convened by DPE to review 
pending ATNs.
A review in Audit revealed that despite reminders, 36 ATNs are awaited from various 
Ministries, as detailed in Appendix-II.
(PRASENJIT MUKHERJEE) 
New Delhi Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Dated: 28 May 2015 and Chairman, Audit Board 
Countersigned
New Delhi (SHASHI KANT SHARMA) 
Dated: 29 May 2015 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


APPENDICES
&
ANNEXURES

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
151 
  (Referred to in para 8.2) 
Recoveries at the instance of Audit during 2013-14 
  (Amount ` in lakh) 
Name of 
Ministry/
Department 
Name of the Central Public Sector 
Enterprise (CPSE) 
Audit observations in brief Amount of 
recovery
pointed
out by 
Audit
Amount
recovered by 
the
Management
Finance
The New India Assurance Company 
Limited 
Non recovery of advance  8.79 3.12 
General Insurance Corporation of 
India
Incorrect claim settlement under FAC policy 
(facultative policy)
152.00 152.00 
General Insurance Corporation of 
India
Short charging/short collection of premium and 
improper grant of NCB. General Insurance Co. 
Treaty No.45359 and 47570 
48.00 32.93 
United India Insurance Company 
Limited 
Excess claim due to error in calculation of the 
value of iron scrap salvage 
3.00 3.00 
Commerce and 
Industry
Export Credit Guarantee 
Corporation of India Limited 
Excess payment of claim 4.93 3.94 
The State Trading Corporation of 
India Limited 
Failure to safeguard the interest of the company 
resulted in unwarranted transfer of gain 
3194.00 2802.00 
Coal Coal India Limited,  MM Division Incorrect calculation of interest on loan provided 
to M/s BEML 
4.44 4.00 
 Food Corporation of India  Excess payment of storage cum handling charges 177.00 261.00 
Appendix-I

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I)
152 
Ministry of 
Consumer 
Affairs,
Food and
Public
Distribution 
Divisional office, Moga to private contractors in violation of contractual 
terms  
Food Corporation of India  
Divisional office, Gurdaspur 
Non recovery of storage cum stacking charges on 
replacement of BRL rice due to delay in 
replacement of substandard rice by State 
Agencies/Millers 
1.03 5.60 
Food Corporation of India  Regional 
office, Punjab 
Acceptance and movement of substandard 
foodgrains and resultant quality complaint 
9.81 13.28 
Food Corporation of India
Divisional office, Faridkot 
Overpayment of overtime allowance to ancillary 
labour
9.65  6.42 
Food Corporation of India
Divisional office, 
Kapurthala
Excess payment of gunny depreciation 85.76 85.76 
Food Corporation of India
Divisional office, 
Kurushetra 
Excess payment to State Govt. and its agencies 
due to non-deduction of Storage gain on direct 
delivery of wheat during Rabi Marketing season 
2004-05
723.24 720.88 
Food Corporation of India Reimbursement of unauthorized
Hill transport subsidy in respect of sugar on 
movement to Andaman & Nicobar Islands. 
389.00 388.79 
Food Corporation of India   Inadmissible payment to State Govt. agencies on 
account of custody & maintenance charge for 
custom Milled Rice. 
19.85 8.66 
Food Corporation of India  
Divisional office, Dimapur 
Irregular payment of incentive  70.30 29.33 
Food Corporation of India   Avoidable loss 
due to excess issue of maize against allocation to 
the Poultry industry in Maharashtra 
35.39 56.31 
Food Corporation of India  
Divisional office, Jaipur 
Irregular payment towards Arhathia charges to 
State Agencies on procurement of wheat. 
349.23 187.74 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
153 
Ministry of 
Consumer 
Affairs,
Food and
Public  
Distribution 
Food Corporation of India  Regional 
office, Gonda 
Irregularities and non-
maintenance of records for purchases of wheat and 
rice excess payment of Mandishulk. 
7.85 7. 85 
Food Corporation of India  Regional 
office, Bareilly 
Payment of gunny
depreciation against instruction of GOI
32.10 377.00 
Food Corporation of India  Regional 
office, Bareilly 
Inadmissible society
commission paid to state Government agency  
379.00 356.00 
Food Corporation of India  Regional 
office, Bareilly 
Unadjusted claims
standing in the name
of state Govt. agencies. 
155.00 154.00 
Total   5859.37 5659.61 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I)
154 
 (Referred to in Chapter IX)
Statement showing the details of Audit Reports prior to 2014 (Commercial) for 
which Action Taken Notes are pending  
No. & year of 
Report
Name of Report  Para No.  
Department of Atomic Energy 
13 of 2013 Compliance Audit Para  1.1 
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Para  1.1 
Department of Chemicals 
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Para 2.1  
Ministry of Civil Aviation
13 of 2013 Compliance Audit Paras 3.1, and 3.3 
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Para 3.1 
Ministry of Coal
3 of 2011-12 Compliance Audit Para 3.2  
8 of 2012-13 Compliance Audit Paras  3.1  
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Paras 4.1  
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Para 8.1 
Department of Fertilizers
03 of 2011-12 Compliance audit Para 8.1 and 8.2 
13 of 2013 Compliance audit Para 8.1 
13 of 2014 Compliance audit Para 2.2 
10 of 2010-11 Performance Audit of activities of selected 
PSUs 
Chapter-IV
Ministry of Finance , Department of Financial Services 
24 of 2009-10 Compliance Audit Para 8.2.1 
10 of 2010-11 Performance Audit of activities of selected 
PSUs 
Chapter V
(03 Companies) 
3 of 2011-12 Compliance Audit Para 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, 
9.5 and 9.6 
Appendix-II

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
155 
8 of 2012-13 Compliance Audit Para 8.1 
13 of 2013 Compliance Audit Paras 9.1, 9.2 (04 
Companies), 9.3 
9.4, 9.6 and 9.7 
Department of Food and Public Distribution
13 of 2013 Compliance Audit Para 6.3  
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Para 6.1 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I)
156 
Annexure-I
(Referred to in para 3.3.2.1) 
Statement showing operating results of DCC during 2009-10 to 2013-14 
(` in crore) 
Particulars 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 
 Income from Sales (A) 144.06 159.20 181.34 165.56 196.69
Variable Cost* (B) 110.93 116.23 148.39 124.12 143.35
Contribution (C )=(A)-(B) 33.13 42.98 32.95 41.44 53.34
Fixed Cost (D) 48.56 47.78 63.55 65.37 69.87
Total Cost (E)= (B)+(D) 159.49 164.01 211.94 189.49 213.22
Profit(+) /Loss(-)(F)= (A)-(E) -15.43 -4.81 -30.60 -23.94 -16.53
Contribution on Sales (Per
cent)
23 27 18 25 27
Contribution on Fixed Cost 
(Per cent)
68 90 52 63 76
*Includes Prior Period Adjustments and cost of other job of non-recurring nature 
Annexure-II
(Referred to in para 3.3.2.3) 
Statement showing capacity utilization at DCC during 2009-10 to 2013-14 
 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
Installed capacity
[Coal (MT)] 
547500 547500 547500 547500 547500
Available capacity 
[Coal (MT)] 
328500 328500 328500 328500 328500
Utilized capacity 
[Coal (MT)] 
166016 143778 89946 72894 93614
Available capacity in 
relation to installed 
capacity (Per cent)
60 60 60 60 60
Capacity utilization in 
relation to installed 
capacity (Per cent)
30.32 26.26 16.43 13.31 17.10
Capacity utilization in 
relation to available 
capacity (Per cent)
50.53 43.77 27.38 22.19 28.49

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
157
Annexure-III
(Referred to in para 3.3.2.3) 
Statement showing actual production against target fixed and deviations from target during 2009-10 to 2013-14 
A) Coal gas:  (in Nm3)
Year
(1)
Available
capacity 
(2)
Producti
on Target 
(3)
Production
Actual
(4)
Deviation
of target 
from
available
capacity
(Per cent)
(5)=(2-3) 
 Deviation 
from
available
capacity 
(6)=(5/2)*100 
Deviation
of actual 
from
target
(7)=(3-4) 
Deviation
from
target  
(Per cent)
(8)=(7/3)*
100
Deviation
from
target (in 
therm)
(9)
Rate
per
therm
(`)
(10)
Opportunity
loss due to 
low 
production
against target 
(`)
(11)=(9*10)
2009-10 103806000 67525000 57841462 36281000 35 9683538 14 1229809 25 30745225 
2010-11 103806000 63875000 57979700 39931000 38 5895300 9 748703 30/33 22461090 
2011-12 103806000 60225000 41834474 43581000 42 18390526 31 2335597 33/38 77074701 
2012-13 103806000 60335000 36301373 43471000 42 24033627 40 3052271 38 115986298 
2013-14 103806000 45293069 45160811 58512931 56 132258 1 16797 38/46 638286 
Total    221776931  58135249  7383177  246905600 
   
   *1 Nm3= 0.127 therm, approximately 
** In case of more than one prevailing price, the lowest price has been considered as per conservative approach. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I)
158 
B) CIL Coke:  (in MT) 
Year
(1)
Available
capacity 
(2)
Production
Target
(3)
Production
Actual
(4)
Deviation
of target 
from
available
capacity 
(5)=(2-3) 
Deviation
from
available
capacity (Per
cent)
(6)=(5/2)*100 
Deviation
of actual 
from
target
(7)=(3-4) 
Deviation on 
target (Per
cent)
(8)=(7/3)*100
Rate per 
MT (
`)
(9)
Opportunity
loss due to 
low 
production
against
target (
`)
(10)=(8*9)
2009-10 108405 29542 25780 78863 73 3762 13 5000 18810000 
2010-11 108405
26776 26359 81629 75 417 2
5000 / 
5062 / 
5362 / 
9862 2085000 
2011-12 108405 47932 27569 60473 56 20363 42 9862 200819906 
2012-13 108405 44266 23465 64139 59 20801 47 9862 205139462 
2013-14 108405 26898 26470 81507 75 428 2 9862 4220936 
 Total     366611   45771   431075304 
* In case of more than one prevailing price, the lowest price has been considered as per conservative approach. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
159 
C ) C o k e  F i n e s :                       ( i n  M T )  
Year
(1)
Available
capacity 
(2)
Production
Target
(3)
Production
Actual
(4)
Deviation of 
target from 
available
capacity 
(5)=(2-3) 
Deviation
from
available
capacity  
(Per cent)
(6)=(5/2)*100 
Deviation
of actual 
from
target
(7)=(3-4) 
Deviation
on target 
(Per cent)
(8)=(7/3)*
100
Rate per 
MT*
(9)
Loss due to 
low 
production
(`)
(10)=(7*9)
2009-10 108405 118169 90758 -9764 -9 27411 23 2250 / 
2560 61674750 
2010-11 108405
107105 70221 1300 1 36884 34
2560 / 
2576 / 
2776 / 
5076 94423040 
2011-12 108405 71898 31263 36507 34 40635 57 5076 206263260 
2012-13 108405 31263 24848 77142 71 6415 21 5076 32562540 
2013-14 108405 25093 24576 83312 77 517 2 5076 2624292 
 Total     188497   111862   397547882 
Note: * In case of more than one prevailing price, the lowest price has been considered as per conservative approach. 
          ** Considering price of Coke Fines (0-10mm) which is lower than that of Coke Fines (6-35mm).

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I)
160 
Annexure-IV
(Referred to in para 3.3.2.5) 
Statement showing amount of extra freight paid by DCC on procurement of Coal 
from SECL instead of ECL (From 2009-10 to 2013-14) 
Year Coal purchased 
during the year 
(in MT) 
Extra freight 
per MT
(in `)   
Total
( `)
2009-10 3,59,400 1,000 35,94,00,000 
2010-11 3,18,844 1,000 31,88,44,000 
2011-12 2,68,495 1,000 26,84,95,000 
2012-13 2,48,137 1,000 24,81,37,000 
2013-14 1,89,662* 1,000 18,96,62,000 
Total - - 138,45,38,000 
*During 2013-14 DCC procured coal from both ECL (w.e.f. September 2013) as well as SECL. Hence 
the figure in 2013-14 represents coal procured from SECL only. 
Annexure-V
(Referred to in para 3.3.2.6) 
Statement showing cost of production of gas vis-à-vis price of gas paid by GCGSC 
and consequent loss due to poor pricing of coal gas: 
Year 
(1) 
Dispatch  
(in Nm3 ) 
(2) 
Dispatch  
( in Therm) 
(3) = (2)* 
0.127 
Cost of 
production 
at DCC per 
therm (`)
(4) 
Price paid 
by
GCGSC 
per therm 
(`)
(5) 
Unrecovered 
Cost per 
therm (`)
*(6)=(4-5) 
Loss due to 
non-
recovery of 
Cost (`)
(7)=(3*6) 
2009-10 54947000 6972774.3 46.97 25 21.97 153191851 
2010-11 55787000 7079370.3 62.44 30 / 33 30.94 219035717 
2011-12 41379567 5251067.05 92.76 33 / 38 57.26 300676099 
2012-13 35827000 4546446.3 90.84 38 52.84 240234222 
2013-14 44028000 5584104.37 80.54 38/46 38.54 215211382 
    Total 1128349271 
    Note: * In case of more than one price (paid by GCGSC) prevailing in a yea r, the applicable rate has 
been considered on   average basis. 
 **1 Nm3= 0.127 therm, approximately 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
161 
Annexure-VI
(Referred to in para 3.3.2.6) 
Statement showing price offered by GCGSC against its tariff of gas per therm to 
domestic, commercial and industrial consumers during the last five years ended on 
31 March 2014: 
                             (in `/therm) 
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 
A) Price offered by GCGSC 
to DCC 
25 30/33 33/38 38 38/46 
Tariff of gas collected by GCGSC: 
B) Domestic consumers 50 51 51 51 51 
C) Commercial consumers 70 85 85 85 85/110 
D) Industrial consumers 60 70 70 70 70/100 
Profit earned by GCGSC through sale of DCC gas: 
E) Domestic consumers  
(B-A)
25 21/18 18/13 13 13/5 
F) Commercial consumers 
(C-A)
45 55/52 52/47 47 47/64 
G) Industrial consumers  
(D-A)
35 40/37 37/32 32 32/54 
Annexure-VII
(Referred to in para 3.3.2.9) 
Statement showing sales of co-product vis-à-vis overall sales during 2009-10 to 
2013-14 (in ` lakh) 
Year 
(1) 
       Sales of Co-products   Total 
Sales of 
All
products  
 (8) 
Co-
products 
as a 
percentage
of Total 
Sales 
 (9) 
=(7) * 100/ 
(8)  
Coke 
(2) 
Coke 
Fines
(3) 
Coal tar 
       
 (4) 
Light 
Oil
(5) 
Ammonium 
sulphate 
(6) 
Total 
(7)=(2)
+(3)+ 
(4)+(5)
+(6)
2009-10 852.60 3544.89 1570.27 88.42 29.32 6085.54 8204.07 74.18 
2010-11 16.21 26.70 20.51 0.74 0.14 64.30 864.87 7.44 
2011-12 1407.39 435.59 1976.72 85.04 0 3904.74 5759.82 67.78 
2012-13 396.52 150.74 1813.88 61.30 0.50 2422.94 4149.85 58.39 
2013-14 258.38 35.29 989.08 75.39 20.56 1378.7 3627.08 38.01 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I)
162 
Annexure-VIII
(Referred to in para 3.3.2.9) 
Statement showing loss due to shortfall in obtaining other products vis-à-vis norms 
during 2009-10 to 2013-14 
COKE
Year 
(1)
Coal
Consumption 
(in MT) 
(2)
Norms 
(in MT) 
(3)
Actual
(in MT) 
(4)
Difference 
(in MT) 
(5)= (3-4) 
Rate per MT 
(`)
(6)
Opportunity
loss due to 
low
production
(`)
(7)= ((5*6) 
2009-10 346824 232372 25780 206592 5000 1032960000 
2010-11 319697 214197 26359 187838 5000 / 5062 / 
5362 / 9862 
939190000 
2011-12 263503 176547 27572 148975 9862 1469191450 
2012-13 260234 174357 23465 150892 9862 1488096904 
2013-14 297280 199178 26470 172708 9862 1703246296 
TOTAL   867005  6632684650 
Note: *   As per norms (July 2011) yield of coke from one mt of coal carbonisation is 670kg. 
          ** In case of more than one prevailing rate, the lowest rate has been considered as per 
conservative approach. 
         *** Coal Consumption = Opening Stock + Purchase – Closing Stock 
COAL TAR 
Year Coal 
Consumpti
on (in MT) 
Norms 
(in MT) 
Actual
(in MT) 
Diff
(in MT) 
Rate per 
MT ( in `)
Loss due to 
low
production
( in `)
2009-10 346824 19075 8753 10322 24999 258039678 
2010-11 319697 17583 7865 9718 29360 285320480 
2011-12 263503 14493 5288 9205 39487 363477835 
2012-13 260234 14313 4440 9873 43368 428172264 
2013-14 297280 16350 3655 12695 43006 545961170 
TOTAL   51813 1880971427 
*  As per norms (July 2011) yield of coal tar from one mt of coal carbonisation is 55 kg. 
** Coal Consumption = Opening Stock + Purchase – Closing Stock 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
163 
LIGHT OIL 
Year 
 (1) 
Coal
Consumpti
on (in MT) 
 (2) 
Norms 
( in Ltr) 
 (3) 
Actual
( in Ltr)
 (4) 
Diff
( in Ltr) 
 (5) 
Rate per KL 
(`)
 (6) 
Loss due to 
low
production
(`)(7)= (5*6) 
2009-10 346824 1248 340 908 19425 17637900 
2010-11 319697 1151 326 825 19425/23425/
26950 
19361719 
2011-12 263503 949 306 643 26950 17328850 
2012-13 260234 937  223 714 26950 19242300 
2013-14 297280 1070 281 789 26950 21263550 
TOTAL   3879 94834319 
Note: * As per norms (July 2011) yield of coke from one mt of coal carbonisation is 3.6 
Ltr
          ** In case of more than one prevailing rate, the lowest rate has been considered 
as per conservative approach. 
Annexure-IX
(Referred to in para 3.3.2.9) 
Year Coke (MT) Coal Tar (MT) Light Oil (KL) Ammonium
Sulphate (MT)
2009-10 8940.02 3783.83 11.44 4.45
2010-11 4692.24 4577.36 17.59 0.8
2011-12 17760.45 4860.39 8.02 0.8
2012-13 37204.76 5051.26 3.55 0.8
2013-14 61054.77 6430.03 4.31 11.85
Total 129652.24 24702.87 44.91 18.7
Statement showing position of Closing Stock of Co-Products

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I)
164 
Annexure-X
(Referred to in para 5.5) 
Sl.
No.
Name of FCI owned 
siding at the 
destination/ Food 
Storage Depot 
District Office 
Destination terminal 
charges paid by 
dispatching unit of FCI 
(
`)
EAST
ZONE       
1 Jamshedpur Ranchi 5321263
2 Dhanbad Dhanbad 841110
3 CSD New Jalpaiguri Siliguri 32705154 GFD New Jalpaiguri Siliguri 
5 FSD Cossipore Road Kolkata North 1991542
6 Kalyani Non-port depot 2455240
7 Budge Budge Non-port depot 7607668
8 Durgapur Durgapur 1016490
9 Dankuni Hooghly 1776566
10 Adra Bankura 411500
11 FSD, Mangalbari Malda 656440
12 Phulwarisharif Patna 1112751
13 NRPA Muzaffarpur 3300720
14 Mokama Patna 1110730
15 Buxar Patna 1190740
16 Dighaghat Patna 287130
17 Gaya Gaya 1017820
18 Jharsuguda Sambalpur 1320860
19 Khurda Road Bhubaneshwar 4196525
NORTH
ZONE       
20 Barabanki Faizabad 354920
21 Dhamora Moradabad  211818
22 Gorakhpur Gorakhpur 602324
23 Hapur Hapur 229180
24 Varanasi Varanasi 1121060
25 Chandari Kanpur 169390
SOUTH
ZONE       
26 Chingavanam Kottayam 496870
27 Kazhakuttam Thiruvananthapuram 495480
28 Mavelikara Allepey 53040
29 Karunagapally Kollam 93760

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
165 
30 Quilon Kollam 473140
31 Hubli Hubli 524200
32 Angamaly Ernakulam 308380
33
FSD
Malankunnathukavu Thrissur 288120
34 FSD Sevur Vellore 1414990
35 FSD Avadi Chennai 327040
36 FSD West Hill Kozhikode 993060
37 FSD Thikkodi Kozhikode 307110
38 FSD Palakkad  Palakkad 489750
39 Krishnajanpuram Bangalore 1202600
40 Whitefiled Bangalore 692360
41 FSD Payannur Kannur 333900
    TOTAL 50068102

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I)
166 
Annexure-XI
(Referred to in para 7.1.6.5 (b) (i)) 
Comparison of the terms of the Company’s Refinance Scheme and those as per 
sanction letters 
Name of 
the
borrower 
Amount of 
loan/date
of sanction 
letter
Terms as per Refinance Scheme
Tenor of Refinance Repayment of 
Refinance
Prepayment
Tenor of refinance 
shall be 10 years 
with a reset after 5 
years.  However, If 
the GoI considers 
necessary may allow 
an extension with 
reset for 5 more 
years after 10 years.  
The repayment of 
refinance would be 
linked with the 
repayment schedule of 
the loan fixed by the 
consortium in a manner 
so as to ensure total 
repayment of Refinance 
amount within a period 
of 10 years. 
Prepayment of 
refinance
instalment is 
permitted only in 
cases where the 
borrowing units 
have prepaid the 
corresponding loan 
instalments. 
Terms as per sanction letter(s) in respect of loans sanctioned to REC, PFC and IDFC 
REC 870 crore / 
26.03.2010  
Four years. Bullet payment on 
19.03.2014 i.e. the 
maturity of tax free 
bonds. 
Not mentioned 
1000 crore / 
30.12.2010 
Three years. Bullet repayment on 
21.01.2014. 
Not mentioned 
1195 crore /  
06.09.2013 
Ten years with 
annual resets. 
Bullet repayment Prepayment option 
on reset with 7 
days’ notice period. 
PFC 630 crore/ 
26.03.2010 
Four years. Bullet payment on 
19.03.2014 i.e. the 
maturity of tax free 
bonds. 
Not mentioned 
1000 crore / 
30.12.2010 
Three years. Bullet repayment on 
21.01.2014. 
Not mentioned 
1083 crore / 
13.06.2014 
Five years with 
annual reset with put 
and call option on 
reset. 
Bullet repayment Prepayment of 
refinance
installment is 
permitted in case of 
reset with a 7 day 
notice period, or 
where the 
borrowing units 
have prepaid the 
corresponding loan 
installments. 
IDFC 668 crore/ 
30.03.2012 
One year 10 months 
with half-yearly 
reset. 
Bullet repayment on 
20.01.2014 co-terminus 
with the maturity of 
bonds raised for 
Prepayment of 
refinance
installment is 
permitted only in 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume I) 
167 
Refinance by the 
Company. 
case where the 
borrowing units 
have prepaid the 
corresponding loan 
installments.  
Further, IDFC to 
have an option to 
prepay at the time 
of reset with a 
month’s notice 
without any 
prepayment 
penalty. 
250 crore/ 
05.03.2013 
One year. Bullet repayment on 
19.03.2014 co-terminus 
with the maturity of 
bonds raised for 
Refinance by the 
Company. 
Prepayment of 
refinance
installment is 
permitted only in 
case where the 
borrowing units 
have prepaid the 
corresponding loan 
installments. 
393 crore/ 
06.09.2013 
Five years with 
annual reset. 
Bullet repayment Prepayment of 
refinance
installment is 
permitted in case of 
reset with a 7 day 
notice period, or 
where the 
borrowing units 
have prepaid the 
corresponding loan 
installments. 
668 crore/ 
21.03.2014 
Five years with 
annual reset. 
Bullet repayment Prepayment of 
refinance
installment is 
permitted in case of 
reset with a 7 day 
notice period, or 
where the 
borrowing units 
have prepaid the 
corresponding loan 
installments. 

© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in