Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Union Government (Commercial)
No. 21 of 2015
(Compliance Audit Observations)
Volume II


Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
for the year ended March 2014 
Union Government (Commercial) 
No. 21 of 2015 
(Compliance Audit Observations) 
Volume II 

i
CHAPTER/ 
PARAGRAPH 
SUBJECT PSU PAGE 
NO.
 PREFACE  v 
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  vii 
Chapter I MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC 
ENTERPRISES
1.1 Non-regularisation of land and delay 
in execution of lease deed
Bharat Heavy Electricals 
Limited 
1
1.2 Avoidable expenditure towards 
payment of demurrages and 
detention charges 
Bharat Heavy Electricals 
Limited 
2
1.3 Unfruitful Expenditure on 
procurement of rail wagon 
Bharat Heavy Electricals 
Limited 
4
1.4 Blocking of funds towards payment 
of Sales Tax 
Bharat Heavy Electricals 
Limited 
6
1.5 Loss due to withdrawal of price 
variation without approval of 
competent authority 
Bharat Heavy Electricals 
Limited 
7
1.6 Undertaking project expansion 
activities without adequate finance 
led to infructuous investment 
Cement Corporation of 
India Limited 
8
1.7 Idle investment  Hindustan Paper 
Corporation Limited 
10
1.8 Unfruitful investment in salt refinery Sambhar Salts Limited 11 
Chapter II MINISTRY OF MINES 
2.1 IT Audit on implementation of 
Oracle e-Business Suite (EBS) 
Hindustan Copper 
Limited 
14
2.2 Fraudulent accounting activities Hindustan Copper 
Limited 
17
Chapter III MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
3.1 Wasteful Expenditure Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited 
20
3.2 Avoidable expenditure  due to non-
rescheduling mechanical completion 
of tankage facilities within the 
stipulated period
Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited 
21
CONTENTS

ii
3.3 Deficient tender document coupled 
with Company’s failure to negotiate 
with L1 bidder in view of reduced 
rate of withholding tax led to 
avoidable expenditure
Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited 
22
3.4 Non achievement of envisaged 
benefits from Flue Gas Cooler 
Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited 
25
3.5 Loss of revenue  on account of 
discount allowed on sale of crude oil 
containing basic sediments and 
water content above the norm 
Oil India Limited 26 
3.6 Avoidable assumption of liabilities 
and incurring avoidable expenditure 
in development of two oil and gas 
bearing fields due to acceptance of 
unfavourable terms in Settlement 
Agreement with a defaulting 
contractor
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited  
29
3.7 Follow-up IT Audit of 
implementation of Material 
Management module in Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation Limited 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited 
35
3.8 Under-utilization of Water Injection 
Platform despite revamping 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited  
45
3.9 Avoidable expenditure due to 
change in scope of work after the 
award of contract and interface 
problems among the constituent 
projects
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited 
47
3.10 Extra expenditure due to 
retendering at the instance of a 
technically disqualified bidder 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited 
49
3.11 Extra expenditure due to non-
availing of concessional customs 
duty
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited 
52
3.12 Avoidable payment of rental due to 
abnormal delay in restoration and 
surrender of abandoned drill sites 
and approach roads 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited 
54
3.13 Defective contracts providing 
interest free advances to contractors 
and linking their recovery to 
progress of work in violation of 
CVC guidelines leading to loss of 
interest   
ONGC Petro additions 
Limited
56

iii
Chapter IV MINISTRY OF POWER 
4.1 Metering and Billing Damodar Valley 
Corporation
59
4.2 Loss of opportunity to recover 
Engine Detention Charges 
Damodar Valley 
Corporation
66
4.3 Avoidable expenditure towards 
additional UI charges 
Damodar Valley 
Corporation
67
4.4  Incorrect evaluation and award of 
contracts to Joint Ventures led by a 
financially weak firm  
Power Grid Corporation 
of India limited 
68
4.5 Loss of Interest due to disbursement 
of soft loans under RGGVY 
Rural Electrification 
Corporation Limited
71
Chapter V MINISTRY OF STEEL 
5.1 Investment of SAIL in Joint 
Ventures
Steel Authority of India 
Limited
74
5.2 Performance of Coke Oven Batteries Steel Authority of India 
Limited 
80
5.3 Non-recovery of interest on 
differential excise duty  
Steel Authority of India 
Limited 
85
5.4 Under recovery of electricity 
charges
Steel Authority of India 
Limited 
86
5.5 Blocking of funds Steel Authority of India 
Limited 
88
5.6 Avoidable expenditure in ISP/SAIL Steel Authority of India 
Limited 
90
Chapter VI MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
6.1 Loss due to deficiency in settlement National Textile 
Corporation Limited 
92
    
Chapter VII MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT 
AND GANGA REJUVENATION
7.1 Inordinate delay in terminating 
projects
National Projects 
Construction Corporation 
Limited 
94
    

iv
Chapter VIII IRREGULARITIES IN PAYMENT OF ENTITLEMENTS AND 
RECOVERIES, CORRECTIONS/RECTIFICATIONS BY CPSEs 
AT THE INSTANCE OF AUDIT
8.1 Irregular payment towards 
encashment of Half Pay 
Leave/Earned Leave/Sick Leave as 
well as employer's share of EPF 
contribution on leave encashment 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited, 
Hindustan Petroleum 
Corporation Limited, 
Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Limited, 
GAIL (India) Limited, 
Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited and Engineers 
India Limited 
97
8.2 Recoveries at the instance of audit Steel Authority of India 
Limited, National 
Highways Authority of 
India, National Building 
Construction Corporation 
of India Limited, and 
National Projects 
Construction Corporation 
Limited 
100
8.3 Corrections/rectifications at the 
instance of audit 
Instrumentation Limited, 
Steel Authority of India 
Limited and Ferro Scrap 
Nigam Limited 
100
    
Chapter IX Follow up on Audit Reports  101 
 Appendix I  105 
 Appendix II  106 
 Appendix III  108 
 Annexures  110 

v
1. The accounts of Government Companies set up under the provisions of the 
Companies Act (including Companies deemed to be Government Companies as per the 
provisions of the Companies Act) are audited by  the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India (CAG) under the provisions of Section 619 of the Companies Act, 1956. The 
accounts certified by the Statutory Auditors (Chartered Accountants) appointed by the 
CAG under the Companies Act are subject to the supplementary audit by CAG whose 
comments supplement the reports of the Statutory Auditors.  In addition, these companies 
are also subject to test audit by CAG. 
2. The statutes governing some Corporations and Authorities require their accounts 
to be audited by CAG. In respect of five such Corporations viz. Airport Authority of 
India, National Highways Authority of India, Inland Waterways Authority of India, Food 
Corporation of India and Damodar Valley Corporation, the relevant statutes designate 
CAG as their sole auditor. In respect of one Corporation viz. Central Warehousing 
Corporation, CAG has the right to conduct supplementary and test audit after audit has 
been conducted by the Chartered Accountants appointed under the statute governing the 
Corporation.
3. Reports in relation to the accounts of a Government Company or Corporation are 
submitted to the Government by CAG under the provisions of Section 19-A of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 
1971, as amended in 1984. 
4. The Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014 has been prepared in two 
volumes. This is Volume II of the Audit Report and contains 37 individual audit 
observations relating to 18 PSUs under the control of seven Ministries/Departments. 
Volume I contains 31 individual audit observations pertaining to 28 PSUs under the 
control of seven Ministries/Departments. Instances mentioned in this Report are among 
those which came to notice in the course of audit during 2013-14 as well as those which 
came to notice in earlier years. Results of audit of transactions subsequent to March 2014 
in a few cases have also been mentioned. 
5. All references to ‘Companies/Corporations or PSUs’ in this Report may be 
construed to refer to ‘Central Government Companies/Corporations’ unless the context 
suggests otherwise. 
6. The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
PREFACE

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
vii
I Introduction
1. This Report includes important audit findings noticed as a result of test check of
accounts of records of Central Government Companies and Corporations 
conducted by the officers of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India under 
Section 619(3) of the Companies Act, 1956 or the statutes governing the 
particular Corporations. 
2. The Report contains 37 individual observations relating to 18 PSUs under 7 
Ministries/Departments. The draft observations were forwarded to the Secretaries
of the concerned Ministries/Departments under whose administrative control the 
PSUs are working to give them an opportunity to furnish their replies/comments
in each case within a period of six weeks. Replies to 27 observations were not 
received even as this Report was being finalised. Earlier, the draft observations 
were sent to the Managements of the PSUs concerned, whose replies have been 
suitable incorporated in the report.
3. The paragraphs included in this Report relate to the PSUs under the administrative
control of the following Ministries/Departments of the Government of India:
Ministry/Department (Number of 
PSUs involved 
Number of 
paragraphs
Number of paragraphs 
in respect of which
Ministry/Department’s
reply was awaited
1.   Heavy Industries and Public
      Enterprises
      (BHEL, CCIL, HPCL and SSL)
8 6 
2.   Mines 
      (HCL)
2 2 
3.   Petroleum and Natural Gas 
      (IOCL, OIL, ONGC and OPAL)
13 11 
4.   Power 
      (DVC, PGCIL and REC)
5 2 
5.   Steel
      (SAIL)
6 3 
6.   Textiles
      (NTC)
1 1 
7.   Water Resources, River
      Development and Ganga
      Rejuvenation
      (NPCCL)
1 1 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
viii
8.   Irregularities in payment of
       entitlements by CPSEs
       (BPCL, GAIL and EIL)
1 1 
Total 37 27
4. Total financial implication of audit observations is ` 2,854.78 crore. 
5. Individual Audit observations in this Report are broadly of the following nature: 
 Non-compliance with rules, directives, procedure, terms and conditions of 
the contract etc. involving ` 1,150.76 crore in 12 paras. 
 Non safeguarding of financial interest of organisations involving 
` 653.47 crore in 13 paras. 
 Defective/deficient planning involving ` 997.29 crore in seven paras. 
 Inadequate/deficient monitoring involving ` 5.82 crore in one para. 
 Non-realisation/partial realisation of objectives involving ` 47.44 crore in 
four paras. 
6. The Report also contains a para relating to recoveries of ` 27.59 crore made by 4 
PSUs and another para relating to corrections/rectif ications carried out by three
PSUs at the instance of Audit.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
ix
II   Highlights of some significant paras included in the Report are given below: 
Water Injection platform (WIN) commissioned in 1984 is the main water injection hub in 
Mumbai High North field of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC). Non-
synchronization of WIN revamping project with repair/ replacement of its associated
pipelines and delay in overhauling of Main Injection Pumps led to non-achievement of 
the designed water injection capacity even after incurring an expenditure of ` 726.50 
crore.
(Para 3.8)
ONGC (Company) awarded a contract in November 2004 for Engineering and 
Construction works as part of development of a deepwater and a shallow water oil and 
gas bearing field, and subsequently (June 2007) terminated the contract due to stalling 
(June 2006) of work by the contractor and initiated action to encash performance bank 
guarantee (PBG) furnished by the contractor. The contractor took up (June 2007) the 
matter of termination of contract and invoking of PBG for arbitration. The Company also 
filed a petition in the High Court of Mumbai for obtaining, inter alia , the custody of 
equipment and material that had remained with the contractor. The Company entered into 
a Settlement Agreement with the defaulting contractor without conducting due diligence 
whereby it obtained a reduction of only USD 0.7 million while it ended up paying a
settlement sum of USD 32 million (` 149.37 crore) to the contractor through 'out of court'
resolution of disputes, besides incurring additional expenditure of USD 66.34 million
(` 342.34 crore) in implementing the agreement in deviation of the approval accorded by 
its Board in October 2008. The expenditure ( ` 342. 34 crore) was irregular as it did not 
have approval of the Board and was not in the financial interests of the Company. In 
addition, the Company incurred an avoidable expenditure of USD 13.7 million ( ` 63.79 
crore) on payment of rental for tools which was included within the amount paid for the 
work completed by the contractor under the already terminated contract. The project for 
development of the oil and gas fields remained incomplete (January 2015) as against the 
revised target date of April 2010 while projected revenues of ` 1,500 crore per annum 
remained unrealised.
(Para 3.6) 
National Textiles Corporation Limited entered into settlement agreement for sharing of 
land with the erstwhile owner ignoring the fact that it was prime freehold land, without 
ascertaining commercial viability, which resulted in a loss of ` 205.01 crore to the 
Company.
      (Para 6.1)
ONGC Petro additions Limited (Company) entered into defective contracts with three
contractors and extended interest free advances during March 2009 to November 2011 
and linked the recovery of these advances to progress of the related project in violation of
CVC guidelines instead of effecting recovery in a time-based manner and, thus, lost 
interest of ` 49.63 crore from August 2012 to October 2014.  Besides this, the Company
was yet to recover advances of ` 144.20 crore from the contractors as on October 2014 
sustaining further loss of interest. 
(Para 3.13)

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
x
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) had 23 Joint Venture Companies (JVCs) as on 
31 March 2014 with total investment of ` 778.82 crore.  Only seven were fully functional 
of which only three were generating profits. Four JVCs were being wound up. SAIL had 
formed two JVCs, one at Bhilai and other at Bokaro with Jaypee Cement Limited (JCL)
which used slag, a by-product produced in SAIL's steel plant for making cement. It was 
noted that SAIL under an agreement was supplying slag to the JV at prices much below 
the market price, as a result of which SAIL lost ` 156.58 crore up to 2013-14. 
(Para 5.1)
Rural Electrification Corporation Limited suffered loss of ` 153.36 crore upto December 
2014 as it did not approach Ministry of Power to reimburse the differential interest on 
soft loans it had extended under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidutikaran Yojana (RGGVY).
(Para 4.5)
Investment amounting to ` 6.38 crore made by Damodar Valley Corporation 
(Corporation) for implementation of modernised metering system remained unproductive 
and ineffective resulting in non-fulfilment of objectives. The Corporation did not adhere 
to the time frame of the tariff petition as prescribed by CERC which was one of the
reasons for the accumulation of huge outstanding dues from consumers. The Corporation 
did not collect disconnection and reconnection charges ( ` 4.33 crore) from its consumers
allowed under Electricity Act, 2003 and also did not install meters at the premises of most 
of LT consumers which prevented the Corporation from ascertaining the actual 
consumption of electricity and resulted in non recovery of ` 142.72 crore towards
electricity charges during 2010-11 to 2013-14. 
(Para 4.1) 
Oil India Limited failed to create facilities in time to contain basic sediments and water 
content in crude oil supplies within the prescribed limit. This resulted in loss of revenue
of ` 105.55 crore during 2008-09 to 2013-14.
(Para 3.5)
There are 33 Coke Oven Batteries (COBs) in the five integrated steel plants operated by 
SAIL. COBs convert coal into coke which is the primary fuel used in the Blast furnaces 
for production of hot metal.
It was noticed that on account of delays in the repairs and maintenance of the COBs, their 
performance was far below the norms set by SAIL. There was a shortfall in production of 
coke by 3.320 MT during the period 2009-14. Similarly, there was shortfall in availability 
of Coke oven gas, which is generated as a by-product during carbonization of coal in 
COBs, resulting in production loss of 2.430 MT of saleable steel and additional 
procurement of furnace oil at a cost of ` 202.85 crore during 2009-13. It was also noticed 
that even where repair and renovation had been carried out, the performance of the COBs
was below the guaranteed performance parameters.
(Para 5.2) 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
xi
Follow-up IT Audit of implementation of Material Management module of ONGC
Limited revealed the following:- 
• There were inadequacies of input controls, validation checks and internal control 
procedures to ensure accurate and timely capture of data. This resulted in lack of
data integrity and incorrect MIS. 
• Deficiencies in the internal control mechanism and lack of user awareness
resulted in stock issues, receipts and consumption not getting captured in a timely
manner leading to incorrect material accounting. 
• There were deficient input controls, validation checks and internal control 
procedures to ensure accurate and timely capture of data and compliance of 
business processes related with physical verification of assets. This resulted in
incomplete physical verification of assets, stores and spares, incorrect MIS and 
lack of data integrity.
• Material Requirement Planning remained subjective as it was being carried out
manually even after implementation of ERP system.
(Para 3.7)
Hindustan Copper Limited implemented Oracle E-Business Suite R12 ERP system after 
investing ` 13.22 crore towards cost of software and hardware. It was, however, noted 
that the IT System did not have documented IT policies, and logical access control. The 
quality of Master Data was also found to be poor. We noted deficiency in the system on 
application of depreciation of fixed assets requiring manual intervention in financial 
records and delay in implementation of payroll module.
(Para 2.1) 
Leave rules/policy for encashment of sick leave or of earned leave with HPL exceeding 
300 days on superannuation, were in violation of the DPE guidelines and resulted in 
irregular payment of ` 157.91 crore during the period April 2006 to March 2014 in 
respect of four CPSEs. Further, two CPSEs (IOCL and GAIL) made irregular 
contributions of ` 12.15 crore on account of provident fund in respect of leave 
encashment to employees. Further, GAIL did not adjust the employer’s share of 
contribution amounting to ` 14.94 crore on leave encashment paid prior to March 2008.
(Para 8.1) 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
1
CHAPTER I: MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND 
PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited 
1.1 Non-regularisation of land and delay in execution of lease deed 
Abnormal delay in taking decision on retention of 1.22 acres of land held in excess of 
allotted area in Noida has the potential of placing an avoidable burden of ` 45.44
crore on BHEL. Lease deed for township also remains to be executed depriving 
BHEL of the otherwise rightful title to the land.
New Okhla Industrial Development Authority (NOIDA) allotted (April 1981) 15 acres of 
land to Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) in Sector-17, Noida at a premium of 
` 1.06 crore (@ ` 175/sq. Mtr.). While giving possession of land, NOIDA also handed 
over possession of adjoining 15 acres land to BHEL which was to be used by NOIDA for 
shopping complex/school/park/road, etc. Of this adjoining 15 acres of land, NOIDA 
allotted (July 1987) 1.5 acres of land for ` 4.51 lakh to BHEL for a school, for which 
lease deed was executed in May 1989.
For protection of land, BHEL constructed (1989-90) a boundary wall covering land 
allotted to it as well as the adjoining land belonging to NOIDA. However, while 
constructing this boundary wall, BHEL extended its construction beyond 30 acres of land 
under its possession. NOIDA asked (November 1992) BHEL to demolish the boundary 
wall. BHEL informed (November 1992) NOIDA that in view of security issues, the 
boundary wall could not be relocated. During a joint inspection (January 2000) of land 
with BHEL, NOIDA observed that as against 30 acres land handed over by NOIDA, an 
area measuring 31.22 acres was in possession of BHEL. Accordingly, NOIDA issued 
(February 2001) a demand for `3.45 crore towards excess land of 1.22 acres held by 
BHEL. However, BHEL refused (February 2001) to pay cost of this land to NOIDA on 
the ground that the excess land was only meant for common/social welfare/open area. 
NOIDA made it clear (October 2002) that BHEL should either remove the boundary wall 
or pay the dues for extra 1.22 acres of land at the then prevailing rates.  However, BHEL 
was yet to finally decide on the issue and lease deed of plot of 15 acres allotted to BHEL 
by NOIDA also remained unexecuted till date (January 2015).
Audit examination revealed that due to increas e in circle rates over time, BHEL now 
faces a potential liability of an estimated amount of ` 48.89 crore (as per NOIDA circle 
rate of August 2014 applicable to sector 17 Noida where the plot is located) instead of 
` 3.45 crore demanded earlier in February 2001 by NOIDA in respect of excess land of 
1.22 acres held by BHEL.
BHEL stated (February 2013) that despite repeated pursuance and follow up with NOIDA 
since August 1982, lease deed had not been executed and that they had expressed 
willingness to pay charges for excess 1.22 acres land under their possession and had 
requested (December 2012) NOIDA to intimate the lease amount and other dues. BHEL 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
2
added (December 2014), that a committee formed (February 2013) for execution of lease 
deed and negotiate/discuss the cost of extra land (1.22 acres) and other dues, had 
however, opined (April 2014) that 1.22 acres of land in the form of common area (road 
and roadsides) belonged to NOIDA and paying for excess land of 1.22 acres was uncalled 
for as the land had not been utilised by BHEL for residential purposes. 
Replies indicated that even after lapse of considerable period, BHEL was still indecisive 
on the issue of either making payment towards the cost of extra land of 1.22 acres or 
surrendering the same to NOIDA. Further, it was in the interest of BHEL to take up the 
long pending issue at an appropriately senior level and possibly through the intervention 
of the Ministry, which was not done. As a result, BHEL now faces an additional potential 
liability of ` 45.44 crore (increase in demand of ` 3.45 crore in October 2002 to an 
estimated value of ` 48.89 crore based on NOIDA circle rate applicable from August 
2014) while lease deed for the plot of 15 acres of land allotted to BHEL also remained 
unexecuted till date (January 2015), depriving BHEL of the otherwise rightful title to the 
land.
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 
1.2 Avoidable expenditure towards payment of demurrages and detention charges
Heavy Power Equipment Plant (HPEP), Hyderabad incurred avoidable expenditure 
of ` 16.27 crore towards payment of demurrage & detention charges due to 
abnormal delay in clearing imported material from Mumbai Port.
As per Custom Manual 2013, the importer of the goods is required to complete the 
customs clearance formalities after arrival of goods in terms of details mentioned in the 
Import General Manifest (IGM) at the customs station by filing bill of entry for home 
consumption or for warehousing in prescribed forms.  
As per section 48 of Major Port Trusts Act 1963, after the goods are unloaded at port, 
these have to be cleared by the importer with in stipulated time or else demurrage charges 
levied by port authorities have to be incurred. In terms of powers conferred by section 48 
of Major Port Trust Act 1963, Tariff Authority for Major Ports vide order no.77 dated 31 
May 2000 notified that in case of Mumbai Port Trust, the stipulated time allowed for 
clearance of goods was three working days and on expiry of these three working days, 
demurrages levied by port authorities have to be paid by the importer. In addition, 
detention charges for containers are to be paid to the shipping agents beyond the 
contractual delivery period. 
Regional Operations Division (ROD), Mumbai, a unit of BHEL is rendering support 
functions to the sister units such as arranging clearing agents, arranging freight forwarder 
for delivery of goods and payments thereof for such services. Later, ROD passes the debit 
note to concerned unit for the expenditure incurred for all imported purchase orders. 
HPEP co-ordinates with ROD, Mumbai in respect of filing of IGM, documents required 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
3
for bill of entry ♠  and freight arrangements to the unit or site. HPEP also forwards the 
documents for clearance of customs duties and for claiming applicable duty concessions. 
HPEP has to ensure the availability of necessary documents with ROD before the 
consignments are landed at the Port. 
Examination in audit revealed that there were abnormal delays over and above the three 
working days ranging from 19 days to 520 days in clearing 144 imported consignments 
ordered by HPEP received at Mumbai Port during 2010-14 due to following reasons:  
• Delay in issue of Mode of Assessment (MOA) of customs duty to ROD, Mumbai 
in respect of 63 consignments; 
• Late submission of necessary import documents in respect 15 consignments; 
• Customs clarifications/delay in submission of revised invoices & licenses in 
respect of 10 consignments; 
• Goods Bonded in Customs warehouse/High sea sale/BE amendments, late receipt 
of import license in respect of 10 consignments; and 
• No reasons for delay were recorded in respect of 46 consignments. 
As a result, ROD, Mumbai could not clear the consignments within the stipulated time of 
three days, which resulted in payment of demurrage and detention charges of ` 16.27 
crore by HPEP during the period 2010-14. 
HPEP in its reply while not contesting the facts and figures, stated (February 2014) that 
demurrage and detention charges were incurred due to non-availability of MOA, non-
availability of documents and licenses at the time of receipt of material, lack of transport 
facility etc. Further, BHEL replied (October 2014) that a Cross Functional Team (CFT) 
comprising members from concerned agencies has been formed to look into the issues 
and to suggest improvements in the system and for minimizing demurrage and detention 
charges at the Unit. Further, it was replied that only 4 cases have been cleared beyond 350 
days (demurrage/detention incurred was ` 65 Lakh) and one case beyond 520 days 
(demurrage ` 3.25 lakh). In addition, it also stated that there was:-  
• Delay on the part of Custom Authorities & Director General of Foreign Trade 
(DGFT) who raised queries on technical write up, original bank attested invoices 
which took more time; Custom Authorities took time to scrutinize the documents 
for Project Import Registration viz., items list for description of items imported; 
Individual POs registrations on account of staggered requirement of material; 
change in custom clearance procedures during 2010; 
•  Delay on the part of customers in providing essentiality certificate; 
                                                           
♠  Signed Invoice Copy, Packing List, Bill of Lading/Airway Bill, Import License, Letter of Credit, 
Certificate of Origin, Insurance documents, Technical write up of machinery, spares etc. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
4
• Amendments to originally issued project certificate in the case of advance license 
due to change in Foreign Trade Policy (FTP); 
• Cargo pertaining to same license arrives at same time but at different port 
locations (JNPT, Mumbai Port, Mumbai/Delhi airport) eventually leading to 
custom clearance activities to be done in series. 
Reply needs to be viewed in the light of the following:- 
• It was a known fact that the imported consignments had to be cleared within 
stipulated time i.e. three working days and it was incumbent upon the Unit 
(HPEP) to devise an appropriate operating procedure to avoid delays. This was 
attempted only in January 2014. 
• The other reasons as explained above are procedural lapses in submission of 
documents for clearing the imported material, which could have been avoided by 
adopting properly devised operational procedure. 
• Though there was change in the procedures in FTP as stated by the company, the 
stipulated time allowed for clearing the goods from port remained three working 
days.  Therefore, it was the responsibility of the management to get the goods 
cleared within three working days.
Thus, delays attributable to HPEP in arranging necessary documents before the goods 
were unloaded at Mumbai Port, resulted in avoidable expenditure towards demurrage and 
detention charges of ` 16.27 crore during the period 2010-14. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in November 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015).
1.3 Unfruitful expenditure on procurement of rail wagon 
Deficient planning and subsequent non-utilization of 28-axle special rail wagon by 
BHEL resulted in unfruitful expenditure of ` 12.04 crore on procurement of the 
wagon.
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) approved (June 2009) capacity augmentation 
programme for its thermal generating set manufacturing facilities which included 
procurement of 28-axle special rail wagon (Wagon) & carrier loading beam for 
transportation of 600/660 MW Turbo-generator (TG) Stators for its Heavy Electrical 
Equipment Plant (HEEP), Haridwar. This wagon was envisaged to provide safer and 
economical means of transportation as compared to road as it did not require activities 
relating to strengthening of roads, building of bypasses, re-enforcement of bridges, etc., 
besides reduced risks of curves, mishaps/accidents on narrow roads and in monsoon 
season.
Meanwhile, HEEP Haridwar also planned to use the above rail wagon to supply an 
existing order of 600 MW TG Stator to Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB) scheduled 
to be delivered by June 2010. Accordingly, HEEP Haridwar floated (May 2009) a single 
tender enquiry on its sister unit BHEL at Jhansi for supply of the wagon and the latter 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
5
submitted its offer (June 2009) quoting delivery schedule of 24 months. Keeping in view 
scheduled delivery of 600 MW TG Stator to TNEB, HEEP Haridwar requested 
(December 2009) BHEL Jhansi to squeeze the delivery period. The latter agreed 
(February 2010) to tentatively reduce the delivery period from 24 months to 18 months. A 
Purchase Order (PO) valuing ` 7.95 crore was issued (March 2010) to BHEL Jhansi with 
scheduled delivery of the wagon by 25 September 2011.
HEEP Haridwar also placed (February 2010) a PO on M/s TAKRAF GMBH, Germany 
for procuring the carrier loading beam, to be mounted on this wagon, at a price of Euro 
383871.38 (landed cost of ` 2.83 crore). Carrier loading beam was received in HEEP, 
Haridwar in March 2012, whereas, the wagon was received only in April 2012 after a 
delay of 7 months from the delivery schedule of September 2011. The wagon costing 
` 12.04 crore
• was finally commissioned in November 2012 after inspection by Research 
Design and Standards Organisation, Lucknow, of Indian Railways. 
As the process of procurement of wagon was delayed, HEEP Haridwar had to supply the 
600 MW TG Stator to TNEB by road in June 2011. Even after commissioning of wagon 
in November 2012, the wagon could not be used so far (January 2015) as the wagon had 
been specially designed and can only be used at the sites with requisite facilities, such as 
Railway sidings, RCC Platform on both sides of track, facility of unloading of 
consignment and Over Dimensional Clearance (ODC) certificate from Indian Railways. 
ODC is possible only for few sites due to height/width constraints, limitation of bridges 
en-route, constraints in turning on track due to length of loaded wagon, limited maximum 
speed of loaded wagon and congestion of passenger trains traffic/goods train traffic. As 
such, not only the TG Stator to TNEB had to be sent by road, but also HEEP Haridwar 
had to dispatch 15 consignments of other TG Stators of 600 MW and above by road 
during December 2012 to March 2014 incurring an expenditure of `17.36 crore as freight 
charges. Thus, due to delay in procurement and defective planning for the operational 
modalities and necessary clearanc es from Indian Railways, the wagon and associated 
carrier loading beam procured at a cost of ` 12.04 crore could not be fruitfully put to use 
even after more than five years of the initial decision to procure the same.  
BHEL (November 2014/January 2015) and Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public 
Enterprises (March 2015) stated that: 
• Vigorous efforts were being made for obtaining ODC and utlisation of wagon for 
pending and future orders for TG stators of capacity 600 MW and above. 
Presently, TG stator for Prayagraj project had been loaded on the wagon and was 
being despatched, and 
• Transportation of TG Stators by rail in own wagon also involves substantial cost 
on account of freight charges payable to Railways, trans-shipment 
(loading/unloading), construction of roads from railhead to the site, etc.
The reply is to be viewed against the facts that:  
• The wagon planned to provide a safer and economical means of transportation had 
not been put to use till January 2015 even after lapse of more than two years of its 
                                                           
• After considering the financial impact of excise duty, frei ght, incidental and consultancy charges in 
respect of Wagon and sea/air freight and incidental charges in respect of carrier loading beam.  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
6
commissioning and all the 15 consignments sent after its commissioning had to be 
despatched only by road. Due to restrictions on ODC and limitations on 
availability of requisite infrastructure at railway sidings in the country, it may be a 
challenging task for BHEL to put the wagon to a fruitful use in future.
• On request by Audit (January 2015) BHEL did not provide analysis of possible 
cost saving of transportation of TG Stators through own rail wagon vis-a-vis
transportation through road, so as to assess net additional expenditure on 
consignments despatched through road. 
Thus, defective planning for procurement of wagon had rendered the investment of 
` 12.04 crore unfruitful, besides depriving BHEL of the facility for a safer and 
economical transport.  
1.4 Blocking of funds towards payment of Sales Tax 
Failure on the part of Heavy Power Equipment Plant (HPEP), Hyderabad in 
prompt collection of Form C for obtaining concession of tax on turnover resulted in 
blocking of funds amounting to ` 9.67 crore towards payment of Sales Tax for 
period ranging from 8 months to 5 years. 
Under the Central Sales Tax (CST) Act 1956 and CST Registration and Turnover (R&T) 
Rules 1957, registered dealers of the State are eligible to certain concessions and 
exemptions of tax on inter-State transactions against submission of prescribed 
declarations in Form C. The assessees are req uired to deposit sales tax to Sales Tax 
Authorities (Authorities) on or before due dates. Sales tax return in the prescribed 
proforma needs to be prepared and submitted every month to the Authorities. Sales tax 
shall be charged at concessional rate on inter-state sales against Form C to be issued by 
the registered dealer. Section 8 (4) (a) of CST Act 1956 provides that concessional rate of 
tax is applicable only if the assessee submits a declaration in prescribed Form C.  
As the sales tax applicable for the despatched goods in Andhra Pradesh was 14.5 per cent, 
non-submission of Form C to the Authorities, attracted additional sales tax of 12.5 per 
cent over and above two per cent CST already levied. Since, HPEP was paying CST @ 
two per cent (i.e @ concessional rate
1) for inter-state sales, it had  to submit proof to the 
Authorities that the customer would be eligible to get these goods at concessional rate. 
Otherwise, HPEP has to pay balance sale tax payable plus penalty as applicable. Hence, 
HPEP was required to collect Form C promptly from its customers and follow up cases 
where Form C was not received.
Examination in audit revealed that HPEP incurred an expenditure of ` 9.67 crore (being 
the differential rate of sales tax against the demand notice of ` 32.99 crore) for the 
assessment years (completed) for 2006-07 to 2010-11 . A test check of records revealed 
that HPEP did not collect and furnish Form C to the Authorities for the concessional 
turnover of ` 340 crore ( ` 214 crore in 2009-10 and ` 126 crore in 2010-11) for the 
assessment years (completed) 2009-10 and 2010-11. However, HPEP collected Form C 
for the turnover of ` 214 crore ( ` 158 crore for the year 2009-10 and ` 56 crore for the 
                                                           
1 Provided the buying dealer confirms such trans actions by furnishing a declara tion in pre-printed form 
that he has received such goods giving all details such as invoice, commodity purpose etc.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
7
year 2010-11) from the customers only after completion of assessment proceedings. It did 
not collect Form C for the balance turnover of ` 126 crore ( ` 56 crore for 2009-10 and 
` 70 crore for 2010-11). Out of this balance turnover of ` 126 crore, receipt of Form C of 
` 108 crore was pending from two major customers i.e. ( ` 74 crore from DVC Koderma 
and ` 34 crore from PPCL).   
BHEL in its reply stated (February 2015) that (i) review of pending Form C is being done 
on regular basis and all efforts are being made to collect pending Form C; (ii) The appeals 
for the respective years are live and BHEL is eligible for refund of the pre-deposited 
amount. Hence, the amount of ` 9.67 crore could not be treated as additional expenditure 
until the case is disposed by the Final Appellate Authority, (iii) With regard to DVC 
Koderma and PPCL, the unit has been constantly in touch with the customers for 
collection of Form C.  
Reply needs to be viewed in the light of the following: 
• While HPEP has paid the additional demand of ` 9.67 crore under protest pending 
appeals before the Appellate Authority, the fact remains that Forms C were to be 
collected from the customer before the completion of sale tax assessment 
proceedings. 
• HPEP has put itself in an avoidable situation, now, when it is entirely dependent 
on its customers to furnish the required documents, which is not a good practice.
Thus, the failure of HPEP in prompt collection of Form C from its customers resulted in 
blocking of funds amounting to ` 9.67
1 crore towards payment of Sales tax for a period 
ranging from 8 months to 5 years. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in March 2015; their reply was awaited (March 
2015).
1.5 Loss due to withdrawal of price variation without approval of competent 
authority 
Unsolicited withdrawal of tender condition by BHEL for exchange rate variation on 
imported materials without obtaining approval of competent authority resulted in 
loss of ` 7.38 crore 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited secured (October 2010) two orders from Nuclear Power 
Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) for manufacture, supply, delivery and guarantee of 
four sets of Reactor Header Assembly sets, two each for Kakrapar Atomic Power Project 
(KAPP) and Rajasthan Atomic Power Project (RAPP) through its Heavy Pressure Boiler 
Plant (the Unit) at Trichy at a total cost of `99.30 crore. The supply was to be completed 
by April and October 2012, which got extended to October and December 2014 for 
KAPP and RAPP respectively.  As per clause 5.4.3 of general conditions of contract 
(GCC) incorporated in the tender document, price adjustment would be allowed on 
                                                           
1 ` 1.68 crore-2006-07; ` 1.95 crore-2007-08; ` 3.23 crore-2008-09; ` 1.39 crore-2009-10; ` 1.42 crore-
2010-11.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
8
imported material component ♣  up to a ceiling of ൅Ȁെ 20 per cent of ex-works price in 
accordance with formula specified in clause 5.5 of GCC. 
The Unit, while bidding for the orders, reckoned tender condition regarding price 
variation (PV) and the total ex-work price was estimated (March 2010) at ` 98.73 crore 
which included an import component of ` 61.81 crore considering exchange rate 
(February 2010) of ` 62 per Euro. During technical evaluation, NPCIL sought (April 
2010) unconditional acceptance to clause 5.4 & 5.5 of GCC, but the Manager, 
Commercial of the Unit confirmed (May 2010) to NPCIL that the material portion was 
firm and thereby withdrew the protection it had against exchange rate variation on 
imported materials. Audit observed the Unit communicated this decision without 
obtaining approval of competent authority i.e. Executive Director (ED).  Since the price 
estimates were approved by ED of the Unit, any changes to it should have also been got 
approved from the ED.  Meanwhile, the Unit imported material valuing Euro 97.98 lakh 
(` 72.67 crore) during the period from May 2012 to June 2013 incurring an additional 
expenditure of `11.92 crore due to exchange rate variation that ranged between ` 69.12 
and ` 78.38 per Euro as against `62 per Euro reckoned at the time of bid submission.  As 
a result, the Unit incurred loss of ` 7.38 crore on account of withdrawal of PV on 
exchange rate variation on imported materials.   
The Unit stated (October 2014) that at the time of submission of offer, exchange rates 
were on downward trend and considering the same, exchange rate variation was not 
considered for PV clause.  During the course of technical evaluation, Euro was less than `
58 due to market instability as against ` 62 per Euro at which the bid was submitted.  
However, the fact remains that exchange rate variation protection was available in the 
tender conditions and without any insistence from NPCIL, the Manager, Commercial of 
the Unit withdrew it purely based on a trend of three months in a volatile foreign 
exchange market environment and hoped that it would continue for a contractual period 
of over two years, which proved detrimental to the financial interest of the Company.  
Moreover, before communicating such an important decision having considerable impact 
on revenue, approval of competent authority was also not obtained.
Thus, unsolicited withdrawal of tender condition for exchange rate variation on imported 
materials without obtaining approval of the competent authority resulted in loss of ` 7.38 
crore. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in October 2014; their reply was awaited (March 
2015).
Cement Corporation of India Limited 
1.6 Undertaking project expansion activities without adequate finance led to 
infructuous investment. 
Venturing into expansion activities without ensuring availability of fund through 
effective measures to facilitate sale of non-operating units resulted in infructuous 
investment of ` 26.60 crore. 
                                                           
♣  Comprising of coefficients of different types of material and labour to be added up to one. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
9
In order to revive Cement Corporation of India Limited (the Company), the Board for 
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) approved (3 May 2006) a scheme (the 
Scheme) envisaging, inter alia, expansion of Bokajan (Assam) unit of the Company with 
an investment of `90.51 crore. As per the Scheme, expansion works were to be carried 
out partly by Government of India funding ( ` 20.02 crore) in the first phase and balance 
of ` 70.49 crore from sale proceeds of seven non-operating units of the Company in the 
second phase. As the partial expansion of Bokajan unit was not viable, the Company 
decided to undertake the expansion project in a single phase. The Company, accordingly, 
issued (24 September 2010) a letter of intent (LOI) to M/s Promac Engineering Industries 
Limited (the Contractor) for expansion of Bokajan unit on turnkey basis to be completed 
within 18 months from the date of LOI at a total cost of ` 142.40 crore.
Audit examination revealed that project activities had lagged behind schedule since 
commencement primarily due to the failure of the Company to open Letter of Credit (LC) 
as per terms of payment, poor project mobilization by Contractor, law and order problems 
in the region, and so on. Meanwhile, sale of assets of seven non-operating units did not 
materialize on account of absence of title deeds of land valuing ` 15.22 crore, and expiry 
of mining lease of land measuring 2,737.10 acres (expired at the time of approval of the 
Scheme). The Company confirmed that though efforts were made since 2008 for sale of 
non-operating units, these could not succeed as all qualified bidders demanded renewal of 
mining lease, clearance of statutory dues of respective state governments and peaceful 
transfer of land. The Company was not even able to liquidate contractor’s bills due to 
financial crunch that finally forced the contractor to suspend (May 2014) all project 
activities. The Company incurred so far (March 2015) an expenditure of ` 26.60 crore on 
expansion activities. 
The Company stated (November 2014) that (i) sale of seven non-operating units could not 
materialize despite best efforts, which jeopardized expansion works, (ii) the expenditure 
was capital in nature and essential to complete the project and would be gainfully utilized, 
and (iii) it had taken up the matter with the Ministry of Heavy Industry and sought an 
assistance of ` 95.40 crore in BE 2015-16 refundable on sale of non-operating units.
The reply does not take away the fact that the Company had failed to regularize title 
deeds of land and renew lease license though it had four years from approval of the 
Scheme till placement of LOI. The Company had known that these issues had to be 
rectified to facilitate sale of non-operating units. Without making much headway towards 
mobilizing financial resources, the Company ventured into expansion activities, which 
constrained it from opening LC and liquidate Contractor bills. As per the Company’s 
estimate (May 2014), at least ` 216 crore was required (including the works awarded) to 
complete the project without cost escalation. Moreover, viability of Bokajan unit was 
doubtful as huge capacity addition with modern technology had taken place in North-East 
(NE) region changing demand scenario in NE region from deficit to surplus.  It is, 
therefore, likely that the Company would not be in a position to sell seven non-operating 
units in the near future, and convince the Ministry for financial assistance especially in 
the background of challenging market environment with tough competition and high 
operating costs.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
10 
Thus, venturing into expansion activities without ensuring availability of funds through 
effective measures to facilitate sale of non-operating units resulted in infructuous 
investment of ` 26.60 crore.
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 
Hindustan Paper Corporation Limited 
1.7 Idle investment  
The Company lost the opportunity of saving in operating cost of ` 4.35 crore 
annually on consumption of coal besides blocking its fund of ` 22.07 crore for over 6 
years due to delay in commissioning of AFBC boiler at Cachar Paper Mill. 
Hindustan Paper Corporation Limited (Company) with a view to saving consumption of 
coal, decided (November 2004) to install two 50 TPH Multifuel FBC Boilers each at its 
Cachar Paper Mill (CPM) and Nagaon Paper Mill (NPM) as the coal consumption of its 
old boilers was on a higher side. An order was placed (May 2005) on M/s Thermax  
Babcock & Wilcox Limited Pune for supply of two 50TPH AFBC Boilers for two paper 
mills at a total value of ` 34.97 crore. Separate order was also placed (May 2005) on M/s. 
Thermax Engineering Construction Company Limited (TECCL), Pune for erection and 
commissioning of boilers at a total value of ` 4.19 crore. The boilers were scheduled to 
be commissioned by July 2007. It was envisaged that there would be an annual saving of 
` 4.35 crore by installation of each boiler. 
The Company was to provide ‘civil fronts’ to TECCL for commissioning the boiler at 
CPM which got delayed (18 months) due to adverse weather situation and extra piling 
work on account of poor soil condition. TECCL claimed (December 2008) price 
escalation of ` 0.90 crore for the delay. After completion of 80 per cent of the erection 
work, TECCL left (October 2009) the site and intimated (November 2009) the Company 
to replace some components of boiler which had got rusted/ damaged due to improper 
storage for prolonged period. The Company procured the components at a value of ` 0.31 
crore and requested (September 2010) TECCL for resumption of the remaining work. 
TECCL, however, informed (March 2011) that they would resume the work only after 
settlement of their claim towards price escalation. TECCL further informed (June 2012) 
the Company that the value of remaining work would be ` 1.24 crore compared to ` 0.39 
crore as per existing work order and also sought an amended work order. The Company 
decided (June 2012) to accept the claim of TECCL at ` 0.47 crore and release of ` 0.25 
crore to TECCL after mobilising the workforce at site. TECCL subsequently agreed (June 
2012) to settle its claim at ` 0.35 crore and mobilise the work force only after receipt of 
advance of ` 0.25 crore along with amendment of work order for the remaining erection 
work.
Instead of getting the remaining work done through TECCL, the Company cancelled (30 
October 2013) the work order and issued (4 November 2013) Letter of Intent (LoI) to 
M/S. M. S. Erectors, Assam (MSE) for erection, commissioning and performance test of 
the boiler at a cost of ` 1.46 crore at the risk and cost of TECCL. The scheduled date of 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
11 
completion was 120 days from LoI i.e.by 4 February 2014. However, MSE carried out 
only 10 per cent of the physical work upto October 2014. 
Audit examination revealed that the Company failed to commission the boiler at CPM as 
only 80 per cent of the job was completed by October 2009. Though TECCL accepted 
settlement of its claim at a reduced value 1, the Company did not resolve the outstanding 
issues and cancelled the order of TECCL. The Company issued order to another party for 
commissioning work after a delay of 16 months 2 with an additional cost of ` 0.22 crore3.
Some components of the boiler had got damaged, in the meantime, which would require 
replacement/servicing as confirmed by MSE. Further, the guarantee period 4 of the boiler 
had expired and the vendor would not be responsible for any underperformance after its 
commissioning. Thus, there was an idle investment of ` 22.07 crore (August 2014) due to 
non-commissioning of boiler at CPM and the objective to save consumption of coal 
remained unfulfilled. Incidentally, the boiler at NPM was commissioned in March 2009 
and the Company had saved on consumption of coal valued at ` 21.59 crore due to use of 
AFBC boiler instead of old boilers during 2010-11 to 2013-14. 
The Company/Ministry contended (November 2013/May 2014) that TECCL had not 
shown interest in completing the job and commissioning of AFBC boiler at CPM got 
delayed mainly on account of their lackadaisical approach. The above contention needs to 
be viewed against the fact that TECCL had agreed to complete the remaining job subject 
to settlement of its claim even at a reduced value offered by the Company. However, the 
Company did not take any action in this respect and issued LoI to another party for the 
remaining job at a higher cost by ` 0.22 crore compared to that offered by TECCL.  
Ministry, while not expressly agreeing with the Company’s stand, stated that the 
Company would have to bear the cost of the replacement of the component of the boiler, 
if found damaged, during commissioning of the boiler, as the guarantee period was over. 
Thus, the Company had lost the opportunity of achieving savings in consumption of coal 
of ` 26.10 crore
5 over a period of more than 6 years due to delays mainly attributable to 
itself in completing the commissioning of AFBC boiler at CPM besides blocking its funds 
amounting to ` 22.07 crore for more than 6 years. 
Sambhar Salts Limited 
1.8 Unfruitful investment in salt refinery 
Award of contract to contractor compromising technical requirements followed by 
deficiencies in inspection and monitoring at the project execution stage resulted in 
an investment of ` 5.82 crore in salt refinery at Sambhar turning unfruitful without 
yielding desired results even after a lapse of eight years.  
Sambhar Salts Limited (Company) invited (February 2006) bids for setting up of a salt 
refinery with capacity of one lakh tonnes per annum at Sambhar in Rajasthan to produce 
                                                           
1 From ` 0.90 crore to ` 0.35 crore 
2 From June 2012 to November 2013 
3 ` 1.46 crore  - ` 1.24 crore (claimed by TECCL) 
412 months from the date of commissioning or 24 months from date of dispatch, whichever period ends 
earlier. 
5 ` 4.35 crore * 6 years 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
12 
refined/non-refined, iodized/non-iodized salt. One of the critical technical tender 
conditions was that the bidder should have successfully commissioned at least a salt 
refinery of capacity of not less than 15 tonnes per hour (TPH) on turnkey basis or 
executed salt refinery projects of value of not less than 
` 5 crore during last five years. 
None of the four bidders met the required technical criteria. Tender committee, however, 
called the bidders for negotiations and based on an undertaking of bidders to execute the 
project as per scope of work on turnkey basis, recommended relaxation of technical 
requirements for all bidders. After relaxation of technical conditions with the approval of 
the competent authority, the letter of Intent for setting up the salt refinery on turnkey basis 
was finally issued (April 2006) to L-1 bidder, M/s Pandian Engineering Industries, Tamil 
Nadu (Contractor) at a contract value of ` 4.95 crore.
After the award of work, the performance of contractor was found deficient both in terms 
of quality of work as well as timely completion of work . The contractor submitted 
Detailed Project Report for the refinery in November 2006 as against the target date of 13 
May 2006. Against the target date of supply, erection and commissioning of salt refinery 
by November 2007, the contractor did not commence supply of plant and machinery till 
June 2008. Despite repeated letters from the Company, the performance of the contractor 
remained slow and the extended targets of May 2009 followed by October 2009 agreed to 
by the contractor were also missed. Slow progress of refinery project was discussed 
(November 2009) by the committee of Directors of the Company with the contractor 
during which the contractor finally agreed to complete the work by December 2009 and 
start trial runs from 15 January 2010.  
Though the work was not completed by the contractor as per the agreed scope of contract 
and the work aggregating ` 42.05 lakh remained unexecuted, the refinery was put to 
limited production from June 2010. There was imbalance and mismatch in equipment 
supplied by the contractor which resulted in frequent problems in operation and the 
refinery never operated at its planned installed capacity. Against the planned installed 
capacity of one lakh tonnes per annum, actual salt production at the refinery during June 
2010 to March 2014 ranged between 5,041 tonnes to 19,904 tonnes per annum ( i.e. an 
average production of 11310
♦  tonnes per annum only). The contractor was repeatedly 
requested by the Company to supply the balance plant and machinery and stabilise the 
production as per tender conditions. However, the same was not done. Accordingly, the 
Company appointed a consultant (February 2014) to study and give recommendations to 
achieve the installed capacity who pointed out several deficiencies in the execution of 
work including use of inferior material and recommended retrofitment of the refinery to 
achieve the planned production level. The Company terminated (October 2014) the 
contract with the contractor and decided to execute the balance work at his risk and cost 
under the terms of the contract. However, the work for retrofitment and capacity 
enhancement of refinery estimated to be done at the cost of ` 3.54 crore was yet to be 
awarded (January 2015).
It was further observed that the Company neither had any professionally qualified staff 
for checking the specifications of the m achinery and material at the time of delivery and 
execution of the project by the contractor nor did it ensure its testing and inspection by an 
                                                           
♦  Calculated based on the actual production of 43,356 tonnes from June 2010 to March 2014. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
13 
independent expert. As a result, equipment and machinery supplied by the Contractor was 
of inferior quality as compared to the agreed tender specifications as assessed by an 
independent consultant. These deficiencies, inter alia, included, leakages in wet mill and 
other equipment reducing their efficiencies; inadequate drainage provision resulting in 
seepage; improper designing of dryers and foundation of machines; malfunctioning of 
various equipments/ machines; and loose wirings, besides the inferior brands of bearing 
used.
Thus, due to relaxation of critical technical requirements at the tender evaluation stage 
and lapses in inspection and monitoring during project execution, the refinery set up at a 
cost of ` 5.82 crore ( ` 2.98 crore being payments made to the contractor and  
` 2.84 crore being interest payable on Government of India loan for setting up of refinery) 
did not achieve the desired results even after lapse of more than eight years of the award 
of work.
The Company accepted (January 2013) that most of the equipment and machinery 
supplied and installed by the Contractor were of inferior quality and did not meet the 
required standards and needed replacement/re-installation. They also accepted (January 
2013 and December 2014) that they did not have required competent manpower for 
installation and commissioning of the project and also did not take steps to engage 
professional/qualified staff for monitoring and implementation of the work done by the 
Contractor. 
Thus, award of contract to a contractor compromising technical requirements followed by 
deficiencies in inspection and monitoring at the project execution stage resulted in an 
investment of ` 5.82 crore in the refinery becoming unfruitful without achieving the 
desired results.  
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
14 
Hindustan Copper Limited 
2.1 IT Audit on implementation of Oracle e-Business Suite (EBS) 
Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) implemented Oracle E-Business Suite (EBS) in 
October 2008 to standardise the Process and for uniform codification throughout HCL 
and also to centralise the processing and to minimise the time and cost for Hardware 
Maintenance at remote places. HCL has implemented Oracle E-Business Suite R12 ERP 
system to carry out all the business functions of the Company from various locations. The 
company incurred ` 4.52 crore towards cost of software and ` 8.70 crore for hardware 
cost.The following issues were observed during audit of Oracle EBS application:
2.1.1 IT related issues 
Following issues were observed in audit: 
IT policies
The Company has not formulated any Information Security Policy stating user 
classification for profile creation, password policy, number of failed login attempts, etc. 
exposing the system to threats of unauthorized usage and loss of data. The management 
replied (April 2014) that they were in the process of preparation of IT security policy.
Logical access control 
(i) Seeded application user account protection 
In terms of Secure Configuration Guide for Oracle E-Business Suite, the passwords for 
seeded application accounts should be changed or disabled. However, it was observed 
that several application user accounts ♣  were kept with their default password against the 
recommendation of Secure Configuration Guide for Oracle E Business Suite, Release 12 
of Oracle Corporation – Version 1.1.1. This indicated potential exposure to the risk of 
unauthorised access.While accepting (April 2014) the fact, the management assured to 
take appropriate steps. 
(ii) Unauthorised login activity 
Scrutiny of user login records, on sample basis, revealed the following: 
• User ids of few users were logged in when the original user was absent or on leave 
indicating the possibility of the user id being shared. 
                                                           
♣   OP_CUST_CARE_ADMIN, OP_SYSADMIN, MOBILEADM, etc. 
CHAPTER II: MINISTRY OF MINES

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
15 
• In terms of Secure Configuration Guide for Oracle E-Business Suite, the 
maximum number of failed login attempts per day was to be configured as five. 
But it was observed that unsuccessful logins were not being monitored as 
significant number of failed login attempts were noticed under various user ids.
The management accepted (April 2014) the finding and was in the process of taking 
appropriate measures. 
2.1.2 Quality of Master Data : Master data files are meant for integrity, consistency, 
completeness and accuracy of master data records. Master data is of vital importance as 
information stored in master data files are usually critical to the processing and reporting 
of financial and operational data. Accuracy of master data filescan affect many related 
transactions and must therefore be adequately protected. 
(i) Material Master: The material master contains various data–identification 
number, description, unit of measurement of materials required by the Company. 
It was, however, observed: 
• That multiple ids (33716 ids out of 749944 ids) were created for same materials 
indicating lack of supervision in maintenance and updation of master records. 
Management had stated (April 2014) that based on use and transaction, material 
codes are assigned to multiple inventory organisations across all the units. 
(ii) Vendor Master: Analysis of the Vendor Master (other than employees) revealed 
that:
• No party name was attached for several vendor ids and address field was also not 
captured for several vendors indicating incomplete data.  
• Creation of two different vendor ids for several suppliers, though Permanent 
Account Number (PAN) was same for each of such two different ids. Existence of 
duplicate vendor ids in the master indicated lack of validation control which led to 
placement of purchase order to the same vendor under different vendor ids. 
While accepting (April 2014) the fact, the management had agreed to take necessary 
action.
(iii) Wrong definition of unit of measurement: There are materials with unit of 
measurement (UoM) “NO”. For such items quantity in stock should be in whole 
numbers. However, scrutiny revealed some instances where quantity in stock were 
in fractions though the UoM was “NO”, thereby indicating deficiency in 
customization.The management offered (April 2014) no comment as no item code 
reference was provided to them. The reply of the management was not acceptable 
as related information was available in their ERP system. 
2.1.3 Depreciation of fixed assets: 
Schedule XIV of the Companies Act, 1956 requires that any asset valuing ` 5000 or less 
is to be depreciated fully in the year of addition. In 630 cases it was seen that assets 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
16 
valuing ` 5000 or below were not depreciated fully and an amount of ` 1.04 lakh needed 
to be depreciated. Management stated (July 2014) that necessary rectification has been 
carried out and accounted for. Further checks, however, revealed that some such instances 
still existed in the system without rectification which indicated that the system of 
accounting for depreciation is still prone to errors. 
The Company could not map the depreciation rates allowed by the Companies Act, 1956 
and charged depreciation at rates other than the prescribed rates. It was observed that 
there was 83 asset items valuing ` 859.79 lakh (out of total 21309 asset items valuing 
` 22386.13 lakh) which were charged depreciation at rates other than rates of 
depreciation prescribed the Companies Act. Management stated (July 2014) that these are 
the assets which are in use since long i.e. before the introduction of Schedule XIV to the 
Companies Act and that the rates of depreciation which are being charged at the derived 
rates based on the estimated life of the asset. The contention of the Management is not 
correct as all assets are required to be depreciated as per Schedule XIV to the Companies 
Act. In case of 1 asset valuing ` 35.08 lakh, depreciation flag was kept at “yes”, however, 
no depreciation rate was attached. Management stated (July 2014) that necessary 
rectification has been carried out at the instance of Audit. However, no such action was 
undertaken.
2.1.4 Manual intervention in financial records 
• Tracking of customer credit balance for sales
In terms of marketing policy of the company, 100 per cent payment should be made by 
the party before lifting materials from the company. However, scrutiny revealed that 
delivery of materials valuing ` 182.55 lakh was made to three customers though no actual 
advance payment was received from the same. Thus, non-existence of monitoring system 
for verification of real-time customer payment led to allowance of soft credit facilities to 
parties who were not eligible for the same. The management had stated (April 2014) to 
take necessary action in this regard. 
2.1.5 Valuation of Stock items : As per accounting policy of the Company, the raw 
materials are valued at the lower of the net realizable value and weighted average cost. 
Scrutiny of valuation of stock items in the system revealed that: 
• Instances where quantity of closing stock of materials was zero but total value was 
captured as more than zero. 
• Items in the stock valued at “NIL” though quantity was available. 
• Same items of stock at stores which were valued at different rates. This indicated 
lack of inventory management through the system and against the prudent 
accounting principles. Moreover, existence of same materials with different 
quantity may lead to improper inventory control. In respect of point no. (1), the 
management had accepted (April 2014) the audit observation that for zero 
material quantity, stock value will also be zero. For point no. (2), the management 
had stated (April 2014) that for materials having stock quantity less than one unit 
and for non-moving items item cost (item rate) was zero. The reply of the 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
17 
management was not acceptable that in the list there were some items, quantity of 
which were more than one unit and none of the materials were separately marked 
as non-moving item. In respect of point no. (3), the management had stated (April 
2014) those items for which item cost were updated on day to day basis, different 
rate may exist for same item. The reply of the management was not acceptable as 
different rate for same item of material should not exist as per prudent inventory 
management. 
2.1.6 Delay implementation of Payroll Module 
The payroll module was one of the modules of Oracle EBS package procured in 2008. 
This payroll module was, however, implemented in all the units alongwith legacy payroll 
system only in 2011-12, indicating delay in implementation and intended benefits of the 
same. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in February 2015; their reply was awaited (March 
2015).
2.2 Fraudulent accounting activities 
Benefits were extended to customers by forging, manipulating the documents as well 
as by passing fictitious entries in the system to camouflage the accounts of the 
company.
As per the procedure followed by Hindustan Copper Limited (the Company), the 
customer has to deposit money in advance in form of RTGS, pay order, cheque or 
demand draft (DD) for purchase of copper product. Thus, before issuing delivery order, 
receipt of payment/availability of sufficient credit balance in the customers’ account was 
to be ensured. 
The Company had introduced Oracle E-Business Suite as its Enterprise Resource 
Planning (ERP) system since 01 October 2008. The Accounts Receivable Module (ARM) 
of the ERP system is used to record receipt of payments for sale of copper products while 
the Marketing Module (MM) is used for recording of sales transactions. When a customer 
makes payment for lifting materials, money receipt entry is recorded in the ERP which is 
applied to generate delivery order to allow the customer to lift materials.  
Scrutiny of customer files, delivery orders, bank statements, data from ERP system and 
analysis of the same through IDEA package disclosed that fictitious entries were made 
both in ARM and MM at Regional Sales Office (East) (RSOE), Kolkata to extend 
pecuniary gains to some customers. However, the files of the customers as provided to 
audit by the management were incomplete and did not contain all the papers relating to 
the business carried out with those customers. 
It was noted that money receipts and bank statements were fabricated for issue of delivery 
orders in favour of customers. During the period covered in audit (2010-11 to 2013-14), 
the company transacted with 48 customers in the RSOE, Kolkata, out of which 3 cases of 
irregular/unauthorized transactions were noticed during test check. It was found that 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
18 
` 282.44 lakh was shown as fraudulent receipts against which delivery orders of ` 182.55
lakh were issued (Annexure-I). Such fraudulent receipts were subsequently reversed.
Audit examination further revealed that there were instances of transfer of customer 
refunds to other customers or unjustified customer refunds. The ERP system captured 
such refunds as invoice issued to the customer. Out of 73 customer refund cases, 28 
refunds were routed through a particular account code viz. “25418–Bank Transfer” which 
was used as an intermediary account to park the above refunds and later the same was 
transferred to the accounts of other customers and shown as receipts from such customers. 
This was done either to enable such unduly benefitted customers to lift materials or to 
adjust their outstanding dues. Through this mechanism, credit balances of ` 241.81 lakh 
in respect of 34 customers (due as on 1 October 2008 – date of go live of ERP) were 
fraudulently transferred to the account of 13 customers which accounted for about 42 per 
cent of the total amount (` 578 lakh) due to customers as on 1 October 2008 (Annexure-
II).
Audit also observed that out of six number of bank guarantees (BGs) valuing ` 200 lakh 
furnished by M/s. Almetal Industries Private Limited (AIPL), five BGs valuing ` 150
lakh were not encashed and allowed to expire by September 2011, even though at that 
point of time the customer had outstanding dues of ` 257.73 lakh. Scrutiny of this 
customer ledger account also revealed that a cheque of ` 50 lakh received from the 
customer was not encashed and reversed subsequently and AIPL was extended undue 
benefit of ` 8, 69,800 by passing a wrong credit memo on account of interest. It was 
further observed that undue advantage was extended to two customers viz
. AIPL valuing
` 91.78 lakh and M/s. Shree Bajrang Bali Ashok Construction Private Limited valuing ` 38.16
lakh by way of unauthorized fake balance transfer from other customers’ account. 
We also noticed following deficienies in the internal control system of the Company:  
• Basic control of matching receipt numbers, financial instrument numbers and 
dates with the physical documents was not exercised.  
• There was no system of recording of receipt of cheques from the customers. As a 
result, control over cheques being encashed was lacking. 
• The system of monitoring the Bank Guarantees was not ensured as no bank 
guarantee register was maintained.
• Internal control through the ERP system was lacking as the vouchers, credit 
memos/ debit memos, rectification or reversal of entries were created and updated 
by using the same user id which is against the basic IT security norms.  
• The laid down policy of the company regarding delegation of powers was not 
followed properly for issue of credit notes and allowing refunds to the customers.  
• On the basis of instruction of the audit committee of the company, though all 
manuals including internal audit manuals were submitted (1 February 2011) by 
State Productivity Council – West Bengal, yet those manuals were not adopted 
(August 2014).

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
19 
• Internal audit reports were not discussed at length in the audit committee 
meetings. As such, it could not be concluded whether the audit committee was 
regularly monitoring the internal audit findings.
• There was no system of periodical confirmation of balances of debtors and there 
was no comprehensive fraud policy.
While scrutinising the ERP records of all the above transactions, it was noticed that most 
of the transactions were executed using a user id viz. “RSOE_FIN_1”. It was found that a 
permanent employee of the company used this id till August 2011. Thereafter, the same id 
was used by a contract employee till the completion of contract tenure (March 2013). 
Audit observed that there was lack of justification towards allowing a contract employee 
to use this id of the Finance section of the company. Further, this id was utilised not only 
to create the document but also to validate/approve  the same. Further, it was noticed that 
another id viz. “FIN_CORE_1” was used by Advisor (Finance). It was also found that in 
January 2012 a new employee in the Marketing (Finance) was recruited to take over the 
duties from the contract employee and to replace the contract employee after a gap of six 
months. But the same was not done; rather, the new employee was shifted (July 2012) to 
another section, thereby allowing the contract employee to continue with the job upto 31 
March 2013, during which period most of these irregularities took place. It would appear 
that the continuance of the contract employee even when a regular employee had been 
recruited would suggest complicity. 
Management accepted (January 2015) all the above audit observations. However, despite 
such serious irregularities, management has neither fixed responsibility nor initiated any 
legal action. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in February 2015; their reply was awaited (March 
2015).

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
20 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited
3.1 Wasteful Expenditure 
The Company went ahead with the execution of Guwahati ATF pipeline project and 
procured the materials thereof without finalization of the commercial terms with 
OIL who was the owner of more than 50 per cent of the required land for laying the 
pipeline. Proper survey of the exact terrain of the land was also not conducted 
before planning of the project. All these led to abnormal increase in project cost and 
consequent abandonment of the project resulting in an idle investment of ` 17.80 
crore and loss of ` 2.57 crore. 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited (Company) decided (November 2009) for laying a 35 
kilometre (km) long Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) pipeline from Guwahati Refinery 
(refinery) to the Aviation Fuel Station (AFS) at Guwahati Airport at an estimated cost of  
` 44 crore as this would ensure safe, economical and faster movement of ATF from the 
refinery to AFS. It was planned to lay the pipeline in the common right of way (RoW) of 
Oil India Limited (OIL) upto Betkuchi (18 km.) and thereafter it would traverse in the 
independent RoW for 17 kms. upto AFS. The orders for supply of mainline pipes were 
issued in April 2011 at a value of ` 14.53 crore and the supply was completed in August 
2011.
The management, however, approached OIL for permission to lay the pipeline in its 
corridor in August 2011. In response, OIL intended to undertake laying of the pipeline for 
the entire length of 35 km. After several round of discussions, the commercial offer of 
OIL for laying of pipeline was received in May 2013. OIL’s offer towards mainline pipe 
laying charges (including RoW) and PMC
♦  charges was higher by ` 30 crore (approx.) 
than the estimated cost. While planning for the project, laying of the pipeline was 
assumed in the normal terrain. After survey it was, however, found that most of the 
stretches of the OIL’s corridor was on marshy land which led to the above increase in 
mainline laying cost. The project cost was subsequently increased to ` 87 crore i.e. ` 43 
crore higher than the earlier estimate. The Company, therefore, decided (December 2013) 
to abandon the project as the advantages envisaged did not justify such a high investment. 
In the meantime, till March 2014 the company had incurred an expenditure of ` 21.81 
crore on this abandoned project of which ` 17.80 crore was related to cost of mainline 
pipe and other capital stores and ` 1.44 crore was for construction of control building. 
The balance amount of ` 2.57 crore incurred towards survey etc. was written off.
Audit observed that the management went ahead with the execution of the project and 
procured the materials thereof without finalisation of the commercial terms with OIL who 
was the owner of more than 50 per cent  of the required land for laying the pipeline. 
                                                           
♦  Project Management Consultancy 
CHAPTER III: MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND
NATURAL GAS

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
21 
Further, proper survey of the exact terrain of the land was not conducted before planning 
of the project. All these resulted in abnormal increase in project cost and consequent 
abandonment of the project which indicates injudicious project planning. 
Management in its reply stated (September 2014) that the project was approved only 
after initiation of discussions with OIL ab out laying of the pipeline in their common 
RoW and after conducting a route surve y. It was also stated that due to reasons beyond 
the control of the Company like OIL’ s delay in agreeing to take up the entire work with 
the condition of appointing them as PMC, the project cost was increased leading to 
shelving of the project. The above reply is not tenable as the management took initiative 
to discuss only the technical feasibility of the project with OIL prior to approval of the 
project. In fact, the initiative for finalization of commercial terms and conditions with 
OIL for laying the above pipeline was commenced after such approval and even 
procurement of majority of the materials was completed before finalization of such terms 
and conditions.
Management’s further contention that the materials procured for th e project were 
proposed to be utilized in other ongoing projects viz Goa ATF Pipeline project, 
Ennore-Trichy-Madurai (ETM) LPG Pipeline project etc. appear to be afterthought. 
The proposed technical specification (WT i.e. wall thickness) of the mainline pipes 
of ETM project was not similar to that of the mainline pipes of Guwahati ATF 
pipeline project. Further, the length of ma inline pipe procured for the abandoned 
Guwahati ATF pipeline project was 35 km. whereas the same for the proposed Goa 
ATF pipeline project was 9.3 km. only. 
This case would show the anxiety to procure the material much ahead of details of the 
project being worked out. It is a case of wasteful expenditure.
The matter was reported to the Ministry in November 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 
3.2 Avoidable expenditure due to non-rescheduling mechanical completion of 
tankage facilities within the stipulated period  
Failure to reschedule mechanical completion of tankage facilities for a refinery 
project in line with provisions in the BOOT contract resulted in an avoidable 
expenditure of ` 12.10 crore without deriving any benefit. 
In order to meet the requirement of crude oil and finished product tanks for the Paradip 
Refinery Project (PDRP), Indian Oil Corporation Limited (the Company) signed (June 
2010) an agreement on build-own-operate-transfer (BOOT) basis with M/s IOT Utkal 
Energy Services Limited (BOOT Contractor). The works were to be completed within 24 
months (by November 2011) from the issue of Fax of Acceptance (23 November 2009), 
which was extended by two months at the request of BOOT Contractor (i.e., completion 
by January 2012). As per clause 4.4 of the contract, in case the Company failed to supply 
utilities by the date set forth or was unable to supply crude oil/product through no default 
of the Contractor, the commissioning shall be deemed to have taken place after three 
months from the time schedule or actual commissioning, whichever occurred earlier. The 
tankage facilities were completed in July 2013. Since the refinery was not commissioned, 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
22 
and in line with clause 4.4 of the contract, the Company paid invoices from November 
2013 (i.e., after 3 months from completion). 
Audit observed that as per the contract (clause 4.6), the Company had the right to extend 
the commissioning schedule of tankage facilities for six months and such right was to 
have been exercised within six months of acceptance of work order.  It was also noticed 
that while accepting the request of BOOT contractor to extend the contract period for two 
months, the Company reiterated its right to extend the commissioning schedule up to 22 
July 2010. However, the Company failed to extend the commissioning schedule despite 
the Project Appraisal Group (PAG) of the Company having noticed (November 2009) the 
risk of time overrun in the PDRP and possible payments to the contractor without 
utilizing the facilities.  
The Company stated (October/November 2014) that the risk highlighted by PAG had 
been taken care of by incorporating a provision for extending commissioning schedule by 
a maximum period of six months. The Ministry further clarified (February 2015) that the 
provision for extending commissioning by six months was kept in the tender as a pre-
emptive action and the Company had exercised it to the extent of two months, at that 
point of time. The Ministry also stated that after completion of tankage facilities in July 
2013, O&M activities were necessary to preserve the health of the equipment and 
maintain the facilities in working order.   
Replies need to be viewed in the light of the fact that extension of two months was 
granted at the request of BOOT Contractor and not as a measure to mitigate the time 
overrun highlighted by PAG. Further, the mandatory O&M activities would have been 
carried out by BOOT contractor at his cost for a period of six months, had the Company 
opted for extending commissioning schedule as per contract. It is also pertinent to 
mention that the overall physical progress of the PDRP was 23.10 per cent  against 
scheduled progress of 33.31 per cent at the end of July 2010.
Thus, the fact remains that the Company failed to utilize the available opportunity to 
extend the commissioning schedule that would have avoided payment of O&M charges of 
` 12.10 crore for six months for the BOOT contract.
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 
3.3 Deficient tender document coupled with Company’s failure to negotiate with L1 
bidder in view of reduced rate of withholding tax led to avoidable expenditure  
Tender documents of the Company were deficient because the bidders were asked to 
quote price inclusive of tax and duties.  Further, the Company failed to negotiate 
with M/s Basell Poliolefine Italia, Italy, L1 bidder to reduce the price in view of 
downward revision of withholding tax rate which led to avoidable expenditure of   
` 9.56 crore.
Indian Oil Corporation Limited (the Company) issued (October 2005) limited tender 
enquiry/Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) to line up the process licensor for its Polypropylene 
(PP) unit at Paradip Refinery (PDRP). The bidders were requested to submit their offers 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
23 
by 15 February 2006 and required to quote gross of withholding tax (WHT) instead of 
indicating the rate and amount of WHT included in the price bid separately. M/s Basell 
Poliolefine Italia, Italy (Basell), being the L1 bidder, was awarded the work at a price of 
` 169.60 crore
1.
As Basell was already rendering similar services at Panipat refinery of the Company, it 
accepted the price with same terms and conditions as applied in respect of Panipat 
refinery. The rate of WHT applied in respect of Panipat refinery was 20 per cent  for 
royalty or fees for technical services. This rate was, however, reduced to 10 per cent
(after including surcharge and cess, effective rate was 10.56 per cent) vide Finance Act, 
2005, with effect from 1 June 2005.   
While approving the draft agenda note for consideration of the Board of Directors of the 
Company (Board), General Manager (Finance) [(GM (F)] noted (October 2006) that 
quoted rates of Basell were inclusive of WHT at the rate of 20 per cent and accordingly 
payments would be released after deducting 20 per cent WHT.  However, tax remittance 
would be at the rate prevailing as per Income Tax Act, but this remark was not apprised to 
the Board which accorded (November 2006) its approval to award the job to Basell at 
` 169.60 crore inclusive of taxes & duties.  The Company entered into agreement with 
Basell in March 2007. 
As per Clause 8.8 of the agreement all fees and charges to be paid by the Company to 
Basell were subject to deduction of all WHT applicable in India at prescribed rates on any 
money payable as applicable from time to time.  Further, as per Clause 8.7, in case of 
delays in paying fees in accordance with terms of the agreement, Basell could give 
written notice to the Company specifying the claimed particulars of default. If such 
default was not remedied by the Company within 60 days after receipt of such notice, 
Basell might assess finance charges (not exceeding the maximum amount permitted by 
applicable law) for the period of delay.
For the invoices raised during July 2007 and January 2008, the Company made payments 
to Basell after deduction of 10.56 per cent  towards WHT, while for invoices raised in 
November 2007 and March 2008, it deducted WHT at 20 per cent. Further, the Company 
asked (February 2008) Basell to refund the excess amount paid due to adoption of WHT 
at the rate of 10.56 per cent instead of 20 per cent.  Basell accepted the same and remitted 
(February 2008) USD 881191 ( ` 3.54 crore)
2. However, after receipt of tax deduction 
certificate in July 2009, Basell realized that the Company had deposited only 10.56 per 
cent of WHT to tax authorities against the deduction of 20 per cent from its invoices.  
Basell, therefore, demanded (November/December 2009) refund of 9.44 per cent of the 
license fee. It also demanded (September 2010) financial charges of USD 5,05,096 
(` 2.30 crore3) under clause 8.7 of the agreement.  
The Company obtained (December 2010) legal opinion from Additional Solicitor General 
of India (ASGI). ASGI opined that as per the terms of agreement, Basell was entitled to 
                                                           
1 Initial rate quotes by M/s Basell was ` 173.30 crore.  Price after negotiation came to ` 169.60 crore. 
2 At the rate of `. 40.1623 per USD. 
3 At the rate of `. 45.54 per USD. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
24 
the refund of the difference of 9.44 per cent aggregating to USD 1685382.20 and advised 
the Company to negotiate with Basell to bring it down to the extent possible.
Basell served (February 2011) legal notice claiming USD 1685382.20 ( ` 7.60 crore) 1
towards additional WHT deducted from the invoices and USD 626869 ( ` 2.83 crore) 2
towards finance charges under clause 8.7.
Left with no alternative, the Company paid (May 2011) USD 1685382.20 ( ` 7.65 crore)3
towards excess deduction on account of WHT. The Company also settled finance charges, 
after negotiation with Basell, by paying USD 358264 (` 1.91 crore)4.
Audit examination revealed that – 
• The tender document was deficient as the bidders were required to quote licence 
fee inclusive of tax rather than obtaining rate for contract and taxes separately. 
• Even after the remarks of GM (F) regarding reduction of withholding tax rate, the 
Company did not exchange any correspondence with Basell to reduce the license 
fee in view of reduced rate of WHT at the time of entering into the licensing 
agreement. Consequently, the Company lost an opportunity to get the license fee 
reduced to the extent of ` 7.65 crore.
The Company replied (November 2014) that the License agreement was executed in line 
with the tender, licensor’s offer and Board approval. The remarks of GM (F) were neither 
in line with tender document nor in line with the offer of Basell and therefore in the 
absence of written document could not have been considered in the Agenda note. 
The reply needs to be viewed against the fact that despite getting clear indication from the 
note of GM (F) about difference in withholding tax rate that would have been considered 
by Basell and actual rate in force, the Company did not clarify the issue with Basell and 
incurred an avoidable expenditure of ` 9.56 crore. As Basell had accepted same terms 
and conditions as were applied in respect of Panipat refinery where WHT deduction was 
20 per cent , the Company ought to have taken cognizance of remarks of GM (F) and 
negotiated further with Basell at the time of entering into agreement, in view of reduced 
rate of WHT and avoided extra expenditure of ` 9.56 crore. 
Thus, deficient tender document and failure to negotiate with Basell in view of reduced 
rate of withholding tax led to avoidable expenditure of ` 9.56 crore
5.
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 
                                                           
1 At the rate of ` 45.106 per USD 
2 At the rate of ` 45.106 per USD 
3  At the rate of ` 45.39 per USD  
4 At the rate of ` 53.31 per USD 
5 (` 7.65 crore towards excess deduction on WHT + ` 1.91 crore towards finance charges) 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
25 
3.4 Non achievement of envisaged benefits from Flue Gas Cooler 
The Company could not achieve intended benefits from Flue Gas Cooler (FGC) due 
to frequent failure leading to excess consumption of fuel. Further the replacement of 
tubes alone of FGC contrary to advice of BHEL at a cost of ` 7.62 crore did not yield 
desired results and has become wasteful as the Company has decided to install new 
FGC unit. 
Flue Gas Cooler (FGC) is a part of Resid Fluidized Catalytic Cracking Unit of Barauni 
Refinery of Indian Oil Corporation Limited (Company) wherein thermal energy of flue 
gas is recovered by generating high pressure superheated  steam for utilisation in the 
processing units of the refinery. In case of FGC not functioning, there would be loss in 
steam generation by about 75 MT/hour thereby increasing the fuel consumption of the 
refinery. Leakages from FGC were often encountered since commissioning of RFCCU. 
There were 23 such failures between August 2002 and June 2011. The reasons for the 
above leakages were got examined (2003 and 2004) initially by Samsung (LSTK 
contractor) and Alstom (Original Equipment Manufacturer). Both the agencies pointed 
out that the tubes of FGC were damaged by corrosion due to condensation of sulphur 
containing gases. It was also pointed out that there were vibrations in the boiler and some 
of the tubes inside the boiler were found oscillating even at non-operative conditions. The 
Company requested (November 2004) Thermax–Babcock & Wilcock (TBW) to carry out 
design study etc. for failure of FGC. TBW submitted (January/February 2005) its offer 
with the proposal for three months shutdown of the FGC for such study. However, such 
proposal was not accepted considering longer outage period of FGC. BHEL, to whom the 
matter was also referred, opined (July 2006) that the replacement with a totally new 
design of steam/mud drums and various tubes of FGC would be a permanent solution. It 
was further stated that replacement of tubes alone would not ensure reliability of FGC.  
The company, however, replaced the tubes of FGC at a cost of ` 7.62 crore during July to 
November 2011. Despite replacement of tubes there were frequent failures and the FGC 
remained inoperative for 257 days during the period from January 2012 to June 2014.  
In view of the persistent failure of the FGC, the management decided to replace the entire 
Unit. The Company in its 596
th Board Meeting on 20 March 2013, while according 
approval for replacement of FGC at an estimated cost of ` 105 crore, expressed concern 
that such a defect was not detected by the Engineering Consultant or by the construction 
team at the time of installation. The Board, therefore, desired a detailed investigation 
should be carried out. 
In pursuance of the Board’s directions, a detailed investigation was carried out which 
came to the conclusion that this was manufacturing defect. The Committee also 
concluded that responsibility for quality assurance during execution was that of the 
Project Management Consultant (PMC), namely M/s. Engineers India Limited. 
This case highlights the failure of management in identifying the defects in the FGC. 
Taking ad hoc decisions where an investment of ` 7.62 crore was made during November 
2011 also did not address the real cause of the problem. This case further highlights the 
inability of the management to take appropriate action against the PMC for deficiencies in 
the performance. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
26 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in October 2014; their reply was awaited (March 
2015).
Oil India Limited
3.5 Loss of revenue  on account of discount allowed on sale of crude oil containing 
basic sediments and water content above the norm 
Failure to create facilities in time to contain the basic sediments and water content in 
the crude oil supplies within the prescribed limit resulted in loss of revenue  of 
` 105.55 crore during 2008-09 to 2013-14. 
Oil India Limited (the Company) is primarily engaged in exploration, production and 
transportation of crude oil and natural gas, both in the country and overseas. The presence 
of Basic Sediment and Water (BS&W) in the crude oil affects the quality of the oil 
supplied to oil refineries. Therefore, it is desirable for the oil producing companies to 
create necessary dehydration facilities for improving the quality of crude oil. Moreover, 
under the post Administrated Price Mechanism regime (2002), it became very stringent 
for the oil producing companies to maintain BS&W content in the crude oil at 0.2 per 
cent and below since the sale price was subject to discount at slab rates in case the content 
of the same in the crude oil exceeded the norm. 
Audit observed (December 2012) that in the north eastern region, 35 per cent  of 
production of the Company was from Greater Tengakhat Area, 60 per cent  from 
Naharkatiya Area and rest 5 per cent  from Shalmari and Moran Area, which after 
processing in the nearby production installations was transported to Central Tank Farm at 
Naharkatiya Area for onward dispatch to refineries through a main trunk pipeline. 
However, the crude despatched to the oil refineries contained higher BS&W than the 
desired level for which the Company had to allow discount to the customers over the 
years.  
It was seen from the records that:  
• In order to address the BS&W content in the crude oil, the Company constituted a 
Committee (March 2005) to study the feasibility for installation of crude 
dehydration facilities at the existing Central Tank Farm at Naharkatiya Area 
taking into account safety norms and other related aspects. The Committee 
recommended (June 2005) installation of a dehydration facility at Central Tank 
Farm at Naharkatiya Area. As the Central Tank Farm was very old and the site 
could not meet safety norms, an alternate site at Oil Collecting Station-3 (OCS-3) 
was selected for installation of Secondary Tank Farm with dehydration facility, 
though the same was rejected earlier on  environment consideration and a new 
place at Naholia was selected. The Company could not acquire the required land 
at Naholia due to land related problems and shifted the project to a new site at 
Central Gas Gathering Station (CGGS) (near Madhuban tea estate, Assam) by 
redesigning the plant layout so that the plant fitted in the available land. However, 
the said dehydration facility is yet to be set up (July 2014) for catering to crude oil 
produced at Naharkatiya Area. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
27 
• The Company had commissioned Intermediate Tank Firm with dehydration 
facility at Greater Tengakhat Area in May 2007 but failed to commission the 
Tengakhat – Shalmari Pipeline (TSPL) till May 2012, which was the best option 
to inject the crude oil into the main trunk pipeline as per the report on feasibility 
conducted by the task force in August 2005.
• Commissioning of dehydration facility at Greater Tengakhat Area and delayed 
commissioning of TSPL project without commissioning dehydration facility for 
crude oil produced at Naharkatiya Area resulted in intermixing of crude in the 
main trunk pipeline and untreated crude oil of Central Tank Firm with the treated 
crude oil of Intermediate Tank Farm. 
Though more than nine years have passed since the recommendation of the Task Force 
(June 2005) to create dehydration facilities for crude oil produced at Naharkatiya Area, 
the facility remains to be created. Failure of the  Company to create necessary facilities in 
time  to reduce the  BS&W content in the crude oil has led to it foregoing revenue of 
` 105.55 crore during the period 2008-09 to 2013-14,  on account of discounts allowed to 
various refineries for BS&W content in the supplied crude exceeding norms. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Management/Ministry stated (October 
2013/February 2014) that: 
• OIL management was sincerely concerned about the loss of revenue to the 
Company on account of higher BS&W content. The loss on account of deductions 
effected by various refineries for BS&W content in crude exceeding norms by 
OIL was not intentional but due to technical factors and certain environmental 
issues beyond OIL’s control. 
• The task force recommendation for setting up a crude dehydration facility at 
Naharkatiya Central Tank Farm was reviewed by the local management and OIL 
decided to look at an alternative site taking cognizance of the vintage of Central 
Tank Farm and safety issue. 
• Currently 60 per cent of OIL’s total production was being handled at Central Tank 
Farm at Naharkatiya, where there was no requisite infrastructure for dehydration 
facility. Once Secondary Tank Farm project was commissioned, all the crude oil 
delivery lines which were presently connected to Naharkatiya Central Tank Farm 
would be re-routed to Secondary Tank Farm and only treated crude oil would be 
despatched to Naharkatiya Central Tank Firm from Secondary Tank Farm for 
onward delivery to refineries. Therefore, Intermediate Tank Farm and Secondary 
Tank Farm together were expected to keep BS&W content lesser than the desired 
level. 
• OIL is committed to supply the customers with quality crude. With this intention 
projects like Intermediate Tank Farm and Secondary Tank Farm were undertaken. 
Considering the cost of setting up of new Secondary Tank Farm was about ` 352
crore,  the Company could have contemplated paying penalty rather than striving 
to set up a CAPEX and OPEX intensive BS&W reduction unit amidst the hostile 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
28 
environment. However, being a responsible company, OIL had initiated action to 
set up the required facilities to bring down BS&W content in refinery supplied 
crude oil. Results of the action initiated by the Company would show in future. 
The contention of the Management/Ministry is not tenable in view of the following: 
• Audit has emphasized that OIL being a responsible company should have been 
able to address technical factors and environment issues within a reasonable time 
and this ought not have taken almost a decade in supplying quality crude to 
consumers.  
• The fact remains that the Company is yet to establish required facilities for 
dehydration of crude oil of Naharkatiya area even after a lapse of nine years, 
which was recommended by the task force in June 2005. The site for construction 
of Secondary Tank Farm with dehydration facility at Oil Collecting Station-3 was 
agreed upon in August 2005 in place of Central Tank Farm, Naharkatiya. But the 
same is yet to be commissioned as there were repeated changes of site for the 
project on environmental and technical grounds which indicated deficiencies in 
project planning and management.  
• Environment and land related problems are common to any project. OIL has been 
continuing with its other core activities like exploration and production of crude in 
the same environment and these issues could have been tackled through better co-
ordination with local administrative authorities. 
• CAPEX of ` 352 crore for setting up the dehydration facility should not be a core 
issue for a cash rich company like Oil India Limited having cash and cash 
equivalents of ` 12133 crore as at 31 March 2013.  Moreover, the full benefit of 
the  investment of ` 92.66 crore already made on Intermediate Tank Farm and 
Tengakhat-Shalmari Pipeline project would be possible only when Secondary 
Tank Farm is put to operation without further delay. 
• Similar issue was pointed out in the Audit Report (Para 14.7.1 of Report No. 11 of 
2008) in respect of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC), another 
upstream oil sector company. ONGC has made significant improvement in the 
quality of crude oil as the discounts allowed were brought down from ` 30.47
crore in 2009-10 to ` 7.47 crore in 2012-13. As against this, the discounts allowed 
by OIL have increased from ` 12.53 crore in 2008-09 to ` 21.72 crore in              
2013-14.
Thus due to delay in installation of required facilities for dehydration of crude oil of 
Naharkatiya area, the Company continued to forgo revenue by way of discounts to  
refineries for not maintaining  quality norms. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
29 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited  
3.6 Avoidable assumption of liabilities and incurring avoidable expenditure in 
development of two oil and gas bearing fields due to acceptance of unfavourable 
terms in Settlement Agreement with a defaulting contractor 
Pursuant to award (November 2004) of a contract for Engineering and Construction 
works as  part of development of a deepwater and a shallow water oil and gas 
bearing field, and subsequent termination (June 2007) of the contract due to stalling 
(June 2006) of work by the contractor, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited 
(ONGC) entered into a Settlement Agreement with the defaulting contractor 
without conducting due diligence whereby it obtained a reduction of only USD 0.7 
million while it ended up paying a settlement sum USD 32 million ( ` 149.37 crore) to 
the contractor through ‘out of court’ resolution of disputes, besides incurring 
additional expenditure of USD 66.34 million ( ` 342.34 crore) in implementing the 
agreement in deviation of the approval accorded by its Board in October 2008. The 
expenditure (` 342. 34 crore) was irregular as it did not have approval of the Board 
and was not in the financial interests of ONGC. In addition, ONGC incurred an 
avoidable expenditure of USD 13.7 million ( ` 63.79 crore) on payment of rental for 
tools which was included in the amount paid for the work completed by the 
contractor under the already terminated contract. The project for development of 
the oil and gas fields remained incomplete (January 2015) as against the revised 
target date of April 2010 while projected revenues of ` 1,500 crore per annum 
remained unrealised (January 2015). 
3.6.1    Introduction 
3.6.1.1  Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limted (ONGC) entered (November 2004) into 
a contract on lumpsum turnkey basis with M/s Clough Engineering Limited, Australia 
(CEL) in November 2004 for Engineering and Construction work in connection with 
development of (i) a deepwater field (G1) and (ii) a shallow water field (GS15) in the 
Krishna Godavari basin, at a cost of USD 215.25 million ( ` 992.91 crore). The scheduled 
date of completion was April 2006. This contract was part of the integrated development 
project of G1 and GS15 fields which involved contracts for Well Completion and on land 
Oil Export Pipelines with different contractors and constituted 70 per cent of the total 
project cost. Drilling was done by ONGC on its own. 
3.6.1.2  As CEL had stalled work since June 2006, ONGC terminated the contract in June 
2007, initiated action to encash performance bank guarantee (PBG) furnished by CEL and 
notified CEL that the balance work would be completed at the risk and cost of the latter. 
ONGC had estimated, while terminating the contract, that 70 per cent of the work had 
been completed and it had paid USD 142.69 million (` 632.11 crore) to CEL, by then. 
3.6.1.3 CEL took up (June 2007) the matter of termination of contract as well as invoking 
PBG by ONGC, for arbitration. ONGC filed (August 2007) a petition in the High Court 
of Mumbai for obtaining, inter alia , the custody of equipment and material that had 
remained with CEL, so that it could proceed with getting the work completed through 
alternate means.  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
30 
3.6.1.4 In its ‘ad interim’ order (September-October 2007), the High Court ordered 
maintenance of status quo with respect to custody of balance project material. Neither 
would ONGC get custody, nor would CEL be able to dispose of any project material. 
Despite this order, CEL had disposed of some project material and ONGC had filed a 
contempt petition before the High Court (October 2007) against CEL. 
3.6.1.5 ONGC decided (April 2008) to explore possibilities of an ‘out of court’ settlement 
with CEL as it felt that it had spent around ` 1,000 crore on the project and that setback in 
project completion would delay production of oil and gas. ONGC expected that it would 
then be able to complete the project by April 2010 and also earn revenue of the order of `
1,500 crore per annum. Accordingly, ONGC held four rounds of negotiations with CEL 
between June 2008 and September 2008. 
3.6.1.6 On being approached by CEL against the termination of the contract and attempts 
by ONGC to encash PBG, Federal Court of Australia had, in the meantime (July 2008), 
allowed ONGC to encash PBG when ONGC realised USD 21.535 million ( ` 91.39 
crore).
3.6.1.7 Negotiations with CEL centred around (i) ONGC acquiring titles and rights in 
equipment/material and services, (ii) settlement sum payable to CEL, and (iii) payment of 
rentals for Tree Running Tools (TRT) and Installation, Workover and Control System 
(IWOCS) to CEL. 
3.6.1.8 The fourth round of negotiations was held (September 2008) by ONGC with CEL 
when the following terms were agreed upon: 
(i) The settlement sum payable to CEL would be USD 32.7 million; 
(ii) ONGC would now assume financial liability and responsibility for payments due 
from CEL to all Indian vendors and sub-contractors including the cost of 
inspection, completion, refurbishment, replacement, transportation and insurance 
relating to equipment/materials; and 
(iii) CEL would assume financial liability and responsibility only in respect of 
contracts of CEL with offshore vendors and sub-contractors. Even here, CEL 
would not bear the liability towards ex-works cost of inspection, transportation 
and insurance of offshore equipment/materials. 
3.6.1.9 ONGC obtained (October 2008) approval of its Board of Directors (Board) to 
these terms of settlement. No agreement was, however, signed by ONGC with CEL 
incorporating the agreed upon terms of settlement. 
3.6.1.10 ONGC had entered (November 2008) into further negotiations with CEL and 
following revised terms of settlement were agreed upon with the approval of Chairman 
and Managing Director (CMD), without the concurrence of the Board. Settlement 
Agreement was also signed (December 2009) with CEL with the approval (June 2009) of 
CMD without approval of the Board. The terms of settlement were, now, as under: 
(i) The settlement sum was reduced from USD 32.7 million to USD 32 million, 
which meant a reduction of USD 0.7 million; 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
31 
(ii) CEL would supply only those equipment/materials and services as specified in the 
agreement at the locations (India and abroad) in the quantity and condition that 
they were, on 42nd day of execution of the agreement; 
(iii) CEL and ONGC would jointly inspect the specified equipment/materials for 
confirming the quantity and their existence, within 39 days of signing the 
agreement; 
(iv) On the expiry of 42 days from the signing of the settlement agreement, ONGC 
would assume all financial and other liabilities including all obligations that were 
previously imposed upon CEL, and 
(v) CEL would supply project documents and verification documents, assign 
possession, titles and rights to ONGC relating only to specified 
equipment/materials and services.  
ONGC paid USD 32 million (` 149.37 crore) in December 2009 for the settlement
1.
3.6.2 Audit Findings
3.6.2.1 Audit examination revealed that the Settlement Agreement of December 2009 was 
not approved by the Board of ONGC. A comparison of the terms of settlement decided in 
September 2008 which were approved by the Board in October 2008, with the terms of 
the Settlement Agreement of December 2009 can be appreciated in the following table: 
Sl.
No 
Issue Settlement 
approved by Board 
(October 2008) 
Settlement of 
December 
2009 
Remarks 
1. Settlement 
sum payable 
to CEL 
USD 32.7 million USD 32 million Though there was a reduction of USD 
0.7 million ( ` 3.26 crore), ONGC 
ended up accepting additional liability 
for purchase, refurbishment/ 
revalidation of warranties of offshore 
equipment/ materials. 
2. Supply of 
Equipment/ 
materials 
CEL was to supply 
all the ‘balance’ 
onshore and offshore 
equipment/materials 
CEL was to 
supply only 
those 
equipment/ 
material that 
were specified 
in the 
agreement 
ONGC allowed CEL to reduce its 
liability as it was now required to 
supply only the equipment/materials 
that were specified in  the agreement 
and not all the balance
2equipment/ 
materials. Correspondingly, ONGC 
took upon itself additional liability 
without assessment of the cost. 
3. Financial 
liability 
towards 
offshore 
vendors/sub 
contractors 
CEL was to assume 
full responsibility for 
this except for cost of 
inspection, 
transportation and 
insurance of offshore 
equipment/ materials. 
ONGC had 
assumed full 
responsibility, 
now, on the 
expiry of 
42
ndday of the 
agreement. 
The condition and usability of 
offshore equipment/material, thus, 
became the responsibility of ONGC 
rather than CEL. ONGC accepted the 
equipment/materials without verifying 
either their actual co ndition or the 
number required for the work under 
                                                           
1 The amount of 32 million USD includes 23 million USD paid to CEL and USD 9 million paid to 
income tax authorities towards tax liabilities. 
2 Such of the equipment/materials required to  complete the project, whose possession CEL had not 
transferred to ONGC during the original contract period from November 2004 to June 2007.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
32 
the contract, though there was more 
than one year time available with 
ONGC to carry out physical 
verification. 
This was an additional benefit 
conferred upon CEL without 
assessment of cost on ONGC. 
3.6.2.2 Additional financial liabilities assumed by ONGC in settlement agreement of 
December 2009 
Audit attempted to ascertain the extent of additional financial liabilities (after taking into 
account the reduction of USD 0.7 million in the settlement sum) that ONGC had taken 
upon itself because of the benefits that were conferred upon CEL in the agreement of 
December 2009 which did not have the approval of the Board. 
(i) ONGC had accepted (December 2009) that CEL would supply only specified 
equipment/materials as per the Settlement Agreement. As a result, three offshore 
equipment/materials
♥  necessary to complete GS-15-1 deck fabrication were not 
supplied by CEL which had to be procured by ONGC at a cost of USD 3.46 
million (` 16.11 crore). 
(ii) ONGC had accepted (December 2009) to receive sub-sea equipment (SSE) from 
CEL on ‘as is where is’ basis according to the Settlement Agreement though 
warranty for the same had expired. CEL was to be responsible for the condition of 
these equipment according to the terms of settlement approved by the Board in 
October 2008. However, ONGC had to incur (over January 2011 to September 
2012) an expenditure of USD 3.52 million ( ` 16.39 crore) on the work of 
refurbishment of SSE by the original equipment manufacturer (OEM). This was 
an additional liability that ONGC had taken upon itself which was beyond the 
terms of approval granted by the Board in October 2008. 
3.6.2.3Additional expenditure resulting from un-favourable Settlement Agreement of 
December 2009 
(i) The warranties on all materials/equipment had lapsed by the time ONGC had 
received them. ONGC decided (February 2010) that warranty for SSE was critical and 
approached the OEM (Cameron) for re-validation of the warranty clause. Being in an 
unenviable position vis-a-vis the vendor, ONGC agreed (September 2010) to bear the 
expenses on retrieval and transportation of defective SSE to OEM for repair or 
replacement even though this condition was a deviation from the standard practice. One 
of the components of SSE, Cameron Vertical Connector (CVC) failed in installation 
(March 2012) and ONGC (June 2013) had to incur an expenditure of USD 9.80 million  
(` 56.33 crore) on its retrieval and transport. CEL was responsible for offshore materials 
including CVC as per the settlement terms of September 2008 and could have been held 
responsible for the damage to the materials had the terms remained un-altered. By 
accepting this responsibility (as per settlement agreement of December 2009), ONGC was 
left in a disadvantageous position of having to negotiate with OEM on the latter’s terms 
leading to an avoidable expenditure of USD 9.80 million (` 56.33 crore). 
                                                           
♥  Pressure relief valves, chemical injection skid and valves 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
33 
(ii) ONGC had also not verified the condition of SSE before accepting full 
responsibility for its components. Another component of SSE, namely Hydraulic Power 
Unit (HPU) failed during factory acceptance test (January 2011) and could not be 
installed on time. The installation could not be carried out in the 2012 season following 
detection of mechanical problem in CVCs (March 2012) and had to be rescheduled to 
2013 season. The re-scheduling of installation led to derailment of project schedule and 
resulted in payment of escalation of USD 50.26 million ( ` 256.77 crore) to the concerned 
contractor (Subsea 7).
3.6.2.4 Avoidable payment of rentals USD 13.7 million (
` 63.79 crore) towards rentals 
for TRT and IWOCS as a part of settlement sum paid to CEL 
The settlement sum of USD 32 million ( ` 149.37 crore) paid to CEL included USD 13.7 
million (` 63.79 crore) towards rentals for TRT and IWOCS, which was not payable by 
ONGC as the rentals for use of the tools (TRT and IWOCS) had already been paid to 
CEL as part of the payment for the work done by CEL till termination of the contract.  
3.6.2.5 Overall, ONGC ended up 
(i)  incurring an additional expenditure of USD 6.28 million ♠  ( ` 29.24 crore) on 
purchase and refurbishment of offshore equipment/ material, after adjusting the 
reduction of USD 0.7 million (` 3.26 crore secured in the agreement of December 
2009) without obtaining revised approval of the Board. 
(ii)  assuming additional financial liability of USD 60.06 million (USD 9.80 million in 
paragraph 3.6.2.3 (i) plus USD 50.26 million in paragraph 3.6.2.3 (ii) or ` 313.10 
crore, by accepting responsibility of offshore equipment/ material without 
ascertaining its condition or usability. 
(iii)  incurring of avoidable expenditure USD 13.7 million ( ` 63.79 crore) towards 
rentals for TRT and IWOCS, as a part of settlement sum paid to CEL. 
3.6.2.6 Thus, ONGC assumed additional financial liabilities of USD 80.04 million 
(` 406.13 crore) in settlement of the contract with CEL. Even accounting for the 
encashment of PBG (July 2008) amounting to USD 21.54 million ( ` 91.39 crore) 
received by ONGC, the net additional burden on the Company was USD 58.50 million 
(` 314.74 crore). More important, ONGC's objectives of completing the integrated 
project even by the revised date of April 2010 and realising revenues of around ` 1,500 
crore per annum remained only on paper (January 2015). 
3.6.3 Reply of ONGC  
3.6.3.1 ONGC, in its reply, stated (January 2015) that: 
(i) it did not feel the necessity of seeking separate approval or ratification of its Board 
as the details of negotiations and the settlement agreement of December 2009 
were explained to the Board in its meeting of June 2010. It also stated that if it had 
                                                           
♠  {USD 3.46 million (paragraph 2.2.1) plus USD 3. 52 million (paragraph 2.2.2) minus USD 0.7 million 
reduction obtained in negotiation of December 2009} 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
34 
not resolved the disputes through mutually acceptable agreement, the entire 
project works would have had to be re-tendered and expenditure to the tune of 
` 1,000 crore would have idled; 
(ii) it consented to the proposal of CEL as it was a ‘fait accompli’ situation since 
signing of the Settlement Agreement with CEL was crucial to restart the project 
work;
(iii) CEL was ready to give project materials only on ‘as is where is’ basis and not 
accepting this would have further delayed revival of the project. The usability or 
‘fit for use’ status of equipment could be checked by the respective OEMs and 
that refurbishment could be taken up subsequently based on the recommendation 
of OEM. Joint inspection of inventory was carried out for all project 
equipment/materials lying outside India and that failure of certain equipment 
could not be predicted and was part of the risk which it had to take while arriving 
at a mutually acceptable settlement agreement with CEL. It had to accept 
Cameron’s condition that the latter would not bear the cost of recovery, 
transportation and installation of SSE as the latter was OEM. It was not feasible 
for ONGC to check the quality of equipment/materials prior to signing the 
settlement agreement as most of the materials/equipment were lying with OEM; 
and
(iv) CEL had not agreed to joint inspection/verification of project 
equipment/materials. It insisted that ONGC should take the equipment/materials 
on ‘as is where is’ basis. Testing of the material would also have delayed the 
project. As far as rentals for tools, namely, TRT and IWOCs were concerned, 
ONGC stated that as the tools were in its custody for 221 days beyond the period 
provided in the terminated contract with CEL, it had paid USD 10.4 million. In 
addition, it paid USD 3.3 million to CEL as a part of negotiated settlement which 
was not attributable to rentals. 
3.6.4 Comments on reply of ONGC 
(i) The terms of settlement of December 2009 entailed huge additional liabilities and 
responsibilities on ONGC compared to the terms approved by the Board in 
October 2008. Agenda papers for the Board meeting of June 2010 did not 
highlight or seek approval or even ratifi cation of the terms of settlement of 
December 2009 from the Board. The fact remains that the Board was not apprised 
of the implications and details of the terms of settlement reached with the 
approval of CMD in December 2009. The contention that investment in the 
project would have idled for want of settlement agreement needs to viewed in the 
light of the fact that the project was yet (January 2015) to be completed. The 
expenditure incurred by ONGC on the contract with CEL was, thus, irregular as it 
did not have the approval of its Board. 
(ii) As far as the replies to the audit findings on the adverse financial implications of 
the terms of settlement of December 2009 are concerned, the fact remains that 
ONGC had agreed to the same without taking even preliminary precautions as it 
had restricted the joint verifica tion exercise to only the number of packets and 
boxes (only for specified equipment/materials) without inspecting the 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
35 
equipment/materials contained therein. Thus, ONGC had taken the risk of 
additional liability towards quality and usability of equipment/materials without 
due diligence and went beyond the approved terms of settlement of October 2008. 
(iii)  Coming to the additional liability that ONGC had taken upon itself on account of 
accepting the equipment/materials on ‘as is where is’ basis, without ascertaining 
their usability and quality, ONGC had time available from October 2008 to 
December 2009 during which the status of critical equipment/materials could have 
been verified.  As regards the payment of rentals (USD 10.4 million) for tools, 
namely TRT and IWOCs for additional 221 days, the fact remains that CEL had 
not resumed work beyond June 2006 even when repeatedly asked to do so by 
ONGC. Also, the tools had become unusable as these were damaged and lost on 
‘parting of riser’
• (August 2006) due to rough seas when CEL personnel were not 
available for operating the tools. Moreover, rentals for TRT and IWOCS, were not 
payable by ONGC as the same had already been paid to CEL as part of the 
payment for the work done by CEL till termination of the contract. CEL had also 
got the benefit of additional amount of USD 3.3 million which, ONGC had 
admitted, was not on account of rentals. 
Conclusion
By entering into a Settlement Agreement with CEL, without conducting due 
diligence, and whose terms and conditions were not approved by its Board, ONGC 
obtained a reduction of only USD 0.7 million while it ended up paying (i) a 
settlement sum USD 32 million (
`149.37 crore) to CEL for 'out of court' resolution 
of disputes with CEL, besides incurring additional expenditure of USD 66.34 million 
(` 342.34 crore) in deviation of terms approved by the Board in October 2008 for 
such a resolution. The assumption of additional financial liabilities ( ` 342.34 crore) 
was irregular as it did not have the approval of the Board and was not in the 
financial interests of ONGC. In addition, ONGC incurred an avoidable expenditure 
of USD 13.7 million (
` 63.79 crore) on payment of rental for tools which had been 
paid to CEL under the already terminated contract. The project for development of 
the oil and gas fields remained incomplete (January 2015) as against the revised 
target date of April 2010 while projected revenues of 
` 1,500 crore per annum 
remained unrealised. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry (March 2015); their reply was awaited (March 
2015).
3.7 Follow-up IT Audit of implementation of Material Management module in Oil 
and Natural Gas Corporation Limited 
3.7.1 Introduction 
In October 2003, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (Company) implemented 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) package, the SAP-mySAP Financials and Logistics, 
under the project Information Consolidation for Efficiency (ICE) incorporating all ten 
                                                           
• Riser: It is a conduit that provides a temporary extension of a sub-sea well to a surface drilling facility. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
36 
modules1 along with mySAP Oil & Gas Upstream Solutions. ICE went live across the 
organization between October 2003 and January 20052.
The implementation of Material Management (MM) module in the ERP System of the 
Company was reviewed by Audit during 2005-06 and the audit findings were reported in 
Chapter VI of C&AG’s Audit Report No.10 of 2007. Audit had also made a set of 
recommendations based on the audit findings and the Company had assured corrective 
action to address these concerns. 
A follow-up audit of the present status of implementation of MM module of ERP package 
in the Company was taken up to review the action taken by the Company's Management 
on the audit recommendations made in the chapter VI of the Audit Report no. 10 of 2007. 
The implementation of the MM module was reviewed for the period April 2011 to March 
2014.
3.7.2  Audit Methodology and limitations 
The methodology adopted during audit was as below: 
• Discussion with the Company, correspondences and questionnaire issued to the 
management and its feedback. 
• Data extraction using the standard and in-house Reports and analysis thereof using 
MS EXCEL/MS ACCESS. 
The limitations faced by Audit were: 
• Audit Information System (AIS), an auditing tool configured within SAP and 
designed for facilitating business and system audits was not implemented. 
• Access to SAP Query and SAP Data Browser was not available. 
3.7.3 Audit Findings 
The follow up audit findings are discussed in subsequent paragraphs: 
3.7.3.1 Recommendation 1 - Strengthening input controls, validation controls and 
internal control procedures to ensure accurate and timely capture of data 
Analysis during the follow-up audit revealed that data inconsistencies resulting from 
inadequacy of input controls, validation controls, internal control procedures as observed 
in the past audit continued to exist as brought out below:
(a) Purchase Order with wrong valuation type 
Split Valuation Procedure (SVP) was configured in the ERP System for stores and spares 
items where separate weighted average cost was maintained for each ‘material type’ 
                                                           
1Financial (FI), Controlling (CO), Material Ma nagement (MM), Plant Maintenance (PM), Project 
Systems (PS), Investment Management (IM), Asset Manage ment (AM), Treasury (FM), Sales & 
Distribution (SD), Business Information Warehouse (BW). 
2 Initially, SAP version 4.6C was installed on HP UNIX operating system and platforms with Oracle 
database management system to store data in SAP whic h was upgraded to ERP 6.0 in 2009 with Oracle 
10g as data base. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
37 
based on corresponding ‘valuation types’ configured in the System. It was commented in 
para 6.7.1.1 of Chapter VI of Report No.10 of 2007 of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India (C&AG) that the inadequacy of input controls resulted in wrong entries 
of ‘valuation type’ of material in purchase orders (POs), leading to incorrect material 
accounting, lack of data integrity and incorrect MIS. 
The Company had stated (November 2007) that a validation would be put in the System 
to ensure that POs on indigenous vendors do not accept valuation types for imported 
materials and vice versa. 
Analysis in the follow up audit, however, revealed that 47 POs for 371 items valuing 
` 7.45 crore were posted during 2011-14, in which the ‘valuation type’ of material was 
inconsistent with the PO types i.e. the valuation types relevant for imported PO were 
entered in case of indigenous PO and vice versa (
Annexure-III).
The Company replied (March 2015) that the valuation type entered in all the 47 POs was 
correct except in case of one PO; however, while creating these POs, error in entering the 
“document type” led to creation of an indigenous PO instead of an imported PO and vice-
versa.
This implies that validation to ensure that POs on indigenous vendors do not accept 
valuation types for imported materials and vice versa had not been put in place to prevent 
such errors yet, though it had been assured by the Company in November 2007. 
(b) Delivery date in Purchase Order 
The entry of correct scheduled delivery dates for materials in the ERP System as per the 
terms and conditions of relevant PO was vital to monitor the supply of materials against 
requirement, performance of the vendors and the completion of POs. 
It was commented in para 6.7.1.3 of Chapter VI of C&AG’s Audit Report No.10 of 2007 
that no input controls were in place for entering the scheduled delivery date of material in 
the POs and that the scheduled delivery dates were pr ior to the date of the PO in certain 
cases. It was further observed that the date of  actual delivery of the supplies was not 
being captured in the System. 
The Company had stated (November 2007) that the scheduled date of delivery depended 
upon the delivery period quoted by vendor and it was not possible to put any validation in 
the System for that. The actual date of delivery was proposed to be captured through 
manual entry by purchase officers in a report developed for the purpose. 
During follow up audit it was observed that the date of actual delivery of the supplies was 
being captured in the System through an in-house developed programme. However, test 
check
♥  revealed that 48 POs for 159 items had been created with scheduled delivery dates 
prior to the PO dates by a period ranging from 2 to 614 days. Thus, incorrect scheduled 
delivery dates in the POs continue to be entered. It was further observed that POs with 
                                                           
♥  POs released during 2011- 14 with actual delivery of materials incomp lete as of September 2014 and 
February 2015. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
38 
future ‘document dates’ ♣  also existed in the System indicating deficient input 
controls/validation checks (Annexure-IV).
Due to incorrect capturing of the scheduled delivery date, the MIS data on procurement 
and execution of PO could not be correctly generated, liquidated damages continued to be 
worked out manually and the inbuilt reminder feature in the SAP for issuing automatic 
reminders in case of delays in delivery could not be used. 
The Company replied (March 2015) that validation for delivery date could not be 
implemented because in certain situations like Board purchase and urgent procurements 
PO had to be placed for regularization after materials are delivered. The Company also 
stated that liquidated damages are partly subjective in nature and are required to be 
worked out manually based on the PO and the contract conditions. As regards ‘document 
dates', it stated that system modification to default the date of creation of PO as the 
document date to avoid such discrepancies shall be examined. 
Contention of the Company that the anomaly in PO dates was to regularize emergency 
purchases was not acceptable. The analysis of Audit was based on POs in 2011-14 with 
incomplete delivery as of September 2014/February 2015, hence, these could not be cases 
of regularization of materials already received. Further, the requirement in case of 
emergency/regularization cases can be taken care  of as exception while putting in place 
the validation for delivery dates in POs. 
(c) Non clearance of Stock in Transfer 
Stock Transport Orders (STOs) are created for internal transfer of material. A Goods 
Issue document posted by the issuing store was to be complemented by a Goods Receipt 
document by the receiving store to complete the documentation, pending which the 
material transfers remain as ‘stock in transfer’ under inventories.
It was commented in para 6.7.1.5 of Chapter VI of C&AG’s Audit Report No.10 of 2007 
that there were instances of delayed posting and non-posting of Goods Receipt documents 
in respect of internal transfer of goods resulting in accumulation of large balances in 
‘Stock in transfer’ indicating lack of internal controls in ensuring timely capture of all the 
stocks received in the System. It had also been observed that there were cases of stock 
transfers where the items were included as ‘Stock in transfer’ in the System even though 
the transferred materials had already been posted as consumed in financial records. 
The Company had stated (November 2007) that a validation would be put in the System 
to disallow further STOs where material remained in transit for more than two months 
and where the available stock at site was more than two months average consumption. 
The follow up audit indicated that, stock transfers for 68,904 items worth ` 75.77 crore 
were found lying un-cleared (August 2014) for over six months with the period of non-
clearance of stock transfers ranging up to more than ten years ( Annexure-V). Analysis of 
the Goods Issue documents remaining in transit as of August 2014 further revealed that 
                                                           
♣  Document date denotes the date of creation of PO. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
39 
89 cases valuing ` 0.82 crore which were included as ‘Stock in transfer’ in the System, 
had already been posted as consumed in financial records. 
The Company replied (March 2015) that validation was already in place in the system to 
stop further procurement if stock in hand was more than twice of maximum consumption 
during last four years. The stock in hand figure was derived after including stock transfer 
out documents lying un-cleared with the indentors, thereby systematically compelling the 
indentors to clear the stock transfers.  As to the 89 cases pointed out by audit, it was 
stated that 87 of these cases had been settled. 
The reply is not acceptable as the stated validation had not been effective to ensure timely 
clearance of Stock Transfers. Further, th e corrective action had not been taken to check 
instances of material remaining as ‘Stock in Transfer’ even though consumption had been 
posted.
(d) Physical Verification Process 
Physical verification of fixed assets was conducted by stock verification teams, annually 
for ‘A’ and ‘B’ category assets and every third year by rotation for ‘C’ category assets. 
The availability status on verification of each asset was updated in the System and a 
discrepancy report was sent to the indentors to confirm/ reconcile/ locate the discrepant 
assets for updating in the System. The physical verification policy also provides for 
perpetual verification of stores, spares and capital items on stock (CIOS) based upon the 
category of the material whereby the CIOS are verified annually and ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ 
category stores and spares are verified annually, biennially and triennially respectively.
It was commented in para 6.7.5 of Chapter VI of C&AG’s Audit Report No.10 of 2007 
that physical verification of assets, CIOS and stores and spares was not being conducted 
regularly and completely. Further, large number of discrepancies in stock verification of 
assets was outstanding for want of final settlement without any age analysis. 
The Company had stated (January 2009/June 2010) that effort would be made to get the 
inventory verified regularly and age analysis of discrepancies in stock verification would 
be incorporated in the System. 
Analysis in follow-up audit revealed as under: 
(i)   Physical Verification of Assets and Stores and Spares 
Physical verification of assets was not being conducted as per the prescribed frequency. 
Analysis of assets having gross book value over ` One lakh each in February 2015 
revealed that 4,052 assets ( ` 391.62 crore) out of 81564 assets ( ` 99,238.49 crore) had 
been last verified during 1992-2013 (Annexures VI, VII and VIII).  It was further 
observed that last inventory date in respect of 4,918 items ( ` 2,864.14 crore) was not 
available in the System and 3055 assets ( ` 164.08 crore) having gross book value over 
` One lakh each were in deficit. Further, 417 real estate assets viz. land, buildings, 
godowns, warehouses, workshops, helipads, bunk houses, roads, walls, canteens, 
bungalows, drill sites, sheds, garages,  etc. were being shown as in deficit in the System. 
In respect of stores, spares and capital items on stock (CIOS), there were shortfalls 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
40 
ranging from 43 to 86 per cent  in verification at various locations during 2011-14 
(Annexure-IX).
The Company replied (March 2015) that many of these Assets were uploaded in the ICE 
system from the erstwhile legacy data without verification, these are appearing as ‘deficit’ 
and all units are being advised to identify and take action for reconciliation of such items. 
Further, a Real Estate module had been created in ICE to upload Real Estate Assets of the 
Company with supporting documentation duly reconciled with the Asset Master; once the 
exercise of mapping and uploading was completed, it was expected that gaps as had been 
pointed out by Audit will be minimized.  
The reply does not explain why the legacy data uploaded as early as in 2003 could not be 
reconciled even after more than ten years. 
(ii)  Age Analysis of Deficient Assets  
Age analysis of all discrepant assets (on 26 September 2014) revealed that 15,525 items 
(` 221.69 crore) were in deficit for periods ranging up to more than twenty years 
(Annexure-X). It was further observed that whereas the ‘date since when an asset was in 
deficit’ could not be later than its last verification date, in case of 919 assets ( ` 15.24 
crore), the date of deficit was la ter than the last inventory dates in Asset Master by up to 
more than five years ( Annexure-XI). Further, 1,355 items ( ` 14.61 crore) were reported 
to be in deficit since their capitalization date. 
Thus, the System had not been configured with necessary data input controls leading to 
incorrect MIS and non-achievement of the organizational objectives attached with the 
physical verification process. 
The Company stated (March 2015) that data for most of the assets which had been deficit 
for very long periods was migrated to the SAP system from erstwhile legacy data without 
complete verification. It further stated that the program to update the status of Asset 
(deficit/Available/surplus), based on Asset verification, was usually run on or after the 
verification date; this date was captured as the reporting date and there was always a 
possibility that date of deficit reporting was later than last inventory date.
The reply needs to be viewed in the context that the legacy data had been uploaded in the 
System in 2003 and it should have been reconciled by now. Further, though the program 
to update the verification status might be run on after the verification date, but the same 
could not be five years later than the verification date. 
(iii) Reconciliation of discrepant Assets 
A capital indentor was authorized in every section to get the assets issued to the ultimate 
users called custodians of the assets for custody and maintenance of fixed assets. In case 
of separation/retirement/transfer, the indentors must transfer the assets in the name of the 
employee taking over the role in their place before relinquishing charge.
Analysis of the indentor details of 14,502 deficit assets (on 02 September 2014) revealed 
that 984 deficit assets ( ` 11.79 crore) were in the name of 51 indentors who were no 
longer in the service with the Company, 1,669 deficit assets (` 30.21 crore) were with 118 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
41 
indentors who were no longer working at the place of location of assets, having been 
transferred long back with period ranging back up to October 2001, 7,200 deficit assets (`
75.34 crore) were with 365 dummy indentors and 2,165 deficit assets ( ` 40.31 crore) 
were with 126 indentors in respect of whom details of current status of service/ posting 
were not available from the reports generated from Human Resource (HR) master data1.
The Company replied (March 2015) that Asset Custodian Reports in WEBICE (in-house 
portal for employees) and another report (ZHRCAPREPO) in SAP are already available 
to view the assets that are in the custody of the employee. Further, a new functionality in 
the system was under development to transfer/hand over asset to new indentor at the time 
of transfer or separation of the existing indentor. 
The reply was not acceptable as no procedures had been put in place by using the already 
available reports to ensure compliance of business process for handing over of assets. 
(iv) Discrepancies in In-house developed Reports 
In-house reports had been developed by ICE team for generating the MIS data on age 
analysis of discrepant assets
2 as well as category and indentor wise asset verification 
status summary 3. Comparative analysis of the two reports (on 26 September 2014) 
revealed  that the number and gross book value of ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ category of assets in 
deficit in the two reports was not tallying with each other ( Annexure-XII) leading to 
incomplete MIS and erroneous reporting.  
3.7.3.2  Recommendation 2 - Strengthening the role of the MRP controller through the 
system and optimizing system use by fixing minimum, maximum and reorder 
levels 
The SAP had Material Requirements Planning (MRP) feature through which minimum, 
maximum, safety and re-order stock levels for various items of materials can be defined 
to ensure their continued availability when needed as also to ensure that funds are not 
unnecessarily tied up in excess inventory holding. The MRP functionality can be utilized 
to generate a PR for procurement whenever the stock level of material reaches its re-order 
level. 
It was commented in para 6.7.2.1 of Chapter VI of C&AG’s Audit Report No.10 of 2007 
that the stock holding was not in consonance with the actual requirement or consumption. 
Further, cases were observed where capital items were lying unused in stores for long 
periods whereas the same were required to be issued to the users immediately on their 
receipt. 
The Company stated (January 2009/ June 2010) that automatic MRP controller could not 
be made applicable for the Company because of varied requirement of highly technical 
nature which depended upon the work plan. However, the feasibility of fixing various 
levels for items of regular consumption and of general nature was being examined. 
                                                           
1SAP T-Codes - ZHR_EMPHIST and ZHREMP_DETAILS 
2SAP T-Code - ZFIAMDFCT 
3SAP T-Code - ZFIVERIABC 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
42 
It was observed that the maximum, minimum, safety and reorder levels of inventory 
holding had not been fixed and despite implementation of the ERP System, material 
requirement planning was being carried out manually which remained subjective. 
(a) Store Items 
Analysis of inventory holding vis-à-vis consumption of 12956 store items having average 
stock value of ` 732.41 crore spread over 15 drilling plants
♥  during 2011-14 revealed 536 
store items spread over 14 plants with ‘nil’ consumption where the average stock value 
(` 73.32 crore) exceeded ` One lakh each. There was no stock movement in 364 of these 
items of average stock value of ` 42.34 crore and  there were 149 store items spread over 
14 drilling plants where average inventory holding showed overall increase of more than 
ten times over 2011-14 with material valuing ` 16.24 crore having been purchased afresh 
despite ‘nil’ consumption. 
The Company replied (March 2015) that a validation to stop further procurement if stock 
was more than two times/1.6 times of maximum consumption during last four years in 
case of stores/ spares items respectively was already in place. 
The reply was not acceptable as the stated validation was of universal nature and could 
not substitute for MRP control through the optimization of system by fixing itemized 
minimum, maximum and reorder levels, as was illu strated from the fact that in case of 
149 store items the average inventory holding showed overall increase of more than ten 
times with material valuing ` 16.24 crore having been purchased afresh despite ‘nil’ 
consumption. 
(b) Capital Stores 
While capital items are to be issued to the concerned indentor soon after receipt, 1,132 
capital items valuing ` 44.28 crore were lying in stores awaiting issue from a period 
ranging up to more than ten years (Annexure-XIII). 
The Company replied (March 2015) that necessary guidelines on receipt and issue of 
capital items had already been issued in October 1996, nevertheless, instructions are 
being re-iterated to regularize/liquidate CIOS items at the earliest. 
3.7.3.3  Recommendation 3 - Cleaning of migrated master data to rectify the errors that 
had crept into the ERP system and establishing comprehensive procedures for 
periodical review of master data 
While implementing SAP ERP System in 2003, the existing data from the erstwhile 
‘Integrated Materials Management System’ (IMMS) was migrated wherein certain gaps 
relating to incomplete codification details in the material master data migration processes 
run by the organization were observed and commented in para 6.7.4 of Chapter VI of 
C&AG’s Audit Report No.10 of 2007. 
                                                           
♥ Agartala, Ahmedabad, Ankleshwar, Baroda, Cambay, Dehradun, Jodhpur, Jorhat, Karaikal, Kolkata, 
Mehsana, Mumbai, Nazira, Rajahmundry, and Silchar 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
43 
The Company had informed (November 2007) about cleaning of material master data 
whereby materials with duplicate codes without complete details were blocked for further 
procurement leading to correction of material master data.  
During the follow up audit, the errors in the migrated master data pointed out by audit in 
para 6.7.4 of Chapter VI of C&AG’s Audit Report No.10 of 2007 were found rectified. 
3.7.3.4 Recommendation 4 - Organizing regular training programmes to raise the level 
of user awareness and minimize errors of data input and making available 
updated operational documentation to the end users 
Analysis of data and information during the fo llow-up audit revealed that the data 
inconsistencies resulting from lack of user awareness and errors in data input as observed 
in the past audit continued to exist indicating inadequacy of action taken by the Company 
to raise the level of user awareness as brought out below:
(a) Creation of fresh purchase requisition with earlier requisitions pending 
A Purchase Requisition (PR) in the System was the trigger for procurement activity and 
was the primary document created in the procurement process which shows the 
genuineness of requirement and indicates administrative approval/sanction for 
procurement. 
It was commented in para 6.7.1.4 of Chapter VI of C&AG’s Audit Report No.10 of 2007 
that on one hand PRs were pending in the System without either any procurement action 
or closure for long time, on the other hand, fresh PRs for some of those items were also 
created and procurement action taken thereon.  
The Company had informed (November 2007) about creation of a transaction code for 
deletion of unedited PRs and training of MRP controllers for not releasing fresh PRs if a 
requisition for the same material already existed in the System. 
Analysis in follow up audit revealed that 12,774 PRs for 34,279 items with delivery dates 
prior to 31 March 2011 were pending in the System as of September 2014 without any 
procurement action or closure. Further analysis in four Plants
♠  revealed that while on one 
hand 173 such PRs of 2008-11 for 997 items were lying without any action, on the other 
hand 43 fresh PRs for 45 of these items were also created and processed during 2011-14 
(Annexure-XIV).
The Company replied (March 2015) that functionality for deletion of such PRs had 
already been made available and a circular had been issued for advising deletion of such 
PRs where procurement action was not required. 
(b) Delay in recording material consumption 
Consumption booking of materials was an important process in materials management as 
materials issued to users from stores remain part of the inventory till actual use in 
operations. On actual consumption, an entry was required to be made in the System so 
                                                           
♠ Ankleshwar Asset, Ahmedabad Asset, Corporate Services Dehradun and Drilling Services Mumbai 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
44 
that it was removed from inventory and its costing takes place in the accounting/financial 
information.  
It was commented in para 6.7.1.6 of Chapter VI of C&AG’s Audit Report No.10 of 2007 
that the material consumption was not being captured in the System in a timely manner 
leading to mismatch between the actual physical stock available and the inventory figures 
appearing in the System and resulting in accounting of material consumption in the 
incorrect period thereby distorting the accounting/ financial figures.
The Company had stated (November 2007) that a validation would be put in the System 
to ensure timely booking of the consumption. 
Analysis in follow up audit revealed that in 102 exploratory wells completed during 
2012-13, materials valuing ` 143.39 crore were posted as consumed with delays ranging 
up to 690 days after the well completion dates ( Annexure-XV) of which the material 
valuing ` 133.98 crore was of the nature consumed during drilling process ( Annexure-
XVI). Further, material valuing ` 18.26 crore consumed prior to 31 March 2013 was 
booked to consumption during 2013-14. 
The Company replied (March 2015) that instructions are issued for booking consumption 
in time and close the pending STOs. Further, all work centers are informed of their 
material at site and material in transit on a regular basis for its liquidation through 
booking of consumption. 
(c) Open Purchase Orders with balance quantities 
When the delivered quantity of the material was marginally less than the ordered quantity 
and the balance quantity was not expected, the PO needs to be closed as completed in the 
System to free the funds attached with balance quantity for utilization elsewhere. 
It was commented in para 6.7.2.3 of Chapter VI of C&AG’s Audit Report No.10 of 2007 
that the System had neither been configured to close or trigger closing of such POs nor 
were such POs being reviewed periodically for closure. 
The Company had stated (November 2007) that instructions had been issued to Purchase 
Officers to regularly review such POs. 
However, analysis of open POs with delivery date prior to 31 March 2014 and residual 
quantity of less than 10 per cent of the ordered quantity as in August 2014 revealed that 
557 POs of this nature involving funds of ` 12.87 crore attached with the residual 
quantities were yet to be closed (Annexure-XVII). 
The Company replied (March 2015) that though the System was configured to close such 
POs automatically but the tolerance limit had been set at zero per cent because it was felt 
that closure of such POs should be deliberate and not automatic. 
The reply of the Company was not acceptable as appropriate procedures to ensure timely 
manual closing of such POs should have been put in place as continuation of such open 
POs resulted in blockade of funds on residual quantity.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
45 
Conclusion
The follow up audit indicates that despite the passage of significant time (over eight 
years) since the earlier audit, input controls, validation checks, compensating 
internal control procedures and user awareness deficits pointed out in the last audit 
had not been adequately addressed to ensure accurate and timely capture of data. 
Of the four recommendations made in the last audit report, action had been taken 
on only one, despite assurances of the Company for appropriate action as early as 
2007-08.
The matter was reported to the Ministry in March 2015; their reply was awaited (March 
2015).
3.8 Under-utilization of Water Injection Platform despite revamping
Water Injection platform (WIN) commissioned in 1984 is the main water injection 
hub in Mumbai High North field of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited 
(Company). Non-synchronization of WIN revamping project with repair/ 
replacement of its associated pipelines and delay in overhauling of Main Injection 
Pumps led to non-achievement of the designed water injection capacity even after 
incurring an expenditure of ` 726.50 crore. 
Water injection is the methodology used for better reservoir management to sustain 
production from a matured field. WIN Platform of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation 
Limited (Company) was commissioned in 1984 and is the main water injection hub in its 
Mumbai High North (MHN) field with water injection capacity of 340000 barrels water 
per day (BWPD). Due to ageing, harsh saline environment, the condition of several 
systems and main equipment of this major complex deteriorated and leakages developed 
in pipelines (WIN-WI3, NR-N7 and N8-NQO). Resultantly, the operational capacity of 
WIN Platform got reduced to 2,90,000 BWPD by March 2008 and the Platform was not 
able to meet the increasing demand of water injection for reservoirs of MHN field. 
Hence, the Company felt (March 2008) the need of revamping of water injection facilities 
on WIN Platform, repair of the pipelines and repair/ replacement for better reservoir 
management and also to increase the recovery factor from the ageing fields.  
In May 2008, the Company approved revamping of WIN platform envisaging average 
peak water injection at 3,12,720 BWPD. Revamping job broadly included revamping of 
motors of Main Injection Pumps (MIPs) and other associated equipment/components, 
control system etc. The revamping project was awarded (February 2011) to a consortium 
of M/s Leighton Contractors (India) Private Limited, Mumbai and M/s. Das Offshore 
Engineering Private Limited, Navi Mumbai at a cost of US$ 141.24 million ( ` 726.50 
crore).  The project for revamping of WIN platform was completed in July 2012.   
Audit observed that: 
• Output from WIN platform declined after revamp instead of targeted 
improvement. The pre-project operating rate of WIN platform (March 2008) was 
2,90,000 BWPD while the post project operating rate (August 2012) was only 
2,38,767 BWPD. The performance, however, slightly improved to 2,52,407 
BWPD by November 2014. The envisaged improvement in performance 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
46 
(3,12,720 BWPD) had not been achieved so far (January 2015). In fact, an 
analysis of the month-wise information from August 2012 to November 2014 
revealed that the facility had never reached even the pre-project performance of 
2,90,000 BWPD. 
• At the time of approval of the project (May 2008), the Company was aware that 
three pipelines connecting WIN and WI3 platforms (WIN-WI3 pipeline), NR and 
NR-7 platforms (NR-N7 pipeline) and N8 and NQO platforms (N8-NOQ pipeline) 
associated with WIN platform for water injection were leaking. However, the 
Company carried out replacement of WIN-WI3 pipeline in February 2011, and a 
partial replacement of damaged section of NR-N7 in April 2014. The third 
pipeline (N8-NQO) had not been repaired/replaced as yet (January 2015).
Thus, non-synchronization of revamping of WIN project with the requisite repair/ 
replacement of its associated pipelines, shortage of water injectors (WIs) and delay in 
overhauling of MIPs without planning the remedial action in a holistic manner led to non-
achievement of the designed water injection capacity of the platform even after incurring 
an expenditure of ` 726.50 crore.
The Company replied (January 2013) that in WIN Project, the shortfall was on account of 
leakages in water injection lines viz. WI3-WI2, NR-N7 and WIN-NQO. As a result, 
fourth MIP with a capacity of 90,330 BWPD was not available for water injection. The 
Management also attributed the issue to shortfall of WIs and stated that overhauling of the 
fourth MIP would increase the water injection capacity of WIN platform. 
Reply of the Company needs to be considered in the light of the tardy and inefficient 
action as stated below: 
• Problems had been experienced in the water injection lines of the WIN platform 
as early as 2008. Though repairs of the pipelines had been envisaged at the time of 
seeking approval for revamping of WIN platform (May 2008), and the pipelines 
had outlived their lives, completion and synchronisation of this activity was not 
ensured with the completion of revamping of WIN platform.  Leakages in the 
pipelines were being repaired as and when detected.
• Along with the envisaged revamp of the WIN platform, proper functioning of the 
water injection pipelines was essential for attaining its targeted capacity. As per 
pipeline replacement policy of the Company, the life of water injection pipeline is 
15 years from the date of commissioning. Water injection pipelines associated 
with WIN platform were also commissioned with the commissioning of the 
platform in 1984 and, hence, ought to have been replaced after 15 years as per the 
pipeline replacement criteria decided in October 2003. 
• Though the Company had included replacement of pipeline connecting NR and 
N7 platform in the Pipeline Replacement Project (PRP) (2008-11), NR-N7 had not 
been taken up for full replacement as yet (January 2015). This also resulted in 
non-achievement of the water injection targets. Pipeline for WIN-NQO was 
neither repaired nor included in PRP project though there was continuous leakage 
from the pipeline. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
47 
• The MIPs were as old as the WIN platform. Overhauling of two MIPs was 
completed during December 2012 to January 2013 and that of the remaining two 
was pending till January 2015. This also impacted the water injection and non-
achievement of the designed capacity. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in February 2014; their reply was awaited (March 
2015).
3.9 Avoidable expenditure due to change in scope of work after the award of 
contract and interface problems among the constituent projects 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (Company) altered the scope of 
reconstruction/revamping of an oil complex ( viz. SHPC) subsequent to its award to 
the Contractor which led to delay in completion of the project and avoidable 
expenditure of ` 32.29 crore. Also, interface issues not visualized by the Company 
for execution of reconstruction/modification of another oil complex ( viz. NQPC) led 
to delays and avoidable expenditure of ` 55.30 crore.
Among others, South Heera Process Complex (SHP Complex) and NQ Process Complex 
(NQP Complex) of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (Company) are two of the 
oldest oil complexes located in Mumbai High field off the west coast of India. SHP 
Complex comprised five platforms viz. SHQ, SHP and SHD commissioned in 1984, and 
SHG, SHW commissioned in 1994. Similarly, NQP Complex comprised four platforms 
viz. NQO and NQD commissioned in 1985, NQG in 1986 and NQP in 1994. 
Due to aging and saline environment, condition of some of the systems and equipment 
installed at these Complexes/platforms deteri orated resulting in increase in maintenance 
related problems.  Accordingly, the Company decided for a major revamp/reconstruction 
of these Complexes/platforms and associated facilities. As these oil complexes were 
brown-fields, their revamping required shutdown of the live platforms. A thorough study 
and planning prior to award of work was needed so as to avoid delay and extra cost in 
execution of work. Examination in audit revealed the following: 
A. Revamp of SHP Complex
The Company awarded (March 2005) the work (SHRC project) of revamping of SHP 
Complex to M/s Larson and Toubro (Contractor) for ` 185.37 crore for completion by 30 
April 2006. The scope of work included revamping of fire and gas system, replacement of 
main oil line pumps, raising level of helideck on one of the platforms (SHQ), installation 
of Walkway Bridge and installation/commissioning of distributed control system.  
Audit observed that the Company had awarded the project on the basis of a design and 
drawings prepared on the basis of 25 years old documents/drawings available with it and, 
thus, in the absence of drawings updated with reference to modifications carried out in the 
intervening period, the drawings handed over to the Contractor had to be changed during 
execution of the project. The project was finally completed on 29 May 2008 with a delay 
of 2 years.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
48 
The Company attributed the delay to the Contractor on account of repetitive surveys, 
incomplete drawing, delay in procurement of equipment and mobilisation of marine 
spread. The Contractor, however, refuted the Company's arguments and claimed that the 
delay was due to (a) modification in scope of work after award of the contract; (b) delay 
in approval of engineering drawings, (c) shut down of SHP complex not allowed as per 
schedule; (d) delays and denial in issuing and adapting to the mode of working of the 
other permits; (e) denial of access to worksite and (f) consequent standby/idling of barge. 
The Contractor claimed ` 85.48 crore on these counts.
The Contractor referred the claim to an Outside Expert Committee ♣  (OEC) on 18 
September 2009. Based on recommendation (11 November 2010) of OEC, the Company 
paid (17 October 2011) an additional amount of ` 28.31 crore to the Contractor.
As the platform was not shut down and not made available to the Contractor for 14 days 
in season 2005-06, the Contractor had to deploy its barge for additional days and incurred 
additional expenditure. Claim ( ` 23.62 crore) of the Contractor on this account was paid 
(October 2011) by the Company to the extent of ` 3.98 crore on the recommendation 
OEC.  
Audit observed that scope of the work was not determined clearly by the Company before 
award of the project to the Contractor and, inter alia, it proposed alterations subsequent to 
award of the project which led to delays and avoidable expenditure of              ` 32.29
crore during execution of the project.
B. Revamp of NQP Complex  
The work of reconstruction of NQP Complex was awarded to the same Contractor as in 
'A' above for US$ 76.79 million + ` 561.71 crore in June 2007 to be completed by 08 
May 2009. 
During execution of the project, three constituent projects ( viz. NQ-RC, NQD-Revamp 
and PRP-II) of revamping were being concurrently executed at NQP Complex by 
different contractors which necessitated multiple barge deployment. Progress of work on 
all the three projects encountered interface issues which were not anticipated by the 
Company before award of all the three projects simultaneously. As a result, the Company 
could provide only intermittent access to the barges which hindered the timely completion 
of the project. The interface problems among the constituent projects led to extension in 
barge deployment upto 150.6 barge days by the Contractor. The Contractor claimed US$ 
18.825 million ( ` 84.71 crore)
♦  for the additional days. Claim of the contractor on this 
account was referred (11 March 2010) to an Outside Expert Committee (OEC). OEC 
found the Company responsible for the delay of 90.4 barge days. Accordingly, the 
Company admitted the claim of the Contractor for US$ 11.3 million ( `50.85 crore). 
Further, OEC also observed (27 April 2011) that deployment of cargo barge for another 
30.9 barge days was also attributable to the Company. This led to an additional 
                                                           
♣ OEC- A mechanism ad opted by the Company to resolve disputes between the contractor and the 
Company.
♦  For 150.6 barge days @ US$ 125,000 per barge day. 1USD = INR 45. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
49 
expenditure of US$ 0.99 million ( ` 4.45 crore). Thus, on the recommendation of OEC, 
the Company accepted the contractor's claim of ` 55.30 crore.
Thus, interface problem not visualized by the Company before award of project led to 
delays and avoidable expenditure of ` 55.30 crore.
The Management stated (January 2013) that OEC had taken a broad overall view and 
recommended the claim. OEC's recommendations were accepted by the Company with a 
view to settle disputes amicably in a time bound manner.   
Reply is not convincing. OEC had not admitted the claims of the Contractor in totality 
and as per its judgement awarded the claim in favour of the Contractor to the extent the 
additional cost was attributable to the Company.  Audit has considered only such parts of 
the claims as were recommended by OEM and were accepted by the Company.  
The matter was reported to the Ministry in February 2014; their reply was awaited (March 
2015).
3.10  Extra expenditure due to retendering at the instance of a technically 
disqualified bidder 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited awarded a tender for two projects –  
(i) Redevelopment of Heera and South Heera Phase II and (ii) Advancement of 
development of phase III of C-series cluster to the lowest bidder viz. 'A'. On 
representation by a technically disqualified bidder viz. 'B', negotiations were 
held with party 'A'. On refusal by 'A' to agree to the terms of negotiation, the 
work was re-tendered resulting in additional expenditure of ` 19.45 crore.
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (the Company) approved (March 2012) 
‘Heera Redevelopment Phase II pipeline project'. In the same meeting, the Company 
also approved ‘Advancement of development of Phase III of C-series cluster’. A 
common tender for procurement of pipelines for both the projects was floated in 
May 2012 with the scheduled placement of Notification of Award (NOA) by 29 
October 2012 and scheduled completion of the project by 30 April 2014. Six bidders 
submitted (September 2012) their bids of which five were found (December 2012) 
technically acceptable. The bid of a party 'B' was technically not accepted as the 
party did not fulfill the requisite experience criteria. Party 'B' represented (December 
2012) against this decision to ONGC which was turned down. 
The Company opened the price bids of five technically qualified bidders on 1 
January 2013 and found the bid of party 'A' for USD 190.24 million
1 to be the 
lowest. Party 'B' again represented (December 2012) to Independent External 
Monitors (IEM) 2 stating that it had been subjected to discriminatory and 
unreasonable treatment by the Company. IEM concluded that the Party 'B'’s reply to 
                                                           
1  The quoted price for the portion of Heera Redevelopment Pipeline Project was USD 98.67 million. 
2 This is an internal arrangement devised by the Company consisting of 1 to 3 members from a panel of 
senior government officials to resol ve disputes relating to bid evaluatio n, awarding of contract etc.  
Observations of IEM are recommendatory in nature. (Source: ONGC's presentation in 'Business 
Partners’ Meet held on 20 and 21 July 2013.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
50 
the Company’s request for clarification was factually incorrect and that the party had 
claimed experience for installation of pipeline works without possessing it. Party 'B' 
again addressed (January 2013) a letter to the Company stating that its bid was 
lower by USD 21 million than the lowest offer received in the price bids. IEM 
decided (January 2013) that as they had concluded the proceedings on the 
representation of Party 'B' and the bid of Party 'B' was rejected on technical grounds, 
the price bid remained un-opened by the Company and, therefore, it could not take 
any view on an un-opened bid. 
Tender Committee (TC) decided (January 2013) that as the price bids of only 
techno-commercially acceptable tenders were opened and considered for further 
evaluation, the disclosure of prices by a bidder whose offer was technically rejected 
could not be given any cognizance. It recommended the award of the work to Party 
'A' at the quoted lump sum price of USD 190.24 million
•. The Executive Purchase 
Committee (EPC) while reviewing the recommendation of TC, noted (February 
2013) that as the revealed price of Party 'B' was substantially lower than the prices 
quoted by Party 'A', negotiations should be held with Party 'A' to match its price to 
the revealed price of Party 'B'. Party 'A' refused (February 2013) to match its price 
with the revealed price of Party 'B' and requested for placement of order without any 
further delay. 
Subsequently in February 2013, TC, which had earlier opined that the price quoted 
by a technically disqualified bidder ought not to be recognized, recommended 
rejection of the bid of Party 'A', closure of the tender and re-tendering. EPC 
accepted (March 2013) the recommendations of TC. As the pipeline work of Heera 
Re-development Phase II Project had to be finalized on fast track basis, EPC also 
suggested that it be tendered separately.  
Tenders for Heera Re-development Phase II Pipeline Project were floated in March 
2013 and the work was awarded (April 2013) to a Mumbai based Party 'C', being the 
lowest bidder on evaluation of bids in the tendering process, at USD 102.22 million 
as against quote of USD 98.67 million (as worked out by the Company on like to 
like basis) of Party 'A' in the last tender. The scheduled date of completion was 15 
May 2014.
Audit observed the following:
• The work has been delayed and the contract has already been extended up to 
15 May 2015 due to non-availability of free issue material to be supplied by 
the Company to the contractor. 
• The bid of Party 'B' being technically un-acceptable, its price bid had not 
been opened as per the two bid bidding process mandated in Material 
Management Manual of the Company. The revealed price of Party 'B' should, 
therefore, not have been considered. Despite this, the Company asked Party 
'A' to match its bid to the revealed price of Party 'B'. Since Party 'A' refused 
                                                           
• Including USD 98.67 million for Heera project as worked out by the Company. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
51 
to oblige, the tender was cancelled. Re-tendering led to a higher price than 
the price achieved in the earlier tender.  
• Notification of Award (NOA) scheduled to be placed in October 2012 was 
extended to November 2012 and then to January 2013 and finally planned in 
March 2013. This significantly reduced the project completion time from 18 
months as originally envisaged to 14 months. Party 'A' did not 
unconditionally accept the extension of NOA beyond 21 February 2013. The 
tender was closed and the work was re-tendered citing imperative of 
completing the project before 30 May 2014. The project, however, has been 
delayed with completion date extended by a year to 15 May 2015. 
Thus, by giving credence to the unopened price bid of a technically disqualified 
bidder and delaying the acceptance of a technically acceptable offer, the Company 
incurred extra expenditure of ` 19.45 crore
♥  towards Heera Re-development Phase 
II Pipeline Project with a delay of one year. The Company, thus, failed to achieve 
both the objectives of cancelling the tender and re-tendering, namely lower price and 
completion by 30 May 2014. 
The Company in reply stated (October 2014) that though Party 'B' had not indicated 
their sub-contractors for pipe line installation works, its subsidiary had executed 
similar projects of the Company in the  past with the help of another competent sub-
contractor and, hence, it was decided that the price revealed by Party 'B' could not 
be totally ignored. The Company also stated that as Party 'A' had not confirmed 
unconditional acceptance of project completion date, its bid was found liable for 
rejection.  Further, the Company stated that in lump sum turnkey (LSTK) tenders, 
bidders quote for entire work and their bid is evaluated based on lump sum price quoted 
by them with no component-wise comparison as work is to be awarded on LSTK basis.
The reply is not acceptable as the Company, after considering the technical bids and 
clarifications received by it from the bidders, had decided that Party 'B' was 
technically disqualified. IEM had also endorsed the same. Hence, giving 
consideration to the price revealed by Party 'B' was not correct. The fact that the 
contractor had not confirmed unconditional acceptance of project completion date 
has to be viewed in the context of compression of project implementation period by 
four months and the fact that the project completion date had to be extended by a 
year following re-tendering owing to non-supply of materials by the Company to the 
contractor. Had the Company awarded the work to Party 'A' in January 2013 as 
recommended by TC, the question of Party 'A' not confirming unconditional 
acceptance of project completion date would not have arisen. The Company had 
arrived at the price of Party 'A' (the previous lowest tender) at USD 98.67 million by 
component-wise comparison of the work 'on like to like' basis with the awarded 
price of USD 102.37 million of the current tender. The extra expenditure as worked 
out by the Company has been brought out in Audit and, hence, the contention that 
component wise comparison is invalid in a LSTK contract is not acceptable. 
                                                           
♥  (USD 102.22 million – USD 98.67 million)*10,00,000*54.79. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
52 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in November 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 
3.11 Extra expenditure due to non-availing of concessional customs duty 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited, though eligible, failed to include a clause 
in the tender for procurement of capital goods in September 2004, for availing 
concessional customs duty under EPCG Scheme which resulted in extra expenditure 
of ` 7.41 crore. 
Export Promotion Capital Goods (EPCG) Scheme was available since August 2004 for 
import of capital goods. As per para 5.2 of this scheme, import of capital goods for pre-
production, production and post-production was allowed at three per cent concessional
customs duty subject to an export obligation equivalent to eight times of duty saved on 
capital goods imported under the scheme to be fulfilled in eight years reckoned from 
authorisation issue date.
To avail of the EPCG benefits under the scheme, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation 
Limited (the Company) issued (September 2004) an office order deciding the functional 
responsibilities. The office order included, inter alia,  the system of identifying eligible 
supply orders, preparation of application and obtaining EPCG licences in line with the 
provisions of the scheme.  In July 2008, the Company created a separate EPCG cell at 
Mumbai for availing EPCG benefits and prescribed the role and responsibility of the cell.
The Company invited (June 2009) tenders through open International Competitive 
Bidding under two bid system for New Propane Gas Compressor project at LPG-I plant at 
Uran. The scope included design, procurement, installation of new propane gas 
compressor (motor driven) and hooking it up with the existing facilities.
The Company awarded the contract to M/s Savair Energy Limited (SEL), Navi Mumbai 
on 31 March 2010 and entered into a contract with SEL on 29 April 2010. The project, 
scheduled to be completed within 22 months i.e. by 30 January 2012, was finally 
completed on 17 July 2012. 
Audit observed as under: 
General Conditions of Contract (GCC) for the bidders  published at the time of inviting 
tenders by the Company indicated that the bidders were not eligible for any concessional 
customs duty and, hence, advised them to quote their prices by considering normal 
customs duty as applicable for imported materials.
In spite of deciding (September 2004) the functional responsibilities of its executives for 
obtaining licences to avail of concessional customs duty on eligible goods under EPCG 
scheme and constituting (July 2008) a dedicated EPCG cell to identify the Purchase 
Orders/Contracts for the purpose, the Company failed to incorporate suitable provisions 
for availing of the benefit in the tender and contract for procurement of new propane gas 
compressor for LPG-I plant, Uran. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
53 
After one year of signing the contract with SEL, the Company realised the necessity of 
availing of the concessional customs duty at the rate of 3.09 per cent instead of normal 
rate of 23.75 per cent1 and invited SEL (29 April 2011) to discuss on the modalities for 
availing of the benefit. The Company held (May 2011) discussions with SEL on the 
matter. However, SEL stated (October 2011) that since (i) EPCG clause was not specified 
at the time of tendering and was not a part of the contract and (b) the procedure involved 
in seeking approvals was enormous and the same might not be possible to complete in 
such a short time and the machine was ready for despatch from the vendor and, hence, 
requested not to consider the EPCG option at that juncture. The Company again held 
(November 2011) discussions with SEL on the matter. SEL stated that as the clause was 
not included in the tender, it had not factored this aspect while quoting for the turnkey 
contract. Finally, the Company conceded (November 2011) that further action to obtain 
EPCG benefit was not possible. 
Hence, by not including the clause regarding EPCG in the tender conditions, the 
Company lost the opportunity of obtaining concessional customs duty resulting in extra 
expenditure of `7.41 crore.
2
The Company stated (September 2014) that availability of EPCG benefit was not 
specifically informed to bidder during pre-bid/tender processing but sincere efforts were 
made by it to avail of EPCG benefit. It also stated that ` 7.41 crore was deposited as 
custom duty with the Government of India and no financial benefit had passed on to any 
private party. 
Reply is not acceptable as financial propriety demands that any expenditure should not be 
more than what the occasion warrants. In the instant procurement, the Company incurred 
a higher expenditure than warranted. Further, though the amount of ` 7.41 crore was 
deposited as custom duty with the Government of India, the Company could have saved 
this expenditure by properly safeguarding its commercial interests while engaging in 
business.
The Ministry forwarded (12 January 2015) the reply of the Company which stated that 
this case was one of the first cases handled by Offshore Technology and Projects (OTP) 
department of the Company and that non-inclusion of EPCG clause in GCC of the tender 
was an unintended omission.  
Reply of the Company forwarded by the Ministry needs to be viewed against the fact that 
the tender for present case was issued in 2009 whereas the Company had availed of the 
concessional customs duty in EPCG cases on the orders placed even in 2008. Further, the 
Ministry/Company in its reply (January 2015) has accepted the omission of non-inclusion 
of EPCG clause in the GCC of the tender.
                                                           
1 Based on Bill of Entry and customs duty paid by the Company. 
2Actual customs duty paid by the contractor ` 8.52 crore minus concessional customs duty payable of 
` 1.11 crore at 3.09 per cent under EPCG. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
54 
3.12 Avoidable payment of rental due to abnormal delay in restoration and surrender 
of abandoned drill sites and approach roads 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited delayed restoration and surrender of land 
to land owners on time in respect of 125 drill sites/approach roads that had been 
abandoned between February 2008 and December 2013 which resulted in avoidable 
payment of ` 6 crore towards rental to the land owners.  
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (Company) acquires land for drill sites to drill 
wells for production of oil and gas and also land for temporary approach roads therefor 
either through the land acquisition authorities or a direct agreement with the land owners. 
Land is acquired initially on temporary basis and entails payment of annual rent to land 
owners. Subsequently, depending upon the result of the drilling, land is either acquired 
permanently by the Company or handed over to land owners after restoration. In terms of 
specific conditions of Environment Impact Assessment Notification of 2006 issued by the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests (MOEF), the Company is required to take measures 
to restore the drill site to the original condition after completion of drilling process.   
During February 2008 to December 2013, 125 drill sites/approach roads for which land 
was acquired by three Assets
1 of the Company located in Western Region through a direct 
arrangement with land owners, were abandoned 2 after declaring the wells dry. The 
Company decided to surrender land related to such abandoned sites/approach roads to 
land owners. However, the Company had actually surrendered 3 land relating to only 45 
such drill sites/approach roads till October 2014. Land relating to remaining 80 
abandoned drill sites/approach roads was yet (October 2014) to be restored and returned 
to land owners.
Paragraph 10 of the Land Acquisition Manual, 2009 (LAQ Manual) of the Company  
stipulates that, if a well was found to be devoid of hydrocarbons and declared dry by 
Drilling Services/Sub-Surface Team (SST), the land acquired on temporary basis under a 
direct arrangement with the land owners should be handed over by the Company to land 
owners, after obtaining their consent/option, whether they would like to get the land 
restored  through a contractor engaged by the Company or would restore the same 
themselves against receipt of restoration charges from the Company. Rentals for a period 
upto three months were payable to land owners beyond the date of payment of restoration 
charges.  
Audit observed that in respect of land surrendered relating to 45 sites, there was delay 
ranging between 496 and 2,240 days in restoration and surrender of land to the land 
owners against the permissible time limit of three months for which rentals were payable 
as per LAQ Manual of the Company. In respect of land relating to 80 abandoned sites and 
yet (October 2014) to be surrendered, the delay ranged between 311 and 2,397 days 
which would continue till actual surrender of these locations. The delay had resulted in 
avoidable payment of rent of ` 6 crore from the date of abandonment even after allowing 
                                                           
1 Asset is a unit of the Company having functions relating to, inter-alia, Development and Production. 
2 AnkleshwarAsset-51, MehsanaAsset-53 and AhmedabadAsset-21. 
3 Ankleshwar Asset-16, Mehsana Asset-23 and AhmedabadAsset-6. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
55 
three months' time for restoration of the sites, till surrender in the ca se of sites actually 
surrendered and till October 2014 in respect of sites yet to be surrendered.
The Company in its reply (October 2014) stated that:
• In respect of Ankleshwar Asset, restoration of land was initially taken up by it as 
farmers did not insist on undertaking restoration of site themselves. However 
subsequently, on farmers’ request, the Asset agreed to pay restoration charges to 
the farmers. It was decided to pay the restoration charges in 2 tranches i.e. 90 per 
cent of the amount to be paid initially and balance 10 per cent on completion of 
restoration.  This change in decision delayed the restoration work by over 2-3 
years and consequential payment of rentals to farmers. The number of abandoned 
wells increased as the ongoing restoration cases could not be considered to be 
complete till necessary certification as per Gujarat Pollution Control Board 
(GPCB) and MOEF's guidelines was ensured. The Asset again decided (May/June 
2014) that all such drill sites would be restored by the Company and restoration 
costs would no longer be paid to the farmers. The same practice was followed in 
respect of Ahmedabad and Mehsana Assets.  
• Action had been taken to complete the restoration process on top priority in all the 
three Assets as a result of  which the process had been regularized. In those 
instances where land restoration was going on, every effort was being made to 
complete the same after following laid down process as per LAQ Manual and in 
compliance of MOEF/GPCB guidelines. Meanwhile, in those cases where rental 
payments were being made as compensation to owners till completion of 
restoration, the same was considered unavoidable business expenditure. 
The reply is not convincing in view of the following: 
• Ankleshwar Asset made payment of restoration charges to land owners till March 
2009. In March 2009, the Asset decided to carry out the restoration work itself. 
The land owners did not accept this arrangement and in July 2011 the practice of 
payment of restoration charges to the land owners was restored. From May/June 
2014, the Asset had switched back to its policy of carrying out the restoration 
work itself. Frequent changes in the policy of restoration of the land had 
contributed to the delay. 
• That delay in restoration work had resulted in payment of restoration charges in 2 
tranches, is not acceptable as the delay was due to failure in carrying out the 
restoration work by the land owners/Asset in a time frame as laid down in the 
LAQ Manual of the Company. 
• Land for only 6 sites had been surrendered and 15 sites remained to be 
surrendered in Ahmedabad Asset while in respect of Mehsana Asset, land for 23 
sites had been surrendered and for 30 sites remained to be surrendered. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
56 
ONGC Petro additions Limited 
3.13 Defective contracts providing interest free advances to contractors and linking 
their recovery to progress of work in violation of CVC guidelines leading to loss 
of interest
ONGC Petro additions Limited (Company) entered into defective contracts with 
three contractors and extended interest free advances during March 2009 to 
November 2011 and linked the recovery of these advances to the progress of the 
related project in violation of CVC guidelines instead of effecting the recovery in a 
time-based manner and, thus, lost interest of ` 49.63 crore from February 2012 to 
October 2014. Besides this, the Company was yet to recover such advances of 
` 144.20 crore from the contractors as on October 2014 sustaining further loss of 
interest.  
ONGC Petro additions Limited (Company) is a Joint Venture (JV) of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited (ONGC), GAIL (India) Limited (GAIL) and Gujarat State 
Petroleum Corporation Limited (GSPC). The Company is engaged in setting up a grass 
root mega Petrochemical Complex at Dahej, Gujarat. For establishing the complex, the 
Company awarded (December 2008 to June 2011) three high value contracts which had a 
provision of extending interest free advance to the contractors: 
Sl.
No. 
Contract Awarded to Contract 
value 
(` in crore) 
Date of 
award 
Scheduled 
completion 
1. Duel Feed Cracker 
Unit and 
Associated units 
(DFCU and AU) 
Consortium of M/s 
Linde AG, Germany 
and M/s Samsung 
Engineering Company 
Limited, Korea. 
6,835.20 23 December 
2008 
22 August 
2012 
2. Linear Low 
Density 
Polyethylene/ 
High Density 
Polyethylene 
(LLDPE/HDPE) 
swing unit and 
Polypropylene 
(PP) units  
Consortium of M/s 
TecnimontSpA, Italy 
and Tecnimont ICB 
Private Limited 
2,075.80 03 June  
2011 
02 October 
2013 
3. Phase I and II of 
Captive Power 
Plant (CPP) 
M/s Bharat Heavy 
Electricals Limited, 
(BHEL), India. 
1,840.00 23 September 
2010 
15 April 2011 
15 October 
2013 
As per the terms of these three contracts, the Company, on the request of the contractors, 
shall make an interest free advance payment of 10 per cent of the contract price within 30 
days after signing of the contract against unconditional, irrevocable and unqualified Bank 
Guarantees (BG). The said advances shall be recovered at 10 per cent of gross value of 
each invoice (submitted by the contractor as a running bill) towards principal. Any 
balance amount of principal due on or after completion of respective project shall be 
recovered by the Company from the final invoice and/or by invoking the BG, at the 
Company’s sole and absolute discretion. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
57 
Accordingly, the Company paid (March 2009 to November 2011) interest free advances 
of ` 1075.10 crore to the contractors of these three projects. All the three projects were 
delayed and were yet (October 2014) to be completed. However, as the recovery of the 
advances was contractually linked to progress of work, advances of `144.20 crore were 
still outstanding against the contractors as on 31 October 2014. 
Audit observed that: 
• The guidelines issued (April 2007) by the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) 
stipulated that though grant of interest free mobilisation advances is not 
encouraged, the recovery of such advances, if extended to the contractor, should 
be time-based and not linked with the progress of work to ensure that even if the 
contractor was not executing the work or executing it at a slow pace, the recovery 
of advance could commence and scope for misuse of such advance could be 
reduced. However, in respect of the above three contracts, the Company entered 
into defective contracts allowing interest free advances by linking their recovery 
to progress of work which was in violation of the CVC guidelines. This resulted in 
loss of interest of ` 49.63 crore
♠  to the Company on the amount of advances 
blocked with the contractors beyond the scheduled date of completion of the 
respective project till October, 2014. 
• Linking the recovery to progress of work led to making the interest free advances 
available to the contractors for a prolonged period and would be an incentive to 
the contractors for delay in the completion of the projects, which was specifically 
prohibited by CVC.
• As against the completion dates of the project (August 2012: one project, and 
October 2013: two projects), none of the projects had been completed by October 
2014.  As on that date, advances of ` 144.20 crore were outstanding against the 
contractors, leading to further loss of interest to the Company.  
The Company in reply (October 2014) stated that: 
a)  The Company was promoted with the intent to establish a non - Public Sector JV.  
About 58 per cent equity of the Company was to be firmed up, of which at least 
50 per cent equity was to be tied up via strategic equity and Initial Public Offer 
(IPO). Since the Company is a non-government company, CVC guidelines were 
not mandatorily applicable to it.  
b)  In all the three cases, the bidders requested for such advances. In case of tender 
for DFCU and AU contract (Sl. No.1 of the table), the second Pre Bid Conference 
(PBC) was held on 10 December 2007 in which bidders submitted their request 
for providing interest free advances. In respect of the limited tender floated for 
LLDPE/HDPE and PP contract (Sl.No.2 of the table), most of the bidders asked 
for advance in PBC. Considering the criticality of the project, CPP package (Sl. 
No. 3 of the table) was awarded on nomination basis to BHEL who also requested 
for advance. Based on the request from the contractors, the Company agreed for 
advance payment. 
                                                           
♠  Calculated at the rate of 10.5 per cent per annum, being the rate at which the Company had  borrowed 
the funds for the project. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
58 
The reply is not acceptable in view of the following: 
• Initially, the Company was floated (November 2006) as a Special Purpose Vehicle 
(SPV) by ONGC, GSPC and Financial Institutions (FIs)/Strategic Partners for 
implementation of Petrochemical Complex project at Dahej. The Petrochemical 
Complex involved an estimated outlay of `13,540 crore envisaging debt equity 
ratio of 2.55:1. The equity into the SPV was to be contributed by  
(a) ONGC: ` 992 crore (26 per cent ), (b) GSPC: ` 190 crore (5 per cent ) and  
(c) FIs and strategic partners ( ` 2,632 crore, 69 per cent).  GAIL was inducted in 
March 2009 with 19 per cent stake into equity of SPV and corresponding 
reduction in the stake of FIs. However, with the passage of time, the envisaged 
equity contribution from FIs has been diluted by ONGC and GAIL by infusing 
substantial funds into the SPV without insisting for requisite equity contribution 
by FIs. As a result, 100 per cent paid up capital (` 2,021.92 crore) of the SPV viz.
the Company as of 31 March 2014 had been contributed by ONGC ( ` 997.96 
crore, 49.36 per cent ), GAIL ( ` 994.94 crore, 49.21 per cent ) and GSPC ( ` 29 
crore, 1.43 per cent ). The Company failed to rope in FIs and strategic partners. 
The meagre contribution of ` 2.5 lakh from individuals was static since 
incorporation.
• In addition to the above, ` 670.92 crore had been extended (May 2013) by ONGC 
as advance against equity of the Company against which shares had not been 
allotted to ONGC as of March 2014. Thus, the operations of the Company are 
virtually being run on public funds entirely through ONGC, GAIL and GSPC 
barring a meagre contribution of ` 2.5 lakh by individuals.
• In relation to all the three contracts, the bidders had only requested for interest 
free advances and did not insist for linking recovery to progress of work. Thus, 
there did not appear adequate justification for linking recovery to progress of 
work.
• The Company was following the CVC guidelines on selective basis. It did not 
agree to extend interest free advance in two cases (contracts with M/s Vijay Tanks 
Vessels Limited and Samsung Engineering Limited awarded in January/June 
2011) though the bidders had requested for such advance.
• Hence, instead of following the CVC guidelines in a selective manner, the 
Company should have uniformly followed these guidelines, especially when its 
equity stakeholders viz. ONGC, GAIL and GSPC were subject to these guidelines 
and were following the same. 
Thus, the fact remains that the Company entered into defective contracts providing 
interest free advances to the contractors and linked recovery of the advances to progress 
of work in violation of CVC guidelines and sustained loss of interest. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
59 
Damodar Valley Corporation 
4.1     Metering and Billing 
4.1.1 Introduction 
Damodar Valley Corporation (Corporation) supplies power in accordance with the 
provision of the DVC Act, to its consumers in core Sectors like Traction (Railways), 
Steel, Coal and other load categories at 33, 132 and 220 Kilo-Volt (KV) level at different 
locations within the Damodar Valley area and also at few locations beyond the valley 
areas with the permission of the concerned State Governments. The Corporation’s 
Transmission and Distribution network is spread over seven districts of the Jharkhand 
State and six districts of West Bengal. As on 31
st March 2014, the Corporation had 283 ♥
High Tension (HT) Consumers with 3,156.195 Mega Volt Amperes (MVA) Contract 
Demand (CD) who were being fed from 41 Sub-stations and at three voltage levels viz. 
220/33 KV (73 Consumers), 132/33 KV (208 Consumers) and 132/25 KV (two 
Consumers). Besides the HT consumers, power is also fed into the Low Tension (LT) 
infrastructure of its colonies set up around the Corporation’s power plants.  
4.1.2 Audit Framework 
4.1.2.1 Scope of Audit 
A review on “Metering, Billing and Collection of Energy Charges” was conducted 
covering the period 1999-2000 to 2002-03 and was incorporated in the Annual Report of 
the Corporation for the year 2002-03 in accordance with Rules 31 of DVC, 1948. The 
significant issues highlighted by audit in the above report were: 
¾ Delay in implementation of the modernised metering system.  
¾ Unfavourable debtors’ ratios. 
¾ Absence of time frame for rectification of defective meters. 
The Action Taken Note (ATN) on these issues has not been received so far (October 
2014). In the meantime power generation capacity, number of consumers and sales of 
power increased considerably. The Corporation had also taken up implementation of 
modernised metering system i.e. Remote Automatic Meter Reading (RAMR) system by 
upgrading or replacing the existing 0.2 accuracy class meters and 
installation/implementation of System Energy Measurement Accounting and Auditing 
(SEMA). In the backdrop of these developments, a follow up audit on the metering and 
billing system of the Corporation was undertaken which covered a period of three years 
(2011-12 to 2013-14). 
                                                           
♥  Regarding number of consumers as on 31.03.2014 different figures were furnished by different 
divisions/sections of the Corporation. We have considered 283 consumers (as furnished by Commercial 
section of the Corporation) on conservative approach. 
CHAPTER IV: MINISTRY OF POWER 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
60 
4.1.2.2 Audit Objectives 
The Audit objectives were to ascertain whether: 
• An appropriate metering system for the consumers of power supplied by the 
Corporation was there and the same was effectively functional. 
• The Corporation has been able to install/configure the electronic revenue 
protection system as intended, in a time bound manner to achieve efficiency in 
billing and monitoring of Distribution loss respectively. 
• The collection of dues from the consumers was efficient and effective. 
4.1.2.3 Audit criteria 
The following audit criteria were adopted: 
• Electricity Act, 2003; 
• Notifications of Central Electricity Authority (CEA); 
• Corporation’s internal orders/circulars; and 
• Tariff orders/ notifications of Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC). 
4.1.2.4 Audit methodology 
Audit examined the records maintained at different departments of the Corporation. 
Besides this, Audit also test checked records of nine out of 41 sub-stations ( 22 per cent )
under six Grid Operation and Maintenance Divisions (GOMDs). Private consumers were 
predominant in 7 out of 9 sub-stations while in the rest 2 sub-stations, PSU consumers 
were predominant. 
4.1.3  Audit Findings 
All the HT power consumers of the Corporation were being metered since 1952. As on 31 
March 2014, there were 283 HT power consumers with active Contract Demand (CD). 
All tariff meters of HT consumers were of 0.2S
♠  accuracy as specified by CEA 
regulations 2006. Apart from this, the Corporation had Low Tension (LT) consumers 
(employees, outsiders and commercial establishments) in its colonies. The LT consumers 
of the Corporation are situated in the colonies set up around its power plants and most of 
them were not metered. 
4.1.3.1 Unproductive investment in implementation of modernised metering system 
Corporation was aware (2000) of the higher T & D losses and decided to take up a time 
bound programme for energy audit. CEA meanwhile notified (March 2006) installation of 
System Energy Accounting and Audit (SEMA) meters at all locations. 
                                                           
♠  0.2S Class Accuracy Meter has the accuracy of +/- 0.2 percent when the current of the meter is within 
the band of >5 percent and within 120 per cent of  rated current (the maximum current that can be 
applied continuously under specified conditions without harming a component, circuit etc.) 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
61 
(a) System Energy Measurement (Accounting & Audit) – SEMA 
The work for establishment of SEMA (Phase- I) for implementation of energy accounting 
system at 33KV and 415V level distribution network of the Corporation, was awarded 
(December 2007) at a cost of ` 6.38 crore with scheduled completion by December 2009. 
However, the work was completed in May 2013 with a delay of 41 months. The 
Corporation accepted (January 2015) that the delay was mainly on execution of its part of 
the job. However, implementation of SEMA (Phase– II) scheme at 132KV & 220KV 
level of Corporation’s power system was pending (March 2014).  
It was observed from the data captured by SEMA system (Phase – I) for around 15 to 47 
consumers for the period June to December 2013, that the difference between SEMA 
energy and consumer energy ranged from (-) 1 per cent  to (+) 6.14 per cent . The 
Corporation stated (November 2014) that the difference indicated insufficient accuracy 
due to manual feeding of data (without software), erratic functioning of communication 
network, breakdown of link due to outage of auxiliary equipments in Global System 
Mobile (GSM) technology, non-availability of auxiliary colony consumption of energy 
and non coverage of new consumers under the SEMA system. It was also stated that post 
February 2014, energy accounting study was not being done.
It was further observed that T&D losses have been on an increasing trend from 3.91 per
cent in 2011-12 to 4.30 per cent in 2013-14. Records revealed that the Jharkhand State 
Electricity Regulatory Commission (JSERC) in its provisional tariff order of 2012-13 
approved T&D loss of three per cent for the Corporation. Analysis of data of the selected 
sub-stations revealed that there was 6.32 MU of T&D loss (beyond three per cent) during 
2013-14 (i.e. after implementation of SEMA) with a financial implication of ` 2.66 crore. 
This loss could have been arrested by the Corporation, if it had ensured that SEMA was 
in proper working condition. Thus, the very objective for which the project was taken up 
was not fulfilled and the investment of ` 6.38 crore remained unproductive.  
The contention of the Corporation (January 2015) that the increasing trend of T&D loss 
was due to enhancement of CD of a few consumers and over drawal of power by JSEB is 
not acceptable as the consumers had drawn power more than their CDs which could have 
been restricted with the implementation of SEMA. 
(b)  Global System for Mobile Communication (GSM) Metering  
With a view to implementing revenue protection system for accurate and faster billing 
through remote metering and thereby improving cash flow cycle as well as revenue 
management cycle, the Corporation took up (September 2007) GSM metering system. 
The main purpose of the GSM metering system was to raise the consumer bill on first day 
of the month and reduce billing cycle. The other purposes of the system were to monitor 
the consumer loading pattern, tamper events, if any, as well as identify loss prone system 
components and to develop the infrastructure for SEMA. Out of total 283 consumers, the 
work for installation and commissioning of GSM connectivity at different locations in 
respect of 250 consumers along with remote automatic meter reading system (RAMR) 
was completed (March 2014).  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
62 
Audit, however, observed as follows: 
(i) Even after implementation of RAMR there were 92 instances where the 
Corporation did not raise consumer bills accurately on first day of the month and 
raised Energy Adjustments Bills for ` 12.51 crore with a delay ranging from 1 to 9 
months. Main reason for such delay was non-tallying of meter reading of RAMR 
with the reading of sub-stations caused either by defective meters or outage of 
auxiliary equipments of GSM system.  
(ii) Many consumers were drawing power in excess of their contract demand (CD). 
Out of 9094 instances of drawal of power in respect of consumers each month 
from June 2011 to March 2014, there were 2558 instances (28 per cent of 9094 
instances) of overdrawal. In 473 instances of 2558, the consumers had overdrawn 
even 100 to 28901 per cent of their CD. Though Eastern Regional Load Despatch 
Centre (ERLDC) had warned the Corporation of this indiscipline in power drawal, 
the same continued even after implementation of GSM scheme. It had since 
increased considerably from 1711388 KVA in 2011-12 to 7533718 KVA in 2013-
14.
The Corporation agreed (January 2015) that there was scope for improvement by way of 
maintenance and monitoring of GSM system.  
4.1.3.2 Unfavourable debtors’ ratio resulted in increase in working capital loan 
Prior to the implementation of Electricity Act 2003 (effective 10 June 2003), the 
Corporation was authorized to determine its own tariff under section 20 of the DVC Act, 
1948. The Corporation, however, continued to bill its consumers at its own determined 
tariff rate and did not approach CERC in time to determine the tariff. Hence, CERC 
initiated suo-motu proceedings and determined the tariff effective for the period 2006-
2009 by allowing two years’ transition period upto March 2006. The Corporation did not 
accept the same and took legal recourse. Consumers were continued to be billed as per 
Corporation’s own tariff. Meanwhile, the tariff order of CERC for 2009-14 had already 
been issued which was accepted by the Corporation and consumers were billed 
accordingly. However, reconciliation of consumer dues with reference to the applicable 
tariff of 2006-09 and 2009-14 was pending (March 2014). This affected the realisation of 
old dues from the consumers. The position of book debts of the Corporation on account of 
Energy Charges vis-à-vis Sales, average collection period and current assets for the last 
three years ending 31 March 2014, is as follows: 
Year Sales ( `
in
crores)
Debtors (`
in crores) 
Per cent  of 
Debtors to 
Sales 
Average 
Collection Period 
(in months) 
Current
Assets ( ` in 
crores)
Per cent  of 
Debtors to 
Current
Assets 
2011-12 7,067.40 5,318.211 75.25 7.80 8,108.44 65.59 
2012-13 10,603.87 6,538.032 61.66 6.80 11,297.77 57.87 
2013-14 11,672.08 8,605.02 73.72 7.89 13,486.91 63.80 
                                                           
1 Excluding un-billed amount of ` 919.82 crore. 
2 Excluding un-billed amount of ` 1,103.87 crore. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
63 
Thus, outstanding debts for more than three years reached ` 3,260.57 crore as on 31 
March 2014 which was 38 per cent  of the total debtors of ` 8,605.02 crore. The 
outstanding dues coupled with higher revenue collection period resulted in increase in 
working capital loan of the Corporation and consequential interest outgo. Records 
revealed that the short-term loan of ` 1,602 crore in 2011-12 had reached ` 3,349 crore in 
2013-14 and the Corporation had to shoulder interest burden of ` 577.79 crore during the 
period 2011-12 to 2013-14, which in turn, increased the cost of short term loan interest 
per megawatt of power♣ .
The Corporation, in its reply (January 2015) attributed accumulation of debtors mainly to 
litigation. However, they were silent on non-adherence to CERC tariff for the period 
2006-09 and non-reconciliation of debts after finalisation of tariff by CERC for 2006-09 
as well as 2009-14. 
4.1.3.3 Delay in raising of Fuel Price Adjustment bill 
The monthly bills for energy charges covering primary fuel cost should be raised on 
consumers along with bills for fuel price adjustment (FPA), if any. 
It was observed that during the period 2011-12 to 2013-14, the Corporation delayed 
issuing FPA bills amounting to ` 178.92 crore. Test check revealed delay ranging from 
one to ten months. The main reason for such delays was late furnishing of fuel data by the 
thermal power stations (TPSs) of the Corporation. This resulted in delayed recovery of 
adjustment bills from consumers, which could have been avoided if there had been an 
appropriate mechanism and/or information system for raising FPA bills in time. 
The Corporation attributed (January 2015) the delay in raising of FPA to non-receipt of 
monthly coal values from TPSs and availability of performance incentive (PI) value for 
coal consumption only at year end. The reply is not convincing as flow of information 
from TPSs regarding consumption of coal was possible to have been streamlined and 
strengthened for timely raising of FPA bills. Further, there was scope for proper 
estimation of PI value of coal consumption after considering the annual contracted 
quantity (ACQ) on the basis of Fuel Supply Agreement (FSA) which was well known to 
the Corporation. 
4.1.3.4 Irregular Meter Reading (HT) 
The Corporation had set up two meters (M1 and M2) and a check meter for capturing 
power consumption and billing thereof as per Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) with HT 
consumers. Both M1 and M2 meter readings were to be taken regularly for ascertaining 
proper functionality of meters and accurate billing. Audit observed that out of the 155 HT 
consumers of the selected sub-stations, M2 meter reading of 106 consumers was not taken 
at all. Further scrutiny of 29 consumers in respect of whom M1 and M2 meter readings 
were both taken regularly, revealed that billing for their power consumption was made 
from the reading of M1 meter irrespective of deviations (both negative and positive) of 
the meter reading as compared to M2 meter reading. Further, in some cases deviation of 
                                                           
♣  Cost of short term loan interest: ` 50/mwh in 2011-12, ` 80/mwh in 2012-13 and ` 100/mwh in 2013-
14. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
64 
the above meter reading was much higher than meter’s accuracy class. No analysis of 
such deviation was found on record. Further, the Corporation did not clarify reasons for 
sub-stations’ not ensuring that readings of both the meters were taken. 
The Corporation stated (January 2015) that in case of a difference of more than 0.4 per 
cent between M1 and M2 meter readings, the Corporation raised bills on average basis 
and in the case of a difference of more than 0.4 per cent in M1 meter and check meter 
reading, investigations and corrective actions were taken. The reply does not answer the 
audit observation which was on irregular reading of both M1 and M2 meters and non-
monitoring for proper functioning of the same. 
4.1.3.5  No time frame followed in rectification of defective meters
As per CEA regulations 2006, if the meter was found erratic and the error was beyond the 
permissible limit as provided in the relevant standard, the meter should be replaced 
immediately with a correct meter. The Corporation did not prescribe any timeline in this 
regard. During the period covered by audit, out of 61 cases of complaints made by HT 
consumers, meters required replacement in 55 cases. Replacement of defective meters 
which was required to be done immediately in all cases as per CEA regulations, took one 
to 12 weeks’ time in 32 cases ( Annexure–XVIII). It was also observed that the monthly 
stock position was sufficient to meet the required replacement.  
The Corporation stated (January 2015) that in 70 per cent of the cases, defective meters 
were replaced within a timeframe of 11 days. This contention is not acceptable as 
defective meters were to be replaced immediately as per the regulation for accurate 
reading and raising of power bills. The contention that action was being taken for 
replacement of defective meters within 2 weeks, was not in line with CEA regulations 
and hence not acceptable. 
4.1.3.6 Non-levy of disconnection & reconnection charges 
As per Section 56 (Disconnection of Supply in default payment) of Electricity Act, 2003, 
the Corporation was entitled to discontinue the power supply of a defaulting consumer 
until such charge or other sum, together with any expenses incurred by it in cutting off 
and reconnecting the supply were paid. During the period covered by audit, there were 
110 cases of disconnections, out of which in 89 cases, the lines were reconnected. In the 
context of numerous cases of disconnection and reconnection, the Corporation estimated 
(September 2011) an amount of ` 4.55 lakh and ` 8.51 lakh for disconnection plus 
reconnection of a consumer’s line fed from Single Circuit (S/C) feeder and Double 
Circuit (D/C) feeder respectively. The total expenditure incurred by the Corporation for 
disconnection and reconnection stood at ` 4.33 crore during period covered under audit, 
which was not levied. 
The Corporation’s view (January 2015) that there were no disconnection and 
reconnection charges in the JSERC Supply Code Regulations, 2005, is not borne out by 
facts. Further, there was no bar in the WBERC Electricity Supply Code for levy of such 
charges. Also, as per section 56 of Electricity Act, 2003, the Corporation was entitled to 
levy disconnection and reconnection charges on consumers and non-levy of the same 
resulted in extension of undue benefit to such consumers. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
65 
4.1.3.7 Loss of revenue due to non-installation of meters to LT consumers: 
The Corporation supplies power in the LT infrastructure of its residential colonies, 
employees of outside agencies residing in the quarters, its offices, government offices, 
public utilities, commercial establishments, shops etc. Scrutiny of records of six field 
formations of the Corporation viz. BTPS, CTPS, DTPS, MTPS
♦ , Maithon and Panchet 
revealed that neither any mechanism existed to restrict the drawal of power by residents 
(including employees) nor any functional metering arrangement was made to measure the 
power consumed by individuals for residential quarters. Bills based on actual power 
consumption were neither issued nor charges collected from employees during the period 
covered by audit. Only a nominal fee of ` 7/10/15/20 per employee per month based on 
their grade pay was recovered from the pay bills of employees posted at the above field 
formations. The total amount collected during the period covered by audit from 
employees of all the six units was ` 9, 69,937/-. Such collection was based on provisional 
rates decided by the Corporation more than a decade ago and the provisional rates were 
not replaced (October 2014) with final rates. Though the basic ceiling of free power units 
for different grades of employees was fixed only in March 2009 but the ceiling was not 
adhered to in the absence of any metering system. An assessment exercise during July 
2012 at MTPS done by the Corporation revealed that ex-employees of the unit staying in 
Corporation’s quarters had an assessed load ranging from 590 watt to 9,560 watt. 
Outsiders staying in quarters at all the units either paid on load assessment basis or fixed 
charge/ charge for fixed units. Some commercial establishments such as banks, ATMs 
etc. were fitted with meters but most of the commercial establishments (including shops) 
were billed on fixed charge basis which was not based on actual consumption. The 
Corporation initiated (2011) a load assessment exercise for commercial establishments to 
bill them on the basis of load assessment which was not accepted by shopkeepers at 
Maithon as they considered it un-scientific and demanded installation of meters. Metering 
of commercial shops was done only in BTPS (2012). As a result, billing and realization 
for 2013-14 increased by 498 per cent as compared to 2011-12 for the Corporation. Non-
installation of meters in the premises of the LT consumers to ascertain actual 
consumption of electricity resulted in the Corporation not enforcing recovery of ` 142.72
crore towards electricity charges during the period covered in audit (Annexure– XIX).
While accepting the audit observations, the Corporation stated (January 2015) that the 
billing would be started on LT consumers as per actual energy consumption after 
completion of installation of energy meters. 
Conclusion
Most of the deficiencies pointed out in the review carried out by Audit of the 
Corporation in 2003 were still persisting. Investment made by the Corporation for 
implementation of modernised metering system, i.e. SEMA and GSM remained 
unproductive and ineffective resulting in non-fulfilment of objectives. The 
Corporation did not adhere to the time frame of the tariff petition as prescribed by 
CERC as per Electricity Act, 2003 which was one of the reasons for the 
accumulation of huge outstanding dues from consumers. Both M1 and M2 meters 
                                                           
♦  BTPS = Bokaro Thermal Power Station, CTPS = Chandrapura Thermal Power Station,  
DTPS = Durgapur Thermal Power Station and MTPS = Mejia Thermal Power Station. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
66 
were not regularly verified and replacement of defective meters was unduly delayed. 
The Corporation did not collect disconnection and reconnection charges from its 
consumers allowed under Electricity Act, 2003 and also did not install meters in 
respect of most of LT consumers. Non-installation of meters in the premises of the 
LT consumers prevented the Corporation from ascertaining the actual consumption 
of electricity which resulted in the Corporation not enforcing recovery of 
` 142.72
crore towards electricity charges during the period covered in audit. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in January 2015; their reply was awaited (March 
2015).
4.2 Loss of opportunity to recover Engine Detention Charges 
The Corporation had lost the opportunity to recover ` 24.25 crore paid by way of 
Engine Detention Charges on account of under-performance of Contractor due to 
absence of suitable contractual provision. 
Mejia Thermal Power Station (MTPS) of Damodar Valley Corporation (Corporation) 
receives bulk quantity of coal through railway wagons. Railway authority levies 
demurrage charges for delay in unloading of rakes beyond specified schedule time. In 
addition, Engine Detention Charges (EDC) are also levied in case Railway LOCO is 
detained for such delay in unloading. As MTPS does not have its own LOCO facility, it 
has no other option but to engage the LOCO provided by the Railways for placement of 
wagons at the track hopper in order to facilitate unloading of coal.
The Corporation entered into a contract agreement with a contractor (June 2009) for 
various services including supervision of loading of coal at loading point and unloading at 
unloading point in respect of MTPS Units # 1 to 6. The value of the contract was `
20.88 crore for a period of one year with a provision to extend it for further period. As per 
the provisions of the agreement, the contractor was to ensure loading of sized coal (below 
200 mm) without any extraneous materials, boulders and slurry etc. at loading point. It 
was also stipulated that demurrage charges payable to Railways due to delay in unloading 
of coal was to be recovered from the contractor. However, there was no provision in the 
agreement towards recovery of EDC levied by the Railways from the contractor for such 
delay in unloading of rakes. The Corporation incurred EDC amounting to ` 35.31 crore
during the period, June 2009 to January 2014.
Audit examination revealed that ` 24.25 crore of the EDC had arisen due to delay in 
unloading coal containing stone/boulders, oversized coal and slurry which was 
attributable to under performance of the contractor at the time of loading. As there was no 
provision in the agreement, the Corporation could not recover it from the contractor. 
Audit also observed that while finalizing the above contract, the management did not 
safeguard the financial interest of the Corporation as there was no clause in the agreement 
to recover EDC from the contractor on account of delay in unloading of coal. It was also 
observed that the above contract was extended from time to time, but the Corporation did 
not consider incorporation of a suitable clause towards recovery of EDC from the 
contractor.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
67 
The Corporation in its reply (July 2014) contended that EDC was in fact engine hiring 
charges and the same came under freight. They further stated that the same was 
recoverable from consumers and hence, there was no loss to the Corporation on account 
of EDC. 
This contention is not acceptable as EDC is payable to Railways for detaining LOCO 
beyond the free time allowed whereas engine hiring charge is payable for the materials 
transported through Railway wagons from one station to another. Further, both EDC and 
demurrage charges were billed by Railways separately in addition to the freight bill. Their 
further contention that EDC was recoverable from consumers is also not acceptable as 
EDC did not form part of energy charges as prescribed by CERC and hence had to be 
borne by the Corporation. 
Ministry stated (September 2014) that the provision for recovery of EDC was not kept in 
the terms of contract, because the same would have inflated the bidders’ quoted price and 
consequently total contract cost, as nobody would bear such unavoidable cost. It was 
further stated that in case of non-occurrence of Engine Detention beyond free time (say 
unloading of good quality indigenous coal/imported coal) payment at inflated rate would 
have been criticized otherwise. 
The above plea of the Ministry that any provision for recovery of EDC would have 
inflated the bidder’s quoted price is not tenable as it was purely hypothetical and not 
based on detailed assessment of figures that could have been used by the contractor. It is 
also pertinent to note that the contractor would not have had to perform any additional 
work for avoidance of EDC. Moreover, the audit observation does not relate to the entire 
EDC but to the extent of EDC that was incurred due to failure on part of the contractor 
like recovery of demurrage. Thus, in the absence of appropriate clause in the agreement, 
the financial interest of the Corporation was not safeguarded. The fact that the Ministry 
stated that inclusion of EDC under contractor’s scope would be reviewed during 
finalization of the scope of work for the next contract is also a tacit admission that there 
was deficiency in the agreement with the contractor. 
Thus, the Corporation had lost the opportunity to recover ` 24.25 crore towards EDC 
arising out of under-performance of the contractor, due to absence of a suitable provision 
in the contract agreement. 
4.3 Avoidable expenditure towards additional UI charges 
Non adherence to IEGC Regulation for maintaining grid discipline by the 
Corporation led to an avoidable expenditure of ` 16.21 crore towards additional 
Unscheduled Interchange charges. 
As per the System Security Aspects of The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
(Indian Electricity Grid Code) Regulations, 2010 (IEGC Regulation), State Load Dispatch 
Centres (SLDCs) shall take all possible measures to ensure that the grid frequency always 
remains within the range from 49.5 to 50.2 Hz. band. For the purpose of the above 
regulation, Central Load Dispatch, Maithon (CLD) of the Corporation is to perform 
functions of SLDC and have the total responsibility for scheduling/ dispatching of its own 
generation. The CLD should also initiate action to restrict the drawal of power of its 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
68 
command area, from the grid, whenever the system frequency falls to 49.7 Hz. It was also 
stipulated that in case the grid frequency is 49.5 Hz or below, CLD of the Corporation 
should ensure that requisite load shedding is carried out in its command area so that there 
is no over-drawal of power. CERC Regulation
1 stipulated that for every over-drawal or 
under-injection of power when the grid frequency is below 49.5 Hz, additional 
Unscheduled Interchange (UI) charges  at a specified rate is applicable over and above the 
applicable UI charges2.
Audit observed that during the period from April 2011 to March 2014, the Corporation 
overdrew power on various occasions when the grid frequency was 49.5 Hz or below for 
which it had to pay ` 16.21 crore towards additional UI charges. This indicated that the 
CLD of the Corporation did not take appropriate steps to restrict drawal of power in its 
command area while the grid frequency reached to 49.7 Hz and also did not resort to 
requisite load-shedding as prescribed by CERC even when the frequency fell to 49.5 Hz 
or below.
Management while admitting the fact of payment of additional UI charges stated (June 
2014) that random load shedding could be done only in a limited quantum of load. 
Ministry, while endorsing the views of the Management, further added (October 2014) 
that the Corporation has been supplying power to some core sectors providing essential 
services and due to its criticiality load shedding was not resorted to. 
The above statement of Management and Ministry has to be seen in the context of 
maintaining Grid Discipline. Drawal of power when the Grid Frequency was 49.5 Hz or 
below constituted a serious act of indiscipline. Such action, besides putting Grid stability 
to danger, also resulted in higher expenditure of ` 16.21 crore by way of additional UI 
charges. 
Power Grid Corporation of India Limited 
4.4 Incorrect evaluation and award of contracts to Joint Ventures led by a 
financially weak firm
Power Grid Corporation of India Limited (PGCIL) awarded seven tower contracts 
between February 2010 and July 2010, valuing ` 927.69 crore to joint ventures led 
by a financially weak firm based on incomplete evaluation by internal Assessment 
Committee resulting in cost overrun and delay in completion of works and 
transmission constraints. 
PGCIL awarded seven tower contracts aggregating ` 927.69 crore to three Joint Ventures 
(JVs)3 led by SPIC-SMO 4, a division of Southern Petrochemical Industries Corporation 
Limited (SPIC), Chennai during February to July 2010. 
                                                           
1 Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Unscheduled Interchange Charges and related matters 
Amendment) Regulations 2010 dated 28.04.2010 
2 UI charge is a commercial mechanism to maintain grid discipline. The UI charges are payable 
depending upon what is deviated from the schedule drawal of power given by the power 
generators/distributors themselves and also subject to the grid conditions at that point of time. 
3 (i) JV of SPIC-SMO & SUJANA (ii) JV of SPIC-SMO  & ASTER and (iii) JV of SPIC-SMO & BS TRANSCOM
4 Maintenance Organisation Division of Southern Petrochemicals Industries Corporation Limited (SPIC), Chennai

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
69 
Award of first contract for tower TW-03 associated with system strengthening scheme for 
Sasan and Mundra UMPPs to Joint Venture of SPIC-SMO and SUJANA led by SPIC-
SMO (L1 bidder) at ` 99.34 crore was approved (December 2009) by the Board of 
Directors (Board) of PGCIL based on the recommendation of the Management that the 
bidder had requisite capability and capacity to execute the contract.  
Subsequently, in January 2010, while approving award of two more contracts for towers 
A2 and A8 associated with Central Part of the Northern Grid to JVs led by SPIC-SMO 
(being L1) at ` 201.59 crore, Board observed that though M/s SPIC met the bid 
evaluation criteria of Minimum Average Annual Turnover (MAAT) and Liquid Assets 
(LA), an assessment of SPIC was required to be carried out in view of their financial 
health before awarding further contracts. Accordingly, an internal Assessment 
Committee
♥  was constituted by PGCIL on 27 January 2010 inter alia  to carry out 
assessment of SPIC-SMO including SPIC’s financial analysis.
The Assessment Committee after visit to office of SPIC in Chennai in January 2010 
reported (February 2010) that despite substantial losses in fertilizer business of SPIC 
during period 2004-05 to 2008-09, their net worth remained positive. However, it was 
noticed in audit that the Assessment Committee while calculating net worth of SPIC had 
ignored not only the accumulated losses of SPIC as appearing in their financial statements 
for the concerned periods, but also the impact of qualifications of the statutory auditors on 
financial statements of SPIC. If the impact of accumulated losses and qualification of 
statutory auditors was considered, the net worth of SPIC would have been ‘Negative’ as 
shown in the table below against ‘Positive’ reported by the Assessment Committee. 
(
` in crore)
Sl.
No.
Particulars 2008-09 Year ending 
March 2008 
(18 months)
Year ending 
September 
2006
(18 months)
2004-05
1 Share capital 120.45 120.45 120.45 100.55
2 Reserves 237.71 237.71 237.71 101.45
3 Accumulated Profit (loss) (1755.21) $ (880.32)^ (219.22)* (325.51)
4 Net Worth (1+2-3) (1397.06) (522.16) 138.94 123.51
* After considering qualification of statutory auditor amounting to ` 44.13 crore under para 5 (ix) of his report 
for the period.  During the year accumulated loss of ` 533.79 crore were adjusted against Revaluation Reserve. 
^ As per Statutory Auditor’s report under para 5 (vii) a & b 
$ After taking into effect qualifications of Statutory Auditors’ under para 4 (vii) a & b of their report 
While reporting that SPIC had not been maintaining satisfactory financial health for the 
last two to three years, the Assessment Committee observed that financial position of 
SPIC had not impacted the operations of its SMO division which was responsible for 
erection of transmission lines under JV arrangement. Assessment Committee in addition 
to already awarded three contracts for tower packages, recommended award of four more 
contracts for towers D1, D2, A1 and A3 to JVs led by SPIC-SMO stating that the 
annualized value of the scope of work to be executed by SMO division of SPIC 
                                                           
♥  Comprising representatives from Finance, Engineering and Contract Services departments of PGCIL

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
70 
aggregated to around 1.5 times of their turnover of ` 125 crore during 2009. Considering 
the report and recommendations of Assessment Committee, the Board approved 
(February to July 2010) award of four more tower contracts to JVs led by SPIC at 
` 626.76 crore.
However, it was noticed in audit that just before the award of seven packages to the JVs 
led by SPIC, the debts of SPIC had been restructured under the Corporate Debt 
Restructuring Mechanism ♣  and a ‘Rework Package’ of SPIC was approved by Asset 
Reconstruction Company (India) Limited and other financial institutions in October 2009. 
The ‘Rework Package’ inter alia provided that SPIC should sell its SMO division on or 
before 31 March 2011. Thus, when Assessment Committee visited the office of SPIC in 
January 2010, SPIC was under an obligation to sell its SMO division as per ‘Rework 
package’. The Assessment Committee’s Report mentioned about approval of the 
restructuring scheme of SPIC but was silent on further details regarding impending sale 
of SPIC-SMO.  SPIC-SMO was sold in September 2011 to M/s Mirador Commercial 
Private Limited (MCPL). Thus, uncertainties arising from change in 
ownership/management of SMO Division during the crucial period of execution of the 
projects were not brought to the notice of Board by Assessment Committee and 
consequently, Board was denied the opportunity to take an informed decision. Poor 
financial health and inadequate mobilization of resources by M/s SPIC was one of the 
significant reasons for delay in execution of contracts because the resources of SPIC were 
found by PGCIL (January 2011) to be overstretched and inadequate to achieve the desired 
rate of progress of works. After take over of SMO division of SPIC from August 2011 by 
MCPL, the latter was also reluctant to deploy resources for the above contracts leading to 
further delay in completion. Four out of seven contracts were completed with delays 
ranging from 22 to 30 months and three contracts are still under execution (March 2015) 
despite delays ranging from 23 to 38 months. Out of the four completed contracts, 
liquidated damages of ` 41.79 lakh had been levied on the contractor for delay on their 
part while decision by PGCIL on levy of liquidated damages in respect of remaining three 
contracts was awaited (March 2015). One out of the contracts under execution had to be 
terminated by PGCIL in May 2014 due to poor performance of contractor and was yet 
(December 2014) to be re-awarded leading to further delay.   
Delay in completion of transmission lines under the above contracts not only led to cost 
over run of ` 53.50 crore but also constraints in transmission systems. It was observed in 
Audit that Talwandi Saboo and Rajpura thermal power stations had been synchronized in 
March 2014 but the associated transmission lines linked to towers A1 and A3 were 
commissioned in May 2014 and August 2014 respectively. National Load Despatch 
Centre inter alia observed (April 2014) constraints in evacuation of power due to delay in 
commissioning of Punjab transmission systems for evacuation of power from Talwandi 
Saboo and Rajpura thermal power stations. Severe constraints were observed in Wardha 
Parli and Wardha Akola Transmission lines due to non-commissioning of 400 kV Wardha 
Aurangabad transmission lines linked to tower contracts D1 and D2. 
PGCIL stated (March 2013/March 2015) that (i) contracts were awarded to JVs of M/s 
SPIC-SMO and other tower manufacturers. In financial terms the share of responsibility 
                                                           
♣ The objective of Corporate Debt Restructuring or CDR introduced by Reserve Bank of India was to 
ensure timely and transparent mechanism for restructuring of corporate debts of viable entities facing 
problems for the benefit of all concerned.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
71 
of M/s SPIC-SMO and tower manufacturers was approximately in the ratio of 45 per cent
and 55 per cent  (ii) though financial performance of SPIC was not very much 
encouraging at the time of assessment, the performance of their SMO division was 
satisfactory and was ring fenced (iii) facts as brought out by the Assessment Committee 
were deliberated by Board of PGCIL before approving the award of contracts in favour of 
JVs of SPIC and (iv) details of impending sale of SMO division of SPIC were not 
brought to the notice of Assessment Committee by SPIC. 
The reply is to be viewed against the facts that (i) M/s SPIC-SMO was the lead partner in 
JVs responsible for critical and specialized nature of work i.e. tower erection and 
stringing. Moreover, in view of negative and deteriorating trend of their net worth, award 
of even 45 per cent share of responsibility in financial terms to SPIC was not free from 
risk of under-performance, (ii) as per Board’s decision of January 2010, the Assessment 
Committee was required to carry out financial analysis of M/s SPIC as a whole and it was 
not appropriate to view the performance of SMO division in isolation, (iii) Board’s 
decision was based on the report of Assessment Committee which provided incorrect 
information regarding net worth of SPIC and did not indicate the updated status of 
impending sale of SMO division to a new owner during crucial period of execution of the 
projects, and (iv) having been aware of the ongoing restructuring of SPIC, it was in the 
interest of PGCIL to update itself of the latest status of restructuring of SPIC from 
independent sources rather than relying solely on the inputs from SPIC. 
Ministry stated (May 2014) that mention regarding positive net worth of SPIC in the 
report of Assessment Committee was inadvertent and would not have affected the final 
conclusion since PGCIL awarded contracts to Companies having negative net worth also. 
Ministry, however, acknowledged that change of ownership of SPIC-SMO and 
unwillingness of MCPL to execute the works contributed to delays.  Ministry added that 
PGCIL had brought in systemic improvements and had introduced assessment of bidder’s 
capacity by Standing Committee at Executive Director level, based on the contractor’s 
performance in PGCIL contracts. 
The fact remains that Board’s decision was based on favourable recommendations of the 
Assessment Committee which downplayed the actual financial condition of SPIC and did 
not report crucial information about impending sale of SPIC-SMO.
Thus, furnishing incorrect and incomplete information by the Assessment Committee to 
the Board resulted in award of contracts to JVs led by a financially weak firm leading to 
cost overrun and delay in completion of awarded works along with transmission 
constraints.
Rural Electrification Corporation Limited 
4.5 Loss of interest due to disbursement of soft loans under RGGVY 
REC suffered loss of ` 153.36 crore upto December 2014 as it did not approach MoP 
to reimburse the differential interest on soft loans extended under RGGVY.
Ministry of Power (MoP), Government of India (GoI) notified (18 March 2005) Rajiv 
Gandhi Gramin Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) and appointed Rural Electrification 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
72 
Corporation Limited (REC) as nodal agency for implementation of the scheme. There 
was no specific condition stipulated by MoP for providing soft loans under RGGVY. 
However, at the time of launching of RGGVY, a brochure issued by MoP inter alia
included that ‘REC has been designated as the nodal agency for implementation of the 
programme.  All funds for the programme would be channelized through REC, which 
apart from the capital subsidy being provided by the Government, would give the 
remaining funds, as loan assistance, on soft terms.’
Instead of approaching MoP for further directions on the rate of interest to be charged on 
the soft loans to be provided under RGGVY and requesting MoP to make good the 
differential interest rate between the normal lending rate and rate of interest chargeable on 
soft loans under RGGVY, REC on the basis of above brochure issued by MoP, in its 
Board of Directors (BoD) meeting (30 August 2005) decided on its own, to provide loans 
to the State Governments at 5  per cent  rate of interest as against the then prevailing rate 
of 8 per cent . No cost and impact analysis was carried out while deciding to charge 
concessional rate of interest under the RGGVY.
The issue of soft term loans was deliberated again by the Board on 7 September 2007 and 
in view of the increased cost of loans under RGGVY, it was decided that the lending rates 
under RGGVY needed upward revision and might be kept softer by only 50 basis points 
than those being charged by REC under T&D schemes.   
Till December 2014, REC had suffered a loss of ` 153.36 crore
♦   on account of charging 
interest at the rates less than the rates applicable to normal rates applicable on similar 
REC loans from time to time. The loss of interest would continue to increase further till 
repayment of outstanding balances of RGGVY loan and further disbursement/repayments 
of soft loan, if any. REC being a separate listed commercial entity should have taken up 
the issue of reimbursement of differential interest cost on soft loans under RGGVY with 
MoP.
The Management stated (December 2014) that: 
• Rate of interest of 5 per cent  was being charged on the loan given under 
‘Accelerated Electrification of One lakh villages and One crore households’ 
scheme which was later merged with RGGVY. REC released ` 557 crore only at 
5 per cent  per annum interest rate for three years up to 9 September 2007. 
Thereafter, loans were released only at 0.50 per cent  per annum lesser than the 
then prevailing lending rate for T&D schemes. The changed interest rate to 0.5 
per cent lower than the prevailing rates of interest was sufficiently covering the 
cost of borrowing as well as adequate spread for REC.
• RGGVY has a social objective to electrify the rural households and REC is a GoI 
Enterprise and also the nodal agency of RGGVY.  Moreover, all RGGVY loans 
                                                           
♦  The loss of `  93.88 crore is worked out on the bas is of difference between prevailing rate of interest (8 
per cent to 10.90 per cent) of REC at the time of loans disbursed under RGGVY and 5 per cent being 
the rate charged on RGGVY loans between 31 January 2005 to 08  August 2007 plus ` 59.48 crore 
worked out on account of charging of rate of interest  softer by 50 basis points than the rate of interest 
under T&D schemes on loans disbursed between the period from 27 September 2007 to 31 December 
2014.  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
73 
are sanctioned to the State Govt. and not to the utilities. Major beneficiaries of 
these loans have been states like Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Assam, Jharkhand etc. and 
the financial health of power sector in these states is in bad shape since these 
states are not able to develop the infrastructure due to lack of finance. 
• The Government is supporting REC by allowing it to raise funds through Section 
54EC capital gain tax exemption bonds and Section 88 Infrastructure Bonds at 
low rate.
The reply of the Management is to be viewed against the facts that: 
• Adoption of rate of interest of 5 per cent charged under erstwhile scheme without 
any impact analysis under RGGVY was not justified. Further, MoP had not 
directed REC to bear the loss on account of extending soft loans under RGGVY. 
Even after enhancement of interest rate on RGGVY loans from 10 September 
2007, REC suffered a loss of around `59.48 crore.
• REC confirmed that in the absence of CSR concept in existence at that time they 
were unable to claim the differential cost of soft loans as CSR expenditure. 
Therefore, it was desirable for REC to have first safeguarded its commercial 
interests before disbursing soft loans. 
• The benefit of Section 54EC capital gain tax exemption bonds was available to 
REC even before the launch of RGGVY and MoP did not provide means of 
raising cheaper funds to REC as a compensation for soft loan to be disbursed by 
REC under RGGVY. 
Thus, REC suffered a loss of ` 153.36 crore upto December 2014 as it did not approach 
MoP to reimburse differential interest on soft loans extended under RGGVY. The loss 
would further increase till the existing loan is fully repaid as well as depending upon 
further soft loan disbursements, if any, under RGGVY in future. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
74 
CHAPTER V: MINISTRY OF STEEL 

Steel Authority of India Limited 
5.1 Investment of SAIL in Joint Ventures 
5.1.1 Introduction 
Steel Authority of India Limited (the company) had 23 Joint Venture Companies (JVCs) 
as on 31 March 2014 with total investment of ` 778.82 crore. Out of 23 JVCs, only 
seven1 are fully functional of which three 2 are regularly generating profits. Seventy nine 
per cent  (` 614.28 crore) of the Company’s total equity investment was in two power 
JVCs viz NTPC-SAIL Power Company Private Limited (NSPCL) and Bokaro Power 
Supply Company Private Limited (BPSCL). Nine JVCs were formed in partnership with 
Central Public Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) and State Government/State owned 
companies. Remaining 14 joint ventures were formed with equity participation of 50 per
cent or more from Private Enterprises which also had management control. Four JVCs
3
were being wound up. The company formulated its policy guidelines on entering into 
MOUs/JVCs in November 2013.  
The objectives of this audit were to assess whether selection process of JV partners was 
transparent, fair and not disadvantageous to the interests of the Company and the JVCs 
had achieved the intended objectives of their formation . Audit examination covered 15
4
JVCs formed during 2007-2013, the records of which were available with the Company. 
Reply of the Company (January 2015) has been suitably considered in this report. 
5.1.2 Audit Findings
5.1.2.1 Terms and conditions of JVC obligations were disadvantageous to SAIL 
The Company formed two JVCs5, one each at Bhilai and Bokaro in April 2007 and March 
2008 respectively, with Jaypee Cement Limited (JCL) which had equity stake of 74 per
cent and management control. JVCs were to use slag, a by-product produced in SAIL’s 
Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP) and Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL) for making cement.  Each plant 
was to supply 8 lakh tonnes of slag to the respective JVCs for the first 12 months and 
thereafter 10 lakh tonnes annually for five years after commissioning of the cement plant.  
                                                           
1 NTPC-SAIL Power Company Private Limited (NSPCL), Bokaro Power Supply Company Private Limited( BPSCL), 
M-Junction Services Limited, Bokaro Jaypee Cement Limited (BoJCL), Bhilai Jaypee Cement Limited, SAIL 
Bansal Service Centre Limited and SAIL SCL Kerala Limited 
2 NSPCL, BPSCL and M-Junction Services Limited 
3 North Bengal Dolomite Limited, UEC-SAIL IT Limited, Romelt SAIL (India) Limited, and North East Steel &    
Galvanising (P) Limited 
4 Bhilai-Jaypee Cement Limited, Bokaro-Jaypee Cement Limited,SAIL SCL Kerala Limited, S&T Mining Company 
Pvt. Limited, International Coal Venture Limited, SAIL RITES Bengal Wagon Industry Private Limited, SAIL & 
MOIL Ferro Alloys Private Limited, SAIL-SCI Shipping Private Limited, SAIL Kobe Iron India Pvt. Limited, 
SAIL-Bengal Alloy Casting Pvt. Limited, SAL SAIL JVC Limited, TMT SAL SAIL JV Limited, ABHINAV SAIL 
JVC LIMITED,  VSL-SAIL JVC LIMITEDand SPU JV ‘Prime Gold SAIL JVC Limited 
5 Bokaro Jaypee Cement Limited(BoJCL) and Bhilai Jaypee Cement Ltd 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
75 
Prior to formation of JVCs, BSP and BSL were selling slag at market price through 
auction/open tender. Under the agreements, the initial selling price of slag to be supplied 
from BSP and BSL to JVCs was fixed at a mutually agreed rate of ` 160 and ` 312 per 
tonne, respectively based on prevalent market price. Annual revision of selling price of 
slag was not market driven but linked to changes in the cement index issued by RBI. It 
would be seen from Table-1 that there was volatility in slag market prior to JVC 
agreement and later years. After formation of JVCs, market price of slag increased 
sharply which was 2-3 times higher than the indexed selling price charged from JVCs. At 
the same time, BSP and BSL also sold surplus slag to other buyers at the prevalent market 
price. Bhilai based JVC procured 60,642 tonnes slag during 2013-14 from BSP outside 
the JVC agreement at ` 750 per tonne besides 8,50,426 tonnes at RBI indexed price of `
190.27 per tonne. 
Table 1: Details of slag output, slag sold to JVCs and other buyers, and selling price 
Year
ended 
on 31 
March 
Bokaro Steel Plant Bhilai Steel Plant 
Total slag 
produced 
(tonne) 
Qty. of slag sold 
to (tonne) 
Selling price `
per tonne sold to 
Total slag 
produced
(tonne) 
Qty. of slag sold to 
(tonne) 
Selling price `  per 
tonne sold to 
Other 
buyers 
JVC JVC Other 
buyers 
Other 
buyers 
JVC JVC Other 
buyers 
2006 732765 724351 - - 244-351 1363871 1637900 - - 155-161 
2007 711471 642050 - - 256-369 1345160 1563911 - - 155-161 
2008 791497 746165 - - 275-305 1601651 1561210 - - 155-207 
2009 756046 760718 - - 275-305 1571425 1682978 - - 207-228 
2010 819380 808517 - - 320-705 1708756 1649163 3551 160 207-400 
2011 693758 669598 - - 500-758 1761920 1324674 416386 160.00 400 
2012 592361 309275 244961 336.65 517-768 1696888 896589 835509 172.68 450 
2013 660705 21028 690004 351.04 1220 1693352 961378 850330 180.05 520-750 
2014 915708 3,670 834193 444.24 1220 1736283 706626 850426 190.27 750-800 
Selling prices so fixed were to be re-visited after 5 years from July 2009 for BSL and 
December 2009 for BSP subject to fulfillment of certain conditions which as per 
Company’s own assessment, may not be fulfille d in case of BoJCL. Initial selling price 
fixed in 2006-07 was not revised upward despite SAIL losing substantially on sale of slag 
to JVCs. Thus, as a result of disadvantageous transfer pricing terms, the Company lost 
` 156.58 
♥  crore up to the year 2013-14.
The Company stated (January 2015) that the JVC partners in both plants were selected 
through open tender and highest premium offered; initial selling price fixed by 
management and revision thereon were included in the tender documents; there was 
volatility in selling price of slag and it was difficult to predict market prices of slag; the 
price variation clause based on cement index issued by RBI/Office of Economic Advisor 
is a standard clause which is operated by SAIL plants to revise the slag prices being 
                                                           
♥  Slag sold to JVCs multiplied by excess of market driven selling price (Weighted average taken) charged 
from  other buyers over RBI/Economic Advisor  indexed selling price (Weighted  average taken) 
charged from JVCs 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
76 
supplied to customers under open tender; and in November 2014, SAIL and JAL had sold 
their total equity stake in BoJCL to another company.  
Reply needs to be viewed against the following facts: 
Agreements between two entities either made as a prelude to JVC formation or later 
should not have any commercial term that compromises the principle of arm’s length 
transaction. Transfer price of slag should be the same as if two companies involved were 
independent. Thus, selling price of slag should have been left to market dynamics. The 
MoU for supply of slag under open tender to customer other than JVCs was for 
comparatively lesser quantity and short duration. BoJCL had started their commercial 
production in July 2011. During 2012-13 and 2013-14, BoJCL procured maximum slag 
from BSL, and on the strength of 2-3 times low price of slag charged by BSL (compared 
to market price), JVC not only registered a net profit of  ` 136 crore and ` 30.62 crore, 
but had also driven its equity capitalization higher to ` 892.78 crore from ` 133.65 crore. 
While higher capitalization benefited JCL with a gain of ` 561.76
1 crore, SAIL could gain 
` 197.372 crore on sale of its 26 per cent equity.
5.1.2.2 Performance of Joint Venture Companies 
As of 31 January 2015, 12 JVCs 3 with equity participation of ` 42.77 crore did not start 
their commercial operations. Intended operational objectives of JVC formation were not 
achieved. There was lack of commitment among the JVC partners, financial support to 
JVCs and commercial terms for provisions of goods/services were not clearly firmed up 
before formation. The current status of these JVCs is given below:
(a) International Coal Venture Limited (ICVL) 
ICVL was formed in May 2009 with SAIL, Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL),  Coal 
India Limited (CIL), NMDC Limited (NMDC)  and NTPC Limited (NTPC) as JV  
partners for securing metallurgical coal and thermal coal asset from overseas. Largely 
governed by SAIL nominated executives, ICVL did not acquire any foreign coal assets in 
the initial five years of operation. ICVL was expected to achieve supply of metallurgical 
coal to the extent of 10 per cent of requirements for 2019-20 of SAIL and RINL from its 
overseas assets by 2011-12. The goal of ICVL was on paper until July 2014 when it 
acquired coal assets of  Rio Tinto Coal Mozambique. Audit noted that out of five JVC 
partners, CIL and NTPC did not show interest in overseas acquisitions as their priority 
was thermal coal and not metallurgical coal. As a result SAIL’s financial exposure to 
ICVL increased disproportionately to 49.43 per cent  (`182 crore) as on 30 September 
                                                           
1 Excess of sale value of equity shares ( ` 660.66 crore) over ` 98.90 crore contributed towards 74 per 
cent equity. 
2 Excess of sale value of equity shares ( ` 232.12 crore) over ` 34.75 crore contributed towards 26 per 
cent equity.  
3 S&T Mining Company Pvt. Limited, Internatio nal Coal Venture Limited, SAIL RITES Bengal Wagon 
Industry Private Limited, SAIL & MOIL Ferro Allo ys Private Limited, SAIL-SCI Shipping Private 
Limited, SAIL Kobe Iron India Pvt. Limited, SAIL-Bengal Alloy Casting Pvt. Limited, SAL SAIL JVC 
Limited, TMT SAL SAIL JV Limited, ABHINAV SAIL JVC LIMITED , VSL-SAIL JVC LIMITED
and SPU JV ‘Prime Gold SAIL JVC Limited

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
77 
2014 from the agreed 28.6 per cent. SAIL approved (July 2014) further equity investment 
of ` 1,000 crore in ICVL.
The Company stated that: (i) as a matter of commercial prudence, it did not buy foreign 
coal assets prior to 2014 because prices of metallurgical coal were very high during 2009 
to 2015; (ii) ICVL had acquired first coal assets in July 2014 i.e. coal block from Rio 
Tinto Coal Mozambique; and (iii) a proposal for restructuring ICVL was under 
consideration of Ministry of Steel, Government of India in which CIL and NTPC were 
not included.
Reply needs to be viewed against the following facts:- 
(i) JVC had participated in bidding process for acquiring coal assets in Australia and 
Mozambique during 2010-14. Bids were not finalised as the project was held up 
by the seller due to depressed market condition; the JVC backed out from bidding 
process citing steep fall in prices of coking coal; and JVC was priced out in 
bidding process,
(ii) due to delayed acquisition, intended benefits were not achieved, and
(iii) exclusion of two partners would enhance the financial risk of the Company in the 
JV.
(b) SCI Shipping Private Limited (SSPL) 
The stated goal of the Company for forming a JVC (May 2010) in partnership with 
Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) was to acquire ships for shipping imported coking 
coal for its plants which was not achieved even after more than 4 years of formation. 
Audit noted that the decision on acquisition of the vessel was pending as SCI was not in a 
position to provide the corporate guarantee to JVC for raising debt and a study was 
required on infrastructure for berthing/discharging of cargo from ‘Capesize’ vessels in 
India. Adequate arrangements with regard to commercial terms and conditions, 
infrastructure requirements, and debt arrangement also were not decided upfront with the 
SCI. SAIL, the hirer of the JVC vessels, stated that ‘cost plus’ arrangement proposed by 
SCI was not acceptable as the rates would be more than the prevailing market rates. The 
reply may be viewed against the fact that market conditions were the same that were 
prevailing at the time of formation of JVC and the Company should have considered 
financial aspects before entering into JV mode. 
(c) SAIL & MOIL Ferro Alloys (Pvt.) Limited (SMFAL) 
The Company formed (July 2008) a JVC with a CPSU viz Manganese Ore (India) 
Limited (MOIL) to set up facility for production of Ferro Manganese (Fe-Mn) and Silico 
manganese (Si-Mn) for captive use in its steel plants. Capital outlay was ` 365 crore and 
the project was to be completed within 22 months. The Company, however, kept on 
changing its requirements. Initial plant configuration included furnaces of 2x27 MVA for 
Si-Mn and 1x16.5 MVA for Fe-Mn. After finalization of L-1 tender, the Company asked 
(August 2012) JVC to set up only Si-Mn furnaces of 2x45 MVA which was not pursued. 
Ministry of Steel’s proposal (October 2013) for merger of SMFAL and RINL-MOIL 
(another JVC of MOIL with RINL) for setting up 3 x 45 MVA furnaces to meet the Si-
Mn requirements of SAIL and RINL was also not found viable due to prevailing cost of 
power and a proposal for captive power plant in the PPP mode was under consideration of 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
78 
JVC. Thus, a JVC formed in 2008 failed to achieve the stated objective of becoming 
captive supplier of Si-Mn to SAIL. The reply of Company that it could buy only where 
the price of ferro-alloy offered by JVC was less than the market price and it was adding 
own capacity for production of Si-Mn to meet its enhanced requirement clearly indicates 
that JVC may not commence its operation in near future. 
(d) S&T Mining Company 
The Company formed a Joint Venture (S&T Mining Company) with Tata Steel in 
September 2008 with 50:50 equity participation to leverage their strength in coal mining. 
No study was conducted to assess the suitability of projects prior to entering into JVC 
which was to develop 50 lakh tonne per annum mine with modern washery to produce 20 
lakh tonne per annum of clean coal.  No coking coal block was established by the JVC 
even after six years from investment of ` 25.88 crore defeating the primary objective of 
securing raw material availability. Initially JVC wanted to develop medium coking coal 
blocks of Central Coalfield Limited for captive use but did not succeed. Later it signed 
with Bharat Coking Coal Limited to revive their 40 years old Bhutgoria colliery having 
6.83 million tonnes reserve of coking coal which did not take off since November 2010. 
JVC incurred losses amounting to ` 13.41 crore during 2008-09 to 2013-14 and 52 per
cent of Company’s investment has since been wiped out.
(e) Steel Processing Units (SPUs) set up as JVC with private enterprises 
The Company decided to set up 5 SPUs in JV mode with 74 per cent  equity stake of 
private enterprises and management control. Each SPU was to convert semi-finished steel 
(billets) into one lakh ton of TMT bars/rounds per annum. SAIL’s financial exposure in 
these 5 SPUs is given in Table 2:- 
Table 2: SAIL’s financial exposure to 5 SPUs as of 31 December 2014 
   (Unit: ` in lakh) 
Name of Joint 
Venture Company 
JV
Partners 
Date of 
Formation 
Equity 
Participation (per
cent)
Total 
Investment 
Present Financial 
exposure (per
cent)*
SAL SAIL JVC 
Limited. (Lakhimpur) 
SAIL February 
2012 
26 79.30 96 
SAL 74 3.70 4 
VSL-SAIL JVC 
Limited. (Ujjain) 
SAIL October 2012 26 27.18 35 
VSL 74 49.45 65 
PRIME GOLD SAIL 
JVC Ltd. (Gwalior) 
SAIL December 
2012 
26 260.00 26 
PGI 74 740.00 74 
TMT SAL SAIL JV 
Limited. (Barabanki) 
SAIL February 
2012 
26 1.30 26 
SAL 74 3.70 74 
ABHINAV-SAIL 
JVC Limited 
(Hoshangabad) 
SAIL May 2012 26 56.00 100 
Abhinav 74 Nil 0 
*Includes contribution towards cost of land and advance against equity 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
79 
Though land was arranged by the Company for four JVCs 1 prior to formation, three 
JVCs2 had not started even plant acquisition activities. Reason for selection of Barabanki 
over other locations was not found on record and JVC has made no progress after 
formation.  
(i) The following inadequacies were noted in JVC formation: 
• JVC partners did not contribute equity capital in the agreed ratio. As could be seen 
in Table 2, financial exposure of the Company in three JVCs was significantly 
higher than the agreed equity participation ratio. The Company should have 
ensured that the private enterprises bring the corresponding funding/assets to 
agreed ratio; 
• As per shareholders’ agreement, the JVCs were to formulate and adopt a business 
plan within 60 days of formation, indicating time scales, detailed project cost 
estimates, financial projections and scheme of financing and timing of capital 
contributions from the shareholders. This was, however, not done even after 2 
years of their formation;  
• The Company selected M/s VSL as a JV partner for Ujjain which was involved in 
misappropriation of ‘semis’ handed over for conversion into TMT under another 
contract where ` 8.51 crore had remained unrecoverable. The case was under 
litigation which raises question on the procedure of selection of JV partner.
5.1.2.3 Monitoring mechanism and corporate governance issues 
SAIL Board Sub-Committee on Strategic Alliance and Joint Ventures was constituted to 
evaluate the proposals and monitor performance. Members of senior Management of the 
Company were on the Board of JVCs. During 2007 to 2014, SAIL Board considered the 
performance of JVCs only twice i.e. in August 2012 and June 2014. Despite adequate 
management structure, there was no effective oversight over the affairs of JVCs and JV 
mode of partnership was not successful. Of the 23 JVCs formed, only seven were 
functional, 12 could not start commercial operation and four were being wound up.
Conclusions
• Annual price revision formula of slag transferred to BoJCL and BJCL was 
not beneficial to SAIL as it was not market driven. 
• 12 JVCs with investment of 
` 42.77 crore did not start commercial operation. 
• Financial exposure of SAIL would increase in ICVL after restructuring due 
to exclusion of CIL and NTPC. 
• More than 52 per cent  of SAIL’s investment has been wiped out in S&T 
Mining Company. 
• Despite adequate management structure, there was no effective oversight 
over the affairs of JVCs. 
                                                           
1 SAL SAIL JVC Limited (Lakhimpur), VSL-SAIL JVC Limited(Ujjain), PRIME GOLD SAIL JVC 
Limited (Gwalior) and ABHINAV-SAIL JVC Ltd (Hoshangabad) 
2 SAL SAIL JVC Limited (Lakhi mpur), VSL-SAIL JVC Limited(Ujja in) and ABHINAV-SAIL JVC Ltd 
(Hoshangabad)

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
80 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in January 2015; their reply was awaited (March 
2015).
5.2 Performance of Coke Oven Batteries  
5.2.1 Introduction  
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL or Company) in its five integrated steel plants 1
had 33 Coke Oven Batteries (COBs or battery) as on March 2014. The main function of 
COBs is to convert coal into coke which is used as the primary fuel and reducing agent in 
the Blast Furnaces (BF) for production of hot metal. The process of carbonization of coal 
in COB yields some by-products (a) namely ‘Coke oven gas’ (CO gas) which has a high 
calorific value and is used as a fuel in production shops like BFs and Rolling Mills
2 for 
heating purposes, (b) coal chemicals like Ammonium Sulphate, Crude Tar and Crude 
Benzol which are saleable in the market after some processing. Thus, efficient 
performance of COBs is critical for steel making in downstream plants.  
Each battery is fitted with average 60-90 ovens
3. The production performance of a battery 
depends on the no. of ovens available for operation vis-a-vis ovens installed as well as 
duration of actual coking time
4 and actual oven pushings 5 against standard norms. Some 
of the ovens were not working due to poor health or otherwise down for repairs, hence 
oven availability was less than Nos. of ovens installed. Less oven pushing caused by poor 
health of COBs had adverse impact on production of BF coke which in turn affected the 
production of hot metal.
Audit assessed the performance of COBs, adequacy and effectiveness of repair and 
maintenance measures implemented by the Company along with performance of rebuilt 
batteries (2007 to 2012) in the five integrated steel plants covering the period 2009-10 to 
2012-13 and updated the status upto 31 March 2014. Replies of the Company/Ministry 
received in February 2013 and March 2014, respectively, have been suitably 
incorporated.
5.2.2 Audit Findings  
5.2.2.1 Production performance of COBs 
The Expert Committee on Coke Making (ECCM) of the Company annually fixed the 
norms for number of oven pushing per day, yield of coke oven gas and other by-products, 
energy consumption etc. Based on this assessment, annual plan for production of BF coke 
is prepared. The Company, however, did not achieve targets of planned production of 
                                                           
1 Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP), Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL), Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP), Durgapur Steel Plant 
(DSP), IISCO Steel Plant (ISP)
2Rolling mills are the units where  finished steel is produced 
3 COBs in various plants have different nos. of ovens installed like BSP has 10 COBs with 65 ovens in 8 
COBs and 67 ovens in 9th &10th COB, BSL has 8 COBs with 69 ovens, DSP has 5 COBs with 78 ovens, 
RSP has 6 COBs with 70 ovens in battery 1 to 3 while 80 ovens in battery 5 and 67 ovens in battery 6 
and, ISP has 3 batteries with 78 ovens and 1 battery with 74 ovens. 
4 Coking time is the duration of time taken by COB to convert coal into coke. 
5 Oven-pushing is a process of removing coke from coke ovens

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
81 
8.703 million tonnes (MT) and there was shortfall of 3.320 MT of BF coke during the 
period, 2009-10 to 2013-14. 
The reasons for short production of coke were analysed in Audit and it was noted that the 
production was less due to less oven pushing. Actual oven-pushings per day vis-a-vis. 
norms fixed in APP in five integrated steel plants was as follows: 
Table 1 
Planned Vs. Actual Oven Pushings 
Years  2009-10 2010-11 2011- 12 2012-13 2013-14 
Planned 2023 2081 2082 1858 1870
Actual 1963 2032 1869 1759 1855
It was seen that targets for oven pushings decided by respective plant managements were 
not achieved due to deterioration in operational health of COBs. This led to loss of 
production of 2.125 MT of BF coke. Deterioration in health of COBs was due to delay in 
routine and timely repair and maintenance (Para 5.2.2.2). 
Out of 33 COBs (refer footnote 1 in para 5.2.1) installed in five integrated steel plants, 26 
COBs including two new
1 COBs were in operation as on 31 March 2014, two COBs were 
under rebuilding2 (BSL #7, & RSP #3), three COBs were under cold 3 repairs (BSP #9, 
BSL # 3 & ISP # 8); one COB was under hot 4 repairs (DSP # 1); and one COB was 
closed (ISP # 9). Table 2 shows that out of 26 COBs in operation, 7 ½ (29 per cent), 8 ½ 
(33 per cent) & 9 ½ (37  per cent) COBs were not performing to their effective capacity 5
in 2011-12, 2012-13 and 2013-14 respectively.
Table 2 
Ineffective performance of COBs in BSP, BSL, DSP and ISP during 2011-12,  
2012-13 and 2013-14 
                                                           
1installed in RSP and ISP in 2013 
2When the extent of damage spreads to almost all are as of the oven complex and no amount of repair 
could sustain the COB, rebuilding plans have to be undertaken. 
3Cold repairs are done by cooling down the ovens and resorted to when hot repairs are not possible and a 
techno-economic feasibility favours it vis-a-vis rebuilding of the battery.
4Hot repair is carried out under the hot condition to contain the ba ttery dimensions within the workable 
limits, while maintaining the coke production in the remaining part of battery. 
5 Effective capacity of a COB is measured by the nos. of Coke ovens available for operation vis-a-vis 
ovens installed as well as actual coking time and actual oven pushings against standard norms which are 
fixed by Plant management keeping in view the actual condition of batteries.
6The batteries in operation for six months or mo re have been considered for calculating averages 
included in Table 2. 
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 
Plant BSP BSL DSP ISP BSP BSL DSP ISP BSP BSL DSP ISP 
(A) Position of Ovens available vis-à-vis ovens installed  
Battery Serial  
No. 
1 7  10  3  7  1  4  9A  7  10 3 5  6  8  1  4  9A 7 10 3 5  6  8  1  4  6  9A
Ovens Installed 65 65 67 69 69 78 78 39 65 67 69 69 69 69 78 78 39 65 67 69 69 69 69 78 78 78 39 
Average 
available Ovens 58 29 38 54 50 58 40 37 44 45 35 57 65 59 57 61 37 55 63 22 38 42 60 48 59 57 37 
(B)  Average 6 actual coking time vis-a-vis  prescribed norms  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
82 
As seen from the table, in BSP, BSL, DSP and ISP fewer ovens were available for 
operation compared to the number of ovens installed. Coking time was more and /or oven 
pushings were less than expected norms resulting in poor production performance of 
batteries.
5.2.2.2  Delay in repairs and maintenance of COBs 
COBs are re-built after 20-25 years of their operations. Average normal life of new or re-
built COBs is about 20-25 years which can be maximised to 30-35 years by an effective 
preventive maintenance regime, hot repairs or cold repairs as per the battery condition. 
Fourteen COBs were 20-42 years old since their installation or last rebuilding. 
There were delays in taking up capital repairs of poorly performing COBs. The Company 
did not take up maintenance of COBs as planned since the number of COBs available was 
not sufficient for planned production of coke. Resultantly, their performance deteriorated 
impacting the health of other functioning COBs. Plant wise position of rebuilding/repairs 
plans and delay in their execution is as under: 
(a) BSP, Bhillai 
COB # 5 Installed in 1965, it stopped production in 1998, Board accorded approval for 
rebuilding in 2004. Though the scheduled com pletion was January 2007, battery 
was commissioned in August 2009 with delay of 32 months. There was delay in 
basic and detailed engineering, supply of equipment and lack of coordination 
between consortium partners. 
COB # 6 Installed in 1966, it stopped production in October 1994. Board accorded approval 
for rebuilding (July 2008), after 14 years. Though the scheduled completion was 
March 2010, battery was completed in June 2011 with delay of 15 months. The 
delay was on account of late supply and rejection of fire clay, silica bricks and 
equipment. 
COB # 9 It was commissioned in 1988 and Hot Complex repair of the battery was done 
during 1999-2002. Expected life of the battery after Hot Complex repairs is about 
6-7 years. According to Comprehensive Project Feasibility Report (CPFR) COB-9 
was due for rebuilding in the period 2008-09 to  2010-2011. But the rebuilding 
work was deferred to fulfill the coke requirement. Consequently, health of this 
battery further deteriorated and it was closed down in April 2011. Company 
accorded approval for cold repairs in July 2012 after lapse of 15 months. 
Abnormal delay in rebuilding of COB-5 and 6 had adverse impact on the health and 
performance of other operating batteries resulting in reduced availability of coke. 
Rebuilding of COB-1 planned in October 2004 was not done. Cold repairs of COB-4 
(planned for 2006-07) were deferred. Due to prolonged use of COB-7, COB-8, COB-9 
Norms fo r
coking time  18 18 18 25 22 20 20 23 18 18 25 19 19 20 20 20 23 18 18 25 20 22 21 20 20 20 22 
Average actual
coking time  22 24 18 23 23 21 20 23 22 19 25 22 21 20 20 20 21 28 21 25 22 20 19 22 22 21 23 
          (C)  Average 6 actual oven pushings  vis-a -vis  prescribed norms 
Norms fo r
pushing pe r
day
87 87 89 46 74 85 61 40 87 89 36 85 84 83 72 61 35 87 89 25 37 61 71 30 63 60 21 
Average actua l
Oven pushings 65 30 51 52 45 67 48 38 48 57 34 58 71 66 67 72 42 47 72 21 41 45 72 52 66 65 39 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
83 
and COB-10 without required repairs, their health deteriorated substantially and resulted 
in bunching of down batteries. 
(b) BSL, Bokaro 
COB # 5 Board first accorded in-principle approval in 1997 for rebuilding. However, on 
account of depressed market conditions, tendering was delayed for 5 years until 
2002. Thereafter tenders were cancelled due to higher prices.  After further delay 
of 2 years, fresh in-principle approval was accorded in May 2004. The battery was 
not commissioned before September 2007, i.e after 10 years from being identified 
for rebuilding.   
COBs # 1 
& # 2 
Delay of 16 and 24 months was noticed in rebuilding of COB-1 and COB-2 due to 
reasons such as late handing-over of site to the contractor, delay in submission and 
approval of drawings, supply of oven machines and refractory bricks, and  start of 
refractory erection work.  
COB # 3 This was 13 years old since it was last rebuilt and number of oven pushings was 
falling due to deterioration in its operational health. It was not put to cold repairs 
till December 2013. 
COBs # 6 
& # 8  
COB-6 and COB-8 were 32 and 21 years old respectively since their 
commissioning and health of both the batteries had deteriorated in absence of 
rebuilding/repairs.
(c) DSP, Durgapur 
COB # 1 
and # 4 
Over 20 years had lapsed since their last rebuilding on the plea that number of 
operational batteries was less. Cold repairs of COB 1 (2003) and COB 4 (2001) did 
not restore their performance. As per the  project feasibility report (2007), COB 1 
and 4 were to be rebuilt during 2011-13 and 2008-11 respectively. However, 
instead of rebuilding, only COB-1 was put to hot repairs (December 2013).
COBs # 2, 
# 5 & # 4 
DSP prepared rebuilding plan for three COBs (2, 5 and 4) which were to be 
completed by 2011. But rebuilding of only one battery (COB-2) was initially 
undertaken and completed in November 2013, while rebuilding of COB-5 (Block 
5A & 5B)  was approved not before  November 2012 (with implementation 
schedule of 30 months) and rebuilding of COB-4 not yet started (February 2015). 
(d) ISP, Burnpur 
COB # 9A It was over 22 years old since its last rebuilding. It could not be put to further 
repairs or rebuilding, pending completion of cold repairs of other battery (COB-8). 
This had resulted in further deterioration in its operating condition, until it was 
permanently closed down in March 2014. 
COB  # 8 As per Action Plan 2011, to improve health of COBs and Oven pushing COB 8 
was planned for Hot repairs from April 2012 to be completed in 18 months. 
However, the same was under repairs (February 2015). 
COB  # 10 Board approved (2006) rebuilding of COB-10, which was completed in 2010 with 
delay of 11 months from scheduled completion. The reason for delay was 
attributed to failure of consultant (MECON) in estimation of civil works which 
were more than the original estimates; besides poor performance of contractor 
(HSCL) which led to termination of contract. 
Audit observed that in order to achieve the short term goal of ensuring adequate and 
uninterrupted supply of BF coke, the Company considerably delayed the required 
shutdowns for repair/re-building. Prolonged and overuse of COBs without timely 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
84 
repair/re-building had resulted in further deterioration in their health as well as that of 
other operating COBs.
5.2.2.3 Effects of poor health of COBs on yield of BF Coke and by-products
Production of BF coke from COBs was less due to poor oven-pushings (Para 2.1) which 
resulted in less availability of inputs in downstream plants. Three steel plants BSP, BSL 
and DSP, therefore procured 2.487 MT of BF coke from market (excluding inter-plant 
transfer) during 2009-10 to 2013-14.
The yield of Coke Oven Gas (CO Gas), which is a by-product generated during the 
carbonization of coal in the COBs, was less than the yearly norms fixed during 2009-14. 
Less availability of CO Gas resulted in unutilized production capacity in rolling mills of 
BSP, BSL, DSP and ISP and consequent production loss of 2.430 MT of saleable steel. 
Additionally, due to less yield of CO Gas, BSP had incurred ` 202.85 crore on purchase 
of 39,134 Kilo litre furnace oil as a substitute for CO Gas, in Plate Mill during 2009-13.  
Low yield of CO Gas also meant low yield of coal chemicals like Ammonium Sulphate, 
Crude Tar and Crude Benzol which are generated as by-products during the carbonization 
of coal in COBs. These by-products were saleable in the market after some processing 
and some quantities were used internally. Yield of the by-products was lower in all the 
plants compared to norms annually fixed. Resultantly, the Company could not produce 
64309 tonnes of Crude Tar, 77282 tonnes of Crude Benzol/Benzol products and 121897 
tonnes of Ammonium Sulphate during 2009-10 to 2013-14 having a potential market 
value of ` 517.79 Crore.
5.2.2.4 Performance of recently built batteries in BSL and ISP 
Performance of rebuilt COBs 5, 1, and 2 in BSL, and COB-10 in ISP was below their 
guaranteed performance parameters and thus resulted in shortfall in availability of BF 
coke. Audit noted that: 
(i) COBs- 5, 1 and 2 of BSL were rebuilt in September 2007, June 2011 and 
February 2012 respectively and guaranteed parameters for coking time and 
pushing were 16.9 hours and 98 ovens per day respectively. Defects in COB-5 
were noticed immediately after its rebuilding in 2007. The battery achieved 
coking time between 21.40 - 22.21 hours and 74 to 78 pushing during 2007-08 to 
2011-12.  Its performance further deteriorated to 58 oven pushings per day during 
2012-13. Even after Hot Complex Repair in September 2013, it achieved pushings 
of 70 ovens per day and coking time between 21.16 to 23.46 hours till March 
2014. During 2011-12 to 2013-14, COB-1 and 2 achieved average oven pushings 
of 65-90 ovens per day and took average coking time in range of 18 to 19 hours or 
more.
(ii) COB-10 of ISP was rebuilt in August 2010 and envisaged performance 
parameters were 104 pushings per day and coking time of 18 hours. Actual oven 
pushings per day during 2011-12 and 2013-14 ranged between 83 to 91 and 
coking time was 20.4 hours to 22.5 hours during the same period. ECCM opined 
(January 2012) that such high coking time in a newly commissioned battery may 
not only deteriorate coke quality but may also adversely affect the health of COB.  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
85 
5.2.2.5 Oversight and monitoring of COBs performance was inadequate 
Though the Company discussed the status of batteries, future requirement of coke, action 
plan to improve the health of COBs and oven pushings in its 377 th Board meeting held on 
29 November 2011, the existing Plant level oversight arrangements like ECCM remained 
ineffective. There was no long-term plan for repairing/rebuilding of COBs specifying 
timely shutdowns required for repair and rebuilding. 
The Company in its replies (February 2013) conceded that the main reasons for less 
production of BF coke and other by-products were less oven pushings caused by poor 
health of oven batteries; and low overall availability of COBs in some plants was due to 
bunching of their repair caused by their prolonged operation without repair. It further 
stated that shutting down of COBs for the required repairs or rebuilding would have 
reduced coke production to a great extent leading to more dependence on purchase of 
coke. Hot/cold repairs and rebuilding of COBs were planned in such a way to ensure 
continuous and adequate supply of BF coke. Ministry in its reply (March 2014) reiterated 
the views of the Company.  
The reply only reinforces the audit observation that the Company did not provide timely 
shutdown of COBs for the repair/rebuilding which resulted in continuous deterioration of 
operational performance of defective COBs as well as affecting the health of other 
operating COBs. 
Conclusion
In audit opinion, norms and planned production fixed by ECCM could have been 
generally achieved because these performance norms of COBs were mostly below 
the rated capacity and were fixed after assessing the availability of COBs and status 
of their current operational health. The Company, however, could not achieve these 
norms, resulting in shortfall of 3.320 MTs of BF coke from COBs during 2009-2014 
against the plan. This factored in market procurement of 2.487 MT of BF coke 
(excluding interplant transfer) in three plants, namely BSL, BSP, and DSP during 
the same period. Less oven pushings due to poor health of COBs resulted in less 
production of 2.125 MTs of BF coke during 2009-14. Low availability of batteries 
was also due to bunching caused by prolonged operations without required repairs. 
Delays in repairing/rebuilding of COBs had a cascading effect on the health of other 
batteries and their condition further deteriorated due to deferment of scheduled 
repairs and prolonged use, in order to meet the immediate requirement of BF Coke. 
A long-term plan for repairs and rebuilding of COBs coupled with effective 
monitoring mechanism is required in all the steel plants to ensure good operational 
health of COBs. 
5.3 Non-recovery of interest on differential excise duty  
The Company failed to ensure recovery of interest charges of 
` 61.94 crore on 
delayed payment of excise duty on long rails supplied to Indian Railways by not 
insisting a suitable clause in the MOU.
Steel Authority of India Limited (the Company) had entered (2003) into a Memorandum 
of Understanding (MOU) with the Indian Railways (IR) for supply of Long Rails/ Panels 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
86 
from its Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP). According to MOU, Chairman, Railway Board would 
decide the final price on the recommendation of the joint pricing committee of IR and the 
Company.  
Scrutiny of records for the period January 2005 to March 2012 revealed that the 
Company had paid differential excise duty of ` 353.99 crore to Government of India 
along with interest amounting to ` 61.94 crore for supply of 51.79 lakh tonnes of rails. 
The Company recovered differential excise duty from IR but failed to recover interest 
charges as there was no such provision in the MOU with IR. Audit noted that final prices 
of rails were approved by the Railway Board in 6 months to 69 months after dispatch of 
goods. The prices finally fixed for supply were either higher or lower than the provisional 
prices. As a result, the Company paid differential excise duty and interest thereon where 
the final approved prices were higher than the provisional pr ices. Final prices for the rails 
supplied after 1 April 2012 were not approved by the Railway Board (February 2015). 
The Company did not make any effort to recover interest charges or include an 
appropriate condition in the MOU to safeguard its claim for interest charges of ` 30.77 
crore for the period January 2005 to December 2008 with IR. The Company belatedly 
realized its mistake and wrote a letter (May 2014) to IR seeking reimbursement of 
interest of ` 31.17 crore paid for the period, July 2010 to March 2012 which the latter 
refused (July 2014) stating that that they were not liable to pay any such interest. The
Company after losing cases at lower judiciary has filed SLP in the Supreme Court 
(October 2010) where no relief by way of stay was given.
While attributing the delay in finalization of rail prices to IR, the Company stated 
(November 2014) that they had demanded the interest arising out from differential excise 
duty from the IR; Ministry reiterated (February 2015) the views of the Company. 
The fact remains that the Company had failed to safeguard their financial interest by not 
insisting on a suitable clause in the MOU with IR to ensure recovery of interest on 
delayed payment of excise duty that had in turn, arisen due to delay in finalisation of 
price of rails by IR. This resulted in the Company incurring avoidable expenditure of 
` 61.94 crore. 
5.4 Under recovery of electricity charges  
The Company did not recover electricity charges at the minimum of domestic tariff 
of State Electricity Boards (SEBs) for electricity supplies to employees in mines 
township in violation of Board approval which resulted in benefits of ` 30.32 crore 
to employees. The company also did not segregate electricity supply lines for 
industrial and domestic use.
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) procures electricity from the concerned SEBs 
and supplies at subsidized rate to the employees residing in the company’s township in 
Mines. Electricity cost (i.e. cost to the company) purchased from the SEBs was 
significantly higher than the amount recovered from the employees. In order to rationalise 
the electricity subsidy, the SAIL decided (23 March 2002) that the chargeable rate for 
electricity supply to the employees in township would be at least equal to the minimum of 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
87 
domestic tariff of SEBs w.e.f 1 April 2002. Audit reviewed the records of all the mines ♠
having townships (except Nandini and Hirri Mines) for 2008-09 to 2013-14 and noted 
that:
(i) Mine managements of Barsua and Kalta mines had implemented the Board 
decision. They also revised the electricity charges recoverable from employees 
periodically which were equal to or higher than the minimum domestic tariff fixed 
by the SEB. Effective March 2003 and August 2003, KIOM-MIOM
1 and BOM 1
management respectively revised electricity charges of executives at par with the 
minimum of domestic tariff of SEB. No further increase was made even when the 
concerned SEB had increased its minimum domestic rates. Gua mines periodically 
revised the electricity charges for executives. Eight mines, however, did not 
implement the Board decision and the electricity charges being recovered from 
employees were less than the minimum of domestic tariff fixed by SEBs. The 
employees were being charged fixed monthly amount which was less than the 
minimum of domestic tariff of SEBs and/or predetermined fixed units without any 
linkage with the actual consumption of electricity. As a result, mines employees 
received benefits amounting to ` 30.32 crore during 2008-09 to 2013-14.
(ii) Electricity for Industrial/ Commercial purpose is provided with High Tension 
Voltage Services (HT connection) and is charged at a rate higher than the rate at 
which domestic consumption is charged. Rajhara mines have separated domestic 
connection from industrial connection for electricity supply to township. The 
separation, however, was not done in other mines and they continued to pay 
energy charges for domestic use at industrial rate. The amount of extra 
expenditure on this account was not quantifiable in the absence of chargeable rate 
for domestic use. 
In C&AG’s Report No. 11 of 2007 it was reported that above decision (2002) of the SAIL 
was not implemented in Bolani mine. While electricity charges were revised in line with 
Board decision with effect from 1 August 2003 for executives, these were not revised 
from time to time when SEB had increased the ir rates. Electricity charges continued to be 
recovered from non executives at pre-determined rates, last revised in August 2008. 
Ministry stated (March 2015) that: (i) necessary action is being initiated to increase the 
recovery rates of electricity for exe cutive employees thereby complying with the SAIL 
Board directives; (ii) The exercise to revise the electricity charge for non-executive 
employees would be completed within six months; and (iii) In case of KIOM, MIOM and 
GOM due to practical difficulties, separation of domestic consumption from industrial 
lines is not feasible.  
The reply of the Ministry may be viewed against the facts that (i) after the issue was 
pointed out to Ministry in December 2014 by audit, the SAIL management issued the 
recovery instructions for executives only in case of BOM, KIOM MIOM, KTR, and 
BNP-TDR mines, with retrospective effect from 5 October 2009, whereas the Board 
                                                           
♠  Kiriburu iron ore mines (KIOM); Megh ahatuburu iron ore mines (MIOM); Bolani Ore Mines(BOM); 
Barsua iron ore mines (BIM) ; Kalta iron ore mines (KIM) ; Gua ore mines (GOM); Kuteswar 
limestone mines (KTR); Tulsidamar dolomite mines (TDR) ; Chasnalla Colliery; and Rajhara mines.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
88 
decision was effective from April 2002 and included both executive and non-executives. 
Similar actions have not been initiated in case of Rajhara mines and Chasnalla colliery, 
(ii) Citing of practical difficulties in separation of domestic consumption from industrial 
lines in case of KIOM, MIOM and GOM without any technical study is not acceptable 
because segregation of lines between industrial and domestic consumption was possible 
in Rajhara mines while it is under progress in BIM and BOM townships. The reply was 
silent on separation of lines in rest of the mines
♥ .
Thus, SAIL did not implement its decision of March 2002 to charge its employees in 
townships in Mines at minimum of the rate charged by SEBs for domestic consumption 
for electricity which resulted in conferring benefits amounting to ` 30.32 crore on its 
employees during 2008-14. The Company also did not segregate electricity supply lines 
for industrial and domestic use. 
5.5 Blocking of funds 
Failure of the management to provide requisite and timely shutdown of the sinter 
machines for replacement of old battery cyclones, led to suspension of work on 
Electro Static Precipitators  since July 2010, resulted in blocking of funds of ` 26.91
crore for more than three and half years. BSL also could not meet the stipulated 
emission norms fixed by Central Pollution Control Board. 
Sinter plant in Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL) of Steel Authority of India limited (SAIL or 
Company) has 3 Nos. sinter machines. Each sinter machine is attached with wind boxes, 
vaccum chambers, wind main ducts, 2 battery cyclones and 2 exhaust fans to control dust 
emission. Six battery cyclones in sinter machines had outlived their useful life, and dust 
emission from the plant was more (250-280 mg/Nm
3) than the statutory norm of 150 
mg/Nm3 fixed by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB). SAIL approved ‘in-
principle’ (January 2005) replacement of the battery cyclones with Electro Static 
Precipitators (ESPs). After delayed finalization  in scope of work, the contract was 
awarded (October 2007) to a consortium of M/s Hamon Research Cottrell, USA 
(Consortium Leader)  and M/s Shriram EPC Limited (SEPC), India (Consortium 
Member), on a turnkey basis at a total cost of ` 75.16 crore.
Audit noticed that the stated goal of overall reduction in emission level was not achieved 
as only one ESP has been replaced so far; (February 2015) and ` 26.91 crore has 
remained blocked for more than three and half years due to failure of management to 
arrange shutdowns stipulated in the contract to install the remaining five ESPs. Detailed 
observations are as under: 
• As per the contract, the schedule of implementation required that all six ESPs 
shall be installed one after another. First battery cyclone No. 6 of sinter machine 3 
had to be dismantled after isolation. New ESP-6 would be installed in the location 
of this battery cyclone along with related dust disposal system and ducting. 
Thereafter, ESP would be connected to the sinter machine No. 3 and be 
                                                           
♥  Bhwnathpur-Tulsidamar dolomite mines (BNP-TDR), Kuteswar Limestone mines (KTR), Kalta iron 
ore Mines(KIM) and Chasnalla Colliery 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
89 
commissioned.  One exhauster would be shut down for a maximum period of 5 
months for dismantling and erection activities. The second battery cyclone of 
sinter machine No. 3 would be dismantled and replaced with ESP, battery 
cyclones of Sinter machine nos. 2 & 1 would be replaced one after another. The 
shutdown of each sinter machine would be given in phases in order to ensure 
uninterrupted sinter feed to blast furnaces. Contract also provided that M/s HRC 
consortium  would require 5 months shutdown (including one week pre-shutdown 
and one week post-shutdown) time for dismantling each battery cyclone for each 
machine and installation and commissioning of ESP in its place. 
• As per the project implementation schedule, first shutdown for ESP-6 was to be 
given in April 2008. BSL, however, took 21 months to grant first shutdown in 
January 2010. Apart from delays in  preparatory works by the contractor,  delay 
was largely attributed to BSL as there was change in scope of work; and the 
contractor was made to execute certain activities ‘off-ESP’ site (out of contract 
agreement), before shutdown, which otherwise could have been  executed parallel 
to the  main ESP erection work. After ESP-6 was installed, put to use and 
capitalized (June 2010) at a cost of ` 11.41 crore, BSL did not give other 
shutdowns to replace other five ESPs on the plea of loss of sinter production. BSL 
also changed the location of new ESP -1 which was not envisaged in the contract 
necessitating change in locations of other ESPs and consequent cost and time 
overrun.
• In the meantime, the balance amount of ` 26.91 crore were paid (up to July 2011) 
to the contractor for men, material and machines mobilized at the project site for 
reception of remaining ESPs, which has remained blocked for past more than  
three and half years (July 2011 to February 2015). Due to idling of men and 
machinery since June 2010, the contractor decided to withdraw from the site in 
January 2011and issued an arbitration notice which had been put on hold. After 
delay of two years, the BSL decided (May 2013) to provide shut down with effect 
from June 2013 for installation of ESP-5. Even this shutdown did not materialize 
as ESP locations were revised.
• It was noticed that CPCB (July 2011) had pointed out inadequacy in air pollution 
control equipments installed with sinter plants and issued direction to BSL under 
section 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act 1986, to commission ESP to ensure 
compliance to stipulated emission norms. On BSL’s failure to comply with the 
above directions, CPCB not only forfeited the bank guarantee of ` 50 Lakh 
(January 2014), but also demanded (August 2014) another bank guarantee of ` 50 
Lakh. CPCB also found (December 2014) that progress of work in respect of 
ESPs at sinter plant was grossly unsatisfactory and directed BSL to complete the 
work by August 2015. 
• The Company stated that: (i) location of ESP was changed due to production 
requirements; and (ii) shutdowns for the remaining ESPs could not be provided 
because the contractor did not liquidate the defects of ESP-6, they did not conduct 
performance guarantee parameters on ESP-6 to demonstrate achieving dust 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
90 
content of 50 mg/Nm3, and the management could not risk sinter production by 
giving shutdown for ESP.
Reply is not tenable as: (i) the scope of work and location of ESPs were to be finalized 
upfront and not after award of contract (ii) new ESP-6 was being operated uninterrupted 
since 17 June 2010 and had achieved not only stack emission norms of 150 mg/Nm
3 of 
CPCB but gradually obtained guaranteed emission parameter of 50 mg/Nm 3. This was a 
turnkey contract, and sequence of replacement of six ESPs and the required shutdown 
was stipulated in the contract. Therefore, shutdown of existing facility was a contractual 
requirement to execute the work sequentially. Project Division of the BSL had also 
sought shutdowns from the user department for completing remaining five ESPs which 
was not granted on consideration of interruption in production. Delaying shutdown to 
avoid slippage in production was not only against the contractual provisions, but also 
resulted in non-achievement of the stated objective from this investment, i.e. to achieve 
the dust emission level in all six battery cyclone from 250-280 mg/Nm
3 to below the 
statutory norm of 150 mg/Nm3.
Thus, failure of BSL to provide requisite and timely shutdown of the sinter machines not 
only led to violation of CPCB’s emission norms but also resulted in  blocking up of funds 
of ` 26.91 crore for more than three and half years. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in February 2015; their reply was awaited (March 
2015).
5.6 Avoidable expenditure in ISP/SAIL 
The Company had to incur an avoidable expenditure of ` 26.40 crore on major 
repairs after an explosion in boiler which had occurred due to non compliance with 
the contractual design parameters and advisories for boiler operation set by the 
equipment supplier.
IISCO Steel Plant (ISP) of Steel Authority of India Limited (the Company) awarded a 
contract to Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited (BHEL) in October 2007 for installation of 
Power and Blowing Station which included three boilers each of 200 ton per hour 
capacity. As per Clause 01.02.01 of the contract agreement, the boilers were designed for 
firing Blast Furnace (BF) gas, Basic Oxygen Furnace (BOF) gas, Coke Oven (CO) gas 
and Coal Bed Methane (CBM) as main fuel. Light Diesel Oil (LDO) was to be used for 
initial start up to 10 per cent rated capacity.
Gas from BF and BOF was not available due to delays in completion of BF and BOF 
projects. Coke Oven Battery-11 was ready and supply of steam from boilers was a 
technical requirement for pre-commissioning activities. The boilers were also ready. 
Keeping the design parameters of the boilers in mind, BHEL and the ISP management 
had mutually agreed in a meeting held on 15 February 2012 that the boilers would not be 
run continuously on LDO alone; the boilers could run on LDO continuously for 
maximum 7 days for charging of first chamber of Coke Oven Battery; and after an 
interval of 15 to 30 days, for further maximum 7 days for charging the second chamber. 
As noted below, the ISP management did not adhere to these design parameters risking 
safety of human life and equipment, and ignored repeated forewarnings and advisories on 
boiler operating instructions from BHEL resulting in an explosion in a boiler. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
91 
On specific demand from the ISP management, BHEL allowed the Boiler-3 to run 
continuously for 14 days from 5 December to 19 December 2012 with a condition that 
any deterioration in performance parameters at later date would be solely on the 
Company’s account. This condition was in line with the Clause 26.2 of the contract which 
states that ‘The Employer shall have the right to take possession or use any completed or 
partially completed work. Such possession or use shall not be deemed to be an acceptance 
of any work done not in accordance with the Contract. However, any damage to such 
work solely to such provision or use shall be to the employers account.’ BHEL reminded 
the ISP management on 21 December 2012 that the boilers cannot be run on LDO alone 
and advised the ISP management to expedite completion of the other fuel lines i.e. BF 
and BOF gas. 
The Boiler-3 was started again on 10 January 2013 and a minor explosion occurred in the 
boiler on 24 January 2013 because prolonged running of the boiler with LDO fuel alone 
had contributed to formation of fuel carryover and deposition which in turn promoted a 
secondary combustion. After repair the BHEL expert put some additional riders including 
3-4 days shutdown to boiler every 10 days for inside cleaning and washing. After 
restoration the boiler was re-started on 4 February 2013 and it was running continuously 
with LDO and the clogging of valves/deposition of unburnt LDO was noted. However, 
the Company did not give shutdown requested on 3 March 2013 by BHEL to clear the 
same, and after a continuous run of 37 days, a major explosion took place on 12 March 
2013 resulting in damage of the Boiler-3.  
BHEL refused to repair the boiler without any extra cost citing provisions of clause 26.2 
of the contract. The insurer too rejected insurance claim
♣  twice citing negligence in 
operation of the boiler. The Company therefore had to award a contract to BHEL for 
repair of the boiler at a total cost of ` 26.40 crore inclusive of taxes and duties. 
While denying negligence in running the boiler, the Company stated (November 2014) 
that incident of boiler explosion was merely an accident, and all the technical parameters 
required to run the boiler were duly taken care of. Discussion on the settlement of claim 
by M/s BHEL and ISP with the insurer was under progress.
The reply is not tenable as BHEL and insurer had noted violation of manufacturer 
instructions by ISP in operation of boiler which was found to be the cause of explosion. 
BHEL intimated (May 2014) to ISP that insurer had rejected the claim altogether citing 
reasons that were neither attributable to nor defensible by BHEL. No amount was realised 
against the insurance claim (February 2015). 
It would be seen that Company operated the boiler in violation of manufacturer’s 
recommendations which resulted in an explosion in the boiler. As a result the Company 
had to incur avoidable expenditure of ` 26.40 crore on restoration of damaged boiler.   
The matter was reported to the Ministry in November 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015).
                                                           
♣  Insurance policy was taken by BHEL 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
92 
CHAPTER VI: MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
National Textile Corporation Limited 
6.1 Loss due to deficiency in settlement 
Entering into settlement agreement for sharing of land with the erstwhile owner, 
without ascertaining commercial viability, resulted in a loss of ` 205.01 crore.
National Textile Corporation (SM) Limited (the Company), functioning under the 
Ministry of Textiles (MOT), was declared a sick Company in 1993. Subsequently, under 
the provisions of Textile Undertakings (Nationalization) Act, 1995 (Act), various textile 
mills of the Company were nationalized including Shree Madhusudan Mills (the Mill), 
Mumbai. A scheme for revival of the Mill was sanctioned (2002) by the Board for 
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) and as per the envisaged scheme, the Mill 
was identified as unviable, which was to be closed and disposed of in order to fund 
revival of viable mills. 
In the meantime, previous owners of the Mill viz. Hall & Anderson Limited (HAL) filed 
a writ petition in the High Court of Calcutta (October 2004) challenging its 
nationalization. HAL also challenged (2005) the rehabilitation scheme sanctioned by 
BIFR in the Appellate Authority for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (AAIFR) on 
the ground that the Mill should not have been declared unviable. The appeal was 
dismissed by AAIFR (July 2006) against which a Special Leave Petition (SLP) was filed 
(2006) in the Supreme Court. An interim order was passed by the Supreme Court 
(December 2006) directing that the property should not be sold. HAL subsequently filed 
an application (June 2008) in the Supreme Court requesting for taking over the Mill as 
SPV/JV. Supreme Court ordered (22 July 2008) that if the petitioner approached the 
Company with a request for amicable settlement, the same may be considered and 
decision taken thereon may be placed before the Supreme Court. Pursuant to the order of 
Supreme Court, HAL filed a proposal (02 August 2008) for revival and rehabilitation of 
the Mill with the Ministry of Textiles (MOT) and the Company for an amicable 
settlement. 
MOT directed the Company to obtain legal opinion before entering into any settlement. 
Accordingly, legal opinion of Attorney General of India (AGI) was obtained (October 
2008) by the Company. As per AGI’s opinion, the Company could consider the proposal 
for amicable settlement after thoroughly examining and scrutinizing all aspects of the 
proposal including its commercial viability and worthiness within the legal framework. 
A committee constituted by the Company to examine the matter decided (November-
December 2008) that land of the Mill could be shared in the ratio of 65:35 between NTC 
and HAL in line with the settlement previously made in the case of another mill, namely 
Kohinoor Mill. In consideration, HAL would pay ` 33.05
♦  crore (35 per cent of ` 83.86 
                                                           
♦  Including ` 2.16 crore paid to Central Bank of India and ` 1.54 crore being statutory dues. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
93 
crore plus all costs, charges, stamp duty for execution/registration of conveyance deed) 
based on realizable value of the land of ` 83.86 crore as mentioned in the BIFR Scheme. 
MOT approved (January 2009) the proposal on the condition that NTC should satisfy 
itself about the commercial viability as per AGI’s advice. Further, the Company as per the 
decision of the Board of Directors filed the terms of settlement, in the Supreme Court 
(February 2009). Settlement amount of ` 33.05 crore was received by the Company 
during April to July 2009. 
Audit examination revealed that: 
• Despite AGI’s categorical opinion to examine commercial viability and MOT’s 
reiteration (January 2009) that the Company should satisfy itself about the 
commercial viability as per the Attorney General of India’s advice, there was 
nothing on record to indicate that NTC had examined and protected its 
commercial interest. This is clear from the fact that the settlement amount arrived 
at by the Company, based on ` 83.86 crore as mentioned in the BIFR Scheme, 
was not the expected realization from the sale of assets as was claimed by NTC, 
but was only the balancing figure to meet the cost of the Scheme. This is 
corroborated by the fact that the Mill was valued in the same BIFR Scheme at 
` 157.91 crore in 2002 and as per Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner Mumbai (2009) 
the rate for developed land was ` 86, 300 per square meter. 
• Improper settlement with HAL led to loss of ` 205.01 crore to NTC based on rate 
of ` 86, 300 per square meter. Loss based on the reserve price fixed by NTC 
during the same year i.e in November 2009 for land of another mill (Bharat Mill) 
in the same area would work out to ` 577.02 crore
♥  (Annexure-XX).
• Detailed settlement terms were communicated by NTC to MOT (December 2008), 
including settlement amount, the basis of which was not evaluated by MOT and 
approval to the settlement was given by MOT (January 2009) with a condition 
that NTC should satisfy itself about the commercial viability as per advice of AGI. 
NTC stated (Feb 2014) that as this was a settlement and not a sale transaction, the 
valuation of the property was not taken into account and only the sharing of the land was 
the ultimate outcome of the settlement. 
Reply is not acceptable. Though it was a settlement and not a sale transaction, the 
Company/Ministry, while examining commercial viability, failed to arrive at any fair 
value of land, resulting in a settlement at a value much below the prevailing market price.  
Thus, the decision of MOT/NTC to reach settlement ignoring the fact that the property 
was prime freehold land, without properly assessing its commercial viability, resulted in a 
loss of at least ` 205.01 crore to the Company. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in November 2013; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015).
                                                           
♥  Loss has been worked out with reference to ‘Reserve Price’ for Bharat Textile Mills. Bharat Textile 
Mills was, however, sold at ` 1505 crore (i.e. more than double of its reserve price in September 2010). 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
94 
CHAPTER VII- MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER 
DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
National Projects Construction Corporation Limited  
7.1 Inordinate delay in terminating projects
National Projects Construction Corporation Limited terminated contracts in 
respect of six roads on detecting fake documents submitted by the contractor and 
inordinately delayed termination of contracts for another 30 roads. This led to 
additional cost of ` 16.42 crore on re-tendering contracts for completion of 
unfinished work in respect of 19 roads.    
National Projects Construction Corporation Limited (NPCC) entered (August 2004) into a 
tripartite agreement with the Ministry of Rural Development (Ministry), Government of 
India, and Government of Bihar for executing construction, commissioning and 
maintenance of roads in the state of Bihar under the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 
(PMGSY), a scheme intended to enhance rural development by promoting access to 
economic and social services through developing all-weather road connectivity. NPCC, 
being implementing agency, was to receive fee @ 10 per cent of the total project cost of 
the awarded works (for construction and five years maintenance) from the Ministry. 
NPCC was assigned projects during 2004-05 to 2009-10 comprising execution of 
construction of 692 roads at a cost of `1,431.63 crore.  Accordingly, NPCC invited open 
tenders as per Standard Bidding Document
1 (SBD) and awarded works to the various 
contractors from time to time. 
Scrutiny of records (February 2014) revealed that NPCC terminated contracts in respect 
of 36 roads 2 having contract value of ` 81.59 crore during September 2010 to August 
2013. In this connection, it was observed that: 
• Clause 12.1 of Section 2–Instructions to Bidders under SBD stipulates submission 
of various documents along with bid including documents in support of 
qualification, experience, ownership of construction equipment etc. NPCC 
accepted bids of M/s Birendra Tiwari Construction in respect of six
3 roads 
(September 2009) without verification of documents prescribed under the SBD. 
Subsequently, on detecting that the contractor had submitted fake documents with 
the tenders, NPCC terminated contracts for three roads each in September 2010 
and December 2010.  
                                                           
1 SBD prepared by National Rural Roads Development Agency and adopted by the Government of Bihar. 
2 Buxar (8), Bhojpur (9), Rohtas (7), Patna (6) and Nalanda (6). 
3 Buxar (3) and Bhojpur (3). 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
95 
• The date of completion of works was 12 months after start of work as prescribed 
under the SBD. However, the contractors did not complete the work in respect of 
remaining 30 roads within the prescribed time. However, NPCC did not initiate 
timely action for termination of these non-performing contracts. Subsequently, 
NPCC terminated these contracts with inordinate delays which ranged between 
744 days and 1838 days after schedule dates of completion of the 
construction/contract.
• In case of termination of contract because of the contractor's default, General 
condition number 24 of contract under SBD stipulates recovery of 20 per cent of 
the value of unfinished work from the contractor on account of additional cost for 
completing the work. NPCC invited fresh tenders during July 2013 to January 
2014 for completion of the unfinished works in respect of 19 roads out of 
terminated contracts for 36 roads involving an additional construction cost of 
` 16.42 crore beyond contractor's liability of 20 per cent . This additional 
construction cost included ` 1.88 crore in respect of contracts for five out of six 
roads earlier awarded to M/s Birendra Tiwari Construction.
• NPCC requested (January 2014) the Ministry for approval of `11.16 crore as 
additional cost for completion of unfinished work of nine roads. While 
considering NPCC’s proposal, the Ministry observed (February 2014) that there 
was negligence to terminate the contracts on the part of the Company as it took 
about five years to terminate contracts in 2012-13 against their awarding in 2007-
08. The Ministry further stated that as per clause 12 (c) of the tripartite agreement, 
in case of escalation due to delay/negligence of NPCC, cost would be borne by it.
• NPCC again sent justification in support of their proposal and requested (February 
2014) the Ministry to accord approval for additional cost involved in terminated 
contracts for nine roads. Subsequently, NPCC requested (March 2014) the 
Ministry for approval of additional construction cost of `5.26 crore in respect of 
balance 10 roads. The Ministry, while addressing NPCC's earlier request of 
January 2014 and February 2014 maintained that excess cost in the nine road 
works was not on account of material change in scope of work or quantities but 
solely because of time overrun and directed (March 2014) NPCC to bear the 
additional cost for the terminated contracts and complete the work satisfactorily at 
the earliest.
Thus, award of contracts in respect of six roads to an ineligible contractor without 
following the tendering procedure scrupulously, and inordinately delayed termination of 
other incomplete contracts resulted in time and cost overrun to the tune of `16.42 crore in 
respect of completion of unfinished construction work of 19 roads. Progress of work 
relating to balance contracts for 17 roads ranged between 20 per cent and 95 per cent and
fate of unfinished work of these roads was yet to be decided (May 2014). Further, denial 
of the Ministry to approve the additional cost corroborates the fact that additional cost has 
to be borne by NPCC.
The Management stated (March 2014) that as per SBD, evaluation of technical bids was 
to be completed within five working days from the date of bid opening and there was no 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
96 
scope for verification of documents due to time constraint. Further, the PMGSY roads 
were located in remote villages, persistent law and order problem in rural areas 
contributed to delay in progress of work. The Management further stated (May 2014) that 
due to increase in cost of materials and closure of operating quarries in Bihar and 
inadequate release of fund from the Ministry, the contractors slowed down the work. As 
these factors were beyond their control, they were granted time extension to complete the 
work. The Management added that the Ministry was requested to approve additional cost 
for construction of 19 roads and NPCC would not execute the work if additional cost was 
not approved by the Ministry. NPCC also added that it had not awarded the work for 
these 19 contracts to any agency and, hence, there was no burden of additional cost as 
projected by Audit.
The Management's reply is not acceptable as the time schedule for bid evaluation was as 
per the SBD and was to be abided by. The additional cost was not on account of material 
change in the scope of work or quantities but solely because of time overrun as stated by 
the Ministry. The Management delayed termination of contracts leading to additional cost 
of ` 11.16 crore in respect of contracts for nine roads, which has to be borne by NPCC in 
terms of clause 12(C) of the Tripartite Agreement of August 2004. The Ministry also 
refused to accede to the Management's request and, therefore, the liability devolves on 
NPCC. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December 2014; their reply was awaited 
(March 2015). 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
97 
CHAPTER VIII- IRREGULARITIES IN PAYMENT OF 
ENTITLEMENTS AND RECOVERIES, 
CORRECTIONS/RECTIFICATIONS BY CPSEs AT THE 
INSTANCE OF AUDIT 
8. Following significant instances of irregularities in payment of various entitlements and 
allowances to the employees of CPSEs were noticed in audit:  
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited, Hindustan Petroleum Corporation 
Limited, Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, GAIL (India) Limited, Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited and Engineers India Limited 
8.1 Irregular payment towards encashment of Half Pay Leave/Earned Leave/Sick 
Leave as well as employer's share of EPF contribution on leave encashment 
Encashment of half pay leave/sick leave/earned leave in deviation from DPE 
guidelines, resulted in irregular payment of ` 157.91 crore.  Further, CPSEs made 
irregular contributions of ` 12.15 crore on account of provident fund in respect of 
leave encashment to employees in violation of the judgment (March 2008) of Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of India and instruc tions of Employees Provident Fund 
Organization. Further, one CPSE did not adjust the employer’s share of 
contribution amounting to ` 14.94 crore on leave encashment paid prior to March 
2008.
In line with the Department of Personnel & Training, GOI guidelines (October 1997) 
enhancing the ceiling for accumulation of Earned Leave (EL) to 300 days for Central 
Government employees, DPE allowed (August 2005) enhanced accumulation of EL up to 
300 days for the employees of CPSEs.  On a reference made by the Ministry of Shipping, 
DPE clarified to all the CPSEs on 26 October 2010 that employees of CPSEs were not 
permitted to accumulate EL for more than 300 days and CPSEs are not permitted to 
encash leave beyond 300 days at the time of retirement of its employees. 
In September 2008, GOI allowed consideration of both EL and Half Pay Leave (HPL) for 
encashment for Central Government employees with effect from January 2006, subject to 
a limit of 300 days for both kind of leave taken together. In a further clarification of 17 
July 2012, DPE referred to its instructions of April 1987 and reiterated that on retirement 
for CPSEs employees, EL and HPL could be considered for encashment subject to an 
overall limit of 300 days and that cash equivalent payable for HPL would be equal to 
leave salary as admissible for half pay plus dearness allowance and commutation of HPL 
would not be permissible to make up the shortfall in case EL to the credit of a CPSE 
employee was less than  300 days.  Further, GOI guidelines do not permit encashment of 
sick leave, which has been reiterated by GOI in December 2012 and February 2014 also. 
A. Audit observed that the following CPSEs deviated from the DPE guidelines and 
made irregular payment of ` 157.91 crore to their employees towards HPL/EL 
encashment on superannuation/separation over and above the ceiling of 300 days. 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
98 
Administrative 
Ministry 
Name of CPSE Period ` in 
crore
Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited April 2007 
to March 
2013
110.76
Hindustan Petroleum 
Corporation Limited 
10.39
Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Limited 
17.64
Engineers India Limited April 2006 
to March 
2014
19.12
Total  157.91 
ONGC stated (September 2013) that instructions issued by the Government are not 
automatically applicable to ONGC and being a Maharatna PSU, it was empowered to 
structure and implement schemes relating to personnel and human resource management, 
training, voluntary retirement schemes, etc.  In view of this delegation of powers, ONGC 
Board is competent to introduce schemes relating to personnel and human resource 
schemes like Good Health Reward Scheme. 
HPCL stated (January 2014) that unless otherwise specifically stated, the instructions and 
provisions pertaining to holidays and Leave Rules in Central Government offices/ 
establishments are not ipso facto applicable to Industrial DA pattern CPSEs. HPL policy 
in HPCL is administered only on medical grounds.  
BPCL in its reply (October 2013) stated that encashment of HPL was introduced to 
ensure undisrupted supply of petroleum products to customers by avoiding absenteeism 
towards the end of the year or at the tim e of retirement merely with the intention of 
exhausting the leave. It also served as a reward for employees to maintain good health 
and who did not need to take 'full pay' sick leave, thereby facilitating round-the-clock 
working.
EIL stated (September 2014) that the provision regulating sick leave and its encashment 
at the time of superannuation is arising out of the operational needs and work requirement 
of the organization and was framed under the provisions of empowerment/flexibility to 
CPSEs for framing Leave Rules under the DPE Circular dated April 1987. It further 
added that nowhere till December 2012, it was mentioned that sick leave/half pay leave 
cannot be encashed at the time of superannuation. Even in GoI at the time of 
superannuation, commuted leave is encashable as a good health reward and the same 
subsequently along with earned leave has been limited to a ceiling of 300 days. 
Replies are not acceptable as leave encashment beyond the overall policy of GoI was not 
permitted as per DPE instructions of April 1987. Further, DPE’s circular of 26 October 
2010 clarified that CPSEs were not permitted to encash leave beyond the overall ceiling 
of 300 days.  In another clarification issued in July 2012, referring to instructions of April 
1987, DPE reiterated that EL and HPL could be considered for encashment on 
superannuation subject to overall limit of 300 days. Moreover, clarification issued by 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
99 
DPE in July 2012 specifically disallowed encashment of sick leave. Further, the 
contention that even in GoI service, commuted leave is encashable as a good health 
reward is not factually correct as in GoI Service, only leave on half pay (HPL) is 
permitted to be encashed to the extent the encashment of Earned Leave at superannuation 
falls short of prescribed ceiling of 300 days and HPL is not allowed to be commuted for 
the purpose of encashment.   
Therefore, encashment of HPL to employees on retirement/separation beyond the overall 
ceiling of 300 days was in violation of DPE guidelines and was, thus, irregular. 
The matter was reported to Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MOPNG) in 
September 2013, reply relating to irregular payment in case of HPCL and BPCL was 
awaited (January 2015), while MOPNG endorsed the view of ONGC in July 2014.  
B. As per Employees’ Provident Fund (EPF) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 
1952, contribution to EPF included employer’s contribution at the rate of 12 per cent of 
the basic wages, dearness allowance and retaining allowance (if any) paid to an employee 
and an equivalent amount towards employee’s contribution which was to be recovered 
from the employees’ salary. The question whether the amount of leave encashment paid 
to employees was to be reckoned as part of basic wages was contested by different 
stakeholders in various courts at various points of time. Bombay High Court
1 (September 
1994) and the Karnataka High Court 2 (October 2003) held that leave encashment was to 
be reckoned as part of basic wages for the purpose of contribution to EPF. Employees 
Provident Fund Organization (EPFO) also advised (9 September 2005) its field offices to 
enforce the recovery of EPF contribution on leave encashment. On subsequent 
adjudication of the dispute, Supreme Court decided
3 (12 March 2008) that “basic wage 
was never intended to include amounts received for leave encashment” and directed that, 
“if any payment has already been made, it can be adjusted for future liabilities and there 
shall not be any refund claim since the fund is running one”. In view of the judgment of 
Supreme Court ibid, EPFO conveyed (May, 2008) to all its field offices to discontinue 
provident fund contribution on leave encashment with immediate effect and where 
provident fund contribution of the  employer’s share had been received; the same should 
be adjusted against future liabilities. 
Audit observed that GAIL (India) Limited continued to make employer’s contribution to 
employees provident fund on the amount of leave encashment amounting to ` 5.28 crore 
till November 2009 and also did not adjust the employer’s share of contribution on leave 
encashment already paid prior to March 2008.  Similarly, Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
also continued to make employer’s contribution on leave encashment amounting to ` 6.87
crore till March 2009 and did not adjust the employer’s share of contribution amounting 
to ` 14.94 crore on leave encashment already paid from 2005-06 to 2007-08 in respect of 
serving employees.  
                                                           
1 In the case of Hindustan Lever Employees’ Union vs. Regional Provident Fund Commissioner (RPFC) 
2 In the case of Manipal Academy of Higher Education vs. Provident Fund Commissioner 
3In case of Manipal Academy of Higher Education vs. Provident Fund Commissioner-Appeal (Civil) No. 
1832 of 2004 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
100 
IOCL stated (December 2014) that no communication from Regional Provident Fund 
Commissioner (RPFC) was received by the Company and only on enquiry from EPFO, 
decision came to the knowledge of the Company. Implementation of any such 
change/decisions can be best implemented prospectively and accordingly provident fund 
deduction on leave encashment was discontinued from 1 April 2009. 
GAIL stated (November 2014) that only during discussion with peer organizations, the 
communication issued by Regional Provident Fund Commissioner (RPFC) came to its 
knowledge. Thereafter, the Company sought clarification from EPFO and the RPFC 
concerned on the applicability of this communication/clarification to the Company, an 
exempted establishment. The clarification was received in November 2009 and 
accordingly provident fund deduction on leave encashment was discontinued from 1 
December 2009. 
Replies are not tenable as the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as instruction of 
May 2008 of EPFO to discontinue provident fund contribution on leave encashment were 
applicable with immediate effect and had also mandated adjustment of excess 
contributions already made against future liabilities.  It was not open to the Company to 
postpone the applicability of EPFO directions and to avoid adjustment of the excess 
contributions already made. 
Thus, payment of provident fund contribution amounting to ` 12.15 crore during April 
2008 to November 2009 on leave encashment and non-adjustment of contributions made 
prior to March 2008 was in violation of judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court and was, 
therefore, irregular. 
Steel Authority of India Limited, National Highways Authority of India, National 
Building Construction Corporation of India Limited and National Projects 
Construction Corporation Limited 
8.2 Recoveries at the instance of Audit   
In five cases pertaining to four CPSEs, audit pointed out an amount of ` 28 crore that was 
due for recovery. The management of CPSEs had recovered an amount of ` 27.59 crore 
(98.5 per cent) during the period 2013-14 as detailed in Appendix-I.
Instrumentation Limited, Steel Authority of India Limited and Ferro Scrap Nigam 
Limited
8.3 Corrections/rectifications at the instance of audit 
During test check, cases relating to violation of rules/regulations, non-compliance of 
guidelines were observed and brought to the notice of the management. Details of the 
cases where the changes were made by the management in their rules/regulations etc. at 
the instance of audit are given in Appendix-II.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
101 
CHAPTER IX 
Follow-up on Audit Reports (Commercial)  
Audit Reports of the CAG represent the culmination of the process of scrutiny of 
accounts and records maintained in various offices and departments of CPSEs. It is, 
therefore, necessary that appropriate and timely response is received from the executive 
on the audit findings included in the Audit Reports. 
The Lok Sabha Secretariat requested (July 1985) all the Ministries to furnish notes (duly 
vetted by Audit) indicating remedial/corrective action taken by them on various 
paragraphs/appraisals contained in the Audit Reports (Commercial) of the CAG as laid on 
the table of both the Houses of Parliament. Such notes were required to be submitted even 
in respect of paragraphs/appraisals which were not selected by the Committee on Public 
Sector Undertakings (COPU) for detailed examination. The COPU in its Second Report 
(1998-99-Twelfth Lok Sabha), while reiterating the above instructions, recommended: 
• setting up of a monitoring cell in each Ministry for monitoring the submission of 
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) in respect of Audit Reports (Commercial) on 
individual Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs); 
• setting up of a monitoring cell in Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) for 
monitoring the submission of ATNs in respect of Reports containing paras 
relating to a number of PSUs under different Ministries; and 
• submission to the Committee, within six months from the date of presentation of 
the relevant Audit Reports, the follow up ATNs duly vetted by Audit in respect of 
all Reports of the CAG presented to Parliament. 
In the meeting of the Committee of Secretaries (June 2010) it was decided to make 
special efforts to clear the pending ATNs/ATRs on CAG Audit Paras and PAC 
recommendations within the following three months. While conveying this decision (July 
2010), the Ministry of Finance recommended institutional mechanism to expedite action 
in the future. 
While reviewing the follow up action taken by the Government on the above 
recommendations, the COPU in its First Report (1999-2000-Thirteenth Lok Sabha) 
reiterated its earlier recommendations that the DPE should set up a separate monitoring 
cell in the DPE itself to monitor the follow-up action taken by various 
Ministries/Departments on the observations contained in the Audit Reports (Commercial) 
on individual undertakings. DPE informed (March 2015) that a separate monitoring cell 
had been set up to monitor the follow up on submission of ATNs by the concerned 
administrative Ministries/Department. DPE also informed that they had also requested all 
the concerned departments having jurisdiction over CPSEs to set up Monitoring Cells in 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
102 
their department. Three monitoring meetings were also convened by DPE to review 
pending ATNs.
A review in Audit revealed that despite reminders, 41 ATNs are awaited from various 
Ministries, as detailed in Appendix-III.
(PRASENJIT MUKHERJEE) 
New Delhi Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Dated: 28 May 2015 and Chairman, Audit Board 
Countersigned
New Delhi (SHASHI KANT SHARMA) 
Dated: 29 May 2015 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


APPENDICES
&
ANNEXURES

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
105 
  (Referred to in para 8.2) 
Recoveries at the instance of Audit during 2013-14 
  (Amount ` in lakh) 
Name of 
Ministry/
Department 
Name of the Central 
Public Sector 
Enterprise (CPSE) 
Audit observations in brief Amount of 
recovery pointed 
out by Audit 
Amount recovered 
by the Management 
Steel Steel Authority of India 
Limited, VISP, 
Bhadravati
Non-availment of CENVAT credit for goods 
imported through DPEB  
213.84 213.84 
Road Transport 
and Highways 
National Highways 
Authority of India 
Non-encashment of Bank Guarantee in respect 
of six lane widening work 
839.00 839.00 
Non-execution of contract for 4/6 lane widening 
work relating to Gundugalanu-Rajahmundary 
section of NH-5 and non-forfeiture of bid 
security
1617.00 1617.00 
Urban
Development 
National Building 
Construction Corporation 
Limited 
Irregular payment of ex-gratia in lieu of bonus 
and reward 
127.00 86.00 
Water Resources National Projects 
Construction Corporation 
Limited, Kolkata 
Short-receipt of 
interest from Bank. 
3.40 2.84 
Total 2800.24 2758.68 
Appendix-I

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
106 
(Referred to in para 8.3) 
Corrections/Rectifications at the instance of Audit  
Name of 
Ministry/
Department 
Name of the 
Central Public 
Sector
Enterprise
(CPSE)
Audit observations/suggestions in brief Action taken by the Management 
Ministry of 
Heavy
Industry & 
Public
Enterprises,
Department 
of Heavy 
Industry
Instrumentation 
Limited, Kota 
The rates of employer's contribution to provident fund were 
revised from 8.33 per cent and 10 per cent to 10 per cent and
12 per cent  vide The Employees Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Ordinance, 1997 
issued vide Government of India, Gazette Notification dated 
22 September 1997 which was subsequently enacted by the 
Parliament as The Employees Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1998, effective 
from 22-9-1997.  
The Company, which was contributing at the rate of 10 per
cent since 01-6-1989, increased the rate from 10 to 12 per
cent as per notification dated 22-9-1997.
Audit observed that increase by the Company, in the rates of 
employer's contribution to PF was not in line with the 
provisions of Schedule II to the GoI, Gazette Notification No. 
On being pointed out by Audit, the 
Company intimated (December 2014) 
that rate of employer's PF contribution 
has been reduced from 12 per cent to 10 
per cent with effect from September 
2014.
Appendix-II

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
107 
S-35019/1/97-SS. II dated 9 April 1997, according to which 
increase in rate of employer's contribution to PF was not 
applicable to establishments viz. (i) establishments having 
less than 20 employees, (ii) any sick industrial company and 
(iii) any establishment which has at the end of any financial 
year accumulated losses equal to or exceeding its entire net 
worth.
As the Company has been declared a sick company by BIFR 
on 1 January 1994 and falling under Schedule II of the 
Gazette Notification dated 09 April 1997, increasing the rate 
by ILK was not in order. 
Steel Steel Authority 
of India Limited
The Company had allowed encashment of leave at the time of 
superannuation to its employee beyond the overall limit of 300 
days both HPL and EL combined. 
The Company had amended its leave 
rule and restricted leave encashment at 
the time of retirement to 300 days (both 
EL and HPL taken together). 
Steel Ferro Scrap 
Nigam Limited 
The Company had allowed encashment of leave at the time of 
superannuation to its employee beyond the overall limit of 300 
days both HPL and EL combined.  
The Company had  amended its leave 
rule and restricted   the leave 
encashment at the time of 
superannuation/Retirement, other than 
on disciplinary grounds,  to 300 days 
(EL and HPL combined), and HPL shall 
not to be commuted.

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
108 
 (Referred to in Chapter IX)
Statement showing the details of Audit Reports prior to 2014 (Commercial) for 
which Action Taken Notes are pending  
No. & year of 
Report
Name of Report  Para No.  
Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprise 
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Para 13.2 
Ministry of  Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Para 13.1 
Ministry of Mines
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Paras 10.1 and 
13.1
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
8 of 2012-13 Compliance Audit Para 11.6 
11 of 2012-13 PA on Hydrocarbon Exploration efforts of 
ONGC Limited 
Standalone
Report
13 of 2013 Compliance Audit Paras 10.1, 10.2, 
10.4, 10.5, 12.1 
(02 Companies)
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Paras 13.1  
(02 Companies),
13.2, and Paras 
11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 
11.4, 11.6 and 
11.8
Ministry of Power 
13 of 2013 Compliance Audit Para 12.1 
(02 Companies)
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Para 12.1  
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Paras  14.2 and 
14.3
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
8 of 2012-13 Compliance Audit Para 9.4 
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Para 15.1 
Appendix-III

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
109 
Ministry of Shipping 
13 of  2013 Compliance Audit Para 12.1  
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Paras 16.2 and 
16.3
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
8 of 2012-13 Compliance Audit Para 9.4 
Ministry of Steel 
8 of 2012-13 Compliance Audit Para 15.2 
13 of 2013 Compliance Audit Paras 12.1 and 
14.3
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Paras 13.2, 17.1, 
17.2 and 17.3 
Ministry of Textiles 
10 of 2010-11 Performance Audit of activities of   selected
PSUs 
Chapter X 
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit 18.1 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
110 
Annexure-I
(Referred to in para 2.2) 
A. Generation of false Money Receipt for issue of Delivery Order (DO) 
Name of the Customer Details of False MR Details of DO issued against 
false MR 
Actual Payment received Undue credit 
extended 
(days) 
Remarks
Date ` in lakh Date ` in lakh Date ` in lakh 
M/S. Maheswary 
Metals & Alloys 
(P) Limited
21.12.12 14.90 21.12.12 14.66 15.01.13 14.90 25 MR created by manipulating bank statement of 
receipt from another customer 
26.12.12 6.10 26.12.12 5.88 17.01.13 6.10 23 Payment of only ` 6.10 lakh was received 
against DO of ` 11.88 lakh    17.01.13 6.00 - - - 
08.01.13 6.50 08.01.13 5.73 01.02.13 6.50 24 False MR generated by using an earlier receipt 
from the party 
M/s. Marsons 
Limited
15.01.13 15.00 15.01.13 11.67 - - - The company suffered loss of `25.86 lakh due 
to delivery of materials against false receipts 22.01.13 15.00 22.01.13 14.19 - - - 
15.01.13 
21.01.13 
28.01.13 
15.50 
15.50 
15.50 
     Entries reversed subsequently 
02.01.13 
17.12.12 
29.01.13 
10.00 
14.50 
20.86 
     Entries reversed subsequently 
M/s. Mescab India 
Private Limited 
07.12.12 14.00 07.12.12 11.93 10.12.12 14.00 3 A false MR was generated to allow the 
customer to lift materials valuing `11.89 lakh 
18.12.12 5.00 - - - - - The false MR was ante-dated and was generated 
by manipulating an instrument number which 
was received earlier.  
19.12.12 28.00 21.12.12 28.71 - - - The false MR was generated by manipulating an 
instrument number which was received earlier. 
SUB-TOTAL  196.86  98.77     

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
111 
B. Generation of Forged Bank Statement
M/s. Maheswary 
Metal and Alloys 
Limited 
22.01.13 10.03 22.01.13 9.76 11.02.13 10.03 21 The fake MR was generated on the basis of a 
forged bank statement  
29.01.13 12.50 29.01.13 11.42 20.02.13 12.05 23 - do - 
01.02.13 12.05      Reversed subsequently 
12.02.13 6.50 12.02.13 5.81    - do - 
M/s. Marsons Limited 12.11.12 14.50 12.11.12 
&
18.12.12 
13.95
&
14.48
17.12.12 14.50 36 The fake MR was generated on the basis of a 
forged bank statement & the company suffered 
a loss of  `14.07 lakh 
29.11.12 14.50  14.28 26.11.12 14.50  This original receipt was reversed subsequently 
after issuing the DO  
05.12.12 15.50 05.12.12 14.08    The fake MR was generated on the basis of a 
forged bank statement & the company suffered 
loss of ` 14.08 lakh 
SUB-TOTAL  85.58  83.78     
GRAND TOTAL  282.44  182.55     

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
112 
Annexure-II
(Referred to in para 2.2) 
Fraudulent/ Unjustified Customer Refund 
Customers to whom refund was made Fraudulent receipt to 
customers 
Remarks 
Case Customer Name ` in lakh  Customer Name ` in lakh 
1. Eastern Coils (P) Limited 0.85 1. Maheswary Metal 
and Alloys Limited 
0.85  
2. Khaitan Electricals Limited 0.13 2. Khaitan Wire 
Products Private 
Limited (KWPPL) 
6.93  
3. Khaitan Electronics (Unit – II) 6.80 
4. Biecco Lawrie Limited 1.52 3. Versatile Metal 
Concept Private 
Limited 
10.30  
5. Patratu Thermal Power Station 2.36 
6. Heavy Engineering Corporation 
Limited 
6.32 
7. Bhagalpur Hightech Chem (I) 
(P) Limited 
0.09 
8. TISCO  23.64 4. Versatile Wires 
Limited 
41.58  
9. Hindustan Cables Limited 
(Naini Unit)  
15.46 
10. Hindustan Photo Film 
Manufacturing Limited  
2.48 
11. Versatile Metal Concept Private 
Limited 
10.91 5. Versatile Wires 
Limited 
10.91  
12. Indo-Riv Refractories (P) 
Limited  
1.01 6. VarunVanyjya 
Private Limited 
6.12  
13. Bansal Cement Private Limited 5.11 
14. Bantiya Metals 1.00 7. Anirox Pigments 
Limited 
1.00  
15. Central Railways  0.43 8.  The Indian Iron Steel 102.96 Ledger
account of 
M/s The 
Indian Iron 
Steel could 
not be found 
in the ERP 
system 
16. Sterlite Industries (I) Limited  8.21 
17. Sail Growth Works Kulti  17.52 
18. Tata Engineering & Locomotive 
Company Limited  
24.75 
19. SAIL-IISCO Steel Plant  25.50 
20. Tata Iron & Steel Company 
Limited  
26.56 
21. Ballarpur Industries Limited  0.30 9. Tata Engineering & 
Locomotive 
Company Limited 
24.75 The amount 
transferred to 
M/s. Tata 
Engineering 
&
Locomotive 
Company 
Limited was 
similar to the 
amount 
shown as 
fraudulently 
refunded to 
the same 
22. Fertilizer Corporation of India 
Limited  
1.12 
23. Davesmen – India  1.76 
24. Hindustan Photo Films Mfg. 
Company Limited  
2.45 
25. Telelink Nicco Limited  2.71 
26. Pro. & IND. I-Limited 2.83 
27. The Associated Cement Limited  3.31 
28. Madhu Processor  2.67 
29. Kay Em Enter prises  7.60 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
113 
customer as 
shown in 
Case No. 8 
30. R. D. Industrial 6.42 10 . R. D. Chemicals  1.90 The ledger 
account of 
M/s. R. K. 
Industries 
could not be 
found in the 
ERP system. 
11. R. K. Industries  4.52 
31. National Steel Corporation  1.83 12. Mima Wires 6.73  
32. General Enterprises  4.90 
33. Sri Sai Krishna Bl asting Works 22.46 13. RO-East Accretion/ 
decretion of st. 
default 
22.46 Unjustified 
refund 
34. Shree Madhav Agencies (P) 
Limited 
0.80 - - 0.80 Unjustified 
refund by 
camouflaging 
account 
TOTAL 241.81 241.81  

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
114 
Annexure-III
(Referred to in para 3.7.3.1 (a)) 
Purchase orders with wrong valuation types 
Nature of 
PO
Valuation
Type
No. of POs No. of Items of 
Materials Involved
Value of items in 
PO (` in crore)
Indigenous Imported 2 27 0.01 
Imported Indigenous 45 344 7.44 
Total 47 371 7.45 
Annexure-IV
(Referred to in para 3.7.3.1 (b)) 
Document date in purchase orders 
Date of Test Check of Data Purchase Order No. Document Date
25-August-2014 4070025506 31-August-2014 
08-September-2014 4070025 935 15-September-2014 
08-September-2014 4070025 979 20-September-2014 
08-September-2014 4070025988 31-October-2014 
08-September-2014 5060084 986 31-March-2015 
25-August-2014 4010027637 08-November-2200 
25-August-2014 4010006638 31-March-2904 
Annexure-V
(Referred to in para 3.7.3.1 (c)) 
Non clearance of ‘Stock in Transfers’ 
Sl. No. Period of Non-Clearance No. of STO Items Value (` in crore)
1 Six months to One Year 5012 29.49 
2 One to Two Years 11547 22.99 
3 Two to Three Years 10275 4.26 
4 Three to Four Years 9404 1.30 
5 Four to Five Years 8179 3.93 
6 Five to Six Years 5682 2.78 
7 Six to Seven Years 4533 1.27 
8 Seven to Eight Years 4602 2.97 
9 Eight to Nine Years 4043 4.10 
10 Nine to Ten Years 3632 2.02 
11 More than Ten Years 1995 0.66 
Total 68904 75.77 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
115 
Annexure-VI
 (Referred to in para 3.7.3.1 (d) (i)) 
Physical Verification of Assets – Verification Status of ‘A’ Category Assets 
Sl. No. No. of Deficit 
Assets
Gross Book Value (` in 
crore)
Year of Last Verification
1 3 1.06 1996-97 to 2007-08 
2 16 39.42 2010-11 
3 3 5.41 2011-12 
4 17 88.41 2012-13 
Total 39 134.30 -- 
Annexure-VII
 (Referred to in para 3.7.3.1 (d) (i)) 
Physical Verification of Assets – Verification Status of ‘B’ Category Assets 
Sl. No. No. of Deficit 
Assets
Gross Book Value (` in 
crore)
Year of Last Verification
1 1 0.12 2005-06 
2 3 0.51 2006-07 
3 3 1.52 2007-08 
4 2 0.32 2008-09 
5 14 3.70 2009-10 
6 232 57.33 2010-11 
7 13 3.85 2011-12 
8 272 66.97 2012-13 
Total 540 134.32 -- 
Annexure-VIII
 (Referred to in para 3.7.3.1 (d) (i)) 
Physical Verification of Assets - Verification Status of ‘C1’ Category Assets 
Sl. No. No. of Deficit 
Assets
Gross Book Value (` in 
crore)
Year of Last Verification
1 17 0.54 1991-92 to 1994-95 
2 216 7.03 1995-96 to 1999-00 
3 175 6.35 2000-01 to 2004-05 
4 456 17.19 2005-06 
5 11 0.42 2006-07 
6 5 0.06 2007-08 
7 2549 89.91 2008-09 
8 8 0.32 2009-10 
9 36 1.18 2010-11 
Total 3473 123.00 -- 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
116 
Annexure-IX
 (Referred to in para 3.7.3.1 (d) (i)) 
Physical Verification of Stores, Spares and Capital Items 
Nature of Stores Warehouse Target Achievement Percentage of shortfall
Capital Items on Stock 
Agartala 97 96 1% 
Ahmedabad 334 224 33% 
Baroda 26 17 35% 
Bokaro 8 0 100% 
KKN Odalarevu 170 0 100% 
Madhopur 23 10 57% 
TOTAL 658 347 47% 
Stores and Spares - Cat A 
Ahmedabad 780 430 45% 
Baroda 4 1 75% 
Bokaro 34 0 100% 
Cambay 102 7 93% 
Chennai 8 5 38% 
Dehradun 88 0 100% 
Jodhpur 39 30 23% 
KKN Odalarevu 17 0 100% 
Madhopur 135 126 7% 
TOTAL 1207 599 50% 
Stores and Spares - Cat B 
Bokaro 1 0 100% 
Cambay 1 0 100% 
Jodhpur 5 1 80% 
TOTAL 7 1 86% 
Stores and Spares - Cat C 
Ahmedabad 108 44 59% 
Bokaro 3 0 100% 
Cambay 9 1 89% 
Chennai 4 1 77% 
Dehradun 15 0 100% 
Jodhpur 3 1 67% 
Karaikal 52 47 10% 
KKN Odalarevu 8 0 100% 
Mehsana 49 46 6% 
Sivasagar 126 75 40% 
Uran 16 10 38% 
TOTAL 393 225 43% 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
117 
Annexure-X
 (Referred to in para 3.7.3.1 (d) (ii)) 
Physical Verification of Assets – Age Analysis of Deficient Assets 
Period of Deficit No. of Deficit Assets Gross Book Value   
(` in crore) 
Upto One Year 1905 39.03 
One to Three Years 2628 52.92 
Three to Five Years 4795 37.13 
Five to Ten Years 4842 77.78 
Ten to Twenty Years 354 5.41 
More than Twenty Years 1001 9.42 
Total 15525 221.69 
Annexure-XI
 (Referred to in para 3.7.3.1 (d) (ii)) 
Physical Verification of Assets - Age Analysis of Period by which the Date of Deficit 
was later to the last inventory date 
Period by which the Date of Deficit was 
later to the last inventory date  
Items of Assets in 
Deficit 
Gross Book Value  
(` in crore) 
Upto Three Months 758 12.02 
Three to Six Months 115 2.47 
Six Months to One Year 10 0.05 
One to Five Years 18 0.66 
More than Five Years 18 0.04 
Total 919 15.24 
Annexure-XII
 (Referred to in para 3.7.3.1 (d) (iv)) 
Discrepancies in In-house developed Reports 
Report (as on 26 September 2014) Items of Assets in 
Deficit 
Gross Book Value
(` in crore) 
Report on Age Analysis of Discrepant Assets1 15525 221.69 
Report on Assets Verification Deficit Summary 
Report2 13965 196.78 
                                                           
1SAP T-Code - ZFIAMDFCT 
2SAP T-Code - ZFIVERIABC 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
118 
Annexure-XIII
 (Referred to in para 3.7.3.2 (b)) 
Material Procurement Planning – Capital Items lying in stores 
Sl. No. Period since lying in Main Stores No. of Items Value ( ` in crore)
1 Six months to One Year 431 18.52 
2 One to Three Years 230 08.55 
3 Three to Five Years 164 06.05 
4 Five to Ten Years 288 11.00 
5 More than Ten Years 19 00.16 
Total 1132 44.28 
Annexure-XIV
(Referred to in para 3.7.3.4 (a)) 
Creation of fresh PRs with earlier requisitions pending 
Plant Name Pending PRs created during 
April 2008 to March 2011
PRs created during April 2011 
to March 2014 for same 
materials with POs issued
No. of PRs Materials
Involved in PRs
No. of PRs Materials
Involved in PRs
Drilling Services Mumbai 50 229 4 4
Ahmedabad Asset 54 191 13 17 
Ankleshwar Asset 28 202 3 2 
Corporate Services 
Dehradun
41 375 23 22 
Total 173 997 43 45 
Annexure-XV
(Referred to in para 3.7.3.4 (b)) 
Delay in recording of material consumption 
Sl. No. Period After Well Completion Wells for which 
consumption booked
Value
(` in crore)
1 Upto One Month 94 63.30 
2 One to Three Months 80 46.01 
3 Three to Six Months 53 20.97 
4 Six Months to One Year 38 10.34 
5 One to Two Years 22 02.77 
Total 102 143.39 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
119 
Annexure-XVI 
(Referred to in para 3.7.3.4 (b)) 
Delay in recording of material consumption 
Sl.
No.
Material Group Description of Materials Value ( ` in crore)
1 01 Drilling Pipes 07.02 
2 02 Casing Pipes 60.17 
3 03 Other Pipes and Fittings 00.27 
4 04 Drill Bits 20.18 
5 06 Other Drilling Store 01.46 
6 09 Oil Well Cement 10.70 
7 10 Chemicals including Mud 
Chemicals 
11.03
8 11 Oil Grease and Lubricants 04.74 
9 15 Tubing Pipe and Fittings 18.41 
Total 133.98 
Annexure-XVII 
(Referred to in para 3.7.3.4 (c)) 
Open Purchase Orders with balance quantity 
Nature of 
PO
Number
of POs
No. of 
Items
Total value of 
items in PO  
(` in crore)
Balance Value of items 
in PO
(` in crore)
Indigenous 531 1092 1110.34 11.19 
Imported 26 246 794.19 01.68 
Total 557 1338 1904.53 12.87 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
120 
Annexure-XVIII
(Referred to in para 4.1.3.5) 
Statement showing analysis of time taken in repair/ replacement of defective meter 
SL
No. 
Name of 
Consumer 
Meter No. GOMD/ Sub 
Station
Date of 
Complain by 
the consumer 
Date of 
Repair/replacement 
of the meter 
Time taken 
in  days in 
repair / 
replacement 
from the 
date of 
complaint by 
consumer 
Replaced / 
Repair
Type of 
Meter 
Replaced 
Date of 
Checking of the 
meter
Date of 
Confirmation
of defect in 
the meter 
1 Cosmic
Ferro Alloy APMA1136 Barjora 19-05-2011 26-05-2011 7 Replaced CHECK 26-05-2011 26-05-2011 
2 LAL Ferro APMA1053 Giridih 01-07-2011 08-07-2011 7 Replaced M1 08-07-2011 08-07-2011 
3 JSEB
Huppu DVCM0035 Gola 29-11-2012 06-12-2012 7 Replaced M1 06-12-2012 06-12-2012 
4 JIPL APMA0119 Kalyaneshwari 25-05-2011 02-06-2011 8 Replaced M1 03-06-2011 03-06-2011 
5 Jai Balaji APMA1050 Durgapur 10-07-2013 19-07-2013 9 Replaced M1 19-07-2013 19-07-2013 
6 HCPL APMA99653 Kalyaneshwari 25-05-2011 03-06-2011 9 Replaced M1 03-06-2011 03-06-2011 
7 CIPL APM99680 Kalyaneshwari 25-05-2011 03-06-2011 9 Replaced M1 03-06-2011 03-06-2011 
8 Sarod
Internation APMA0101 Kumardhubi 11-07-2013 20-07-2013 9 Replaced M1 16-07-2013 16-07-2013 
9 HMFL
Bhuli DVCM0021 Putki 17-03-2012 26-03-2012 9 Replaced M1 26-03-2012 26-03-2012 
10 Arjan Das APMA1166 Barjora 30-08-2011 09-09-2011 10 Replaced M2 09-09-2011 09-09-2011 
11 Bharat 
Hitech DVCM0066 Purulia 07-03-2012 17-03-2012 10 Replaced M1 17-03-2012 17-03-2012 
12 Dinman
Polypack  APMA1143 Durgapur 06-08-2011 17-08-2011 11 Replaced M2 17-08-2011 17-08-2011 
13 Impex Steel  DVCM0205 Kalyaneshwari 27-09-2011 08-10-2011 11 Replaced M1 08-10-2011 08-10-2011 
14 JSEB
Koderma DVCM0449 Koderma 20-07-2012 31-07-2012 11 Replaced M2F2 31-07-2012 31-07-2012 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
121 
15 MVL FDR 
Check DVCM0075 Right Bank 10-12-2012 21-12-2012 11 Replaced CHECK 21-12-2012 21-12-2012 
16 Santpuria
Alloy APMA1063 Giridih 26-11-2011 12-12-2011 16 Replaced M2 12-12-2011 12-12-2011 
17 FPL APMA1104 Burdwan 29-05-2013 15-06-2013 17 Replaced M2 15-06-2013 15-06-2013 
18 UMSPL APMA1074 Kalyaneshwari 02-11-2013 19-11-2013 17 Replaced M1 19-11-2013 19-11-2013 
19 UMSPL APMA1212 Kalyaneshwari 02-11-2013 19-11-2013 17 Replaced M2 19-11-2013 19-11-2013 
20 HCPL APM99642 Kalyaneshwari 02-11-2013 20-11-2013 18 Replaced M1 20-11-2013 20-11-2013 
21 MSPL DVCM0207 Kalyaneshwari 02-11-2013 20-11-2013 18 Replaced M2 20-11-2013 20-11-2013 
22 Vikash
Metal  APMA1187 PHS 26-05-2011 16-06-2011 21 Replaced M2 16-06-2011 16-06-2011 
23 War Steel  APMA1115 Ramgarh 05-09-2012 27-09-2012 22 Replaced M2 27-09-2012 27-09-2012 
24 Balashree
Metals APMA1024 Ramgarh 05-09-2012 27-09-2012 22 Replaced M2 27-09-2012 27-09-2012 
25 UMSPL APMA1188 Kalyaneshwari 13-09-2013 07-10-2013 24 Replaced M1 07-10-2013 07-10-2013 
26 Sumi Vyper APMA1074 Ramgarh 20-11-2012 22-12-2012 32 Replaced M2 22-12-2012 22-12-2012 
27 Shri
Ramrathi APM99637 Barjora 15-10-2012 22-11-2012 38 Replaced M1 22-11-2012 22-11-2012 
28
Ram
Sawrup
Nirman
APMA1163 Durgapur 15-10-2012 23-11-2012 39 Replaced M1 23-11-2012 23-11-2012 
29 G&A Metel APMA1132 Barjora 26-10-2013 07-12-2013 42 Replaced M1 28-10-2013 28-10-2013 
30 Tulip Fabric APMA1155 Barjora 26-10-2013 07-12-2013 42 Replaced M2 28-10-2013 28-10-2013 
31 Dayal Steel  DVCM0473
(M-11) Ramgarh 05-11-2013 11-01-2014 67 Replaced M2F2 11-01-2014 11-01-2014 
32 BSL FAF20 CTPS 30-04-2013 25-07-2013 86 Replaced M1 03-05-2013 03-05-2013 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
122 
Annexure-XIX
(Referred to in para 4.1.3.7) 
Statement showing loss on account of non-metering in the colonies (BTPS, CTPS, 
DTPS, MTPS, Maithon and Panchet) of DVC during the years 2011-12 to 2013-14
Name of the Colony Loss in `
BTPS 35,94,17,871 
CTPS  31,30,79,253 
DTPS  8,77,13,760 
MTPS 13,74,22,314 
Maithon  40,21,26,825 
Panchet  12,74,35,476 
Total 1,42,71,95,499 

Report No. 21 of 2015 (Volume II) 
123 
Annexure-XX
(Referred to in para 6.1) 
Statement showing net loss 
Particulars Area in square 
meters 
Loss if 
compared
with Bharat 
Textile Mills 
reserve price 
(
` In crore) 
Loss if compared 
with per sq. 
Meter rate of 
developed land 
as per Stamp 
Duty Ready 
Reckoner (
` In 
crore)
Hall and Anderson share of 
land (35 per cent of total land) 27585.36$ (P) 
Rate in ` Per square meters as 
per reserve price fixed by 
NTC (2009) in respect of 
Bharat Mills (Process House) 
located in same zone as 
Madhusudan Mills 
221155.46 (Q)
Rate per square meters of a 
developed land as per Stamp 
Duty Ready Reckoner 
Mumbai 2009 
86300 (R)
Value of land given to HAL 
under settlement if compared 
with reserve price of Bharat 
Textile Mills (P x Q)
610.07
Value of land given to HAL 
under settlement if compared 
with rate per square meters of 
a developed land as per Stamp 
Duty Ready Reckoner 
Mumbai 2009 (P x R) 
238.06
Less: consideration received  33.05* 33.05* 
Net Loss  577.02 205.01 
$- Total land area- 78815.3 (35% of 78815.3= 27585.36) 
*Includes ` 2.16 crore amount paid to Central Bank of India and ` 1.54 crore being statutory dues. 

© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in