www.saiindia.gov.in
Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 on
Economic Sector 
for the year ended March 2012 
Government of Andhra Pradesh 
Report No. 3 of 2013


Page|i
Subject Reference to 
Paragraph(s) Page(s)
Preface  iii 
Overview  v-viii 
Chapter-1  Overview of Economic Sector 
About this Report 1.1 1 
Profile of Economic Sector 1.2 2 
Finalisation of Separate Audit Reports 
(SARs) of autonomous bodies 
1.3 2 
Response of the Departments to Audit 
findings 
1.4 2 - 4 
Chapter-2  Performance Audit on  
Public-Private Partnership (PPP) 
projects in Ports Sector
2 5 - 33 
Chapter-3  Chief Controlling Officer (CCO) 
based Audit of Forest Department
3 35 - 62 
Chapter-4  Compliance Audit Observations
Thematic Audit of Road Over Bridges 
(ROBs) and Road Under Bridges (RUBs) 
at Rail Crossings 
4.1 63 - 85 
Non- recovery of loans from Co-operative 
Sugar Factories 
4.2 85 -87 
Annexures  89 - 112 
Glossary  113- 116 
Table of Contents 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
TableofContents
Page|ii
Annexures
Annexure
No.
Subject Page(s)
1.1 List of audited entities falling within the Economic Sector 89 - 91
3.1 Organisational structure of Forest Department 92
3.2 Test-checked Audit Sample 93
3.3 Failure of Plantations 94-96
3.4 Profile of Functioning of Vana Samrakshana Samithis 97
3.5 Delay in Funds Flow 98
4.1 Process for planning and execution of ROBs/RUBs 99-100
4.2 List of ROBs/RUBs selected for test-check 101-107
4.3 Instances of bridge proper complete but approaches 
incomplete and vice versa etc. 
108-109
4.4 Details of sugar factories under the cooperative sector  110
4.5 Details of loans sanctioned by GoAP to Cooperative 
Sugar Factories 
111
4.6 Statement showing Profit and Loss of Cooperative Sugar 
Factories from 2007-08 to 2011-12
112



Page|iii
1. This Audit Report on the Government of Andhra Pradesh, covering the 
activities of the Economic Sector (e xcluding State Government Companies and 
Statutory Corporations), has been prepared for submission to the Governor 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of India. Audit findings on State 
Government Companies and Statutory Corporations have been covered 
separately in the Audit Report (Public Sector Undertakings). 
2. This Report contains the results of a Performance Audit on Public-Private 
Partnership (PPP) projects in Ports Sector (Chapter-2); Chief Controlling 
Officer (CCO) based Audit of Forest Department (Chapter-3); and Thematic 
Audit of Road Over Bridges (ROBs) and Road Under Bridges (RUBs) at Rail 
Crossings and Compliance Audit of Commissioner of Sugar & Cane 
Commissioner (Chapter-4). 
3. The cases mentioned in this Report are those which came to notice in the 
course of audit during the year 2011-12, as well as those which came to notice 
in earlier years but were not dealt with in the previous Reports. Matters relating 
to the period subsequent to 31 March 2012 have also been included, wherever 
necessary. The report has been finalized, after considering the responses of the 
Government/Departments, wherever received. 
4. Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Preface



Overview


Page|v

This Audit Report covers the results of audit of the Government Departments in the 
Economic Sector, including autonomous bodies, as appropriate, but excluding 
findings in respect of State Public Sector Undertakings, which are reported 
separately through the Audit Report (Public Sector Undertakings). 
1. Overview of Economic Sector 
The Economic Sector of the Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) accounted for  
` 30,045.16 crore of expenditure in 2011-12. Of this, the maximum expenditure was 
by the Irrigation & Command Area Development Department ( `17,787.39 crore) 
followed by the Energy Department ( `4367.68 crore), and the Agriculture &  
Co-operation Department (` 3334.54 crore). 
As of December 2012, five Explanatory Notes in respect of audit paragraphs 
pertaining to Economic Sector Departments were yet to be received, and Action 
Taken Notes on 96 recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee presented 
to the State Legislature had not been received. Further, as of 31 December 2012, 
3752 audit Inspection Reports (IRs) containing 11297 paragraphs issued upto 
September 2012 were pending settlement.  
 (Chapter – 1)
2. Performance Audit on Public-Private Partnership 
 (PPP) Projects in Ports Sector 
The State of Andhra Pradesh has a 975 km long coast line, which is the second 
longest in the country, and has 14 notified non-major/minor Ports. GoAP undertook 
extensive development of non-major /minor Ports in PPP (Public Private Partnership) 
mode along its coastline since the late 1990’s.  
A performance audit of the development in PPP mode of  Kakinada Deep Water Port, 
Krishnapatnam Port, Gangavaram Port, Machilipatnam Port, and VANPIC Port 
(Nizampatnam - Vadarevu Port Corridor), as well as efforts toward development of 
Bhavanapadu, Meghavaram and Nakkapalli minor ports was undertaken with the 
objective to assess whether (a) the process for selection of the PPP developer and 
award of concessionaire was fair, transparent and competitive and risks/rewards 
were optimally shared between GoAP and the developer; (b) the PPP projects and 
the associated Concession Agreements were effectively and properly implemented 
within stipulated timelines; (c) GoAP received its due share of revenue from the PPP 
Projects and other dues in full and in timely manner; and (d) monitoring of project 
implementation and operation over the concession period by GoAP and Director of 
Ports (DoP) was adequate and effective.  
Overview


Page|vi
AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Overview
The major audit findings are summarized below: 
x There were deficiencies in the competitive bidding process for selection of 
developers in Gangavaram and Kakinada Deep Water Port, reflecting adversely 
on fairness and transparency in selection. In respect of the Machilipatnam Port 
and VANPIC Port Project, similar issues were reported earlier through paragraph 
2.2.3 of the CAG’s Audit Report for 2008-09 and paragraph 4.10 of the CAG’s 
Audit Report on Land Allotment for 2011-12 respectively. 
x There were post-bid/post-award changes to the terms and conditions of the 
project, though none of the Concession Agreements had provisions for such 
amendments/revisions. This resulted in undue favour to the private developers 
and against the financial interests of GoAP. Changes were made to the 
Concession Agreement to alter its basic structure, thereby vitiating the sanctity of 
the bidding and contracting process. 
x Notwithstanding the provisions of the Concession Agreements, GoAP irregularly 
permitted or allowed change in the shareholding pattern of the development 
consortium and/or port operator in three ports (Krishnapatnam Port, Gangavaram 
Port and Machilipatnam Port). 
x There were deficiencies/deviations in revenue sharing and financial arrangements, 
as well as in the monitoring mechanism adopted by the Department of Ports/ 
GoAP over the implementation of the PPP Projects and the Concession 
Agreements.
x A key aspect of the development of ports on PPP mode has been the allotment of 
large amounts of land to these ports, also facilitating mortgaging of such lands by 
the private developers to banks and other lending institutions for obtaining huge 
loans for project development, leaving little risk or exposure on the part of the 
private parties. 
x Multiplicity of non-major Ports along the coastline, along with liberal grant of 
exclusive rights over large lengths of the coastline (well beyond Port Limits) has 
virtually rendered the majority of the State’s coastline privatised. 
(Chapter – 2) 
3. Chief Controlling Officer (CCO) based Audit of Forest 
 Department 
Andhra Pradesh has a total recorded forest area of 63,814 sq.km (comprising 23.2 
per cent  of its geographical area), of which 15,200 sq.km is under Community  
Forest Management with a participatory approach involving communities in forest 
management. The State also has 21 wildlife sanctuaries, six national parks and one 
tiger reserve. These resources are managed by the Forest Department, whose 
Executive Head is the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests. A CCO-based audit of 
the Forest Department was undertaken during March and between July and 
September 2012, covering the three year period 2 009-12 and involving the 
examination of records at the Headquarters Office, 12 circles and 25 divisions. The 
main findings of the CCO-based audit are summarized below. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Overview
Page|vii
x The recorded forest area of the State was being shown at 63,814 sq.km since 
1991, despite diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes under the Forest 
Conservation Act, 1980 and alienation of land under the Scheduled Tribes and 
Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 
(ROFR Act, 2006). Further, unclassed forest area of 970 sq.km had also not been 
notified. 
x There was a substantial spurt in encroachment after enactment of ROFR Act, 
2006. Also, the frequency of beat inspections prescribed was not adequate 
enough to protect the forest. 
x Non-forest land handed over for compensatory afforestation in lieu of diversion of 
forest land was already afforested, violating the spirit of the Forest Conservation 
Act, 1980. In another case, compensatory afforestation could not take place due 
to non-availability of identified non-forest land, which was caused by improper 
identification of non-forest land in a far away Division. 
x Lack of a timeframe for completing implementation of the ROFR Act and 
recognition of rights, in effect, keeps the process open indefinitely, with scope for 
possible exploitation and incorrect claims and increasing vulnerability of forest 
area. Various instances were noticed where ROFR rights were granted to 
ineligible persons and individuals in Vana Samrakshana Samithi areas. Further, 
community rights extended to tribal VSSs were not in line with the provisions 
under ROFR Act, 2006. 
x Audit scrutiny also revealed deficiencies in funds utilization and implementation of 
various Central and State schemes/activities, including the Intensification of 
Forest Management Scheme (IFMS), Accelerated Programme of Restoration and 
Regeneration of Forest Cover, Bio-Diesel Plantation in Forest Areas, 13th Finance 
Commission grant-in-aid for forests, Project Elephant, River Valley Project, and 
CAMPA (Compensatory Afforestation Management and Planning Authority). 
x Non-achievement of targets under various schemes was partly on account of 
non-release/late release of funds by the Government/PCCF, as well as delay in 
authorization by the Director of Works Accounts/PAO under the PAO system of 
works and forests payments. 
(Chapter – 3) 
4. Compliance Audit Observations 
Thematic Audit of Road Over Bridges (ROBs) and Road Under Bridges  (RUBs) at 
Rail Crossings 
Road Over Bridges (ROBs) and Road Under Bridges (RUBs) at rail crossings 
represent important safety measures, besides reducing traffic congestion. At Level 
Crossings (LCs) where the traffic density is one lakh Train Vehicle Units per day 
(TVU) or more, the Railways share the cost of construction of ROBs and RUBs, in 
lieu of the LC, with the State Government on a 50:50 basis. The State Government 
can also propose construction of ROBs/RUBs on 100 per cent  funding basis. The 
construction of the bridge proper over or under the railway track is undertaken by the 
Railways, while the approaches are constructed by the Roads & Buildings (R&B) 


Page|viii
AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Overview
Department of the State Government. The process for planning and execution of 
ROBs/RUBs is elaborate and effective and efficient co-ordination between the 
Railways and the R&B Department is essential for smooth and timely completion of 
ROBs and RUBs. 
An audit was conducted covering  43 out of 123 ROBs/RUBs (as per outcome budget 
2011 of AP) and one ROB fully Railway funded; of these, 14 had been completed, 20 
were in progress and 10 were in their initial stages. The main findings and 
recommendations arising from audit are summarized below: 
x There were instances where even though the ‘bridge proper’ was completed by 
the Railways, the approaches (to be completed by the R&B Department) were 
incomplete and vice-versa; thus, the objectives of free flow of traffic and 
elimination of LC (with concomitant railway safety issues) were not achieved. In 
two test-checked cases, the ROBs were stalled/not usable due to non-shifting of 
HT Transmission Lines obstructing the ROB. In two other cases, although the 
ROBs were completed, the LCs were not closed. Other instances of lack of 
effective co-ordination between the R&B Department and Railways were non-
matching of the levels of the approaches and the bridge proper, change from 
ROB to RUB and back to ROB, addition of an extra pier and non-pursuance of 
widened four-lane ROB. 
x Delayed/non-acquisition of land and non-shifting of utilities, differences/ 
deficiencies in alignment, change in degree of skew, alignment/location not along 
the current LC and other design issues with an adverse impact on traffic 
congestion were noticed, resulting in delayed completion/non-completion/ 
non-utilisation of ROBs/RUBs. 
x Award on single bids and limited competition at the bidding stage were noticed. In 
most of these cases, the winning bid was at a premium close to the ceiling of  
5 per cent  over Estimated Contract Value (ECV). This not only affected the 
transparency of the bidding process but also adversely affected Government’s 
financial interests. 
x There were instances of undue favours to contractors by revision of rates, 
allotment of substantial additional works on nomination basis, reduction of 
interest rate on mobilisation advance etc. 
x Audit also noticed several instances of deficient quality control, mainly relating to 
non-compliance with the Departmental/MORTH (Union Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways, Government of India)’s instructions on procurement of 
steel from original manufacturers etc. 
(Paragraph 4.1) 




Chapter-1
Overview of Economic Sector


Page|1

1.1 About thisReport
With an aim to integrate audit efforts and present a sector based perspective, 
restructuring of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG)’s audit 
arrangements in respect of the Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) took place 
with effect from April 2012. Accordingly, audit of government offices, special 
purpose agencies, local bodies, parallel bodies, Public Sector Undertakings, etc., are 
integrated into suitable sectoral audits, such as ‘Social’, ‘Economic’, ‘General’ and 
‘Revenue’.  
Accordingly, this year onwards, Audit Reports covering sector-wise State 
Government departments are being prepared separately by the CAG for submission to 
the Governor as per the provisions of the Constitution of India. 
The authority for audit by the CAG is derived from Articles 149 and 151 of the 
Constitution of India and the Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, Powers and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 (DPC Act). CAG conducts audit of expenditure of 
the economic sector departments of the GoAP under Section 13 1 of the DPC Act. 
CAG is the sole auditor in respect of autonomous bodies which are audited under 
sections 19(2) 2 and 20(1) 3  of the DPC Act. In addition, CAG also conducts audit, 
under Section 14 4 of DPC Act, of other autonomous bodies which are substantially 
funded by the Government. Principles and methodologies for various audits are 
prescribed in the Auditing Standards and the Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 
2007 issued by the CAG. 
This Report covers the results of audit of the Government Departments in the 
Economic Sector including autonomous bodies, as appropriate. Audit findings in 
respect of State Public Sector Undertakings are reported separately through the Audit 
Report (Public Sector Undertakings) of the State. 


1 Audit of (i) all transactions from the Consolidated Fund of the State, (ii) all transactions relating to the 
Contingency Fund and Public Accounts and (iii) all trading, manufacturing, profit & loss accounts, 
balance sheets & other subsidiary accounts kept in any department of a State 
2 Audit of accounts of Corporations (not being Companies) established by or under law made by the 
State Legislature in accordance with the provisions of the respective legislations 
3 Audit of accounts of any body or  authority on the request of the Governor, on such terms and 
conditions as may be agreed upon between the CAG and the Government 
4 Audit of all (i) receipts and expenditure of a body/authority substantially financed by grants or loans 
from the Consolidated Fund of the State and (ii) all receipts and expenditure of any body or authority 
where the gran ts or loans to such body or authority from the Consolidated fund of the State in a 
financial year is not less than ` one crore
Overview of Economic Sector 1
CHAPTER



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|2
ChapterǦ1
OverviewofEconomicSector
1.2 Profile ofEconomicSector
A summary of the expenditure incurred during the last five years by the Departments 
of GoAP falling within the Economic Sector is given below: 
Table-1.1 – Summary of Expenditure of Economic Sector 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. No. Name of the Department 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
1 Agriculture & Co-operation 1413.98 2994.73 1803.82 2270.40 3334.54
2 Animal Husbandry & Fisheries 483.41 536.56 503.31 567.70 729.58
3 Energy 4529.61 3659.38 3259.28 3696.98 4367.68
4 Environment, Forests, Science 
and  Technology 
314.38 305.40 266.47 277.56 343.01
5 Industries and Commerce 576.21 350.03 297.62 448.45 380.74
6 Information Technology and 
Communications 
102.75 331.68 18.92 24.53 57.72
7 Irrigation & Command Area 
Development 
15839.90 12635.25 16712.71 15710.87 17787.39
8 Public Enterprises 0.72 0.90 1.04 1.28 1.46
9 Transport, Roads & Buildings/ 
Infrastructure & Investment 
2264.98 2698.66 2634.37 2272.95 3043.04
 Total 25525.94 23512.59 25497.54 25270.72 30045.16
Source: Appropriation Accounts of Government of  Andhra Pradesh for the relevant years 
A list of the departments in the Economic Sector, along with the State Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSUs) under these departments and the Autonomous Bodies for which 
the CAG is the sole auditor, is indicated in Annexure – 1.1.
1.3 Finalisation ofSeparateAuditReports(SARs)of
autonomousbodies
The Separate Audit Report (SAR) on the accounts of one autonomous body,  
Andhra Pradesh Khadi and Village Industries Board (APKVIB) 5, is required to be 
placed in the State Legislature. The SARs on the accounts of APKVIB for 2003-04 to 
2008-09 (which were issued in May 2011 for the years from 2003-04 to 2006-07, in 
March 2012 for the year 2007-08, and in January 2013 for the year 2008-09) are yet 
to be placed in the Legislature. 
1.4 Response oftheDepartmentstoAuditFindings
1.4.1 Submission ofExplanatoryNotes
Audit Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India represent the 
culmination of the process of scrutiny starting with initial inspection of accounts and 
records maintained in various offices and departments of Government. It is, therefore, 
essential that the Executive takes necessary rectificatory measures and furnishes 
appropriate and timely response on the audit findings included in the Audit Report.  

5 Audited under Section 19(3) of the DPC Act 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|3
ChapterǦ1
OverviewofEconomicSector
As per the instructions issued (November 1993) by the Finance and Planning 
Department, the administrative departments are required to submit Explanatory Notes 
indicating corrective/remedial action taken or proposed to be taken on paragraphs and 
reviews included in the Audit Reports within three months of their presentation to the 
Legislature, without waiting for any notice or call from the Public Accounts 
Committee (PAC). 
Though the Audit Reports for the year 2002-03 to 2010-11 were presented to the State 
Legislature between March 2004 and March 2012, five explanatory notes in respect of 
audit paragraphs pertaining to the following departments under the Economic Sector 
as detailed below were yet to be received, as on December 2012. 
Table-1.2 – Position of Pending Explanatory Notes 
Department Pending Explanatory Notes in respect of 
Audit Reports for the year 
Total pending 
Explanatory 
Notes 2002-03 2009-10 2010-11 
Agriculture and Cooperation 02 01 01 04
Industries and Commerce -- -- 01 01
Total 02 01 02 05
1.4.2 Pending ActionTakenNotes
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on the recommendations of the Public Accounts 
Committee (PAC) are required to be furnished within six months from the date of 
presentation of the PAC Report to the State Legislature. ATNs on 96 
recommendations of the PAC presented to the State Legislature had not been received 
as of December 2012, as summarized below: 
Table 1.3 – Position of pending Action Taken Notes (ATNs) 
Department No. of pending ATNs 
Agriculture and Co-operation 8
Animal Husbandry, Dairy Development and Fisheries 1
Environment, Forests, Science and Technology 1
Irrigation and Command Area Development 86
Total 96
1.4.3 Outstanding RepliestoInspectionReports
Audit observations noticed during audit and not settled on the spot are communicated 
to the Heads of offices and next higher authorities of the departments concerned 
through Inspection Reports (IRs). The Heads of offices and the next higher authorities 
are required to respond to the observations contained in the Inspection Reports (IRs) 
and take appropriate corrective action. The audit observations communicated in the 
IRs are also discussed in the meetings at district level by the officers of the 
departments with the officers of the Principal Accountant General's office. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|4
ChapterǦ1
OverviewofEconomicSector
As of 31 December 2012, 3752 IRs containing 11297 paragraphs issued upto 
September 2012 were pending settlement. The department wise details are given 
below:
Table-1.4 - Department-wise break-up of outstanding Inspection Reports and Paragraphs 
Department Number of IRs/Paragraphs pending 
as of 31 December 2012
IRs Paragraphs 
Agriculture and Cooperation 607 2118 
Animal Husbandry, Dairy Development and Fisheries 287 1051 
Environment, Forests, Science and Technology 542 1284 
Industries  and Commerce 265 846 
Information Technology and Communication 8 57 
Infrastructure and Investment 2 10 
Irrigation & Command Area Development 1564 4533 
Roads and Buildings 477 1398 
Total 3752 11297 
Audit recommends that: 
x the Government should ensure that a procedure exists for action against 
officials who failed to send replies to Inspection Reports/Draft Paragraphs/ 
Reviews and ATNs on recommendations of PAC as per the prescribed time 
schedule; and 
x the system of responding to audit observations should be revamped, to ensure 
strict compliance with the specified timelines for responses. 



Chapter-2
Performance Audit on
Public-Private Partnership (PPP) 
Projects in Ports Sector 


Page|5

ExecutiveSummary
The State of Andhra Pradesh has a 975 km long coast line, which is the second 
longest in the country, and has 14 notified non-major/minor Ports. Government of 
Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) undertook extensive development of non-major/minor 
Ports in PPP (Public Private Partnership) mode along its coastline since the late 
1990’s.
A performance audit of the development in PPP mode of  Kakinada Deep Water 
Port, Krishnapatnam Port,  Gangavaram Port, Machilipatnam Port, and VANPIC 
Port (Nizampatnam - Vadarevu Port Corridor), as well as efforts towards development 
of Bhavanapadu, Meghavaram and Nakkapalli minor ports was undertaken with 
the objective to assess whether (a) the process for selection of the PPP developer 
and award of concessionaire was fair, transparent and competitive and risks/ 
rewards were optimally shared between GoAP and the developer; (b) the PPP 
projects and the associated Concession Agreements were effectively and properly 
implemented within stipulated timelines; (c) GoAP received its due share of revenue 
from the PPP Projects and other dues in full and in timely manner; and (d) 
monitoring of project implementation and operation over the concession period by 
GoAP and Director of Ports (DoP) was adequate and effective. 
The major audit findings are summarized below: 
x There were deficiencies in the competitive bidding process for selection of 
developers in Gangavaram and Kakinada Deep Water Port, reflecting adversely 
on fairness and transparency in selection. In respect of the Machilipatnam Port 
and VANPIC Port Project, similar issues were reported earlier through 
paragraph 2.2.3 of the CAG’s Audit Report for 2008-09 and paragraph 4.10 of 
the CAG’s Audit Report on Land Allotment for 2011-12 respectively. 
x There were post-bid/post-award changes to the terms and conditions of the 
project, though none of the Concession Agreements had provisions for such 
amendments/revisions. This resulted in undue favour to the private developers 
and against the financial interests of GoAP. Changes were made to the 
Concession Agreement to alter its basic structure, thereby vitiating the sanctity 
of the bidding and contracting process. 
 CHAPTER
2 Performance Audit on Public-Private
Partnership (PPP) Projects in Ports Sector



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|6
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
x Notwithstanding the provisions of the Concession Agreements, GoAP 
irregularly permitted or allowed change in the shareholding pattern of the 
development consortium and/ or port operator in three ports (Krishnapatnam 
Port, Gangavaram Port and Machilipatnam Port). 
x There were deficiencies/deviations in revenue sharing and financial 
arrangements, as well as in the monitoring mechanism adopted by the 
Department of Ports/GoAP over the implementation of the PPP Projects and the 
Concession Agreements. 
x A key aspect of the development of ports on PPP mode has been the allotment of 
large amounts of land to these ports, also facilitating mortgaging of such lands 
by the private developers to banks and other lending institutions for obtaining 
huge loans for project development, leaving little risk or exposure on the part of 
the private parties. 
x Multiplicity of non-major Ports along the coastline, along with liberal grant of 
exclusive rights over large lengths of the coastline (well beyond Port Limits) has 
virtually rendered the majority of the State’s coastline privatised. 
2.1 Introduction 
2.1.1 Background 
The State of Andhra Pradesh has a 975 km long coast line, which is the second 
longest in the country. Indian ports fall into two categories viz.: 
x Major ports – These fall under the jurisdiction of the Government of India (GoI)1;
there are 13 major ports (including one corporatized port) in India. One major  
port (Visakhapatnam) under the control of GoI falls within the territory of  
Andhra Pradesh. 
x Non-major/minor ports – These include ports managed by the Director of Ports, 
Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP), private ports and ports developed/ 
transferred under Public Private Partnership (PPP). 
GoAP has 14 notified non-major/minor ports (Bhavanapadu, Meghavaram, 
Kalingapatnam, Bheemunipatnam, Gangavaram, Nakkapalli, Kakinada SEZ, 
Kakinada, S.Yanam/ Rawa, Narsapur, Machilipatnam, Nizampatnam and Vadarevu 
and Krishnapatnam). A map of the ports along the State’s coastline is depicted below. 

1 Vide Item 27 of the Central List in the VII Schedule to the Constitution of India 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
Page|7
Ports in Andhra Pradesh
(1 Major Port & 14 Non-Major/Minor/Captive Ports)
Gangavaram
Bheemunipatnam
Kalingapatnam
S.Yanam
Bhavanapadu
Major Port – 1 No.
Non-Major Ports-10 Nos.
Krishnapatnam
Va d a r e v u
Nizamapatnam
Machilipatnam
Narsapur
Kakinada
Visakhapatnam
Kakinada SEZ
Meghavaram
Captive Port – 4 Nos.
Nakkapalli

Source: Director of Ports, Government of Andhra Pradesh 
GoAP undertook extensive development of non-major/minor ports in PPP mode along 
its coastline since the late 1990s. Of these, Kakinada Deep Water Port (KDWP) 2 in 
East Godavari District, Krishnapatnam Port in SPS Nellore District and Gangavaram 
Port in Visakhapatnam District are commercially operational. A brief profile of the 
non-major/ minor ports developed in PPP mode is given below: 
Table 2.1 – Status of PPP Port Projects in Andhra Pradesh 
Name of the Port 
(District) 
Name of the 
SPV 
Date(s) of 
Concession 
Agreement and 
Supplementary/ 
Revised Agreement 
Estimated
cost 
(` in crore) 
Concession 
period 
(in years) 
Status 
Kakinada Deep 
Water Port  
(East Godavari) 
Kakinada
Seaports
Limited (KSPL) 
19-03-1999
SA-1: 25-08-2003 
SA-2: 28-01-2009 
395.60 30 years + 
extension of 
2 spells of 10 
years each 
Operational 
Krishnapatnam 
(SPS Nellore) 
Krishnapatnam
Port Company 
Limited (KPCL) 
04-01-1997
RA: 17-09-2004 
1495.00
(Ph-I)
6000.00
(Ph-II)
30 years + 
extension of 
2 spells of 10 
years each 
Operational 
Gangavaram
(Visakhapatnam) 
Gangavaram
Port Limited 
(GPL)
07-08-2003 1677.00 30 years + 
extension of 
2 spells of 10 
years each 
Operational 
Vadarevu and 
Nizampatnam Ports  
(Guntur & 
Prakasam)
VANPIC Ports 
Pvt. Ltd. 
11-07-2008 16,000.00 33 years + 
extension of 
2 spells of 11 
years each 
Yet to take 
off
Machilipatnam
(Krishna)
Vajra Seaport 
Private Limited/  
Machilipatnam 
Port Limited 
21-04-2008
RA: 07-06-2010 
1255.00
5074.03 
30 years + 
extension of 
2 spells of 10 
years each 
Yet to take 
off
Note: SA – Supplementary Agreement; RA: Revised Concession Agreement 
Source: Department of Ports 

2 As distinct from the Kakinada Anchorage Port, which continues to be with GoAP 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|8
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
The position in respect of other minor ports is as follows: 
Table 2.2 – Status of other Minor Ports in Andhra Pradesh 
Port Brief Details 
Bhavanapadu Port Proposal by East Coast Energy Pvt. Ltd. (ECEPL) for developing 
captive berths is under consideration of GoAP. 
Meghavaram Port This was notified in March 2008. GoAP accorded permission (January 
2009) to ECEPL for constructi ng a dedicated captive jetty for its 
thermal power project. However, the project is yet to take off. 
Kalingapatnam 
Proposed to be developed as minor (lighterage3) ports 
Bheemunipatnam 
Nakkapalli Port This was notified in August 2010 by GoAP, which also accorded in-
principle approval to Anrak Aluminium Ltd. for constructing a captive 
jetty. However, the project is yet to take off. 
Kakinada SEZ Although notified in December 2007 at the request of Kakinada SEZ 
Pvt. Ltd., no activity has taken place. 
Kakinada Anchorage Port This is an old minor port, with a cent ury old history, and continues to 
be managed by GoAP 
Rawa/ S.Yanam Port This port, which was declared as a Minor Port in January 1996, is an 
off-shore Single Buoy Mooring (SBM ) system for transporting oil 
from the Rawa Oil Field. 
Narsapur The current port does not handle cargo. This port is proposed to be 
developed as a greenfield minor port. 
Source: Department of Ports 
2.1.2 Organisational setup
The Director of Ports (DoP), under the control of the Principal Secretary, 
Infrastructure and Investment Department, GoAP, is the Head of the Port Department 
and the Marine Adviser to the GoAP. He is assisted by two Port Officers at Kakinada 
and Machilipatnam and a Superintending Engineer (Marine), who heads the 
Engineering Wing of the Department, and is, in turn, assisted by three Executive 
Engineers.
2.1.3 Governing Framework
GoAP does not have a separate formal policy for development of non-major/minor 
ports on PPP basis. However, a Task Force, headed by the Chief Secretary, was 
constituted in June 2000 to provide a cross-sectoral perspective to infrastructure 
development and co-ordination among the stakeholders. Subsequently, the  
Andhra Pradesh Infrastructure Policy, which was notified in December 2000, provides 
for guidelines for attracting and facilitating private investm ents in the infrastructure 
sector; minor ports and harbours are among the 21 infrastructure sectors covered by 
the Policy. The Policy also spelt out the executive functions of the Task Force. 

3 Lighterage is the pro cess of transferring cargo  from larger vessels (too big to enter the port) into 
smaller vessels for offloading 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
Page|9
Further, the Andhra Pradesh Infrastructure Development Enabling Act, 2001 (APIDE 
Act) was enacted to provide rapid development of physical and social infrastructure in 
the State and attract private sector participation in design, finance, construction, 
operation and maintenance of infrastructure projects in the State. The AP 
Infrastructure Authority (APIA) was constituted in accordance with this Act. 
In order to tap the advisory technical assistance of the Asian Development Bank 
(ADB) in mainstreaming PPP projects through capacity enhancement and utilizing 
public and potential private resources for infrastructure development, GoAP entered 
into an Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) (April 2007) with GoI and ADB, and 
a PPP Cell in the Finance (PMU) Department was created. 
2.2 Audit approach
2.2.1 Audit Objectives
The objectives of the performance audit were to assess whether: 
x The process for selection of the PPP developer and award of the concession was 
fair, transparent, and competitive, and risks/rewards were optimally shared 
between GoAP and the PPP developer; 
x The PPP projects and the associated Concession Agreements were effectively and 
properly implemented within stipulated timelines; 
x GoAP received its due share of revenue from the PPP Projects and other dues (on 
account of land cost, lease rentals etc) in full and in timely manner; and 
x Monitoring of project implementation and operation over the concession period by 
GoAP and DoP was adequate and effective. 
2.2.2 Audit Scope
The Performance Audit covered the priva tization/development in PPP mode of  
(i) Kakinada Deep Water Port, (ii) Krishnapatnam Port, (iii) Gangavaram Port,  
(iv) Machilipatnam Port, and (v) Vadarevu and Nizampatnam Ports (Vadarevu, 
Nizampatnam Port & Industrial Corridor - VANPIC), as well as efforts towards 
development of Bhavanapadu, Meghavaram and Nakkapalli minor ports in captive 
mode.
2.2.3 Sources ofAuditCriteria
The main sources of audit criteria adopted for the performance audit were: 
x State Government’s Policy on Infrastructure, 2000; 
x Andhra Pradesh Infrastructure Development Enabling Act, 2001; 
x Terms of Concession Agreements, State Support Agreements and other 
contractual documents; and 
x Technical and financial estimates as per the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) and 
other project documents. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|10
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
2.3 Audit Methodology
An entry conference was held with the Principal Secretary, Infrastructure & 
Investment Department and the Director of Ports (DoP) in March 2012, wherein the 
audit approach was outlined and discussed. 
Audit scrutiny of records at various offi ces, as well as joint site  visits to the test-
checked ports, was conducted between December 2011 and March 2012; these 
covered the Infrastructure and Investment Department; PPP Cell of Finance 
Department; APIA and AP Industrial Infrastructure Corporation (APIIC); DoP, and 
Port Officers at Kakinada and Machilip atnam; Offices of District Collectors of 
Krishna, SPS Nellore and Visakhapatnam; Customs Department offices at Kakinada, 
Nellore and Visakhapatnam; and Registrar of Companies – Hyderabad. 
The draft audit findings were issued to GoAP in November 2012, requesting their 
response and also requesting the conduct of an Exit Conference. Despite the issue of a 
reminder (December 2012), the response of GoAP has not been received, nor could an 
Exit Conference be held (December 2012). 
Audit Findings 
2.4 Non ǦconstitutionofAPMaritimeBoard
GoI had advised GoAP to establish a Maritime Board 4 to provide one-stop solution to 
entrepreneurs and also act as a regulator for the minor ports in the State for the rapid 
development of port sector. GoAP stated in the Outcome Budget for 2007-08 that it 
had issued orders (October 2005) for establishment of AP Maritime Board, and that 
the AP Maritime Board Act was under preparation. Subsequently, in response to an 
audit enquiry, GoAP stated (December 2011) that after detailed examination with GoI 
and also after obtaining legal advice, the AP Maritime Board Bill, 2010 was 
introduced in the AP Legislative Assembly in December 2010 and added that 
necessary further action would be taken after the approval of Legislature.
The fact remains that the Act for the establishment of the AP Maritime Board had not 
been enacted even as of December 2012, leaving the development and regulation of 
14 non-major/ captive ports without a full-fledged regulator. 
2.5 Port SpecificFindingsǦKakinadaDeepWaterPort
(KDWP)5
2.5.1 Introduction 
Kakinada Deep Water Port (KDWP), located in East Godavari District and 
comprising three berths and other related infrastructure, was developed by GoAP 

4  Maritime Boards had already been constituted in the states of Gujarat, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu; 
these Boards have been functioning exclusively fo r overseeing the development of minor ports, 
which includes regulating their functioning and fixing tariff for privatised ports. 
5  Kakinada Port comprises of Kakinada Anchorage  Port and Kakinada Fishing Harbour (managed 
departmentally by the Director of Ports), and Kakinada Deep Water Port  (developed by GoAP and 
handed over in PPP mode to a private developer).



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
Page|11
between 1993 and 1996 at a cost of `321 crore (including a loan of `246 crore from 
the ADB). 
In view of the additional investment required for optimum utilisation of the facilities 
created so far, the huge potentiality that exists for Kakinada Port and the paucity of 
funds for making further investment, GoAP decided to develop Kakinada Port 
through the private sector. The advertisement issued in July 1994 for privatisation of 
Kakinada and other minor ports was not successful. Tender notices were again issued 
(October to December 1996) for only Kakinada Deep Water Port in three packages – 
(a) Package I – container terminal; Package II – operation & maintenance of three 
berths and construction of fourth berth; and Pac kage III – construction and operation 
of six new offshore berths. While Packages I and III were not successful 6, Package-II 
culminated in the award of 3 + 1 berths at KDWP to the International Seaports Pte 
Limited, Singapore (ISPL) consortium, led by Larsen & Toubro (India) Ltd., on 
Operate, Maintain, Share and Transfer (OMST –for three berths)/Build Operate, 
Share and Transfer (BOST- for fourth berth) basis. The successful consortium floated 
(December 1998) a special purpose vehicle called Cocanada Port Company Limited 
(KSPL-SPV) 7  to operate KDWP. In March 1999, GoAP signed the Concession 
Agreement (CA) with the SPV and handed over the project facilities. 
Port operations were started by the KSPL-SPV in April 1999. The fourth berth was 
commissioned in March 2008. Further, two additional berths (fifth and sixth berths) 
were commissioned in 2011-12. 
2.5.2 Selection ofdeveloperfor3+1berthatKDWP
As per the “White Paper on Privatisation of 3+1 Berths at KDWP” of September 1998 
of the erstwhile Transport, Roads & Buildin gs (Ports) Department of GoAP, the 
package for 3 + 1 berths at KDWP was advertised in December 1996 and 14 parties 
were shortlisted by the consultant (RITES) engaged by GoAP. Detailed bids were 
received from four parties in September 1997; technical bids were opened in 
September 1997 and financial bids8 were opened in October 1997.
RITES evaluated the proposals of three parties in two stages  – (a) Stage 1 – based on 
clearing specified hurdle criteria; and (b) Stage 2  – evaluating project pre-tax IRR 9
for viability, and giving weightage to three factors – minimum guaranteed share of 
income (50 marks), percentage share of income quoted to be paid to GoAP (30 marks) 
and investment planned in Phase-I development (20 marks). RITES proposed 
rejection of the offer of one party, and evaluated the offers of the remaining two 
consortia - KPB and ISPL, awarding 99 marks to the KPB consortium and 96 marks 
to the ISPL consortium. According to the white paper, RITES stated that KPB and 
ISPL had scored nearly equal marks and recommended that both parties were equally 

6 10 and 8 proposals were shortlisted for the pack ages for the container terminal at Kakinada and 
construction and operation of six new off-shore berths, but no party submitted detailed proposals. 
7 Later renamed as Kakinada Seaports Limited (KSPL) 
8 One consortium withdrew from the process two days before the opening of financial bids 
9 Internal Rate of Return 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|12
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
suitable for award of the project and GoAP could choose any one of them, but opined 
that certain finer points10 tilted the balance in favour of ISPL. 
However, the Task Force11 “wanted to have the benefit of a second expert advice” and 
sought a second opinion, which did not indicate any clear choice between the 
remaining two bids. Thereafter, the Task Force re-evaluated the marks for the 
bidders, and awarded 99 marks to ISPL and 69 marks to KPB, on the following 
grounds:
x The Task Force felt that  “on deeper consideration”, although KPB had indicated 
higher percentage of earnings to be shared with GoAP, the amount in absolute 
terms was much lower compared to ISPL (
`366.8 crore for KPB and `1636 crore 
for ISPL). According to the Task Force,  “percentage of gross revenue is just a 
number, and what is more important is the quantum of gross revenue accruing to 
the Government. A higher percentage on a lower base will give less revenue than 
a small percentage on a higher base”.
x Further, the Task Force felt that it was not desirable to reduce or moderate the 
investment offered by the parties (as done by RITES), since higher investment 
would result in better facilities to the Port users, more revenue to the operator and 
higher share of revenue to GoAP.
A comparison of the marks originally awarded by RITES and the modified marks 
awarded by the Task Force is summarised below: 
Table 2.3 – Marks awarded by RITES and Task Force for KDWP Developer Selection 
Consortium Investment in 
Phase-1 
Minimum
guaranteed share of 
income 
Percentage 
share of income 
to GoAP 
Gross revenue 
and share of 
revenue to GoAP 
RITES Task Force RITES Task Force RITES Task Force 
KPB 19 12 50 50 30 7
ISPL 20 20 49 49 27 30
Source: White paper published by GoAP 
As KPB was evaluated as the H-1 bidder by RITES, revaluation by the Task Force 
resulted in the original H-2 bagging the contract. The justification for the amendment 
of the ranking precedent to the award of the contract to ISPL proved to be fallacious:
x The anticipated investment by ISPL did not materialize for the first five years; the 
investment of ISPL during 1999-2004 was just 
`77.24 crore. It was only after 
signing the first Supplementary Agreement (SA) in 2003 (granting post-bid 
concessions to ISPL) that investments by ISPL saw a jump, which amounted to 
`824 crore. 


10 viz. higher cargo projections, use of high er capacity equipment, pr oper railway linkage, integrated 
services to port users, higher investment, etc. 
11 Constituted by GoAP in 1995 under the Chief Secretary for infrastructure projects 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
Page|13
x The Task Force’s justification that ISPL had projected much higher gross revenue 
(and revenue share to GoAP) also did not turn out to be the case. Till the 
conclusion of the first SA in August 2003, the actual traffic was far less than the 
traffic projected; the difference was as high as 59 per cent  (2002-03). Clearly, 
these optimistic traffic projections weighed in favour of the successful bidder in 
winning the project. 
The representations made by the Developer before the Government for effecting 
subsequent changes in the CA, on the basis of non-viability of the project due to 
non-reaching the targeted traffic, confirmed that the projections made by the 
developer at the time of bidding to win the project were unreliable. 
x Further, ISPL subsequently allotted 26 per cent  stake to the unsuccessful party, 
KPB, after the conclusion of the CA, evidently to compensate it for the loss of the 
contract. This clearly vitiated the spirit of effective competitive bidding, and the 
possibility of pre-award collusion between the only two qualified bidders cannot 
be ruled out. 
2.5.3 Post ǦbidrevisionstoConcessionAgreement
Consequent to the representations made by the SPV from time to time and approval of 
suggested modifications by the Council of Ministers, a SA to the CA was made in 
August 2003. The main changes introduced by the first SA were to mutually review/ 
discuss the situation, if even after making the investment as per DPR, the traffic still 
did not improve. 
This introduced clause gave an opportunity to the KSPL-SPV to make requests for 
amending the CA and the KSPL-SPV requested (September 2008) to amend certain 
‘restrictive aspects’ of the CA so as to bring them on par with those entered with 
developer for ‘greenfield ports’ 12  at Krishnapatnam and Gangavaram, although 
KDWP was a ‘brownfield port’13. Further, the KSPL-SPV also requested GoAP to 
extend facilities to them broadly in line with the other port projects taken up under 
PPP mode. Upon request from the SPV, the second SA to the CA was approved by 
the Council of Ministers (December 2008) and signed (January 2009); this was based 
on the recommendations of a Group of Ministers (GoM) 14 constituted by GoAP in 
October 2008 to examine the requests of the SPV.  
The GoM felt that there was strength in the argument of the KSPL-SPV for amending 
‘restrictive clauses’, since the subsequent port policy15 put the SPV at a disadvantage 
vis-à-vis subsequent greenfield ports, although they were on a different model. The 
Council of Ministers approved the decision of GoM. 

12 Development of entirely new port 
13 Already built port 
14 Interestingly, Principal Secretary, Infrastructure & In vestment Department was not associated with 
the exercise and the then Special Secretary in the Infrastructure & Investment Department was 
nominated as the convenor. 
15 No such ‘policy’ was formally issued by GoAP in the form of a G.O. etc. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|14
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
However, the SPV’s argument for removal of ‘restrictive aspects’ is not tenable. Bids 
were invited and the concession awarded on the basis of conditions then prevalent, 
binding both parties to their respective rights and duties. The terms of subsequent 
agreements cannot be applied to projects already awarded under earlier terms and 
conditions. Such comparison is misleading and incorrect, and the changes made on 
the basis of such claims amount to undue favours to the private party.
Audit scrutiny revealed that the second SA granted several undue concessions to the 
KSPL-SPV and completely altered the structure of the original agreement in favour of 
the KSPL-SPV. A summary of the major concessions granted to the KSPL-SPV 
through the second SA is given below: 
x Grant of land leased to other parties to KSPL  – “GoAP would offer land, if any 
available and also in future as and when any lease agreements entered with GoAP 
by the port users expire (both annual and long term), first right of refusal (ROFR) 
may be offered to KSPL in deep water port, except the areas earmarked for ship-
building units, fishing harbour and land being used for Government purpose” . In 
fact, even the condition for ship-building units was not subsequently adhered to. 
x Extension of Concession Period  – Instead of the original period of 20 years, the 
concession period was extended to 30 years (from the in-operation date), which 
was extendable by 20 years in two spells of 10 years each under the same CA. The 
revenue sharing arrangement was extended to years 21 to 50.
The consultant felt that there was no merit in the KSPL-SPV’s request for 
extension and the Law Department of GoAP did not consider it necessary to 
review the clause. However, these concerns were not accepted. 
x Development of new berths/facilities –While the CA was for a four berth 
terminal16, the second revision stipulated that the concessionaire shall have the 
freedom to develop new berths/facilities within the Deep Water Port 17. In all other 
cases, the concessionaire has ROFR. Pursuant to the above, the KSPL-SPV 
completed the fifth and sixth berths during 2011-12 and had also drawn up plans 
for the seventh berth. 
The consultant indicated that the request of the KSPL-SPV for future 
developments was not in accordance with the CA and the Law Department of 
GoAP did not consider it necessary to review the clause. However, these concerns 
were not accepted. 
Along with the clause for extension of concession period, the clause permitting the 
concessionaire to develop new berths/ facilities changed the very nature of the KDWP 
Project. At the time of bidding, the project was clearly specified as 3+1 berths (i.e. 3 
existing and one new berth). In fact, no detailed proposals were submitted for a 

16  3 + 1 berths – 3 existing and 1 new berth 
17 GoAP could construct and operate its own berth(s ). However, this had no practical value, since 
GoAP’s policy was to develop ports only through the PPP mode 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
Page|15
separate package for construction of six new offshore berths. This clause amounts to a 
backdoor expansion of the project scope, which was never envisaged originally. 
x Harbour Maintenance and Capital Dredging Costs  – The original CA stipulated 
creation of a Port Dues Account (Fund), which would receive port dues from 
vessels entering the port 18, and was to be used for maintenance dredging etc. At 
the end of the Concession Period, the balance of the fund was to be transferred to 
GoAP. The original CA stipulated that GoAP would fix the total expenditure on 
harbour maintenance on the KSPL-SPV’s recommendation, to be incurred out of 
the Fund. However, the second SA amended this provision, whereby this 
expenditure could be incurred now by the KSPL-SPV out of the Fund, after 
merely intimating GoAP19.
Such substantial changes in the CA were not ju stified as the only cause for changes 
would be ‘force majeure’, which is already stipulated in the CA, or significant events, 
which could not reasonably have been foreseen at the time of bidding and signing of 
the CA. Changes to the CA, at the request of the successful bidders, on grounds of 
long term viability and bankability, vitiate the sanctity of the bidding process. 
2.5.4 Construction ofadditionalberths,despitenonǦapprovalof
drawingsanddesigns
The second SA (2009) was silent about submission of revised detailed project report 
(DPR), milestones, etc. The KSPL-SPV proposed (November 2009) for construction 
of three additional berths and submitted (February 2011) designs and drawings of the 
fifth and sixth berths to GoAP for approval. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that GoAP did not accord approval for the drawings and 
designs as of December 2011 even though these additional berths were commissioned 
during 2011-12. Thus, KSPL-SPV constructed additional berths without the approval 
of the GoAP to the drawings and designs. 
2.5.5 Change inshareholdingpattern
As per the CA, prior approval of GoAP was to be obtained for change in the 
shareholding pattern of the promoter of the KSPL-SPV. In June 2008, GoAP 
approved a proposal for transfer of entire stake of 39.12 per cent of L&T in favour of 
Kakinada Infrastructure Holding Pvt. Ltd. (KIHPL). GoAP stated (December 2011) 
that permission was accorded by it to the change in shareholding pattern. This 
decision of GoAP paved way for the exit of the promoter of the successful bidder 
from the Consortium and back-door entry of a new company, which was not part of 
the original consortium, and control (directly and indirectly) 71.52 per cent stake in 
the KSPL-SPV. 

18 Collected for each entry at the port and assessed on the vessel’s total Gross Registered Tonnage 
19 Likewise, the requirement for a proposal for capital dredging by the concessionaire and approval by 
GoAP was done away with and replaced by mere intimation to GoAP. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|16
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
2.5.6 Utilisation ofPortDuesAccountreceiptsfortermloan
principalandinterestrepayment
The CA stipulated that maintenance dredging 20 required prior approval of GoAP, and 
only then could expenditure thereon be charged to the Port Dues Account (Fund). The 
KSPL-SPV irregularly utilized `29.99 crore in the Fund for payment of interest and 
repayment of principal of a term loan to Union Bank of India from April 1999 to 
March 2007; this was discontinued only after repeated warnings of GoAP.
Instead of adjusting the irregular payment of loan from the Fund, for reimbursement 
of the already spent `31.21 crore towards maintenance dredging, the KSPL-SPV 
sought approval of GoAP in October 2004 to utilize the accruals to the Fund and to 
borrow from the lenders to meet the shortfall, if any, in the Fund; this was rejected 
(March 2006) as prior approval for incurring the expenditure was not obtained from 
GoAP. KSPL-SPV again represented (May 2007) to GoAP for reimbursement of the 
expenditure incurred. GoAP approved (March 2009) reimbursement of the 
maintenance dredging expenditure of 
`31.21 crore. The change in GoAP’s stand, 
without any change in circumstances, lacked transparency and justification since this 
amount could have easily been adjusted by GoAP from the irregularly utilised fund.  
2.5.7 Other concessions
Other concessions granted to the KSPL-SPV are discussed below. 
x GoAP appointed (July 1999) RITES as the proof consultants on the basis of an 
offer by RITES without any indication of periodic review/renewal, and without 
following a process of competitive tender. Further, violating the CA which 
provided for payment of the cost by the KSPL-SPV, GoAP paid `4.10 crore up to 
December 2011 to RITES. 
x DoP allotted (August 2000) the second floor of the Port administrative building to 
the KSPL-SPV against a consideration of maintenance of entire building. 
However, prior approval of GoAP was not taken, nor any agreement was entered. 
Audit scrutiny of the administrative building revealed that the SPV failed to 
honour its promise for maintenance of the entire building. 
x The CA stipulated that the KSPL-SPV should furnish a Bank Guarantee (BG) of  
` seven crore by April 1999 for securing the payment of revenue share and the 
guarantee, thereafter, shall be assessed every year in advance for safeguarding the 
financial interests of GoAP. Audit scrutiny, however, revealed that the KSPL-SPV 
submitted the BGs with delays ranging from 15 to 341 days. 
x The concession granted to the KSPL-SPV through the second SA of Government 
offering land to the KSPL-SPV as well as ROFR over land leases expiring in the 
KDWP area has already been discussed in paragraph 2.5.2. DoP refused to renew 
the expired leases of four firms for land in Kakinada Port (outside the KDWP 

20 Required to maintain the stipulated depth of the common channel 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
Page|17
area) and issued standing instructions (May 2011) to the Port Officer, Kakinada to 
issue resumption notices to other lands on expiry of annual lease periods.
In response to an audit enquiry, DoP stated (February 2012) that lands were 
resumed owing to technical reasons, and also that a stand had been taken to allot 
lands on the western-side of the ADB road on annual/long lease, and ROFR would 
be given to the KSPL-SPV in respect of land on the eastern side of the road, 
except areas earmarked for ship-building units, and fishing units. The response 
confirms the intention to allow KDWP to gain control over land even beyond the 
concessions already granted through the second SA. 
x Notwithstanding the CA, as well as the second SA, excluding areas for ship-
building units from the purview of the KSPL-SPV, GoAP, at the SPV’s request, 
accorded permission (October 2010) to the KSPL-SPV to establish this facility in 
collaboration with Sembmarine Kakinada Limited (SKL), which, itself, was a 
joint venture between Sembawang Shipyard, Singapore and the KSPL-SPV. 
Further, 70 acres of land earmarked for ship building units, fishing harbour etc., 
were also subsequently allotted by GoAP to SKL. Such grant of permission and 
allotment of land was irregular. 
2.5.8 Deficiencies/deviations inrevenuesharingandfinancial
arrangements
A test check of records revealed the following deficiencies in revenue sharing and 
financial arrangements by the KSPL-SPV: 
x For the period from 1999-00 to 2011-12, GoAP received revenue share (ranging 
from 20 to 22 per cent  of gross income) of `341.06 crore. Up to 2006-07, the 
revenue share actually received was less than the Minimum Guarantee Amount 
(MGA) as per the original agreement, but thereafter the actual revenue share 
exceeded both the originally prescribed MGA as  well as the revised MGA as per 
the first SA.  
x As per the CA, the KSPL-SPV was not entitled to any tax concessions. Audit 
reviewed the compliance of the KSPL-SPV to various tax laws with the concerned 
authorities. Cases of evasion/short payment of revenue are discussed below. 
¾ Cross verification of the gross revenue of the KSPL-SPV, as reported by the 
consultant, with details indicated in the service tax returns filed by the KSPL-
SPV for 22 months (June 2009 to March 2011) revealed understatement of 
gross income by 
`36 crore, leading to short remittance of revenue share to 
GoAP of `7.88 crore. 
¾ The KSPL-SPV had been deducting expenditure incurred (amounting to `3.29
crore during the period 2009-10 to 2011-12 (3rd quarter) on supply of 
essentials, electricity charges, payments made to APPCB 21 etc. from the gross 
revenue without establishing the material content. Such deductions are 

21 Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|18
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
permissible only in respect of services where the material content would be 80 
per cent or more of the tariff; this was neither ensured by the KSPL-SPV nor 
validated by the Consultant.
¾ Between April 2001 and December 2010, GoAP leased out 302.09 acres of 
land to the KSPL-SPV for periods which would be co-terminus with the CA 
and the SA thereto. None of the lease agreements were registered with the 
Stamps and Registration Department, resulting in evasion of stamp duty and 
registration charges of 
`60.21 crore. Also, the lease agreements (except for 
one agreement for 47.76 acres) did not even have the survey numbers of the 
lands.
¾ Further, 19 sub-leases by the KSPL-SPV were also not registered with GoAP. 
Of these, three sub-leases involved land to the extent of 51010 sq. metres and 
revenue loss of 
`2.49 crore (stamp duty: `0.23 crore and registration charges: 
`2.26 crore). 
¾ KSPL-SPV had not paid seigniorage 22 charges amounting to `43.80 crore on 
124.58 lakh cum of dredged sand. Further, the KSPL-SPV did not comply 
with the notices issued by the Mines & Geology Department of GoAP for 
payment of seigniorage charges of `11.86 crore. 
¾ KSPL-SPV had executed works valuing `634 crore. Against the payable 23
VAT of `17.76 crore, it had paid only `0.30 crore during 2006-12 (as of 
December 2011), leaving `17.46 crore unpaid.
¾ KSPL-SPV failed to remit cess amounting to `6.63 crore at one (1) per cent
under the Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess Act, 1996 
on executed works of `663 crore since April 2004. 
DoP stated (February 2012) that the SPV had received a notice from the Joint 
Commissioner of Labour, but had sought to pass on the responsibility for payment 
to the contractors. The reply is not convincing since it is the SPV’s responsibility 
to recover the cess at source and remit it to the AP Building and Other 
Construction Workers’ Welfare Board. 
2.6 Krishnapatnam Port
2.6.1 Introduction 
Krishnapatnam Port is situated in the south-east part of the State in SPS Nellore 
District. It has a vast hinterland covering the areas of Southern Andhra Pradesh, 
Districts of  Rayalaseema, North Tamil Nadu and Eastern Karnataka. 
GoAP conceived (1992) and approved (September 1993) the development of 
Krishnapatnam Port in phases through the private sector for import of coal and other 
cargo linked to the requirement of coal for the nearby proposed power plants. 

22 Cess on natural resources 
23 At 4 per cent of the cost of works, after allowing 30 per cent deduction towards labour component 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
Page|19
RITES24 was engaged (May 1994) as the consultant for the process for selection of 
the bidder for port development. Although APSEB 25 awarded (July 1994) Letters of 
Intent (LoIs) for setting up two 500 MW power plants, together with jetty facilities for 
coal handling, GoAP continued with the selection process for development of 
Krishnapatnam Port through the private sector. Detailed proposals were received from 
three parties (NATCO Group 26 , Hyderabad; Balaji Industrial Corporation Ltd, 
Madras; and Duncan Macneil Infrastructure Ltd, New Delhi), and GoAP found 
NATCO’s proposal to be comprehensive and consistent with the requirements of the 
bid notice and selected its offer. GoAP entered into a CA for Krishnapatnam Port with 
Krishnapatnam Port Company Ltd 27  (KPCL-SPV) in January 1997. However, the 
project did not take off, due to delays in implementation of the private power plants.  
Thus, awarding the CA for Krishnapatnam Port to NATCO consortium when the LoIs 
for the private power plants already awarded by APSEB involved captive jetty 
facilities for coal handling i.e. without linkage with the proposed Krishnapatnam Port, 
was not judicious. 
2.6.2 Signing ofRevisedConcessionAgreement(September2004)
Although there was no clause in the original agreement for any change/amendment to 
the CA, the CA was revised at the request of the KPCL-SPV, on the grounds that the 
development of the Port was delayed due to delays in implementation of private 
power plants at Krishnapatnam. The main benefits/concessions granted to the  
KPCL-SPV through the Revised CA are summarised below: 
x Lease period – This was changed from 35+20 years (extension) from the date of 
handing over physical possession of land (January 1997) and structures to 
30+10+10 years (extension) from Commercial Operations (March 2009). 
x Land allotment - GoAP agreed to make available more land belonging to GoAP, 
if found necessary, at the appropriate time (as may be required by KPCL-SPV) to 
the KPCL-SPV. Further, additional land needed for port development should be 
acquired and owned by GoAP; the cost would be initially borne by KPCL-SPV 
and adjusted over 15 years from the commencement date out of the revenue share 
available to GoAP. Also, specific permission for KPCL-SPV to sub-lease the land 
(with GoAP approval) was included. Further, the concessionaire was permitted, 
with prior approval of GoAP, to reclaim and use further land on the waterfront. 


24 RITES Ltd was awarded (May 1994) a consultancy assignment for Phase-I privatization of four 
ports, including Krishnapatnam Port. 
25  Erstwhile Andhra Pradesh Stat e Electricity Board has now been di vided into six power sector 
companies. 
26 Consortium of NATCO Pharma Ltd, Itochu Corp oration, Fluor Daniel Inc., HAM Dredging and 
Marine Contractors, and India Investments Inc. 
27 An SPV formed for this purpose 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|20
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
x Equity contribution – GoAP would make equity contribution of upto 13 per cent
on the railway line towards the cost of land in the KRCL (Krishnapatnam Rail 
Company Ltd.) for construction of rail project from Krishnapatnam Port to 
Obulavaripalli. 
x Fiscal incentives  (not included in the original CA) would be given by GoAP 
through foregoing revenue streams in the form of exemption from (i) Sales Tax on 
all inputs, (ii) Stamp Duty and Registration Fee on the first transfer of land and 
project agreements/financing agreements and (iii) payment of seigniorage charges 
during construction period”. 
x Reduction in minimum shareholding of promoter  (NATCO Group) from 55 per
cent (indicated in bid proposal/RITES report) to 26 per cent.
x Huge reduction in GoAP revenue share  from 5 per cent for the first five years,  
8 per cent  for next five years, 10 per cent  for next five years, and 12 per cent
thereafter to 2.6 per cent of gross income for the first 30 years, 5.2 per cent for  
31-40 years, and 10.4 per cent  for 41-50 years. Further, in deviation from the 
original CA, zero revenue share was payable under the revised agreement in 
respect of any year where the KPCL-SPV did not have a gross profit. 
x Mortgaging the land held on lease for obtaining loan  – The KPCL-SPV was 
entitled to grant in favour of lenders a first ranking security interest over all rights 
and assets held or enjoyed by the Concessionaire in connection with the Project, 
even without obtaining the approval of GoAP, though such approval of GoAP was 
required as per the original CA. 
Changes to the CA as indicated above comp letely altered its basic structure. There 
was, thus a need for a new set of project terms and conditions and a fresh bidding 
process, which was circumvented and resulted in undue favour to the developer. 
2.6.3 Subsequent Concessions
2.6.3.1 Allotment ofadditionallandandnonǦfixationofmarketvaluefor
determinationofleasecharges
The Revised CA had an open-ended, but discretionary clause (3.13) on GoAP making 
available ‘more land’, as required by the SPV for future development plans. In June/ 
August 2007, the KPCL-SPV projected additional land requirement of 5800 acres 
plus 1000 acres of water bodies and sand dunes. This was approved by GoAP in 
October 2007. As of November 2011, 2978 acres of land was handed over to the 
KPCL–SPV. Further, GoAP handed over 1000 acres of land (water bodies) to the 
DoP and eventual handing over of this land to the KPCL-SPV did not materialise, as 
approval from GoAP was not received, though the land has been in possession of the 
KPCL-SPV. Handing over of the remaining 2822 acres (5800 acres – 2978 acres) was 
reportedly under process. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
Page|21
Out of the total allotment of additional  land, audit noticed that while advance 
possession of 2486.05 acres of Government land 28 was handed over to the KPCL-
SPV, fixation of market value and alienation proposals were not finalised on this land. 
This resulted in non-raising of the demand for the lease charges. Further, full 
particulars of lands handed over, yet to be handed over, and status of alienation 
proposals were sought by audit from the Revenue Department, but were still awaited. 
2.6.3.2 Non ǦconsiderationofimpactontheNationalWaterway
GoI had declared the canal stretch of 1095 km connecting Kakinada to Puducherry as 
National Waterway No. 4 and this was passing through the land allotted to the Port; 
there was no evidence of consideration of the impact of allotment of the 1000 acres of 
land on the future development of this National Waterway. Further, there were 
representations from the public against closure of water bodies, and consequential 
problems of flood waters finding their way into the habitations, there were no records 
with DoP regarding redressal of such environmental issues.  
2.6.3.3 Belated conclusionofleasedeeds
Out of 2978 acres of land allotted, lease deeds stood executed only in respect of 
612.95 acres of land as of July 2010. One of the prime ‘concessions’ to the KPCL-
SPV in the revised CA was the right to assign, by way of security, its rights and 
interests to lenders. This facilitated the mortgaging of 269.95 acre Government land 
for obtaining loans of `887.50 crore. The scope for more mortgages by the KPCL-
SPV is enormous, since 2978 acres of land had been handed over to KPCL-SPV and 
handing over of another 3822 acres (out of the total of 6800 acres) is stated to be 
‘under process’. Under Phase II development of the project, a loan of `2990 crore was 
sanctioned by a consortium of banks led by State Bank of India against the mortgage 
of 1840 acres. 
2.6.4 Other concessions
Other concessions granted to the KPCL-SPV are discussed below. 
x Clause 13.2 of revised CA made the KPCL-SPV responsible for complying with 
all applicable laws. However, the KPCL-SPV did not obtain permission and pay 
the fee of 
`1.78 crore for conversion of agricultural land of 2006.38 acres under its 
occupation for port development.  
x There was short levy of lease charges of `0.14 crore from September 2004 to 
August 2011 on 269.925 acre land, due to continued adoption of the base rate at 
`6,000/acre (as of January 1997) instead of adopting the fair market value of 
`40,877/acre of 2004. 
x The KPCL-SPV was to pay lease charges on 676 acres of water front land 
reclaimed by GoAP at the cost of `25.48 crore in October 2008. District 

28 Comprising of DKT (Darkhastudar patta) lands, CJFS (Co-operative Joint Farming Society) lands, 
assigned, unassigned and other lands 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|22
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
Authorities have yet to survey the reclaimed land and fix the market value. This 
resulted in non-raising the demand for the lease charges even after three years of 
reclamation. 
x The Revised CA provided for GoAP’s contribution at 13 per cent  as equity 
towards land cost for the railway line from Krishnapatnam to Obulavaripalli. 
GoAP contributed 
`35 crore as equity to the cash calls of the Special Purpose 
Company, Krishnapatnam Rail Road Corporation Ltd, instead of remitting this 
amount to the Revenue Authorities for land acquisition (since GoAP’s agreement 
for equity contribution was towards land cost). Utilisation of this amount towards 
land acquisition (or otherwise) is to be confirmed. 
x As per the agreed terms of revised CA, the KPCL-SPV approached (March 2006) 
GoAP for fiscal incentives like exemption of stamp duty and registration fee, 
refund of VAT paid, seigniorage charges for procurement/ excavation of minor 
minerals and entry tax on notified goods/motor vehicles (total estimate `124
crore), and GoAP issued orders conferring these incentives till April 2010 or 
Phase-I completion, whichever was earlier. However, these fiscal incentives were 
not stopped on completion of Phase-I (2008), and were irregularly continued and 
extended till completion of Phase-II construction or till 2015, whichever was 
earlier.
x The Revised CA stipulated that the NATCO Group would hold 26 per cent
shareholding in the SPV for at least five years from the date of commercial 
operations (up to March 2014). This was not adhered to by the KPCL-SPV, and 
substantial control was passed on to Navayuga Engineering Company Limited 
(NECL).
2.6.5 Traffic projections
Traffic projections vis-à-vis actual traffic at Krishnapatnam Port during 2008-12 is 
given below. 
Table 2.4 – Traffic projections and actual traffic at Krishnapatnam Port 
(In Million Tonnes) 
Year Traffic projected by SPV Actual traffic
2008-09 14.40  8.20
2009-10 20.50 16.13
2010-11 30.50 15.91
2011-12 45.30 15.42
Source: Records of Department of Ports  
Commercial operations began during 2008-09. The KPCL-SPV did not achieve the 
projected traffic in any year; during 2010-11, it was about 50 per cent of the projected 
traffic and the gap between projections and actual traffic has widened further in  
2011-12, as it was about one-third of the estimate. 
 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
Page|23
2.6.6 Revenue Share
During the period March 2009 to March 2011, the concessionaire indicated revenue 
of `1195.44 crore. Of this, GoAP’s revenue share was `31.07 crore; after the  
KPCL-SPV adjusted `15.10 crore against land acquisition and remitted `15.97 crore 
to GoAP. 
Further, there were delays in remittance of  revenue share, on which interest of `0.18
crore was to be levied for the period March 2009 to March 2011, which had not been 
levied or collected. 
2.6.7 Extension ofexclusiverightsovercoastline
While the Revised CA conferred exclusive rights on the KPCL-SPV over 30 kms on 
either side of the port (a total of 73 km 29), the KPCL-SPV requested (June 2008) 
extension of concessionary rights up to 30 km south of Vadarevu Port (which 
represented the boundary of exclusive rights for VANPIC) for enabling development 
of cargo handling facilities with suitable jetties, promotion of Special Economic 
Zones (SEZs), power plants, multifarious industries and social infrastructure. 
GoAP approved (September 2008) the request of KPCL-SPV on the justification that 
the effective hinterland of Krishnapatnam Port gets reduced to a greater extent due to 
development of ports in every district of the State and location of major ports like 
Chennai, which may also result in reduced cargo handling and affect its viability and 
the amendment to the CA made in February 2009. Although the GO did not mention 
the exact length of the coastline for which the KPCL-SPV would have exclusive 
rights, this amounted to 153 km i.e. an additional 80 km over the terms of the Revised 
CA. 
The irregular extension of concession rights (that too without any corresponding 
increase in revenue share to GoAP) to a length of 153 km, covering 15 per cent of the 
AP coastline, prevents potential port development by GoI/GoAP, as well as by other 
private parties, which could have provided competition to the KPCL-SPV. 
2.6.8 Monitoring Arrangements
The Revised CA empowered GoAP to organise operational and financial audit to 
ensure accuracy of the income of the KPCL-SPV, of which it gets its share. GoAP 
had not appointed a financial auditor and independent engineer since the 
commencement of commercial operations in March 2009. Subsequent to an audit 
enquiry, DoP initiated (March 2012) the process for appointment of financial auditor. 
The CA also empowered GoAP to inspect the implementation of all construction 
activities and monitor compliance with the approved plans and designs. GoAP had not 
conducted such inspection. A joint inspection of the Port by GoAP with the Port 
Authorities, though required, was not conducted. 

29 Actual port area of 13 km + 30 km North + 30 km South 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|24
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
The CA stipulated Performance Standards covering average pre-berthing time 30 not 
exceeding 12 hours, as well as levy of penalty for failure to meet these Standards. 
However, DoP and GoAP had no information about actual pre-berthing time, or about 
penalty leviable, if any, and thus failed to monitor compliance with the stipulated 
Performance Standards. 
While the Master Plan and Land Usage Plan of the KPCL-SPV projecting land 
requirement of 5800 plus 1000 acres was approved by GoAP in October 2007, a 
revised Master Plan (over the already approved Master Plan, earmarking details of 
land and its utility, duly indicating Customs Zone) had not been furnished by the 
KPCL-SPV. 
2.7 Gangavaram Port
2.7.1 Introduction 
Gangavaram is situated about 15 km south of Visakhapatnam on the East Coast. 
GoAP issued orders in 1994 declaring Gangavaram as a Minor Port, and the Task 
Force decided (1996) to develop Gangavaram through privatisation. After an 
unsuccessful attempt at privatisation, GoAP nominated (September 2000) APIIC as 
the nodal agency for project development; APIIC, in turn, entered into a MoU with 
Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services Limited (IL&FS) as the Project 
Development Promotion Partner. 
APIIC invited (September 2001) Expression of Interest (EoIs) for port development. 
10 firms submitted EoIs, of which seven firms were shortlisted (January 2002) for 
issue of Request for Proposal (RFP). Two consortia, led by Adani Exports Ltd. 31 and 
DVS Consortium 32, submitted bids in May 2002. After evaluation, the project was 
awarded (July 2002) to the DVS consortium, which incorporated (March 2003) a 
Special Purpose Company in the name of Gangavaram Port Limited (GPL-SPV). 
GoAP signed a CA (August 2003) with the GPL-SPV for a concession period of 30 
years, extendable by two spells of 10 years each. Construction for Phase-I (five 
berths) commenced in December 2005. GoAP declared (April 2010) commercial 
operations to have commenced from April 2009. Phase-I, consisting of five berths at 
an estimated cost of `1677 crore, was completed in 2008-09, while Phase-II, for four 
additional berths, is under consideration of GoAP. 
2.7.2 Selection ofDeveloper
Audit scrutiny revealed deficiencies in selection of the developer affecting the 
fairness and transparency of the award process as summarised below. 

30 The waiting period for ship which is ready in all aspects for berthing and the receivers/shippers of 
which are ready to receive/load full cargo 
31 Consisting of Adani Exports Limited, Adani Infrastructure Services Limited and Adani Port 
Infrastructure Limited 
32 Consisting of Sri DVS Raju, New Wave Secu rities & Industrial Credits Ltd., Dubai Ports 
International (DPI), Dubai, West Port Ho ldings SDN BHD, Malaysia and Jurong Consultants Pte. 
Ltd., Singapore 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
Page|25
x Conditional qualifying of four parties  - Four parties (including the successful 
bidder – the DVS consortium) were qualified conditionally for issue of RFP. 
APIIC requested (February 2002) the DVS Consortium to furnish the three 
previous annual reports of Dubai Ports International (DPI) – the specified port 
operator for the DVS consortium – or documentary evidence certified by an 
independent auditor/banker or a corporate brochure to assess the financial position 
of DPI. The DVS Consortium expressed difficulties in submission of annual 
reports of DPI, and promised to submit a Government certificate that they 
exceeded all the stipulated financial criteria. Although the consultants expressed 
their reservations and insisted on additional documentation, so as to be transparent 
and fair to other parties involved, the AP Infrastructure Authority (APIA) did not 
agree and decided (April 2002) that the letter from the Dubai Port authorities 
could be considered as sufficient, subject to confirmation of its financial status. 
x Lead member (DVS consortium) had no port experience  - While accepting the 
Evaluation Report on EoIs, the Steering Committee 33  stipulated that the lead 
member should have port-related experience, and also that an individual should 
not be named as the lead member of any consortium; instead, a company 
preferably having port/ shipping experience should be named as the lead member. 
The individual (who along with New Wave Securities & Industrial Credits 
Limited was the lead member of the successful consortium) was in the IT industry 
for the last 15 years, and had no port experience. However, APIA successively 
changed the definition of lead member to ‘an individual and a firm, together 
satisfying the EoI criteria’ and then to ‘a firm or an individual along with a firm 
satisfying the EoI criteria and nominated to act as the lead applicant’ . This 
allowed the DVS consortium to be qualified, despite the lead member having no 
port experience. 
x Change in consortium composition before bid submission  - In January 2002, the 
Steering Committee stipulated that changes in consortium members were to be 
allowed up to the date of submission of RFP, with the prior approval of 
APIIC/GoAP, and the new members should have equal or better credentials. 
Though the conditional selection of the DVS - led consortium was based on the 
financial statements of West Port Malaysia and Jurong Town Corporation (parent 
company of Jurong Consultants Pvt. Ltd) and the net worth statements of DPI and 
the individual, yet in April and May 2002, these two members withdrew due to the 
joint and several liability clauses in the RFP, and a Consortium Agreement was 
signed between the remaining parties. Although APIIC was aware of the 
withdrawal, it did not report this to GoAP. Further, the credentials of the newly 
formed DVS-led consortium at the RFP stage were not re-examined. Such 
changes in the consortium composition after the EoI short listing rendered the 
process of short listing at the EoI stage irrelevant, while minimising competition 
by ensuring that new consortia could not submit proposals. 

33 Constituted specifically for the development of the Gangavaram Port Project 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|26
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
x Inflated traffic projections by the successful bidder - The traffic projections in 
the RFP and DPR by the DVS Consortium were vastly overstated vis-à-vis the 
actual cargo traffic for the first three years (2009-12). Inclusion of traffic 
projections in the technical evaluation, without any mechanism for holding the 
bidder accountable for achieving such projections, is overlooking the financial 
interests of the Government. 
2.7.3 Change inShareholdingandPortOperator
The CA stipulated that the Port Operator, holding an equity stake of not less than  
13 per cent, should continue for a minimum period of five years from the Commercial 
Operations Date. However, even before the completion of construction (let alone 
commencement of operations), the GPL-SPV requested (March 2006) to permit 
change of Port Operator from DPI to Integrax Berhad, Malaysia on the grounds that 
continuation of DPI would lead to monopoly, as well as major conflict of interest to 
Gangavaram Port. GoAP approved the change in Port Operator in March 2006. 
Integrax Berhad, Malaysia was further replaced (November 2007) as ‘Port Operator’ 
by Portia Management Services Ltd., UK with the approval of GoAP citing that Portia 
Management Services had better capabilities, international experience and expertise in 
providing technical operations and maintenance services in port operations.
Contrary to the terms of the CA (stipulating 13 per cent  shareholding for the Port 
Operator), Portia Management Services did not have any equity share in the SPV as 
of August 2011. Further, the brochure of Portia Management Services Ltd., UK 34
indicated that the scope of Portia’s involvement with Gangavaram Port was indicated 
as “Technical Support” and not Port Operator; this was in clear contrast to ports in 
other countries 35 where Portia’s responsibility for a terminal was clearly indicated. 
Supplementary information on Portia’s website indicated the Technical Support 
Project for Gangavaram Port commenced from January 2008 and was ongoing; with 
just four professional staff with 16 man months.  
It is, thus, evident that the services rendered by Portia Management Services Ltd. UK 
are clearly limited to technical support, and do not appear, by any means, to extend to 
“Port Operator”, nor is Portia an equity shareholder at all in the GPL-SPV. The 
provisions of the CA relating to the Port Operator have not been adhered to. 
2.7.4 Land Allotment
The CA stipulated that land of 1800 acres and the waterfront within the port limits 
was earmarked for development of the Port. GoAP acquired 1400 acres from 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 36 and 604.96 acres from Revenue Department 
at a cost of `53.73 crore, and transferred 1800 acres (August 2007) to the GPL-SPV, 
which availed of a loan of `1170 crore from a consortium of 13 banks for Phase-I, by 
mortgaging lands allotted to it. Although the SPV informed GoAP (June 2005) that 

34 Available on Portia Management Services’ website 
35 Pakistan, Lebanon, Trinidad, Mozambique, Argentina, and Kenya 
36 Also commonly known as Visakhapatnam Steel Plant (VSP) 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
Page|27
creating equitable mortgage on the lands allotted was a standard requirement of any 
financial institution to reach financial closur e, however, dates of creation of mortgage 
were not available with GoAP. 
2.7.5 Other Irregularities
x In November 2000, APIIC appointed IL&FS as a Project Development Promotion 
Partner for selection of the consultant as well as the developer for Gangavaram 
Port. A Project Development Fee (PDF) was to be collected from the selected 
bidder and shared between APIIC and IL&FS in a mutually agreed ratio, which 
was not determined in advance. In February 2002, the Steering Committee 
decided that the successful bidder would furnish Performance Security through 
Bank Guarantee of `25 crore. GoAP also fixed the PDF to `15 crore at a pre-bid 
meeting stage. However, post-award, after negotiation between the Developer and 
APIIC, Government (October 2002) reduced the PDF from `15 crore to `5 crore, 
also with instalment-based payment 37, and the Performance Security from `25
crore to `20 crore, that too in three stages. While IL&FS questioned APIIC on the 
huge reduction in PDF, this was resolved between IL&FS and APIIC by sharing 
the PDF in the ratio of 75:25.
Reduction in PDF and performance security, and instalment/stage-based payment, 
thus led to post-award undue favours to the successful bidder. DoP confirmed 
(February 2012) that copies of performance securities were also not available  
with it. 
x Though, the land was handed over to GPL-SPV between November 2006 and 
August 2007, yet the lease charges were calculated by adopting the fair market 
value as of January 2002 (which pre-dated the CA) resulting in unjust financial 
gain to the GPL-SPV of `2.17 crore over the period January 2002 to August 2007, 
with substantial future losses as well.  
x The CA and the State Support Agreement mandated provision of external 
infrastructure (road connection to the nearest National Highway from the port 
boundary, water supply up to port boundary, and power supply from nearest 
substation to port boundary) by GoAP before financial closure in October 2005. 
These were, however, not provided by GoAP in time. The road works were 
completed in June 2006. The water supply scheme was commissioned in 
November 2008 and handed over to the GPL-SPV in February 2009.  
x In May 1995, GoAP had declared Mutyalammapalem as a Minor Port, with 
prescribed Port Limits. Gangavaram Port limits were notified by GoAP in June 
2001. GoAP de-notified (August 2008) the existing Mutyalammapalem Minor 
Port and extended the Port Limits of Gangavaram Port by merging the port limits 
of Mutyalammapalem Port. Such de-notification has led to GoAP foregoing its 
right to develop this port and amounted to undue favour to the GPL-SPV. 

37 `2 crore immediately after issue of LoI and `3 crore at the time of financial closure 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|28
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
x The GPL-SPV was to pay annual lease charges at 2 per cent of fair market value, 
with annual escalation of 6.5 per cent  per annum. However, the developer paid 
lease rentals with delays ranging from 9 to 57 days. Neither the CA nor the lease 
agreements had any provision for interest for delayed payment. 
2.7.6 Revenue Share
The CA stipulated payment of annual concession fee at 2.1 per cent  of the Gross 
Income for the first 30 years of the Concession Period, and at double the rate for the 
extended spells of 10 years each. However, the CA also provided for non-payment of 
the Concession Fee, where the GPL-SPV did not earn a Gross Profit; this clause  
did not exist in the bidding documents 38, and amounted to post-bid favour to the  
GPL-SPV. During the period 2009-11, the Port earned gross revenue of `810.26
crore, of which GoAP received a revenue share of `17.02 crore. 
2.7.7 Monitoring Arrangements
x The CA provided for appointment by GoAP of an Independent Engineer (within 
one year from the date of the CA) i.e. by August 2004 and an Independent 
Auditor. However, GoAP appointed RITES as the Independent Engineer only in 
October 2007. Also, GoAP appointed RITES as the Independent Auditor in April 
2011; however, after noticing that RITES was not on the list of empanelled 
auditors with RBI, DoP requested (December 2011) GoAP to withdraw the orders 
appointing RITES as the Independent Auditor, and appointing an audit firm from 
the panel maintained by the CAG. RITES’ appointment was finally cancelled by 
GoAP in March 2012, after being pointed out by audit and DoP was requested to 
submit a proposal for appointment of an auditor from amongst the CAG’s panel. 
x The CA stipulated Performance Standards covering average pre-berthing time
39
not exceeding 12 hours, as well as levy of penalty for failure to meet these 
Standards. However, DoP and GoAP had no information about actual pre-berthing 
time, or about penalty leviable, if any, and thus failed to monitor compliance with 
the stipulated Performance Standards. 
x GoAP is required to watch the utilisation of funds provided for carrying out relief 
and rehabilitation of affected families, creation of external infrastructure, etc. 
since these are vital for completion of construction of the Port and opening it for 
commercial operations. GoAP released 
`152.23 crore to various agencies for the 
above purposes.
Even after eight years of receipt of funds, UCs had not been submitted for  
`79.38 crore. Expenditure particulars collected from the Special Officer, R&R, 
Gangavaram Port reflected unspent balance of `4.38 crore. 

38 The draft CA supplied by GoAP (prepared by LTR) contained a clause stating that in case the 
concession fee, which would be worked out on th e basis of percentage of gross income was more 
than the net profit, concessionaire shall not pay any fee for that year. 
39 The waiting period for ship which is ready in all aspects for berthing and the receivers/shippers of 
which are ready to receive /load full cargo 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
Page|29
Further, no cash book was maintained by the Special Officer and monthly reconci-
liation was not done with the Bank, contrary to requirement. Further, a Chartered 
Accountant was appointed for conducting audit only up to 2007-08, and he had 
not submitted any report to the Special Officer/ GoAP even as of January 2012. 
x Although the CA empowered GoAP to inspect facilities with regard to O&M of 
the Port with prior intimation to the GPL-SPV, and also to conduct an annual 
physical inventory of plants, equipment and accessories provided by the GPL-SPV 
as part of the Port development, no evidence of such inspection was available. 
x The GPL-SPV commenced trial operations in August 2008 and the Customs 
Department issued the notification in October 2008. However, the issue of 
declaration of Commercial Operations Date (COD) was under examination by 
GoAP till 8 April 2010, when the COD was retrospectively declared as April 2009. 
2.8 Machilipatnam Port
2.8.1 Introduction 
GoAP decided to develop all weather, deep water multipurpose port at Machilipatnam 
in Krishna District through a competitive process. Expression of Interest (EoI) was 
invited in September 2005; nine firms responded, out of which five were short-listed 
for issue of bid documents. After issue of bids and a pre-bid meeting, only one party, 
a consortium of four companies which included MAYTAS Infrastructure Pvt. Limited 
(MAYTAS), submitted the bid for development of the port at ‘Gogileru’. The work 
was entrusted to the Consortium in January 2007 on BOST basis. The location of the 
port was subsequently changed (January 2008) to ‘Gilakaladinne’ by GoAP, and the 
CA was signed in April 2008. Audit findings on the award of development of 
Machilipatnam Port were reported through paragraph 2.2.3 of the Audit Report for the 
year ended 31 March 2009. 
Subsequently, GoAP allowed the substitution of MAYTAS by Navayuga Engineering 
Company Ltd. (NECL), and a revised CA was signed in June 2010. The project is yet 
to take off, mainly due to land acquisition issues. 
2.8.2 Change inShareholdingPatternofSPV
In August 2009, the SPV sought approval of GoAP for admitting NECL and exit of 
MAYTAS and SREI-SCPL due to the financial difficulties being faced by MAYTAS. 
Simultaneously, MAYTAS authorised another member of the consortium, Nagarjuna 
Construction Company Ltd (NCC), to represent it before GoAP and release it from all 
matters under the CA. 
Although the CA and the Consortium Agreement (March 2006) did not provide for 
substitution of the lead member of the project (MAYTAS) and concerns were also 
expressed internally within GoAP (October 2009) that such an amendment would be 
violative of constitutional requirement of equality, GoAP decided (March 2010) to 
sign the amended agreement with a new party. Further, GoAP also ignored another 
request (November 2009) from MPSEZL (Mundra Port & Special Economic Zone 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|30
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
Ltd), which was successfully operating Mundra Port for a decade, to grant the port to 
new players so that competition could be induced. 
GoAP allowed the change of lead partner (with 89 per cent  stake) from MAYTAS 
and its associates to NECL by amending the CA, without going through a tendering 
process for selection of a new lead partner. This also ensured that GoAP continued to 
be burdened by an additional cost of `335 crore payable to the original SPV for 
change of port location as discussed in paragraph 2.2.3 of the CAG’s Audit Report 
(Civil) for the year 2008-09. The following deficiencies were further noticed in the 
project:
x The Machilipatnam Ports Limited (MPL-SPV) sought (May/June 2008) exclusive 
rights zone of 30 km for setting up power plant at the previous location at 
Gogileru village (originally proposed for the Port) in an area of 2300 acres. DoP 
submitted draft notification for the extension of port limits. GoAP issued orders in 
August 2008 for the extension of the port limits 40 with exclusive rights to the 
SPV41 though not contemplated in the CA.  
x Although the foundation stone for the port project was laid in April 2008, and the 
revised CA (involving NECL) signed in June 2010, the port project is yet to take 
off, mainly due to land acquisition issues. The DPR submitted (June 2010) by 
Vajra Seaport Private Limited was followed by a Supplementary DPR (SPR) in 
May 2011, which was scrutinised through Indian Ports Association (IPA) but had 
not yet been approved by GoAP. 
The then Collector, Krishna District intimated (November 2005/ March 2006) that 
required Government lands were available for port development; hence, GoAP 
committed to hand over 6262 acres of land through the RFQ for the successful 
bidder. However, in January 2011, the district administration belatedly noted that 
only 1249 acres of Government land was available, and the balance would have to 
be acquired from private persons at an assessed cost of 
`200 crore.
Incidentally, DoP felt (December 2010) that as per the DPR, only 761 acres of 
land was required even for the final phase of the Port; the remaining requirement 
was for other purposes (setting up a steel plant, power plant, multi-purpose SEZ, 
integrated township, desalination plant, container freight station etc.); and that it 
was not desirable to acquire 4000 acres from the socio-economic point of view. 
However, DoP later communicated (January 2012) comments on the IPA Report 
(January 2012) agreeing to the additional requirement of land. 
x Government land of 412.57 acres was handed over (October 2008) by DoP to the 
MPL-SPV, for which lease charges of 
`0.63 crore (based on the value fixed for 
land) were payable from October 2008 to October 2010 was not paid (June 2010) 
by the SPV, on the grounds that the Fair Market Value (FMV) was not fixed by 
the District Collector. DoP requested GoAP in August 2011 to address the District 

40 Although the notings indicate a zone of 35 kms, the GO indicated the boundary co-ordinates and not 
the port limits in kms. 
41 Then designated as Vajra Seaport Private Limited, which was renamed as Machilipatnam Port Ltd. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
Page|31
Collector to fix the FMV. No further demand had been made on the SPV, and 
lease charges of `1.35 crore for the four year period from October 2008 to 
October 2012 remained unrealised. 
2.9 VANPIC Port
x Deficiencies in the award of selection of developer in respect of VANPIC project 
were reported through paragraph 4.10 of CAG’s Audit Report on Land Allotment 
for 2011-12. 
x Critical records relating to VANPIC Port (viz. MoU between GoAP and 
Government of Ras Al Khaimah; development of VANPIC – request for deletion/ 
withdrawal of certain lands; information relating to various components of the 
project by different SPVs; review meetings in connection with the Project; road 
connectivity to Vadarevu Port) were not provided to audit on the grounds of these 
being handed over to CBI42.
x VANPIC Port SPV transferred 40.5 per cent  shareholding in the Consortium to 
NECL. in violation of Clause 3.8 of the CA, which prescribed that M/s Matrix 
Enport Holdings Pvt. Ltd. (MEHPL) should hold 49 per cent  stake in the SPV. 
This transfer resulted in reducing the shareholding of MEHPL to 6.13 per cent .
Further, GoAP objected to this transfer, as it was violative of the CA. 
2.10 Captive Ports
GoAP considered the requests of the promoters of private power plants in Srikakulam 
and Visakhapatnam districts and allotted Bhavanapadu/ Meghavaram and Nakkapalli 
minor ports on captive basis, without tender process. Observations are discussed in 
the succeeding paragraphs. 
2.10.1 Bhavanapadu andMeghavaramPorts
East Coast Energy Pvt. Ltd (party) requested (August 2007) GoAP to accord 
permission for establishing captive jetty facilities at Bhavanapadu Port in Srikakulam 
District for receiving and unloading the imported coal for use at the proposed Thermal 
Power Project. However, the party sought revision (within 10 days) for establishing 
captive jetty facilities at Meghavaram, which was accorded (January 2009) to ECEPL. 
However, State Government’s order did not restrict the permission specifically for 
coal handling for the thermal power project. 
The party again approached DoP in April and December 2010 with proposals for 
developing captive berths at Bhavanapadu Minor Port. DoP recommended (January 
2011) the party’s proposal for consideration of GoAP. The recommendation of the 
DoP was incorrect in view of the following:
x A tendering process was not followed for selection of the developer, and signing 
of a CA as per the terms and conditions proposed by the private parties was 
against the principles of transparency and equity.  

42 Central Bureau of Investigation 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|32
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
x The GO did not include the term ‘coal handling for the thermal power plant’ and 
merely indicated construction of captive jetty. This was an obvious deviation and 
unintended favour to ECEPL.
DoP contended (February 2012) that captive jetty was different from the 
development of a greenfield port and that tender system was not feasible in cases 
of captive jetties. The response of DoP is not tenable, in the absence of any 
specific guidelines for allotment of captive jetties/ berths to private parties in a 
transparent and fair manner and finalisation of project terms and conditions, other 
than through a tendering process. 
2.10.2 Nakkapalli Port
ANRAK Aluminium Limited requested (May 2010) GoAP for approval for a captive 
jetty at Nakkapalli in Visakhapatnam District. The Special Secretary to GoAP 
directed (June 2010) DoP to furnish a detailed report on this proposal, including 
whether any naval base was being set up by the Ministry of Defence at the proposed 
location as well as an undertaking from ANRAK Aluminium Limited about 
implementation of the rehabilitation package. 
However, without ascertaining information about the naval base and obtaining an 
undertaking on the rehabilitation package, DoP submitted (July 2010) a draft 
notification to declare Nakkapalli as a Minor Port. GoAP notified (August 2010) 
Nakkapalli as a Minor Port and accorded in-principle permission to ANRAK 
Aluminium Limited for constructing a captive jetty. 
In October 2010, the Eastern Naval Command (ENC) requested GoAP for reconsi-
deration of the notification, as it was only seven nautical miles from the strategic 
infrastructure being created at Rambili. DoP intimated (December 2010) ENC that 
there was no need to reconsider the decision, as the proposed location was beyond 10 
km of the south side of the Naval Alternate Operating Base (NAOB) boundary. 
However, ENC approached (January 2011) the Chief Secretary, GoAP on this issue, 
which was followed up by the Defence Secretary (December 2011) with GoAP. 
DoP stated (February 2012) that they had no information about the development of 
the naval base at the time, and indicated that a decision would be taken after due 
examination. 
2.11 Setting upofsecondMajorPortinAndhraPradeshbyGoI
As per the press releases of the Press Information Bureau of GoI, a technical 
committee of the Ministry of Shipping (MoS), GoI had visited three sites in Andhra 
Pradesh for the second major port (besides Visakhapatnam); MoS would finalise the 
site by end-August 2012 for subsequent in-principle approval by GoI. However, as of 
date, although the establishment of the second new major port of GoI in Andhra 
Pradesh was stated to have been approved by the MoS, its location was not notified. 
This is particularly critical, considering the extensive stretches of exclusive rights 
granted by GoAP to various private port developers along the State’s coastline. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ2
PerformanceAuditonPPPProjectsinPortsSector
Page|33
2.12 Conclusion 
GoAP developed several non-Major Ports along the State’s coastline through the 
Public Private Partnership mode. While audit acknowledges the importance of port 
development for the economic development of the hinterland and the contribution of 
these non-Major Ports to such growth, the mode of such development had numerous 
deficiencies and irregularities. Further, the Act for establishment of a Maritime 
Board in the State has also not been enacted. 
There were deficiencies in the process of award of these Ports and various instances 
of post-bid/ post-award changes to the projects and terms and conditions, which 
resulted in undue favour to the private developers and against the financial interests 
of GoAP, though none of the Concession Agreements had provisions for such 
amendments/revisions. Changes were made to the Concession Agreements to alter its 
basic structure, thereby vitiating the sanctity of the bidding and contracting process. 
GoAP’s financial benefit from these PPP projects (excepting Kakinada), with the 
miniscule revenue share, was vastly overshadowed by other costs incurred by GoAP 
in terms of external infrastructure creation, land acquisition and relief & 
rehabilitation. Thus, existing port assets and the rights for future developments were 
granted to private parties without commensurate benefit to GoAP. 
A key aspect of the development of ports on PPP mode has been the allotment of large 
amounts of land to these ports, also facilitating mortgaging of such lands by the 
private developers to banks and other lending institutions for obtaining huge loans for 
project development, leaving little risk or exposure on the part of the private parties. 
Multiplicity of non-major Ports along the coastline, along with liberal grant of 
exclusive rights over large lengths of the coastline (well beyond Port Limits) has 
virtually rendered the majority of the State’s coastline privatised. 
2.13 Recommendations 
x GoAP may consider setting up a Maritime Board to regulate the functioning of 
the privatised ports (as well as minor ports under GoAP’s control). 
x Action should be initiated against the persons responsible for the irregularities 
and deficiencies pointed out in audit scrutiny. Necessary action may be initiated 
for recoveries of dues from the SPVs. Accordingly, responsibility needs to be 
fixed for the various lapses/ deficiencies pointed out. 
x Legal advice may be sought as to the extent to which it would be feasible for 
GoAP to withdraw and/or curtail post-bid concessions/favours granted to the 
successful bidders. 
x GoAP may initiate action for rev iewing withdrawal/ curtailing the exclusive 
rights granted to Ports. This is particularly important to provide potential for 
setting up of a second Major Port by GoI (in addition to Visakhapatnam).



Chapter-3
Chief Controlling Officer (CCO) 
based Audit of Forest Department


Page|35

ExecutiveSummary
Andhra Pradesh has a total recorded forest area of 63,814 sq.km (comprising 23.2 
per cent of its geographical area), of which 15,200 sq.km is under Community 
Forest Management with a participatory approach involving communities in forest 
management. The State also has 21 wildlife sanctuaries, six national parks and one 
tiger reserve. These resources are managed by the Forest Department, whose 
Executive Head is the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests. A CCO-based audit 
of the Forest Department was undertaken during March and between July and 
September 2012, covering the three year period 2009-12 and involving the 
examination of records at the Headquarters Office, 12 circles and 25 divisions. The 
main findings of the CCO-based audit are summarized below: 
x The recorded forest area of the State was being shown at 63,814 sq.km since 
1991, despite diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes under the Forest 
Conservation Act, 1980 and alienation of land under the ROFR Act, 2006 1.
Further, unclassed forest area of 970 sq.km had also not been notified. 
x There was a substantial spurt in encroachment after enactment of ROFR Act, 
2006. Also, the frequency of beat inspections prescribed was not adequate 
enough to protect the forest. 
x Non-forest land handed over for compensatory afforestation in lieu of diversion 
of forest land was already afforested, violating the spirit of the Forest 
Conservation Act, 1980. In another case, compensatory afforestation could not 
take place due to non-availability of identified non-forest land, which was 
caused by improper identification of non-forest land in a far away Division. 
x Lack of a timeframe for completing implementation of the ROFR Act and 
recognition of rights, in effect, keeps the process open indefinitely, with scope 
for possible exploitation and incorrect claims and increasing vulnerability of 
forest area. Various instances were noticed where ROFR rights were granted to 
ineligible persons and individuals in Vana Samrakshana Samithi areas. 
Further, community rights extended to tribal VSSs were not in line with the 
provisions under ROFR Act, 2006. 

1 Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 
CHAPTER
Chief Controlling Officer (CCO) based
Audit of Forest Department3



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|36
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
x Audit scrutiny also revealed deficiencies in funds utilization and 
implementation of various Central and State schemes/activities, including the 
Intensification of Forest Management Scheme (IFMS), Accelerated Programme 
of Restoration and Regeneration of Forest Cover, Bio-Diesel Plantation in 
Forest Areas, 13 th Finance Commission grant-in-aid for forests, Project 
Elephant, River Valley Project, and CAMPA (Compensatory Afforestation 
Management and Planning Authority). 
x Non-achievement of targets under various schemes was partly on account of 
non-release/late release of funds by the Government/PCCF, as well as delay in 
authorization by the Director of Works Accounts/PAO under the PAO system of 
works and forests payments. 
3.1 Introduction 
3.1.1 Forest Area
Andhra Pradesh has a total recorded forest area of 63,814 sq.km 2 (comprising 23.2  
per cent of its geographical area). In terms of notification under the AP Forest Act, 
1967, this area includes reserved forest (50,479 sq.km – 79.1 per cent ), protected 
forest (12,365 sq.km – 19.4 per cent), and unclassed forest3 (970 sq.km – 1.5 per cent).  
Of the 23 districts in the State, the forest area in three districts (Adilabad, Khammam 
and Visakhapatnam) constitutes more than one-third of the geographical area, while in 
four districts (Krishna, Medak, Nalgonda and Rangareddy), the forest cover is less 
than 10 per cent of the geographical area. 
Out of the total forest area of 63,814 sq.km, 15,200 sq.km 4  (23.8 per cent ) is  
under Community Forest Management (CFM), with a participatory approach 
involving communities in forest management. This involves 7,718 VSSs (Vana 
Samrakshana Samithies), JFMCs (Joint Forest Management Committees) 5 and EDCs 
(Eco Development Committees)6, involving 15.39 lakh members (of which 7.88 lakh 
members belong to SC/ST). These Committees have to perform certain duties (viz. 
managing forests in accordance with the micro plan prepared by them, and protecting 
forests in the allotted areas) and, correspondingly, also enjoy certain rights and 
privileges (e.g. entitlement for all non-timber forest produce, 100 per cent incremental 
value of timber, share in beedi leaf net revenues, and share in compounding fees 
collected). 
The State has a Protected Area (PA) network of 15,281 sq.km (23.9 per cent of total 
forest area), comprising of  21 wildlife sanctuaries,  6 national parks and  1 tiger reserve. 

2 As per the AP State of Forest Report 2011 (APSFR 2011) 
3 Unlike reserved and protected forest, unclassed fore st area has not been notified under any section of 
the AP Forest Act, 1967. 
4 The remaining area of 48,614 sq.km (63,814 – 15,200 VSS area) is managed by the Forest 
Department. 
5 In FDA (Forest Development Agency) areas 
6 In wildlife areas 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|37
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
3.1.2 Forest Cover7
The AP State of Forest Report 2011 (APSFR 2011) indicates the forest cover in the 
State in terms of canopy density as very dense forest (950 sq.km – 1.49 per cent ),
moderately dense forest (18,629 sq.km – 29.19 per cent), open forest (22,584 sq.km – 
35.39 per cent ), scrub (13,504 sq.km – 21.16 per cent ), non-forest (7,496 sq.km – 
11.75 per cent) and water bodies (651 sq.km – 1.02 per cent). 
However, the India State of Forest Report 2011 (ISFR 2011) prepared by the Forest 
Survey of India (FSI) based on interpretation of satellite data during the period 
October 2008-March 2009  shows total forest cover of 46,389 sq.km, consisting of 
very dense forest (850 sq.km), moderately dense forest (26,242 sq.km) and open 
forest (19,297 sq. km). The ISFR 2011 draws a distinction between ‘forest area’ (area 
recorded as forests in Government records, i.e. within the control of the Forest 
Department) and ‘forest cover’ (all lands more than one hectare in area with a tree 
canopy density of more than 10 per cent). Thus, while forest area denotes the legal 
status of the land, forest cover indicates the presence of trees on any land, irrespective 
of their ownership, and excludes recorded forest areas without any trees or tree 
density of less than 10 per cent.

Forest Cover Map of Andhra Pradesh 
(Source: India State of Forest Report 2011) 

7 Of the entire forest area, the area which is actually covered by trees is called forest cover. Its 
classification depends upon the canopy density of the forest 




AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|38
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
3.1.3 Governing StatutesandPolicies
The main statutes governing the management and maintenance of forests are: 
x the AP Forest Act, 1967, which lays down the procedure for declaration of 
‘reserve forest’ and ‘protected forest’ and the associated rights and conditions; 
x the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, a Government of India Act, which stipulates 
the restrictions on, and procedures for de-reservation of reserved forest and 
diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes; 
x the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, a Government of India Act,  which lays down 
the broad framework for protection of wild animals and birds, declaring areas as 
sanctuaries and national parks, and regulating possession/acquisition/trade in wild 
animals and animal articles; and 
x the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of 
Forest Rights) Act, 2006, a GOI Act, (commonly termed as the ROFR Act), which 
seeks to recognise and vest the forest rights and occupation in forest land in forest 
dwelling scheduled tribes and other traditional forest dwellers and provides a 
framework for recording the forest rights and the nature of evidence required. 
The State has also a policy for management of forest i.e., State Forest Policy, 1993 (as 
revised in 2002), which involves: 
x sustainable management of forest resources through participatory approach 
involving communities, with emphasis on protection and regeneration of forests 
and forest lands; 
x maintenance of environmental stability through preservation and restoration of 
ecological balance and checking of soil erosion and denudation of catchment areas 
of the rivers, lakes and reservoirs; and 
x increasing tree cover through massive afforestation and social forestry 
programmes and conserving bio-diversity and genetic resources. 
A notable development in the area of forest conservation is the Supreme Court order 
of 29 October 2002, creating a Compensatory Afforestation Fund for pooling in 
amounts paid by user agencies for diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes; 
these amounts were mainly towards Compensatory Afforestation (CA) and the Net 
Present Value (NPV) of the forest land being diverted. Subsequently, as per orders of 
the Supreme Court and Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India, 
an ad hoc Compensatory Afforestation Management and Planning Authority 
(CAMPA) at the Centre and State CAMPAs have been created. 
3.1.4 Organisation 
The management of forests and maintenance of the ecological balance is the 
responsibility of the Environment and Forest Department, which is headed by a 
Special Chief Secretary to the Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP). The Principal 
Chief Conservator of Forests (HoFF
8) is the Executive Head of the Forest Department 

8 Head of Forest Force 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|39
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
and its Chief Controlling Officer (CCO). He/she is assisted by the Principal Chief 
Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) & Chief Wildlife Warden, who is responsible for 
matters relating to wildlife. In addition, at the Head Office level, there are four 
Special Chief Conservators of Forests, 16 Additional Principal Chief Conservator of 
Forests, 12 Chief Conservators of Forests (CCFs), and other staff. 
A detailed organisational chart is indicated in Annexure 3.1.
3.1.5 Financial Management(includingprogrammefunding)
The main sources of funding for the Forest Department are: 
x Regular funds provided by GoAP – both for non-plan activities and (State) plan 
schemes; 
x Funds provided by GoI for implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes; 
x Funds released by the Central ad hoc CAMPA; and 
x Funds provided for execution of convergence works as part of MGNREGA 
(Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act). 
A profile of budget allocation, releases and expenditure during the three year period 
from 2009-10 to 2011-12 is given below: 
Table 3.1 – Outlay, releases and expenditure during 2009-12 
 (a) Plan and Non-Plan Expenditure from GoAP 
(` in crore)
Year Outlay Total Releases Total Expenditure Total
Plan Non-
Plan Plan Non-
Plan Plan Non-
Plan 
2009-10 102.08 239.28 341.36 65.11 221.93 287.04 57.10 203.97 261.07
2010-11 74.34 266.36 340.70 71.26 249.00 320.26 43.92 233.36 277.28
2011-12 78.59 339.83 418.42 79.16 322.05 401.21 71.01 260.14 331.15
Total 255.01 845.47 1100.48 215.53 792.98 1008.51 172.03 697.47 869.50
Source: Records of PCCF’s office  
During 2009-12, `172.03 crore and `697.47 crore were incurred under plan and non-
plan actually, against the outlay of `255.01 crore and `845.47 crore respectively.
(b) Funding from CAMPA and MGNREGA (outside Government Account) 
(` in crore) 
Year
CAMPA MGNREGA
Funds 
released 
Expenditure by 
Forest 
Department 
Releases Expenditure by 
Forest 
Department 
Remarks
2009-10 43.80 10.87 20.00 4.15 ` 14.50 crore refunded to GoAP, 
balance utilized by DFOs 
2010-11 62.72 82.83 82.28 82.28 Advance releases done away with 
under MGNREGA Centralized 
Fund Management System 
2011-12 157.92 153.18 151.55 151.55 
Total 264.44 246.88 253.83 237.98 
Source: Records of PCCF’s office  



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|40
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
From 2010-11 onwards, releases from the Central ad hoc CAMPA became the most 
important source of funding for developmental activities. 
3.2 Audit Objectives
The Chief Controlling Officer (CCO) based audit is an audit of a fair number of units 
in a department in an integrated manner to have common audit findings from the 
selected sample units. It assesses all aspects of functioning of a department such as 
financial management, planning and project management, human resources 
management, material/stores management, monitoring, internal controls, etc. The 
Forest Department was selected for CCO based audit in view of the magnitude of 
investment in the sector and its importance to ecosystem.  
The main objectives of the CCO-based audit of the Forest Department were to 
ascertain whether:
x The developmental and other activities of the Department for managing and 
maintaining forests were properly planned and executed; and 
x Financial management was properly planned, executed, monitored and controlled. 
3.3 Audit Criteria
The main sources of audit criteria were: 
x A.P. Forest Act, 1967, Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, Forest (Conservation) 
Act, 1980 (FC Act) and ROFR Act, 2006; 
x National Forest Policy, 1988 and State Forest Policy, 2002; 
x Working Plans and Management Plans of Territorial and Wildlife Divisions; and 
x AP Financial Code, AP Forest Code and AP Treasury Code. 
3.4 Scope ofAudit
The scope of the CCO-based audit, which was conducted during March 2012 and 
between July to September 2012, covered the three year period from 2009-10 to  
2011-12 and involved examination of the records at the Headquarters Office  
(Special Chief Secretary and PCCF), 12 circles and 25 divisions, out of 26 circles and 
105 Forest divisions. The selection of divisions was made in a manner so as to ensure 
adequate coverage of different schemes/ plans, and forest regions and types. Details of 
the test-checked audit sample are indicated in Annexure 3.2.
3.5 Audit Findings
3.5.1 Forest Area
3.5.1.1 Updation ofForestArea
Despite diversion of 6487.22 ha of forest land during 2007-12 for non-forest purposes 
under the FC Act, 1980 and alienation of 1,91,099 ha land under ROFR Act, 2006, the 
recorded forest area of the State was being shown at 63,814 sq.km since 1991. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|41
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
Updation is the responsibility of the PCCF (HoFF), based on inputs from the 
Divisional Forest Officers (DFOs), duly taking into account the forest land diverted 
and compensatory non-forest land received for afforestation. However, no mechanism 
has so far been prescribed for discharging this responsibility. 
3.5.1.2 Unclassed ForestArea
As per APSFR 2011, the State has unclassed forest area of 970 sq.km (equivalent to 
97,000 hectare), which is under the control of the Forest Department but has not been 
notified under any section of the AP Forest Act, 1967. The process for notification of 
reserved/protected forest involves the following: 
x Notification of proposals for reservation; 
x Appointment of Forest Settlement Officer (FSO) from the Revenue Department; 
x Proclamation of areas to be reserved, duly calling for objections, if any, from the 
persons affected within one year of proclamation; 
x Holding of inquiry by FSO and settlement of rights; and 
x Publication of final notification for reservation of forests, after allowing appeals. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that there was delay in final notification on account of  
non-conduct of survey/resurvey and demarcation, and cancellation of irregular 
assignments of land9 and joint survey with Revenue Department authorities in respect 
of six selected divisions. The prescribed process though planned decades back but 
could not executed so far by the DFOs. The reason for non-execution of the activities 
was not available on records. Details of delays in six divisions are summarised below: 
Table 3.2 - Delay in notification of unclassed area 
Name of the Division No. of blocks Unclassed 
Area (in ha) 
Process pending 
since the year 
Khammam 2  (Katkur Ext.VII and 
Mustibanda- Ext.Bit I) 
256.91 1994
Bhadrachalam (South) 4 (CA blocks) 130.68 2001
Warangal (North) 8 2981.56 N.A
Karimnagar (West) 4 1083.53 1982
Chittoor (West) 11 (10 CA and 1 Non-CA blocks) 200.579 N.A
Kadapa 1 (Yerraballi) 653.25 1990
Source: Divisional records of concerned DFOs 
Existence of substantial unclassed forest area carries risks of encroachment and loss 
of forest cover. Further, it was also observed in three divisions, that the unclassed 
forest area also included sixteen Compensatory Afforestation blocks. This showed 
that non-forest land accepted for afforestation was not free of disputes10.

9  Forest land incorrectly assigned as Revenue lands have to be cance lled, by resolving the disputes 
with the Revenue Department after holding joint  survey. Notification process was held up due to 
non-cancellation of such irregular/ incorrect assignment of land by non-conduct of joint survey with 
the Revenue Department. 
10 In cases of diversion of forest land for non- forest purposes, compensatory afforestation is generally 
to be undertaken on non-forest land. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|42
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
Audit scrutiny, further, revealed that: 
x In Khammam Forest Division, the computed forest area in seven blocks 11 was 
more than notified area by 8,590 ha.  For reconciliation of the discrepancy, a 
survey in seven blocks was proposed in the working plan (2003-04 to 2012-13) 
during the period from 2004-05 to 2010-11 (one block each year).  However, the 
proposed action plan was not carried out to date for which the reasons were not 
available on record.
x In Kadapa Forest Division, the land allotted (May, 2003) by Revenue Department 
for compensatory afforestation (CA) (210.44 ha) in Thumkunta Village of 
Raychoti Mandal was, in fact, not physically taken over, as some portions were 
either under encroachments or pattas were already given. The notification process 
initiated in 2007-08 was still in progress even after lapse of five years, mainly on 
account of non-availability of whole land (210.44 ha) due to failure of the then 
FRO to physically take over the land after proper verification. No action was 
taken against the FRO except issue of charge memo, while District authorities was 
addressed (June, 2010) to cancel the pattas given in CA areas. Progress made in 
the matter was not on record; the CA area was yet to be notified and CA yet to be 
completed (December  2012). 
3.5.1.3 Reduction inForestCover
According to APSFR 2011, 
x There was a reduction of 22.67 sq.km in Moderately Dense Forest (MDF) and 
61.77 sq.km in Open Forest (OF) as against the position from 2010, which was 
reflected in an increase in non-forest area (82.58 sq.km) and scrub (1.86 sq.km). 
Very Dense Forest (VDF) remained static at 950.14 sq.km.  
A loss of forest cover of 104.04 sq.km was reported, of which 56.73 sq.km was 
due to fresh harvesting of plantations. It was observed that due to encroachment of 
18.56 sq.km of forest land under management of CFM 12, 56.56 sq.km of forest 
cover was lost in one year (2009-10). Khammam, Rajahmundry, and Warangal 
Circles topped in loss of forest cover, reporting losses of 31.94 sq.km, 14.62 
sq.km. and 12.94 sq.km respectively.  
x Decadal forest cover change studies carried out by Forest Department on a pilot 
basis for Jannaram Forest Division, Kawal and Pakhal Wild Life Sanctuaries for 
the period from 1988 to 2000 & 2000 to 2010, showed that there was an aggregate 
loss of forest cover ranging between 8 and 10 percentage in two decades without 
showing any positive change as depicted below. 


11 Gowaram, Cheemalpad, Erlapudi-I, Katkur, Tirumalakunta, Lanthalapally and Kanakgiri blocks 
12 having participatory approach in forest management 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|43
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
Table 3.3 – Loss of Forest Cover 
Name of the 
Division/ WL 
Sanctuary 
Forest Cover Loss of forest cover (sq.km) Total 
Loss 
In 1988 1988-2000 2000-2010 1988-
2010 MDF OF MDF OF Total MDF OF Total 
Jannaram  258.91 233.34 22.03 2.48 24.51 14.41 2.08 16.49 41.00
Kawal WLS 374.45 320.93 25.68 10.15 35.83 16.74 10.20 26.94 62.77
Pakhal WLS 153.61 452.86 3.70 39.57 43.27 4.96 11.67 16.63 59.90
Source: AP State of Forest Report - 2011 
Further, ISFR 2011 also confirmed the loss of forest cover in the State; vis-à-vis  
the position in 2009, it showed decreases in MDF of 135 sq.km, Open Forest of  
146 sq.km, and scrub of 53 sq.km, with increase in NF (Non-Forest) of 334 sq.km. 
Encroachments and harvesting of plantations were cited as possible reasons for the 
loss of forest cover, but the performance of the Department in preventing the 
encroachments was ineffective. 
3.5.2 Encroachment offorestarea
According to APSFR 2011, the forest land under encroachment in the State was 5,674 
ha (less than 0.09 per cent of the total recorded forest area).  However, this figure of 
5,674 ha apparently related to encroachments that took place prior to implementation 
of ROFR Act, 2006 and did not consider subsequent attempted encroachments on the 
ground that control over the encroached land was subsequently regained. Though the 
control was regained over encroached land, in most of the cases, it was observed that 
forest cover on such land was already destroyed. It was the responsibility of the 
Divisional Forest Officer to enforce prevention of encroachment. Further, AP Forest 
Act 1967 also provides for penalty, prosecution and imprisonment besides 
compounding in case of offence. 
As can be seen below, there was a substantial spurt in encroachment after the ROFR 
Act, 2006 (ranging between 108 and 2676 ha), as against the relatively modest recorded 
encroachment (ranging between 31 and 598 ha) prior to enactment of ROFR Act: 
Table 3.4 – Encroachment on forest land 
(All area in ha) 
Name of the 
Division
Recorded 
forest 
area 
Recorded 
encroachment 
prior
to ROFR Act 
Encroachments after ROFR Act 
(Figures in bracket indicate number of cases) 
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 Total 
Khammam 1,32,234  486 43.52
(26)
148.34
(56)
658.11
(118)
365.70
(62)
1317.93 
(162)
142.82 
(28)
2676.42
Bhadrachalam 
(South)
1,29,366 90 33.87 
(08)
159.60 
(24)
34.50 
(11)
7.50 
(07)
374.50 
(62)
7.20 
(04 up to 
12/2011)
617.17
Kothagudem 1,68,388 505 54.80
(21)
247.66
(49)
77.86
(17)
151.65
(30)
433.80 
(109)
105.37 
(41)
1071.14
 Paloncha 1,52,352 598 43.27 
(17)
183.19 
(17)
622.09 
(66)
292.32 
(59)
276.40 
(70)
203.01 
(51)
1620.28



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|44
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
Name of the 
Division
Recorded 
forest 
area 
Recorded 
encroachment 
prior
to ROFR Act 
Encroachments after ROFR Act 
(Figures in bracket indicate number of cases) 
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 Total 
Bhadrachalam 
(North) 
1,43,557 59 12.00
(2)
360.33
(46)
454.62
(42)
72.71
(11)
281.34 
(45)
40.20 
(11)
1221.20
WLM, 
Paloncha 
68,638 80 28.50 
(11)
82.98 
(17)
47.50 
(25)
221.148 
(64)
485.19 
(158)
137.18 
(92)
1002.53
WLM, 
Warangal 
53,855 77 2.08
(02)
35.91
(05)
28.94
(13)
28.62
(07)
13.44 
(07)
Nil 108.99
Warangal 
(North) 
2,31,025 265 30.70 
(13)
198.00 
(55)
279.43 
(88)
213.32 
(73) --- --- 
721.45
Karimnagar
(West)
97,499 35 0.99
(01)
24.90
(06)
249.09
(32)
113.20
(17)
14.20 
(06) --- 
402.38
Chittoor 
(West)
2,09,017 31 No encroachments were reported after 01-01-2006. --- 
 Source: correspondence files in test checked Circles and Divisions 
Action in the above cases was taken as per extent law, but only after the act of 
encroachment, indicating failure of prevention mechanism by the department as 
discussed in the succeeding paragraph. It is desirable that the frequency of beat 
inspection prescribed by PCCF (1995) is enhanced to improve prevention mechanism.    
3.5.3 Forest Protection
The State Forest Department seeks to protect forest areas through regular patrolling of 
vulnerable and non vulnerable areas; demarcation by constructing boundary pillars 
and walls; provision of new fast moving vehicles to front line staff; establishment of 
base  camps (200) and strike forces (85) in vulnerable areas; and involvement of VSSs 
in protection aspects. 
According to PCCF’s instructions of November 1995, inspection of beats and natural 
forest in a Division should be conducted in a phased manner covering all vulnerable 
and non vulnerable beats in a year. Each vulnerable beat should be inspected at least 
once in a quarter, and each non-vulnerable beats should be inspected at least once in 
six months. Beat inspection reports, covering inspections conducted in the previous 
month, have to be forwarded to the DFO on a monthly basis, and beat inspection 
registers are prescribed at Range and Division level.
Audit scrutiny of the beat inspection programmes in 11 selected territorial divisions 
revealed the following: 
x Beat inspection reports were not sent promptly by the Range Officers to the 
DFOs; this indicated that either the inspections were not conducted or the reports 
were not sent to the Divisions. In Hyderabad Division, 12 inspection reports 
relating to 2010-11 were yet to be received (June, 2012) from the Range Officers. 
Similarly, Khammam and Warangal North Divisions were yet to receive (August 
2012) 19 and 38 reports relating to 2010-11 and 47 and 42 reports relating to 
2011-12 from the respective Range Officers. Chittoor West Division did not 
maintain any beat inspection register, yet compliance to completion of phased 
inspection programme was reported. In the balance seven divisions, no deviation 
was observed. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|45
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
x Despite conduct of beat inspections and formation of base camps and strike 
forces, there were a large number of offence reports relating to offences like 
encroachment, trespassing and destruction of forest (both detected and undetected) 
in eight test checked divisions13 indicating that the minimum inspection prescribed 
was not adequate enough to protect the forest from such offences. Frequency of 
the offences are summarised in the table 3.5 below. 
Table 3.5 – Offence Reports 
 (Money value in ` crore) 
Category 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Number Money 
Value 
Number Money 
Value 
Number Money 
Value 
Offence reports 2978 1.34 3095 1.54 3656 1.74
Undetected 
offence reports 
346 1.30 696 0.97 673 1.47
Source: Offence registers and case files of test-checked divisions 
The increasing trend in offences was attributable to ineffective preventive mechanism.                               
3.5.4 Diversion offorestareafornonǦforestrypurposes
The FC Act, 1980 and the Forest (Conservation) Rules, 2003 issued thereunder, 
prohibit diversion of forest land for non-forestry purposes, except with prior approval 
of GoI. Such approval is granted in two stages: 
x In Stage-I, the proposal for diversion is agreed to in principle, subject to fulfilment 
of various conditions e.g.: 
¾ providing equivalent non-forest area (or degraded forest area to the extent of 
twice the forest area diverted in case non-forest area is not available in the 
State) for compensatory afforestation; 
¾ payment of Net Present Value (NPV) of forest diverted, cost of compensatory 
afforestation, penal cost of afforestation, if any, etc. by the user agency 
requesting such diversion. 
x In Stage-II, formal approval is accorded for diversion after all conditions 
stipulated in Stage-I are fulfilled. 
In Andhra Pradesh, as of September 2011
14,
x Diversion of forest land under FC Act, 1980 was allowed in 446 cases, covering 
35,790 ha (0.56 per cent of total recorded forest area) after approval from GOI. 
The main user agencies were Irrigation & Command Area Development 
Department, Roads & Buildings Department, Tourism Department, electricity 
utilities, Singareni Colleries Company Ltd. (a Public Sector Undertaking), Indian 
Railways, and AP State Road Transport Corporation.

13 Warangal North, Karimnagar West, WLM Warangal, Khammam, Chittoor West, Bhadrachalam 
South, Kadapa and Hyderabad 
14 Updated figures upto March 2012 were not provided by the Department 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|46
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
x Out of the stipulated area for compensatory afforestation of 35,441 ha, 
compensatory afforestation was carried out in 28,087 ha (79 per cent), leaving a 
balance of 7,354 ha. 
x Against the cost of compensatory afforestation of `201.22 crore and NPV of 
`1299.72 crore to be recovered from user agencies, the amounts actually 
recovered were `199.36 crore and `1299.72 crore respectively. 
A test check of 11 diversion cases in seven divisions revealed deficiencies in 
implementation of the provisions of the FC Act, 1980 in two cases. 
3.5.4.1 Diversion offorestland
Revenue Department (August 2010)  diverted 6.70 ha of forest land in Indupulapaya 
Polmyrah Plantation Reserve Forest, Vempally Range of Kadapa Forest Division in 
favour of the Department of Youth Advancement, Tourism  and Culture (DOYAT). 
However, the identified non-forest land of 25.08 acre (10.15 ha) for raising 
compensatory afforestation as per Stage-I approval (June 2010) was, in fact, within an 
area of 30.08 acres (12.17 ha) 15  of revenue land handed over by the Revenue 
Authorities to AP Forest Development Corporation (APFDC) in 2007 for raising of 
red sanders plantations in Vempally Range. APFDC had  already done afforestation 
on this area during 2007-08 (incurring expenditure of `17.31 lakh16), but handed over 
(February 2009) 5 acres to the Forest Department for establishing a conservation 
breeding centre and the remaining 25.08 acres (December 2009) to the Forest 
Department to facilitate diversion of forest land to DOYAT. Handing over of already 
afforested land against diversion of land was a violation of the guidelines issued under 
FC Act 1983, which stipulates that land which is not already planted should be 
afforested thereagainst. 
3.5.4.2 Non Ǧcompletionofcompensatoryafforestationover80hain
KadapaDistrictduetononǦavailabilityofidentifiednonǦforest
land
231.94 ha of forest land in Kothagudem Forest Division of Khammam Circle was 
diverted (2006) in favour of The Singareni Colleries Company Ltd. 17 for coal-mining 
activities. Non-forest land for compensatory afforestation was identified in Kadapa 
Forest Division (210.44 ha) and Bhadrachalam South Forest Division (21.50 ha). 
However, scrutiny of records in Kadapa Forest Division revealed that the land 
identified for compensatory afforestation was not available, as some of the land was 
already alienated by issue of DKT pattas etc. When repeatedly pressed by PCCF for 
initiating notification of compensatory afforestation lands under the A.P. Forest Act, 
1967, FRO Rayachoty reported (January 2009) that the handing over of 210.44 ha 
(520 Acres) was on paper only, and not physically. The compliance to Stage-I 
conditions (taking over of CA land) reported by FRO which led to grant of Phase-II 

15 @ 2.47105 acres/ ha 
16 This was claimed by APFDC from the Forest Department, but was yet to be reimbursed. 
17 A public sector undertaking 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|47
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
approval (2006) was found later (January 2009) to be false, and hence no demarcation 
could be carried in view of disputes with regard to boundaries. The Collector, YSR 
Kadapa District was addressed by DFO (June 2010) for cancellation of pattas issued 
on CA land, and the matter was also referred by DFO (July 2010) to CF, Kurnool 
Circle. Further progress in the matter was not on record. 
Consequently, out of the proposed 210.44 ha, compensatory afforestation was carried 
out only over 130.44 ha, incurring an expenditure of `40.50 lakh (out of the total CA 
cost of `1.93 crore deposited by the user agency); the balance area of 80 ha was yet to 
be afforested (September 2012).  
Thus, improper identification of non-forest land in a far away Division resulted in 
incomplete compensatory afforestation for diverted forest land. 
3.5.5 Recognition offorestrightsandawardoftitlesunderROFR
Act
The ROFR Act, 2006, notified in January 2007 in the Gazette of India, seeks to 
recognise and vest the forest rights and occupation in forest land in forest dwelling 
Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers who have been residing in such 
forest for generations but whose rights could not be recognized. It also provides a 
framework for recording the forest rights and the nature of evidence required. 
Thirteen forest rights to be recognized are listed in Section 3(1) of the Act; these 
covered both individual rights and community rights. The Act distinguishes between 
recognition of rights of forest-dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest 
dwellers: 
x The rights existing as of 13 December 2005 for forest-dwelling Scheduled Tribes 
are recognised under the Act; 
x In respect of other traditional forest dwellers, the existing right of those who were 
primarily residing and depending on forest/forest lands for bona fide livelihood 
needs at least for three generations prior to 13 December 2005 are recognised. 
The ROFR Rules 2008, for carrying out the provisions of the Act, were notified in 
December 2008. The rules prescribed a three stage process for recognition of rights at 
three levels i.e. Gram Sabha, Sub-Divisional Level Committee (SDLC) and District 
Level Committee (DLC), which is summarised below: 
x Claims for rights are received and decided by the Gram Sabha and recommended 
to SDLC (Sub-Divisional Level Committee). 
x SDLC (consisting of Sub-DFO from Forest De partment and RDO from Revenue 
Department) examines the recommendations by the Gram Sabha and sends 
eligible claims to District Level Committee (DLC) for consideration.
x DLC, chaired by District Collector and including DFO and District Tribal Welfare 
Officer, finally decides on entitlement to rights and passes resolution to that effect, 
whereupon title deeds are issued to the beneficiaries signed by DLC members. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|48
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
However, no time limit is prescribed in the ROFR Act or the ROFR Rules for 
completing the recognition process. 
GoAP took up the implementation of the ROFR Act on fast track mode; as per the 
prescribed road map, the entire process of recognition was to be completed by 30 
October 2008. Audit scrutiny of the implementation of the ROFR Act revealed the 
following.
3.5.5.1 Continuation ofrecognitionbeyondtheroadmapperiod
Although the ROFR Act prescribed a cut-off date of 13 December 2005 for eligibility 
for grant of rights, it does not prescribe any time limit for reorganization of rights. 
However, GoAP prescribed a road map, whereby the entire process was to be 
completed by 30 October 2008.  
However, this timeline was not adhered to, the reasons for which were not on record. 
Not only was the issue of titles extended upto 2010-11, Phase-II of the programme 
commenced in 2011-12 and was in progress. At the end of Phase-I (2010-11), the 
reported status of issue of titles (individual and community) was as follows; 
Table 3.6 – Issue of rights under ROFR Act, 2006 
Category No. of titles issued Extent of land (Acres) 
Individual titles  1,65,691 4,72,016
Community titles 2,106 9,79,207
Source: Records of PCCF’s office  
The lack of a timeframe for completing implementation of the ROFR Act and 
recognition of rights, in effect, keeps the process continuing with scope for possible 
exploitation and incorrect claims and increasing vulnerability of forest area. 
In Khammam Division, 452 claimants, whose claims were rejected earlier in Phase-I, 
attempted fresh encroachments and claimed titles in Phase-II over an area of 1800 
acres. The timely action of the Range Officer, Tallada in bringing the matter to the 
notice of the DFO, resulted in the DFO writing (May 2012) to the Tahsildars 
(Revenue Authorities) not to entertain the claims. 
Year-wise figures of issue of titles had not been produced to audit, despite being 
sought.
The absence of time frame for award of titles and rights under the ROFR Act, acts as 
an incentive for possible encroachments with a view to subsequent regularisation in 
the future. This resulted in increasing trend in encroachment on forest area post-
ROFR, as detailed in paragraph 3.5.2.
3.5.5.2 Grant ofrightstoineligiblepersons
Seventy two persons were granted individual rights to hold forest land and title deeds 
issued under the ROFR Act, 2006 for 248.77 acres (100.7 ha) in Bhadrachalam North 
and Khammam Forest Divisions, although they were not the dwellers of forest land as 
on 13 December 2005, and the lands over which titles were given were in forest areas 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|49
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
subjected to attempted encroachments only after 2007. The fact of illegal grant of 
rights was brought to the notice of the District Collector (May/August 2010) by the 
CF/DFOs concerned for cancellation of titles. However, such cancellations did not 
take place to date. Division-wise details of issue of illegal titles are as follows: 
Table 3.7 – Instances of issue of illegal titles 
Name of the 
division 
Name of the 
Village & Mandal 
Compartment No.& 
Forest block 
No. of 
claimants 
Year Extent of 
Area
(Acres) 
Bhadrachalam 
North 
Madhavaraopeta 
and Arlaagudem of 
Bhadrachalam 
Mandal 
137/Madhavaraopeta 
and RF 43/Arlagudem 
56 2008-09 222.69
Khammam Vedanthapuram EP 
of Dabbatogu 
Habitation of 
Sathupally Mandal 
Area given to APFDC 
for plantation during 
1984.  They were 
proposed for Bamboo 
MFP during the year 
2010 by APFDC 
16 2009-10 26.08
Source: Divisional records of concerned DFOs  
Audit scrutiny further revealed that: 
x In respect of Bhadrachalam areas, the DFO relied on satellite imagery for the year 
2007 to show that the areas were under dense forest cover in 2007 and that 
encroachments were attempted after 2007 to claim title under the Act.   
x In respect of forest areas in Khammam given to APFDC for eucalyptus plantation 
in the year 1984, three rotations of eucalyptus plantations were completed and 
bamboo mixed plantation was proposed during the year 2010. Advance operations 
were commenced from December 2009 and an amount of 
`8.62 lakh18 was spent 
on these operations.  The area was under the control of APFDC till the rights were 
entertained under the ROFR Act over an extent of 26.08 acres (2009-10). 
3.5.5.3 Grant ofRightstoIndividualsinVSSareas
Vana Samrakshana Samithis (VSS) were formed under the Joint Forest Management  
Programme during 1990-99 and revitalised and re-visited during the AP Community 
Forest Management. Each VSS is given a certain forest area for management with 
rights to enjoy certain benefits and also duties to protect the forest areas.  The areas 
under the management of VSSs are forest areas over which no individual (VSS or 
non-VSS) has any right to ownership. Accordingly, PCCF clarified (August 2009) 
that individuals could not claim rights in VSS areas,  as they were not in possession of 
land on the cut off dates of 13  December 2005 and 31 December 2007; the second 
date – 31 December 2007 – is not a cut off date specified in the ROFR Act, 2006.  
However, rights were already granted to individual claimants in three test-checked 
divisions, prior to the receipt of this clarification as detailed below.

18 @ `25,000 per ha over 34.50 ha of plantation area 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|50
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
Table 3.8 – Grant of rights to individuals in VSS areas 
Name of the 
division 
No. of VSS/ EDCs 
where titles given 
No. of individual titles issued Extent of 
Area (Acres) 
Warangal North 41 VSSs 859 (VSS- 150 + Non VSS- 709) 2151.53
Karimnagar West 8 VSSs i)  85 claims in Raikal & Siricilla 
Ranges 
ii) Other claimant in Jagitial Ranges 
(numbers not available) 
244.57
WLM, Warangal 4 EDCs 34 110.10
Source: Divisional records of concerned DFOs  
No action, however, was taken to cancel the rights already granted in the above cases 
(December 2012). 
3.5.5.4 Grant ofCommunityRightstoTribalVSSs
Audit scrutiny revealed that community rights were given to tribal VSSs in the 
following Divisions: 
Table 3.9 – Grant of community rights to tribal VSSs 
Name of the Division No. of VSSs community 
Rights granted 
Extent of forest land over 
which rights given (Acres) 
Warangal North 33 VSSs 32,992.03
Warangal South 101 VSSs 85,129.55
Chittoor West 12 VSSs 8,108.51
Nandyal WLM 8 VSSs 6,453.10
Narsipatnam 103 VSSs 24,136.29
Vizianagaram 95 VSSs 36,291.40
Source: Divisional records of the concerned DFOs  
In this context, a clear distinction is required to be made between the rights of VSSs 
and the community rights envisaged under the ROFR Act, 2006. The rights, duties 
and responsibilities of VSSs emanate from the MoU with the Forest Department, 
micro-plans drawn and VSS resolutions for execution of works and sharing of 
benefits. VSS members get benefits, because they are required to perform certain 
forestry operations and protect forests over the allotted area and are also required to 
maintain operational and accounting records prescribed under the Community Forest 
Management scheme (CFM).  
However such responsibility of maintenance of records, foresting operation and  
protecting forest  on allotted land was not imposed along with community rights 
granted under the ROFR Act, thus, leading to grant of rights without any 
responsibility.
3.5.5.5 Misuseofrightsgranted
Title deeds issued under the ROFR Act, 2006 are for bona fide livelihood needs (viz. 
fulfilment of sustenance needs of self and family through production or sale of 
produce resulting from self cultivation of forest land given). The land is heritable, but 
not transferable or alienable under the ROFR Act. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|51
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
Contrary to the above legal provisions, 50 acres out of 111.79 Acres of land given to 
38 members during 2009-10 under the Act in Chandrapalem Village of 
Annapureddypalli RF of Khammam Division were transferred by the beneficiaries on 
lease for two years to a developer, who raised a banana crop on the area taken on 
lease. Although the matter was reported (May 2011) by the DFO the action on the 
report from authorities was awaited (December 2012). 
3.5.6 Management offorestsandwildlife
The State has been implementing several Central and State schemes for improvement 
of existing forests, afforestation of degraded forest land, and increasing tree cover on 
non-forest lands.  Performance of some of these schemes is discussed in the following 
paragraphs.
3.5.6.1 Intensification ofForestManagementScheme(IFMS)
The Intensification of Forest Management Scheme (IFMS),introduced in 2008-09, a 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme financed by the Central and State Governments in the 
ratio of 75:25, is intended to support State Forest Departments in taking up important 
works related to improvement of forest infrastructure and strengthening of forest 
protection machinery. The year-wise Annual Work Plan allocations, releases and 
expenditure under IFMS are indicated in table given below: 
Table 3.10 Intensification of Forest Management Scheme 
Year Annual Work Plan 
(AWP) approved by 
GOI
Central releases 
(Fresh & 
Revalidated) 
(` in Lakh) 
Budget Releases by 
State Govt. 
(` in Lakh) 
Expenditure
(` in Lakh) 
2009-10 - NIL- 
(approved AWP of 
`454.15 lakh kept in 
abeyance due to non-
release of State Share) 
70.94
(towards
revalidated AWP 
of 2008-09) 
170.94
(revalidated 
AWP of  2008-09) 
[(CS-`70.94 (Sept.2009) 
SS-`100.00 (Nov.2009)] 
80.39
(AWP 2008-09) 
(CS-`31.63;
SS-`48.76)
2010-11 228.23
(Central Share - `171.17
State Share - `57.06)
176.25
(June, 2010) 
(AWP 2008-09) 
102.90
Revalidated 
(AWP 2008-09) 
(CS-`39.30; SS-`63.60)
56.74
(CS-`3.64;
SS-`53.10)
(AWP 2008-09) 
2011-12 230.62
(CS- `172.97; SS- `57.65)
-NIL- - NIL- -NIL- 
Source: Records of PCCF’s office  
A review of the above table revealed that the implementation of IFMS during 2009-12 
was unsatisfactory due to delays in release of budget  ranging between three and five 
months during 2009-10 & 2010-11 by the State Finance Department. Further, 
unsatisfactory performance and poor expenditure in earlier years prompted GoI not to 
make any allocation in release of budget for 2009-10 and again for 2011-12. Hence, 
the Annual Work Plan (AWP) for 2009-10, though cleared, and the AWP for 2011-12 
(originally proposed for `10.31 crore but approved for only `2.31 crore by GoI) were 
not executed, due to non-release of State share.



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|52
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
3.5.6.2 Accelerated ProgrammeofRestorationandRegenerationof
ForestCover
Additional Central Assistance (ACA) for “Accelerated Programme of Restoration and 
Regeneration of Forest Cover” was a new State Plan introduced by GoI in 2009-10 
with the objectives of promoting ecological restoration and regeneration of degraded 
forests (with special emphasis on Assisted Natural Regeneration (ANR), Artificial 
Regeneration (AR) of forest plant series, restoration of problem areas,  eco-restoration 
and Production of Quality Planting Material (PQPM), high tech nurseries, genetic 
selection etc.); and conservation of existing forests with special emphasis on 
conserving rare, endangered and threatened species. Details of Approved Action Plan, 
budget releases and expenditure are indicated in the table given below. 
Table.3.11 - Accelerated Programme of Restoration and  
Regeneration of Forest Cover 
Year Approved Action Plan
(` in lakh)
Budget Releases
(` in lakh)
Expenditure 
(` in lakh)
2009-10 Advance works - 896.29 
Aided Natural  -  421.19 
       Regeneration 
Nursery Activity - 824.86 
(Territorial and Hitech) 
       Total - 2142.34 
NIL NIL 
2010-11 - do - NIL NIL 
2011-12 - do - 388.00 
(revalidated) 
388.00 
Source: Records of PCCF’s office  
However, the scheme could not take off during 2009-10 and 2010-11 due to late 
receipt (October 2009) of guidelines from GoI, consequent delay in finalization of 
Action Plans (December 2009), and belated release of funds in both 2009-10 and 
2010-11. The unspent balances for 2009-10 and 2010-11 were revalidated for an 
amount of `3.88 crore and released in October 2011; the revalidated amount was  
utilized in the months of February and March 2012 for carrying out only advance 
work of plantations, due to late authorization of funds by the DOWA/PAOs 19. The 
failure of the PCCF to prepare the action plans in time and ensure prompt release of 
funds, resulted in dismal performance of the Scheme.  
3.5.6.3 BioǦDieselPlantationinForestAreas
The Project ‘Bio-Diesel Plantation in Forest Areas’, funded by the National Bank for 
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) under RIDF-XIII 20 and sanctioned 
by GoAP in April 2008 at an outlay of `23.42 crore (NABARD `22.24 crore and 
GoAP `1.17 crore) which envisaged bio-diesel plantation over 8,800 ha through 101 
projects (ranges), was started in 2008-09 and ended in March 2011. 

19 DOWA: Director of Works Accounts; PAOs: Pay and Accounts Offices 
20 RIDF – Rural Infrastructure Development Fund 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|53
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
Audit scrutiny revealed that 17 out 101 projects were deleted subsequently for want of 
suitable land and problems of encroachments. Against the target of 8800 ha, coverage 
of 5250 ha at a cost of `11.20 crore was achieved; details of achievement in the  
test-checked divisions are indicated in the table below. 
Table 3.12 - Bio-Diesel Plantation 
Sl.
No. 
Name of the 
Division 
Name of the 
Project (Range) 
Target Achievement 
Physical
(Ha) 
Financial
(` in lakh)
Physical
(Ha) 
Financial 
(` in lakh) 
1 Hyderabad Hyderabad South 125 36.14 80 21.89 
2 Hyderabad Vikarabad  80 22.19 20 6.16 
3 Hyderabad Mohammadabad - Non Starter Project - 
4 Hyderabad Tandur  - Non Starter Project - 
5 Khammam Sathupally  25 5.140 20 0.474 
6 Khammam Karepally  50 10.270 - Non Starter Project - 
7 Khammam Dammapet  50 10.270 25 5.961 
8 Khammam Tallada  50 10.270 25 6.638 
9 Bhadrachalam 
South
VR Puram 40 8.220 40 6.860 
10 Bhadrachalam 
South
Chintur 50 10.270 50 4.79 
(1st year maintenance  
of 50 Ha not carried) 
11 Bhadrachalam 
South
Kunavaram 25 5.140 25 2.780 
(1st year maintenance 
of 25 Ha not carried) 
12 Chittoor West Punganuru  50 10.270 38 4.514 
13 Chittoor West Madanapalli  50 10.270 30 3.939 
14 Chittoor West Kuppam  40 8.220 35 4.517 
15 Chittoor West Chittoor West  50 10.270 40 7.162 
16 Chittoor West Palamner  30 6.610 10 3.120
Source: Divisional records of concerned DFOs  
3.5.6.4 13 thFinanceCommissionGrant
Grant-in-aid for forests, based on the award of the 13 th Finance Commission, covered 
different activities and components viz. forest protection, wildlife, social forestry, 
FDA, research, training, IT & Communications, and preparation and revisiting of 
working plans; it was  programmed to be implemented over a period of 5 years upto 
2014-15. Grants were to be released in five annual instalments (not later than July for 
each year); while instalments for 2010-11 and 2011-12 would be unconditional and 
untied, the last three instalments would, however, be based on the progress made on 
execution of approved Working Plans. The component wise action plan for the period 
from 2010-11 to 2014-15 were approved by GoAP in February 2011.  
However, audit scrutiny revealed that the implementation of the scheme suffered from 
several deficiencies. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|54
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
x During 2010-11, despite timely release of grant of `33.58 crore by GoI (March 
2010), the Department could utilize only `21.53 crore , leaving an unspent balance 
of `12.05 crore. This poor performance was mainly attributable to (a) delayed 
preparation/ revision of action plans and their approval (February 2011) by GoAP, 
and (b) delayed release of budget (November 2010) by GoAP.  
x The unspent balance of `12.05 crore, which was revalidated and released in July 
2011, as well as the regular grant of `33.48 crore for 2011-12, was also not fully 
utilized, due to incomplete execution  of action plans in field, leaving unutilised 
balances of `0.76 crore (revalidated) and `4.95 crore (regular). 
Details of component-wise fund utilisation are indicated in the table below. 
Table 3.13 - 13th Finance Commission Grant 
(`in lakh)
Sl.
No. 
Component 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released
Expendi-
ture
incurred
Revalidated Regular 
Amount 
released
Expendi-
ture 
Amount 
released
Expendi-
ture 
1 Forest
Protection  
479.25  292.363 185.887 178.07 429.620 354.794
2 Wild life 575.00 392.282 262.720 258.087 580.000 466.461
3 RIDF 358.00 190.010 -----Component deleted---------
4 Social
Forestry 
1,000.00 941.985 226.241 225.250 1379.350 1293.180
5 FDA 525.00 124.916 284.579 260.322 572.000 512.167
6 Research 50.00 39.034 10.996 10.945 21.850 21.690
7 Training 116.65 27.867 88.784 76.305 70.000 26.237
8 IT & C 210.70 128.792 117.413 97.004 192.600 100.00
9 Working Plans 43.30 16.090 27.310 21.929 112.580 88.153
Total 3358.00 2153.339 1203.900 1127.859 3358.000 2862.682
Unspent balances 1204.661 76.041 495.318
Source: Records of PCCF’s office  
3.5.6.5 Project Elephant
Project Elephant, a 100 per cent  Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS), has been 
implemented in Royala Elephant Reserve area, Chittoor West Division since 1991-92, 
and consists of programmes relating to habitat improvement, eco-development,  
anti-poaching measures, fire protection and awareness programmes among the public. 
Funding for the project suffered during the period from 2009-10 to 2011-12, due to 
not having an approved management plan for Koundinya Wild Life Sanctuary located 
in the Royala Elephant Reserve, and GoAP could not get any assistance from GoI 
during 2010-11 and 2011-12. Despite repeated insistence by the PCCF since 2001-02, 
no management plan was prepared and submitted to PCCF by the DFO till 2012-13. 
The draft management plan submitted (November 2012) was yet to be approved. 
Details of funds released and utilized are indicated in the table below. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|55
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
Table 3.14 - Project Elephant 
Year Project outlay 
proposed by GOAP 
(` in lakh)
Project out-lay Approved 
by Govt. of India 
(` in lakh)
Releases by GOI/ 
State Govt. 
(` in lakh)
Utilization 
(` in lakh)
2009-10 100.00 52.50 21.50 21.50 
2010-11 125.00 NIL 2.85 
(GoAP) 
2.85 
2011-12 150.00 NIL 15.85 
(GoAP) 
15.85
Source: Divisional records of concerned DFOs  
3.5.6.6 River ValleyProject
River Valley Project (RVP), a 100 per cent  Centrally Sponsored Scheme for soil 
conservation in the catchment areas of Machkund and Sileru Rivers, is being 
implemented in Visakhapatnam Circle since 1992. 232 watersheds, covering an area 
of 2,60,244 ha, were identified for treatment - As per guidelines of Watershed 
Development Project issued by GoI, treatment of a watershed should be planned on 
project basis for a period of four to seven years. The reported implementation of the 
Project was very slow, only 134 out of 232 identified water sheds could be treated 
over a period of two decades. The deficiency in achievement was mainly attributable 
to meagre release of funds by the nodal agency, despite approval by GoI for higher 
allocation of funds, and late releases of funds. During 2011-12, the last instalment of  
`1.25 crore was released during the last week of March 2012, resulting in non 
utilization of `1.00 crore. Details of GoI allocation, releases by Agriculture & Co-
operation Department and expenditure there against are summarised in the table below. 
Table 3.15 - River Valley Project 
Year Allocation by GOI 
(As per approved 
annual plan) 
(` in lakh) 
Amount released by 
Nodal Agency 
(Agriculture Dept.) 
(` in lakh) 
Deficit
financing 
(` in lakh) 
Percentage 
of releases 
to GOI 
approval 
Expenditure 
incurred
(` in lakh) 
2009-10 1547.86 500.00 1047.86 32 475.11 
2010-11 1475.10 517.10 958.00 35 376.25 
2011-12 1107.90 615.84 492.06 55 516.05
Source: Divisional records of concerned DFOs  
3.5.6.7 CAMPA 
Funds release by the central ad-hoc CAMPA is based on the Annual Plan of 
Operation (APO), prepared by the Executive Committee of the State CAMPA and 
approved by its Steering Committee. The activities undertaken as per the approved 
APO covered the whole gamut of forest functioning i.e. forest management, forest 
and wildlife protection, infrastructure development and office support under NPV 
component, and compensatory afforestation under the CA component. 
A summary of fund requirements projected in the APO, funds released and 
expenditure incurred during the 3 years period is given below. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|56
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
Table 3.16 – Funds requirement, releases and expenditure under CAMPA 
(` in crore) 
Year Funds requirement - APO Releases Expenditure 
2009-10 87.29 89.78 10.87
2010-11 168.75 120.74 82.83
2011-12 169.81 118.57 153.19
Total 425.85 329.09 246.89
Source: Records of PCCF’s office  
Audit scrutiny revealed that: 
x The poor implementation of the APO during 2009-10 was attributable to late 
release (November 2009) of funds by the ad-hoc CAMPA and late communication 
of APO (January 2010) by the State CAMPA to all circles and divisions. 
Performance during 2010-11 was also not satisfactory; however, during 2011-12, 
90 per cent of the funds released were expended. 
x As part of CAMPA works, DFO, Khammam proposed to construct eight Km of 
protection wall with an estimated cost of 
`1.77 crore during 2011-12. While 
tendering was initiated in August 2011 and the work awarded to the lowest bidder, 
the Department did not execute the agreement and gave the bidder extension of 
time due to non availability of funds in 2011-12. Audit scrutiny of the APO for 
2012-13 revealed non-allotment of funds for this work even during 2012-13; 
consequently, this work could not be taken up till date (July 2012). 
3.5.6.8 Plantations undervariousschemes
Plantations raised under various Schemes/Projects often failed due to various reasons 
like encroachments, unsuitability of climate and failure to take up maintenance due to 
paucity of funds. A list of 33 instances of such failures in plantation activities detected 
during field inspections by the Forest Department is indicated at Annexure 3.3.
3.5.7 Community ForestManagement(CFM)
Audit scrutiny revealed that while the concept of Community Forest Management 
(CFM) reached its zenith during 2004-05 to 2009-10 when the AP Community Forest 
Management Project, a World-Bank aided project, was in existence, it lost its 
prominence thereafter. Out of 1837 VSSs formed in ten test checked Divisions,  
the number of functional VSSs ranged between 415 (2009-10) and 301 (2011-12).  
A division-wise profile of VSSs functioning and expenditure incurred by them during 
2009-12 is given in Annexure – 3.4 . A large proportion of the functional VSSs were 
those formed under GoI funded FDA and NAP
21 schemes, which mandated execution 
of works only through JFMCs. Further, out of the 301 functional VSSs in 2011-12, 
178 (59 per cent) were under FDA. 
Audit scrutiny also revealed that: 
x Contrary to the stipulation of re-investment of at least 50 per cent of net proceeds 
from harvest and sale of forest produce in the VSS Joint Account with the Forest 

21 NAP: National Afforestation Programme 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|57
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
Department Officials for carrying out forestry works in the allotted areas, no such 
reinvestment was taking place in the test-checked VSS Joint Accounts. In fact, the 
Kakinada Territorial Division reported realization of net sale proceeds of 
`79.14
lakh by VSSs during the period 2009-12, out of which an amount of `43.84 lakh 
was kept separately for regeneration without depositing in the respective VSS 
Joint Accounts. 
x Although the State and National Forest Policies mandated carrying out of forest 
works in VSS areas by VSSs, audit scrutiny of test-checked divisions indicated 
that works under CAMPA as well as convergence works under MGNREGA were 
not being executed through VSSs. 
x Although VSSs were entitled to 50 per cent  of the compounding fees that they 
collected, no such fees were earned by them during 2009-12. In fact, the 2011 AP 
State of Forest Report indicates that VSSs accounted for 1856 ha of encroachment 
during one year. 
x Advances of 
`4.31 lakh and `1.95 lakh given to three VSSs in Karimnagar Forest 
Division and 19 VSSs in Warangal North Division during 2001-08 and 2004-06 
were outstanding as of September 2012. 
3.5.8 Wildlife Management
The Protected Area (PA) network in the State consists of 21 wildlife sanctuaries, six 
national parks and one tiger reserve. The AP State Forest Policy (2002) requires that 
management plans covering “Strengt hening of existing infra structure, identification 
and creation of conservation zones, improvement of habitat for wild life, restoration 
and enhancement of water sources and mitigation of man-animal conflict in and 
around protected areas” be prepared for each of these protected area for their holistic 
development, besides prescribing general measures for conservation of bio-diversity 
and wild life, and mitigation of man-animal conflict by creation of  ‘corridors’. 
Community and people’s participation in bio-diversity conservation through Eco-
Development Committees (EDCs) also finds an important place in the State Policy. 
Audit scrutiny of records relating to eight Wild life Sanctuaries and one  
Tiger Reserve 22  functioning under the control of Wildlife Management Divisions/ 
Territorial Divisions revealed the following: 
3.5.8.1 Management Plans
As against the holistic long-term management plan envisaged in the State Forest 
Policy, 2002, four sanctuaries 23 - did not have any management plan in place since 
inception. The management was being carried out as per Annual Plan of Operations 
(APO) prepared each year. In fact, the draft management plans in respect of Koundinya, 
Eturunagaram and Pakhal WLS had been submitted (August/September 2012) to the 

22 Pakhala, Eturunagaram, Koundi nya, Rollapadu, Krishna, Kawal, Kolleru lake, Coringa WL 
Sanctuaries, Nagarjuna Sagar- Srisailam Tiger Reserve (N.S.T.R.) 
23 Koundinya Wild Life Sanctuary (WLS) in Chittoor West Territorial Division , Eturunagaram WLS and Pakhal 
WLS in Warangal WLM Division  and Krishna Wild Life Sanctuary  in Eluru WLM Division



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|58
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
PCCF and their approval was still awaited (September 2012), while the management 
plan for Krishna WLS was not prepared. 
Further, the Integrated Management Plan (IMP) for Kolleru WLS had not been 
implemented to date, due to non-establishment of Kolleru Development Authority. 
3.5.8.2 Control oversanctuaries
The National Wildlife Action Plan (2002-2016) implies that the protected area should 
be under the control of one Division (Wildlife/Territorial) so as to ensure effective 
management of the area. However, two sanctuaries 24 were under the multiple control 
of three Divisions i.e. Warangal WLM, Warangal North and Warangal South 
Territorial Divisions, instead of one single Division.
3.5.8.3 Wild lifeCensus
Scrutiny of records relating to Wild Life Census conducted in Five Wild life 
Divisions and one tiger reserve during the years 2010 to 2012 revealed that while 
there was no significant change in common animals and birds like deer, sambar, black 
bucks, wild boars, bears, foxes and wolves, changes were noticed in the population of 
tigers, elephants and Great Indian Bustard, as summarised below: 
x Wildlife census conducted in 2012 revealed that the tiger population within 
Warangal WLM Division has come down over the years from two in 2007 to ‘Nil’ 
in 2012, while the population of leopards has decreased from ten in 2007 to five in 
2012.
x Elephant census conducted in Koundinya WLS (an elephant reserve) in Chittoor 
West Division in 2010 revealed that there was an increase in elephant population 
from 9 in 2007 to 17 in 2012. 
x Great Indian Bustard (GIB), an endangered species notified in Schedule 1 to the 
Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, found in Rollapadu WLS in Atmakur WLM has 
become almost extinct. Its number had come down to just five (One male and four 
female) in 2010 from 98 found in 2001. 
x Tiger population in Nagarjuna Sagar-Srisailam Tiger Reserve (NSTR), the largest 
tiger reserve of India, did not show any appreciable change during the five year 
period from 2007-2012; the number of tigers recorded was 76, 85, 80, 85 and 79 
during these five years. However, the population of panthers increased from 58 
(2007) to 88 in 2011. 
x Tiger population in Kawal Wild Life Sanctuary in Jannaram WLM Division was 
static at four since 2009 and that of panthers showed a decline from 23 in 2009 to 
21 in 2011. 
 

24 Pakhal WLS and Eturunagaram WLS 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|59
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
3.5.9 Financial ManagementandControl
3.5.9.1 Forest Revenues
The Forest Department receives revenues mainly from sale of timber, bamboo, beedi 
leaves and other Minor Forest Produce (MFP); other sources of revenue include 
compounding fees (‘C’ fees) collected from persons indulging in forest offence cases, 
license fee collected from saw mill licensees, and fees collected on permits issued 
under the Forest Produce Transit Rules. While timber and bamboo are sold through 
timber/ bamboo depots established by the Department, sale of beedi leaf is done 
through bidding by APFDC; as a matter of policy, net revenue in the beedi leaf trade 
is distributed 100 per cent  to beedi leaf collectors from 2006-07. Revenue targets 
fixed and achieved during the last three years was as follows: 
Table 3.17 – Forest Revenues 
(` in crore) 
Year Sale of timber and other forest 
produce 
Other receipts 
Target Achievement Target Achievement 
2009-10 76.03 74.94 27.41 28.42
2010-11 80.00 63.05 28.62 65.69
2011-12 81.51 68.17 32.54 80.69
Source: Records of PCCF’s office  
As can be seen above, the target for sale of timber and other forest produce could not 
be achieved in any of the three years; this was mainly on account of lesser sales of 
bamboo (whose productivity was coming down year after year). There was, however, 
a substantial increase in respect of other receipts. 
In respect of MFP, monopoly rights are given to the Girijan Cooperative Corporation 
(GCC), Vishakapatnam for collection and sale of MFP; rentals are fixed every year by 
the DFOs and the demand communicated to the GCC for payment. Audit scrutiny 
revealed that with regard to the agreement with GCC Ltd. for items of MFP, payments 
through book adjustments between the Forest and Tribal Welfare Departments were 
not being made in time; as per GCC’s version, the amount to be paid was 
`69.04 crore 
for the period 2002-03 to 2010-11; this amount could be higher as the exact figures of 
amounts in arrears were not available with the PCCF. The CCF/CFs were requested 
(May 2012) to provide the exact amount of recoverable dues, so as to impress upon 
the GCC for early settlement of dues. 
Also, scrutiny of records relating to STC Circle Hyderabad, revealed that an amount 
of
`12.82 crore relating to the Beedi Leaf Seasons 2009 to 2010 (which was to be 
distributed to beedi leaf collectors as per GoAP’s decision of 2006) was remaining 
undistributed with APFDC,for the reasons of non- tracing of the persons who had 
originally collected the leaf and left the villages afterwards. The undistributed amount, 
being the revenue of the Government, should be remitted to Government account.   
3.5.9.2 PAO SystemofPayment
The PAO system of works payments, whereby all work bills would be subject to pre-
check and issue of cheques by the PAOs, was introduced in respect of the Forest 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|60
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
Department with effect from August 2005; an exemption was provided for works 
executed by the VSSs, by empowering PAOs to issue authorization letters to the 
banks concerned to honour the cheques drawn by the DFO against the Letter of Credit 
(LOC) released by the Government.  
Audit scrutiny revealed that the PAO system of works was resulting in delays in flow 
of funds for execution of forestry operations.
x The amounts of the bills were small (below `1.00 lakh) and received lesser 
attention at the PAOs.
x Although VSS works are exempted from the PAO system of execution, fund flow 
to VSSs was also affected due to delay in issue of authorization by the 
PAO/APAO to the banks concerned.
x While there was no significant delay between release of funds by the PCCF and 
authorization by the Director of Work Accounts (DOWA) (the gap was not more 
than a week), delay in authorization by PAO/APAO was noticed in almost all 
cases. In one case (Chittoor West Division), PAO delayed the authorization by 
more than six months on the ground that there was a freeze on release of funds by 
the Finance Department.  
Instances of delay noticed in audit are summarised in Annexure 3.5.
3.5.9.3 Internal auditsetup
The Department has a well structured internal audit system, with sanctioned posts of 
17 Accounts Officers (14 at field level - 1 A.O. for each Circle - and 4 at PCCF 
Office), and one Chief Accounts Officer located at PCCF Office. Internal audit is 
conducted annually covering all 180 Audit Units. Internal audit for the year 2011-12 
was in arrears in 12 Units (eight located in Ad ilabad and 4 in Kurnool Circle) on 
account of vacancy of one post in Adilabad Circle and for other administrative 
reasons in Kurnool Circle. 
3.5.10 Vacancies infrontlinestaff
While the IFS cadre posts were adequately filled, there were substantial vacancies in 
the posts of front-line staff in the field and other ministerial and technical staff at 
Head Quarters, as summarised below: 
Table 3.18 – Vacancies in frontline staff 
S.No Name of the Post Sanctioned 
Strength
Persons-in-
Position 
Vacant Posts 
1 ACF (Non-Cadre) 160 97 63
2 Forest Range Officer 426 336 90
3 Forest Beat Officer(FBO) 2916 2760 156
4 Asst. Beat Officer (ABO) 1458 1267 191
5 Draftsman-Gr.II 69 53 16
6 Tanadar 47 23 24
Source: Records of PCCF’s office  



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|61
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
3.6 Conclusion 
There was lack of effective action for notification of unclassed forest area, reduction/ 
loss of forest cover and deficient implementation of statutory provisions for diversion 
of forest land in two cases. There was also a substantial spurt in encroachment after 
the coming into force of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006. The lack of a timeframe for completing 
implementation of the ROFR Act and recognition of rights, in effect, keeps the process 
open indefinitely, with scope for possible exploitation and incorrect claims and 
increasing vulnerability of forest area. Various instances were noticed where ROFR 
rights were granted to ineligible persons and individuals in VSS areas as well as 
community rights extended to tribal VSSs, not in line with the provisions of the ROFR 
Act.
Audit scrutiny also revealed that many of the schemes for forest management were not 
effectively implemented due to delayed preparation of action plans, and delay in 
release of State share of funds. The concept of Community Forest Management 
(CFM) had also lost its erstwhile prominence, with a vastly reduced proportion of 
functional Vana Samrakshana Samithis (VSSs). There were also deficiencies in 
management of test-checked wildlife sanctuaries. 
Further, non-achievement of targets under various schemes was partly on account of 
non-release /late release of funds by the Government/PCCF, as well as delay in 
authorization by the Director of Works Accounts/PAO under the PAO system of works 
and forests payments. 
3.7 Recommendations 
x The recorded forest area needs to be updated, by excluding land diverted for 
non-forest purposes and alienated under the ROFR Act, 2006 and including 
additions to forest land. The Forest Department needs to put in place a 
mechanism for such periodic updation. 
x The process of notifying unclassed forest area should be expedited and 
monitored effectively. 
x It is now almost eight years since the cut-off date of 13 December 2005 for 
eligibility for recognition of forest rights under the ROFR Act. Thus, future 
applications for recognition of rights (including under Phase-II) should be 
scrutinized very closely and strictly, especially with reference to satellite imagery 
to establish beyond doubt the existence of such rights as on 13 December 2005, 
both by the Forest and Revenue Departments. 
x Cases of irregular allotment of rights, not in conformity with the provision of 
the ROFR Act, 2006, should be cancelled. Also, the PCCF circular of August 
2009 should be amended to remove reference to the cut-off date of 31 December 
2007, which is not as per the provisions of the ROFR Act. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|62
ChapterǦ3
CCObasedAuditofForestDepartment
x Considering that the magnitude of financial transactions in respect of forestry 
operations and the delays in fund flows (especially at the PAO/APAO levels) 
which adversely affect the execution of forest operations, GoAP may ensure 
expeditious settlement of payments. 
x Significant vacancies in frontline staff in the Forest Department need to be 
filled up urgently, to improve its functioning. 



Chapter-4
Compliance Audit Observations 


Page|63
Transport,RoadsandBuildingsDepartment
4.1 Thematic AuditofRoadOverBridges(ROBs)andRoad
UnderBridges(RUBs)atRailCrossings
ExecutiveSummary
Road Over Bridges (ROBs) and Road Under Bridges (RUBs) at rail crossings 
represent important safety measures, besides reducing traffic congestion. At Level 
Crossings (LCs) where the traffic density is one lakh Train Vehicle Units per day 
(TVU) or more, the Railways share the cost of construction of ROBs and RUBs, in 
lieu of the LC, with the State Government on a 50:50 basis. The State Government 
can also propose construction of ROBs/RUBs on 100 per cent funding basis. The 
construction of the bridge proper over or under the railway track is undertaken by 
the Railways, while the approaches are constructed by the Roads & Buildings 
(R&B) Department of the State Government. The process for planning and 
execution of ROBs/RUBs is elaborate and effective and efficient co-ordination 
between the Railways and the R&B Department is essential for smooth and timely 
completion of ROBs and RUBs. 
An audit was conducted covering  43 out of 123 ROBs/RUBs (as per outcome 
budget 2011 of AP) and one ROB fully Railway funded; of these, 14 had been 
completed, 20 were in progress and 10 were  in their initial stages. The main 
findings and recommendations arising from audit are summarized below: 
x There were instances where the bridge proper was completed by the Railways, 
but the approaches (to be completed by the R&B Department) were incomplete 
and vice-versa; thus, the objectives of free flow of traffic and elimination of LC 
(with concomitant railway safety issues) were not achieved. In two test-checked 
cases, the ROBs were stalled/not usable due to non-shifting of HT Transmission 
Lines obstructing the ROB. In two other cases, although the ROBs were 
completed, the LCs were not closed. Other instances of lack of effective  
co-ordination between the R&B Department and Railways were non-matching 
of the levels of the approaches and the bridge proper, change from ROB to RUB 
and back to ROB, addition of an extra pier and non-pursuance of widened 
 four-lane ROB. 
CHAPTER
4 Compliance Audit Observations 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|64
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
x Delayed/non-acquisition of land and non-shifting of utilities, differences/ 
deficiencies in alignment, change in degree of skew, alignment/location not 
along the current LC and other design issues with an adverse impact on traffic 
congestion were noticed, resulting in delayed completion/non-completion/ 
 non-utilisation of ROBs/RUBs. 
x Award on single bids and limited competition at the bidding stage were noticed. 
In most of these cases, the winning bid was at a premium close to the ceiling of 
5 per cent over Estimate Contract Value (ECV). This not only affected the 
transparency of the bidding process but also adversely affected Government’s 
financial interests. 
x There were instances of undue favours to contractors by revision of rates, 
allotment of substantial additional works on nomination basis, reduction of 
interest rate on mobilisation advance etc. 
x Audit also noticed several instances of deficient quality control mainly  
relating to non-compliance with the Departmental/MORTH 1  instructions on 
procurement of steel from original manufacturers etc. 
4.1.1 Background 
4.1.1.1 Need forROBsandRUBsatrailroadintersections
The intersection of a railway line with a ro ad or a path either culminates in a Level 
Crossing (LC), or, in lieu of an LC, either a Road Over Bridge (ROB) or a Road 
Under Bridge (RUB). LCs present a significant risk of collision between trains and 
road vehicles, especially with the development of the road network and increase in 
road and rail traffic. They also increase traffic congestion, due to frequent closure of 
the LC gates, thus resulting in inconvenience to the general public and vehicular 
traffic. 
As per the existing policy of the Indian Railways, provision of an LC is made in 
consultation with the State Government at the time of laying a new line or within 10 
years of the date of its commissioning to traffic. After the 10 year period, the 
Railways share the cost of construction of ROBs/RUBs in replacement of busy LCs 
with the State Government on a 50:502 basis.  
The Railways adopts a general criterion of minimum traffic density of one lakh Train 
Vehicle Units per day 3 (TVU) for provision of ROBs/ RUBs on cost-sharing basis; 
this traffic density condition is relaxed in cases of suburban sections with high 
frequency of train services and near stations where detentions to road traffic are high 
due to Railway operations. Also, since January 2003,  

1 MORTH: Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Government of India 
2 Excluding the cost of land acquisition and cost of structures thereon, which is to be borne by the State 
Government 
3 The product of number of trains and number of road vehicles passing the LC per day e.g. if an LC has 
20 trains passing per day [24 hours], and the tota l number of vehicle units crossing the LC is 6,000, 
the TVU is 1,20,000 


Page|65
AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
x The Railways share 50 per cent of new four lane ROBs/RUBs, if the TVU is at 
least 3 lakh, with at least 6000 road vehicle units, and the State Government 
agrees for four laning of the approach roads; 
x The Railways also share 50 per cent of the cost of widening of existing two lane 
ROBs/RUBs to four lane, if the TVU is at least 5 lakh, comprising of at least 
10000 vehicle units; an incremental increase of 2 lakh TVU and 4000 road vehicle 
units must have taken place since the construction of the two lane ROB/ RUB. 
In addition to ROBs/RUBs on cost-sharing basis, the State Government can also 
propose construction of ROBs/ RUBs with 100 per cent funding. 
For the ROB/ RUBs, the construction of the “bridge proper” over or under the railway 
track (i.e. within Railway limits) is undertaken by the Railways, while the construction 
of the approach roads up to the ‘bridge proper’ (including land acquisition, construction 
of service roads, shifting of utilities etc.) is undertaken by the Roads & Buildings 
(R&B) Department of the State Government. 
4.1.1.2 Process forplanningandexecutionofROBs/RUBs
The process for planning and execution of ROBs/RUBs is elaborate, involving 
multiple stages: 
x Proposal for ROBs/RUBs are included in the Railway Budget; the alignment is 
finalised and the General Arrangement Drawing (GAD) approved; 
x The Combined Estimate of Railways and R&B Department is finalised, and 
administrative and technical sanction of works accorded; simultaneously, the 
process of land acquisition for construction of the approaches is initiated in 
consultation with Revenue authorities. The acquisition of private land is a 
sensitive and time-consuming process, and is also open to the possibility of land 
owners seeking legal recourse. 
x Tendering, contracting and work execution takes place; LC is closed after opening 
of ROBs/RUBs. 
Details of different stages in this process are summarized in Annexure-4.1.
4.1.1.3 Profile ofplannedROBs/RUBsinAndhraPradesh
As per the outcome budget for 2011-2012 of the GoAP, under the Railway Safety 
Works (RSW) scheme, 112 ROBs/RUBs have been approved by the Railway Board 
on cost sharing basis.  In addition, 11 ROBs/RUBs, which fall below the threshold of 
one lakh TVU, have been taken up with 100 per cent funding from GoAP.  Details of 
cost of ROBs/RUBs as well as stage of execution is given below. 




AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|66
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
Table 4.1 – ROBs and RUBs planned by Government of Andhra Pradesh 
Funding Pattern No of ROBs/RUBs Cost  
(` in crore) 
Stage of execution 
Cost Sharing  49 633.18 Completed 
29 662.75 In progress 
5 146.00 Tender stage 
16 506.20 Estimation stage 
10 330.00 Administrative sanction stage 
3 102.50 Investigation stage 
Fully funded by GoAP 4 53.43 In progress 
7 129.42 Estimation stage 
Total 123 2563.48
Source: Outcome Budget of R&B Department 2011-12 
4.1.1.4 Budget andExpenditure
A provision in the annual budget is made towards Railway Safety Works under Major 
Head - 5054 Plan. A summary of budget provision and actual expenditure under 
‘Railway Safety Works’ for construction of ROBs/RUBs in Andhra Pradesh during 
the period 2007-2012 is given below: 
Table 4.2 – Budget and Expenditure for Railway Safety Works 
(`in crore)
Year Budget Expenditure Excess(+) / Savings(-) 
2007-08 80.00 40.79 (-)    39.21
2008-09 130.00 137.33 (+)     7.33
2009-10 300.00 189.22 (-) 110.78
2010-11 300.00 124.58 (-) 175.42
2011-12 300.00 162.25 (-) 137.75
Source: Accounts data from Pr. AG (A&E), AP, Hyderabad 
4.1.2 Organisational setup
The Engineer-in-chief (Administration & NH) in the R&B Department (ENC) is  
in-charge of maintenance of National Highway (NH) Roads and construction of 
ROBs and RUBs. He is assisted at the field level by Superintending Engineers (SEs) 
at the circle level, Executive Engineers (EEs) at the divisional level, and Deputy EEs/ 
Assistant EEs at the sub-divisional/sectional level. 
4.1.3 Audit Approach
4.1.3.1 Audit Scope/Objectives
The objectives of the thematic audit were to ascertain whether: 
x There was proper and effective coordination by GoAP with Railways at the 
planning and execution stages (including finalising of alignments); 
x Pre-requisites (viz. land acquisition, shif ting of utilities etc.) were fulfilled 
effectively and in time;  


Page|67
AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
x Tendering and contract management, and works execution (including quality 
control) were adequate, timely and effective; and
x The intended objectives of providing free flow of traffic and permanent 
elimination of LC were achieved. 
4.1.3.2 Sources ofAuditCriteria
The main sources of audit criteria were circulars of Railways and Roads & Buildings 
(R&B) Department/GoAP; General Arrangement Drawings (GAD), Combined 
Estimates of Railways and R&B Department, detailed designs and drawings of 
R&B/technical sanction, and other related records. 
4.1.3.3 Audit SampleandMethodology
Out of the 112 ROBs/RUBs involving cost-sharing and 11 ROBs/ RUBs with 100 per
cent GoAP funding, 43 ROBs/RUBs were selected for detailed audit examination.  
Further, one ROB, which was 100 per cent  Railway funded, was also selected for 
detailed examination. Details of the 44 ROBs/RUBs selected for detailed audit 
scrutiny are indicated in Annexure - 4.2.
Field audit involved scrutiny of the records of the R&B Department, as well as joint 
field visits to the sites along with the Departmental officials, which also involved 
collection of photographic evidence.  
The draft findings were issued to GoAP in August 2012; despite issue of a reminder 
(September 2012), their response was yet to be received (December 2012). 
4.1.3.4 Acknowledgement 
We acknowledge the co-operation extended by the R&B Department and its officials 
in the conduct of this thematic audit.
Audit Findings 
4.1.4 Profile ofexecution/completionoftestǦcheckedROBs/RUBs
Of the 44 test-checked ROBs/RUBs, 14 had been completed 4, 20 were in progress, 
and 10 were in their initial stages. Expenditure of `203.08 crore and `195.72 crore 
had been incurred on completed ROBs/RUBs and ROBs/RUBs in progress 
respectively, as detailed in Annexure – 4.2. A scrutiny of records relating to execution 
of works for these ROBs/RUBs revealed various deficiencies with respect to deficient 
planning, delayed completion, deficient contract management and quality related 
issues, as discussed in paragraphs 4.1.5 to 4.1.8.
4.1.5 Deficient planningofROBs/RUBs
Audit scrutiny revealed the following instances of deficient planning leading to 
delayed commencement/non commencement of the work for long periods, as detailed 
below:

4 Including one ROB (Bhalabhadrapuram) completed, but not opened for traffic 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|68
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
x Although the work of ROB at Bhanugudi Junction  was included in the Railway 
Works Programme (RWP) for 2008-09 and administrative sanction accorded in 
February 2009, the work designs and estimates were under approval, due to delay 
in finalization of alignment.  The work had not yet commenced (April 2012).
x Although the work of ROB at Battala Bazar  was included in the RWP for  
2007-08, administrative sanction and technical sanction were accorded only in 
August 2011 and March 2012 respectively.  The finalization of the alignment was 
delayed due to its location in built up area, and tenders were invited only in  
April 2012. 
x The original proposal for construction of ROB at Muddanur  at the existing LC, 
which was included in the RWP for 2008-09, was subsequently changed twice; 
finally an alignment at 540 metres from the existing LC was approved by GoAP 
(April 2012). The approval of GAD by Railways was still pending. 
x Although the ROB at Kazipet Yard  was included in the RWP for 1992-93, 
correspondence on the ROB location went on till August 2001, when the 
originally proposed location was accepted. However, the administrative sanction 
was accorded only in February 2002. The technical sanction was delayed 
(September 2002) and tenders issued only in December 2003. The work was 
completed in April 2006. 
4.1.6 Delay incompletion/nonǦcompletionofROBs/RUBs
The execution of ROBs/RUBs was delayed substantially, as summarised below: 
x Out of 14 test-checked ROBs/RUBs which were completed, none was completed 
within the original agreement period; the delay ranged between 183 days and 960 
days. In the case of one ROB (at Bhalabhadrapuram) , though the work was 
completed in November 2011, the ROB was not yet opened for traffic for want of 
shifting of  High Tension (HT)  transmission lines. 
x Out of 20 test-checked ROBs/RUBs in progress, the original agreement period of 
14 ROBs/RUBs was already over as of July 2012; the delay ranged between 75 
days (ROB at Dwarapudi ) and 4265 days ( ROB at Palakol ).  The expenditure 
on these 14 ROBs/RUBs upto July/August 2012 was 
`180.49 crore.
x In case of two RUBs (at RIMS-Kapada and Nandalur) , the work of approaches 
was not even taken up, although the bridge proper by the Railways was nearing 
completion (July 2012). The expenditure upto July 2012 on these two RUBs was 
`5.52 crore. 
The main reason for delayed completion/ non completion of ROB/RUBs was either 
the bridge proper completed but approaches were incomplete or vice versa and lack of 
coordination in planning and execution etc. as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 


Page|69
AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
4.1.6.1 Bridge propercompletebutapproachesincompleteandviceversa
It is imperative on the part of the Railways as well as the R&B Department to 
complete their portion of work (i.e., bridge proper/approach) by synchronisation of 
work in such a way that both works are completed simultaneously. A scrutiny of 
records of 44 test checked ROBs/RUBs revealed that such synchronisation was 
missing in the following cases: 
x The approaches for six ROBs (at Dwarapudi, Rajampet, Tummikapalli, 
Tadepalligudem (2nd ROB), Puttur, and SH 30 at Renigunta) and two RUBs 
at Nandalur and RIMS – Kadapa  (with total expenditure of `76.31 crore upto 
July 2012) were incomplete or yet to be grounded, although the bridge proper had 
been completed by the Railways. These were largely on account of land 
acquisition problems. Before proceeding with tendering and award of contracts, 
the Department failed to ensure physical possession of the land. 
Bridge proper at Tummikapalli completed, but approaches incomplete 
x One RUB at Puttur Town  and one 
ROB at Milk Project, Vijayawada
(with total expenditure of `21.28
crore upto July 2012) were open to 
traffic but with certain incomplete 
facilities  (i.e non completion of  
service roads approaching the ROB/ 
RUB, drainage, sump well for 
collecting rainwater and pumping 
the water). Thus, the benefit as 
envisaged could not be achieved. 
 Photograph showing water stagnation resulting in 
obstruction to traffic at RUB at Puttur Town 
x In respect of two ROBs at Tuni and Yerraguntla  (with total expenditure of 
`27.18 crore upto July 2012), the approaches were complete or nearly complete, 
while the bridge proper was incomplete.  




AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|70
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
x Two ROBs at Bhalabhadrapuram and Bonakal Yard (with total expenditure of 
`28.47 crore upto July 2012) were obstructed by HT transmission lines crossing 
the ROBs, which had not been shifted. 
x Two ROBs at Anaparthy and Lankelapalem  (with estimated cost/Revised 
Estimate (RE) cost of `23.49 crore, against which total expenditure upto July 2012 
was `33.15 crore) were completed and opened for traffic, but the LCs had not 
been closed. Consequently, the safe ty objectives of LC closure through 
construction of ROBs have not been achieved. 
ROB/RUB-wise details, including details of undue haste in tendering and awarding of 
contracts, without completion of pre-requisites, are given in Annexure – 4.3.
Approach for ROB on SH 30 at Renigunta 
affected due to land acquisition problem
Perilous state of ROB at Bhalabhadrapuram 
vis-à-vis 220KV and 400KV HT lines
Thus, despite expenditure of `186.39 crore by the R&B Department on 16 ROBs/ 
RUBs (excluding the expenditure incurred by the Railways), the benefits to the public 
of reduced traffic congestion and safety were not achieved. 
4.1.6.2 Lack ofeffectivecoǦordinationinplanningandexecution
Audit scrutiny also revealed that in six cases, there was lack of effective  
co-ordination in planning and execution between the R&B Department and Railways, 
which are summarised below. 
x In respect of the  ROB at Anaparthy 
(expenditure  of 
`9.87 crore up to July 
2012) the R&B Department changed 
the designs of the ROB superstructure 
from T beam slab (as per jointly 
agreed GAD) to deck slab for the 
approach portion, without intimating 
modified designs to the Railways. 
Consequently, the approach levels did 
not match that of the bridge proper; 
this had to be rectified by the Railways 
providing extra height of bed blocks on 
the common piers to match the level of 
the deck slab. 
Extra height of bed blocks added by Railways to 
match height of deck slabs at ROB at 
Anaparthy



Page|71
AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
x In respect of the ROB at Eluru  (expenditure of `14.56 crore up to July 2012), 
although the RCL 5 of 22.725 metres of the Railways and R&B should have been 
identical, there was a difference of 0.415 metre in levels. During a joint meeting, it 
was decided that a difference of 0.385 metre would be rectified; the Railway deck 
would be lowered by 0.18 metre, and the R&B slab would be raised by 0.105 
metre. However, ENC noted (October 2011) that there was still 10cm difference 
in levels. 
x In respect of the ROB at Ghanpur (Expenditure of `3.35 crore up to July 2012), 
although construction of an ROB at the LC was sanctioned by the Railways and 
included in the RWP for 2005-06, R&B Department proposed conversion to an 
RUB (on grounds of economy and less land acquisition), issued the technical 
sanction for RUB in September 2007, and awarded contracts for RUB in April 
2008. However, the Railways found that the construction of RUB was not feasible 
on technical and safety grounds
6, and the R&B Department had to revert back to 
the ROB; the re-tendered contract for ROB was awarded only in June 2011. This 
change from ROB to RUB and back to ROB resulted in substantial delays, besides 
expenditure of `3.45 lakh incurred by the R&B Department on preliminaries. 
x In respect of the ROB at Milk Project, Vijayawada (expenditure of `18.98 crore 
up to July 2012), a two lane ROB was sanctioned in the 2005-06 Railway Budget. 
However, even in March 2003, the TVU was five lakh. According to the R&B 
Department, the proposal was initiated by the VGTM Urban Development 
Authority (VGTMUDA), and subsequently included in the R&B Department’s 
budget due to lack of sufficient funds with VGTMUDA. 
x In respect of the ROB at Yerraguntla  (Expenditure of `15.91 crore up to July 
2012), due to change in spacing of piers by the Railways, an additional pier has to 
be added to the approach. 
x In respect of the ROB at Rayavaram  (Expenditure of `12.06 crore up to July 
2012), the distance between adjoining spans of the ROB pertaining to the R&B 
Department on either side of the Railway piers were 10.76 metres apart (10.37 
metres effective), and accordingly alignment was fixed and the work executed.  
However, R&B Department reported that the Railways shifted the centre line 
towards Markapur side, resulting in reduced span of 7.85 metres. On Podili side, it 
was increased to 13.170 metres against the original 10.76 metres. This 
necessitated one extra pier indicating lack of effective co-ordination between the 
Railways and the R&B Department. 
4.1.6.3 Differences/Deficiencies inAlignmentand/orlocation
Audit scrutiny also revealed instances of differences/deficiencies in alignment and 
location, which are summarised below. 

5 Road Crest Level 
6 Due to presence of rocky strata 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|72
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
x In respect of the ROB at Tuni,  the combined estimate of the Railways proposed  
a 27 degrees skew at the track centre, as  against 44 degrees skew in the 
countersigned GAD. This was settled in January 2008 at 44 degrees, while the 
R&B Department had awarded the works contract in June 2007 itself. Further, field 
inspection by the audit team revealed an extremely unusual alignment of piers 
between the bridge proper and the approaches, as depicted in the photograph below: 
Unusual alignment of piers between bridge proper and approaches at ROB at Tuni 
x In respect of the ROB at Dwarapudi, the work could not be started even after ten 
months of the agreement time was over, due to change in alignment of the 
approaches by the R&B Department. Further, the design of the approaches 
involves two arms on one side, but only one arm on the other side 7, which may 
result in congestion of traffic and sub-optimal utilisation. 
x In respect of the ROB at Palakol, the ROB is 800 metres away from the existing 
LC. The GoAP has not responded to the Railways’ insistence again (February 
2011) for assurance for closure of LC. 
x In respect of the ROB at Yerraguntla , during the initial joint inspection (May/ 
June 2006), an alignment of 45 degrees skew was decided. However, in February 
2007, the skew angle was changed to 5 degrees at the R&B Department’s request 
(on account of difficulties in acquisition of structures). This alignment was changed 
to 11 degrees after opening of tenders. Also, the gradients on both sides were 
changed, post-award. In its current shape, the ROB may be unusable for heavy 
vehicles for want of formation of a link road, as well as land acquisition issues. 
x In respect of the ROB at Kovur Gate, in addition to modification of designs after 
work award (but before commencement), numerous changes in alignment were 
made at the execution stage (viz. shifting of alignment from left edge to centre of 
the old NH; reducing the gradient from 1 in 35 to 1 in 30 on Chennai side; 

7 Two arms on the Kakinada- Rajahmundry side and one arm on the Rajanagaram side (all of two lane 
width) 



Page|73
AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
redesigning of abutments; providing cross drainage on Kolkata side; modification 
in retaining wall sections on Kolkata side; change in super structure designs of  
T junction). 
Further, the design of the ROB approaches is such that even direct traffic (on the 
Vijayawada - Nellore route) not crossing the railway track is forced to use the 
ROB approaches, which could result in avoidable congestion/ safety issues at the 
elevated T-junction on the ROB. 
Direct traffic (bus) forced to take elevated T-junction at ROB at Kovur Gate 
x In respect of the RUB at RIMS (Kadapa) , a vertical clearance of only 4 metres 
(against the IRC 8 requirement of 5.5 metres) was provided, which may result in 
restricted movement of traffic.  
x In respect of the RUB at Puttur Town , the RCL of the RUB proper was revised 
to (+) 95.310m against the approved RCL of (+) 94.880m in the GAD.  Due to 
change of RCL, the vertical clearance of the RUB was also reduced from 3.66 
metres to 3.23 metres, which may result in restricted movement of traffic. 
x In respect of the  ROB at Matwada , the original estimate provided for ‘Y’ 
junction on the Fort Road side. One side arm was, however, removed in 
September 2006, but reinstated in January 2008 after protests from the people and 
public representatives. 
x In respect of the ROB at Milk Project , Vijayawada, the width of service roads 
was not uniform. At some places, it was as narrow as 2.65 metres against the 
required 5.5 metres. Further, there was already a drain constructed on the right 
side edge, rendering any further improvements unlikely. According to the 
Department, this was due to the Municipal Corporation’s not taking up under 
ground drainage (UGD) work for the existing drain. 

8 IRC: Indian Roads Congress 




AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|74
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
x In respect of the ROB at Kadiam , the original alignment for the ROB did not 
follow the existing road, and involved extensive land acquisition. Pursuant to the 
matter being taken to the High Court, the alignment was amended after 
negotiation with a private party to reduce the amount of land acquisition, and the 
approach now falls in the existing road area. This delay, which resulted in 
additional costs due to SSR 9 revision, could have been avoided through more 
logical planning. 
x In respect of the ROB at Kazipet Yard , the request of Kadipikonda villagers for 
construction of a ramp to the approach road was rejected on the grounds of public 
safety, as it would be as high as three metres from the ground level, and also since 
service roads were laid. However, an unauthorised ramp was laid by the villagers, 
which reportedly resulted in five to six serious accidents, causing two deaths. 
x In respect of the ROB at Rayavaram , the SE, Designs & Planning (D&P) Wing, 
Hyderabad noted that the alignment marked on the ground was not as per the 
approved alignment of the ENC as the radius of the curve no. 1,2,3 was modified. 
Though, the deviations were approved post facto, this is an indication of 
inadequate planning. 
4.1.6.4 Other deficiencies
In addition to lack of coordination in planning and execution; delayed/non-acquisition
of land and structures and non-shifting of utilities, audit scrutiny also revealed other 
instances of deficiencies resulting in delayed completion/non-completion/non- 
utilisation of ROBs/RUBs, which are summarised below: 
x In respect of the ROB at Lankelapalem , though, a four lane ROB was 
constructed, yet one approach road leading to the ROB is only two lane, and was 
not widened. This may result in congestion of traffic. 
x In respect of the ROB at Dendukuru , the ROB was still incomplete, with the 
delay due to non-shifting of utilities, revised RCL, and obstruction by local 
residents demanding a Limited Height Subway (LHS). Further, the technical 
sanction does not consider the full length of the service road. The possibility of 
difficulties in timely LC closure (even after completion of ROB) cannot be ruled out. 
x In respect of the ROB at Tuni, the foundations of two piers had to be re-designed, 
due to inadequate soil sample testing on built-up area. According to the 
Commissioner, Tuni Municipality, the original ROB did not involve demolition of 
municipal shops, but the R&B Department changed the alignment, without 
advance intimation to the Municipality, involving such demolition. 
Further, the surface of the service roads on both sides of the ROB were irregularly 
changed to Cement Concrete (CC) at a cost of 
`1.30 crore, after award of work on 
the basis of BM and SDBC10. The Department’s reply that the existing road lies in 

9  Standard Schedule of Rates 
10 BM: Bituminous Macadam; SDBC: Semi-dense bituminous concrete 


Page|75
AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
built-up area and is low lying appears to be an after-thought, since this should 
have been considered as part of the original estimation. 
x In respect of the ROB at Hanuman Junction , the completion of the ROB was 
delayed due to non-shifting of utilities, and delay in formation of diversion road. 
x In respect of the ROB at Yerrupalem , although the contract was awarded in 
March 2010, the contractor commenced work execution only in April 2011. 
Further, the work of diversion road was awarded only in April 2011 and does not 
appear to have been grounded. Strangely, although the estimate for the  diversion 
road was for 
`5.14 crore, the technical sanction was only for `1.25 crore. 
x In respect of the ROB at Tanuku , although the bridge proper was completed in 
January 2007, completion of ROB approaches was delayed substantially. The 
contract for ROB approaches was awarded only in March 2007 (after three rounds 
of tendering), although administrative and technical sanctions were received in 
December 2003 and November 2004 respectively. The approaches were finally 
completed only in March 2010 (three years after completion of the bridge proper). 
x In respect of the ROB at Kovur Gate , a diversion road with Estimate Contract 
Value (ECV) for `2.91 crore, which was utilised from the ROB estimate, was 
entrusted (August 2007) to a contractor and was completed by August 2008, while 
the main ROB approach, which was entrusted in August 2005, was completed by 
October 2008. Thus, the expenditure on the diversion road did not serve its 
intended ROB-related purpose. 
x In respect of the ROB at Palakol, the ROB involved crossing of both the railway 
line and the Narasapur canal, before joining Narasapur- Aswaraopeta road. While 
the approaches were awarded in 1999, defective/inadequate soil investigation 
beneath the foundations resulted in settling/depressions at various points along the 
ROB; rectification work is still incomplete, and the bridge proper was taken up by 
the Railways for reconstruction in 2011-12. 
x In respect of the ROB at Yerraguntla, the carriage width of the service roads was 
reduced from 7.50m to 5.00m, thus permitting traffic in one direction only. 
x In respect of the ROB at Rayavaram , for approaches, provision made for the 
crust of GSB, WBM, WMM
11 was changed during execution. In respect of service 
roads for ROB, these roads were provided with CC pavements as against BT 
contemplated in original estimate. This change from BT roads to CC pavements 
lacked justification. 
4.1.7 Deficiencies inTenderingandContractManagement
Audit scrutiny also revealed numerous instances of award on single bids, as well as 
other instances of limited competition at the bidding stage, often through 
disqualification of bidders and cancellation of tenders on specious grounds. In most of 

11 GSB: Granular sub-base; WBM: Water bound macadam; WMM: Wet mix macadam; BT: Black top 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|76
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
these cases, the winning bid was at a premium close to the ceiling of 5 per cent over 
ECV, casting doubts on the robustness of the competitive bidding process. Out of 44 
test checked ROBs/RUBs works, in 16 cases, the contract was awarded to a single 
bidder. Of these, 14 tenders received were within the range of four per cent and five 
per cent.  This not only affected the transparency of the procurement process but also 
adversely affected Government’s financial interests. Details are given below: 
4.1.7.1 Works awardedonsingle/limitedtender
x In respect of the ROB at Veleru, although three bids were received by 11 August 
2011 (with stipulated validity upto 8 November 2011), the SE sought to delay the 
opening of the bids, and opened only two price bids on 4 November 2011, without 
opening the third bid on the grounds that the bidder did not extend its validity 
beyond 8 November 2011. The ground for delayed price opening of seeking 
clarification was invalid, as the clarification was received on 20 October 2011. 
Even after Commissionerate of Tenders (COT) directed opening of the third bid, 
this was not done on the grounds of the expiry of bid validity. Subsequently, the 
tenders were cancelled and called afresh. 
x In respect of the ROB at Kazipet Yard , although the successful tenderer for the 
work of improvement of a connecting road (ECV of 
`4.34 crore) backed out at the 
time of agreement, only his EMD was forfeited; the tender condition of 
suspension of the agency’s business with all GoAP Departments was not enforced. 
When the work was re-tendered in September 2010, three out of four bids were 
disqualified (two being disqualified on trivial grounds relating to the DD for 
EMD
12), and the work awarded to the remaining single bidder 13 at a premium of 
4.41 per cent over ECV. The difference between the successful bidders in the first 
and second rounds was `0.96 crore. The triviality of errors by the two disqualified 
bidders is a matter of concern. 
x In respect of the ROB at Eluru, the work was tendered four times: 
¾ In February 2007, and cancelled due to non-availability of encumbrance free 
site; 
¾ In August 2007, with no response; 
¾ In October 2007, and the single tenderer disqualified inter alia for not meeting 
the required technical qualification for well sinking14;
¾ In November 2007, after removing the technical qualification for well sinking 
(which, however, remained part of the work items); and awarded to a single 
bidder15 at 4.95 per cent excess over ECV (the same single bidder disqualified 
in the third round). 

12 Demand Draft for Earnest Money Deposit drawn in favour of POA/ KCC Hanumakonda and APAO/ 
KCC Hanumakonda, instead of PAO/ KCC Hanumakonda 
13 Janga Constructions Pvt. Ltd. 
14 A distinct method of foundation 
15 RSV Constructions Pvt. Ltd. 


Page|77
AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
x In respect of the four lane ROB at Renigunta, two16 out of three bids received on 
20 October 2008 were disqualified for furnishing invalid bank solvency certificate 
(which was valid upto 11 October 2008, beyond the tender publication date of 27 
September 2008 17) and not furnishing proof of latest Income Tax return (which 
was interpreted for disqualification purposes as the return for 2008-09, which was 
due only by 30 September 2008).  
x The second disqualified bidder engaged in correspondence with the ENC in 
November 2008, but withdrew his request in December 2008 18. The work was 
entrusted to a single qualified bidder at 3.44 per cent excess over the ECV. 
x In respect of the ROB at Milk Project, Vijayawada , the work was awarded on a 
single tenderer in the first call itself at 4.99 per cent premium over ECV, just 0.01 
per cent  below the maximum ceiling of 5 per cent , citing the reasons that the 
Railways and local public were pressing for early grounding of the work.
x In respect of the ROB at Dwarapudi , in the first call for tenders (November 
2008), a single bid was received, which was allowed to lapse (February 2009) 
after extensive correspondence between the ENC and the SE as to whether the 
income tax clearance certificate was mandatory but not attached.  
During the second call for tenders (July 2009), five out of eight tenders received 
were disqualified technically; however, the stipulated time for completion was 
increased from 24 to 30 months. 
x In respect of the ROB at Rajampet , in the first round of tendering (January 
2007), all three bidders
19 were technically disqualified due to lack of experience 
for reinforced soil retaining walls. In the second round (May 2007), this qualifying 
condition was removed, although this remained part of the work items, and the 
single qualified bidder20 (MRKR Constructions) was aw arded the contract at 4.59 
per cent excess over ECV. 
x In respect of the ROB at Tummikapalli , the tender was awarded on the first call 
(February 2006) to the single bidder (BVSR Constructions Pvt. Ltd.) at 2.90 per
cent excess over ECV  without acquiring adequate land, which was subsequently 
foreclosed due to non-handing over of the required land. 
x In respect of the ROB at Anaparthy , the initially awarded contract was 
foreclosed due to land acquisition problems. During retendering, the contract was 
awarded on a single bid at 4.47 per cent excess over ECV to Coastal Engineering 
Constructions Ltd., which did not have the required experience in reinforced soil 
retaining walls and was thus not qualified. However, the contractor was 

16 RSV Constructions Pvt. Ltd, and MRKR Constructions Pvt Ltd.  
17 However, the bid could be downloaded only from 4 October 2008 onwards. 
18 E-mail of 23 October 2008 sent to the bidder (referred to in the bidd er’s correspondence with ENC) 
was not made available to audit. 
19 MRKR Constructions, BVSR Constructions Pvt. Ltd, East Coast Constructions and Industries 
20 One other bidder (not amongst the three first-time bidders) was disqualified. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|78
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
irregularly termed as technically qualified, and awarded the contract. COT 
decided to consider the contractor’s bid ‘as a special case’ by tying up with 
another party for this work item, but informed ENC not to provide such unique 
items under qualification criteria and, if provided, to adhere to such criteria in 
future. 
x In respect of the RUB in Puttur Town , the work was awarded to the single 
bidder21 (at 4.95 per cent excess over ECV) on the first call itself (July 2008) on 
account of no hope of getting more favourable tenders and delayed entrustment 
possibly resulting in larger price escalation. However, the work is still incomplete. 
x In respect of the ROB at Dornakal , the work was entrusted to a single bidder 22
(4.92 per cent excess over ECV) in the first call itself (April 2007) on grounds of 
urgency, but work was completed only in October 2010, against the stipulated 
completion date of May 2009. 
x In respect of the ROB at Dendukuru, the work of a diversion road (which should 
normally have been the responsibility of the main contractor) was awarded to a 
separate single bidder 23 with premium of 4.95 per cent  over ECV (just 0.05 per
cent below the ceiling of 5 per cent). 
x In respect of the ROB at Yerraguntla , three calls for tenders were made. The 
first call (February 2007) was cancelled on grounds of change of work; the second 
call (August 2007) received only a single bidder 24 who was disqualified on the 
grounds that the bidder had not signed all the documents/statements, which 
appears unusual. In the third call (October 2007), the work was awarded to a 
single bidder25 at 4.5 per cent over ECV. Further, the agreement was signed only 
in March 2008. 
x In respect of the ROB at Vallabhai Road, Kakinada , the work was entrusted on 
a single bid in the first call itself (April 2007) to Tracks & Towers Infra Tech Ltd. 
at 4.75 per cent over ECV, due to pressure from the Railway authorities and local 
people for early grounding of work. However, the work was completed only in 
April 2010, against the scheduled completion date of December 2008. 
x In respect of the ROB at Gannavaram, the work was entrusted on a single bid in 
the first call itself (May 2008) to Tracks & Towers Infra Tech Ltd. at 4.44 per cent
over ECV, on account of pressure from the Railway authorities and local people 
for early grounding of work. However, against the scheduled completion date of 
July 2010, the work is still incomplete. 

21 GVR Constructions Pvt. Ltd. 
22 K Narasimha Reddy 
23 VSRK Constructions 
24 GVR Constructions 
25 BVSR Constructions 


Page|79
AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
x In respect of the 2nd ROB at Tadepalligudem , the first call for tenders was 
invited in August 2005, and cancelled due to erroneous nomenclature in the 
Tender Notice. The tender was again called in December 2005, and awarded to a 
single bidder25 at 2.90 per cent over ECV. However, the work is still incomplete, 
due to court cases, regarding land acquisition. 
x In respect of the ROB at Rayavaram , tenders for the work were called for in 
October 2007.  In response, two bids were received. The tender uploaded by  
Sri P.Bhaskar Reddy was disqualified on the ground that the tenderer had not 
uploaded the well sinking quantity as per experience certificate. The second 
tenderer25 quoted 4.99 per cent excess over ECV of `13.40 crore.
The evaluation reports of bids were forwarded to ENC in November 2007.  
However, the tenders were cancelled by ENC, quoting the contractor,  
Sri P. Bhaskar Reddy’s representation of 28 November 2007 addressed to the SE 
(R&B) Circle, Ongole and copy marked to ENC. However, a copy of the 
contractor’s representation dated 28 November 2007 addressed to SE, R&B 
Circle, Ongole, was not available from the records produced to audit.  
The second call for tenders was invited in December 2007.  In response, only a 
single qualified tender of MRKR Constructions Pvt Ltd. was received. The work 
was entrusted with a tender premium of 4.86 per cent over ECV of `13.40 crore in 
March 2008. The reasons stated by the Department for entrustment of work to a 
single qualified tenderer were  (i) it may not possible to receive favourable tender 
in next call (ii) further delay would result in increase in the cost of work and  
(iii) early grounding of work.  It was, however, observed that the work scheduled 
to be completed by September 2009 was actually completed in January 2012 and 
opened for traffic during February 2012 only.
x In respect of the ROB on SH-30 at Renigunta , the work was awarded to the 
single bidder, GVR Infra Project Ltd., on the first call itself (August 2008) at 4.54 
per cent over ECV (`7.15 crore) in January 2009, on account of no hope of getting 
more favourable tenders and delayed entrustment result in possibility of large 
price escalation. However, against the scheduled date of completion in all respects 
by January 2010, the work is still incomplete due to land acquisition problems. 
4.1.7.2 Undue favourtocontractors
Audit also noticed several instances of undue favours to contractors (involving undue 
revision of rates, allotment of substantial additional works on nomination basis, 
reduction of interest rate on mobilisation advance etc.), which are summarised below: 
x In respect of the ROBs at Tummikapalli and Anaparthy , the contractors sought 
for foreclosure due to High Court stay for land losers, which was permitted by the 
R&B Department (without insisting on an undertaking regarding not claiming of 
compensation). Later, the contractors filed a suit seeking compensation due to 
breach of contract by the Government. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|80
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
x In respect of the ROB at Milk Project, Vijayawada , provision for land 
acquisition was over-estimated, and `1.64 crore thereof diverted to work items. 
According to the R&B Department, the quantum of land acquired came down 
dramatically due to a modification of one approach. 
x In respect of the ROB at Hanuman Junction , the work was entrusted to a 
contractor26 in July 2003 stipulated completion by January 2005. However, the 
contractor executed only 42.30 per cent (valuing `2.18 Crore) of the work during 
the agreement period.  The progress of work was hampered due to delays in 
shifting of utilities and formation of diversion road.
Further, an additional work of road widening and strengthening (not related to the 
ROB) amounting to `6.16 crore, which was 80 per cent of the original work cost, 
was awarded on nomination basis to the same contractor on 11.5 per cent discount 
and to avoid time in calling tenders for an agency. Audit scrutiny revealed that 
these two advantages were nullified, since, neither was the work completed in 
time, nor did the award of the work on nomination basis to the same contractor 
result in any advantage to Government. The work was delayed by more than one 
year and three months from the extended date of completion (December 2005) and 
the payments were allowed at revised quarterly SSR rates, without deducting the 
tender discount of 11.50 per cent.
The action of the Government in awarding the work on nomination basis and 
allowing payment of SSR rates prevailing at the time of execution, without 
deducting the tender discount of 11.50 per cent , was irregular. It may be noted 
that in other cases where premium was quoted, revised SSR rates were paid along 
with premium. This action resulted in unintended benefit of `1.38 crore due to 
waiver of the tender discount. 
x In respect of the ROB at Yerrupalem , delayed commencement of work by the 
contractor by one year resulted in avoidable price escalation on account of cement 
and steel of `13.04 lakh. 
x In respect of the ROB at Kovur Gate , by contrast to the case involving tender 
discount, Government allowed revision of SSR rates (with quoted tender premium 
of 4.50 per cent) to the contractor
27, as well as adoption of MORTH pattern 28. In 
addition, additional works for box cell culvert and service roads totalling `8.15
crore (35 per cent  of the original scope of work) were entrusted on nomination 
basis. Also, quarry lead was irregularly increased beyond the agreement 
conditions.
x In respect of the ROBs at Matwada, Kakinada and Kadiam instead of applying 
the price adjustment formula provided in the agreement for increases/decreases in 

26 VSN Benarji, Engineers and Contractors 
27 BVSR Constructions 
28 Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MOR TH) pattern involving overhead charges at 21 per 
cent for bridges and 6 per cent approaches, contractor’s profit of 10 per cent, and municipal area 
allowance of 20 per cent


Page|81
AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
the rates of steel, cement, bitumen and POL beyond 5 per cent , the contractors 
were paid based on rates arrived after revising SSRs (and also overhead and 
contractor’s profit, which were not incorporated in the original estimates, in the 
case of Matwada). This resulted in extra payments which could not be quantified 
in audit. 
x In respect of the ROB at Lankelapalem, payment was made at revised SSRs (and 
not the agreement rates), including addition of overhead charges, contractor’s 
profit, municipal area allowance. Further, in terest rate on mobilisation advance 
was reduced from 15 per cent  per annum to 9.5 per cent , resulting in undue 
benefit of 
`8.95 lakh. 
x In respect of the 2nd ROB at Tadepalligudem , payment was made at revised 
SSRs (and not the agreement rates), including addition of overhead charges, 
contractor’s profit, municipal area allowance. 
x In respect of the ROB at Kakinada, quantity of fill material and drainage fill was 
not proportionately decreased with the reduction in the area of the reinforced soil 
wall from 1840 sq. metres to 1427 sq. metres.  
x Further, the Department irregularly proposed lead of 46 kms for sand, whereas for 
another ROB at LC 9 (just half a kilometre away), the corresponding lead was 
only 18 km. 
x In respect of the ROB on SH 30 at Renigunta , `2.57 crore out of capitalized 
maintenance charges provided by Railways (since the ROB was fully Railway 
funded) was irregularly diverted for two road improvements not connected with 
the ROB, but entrusted to the ROB contractor (GVR Infra Projects Ltd.) without 
tendering. Further, mild steel railings in place of guide posts were proposed at an 
extra cost of 
`0.58 crore (over the original provision of `0.04 crore). 
4.1.8 Quality relatedfindings
Audit noticed several instances of deficient quality control (QC), mainly relating to 
non-compliance with the provisions for procurement of steel from original producers. 
As per Departmental/MORTH instructions, all steel shall be procured from the 
original producers/authorised dealers and no re-rolled steel shall be incorporated in 
the work. However, the use of steel only from original manufacturers and non-resort 
to ‘re-rolled steel’ is mentioned as an agreement condition, but has not been enforced 
at all. This is a serious issue from the perspective of safety and long-term asset 
maintenance, since the brand of steel cannot, in practice, be verified after use in the 
work.
Detailed quality-related audit findings are summarised below: 
x In respect of the ROB at Eluru , QC inspections revealed that various brands of 
steel engraved on the steel were being used in well-steining work and were 
available at site, and bills for used material such as cement and steel were not 
furnished for verification. However, no recommendations/directions for suspension 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|82
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
of work were made; instead, the EE was asked to verify the same and satisfy 
himself, before making payment. 
In response to an audit enquiry, bills for steel from various traders (purportedly 
agents of Tata, Vizag Steel etc.) were produced to audit; audit is unable to verify 
whether these bills29 truly represent purchases from original manufacturers or not. 
x In respect of the ROB at Kovur Gate , records relating to log of cement, 
compliance for previous reports, modified design details, ground/foundation 
levels, and QC test results, original bills for steel, and test certificates for 
elastomeric neoprene rubber bearings were not produced to QC authorities. 
x In respect of the ROB at Ghanpur , QC authorities noted the instructions for  
non-use of re-rolled steel, but did not indicate what was actually used.
x In respect of the 2
nd ROB at Tadepalligudem , QC inspection noted several 
deficiencies in the work (fille r material not used in joints, berms not compacted, 
less height of curb, hand rail/top of hand posts not to true thread line etc.) as well 
as non-production of bills of cement, steel and bitumen and records pertaining to 
levels. QC authorities also noted that Sujana TMT and Mangal TMT were 
engraved on steel being used for span reinforcement work. 
x In respect of the ROB at Yerraguntla, QC inspection pointed out non-production 
of logs of cement and steel bills, as well over-sized filter media, inadequate 
number of tests by field officers, and also recommended recovery of marginal 
amounts for deficiencies in weight of steel used. 
Copies of steel bills from traders were produced to audit, who, however, could not 
verify whether these bills actually represented purchases from original 
manufacturers or not. 
x In respect of the ROB at Tummikapalli , QC authorities noted use of Vinayaka 
TMT, and directed that use of steel from Government of India (GoI) undertaking 
steel plants be insisted upon. The possibility of sub standard work due to use of 
such brand of steel cannot be ruled out. 
x In respect of the ROB at Hanuman Junction , QC authorities pointed out use of 
steel from Sujana Metal Products and Vizag Profiles Ltd, contrary to the 
agreement clause. While the R&B Department issued orders in April 2011 for 
working out financial implications thereof and recovery from field staff, action 
thereon was not available on record. 
x In respect of the ROB at Puttur , QC authorities noted that Reinforced Cement 
Concrete (RCC) was carried out using Shalimar TMT and DILL TMT steel 
instead of original manufacturer steel. 
x In respect of the ROB at Kadiam , QC inspections had not been conducted since 
November 2010, after which 11 bills had been paid. Further, QC authorities stated 

29 In the absence of batch number or other unique identifier; even the brand name was not mentioned 


Page|83
AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
that they were not being informed about important concrete cubes (nor were these 
sent for QC), and the stage of fabrication of reinforcement deck slab from time to 
time was not adhered to. 
x In respect of the ROB at Tuni , the Chief Engineer (R&B), D&P noted that some 
piers were executed without checking/ensuring the Safe Bearing Capacity, which 
was a prerequisite for starting work. 
x In respect of the four lane ROB at Renigunta , from the records it was seen that 
QC inspection was last done in July 2010 and no further QC inspection was 
conducted up to July 2012.  In the absence of the QC inspection for the last two 
years, the details of testing quality aspects relating to concrete, steel, cement and 
GSB, etc were not known. 
During QC inspection, it was pointed out that RCC work was carried out using 
DIIL, Sujana and Shalimar TMT steel; QC instructed for procurement of steel 
from the authorized/original manufacturers and getting it tested at Soil Research 
Centre before execution of the work. QC also instructed the field officials to 
produce original steel bills, duly noting the name of the work, and relevant test 
certificates. The compliance details were not available to audit. During inspection, 
QC authorities made 26 general remarks. The compliance report to these remarks 
was not available. 
x In respect of the RUB at Puttur, QC pointed out use of steel from DIIL TMT and 
directed that the contractor had to purchase the steel from the original 
manufacturers and no rerolled steel should be used on the work as per the 
MORTH specifications. 
x In respect of the ROB at Rayavaram, as per drawings, the bottom reinforcement 
for the slabs of the ROB, require 29 rods each for three types (i.e. a1-straight; a2 
and a3-crank) of rods for each slab. Though a1 rod was provided as per drawings, 
the crank rods were provided with a wider spacing of 720 mm against the required 
spacing of 360 mm, resulting in short provision of steel reinforcement. Further, 
instead of obtaining separate designs from the Design & Planning wing for curved 
slabs, the designs for straight slabs were adopted, instead of 87 rods for each 
straight slab, the steel rods used for thirteen slabs (five straight and eight curved 
slabs) ranged between 57 and 63 per slab. 
Having noticed the defective work due to inadequate quantity of steel used, the 
R&B Department conducted load test with 85 tonnes and restricted the usage of 
the ROB for vehicles upto 70 tonnes only. However, when the Department 
approached IIT, Madras for review, the latter stated that the load to be applied on 
ROB for the load test should have been 131.4 tonnes, and not 85 tonnes.  
IIT, Madras, further, stated that the deficient slabs had to be necessarily 
strengthened to achieve code compliance. 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|84
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
Photograph at ROB at Rayavaram showing warning board to road users for  
limiting weight of vehicles to 70 tonnes 
The above matters were reported to the GoAP (August 2012); their reply is still 
awaited (December 2012).
4.1.9 Conclusion 
Replacement of high traffic density Level Crossings (LCs) at rail-road intersections 
by Road Over Bridges (ROBs) and Road Under Bridges (RUBs) reduces traffic 
congestion and also increases railway safety. Such replacement of high traffic density 
LCs by ROBs/RUBs is funded by the Indian Railways and the State Government on a 
50:50 basis.
Since construction of proper bridge over/under the railway track is handled by the 
Indian Railways, while the approaches to the bridge are done by the State 
Government, effective co-ordination is of prime importance. Audit scrutiny, however, 
revealed numerous instances where the bridge proper was completed by the Railways, 
but the approaches were incomplete (and also vice versa). Further, there were 
instances of differences/deficiencies in alignment and other design issues, which 
could have an adverse impact on traffic congestion. 
Audit scrutiny also revealed numerous instances of award on single bids, as well as 
other instances of limited competition at the bidding stage, as also undue haste in 
tendering and award of contracts, without completion of pre-requisites, besides 
instances of deficient quality control, non-compliance with stipulated provisions for 
procurement of steel from original producers etc. 
 



Page|85
AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
4.1.10 Recommendations 
x Considering the huge amount of blocked funds on incomplete projects due to 
lack of effective co-ordination by R&B Department with the Railways, GoAP, in 
association with the Railways, may consider the feasibility of entrusting of the 
entire work of ROBs/RUBs (both the bridge portion and the approach roads) to 
a single agency (e.g. SCR Construction Organisation or IRCON or other 
railway-related entity) on deposit works basis, so as to minimize instances of 
lack of co-ordination. It may be noted that the Railways had decided (October 
2009) to assign such works falling in Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Karnataka and 
Gujarat to a single agency on experimental basis. 
x Frequent changes of alignment and other specifications (especially post-award) 
are undesirable and should be avoided, especially when the grounds on which 
such changes are justified could have been foreseen well in advance. 
x Award on single financial bid should be strictly avoided. In cases, where this is 
necessitated and approved by higher authorities on grounds of urgency, the 
concerned officials should be held personally accountable for completion of 
such urgent works within the stipulated completion dates. The grounds of 
urgency should be linked not to the early grounding of work (as recorded in 
several cases), but to the timely completion thereof. 
x Post-award changes to agreements should be strictly avoided. 
x GoAP should mandatorily list out the original manufacturers from whom steel 
can be procured; all other manufacturers/units rolling/re-rolling steel products 
from billets should be automatically disqualified. In addition to QC of steel 
before reinforcement is undertaken, bills for steel should be admitted only if 
they mention the specific lot/ batch number of production from the approved 
original manufacturers. 
IndustriesandCommerceDepartment
(CommissionerofSugarandCaneCommissioner)
4.2 Non ǦrecoveryofloansfromCoǦoperativeSugarFactories
Commissioner of Sugar & Cane Commissioner (CoS), Government of Andhra Pradesh 
(GoAP) has been entrusted with the supervision and control of Co-operative Sugar 
Factories (CSFs) in the State of Andhra Pradesh. There are 38 Sugar Factories in the 
State, of which 11 are under the cooperative sector (as detailed in Annexure 4.4 ),
three under joint venture and 24 under the private sector.  Each of the CSF is headed 
by a Managing Director, who is the executive head and supervising officer.
CSFs in Andhra Pradesh have been approaching GoAP/CoS from time to time for 
financial assistance. CoS has been coordinating with the Andhra Pradesh State  
Co-operative Bank (APCOB) for extending loans to CSFs towards working capital 
requirements, and also recommending to GoAP to extend guarantee in respect of 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|86
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
loans sanctioned by APCOB. During 2006-12, loans were sanctioned by APCOB 
against hypothecation of sugar stocks of CSFs and guarantee given by GoAP. In 
addition, CSFs also approached CoS/GoAP for financial assistance, over and above 
the term loans sanctioned by APCOB during 2006-2012. As per the recommendations 
of CoS, GoAP extended financial assistance to CSFs either directly or through State 
PSUs in the form of loans/grants. 
An amount of `152.23 crore ( `92.14 crore by GoAP, `36.29 crore by APIIC and 
`23.80 crore by APIDC 30) was released to CSFs during 2006-12. The details of loans 
sanctioned by GoAP, repayment and outstanding balances are given in Annexure-4.5.
In this connection, the following audit observations are made: 
x Out of the total loan amount of `92.14 crore released by GoAP to eight CSFs to 
the end of March 2012, an amount of `73.66 crore was due for repayment, but 
none of the CSFs repaid any amount towards principal or interest so far. There is 
nothing on record to show that the proposals for financial assistance were 
scrutinized by CoS for arriving at the estimated/actual requirement of CSFs, 
before recommending the same for approval of GoAP. Although these eight CSFs 
were incurring losses, loans were released by GoAP without considering their 
financial position. Further while releasing the loans, GoAP did not issue any 
instructions to CoS for pursuing the recovery of loans from CSFs. 
x GoAP directed (June 2007) APIIC to release a temporary loan of 
`36.89 crore to 
CoS for clearing NPA31 of CSFs towards APCOB. APIIC expressed its inability to 
extend the loan, as this would violate its Memorandum & Articles of Association. 
However, on directions (July 2007) of GoAP to release funds to CoS, out of 
revenue payable by APIIC to GoAP, APIIC released an amount of `36.29 crore to 
CoS. Though, this amount was to be remitted back to Government within one 
month the same had not been received from CSFs. 
x APIDC was directed (Sept 2008) by GoAP to release an amount of `23.80 crore 
as advance to CoS on reimbursement basis to clear cane price dues of CSFs, to be 
repaid after disposal of sugar stocks. It was observed that instead of paying `23.80
crore as advance to CoS, APIDC disbursed the loan directly to eight CSFs. 
Further, APIDC requested the CoS to furnish information regarding hypothecation 
of sugar stocks to any other financial institution/bank, but the loan was disbursed 
without waiting for reply/information. Before releasing the loan, neither was the 
financial position evaluated nor was any security obtained by APIDC. 
Thus, as on 31 May 2012, out of total loan of `23.80 crore, an amount of `21.81
crore was due from CSFs, besides interest dues of `7.46 crore. 

30 Andhra Pradesh Industrial Development Corporation Limited
31 Non Performing Asset i.e. outstanding over due amount


Page|87
AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
ChapterǦ4
ComplianceAuditObservations
x The financial position of eight CSFs as on 31 March 2011/2012 as given in 
Annexure-4.6 revealed that the eight CSFs are incurring losses and had aggregate 
accumulated losses of C429.42 crore. 
x Though the equity of GoAP is more than 51 per cent in seven of the eight CSFs, 
State nominees were not appointed due to non-availability of elected bodies since 
2005, resulting in lack of monitoring on working of CSFs. 
Thus, extension of loans amounting to C152.23 crore (by GoAP, APIIC and APIDC), 
without taking into account the performance of CSFs, coupled with inadequate 
monitoring led to non-recovery of loans. 
GoAP/CoS should exercise effective monitoring over the functioning of CSFs to 
make them viable and take steps for improving the financial position of the CSFs for 
their self sustenance. 
Hyderabad
The
(K.R. SRIRAM) 
Principal Accountant General 
 (Economic & Revenue Sector Audit) 
Andhra Pradesh
Countersigned
New Delhi  
The
(VINOD RAI) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India




Annexures



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|89
Annexures
Annexure – 1.1 
(Reference to paragraph 1.2 page 2) 
List of audited entities falling within the Economic Sector 
A. Departments 
x Agriculture and Co-operation 
x Animal Husbandry and Fisheries 
x Energy
x Environment, Forests, Science and Technology 
x Industries and Commerce 
x Information Technology and Communications 
x Infrastructure and Investment 
x Irrigation and Command Area Development 
x Public Enterprises 
x Transport, Roads and Buildings 
B. State Public Sector Undertakings (State Government Companies and Statutory 
 Corporations) 
(i) Working Government Companies and Statutory Corporations 
Department Government Companies and Statutory Corporations 
Agriculture and 
Co-operation
x Andhra Pradesh State Agro Industri es Development Corporation 
Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh State Seeds Development Corporation Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh State Warehousing Corporation 
Animal Husbandry 
and Fisheries 
x Andhra Pradesh Meat Development Corporation Limited 
x Indira Gandhi Centre for Advan ces Research on Livestock Private 
Limited 
Energy x Andhra Pradesh Heavy Machinery and Engineering Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh Power Finance Corporation Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh Power Development Company Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh Power Generation Corporation Limited 
x Central Power Distribution Company of Andhra Pradesh Limited 
x Eastern Power Distribution Company of Andhra Pradesh Limited 
x Northern Power Distribution Company of Andhra Pradesh Limited 
x New and Renewable Energy Development Corporation of Andhra 
Pradesh Limited 
x Southern Power Distribution Company of Andhra Pradesh Limited 
x The Singareni Collieries Company Limited 
x Transmission Corporation of Andhra Pradesh Limited 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|90
Annexures
Department Government Companies and Statutory Corporations 
Environment, 
Forests, Science 
and Technology 
x Andhra Pradesh Forest Development Corporation Limited 
Industries and 
Commerce 
x Andhra Pradesh Handicrafts Development Corporation Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh Industrial Development Corporation Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh Gas Infrastructure Corporation Private Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh Mineral Development Corporation Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh State Financial Corporation 
x Andhra Pradesh Trade Promotion Corporation Limited  
x Damodhara Minerals Private Limited 
x Fab City (India) Private Limited 
x Krishnapatnam International Leather Complex Private Limited 
x Leather Industries Development Corporation of Andhra Pradesh Limited 
x Pashamylaram Textile Park 
x The Nizam Sugars Limited 
x Vizag Apparel Park for Export 
Information
Technology and 
Communications
x Andhra Pradesh Technology Services Limited 
Infrastructure and 
Investment
x Andhra Pradesh Aviation Corporation Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh Gas Distribution Corporation Limited 
x Infrastructure Corporation of Andhra Pradesh Limited 
Irrigation and 
Command Area 
Development 
x Andhra Pradesh State Irrigation Development Corporation Limited 
Transport, Roads 
and Buildings 
x Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation Limited 
(ii) Non-working Government Companies 
Department Government Companies and Statutory Corporations 
Agriculture and
Co-operation
x Hyderabad Chemicals and Fertilisers Limited 
Animal Husbandry 
and Fisheries 
x Andhra Pradesh Dairy Development Corporation Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh Fisheries Corporation Limited 
x Proddutur Milk Foods Limited 
Industries and 
Commerce 
x Allwyn Auto Limited 
x Allwyn Watches Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh Automobile Tyres and Tubes Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh Electronics Development Corporation Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh Small Scale Industrie s Development Corporation 
Limited 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Annexures
Page|91
Department Government Companies and Statutory Corporations 
x Andhra Pradesh Scooters Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh State Non Resident Indian Investment Corporation 
Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh State Textile Development Corporation Limited 
x Andhra Pradesh Steels Limited 
x Aptronix Communications Limited 
x Golkonda Abrasives Limited 
x Krishi Engineering Limited 
x Marine and Communication Electronics (India) Limited 
x PJ Chemicals Limited 
x Republic Forge Company Limited 
x Southern Transformers and Electricals Limited 
x Suganthy Alloy Castings Limited 
x Vidyut Steels Limited 
C. Autonomous Bodies involving issue of Separate Audit Reports (SARs), where 
 CAG is the sole auditor 
x Andhra Pradesh Khadi and Village Industries Board 
x Environment Protection Training and Research Institute 




AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|92
Annexures
Annexure – 3.1 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1.4 page 39) 
Organisational structure of Forest Department
Sub-DFO : Sub-Divisional Forest Officer 
FRO : Forest Range Officer 
Dy.RO : Deputy Range Officer 
FBO : Forest Beat Officer 
Asst. FBO : Assistant Forest Beat Officer 
Dy. CF : Deputy Conservator of Forests 
CAO : Chief Accounts Officer  
ACF : Assistant Conservator of Forests 
AO : Accounts Officer 
GA (T) : Gazetted Assistant (Technical) 
GA (NT) : Gazetted Assistant (Non-Technical) 






AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Annexures
Page|93
Annexure – 3.2 
(Reference to paragraph 3.4 page 40) 
Test-checked Audit Sample 
Sl.
No. 
Circles Sl.
No. 
Circles
1 Territorial Circle, Hyderabad 7 Territorial Cricle, Guntur 
2 P&E Circle, Hyderabad 8 Territorial Circle, Kurnool 
3 STC Circle, Hyderabad 9 P&E Circle, Ananthapur  
4 R&D Circle, Hyderabad 10 P&E Circle, Visakhapatnam 
5 Territorial Circle, Khammam 11 FDPT, Srisailam 
6 Territorial Circle, Warangal 12 Territorial Circle, Visakhapatnam 

Sl.
No. 
Divisions Sl.
No. 
Divisions
1 DFO (T), Hyderabad 14 DFO (T), Adilabad 
2 DFO (SF), RR District, Hyderabad 15 DFO (WLM), Jannaram 
3 SS, Rajahmundry 16 DFO (WLM), Atmakur 
4 DFO (T), Khammam 17 DFO (WLM), Eluru 
5 DFO (T), Bhadrachalam South 18 DFO (Logging), Nirmal 
6 DFO (T), Warangal North 19 DFO (Logging), Jangareddygudem 
7 DFO (T),  Karimnagar West 20 DFO (Logging), Bhadrachalam 
8 DFO (WLM), Warangal 21 DFO (T), Narasipatnam 
9 DFO (T), Nellore 22 DFO (T), Vizianagaram 
10 DFO (T), Kadapa 23 Nehru Zoological Park, Hyderabad 
11 DFO (FSD), Kurnool 24 WLM, Hyderabad 
12 DFO (SF), Ananthapur 25 APFA, Dulapally, Hyderabad 
13 DFO (T), Chittoor West 





AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|94
Annexures
Annexure - 3.3 
(Reference to paragraph 3.5.6.8 page 56) 
Failure of Plantations 
Sl. 
No
Name of the 
Division
Scheme 
under 
which 
raised 
Year of 
plantation
& area 
planted 
Location of 
plantation
Amount
spent on 
plantation
(` in lakh) 
Survival
percent-
tage
Reasons for 
failure 
1 Khammam RIDF-
XIII
2007-08, 25 
Ha
Pallewada VSS 
Sathupalli
Range
5.68 9 Failure in  raising 
year itself due to 
unsuitable climate 
2 Kothagudem RIDF-
XIII
2007-08,
11.15 Ha 
Thippannapally 
VSS, 
Ramavaram 
Range
1.65 0 Damaged in 
Bhoopartam 
3 Kothagudem RIDF-
XIII
2009-10 Anugulabodu
VSS, 
Komararam
Range
1.91 0 Encroachments 
4 Warangal
North
FDA - 
NAP 
2007-08, 20 
Ha
Machapur, 
VSS-  
Mulugu range 
-- -- Failure due to poor 
maintenance on 
account of delayed 
funding
5 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2007-08, 3 
Ha
Mullakatta 
VSS, 
Eturunagaram 
Range
-- -- Failure due to poor 
maintenance on 
account of delayed 
funding
6 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2007-08, 7 
Ha
Etur VSS, 
Eturunagaram 
Range
-- -- Failure due to poor 
maintenance on 
account of delayed 
funding
7 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2007-08,
7 Ha 
Papkapur VSS, 
Eturunagaram 
Range
-- -- Failure due to poor 
maintenance on 
account of delayed 
funding
8 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2009-10,
15 Ha 
L.B Nagar 
VSS, Pasara 
Range
-- -- Damaged
9 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2009-10
10 Ha 
Narayanpur 
VSS, 
Bhupalpalli
(N) Range 
1.69 -- Damaged
10 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2009-10
5 Ha 
Roheer VSS, 
Eturunagaram 
Range
-- -- Failure due to poor 
maintenance on 
account of delayed 
funding
11 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2008-09
7 Ha 
Dubbagudem
VSS., Mulugu 
Range
-- -- Failure due to poor 
maintenance on 
account of delayed 
funding
12 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2008-09
11 Ha 
Tondyal 
laxmipur VSS, 
Eturunagaram 
Range
-- -- Failure due to poor 
maintenance on 
account of delayed 
funding



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Annexures
Page|95
Sl. 
No
Name of the 
Division
Scheme 
under 
which 
raised 
Year of 
plantation
& area 
planted 
Location of 
plantation
Amount
spent on 
plantation
(` in lakh) 
Survival
percent-
tage
Reasons for 
failure 
13 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2009-10
20 Ha 
Katrapally 
VSS, Mulugu 
Range
-- -- Failure due to poor 
maintenance on 
account of delayed 
funding
14 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2009-10
10 Ha 
Andhukuthanda
VSS, 
Bhupalpally 
North Range 
-- -- Failure due to poor 
maintenance on 
account of delayed 
funding
15 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2009-10
5 Ha 
Ontippathanda 
VSS, 
Bhupalpally 
Range
-- -- Damaged
16 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2009-10
5 Ha 
Ramnaikthanda 
VSS, 
Bhupalpalli
North Range 
-- -- Damaged
17 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2009-10
11 Ha 
Tondyal 
laxmipur VSS, 
Eturunagaram 
-- -- Failure due to 
encroachments 
18 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2008-09
15 Ha 
Etur VSS, 
Eturunagaram 
Range
-- -- Failure due to 
encroachments 
19 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2008-09
15 Ha 
Tondyal 
Laxmipur VSS, 
Eturunagaram 
Range
-- -- Failure due to 
encroachments 
20 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2008-09
15 Ha 
Papkapur VSS, 
Eturunagaram 
-- -- Failure due to 
encroachments 
21 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2010-11
2 Ha 
Ekkela VSS, 
Tadvai Range 
0.16 -- Failure due to 
encroachments 
22 Warangal
North
RIDF-Bio
Diesel 
2009-10
5 Ha 
Jaggaipet VSS, 
Bhupalpally (N)
1.60 -- Damaged
23 Warangal
North
RIDF-Bio
Diesel 
2009-10
5 Ha 
Jubilee Nagar, 
Bhupalpally (N) 
0.82 -- Damaged
24 Warangal
North
RIDF-Bio
Diesel 
2009-10
5 Ha 
Immadigudem
VSS, Tadvai 
Range
0.37 -- Failure due to poor 
management  and 
funds crunch 
25 Warangal
North
RIDF-Bio
Diesel 
2009-10
5 Ha 
Ekkela VSS, 
Tadvai Range 
0.30 -- Failure due to poor 
management  and 
funds crunch 
26 Warangal
North
RIDF-Bio
Diesel 
2009-10
5 Ha 
Manzoor nagar 
VSS, 
Bhupalpally 
(N) Range 
0.25 -- Failure due to poor 
management  and 
funds crunch 
27 Warangal
North
RIDF-Bio
Diesel 
2009-10
5 Ha 
Rajeev nagar 
VSS, 
Bhupalpally 
(N) Range 
-- -- Failure due to poor 
management  and 
funds crunch 
28 Warangal
North
RIDF-Bio
Diesel 
2009-10
10 Ha 
Laxmipur VSS, 
Bhupalpally 
(N) Range 
0.48 -- Failure due to poor 
management  and 
funds crunch 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|96
Annexures
Sl. 
No
Name of the 
Division
Scheme 
under 
which 
raised 
Year of 
plantation
& area 
planted 
Location of 
plantation
Amount
spent on 
plantation
(` in lakh) 
Survival
percent-
tage
Reasons for 
failure 
29 Warangal
North
RIDF-Bio
Diesel 
2009-10
10 Ha 
Laxmipur VSS, 
Bhupalpally 
(N) Range 
0.48 -- Failure due to poor 
management  and 
funds crunch 
30 Warangal
North
FDA-
NAP 
2011-12
10 Ha 
Ramnaikthanda 
VSS, 
Bhupalpally 
(N) Range 
1.89 -- Failure due to poor 
management  and 
funds crunch 
31 Warangal
North
CAMPA
(NPV) 
2011-12
5 Ha 
Puredupalli- 1 
VSS,  
Eturunagaram 
Range
3.29 -- Failure due to 
encroachments 
32 Warangal
North
CAMPA
(NPV) 
2011-12
5 Ha 
Puredupalli -2 
VSS,  
Eturunagaram 
Range
0.67 -- Failure due to 
encroachments 
33 S.S. 
Rajahmundry 
C.S.S 2010-11
50 Ha 
Marlagudem
RF,
Compartment 
No. 136 & 137 
15.00 -- Damaged due to 
fire, due to non 
clearance of 
weeding, non 
execution of fire 
tracing and absence 
of watch and ward 
Total 36.24 




AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Annexures
Page|97
Annexure – 3.4 
(Reference to paragraph 3.5.7 page 56) 
Profile of Functioning of Vana Samrakshana Samithis 
Sl.
No. 
Name of the 
Division 
No. of 
VSSs 
formed 
Year wise expenditure involving VSSs 
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
No. 
of 
VSSs 
Amount 
(` in 
lakh)
No. of 
VSSs 
Amount 
(` in 
lakh)
No. of VSSs 
(FDA VSSs 
given in 
brackets) 
Amount 
(` in 
lakh)
1 Khammam 110 29 80.35 19 21.30 26  
(23%) 
(FDA- 14) 
130.97 
2 Warangal 
North 
127 19 20.81 12 2.01 15 
(12%) 
(FDA- 10) 
40.99 
3 Warangal 
WLM 
43 10 0.92 NIL NIL 1 (FDA) 
(2%) 
0.350 
4 Karimnagar 
West 
236 17 24.82 17 18.33 18 
(8%) 
(FDA- 18) 
31.89 
5 Chittoor 
West  
232 96 111.97 90 61.97 71 
(30%) 
(FDA- 60) 
83.80 
6 Hyderabad 123 50 103.12 38 90.11 23 
(19%) 
(NIL) 
43.88 
7 Adilabad 325 44 39.47 Nil Nil 17 
(5%) 
(NIL) 
1.03 
8 Kakinada 528 116 214.77 113 175.25 100 
(19%) 
(FDA-75) 
243.48 
9 Jannaram 
WLM 
73 16 51.89 13 63.94 16 
(22%) 
(NIL) 
49.24 
10 WLM Eluru 40 18 32.61 24 61.72 14 
(35%) 
(NIL) 
132.25

 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|98
Annexures
Annexure – 3.5 
(Reference to paragraph 3.5.9.2 page 60) 
Delay in Funds Flow 
Sl.
No. 
Name of the 
Division 
Scheme Year Date of release by 
PCCF - Amount 
Date of 
authorization  
by PAO 
Delay 
1 SF Division, 
RR Dist., 
Hyderabad 
09-Mixed 
Plantation 
2009-10 1. I st Quarter 
22.05.09 -  
`1.70 lakh 
24.06.09 1 month 2 
days 
2. IV th Quarter 
20.03.10 -  
` 3.16 lakh 
NIL NIL 
2010-11 1. 19.06.10 -  
` 2 lakh 
25.07.10 1 month 6 
days 
2. 15.03.10 -  
`0.50 lakh 
No authorization
2011-12  27.05.11-  
`2.685 lakh 
25.06.11 28 days 
12th Finance 
Commission 
2009-10  15.10.10 -  
` 2.80 lakh 
December 
2009 
1 month 
15 days 
13th Finance 
Commission 
2010-11  8.12.10 -         
` 53.23 lakh 
 15.12.10 -  
` 47.88 lakh (SF) 
January 2012 1 month 
2011-12  22.11.11 -  
` 67.73 lakh 
February 2012 More than 
2 months 
2 All Divisions ACA 2010-11  17.02.11 Last week of 
March 2011 
40 days 
2011-12  2.11.11 Jan./Feb. 2011 3 months 
3 Chittoor West Project
Elephant 
2009-10  14.09.09 -  
` 21.50 lakh 
3.10.09 20 days 
2010-11  19.06.10 4.07.10 15 days 
2011-12  22.06.11 - 
`15.850 lakh 
Feb. 2012 7 months 
8 days 
13th Finance 
Commission 
(FDA) 
2010-11  8.12.10 -  
` 4.20 lakh 
Jan. 2011 1 month 
2011-12  22.11.11-  
` 34 lakh 
Feb. 2012 2 month 
4 Warangal 
North 
IFMS 2009-10  27.10.09 - 
` 0.67 lakh 
29.01.10 3 month 
ACA 2011-12  2.11.11 -  
` 2 lakh 
Jan.2012 2 month 
13th Finance 
Commission 
2011-12  22.11.11-  
` 11.535 &  
`10.320 lakh 
5.05.12 1 month 
13 days 
5 Khammam  13th Finance 
Commission 
2010-11  8.12.10 -  
` 8.925 lakh 
Jan. 2011 1 month 
2011-12  22.11.11 -  
` 34.37 lakh 
Feb. 2012 2 month 
6 SS,
Rajahmundry 
13th Finance 
Commission 
2010-11  7.01.11 -  
` 8.25 lakh 
Feb. 2011 1 Month 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Annexures
Page|99
Annexure - 4.1 
(Reference to paragraph 4.1.1.2 page 65) 
Process for planning and execution of ROBs/ RUBs 
Stage Details
Proposal for 
ROBs/ RUBs for 
inclusion in 
Railway Budget 
x Every year, the Chief Bridge Engineer of the Railway Zone 1
communicates a list of eligible LCs with TVU of more than 
1 lakh for construction of ROBs/RUBs on cost-sharing basis. 
x Field officers of both Departments (Railways and R&B) Department 
conduct a joint inspection of the site, and finalise the proposal for 
ROB/RUB (including LC closure declaration by the State 
Government, traffic census by R&B Department etc.) and submit the 
same to the Chief Bridge Engineer through the State Government. 
x The Chief Bridge Engineer submits the total consolidated proposals 
in the State to the Railway Board for approval, after which the 
proposed ROBs/RUBs are sanctioned as Railway Safety Works 
(RSWs) in the Railway Work Programme (RWP), as part of the 
annual Railway Budget. 
Finalisation of 
alignment, and 
approval of 
GAD (General 
Arrangement 
Drawing)
x On receipt of sanctions in the Railway Board, the R&B Department 
and Railways conduct joint inspection of the proposed site, and 
finalise the feasible alignment of approaches, including the Road 
Crest Level (RCL). 
x On submission of alignment by R&B Department, the Railways 
prepare the General Arrangement Drawing (GAD) and forwards it to 
the R&B Department for approval. The GAD will be approved by the 
R&B Department, unless a geometric parameter (e.g. skew angle, 
RCL) attracts attention. 
Finalisation of 
Estimates
x After approval of GAD, the R&B Department and the Railways take 
up preparation of designs and estimates for the approaches and 
bridge proper respectively. The process of detailed technical 
estimates and land acquisition is to be completed within 3 to 12 
months. 
x The R&B Department submits the estimates for approaches to the 
Railways for preparation of the Combined Estimate of the Bridge 
Proper and Approaches, which is then furnished by the Railways to 
R&B Department for approval. 
x In the meanwhile, GoAP is addressed for according administrative 
sanction2.

1 South Central Railway, Southern Railway and East Coast Railway 
2 The administrative sanction is generally taken for 50 per cent of the cost of the bridge proper and 
100% of the approaches (including land acquisition); this is subject to subsequent adjustment with the 
Railways



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|100
Annexures
Stage Details
Land
Acquisition
process
x Simultaneously, the land acquisition process is initiated in 
consultation with Revenue authorities after approval of the final 
alignment and Railway GAD. The process of land acquisition 
involves various stages - (a) preparation of land plan schedules 
indicating the areas to be acquired, separately for Government land 
and private land, which is furnished to the District Collector by the 
R&B Department;  (b) deposit of amount with Revenue authorities 
for compensation payable to land losers;  (c) joint inspections by 
R&B Department and Revenue authorities; (d) publication of Draft 
Notification and Draft Declaration by the Revenue authorities, 
indicating details of the area and owners; and (e) handing over the 
land to R&B Department by the Revenue authorities after due 
process, as per the LA Act. 
Tendering and 
Contracting,
and Project 
Execution
x After receipt of administrative and technical sanctions, tenders are 
invited by the R&B Department for the approaches, contracts 
awarded and works are to be executed within 18 to 24 months of 
award. 
LC closure x After opening of ROBs/RUBs, the LCs are to be closed by GoAP (in 
line with the LC closure declaration at the time of the ROB/RUB 
proposal). 





AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Annexures
Page|101
Annexure - 4.2 
(Reference to paragraph 4.1.3.3 page 67) 
 List of ROBs/RUBs selected for test-check 
Sl.
No. 
Name of the 
ROB/RUB in short 
Full nomenclature 
of the work 
Financial
progress in  
Percentage as 
reported by 
Department 
Physical  
Status
Agreement / 
Estimate cost 
(` in crore) 
Expenditure as 
reported by 
Department 
(` in crore) 
A. COMPLETED 
1 ROB at Eluru 
(Vijayawada – 
Visakhapatnam
section)
Construction of ROB at 
Eluru in lieu of LC 349 at 
railway km.487/12-14 and 
km 64/374 of Vijayawada 
– Visakhapatnam road (old 
NH road) in Eluru 
municipal limits, in West 
Godavari District 
100 Completed 14.60 14.56 
2 ROB at Kovur Gate 
(Gudur-Vijayawada 
section)
Construction of ROB at 
Kovur gate (near 
Polytechnic college) in 
Nellore town in lieu of LC 
No 119 at railway km 
176/12-15 of Gudur-
Vijayawada section at km 
0/2 of Nellore-Bellary-
Bombay road in SPS 
Nellore District 
100 Completed 13.51 30.96 
3 ROB at 
Lankelapalem 
(Vijayawada-
Visakhapatnam
section)
Construction of ROB at 
Lankelapalem in lieu of 
LC No 490 at railway 
km755/3-6 of Vijayawada-
Visakhapatnam section at 
km 7/4 of Parawada-
Asakapalli road in 
Visakhapatnam District 
100 Completed 14.01 23.28 
4 ROB at Kazipet yard
(Railway km 324/1-2 
in  Kazipet yard )
Construction of ROB in 
lieu of LC No 59A at 
railway km 324/1-2 in  
Kazipet yard at km 
132/370 of Hyderabad-
Hanamkonda road in 
Warangal District   
100 Completed 5.24 9.80 
5 ROB at Milk Project 
(Kazipet-Vijayawada 
section)
Construction of ROB at 
Milk Project in Vijayawada 
at LC Nos 315A, 315B 
and G6 at railway km 
581/01-03 and km 581/20-
22 of Kazipet-Vijayawada 
section at km 5/640 of 
Vijayawada-Vissannapeta 
road in Krishna District 
100 Completed 17.50 18.98 
6 ROB at 
Bhalabhadrapuram
(Vijayawada-
Visakhapatnam
section )
Construction of ROB at  
Bhalabhadrapuram in lieu 
of LC No 417 at railway 
km 607/30-32 of 
Vijayawada and 
Visakhapatnam section 
corresponding to road km 
14/8-10 of Someswaram – 
Rajanagaram road in East 
Godavari District 
100 Completed 
(but not 
opened for 
traffic) 
11.50 13.20 




AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|102
Annexures
Sl.
No. 
Name of the 
ROB/RUB in short 
Full nomenclature 
of the work 
Financial
progress in  
Percentage as 
reported by 
Department 
Physical  
Status
Agreement / 
Estimate cost 
(` in crore) 
Expenditure as 
reported by 
Department 
(` in crore) 
7 ROB at Hanuman 
Junction
(Vijayawada–
Visakhapatnam
section )
Construction of ROB  at 
Hanuman Junction in lieu 
of LC No 336 at railway 
km 470/12 of Vijayawada 
– Visakhapatnam section at 
km 61/8 of Machilipatnam-
Nuzvid-Kalluru road in 
Krishna District  
100 Completed 12.53 16.44 
8 ROB at Anaparthy
(Vijayawada–
Visakhapatnam
section )
Construction of ROB at  
Anaparthy in lieu of LC 
No 412T and 413T at 
railway km 601/7-8 of 
Vijayawada – 
Visakhapatnam section at 
km 0/6 of ILTD road in 
East Godavari District 
100 Completed 9.48 9.87 
9 ROB on Vallabhai 
road
(Kakinada – 
Samalkot section) 
Construction of ROB at 
Kakinada in lieu of L.C No 
9 at railway km 12/22-23 
of Kakinada – Samalkot 
section on Vallabhai road 
from NH-214 at 
Jagannaickpur to NH-214 
Junction at SP office in 
Kakinada town limits, in 
East Godavari District 
100 Completed 9.49 11.31 
10 ROB on Matwada 
(Kazipet-Vijayawada 
section)
Construction of ROB in 
lieu of L.C. No 63/T-3 at 
railway km377/45-47 of 
Kazipet-Vijayawada 
section on Matwada 
diversion road connecting 
Hanamkonda-Narsampet-
Mahabubabad road at km 
3/5 and joining at km 7/8-
10 of Hanamkonda-
Khammam road in 
Warangal District         
100 Completed 7.37 10.40 
11 ROB at Tanuku 
(Bhimavaram-
Nidadavole section) 
Construction of ROB at 
Tanuku in lieu of L.C No 
153 at railway km 138/6-7 
of Bhimavaram-
Nidadavole section at km 
131/914 of old 
Vijayawada-
Visakhapatnam road in 
West Godavari District 
100 Completed 8.38 9.09 
12 ROB at Kakinada 
town 
(Kakinada town-
Kakinada port 
section)
Construction of ROB at 
Kakinada town limits  in 
lieu of L.C No 11 at
railway km 14.05 of 
Kakinada town-Kakinada 
port section on Brahmarshi 
street from NH214 
Junction at Manasarovar 
hotel to Dairy farm centre, 
in East Godavari  District 
100 Completed 10.34 11.74 




AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Annexures
Page|103
Sl.
No. 
Name of the 
ROB/RUB in short 
Full nomenclature 
of the work 
Financial
progress in  
Percentage as 
reported by 
Department 
Physical  
Status
Agreement / 
Estimate cost 
(` in crore) 
Expenditure as 
reported by 
Department 
(` in crore) 
13 ROB at Dornakal 
(Kazipet–
Vijayawada section) 
Construction of ROB at 
Dornakal in lieu of LC No 
92 at railway km 463/06-08 
Kazipet–Vijayawada 
section corresponding to 
road km 1/ 4 of Dornakal – 
Lingala road in Khammam 
District 
100 Completed 10.89 11.39 
14 ROB at Rayavaram  
(Guntur-Nandyal 
section)
Construction of ROB at 
Rayavaram in lieu of LC 
No 236 at railway km 
143/10-12 of Guntur – 
Nandyal section at R&B 
road at 37/2 of Podili-
Markapur road in 
Prakasam District 
100 Completed 14.05 12.06 
SUB TOTAL (Completed) 158.89 203.08 
B. IN PROGRESS 
1 4 Lane ROB at 
Renigunta 
(Renigunta–Tirupati 
sections)
Construction of ROB  at 
Renigunta in lieu of LC No 
111 on NH 205 at km 
84/25-37 between 
Renigunta–Tirupati 
stations in Chittoor District 
80 In progress 26.34 19.69 
2 RUB at RIMS, 
Kadapa town 
Construction of RUB at 
RIMS in Kadapa town 
limits at railway km 
257/11-12 between 
Kadapa-Kanamolapalli 
stations, in YSR District  
(fully state funded)
90 In progress 4.32 3.90 
3 ROB at Dwarapudi 
(Vijayawada–
Visakhapatnam
section)
Construction of ROB at 
Dwarapudi in lieu of LC 
No 410 at railway km 
598/18-20 of Vijayawada–
Visakhapatnam section 
corresponding to road km 
14/10 of Tokada-
Dwarapudi road in East 
Godavari District 
40 In progress 17.81 6.70 
4 ROB at Dendukuru
(Kazipet–
Vijayawada section)
Construction of ROB at 
Dendukuru in lieu of LC 
No 125 D&U at railway 
km 534/8-10 of Kazipet–
Vijayawada section at km 
5/4-6 of Madhira-
Yerrupalem road in 
Khammam District 
77 In progress 19.68 17.56 
5 ROB at Rajampet 
(Renigunta-Guntakal 
section)
Construction of ROB at 
Rajampet in lieu of LC No 
103 at railway km 208/13-
14 of Renigunta-Guntakal 
sections corresponding to 
road km 1/6-8 of 
Rajampet-Kadiri-Tumkur 
road in YSR District 
100 In progress 11.90 10.88 




AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|104
Annexures
Sl.
No. 
Name of the 
ROB/RUB in short 
Full nomenclature 
of the work 
Financial
progress in  
Percentage as 
reported by 
Department 
Physical  
Status
Agreement / 
Estimate cost 
(` in crore) 
Expenditure as 
reported by 
Department 
(` in crore) 
6 ROB at Palakol 
(Bhimavaram–
Narasapur section) 
Construction of ROB at 
Palakol in lieu of LC No 
23 at railway km 21/10-11 
of Bhimavaram –Narasapur 
section at km 22/0 +71m  
in Palakol municipal limits 
of Palakol town on 
Bhimavaram-Palakol road 
in West Godavari District 
50 In progress 7.53 11.66 
7 ROB at Yerraguntla 
(Renigunta-Guntakal 
section)
Construction of ROB at 
Yerraguntla yard in lieu of 
LC No 138 at railway km 
298/4-5 of  Renigunta-
Guntakal section 
corresponding to road km 
0/4-8 of Yerraguntla-
Proddatur road in YSR 
District 
98 In progress 8.82 15.91 
8 2nd ROB at 
Tadepalligudem 
(Vijayawada –
Visakhapatnam
section)
Construction of 2nd ROB at 
Tadepalligudem municipal 
limits at 160 metres 
towards Tadepalligudem 
railway station from LC 
No.371 at railway km 
534/28-31  of Vijayawada 
–Visakhapatnam section 
and at km 112/8 of Old 
NH-5 and ends at km 60/10 
of N.A road in West 
Godavari District (fully
state funded)
100 In progress 11.67 21.70 
9 ROB at Ghanpur 
(Secunderabad–
Kazipet section) 
Construction of ROB at 
Ghanpur in lieu of LC No 
49  at railway km 305/120-
140 on Secunderabad – 
Kazipet section in km 0/8-
10 of branch road to 
railway station connecting 
Ghanpur-Zaffarghad and 
Ghanpur–Palakurthy road 
in Warangal District 
30 In progress 13.65 3.35 
10 ROB at 
Tummikapalli
(between stations 
Kothavalasa–
Kantakapalli in 
Vizianagaram
District)
Construction of ROB at 
Tummikapalli in lieu of 
LC No 481 at km 0/2 of 
Kothavalasa Deverapalli 
road at railway km 851/0-1 
between stations 
Kothavalasa Kantakapalli –
in Vizianagaram District 
30 In progress 10.77 3.26 
11 RUB at Puttur
(Renigunta-Chennai 
section)
Construction of RUB in 
Puttur Town limits in lieu 
of LC No 57 between 
Renigunta-Chennai section 
in Chittoor District 
100 In progress 2.52 2.30 
12 RUB at 
Mahabubabad
(Kazipet–
Vijayawada)
Construction of RUB at 
Mahabubabad in lieu of LC
No 81 at railway km 437/3-
15 of Kazipet–Vijayawada 
section in km 0/4 of 
Mahabubabad-Maripeda 
road in Warangal District 
67 In progress 7.62 1.40 




AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Annexures
Page|105
Sl.
No. 
Name of the 
ROB/RUB in short 
Full nomenclature 
of the work 
Financial
progress in  
Percentage as 
reported by 
Department 
Physical  
Status
Agreement / 
Estimate cost 
(` in crore) 
Expenditure as 
reported by 
Department 
(` in crore) 
13 ROB at Puttur
(Renigunta–Chennai 
section)
Construction of ROB at 
Puttur in lieu of LC No 58
at railway km 111/38 to 
112/2 of Renigunta – 
Chennai section in Chittoor 
District 
90 In progress 18.59 18.13 
14 RUB at Nandalur 
yard
Construction of RUB at km 
219/14-15 in Nandalur 
station yard, YSR District 
(fully state funded)
0 In progress 1.95 1.62 
15 ROB at Tuni 
(Vijayawada–
Visakhapatnam
section)
Construction of ROB at 
Tuni in lieu of LC No 449
at railway km 682/16-18 of 
Vijayawada–
Visakhapatnam section 
corresponding to road km 
0/0 to 0/660 in Tuni town 
limits in East Godavari 
District 
90 In progress 8.82 11.27 
16 ROB on Madhira-
Yerrupalem road 
(Kazipeta–
Vijayawada section) 
Construction of ROB in 
lieu of LC NO.128/T at 
railway km 542/30-32 of 
Kazipet-Vijayawada 
section in km 17/2-4 of 
Madhira-Yerrupalem  road 
in Khammam District 
15 In progress 11.94 1.70 
17 ROB at Kadiam 
(Vijayawada-
Visakhapatnam
section)
Construction of ROB at 
Kadiam in lieu of LC 
No.398 at railway 
km.579/12-14 of 
Vijayawada-
Visakhapatnam section 
corresponding to road  at 
km 0/6 of Rajahmundry–
Kesavaram road in East 
Godavari District 
100 In progress 9.66 8.93 
18 ROB at Bonakal 
(Kazipet–
Vijayawada section) 
Construction of ROB  at 
Bonakal Yard in  lieu of 
L.C No 117 at km 512/35-
37 of Kazipet–Vijayawada 
section and km 25/2-4 of 
Jaggaiahpeta-Wyra road in 
in Khammam District 
73 In progress 17.55 15.27 
19 ROB at Gannavaram 
(Vijayawada-
Visakhapatnam
section)
Construction of ROB at 
Gannavaram in lieu of LC 
No 320 at railway  km 
448/6-8 of Vijayawada-
Visakhapatnam section in 
km30/2 of Nuzvid-
Gannavaram road in 
Krishna District 
100 In progress 12.96 10.37 
 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|106
Annexures
Sl.
No. 
Name of the 
ROB/RUB in short 
Full nomenclature 
of the work 
Financial
progress in  
Percentage as 
reported by 
Department 
Physical  
Status
Agreement / 
Estimate cost 
(` in crore) 
Expenditure as 
reported by 
Department 
(` in crore) 
20 ROB on SH 30 at 
Renigunta
(connecting Gooty 
Renigunta line to 
Gudur-Renigunta 
line) 
Construction of ROB at km 
1/4-6 on SH-30 in 
connection with proposed 
railway Bye pass line 
connecting Gooty-
Renigunta and Gudur-
Renigunta lines near 
Renigunta, in Chittoor 
District. (Fully Railway 
Funded)
83 In Progress 7.48 10.12 
SUB TOTAL (In Progress) 231.58 195.72 
C. IN INITIAL STAGES 
1 ROB at Veleru
(Vijayawada-
Visakhapatnam)
Construction  of ROB at 
Veleru village limits in lieu 
of LC No 334E at railway 
km 467/8-10 of 
Vijayawada – 
Visakhapatnam and km 
30/2 of Sobhanapuram 
Hanuman Junction in 
Krishna District 
0 Initial stage 0 0
2 RUB at Kodur
(Guntakal–
Renigunta section)
Construction of RUB at 
Kodur railway station in 
YSR District in Guntakal–
Renigunta section (fully
state funded)
0 Initial stage 0 0
3 ROB at 
Kamalapuram
(Chennai–Guntakal 
section)
Construction of ROB at km 
14/4-8 of Khajipeta 
Kamalapuram road in 
Kamalapuram Town in lieu 
of LC No 134 of Madras–
Guntakal section 
corresponding to railway 
km 282/16-283/1 in YSR 
District (fully state funded)
0 Initial stage 0 0
4 ROB at Gunadala 
(Vijayawada–
Gudivada section) 
Construction of ROB in 
lieu of LC No 8 at 
Gunadala at railway km 
5/6-7 of Vijayawada – 
Gudivada section at km 
5/204 of Vijayawada-
Gudivada road in 
Vijayawada municipal 
limits in Krishna District  
0 Initial stage 19.60 0
5 ROB at Powerpet 
(Vijayawada–
Visakhapatnam
section)
Construction of ROB in 
lieu of LC No 347 at 
railway km 486/26-28 of 
Vijayawada – 
Visakhapatnam section and 
km 64/2 of Vijayawada –
Visakhapatnam road in 
Eluru town limits 
(Powerpet Gate) in West 
Godavari District 
0 Initial stage 0 0
 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Annexures
Page|107
Sl.
No. 
Name of the 
ROB/RUB in short 
Full nomenclature 
of the work 
Financial
progress in  
Percentage as 
reported by 
Department 
Physical  
Status
Agreement / 
Estimate cost 
(` in crore) 
Expenditure as 
reported by 
Department 
(` in crore) 
6 ROB at Vatluru 
(Vijayawada–
Visakhapatnam
section ) 
Construction of ROB in 
lieu of LC No 343 at 
railway km 480/26-28 
Vijayawada – 
Visakhapatnam section  at 
Vatluru on Vijayawada 
Visakhapatnam road in 
West Godavari District 
0 Initial stage 0 0
7 ROB at Muddanur 
(Renigunta-Guntakal 
section)
Construction of ROB in 
lieu of LC No 145
(Chennai-Mumbai lane) at 
km 316/01 between 
Muddanur and 
Mangapatnam station on 
Renigunta-Guntakal 
section in YSR District 
0 Initial stage 0 0
8 ROB at Battala bazar 
(Kazipet-Vijayawada 
section)
Construction of ROB in 
lieu of LC No 62/T at 
Battala Bazar in Warangal 
town limits at railway km 
376/2-4 of Kazipet-
Vijayawada section on 
Hanamkonda – Khammam 
road at km 6/8-10 in 
Warangal District
0 Initial stage 0 0
9 ROB at Bhanugudi 
Junction
(Samalkot-Kakinada
section)
Construction of ROB at 
Kakinada in lieu of LC No 
7 at railway km 11/19-20 
of Samalkota-Kakinada 
section on the road from 
Kakinada-Rajahmundry 
road at ZP Junction to NH-
214  at Bhanugudi Junction 
in Kakinada city limits in 
East Godavari District  
0 Initial stage 0 0
10 ROB at Kakinada 
(Kakinada Port 
Yard) 
Construction of ROB in 
lieu of LC No 13 at km 
166/4-5 in Kakinada Port 
Yard and LC No 1 at km 
0/8-9 between Kakinada 
Port Yard and NFCL siding 
on Kakinada-Rajanagaram 
(ADB) road in East 
Godavari District. 
0 Initial stage 0 0
SUB TOTAL (In Initial Stages) 19.60 0
GRAND TOTAL 410.07 398.80 





AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|108
Annexures
Annexure – 4.3 
(Reference to paragraph 4.1.6.1 page 70) 
Instances of bridge proper complete but approaches incomplete  
and vice versa etc. 
ROB Expenditure 
incurred
(as reported by 
Department)
(` in crore)
Brief Description
ROB at Dwarapudi 6.70 Tenders were floated and work was awarded (November 
2009), prior to completion of land acquisition, which is 
now sub-judice. The bridge proper is completed, while 
approaches are still incomplete (June 2012). 
ROB at Rajampet 10.88 The work was awarded in June 2007, without completion of 
land acquisition. The Bridge proper was completed however, 
the approaches are still incomplete (November 2011). 
ROBs at 
Tummikapalli 
3.26 The bridge proper is comp leted, while the approaches are 
still incomplete, due to land acquisition problems (July 2012). 
2nd ROB at 
Tadepalligudem
21.70 The bridge proper and ROB structure are complete, but 
approach road is incomplete due to incomplete land 
acquisition and a pending court case (March 2012). 
ROB at Puttur 18.13 Railway Bridge proper completed, but the approaches are 
still incomplete due to land acquisition problem and delay 
in finalization of designs of the super structure and 
substructure of ROB approaches (August 2012). 
ROB on SH-30 
Renigunta
10.12 Though the work was entrusted in January 2009 with a 
stipulation to complete by  January 2010, enormous delay 
was noticed in land acquisition due to which though the 
Bridge proper completed by Railways, the approaches 
remain incomplete (August 2012). 
RUB at Nandalur 1.62 The railway portion of the RUB is complete, but the 
approaches (R&B portion) are yet to be grounded. 
(November 2012). 
RUB at RIMS 
(Kadapa)
3.90 Bridge proper completed but approaches were not taken up, 
due to land acquisition problems (October 2012). 
RUB at Puttur 
Town
2.30 Water gets stagnated in Subway  portion for even small 
rains and there is interrup tion of traffic due to non 
completion of the work of construction of sump well to 
collect the rain water in subw ay and pumping the water 
(August 2012). 
ROB at Milk 
Project, Vijayawada
18.98 While the ROB has been opened for traffic, works relating 
to service roads, side drains and pipe culverts are yet to be 
completed, due to non-comple tion of UGD pipeline by the 
Municipal Corporation (February 2012). 
ROB at Tuni 11.27 R&B Department called for tenders in April 2007 and 
entrusted the work in Jun e 2007, without completion of 
land acquisition and shifting of utilities, and even the 
communication of the combined estimate by the Railways 
(November 2007). In fact, the RCL was not finalised even 
by 2010. 
The approaches were completed by March 2010, and held 
up for want of completion of the bridge proper by the 
Railways  (June 2012). 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Annexures
Page|109
ROB Expenditure 
incurred
(as reported by 
Department)
(` in crore)
Brief Description
ROB at 
Yerraguntla
15.91 Agreement was conclude d in March 2008, before 
completion of land acquisiti on. Further, alignment of 
approaches was modified after opening of tenders. R&B 
approach portion is completed (except slabs near common 
piers), while the Railway portion was still incomplete 
(November 2011). However, a link road for one of the 
approaches (Proddatur side) facilitating movement of 
heavy traffic is not yet taken up (October 2012). 
ROB at
Bhalabhadrapuram
13.20 The bridge proper and ROB are complete, but the ROB is 
not usable due to non-shifting of HT Transmission Lines of 
220 and 400 KV. As pe r the electricity authorities, the 
clearance from the ROB RCL level as 7.13 metres and 7.27 
metres for the 220 and 400 KV lines, against the stipulated 
minimum clearances of 7.926 metres and 8.84 metres. 
However, the ROB records showed clearances of 9.005 
metres and 9.476 metres respectively (June 2012). 
ROB at Bonakal 
Yard
15.27 Two spans on Jaggaiahpeta side are obstructed by a 132 
KV HT Transmission line, which is crossing the ROB slabs 
without minimum clearance over RCL. Consequently, part 
of the work was stopped for want of shifting of HT line 
(February 2012). 
ROB at Anaparthy 9.87 Originally, the ROB was to be  constructed at LC 413T as 
per RWP. Subsequently, the ROB was shifted to LC 412T 
(1km away) on grounds of difficulties with acquisition of 
land and structures in a he avily built-up area; this was 
accepted by the Railways with the proviso that both LCs – 
412T and 413T – would be closed. However, despite 
completion of the ROB, the LC at 413T has not been 
closed (April 2012). 
ROB at 
Lankelapalem
23.28 Although the work was entrusted in July 2006, the site was 
physically handed over only in April 2007; this was due to 
delay in the land acquisition process. 
Although the ROB was finally completed and opened for 
traffic (August 2010), the LC was not closed; reasons were 
not available on record (July 2012). 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|110
Annexures
Annexure - 4.4 
 (Reference to paragraph 4.2 page 85) 
Details of sugar factories under the cooperative sector 
Sl. No. Name of the CSF 
1 The Kadapa Co-operative Sugars Limited, Kadapa 
2 NVR&ADR Co-operative Sugars Limited, Guntur 
3 The Chittoor Co-operative Sugar Limited, Chittoor 
4 The Kovur Co-operative Sugars Limited, Nellore 
5 The Anakapalle V.V.Ramana Co-op. Sugars Limited, Anakapalle 
6 The Nizamabad Co-operative Sugars Factory Limited, Nizamabad 
7 The Thandava Co-operative Sugars Limited, East Godavari District 
8 Sri Venkateswara Co-operative Sugars Factory Limited, Chittoor 
9 Sri Vijayarama Gajapati Co-operative Sugars Factory Limited, Vizianagaram District 
10 Chodavaram  Co-operative Sugars Factory Limited, Visakhapatnam 
11 Etikoppaka Co-operative Sugars Factory Limited, Visakhapatnam 




AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Annexures
Page|111
Annexure – 4.5 
(Reference to paragraph 4.2 page 86) 
Details of loans sanctioned by GoAP to Cooperative Sugar Factories 
Sl.
No. 
Name of the 
CSF 
Yearly Details of Loans taken by CSFs (` in lakh)
Re-
payment
2006-07 
2007-08 
2008-09 
2009-10 
2010-11 
2011-12 
Total 
Loans 
1 The Kadapa  
Co-operative 
Sugars Limited, 
Kadapa 
700.00 502.56 - - - - 1202.56 Nil
2 NVR & ADR 
Co-operative 
Sugars Limited, 
Guntur 
- - - - 749.00 - 749.00 Nil
3 The Chittoor  
Co- operative 
Sugar Limited, 
Chittoor 
- - - - 350.00 2356.63 2706.63 Nil
4 The Kovur
Co-operative 
Sugars Limited, 
Nellore 
- - - - 688.00 962.63 1650.63 Nil
5 The Anakapalle 
V.V.Ramana 
Co-op. Sugars 
Limited, 
Anakapalle 
- - - - 30.22 609.71 639.93 Nil
6 The Nizamabad 
Co-operative 
Sugars Factory 
Limited, 
Nizamabad 
- - - - 558.00 - 558.00 Nil
7 The Thandava   
Co-operative 
Sugars Limited, 
East Godavari 
District
- - - - - 373.52 373.52 Nil
8 Sri Venkateswara 
Co-operative
Sugars Factory 
Limited, Chittoor 
- - - - - 1333.37 1333.37 Nil
Total Amount 700.00 502.56 - - 2375.22 5635.86 9213.64 Nil
 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Page|112
Annexures
Annexure – 4.6 
(Reference to paragraph 4.2 page 87) 
Statement showing Profit and Loss of  
Cooperative Sugar Factories from 2007-08 to 2011-12  
(`in lakh)
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
C.S.F 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 Accumulated
losses as on 31 
March 2012 
1 The Kadapa Co-
operative Sugars 
Ltd, Kadapa 
(-) 699.42 (-)  48.94 (-) 150.50 (-) 165.40 --- 2801.12 
(31.03.2011) 
2 NVR & ADR Co-
operative Sugars 
Limited, Guntur 
(-) 456.01 (-) 341.87 (-)  45.93 (-) 180.39 --- 2982.90 
(31.03.2011) 
3 The Chittoor Co- 
operative Sugar 
Ltd. Chittoor 
(-)1252.04 (+)285.67 (-) 667.93 (-)1711.88 (-) 936.00 9365.50 
4 The Kovur Co-
operative Sugars 
Limited, Nellore 
(-)1938.81 (-) 345.02 (-) 611.14 (-)1187.04 (-) 681.00 9920.70 
5 The Anakapalle 
V.V.Ramana Co-
op. Sugars 
Ltd.,Anakapalle 
(-) 151.12 (-)  46.97 (-) 296.36 (-) 304.23 (-) 450.33 3977.19 
6 The Nizamabad 
Co-operative
Sugars Factory 
Ltd, Nizamabad 
(-) 943.09 (-) 261.68 (-) 353.42 (-) 454.33 --- 6281.30 
(31.03.2011) 
7 The Thandava  
Co-operative
Sugars Limited, 
East Godavari 
District
(-) 688.20 (+)365.90 (+)129.66 (+) 28.16 --- 2338.75 
(31.03.2011) 
8 Sri Venkateswara 
Co-operative
Sugars Factory 
Ltd, Chittoor 
(-)1115.48 (+)760.20 (-)  90.81 (-) 811.65 --- 5274.92 
(31.03.2011) 
Total 42942.38 



Glossary



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Glossary
Page|113
ADB : Asian Development Bank 
AEE : Assistant Executive Engineer 
ANR : Assisted Natural Regeneration 
APCOB : Andhra Pradesh State Cooperative Bank 
APFDC : Andhra Pradesh Forest Development Corporation Limited
APIA : Andhra Pradesh Infrastructure Authority 
APIDE Act : Andhra Pradesh Infrastructure Development Enabling 
Act, 2001 
APIIC : Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation 
Limited 
APSEB : Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board 
APSFR : Andhra Pradesh ‘State of Forest’ Report 
APSRTC : Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation 
AR : Artificial Regeneration 
BG : Bank Guarantee 
BM : Bituminous Macadam 
BOST : Build, operate, share and transfer 
BT : Black Top 
CA  
(as in  Chapter-2)
: Concession Agreement 
CA  
(as in  Chapter-3)
: Compensatory Afforestation 
CAMPA : Compensatory Afforestation Management and Planning 
Authority 
CC : Cement Concrete  
CCF  : Chief Conservator of Forests 
CCO : Chief Controlling Officer 
CE : Chief Engineer 
CFM : Community Forest Management 
COD : Commercial Operations Date 
COS : Commissioner of Sugar & Cane Commissioner 
COT : Commissionerate of Tenders 
CSC : Cabinet Sub Committee  
CSF : Cooperative Sugar Factories 
D&P Wing : Designs and Planning Wing, R&B Department 
DC : Deputy Commissioner 
DD : Demand Draft 
DEE : Deputy Executive Engineer 
DFO : Divisional Forest Officer 
DLC : District Level Committee 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Glossary
Page|114
DoP : Director of Ports 
DOWA : Director of Works Accounts 
DPR : Detailed Project Report 
ECEPL : East Coast Energy Private Limited 
ECV : Estimate Contract Value 
EDC : Eco Development Committees 
EE : Executive Engineer 
EMD : Earnest Money Deposit 
ENC : Engineer-in-Chief (R&B) Administration & National 
Highways, R&B Department 
EoI : Expression of Interest 
EP : Eucalyptus Plantation
FDA : Forest Development Agency 
FRO : Forest Range Officer 
FSI : Forest Survey of India 
GAD : General Arrangement Drawing 
GoM : Group of Ministers 
GPL : Gangavaram Port Limited 
GSB : Granular Sub-Base 
HoFF : Head of Forest Force 
HT Transmission 
lines 
: High Tension Transmission lines 
I&CAD : Irrigation and Command Area Development Department 
IFMS : Intensification of Forest Management Scheme 
IRR : Internal rate of return 
ISFR : India ‘State of Forest’ Report 
IT return : Income Tax return 
IT&C : Information Technology and Communication 
JFMC : Joint Forest Management Committees 
KDWP : Kakinada Deep Water Port 
KPCL : Krishnapatnam Port Company Limited 
KSPL : Kakinada Sea Port Limited 
LA : Land Acquisition
LC : Level Crossing 
LOC : Letter of Credit 
MDF : Moderately Dense Forest 
MGA : Minimum Guaranteed Amount 
MoRTH : Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, Government of 
India



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Glossary
Page|115
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding 
MTPA : Million Tonnes per annum 
NABARD : National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
NAP : National Afforestation Programme 
NH : National Highway 
NPV : Net Present Value 
OF : Open Forest 
OMST : Operate,  maintain, share and transfer 
PA : Protected Area 
PAO : Pay and Accounts Office 
PCCF : Principal Chief Conservator of Forests 
PMU : Project Monitoring Unit 
PO : Port Officer 
POL : Petrol, Oil and Lubricants
PPP : Public Private Partnership 
PSU : Public  Sector Undertaking 
QC : Quality Control 
R&B : Roads and Buildings Department 
R&R : Relief and Rehabilitation 
RA : Revised Agreement 
RBI : Reserve Bank of India 
RCC : Reinforced Cement Concrete 
RCL : Road Crest Level 
RFP : Request for Proposal 
RFQ : Request for Qualification 
RIDF : Rural Infrastructure Development Fund 
ROB : Road Over Bridge 
ROFR  
(as in  Chapter-2)
: Right of First Refusal
ROFR  
(as in  Chapter-2)
: Recognition of Forest Rights 
RSW : Railway Safety Works 
RUB : Road Under Bridge 
RVP : River Valley Project 
RWP : Railway Works Programme 
SA : Supplementary Agreement 
SBC : Safe Bearing Capacity 
SBM : Single Buoy Mooring 
SDBC : Semi-Dense Bituminous Concrete 



AuditReport(EconomicSector)fortheyearendedMarch2012
Glossary
Page|116
SDLC : Sub- Divisional Level Committee 
SE : Superintending Engineer 
SEZ : Special Economic Zone 
SPS Nellore : Sri Potti Sriramulu Nellore District  
SPV : Special Purpose Vehicle 
SSR : Standard Schedule of Rates 
TMT Steel : Thermo Mechanically Treated Steel 
TR&B (P) : Erstwhile Transport, Roads & Buildings (Ports) 
Department 
TVU : Train Vehicle Units 
UC : Utilization Certificate 
UGD : Under Ground Drainage 
VANPIC : Vadarevu & Nizampatnam Ports & Industrial Corridor
VAT : Value Added Tax 
VDF : Very Dense Forest 
VGTMUDA : Vijayawada, Guntur, Tenali and Mangalagiri Urban 
Development Authority 
VSS : Vana Samrakshana Samithies 
WBM : Water Bound Macadam 
WLM : Wild Life Management 
WLS : Wild Life Sanctuary 
WMM : Wet Mix Macadam 
WPI : Wholesale Price Index 