v
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
There are 11 major ports in India governed by the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, which serve as the 
primary conduit for India’s international trade, by handling three-fourths of the nation’s maritime 
cargo. These ports function as autonomous bodies under the Ministry of Shipping. They follow a 
traditional business model where ports take upon themselves, the task of creation of common 
infrastructure and the responsibility of commercial operations like marine and cargo handling 
services. However, with the rapid increase in cargo traffic over the last decade, massive investments 
in capacity augmentation had become necessary. To address the need, the Ministry formulated 
the National Maritime Development Programme in 2005-06, which envisaged an investment of 
Rs 55800 crore for the major ports by 2012. The programme also indicated a paradigm shift in 
policy towards the ‘landlord’ model, whereby the ports would act as trade facilitators by investing 
in common user facilities like deepening of channels, improvements in connectivity, etc, leaving 
commercial services to private entities under revenue sharing arrangements.
The performance audit revealed that the depths available at the major ports were unable to cater 
to all types of vessels that plied international waters. Moreover, dredging undertaken by these 
ports had not been effective as significant variations were noticed between the drafts at the access 
channels and the berths. The depths reported by the ports did not provide adequate assurance 
to the visiting vessels. The dredging policy of the Ministry compelled some ports to engage the 
Dredging Corporation of India for the work, but it often failed to maintain the required drafts. 
Further, deepening projects, critical for the competitiveness of the ports, were neglected. These 
factors limited the berthing options available to ships, resulting in their queuing up for a few berths, 
leading to high pre-berthing detentions. It was estimated that maritime trade in India lost more 
than Rs 1400 crore per annum on account of such detentions. It was also found that important 
marine services like providing of tugs and pilots for safe navigability, in which ports enjoyed a 
monopoly, were not being carried out efficiently. Lack of provision of night navigation facilities also 
restricted round -the -clock access of vessels to the ports. 
It was found that the cargo handling services of the ports were inefficient, as a predominant 
number of berths still did not have the dedicated facilities that were necessary for quick handling 
of the main forms of cargo like liquid bulk, dry bulk and containers. Liquid bulk which primarily 
consisted of petroleum, oil and lubricants, constituting 33 per cent of the total cargo, faced handling 
inefficiencies due to slow rates of discharge at specialized berths, leading to high turn-round time 
of vessels. The users at the major liquid bulk handling ports were, therefore, compelled to shift  
handling points to offshore Single Buoy Moorings, thereby affecting the revenues of the ports. It 
was found that dry bulk cargo, viz. coal, iron ore, fertilizers, etc, comprising around  40 per cent 
of the total cargo, was mostly handled at non-mechanised berths as only eight per cent of all the 
dry bulk berths at the ports had specialized equipment for the same. Moreover, 55 per cent of 
equipment available at all ports except at the Jawaharlal Nehru Port had crossed their economic 
v

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
vi
lives, resulting in low utilization, with users preferring to hire modern and privately owned 
equipment. For faster handling, the users of the ports were hiring private labour at additional 
costs, over and above the mandatory engagement of port labour. It was also found that the ports 
were assessing labour productivity on the basis of outdated norms. Further, the entire handling 
output was being attributed to port labour, disregarding the engagement of private labour, leading 
to misreporting of labour productivity to the Ministry. Thus, the inefficient rendering of marine 
and cargo handling services made the ports less attractive to trans-shipment cargo and bigger 
vessels, as compared to neighbouring ports of Colombo and Singapore. 
In the case of containers, which saw the fastest growth in traffic during the period covered, around 
65 per cent were being handled at privately operated terminals in Chennai, Jawaharlal Nehru Port 
and Tuticorin. The handling efficiency in these terminals touched international benchmarks. 
The performance audit revealed that storage space and connectivity at the ports, necessary for 
smooth accumulation and dispersal of cargo, was inadequate. Dispersal of cargo by rail was affected 
due to lack of double- line connectivity, low mechanisation at sidings, restrictions in lengths of 
sidings causing part-rake handling and the absence of exclusive freight corridors. Efficient dispersal 
of cargo by road was hindered by narrow last-mile linkages, city traffic restrictions on movement 
of trucks during daytime and lack of exclusive port roads connecting to highways. To address these 
problems, a number of schemes had been planned and the Committee on Infrastructure had 
recommended four-laning of roads and doubling of railway lines at ports by 2008. However, due 
to delays in implementation, only four out of 33 schemes could be completed by March 2009. The 
possibility of alternative modes like inland water transport and coastal shipping that were being 
used extensively at international ports worldwide, remained underexplored. 
Procedures for assessment, monitoring and reporting of performance by ports were fraught with 
several deficiencies. The assessment of berth occupancy, a prime indicator for congestion at ports, 
was distorted. As occupancy was shown in terms of days, a berth occupied for even an hour was 
being shown to have been occupied for a whole day. Thus, high occupancy was being reported 
for relatively idle berths. The calculation of handling capacities at berths did not represent the 
optimum handling possible, based on equipment support, size of vessels, nature of cargo etc., but 
was based on the actual handling done in previous years. Existing inefficiencies were, therefore, 
factored into the calculation, resulting in understatement of the capacities of the ports. It was 
also noticed that critical performance parameters such as pre-berthing detention and turn-round 
time were not being recorded and reported correctly by most of the ports, leading to the risk of 
real problems remaining unidentified and unaddressed. Moreover, the targets set by the Ministry 
through Memoranda of Understanding with the ports, remained mere upgrades of their previous 
years’ performances and were neither based on any norms nor were always mutually consistent. 
Abnormally low targets like idle time of 42 per cent in Haldia and less than 20 per cent equipment 
utilisation at Mumbai did not incentivise efficiency. 
vi

vii
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
Audit observed that only 31 out of 170 schemes planned for the first phase of National Maritime 
Development Programme (March 2009) could be completed at the 11 major ports, resulting in 
an investment lag of 80 per cent. Implementation of critical deepening and connectivity projects, 
which was the primary responsibility of the ports under the ‘landlord’ model, was poor. Private 
participation in commercial operations at ports, as envisaged under the model, was slow due 
to delays in handing over of sites and grant of security clearances. An analysis by Audit showed 
that 18 out of 26 ongoing schemes were delayed by over a year due to delays in approvals at 
various stages. Build Operate Transfer agreements for the terminals included clauses containing 
ambiguities regarding the nature of the services to be provided to the ports. 
Thus, in order to enhance maritime trade and competitiveness of the ports with the international 
ports and the emerging private ports in India, the Ministry needs to ensure formulation of adequate 
draft plans, assessment of dredging requirements based on long-term planning, adequate night 
navigation facilities, rapid mechanization of handling facilities, phasing out of outdated equipment, 
proper and effective  implementation of deepening and connectivity projects, correct reporting of 
berth occupancy as well as pre-berthing detention and turn-round time and strict adherence to 
the defined common minimum standards of performance. 
vii

ix
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
HIGHLIGHTS AND SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
Marine Operations
=	 Lack of navigable depth was the biggest challenge faced by major ports in India as 
reported drafts did not provide adequate assurance to visiting vessels. As the issue was 
not addressed adequately, large ships of higher than 60000 dead weight tonnage were 
not visiting to these ports except  for Chennai, New Mangalore and Visakhapatnam.  
Twenty one per cent of the vessels visiting Haldia needed to be lightened to gain access 
to its berths.
 (Paragraph 2.1.1 and 2.1.2)
Due to significant mismatches in drafts at channels and berths at some of the ports, the ship -•	
ping lines were left with limited berthing options besides underutilization of draft at approach 
channels. 
(Paragraph 2.1.3)
Depth survey procedures at the ports were not standardised and in some cases, survey results •	
were not included in the dredging contracts. As per dredging policy of the Ministry, some ports 
were compelled to engage the Dredging Corporation of India, which often failed to maintain 
the required drafts. Dredging by port dredgers was costly due to poor utilisation and hiring of 
private dredgers was justified on faulty basis.
(Paragraph 2.2.1 and 2.2.2)
Capital dredging projects at Haldia and Kolkata were neglected and poor management of main-•	
tenance dredging threatened navigability at these ports. 
(Paragraph  2.2.3)
Barring Visakhapatnam, significant delays were noticed in providing pilotage to incoming ves-•	
sels in most of the ports.
(Paragraph 2.3.1)
Accessibility at night was restricted at Cochin, Jawaharlal Nehru Port (JNPT), Kandla, Kolkata, •	
Mumbai and Tuticorin due to lack of adequate facilities for night navigation.
 (Paragraph 2.4)
ix

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
x
= Maritime trade lost an estimated an amount of Rs 1400 crore per year on account of pre-
berthing detentions. These, inter alia, were caused due to lack of specialised berths, resulting 
in congestion of vessels.
(Paragraph 2.6)
Recommendations
Ø  Concerted efforts should be made by the Ministry to ensure the minimum draft availability of 14 
metres as recommended by the Inter-Ministerial Group.
Ø  The draft plans of each port, particularly Chennai and Visakhapatnam should focus on addressing 
the significant mismatches of drafts between the approach channels and the berths. 
Ø  As the present dredging policy of the Ministry compelled some ports to engage Dredging 
Corporation of India in spite of the latter failing to meet the targets, a clear cut policy ensuring 
competitive bidding should be formulated. 
Ø  Assessment of dredging requirements should be made based on long-term planning and proper 
surveys with the help of specialized organizations like National Institute of Ocean Technology  
and Central Water and Power Research and Consultancy Services  for better quality assurance.
Ø  Proper efforts should be made to improve night navigation facilities in Cochin, Kandla, Kolkata 
and Tuticorin.
Ø  Factors leading to pre-berthing detentions on port account should be identified and addressed 
by the ports. 
Handling Operations
Liquid bulk – primarily consisting of petroleum, oil and lubricants (POL) constituting 33 •	 per cent 
of the total cargo in 2008-09, faced handling inefficiencies due to slow rates of discharge through 
Marine Loading Arms at specialized berths, leading to high turn-round time of vessels. 
 (Paragraph 1.1, 3.1.1 and 3.1.2)
At two ports – Haldia and Cochin – insufficient storage capacities and low drafts at liquid berths •	
respectively resulted in diversion of cargo to other ports. Revenues of Cochin port declined as 
users shifted handling points to the offshore Single Buoy Mooring.
(Paragraph 3.1.2 -3.1.3)

xi
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
The method of measurement of the volume of liquid cargo handled and the system of billing •	
varied from port to port. Absence of any standard norm for measurement of liquid bulk resulted 
in discrepancies between the actual cargo handled and the quantities billed.
(Paragraph 3.1.4)
Only eight per cent of all berths at the ports had specialized equipment for handling dry bulk, viz •	
coal, iron ore, minerals, fertilizers, foodgrains, etc. A significant proportion was being handled 
at non-mechanised berths at Chennai, New Mangalore, Paradip, Tuticorin and Visakhapatnam, 
resulting in higher turn-round times.
(Paragraph 3.2.1)
Container handling efficiency at JNPT and Tuticorin, particularly at privately operated terminals, •	
fulfilled international benchmarks. Other major container handling ports like Chennai, Cochin 
and Kolkata registered lower TEUs per berth as these ports were having less equipment 
support. 
(Paragraph 3.3.1)
At Cochin, 94 •	 per cent of the port equipment were beyond their economic lives.
(Paragraph 3.4.1)
Except for Kandla, the average utilisation of all equipment belonging to nine other ports •	
remained significantly below the minimum utilisation norm of 60 per cent as prescribed by the 
Ministry. This indicated low demand for port-owned equipment. 
(Paragraph 3.4.2)
In all ports except JNPT, 55 •	 per cent of all available equipment for handling cargo had crossed 
their economic lives by 2007-08. At Haldia, where dry bulk made up the biggest cargo share, 
instead of procuring dry bulk related handling equipment, the port spent Rs 71.19 crore on 
purchase of container handling equipment that remained underutilized. 
(Paragraph 3.4.1 and 3.4.4)
Assessment of labour productivity at ports was based on outdated norms and was not •	
standardised.
(Paragraph 3.5.2)

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
xii
As Handling by port labour was generally inefficient, the Port users at some Ports had to hire •	
private labour at additional cost to overcome handling inefficiencies. The ports, however, 
attributed the entire handling output to port labour, thereby distorting the reporting of labour 
productivity to the Ministry.
(Paragraph 3.5.2)
Availability of open storage sheds was inadequate and of poor quality at Cochin, Kandla, •	
Kolkata and Mumbai. The practice followed at Chennai port of regular review and re-allotment 
of unutilized licensed storage space was good. 
(Paragraph 3.6.1, 3.6.2 and 3.6.3)
The pollution control cell at Mumbai was inadequately manned; control equipment was not •	
being maintained and air quality was not being adequately monitored there. Visakhapatnam 
port introduced a number of good practices for containing pollution arising from handling of 
dry bulk cargo. 
(Paragraphs 3.7.2)
Recommendations
Ports should address the problem of underutilisation of existing discharge capacities of Marine Ø 
Loading Arms. To reduce the turn-round time of liquid bulk vessels, low capacity MLAs should 
be replaced with high capacity arms.
The Ministry should fix a standard system of measurement of liquid cargo and
Ø  frame a standard 
document for verification of the quantities handled and claiming of wharfage.
Dry bulk should be handled exclusively at specialised berths with mechanised handling facilities Ø 
to arrest the increasing turn-round time of dry bulk vessels.
With the increasing trend of containerization of cargo, ports should create facilities of 
Ø 
specialised container berths. Possibilities for conversion of existing general cargo berths into 
such berths should be explored. .
Concerted efforts should be made by the ports to phase out outlived equipment. Selection of Ø 
equipment should reflect the port’s business plan, trend and type of major cargo handled and 
users’ preferences.

xiii
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
For making correct assessments of labour productivity, the ports should revise the manning Ø 
scales and datum as recommended by the National Tribunal in 2006.
The 11-month ceiling on storage area licences may be modified in the interest of long-term Ø 
users.
The Chennai model of storage area review may be adopted at other ports.
Ø 
Ports should consistently deploy oil booms and other protective measures while handling Ø 
POL cargo to restrict the impact of oil spillage. Oil sensors to detect spillage of oil in the 
water front and oil-water separators, skimmers, dispersant spray systems etc. should be 
used to remove pollutants from water bodies as per international best practices.
Ports should make provisions for levying fines on tankers/vessels polluting harbour waters and 
Ø 
berths and recover the cost of consumables used for cleaning operations of oil spillages from 
the users.
Port connectivity
=	 In comparison to international ports like Rotterdam, where more than 50 per cent of cargo 
moved by inland barges, the use of inland waterways and coastal shipping was minimal, 
except at Mormugao.
(Paragraph 4.1)
Railway infrastructure was found to be deficient at most ports due to lack of double •	
line connectivity, low mechanisation at sidings, restrictions in length of sidings, causing 
part-rake handling and absence of exclusive freight corridors.
(Paragraph 4.2- 4.4)
Efficient dispersal of cargo by road was hindered due to narrow last-mile linkages, city •	
traffic restrictions on movement of trucks during daytime and absence of exclusive cor-
ridors connecting highways to ports.
(Paragraph 4.6-4.7)

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
xiv
Due to delays in implementation, only one of the 11 rail connectivity projects and two •	
out of 22 road connectivity projects at ports could be completed by March 2009, as 
planned.
(Paragraph 4.5 and 4.8) 
Recommendations
Ø  Four-lane roads and double line rail connectivity as recommended by the Committee on 
Infrastructure should be taken up for speedy implementation. Increased length of loops 
at sidings and larger space envelopes should be factored in while implementing new rail 
projects.
Ø  Mechanization of handling at sidings should be considered at ports with larger volumes 
of bulk cargo. 
Ø  Emphasis should be laid on widening of the port roads where they are narrow.
Ø  Implementation of road projects in close coordination with National Highway Authority 
of India should be taken up expeditiously for efficient evacuation of cargo from the 
ports.
Performance indicators
Performance targets set by the Ministry through Memoranda of Understanding with the ports •	
remained mere upgrades of the previous years’ performances and were not based on any 
norms. The standards of performance also varied from port to port. 
(Paragraph 5.1 and 5.2)
At Haldia, the targets allowed 42 •	 per cent idle time at the berths while at Mumbai, the targets 
for equipment utilisation were less than 20 per cent of the total working time. In contravention 
of Ministry’s stipulations against lowering performance targets, several ports viz. Haldia, JNPT, 
NMPT and Visakhapatnam reduced the targets of PBD and TRT in their MoUs. 
(Paragraph 5.2 and 5.2.4)

xv
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
Important performance parameters such as pre-berthing detention and turn-round time were •	
not being recorded and reported correctly by most of the ports. The segregation of these 
parameters into ‘port account’ and ‘non-port account’ to identify the delays under separate 
heads, was not done. 
(Paragraph 5.3)
For computing berth occupancy, a berth occupied for even an hour was shown to have been •	
occupied for the whole day. Thus, relatively idle berths reported high occupancy. In Cochin, a 
berth showing 100 per cent occupancy was found to be actually occupied for only 16 per cent 
of the time, when computed in hours. Similarly, at New Mangalore, a berth showing 60 per cent 
occupancy actually handled only nine vessels in two months. Moreover, several investment de-
cisions like widening and reconstruction of berths were based on inaccurately reported high 
occupancy rates of berths.
(Paragraph 5.5)
The mode of calculation of the handling capacity of the berths did not represent the optimum •	
handling possible at those berths but was based on actual handling done in previous years. The 
existing inefficiencies were, therefore, factored into the calculation, due to which most of the 
ports were reporting high capacity utilisation.  
(Paragraph 5.6)
Recommendations
The Ministry should consider computation of berth occupancy in hours. Capital expenditure 
Ø 
decisions on new berths should be based on the occupancy and utilisation figures of the exist-
ing berths in hours.
Capacity should be objectively assessed based on the capacities of equipment and other infra-Ø 
structural facilities and should not merely reflect the handling done during the earlier years.
The Ministry should ensure correct reporting of pre-berthing detention and turn-round time Ø 
by the ports.

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
xvi
All major ports should adhere to the defined common minimum standards of performance Ø 
based on the output of standard equipment under normal working conditions without making 
allowances for deficiencies.
In the case of equipment, the ports should adopt measures like prioritization and synchroniza-Ø 
tion of maintenance schedule, proper inventory management, timely cargo aggregation and 
disposal of obsolete/surplus equipment, without undue delays in achieving better availability 
and utilisation, rather than lowering the targets to indicate achievements. 
Schemes undertaken
=	 The National Maritime Development Programme drawn up by the Ministry of Shipping in 
2005-06 envisaged spending about Rs 27075 crore in the implementation of 170 infrastructure 
augmentation projects which were planned under the first phase to be completed by March 
2009. However, progress on implementation was marred by delays at various stages and only 
31, i.e. 18 per cent of the projects could be completed.
(Paragraph 6.1 and 6.2)
Out of 26 ongoing schemes, 18 schemes were delayed by over a year due to delays in ap-•	
provals of the schemes at various levels. Implementation of schemes was poor at JNPT, 
Kandla, Mormugao, Mumbai, New Mangalore, and Visakhapatnam.
(Paragraph 6.2.1)
Adequate priority was not accorded to the most critical projects like deepening and con -•	
nectivity projects, which were the main responsibility of the ports under the ‘landlord’ 
model. Only two out of the 15 deepening schemes planned for Phase- I of National Mari-
time Development Programme could be completed.
(Paragraph 6.2.2)
The progress of schemes planned for privatisation of commercial services, mainly in the •	
nature of building and operation of terminals under lease, was also slow due to delays in 
handing over of sites, grants of security clearances, etc. Only one out of the seven termi-
nals planned could be completed by March 2009.
(Paragraph 6.3)

xvii
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
The minimum performance prescribed for the private operators under the Build Operate •	
Transfer (BOT) agreements varied widely and was not properly benchmarked. 
(Paragraph 6.3.2- 6.3.4)
Recommendations
Ø  The Ministry should formulate a clear time schedule for all stages of schemes and 
concerted efforts should be made to implement these schemes in a time-bound manner. 
Ø Planning by individual ports should be aligned to the National Maritime Development 
Programme, which is a national Plan document. Integration with other national Plans 
like that of the Railways and National Highways Authority of India should also be 
considered.
Ø  While framing BOT agreements, performance benchmarks need to be fixed as per 
identified best practices. The Ministry should play an active role in identification of such 
best practices.

1
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
1        INTRODUCTION
1.1   Ports and the Indian Economy
Ports play a pivotal role in stimulating economic activity in their surroundings and hinterland 
through the promotion of seaborne trade. In India, they handle 95 per cent of the country’s 
international trade cargo by volume and 70 per cent by value. The sector is broadly categorised into 
major and non-major1a ports. There are 12 major ports, out of which 11 function as autonomous 
bodies under the Ministry of Shipping1b (Ministry), Government of India and are governed by the 
Major Port Trusts (MPT) Act, 1963. The twelfth major port, located at Ennore, is a corporatised 
one under the same Ministry. Apart from these, there 
are 187 notified non-major ports across 13 maritime 
States. The 12 major ports handle about three- fourths 
of the cargo traffic of the country. These ports handled 
383.75 million tonnes (MT) of cargo in 2004-05. 
Anticipating a rapid rise in traffic along with robust 
growth of the economy, the Ministry drew up (2005-
06) the National Maritime Development Programme 
(NMDP). The objective of NMDP was to increase the 
capacity of major ports to 650.90 MT by March 2009. 
During 2008-09, the actual handling by the ports rose to 530.37 MT against a reported capacity of 
576.09 MT of cargo, registering a 38 per cent rise in volume in five years. The cargo-mix is shown 
in Fig 1.1.
1.2 Profiles of Major Ports
The 11 major ports are strategically located along the 7517 km coastline of India with six ports 
on the west and five on the east coast, having a shared hinterland. The first six autonomous port 
trusts set up under the MPT Act 1963 included the three legacy ports of Chennai, Kolkata and 
Mumbai along with the ports of Cochin, Tuticorin and Visakhapatnam. Subsequently, five other 
ports viz. Jawaharlal Nehru Port (JNPT), Kandla, Mormugao, New Mangalore and Paradip were 
added to the list. A brief profile of these ports is presented overleaf.
1aNon-major ports include minor ports, notified under the Indian Ports Act, 1908 and managed by State Maritime 
Boards, intermediate ports developed under public-private partnerships and private ports. The cargo share of 
the non- major ports in Gujarat was 75 per cent of the total volume handled at all non-major ports in India in 
2008-09.
1b Erstwhile Ministry of Shipping Road Transport and Highways.
Fig 1.1

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
2


3
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
1.3     Recent Developments
Among the major ports, wide variations in performance and productivity were noticed due to 
differences in the nature of cargo handled, nautical access, economies of scale and frequency 
of ship calls. To transform Indian ports into world-class facilities suited to the requirements 
of the future, the Ministry mandated that each major port should develop its own long-term 
business plan. The Port of Rotterdam was appointed as an adviser to the Ministry to review 
the process of development of the business plans. Subsequently, each of the ports engaged 
consortia of national and international consultants to prepare their business plans. The exercise 
was completed in 2007. SWOT analyses done for the ports indicated, inter alia, that they were 
suffering from limited water depths, old infrastructure, inefficient handling systems, poor 
hinterland connectivity, overstaffing and poor quality of services. The study also indicated that 
the dominant market share of the huge Indian hinterland and locational advantages were among 
the primary strengths of these ports. 
It is, however, important to note that 
the market share of the major ports 
have steadily declined over the last 
10 years (see Fig 1.2) in the face of 
growing competition from the rapidly 
developing non-major ports. Keeping 
in view the prominence that the major 
ports have enjoyed in India’s economic 
development, the scenario of steady 
decline in cargo share at major ports 
and weaknesses in the implementation 
of capacity augmentation schemes, 
the Government formulated (2006) NMDP to facilitate enhanced private investment, improve 
service quality and promote competitiveness by identifying specific schemes/projects and other 
measures. The schemes were planned to be implemented in two overlapping phases: Phase I 
(2005-2009) and Phase II (2007-2012). Although most of the ports had drawn up ambitious
2 
long- term plans, there were a number of material issues that affected their service delivery. To 
analyse such issues, a performance audit of the functioning of these major ports was taken up in  
August 2008.
2In their vision statements included in their business plans, most ports aimed to develop themselves as hub ports 
in the South Asian region, handling trans-shipment cargo. However, big shipping lines do not prefer Indian ports 
as trans-shipment bases due to depth limitations and inefficiencies.
Fig 1.2
Market share for the last ten years
Major 
ports
Non-major 
ports

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
4
1.4   Layout of a Port
The layout of a typical major port (JNPT shown here) along with the main activity locations is given 
below:


5
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
1.5 Audit Objectives
The performance audit of major port trusts was conducted to assess whether
Ø  marine services were delivered in an efficient and effective manner.
Ø  cargo handling services were efficient, effective and economical. 
Ø  efficient port connectivity and storage infrastructure were available vis-à-vis the volume 
of business and future plans.
Ø  performance benchmarks set by the Ministry induced improvements in operational 
efficiency and were reported and monitored correctly. 
Ø
  capacity augmentation schemes taken up under the National Maritime Development 
Programme were implemented in an efficient and effective manner.
1.6 Scope
The performance audit covers the 11 major ports which function as autonomous bodies under the 
Ministry. The corporatised Ennore port has been kept out of the purview of this audit. The report 
covers performance issues relating to the period from 2004 to 2009. Matters relating to tariff  
fixation, financial management and estate management have not been included.
1.7 Audit Criteria
The following audit criteria were used in the preparation of the performance report: 
Ø  Operational targets specified by the Ministry in their annual MOUs3 with ports
Ø  Targeted capacity additions and time schedules for schemes under NMDP
Ø  Global efficiency benchmarks for handling major categories of cargo
Ø  Depth targets set by ports in dredging contracts
Ø  Best practices at select terminals and ports in India
1.8 Audit Methodology
The performance audit commenced with entry conferences with the Managements of all the 
major ports where the audit objectives and scope were explained and the audit criteria were 
agreed upon. The concerns of the users of each port were identified through surveys. During the 
field work, operational data was collected and audit memoranda were issued. Two months, viz. 
3Every year, the Ministry enters into Memoranda of Understanding with ports, to fix operational and financial 
targets.

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
6
July and December 2007 were selected for detailed test-checking of vessel-related data. The audit 
teams also conducted physical inspections of port facilities. Observations relating to each port 
were issued separately. Replies were received from the Managements of nine ports 4 and have 
been suitably incorporated in the report. The draft report was issued to the Ministry and an exit 
conference was held in June 2009. The replies of the Ministry were received in August 2009 and 
have also been suitably incorporated in the report. 
1.9 Acknowledgement
We thank the Managements of the major ports and the Ministry for extending their cooperation 
and support during the course of this audit.
4Cochin, Chennai, Kandla, Kolkata, Mormugao, Mumbai, New Mangalore, Tuticorin and Visakhapatnam.

7
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
2 Marine Operations
Marine operations constitute a set of services provided by ports to facilitate smooth movement of 
vessels between anchorage points and berths as described below:
=	 The ports should ensure that the 
access channels to the dock systems 
and berths are maintained at 
their reported depths so that the 
movement of vessels visiting the ports 
is not restricted due to unavailability 
of adequate draft
5.
=	 The visiting vessels should be guided through these channels by pilots to ensure safe 
navigability. As per the provisions of the Indian Port Act 1908, all visiting vessels of more than 
200 GRT
6 are required to engage the services of pilots available at the ports. 
It is also imperative that tugs should be engaged 
for proper placement of vessels at the time of 
berthing/de-berthing, shifting, turning, and 
movement through narrow channels. Delays in 
provision of pilotage services and tugs add to 
pre-berthing detention (PBD)
7 and increased 
turn-round time (TRT) 8. Detention of vessels 
affects shipping schedules and inventories of 
shippers. It also results in higher vessel hiring 
charges for cargo operators, which are added 
to the prices of cargo at the destination. 
=	 Ports should ensure that adequate navigational aids like buoys 9, signals and communication 
systems for night navigation are made available for accessibility round the clock and ensure 
smooth allotment of berths for cargo handling.
 Audit examined the issues affecting efficiency and effectiveness in respect of marine operations 
at major ports. The findings are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs:
5Depth necessary to submerge a ship to her load-line. It determines the minimum depth of water required for 
safe navigation.
6Gross Registered Tonnage: All cargo vessels other than small barges meet this criteria
7Time for which a ship waits before getting entry into a berth.
8Total time spent by a ship since its entry till its departure. i.e the time taken by a vessel moving from anchorage 
to berth and returning to anchorage after completing cargo handling operations.
9Floating devices used as sea marks to aid pilotage by marking maritime access channels.


Report No. 3 of 2009-10
8
2.1 Adequacy of Draft
The average size of vessels plying on international routes registered an increasing trend from 68000 
– 92000 DWT10  in 2003-04 to 76000 – 108000 DWT in 2007-08. 
NMDP envisaged a draft of 13 to 14 
metres or more for accommodating such 
types of vessels (See Fig 2.1). An Inter-
Ministerial Group (IMG) constituted 
(March 2006) under the Committee on 
Infrastructure
11 recommended achieving 
a 14 metre draft at all ports by December 
2008. Further, NMDP also envisioned that 
deep drafts were necessary at the ports 
to compete with other international ports 
in the region. At the ports of Colombo 
and Singapore, which acted as the 
primary trans-shipment
12 ports for cargo 
originating at or destined for India, draft  
of 14-16 metres was being maintained, 
thereby allowing all classes of ships to enter them. It was, therefore, imperative that the access 
channels and harbours of the nation’s major ports should be made deep enough to handle all 
classes of vessels.
2.1.1  Draft unavailable for vessels plying international routes
Audit observed that out of the 11 ports, access channels at only three ports, viz. Chennai, New 
Mangalore and Vishakhapatnam (outer harbour) had the requisite draft to cater to vessels of 
current sizes. Most of the ports had multiple access channels. Kolkata Port comprised two dock 
systems, viz the Kolkata Dock System (KDS) and the Haldia Dock Complex (HDC) both having 
different access channels. Cochin port had three access channels viz Mattanchery channel (MC), 
an outer channel (OC) and the Ernakulam channel (EC). JNPT had a common channel (CC) with  
 
10Dead weight tonnage - the carrying capacity of a ship (stores, fuel and cargo), expressed in tonnes. 
11The Committee on Infrastructure, under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister, was constituted on 31st August 
2004 with the objective of initiating policies that would ensure time-bound creation of world class infrastructure 
delivering services matching international standards, developing structures that  would maximize the role of 
public-private partnership (PPPs) and monitoring progress of key infrastructure projects to ensure that estab -
lished targets were realized.
12Shipment of goods to an intermediate destination and then from there to another destination. The main rev -
enue at the ports of Colombo, Singapore and Dubai comes from trans-shipment where cargo is transferred from 
feeder vessels to large ocean-going vessels. 
Fig 2.1

9
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
Mumbai port, apart from its 
own. Mumbai port had an access 
channel in addition to its own 
main channel. Vishakapatnam 
had an outer channel for the 
berths in the outer harbour 
followed by an inner channel for 
the berths in the inner harbour. 
The maximum and minimum 
drafts available at the channels 
providing access to the ports 
were as described in Fig 2.2. 
In the eight other ports including 
JNPT, India’s biggest container port, 
access remained largely restricted 
to vessels of smaller size that 
were less than 60000 DWT, due 
to lack of adequate draft. Vessels 
requiring higher draft could only 
access ports after performing 
lighterage
13 or uptopping 14 operations 
outside the harbour. The extent of such 
operations on visiting vessels in 2007-
08 ranged from 2.5 per cent at Kandla to 
about 21 per cent  at Haldia. Lighterage 
and uptopping contributed to high TRTs
15 
of vessels. 
The Ministry, in its reply, stated (August 
2009) that greater efforts would be 
required to maintain drafts of 14 metres 
at ports as recommended by IMG. Capital 
dredging projects had been taken up in 
seven ports during 2007-10, viz. Cochin, 
Haldia, JNPT, Kandla, Mumbai, New  
 
 
13Partial unloading of a vessel outside the harbour to reduce its draft, enabling access to berths.
14Loading of remainder cargo on to a vessel to its capacity, outside the harbour. 
15Data on TRTs: Port-wise TRTs are shown in the chapter on performance benchmarks.
Fig 2.2


Report No. 3 of 2009-10
10
Mangalore, and Paradip. Although deepening schemes in these ports were envisioned under NMDP 
for completion by March 2009, it was noticed that except for one scheme of deepening in New 
Mangalore port, all the remaining schemes were significantly delayed and still to be completed 
(March 2009).
2.1.2  Reported depths did not provide adequate assurance to vessels
Reliability of draft is important so that ship operators can maintain voyage schedules and shippers 
can effectively manage their inventories. Audit scrutiny of vessel visits during 2007-08 revealed 
that only a minor share of vessels were of sizes compatible with the maximum drafts reported by 
each of the ports. The following table (2.1) shows significant variations between the reported
16 
and the actual utilized drafts across all major ports including the three that had declared drafts 
deep enough to cater to vessels of current sizes.
Maximum drafts reported by ports and highest draft vessels that berthed in 2007-08
Port
No of ves-
sels in 
2007-08
R e p o r t e d 
draft (max) in 
metres 
Highest draft vessel (draft 
in metres) 
Percentage of vessels 
within one metre of  the 
highest draft vessel
Chennai 2053 19.2 17 2
Cochin 1171 13.8 12.5 7.6
JNPT 2712 16.47 12.6 4
Kolkata 1040 8.5 8.2 26
Haldia 2343 8.7 8.7 11
Mumbai 6150 14.88 14.6 3
New Mangalore 1166 15.4 14 14
Paradip 1655 15 12.5 4
Tuticorin 1602 12.5 10.9 1
Vishakhapatnam (Out -
er Harbour) 2346
20 17 2.7
Vishakhapatnam (Inner 
Harbour) 11.8 10.8 18
Table 2.1
In the case of Cochin, out of 142 vessels which visited the port during the sample months of 
July and December 2007, only 24 had drafts above 10.5 metres. Reported drafts, therefore, did 
not provide adequate assurance to vessels calling at the major ports. Port users in Mumbai and 
Tuticorin stated (December 2008) that the actual drafts were much less than those reported by 
those ports. Even at New Mangalore, where the proportion of visits of high draft vessels vis-à-vis  
 
16Draft availability is reported or declared to shipping agencies periodically by the ports through tide and draft  
tables.

11
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
the reported drafts were highest (about 14 per cent), the actual draft available during four months 
was found to be below the minimum draft (13.75 m), declared during 2007-08. This restricted the 
cargo load of crude oil tankers visiting the port. 
2.1.3  Draft variations between channels and berths leaving limited berthing options
Audit observed that in five out of the 11 ports, viz. Chennai, Cochin, Kandla, Tuticorin and 
Visakhapatnam, there were significant mismatches between the drafts available at the berths and 
the channels. As a result, the drafts at the approach channels in these ports remained underutilized. 
The position in Chennai is illustrated in Fig 2.3.
The problem was further compounded by the prevalence of high draft variability among the berths 
within these ports that left shipping lines with limited berthing options.
This resulted in the ships queuing up for 
a few berths leading to increased PBD 
and TRT of vessels. These problems 
were also pointed out by the port 
users in Chennai and Visakhapatnam. 
In the other six ports, the problem 
was not found to be significant. The 
user surveys conducted by Audit also 
indicated that draft reliability and 
timeliness of pilotage coupled with 
towage, navigational aids, etc were the 
major problems faced by the users of the major ports. 
Thus, the issue of maintaining proper navigable drafts across major ports had not been addressed 
effectively. Inadequacy of draft had been one of the biggest limitations on efficient performance 
and development of trans-shipment volumes. Due to draft restrictions and wide variability, the 
major ports had been frequented by feeder vessels
17 up to the size of 12.5m. The restrictions 
imposed additional costs for vessels in terms of extra handling on trans-shipment or lighterage, 
additional trips or longer TRTs. With emerging competition from deep draft non- major ports in 
India, the share of these ports in the volume of Indian maritime cargo handled, may continue to 
decline.
 
17 Large ocean going vessels known as mother vessels cannot enter all ports and visit only the bigger ports called 
hub ports. Cargo is shipped from these mother vessels to smaller ports in the vicinity in smaller vessels called 
feeder vessels.
Fig 2.3

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
12
The Ministry accepted the observation and stated (August 2009) that the draft variations were 
mainly due to siltation by natural causes and improper maintenance dredging. It stated that 
suitable plans needed to be drawn up by the ports to address the variability of drafts between 
the channel and berths, to signal certainty of drafts and to provide larger berthing options.
2.2 Survey and Dredging
As all major ports except Tuticorin port, which had a rocky seabed, were prone to siltation in 
different degrees, maintenance of appropriate navigable drafts posed a key business challenge 
to them. These ports were expected to maintain designed drafts by assessing dredging 
requirements through depth surveys and undertaking dredging work. Dredging is primarily 
of two types viz. maintenance dredging, which is a regular activity that ensures that channels 
and berths are maintained at the reported depth and capital dredging, which involves channel 
deepening and widening to accommodate larger vessels, with the aim of achieving larger 
economies of scale. 
2.2.1 Non-standardization of survey affecting dredging assessments
For proper draft maintenance, depth surveys were being conducted in-house at most major 
ports (excepting Cochin, JNPT and Mormugao) for assessing dredging requirements. It was 
noticed in audit that although the echo sounding
18 method was in use, the survey process was 
not standardized across the ports. Frequency of surveys ranged from twice in a week at Paradip 
to once in two to five years at Tuticorin. At Vishakhapatnam no survey had been conducted for 
two and a half years. Further, it was noticed in audit that in two out of the 11 ports, viz. New 
Mangalore and Mumbai, the dredging volumes awarded in the contracts were not based on 
survey assessments. At New Mangalore, the dredging volumes were estimated on the basis of 
previously executed quantities in spite of regular surveys. In the case of Mumbai, the differences 
between the survey estimates and the quantities in the dredging contracts differed by as much 
as 29 per cent during 2004-0 5. 
 
 
 
18Procedure for measuring depth by emitting sounds from the water surface to the bottom and measuring the 
time taken in receiving the echoes.

13
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
2.2.2  Inadequate management of maintenance dredging
For carrying out maintenance dredging, all the 
ports except Mormugao had their own dredgers. 
It was observed in audit that the dredgers owned 
by the ports remained grossly underutilized.
As the overhead expenditure on such dredgers 
remained almost fixed, their low utilization 
resulted in high cost of dredging per unit volume 
dredged by port-owned dredgers. (See example 
of Mumbai in Fig 2.4). This statistic was then used by the ports to justify hiring of dredgers at lower 
unit costs. For example, at Cochin, the port’s dredger was engaged for 235 days in 2005-06. It 
dredged 1.099 mcum
19 at a unit cost of Rs 62 per cum at 65 per cent utilization. In the subsequent 
year, the dredger was engaged for only 160 days to dredge 0.639 mcum. Both the percentage 
utilization and quantity dredged dropped sharply and the unit rate of dredging shot up to Rs 108 
per cum. The port, while justifying the underutilisation of the dredger, stated (May 2009) that the 
dredger, being very old, was utilised after observing the norms of routine lay-offs during holidays 
and for annual surveys. In Chennai port also, hiring of dredgers was done and the port’s own 
dredgers remained underutilised. 
It was noticed that all ports, except Tuticorin, which has a rocky seabed, resorted to hiring of dredgers 
for carrying out maintenance dredging. Although, the Major ports were having the options to hire 
parties for dredging by inviting open competitive bids, the Dredging Corporation of India (DCI), a 
public sector undertaking was, however, having an edge over others as the Government reserved 
the right to assign any dredging contract to it in public interest. At Kolkata port,  which required 
intensive dredging throughout the year and which was mandated by the Ministry to engage DCI 
alone, the required draft could not be maintained in 2007-08 in spite of the contract having a 
‘guaranteed depth’
20 clause. Due to falls in the draft, even smaller vessels could not comfortably 
access the port during February 2008. The navigability at Haldia also emerged as a serious cause 
of concern in 2008 and the port had to resort to emergency measures. In reply, the Kolkata port 
stated (June 2009) that due to DCI’s inability to provide adequate numbers of dredgers, as per the 
contractual obligation, during the last few years, the depth at the governing bars
21 in the channel 
had fallen. 
19 million cubic metres  
20 A clause in a dredging contract which binds the agency to guarantee the achievement of an agreed depth, fail-
ing which the agency can be penalized.
21 Raised portions of land in the river bed. Some of the bars along the main channel determine the effective draft  
that can be availed of. These are called governing bars.
Fig 2.4

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
14
As seen from Figure 2.5, the rates for maintenance dredging varied amongst the ports. 
It was also noticed that DCI’s rates varied widely from port to port. Further, the dredging contract 
agreements were not standardized and in general, failed to incentivise the achievement of the 
required depths. In the case of daily-rated contracts 22, none of the ports had conditions to take 
into account the speed of the dredgers, hopper leakages 23 etc. Such conditions were included in 
unit rate contracts only at New Mangalore and Mormugao. Density based restrictions for unit 
rated contracts were included only at Paradip and Chennai. The minimum daily targets were also 
different for the ports. In the case of New Mangalore, the minimum daily target was 85000 cum 
against 21000 cum at Paradip.
The above observations indicate that the issue of maintenance dredging had not been  
addressed effectively by the ports. Further, the policy of the Government of India restrained the 
ports from exploring other options or engaging firms of international repute for maintaining 
the channel. The Ministry stated (June 2009) during the exit conference, that DCI itself was 
facing capacity constraints  and that the ports were being encouraged to explore other 
options, including global bidding. The Ministry stated (August 2009) in its reply, that improper 
maintenance dredging was adding to the siltation problem and dredging projects were also 
being delayed due to non-availability of bigger dredgers and quality services. This buttresses 
the need for a more open dredging policy to explore best resources worldwide.  
22The dredging contracts were primarily of three types: unit rated, daily-rated and daily-rated with depth-guar -
anteed clauses.
23Compartments in a dredger for storing dredged material. In cases where the hoppers leak, the dredged material 
falls back into the channel, reducing the effectiveness of dredging.
Fig 2.5

15
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
Dredging contracts: A case study
=		 At Cochin Port Trust, nearly 30 per cent of the port’s revenue excluding estate rental 
revenues was consumed on dredging. The share of dredging volume by the port’s 
own dredgers was only five per cent at a capacity utilization of 50 per cent during 
2003-08. The bulk of the dredging work was done through the engagement of private 
contractors.
=	 	 The port awarded maintenance dredging work to M/s Jaisu Shipping Co.Pvt.Ltd during 
the year 2007-08. As per the agreement, if the contractor failed to maintain the 
channels to the required width and depth, recovery was to be made at defined rates up 
to a maximum of four per cent for a shortfall of 0.9m to 1.2m below the target depth. 
Such low rates of penalty did not incentivise performance. Further, the penalty clause 
was also changed to favour the contractor. For example, in 2005-06, the penalty for 
non-achievement of the target was reduced by half as compared to the preceding year, 
without reasons. The leftover volumes of a year were carried forward to the dredging 
estimate for the next year, thereby inflating the value of the contract. Data on the size 
of vessels visiting during the last five years also indicated that the reported channel 
draft was underutilized and only three per cent of the vessels corresponded to draft of 
11-12m. In reply, the port stated (May 2009) that to minimize the maintenance cost, 
the contract specified acceptance of a ruling shortfall upto 1.2 m at all locations and the 
contractor’s failure to keep specified depths could not be construed as a violation of 
the contract. If the depths available were below the required draft, localized dredging 
together with the tidal window
24 was used to navigate the vessels having draft upto  
12.5 m. The reply is not acceptable as it was the responsibility of the port to ensure 
the availability of the required draft. Resorting to localized dredging along with the 
tidal window to make up the shortfall in the required draft cannot be accepted as a 
standard practice. Besides, the clause regarding acceptance of 1.2 m shortfall failed to 
incentivise target achievement. 
=	 	 Audit observed that the cost of annual maintenance dredging ranged from Rs 24.54 crore 
to Rs 30.90 crore during the period 2003-04 to 2006-07, which increased to Rs. 46.58 crore 
during 2007-08. It was noticed that the tendered cost during 2007-08 was exorbitant due 
to the high estimated cost of Rs. 40 crore which was based on budgetary offers from various 
dredging firms. As this was not a new work, the port should have worked out the estimated 
cost, taking into consideration the previous year’s expenditure on the work and technical 
aspects during the ensuing year. The procedure adopted by the port resulted in unjustified  
estimated costs during 2007-08. This led to the abnormal increase in the contract price. 
24The time period when higher draft is available due to high tide conditions.

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
16
In reply, the Management stated (May 2009) that as a claim from DCI for extra payment 
for the additional quantity dredged during 2006-07 was still pending and the completion 
cost was not available, it was not prudent to consider the contract with DCI as the base 
for the dredging estimate for 2007-08. The estimate was thus prepared on the basis 
of budgetary offers of DCI. The reply is not acceptable due the fact that the estimates 
should have been prepared considering the previous year’s expenditure as the work was 
not new and could not have increased abnormally in the next year.
2.2.3  Few schemes for capital dredging
Although NMDP placed emphasis on capital dredging projects, it was found that only 15 such 
projects had been planned and no major project had been completed as of date. It was also 
noticed that the funds earmarked for capital dredging of 7 mcum at seven ports was Rs 137 crore 
as compared to the expenditure of Rs. 272 crore incurred on  maintenance dredging of 2.7 mcum 
during the last 10 years. 
Despite a global tender called in 2007 for a major deepening scheme at JNPT, the tender could not 
be finalized as the Ministry did not approve the award of the work because the lowest quotation 
received was above the estimated value of Rs 800 crore.
At Kolkata and Haldia which had long access channels prone to ‘shoaling’
25 at particular stretches, 
a scheme for comprehensive river regulatory measures had not been approved by the Ministry 
even after 20 years of the initial proposal. The scheme, with an estimated cost of Rs 385 crore, was 
also included in the first phase (2005-2009) of NMDP . However, it was not taken up and the Kolkata 
port engaged (2009) Central Water and Power Research and Consultancy Services, (CWPRS), Pune 
for revalidation of the scheme under directions of the Ministry.
Recommendations
Ø  Concerted efforts should be made by the Ministry to ensure the minimum draft availability 
of 14 metres as recommended by the Inter-Ministerial Group. Assessment of dredging 
requirements should be made based on long-term planning and proper surveys with the 
help of specialized organizations like National Institute of Ocean Technology and Central 
Water and Power Research and Consultancy Services. 
Ø  The draft plan of each port, particularly those of Chennai, Cochin and Visakhapatnam should focus 
on addressing the significant mismatches of draft between approach channels and berths. 
Ø  As the present dredging policy of the Ministry compelled some ports to engage DCI in spite 
of the latter failing to meet targets, a clear cut policy ensuring competitive bidding should be 
formulated. 
25 Gradual formation of sandbanks, thereby creating shallow water which is hazardous for ships.

17
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
2.3 Pilotage
According to the Indian Port Act, 1908 all vessels bigger than 200 Gross Registered Tonnage (GRT)26 
calling at a port have to compulsorily engage pilotage services. The optimum inventory of pilots, 
pilot vessels and tugs depends on the specific operating conditions at each port where issues like 
length of the access channel, extent of navigational hazards and the number of vessels handled 
during a certain period have to be factored into the calculation. 
It was observed that the resources available at the ports were partly owned and partly hired, with 
Chennai, Kolkata, and Mumbai using lesser hired resources than JNPT, Mormugao and Tuticorin.
2.3.1  Promptness in providing pilotage
To avoid high detention of vessels, it is 
imperative that ports ensure that pilotage 
services are provided promptly for them. 
It was seen that the minimum time for 
providing pilotage varied from port to port 
depending on channel length, location of 
pilot station, etc. Any delay in providing 
pilotage at a port would be taken as the 
time taken for vessels to receive pilot 
facilities over and above the minimum 
time.  In this regard, Audit observed the 
following: 
 
=	 In four out of the 11 ports, viz. Chennai, Cochin, Kandla, and New Mangalore, there were 
significant delays in providing pilotage. 
=	 At both New Mangalore and Cochin, against the minimum time of 10 and 40 minutes 
respectively, about 20 per cent and 18 per cent of the vessels received the facility after 24 
hours. (See Fig 2.6 for Cochin as an example)
=	 At Chennai, against a minimum time of 2 hours and 23 minutes, about 40 per cent of the 
vessels received pilotage after 50 hours of arrival during July and December 2007.
 
26Weight of an empty vessel. The weight of 100 cubic feet of enclosed space in a ship is one vessel tonne.
Fig 2.6

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
18
At Kandla, against 45 minutes of minimum pilotage time, delays in providing pilot facilities were 
upto 10 days for the months of July and December 2007. A user survey at Kandla indicated that the 
availability of pilots was inadequate. At Haldia, although the port had a large inventory of pilotage 
facilities, detention of ships were reported due to unavailability of pilots.
The Ministry accepted (August 2009) the shortage of pilots in all the ports and stated that almost 
two-thirds of the pilots working in the ports were on contractual basis. 
Good practices in India: 
At Visakhapatnam, sample check in audit showed that the services were fairly prompt. Pilotage 
at VPT was provided between 15 minutes and three hours of the vessels calling at anchorage.This 
was being achieved despite the fact that the port had an old fleet of pilot vessels with nine pilots 
servicing 21 vessels per month on an average. 
2.3.2 Low utilization and high 
maintenance cost incurred on old 
pilot vessels
The average age of the pilot vessel 
fleets (three to six in each port) 
was more than 10 years in all ports 
except Kandla and Paradip. Their 
utilization was found to be less 
than 50 per cent except in respect 
of Mumbai and Paradip as shown in 
Fig 2.7. 
It was also noticed that the 
expenditure on maintenance of the 
vessel fleets increased sharply in 
the case of older vessels as shown in 
Fig 2.8. In three out of the 11 ports, 
viz. Mormugao, Mumbai and JNPT, 
where the average age of the vessels 
was above 15 years, the average 
maintenance expenditure per vessel 
ranged from Rs 48.50 lakh at JNPT to 
Rs 58.17 lakh at Mumbai.
Fig 2.7
Fig 2.8

19
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
2.4 Night Navigation
For ensuring smooth access to berths round the 
clock, the ports should provide proper facilities 
for night navigation like lights, lighted buoys, 
signals, pilots etc. It was observed that the 
proportion of vessel movements at night varied 
from port to port, being high in Chennai and 
Visakhapatnam and low in every other port as 
shown in Fig 2.9.
Facilities were found to be lacking particularly in 
Cochin, Kandla, Kolkata, Mumbai and Tuticorin. 
At Cochin, users stated that night navigation facility was not available in Matancherry wharf 
due to poor lighting of channels. In Kolkata, night navigation through the Kolkata channel in 
the upper reach (for about 42 miles) was not available due to the absence of proper lighting 
arrangements. At Kandla, there were restrictions on night navigation for vessels having draft of 
more than 10.2 m and LOA
27 of more than 200 metres. Kandla port suspended night navigation 
from December 2008 due to shortage of pilots. Users of Mumbai and Tuticorin ports pointed 
out (December 2008/January 2009) considerable delays in getting facilities (pilot, tugs etc.) at 
night. At Mumbai, the deployment of supervisory staff during the third shift
28 was less than the 
first shift. Users also pointed out that at JNPT, vessels up to LOA of 270m were permitted and 42 
per cent of vessel movements took place at night. However, due to the restricted availability of 
facilities, there were PBDs of larger size vessels (having LOA beyond 270metres) arriving at the 
calling points at night.
2.5 Lock Gate Systems
Among the ports, lock gate systems29 for entry into the harbours were in use only in Mumbai and 
Kolkata Port. 
 
27Linear measurement of a vessel indicating the maximum length of a ship.
28Daily work at ports is done in three eight-hour shifts. The night shift (10pm-6am) is referred to as the third 
shift.
29At impounded dock systems, a certain depth is maintained by restricting tidal variations and shoaling outside 
the harbor by means of multiple lock gates. Vessels can only access the harbour after passing through a narrow 
lock entrance channel when the gates are operated. 
Fig 2.9

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
20
It was observed that inefficient operation of 
old lock gates at Kolkata Port both at KDS and 
HDC led to detention of vessels. 
 
The average time taken to operate the lock 
gate system was highest at Haldia (96 minutes) 
whereas in Mumbai 30 it was minimum (15 
minutes) as shown in Fig 2.10. This restricted 
the number of vessels that could enter or 
leave the port to eight per day. This resulted 
in high PBD (2.86 days) and TRT (4.26 days). To 
overcome this restriction, a second lock entrance had been planned under NMDP Phase–II, to be 
implemented during the period 2007-12. 
2.6 Berthing
Berth allotment constitutes an 
integral part of marine services. When 
vessels call at anchorage, the marine 
department of each port allots berths 
for cargo handling operations. 
The allotments are 
primarily dependent upon 
the availability of vacant  
berths, equipment support available 
in them and the type of cargo to 
30Lock gates are in use at Indira Dock, Victoria Dock and Princess Docks at Mumbai.
Fig 2.10
Fig 2.11

21
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
be handled. With increased specialisation of the type of cargo, vessels prefer berths 
that have specialised cargo handling equipment, thereby facilitating efficient handling. 
Berths at major ports consist of specialised berths for handling liquid bulk, dry bulk and 
containerised cargo apart from general purpose berths (Fig 2.11). It was found that 50 
per cent  of the berths at all the ports except JNPT and Haldia belonged to the general 
category.
It was noticed that although the cargo mix at major ports showed that liquid bulk, dry bulk 
and containers were the three main types of cargo handled at the ports, the low proportion 
of specialised cargo berths resulted in queuing up of ships for such berths and consequent 
PBD.
It was observed that a significant proportion 
of PBD was attributable to non-availability of 
berths as shown in Figure 2.12. It was also 
noticed that the PBD on all other factors 
attributable to the ports (port account) was 
not being identified and addressed by the 
ports.
At Visakhapatnam, the PBD for want of berths 
in 2007-08 was 8348 hours, amounting to 
13.47 per cent  of total PBD at the port in that 
year. It was found that vessels were detained at anchorage as the two preferred berths at 
the outer harbour (one being privately operated with better 
equipment support and the other being the only multi-cargo 
berth) were occupied. 
At Mumbai, it was found that more than one-third of the total 
ships which needed berthing at the chemical berth at New Pir Pau 
were detained for more than 24 hours due to non-availability of 
the berths. 
Although a proposal for constructing a second chemical berth to 
reduce congestion was approved way back in 2002 and was also 
included in NMDP , it had not been implemented as of date. 
The total PBD during the two sample months of 2007 was 3983 
days (as shown in Table 2.2). This resulted in an additional cost 
burden on trade of more than Rs 1400 crore per annum.
Fig 2.12
Total PBD reported at major 
ports during July and Dec 2007
PORT Total PBD  
(in days)
CoPT 77
HDC 1247
JNPT 325
KPT 988
MbPT 262
MGPT 7
NMPT 113
TPT 401
VPT 563
Total 3983
Table 2.2

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
22
Recommendations
Ø Proper efforts should be made to improve night navigation facilities in Cochin, Kandla, 
Kolkata, and Tuticorin.
Ø Factors leading to pre-berthing detentions on port account should be identified and 
addressed by the ports. 

23
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
3 Handling Operations
All the 11 major ports had facilities to handle different types of cargo and they handled 530 MT of 
cargo in 2008-09.
The natur e of cargo was categorised into 
liquid bulk 31, dry bulk 32, containers 33 and 
break bulk 34 cargo. In terms of actual 
handling, the predominant share in the 
cargo mix was liquid bulk for Kandla, 
Mumbai, Cochin and New Mangalore, 
dry bulk for Mormugao and Paradip and 
containers for JNPT. Other ports handled 
multiple cargo types in relatively even 
proportions. Four ports on the east coast, 
viz. Chennai, Kolkata, Paradip, and Visakhapatnam played a predominant role in handling 
dry bulk. Dry bulk handling at Kolkata Port Trust was mainly carried out at the Haldia Dock 
Complex. The other three types of cargo were mainly handled at the six ports on the west 
coast (Fig 3.1) with JNPT alone handling 
60 per cent of the total containers during 
2008-09. 
The nature of cargo has nowadays become 
specialized with POL, dry bulk (mainly iron ore, 
coal and fertilizers) and containers comprising 
more than 85 per cent of the traffic at ports. 
With increasing containerization of cargo 
globally, the share of break bulk cargo, which 
involves labour intensive handling, is presently as low as six per cent in India. For increasing handling 
efficiency, it is imperative that the ports create specialised high capacity berths, supported by 
modern equipment and an efficient labour force. It was, however, noticed (See Fig 3.2) that the 
share of specialised berths at the major ports was low, with 64 per cent of the berths being of  
 
 
31 Petroleum oil and lubricants (POL), liquid chemicals, etc
32 Coal, iron ore, alumina, fertilizers, etc.
33 Standardised boxes measuring 20 feet or 40 feet in length carrying a variety of cargo.  
34 Cargo shipped in non- standard packages, e.g.: project cargo, steel components, etc.
Fig 3.1
Fig 3.2


Report No. 3 of 2009-10
24
general35 nature. Only in the case of liquid bulk cargo, almost the entire handling was occurring at 
specialized berths and Single Buoy Moorings (SBM 36). The factors that affected efficient handling 
of each type of cargo were examined in audit and the findings are discussed below:
3.1 Liquid Bulk
For handling of liquid bulk, all ports had 
specialised berths where mar ine loading arms 
(MLAs 37) had been installed. During 2007-08, 
44 such berths handled 125 MT of liquid cargo 
with significant handling occurring in five out of 
11 ports, viz. Haldia, Kandla, New Mangalore, 
Mumbai and Visakhapatnam as shown in Fig 3.3. 
Although 1.05 MT of liquid cargo was handled 
during 2007-08 at the Kolkata Dock 
System, no MLAs were installed 
there.
Apart from this, 28.6 MT of POL was 
handled at three offshore SBMs at 
Kandla, which was the highest liquid 
bulk handling port. More than 90 
per cent of the liquid cargo was handled in 
specialised berths or SBMs. The average TRT 
of liquid bulk vessels, however, ranged from 
1.76 days  at JNPT to 5.59 days at Tuticorin 
(See Fig 3.4).
 
35 Berths with equipment support that enable handling of various categories of cargo.  
36 Offshore handling facility where a temporary floating platform with pipe arrangement allows removal of cargo      
while a ship is anchored in the sea with the help of tugs.
37 Specialised equipment installed at berths, connected to pipelines that enable transfer of liquid bulk cargo  
between a vessel and a storage tank. Capacity of an MLA is expressed in tonnes per hour. A specialised liquid 
berth has 3-5 MLAs.
Fig 3.3
Fig 3.4

25
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
3.1.1 Low capacity utilization of marine loading arms
For efficient handling, it is imperative that the MLAs have adequate throughput capacity which is 
higher than the pump capacity 38 of the liquid bulk vessels. The actual discharge rates depend on 
other parameters like size, distance and height of storage tanks, draft availability at the berths 
and size of the vessels. 
It was, however, found that in four 
out of 11 ports, viz. Chennai, Kandla, 
Mumbai and Tuticorin, which handled 
close to 30 per cent of the liquid bulk 
traffic, the actual rates of discharge 
along MLAs were significantly below 
capacity (See Fig 3.5). 
Underutilisation of capacity of MLAs 
was 39 per cent  at Mumbai to 70 per 
cent at Tuticorin, indicating inefficient 
handling at these ports, resulting in 
higher TRT. The significant low actual rate of discharge at Kandla was due to the fact that 
none of the seven MLAs at the liquid berths was in working condition since 2001-02. The 
six specialised berths at Kandla handled 22 per cent  (9.59 MT) of liquid cargo in 2007-08 
whereas the three SBMs there, handled 67 per cent  (28.6 MT) at an average of 9.5 MT per 
SBM. In Mumbai, the actual discharge was low due to the low receiving capacity of the 
refineries. The Mumbai port, in its reply, accepted (June 2009) the observation and stated 
that the low discharge rates at certain cases were also due to the pump capacity of the 
vessels. Moreover, the port could not decide the rates of transfer independently as the 
users, viz. the oil companies, planned the rates of handling based on their resources and the 
port was maintaining the system to ensure maximum utilisation.
3.1.2 Inadequate handling infrastructure
It was observed that the installed discharge capacity of the MLAs at all the ports was less than 
2000 tonnes per hour except at Mumbai. Further, at Tuticorin, the capacity of the loading arms 
was significantly lower than that at other ports. Thus, only vessels of smaller size could be 
handled at these ports. Low discharge capacity of the arms resulted in higher TRT of these 
vessels during the sample months, when compared to Mumbai, whi ch handled vessels of similar 
size at berth no JD-2. The details are provided in Table 3.1 below:
 
38  For efficient transfer, the capacity of MLAs must match those of the vessel pumps (2500 tonnes per hour (TPH) 
for mid-sized tankers that commonly call at Indian ports.)  
Fig 3.5

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
26
At the Kolkata Dock System, the liquid bulk vessels were constrained by the low drafts and faced 
inadequate handling infrastructure. As a result, 72 per cent of the handling was occurring at the 
anchorage and particular locations on the access channel, resulting in high TRT (4.1 days compared 
to 1.76 days at JNPT) of liquid bulk vessels.
The Ministry replied (August 2009) that the number of vessels calling at some ports was low and 
there was not much waiting time for such vessels. As the revamping of the MLAs was capital 
intensive in nature, ports were revamping them according to their requirements. While the 
Ministry’s argument is valid to some extent, it, however,  needs to be stressed that in ports like 
Mumbai where large volume of liquid cargo was handled, investment in revamping of MLAs at 
berths with low capacity would result in efficiency gains in operation. Further, in ports where the 
volumes handled are presently low, improvements in handling efficiency are necessary for them 
to remain competitive. 
It was found in Cochin that liquid cargo was being backloaded followed by diversion to other ports. 
The details are given below:
Backloading of crude at Cochin:
At Cochin port, backloading of crude/POL took place when there was excess receipt of crude 
oil from the SBM as compared to KRL
39 storage capacity. The excess quantity of crude was 
backloaded to Mangalore or Mumbai refineries through NTB and COT berths and handling 
charges at Rs 65 per tonne were fully waived to relieve the port users from making double 
payments on the ground that wharfage on this account had already been collected at the 
SBM. The action of Cochin port was not justified as the handling charges collected at the 
SBM were Rs 25 per tonne whereas wharfage on the quantity backloaded from the berths 
was leviable at Rs 65 per tonne, resulting in a loss of Rs 40 per tonne. Moreover, the berths  
were also engaged in multiple handling of the same cargo, already handled once at the SBM.  
 
39  Kochi Refineries Limited
Capacity of Marine Loading Arms and TRT (sample months July 2007 and December 2007)
Port /Berth Quantity 
handled 
in MT
No of 
MLAs
Capac-
ity of MLAs 
(tonnes/hr)
Avg size of 
vessels July 
2007(GRT) 
TRT in 
days in 
July 2007
Avg size 
of vessels 
December 
2007(GRT) 
TRT in days 
in Decem-
ber 2007
Mumbai/JD-1 3.891 5 2000 34500 2.3 32000 1.91
Mumbai/JD-2 1.29 3 2000 20000 1.9 13000 2.07
Mumbai/JD-3 4.73 5 2000 35000 1.78 34000 2.19
Mumbai/JD-4 13.444 5 3000 62000 1.58 57000 1.57
Tuticorin/B1 0.481 5 275-600 11000 2.38 11000 3.06
Table – 3.1

27
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
The port, in its reply, stated (May 2009) that the decision to waive wharfage for backloaded 
POL was taken to reduce idling at the liquid berth in the post-SBM scenario and ensure 
revenue from vessel-related charges for additional throughput proposed by KRL. While the 
port’s effort to utilise the idle berth was understandable, the argument regarding additional 
revenue was not acceptable as the port’s revenue expectation of additional throughput at 
the SBM did not actually materialise. 
The Ministry stated (August 20 09) that the backloading of cargo was an essential operation and 
was planned so as to ensure minimum berth occupancy. The fact, however, remains that due to 
infrastructural constraints, multiple handling had to be done resulting in increased berth occupancy. 
Consequently, the port also suffered financially due to lower rates allowed for the SBM on one 
hand and for their inability to use their berths on the other hand. 
3.1.3 Draft restrictions compelling shift to SBMs and other ports
At the Haldia Dock Systems at Kolkata, which ranked fifth among the major ports in terms of volume 
(19.66 MT) of liquid bulk handled in 2007-08, draft restrictions above eight metres at the two oil 
jetties together with inefficient handling had become serious limitations to smooth operations. 
The principal user, Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), shifted (November 2008) its handling 
operation to Paradip port in Orissa even though the cargo would eventually come to IOCL’s storage 
facilities at Haldia through underground pipelines. The port had failed to take any proactive action 
to minimise the significant business loss.
Even at Cochin, the single largest customer, KRL, shifted (December 2007) the handling point from 
the liquid berths dedicated to them since 1986 to the SBM. The shift resulted in reduction of 
revenue along with idling of the berths. Even the business plan of Cochin port had identified that 
the port’s revenues were linked to the capacity of KRL refinery.
3.1.4 System of measurement of liquid cargo not standardised
For safeguarding the financial interests of the ports and for making inter-port comparisons 
meaningful, the method of measurement of volume of handling of liquid cargo and the system of 
billing should have been standardised. It was, however, found that the method varied from port to 
port as shown in Table 3.2 below:
Names of the ports Method of measurement/ documents 
accepted for verification
Figures accepted for billing purposes
Chennai Ship- Captains’ and users’ certificates Manifested quantities in import applica-
tions, Outturn Report, bill of lading and 
approved surveyor report.
Cochin Requisitions filed by importers Importers’ quantities

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
28
Haldia, Paradip,  
Tuticorin
Ullage40 report of the independent  
surveyors 
Ullage quantity
JNPT Bills of lading of Customs and ullage re -
ports of independent surveyors
Higher quantity between BL and ullage 
quantity
Kandla,  Mormugao Outturn reports of oil companies Outturn reports of oil companies
Kolkata Ullage survey Outturn reports of oil companies
Mumbai Quantity shown in Import General Mani-
fest 
Quantity shown in Import General Mani-
fest
New Mangalore International standard draft survey Measured quantity
Vizag Displacement method (ship figure) Ship discharge quantities
Table 3.2
The absence of any standard norm for measurement of liquid bulk resulted in discrepancies 
between the actual cargo handled and the quantities billed. In Chennai, a discrepancy of Rs.87.90 
lakh in collection of revenue was noticed during the years 2006-07 and 2007-08. The port, in its 
reply, accepted (June 2009) the discrepancy, stating that it was due to data entry mismatch, and 
assured that the differences would be reconciled.
Recommendations
Ø Ports should address the problem of under-utilisation of existing discharge capacities of 
Marine Loading Arms. To reduce TRT of liquid vessels, low capacity MLAs should be replaced 
with high capacity arms.
Ø  Adequate draft for tankers should be maintained to avoid unnecessary diversion of cargo.
Ø The Ministry should fix a standard system of measurement of liquid cargo and notify a 
standard document for verification of the quantities handled and claiming of wharfage.
3.2 Dry Bulk
Dry bulk cargo constituted 40.55 per cent of the total cargo handled at major ports by volume in 
2007-08. 
40 Empty space available inside fuel tanks. The ullage quantity indicates the volume of oil cargo that has been 
transferred out/into the fuel tank.

29
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
The ports on the eastern coast played a predominant role by handling 65.92 per cent of this 
quantity (see Fig 3.6).
In Mormugao, Paradip, Tuticorin and Visakhapatnam, dry bulk cargo constituted 94, 91, 56 and 64 
per cent of the total cargo respectively. 
3.2.1 l arge volume handled at non-
mechanized berths
For ensuring efficient handling of this type 
of cargo, it was necessary that specialized 
mechanised 
40berths41 were available in the 
ports. It was, however, found that handling 
of dry bulk at the ports was predominantly 
being carried out by non-mechanised 
means that included multiple handling. 
Although dry bulk constituted more than 40 per cent share of cargo by volume, only eight per cent 
of the berths were specialised dry bulk berths. In three out of 11 ports handling dry bulk, viz. JNPT, 
Kandla and Mumbai, there were no mechanised berths. In the eight other ports, there were 19 
specialised berths for handling dry bulk, which had mechanised facilities. It was noticed that only 
37 per cent of the dry bulk cargo was handled at these 19 mechanised berths. In 2007-08, 125 MT 
of dry bulk cargo was handled at non-mechanised berths. 
This indicated significant inefficiencies in the handling of dry bulk at the ports.
40 
41 Berths fitted with conveyor systems connecting them to stackyards and handling plants. Non- mechanized berths 
transfer the cargo from the stackyards to tippler trucks to the quays. The material is then aggregated with the help 
of dozers, picked and loaded on to the ships by the use of the ships’ own gear (grabs). Such multiple handling is 
avoided at mechanised berths.
Fig 3.6

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
30
Audit scrutiny of six major dry bulk 
handling ports such as Chennai, Haldia, 
New Mangalore Paradip, Tuticorin and 
Visakhapatnam revealed that dry bulk 
vessels faced higher TRT at non-mechanised 
berths during 2007-08, as shown in  
Figure 3.7. 
The business plans of three of these ports, viz. 
New Mangalore, Paradip and Visakhapatnam 
also identified non-mechanised dry 
bulk handling as a critical weakness in 
them. Tuticorin port accepted the audit 
observation and stated (April 2008) that 
more mechanised berths were being planned 
for the future. They also stated that as and 
when specific proposals for privatisation 
of bulk cargo handling were received, they 
would be examined in conformity with the 
Government’s policy on public private partnership (PPP) projects.
Recommendation
Ø  Dry bulk should be handled exclusively in specialised berths with mechanised handling 
facilities to arrest the increasing trend of TRT of dry bulk vessels.
3.3 Containers
With the rising global trend towards containerization, 
the major ports witnessed a significant increase 
in container traffic by 72 per cent  during the 
performance audit period. The volumes were, 
however, driven by JNPT which alone handled 60 
per cent of the total containers arriving at these 
ports during 2007-08 (Fig 3.8)
Fig 3.7
Fig 3.8


31
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
Three other ports viz. Chennai, Kolkata, and Visakhapatnam also witnessed very high 
growth rates during 2003-2008. Despite the high growth of containerized cargo, only 
five ports viz. Chennai, Cochin, 
JNPT, Kolkata and Tuticorin, 
handled significant volumes of this 
emerging variety of cargo. Handling 
was mostly done at 28 specialized 
berths at eight out of the 11 ports 
with the exception of Mormugao, 
New Mangalore and Paradip. It was 
noticed that although five ports, viz. 
Chennai, JNPT, Kandla, Mormugao 
and Mumbai had planned schemes 
costing  Rs.3079 crore for increasing 
their container handling capacity by 2009, only one new container terminal
42 at JNPT had 
come up till March 2009. Construction of terminals at Chennai, Kandla and Mumbai were 
under progress.
3.3.1 High performance achieved in select container terminals
The container  handling capacity of a port is determined by several parameters which, inter 
alia, include the number of specialised terminals, the quay lengths of the same, the number 
of shore cranes, the size of container stack yards and the ratio of shore to yard equipment. 
The efficiency in handling containers depends on the speed of movement of the cranes and 
the optimal equipment ratio and is measured in terms of moves per crane hour, TEUs per 
metre length of quay and the number of vessels handled with the least possible TRT. It was, 
therefore, imperative that the ports created optimal handling facilities for efficient handling 
of containers. 
It was found that the handling 
efficiency achieved at some of the 
container terminals, especially the 
privately operated ones at JNPT and 
Tuticorin, compared favourably with 
international benchmarks. 
The status of container handling 
facilities along with the volumes 
handled at the five main container ports 
in 2007-08 is shown in Table 3.3 below: 
42 A contiguous set of berths handling containers collectively known as a terminal.


Report No. 3 of 2009-10
32
Table 3.3: Handling performance at the main container  terminals at major ports
Terminals 
at ports
No of 
berths
No of 
quay 
cranes
No. of yard 
equipment43
Total 
TEUs 
handled 
in 07-08
TEUs 
handled 
per berth 
in 07-08
No of moves 
per crane hour 
as per Min-
istry’s report 
(norm44 = 25)
TEUs handled 
per metre 
quay length 
as per Min-
istry’s report 
(norm45=1500)
Chennai 6 7 24 1052993 175499 21 1267
Cochin 3 4 11 253715 84572 14.6 469
GTICT46 3 8 36 1290862 430287 23.7 1813
JNPCT 3 8 23 1260923 420308 16.2 1756
Kolkata 4 2 16 297287 74322 19.5 NA
NSICT47 2 8 35 1508056 754028 23 2513
Tuticorin 1 3 9 450398 450398 27 1283
Only two ports, JNPT and Tuticorin, handled more than four lakh containers per berth as may be 
seen from Fig- 3.9. 43444546
47The privately operated terminals at these two 
ports registered higher performance. The port 
operated terminal at JNPT achieved high handling 
efficiency. It was noticed that with identical 
equipment support and larger yard space, JNPCT, 
the port operated terminal at JNPT, showed 3.38 
per cent reduction of containers during 2007-08 
against 10.96 per cent increase at the adjoining 
NSICT, a privately operated terminal at JNPT. In 
the case of Cochin, where the container terminal 
was under private operation, the operational 
parameters were much below all the benchmarks as seen in Table-3.3. The nature of the agreement
48 
with the operator at Cochin also failed to incentivise high standards of performance. It was also 
noticed that other major container handling ports like Chennai, Cochin and Kolkata registered 
lower TEUs per berth. An important factor for such low handling was that the terminals at these 
ports had less equipment support and the equipment ratios per berth and yard were less than that 
at JNPT or Tuticorin. 
43  Rubber Tyred Gantry Cranes (RTGC), Rail Mounted Gantry Cranes (RMGCs), Reach Stackers 
44  Crane moves per hour norm taken from the Port of Rotterdam Advisory Report, 2007. 
45  TEUs handled per metre quay length, Norm taken from UK benchmark (consultant’s study report, Port of 
Chennai) 
46  Gateway Terminals India Container Terminal - privately operated. 
47  Nhava Sheva International Container Terminal – privately operated. 
48 Deficiencies in the licence agreement at Cochin have been separately commented upon in the chapter on 
implementation of schemes in this report.
Fig 3.9

33
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
Although Kandla had a good ratio of berth and shore cranes, it handled only 165092 TEU containers 
during 2007-08. This indicated underutilization of facilities and called for optimization of the 
container handling operations at Kandla. It was found that Mumbai port suffered a steady decline 
in the volume of containers handled during the period covered in the report (40.15 per cent during 
2003-08). The port outsourced its entire container handling operations to a private operator from 
June 2008 onwards.
3.3.2  Variations in standards for conversion of container TEUs to tonnes
In order to exhibit a port’s performance, the number of container TEUs handled is expressed in 
terms of volume, i.e tonnage handled. Although the Ministry had set a conversion norm where one 
TEU should be taken as 12.5 MT on an average, different ports adopted different conversion factors, 
leaving no scope for comparing their performance. Audit observed that during the period from 
2003-04 to 2007-08, ports adopted variable conversion factors in determining their performance, 
as evident from Table 3.4 below:
Table 3.4: Factors used for conversion from TEUs to tonnes 
Chennai Cochin JNPT Kandla KDS Mormugao Mumbai New Man-
galore
Paradip Tuticorin Visakha-
patnam
16 12-13 12-13 14-16 14-17 10-12 12-14 14-16 14-16 11–13 13-16
As a result of adopting different standards, the reported tonnage handled differed from the actual 
volume of containerized cargo handled by these ports. As per the Ministry’s instructions (2002) 
regarding standardization of definitions and concepts for reporting port performance, the tare 
weight of containers was not to be included in the commodity-wise traffic handled for export and 
import except for computing container traffic, where tare weight had been included for estimation 
purposes. It was, however, observed that at Tuticorin, the tare weight of the containers was being 
taken into account for computation of the port’s performance, resulting in overstatement of cargo 
by 73977 tonnes and 71329 tonnes in July 2007 and December 2007 respectively. Moreover, due to 
inclusion of empty containers in the total figure for cargo handling, the total handling was inflated 
by 4.7 MT during the period 2003-08.
Tuticorin port stated (June 2009) that no specific instructions had been received from the Ministry 
in this regard. The reply was, however, not acceptable as the practice was in contravention of 
the Ministry’s guidelines and the inclusion of empty containers was against the benchmark for 
operational efficiency as stated in the consolidated business plan for major ports made by the Port 
of Rotterdam.

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
34
Recommendations
Ø  With the increasing trend of containerisation of cargo, ports should create facilities of 
specialised container berths. Possibilities for conversion of existing general cargo berths 
into such berths should be explored. 
Ø  Equipment ratios between berths and yards should be enhanced to the levels of JNPT and 
Tuticorin at ports having significant container cargo.
Ø  The Ministry should fix a standard conversion factor for computation of tonnage from TEUs 
handled at ports so that performance reports are not distorted.
3.4 Adequacy of Equipment Support
The major ports, so far, have followed a service model 49 orientation where the port authorities 
have taken upon themselves, the responsibility of cargo handling and maintenance of equipment. 
All the ports owned and maintained large fleets of equipment which, inter alia, included a variety 
of shore cranes, yard cranes, trucks, pay loaders, and stackers.  The numbers of equipment owned 
were particularly high in the older city-based ports of Kolkata and Mumbai, which had large 
numbers of general cargo berths. 
3.4.1  Old and outlived equipment
As handling efficiency and in turn, the TRTs of vessels depended on the nature of equipment support, 
it was necessary for the ports to ensure the availability of suitable and well-maintained equipment.
49 A business model traditionally followed by ports the world over where responsibility of all commercial opera -
tions like cargo handling, storage etc is taken upon by the ports themselves.
Fig 3.10

35
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
It was found that in all the ports except JNPT, 55 
per cent of the equipment were existing beyond 
their economic life. The presence of outlived 
equipment varied from 22 per cent at Tuticorin 
to 94 per cent at Cochin (see Fig 3.10.). The 
position was far worse in the case of dry bulk 
cargo handling equipment
50. Kolkata, Mumbai 
and JNPT had no ancillary equipment for handling 
of dry bulk. At Tuticorin, which had one fully 
mechanized and one semi-mechanized berth for 
handling dry bulk that accounted for 56 per cent of cargo, there was no ancillary equipment other 
than one grab crane, although dry bulk was the major cargo handled there. The users at Tuticorin 
were using private equipment for handling. Except for three pieces of equipment in Paradip and 
two at Cochin, all dry bulk handling equipment in the ports were outlived. In all, 94 per cent of the 
ancillary equipment for handling of dry bulk at ports had crossed their economic life on or before 
2007-08.
3.4.2  Low demand for port equipment 
and hiring from private parties
It was noticed that although the ports 
were ensuring high availability of shore 
cranes, yard cranes, pay-loaders, top 
lift truck, fork lifts etc, their average 
utilisation was very low in eight ports
51. 
This indicated their unsuitability and low 
demand for port-owned equipment. The 
availability and utilisation of port-owned 
equipment during 2007-08 was as shown 
in Table 3.5 .
It is evident from the table that three 
ports, viz. Kandla, Tuticorin and  
Visakhapatnam could ensure compliance 
with the Ministry’s availability norms. 
50Ancillary equipment for handling dry bulk mainly comprising pay loaders, fork lift trucks, tractors, dozers, etc.
51Except Kandla, Tuticorin and Visakhapatnam.
Table 3.5 :Availability and utilisation of port owned  
equipment (2007-08)
Major Ports
Average availability
 (Ministry norm: 
minimum 90%)
Average  
utilisation
(Ministry norm: 
minimum 60%)
Chennai 65.00 15.60
Cochin 84.42 15.54
Kandla 94.00 52.00
Kolkata 66.92 26.10
Mormugao 88.60 20.80
Mumbai 79.00 18.00
New Mangalore 96.74 10.75
Paradip 71.60 21.73
Tuticorin 97.19 42.36
Visakhapatnam 90.70 39.52

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
36
However, utilisation of all equipment  belonging to the ports was much below the minimum 
utilisation norms of 60 per cent prescribed by the Ministry.
During 2007-08, the utilization of 26 pieces of equipment at Cochin, Mormugao, New Mangalore 
and Visakhapatnam was less than 5 per cent despite the availability being above 80 per cent. In 
Chennai, two pay loaders were not used even once despite 52 per cent52 availability.
At Haldia, which featured among the top five ports in terms of volume of dry bulk cargo handled, 
11 pay loaders had suffered breakdowns and the users were hiring private equipment to carry out 
operations. The users of Visakhapatnam port indicated that low productivity of port equipment 
made cargo handling uneconomical. The demand for port equipment was low as they had outlived 
their economic life.
As port equipment was often unsuitable for meeting user requirements, users at all ports except 
Cochin, New Mangalore and Visakhapatnam were resorting to hiring of equipment directly from 
52  The availability of these two payloaders was much below the Ministry’s norms due to frequent breakdowns.
Case Study: Crane utilisation at Chennai
Three 20-tonne gantry cranes were procured and commissioned by Chennai port at a cost of  
Rs 35.77 crore in 2000.  Their utilisation declined steadily as shown below:-
Year Percentage utilisation
2002-03 18.12
2003-04 4.61
2004-05 1.06
2005-06 0.72
2006-07 0.0
It was found that the users of the port were not willing to hire the cranes as the hiring charges 
levied by the port were high. The users, instead, preferred to hire private equipment having grabs 
of higher capacity. Apprehending a safety threat reported by the Inspectorate of Dock Safety, action 
for disposal of the entire lot was taken by the port in April 2007.The highest offer received was 
Rs.4.67 crore. The port approached the Ministry in November 2007 for writing off the eventual loss 
on disposal. Approval of the Ministry was awaited as of February 2009. While accepting the facts, 
the Management, stated (February 2009) that the primary cause of underutilisation was that the 
users had the option to use their own or private equipment and the cranes available with the port 
were unable to work with grabs of higher capacity as preferred by the users. It was further stated 
that reduction of hire charges below the ceiling rate approved by the Tariff Authority for Major Ports 
(TAMP) would have only drastically reduced the return on investment (ROI) made on acquisition 
of the cranes without improving the level of utilisation. The reply was not tenable as the ROI had 
become very low since 2003-04 due to poor utilisation.   

37
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
private vendors. In Cochin, private equipment was not allowed in any of the docks and the users 
were thus compelled to use old and obsolete port equipment.  In Mormugao and Kolkata, the 
users were hiring container handling equipment.  No ports, however, maintained any systematic 
records relating to the extent of such hiring. The performance of port-owned equipment vis-à-vis 
private-supplied equipment could not be compared due to the absence of sufficient records.
Equipment maintenance
Although the demand for port-owned equipment was low and a large share of the fleet 
was beyond economic life, the ports were found to be incurring substantial expenditure 
on maintenance. The maintenance policies, however, varied from port to port. The entire 
fleet was being maintained internally at five ports (Fig 3.11). Only in Visakhapatnam, 
repairs and maintenance of 73.53 per cent of the equipment was outsourced. High-priced 
modern equipment like RMQC, RTYGC
53 were, however, being maintained by OEM 54 at all 
ports except JNPT, where equipment availability was more than 90 per cent. At Kolkata, 
which had the largest equipment fleet following Mumbai, with only 26 per cent  utilisation, 
the expenditure on the maintenance setup per annum was highest at Rs 22.21 crore. 
In spite of this, the equipment availability at the port was the least (66.92 per cent) 
among the ports and was far below the minimum availability norms set by the Ministry. 
At Haldia, although the container traffic was low, the container handling cranes (RMQCs) 
maintained by OEM registered 32 per cent  downtime during 2007-08 indicating improper 
maintenance.
53Rubber Tyred Yard Gantry Crane
54Original Equipment Manufacturers
Fig 3.11

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
38
3..4.4  Replacement of equipment
Replacement and procurement of new equipment was being done at all ports except Kandla where 
the port extended the life of nine outdated equipment by two years, leaving Rs.108.33 crore in the 
Replacement Fund unutilized till 2007-08.  In order to synchronise the equipment support with 
the emerging cargo mix, it was imperative that the ports factored in their own business plans, 
their traffic projections and preferences of users of equipment. It was found that equipment 
replacement was being done mostly on immediate need basis and all the factors mentioned earlier 
were not being taken into consideration. Further, no port was found to have paid attention to 
the preferences of users regarding procurement or replacement of equipment during 2007-08. 
Procurement and replacement were not commensurate with the cargo mix handled by the ports, 
future diversification plans and user preferences as described in the examples given below: 
=	 	 At Chennai, although the port planned to gradually phase out dry bulk cargo like coal and 
iron ore, it invested Rs.47.83 crore on installation and operation of a semi-mechanised 
coal handling plant in 2007. The Management stated (June 2009) that as coal handling was 
on the rise due to capacity constraints at Ennore, installation of the system had become 
necessary to control dust pollution. Moreover, due to overall recession in the shipping 
trade, shifting of coal elsewhere would have affected the port’s revenue. The reply is not 
acceptable as the contention of the port is inconsistent with its long term vision. Further, 
the argument of recession is not valid as the investment was made in 2007 when maritime 
cargo in Chennai and in India overall, was witnessing high growth.
=	 	 Although dry bulk handling was significant at Haldia (Kolkata port), no dry bulk handling 
equipment had been procured for the port during the last five years. Instead, six container 
handling equipment were purchased at a cost of Rs. 71.19 crore, which remained 
underutilized as container cargo at Haldia remained low. 
=	 	 At Visakhapatnam, the port did not have adequate equipment to effectively meet user 
requirements. There were demands from the users for better capacity equipment like 
mobile cranes of 150 tonne capacity, shore cranes of 40 tonnes capacity, etc which could 
not be provided by the port.
Further, the ports had reoriented their business models from ‘service’ port to the new ‘landlord’ 
port model under NMDP , framed in 2006. According to the ‘landlord’ model, a port focuses on trade 
facilitation by making investments on creation of common user facilities. Commercial operations 
like cargo handling are undertaken by private players who share revenue with the ports. Under 
this new model, although the ports were expected to move away from commercial operations like 

39
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
cargo handling, it was noticed that 41 schemes for procurement and replacement of equipment 
valuing Rs 1622.67 crore were planned by the ports under NMDP (2005-06). 
The Ministry, in its reply (August 2009), did not comment on the need to factor in user preferences, 
future diversification plans or the decisions to move away from the service model and its impact on 
equipment procurement. It simply stated that the ports had undertaken major capacity expansion 
plans that included modernization and addition of cargo handling equipment.
Recommendation
Ø
  Concerted efforts should be made by the ports to phase out outlived equipment. Selection of 
equipment should reflect the port’s business plan, trend and type of major cargo handled, 
and users’ preferences. 
3.5 Labour Engagement
As cargo handling operations had been highly labour- intensive in the past, an assured supply 
of a large number of dock workers was necessary to provide competitive advantage to ports. In 
India, Dock Labour Boards (DLBs) had been set up at seven major ports, viz. Chennai, Cochin, 
Kandla, Kolkata, Mumbai, Mormugao and Visakhapatnam under the Dock Workers (Regulation of 
Employment) Act, 1948 for ensuring optimum labour utilization. This Act was amended in 1997 to 
merge the DLB pool with the port labour. This had been achieved in all ports except Kolkata. 
The process of handling, 
however, witnessed increased 
mechanisation as cargo 
packaging became more 
standardised. This led to a 
sharp fall in labour intensity of 
cargo transfer operations over 
the past decade, along with a 
rise in demand for new skills 
to operate the mechanised 
facilities.
Although the legislation governing DLBs was amended in 1997, leading to merger of the entities 
with the ports, old ports like Mumbai and Kolkata continued to remain heavily staffed organizations, 
resulting in high cost of services provided. The position of labour at the ports is shown in Figure 
Fig 3.12

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
40
3.12. The overall staff positions at newer ports varied significantly with those of the old ports 
which were heavily staffed at all levels. The DLB at Kolkata continued to remain a separate entity. 
3.5.1  Adequacy of labour supply
For ensuring effective and efficient cargo handling operations, it is necessary that the supply 55 of 
labour by ports is adequate. Audit observed that eight out of 11 ports, except Chennai, Paradip 
and Tuticorin reported shortfalls 56 in supply. The shortfalls at Kandla (25 per cent), Kolkata (30 
per cent) and Visakhapatnam (59 per cent) were particularly high. In contrast, a surplus of 39 per 
cent was noticed at Paradip during 2007-08. The Chennai port business plan identified surplus 
labour as a weakness of the port. Mormugao was unable to supply enough workmen to operate 
a minimum of three hook
57 points at the berths. At Visakhapatnam, the shortfall was due to short 
supply of labour by the DLB. The users of the port indicated that the short supply of labour had 
seriously hampered onboard operations on many occasions. The users were, therefore, compelled 
to engage private labour. 
The Ministry stated (August 2009) that the Visakhapatnam Dock Labour Board had been merged 
with the port and Visakhapatnam Port had also implemented the tribunal award on manning 
scales. This changed scenario could take care of the shortage of labour at Visakhapatnam.
3.5.2  Labour Productivity
To attain high operational efficiency in cargo handling, the ports should ensure that the available 
labour pool is properly trained, disciplined and productive. Further, the Ministry should also 
facilitate the laying down of proper standards for productivity assessment under the present 
equipment and handling conditions. Also, a standard format for reporting of productivity should 
be put in place to enable monitoring of performance.
The assessment of labour productivity at the ports was being made as per certain standards, 
viz. manning scales and datum.  While manning scales determined the number of persons 
required for carrying out each type of activity, the datum determined the minimum output 
of labour per hook per shift, fixed on the basis of 80 per cent of the average tonnage handled 
during previous three years. For proper assessment, therefore, it was critical that the scales 
and the datum were reviewed and revised on a r egular basis as new equipment and handling 
procedures were introduced in the ports. 
55 The ports supply labour to users on requisition. Deployment is made in terms of gangs for the number of hooks 
to be operated, and billing is done on the basis of period of engagement.  
56 Shortfall has been measured in terms of number of gangs supplied against number of requisitions.
57 A location on the berth where cargo is transferred from the vessel by cranes/ grabs etc.

41
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
In this regard, Audit observed the following: 
=	 The scales and datum at most of the ports had been fixed long back and had not been revised 
for more than 10 years. 
=	 At Kolkata, an average of Rs 3.55 crore per annum was being paid on overtime allowances. 
Further, the ports were also incurring substantial expenditure on incentives to workers, as 
overall cargo volumes had shot up. For example, incentives were being paid in 2007-08 at 
Tuticorin under the piece rate incentive scheme, 1996 on the basis of datum fixed in 1998, 
although cargo volume had more than doubled at the port. Consequently, the users were also 
facing the high cost burden of port labour.
=	 At New Mangalore, the standards agreed upon in 1974 were being followed without revision, 
even though large scale mechanisation of handling facilities viz. conveyors, MHCs, etc had 
been made subsequently at the port. The norms were prescribed at Kandla  in 1979, but no 
revision had been carried out so far. Due to such non-revision, the productivity assessment 
was distorted. As the manning scales were outdated, the deployment of persons for handling 
activities was higher, resulting in large overtime payments incurred by the ports.
=	 The business plan of New Mangalore port noted that the private sector was being forced to 
make use of the port’s labour for cargo handling, which was more expensive. This was identified 
by its consultant as one of the main weaknesses of the port. The users of New Mangalore port 
felt that the manning scales for deployment and the datum required downward revision, 
which would reduce the cost of labour. 
During the exit conference, the Ministry accepted (June 2009) the audit observation and stated 
that the matter of revision of manning scales had been referred to a National Tribunal. As per the 
recommendations received in 2006, orders were being issued in May 2009 for implementation. 
The Ministry accepted that with such implementation, the unjustifiable overtime payments would 
be significantly reduced.
The Ministry stated (August 2009) that the issue of standardization of manning scales and rates 
was referred to the National Industrial Tribunal in the year 2000, but the award could not be 
implemented due to a stay by Andhra Pradesh High Court. The stay was vacated in April 2009 and 
all ports were asked to implement the award. The Ministry felt that the implementation would 
bring uniformity and also bring down excess overtime payments. It was, however, seen that apart 
from Cochin, Mormugao, Paradip and Visakhapatnam ports, the other ports were yet to implement 
the award. 

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
42
It was also noticed that the nature of reporting of productivity by ports was dissimilar and 
incorrect. The productivity was being reported in terms of gangs 58 or hooks. As composition of 
gangs and deployment per hook varied from port to port and also from cargo to cargo, inter-
port comparison was difficult. It was further noticed that although the ports stated that they 
were not engaging any private labour, users at Chennai, NMPT, Tuticorin and Visakhapatnam 
clearly indicated that they had to engage private labour at additional cost, as the port labour was 
unproductive, inhibiting efficient handling. The extent of such handling done by private labour 
was neither being recorded nor segregated by the ports and the entire handling contribution 
was being attributed to port labour. Thus, the labour productivity reported by the ports to the 
Ministry was inflated and incorrect. While factoring in such distortions, inter-port comparison 
indicated that productivity at Cochin was very low. Business plan of Cochin port also identified 
this as a major weakness. Further, the labour rates at Cochin were substantially higher. The 
Management of Cochin Port accepted (May 2009) the observation and stated that steps to 
improve productivity through rationalization were being taken. They further offered to examine 
the reasons for variation in labour rates.
Reasons for low productivity of labour were mainly lack of training, aging labour force and 
indiscipline. Port users at Goa, Mumbai and Visakhapatnam stated that the available labour 
pool was unskilled and the skills of the labourers, especially those who handled steel and project 
cargo were inadequate. Hence, training was required for them. It was also noticed that the 
average age of the 5720 labourers at Mumbai was 51 years, which could have been a reason 
for low efficiency. Users also pointed out that labour indiscipline was inhibiting efficiency at 
Visakhapatnam. Effective work time in a day was only seven to eight hours there due to erratic 
punctuality, resulting in higher cost of operations. Visakhapatnam port, in its reply, stated (June 
2009) that effective steps had been taken to improve punctuality of the labour. However, the 
Management also pointed out that delays in handling occurred as untrained hired labour was 
being engaged by the users in case of shortfall of port labour. At Cochin, the work was affected 
on 11 occasions in 2007-08 due to unrest by the port’s own labour. On three occasions, the work 
down was extended up to 23 days, 17 days and 37 days, resulting in diversion of cargo. The port 
communicated to the Ministry that in addition to strikes called by the port’s own employees, 
there were many instances of dislocation of work due to flash strikes, etc called by workers 
of different stakeholders like steamer agents, Customs agents, truck operators, etc. affecting 
productivity adversely.
58 Deployment is made in terms of gangs for the number of hooks to be operated, and billing is done on the basis 
of period of engagement. Composition of a gang varies from nine to 17 workers. 

43
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
Recommendations
Ø  For making correct assessment of labour productivity, ports should revise the manning 
scales and datum as recommended by the National Tribunal in 2006.
Ø  The extent of engagement of private labour and their output should be recorded to 
distinguish their output from that of port labour, to avoid misreporting to the Ministry.
3.6 Storage of Cargo
Availability of large storage areas at ports enables larger handling capacities and efficient 
accumulation of cargo. Moreover, ports earn significant revenue by leasing and renting out storage 
spaces.
3.6.1  Adequacy of storage area
To ensure efficient landward 
transfer of cargo handled at 
the berths, it was necessary 
for the ports to have adequate 
storage areas. It was noticed 
that the storage areas 
available at ports, apart from 
Kandla and Visakhapatnam 
were less than 60 hectares
59 
as shown in Fig 3.13. 
Further, the scope of expanding the available storage areas also had its limitations. For example, 
at JNPT which faced shortage of space, further expansion possibility was limited as the process 
of land acquisition behind the terminal was fraught with rehabilitation risks.. Unlike international 
ports like Singapore, the major ports were generally not undertaking expansion by reclamation of 
land from the sea. Only at Tuticorin, the port had undertaken such reclamation. 
59Against 60 hectares for three terminals at JNPT, the land availability for four container terminals at the Port of 
Singapore is 425 hectares. 
Fig 3.13

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
44
It was also noticed that the revenue earned by the ports from 
storage operations varied widely as seen from Table 3.660.
In spite of having more space, Kandla and Visakhapatnam, 
which handled the highest volumes of cargo among major ports, 
earned low revenue from storage services. The business plan 
of Kandla port also identified sub-optimal utilisation of space 
around the port, as one of its major weaknesses. The users of 
most ports felt the availability of storage areas was inadequate.
Faced with scarcity of land for storage and limited scope for 
expansion, optimal utilisation of storage space was necessary 
to avoid congestion and to earn more revenue for the ports.
3.6.2 Undeveloped spaces/sheds hindered optimal utilization of storage area
At the ports, while some areas were earmarked for storage of containers and bulk cargo, most of 
the storage areas were for multipurpose use. Port users felt that the storage areas were of poor 
quality as detailed below:
=	 At Cochin, there was no exclusive storage area for foodgrains and other perishable cargo. 
Users complained about the poor maintenance of covered storage space resulting in 
deterioration in the quality of wheat stored and heavy losses. Sheds for storing cement 
were reportedly leaking.
=	 In Kolkata, the areas available within the port premises were not developed and properly 
allocated for storage. Port users at Kolkata felt that the hardstands
61 and the storage areas 
were of poor quality and the lease rates sought for these marshy and unsuitable areas were 
relatively high. A number of godowns (at Garden Reach jetty) were presently filled with 
scrap and remained unused. The users felt that obsolete sheds and spaces at a number of 
locations (like Alifnagar and southern parts of Kidderpore and Netaji Subhash Docks) could 
be developed into proper storage areas.
=	 At Mumbai, there was a shortage of covered storage sheds. Consequently, roofless sheds 
were being allotted for foodgrains. Further, for automobile cargo, the parking area allotted 
was far away from the berth, causing inconvenience to users in loading, leading to higher 
TRT. The poor storage conditions also invited damage claims amounting to Rs 1.92 crore.
60At MGPT, storage and handling charges are collected together, and cannot be bifurcated.
61 Built up spaces (concrete surfaces) used for storage.
Revenue earned from storage
Port Storage and demurrage 
receipts 2007-08 (Rs in 
crore)
ChPT 6.07
KPT 7.06
MbPT 76.97
NMPT 1.72
TPT 6.00
VPT 8.54
Table 3.6

45
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
At Kandla, a joint inspection carried out by Audit along with the port officials, revealed that there 
was no proper demarcation of plots, the storage areas were not clean and cargo was not being 
stacked properly as shown in Figure 4.2 that follows:.
=		 Verification of records at Mattancherry and Ernakulam wharfs at Cochin for the period 2003-
08 revealed that food items such as wheat, soybeans oil, copra cake, etc. were stored in the 
same shed where chemicals and minerals like calcium bauxite, industrial salt, sponge iron, 
murate of potash, coal, etc were stored. 
=	 At Haldia, the users indicated that although sheds in the back-up area of Berth no. 9 had been 
allotted for storing food and agricultural products, these could not be utilised due to handling 
of iron ore at the berth. Therefore, the foodgrains had to be stored in other sheds. 
=	 Apart from Mormugao and Mumbai,  none of the ports had a laid down system for regular 
maintenance of storage areas. At Mormugao, temporary partitions were being used to 
segregate cargo. In Mumbai, the port had an annual budget of over Rs one crore whereas at 
Visakhapatnam, less than Rs 15 lakh per annum was incurred during the last three years for 
maintenance of the storage areas. 
3.6.3  Storage policy and review of storage areas
At the ports, allotment of space inside the wharf areas was done by the Traffic Managers and 
outside these areas, by the Estate Officers of the concerned ports, based on the land policy 
guidelines issued by the Ministry in 2004. 
As per the policy framed by the Ministry, the validity period for allotment of licences inside the 
port area was 11 months, with an option for renewal by paying five per cent escalation charges. 
Further, the licensees were required to follow all conditions stipulated in the Scale of Rates. Users 
Plot No. 1 at KPT
 Plot No.7 at KPT

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
46
of the port at Kolkata  felt that the quality of land allotted for sto rage was poor, compelling the 
licensees to make substantial investments in cleaning and construction of hardstands for making 
the areas suitable for storage. 
Audit observed that as the validity period of the lease was only up to 11 months, it was a disincentive 
for making long-term investments and the 11-month ceiling on validity of lease was not in the 
interest of long -term users of the ports.
It was noticed that storage area plans were being reviewed annually in four ports, monthly at 
Visakhapatnam and as and when required in three other ports. At Kolkata, there was no system of 
regular review of storage area plan. At Chennai, it was found that the port had introduced a good 
practice, i.e if space licensed by a firm was not utilised and kept vacant for a period exceeding 
two months, the licence issued to it was to be terminated and the firm advised to surrender the 
space.
Recommendation
Ø  The 11-month ceiling on storage area licences may be modified in the interest of long-term 
users.
Ø The Chennai model of storage area review may be adopted at other ports.
3.7 Cargo Handling and Environment
As handling of liquid bulk (POL, chemicals, etc) and dry bulk (coal, iron ore) carry significant 
environment pollution risks, it was necessary that the ports ensured compliance with extant 
regulations and implemented good practices to mitigate them. The issues relating to the 
environmental risks noticed during audit are described in the succeeding paragraphs.
3.7.1  Precautions for handling oil cargo
To prevent and minimise risks to marine environment posed by the handling of POL
62 cargo, vessels 
handled at berths should be surrounded by oil booms63, so as to restrict the spillage of oil. 
Further, the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) regulations stipulate that ports should install 
oil sensors, oil spill response equipment, fire sensors, etc, and also   periodically report compliance 
to the Pollution Control Boards. 
                 
62 Petroleum Oil and Lubricants
63 Protective floating barriers that surround the ship to restrict the impact of spillage of oil.

47
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
Audit observed that at Mumbai port, one of the highest POL cargo handlers in India, marine pollution 
equipment procured at Rs. 2.63 crore between 1991 and 1995 was not being utilised properly 
due to the absence of trained staff and proper maintenance. Non- removal of old pipelines also 
constituted safety hazards. At Tuticorin, there was no oil spill response equipment. Unlike JNPT 
which had scuppers
64 at the jetty. no such structures were found installed at Kolkata, although 
significant oil handling was occurring at jetties (at Budge Budge) outside the dock systems. In the 
absence of these, the oil jetties and installations at Kolkata remained greasy. There was no ballast
65 
facility at the berths at Cochin.
3.7.2  Precautions for handling dry bulk
To mitigate the impact of dust, air and noise pollution due to handling of dry bulk, CPCB stipulated 
that ports should restrict the heights of iron ore and coal stacks; surround them with wind-screens; 
load vehicles carrying such dry bulk cargo up to the brim and cover them with tarpaulin; install  
sensors for automatic water sprinkling at dust generating locations and install anemometers 66 to  
 
 
64Openings in side walls allowing draining out of liquids.
65Water filled devices used on ships for stability. To avoid marine pollution by introduction of invasive species dur-
ing ballast discharge from tankers, specific facilities need to be created.
66Devices for measuring wind speed.
Good practices in India:
In Visakhapatnam, oil booms were being placed on all sides of liquid bulk vessels to suck spilled oil. 
Fire watches were also being placed near the vessels. User charges were being levied for such services. 
Such booms were also being used at Chennai where an oil recovery vessel was also available. At New 
Mangalore, de-ballasting facilities were provided for tankers in its premises to avoid pollution. The 
port was also recovering cleaning charges from users. 
Greasy oil jetty at KDS

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
48
carry out ambient air quality measurements. Ports were also required to report periodically on a 
number of air quality parameters to respective State Pollution Control Boards and ensure that air 
quality indicators like suspended particulate matter (SPM), etc were within prescribed limits. 
Audit observed the following:
=	 The business plan of Chennai identified exposure to dust-filled environment as a serious 
weakness of the port. A large number of measures had been taken in Chennai to restrict 
such pollution and independent monitoring was being done by Richardson & Crudass Ltd, a 
Government of India undertaking.
=	 At Haldia, although sprinklers and tarpaulin covers were in use, wind protection screens 
around coal stacks were not found to be in use. Users at New Mangalore indicated high levels 
of pollution at bulk handling berths like ore and coal berths.
=	 At Mumbai, the Pollution Control Cell was inadequately manned, there was poor maintenance 
of pollution control equipment and the air quality was not being adequately monitored. 
=	 Proper procedures were also being followed at major bulk handling ports like Mormugao and 
Paradip.
=	 At New Mangalore, the port engaged an independent agency, viz. the National Institute of 
Technology, Karnataka (NITK), Suratkal for monitoring environmental parameters including 
ambient air quality on monthly basis. Although the port put in place all the requisite measures, the 
NITK reports revealed high dust pollution within the port premises in two out of the three months 
surveyed by them. Critical parameters like SPM and RPM were beyond tolerance limits. 
=	 At Visakhapatnam, the port had introduced some good practices like usage of leak proof 
grabs, deployment of leak proof dumpers for transportation, etc.
Recommendations
Ø  Ports should consistently deploy oil booms and other protective measures while handling 
POL cargo to restrict the impact of oil spillage. Oil sensors to detect spillage of oil in the 
water front and oil-water separators, skimmers, dispersant spray systems etc. should be 
used to remove pollutants from water bodies as per international best practices. 
Ø  Ports should make provisions for levying fines on tankers/vessels polluting harbour waters 
and berths and recover the cost of consumables used for cleaning operations of oil spillages 
from the users.

49
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
3.8 Handling and Documentation
In order to ensure minimum idle time of vessels and post-handling detention at berths, it was 
necessary that the information interfaces between the port, the Customs authorities and the users 
were efficient. The users of most of the ports mentioned that there were delays due to cargo 
clearance formalities both at Customs and clearance points at the ports. Users at Cochin mentioned 
that over 35 sheets had to be filled in for clearances from the Customs and port authorities. 
Although all the ports had LAN based information systems and displayed multiple information on 
their websites, none of the websites had the status of clearances of bills or other information like 
berthing schedules, etc which were of immediate use to the users. At Mormugao, information 
on status of refunds being processed by the port was not available to the users. It was noticed in 
Tuticorin that online procedures did not reduce the burden of manual procedures. Import/export 
applications, after being filed electronically, had to be also produced physically for processing, 
defeating the very purpose of e-filing/booking. At Visakhapatnam, erroneous bills were being 
generated from the online system and the same had to be subsequently corrected manually. 
Similarly, in spite of having e-booking facilities for berths, users could not get reservations for 
the berths at once, unlike leading ports in China, Singapore etc. Moreover, ports did not have 
fixed time limits for processing information requests online. At Paradip, for example, out of eight 
information requests received online in July and December 2007, two had not been addressed 
till December 2008, indicating slow response. The port users at Kolkata indicated the need for a 
friendly information interface between port users, Customs and the ports. 
Problems noticed at Visakhapatnam are presented in the box below:
IT interface at Visakhapatnam Port Trust: A system study
At Visakhapatnam, computerization began in 2002. However, several processes remained 
dependent on earlier manual data generation. The vessel-related inputs for the berthing 
programme meetings (where agents met the Traffic Manager’s staff to decide the day’s 
berthing, unberthing, shifting movements) were not generated through the Visakhapatnam 
Port Operation and Management System (VPOMS) application. Daily reports like shed position, 
ore berth position, etc were also not being generated. Berth information was noted in manual 
registers and conveyed to the control room over phones for data entry into the computerised 
system, indicating time lags and duplication. Video-conferencing systems supplied to the Traffic 
Manager and Dock Managers had not been put to use so far. Six levels for approving the bills 
extant in the manual system continued even after computerization, indicating no business 
process reengineering. As all the information was not being captured at source, certain bills 
continued to be generated manually. Problems were also faced in generation of lease bills in the 
case of new agents who did not have deposit accounts. The processes generated dissatisfaction 
among users. Agents complained that services were not provided on Saturdays after 12 noon 
due to server shutdowns.

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
50
At JNPT, although high operational efficiency in handling was noted, the users, in the absence 
of a single window system, were required to file papers at different locations, viz. the Marine 
Department, Operations Department, the Cash Section under the Finance Department as well as 
at the gate. These points were dispersed, causing delays in transmission of papers and information. 
An EDI system linking the port, Customs and the container freight stations at the port was still to be 
fully implemented. Port users felt that Customs clearance was a big hurdle and stated that in spite 
of computerization, hard copies of documents were being insisted upon. Although information on 
location of containers at the yard was available online to users and agents due to the implementation 
of a container tracking system, the users felt the need for more accuracy in the system. They also 
pointed out that the private container terminals provided quick and accurate responses queries 
made on their websites. Such procedures made identification of cargo and doing business easier.
The Inter-Ministerial Group constituted by the Committee on Infrastructure had identified 
information technology (IT) as a strategic tool that would eliminate 23 person-to-person interfaces 
and 50 minutes in pre-arrival documentation besides 23 hours in import and 15 hours in export 
documentation. Towards this objective, the Ministry was funding the development of a Port 
Community System (PCS) for all ports through the Indian Port Association (IPA) complying with the 
uniform forms as per UN EDIFACT
67 standards. The PCS would enable ordering of berth and pilot 
services, smooth documentation, acceptance of digitally signed documents, enquiry and tracking, 
linkage to port authorities and existing port user systems and billing. It was noticed that the PCS 
was not fully functional till December 2008, in spite of the targeted completion time of December 
2007. Moreover, the linkages to the ports and the existing systems of the ports appeared remote 
in light of the fact that each port had developed its system independently without integration as 
an objective. For example, the IT systems of Kolkata Dock System and Haldia Dock Complex under 
the same port authority still remained to be integrated in spite of computerisation plans under 
implementation since the last 10 years.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67 United Nations/Electronic Data Interchange for Administration, Commerce, and Transport

51
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
Best Practices in documentation:
The Port of Singapore provides a single window environment to users as shown below: 
Ø  A user at Singapore files a single document online which is communicated to statutory 
bodies online for approvals, thus reducing the TRT and labour costs. 
Ø  Port of Rotterdam.com, launched in December 2000, is one of the most cited instances of how 
best a port authority can make use of the Internet medium to cater to the diversified needs 
of various players in a port community. The Rotterdam port’s Internet platform consists of a 
main website with five sub-portals; a news site, a job site, a business index, a database with 
sailing times and information about the Port of Rotterdam Authority. Additional thematic 
sub-portals are being planned as more port-related companies develop online applications 
for their businesses. In addition to the thematic sub-portals, many categories will give access 
to relevant websites. The site is in many ways, a microcosm of the port itself. Rotterdam is 
a hub where flows of various goods converge. Cargo such as oil, ore and coal, fruit and dry 
goods are handled by specialised companies, which are located in designated areas of the 
port. The online portal reflects this multi-operation/ multi-location character of the port. 
Various information flows are managed by external business partners but converge in one 
centrally coordinated site.
Ø Mundra Port in India has a clear berthing policy displayed on the webpage of its website

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
52
The Ministry, in its reply, stated (August 2009) that the ports had been directed to computerise 
their activities. They assured that the time taken in documentation would be significantly reduced 
once the PCS system was properly implemented. They also pointed out that the users needed to 
be properly involved for the new system to be effective.
Recommendation
Ø  To reduce delays in documentation, the ports should strive to achieve single window 
clearance systems and implement the Port Community System effectively.

53
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
4 Port Connectivity
4.1 Cargo Dispersal at Ports
A multimodal system, which uses the most efficient modes of transport from origin to destination, 
is a prerequisite for the smooth functioning of any port. With the growth of cargo in the ports 
by over seven per cent and increase in container traffic by 17 per cent, the Government had laid 
emphasis on capacity expansion and improvement in infrastructure of the ports for handling these 
growing volumes of cargo. Unless matched with connectivity infrastructure, the increased cargo 
would result in congestion and undermine the competitiveness of Indian industry and also affect 
the economy at large.
Unlike international ports like Singapore and Rotterdam, the shortage of storage space in the major 
ports in India had further compounded the problem of speedy evacuation of cargo from port 
premises. The Port of Rotterdam Authority
68, in the consolidated business plan for major ports, 
highlighted weaknesses such as poor hinterland connections, inadequate road and rail facilities, 
sub-optimal usage of rail connectivity, increasing pressure on existing facilities and lack of inter-
modal facilities.
In the major ports, liquid cargo was directly moved to the storage tanks of the users, bulk cargo was 
moved initially to the stackyards within the ports and from there to the users’ points. Containers 
were initially stored in container yards within the port or moved to Container Freight Stations 
(CFS)
69 and from there to the users’ points. In a few cases, containers directly moved from the ship-
shore interfaces70 to the user areas. 
 
 
 
68 As stated earlier, the Port of Rotterdam Authority acted as consultant to IPA in consolidating the individual busi-
ness plans of all major ports.
69 Closed areas for containers, having customs clearance facilities as well
70 The point where the cargo is first unloaded from the ship

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
54
It was noticed that in the major ports, roads continued to be the dominant mode71 for dispersal of 
cargo as shown in Fig 4.1.
The other forms of dispersal mainly c omprised movement of liquid cargo through pipelines and 
also included inland water barges at Mormugao port 72 and conveyor systems 73 at Tuticorin. The 
percentage of different modes of dispersal of cargo in major ports is shown in Fig 4.2. The other 
modes of disposal mainly comprised pipelines for movement of liquid cargo. 
At the Port of Rotterdam, 50-60 per 
cent of the movement of bulk cargo and 
containers is done by barges because of 
excellent inland water networking. Inter-
modal connectivity by rail and road is 
seamless. The modal share of inland water 
transport is 42 per cent in Netherlands, 15 
per cent in France, 15 per cent in Hungary, 
15 per cent in USA, 14 per cent in Germany 
and 13 per cent in Belgium. Although India has 14,500 km of navigable waterways, of which about 
5700 km is navigable by mechanized vessels, the modal share of inland water transport in India is 
only 0.28 per cent.
71 Cochin Port Trust did not disclose the modes of cargo movement in its Administration Report unlike the other 
ports.
72 78 per cent of bulk cargo at Mormugao port moved through barges
73 28 per cent of cargo at Tuticorin moved through conveyor systems
Fig 4.1
Fig 4.2

55
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
4.2 Dispersal of Cargo through Railways
Keeping in view the significance  of port connectivity for efficient evacuation of cargo from the 
ports and its impact on international trade, the Committee on Infrastructure recommended 
(2006) minimum double-line rail connectivity for major ports, which was to be achieved within the 
stipulated time frame of three years.
Audit, however, observed that 
JNPT, Kandla, Mumbai, and Paradip 
ports had double lines in parts of 
their rail networks whereas the 
ports at Chennai, Cochin, Goa, 
Haldia, Kolkata, Tuticorin and 
Visakhapatnam continued to have  
single-line connectivity, resulting in 
slower movement and inefficient 
cargo dispersal. At Cochin, the rail 
connectivity from the port area to 
the main rail line network was in poor 
state. The marshalling yard at Willington island was being used as an unloading platform for coal 
cargo. According to the business plan of the port, the line was connected to the main line by an 
old railway bridge which did not have the capacity for high traffic. At Kandla, there were 11 tracks, 
of which only three had double lines. Users at Mormugao port felt that double line connectivity 
was required at the port to harness cargo from nearby areas like Belgaum. At Paradip, the network 
from the port premises to the railway station was partly double line. 
Although NMDP envisaged taking up 16 railway schemes for laying of new lines, no specific scheme 
for conversion of single lines to double lines had been mooted. Despite the emphasis on exclusive 
freight corridors by the Government, passenger and freight systems shared the same railway 
networks outside the port areas. Rail networks at ports other than Mormugao were not connected 
to the hook points and the cargo had to be inter-carted
74 to the sidings using dumpers, trucks and 
trailers. Such multiple handling of cargo could only add to increase in the handling time and the 
cost of handling. Port users at Chennai felt that the long distances between railway sidings and the 
berths needed to be addressed by laying railway tracks just along the berths which would result in 
quicker, easier and cheaper loading / unloading operations.
74  transported from the berths to the storage areas or other areas 


Report No. 3 of 2009-10
56
Handling efficiency at sidings depended on the length of the sidings and the equipment available 
there. Audit observed that the sidings at JNPT, Haldia, and New Mangalore could handle full  
rakes of 59 wagons, while only some sidings at Chennai (two sidings), Paradip (21 out of 41) and  
Visakhapatnam (eight out of 15) could handle full rakes. 
Out of 18 sidings at Mumbai, only two had the length to 
accommodate 40 wagons whereas the other sidings could 
accommodate 20 or less wagons. At other ports, the sidings 
could not accommodate even half rakes. At Mumbai, even 
the two sidings having capacity of 40 wagons each could 
not be optimally utilized as the low capacity locomotives 
used for hauling could not handle rakes having more than 
20 wagons. Users at Kolkata port stated that full rakes 
could not be handled at the berths at Netaji Dock and 
Kidderpore Dock due to which longer time was required 
for handling the rakes, resulting in increased detention 
charges for wagons. Loading a rake at Mumbai and some 
sidings of Chennai took upto 13 hours which was higher 
in comparison to other ports as shown in Table 4.1.The loading and unloading systems at 
sidings also differed across ports. Haldia, JNPT, Mormugao and Bharati Dock at Chennai had 
mechanized tippling systems for dry bulk and rail mounted gantry cranes (RMGC) for containers 
whereas at other ports, the system was not mechanized. 
Audit observed that in JNPT, Mormugao and Visakhapatnam, the handling at private sidings was 
more efficient as compared to the port sidings. As an example, the handling at the sidings of 
private operators and the port sidings at JNPT is shown in Table 4.2 below: 
Terminals of JNPT Rakes per day Number of RMGC Average time per rake 
(no of hours)
JNPCT75 5.22 5 4.41
NSICT76 6.04 3 3.65
GTICT77 5.60 3 3.10
Table 4.2757677
The time taken for handling a single rake at the private sidings of M/s SWPL 78 in Mormugao port 
was five to six hours as compared to the port operated berths, where handling a single rake  
75  Jawarharlal Nehru Port Container Terminal 
76  Nhava Sheva International Container Terminal 
77  Gateways Terminal India Container Terminal 
78  South West Port Ltd
Port Rakes per 
day
(2006-08)
Average Time 
to load a rake 
(hrs)
ChPT 0.5-1.5 6-13
JNPT 16.8 3.72
MbPT 2.5 12.69
NMPT 1 9
PPT 16.6 5
TPT 2 8
Table 4.1

57
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
took an average of 13 hours. In its reply, the Mormugao port Management stated (June 2009), 
that the differences in handling time were due to the fact that unlike the private siding, the port 
operated sidings did not have mechanised handling infrastructure. At Cochin, the sidings of the 
Food Corporation of India (FCI) and the Indian Oil Corporation (IOC) had not been used for more 
than five years. 
4.3 Adequacy of Rakes
For the operation of sidings, working agreements existed between the Railways and siding 
operators in seven79 ports. However, in the cases of Cochin, Kandla, New Mangalore and Tuticorin 
ports, parties had to directly deal with the Railways for placing indents for wagons. At Cochin, 
two terminal operators, viz FCI
80 and IOC 81 had their own rakes whereas at JNPT, the supply of 
rakes was controlled by the Container Corporation of India (CONCOR). At Cochin port, CONCOR 
operated only 70 trains during the year which at full capacity could handle only 6300 20-foot 
containers, which was less than three per cent of the total container movements through the 
port.
Adequate and timely supply of rakes was necessary to reduce the waiting time for movement of 
cargo. Audit observed that there was a short supply of 90 rakes at  Visakhapatnam Port Trust in 
2007, due to which the port could not meet the commitments of handling the required tonnage. 
The port Management stated (May 2009) that the Railways were being pursued for supply of rakes. 
At Mumbai port, only 47 per cent of the wagons requisitioned in July and December 2007 could be 
supplied by the Railways. The trend of non-supply of wagons registered an increasing level there as 
shown in Fig 4.3. Users also felt that the free time for removal of cargo was insufficient considering 
the shortage in availability of rakes.
The wagons indented by the ports are supplied 
by the Railways to the ports and then to the 
parties for a length of time (free time), beyond 
which demurrage charges are payable.
It was observed at JNPT that 16.72 per cent and 
9.94 per cent of the cargo could not be cleared 
within the free time during the months of July 
2007 and December 2007 respectively. This was  
 
79 Chennai, Kandla, Kolkata, Mormugao, Mumbai, Paradip and Visakhapatnam,
80 Food Corporation of India
81 Indian Oil Corporation
Fig 4.3

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
58
due to delays in obtaining delivery orders, inadequate transport arrangements by Container Freight 
Stations and also non- supply of rakes by CONCOR. It was also noticed that due to non-dispersal of 
cargo within the free time, the port recovered Rs.15.31 crore during 2007-08 as storage charges 
from the parties.
4.4 Limitations of Railway Infrastructure
International railway systems carry more than 100 wagons per rake with the Australian system 
carrying over 300 wagons per rake. Compared to this, a rake in India handles 58 BOX wagons as the 
length of the loops in the yards and stations in India is only 686 m, limiting the length of the trains. 
Even rakes of 58 wagons cannot be handled at sidings of some ports as stated earlier in Para 4.2, 
with some of the sidings capable of handling only five wagons at a time.
The space envelope
82 in India does not permit the movement of double stack container wagons. 
Since stations, platforms, roofs and bridges had been constructed according to the previously 
designed space envelopes, the envelopes of existing railway lines cannot be increased, thereby 
limiting the carrying capacity of the rakes. Load carrying capacity expressed as the ratio of a loaded 
wagon to an empty one ranges from 4-7 internationally as against 2.5 in India.
The axle load permitted on tracks in India was 20.3 to 22.9 tonnes as against 25 to 37.5 tonnes per 
axle carried by major freight carrying systems in the world such as the Australian system.
These infrastructure constraints limited the payload carrying capacity of freight trains.
The high density Eastern and Western rail corridors in India were saturated in terms of line capacity 
and utilisation. To overcome some of these issues, the Committee on Infrastructure approved 
(February 2006) the constitution of a Task Force to prepare a concept paper on dedicated freight 
corridor projects. The report suggested an institutional roadmap for the construction and operation 
of the dedicated freight corridors. These corridors would be constructed, operated and maintained 
by a corporate entity on commercial principles, relying on efficient technological solutions. Scarce 
budgetary resources would be leveraged for raising debt from the markets based on a sound 
business plan.
Audit observed that even after the lapse of three years, the projects had not been implemented 
as of date due to financing issues as a result of which, the benefits from these exclusive corridors 
could not be harnessed by the ports.
 
82 The vertical cross- sectional area at any point on a railway line

59
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
4.5 Development of Port Railways
NMDP envisaged undertaking 11 projects under Phase-I and three projects under Phase-II for 
improvement of port railways. The scheduled date of completion of the projects under Phase-I 
was March 2009, whereas the projects under Phase-II were to be completed by 2012. 
Audit observed that out of 11 projects 
under Phase-I, only one project had 
been completed as of date as shown 
in the Annexure. Five projects were 
languishing at the planning stage, two 
projects had been taken over by the 
Railways and four projects were still 
in progress due to delays at various 
levels. The progress of three works 
under Phase-II was very slow.
Audit also observed the following deficiencies:
=	 At Cochin port, 70.29 acres of land in the port area was under the possession of the Railways 
since 1949. Due to this, CoPT could not undertake rail development projects on its own nor 
levy way leave charges83 unlike other ports.
=	 Mormugao port was connected to the trunk Railways (South Western Railway and Konkan 
Railway) by a single line which was also used as a passenger line. This hampered the timely 
movement of rakes out of the port. There was no immediate scheme for conversion of the 
single line to double line tracks. The port, in its reply, stated (June 2009) that lack of proper rail 
connectivity was assuming great importance. Better connectivity was necessary for the port 
to achieve the handling target (45 MT) set by the Ministry for 2009-10.
=	 Mumbai port had deposited (2004) Rs. 89 lakh with Central Railway for the preparation of 
estimates and survey reports for a dedicated goods line from Wadala to Kurla. The MoU of 
the work was, however, signed with the Railway only in January 2009, after the expiry of five 
years. This resulted in blockage of Rs 89 lakh, besides denial of the intended benefits of the 
connectivity to port users. 
=	 At New Mangalore port, the users stated (December 2008) that a rail link between Ankola 
and Hubli should be established to reduce the distance from the port to the mineral rich 
hinterland.
83 Charges levied for the use of port land


Report No. 3 of 2009-10
60
4.6 Absence of Exclusive Roads and Access Restrictions on Common Roads
It was noticed that 28 per cent of cargo dealt with by the major ports during 2007-08 was 
transported through roads. Except for Haldia, Mormugao, Paradip and Visakhapatnam where rail 
was the preferred mode for dispersal of cargo, the movement at other ports was by roads.  
Exclusive approach roads and unrestricted movement of cargo play a significant role in speedy 
evacuation of cargo from port areas and reducing congestion to a great extent.
Audit observed that most of the major ports except Princess Dock in Mumbai had two to three 
common entry and exit gates for movement of cargo. JNPT had only one access point to the port. 
In all the ports, the exit points opened to roads common to general traffic as well and there were 
no exclusive port roads except for short ones in Kandla and Visakhapatnam. This restricted the 
free and speedy movement of cargo from the port premises, which was further delayed due 
to restrictions imposed on cargo movement during working hours. At Chennai, the movement 
of cargo during the daytime was restricted due to the absence of exclusive approach roads. At 
Mormugao port, entry for heavy vehicles in the city was restricted during daytime. At Kolkata port, 
Customs clearances were given from 10 am to 4 pm whereas from 6 am to 6 pm, trucks were not 
allowed on the roads. The waiting period for trucks to enter the port was thus very long. Due to 
non-availability of data, the waiting time could not be measured in respect of Kolkata port but the 
feedback of users disclosed that it was more than a day. 
Thus the lack of exclusive approach roads as well as access restrictions on common roads resulted 
not only in delays in the movement of cargo but also led to congestion. 
At Visakhapatnam, users felt that due to several railway crossings, the movement of trucks on 
roads had to be stopped frequently due to placing of wagons. The port’s Management stated (June 
2009) that the interface between rail and road was an issue of concern and congestion was caused 
mainly due to lack of space. Construction of flyovers at some points was being contemplated by 
them.
Users of Mormugao port felt that restrictions on city roads for trailers carrying 40 feet containers 
caused loss of time.
4.7 Wider and Better Maintained Roads 
The Committee on Infrastructure recommended that  all port connectivity national highways 
having a traffic count of 12,000 passenger car units or more should  be taken up for four-laning and 
directed the port trusts to prepare pre-feasibility studies for such projects. Audit observed that 

61
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
the average width of roads varied amongst 
the ports. As seen from Fig 4.4, the roads 
at Mormugao Tuticorin and Visakhapatnam 
were narrow. Six - lane roads were available 
only at JNPT where the maximum width of 
the road was 22 m.
In Cochin, a sizeable portion of cargo was 
transported by roads, which were very 
congested during peak hours. The port roads 
were not straight and there were no four-
lane roads. The existing link road between Wellingdon Island and the NH- 47 bypass was very 
congested due to heavy truck and passenger traffic during peak hours. The port users suggested 
an exclusive/dedicated corridor for port cargo. The port reported that the land available in the 
port area to provide for a four lane road was very limited. Cochin port had requested NHAI 
in May 2007 to update the detailed project report pertaining to the four-laning of NH- 47A 
from Kundannoor to Willingdon Island through their consultant, the outcome of which was still 
awaited.
Ports such as Haldia, Kandla, Mormugao and Visakhapatnam, were connected to one national 
highway whereas the other ports had connectivity with more than one highway.
At Chennai, port users felt that the national highways leading to the city from various parts of the 
State were in good shape, but the city roads connecting such national highways with the port were 
in poor condition. For example, the road connecting the port with the National Highway leading to 
Kolkata was just 15 feet wide for a long stretch at Royapuram leading to frequent traffic congestion. 
At Cochin, the users felt that the port roads were narrow involving numerous turns with residential 
areas, schools and religious buildings at both the sides, hindering movement of traffic. 
New Mangalore port users expressed the need for widening of NH -13 connecting the mineral rich 
hinterland and the port.
Port users at Visakhapatnam found the condition of the port roads to be very poor. The roads 
in the dock area being laid with cement bricks were getting damaged within a short period of 
six months, requiring frequent repairs adding to the traffic problem. Besides, there were no 
alternate roads for emergency use. The port’s Management stated (June 2009) that cement 
bricks were being used after being considered suitable in light of the marshy soils beneath 
and also to avoid the huge costs of consolidating the road crest to the extent of 10 metres as 
recommended by a consultant. 
Fig 4.4

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
62
4.8 Delays in Road Connectivity Projects
The National Maritime Development Programme envisaged 22 road connectivity projects under 
Phase-I and five projects under Phase-II. The projects under Phase-I were to be completed by 
March 2009 whereas the stipulated date of completion of the projects under Phase –II was 2012.
Audit observed that only two projects had been completed as of date and 15 projects were in 
progress. It was noticed that two projects were at the planning stage, whereas the feasibility 
studies of three projects had been proposed to be taken up. Two projects at Visakhapatnam were 
at the stage of feasibility study and one project each at Chennai and New Mangalore ports had 
been taken over by NHAI as Special Purpose Vehicle projects. Audit observed that the delays in 
completion of these projects were due to lack of environmental clearances, alignment issues and 
changes in the scope of some works.
In Chennai, inordinate delays were noticed in the implementation of road connectivity improvement 
schemes. A connectivity scheme called ‘Dedicated Elevated Corridor on NH-4 from Port to 
Maduravoyal’ envisaged as early as in 2005 was still to take off. The port’s Management agreed 
that the road projects had been delayed and stated (May 2009), that they were under execution 
by SPVs which had been set up for the purpose. 
For increasing road connectivity, Mormugao port initiated (2000) construction of a four -lane 
highway of 18 km under NHAI providing connecting to NH- 17, which was to be completed in March 
2003. Despite having deposited funds with the State Government for the project, the highway had 
not been connected to the port due to delay in land acquisition by the State Government.
Case Study: Road Connectivity projects remained incomplete at Mumbai
Ø  The concretisation of the Mazagaon Sewree Reclamation Road was proposed in July 2006 
with a stipulation to complete it by August 2008.  Despite the fact that the poor condition 
of the road hampered the smooth flow of traffic, the work was finally awarded only in June 
2007 and remained incomplete as of January 2009. 
Ø  The reconstruction work of Nawab Tank Overbridge was pending for more than three 
years after it was initially proposed in November 2005.  Approval of the Board to engage a 
consultant for preparing the design and estimate took two years after the initial proposal. 
Although the consultant submitted his report in June 2008, the work had not been awarded 
as of January 2009..

63
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
Ø  Although proposals for construction of two other roads were made in November 2005 for 
meeting the increased traffic due to the Offshore Container Terminal, the projects were still 
to be finalized as of January 2009.
Ø  The construction of a salt pan link road between MbPT’s Wadala Mahul Pipeline Road 
and MCGM’s Wadala Truck Terminus Road was taken up in 1994 to improve the road 
corridor for smooth movement of container traffic. It comprised widening of the  Wadala 
Mahul Road (400m), construction of a bridge across Kharoop Creek and construction of 
a new salt pan link road (700m). While the first two components were completed at a 
total cost of Rs.2.50 crore in 1998, construction of the link road measuring 700 m was yet 
to commence due to a litigation arising from the notification for closure of salt work in 
1962. As the work was taken up without clear title to land, the objective of easing traffic 
movement could not be served. Besides, funds amounting to Rs.2.50 crore remained 
blocked from 1998.
Ø  Mumbai port decided (February 2005) to fund the work of Panjorapole Link road to the 
extent of Rs.35 crore or 25 per cent of the contract amount, whichever was lower.  The work 
order was issued by MMRDA in April 2005 with a completion period of 24 months (April 
2007). Till December 2008, only three per cent of the work was completed. Moreover, if 
the road of 700 m length between Wadala Mahul Pipeline Road and MCGM Truck Terminal  
as referred to in the previous paragraph, was not developed, the purpose of the  link road 
would be defeated.
The Ministry stated (August 2009) that the projects under implementation were being 
monitored by the Ministry. However as stated in the foregoing paragraphs, it was noticed that 
the implementation of the projects was badly delayed, due to which the intended benefits 
could not be availed of in time.
Recommendations
Ø  Four-laned roads and double line rail connectivity as recommended by the Committee on 
Infrastructure should be taken up for speedy implementation. Increased length of loops 
at sidings and larger space envelopes should be factored in while implementing new rail 
projects so as to harness increased volumes of cargo.

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
64
Ø  Mechanization of handling at sidings should be considered at ports with larger volumes of 
bulk cargo.
Ø  Emphasis should be laid on the widening of the port roads where port roads are narrow.
Ø  Implementation of road projects in close coordination with NHAI should be taken up 
expeditiously for efficient evacuation of cargo from ports.

65
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
5 Performance indicators
5.1 Performance Indicators of Ports
Operational efficiency at ports is determined primarily by the following four efficiency 
parameters:
Every year, each major port enters into a MoU with the Ministry, in which targeted efficiency 
parameters are agreed upon. The efficiency parameters for a year are fixed, taking into account 
a percentage increase over the average of the last three years and the traffic projections as 
communicated by the Ministry of Shipping. The Ministry had stipulated (April 2003) that these 
targets should not be lower than the actuals for the previous year. As the performance of a port in 
respect of the above parameters enhances its competitiveness, it is imperative that the targets are 
fixed in a manner that incentivises better performance.
5.2 Fixation of Targets
Audit observed significant deficiencies in the formulation and fixation of performance targets as 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
66
5.2.1  Wide variations in targets 
There were significant inter-port variations in respect of targeted efficiency parameters which 
were abnormally low in 
some cases. The variation 
in targets for output per 
ship berth day in 2008-09 in 
different ports for different 
categories of cargo, are 
shown in Figures 5.1, 5.2 
and 5.3. 
It can be seen that the 
targets for output per 
berth day at Tuticorin and 
Mormugao were very low 
compared to those of Cochin 
and Kandla in the case of 
liquid cargo. Similarly, for 
dry bulk cargo, the targets 
were low for Kolkata and 
Mumbai as compared to 
Mormugao and Paradip. 
Container targets were 
highest in Chennai, JNPT 
and Tuticorin. 
Since the targets fixed by 
the Ministry were not based 
on the standard outputs of 
equipment and berths and 
remained a mere upgrade of 
the previous performances 
as already stated in Para 
5.1, very low targets were 
set in some ports based on 
past achievements, which did not motivate them to achieve higher mechanisation levels and 
adopt better labour practices. 

67
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
5.2.2  Formulation of high idle time
Audit observed that in seven out of the 11 ports, the Ministry had fixed idle time targets of 
more than 20 per cent of the time at berth as shown in Figure 5.4. At Haldia, the vessels were 
targeted to be idle at berths 
for 42 per cent  of the time. 
As a result, vessels remained 
at berths for longer periods, 
resulting in increased waiting 
time for incoming vessels and 
congestion. It was noticed that 
despite having mechanised 
facilities for handling dry bulk 
cargo, the average PBD for a 
dry bulk vessel at Haldia was 
4.24 days, out of which 2.21 days were on account of berths remaining occupied. 
In the case of Mumbai port, the idle time at berths targeted continuously for the last three years 
was 25 per cent. The port Management stated (May 2009) that the high idle time was due to the 
long time taken for documentation and clearances, constituting 60 per cent of the idle time. Since 
the targets were based on past achievements, the idle time incurred for documentation was also 
factored into the targets. This indicated that the targets fixed by the Ministry were not realistic.
5.2.3  Low equipment utilisation target
Although the Ministry fixed norms of 90 per 
cent availability and 60 per cent utilisation for all 
equipment, these were adopted only by JNPT. In 
Mormugao and Kolkata, no specific targets for 
utilisation of equipment were prescribed in the 
MoUs. At all other ports, the targets for utilisation 
mentioned in the MoUs were below the prescribed 
norms for some of the categories of equipment. At 
Cochin and New Mangalore ports, the utilisation 
targets for wharf cranes were below 10 per cent. 
Mumbai port consistently adopted abnormally 
low targets for utilisation of equipment for the 
last three years as shown in Table 5.1.
Fig 5.4
Table 5.1
Utilisation targets for Mumbai port (percentage)
Type of  
equipment
2005-06 2006-07 2007-08
Wharf crane 17 17 17
Fork lift 20 20 18
Heavy duty 
fork lift
15 10 15
Quay gantry 
cranes
25 20 15
RTG crane 5 Not fixed Not fixed
Reach stacker 10 10 Not fixed
Mobile crane 12 12 12

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
68
The Ministry validated these low targets in the MoUs in disregard of the norms it had prescribed 
earlier. The low and easily achievable targets did not motivate the ports to adopt good practices 
like synchronization of maintenance schedules, proper inventory management and timely cargo 
aggregation for improving the utilisation of equipment.
5.2.4  Reduction in targets
In contravention of the Ministry’s stipulation (April 2003) against lowering performance targets, 
several ports reduced the targets in their MoUs (Table 5.2).
Efficiency parameters Instances where targets were lowered
Average ship berth day output Target lowered in the case of VPT for liquid and JNPT for dry and 
break bulk cargo
Idle time at berth Target lowered for JNPT
Pre-berthing detention Target lowered for HDC, JNPT, NMPT and VPT
Turn-round time Target lowered for Haldia and JNPT and VPT
Table 5.2
By validating the reduced targets, the Ministry’s stipulation for non-reduction of performance 
targets was rendered largely ineffective.
5.2.5  Targets not based on facts 
The performance parameters were not based on standard equipment or output of berths due to 
which there was no proper interrelationship between the parameters. 
Audit observed the following in this regard:
=	 At Kolkata port, a two per cent increase in output per ship berth day was targeted to handle 
six per cent increase of cargo volumes, indicating a mismatch between the two.
=	 High availability levels of equipment presuppose proper maintenance arrangements like 
annual maintenance contracts, periodic overhauling and manning of in-house workshops, in 
the case of old ports. The cost of maintaining high availability levels of equipment is realised 
only if they are matched with proper utilisation. It was noticed in audit that the targeted 
availability of forklift trucks in Cochin was raised from 75 to 85 per cent in the targets set for 
2008-09, whereas the target for utilisation was reduced from 50 to 29 per cent. Similarly, in 
the case of wharf cranes, the availability for 2008-09 was targeted at 90 per cent whereas the 

69
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
utilisation target was reduced from nine to seven per cent at Cochin. At New Mangalore the 
targets for such cranes came down from seven to five per cent during 2006-08. Increasing 
the availability targets without increasing the scope of utilisation would have enhanced the 
maintenance costs without any added benefits. 
5.3 Recording and Reporting of Performance
As per the international norms, TRT of a vessel is calculated from the time of arrival till its departure. 
It is expressed in days or hours. A diagrammatic representation of PBD and TRT is shown in  
Figure 5.5. 
Fig 5.5  Diagrammatic representation of PBD and TRT

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
70
As s hown in the diagram, the total TRT also includes PBD. In 2002, the Ministry instructed 
the ports to report TRT from the time when a vessel was ready for berthing till the time it 
left the berth and to exclude the waiting period on non-port account.
Similarly, PBD was to be reckoned from the time of arrival of a vessel at anchorage till the 
time of its readiness for berthing as shown above. The Indian Ports Association (IPA), an 
autonomous body under the Ministry of Shipping, communicated (July 2006) to all the ports, 
the need for segregating the factors affecting PBD into ‘port account’ and ‘non-port account’. 
Factors such as requirement of berths, pilots etc, which were directly under the control of 
the port, were to be classified to be under ‘port account’ and factors like ship breakdown, 
weather constraints etc were to be clubbed under ‘non-port account’. 
 In this regard, Audit observed the following;
=	 Chennai port reported average PBD of 0.96 hours per vessel in their Administrative 
Report for 2007-08, which represented the PBD only on ‘port account’ whereas the 
average PBD was 37.37 hours if delays on ‘non-port account’ were also included in the 
calculation. The other ports however, disclosed the total PBD in their reports.
=	 At Cochin, PBD due to non-availability of berths was recorded as PBD on ‘port account’ 
and all other factors for delays from the time of arrival of the vessels at the anchorage 
point up to the berthing time were classified under ‘non-port account’. Even though the 
port accepted (May 2009) that the movement of hazardous cargo vessels was restricted 
during night hours due to poor lighting in the Mattancherry channel, no PBD on account 
of night navigation was recorded under ‘port account’. After including 4646 hours of 
PBD, which was not classified, under ‘port account’, the PBD worked out to 7.65 hours 
as against 1.21 hours per vessel reported by the port for 2007-08. 
=	 At JNPT, the vessel data in the Vessel Register of the Operations Department did not 
match the entries in the reports prepared by the Marine Department. It was noticed 
that the time of boarding of a vessel by a pilot was in some cases shown to be prior 
to the time of arrival of the vessel at anchorage. The entries in pilots’ diaries showed 
that one pilot had handled more than two arriving vessels at the same time and one 
pilot had handled two vessels- one incoming vessel from anchorage to berth side and 
another outgoing vessel sailing from berth at the same time, which was not possible. 
Such inconsistencies in reporting of data were also noticed in the software used by the 

71
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
port. The software for recording the vessel data required dates to be reported as MM/
DD/YYYY, whereas sometimes dates were reported as DD/MM/YYYY, leaving scope for 
incorrect comp utation of PBD and TRT. 
=	 JNPT computed the PBD of vessels by ignoring the period from the arrival of a ship 
at anchorage to the boarding of the pilots. This was not as per the IPA code and 
the actual PBD was, therefore, much higher than the reported one. The total PBD 
in respect of 1725 vessels that called at the port during 2007-08 was 39,947 hours. 
Against an average PBD of 4.22 hours and 2.17 hours computed by the port for two 
months viz; July and December 2007 respectively, the average PBD actually worked 
out to 9.18 hours and 7.40 hours as computed from the records of the Dock Master/
Berthing Assistant.
=	 The PBD at Kandla was computed taking into account the dates and timings of arrival 
of vessels at the outer berth till the dates and timings of boarding of the pilots on the 
vessels. At Kandla, if a vessel was anchored at the mooring before final berthing due to 
any other reason, the waiting time in the mooring was also added to the PBD.
=	 Tuticorin port had two operational wings, viz Zone A and Zone B. Though the cargo 
handled at Zone B was included in the total cargo handling of the port, the performance 
indicators of Zone B were not included in their Administration Report. The port’s 
Management replied (April 2009) that these indicators were not being maintained as 
Zone B handled small vessels/ barges only. Reply of the Management is not acceptable 
as there is no such evaluation by the Ministry for preparation of performance indicators. 
In the absence of this information, the reports did not reflect the complete picture of 
the performance of all the berths of the port.
As calculations of PBD and TRT were reckoned from the time when vessels were ready 
for berthing, the readiness was interpreted differently by different ports considering 
factors such as the time when the pilots boarded the vessels, pilot call time and starting 
time towards the berth, resulting in lack of uniform reporting of TRT amongst the 
ports. The method of computation of TRT also differed from international practices of 
computing TRT adop ted by the United Nations Conference for Trade and Development 
(UNCTAD).

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
72
5.4 Achievement of PBD and TRT targets
Apart from the deficiencies in target fixation discussed above, most of the ports failed to achieve 
the efficiency targets for PBD and TRT as shown in Figures 5.6 and 5.7.
Fig 5.6
Fig 5.7
At Visakhapatnam, the TRT targets could not be achieved as dry bulk constituting 64 per 
cent  of the total cargo was mostly handled by conventional means instead of through 

73
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
JNPT 
Berth
Number 
of vessels
TRT in days re-
ported by Port
JNPCT 664 2.27
NSICT 722 1.04
GTIPL 941 1.48
Table 5.3
mechanised facilities, consuming more time than required. Analysis of data on post-
handling detention time for vessels at NMPT during 2007-08, revealed that 696 vessels 
were detained for more than three hours on an average beyond the normal time of two 
hours prescribed by the port. Such post-handling delays were mainly attributable to 
documentation and draft problems.
The average TRT at Berth No-9 having a Mechanical Ore Handling Plant, the most preferred berth 
at MGPT, was 5.93 days in 2007-08 against 5.76 days in 2006-07. Lower output during the year 
coupled with shortage of preferred berths caused the increase in TRT of the vessels.
Audit observed that the TRT for 2007-08 (Table 
5.3) at the port’s own container terminal in JNPT 
was almost double the TRT of private operators, 
indicating higher efficiency of private terminals. This 
enabled the private terminals to handle more vessels 
than JNPCT. 
At Haldia, it was noticed that in the cases of 72 vessels, an average of 25 hours per vessel was lost 
due to idle time at berth and post-handling detentions during December 2007.
At Kandla, the high occupancy of berths was due to the vessels not leaving the berths after 
completion of handling. It was also noticed that in 114 cases during 2006-07, ships were detained 
after the completion of cargo handling for 11 to 24 hours against the average post-cargo handling 
detention of five to six hours at the port. This also led to idle occupancy of berths and increase in 
TRT.
At Mumbai, TRT was 2.91 days, mainly caused by the time lost at the berths. Out of 1.08 lakh hours 
spent at berths, 0.17 lakh hours were idle mainly on account of documentation problem.
5.5 Berth Occupancy 
The berth occupancy factor (BOF) is the time that a berth is utilised, divided by the total available 
time. For a port, it is the primary indicator of congestion. As recommended in the Major Ports 
Development Plan by the Port of Rotterdam, 60-70 per cent would be the optimum BOF while 
higher berth occupancy would indicate congestion. 
The parameter is defined as a percentage of the time when a berth is occupied to the total time 

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
74
available at the berth. BOF is an important consideration 
for making investment decisions for addition of new 
berths or extension of existing ones. It was, therefore, 
important that the correct position of berth occupancy 
be presented to the Management and investors. 
It was noticed in audit that the ports
84 were computing 
and reporting BOF in terms of the days when the berths 
were occupied during a year. Even when a berth was occupied for an hour during the day, occupancy 
for the whole day was reported. This resulted in reporting of high berth occupancy even when only 
a few vessels were being handled.
At New Mangalore Port Trust, berths handling fewer vessels also reported high occupancy as 
shown in Table 5.4 due to lower capacity of MLA’s and non-mechanisation of berths. Similarly, 
at Visakhapatnam, Berth No EQ 2 reported 80 per cent occupancy, whereas it handled only 0.61 
million tonnes of cargo during the year. At JNPT, during 2007-08, the berth occupancy reported 
was in the range of 54.71 to 84.55 per cent, whereas the berth occupancy calculated by Audit 
ranged from 31.38 to 83.65 per cent as shown in Table 5.5. 
Type of berth Occupancy reported by the Port Occupancy calculated by Audit
JNPCT 84.55 79.66
GTICT 71.69 59.30
Shallow Water Berth 54.71 31.38
BPCL 60.29 59.55
Table 5.5
Calculation of berth occupancy in days did not give a correct position of congestion at the 
berths and also posed a risk in taking decisions regarding new berths, as cited in the following 
case study.
84 NMPT however stated in June 2009 that they were computing and reporting BOF on hourly basis. 
Berth no
(NMPT)
No. of vessels 
handled in July 
and December 
2007
Occupancy 
Percentage
10 28 71
7 9 60
Table 5.4

75
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
As seen from the table, the BOF fell sharply 
when it was computed in hours. Audit 
observed that in light of the low occupancy 
figures computed in hours  and poor 
utilisation of capacity (56 per cent in 2007-
08), the capital expenditure decision to 
reconstruct Mattancherry wharf (Q4 berth) 
needed reconsideration. In addition, the 
project also merits reconsideration in view of 
the following factors:
(i) The consultant reported that the trend 
of the cargo was decreasing as shown in 
the figure below 
(ii) The wharf (Q4 berth) was being 
designed to accommodate vessels with 
draft of 12.5m. The average depth of 
Mattancherry Channel was only 8.10 
m and it would require more capital 
investment for extensive capital 
dredging;
(iii) Due to prevalent height restrictions by 
the adjacent naval base, two cranes of 
25 tonne capacity each, could not be 
installed. Thus, operation of the berth 
remained a remote possibility.
Occupancy in hours
Berth no Type of 
Cargo
Occu-
pancy 
reported 
in days  
( per cent)
Berth  
occupancy 
based on 
hours 
 ( per cent)
Q1 General 
cargo
100 16.50
Q3 General 
cargo
75 35.30
Q6 General 
cargo/  
containers
67 54.63
Q7 Containers 30 26.30
Q8 & Q9 Containers 42 41.25
NCB & SCB General 
cargo/Liquid  
Ammonia
59 44.90
Average 66 50.00
Capital expenditure decisions
Sl. 
No
Name of the 
work
Board 
sanction
Tendered cost 
(Rs in crore)
1. Widening of 
BTP
30.1.2006 3.85
2. Reconstruc-
tion and 
revamping of 
NCB (for han-
dling coal)
15.10.2007 19.88
3. Re-con-
structions of 
Mattancherry 
/wharf (Q4 
berth)  (for 
handling dry 
bcarbulk (c) 
cargo)
31.10.2006 45.22
Case Study: Berth Occupancy at Cochin and Investment Decisions
The port calculated berth occupancy by taking the occupancy for a day even when the berth was 
occupied just for a few hours during the day. Under this method, the berth occupancy was high de -
spite the berths being vacant most of the time. Even though the port was operating at 56 per cent of 
its capacity, the berth occupancy figures at Cochin ranged between 60 and 72 per cent. It was seen 
that the occupancy of the berths would be lower, if calculated in hours, as shown below. The capital 
expenditure decisions for berth reconstruction and widening taken to address the high occupancy of 
berths are also shown below:

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
76
5.6 Port Capacity 
In respect of major ports, the capacities of the port are the aggregated capacities of all their berths 
as computed below:
Capacity = 330 x berth occupancy x achievable ship berth day output
(=330 = No. of working days in a year)
Berth Occupancy = I     Specialised terminals
a        One berth                                       60 %
b        More than one berth                   70 %
II General cargo berths
a        Upto three berths                        70 %
b        More than three berths              75 %
Achievable Ship Berth Day 
Output = Volume of cargo handled in that berth in a year/ berth utilisation 
in a year
In the case of existing berths, the maximum output achieved 
o 
during the past few years may be taken
In the case of new berths, average ship berth day output may o 
be taken, considering parameters like type of cargo, method of 
handling, vessel characteristics and equipment productivity. 
Audit observed the following;
=		 As per para 7.1.2 of the recommendation of the IMG in July 2007, ports were to ensure round-
the-clock operations by December 2008. By taking the working days in a year as 330, the 
calculation of capacity was conservative by 10 per cent.
=		 Berth occupancy was not computed properly in the ports as stated in Para 5.5 and further 
assessments based on such figures only distorted the capacity position. 
=		 The capacity of berths did not represent the handling of cargo that was possible at a berth but 
was merely an extension of what happened in the previous years. This is explained by means 
of an illustration as shown subsequently:
The Management stated (May 2009) that the investments for creation of capacity were capital- 
intensive with a long- term life span and it may not be appropriate to limit the scope of future growth 
in view of constraints that were short-term in nature. The port ought to have considered factors 
such as availability of Ernakulam wharf with 12.5 m draft for handling bulk cargo, naval restrictions 
on the height of cranes and the possibility of higher utilisation of other berths, before going in for 
investment of Rs 45 crore on Mattancherry wharf.
The Ministry accepted (August 2009) the audit recommendations. 

77
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
Example:
Total cargo handled during a year  =600 tonnes
Berth occupied in days   =200 days
Capacity (taking 365 days)=(Average output per day) X (Berth Occupancy) X 365
     = (600/200) X (200/365) X 365
     = 600 tonnes
Thus the capacity calculated by the ports was equal to the cargo actually handled and had no 
relation to the size of berth, draft, other infrastructure facilities. As a result, the inefficiencies of 
the past years were being factored into the subsequent years due to which most of the ports were 
reporting high capacity utilisation. 
Case Study: Ad hoc capacity calculations
(i) Capacity at Kolkata Dock System (KDS) (calculation as on 31 March, 2007)
o   For calculating the capacity at KDS, the actual ship berth day output was not taken but 
some projected figures were taken which were up to 85 per cent more than the actual. 
The increment in output considered for calculating capacity was not realistic when the 
equipment and all other factors remained the same. 
o   Berth occupancy was taken as 75 per cent  for all the berths even though the highest 
occupancy was 63 per cent and 21 berths had occupancy of 27 per cent or less with the 
least being 7 per cent.
o   KDS adopted 330 days for calculation of capacity against 365 days as envisaged in the port’s 
policy, 
(ii)  Capacity at Cochin (calculations as on 31 March, 2008)
o   Instead of the actuals, projected figures were taken for outputs, which were not linked to 
equipment or other facilities at berths.
Berth No Actual berth day output Berth day output taken for capacity calculation
Q2 413 1500
Q3 562 1500
NCB 3899 3000
SCB 5412 3000
COT 27052 10100
NTB 9730 8000
STB 8389 8000
Q7 7541 6000
Q8 9562 6300
Q9 8152 6300
o  The capacity arrived at as per the calculation was 22.87 million tonnes as on March 2008 
but the figure of reassessed capacity was finally stated as 28.37 million tones, indicating an 
addition of 5.5 MT. The reasons for addition of capacity were not available on record.

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
78
The Ministry stated (August 2009) that the capacity of the ports was assessed by the Engineering Wing 
of the Ministry after objective assessment of the infrastructure like jetties and equipment. The reply 
is not acceptable as it was found that the capacity calculations were based on past performances and 
objective assessment on the basis of available infrastructure was not being made.
5.7 Capacity Augmentation Schemes
Audit examination revealed that high c apacity utilisation and berth occupancy were considered 
to be important parameters to justify expansion and addition of berths as well as other facilities 
by the ports. Inaccurate assessment of these parameters entailed the risk of creation of surplus 
capacity as discussed below:
=	 At Cochin, the capacity of the port as on March 2008 was 28.37 million tonnes. The actual 
cargo handled during the year was, however 15.76 million tonnes at 56 per cent of the 
capacity. Against this background, NMDP envisaged further capacity augmentation to 33.50 
million tonnes at the end of Phase-I i.e. by 2008-09. As the capacity was already understated 
by factoring inefficiencies in the capacity calculations, the capital expenditure decisions taken 
by the port were not justified.
=	 In New Mangalore, four out of 13 berths had capacity utilisation of less than 50 per cent. Lack 
of facilities at the berths resulted in non-uniform 
utilisation of berths. It was also noticed that after 
creation of the facilities, the capacities remained 
unutilized. The capacity of New Mangalore as 
of March 2005 was 30.30 million tonnes which 
increased by 4.5 million tonnes during 2006-07 
with the construction of an additional general cargo 
berth. The re-assessed capacity of the port as of 
March 2008 was 43.50 million tonnes. This capacity 
remained unutilised as shown in Fig. 5.8.
Recommendations
Ø  All major ports should adhere to the defined common minimum standards of performance 
based on the output of standard equipment under normal working conditions, without 
making allowances for inefficiencies.
Ø  In the case of equipment, the ports should adopt measures like prioritization and synchronization 
of maintenance schedules, proper inventory management, timely cargo aggregation and 
disposal of obsolete/surplus equipment without undue delays in achieving better availability 
and utilisation, rather than lowering the targets to indicate achievements.
Fig 5.8

79
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
Ø  The Ministry should ensure correct reporting of pre-berthing detention and turn-round time 
by the ports.
Ø The Ministry should consider computation of berth occupancy in hours, Capital expenditure 
decisions on new berths should be based on occupancy and utilisation figures of existing 
berths in hours.
Ø Capacity should be objectively assessed, based on the capacities of equipment and other 
infrastructure facilities and should not merely reflect the handling done during the earlier 
years.
The Ministry stated (August 2009) that the cargo handled differed across ports and the equipment 
and infrastructure were not standardised. 
The argument cannot be accepted as except for some types of cargo like logs or machinery for 
projects, most Indian ports were essentially handling similar cargo such as iron ore, coal, crude oil, 
POL, fertilizers and containers, although the cargo mix varied from port to port. Audit compared 
the targeted efficiency parameters for different types of cargo across ports (Figs 5.1, 5.2, 5.3) and 
found that the targeted outputs varied widely for similar cargo. For example, in the case of the 
most standard cargo i.e containers, the average output per day varied widely from 2500 TEUs per 
day to 18000 TEUs per day. Further, for each category of equipment, there needed to be a standard 
level of output on the basis of which, the efficiency targets for berths should have been fixed. 
Consequently, low targets in some ports did not motivate them to achieve higher standards of 
performance. Moreover, as explained in the foregoing paragraphs, efficiency enhancements could 
not be achieved by allowing targeted idle time at berth of over 20 per cent in seven of the 11 ports 
(Para 5.2.2) and equipment utilization target of less than 20 per cent (Para 5.2.3).
In light of the above, instead of fixing targets based on past performances, there was a need for 
defining standards across ports based on objective parameters like standard output of equipment 
and labour, so that reasonable and comparable standards of efficiency could be achieved at all 
ports.
The Ministry further stated (August 2009) that efficiency parameters like PBD and TRT were being 
monitored both by the Ministry and the IPA. In this regard, Audit noticed that details of the factors 
causing PBD and TRT at ports as required by IPA and the Ministry were not being maintained and 
reported uniformly by the ports. The Ministry’s contention that the ports were maintaining the 
records of time taken for each activity from the vessel arrival at anchorage was, therefore, not 
acceptable. 

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
80
6 Schemes undertaken
6.1 National Maritime Development Programme
Government of India had formulated the National Maritime Development Programme (NMDP) 
in 2006 to facilitate enhanced private investment, improve service quality and promote 
competitiveness amongst the ports. A total of 276 schemes and projects, involving investment of 
Rs 55804 crore85 up to 2011-12 were identified under the NMDP to realise the stated objectives. 
The programme was the first national level Plan for the sector and sought to integrate all major 
schemes under implementation in the major ports as on 2005-06. It also underscored a policy shift 
for the business model to be followed by the ports from a ‘service model’ to a ‘landlord model’, as 
explained in Fig 6.1 below:
The term ‘landlord model’ had developed gradually in the literature on port development. The 
advantages cited for adoption of this model for ports included availability of customer-tailored 
85This included 14 schemes of Ennore Port involving an investment of Rs 6466 crore.

81
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
services, inflow of expertise and technology, increased responsiveness to market demands and 
curbs on cross- subsidization and segmentation of tariff.
NMDP envisaged enhancement of the handling capacity of the major ports from 385 MT in 2004-
05 to 755 MT by 2011- 2012, in two phases (2005-09 and 2007-12) as given in Table 6.1 below:
NMDP No of 
schemes
Total invest-
ment
(Rs in crore)
Private funding
(Rs in crore)
Share of pri-
vate funds
(in % terms)
Expected capac-
ity 
rise (in MT)
*Phase-I (05-09) 170 27075 14562 54 230.40
*Phase-II (07-12) 92 22263 14194 64 139.27
Total 262 49338 28756 58 369.67
Table 6.1
The schemes under NMDP focus on 
the following major areas (Fig 6.2): 
=		 Deepening of channels/ berths
=		 Berth construction
=		 Procurement of equipment, 
=		 Connectivity projects,
=		 Others. 
In line with the landlord model, the 
bulk of the public investment was 
planned to be made on development 
of common facilities through schemes on deepening and connectivity. Fifty four per cent of the 
investment was planned for construction, upgradation and reconstruction of berths, where private 
players were expected to play a dominant role under private-public partnership (PPP). It was 
expected that by the end of Phase-I i.e. by March 2009, an additional capacity of 230 MT would be 
created
86 to take the total handling capacity in major ports to 616 MT.
86 Another 139.27 MT of capacity was expected to be added upon completion of Phase-II of NMDP by the end of 
Phase-II i.e March 2012.
Fig 6.2
*Excepting schemes planned for Ennore Port

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
82
6.2 Status of Implementation
It was observed that only 31 out of 170 schemes constituting only 18 per cent of the total schemes 
envisaged under Phase I of NMDP were completed (Fig 6.3) by March 2009. These were mostly 
schemes relating to replacement of equipment where the average value of investment was below 
Rs 50 crore and was within the sanctioning power of the port trust boards.
The progress of implementation of schemes relating to deepening of channels and construction of 
berths was dismal. In spite of this, the ports reported (March 2009) a handling capacity addition of 
184.57 MT in four years from March 2005 to March 2009, which was 80 per cent of that targeted 
in Phase-I of NMDP . 
6.2.1 Delays in execution
An analysis of 26 ongoing schemes (see Fig 6.4) 
indicated that these schemes were behind schedule 
during December 2008. Delays in completion of the 
projects were attributable to factors like delays in 
approvals of the Ministry, delays in clearances from the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) and State 
Pollution Control Boards and delays in tendering and 
contract procedures. 
Fig 6.3
Fig 6.4

83
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
JNPT had planned 27 schemes (the highest among all ports) to be taken up by March 2009. Out of 
these, only 11 schemes had been taken up and only five could be completed.
At Mumbai, the NMDP schemes planned for development of berths (through PPP or public 
investment) could not take off due to reasons shown in the following box: 
Berth construction/ upgradation schemes in Mumbai: Rs 1577 crore
i)  “Construction of second berth for handling chemicals off Pir Pau pier” (Rs 90 crore with 
investment from port’s and State Government’s funds). The aim was to reduce high PBD at 
the existing chemical berth at New Pir Pau. The construction was still to commence even 
after 10 years from the original sanction date.
Project Original 
sanction 
date for 
develop-
ment by 
private 
funds
Cancel-
lation of 
original 
tender
Sanction 
date for de-
velopment 
by internal 
resources
Date of 
seeking 
Ministry’s 
approval
Date of 
sanction 
by Min-
istry 
Date of 
cancel-
ation of
new 
tender.
Date of re
tendering
Status as of 
December 
2008
Second-
chemi-
cal 
berth
November 
1999
Septem-
ber 2002
July 2005 April 2006 November 
2007
March 
2008
October 
2008
Tenders
pending
finalisation
Delays - - 33 months 8 months 18 mths - 6 months
ii) “Construction of two offshore container terminals (Rs 1228 crore)” through PPP mode. Works 
were still to commence after 10 years since conception.
Project Master 
Plan
sanc-
tion 
date
Prepara-
tion of 
detailed 
feasi-bility
report
Target 
date of 
commis-
ioning
Delay in in-
vitation and 
processing 
of Request 
for Qualifi-
cation
(RFQ)
Delay in 
grant of 
security 
clearance 
by Min-
istry 
for open-
ing
RFPs
Time 
taken 
for 
finalisa-
tion of 
draft 
licence 
agree-
ment
Time taken 
by Ministry to 
grant approval 
to port’s com-
ponent of work 
(about 35%)
Status as 
of  
December 
2008
Off-
shore 
con-
tainer 
ter-
minal
January 
1999
December 
2001
March
2005
36 months 20 
months
30 
months
15 months Licence 
agreement 
signed in 
December 
2007. 

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
84
 Audit also observed the following deficiencies in other ports:
=		 Chennai port had planned a total investment of Rs 1597 crore on 10 schemes, targeting a 76 
per cent addition to its existing capacity of handling 41.2 MT as on March 2005. It was found 
that none of the projects could be completed within the schedule and the capacity reported 
by the port at the end of 2007-08 was only 53.35 MT. 
=		 For Mormugao, nine schemes with a total estimate of Rs 573 crore were included in NMDP for 
capacity addition of 13 MT. Out of these, as of October 2008, only one equipment replacement 
scheme, involving an expenditure of Rs 33 crore, had been completed. Three critical schemes 
planned with private investment of Rs 302 crore had not been initiated as of March 2009. 
=		 New Mangalore port planned 14 projects for Phase-I with an investment of Rs 4240 crore 
including private funding of Rs 3145 crore on eight schemes. It was noticed that till March 
2009, two projects involving Rs 190 crore from private funds were in progress and one scheme 
was dropped. However, five projects involving Rs 2830 crore of private funds were still to be 
taken up. Out of those, two schemes involving Rs 50 crore private investments were awaiting 
Government approval.
=		 The capacity increase envisaged for Tuticorin port during Phase-I of NMDP was 2.25 times of 
its existing capacity of 15.8 MT in March 2005. Towards this end, 17 schemes were planned 
for the port. It was noticed that due to delays and non-completion of most of the projects, the 
port’s handling capacity stood at only 20.75 MT, registering a rise of only 25 per cent against 
the ambitious target. 
=		 Visakhapatnam port targeted a capacity addition of 50 per cent against its existing capacity 
of 49.65 MT, with the implementation of 22 schemes under NMDP . Being a port which 
iii)  “Reconstruction of quay wall to avoid damage to Hay Bunder”:  Although construction work 
was taken up, the contractor abandoned the job after physical progress of 4 per cent.
Project Date of 
issue of 
three  
tenders 
that 
were 
cancelled
Date
Cancel-
lation 
of third 
tender
Final 
work 
award
Through 
4th ten-
der
Target 
date of 
com-
pletion
Date of 
abandon-
ment of 
work by
contractor 
Date of 
approval 
-termina-
tion of 
contract 
by port
Physical 
progress 
of work
Audit 
obser-
vation
Quay 
wall
July 2001
July 2003
May 
2005
July 2006 Sept
2006
Janu-
ary2008
October 
2007
October 
2008
Four per 
cent
Inad-
equate 
monitor-
ing of the 
emergency 
job by the 
port.

85
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
handled significant volumes of dry bulk cargo, successful implementation of the schemes 
on modernization of handling equipment formed a critical prerequisite for its capacity 
augmentation. It was found that out of five schemes for procurement of equipment under 
Phase-I, only two could be completed. Out of five railway connectivity schemes envisaged at 
Visakhapatnam, none could be completed. 
The status of schemes planned under Phase-I of NMDP is enclosed in the Annexure to the report.
6.2.2  Prioritisation among schemes
NMDP acknowledged the limitations of drafts at Indian ports. However, it was observed that only 
11 per cent of the funds amounting to Rs 2878 crore were envisaged for 15 deepening projects 
planned in the first phase (Table 6.2). 
Status of all major deepening schemes taken up under NMDP phase-I               (Rs in crore)
Port (No of 
Schemes)
Investment 
planned
Budgetary 
support
Port’s 
Internal 
resources
Progress Remarks
Chennai (1) 143 48 47 68 per 
cent com-
pleted
Project cost to be met completely 
from internal resources.
Cochin (2) 412 189 223 One com-
pleted
One scheme of Rs 33 crore com -
pleted. 36 per cent of the other one 
completed till 31 March 2009. Gov-
ernment sanctioned Rs 83.93 crore 
loans for the scheme.
JNPT (1) 800 nil 800 No work Ministry did not approve the ten -
dered value (being 25% above es -
timates).
Kandla (1) 136 68 68 In progress Work-in-progress as on March 
2009.
KoPT (1) 385 385 nil No work Ministry directed to get the scheme 
revalidated. Due to delay the re -
vised estimates have crossed Rs 
900 crore.
MGPT (1) 65 32 33 No work Not yet taken up.
NMPT (2) 20 nil 20 One com-
pleted
The other scheme is in progress.
Paradip (2) 194.84 143.23 51.61 work in 
progress
One scheme is in progress.
TPT (1) 450 225 225 No work Tender under process.
Vizag (3) 273 103 135 One work 
in progress
Dredging in progress under one 
scheme. Second scheme at tender 
stage. Third is to be taken up.
Table 6.2

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
86
All the major deepening schemes except the one at JNPT were planned to be executed with 
budgetary support from the Government to the extent of 34-100 per cent as seen from Table 6.2. 
Audit observed that none of the critical deepening schemes, planned at seven ports, could be 
completed during the Phase-I period of the NMDP . The problems were attributed either to decision 
delays at various stages or non-finalization of tenders. However, the fact that not even a single 
major scheme had been completed indicated that adequate priority had not been accorded to this 
category of projects. The situation was similar for connectivity projects
87 where one out of the 11 
rail projects, and only three out of 22 road projects could be completed. Problems were attributed 
to delays in approvals and slow progress on behalf of partner agencies like Railways, NHAI, State 
governments, etc. 
Since deepening schemes aimed at creation and upgradation of common user facilities which 
were the primary responsibility of ports under the landlord model, non-implementation of these 
indicated a lackadaisical approach towards the National Maritime Development Policy. The biggest 
challenge of draft adequacy was not addressed while other related schemes were taken up. 
For example, at Haldia, where draft availability was the biggest threat and inefficient lock gate 
operations restricted entry to only eight vessels on an average per day, schemes for addition of 
berths were taken up without addressing these vital issues. Lack of proper emphasis on deepening 
schemes resulted in shortfalls in achievement of targeted capacity
88. 
The Ministry stated (August 2009) that an Apex committee and an operational committee with 
representatives of all concerned had been formed for better coordination in the case of connectivity 
projects. 
6.2.3  Non-alignment with the National Plans
Since NMDP had been formulated by taking into account important parameters like vessel sizes, 
economic growth, national traffic demand and other national projections, taking up of schemes  
 
 
87Implementation delays in connectivity projects and reasons have been discussed in the chapter on port con -
nectivity (Chapter 4).
88Targeted capacity: In spite of slow progress on the schemes that were planned, the actual capacity of major 
ports reported by the Ministry at the end of 2008-09 was 570.07 MT. The reported capacity addition during 
Phase-I of NMDP was 184.57 MT against the target of 230.40 MT, indicating 80 per cent achievement of the 
target. However, as the actual capacity calculated by ports was based on actual handling that was done and not 
on any scientific basis depending on the types of berths, types of equipment support, sizes of vessels, etc the 
actual target achievement in capacity augmentation could have been much lower. The problems inherent in the 
capacity calculations made by the ports have been separately commented upon in the Chapter on ‘Performance 
indicators’. 

87
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
by ports other than those envisaged under NMDP , posed a risk of allocation of resources towards 
projects in a suboptimal manner, in deviation of the national Plan. 
It was, however, noticed that the ports were implementing important schemes which were not 
covered under NMDP as shown in Table 6.3 below:
The projects taken up in Chennai 
under NMDP were based on 
a policy decision taken earlier 
(1999) that the port would be 
developed as a clean cargo 
port, primarily for handling 
containers. Dirtier cargo like coal 
and iron ore were planned to be 
gradually shifted to Ennore, the 
only corporatized major port 
in India located to the north of 
Chennai. Immediately following 
this decision, the handling 
of coal at Chennai showed a 
declining trend. The port also 
planned the development of 
a second container terminal 
under NMDP Phase-I and a third 
container terminal during Phase 
II by converting three existing 
coal handling berths and the coal 
stacking yard into a container storage yard. In spite of these development plans, coal handling 
again began to increase since 2005-06. In disregard of the plans of NMDP, the Chennai port 
signed (September 2007) a contract for installation of a semi-mechanised coal handling plant 
at a cost of Rs.42.83 crore and operation and maintenance of the same for five years at a 
cost of Rs.5 crore. The Management justified the investment stating that even though Ennore 
port was established in 2001, the entire thermal coal meant for power stations could not be 
handled there. Therefore, the coal handling at Chennai was on the rise. Thus, the vision of 
making Chennai port a clean port envisaged in 1999 and agreed to by the consultants, did not 
materialize. The investment made by the port was not along the lines of its stated long-term 
plans.
Ports No of 
non-NMDP 
schemes
Important non-NMDP schemes
KPT 4 Capital dredging at B7-B10- Rs 6 cr
Procurement of 3 MHCs-Rs 38.44 cr
Improvement of facilities-Rs 20 cr
Barge jetty at old Kandla-Rs 10 cr
MbPT 1 Replacement of 4 pilot launches- Rs 19.88 
cr
TPT 5 Sethusamudram project-Rs 2233 cr
Cargo berth construction-Rs 40 cr
Procurement of 
3 MVA Captive Power Plant-Rs10 cr
VPT 11 Replacement of dredger-Rs 30.90 cr
Replacement of tug-Rs 18.80 cr
Berth construction- Rs 34.04 cr
Construction of berths on BOT basis
Crane procurement-Rs 32.64 cr
Table 6.3

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
88
The Ministry stated (August 2009) that NMDP envisaged integration of all schemes for coordinated 
national development and efforts were being made for timely and coordinated implementation. 
The fact, however, remained that the schemes were being implemented haphazardly and there 
was no priority allocation among schemes as mentioned before.
6.3 Privatisation of Commercial Services
Even before the formulation of NMDP , the policy direction of the Government had been towards 
facilitating privatisation of commercial operations at ports. The Major Port Trust Act, 1963 was also 
amended in 2000 for the purpose, and the build-operate-transfer (BOT) option, was adopted for 
operation of terminals as shown below:

89
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
A number of private terminals 
were in operation on 30-year 
lease (except at Cochin and 
Mumbai) even before the 
commencement of NMDP . These 
included container terminals, 
liquid bulk berths and dry bulk 
berths. The terminal leases 
under operation are shown in 
Table 6.4.
Audit observed that a significant 
amount of traffic, viz. 70 per 
cent of total container traffic 
was being handled at the private 
terminals. During 2007-08, private terminals at Kandla handled more than 31 per cent of the liquid 
bulk handled at the port. Two out of three container terminals at JNPT were being operated on 
BOT basis, with the latest one, GTICT, commencing operations in 2006-07, as planned under NMDP 
Phase-I. 
As mentioned earlier, the average daily output at private terminals of JNPT during the  
year 2007-08 was higher than the port-operated terminal by 11 per cent, indicating faster handling 
at the private terminals. 
Similarly, it was noticed (Figure 6.5) that the 
output per ship berth day was significantly 
higher at Chennai JNPT and Tuticorin, 
where terminals were being operated 
by private operators. NMDP , in line with 
the landlord model, had targeted private 
investment of Rs 14562 crore amounting to 
54 per cent of the total investment, during 
Phase-I of NMDP . The projects were in the 
Terminal leases at a glance
No of  
terminals 
awarded to 
BOT  
operators
No of terminals
in operation
Agreements without  
minimum guaranteed  
throughput89 (MGT)
31 14# 3##
# Six container terminals-at Chennai, Cochin, JNPT, Tuticorin and VPT, 
two dry bulk berths- at Haldia and Visakhapatnam each and four liquid 
bulk berths at Chennai, JNPT and Kandla were in operation under lease. 
Liquid bulk berths were leased out only to PSU oil companies (except an 
SBM and oil jetty operated by M/s Essar Ltd at Kandla)
## No MGT in agreements for first and second container terminals in 
Cochin and cargo operation leases at berths EQ8 and EQ9 in Visakha -
patnam
Table 6.4Fig 6.5
89The minimum volume of cargo that a BOT operator needs to handle per year at the terminal leased. For any 
shortfall in achievement of this target, penalty is to be paid by the operator to the port, at prescribed rates. The 
fixing of MGT is a critical exercise having a long term impact. At the optimum level, the port can ensure a signifi-
cant revenue flow from the lease and the operator is incentivized to perform efficiently.

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
90
nature of leasing out of existing terminals, construction of new terminals on BOT basis, leasing of 
land for aggregation of cargo or other port related activities etc. Eighty five per cent of the private 
investment of Rs 14562 crore anticipated in Phase-I related to projects envisaged in four ports, viz. 
Cochin, JNPT, Kandla and New Mangalore. 
Although the operation of private terminals had resulted in higher efficiency, only one BOT project 
among the ones planned in the first phase of NMDP , viz. the second BOT container terminal at JNPT, 
could be commissioned, although two years behind schedule. The status of other BOT projects is 
shown in Table 6.5 below
Port Name of the project Estimated 
cost (Rs in 
crore)
Private funds 
envisaged (Rs 
in crore)
Remarks
ChPT Second container 
terminal
495 395 Completion delayed due to delay in 
handing over site by the port.
CoPT International con-
tainer trans-ship-
ment terminal
2118 2118 In progress.
KPT Container terminal at 
berths,11 and 12
271 155 Phase-I commissioned. 
Phase-II in progress.
MGPT Cruise-cum- contain-
er terminal
185 82 Yet to be taken up.
MbPT Offshore container 
terminal
1228 828 Project still to be completed. Security 
clearances took 20 months (March 2005 
to November 2006). Components to be 
executed by MbPT yet to be completed.
Table 6.5
Among the BOT projects that were already in operation, Audit noted a number of issues as listed 
below:
6.3.1  Standards for minimum performance
The contract agreements with BOT operators provided for an MGT clause prescribing minimum 
expected levels of achievement. To ensure significant long-term revenue flow for the lessor and 
incentivise high volumes of handling by the lessee, it was imperative that the MGT was to be fixed 
at an optimal level. 
It could not be ascertained in audit whether the actual MGT fixed in BOT agreements were based 
on accepted standards of performance or upon rough projections. 

91
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
The BOT operators achieved outputs 
much higher than the MGT fixed by the 
ports (Table 6.6). This indicated that the 
ports had fixed very low targets.
In the case of a container terminal 
agreement signed by Chennai port in 
2001-02, the port had recommended the 
UK benchmark for minimum throughput 
of 1500 TEUs per metre quay length for 
the operator, viz. Chennai Container Terminal Limited (CCTL). However, during finalization of the 
agreement, the minimum throughput fixed for the operator was fixed much below the benchmark 
at 1100 TEUs per metre quay length.
6.3.2  Shortcomings in BOT agreements
It was found that the concession agreements that the ports entered into varied widely, leaving 
scope for interpretation. An illustrative case study is given below:
Case study on standardization of clauses in BOT agreements:
Chennai port signed a BOT agreement for operation of a container terminal with M/s CCTL in 
2001-02. Cochin port entered into a similar agreement with M/s Dubai Ports International in 
January 2005, following the commencement of NMDP . It was found that the agreements were 
very different and the Chennai agreement ensured much higher commitments from the operator 
than the Cochin agreement. 
Chennai CCTL agreement Cochin IGTPL agreement
Huge investment (US$50M) by the licensee, includ-
ing state- of -the -art equipment.
No such clause
Clear performance parametres and MGT
Develop Chennai as a hub port. 
Ensure calls from mainline vessels within 3 years. 
Minimum throughput to be contributed by non-trans-
shipment traffic. 
Continuous failure for a period of 3 years to attract 
termination.
Pay compensation for shortfall.
No clear performance clause, MGT
Provide project facilities capable of handling mainline 
vessels.
Endeavour to handle them from the second year of 
commercial operation. 
No minimum throughput.
No compensation for shortfall.
No liability of port on account of power commit -
ments
In the event of disruption of power supply or break -
down in supply of power for any reasons whatsoever 
or for a planned maintenance shut down, no compen-
sation whatsoever to be paid by licensor for any loss 
or damages.
Power commitments underwritten by the port
Licensor to provide power supply.
In the event of disruption of power/water supply for 
reasons attributable to the licensor only, the licensee 
to be compensated by the licensor for any direct loss 
or damage.
Port MGT as per  
agreement
TEUs as per 
international 
benchmark
Actual 
handling
Achieve-
ment 
above 
global 
benchmark
ChPT 500000 880000 1128000 128%
NSICT 550000 660000 1508056 128%
GTICT 350000 783200 1290862 165%
Table 6.6

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
92
Clear Royalty payment clause –
Licensee to pay the licensor 37.128 per cent of all 
revenue earned from operation, storage recovered/
charged from users.
No deferment in payment of royalty. For delays inter-
est @ 2 per cent  month from the due date till the 
date of payment or realization, to be paid.
Conservative clause  for payment of royalty 
Royalty per month to be equivalent of 33.30 per cent 
of the gross revenue. Gross revenue not to include 
income from interest, sale of assets, penalties or 
charges for delay not notified in the SOR, expenses 
incurred by licensee for providing services etc.
Twenty five per cent of the royalty payable for each 
year to be deferred and to become payable in the 
start of the ninth year. 
Low interest on delayed payments.
Performance Security
Licensee to provide the licensor with an irrevoca-
ble and unconditional performance security for an 
amount equal to the estimated revenue based on 
guaranteed traffic on the date of commercial opera -
tions and at the beginning of each succeeding year of 
operation.
No Performance Security
Instead of performance security, a bank guarantee for 
Rs 10 crore for due performance of its obligations dur-
ing the operations phase at RGCT and/or construction 
phase at ICTT and periodic renewal of the same to 
keep it valid until expiry of 3 months from the date of 
commercial  operations.
As the performance incentives under the Cochin agreement were weaker, it was found that its 
efficiency in handling containers was also much lower compared to any other container terminals 
in India. Further, the vessels visiting the port faced high congestion due to delays in handling 
containers following frequent failures of cranes. 
The number of container ships visiting Cochin’s container terminal registered a decline as shown 
in Figure 6.6 below:
It was found that the operator had not installed any modern equipment to improve efficiency in 
cargo handling. The users of the port also reported that the existing equipment was insufficient 
to meet the present and future requirements. The 
business plan of Cochin port envisaged handling of 
containers in excess of three lakh TEU’s per year. For 
meeting this target, the terminal area needed to be 
expanded along with addition of one more berth. 
Although the agreement provided for such initiatives 
to be undertaken by the operator, such actions were 
not undertaken. The MGT clause which could have 
driven the party to install better equipment and improve performance was not there in the 
agreement. Moreover, the licensee was also protected by the absence of penalty clauses. 
During the exit conference (June 2009), the Ministry agreed to the observation on shortcomings 
in BOT agreements, leaving scope for interpretation. It was pointed out that a model concession 
agreement (MCA) had been framed and circulated among ports and its effectiveness would have 
to be monitored. 
Fig 6.6

93
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
Recommendations
Ø  The Ministry should formulate a clear time schedule for all stages of schemes and concerted 
efforts should be made to implement these schemes in a time-bound manner.
Ø  Planning by individual ports should be aligned to NMDP , which is a national Plan document. 
Integration with other national Plans like that of the Railways and National Highways 
Authority of India should also be considered.
Ø  While framing BOT agreements, performance benchmarks need to be fixed as per identified 
best practices. The Ministry should play an active role in identification of such best 
practices.
Ø  Considering the number of high value schemes planned for the ports and their criticality to 
capacity augmentation, the delegation of financial powers at the level of port is low and 
needs to be reviewed, to enable faster implementation.
(L.V. Sudhir Kumar)
Dated : 21 January, 2010 Principal Director of Audit (Central), Kolkata
Countersigned
New Delhi (VINOD RAI)
Dated : 25 January, 2010 Comptroller and Auditor General of India


95
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
Annexure 
(Refer Para No. 6.2.1)
Status of schemes under Phase- I  of National Maritime Development Programme
Name of the Port
Name of the Project
Type *
Estimate
(Rs in crore)
Budgetary Support
(Rs in crore)
Private funds estimated
(Rs in crore)
Date of commencement 
as per NMDP
Date of commercial op-
eration as per  NMDP
Date of actual comple-
tion / % execution of 
the project if WIP
Completed (C)/ WIP (W) 
/Not commenced (N) /
Dropped (D)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
ChPT Second container 
terminal B 495 0 395 31 January 
2008
31 March 
2008 70 W
CoPT
International Con-
tainer Transshipment 
Terminal(ICTT)
B 2118 0 2118 01 April 2007 01 April 
2009 68 W
CoPT LNG Re-gasification 
Terminal B 1600 0 1600 2005-06 2009-10  N
CoPT Crude Oil Handling for 
Kochi Refineries Ltd. B 720 0 720 2005-06 2007-08 100 C
HDC
Multipurpose 
berth(No.2) inside the 
impounded dock
B 46.8 0 0
October-2005 
(construction 
work)
January 
2007
 July 
2010 W
HDC
Multipurpose berth 
(No.13) inside the im-
pounded dock
B 39.56 0 39.56
December-2005 
(Construction 
work)
March 2007    July 
2010 W
HDC Riverine jetty north of 
existing Lock Gate B 30 0 0
February-2006 
(Construc-
tion work) 
after obtaining 
Environmental 
Clearance and 
processing of 
tender
June 2007  N
HDC  Riverine jetty north of 
existing 3rd Oil Jetty B 45 0 45
March-2006 
(Construc-
tion work) 
after obtaining 
Environmental 
Clearance and 
processing of 
tender
July 2007  N
JNPT
Redevelopment of Bulk 
Terminal into Container 
Terminal
B 900 0 900 August-2004 August 2006 October 
2006 C
JNPT
Extension of Container 
berth by 330 m and 
other facilities
B 453 0 285 December-2006 December 
2007
January 
2012 N
KDS
Development of infra-
structure in the docks 
and allied facilities
B 12 0 0 December-2005 
to March-2007 March 2008
Scheme 
had 
attained 
comple-
tion in 
March- 
2009
C
*B:  construction of berths C:  connectivity projects D:  deepening projects  
*E:  procurement of equipment O:  others

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
96
KPT
Construction of 12th 
Cargo Berth including 
Back-up area & setting 
up of state of art con-
tainer Terminal through 
BOT at 11th & 12th 
Cargo berth with back up 
area of 40 hectares.
B 271 0 155 March 2005 August 2006  W
KPT
Setting up of marine 
terminal by M/s VOTL 
at Vadinar for M/s Essar 
Oil Ltd.
B 750 0 750 May 2004 December 
2006  W
KPT Modification of Bunder 
Basin for barge handling B 10 0 0 March 2004 May 2006  C
KPT
Additional facilities for 
handling crude oil at 
Vadinar(i) Procurement 
of different crafts (Esti-
mated Cost 17.41 crore)
(ii) Construction of exten-
sion jetty (Estimated Cost 
4.50 crore) (iii) Construc-
tion of T-Shaped Service 
Jetty along with allied 
facilities (Estimated Cost 
28.09 crore)
B 50 0 0 June 2007 and 
August 2007
June 2008 
and March 
2009
 W
KPT
Construction of 13th 
& 14th Cargo Berth at 
Kandla
B 100 0 0 March 2006 
and May 2006
November 
2007 and 
January 
2008
 N
KPT
Construction of 15th to 
18th cargo berth on BOT 
Basis including mecha-
nization
B 430 0 0 January 2007 January 
2009  N
KPT
Creation of Berthing 
and allied facilities off 
Tekra near Tuna (outside 
Kandla Creek)
B 1200 13 498 March 2007 March 2009  N
MbPT
Construction of two off-
shore container termi-
nal. Development of two 
container berths of total 
quay length of 700 Mtr. 
and related upgrada-
tion for handling vessels 
of 6000 TEUs capacity. 
Capacity (0.8 MTEUs)
B 1228 0 828 31 March 2006 31 March 
2009  W
MbPT
Redevelopment of 18 
to 21 ID, Harbour Wall 
Berths. Upgradation of 
the four berths to three 
berths to handle larger 
& deep drafted general 
cargo vessels.
B 259 0 0 31 March 2007 31 March 
2009  N
MbPT
Construction of 2nd 
berth for handling chem-
icals/specialised grade of 
POL off Pir Pau Pier.
B 90 0 0 31 December 
2006
31  
December 
2008
 N

97
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
MbPT New cruise terminal 
near Gateway of India. B 152 0 70 31 December 
2007
31 March 
2009  N
MGPT
Construction of cruise-
cum container berth at 
Baina
B 185 0 82 31 August 2006 28 February 
2009  N
NMPT Construction of Addl. 
General cargo berth B 49 0 0 27 September 
2007 April 2006 31 March 2008 C
NMPT
Setting up of Dry Dock 
with repair facilities for 
Ocean going vessels & 
other Floating crafts at 
NMP
B 125 0 125 December 2006 December 
2008  D
NMPT Development of LNG 
Terminal B 2600 0 2600    N
NMPT Development of Coal 
Handling B 180 0 180 January 2006 December 
2008 Work in progress W
PPT
Extension of Iron Ore 
berth to handle 75000 
DWT vessel
B 10 0 0 1 January 2005 31 May 
2006  W
PPT Creation of additional 
facilities for Oil Jetty B 15 0 0 February 2006 March 2008  W
PPT Extension of break-water 
Ph.I B 20 0 0 November 
2007
November 
2010  N
PPT
Extension of wet basin 
and construction of 
integrated dry dock
B 18.53 0 0 1 November 
2003
31 March 
2006  W
TPT
Construction of Coal 
Berth at NBW for NLC 
- TNEB 
B 40 0 0 July 2006 November 
2007  N
TPT Construction of Berth 9 B 40 0 0 March 2006 November 
2007 76 W
TPT Reclamation and heavy 
duty pavement B 15 0 0 January 2007 November 
2007  N
TPT Construction of shallow 
draught Berth (3 Nos.) B 30 0 0 October 2006 November 
2007  N
TPT Structural Upgradation 
of Coal Jetty II B 5 0 0 October 2006 November 
2007  N
VPT
Strengthening of EQ5 
& EQ6, WQ2 & WQ3 to 
cater to 11 Mtrs draft 
vessels
B 20 0 0 April 2006 April 2007  N
VPT
Allotment for develop-
ment of WQ6 berth in 
the Inner Harbour for 
Alumina exports
B 145 0 140 January 2007 December 
2008  N
VPT
Allotment of WQ7 berth 
for captive user for 
Alumina exports
B 140 40 0 March 2007 December 
2008  N

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
98
VPT
Strengthening of EQ5, 
EQ6, EQ7, WQ1,WQ2 
WQ3 WQ4,WQ5 & WQ7 
to cater to 12.5 Mtrs 
draft
B 30 0 0 May 2006 May 2007  N
VPT Relocation of oil mooring 
facilities B 20 0 0 December 2006 December 
2007  D
ChPT Port Connectivity Bridg-
ing Gap in EMRIP project C 50 0 0 31 January 
2006
31 March 
2007 0 D
ChPT
Dedicated elevated corri-
dor on NH-4 from Port to 
Maduravoyal
C 400 0 0 1 January 2007 31 March 
2009
Work executed 
by NHAI W
CoPT National Highway  
connectivity C 350 90 0 1 July 2006 1 January 
2009 47.96 W
CoPT Rail connectivity C 125 0 0 1 July 2006 1 January 
2009 75 W
JNPT
Improvement of road 
connectivity Package I 
NH4B Package-II SG54 
Amra Marg
C 357 0 0
Package-I-
February-2002 
Package-II 
October-2004
Package-I-
February-
2002 
Package-II 
October-
2005
Package-I-
February 2002 
Package-II 
October-2004
N
JNPT Internal Port Road 
widening C 37 0 0 February 2005 December 
2007 March 2009 C
JNPT
Rail work Extension of 
doubling beyond holding 
yard leading to terminal 
1,2 & 3
C 20 0 0 January 2007 December 
2008 NYA N
JNPT
Road work Construc-
tion of Grade separator 
through SPV of Port 
connectivity
C 80 0 0 April 2007 March 2009 NYA N
JNPT
Construction of addl. Rail 
lines in Jasai yard and 
holding yard and exten-
sion of electrification 
C 22 0 0 April 2007 March 2009 NYA N
JNPT
Construction of Sorting 
yard for handling mix 
trains
C 40 0 0 April 2007 March 2009 NYA N
JNPT Internal Port road widen-
ing Stage-II C 45 0 0 April 2007 March 2009 March 2012. W
JNPT Construction of second 
link road to Port C 168 0 0 April 2007 March 2009 NYA N
JNPT Six Lanning of NH 4B C 45 0 0 April 2007 March 2009 NYA N
JNPT Construction of second 
evacuation road C 45 0 0 April 2007 March 2009 NYA N
JNPT Road connectivity to 
Port C 300 0 0 April 2007 March 2009 NYA N

99
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
KPT
Extension of Road & Rail-
way network in the rear 
of back up area from 
berth no. 11 to 18 at 
Kandla. (Estimated Cost 
Rs.15.00 crore)
C
57.49 0 0
January  2006 
and February 
2008
January 
2007 and 
January 
2009
 W
KPT
Construction of ad-
ditional carriage way for 
four -laning of road from 
kutch salt junction to 
west gate no. 2 at kandla 
(Estimated Cost Rs.7.70 
crore)
C
August  2004 
and August  
2006
November 
2005 and 
March 2007
 W
KPT
Providing railway net-
work in newly developed 
cargo jetty (Estimated 
Cost Rs.13.00 crore)
C June  2006 and 
February  2008
June 2007 
and Mar 
2010
 W
KPT
Four laning of existing 
road from national 
highway 8A upto jetty 
complex. (Estimated 
Cost Rs.21.79 crore)
C
January 2006 
and January 
2007
July 2007 
and July 
2007
 W
KPT
Gandhidham Palanpur 
Gauge conversion (which 
will reduce distance 
from Kandla from 
Northern Hinterland by 
114 Kms.)
C 52 0 0 2004 March 2006  C
KPT Gauge conversion of 
Bhildi Samdari Segment C 35 0 0 March 2006 March 2008  W
MbPT
Improvement of Rail & 
Road infrastructure. Rail 
connectivity between 
wadala & Kurla, 2 Road 
improvements within 
MbPT estate, 3 Road 
improvements outside 
MbPT estate, Wadala 
Mahul to Truck Terminus 
Link 4.Anik Panjarpol 
Link  
C 328 0 0 31 August 
2008  W
NMPT Improvement to Port 
internal roads. C 50 0 0   80 W
NMPT Road connectivity to the 
Port. C 896 0 0  2008 Work in progress W
NMPT
Addl. Rail connectivity to 
the Port from the exist-
ing KRCL railway.
C 50 0 0  2008  N
PPT
Upgradation of Paradip 
Railway Yard, Signalling, 
Station building
C 25 0 0 March 2006 March 2008  W
PPT Upgradation of road 
inside Harbour Area C 15 0 0 7 February 
2006
2 nos. by 
31 March 
2006  & 
other 3 nos. 
by 31March 
2007
 W

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
100
TPT
Four- laning of NH 
7A between TPT and 
Palayamkottai.
C 25 0 0 April 2004 June 2006  W
VPT
Development of addl. 
Link road from port junc-
tion to the industrial by 
pass road.
C 95 0 0 16 June 2002
31  
December 
2005
15 December 
2006 W
VPT
Improvement to road 
infrastructure with road 
bridges/fly over bridges
C 30 0 0 May 2005 March 2007 (A) W
VPT
Improvement to road 
infrastructure with road 
bridges/fly over bridges 
Phase-II
C 55 0 0 March 2007 September 
2008  N
VPT
Development of inter-
change Yard at Vadlapudi 
and Reception and Des-
patch yard at Mindi and 
associated facilities.
C 81 0 0 December 2006 December 
2008  N
VPT Improvement to port 
railway system C 30 0 0 October 2002 31 March 
2007 (A) W
ChPT Deepening of Channels, 
Basin and Berths D 143 48 0 31 July 2006 31 March 
2009 68 W
CoPT
Capital dredging for 
providing 12.5 m draft 
at RGCT
D 33 0 0 13 May 2005
December 
2006  
(Date of 
completion 
of work)
February 2006 C
CoPT
Capital dredging for ICTT 
1st stage for 14.5 m draft 
and LNG basin to create 
a draft of 11.5 m
D 379 189 0 01 April 2007 31 March 
2009 36 W
JNPT
Deepening & widening 
of main harbour channel 
and JN Port Channel 
Phase I to increase draft 
from 12.5 m. to 14.0 m.
D 800 0 0 September 
2006
December 
2008 NYA N
KDS
River Regulatory 
Measures for improve-
ment of Draft in Hooghly 
Estuary from average 8.5 
m to 9.0 m and reduce 
annual maintenance 
dredging by 2 million 
cub. Mtrs.
D 385 385 0 2006 2007
Expected 
completion 
after 5 years
NYA N
KPT
Deepening of Naviga-
tional channel of KPT 
from 11.7 m to 13.5 m 
draft
D 136 68 0 April 2008 July 2008  W

101
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
MGPT
Deepening of Approach 
Channel and berth no. 
9 to increase the draft 
from 14.10 m. to 15.10 
m.
D 65 32 0 31 October 
2006
31 October 
2007  N
NMPT
Deepening of Channel & 
lagoon area to create a 
draft of 14 m (In front of 
DDGB Berth)
D 10 0 0   17 January 2006 C
NMPT
Improvement of Draft 
and Strengthening & 
Deepening of General 
Cargo Berths to increase
D 10 0 0   Work in progress W
PPT
Deepening of channel 
from 13.0 m to 17.1 m 
to handle 1,25,000 DWT 
vessels
D 154.84 103.23 0
February  2006 
subject  
clearance by 
GOI
July 2003  N
PPT
Enhancement of draught 
at existing dock system 
from 12.0 m to 14.0 m to 
cater to Panamax vessel
D 40 40 0 August 2006 December 
2008  N
TPT
Dredging the Dock Basin 
and Channel to increase 
the draft from 10.70 m 
to 12.80 m.
D 450 225 0 June 2006 November 
2007  N
VPT
First Stage - Deepening 
and widening of inner 
harbour entrance chan-
nel and turning circle 
from draft of 10.6 m to 
11 m.
D 30 0 0 30 July 2005 31 May 
2006 74% W
VPT
Second Stage- Deepen-
ing of Inner harbour 
entrance channel and 
turning circle from 11.0 
m to 12.5 m.
D 50 7 35 July 2006 July 2007  N
VPT
Enlarging the scope 
of outer harbour for 
2,00,000 DWT Iron ore 
vessels by deepening 
outer channel from 16.5 
to 18.1 m. 
D 193 96 0 April 2007 March 2009  N
ChPT Replacement of Wagon 
Tippler E 5.14 0 0 04 August 2004 27 July 2005  D
ChPT Desalination projects of 
1000 MT per day E 6 0 6 30 March 2006
31  
December 
2006
 D

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
102
HDC
Procurement of 2 
RMQCs for container 
handling (including 
RMQC track and cabling) 
E 49.91 0 0
Erection work 
already  
commenced
October 
2005  C
HDC
Procurement of 4 RTGCs 
for container handling 
at CPY
E 21.28 0 0
Construction 
work is in 
progress
February 
2006  C
HDC Procurement of 2 No.s 
Stacker-cum-Reclaimer E 24.7 0 0
January 2006 
(construction 
work)
April 2007  N
HDC Acquisition of 2 nos. 
Mobile Harbour Cranes E 30 0 30 March 2007 July 2007  N
JNPT Acquisition of two 
RMGCs E 24 0 0 July 2005 June 2006 June 2007 C
JNPT Procurement of 20 nos. 
of Tractor Trailers E 11 0 0 August 2005 March 2006 August 2006 C
JNPT Acquisition of three 
RMGCs E 76 0 0 June 2006 August  
2007
27 months after 
approval from 
the Ministry.
N
JNPT
Procurement of one 
RMQC and shifting of 
two old RMQC and 
shifting of two old RMQC 
at SWB
E 25 0 0 August 2006 December 
2007
12 months after 
award of work. N
JNPT Acquisition of six RTGCs E 30 0 0 August 2006 December 
2007 NA N
JNPT
Replacement of three 
Pilot launches, one 
VIP launch, one Utility 
launch and procurement 
of Pollution control 
vessels
E 22 0 0 June 2006 December 
2008  W
JNPT Replacement of One 
RMGC on line 1 and 2 E 12 0 0 December 2007 December 
2008 NYA N
JNPT Replacement of three 
tugs E 90 0 0 February 2008 March 2009  N
KDS
Procurement/Replace-
ment of Cargo handling 
equipment.
E 25 0 0 January 2005 to 
March 2007 March 2008  March’2010 
(Anticipated) W
KDS Modernisation/Replace-
ment of Port Craft E 14 0 0 February 2006
Vessel 
expected to 
be delivered 
by March 
2008 sequel 
to which it 
would be 
ready for 
operation.
 C
KPT
Procurement of 6 nos. 
ELL Wharf Cranes (i) 
Present Till Cranes (3 
nos.) (Estimated Cost 
Rs.29.00 Crore) (ii) 
New Cranes (03 Nos.) 
(Estimated Cost Rs.24.32 
crore)
E 53.32 0 0
4 October 2004 
and December 
2005
April 2006 
and  
February 
2007
 W

103
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
KPT
Up-gradation of Marine 
Infrastructure/Flo-
tilla for Handling Larger 
Vessels.1. No.50 Ton 
Harbour Tug for Kandla 
(Estimated Cost Rs.17.91 
crore) 2. No. Pilot 
Launches one each for 
upgradation of flotilla 
at Kandla and Vadinar 
(Estimated Cost Rs.7.10 
crore)  3. Remaining 
items :- (i) 2 nos. 50 ton 
tugs for tuna (Estimated 
Cost Rs.40.00 crore) (ii) 
01 No. 50 Ton Tug for 
Vadinar (Estimated Cost 
Rs.20.00 crore) (iii) 03 
nos. Tugs of 30 Ton for 
Kandla (Estimated Cost 
Rs.45.00 crore) (iv) 04 
nos. Pilot Launches 02 
for Kandla and 02 for 
Tuna (Estimated Cost 
Rs.16.00 crore) (v) 02 
nos. Mooring Launches 
for Tuna (Estimated Cost 
Rs.8.00 crore)
E 154.01 0 0
February 2005, 
August 2005, 
October 2007, 
March 2007, 
March 2009, 
October 2007 
and October 
2007
August 
2006,  
August 
2007, March 
2009,  
November  
2009,  
November   
2010, 
March 2009 
and March 
2009
 W
MbPT
Procurement of 2 nos. 
32 T Bollard Pull Harbour 
Tugs.
E 24.98 0 0
7 December 
2004 
31 March 
2006 100 C
MbPT Replacement of caisson 
gate at HDD. E 12.53 0 0 30 April 2006 30 Novem-
ber 2007 75 W
MbPT Replacement of 3 Dock 
by 2 Dock tugs. E 19 0 0 31 March 2006 31 March 
2008 100 C
MbPT
Modernisation of cargo 
handling equipments. 
Procurement of 2 nos. 
QGCs, 2. Procurement of 
3 nos. RTGs, 3 Procure-
ment of 10 nos. 6 Tonnes 
Ell wharf cranes.
E 114.55 0 0
30 April 2007
31 March 2006
31 October 
2008 & 31 
May 2008
31 October 
2007
92 W
MGPT Replacement of remain-
ing four barge unloaders E 33 0 0 31 January 
2005
31 March 
2007  N
MGPT Replacement of one 
bucket wheel reclaimer E 15 0 0 28 February 
2006
31 October 
2007  N
MGPT Replacement of one Ship 
loader E 15 0 0 28 February 
2006
31 October 
2007  N
MGPT Replacement of two 
stackers E 15 0 0 November 
2005
31 Decem-
ber 2008  N
MGPT Installation of wagon 
handling system E 80 0 80 30 June 2006 31 Decem-
ber 2007  N
MGPT Tran shippers for Iron 
ore export E 140 0 140 September 
2006
31 Decem-
ber 2008  N

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
104
NMPT Procurement of Harbour 
Crane E 30 0 30    N
PPT Replacement of wharf 
crane E 12 0 0 25 September 
2004
31 March 
2006  N
PPT upgradation of Iron Ore 
Handling Plant E 30 0 0 March 2006 March 2008  W
TPT Conversion of Berth 8 as 
container terminal (BOT) E 150 0 150 01 June 2006 27 August 
2007  N
TPT Replacement of Old 
Crane at Berth I & II E 25 0 0 January 2006 31 Decem-
ber 2006  W
TPT Floating Craft Procure-
ment E 60 0 0 January 2006 November  
2007  N
TPT Replacement of Rajaji 
Tug E 27.25 0 0 28 August 2004 February 
2006 29 August 2006 C
TPT Replacement of Kamaraj 
Tug E 22 0 0  November  
2007  N
VPT
Mechanized cargo han-
dling facilities at GCB at 
Outer Harbour
E 50 0 0 August 2006 March 2008  N
VPT
Mechanized cargo 
handling facilities at 2 
berths on Western side 
of Northern arm at Inner 
harbour
E 25 0 25 January 2007 June 2008  C
VPT
Modernization of iron 
ore handling complex 
(Replacement of stacker, 
control panels, circuit 
breakers, HT motors etc)
E 15 0 0 April 2006 October  
2007  N
VPT Replacement of 1 tug (TT 
Swarna) E 20 0 0 October  2006 March 2008  W
VPT Replacement of 2 nos. 
Locos by 1430 HP E 14 0 0 March 2007 March 2009
I loco- 27  
February, 2007       
II loco-19  
February 2008
C
ChPT Modernisation of Chen-
nai Port O 200 0 0
Work already 
commenced 
for Ph.I, Dev. 
Work costing 
Rs.40 crore 
with Board’s 
approval
31 March 
2009 90 W
ChPT
Creation of addl. Open 
storage yards by recla-
mation
O 200 0 0
01 April 2006 
& 01 October 
2006
01 October 
2007 & 31 
October 
2008
70 W
ChPT
Development of Back up 
area at Sthangadu off 
Dock CFS
O 50 0 0 01 January 
2006
31 March 
2007  N
ChPT Multilevel Stack yard for 
Automobile export O 48 0 0 01 April 2006 31 October 
2006  N

105
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
CoPT International Bunkering 
Terminal O 195 0 170 2005-2006
Phase-I: 
2007-08 
Phase-II: 
2011-12
 N
CoPT International Ship Repair 
Complex O 315 0 315 December 2006 December  
2010  D
CoPT Port based special Eco-
nomic Zone O 1510 0 1412 2006-2007
Various 
dates but be 
completed 
by 2011-12
 W
CoPT International Cruise 
Terminal O 55 0 12.1 July 2006 July 2008  N
CoPT
Reclamation for stream-
lining of Flow in the Port 
Channel for reducing 
siltation and for future 
development works
O 120 0 0 December 2006 December 
2009  N
CoPT Construction of Break-
waters O 80 0 0    N
HDC
Acquisition of Land at 
Jellingham for dumping 
of dredged spoil. (1st 
phase of acquisition of 
2500 acres)
O 50 25 0
November 2005 
acquisition 
proceedings by 
State Govt. as 
per LA 
Not appli-
cable  N
HDC
Development of Road 
Infrastructure including 
drainage, etc. inside and 
outside dock (in phases)
O 30 0 0
Construction 
work is in 
progress
Not appli-
cable  July 2010 W
HDC
Improvement of Back up 
Area with Railway con-
nectivity inside the Dock 
(in phases)
O 25 0 0
Construction 
work is in 
progress
April 2006 
onwards  C
JNPT
Area development 
behind SWB and devel-
opment of ICD yard
O 16 0 0 November-
2004
December 
2005  C
JNPT Infrastructure facilities 
for Port based industries O 45 0 0 September 
2005
December 
2007 March 2012 W
JNPT Environmental measures O 10 0 0 June 2007 March 2009  W
JNPT
Infrastructure facilities 
for Port Based industries 
Ph-II
O 45 0 0 April 2007 March 2009 March 2012 W
JNPT Environmental measures O 20 0 0 May 2007 March 2009 March 12 W
KDS
Upgradation/extension 
of VTMS up to Kolkata 
with accessories and 
night navigational aids 
etc.
O 11 0 0
February 2006 
to December 
2006
Scheme 
expected to 
be commis-
sioned by 
March 2008 
after which 
it would be 
ready for 
operation.
  March 2010 
(Anticipated) W

Report No. 3 of 2009-10
106
KPT
Upgradation of infra-
structure facilities in 
newly added custom 
bounded area (66 
hectares)
O 33 0 0 February 2005 May 2005  C
KPT Development of open 
storage facilities O 53 0 0 January 2006 November 
2007  W
KPT Construction of Storage 
Godown O 22 0 0 July 2003 October 
2006  C
KPT Construction of Ship 
bunkering complex O 400 0 296 August 2006 February 
2008  N
KPT Augmentation of Water 
Supply at Kandla O 12.8 0 0 December 2003 December 
2006  W
KPT Captive Power Plant at 
Kandla. O 18 0 0 April 2006 April 2008  N
MGPT Strengthening of break-
water O 25 0 0 31 August 2006 31 Decem-
ber 2007  W
NMPT Development of Mar-
shalling Yard O 30 0 10  September 
2007 Work in progress W
NMPT
Allotment of land for 
setting up of iron & coal 
Handling facilities for the 
proposed Multipurpose 
Berth
O 150 0 150 June 2006 March 2008  N
NMPT Development of Bunker-
ing facilities at NMP . O 10 0 10 May 2007 November 
2007  N
NMPT Development of Port 
based SEZ O 50 0 40    N
PPT Illumination of Storage 
Area O 10 0 0 30 July 2005 31 Decem-
ber 2006  N
TPT
Widening & strengthen-
ing of port roads from 
Western boundary to 
green Gate and strength-
ening of approach road, 
Ambedkar road with 
bituminous layer
O 17 0 0 January 2006 December 
2006 30 June 2008 C
TPT
Usage of information 
technology for the 
operation and manage-
ment of port.
O 5 0 0  November 
2007  W
TPT Conversion of HT / LT 
Over head Lines. O 10 0 0    W
TPT Up gradation of Port 
Electrical System O 20 0 0    W
TPT Auxiliary facilities O 20 0 0 April 2006 November 
2007  W

107
Report No. 3 of 2009-10
VPT
Transit shed of 5,000 
sq.mtrs. and Open 
Storage shed (2 nos.) of 
20,000 Sq.mtrs.
O 19 0 0
i) 31 July 2005 
for T8 shed; 
and ii) 28 Feb-
ruary 2006 for 
2 open storage 
sheds
28 February 
2007
21 February 
2007 for T-8 
shed over-
all physical 
progress-32%
W
VPT
Allotment of land for 
development of ware 
houses in Phase-I
O 20 0 20 February 2006 February 
2007  D
VPT Environmental up-grada-
tion schemes. Phase-I O 17 0 0 January 2006 March 2009 (A) W
VPT
Shifting of non VPT 
periodical maintenance 
examination activities 
at ore exchange yard to 
separate
O 12 0 0 April 2006 M a r c h                                                                       
2007  D