Union Government
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
Report No. 34 of 2015
(Performance Audit)
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Renewable Energy Sector in India

 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on  
Renewable Energy Sector in India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
Report No. 34 of 2015 
(Performance Audit) 
  

Report No. 34 of 2015 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | iii 
 
Contents 
 
  
 Topics Page No. 
 Preface v
 Executive Summary and Recommendations vii
Chapter I Renewable Energy Sector in India 1
Section I National Action Plan on Climate Change – Renewable Purchase 
Obligation and Clean Development Mechanism 
Chapter II Compliance with Renewable Purchase Obligation and availing 
benefits of Clean Development Mechanism 
13
Section II Grid Connected Renewable Power
Chapter III Solar Power 29
Chapter IV  Wind Power 55
Chapter V Small Hydro Power 81
Chapter VI Biomass Power 99
Section III Off-Grid Renewable Power
Chapter VII Solar Photovoltaic Systems 115
Chapter VIII National Biogas and Manure Management Programme 141
Chapter IX Remote Village Electrification 151
Chapter X Ladakh Renewable Energy Initiative 169
Chapter XI Prime Minister’s Special Package for Arunachal Pradesh 179
Section IV Research, Design, Development and Demonstration Activities 
Chapter XII Research, Design, Development a nd Demonstration Activities in 
the Renewable Energy Sector 
189
 Annexures 201
 Abbreviations 241

Report No. 34 of 2015 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | v 
 
 
Preface 
The Renewable Energy (RE) potential in India is 8,89,508 Mega Watt. The 
Government of India, in pursuit of energy securi ty and for minimizing 
impact on environment, has been prioriti zing the development of RE sector 
through its policies and programmes. In this context, the performance audit 
of the RE sector was conducted to pr imarily assess the extent to which 
contribution of RE to the energy mi x in the country had increased and 
whether RE had succeeded in improving access to electricity in the remote 
and rural areas. 
The performance audit revealed that the exploitation of the two largest 
components i.e. solar energy and wind  energy potential was only 0.35 and 
21 per cent, respectively and varied  significantly ac ross States. Audit 
observed that while the overarching policy and incentives  offered by the 
Government of India to promote RE re mained uniform for the country, the 
varied development of the sector in St ates was a result of State specific 
factors such as the State’s RE develo pment policy, the State tariff regime 
and the conduciveness of the Stat e’s implementation environment. 
Inadequate evacuation and transmissi on infrastructure was a bottleneck. 
Problems in maintaining grid stability caused by infirm and variable nature 
of wind energy remained unaddressed. Renewable Purchase Obligation 
mechanism designed as a policy instrument to demonstrate commitment 
and create a demand incentive for the development of RE resources in India, 
had not been effectively enforced. 
We hope that this Report prepared for submission to the President under 
Article 151 of the Consti tution, for being laid be fore the Parliament, will 
help the planners and administrators in addressing the pr oblems that are 
hindering development of the RE sector in India. 
  

Report No. 34 of 2015 Executive Summary and Recommendations  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | vii 
Executive Summary and Recommendations 
 
Why did we select this subject for audit? 
India supports around 17 per cent  of the world’s population but  its energy and electricity 
consumption is only around five per cent  of the world’s consumption. Its per capita 
consumption of energy and electricity is less than one-third of the world average. 
In order to sustain a growth rate of over eight per cent through the next two decades, India 
would need to grow its primary energy supply by three to four times and electricity supply 
by at least five to seven times of its current consumption. The country might need to import 
over 90 per cent  of its requirement of oil and over 45 per cent of its requirement of coal. 
Energy shortages are currently at an average of 8.7 per cent  with peak deficit at nine  
per cent. 
Fossil fuels, though cost effective and efficient, are depleting. They pollute the environment 
and contribute to the greenhouse effect an d global warming. Renewable Energy is 
environment friendly and can provide energy securi ty and offers distributed solutions. It is 
derived from natural processes that are replenished constantly. 
India has made voluntary commi tment at the United Nations Framework Convention for 
Climate Change to reduce its ca rbon emissions intensity by 20-25 per cent  by 2020 in 
comparison with the 2005 levels. It is also  envisaged that Renewable Energy would 
constitute 15 per cent of the energy mix of India by 2020. 
India is endowed with vast Renewable Energy (RE) potential of 8,89, 508 MW. The Planning 
Commission in the 12th Five Year Plan document had stated that the supply from renewables 
is expected to increase rapidly fr om 24,503 MW by the end of the 11 th Five Year Plan to 
54,503 MW by the end of the 12 th Five Year Plan, and underlined  the need for investments 
in RE. 
Considering the significance of RE as an al ternative to meet the ever growing energy 
demand of India, we decided to take up Performance Audit of Renewable Energy Sector in 
India for the period 2007-14. Apart from auditing the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy and institutions under it, audit was also conducted in 24 selected States. 
What were our audit objectives? 
The objectives of the Performance Audit of Re newable Energy Sector were to examine the 
progress made in: 
(i) Increasing the contribution of RE resources in India’s energy mix/electricity mix; 
(ii) Increasing access to electricity/ lighting needs in remote and rural areas; and 
(iii) Promoting research, design, development and demonstration. 
 

Executive Summary and Recommendations  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | viii Renewable Energy Sector in India 
What did our Performance Audit reveal? 
 
Compliance with Renewable Purchase Obligat ion and availing of benefits of Clean 
Development Mechanism 
As per the National Action Plan on Climat e Change (NAPCC) announced in June 2008, a 
target of five per cent  for purchase of electricity generated from RE sources was set for 
2009-10 against the then existing level of around 3.5 per cent. This target was to increase by 
one per cent per year for next 10 years i.e. the NAPCC envisaged that RE would constitute 15 
per cent  of the energy mix of India by 2020. It was observed that as against the National 
Action Plan on Climate Change target of eight and nine per cent for the years 2012-13 and 
2013-14, the national achievement was only 4.28 and 4.51 per cent, respectively. 
(Chapter II, Paras 1 and 2.1) 
In none of the 24 sampled States, except Himachal Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, Renewable 
Purchase Obligations (RPO) were fixed in sync with the norms set under the National Action 
Plan on Climate Change. 
(Chapter II, Para 2.2) 
Direct purchase of electricity generated from RE sources was still the preferred option to 
meet RPO. Between 2010 and 2014, only 4.77 per cent  of RPO compliance was through 
Renewable Energy Certificate (REC) mode, whereas 95.23 per cent was through direct 
purchase of electricity from RE sources. 
(Chapter II, Para 2.4) 
Uncertain policy environment and poor RPO enfo rcement led to a situation, where as of 
August 2014, 93,64,699 RECs, each valuing at least ` 1,500 were lying unredeemed, 
affecting the planned cash flow of the generators. 
(Chapter II, Para 3.2) 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) had not devised any mechanism for 
claiming of Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) benefits for the grid connected and off-
grid RE projects. There was lack of awareness with respect to claiming CDM benefits. 
(Chapter II, Para 4.2) 
Recommendations 
1. MNRE needs to pursue with the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions for the 
adoption of Renewable Purchase Obligation targ ets in alignment with National Action 
Plan on Climate Change targets. These target s should be enforced, with due monitoring 
and collection of penalties for default in compliance. 
2. MNRE, being the nodal Ministry should ensure firming up of clear guidelines on the life of 
Renewable Energy Certificates and management of unredeemed Certificates, in a time 
bound manner. 
3. MNRE should introduce a comprehensive framework for creating awareness of Clean 
Development Mechanism and availing benefits under it. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Executive Summary and Recommendations  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | ix 
Grid Connected Renewable Power 
 
Solar Power 
The installed capacity of grid interactive solar power in the country at the beginning of the 
11th Five Year Plan period was `Nil’. This rose  to 2,656 MW by March 2014, which was 0.35 
per cent of the country’s solar energy potential of 7,48,990 MW. 
In the ten States endowed with 78 per cent  of the National solar potential, the exploited 
potential varied from zero to 2.56 per cent. Gujarat and Rajasthan alone created more than 
50 per cent of the capacity installed in the country but had exploited only 2.56 per cent and 
0.51 per cent of their respective potentials. Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh with 
potentials of 1,11,050 MW and 33,840 MW respec tively, had not set up any grid connected 
solar project. 
(Chapter III, Para 2) 
As per the Solar Power Policy 2009 of the Government of Gujarat the tariff was fixed in a 
phased manner and in alignment with the decrea sing capital cost of the systems. However, 
there were anomalies in the schemes intr oduced by MNRE betw een 2008 a nd 2010. The 
tariff assured and the period of commitment of the Government of India was increased 
during this period. Immediately thereafter, between 2011 and 2014, the Central Electricity 
Regulatory Commission tariffs and the revers e bidding rates decreased. Hence, while 
designing the schemes, MNRE ha d not provided for any flexibility to review the tariff being 
assured. 
(Chapter III, Para 3.4) 
Under Demonstration Programme , Solar Photovoltaic power project developers availing 
Generation Based Incentive (GBI ) were not eligible to avail Accelerated Depreciation (AD) 
benefit under the Income Tax Act 1961. This was not ensured by MNRE/Indian Renewable 
Energy Development Agency (IREDA) before releasing GBI claims of ` 22.49 crore to 
Reliance Industries Ltd (RIL). This resulted in  both GBI and AD being claimed by RIL in the 
period August 2010 to December 2012. 
(Chapter III, Para 4.1.1) 
MNRE had not formulated guidelines for net metering to provide an enabling environment 
for solar technology penetration in the country at a decentralized level. 
(Chapter III, Para 4.3) 
Against the target of 500 MW of Solar Th ermal projects, projects of 447.50 MW 
(approximately 90 per cent) had not been commissioned (February 2015). Government land 
of 3,404 acres in Rajasthan leased to six Sola r Thermal project developers had not been put 
to intended use so far. In Demonstration Programme, in one case, 345 acres of land had 
been leased in excess of requirement for a Solar Photovoltaic power plant. 
(Chapter III, Para 4.4.2) 
Lack of coordination between NTPC Vidyut Vy apar Nigam Limited, Power Grid Corporation 
of India Limited and State Agencies led to in stances of delay in supply of thermal based 

Executive Summary and Recommendations  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | x Renewable Energy Sector in India 
power for bundling arrangement and non availa bility of Long Term Access for inter-State 
transmission system to the State Agencies, re sulting in disputed claims with distribution 
companies. 
(Chapter III, Paras 4.4.6 and 4.4.7) 
Recommendations 
4. MNRE should focus on develo pment of solar energy in th e States endowed with high 
solar energy potential. 
5. MNRE, while formulating schemes that commit the Government to long term liability for 
incentives like Generation Based Incentives, m ust ensure that these are kept flexible to 
match changes in tariffs and costing structur e to avoid unwarranted burden on public 
exchequer or developers. 
6. MNRE must formulate guidelines for ne t metering so as to provide an enabling 
environment for solar technology penetration in the country at a decentralized level. 
7. MNRE must ensure that the solar projects are completed as per schedule. In case of 
delays, the Central/ State Governments must review the status of the public resources 
like land allotted to the solar power developers and take necessary corrective measures. 
8. MNRE, in coordination with other Central Go vernment agencies, should ensure timely 
arrangement for making available conven tional power for bundling and Long Term 
Access to inter-State transmission system, for smooth operation of the schemes. 
Wind Power 
The installed capacity of grid interactive wind power in the country at the beginning of the 
11th Five Year Plan was 7,091 MW. This rose to  21,137 MW by March 2014, which was 21 
per cent of the country’s wind energy potential of 1,02,788 MW. 
(Chapter IV, Para 3.1) 
MNRE could not ensure seamless continuati on of Generation Based Incentive and 
Accelerated Depreciation schemes in the 12 th Five Year Plan. The break in incentives being 
provided to wind energy developers between 2012 and 2014 adversely affected the capacity 
addition during this period. 
(Chapter IV, Para 3.2.3.1) 
There was no competition in the wind energy sector either with respect to tariff fixation or 
allocation of sites to the develo pers. Thirty two stations identi fied as potential sites allotted 
to private developers for setting up wind fa rms were not developed within the extended 
time frame. These stations were not included in the normal list of potential stations as 
stipulated in MNRE guidelines, thus depriving potential developers who could be looking for 
such sites for establishing wind farms of the opportunity to develop projects. 
(Chapter IV, Para 3.2.4) 
In the ten States endowed with 97 per cent of the country’s wind potential, the exploitation 
varied from zero to 68 per cent  of the States’ potential. Maharashtra had the highest 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Executive Summary and Recommendations  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | xi 
potential exploitation at 68 per cent  followed by Tamil Nadu at 51 per cent . Jammu & 
Kashmir, Odisha and Uttar Pradesh had not exploi ted the potential at all. More significantly, 
of the four highest potential States, three i. e. Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka had 
very low rates of potential exploitation ranging from five to 17 per cent. 
(Chapter IV, Para 4.1) 
There were problems in evacuation of wind power generated by the States due to non-
availability of sufficient transmission infrastr ucture and non-synchron ization of generation. 
Lack of scientific techniques to predict the wind power also created problems in maintaining 
grid discipline. In Tamil Nadu, the quantu m of wind power backed down was 6,018.43 MUs 
during 2007-2014, the maximum backing do wn being in 2012-13 (1,155.27 MU) and 2013-
14 (3,419.85 MU), resulting in a loss of revenue to the extent of ` 2,040.25 crore during this 
period. 
(Chapter IV, Paras 4.4.3 and 4.4.5) 
Repowering of wind turbines could lead to be tter utilization of wind-rich sites through the 
installation of latest technology wind turbin e models available and improve the capacity 
utilization factor by almost two to three ti mes. Over 4,600 turbines rated below 500 kilo 
Watt with an aggregate capacity of 1.6 Gi ga Watt and operational for more than 10/12 
years, were ideal for repowering. No progress had been made with regard to re-powering of 
old wind turbines. 
(Chapter IV, Para 5) 
Recommendations 
9. MNRE should focus on development of wind en ergy in the States endowed with high 
wind energy potential. 
10. MNRE may work towards development of adequate transmission and distribution 
infrastructure, both intra-State and inter-State, to meet the needs of large scale 
evacuation of wind power and grid stabilization through scientific forecasting 
techniques. 
11. MNRE may look into the issue of repowering the old wind turbines and formulate a policy 
for optimal utilization of existing capacities and their enhancement. 
Small Hydro Power 
The installed capacity of grid interactive Sma ll Hydro Power projects in the country at the 
beginning of the 11 th Five Year Plan was 1,976 MW. This ro se to 3,803 MW by March 2014, 
which was 19 per cent of the country’s Small Hydro Po wer potential of 19,749 MW. Out of 
6,474 potential sites identified by MNRE, proj ects had been installed on 997 sites and 254 
projects were under implementation. 
(Chapter V, Para 2.1) 
There were delays and problems in conducting feasibility studies for identifying potential 
sites for setting up Small Hydro Power projects, which was a critical activity for development 
of Small Hydro Power. In Himachal Prades h 37 consent letters were issued but the 

Executive Summary and Recommendations  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | xii Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Independent Power Producers did not submit any Detailed Proj ect Report even after five 
years; out of 88 Detailed Project Reports submitted by Himurja to the Department of Energy 
for technical approval none had been approv ed and the Independent  Power Producers had 
not submitted feasibility study reports for 78 projects allotted to them. Fifty two 
Small/Mini/Micro projects of 714.40 MW in Arunachal Pradesh and 50 Small Hydro Power 
projects of 612.25 MW in C hhattisgarh had not been commissioned and were still in the 
preliminary stages. 
(Chapter V, Para 2.3) 
Due to delays and problems in according tech nical approvals to Detailed Project Reports, 
allotment of projects, acquiring land for se tting up projects and obtaining forest and 
environmental clearances, several projects could not be taken up and completed in time. 
(Chapter V, Paras 3.1 to 3.3) 
Approved projects could not be completed du e to negligence of contractors, midway 
changes in design, etc. resulting in significan t time and cost overruns. In Bihar 15 projects 
had not been commissioned even after delays of 37 to 88 months and incurring expenditure 
of ` 128.19 crore. 
(Chapter V, Para 3.4) 
Sixty projects in five States were shut down, under repairs and ma intenance or working 
below capacity, resulting in loss of power generation and revenue. 
(Chapter V, Para 4.1) 
Recommendations 
12. MNRE must ensure that pr e-requisites such as land an d statutory clearances are 
obtained before release of Central Financial Assistance to developers , in order to avoid 
time and cost overruns. 
13. MNRE should focus on reviewing Small Hydro Power projects that are held up or are 
under performing, to find solutions to the pr oblems hindering the completion of these 
projects. 
Biomass Power 
The installed capacity of grid connected biom ass power in the country at the beginning of 
the 11th Five Year Plan period was 1,184 MW. It rose to 4,123 MW by  March 2014, which 
was 23 per cent of the country’s Biomass potential of 17,981 MW. 
(Chapter VI, Para 2.1) 
Audit observed instances of non traceable biomass plants, inoperative plants, plants 
working at lower capacities, plants installed wi th different specifications than approved and 
plants using non-permitted fuels. None of the developers had furnished the generation data 
to MNRE after the commencement of commercial generation of electricity. 
(Chapter VI, Paras 5.2 and 6) 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Executive Summary and Recommendations  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | xiii 
Recommendations 
14. MNRE must ensure that the Central Finan cial Assistance is released only after 
compliance with conditions and thereafter the implementation of the sanctioned 
biomass projects should be closely monitored. 
15. MNRE must review the power generation from the sanctioned biomass projects to 
ensure that these are operating as per specifications and use approved RE fuel. 
Off-Grid Renewable Power 
 
Solar Photovoltaic Systems 
MNRE did not align its off-grid targets with the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission 
(JNNSM) targets and only 31 per cent of the JNNSM targets were achieved. 
(Chapter VII, Para 2) 
There were cases of irregularities in distribut ion of solar devices, delay in distribution, 
irregular purchases of solar devices, deficienci es in award of works for Solar Power Plants, 
irregular payments and delays in completion of projects. 
(Chapter VII, Para 4) 
Cases of irregular installation, non installati on of solar devices and poor quality of work 
were noticed which indicated deficiencies in monitoring and evaluation. 
(Chapter VII, Para 4.2) 
Maintenance of the off-grid systems was deficien t. Physical verification of sampled systems 
by Audit revealed that 47 per cent of the off-grid systems were not working, one per cent of 
the systems were found missing and five per cent  of the systems were issued to villages 
already electrified. 
(Chapter VII, Paras 4.3 and 4.4) 
Recommendations 
16. MNRE must ensure that targets set under  the programme are in alignment with 
Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission. 
17. MNRE may review all delayed off-grid projec ts, set clear timelines for completion of 
these projects by the State Nodal Agenci es/State Government s and ensure adherence 
with the same. 
18. MNRE may set up an effective mechanism, in  coordination with the State agencies, to 
ensure that the off-grid syst ems are properly maintained and remain functional through 
their useful life. 
 

Executive Summary and Recommendations  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | xiv Renewable Energy Sector in India 
National Biogas and Manure Management Programme 
The total estimated potential for biogas plants was 1.23 crore plants, of which 47.52 lakh 
biogas plants (39 per cent ) were installed as of March 2014. However, the planning was 
done based on the potential assessment of the cattle census of 1981-82. The potential 
exploitation varied from 95 per cent in Mizoram and Maharashtra to 2.37 per cent in Jammu 
& Kashmir. 
(Chapter VIII, Para 2.2) 
Physical verification of sampled systems by Audit revealed that 26 per cent  of the biogas 
plants were not working. 
(Chapter VIII, Para 4.3) 
Recommendation 
19. MNRE may ensure better compliance with gui delines, particularly with regard to 
successful functioning of the biogas plants constructed under the programme. 
Remote Village Electrification 
The number of remote villages/ hamlets that  had been covered under the programme of 
Remote Village Electrification was 3,254 at the beginning of the 11 th Five Year Plan, which 
increased to 10,318 by March 2014, although th e number of villages/ hamlets eligible for 
electrification was 12,392. There were instance s of mismatches between the list of Remote 
Villages verified by Rural Electrification Corpor ation Limited, sanctioned by the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy and actually reported as covered by the States. 
(Chapter IX, Para 2.1) 
Audit also observed shortcomings in implemen tation of the programme in the States. There 
were instances of inordinate delays in completion of projects, award of contracts to 
ineligible contractors, irregular distribut ion of lighting systems and incomplete/non-
installation of Remote Village Electrification systems. 
(Chapter IX, Para 3) 
Deficiencies in maintenance of systems were  noticed across the sampled States due to 
under collection of user charges and deficienci es in maintenance arrangements. Physical 
verification of sampled system s by Audit revealed that 20 per cent  of the Remote Village 
Electrification systems were not working and six per cent  of the systems were found 
missing. 
(Chapter IX, Paras 5 and 6) 
Recommendations 
20. MNRE must ensure that only eligible villages/hamlets and beneficiaries are covered in 
the Remote Village Electrification programme. 
21. MNRE must ensure long term operation,  maintenance and sustainability of the Remote 
Village Electrification systems. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Executive Summary and Recommendations  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | xv 
Ladakh Renewable Energy Initiative 
Even after four years of implementation of the Programme, none of the 17 Small and Micro 
Hydro Power projects sanctioned had been commissioned as of July 2015. 
(Chapter X, Para 2.2) 
The projects were sanctioned without conducting proper feasibility studies, allotment of 
land, statutory clearances such as environmental, forest, irrigation clearances and technical 
approvals. This was compounded by slow progress in execution of projects. 
(Chapter X, Para 3) 
Off-grid solar power projects were sanction ed without conducting feasibility studies. As a 
result, two solar plants were installed in a village that was already covered under Rajiv 
Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana and 702 Solar Home Lighting Systems were 
distributed to ineligible beneficiaries. There were deficiencies in implementation of the 
projects. 
(Chapter X, Paras 4.3.2 and 4.3.5) 
Recommendations 
22. MNRE must ensure that comprehensive and reliable feasibility studies of the sites are 
conducted before sanctioning projects. 
23. Prior to sanctioning of the projects all stat utory clearances, particularly land clearances, 
must be taken. 
24. Evaluation of progress of work during implem entation and post implementation must be 
carried out by MNRE or State Agencies or reliable third parties. 
Prime Minister’s Special Package for Arunachal Pradesh 
There was shortfall in achievement of Planning Commission targets, mainly on account of 
non-completion of nine Small Hydro Power projects (36 MW), against which expenditure of 
` 358.46 crore had been incurred. In a ddition, the Department of Hydro Power 
Development did not complete 13 hydel projects (capacity: eight MW) and Arunachal 
Pradesh Energy Development Agency had not completed 25 hydel proj ects (capacity: one 
MW) due to various reasons, such as, delay in completion of projects by turnkey contractors 
and non-availability of funds. The delay ranged fr om two to three years. As of 2013-14, only 
1,051 i.e. 65 per cent of the villages had been electrified. 
(Chapter XI, Para 2) 
Even after completion, some of the projec ts were non functioning due to defective 
equipment, natural calamities, la ck of repair, abandoning of pr ojects by contractors, etc. 
which resulted in losses in power generation. 
(Chapter XI, Para 4) 
 

Executive Summary and Recommendations  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | xvi Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Recommendation 
25. MNRE must review the work done under Prime Minister’s Special Package for Arunachal 
Pradesh and take action in coordination with the State Ag encies for completing delayed 
projects, ensuring operations of commission ed projects and adequa te post-project 
maintenance thereof. 
Research, Design, Development and Demonstrat ion Activities in the Renewable Energy 
Sector 
MNRE sanctioned 190 projects at a cost of ` 545.90 crore during the period 2007-14 to 
various Research & Development organizations,  of which 112 projects were completed and 
78 projects were under progress. 
(Chapter XII, Para 1) 
Audit observed that although a large number of sanctioned projects were in alignment with 
focus areas identified under various divisions,  realisation of deliverable outcome was not 
achieved in a majority of projects. This was pa rtly due to the fact th at industry participation 
could not be secured in the projects where it  was envisaged, which limited the commercial 
exploitation of technologies developed. There were delays in implementation of projects 
and inability of the implementing agencies to ei ther file patents or publish research papers 
as envisaged in the projects. 
(Chapter XII, Para 2) 
Monitoring of the projects by MNRE was lax,  as in many cases, project progress reports 
were not submitted by the implementing agenci es and project completion reports were not 
evaluated by MNRE or by third parties. 
(Chapter XII, Para 2) 
Recommendations 
26. Project Completion Reports of research proj ects should invariably be vetted by field 
experts and peer groups before their acceptance, to validate the presented output. 
27. Emphasis should be laid on regular monitoring of ongoing projects to ensure that these 
are completed on time and if required, course correction introduced. 

Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 1 
Chapter - I 
Renewable Energy Sector in India 
1. Introduction 
India supports around 17 per cent  of the world’s population but its energy and electricity 
consumption is only around five per cent  of the world’s consumption. Its per capita 
consumption of energy and electricity is less than one-third of the world average. In order to 
sustain a growth rate of over eight per cent through the next two decades, India would need 
to grow its primary energy 1 supply by three to four times a nd electricity supply by at least 
five to seven times of its current consumptio n. The country might ne ed to import over 90 
per cent  of its requirement of oil and over 45 per cent  of its requirement of coal 2. Energy 
shortages are currently at an average of 8.7 per cent with peak deficit at nine per cent3. 
Fossil fuels though cost effective and efficien t, pollute the environment and contribute to 
the greenhouse effect and global warming. For instance, mining of coal results in the 
destruction of wide areas of forest land a nd is environmentally hazardous. Coal also 
produces sulphur dioxide which creates acid rain. All fossil fuels have a finite life - the 
deposits that exist cannot be replenished easily once these are used. 
Renewable Energy (RE) is environment friendly and can provide energy security and offers 
distributed solutions. It is derived from natu ral processes that are replenished constantly 
such as sunlight, wind, rain, tides, waves a nd geothermal heat. RE has the potential to 
address the growing concern over indiscriminate use of fossil fuels and its impact on climate 
change. RE technologies are ideally suited to distributed applications and they have 
substantial potential to provide a reliable and se cure energy supply as an  alternative to grid 
extension or as a supplement to grid-provide d power.The challenge is to make the RE 
technologies convenient, efficient, safe and affordable. 
Recognising that climate change was a global challenge, India has been  actively engaged in 
multilateral negotiations at the United Nati ons Framework Convention for Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) and made voluntary commitment to re duce its carbon emissions intensity by  
20-25 per cent by 2020 in comparison with 2005 levels
4. India launched the National Action 
Plan for Climate Change (NAPCC) in 2008 which had eight missions with a view to mitigate 
climate change. One of the missions under NAPCC was the National Solar Mission with an 
a i m  t o  i n s t a l l  2 0 , 0 0 0  M W  s o l a r  p o w e r  c a p a c i t y  b y  2 0 2 2 .  I t  a l s o  e n v i s a g e d  t h a t  R E  w o u l d  
constitute 15 per cent of the energy mix of India by 2020. 
                                                            
1 Primary energy is an energy form found in nature that has not been subjected to any conversion or 
transformation process. 
2  Address of the Minister MNRE delivered at Institute of International a nd European Affairs,  Dublin, Ireland 
in June 2012 available at http://mnre.gov.in. 
3 As per Energy Statistics 2013 of Central Statistics Office, Min istry of Statistic s and Programme 
Implementation. 
4  The Final Report of Expert Group on Low Carbon Strategies for Inclusive Growth of Planning Commission 
(April 2014) 

Chapter I Report No. 34 of 2015 
 
Page | 2 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
The grid-connectable renewable power had estimated potential of 8,89,508 5 MW. The 
Planning Commission in the 12 th Five Year Plan (FYP) document has stated that the supply 
from renewables is expected to increase rapidly from 24,503 MW by the end of the 11 thFYP 
to 54,503 MW by the end of the 12thFYP, and underlined the need for investments in RE. 
The installed power generation capacity in India was 2,84,634 Mega Watt (MW) (March 
2014) which mainly incl uded 1,99,947 MW (70 per cent) from thermal, 40,531 MW (14 per 
cent) from hydro, 4,781 MW  from nuclear (two per cent ) sources and non-utilities 6 
accounted for 39,375 MW (14 per cent). 
In April 2002, RE based power generation in stalled capacity was 3, 475 MW which was two 
per cent  of the total installed capacity in th e country. As on 31 March 2014 it was 31,719 
MW which was around 11 per cent of the installed capacity in  the country. Grid connected 
RE installed capacity included Solar (2,656 MW), Wind (21,137 MW), Small Hydro (3,803 
MW) and Biomass 7 (4,123 MW). Ten 8 States endowed with 78 per cent  of the country’s 
Renewable Energy potential varied in terms of potential exploited9. 
Considering the significance of RE as an alte rnative to meet ever growing energy demand of 
India we decided to take up Performance Audit of Renewable Energy Sector in India for the 
period 2007-14. 
2. Strategy adopted by the Government of India (GoI) to develop and 
promote RE 
RE had been an important component of I ndia’s energy planning process. The GoI’s 
commitment to RE led to establishment of th e Department of Non-Conventional Energy 
Sources in 1982, which was upgraded to a full-fl edged Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy 
Sources (MNES) in 1992, subsequently rename d as Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(MNRE) in October 2006. 
MNRE adopted a three-fold strategy for the development, promotion and use of RE 
technologies across the country. The salient features of the strategy were: 
(i) providing budgetary support for resear ch, development and demonstration of 
technologies;  
(ii) facilitating institutional finance through various financial institutions; and  
(iii) promoting private investment through fiscal  incentives, tax holidays, depreciation 
allowance and remunerative returns for power fed into the grid. 
 
                                                            
5 Solar–7,48,990 MW, Biomass-17,981 MW, Small Hydr o-19,749 MW, Wind (at 80 metres)-1,02,788 MW. 
6  RE, Captive Power etc. 
7 Including biomass power, bagasse cogeneration, urban and industrial waste to energy. 
8 Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Odisha, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu. 
9  State wise details are given in Chapters III, IV, V and VI. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter I  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 3 
3. Renewable Energy Programme 
The RE programme of MNRE included deploy ment of RE based projects, systems and 
devices in the categories: (i) grid-connected 10 renewable power, (ii) off-grid 11/captive 
renewable power, (iii) energy for rural applic ations and (iv) RE for urban, industrial and 
commercial application. 
3.1. Grid Connected Renewable Power 
This category comprised power generation mainly from - (i) Solar (ii) Wind (iii) 
Biomass/Bagasse12 Cogeneration13 and (iv) Small Hydro resour ces. The growth of grid 
connected RE during the 11thand 12th Five Year Plan (FYP) is given in Table 1. 
Table 1: Capacity addition since 9th Five Year Plan (in MW) 
Resource Estimated 
Potential 
Capacity Addition 
Prior to 
11th FYP 
During 11th FYP 
(2007-2012) 
During 12th FYP 
(2012-14) 
Total capacity as on 
31 March 2014 
Solar power 7,48,990 Nil 940 1,716 2,656 
Wind power 1,02,788 7,091 10,267 3,779 21,137 
Small Hydro 
Power 
19,749 1,976 1,419 408 3,803 
Bio power* 17,981 1,185 2,042 896 4,123 
Total 8,89,508 10,252 14,668 6,799 31,719 
Source: MNRE. *Note – including biomass power, bagasse cogeneration, urban and industrial waste to energy. 
3.2. Off-Grid Renewable Power 
Programmes for deployment of off-grid/ dist ributed renewable power and decentralized 
energy systems for rural applications are given in Table 2. 
Table 2: Deployment of off-grid RE systems upto 31 March 2014 
S.No. Resources Cumulative Achievements (in MW) 
Off-Grid/Distributed Renewable Power (including Captive/Cogeneration Plants) 
1.  Biomass Power / Cogeneration(non-bagasse) 
Plants 
531.80 
2.  Biomass Gasifier Plants 164.70 
3.  Waste-to- Energy Projects 132.70 
4.  Solar Photovoltaic Power Plants 174.40 
5.  Aero-Generators/Hybrid Systems 2.30 
6.  Water Mills/Micro Hydel Power Projects 13.21 
 Total 1,019.11 
                                                            
10  Energy systems connected with el ectricity grid for feeding the grid. 
11 Energy systems for local use not connected with electricity grid. 
12 Bagasse is sugarcane fibre wast e left after juice extraction. 
13 Cogeneration is the simultaneous generation of both electricity and heat from the same fuel, for useful 
purposes. 

Chapter I Report No. 34 of 2015 
 
Page | 4 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Decentralized Energy Systems (in numbers or area as applicable) 
1.  Family Type Biogas Plants 47.52 lakh 
2.  Solar Photovoltaic Home Lighting Systems 11 lakh 
3.  Solar Lanterns 9.60 lakh 
4.  Solar Photovoltaic Street Lighting Systems 2.75 lakh 
5.  Solar Photovoltaic Pumps 11,626 
6.  Solar Water Heating - Collector Area14 8.08 million sqm. 
Source: MNRE. 
4. Agencies involved in promotion of Renewable Energy 
While MNRE provides the policy direction and monitors the implementation and the impact 
of the policies, various agencies at the Centre and the States are responsible for 
implementation of the schemes. A brief descri ption of these agencies and their functions 
are given below: 
4.1. State Government and State Nodal Agencies (SNAs) 
Apart from the Central Government’s initiatives to promote RE, the State Governments 
work towards formulating concomitant State policies and implementation of the policies. 
SNAs play a critical role in the develo pment of a long-term renewable policy and 
implementation of sustainable energy programmes across the States. SNAs promote RE 
technologies and energy conservation measur es and popularize them through schemes and 
programmes formulated in the light of the Cent ral and State policies, viz socially oriented 
schemes for urban, tribal, remote and unde rdeveloped regions; commercially oriented 
schemes; demonstration projects and progra mmes; aid in the form of subsidies for 
production and dissemination of RE techno logies; support to Research & Development 
(R&D) activities, and information and education activities, etc. 
4.2. Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency (IREDA) 
IREDA is a Government Company that was registered as Non-Banking Finance Company with 
the Reserve Bank of India in 2008.  The main ob jective of IREDA is to give financial support 
to specific projects and scheme s for generating electricity a nd / or energy through new and 
renewable sources and conserving energy thro ugh energy efficiency. Report No.12 of 2015 
Union Government (Ministry of New and Renewable Energy) of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India deals with the Financing of RE Projects by IREDA. 
4.3. NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam Limited (NVVN ) and Power Grid Corporation of India 
Ltd. (PGCIL) 
NVVN and PGCIL are Government Companies under the Ministry of Power. The main 
objective of NVVN is to carry on the business of  purchase and sale of all forms of electrical 
power, both conventional and non-conventional . It was decided by MNRE that NVVN would 
                                                            
14 A Solar Water Heater comprises of an array of solar co llectors to collect solar energy and an insulated tank 
to store hot water. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter I  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 5 
be the agency responsible for achievement of the target of 1,000 MW of grid connected 
solar power plants up to March 2013 under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission. 
PGCIL is the Central Transmission Utility. Its objectives are to undert ake transmission of 
electric power through Inter-State Transmission  System; discharge all functions of planning 
and coordination relating to Inter-State Transmission System with State Transmission 
Utilities and other stakeholders; and ensure de velopment of an efficient, coordinated and 
economical system of Inter-State Transmission  lines for smooth flow of electricity from 
generating stations to the load dispatch centres. 
4.4. Institutes under MNRE 
There are three institutes under MNRE engaged in R&D activity. 
4.4.1. National Institute of Wind Energy (NIWE) 
NIWE (formerly C-WET
15) located at Chennai, Tamil Nadu, was established as a technical 
focal point for wind power development in Indi a to promote and accelerate the pace of 
utilization of wind energy. A Wind Turbine Test Station had also been established at 
Kayathar, Tamil Nadu, with technical and financ ial support from DANIDA, an agency of the 
Government of Denmark. 
MNRE through NIWE had initiated a major proj ect on Solar Radiation Resource Assessment 
(SRRA) across the nation to assess and quantif y the solar radiation availability along with 
weather parameters with a view to develop Sola r Atlas. NIWE had installed a network of 51 
SRRA stations in the first phase in different States.  
4.4.2. National Institute of Solar Energy (NISE) 
NISE (formerly SEC
16) located at Gurgaon, Haryana, is a dedicated unit of MNRE for 
development of solar energy technologies and its related science and engineering. To 
achieve its objective, NISE had been working on  various aspects of solar resource utilization 
and technology development in collaboration with implementing agencies and industry. 
Over the years, it had developed a variety of technical facilities for technology evaluation 
and validation, testing and standardization, performance reliability, monitoring and data 
analysis apart from training. 
4.4.3. Sardar Swaran Singh National Institute of Renewable Energy (SSS-NIRE) 
SSS-NIRE located at Kapurthala, Punjab, is an up-coming R&D centre with mandate to focus 
on Bio-energy and develop innovative technologies in the area of renewables and biofuels. 
 
 
                                                            
15 Centre for Wind Energy Technology. 
16  Solar Energy Centre. 

Chapter I Report No. 34 of 2015 
 
Page | 6 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
5. Audit Objectives 
The objectives of the Performance Audit of Re newable Energy Sector were to examine the 
progress made in: 
(i) Increasing the contribution of RE resources in India’s energy mix/electricity mix; 
(ii) Increasing access to electricity/ lighting needs in remote and rural areas; and 
(iii) Promoting research, design, development and demonstration. 
6. Scope of Audit 
The all India Performance Audit of Renewable Energy Sector in India was taken up by the 
office of the Principal Director of Audit, Sc ientific Departments. It included the audit of 
MNRE and institutions under it - NISE, NIWE , SSS-NIRE. The period covered in audit was 
from 2007-08 to 2013-14. 
The State Accountants General audited the St ate Nodal Agencies (SNAs) in 24 selected 
States
17 and other related Departments. These St ates were selected for audit based on 
criteria of Central Financial Assistance released, the Renewable Energy potential in the State 
and the level of its exploitation. 
The two offices of the Principal Directors of  Commercial Audit & ex- officio Member Audit 
Board-III & IV, New Delhi audited NVVN, PGCIL and IREDA. 
For this audit suitable sample were drawn fo r grid connected and off-grid programmes. In 
respect of grid connected programmes the sample is given in Annexure I. 
7. Audit methodology 
 
A stakeholder’s workshop was held on 24 Sept ember 2013 in the office of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India to identify audit issues. Experts from MNRE, Regulatory 
Bodies18, State Nodal Agencies, Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs) and Generators 
Association attended the Conference. Subseque ntly, an Entry Conference was held on  
6 August 2014 at MNRE wherein the audit ob jectives, audit scope and audit methodology 
were discussed. The meeting was attended by th e officials of MNRE led by Secretary MNRE. 
MNRE agreed with the objectives and methodol ogy adopted in this Performance Audit. The 
draft Audit Report on Performanc e Audit of Renewable Energy Se ctor in India was issued to 
MNRE on 27 January 2015, to seek their comment s on the audit findings and to confirm the 
facts and figures mentioned in the report. MNRE  furnished replies to the draft Audit Report 
on 18 May 2015. 
                                                            
17 Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal. 
18 Central Electricity Regulatory Commissio n and Central Electricity Authority. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter I  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 7 
The draft Audit Report was revised based on the responses received from MNRE in May 
2015 and shared with MNRE on 16 June 2015. The Exit Conference was held on 3 July 2015. 
Subsequent to the Exit Conference, MNRE furnished supplementary replies (July 2015), 
which have also been considered while finalizing this report. 
8. Scope limitation - non production of records 
8.1 Biomass projects 
MNRE was the custodian of records for bioma ss projects including the proposals and their 
evaluation, based on which Central Financial A ssistance (CFA) was released. Hence, it was 
very important to examine the project files of the biomass projects at MNRE with respect to 
determination of amount of elig ible CFA, monitoring, electricity generation and functional/ 
non-functional aspect of the projects. 
MNRE did not provide any register, evidencing, in a chronological orde r, the comprehensive 
list of project proposals received and appr oved. These details were required for random 
selection of projects for audit scrutiny. Inst ead MNRE initially provided Audit with seven 
bagasse and five non bagasse ca se files of its own selection, which was not as per the 
required random check envisaged in the audit me thodology. This limitation was brought to 
the attention of the Secretary, MNRE. Therea fter, MNRE furnished a list of 79 biomass 
bagasse and cogeneration projects wh ich had been funded during 2007-14. The 
completeness of the list could not be assured in audit. A sample of 20 projects was selected 
for detailed scrutiny by Audit from this list, but MNRE did not provide project files for eight19 
projects even after repeated request from Audit. 
Similarly, MNRE did not furnish the list of no n-bagasse project (except Captive Power) to 
which funds had been released. Audit observed that as per Industrial cogeneration report 
there were 75 such projects to which CFA ha d been released by MNRE. Audit requested 
MNRE to furnish project files for 24 projects of these 75 projects.  MNRE furnished only 12 
project files and the remaining 12 20 were not made available to  Audit. MNRE provided 19 
files of bagasse cogeneration and 17 files of non-bagasse projects. 
8.2 Small Hydro Projects 
MNRE did not provide a complete list of Sma ll Hydro Power (SHP) projects approved by it 
but provided the list of sanctions of CFA for the projects. 18 SHP proj ects implemented by 
private developers were selected for audit scrutiny from the list of sanctioned CFA, however 
                                                            
19 M/s Sahabad Cooperative Sugar Mil Ltd, Haryana; M/s Athani Farmers Sugar Factory Ltd, Karnataka;  
M/s Malegaon SSK Ltd, Maharashtra;  M/s Vikas SSK Ltd, Maharashtra;  M/s Shreenath Mhaskoha Sakhar 
Karkhana Ltd, Maharashtra; M/s Gurudatta Sugar Ltd, Maharashtra; M/s Sarvana Sugar Ltd, Tamil Nadu and 
M/s Kesar Industries Ltd, Uttar Pradesh. 
20 M/s Vijaynagar Biotech Ltd, Andhra Pradesh; M/s Bh arat Starch Industries, Haryana; M/s Ruchira Papers 
Ltd Kala Amb, Himachal Pradesh; M/s Diamond Food Products, Kerala; M/s Lanxess India Pvt Ltd, Birlagram, 
Madhya Pradesh; M/s Mallu Papers Lt d, Maharashtra; M/s Maa Durga Rice  Products Pvt. Ltd, Odisha; M/s 
ABC papers Ltd, Punjab; M/s SEL Manufacturing  Company Pvt. Ltd, Punjab; M/s Anand Triplex Board, 
Meerut, Uttar Pradesh; M/s Sidarth Papers Ltd, Uttarakhand and M/s Paramount Rice Mills, West Bengal. 

Chapter I Report No. 34 of 2015 
 
Page | 8 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
files and documents pertaining to the same we re not provided to Audit by MNRE during the 
period of audit. 
8.3 Research, Design, Development and Demonstration (RDDD) 
Audit sought details of projects sanctioned  during 2007-08 to 2013-1 4 from the concerned 
divisions of MNRE. In response, all divisions of MNRE provided the information, except Solar 
Photovoltaic and Solar Thermal divisions, wh ich did not provide details of six projects 
each21. Based on this information, detailed records of 117 projects were called for, of which 
MNRE provided only 58 project records. 
Non production of records and production of  incomplete records placed a significant 
constraint and hindrance to audit scrutiny and is reported as scope limitation to audit. 
9. Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation received from MNRE, IREDA, NVVN, PGCIL, NIWE, NISE, 
SSS-NIRE, concerned State Governments and State Nodal Agencies at each stage of this 
audit. Audit also acknowledges co-operation received from Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission and Central Electricity Authority in providing pertinent information. 
10. Arrangement of Audit Findings 
 
The audit findings are discussed in four sections  with Chapters II to XII. Chapter I of this 
report provides an introductory perspective. 
• Section I : National Action Plan on Climate Change – Renewable Purchase Obligation 
and Clean Development Mechanism. 
 Chapter II of this report deals with co mpliance with Renewable Purchase Obligation 
and availing benefits of Clean Development Mechanism. 
• Section II: Grid Connected Renewable Power 
 Chapter III of this report deals with Solar Power. 
 Chapter IV of this report deals with Wind Power. 
 Chapter V of this report deals with Small Hydro Power. 
 Chapter VI of this report deals with Biomass Power. 
• Section III: Off-Grid Renewable Power 
 Chapter VII of this report deals with Solar Photovoltaic Systems. 
 Chapter VIII of this report deals with  National Biogas and Manure Management 
Programme. 
 Chapter IX of this report deals with Remote Village Electrification. 
 Chapter X of this report deals with  Ladakh Renewable Energy Initiative. 
                                                            
21  Total number of projects sanctioned for Solar Photovoltaic were 27 and for Solar Thermal were 22. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter I  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 9 
 Chapter XI of this report deals with Pr ime Minister’s Special Package for Arunachal 
Pradesh. 
• Section IV: Research, Design, Development and Demonstration Activities 
 Chapter XII of this report deals wi th Research, Design, Development and 
Demonstration Activities in the Renewable Energy Sector. 
All audit findings and data pertaining to Andhra Pr adesh in this Audit Report refers to the 
position before bifurcation into separate States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section I –  
National Action Plan on 
Climate Change – Renewable Purchase 
Obligation and Clean Development 
Mechanism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 13 
Chapter - II 
Compliance with Renewable Purchase 
Obligation and availing benefits of Clean 
Development Mechanism 
1. Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO) 
As a follow up on India’s commitment to reduce carbon emission under United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (U NFCCC), the Government of India announced 
(June 2008) a National Action Plan for Clim ate Change (NAPCC). On e of the important 
measures identified was increasing the shar e of Renewable Energy (RE) in the total 
electricity consumption in the co untry. NAPCC set target of five per cent  for purchase of 
electricity generated from RE sources for 2009- 10 against the then existing level of around 
3.5 per cent. This target was to increase by one per cent per year for next 10 years i.e. the 
NAPCC envisaged that RE would constitute 15 per cent of the energy mix of India by 2020. 
National Solar Mission in 2011 further provid ed that ‘within the percentage so made 
applicable, to start with, the State Electric ity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs) shall also 
reserve a minimum percentage for purchase of  solar energy which will go up to 0.25 per 
cent by the end of 2012-2013 and further up to 3 per cent by 2022’. 
1.1. Authority to set RPO targets 
The existing legal framework under Electricity Act 2003 puts the responsibility for promotion 
o f  R E  o n  t h e  S E R C s .  I t  p r o v i d e s  t h a t  S E R C  should ensure ‘promotion of cogeneration and 
generation of electricity from renewable source s of energy by providing suitable measures 
for connectivity with the grid and sa le of electricity to any person, and also specify, for 
purchase of electricity from such sources 1, a percentage of the total consumption of 
electricity in the area of a distribution licensee’. 
National Tariff Policy 2006 also provides that ‘the Appropriate Commission shall fix a 
minimum percentage for purc hase of energy from such so urces taking into account 
availability of such resources in the region and its impact on retail tariffs’. 
Hence, RPO of distribution companies/ direct bu yers of Electricity were to be fixed by SERCs 
across the States. 
1.2. Renewable Energy Certificate (REC) 
Though India has more than enough RE potential to achieve these targets, availability of RE 
sources is widely dispersed, and the capacity to meet these targets varies widely from State 
to State. In some States, the potential for RE is insignificant (e.g. Haryana), whereas some 
other States have substantial RE sources e.g. wind energy is abundant in Gujarat, Karnataka 
and Tamil Nadu, solar power is concentrated in  the north-west region of the country and 
small hydro power is concentrated in the States of Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand. 
                                                            
1 Renewable Energy. 

Chapter II Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 14 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
MNRE undertook a study (June 2009) and came up with conceptual framework for REC 
mechanism to possibly address the issue of geographical dispersion of RE resources. 
The REC mechanism was based on the premise that the RE generation entails reduction of 
certain environmental attributes like Green House Gases, apart from electricity generation. 
Thus, RE generator can sell two different pr oducts on account of  renewable energy 
generation. These products are electricity and the associated environmental attributes, in 
the form of RE Certificate. 
Chart 1: REC mechanism 
Note: OA-Open Access. 
In the proposed mechanism, one REC would be  issued to the RE ge nerator for one Mega 
Watt hour (MWh) electrical energy 2 fed into the grid. The RE ge nerator could sell electricity 
to the distribution company and associated RECs also to the distribution company or any 
other obligated entity 3 within the State or outside th e State. The REC mechanism would 
enable obligated entities in any State to procure RECs generated in any of the States in India 
and surrender the same to satisfy its RPO target. Thus, REC mechanism was supposed to 
address the issues of scarcity of RE sources in some States which had negligible RPO targets 
in view of the limited RE potential in the State. 
RPO and REC mechanisms were designed as policy instruments to demonstrate 
commitment and create a demand incentive for the development of RE sources in India. 
 
 
                                                            
2 The solar generating companies registered under REC framework prior to the date of effect of the Third 
REC Amendment Regulations (1 January 2015) would be eligible for 2.66 REC for one MWh of electricity 
generated and fed into the grid and this dispensation would be available to such projects for the period 
upto 31 March 2017, after which the said projects would be eligible for one REC for one MWh of electricity 
generated. 
3 The entities mandated to purchase a defined quantum of renewable energy of their overall consumption 
are obligated entities. In a State these may include Distribution Licensees, Captive Consumers, Open Access 
users etc. 


Report N
Renewa
2. A
2.1. 
As state
and 20
respect
RPO tra
Chart 2
sample
Ch
Source: S
It can b
only fou
achieve
2.2. 
The tar
in audit
               
4 Data 
13 an
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
In per cent
No. 34 of 201
able Energy S
udit Findi
Shortfall in
ed above th
13-14 agai
tively. 
ajectory rec
2 exhibits t
d. 
hart 2: State 
State Nodal Ag
be seen from
ur States ( H
e their RPO 
State RPO 
gets for RPO
t are given i
                      
regarding ele
d 2013-14. 
00
00
00
00
00
00
Andhra Pradesh
Arunachal Pradesh
15 
Sector in Ind
ings 
n achieving 
he NAPCC ta
nst which t
commended
he targets 
wise achiev
gencies. 
m the chart 
Himachal Pr
targets in a
not in keep
O set by the
n Annexure
                      
ctricity gener
Assam
Bihar
Chattisgarh
Gj t
dia  
RPO target
argets were
the nation a
d by NAPCC
set for 20
vements for 
total energ
above that
radesh, Karn
ccordance 
ping with ta
e SERCs fro
e II. From th
 
ration from RE
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu & Kashmir
ts as per NA
e to be eigh
al achieve m
C indicates R
13-14 and 
RPOs and ta
gy purchased
t even after
nataka, Miz
with NAPCC
argets set un
om 2010-11
he data coll
E sources wa s
Jammu & Kashmir
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
RPO Target
RPO 
APCC target
t and nine p
ment was o
RPO targets
achieveme
argets under
d in 2013-14
r four years 
zoram and T
C targets. 
nder NAPCC
to 2019-20
ected in au
s made availa
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Meghalaya
 for 2013-14
Target for 201
ts 
per cent for
only 4.28 a
s of nine pe
nt there a g
r NAPCC as a
since NAPC
Tamil Nadu
C 
0 in the 24 S
dit, it was e
able by CEA o n
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha
Pj b
RPO Achie
13-14 as envis
Ch
P
r the years 
nd 4.51 pe
er cent for 2
gainst in 2 4
a percentage
CC was form
u) had bee n
States test c
evident that
nly for the y e
Punjab
Rajasthan
Tamil Nadu
Uttarakhand
evement for 2
saged under N
hapter II   
Page | 15 
2012-13 
er cen t4, 
2013-14. 
4 States 
e of  
mulated, 
n able to 
checked 
t: 
ears 2012- Uttarakhand
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal
013-14
NAPCC

Chapter II Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 16 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
i. In none of the 24 sampled States, exce pt Himachal Pradesh and Tamil Nadu RPO 
were fixed in sync with the targets set under the National Action Plan on Climate 
Change; 
ii. Only three States5set RPO targets for the entire period covered in NAPCC. Setting out 
RPO targets for a long term i.e. 10 years wa s required both for setting a road map to 
meet National commitments as well as to bring policy clarity; 
iii. In five of the 24 States, the RPO reported by respective State Nodal Agencies differed 
from the RPO as per MNRE in these States . The details of differences are given in 
Table 3. 
Table 3: Difference between RPO reported by States and MNRE 
State Year RPO as per MNRE RPO as per SNA 
Bihar 2011-12 3 per cent 2.50 per cent 
Chhattisgarh 2013-14 5.75 per cent 6.25 per cent 
Mizoram 2013-14 Nil 9 per cent 
Nagaland 2011-12 7 per cent 5 per cent 
2012-13 8 per cent 5 per cent 
2013-14 Nil 5 per cent 
West Bengal 2011-12 Nil 2 per cent 
2012-13 Nil 3 per cent 
 
This difference in the data between MNRE and State could hinder proper monitoring 
and review. 
iv. Rajasthan, which had 19 per cent  of the estimated RE po tential of the country, 
prescribed RPO target upto 2013-14. The RP O were consistently marginally lower 
than the NAPCC target, though the gap progressively reduced i.e. from one per cent 
in 2011-12 to 0.8 per cent in 2013-14; 
v. Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmi r and Madhya Pradesh consistently set 
RPO targets below the target as per NAPCC; 
vi. Himachal Pradesh, which has five per cent  of the estimated RE potential of the 
country, not only prescribed RPO targets co nsistently higher than the road map set 
out in the NAPCC for the entire period of NAPCC; but also surpassed its own targets 
consistently. 
vii. Tamil Nadu, which has four per cent  of the estimated RE potential of the country, 
prescribed RPO targets consistently higher  than the road map set out in the NAPCC 
though these have been set out only upto 2015-16 and not the entire period of 
NAPCC. 
viii. Low RE potential States, excepting Mi zoram and Nagaland, continued to set 
substantially lower RPO targets. This i ndicated that the REC mechanism which was 
meant to address the issue of disparity in geographical dispersal of RE resources and 
enable inter-State RE transactions for further promotion and development of RE 
                                                            
5 Bihar, Himachal Pradesh and Kerala. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter II   
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 17 
sources, had failed to instill confidence in the low RE potential States to set higher 
RPO targets. 
The above analysis indicates the need for grea ter unity of purpose between the Centre and 
the States. MNRE stated (May 2015) that the technical document of NAPCC had suggested 
RPO targets which were not ma ndatory. Under Electricity Act 2003, the State Regulator was 
to fix the RPO. The reply needs to be viewed in the context that NA PCC provided the broad 
framework for RPO compliances to target 15 per cent of RE in the energy mix of the country 
by 2020. 
2.3. Status of discharge of Renewable Purchase Obligations 
Audit examined the notified RPO across the selected 24 States and their achievements. The 
status of RPO compliance between 2010-11 and 2013-14 by the 24 States are given in 
Annexure III. Analysis of the data revealed that: 
i. Of the 24 States, six States 6 complied with the RPO targets set by the respective 
State Energy Regulatory Commissions; 
ii. Of the six States mentioned above, two States 7 were high potential States. These 
States not only met the RPO but also exce eded the RPO target set under the NAPCC. 
Tamil Nadu, which has four per cent of the national RE potential, also exceeded the 
NAPCC targets. Mizoram exceeded the NAPCC targets in 2011-12, 2012-13 and 2013-
14. Arunachal Pradesh exceeded these in 2012-13 and 2013-14. 
iii. Of the remaining six8 high RE potential States, the performance of Jammu & Kashmir 
and Andhra Pradesh was poor. Jammu & Kashmir reported ‘Nil’ purchase of power 
from RE sources between 2011-12 to 2013-14, the period for which RPO was notified 
in the State. Andhra Pradesh reported purchase of electricity from RE sources as 1.75 
per cent in 2012-13. RPO achievement for 2013 -14 was not available. Gujarat, 
Maharashtra and Rajasthan though not able  to achieve the RPO over the years, 
showed a rising trend in the percentage of electricity purchased from RE sources, 
which was a positive sign. Madhya Prad esh did not provide the data of RPO 
adherence. 
iv. While Punjab reported a rising trend in th e percentage of electricity purchased from 
RE sources, Assam registered a declining trend. 
Inability of RE deficit States to meet their RPO and REC mode contributing in a miniscule 
manner towards overall compliance
9, indicates poor inclination of the States to meet their 
targets. 
 
 
                                                            
6 Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Karn ataka, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tamil Nadu. 
7 Himachal Pradesh (36,386 MW) and Karnataka (38,276 MW). 
8  Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Rajasthan endowed with 
62 per cent of the RE potential. 
9 Discussed in detail in para 2.4. 

Chapter II Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 18 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
2.4. Distribution of purchase of electricity from RE sources and RECs in meeting RPO 
The cumulative data of RPO in terms of electr i c i t y  t o  b e  p u r c h a s e d  f r o m  R E  s o u r c e s ,  t h e  
extent to which it was done directly or th rough purchase of RECs between 2010 and 2014 is 
given in Annexure IV. From this data collected in audit, it is concluded that: 
i. Direct purchase of electricity generated from RE sources was still the preferred 
option to meet RPO as only 4.77 per cent of RPO compliance was through REC mode, 
whereas 95.23 per cent was through direct purchase of electricity from RE sources. 
ii. Purchase of RECs was not an attractive opti on as evident from the fact that despite 
17 States falling short of meeting their RPO, only six States reported purchase of 
RECs, despite RECs being available in the designated exchanges
10. Gujarat led these 
States by meeting 43 per cent of its RPO through RECs. 
2.5. Monitoring of compliances with RPO and penalty for non-compliance 
MNRE in its framework for REC mechanism recommended formatio n/designation of a 
monitoring committee in the States with th e primary objective of monitoring the RPO 
compliances by designated entities. The monito ring committee was required to secure data 
on RPO compliances by obligated entities incl uding those which may no t be covered in REC 
mechanism or have on site captive genera tion. Electricity Act 2003 under Section 142 
empowers SERCs to impose penalties for non-co mpliances of the Act, Rules, Regulations or 
Provisions. Twenty one States had designated  a State agency for submitting a quarterly 
report to their respective SERCs, indicating  RPO compliances and shortfalls. Based on the 
data received from monitoring committee, SE RCs were expected to impose and collect 
penalties from obligated entities for shortfall. 
It was observed that: 
i. Rajasthan and Karnataka had not prescribed any rate for levy of penalty, whereas 
Uttar Pradesh did not even have the prov ision for penalty in case the obligated 
entity was not able to meet the RPO. 
ii. There was no shortfall in meeting RPO targets in six States. No penalty was collected 
in 17
11 of the 24 States sampled, which report ed shortfall, except collection of a 
token penalty by Uttarakhand. 
iii. Audit estimated penalty leviable on obligat ed entities for not complying with RPO, 
based on a conservative assumption that the shortfall in RPO would have been met 
by buying RECs (non-solar) at the floor price of ` 1,500 per REC. The State wise 
details of the estimate are given in Annexure V  and indicate that an amount of  
` 4,234.79 crore was leviable on the obligated entities. 
The enforcement of RPO was further diluted by frequent deferring of RPO targets as seen in 
the cases of Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Uttarakhand. 
                                                            
10 Discussed in detail in para 3.2. 
11 As per Annexure V. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter II   
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 19 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the RPO Regulations notified by the respective State 
Regulator provided for penal provisions for non-compliance of RPO by the obligated entities. 
These penal provisions were to be invoked by  the respective Regulator after taking into 
consideration the reasons for non-achieving RPO by the obligated entities. It further stated 
that by not achieving RPOs the distributio n companies have not accrued undue benefits 
because all the power purchased and sold had to be reflected in Annual Revenue 
Requirements which was approved by SERCs. The reply of the Ministry does not address the 
issue raised above on non-enforcement of RPO and non-collection of resultant penalties by 
SERCs as mandated by Electricity Act 2003. 
3. Difficulties in RPO compliance 
Difficulties in compliance with RPO were po sed primarily by REC mechanism not being 
successful and constraints of infrastructure. These are discussed below: 
3.1. Declining trend for projects registered through REC route 
MNRE framework for REC mechanism provided that  initially RE projects with a minimum of 
250 kW capacity were eligible to  register in REC mode. It wa s envisaged that as the REC 
market matured, off grid technologies coul d also be considered for inclusion in REC 
mechanism. Audit observed a declining trend in REC registered projects after an initial spurt, 
in both solar and non solar mode over the years. 
Chart 3: Projects and capacities added in REC mode for non solar category 
Source: REC Registry of India. 
As can be seen from Chart 3, after an init ial thrust towards REC mode, the interest of 
generators to register under REC mechanism gradually dwindled. The reason for declining 
interest may be attributed to poor RPO compli ances in States. In solar category, only 164 
projects (18 per cent) with capacity of 368.89 MW (nine per cent) had been registered under 
REC mode since 2012 till date. The State wise lis t of projects registered under solar and non 
solar REC mode as on July 2014 is given in Annexure VI. 
11
334 299
93
84.90
1,979.48
1,174.80
483.21
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
Capacity 
addition in non 
solar projects 
in REC mode 
(in MW)
Number of non 
solar projects 
in REC mode 
(in Nos.)
MW

Chapter II Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 20 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
From the trends, it would emerge that the RE pa rticipants have gradually lost interest in the 
REC mechanism.  
3.2. Continuously increasing unredeemed RECs  
Electricity Act 2003, under Section 66, provid es for development of trading markets. 
Currently RECs are being traded at Indian En ergy Exchange and Powe r Exchange of India 
Limited. First solar REC was issued in May 2012 , whereas first non solar REC was issued in 
March 2011. Shelf life of RECs was initially kept at one year but Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (CERC) vide order dated February  2013, extended the shelf life to two years. 
This was further extended by three years in January 2015 on an adhoc basis. RECs were to 
be issued by REC registry 12 to generators in electronic form within three months of RE 
generation. Such RECs were to be bought by  obligated entities and other voluntary buyers 
through REC trading platforms. 
The details of unredeemed RECs pending  in National Load Dispatch Centre
13 (NLDC) are 
given in Table 4. 
Table 4: Details of RECs pending for redemption 
Year No. of RECs pending for redemption at the end of the year 
2010-11 108 
2011-12 38,545 
2012-13 17,76,929 
2013-14 56,53,314 
2014-15 ( till August 2014) 93,64,699 
Source: REC Registry of India. 
It can be seen from Table 4 that: 
i. Due to insufficient RPO compliances, unredeemed RECs have been on an increasing 
trend. These grew from 108 RECs at the en d of 2010-11 to 93.65 lakh RECs as of 
August 2014. Of the 93.65 lakh RECs pendi ng in August 2014, examination in audit 
revealed that 5.15 lakh RECs were pending redemption for over a year. 
ii. CERC took ad-hoc measures of increasing the shelf life of RECs from initial one year 
to three years (January 2015). 
iii. Uncertain policy environment and poor RP O enforcement led to a situation where 
93.65 lakh RECs each valuing at least ` 1,50014 remain unredeemed as of August 
2014. Consequently the planned cash flow of REC mode generators was affected. 
Huge closing balances of unredeemed RECs at the exchanges require structural and 
regulatory changes for keeping the viability of REC mechanism as an important growth 
factor of RE market in India. 
 
                                                            
12  REC registry is an online platform governed by National Load Dispatch Centre as a depositary for RECs. 
13  NLDC was the Central Agency for energy accounting and reporting. 
14  Floor price of non-solar REC. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter II   
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 21 
3.3. Supply concentration and transmission constraints 
RE was mainly concentrated in a few States and within the State to a few generation 
pockets. Geographical distribution of such resources caused problems in integrating RE to 
the grid. RE projects, being location specific cannot be aligned with existing load centres 
necessarily. The existing grid infrastructure was insufficient at most places to transport 
renewable power (wind specially)  to load centres. State utilities were unable to create 
sufficient infrastructure for variable power. Henc e, construction of new intrastate as well as 
interstate transmission infrastructure was cr itical to meet the needs of large scale RE 
deployment. The matter has been discussed in detail in Chapter IV of this report. 
4. Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) 
 
The basic rules for the functioning of the CDM we re agreed on at the seventh Conference of 
Parties (COP-7) to the United Nations Fram ework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
held in Marrakesh, Morocco in October-Nove mber 2001. Projects starting in the year 2000 
were eligible to earn Certified Emission Reduc tions (CERs) if they lead to "real, measurable, 
and long-term" Green House Gases (GHG) reduct ions, which were additional to any that 
would occur in the absence of the CDM project. 
At COP-7, it was decided that the following types of projects would qualify for fast-track 
approval procedures: 
• RE projects with output capacity up to 15 MW. 
• Energy efficiency improvement projects which reduce energy consumption on the 
supply and/or demand side by up to 15 Giga Watt hours annually. 
• Other project activities that both reduce em issions by sources and directly emit less 
than 15 kilo tonnes Carbon Dioxide equivalent annually. 
While investors profit from CDM projects by obtaining reductions at costs lower than in 
their own countries, the gains to the developing  country host parties are in the form of 
finance, technology, and sustainable development benefits. 
4.1. Introduction of CDM in India 
National Action Plan on Climate Change id entified possible role of Clean Development 
Mechanism (CDM) 15 in financing efficient technologies. MNRE perceived it as a new and 
important window to take up CD M projects with emphasis on households, small enterprises 
and rural areas. MNRE came up with the framework for programmatic CDM projects in RE in 
May 2009 and identified seven specific16 areas for implementation. 
 
                                                            
15 Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) was made functional in 2001. 
16 Family Type Biogas Plants programme, Medium and Large Size Biogas Plants programme, Solar Water 
Heating, Solar Cooking programme, Improved Cook st ove programme, Biomass app lications in Industry, 
Village Electrification programme. 

Chapter II Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 22 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
4.2. CDM benefits not availed 
National Clean Development Mechanism Author ity (NCDMA) of India was constituted in 
2003 by the Ministry of Environment and Fore sts, which was the single window clearance 
for CDM projects in the country. It had devise d formats and procedures for submitting the 
projects for approval under CDM mechanism. 
Audit observed that MNRE had not devised any mechanism for claiming of CDM benefits for 
the grid connected and off-grid RE projects. None of the schemes of MNRE encouraged the 
developer/ beneficiary to clai m the benefits of CDM. There was a lack of awareness with 
respect to claiming of CDM benefits. 
4.3. State wise analysis of status of claiming of CDM benefits 
Out of 24 States selected for Audit, 21 did no t respond to the Audit queries related to the 
operationalisation of CDM benefits. The Audit findings with respect of the three States that 
responded are given below: 
Kerala 
The Government of India agreed to provide loan to implement Bachat Lamp Yojana in 
Kerala as part of UNFCCC targets to replace incandescent lamps with Compact Fluorescent 
Lamps. The repayment was to be made on receip t of fund on sale of carbon credit. If the 
scheme was not implemented successfully then Kerala State Electricity Board (KSEB) had to 
bear the cost from its budget and resour ces. Audit observed that, even though ` 52.50 
crore was released, KSEB did not claim the benefit under CDM. 
Tamil Nadu 
i. The Detailed Project Report for the cogenera tion plants in the co-operative sugar 
mills being implemented by Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation 
Limited (TANGEDCO) envisaged that each of the plant with 172 days of operation 
with bagasse would fetch around 31,000 Certified Emission Reductions per annum 
valued at ` 40 lakh 17. Audit observed that TANGEDCO did not even register the 
plants with UNFCCC for claiming CDM benefits. 
Similarly, none of the 18 Small Hydro Po wer projects implemented by TANGEDCO, 
which were entitled for CDM benefits, had availed the benefits so far. 
ii. The Tamil Nadu Regulatory Electricity Co mmission (TNERC), in its Comprehensive 
Tariff Orders on Wind Energy issued dur ing 2009 stipulated that CDM benefits 
should be shared between the promot er and the distribution licensee i.e. 
TANGEDCO, starting from 100 per cent  to the promoter in the first year till the 
sharing becomes equal to both the promoter and TANGEDCO in the sixth year. 
Test check of 33 wind, biomass and coge neration projects which had energy 
purchase agreements with TANGEDCO and wh ich had received CERs equivalent to 
42,97,177 credits from UNFCCC during the period 2007-08 to 2012-13 revealed that 
in none of these cases, TANGEDCO initiated action for modification of the 
                                                            
17 At the rate of two Euros per CER. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter II   
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 23 
agreements providing for sharing of CDM be nefits as per the directions of TNERC. 
TANGEDCO neither received nor claimed its share of CDM benefits from the 
promoters as of March 2014. 
West Bengal 
According to the NCDMA, carbon credit of ` one per kWh of energy generated was 
available to West Bengal Green Energy Development Corporation Limited (WBGEDCL) from 
the two MW solar power plants at Jamuria. 
Audit observed that WBGEDCL had not applied in prescribed format to NCDMA and could 
not avail CDM benefits, estimated around ` 49.09 lakh, between August 2009 and March 
2014. 
 
5. Reduction in use of Liquified Petrol eum Gas (LPG) or conventional fuel 
and Green House Gas (GHG) emissions 
Renewable Energy is a clean fuel and its usage is  expected to bring reduction in emission of 
GHGs. MNRE in its various schemes promoting the use of RE articulated reduction in the use 
of conventional fossil fuels (Kerosene) and reduction in GHG emission as one of the 
objectives e.g. 
i. National Biogas and Manure Management programme, inter alia, aimed at providing 
clean bio-gaseous fuel mainly for cooking pur pose and also for other applications for 
reducing use of LPG and other conventional fuels, 
ii. Solar Photovoltaic (SPV) off-grid progra mme also aimed to reduce the consumption 
of kerosene for lighting purpose by replac ing the kerosene lanterns and wick lamps 
with SPV systems and to improve the quality of life in rural areas through the use of 
environment friendly solar lighting systems, which do not need an y fossil fuels, do 
not emit any pollutants and are free from health and fire hazards. 
Audit attempted to examine whether there wa s reduction in use of LPG/ kerosene and 
other conventional fuels and in emission of GHGs with the adoption of RE based solutions. 
As per MNRE, the estimated abatement of Carbon  dioxide (a GHG) by installation of RE 
systems is given in Table 5. 
Table 5: Estimated abatement of Carbon dioxide by installation of RE systems 
Technology Achievement 
(MW) 
Annual Electricity 
generation (MWh) 
Carbon Dioxide emission 
abated (million tonnes) 
Grid connected RE power 31,719 7,63,95,055 75 
Off-grid/ Decentralised systems 4,039 1,21,15,984 19 
Total 35,758 8,85,11,039 94 
Audit observed that though estimates were pr ovided by MNRE, no actual calculations of 
reduction in GHG emissions were made available by MNRE. 

Chapter II Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 24 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that it attempted to ca lculate reduction in emission by the biogas 
plants installed in eight States during the period 2007-08 to 2011-12. Reply of MNRE need to 
be viewed in light of the fact that this exercise was conducted only for biogas plants, 
whereas, it was not done for other grid and off-grid RE based capacity created. 
Audit test checked records of 24 SNAs and found some studies to estimate reduction in GHG 
emissions. The audit findings are given below. 
Jammu & Kashmir 
As per the memorandum for Expenditure Finance Committee of  MNRE the annual fuel 
savings with the installation of 25,000 sqm co llector area of Solar Water Heating Systems 
(SWHSs) were estimated as equivalent to 3, 000 tonnes of firewood and 400 kilo litres of 
diesel but actually only 5,509 sqm collector area was installed and actual saving of 
conventional fuel was not calculated. 
Kerala 
Agency for Non-conventional Energy and Rural Technologies (ANERT) conducted studies on 
reduction in use of conventional fuels, wher ein targets were fixed each year for reduction 
of conventional fuels i.e. LPG, kerosene  etc. However, achievements were not 
assessed/analysed during the period 2007-08 to 2009-10. 
Meghalaya 
No impact assessments were carried out by Meghalaya Non-Conventional and Rural Energy 
Development Agency (MNREDA) on the Remote Village Electrification (RVE) projects 
executed under the scheme to ensure reductio n in the use of conventional fuel. However, 
as per the third party monitoring report relati ng to the electrification of 70 remote villages 
completed in January 2010, 92 per cent  of the beneficiaries reported to have spent less 
amount on lighting fuels like kerosene after installation of SPV lighting systems at their 
houses. The consumption of kerosene was report ed to have declined to one fourth from 
around 4.77 liters per month to 1. 13 liters per month, resulting in a savings of 64.80 kL per 
year, or approximately ` 9.72 lakh. 
In the case of electrification of 52 remo te villages completed in May 2010, third party 
monitoring was yet to be conducted. Hence th e impact on the use of conventional fuel 
could not be assessed. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the evalua tion studies were done by independent 
organizations from time to time as part of monitoring and evaluation of the programme and 
this subject was included in such studies. 
6. Conclusion 
Under the National Action Plan for Climate Change, RPO target of five per cent  was set 
(2009-10) for contribution of RE in the total electricity consumption of the country, which 
could be achieved either by directly purchasin g electricity generated from RE sources from 
the grid or through purchase of RECs from other energy rich States. The RPO was to increase 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter II   
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 25 
by one per cent over the next 10 years so as to reach 15 per cent by 2020. During 2012-13 
and 2013-14, against the RPO target of eight and nine per cent as envisaged under National 
Action Plan for Climate Change, national achievement was 4.28 and 4.51 per cent  
respectively. 
Only two States had fixed RPO in alignment with National Action Plan for Climate Change 
norms. Only six out of 24 selected States ha d managed to meet the RPO fixed by respective 
SERCs. Despite there being a provision for levy of penalty for non-achievement of RPO 
targets, no penalty was levied by 17 SERCs. Purchase of RECs  was not a preferred mode to 
meet RPO, as only six States opted for purchase of RECs. 
Only 4.77 per cent of RPO compliance has been through REC mode, whereas 95.23 per cent 
had been through direct purchase of electricity from RE sources. 
Poor RPO compliance by States led to decline in registration of projects in REC mode on the 
one hand and increase in number of unredeemed RECs available in designated exchanges on 
the other. There were no policy guidelines  for unredeemed RECs, which would affect 
planned cash flow of generators registered  for REC regime. As of August 2014, 93,64,699 
RECs were lying unredeemed. On a conservative basis each REC was valuing at least ` 1,500. 
RE projects are capital intens ive, long duration investments which ideally should provide 
relatively steady returns over the life cycle of the project with minimum variability. The lack 
of long term RPO targets, weak enforcement by SERC coupled with issues related to liquidity 
and lifetime of RECs creates uncertainty, which is detrimental to the development of the RE 
sector. 
Audit observed that MNRE had not devised any mechanism for claiming of CDM benefits for 
the grid and off-grid RE projects. MNRE desp ite being the nodal Ministry for promotion of 
RE in the country did not take action to form ulate guidelines and create awareness of CDM 
benefits. 
7. Recommendations 
• MNRE needs to pursue with the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions for the 
adoption of Renewable Purchase Obligation targ ets in alignment with National Action 
Plan on Climate Change targets. These targets should be enforced, with due 
monitoring and collection of penalties for default in compliance. 
• MNRE, being the nodal Ministry should ensure firming up of clear guidelines on the life 
of Renewable Energy Certificates and management of unredeemed Certificates, in a 
time bound manner. 
• MNRE should introduce a comprehensive framework for creating awareness of Clean 
Development Mechanism and availing benefits under it. 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section II –  
Grid Connected Renewable Power 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 29 
Chapter - III 
Solar Power 
 
1. Introduction 
India is endowed with vast solar energy pote ntial. About 5,000 trillion kilo Watt hour (kWh) 
per year energy is incident over India’s land area with most parts receiving 4-7 kWh per 
square meter per day. Hence both  technology routes for conver sion of solar radiation into 
heat and electricity, namely, solar thermal and solar photovoltaic, can effectively be 
harnessed, providing huge scalability for solar energy in India. Solar energy also provides the 
ability to generate power on a distributed basi s and enables rapid capacity addition with 
short lead times. From an energy security pe rspective, solar is the most secure of all 
sources, since it is abundantly available. 
1.1. Solar resource assessment  
MNRE sanctioned (2010), to Na tional Institute of Wind Energy 1 (NIWE) a mission mode 
project for setting up a network of Solar Radiat ion Resource Assessment (SRRA) stations all 
over the country to overcome the deficiencies  in the availability of investor grade ground 
measured solar radiation data. This data was crucial for planning a nd implementation of 
solar power projects. NIWE had done an assessment of the solar potential of India and also 
prepared a solar atlas of the country. 
2. Potential, target and achievements 
The targets fixed by MNRE and achievements there against during 11 th FYP (Five Year Plan) 
Period (2007-12) and 12th FYP period (upto 2014) are given in Table 6. Annexure VII contains 
State wise details of potential, targets and achievements. 
Table 6: Targets and achievement under 11th and 12th FYP 
S.No. Year Target (in MW) Achievement (in MW) Excess(+)/ Shortfall(-) (in per cent)
11th Five Year Plan Period (2007-12) 
1 2007-08 Nil Nil Nil 
2 2008-09 14 Nil -100 
3 2009-10 2 8 +300 
4 2010-11 200 27 -87 
5 2011-12 200 905 +353 
 Total 416 940  
12th Five Year Plan Period (upto 2014) 
6 2012-13 800 754 -6 
7 2013-14 1,100 962 -13 
 Total 1,900 1,716  
 Grand Total 2,316 2,6562  
Source: MNRE. 
                                                            
1  Formerly Centre for Wind Energy Technology (C-WET), Chennai. 
2  While the target and achievement in the table above are reflected year wise, the Annexure VII contains 
these figures State wise. 

Chapter III  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 30 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Based on the analysis of data in Table 6 a nd examination, the following observations are 
made: 
i. At the commencement of the 11 th FYP period, the grid interactive solar power 
installed capacity in the county was `Nil’. During the 11 th FYP the target of solar 
power capacity addition was set at 416 MW which was 0.06 per cent  of the total 
potential of the country. Against a target of 416 MW the achievement in solar power 
capacity addition was 940 MW. MNRE set th e target of 1,900 MW for the first two 
years (2012-14) of the 12th FYP and achieved 1,716 MW up to 31 March 2014. 
ii. MNRE did not provide any record based on which these targets were set and State 
wise breakup of the targets. As can be seen from Table 6 and Annexure VII , the 
consolidated year wise targets set by MNRE for 2007-14 (2,316 MW) did not match 
with the aggregated targets set State wise for the same period (4,409 MW). 
Similarly, the achievements as report ed by SNAs for the period 2007-14 was 
2,412.56 MW as against 2,656 MW reported  by MNRE based on year wise aggregate 
and 2,631.14 MW on State wise aggregate. Thus, there was inconsistency in respect 
of the data maintained by MNRE and SNAs. 
iii. Based on the analysis of State wise details given in Annexure VII, it was observed 
that: 
a) As against an estimated potential of  7,48,990 MW, in 29 States and Union 
Territories, the installed capacity was only 2,631.14 MW
3 (0.35 per cent). 
b) Only 18 States had installed grid connect ed solar power but it was a very small 
per cent (0.09 to 2.56 per cent), of the estimated potential of the State. 
c) Seventeen States had not fixed any targ ets during the period 2007-14. In the 
seven States that had fixed targets, th ere was shortfall in achievement of the 
targets in each of them. 
d) Based on the solar potential assessed in all the State/UTs listed in the annexure, 
Audit identified that ten States listed in Table 7 accounted for 78 per cent of the 
solar potential of the country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
3  As per MNRE and 2,412.56 MW as per SNAs. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter III  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 31 
Table 7: Estimated potential and installed capacity (Grid connected) for the States 
endowed with 78 per cent of country’s solar energy potential. 
(in MW) 
S.No. State Estimated potential4 Installed capacity Percent installed 
High5 potential States with 59 per cent of the estimated National solar energy potential 
1 Rajasthan 1,42,310 730.10 0.51 
2 Jammu & Kashmir 1,11,050 Nil Nil 
3 Maharashtra 64,320 249.25 0.39 
4 Madhya Pradesh 61,660 347.17 0.56 
5 Andhra Pradesh 58,850 131.84 0.22 
 Total 4,38,190 1,458.36 0.33 
Medium6 potential States with 19 per cent of the estimated National solar energy potential 
6 Gujarat 35,770 916.40 2.56 
7 Himachal Pradesh 33,840 Nil Nil 
8 Odisha 25,780 30.50 0.12 
9 Karnataka 24,700 31.00 0.13 
10 Uttar Pradesh 22,830 21.08 0.09 
 Total 1,42,920 998.98 0.70 
Source: MNRE. 
The installed capacity in these ten States varied from zero to 2.56 per cent  of their potential. 
Gujarat had the highest exploitation of solar energy potential at 2.56 per cent followed by 
Madhya Pradesh. Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh had not exploited the potential 
at all. Gujarat and Rajasthan alone had created more than 50 per cent of the total capacity 
installed in the country. 
Thus, unless MNRE and the State Governments of these ten States prioritise exploitation 
and development of solar power, the impact of the progress made in the sector will remain 
insignificant. 
MNRE accepted the audit observation. 
3. Programmes of MNRE for promotion of Solar Power 
Between January 2008 and February 2010, MN RE introduced three programmes for 
promoting generation of electricity from solar energy. These are discussed below: 
3.1. Demonstration programme 
Under MNRE’s Demonstration programme (app roved in January 2008), Generation Based 
Incentive (GBI) of ` 12 per kWh for the electricity fed into  the grid by Solar Photovoltaic 
(SPV) power projects 7 was promised. The project had to  be commissioned by 31 March 
2010, which was subsequently extended up to 31 March 2012. Th e incentive was available 
                                                            
4  As per NIWE. 
5  States with estimated potential higher than 50,000 MW. 
6  States with estimated potential between 20,000 MW and 50,000 MW. 
7  With total installed capacity ≥ 1 MW and ≤ 25 MW. 

Chapter III  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 32 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
for a maximum duration of 10 years for approv ed projects. The programme lapsed at the 
end of 11th FYP. 
Seven projects of 20 MW capacity were commissioned during the period September 2009 to 
March 2012 under this programme. 
3.2. Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission (JNNSM) 
JNNSM was launched in January 2010 with the aim to deploy 20,000 MW of grid connected 
solar plants and 2,000 MW of off-grid solar applications by 2022. 
During Phase I (upto 2012-13) of the Mission , the target was to set up 1,100 MW grid 
connected solar plants which included 1,000 MW of large grid solar plants connected to 33 
kV and above grid line, and 100 MW of roofto p and small solar power plants connected to 
grids below 33 kV, to be completed by March 2013. 
3.2.1. 1,000 MW capacity from Grid connected Solar Power Plants-JNNSM Phase I 
NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam Limited (NVVN) wa s the nodal agency to purchase 1,000 MW of 
solar power from the RE project developers, bundle it with the unallocated power made 
available from the NTPC coal-based stat ions and sell this “bundled” power to the 
Distribution Utilities. It was decided to select projects of 1,000 MW capacities based on solar 
thermal and SPV technologies. Th e capacity to be installed was equally divided (i.e. 500 
MW) between the two technologies. The select ion of Solar Thermal projects for 500 MW 
was completed in FY 2010-11. The selection of SPV grid power projects of 500 MW capacity 
was done in two batches over two financial years i.e., 2010-2011 and 2011-2012. The 
projects were selected on reverse bidding
8 basis. 
3.2.2. 100 MW capacity from Roof top PV and Small Solar Power Plants 
MNRE announced (June 2010) guidelines for R ooftop PV and Small Solar Power Generation 
Plants (RPSSGP) connected to distribution ne twork below 33 kV.  This component of JNNSM 
was designed essentially as a State driven sche me to encourage the States to declare their 
solar policy for grid connected projects focusing on distribut ion network and to strengthen 
the tail end of the grid. Another purpose of the scheme was to encourage as many States as 
possible to set up small solar grid connected projects. The RPSSGP projects were selected on 
first-come-first serve basis by IREDA. 
3.3. Migration scheme 
Migration scheme was launched (February 2010) to facilitate quick start-up of the JNNSM. 
Under the scheme 16 projects of 84 MW capacities
9 were approved to be commissioned by 
end of October 2011. Of the 16 approved projec ts, 11 SPV Projects of 48 MW capacity and 
one solar thermal project of 2.5 MW capacity had been commissioned by February 2012 and 
February 2013, respectively. 
                                                            
8  Developers quoting the lowest tariff rate are selected. 
9  13 projects of 54 MW of SPV and three projects of 30 MW for solar thermal 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter III  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 33 
The detail of projects sanctioned and commissioned under these schemes is given at  
Table 8. 
Table 8: Scheme wise details of projects sanctioned and commissioned as of April 2014. 
Scheme Type of 
project 
No of projects (capacity in MW) 
sanctioned 
No of projects (capacity in 
MW) commissioned 
Demonstration SPV 6 (18) 6 (18) 
JNNSM Batch- I SPV 30 (150) 28 (140) 
ST 7 (470) 1 (50) 
JNNSM Batch-II SPV 28 (350) 26 (330) 
RPSSGP-SPV SPV 78 (98) 71 (90.80) 
Migration SPV 13 (54) 11 (48) 
ST 3 (30) 1 (2.50) 
Total  165 (1,170) 144 (679.30) 
Note: SPV – Solar Photovoltaic and ST – Solar Thermal. 
3.4. Anomalies in design of the schemes 
Multiple schemes to develop Solar Power offering assured Generation Based Incentive 10 
(GBI) were introduced between  2008 and 2010 as discussed below. The period of these 
schemes overlapped. The salient features of incentives offered under each scheme are given 
in Table 9. 
Table 9: Comparison of features and incentives offered by the various schemes. 
Year Scheme Incentive/ Tariff Government liabilities 
January 
2008 to 
March 
2012 
Demonstration 
Programme 
Maximum GBI of ` 12 per 
kWh for 10 years to be paid 
through IREDA. 
Liability of ` 388.55 crore over 10 
years. 
January 
2010 to 
March/ 
May 
2013 
JNNSM Phase I 
Batch I  
Lowest tariff of ` 10.85 per 
kWh for SPV and ` 10.49 
per kWh for ST as per 
reverse bidding. 
Projects under JNNSM were 
selected on reverse bidding 
process by NVVN . Hence, there 
was no tariff liability on GoI. 
Tariff assured under Migration 
scheme was also to be borne by 
NVVN. However, a Payment 
Security Scheme with a corpus of 
` 486.05 crore was set up by 
MNRE for payment to Solar 
Power Developers in case of 
default by Discoms11. 
January 
2010 to 
March 
2013 
JNNSM Phase I 
Batch II  
Lowest tariff of ` 7.49 per 
kWh for SPV as per reverse 
bidding. 
February 
2010 to 
March 
2013 
Migration 
Scheme  
CERC tariff of ` 17.91 per 
kWh for SPV and ` 15.39 
per kWh for ST, to be paid 
by NVVN for 25 years. 
                                                            
10  GBI is an incentive provided by MNRE to support grid RE power projects connected to the distribution grid. 
11  Electricity Distribution Company. 

Chapter III  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 34 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Year Scheme Incentive/ Tariff Government liabilities 
June 
2010 to 
March 
2013 
RPSSGP Difference between CERC 
tariff of ` 17.91 per kWh 
and the base rate of ` 5.50 
per kWh (for FY 2010-11), 
to be escalated by three 
per cent  every year for 25 
years. 
Liability for Centre of ` 3,899 
crore and States of ` 3,766 crore 
created over 25 years. 
Audit analysed certain inconsistencies in th e schemes due to which the developers could 
derive unwarranted benefits. These are discussed below: 
3.4.1. Increase in tariff in the period registering a downward trend in costs 
As can be seen from Table 9, MNRE launche d (January 2008) Demonstration programme in 
which maximum GBI of ` 12 per kWh was provided for a maximum duration of 10 years to 
approved projects. RPSSGP launched in January 2010 12 as part of JNNSM, assured tariff of  
` 17.91 per kWh for 25 years. The Migration Sc heme launched in February 2010 assured  
` 17.91 per kWh for SPV and ` 15.39 per kWh for ST for a peri od of 25 years. Hence, both 
the assured tariff/GBI as well as the period  of commitment increa sed between 2008-10 in 
the schemes devised by MNRE. 
Audit observed that: 
i. The cost of the SPV plant as well as the tariff as determined by CERC had been 
decreasing as indicated in the Table 10. 
Table 10: CERC estimated cost of the SPV plants and the tariff fixed during 2009-14. 
Year CERC estimated cost of SPV plant 
(` crore per MW) 
CERC tariff 
(` per kWh) 
2009-10 17  
2010-11 16.90 17.91 
2011-12 14.42 15.39 
2012-13 10.00 10.39 
2013-14 8.00 8.75 
ii. Between 2010-12, the lower SPV tariff di scovered under JNNSM reverse bidding 
process was ` 10.85 per kWh in 2010-11 and ` 7.49 per kWh in 2011-12. 
iii. Further, it was observed that as per the Solar Power Policy 2 009 of the Government 
of Gujarat the tariff was fixed in a phased manner and in alignment with the 
decreasing capital cost of the systems. The tariff structure as per this policy is given 
in Table 11. 
                                                            
12  Guidelines were issued in June 2010 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter III  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 35 
Table 11: Tariff structure as per Solar Power Policy 2009 of the Government of Gujarat 
Date of 
commissioning SPV (` per kWh) ST (` per kWh) 
Prior to January 
2010 
` 13 for first 12 years and ` 3 for next 
13 years 
` 10 for first 12 years and 
` 3 for next 13 years 
After January 2010 
and before 31 March 
2014 
` 12 for first 12 years and ` 3 for next 
13 years 
` 9 for first 12 years and 
` 3 for next 13 years 
Based on these facts it can be seen that: 
a) The tariff in Migration and RPSSGP programm es was for long durations of 25 years. 
While designing the schemes, MNRE had not pr ovided for any flexibility to review the 
tariff being assured. The schemes committed GoI to liabilities at a high rate for long 
periods i.e. 25 years without maintaining any provision for revisions in tariff based on 
changes in costing structures. The schemes were changed for higher tariffs but kept 
inflexible at a peak tariff rate with no room of downward review. 
MNRE stated (April 2015) that CERC tariff was not available at the time of 
announcement of Demonstration Scheme and in the year 2010-11, CERC had announced 
a fixed levelised tariff of 
` 17.91 per kWh for SPV projects and ` 15.31 per kWh for ST 
projects for 25 years and the same was incorporated in the scheme guidelines. 
The reply is not tenable as maximum tariff in Demonstration scheme was ` 15 per kWh 
for 10 years and in the subsequent  schemes MNRE increased it to ` 17.91 per kWh for 
25 years. Further, CERC tariff unde rgoes frequent revisions to adjust it to the changes in 
cost as was reflected in the subsequent tari ff notifications; whereas, the MNRE schemes 
committed to inflexible tariffs for a long term i.e. 25 years. 
b) The details provided by NVVN disclosed th at the Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) 
were entered into between the de velopers and Discoms in advance 13, and the projects 
were not commissioned as per the scheduled commissioning period. Thus, due to delay 
in commissioning, the developers could take the benefit of the reduction in capital cost 
of the plant. Therefore, the tariff should have been fixed on the basis on the tariff of the 
year in which the project was commissioned instead of the year of signing of the PPA.  
MNRE stated in April 2015 that the fixation of tariff based on the year of signing of PPA was 
a policy decision. It further stated that if MN RE would have fixed the tariff based on year of 
commissioning, and tariffs could have increase d, MNRE would have had to bear increased 
liability. Reply of MNRE was not tenable beca use it did not foresee the market trend of 
decrease in capital cost, which apparently wa s anticipated by the Gujarat Government in 
2009. 
 
                                                            
13  JNNSM and Migration schemes. 

Chapter III  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 36 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
3.4.2. Case study of M/s Azure power (Punjab) Private Ltd 
Audit noted that M/s Azure Power (Punjab) Private Limited (Developer) executed PPA with 
Punjab State Electricity Board (PSEB) on 27 May 2009 under the New and Renewable 
Sources of Energy (NRSE) Policy of Punjab 2006 .  The Developer there after first shifted to 
Demonstration scheme and later shifted to th e Migration scheme of MNRE. The chronology 
of events is given in Table 12. 
Table 12: Chronology of events for M/s Azure Power (Punjab) Private Limited. 
Year Event 
March 2008 
to March 
2009 
Bid under NRSE policy 2006 of Punjab for two MW; Allotment of project via 
tender; Signing of MoU; Preparat ion of DPR and its submission; 
Registration of land lease and Implementation agreement signed. 
15 April 2009 Targeted date for commencement of project construction. 
May 2009  S i g n i n g  o f  P P A  w i t h  P S E B  a t  T a r i f f  o f `  7.71 per unit for 2008-09 with 
annual escalation of five per cent up to 2011-12 for 30 years. 
October 
2009 
MNRE approved transfer of project to Demonstration Programme at the 
Tariff of ` 8.50 per unit with GBI of ` 1.14 per unit for 10 years. Targeted 
date of commercial generation was 15 October 2009. 
December 
2009 
One MW plant commissioned. 
MNRE approved transfer of partially commissioned one MW under 
Demonstration Scheme at a tariff of  ` 15 per unit with GBI of ` 6.90 per 
unit for 2009-10 and ` 6.50 per unit for 2010-11. GBI of ` 76.57 lakh was 
paid between December 2009 to September 2010. Thereafter no GBI was 
paid by MNRE. 
October 
2011 
MNRE approved transfer of the en tire two MW project to Migration 
Scheme at the tariff of ` 17.91 per unit. Payment to be made through 
NVVN. 
November 
2011 
Remaining one MW plant commissioned. 
MNRE frequently kept changing its schemes and did not allow the schemes to mature. As 
can be seen from the case of M/s Azure Powe r (Punjab) Private Ltd, this resulted in the 
developer migrating to more profitable schemes. MNRE allowed the Developer to benefit by 
allowing it to change from State scheme to  Demonstration Scheme and further to more 
profitable Migration Scheme. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that on meeting the eligibility criteria for selection, M/s Azure 
Power (Punjab) Pvt. Ltd, had b een selected as one of the So lar Power Developers (SPDs) 
under the Migration Scheme of JNNSM Phase-I for their then upcoming two MW capacity 
SPV Power Project. NVVN signed PPA with  them on 15 October 2010. As Migration 
Guidelines do not have any room for partial commissioning of the solar power project, no 
such provisions had therefore been made in  the PPA signed with the qualified Project 
Developers under the scheme. It further stated that the earlier PPA with PSEB under NRSE 
Policy 2006 was for 30 years duration while, with NVVN PPA was entered for 25 years 
duration from date of commercial operations. Thus, the total duration of supply envisaged, 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter III  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 37 
including period prior to NVVN PPA become  operational, was less than 30 years (as 
envisaged under PPA with PSEB). 
The reply may be viewed in the light of the fact that the project was submitted through the 
bidding process of NRSE Policy 2006 of Punjab and the tender of PEDA was independent of 
MNRE programme and the decided tariff was ` 7.71 per kWh (for the year 2008-09) with 
five per cent  annual escalation upto 2011-12 for the pe riod of 30 years.  Further, while 
shifting the project to demonstratio n scheme, MNRE approved the GBI @ ` 1.14 and tariff 
of ` 8.50 and the Developer partially commissio ned one MW capacity in December 2009. 
Also, there was no room for partial commissioning of the solar power project in the 
Migration Scheme and the proj ect was allowed in a phased manner. Moreover, MNRE had 
no reason for considering the project for Demonstration Scheme as the Developer had 
already signed the PPA under NRSE policy of Punjab 2006. Therefore, MNRE permitted 
frequent changes in the scheme opted to the benefit of the Developers. 
3.5. Policies of the States for the promotion of solar power 
While the overarching policy and incentives offe red by the Government of India to promote 
solar energy across the States remained commo n, the comparative and varied development 
of solar energy in these States was dependent on factors such as State policies, evacuation 
infrastructure, tariff fixed by the SERC, Plant Load Factor (PLF) generated, enforcement of 
RPO/ REC and overall commitment of the Stat e Governments to development of Solar RE 
resources. 
The performance analysis of West Bengal is presented below as a Case Study to illustrate 
that lack of commitment to policy and lax implementation environment in States could lead 
to poor performance. 
Case Study I 
Poor implementation of Solar Power programme in West Bengal 
West Bengal Green Energy Development Corporation Ltd. (WBGEDCL) approved 
(September 2009) a work plan to install RE projects of 400 MW, Green Building of five MW, 
roof top SPV plants of 10 MW and develop ev acuation infrastructure of 400 MW, to be 
achieved by 2015. It involved a total investment of ` 4,225 crore. 
Government of West Bengal developed (April 2 010) a State Action Plan for Climate Change 
(SAPCC) which identified a solar potential of 16,000 MW. 
Subsequently, in June 2012, Gove rnment of West Bengal declared its RE policy. In the 
Policy, estimated potential of each RE source s, except Solar, was mentioned. Regarding 
solar potential it was stated that the sa me was under preparation. Significantly, the 
potential assessed under the SAPCC was not consid ered in the RE Polic y declared in June 
2012 and as per assessment made by NIWE (in 2011), the estimated solar potential of West 
Bengal was 6,260 MW. The RE Policy set out targets for creation of capacity of 100 MW and 
500 MW to be achieved by 2017 and 2022, respectively. 

Chapter III  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 38 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
During 2007-14, against target of 100 MW solar power, the State could install capacity of 
two MW only which was 0.03 per cent  of installed capacity in the State, a negligible 
achievement. 
As per RE Policy, WBGEDCL was to identi fy Government waste land and the land so 
identified was to be transferred to WBGEDC L which in turn would be leased to the 
developers. For projects on private land the developer was to arrange the entire required 
quantum of land through direct purchase. Au dit noticed the following deficiencies in 
planning and implementation of solar projects in West Bengal: 
i) Details of sites identified for setting of RE based projects were  not kept in public 
domain in order to facilitate the developers in assessing the information. 
ii)  Land could not be acquired by seven developers  for setting up 32.5 MW solar 
projects. 
iii) In Bankura district, WBGEDCL identified  (September 2012) Government waste land 
(178 acres) in Mejia block. Department of Power and Non-Conventional Energy 
Resources (DPNES), WBGEDCL was to carry out the feasibility of grid connectivity and 
submit proposal on these wastelands. The report was not prepared even after lapse 
of more than two years. 
iv) Audit observed that, since June 2012, WREDA received 11 proposals for solar 
projects but none were cleared till date (September 2014). 
Thus, due to lack of commitment to policy and to business plan, only two MW of the Solar 
RE capacity could be installed in West Bengal. 
 
4. Audit observations on implementati on of schemes for promotion of 
Solar Power 
4.1. Implementation of Demonstration Programme by Indian Renewable Energy 
Development Agency (IREDA) 
4.1.1. Ineligible payment of GBI to Reliance Industries Ltd. 
Rajasthan Renewable Energy Corporation Ltd (RRECL) in June 2008 approved a five MW Grid 
Interactive Solar PV Power Gene ration Project of Reliance Industries Ltd. (RIL) at District 
Nagaur, Rajasthan under the Demonstration Sche me. MNRE accorded approval for allowing 
GBI to RIL through IREDA.  As per the te rms and conditions of the programme, project 
developers would not avail Accelerated Depreciation (AD) benefit as per the Income Tax Act 
1961. In case of any violation of the conditions, IREDA was to immediately stop releasing the 
GBI to the project and refer the matter to the Ministry. 
The project was commissioned in July, 2010 a nd a MoU was signed be tween IREDA and RIL 
in April, 2011. MNRE directed (June 2013) IREDA to obtain conf irmation from all the project 
developers that Accelerated De preciation benefit was not ava iled at their end. MNRE again 
(August 2013) directed that IREDA should ensure that only 7.69 per cent  depreciation is 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter III  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 39 
claimed by the project develope r in their income tax return s. IREDA observed (July 2013) 
that RIL was claiming depreciation at a higher rate i.e. 15 per cent instead of 7.69 per cent in 
its income tax returns. 
Audit observed that RIL had violated th e above condition by availing Accelerated 
Depreciation rendering the project ineligible for claiming GBI under this scheme. In violation 
of the programme conditions, IREDA disbursed GBI of ` 22.49 crore from August 2010 to 
December 2012 to RIL. IREDA on the request of RIL informed MNRE (November 2013) that 
the developer had given an undertaking (O ctober 2013) that the claim for rate of 
depreciation would be revised from 15 per cent to 7.69 per cent in its income tax returns on 
or before 31 March 2014 for Assessment year 2011-12 and 2012-13 and requested to 
consider releasing further payment of ` 7.79 crore upto September 2013. MNRE did not 
respond to the request of RIL and claims of ` 18.79 crore (January 2013 to December 2014) 
were pending. 
While confirming the facts, IREDA stated (May  2015) that the request of RIL was forwarded 
to MNRE in November 2013 . However, approval of MNRE was not received to this effect 
and resultantly no GBI had been released. It  further stated that in the Demonstration 
Programme, there was no prescribed rate of depreciation to be claimed by the project 
developer. 
The reply of the IREDA was not tenable as the specified terms and conditions appended with 
MoU, inter alia  states that SPV power project deve lopers would not avail Accelerated 
Depreciation benefit under Section 32 of the Income Tax Act 1961. This fact had not been 
ensured by MNRE/IREDA before  releasing GBI claims which resulted in passing of undue 
benefit to RIL. The reply of IREDA was also s ilent about the revision of Income Tax Returns 
by RIL. Pending the resolution of this issu e, the possibility of recovering the GBI of 
` 22.49 
crore paid irregularly remains in abeyance. 
MNRE confirmed (July 2015) IREDA’s reply and st ated that the request of RIL for releasing 
further payment was not considered due to non compliance by RIL. 
4.1.2. Excess recovery of service charges by IREDA 
The terms and conditions of GBI-Demonstration Solar scheme stipulated that a maximum of 
one per cent  of the total funds released by IREDA in a year to project developers as GBI, 
would be allowed as administrative charges fo r implementation of the program subject to a 
maximum of ` 5 lakh per project per year. This al so needed reconcili ation while making 
future releases. 
It was however observed that IREDA deducted one per cent of each disbursement of GBI 
even beyond the limit of ` 5 lakh per annum per project in case of three projects to the 
extent of `27.39 lakh. The details of year-wise proj ect wise service charges deducted by 
IREDA are given in Annexure VIII. 
During the meeting (December 2013) between MNRE and IREDA it was decided that in cases 
where IREDA had claimed administrative charges more than ` 5 lakh per project per year of 
operation in the past, requisite adjustments were  to be made from the future releases. Out 
of excess service charges amounting to ` 27.39 lakh in respect of three projects during the 

Chapter III  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 40 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
period from 2011-12 to 2013-14, ` 18.28 lakh remained unadjusted by IREDA (September 
2014). 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that the amount of excess service charge claimed by IREDA has 
now been reconciled and adjust ed in respect of two develope rs, the excess charges claimed 
against M/s RIL could not be adjusted. The re ply of MNRE is not tenable as the whole 
amount could have been adjusted while releasing the claims to IREDA. 
4.2. Implementation of RPSSGP by IREDA 
JNNSM RPSSGP was announced in June 2010. Duri ng the period 2007-14, 78 projects were 
registered by IREDA in its capacity as prog ramme administrator of the scheme. Of the 78 
projects, six were dropped after registration due to non-commissioning of the projects on 
time and one case was kept in abeyance as the case is under investigation by Central Bureau 
of Investigation (CBI). Of the 71 projects implemented, in three projects GBI was not 
released due to non-furnishing of complete documents and in one case document were not 
furnished for claiming GBI till date (September 2014) by the project proponent. Thus, GBI 
under the scheme had been released to 67 projec ts. Out of 71 projects, Audit examined 17 
projects. The detailed audit findings are given below: 
4.2.1. Delay in passing the GBI claims 
The RPSSGP guidelines state that if there was shortage of funds, the program administrator 
would arrange a standby facility to release the funds on time. However, it was observed that 
IREDA did not avail the facility of alternative funds from commercial banks to ensure timely 
release of funds to developers. 
In four out of 17 selected projects it was ob served that IREDA had not released GBI claims 
within the specified period of 15 days and had passed the claims with a delay ranging 
between 68 to 405
14 days. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that delay in release of GBI was due to delay in receipt of claim 
documents/ clarifications from utilities. The reply is not tenable as IREDA was not processing 
the claims on monthly basis as envisaged in th e Scheme but it proce ssed the claims as and 
when the funds were received from MNRE. 
4.2.2. Pendency of claims under RPSSGP scheme 
MNRE started releasing funds for GBI in instalments
15 to IREDA. Audit observed that GBI 
claims (March 2014) amounting to ` 84.50 crore were lying pending for payment due to non 
receipt of funds from MNRE. Further claims of ` 24.78 crore were yet to  be processed by 
IREDA. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that the claims were  to be processed by IREDA upon receipt of 
complete documents as per the scheme guid elines. The reply is not tenable because 
MNRE/IREDA should ensure that the claims are passed in time. 
                                                            
14  M/s PCS Premier (405 days delay), M/s Saimeg Infras tructure Pvt. Ltd (383 days delay), M/s RV Akash 
Ganga Infrastructure Ltd (324 days delay) and M/s Soma Enterprises Ltd (68 days delay). 
15  It released ` 15 crore (March 2011), ` 40 crore (August 2012) and ` 100 crore (July 2013). 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter III  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 41 
4.3. Net metering 
Net metering was important to make the RPSSGP scheme successful. The advantage of net 
metering was that payment had to be made  only for the difference between the power 
supplied by the utility and the power produced by the solar panels and there was no need to 
store the surplus energy in batteries for later us e. It would also allow consumers to directly 
contribute to enhancing the RE capacity of the country. 
Audit observed that while Regulatory framework for electricity generation was a State 
subject, MNRE could have issued guidelines for reference by the States, as an enabling 
environment for solar technology penetration in the country at a decentralized level. As of 
May 2015, 19 States/UTs 16 had formulated a net metering  policy. In the absence of 
recommended guidelines, different States had adopted different models in implementing 
net metering. Audit findings in this regard are given below: 
Andhra Pradesh 
The State Government introduced net metering in the State in March 2013. But the issues 
not addressed in the policy were: 
• Difference between higher cost of solar generation and applicable retail tariff. 
• Provision for restrictive capacity on ov erall/local grid penetration to address 
technical, safety and security issues ar ising out of possible reverse flow of 
electricity in local grids as the current  distribution system was not geared to 
accommodate reverse power flows in the distribution network. 
• Energy accounting and commercial settlem ents as per the time of day tariff 
regimes. 
Chhattisgarh 
In the State, a total 4,640 Solar Power Plants (SPPs) in residences, commercial 
establishments, hostels, Community Health Ce ntre/Primary Health Centre etc (off- grid 
and decentralized) were installed, with capacity ranging from one kW to 1,000 kW. The 
total generation capacity was about 21,238 kW.  However, no SPP was connected to grid 
for export of surplus power to Distribution Companies (Discoms). As per CERC regulation, 
the above SPPs were also e ligible for net-metering. Ch hattisgarh Renewable Energy 
Development Agency (CREDA) stated that list of all the SPPs having capacity of more than 
50 kW had been provided to Chhattisgarh State Power Distribution Company Limited 
(CSPDCL) and the grid connectivity was to be done by them. 
  
                                                            
16 Andhra Pradesh, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & 
Diu, Delhi, Goa, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Lakshadweep, Odisha, Pondicherry, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, 
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. 

Chapter III  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 42 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Karnataka 
The Government of Karnataka approved (January 2013) Solar Roof Top Yojana 17 with 
subsidy of 20 per cent  in addition to MNRE subsidy of 30 per cent . It was proposed to 
install solar power packs with battery backups at an approximate cost of ` 2.70 lakh per 
kW. 
Audit observed that even though it was prop osed as grid connected power plant, there 
was no proposal to introduce net metering concept and the energy generated was to be 
used for captive consumption. The scheme wa s not successful as there was poor response 
from the beneficiaries with only seven applications received. 
4.4. Implementation of Migration scheme and JNNSM (excluding RPSSGP) by NVVN 
4.4.1. Non encashment of Performance Bank Guarantee 
In JNNSM the projects were to be commissioned within 28 months of the date of signing of 
Power Purchase Agreement (PPA). In case of fa ilure to achieve this milestone, NVVN was to 
encash the Performance Bank Guarantee (PBG),  followed by levying of Liquidated Damages 
and finally terminating the project. 
Audit observed that only one solar thermal plant of 50 MW capacity was commissioned 
(March 2014) out of seven of 470 MW allotted, but NVVN neit her encashed PBG nor levied 
liquidated damages. 
MNRE stated in June 2014 that the projects  were permitted to be commissioned by 
September 2015 with levy of liquidated damages but the projec t developers filed petition 
before CERC inter-alia  seeking extension and restraining NVVN from encashing PBGs and 
CERC (March 2014) directed NVVN not to encash the PBGs. 
4.4.2. Status of land alienated for the Solar projects under Migration and JNNSM 
Under JNNSM (Phase I, Batch I), six Solar Therma l (ST) projects having 420 MW capacity had 
not been commissioned till date (September 2014). Under Migration scheme, two ST project 
of 20 MW capacity had not been commissioned and one project had been partially 
commissioned
18 (February 2013). 
These non-commissioned/ partially commissioned ST projects were located in Andhra 
Pradesh (one), Gujarat (one) and Rajasthan (six and one partially commissioned). 
Audit observed that the land for the un-commissioned Gujarat project had been directly 
acquired by the developer (May 2011). In ca se of Andhra Pradesh project, the land was 
partially acquired by the developer (April/Ju ne2011) and the land to be provided by the 
State Government was still in the acquisition process. 
                                                            
17  A scheme for generation of electricity by installing grid connected Solar Photo Voltaic generators on roof 
top of buildings. It was initially introduced in Bangalore, Mysore, Hubli and Mangalore. 
18  Against the envisaged 10 MW capacity on ly 2.5 MW had been installed in May 2011. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter III  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 43 
In Rajasthan, the State policy gave preferential treatment in allotment of land to these 
developers as this land was being allocated for public purpose. The preferential treatment 
included allocating Government land at rates lower than the Collector rate and changing the 
land use status. The records revealed that in Rajasthan, in four 19 ST projects sanctioned 
under JNNSM (January 2011) and two 20 ST projects sanctioned under Migration scheme 
(October 2010), a total of 3,404 acres of Gove rnment land was leased to the solar power 
developers at the rate of 10 per cent of prevailing Collector rate in districts of Jaisalmer and 
Jodhpur. The land had been leased 21  by Rajasthan Government for 30 years to these 
developers and ST projects had not been co mmissioned till February  2015. This indicated 
that these developers had created substant ial land banks under the Rajasthan Government 
policy which had not been put to intended use. 
Audit also observed that in Demonstratio n programme, Rajasthan Government leased 
(September 2008) 375 acres of land to M/s Par Solar for five MW SPV plant which was 
commissioned in March 2012. For commissioning of one MW SPV project, approximately six 
acres of land was required. Hence, 345 acres of land was leased in excess of requirement. 
MNRE stated (April 2015) that the information on the status of the land where the allotted 
solar power projects have either not come up or  were cancelled, was not available with the 
Ministry. 
4.4.3. Irregularities in operation of Solar Payment Security Account (SPSA) 
MNRE introduced (June 2011) Payment Securi ty Scheme for grid connected solar power 
projects under Phase-I of JNNSM with Gross Budgetary Support not exceeding 
` 486.05 
crore to MNRE. The main objective of the sche me was to facilitate creating a Solar Payment 
Security Account (SPSA) and other necessary mechanisms as a payment risk mitigation 
strategy in the event of default by State Utilities/Discoms in making payment to the 
developer. 
The salient features of the scheme were as under: 
• The State utilities/Discoms were to open  Letter of Credit (LC) for six month 
equivalent amount which would be backed by an escrow account22. 
• As per the available provisio ns of the PPA, NVVN was to raise a provisional bill 
against the State Utilities/Discoms on the la st day of the month. The due date of 
payment would be 30 days from date of b illing. If payment was not made by the 30 th 
day, NVVN was to notify a default and enca sh the amount from LC. In addition to 
encashing LC, NVVN had the right to di vert and sell the bundled power in the 
spot/short term market. 
                                                            
19  M/s Rajasthan Sun Technique Energy Pvt Ltd, M/s Co rporate Ispat Alloys Ltd, M/s Diwakar Solar Projects 
Pvt Ltd and M/s KVK Energy Ventures Pvt Ltd. 
20  M/s Entegra Ltd and M/s Dalmia Solar Power Ltd. 
21  Date of acquisition of land for two projects under Migration Scheme was February 2010 and for the four 
projects under JNNSM was between May and July 2011. 
22  It is a temporary account held by a third party during the process of a transaction between two parties. 

Chapter III  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 44 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
• In case, the realized amount from the market was lower than the cost of the bundled 
power, the difference was to be paid from the SPSA provided under the scheme. 
MNRE released ` 58.32 crore in three tranches to NVVN upto December 2013 and 
recognized interest earned as accretion of ` 2.30 crore (August 2014). NVVN had been 
utilizing the funds for releasing payments to Solar Power Developers (SPDs) and recouping 
the same on realization from Discoms. Till August 2014, NVVN had utilized ` 47.14 crore of 
which ` 28 crore were recouped and balance ` 19.14 crore were utilised towards charging 
of trading margin23, leaving ` 41.48 crore24 as unutilized balance available with NVVN. 
Audit examination revealed the following in the operation of SPSA: 
i. NVVN entered into PPA with SPDs with ba ck to back Power Sale Agreement (PSA) 
with Discoms in 10 States 25 (October 2010 to May 2012) to sell bundled power. 
NVVN did not obtain adequate LC as per the terms of PSAs from Discoms. Against 
the total amount of ` 1,102.09 crore LCs to  be obtained as per the terms of PSA, 
NVVN had obtained LCs of only ` 221.94 crore as of August 2014. 
ii. The Discoms did not open Escrow Accounts in any of the States. Thus shortfalls in LCs 
obtained and non-opening of Escrow account s, reduced the security available with 
NVVN to recover the defaulted amount from Discoms. 
iii. NVVN did not explore the option of diverting and selling the bundled power in spot/ 
short term market before drawing the money from SPSA as per the guidelines. NVVN 
did not maintain records of negotiations  with third parties including prevailing 
exchange prices during such periods in a format specified by CERC, which was to be 
verified by MNRE and the Ministry of Power through a standing committee. 
iv. NVVN was to utilize its working capital from  day one of the billing up to 60 days, to 
pay the claims raised by SPDs and NTPC Ltd. SPSA was to be used only in the event of 
non payment of dues by the Discoms within  60 days from the billing date. SPSA was 
to be used only as a ‘fall back’ arrangement when other payment security provisions, 
such as, the availability of working capital, Letter of Credit linked with an Escrow 
account, had been exhausted. However, in case of Rajasthan Discoms, LC of only  
` 21.97 crore was provided by Rajasthan Di scoms against the requisite LC of  
` 481.38 crore as per PSA. This amount was only four time monthly revolving in a 
month (August 2014) instead of the mandated six months to cover the risk of default 
in payment. When these Discoms disputed the payment of trading margin 26, instead 
of encashing available LCs, NVVN utilized ` 19.14 crore from SPSA towards 
unrecovered trading margin from Rajasthan Discoms. This utilization of SPSA was in 
violation of the provisions of the scheme because NVVN could utilize SPSA only after 
accessing alternate sources of funds includi ng letter of credit linked with Escrow 
account. 
                                                            
23  Margin earned by the person who has been grante d licensee by CERC to undertake inter-State trading in 
electricity. 
24  ( ` 58.32 crore + ` 2.30 crore) – ` 47.14 crore + ` 28 crore = ` 41.48 crore. 
25  Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisg arh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh 
and West Bengal. 
26  The issue of disputed trading margins is discussed in details at para 4.4.5. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter III  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 45 
NVVN stated (September 2014) that the Discom s were requested to open Escrow account 
and Discoms had retained the amount on acco unt of pending issues. MNRE stated (May 
2015) that the Discoms had been requested ma ny times to open the Escrow account and 
LCs with proper amount but they have not done the same because of financial resource 
crunch and limits not available. 
4.4.4. Encashed Bank Guarantee not kept in separate Bank account 
As per Migration Scheme the Project Developer was to provide a performance guarantee to 
NVVN in the form of Bank Guarantee (BG) at the rate of ` 50 lakh per MW. This BG was to 
be encashed by NVVN if the SPV power plants were not commissioned within 12 months 
and solar thermal in 28 months from the date  of signing of PPA. During the course of 
implementation of the scheme, NVVN encashed total BG of 
` 147.42 crore 27 from March 
2011 to March 2014. 
MNRE directed (June 2012) that the money so obtained after encashment of BG be kept 
separately in maximum interest  bearing account. It further directed (December 2012) that 
NVVN may use the funds as working capital for (i) coverage of litigation charges and (ii) 
releasing payments to SPDs to wards settlement of their claims, with the condition that 
NVVN will recoup the funds by its receipts from Discoms and the total amount will remain 
the same (i.e. the amount realized from encashment of BGs). 
Out of 
` 147.42 crore, NVVN utilized ` 97.79 crore for non-payment of dues by Discoms 
under JNNSM scheme and ` 1.30 crore for legal expenses. 
Audit observed that NVVN did not keep the ab ove money in a separate  account as directed 
by MNRE (June 2012) and it cannot be assured in audit that mo ney was not used as working 
capital. 
NVVN (September 2014) stated that there wa s no direction from MNRE to open the 
separate account for this money and that it  was keeping its accounting separate from 
NVVNs business money/revenue. Reply of NVVN was not tenable, as the order of MNRE 
(June 2012), clearly stated that the money should  be kept separately in maximum interest 
bearing account which had not been done by NVVN. 
4.4.5. Non-quantification of trading margin 
A trading margin is earned by person/ enti ty who had been grante d license by Central 
Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) to undertake inter-State trading in electricity.  
CERC (Fixation of Trading Margin) Regulation s 2010, stated that, “the licensee shall not 
charge trading margin exceeding seven paise per kWh in case the sale price exceeded 
rupees three per kWh and four paise per kWh where the sale price was less than or equal to 
rupees three per kWh.” 
MNRE fixed (June 2013) the trading margin of seven paise per kWh on the power sold by 
NVVN to State Utilities/Discoms from JNNSM Phase-I projects. 
                                                            
27  ` 17.50 crore in six projects under Migration Scheme, ` 116.18 crore in 19 project of Batch I, ` 2.66 crore in 
one project of Batch II of JNNSM and LD of ` 11.08 crore in three projects. 

Chapter III  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 46 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
NVVN signed PSA with three 28 Rajasthan Discoms and with Grid Corporation of Odisha 
Limited (GRIDCO) in January 2011 for the sa le of bundled power. Audit observed that 
though the CERC’s regulations for fixation of trading margin were already notified (January 
2010), NVVN did not incorporate the rate of tr ading margin in PSA signed from October 
2010 to May 2012. Instead there was only a provision to charge trading margins in the PSAs, 
but the rate at which NVVN would charge trading margin was not stipulated in the PSA. 
Consequently, Discoms disputed the trading ma rgin of seven paise pe r kWh fixed by MNRE 
and charged by NVVN, stating that any subsequent memorandum through which rate of 
trading margin is unilaterally imposed on the pr ocurer after signing of PSA defeats the very 
sanctity of PSA. This ambiguity in the PSA resulted in a disputed claim of ` 25.0729 crore. 
NVVN (22 September 2014) stated that it was envisaged that the Discoms would pay to 
NVVN trading margin i.e. CERC cap trading margin as mentioned in the expression of 
interest against which quotes were received  from the Discoms and this matter was being 
pursued with the Discoms. NVVN’s reply was not acceptable as the fact remains that 
although charging of trading margin was mentio ned in expression of interest but the PSA, 
which was a legal binding document between NVVN  and Discoms, it was silent on the rate 
of trading margin. 
NVVN further stated (July 2015) that it had recovered outstanding ` 19.14 crore on account 
of trading margin and other dues from the funds provided under the Payment Security 
Scheme. However, this recovery made by NVVN was not in line with the terms and 
conditions of the Payment Security Scheme as discussed in para 4.4.3 (iv). 
4.4.6. Non synchronization of supply of thermal power with solar power 
NVVN and Discoms executed PS A (January 2011) setting out the terms and conditions for 
the sale of bundled power 30 up to the agreed contracted capacity. Audit observed instances 
in which the supply of solar power started fr om the commissioning of SPV project without 
simultaneous commencement of supply thermal power from NTPC Ltd. (NTPC) as required 
under the bundling arrangement. Consequently , the power supplied during initial period 
was billed at average rate of solar power which was higher than the bundled rate. As the 
PSA was for bundled power, the Discoms did no t accept the claims raised by NVVN at 
average rate of solar power as detailed below:- 
i. Rajasthan: In 45 projects delay ranging betwee n 11 days to 160 days was noticed in 
allocation of NTPC-thermal power result ing in non-supply of bundled power to the 
Rajasthan Discoms. Consequently, these Discoms did not accept claim of 
` 26 crore 
which was still outstanding (March 2014).The  details of delay in supply of bundled 
power in JNNSM is given in the Annexure IX. 
ii. Odisha: The supply of NVVN thermal power started after 84 days of commissioning 
of SPV project. The power supplied during in itial period from 7 February 2012 to 30 
                                                            
28  Ajmer Vidyut Vitaran Nigam Limited, Jaipur Vidyut Vitaran Nigam Limited and Jodhpur Vidyut Vitaran 
Nigam Limited. 
29  Rajasthan ( ` 24.77 crore) and Odisha (` 0.30 crore). 
30  Solar component + equivalent thermal component from unallocated quota of NTPC. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter III  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 47 
April 2012 from SPV project commissioned in  Odisha was admitted by GRIDCO at  
` 5.154 per kWh at the bundled energy rate though NVVN raised the bill at average 
solar power rate of ` 12.35 per kWh, resulting in outstanding dues of ` 1.11 crore. 
Thus, inability to synchronize supply of thermal power with solar power resulted in disputed 
claim of ` 27.11 crore as the same was not in accordance with provisions of PSA. 
NVVN (September 2014) stated that the implemen tation of the allocation and scheduling of 
NTPC thermal power was done by Regional Power committees /Regional Load Dispatch 
Centres on submission of commissioning certif icates issued by SNAs. The scheduling of 
power inter-state, co-ordination was to be done by NVVN with the distribution companies. 
The simultaneous flow of solar power in the grid with the equivalent thermal power does 
not happen due to the system procedures requirements carried out by State/Central 
authorities. In view of above, simultaneous  supply of solar power and NTPC Power from 
beginning for bundling was not contemplated which has been claimed by Rajasthan Discoms 
and GRIDCO. 
NVVN’s reply is not acceptable because “bundling” mechanism was devised to lower the 
average cost of power and such delays and billin gs are not only in contravention of the PSA 
but skew the costing structure for NVVN and impose a burden on Discoms. 
4.4.7. Non availability of Long Term Access (LTA) to inter-State transmission system 
NVVN requested (November 2012) the Ministry of  Power for allocation of power from the 
unallocated power of coal based stations of NTPC for bundling the same with Solar Power in 
anticipation of commissioning of 295 MW So lar power projects (Phase-I, Batch-II) in 
Rajasthan by February 2013, under JNNSM. 
The Ministry of Power allocated (12 February 2013) equivalent (295 MW) thermal power for 
bundling with the solar power. Out of 295 MW  bundled power, 85 MW was to be supplied 
within Rajasthan and remaining 210 MW bundled power was to be supplied to other States. 
However, since PGCIL did not permit LTA to inter-State transmission system of 210 MW 
solar power which was allocated to other St ates. This 210 MW power was reallocated  
(1 April 2013) to Rajasthan till the receipt of LTA with the prior approval of Rajasthan 
Discoms Power Procurement Centre (RDPPC) (19 March 2013). 
Audit observed that RDPPC withdrew its cons ent (30 May 2013) for temporary allocation of 
additional 210 MW power from 1 July 2013, citing the reason that there was reduction in 
requirement of power in the State. Despite th is NVVN continued power supply to Rajasthan 
till the granting of LTA on 12 August 2013. 
However, in view of prior intimation of withdr awal of consent, RDPPC decided to make only 
partial payments for the above energy supplied for the said period (1 July 2013 to 15 August 
2013). 
Thus, non-availability of LTA for evacuating solar power outside Rajasthan resulted in 
disputed claim of 
` 66 crore. More importantly, this also  indicated that there was no proper 

Chapter III  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 48 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
coordination between NVVN, Discoms and PGCIL,  due to which NVVN could not obtain LTA 
for evacuation of solar power outside Rajasthan as planned. 
NVVN stated (19 September 2014) that the proc edure to obtain LTA of 210 MW started on 
14 February 2013 and LTA was signed on 8 Ju ly 2013. While the inter–state scheduling of 
solar power was commenced by Regional Load Dispatch Centre (RLDC) from 16 Aug 2013 
after persuasion by NVVN, bundled power remained within Rajasthan from 1 July 2013 to 15 
Aug 2013. 
5. Other Audit findings 
 
Gujarat 
5.1. Incorrect tariff fixation – Central Excise and Custom exemptions not considered 
The Gujarat Government Solar policy 2009 proposed that the energy generated from a solar 
power project would be sold to the distribution licensees in th e State at a levelised per unit 
tariff for the period of 25 years. Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission (GERC) in 
exercise of power conferred under Electricity Act 2003 issued tariff order (29 January 2010) 
for procurement of power by the distribution licensees and others from Solar Power 
Generators (SPG) for 25 years whic h determined the levelised tariff 31 of ` 12 per kWh and  
` nine per kWh for SPV and Solar Thermal project, respectively. 
MNRE vide office memorandum dated 3 June  2010 issued procedure for issue of the 
certificate for exemption of Excise Duty, on  items manufactured for Solar Thermal and SPV 
power generation projects. The SERCs were re quired to factor in these exemptions while 
determining the tariffs. 
Audit observed that 47 developers sought excise duty exemption for an amount of ` 83.77 
crore and customs duty exemption amounting to ` 104.53 crore. Gujarat Energy 
Development Agency (GEDA) forwarded the in formation to MNRE but no data regarding 
exact amount of exemption actually availed by  respective developers was maintained and 
forwarded to Energy and Petrochemicals Department of the Government of Gujarat and/or 
GERC for working out its impact on the levelised  per unit tariff. In absence of receipt of any 
data on exemption of duties GERC did not factor in the exemptions and fixed the capital cost 
as ` 16.50 crore per MW for SPV and ` 13 crore per MW for Solar Thermal which were on 
the higher side as compared to the levelised tariffs of ` 12 per kWh and ` nine per kWh for 
SPV and Solar Thermal project, respectively. Thus Gujarat Urja  Vikas Nigam Ltd. (GUVNL) a 
State Government company engaged in the busine ss of bulk purchase and sale of electricity 
continued to pay the higher tariff. 
The State Government stated (November 2013) that the GERC had set aside (8 August 2013) 
a petition (1320 of 2013) for revision in solar tariff filed by GUVNL considering 
determination of appropriate capital cost, actual  equity-capital deployed for servicing at  
14 per cent,  but did not mention the duty exempt ion parameter. The reply was not 
                                                            
31  The tariff was worked out taking into account the benefit of Accelerated Depreciation under the Income 
Tax Act, Rules and the then prevailing applicable duties and taxes including Excise and Customs Duty. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter III  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 49 
acceptable as the non-considerat ion of exemptions in the capita l cost of the project led to 
passing of undue benefit on to developers and burdens the consumers of the State. 
Rajasthan 
5.2. Delays in installation of projects 
The State Government sanctioned 177 grid co nnected solar projects  for a capacity of 
1,379.67 MW of which 140 power plants with capacity of 725.50 MW (52.59 per cent) could 
be installed by March 2014. Audit analysis of the projects under execution disclosed that the 
projects were held up due to the following reasons: 
Type of hindrance Details of projects 
Non-allotment of 
land 
In a case of 150 MW project unde r Policy 2011 (open access), land 
could not be allotted to the powe r producer and consequently the 
power producer expressed inability to execute the project. 
Six projects totalling 55 MW appr oved through Competitive bidding 
under Policy 2011 could not be co mmissioned by the stipulated 
period of March 2014 due to land not being made available or delay 
in making available the land for the projects (one project of five MW 
out of the six was commissioned in August 2014). 
Financial difficulties In respect of another 50 MW project, the lead banker for the project 
requested MNRE to substitute the existing promoter with the new 
promoters owing to serious liquidity crunch. 
Abandoned 
projects 
In respect of two solar thermal projects of 100 MW each, under 
JNNSM Batch-I (Letter of Intent issued in December 2010), only part 
of the foundation work had been  carried out and no progress was 
reported (till March 2014). 
5.3. Incorrect tariff fixation under GBI scheme by MNRE 
In Rajasthan two projects were sanction ed by MNRE under Demonstration programme, 
details of which are given in Table 13. 
Table 13: Details of two projects under Demonstration programme 
Particulars Name of developer 
M/s Reliance Ind. Ltd.(RIL) M/s Par Solar 
Date of application to RRECL 4-1-2008 27-11-2007 
Capacity approved by RRECL 5 MW 5 MW 
Schedule completion date 30-11-2008 30-6-2009 
Date of approval by MNRE 30-10-2009 9-12-2009 
Capacity approved by MNRE 5 MW 3 MW 
Date of actual commissioning 31-3-2011 28-3-2012 
GBI approved by MNRE  ` 11.33 per kWh vide 
letter dated 31-3-2011 
` 10.76 per kWh vide letter 
dated 14-8-2012 

Chapter III  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 50 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
The MNRE took a period of 13 to 15 mo nths in sanctioning the projects after 
recommendations by Rajastha n Renewable Energy Corpor ation Ltd. (RRECL) which 
ultimately delayed the establishment of projects. This showed that MNRE itself did not 
adhere to the guidelines of the programme. 
As per MNRE guidelines, the amount of GBI was to be determined after deducting the 
power purchase rate of PPA from th e maximum permissible tariff of ` 15 per kWh. 
Maximum permissible GBI was ` 12 per kWh for the projects commissioned up to 31 
December 2009 and ` 11.40 per kWh for projects commi ssioned after 31 December 2009. 
Also, the GBI was to be reduced by 5 per cent i.e. (` 10.76 per kWh), in case the project was 
commissioned after 31 December 2009. 
MNRE granted extension to both the developers (RIL up to 31 March 2011 and M/s Par Solar 
up to March 2012) but it did not follow identical policy for both the developers as it allowed 
reduced GBI of ` 10.76 per kWh to M/s Par Solar but in case of RIL, the MNRE allowed GBI of 
` 11.33 per kWh despite the fact that plan t was commissioned on 31 March 2011. This 
resulted in an additional payment of tariff by ` 0.57 per kWh to RIL and creating an 
additional burden of ` 4.5532 crore during the period of 10 years on the Discoms at the net 
expected power generation of 79.89 lakh units per annum for a five MW plant. 
5.4. Non recovery of development charges 
Para 13 of the Rajasthan Solar Energy Policy 2011 provided that for Solar power projects 
established for sale of solar power to partie s other than Discoms of Rajasthan, the power 
producer shall deposit non-ref undable development charges of ` 10 lakh per MW to RRECL 
within one month from the date of issue of ‘in-p rinciple clearance’. In case of failure, ‘in-
principle clearance’ shall be cancelled without any notice. During the period of finalisation 
of new Policy-2011, RRECL registered 25 pr ojects of 500 MW capacities under JNNSM 
guidelines which were approved by NVVN in  November 2010 and PPAs were signed on 15 
January 2011. NVVN had also confirmed alloca tion of 225 MW power to Rajasthan and the 
remaining 275 MW power was to be sold to States other than Rajasthan. 
Audit observed that development charges re coverable under the Po licy from 25 projects 
were not recovered. RRECL submitted (October 2011) a proposal for waiver of development 
charges to the Energy Department, of the St ate Government stating that these projects 
were registered under Policy 2004 which did not have any provision for recovery of 
development charges. The Energy Department  agreed with the proposal. The Finance 
Department, however, stated (June 2012) that it was a case of amendment/relaxation in the 
Policy and would require approval of the Cabi net which was not obtain ed. Hence, issue of 
recovery of the development charges of 
` 27.50 crore from the power producers remained 
unresolved. 
5.5. Non recovery of processing fee 
As per Rajasthan Solar Energy Policy, 2011, wi th effect from 19 April 2011, the solar power 
producer was to deposit a non- refundable processing fee of 
` 50,000 per at the time of 
application for the project. Amendments (September 2012) to the policy also stipulated that 
                                                            
32  ` 0.57 x 79.89 lakh kWh per annum x 10 years. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter III  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 51 
any ‘Parent’, ‘Subsidiary’ or ‘Ultimate Parent Company’ may distribute/transfer the project 
capacity between them for setting up maximu m four projects at any time against one 
application. Thus, the project capacity and pr ocessing fee was non-transferable to another 
project prior to the amendment (September 2012) in the Policy. 
Audit observed that in ten 33 cases RRECL transferred the regi stration of the projects from 
one company to another without recovery of the processing fees of ` 2.98 crore. 
5.6. Non forfeiture of security deposit 
Clause 12.2 of Rajasthan Solar Energy Polic y 2011 required the power producer to deposit 
security amount of ` five lakh per MW by cash and ` 20 lakh per MW in the form of bank 
guarantee within one month from the date of i ssue of `in-principle’ clearance of the project 
and in case the power producer failed to co mmission the power plant in scheduled time, 
including extension granted, the security deposit and bank guarantee were to be forfeited. 
Audit observed that in case of M/s VS Lignite the project was not commissioned by 
scheduled date (8 February 2014) but the bank guarantee and security deposit of ` 2.50 
crore was not forfeited. 
Tamil Nadu 
5.7. TANGEDCO denied permission to sign Power Purchase Agreements 
As per Section 63 of the Electricity Act 2003, an Appropriate Commission shall adopt the 
tariff if such tariff has been determined through transparent process of bidding in 
accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central Government34. 
Government of Tamil Nadu in its Solar Po licy 2012 committed to generate 3,000 MW solar 
power by the year 2015. 
TANGEDCO invited (December 2012) bids from developers for establishing solar power 
plants of one MW or above capacity totalling 1,000 MW in the State through long term 
PPAs. Based on the offers received, Letters of Intent (LoI) were issued (April-June 2013) to 
52 developers for procurement of a combined capacity of 708 MW of solar power at rates 
upto 
` 6.48 per unit for 2013-14, subject to escalation as per terms and conditions of the 
tender. 
When TANGEDCO sought Tamil Nadu Electr icity Regulatory Commission’s (TNERC) 
permission for signing PPA with the solar deve lopers who were issued LoI, TNERC declined 
(September 2014) TANGEDCO’s request on the ground that in the absence of guidelines 
issued by the Central Government, the bi dding process adopted by TANGEDCO for 
                                                            
33  M/s Dhanu Solar Power Pvt Limited ( ` 25 lakh), M/s Reliance Green Power Pvt. Ltd ( ` 150 lakh), M/s Kiran 
Energy Solar Power Ltd ( ` 12.50 lakh), M/s Field Energy Pvt Ltd ( ` 10 lakh), M/s Global Power Infra Ltd  
(` 25 lakh), five cases (M/s North Delhi Power Ltd, M/s Bhanu Solar Projects Pvt. Ltd, M/s KVK Energy 
Ventures, M/s Chenab Securities and M/s GMR Rajmundry)(` 75 lakh). 
34  Ministry of Power within the GoI was to notify / approve the guidelines for the bidding process. 

Chapter III  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 52 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
procurement of solar power had no legal sanctity for consid eration under Section 63 of the 
Electricity Act 2003. 
The solar projects which were expected to be commissioned before April 2014 were thus 
delayed without any reasonable chance of commissioning in the near future. 
5.8. Stalling of tender process 
In line with the State Solar Policy, the Go vernment also planned (November 2012) for 
setting up of Solar Power Parks in different lo cations of the State for generating 1,000 MW 
of solar power in five years. The first such park (for 100 MW) was being developed in the 
Ramnad district, with an investment of around ` 920 crore through the Tamil Nadu 
Industrial Development Corporation in associat ion with a private promoter. Expressions of 
Interest were also received (February 2013) from various deve lopers for a total of 55 MW. 
Consequent to the stalling of TANGEDCO’s te nder process, the develo pment of this project 
became uncertain as of September 2014. 
5.9. Deficient scheme for domestic consumers 
The Government of Tamil Nadu announced (April 2013) capital incentive of 
` 20,000 per kW 
for 10,000 domestic consumers who installed one kWp 35 solar roof tops and generated 
power. TEDA proposed (May 2013) installation  of a battery less Grid Tie Solar Rooftop 
Photovoltaic (PV) system of one kW capacity and accordingly, the Government issued 
(October 2013) orders for implementation of the scheme. 
Under the scheme, the beneficiarie s were entitled to CFA at 30 per cent on the cost of the 
solar plant limited to the bench mark cost of ` one lakh fixed by MNRE and in addition, the 
State Government would also provide a subsidy of ` 20,000 per system. The anticipated 
generation from each plant was 1,600 units per year and the scheme envisaged coverage of 
5,000 beneficiaries in the first year. As of June  2014, TEDA received a pplications from 1,864 
beneficiaries but the system had been installed in only 51 houses (including three houses 
with net metering). 
Audit observed that: 
i. The scheme was intended only for the domestic Low Tension (LT) consumers and did 
not cover other LT consumers like Educatio nal Institutions, Hostels and Commercial 
establishments. 
ii. The scheme provided for a battery less grid - tie system, which would generate 
power only when there was supply of powe r from the grid and in the absence of 
such supply from the grid, the solar PV system would not work. 
TEDA stated (June 2014) that a system with batte ry involved additional cost of procurement 
and maintenance. The reply was not acceptable as the minimum expectation of a common 
man going in for a supplementary power generation unit in his premises was to mitigate the 
                                                            
35  Wp - means Watt peak. It is the maximum amount of power a solar panel could produce in perfect 
conditions. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter III  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 53 
effect of power cuts. This was evident from th e fact that against the anticipated target of 
5,000 systems, only 51 had been installed till June 2014. 
Uttarakhand 
5.10. Solar power plants not connected to grid since May 2011 
Uttarakhand Renewable Energy Development Agency (UREDA) installed (March 2004) two 
Rooftop Solar Power plants of capacity of 25 kW each at Secretariat premises, at a cost of 
`1.29 crore with a production capacity up to 150 units per day. The plants were shifted (May 
2011) to Energy Park, Dehradun, and were non-functional because of delay in installation of 
100 kVA transformer. 
6. Conclusion 
The installed capacity of grid interactive solar power in the country at the beginning of the 
11
th Plan period was `Nil’. During the 11th Five Year Plan period and 12th Five Year Plan (upto 
2013-14), 2,656 MW of solar power capacity was added in the country, which was 0.35 per 
cent of the country’s solar energy potential. In the 24 States test checked in audit, it was 
observed that 17 of the 24 States did not se t any targets for grid connected solar power 
generation. There was no installed capacity in 10 of these States. The remaining 14 States 
had a total installed capacity of  2,413 MW which was only 0.36 per cent  of the total 
estimated potential of these States. In the ten States endowed with 78 per cent  of the 
national solar potential, the exploited potential varied from zero to 2.56 per cent. Gujarat 
and Rajasthan alone created more than 50 per cent of the capacity installed in the country 
but had exploited only 2.56 per cent and 0.51 per cent of their respective potential. 
MNRE introduced three sche mes between 2008 and 2010 for pr omoting the use of solar 
energy. There was a shortfall in achievin g targets under all the schemes except in 
Demonstration programme. The major shortfall wa s in achieving targets in setting up Solar 
Thermal power plants. Against the target of  creating 500 MW of Solar Thermal power 
capacity, plants of 447.50 MW (approximately 90 per cent ) had not been commissioned 
(February 2015). 
Government land of 3,404 acres leased at preferential rates to the developers for six Solar 
Thermal projects in Rajasthan had not been put  to intended use so far. In Demonstration 
Programme, in one case, 345 acre s of land had been leased in  excess of requirement for a 
Solar Photovoltaic power plant. 
The three schemes launched between 2008 and 2010 for promoting grid linked solar power 
projects came in quick succession and the GBI assured increased from 
` 12 to ` 12.41 per 
unit, the tariff assured increased from ` 15 to ` 17.91 per unit and the period of 
commitment from 10 years to 25 years, under these schemes. 
While the MNRE schemes pegged the GBI at ` 12 per unit and tariff at ` 17.91 per unit, 
during the period 2011-12, the Central Electric ity Regulatory Commission tariffs fell from  
` 17.91 to ` 10.39 per unit and the rates obtained in  the reverse bidding under Jawaharlal 

Chapter III  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 54 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Nehru National Solar Mission were ` 10.85 and ` 7.49 per unit. The programmes also did 
not have any scope for revision of GBI periodic ally to reflect changi ng costs. This also 
created an opportunity for the Developers to shift from programmes to seek better 
benefits. 
While Regulatory framework for electricity generation was a State subject, MNRE could 
have issued guidelines for reference by the States, as an enabling environment for solar 
technology penetration in the country at a decentralized level. In the absence of such 
guidelines the States adopted different models for net metering. 
There were deficiencies in the implementati on of MNRE programmes by IREDA such as 
irregular payment of GBI to developer, delays in passing GBI claims and also delays by MNRE 
in releasing funds to IREDA resulting in pendency and settlement of GBI claims. 
The Solar Payment Security Account introduced  to safeguard solar power developers/ NTPC 
Vidyut Vyapar Nigam Limited from default in  payment by distribution companies was not 
operated as envisaged. Distribution companie s did not provide require d Letter of Credits, 
open escrow accounts and opportunity to sell power on spot were not explored prior to 
accessing the funds. 
Under the `bundling’ of power arrangements for lowering the average cost of power, supply 
of thermal power could not be ensured in ti me, resulting in NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam 
Limited billing distribution companies at higher rates and leading to disputed claims. Delays 
in providing Long Term Access to inter-State transmission system also created disputes 
between distribution company and NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam Limited. 
7. Recommendations 
• MNRE should focus on develo pment of solar energy in th e States endowed with high 
solar energy potential. 
• MNRE, while formulating schemes that commit the Government to long term liability for 
incentives like Generation Based Incentives, m ust ensure that these are kept flexible to 
match changes in tariffs and costing struct ure to avoid unwarrant ed burden on public 
exchequer or developers. 
• MNRE must formulate guidelines for ne t metering so as to provide an enabling 
environment for solar technology penetration in the country at a decentralized level. 
• MNRE must ensure that the solar projects are completed as per schedule. In case of 
delays, the Central/ State Governments must review the status of the public resources 
like land allotted to the solar power developers and take necessary corrective measures. 
• MNRE, in coordination with other Central Go vernment agencies, should ensure timely 
arrangement for making available conven tional power for bundling and Long Term 
Access to inter-State transmission system, for smooth operation of the schemes. 

Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 55 
Chapter - IV 
Wind Power 
1. Introduction 
India is a wind-rich country with quality, ha rvestable wind potential. Monsoon patterns and 
geography of India play a major role in the Indian wind climatology structure. Indian 
geography - a mixture of elevated plateau, hill blocks, passes and coastal plains, aid the 
monsoons, especially the Southwest monsoon to earn harves table wind potential. Due to 
this, States like Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu are endowed with rich wind energy potential. Wind 
power is the fastest growing Renewable Energy (RE) source in India. With an installed 
capacity of about 21,137 MW as of March 2014, it constitutes 67 per cent of the total RE 
capacity in India. 
2. Assessment of Wind Potential 
National Institute for Wind Energy 1 (NIWE) in association with Riso DTU, Denmark has 
developed Numerical Wind Atlas2 of India at 50 metre (m) and 80 m mast 3 height which was 
published in April 2010. The Wind Resource As sessment (WRA) programme was an ongoing 
activity being co-ordinated by the NIWE in association with State Nodal Agencies (SNAs). 
2.1. At 50 meters mast height 
For estimating potential at 50 m height, the WRA covered 28 States and three Union 
Territories (UTs) and involved establishment of about 789 Wind Monitoring Stations (WMS). 
The total wind energy potential at 50 m mast height was estimated at 49,130 MW. 
2.2. At 80 meters and 100 meters mast height 
NIWE had commissioned 73 numbers of 100 m hi gh meteorological masts with multilevel 
measurements in seven windy States to va lidate and fine-tune the 80 m wind Atlas and 
estimate and validate potential at 100 m height. 
MNRE had also formulated (July 2014) a ne w scheme for implementation of WRA in 
uncovered/new areas to assess the realistic potential at 100 m level in 500 new stations 
across the country. It was to be implemented through NIWE in Public-Private Partnership 
mode, in association with SNAs and private developers, which was yet to start. 
 
                                                            
1  Formerly Centre for Wind Energy Technology, Chennai. 
2  Numerical wind atlas methodologies have been  devised to solve the issue of insufficient wind 
measurements. One such methodology is the KAMM/WAsP method developed at Riso National Laboratory, 
Denmark. Karlsruhe Atmospheric Mesoscale Model (KAMM) and Wind Atlas Analysis and Application 
Program (WAsP) are used to model the effects on the wind flow over India using modeling domains. 
3  Height of pole used for wind studies before a wind turbine generator is erected in its place. 

Chapter IV  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 56 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
2.3. State Nodal Agency initiatives 
During the test check of the records of 24 SNAs, Audit observed that some SNAs in 
collaboration with NIWE attempted to undert ake wind resource assessment with varying 
degree of success. Audit findings in this regard are reported below. 
2.3.1. Jharkhand 
Jharkhand Renewable Energy Development Agency  (JREDA) in consultation with NIWE had 
identified eight 4 locations for setting up Wind Monitoring Stations (WMS) which were 
approved by MNRE. Audit observed that NIWE  could not assess the wind potential due to: 
(i) non furnishing of Wind monitoring data co ntinuously by JREDA for one year as required 
from WMS at three locations 5; (ii) At Sakhuapani the WMS could not be operated as the 
mast was placed at a higher level than require d height of 50 m; (iii) WMS at Parasnath and 
Jhumra hills could not be established for want of forest clearances; and (iv) WMS at Kurta 
and Hadari in Hazaribagh district could not be  established as JREDA did not initiate action 
for setting up of WMS within three months of issue of instruction (June 2014) by NIWE. In 
this regard JREDA also furnished bank details to NIWE in January 2015, after a delay of four 
months, for receipt of first installment of funds. 
2.3.2. Bihar 
Bihar Renewable Energy Development Agen cy (BREDA) commissioned (February 2009) 
three6 WMS for ` 4.50 lakh in consultation with NIWE but these were closed in 2010-11 
without submission of any report by NIWE. Three 7 other sites were commissioned but no 
feasibility or data analysis report was given by NIWE. The SNA stated that there was nothing 
mentioned in the scheme about giving or buying the report. 
3. Potential, target and achievements 
3.1. Targets and achievements of MNRE 
The targets and achievements of MNRE under the 11 th Five Year Plan (FYP) and 12 th FYP 
upto 2014 are given in Table 14 below: 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
4  Netarhat (Lohardaga) and Pithoria (Simdega) in 2003-04, Sakhuapani (Gumla) and Metramata (Simdega)  
in 2005-06, Parasnath and Jhumra hills (Giridih) in 2008-09 and Kurta a nd Hadri in Ichack (Hazaribag) in 
2013-14. 
5  Metramata, Netarhat and Pithoria. 
6  Kaimur, Lalganj and Simultala. 
7  Bodh Gaya (K P Nagar), Motihari (Chikni) and Munger (Shankarpur). 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IV  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 57 
Table 14: Targets and achievement under 11th and 12th FYP 
S.No. Year Target (in MW) Achievement (in MW) Excess(+)/ Shortfall(-) (in per 
cent) 
11th Five Year Plan Period (2007-12) 
1 2007-08 1,500 1,663 +11 
2 2008-09 2,000 1,485 -26 
3 2009-10 2,500 1,565 -37 
4 2010-11 2,000 2,349 +17 
5 2011-12 2,400 3,197 +33 
 Total 10,400 10,259  
12th Five Year Plan Period (upto 2014) 
6 2012-13 2,500 1,700 -32 
7 2013-14 2,500 2,079 -17 
 Total 5,000 3,779  
 Grand Total 15,400 14,038  
Source: MNRE. However, data on State wise capacity installed between 2007 and 2014 given by MNRE in Table 
15 under para 3 is 14,046 MW as compared with 14,038 MW reported as achievement under 11 th and 12 th 
FYPs. 
3.1.1. Target setting and achievement under 11th FYP 
At the commencement of the 11 th FYP period, the wind power capacity installed in the 
county was 7,091 MW. During the 11 th FYP period (2007-12) the target of wind power 
capacity addition was set at 10,400 MW which was 21 per cent of the potential at 50 m mast 
height.  Against a target of 10,400 MW, the achievement in wind power capacity addition 
was 10,259 MW. As a result of the 11 th FYP achievement, and to ensure effective 
exploitation of wind energy resource, the 12th FYP target has been kept at 15,000 MW which 
was roughly 1.5 times the 11th FYP target. 
As can be seen from Table 14, from 2007 to 2014, in four years there was a shortfall in 
achievement of the target and in three years there was an excess, and overall there was a 
shortfall of nine per cent. The shortfall in achievement of targets set for the first two years 
of 12th FYP (2012 to 2014) was 24 per cent. 
MNRE stated (October 2014) that after the wi thdrawal of Accelerated Depreciation (AD) 
scheme by the Ministry of Finance w.e.f. April 2012 the capacity addition gradually 
decreased in this sector. MNRE further stated (July 2015) that the target for 11 th FYP period 
was originally 10,400 MW which was reduced to 9,000 MW at mid-term appraisal stage. 
3.1.2. State wise target and achievement 
State wise wind potential of India at 80 m a nd 50 m mast height as assessed by NIWE, and 
targets fixed for creation of installed ca pacity between 2007 and 2014 and the installed 
capacity as on 31 March 2014 is given in Table 15 below: 
 
 

Chapter IV  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 58 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Table 15: Wind potential, target and installed capacity 
(in MW) 
S. 
No. 
State/ Union Territory Estimated potential  Targets 
fixed 
(2007-14) 
Installed capacity Installed 
capacity as a 
percentage 
of potential 
  at 50 m8 at 80 m9 
(2010) 
 Prior 
to 
2007 
Between 
2007-14 
As on 
31.3.14 
50 m 80 
m 
1 Andaman & Nicobar Islands 2 365 NA Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
2 Andhra Pradesh 5,394 14,497 NF 123 624 747 14 5 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 201 236 NF Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
4 Assam 53 112 NF Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
5 Bihar NE 144 NF Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
6 Chhattisgarh 23 314 NF Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
7 Diu & Daman NA 4 NA Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
8 Gujarat 10,609 35,071 NF 637 2,818 3,455 33 10 
9 Haryana NA 93 NF Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
10 Himachal Pradesh 20 64 NF Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
11 Jammu & Kashmir 5,311 5,685 NF Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
12 Jharkhand NE 91 NF Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
13 Karnataka 8,591 13,593 2,969 822 1,497 2,319 27 17 
14 Kerala 790 837 NF 2 33 35 4 4 
15 Lakshadweep 16 16 NA Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
16 Madhya Pradesh 920 2,931 3,259 56 367 423 46 14 
17 Maharashtra 5,439 5,961 2,100 1,487 2,610 4,097 75 68 
18 Manipur 7 56 NA Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
19 Meghalaya 44 82 NF Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
20 Mizoram NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
21 Nagaland 3 16 NF Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
22 Odisha 910 1,384 NF Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
23 Puducherry NA 120 NA Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
24 Punjab NA NA NF Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
25 Rajasthan 5,005 5,050 1,400 470 2,316 2,786 56 46 
26 Sikkim 98 98 NF Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
27 Tamil Nadu 5,374 14,152 2,400 3,494 3,777 7,271 135 51 
28 Uttar Pradesh 137 1,260 NF Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
29 Uttarakhand 161 534 2 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
30 West Bengal 22 22 75 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
31 Others NA NA NA NA 4 4 NA NA 
 Total 49,130 1,02,788 12,205 7,091 14,046 21,137 43 20 
NA – Not Available; NE- Not Estimated, NF- Not Fixed  
Source: MNRE. 
                                                            
8  The 50 m map was prepared and published in April 2010 after validation. 
9  At 80 m, the estimated potential is to be validated through field measurements. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IV  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 59 
It is evident from Table 15 above that agains t an estimated potential of 49,130 MW at 50 m 
mast height and 1,02,788 MW at 80 m mast height, the installed capacity was 21,137 MW 10 
which was 43 per cent of the potential at 50 m height and 21 per cent of potential at 80 m 
height. MNRE did not have details of the mast heights at wh ich the capacities had been 
installed, for better analysis of the extent to which potential had been exploited. 
Based on analysis of the data at Table 14 and 15, the following observations are made: 
i. Data of targets and achievement, both State-wise and under 11 th and 12 th FYP, was 
collected from MNRE. However, discrepancies in the two sets of data were noted. As per 
State-wise breakup (Table 15), the target  for the period 2007-14 for each States 
aggregated to 12,205 MW whereas for the 11 th FYP period and fr om 2012 to 2014 under 
the 12th FYP (Table 14) the target was 15,400 MW. Similarly, achievement as per Table 15 
for the period 2007-14 was 14,046 MW whereas as per Table 14 it was 14,038 MW, a 
nominal difference of eight MW. 
ii. MNRE did not provide any record based on which FYP targets were set and State wise 
breakups of the targets. No records were shown to Audit that inputs have been taken 
from the States in setting these targets. As can be seen from Table 15 above, 17 States 
(of which three States
11 alone had over 50 per cent of the wind energy potential 12, had 
not fixed any targets during the period 2007- 14. Moreover, there was a discrepancy of 
3,195 MW in the State-wise targets and FYP ta rgets for the same period (refer point i 
above). From these observations it appeared that the targets had been routinely set by 
MNRE without proper planning, analysis, involvement of and communication with the 
States. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that it does not fix State wise targets, rather it had a single 
national target.  It further stated that few States based on their own performance, kept 
annual targets which were same or different from the national targets and this happened 
because of the fact that Wind Power Projects (WPP) were taken up with private sector 
investment.  Ministry’s reply needs to be viewed in the context that MNRE and the States 
with rich potential of wind energy should work in tandem to ensure significant 
exploitation of potential for meeting national goals. 
iii. At the stage of framing targets for 11
th FYP, the wind resource assessment was available 
at only 50 m mast height and the target set was 21 per cent  of capacity. By 2010, the 
India wind Atlas estimated the potential at 80 m mast height at 1,02,788 MW and also 
the technology to exploit the wi nd energy at this height wa s available in the country. It 
was observed in audit, that the targets set for capacity addition in 12 th FYP were a 
modest 15 per cent of potential, which was not adequate  to translate Government intent 
and priority in promoting renewable energy sources as a significant component of the 
energy mix of the country and a necessity for ensuring its energy security and adhering to 
                                                            
10  However, as per the records furnished by individual SNAs, the installed capacity totaled to 20,564 MW. The 
difference was largely in the installed capacity in Madhya Pradesh as recorded in MNRE i.e. 424 MW 
whereas as per the SNA records, it was only 52 MW. 
11  Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Jammu & Kashmir. 
12  At 80 m mast height. 

Chapter IV  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 60 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
the targets set for 2020 in the NAPCC regarding proportion of RE sources in the electricity 
consumed in the country. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the targets were not kept only in view of potential 
availability. Annual targets were set dependi ng upon feasibility of exploitation of the 
available potential in a particular year de pending upon policy environment and market 
conditions for bringing private sector investments. 
MNRE’s reply highlights the need  for strategic planning if significant progress had to be 
made in the Renewable Energy sector since there will always be competing needs and 
the Government must prioritise this sector  both in policy formulation and development 
strategy. 
3.2. MNRE programmes for promotion of wind energy 
MNRE from time to time brought out diffe rent programmes to promote development of 
wind energy in the country. The incentives were in form of Generation Based Incentive (GBI) 
or Accelerated Depreciation (AD) under the Income Tax Act 1961. Th e programmes and the 
audit finding on the implementation of each are given below: 
3.2.1. Demonstration project 
i. MNRE (December 2006) launched Demonstratio n project for State Governments, for 
promotion of grid interactive power projects. Ca pacity of each eligib le project was to be 
greater than 500 kW; not more than one per cent of technical potential of State or six 
MW whichever was less; and in the States where commercial activity had not taken off. 
Under this scheme an aggregate capacity of 71 MW was installed at 33 locations in nine 
States through State Governments/ SNAs or  State Electricity Boards. After December 
2006 no new project had been established. However, it was observed that in four
13 
States more than six MW was commissioned contrary to eligibility criteria. 
ii. MNRE (July 2008) launched the Demonstratio n programme for the independent power 
producers with minimum installed capacity of  five MW. The scheme was not applicable 
for captive consumption, third party sale, merchant14 plants etc. 
Under this scheme, four 15 companies installed 48.9 MW capacity in three States 16. The 
GBI of ` 27.52 crore had been released by MNRE to IREDA till March 2014 under this 
scheme and all the UCs had been received. 
 
 
                                                            
13  Gujarat (17.30 MW), Karnataka (7.10 MW), Maharashtra (8.40 MW) and Tamil Nadu (19.40 MW). 
14  A merchant power plant is funded by investors a nd sells electricity in the competitive wholesale power 
market. 
15  M/s Generacion Eolica India Ltd, M/s Green Infra Wi nd Energy Ltd, M/s CLP India Pvt Ltd and M/s Simran 
Wind Power Pvt Ltd. 
16  Gujarat, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IV  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 61 
3.2.2. Generation Based Incentive (GBI) 
i. MNRE launched GBI scheme (GBI -I) (December 2009) for the 11 th FYP with the objective 
of enhancing generation of electricity from  grid connected wind power projects and to 
encourage investment by pr oject proponents who would not avail of Accelerated 
Depreciation under the IT Act for making investments in wind power projects.  
ii. MNRE further extended (September 2013) re trospectively from April 2012 the scheme 
(GBI-II) for continuation of GBI during for the 12th FYP period with the same objectives. 
Audit observed that under the GBI-I scheme , 167 projects of 2,230 MW capacity were 
registered. Under GBI-II scheme, 176 projects of 2,749.40 MW had been registered till 
September 2014. 
3.2.3. Accelerated Depreciation (AD) 
The installation of commercial wind power pr ojects along with energy from other RE 
resources had been promoted by MNRE since th e early 1990s through fiscal incentives also 
which included Accelerated Depreciation (A D) under the Income Ta x Act 1961. Under the 
AD provision investors were allowed to claim 80 per cent of the gross block as depreciation 
in the first year of installation of a project. This substantially reduced their stated income for 
income tax purposes during the year, thereby de ferring income tax payout. This provision 
was attractive to companies, investors and captive users because of the tax planning 
opportunity it provided and simultaneously encouraged the development of the wind power 
projects. The scheme was discontinued from April 2012 and re-introduced in April 2014. As 
per data provided by IREDA the total capaci ty addition made under AD scheme till March 
2014 was 15,81817 MW. 
3.2.3.1. Affect of discontinuation of AD and GBI 
Both the schemes i.e. GBI and AD, were disc ontinued from April 2012. GBI was discontinued 
because it was only for the 11 th FYP period and MNRE could no t ensure that it seamlessly 
continued in the 12 th FYP. It was re-introduced (Septemb er 2013) retrospectively from April 
2012. AD provision was also not continued in 2012-13 and 2013-14 due to reservations 
expressed by Central Board of Direct Taxes, Ministry of Finance (MoF). 
In order to analyse the impact of discontinuati on of the incentives for one and half years 
(GBI) and two years (AD), Audit attempted to co llect data of projects installed under each 
category from MNRE. MNRE could not provid e list of projects commissioned under AD and 
GBI mode to Audit. It stated that the benefit of AD was given to the developers under the 
provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961 and MN RE had no details of the projects installed 
under AD scheme. Consequently, Audit obtained list of projects installed under GBI scheme 
from IREDA and the capacity installed through AD was calculated by deducting the capacity 
installed under GBI from the total installed capa city data provided by MNRE. The data is 
given in Table 16 below: 
 
                                                            
17  Based on calculation discussed in para 3.2.3.1. 

Chapter IV  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 62 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Table 16: Year wise capacity addition under the AD Scheme 
 (in MW) 
Year Total Capacity Through GBI Through AD18 
Pre 2009 10,239 120 10,119 
2009-10 1,565 138 1,427 
2010-11 2,349 603 1,746 
2011-12 3,197 1,490 1,707 
2012-13 1,700 1,398 302 
2013-14 2,079 1,562 517 
Total 21,129 5,311 15,818 
Source: MNRE and IREDA. However, data on capacity installed given by MNRE in Table 15 under para 3 is 
21,137 MW as compared with 21,129 MW reported as achievement under 11th and 12th FYPs. 
As can be seen from Table 16, between 2009-10 and 2011-12, the capacity addition 
increased considerably both under GBI and AD category. AD was the preferred category, 
whereas GBI was also catching up. In the year  2011-12, the capacity addition crossed 3,000 
MW. 
Post withdrawal of GBI and AD, the capacity addition in this sector was only 3,779 MW 
(2,960 MW through GBI and 819 MW through AD) during 2012-14, against a target of 5,000 
MW. Hence, there is a strong indication that th e break in incentive due to policy reversal in 
2012-14 did adversely affect capacity addition. 
MNRE (July 2013) moved a Cabinet note seekin g reintroduction of both GBI as well AD 
incentives for the wind energy sector. Centra l Board of Direct Taxe s (CBDT) under Ministry 
of Finance (MoF) objected to AD scheme. The Department of Re venue, MoF, expressed 
reservations on the proposal to re-introduc e AD on the ground of revenue foregone and 
also the AD benefit being front loaded in th e first year. They also expressed apprehension 
regarding double benefit, both under AD and GB I, being availed by some developers even 
though they were mutually exclusive schemes.  MNRE had pointed out that benefit of AD 
was being provided to all other RE sources and in many other sectors also, and therefore it 
would be unfair to discriminate against wind energy sector. MNRE also pointed out that 
there was a provision in the GBI scheme th at the wind power developers should be 
registered with IREDA, they would have to prove that they are not taking benefits of AD and 
IREDA would build safeguards in the implementa tion process to avoid misuse of incentives. 
But these were not implemented for want of notification from the Department of Revenue. 
Audit found that: 
i. As per study 19 conducted (February 2012) by MNRE, out of the target of 15,000 MW for 
the 12th FYP, 6,000 MW would have come from AD route. The taxes 20 foregone by the 
Government, on NPV 21 basis, due to no investment because of absence of AD was  
                                                            
18  In the years 2012-14, there was no capacity addition  under AD. The capacity shown may pertain to captive 
users, third party sale, GBI etc. GBI was restored in September 2013 with retrospective effect from April 
2012 and the developers who installed wind power plants during this period are opting for GBI. 
19  CRISIL Risk and Infras tructure Solutions Ltd. 
20  Minimum Alternate Tax, Central Sales Tax and Service Tax. 
21  Net Present Value. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IV  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 63 
` 6,741 crore and the income tax deferm ent, on NPV basis would have been ` 5,606 
crore. Hence, there would have been benefit of revenue to the Government to the tune 
of ` 1,135 crore. Also, the financial liability of GBI would decrease from ` 16,354 crore to 
` 11,164 crore. Still, AD was withdrawn at the behest of CBDT, MoF. 
ii. Further on the issue of misuse of the GBI and AD scheme, Audit found that the list of 
developers claiming GBI wa s forwarded by MNRE to CB DT in January 2013 for their 
verification to rule out the suspicion of double benefit being availed. Audit enquired from  
CBDT of its action and findings on the list of developers. CBDT stated (April 2014) that the 
field offices were asked to verify the cl aims and one firm had claimed additional 
depreciation for the Assessment Year 2011-1 2 and later on the assessee revised the 
return. It further stated that no other discrepancy was reported relating to availing of GBI 
and AD in a mutually exclusive manner. 
iii. It was also observed that after expressing re servations on the reintroduction of AD in 
2013, MoF reintroduced AD benefit for the wi nd energy developers in the Finance Bill 
2014. Audit sought the documents justifying rein troduction of AD after it had once been 
rejected, from CBDT (December 2014). CBDT stated (April 2015) that the proposal of 
introducing certain safeguards to address th e concerns was not fo und acceptable and it 
was felt that monitoring of such a scheme would not be feasible. 
The fact remains that the AD scheme was re introduced September 2014 onward after a gap 
of over two years, CBDT’s concerns notwit hstanding. Also, the AD benefit was being 
provided to all other RE sour ces and in many other sectors,  and was withdrawn only for 
wind energy sector. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that IREDA has taken ad equate safeguards to ensure that GBI is 
provided to only those developers who do not avail AD benefit by checking their Income Tax 
returns. 
3.2.3.2. Proposed checks for AD by MNRE not take n into consideration by the Ministry of 
Finance 
Audit examination revealed that in order to make AD more transparent and to address MoF 
concern of the misuse of AD, MNRE had proposed the following checks: 
• All the developers should be registered with IREDA, and the AD would be allowed in tax 
assessment by MoF only after certificate from IREDA that GBI had not been claimed. 
• The ownership of the wind turbine cannot be transferred within three years of 
commissioning. 
• The capacity utilization factor of the AD projects should be minimum of 15 per cent per 
year for a minimum of three years. 
• AD would be made available for a maximum capex of wind power project which will be 
linked with CERC norms. 
MoF did not take these into considerations and withdrew the AD scheme (March 2012). 
Also, MoF/CBDT had not issued any notification, to include these checks, while  
re-introducing the AD scheme (September 2014). 

Chapter IV  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 64 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Audit scrutiny in Maharashtra revealed instan ces when the developers had been paid GBI 
without ensuring production of required ce rtificate to the effect the Accelerated 
Depreciation benefit had not been availed of. The details are given in the box below. 
Excess payment to wind generator without Accelerated Depreciation certificate 
In Maharashtra, as per Energy Purchase Ag reement (EPA) executed with the developer a 
certificate from Chartered Accountant /IT Department had to be submitted within two years 
from the date of Commercial Operation (COD) that the AD has not been availed. 
Audit observed that that wind generators of Satara, Pune, and Nandurbar (March 2012) had 
not submitted the certificate for AD to Maha rashtra State Electricity Distribution Company 
Limited (MSEDCL) even after two years from the date of COD. 
Even in the absence of the certificate, payment was made by MSEDCL at higher rate in 
respect of 595 million units purchased during Ap ril 2010 to March 2014 resulting in possible 
excess payment of ` 78.31 crore. 
MSEDCL stated (December 2014) that this was be ing verified for taking necessary action as 
per EPA. 
MNRE (April/May 2015) did not comment on the issue and stated that inputs from MSEDCL 
through Maharashtra Energy Development Agency  were awaited. The fact remains that the 
AD was reintroduced in 2014, the reservat ions notwithstanding, but the safeguards 
proposed are yet to be notified. 
3.2.4. Lack of competitive bidding for allotment of wind energy projects 
Wind energy constitutes around 67 per cent  of installed RE capacity in the country. Audit 
observed that 
i. There was no competition in the wind energy  sector either with respect to tariff 
fixation (unlike JNNSM under solar energy) or with respect to allocation of sites to 
the developers (as in the case of SHP). 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that in sola r energy, the cost per MW came down 
substantially due to realistic estimate in India and also due to cost reduction 
internationally during the last few years.  In case of wind energy, the cost corrections 
have already taken place in the last 20 years. It further stated that wind being 
relatively more variable in nature, compet itive bidding route may not lead to better 
results because it may not be possible to co rrectly estimate the generation and grid 
availability at a particular site. MNRE repl y should be considered in the context of 
the need to address problems linked with infirm nature of wind energy in terms of 
accurate forecasting, maintaining grid discipline and adequate evacuation 
infrastructure which are plaguing the sect or. These issues have been discussed in 
para 4.4. 
 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IV  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 65 
ii. The guidelines issued by MNRE in June  2008 on wind measurement involving private 
sector stipulated that private develope rs should establish wind farms on lands 
categorised as wind farmable site within three years 22 of issue of No Objection 
Certificate (NOC) by the respective SNA. Th e guidelines further stipulated that in 
cases where no development takes place even after the prescribed period of 
three/five years, the SNA would be at liber ty to invite bids for setting up wind power 
projects from others.  When such sites are declared open for others, all data of the 
site would be treated as pa rt of NIWE knowledge bank and would be given in the 
normal list of potential stations by NIWE. A udit observed that out of 572 stations in 
which private promoters conducted measurem ent, 32 stations were identified as 
potential sites for setting up wind farms. As these sites had not been developed 
within the extended time frame of five years, NIWE should have included them in 
the normal list of potential stations as sti pulated in the Ministry’s guidelines. This 
deprived potential developers of the opport unity for planning and establishing wind 
farm. NIWE stated (May 2013) that such si tes would be listed after discussion with 
the concerned SNAs and MNRE. 
4. State wise analysis 
4.1. Potential and installed capacity 
Based on the wind energy potential assessed in the 31 States/UTs listed in the Table 15 
above, Audit identified that four
23 States were endowed with 75 per cent of the wind energy 
potential in the country at 80 m mast height and six 24 States with 22 per cent of the wind 
potential. Together, these ten States were endowed with 97 per cent of the country’s wind 
potential. In order to tap the wind energy, it was necessary to focus on developing the 
resource in these States. 
Table 17: Estimated potential and installed capacity (Grid connected) for the States 
endowed with 97 per cent of the country’s wind energy potential, as of March 2014 
(in MW) 
S. 
No. 
State Estimated potential at 80 m height Installed capacity Percent installed 
High25 potential States with 75 per cent wind energy potential 
1 Gujarat 35,071 3,455 10 
2 Andhra Pradesh 14,497 747 5 
3 Tamil Nadu 14,152 7,271 51 
4 Karnataka 13,593 2,319 17 
 Total 77,313 13,792 18 
                                                            
22  The period of three years could be extended upto five years in cases of circumstances beyond the control 
of the developer. 
23  Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. 
24  Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. 
25  States with estimated potential higher than 10,000 MW. 

Chapter IV  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 66 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
S. 
No. 
State Estimated potential at 80 m height Installed capacity Percent installed 
Medium26 potential States with 22 per cent wind energy potential 
5 Maharashtra 5,961 4,097 68 
6 Jammu & Kashmir 5,685 Nil Nil 
7 Rajasthan 5,050 2,786 46 
8 Madhya Pradesh 2,931 423 14 
9 Odisha 1,384 Nil Nil 
10 Uttar Pradesh 1,260 Nil Nil 
 Total 22,271 7,306 33 
Source: MNRE 
i. The installed capacity in these ten States varied from zero to 68 per cent  of the 
potential. Maharashtra had the highest exploitati on of the wind energy potential at 
68 per cent  followed by Tamil Nadu at 51 per cent  and Rajasthan at 46 per cent . 
Jammu & Kashmir, Odisha and Uttar Pradesh had not exploited the potential at all. 
More significantly, of the four high potential States, three i.e. Gujarat, Andhra 
Pradesh and Karnataka had very low rates of exploitation of their wind energy 
potential, ranging from five to 17 per cent . Thus, unless MNRE and the State 
Governments of these high potential States prioritise exploitation and development 
of the wind energy, the impact of the progress made in the sector will remain 
insignificant. 
ii. While the overarching policy and incentives  offered by Government of India to 
promote wind energy across these States remained common, th e comparative and 
varied development of wind energy in these States was dependent on factors such as 
State policies, evacuation infrastructure , tariff fixed by the State Electricity 
Regulatory Commission, Plant Load Factor (PLF) generated beca use of wind speeds, 
enforcement of Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO)/ Renewable Energy Certificate 
(REC) etc. An analysis of the conditions prevailing in these ten high potential States is 
discussed below: 
4.2. Policy, Planning and implementation 
In order to give impetus to development of a particular activity, it is important that the 
Government policy on the activity be clearly articulated. This should then be followed up 
with proper planning, target setting and mo nitoring of implementation. The State wise 
findings in this regards are given below: 
 
 
 
                                                            
26  States with estimated potential between 10,000 MW and 1,000 MW. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IV  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 67 
Andhra Pradesh 
The new Wind Policy 2008 was favorable to the developers. But, NREDCAP 27, the nodal 
agency had only one officer looking after renewable sources of energy, with limited 
support and no access to specialists. Lack of reliable information, even to the regulators, on 
different parameters affecting energy tariffs also had its impact on tariff determination. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that APERC has issued the preferential generic levelised tariff for 
25 years for wind power generation projects in the State on 31 March 2015. 
Gujarat 
The State had the maximum estimated wind energy potential at 35,071 MW. So far it had 
installed capacity of 3,455 MW which was the third highest in the country. However, in 
terms of percentage of the potential, the installed capacity was 10 per cent  of the 
estimated potential. While the State Govern ment did frame a wind energy policy in 2007 
and revised it in 2013, it did not set any targets for creation of capacity between 2007-14. 
This is indicative of comparatively lower pr iority and focus of the State Government in 
developing this source of energy. Being the highest potential State, it was imperative that it 
lead in terms of exploitation of potential capacity to meaningfully contribute towards 
meeting the Nation’s commitment to Renewable Energy. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that the State had been consistently providing investor friendly 
wind power policies to facilitate setting up of wind power projects in the State with seven 
per cent   RPO for the year 2015-16 which reiterate the commitment of the State 
Government towards promotion of wind power in the State. 
Karnataka 
Against a target of creating installed capaci ty of 2,969 MW in 2007-14, only 1,497 MW was 
created due to difficulties in getting statutory clearances. It was seen in audit that 18 wind 
projects allotted for a total 475 MW were pend ing for clearances. Three projects totaling 
33 MW were pending for allocation of Revenue land and 15 projects totaling 442 MW were 
pending for clearance from the Forest Department. This was despite the fact that the State 
RE Policy 2009-14 envisaged that Karnataka Renewable Energy De velopment Limited 
(KREDL) would obtain all statutory clearances from different departments beforehand and 
offer such lands for Renewable Energy Project development. KREDL was to pursue with the 
departments and co-ordinate approvals a nd clearances within 90 days from all 
departments / agencies and 120 days in case of Forest clearance. 
Jammu & Kashmir, Odisha and Uttar Pradesh 
These three States set little priority in developing wind energy potent ial, as was indicated 
by the absence of both a Government policy  and targets, and failed to exploit this 
resource. 
Madhya Pradesh 
The State could achieve only 367 MW capacity  creation against a target of 3,259 MW 
during 2007-14. No specific reasons for such substantial under achievement were found on 
record. 
                                                            
27  New and Renewable Energy Corporation of Andhra Pradesh Ltd. 

Chapter IV  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 68 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Maharashtra 
The State leads the high potential States in its performance in terms of percentage of 
potential exploited (68 per cent) and ranks second in terms of capacity creation. While it 
did not formulate a separate policy for wind en ergy, a combination of targets, attractive 
tariffs28 and adequate evacuation infrastructure contributed to the commendable 
performance. 
Rajasthan 
The Wind Energy Policy of 2012, which envisaged selection of power pr oducers on basis of 
competitive bidding, was stayed by the Rajast han High Court. Thereafter, Government of 
Rajasthan amended (March 2014) the policy and allowed preferential tariff determined by 
the Rajasthan Electricity Regulatory Commissi on (RERC) for the years 2013-14 to 2015-16 
but during the year 2013-14 only 98.80 MW could be added. 
Tamil Nadu 
About 60 per cent of small wind turbines (<400 kW) that had been installed before the year 
2000 were operating with PLF ranging from 10 to 15 per cent, whereas the new technology 
wind turbines could operate at a PLF range of 27 to 32 per cent on the same sites. There 
was no policy for repowering of these old turbin es which resulted in fall in efficiency of 
these windmills over the years. The issue has been discussed in detail in para 5. 
 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the inputs from State Agencies were awaited. It further stated 
that the State specific achievements were not only dependent on Central Government 
incentives and these were mainly dependent upon wind regime, State government policies, 
grid infrastructure availability and investor-f riendliness of the State and  private sector 
investment but the reply is silent on planning, target setting and monitoring of 
implementation of the scheme. 
4.3. Tariff 
4.3.1. Comparison between CERC and SERC tariffs 
CERC (Terms and Conditions for Tariff determination from RE Sources) Regulations 2012, 
provide for terms and conditions and the proc edure for determination of tariff for RE 
generating stations. The Regula tions enjoin upon CERC to determine the generic tariff on 
the basis of the suo-motu petition, for RE technologies for which norms have been provided 
in the RE Tariff Regulations. 
CERC had subsequently issued generic suo-motu tariff orders applicable for RE projects 
commissioned during first, second and third yea r of the control period (i.e. 2012-13, 2013-
14 and 2014-15). The tariff was fixed by CERC on the basis of power generation capacity, 
capital cost, debt-equity, depreciation, operation & maintenance expenses etc. 
Zonal tariff are fixed by CERC for wind energy, based on the Capacity Utilization Factor (CUF) 
depending on the wind zone as per NIWE. The zo ne wise tariff fixed by CERC is given in 
Table 18. 
                                                            
28  Refer para 4.3.1 and 4.3.2. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IV  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 69 
Table 18: Zone wise tariff fixed by CERC 
Wind 
Zone 
Wind 
Density 
(in 
Watt/ 
sqm) 
CUF (in 
per cent) 
2012-13 2013-14 
Levelised 
Tariff 
(`/kWh) 
Levelised Tariff 
after adjusting AD 
benefits (`/kWh) 
Levelised 
Tariff 
(`/kWh) 
Levelised Tariff 
after adjusting AD 
benefits (`/kWh) 
Zone 1 Upto 
200 
20 5.96 5.36 6.29 5.80
Zone 2 201-250 22 5.42 4.87 5.72 5.27
Zone 3 251-300 25 4.77 4.29 5.03 4.64
Zone 4 301-400 30 3.97 3.57 4.19 3.86
Zone 5 Above 
400 
32 3.73 3.35 3.93 3.62
In the States, the tariff for the wind power pr ojects are fixed by th e SERC based on the 
factors such as capital cost, return on investment, debt equity ratio, interest on loan, 
depreciation, operation and maintenance char ges, CUF, sharing of CDM benefits, subsidy 
given by Central/ State Government, useful life etc. 
Table 19 gives the details of tariff fixed in the ten high potential States by their respective 
SERC’s. 
Table 19: Tariff related details in ten States with highest wind energy potential. 
S. 
No. 
State Potential 
exploited 
Tariff (` per Unit) CUF (in 
per cent) 
Installable Potential (in per cent) 
Zone 1 Zone 2 Zone 3 Zone 4 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
5 4.70 24.50 92 6 2 0 
2 Gujarat 10 4.15 23 92 8 0 0 
3 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Nil Not fixed Not fixed 9 25 0 66 
4 Karnataka 17 4.20 26.50 97 1 2 0 
5 Maharashtra 68 Zonal29 22 98 2 0 0 
6 Madhya 
Pradesh 
14 5.92 22.50 100 0 0 0 
7 Odisha Nil 5.31 - 100 0 0 0 
8 Rajasthan 46 5.7230 & 5.44 21 & 20 100 0 0 0 
9 Tamil Nadu 51 3.51 27.50 100 0 0 0 
10 Uttar 
Pradesh 
Nil 4.02 - 100 0 0 0 
On principle, tariff decreases as the CUF incr eases i.e. tariff was highest for Zone 1 and 
lowest for Zone 4. Table 19 shows that States like Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh had most of their wind potential in wind Zone 1, but 
they had fixed tariff much lower than the CERC tariff for the Zone. States like Maharashtra, 
Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan have  relatively high tariff to co mpensate project developers 
                                                            
29  Zone 1 - ` 5.81, Zone 2 - ` 5.05, Zone 3 - ` 4.31, and Zone 4 - ` 3.88. 
30  For Barmer, Jaisalmer and Jodhpur. 

Chapter IV  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 70 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
for low CUF, making it attractive. Maharashtr a and Rajasthan were the only States to fix 
zone wise tariff as per CERC norms. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that the tariff fixation was done by the State Energy Regulatory 
Commissions (SERCs). In many cases the State Regulatory Commission does not fix tariff as 
per the CERC Guidelines due to various reasons including financial health of Discoms. 
4.3.2. Revision of tariff 
Table 20: Status of revision of tariff in ten States with highest wind energy potential. 
S.No. State Tariff (` per Unit) Revision of Tariff (2007-14) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 4.70 Tariff revised in 2008-09 and 2011-12 
2 Gujarat 4.15 Tariff revised in 2008-09 and 2011-12 
3 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Not fixed Not fixed. 
4 Karnataka 4.20 Not revised since 2008-09 
5 Maharashtra Zonal31 ranging from 5.81 to 3.88 Regularly revised zone wise every year 
6 Madhya Pradesh 5.92 Regularly revised every year 
7 Odisha 5.31 Not revised since 2010-11 
8 Rajasthan 5.7232 & 5.44 Regularly revised since 2008-09 
9 Tamil Nadu 3.51 Regularly revised since 2009-10 
10 Uttar Pradesh 4.02 Regularly revised since 2008-09 
Audit observed that CERC had been regularly revi sing the indicative tariff fixed by it for the 
wind energy projects. But most of the States as  given in the table above had not revised the 
tariff. States like Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh 
have not revised the tariff regularly. On the other hand it was observed that Maharashtra 
has regularly revised the zone wise tariff. 
MNRE while accepting the audit observation stated (May 2015) that State Regulatory Bodies 
are not revising the tariff as per the CERC guidelines on regular basis and this was one of the 
short-comings of the wind sector. 
4.3.3. Non execution of Energy Purchase Agreement (EPA) with generators 
In Maharashtra, as per Citizens’ Charter of Maharashtra State Energy Distribution 
Corporation Ltd (MSEDCL) the EPA had to be executed within a period of 15 days after 
receipt of the proposal from the Generators. 
MSEDCL received (July 2013 to May 2014) prop osals from 106 wind energy generators for 
execution of EPA. However, MSEDCL had not ex ecuted EPA, resulting in delay ranging from 
26 to 334 days from the date of receipt of proposed EPA (June 2014). 
                                                            
31  Zone 1 - ` 5.81, Zone 2 - ` 5.05, Zone 3 - ` 4.31, and Zone 4 - ` 3.88. 
32  For Barmer, Jaisalmer and Jodhpur. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IV  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 71 
Audit observed that six wind projects pertaini ng to Satara and Sang li Circles had generated 
52.99 MUs from the date of commissioning and fed the same into MSEDCL grid upto 31 May 
2014. However, MSEDCL had not paid an amount of ` 30.7933 crore to the generating 
companies for the energy supplied. 
MSEDCL stated (Dec 2014) that due to pendency of litigations, the signing of EPAs was 
delayed during 2013-14. The fact remains that MSEDCL has not adhered to the terms of the 
Citizens’ Charter issued by itself under ap proval of Maharashtra Energy Regulatory 
Commission (MERC). MNRE stated (July 2015) that the reply from States was awaited. 
4.4. Evacuation 
4.4.1. Background 
Central Electricity Authority (CEA) has envisaged a capacity addition from RE sources during 
the 12th FYP to be about 32,000 MW which was likel y to come up in eight States i.e. Andhra 
Pradesh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan 
and Tamil Nadu and out of which 30,000 MW was expected to come from solar and wind 
energy. 
Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan had substantial percentages 18 per cent, 40.5 per cent 
and 26 per cent of the RE in their total installed capa city respectively, predominant of which 
was wind and solar. The other States with su bstantial RE capacity were Maharashtra and 
Karnataka. 
The interstate and inter regional transmission infrastructure was being developed and it was 
expected that all the five electrical regions of India would be sync hronously connected by 
2014. The transmission system costing about 
` 32,000 crore had been planned to cater the 
needs of about 32,000 MW RE capa city addition program for the 12 th FYP (2012-17). These 
systems include both intra state and interstate  transmission system of 132 kV, 220 kV, 400 
kV and 765 kV voltage levels. Presently, the Sout hern grid is not synchronized fully with the 
National Grid to evacuate wind power to other States or to other regions. 
The transmission planning in the country was done through a coordina ted process with the 
participation of CEA, Central Transmission Ut ility (POWERGRID) and the State Transmission 
Utilities. 
The all India grid was divided into 28 control areas interconnected with each other through 
interstate transmission links and high capacity  corridors. Each State had its own generation 
sources in addition to the shared generation resources called interstate generating stations. 
4.4.2. Green Energy corridor 
A report `Transmission Plan for Envisaged Renewable Capacity’
34 of PGCIL was released 
(September 2012) to evolve in tra/ inter State transmission system for strengthening 
adoption/ transfer of RE power within State/ outside State called the Green Energy Corridor. 
                                                            
33  52.99 MUs x ` 5.81/unit. 
34  Prepared after consultation with MNRE/ Ministry of Power / Planning Commission/ CERC/ CEA/ Forum of 
Regulators 

Chapter IV  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 72 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
The report also included proposals regardin g other real time monitoring and control 
infrastructures required for supply balancin g mechanism to address intermittency and 
variability aspects of RE generation, estimated capex requirement, fina ncing strategy etc. 
Ministry of Power conveyed (February 2014) its approval for implementation of Inter State 
Transmission Schemes (ISTS), setting of RE Moni toring Centers and control infrastructure by 
PGCIL for Green Energy Corrido r. PGCIL had conveyed (October 2014) that Green Energy 
Corridor-ISTS was to be commissioned progressively from 2017. 
4.4.3. Deficient transmission infrastructure in Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu has the largest installed capacity  based on wind energy  at 7,271 MW. Tamil 
Nadu Energy Regulatory Commission (TNERC) in its tariff order (May 2006) ordered creation 
of enough transmission infrastructures in the critical areas of wind energy generation on 
urgent basis. 
It was observed that neither Tamil Nadu Gene ration and Distribution Corporation Limited 
(TANGEDCO)35 nor Tamil Nadu Transmission Corporation Limited (TANTRANSCO) 36 were 
able to create adequate transmission infrastruc ture facilities or utilise the existing facilities 
effectively. During high wind season, the tr ansmission lines were congested leading to 
problems of voltage stability and power qualit y.  There was no common spinning reserve 37 
maintained with other States in the region to fully utilize the heavy wind generation. 
Audit further observed: 
i. That there was no long-term transmission planning process to incorporate 
transmission and evacuation requirements of wind energy. Wind energy projects had 
low gestation periods which led to rapid increase of installed capacity over the years, 
there was no matching creation of grid in frastructure resulting in bottlenecks in 
evacuation of the generated energy. 
ii. Examination of substation facilities for ev acuation of wind power that existed in 
2008-09 and the additional capacity that was created upto 2013-14 indicated that as 
on 31 March 2014, against the installed capacity of 7,271 MW, TANGEDCO had 
transmission facility for only 6,085.96 MW leaving a shortfall of 1,185.04 MW. 
iii. To evacuate the entire energy from the wind energy generating areas of Tirunelveli, 
Udumalpet and Theni in the southern parts of the State to the distant load centres in 
northern parts of the State, establishmen t of 400 kV substations was essential. A 
backbone transmission network from Ka yathar in the Tirunelveli area to 
Ottiyambakkam (Sholinganallur) near Chennai in the northern part of the State for a 
route length of 709 km estimated to cost 
` 2,200 crore was proposed for 
implementation during the 12 th FYP period. The work was scheduled to be 
completed by 2014 to help evacuation of power during the 2014 season. It was 
however observed that as of June 2014, the work had not been completed. The 
                                                            
35  Responsible for energy distribution. 
36  Responsible for creati ng evacuation facility. 
37  The spinning reserve is the extra generating capacity  that is available by increasing the power output of 
generators that are already connected to the power system. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IV  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 73 
allied substation works at Kanarpatti was also pending. The works were under 
various stages of completion. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that in some cases,  the utility was not able  to provide timely 
evacuation facilities for new projects as they ha ve financial constraints to augment the grid 
and that the States were trying to improve the situation. The reply was indicative of the fact 
that there were bottlenecks on transmission and evacuation requirements of wind energy. 
The impact of inadequate infrastructure on development of the wind energy in various 
States is given in box below: 
Projects pending for want of evacuation infrastructure 
In Andhra Pradesh 118 projects of 3,972.67 MW had been sanctioned till 31 March 2014. 
Audit observed that 63 projects with a capaci ty of 3,074.50 MW are pending for want of 
power evacuation facility 38. Some of the projects are pending since November 2000. State 
transmission utilities have sought funds to the extent of ` 3,058.46 crore from MNRE which 
are yet to be sanctioned by MNRE. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that Transmission Corporation of Andhra Pradesh Limited 
(APTRANSCO) had taken up strengthening of tran smission infrastructure in two phases for 
evacuation of 3,150 MW capacity with estimated cost of ` 3,373 crores in Ananthapur, 
Kurnool and YSR Kadapa Districts, where maxi mum potential was available, by installing 
three 400 kV and nine 220 kV sub stations a nd proposals were submitted by APTRANSCO 
for sanction of 40 per cent matching grant under National Clean Energy Fund. 
Power backed down 
In Tamil Nadu the quantum of wind  power backed down was 6,018.43  MUs during 2007-
2014, the maximum backing down being in 20 12-13 (1,155.27 MUs) and 2013-14 (3,419.85 
MUs). This resulted in loss of revenue to the extent of ` 2,040.25 crore39 during the period. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that due to variable nature of wind energy and lack of scheduling 
and forecasting mechanism, wind power projec ts are, sometimes, backed down. State 
Governments are bringing regulations for sche duling and forecasting. NIWE with VORTEX 
of Spain, in association with Indian Wind Power Association (IWPA) and TANGEDCO was 
working on a pilot project for scheduling and fo recasting. However the fact remained there 
was loss of power to be fed into the grid and the revenue could not be made good. 
Under achievement of generation due to lesser evacuation capacity 
In Maharashtra transmission facilities for evacuation of 255 MW were approved (July 2006) 
for M/s Suzlon Energy Limited at Ghatnandre,  Dist Sangli. Howeve r, due to unresolved 
Right of Way and problems in evacuation , the Company issued final connectivity 
(November 2013) only to the extent of 231.50 MW rendering 23.50 MW of identified 
potential wasteful. This resulted in unachieve d generation of 13.724  MUs and consequent 
loss of revenue of ` 7.9740 crore to the RE sector in the State. 
                                                            
38  Out of 63 projects, 24 projects were held up due to non allotment of revenue land also. 
39  Calculated at the 20 years average tariff of ` 3.39 per unit as per TNERC’s wind energy tariff order of 2009. 
40  ` 5.81 x 23.50 MW x 1,000 x 24 x 365 x 4 months/12 months x 20 per cent CUF. 

Chapter IV  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 74 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Applications pending for issue of grid connectivity 
In Maharashtra, the State Transmission Utility had to dispose of the applications for grid 
connectivity within 45 days from the date of receipt of application. Audit observed that 74 
applications for grid co nnectivity involving 4,304 41 MW were pending with Maharashtra 
State Electricity Transmission Company Limi ted (MSETCL) (March 2014) from March 2012 
onwards. In addition, in respect of seven proj ects involving 1,025 MW, though the 
company had received MEDA’s recommendation letter, the cases were pending for want of 
applications from the developers. 
4.4.4. Reimbursement of evacuation expenditure 
The Maharashtra Government de clared (October 2008) that the RE developer shall be 
eligible for refund of expenditure on evacuation infrastructure42. Audit observed that  
i. 16 eligible applications of 397 MW for ` 55.08 crore were pending for reimbursement 
of evacuation expenditure from MSETCL. MSEDCL had also not reimbursed ` 17.16 
crore to developers in Satara, Pune Rural and Sangli circles. 
In reply, MSEDCL stated (Dec 2014) that if reimbursement was made, then the same 
shall have to be included in  the tariff petition and the common consumers would have 
to suffer the ultimate burden. The reply was not tenable as the action of MSEDCL was 
not in keeping with Government Policy a nd reimbursement of cost of creating 
evacuation infrastructure would have reduced the capital cost of the producer. 
ii. Expenditure on power evacuation in respect of 1,110 wind energy project 
commissioned and operationalised between  2007 and 2014 had not been reimbursed 
to the project owners. It was also observ ed that no expenditure was incurred on 
construction of approach roads to these 1,110 projects, which was also confirmed by 
the departmental officials during the joint physical verification of all selected projects. 
iii. MSETCL had also approved payment of centage charges43 amounting to ` 7.80 crore, as 
a component of capital expenditure, which was not eligible for reimbursement. 
MSETCL stated (July 2014) that  centages form part of de veloper’s capital expenditure. 
Reply was not acceptable as the entire capital expenditure was covered in the item wise 
audited statement of amount spent by the developers. 
iv. Test check of records in MSEDCL revealed th at at the time of approving the estimates 
for the cost of the evacuation lines to be  constructed by the re spective Generator/ 
Developer, different methods of arriving at the approved cost were employed by 
different Circles/ Division offices: 
                                                            
41  Solar 1,348 MW, Bagasse 288 MW, SHP 17.50 MW, Wind 2,650.50 MW. 
42  The RE developer shall be eligible for refund of actual expenditure on evacuation infrastructure or the 
sanctioned estimate approved by MSEDCL/MSETCL or the amount as specified in the policy, whichever is 
lower after one year from the date of commissioning of evacuation arrangement;  the expenditure to be 
shared equally by SNA and MSEDCL/MSETCL 
43  At the rate of 10.75 per cent . Centage charges are prescribed for approval of layouts and sub-division of 
sites. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IV  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 75 
• In Satara and Pune Circles only material and labour elements were considered for 
approving the estimates. 
• In Dhule and Nandurbar circles, the estimates included an additional five per cent for 
transportation cost (Dhule) and 10 per cent  Lattitude 44 charge (Nandurbar). In 
Nandurbar circle, additional cost elements such as Service Tax, insurance, 
contractors’ profit, contractors’ supervision,  contingencies, head office supervision, 
escalation etc. were also included in the estimate amount. 
• Supervision charges were calc ulated at the rate of 15 per cent of labour charges in 
Nandurbar whereas it was calculated at the rate of 1.3 per cent of material and 
labour charges in other circles. 
MSEDCL stated (Dec 2014) that necessary inst ructions had been issued for framing the 
estimates as per MSEDCL standard procedure. 
v. The reimbursement of 50 per cent of the eligible amount of evacuation expenditure in 
five annual installments had to commenc e after one year from the date of 
commissioning of the evacuation facility. In MSETCL, there were delays in 
reimbursement ranging from one to six years in 10 cases. 
4.4.5. Synchronisation of generation  and maintenance of grid discipline 
4.4.5.1. Accurate prediction of wind power 
The variability of RE power can be addresse d through improved forecasting techniques, 
which are still evolving. When the percentage of  RE becomes significant, special attention 
needs to be paid to accurately forecast their output. 
i. RE Management Centers not set up in SLDCs: 
To enable accurate forecasting and schedulin g, RE Management Centers were expected 
to be set up in the State Load Dispatch Ce nters (SLDCs).  It was observed (September 
2014) that, no such centre had been set up in the States. 
ii. Non-scientific methods for calculation of wind power 
Wind power was scheduled by averaging the previous two days availability and no 
scientific methods were used to arrive at correct wind forecast for the day ahead. 
4.4.5.2. Maintenance of grid discipline 
CERC amended the Indian Electricity Grid Co de (IEGC) in April 2010 to allow flexibility in 
scheduling and despatch of wind energy. The ne w grid code of CERC mandated that all new 
renewable energy power sources of 10 MW and above and connected to the grid at 33 kV 
and above should schedule power generation  and provide a forecast to the system 
operator. The code provided that a +/- 30 per cent variation between scheduled and actual 
                                                            
44  Charges levied by MSEDCL. 

Chapter IV  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 76 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
power injection would not attract any penalty for the wind developer 45. Any variation 
beyond +/- 30 per cent would be to the account of the developers . Therefore, good short-
term46 forecasting facilities of renewable energy , especially for wind power, using modern 
tools were necessary to reduce forecasting er rors and reduce the impact of Unscheduled 
Interchange (UI) penalties. 
The peak wind season in Tamil Nadu was from J une to September.  During this period, wind 
energy contributed about 30-35 per cent  of the energy consumption in the State. Chart 4 
below indicates month-wise wind generation in the State during 2013-1447: 
 
As seen above, the generation pattern of wi nd power was infirm varying from about 2,200 
MW (high-wind season) to about 118 MW (low-wind season),  and even during high wind 
season, the generation, at times tapered down to 320 MW or less from  a high of 2,170 MW 
within a day. Due to wide variations in wind generation within short periods, the grid got 
affected due to voltage control and transient stability.  The variable generation led to 
overloading of transformers and main transmi ssion lines which required high capacity of 
strengthening of transmission network. As the conventional hydro source available in Tamil 
Nadu to compensate the wind generation loss was very limited, the vagaries of wind 
generation had serious bearing on the ava ilability and supply of power in Tamil Nadu. 
Because of the constraints in transmission system and to contain the frequency within the 
bandwidth as per the Indian Grid Code, TANGEDCO had to either back down wind 
generation during excess generation  or in cases of drop in wind generation resort to either 
overdrawal of power from the regional grid or resorted to unplanned load shedding. The 
detail has been reported in para 4.4.3. 
It was observed that, in Tamil Nadu, there were  individual generators with capacities of 250 
kW also.  Sub-regulation 23 of regulation 6.5 of the new Grid code provided that for capacity 
below 10 MW and for old wind farms, schedulin g of wind energy could be mutually decided 
between the wind generator and the transmission or distribution utility as the case may be 
if there was no existing agreement to the contrary.  Since forecasting and scheduling by all 
wind generators was required to ensure better operational decision making and ensure 
secure grid operation, implementation of  the new mechanism in Tamil Nadu could be 
                                                            
45  With host States taking all the Unscheduled Interc hange (UI) liabilities through Renewable Regulatory Fund. 
46  Day-ahead and three hour ahead. 
47  Southern Regional Power Committee’s monthly progress report for 2013-14. 
267
1,858
2,195
1,6041,394
964 749
118 250 303 227 325
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500in Million Units
Chart 4:Month wise wind energy  generation during 2013-14

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IV  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 77 
carried out only by mutual agreement. As of September 2014, there had been no agreement 
between the wind developers and the State utilit y to this effect.  Even though the code 
focused on the problems faced by the States having huge infirm power, since it was 
applicable only in respect of the new generators who are coming into the grid, there was 
not much benefit for TANTRANSCO as the State has almost reached saturation level in wind 
capacity at 50 m mast height. TANTRANSCO was yet (September 2014) to set up Renewable 
Energy Management Centres in the State Load  Despatch Centre which would have enabled 
accurate forecasting and scheduling. 
5. Repowering of the wind power projects 
Repowering could lead to better utilization of wind-rich sites through the installation of 
latest technology wind turbine models availabl e and improve the capacity utilization factor 
to 25-30 per cent48. Also, the total cost of repowering a site was 20 per cent lower than a 
Greenfield49 installation. Moreover, the process does not require any permits or approvals. 
The return on investment could be considerably  improved by repowering of old wind sites- 
through an increase in energy generation, high er tariff and the REC mechanism. In addition, 
repowering would reduce the noise produced by turbine operations and facilitate grid 
integration as the modern turbin es comply with grid code st andards as well as demonstrate 
improved performance under erratic grid conditions.  
Over 4,600 turbines rated be low 500 kW and operational for mo re than 10/12 years were 
ideal for repowering. These turbines have an ag gregate capacity of 1.6 Giga Watt, which is 
over 9 per cent  of the total installed capacity and located at sites with excellent wind 
conditions. Most of the turb ines were installed a decade ago under power purchase 
a g r e e m e n t s  t h a t  w e r e  s i g n e d  f o r  2 0  t o  2 5  years. Old projects aggr egating 500-1,000 MW 
could be repowered with high levels of success. 
MNRE while agreeing with the issue of repoweri ng the wind power projects raised by Audit 
stated in October 2014 that many wind turbin es installed in the earlier years have 
completed up to 15 years out of the theoretical life of 20 years of turbines. It further stated 
that due to the advancement in technology, hi gher hub heights and larger rotor diameters, 
there was a good scope of repowering the old wind turbines of few kW size into MW size. 
The Ministry also stated that it had not conducted any study to arrive at the figure. 
MNRE further clarified that some major issues  like signing of new PPAs, permission from 
adjoining project owner, use of land, requirement of micro-sitting 50 (in Tamil Nadu), 
ownership of land and multiple owner of proj ect are involved in repowering the wind 
projects and it has not yet issued any scheme on repowering of wind power projects. 
 
                                                            
48  Almost two to three times the current plant load factor (PLF) of old turbines 
49  Structures in an area where no previous facilities exist. 
50  Wind farm micro sitting- a method which could calculate the wind farm velocity. 

Chapter IV  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 78 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
6. Other audit findings on implementati on of wind energy projects in 
States 
 
Andhra Pradesh 
6.1. Government land not returned after reduction in capacity 
NREDCAP entered (May 1994 ) into a MoU wi th a wind energy developer (M/s Andhra 
Sugars Ltd.) to set up wind mill of 10 MW at  Ramagiri in Ananthpur and alienated 73.86 
acres of land to the developer. The developer executed the works for 2.025 MW and did not 
develop capacity of 7.975 MW. As per MNRE norms 15.54 acre of government land should 
have been returned, which had not been done. 
Rajasthan 
6.2. Non-recovery of extension fees 
Clause 15.3 of the Policy for promoting Generati on of Electricity through Non-Conventional 
Energy Sources 2004 of Rajasthan, provides that  Wind Energy Projects should be completed 
within six to 24 months from the date of a llocation of capacity by Rajasthan Renewable 
Energy Corporation Limited (RRECL). Extensio n would be granted for prescribed period 
along with extension fees payable. 
Audit observed that in three projects of M/s Enercon (India) Limited, the extension fees of 
`2.90 crore was not recovered by RRECL. 
6.3. Non recovery of processing fee on re-registration 
Clause 15.1 and 15.2 of the Policy for promot ing Generation of Electricity through Non-
Conventional Energy Sources 2004 of Rajast han stipulated that the Developer/Power 
producer would deposit a refundable amount at ` five lakh per MW with RRECL as security 
deposit within 30 days from the date of capaci ty allocation and if the security amount was 
not deposited within the time specified, the approval of the State Level Empowered 
Committee (SLEC) shall stand withdrawn and pr iority shall be accorded to the next 
applicant. For re-submission of the case to SL EC for project approval, the applicant will have 
to re-register the case, along with the processi ng fee, within the next 30 days, failing which 
the land allotted shall also stand cancelled. 
Audit observed that in five
51 cases processing fees amounting to ` 1.04 crore was not 
recovered on re-registration. 
6.4. Non obtaining/non-forfeiture of Security Deposit 
Clause 15.1 & 15.2 of Non Conventional Energy  Sources Policy 2004 stipulated that in case 
of wind energy projects the Developer/Power producer would deposit a refundable amount 
                                                            
51  M/s Enercon India Ltd, M/s Vish Wind Infrastructure (two cases), M/s Gujarat Fluorochemical and M/s Veer 
Energy Infrastructure. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IV  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 79 
at `5.00 lakh per MW with the Company as security deposit within 30 days from the date of 
capacity allocation towards completion of the project in the prescribed time frame. 
Audit observed that in one 52 case a 16 MW capacity was not commissioned by the 
developer but the bank guarantee for ` 80 lakh was not encashed by RRECL. 
7. Conclusion 
Wind power was the fastest growing renewable energy resource in India, constituting 67 per 
cent of the total RE capacity. MNRE had assessed the potential for wind energy at 50 m mast 
height. Assessment of capacity at 80 m height was in progress and that at 100 m height was 
yet to be explored. 
Against an estimated potential of 1,02,788 MW at 80 m mast height, the installed capacity 
was 21,137 MW53 which was 21 per cent of potential at 80 m height. 
At the beginning of the 11th Five Year Plan period, total installed capacity of wind power was 
7,091 MW. During the 11 th Five Year Plan period, against target of 10,400 MW, capacity of 
10,259 MW was achieved. In the first two years of the 12 th Five Year Plan period, against a 
target of 5,000 MW, 3,779 MW was achieved. T hus, there was overall shortfall of nine per 
cent in achievement of targets as of 2014. This was despite the fact that the targets set were 
modest in comparison to the assessed wind energy potential as well as technological 
competence available in the country. It appeared that the targets had been routinely set by 
MNRE without proper planning, analysis, involvement of and communication with the 
States. 
The installed capacity in the high pote ntial States varied from zero to 68 per cent of the 
potential. Maharashtra had the highest exploitati on of the wind energy potential at 68 per 
cent. The remaining States had exploited only five to 51 per cent of their potential. Three 
States did not have any installed wind power capacity.
 
MNRE could not ensure seamless transiti on of GBI and AD schemes in the 12 th Five Year 
Plan. The growth in wind energy sector was hampered by the resultant uncertainties in the 
policy framework. The safeguards proposed fo r ensuring that developers did not avail 
benefit, simultaneously under GBI and AD schemes, were not introduced. 
There was no competition in the wind energy sector either with respect to tariff fixation or 
with respect to allocation of sites to the developers. Thirty two stations identified as 
potential sites allotted to private develope rs for setting up wind farms had not been 
developed within the extended time frame of five years. These stations were not included in 
National Institute of Wind Energy’s normal list of  potential stations as stipulated in MNRE’s 
guidelines. This deprived potential develope rs who could be looking for such sites for 
establishing wind farms of the opportunity to develop projects. 
                                                            
52  M/s Vish Wind Infrastructure Limited. 
53  However, as per the records furnished by individual SNAs, the installed capacity totaled upto 20,564 MW. 
The difference was largely in the installed capacity in  Madhya Pradesh as recorded in MNRE i.e. 424 MW 
whereas as per the SNA records, it was only 52 MW. 

Chapter IV  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 80 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
There were problems in evacuation of wind power generated by the States due to non-
availability of sufficient transmission infrastr ucture, non-synchronization of generation and 
grid management in the event of unexpected fl uctuations. Lack of adequate infrastructure 
and scientific techniques to predict wind power also created problems in maintaining grid 
discipline. 
Though MNRE acknowledged the importance of re-powering of old wind turbines, no action 
had been taken in this regard. 
8. Recommendations 
• MNRE should focus on development of wind energy in the States endowed with high 
wind energy potential. 
• MNRE may work towards development of adequate transmission and distribution 
infrastructure, both intra-State and inter-State, to meet the needs of large scale 
evacuation of wind power and grid stabi lization through scientific forecasting 
techniques. 
• MNRE may look into the issue of repowering the old wind turbines and formulate a policy 
for optimal utilization of existing capacities and their enhancement. 

Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 81 
Chapter - V 
Small Hydro Power 
1. Introduction 
 
MNRE has been vested with the responsibility of developing Small Hydro Power (SHP) 
projects up to 25 MW capacities. SHP projects can play a critical role in improving the overall 
energy scenario of the country and, in particul ar, for remote and inaccessible areas. Most of 
the potential is in the Himalayan States as river-based projects an d in other States on 
irrigation canals. MNRE’s aim was to in stall about 7,000 MW by the end of 12 th Five Year 
Plan (FYP) i.e. 2017. 
2. Potential, Target and Achievement 
 
MNRE had identified 1 and created a database of 6,474 po tential sites with an aggregate 
capacity of 19,749 MW. The State Government s also assessed the potential in their 
respective States. The independent Power Pro ducers could also identify the potential and 
install projects. 
2.1. Targets and achievements 
The installed capacity of grid interactive SHP pr ojects in the country at the beginning of the 
11th FYP was 1,976 MW. The targets and achievements of MNRE under the 11 th Five Year 
Plan (FYP) and 12th FYP upto 2013-14 were as given in Table 21 below: 
Table 21: Targets and achievement under 11th and 12th FYP 
S. No. Year Target (in MW) Achievement 
(in MW) 
Excess(+)/ Shortfall(-) 
(in per cent) 
CFA released 
(In ` crore) 
11th Five Year Plan Period (2007-12)  
1 2007-08 200 205 2 49 
2 2008-09 250 249 0 72 
3 2009-10 300 305 2 100
4 2010-11 300 307 2 152
5 2011-12 350 353 1 154
  Total 1,400 1,419 1 527
12th Five Year Plan Period (upto 2014)  
6 2012-13 350 237 -32 159
7 2013-14 300 171 -43 123
 Total 650 408 -37 282
  Grand 
Total 
2,050 1,827 -11 809
Source: MNRE 
                                                            
1  With the assistance of Alternate Hydro Energy Centre (AHEC), Roorkee. 

Chapter V  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 82 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
During 2007-12, MNRE was able to achieve its target. However, during 2012-14 there was a 
shortfall of around 38 per cent. 
As of March 2014, of the identified 6,474 potential sites for SHP projects of 19,749 MW, 
only 997 projects (3,803 MW) were comple ted and 254 projects (895 MW) were under 
implementation i.e. only 19 per cent of total potential sites ha d been exploited. MNRE had 
planned to install 7,000 MW by the end of 12 th FYP (upto 2017). Based on analysis of the 
target and achievement, the following observations are made: 
i. MNRE had achieved 3,803 MW 2 as on 31 March 2014, which was 58 per cent  of 
target set to be achieved by the end of 2017. 
ii. There had been a substantial shortfall in achieved targets in the first two years of the 
12th FYP. The capacity addition in these two years i.e. 2012-14 had only been 408 
MW. This implies that MNRE will be requi red to make a concerted effort to add 
another 3,197 MW capacity approximately, starting from conceptualization to 
commissioning, in the coming three years to meet its 12th FYP targets. 
2.2. Small Hydro policy of Government of India (GoI) 
MNRE, from time to time, formulated SHP po licy. Prior to 2009-10 the policy was part of 
combined RE policy of MNRE. The exclusive SHP policy came in November 2009. The policy 
was revised in July 2014. 
The GoI had also launched the schemes of PM’s Special Package for Arunachal Pradesh and 
Ladakh Renewable Energy Initiative targeting development of local SHP and solar resources 
to meet the energy needs of the region. Audit findings on these programmes are discussed 
in Chapter X and XI, respectively, of this report. 
2.3. State wise potential and cumulative achievement 
The State wise detail of estimated potential a nd cumulative installed capacity is given in 
Annexure X. From the annexure, it can be observed that of the 29 States/UTs endowed with 
SHP potential, Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Haryana reported highest potential 
exploitation at 66 and 64 per cent, respectively. However, since the potential in these states 
was marginal, the contribution to aggregated installed capacity by these States was a 
meager 75 MW at eight sites. The highest capaci ty addition was made in Karnataka at 1,032 
MW, which was also the State with highest potential. 
For better analysis and appreciation of performance, Audit identified that six States were 
endowed with 61 per cent of the SHP potential in the country and five States with 20 per 
cent of the SHP potential. Together, these eleven States were endowed with 81 per cent of 
the country’s SHP potential. The details are br ought out in the following Table 22 with the 
data of these 11 States. 
 
                                                            
2  Including 895 MW not yet commissioned 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter V  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 83 
Table 22: Estimated potential, targets and achievement (Grid connected) for the States 
endowed with 81 per cent of country’s SHP potential, as of March 2014 
(in MW) 
S. 
No. 
State Estimated potential As per SNA Installed 
capacity 
Per cent 
installed Target fixed Achievement 
High3 potential States with 61 per cent of the SHP potential 
1 Karnataka 4,141 600* 742 1,032 25 
2 Himachal Pradesh 2,398 2,473 438 639 27 
3 Uttarakhand 1,708 NA 14 175 10 
4 Jammu & Kashmir 1,431 Not fixed 144 148 10 
5 Arunachal Pradesh 1,341 79.85 28 104 8 
6 Chhattisgarh 1,107 NA 27 52 5 
 Total 12,126   2,150 18 
Medium4 potential States with 20 per cent of the SHP potential 
7 Andhra Pradesh5 978 NA 127 221 23 
8 Madhya Pradesh 820 266.50 NA 86 11 
9 Maharashtra 794 40# 41 327 41 
10 Kerala 704 Nil 163 158 22 
11 Tamil Nadu 660 Nil 107 123 19 
 Total  3,956   915 23 
* Only 2009-14, #2010-11 to 2013-14 
An analysis of these eleven States indicates that: 
i. Though cumulatively the high potential category States contributed more toward 
capacity installed in absolute values i.e. 2,150 MW as compared with medium 
potential category States with 915 MW, the latter performed better in terms of 
percentage of potential exploited i.e. 23 per cent as compared with 18 per cent; 
ii. In the high potential category States, Hi machal Pradesh and Karnataka had exploited 
27 and 25 per cent  of their potential as compared with five to 10 per cent 
exploitation by the other four States in this category; 
iii. In the medium potential category, Mahara shtra stood out with highest contribution 
both in terms of capacity creation and potential exploited followed closely by Andhra 
Pradesh, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. Ma dhya Pradesh, though endowed with 
considerable potential, lagged behind in exploiting it. 
It is therefore important that MNRE and respec tive Governments of these States prioritize 
development of hydro potential in the next  three years in order to achieve the 12 th FYP 
targets. 
                                                            
3  States with estimated potential higher than 1,000 MW. 
4  States with estimated potential between 1,000 MW and 600 MW. 
5  Figures refer to the position before bifurcation into separate States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. 

Chapter V  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 84 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Audit’s findings of the reasons for low capacity creation in some of these States, based on 
examination of records are given below:  
Arunachal Pradesh 
Memoranda of Agreement were entered with private developers and the State Government 
for setting up 52 Small/Mini/Micro Hydro Powe r projects with a capacity of 714.40 MW 
(upto 25 MW) between 2007-08 and 2014-15. Howe ver, none of the projects have been 
commissioned yet. These were still in the preliminary stages due to various reasons, like 
pending forest and environment clearances and public hearings, etc. 
Chhattisgarh 
Chhattisgarh State Renewable Energy Development Agency (CREDA) sanctioned 50 SHP 
projects of 612.25 MW and identified (2010) about 70 potential sites for development of 
SHP/Mini Hydro Power (MHP) projects of 2,997 kW but none had been commissioned till 
December 2014 because of delay in obtaining No  Objection Certificate (NOC), local issues 
and non-execution of Power Purchase Agreement (PPA). 
Himachal Pradesh 
i. Hydro Power Policy 2006 of the State Government stipulated the timeline for 
preparation of feasibility report and Detaile d Project Report (DPR) submission as 24 
months from the date of issue of consen t letter / MoU. Himachal Pradesh Energy 
Development Agency (Himurja) issued 37 co nsent letters in J une and July 2009 but 
even after five years the Independent Po wer Producers (IPPs) have not submitted 
the DPRs. Himurja had levied extension fee of ` 1.79 crore (up to December 2013) on 
37 IPPs of which only six IPPs had paid full extension fee of ` 0.25 crore, 25 IPPs paid 
partly (` 0.33 crore) and six IPPs did not pa y at all.  Himurja cancelled two 6 projects, 
14 were recommended for cancellation and 15 were given show cause notice. 
ii. Himurja submitted 88 DPRs between April 2003 and March 2013 for total capacity 
creation of 278.76 MW to the Department of Energy (DoE) for technical approval but  
none had  been approved so far (August 2014). 
iii. IPPs had not submitted the feasibility study  report of 78 projects (total capacity 
217.87 MW) allotted between February 2008 and March 2013. 
Himurja stated (February2015) that matter had been taken wi th the State Government for 
extension beyond the period mentioned in the policy. In respect of the non serious IPPs who 
have neither responded to show cause notice nor deposited any extension fee, the project 
allotted to them had been re commended for cancellation. The reply is not tenable as 
Himurja took a long time to act and the projects have still not been cancelled. 
Karnataka 
The State Government, keeping in view the envi ronmental issues, restricted the mini hydro 
projects to five MWs and only run-of-the-river  projects were encouraged in Western Ghats 
Districts/Forest areas. Audit observed that 167 allotments made for establishing Mini Hydro 
projects in the State were held up due to non clearance from the Forest Department. 
                                                            
6  Dehar-III one MW, Jiya one MW. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter V  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 85 
The State Government informed (November 2014) that obtaining clearances in this 
ecologically sensitive region was a major hurdle for implementation of projects and 
achieving targets. 
Uttarakhand 
i. The State Government approved (Febru ary 2006) 250 kW SHP project at Gauri 
Chhina (Pauri) for ` 2.24 crore with a Central Financial Assistance (CFA) of ` 0.93 
crore. Scrutiny of records revealed that even after a lapse of seven years from the 
date of work order (April 2007), only 15 per cent of the work was completed at an 
expenditure of  ` 0.69 crore. The construction work was discontinued in October 
2013. There was also a delay of two years in transfer of forest land. However, 
Uttarakhand Renewable Ener gy Development Agency (U REDA) had given assurance 
to MNRE at the time of seeking CFA that no  forest land was involved at the site of 
the project. Further, there was lack of interest of the firm 7 towards completion of 
work. The State Government accepted the facts (January 2015). 
ii. Gangori SHP (4 X 200 kW) project was co mmissioned in March 1987 but the project 
was lying closed since 1990. After the form ation of Uttarakhand, the project was 
transferred to Uttarakhand Jal Vidyut Ni gam Ltd (UJVNL) without the land records. 
UJVNL prepared a proposal (September 2003) for Renovation, Modernization and 
Upgradation (RMU) of Gangori SHP project of ` 1.91 crore. DPR of the project was 
approved by UJVNL in December 2007, after delay of four years. Due to agitation by 
the local villagers claiming compensation fo r the land, which could not be refuted in 
absence of proper land deeds, it was decided in February 2014 to abandon the 
project.  Expenditure of ` 1.60 crore incurred till then was rendered wasteful. The 
State Government accepted the facts (January 2015). 
iii. Scrutiny of 31 SHP projects sanctioned dur ing 2007-14 revealed that 13 projects, to 
be constructed on public community partic ipation mode, were not only delayed but 
had not been completed till da te (June 2014) due to lack of interest and poor co-
ordination of sharing partners which resulted in blocking of funds of ` 6.51 crore. 
The State Government accepted the facts. 
The above cases illustrate that there was an  urgent need to resolve the hindrances 
confronting the planning, approval and implementation of projects. 
3. Implementation of the SHP Scheme 
The SHP scheme was implemented through th e State Government Departments, State 
Electricity Board, State Nodal Agencies (SNAs), private developers, individual entrepreneurs, 
Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs), Finan cial Institutions/ banks etc. There were 
delays and problems in according technical ap provals to Detailed Project Reports, allotment 
of projects, acquiring land for setting up proj ects and obtaining forest and environmental 
clearances, several projects could not be taken up and completed in time. The detailed audit 
findings are given below: 
                                                            
7  M/s Standard Electronics Inst ruments Corporation, Roorkee. 

Chapter V  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 86 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
3.1. Identification of new potential sites and preparation of plan and DPR 
MNRE provided financial support for the overall estimation of potential of SHP projects in 
the States, identification of new potential SHP sites and for preparation of plan for 
systematic SHP development in the States. 
3.1.1. Few feasibility studies and site identification done by the States 
Identification of sites and assessing potential for SHP projects was a critical planning activity. 
Audit separately enquired from  the selected 24 States of feasibility studies and site 
identification done in each State. Of the 24 selected States only three set targets for 
conducting feasibility studies between 2007-14 as shown in the Table 23 below: 
Table 23: Targets for conducting feasibility studies and achievement 
State Target No. of studies conducted No of sites identified 
Himachal Pradesh 78 78 Nil* 
Nagaland 24 24 13 
Uttarakhand 23 23 52 
*IPPs had not submitted feasibility/non feasibility report. 
This indicates that very few States undertook th e process of site identification in a planned 
manner by setting targets and monitoring ag ainst them, beyond the exercise done by 
MNRE. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that it had no ro le in this process. The expressions of 
interest/proposals/bids from private develo pers are invited by the State Government. 
MNRE should have ensured that the States take up feasibility studies and identification of 
sites as MNRE was responsible for developing  SHP projects upto 25 MW . Identification of 
new potential sites and systematic detailed survey and investigation of all identified 
potential sites was a primary and critical component for SHP development. 
3.1.2. Delays and problems in the DPRs prepared by the States 
Apart from the three States mentioned abov e, some States also conducted feasibility 
studies, though no targets for such studies were set. Due to dela ys and problems in 
according technical approvals to Detailed Projec t Reports, allotment of projects, acquiring 
land for setting up projects and obtaining fo rest and environmental clearances, several 
projects could not be taken up and completed in time. Audit findings on the status and 
quality of feasibility studies are presented below: 
Chhattisgarh 
CREDA awarded DPR work (May 2005) to M/s Savitri Power Projects Ltd, Hyderabad for 
` 2.52 lakh along with the project at an estimated project cost of ` 7.28 crore. However, 
the application of the firm requesting for re lease of assistance for preparing DPR was 
pending with MNRE for eight years. MNRE stated (July 2015) that CREDA had not taken 
the prior approval/sanction for DPR work, hence the CFA was not considered. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter V  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 87 
Himachal Pradesh 
The potential sites were identified on the basis of preliminary reconnaissance only and no 
system existed to assess power potential accurately to obviate the chances of 
enhancement of capacity or cancellation of projects due to non-feasibility at a later stage. 
Audit scrutiny (July 2014) revealed that beca use of above there was a variation of 40 to 
1,300 per cent in the capacity allotted to the va rious SHP projects (136.50 MW) and the 
actual capacity addition (407 MW) in SHP projects. 
Tamil Nadu 
As per notification dated 11 December 2009 of the MNRE, Tamil Nadu Generation and 
Distribution Corporation (TANGEDCO) was entitl ed to receive subsid y for preparation of 
DPRs for the identified SHP projects, as also  capital subsidy for setting up the projects. 
Though TANGEDCO had claimed the eligible  subsidy in 2010 and followed it up with 
several reminders with MNRE, it was yet  to receive the eligible amount of ` 25.90 crore. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that TANGEDCO had not taken the prior approval/sanction for 
DPR and also work awarded the on single tende r basis which was violation of provision of 
guideline, hence the CFA was not considered. 
Uttar Pradesh 
MNRE has identified 251 sites and estimated potential of 460.75 MW in Uttar Pradesh 
whereas the State Government had identified  only 57 sites and po tential of 167 MW for 
installation of SHP projects. Out of the 57 sites,  pre- feasibility report and DPR in case of 
only 11 sites had been prepared in 2004-05. 
3.2 Delays in allotment of projects 
Audit observed instances when allotment of projects where DPRs had been prepared was 
inordinately delayed, hampering the exploitation  of potential. These instances are reported 
below: 
Himachal Pradesh 
Himurja prepared DPRs for 16 projects (total  installed capacity 63.05 MW) at a cost of 
` 88.71 lakh for which MNRE sanctioned CFA of ` 72 lakh during 2010-11. It took up the 
matter with the State Government for execut ion of the projects. However, the State 
Government allowed Himurja to set up only three projects 8 (14.5 MW) on BOT (Built 
Operate and Transfer) basis and the remaining 13 projects were yet to be allotted though 
a period of more than three years had elap sed since the preparation of DPRs. The three 
projects allotted to Himurja had also not be en taken up for execution so far (March 
2014). 
  
                                                            
8  Lower Sumej, Tauhak and Kareri. 

Chapter V  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 88 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Punjab 
Punjab Energy Development Agency (PEDA)  allotted (between August 1999 and January 
2010) 19 MHP sites having power potential of 17.13 MW on Built, Operate and Own 
(BOO) basis to six private developers, to be developed within two years of allotment.  
Audit noticed that the developers did not take any steps to perform their obligations after 
signing Implementation Agreements (IAs) with  PEDA even after getting extension ranging 
between 450 and 1,391 days.  Resultantly, PE DA terminated all the agreements between 
June 2009 and October 2013  and encashed performance bank guarantee of ` 49 lakh.  
Audit further noticed that out of these 19 cancelled MHP sites, seven MHP sites with 
power potential of 9.40 MW only were re-allotted during March 2010 to October 2013 
and 12 MHP sites with power potential of 7. 73 MW were not allotted even after a lapse 
of eight to 60 months.  PEDA stated that efforts were being made to harness the 
potential. 
Uttar Pradesh 
Uttar Pradesh New and Renewable Energy De velopment Agency (UPNEDA) invited bids 
for 11 projects in December 2010 and Janu ary 2013 but only one project (Walipura, 
Bulandsahar) had been allotted so far (Nov ember 2014). Proposal for another two were 
pending with MNRE. Considering that Uttar Pradesh was an electricity deficit State there 
was need for greater efforts to harness the small hydro energy. 
3.3 Problems in Land acquisition and Forest and Environmental clearances 
In 24 selected States Audit observed that a number of SHPs were held up for problems in 
acquiring land or getting forest clearances. While the impact of problems in getting 
clearances on projects in Karnataka and Uttara khand has been reported in para 2.3, other 
such instances that came to the notice of Audit are reported below: 
Bihar 
Audit observed that MNRE released CFA of ` 1.31 crore to three 9 SHP projects during 
1995-96. All the three projects were held up fo r want of forest clearances. Neither Bihar 
State Hydroelectric Power Corporation lim ited (BSHPCL) nor MNRE monitored the 
projects. BSHPCL could not furnish the details  of fund utilised and work executed. As per 
the terms and condition of the MNRE sanction, the BSHPCL was liable to return the CFA 
along with interest of ` 3.20 crore. 
Meghalaya 
MNRE sanctioned (March 2001) ` 7.39 crore for revival of abandoned Sonapani SHP 
project. Meghalaya State Electricity Board (MeSEB) could take the possession of land, free 
from all encumbrances only in October 2009. Similarly Lakroh SHP project was sanctioned 
(March 2001) by MNRE for ` 11.76 crore. MeSEB could acqui re the required land only in 
January 2008 after a delay of more than six years. The projects had not been 
commissioned so far (September 2014). 
                                                            
9  Lower Ghagri ` 40 lakh, Sadani ` 90 lakh and Netharhat ` 1 lakh. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter V  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 89 
 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that the Techno-Econo mic Clearances were provided by the State 
Government and will advise all the State Government to expedite the pre-requisite 
clearances. 
3.4 Delay in completion of projects – time  and cost overruns attributable to 
implementing agencies 
As per guidelines of MNRE, the projects should be completed within five years of release of 
first installment for run-of-the-river projec t and three years for canal based projects. 
Approved projects could not be completed due  to negligence of contractors, midway 
changes in design, etc. resulting in signific ant time and cost overruns. The detailed audit 
findings are highlighted below: 
Assam 
Lungnit SHP project was approved (March  2000) by MNRE. The State Government 
approached the Ministry of Environment a nd Forests (MoEF) for forest clearance in 
February 2004, after a delay of four years. MoEF accorded the cl earance in December 
2004. The estimated cost of the project was ` 55.61 crore and the contracted value was 
` 47.08 crore. Till November 2014 expenditure of ` 11.11 crore had been incurred but the 
project was still in initial stages only. The pr oject was delayed due to the negligence of 
the contractor to whom a mobilization advance of ` 4.32 crore was released. The contract 
was terminated in August 2012 without recovering ` 3.93 crore. The contract had not 
been re-awarded as yet (December 2014). 
Bihar 
BSHPCL was sanctioned 23 projects by MN RE during the period 2005-12. Only eight 
projects were completed and remaining 15 under  construction projects were yet to be 
completed despite lapse of time ranging be tween 37 to 88 months from the date of 
release of first installment of subsidy and after incurring an expenditure of ` 128.19 crore, 
including MNRE subsidy of ` 19.15 crore.  The last installment of ` 2.95 crore for eight 
projects was not released by the MNRE due to non submission of completion report, 
Utilisation Certificate (UC), audited accounts etc. Four projects10 could not be started due 
to non-availability of forest land. No reply was furnished by BSHPCL. 
Audit scrutiny further revealed that each of the eight completed projects was delayed. 
The delays ranged between 41 to 59 months from  date of release of first installment in 
three canal based projects 11and between nine to 68 months in all eight commissioned 
projects. The cost overrun in these eight projects was ` 48.06 crore. 
Mizoram 
MNRE approved (October 2011) five MW SHP projects for ` 56.93 crore. The project 
which was necessary for North Eastern Rural Development Blocks of Mizoram especially 
for Ngopa, Khawzawl and S. Khawbung having 114 villages located in the remotest corner 
bordering Myanmar was to be completed within 36 months.  But, monthly progress 
                                                            
10  Dhobaha SHP, Sadani SHP, Lower Ghaghri SHP and Netarhat SHP. 
11  Arwal, Belsar and Sewari. 

Chapter V  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 90 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
report as of June 2014 revealed that the pr ogress of work was very slow. Zoram Energy 
Development Agency (ZEDA) in its reply (Ja nuary 2015) stated that the delay was due to 
late tender process, non inclusion of items of work like bailey bridge, transmission lines in 
the contractor’s package and non releas e of mobilization advance by the State 
Government. 
Punjab 
As per Project Implementation Schedule, 19 pr ojects were to be commissioned within 16 
months12 from the date of Implementation Agreement (IA). Audit noticed that out of 12 
projects at 19 sites of 11.05 MW, commissioned between 2009-14, only one13 project was 
commissioned within scheduled time and th e remaining 11 projects were commissioned 
with delays ranging between three and 86 months. 
Further, out of 19 projects (at 20 sites) under execution with po wer potential of 28.94 
MW allotted (between April 1998 and October 2013)  by PEDA to private developers as of 
March 2014, IAs were signed for 16 projec ts between August 2001 and October 2012.  
Out of these 16 projects, commissioning of nine  projects with power potential of 18.05 
MW were inordinately delaye d by 16 to 135 months (position as of March 2014) beyond 
the prescribed time period.  Remaining three projects a llotted between December 2009 
and October 2013 were at DPR stage and IAs were not signed as yet (October 2014). 
Tamil Nadu 
Test check in audit of seven 14 completed/ongoing SHP projects revealed that in all the 
seven projects, there were slippages in time schedule ranging between 49 and 87 months 
with consequential cost overrun of ` 448.75 crore.  Even after commissioning, the 
Perunchani and Periyar Vaig ai Projects suffered freque nt forced outages due to 
mechanical problems, causing loss of generation.  The dela ys in commissioning together 
with the outages caused loss of generation equivalent to 455.42 MUs during the period 
2007-2014. The factors contributing to the increase  in cost of the projects were delays in 
awarding of contracts, midway changes in design, increase in cost of materials and 
equipment etc. 
 
From the above findings it was evident that poor planning and implementation led to low 
exploitation of SHP resources in the country, apart from time and cost overruns. 
4. Deficiencies in operation and maintenance of the projects 
4.1 Non/under performance of commissioned projects 
The success of the SHP programme lay not only in commissioning projects but also in 
ensuring that these were properly run and ma intained after commissioning. During test 
check in audit in five States, 60 projects 15 were found shut down or under repairs and 
                                                            
12  485 days. 
13  Terkiana head works. 
14  Perunchani Mini Hydel, Periyar Vaigai Small Hydro (P V-I to IV) and Bhavani Barrage Small Hydro (BB-I and II) 
15 Arunachal Pradesh (47 projects), Bihar (one projec t), Himachal Pradesh (five projects), Punjab (four 
projects), and Mizoram (three projects). 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter V  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 91 
maintenance or working below ca pacity due to low discharge of  water, leading to loss of 
power generation and revenue. Individual cases of interest that were  noticed during audit 
are reported below: 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Department of Hydro Power Development (DHPD) 
i. Between 2007 and 2014, the installed capa city under DHPD incr eased from 34.095 
MW to 61.810 MW but the percentage of el ectricity generation decreased from 17.48 
per cent (2007-08) to 9.91 per cent (2013-14). Due to low gene ration, the power loss 
was 3,018.23 MU. This was because DHPD  did not operate/under-operated 19 SHP 
projects since their commissioning, due to non-availability of sufficient operating staff 
(seven projects), low discharge of water (eight projects), non-repair/replacement of 
defective Electrical & Mechanical equipment and non-availability of sufficient 
transmission and distribution lines (two projects), fixing of unsuitable head (one 
project) and non-commissioning (one project) , resulting in unfruitful expenditure of 
` 33.70 crore, besides depriving 171 villages of electricity. 
ii. In addition, DHPD started (January 2011) Renovation & Modernization (R&M) of 15 
SHP projects to be completed by Nove mber 2012. But even after incurring an 
expenditure of ` 43.29 crore16 the work has not been completed (September 2014) as 
the State Government only released ` 4.94 crore out of committed share of ` 32.46 
crore leaving a balance of ` 27.52 crore. DHPD stated that the R&M projects were 
rescheduled to be completed by March 2015, subject to release of funds from MNRE. 
iii. In respect of Rina SHP projec t it was observed that due to low discharge of water and 
non-availability of sufficient transmission  capacity, DHPD generated 9.30 MUs of 
power against the targeted generation of 63. 06 MUs, resulting in loss of generation of 
53.76 MUs during 2008-14. 
iv. Both machines of Units I & II of Bramdho ngchung - I SHP (100 kW)  project were not 
working (July 2013) due to turbine problems  and the machines were taken out and 
kept in the power house. 
Arunachal Pradesh Energy Development Agency (APEDA) 
v. In respect of 11 test-checked  SHP projects (485 kW) of APEDA, generation was very 
low, where APEDA lost generation of 3.09 MUs. Reasons for the shortfall were not on 
record. 
vi. 11 SHP projects, with a capacity of 275 kW and constructed at a cost of ` 4.17 crore, 
were rendered non-operative after working fo r 18 to 72 months due  to availability of 
local grid connection to the villages. Ne ither the State Government nor APEDA re-
deployed the energy systems to other need y places nor connected the plants to the 
local grid for continuous operation. Besi des, the plant and machinery would become 
unusable due to wear and tear, rust, etc. 
  
                                                            
16  CFA of ` 10.77 crore, State share ` 4.94 crore and Prime Minister’s Package of ` 27.58 crore. 

Chapter V  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 92 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Bihar 
i. One unit of 1.5 MW Triveni Link Canal pr oject (1.5X2 MW) at Valmikina (Bihar) 
installed in February 2009 was shut down since May 2013 due to inadequate repair 
and maintenance.  
ii. BSHPCL generated only 56.70 MUs (20 per cent) of energy during the period 2013-14 
as against design energy of 278 MUs for SHP projects. 
Himachal Pradesh 
Himachal Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Co mmission (November 2013) specified capacity 
utilisation factor of 55 per cent  for SHP projects for the purpo se of tariff determination. 
Test check (August 2014) of five SHP projects 17 revealed that against a target of 172.48 
MUs during the period 2007-14, the projects could generate only 83.40 MUs leading to a 
loss of ` 26.28 crore18. 
Punjab 
Mention was made in paragraph 3.14.7 of the Audit Report No. 4 of 2009-10, Government 
of Punjab regarding less 19 generation of power from four MHP projects having total 
capacity of 3.9 MW 20 during 2005-2010. Audit further noti ced that generation of power 
from these MHP projects during the year 2010-11 was 0.44 MUs only against the annual 
target of 10 MUs and the Operation a nd Maintenance (O&M) contractor stopped 
generation in all four MHP projects from May 2010.  On failure of the contractor to execute 
the contract as per provisions, Punjab State Power Corporation Limited (PSPCL) sent (April 
2011) the Bank guarantee (BG) of ` 25 lakh for encashment to the Bank, but the same 
could not be done because the serial number of the stamp paper of the BG did not match 
with its copy in the Bank. The possession of  these MHP projects was taken over from the 
contractor (March 2012) but PSPCL noticed that major components of the plants were 
missing from the sites. Arbitrator awarded (14 August 2012) finally a claim of ` 6.28 crore 
in favour of PSPCL which was not recovered from the contractor as of February 2015. 
Mizoram 
i. Serlui-B project  should have generated 178.72 MU in four years but it only 
generated 104.33 MUs leading to loss in revenue of ` 22.31 21 crore. ZEDA in its 
reply (January 2015) attributed the low generation to occurrence  of non repairable 
defects in third unit after tria l run. It further stated due to the absence of provision 
for third party inspection in original project, this had not been conducted. 
ii. Out of 11 hydro power stations in Mizora m, Turivang power station (300 kW) was 
not operating since long. As per DPR the re maining projects should have operated 
at 70 per cent load factor for seven months ever y year. Audit observed that during 
2007-14 against the required generation of 565.35 MUs, the SHP projects only 
generated 211.547 MUs. ZEDA stated (J anuary 2015) that the generation was 
                                                            
17  Lingti, Rukti, No gli, Aloe and Kothi 
18   89.08 MU x ` 2.95 (tariff) = ` 26.28 crore. 
19  During 2005-10, only 28.2 MUs were generated against the projected 50 MUs (10 MUs per year). 
20  Nidampur (0.80 MW), Rohti (0.80 MW), Thuhi (0.80 MW) and Daudhar (1.50 MW). 
21  74.39 MU x ` 3.00(tariff) = ` 22.31 crore. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter V  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 93 
affected as many of the SHP projects are more than 20 years old and one SHP 
project at Tuipanglui was damaged due to cl oud burst. Further, it stated paucity of 
fund for operation and maintenance, resulting in low generation. 
iii. Serlui-A, one MW SHP project in Mi zoram was commissioned in 1984. MNRE 
sanctioned (March 2004) R&M for ` 1.91 crore, which was completed (September 
2007) and the project was re-commissioned (July 2008) at a cost of ` 2.57 crore. 
Audit observed that as against desired generation of 3.53 MUs annually, the SHP 
project generated only 2.34 MUs annually during 2008-14. ZEDA in its reply 
(January 2015) assigned the reasons for lo w generation as poor hydrology in the 
area but remained silent on non repara bility of machines as observed by the 
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM). Audit observed that ZEDA ignored the 
fact of poor hydrology, age of the projec t (over 20 years old) and observation made 
by the OEM, and carried out repair and modernization work. Thus the expenditure 
incurred on the project proved to be infructuous. 
 
The above findings indicate that there were a large number of projects that had been 
commissioned and reported as a part of installed capacity in the country, but were either 
not functioning or functioning sub-optimally. 
4.2 Non collection of consumption charges 
As per Agreements with contractors, Aruna chal Pradesh Energy Development Agency 
(APEDA) was required to form Village Ener gy Management Committees (VEMCs), for 
operation and maintenance of SHP projects, with beneficiaries as  members. However, 
APEDA formed only 12 VEMCs for 74 SHP projects commissioned between January 2005 and 
February 2014. In the absence of VEMCs,  APEDA incurred an expenditure of 
` 82.30 lakh for 
operation, maintenance and repair of damaged works etc; on its own. Besides, APEDA did 
not collect consumption charges of ` 1.73 crore from beneficiaries for supply of 6.30 MUs of 
energy. 
4.3 Generation and Evacuation of power 
Adequate infrastructure and PPAs are a prerequisite for ensuring the successful functioning 
of projects. As per guideline of MNRE the proj ect developer had to enter into PPAs with the 
State Utility before submitting application for financial support from MNRE. Audit 
examination revealed deficiencies in Himachal  Pradesh on both arrangements as reported 
below: 
i. Electricity generation of SHP (Beas Kund nine MW) project commissioned in June 
2012, was blocked (7.5 MUs) during 201 2-14 due to inadequate evacuation 
infrastructure. This resulted in loss of energy to the extent of 
` 2.21 crore22. 
ii. PPA in respect of one SHP (Binwa IV) proj ect with installed capacity of four MW, 
commissioned in July 2013 had not been si gned with distribution licensee so far 
(August 2014). 
                                                            
22   7.5 MU X ` 2.95 (tariff) = ` 2.21 crore. 

Chapter V  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 94 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
5. Other audit findings 
5.1 Unwarranted financial accommodation of developers 
5.1.1 Non levy and recovery of  Liquidated damages, envi ronmental dues, capacity 
enhancement, commitment fees, etc. 
Audit observed certain instances of unwa rranted financial accommodation of the 
developers by the State Agencies, in contravention of applicable terms and conditions of the 
award of contract. These are reported below: 
Himachal Pradesh 
i. Hydro Power Policy of the State stipulated that if the capacity of the project below five 
MW was enhanced the IPP would have to pa y additional premium and additional free 
power as applicable for projects above five MW. Audi t noticed (July 2014) that 
capacity addition charges/upfront premium of ` 3.90 crore was not deposited by four 
developers23 for capacity enhancement. These proj ects were allotted initially for total 
6.60 MW during 2005-07 which was later enhanced to 45.60 MW. Neither IAs had 
been signed nor upfront premium/capacity  addition charges deposited even after 
lapse of more than seven to nine years. 
ii. Further the Hydro Power Policy 2006 provided that 1.5 per cent of the final cost of the 
projects above five MW and one per cent of the final cost up to five MW would be 
contributed towards Local Area Development Fund (LADF) for Environmental 
Management Plan, Catchment Area Treatment Plan, Compensatory Afforestation etc. 
Audit observed (September 2014) that four  IPPs were commissioned between January 
2008 and May 2013 but LADF of ` 4.87 crore 24 was not deposited by them. 
Madhya Pradesh 
Eleven developers in Madhya Pradesh ha d originally applied to Narmada Valley 
Development Authority/ Water Resource Department and were migrated to the new policy 
(November 2011). Three 25 developers did not pay commitment fee of ` one lakh per MW 
after migration to the new policy. None of the developers paid project performance 
guarantee of ` one lakh per MW aggregating to ` 2.67 crore. But no action was taken by 
the SNA. None of the developers executed  Hydro Power Development Agreement (HPDA). 
It was further noticed that no specific projec t completion and other related activities i.e. 
DPR etc were prepared by any developer. 
Maharashtra 
MEDA did not levy Liquidated Damages amounting to ` 3.59 crore in respect of seven 26 
projects, where the projects were commissioned with delays ranging from 360 days to 
1,320 days and all RE benefits had been released to these developers. 
                                                            
23  Parbati project 12 MW - ` 1.09 crore, Sharmi project 9.60 MW- `0.71 crore, Hurla-I project 9.40 MW -  
` 0.84 crore and Kurpan-III project 14.60 MW- ` 1.26 crore. 
24  M/s Kapli Mohan & Associates Hydro Power Pvt. Ltd: Beas Kund 9 MW- ` 1.14 crore; Om Hydro Power Ltd: 
Neogal 15 MW-` 0.77 crore; Rangaraju Ware Housing Pvt Ltd: Sumej 14 MW- ` 1.08 crore; Patikari Hydro 
Electric Project Ltd: Patikari 16 MW-` 1.88 crore. 
25 Hata (4 MW), Danwa (5 MW) and Pancpani (4.5 MW). 
26 Veer Nira Left Bank Canal, Sonawade, Kolhapur Kumbhi, Chitri, Gadre Marine Export, Kasari and Dhom 
Balkawadi. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter V  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 95 
5.1.2 Excess payments for evacuation arrangements and tariff 
Audit observed following instances of excess payments to developers. 
Bihar 
Loss of revenue  
In 2009, on a tariff petition filed by BSHPCL, BERC 27 fixed provisional tariff of ` 2.49 per 
kWh as the annual accounts were in arrear since 2001-02 and also directed BSHPCL to 
update its accounts and get them audited. In Ap ril 2010, BSHPCL filed petition for revision 
in tariff to `3.72 per kWh which was rejected by BE RC in June 2010 because BSHPCL could 
not submit audited annual accounts from 2001 -02 onwards, and the provisional tariff 
continued to be applicable (December 2014). This led to loss of revenue of ` 21.98 crore, 
during the period 2011-14.  Further, Audit ob served that the CERC rate for SHP was ` 4.00, 
` 3.65, ` 3.84, ` 4.16 and ` 4.40 per unit during the period 2009-14 which was substantially 
higher than the rate allowed to BSHPCL. No reply was furnished by BSHPCL. 
Maharashtra 
Excess payment towards evacuation arrangement 
The State Government stipulated (July 2010) that MEDA will reimburse 50 per cent of the 
expenditure on evacuation at the rate ` 11 lakh per km, limited to  actual expenditure or 
` 1.10 crore, whichever is lower. Audit scrutiny revealed that MEDA reimbursed ` 2.53 
crore as against ` 0.64 crore admissible in respect of five 28 projects having capacity upto 
five MW. 
Punjab 
Extra payment due to delay  
PEDA(Punjab)  allotted (November 1997) five 29 MHP projects of 5.05  MW to M/s Triveni 30 
Engineering and Industries Limited for which Implementation Agreement (IA) was signed 
(November 2001) and the PPA was to be signed  within 90 days from the IA, but the PPA 
was signed in November 2008. Due to delay in signing of the PPA, Punjab State Power 
Corporation Limited had to purchase power at higher rates ranging between ` 3.81 and 
` 4.04 per unit during 2009-14 instead of ` 3.66 per unit (fixed) as  per New and Renewable 
Sources of Energy Policy 200131. The developer sold 1,039.112 lakh units during 2009-14 on 
which PSPCL had to make an extra payment of ` 3.59 crore. 
5.1.3 Payment of higher CFA 
In Himachal Pradesh it was observed that a Mo U for the construction of three MW capacity 
Aloe-I SHP project was signed (March 2001) with M/s Aloe Manali Hydro Power Private 
                                                            
27  Bihar Electricity Regulatory Commission. 
28  Veer Nira, Sonawade, Kolhpur Kumbhi Lakmapur, Kasari and Tembhu. 
29  Akhara, Gholian, Channuwal, Khanpur and Sudhar on Abohar Canal Branch. 
30  Renamed as Abohar Powergen Limited. 
31 As per NRSE policy, 2001, rate per unit was ` 3.01 (base year 2000-01) with five per cent annual escalation 
up to 2004-05 for the projects for which PEDA had already entered into MoU/IA.  No escalation was to be 
paid beyond 2004-05. 

Chapter V  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 96 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Limited with a CFA of ` three crore. But at the time of  Techno Economic Clearance in 
January 2002 it was known that the discharge from Allian Nala would get reduced and the 
plant capacity would be lo wer and corresponding elig ible CFA would be only ` one crore. 
After 2010, the generation capacity of the unit was reduced to 510 kW due to reduction in 
water discharge after commissioning of Allian- Duhangan Project. This aspect was ignored at 
the stage of technical clearance for three MW in September 2006, allowing the developer to 
claim higher CFA. 
5.2 Allotment of project to ineligible contractors 
As per bidding document of Jammu & Kashmir Energy Development Agency (JAKEDA) the 
eligibility criteria for contractors were - pe rmanent resident of Jammu & Kashmir; and 
experience of developing and executing infrastructure projects of aggregate cost not less 
than ` 0.75 crore, of which ` 0.25 crore should be for hydro electric related projects, in the 
last 10 years. Audit observed that work (six  projects) was awarded (February 2013) to five 32 
ineligible contracts. 
5.3 Non maintenance of records of land acquisition 
DHPD and APEDA in Arunachal Pradesh did not maintain any evidence of land acquisition for 
projects. It was stated that in lieu of land compensation, work orders were issued for 
carrying out civil works. However, details of  the extent of land acquired, names of land 
owners and the number and value of work orders  issued were not maintained either by the 
DHPD or APEDA. 
5.4 Poor quality of work executed 
As per Schedule of Work, power houses of Sik in Koro and Sinyum Koro SHPs in Arunachal 
Pradesh were to be constructed with cement concrete. During physical verification of the 
projects, it was noticed that the power houses  were constructed with ordinary material - 
the walls of power houses were of Corrugate d Galvanised Iron Sheets. However, the full 
amount of 
` 10.39 lakh was paid to the contractor  as per Schedule of Work by the DHPD, 
which was irregular. DHPD stated (December 2014), that after enquiry, responsibility would 
be fixed on concerned officers. 
6. Monitoring and evaluation 
 
As per MNRE’s guideline the implementing agencies would set up reviewing arrangements 
to closely monitor the implementation of projects. MNRE itself or through third 
party/consultants may also monitor the impl ementation and post commissioning of the 
projects. Implementing agencies were also requ ired to submit monthly generation data to 
MNRE for ten years after commissioning. 
MNRE had conducted third party evaluation s for 70 projects installed during the 11 th FYP, 
however, no generation data was available with MNRE. 
                                                            
32  M/s JK Renewable Energy, M/s SA Power Utilities Pvt Ltd, M/s Gousia Road Construction Company,  
M/s Sharika Enterprises and M/s A.M. Contractors. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter V  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 97 
7. Conclusion 
About 7,000 MW capacity was targeted for inst allation through Small Hydro Power projects 
by the end of the 12th Five Year Plan period i.e. by 2017. Of this 3,395 MW i.e. 48.50 per cent 
had been created by the end of the 11 th Five Year Plan period i.e. by 2011-12. During the 
12th Five Year Plan period, as of 2013-14, MNRE added another 408 MW only and was 
running behind its targets by 38 per cent. This implied that a sign ificant 3,197 MW capacity 
would be required to be added in the remaining three years of the 12th Five Year Plan period 
to be able to meet target for development of Small Hydro Power. In eleven States endowed 
with 81 per cent of the National Small Hydro Power po tential, the exploitation varied from 
five to 41 per cent of the potential. 
MNRE had identified 6,474 potential sites wi th aggregate capacity of 19,749 MW in 29 
States for setting up Small Hydro Power projects . As of 2013-14, 997 projects with capacity 
of 3,803 MW were installed. Thus, of the total capacity identified, only 19 per cent had been 
exploited so far. 254 projects (895 MW) were under implementation. 
Audit observed delays and problems in co nducting feasibility studies for identifying 
potential sites for setting up Small Hydro Power projects, wh ich was a critical planning 
activity for development of Small Hydro Power. In Himachal Pradesh 37 consent letters were 
issued but the Independent Power Producers did not submit any Detailed Project Report 
even after five years; out of 88 Detailed Pr oject Reports submitted by Himurja to the 
Department of Energy for technical approval none had been approved and the Independent 
Power Producers had not submitted feasibility study reports for 78 projects allotted to 
them. 
Further, due to delays and pr oblems in according technical approvals to Detailed Project 
Reports, allotment of projects, acquiring land for setting up projects and obtaining forest 
and environmental clearances, several projec ts could not be taken up and completed in 
time. In Arunachal Pradesh the State Governme nt had entered into agreement with private 
developers for setting up 52 Sm all/Mini/Micro Hydro Power projects of 714.40 MW but 
none had been commissioned. Similarly, in Ch hattisgarh the State Nodal Agency sanctioned 
50 Small Hydro Power projects of 612.25 MW but none had been commissioned. 
Approved projects could not be completed fo r various reasons such as negligence of 
contractors, midway changes in design, etc. This led to significant time  and cost overruns. In 
Bihar 15 projects had not been commissioned even after a delay of 37 to 88 months and 
incurring an expenditure of ` 128 crore. 
Audit also observed deficiencies in post-co mmissioning maintenance of the projects. Test 
check revealed that 60 projects in five States were shut do wn, under repair and 
maintenance or working below capacity, result ing in loss of powe r generation, revenue 
losses, unfruitful expenditure on out of orde r plants, wasteful expenditure on abandoned 
plants, etc. 
There were instances of non-recovery of  liquidated damages, environmental dues, 
commitment fees, diversion of funds, excess payments to developers, non-revision of tariffs, 
etc. There were also deficienci es in monitoring and evaluation of projects by MNRE and 
State agencies. 

Chapter V  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 98 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
8. Recommendations 
• MNRE must ensure that pr e-requisites such as land an d statutory clearances are 
obtained before release of Central Financial Assistance to developers , in order to avoid 
time and cost overruns. 
• MNRE should focus on reviewing Small Hydro Power projects that are held up or are 
under performing, to find solutions to the pr oblems hindering the completion of these 
projects. 

Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 99 
Chapter - VI 
Biomass Power 
1. Introduction 
 
Biomass is an important source of RE because it  is widely available, carbon-neutral, capable 
of providing firm energy and generating signif icant employment in the rural areas. About 32 
per cent of the total primary energy used in the country is still derived from biomass and 
more than 70 per cent  of the country’s population depends upon it for its energy needs. 
Biomass is the most commonly used energy sour ce for several small-scale industries and is 
used as fuel for independent power plants. Biomass materials used for power generation 
include sugarcane bagasse and other non baga sse materials like rice husk, straw, cotton 
stalk, coconut shells, soya bean husk, de-oile d cakes, coffee waste, jute waste, groundnut 
shells, saw dust etc. 
2. Biomass resource assessment 
As per MNRE biomass resource asse ssment conducted between 2002 and 2004, the 
availability of biomass in India was estimated at about 500 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) per 
year. The surplus biomass availability was estimated at about 120-150 MMT per annum 
covering agricultural and forestry residues, corresponding to a potential of about 18,000 
MW. As per MNRE, this potential can be increased significantly by exploring the opportunity 
of high yield varieties and energy plantations in the wastelands. This apart, about 5,000 MW 
additional power could be generated through bagasse based cogeneration in the country’s 
550 sugar mills, if these sugar mills were to adopt technically and economically optimal 
levels of cogeneration for extracting power from the bagasse produced by them. 
2.1. Variation in potential assessment done by MNRE and the States 
The installed capacity of grid interactive Biom ass power in the country at the beginning of 
the 11th Plan period was 1,184 MW. It rose to 4,123 MW by March 2014, which was 23 per 
cent of the country’s Biomass potential of 17,981 MW.  Of the 24 test checked States, 16 
undertook Biomass energy potential assessmen t independent of MNRE. The comparative 
position of the biomass potential as assessed by MNRE and the State Nodal Agencies (SNAs) 
is given in Table 24. 
Table 24: Biomass power potential as assessed by MNRE and SNAs 
(in MW) 
S. 
No. 
State Potential estimated by 
MNRE 
Potential estimated by 
SNA 
Variation 
1 Andhra Pradesh 150.20 448.50 -298.30 
2 Arunachal Pradesh Not assessed Not assessed Not assessed
3 Assam 165.50 Not assessed Not assessed
4 Bihar 530.30 Not assessed Not assessed
5 Chhattisgarh 220.90 1,000 -779.10 
6 Gujarat 1,014.10 900 114.10 

Chapter VI  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 100 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
S. 
No. 
State Potential estimated by 
MNRE 
Potential estimated by 
SNA 
Variation 
7 Haryana 1,261 1,150 111 
8 Himachal Pradesh 128 Not assessed Not assessed
9 Jammu & Kashmir 31.80 Not assessed Not assessed
10 Jharkhand 66.80 90 -23.20 
11 Karnataka  843.40 2,500 -1,656.60 
12 Kerala 762.30 1,044 -281.70 
13 Madhya Pradesh 1,065.40 Not assessed Not assessed
14 Maharashtra  1,585 2,281 -696 
15 Meghalaya 1.10 165.30 -164.20 
16 Mizoram Not assessed Not assessed Not assessed
17 Nagaland 3.10 Not assessed Not assessed
18 Odisha 147.30 240 -92.70 
19 Punjab 2,674.60 1,100 1,574.60 
20 Rajasthan  4,595 1,039 3,556 
21 Tamil Nadu 863.70 1,671 -807.30 
22 Uttar Pradesh 1,477.90 3,757 -2,279.10 
23 Uttarakhand 6.60 262.31 -255.71 
24 West Bengal 368.30 6,663 -6,294.70 
Source: MNRE and SNAs. 
Analysis of the data in the above table brings out that: 
i. There were variations in the biomass potential assessed by MNRE and the SNAs in 16 
States that undertook such study. 
ii. The potential assessment was done by MNRE  in 2002-04, and no efforts were made 
by MNRE to reconcile their potential assessment with that of the SNAs so that efforts 
could be made to concentrate on the States having high potential. In Rajasthan, this 
difference was more than 3,500 MW. 
iii. Eight SNAs had not done any potential a ssessment, significant among them was the 
SNA of Madhya Pradesh, which ranked sixth in terms of potential assessed by MNRE. 
A comprehensive mapping of biomass resource is required to be carried out in order to 
estimate the realistic achievable biomass po wer potential. MNRE had initiated various 
studies and has undertaken the launch of Bio energy mission in the 12th plan period. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that there was no co-relation betw een potential assessed by IISc 1 
and SNAs. The variation might be due to dynamic nature of crops, year of survey and 
assumptions used in the survey. However, the reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact 
that there were large variations indicating that the assumptions used in the survey were not 
correct and scientific. 
  
                                                            
1  Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VI  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 101 
3. Target and achievements 
3.1. Targets and achievement  
The targets and achievements of MNRE under the 11 th Five Year Plan (FYP) and 12 th FYP 
upto 2014 are given in the following table: 
Table 25: Targets and achievement under 11th and 12th FYP 
S. 
No. 
Year Target Achievement 
11th Five Year Plan Period (2007-12) 
   Bio power@ Bagasse 
1 2007-08 250 81 185 
2 2008-09 300 97 248 
3 2009-10 400 151 297 
4 2010-11 455 144 322 
5 2011-12 450 153 317.70 
 Total 1,855 626 1,369.70 
12th Five Year Plan Period (upto 2014) 
  Bio power@ Bagasse   
6 2012-13 105 350 114.70 352.20 
7 2013-14 105 300 101.60 310.92 
 Total 210 650 216.30 663.12 
 Grand Total 2,715 2,875.122 
Source: MNRE. 
@ Other than bagasse 
As per MNRE, as against the target of 2,71 5 MW the capacity cr eated was 2,875.12 MW 
during 2007-14. In addition to above installed ca pacity, projects of 1,150 MW capacity were 
in pipe line (May 2015). 
3.2. Variation in achievement as reported by MNRE and SNAs 
MNRE had not fixed any State wise targets.  Data collected from 24 test checked States of 
their targets and achievements juxtaposed agai nst the achievements re ported by MNRE is 
given in Table 26. 
  
                                                            
2  However, the State wise installed ca pacity as per MNRE was 4,013.55 MW. 

Chapter VI  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 102 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Table 26: Targets and achievements reported by SNAs and MNRE in  
creation of installed capacity as on 31 March 2014         
(in MW) 
S. 
No. 
State As per SNA As per MNRE Variation (per
cent) 
  Targets Achievement Variation 
(-) shortfall 
(percent) 
Achievement  
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) vii (iv-vi)
1 Andhra Pradesh3 No targets 467.98 380.75 87.23 (19)
2 Arunachal Pradesh No targets Nil Nil Nil
3 Assam No targets Nil Nil Nil
4 Bihar 10.02 8.12 -1.90 (-19) 43.42 -35.30 (-435)
5 Chhattisgarh No targets 260 264.90 -4.90 (-2)
6 Gujarat No targets 31.20 43.90 -12.70 (-41)
7 Haryana 242 60.90 -181.10
(-75) 
45.30 15.60 (26)
8 Himachal Pradesh No targets Nil Nil Nil
9 Jammu & Kashmir No targets Nil Nil Nil
10 Jharkhand No targets Nil Nil Nil
11 Karnataka 581 613 32 (6) 603.28 9.72 (2)
12 Kerala No targets Nil Nil Nil
13 Madhya Pradesh 296.85 12 -284.85
(-96) 
26 -14 (-117)
14 Maharashtra 1,605 1,245.45 359.55 (22) 940.40 305.05 (24)
15 Meghalaya No targets Nil Nil Nil
16 Mizoram No targets Nil Nil Nil
17 Nagaland No targets Nil Nil Nil
18 Odisha No targets 20 20 0
19 Punjab 1,100 105 -995 (-90) 140.50 -35.50 (-34)
20 Rajasthan 322 70 -252 (-90) 101.30 -31.30 (-45)
21 Tamil Nadu No targets 870 571.30 298.70 (34)
22 Uttar Pradesh No targets 1,142 776.50 365.50 (32)
23 Uttarakhand No targets 52 30 22 (42)
24 West Bengal 595 85 -510 (-86) 26 -59 (-69)
Source: MNRE and SNAs. 
From the Table 26 it can be seen that 
i. Sixteen States had not fixed any targets for exploitation of biomass potential during 
2007-14. However, seven of these 16 States still reported capacity creation and in 
the case of Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu it was substantial.  
ii. Of the eight States which had fixed targets for themselves, in six there was shortfall 
in achieving the targets. The sh ortfalls were as high as 96 per cent  in Madhya 
Pradesh, 86 per cent  in West Bengal and 90 per cent  in Punjab and Rajasthan. 
Karnataka and Maharashtra were able to exceed their targets. 
                                                            
3  Figures refer to the position before bifurcation into separate States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VI  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 103 
iii. There was variation in the achievement re ported by MNRE and SNAs. No efforts 
were made by MNRE to reco ncile these differences, even  though it is the nodal 
Ministry for the implementation of biomass programme. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that the variation was due to difference in capacity addition 
of sugar mills of the States, biomass availab ility, financial tie up, interest rate, State 
Government policies and tariff announced  by State Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (SERC). The reply is not tenable as the audit observation is on variation 
in reporting of targets and achievement by MNRE and States, which should have 
been reconciled. 
3.3. State wise analysis 
Based on the biomass energy potential assessed in Table 26, Audit identified that seven 
States with a potential of over 1,000 MW accounted for nearly 76 per cent of the biomass 
potential in the country. In order to tap the biomass energy it was necessary to focus on 
these States. 
Table 27: Estimated potential and achievement (Grid connected) for the States endowed 
with 76 per cent of country’s Biomass potential, as of March 2014 
 (in MW) 
S. No. State Potential Achievement Exploitation (in per cent) 
1 Rajasthan  4,595 101.30 2 
2 Punjab 2,674.60 140.50 5 
3 Maharashtra 1,585 940.40 59 
4 Uttar Pradesh 1,477.90 776.50 53 
5 Haryana 1,261 45.30 4 
6 Madhya Pradesh 1,065.40 26.00 2 
7 Gujarat 1,014.10 43.90 4 
 Total 13,673 2,073.90 15 
Source: MNRE. 
These States were able to exploit only 15 per cent of their estimated potential. The installed 
capacity varied from two to 59 per cent of the potential assessed by MNRE in these States . 
Maharashtra had the highest exploitation of biomass potential followed by Uttar Pradesh.  
More significantly still, of these seven States, five i.e. Gujarat, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, 
Punjab and Rajasthan had very low rates of exploitation of biomass potential ranging from 
two to five per cent. MNRE and the State Governments of these high potential States need 
to prioritise exploitation and development of the biomass energy in these areas. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that the State wise targets were not fixed and the projects were set 
up by private developers. 
 
 

Chapter VI  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 104 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
3.4. Policies of MNRE for promotion of Biomass Energy 
MNRE promoted grid interactive biomass power and bagasse cogeneration in sugar mills. 
MNRE was also promoting biomass cogenera tion based power plants for producing 
electricity using locally available surplus bioma ss resources such as small wood chips, rice 
husk, arhar stalks, cotton stalks and other agro-residues to meet the unmet demand of 
electricity. MNRE’s support to developers was given in the form of Central Financial 
Assistance (CFA) determined on the paramete rs like gas pressure, type of project and 
category of the State. 
The proposals for biomass projects were sent directly by the developer to MNRE and not 
through the SNAs. It was vetted at the Ministry and CFA released directly to the developers. 
The concerned SNAs and MNRE were to closel y monitor the execution of the project and 
ensure their timely completion. 
Out of 24 test checked States it was found that only three States i.e. Rajasthan, Maharashtra 
and Madhya Pradesh had framed their biomass policy. 
4. Non maintenance of records by the States 
In the 24 States selected for Audit, it was obse rved that no data of the projects executed 
was maintained in the States of Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, 
Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh. According to  the database provided by West Bengal 
Renewable Energy Development Agency (WBREDA)  in West Bengal, 145 plants of different 
capacity (total capacity 61.207 MW) based on  biomass were commissioned in the State 
between 2001 and 2014. Audit scrutiny  revealed that out of 145 pl ants installed, location of 
24 plants was not available with the WBREDA and files in connection with 21 plants were 
only available with WBREDA. The CFA was releas ed directly by MNRE to the developer and 
no agency was monitoring the operations of  the plants. WBREDA had not maintained any 
data of power generated from biomass plants, in absence of which the status of plants could 
not be ascertained in audit. 
5. Implementation 
Subject to scope limitation reported in Para 8 of Chapter I of this report, the audit findings 
based on examination of 19 files of bagasse  cogeneration and 17 files of non-bagasse 
projects produced to Audit are given below. 
5.1. Biomass Bagasse Cogeneration 
5.1.1. Plants not installed even after taking first advance installment of CFA 
It was observed in audit that four projects  were not commissioned after release of first 
advance installment of CFA as detailed in Table 28. 
 
 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VI  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 105 
Table 28: projects were not commissioned after release of first advance installment of CFA 
(` in crore) 
S. 
No. 
Name of Project and 
Capacity(In MW) 
Capacity 
(in MW) 
Date of 
sanction 
CFA 
sanctioned 
CFA 
released 
Balance 
CFA 
1 Boot Model Cogen Project in 
12 Cooperative Sugar Mills by 
TANGEDCO, Tamil Nadu 
116 28.03.2012 58.25 29.12 29.13 
2 Kukadi S.S.K. , Ahmednagar, 
Maharashtra 
6.62 08.12.2011 1.32 0.66 0.66 
3 Bhima S.S.K.,Daund Pune, 
Maharashtra 
11.40 08.09.2012 2.08 1.04 1.04 
4 Kumbhi Kasari S.S.K. Ltd., 
Kolhapur, Maharashtra 
NA 15.03.2014 3.60 1.80 1.80 
 Total   65.25 32.62 32.63 
Note: NA – Not Available. 
The first installment of CFA was to be released  only after placing of order of equipment and 
after furnishing the details of the equity and promoters share etc. by the developer. 
However, in these cases first installment was released in advance without obtaining the 
required documents. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that performance asse ssment of the projects at serial number 2 
and 3 was under way for release of final insta llment of CFA. Regardin g project at serial 
number 4, it stated that the performance assessment had been completed in March 2014 
and the final release of CFA was under way. Further the project at serial number 1 was 
under progress. However, the fact remains that  the first installment was released without 
complying with the requirements of the guidelines. 
5.1.2. CFA released by MNRE without following scheme guidelines and verifying facts 
Maharashtra State Cooperative Bank Ltd (M SCBL) forwarded to MNRE (September 2010) 
application for grant of capital subsidy to M/s Vasantrao Dada Patil SSK. Ltd Vithewadi, 
Nasik, Maharashtra for a 17 MW (11 MW surplus power over and above the captive 
consumption) Bagasse Cogeneration power pr oject. MNRE sanctioned (December 2010) the 
capital subsidy of ` 6.60 crore and released 50 per cent of the capital subsidy to MSCBL. 
Audit scrutiny revealed the following deficiencies: 
i. Fifty per cent  CFA was to be released afte r successful commissioning and 
performance testing of the project which inter alia implied operation of the project 
for three months including at least 72 hours continuous operation at minimum 80 
per cent  of rated capacity. Audit observed that CFA of 
` 3.30 crore was released 
without certificate of performance testing by the designated agency. Interestingly, 
the balance CFA was neither demanded by Financial Institutions (FI)/ sugar mill nor 
was it looked into by MNRE. 
ii. The developer was to provide month wise ge neration data on half yearly basis to 
MNRE but MNRE never asked the developer to furnish the same. 

Chapter VI  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 106 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
iii. It was also revealed that during the crushing season 2007-09 the sugar mill’s licensed 
crushing capacity was 2,500 Tonnes Crushe d per Day (TCD). The cane crushed daily 
was between 2,560 TCD to 3, 000 TCD and number of days  cane crushed in these 
years was 239 in 2007-08, 111 in 2008-09 and 153 in the year 2009-10. It is pertinent 
to mention here that per day cane crushed was on a decreasing trend which indicate 
changing crop pattern. In this context, MNRE assumption of 3,500 TCD per day for 
calculating surplus power indicates distor tion of facts towards higher side for 
calculating surplus power. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that the commercial operation of the cogeneration plant was 
started in February 2012 but due to scarcity of water, the pe rformance test was postponed, 
and the SNA had been asked to monitor and submit the status report. 
5.1.3. Delay in implementation of cogeneration plants in co-operative sugar mills 
Based on the approval (February 2008) of Tamil Nadu Government for setting up of 
cogeneration plants in co-operative and public  sector sugar mills in the State, TANGEDCO 
executed (February 2010) an agreement with M/s Walchandnagar Industries to establish 12 
cogeneration plants in the sugar mills on Engineering, Procurement and Commissioning  
(EPC) basis.  The estimated cost of the proj ect, with a total capacity of 183 MW, was  
` 1,241.15 crore. As per the scheme, the sugar mills would make the sites available to Tamil 
Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporatio n Limited (TANGEDCO) for setting up the 
cogeneration plants. TANGEDCO would raise upto 90 per cent of the funds required for the 
project through institutional loans and the balance would be met by the sugarcane growers 
of the respective mills. The plants after commi ssioning would be run by the sugar mills and 
the surplus power over and above the captiv e consumption would be  exported to the 
TANGEDCO grid. MNRE released 
` 29.12 crore, being 50 per cent of the capital subsidy, for 
the project during 2012-13 with the balance subsidy to be disbursed only after 
commissioning. 
Though the 12 plants were scheduled to be  commissioned in September 2011 as per the 
scheme, the project suffered due to delays committed by the EPC contractor in mobilization 
of men and materials, non-synchronisation of materials and erection activities, lapse of 
excise exemption certificate resulting in six months delay on account of revalidation etc. 
Consequently, the project suffe red time over run (36 months  as of September 2014) and 
was expected to be completed only by March 2015. 
Due to the delay in commissioning of the plants, power generation capacity of 183 MW 
including exportable power of 123 MW did not accrue to the State during the years 2012-13 
and 2013-14 as envisaged. 
MNRE (July 2015) accepted the audit observations and stated that the delay was due to non 
performance of contractual obligations by the owners and non availability of sand for 
completion of civil works. The reply is not corre ct as these issues should have been settled 
mutually in advance at planning stage. 
 
 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VI  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 107 
5.2. Biomass power generation 
The MNRE guidelines (December 2006, August  2008 and April 2010) for grid interactive 
power generation projects required the developers to provide data on electricity generation 
on a six monthly basis for a period of 10 years  (5 years for the projects sanctioned after  
1 April 2010) after commencement of commercial generation by the plant. 
Audit scrutiny of the 124 cases at MNRE, revealed that none of the developers had furnished 
the generation data to MNRE after the co mmencement of commercial generation of 
electricity. In absence of generation data, the current  status of the projects, whether they 
are in working condition or closed could not be ascertained in audit. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that emphasis was laid  on SNAs to provide generation data on 
quarterly basis and the data was recorded by the State Utilities. However, the fact remained 
that the developers did not furnish their gene ration data to MNRE as per the requirements 
of the scheme guidelines. 
6. Findings from audit of State Nodal Agencies 
Audit observed instances of non traceable biomass plants, inoperative plants, plants 
working at lower capacities, plants installed wi th different specifications than approved and 
plants using non-permitted fuels. None of the developers had furnished the generation data 
to MNRE after the commencement of commercia l generation of electricity. The cases are 
highlighted below: 
6.1. Missing Biomass plants 
Test check of records of SNAs and physical verification by Audit team revealed the following: 
Andhra Pradesh 
Audit team conducted Physical Verification of the biomass plant of M/s. Sainath Power at 
Bandarupalli village, Warangal District along with NREDCAP 5 representative and found 
that there was no power plant in the village which was endorsed by the Gram Sarpanch. 
Bihar 
Test check by Audit revealed that one biomass plant of 32 kW at Churahi, West 
Champaran was not in existence. 
                                                            
4  M/s Shri Dyaneshwar SSK Ltd, Dnyaneshwarnagar Ah medabad, Gujarat, M/s Amreli Power Project Ltd, 
Village Amereli, Gujarat, M/s Junagadh Power Project Pvt Ltd Khokhareda  Village Vanthali, Taluk Junagarh, 
Gujarat, M/s Maharishi Shankarrao Mohite SSK Ltd, Solapur, Maharashtra, M/s Yashwant Rao Mohite 
Krishna SSK Ltd, Satara, Maharashtra, M/s Purna SSK, Hingali, Maharashtra, M/s Samarth SSK Ankushnagar, 
Jalna, Maharashtra, M/s Bhimashankar Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana (SSK) Ltd, Dattatryangar Pargaon Awasari 
Pune, Maharashtra, M/s Someshwar SSK Ltd, Baramati, Pune, Maharashtra, M/s Chambal Power Ltd, 
Village Rangur, Kota, Rajasthan, M/s Dee Developm ent Engineers Pvt Ltd Village Gadda Dhob, Abhor, 
Firozepur, Punjab, M/s ETA Power Generation Pvt Ltd, Sattur, Virudhungar, Tamil Nadu. 
5  New and Renewable Energy Development Corporation of Andhra Pradesh Ltd. 

Chapter VI  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 108 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
6.2. Biomass plants not working or working at lesser capacity 
Test check of records of SNAs for assessing the actual working of the plants that had 
received CFA revealed the following: 
Andhra Pradesh 
MNRE sanctioned CFA of ` 7.02 lakh and Indian Renewabl e Energy Development Agency 
(IREDA) sanctioned loan of ` 131.90 lakh for one MW plant at Siddipet, Medak to Harsha 
Power Projects (P) Ltd. The plant was commissioned (March 1999) but stopped 
generation (August 2000) due to ban on third party sales of the power produced by 
Andhra Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Co mmission (APERC) and malfunctioning of 
generator sets installed. 
Bihar 
Test check of records of 28 projects, which had availed CFA, revealed that 10 projects 
were closed and in one project, the develo per had sold the plant after five years of 
commissioning without prior permission of MNRE. 
Haryana 
Four plants 6 for which CFA of ` 1.40 crore was released were not working since 
installation. MNRE stated (May 2015) that CFA was released after verification of 
generation data for three months by SNA. MN RE further stated that two plants (M/s REI 
Agro Limited and M/s Satyam Industries Pvt.  Ltd) were not operational because of 
financial issues with the banks and the other two plants (M/s RP Basmati Rice Ltd and M/s 
Kayem Foods Industries Pvt. Ltd) were closed due to maintenance problems. 
Karnataka 
Eleven projects totaling 83 MW had been commissioned upto 2005-06 and four projects 
for 20 MW had been commissioned thereafter. Out of the 11 projects commissioned upto 
2005-06, five projects had stopped workin g and another three were working only 
intermittently. The reason for not working was attributed to un-remunerative tariff. 
Maharashtra 
M/s Ind Bharat Energies Limited was to ge nerate 126.72 MUs per year but the actual 
generation was only  11.86 to 45.74 per cent  during 2009-14 due to non-availability of 
biomass. 
Mizoram 
Two biomass gasifier power plants with 200 kW capacity commissioned (March 2003) for 
`79.10 lakh were not operating since middle of 2003 and a large number of essential 
parts were missing. Zoram Energy Develo pment Agency (January 2015) stated the 
machines remained idle for long period due to lack of manpower. 
                                                            
6  M/s RP Basmati Rice Ltd, Karnal; M/s REI Agro Ltd,  Rewari; M/s Kayem Food Industries Ltd, Panipat and M/s 
Satyam Ind. Pvt. Ltd, Pardhana, Panipat. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VI  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 109 
Punjab 
During 2007-12, M/s Rana Sugars Limited, Amritsar, a grid connected bagasse based 
project, generated 947.204 lakh units, of which, it exported 781.452 lakh units to the grid 
valued at ` 28.59 crore, but it did not supply any power during 2012-14 in spite of the 
commitment in the PPA for supply of 10. 20 MW power to Punjab State Power 
Corporation Ltd (PSPCL) every year and there was no penalty clause in the PPA for such 
default. PSPCL stated (February 2015) that  the project stopped generation due to 
litigation/ pending resolution of dispute regarding re-determination of tariff. 
Rajasthan 
MNRE released (January 2013) a CFA of ` 40 lakh to M/s Sharda Solvent Limited, Mundla 
power plant which was not in operation sinc e September 2011. From the log book of the 
plant, it was observed that MNRE officials did not verify the operations. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the plant was in  working condition as it had released the 
CFA after verification of three months generation by SNA. The reply is not tenable 
because the log books of the plant did not depict the working of plant. 
6.3. Biomass plant not installed or not installed as per specification approved 
Test check of records of SNAs revealed incons istencies in the capacities installed in the 
following cases. 
Bihar 
i. MNRE sanctioned (November 2006) six plants  with capacity of 50 to 100 kW for 
` 2.01 crore with CFA of ` 57.80 lakh but only four plants of lesser capacity were 
installed. Bihar Renewable Energy Develo pment Agency (BREDA) did not take any 
action against the firm/developer. MNRE stated (May 2015) that it had not 
released the entire funds to BREDA but only 70 per cent CFA was released and that 
BREDA had been requested to verify the installations and release only eligible CFA. 
The reply is not tenable because the project was sanctioned in 2006 and MNRE 
had not ensured the finalization of the project till date. 
ii. MNRE sanctioned (February 2007) one unit of 120 kW biomass gasifier with 100 
per cent  producer gas engine at Garkha, Saran for ` 0.70 crore including CFA of 
` 18.12 lakh, of which ` 12.60 lakh had been released to the developer. Audit 
observed that dual fuel mode biomass gasifier engine was installed which could be 
run on non permitted fuels. But no action was taken by BREDA. 
Chhattisgarh 
Fourteen developers were given permission (2 006 to 2011) to install biomass plants, with 
a capacity 128 MW, but even after lapse of mo re than 3-8 years only one project of 15 
MW was commissioned. 
  

Chapter VI  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 110 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Rajasthan 
i. In a 15 MW plant (January 2009) of M/s Orient Green Power Company only eight 
MW was installed because of  delay in providing evacuati on infrastructure and the 
remaining capacity allocation was cancel led. The excess 50 ac res land allotted for 
seven MW was not returned by the developer to the State Government. 
ii. M/s Transtech Green Power Private Limite d registered (March 2011) a project for 
six MW capacity but failed to finalise land , power evacuation plan and availability 
of water within four months of registration. RRECL did not cancel the project. 
West Bengal 
MNRE sanctioned (December 2008) a plant at Chikisabrati Udyog for ` 13.68 crore, which 
was installed (December 2009) but not commissi oned because they were not able to sell 
their entire power to the grid. 
6.4. Biomass plants using non-permitted fuel after availing CFA 
One of the parameters for determining the am ount of CFA to be released was the fuel 
proposed to be used.  In Andhra Pradesh audi t scrutiny revealed three instances where the 
power producers were not using the approved RE fuel for generation. 
i. MNRE sanctioned (October 2005) a 20 MW plant to M/s NCS Sugars Ltd with CFA of 
` 78.65 lakh and the fuel to be used was bagasse, cane trash and cane tops only. 
Audit observed that the plant was using non-permitted fuel.  
ii. In respect of M/s Nava Bharat Ventures Lt d, in a 20 MW plant, the developer started 
using coal instead of bagasse. 
iii. A plant of 5.5 MW of M/s. Sri Rayala seema Green Energy Ltd., commissioned 
(February 2001), was not using rice husk, ground nut and farm waste as fuel instead 
used woody biomass derived from exempted and non exempted species after paying 
penalties to the Forest Department. 
Thus, the project set up to work on RE we re actually not complying with the basic 
conditions. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that the issue of utiliz ation of non renewable fuel by the projects 
was not reported by SNAs to the Ministry. However, the fact remained the MNRE was not 
monitoring the projects. 
7. Conclusion 
MNRE assessed the total potential from biomass to be 17,981 MW. During the 11 th FYP 
period, a target of capacity creation of 1, 855 MW through Biomass was set against which 
MNRE achieved 1,995.70 MW. In the first two years of the 12 th Five Year Plan, MNRE set a 
target of 860 MW against which 879.42 MW was achieved. As such, overall target for the 
period 2007-08 to 2013-14 were  achieved. MNRE had not fixe d any State wise targets for 
Biomass power. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VI  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 111 
State wise analysis showed that most of the States did not set targets for biomass capacity. 
Of the eight States that did set targets, the sa me were achieved in two States only, with the 
remaining States showing a deficit of 19 to 96 per cent. Seven States having 76 per cent of 
the country’s potential in biomass en e r g y  w e r e  a b l e  t o  e x p l o i t  o n l y  1 5  per cent of their 
estimated potential. Further, 21 States did not frame a biomass policy for promotion for 
biomass energy. 
Audit scrutiny of implementation of biomass pr ojects showed cases of project not installed 
even after release of assistance, irregular rele ase of assistance by MNRE, inoperative plants, 
plants working at lower capacities, plants inst alled with different specifications than what 
was approved and plants working on coal rather than bagasse. Audit also observed 
instances of biomass plants not being traceable at the places where they were reported to 
be installed. 
Audit observed that none of the developers had furnished the generation data to MNRE/ 
State Nodal Agency after the commencement of commercial generation of electricity. 
8. Recommendations 
• MNRE must ensure that the Central Finan cial Assistance is released only after 
compliance with conditions and thereafter the implementation of the sanctioned 
biomass projects should be closely monitored. 
• MNRE must review the power generation from the sanctioned biomass projects to ensure 
that these are operating as per specifications and use approved RE fuel. 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section III –  
Off-Grid Renewable Power 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 115 
Chapter - VII 
Solar Photovoltaic Systems 
 
1. Introduction 
Since 2005-06 MNRE had been providing Cent ral Financial Assist ance (CFA) to the 
implementing organisations 1 for deployment of off-grid 2 Solar Photovoltaic (SPV) systems 
such as Solar Home Lighting Systems (SHLSs), Solar Street Lighting Systems (SSLSs), 
standalone Solar Power Plants (SPPs), Solar Lanterns (SLs), Solar Water Heating Systems 
(SWHSs) and Solar Water Pumps (SWPs) etc. Various off-grid SPV systems up to a maximum 
capacity of 100 kW per site and off-grid and de centralized solar thermal applications, were 
also eligible for CFA. Mini-grids for rural el ectrification up to a maximum capacity of 250 kW 
per site were also supported. The main objectives were to promote the use of SPV systems, 
reduce the consumption of kerosene for light ing purposes, improve the quality of life in 
rural areas and provide an alternate for meet ing rural lighting/energy requirements. In 
January 2010, the Government of India (GoI) la unched the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar 
Mission (JNNSM) which aimed at 2,000 MW by 2022 and merged all th e previous schemes 
into the mission. 
The solar off-grid policy of MNRE was dema nd driven and open to each implementing 
organization. The locations
3 w e r e  t o  b e  i d e n t i f i e d  b y  the State/ Accredited Channel 
Partners/Beneficiary. The selection of locati ons was the prerogative of the State Nodal 
Agency (SNA)/ Channel Partners. The projects were to be approved by MNRE. 
2. Targets and achievements 
2.1. Mismatch between MNRE targets and targets set under JNNSM 
The targets of MNRE and those set under JNNSM are given in Table 29. 
Table 29: MNRE and JNNSM targets 
(in MW) 
Year MNRE Target Target under JNNSM Achievement 
2007-08 0 Not Applicable 4 
2008-09 0 Not Applicable 3 
2009-10 5 Not Applicable 9 
2010-11 32 Phase I 
200 
11 
2011-12 20 16 
                                                            
1  The programme was implemented through SNAs/ State Nodal Departments (SNDs)/Corporations, PSU 
Banks, IREDA, and Akshaya Urja Shops. The Scheme was also being implemented through various Channel 
Partners like Renewable Energy Service Providing Compan ies; Financial Institutions  including microfinance 
institutions acting as Aggregators; Financial Integrators, System Integrators and Programme Administrators. 
Akshaya Urja Shops are shops for sale of solar  energy products and to provide easy after sales repair 
services. 
2  Distributed/decentralized renewable power (solar) system for isolated communities and areas which are 
not likely to be electrified in near future from grid connectivity 
3  Site/Village/Community/Institution. 

Chapter VII  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 116 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Year MNRE Target Target under JNNSM Achievement 
2012-13 30 34 
2013-14 40 Phase II (2013-17) 
800 
50 
Total 127 1,000 127 
Source: MNRE. 
JNNSM envisaged incremental targets - Phas e I (2010-13): 200 MW, Phase II (2013-17): 800 
MW and Phase III (2017-22): 1,000 MW. However,  the year wise targets of MNRE were not 
aligned with JNNSM targets. For Phase I, MNRE target of 82 MW was 59 per cent  below 
JNNSM target, and achievement was only 61 MW i.e. 31 per cent of JNNSM target. 
For the Phase II, JNNSM target was 800 MW (f rom 2013-17) but achievement in the first 
year (2013-14) was only 50 MW. MNRE was unable to elaborate its plan to achieve the 
target of 800 MW in Phase II, within the next  three years, with 750 MW  capacity yet to be 
installed. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that the sanctioned projects take 24 to 36 months to complete. 
Hence, installation targets are different from the sanctioned targets. Further, for Phase-II 
the sanctioned target had been revised to 500 MW. 
The reply is not tenable because in JNNSM the target was installation of 2,000 MW by 2022. 
Also, the Phase I target (200 MW) of JNNSM was not achieved by MNRE over the three year 
period 2011-14 (100 MW). 
2.2. Achievement of physical targets by the States 
In order to determine the extent to which targ ets were achieved, Audit collected the data in 
each category of the SPV systems (in numbers) from the State Nodal Agencies (SNAs) of the 
24 States sampled. 
The State wise details of targets and achievements are given in Annexure XI. Analysis of 
achievement of physical targets in percentage terms in 24 States selected in Audit is 
summarized in Table 30 below. 
Table 30: Achievement of States for various off-grid programmes 
(in numbers) 
SPV 
system 
Number 
of States 
without 
targets 
Number of States with
100 to 90  
per cent 
achievement 
90 to 75 
per cent 
achievement 
75 to 50 
per cent 
achievement 
50 to 25 
per cent 
achievement 
Less than 25 
per cent 
achievement 
Nil 
achievement 
SL 12 8 2 - - 1 1
SHLS 6 8 3 2 3 1 1
SSLS 5 10 4 1 3 - 1 
SWP 16 3 1 1 1 1 1
SPP 6 8 - 5 3 2 -
SWHS 5 3 1 4 7 4 -
Source: SNAs. 
Note: Solar Home Lighting System (SHLS), Solar Street Lighting System (SSLS), Solar Power Plant (SPP), Solar 
Lantern (SL) and Solar Water Pump (SWP). 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VII  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 117 
Audit observed that: 
i. Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Mizoram, Nagala nd, Odisha and Punjab did not fix any 
targets for some of the off-grid programmes. In Chhattisgarh, Mizoram and Nagaland 
though no targets had been set, various off-grid programmes were running. 
ii. Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Rajasthan 
and Uttarakhand were able to achieve more than 90 per cent of the targets fixed by 
them for various off-grid programmes. 
iii. In Assam and Tamil Nadu, the achievement was less than 25 per cent for some of the 
off-grid programmes. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that solar mission  was demand driven and project based and 
Ministry cannot enforce any targets for the States. The reply needs to be viewed in the 
context that JNNSM does set a target, which can be achieved only through State agencies. 
2.3. Approval Mechanism 
As per JNNSM guidelines, MNRE had to consti tute a Project Appraisal Committee (PAC) to 
approve projects within 45 days of receiving the project proposal. This committee was to 
provide approval as also review progress. De ficiency, if any, had to be communicated in 
writing to the Proposer/Channel Partner wi thin 30 days. The Committee would then, on 
receipt of clear proposal approve it. The enti re approval process was to be Information 
Technology (IT) enabled. 
Audit observed that the projects were not appr oved by MNRE within 45 days of date of the 
submission of the application. MNRE approved the projects based on the availability of the 
funds. No application was accepted by MNRE in the year 2013-14 as it had applications 
pending from previous years. PAC also did no t review the progress of the projects. The 
approval process was not IT enabled. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that PAC could not ap prove the projects as Phase II of JNNSM was 
approved on 26 May 2015 and now approval process is IT enabled. 
3. Financial Management of SPV off-grid programme 
During the years 2007-14, MNRE released CFA of ` 864 crore to the 24 sampled States for 
SPV projects, States contributed ` 707 crore and ` 114 crore was received from other 
sources. State wise details of  the 24 sampled States are at Annexure XII . Audit noticed 
instances of non submission of Utilization Ce rtificates, excess claim of Central Financial 
Assistance and diversion of Central Financial  Assistance. The detailed audit findings are 
given below: 
3.1. Non submission of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) 
As per Rule 212 of General Fi nancial Rules (GFR), UCs should be submitted by the 
organization receiving funds within 12 months of the closure of the financial year. MNRE 

Chapter VII  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 118 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
should monitor the submission of UCs and if the UC was not received within the specified 
time, the grantee organization should be bl ack listed. As per Prin cipal Pay and Accounts 
Officer of MNRE, UCs worth ` 198 crore were pending (Augus t 2014).MNRE did not review 
these cases of pending UCs to see whether th e works had been done as per sanction and 
the reasons for non submission of UCs. The State wise audit findings are given below: 
Assam 
i. Assam Energy Development Agency (AEDA) carried out awareness activities through 
Akshay Urja Diwas, seminars, exhibition s, conferences, debates, competitions, 
media campaigns etc. during 2007-12, and ` 0.36 crore were released by MNRE for 
these activities. An expenditure of ` 0.33 crore was incurred, UCs for ` 0.14 crore 
were available with AEDA, of which UC for ` 0.04 crore had not been sent to MNRE, 
and UCs for ` 0.19 crore were not available,  rendering expenditure of ` 0.19 crore 
doubtful. 
ii. MNRE sanctioned (September 2008) ` 0.53 crore for installation of solar systems to 
be completed by September 2009. The wo rk was completed in September 2010. 
AEDA sent UCs to MNRE in September 2009,  one year before actual completion of 
the work. 
Jammu & Kashmir 
UCs, in respect of SWHSs sanctioned durin g 2009-12, were submitted to MNRE after a 
delay ranging from nine to 28 months. UC s submitted (January 2013) in respect of 
installation of 46 SWHSs sanctioned by MNRE during February 2011 confirmed that all 
the 46 SWHSs had been installed and commissioned. Records, however, showed that six 
SWHSs were not installed/ commissioned at th e time of submission of UCs, of which 
three SWHSs had not been installed even as of August 2014. 
Punjab 
For implementation of Integrated Rural En ergy Programme (IREP) during 2006-07, MNRE 
released (January 2007) ` 0.73 crore to the State Government, which in turn released 
` 1.46 crore, including its share of ` 0.73 crore, to Punjab Energy Development Agency 
(PEDA) in November 2008 (after a delay of 23 months). Audit noticed that the scheme 
was not implemented and PEDA while refunding ` 0.01 crore submitted (December 2009) 
UCs of ` 0.72 crore to MNRE showing the amount as spent on salaries and development 
of Information Technology infrastructure etc. during 2006-07, which was irregular. 
3.2. Excess claim of CFA 
Audit observed that in Tamil Nadu a project fo r installation of a 100 kW solar system was 
approved by MNRE to be completed by Fe bruary 2012. The project was commissioned on 
24 February 2012 at an actual cost of ` 1.80 crore. Audit observed that the project cost was 
certified by Tamil Nadu Energy Development Agency (TEDA) as ` 2.35 crore while claiming 
the balance CFA from MNRE, though the benefi ciary had submitted details of expenditure 
for the project as ` 1.80 crore only. On 18 April 2013, it was seen that solar systems of 40 
kW was installed. There was no mention about the installation of the balance 60 kW. The 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VII  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 119 
status of the project whether ongoing or abando ned/stopped, was also not clear as of June 
2014. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that the settlement of claim was based on the audited Statement 
of Expenditure and completion certificate given by the agency after inspection. Reply is not 
acceptable as the status of project was not submitted to MNRE and excess claim of CFA was 
not checked by MNRE. 
3.3. Diversion of CFA 
Audit observed that in Chhattisgarh MNRE sanctioned capital subsidy of ` 2.22 crore in 
2012-13 for installation of domestic SWHSs with  collector area of 7,000 sqm and released  
` 1.55 crore as first installment. Audit observed that an amount of ` 0.53 crore (1,706 sqm 
collector area) was diverted for installation of  SWHSs in commercial/ Industrial/ institutions 
etc. Chhattisgarh Renewable Energy Developm ent Agency (CREDA) st ated (December 2014) 
that the systems were installed in various sectors like industries, hospitals and educational 
institutions etc., within the overall targets. The reply was not tenable as the sanction was 
only for domestic purposes and the changes in purpose were not approved by MNRE. 
4. Implementation of off-grid programme 
Implementation of the off-grid programme wa s examined in audit at two stages i.e. 
execution and monitoring. There we re cases of irregularities in distribution of solar devices, 
delay in distribution, irregular purchases of sola r devices, deficiencies in award of works for 
Solar Power Plants, irregular payments and delays in completion of projects. Cases of excess 
recovery of beneficiary share were also noticed. Findings of each stage are given below. 
4.1. Execution 
MNRE released CFA to the State Governments for procurement of solar appliances and their 
distribution to beneficiaries wi th certain terms and condition s. However, Audit observed 
that in some States, SNAs did not follow the terms and conditions stipulated in the 
Ministry’s sanction for distribution of solar appliances/devices to beneficiaries. 
4.1.1. Irregularities in distribution of solar devices 
Based on test audit, some instances of irregu larities in distribution of solar devices were 
noticed. The State wise audit findings are given below: 
Bihar 
In Bettiah district, 90 SLs were shown as distributed during 2006-07 but details of total 
number of SLs received from Bihar Renewable Energy Development Agency (BREDA) were 
not on record of Deputy Development Commissioner (DDC) and the recipients signature 
were also not on record. It was also observ ed that six SLs were irregularly distributed 
among the DDC (two), BREDA (o ne), technician (one) and signatures of recipients of 
remaining two SLs were not on record. 
  

Chapter VII  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 120 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Meghalaya 
i. MNRE sanctioned (February 2006) 20,000 SL s for un-electrified villages. Meghalaya 
Non-Conventional and Rural Energy development Agency (MNREDA) purchased (April 
2008) 12,000 SLs and could distribute (Octob er 2011) only 3,318 with under recovery 
of beneficiary share of ` 0.15 crore (actual beneficiary share ` 0.56 crore). MNREDA 
decided (November 2012) to distribute th e remaining 8,682 SLs free of cost in 
schools but by that time the batteries ha d expired, which had to be replaced for 
` 0.53 crore. The school children to whom these lanterns were given were not from 
un-electrified villages. UCs sent to MNRE indicated that 20,000 SLs had been 
distributed to the beneficiaries instead of 12,000 SLs actually distributed. 
ii. MNRE sanctioned (October 2006) 8,000 SLs to be distributed, free of cost, to girl child 
studying in Class IX and X. Audit observed  that only 5,600 lanterns were purchased 
and these were given to beneficiaries for ` 1,465 per lantern instead of free of cost. 
Uttarakhand 
Scrutiny of records (July 2014) revealed  that Uttarakhand Renewable Energy 
Development Agency (UREDA) collected ` 0.69 crore more from 80,859 beneficiaries for 
distributing SLs to them, claiming the collect ion as service charges. This was irregular 
since service charges were to be rele ased by MNRE at the rate of three per cent of CFA 
and not to be borne by beneficiaries. The State Government accepted the facts. 
West Bengal 
Out of 1,000 lanterns procured, WBREDA could produce a list of six institutions to whom 
258 lanterns were handed over, no record of  the balance 742 lanterns was furnished to 
Audit. 
4.1.2. Non distribution/delay in distribution of solar appliances 
Audit observed that in certain States there we re instances of solar appliances either not 
being distributed to beneficiarie s or delay in distribution of solar appliances. The State wise 
audit findings are given below: 
Arunachal Pradesh 
MNRE released (January 2014) ` 0.25 crore to APEDA for procurement and distribution of 
solar energy education kits to Government  school students. APEDA procured 500 solar 
energy education kits in April 2014 at a cost of ` 0.25 crore but these were yet 
(September 2014) to be distributed. APEDA accepted the facts. 
Bihar 
i. Under the Tharu community development pr ogramme, a total of 4,000 SLs were to 
be provided to 3,846 members (Novembe r 2013). Audit scruti ny revealed that 
only 3,556 SLs were distributed and 444 SLs worth ` 0.06 crore remained un-
distributed. Delay in distribution might result  in discharge of batteries kept in unused 
conditions. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VII  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 121 
ii. BREDA (2009-10) delayed distribution of 2,000 SLs in 38 districts. There was delay of 
five to eleven months in the distribution of the material supplied by the supplier to 
districts. Further, the lanterns were distri buted with a delay of two to 11 months by 
the Deputy Development Commissioner ( DDC) after receipt from the supplier 
because of which not only the capacity of batteries decreased, the beneficiaries also 
remained deprived of the benefit of the scheme. 
iii. Audit scrutiny of records revealed that 59 SLs and six SHLSs supplied (May 2007) to 
the DDC Saran got destroyed (December 2007) in a fire in the godown. As per BREDA 
directives, these should have been immediately distributed to the beneficiaries. 
Jammu & Kashmir 
i. MNRE sanctioned (February 2013) 10,000 SHLSs for ` 11 crore for various villages in 
Kishtwar, Dodha District. Audit observed th at the SHLSs had not even been procured 
by Jammu and Kashmir Energy Development Agency (JAKEDA) as of August 2014. 
MNRE stated (May/July 2015) that orders ha d been placed and the project had been 
extended upto September 2015 for completion. 
ii. MNRE sanctioned (March 2010) assistance of ` 1.81 crore for distribution of 15,150 
SLs in the Gujjar and Bakerwal basties of the State. Test check of records of Anantnag 
District, revealed that of the 4,384 SLs received in 2011, 803 had not been distributed 
and the batteries were exhausted. MNRE  stated (May 2015) that SNA completed 
distribution of SLs and submitted audite d SoE. However, MNRE did not furnish 
documents evidencing distribution of SLs. 
Punjab 
MNRE sanctioned (March 2011) 2,680 SHLSs in 147 villages of Gurdaspur, Ferozepur, Tarn 
Taran and Amritsar districts for ` 5.36 crore. PEDA placed (May 2011) order for supply of 
1,000 SHLSs. The contractor 4 could supply only 500 SHLSs for which a payment of ` 0.90 
crore was made, and these were also below MNRE specifications. 
In Abohar 30 SHLSs worth ` 0.05 crore were destroyed in a fire. Audit observed that 
these had been kept in an ordinary rented house and had not been distributed even after 
13 months of procurement. 
4.1.3. Delay in completion of projects 
Projects were sanctioned by MNRE based on the proposal received from SNAs/ other 
agencies. Audit observed that there were delays in completion of projects. The State wise 
audit findings are given below: 
Assam 
i. MNRE sanctioned 11 SPV projects durin g October 2006 - March 2013 to AEDA for 
` 23.29 crore. Out of 11 projec ts, five were completed with delay of seven months to 
two years, while six had not been completed (July 2014) even after delays of eight to 
25 months. Delay in completion of works was due to considerable time taken in initial 
processing and issuing the notice inviting te nders, with delays ranging from four to 21 
                                                            
4 M/s R.R Solar System, Ahmedabad. 

Chapter VII  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 122 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
months from date of receipt of sancti on orders from MNRE. An amount of ` 16.14 
crore remained blocked out of ` 23.29 crore sanctioned between October 2006 to 
March 2013. MNRE accepted the facts (May 2015). 
ii. MNRE sanctioned (August 2012) installation of SPV power plants (28kW) at various 
locations in the State for ` 0.69 crore to be completed by April 2013. The work was 
awarded (February 2014) to M/s National Small Industries Corp oration (NSIC) which 
further sub contracted the work to M/s Ma c Power system agains t the general terms 
and conditions of contract. The work to be completed by April 2013 was still under 
progress (November 2014). 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that progress of work was slow because of local problems 
and there was no financial burden on eith er MNRE or the State Government. The 
reply is not acceptable as the projects were delayed. 
iii. MNRE sanctioned two projects (September 2010) for development of solar cities in 
Guwahati and Jorhat for ` 0.45 crore and ` 0.49 crore respectively. The Master Plan 
was to be prepared by September 2011 and the other three activities 5 w e r e  t o  b e  
carried out during the following five years. It was observed that while the Master Plan 
prepared by Jorhat Municipal Board (JMB) was sent to MNRE during September 2011, 
the Master Plan prepared by Guwahati Municipal Corporation (GMC) was sent in 
March 2013, after a delay of 18 months. The Master Plan of Guwahati was approved 
by MNRE in January 2014. 
RE proposals for Jorhat valuing ` 1.96 crore were sent to MNRE in December 2012, 
which were yet to be approved. As for Gu wahati, the same had not been sent (June 
2014). Further, the MNRE released ` 0.15 crore (March 2012) and ` 0.05 crore (March 
2013) for setting up of Solar Cell and promotional activities for Jorhat and Guwahati, 
respectively. No further progress in the matter was on record. 
iv. The work of installation of RE systems in Raj Bhawan was sanctioned in November 
2011, to be completed by November 2013. However, tender was invited (September 
2013) after a delay of 23 months, and the wo rk was awarded in February 2014. MNRE 
had censured the concerned agency for the abnormal delay in work, stressing that the 
financial support would be completely wi thdrawn for delay beyond 36 months from 
date of original sanction. The work was under progress (November 2014). 
v. The work of installation of Solar Plants  o f  2 4 0  k W  a t  1 1  l o c a t i o n s  ( A s s a m  S t a t e  
Secretariat – 100 kW; Guwahati High Cour t – 50 kW; and Dibrugarh Public Health 
Engineering Department (PHED) – 90 kW)  was sanctioned in March 2013 to be 
completed by November 2013. AE DA invited an expression of interest on behalf of 
Dibrugarh PHED in December 2013, the te nder was invited in January 2014 and the 
work was awarded in February 2014 to Nati onal Small Industrial Corporation (NSIC). 
NSIC in turn sublet the work to M/s Mac Power Systems. 
In relation to other two locations (viz. State Secretariat and High Court) the work was 
yet to be awarded (July 2014).  The tender for Assam Secretariat was invited in June 
2014 and was at the tender evaluation stage. Delay in inviting tenders was attributed 
to changing of the nodal agency multiple times by the State Government. 
  
                                                            
5 Implementation, Setting up of Solar Cell and Promotional activities  

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VII  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 123 
Bihar 
i. BREDA received a sum of ` 27.91 crore for implementing the Saur Kranti Solar Pump 
Scheme in five districts, to be comple ted within four months of execution of 
agreement. Audit observed that the scheme  was not completed even after a lapse of 
nine months of the execution of agreements despite availability of funds. 
ii. BREDA was to install 1006 SSLs for which an amount of ` 0.19 crore was received from 
the three 7 beneficiaries. However, these SSLs had not been commissioned so far 
(November 2014). 
iii. Audit scrutiny of records of DDC, Muzaffarpur  reveal ed th at out of 18 SSLs receiv ed 
(June 2011) only nine were installed (November 2014). BREDA failed to monitor the 
complete installation of the same. 
iv. The State Government released (2007-08) ` 0.50 crore to BREDA and MNRE had to 
provide CFA of ` one crore for establishing State Level Energy Park. The park was not 
established and funds were surrendered (Jul y 2012) after three years. The SNA stated 
that State Government did not allot the requi red 2.5 to 3 acres of land resulting in 
non-construction of the energy park and the grant was refunded. 
v. Ten Solar Roof Top power plant of 50 kW and four Solar Roof Top power plant of 200 
kW totaling 1.3 MW were to be installe d under Mukhyamantri New and Renewable 
energy scheme for which BREDA received ` 24.67 8 crore during 2008-14, but the 
scheme was yet to be implemented. 
Jammu & Kashmir 
i. MNRE sanctioned (December 2010) ` 32.70 crore for installation of SPPs of 1,090 kW 
at 69 district hospitals/ health centres. Audit observed that 22 plants had not been 
installed even after a lapse of 32 months. Also the contract was placed on a firm 9 
whose turnover was not certified by a Chartered Accountant as required under the 
eligibility conditions. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the project was still incomplete and the SNA was to 
follow tender conditions in which it would not interfere. 
ii. MNRE sanctioned (February 2012) installati on of SPPs of 905 kW at 107 Community 
Information Centers for ` 24.44 crore. Audit observed that 22 plants had not been 
installed (August 2014) even after a lapse of 20 months. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that some of the companies to whom the contract was 
awarded had gone to Court and the project was stalled. 
iii. MNRE sanctioned (September 2012 - February 2013) installation of 22 SPPs of 752 kW 
at 22 locations and nine SPPs of 900 kW in nine institutions. Audit observed that the 
plants had not been installed (August 2014) due to non-finalization of tenders. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the project was under court litigation. 
                                                            
6  Three at Betiya, 27 at Gaya, and 70 at the uni ts of Bihar State Tourism Development Corporation. 
7  ` 0.05 crore from Gaya Engineering College, ` 0.14 crore from Bihar State Tourism Development 
Corporation and ` 0.58 lakh from District Magistrate (DM), West Champaran, Bettiah. 
8  MNRE- ` 0.49 crore, State- ` 24.18 crore. 
9  M/s Sova Power Ltd . 

Chapter VII  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 124 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
iv. MNRE sanctioned (September 2009) establis hment of State Level Energy Park for 
` one crore and seven Akshya Urja shops for ` 0.04 crore, but the same had not been 
established (August 2014) and the funds remained unutilised. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that project had been cancelled. 
Madhya Pradesh 
i. The installation of 2,12,800 Litres per day (LPD) capacity SWHSs at 41 places was to be 
completed by  M/s Waree Energy Pvt. Ltd, Mumbai by  December 2013. Audit 
observed that only six per cent work was completed upto March 2014. 
ii. A work order was placed on M/s Steam Power Entertech Pvt. Ltd, Rajkot for 
installation of 40,000 LPD capacity SWHS at MP State Cooperative Diary Federation, 
Gwalior at `0.59 crore to be completed by Nove mber 2013. There was no progress in 
the work (March 2014). 
Mizoram 
i. MNRE sanctioned (January 2006) an Education Park for ` 1.50 crore to create 
awareness about solar energy. ZEDA failed to arrange suitable land in Aizwal city, and 
after four years (October 2010) arranged a plot in Mizoram University campus, 14 km 
away from the city. ZEDA unilaterally dropped a number of systems to be installed and 
terms of AMC were also relaxed for the contractor 10. At present the park was not 
being used. MNRE also failed to monitor successful implementation of the project. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that park has been  completed but due to funds constraint, 
AMC could not be signed. The fact remains that there was delay of more than seven 
years in completion of the project. 
ii. MNRE sanctioned (February 2008) solar dryer for drying turmeric for import and 
export. Work order for seven 35 kg solar dr yers were placed (July 2008) and the order 
for the rest was to be placed after setting  the dryer in the most optimum condition 
suiting the climate of Mizoram. A udit observed that the contractor 11 supplied 
(November 2012) 42 solar dryers without iden tification of the site and required 
infrastructure by the user 12 agency. These solar dryers had not been installed leading 
to unfruitful expenditure of ` 1.11 crore. 
Nagaland 
i. MNRE approved (November 2011)  ` 22.31 crore for installation of SPPs of 670 kW at 
45 locations in Kohima, to be  completed by May 2012. Althou gh installation work was 
completed, commissioning and handing over of 17 SPPs (260 kW) had not been done 
(May 2014) and commissioning of 16 plants wa s also delayed by seven to 18 months. 
The delay was attributed to delay in releas e of payments to contractors. The State 
Government stated that it had released the balance civil deposit amount of ` 1.71 
crore in September 2014 and the contract or had been asked to commission the 
balance 17 SPPs at the earliest. 
                                                            
10  M/s Swastik Enterprise, Kolkata. 
11  National Research Development Corporation, a PSU. 
12  Mizorganic Producers Compan y Limited, a private company. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VII  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 125 
ii. MNRE accorded (2003) sanction of ` 0.83 crore for installation and commissioning of 
solar devices to be completed wi thin 24 months. MNRE released ` 0.42 crore in 2003 
but the State share 13 was released after a delay of fi ve years. The work was awarded 
to M/s V K Keguruse without inviting open bid. Due to delay in completion of work, 
the contract was subsequently cancelled (A ugust 2013) after incurring an expenditure 
of ` 1.30 crore. MNRE accepted the facts (May 2015). 
Uttar Pradesh 
i. UPNEDA was to install 292 SWHSs (January 2011)  at KG Residential Balika Vidhyalayas 
in 48 districts. Audit observed that insta llation of 190 SWHSs was still pending as the 
firms could not supply the equipment.  The work was retendered but even then the 
work could not be completed.  Despite la pse of more than two and half years the 
work was still incomplete. The main reas on for non-completion was lack of 
coordination between UPNEDA and Education Department. 
ii. MNRE approved (July 2010) CFA of ` 2.77 crore for providing SPPs of 4.8 kW and six 
SSLSs to each of the 57 Rajkiya Ashram Pa dhati Vidhyalayas located in 42 districts. 
Though 342 SSLSs (six SSLSs for each of 57 SPPs) were installed, the firm 14 could install 
only 22 SPPs (April 2011) and none of  them were functional. Payment of ` 1.32 crore 
had been made to the firm. The work could not be completed by UPNEDA even after a 
lapse of over four years 15. UPNEDA stated that the firm had been blacklisted and 
performance guarantee forfeited and 22 SPPs would be operationalised soon and 
remaining 35 SPPs would also be installed. 
West Bengal 
i. MNRE released CFA of ` 8.67 crore to WBREDA during September 2011 - March 2013 
for installation of standalone SPV system of capacity 5 kW each at 100 Government 
aided schools in South and North 24 Parganas and Murshidabad districts along with 
one 24 kW SPV system at Jalpaiguri Engineering College. WBREDA installed solar 
rooftop PV plant in 70 out of 100 schools and 25 kW SPV plant at Jalpaiguri college at 
a cost of ` 6.61 crore as of  September 2014. WBREDA had not identified the 
remaining 30 schools on which rooftop SPV plant was to be installed under the 
programme. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the project was still incomplete and the Ministry would 
consider cancelling the projects for the remaining 30 schools based on audit 
observations. 
ii. MNRE sanctioned a project for insta llation of 500 SWHSs in different 
institutions/domestic areas at a cost ` 0.32 crore, to be completed within twelve 
months and released ` 0.22 crore in September 2011. MNRE’s sanction stipulated that 
remaining funds ( ` 0.10 crore) would be released to WBREDA on demonstration of 
SWHS with the report of monitoring of th e systems by third party. However, Audit 
observed that WBREDA could spend only ` 0.14 crore on installation of 137 SWHSs 
against the target of 500 SWHSs, as of September 2014. WBREDA did not conduct any 
third party monitoring as required under MNRE’s sanction. 
                                                            
13  Civil works ` 0.56 crore (State share); and Supply, installati on and commissioning of solar devices ` 0.83 
crore (CFA). 
14   M/s Gangotri Enterprise, Lucknow. 
15  October 2010 to September 2014. 

Chapter VII  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 126 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
4.1.4. Deficiencies in award of work for Solar Power Plants 
Applicable guidelines are to be followed by the SNAs/ implementing agencies while 
executing the projects with regard to tendering and award of the work. The State wise audit 
findings are given below: 
Assam 
MNRE sanctioned (December 2011) 354 16 kW SPV power plants for ` 8.73 crore to be 
completed by December 2012. AE DA awarded the work (February 2013) to an ineligible 
contractor17. The work, that was to be completed by August 2013, was started by the 
contractor in October 2013 with an undertak ing to complete it by February 2014. 
Thereafter, the contractor sub-contracted the work to M/s Geetanjali Solar Enterprises. 
The work was not completed till date (June 2014). Audit also observed that another order 
was placed on M/s Umgreen Lighting for insta llation of two SPV power plants of five kW 
of similar nature, specifications and locati on at a lower rate wh ich led to an excess 
expenditure of ` 0.22 crore. 
Jammu & Kashmir 
Inspection report of the Director General Qu ality Assurance (DGQA) indicated that 5,000 
SHLSs supplied by a firm18 for ` 5.44 crore were not as per Indian Standard specification as 
envisaged in the Notice Inviting Tender (NIT ) and Chinese solar cells were used which 
were not allowed as per NIT. JAKEDA did not take any action against the defaulting firm 
and justified the deviation to Audit on the grounds that the firm was to maintain the 
system for five years free of cost. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that all procured  items were test certified as per MNRE 
requirements and there was no restriction on Ch inese cells. The reply is not tenable as it 
violates the standard given in NIT and modul es were not indigenous as envisaged in 
programme guidelines. 
Jharkhand 
Scrutiny of records revealed that two mi ni-grid (off-grid) power plants of 120 kW 
(Jhargaon and Jari villages in Gumla District) were allotted to developers19without inviting 
tender. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that with no party coming forward to work in Gumla District, 
work was awarded on nomination basis by the State Government. 
4.1.5. Irregular payments 
Audit observed that in two States, SNAs had released payment to firms without following 
MNRE guidelines and obtaining requisite insta llation/commissioning reports. The State wise 
audit findings are given below: 
                                                            
16  Five kW capacity each at 27 DC offices and one kW SPV power plant at 219 Aryabhatta science centers. 
17  M/s Eversun Energy Pvt. Ltd, who had the experi ence of manufacturing, supply, installation and 
maintenance of off-grid SPV systems of 250 kW instead of required 350 kW in the previous three years. 
18  M/s Jain Irrigation Systems Limited. 
19  M/s DD Solar India Pvt Ltd and M/s Bergen Solar Power & Energy Ltd. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VII  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 127 
Jammu & Kashmir 
The SNA awarded contracts for installation of 422 SWHSs to two firms 20. It was observed 
that without following the guidelines and obtaining requisite installation/ commissioning 
reports, photographs of systems installed and full details of solar collector type and area 
installed, the SNA released payment of ` 0.41 crore to the firms. 
Tamil Nadu 
MNRE approved (May 2011) installation of six SPPs in Coimbatore at a cost of ` 12.60 
crore. CFA of ` 3.42 crore was sanctioned of which ` 1.70 crore released to TEDA. TEDA in 
turn released (June 2011) the entire amount of ` 1.70 crore received from MNRE to the 
supplier. Audit observed that TEDA released the CFA to the supplier directly, instead of 
releasing it to the beneficiary, which was no t as per MNRE guidelines. Despite the entire 
CFA being released to the supplier none of the six SPPs had been commissioned as of 
June 2014. 
Accepting the facts, MNRE stated (July 2015) that TEDA had released ` 1.70 crore without 
bank guarantee and now TEDA has filed police case against the supplier. 
Uttar Pradesh 
i. Uttar Pradesh New and Renewable Energy Development Agency (UPNEDA) 
purchased 7,517 Compact Fluorescent Lamp (CFL) based SSLSs (ordered at the rate of 
` 22,301) and installed them (January/March 2011) , under Project Mode even when 
cheaper Light Emitting Diode (LED) based SSL (at the rate of ` 16,830) were installed 
under Dr. Ambedkar Gram Yojna  (2010-11) in September 2010 , leading to an extra 
expenditure of ` 4.1121 crore. 
The SNA stated that CFL based SSLSs was or dered as per sanction of MNRE. The reply 
was not tenable as the UPNEDA could have sent revised proposal based on LED for 
the project. 
ii. In another case UPNEDA purchased (December 2011) 16,507 CFL based SSLSs at a 
higher price of ` 22,301 per unit, thereby paying an excess amount of ` 10.4022 crore, 
even though there was a valid  rate contract23 for supply of cheaper  and technically 
better Light Emitting Diode (LED) based SSL24. 
iii. Further, despite having above rate contra ct for LED based SSLSs (at the rate of 
` 16,000), UPNEDA ordered (September,  November 2011) for 13,262 and installed 
13,185 LED based SSLSs at higher cost (at the rate of ` 18,500) under Dr. Ambedkar 
Gram Yojna (2011-12) at an extra expenditure of ` 3.3025 crore. 
                                                            
20   M/s Electrotherm and M/s Tata BP. 
21  ` (22,301-16,830) X 7,517= ` 4.11 crore. 
22  ( ` 22,301 - ` 16,000) X 16,507 = ` 10.40 crore. 
23  M/s Linker Associates Lucknow. Ex ecuted in July 2011 and valid till January 2012 to supply LED based SSLSs 
at the rate of ` 16,000 per unit. 
24  A comparison between CFL and LED based SSLSs showed that luminosity of an 11 watt CFL-SSLS provides a 
lumen of 900 while a 10 watt LED-SSLS provided the same lumen (at the rate of 90 lumen per watt decided 
by MNRE). CFL based SSLS of 11 watt used solar panel of 75 watt and 75 AH tubular plate battery whereas 
solar panel of 45 watt and 40 AH tubular plate battery was used in LED based 10 watt SSLS. The working life 
of a LED and CFL was 50,000 hours and 8,000 hours respectively. Thus, it could be seen that a 10 watt LED 
based SSL is far better than an 11 watt CFL based SSLS both in terms of luminosity and price. 

Chapter VII  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 128 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
SNA stated that LED based SSLSs were not purchased (rate contract at the rate of 
` 16,000 per system) because these systems were  not as per standard and specification 
of MNRE. The reply was not tenable because in such circumstances the supplier 26 should 
have been disqualified instead of signing of rate contract. Further UPNEDA could have 
installed 16,507 LED instead of CFL based SSLSs. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that procurement was as per demand of public in rural areas and 
during 2011-12 CFL based light was proven system. The reply is not tenable as during the 
same year LED based SSLSs were installed at a cheaper rate. 
4.1.6. Non-adherence to contractual obligations 
Audit observed that in two States, SNAs were not able to ensure that the contractors adhere 
to the contractual obligations. The State wise audit findings are given below: 
Nagaland 
M/s Electrotherm was allowed (May 2012) to install and commission the incomplete 
portion of the SWHS work, initially allotted to  it, after cancellation of work order and 
release of EMD amounting to ` 0.10 crore, instead of forfeiting the same.  Penalty of 
` 0.21 crore27 on undelivered portion as stipulated in contract agreement was not levied. 
Similarly, the Department of New and Rene wable Energy (DNRE) had also failed to 
impose penalty of ` 0.06 crore28 on M/s Swastik for the delay in supply of SWHS materials 
and paid the Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) amount of ` 0.10 crore in full instead of 
forfeiting the same. 
Punjab 
i. MNRE sanctioned ` 2.48 crore for installation (N ovember 2007) of 4,000 SHLSs and 
500 SSLSs. Audit observed that though 3,600 SHLSs were not supplied by the 
contractor29, PEDA did not levy penalty of ` 0.44 crore as per contracted terms. Also 
the project was completed with extra payment of ` 0.13 crore, which was not 
recovered from the defaulting contractor due  to not including an enabling clause in 
the contract. The subsequent contractor 30 was also contractually liable to a penalty 
of ` 0.12 crore for delaying supply beyond December 2008 without approval of 
extension of time. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that this decision was taken by PEDA and the Ministry could 
not interfere in the mater. 
                                                                                                                                                                                         
25  ` (18,500-16,000) X 13,185=` 3.30 crore. 
26  M/s Linker Associates. 
27  The amount of penalty calculated for a period of 28 weeks (November 2011 to May 2012) was (0.5 per cent 
x ` 1.48 crore x 28 weeks). 
28  Delay for the period of four months or 16 weeks amounting to ` 0.06 crore (0.5 per cent x ` 0.80 crore x 16 
weeks). 
29  M/s Divayam Solar Energy De velopment Agency, Jalandhar. 
30  M/s Suntime Energy Delhi 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VII  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 129 
ii. MNRE sanctioned (July 2011) installation of 600 solar pumps for ` 22.20 crore to be 
completed by March 2012 and released ` one crore as the first installment. The 
supply order for 100 pumps was placed (May  and November 2013) by PEDA, and the 
pumps were installed with a delay of 25 to 151 days for which a penalty of ` 0.09 
crore was not imposed. Also incorrect UC for ` one crore against the due subsidy 
claim of ` 0.81 crore was sent by PEDA to MNRE in June 2013. 
iii. The State Government agreed to pay 40 per cent subsidy of ` 1.12 crore to PEDA for 
100 pumps valuing ` 2.80 crore.  However, it did not release the agreed amount of 
subsidy. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that penalty figure was imaginary. Further PEDA had also 
informed that the entire amount was spent and documents for release of balance CFA 
were under process. The reply wa s not tenable as work order provides the imposition of 
Liquidated damage at the rate of 0.5 per cent per week and maximum of 10 per cent of 
the contract value. 
Tamil Nadu 
MNRE sanctioned for installation of 60,000 SH LSs for houses constructed for BPL families 
under the Chief Minister’s solar powered green houses scheme. TEDA decided to 
implement the scheme with CFL bulbs in 49,650 houses and with LED bulbs in the 
remaining 10,350 houses. Tenders were in vited (October 2012) for commissioning and 
maintenance for five years for the 49,650 CFL based system and Letters of Acceptance 
(LoA) after evaluation of the bids was issued to the successful bidders by TEDA on 21 June 
2013 by which time, the validity of the bids had already expired on 1 June 2013. As one of 
the parties to whom LoA was issued expresse d its inability to extend the validity, the LoA 
for 28,596 units was cancelle d (July 2013). In the subsequent tender for 2013-14, the 
backlog quantum was awarded at a higher rate of ` 22,276 per system as against the 
originally decided price of ` 19,860 in 2012-13. The delay in  finalizing the tender led to 
additional expenditure of ` 6.91 crore besides loss of o pportunity to generate solar 
energy in 28,596 houses. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that delay was due to retendering as bidder expressed inability 
to fulfill order. The reply was not tenable as there was delay in the process of award of 
work. 
4.1.7. Excess recovery of beneficiary share 
Audit observed that in some States excess be neficiary share was collected by SNAs. MNRE 
had no mechanism to monitor such cases. The State wise audit findings are given below: 
Madhya Pradesh 
Excess amount of ` 1.26 crore received from MNRE and Madhya Pradesh Jail Department 
towards installation of 126 SPPs, was not re turned by Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd, Bhopal. 
Further,   excess amount of ` 0.07 crore received as beneficiary share from Commissioner 
Nagar Nigam, Gwalior and Tribal Research Inst itute, Bhopal had also not been returned 
since the last four years (August 2010 to August 2014) by Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd, Bhopal. 

Chapter VII  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 130 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Meghalaya 
MNRE sanctioned (September 2008) CFA of ` 1.77 crore for installation of 1,000 SSLSs in 
the State, for which the contract was awar ded in March 2010 by MNREDA and work was 
completed in June 2010. It was observed th at beneficiary share was very high at ` 9,450, 
as compared to State share of ` 2,000.  Also MNREDA was only  able to provide a list of 
only 170 beneficiaries to Audi t, instead of 1,000, indicating that the project was not 
completed. 
4.2. Monitoring and evaluation 
Cases of irregular installation, non installati on of solar devices and poor quality of work 
were noticed which indicated deficiencies in monitoring and evaluation. The detailed audit 
findings are given below: 
4.2.1. Deficient monitoring system 
As per JNNSM guidelines, Information and Co mmunication Technology was to form the 
backbone of monitoring system. At primary le vel the monitoring was to be done by the 
Channel Partners and additional monitoring co uld be done by reputed civil society groups, 
eminent persons, corporate houses, SNAs and MNRE officials, on random sample basis. 
Also, certified energy auditors were to be em panelled for certifying whether the outputs of 
the system correspond to the pa rameters laid down in the in-principle approval for non-
credit linked projects. 
Audit observed that third party monitoring was not carried out by MNRE/ SNAs and 
information technology was not made use of fo r monitoring. Energy auditors were also not 
empanelled by MNRE/ SNAs to certify the output of the systems. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that primary monitoring was done by SNAs and MNRE officials also 
visit the systems on random basis. MNRE acce pted that Information Technology enabled 
monitoring was an issue. 
4.2.2. Deficiencies in installation of solar devices 
Projects were sanctioned by MNRE based on the proposal received from SNAs/ other 
agencies. Test audit revealed instances of irregu larities in installation of solar devices which 
indicated deficiencies in monitoring. The State wise audit findings are given below. 
Assam 
MNRE sanctioned (July 2006 to March 2008) setting up of 10 di strict level energy parks 
for ` 0.65 crore. Inspection of one 31 park (October 2010) by AEDA revealed that poor 
quality work was done and there were defici encies in 10 of the 16 allotted works. No 
action in this regard was ta ken by AEDA.  AEDA furnished the UCs to MNRE in November 
2013 and claimed the balance of ` 0.30 crore. 
  
                                                            
31 Don Bosco High School. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VII  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 131 
Chhattisgarh 
MNRE sanctioned (October 2010) installati on of one kW SPP in nine Janpad sites 32of 
Surguja district. Out of nine, only four plants 33 were installed and two 34 of these plants 
were installed at unapproved locations. Five plants were not installed because of 
technical reasons. MNRE accepted the facts (May 2015). 
Himachal Pradesh 
i. Himurja installed 560 SSLSs under MNRE programme in villages Kandaghat and Batal 
during the years 2012-14 at an expenditure of ` 1.07 crore. Audit observed (August 
2014) that Himurja again installed 95 SSLSs at the cost of ` 0.19 crore out of funds 
sanctioned by the Department of Tourism for installation of SSLSs in the above 
villages. It was further noticed that SSLSs  were mostly installed adjacent to the 
electrical SSLSs. 
ii. MNRE sanctioned CFA of ` 0.20 crore in November 2008 for installation of 12 kW 
capacity wind-solar hybrid systems at Pooh in Kinnaur District. The first installment of 
` 0.15 crore was released by MNRE to Himurja in March 2009 and it released ` 0.13 
crore to M/s Machnocraft, Pune in the same month. The systems were installed in 
July 2009 but it could generate only 1,300 kW upto November 2009 and were not 
working satisfactorily thereafter. The balance grant of ` 0.02 crore had not been 
released by Himurja so far (March 2014.) Himurja accepted the facts (February 2015). 
Jammu & Kashmir 
Audit observed that 236 SPPs (capacity: 4,473 kW) sanctioned during 2008-14 were 
installed in Government buildings in areas wh ich were connected with  electricity grids. 
MNRE accepted the facts (May 2015). 
Mizoram 
Almost all SPPs were installed in areas wh ere grid connected power was available and 
more than 50 per cent  of the projects were commissioned in Aizwal city only. This 
indicated that preference was not given to is olated un-electrified rural areas. The State 
Government stated (January 2015) that ZEDA was not involved in the implementation of 
systems as these were implemented by Channel Partners of MNRE. It also stated the 
beneficiaries who are willing to contribute thei r share were selected. Due to shortage of 
fund it failed to extend its activities to far flung areas. The reply was not justified since 
solar systems were more required in rural areas than urban areas. MNRE accepted the 
facts (May 2015). 
  
                                                            
32 Ambikapur, Kusmi, Shankargarh, Manpat, Balrampur, Udaipur, Ramchandrapur, Odgi and Premnagar. 
33 Balrampur, Udaipur, Odgi and Premnagar. 
34 Balrampur and Premnagar. 

Chapter VII  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 132 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Nagaland 
i. Contract for installation of 4,200 SSLSs in 139 villages was awarded to three 
contractors35. According to progress report submitted (October 2013) to MNRE, 3,786 
SSLSs had been installed, in 196 villages. However, Audit observed that only 3,046 
SSLSs were installed, leading to inflated reporting of installation of 740 SSLSs of ` 2.22 
crore36. MNRE stated (May 2015) that it would s eek clarification in this regard from 
the SNA. 
ii. Audit scrutiny of completion reports submi tted by the firms, revealed that out of 
1,579 certificates submitted, 199 had identical serial numbers of major components 
of the devices reported to have been installe d, leading to doubt on the installation of 
SSLSs amounting to ` 0.60 crore. 
Uttar Pradesh 
With the aim of providing electricity in the remote unelectrified villages, UPNEDA decided 
(October 2010) to install 1.2 kW mini grid SPPs at 47 villages of 16 districts. Contracts 
were assigned (December 2011) to five firms for the work of design, supply, installation 
and commissioning of the plants. While three firms failed to execute the contract, two 
firms could install 23 plants in 23 villages of  11 districts (December 2012). Audit observed 
that most of the installed plants were lyin g non-functional since July 2013. As per the 
project report each plant was to have a maximum of 200 connections but these ranged 
from 46 (Hajipur, Sitapur) to 176 (Kathelakoth i, Sidharth Nagar). SNA stated  that the 
design of the project was not as per the elec tricity requirement of the villagers. It was 
also stated that some of the villagers drew electricity irregularly by tempering with the 
wires due to which the plants frequently became non-functional. 
4.2.3. Non preparation of beneficiaries list 
As per MNRE guidelines, all programme impl ementing organizations were required to 
prepare a record containing details of benefi ciary and SPV systems. The data was to be 
made available on a computer floppy/ Compac t Disc (CD) for verification/ audit purpose. 
The implementing agency was to prepare the beneficiary lists as per guidelines before 
sending the proposal to MNRE. The State wise audit findings are given below: 
Assam 
MNRE sanctioned two SWHS projects  (October 2012 and October 2013) for ` 3.33 crore 
and ` 3.50 crore. In the first project, out of 5, 925 square metre (sqm) of collector area at 
various locations, only 58 sqm area had been  installed and AEDA was still to prepare a list 
of beneficiaries. No progre ss was made in the second project at Guwahati Municipal 
Corporation. 
  
                                                            
35  M/s Sunshine Power Products Pvt Ltd., M/s Microsun Solar Tech. Pvt. Ltd. and M/s Sanmati Traders. 
36  740 X `  30,000 per set. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VII  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 133 
Odisha 
SPV systems were centrally proc u r e d  b y  H e a d  O f f i c e  ( H O )  of Odisha Renewable Energy 
Development Agency (OREDA) and issued to di fferent RE cells of the districts based on 
their requisitions. Test check of beneficiaries’ list of districts by Audit revealed that they 
were incomplete as these did not contain detailed address of beneficiaries. 
SPV systems were issued in the name of the concerned technicians, but details of 
beneficiaries to whom technicians supplied th e systems were not on record. In one case 
of Khurda District, SPV systems were issued di rectly from HO to bene ficiaries, details of 
beneficiaries could not be made available to Audit. 
OREDA stated that targets were fixed de pending upon the willingness of the user 
organization assessed by the districts as well as HO. The reply is not tenable as there were 
no records of assessment of SPV system s by the district offices and at OREDA 
headquarters. 
Punjab 
Out of 2,500 beneficiaries to whom SLs were  distributed, PEDA did not provide list of 
beneficiaries in respect of 678 lanterns valued at ` 0.18 crore. 
4.3. Deficiencies in Annual Maintenance Contract (AMC) of systems 
As per MNRE guidelines upto January 2010 (before JNNSM), the SNA/ implementing agency 
had to enter into an AMC for the maintenanc e and proper running of the equipment after 
warranty period and quarterly report regardin g maintenance of systems/equipment was to 
b e  s e n t  t o  M N R E  b y  S N A .  H o w e v e r ,  A u d i t  o b s e r v e d  t h a t  i n  s o m e  S t a t e s  t h e r e  w e r e  
deficiencies in maintenance of systems by SN As. MNRE had no mechanism to monitor such 
cases in the States. State wise audit finding s on the maintenance of systems are given 
below: 
Assam 
During beneficiary survey, it was seen th at out of 48 SHLS systems installed under 
different off-grid SPV scheme s during 2009 – 2013, as many as 30 were defective or not 
working within one year of installation. 
Chhattisgarh 
As per suggestion of the System Integrator, for better generation, solar panels should be 
cleaned twice a week. During the test check of the records of SPV power plant of 100 kW 
installed in October 2012 at MGM Welfare So ciety, Raipur, Audit observed that power 
generation from the plant was on ly 78,700 kWh per year (about 50 per cent) due to non-
cleaning of panels. 
Haryana 
Village Energy Committees were to be constituted to ensure maintenance and upkeep of 
the off-grid systems. The concerned Panchaya t were required to de posit an amount of 
` 2,500 per SSL system in the account of Village  Energy Committee, as one time grant to 
meet the future maintenance expenditure. Audit observed that Village Energy 
Committees had not been formed. 

Chapter VII  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 134 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Himachal Pradesh 
Himurja executed AMC with the suppliers for off-grid systems installed in various villages. 
Audit observed (June 2014) that the representa tives of these suppliers were not visiting 
the sites regularly. During physical verifica tion of Chango village, the Pradhan Gram 
Panchayat stated that local skilled person a ttended to the complaints and rectified the 
defects in the solar systems installed. Himurja accepted (February 2015) the facts. 
Jharkhand 
i. Audit observed (July 2014) that AMC/CMC were done only for 2,827 out of 3,467 
SSLSs. No AMC/CMC was done for 7,000 SLs. 
ii. The suppliers were required to submit quarterly reports duly certified by the 
concerned local panchayats or bodies desi gnated by JREDA on functioning of the 
systems, but suppliers neither submitted any report nor clai med (March 2014) AMC 
charges (August 2014). JREDA also did not ensure submission of regular quarterly 
progress report. SNA accepted the audit observation. 
iii. Audit observed that Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL) Dhanbad reported (between 
November 2011 and February 2013) 70 per cent non-functional systems out of 299 
SSLSs installed during 2010-12 due to non ma intenance of the systems. Further, on 
the ground of non maintenance of installe d systems, BCCL withdrew (April 2013) its 
subsequent installation of SSLSs. SNA accepted the audit observation. 
Madhya Pradesh 
100 kW SPP commissioned (November 1999) at Jaitpura costing ` 3.59 crore was lying 
idle since October 2011 due to lack of maintenance. 
Maharashtra 
Under Special Area Demonstration Programme  (SADP) systems were installed at 
important Government buildings at a cost of ` one crore per site, inclusive of 
procurement and installation of systems a nd devices along with AMC. Audit observed 
that the system installed under SADP at  Raj Bhavan, Mumbai at a cost of `0.63 crore was 
not working satisfactorily. No action was take n to rectify the defici encies in the working 
of the system. An amount of ` 0.23 crore under the programme remained unutilized with 
the SNA. 
Punjab 
i. PEDA allotted the work of maintenance to  private contractors including warranty 
period of two to 10 years, but it was found during joint physical verification by Audit 
and PEDA, that contractors were not providing services properly, as three out of nine 
off-grid SPV systems inspected were found to be non-functional due to lack of 
maintenance. 
ii. MNRE sanctioned (October 2010) ` 5.40 crore for commissioning of SPPs in 17 
villages of Gurdaspur district to be comp leted by 30 June 2012, and to be operated 
and maintained for 10 years by the contractor under warranty clause. Plants were 
installed (October 2012) by the contractor at a cost of ` 2.63 crore but these were 
not working (September 2013) as the cont ractor was not maintaining the plants, 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VII  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 135 
despite these being covered in the warrant y period. Joint physical verification of 
three out of nine power plants conducted by Audit and PEDA, disclosed that all the 
three plants were not working. PEDA also did not levy penalty of ` 0.21 crore for 
delay in installation of the plants. One plant of 10 kW capacity valuing ` 0.29 crore in 
village Lodhi Naggal was installed in a priv ate house against the project proposal to 
install the same on Government Land/Panchayat buildings. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that defects were re ctified but did not comment on the issue of 
levy of penalty and installation of plant on a private house. 
Uttar Pradesh 
MNRE approved (February 2010) setting up SPPs at 340 police stations for ` 14.96 crore. 
Audit observed that the work was completed (June 2011) after a delay of six months but 
90 systems were not functioning (August 2012). The supplier 37 did not repair the systems 
even though these were within the two yea rs warranty and three years AMC. In Gonda 
eight out of 15 plants installed were lying no n-functional for almost one year. Payment of 
` 8.52 crore had been made to the supplier. SNA stated  that the systems became non-
functional due to excess use and overloading.  The reply was not acceptable as the full 
amount of ` 8.82 crore was released (November 2011) to the firm and systems were 
covered under warranty and AMC. 
Uttarakhand 
i. UREDA made an agreement with Central El ectronic Limited (November 2008) for the 
supply and maintenance of SSLSs in the State with two years warranty. In case the 
contractor could not rectify the defects wi thin 15 days of receipt of complaint, 
UREDA would restore the devices in working condition at the contractor’s expenses.  
Audit observed that 54 street lights were gi ven to Zilla Panchayat (ZP), Tehri Garhwal 
for installation in 29 villages and remain ing were distributed to the Gram Pradhans. 
Audit also observed that 45 out of 54 str eet lights installed were inoperative since 
June, 2011 i.e. within the warranty period. UREDA did not restore the systems at the 
contractor’s expenses. It was also noticed that in respect of 10 inoperative streets 
lights, the plates, batteries and CFL were stolen. The State Government accepted the 
facts (December 2014). 
ii. Under Special Area Demonstratio n Programme of MNRE, CFA of ` 0.41 crore was 
sanctioned (July 2010) for installation of ten solar devices at Raj Bhavan, Dehradun. 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that three 38out of the seven solar devices 39 actually 
installed were inoperative since their installation (May 2011). UREDA did not make 
any effort to rectify the inoperative sola r devices at the contractor’s expenses 
(August 2014). Accepting the facts, MNRE stated that action for rectification of solar 
devices had now been taken (May 2015). 
                                                            
37  M/s Kotak Urja Pvt Ltd, Bangalore. 
38  Solar road stud, solar pump and solar water purifier 
39  Out of ten, Raj Bhavan authorities did not permit fo r installation of two devices and for one device fund 
was not allocated. 

Chapter VII  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 136 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
4.4. Physical verification of off-grid systems by Audit 
In order to check the functionality of the installed off-grid systems, Audit conducted physical 
verification on a sample basis, the results of  which are summarized in Table 31. The audit 
findings indicate that large numbers of systems were not functioning properly in a number 
of States. Details may be seen in Annexure XIII. 
Table 31: Summary of physical verification of off-grid systems 
System 
No. of 
systems  
inspected 
No. of 
systems not 
working 
No. of 
systems 
missing 
Observations 
SHLS 1,191 372 29 
Issues ranged from lack of maintenance 
and after sales service facility to irregular 
issuance of systems to already electrified 
villages. 
SSLS 1,233 857 19 
A large number of systems were not 
working due to lack of maintenance 
facilities. 
SL 1,413 580 2 
Almost half the systems were not in 
working condition. Diversions of usage to 
factories/temples were also observed. 
SPP 24 9 Nil 
In addition to large number of idle systems, 
very low Cumulative Utilisation Factor was 
observed in working systems. 
SWP 91 47 Nil 
Issues like theft of modules, misuse 
towards commercial activities and very low 
discharge of water were observed. 
SWHS 7 3 Nil Nil 
Total 3,959 1,868 50  
Note: Solar Home Lighting System (SHLS), Solar Street Lighting System (SSLS), Solar Power Plant (SPP), Solar 
Lantern (SL) and Solar Water Pump (SWP). 
Physical verification of sampled systems by Audit revealed that 47 per cent of the off-grid 
systems were not working and one per cent of the systems were found missing and five per 
cent of the systems were issued to villages already electrified. 
4.5. Non implementation of awareness programme 
As per the JNNSM guidelines, awareness and de monstration of effective and innovative use 
of solar systems for individual/ community/ instit utional/ industrial applications were to be 
promoted. Audit observed that in some St ates awareness and demonstration programmes 
were not implemented as per JNNSM guidelin es. The State wise audit findings are given 
below: 
  

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VII  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 137 
Assam 
MNRE sanctioned (September a nd November 2005) an amount of ` 0.34 crore to District 
Level Renewable Energy Ad visory Committee (DLREACs) under Information & Public 
Awareness Programme in 23 districts.  Audit observed that only three 40 districts had set 
up these committees. MNRE had expressed its dissatisfaction over the working of the 
DLREACs from time to time and had stressed on improving their functioning. 
Gujarat 
GEDA received ` 0.38 crore during the period 2007- 10 out of which it utilised only ` 0.05 
crore and refunded ` 0.33 crore to MNRE as unutilised amount. Out of the above 
amount, ` 0.26 crore was given to GEDA for conducti ng functions/activities to generate 
mass awareness about the need, benefits a nd use of new and renewable energy on 20 
August of each year on the occasion of Rajiv Gandhi Akshay Urja Diwas. But 80 per cent of 
the fund was refunded to MNRE thereby defeating the very purpose and objective of the 
programme. Further, an amount of ` 0.12 crore was given to GEDA for setting up of 
renewable energy clubs in engineering college s/institutions and creating awareness and 
publicity of renewable energy in the year 2007-08. However, the entire amount of ` 0.12 
crore was refunded. 
Himachal Pradesh 
Himurja made efforts to create awareness through exhibition, Doordarshan/All India 
Radio, newspapers, National and State level trade fairs, events, publicity campaigns and 
mobile exhibitions in rural / remote areas during 2007-13.  Agains t allocated financial 
target of ` 0.84 crore (2007-14), MNRE released ` 0.60 crore.  Of that, Himurja spent 
` 0.59 crore.  However, the SNA could not organize the awareness programme during the 
year 2013-14 due to non-release of funds by MNRE. 
Uttar Pradesh 
MNRE released (August 2006) ` 0.11 crore for setting up Renewable Energy Clubs in 
engineering colleges/institutions approved by  AICTE in order to create awareness about 
RE, its various systems and de vices among students. Audit observed that out of the 64 
colleges selected by UPNEDA, 16 colleges were non-engineer ing colleges and only three 
colleges utilized ` 0.45 crore. 
Uttarakhand 
Against available fund of ` 1.80 crore during 2007-14, UR EDA incurred expenditure of 
only ` 1.35 crore on awareness programme throug h seminars, exhibitions, training and 
capacity building. Further, a Mobile Exhibition Van (MEV) costing ` 0.10 crore was 
procured (2004) by UREDA for organizing exhibi tions/publicity on RE in schools, colleges, 
public places including remote and far flung areas. Audit observed (August 2014) that the 
MEV was under utilized 41 since January 2012.  Rural areas including non-electrified 
villages were rarely covered. Further the publicity systems/devices (solar TV/ Biogas tank) 
installed in the MEV for demonstration pur pose were not functioning. The State 
Government accepted the facts (December 2014). 
                                                            
40  Karimganj (May 2005), Kamrup (June 2005) and Dibrugarh (July 2008) 
41  Was used in one rural area and six  urban areas of Dehradun and Nainital. 

Chapter VII  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 138 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
4.6. Failure of training centers in achievement of objectives 
As per MNRE guidelines, SNAs were required to  setup training centres for demonstration of 
solar appliances to be installed under RE off-gr id programmes and for that, SNAs were to fix 
targets for organizing training programme. Audi t observed that in Uttar Pradesh, Training 
centre at Chinhat had received ` 0.27 crore in 2009-10 and 2012-13 for conducting training 
programmes but for remaining years 2007 to 2014 (except 2009-10, 2012-13), neither any 
training proposal was submitted by UPNEDA no r were any funds released by MNRE for the 
purpose. Further, a demonstration-cum-training centre `Non Conventional Energy Research 
Institute’ (NERI) was set up at Ghosi, district Mau in 1993-94 for ` 1.76 crore. Audit observed 
that only one training programme for 40 pe rsons (Industrial Training Institute passed 
unemployed youths) was organized (March 2014) and no research work was done at the 
Institute. The building was lying vacant. Thus, the training centre failed in achieving its 
objectives. 
4.7. Mandatory requirement of SWHS 
Audit examined whether the State Government s/SNAs/Municipal Corporations had come 
up with policies that encourage hotels/instituti ons/society/ individual home etc, to install 
SWHSs and that new building in certain cate gories were not constructed unless solar 
assisted water heating systems were installed in the building.  
Audit examination revealed that the Stat e Government in Andhra Pradesh issued 
(December 2004) orders making SWHSs mandatory for all hospitals, nursing homes, hotels, 
guest houses, lodges and multi storied buildings  in colonies. No Objection Certificate (NOC) 
for building plan was to be issued only after deposition of 25 per cent of estimated cost of 
SWHSs as refundable performance guarantee, to  be refunded on successful installation of 
the SWHSs. Audit observed that as of March 2013, an amount of ` 9.69 crore was pending 
refund by the Non conventional Energy Development Corporation (NREDCAP) to residential 
apartments/commercial complexes/ hospitals after installing the SWHSs. These advances 
were outstanding since 2005 onwards. 
5. Conclusion 
MNRE did not align its solar photovoltaic off-grid targets with the Jawaharlal Nehru National 
Solar Mission targets and only 31 per cent of the Phase I, Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar 
Mission targets were achieved. Most of the Stat es did not set any solar photovoltaic off-grid 
targets and in cases where the targets were se t, the same were not achieved. The Project 
Appraisal Committee did not review the progre ss of the projects and the processing of 
applications was not Information Technology  enabled as envisaged under the Jawaharlal 
Nehru National Solar Mission guidelines. 
Audit noticed instances of non submission of  utilization certificates. Cases of excess 
recovery of beneficiary share were also observed. There were instances of irregularities in 
distribution of solar devices, delay in distribution, irregular purchase of solar devices, 
deficiencies in award of works for solar power plants, irregular payments and delay in 
completion of projects by the States. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VII  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 139 
Maintenance of the off-grid systems was also  not done as per the guidelines and the 
provisions of Annual Maintenance Contract. Physical verification of sampled systems by 
Audit revealed that 47 per cent of the off-grid systems were not working, one per cent of the 
systems were found missing and five per cent  of the systems were issued to electrified 
villages. 
6. Recommendations 
• MNRE must ensure that targets set under  the programme are in alignment with 
Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission. 
• MNRE may review all delayed off-grid projec ts, set clear timelines for completion of 
these projects by the State Nodal Agenci es/State Government s and ensure adherence 
with the same. 
• MNRE may set up an effective mechanism, in  coordination with the State agencies, to 
ensure that the off-grid syst ems are properly maintained and remain functional through 
their useful life. 
  

Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 141 
Chapter - VIII 
National Biogas and Manure Management 
Programme 
 
1. Introduction 
The Central Sector Scheme on National Biogas and Manure Management Programme 
(NBMMP) mainly catered to setting up of fam ily type biogas plants. It has been under 
implementation since 1981-82. The programme was implemented by State Nodal Agencies 
(SNAs)/State Nodal Departments (SNDs) lik e Agriculture Department, District Rural 
Development Agencies (DRDAs) and Khadi and Village Industry Commission (KVIC) centres. 
The main objectives of the scheme were to  provide clean bio-gaseous fuel mainly for 
cooking purposes; for reducing use of Liquified Petroleum Gas (LPG) and other conventional 
fuels; and to provide bio-fertilizer/ organic manure to reduce use of chemical fertilizers. 
1.1. NBMMP policy 
NBMMP provides for grant of central subsidy to the plant; turn-key job 1 fee linked with five 
years free maintenance warranty ; financial support for repair of old non-functional plants; 
training of users, staff, entrepreneurs, etc. and publicity and communication. 
CFA was being released to the concerned SNA/ SND and other implementing agencies at the 
rate of ` 16,700 per plant for North Eastern Region (NER) States and ` 8,000 to ` 10,000 per 
plant for other States. 
2. Potential, target and achievements 
2.1. Shortfall in achievement of targets 
The targets and achievements under the 11 th Five Year Plan (FYP) and 12 th FYP upto 2014 
are given in Table 32 below: 
Table 32: Targets and achievement under 11th and 12th FYP 
(Number in lakh) 
S. 
No. 
Year Target Achievement (Shortfall)/excess Percentage of 
shortfall 
11th Five Year Plan Period (2007-12) 
1 2007-08 1.04 0.89 (0.15) 14.42 
2 2008-09 1.24 1.08 (0.16) 12.91 
3 2009-10 1.50 1.20 (0.30) 20.00 
4 2010-11 1.50 1.51 0.01 - 
                                                            
1  A job or contract in which the contractor agrees to  complete the work of building and installation to the 
point of readiness for operation or occupancy. 

Chapter VIII Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 142 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
S. 
No. 
Year Target Achievement (Shortfall)/excess Percentage of 
shortfall 
5 2011-12 1.52 1.40 (0.12) 7.89 
 Total  6.80 6.08 (0.72) 10.58 
12th Five Year Plan Period (upto 2014) 
6 2012-13 1.30 1.25 (0.05) 3.85 
7 2013-14 1.06 0.84 (0.22) 20.75 
 Total  2.36 2.09 (0.27) 11.44 
 Grand Total 9.16 8.17 (0.99) 10.81 
Source: MNRE 
From the above table it can be seen that agains t the target of 9.16 la kh biogas plants, 8.17 
lakh (89 per cent) biogas plants were installed during th e period 2007-14. Except in the year 
2010-11, targets were not achieved in any of the years covered in audit. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the shortfall of only 11 per cent  over the period of seven 
years was not a major shortfall and was attributab le to reasons such as - (i) Poor economic 
conditions of the beneficiaries/farmers; (ii) In creased cost of construction and appliances; 
(iii) Increasing infiltration of domestic LP G as well as free LPG connections on first 
registration of most potential beneficiaries of bi ogas plants; (iv) Some of the States are high 
in potential but low priority is given  for the scheme by the State Governments; and (v) 
Increasing wages of labourer and trained biogas  masons and also due to lack of labourer 
availability, particularly after launching of the MGNREGA in the States. It also stated that on 
an average MNRE subsidy was only about 32 to 35 per cent of the costs of a biogas plant 
except in the North Eastern States where this was about 50 per cent and remaining amount 
was invested by the beneficiary from his pock et. A biogas plant cannot be subsidised 100 
per cent to achieve the target because of limitation of budgetary allocations. 
The reply is not tenable becaus e as per guidelines, the State Governments had to constitute 
Unit Cost Committees at the State Level to examine all issues relating to fixation of unit cost 
of installation of various models and sizes of  biogas plants. But the same was not done and 
MNRE did not revise the subsidy amount for the biogas plants. 
2.2. State wise potential, target and achievement 
State-wise target, potential, achievement and the total number of plants installed since 
1981-82 are given in Annexure XIV. The estimated potential of bi ogas plants was 1.23 crore 
plants of which 47.52 lakh plants (39 per cent) had been installed upto March 2014. From 
the annexure it was observed that: 
(i) There was high potential exploitation in Mizoram, Maharashtra (95 per cent each) and 
in Kerala (94 per cent). 
(ii) The potential exploitation was lowest in Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh 
and Bihar where it ranged between 2.37 per cent to 17.71 per cent. 
(iii) In Nagaland and Sikkim the reported achievement exceeded the potential which 
appeared to be anomalous. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VIII  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 143 
(iv) All States except Meghalaya fell short of achieving their targets. 
Some of the audit findings that illustrate the reasons for shortfall in achieving targets are 
given below: 
Bihar 
Bihar Renewable Energy Development Agency (BREDA) retained unspent balance of 
` 52.82 lakh sanctioned for NBMMP during 1984-87 for more than 27 years. It was also 
observed that MNRE stopped further f unding from 2001-02 onwards as the final 
settlement of accounts was a pre-requisite co ndition for implementation of the scheme. 
After the year 2009-10 neither BREDA nor MNRE provided any fund under this scheme. 
Nagaland 
Department of New and Renewable Energy (DNRE) reported that 3,371 biogas plants had 
been commissioned, but actually 1,416 plants had been commissioned, leading to inflated 
reporting of 1,955 plants being commissioned for a value of ` 1.82 crore. 
Punjab 
During 2007-11 Punjab Energy Development Agency (PEDA) was able to achieve the 
targets fixed for installation of biogas plants.  There was shortfall of 8,372 units during 
2011-14 and shortfall was hi ghest during 2011-12 (32.65 per cent ).  The  targets for 
2012-13 and 2013-14 included targets of 2,000 and 500 units respectively for Scheduled 
Caste (SC) beneficiaries, agains t which only five units (0.25 per cent) and `nil’ units were 
installed leaving a shortfall of 1,995 (99.75 per cent) and 500 units (100 per cent) during 
these years. 
 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that the estimated potential of family type biogas plant is based on 
cattle census of 1981-82 and the households having cattle holding of four and above. This 
may have varied from State to State in th e following period of 30 years. Hence, the 
achievements made so far cannot be compar ed exactly with the tentatively estimated 
potential of 1981-82. It further stated that the farmers/villagers cannot afford the balance 
cost of plant in Jammu & Kashmir.
 
3. Implementation 
3.1. Irregularities with respect to distribution of beneficiary share 
i. As per guidelines, Central Financial Assist ance (CFA) for construction of biogas 
plant2 was to be directly released to the beneficiary on completion of work. In 
Gujarat, Audit found that Gujarat Agro Industrial Corporation Limited (GAICL) in 
its books of accounts of 2012-13 had shown ` 2.06 crore as subsidy payable to 
beneficiaries for installation of biog as plant up to 2008-09. This amount 
                                                            
2  CFA for North Eastern Region was fixed by MNRE at ` 16,700 and for other States it was `  10,000. Rest of 
cost was to be borne by the beneficiary. 

Chapter VIII Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 144 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
included subsidy given by MNRE as well as State Government for NBMMP 
programme which was unpaid due to the same being unclaimed by the 
beneficiary. GAICL should have either made efforts to identify the beneficiary 
or refund the amount. MNRE stated (May 2015) that the concerned 
implementing agency in Gujarat have been asked to give the factual position 
regarding non-payment of subsidy in Gujarat. 
ii. MNRE enhanced (November 2009) the additional CFA for toilet linked biogas 
plants from 
` 500 to ` 1,000 per plant for implem entation of NBMMP during 
the 11th Five Year Plan, effective from 1 November 2009.  In Karnataka, it was 
observed that the Zilla Panchayat (ZP) , Belgaum did not comply with this, 
leading to short payment of additional CFA of ` 0.66 crore in respect of 13,287 
toilet linked biogas plants constructed during 2010-14. The State Government 
stated (October 2014) that ZP Belgaum utilised an amount of 
` 0.47 crore 
towards additional CFA for sanitary linked biogas plants. The documents, 
however, indicated that the payment was made only at the rate of ` 500 per 
beneficiary. 
3.2. Non adherence to the sche me guidelines regarding payment to Turn key Job 
Workers (TKJWs) 
As per MNRE guidelines, each TKJW would be paid an amount of ` 700 in the first year and  
` 200 for next four years per plant for regular ma intenance, after completing the inspection 
and providing satisfactory services. As per the scheme guidelines, the TKJW were to visit the 
plant twice a year, at least during the warranty period. However, Audit found that the SNAs/ 
SNDs did not have complete records relating to the visit of TKJWs. The State specific findings 
are given below. 
Himachal Pradesh 
Audit noticed (July-August 2014) that in eight 3 districts turn key job fee of ` 0.70 crore was 
paid during 2012-14 to the mistries in one installment at the rate of ` 1,500 per biogas 
plant, instead of in five installments spread over five years and linked with visits as per 
MNRE guidelines. 
Jharkhand 
JREDA allotted construction of biogas plants  to Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs) 
and technicians on turn key basis with the cond ition to maintain the plants for five years 
after commencement of the projects. For all 1,683 plants, no report regarding 
maintenance was available but payment of ` 0.26 lakh at the rate of ` 500 per plant for 52 
plants installed in 2007-08 and of ` 0.28 lakh at the rate of ` 350 (50 per cent of admissible 
rate of ` 700) for 80 plants installed during 2008-0 9 and 2010-11 were made to the NGOs 
that had installed the plants. 
  
                                                            
3  Bilaspur, Chamba, Hamirpur, Kangra, Mandi, Sirmour, Solan and Una. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VIII  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 145 
Karnataka 
i. Annual payment of ` 200 per completed biogas plant  was not being made to TKJWs but 
retained as caution money deposit. Karnat aka Renewable Energy Development Agency 
(KREDA) stated (October 2014) that KVIC had informed them that it had not received any 
claims for the refund and the amount would be refunded on receipt of claims. 
ii. In three4 Zilla Panchayats, CFA of  ` 4.20 crore was not released by MNRE and payment 
of ` 0.49 crore was pending to the turnkey agents for installation of 8,118 biogas plants. 
KREDA stated (October 2014) that it had no w made available the funds to clear the 
pending bills. 
Odisha 
During 2007-14, Odisha Renewable Energy Development Agency (OREDA) executed 33,244 
family type biogas plants. Ou t of 33,244, 8,387 plants were  executed departmentally by 
OREDA in deviation of guidelines for which OREDA claimed ` 1.02 crore during the period 
2007-12, which was also released by MNRE. 
16,081 plants were executed through depl oyment of TKJWs for which payment of ` 2.13 
crore was made during 2007-12 but the paymen t was not linked to five years warranty 
condition. 
OREDA stated that in order to generate revenue for its sustainability, it had been executing 
biogas projects on turn key basis through its staff.  The fact however remained that turn 
key fees was not admissible for the departme ntally executed projects as per MNRE’s 
guidelines. 
3.3. Irregular payment of CFA 
Given below is a Case Study from Karnataka where overall non-compliance with the MNRE 
guidelines was noticed. 
Case Study II 
Payment for incomplete Biogas plants and records in Karnataka 
There was irregular payment of CFA and State Financial Assistance of ` 4.37 lakh and ` 10.98 
lakh in Udupi and Shimoga ZPs respectively as  the biogas plants were incomplete and the 
payment was irregularly made without any details of date of construction and 
commissioning recorded on the completion report. 
These apart, deficiencies like only photocopies  of beneficiary records being produced to 
Audit, the beneficiary not signing in his/her application for biogas plant, claim form of 
beneficiary not being signed by the Executive Officer (EO)  of Taluk Panchayat (2010-11 
onwards), not obtaining the signature of be neficiary on the advance stamp receipt and 
issuing inspection certificate without recording the date of installation and commissioning 
of the biogas plant were noticed at Shimoga ZP. 
                                                            
4   Udupi, Shimoga and Tumkur. 

Chapter VIII Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 146 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
4. Monitoring 
4.1. Monitoring and physical verification of biogas plants 
As per the guidelines, the SNA had to send a quarterly report to MNRE regarding the 
number of plants installed in the State a nd how many of them were functional/ non-
functional. The SNA had to select at least tw o villages in each month for determining the 
status of biogas plant earlier set up. Some State specific audit findings are given below. 
Arunachal Pradesh 
i. APEDA did not select two villages each month to determine the status of the biogas 
plant set up earlier as required in MNRE guid elines. Quarterly progress reports were not 
sent to MNRE after physical verification. As a result, details of the number of biogas 
plants in working condition, etc; were not available on record. 
ii. APEDA did not conduct training/user courses for beneficiaries, masons, technicians, etc. 
under this scheme. However, it was stated th at beneficiaries were explained how to use 
biogas plants at the time of installation. 
Bihar 
Audit observed that SNA had not carried out any district wise assessment of the 
performance of the installed biogas plants except in Nalanda district where nine plants 
remained non-functional out of 70 plants installed during 2010-11. 
Gujarat 
GAICL had also not selected two villages for physical verification. 
Haryana 
Data base of functional and non-functional plants was not maintained by the Agriculture 
Department. 
Jammu & Kashmir 
Jammu & Kashmir Energy Development Agency (JAKEDA) did not carry out assessment of 
the number of non-functional plants and details of cost of repairs on these plants. At least 
two villages in each month were to be selected for determinin g the status of biogas plant 
earlier set up and quarterly reports thereof needed to be sent to MNRE. It was seen in 
audit that these agencies had not devise d any such mechanism to ascertain the 
performance of plants. 
Karnataka 
Since quarterly progress reports were not s ubmitted, the information on functioning and 
non-functioning biogas plants could not be assessed. Audit noticed during physical 
verification of 35 biogas plants of selected districts (RDPR) that 10 biogas plants were 
found to be non-functional. 
KREDA stated (October 2014) that the projec t engineer working in the programme had 
brought to its knowledge that cracks had deve loped in the plants due to quality of sand, 
black soil etc.; the cost of repair worked out to ` 10,000 and beneficiaries were not coming 
forward to set right the defects but were evincing interest for new plants.  

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VIII  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 147 
Uttar Pradesh 
Uttar Pradesh New and Renewable Energy Limi ted (UPNEDA) was to select at least two 
villages each month for determining the status of biogas plants but this was done only 
once in 2012. Inter district inspection was carr ied out by the project officers to verify the 
status of the plants. Once in May 2010 field inspection and evaluation was carried out by 
MNRE. 
Uttarakhand 
Uttarakhand Renewable Energy  Development Agency (UREDA) monitored the biogas 
programme through turnkey agents. The Bi ogas Development and Training Centres 
(BDTCs) also carried out inspections of the installed plants. However, SNA did not maintain 
any records for functioning of the systems. 
 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that SNAs are monitoring the biogas programme through turn key 
agents, biogas development and training cent res and carried out inspections of installed 
plants from time to time by visiting the biog as plants for physical verifications before the 
release of subsidy, TKJW fees etc. and the record  related to visits and verification of biogas 
plants were maintained by SNAs and the completion certificate are issued after 100 per cent  
inspection of the plants. It further stated that it was getting evaluation studies carried out 
by independent organizations from time to time as part of monitoring and evaluation of the 
programme. As per the last two independe nt evaluation studies carried out for 
implementation of the programme during the 10
th and 11 th FYP Period, the study reports 
have brought out a functionality rate of 95.80 per cent for the plants installed in six States 
during the 10 th FYP Period and 95.45 per cent for the biogas plants installed in eight States 
during the 11th FYP. 
However, the fact remained that audit examinat ion on a test check basis in selected States 
threw up instances of non-compliance with programme guidelines in this regard. The 
physical verification conducted by Audit revealed that 26 per cent plants test checked were 
not working (Refer to para 4.3). 
4.2. Independent evaluation 
As per the guidelines, the SNA could involve independent organizations and reputed NGOs 
in the monitoring and evaluation of the programme. State specific audit findings with regard 
to third party evaluations are given below. 
Gujarat 
GAICL carried out evaluation of the plants implemented in Gujarat during last 13 years (i.e. 
from 2001-02 to 201 2-13) by Gujarat Industrial and Te chnical Consultancy Organisation 
Limited (GITCO) in July 2013. GITCO in its inspec tion/study reported that 219 Sintex make, 
1,429 Deenbadhu make and two KVIC floating dome biogas plants were not working out of 
3,559 Sintex plants, 66,472 Deenbandhu plants and 128 KVIC plants respectively. 
  

Chapter VIII Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 148 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Jharkhand 
A third party evaluation was done by Gram Vikas Abhiyan Kendra, Ranchi for 270 units out 
of 1,683 units in 2009-10. Out of 270 units 200 (74 per cent) were found non-functional 
due to reasons of insufficient dung, water loggi ng and pipe leakage. No action was taken 
by Jharkhand Renewable Energy Developmen t Agency (JREDA) against the NGO for non-
functional units. However, no further work was allotted in subsequent years (2010-13). 
4.3. Physical Verification by Audit 
Audit conducted a physical verification of the biog as systems on a test check basis in the 24 
sampled States to gauge the condition of the systems installed and th e problems faced by 
the users. The Audit findings are given in Table 33. Details may be seen in Annexure XV. 
Table 33: Summary of physical verification of NBMMP systems 
System No. of 
systems 
inspected 
No. of systems not in 
working condition 
(in per cent) 
Observations 
Biogas 429 112 (26) 
A large number of systems were found to be in non-
working conditions due to following reasons: 
• Non availability of raw material 
• Use of alternate fuels like LPG and firewood 
• Damaged plants  
• Lack of maintenance 
 
Physical verification of sampled systems by Audit revealed that 26 per cent  of the biogas 
plants were not working. 
5. Awareness/training 
As per guidelines, the SNA had to prepare st andard publicity materials such as Do’s and 
Don’ts, leaflets, booklets, posters, etc. for wider dissemination in the State availing the 
financial assistance. Audit findings based on test check, with regard to awareness and 
training are given below. 
Gujarat 
Except during 2010-11 (beneficiaries meeting at Surat) no training was imparted to 
beneficiaries for biogas plant. Moreover, trai ning was imparted to masons in the year 
2007-08 only. 
  

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter VIII  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 149 
Karnataka 
Mass media has been utilized extensively to bring about awareness regarding the policies 
and incentives available but there was lack  of community participation due to non-
involvement of local bodies. KVIC creates awar eness about biogas plants through booklets 
and leaflets. 
Rajasthan 
Biogas Development and Training Centre (BDT C) and KVIC were creating awareness about 
the biogas projects in the State. Publicit y was done through distribution of printed 
material like posters, pamphlet and other manuals by BDTC on a large scale. Information 
regarding incentives and subsidy were also ad vertised through these materials. However, 
it was noticed that there was no proper participation of local bodies like Panchayats in this 
scheme and the same was not provisioned in the scheme also. 
 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that it is supporting the SNAs /SNDs and KVIC as well as BDTCs 
across the country for taking up promotional activities through communication and publicity 
component. Targets for various training courses including for awareness / promotional 
activities are allocated annually to all the desi gnated SNAs /SNDs and KVIC and BDTCs. They 
all conduct regular training programmes besides preparation of publicity material for wider 
dissemination of the NBMMP in the States. Howeve r, the reply is silent on the adequacy of 
number of training programmes and participation of local bodies. 
6. Conclusion 
The total estimated national potential for biogas plants was 1.23 crore, of which 47.52 lakh 
biogas plants (39 per cent) had been achieved as of March 2014. During 2007-14, against a 
target of 9.16 lakh biogas plants, 8.17 lakh (89 per cent) biogas plants were installed. None 
of the States except Meghalaya were able to achieve their targets during the period 2007-
14. However, the planning was done based on  the potential assessment done on the cattle 
census of 1981-82. 
Audit observed that several States did not follo w the guidelines with respect to timing and 
amounts released to turn key workers and complete records of visits of turn key workers 
were not maintained. In some States, implementing agencies did not conduct physical 
verification as required under the programme guidelines.  
Physical verification of sampled systems by Audit revealed that 26 per cent  of the biogas 
plants were not working. 
7. Recommendation 
• MNRE may ensure better compliance with gui delines, particularly with regard to 
successful functioning of the biogas plants constructed under the programme. 
  

Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 151 
Chapter - IX 
Remote Village Electrification 
 
1. Introduction 
The Remote Village Electrification (RVE) Pr ogramme was designed to provide financial 
support for electrification of those remote un electrified census villages and unelectrified 
hamlets of electrified census villages where grid-extension was either not feasible or not 
cost effective; and were not covered under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana 
(RGGVY). Such villages were to be provided basic facilities for electricity/lighting in 
distributed power generation mode, through various Renewable Ener gy (RE) sources like 
Small Hydro Power (SHP), biomass gasification based electricity generation systems, Solar 
Power Plants (SPP), etc depending upon local availability. 
Projects under the RVE Programme were inte nded to cover all the households in the 
village/hamlets, including those in the dalit bastis of the village, and creation of capability 
for availability of electricity as laid down in the National Electricity Policy 2005, i.e., a 
minimum of one kWh per household per day. However, if the State Governments concluded 
that the norm of one kWh per household per day was not achievable in a cost effective 
manner through various RE technologies, due to inadequate ava ilability of the resources, 
then as a last resort they could decide to pr ovide at least the basic lighting facilities through 
Solar Home Lighting Systems (SHLSs) for each of the willin g households in the village. 
However, as per the Rural Electrification Po licy 2006 of the Government, villages/hamlets 
using isolated lighting technologies like SPV, were not to be designated as “electrified”. 
The programme was to be implemented through State Nodal Agencies (SNAs)/ Power 
Departments/Electricity Boards/Corporate Entities  with active involvement of District-level 
Bodies, Panchayati Raj Institutions, Village Councils, etc. However, the State Governments 
were to notify the nodal agency which would be responsible for coordination of all the 
efforts in the State pertaining to electrific ation of remote unelectrified census villages 
through non-conventional energy sources. 
2. Targets and achievement 
2.1. Position of electrification of remote villages/hamlets 
At the end of the 10th Five Year Plan (FYP), 3,254 remote villages/ hamlets had been covered 
under the programme. The State wise targets a nd achievements for the period 2007-14 are 
given in Annexure XVI. The consolidated position as per MNRE for the period 2007-14 is 
detailed in Table 34 below: 
 
 
 

Chapter IX Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 152 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Table 34: Targets and achievement under 11th and 12th FYP 
S. 
No. 
Year Target (No. of villages/ 
hamlets) 
Achievement (No. of 
villages/hamlets) 
Up to 10th Five Year Plan Period # 3,254 
11th Five Year Plan Period (2007-12) 
1 2007-08 2,000 1,297 
2 2008-09 1,500 326 
3 2009-10 1,500 1,013 
4 2010-11 1,500 1,537 
5 2011-12 500 1,056 
 Total 7,000 5,229 
12th Five Year Plan Period (upto 2014) 
6 2012-13 Not fixed 975 
7 2013-14 Not fixed 860 
 Total Not fixed 1,835 
 Grand Total  10,318 
Source: MNRE. 
# - Figure not furnished by MNRE. 
Table 34 above revealed that progressively from 2007-08 onwards the coverage under the 
RVE programme declined. No targets were fi xed by MNRE for the years 2012-13 and 2013-
14. MNRE stated (July 2015) that it had sanctioned 13,059 villages/hamlets during the 
period 2007-14 out of which 11,308 had been comp leted/ electrified. The total of the year 
wise achievement as depicted in Table 34 di d not match with the achievement claimed by 
MNRE for the period 2007-14. 
It was also observed that the release of Cent ral Financial Assistance (CFA) decreased from  
` 132.81 crore in 2007-08 to ` 17.92 crore in 2013-14 and this was not commensurate with 
the RVE targets. 
Such wide variations in all parameters of target setting and achievement raise doubts on the 
reliability of the planning process and the data maintained by MNRE. 
2.1.1. Short achievement of  targets 
Under RVE programme, Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Kerala and Nagaland completed 
electrification in villages/hamlets as per MNRE ’s sanction. However, Chhattisgarh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal could not cover all 
the villages/hamlets sanctioned by MNRE under the scheme. 
2.1.2. Coverage of excess villages/hamlets under RVE programme 
Under RVE programme,  in the following States more villa ges/hamlets were reported to be 
covered than the villages identifi ed as eligible by REC, thus indicating that ineligible 
villages/hamlets were covered under the RVE programme. The States in which the number 
of villages/hamlets identified as eligible as RE C were less than the actual coverage reported 
are given in Table 35. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IX  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 153 
Table 35: States which covered more villages/hamlets than identified as eligible by REC. 
State Number of villages/hamlets 
verified by REC 
Number of villages/hamlets 
completed upto 2013-14 
Goa 0 19 
Haryana 149 241 
Himachal Pradesh 1 20 
Tripura 583 606 
2.1.3. Improper planning by the States 
As per the scheme guidelines of RVE, v illages/hamlets covered under RGGVY based on 
certification by REC, were not eligible fo r coverage under the RVE programme. However, 
Audit observed deviations in this regards in some States. The State wise audit findings are 
given below: 
Assam 
i. The State Government notified three agencies for implementing RVE – Assam 
Power Distribution Company Limited (f or 1,057 villages), Assam Energy 
Development Agency (AEDA) (for 920 villages) and Forest Development Agencies 
(for 162 villages). As of Nove mber 2014, 191 villages remained to be electrified, but 
no record of basis of prioritization among villages was available. All residents of the 
villages were not covered and the basis of  selection of individual beneficiary was 
not on record. 
ii. Audit observed that out of 206 villages identified for electrification, one had no 
beneficiaries, ten were al ready electrified and four were covered under village 
energy security programme. Four villa ges electrified under RVE programme had 
already been covered under RGGVY. As pe r DPR approved in February 2008, in 19 
villages in Dhubri district there was a vast  difference in the num ber of beneficiaries 
actually present, which led to delay of four years in implementation of scheme. 
Chhattisgarh 
REC prepared DPR for electrification of 10 villages under RGGVY. However in disregard of 
the programme guidelines, electrification of Kurkuriya village (Jashpur district) was done 
by CREDA through solar po wer. Similarly, out of 85 villages covered under RGGVY 
scheme, nine more villages were being electrified by CREDA. 
Jharkhand 
Jharkhand Renewable Energy Development Agency (JREDA) did not have a complete list 
of un-electrified villages in the State. During  2007-14, it prepared annual work plans to 
implement the programme in 792 villages but could not send proposals to MNRE during 
2007-08 and 2012-14. As such, programmes of RV E was sanctioned by MNRE only for 251 
villages. However, 353 villages1 were covered under this programme during 2007-14.  
                                                            
1  RVE for 102 villages was sanctioned in 2006-07. 

Chapter IX Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 154 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Jammu & Kashmir 
Jammu and Kashmir Energy Development Agen cy (JAKEDA) had not undertaken surveys 
of remote villages for assessment of demand for electricity and availability of RE sources. 
As such, DPR and lists of beneficiaries had not been prepared despite the fact that 
JAKEDA received ` 2.86 crore from MNRE, which had been utilized on unapproved items 
like purchase of five vehicles, Petrol, Oil and Lubricants, Travelling Allowance, air fares, 
lunch in hotels, repair of vehicles, hiring of  vehicles, office equipment, wages etc. during 
2008-14. Audit observed that the SNA relied on  the lists of remote villages/ beneficiaries 
framed by the Rural Development Department, which were vetted by the concerned 
Deputy Commissioners. The criteria adopted by the Rural Developm ent Department for 
formulation of lists of remote villages/ bene ficiaries was not on record. It was seen in 
audit that long term as well as short term targets had not been fixed for electrification. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that identification of beneficiary and survey for demand of 
electricity was a State subject and a clarif ication will be sought from JAKEDA with 
reference to expenditure. The reply is not tenable because MNRE did not monitor the use 
of CFA either through utilization certificate or otherwise. 
Odisha 
RVE programme was implemented in eleven  districts during 2007-12 with CFA of ` 51.77 
crore and State Financial Assistance of ` 21.93 crore. The targeted number of 1,621 
villages were electrified after delays rangin g from five months to three years due to 
indecisiveness of the State Government. Furt her, delay in release of State share of 
financial assistance, delay on the part of administrative department 2 to finalise 
mechanism for implementation and consequential delay in placement of orders on 
vendors, etc led to CFA of ` 1.45 crore pertaining to th e period 2008-10 to be refunded 
(January 2013). 
West Bengal 
Out of 24 villages only six villages had been covered due to delay in tendering. Further, 
provision was made for electrification of 18 villages by SHL system but the project had not 
yet commenced. MNRE stated (May 2015) th at the State had been advised through 
meeting, video conferencing to expedite the implementation. 
2.2. Funding of the programme 
As per MNRE guidelines, CFA of upto 90 per cent of the costs of the RE generation systems 
was to be provided for approved projects, subject to the maximum amounts, and balance 
cost was to be financed through contributions  from State funds, beneficiaries, or other 
sources. 
Further, 70 per cent of the CFA was to be released alon g with sanction. The amount was to 
be used as early as possible. In case it was not possible to utilize the funds, the same was  
to be kept in interest bearing separate bank account and the accrued interest credited 
towards CFA. The second installment of 30 per cent was to be released after the receipt of 
                                                            
2  Science and Technology Department of the Government of Odisha. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IX  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 155 
Utilisation Certificates/ Statement of Expenditure s (SoEs) and periodical monitoring reports 
from SNA /independent bodies. 
2.2.1. Irregularities in release of CFA and its utilisation 
Audit observed that there were issues like non release of CFA by  MNRE, CFA not being 
released in proportions fixed for the programm e, CFA being kept in non-interest bearing 
account etc. The State wise audit findings are given below: 
Assam  
During 2005-14, MNRE sanctioned eight pack ages covering 882 villages with a CFA of 
` 62.13 crore. As per guidelines the initial installment of 70 per cent was to be released 
along with the sanction. Audit observed that  in five packages, MNRE released initial 
installment of only 0.38 per cent  to 31 per cent  and subsequent installments were 
released after lapse of 32 to 1,627 days. CFA of ` 12.20 crore was yet to be released by 
MNRE. Delay in release of sufficient installments impacted smooth progress of the 
projects. AEDA submitted Utilisation Certificates (UCs) with a delay of 652 to 1,755 days.   
Further, AEDA did not have an interest bearing account for the CFA received, which led to 
loss of interest of ` 67.72 lakh during phase I of the programme. 
Meghalaya 
Contrary to guidelines, in respect of two projects (70 and 66 remote villages) CFA of 
` 2.18 crore and ` 1.68 crore released by MNRE was ke pt in non-interest bearing account 
leading to loss of interest of ` 9.78 lakh. MNRE withheld the final release of installment of 
` 0.89 crore and ` 0.71 crore, respectively due to violation of guidelines and non 
evaluation of projects by third party. 
Odisha 
During 2006-07 to 2011-12, Odisha Renewa ble Energy Development Agency (OREDA) 
neither kept the fund in a separate bank account nor credited the interest on the 
unutilised funds to that account. Thus, CFA of ` 15.84 lakh to ` 10.63 crore were blocked 
without utilisation for a period ranging from 15 to 652 days leading to loss of interest of 
` 1.72 crore. OREDA stated that interest ac crued on this account is utilized to meet 
several contingencies in the execution of th e programme. However, it was observed that 
interest earned on the funds were not identified and added to the CFA. 
Rajasthan 
During the years 2011-13, MNRE sanctioned ` 13.41 crore for installation of 12,941 SSLSs. 
The systems had been commissioned, but ` 3.29 crore were yet to be released by MNRE 
for want of third party evaluation. 
 
 

Chapter IX Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 156 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
2.2.2. Irregularities in collection of beneficiary share 
The State wise audit findings are given below: 
Assam 
i. Audit observed that there was excess collection of beneficiary share of ` 2.72 crore 
by the implementing agencies for SHLSs in 305 villages. 
ii. AEDA did not procure systems at the cost fixed by MNRE which le d to an additional 
burden of ` 28.33 lakh to be shared betwee n the State Government and the 
beneficiaries. 
Jammu & Kashmir 
Beneficiary share of ` 750 per SHLS and ` 500 per SL was to be reco vered before issue of 
these equipment. Audit observed that an amount of ` 25 lakh had been outstanding 
against district officers as beneficiary sh are as of March 2014 for the systems issued 
during 2009-13. Further, foolproof mechanism for recovery of beneficiary share had not 
been formulated as beneficiary share to be recovered was not indicated in the SHLS 
distribution lists. As a result, the district officer, Baramulla had collected (2011-12) 
beneficiary share in the range of ` 1,600 to ` 3,000 in villages of Jabla and Gakhrote in 
place of approved amount. 
3. Implementation of the RVE programme 
Audit noticed instances of inordinate delays in completion of projects, award of contracts to 
ineligible contractors, irregular distribut ion of lighting systems and incomplete/non-
installation of Remote Village Electrificatio n systems. The detailed audit findings are given 
below: 
3.1. Delay in completion of projects 
As per MNRE sanctions, all projects were to  be completed within one year of release of 
funds. However, Audit observed that there were inordinate delays in completion of projects. 
The State wise audit findings are given below: 
Chhattisgarh 
Under RVE programme, MNRE sanctioned ` 23.18 crore for 314 villages and released 
` 16.21 crore during 2007-09. CREDA had execut ed the electrification work of 252 
villages. MNRE did not release the remaining CFA as electrification work could not be 
completed even after seven years, due to law and order problems affecting the villages. 
  

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IX  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 157 
Meghalaya 
A project of 70 villages approved in March 2007 was completed with a delay of 22 months 
as State share was not released on time and there were changes in the list of villages3 and 
increase in number of households 4. Another project of 66 villages sanctioned in March 
2010 was completed (May 2011) wi th delay of two months and only 52 villages were 
electrified5 as 11 villages were covered by othe r schemes and three villages were not 
inhabited. 
 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that efforts were  being made through video conferences and 
meetings to expedite the implementation within the stipulated time. 
3.2. Non utilization and diversion of funds 
Audit observed that there were cases of non utilization of funds and diversion of funds. The 
State wise audit findings are given below: 
Bihar 
An amount of  ` 20 lakh received from  the State Government during 2007-08 was lying 
unutilized for last six years as no project was taken up by BREDA. Further, ` 0.52 lakh was 
transferred to Rajiv Gandhi Akshaya Urja Di was during 2012-13 from this amount. BREDA 
accepted the facts. 
Chhattisgarh 
MNRE sanctioned (June 2007) an amount of ` 2.14 crore for electrification of village 
Kachhar. Instead electrification work at thr ee villages (Arsiya, La lpani, Tumnar) was done 
by utilizing MNRE share of ` 59.40 lakh. Further, cases of deviation in number of 
sanctioned households, SHLS, SLS, power plants  were also noticed. In some villages SPV 
Power Plants had been sanctioned but no Powe r Plants were installed and electrification 
was done through SHLSs and SLSs only. 
 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that during the final settlement CFA was disbursed only for those 
villages which were approved and no deviat ion was allowed without prior approval. The 
reply is not tenable because electrification was not done in the villages as per the sanctions 
accorded. 
3.3. Award of contract to ineligible contractors 
As per MNRE guidelines, competitive bidding pr ocess was to be followed in award of works 
to contractors. For SPV systems, procurement was to be done from suppliers having valid 
test certificate from a MNRE authorized test  centre. The State wise audit findings are as 
follows: 
                                                            
3  12 villages in the original list had to be replaced  as 11 villages were unwilling and one was abandoned. 
4  There was an increase in the total number of househol ds which led to increase in installation of SHLSs to 
1,570. 
5  Six villages were already electrified by MeECL, five villages were covered by it under Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs Programme/other programme and three villages were uninhabited. 

Chapter IX Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 158 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Jammu & Kashmir 
JAKEDA placed orders 6 (26 October 2009) for supply of 11,227 SHLS 7 for ` 11.24 crore. 
Audit observed that the supply order was pl aced without the approval of the JAKEDA 
board and it was split into 14 supply orders in  order to avoid cheques being jointly signed 
by the CEO and Commissioner/ Secretary. Taki ng serious note of the matter the Minister 8 
ordered cancellation (Novembe r 2009) of supply order, but JAKEDA did not cancel the 
supply order placed with Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals (DGS&D). Further, 
DGS&D rate contract was to lapse by 31 Oc tober 2009. The new DGS&D rate contract for 
the systems was lower ( ` 12,500) than the previous rate contract ( ` 12,978), leading to 
loss of ` 32.81 lakh. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that at the time of final Settlement the SNA had to certify that 
the CVC guidelines have been followed while selecting the contractor. 
Nagaland 
M/s Kuwe Mero, who had qualified in both th e technical and financial bids had quoted 
the lowest rate among the tenderers for supply of SHLSs and SSLSs. The supply orders 
were however awarded to M/s Kuovisie Rio and M/s Kevi Chadi at a rate higher than that 
quoted by M/s Kuwe Mero. No justification for selection of bidder at higher rate was on 
record. This led to excess expenditure of ` 26.60 lakh. 
The Department of New and Renewable Energy (DNRE) accepted the fact and stated that 
though lowest rate was recommended for awar d of contract, the Directorate of DNRE, 
recommended award of contract to higher bidder. Accordingly, supply order was issued. 
3.4. Excess/irregular distribution of RVE systems 
As per MNRE guidelines, the implementation of the RVE systems should be certified by 
authorized village/district level officials/bodi es to the effect, that the village has been 
electrified or that work had been carried ou t as per the sanction order/DPR (for SHLS). 
Further, periodic monitoring should be done  by the SNA/independent agency and report 
thereof submitted to MNRE. MNRE should also  monitor the progress of the project through 
the reports submitted by the SNAs so that  RVE systems are distributed as per MNRE 
sanction. The State wise audit findings are given below: 
Jammu & Kashmir 
i. In four test-checked districts, records showed that 25,016 SHLSs were approved for 
25,016 households of 148 villages. JAKEDA procured only 22,690 SHLSs out of which 
only 10,324 SHLSs were distribut ed as per sanction. 3,382 SHLSs were distributed in 
34 unapproved villages/ hamlets without obtaining the approval of MNRE and 8,984 
SHLSs were distributed in 37 electrified ha mlets. The State Government stated (July 
2014) that the villages which had been elec trified during the process of obtaining 
                                                            
6  With Director General Supplies and Disposals (DGS&D), New Delhi. 
7  6,872 SHLS of M/s Bharat Electronics Ltd make and 4,355 SHLS of M/s Kotak Urja Private Ltd. make. 
8  Science and Information Technology Department. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IX  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 159 
sanction from MNRE were dropped and on ly actual un-electrified villages were 
covered. However, Audit observed that the due process of obtaining prior permission 
from MNRE for distribution of SHLSs amon g the beneficiaries was not followed and 
SHLSs were distributed in electrified hamlets. 
ii. The executive committee of the JAKEDA decided (May 2009) that the hospitals which 
were suitably connected with grid would not require SPP as a backup and decided to 
install SPP only in the health centres of the REC cleared villages which were without 
electricity. Records, however, showed th at 47 SPPs were installed at district/sub-
district hospitals which were grid connected. Similarly, 40 SSLSs (cost: ` 10 lakh) were 
installed (November 2011) at four hospitals of Jammu city which were already 
provided with grid based SSLSs. 
3.5. Incomplete /Non deployment of RVE systems 
Audit observed that there were cases of inco mplete installation of RVE systems and non 
deployment of RVE systems. The State wise audit findings are given below: 
Jammu & Kashmir 
MNRE had released CFA of ` 64.32 crore during 2007-14 for in stallation/distribution of 
1,04,118 SHLSs/SSLSs. Ho wever, only 48,298 (46 per cent) SHLSs had been distributed as 
of March 2014. 
Jharkhand 
As per MNRE guidelines, RVE systems installed in the village should be redeployed if the 
village was connected to a grid before expiry of  at least five years of the installation of 
RVE systems. 
However, Audit observed that in 14 villa ges of Potka block in East Singhbhum, RVE 
systems (SHLS: 902 and SSLS: 89) installed were not redeployed on getting grid 
connectivity under RGGVY. 
Uttarakhand 
The State Government approved (December 2 008) construction of two SHP projects at 
Pinswad (50 kW) and Kotijhala (200 kW) under RVE programme for providing electricity to 
2,700 inhabitants of 502 households for ` 0.81 crore. Construction of both projects was 
stopped (December 2012) after in curring an expenditure of ` 0.43 crore because of lack 
of interest by Urja Samitti, deviation in drawing, substandard work (May 2011) and 
further damage caused by natural disaster in  June 2013. MNRE stated (May 2015) that as 
informed by the SNA, the work was in progress. 
West Bengal 
MNRE sanctioned ` 36.76 crore (February 2010) with CFA of ` 21.60 crore for 
electrification of 18 remote villages of Sundarban by providing SHLS to 23,845 households 
and 2,008 SSLSs. 

Chapter IX Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 160 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Audit observed that no work was taken up (September 2014) because of delay in 
finalization of the beneficiary list, delay in  tendering and absence of infrastructural 
support. Although only ` one lakh was spent but UC for the full amount was sent to 
MNRE. MNRE also did not monitor the implementation of the project. MNRE stated (May 
2015) that it accepts the UC cert ified by SNA, however, in this  case a clarification will be 
sought from WBREDA and that WBREDA has been instructed to finish the project in time. 
4. Monitoring and evaluation 
As per MNRE guidelines, the concerned State Departments/ Implementing Agencies were to 
ensure close monitoring of the implementation  of the projects and to provide periodic 
progress reports to MNRE. Third party monitori ng by an independent, reputed agency after 
completion of the projects was mandatory befo re release of the final installment. MNRE 
provided ` 50,000 per village as service charge to the Implementing Agencies for third party 
monitoring by an independent, reputed agency. 
After installation also it was the responsib ility of the implementing agencies to ensure 
functionality of the systems and periodic moni toring was to be carried out by them.  The 
district/village level agencies were to be clos ely associated in planning, implementation and 
monitoring of all projects. 
MNRE was also to carry out its own monitoring and evaluation of the projects directly or 
through independent agencies appointed by it. 
Test audit revealed deficiencies in monitori ng by SNAs and MNRE. The State wise audit 
findings are given below: 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Arunachal Pradesh Energy Development Agency (APEDA) conducted third party 
monitoring only once after installation of SHLSs under RVE programme in 2005-06 by 
Arunachal Pradesh Aditya Solar Society, Itanag ar (NGO). However, there was no data on 
the number of SHLSs functioning. MNRE stat ed (May 2015) that clarification will be 
sought from APEDA in respect to evaluation report. 
Assam 
The three9 implementing agencies got the systems evaluated by third parties like Assam 
Financial Corporation, IIT Guwahati, Tezpur Un iversity etc. The deficiencies pointed out 
included non installation of systems as per work order, insufficient training, systems being 
stolen, systems sold/transferred to others , excess collection of beneficiary share, 
demands for grid connected power so that ot her household needs could be fulfilled, non 
creating of corpus funds for maintenance and replacement of batteries, systems not 
working to the full extent etc. 
  
                                                            
9 AEDA, APDCL and FDAs. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IX  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 161 
Chhattisgarh 
CREDA received an amount of ` 1.09 crore from MNRE as service charges for RVE projects 
but monitoring and evaluation of the completed RVE projects was not conducted through 
any agency/organisation. MNRE stated (May  2015) that third Party monitoring was a 
mandatory requirement for final settlement of  projects and CREDA had been asked for 
submission for the same. 
Jammu & Kashmir 
i. Audit observed that the SNA had neither carried out periodic inspections nor 
monitored the implementation of the proj ects through independent agency. As a 
result, performance of these projects could not be ascertained. The State 
government stated (July 2014) that since th e projects had been recently completed, 
the third party monitoring got delayed and it would be  taken up immediately. The 
reply is not tenable as RVE had been running since 2007-08. 
ii. The UCs and SoE in respect of installati on of SHLSs under RVE programme were not 
submitted to  MNRE within the scheduled period of time as detailed  below: 
• UCs and SoE in respect of electrificatio n of 68 villages (sanctioned in February 
2009), 77 villages (March 2010) , 27 villages (March 2010), 80 villages and 20 
hamlets (March 2010) and 48 villages (July 2010) were submitted to the MNRE in  
January 2013 after a delay of 31 to 47 months; 
• The UCs and SoE in respect of 12 projec ts sanctioned during November 2007 to 
February 2012 were submitted to the MN RE during the period April 2010 to May 
2014 after delays ranging between 14 and 36 months; and 
• The UCs and SoE in respect of installation of one SPP of 100 kW capacity 
sanctioned (December 2011) had not been  submitted as of August 2014 due to 
non-completion of the project. 
Kerala 
Audit observed that no monitoring was done  by the ANERT, thereby violating the terms 
and conditions of the RVE programme. 
Maharashtra 
i. In 30 villages the quarterly reports were submitted for periods two to three years 
only as against the full duration of five yea rs. Quarterly reports for the entire period 
were not available with MEDA in respect of the remaining five villages10. 
ii. In 14 villages the Gram Sevaks did not subm it six monthly reports to MEDA, in the 
absence of which the functioning of solar equipments (home/street lights) could not 
be ascertained in audit. 
iii. The report on training, orientation and awareness programmes for operating the 
solar equipments for various target groups  / stake holders conducted by the supplier 
during the period 2007-14 were not furnished to  Audit. In the absence of reports, it 
could not be ascertained whether the trainings were conducted or not. 
                                                            
10 Bhatpur district Gadchiroli, Ahire-Khandi district Pune, Charmali district Jalgaon, Gongwada and 
Rameshgudam district Gadchiroli. 

Chapter IX Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 162 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Meghalaya 
Third party monitoring was done by private cons ultants only for the project of 70 villages. 
As per the monitoring re port submitted, 97.49 per cent of the total systems were found 
available at the time of survey. However, in  the absence of the third party monitoring 
report for the other project for electrificatio n of 52 villages, the impact of the project 
implementation could not be ascertained in audit. 
Nagaland 
As per the DPR, a Village Energy Management  Board (VEMB) was to be formed for long 
term sustainability of the project, monthly co llection of revenue and periodic monitoring. 
However, records on actual functioning of the VEMB and its monitoring by DNRE could 
not be furnished to Audit. DNRE stated that as per MNRE guidelines, VEMB was formed in 
all the eight villages. However, collection of revenue was not done by VEMB inspite of the 
Department’s directives. 
Uttar Pradesh 
Audit observed that there was no periodicity of sending monitoring reports to MNRE and 
the same was sent as and when demanded by MNRE. However, copy of reports could not 
be furnished to Audit. 
Uttarakhand 
SNA did not maintain any record to indicate functionality of systems under RVE which was 
also confirmed during physical verification. 
 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that under the prov isions of the RVE Programme, maintenance 
and long-term sustainability of installed syst ems was primarily the responsibility of the 
concerned State Governments/SNAs. The reply is not tenable because MNRE did not carry 
out its own monitoring and evaluation thro ugh an independent agency to address the 
problems. 
5. Maintenance 
Deficiencies in maintenance of systems were  noticed across the sampled States due to 
under collection of user charges and defici encies in maintenanc e arrangements. The 
detailed audit findings are given below: 
5.1. Collection of user charges from beneficiaries 
As per the programme guidelines , user charges on an upfront basis and/or monthly basis 
were to be collected from  beneficiaries. Where SHLSs are used, a charge of ` 20 per month 
or ` 10 per month were to be coll ected depending on the model of SHLS installed. This 
money was to be kept in a separate account for use for replacement of batteries and other 
components. A willingness to pay this amount by the beneficiaries was to be obtained 
before installation. The State wise audit findings in this regard are given below: 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IX  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 163 
Assam 
Audit observed that the Village Electrification Committees remained non functional which 
led to beneficiary share not getting collected, maintenance issue not being taken up with 
the contractors / implementing agencies and  non monitoring the use of electrical and 
electronic gadgets by beneficiaries which had  an adverse affect on the life of the 
systems. 
Chhattisgarh 
CREDA invited tenders in 2011-12 for AMC of SPPs, SSLSs and SHLSs installed in the 
villages. During the period 2000-01 to 2013-14, a total 708 villages/hamlets were 
electrified covering 25,873 beneficiaries. Audit observed that user charges of ` 20.45 lakh 
were not collected from beneficiaries. 
Gujarat 
Gujarat Energy Development Agency (GEDA) awarded contract for installation of 509 
SHLSs and 39 SSLSs under RVE programme during 2005-06 for electrification of 36 remote 
villages. These contracts had a provision for recovery of ` 20 per user per month as user 
charges for maintenance of SHLSs by the contra ctor. The three contractors were to install 
509 SHLSs and should have recovered ` 6.11 lakh from the benefi ciaries for the period of 
five years and deposited the same with GEDA. Audit observed that only Bharat Electronics 
Limited (BEL) had collected ` 30,500 and deposited the same with GEDA. Thus, there was 
short recovery of ` 5.80 lakh required for the replacem ent of batteries after the five year 
period. 
Jharkhand 
Test check of records of five villages revealed  that JREDA did not ha ve system to collect 
the beneficiary share for maintenance. SNA accepted the facts. 
Jammu & Kashmir 
Audit observed that JAKEDA distributed 48, 298 SHLSs to households of un-electrified 
villages during 2008-13. However, Audit obse rved that the SNA did not obtain the 
requisite willingness from the beneficiaries fo r payment of user charges leading to an 
annual loss of ` 1.16 crore. The State Government  stated (September 2013 and July 
2014)) that it was very difficult to manage the collection of user charges in the rural and 
far flung areas as JAKEDA did not have adequate manpower for the purpose. 
Maharashtra 
Audit observed that under RVE programme fo r the period 2007-14, in 35 villages monthly 
charges amounting to ` 3 6 . 5 3  l a k h  w e r e  n o t  r e c o v e r e d  from 3,044 beneficiaries by the 
Village Panchayats. 
Meghalaya 
There was irregular collection of beneficiary contribution of ` 1,500 towards capital cost 
and ` 60 month towards maintenance. Further, th ere was no database of the installed 
systems with MNREDA, which indicated lack  of monitoring. The same was also not 
checked by MNRE. 

Chapter IX Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 164 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Nagaland 
Though system of collection of ` 50 per month from benefici aries through Village Energy 
Management Board (VEMB) was set up, no colle ctions were being made as of November 
2014. 
 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that collection from beneficiary was not mandated by MNRE and it 
was upto to the States to decide considering successful implementation and maintenance of 
systems and that the State Government certify that the replacement of batteries after five 
years was their responsibility. 
The reply is not tenable because as per MNRE guidelines the willingness to pay had to be 
taken from the beneficiaries before installation. 
5.2. Deficiencies in maintenance arrangements 
As per Programme guidelines, to ensure long term operation, maintenance and 
sustainability of the projects, appropriate arra ngements were to be made for suitable AMC 
for a minimum period of five years. The State wise audit findings are given below: 
Chhattisgarh 
i. In Gariyaband District, 81 villages were electrified through SPPs/SPV devices 
(commissioned during 2004 to 2008). Work order for operation and maintenance of 
the power plants in these clusters was issued to M/s Friends Solar Pvt Ltd, Raipur. As 
per conditions, the SSLSs were to be operational for a minimum of 25 days and 90 per 
cent SHLSs should be operational in a mont h. Scrutiny of monitoring reports and 
payment vouchers for the period 2010-14 revealed that the SHLSs and SSLSs and the 
power plant remained non-functional fo r three to 10 months continuously. For 
instance, SPPs at Paylikhand 11, Kochenga 12, Kurrubhata 13 and Gajimuda 14 were not 
functional due to theft of modules, invert er and battery problems. Thus, there was 
no electricity in these villages continuously  for five to six months. Due to lack of 
proper maintenance of the systems, regular supply of electricity to the villagers could 
not be ensured. SNA accepted the facts (December 2014). 
ii. Audit also observed that out of the fund granted by the State Government under RVE 
programme, every year a provision of ` one crore was being made for village 
electrification Operation and Maintenanc e (O&M) fund which was kept in Terms 
Deposits (TD). The present value of TD was ` 10 crore (as of March 2014). Thus, fund 
provided for incurring O&M expenditure had been kept in TD, which was violation of 
the financial rules. 
  
                                                            
11  June 2012 to October 2012. 
12  October 2010 to January 2011 & June 2012 to December 2012. 
13  September 2013 to November 2013. 
14  June 2012 to December 2012. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IX  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 165 
Haryana 
HREDA signed Comprehensive Maintenance Contract (CMC) with the suppliers for 
maintenance of the systems which were commissioned in June-July 2006, for five years 
which expired in June 2011. Thereaft er, for maintenance of the plants 15 a village level 
Akshay Urja Samiti was formed. The said  Samiti collected monthly charges of ` 60 from 
the beneficiaries to be used for repair and maintenance of the plant. The monthly charges 
of ` 1.50 lakh were collected from the panchayats for two years. Thereafter, the charges 
had not been deposited by the beneficiaries.  After the expiry of warranty period, these 
systems remained non-functional. 
Jharkhand 
As per CMC, service centers of the suppliers  were to send summary service reports to 
JREDA on half yearly basis regarding number of systems covered by the service station, 
number of systems working satisfactorily, number of complaints received, number of 
complaints attended, major cause of failure  as observed and major replacement made. 
But, no such reports were submitted by the service centres to JREDA. As such JREDA was 
unaware of number of non-functional systems and reasons thereof. 
Jammu & Kashmir 
Audit observed that maintenance of SHLSs ha d not been provided by eight out of 13 
suppliers, as these suppliers had not established service centers in the respective districts. 
Audit also observed that four out of five service centers esta blished in district Doda were 
non-functional (August 2014) and that service centers had not been established in 
Anantnag and Poonch districts. Further, free  of cost maintenance during the warranted 
period of five years was to be provided. But the service centre of M/s Kotak Urja 
established in Gurez charged fees of ` 200 to ` 400 from beneficiarie s. JAKEDA had not 
initiated any action against the defaulting  suppliers who had not established service 
centers or charged fees from beneficiaries.  Accepting the facts, the State Government 
stated (July 2014) that JAKEDA had been ensuring setting up of proper service centers and 
that these would be strengthened further. 
Kerala 
As per the contract, the preventive/routi ne maintenance was to be done by the 
manufacturer at least once in every four/s ix months. For effective carrying out of 
maintenance at least one service centre wa s to be developed by  the manufacturer for 
every 500 SPV systems. But the same was not done. 
Nagaland 
Department of New and Renewabl e Energy (DNRE) did not insert the clause of “security 
Deposit” of five per cent of the contract agreement while placing the supply order on M/s 
Kuovisie-Rio and M/s Kevi Chadi, with the re sult that the suppliers did not submit the 
security deposit of ` 4.59 lakh. Further, DNRE had to release ` 4.59 lakh (five per cent of 
the contract agreement) towards AMC to suppliers in a span of five years (at the rate of 
one per cent every year), however the same was released in full to suppliers. 
                                                            
15  SPV power plants of 5 kW at Babarwali, Khairi, Nagr asu, Thandaut, Kahlon and Dudhla hamlet of Panchkula 
District. 

Chapter IX Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 166 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
DNRE stated that it was due to inexperien ce and oversight and there was no complaint 
from beneficiaries as systems are working sati sfactorily. However, in case of breakdown, 
the systems were not attended to by suppliers but were being individually maintained by 
the beneficiaries. 
 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that under the provisions of the RVE programme, maintenance 
and long-term sustainability of installed syst ems was primarily the responsibility of the 
concerned State Governments/SNAs. The Stat e Governments also undertook to provide 
funds and ensure replacement of batteries and other major mainte nance expenditures as 
and when required. The CFA sanctioned by MNRE included the cost of a five year AMC with 
the suppliers. MNRE provided additional financ ial support for organization of training of 
beneficiaries and awareness camps. The reply is  not tenable because due to lack of proper 
maintenance of the systems, regular supply of  electricity to the villagers could not be 
ensured. The AMC was also not executed as pe r MNRE guidelines and service centres were 
not established. MNRE also did not monitor the working of the RVE programme. 
6. Physical verification of systems installed under RVE programme 
Audit conducted a physical verification of the RVE systems on a test check basis to see the 
condition of the systems installed a nd the problems faced by the users.  Audit findings 
related to 45 sites in 11 States are given in Table 36.  The State wise details are given in 
Annexure XVII. 
Table 36: Summary of physical verification of RVE systems 
System 
No. of 
systems 
inspected 
No. of 
systems not 
working 
No. of systems 
missing Observations 
SHLS 2,527 532 177 
A large number of systems were lying idle due 
to issues such as battery failure, availability of 
quality grid power to users and lack of 
maintenance. 
SSLS 345 48 6 Audit observed issues of delayed maintenance 
and poor quality of parts. 
Biomass 
Gasifier 
plants 
14 14 Nil 
Audit observed that there was lack of user 
interest in these systems due to availability of 
grid power. Further the systems were provided 
in electrified villages. 
SPP 1 1 Nil System was not working and performance 
bank guarantee was not encashed. 
SHP 1 1 Nil Machinery defects resulted in idling of plant. 
Total 2,870 585 183  
Note: Small Hydro Power (SHP), Solar Home Lighting System (SHLS), Solar Street Lighting System (SSLS) and 
Solar Power Plant (SPP). 
Physical verification of sampled sy stems by Audit revealed that 20 per cent  of the RVE’s 
systems were not working and six per cent of the systems were found missing. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) the clarification from a ll States will be sought with respect to the 
remarks made by the Audit. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter IX  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 167 
7. Conclusion 
Remote Village Electrification programme aimed at providing financial support for 
electrification of those villages and hamlets where electrification through grid extension was 
either not feasible or not cost effective. During the 11th Five Year Plan, MNRE set a target for 
electrification of 7,000 villages and achieved the same in 5,229 villages. Progressively from 
2007-08, the coverage under the Remote Village Electrificatio n programme declined over 
the years. No targets were fixed by MNRE for the years 2012-13 and 2013-14. It was also 
observed that the release of Central Financial Assistance decreased from ` 132.81 crore in 
2007-08 to ` 17.92 crore in 2013-14 and this was not commensurate with the Remote 
Village Electrification targets. 
Audit observed that in some States there were mismatches between the list of remote 
villages verified by Rural Electrification Corpor ation Limited, those sanctioned by the MNRE 
and the villages actually reported as cove red by the States. In Assam and Chhattisgarh 
villages already covered under the Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana, were also 
taken up under this Programme. 
There were instances of irregularities in re lease of Central Financial Assistance and its 
utilization. 
Audit also observed shortcomings in implemen tation of the programme in the States. There 
were instances of inordinate delays in comp letion of projects, award of contracts to 
ineligible contractors, irregular distribut ion of lighting systems and incomplete/non-
installation of Remote Village Electrification systems. 
There were instances of non maintenance of data to evidence functionality of systems 
under Remote Village Electrification. Monitoring reports were not available as per the 
scheme guidelines. There were deficiencies in the maintenance of systems due to under 
collection of user charges and deficiencies in maintenance arrangements. 
Physical verification of sampled systems by Audit revealed that 20 per cent of the Remote 
Village Electrification systems were not working and six per cent of the systems were found 
missing, indicating poor maintenance and monitoring.
 
8. Recommendations 
• MNRE must ensure that only eligible villages/hamlets and beneficiaries are covered in 
the Remote Village Electrification programme. 
• MNRE must ensure long term operation, maintenance and sustainability of the Remote 
Village Electrification systems. 
  

Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 169 
Chapter - X 
Ladakh Renewable Energy Initiative 
 
1. Introduction 
MNRE sanctioned (June 2010) Ladakh Renewable Energy Initiative (LREI) for promotion of 
RE in Ladakh region. The duration of the proj ect was three and a half years i.e. up to 31 
December 2013. 
The project was being implemen ted by two agencies: Leh Re newable Energy Development 
Agency (LREDA) and Kargil Renewable Energy Development Agency (KREDA). Both these 
agencies are registered  as Societies under the Jammu & Kashmir Societies Registration Act 
1941. 
2. Grid Connected Power 
2.1. Planning 
The State Government formulated (December 2011) policy for development of Micro/ Mini 
Hydro Power (MHP) projects 1 up to two MW with the objective to attract investors for the 
development of the State’s water resources and to provide a solution to the energy 
problems in remote and hilly areas where exte nsion of grid system was un-economical or 
un-viable. In the State, power projects up to two MW were implemented by Jammu & 
Kashmir Energy Development Agency (JAKEDA)/ LREDA/ KREDA. 
LREDA along with the Alternate Hydro Energy Centre (AHEC) of the Indian Institute of 
Technology, Roorkee had conducted (2010-11) comprehensive feasibility studies to assess 
the total hydro power potential in Leh District  and identified 63 potential sites for hydro 
projects of aggregate capacity  of 45 MW. Audit observed that the inventories of all the 
identified sites had not been put in public domain. LREDA had not prepared long term plans 
to exploit hydro resources in the Leh District separately.  
KREDA had neither conducted assessment of hy dro power potential in Kargil District, nor 
prepared comprehensive plans to exploit the hydro power. MNRE stated (May 2015) that 
KREDA had got the pre-feasibility report of the executed projects from Civil Investigation 
Department (CID), Kargil and the same had been approved by the Governing Board of 
Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council (LAH DC). However, the fact remains that the 
agencies did not prepare long term and compre hensive plans to exploit the hydro power of 
the region and none of the SHP/MHP proj ects had been completed (March 2014) as 
discussed below. 
2.2. Target and achievement (2010-14) 
The target and achievements of LREDA and KREDA during 2010-14 is given in Table 37. 
                                                            
1 The power projects upto 100 kW are defined as micr o and power projects from 101 kW to 2,000 kW are 
defined as mini hydel as per the policy. 

Chapter X Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 170 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Table 37: Target and achievements of LREI 
LREDA KREDA 
Targets Revised target Achievement Target Revised target Achievement 
Nos Capacity Nos. Capacity Nos. Capacity Nos. Capacity Nos Capacity Nos Capacity 
19 11.2 
MW 
10 6.1 MW Nil Nil 11 12.5 
MW 
7 11 MW Nil Nil 
Source: LREDA and KREDA  
As can be seen from Table 37, even after fo ur years of implementa tion of the Programme, 
none of the 17 Small and Micro Hydro Power projects sanctioned had been commissioned 
as of July 2015. 
2.3. Budgetary provisions 
The details of budget and expenditure for the period 2010-14 are given in Table 38. 
Table 38 : Budget and expenditure of LREI 
(` in crore) 
Activities MNRE Grant as 
per Sanction 
Funds received 
from MNRE as of 
31 March 2014 
Interest earned 
as on 31 March 
2014 
Total 
Expenditure 
Un-utilised fund 
(including 
interest) 
LREDA+ KREDA LREDA KREDA LREDA KREDA LREDA KREDA LREDA KREDA 
SHP/ 
MHP 
projects 
266.80 24.02 20.23 0.34 NA 24.26 17.72 0.10 2.51 
Source: LREDA and KREDA 
MNRE sanctioned ` 266.80 crore for MHPs for LR EI, but it released only ` 44.25 crore and 
the expenditure was only ` 41.98 crore. 
Audit also observed that MNRE had released funds of ` one crore for trees and land 
compensation during November 2011. KREDA had no t identified (August 2014) the status of 
land2 and as a result, ` 0.99 crore had remained unutilized as of August 2014. KREDA 
however, had shown these funds as utilized in  the utilization certificates for the year 2012-
13. This indicated that the KREDA had refl ected incorrect position in the utilization 
certificates. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the status of land had been taken up with the Assistant 
Commissioner (Revenue), Kargil  and remaining amount of tree and land funds had been 
utilized for other SHP purposes, being the scheme under SHP head. 
3. Implementation 
The projects were sanctioned without allotm ent of land, statutory clearances such as 
environmental, forest, irrigation  clearances and technical a pprovals. This was compounded 
by slow progress in execution of projects. The detailed audit findings are given below: 
                                                            
2  Whether it was forest or private land. Also refer to para 3.2. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter X  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 171 
3.1. MHP projects sanctioned by MNRE without proper feasibility studies/ statutory 
clearances 
MNRE sanctioned (June 2010) 30 MHP projects of 23.68 3 MW for ` 266.80 crore on the 
basis of preliminary reports, to be complete d by December 2013. Su bsequently, well after 
sanction of projects by MN RE, LREDA and KREDA allotted (A ugust 2010 to August 2012) the 
work of survey, investigations and preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) in respect 
of 31 MHP projects 4. On the basis of DPRs the projec ts were revised downwards to 17 5 
(17.10 MW) for an estimated cost ` 219.58 crore. 
None of the MHP projects had been completed (July 2014). 
3.2. MHP projects allotted without obtaining necessary clearances 
Audit observed that LREDA and KREDA allotted 17 mini hydro power projects to contractors 
for development without ascertaining the status of land of identified sites of these projects, 
taking statutory clearances viz environmental clearances, forest clearances, irrigation and 
land clearances etc. and technical approvals as given at Table 39. 
Table 39: Status of statutory clearances and technical approvals for MHP projects 
Agency Projects 
(MW) 
Allotted 
cost  
(` in crore) 
Status of 
land 
Allotment 
of 
contracts 
Issue of 
land 
acquisition 
taken up 
Clearances 
of MoWR6 
Other 
clearances 
LREDA 10 
(6.10) 
87.67 Not 
ascertained 
September 
2011 to 
June 2013 
June to 
December 
2013 
December 
2012 
Technical 
approval of IIT 
Roorkee was 
not obtained KREDA 07 
(11.00) 
134.00 Not 
ascertained 
August 
2012 to 
November 
2013 
March to 
May 2014 
Not 
obtained  
 
Records showed that LREDA and KREDA had incurred (March 2014) an expenditure of  
` 41.987 crore on these projects without land acqui sition and obtaining technical approval. 
MNRE released (November 2011) ` one crore for land compensation but the funds were 
diverted (August 2014), as in absence of surv eys it was not ascertainable whether land was 
Government, forest or private land. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the matter for land acquisition had already been taken up 
with the Revenue Department of the State Go vernment for transferring the land for hydro 
projects. 
 
                                                            
3  11.18 MW in Leh covering 61 villages and 12.50 MW in Kargil covering 63 villages. 
4  Which included only 23 sanctioned projects. 
5   Four of which were not in th e original list approved by MNRE. 
6  Ministry of Water Resources. 
7  Leh: ` 24.26 crore; Kargil: ` 17.72 crore. 

Chapter X Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 172 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
3.3. Contract awarded without establishing reasonability of rates 
As per CVC guidelines estimated rate is a vital element in establishing the reasonability of 
prices. Audit scrutiny revealed that the Project Director, KREDA had prepared cost estimates 
and invited (June 2010) tenders for “surveys, investigation and preparation of DPR and 
supervision till successful commissioning” for 10 MHP projects. However, the orders were 
placed (August 2010) for surveys, investigation, detailed engineering design and preparation 
of DPR at a cost of 
` 2.11 crore omitting ‘the supervis ion till successful commissioning’ 
without corresponding reduction in the cost. T hus, alteration in the scope of work in the 
contract without corresponding reduction in price indicated that undue benefit was given to 
the contractor with an extra expenditure of ` 1.35 crore incurred on preparation of DPRs of 
10 projects by KREDA. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the terrain of the project sites are very difficult to traverse for 
contouring and detailed survey and investigatio n as compared to project sites of LREDA and 
JAKEDA, thus attracting higher rates. The repl y is not acceptable as the average expenditure 
per DPR was more than double the expenditure incurred by LREDA or JKEDA and KREDA did 
not see the reasonability of the price. 
3.4. Poor physical progress of construction of MHP projects 
KREDA had invited (December 2011) tenders in respect of seven MHP projects which were 
finalized (August 2012 and November 2013) afte r a period of eight to 23 months, to be 
completed within 24 months. Audit observed that physical progress in respect of these 
projects was poor even though an expenditure of ` 21.94 crore had b een incurred (June 
2014). The construction work in respect of fo ur projects - Khandi, Sangrah, Bairas and 
Chilong was in the initial stage8 and construction work in respect of remaining three projects 
Raru, Matayeen and Zunkul had not been started (June 2014). 
LREDA allotted (September 2011 to  December 2011) projects to  be completed by October 
2013, but progress of civil works and pen stock 9 works of six out of 10 MHP projects was 
slow as given in Table 40. 
Table 40: Progress of civil and pen stock works 
Details 
of work 
Head 
works 
Feeder 
channel 
By pass 
channel 
De-silting 
Tails 
Foreway Power 
house 
Tail Race Penstock 
Progress 
(in per 
cent) 
Nil to 50 Nil to 100 Nil to 100 Nil to 100 Nil to 95 30 to 
90 
Nil to 70 Nil to 60 
Similarly, the construction work in respect of remaining four projects allotted during 
December 2012 to June 2013 was in the initial stage10. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that lack of bidders , inaccessible terrain and locations, short 
working seasons and delay in release of funds resulted in poor progress.  
                                                            
8  Earthwork, trench excavation, Plinth/Fl oor level of store rooms and staff quarters. 
9  A penstock is a sluice or gate or in take structure that controls water flow. 
10  Part earthwork in respect of civil structures, non-comp letion of approach roads, RCC works taken up in only 
one project as of May 2014. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter X  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 173 
4. Off-Grid/Decentralised systems 
4.1. Target and achievement (2010-14) 
The target and achievement for the Off-Grid/Dec entralised systems for LREI is given in  
Table 41. 
Table 41: Target and achievement for the Off Grid/Decentralised systems for LREI 
Programme LREDA KREDA 
Targets Achievement Target Achievement 
Nos. Capacity 
(in kW) 
Nos. Capacity 
(in kW) 
Nos. Capacity 
(in kW) 
Nos. Capacity 
(in kW) 
SPPs of 5 to 100  kWs 
with battery support 
for villages 
51 1,502 34 1,033 23 1,100 19 840 
SPPs of 5 to 10 kWs for 
Institutions 
60 447 58 422 65 367 64 357 
SPPs of 100 kWs in 
Defence 
establishments 
15 810 14 790 2 157 1 100 
SWHS (in sq m) - 20,384 2,002 5,378 - - 68 131 
Dish Cookers 4,500 - 1,200 - 5,500 - 186 - 
Steam Cooking 
Systems 
15 - 1 - 10 - Nil - 
Domestic Green 
houses for BPL families 
2,500 - 2,500 - 3,000 - 3,000 - 
Commercial Green 
houses 
250 - 250   250 - 240 - 
Solar Dryers 500 - Nil - 500 - Nil - 
Experimental System – 
Ground supported 
heat pumps etc  
5 - Nil - 5 - Nil - 
SHLS 2,000 74 Nil - 2,000 74 Nil - 
Source: LREDA and KREDA. 
Note: Below Poverty Line (BPL), Solar Home Lighting System (SHLS), Solar Power Plant (SPP) and Solar Water 
Heating Systems (SWHS). 
4.2. Budgetary provisions 
The details of budget and expenditure for the period 2010-14 are given in Table 42. 
  

Chapter X Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 174 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Table 42: Budget and expenditure for the Off-Grid/Decentralised systems of LREI 
(` in crore) 
Activities  MNRE 
grant as 
per 
sanction 
Funds received 
from MNRE as 
of 31 March 
2014 
Interest earned 
as on 31 March 
2014 
Total 
Expenditure 
Un-utilised fund
(including 
interest) 
LREDA+ 
KREDA 
LREDA KREDA LREDA KREDA LREDA KREDA LREDA KREDA
SPPs and lighting 
systems 132.00 57.83 46.93 0.25 NA 58.06 39.72 0.02 7.21 
Solar water 
heating/ cooking/ 
solar passive 
heating/ green 
houses/ solar 
dyers 
64.20 7.65 3.54 0.06 NA 6.64 4.32 1.07 (-) 
0.78 
Capacity building, 
training, 
consultancy etc. 
10.00 4.00 4.00 0.07 NA 3.51 3.46 0.56 0.54 
Total 206.20 69.48 54.47 0.38 0 68.21 47.50 1.65 6.97
Source: LREDA and KREDA. 
4.3. Implementation 
4.3.1. Solar Power Plants (SPPs) sanctioned without feasibility studies 
MNRE sanctioned (June 2010) 200 SPPs for insta llation in villages, institutions and Defence 
establishments in Leh and Kargil districts withou t preparation of DPRs and identification of 
sites. Sites of 19 villages in Kargil District  were changed after placement (September 2010) 
of supply order, as most of these villages were electrified with the commissioning of Chutuk 
hydro power project during November 2012 a nd January 2013. Similarly, sites of 12 
institutions were also changed due to non-availability of space for installation of SPPs. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that ne w sites were identified by LA HDC and prefeasibility report 
was prepared. The reply was not tenable as the KREDA had to change the sites due to 
electrification of villages and due to non-availa bility of space for installation of SPPs which 
indicate the lack of reliable feasibility studies. 
4.3.2. Inappropriate selection of sites 
i. It was observed that the village Saliskote in Kargil district was covered under Rajiv 
Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) for Chutak hydro project (2010-11). 
As a result of this one SPV power plant of 65 kW approved (September 2010) for 
Saliskote village was shifted to anothe r village Prachik Yogma, but another SPV 
power plant of 40 kW installed (December 2011)  in the same village was not shifted. 
Further, another SPV power plant of 75 kW to be installed at Hardass village was 
shifted to Saliskote village (December 2011), despite the village being already 
covered under RGGVY. Thus the expenditure of 
` 2.01 crore (cost of 75 kW) incurred 
by KREDA was avoidable. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the change of sites was suggested by the Governing 
Board. The facts remains that change of sites led to wasteful expenditure. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter X  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 175 
ii. SPPs at villages Chikten Zgang (37.5 kW) a nd Techna (42.5 kW) were shifted due to 
their connectivity with Chut ak hydro power project. Th ey were installed at Sheep 
breeding farm Kakakul (37.5 kW) and at co-o perative marketing society Kharul (42.5 
kW) without ascertaining the power load re quirement of these institutions by the 
respective representation of LAHDC and without approval of MNRE. KREDA records 
showed that the power load requirement of sheep breeding farm was five kW 
leading to under utilization and consequent injudicious utilisation of funds of ` 2.42 
crore. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that the excess power was utilized in the nearby school. The 
reply is not tenable as the MNRE had not explained whether the full capacity of 80 
kW was being utlilized. Further, the KREDA ha d not done the feasibility study leading 
to change of site. 
4.3.3. Physical progress of installation not monitored 
LREDA placed (2010-11) orders for installation of 126 SPPs in Leh District. Audit observed 
that 13 SPPs (totaling to a capacity of 465 kW) had not been commissioned (June 2014) 
despite lapse of 39 to 44 months. Similarly, reco rds of KREDA showed that six SPPs (totaling 
to a capacity of 327.50 kW) out of tota l of 88 had not been commissioned (June 2014) 
despite a lapse of 45 months. Non-commissionin g of systems had rendered the expenditure 
of ` 10.30 crore incurred on the 19 SPPs unfruitful. 
The Project Director KREDA stated (September 2014) that SPPs could not be installed due to 
some disputes at sites even though the plants  had been supplied by the firms. LREDA stated 
(May 2015) that the SPPs shall be installed within a period of four to five months or during 
the coming season. 
4.3.4. Solar power plant installed without establishing reasonability of rates 
As per CVC guidelines estimated rate was a vita l element in establishing the reasonability of 
prices. Audit observed that, there was no c oordination between LREDA and KREDA, and the 
cost of installation solar power plants by KRED A was higher than that by LREDA, leading to 
excess expenditure of 
` 0.95 crore as given in Table 43. 
Table 43: Cost of installation of SPV power plants 
Capacity of 
SPV power 
plants (in kW) 
Cost of SPV power plant  Cost difference 
per  plant 
(in `) 
No. of 
systems 
Total extra 
cost(in `) LREDA KREDA 
5 12,54,041 13,23,690 69,649 18 12,53,682 
10 20,55,000 21,92,342 1,37,342 16 21,97,472 
37.50 78,38,000 82,21,620 3,83,620 5 19,18,100 
42.50 91,51,000 94,47,025 2,96,025 4 11,84,100 
57.50 1,20,66,000 1,23,39,000 2,73,000 3 8,19,000 
65 1,37,48,000 1,40,59,268 3,11,268 6 18,67,608 
100 1,73,00,000 1,76,25,361 3,25,361 1 3,25,361 
Total    53 95,65,323 
 

Chapter X Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 176 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Similarly, in case of Evacuated Tube Based Collector SWHS the rates difference given by the 
same contractor in Leh and Kargil was ` 7,997 for 300 Litres per day SWHS and  ` 25,549 for 
500 Litres per day SWHS leading to excess expenditure of ` 0.09 crore11 by KREDA. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the public tende r procedure was followed. The rates were a 
little higher than LREDA. The reply is not acceptable as the cost difference was very high and 
KREDA could have negotiated with the firm who had supplied the same systems to LREDA. 
4.3.5. Solar Home Lighting Systems distributed to ineligible beneficiaries 
MNRE sanctioned (June 2010) 2,000 SHLSs for Kargil district under LREI. Audit observed that 
KREDA had not conducted any survey to identify the beneficiaries and 451 SHLSs for ` 53.22 
lakh were distributed in villages falling with in the electric connectivity of hydro power 
projects and 251 SHLSs for ` 29.61 lakh in the villages where the SPV power plants had been 
established during 2010-12. Audit also notice d that 246 SHLSs were issued against 192 
households in four villages where as in nine  villages 205 SHLSs were distributed against 350 
households in these villages, which was anomalous. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the distribution was as per the decision of Governing Board of 
LAHDC. However, the fact remains that KREDA had not conducted any survey to identify the 
beneficiaries, leading to ineligible beneficiaries being given SHLSs. 
4.3.6. Excess expenditure incurred by not invoking the ‘risk and cost’ clause 
The terms and conditions of the bidding docume nt envisaged that if the supplier failed to 
make supply within the stipulated period, risk  purchase at the cost of the supplier will be 
made within two months of the expiry of stip ulated delivery period by inviting short term 
quotations. Based on the bidding process,  LREDA placed order on four agencies12for design, 
manufacture, supply, installation and commissi oning of SWHSs covering 7,500 sqm. It was 
observed in audit that the suppliers cove red only 3,432 sqm during 2011-12 leaving a 
balance of 4,068 sqm. LREDA instead of taking  penal action against the suppliers, invited 
(March 2013) fresh Notice Inviting Tender (N IT) and placed supply order for purchase of 
systems of 15,000 sqm collector area including 4,068 sqm at a rate higher than the rate 
approved in earlier tendering process. LREDA had not recovered excess cost of ` 22.65 lakh 
from the pending bills of the suppliers who had earlier partly supplied the systems. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the 7,500 sqm wa s an envisaged target and not necessarily 
equal to the supply orders. Demand upto 2013 was only for 3,432 sqm hence supply orders 
for this number of systems were issued. The reply is not acceptable as the work order was 
placed for 7,500 sqm. 
4.3.7. Irregularities in establishment of polygreen houses 
MNRE sanctioned (June 2010) CFA for estab lishment of 5,500 domestic green house for 
Below Poverty Line (BPL) families and 500 fo r commercial purpose. Audit observed that, 
                                                            
11   300 LPD- 6 Nos = ` 7,997 X 6 = ` 47,982, 500 LPD – 70 Nos = ` 25,549 X 70 = ` 17,88,430. 
 Total extra expenditure = ` 47,982 + ` 17,88,430 = ` 18,36,412, On 50 per cent  payment = ` 9,18,206. 
12  M/s Electrotherm Renewables, M/s Solarium Solar Power Systems, M/s Neutech Solar Systems Pvt Ltd and 
M/s Solar Energizers Pvt Ltd. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter X  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 177 
during 2011-14, only 600 poly green houses were established for BPL families and 1,900 
were given to other interested non-BPL beneficiaries. 
As per guidelines, ` 11,500 per house or 50 per cent of the cost whichever was less, was to 
be recovered from the benefi ciary but LREDA under recovered ` 1.42 crore and KREDA did 
not recover any amount. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that there was no further BPL family taker for the 1900 poly 
greenhouses, hence decision was taken by LAHDC that left over domestic green houses be 
distributed to every block of the district on popu lation basis, to the interested beneficiaries. 
Reply cannot be accepted as the agencies had not taken the permission of MNRE for 
distribution to other than BPL family and recoveries should be as per MNRE’s guideline. 
Further, the cost of poly greenhouses was ` 23,000, much higher than benchmark rate of 
MNRE. 
4.4. Monitoring 
Audit observed that periodic monitoring to en sure proper functionality of systems had not 
been carried out. Third party evaluation was not done. Further the functional status of 
plants installed under LREI was no t ascertained and the Agency ha d no relevant data in this 
regard. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the required thir d party inspection for the project on LREI 
shall be done soon. 
4.5. Physical Verification 
Audit conducted physical verification of the sy stems installed under LREI on a test check 
basis to see the condition of the systems inst alled and the problems faced by the users. 
Audit findings are given in Table 44. 
Table 44: Physical verification of LREI systems 
Type of 
system 
Location Reasons 
Solar 
Power 
Plant 
Saliskote 
Village 
Two plants were installed. One plan t of 40 kW installed in December 
2011 was not working properly. Th e battery backup was very poor 
and had not been rectified despit e the firm (M/s TATA BP) being 
approached. The village was also covered by RGGVY. 
Village 
Umba 
Connection was provided only to 65  households out of 150 because 
of non-laying of distribution network. 
 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that due to the scattere d nature of the village and low capacity of 
the SPV power plant the lighting system wa s connected to only 65 households. Hence 
LAHDC has decided to approach MNRE for another SPP for the remaining hamlets of the 
same capacity, so that entire village could be  covered. However, the fact remains that 85 
households were still to get electricity from SPP. 

Chapter X Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 178 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
5. Conclusion 
Ladakh Renewable Energy Initiative was ta ken up with the objective of promotion of 
renewable energy in Ladakh region. The duratio n of the project was three and a half years 
(June 2010 to December 2013). 
Audit observed that Ladakh Renewable Ener gy Development Agency and Kargil Renewable 
Energy Development Agency did not undertake co mprehensive feasibility studies to assess 
the total hydro power potential. Though th e two implementing agencies viz. Ladakh 
Renewable Energy Development Agency and Ka rgil Renewable Energy Development Agency 
set targets of 11.2 MW (revised to 6.10 MW) and  12.50 MW (revised to 11 MW) 
respectively during 2010-14, neither of the tw o agencies were able to put in place any 
capacity during the period. Even after four years not a single Smal l Hydro Power/ Mini 
Hydro Power project was installed. 
Audit further observed poor due diligence in implementation of sanctioned projects, such as 
allotment of land without taking statutory environmental, forest, irrigation and land 
clearances and technical approvals, excess pa yments to contractors, diversion of funds 
besides non-completion of projects. Monitoring mechanism was also found to be deficient. 
Audit observed that off-grid solar power pr ojects were sanction ed by MNRE without 
conducting feasibility studies. As a result, two solar plants were installed in a village that was 
already covered under Rajiv Gandhi Gramee n Vidyutikaran Yojana and 702 Solar Home 
Lighting Systems were distributed to ineligible  beneficiaries. There were deficiencies in 
implementation of the projects. 
It was further observed that contracts were awarded without adhering to bidding document 
requirements. Instances of excess payment to contractors and awarding of contract without 
establishing reasonability of rates were also noticed. 
6. Recommendations 
• MNRE must ensure that comprehensive and reliable feasibility studies of the sites are 
conducted before sanctioning projects. 
• Prior to sanctioning of the projects all stat utory clearances, particularly land clearances, 
must be taken. 
• Evaluation of progress of work during implem entation and post implementation must be 
carried out by MNRE or State Agencies or reliable third parties. 

Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 179 
Chapter - XI 
Prime Minister’s Special Package for 
Arunachal Pradesh 
 
1. Introduction 
The Prime Minister announced a package of ` 550 crore in January 2008, to 
electrify/illuminate villages 1 in Arunachal Pradesh through Solar Power and Small Hydro 
Power projects by December 2011. The progra mme was extended with the approval of the 
Cabinet till March 2015. 
2. Target and Achievements 
The year wise targets and achievements under the PM’s special package are given at  
Table 45. 
Table 45: Year wise targets and achievements under the PM’s special package        
(in Nos.) 
Year Target Achievement 
No. of 
Households 
No. of border villages No of Home Lighting 
Systems 
No. of Villages 
SPV SHP SPV SHP SPV SHP SPV SHP 
2008-09 5,758 48,331 546 868 - 27,859 - 216 
2009-10 - 6,707 - 191 5,852 3,470 523 100 
2010-11 - - - - - 2,339 - 58 
2011-12 -  - - - 3,477 - 108 
2012-13 - - - - - 664 - 27 
2013-14 - - - - - 688 - 19 
TOTAL 5,758 55,038 546 1,059 5,852 38,497 523 528 
Source: APEDA and DHPD. 
Note: SPV – Solar Photovoltaic and SHP – Small Hydro Power. 
As can be seen from Table 45, 1,605 un-electrif ied border villages were to be electrified for 
which funds were given by Planning Commission and MNRE. The breakup of targets and 
achievements between Planning Commission and MNRE are given at Table 46. 
  
                                                            
1  Apart from villages already covered under RGGVY. 

Chapter XI Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 180 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Table 46: Breakup of targets and achievements between Planning Commission and MNRE 
 Planning Commission MNRE 
Target Achievement Target Achievement 
No. of villages 486 303 1,119 748 
No. of households 29,212 23,867 31,584 20,482 
No. of SHP 
projects  
(capacity in 
MW) 
DHPD2 46 (61 MW) 37 (25 MW) 48 (16 MW) 35 (8 MW) 
APEDA3 
- - 67 (2 MW) 42 (1 MW) 
Source: APEDA and DHPD. 
The shortfall in achievement of Planning Commission targets was mainly on account of non-
completion of nine SHPs (36 MW ), against which expenditure of ` 358.46 crore (including 
expenditure prior 2007-08 and State share as of August 2014) had been incurred. Against a 
target of 486 villages only 303 had been electrified. 
The shortfall in achievement of MNRE targ ets was because Department of Hydro Power 
Development (DHPD) did not complete 13 hyde l projects (capacity: eight MW) and APEDA 
not completing 25 (capacity: one MW) due to va rious reasons, such as, delay in completion 
of projects by turnkey contra ctors and non-availability of funds. The delay ranged from two 
to three years. Against a target of 1,119 villages only 748 had been electrified. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that some of the pr ojects got delayed due to site conditions and 
some under installation projects also got da maged due to heavy rains and that the DHPD 
had further requested for additional fund of 
` 1,719.11 crore from the Central Government, 
to complete the SHP projects. 
3. Budgetary provisions 
The details of budget and expenditure for the period 2007-14 are given at Table 47. 
Table 47: Details of budget and expenditure for the period 2007-14 
(in ` crore) 
Year CFA released by 
MNRE4 
Funds released by 
Planning Commission 
State/ Individual 
Share 
Actual Expenditure  
2007-14 
2007-08 - 69.11 - - 
2008-09 18.73 100.14 1.86 126.01 
2009-10 56.00 105.31 0.22 132.09 
2010-11 60.75 - 1.28 149.62 
2011-12 62.09 - 10.77 74.61 
2012-13 34.00 - 23.95 49.58 
2013-14 9.75 - 8.85 25.41 
Total 241.32 274.56 46.93 557.32 
Source: APEDA and DHPD. 
                                                            
2  Department of Hydro Power Development. 
3  Arunachal Pradesh Energy Development Agency. 
4  CFA released by MNRE included funds released to Department of Power ( ` 38 crore), DHPD ( ` 148.82 
crore) and APEDA (` 54.50 crore) from 2007-08 to 2013-14. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter XI  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 181 
During the period 2008-09 to 2013-14,  out of total available funds of ` 562.81 crore an 
expenditure of ` 557.32 crore was incurred, leaving a balance of ` 5.49 crore. 
3.1. Diversion of funds 
The DHPD diverted (March 2011) ` 13.17 crore out of ` 13.85 crore released in 2008-09 for 
construction of Sipit and Sidip SHP projects, later scrapped in October 2011 for construction 
of an additional unit of four MW Halaipani SHP project without approval of the Planning 
Commission. 
DHPD stated that matter was placed before State Level Monitoring Committee and 
approved by the State Government. However,  the fact remains that no approval was 
obtained from the Planning Commission. 
MNRE offered no comments as the projects were supported by the Planning Commission 
directly to the State. 
4. Implementation and Power Generation 
Audit observed that some of the projects were non functioning due to defective equipment, 
natural calamities, lack of repair, abandoning of  projects by contractors, etc. which resulted 
in losses in power generation. The detailed audit findings are given below: 
4.1. Absence of a specific State Government policy for acquisition of land 
Absence of State Government policy regarding acquisition of land for projects, 
compensation, resettlement and rehabilitation of land owners led to delay in completion of 
Sirikorang SHP project (500 kW) by two years due to disputes with villagers for acquisition of 
land. This resulted in cost escalation of 
` 1.43 crore, which could have been avoided. 
4.2. Non levy of Liquidated Damages (LDs) 
As per terms and condition of the agreement with the developers/ contractors, if the 
commissioning/ supply were delayed beyond a certain period, then LDs at the rate of 10 per 
cent were to be charged. Audit findings in this respect are brought out in the Table 48. 
Table 48:  Contractors on which Liquidated Damages (LDs) were not levied 
S.No. Particulars of work Delay 
period 
Amount of LD 
(in ` crore) 
1 APEDA did not deduct LDs from turnkey contractors (M/s Gita 
Flow Pumps, M/s Jal Sakhti Engg. & M/s Ushwin) for delayed 
completion of 42 SHP projects and non completion of 25 SHP 
projects for 55 months. 
3 to 39 
months 
1.18 
2 Delays in completion of works relating to supply and 
installation of SHLSs from the contractors, namely, M/s Sun 
Energy Systems, Gujarat,  M/s ICOMM Tele Limited, 
Hyderabad, and M/s Reliance Industries Limited, Kolkata. 
Eight 
months 
0.86 

Chapter XI Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 182 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
S.No. Particulars of work Delay 
period 
Amount of LD 
(in ` crore) 
3 ` 20.37 crore were sanctioned (January 2010) by the Planning 
Commission for Sambachu SHP project (three MW) in Tawang 
District, to the Hydro Power Development Corporation of 
Arunachal Pradesh Limited (HPDCAPL). M/s Nortech Power 
Project (P) Ltd., Kolkata could complete (August 2014) only 80 
per cent of the work. Performance bank guarantees of ` 2.59 
crore and ` 0.82 crore towards Security Deposit had also not 
been collected. 
Three 
years 
1.29 
4.3. Non-functional SHP projects 
4.3.1 Six SHP projects not working due to damage in floods 
Six SHP projects with a capacity 195 kW, were  not working for different periods ranging 
from one to 24 months due to flood damage to power channels, head  works and penstock 
pipes. As a result, expenditure of ` 4.04 crore incurred on the projects remained 
unproductive. 
MNRE (May 2015) accepted the facts and stated that 30 per cent of the projects were not 
working due to natural calamities. 
4.3.2 Unfruitful expenditure 
As per Memorandum of Understanding (February 2001), the National Hydro Power 
Corporation, Ltd. (NHPC), handed over th e Kambang MHS project completed by turnkey 
contractor, M/s Kirloskar Brothers, Pune, to  the DHPD for operation and maintenance 
without full load testing. An expenditure of 
` 62.43 crore was incurred on the project. 
Unit III of the project remained non-operative since April 2010 due to defective equipment. 
As per the Defective Liabilities Clause – Cl ause 27.2 of the Agreement, the turnkey 
contractor was responsible for successful operation for a period of 24 months from the date 
of operational acceptance. But the contractor neither repaired nor re placed the defective 
equipment even after a lapse of 49 months. 
Later, Units I and II were also shut down from  January to June 2014 due to vibration and oil 
leakage. As of June 2014, the tu rnkey contractor had not repaired  Units I and II. As a result, 
the Department lost generation of 4.3 Million Units (MUs) of power in respect of Unit I and 
4.3 MUs in respect of Unit II, whereas non-operation of Unit III since commissioning resulted 
in loss of potential generation of 42.34 MU s (May 2010 to June 2014). Thus, expenditure of 
` 62.43 crore incurred on the project re mained unfruitful. The expenditure of ` 0.32 crore 
incurred on repair and rectification of electrical equipment wa s also not recovered from the 
turnkey contractor by the Department. 
In the Exit Conference (December 2014) held with the officials of DHPD, it was stated that 
the contractor abandoned the project (Kambang MHS). However, a notice was served to the 
contractor to resume works. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter XI  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 183 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that it is the State’ s responsibility to complete the work as per 
work contract. 
4.3.3 Inoperative Liromoba SHP project 
M/s Swamina International Private Limited, Kolkata, completed the works of overhauling, 
repairing, renovation, modification, erection , testing and commissioning of Electrical & 
Mechanical (E&M) equipment of Liromoba SH P project (2 x 1 MW) after a delay of 27 
months (March 2009) from the date of Agreement (September 2006). But the LD of ` 0.14 
crore was not levied on the contractor as per terms and conditions of the Agreement. 
Reasons for delay were also not on record. Since commissioning (March 2009) till October 
2012, the project was operated with a lo ad of 130-140 kW on manual mode due to 
problems with the  electronic governor which was unable to pick up any load exceeding 15 
kW on both units. From October 2012 onward s the project remained non-operative, 
resulting in loss of potential generation of 15.55 MUs worth around ` 3.25 5 crore. The 
Department neither repaired nor replaced the defective equipment at the risk and cost of 
the contractor. 
4.3.4 Under-utilisation due to non-availability of Transmission and Distribution lines 
The DHPD constructed Solegamang SHP project (1  x 50 kW) (Menchuka Circle) at a cost of  
` 0.88 crore, but it provided electricity supply to only one village against the target of eight 
villages due to non-availability of Transmissi on and Distribtution lines. Further due to 
operation of the project only at 15 kW capacity against its full capacity of 50 kW, the 
Department lost generation of 0.15 MUs (August 2013 to  June 2014) valued around ` 0.326 
crore. 
4.4 Sub-standard work 
As per scope of work agreement, the contra ctor was to perform at  least one practical 
demonstration on laying, fixing, jointing, insta llation and commissioning of pipes in districts 
having up to five projects and at least two demo nstrations in districts having more than five 
projects. If the demonstration failed or any material was found to be sub-standard during 
the demonstration or at any subsequent point of time, they would be rejected and the 
amount recovered, wherever applicable. Howeve r, the contractor installed penstock pipes 
without ascertaining their quality, as a resu lt of which damages and leakages of fibre 
penstock pipes was reported from Jangtang pu Mini Hydel Power(MHP) projects. But no 
action was taken against the contractors by the APEDA. 
APEDA stated that more than 15 per cent  of the agreed cost was retained and the cost of 
defective work would be recovered before releasing final payment. 
4.5 Overlapping work 
Both the DPRs for construction of Khadiabe  SHP project by APEDA and DHPD covered 10 
villages, and the same villages were also covered under the RGGVY Programme. Thus, lack 
                                                            
5   15.55 MUs @ ` 2.09 per unit = ` 3.25 crore. 
6   0.15 MUs @ ` 2.09 per unit = ` 0.32 crore. 

Chapter XI Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 184 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
of co-ordination and proper planning between the Agency and Departments resulted in 
overlapping of villages, which may have caused unnecessary expenditure. 
In reply, DHPD stated that from the list of villages prepared by DHPD  and APEDA, only two 
villages (Tania and Sube) overlapped.  
The reply was not tenable as six villages were included in the DPRs prepared by DHPD and 
APEDA. Besides, the villages listed in the DPRs were taken up unde r RGGVY for supply of 
power through grid. 
4.6 Work orders placed without tender process 
As per GFR, works were to be executed through open tender and as per Central Public 
Works Department Works Manual, tenders sh ould normally be called for all works 
exceeding ` 50,000. Audit observed that: 
i. Contrary to the guidelines, DHPD carried out Civil and E&M Works, in respect of 17 
projects under the PM package, valued at 
` 68.86 crore, without following any 
tendering procedures. The civil works were executed through local villagers (stated 
to be land donors) by issue of a number of work orders, without any technical 
sanction or calling for open tenders. 
DHPD stated that the Department adopte d splitting of works on piecemeal basis 
through Work Orders, mostly for earth work components, to benefit local people. 
The reply is not acceptable as the work s were done in contravention of the 
Guidelines, and without ensuring economy and quality of works executed.  
ii. MNRE released (2006-07) 
` 4.70 crore for construction of Kambang MHP project. 
However, DHPD diverted ` 0.79 crore for reconstruction works on damage to 
Kambang MHP project in 2006-07 by flood dur ing construction, without approval of 
the MNRE. The works were executed by issue of a number of work orders to 
individuals without calling for open tenders. 
DHPD stated that the Desilting Tank was severely damaged due to flash floods and 
immediate rectification was required for timely restoration of power supply. 
The reply was not acceptable as the releas ed amount was diverted for flood damage 
works without approval. 
5 Monitoring 
i. Monthly generation data was not submitted to MNRE in respect of all commissioned 
projects, except for Kambang, Sippi and Nuranang SHP projects. 
ii. APEDA neither monitored the progress of wo rks nor received Progress Reports from 
the DHPD or Department of Power. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter XI  
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 185 
iii. DHPD monitored 67 SHP projects out of 94 SHP projects under the PM’s Package 
through third parties like Nabard Consultanc y Services (Private) Ltd. (NABCON) and 
Alternate Hydro Energy Centre, IIT Roorkee from  June 2009 to March 2014. 
However, the other 27 SHP projects remained un-monitored by any agency. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the monitoring wo rks of SHP projects was assigned to AHEC 
and IIT Roorkee on random basis and that th ey had regularly monitored the SHP projects. 
The reply of MNRE should be considered in the context of the audit findings reported in the 
preceding paragraphs which revealed that 38 projects were yet to be completed. 
6 Maintenance 
6.1 Non-repair /replacement of equipment 
Due to non-commissioning of Unit-II (250 kW ) by the turnkey contractor - M/s BIEECO 
Lawrie Ltd., Kolkata and non-repair/rectification of fault in Unit-I(250 kW), the project 
Sirikorong SHP remained under operative, resulting in loss of generation 2.08 MUs valued 
around ` 0.44 crore 7 (August/2003 to July/2014) a nd unproductive expenditure of ` 6.40 
crore. 
6.2 Annual Maintenance Contract (AMC) 
APEDA did not enter into any AMC with suppliers as per terms of the Agreement even after 
two years (July 2014) of installation of 5,852 Solar Home Lighting Sy stems (SHLSs). As a 
result, the full life efficiency/expectancy of the installed systems could not be ensured. 
Reasons for the same were not on record. 
APEDA stated that AMC was in-built in the orig inal contract agreement with the parties. It 
was further stated that effective implementation of AMC was difficult due to various 
logistical factors, site difficulties, lack of awareness of beneficiaries and fund constraints. 
The fact remains that APEDA did not implement the AMC. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that it has asked AP EDA to make the AMC as the part of the 
contract Agreement with the PV equipment supp liers, and accordingly, it was the part of 
agreement. However, the effective implementation of AMC lies with implementing 
organization i.e. with APEDA. 
6.3 Setting up of  Service Centres 
As per terms of Agreement, contractors were required to set up one Service Centre with a 
technician in each District or for every 500 SPV systems with a ll necessary spares. A 
maintenance report was to be submitted ever y three months to concerned APEDA Project 
Officers for the entire contract period. However, the contractors did not submit the 
maintenance reports to APEDA. 
                                                            
7 2.08MUs X ` 2.09 per unit = ` 0.44 crore. 

Chapter XI Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 186 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
APEDA stated that Service Centres were set up by contractors in all District Headquarters 
and that the Service Centres initially function ed satisfactorily. On completion of the two 
years of warranty period and there being no complaints against functioning of the systems 
provided, the Security Deposits/Bank Gurantees were released. 
MNRE agreed with the reply given by the APED A. However, it needs to be considered how 
the SPV systems would be maintained in the absence of Service Centres. 
7 Conclusion 
A Prime Minister’s special package of ` 550 crore was announced  in January 2008 for 
electrification of 1,605 border villages locate d in Arunachal Pradesh through Solar Power 
and Small Hydro Power projec ts. The project was to be completed by December 2011. 
Funds of ` 515.888 crore were released by the Planning Commission and MNRE. 
As of 2013-14, only 1,051 9 i.e. 65 per cent  of the villages were elec trified. Audit observed 
that the shortfall was due to delay in completi on of projects and non-availability of funds. 
Nine Small Hydro Power projects of 36 MW, funded by the Planning Commission, remained 
incomplete even after incu rring an expenditure of ` 358.46 crore. 38 projects of nine MW 
aggregate capacity sanctioned by MNRE also remained incomplete. Even after completion, 
some of the projects were found to be not f unctioning due to defect ive equipment, natural 
calamities, inaction by cont ractors to repair the same, abandoning the projects by 
contractors, etc. which resulted in losses in power generation. MNRE agreed that 30 per 
cent of the projects were not functioning. 
Audit observed instances where provisions of General Financial Rules and terms and 
conditions of the contracts were not followe d, tendering process was not followed and 
substandard work was done. 
Audit further observed that Annual Mainte nance Contract for maintenance of solar 
equipment installed were not in place after the first two years. No service centres for 
maintenance of the projects were functioning.  There were deficiencies in monitoring of 
implementation of the Small Hydro Power projects by MNRE and by the State Agencies. 
8 Recommendation 
• MNRE must review the work done under Prime Minister’s Special Package for Arunachal 
Pradesh and take action in coordination with the State Ag encies for completing delayed 
projects, ensuring operations of commission ed projects and adequa te post-project 
maintenance thereof. 
                                                            
8  MNRE - ` 241.32 crore and Planning Commission - ` 274.56 crore. 
9   SPV – 523 and SHP – 528. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section IV –  
Research, Design, Development and 
Demonstration Activities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 189 
Chapter - XII 
Research, Design, Development and 
Demonstration Activities in the Renewable 
Energy Sector 
 
1. Introduction 
Research, Design, Development and Demonstration (RDD&D) activities of MNRE were aimed 
at resource assessment, technology develo pment, demonstration and facilitating the 
industry to become internationally competitive. Accordingly, the RDD&D projects pertaining 
to the above sectors were sponsored to the various Research and Development (R&D) 
organizations/institutions, industries, autonomous organizations, etc. 
The RDD&D policy framework of MNRE provided  guidelines for project identification, 
formulation, evaluation by experts, approval, financial support, monitoring and appraisal. It 
specified two types of committees for providing overall guidance to the RDD&D efforts in 
new and renewable energy sector i.e. RDD& D Sectoral Project Appraisal Committee and 
RDD&D Project Appraisal Committee. 
A total of 190 RDD&D projects with budget of ` 545.90 crore had been funded to various 
R&D institutions/ organizations, Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs), Industries, etc 
during 2007-14. The position of RDD&D Projects taken up during 2007-14 is detailed in Table 
50. 
Table 50: Sector wise projects sanctioned, completed and funds sanctioned by MNRE 
S.No. Area of project Projects 
sanctioned 
Amount sanctioned 
(in ` crore) 
Projects 
completed 
Projects under 
progress 
1 Solar Thermal  22 143.77 13 9 
2 Solar Photovoltaic 27 148.22 17 10 
3 Bio-energy 7 39.09 1 6 
4 Biomass Cook stove 7 4.43 5 2 
5 Biogas 32 36.87 19 13 
6 Bio-Fuel 30 27.15 14 16 
7 Waste to Energy 3 9.23 3 Nil 
8 Hydrogen Energy 40 125.58 23 17 
9 Fuel Cell 14 6.06 9 5 
10 Wind Energy 8 5.50 8 Nil 
 Total 190 545.90 112 78 
Source: MNRE. 
 

Chapter XII Report No. 34 of 2015 
 
Page | 190 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
2. Audit Observations 
Subject to scope limitation reported in Para 8 of Chapter I of this Report, Audit scrutinized 
58 project records produced to it. Of these 58 projects, audit observations on 50 projects 
are given below: 
2.1. Non development of high efficiency Heterojunction with intrinsic thin layer solar 
cells 
National Institute of Solar Energy (NISE) sanctioned (July 2008) an R&D project titled 
‘Development of high efficiency Heterojunction with intrinsic thin layer (HIT)solar cells’ to be 
implemented by NISE in collaboration with Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Mumbai with 
four
1 deliverables proposed. The total project outlay was ` 98.58 lakh and was fully funded 
by MNRE. IIT Mumbai, contributed in terms of  space, equipment and infrastructure. The 
project duration was initially for three years, but after extensions, the project was 
completed (July 2012), after in curring an expenditure of 
` 71.80 lakh. The audit findings in 
this regard were: 
i. The project completion report indicate d that a single side HIT cell with 12 per cent 
efficiency on a 4 cm 2 area was developed against the target of 10X10 cm 2 surface, 
double sided solar cell. Thus, the project pa rameters were not ac hieved. NISE in its 
reply accepted that only a single side d cell was developed due  to technological 
constraints. It also stated that effo rts were being made to fabricate a 36 cm 2 area 
cell. 
ii. The envisaged cells were to have a rated capacity of two watts, however the final 
completion report did not indicate the ac hieved output. NISE replied that power 
output would be calibrated only af ter development of the cell on 100 cm 2 area 
surface. 
iii. The final completion report was silent about development of a lab scale module as 
envisaged. 
iv. The developed cell was to be sent to NI SE for performance evaluation and field 
observation. NISE replied that only after developing a 36 cm
2 area cell, module would 
be prepared and sent for field trial. It further stated that module could not be 
developed due to technological constraints.  
v. MNRE in its reply claimed that the proce ss developed (Hot Wire Chemical Vapour 
Deposition) was novel and cost effective as compared to existing processes. 
However, it is observed in audit that the claim could not be verified as no effort was 
made to obtain the patent in this regard.  
                                                            
1  Development of a 20 per cent efficiency HIT double sided solar cell on a 10 X 10 cm 2 surface with a power 
output of 2 watts, Demonstrate the lab scale module of PV cell, Performance evaluation of solar cells, their 
temperature dependence and field performance by NISE. After fabrication of HIT cell through Hot Wire 
Chemical Vapour Deposition (HWCVD), a unique process, patent to be obtained for fabrication of HIT cell. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter XII  
 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 191 
vi. As per RDD&D guidelines of MNRE, for all projects, a third party monitoring 
mechanism was to be introduced to ensu re timely execution and achievement of 
deliverables and also to allow mid course corre ction, if required. In this project, it 
was observed that the task of monitoring was assigned to NISE and IIT Mumbai. This 
posed a conflict of interest as both were the stakeholders in the project.  
MNRE stated (May 2015) that additional large amount of funds for purchase of equipment 
were needed along with manpower and exte nsion of project duration to achieve all 
objectives. Reply itself indicates deficiency in  planning for the project. The project had, 
however, positively contributed in terms of award of PhD degree to two students. 
Thus, though the research was aimed at developi ng high efficiency cells with an alternate 
and cost effective technology, the objectives of the project were overambitious and lacked 
necessary forecast for infrastructure. Lack of independent monitoring and follow up, evident 
through non filing of patent, exhibited a la ckadaisical approach towards the research 
project. 
2.2. Non-design and development of poly silicon deposition reactors 
MNRE sanctioned (June 2009) a research project titled ‘Development of solar grade poly 
silicon material’ to be implemented by M/s Ma harishi Solar Technology Pvt. Ltd (MSTPL), 
New Delhi at a total cost of 
` 23.20 crore. Under the project it was proposed to design and 
develop process reactor and optimi ze the deposition process to make poly silicon for use in 
solar cell. The reactors for silicon producti on were to be indigenously designed and 
manufactured. MNRE’s financial support was for ` 5.28 crore and was to be applied towards 
design and development of reactor a nd related equipments. MNRE released ` 1.76 crore in 
June 2009 as first installment to MSTPL. An expenditure of ` 1.74 crore was reported as 
incurred by MSTPL as on October 2010. 
Audit scrutiny of the implementation of the project revealed the following: 
i. From the utilization certificate submitted in October 2010 by MSTPL, it could be seen 
that expenditure on civil works, which was to be borne by MSTPL, was also booked 
against MNRE contribution, which was irregular. 
ii. It was observed from the fourth quarterly  report of MSTPL that till October 2010 the 
progress of project was slow. Works like ci vil work, infrastructure development, 
design of poly silicon reactor, arrangement of electrical power supply, plant and 
machinery and raw material storage facilities had not been completed by the MSTPL. 
iii. Research and Development Project Approval Committee in its meeting (May 2009) 
recommended that in line with 50 per cent  support to industry concept, the 
company must match the MNRE funding. Howeve r, it was noticed th at no record of 
any expenditure by MSTPL from its own budget as against an expenditure of 
` 1.74 
crore contributed by MNRE was available. 
iv. The monitoring of the project was lax as was evident from the fact that neither the 
report of the committee constituted by MN RE in July 2010 to visit the project site 

Chapter XII Report No. 34 of 2015 
 
Page | 192 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
was available in the records nor MSTPL s ubmitted quarterly reports after October 
2010. 
v. Project completion report was not submitted. 
Audit observed that MNRE did not object to th e slow progress of the project, application of 
MNRE funds to ineligible works and MSTPL not contributing to the project in terms of its 
financial commitment. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the solar grade polysilicon material was developed; however, 
it required detailed characterization to establis h quality. In absence of any characterization, 
no further instalments were released. Reply it self was indicative of the fact that the 
objective of the project was not achieved. 
2.3. Development of a Megawatt-scale National So lar Thermal Power Testing, Simulation 
and Research Facility 
MNRE sanctioned (September 2009) an RDD&D project ‘Development of a Megawatt-scale 
National Solar Thermal Power Testing, Simulatio n and Research Facility’ to be implemented 
by Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Mumbai  in collaboration with NISE with specific 
objectives2.  The total project outlay was ` 41.17 crore and was fully funded by MNRE. Cost 
of the project was revised from ` 41.17 crore to ` 48.12 crore. IIT Mumbai was to contribute 
in terms of space, equipment and infrastructure. The project duration was for five years and 
an expenditure to the tune of ` 43.51 crore had been incurred (July 2015). 
Audit observed that: 
i. Initially the site in Aurangabad was select ed due to good amount of solar radiation 
and convenience for the project team of IIT  Mumbai to frequently visit the site. 
However, the site was shifted to NISE ca mpus. This resulted in increase in the 
estimated cost by ` 7.27 crore on equipment alone. This was required due to 
revision in technical specification3 because of change in location. 
ii. The site at NISE had a number of riverines and the quality of  soil was very loose.  In 
order to protect the civil foundations of vari ous structures and collector fields from 
soil erosion, additional expenses toward s soil pitching, drainage, check dams and 
associated land development work had to be undertaken. 
 
                                                            
2  Establishment of a National Research Facility on  Solar Thermal Power (one MW grid-interactive), 
Establishment of test facility for component and sy stem characterization, Development of simulation 
facility for future scale-up of plant capacity, Facilitate R&D for cost reduction of concentrated solar power. 
3  The original project proposal was prepared for Au rangabad where the solar in solation was higher (800 
Watt/m2) than the solar insolation at NISE (600-650 Watt/m 2).Consequently, the aperture area of solar 
concentrators had to be increased to about 1.3 times to achieve the designed capacity of one MW. No 
specific reasons justifying the shift were found on record. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter XII  
 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 193 
iii. As per Standing Finance Committee (SFC) memorandum, the participation of Indian 
industry4, to the tune of ` 3.57 crore was proposed by MNRE. However, nothing on 
record showed that industry partners were involved. MNRE stated (May 2015) that a 
number of industry partners left due to change in site location and contributions 
received from industry were ‘in kind’. 
iv. As per RDD&D guidelines of MNRE the proj ect was to be monito red regularly by an 
expert committee. To facilitate this, a provision of one per cent of the project cost 
was kept aside for monitoring charges. Such monitoring was to also review the 
industry participation and revenue generation  by the project. However, nothing was 
on record to show that the project was monitored by any expert committee. 
v. As per the MNRE’s sanction, the extensive testing and data collection was scheduled 
to start from the third year of implementati on. However, it was noticed in audit that 
work of extensive testing and data collection was not done even after lapse of third 
year of implementation. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that the plant was feeding power to the grid since May 2014. 
However it further stated that Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) with Distribution Company 
was yet to be signed. In the absence of PPA, there remains ambiguity regarding the status of 
grid connectivity. 
2.4. Establishment of 3.5 MW Solar Thermal Power plant with 16 hours thermal storage 
for continuous operation 
MNRE sanctioned a RDD&D project `Establishm ent of 3.5 MW Solar Thermal Power plant 
with 16 hours thermal storage for continuous operation’ to World Renewal Spiritual Trust 
(WRST) at Mount Abu in October 2010 at a total cost of 
` 63 crore. The project cost was to 
be shared amongst MNRE (` 12.60 crore), WRST (` 26.40 crore), BMU Germany (` 10 crore) 
and M/s Unnathi projects (industrial partner - ` 14 crore).  
During the period October 2010 to  November 2012, MNRE released ` six crore (50 per cent 
of its commitment) to WRST. Further, as pe r audited Statement of Expenditure (SoE) and 
Utilisation Certificates (UCs) submitted by WR ST, WRST and M/s Unnathi projects together 
had released a sum of ` 8.10 crore for the project. In November 2012, WRST intimated that 
M/s Unnathi Projects had withdrawn from the pr oject without contributing anything. It also 
proposed that the project cost should be revised to ` 81 crore and contributions enhanced. 
Accordingly MNRE enhanced (Feb ruary 2014) its contribution to ` 21.20 crore, BMU’s to  
` 32.80 crore and WRST’s to ` 27 crore. MNRE had released a total sum of ` 18.50 crore till 
date (July 2015). 
Audit observed that the project was appr oved by RDD&D Project Appraisal Committee 
subject to involvement of an industrial partner, in addition to BMU Germany, for sharing the 
cost of the project. Accordingly M/s Unnath i Projects Ltd entered into a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) (November 2009) wi th WRST with a contribution of ` 14 crore. 
                                                            
4  L&T, KIE Thermosystems, Clique Development Pvt Ltd, Tata Power, Heavy Water Board and TCE consulting 
engineers. 

Chapter XII Report No. 34 of 2015 
 
Page | 194 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Withdrawal of M/s Unnathi Projects at a later stage was in violation of this condition. 
Further, at the stage of revision in the project cost and contribution shares, MNRE did not 
raise the discrepancy in audited SoE regardin g the fact that contribution of M/s Unnathi 
Projects and WRST was being shown together to give an impression that the industry 
partner was meeting its financial commitment. Thus, the failure of MNRE in monitoring SoEs 
and fund flows to the project resulted in a situation where MNRE was been saddled with 
extra financial burden due to withdrawal of industrial partner. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that it tried its be st to convince and bring in another industry 
partner, but in vain. However, the fact rema ins that timely monitoring and securing M/s 
Unnathi Projects’ contribution at early stages co uld have tied the partner to the project as 
envisaged. MNRE reply was silent on current status of the project. 
2.5. Preparation of standards and guidelines and certification of Wind Power Systems 
NIWE was established to render well organi sed support on a continuous basis to 
manufacturing industry, investors, develope rs and utilities in the Wind Energy Sector, 
including developing Indian standard and guidelines for design criteria, loads and safety in 
association with Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS). 
Audit, however, observed that so far NIWE had not finalised standards and guidelines with 
respect to Indian conditions
5.  NIWE at present provided ce rtificates to the wind turbines 
based on a provisional scheme titled ‘Type Approval Provisional Scheme 2000 (TAPS 2000)’. 
Further, Audit also observed that certificat es issued by the Centre had no universal 
acceptance. 
During the last six years NIWE could undertak e only 26 proposals for certification. Audit 
analysis revealed that after 2008-09, the numbe r of certifications unde rtaken registered a 
declining trend.  While in the year 2008-09 it wa s eight, it was only four in subsequent two 
years. In the year 2011-12, it wa s further reduced to three befo re it marginally rose once 
again to four. The amount of revenue earned al so came down significantly. While it was  
` 117.10 lakh in the year 2008-09, it was only ` 19.40 lakh in the year 2012-13. 
Thus, the capability of independent certification with internationally acceptable standards 
was not developed even after a lapse of fifteen years of establishment of the Centre. NIWE 
replied that international accreditation was not obtained due to lack of adequate trained 
manpower in multi disciplinary engineering.  As regards low number of certifications 
undertaken, NIWE replied that numbers could be increased only with an increase of 
manpower.  As regards non-incorporation of I ndian standards, NIWE stated that the BIS 
committee had already approved three draf t standards and the documents would be 
printed in due course. 
 
 
                                                            
5  To reflect special considerations for the country su ch as wind condition, grid conditions or temperature 
limits 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter XII  
 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 195 
2.6 Other audit findings 
Apart from the significant audit findings re ported in the preceding paragraphs, audit 
findings on the remaining 45 projects reviewed by Audit are given belo w. The project wise 
audit findings are given at Annexure XVIII. 
2.6.1 Delays in completion of proj ects and deficiencies in monitoring 
The audit findings relating to timely completion of projects, submission of UCs, monitoring 
of the projects, submission of Project Completi on Reports (PCRs) and their evaluation with 
regards to these 45 projects, are summarized in Table 51. 
Table 51: Summarised audit findings on 45 RDD&D projects 
S.No. Audit finding Total (in Nos.) Percentage 
1.  Project not completed in time 32 71 
2.  UCs not submitted in time 7 16 
3.  Projects not monitored by independent Experts 16 36 
4.  Project Completion Report not received 4 9 
5.  Project Completion Report not evaluated by 
Experts 
16 36 
 
As can be seen from the table above 71 per cent of the projects could not be completed in 
time. In 36 per cent  of the projects reviewed, neither the quarterly reports had been 
submitted nor were these reviewed by independent Experts. While in nine per cent of the 
reviewed projects the PCRs had not been submitted till July 2015, in 36 per cent of the cases 
where PCR had been received, it had not been evaluated by Experts. 
2.6.2. Non achievement of objectives 
Some project proposals approved by MNRE set out certain measurable outputs in terms of 
transfer of technology, patent s to be filed and research pa pers to be published. Some 
projects also envisaged engagement of industr y partners in the research project. Audit 
scrutiny in this regards revealed the following: 
i. Of the 45 projects, in nine projects partic ipation of industry was envisaged. In none 
of these projects such a partnership could be secured. 
ii. In seven projects where it was anticipa ted that the research papers would be 
published, no such publications were made. 
iii. In six cases though the project proposal ta rgeted transfer of te chnology, this could 
not be achieved. 
iv. In 16 cases, where filing of patents was committed to in the project proposal, no 
such patent was filed. 

Chapter XII Report No. 34 of 2015 
 
Page | 196 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
2.7 RDD&D activities in States  
Audit observed that in the 24 selected Stat es, only a few States had undertaken RDD&D 
activities. The audit observations on the projects undertaken by the States are given below. 
Gujarat 
For Wind Energy, GEDA had identified two focus areas for R&D without any feasibility 
study and had not implemented any project t ill 2013-14. For Biomass Energy GEDA had 
identified 10 focus areas for RDD&D without any feasibility study and had not 
implemented any project till 2013-14.  
Kerala 
No R&D activities were carried out by the State during the period  2007-2014 except for 
the development of two portable type biogas plants during the year 2012-13. 
West Bengal 
WBREDA signed (February 2013) MoU with Bengal Engineering and Science University for 
creating a Centre of Excellence for Green Ener gy and Sensor System to be funded through 
a Green Energy Fund. The Green Energy Fund  was to be funded by an initial equity 
contribution from the State Government and th en it was to generate sufficient revenues 
to be self-sustained. Audit observed that ne ither was the fund set up nor could the Centre 
of Excellence be established. 
3. Conclusion 
Under the Research, Design, Developmen t and Demonstration programme, MNRE 
sanctioned 190 projects at a cost of ` 545.90 crore during the period 2007-08 to 2013-14 to 
various R&D organizations, of which 112 proj ects were completed and 78 projects were 
under progress. 
Audit observed that although a large number of sanctioned projects were in alignment with 
focus areas identified under various Divisions of MNRE, realisation of deliverable outcome 
was not achieved in a majority of projects. Th is was partly due to the fact that industry 
participation could not be secured in the projects where it was envisaged, which limited the 
commercial exploitation of technologies developed. There were delays in implementation of 
projects and inability of the implementing agencies to either file patents or publish research 
papers as envisaged in the projects. 
Monitoring of the projects by MNRE was lax,  as in many cases, project progress reports 
were not submitted by the impl ementing agency and project completion reports were not 
evaluated by MNRE or by third parties. 
MNRE sponsored research, design, development and demonstrat ion activities did not yield 
significant results with regard to cost reduc tion or development of new technology and 
processes. 
 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Chapter XII  
 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 197 
4. Recommendations 
• Project Completion Reports of research proj ects should invariably be vetted by field 
experts and peer groups before their acceptance, to validate the presented output. 
• Emphasis should be laid on regular monitoring of ongoing projects to ensure that these 
are completed on time and if required, course correction introduced. 
 
 
 
 
 (GURVEEN SIDHU) 
New Delhi Principal Director of Audit, 
Dated:  Scientific Departments 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi (SHASHI KANT SHARMA) 
 Dated: Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexures 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 201 
Annexure I 
(Refer to para 6 in Chapter I) 
State wise sample selected for audit of Small Hydro Power, Biomass bagasse and Biomass 
non bagasse 
State Small Hydro Power Biomass bagasse Biomass non bagasse 
Total 
Projects 
Sample 
Selected 
Total 
Projects 
Sample 
Selected 
Total 
Projects 
Sample 
Selected 
Andhra Pradesh 67 7 24 2 10 5 
Arunachal Pradesh 187 33 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Assam Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Bihar 13 1 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Chhattisgarh 2 1 Nil Nil 1 1 
Gujarat 5 None Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Haryana 4 Nil 4 2 17 9 
Himachal Pradesh 88 13 0 0 0 0 
Jammu & Kashmir Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Jharkhand Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Karnataka 87 12 53 5 13 3 
Kerala 13 5 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Madhya Pradesh 86 11 Nil Nil 34 6 
Maharashtra 46 5 81 8 18 2 
Meghalaya 4 2 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Mizoram 11 1 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Nagaland 1 1 1 1 1 1 
Odisha 5 1 Nil Nil 1 1 
Punjab 42 4 1 1 24 13 
Rajasthan 10 Nil 14 2 1 1 
Tamil Nadu 21 5 95 10 8 4 
Uttar Pradesh Nil Nil Nil Nil 25 10 
Uttarakhand 7 4 3 1 6 1 
West Bengal 8 2 Nil Nil 150 15 
Source: MNRE. 

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 202 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Annexure I 
(Refer to para 6 in Chapter I) 
State wise sample selected for audit of wind energy programmes 
States Generation Based Incentive (GBI) Accelerated Depreciation (AD) 
Total Projects Sample Selected Total Projects Sample Selected 
Andhra Pradesh NA NA 42 4 
Arunachal Pradesh Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Assam Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Bihar NA NA NA NA 
Chhattisgarh Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Gujarat Nil Nil 1,230 62 
Haryana Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Himachal Pradesh Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Jammu & Kashmir Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Jharkhand Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Karnataka 145 15 Nil Nil 
Kerala 3 1 Nil Nil 
Madhya Pradesh Nil Nil 88 13 
Maharashtra* 1,938 100   
Meghalaya Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Mizoram Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Nagaland Nil Nil 2 2 
Odisha Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Punjab Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Rajasthan Nil  Nil 71 8 
Tamil Nadu* 11,598 170   
Uttar Pradesh Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Uttarakhand Nil Nil Nil Nil 
West Bengal Nil Nil 3 2 
Source: SNAs. 
NA – Not Available. 
* In the States of Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu the total projects shown are combined i.e. installed 
under GBI and AD schemes. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 203 
Annexure I : (Refer to para 6 in Chapter I) 
State wise sample selected for audit of grid connected Solar Renewable Energy programmes 
State JNNSM Migration RPSSGP Demonstration Programme Solar Projects under the State 
Policy 
Total 
Projects 
Sample 
Selected 
Total 
Projects 
Sample 
Selected 
Total 
Projects 
Sample 
Selected 
Total 
Projects 
Sample 
Selected 
Total Projects Sample 
Selected 
Andhra Pradesh 5 2 Nil Nil 11 1 1 Nil 28 4 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Assam Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Bihar Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Chhattisgarh Nil Nil Nil Nil 2 1 Nil Nil 2 1 
Gujarat 1 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 78 20 
Haryana Nil Nil Nil Nil 9 2 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Himachal Pradesh Nil  Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Jammu & Kashmir Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Jharkhand Nil Nil Nil  Nil 8 4 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Karnataka 2* Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 3 3 
Kerala Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Madhya Pradesh Nil Nil Nil Nil 3 Nil Nil Nil 69 27 
Maharashtra 3 1 3 1 3 3 1 1 2 1 
Meghalaya Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Mizoram Nil  Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Nagaland Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Odisha 2*  Nil Nil Nil 8 2 Nil  Nil Nil Nil 
Punjab Nil Nil 1 1 7 2 Nil Nil 1 1 
Rajasthan 50* Nil 12 Nil 12 3 2 2 73 19 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 204 
State JNNSM Migration RPSSGP Demonstration Programme Solar Projects under the State 
Policy 
Total 
Projects 
Sample 
Selected 
Total 
Projects 
Sample 
Selected 
Total 
Projects 
Sample 
Selected 
Total 
Projects 
Sample 
Selected 
Total Projects Sample 
Selected 
Tamil Nadu 1 Nil Nil Nil 7 2  1 1  Nil Nil 
Uttar Pradesh 1  Nil Nil Nil 5 Nil  Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Uttarakhand Nil Nil Nil  Nil 3 1 Nil Nil Nil  Nil 
West Bengal Nil Nil  Nil Nil Nil Nil 1 Nil 1 1 
Source: MNRE, State Nodal Agencies, NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam Limited and Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency. 
* One project each in these States have been cancelled. In addition to the above out of 62 JNNSM projects implemented by NVVN, 46 were selected for audit. Out of a total 
of 16 projects under Migration scheme implemented by NVVN, nine we re selected for audit. Further, out of 67 RPSSGP project impl emented by IREDA, 17 were selected 
for audit and out of a total of six Demonstration projects implemented by IREDA, three were selected for audit. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 205 
Annexure II 
(Refer to para 2.2 in Chapter II) 
Targets for Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO) set by the State Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions from 2010-11 to 2019-20 
(in per cent) 
S. 
No. 
State 2010-
11 
2011-
12 
2012-
13 
2013-
14 
2014-
15 
2015-
16 
2016-
17 
2017-
18 
2018-
19 
2019-
20 
 NAPCC Target 6.00 7.00 8.00 9.00 10.00 11.00 12.00 13.00 14.00 15.00 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00    
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
  4.20 5.60 7.00      
3 Assam  2.80 4.20 5.60 7.00      
4 Bihar 1.50 3.00 4.00 4.50 5.00 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 
5 Chhattisgarh 5.00 5.25 5.75 5.75 5.75      
6 Gujarat 5.00 6.00 7.00 7.00 8.00 9.00 10.00    
7 Haryana 1.50 1.50 2.05 3.10       
8 Himachal 
Pradesh 
10.00 10.01 10.25 10.25 10.25 11.25 12.25 13.50 14.75 16 
9 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
 3.00 5.00 5.00 6.00 7.50 9.00    
10 Jharkhand 2.00 3.00 4.00 4.00 4.00 4.00     
11 Karnataka  7.25 7.25 7.25       
12 Kerala 3.30 3.60 3.90 4.20 4.50 4.80 5.10 5.40 5.70 6.00 
13 Madhya 
Pradesh 
 2.50 4.00 5.50 7.00      
14 Maharashtra 6.00 7.00 8.00 9.00 9.00 9.00     
15 Meghalaya 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.00       
16 Mizoram 5.00 6.00 7.00        
17 Nagaland 5.00 7.00 8.00        
18 Odisha  5.00 5.50 6.00 6.50 7.00     
19 Punjab   2.40 2.90 3.50 4.00      
20 Rajasthan 8.50 6.00 7.10 8.20       
21 Tamil Nadu  9.00 9.00 9.00 11.00 11.00     
22 Uttar Pradesh 3.75 5.00 6.00 6.00       
23 Uttarakhand   4.53 5.05 6.05 7.08 8.10 9.30 11.50   
24 West Bengal    4.00 5.00 6.00 7.00 8.00   
Source: Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. 
Note: NAPCC – National Action Plan for Climate Change. 
  

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 206 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Annexure III 
(Refer to para 2.3 in Chapter II) 
Status of Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO) compliance between 2010-11 and 2013-14 
S.No. RPO notified/ achievement (in per cent) 
 State 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 
 NAPCC 6.00 7.00 8.00 9.00 
1 Andhra Pradesh  5.00/ NA 5.00/ 1.75 5.00/ NA 
2 Arunachal Pradesh   4.20/ 8.41 5.60/ 8.87 
3 Assam  0/ 8.40 2.80/ 4.02 4.20/ 3.44 5.60/ NA 
4 Bihar 1.50/ 1.00 2.50/ 2.10 4.00/ 2.90 4.50/ 1.89 
5 Chhattisgarh  5.00/ 0 5.25/ 2.76 5.75/ 2.96 6.25/ NA 
6 Gujarat 5.00/ 2.76 6.00/ 4.73 7.00/ 6.50 7.00/ 6.72 
7 Haryana 1.50/ 1.06 1.50/ 1.07 2.05/ 0.97 3.10/ 0.94 
8 Himachal Pradesh 10.00/ 12.00 10.01/ 15.73 10.25/ 17.26 10.25/ 16.69 
9 Jammu & Kashmir  3.00/ Nil 5.00/ Nil 5.00/ Nil 
10 Jharkhand 2.00/ 0.19 3.00/ 0.28 4.00/ 0.39 4.00/ 0.42 
11 Karnataka 0/ 10.70 7.25/ 10.73 7.25/ 9.93 7.25/ 10.97 
12 Kerala 3.00/ 3.38 3.30/ 2.85 3.60/ 2.47 3.90/ NA 
13 Madhya Pradesh  2.50/ NA 4.00/ NA 5.50/ NA 
14 Maharashtra 6.00/ 5.77 7.00/ 7.15 8.00/ 7.05 9.00/ 7.66 
15 Meghalaya 0.50/ 4.14 0.75/ 3.41 1.00/ 5.00 1.00/ 3.80 
16 Mizoram 5.00/ 5.14 6.00/ 7.76 7.00/ 14.45 9.00/ 11.99 
17 Nagaland 5.00/ Nil 5.00/ Nil 5.00/ Nil 5.00/ Nil 
18 Odisha  5.00/ NA 5.50/ NA 6.00/ NA 
19 Punjab   2.40/ 1.69 2.90/ 2.59 3.50/ 3.08 
20 Rajasthan 8.50/ 3.55 6.00/ 5.16 7.10/ 6.30 8.20/ 7.25 
21 Tamil Nadu 0/ 17.27 9.00/ 20.09 9.00/ 26.13 9.00/ 20.04 
22 Uttar Pradesh 3.75/ 4.56 5.00/ 6.19 6.00/ 4.68 6.00/ 4.45 
23 Uttarakhand   4.53/NA 5.05/ 3.78 6.05/ 3.15 
24 West Bengal  2.00/ NA 3.00/ 1.47 4.00/2.54 
Source: Data provided by respective State Nodal Agencies. 
Note: NA – Not Available. 
  

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 207 
Annexure IV 
(Refer to para 2.4 in Chapter II) 
State wise Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO) achievement 
State Total 
Electricity 
purchased 
during 
2010-14 
 (in BU) 
RPO 
Targets 
for 2010-
14 
 (in MU) 
RPO achieved through 
Renewable Energy 
purchase 
RPO achieved 
through Renewable 
Energy Certificate 
mode 
 (in MU) 
Total RPO 
Achievement 
(in MU) 
Shortfall 
 (in MU) 
   (in MU) Percentage (in MU) Percentage   
Andhra 
Pradesh 
76 3,800 1,330 100 Nil Nil 1,330 2,470 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
2.36 58.31 102.78 100 Nil Nil 102.78 Nil 
Assam  12.64 434.79 17.09 100 Nil Nil 17.09 417.70 
Bihar 24.21 793.32 488.72 100 Nil Nil 488.72 304.60 
Chhattisgarh 41.09 2,266.82 1,090 92.37 90 7.63 1,180 1,086.82 
Gujarat 287.04 18,990 8,620 56.89 6,530 43.11 15,150 3,840 
Haryana 144.56 2,981 1,452 100 Nil Nil 1,452 1,529 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
30.02 5,000 4,620 100 Nil Nil 4,620 380 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
Jharkhand 39.96 1,319.36 39.36 100 Nil Nil 39.36 1,280 
Karnataka 214.70 15,020 22,712 100 Nil Nil 22,712 Nil 
Kerala 45.95 1,490 1,320 100 Nil Nil 1,320 170 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
181.94 6,350 2,480 100 Nil Nil 2,480 3,870 
Maharashtra 373.84 28,252.59 25,675.09 98.86 296.49 1.14 25,971.58 2,281.01 
Meghalaya 6.96 57.20 290 100 Nil Nil 290 Nil 
Mizoram 1.62 110.81 161.27 100 Nil Nil 161.27 Nil 
Nagaland 1.98 99.09 99.09 100 Nil Nil 99.09 Nil 
Odisha NA 2,469 1,706 100 Nil Nil 1,706 763 
Punjab 131.68 3,888 2,900 89 368 11 3,268 620 
Rajasthan 210.03 15,621 11,949 100 Nil Nil 11,949 3,672 
Tamil Nadu 203.15 13,740 42,359 100 Nil Nil 42,359 Nil 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
291.05 17,738.84 15,053.26 100 Nil Nil 15,053.26 2,685.58 
Uttarakhand 32.87 1,714.52 1,219.29 90.76 124.12 9.24 1,343.41 371.11 
West Bengal 154.69 5,030.06 2,536.19 99.99 2.81 0.10 2,539 2,491.06 
Total   148220.14 95.23 7411.42 4.77 155631.56 28231.88 
Note: NA – Not Available. 
  

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 208 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Annexure V 
(Refer to para 2.5 in Chapter II) 
Non levy of penalty on obligated entities for not complying with  
Renewable Purchase Obligation 
State Shortfall 
(in MU) 
Estimated 
penalty* 
(in ` crore) 
Remarks 
Andhra Pradesh 2,470.00 370.50 Penalty for non solar at the rate of ` 1,500 per REC. For period 
2012-13 
Arunachal Pradesh Nil Nil No shortfall 
Assam 417.70 62.66 For period 2011-13  
Bihar 304.60 45.69 Bihar Energy Regulatory Commissi on  ordered creation of a separate 
fund of ` 21.08 crore for shortfall, however the same has not been 
done yet for period 2010-14 
Chhattisgarh  1,086.82 163.02 For period 2011-13  
Gujarat 3,840.00 576.00 For period 2010-14. The matte r of RPO fulfillment is kept for 
judgment (petition no. 1437 and 1442 of 2014) by Gujarat Energy 
Regulatory Commission. 
Haryana 1,529.00 229.35 For period 2010-14. 
Himachal Pradesh 380.00 57.00 For period 2010-14. 
Jammu & Kashmir NA NA  
Jharkhand 1,280.00 192.00 For period 2010-14. 
Karnataka Nil Nil For period 2007-14. Being an RE rich  state, RPO targets were met. 
However Karnataka Energy Regulatory Commission has not 
prescribed any penalty for non compliance  
Kerala 170.00 25.50 For period 2010-14. 
Madhya Pradesh 3,870.00 580.50 
 
For period 2007-14. 
Maharashtra 2,281.01 342.15 Time extension upto 2013-14 for Non-Solar Projects and upto 2015-
16 for Solar Projects were been granted by Maharashtra Energy 
Regulatory Commission for recoupment of the shortfall. 
Meghalaya Nil Nil For 2010-14. No shortfall. 
Mizoram Nil Nil For 2010-14. No shortfall. 
Nagaland Nil Nil No shortfall. 
Odisha 763.00 114.45 For period 2012-14. 
Punjab  620.00 93.00 For period 2011-14. 
Rajasthan 3,672.00 550.80 For period 2007-14. Rajasthan Energy Regulatory Commission had 
not prescribed the scale of penalty for shortfall. 
Tamil Nadu Nil Nil No shortfall 
Uttar Pradesh 2,685.58 402.84 No clause for imposition of penalty for non-compliance 
Uttarakhand  371.11 55.67 Uttarakhand Energy Regulatory Commission had levied a token 
penalty of ` 20,000 on Uttarakhand Power Corporation Limited. 
Recently it had allowed carrying over of unmet RPO to FY 2014-15 
West Bengal 2,491.06 373.66 For 2010-14. 
Total 28,231.88 4,234.79  
* Calculated at a floor price of ` 1,500 per Renewable Energy Certificate (REC). 
Note: NA – Not Available. 
 
  

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 209 
Annexure VI 
(Refer to para 3.1 in Chapter II) 
State wise list of projects registered under Solar and  
non Solar Renewable Energy Certificate (REC) as on July 2014 
State Projects registered under 
Solar REC 
Projects registered under non Solar 
REC 
Total projects registered under 
REC 
Number Capacity (in 
MW) 
Number Capacity (in MW) Number Capacity (in 
MW) 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
7 37.79 14 124.80 21 162.59 
Bihar 0 0 5 26.60 5 26.60 
Chhattisgarh  2 3.10 8 86.50 10 89.60 
Gujarat 0 0 47 336.30 47 336.30 
Haryana 0 0 6 18.56 6 18.56 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
0 0 7 55.51 7 55.51 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
0 0 1 15 1 15 
Karnataka 0 0 15 137.25 15 137.25 
Kerala 0 0 2 23.20 2 23.20 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
53 83.77 9 63.17 62 146.94 
Maharashtra 29 45.75 324 845.84 353 891.59 
Nagaland 0 0 1 24 1 24 
Odisha 1 2.50 2 30.40 3 32.90 
Punjab  0 0 6 53.28 6 53.28 
Rajasthan 59 159.12 20 141 79 300.12 
Tamil Nadu 13 36.86 214 1,018.85 227 1,055.71 
Uttar Pradesh 0 0 53 678.13 53 678.13 
Uttarakhand  0 0 3 44 3 44 
Total 164 368.89 737 3,722.39 901 4,091.28 
Source: Renewable Energy Certificate Registry of India. 

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 210 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Annexure VII 
(Refer to para 2 in Chapter III) 
Estimated potential, target fixed and installed capacity 
of Solar power as on 31 March 2014 
S. No. State Estimated 
potential1 
(in MW) 
Targets 
fixed 
(2007-14) 
Installed 
capacity as 
per MNRE 
(in MW) 
Installed 
capacity as 
per States/ 
UTs 
(in MW) 
Installation (in 
percentage) 
over estimated 
potential 
  (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (iii) x 100/(i) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 58,850 Nil 131.84 95.98 0.22 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 8,650 Nil 0.03 Nil Nil 
3 Assam 13,760 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
4 Bihar 11,200 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
5 Chhattisgarh 18,270 Nil 7.10 9.60 0.04 
6 Delhi 2,050 - 5.15 - 0.25 
7 Goa 880 - Nil - Nil 
8 Gujarat 35,770 Nil 916.40 891.16 2.56 
9 Haryana 4,560 Nil 10.30 12.80 0.23 
10 Himachal Pradesh 33,840 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
11 Jammu & Kashmir 1,11,050 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
12 Jharkhand 18,180 Nil 16.00 16.00 0.09 
13 Karnataka 24,700 256.00 31.00 31.00 0.13 
14 Kerala 6,110 Nil 0.03 Nil Nil 
15 Madhya Pradesh 61,660 748.38 347.17 272.77 0.56 
16 Maharashtra 64,320 225.00 249.25 230.25 0.39 
17 Manipur 10,630 - Nil - Nil 
18 Meghalaya 5,860 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
19 Mizoram 9,090 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
20 Nagaland 7,290 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
21 Odisha 25,780 Nil 30.50 13.00 0.12 
22 Punjab 2,810 1,000 16.85 10.50 0.60 
23 Rajasthan 1,42,310 1,380 730.10 725.50 0.51 
24 Sikkim 4,940 - Nil - Nil 
25 Tamil Nadu 17,670 700 98.36 97.00 0.56 
26 Tripura 2,080 - Nil - Nil 
27 Uttar Pradesh 22,830 Nil 21.08 Nil 0.09 
28 Uttarakhand 16,800 Nil 5.05 5.00 0.03 
29 West Bengal 6,260 100 7.05 2.00 0.11 
30 Union Territories2 790 - 7.88  1.00 
 Total 7,48,990 4,409.38 2,631.143 2,412.56 0.35 
Source: State Nodal Agencies (SNAs) and MNRE. 
                                                            
1  As per National Institute of Wind Energy. 
2  Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Dadar & Na gar Haveli, Daman & Diu, Lakshadweep and Puducherry. 
3  However, the year wise installed capacity as per MNRE was 2,656 MW. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 211 
Annexure VIII 
(Refer to para 4.1.2 in Chapter III) 
Year-wise project wise service charges deducted by Indian Renewable Energy 
Development Agency (IREDA) 
(in `) 
Year/ 
Name of 
project 
proponent 
M/s Reliance Industries M/s Sapphire Industrial 
Infrastructures Private limited 
M/s Par Solar Pvt ltd. 
 Service 
charges 
charged 
by IREDA 
Maximum 
limit 
Excess 
charged 
by IREDA 
Service 
charges 
charged 
by IREDA 
Maximum 
limit 
Excess 
charged 
by IREDA 
Service 
charges 
charged 
by IREDA 
Maximum 
allowable 
Excess  
charged 
by 
IREDA 
2011-12 15,67,647 5,00,000 10,67,647 10,79,545 5,00,000 5,79,545 0 0 0 
2012-13 6,81,052 5,00,000 1,81,052 36,751 5,00,000 0 0 0 0 
2013-14 0 0 0 10,54,562 5,00,000 5,54,562 8,56,391 5,00,000 3,56,391
Total 22,48,699 10,00,000 12,48,699 21,70,858  11,34,107 8,56,391  3,56,391
Adjusted 
in 2014-15 
  0 (6,21,619)   (2,89,501)   
The total excess charged by IREDA during 2011-14 works out to ` ( 12,48,699+11,34,107+3,56,391) =  
` 27.39 lakh. 
  

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 212 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Annexure IX 
(Refer to para 4.4.6 in Chapter III) 
Details of delay in supply of bundled power in 
Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission (JNNSM) 
Name of 
Scheme 
Number 
of 
projects 
Date of commissioning 
of the projects 
Allocation of NTPC 
thermal power made 
effective from 
Number of days for which 
NVVN supplied only solar 
power (without bundling 
with thermal power) 
Migration 7 10-15 October 2011 and 
20 November 2011 
26 October 2011 and 14 
December 2011 
11 to 24 days 
Batch-I of 
JNNSM 
8 1 January 2012 to  
10 January 2012 
21 January 2012 11 to 20 days 
Batch-I of 
JNNSM 
5 2 February 2012 to  
22 March 2012 
11 July 2012 111 to 160 days 
Batch-II of 
JNNSM 
8 23 December 2012 to  
13 February 2013 
1 March 2013 16 to 68 days 
Batch II of 
JNNSM 
17 11 February 2013 to  
26 March 2013 
6 April 2013 11 to 54 days 
 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 213 
Annexure X 
(Refer to para 2.3 in Chapter V) 
State wise estimated potential and installed capacities of Small Hydro Power 
S. No. States Estimated Potential Installed Capacity Sites used 
(in 
percentage) 
Installed 
Capacity (in 
percentage) 
No. of 
sites 
Capacity 
(in MW) 
No. of 
sites 
Capacity 
(in MW) 
1 Andaman &Nicobar 
Islands 
7 7.91 1 5.25 14 66 
2 Andhra Pradesh 387 978.40 68 221.03 18 23 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 677 1,341.38 149 103.905 22 8 
4 Assam 119 238.69 6 34.11 5 14 
5 Bihar 93 223.05 29 70.70 31 32 
6 Chhattisgarh 200 1,107.15 9 52 5 5 
7 Goa 6 6.50 1 0.05 17 1 
8 Gujarat 292 201.97 5 15.60 2 8 
9 Haryana 33 110.05 7 70.10 21 64 
10 Himachal Pradesh 531 2,397.91 158 638.905 30 27 
11 Jammu &Kashmir 245 1,430.67 37 147.53 15 10 
12 Jharkhand 103 208.95 6 4.05 6 2 
13 Karnataka 834 4,141.12 147 1,031.658 18 25 
14 Kerala 245 704.10 25 158.42 10 22 
15 Madhya Pradesh 299 820.44 11 86.16 4 11 
16 Maharashtra 274 794.33 58 327.425 21 41 
17 Manipur 114 109.13 8 5.45 7 5 
18 Meghalaya 97 230.05 4 31.03 4 13 
19 Mizoram 72 168.90 18 36.47 25 22 
20 Nagaland 99 196.98 11 29.67 11 15 
21 Odisha 222 295.47 10 64.625 5 22 
22 Punjab 259 441.38 47 156.20 18 35 
23 Rajasthan 66 57.17 10 23.85 15 42 
24 Sikkim 88 266.64 17 52.11 19 20 
25 Tamil Nadu 197 659.51 21 123.05 11 19 
26 Tripura 13 46.86 3 16.01 23 34 
27 Uttar Pradesh 251 460.75 9 25.10 4 5 
28 Uttarakhand 448 1,707.87 99 174.82 22 10 
29 West Bengal 203 396.11 23 98.40 11 25 
 Total 6,474 19,749.44 997 3,803.678 15 19 
Source: MNRE. 
Note: No Small Hydro Power potential was reported for Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu, 
Delhi, Lakshadweep and Puducherry.
 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 214 
Annexure XI 
(Refer to para 2.2 in Chapter VII) 
Physical targets and achievements of off - grid Renewable Energy systems (2007-14) 
S. No. State Target and 
Achievement 
Solar Lanterns 
(Nos.) 
Solar Home 
Lights (Nos.) 
Solar Street 
Lights (Nos.) 
Solar Water 
Pumps (Nos.) 
Solar Power Plants 
(kW/Nos.) 
Solar Water Heating 
(sqm/LPD/Nos.) 
1 Andhra Pradesh Target 30,625 150 3,156 NA NA 88,934 
Achievement 29,117 21 2,845 5 1,581.83 kW 22,633 
2 Arunachal Pradesh Target 4,000 5,579 300 NA 2 NA 
Achievement 4,000 5,579 300 Nil 2 Nil 
3 Assam Target 500 1,041 638 NA 638 kW 6,597 (sqm) 
Achievement Nil 291 588 Nil 220 kW 648 (sqm) 
4 Bihar Target 17,700 8,600 1,189 1,560 100 kW 15,000 LPD 
Achievement 17,700 8,600 1,089 1,300 100 kW 9,400 LPD 
5 Chhattisgarh Target NA NA NA NA NA NA 
Achievement 8,412 3,821 3,074 1, 834 4,640 kW 2,793 
6 Gujarat Target NA 3,058 NA NA 57 19,675 
Achievement Nil Nil Nil Nil 40 12,936 
7 Haryana Target 43,591 17,879 32,787 74 169 30,00,000 LPD 
Achievement 43,591 13,185 31,497 74 36 26,15,000 LPD 
8 Himachal Pradesh Target 16,052 2,040 35,062 NA 2,825 kW 33,773 (sqm) 
Achievement 12,292 2,040 35,062 Nil 2,825 kW 15,889 (sqm) 
9 Jammu & Kashmir Target 15,150 32,500 300 NA 4,473.30 kW 21,660 (sqm) 
Achievement 14,347 21,550 210 Nil 2,154.30 kW 2,464 (sqm) 
10 Jharkhand Target 7,000 NA 7,000 77 5,060 kW 250 
Achievement 7,000 Nil 3,467 Nil 230 kW 81 
11 Karnataka Target NA NA NA NA NA NA 
Achievement Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 98 
12 Kerala Target NA 4,704 1,400 NA 11,780.65 kW 7,955 (sqm) 
Achievement Nil 4,704 579 Nil 6,703.36 kW 3,428 (sqm) 
13 Madhya Pradesh Target NA 4,700 12,979 4 1,586 843 
Achievement Nil 3,805 12,875 4 576 843 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 215 
S. No. State Target and 
Achievement 
Solar Lanterns 
(Nos.) 
Solar Home 
Lights (Nos.) 
Solar Street 
Lights (Nos.) 
Solar Water 
Pumps (Nos.) 
Solar Power Plants 
(kW/Nos.) 
Solar Water Heating 
(sqm/LPD/Nos.) 
14 Maharashtra Target 60,000 274 1,173 NA NA 123 (sqm) 
Achievement 60,000 274 1,173 Nil Nil 123 (sqm) 
15 Meghalaya Target 3,26,356 1,26,156 1,56,132 NA 422 186 
Achievement 330 1,28,130 1,34,128 Nil 424 186 
16 Mizoram Target NA NA 1,000 NA 41 NA 
Achievement 2,181 4,004 Nil Nil 41 922 
17 Nagaland Target NA NA 4,200 NA 57 NA 
Achievement 5,503 2,791 3,816 Nil 55 1,232 
18 Odisha Target NA 1,000 180 NA NA 4,000 (sqm) 
Achievement Nil 476 214 Nil 70 722 (sqm) 
19 Punjab Target NA NA NA 600 NA 17,00,000 LPD 
Achievement 2,438 4,500 3,866 100 1,120 kW 8,42,000 LPD 
20 Rajasthan Target NA 71,391 NA 15,550 7 5,100 
Achievement Nil 67,587 90 14,414 7 2,015 
21 Tamil Nadu Target NA 1,80,000 60,000 500 6,000 kW 50,000 (sqm) 
Achievement Nil 78,343 21,130 134 2,055 kW 28,932 (sqm) 
22 Uttar Pradesh Target NA 13,164 1,24,344 900 981 23,64,000 LPD 
Achievement Nil 11,874 1,02,975 567 691 14,80,500 LPD 
23 Uttarakhand Target 1,13,259 9,985 18,543 NA 19 7 
Achievement 1,13,259 9,985 18,143 Nil 19 7 
24 West Bengal Target 15,000 34,783 8,325 Nil 101 kW 500 
Achievement 13,035 28,771 6,325 1 71 kW 137 
Note – NA – Not Available, Nos – Numbers, LPD – Litre per day, sqm – square metre, Solar Home Lighting System (SHLS), Solar Street Lighting System (SSLS), Solar Power 
Plant (SPP), Solar Lantern (SL) and Solar Water Pump (SWP), LPD – Litres per day, sqm – square metres, kW – kilo Watt. 
  

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 216 
Annexure XII 
(Refer to para 3 in Chapter VII) 
Details of Central Financial Assistance (CFA) released to States and unspent balances 
(in ` crore) 
S. No. State Opening 
Balance 
Budget  Total Budget Expenditure Unspent 
balance 
Refund 
CFA State share  Others 
1 Andhra Pradesh Nil 15.36 Nil Nil 15.36 8.36 7 Nil 
2 Arunachal Pradesh Nil 26.48 1.05 Nil 27.53 27.93 (-) 0.40 Nil 
3 Assam Nil 7.80 0.74 Nil 8.54 4.88 3.66 Nil 
4 Bihar Nil 5.96 68.13 22.01 96.11 34.77 61.34 Nil 
5 Chhattisgarh Nil 137.29 87.34 Nil 224.63 419.93 (-)195.30 Nil 
6 Gujarat Nil 17.07 0.87 Nil 17.94 12.21 5.73 0.45 
7 Haryana Nil 31.49 33.91 Nil 65.40 62.66 2.74 Nil 
8 Himachal Pradesh Nil 52.03 1.20 7.21 60.44 89.56 (-)29.12 Nil 
9 Jammu & Kashmir Nil 38.05 26.17 Nil 64.22 61.25 2.97 Nil 
10 Jharkhand Nil 15.44 81.45 14.47 111.36 76.88 34.48 Nil 
11 Karnataka Nil 3.45 Nil Nil 3.45 Nil 3.45 Nil 
12 Kerala Nil 7.67 16.55 0.51 24.73 46.50 (-)21.77 Nil 
13 Madhya Pradesh Nil 27.29 13.42 Nil 40.71 44.44 (-)3.73 Nil 
14 Maharashtra Nil 40.98 Nil Nil 40.98 40.98 Nil Nil 
15 Meghalaya Nil 22.46 1.96 Nil 24.42 28.53 (-)4.11 Nil 
16 Mizoram Nil 6.57 4.95 2.15 13.67 13.67 Nil Nil 
17 Nagaland Nil 16.06 11.62 Nil 27.68 24.33 3.35 Nil 
18 Odisha Nil 1.76 10.75 Nil 12.51 6.62 5.89 Nil 
19 Punjab Nil 20.66 1.42 Nil 22.08 21.88 0.20 Nil 
20 Rajasthan Nil 117.11 12.66 Nil 129.77 112.43 17.34 Nil 
21 Tamil Nadu Nil 56.93 157.60 Nil 214.53 214.53 Nil Nil 
22 Uttar Pradesh Nil 72.75 114.11 Nil 186.86 185.45 1.41 Nil 
23 Uttarakhand 10.87 87.52 28.24 51.90 167.66 164.93 2.73 Nil 
24 West Bengal Nil 35.94 32.45 16.11 84.50 78.87 5.63 Nil 
 Total  10.87 864.12 706.59 114.36 1,685.07 1,781.58 (-) 96.51 0.45 
 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 217 
Annexure XIII 
(Refer to para 4.4 in Chapter VII) 
Details of State wise physical verification of off-grid Solar systems by Audit 
Type of 
System 
Location and year of 
installation 
Number of 
systems 
inspected 
Audit observation 
Andhra Pradesh 
SHLS 
and 
SSLS 
Suddakunta village 
2008-09 
284 SHLS and 
34 SSLS 
Out of five households electrified, none was 
occupied, and one house holder was staying at 
Venkatadripalem village. 
SHLS 
and 
SSLS 
Billagondi hamlet 37 SHLS and 4 
SSLS 
37 SHLS and 2 SSLS were not working. 
Assam 
SHLS 2009 to 2013 48 30 were not working. The beneficiaries in many 
cases were not aware of the person to be 
contacted and in 5 cases where AEDA had been 
informed, action was yet to be taken.  
Arunachal Pradesh 
SSLS East Siang 
2007 and 2009 
15 Two were not working and 13 were missing. 
SSLS 2010 and 2011 25 Six were not working and six were missing. FIR 
lodged with police for the missing systems. No 
maintenance was carried out either by suppliers 
or by APEDA. 
SHLS 11 villages 
2005, 2006,2007, 2010 and 
2012 
163 87 were not working and 23 missing. 
SHLS Papumpare, East Siang and 
Tawang. 
2012 and 2010 
63 in Kimin 
village, 67 in 
Shyaro village 
and 79 in 
Debing village. 
Though villages were electrified under RGGVY, 
SHLSs were still issued. 
SL Four villages 
1999 and 2007 
26 23 were not working. 
Bihar 
SSLS Ten districts. 519 353 were not working and 29 were not received. 
SHLS Ten districts. 65 21 were not working and eight were not 
received. Recipient’s signatures were not on 
record in respect of 30 SHLS in Vaishali district 
during the year 2010-11. 
SSLS Six districts1 9 Four were not working. 
Chhattisgarh 
SWP 2004-05 to 2012-13 69 32 were not working due to theft of modules and 
other reasons. 
                                                            
1  East Champaran, Gaya, Nalanda (Bihar Sharif), Pa tna, Vaishali (Hazipur), West Champaran (Bettiah). 

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 218 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Type of 
System 
Location and year of 
installation 
Number of 
systems 
inspected 
Audit observation 
Gujarat 
SHLS Dhirkhadi (Taluka-Nandod) 
2003-04 
92 26 were not working. 
SHLS Ajamapat Nes (Taluka-
Ranavav) 
2006-07 
42 22 were not working. 
Haryana 
SSLS Villages in five selected 
districts(Kurukshetra, Hisar, 
Panipat, Jhajjar and 
Bhiwani) 
During 9 th,10thand 11 th Five 
Year Plans 
256 201 were not working  
SHLS -do- 59 24 were not working 
SL -do- 44 37 were not working 
SWP Hisar district  1 Water discharge capacity was very low 
Himachal Pradesh 
SHLS, SL 
and 
SSLS 
Batal 18 All the 18 SSLSs were found to be not working. 
SHLS, SL 
and 
SSLS 
Chail 30 All the 30 SSLSs were found to be not working. 
SHLS, SL 
and 
SSLS 
Dumehar 15 All the 15 SSLSs were found to be not working. 
SL Chamba 
1997-98 to 2010-11 
109 All the 109 SSLSs were found to be not working. 
Jharkhand 
SPP Deoghar district 
August 2011 
4 As per guidelines, generation should have been 
90 per cent  of its capacity. But it was only 
between 13 to 24 per cent  of capacity in the 
plants. 
Jammu & Kashmir 
SSLS Four hospitals in Jammu 
November 2011 
40 All the 40 were not working. Batteries and other 
accessories of all the 40 systems were missing 
and no action was taken. 
SSLS Budgam district 
November 2011 
20 One was not working. 
Maharashtra 
SHLS Miraj, ZP Sangli 
2006-07 
20 Five were not in the premises where they were to 
be installed. For other 15, subsidy was not given 
to beneficiary and training for use and care of 
SHLSs and AMC was not provided, which was 
mandatory. Supplier recovered excess amount 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 219 
Type of 
System 
Location and year of 
installation 
Number of 
systems 
inspected 
Audit observation 
ranging from ` 4,269 to ` 13,619 from the 
beneficiaries. 
SL Vidarbha2 
2008-09 
47 42 were not working. 
Odisha 
SHLS, SL 
and 
SSLS 
 73 SSLS, 51 
SHLS and 88 SL 
33 SSLS, 28 SHLS and 44 SL were not working. 
SL Khurda district3 
2000-01 
45 45 were not working.  
Mizoram 
SHLS 
and SL 
 35 28 were not working.  
SPP 2003 4 One was not working and other three were 
working at 50 per cent efficiency due to damage 
of batteries. 
Nagaland 
SPP Kohima 10 Four were not working and one was yet to be 
commissioned.  
SWHS Kohima and Pfiitsero Town 7 Three were not working. 
Punjab 
SL Four sites in four4 districts. 24 17 were not working. Four were stated to have 
been gifted to friends/ relatives. 
SHLS Five sites in four districts. 27 22 were not working. Two were stated to have 
been gifted to relatives and one was missing. 
SL Nine sites in four districts. 476 163 were not working. Two were missing.  In 
Gurdaspur, 46 non-working lights were 
connected to regular electric supply. 
SWP Four sites in five5 districts. 15 15 were not working Solar Panels were used for 
charging regular electric invertors. 
SPP Six sites in three6 districts. 6 Four were not working. Plant installed at 
important place like Wagha border was not 
working.  Three plants at Primary school, Lehal 
and Kalanaur and at Bus stand, Kalanaur were 
rectified at the instance of Audit. 
Rajasthan 
SSLS Village Silora, District Ajmer 
2009 
90 All 90 were not working. 
                                                            
2  Khamgaon, Lonar, and Buldhana in ZP Buldhana, Dh amangaon in ZP Amaravati and Ner, Yavatmal and  
Babulgaon in ZP Yavatmal 
3  Damanibara and Niladriprasad Gram Panchayat of Banpur Block. 
4  Gurdaspur, Tarn Taran, Patiala and Ludhiana. 
5  Gurdaspur, Ludhiana, Patiala, Tarn Taran and Amritsar. 
6  Gurdaspur, Patiala and Amritsar. 

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 220 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Type of 
System 
Location and year of 
installation 
Number of 
systems 
inspected 
Audit observation 
SWP  6 Two water pumps were being utilised in 
commercial activities (roadside hotel and 
manufacturing of cement structures) as against 
agricultural use mentioned in the scheme.  
SHLS Seven villages 20 Eight were not working. 
Uttarakhand 
SSLS NIVH7, Dehradun 
2006 
68 46 were not working. 
SSLS RAPV8 Hostel. 
2006 
2 One was not working. 
SHLS Maldevta, Dehradun -- Not found at the locations mentioned in the list 
of beneficiaries. 
SHLS Tehri -- Physical verification could not be done as UREDA 
officials did  not  co-operate  
SL 2002-03 to 2014 554 100 were not working 
SHLS Gurjarbasti, Bahadrabad, 
Haridwar 
May 2007 
39 All 39 were not working. Systems became 
obsolete because of lack of monitoring by 
UREDA. 
SSLS Jaiti Bazar, Almora district 
September 2008 
15 All 15 were not working properly. 
Total  3,959 1,868 systems were not working properly and 50 
systems were missing. 
Note: Solar Home Lighting System (SHLS), Solar Street Lighting System (SSLS), Solar Power Plant (SPP), Solar 
Lantern (SL) and Solar Water Pump (SWP). 
 
                                                            
7  National Institute for Visually Handicap. 
8  Rajikya Ashram Padhati Vidhyalaya. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 221 
Annexure XIV 
(Refer to para 2.2 in Chapter VIII) 
State wise target, achievement and installed capacity of Biogas 
S.No. State/ Union 
Territories 
Estimated 
potential (in 
lakh) 
Estimate 
shown by 
State 
Target 
fixed by 
State 
2007-14 
Achievement 
as per State 
2007-14 
Shortfall (in 
percentage) 
w.r.t target 
of 2007-14 
Cumulative 
achievements 
as per MNRE 
(31.03.2014) 
Achievement 
(in 
percentage) 
over 
potential 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
10,65,000 10,65,000 1,21,300 94,237 22.31 5,21,764 48.99
2. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
7,500 NA 700 690 1.43 3,472 46.29
3. Assam 3,07,000 Not 
assessed 
42,000 40,013 4.73 1,08,302 35.28
4. Bihar 7,33,000 Not 
assessed 
1,305 805 38 1,29,825 17.71
5. Chhattisgarh 4,00,000 NA 28,100 24,332 13.40 48,509 12.13
6. Goa 8,000 Not selected 4,086 51.08
7. Gujarat 5,54,000 Nil 55,500 35,832 35.44 4,28,676 77.38
8. Haryana 3,00,000 1500-
2000 per 
year 
11,500 9,259 19.48 59,868 19.96
9. Himachal 
Pradesh 
1,25,000 Not 
assessed 
1,951 1,863 4.51 47,255 37.80
10. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
1,28,000 KVIC1: 
Not 
assessed 
575 437 12.84 3,033 2.37 
JAKEDA2:  
Not 
assessed 
500 500 
11. Jharkhand 1,00,000 Not 
assessed 
5,000 1,683 66 7,237 7.24
12. Karnataka 6,80,000 Nil 87,029 72,033 17.23 4,69,671 69.07
13. Kerala 1,50,000 Not 
assessed 
22,519 18,504 17.83 1,41,378 94.25
14. Madhya 
Pradesh 
14,91,000 Not fixed 82,000 68,990 15.86 3,45,808 23.19
15. Maharashtra 8,97,000 Nil 1,05,100 1,04,523 0.55 8,56,436 95.48
16. Manipur 38,000 Not selected 2,128 5.60
17. Meghalaya 24,000 Not 
estimated 
3,000 3,000 Nil 10,046 41.86
18. Mizoram 5,000 -- 2,400 1,165 51.46 4,770 95.40
19. Nagaland 6,700 Not 
Assessed 
3,750 3,371 10.11 7,653 114.22
20 Odisha 6,05,000 6,05,000 42,500 33,244 22 2,61,830 43.28
                                                            
1  Targets & Achievements for the year 2013-14 were  not available with the Khadi and Village Industry 
Commission. 
2   Records for the period 2007-14 were not available due to winding up of Integrated Rural Energy 
Programme (IREP) in April 2011. MNRE had not sancti oned any biogas plant under the programme except 
the target of 500 plants during 2010-11. 

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 222 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
S.No. State/ Union 
Territories 
Estimated 
potential (in 
lakh) 
Estimate 
shown by 
State 
Target 
fixed by 
State 
2007-14 
Achievement 
as per State 
2007-14 
Shortfall (in 
percentage) 
w.r.t target 
of 2007-14 
Cumulative 
achievements 
as per MNRE 
(31.03.2014) 
Achievement 
(in 
percentage) 
over 
potential 
21 Punjab 4,11,000 Not 
assessed 
75,700 67,323 11.08 1,64,295 39.97
22. Rajasthan 9,15,000 Nil 2,183 2,089 4.31 69,393 7.58
23. Sikkim 7,300 Not selected 8,744 119.78
24. Tamil Nadu 6,15,000 NA 13,812 10,068 27 2,21,704 36.05
25. Tripura 28,000 Not selected 3,328 11.89
26. Uttar 
Pradesh 
19,38,000 Nil 26,900 16,204 40 4,37,360 22.57
27. West Bengal 6,95,000 Not 
assessed 
74,000 32,805 44.33 3,66,333 52.71
28. A&N Islands 2,200 Not selected 137 6.22
29. Chandigarh 1,400 Not selected 97 6.93
30. Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
2,000 Not selected 169 8.45
31. Delhi 12,900 Not selected 681 5.28
32. Puducherry 4,300 Not selected 578 13.44
33. Uttarakhand 83,000  3,700 3,206 17,534 21.13
 Total 1,23,39,300  8,13,024 6,46,176 20.52 47,52,100 38.51
Source: MNRE and State Nodal Agencies. 
NA – Not Available. 
 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 223 
Annexure XV 
(Refer to para 4.3 in Chapter VIII) 
Details of State wise physical verification of Biogas plants by Audit 
Location When 
installed 
Number 
inspected 
Audit observation 
Andhra Pradesh 
Khammam and 
Warangal 
districts 
NA 70 Audit observed that out of 70 plants inspected five were not 
working. The reasons for non-functioning of Biogas Plant were: 
damage of main gate wall, not feeding of cow dung regularly by 
the beneficiary 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Papumpare, 
West Siang, 
Lower Subansiri, 
East Siang 
districts 
1998-99, 
2003, 
2007, 
2011 and 
2013 
25 Audit observed that out of 25 plants inspected 23 were not 
working (seven in West Siang, four in Papumpare, four in 
Lower Subansiri and eight in East Siang districts were not 
working. two plants in Papumpare were not working). Reason 
for not working were that beneficiaries lacked interest in 
operating the plants as alternate fuel i.e. LPG, was readily 
available. None of the plants had serial/ identification number 
on a metal strip. 
Assam 
 NA 36 Audit observed that out of 36 plants inspected seven were not 
working. Of these, two were not working since installation and 
two were found defective.  
Bihar 
Five districts1 NA 8 Audit observed that out of eight plants inspected one was not 
working. 
Haryana 
6 sites/villages in 
5 selected 
districts 
(Kurukshetra, 
Hisar, Panipat, 
Jhajjar and 
Bhiwani) 
During 
9th,10th 
and 11th 
Five Year 
Plans 
56 Audit observed that out of 56 plants inspected, 41 were not 
functional. 
Jharkhand 
Deoghar district 2005-06 
and 2008-
09 
7 Audit observed that out of seven plants inspected, six were not 
working due to the reason of non-formation of gas. 
Jammu & Kashmir 
 NA 9 Audit observed that out of nine plants inspected two were not 
working due to breakage in drum and one plant faced some 
problem in gas pipe. Complaint for rectification was reportedly 
not attended by the technician though repeatedly informed 
about the problem on telephone. 
                                                            
1  Ara, Jehanabad, Nalanda (Bihar Sharif), Patna and Vaishali (Hazipur). 

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 224 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Location When 
installed 
Number 
inspected 
Audit observation 
Karnataka 
Udupi, Shimoga 
and Tumkur 
NA 50 Audit observed that out of 50 plants inspected 11 were not 
working and the beneficiaries were using LPG and firewood for 
cooking purposes as the above plants were not functioning for 
the last two to three years. 
Mizoram 
Aizwal NA 10 Audit observed that out of 10 plants inspected three were not 
working, as their tanks were damaged due to rusting. Of these, 
two were installed in 1994 and one in 2008. 
Madhya Pradesh 
 NA 75 All working. 
Nagaland 
Phek and 
Mokokchung 
NA 5 Audit observed that out of five plants inspected four were not 
working and one was not commissioned. 
Punjab 
11 site in 5 
districts. 
NA 74 Audit observed that out of 74 plants inspected five were not 
working;the five beneficiaries were also using LPG cylinders 
Uttar Pradesh 
Barabanki 2010-11 2 Audit observed that two plants inspected were not operated, 
as the Dhaba where they were installed had closed down.  
Lodhaan village, 
Varanasi 
NA 2 Audit observed that two plants  inspected were not working 
due to the non-availability of raw material. 
Total  429 112 not working. 
Note – NA – Not Applicable. 
 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 225 
Annexure XVI 
(Refer to para 2.1 Chapter IX) 
The State wise targets and achievements under Remote Village Electrification 
Programme for the period 2007-14 
Sl 
No. 
State Number 
of 
villages/ 
hamlets 
verified 
by REC 
Number of 
villages / 
hamlets 
sanctioned 
Number of 
villages/ 
hamlets 
completed 
Percentage 
of eligible 
hamlets/ 
villages 
covered 
Percentage of 
target 
achieved 
CFA 
released 
(in ` 
crore) 
 (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (iv) X 100/(ii) (iv) X 100/(iii)  
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
112 13 13 12 100 0.31 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
145 0 141 97 - 4.94 
3 Assam 2,385 1,691 1,913 80 113 117.92 
4 Bihar 80 NA NA NA NA NA 
5 Chhattisgarh 1,621 314 243 15 77 16.21 
6 Delhi NA NA NA NA NA 0.25 
7 Goa 0 19 19 - 100 0.10 
8 Gujarat 49 0 0 Nil - 0.35 
9 Haryana 149 92 241 163 262 0.69 
10 Himachal 
Pradesh 
1 0 20 2,000 Nil NA 
11 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
1,035 619 232 22 37 69.91 
12 Jharkhand 832 251 206 25 82 44.25 
13 Karnataka 173 59 30 17 51 1.26 
14 Kerala 73 49 49 67 100 3.39 
15 Madhya 
Pradesh 
972 424 547 56 129 31.51 
16 Maharashtra 362 82 230 64 280 22.20 
17 Manipur 166 49 106 64 216 5.21 
18 Meghalaya 158 66 124 78 188 2.30 
19 Nagaland 11 8 8 73 100 0.83 
20 Odisha 2,116 1,528 1,491 70 98 52.44 
21 Sikkim NA NA NA NA NA 0.08 
22 Rajasthan 493 103 253 51 246 21.53 
23 Tamil Nadu 130 32 30 23 94 0.67 
24 Tripura 583 479 606 125 127 27.40 

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 226 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Sl 
No. 
State Number 
of 
villages/ 
hamlets 
verified 
by REC 
Number of 
villages / 
hamlets 
sanctioned 
Number of 
villages/ 
hamlets 
completed 
Percentage 
of eligible 
hamlets/ 
villages 
covered 
Percentage of 
target 
achieved 
CFA 
released 
(in ` 
crore) 
25 Uttar Pradesh 419 257 335 80 130 22.66 
26 Uttarakhand 234 173 164 70 195 6.77 
27 West Bengal 93 24 6 6 25 27.88 
 Total 12,392 6,332 7,007 57  481.06 
Source: MNRE. 
Note:  1. Information was not available in respect of Bihar, Punjab and Mizoram. 
            2. Delhi, Goa, Manipur, Sikkim and Tripura were not part of audit scrutiny. 
 3. CFA – Central Financial Assistance, REC - Rural Electrification Corporation Limited. 
 
 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 227 
Annexure XVII 
(Refer to para 6 in Chapter IX) 
Details of State wise physical verification of 
Remote Village Electrification systems by Audit 
Type of 
System 
Location When 
Installed 
Number 
inspected 
Non- 
Functional 
Reasons 
Andhra Pradesh 
SHLS 
and 
SSLS 
Suddakunta 
village 
2008-09 284 SHLSs 
and 34 SSLSs 
- Out of five households electrified none 
was occupied, and one house holder was 
staying at Venkatadripalem village. 
Billagondi 
hamlet 
37 SHLSs and 
4 SSLSs 
37 SHLSs 
and two 
SSLSs were 
not working 
 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Biomass 
Gasifier 
Power 
Plants 
Rani and 
Balijan 
villages 
2014 2 plants (328 
beneficiaries)
2 Lack of interest from beneficiaries and 
availability of quality power supply from 
the local grid. 
SHLS Pusi Doke 
and Tabasora 
illages 
2002-03 
and 2005-
06 
132 - 122 were not available. 
SHP Panya 2009 1 1 Not working due to machinery defects. 
SHLS Taba Sora  2002-03 
and 
2005-06 
73 63 After supply of electricity through local 
grid, APEDA did not monitor the 
functioning of systems. Pusi Doke 59 59 
Biomass 
Gasifier 
Power 
Plants 
 2004-2005 12 Villages 
(1,024 
beneficiaries)
12 APEDA did not certify that 
hamlets/villages were un-electrified. 
However, these were covered under 
RGGVY. APEDA/State Govt. neither re-
deployed the energy systems to other 
needy places nor connected the plants to 
local grid for continuous operation as per 
RVE Programme Guidelines. Expenditure 
of ` 87.14 lakh was rendered unfruitful. 
Jharkhand 
SHLS Jojogora, 
Potka, E. 
Singhbhum 
Between 
November 
2007 and 
August 
2008 
36 21 Not known. 
04 03 
Papragaru, 
Potka, E. 
Singhbhum 
Between 
November 
2007 and 
August 
2008 
19 13 Not known. 
02 01 

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 228 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Type of 
System 
Location When 
Installed 
Number 
inspected 
Non- 
Functional 
Reasons 
Gamarkocha,  
Potka, E. 
Singhbhum 
Between 
November 
2007 and 
August 
2008 
13 05 Not known. 
01 Nil 
Sirka, 
Angara, 
Ranchi 
2003-04 286 13 Failure of battery. 
05 01 
Bisha, 
Angara, 
Ranchi 
2003-04 424 65 Failure of battery. 
06 06 
Kerala 
SHLS Agali Gram 
Panchayat 
Not 
Available 
5 5 There were cases of lack of preventive 
maintenance. No arrangement was done 
to ensure functionality of systems after 
AMC. 
Jammu & Kashmir 
SHLS Five1 villages 
of Poonch 
district. 
Not 
Available 
90 4 In 15 systems only one tube was working, 
in three systems only one tube was 
provided. 
Maharashtra 
SPP 
(17.5 
kW) 
Ozarkhed 
village, 
district 
Nashik 
March 
2008 
1 Not 
working 
since 
February 
2013 
Performance BG of ` 9.98 lakh was 
required to be forfeited, which was not 
done. 
Madhya Pradesh 
SSLS Salkanpur/ 
Sehore 
December 
2012 
196 - Poles damaged because of poor quality 
of GI pipes and delay in maintenance. 
Odisha 
SHLS 
and 
SSLS 
Jamudiha 
village of 
Keonjhar 
district 
Not 
Available 
925 SHLSs 
and 93 
SSLSs. 
177 SHLSs 
and 35 
SSLSs 
In 17 villages covering 909 households, 
55 SHLSs and 6 SSLSs were missing. 
Defunct due to non-functioning of 
batteries. 
Rajasthan 
SHLS Five villages 
of Alwar 
district 
Not 
Available 
50 8 Supplier did not take care during AMC 
period. Beneficiaries repaired the 
systems on their own or got it repaired 
from the open market.  Proper training 
for handling of systems was not given to 
the beneficiaries. Beneficiaries were not 
aware of the AMC and did not know the 
                                                            
1  Ghani, Nangali, Bandi Chechian, Qusba and Khandi. 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 229 
Type of 
System 
Location When 
Installed 
Number 
inspected 
Non- 
Functional 
Reasons 
contact numbers of representative of 
the AMC providers. 
Under RVE, home lighting systems of 
only 37 watt was provided which was 
not sufficient according to the 
beneficiaries as informed during the 
physical verification. 
Uttarakhand 
SHLS Saibhar, 
Munsyar, 
Pithoragarh 
Not 
Available 
63 39 There were cases of non working of 
batteries. Further, beneficiary charges 
were not collected and proper training 
was also not given to beneficiaries. 
West Bengal 
SHLS  Not 
Available 
13 12 Due to non-maintenance and poor 
monitoring by WBREDA. 
Total   2,870 585 183 systems missing. 
Note - Solar Home Lighting System (SHLS), Solar Street Lighting System (SSLS), Solar Power Plant (SPP), Solar 
Lantern (SL) and Solar Water Pump (SWP). 
 

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 230 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Annexure XVIII 
(Refer to para 2.6 Chapter XII) 
 
Solar Photovoltaic Division 
Fabrication of CU (In Ga) Se-2/C ds thin film solar cells on large area glass and flexible 
substrate using sputtering selenization technique 
The project was sanctioned (May 2009) to Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology 
University, Bhubaneswar with a financial outlay of ` 57.07 lakh and expenditure of ` 56.85 
lakh was incurred. The project proposal envisaged filing of patents and publication of 
research papers. However, no patent was file d and no research paper was published in any 
Indian/foreign journals as an outcome of this project. 
There was delay of nine months in completion of project. Project completion report (PCR) 
was not evaluated by the Ministry’s scientists or  external experts. In the absence of proper 
evaluation of PCR by the experts, it could not be concluded that the objectives of the project 
were achieved. Further, the proj ect was not monitored by experts/Institutions as stipulated 
in the sanction. MNRE stated (May 2015) that  constraints like manpower and infrastructural 
facilities led to the deficiencies. 
Novel Doped 3-D Nanoporous oxides for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells 
The project was sanctioned (March 2009) to Indi an Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun with a 
financial outlay of ` 38 lakh and expenditure of ` 25.30 lakh was incurred. The progress of 
the project was not reviewed after Septembe r 2012. PCR had still not been submitted (July 
2015). 
The project proposal envisaged filing of pa tents and publication of research papers. 
However, no patent was file d and no research paper published in any Indian/foreign 
journals as an outcome of this project. 
Development of an improved electrical-optical model for the simulation of Hetero 
junction with Intrinsic Thin Layer (HIT) Solar Cells 
The project was sanctioned (February 2011) to I ndian Association for Cultivation of Science, 
Kolkata with a financial outlay of ` 25.30 lakh and expenditure of ` 5.18 lakh was incurred. 
The project scheduled to be completed by Fe bruary 2013 was still ongoing.  The project was 
last reviewed by Project Monitoring Committee in September 2012. Thereafter, the progress 
of the project was not reviewed. No efforts were  made by the Ministry for early completion 
of the project. Quarterly reports mandated by the sanction were not received in timely 
manner. MNRE stated (May 2015) that Project Investigator had not responded even after 
many reminders. 
Exploitation of Unique Properties of Quantum Dots for Efficient Energy Harvesting in Solar 
Cells 
The project was sanctioned (May  2011) to Center for Emerging  Technology, Jain University, 
Bangalore with a financial outlay of ` 37.16 lakh and expenditure of ` 25.34 lakh was 
incurred. The project scheduled to be comple ted by May 2014 was still ongoing. No efforts 
were made by the MNRE for early completi on of the project. Quarterly monitoring 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 231 
mandated by the sanction was not done. MNRE  stated (May 2015) that extension of the 
project would be considered in next RDD&D Sectoral Project Appraisal Committee meeting. 
Design and Development of Organic Solar Cell Sub-Modules 
The project was sanctioned (March 2011) to In dian Institute of Technology, Kanpur with a 
financial outlay of ` 18.05 crore and expenditure of ` 4.64 crore was incurred. The project 
scheduled to be completed by March 2014 was granted extension upto March 2015 without 
proper justification. The progress of the proj ect was not reviewed by the experts on the 
quarterly basis as mandated by the sanction. As per sanction, a minimum of 10 research 
papers and 10 patents were the likely outcome of the project. However, none was found on 
record as of September 2014. MNRE stated (May 2015) that the project has further been 
extended upto September 2015. 
 
Solar Thermal Division 
Development of testing of 3TR liquid desiccant based solar multi-utility heat pump 
The project was sanctioned (September 2008) to  Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 
with a financial outlay of ` 61.98 lakh and expenditure of ` 47.90 lakh was incurred. MNRE 
sanctioned this project with specific deliverable  objectives in terms of output and were to 
extent of setting the target commercial cost of the unit between ` 2.75 lakh to ` 3.25 lakh. 
The project was to be completed in Septembe r 2011 and final PCR including the field test 
report was to be submitted by August 2011. IIT Mumbai also assured of first phase of 
commercialization to start by June/July 2012 wi th help of the industry partner M/s Mech 
World Echo, Nashik. A total of ` 48.85 lakh was released by MNRE.  In February 2012, MNRE 
requested Project Investigator (PI) to submit final PCR as committed. The final PCR had not 
yet been received (May 2015). Further, field te sting data about the deliverable objectives 
and proposed commercialization had not taken place for reasons not on record. In absence 
of receipt of final PCR and its vetting by indepe ndent expert it could not be assured that the 
project objectives were achieved. The details of monitoring exercise by MNRE on the project 
were not available on record. 
MNRE stated (May 2015) that field data takes some time and accounts of the project are yet 
to be settled. 
Development and demonstration of automatic two axis tracking paraboloid Solar Thermal 
concentrator 
The project was sanctioned (September 2011)  to M/s Clique Deve lopments Limited, 
Mumbai with a financial outlay of ` 55.83 lakh and expenditure of ` 51.53 lakh was 
incurred. The project scheduled to be co mpleted by September 2012 was still ongoing 
beyond the scheduled date of completion (May 2015). No efforts were made by the 
Ministry for early completion of the projec t. The project proposal envisaged filing of 
patents. However, no patent was filed. 
  

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 232 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Integrating and Hybridizing a-2 Axis tracking  Parabolic Dish Based concentrated Solar 
Thermal with Bio-mass based Thermic Fluid Heating System in a process industry 
The project was sanctioned (May 2013) to M/ s Megawatt Solutions Private Limited, Noida 
with a financial outlay of ` 1.64 crore and expenditure of ` 95.72 lakh was incurred. The 
project scheduled to be completed by August 2014 was still ongoing beyond the scheduled 
date of completion. No efforts were made by  the Ministry for early completion of the 
project. MNRE stated (May 2015) that perfor mance monitoring of the project is yet to 
commence. 
 
Hydrogen Energy and Fuel Cell Division 
Lean limit extension for spark ignited direct  injection  engine through on board Non-
Thermal Plasma conversion 
The project was sanctioned (February 2010) to Annamalai University, Tamil Nadu with a 
financial outlay of ` 39.25 lakh and expenditure of ` 29.32 lakh was incurred. The project 
scheduled to be completed by  February 2013, was still not co mpleted (October 2014) even 
after grant of extension upto 31 December 2013.  The audited UCs were still awaited. The 
project envisaged transfer of technology developed. However, no technology was 
transferred under this project. MNRE stated (J uly 2015) that PCR has now been accepted by 
Project Monitoring Committee in its meeting held on November 2014.  
Use of Hydrogen (upto 30 per cent ) as fuel blended with compressed natural gas in 
internal combustion engine 
The project was sanctioned (September 2007) to Society of Indian Automobile 
Manufacturers, New Delhi with a financial outlay of ` 6.34 crore and expenditure of ` 5.10 
crore was incurred. The project scheduled to  be completed by Se ptember 2009 was still not 
complete. A sum of ` 1.94 crore was released by the Ministry on this project. The project 
was granted extension upto December 2013. The progress of the project was last reviewed 
in June 2013 and the project was not reviewed thereafter by the Ministry. The audited UCs 
were awaited in the Ministry . The project proposal envisa ged transfer of technology 
developed under the project and filing of pate nt. However, no techno logy was transferred 
under this project and no patent filed. MNRE stated (July 2015) that PCR has now been 
accepted by Project Monitoring Committee in its meeting held on November 2014. 
Design and development of Hydrogen Gas Burner for Industrial Application 
The project was sanctioned (February 2010) to Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur with a 
financial outlay of ` 23.90 lakh and expenditure of ` 21.55 lakh was incurred. The project 
scheduled to be completed by February 2013 was complete d in November 2013 after a 
delay of nine months. PCR submitted in No vember 2013 was not evaluated by external 
experts. Further, in the project proposal, industry participation was proposed. However, this 
was not visible in the project. 
  

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 233 
Development of the prototype photo reactor for the hydrogen  production from hydrogen 
sulphide under natural sun light 
The project was sanctioned (December 2011) to Centre for Materials for Electronics 
Technologies, Pune with a financial outlay of ` 22.40 lakh and expenditure of ` 22.40 lakh 
was incurred. The project scheduled to be  completed by December 2013 was granted 
extension upto July 2014 and further upto July 2015 without justification. 
Theoretical Investigation on likely to be favo rable factors of helical Carbon Nanotubes for 
Enhanced Hydrogen absorption 
The project was sanctioned (February 2008) to Thiagarajar College of Engineering, Madurai 
with a financial outlay of ` 24.72 lakh and expenditure of ` 24.24 lakh was incurred. The 
project scheduled to be comp leted by August 2009 was comp leted in October 2010 after a 
delay of 14 months. PCR was submitted in October 2010 was not evaluated by external 
experts. 
CNT Doped Polymeric Membranes for Hydrogen Purification 
The project was sanctioned (February 2008) to University of Rajasthan, Jaipur with a 
financial outlay of ` 30 lakh and expenditure of ` 27.25 lakh was incurred. PCR was not 
evaluated by the external experts. 
Numerical and Experimental Analysis for the development of a metal Hydride based 
Hydrogen Energy Storage device 
The project was sanctioned (August 2008) to Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati with a 
financial outlay of ` 33.45 lakh and expenditure of ` 26.31 lakh was incurred. The project 
scheduled to be completed by  August 2011 was competed in August 2012 after a delay of 
one year. The PCR submitted in August 2012 was not evaluated by external experts. The 
project proposal envisaged transf er of technology and filing of patents. However, no patent 
was filed as an outcome of the project, nor was there transfer of technology. 
Generation of Hydrogen from bio-mass derived glycerol 
The project was sanctioned (February 2008) to Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, 
Hyderabad with a financial outlay of ` 46.43 lakh and expenditure of ` 46.43 lakh was 
incurred. The project scheduled  to be completed by February 2010 was competed in March 
2011 after a delay of more than one year. The project was extended upto August 2010 and 
further upto February 2011 without any justif ication. The PCR submitted in March 2011 was 
not evaluated by external experts. Further, pr oject proposal envisaged filing of patents and 
publication of research papers. However, no patent was filed and no  research paper was 
published in any Indian/Foreign journals. 
Survey on inventory and quality of by prod uct Hydrogen potential in selected major 
sectors in India 
The project was sanctioned (February 2008) to University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, 
New Delhi with a financial outlay of ` 15.27 lakh and expenditure of ` 17.56 lakh (which 
included ` 2.29 lakh contributed by the University) was incurred. The project scheduled to 
be completed by November 2008 was comp leted in January 2010 after a delay of 14 
months. Progress of the project was not review ed by the Ministry’s committee and PCR was 
not evaluated by external experts. 

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 234 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Non-thermal Plasma Assisted Direct Decomposition of Hydrogen Sulphide into Hydrogen 
and Sulphur 
The project was sanctioned (February 2009) to National Institute of Technology, Tamil Nadu 
with a financial outlay of ` 31.48 lakh and expenditure of ` 25.78 lakh was incurred. The 
project scheduled to be comp leted by February 2012 was co mpleted in February 2013 after 
a delay of one year. The PCR was not evaluated by external experts. The project proposal 
envisaged transfer of technology and filing of patents. However, no patent was filed as an 
outcome of the project, nor was there transfer of technology. 
Synthesis of Magnesium based Hydrogen Storage Alloys with Lower Absorption 
Temperatures 
The project was sanctioned (July 2010) to No n-Ferrous Materials Technology Development 
Centre, Hyderabad with a financial outlay of ` 82.66 lakh and expenditure of ` 82.66 lakh 
was incurred. The project scheduled to be  completed by July 2013 was still ongoing 
(October 2014) even after extension upto Ma rch 2014. No efforts were made by the 
Ministry for early completion of  project even after release of ` 82.66 lakh on the project. 
MNRE stated (July 2015) that PCR has now been  accepted by Project Monitoring Committee 
in its meeting held on September 2014. 
Development of Transition Metal tantalates  and oxynitrides for water splitting and 
pollution abatement 
The project was sanctioned (February 2008) to Institute of Minerals and Materials 
Technology, Bhubaneswar with a financial outlay of ` 35.54 lakh and expenditure of ` 32.54 
lakh was incurred. The project scheduled to be completed by February 2011 was competed 
in May 2012. The project proposal envisaged filing of patents, however, no patent was filed. 
The PCR was not evaluated by external experts. 
Development of Semiconductor Nano-Composites for photo catalytic wa ter splitting into 
hydrogen and oxygen under solar light irradiation 
The project was sanctioned (January 2011) to Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, 
Hyderabad with a financial outlay of ` 59.66 lakh and expenditure of ` 49.58 lakh was 
incurred. The cost of the project was revised from ` 47.86 lakh to ` 59.66 lakh due to 
increase in cost of equipment without proper  justification. The project scheduled to be 
completed by January 2014 was still ongoing. MNRE stated (July 2015) that PCR has now 
been received and would be placed for consideration by Project Monitoring Committee. 
Establishment of Hydrogen Production and Utilization facility through Photovoltaic-
Electrolyser system 
The project was sanctioned (February 2011) to University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, 
New Delhi with a financial outlay of ` 14.02 crore and expenditure of ` 7.20 crore was 
incurred. The cost of the project was revised from ` 11.15 crore to ` 14.02 crore due to 
addition of items viz equipment and civil work.  The project scheduled  to be completed by 
February 2014 was still ongoing even after ex tension upto October 2014. No efforts were 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 235 
made by the Ministry for early completion of project. MNRE stated (July 2015) that it was 
the first project of its kind implemented in the country and therefore took more time in its 
implementation than originally envisaged. 
Hydrogen Storage Properties of complex hydrides 
The project was sanctioned (February 2008) to I ndian Institute of Technology, Mumbai with 
a financial outlay of ` 40.48 lakh and expenditure of ` 40.48 lakh was incurred. The cost of 
the project was revised from ` 36.00 lakh to ` 40.48 lakh due to revision in cost of 
manpower without any justification. The projec t scheduled to be completed by February 
2011 was completed in March 2012 after a dela y of more than one year. The project 
proposal envisaged transfer of technology. Ho wever, no technology was transferred after 
completion of the project. The PCR submitte d in March 2012 was not evaluated by external 
experts. 
Design and development of functional hybrid nano structures for photo electro-chemical 
water splitting 
The project was sanctioned (May 2010) to Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, 
Bhubaneswar with a financial outlay of ` 55.09 lakh and expenditure of ` 52.96 lakh was 
incurred. The project scheduled to be comple ted by May 2013 was co mpleted in February 
2014 after a delay of nine months. The PCR submitted in May 2014 was not evaluated by 
external experts. Further, project proposal en visaged filing of patents. However, no patent 
was filed as an outcome of the project. 
Development of Methanol Electrolyser 
The project was sanctioned (February 2008) to Southern Petrochemicals Industries 
Corporation Science Foundation with a financial outlay of ` 25.02 lakh and expenditure of 
` 22.02 lakh was incurred. The project schedu led to be completed by February 2009 was 
completed in May 2009 after a delay of three months. PCR was not evaluated by external 
experts. The project proposal envisaged filing of patents and publication of research papers. 
However, no patent was filed and no research paper was pub lished in any Indian/foreign 
journals as an outcome of this project. 
 
Bio Fuel Division 
Design development and evaluation of pilot scale ethanol production from cassava starch 
The project was sanctioned (September 2008) to  Tamil Nadu Agriculture University with a 
financial outlay of ` 35 lakh and expenditure of ` 30.45 lakh was incurred. A third party 
monitoring mechanism was to be in troduced and a provision of two per cent of project cost 
(capped at ` 10 lakh) was also made. It was observed that though PI kept sending regular 
progress reports but neither an expert commi ttee was identified for monitoring as per 
guidelines nor the project was ever monitored or visited by MNRE scientists as mandated by 
the sanction. 

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 236 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Project proposal envisaged participation of  two industries for help in establishing/ 
demonstration of the pilot plant and to popu larize the technology for wider adoption. 
Further, transfer of technology to entrepre neur/ line departments was proposed. From the 
record, it could not be ascertained whether the technology was actually transferred as 
proposed. Further, contribution of participating industries to popularize the pilot plant could 
not be substantiated. MNRE stated (May 2015) that involvement of industry was not 
mandatory and was optional only . Reply contradicts the MNRE’s broader vision of including 
industry participation, wherever possible. 
Demonstration of Modular Pyrolysis Unit to produce Bio Oil from Agro-Industrial Biomass 
Wastes and Methodology for Analysis, Use and Upgradation of Bio Oil 
The project was sanctioned (October 2010) to The Energy and Resources Institute, New 
Delhi with a financial outlay of ` 1.70 crore and MNRE has released ` 1 . 5 5  c r o r e .  A s  p e r  
RDD&D guidelines of MNRE, for all pr oject proposal with cost exceeding ` one crore, an 
expert committee would be deputed to have on the spot assessment of capabilities and 
capacity of project team and av ailable technical and administrative setup at the Institution 
and submit a report to the Ministry. However, no such committee was constituted. 
Project sanction mandated an expert committee for monitoring the progress at half yearly 
intervals. Though annual progress reports were  received from Project Investigator (PI), 
MNRE did not constitute/monitor the progress at  mandated half yearly intervals. Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited was stated to be a ‘partn er in kind’ for the project for analytical 
activities for characterization, use and upgradati on of bio oil. The project completion report 
indicated non availability/susceptibility of Indi an industry to test the oil in combustion 
applications and as transport fuel. In light of  this bottleneck, contribution of IOCL towards 
the project could not be ascertained and industry participation in the project remained 
merely on paper. 
Design and development of dual operating pilo t scale bio-reactor system for comparative 
simulations studies on algal cultivation 
Project was sanctioned (September 2011) to M/ s Abellon Clean Energy Limited, Gujarat, 
with a financial outlay of ` 21.38 lakh, after receiving comments from three subject experts. 
Comments of one expert required modification  of the proposal and response to the 
comments were received from the PI in June 2011. Such response should have been 
forwarded to the concerned expert and revise d acceptance obtained. However, the same 
was not available on record. 
In midterm monitoring report of 30 July 201 2, it was indicated that the reactor was 
defective in designing and modifications were  suggested for implementation. The project 
was completed in October 2012 and second installment of ` 4.30 lakh was released in 
December 2012. MNRE after accepting the project completion report and releasing ` 9.30 
lakh, intimated the adverse comments in system design to PI in May 2013, which was 
procedurally incorrect. 
  

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 237 
Bio Energy Division 
Addressing Novel Applications of Current Generation Using Micro Organisms 
The project was sanctioned (February 2008) to Central Electrochemical Research Institute, 
Tamil Nadu with a financial outlay of ` 24.69 lakh and expenditure of ` 26.03 lakh (which 
included ` 1.32 lakh contributed by the Institute) wa s incurred. The project scheduled to be 
completed by February 2011 was completed in September 2011 after a delay of seven 
months. PCR was submitted in April 2012. Progre ss of the project was not monitored by any 
committee of experts. Further, project proposal envisaged filing of patents. However, no 
patent was filed as an outcome of the project. 
State of the Art Review of Global Research and Development in Polygeneration Facilities 
for the production of Liquid Fuels & Chemicals for Cogeneration of Power 
The project was sanctioned (December 2007) to  Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 
with a financial outlay of ` 1.50 lakh and expenditure of ` 0.75 lakh was incurred. There was 
delay of three years in submission of PCR by PI. The project was completed in June 2008 and 
PCR was submitted in June 2011. Progress of the project was not monitored by any 
committee of experts. 
Biogas Refrigerator for Urban, Semi Urban and Rural Area Applications 
The project was sanctioned (August 2008) to Annamalai University, Tamil Nadu with a 
financial outlay of ` 11 lakh and expenditure of ` 2.50 lakh was incurred. The project was 
not completed as the participating industry failed to fabricate the refrigerator system as per 
design mentioned in the project proposal. The progress report submitted upto February 
2009 was accepted as final report. The projec t was abandoned midway without achieving 
the objectives. The expenditure of ` 2.50 lakh incurred by the MNRE remained unfruitful. 
High Efficiency Biogas Gensets 
The project was sanctioned (September 2008) to Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore with 
a financial outlay of ` 33 lakh and expenditure of ` 26.53 lakh was incurred. There was delay 
of eight months in submission of PCR by PI . The project was completed in September 2011 
and PCR was submitted in June 2012. The proj ect proposal envisaged filing of patents. 
However, no patent was filed as an outcome of this project. 
Development of  Household Wastes and Sanitation Device with biogas recovery 
The project was sanctioned (September 2008) to  National Institute for Interdisciplinary 
Science and Technology, Kerala with a financial outlay of ` 19.89 lakh and expenditure of 
` 24.89 lakh (which included ` five lakh contributed by the Institute) was incurred. The 
project, scheduled to be completed by Se ptember 2010, was completed in December 2012 
after a delay of more than two years. Prog ress of the project was not monitored by any 
committee of experts. The project proposal envi saged filing of patents. However, no patent 
was filed as an outcome of this project. Furt her, the modular household wastes sanitation 
device with biogas recovery system, which was one of the objectives was not developed.  

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 238 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Comparative Evaluation of Performance and Mass Emissions of an Automotive Passenger 
Vehicle fuelled with the Enriched Biogas using Field Trial Tests 
The project was sanctioned (March 2011) to I ndian Institute of Technology, Delhi with a 
financial outlay of ` 18.09 lakh and expenditure of ` 11.71 lakh was incurred. The project 
scheduled to be completed by March 2013 was completed in July 2013 after a delay of more 
than four months. There was further delay of one year in submission of PCR. The PCR was 
submitted in June 2014. The comments of expe rts on PCR were awaited. The Ministry did 
not pursue the matter in this regard with the experts. 
Biogas Slurry Handling and Biomanure Management 
The project was sanctioned (March 2011) to I ndian Institute of Technology, Delhi with a 
financial outlay of ` 16.91 lakh and expenditure of ` 8 . 4 5  l a k h  w a s  i n c u r r e d .  T h e  p r o j e c t  
scheduled to be completed by March 2013 wa s completed in December 2013 after a delay 
of more than nine months. Progress of the project was not monitored by any committee of 
experts. The project proposal envisaged filing of patents. However, no patent was filed as an 
outcome of this project. 
Development of Humic Acids Extraction Lab Sc ale Plant for Biogas Spent Slurry and its 
dissemination for Industrial Application 
The project was sanctioned (November 2011) to Maharana Pratap University of Agriculture 
and Technology, Rajasthan with a financial outlay of ` 55.55 lakh and expenditure of ` 27.83 
lakh was incurred. The project proposal en visaged filing of patents and publication of 
research papers. However, no patent was file d and no research paper was published in any 
Indian/Foreign journals as an outcome of this project. 
Development of integrated ultrasonically aided biomethanation plant  
The project was sanctioned (February 2008) to Institute of Minerals and Material 
Technology, Bhubaneswar with  a financial outlay of ` 33 lakh and expenditure of ` 12.50 
lakh was incurred. The project scheduled to be completed by August 2010 was completed in 
October 2012 after a delay of more than two years. Progress of the project was not 
monitored by any committee of experts. 
Development of a Thermophillic Biodigester for Decentralized Treatment of Organic 
Wastes 
The project was sanctioned (October 2008) to  The Energy and Resources Institute, New 
Delhi with a financial outlay of ` 14.73 lakh and expenditure of ` 9.53 lakh was incurred. The 
project scheduled to be comp leted by October 2010 was comp leted in January 2011 after a 
delay of more than three months. Progress of the project was not monitored by any 
committee of experts. The project proposal envisaged publication of research papers. 
However, no research paper was published in an y Indian/Foreign journals as an outcome of 
this project. 
 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 239 
Wind Division 
Experimental Characteristics of Wind Turbine Blading  
The project was sanctioned (July 2010) to Park College of Engineering and Technology, Tamil 
Nadu with a financial outlay of ` 15.80 lakh and expenditure of ` 9.30 lakh was incurred. 
Project scheduled to be comple ted by June 2012, was comple ted in May 2014, after a delay 
of 23 months. UCs for ` 7.75 lakh were not submitted. I ndustries were not involved in the 
project. PCR was not evaluated by external experts. 
Everybody’s battery charger 
The project was sanctioned (June 2009) to RM K Engineering College, Tamil Nadu with a 
financial outlay of ` 5.10 lakh and expenditure of ` 1.62 lakh was incurred. Project 
scheduled to be completed by  December 2010, was completed in December 2013, after a 
delay of three years. Industries were not involved in the proj ect. PCR was not evaluated by 
external experts. 
Wind Energy Centre at Amrita University, Coimbatore to conduct Diploma Course 
The project was sanctioned (A ugust 2010) to Amrita Viswa Vi dya Peetham, Tamil Nadu with 
a financial outlay of ` 1.53 crore and expenditure of ` 93 lakh was incurred. Project 
scheduled to be completed by August 2013, was discontinued midway in March 2013 after 
incurring expenditure of ` 93 lakh. UCs for ` 17.01 lakh were not submitted. 
Health/conditions maintaining at experimental Wind farms 
The project was sanctioned (June 2010) to Ce ntre for Wind Energy Technology, Tamil Nadu 
with a financial outlay of ` 40.89 lakh. Project was to be completed in two phases. First 
phase of Project scheduled to  be completed by June 2011, was still not completed as of 
March 2014 even after expenditure of ` 36.22 lakh was incurred.  Industries were not 
involved in the project and PCR was not submitted. 
Capacity Building in Wind Mill Sector for conducting Certificate and Diploma Course 
The project was sanctioned (August 2010) to PS G College of Technology, Tamil Nadu with a 
financial outlay of ` 1.67 crore. Project scheduled to be  completed by August 2013, was 
discontinued midway in March-2013 after expenditure of ` 55.66 lakh was incurred. UCs for 
` 6.22 lakh were not submitted, Industries were not involved in the project and PCR was not 
submitted. 
Power quality issues in Grid connected Wind farms 
The project was sanctioned (July 2009) to RMK Engineering College, Tamil Nadu with a 
financial outlay of ` 37.38 lakh. Project scheduled to be completed by June 2012, was 
completed in December 2013, after a delay of 18 months. UCs for ` 10.34 lakh were not 
submitted by the implementing agency. Industries were not involved in the project. PCR was 
not evaluated by external experts. 

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 240 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Power evacuations studies for Grid lntegrated Wind Energy conversion system 
The project was sanctioned (June 2009) to An na University, Tamil Nadu with a financial 
outlay of ` 16 lakh and expenditure of ` 11.86 lakh was incurred. Project scheduled to be 
completed by December 2011, was completed in November 2013, after a delay of 23 
months. UCs for ` 5.53 lakh were not submitted. Industr ies were not involved in the project 
nor was the PCR evaluated by external experts. 
 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 241 
Abbreviations 
1.  AD Accelerated Depreciation 
2.  AEDA Assam Energy Development Agency 
3.  ANERT Agency for Non-conventional Energy and Rural Technologies (Kerala) 
4.  APEDA Arunachal Pradesh Energy Development Agency 
5.  AMC Annual Maintenance Contract 
6.  BPL Below Poverty Line 
7.  BREDA Bihar Renewable Energy Development Agency 
8.  BSPHCL Bihar State Power Ho lding Corporation Limited 
9.  CDM Clean Development Mechanism 
10.  CEA Central Electricity Authority 
11.  CER Certified Emission Reduction 
12.  CERC Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
13.  CFA Central Financial Assistance 
14.  CFL Compact Fluorescent Lamp 
15.  CoP Conference of Parties 
16.  CREDA Chhattisgarh Renewable Energy Development Agency 
17.  CUF Capacity Utilization Factor 
18.  C-WET Centre for Wind Energy Technology 
19.  DDC Deputy Development Commissioner 
20.  DGS&D Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals 
21.  DHPD Department of Hydro Power Development 
22.  DNRE Department of New and Renewable Energy (Nagaland) 
23.  DPR Detailed Project Report 
24.  EA 2003 Electricity Act 2003 
25.  EPC Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
26.  ESCOM Electricity Supply Company 
27.  FI Financial Institution 
28.  FoR Forum of Regulators 
29.  FYP Five Year Plan 
30.  GBI Generation Based Incentive 
31.  GEDA Gujarat Energy Development Agency 
32.  GERC Gujarat Energy Regulatory Commission 
33.  GFR General Financial Rules 
34.  GHG Green House Gas 
35.  GRIDCO Grid Corporation of Odisha Limited 
36.  GoI Government of India 
37.  GW Giga Watt 
38.  HAREDA Haryana Renewable Energy Development Agency 
39.  Himurja Himachal Pradesh Energy Development Agency 
40.  HPSEB Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board 
41.  IA Implementation Agreement 
42.  IIT Indian Institute of Technology 

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 242 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Abbreviations 
43.  IPP Independent Power Producer 
44.  IREDA Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency 
45.  JAKEDA Jammu & Kashmir Energy Development Agency 
46.  JNNSM Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission 
47.  JREDA Jharkhand Renewable Energy Development Agency 
48.  KL Kilo Litre 
49.  KREDA Kargil Renewable Energy Development Agency 
50.  KREDL Karnataka Renewable En ergy Development Limited 
51.  KSEB Karnataka State Electricity Board 
52.  kW Kilo Watt 
53.  LAHDC Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council 
54.  LC Letter of Credit 
55.  LED Light Emitting Diode 
56.  LoA Letter of Acceptance 
57.  LPD Litre per day 
58.  LPG Liquified Petroleum Gas 
59.  LREDA Ladakh Renewable Energy Development Agency 
60.  LREI Ladakh Renewable Energy Initiative 
61.  LTA Long Term Access 
62.  MEDA Maharashtra Energy Development Agency 
63.  MERC Maharashtra Energy Regulatory Commission 
64.  MSEB Maharashtra State Electricity Board 
65.  MHP Mini Hydel Power 
66.  MNRE Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
67.  MNREDA Meghalaya Non-Conventional and Rural Energy Development Agency 
68.  MoEF Ministry of Environment and Forests 
69.  MoP Ministry of Power 
70.  MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
71.  MPUVNL Madhya Pradesh Urja Vikas Nigam Limited 
72.  MSEDCL Maharashtra State Electric ity Distribution Company Limited 
73.  MSETCL Maharashtra State Electricity Transmission Company Limited 
74.  MW Mega Watt 
75.  NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
76.  NAPCC National Action Plan on Climate Change 
77.  NBMMP National Biogas and Manure Management Programme 
78.  NIT National Institute of Technology 
79.  NREDCAP New and Renewable Energy Development Corporation of Andhra 
Pradesh Limited 
80.  NGO Non Governmental Organisation 
81.  NISE National Institute of Solar Energy 
82.  NIWE National Institute of Wind Energy 
83.  NLDC National Load Dispatch Centre 

Report No. 34 of 2015 Annexures 
Renewable Energy Sector in India  Page | 243 
Abbreviations 
84.  NVVN NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam Limited 
85.  OREDA Odisha Renewable Energy Development Agency 
86.  PAC Project Appraisal Committee 
87.  PEDA Punjab Energy Development Agency 
88.  PCR Project Completion Report 
89.  PGCIL Power Grid Corporation of India Limited 
90.  PI Project Investigator 
91.  PLF Plant Load Factor 
92.  POSOCO Power System Oper ation Corporation Limited 
93.  PPA Power Purchase Agreement 
94.  PSA Power Sale Agreement 
95.  PSPCL Punjab State Power Corporation Limited 
96.  RDD&D Research, Design, Deve lopment and Demonstration 
97.  RE Renewable Energy 
98.  REC Renewable Energy Certificate 
99.  REC Rural Electrification Corporation Limited 
100. RED Renewable Energy Department 
101. RGGVY Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana 
102. RPO Renewable Purchase Obligation 
103. RPSSGP Rooftop Photovoltaic and Small Solar Power Generation Plants 
104. RRECL Rajasthan Renewable Energy Corporation Limited 
105. RVE Remote Village Electrification 
106. SADP Special Area Demonstration Programme 
107. SEB State Electricity Board 
108. SEC Solar Energy Centre 
109. SERC State Electricity Regulatory Commission 
110. SHP Small Hydro Power 
111. SLEC State Level Empowered Committee 
112. SNA State Nodal Agency 
113. SND State Nodal Department 
114. SoE Statement of Expenditure 
115. SHLS Solar Home Lighting System 
116. SL Solar Lantern 
117. SPP Solar Power Plant 
118. SSLS Solar Street Lighting System 
119. SWHS Solar Water Heating System 
120. SWP Solar Water Pump 
121. SPD Solar Power Developer 
122. SPSA Solar Payment Security Account 
123. SPV Solar Photovoltaic 
124. SRRA Solar Radiation Resource Assessment 
125. SSS-NIRE Sardar Swaran Singh National Institute of Renewable Energy 

Annexures  Report No. 34 of 2015 
Page | 244 Renewable Energy Sector in India 
Abbreviations 
126. ST Solar Thermal 
127. TANGEDCO Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation Limited 
128. TANTRANSCO Tamil Nadu Transmission Corporation Limited 
129. TEDA Tamil Nadu Energy Development Agency 
130. TNERC Tamil Nadu Energy Regulatory Commission 
131. UC Utilisation Certificate 
132. UJVNL Uttarakhand Jal Vidyut Nigam Limited 
133. UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
134. UPNEDA Uttar Pradesh New and Renewable Energy Development Agency 
135. UREDA Uttarakhand Renewable Energy Development Agency 
136. VEC Village Energy Committee 
137. WBGEDCL West Bengal Green Energy Development Corporation Limited 
138. WBREDA West Bengal Renewable Energy Development Agency 
139. WMS Wind Monitoring Station 
140. WRA Wind Resource Assessment 
141. ZEDA Zoram Energy Development Agency (Mizoram) 
 

© COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in