 
iii 
 
 
 
  
The report for the year ended March 2009 containing the results of the 
performance audit of Income Tax Refunds has been prepared for submission to 
the President under Article 151(1) of the Constitution of India. 
 
The audit of Revenue Receipts – Direct Taxes of the Union Government is 
conducted under Section 16 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
(Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.   
 
Our findings are based on mainly test audit conducted during the period January 
2009 to August 2009.  Some findings of audit conducted in earlier years, but 
could not be covered in previous reports, have also been included. 
 
PREFACE  

 
 
v
Executive Summary 
A taxpayer becomes eligible for a refund if the tax paid by him was higher than 
the tax due in the year.  The refund process gets initiated with the claim 
contained in the annual tax returns submitted by the taxpayer, which is then 
examined by the assessing officer for eligibility.  The claim is finally disposed 
when the refund voucher is prepared and issued to the assessee through the 
authorized banks. 
Timely disposal of refund claims is a key measure of the operational efficiency of 
tax administration.  Prompt refunds instill confidence among taxpayers and 
increase tax compliance.  Automation was aimed to speed up the disposal and 
thus reduce the pendency of claims. 
We conducted performance review of income tax refunds processed during 
2005-06 to 2008-09 in order to seek an assurance that the systems and 
procedures were geared towards timely and accurate processing of refund 
claims and that internal controls provide for effective monitoring. While the 
department largely cooperated with our efforts, access to records was a major 
constraint with the department not producing 20 per cent  of the records asked 
for by us. 
In our review we found procedural irregularities in refunds aggregating 
Rs. 5803.5 crore; the tax effect of erroneous refunds being Rs. 135.8 crore.   
Incidence of tax refunds measured by refunds as a percentage of gross tax 
collections, showed a declining trend during the period 2005-09, which reflects 
streamlining of the tax assessment process.  Despite automation, the pendency 
rate of refund claims showed an upward trend.  Our analysis showed that 
increase in interest outflows on refunds was mainly on account of delays in 
processing than due to increase in the volume of refunds.  The recent initiative of 
the Department to establish the Central Processing Centre (CPC) at Bengaluru, is 
aimed to reduce the pendency. 
Interest on belated refunds of excess tax is being incorrectly accounted as 
reduction of revenue instead of being correctly budgeted as an expenditure item.  
The incorrect accounting practice also leads to interest payments escaping 
legislative scrutiny despite being a charge on the Consolidated Fund of India and 
needs to be rectified. 
We reviewed the checks and controls in the system for ensuring accuracy of the 
refund advice.  The computerised systems are yet to stabilize.  Although 
automation allows online verification of tax credits claimed by the assessees, the 
high incidence of credits that could not be matched with the PAN of the assessees 
(called OLTAS suspense) has rendered such verification difficult.  The 

 
 
vi 
Assessment Information Systems (AST) is being used mainly for summary 
assessment.  Even so, the system controls do not ensure that refunds granted 
through summary assessments were adjusted while processing subsequent 
refunds.  We also found cases of excess payment of interest on refunds.  
Till such time that the computerised systems stabilise, continuance of manual 
systems of control become inevitable.  We, however, noticed that maintenance of 
the manual registers was unsatisfactory and the supervisory controls were 
ineffective. 
We have evaluated the timeliness in processing of refunds particularly of small 
taxpayers.  The departmental target of settling refund claims within 4-6 months 
is much longer than international standards which range from 24 days to six 
weeks.  Our analysis showed that the average time taken for processing of refund 
claims leading to issue of refund vouchers is 10 months.  The average time taken 
for the assessee to receive the refund voucher after its issue is 40 days.  In 2007-
08 the taxpayer received the refund in 12 months after he submitted the claim.  
This inconveniences the taxpayer considerably, particularly the senior citizens 
whose refunds, the department claims, have been put on fast track with an 
assurance for on-the-spot settlement.  We found that the average time taken for 
receipt of refund by a senior citizen was 12 months after filing of return. 
The delays in processing of high value refunds were akin to that of low value 
refunds, with bottlenecks at various stages.  The impact of delays in high value 
refunds is many fold: taxpayer inconvenience; both cost to the assessee and the 
monetary loss suffered by Government on account of interest payments is higher 
in high value refunds; the distortion of tax collections due to pending high value 
refunds, is also higher.  The Refund Banker Scheme, which is in a pilot stage, has 
had a good impact on stemming delays in payment (i.e., stage after the refund 
voucher is issued). 
During the exit conference, the Ministry accepted the audit recommendations 
and agreed to address the issues brought out in the report. 
 
 
 

 
 
vii  
Summary of Recommendations 
/xrhombus On incidence of refunds in company cases                      (Paragraph 2.4) 
• We recommend that the Ministry conducts an analysis of high value 
refunds to identify pockets of high incidence.   
/xrhombus On increasing pendency of refund claims                         (Paragraph 2.9) 
• We recommend that the Ministry reviews the gaps in automation 
which are impeding the clearance of refund claims.  
/xrhombus On internal control and monitoring mechanism…   
 (Paragraphs 3.3, 3.5, 3.21, 3.22, 3.24, 3.29, 3.30) 
• We recommend that the controls effected in the manual system may 
not be lost in automation.  This will strengthen the MIS also.  
• We recommend incorporation of an online auto-reconciliation feature 
in the system for every cheque issued.  
• We recommend that the Ministry identifies the risks during migration 
and the steps that would be needed to mitigate the risks.  
• We recommend that since automation captures the flow of the income 
tax return after its receipt, the automation system should be able to 
generate jurisdiction-wise report of pending refunds leading  to effective 
control. 
• We recommend that the Department unde rtakes clearance of legacy 
data and improving the fidelity of the data on priority basis.  This will also 
encourage the AOs to use the system and thus promote the integration of 
automation into regular assessment proceedings. 
• We recommend that pending full use of AST for all the assessment 
work, the results of all types of assessments viz., summary, scrutiny, 
rectification, revision etc. be posted mandatorily in the AST module.  This 
will help the AOs to verify the arrears of demand and refunds issued 
earlier. 
 
 
 

 
 
viii 
/xrhombus On assessment of timeliness in disposal of refund claims…     
    (Paragraphs 4.5, 4.9 and 4.10) 
• We recommend that the monthly monitoring should capture the 
delays in the stage of processing, which our analysis shows, was the 
biggest bottleneck.  The monitoring process should also capture the 
reasons for pendency in order to flag the deviations from the procedure 
by AOs. 
/xrhombus On enhancing taxpayer satisfaction…   (Paragraphs 3.14 and 4.5 to 4.8) 
• We recommend that the Ministry may consider setting up a 
mechanism to filter refund claims of senior citizens in CPC/dedicated 
processing units for priority processing.  The monitoring process should 
also capture pendency in the claims of senior citizens separately in order 
to alleviate inconvenience caused to them. 
• We recommend that in order to enhance transparency, refund claims 
should be processed in chronological order.  The process can be made 
more transparent by displaying the status of the claim on the 
departmental website. 
• We recommend that the departmental staff are sensitized to perceive 
themselves as service providers working towards customer satisfaction.  
This may be integrated into the training programmes and 
seminars/workshops organized in the Department.  
/xrhombus On accuracy of advice…                              (Paragraphs 5.1 and 5.3) 
• We recommend that the different mechanisms and controls offered by 
the ITD applications towards reconciliation of the demands should be 
properly utilized during processing of the refunds. 
• We recommend that the responsibility of the staff members may be 
clearly fixed in case of material arithmetical error.  This will help in 
reducing such avoidable errors. 
 

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
1 
                
                                                         Introduction                                                     
     
1.1 Tax refund primarily arises when tax paid by an assessee at the pre-assessment 
stage 1 exceeds tax determined as payable at the time of assessment, whether in 
summary or in scrutiny 2.    
1.2 Disposal of refund claims is a key indicator for measuring the operational 
performance of tax administration in providing quality services to the taxpayers; 
dimensions of quality being taxpayer satisfaction through accuracy of advice and 
timeliness in receipt of refund.  Prompt issue of refunds reduces the interest liability of 
the government and by instilling confidence in the taxpayers, encourages them to 
greater tax compliance. 
1.3 The Task Force on Direct Taxes (Kelkar Committee) had observed that “the 
failure of the tax administration to issue refunds continues to be a major source of 
public grievance.”  One of its main recommendations to address the problem was 
replacement of the existing cumbersome and manually-operated procedures for issue 
of refunds with a more efficient automated system.  The initiatives of the Department in 
automation were aimed to improve efficiency in management of refunds.  
 
Legal provisions 
1.4 Chapter XIX of the Income Tax Act, 1961 deals with the law and procedure 
regarding refunds.  Sections 237 to 245 relate to refunds with particular reference to 
excess tax paid; persons entitled to claim refund in special cases; procedure and time 
limit for claim of refund; interest on refunds and set-off of refund against pending tax 
demands. 
Why we chose the topic 
1.5 We had conducted a performance evaluation of refunds in 2001-02.  Our major 
findings highlighted taxpayer inconvenience because of delays in refunds, particularly 
those arising out of appeals 3 and set-off of refunds against pending tax demands 
without intimating the tax payers; excess payment of refunds arising out of 
computation errors; and avoidable and excess payment of interest on refunds.   
                                                 
1 Tax at pre-assessment stage is collected by way of tax deducted at source (TDS), advance tax and self assessment tax.  While TDS is 
deducted by third party deductors from payments made to tax payers and remitted to government, advance tax and self-assessment form 
voluntary compliance by the tax payer. 
2 Annual tax return submitted by the tax payer is first summarily assessed by AOs without calling for additional documents or insisting 
on the presence of the tax payer.  High risk returns are then selected for scrutiny assessments in which AOs subject the returns to 
detailed examination with reference to additional documents, if need be. 
3 An aggrieved tax payer can avail of appellate mechanisms within the Department; if still aggrieved he can take legal recourse. 
CHAPTER 1  

                Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
 
 2  
1.6 Public Accounts Committee (PAC) made several recommendations on the above 
audit report in its 55 th  Report (13 th  Lok Sabha) and 15 th  Report (14 th  Lok Sabha), in 
response to which the Department committed the following: 
 To address the Committee’s concern on inordinate delays, the Department 
assured that instructions had been issued to field formations to strengthen their 
internal procedures for prompt detection of delays, with their performance 
being monitored through monthly reports on refunds; 
 PAC was informed that the Information Technology (IT) systems have been put 
in place to minimize errors in computation; and 
 Section 244A was amended to reduce the interest rate on refunds to discourage 
taxpayers from paying excess tax.  A new section was also introduced to charge 
interest on excess refunds granted in summary assessment. 
1.7 The PAC desired that it may be apprised of the progress in implementation of IT 
systems as well as of the impact of the administrative measures to bring in timeliness in 
issue of refunds.  We audited refunds this year to examine the extent to which the 
Department has been able to fulfill the above commitments. 
1.8 The fact that efficiency in giving timely refunds forms the touchstone for 
evaluation of the Department’s IT systems also prompted us to choose this audit.  Our 
attempt was to focus on the grievances of the common taxpayer who is affected the 
most by the quality of services provided by tax administration in refunds. 
Objectives of audit 
1.9 The objectives of our audit were to seek an assurance that:   
 The systems and procedures are geared to timely examination of refund claims 
and issue of refunds; 
 Internal controls provide for effective monitoring of delays in issue of refunds 
and for timely corrective action; 
 Automation in the Department has helped to improve efficiency in processing of 
the refunds.  It also provides adequate safeguards to ensure accuracy in refund 
advices.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
3 
Scope of audit 
1.10 Refunds due and paid during the financial years 2005-06 to 2008-09, were the 
subject of our study  conducted during the period from January 2009 to August 2009.  
We divided refunds into two clusters notably high value refunds 4 and low value 
refunds 5:  
 Two tier statistical sampling was employed while conducting the review.  At 
level–1, the assessment units were selected using stratified random sampling.  
The universe was sub-divided into types of assessment units with specified 
percentage selection amongst them.  Selection of the actual units was based on 
the risk analysis of each unit 6.  At level-2, assessment records having high value 
refunds were selected for audit within the assessment units using stratified 
random sampling.  Low value refunds of individuals were sampled randomly 7 as 
indicated in Appendix-I.   
 12423 high value refunds in 613 selected assessment circles/wards in 23 offices 
were selected for detailed examination with regard to compliance with laws and 
procedures and accuracy in advice.  Of these, 9889 assessment records 
representing nearly 80  per cent  of the selection were provided to audit.  The 
remaining assessment records were not produced to audit.   
 12491 low value refund cases were selected to see if the small taxpayer is being 
served well by timely receipt of refunds.  Delays, if any, were the only focus in 
examining low value refunds.   
Acknowledgement 
1.11 Indian Audit and Accounts Department acknowledges the cooperation of the 
Income Tax Department in providing the necessary records and information for audit.  
An entry conference was held on the review on refunds, with the Member (Audit) and 
other senior officers of the CBDT.  The audit objectives, scope of audit and the main 
areas of audit examination were explained in the meeting.  Audit was conducted on the 
assessment records in the respective field formations of the IT Department.   
1.12 The exit conference was held (March 2010) with the CBDT wherein the report 
was discussed.  The views expressed by the Board in the exit conference have been 
suitably incorporated in this report.  Replies from the Ministry have not been received 
(March 2010). 
                                                
 
4 Involving not less than Rs. 5.00 lakh;  
5 Involving not more than Rs. 5.00 lakh and less than Rs. 500  
6 Several factors such as materiality of assessments in an unit, assessee profile of an unit and previous audit observations in respect of an 
unit etc., form the risk matrix for evaluation of a unit. 
7 Without following pre-defined criteria other than the value of refund and subjecting the total number of cases to be selected by any field 
formation to a ceiling. 

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
5 
Refunds and interest - Trends 
9
14 
19 
05-06 06-07 07-08 08-09 
Financial Year 
9
14 
19 
Refunds 
as a % of 
Gross tax 
collection 
Interest 
as a % of 
refunds 
                                     
 
Incidence of refunds as measured by ‘refunds as a percentage of gross tax collections’ 
showed a decreasing trend over the period indicating a positive shift towards 
streamlining of tax assessment.  It was higher in respect of company cases as compared 
to non-company cases.  However, the differential gap between the two categories (in 
terms of per cent ) was reducing.  We found that the tendency to pay excess advance tax 
especially among PSUs persisted in the department.  This continuing trend points to a 
risk that assessing officers may resort to collection of excess advance tax to meet their 
targets and subsequently refund the excess.  Despite automation, the pendency in 
processing of refund cases exhibited an increasing trend with a six months backlog 
from 2008-09.  Our analysis showed that increase in interest outflows on refunds was 
mainly on account of delays in processing than due to increase in volume of refunds. 
2.1 We made the following assumptions in the analysis of incidence of refunds: 
 A taxpayer will ordinarily pay tax closest to what is due and would not like to 
pay more than due;  
 In a refined tax administration, a taxpayer can calculate the tax due with greater 
accuracy because of either clarity in tax provisions or consistent application of 
provisions by assessing officers in past assessments; 
 In an emerging economy as new types of businesses open, some amount of over-
payment of tax leading to refunds is unavoidable. 
Hence, reduction in the incidence of refunds as measured by refunds as a percentage of 
gross collections would indicate refinement in tax assessment. 
2.2 Over the years 2005-09, quantum 
of refunds has increased by 30 per cent , 
but the incidence of refunds has come 
down (Table 2.1).  Interest payments as 
a percentage of refund   showed a 
fluctuating trend (Chart 2.1).   Nearly 
one-eighth of the gross collections were 
refunded to the assessees during this 
period, which is substantially lower than 
its share in pre-2000s when one-fourth 
of the gross collections were refunded.  
The decreasing trend is a pointer to the 
streamlining of tax assessment process.   
Chart 2.1: Incidence of refunds  
CHAPTER 2  
Incidence of refunds  
 

                Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
 
 6  
2.3 Interest on refunds showed a progressive increase during 2006-09 at a pace that 
was higher than that of refunds (Table 2.1).  In 2008-09, refunds registered a dip as 
compared to the previous year but interest payments rose by 32 per cent .  This shows 
that increase in interest payments were mainly on account of delays in processing 
refunds than due to increase in volume of refunds.   
  Table 2. 1:   Volume of refunds 
                      (Rs. in '000 crore) 
Financial 
year 
Gross tax 
collection 
Refunds  Interest on 
refunds 
Net Tax 
Collection 
2005-06 187  25.4  4.6  157 
2006-07 257  33.3  3.7  220 
2007-08 337  36.6  4.4  296 
2008-09 359  33.2  5.8  320 
Incidence of corporate refunds  
2.4 There is a wide variation between refunds relating to corporate and non-
corporate assessees.  On an average, 14.9 per cent  of gross collections were refunded to 
companies as compared to 9.0 per cent  in non-company cases.  This indicates a greater 
tendency among corporates to deposit higher tax.  It was much higher in pre-2000s 
when 23.4 per cent  of gross collections were refunded to companies and 10.5 per cent  
to assessees other than companies. 
2.5 55 th  Report of the PAC had also noted the disturbing tendency, particularly 
among Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), of making excess advance tax payments and 
thus being the highest claimants to refunds.  The Ministry in its reply stated that to 
dissuade the claimants from doing so, the interest rate on refunds was reduced from 8 
per cent  to 6 per cent  in 2003.  We found that the tendency to pay excess advance tax 
persisted although to a lesser extent.  There were 21 corporates in 6 8 States, who paid 
excess advance tax of Rs. 436 crore, especially a t the year end.  Of this, Rs. 403 crore, 
representing 92 per cent  of excess tax, was paid by 9 PSUs.  Department 9 replied that 
they have no control if assessees paid advance tax in excess of the amount due. 
2.6 The PAC had directed the Department to study the trends in the payment of 
advance tax to identify the factors that gave rise to huge refunds as also the major 
claimants of refunds.  We noted that refund amount higher than pre-determined levels 
is a parameter used in selection of cases for scrutiny assessment.   
2.7 Excess payment of advance taxes also distorts the performance evaluation of 
assessing officers (AO) against the targets for tax collection.  This trend is fraught with 
the risk of encouraging the AOs to collect excess advance tax to fulfill their targets 
which is subsequently refunded.   
                                                
 
8 Jharkhand, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh  
9 DCIT Range I Lucknow  

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
7 
Quarterly trends of Corporation tax refunds vis-a- 
vis Gross Tax Collections 
0
10000 
20000 
30000 
40000 
50000 
60000 
70000 
80000 
90000 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
Financial Year 
Amount (Rs. in crore) 
Gross Tax 
Collection 
(CT) 
Refund 
(CT) 
Net Tax 
Collection 
(CT) 
Refund cases received and disposed off 
2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
Total no. of refund cases 
Number of pending refund claims 
Pendency rate 
Quarterly trends 
2.8 Chart 2.2 shows that collections pick 
up momentum in the second quarter of the 
year and peak in the fourth quarter; first 
quarter collections averaged around 1/7 th  
of total collection.  Similarly average 
refunds also peak in the fourth quarter, 
with the result that the net collections 
show a quantum jump in the second 
quarter to peak in the fourth quarter.    
 
 
Pendency rate 
2.9 Kelkar Committee concluded that the 
public inconvenience with regard to 
refunds was partly due to the 
Department’s inability to promptly 
process the increasing number of returns 
and partly due to the cumbersome process 
of issuing of refunds, which was sought to 
be corrected through IT initiatives.  
However, IT efforts are yet to make a 
substantial impact on the Department’s 
ability to process the refund claims (Graph 
2.3).  The pendency rate of refund claims 
(claims pending over total received) has 
shown an upward trend (Table 2.2) 
ranging 22.5 per cent  to 37 per cent  each 
year.  The Department needs to identify 
the bottlenecks that are impeding its goals 
of reducing the pendency of claims.  
 
Table: 2. 2  Refund cases received and processed 
(in lakhs) 
Year Opening 
balance 
No. 
received Total No. 
processed No. pending Pendency 
rate 
2005-06 5.2  20.1  25.3  19.6  5.7  22.5 
2006-07 5.7  12.3*  18.0  13.6  4.4  24.4 
2007-08 4.4  22.8  27.2  18.8  8.4  30.9 
2008-09 8.4  33.8 42.2  26.7  15.610  37.0 
* The figures provided by the department appear to be erroneous 
                                                 
10  This translates into a backlog of six months in the year 2008-09.  
Chart  2.3: Status of refund cases  
        Chart 2.2:  Quarterly trends  

                Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
 
 8  
2.10 A BPR study conducted by the Department (2007) found that handling of 
multiple jobs by the AOs, mixing routine jobs with other specialized activities, was 
leading to high taxpayer grievances.  An initiative to streamline the processing of 
returns was creation of the Central Processing Centre (CPC) at Bengaluru.  The CPC 
would process all the e-filed returns in the country and paper returns filed in Karnataka 
and Goa summarily, thus separating this activity from the regular scrutiny assessments 
by the AOs.  It will enable the Department to process the returns and issue refunds 
expeditiously and encourage more taxpayers to resort to electronic filing of returns.   
2.11 Meanwhile, efforts for centralized processing in jurisdictional areas are yet to 
bear fruit.  For instance, DT01 charge, Mumbai 11  could process (August 2009) only 111 
cases of the 1.8 lakh refund returns received upto July 2008. 
 
2.12 Recommendations 
 We recommend that the Ministry may conduct an analysis of high value refunds to 
identify pockets of high incidence.  
The Ministry stated (March 2010) during the exit conference that the generic 
causes could be identified.  For instance, higher incidence of refunds in respect of 
PSUs could be on account of refund of tax deducted at source on payments 
received by loss making PSUs.  A detailed analysis could throw up the specific 
causes. 
 Ministry may review the gaps in automation which are impeding the clearance of 
refund claims.    
The Ministry stated (March 2010) during the exit conference that they were not 
oblivious to the gaps but were hampered by resource constraints.  Efforts are 
being made to overcome the problems in the existing AST software and replace 
it with a new software. 
 
                                                
 
11  Centralised processing centre Direct Tax 01 (DT01) under CIT 29 Mumbai, where all salary returns are being processed  

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
9 
    
 
   Refunds Process and Internal Controls  
 
The refund process starts with the submission of claim by the assessee in annual 
income tax returns.  The AO determines the refund amount and dispatches the refund 
voucher through authorised banks.  Benefits of the controls available in the ITD 
applications towards referencing and reconciliation of information prior to making 
refunds are not being utilised appropriately.  The controls provided by automation are 
compromised because of glitches in the flow of data across the system.  The AOs have 
not integrated automated controls in their regular work.  In the meanwhile, manual 
procedures are falling into disuse, thereby creating additional risks.  Exercise of 
supervisory controls provided in checking the accuracy of refunds and by way of 
administrative approvals in high value refunds, is inadequate.  Interest on belated 
refunds of excess tax is being incorrectly accounted as reduction of revenue instead of 
being correctly budgeted as an expenditure item.  The incorrect accounting practice 
also leads to interest payments escaping legislative scrutiny despite being a charge on 
the Consolidated Fund of India and needs to be rectified. 
3.1 Chart 3.1 outlines the processes involved in refund. 
            Chart 3.1: Flow of refund to the assessee 12  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Refund above   Prescribed  
                                                    limits 13  
  
      
           Refund less  
     than prescribed 
     limit 13         
             
       
 
                                                
 
12   30 per cent  upto 15 June, 60 per cent upto 15 December and & 100 per cent  upto March of the financial year immediately preceding the 
relevant AY.  Concept of AY and previous year are proposed to be done away with in the new Draft Tax Code. 
13  The limits for administrative approval of supervisory officers as decided by the CCIT/DGIT as per paragraph 1 (iv) of instruction of 
August 1999. 
Summary/Scrutiny 
Assessment by AOs  
Return filed 
by assessee 
Refund determined 
by AO 
Administrative 
approval  
Authorized 
Bank  
Tips for individual assessees claiming 
refund 
• Correct particulars including PAN, bank 
account details etc. should be filled up.   
• Work out the income and tax correctly for 
the relevant assessment year.  In case of any 
difficulty, the tax payer should take the help 
of a Tax Return Preparer (TRP).  
• Furnish correct PAN to the deductor and 
verify the tax deposited to the government on 
the website (https://www.tin-nsdl.com/).   
• Keep the bank and the income tax 
department informed about any change of 
any particulars.   
• Submit the return in time (normally, last 
date of filing of return is 31 July). 
• The advance tax should be paid in time 12. 
• Check status of refund on website 
(https://tin.tin.nsdl.com/oltas/refundstatusl 
ogin.html). 
• Refund cheque received should be 
submitted to the bank immediately to avoid 
expiry. 
Assessee 
CHAPTER 3  

                Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
 
 10   
3.2 The goals of timely issue of accurate refunds can be achieved if the Department 
has a robust internal control mechanism that alerts it to problems on time to enable it 
to take timely measures to redress them.  We divided internal controls in three 
categories: controls on cash flow; controls on timely issue of refunds; and controls that 
ensure accuracy in refund advice. 
Controls on cash flow 
3.3 One of the most important financial controls to mitigate frauds is regular bank 
reconciliation of cheques encashed with cheques issued.  The manual system of 
reconciliation was cumbersome and was rendered impossible with mounting volume of 
transactions. On-line tax accounting through OLTAS 14  greatly facilitates the 
reconciliation.  The details of the refunds encashed by the assessee at various banks, is 
communicated by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) daily as part of the payment scrolls. 
The account is required to be reconciled with the respective Zonal Accounts Offices.  
3.4 On receipt of the reconciled accounts, a Daily Refund Register (DRR) is prepared 
electronically at/by Regional Computer Centres (RCCs) and dispatched to the 
concerned Ranges for distribution among AOs.  The AOs are required to tally the 
amount paid with the office copy of the refund vouchers and note the date of 
encashment in the space provided in the office copy of the voucher and in the Demand 
and Collection Register (DCR).  Such reconciliation at various levels constitute an 
important check to detect encashment of bogus refunds. 
3.5 However, the controls exercised through the online system have not been 
optimized because of large amounts lying in OLTAS suspense 15 .  Invalid PANs are a 
major cause for transactions that remain unreconciled.  For our study on timeliness of 
refunds (refer to paragraph 4.4), we requested for details of the encashment of 9737 
refund vouchers.  The Department confirmed payment in 4291 cases.  It informed that 
177 cases remained unpaid and could not confirm payment for 5269 cases 
(representing 54 per cent  of the sample) as ‘no data was found’ with them.  Evidently, 
reconciliation is rendered difficult in such a milieu.  Regular reconciliation at the head-
end of the chain, ZAO-NSDL 16 , is a vital artery to its flow down to the level of the AO, 
which is impaired in this framework thus constituting high risk.  
3.6 The automated system has clearly not stabilized and till such time it does, 
continuing with the manual systems of control becomes inevitable.  We found that at 
the field level, office copies of the refund vouchers are not being maintained properly in 
                                                 
14  The Department has an Online Tax Accounting System (OLTAS) which allows check of refunds encashed by the taxpayers through the 
data uploaded by payee banks.  
15  The tax deposited by an assessee and credited to government account is put in a suspense head if it is not matched to the assessee’s 
Permanent Account Number (PAN).  Further details are at paragraph 3.22  
16   The accounting of both expenditure and revenue (Direct Taxes) on monthly basis is done through the Zonal Accounts Officers (ZAOs).   
National Securities  Depository Limited (NSDL) hosts the Tax Information Network (TIN).  ZAOs have been provided with the facility to 
access the NSDL site through which they can view the challans/scrolls uploaded to TIN and take up the matter with Banks/ITD if data 
loaded to TIN  does not match the details reported to them through challans or scrolls. 

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
11 
many offices 17 .  In some offices where they were being maintained, their maintenance 
was not proper.  We also found that the DRR is either not maintained or, where it was 
kept, its maintenance was tardy 18 .     
3.7 Refund vouchers, duly filled and signed by the AO but not issued for any reason 
should be cancelled or revalidated in order to prevent its misuse under the signature of 
issuing authority.  These instructions were not being followed in some offices 19 . 
6008 refund cheques issued in 24 circles/wards of CCsIT Jaipur, Udaipur and Jodhpur 
during 2005-06 to 2008-09 were returned due to wrong address or non-availability of 
assessee.  We found that in most of the cases envelopes were not opened and refunds 
were lying without cancellation under the signature of AO.  Register of refund cheques 
received back were also not maintained in these circles /wards.   
In DCIT Circle-1, CIT Jamshedpur charge, we found that a few refund vouchers, duly 
filled and signed by the issuing authority but not issued, were kept without cancellation 
– a situation fraught with high risk. 
3.8 In order to prevent the misuse of refund vouchers, a proper record of issue and 
utilization of refund book is required to be maintained.  The refund book itself 
containing used or blank refund vouchers must be kept in safe custody.  Proper handing 
over of the refund book should be ensured at the time of the change of incumbency of 
an office.  We found that in 31 units in Rajasthan, stock register of refund voucher was 
not found maintained.  
3.9 The Board issued (1989) instructions for quarterly verification from the office 
copies of advice notes as well as from the relevant entries in the Demand and Collection 
Register to find out the cases of paid foils not received within six months of the issue of 
the refund voucher in order to ensure that there was no fraudulent payment.  We found 
that the verification process is largely in disuse 20 .   
3.10  We had earlier commented 21  that the government was following an incorrect 
procedure of accounting for interest paid on refunds.  Interest payment is a charge on 
the Consolidated Fund of India and is, therefore, payable through a proper budgetary 
mechanism.  Accordingly, Minor Head “interest on refunds” is to be operated under the 
Major Head “2020-Collection of Taxes on Income and Expenditure”.  However, no 
                                                 
17  Andhra Pradesh, Bihar (19 cases), Chandigarh UT, Jharkhand, Orissa (212 cases), Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal (out 
of 211 cases not properly maintained in most of the cases). 
18  in Chandigarh (UT), Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Maharashtra (Out of the selected 132 circles/wards, 21 circles/wards 
confirmed that the daily refund register were not maintained, 94 circles/wards did not produce the said register and 17 circles/wards 
not properly maintained the above register), Orissa, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh except West Bengal charges  
19  In Jharkhand and Rajasthan  
20  There was no quarterly verification in the circles/wards selected for review in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar {except ITO Ward 2(2)}, 
Chandigarh UT, Gujarat (in 16 units out of 18 units), Haryana (except ACIT and ITO ward I Rohtak), Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand 
(records not furnished except CIT Dhanbad), Maharashtra (not done in 49 units and records not produced by 59 units), Orissa (records 
from 10 circles/wards not furnished), Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal (in 10 units maintained records out of 51 units) 
charges. 
21  in Audit Reports of 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008 and 2009  

                Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
 
 12   
budget provision for ‘interest on refund’ was made in the budget estimates for 2008-09 
and the expenditure on interest on refunds amounting to Rs. 5,785 crore was treated as 
reduction in revenue.  Accounting of interest on refund as reduction in revenue is 
incorrect as this interest was never collected in the first instance.  Interest on belated 
refunds of excess tax should be budgeted as an expenditure item which, in fact, was 
done in the Budget Estimates 2001-02 when Rs. 92 crore was provided in the demand 
of ‘Direct Taxes’ under the Major Head ‘2020 – Collection of taxes on Income & 
Expenditure’ towards interest on belated refund of excess tax.  However, subsequently 
at the Revised Estimates stage the earlier practice of showing the interest on excess 
refund as deduct receipt was reverted to.  The incorrect accounting practice which also 
results in interest payment escaping legislative scrutiny despite being a charge on the 
Consolidated Fund of India is still being followed and needs to be rectified. 
Controls to stem delays 
 
I At the level of the Board 
3.11 The Department assured the PAC that it would stem the delays by fixing targets 
in CAP and by monitoring the adherence to targets through monthly reports from field 
formations.  The standards for time were actually relaxed from 4 months to six months 
(refer to parag raph 4 .1).  The delays we found in the process reflect adversely on the 
effectiveness of the monitoring mechanisms.   
3.12 The monthly reports capture the delays from the stage of processing and do not 
track delays in processing itself.  There is a need to watch the number of refund 
applications received and the time taken in processing of these cases in addition to the 
number of returns processed, refunds determined, refunds dispatched and refunds 
pending during the month as mentioned in the monthly report on refunds (MRR) for 
better monitoring of delays in disposal of refund applications. 
II  In the field 
3.13 In the manual system, various registers were maintained in order to exercise 
controls.  Register of refund applications records the receipt and disposal of claims 
while the Demand & Collection Register is a master database used for recording all the 
details of the assessee with the details of the tax credits; demands due from him and the 
refunds issued to him.  We found that the above registers that provided the controls 
were not being maintained in some offices 22 .  
3.14 An important step in curbing discretion of AOs, is that refunds claims must be 
taken up for processing chronologically from the date of filing returns.  Such a system 
would be transparent and inspire the confidence of taxpayers, especially the small 
                                                 
22  Audit noticed in selected circles/wards in Bihar (in most of the units), Orissa and Rajasthan (in 33 out of 39 units) that the register of 
refund application was not maintained and in Chandigarh UT, Haryana, Orissa (10 units) and Rajasthan relevant entries were not made 
in the demand and collection register.  

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
13 
taxpayers.  For not issuing refunds chronologically, various reasons were cited by AOs 
like shortage of space, invalid PANs delaying the processing of some returns, physical 
verification of TDS certificates where credits could not be found in OLTAS etc.  It was 
also stated that refunds were being issued by and large chronologically except in those 
claims in which correlation is rendered difficult, which are then pushed to the end of 
the queue.  
Controls on accuracy of advice 
3.15 Refund vouchers prepared by a tax assistant are required to be checked by a 
supervisor before they are submitted to the AO for final checking and signature.  But we 
found vouchers in Chandigarh and Jharkhand which did not have the signatures of the 
cheque writing person or of the supervisor.   
3.16 Accuracy in refund advice is to be ensured by the AO by applying the following 
checks: 
 Credits for the tax claimed to have been paid by the assessee 23  are verified; 
 Refunds already issued have been considered; 
 Verification of arrears and outstanding demands, if any, and 
 Other details like period of interest, rates of tax etc. have been correctly 
computed and applied. 
3.17 These checks when conducted manually were cumbersome and led to mounting 
pendency.  With the processing of tax returns in the integrated computerized system of 
the Department, it was hoped that not only would the process be faster but also it 
would ensure accuracy since it would be system-driven.  In 2004, electronic filing of 
income tax returns was introduced to obviate the need for data entry and thus further 
accelerate the processing of refund claims.   
Risks during transition 
3.18 During the transition stage after introduction of electronic filing in 2004, the 
assessee 24  was filing returns of income electronically through authorized e-return 
intermediaries.  The intermediaries were to digitize the data in such returns and 
transmit the same electronically to the e-filing server.  On successful validation of data 
structure and PAN, the Department would issue an on-line acknowledgement of the 
return.  Signed paper return was also submitted to the AO affixing a printout of the 
online acknowledgement within 15 days.  The Department made it mandatory to 
furnish the income tax return electronically for the corporate taxpayers (companies 
and firms requiring statutory audit) after 24.7.2006.  Thus, during the transition period, 
                                                 
23  TDS data i.e. the base income on which TDS was deducted and the TDS remitted would also need to be captured so as to ensure that the 
income on which TDS credit is given has been offered for tax. 
24   any person, except Association Of Persons/Body of Individuals, who had been allotted a PAN  

                Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
 
 14   
assessee was filing both electronic and paper returns.  We noticed a few cases of double 
refunds. 
Charge: CIT Thrissur, Kerala: AY: 2006-07 
LFC Hire Purchase Co. Ltd. filed a manual return which was processed by ACIT, Circle 
(1), Palakkad, summarily to issue refund of Rs. 2.8 lakh in October 2006.  In November 
2006, the assessee filed the tax return electronically which was processed by ACIT, 
Range 2, Kochi to issue a refund, once again , in March 2008. 
3.19 In Mumbai charge, double refund was issued in six cases, all of which came to 
notice when one of these assessees reported it 25 .  The mistake occurred because the 
refund was first processed on AST and later issued through the refund banker scheme.   
3.20 Although we did not find preponderance of double claims in our audit sample of 
refunds, the above instances are a pointer to the risks that the system was exposed to 
during transition.  The computerized systems are yet to stabilize.  The next big 
transition will be the centralised processing of returns after consolidating all 36 
regional databases into a single database in the CPC (refer to paragraph 2.10) which 
will also issue refunds.  
3.21 The shift of responsibilities from AOs to the CPC, bulk movement of records and 
dual methods of filing - manual and electronic filing, create risks which the Department 
must first identify to lay down clear instructions for mitigation. 
Verification of credits 
3.22 Banks upload the data relating to taxes through OLTAS.  OLTAS provides details 
on challan number, nature of tax as well as the date of deposit; details that help the AO 
to verify the tax deposit claimed by the assessee in his refund claim.  Several problems 
like inability to match the PAN 26  uploaded by the banks with the PAN database of the 
Department have led to a surge in tax credits lying in suspense accounts.  OLTAS 
suspense as of March 2009 stood at Rs. 2762.8 crore27 . This has considerably 
compromised the control that the AO could have exercised in the automated system.  
We did not get access to the system for checking this aspect.  The AOs also could not 
provide an assurance on credits citing system difficulties that render confirmation of 
credits difficult.  
3.23 During 2008-09, 42.4 per cent  of the tax deposits at the pre-assessment stage 
was through Tax deducted at Source (TDS) by third party deductors, identified by the 
                                                 
25  Thereafter, the department had issued letters to all the 54 assessees whose returns were processed on AST and refund vouchers were 
generated by refund banker.  Six assessees returned refund cheques that had been issued twice.  The Department verified and found that 
41 assessees had intimated non-receipt of double refund.  However, the position in remaining seven cases could not ensured in audit. 
26  Each tax payer is identified through the Permanent Account Number (PAN) allotted by the Department.  The PAN database resides in 
the Assessee Information System (AIS) module.  
27  The department is working towards putting in place a mechanism to facilitate greater compliance with regard to submission of returns 
by deductor as also to improve the tax details in the assessment records.   

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
15 
system through Tax deduction Account Number (TAN).  TDS deductions are credited to 
the assessee’s PAN account after the TDS returns submitted by the deductor (TAN) are 
processed through the e-TDS module.   
3.24 In our audit of e-TDS (2008), we found that only 9.4 per cent  of the TDS returns 
could be processed by the Department in Andhra Pradesh, Chennai, Delhi, Gujarat, 
Karnataka, Kolkata and Mumbai charges.  The reasons were many but mainly because 
PAN of the deductees was either wrongly quoted by deductor in the TDS return or was 
not quoted at all 28 .  The problem was compounded further by the incidence of invalid/ 
incorrect TAN/PAN quoted by assessee in the return.  In such a scenario, the AO 
processing a refund claim cannot verify a TDS credit in the system and would have no 
other alternative but to call for the original TDS certificates 29  from the taxpayer, thus 
delaying the process, diluting the controls and causing inconvenience to the assessee. 
Use of TDS certificates 
3.25 We found that the controls required to be exercised while accepting TDS 
certificates were given a go-by.  In 53 cases 30 , TDS certificates ineligible for admission 
were accepted for processing refund of Rs. 30.2 crore.  The practice exposed the 
Department to the risk of generation of inaccurate refunds as well as the risk of 
granting ineligible refunds. 
3.26 Where an assessee claims refund on the basis of duplicate TDS certificate, the 
Department obtains an indemnity bond.  This is to mitigate the risk of double claim of 
TDS credit.  We found 15 cases 31  of refunds amounting to Rs. 23.5 crore where TDS 
credits were granted on duplicate copies of certificates without obtaining indemnity 
bonds.  The practice is fraught with the risk of double claims.   
 
Adjustment of refunds and demands 
3.27 Excess refund granted is deemed to be tax payable by the assessee, to be 
recovered from him by way of adjustment or otherwise alongwith interest under 
Section 234D.  The AOs are also instructed to ensure that all outstanding demands are 
first adjusted against the refund while determining the amount to be refunded.  Section 
245 requires that the assessee must be given a written intimation before adjusting his 
refund with outstanding demand. 
                                                
 
28  TDS returns are accepted by the system if the threshold limit for PAN quoting (of deductees) was adhered to by the deductor.  
Threshold limit for and from quarter ending 31 March 2008 was 95 per cent  for form no. 24Q   
29  TDS certificates are prepared by the deductor in triplicate: for the taxpayer, for the deductor himself and one for the AO.  The AO calls 
for the original certificate from the tax payer to mitigate the risk of double claims. 
30  The refunds were inadmissible due to variety of reasons such as TDS certificates not in the favour of the assessee; they were defective 
such as challan number and TAN of the deductor not mentioned; relevant income not offered for tax; challan and TDS certificates not 
related to the assessment year etc.  These were detected in Assam, Chandigarh UT, Chattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Uttarakhand charges. 
31  Bihar, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab and Rajasthan  

                Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
 
 16   
3.28 The annual returns submitted by the taxpayer are processed in the module, 
Assessment Information System (AST).  AST was designed to assist the AO in carrying 
out all assessment and related functions at various stages viz., assessments, re-
assessments, rectification, penalty as well as monitor progress and post results in 
appeal, revision, in settlement commission and in prosecution.  The results of such 
assessments would then flow to Individual Running Ledger Account (IRLA), another 
module that  generates a comprehensive ledger covering assessment year-wise data on 
demands, collections and refunds for each assessee (PAN).  Thus, the AO can use IRLA 
to verify past refunds and arrears in demands, if any, while processing a refund in AST. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        PAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.29 We found that AST is currently being used mainly for processing of returns 
under summary and issue of refunds flowing from such assessment.  It, therefore, does 
not capture events that occur subsequently viz. demand/refund determined under 
scrutiny assessment (if selected), appeals, revision etc.  The AOs are not currently 
feeding the results of post-assessment stage in AST either.  Such data is unavailable in 
IRLA also, as it would be uploaded to IRLA through AST only.  Thus, verification of 
arrear demands/refunds flowing from summary assessment alone would be available 
to the AO while processing refunds.   
AST  
(Demand/ 
Refund after 
assessment  
National Computer 
Centre 
IRLA  
AIS  
Assessee  
TIN/ NSDL  
Income tax re turns  
Chart 3.1:   Flow of Information in ITD  
Banks  (income 
tax payments)  
Remittance into 
Government 
Account  
OLTAS  
e-TDS  
Payment details 
TDS Credits  
Income tax 
Department  

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
17 
3.30 We found that the system controls were not utilised to ensure that refunds 
granted through summary assessments were adjusted while processing subsequent 
refunds (refer paragraph 5.1).  The fact that the details available in AST were either not 
complete or used while processing refunds, show that the AOs by and large are working 
outside the system, thus compromising the controls therein.   
3.31 All large refunds 32  are required to be approved by the CIT before issue.  One of 
the checks exercised by the CsIT is that there are no high demand scrutiny assessments 
in the refund case that can be adjusted against the refunds.  Each CCIT/DGIT has been 
delegated the power to fix the monetary ceiling above which the approval of JCIT/Addl. 
CIT shall be taken by the AO before the issue of refund, in their respective regions.  
Where administrative approval is necessary, the refund should be issued within thirty 
days from the date of its determination.  
3.31.1 We found 85 cases involving refund of Rs. 1101.4 crore 33  which were issued 
either without obtaining the necessary administrative approval of the appropriate 
authorities or before obtaining such approval, though in each case approval was 
required to be obtained before issue of the refund from the competent authority.    
3.32 The Board has fixed norms 34  for selection of cases for compulsory scrutiny for 
corporate and non-corporate assessees where high value refunds were issued during 
2005-08.  We found 140 cases 35  involving refund of Rs. 15.8 crore which met the norms 
fixed for selection, but were not selected for compulsory scrutiny.  The selection for 
scrutiny has moved from traditional, manual selection to a risk-based system-driven 
process through the Computer Assisted Scrutiny System (CASS) module.  Further 
selection out of the large sample is yet to be made transparent and is guided by 
discretion and judgment. 
 
 
 
                                                
 
32  As per Central Action Plans 2005-09, approvals are to be taken in respect of issue of refund of Rs. 1.0 crore and above in the case of 
Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Ahmedabad and Pune and Rs. 25.0 lakh above for other stations  
33  in Bihar, Chandigarh UT, Delhi, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu 
charges  
34   
F. Y. Corporate  Non -Corporate  
2005 -06  all returns (except cases of foreign companies*) where 
refund claimed is Rs. 50.00 lakh or above in cities** and 
Rs. 20.00 lakh or above in other places. 
all returns (except cases of non -residents* ) where 
refund claimed is Rs. 10.00 lakh or above in cities** and 
Rs. 5.00 lakh or above in other places. 
2006 -07  All returns (except cases of foreign companies*) where 
refund claimed is Rs. 5.00 lakhs or above. 
All returns (except cases of non -residents* ) where 
refund claimed is Rs. 5.00 lakhs or above. 
2007 -08  All returns where refund claimed is Rs. 5.00 lakhs or above. 
*limit for selection would be decided by the DGIT(International Taxation). 
** Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Pune, Hyderabad, Banga lore and Ahmedabad  
 
35  In Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chattisgarh, Chandigarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa  

                Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
 
 18   
3.33 Recommendations 
 We recommend that the controls effected in the manual system may not be lost in 
automation.  This will strengthen the MIS also.  
The Ministry stated (March 2010) during the exit conference that the controls 
had been provided in the automation but were not being used by the AOs 
currently.  Better advocacy, capacity building and change of mindset among the 
AOs, would result in greater usage of controls in the automated system. 
 Since automation captures the flow of income tax return since the time it is 
received, the automation system should be able to generate jurisdiction-wise report 
of pending refunds in order to have an effective control.   
The Ministry accepted the recommendation.  
 In order to enhance transparency, refund claims should be processed in 
chronological order.  The process can be made more transparent by displaying the 
status of the claim in terms of stage at which it is pending on the departmental 
website.   
The Ministry stated (March 2010) during the exit conference that instructions 
existed for chronological processing.  However, as on date, majority of the 
returns were being received manually.  Due to acute shortage of manpower, data 
entry was hampered.  The huge backlog of refunds had a dominoes effect on 
disposal of fresh refund claims.  The CPC would address these issues and take 
care of the need for transparency.   
 The Ministry may ensure that for every cheque issued, an online auto-reconciliation 
is done by the system.   
The Ministry stated (March 2010) during the exit conference that since the 
introduction of the Three tier system with a Primary Data Centre at Delhi, the 
mechanism of auto-reconciliation of refunds issued by AO vis-à-vis refunds 
encashed is already in place in the ITD system.  The auto-reconciliation is being 
done through the Refund Banker and in non-refund banker cases where returns 
have been processed on AST.  The OLTAS database has encashment details of all 
the IT refunds which is also available to the AO for reconciliation.  However, in 
case of refunds arising out of rectification of assessment, appeal effect etc. auto-
reconciliation was not facilitated. 
 The Ministry may identify the risks during migration and the steps that would be 
needed to mitigate the risks.   
The Ministry stated (March 2010) during the exit conference that they were 
aware of the risks.  The fact remains that the risks needed to be documented as 

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
19 
this would have an institutional follow-up potential instead of being of isolated 
concern to individuals. 
 The Ministry may provide budget provision for ‘interest on refunds’ as an 
expenditure item in the budget estimates .   
The Ministry stated (March 2010) during the exit conference that this was a 
policy decision taken at the highest level.   
 The Department may consider clearance of legacy data and improving the fidelity 
of the data on priority basis.  This will also encourage the AOs to use the system and 
thus promote the integration of automation into regular assessment proceedings.  
The Ministry stated (March 2010) during the exit conference that the current 
year was the first year of three tier environment wherein the ITD has a 
centralized database at the Primary Data Centre at Delhi.  However, it is difficult 
to automate the clearance of legacy data which remains in the suspense account.  
While processing the claims on AST, the AOs can query the system and match the 
credits to the best fit and clear the OLTAS suspense.  The clearance of the 
unmatched data at an aggregate level will need to be compiled.   
 Pending full use of AST for all the assessment work, it may be made mandatory that 
results of all types of assessments viz., summary, scrutiny, rectification, revision etc. 
should be posted in the AST module.  This will help the AOs to verify the arrears of 
demand and refunds issued earlier.   
The Ministry stated (March 2010) during the exit conference that IRLA had a 
software limitation and piecemeal entry of data (i.e. at any stage viz. scrutiny, 
reassessment, appeal effect etc.) in AST was not possible.  The software would 
accept data only if the system had complete details relating to earlier stages. 
However, CPC would take care of this limitation. 
 

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
21 
 
 
     
An attempt was made to evaluate the timeliness in processing of refunds particularly 
the low value refunds of small taxpayers.  The department had set a standard for 
settling the refund claims in 4-6 months.  Our analysis, however, showed that refunds 
were processed in an average time of 10 months after submission of the claim.  The 
time taken was much higher than the international standards ranging from 24 days to 
six weeks.  The  refund vouchers took an average of 40 days to reach the assessee after 
their issue.  The average time taken for receipt of refund claim by the senior citizens 
was 12 months whereas the department had fixed the benchmark of maximum of three 
months for priority processing of such claims.  We noticed instances of unwarranted 
delays at various stages - in processing, issue of refunds after processing and of refunds 
not received by the assessee after issue.  The Refund Banker Scheme has succeeded in 
reducing the transmission time. 
4.1 With a view to minimize delays that will not only inconvenience the taxpayer but 
also result in avoidable payment of interest, the Department fixes timeframe for 
processing of refund cases through the annual Central Action Plan (CAP).  The upper 
limit for processing time during 2005-08 was four months, which was increased to six 
months in 2008-09.  The commitment to the public in the Citizen’s Charter was for 
refunds in nine months.  The extension of time is, in a way, admission of the constraints 
that the department is facing despite automation.  This is also a significant departure 
from the assurance given (2005) to the PAC that electronic filing of returns would 
facilitate speedy processing and issue of refunds. 
4.2 We compared the standards of CBDT with that of the other international tax 
administrations.  We found that in most countries, the standards were pegged at below 
24 days and the highest being six weeks.  The adherence to the standards was in the 
range from 92 per cent  to 100 per cent . 
Table 4.1 : International standards of processing and adherence  
Country Standard Adherence 
Austria 24 days 20.8 days 
Singapore Refund 100% in 30 days 96% in 30 days 
Spain Average in 30 days 27 days 
Mexico 40 days 25 days 
USA 40 days 98.9% 
Australia 92% in 42 days 91.7% in 42 days 
Japan 90% in 6 weeks 95.3% in 6 weeks 
Source : Country Survey Responses reported in OECD Report on Tax  Administration in OECD and selected non-OECD countries; 
Comparative Information Series (2008)  
  Timeliness in processing o f refunds  
CHAPTER 4  

                Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
 
 22   
Time Analysis - Issue of refunds 
(Common taxpayer) 
243 
403 
1304 
84 
1985 
2775 
Returns 
not 
processed 
< 6 6 to 12 12 to 18 > 18 Refunds 
not issued No. of months 
No. of refunds 
 
4.3 In addition to the general time frame of 4 to 6 months, CBDT also issued circulars 
directing field formations to settle, on-the-spot, refund claims of senior citizens (65 
years and above).  If the same is not feasible due to administrative constraints, claims 
should be settled within three months of receipt.  The Ministry also assured (December 
2008) the Parliament that it had adequate mechanisms to address the grievances of 
senior citizens. 
I Time analysis: small taxpayer 
4.4 We sought an assurance on adherence to these targets in a sample of 12491 low 
value refunds of individuals for assessment years 2004-05 to 2008-09.  The objective 
was to ascertain the time taken for processing the claim and the bottlenecks, if any, in 
the stream of steps leading to refund.   
 
4.5 Time analysis of the data 
showed that the average time 
taken for processing a refund 
through summary assessment 
leading to t he issue of refund 
voucher was 10 months from the 
date of filing of return.  31 per 
cent  of refunds were processed 
within 6 months but 20 per cent  
took over 18 months.  There were 
403 refunds that took two to four 
years, 243 refunds 36  that were not 
issued and 84 returns 37  that were 
not processed at all (August 
2009).  
 
4.6 Time taken to receive the refund by the taxpayer, from the date of preparation of 
refund voucher, was ascertained with reference to the date of encashment by the 
taxpayer from OLTAS.  The average 38  time taken was 40 days. 
 
 
 
                                                
 
36   243 low value refunds in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan 
and Tamil Nadu were not issued after processing of returns in these cases. 
37   84 returns in Goa, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala and Punjab charges were not processed in summary manner.  
38  The average depicted by the peak of the normal distribution curve is an estimate of the time taken in payment of refund after its issue.  
On an average most refunds got paid in 40 days.  The sample consisted of 2701 cases where refunds were successfully paid.  Out of these 
cases, 646 cases pertains to the year 2005-06, 1062 to 2006-07, 867 to 2007-08.  Data analysis of these cases revealed a decrease in the 
time taken for payment of low value refunds.  1210 refunds were not received in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Delhi, Haryana, Himachal 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal charges.  85 refunds were not encashed in Rajasthan 
charge.    
Chart 4.1: Issue of refunds -Time Analysis   

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
23 
Time taken - Issue and Payment of refunds 
11 
8
9
12 
10 
12 
1.2 1.4 2.4 
2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 
Average total 
time for receipt 
of 
refund(months) 
Average time for 
processing of 
refund 
voucher(months) 
Average time for 
encashment of 
voucher 
(months) 
Time Analysis - Payment of refunds (Common taxpayer) 
72 
40 
35 
41 
2005-06 Overall 2007-08 2006-07 
 
 
  
 
 
4.7 Year-wise analysis showed that 
though the average time taken for 
processing low value refunds has 
increased during the period 2005-08, the 
average time taken for encashment 39  of 
refunds by the assessees showed a 
decreasing trend.  On an average it took 
around 12 months for an assessee to 
receive the refund in 2007-08, a 
performance which is way below par with 
reference to the Department’s own targets 
as well as international standards.   
      
4.8 We found that despite the intent, the Department was unable to process the 
refund claims of senior citizens on priority.  The average time taken for the receipt of 
refund claim by a senior citizen was 12 months.  The replies from the field formations 
of the department varied considerably.  Some stated that the assessment module (AST) 
provided for this priority processing could not be run due to systemic problems, while 
others stated that there were no special arrangements for senior citizens. 
                                                 
39  Encashment details as indicated by DG (Systems)  
Chart 4.2: Payment of refunds - Time Analysis  
Chart 4.3: Issue and payment of refunds-Annual trends 
The area under the normal 
distribution curve 
represents the frequency 
distribution of time taken 
for payment in respect of 
the sample of low value 
refund cases.  The bell 
curve is positively skewed 
indicating lesser frequency 
of refunds where the time 
taken for payment was 
more than the average 
value (i.e. mean) which has 
been calculated in terms of 
the number of days and 
depicted on top of the 
curve. 

                Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
 
 24   
Time Analysis - Processing refunds 
(Senior citizens) 
193 
231 
166 
41 
4 2 2 1
3 9 15 21 27 33 39 45 
No. of months 
No. of refunds 
      
Time Analysis- Encashment of refunds 
(Senior Citizens) 
122223
175 
30 
58 
1
15 45 75 105 135 165 225 255 315 465 
No. of days 
No. of refunds 
  
 
II Timeliness: high value refunds 
4.9 We found delays in processing in high value refunds akin to that of low value 
refunds; but where the refund value itself was high, the impact of delays was many-fold.  
The government suffered monetary loss on account of higher interest payments; the 
cost to the assessee was high; and the pending refunds of high value distorted the 
actual collection of revenue more significantly.  We found 34 cases of refunds 40  of 
Rs. 2212.6 crore where the Department paid avoidable interest in excess of Rs. 25 lakh 
each, because of the inability to process the claims within the relevant assessment year.  
The total amount of avoidable interest paid in these delayed refunds was Rs. 69.5 crore.   
CIT-I, Delhi took 12 months for summary assessment of Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. (AY: 
2005-06) and allowed refund of Rs. 406.8 crore including interest of Rs. 43.6 crore. 
CIT-I, Delhi took 12 months for summary assessment of Bharti Cellular Ltd. (AY: 2004-
05) and allowed refund of Rs. 22.3 crore including interest of Rs. 1.7 crore.  
 
Issue of vouchers: high value refunds 
4.10 What was of particular significance in high value refunds was the delay in issue 
of refund vouchers even after the determination of refund due to the tax payer in the 
summary assessment.  The causes for delays were: 
• Refunds determined at processing stage but issued after completion of scrutiny 
assessment thus deviating from departmental instruction; 
• Refunds determined but final refund vouchers not prepared within the 
prescribed time limit; 
• Refunds determined but not issued; 
• Refunds not dispatched within the prescribed time limit. 
                                                 
40  In Bihar, Delhi, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal;  
Chart 4 .4 : Issue of refunds (Senior citizens)  Chart 4.5 : Payment of refunds (Senior ci tizens)  

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
25 
Delay in High Value Refunds 
2
6
28 
56
0
5
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
0 to 12 12 to 18 18 to 24 24 to 36 more 
than 36 
Delay (in months) 
No. of cases 
4.10.1   CBDT’s instructions 41  clearly lay down that refunds should be issued on the 
basis of annual return of income or loss 
immediately, without waiting for the 
scrutiny assessment.  We found that 
these instructions were not being 
adhered to which resulted in delays.  In 
47 cases involving refunds of Rs. 325.7 
crore 42 , refunds were determined at the 
processing stage but issued only after 
completion of scrutiny assessment.  The 
delays 43  were substantial, averaging to 
28 months leading to avoidable 
payment of interest.   
Charge: CIT-II Delhi, AY: 2005-06 
The return of Maruti Insurance Brokers Ltd. was processed under summary assessment 
in November 2006 determining a refund of Rs. 4.4 crore which was not issued to the 
assessee.  Scrutiny assessment was completed in November 2007 and the refund of 
Rs. 2.6 crore was paid and Rs. 1.8 crore was adjusted against pending demand in 
January 2008.  Thus the refund was issued 22 months after processing. 
4.10.2  There were 49  cases involving refund 44  of Rs. 772.7 crore, where the refunds 
were determined but the final refund vouchers were not prepared within the 
prescribed time limit 45  of 30 days.  We noticed delays of more than one year (i.e. more 
than 30 days after the determination of refund) in 11 cases and more than three years 
in nine cases.   
Charge: CIT-I Kolkata, West Bengal, AYs: 1999-2000 & 2000-01 
The assessment of Sri Bajrang Jute Mills Ltd. for the two assessment years was 
processed in March 2001 and January 2002 determining a refund of Rs. 82.6 lakh and 
Rs. 29 lakh respectively which were not issue d to the assessee.  The assessee filed 
petitions repeatedly but refund of Rs. 99.7 lakh was issued in June 2008 after adjusting 
the pending demands of the earlier assessment years resulting in a delay of 86 months 
(for A. Y. 1999-2000) and 76 months (for A. Y. 2000-01).  This also led to an avoidable 
interest loss of Rs. 39.5 lakh.  The Department replied (August 2009) that the delays 
were due to change of incumbent in July 2007.  The reply ignores the 5-6 years delay 
prior to the change in incumbency. 
                                                
 
41  Board’s circular no. 549 dated 31.10.1989  
42  in Assam, Delhi, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Rajasthan charges  
43  delay has been worked out from the end of the relevant assessment year. 
44  in Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal charges. 
45  Board issued instruction no. 7 in August 2002 to the effect that the refunds determined in which administrative approval is necessary 
before issue of refund, should be issued within 30 days from the date of determination of refunds. 
Chart 4 .6: Timeliness - High Value Refunds  

                Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
 
 26   
Charge: ACIT circle-1, CIT Jammu, AYs: 1994-95 and 1995-96 
Green Field Commercial Pvt. Ltd. of Jammu & Kashmir waited for 9 years and 10 years 
respectively for the refund of Rs. 12.4 lakh on which it received Rs. 14.4 lakh as interest.  
The chronology is as follows: 
• Receipt of claim: November 1994 (AY: 1994-95), November 1995 (AY: 1995-96) 
• Matter referred for TDS verification: March 1995 (AY: 1994-95), after May 1996 
(AY: 1995-96) 
• Verification of TDS claims: August 2004 
• Matter referred for administrative approval of Addl. CIT: January 2005 
• Approval of Addl. CIT: March 2006 
4.10.3   We found 30 cases 46  involving refund of Rs. 47.1 crore where the refunds were 
determined during the period April 2005 to December 2008 but were yet to be issued 
till the date of audit (March 2009).   
Charge: CIT-I Pune, Maharashtra, AYs: 2001-02 to 2004-05 
Refund totaling Rs. 33 crore of Bank of Maharashtra for four years - AY 2001-02 to 
2004-05, was determined in one go in March 2008.  The refund, already delayed in 
determination, had not been issued till March 2009. 
Charge: CIT Raipur, Chattisgarh, AYs: 2003-04 & 2004-05 
Refund totalling Rs. 92.6 lakh of Board of Trustee Hindustan Steel Ltd. was determined 
in February 2005 and April 2005 but was not issued to the assessee. 
Charge: CIT-I Jalandhar, Punjab, AY: 2005-06 
Refund of Rs. 12.3 lakh of Naranjan Rice Exports Pvt. Ltd. was determined in March 
2006.  Out of which, Rs. 4.3 lakh was adjusted against previous demand (AY: 2003-04) 
and balance of Rs. 8 lakh was not issued to the assessee. 
4.10.4   Refund vouchers, regardless of the amount involved, are required 47  to be 
dispatched within 15 days of the assessment  order resulting in refund.  However, these 
instructions are not being complied with.  In five circles/wards of Rajasthan, we found 
36 refund vouchers amounting to Rs. 2.1 crore which were dispatched after 47 to 285 
days of the assessment order. 
                                                
 
46  in Assam, Chhattisgarh,  Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. 
47  Refunds upto Rs 10,000 are sent directly to the assessee by registered post.  Higher amounts are paid through the banks through 
Electronic Clearing System (ECS) or through cheques.  Board’s instruction no. 1946 and 1952 dated 18 November 1997 and 14 August 
1998 set the time limits for dispatch. 

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
27 
Refund Banker Pilot Scheme 
Delhi Mumbai Bangalore Chennai Kolkata Patna 
N o. of refund cases 
Received 
Successfully 
sent 
Unpaid or 
returned back 
4.10.5    We found delays ranging from 52 days to almost 10 months in according 
administrative approval 48  at various stages in 11 cases 49  involving refund of Rs. 224.9 
crore leading to payment of avoidable interest of Rs. 10.7 crore.  
 
Charge: CIT Ranchi, Jharkhand, AY: 2005-06 
Administrative approval in the case of Central Coalfield Ltd. from CIT, Ranchi was given 
(February 2007) 10 months after it was sought.  Not only did it delay the refund, but 
the Department also had to pay Rs. 9.6 crore as interest due to this delay.   
 
III Refund banker scheme 
4.11 Government introduced the Refund 
Banker Scheme (January 2007) which 
became operational for taxpayers 
assessed in Delhi and Patna in the first 
phase.  It was later (September 2007) 
extended to four other cities - Bangalore, 
Chennai, Mumbai and Kolkata (except for 
company and exemption refunds).  Under 
this scheme, the data on income tax 
refunds determined are picked up 
electronically by the authorized banks and 
remitted to the bank account of the 
taxpayers through ECS 50  or Banker’s 
cheque sent to the taxpayers to the 
address indicated in the return.   
4.11.1   The advantages of the scheme included faster turnaround time and facility for 
online tracking of refund status with reasons for return, if any.  It also eliminated the 
interface between the taxpayer and the AO in this regard. 
4.11.2 The departmental reports show a success rate of 85 51  per cent  in transmission of 
refunds.  Chart 4.8 illustrates the results.  However, the scheme has had its glitches with 
software problems (Appendix II).  Bogus refunds in four cases were also detected. 
 
                                                
 
48  Refer paragraph 3.31  
49  Goa, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan  
50  Salaried tax payers may get the refund online to their bank accounts for amounts upto Rs. 25,000 through ECS compulsorily.  Only in 
cases where the assessee has clearly opted against ECS, the refund shall be issued on paper stationery.  For ECS, the tax payer has to 
submit the necessary details of his bank account along with the MICR code of his bank in his return form along with the mandate for 
online transfer of refund. 
51  The balance 15% refunds were either not paid or returned due to various reasons such as incorrect bank account number; incorrect 
MICR code; account closed; incorrect account description; expired cheques; house locked; party shifted; no such address; no such person; 
stop payment and others. 
    Chart 4 .7:  Refund Banker Scheme - Performance results  

                Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
 
 28   
Time Analysis- Pre and Post Refund Banker 
Scenario 
24 
41 
84 
11 
21 23 
Delhi Kolkata Patna 
No. of days 
Payment of 
refund Pre- 
RBPS 
Payment of 
refund Post- 
RBPS 
4.11.3 Our sample 52  check of low 
value refunds showed that in Delhi, 
Kolkata and Patna the introduction 
of the refund banker scheme has 
substantially reduced the average 
time taken in the payment of refunds 
after their issue.  In Delhi the average 
time taken was decreased by 73 per 
cent , in Kolkata by 49 per cent  and in 
Patna by 54 per cent .  
 
 
4.12 Recommendations 
 
 The monthly monitoring should capture the delays in the stage of processing, which 
our analysis shows, was the biggest bottleneck.  The monitoring process should also 
capture the reasons for pendency in order to flag the deviations from the procedure 
by AOs.   
 
The Ministry stated (March 2010) during the exit conference that shortage of 
manpower is leading to delays from receipt of returns to their processing.  
However, this situation will improve with the availability of larger manpower as 
also the extension of the CPC. 
 
 Ministry may consider setting up a mechanism to filter refund claims of senior 
citizens in CPC for priority processing.  The monitoring process should also capture 
pendency in claims of senior citizens separately in order to alleviate inconvenience 
caused to them .  
 
The Ministry stated (March 2010) during the exit conference that the 
Department had resource limitations.  This aspect too will be factored in the CPC. 
 
 There is a need to sensitize the departmental staff to perceive themselves as service 
providers working towards customer satisfaction.  This may be integrated into the 
training programmes and seminars/workshops organized in the Department.   
 
The Ministry stated (March 2010) during the exit conference that the  
Department was aware and gearing up towards being customer friendly.  It had 
introduced Sevottam scheme in three cities which would be extended to four 
more for grievance redressal. 
 
                                                
 
52   The sample consisted of 719 successfully paid low value refunds relating to Delhi, Patna and Kolkata charges out of which 400 cases 
were relating to pre-refund banker scenario and 319 to the post-refund banker scenario.   
Chart 4 .8 : Payment of low value refunds -Pre and Post RBPS  

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
29 
 Efforts may be made for strengthening the Refund Banker Scheme by addressing 
the software problems.  
The Ministry stated (March 2010) during the exit conference that many software 
related system issues had already been taken care of. 
 
 Feasibility of extending the Refund Banker Scheme to the remaining categories of 
assessees may be explored.    
The Ministry accepted the recommendation.  

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
31 
        Accuracy of advice 
 
Refunds have been adjusted without proper determination of outstanding demands of 
the assessees.  Inaccuracy in refund determination has led to undercharge of tax of 
Rs. 135.8 crore.   
5.1 We found 21 cases 53  where refunds of Rs. 33.8 crore granted at summary stage  
were not considered in scrutiny assessments/subsequent revisions etc. made later 
leading to excess refunds.  In some cases interest levied on the amount adjusted under 
Section 220(2) was less than due or was not levied 54 .  Arrears in demands were either 
set-off against refunds without intimating the assessees 55  or were not considered 
during determination of refund claim 56  .  In one case the refund was set off without 
ascertaining the correct demand thereby leading to avoidable loss of interest.  This not 
only violated the provisions of the Act and the principles of natural justice, but in some 
cases, led to erroneous set-offs against demands of other assessees.  
Refunds not adjusted 
Charge: CIT-I Chennai, Tamil Nadu, AY: 2006-07 
Refund of Rs. 10.7 crore granted to the Tamil Nadu Urban Finance and Infrastructure 
Development Corporation Ltd. in March 2008 during summary assessment was not 
considered while computing tax under scrutiny assessment in November 2008.   
 
Charge: CIT-II Mumbai, Maharashtra, AY: 2005-06 
Tax demand of Rs. 425.5 crore was raised in December 2007 in scrutiny assessment of 
Bank of India, without adjusting  refund of Rs. 3.9 crore issued in March 2007, leading 
to short demand of Rs. 4.1 crore including interest of Rs. 19.6 lakh.   
 
                                                
 
53  in Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu  and West Bengal  charges  
54  Section 220(2) provides that if the tax is not deposited within the prescribed period against a demand, the assessee is liable for 
payment of interest.  We found 20 cases in Bihar, Jharkhand, Haryana, Karnataka, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra, where 
interest amounting to Rs. 6.9 crore was not levied or levied short of due. 
55  In 93 cases of refund of Rs. 608.1 crore in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chattisgarh, Delhi, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Orissa and West Bengal charges  
56  In one case in Orissa of Rs. 13.1 crore  
CHAPTER 5  

                Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
 
 32   
Charge: CIT-III Chennai, Tamil Nadu, A.Y.: 1998-99 
The assessment of Shriram Financial Services Holdings (P) Ltd. was revised in 
December 2007 to determine income of Rs. 2 crore.  We found that Rs. 2.8 crore 
collected from the assessee by way of adjustment of past refunds was not considered 
during revision in December 2007, leading to excess demand of tax of Rs. 3.9 crore 
including interest. 
Interest on refunds set-off against arrear demands  
Charge: CIT-II Mumbai, Maharashtra, A.Y. : 2003-04 
A demand of Rs. 95.1 crore against Larsen & Toubro Ltd. raised in scrutiny assessment 
(January 2006) was revised (December 2008) to raise an additional demand of Rs. 44.5 
crore.  The demand of Rs. 95.1 crore, which was not deposited by the assessee, was 
adjusted against refund for AY 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07 on various dates.  We 
found that the amount adjusted was less than what was due by Rs. 4.9 crore on account 
of short levy of interest 57 .  
Arrears in demands not adjusted 
Charge: CIT Sambalpur, Orissa, A.Y.: 2006-07 
In the assessment of Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd., a demand of Rs. 13.1 crore was raised in 
March 2008.  We found that refund of Rs. 62.1 crore relating to AY 1999-2000 to 2001-
02 was made 58  in April 2008 without adjusting the outstanding arrear demand of 
Rs. 13.1 crore.   
Set-off of refunds without ascertaining the correct demand 
Charge: CIT-II Kolkata, West Bengal, A.Y.: 2003-04 
West Bengal Infrastructure Development Finance Corporation Ltd. deposited tax (April 
2006) of Rs. 128.1 crore following a demand raised in scrutiny assessment.  Yet, the 
demand was adjusted (May 2006) against a refund of Rs. 20.8 crore pertaining to the 
AY 2005-06.  Due to this error, the amount had to be refunded later (February 2008) 
with an interest of 2.2 crore under section 244A.   
 
 
 
                                                
 
57  interest was levied at Rs. 7.48 crore for the period from March 2006 to December 2007 instead of Rs. 12.41 crore for the period from 
February 2006 to January 2008. 
58  while giving effect to appellate order under section 251/254  

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
33 
Admissibility of interest on refunds 
5.2 Section 244A provides that where a refund is due to an assessee, he will receive 
interest at the rate of half a per cent per month for every month till the grant of refund. 
The conditions that govern the payment of interest are: 
 No interest is payable if the amount of refund is less than ten per cent  of the tax 
determined in assessment. 
 No interest is payable for the period of delay in proceedings that is attributable 
to the assessee; the decision with regard to the period will be at the discretion of 
the Chief Commissioner whose decision thereon shall be final. 
 Assessee is liable to pay interest on any amount refunded in excess of due. 
 Interest received by the assessee on refunds is an income, taxable under the 
head ‘Income from other sources’.  
5.3 Our findings on interest payments and excess/short payment of refunds are 
tabulated below.  Details are at Appendix III. 
Rs. in crore 
Sl. no.  Issue: Interest/Refunds  No. of 
cases  
Amount  
(i)  Charged on excess refunds  57  11.6  
(ii)  Paid although the amount refunded was less than 10% of 
assessed tax  
10  3.4  
(iii)  Allowed for periods of delay attributable to the assessee  18  3.0  
(iv)  Was wrongly computed leading to excess levy  56  17.1  
(v)  Was wrongly computed leading to short levy  32  25.0  
(vi)  Income not offered to tax  06  4.8  
Few cases are illustrated below: 
Charge: CIT-I Delhi, AY: 2004-05 
Airports Authority of India Ltd. was allowed a refund of Rs. 34.0 crore in summary 
assessment in April 2005.  In scrutiny assessment in May 2006, a demand of Rs. 133.0 
crore including interest of Rs. 4.4 crore levied under section 234D was raised.  We 
found that interest was charged in excess by Rs. 2.0 crore.   
Charge: CIT Sambalpur, Orissa, AY: 2005-06 
In the scrutiny assessment of Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd., interest of Rs. 1.1 crore was paid 
on the refund of Rs. 15.6 crore although the refund amount was less than 10 per cent  of 

                Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
 
 34   
the tax determined (Rs. 632.6 crore).  This was in contravention of provisions of the 
Act. 
Charge: CIT-II Ludhiana, Punjab, A. Y. 2006-07 
The summary assessment of Bahadur Chand Investment Private Ltd. was processed in 
December 2007 at an income of Rs. 2.8 crore, by which refund of Rs. 15.4 lakh was 
granted.  Out of the refund, Rs. 6.1 lakh was adjusted against the tax demand of earlier 
years and balance refund of Rs. 9.3 lakh was issued in March 2008.  We found that the 
returned income of Rs. 2.8 crore included special rate income of Rs. 2.1 crore but the 
entire income was taxed at special rate of 10 per cent .  Thus, incorrect application of 
rate of tax resulted in excess refund of Rs. 15.4 lakh. 
Charge: CIT-I Kolkata, West Bengal, AY: 2003-04 
In the case of Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd., a refund of Rs. 14.2 crore 
including interest of Rs. 77.9 lakh was processed in July 2004.  The assessment 
completed in February 2006, was revised in November 2007 allowing further refund of 
Rs. 4.3 crore including interest of Rs. 17.8 lakh.  We found that while computing refund 
in November 2007, the interest payable on Rs. 14.2 crore for the period from April 
2003 to July 2004 (date of issue of first refund) was not considered.  The mistake 
resulted in short payment of refund of Rs. 1.26 crore. 
 
Charge: CIT-II Thane, Maharashtra, AY: 2008-09 
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust received interest of Rs. 13.9 crore on refunds for AY 2006-
07 and 2007-08, which was not offered to tax in AY 2008-09, resulting in short levy of 
tax of Rs. 4.7 crore.  Department issued notice (April 2009) to the assessee for selection 
for scrutiny after it was pointed out by audit to examine the matter during the course of 
the regular assessment.  
 
 
5.4 Recommendations 
 The different mechanisms and controls offered by the ITD applications towards 
reconciliation of the demands should be properly utilised during processing of the 
refunds.   
The Ministry stated (March 2010) during the exit conference that the Department 
was working towards it. 
 

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
35 
 Responsibility of the staff members may be clearly fixed 59 , in case of material 
arithmetical error.  This will help in reducing such avoidable errors.   
The Ministry stated (March 2010) during the exit conference that full scale 
automation would reduce the possibility of occurrence of such errors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi             (REBECCA MATHAI)  
Dated                               Principal Director (Direct Taxes) 
                   
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                    (VINOD RAI)  
Dated             Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
                                                
 
59  As emphasized in paragraph 7.4 of Board’s Instruction no. 9 of 2006  

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
37 
 Appendix - I 
 (Reference: Paragraph 1.10) 
Criteria for selection of units and of cases 
High value refund cases 
 
 
 
Selection of refund cases where station is networked under AST 
Summary 10 cases 62  
Selection of refund cases other than summary stage Percentage 
Company Circles/wards 
Refund cases exceeding Rs. 1.00 crore 100 % 
Refund cases between Rs. 50.00 lakh and upto Rs. 1.00 crore. 50 % 
Refund cases between Rs. 10.00 lakh and upto Rs. 50.00 lakh 10 % 
Other than Company Circles/ward 
Refund cases exceeding Rs. 25.00 lakh 100 % 
Refund cases between Rs. 10.00 lakh and upto Rs. 25.00 lakh 50 % 
Refund cases between Rs. 5.00 lakh and upto Rs. 10.00 lakh 10 % 
 
Selection of refund cases where station is not networked under AST 
Selection of refund cases Percentage 
Company Circles/wards 
Refund cases exceeding Rs. 50.00 lakh 100 % 
Refund cases between Rs. 10.00 lakh and upto Rs. 50.00 lakh 50 % 
Refund cases between Rs. 5.00 lakh and upto Rs. 10.00 lakh 10 % 
Other than Company Circles/wards 
Refund cases exceeding Rs. 25.00 lakh 100 % 
Refund cases between Rs. 10.00 lakh and upto Rs. 25.00 lakh 50 % 
Refund cases between Rs. 5.00 lakh and upto Rs. 10.00 lakh 10 % 
 
Low value refund cases 
 
Office located at Total no. of individual 
cases which involves 
refund 63  
Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai, Bangalore and Hyderabad 700 
Other offices 500 
                                                 
60  Includes circles which deal with both company and non-company cases  
61  Includes wards which deal with both company and non-company cases  
62  per assessing officer  
63  These cases could be either processed or not processed but involved refund between Rs. 500 and Rs. 5 lakh  
Selection of units Percentage 
Company Circles 60  50 % 
Company wards 61  20 % 
Other than Company Circles (excl. central circle)/wards 10 % 
  

                Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
 
 38   
Appendix-II  
 [Reference: Paragraph 4.11.2] 
Refund Banker Scheme – Technical Constraints  
 Refunds are shown pending for printing inspite of taking the requisite action for correction of the 
ITD application error.  The same is either not rectified immediately or was done after a gap of few 
days.  Further processing of refunds meanwhile, gets locked in the software.  As a result this holds up 
the processing in all cases. 
 In many cases the error was reported wrongly even though there was no mistake in data entry of 
returns. 
 In many cases the exact details of the refunds which were held up is not shown on the screen due to 
which the assessing officers are unable to take requisite action in the cases pending for correction.   
 More often the above situation would not require the AO to conduct enquiries by writing to assesses 
to find out the correct address, bank accounts etc.  This would set the AO on the back foot resulting in 
loss of time addressing the matter.   
 The processing hangs with the computer showing the message “you cannot proceed with processing 
as (numbers) PAN are pending for printing”.  Even after giving the necessary print command in 
respect of the PAN pending for printing, the problem persists.  Often, the query on ‘PAN pending for 
processing/printing” gives the response ‘No PAN pending for processing/printing”.  As a result, it is 
not possible to identify the returns which have been processed and are pending for printing.  An 
elaborate exercise of checking all the entries, one by one, has to be carried out to identify such 
returns. 
 Refunds are returned by the Refund Bankers for various reasons such as incorrect PAN, incorrect 
address, party shifted etc.  Many times both the check boxes, i.e. one meant for making changes as 
well as that meant for mentioning the MICR code and the bank account number are found blocked as 
a result of which it is not possible to make the necessary changes in the address etc. 
 Those cases, where the check-box meant for making changes is open, the changes made, or the 
command ‘no change is required’ whichever is applicable can not be saved. 
 In many cases, refunds issued through ECS under the Refund Banker Schemes are still pending with 
SBI for several months despite the details regarding MICR code and Account No. etc. having been 
correctly entered. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                                                       Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
  
39 
Appendix III  
   (Reference: Paragraph 5.3) 
Details of interest payments and excess/short payments of refunds 
(Rs. in lakh) 
Sl. 
no. 
State Charged on 
excess refunds 
Paid although 
the amount 
refunded was 
less than 10% of 
assessed tax 
Allowed for 
periods of delay 
attributable to 
the assessee 
Was wrongly 
computed 
leading to excess 
levy 
Was wrongly 
computed 
leading to short 
levy 
Income not 
offered to tax 
No. 
of 
cases 
Amount No. 
of 
cases 
Amount No. 
of 
cases 
Amount No. 
of 
cases 
Amount No. 
of 
cases 
Amount No. 
of 
cases 
Amount  
1.  Andhra Pradesh 1  14.46  1 123.64    1 45.76      
2.  Assam 4  2.86   1 0.54  1 0.23     
3.  Bihar 1  9.87      1 3.09  5 32.25    
4.  Chattisgarh   2 3.48  1 2.08        
5.  Chandigarh UT         1 0.49    
6.  Delhi 8  392.34      12  147.63 1 134.48    
7.  Goa 4  2.00      3 1.96      
8.  Gujarat 1  7.55      1 6.87      
9.  Haryana       3 30.43      
10.  Himachal Pradesh 15  9.57    3 4.2  2 11.56    1 2.20  
11.  Jammu & Kashmir 10  4.53      2 5.95      
12.  Jharkhand           3 2.33  
13.  Karnataka 4  128.4  2 88.96  2 7.87        
14.  Kerala       2 20.4      
15.  Madhya Pradesh   1 0.96    2 1.33  5 226.26    
16.  Maharashtra 5  531.76  1 12.3  8 210.96  2 6.46    1 473.31  
17.  Orissa 1  6.2  1 106.38    2 28.93  7 47.08    
18.  Punjab 1  1.6  1 2.16    5 27.27      
19.  Rajasthan   1 0.07    2 1.24  1 625.64    
20.  Tamil Nadu 1  20.73    3 72.31  9 1269.13    1 5.97  
21.  West Bengal 1  27.51      6 105.33  12  1433.25    
22.  Total 57  1159.38  10  337.95  18  297.96  56 1713.57 32 2499.45  6 483.81  
 
 

                Report No. 7 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit) 
 
 40   
Glossary of terms 
 “Assessing Officer” (AO)  means the Income-Tax Officer or Assistant Commissioner of Income-Tax or 
Deputy Commissioner of Income-Tax or Joint Commissioner of Income-Tax or Additional Commissioner 
of Income-Tax who is authorized by the Board to exercise or perform all or any of the powers and 
functions conferred on, or assigned to an AO under the Income tax Act, 1961. 
 “Assessee Information Systems” (AIS) : AIS, a module of ITD applications consists of the database of 
Permanent Account Numbers (PAN) allocated to the assessee. 
 “Assessment Information System” (AST) : AST module is the core process of ITD applications 
conceptualized as an on-line, menu driven software capable of carrying out all assessment and related 
functions. 
 “Business Process Re-engineering” (BPR) : The BPR project of ITD is the first such project initiated 
(May 2007) by Government of India where a comprehensive study of ITD was undertaken in two phases 
– ‘As is’ study phase and ‘To be’ model stage covering 15 locations (including four metros).  Based on the 
mapping of the existing processes in ITD; the bottlenecks and problem areas identified through ‘Gap 
Analysis’ and the best global practices in the area of  tax administration; ‘To be’ models and 
recommendations were suggested for re-designing the processes.  One of the main recommendations 
being creation of ‘Bulk Operation Division’ (BOD) for handling routine and repetitive activities and 
‘Compliance Operation Division’ (COD) for carrying out specialized activities for a smaller number of 
taxpayers.  
 “Central Processing Centre” (CPC) : The Income Tax Department (ITD) has set up CPC at Bengaluru for 
processing of all e-filed returns in the country and paper returns (filed in Karnataka and Goa), rectifying 
the mistakes which are apparent from processing of returns under section 154, to call for information 
under section 133, to declare return of income filed by the assessee as invalid return for non-compliance 
of procedure or otherwise, to declare return of income filed by the assesses as defective return under 
sub-section (9) of section 139, to set-off or adjustment of refunds against outstanding tax liability of the 
assessee under section 245 and to issue notice of demand under section 156 of the Act.   
 “Individual Running Ledger Account System” (IRLA) : IRLA maintains ledger accounts of individual 
taxpayers which is regularly updated by the Tax Accounting System (TAS) and AST applications. 
 “Ombudsman” : The Income Tax Ombudsman offices located at New Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, 
Bangalore, Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Pune, Kanpur, Chandigarh, Bhopal and Kochi were set up with the 
objective of enabling the resolution of complaints relating to public grievances against the ITD and to 
facilitate the satisfaction or settlement of such complaints. 
 “Online Tax Accounting System” (OLTAS) : OLTAS is ITD’s initiative to receive information and 
maintain records of payment of taxes through banks via online uploading of challan details.  With the 
help of CIN (Challan Identification Number), every payment will be uniquely identified enabling online 
transmission of details of tax payments by banks to the ITD.  The taxpayers can enquire about the status 
of their challans through TIN (Tax Information Network), established by NSDL (National Securities 
Depository Ltd.). 
 “Permanent Account Number” (PAN) : PAN is a ten-digit alphanumeric number issued in form of 
laminated card, by the ITD.  It is also a national identification number of the taxpayer which has to be 
mandatorily quoted on the return of income and in all the correspondence with the Department. 
 “Tax Information Network” (TIN) : TIN, a repository of nationwide Tax related information, has been 
established by National Securities Depository Limited (NSDL) on behalf of ITD. 
 “Zonal Accounts Officer” (ZAO):  The 24 ZAOs, under the jurisdiction of Principal Chief Controller of 
Accounts (Pr.CCA) are responsible for accounting of the Expenditure and Revenue (Direct Taxes) on 
monthly basis at the field level.  In the Post OLTAS scenario the ZAOs have become sole repository of 
Single Copy Challan received in their office from Nodal Branches of authorized Banks. 
 
 