 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
On 
 
Information Technology Audit of 
 Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
 
for the year ended March 2015 
 
 
 
Laid in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on_________ 
 
 
 
Union Government (Railways) 
Report  No.47 of 2015 
(Information Technology Audit) 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 
 Paragraph Pages 
Glossary  i – vii 
Executive Summary and Major Findings  viii – x 
Recommendations  x-xi 
  Chapter 1 – Introduction 
CMS Objectives 1.1 1-2 
System Architecture 1.2 2 
Organization 1.3 3 
Audit Objectives 1.4 3-4 
Sample Size and Audit Scope 1.5 4 
Audit Methodology 1.6 4-5 
Acknowledgement 1.7 5 
Chapter 2 – Status of Achievement of Objectives of CMS 
Discrepancy in Sancti oned Strength/Men-in-
position as shown in CMS vis-a-vis Manual 
Records 
2.1.1 6 
Incorrect/Irregular Inventory of Crew 2.1.2 7 
Incomplete Particulars of Crew 2.1.3 8 
Incorrect/Invalid Data Pertaining to Pay 
Particulars 
2.1.4 8-9 
Incomplete/Incorrect Data Relating to Inactive 
Profile of Crew 
2.1.5 9 
Incorrect/Incomplete Family Profile Data 2.1.6 10 
Incorrect/Incomplete/Irregular Loco Holding 
Details 
2.1.7 10-11 
Incorrect/Incomplete Data  of Stations  and 
Routes 
2.1.8 11 
Booking of Crew using Fetch Crew All option 
Rather than Fetch Crew as per Rule option 
2.1.9 11-12 
Irregular Crew Calling Time 2.1.10 12-13 
Irregular Crew Call Received/Acknowledged 
Time 
2.1.11 13 
Irregular ‘sign on time’ of Crew 2.1.12 13-14 
Delay in Supervisory A pproval of Crew Sign on 
Time 
2.1.13 14 
Irregular Supervisory Approval Time of Crew 
Sign off 
2.1.14 14-15 
Irregular Crew Sign on vis-a-vis Crew Sign off 
Time 
2.1.15 15 
Booking Through Mobile Short Message 
Services (SMS) – Non-usage of SMS 
2.2.1 15-16 
Incorrect Generation of Mileage Reports 2.3.1 16-17 
Manual Maintenance of Records 2.3.2 17-18 
Failure in Monitoring Crew Road Learning 
Training 
2.4.1 18 
Failure to Provide Effective MIS Reports for 
Monitoring Crew Training 
2.4.2 18-19 

 
Discrepancies in loco details used for validating 
crew competency 
2.4.3 19 
Lack of provision for Safety tools Sign on/off 2.4.4 19 
Non-feeding of Caution Orders/Circulars 2.4.5 20 
Booking of Crew on Continuous Running Duties 
Beyond 10 hours 
2.4.6 20 
Grading of Crew by Loco Inspectors – 
Discrepancies Thereof 
2.4.7 20-21 
Counselling of Crew – Discrepancies Thereof 2.4.8 21-22 
Poor Usage of QUICK as a Tool for Upgrading 
Crew Knowledge 
2.4.9 22 
Poor Implementation of Breath Analyzer (BA) 
Units 
2.4.10 22-23 
Wrong Configuration of Allowances for Non-
running Duties/Training at 
Headquarters/Outstation 
2.5.1 23-24 
Inconsistencies in Conf iguration of Admissible 
Kilometrage for Outstation Duties in CMS 
2.5.2 24 
Incorrect Charging of Mileage Allowance 2.5.3 24-25 
Generation of Mileage Allowance – Non-
validation of/Delay in Sign on/off Time, Wrong 
Configuration of Allowances etc. 
2.5.4 25 
Same Crew Sign on/off Ti me from Same Lobby 
– Generation of Irregular Mileage Allowance 
2.5.4.1 25-26 
Crew Sign on/Sign off at the Same Time From 
Two Different Lobbies – Generation of Irregular 
Mileage Allowance 
2.5.4.2 26 
Wrong Configuration of Minimum Guarantee 
/Handicapped Section 
2.5.4.3 26-27 
Wrong Calculation of Ghat Allowance 2.5.4.4 27 
Computation/Payment of Excess 
ShuntingMileage Allowance Due to Late 
Signing off 
2.5.4.5 28-30 
 
Time Lag in Data-updation Leading to 
Inadmissible Computation/Payment of 
Officiating Mileage Allowance 
2.5.4.6 30 
Increase in Percentage of Non-programmed 
Utilisation of Crews to Their Programmed 
Utilisation over the Years 
2.5.5 30-31 
Comparison of Crew Movement Data vis-a-vis 
FOIS/CMS/COA Train Departure/Arrival Time 
2.5.6 31 
Chapter 3 – Review of Application Controls 
Multiple Traffic Advice(TAs) of Same Train – 
Non-validation of Crew Competency 
3.1 32-33 
Discrepancies in Traffic Advice Data/Incomplete 
Data 
3.2 33 
Multiple Acknowledgement of Call 3.3 33-34 
Non-capturing of Train Number 3.4 34 
Non-capturing of Traction Details 3.5 34 

 
Non-updation of Training, Leave and Security 
Records of Crew in CMS 
3.6 35 
Non-capturing of Correct Data for Cancellation 
of TA 
3.7 35 
Improper  Capturing of Reasons for Changes in 
Sign on/off Time of Crew 
3.8 36 
Review of ‘Lobby Utilization Reports’ Data 3.9 36-37 
Inconsistency in Output Reports 3.10 37-38 
Non-usage/Incomplete Usage of Abnormality 
Module 
3.11 38 
Non-usage of Link 3.12 39 
Chapter 4  - Review of IT Security 
Physical Access controls 4.1 40-41 
Logical Access control – Password Policy 4.2 41-42 
Poor User Profile Management 4.3 43-44 
Non-monitoring of Activ ities of Database 
Administrator(DBA)/Lack of Audit Trail 
4.4 44-45 
Non-installation/Updation of  Antivirus and 
Operating System Patches 
4.5 45 
Deficiencies in Business Continuity 
Plan/Disaster Recovery Plan (BCP/DRP) 
4.6 45-46 
Non/Irregular Maintenance of CMS data backup 4.7 47 
Chapter 5 – Review of Contracting Issues, IT Operations, Project 
Management/Monitoring
Incomplete Project Implementation 5.1 48-50 
Poor Planning for Implementation 5.2 50-51 
Non-implementation of Project Within Target 
Date 
5.3 51 
Lack of Trained Pers onnel to Operate the 
Terminals 
5.4 51-52 
Non-usage of CMS 5.5 52-53 
Manual Reporting of Various Type of 
Information by Different Lobbies to Control 
Office 
5.6 53 
Contracting Issues – Supply of Hardware/Thin 
Clients and Maintenance Thereof 
5.7 53 
Non-execution of Annual Maintenance Contract 
at CMS Locations 
5.7.1 53-54 
Non-replacement of Over-aged and Defective 
Hardware and Non-maintenance of Stock for 
Spares 
5.7.2 54 
IT Operations/CMS Operations 5.8 54 
Custodian of Lobbies Not Fixed 5.8.1 54-55 
Non-provision of Dust Free and Air Conditioned 
Environment 
5.8.2 55 
Chapter 6 – Review of Change Management and Outsourcing of 
Activities
Change Management – Lack of Formal Change 6.1 56 

 
Procedure  
Non-updation of CMS Documentation 6.2 56-57 
Lack of Dedicated Staff at Lobbies for CMS 
Operations 
6.3 57-58 
Chapter  7 – Conclusion and Recommendations 
Conclusion 7.1 59-60 
Recommendations 7.2 60-61 
Appendix /Annexure
CMS Server Architecture Appendix I 62 
Statement Showing Discrepancies in the Crew 
Bio-Data 
Appendix II 63 
Statement Showing Cases of Important  Details of 
Crew Not Being Captured 
Appendix III 64 
Statement Showing Incomplete/Incorrect Family 
Details 
Appendix IV 65 
Statement Showing Details of Locos having no 
Corresponding Zone Codes 
Appendix V 66 
Statement Showing Incomplete/Inconsistent data 
of Station, Routes, Distance etc. 
Appendix VI 67 
Statement Showing Details of 
Transactions/Discrepancies Where Crew Were 
Booked with Fetch All Option 
Appendix 
VII 
68 
Statement Showing Results of Analysis of Data of 
Call Made to Crew 
Appendix 
VIII 
69 
Statement Showing Results of Analysis of Data 
pertaining to Call Serve Time and 
Receive/Acknowledge Time 
Appendix IX 70 
Statement Showing Results of Analysis of Data 
Pertaining to Crew Sign on Time 
Appendix X 71 
Statement Showing Results of Analysis of Data 
pertaining  to Supervis ory Approval  of Crew 
Sign on Time 
Appendix XI 72 
Statement Showing Discrepancies in Supervisor 
Approval of Crew Sign  off Time 
Appendix 
XII 
73 
Statement Showing Irregularity in Crew Sign on 
vis-à-vis Sign off Time 
Appendix 
XIII 
74 
Statement Showing Status of Usage of SMS over 
Different Zones 
Appendix 
XIV 
75 
Statement Showing Cases Where LR Due Date 
was not computed Correctly 
Appendix 
XV 
76 
Statement  Showing Disc repancies in Training 
Reports/Data 
Appendix 
XVI 
77 
Statement Showing Discrepancies Noticed in 
Loco Details used in TA 
Appendix 
XVII 
78 

 
Statement Showing Discrepancies in the Crew 
Counselling Data  
Appendix 
XVIII 
79 
Statement Showing Status of Breath Analyzer 
Devices over Different Zones 
Appendix 
XIX 
80-81 
Statement Showing Details  of Discrepancies in 
the Configuration of Mileage Allowance 
Appendix 
XX 
82 
Statement Showing Details  of Discrepancies in 
Admissible Kilometrage 
Appendix 
XXI 
83 
Statement Showing Details of 
Discrepancies/Irregularities in Crew Sign on 
Time vis-a-vis Train Departure/Arrival Time 
Appendix 
XXII 
84 
Statement Showing Discre pancies in Particulars 
of Traffic Advice 
Appendix 
XXIII 
85 
Statement Showing Details of Cases Having 
Inconsistencies in CMS Reports 
Appendix 
XXIV 
86 
Statement Showing Deficiencies in Security 
Measures Noticed over Different Zones 
Appendix 
XXV 
87 
Statement Showing Deficiencies/Irregularities 
Noticed in the Management of Railway CMS 
Users at Different Levels 
Appendix 
XXVI 
88 
Statement Showing Details of Irregularities in the 
Management of CMS Users   
Appendix 
XXVII 
89 
Statement Showing Deficiencies in 
Infrastructure/Business Continuity Plan at 
Lobbies 
Appendix 
XXVIII 
90 
Statement Showing Cases of Delay in 
Commissioning of Lobbies over Different ZRs 
Appendix 
XXIX 
91 
Statement Showing Details of Non-usage of CMS 
over Different Zones 
Appendix 
XXX 
92 
Statement Showing Names of Railway Zones and 
Divisions Selected as Sample 
Annexure 1 93-95 
Statement Showing Sanctioned Strength and Men 
In Position as per CMS and Manual Records 
Annexure 2 96 
Statement Showing Results of Analysis of 
Profiles of Active Crew 
Annexure 3 97 
Statement Showing Number of Blank Records of 
Active Crew 
Annexure 4 98-99 
Statement Showing Details of Incorrect/Invalid 
Data for Different Fields 
Annexure 5 100 
Statement Showing Reason-wise Analysis 
ofInactive Status of Crew 
Annexure 6 101 
Statement Showing Number of Cases of Family 
Particulars 
Annexure 7 102 
Statement Showing Loco Holdings Position in 
CMS vis-a-vis Manual Records 
Annexure 8 103 
Statement Showing Details of Non-
availability/Incorrect Data of Zone/Divisional 
Codes/Stations in CMS and 
Differences in Distances recorded in Working 
Annexure 9 104-105 

 
Time Table, CMS and RBS 
Statement Showing Booking of Crew Using Fetch 
All Option Rather Than Fetch Crew as Per Rule 
Option 
Annexure 10 106 
Statement Showing Difference Between Train 
Ordering Time and  Crew Call Time 
Annexure 11 107 
Statement Showing Difference Between Call 
Time and Call Received/Acknowledged Time 
Annexure12 108 
Statement Showing Difference Between Crew 
Sign on Time & Train Ordering Time 
Annexure 13 109 
Statement Showing Difference Between Crew 
Sign on Time and Supervisory Sign on Approval 
Time 
Annexure 14 110 
Statement Showing Difference Between Crew 
Sign off Time and Supervisory Sign off Approval 
Time 
Annexure 15 111 
Statement Showing Difference Between Crew 
Sign on and Crew Sign off Time 
Annexure 16 112 
Statement Showing Position of SMS During 5th 
September 2014 to 5th December 2014 
Annexure 17 113 
Statement Showing Reason-wise Position for 
Non-generation of Mileage Report through CMS 
Annexure 18 114 
Statement Showing Review  of Route Learning 
Data,- Details of Cases where LR Due Date not 
Computed Correctly 
Annexure 19 115 
Statement Showing Position of Grading Done by 
Loco Inspector 
Annexure 20 116 
Statement Showing Counselling Details of Crew Annexure 21 117 
Statement Showing Status of Crew Who Have 
Taken Quiz 
Annexure 22 118 
Statement Showing Results of Data Analysis of 
Breath Analyzer Test 
Annexure 23 119 
Statement Showing Mileage Allowance Charged 
by CMS for Performing Non-running Duties at 
Headquarters 
Annexure 24 120 
Statement Showing Admissible  Kilometrage 
Configured in CMS by IR  Lobbies 
Annexure 25 121-122 
Statement Showing Different Mileage Allowance 
Charged for Loco Pilot and Guards 
Annexure 26 123 
Statement Showing Mileage Charged for Zero 
Duty Hours Transaction 
Annexure 27 124 
Statement Showing Handicapped Sections Annexure 28 125 
Statement Showing Year-wise Programme Hours 
and Non-Programme Hours of Crew 
Annexure 29 126-127 
Statement Showing Results  of Comparison of 
Crew Sign on/off Time with CMS/COA/FOIS 
Train Departure/Arrival Time 
Annexure 30 128 
Statement Showing Details of Multiple Traffic 
Advices Prepared for Crew Booking 
Annexure 31 129 

 
Statement Showing Multiple Call 
Acknowledgement by Crew 
Annexure 32 130 
Statement Showing Railway Zone Wise Missing 
Traction Details 
Annexure 33 131 
Statement showing Wrong/Incomplete Details of 
Period of Crew Utilization 
Annexure 34 132 
Statement Showing Details of Password Used by 
Crew 
Annexure 35 133 
Statement Showing Details of Password Used by 
CMS Operators 
Annexure 36 134 
Statement Showing Details of Password Used by 
Chief Loco Inspector/Senior Loco Inspector/Loco 
Inspector 
Annexure 37 135 
Statement Showing Railway wise CMS Users 
(ALP/TNC/Call Boy/Porter/Gang-man/RR 
Bearer/Private Operato r) having Supervisory 
Privileges. 
Annexure 38 136 
Statement Showing Cases Where Booking and 
Supervisory Operations Performed by Same 
Person 
Annexure 39 137 
 

PREFACE 
This Report of the Comptroller and A uditor General of India for the year 
ended March 2015 has been prepared for submission to the President of India 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
The Report contains the results of revi ew of Crew Management System in 
Indian Railways for the period 2014-15. 
The instances mentioned in the report are those which came to the notice 
during the course of the review; matters  related to the period prior to April 
2014 have also been included wherever necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conf ormity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
  

Report No. 47 of 2015   i 
 
Glossary 
Abbreviation Explanation 
3PH Three Phase Training 
ADL Andul 
AEME Assistant Executive Mechanical Engineer 
AK Akola Junction 
ALD Allahabad 
 ALK Allowance in Lieu of Kilometrage 
ALP Assistant Loco Pilot 
AM Additional Member 
AMC Annual Maintenance Contract 
AMG Alam Nagar 
ANGL Angul 
ANVR Anand Vihar 
APDJ Alipurduar Junction 
ARVL Arrival 
ASIG Automatic Signalling 
ASN Asansol 
ASR Amritsar 
AWB Augangabad 
AZ Azimganj 
BA Breath Analyser 
BA Test Breath Analysis Test 
BBS Bhubaneswar 
BCP Business Continuity Plan 
BDC Bandel 
BHC Bhadrak 
Bio-metric Biometric system is used to validate the identity of a 
crew at the time of his sign on/off by using his physical 
features like finger prints 
BJRI Bijuri Goods Shed 
BLC Bolda 
BMF Basmat 
BoR Breach of Rest 
BRJN Brajrajnagar 
BSB Varanasi 
BSP Bilaspur 
BTI Bhatinda 
BWN Barddhaman 
BZA Vijayawada 
C&IS Computerisation and Information System 
CAO/FOIS Chief Administrative Officer (Freight Operations 
Information System) 
CC Crew Controller 
CCC Chief  Crew Controller 
CCTV Closed Circuit Television 

Report No. 47 of 2015   ii 
 
Abbreviation Explanation 
CDC Computer Data Centre 
CDG Chandigarh 
CEE/ CELE Chief Electri cal Engineer/Chief Electric Loco Engineer 
CH Chandausi 
CKP Chakradharpur 
CL Casual Leave 
CLA Kurla 
CLI Chief Loco Inspector 
CME /CMPE Chief Mechanical Engineer/Chief Motive Power 
Engineer 
CMS Crew Management System 
CNB Kanpur Central 
CNBI Chandari 
COA Control office Application 
COIS Coaching Operations Information System 
COM Chief Operations Manager 
CR Central Railway 
CREW Crew refer to running sta ff involve in train operations 
and includes Loco Pilots, Guard, Shunter etc. 
CRIS Centre for Railway Information System 
CRSE/O&F Chief Rolling  Stock Engi neer (Operations and Freight) 
CSOD Crew Sign on Details 
CSTM Chatrapati Shivji Terminal 
CTC Cuttack 
CTCC Chief Traction Crew Controller 
CTLC Chief Traction Loco Controller 
CTR Combined Train Report 
CUG Closed User Group 
CWA Chhindwara Jn. 
CWI Chondi 
DAR  Discipline & Appeal Rules 
Day Day means a calendar day beginning at midnight of a 
day/date and ending at midnight of the following 
day/date. 
DBA Database Administrator 
DBMS Database Management System 
DCMN Divisional Console Manager 
DRMN Divisional Report Manager 
DDN Dehradun 
DEE Divisional Electrical Engineer 
DEE Lobby Delhi Sarai Rohilla Lobby 
DGG Dongargarh 
DHN Dhanbad Junction 
DLI Delhi 
DME Divisional Mechanical Engineer 
DMU Diesel Multiple Unit 

Report No. 47 of 2015   iii 
 
Abbreviation Explanation 
DNE Dhamni halt 
DOA Date of Appointment 
DOB Date of Birth 
DOM Divisional Operations Manager 
DPRT Departure 
DRP Disaster Recovery Plan 
DRZ Dallirajhara 
DSL Diesel 
ECoR East Coast Railway 
ECR East Central Railway 
Elec Electrical 
EMU Electric Multiple Unit 
ER Eastern Railway 
FBD Farrukhabad 
FD Faizabad 
FIFO  First In First Out 
FOIS Freight Operations Information System 
FZR Ferozepur 
GADH Goaldih 
GHY Guwahati 
GMO Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Junction, Gomoh 
GPR Ghorpuri 
GZB Ghaziabad 
HDW Haldwani 
 HER Hours of Employment Regulation 
HLDD Haldi Road 
HNL Hingoli (Deccan) 
HOER Hours of Employment and Period of Rest Rules 2005 
HW Haridwar 
HWH Howrah 
HYB Hyderabad 
ICMS Integrated Coaching Management System 
ID Identification 
IGP Igatpuri 
IR Indian Railways 
IT Information Technology 
JAT Jammu 
JBP Jabalpur Junction 
JHL Jhakal 
JKPR Jakhapura Junction 
JMP Jamalpur 
JREA Jhareda 
JUK Jaulka 
JUNX Junona Halt 
JUC Jalandhar City 
KCG Kacheguda 

Report No. 47 of 2015   iv 
 
Abbreviation Explanation 
KDJR Kendujhar Garh 
KGM Kathgodam 
KGP Kharagpur 
KGS Khong Sara 
Kiosk Kiosk is a computer which is used by a crew to sign in 
and sign off (logout) of CMS.   It displays 
circulars/caution orders for crew, allow crew to change 
his password and enables a crew to record abnormality 
noticed by him during enroute journey. 
KIR Katihar Jn. 
KLK Kalka 
KKDE Kurukshetra 
KKG Kekatumar 
KNRG Kanhargaon Naka 
KOAA Kolkata 
KOP Kolhapur 
KSIK Kulapahari Siding Pakur 
KTE Katni Junction 
KUR Khurda Road Jn. 
KWAE Katwa 
KXX Kata Road 
KYN Kalyan 
LAP Leave on Average  Pay 
LDH Ludhiana 
LI Loco Inspector 
LJN Lucknow Junction (North Eastern Railway) 
LKO Lucknow (Northern Railway) 
LKU Lalkaun 
LMG Lumding 
LNL Lonavala 
Lobby Lobby is a place where crew members/guards are 
booked for different types of duties, mark their 
attendance.  A lobby keeps records pertaining to crew 
rest, counselling, training, mileage etc.Loco Lobby 
pertains to Loco Crew members and Traffic Lobby 
pertains to Guards. 
Loco Running 
Staff 
Running Staff: Pilot, Asstt. Pilot, Guard and Shunter 
who are responsible for/associated with duties pertaining 
to train running/movement. 
Loco/Traffic Crew Assistant Loco Pilot, Loco Pilot Goods/Passenger, Loco 
Pilot Shunter, Guard etc. responsible for running train. 
LP Loco Pilot 
LPG Loco Pilot Goods 
LPS Loco Pilot Shunter 
LR Road Learning 
MAS Chennai 

Report No. 47 of 2015   v 
 
Abbreviation Explanation 
MB Moradabad 
MCDO Monthly Confidential Demi-Official 
MEMU Mainline Electric Multiple Unit 
MG Metre Gauge 
MGK Minimum Guarantee Kilometrage 
MGS Mugalsarai 
MIB Motibagh 
MIS Management Information System 
MLDT Maldah Town 
MLY Maula Ali 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MRJ Miraj 
MRV Marsul 
MSB Chennai Beach Junction 
MTC Meerut Cantt. 
MTMI Motimari  
NBQ New Bongaigaon  Junction 
NCB New Coochbehar 
NCR North Central Railway 
NDLS New Delhi 
NER North Eastern Railway 
NFR North East Frontier Railway 
NG Narrow Gauge 
NGC New Guwahati Goods Shed 
NGP Nagpur 
Night Night Starts from 22:00 Hrs and continues upto 06:00 
Hrs next Day 
NJP New Jalpaiguri 
NKJ New Katni Junction 
NMP Nimpura 
NR Northern Railway 
NRW Narwana 
NTSK New Tinsukia 
NWR North Western Railway 
NZM Nizamuddin 
NYG Nayagarh 
OT Over Time 
PAD Pre Arrival Detention 
PAU Purna Junction 
PCR Power Controller 
PD Promotional Diesel 
PDD Pre-Departure Detention 
PF Provident Fund 
PKR Pakur 
PKRZ Pakur Old Siding a nd Pakur Quarry Buffer 
PME Periodical Medical Exam 

Report No. 47 of 2015   vi 
 
Abbreviation Explanation 
PN Pending 
PNP Panipat 
PNVL Panvel 
PPLC Pimpla Chaure Halt 
PRIME Pay Roll and Relate d Independent Modules 
PRLI Parli Vaijnath Junction 
PRNR Parjanpur 
PRSEL Pre-selec tion Training 
PSA Palasa 
PSY Psychological 
PTK Pathankot 
PUI Puri 
PWL Palwal 
R Raipur 
RB Railway Board 
RBS Rate Branch Software 
RDBMS Relational Database Management System 
REFD Refresher Diesel 
REFE Refresher Electrical 
REFSC Refresher Safety Camp 
REFT Refresher Transport 
ROK Rohtak 
RPH Rampurhat 
SALP Senior Assistant Loco Pilot 
SBB Sahibabad Junction 
SBG Sahibganj 
SC Secunderabad 
SCR South Central Railway 
SECR South East Central Railway 
SER South Eastern Railway 
SFCM Safety Camp 
SGO Saugor 
SHDT Shed Duty 
SIF Sirli 
Sign off Time at which a Loco Crew/Guard is considered to be 
off Duty 
Sign on Time at which a Loco Crew/Guard is considered to be on 
Duty 
SLN Sultanpur 
SMS Short Messages Services 
SNF Sanat Nagar 
SNP Sonipat 
SNT Sainthia 
SR Southern Railway 
Sr, DEE (TRO) Senior Divisional Elec trical Engineer (Traction Rolling 
Organization) 

Report No. 47 of 2015   vii 
 
Abbreviation Explanation 
Sr. DEE(RSO) Senior Divisional El ectrical Engineer (Rolling Stock 
Organization) 
Sr. DEE/OP Senior Divisional El ectrical Engineer (Operations) 
Sr. DME (O&F) Senior Divisional Mech anical Engineer (Operations and 
Fuel) 
Sr. DOM Senior Divisiona l Operations Manager 
Sr. DOM/OP Senior Divisional Op erations Manager (Operations) 
SRC Santragachi 
SRS System Requirement Specification 
SSB Shakurbasti 
SSE Senior Section Engineer 
STA Satna Junction 
STDTO Stationary Duty Without NDA 
SWR South Western Railway 
TA Traffic Advice 
TCC Traction Crew Controller 
TDL Tundla Junction 
TDLE Tildanga 
TKD Tuglakabad 
TLC Traction Loco Controller 
TLHR Talcher 
TNC Train Clerk 
Traffic Running 
Staff 
Staff (Guard) who sits in the rear of the train in a break 
van 
TSS Terminal Support System 
UDL Andal Junction 
UKH Ukhali Halt 
UMB Ambala 
UPS Uninterrupted Power Supply 
USL Uslapur 
VAST Very Small Aperture Terminal 
VSKP Vishakhapatnam 
WCR West Central Railway 
WHM Washim 
WR Western Railway 
ZRs Zonal Railways 
 
  

Report No. 47 of 2015   viii 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
1. Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Crew Management System (CMS) was introduced over Indian Railways (IR) 
to manage crew assignments to various trains and to improve efficiency in 
crew operations, their monitoring and compliance with safety requirements 
and to improve financial management . CMS project was sanctioned by IR 
during 2005-06 and was expected to be completed by 2010. 
In Indian Railways, CMS was planned for implementation at 747 
lobbies/locations.  It was targeted for integration and implementation as one of 
the modules of Freight Operations Information System (FOIS) by 2010. As on 
31
st March 2015, it was rolled out in 372 l obbies which include two training 
locations and one testing location at CRIS Headquarters. 
The extent of achievement of the objectives of CMS was evaluated in Audit 
and the aspects relating to IT applicati on controls, IT secur ity, continuity of 
the organization’s business, contracting issues, project 
management/monitoring and change ma nagement were also reviewed. The 
study has revealed that the CMS has failed to fully achieve its objectives.  
The major audit findings are as under: 
I. Non-updation/Improper feeding of mast er data of crew, crew family 
details, routes, loco holding detail and lack of validation controls led to 
inaccurate inventory of crew, routes , loco holding, thus, defeating the 
very purpose of effective monitoring of crew.  
[Para 2.1.1 to 2.1.8]  
II. Crew members were booked without ensuring their competency in all 
respect of the prescribed criteria. Inconsistencies were noticed in data 
pertaining to assignment and schedu ling of crew. Abnormal delay was 
noticed in approving crew sign on/off activities. 
[Para 2.1.9 to 2.1.14] 
III. SMS facility was not actively in use for crew booking. Mileage 
statements generated through CMS we re incorrect a nd could not be 
directly used for payment. Manual records were being maintained 
simultaneously at lobbies resulting in non-achievement of objective of 
making the lobbies paperless. 
 [Para 2.2.1, 2.3.1 & 2.3.2] 
IV. Data relating to training/tests for crew was not correctly updated. MIS 
generated for monitoring crew tr aining were not giving actionable 
information. Dummy loco numbers were used for validating crew 
competency for loco which raises su spicion as to the deployment of 
competent crew. Crew members were booked in excess of the 
prescribed duty hours.  
[Para 2.4.1 to 2.4.3, 2.4.6] 

Report No. 47 of 2015   ix 
 
V. The grading of crew and their counselling was not done as per 
prescribed periodicity. Data of  grading and counselling was not 
properly maintained as mismatch was noticed between the CMS data 
and manual records which was not assisting management in the 
monitoring and deployment of crew. 
[Para 2.4.7 to 2.4.8] 
VI. The most crucial security measures/devices like Biometric and 
Integrated Breath Analyser (BA) to validate crew authenticity and 
competency were not implemented all over IR. Biometric system was 
introduced over six ZRs and integrated BA system was introduced over 
four ZRs only. 
[Para 2.4.10, 5.1] 
VII. Improper configuration of the CM S led to wrong computation of 
mileage allowance of 21136799 kms. Weak  application controls led to 
charging of mileage allowance ev en for zero duty hours, mileage 
allowance was paid even when the crew was absent.  
 [Para 2.5.1 to 2.5.4]  
VIII. Weak application controls depriv ed the Railway Administration of 
effective deployment of crew as CM S allowed incorrect capturing of 
Traffic Advice (TA), train details and booking of crew against such 
incorrect TAs. Improper reasons were  allowed to be captured for TA 
cancellation, change in sign on/sign  off time. Reports pertaining to 
periodical rest, training, breach of  rest, Lobby utilization contained 
inconsistent/wrong details . The Abnormality Module and Coaching 
Link Module were not actively in use.  
[Para 3.1 to 3.12] 
IX. Preventive and detective measures to ensure physical security of 
resources were not found adequate. Passwords in use did not prevent 
unauthorized access to the system. CMS user management was found 
to be weak. Anti-virus patches we re not timely updated. Business 
Continuity Plan (BCP)/Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP) was 
implemented at local site and was yet to be implemented at remote 
site/lobby level for ensuring 24x7 CMS operations. Remote site data 
backup was not maintained. Privilege s assigned to users were not 
commensurate with their job specifications.  
[Para 4.1 to 4.7] 
X. Proper roadmap could not be drawn for the complete rollout of CMS .  
Locations were selected/priorities were fixed without considering the 
feasibility aspect. Poor monitoring of development and implementation 
of the project resulted in delayed implementation of the project. CMS 
was not in use by guards/crew at  a number of lobbies. Trained 
personnel were not operating CMS at  lobbies of different zones. 
Lobbies were not integrated as pe r RB directives. Annual Maintenance 
Contract at majority of the lobbies  was not in plac e. Custodian of 

Report No. 47 of 2015   x 
 
lobbies was not fixed and IT environment for computerization of 
lobbies required for smooth CMS operations was not created at a 
number of lobbies. 
[Para 5.1 to 5.8] 
XI. Integration of CMS with other applicat ions of Indian Railways such as 
Payroll and Related Independent  Module (PRIME), FOIS, ICMS, 
COA was either not achieved or it was not effective enough to serve 
the needs of the users.  
[Para 5.1] 
XII. Change Management Procedure was not defined. The CMS lacked 
complete and updated documentation for ensuring smooth operations. 
No dedicated staff was available for CMS operations; crew members 
(Drivers/Guards) were operating CM S. There was a lack of policy for 
outsourcing CMS activities.  
 
[Para 6.1 to 6.3] 
2. Recommendations 
 
I. The Master tables in the CMS dat abase need to be standardized.  
Necessary validation controls on im portant fields may be introduced 
for ensuring completeness and accuracy of data input. It will 
enhance the user’s reliability and dependency on CMS and enable 
the users to dispense with the sy stem of parallel maintenance of 
manual records. 
II. Effective integration of CMS with  Pay Roll Application, Control 
office Application, FOIS and ICMS should be expedited so that 
needs of the users may be served. 
III. Grading and counselling of crew sh ould be ensured at prescribed 
periodicity by completely and ac curately updating the relevant 
database.     
IV. Implementation of biometrics and integrated BA devices should be 
expedited at all lobbies to ensure cr ew validation at the time of sign 
on/off and that crew remains sober while operating the train 
respectively. 
V. Adequate checks/validation controls should be introduced for data 
validation.  Controls such as dropdown menu/list box etc. may be 
considered for validating data.   
VI. Adequate controls may be introduced and CMS may be configured as 
per extant orders/authority to prevent excess payment of allowances. 
VII. IT Security Policy including backu p and password policy should be 
strictly implemented. Implemen tation of BCP/DRP at remote 
site/lobbies should be expedited to ensure uninterrupted operations. 
Physical security at lobbies may be strengthened. Software 
patches/updates may be timely and regularly installed. 

Report No. 47 of 2015   xi 
 
VIII. The Change Management Procedure should be devised. Formal 
training mechanism to educate CMS operators about new features of 
CMS may be ensured and complete/updated CMS documentation 
should be made available to all concerned.   
IX. Dedicated staff for CMS operations should be provided. In case 
outsourced staff is deployed for CM S activities then there should be 
approved policy for outsourcin g, specifying the individual 
responsibilities of railway users vis-à-vis outsourced users.  
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 1 
 
Chapter 1– Introduction 
The Crew Management System (CMS) is a critical IT application of the Indian 
Railways (IR) for managing crew assi gnment to the various trains which 
impacts the safety of train operations.  The application aims at managing over 
one lakh drivers and guards to ensure round the clock safe operations of IR. 
Though the overall financial  invest ment in the project is only ` 80 crore, it 
assumes significance on account of the na ture of business transacted on this 
application.  
1.1 CMS Objectives 
The objectives of CMS are:  
a. To improve the efficiency in operations by: 
i.  Optimum and effective utilization of crew by maintaining inventory of 
all crew.  
ii.  Effective scheduling and assignment of train crew.  
iii.  Crew booking through SMS, thus eliminating call boy/book system.  
iv.  Generating computerized mileag e reports for direct submission to 
Personnel branch for payment. 
v.  Using as a tool for making the crew  lobbies more or less paperless.  
b.  To effectively monitor crew and to comply with the safety 
requirements relating to crew management by:  
i.  Monitoring road learning and training of crew to operate the 
locomotive of different traction and gauges.  
ii.  Monitoring of training of staff due  for refresher courses and also the 
staff whose competency certificates are due for renewal.  
iii.  Monitoring 10 hours duty in accordance with HOER 1/HER2 rules.  
iv.  Scheduling periodic rests.  
v.  Assisting in monitoring by the Loco  Inspector/Traffic Inspector of the 
drivers and appropriately grading of the crew.  
vi.  Serving as a tool for upgr ading knowledge of the crew and 
continuously evaluating their performance.  
c.  To improve the financial management and monitoring by:  
i.  Serving as a tool for controlli ng payment of overtime and kilometer 
allowance.  
ii.  Monitoring crew productivity by calculating to tal hours of duty 
worked and total kilometers earned by each staff.  
                                                            
1 Hours of Employment and Period of Rest Rules 
2 Hours of Employment Rules 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 2 
 
iii.  Providing for cases of acts of malingering like late turning up and 
leave in excess of 30 days.  
The work of CMS was sanctioned in 2005-06. The CMS application 
was developed by Centre for Railway Information Systems (CRIS), an IT 
development unit of Indian Railways.  The application was hosted at the 
Computer Data Centre (CDC) managed by CRIS, at Chanakyapuri, New Delhi 
to run on the Freight Operations In formation System (FOIS) network 3 of 
Indian Railways. 
The project was planned for implem entation at 747 lobbies/locations 
over different zones of IR and was e xpected to be completed by 2010. As on 
31 March 2015, CMS was under implement ation. It was rolled-out in 372 
lobbies/locations4, constituting around 50 per cent  of the total 
lobbies/locations, against the target of completion of integration and 
implementation of CMS as one of th e modules of Freight Operations 
Information System (FOIS), among others modules of FOIS5 by 20106. 
1.2 System Architecture 
The design is modeled on three- tier client server technology 7 using 
middleware8 and a Relational Data Base Management System (RDBMS)9.  
Data from lobbies is captured through thin clients10/kiosks11 and sent to 
the CDC at CRIS through communication links 12 for transaction processing. 
Application servers at the CRIS are networked and linked to a central database 
for global level transactions 13. The central database provides management 
reports both at zonal level and divisional levels. It is also a repository of all 
current and historical data. A diagram of  the server architecture is given in 
Appendix I. 
                                                            
3A network consisted of physical communication lin es, microwave channels and Very Small Aperture 
Terminal  (VAST) devices (A device used to transmit & receive data signal through a satellite) 
4For lobbies, refer to glossary.  Location refers to places other than lobbies  like Training Centre, 
CRIS Headquarters etc. 
5 Rolling Stock Maintenance and Examination, R evenue Apportionment, Crew Management, Control 
Charting, COIS etc. 
6As per Railway Budget speech of Minister for Railways for the year 2007-08. 
7A special type of client/server architecture consis ting of three well-defined and separate processes, 
each running on a different plat form: i.e. User Interface, Mi ddleware and Database Management 
system.  User Interface, runs on the user's computer (client machine), middle tier which actually 
process data, runs on a server called App lication server and databas e management system 
(DBMS) that stores the data required by the middle tier, runs on a server called the database server. 
8 Middleware is a programme that mediates betw een two separate but exis ting programs and allow a 
program written for one database to access other databases. 
9Relational Database Management System is a progra mme that lets one create, update and manage a 
relational database, data in different tables can be  accessed by linking diffe rent tables through a 
common field. 
10 A thin client is a low cost, devoid of CD-ROM drive, diskette drive and expansion slots computer. 
11Kiosk is a type of computer linke d with central servers and is used by a user (crew) for various 
functions like signing on/signing off his attendance,  view circulars, report abnormality noticed en 
route etc. 
12FOIS Network 
13 A transaction generated in CMS from any of th e terminal/machines having connectivity with CMS 
which can also be viewed from any terminal/machine having access to CMS (including those viewed 
from website). 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 3 
 
1.3 Organization 
There is no uniformity in organiza tional hierarchy prescribed by the 
Railway Board, for operation, control and maintenance of CMS application at 
zonal level.  At zonal level, it was seen that generally offices of the Chief 
Mechanical Engineer/Chief Rolling Stoc k Engineer (Operations & Freight), 
Chief Electrical Engineer/Chief Electric  Loco Engineer &Chief Operations 
Manager are responsible for implemen tation of policies decided by Railway 
Board(RB)/monitoring of working of lobbies. 
At Divisional level, offices of  Senior Divisional Mechanical 
Engineer(Operations and Fuel)/Senior Di visional Electrical Engineer (Rolling 
Stock Organization/Traction Rolli ng Organization)/Senior Divisional 
Operations Manager are re sponsible for providing 
manpower/infrastructure/monitoring of crew lobbies.  
At lobby level, Senior/Chief Crew Controller is Administrative in-
charge of the lobby and is assisted by Cr ew Controller. He is responsible for 
smooth and proper working of crew/lobby pertaining to various issues of 
crew/lobby like crew booking, crew sign on/off operations, breath analysis, 
crew leaves, report generation etc. 
 
1.4  Audit Objectives  
The IT Audit of CMS was conducted with a view to:  
i. Assess the extent to which the CMS was effective in improving the 
train operations by evaluating: 
• Whether inventory of crew, loco, stations, route etc. was properly 
maintained and scheduling and assignment of train crew was 
effective. 
• Whether crew booking through SMS wa s effective in eliminating 
the call boy/book system. 
• Whether CMS was generating com puterized mileage reports for 
direct submission to Personnel branch for payments and the extent 
to which lobbies became paperless through CMS. 
• Whether monitoring of crew tr aining, crew grading, crew 
counselling etc. was effective.  
• Whether CMS was effective in co ntrolling payment of overtime 
and kilometer allowance, monitoring of crew productivity and 
cases of acts of malingering.  
ii.  Review the application controls to ensure that proper authorization, 
completeness, accuracy and validity of transactions, their maintenance 
and other types of data input were in place.  
iii.  Review the IT security to ensure that it was capable of reasonably 
protecting all business critical info rmation and information technology 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 4 
 
assets from loss, damage or abuse. Review the Disaster Recovery Plan 
(DRP)/Business Continuity Plan (BCP) to ensure the continuity of the 
organization’s business in the event of unforeseen events.  
iv.  Review contracting issu es, IT operations and project 
management/monitoring to ensure that various contracts, IT 
operations, project management and monitoring aspects were 
adequately addressed.  
v. Review the effectiveness of cha nge management and outsourcing of 
activities. 
1.5  Sample Size and Audit Scope 
• For CMS audit, one division of each zonal railway (ZR) was selected, 
on random basis, as sample which constituted around 24 per cent of the 
all divisions of IR. Al l 109lobbies of th e selected divisions were 
included in the sample.  Details of the divisions and lobbies included in 
the sample are given in Annexure – 1. 
• The analysis of the transaction data 14 of the most rece nt nine months, 
i.e. March 2014 to 5 December 2014, collected from CRIS, was done. 
• Online CMS reports available during the period of Audit were 
reviewed, Joint Traffic Reports (J TR) of Crew and Guards were 
compared with crew mileage repo rts and Control office Application 
(COA) data was also used to verify  completeness and other aspects of 
CMS data. 
• For other aspects relating to proj ect management and implementation, 
audit reviewed CMS project from  inception during 2005-06 till 31 
March 2015.  
• The IT Security evaluation primar ily focused on application level 
security15.  
1.6.  Audit Methodology 
Audit methodology included scruti ny of records relating to 
implementation of project over different zones/divisions at the zonal/divisional 
Headquarters and at lobbies. The CMS reports were reviewed, information 
pertaining to different asp ects of CMS was gathered from various lobbies of 
the selected divisions using questionna ire, interview and discussion with 
divisional/lobby officials.  Simulation tests were conducted and data was 
analyzed using Computer Assisted Aud it Techniques. For issues related to 
security, change management, documenta tion etc., records at CRIS office at 
New Delhi and at zonal/divisional h eadquarters/different lobbies were 
scrutinized.  
                                                            
14Transaction data is the information pertaining to various crew operations like crew booking, crew 
signing on/off, crew allowances, grading, rest etc. 
15Application level security encompasses measures taken throughout the code's life-cycle to prevent 
gaps in the security policy of an application or the underlying system (vulnerabilities) through flaws 
in the design, development, deployment, upgradation or maintenance of the application etc. 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 5 
 
The Entry Conferences were held at zonal level with Railway 
Administration. The draft re view report was issued to Railway Board on 16 
June 2015 which was followed by an update d draft review report, issued on 5 
August 2015. The Exit Conferences were held at zonal le vel with Railway 
Administration.  The Railway Board gave the replies to the draft review report 
in September 2015 and the same have b een duly incorporat ed in the Audit 
Report. An Exit Conference was also held at Railway Board in which the audit 
observations were discussed and Railw ay Administration assured for the 
remedial action. 
1.7 Acknowledgement 
The Audit team wishes to express its appreciation to the management 
and staff of the Railway Administrati on at Railway Board, Zonal/Divisional 
Headquarters and lobby level as well as  CRIS CMS team for the assistance 
and cooperation extended to the Auditors during this assignment. 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 6 
 
 
Chapter 2 – Status of Achievement of Objectives of CMS 
Audit Objective 1 
To evaluate the extent to which the CMS was effective in improving the train 
operations 
 
Audit Sub-objective : Whether inventory of crew, loco, stations, route etc. 
was properly maintained and scheduli ng and assignment of train crew was 
effective. 
An analysis of CMS master data as well as physical records revealed 
that wrong/incomplete MIS were generated, crew members were 
booked on the basis of manual records and there was manual 
intervention in CMS operations as the inventory of crew was 
incomplete, personal and professional details of crew were inaccurate 
and incomplete and master data rela ted to locos, rout es and stations 
was also incomplete and inaccurate. In this regard, audit test check 
revealed the following instances of deficiencies:   
2.1.1 Discrepancy in sanctioned stren gth/men-in-position as shown in 
CMS vis-à-vis manual records 
A comparison of crew’s sanctione d strength and men-in-position 
populated in CMS with the manual r ecords available in the selected 
lobbies of 16 zones revealed that there were differences between actual 
sanctioned strength and sanctioned strength as per CMS. Discrepancies 
were also seen in the men in position.  
Over NR, one of the reasons noticed  for differences between two sets 
of records was that crew deputed to  other lobbies for temporary duties 
were shown in CMS as men in position of the lobby to which they 
were deputed for temporary duty  but were shown in the manual 
records of their parent lobby as men-in-position. Instances of non-
updation of CMS data pertaining to  sanctioned strength and men-in-
position were also noticed over NR and other zones. 
This clearly indicated that data in the system was not updated and 
transfer/retirement entries were not  done in time. Such discrepancies 
are bound to affect management’s ab ility to ascertain the effective 
deployment of crew. 
(Annexure - 2) 
In reply (September 2015), RB stated  that zonal railways have been 
advised to update the database. 
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 7 
 
 
 
2.1.2 Incorrect/Irregular inventory of crew 
The CMS database was populated with incorrect personal details of the 
crew, database was not updated a nd there was lack of adequate 
validation controls to prevent book ing of superannuated crew which 
has resulted in making superannua ted crew available for booking, 
allowing signing on/off using Id entification (ID) number of 
superannuated crew as well as charging mileage allowance. 
Data analysis of CMS database of  16 zonal railways (ZRs), available 
as on 5 December 2014 revealed instances where age of the crew was 
less than 18 years (Boy  Service), difference betw een date of birth and 
date of appointment of crew was more than 50 years, dates of 
appointment and promotion of crew were same and there were 
instances where crew had dates of birth and dates of appointment as 
same. 
Instances were noticed over NR and SCR where crew members who 
had crossed their retirement age but  were still found to be active in 
CMS, available for booking and were booked for duty. However, they 
did not work the trains. The details of the above observations are given 
in Appendix –II.  
A test check of physical records of active crew having crossed 
superannuation age revealed that: 
• CMS database of superannuated crew of Nizamuddin (NZM) and 
Tuglakabad (TKD) lobbies of Delhi (DLI) division was not 
updated and at Moradabad (MB) lo bby, year of birth of one crew 
was wrongly recorded in CMS as  1951 instead of 1957 and in 
another case, superannuated crew was actually booked after a 
period of more than three months  from his retirement, had signed 
on/off record in CMS and his mil eage was also allowed/computed 
by CMS.  
In a reply to audit (July 2015), MB lobby admitted the mistake of 
entering sign on and movement deta ils of retired crew by the CMS 
operator and rectified the mistake on detection.  
This indicates that CMS did not have  adequate controls to validate the 
correctness of data pertaining to da tes (age etc.) leading to populating 
inaccurate data which results in generation of wrong MIS which may 
distort the decision making process.  Booking of superannuated crew 
entailed the risk of wrong payment of  mileage allowances and security 
risk to the System as well. 
(Annexure–3) 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 8 
 
 
2.1.3 Incomplete Particulars of crew 
Effective control over master files is essential to ensure integrity of the 
data as the reliability of the syst em depends heavily on the correctness 
and completeness of the master data . During the evaluation of master 
files of CMS, it was observed that crew details such as contact number, 
promotion date, traction etc. were  either unavail able or were 
incomplete. The details are given in Appendix – III. 
During test check of records, it was noticed that the details in 
important fields of CMS such as mobile number/address, promotion 
date, Loco Inspector Name, traction details were not captured/updated 
necessitating parallel runni ng of manual system and this could affect 
the smooth operations relating to crew booking/operations, crew 
allowances and could also affect the overall effectiveness of CMS. 
Further, it leads to generation of incomplete MIS. 
(Annexure-4) 
2.1.4 Incorrect/Invalid data pertaining to pay particulars 
It was found in audit that values in the fields viz. Basic Pay, 
Availability Date, Increment Date, Officiating Date and PF Number, 
were either incorrect or invalid which could affect calculation of 
allowances and various MIS reports pertaining to deployment of crew. 
The analysis of data pe rtaining to above fields for all the 16 zones was 
as under:  
Sr. 
No. 
Field Name No. of incorrect/ 
invalid records 
for the fields 
Highest incorrect 
records and zone 
name 
1 Availability Date 280 87 in NR 
2 Increment Date 31725 5905 in SECR 
3 Basic Pay 3615 916 in SER 
4 Officiating Date 83829 12106 in NCR 
5 PF Number 4810 1796 in NR 
 (Annexure-5) 
The CMS lacked adequate controls to  validate basic details of a crew 
which results in generation of wrong MIS and may affect integration of 
the CMS with other applications, besides affecting calculation of 
correct allowances. In this regard, observations are as under:- 
• In the master table containing crew Bio-data, the field for PF code 
was found to be defined as charact er with length as 25. As PF 
number needs to be unique 8 dig it number for identification of a 
crew, the provision of 25 characters length was incorrect leading to 
invalid PF numbers getting entered in the table. Over NR, PF 
numbers consisted of one to 16 alpha-numeric characters. 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 9 
 
 
• During test check of records, it wa s noticed that presently the data 
pertaining to basic pay, increment date and PF number was not in 
use and manual records were being relied upon. However, incorrect 
data pertaining to officiating date leads to wrong or non-booking of 
crew for officiating purposes a nd wrong PF number may affect the 
integration of CMS with payroll ap plication, besides generation of 
wrong MIS. 
In reply (September 2015) to the ob servations contained in paragraph 
numbers 2.1.2 to 2.1.4 mentioned above, RB endorsed CRIS remarks 
that the provision for a number of fields, which are not necessary for 
crew booking, has been made on user request so as to have complete 
crew particulars at one place and at  the same time it was stated by RB 
that instructions have been issued to all users for correct and complete 
data updation.   
The reply of RB is not acceptable. As stated above, CMS lacks 
requisite controls to validate da ta which includes fields having 
relevance for crew booking and needs requisite controls for ensuring 
complete and correct capturing of data to achieve the desired 
objectives. 
2.1.5 Incomplete/Incorrect data relating to inactive profiles of crew 
 The CMS failed to ensure capturin g of complete and accurate data 
pertaining to inactive status of  crew, which may hamper proper 
deployment of crew on day to day basis, besides generation of wrong 
MIS. In this regard, observations are as under: 
• In case of transfer of crew from  one lobby to another, new crew 
IDs get created through system. Old IDs are retained and shown as 
inactive in the database. An analysis of master data of CMS 
revealed that, specific reasons for inactive status of 6442crew of 15 
ZRs were not recorded.  
• It was found that 2339 crew of 16 ZRs were shown as inactive due 
to superannuation even though they were not due for 
superannuation. 
• During test check of CMS data with  manual records, it was noticed 
at TKD and NZM lobbies of NR that crew marked as 
superannuated were actually declared medically unfit and were 
working on locations other th an CMS lobbies. Thus, wrong 
information was recorded in CMS. 
(Annexure ­ 6) 
In reply (September 2015), RB whil e endorsing CRIS remarks that the 
bug responsible for saving record without capturing reasons for 
inactive status has been removed, issued instructions to users for 
updation of database. 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 10 
 
 
2.1.6 Incorrect/Incomplete family profile data 
Maintenance of accurate family profile  data is to facilitate further 
course of action in case of an event in which benefits accrue to the 
family members. It was, however, ob served that correct and complete 
family particulars such as depende nt relation, gender, marital status, 
father name etc. were not correctly captured.(Appendix -IV) 
This may result in a situation where benefits due to the dependents are 
delayed or denied in the absence of manual intervention.   
(Annexure - 7) 
In reply (September 2015),RB, wh ile endorsing CRIS remarks that the 
provision for capturing family details was made on the request of users 
and audit observations have been  noted for necessary validation 
controls, issued instructions to all users for data updation. 
2.1.7 Incomplete/Incorrect/Irregular loco holding details 
A comparison was made in audit of loco master data as available in 
CMS with manual stock records/target  fixed for loco availability for 
Electrical & Mechanical departme nts by RB for November/December 
2014 and differences in two sets of records of locos in terms of total 
number, type and shed were noticed.  
As per the RB targets for maintaining loco holding for each ZR for the 
month of November/Decem ber 2014, holding of Diesel
16 and 
Electric17locos was 4259 and 4600 whereas CMS database had 5182 
and 4407 Diesel and Electric locos respectively.  
The differences in manual and CMS records indicated that either 
dummy data has been populated in CMS or records of locos were not 
updated which could lead to wrong usag e of loco numbers resulting in 
non-validation of crew’s competency for a particular loco. 
In CMS Loco master table, 1700 locos were not having corresponding 
zone code to group them and make them available when any query 
based on the Zone was made on the master data.(Appendix - V) 
(Annexure - 8) 
Thus, the data available in the CMS was inconsistent and was not 
reliable for operational and analytic al purposes. Such inaccurate data 
would prevent the system from valid ating the loco competence of staff 
before booking, thereby compromisi ng the safety of operation of 
trains. 
                                                            
16All zones except SCR, ECR and NWR 
17 All zones except NER, NFR, SWR, NWR and ECR 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 11 
 
 
In reply (September 2015), RB en dorsed CRIS remarksthat now the 
Loco Master is synchronized with FOIS database.  User is asked to get 
the loco details entered in FOIS for it to appear in CMS to maintain the 
sanctity of loco data.  
In view of the fact that CMS ha d interface with FOIS database, RB 
needs to confirm the correctness of Loco database of FOIS for it to 
appear correctly and completely in CMS. 
2.1.8 Incorrect/Incomplete data of stations and routes 
During test check of CMS data as we ll as scrutiny of physical records, 
instances were noticed where zone and division codes were not 
available for stations, stations were not available, stations had invalid 
codes, routes were not available, r outes had incorrect distances etc.  
Non/incorrect defining of stations, r outes in the system was leading to 
manual correction of mileage allo wance, besides generation of 
incorrect MIS. (Appendix - VI) 
(Annexure - 9) 
In reply (September 2015) to disc repancies in stations, RB endorsed 
the CRIS remarks that data of station master entered in CMS is as per 
FOIS database. CMS and FOIS data is  synchronized in periodicity of 
every three months or in case of any user request, whichever is earlier. 
In reply to discrepancies in rout es, RB endorsed the remarks of CRIS 
that now routes are created from RB S database. Modifications are still 
allowed in exceptional cases for correction of kms. and user is 
encouraged to get the data corrected in RBS database itself.  
The reply of RB is indicative of disc repancy in the database which is 
being corrected on a periodical basis, RB needs to correct and 
complete the database of stations and routes as a one-time exercise to 
ensure smooth and efficient CMS operations. 
2.1.9 Booking of crew using ‘Fetch Crew  All’ option rather than ‘Fetch 
Crew as per Rule’ option 
As per CMS documentation as well as  examination of CMS, there are 
two options through which list of cr ew available for deployment is 
shown by CMS. One is ‘Fetch Crew A ll’ option and the other is ‘Fetch 
Crew as per Rule’ option. As per CMS documentation, under the first 
option, CMS validates that crew is  not due for Periodical Medical 
Examination test, REFT/REFD/REFE training, has required loco 
competency, is not under rest condition etc.  
Under the second option, CMS also va lidates that Road Learning (LR) 
for the section/route on which the crew has to be booked is not due, 
Safety Camp training is not due and Automatic Signaling competency 
is also verified.  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 12 
 
 
For using first option a reason must be  entered into CMS. It was seen 
in audit that booking of crew in majority of the cases was done by 
using ‘Fetch Crew All’ option which tantamount to compromising with 
the safe running of the trains as the additional aspects as mentioned 
above for deputing crew by using ‘Fetch Crew as per Rule’ option are 
overlooked while deputing crew by using ‘Fetch Crew All’ option. 
Analysis of data has revealed that 74 per cent of the crew was booked 
using ‘Fetch Crew All’ Option. Reas ons for using this option were not 
recorded in large number of cases; more than 8000 types of codes were 
used for using this option. (Appendix - VII) 
There is a need to ensure that only competent crew is booked, fulfilling 
all the conditions required for train operations. 
(Annexure - 10) 
In reply (September 2015), RB endorsed CRIS remarks that CMS does 
not allow user to book crew using ‘fetch crew all’ without entering 
valid reasons and standard reas ons in Dropdown Menu have been 
provided, to help user select proper reasons, since October 2012. 
The reply of RB is not acceptable as no Dropdown Menu facility was 
available to the CMS user for selecting proper reason. 
2.1.10 Irregular crew calling time 
As per Operating Manual
18, a notice to running staff (Driver/Guard 
etc.) informing name/description, time et c. of the train in which he/she 
is booked, is to be served, as far as possible, two hours before he/she is 
due to report for duty and notice is generally not served to running 
staff working on fixed links. Further, as per rules 19 different running 
staff members are generally required to sign on for duty within 10 to 
45 minutes before the scheduled/expected departure time of the train. 
As per the process of CMS crew booki ng, call is made to the crew at 
the time of booking of crew. Data an alysis of 2599975 transactions of 
16 ZRs revealed that in 6.66 per cent transactions, calls were found to 
be made after train scheduling/ordering time and in 21.52 per cent 
transactions, calls were found to be made more than 165 minutes 
before/in advance of train ordering time. (Appendix - VIII) 
Thus, the CMS lacked adequate control to validate call time as it 
accepted call time much in advance of  the expected time of departure 
of train/ordering time as well as much beyond the expected time of 
departure of train/ordering time. Fu rther, as observed under paragraph 
3.1, Traffic Advices having accurate /realistic expected departure 
time/ordering time were not used le ading to populating of CMS with 
                                                            
18Northern Railway Operating Manual 
19Indian Railway General & Subsidiary Rules/Manual provision, 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 13 
 
 
wrong data or late trains were not marked as such in CMS, thus, it 
resulted in generation of wrong in formation by CMS. Acceptance of 
call time beyond the expected time of departure of the train by CMS is 
a major flaw as it establishes that  CMS cannot be relied upon fully for 
ensuring smooth running of trains.  
(Annexure - 11) 
In reply (September 2015), RB adm itted the audit observations for 
remedial action. 
2.1.11 Irregular crew call recei ved/acknowledged time 
After making a call to the crew, the crew is expected to 
receive/acknowledge the call at the ear liest. In the case of call served 
through SMS, it is expected to be acknowledged within 10 minutes20.  
An analysis of the call serve time and call receive/acknowledge time of 
2745140 transactions revealed instance s where calls were found to be 
received even before the calls were  made indicating weak application 
control. In 16.07 per cent transac tions, calls were found to be 
acknowledged 165 minutes after call were made and in 54.21 per cent 
transactions, calls were acknow ledged within 30 minutes. (Appendix-
IX) 
(Annexure - 12) 
Thus, CMS lacked adequate validation controls as receipt of call prior 
to the call was being made is very serious flaw in the system and wide 
variations in call receive time indicates that calls were not 
acknowledged in-time.  
In reply (September 2015), RB admitted audit observations for 
remedial action. 
2.1.12 Irregular ‘sign on time’ of crew 
As per Indian Railways General and Subsidiary Rules, various types of 
running staff (Driver/Guard etc.) are required to ‘sign on’ within 10 to 
45 minutes of the scheduled/expected  departure time of the train 
(depending upon originating/intermediate  station of trai n). The results 
of analysis of data of 2771169 tran sactions revealed that in 26 per cent 
cases, crew were found to have sign ed on or after train ordering time 
and in 12 per cent cases, crew were found to have signed on less than 
10 minutes before train ordering tim e against the requirement of 10 to 
45 minutes before expected depart ure (ordering) time of the train.  
(Appendix - X) 
(Annexure - 13) 
                                                            
20As per CMS Manual 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 14 
 
 
Thus, the above facts indicate that  CMS lacks data entry validation 
controls because there cannot be any possibility of crew signing in 
after the train ordering time/expected time of departure of the train or 
the train was not marked late leading to such an eventuality. 
Data analysis further revealed that TA with proper ordering time were 
not used as is evident from the observations made under Para 3.1. 
In reply (September 2015), RB endorsed CRIS remarks that audit 
observations have been noted for necessary remedial action. 
2.1.13 Delay in supervisory approval of ‘crew sign on’ time 
‘Crew sign on’ activity is expected to be approved by the Supervisor 
immediately at the time of ‘crew si gn on’ for its regularization as it 
enables crew to ‘sign off’ at destination location.  
Data analysis of 3070897 transactions  of ZRs revealed cases where 
Supervisor approval of ‘crew sign on ’ time was prior to the ‘crew sign 
on’ time.  In 68 per cent cases ‘crew sign on’ time was approved by 
Supervisor after 30 minutes or mo re from ‘crew sign on’ time. 
(Appendix - XI) 
Thus, CMS lacked adequate data va lidation controls as it allowed 
Supervisory approval even prior to  ‘crew sign on’ time. Moreover, 
delay/abnormal delay in Supervisor y approval of ‘crew sign on’ time 
raises doubt as to whether the crew had properly signed on by fulfilling 
all the formalities, besides leading to further delay in ‘crew sign off’. 
(Annexure -14) 
In reply (September 2015), RB endor sed CRIS remarks/admission that 
CMS lacks validation controls. 
2.1.14 Irregular Supervisory approval time of ‘crew sign off’ 
A cycle of ‘crew sign on’ and sign off is treated as complete only after 
the Supervisor has approved the ‘c rew sign off’ activity. Supervisory 
approval of the cycle of ‘sign on’ and ‘sign off’ is very crucial because 
only after that, a crew comes under rest  state and further activities like 
crew’s entitlement for allowances, further booking etc. become active. 
Data analysis of  1642377 transactions of 15 ZRs 21by audit revealed 
cases where Supervisor was found to have accorded approval even 
prior to crew sign off’.  In 37 per cent cases Supervisor was found to 
have approved ‘crew sign off’ time after a delay of more than one 
hour.(Appendix - XII) 
(Annexure – 15) 
                                                            
21 All zones except NER  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 15 
 
 
This indicates that the CMS lacked adequate data validation controls as 
it allowed ‘Supervisory sign off’ approval even prior to ‘crew sign off’ 
time and delay in approval of ‘crew sign off’ by the Supervisor leads to 
further non-booking of cr ew, generation of inco mplete Crew Mileage 
Reports/manual preparation/modification of Mileage Reports. 
In reply (September 2015), RB endor sed CRIS remarks/admission that 
CMS lacks validation controls 
2.1.15 Irregular‘crew sign on’ vis-a-vis‘crew sign off’ time 
An analysis by Audit of crew sign on time and crew sign off time of 
1367760 transactions approved by Supe rvisor pertaining to 15 ZRs 22 
revealed instances where ‘crew sign on’ and ‘sign off’ time was same, 
i.e. the sign on/off transactions were wrongly recorded.  In 2.82 per 
cent transactions, a difference of mo re than 20 hours between the ‘sign 
on’ and ‘sign off’ times indicated th at either the crew had not timely 
performed his sign off duties or du mmy sign off times were approved.  
(Appendix - XIII) 
(Annexure – 16) 
Thus, acceptance of abnormal/untimel y activity of ‘sign on/off’ by 
CMS indicates that data entry vali dation controls were not accurately 
built in into the system which leads to wrong generation of MIS reports 
related to crew utilization as well as wrong charging/payment of 
mileage allowances, as highlighted under paragraph 2.5.4.5. 
In reply (September 2015), RB endors ed CRIS remarks that an alert is 
given at login to Supervisor as well as to TNC where crew is at sign on 
status for more than 36 hours and stat ed that zonal railways have been 
advised to take necessary corrective measures in this regard. 
Audit Sub-objective:  Whether Crew Booking through mobile SMS was 
effective in eliminating the Call boy/Book system 
2.2.1 Booking through mobile Short Message Services (SMS) – Non-
usage of SMS 
CMS application has provided a mob ile SMS support functionality to 
its users by using mobiles. SMS facility was mainly for call serving, its 
acknowledgement and for communicat ing various other operational 
alerts.  
A review of CMS database pertaining to crew and SMS from 5 
September 2014 to 5 December 2014 revealed that only 10.63 per cent 
of the SMSs sent were acknowledged/replied and 54.30 per cent of the 
SMSs sent to the crew were shown as ‘Pending’, SMS service was not 
                                                            
22All zones except NER  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 16 
 
 
used at 43 lobbies and Closed Us er Group (CUG) mobile status was 
not correctly depicted. Over CR, NR, NWR and SCR, only in 16.01per 
cent of total sign on transactions, SMS were sent. In 13983 cases, even 
though Closed User Group (CUG) mobile  status was shown as Y, the 
mobile number was shown as zero on 13 ZRs. (Appendix - XIV) 
(Annexure - 17) 
From the findings brought out above, it is clear that SMS services were 
not being used effectively and comp rehensively despite the fact that 
CMS application has provided a st rong SMS support functionality to 
its users by using mobiles. 
In reply (September 2015), RB while admitting the audit observations 
and endorsing CRIS remarks that reme dial action will be taken in 
respect of observations pertaining to   pending cases and zero mobile 
status, stated that necessary instru ctions have been issued to zonal 
railways in respect of audit observations. 
Audit Sub-objective: Whether CMS was generati ng computerized mileage 
reports for direct submission to Personne l Branch for payments and the extent 
to which lobbies became paperless through CMS. 
2.3.1 Incorrect generation of mileage reports 
One of the primary objectives of development and implementation of 
CMS was to generate Mileage, Over  Time (OT) Allowance and other 
statements for payment to running staff. In order to assess the accuracy 
of CMS in generating the mileag e, OT and other allowances’ 
statements for payment to the crew , a test check of monthly Mileage 
Statements called Crew Sign On De tails (CSOD) was carried out by 
Audit in selected lobbies. It was observed that the mileage statements 
generated through CMS needed to be corrected manually prior to 
sending the final figures to Pers onnel department for payment. 
Instances were noticed where t hough CMS was in use but mileage 
statements were prepared manually
23 which was against the extant 
orders of RB; further the CMS ge nerated statements had to be 
manually corrected due to following reasons:  
• Either crew sign on or sign off was manual through the register 
because of non-working of CM S/operational reasons at the 
location.(All Zones except NER and NWR) 
• Complete details of leave were not entered in CMS. 
                                                            
23 At CMS BWN (DSL) lobby of ER, mileage of cr ew was manually computed. At majority of the 
lobbies of Delhi division mileage of guards was being computed manually 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 17 
 
 
• All the routes pertaining to the lobby were not defined over five 
ZRs24 in CMS.  
• Data entry errors/Wrong sign on/off time entry by 
outsourced/railway staff over eight ZRs25.  
• Missing transactions due to CM S failures/inaccurate/non-updating 
of crew details (CR, SR, SER, ECoR, NR, WCR and NCR). 
(Annexure-18) 
2.3.2 Manual Maintenance of Records 
One of the prime objectives of automation through CMS is to make the 
lobbies paperless. However, audit of selected lobbies revealed that: 
i. Almost all lobbies were found to be taking printouts of Mileage 
Reports/Summary Mileage Reports  from CMS which were being 
corrected manually and modifi ed data was being manually 
populated in Payroll and Related  Independent Module (PRIME).  
ii. At Jind, GZB and TKD lobbies of  NR, OT Allowances were 
computed manually and it was informed (March 2015) that CMS 
was not configured to generate OT  Allowance Report as per extant 
orders.  
iii. Following manual records were also being simultaneously 
maintained in one or more lobbies of the selected divisions of 
twelve Zones: 
Records Zonal Railways26 
Sign on and Sign off Register/Crew 
Booking Diary 
CR, WCR, SR, WR, SWR, NR, SER, SECR, 
NCR, ECoR, NWR and NFR (12 ZRs) 
Abnormality Register CR, WR, SW R, NR, SER, SECR, NWR, SCR 
and NFR (nine ZRs) 
List of staff due for PME CR, SR, NR, ER, SER, NWR and SECR (seven 
ZRs) 
List of Crew Due for Training and 
Refresher Courses 
CR, SR, NR, SER, SECR, NWR and ER (seven 
ZRs) 
Crew Bio data CR, SR, NR, SE R, NWR and ER (seven ZRs) 
Pre-departure Detention  CR, NR, NWR and SER(four ZRs) 
Circulars and Caution Order Register SW R, NR, SER, SR and NFR (five ZRs) 
Thus, from the above it can be seen  that to a large extent manual 
records were being maintained defeating the CMS objective of making 
the lobbies paperless. 
                                                            
24 CR, ECR, WCR, SCR and, ER 
25 CR, SR, WCR, SWR, SCR, ER, NR  and  SECR  
26 See glossary 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 18 
 
 
In reply (September 2015), RB, wh ile endorsing remarks of CRIS that 
CMS provides for generation of mileage data in XML format which 
can be taken in soft form (copy) to prime servers, stated that necessary 
instructions have been issued to  zonal railways regarding audit 
observations.  
Audit Sub-objective: Whether monitoring of crew training, crew grading, 
crew counseling etc. was effective. 
2.4.1 Failure in monitoring Crew  Road Learning Training 
As per the training requirement of Running Staff, before a crew is 
deployed on a train, he mu st be familiar with th e route he is going on. 
For this, every new crew is requir ed to be given three trips for 
familiarizing himself with the section. If a driver has not operated on a 
section for over three months, he  should be given ‘Road Learning 
Trips’ as below: 
Duration of Absence Number of Trips 
3 months to 6 months 1 
6 months to 2 years 2 
Over 2 years 3 
Over five zones 27, audit found from data anal ysis that in respect of 
3349489 cases, next due date was prior to last drive date. 
In reply, RB endorsed CRIS remarks that due date is shown based on 
the last run ‘plus’ periodicity (if lapsed). In such case crew is required 
to complete three runs as per statutory requirement. The LR due date is 
not changed till all three runs have been completed. Till such time even 
though drive date is changed based on the run, due date remains the 
same and will be prior to drive date. 
 
However, the reply of RB is not acceptable due to the fact that 
instances were noticed where trip s were not due but CMS did not 
compute the next due date as per ex tant orders.  Similarly, instances 
have been noticed where trips were due still CMS computed next due 
date which was irregular.(Appendix –XV) 
(Annexure 19) 
2.4.2 Failure to provide effective MIS reports for monitoring crew 
training 
An analysis of CMS database reve aled that CMS was depicting next 
due date for training though the Crew  did not require the concerned 
training and the Business Logic of CMS for reckoning next due date 
for Automatic Signaling (ASIG) trai ning was not in accordance with 
                                                            
27 NR=1317478.  ECoR=27069, , ER=25460, SCR=1895560 and SER=83922 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 19 
 
 
the Indian Railway General an d Subsidiary Rules (NR-2011). 
(Appendix XVI) 
Thus, CMS training report s/database were not properly designed to be 
effective in monitoring crew training.  
In reply(September 2015), RB while endorsing CRIS remarks that the 
issue pertains to data entry errors by the users, stated that necessary 
instructions have been issued to zonal railways for correct and 
complete data updation.  
2.4.3 Discrepancies in loco details us ed for validating crew competency  
An analysis of Traffic Advice (TA) data by Audit for the period 5 
September 2014 to 5 December 2014 re vealed that loco type was 
shown as zero, however, no loco of such type was available in the 
master data. Similarly data analys is over different railways revealed 
that dummy numbers of locos like 111, 123, 147, 1111 etc. were used 
by one or more than one lobby fo r generation of multiple TAs.  
Booking of crew against such TAs having dummy loco numbers raises 
suspicion whether crew competency  for actual loco was validated.  
(Appendix - XVII) 
In reply (September 2015), RB endor sed CRIS remarks that validation 
for correct entry of loco number with  respect to loco  type has been 
introduced in system. However, acti on taken to prevent usage of same 
(dummy) loco number in different TAs by different lobbies/same 
lobby at the same time has not been communicated. 
2.4.4. Lack of provision for Safety tools sign on/off 
As per rule 4.19 of Indian Railway General and Subsidiary Rule (NR), 
a Loco Pilot or Guard shall carry the prescribed equipment while on 
duty with the train and will report the deficiency to his Supervisors for 
making good the deficiency. However, Audit noticed that CMS did not 
prompt the crew for confirming whether he had the required safety 
tools with him when he was signing on duty, though in the CMS 
database, fields necessary for capturing the requisite details were 
available. 
In reply (September 2015), RB endorsed the comments of CRIS that 
the issue was not within the scope of  CMS. However, the reply is not 
acceptable because as per manual/codal provision, a crew 
(Driver/Guard) is required to ensure  availability of prescribed tools 
during duty. 
 
 
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 20 
 
 
2.4.5 Non-feeding of caution orders/circulars 
Over SWR, NFR and NCR28, no circular/caution orders were uploaded 
in the system. The system of maintenance of registers of 
circulars/caution orders continued to  prevail over all the lobbies of 
these railways. 
In reply (September 2015), RB stated that necessary instructions have 
been issued to the zonal railways.  
2.4.6 Booking of crew on continuous  running duties beyond 10 hours 
As per Appendix ‘B’ of NR Oper ating Manual, running duties of 
loco/traffic running staff should not  ordinarily exceed 10 hours at a 
stretch.  As per review of Worki ng Hours Reports of CMS pertaining 
to December 2014 to February 2015, it was noticed that out of 23835 
crew members, 1948 crew members ( eight per cent ) were on running 
duties for a continuous period of more than 10 hours. 
Booking of crew beyond a period of  10 hours for continuous running 
duties could affect safe train operations.  
2.4.7 Grading of crew by loco Insp ectors – Discrepancies thereof. 
As per Drivers’ Grading Booklet  pertaining to their safety 
categorization circulated by RB in  March 2007, Loco Inspectors (LI) 
have to keep monitoring their alloca ted drivers as per the periodicity 
and schedule prescribed by the concer ned railway and every driver is 
to be graded as ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’ or  ‘D’ by his LI at the end of the 
prescribed periodicity. 
Newly entered and those promoted as  Goods Train drivers are initially 
put in ‘C’ category and are re-evaluat ed at an interval of one year. A 
crew having a grading of ‘B’ is to be monitored again for grading at an 
interval of two years and crew ha ving a grading of ‘A’ is to be 
monitored again for grading at an interval of three years.  
Analysis of CMS data for 16zones revealed that out of 37690 loco 
pilots, 28254 were graded  and remaining 9436 (33.39 per cent) were 
not graded as per prescribed pe riodicity by their concerned Loco 
Inspectors (LIs). 
Analysis from CMS data set shows that 2343 crew belonging to A, B 
and C categories of five ZRs 29 were graded 3 to 49 times within a 
period of five to six years. Data analysis revealed that 4316 LPGs were 
graded within one year of their promotion in nine ZRs30. 
(Annexure – 20) 
                                                            
28After 27.08.2012  over NCR 
29 NR=585, SCR=1486, WCR=6, SECR=260, ECoR=6 
30 ECoR=216, NFR=40, SCR=241, NR=744, SER=516,WCR=1159, SWR=812, WR=108, SECR=480 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 21 
 
 
Thus, periodicity of grading of LPGs has not been followed in 
accordance with the extant orders as is evident from the data thrown by 
CMS or the grading has not been timely and accurately 
recorded/updated in CMS. Thus, CMS has not fully facilitated the 
decision making based on the results shown. 
In reply, RB stated that necessary inst ructions have been issued to ZRs 
for proper grading of Loco P ilots/Crew and their monitoring 
accordingly. 
2.4.8 Counseling of Crew – Discrepancies thereof. 
In order to increase the knowledge base of a crew, various methods are 
used like deputing crew to various training courses, their counselling 
by their LIs etc.  
Audit found during the review of  the CMS data pertaining to 
periodicity of the counseling of cr ew (Grade A, B and C) by their 
Chief LI/LI for the period prior to 6 December 2014 that around 29 
percent crew over NR, 88 per cent crew over NFR and six per cent 
crew over NWR were not counsel led as per the prescribed 
periodicity.(Appendix – XVIII) 
Out of total 7840 active crew on CR, da ta pertaining to counselling of 
only 1593 crew had been captured in CMS. The number of times the 
counseling had been done ranged between one to157.  
Over six zones
31 there were 2167 instances where crew were counseled 
by Loco Inspector, but IDs of Loco  Inspectors, who counseled the 
crew, were not available on CMS record. 
During a comparison of CMS grading and counselling da ta with Loco 
Inspector’s manual records/divisional  records, mismatch were noticed 
between the two sets of informa tion over NR (Delhi division) and 
NFR. 
Thus, periodicity of counseling was not followed in accordance with 
the extant orders which could affe ct smooth train operations or the 
counselling has not been timely and accurately updated in CMS which 
may affect decision making based on counselling data available in 
CMS. 
During visit to Delhi Division Headqua rters of NR, it was noticed that 
Loco Inspectors were forwarding manually, monthly reports of crew 
grading and counselling to Divisional Headquarters and the same 
details were being further manua lly compiled for decision making, 
though the relevant details were al ready available in CMS and CMS 
was also generating reports containing relevant data. 
(Annexure - 21) 
                                                            
31 CR=529, ECOR=773, SECR=446, NR=101,NFR=98, NWR=220 (Total =2167) 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 22 
 
 
In reply (September 2015), RB stated that necessary instructions have 
been issued to ZRs. 
2.4.9 Poor usage of QUICK as a tool for upgrading crew knowledge 
QUICK implies Quiz for improving crew knowledge. This option has 
been provided in the CMS which is a crew knowledge evaluation and 
improvement game wherein the user is offered a ques tion with four 
alternatives. Utility and effectivene ss of this tool was examined in 
audit by analyzing the Quiz transac tion data and which revealed that 
out of  63729 active crew analysed over 16 ZRs, only 16401 (25.74 per 
cent) crew had taken the on line quiz to check their knowledge.  
(Annexure - 22) 
In reply (September 2015), RB stated that necessary instructions have 
been issued to zonal railways. 
2.4.10 Poor Implementation of Breath Analyzers (BA) units 
As per revised policy on drunkenne ss on duty issued by RB in 
December 2001, no running staff is to be allowed to sign on for the 
duty without undergoing breath analyzer  test and reading of the breath 
analyzer test is to be recorded in  the signing register. Similar standards 
are also to be maintained at the time of duty ‘sign off’. 
Safety Directorate (Railway Board) opined that BA test at sign on/off 
stage is deterrent as we ll as initial proof of drunkenness. It is possible 
if during sign on, a crew is found dr unk, he may report sick. Further, if 
the crew is found drunk during si gn off, DAR action can be taken 
against him. Thus, integration of  BA equipment in CMS makes it 
foolproof against the impersonation a nd strengthens the checks. It is 
helpful in checking the menace of alcoholism on duty among the crew 
and enhances safety in train operations.  
It was, however, observed in Audit that BA units have not been 
integrated with CMS resulting in  manual intervention leading to 
inconsistent values being recorded in CMS, besides leaving a 
possibility of collusion between the crew and the Supervisor.   
Despite knowing the importance of BA  testing for the safe running of 
trains, the Railway Administra tion/CRIS did not provide for 
integration of BA units with CMS at the time of System Design stage 
in 2006, to mitigate the associated risks. The BA units were not 
integrated in 12 ZRs. The number of lobbies where it has been 
integrated is miniscule. The deta ils of lobbies where it has been 
integrated and irregularities due to  non integration are given in the 
Appendix – XIX. 
(Annexure - 23) 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 23 
 
 
In reply (September 2015), RB endorsed CRIS remarks that CMS final 
phase, stage-I only has been sanctioned with BA devices, provision has 
been made available in CMS application to cater to bio-metrics and 
BA test requirement and newly developed client image needs to be 
loaded on the kiosk thin clients. Regarding inconsistent values, CRIS 
remarked that these are data errors generated th rough trials.  RB, in its 
reply, also stated that necessary inst ructions have been issued to zonal 
railways.   
However, RB did not elaborate reasons for not sanctioning BA devices 
for lobbies implemented under phase I,  phase-II and stage II of final 
phase. Moreover, CRIS remarks were not acceptable as data 
inconsistency transactions pertained to a period of two to three months 
and remedial action taken in the matter has not been communicated. 
Audit Sub-objective: Whether CMS was effective in controlling payment of 
overtime and kilometer allowance, mon itoring of crew pro ductivity and cases 
of acts of malingering 
Audit noticed that incorrect/non-con figuration of CMS as per extant 
orders, delay in timely updating of cr ew database, lack of adequate 
means to validate crew sign on/off time, authenticity of crew and 
inadequacy of application controls  led to generation/computation of 
abnormal/wrong mileage allowance as well as payment of excess 
mileage allowance thereby defeatin g the CMS objective of preventing 
excess payment of mileage allowan ce. Audit observations in this 
regard are as under: 
2.5.1 Wrong configuration of allowances for non-running 
duties/training at headquarters/outstation 
As per Para 907 of Indian Railways Establishment Manual, when 
running staff is engaged in or em ployed for non-running duties (such 
as Training, Enquiry etc.), they  are entitled for payment of an 
Allowance in lieu of Kilometrage (ALK) for every calendar day for 
such non-running duties as they may be required to perform. When 
such non-running duties are performe d by the running staff at their 
Headquarters, they shall be paid the pay element of running allowance, 
i.e. 30 per cent of the basic pay applicable for the day ( viz.one per cent 
per day). When such non-running du ties are performed at outstation, 
they shall be paid ALK as may be specified (i.e. 160 kilometrage per 
day). A provision has been made in CMS which enables different 
lobbies to configure the various allo wances which are to be paid to 
different crew members for performing non-running duties at 
outstation and at headquarters. 
A review of the allowances confi gured in the CMS revealed that 
lobbies configured the CMS in viol ation of the rules and there were 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 24 
 
 
cases of charging of 80/120/160 kilo metrage per day to crew for 
attending non-running duties/training at their headquarters.  The wrong 
configuration of CMS resulted in computation of mileage allowance of 
approx. ` 485 lakh. Instances were also noticed where crew was shown 
to perform non-running duties at othe r than headquarter, however, his 
headquarters locations and outstation locations were ex actly the same, 
In CMS, 98 types of non-running du ties were defined in the master 
data of CMS, however, 100 types of non-running duties were found 
processed under CMS. During physical  verification instances of actual 
payment of kilometrage allowance were noticed though non-running 
duties were performed at the headquarters. (Appendix - XX) 
(Annexure - 24) 
In reply (September 2015), RB stated that necessary instructions have 
been issued to zonal railways. 
2.5.2 Inconsistencies in configuratio n of admissible kilometrage for 
outstation duties in CMS 
CMS has been configured to pay ‘a dmissible kilometrage’ to crew 
members.  Review of configuratio n of CMS for allowing admissible 
kilometrage to crew of various lobbies
32 revealed major inconsistencies 
in admissible kms. (to and fro) between two stations e.g. from NZM to 
CH it was 160 kms., from DLI to CH it was 204 kms. and from NDLS 
to CH it was 320 kms.  Thus, it varied between 160 and 320 kms. 
between the pair of lobbies/stations of the same cities.  The other 
examples of inconsistencies over NR and other ZRs are given in 
Annexure 25. During test check, instances were noticed where mileage 
allowance reports generated by CMS were manually corrected due to 
wrong configuration of admissible kms. (Appendix -XXI) 
(Annexure - 25) 
Thus, the above establishes that the CMS has not been configured 
properly for charging ‘Admissible Kilometrage’ due to which manual 
corrections are being made in the mileage reports and possibility of 
wrong payment cannot be ruled out. 
In reply (September 2015), RB stated that necessary instructions have 
been issued to zonal railways.   
2.5.3 Incorrect charging of mileage allowance 
During analysis of mileage reports  of November 2014 of Pakur (PKR) 
lobby of ER, Audit found that system  generated mileage allowance of 
160 kms. over route number 10151 and 210 kms. over route number 
10150 for traversing same distance of 4 kms. between PKR to PKR.  
                                                            
32 NR, ER, CR, SECR and NFR 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 25 
 
 
Route No. 1015133 and route number 1015034 created in the CMS were 
fixed mileage route and  it was noticed in audit that route number 
10151 was used as default for booking of Pilots and route number 
10150 was used as default for booking of Guards. This resulted in 
charging of different mileage for pi lots and guards. Orders/instructions 
in support of the above practice were  not produced to audit.  Payment 
to the crew of PKR lobby was made  on the basis of mileage allowance 
generated by the CMS. 
(Annexure - 26)  
In reply (September 2015), RB stated that necessary instructions have 
been issued to zonal railways.  
2.5.4 Generation of Mileage Allowance – Non-validation of/delay in sign 
on/off time, wrong configuration of allowances etc. 
As per paragraph 914 (ii)  of IR Establishment Manual, each railway 
shall identify such sections and ci rcumstances which do not have the 
potential for enabling the running st aff to earn adequate kilometrage 
within the stipulated duty hours. For these identified sections and 
circumstances, the running staff sha ll be paid at the rate of 120 kms. 
for the full stipulated duty hours and such section will be considered as 
‘minimum guarantee section’. However, this rule was not properly 
followed/implemented.  Further, system also did not validate crew sign 
on/off time which resulted in wrong generation of mileage allowances.  
Instances found in this regard are given below: 
2.5.4.1 Same crew sign on/off time from  same lobby – generation of 
irregular mileage allowance 
• Over ER, Audit found during test check of CMS data as well CMS 
Mileage Reports that in seven transactions, where time and 
lobbies/locations of crew sign on and sign off were same viz. the crew 
duty hours were zero, no mileage allowance should have been 
computed by the system. However, a mileage of 120 kms. was allowed 
in each case by CMS as the rout es were marked as Minimum 
Guarantee section.  
• Over NR, in respect of seven cases , crew had signed on/off from same 
station/lobby and at the same tim e but CMS had computed mileage 
allowance in the range of 40 kms. to 248 kms even though six out of 
seven routes were not marked as Minimum Guarantee section.  In one 
of the seven cases, the TA was prep ared for zero mileage allowance 
but mileage of 120 kms. was computed by the CMS which was 
irregular. 
(Annexure - 27) 
                                                            
33 PKR-PKR-KSIK---/160 
34 PKR-PKR-PKRZ----/210 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 26 
 
 
This implies that CMS lacks adequate controls to validate crew sign 
on/off time and mileage allowances generated by it. 
  In reply (September 2015), RB whil e endorsing remarks of CRIS that 
cases pertain to fixed mileage rout es and no validation are proposed as 
there is no minimum run time, issued necessary instructions to zonal 
railways. 
 The remarks of CRIS are not accepta ble as necessary validations are 
required to prevent charging of mileage allowance for zero duty hours. 
2.5.4.2 Crew sign on/sign off at the same  time from two different lobbies – 
generation of irregular mileage allowance 
Over two ZRs
35, audit found, during test check  of CMS data as well as 
CMS Mileage Reports, 732 instances /transactions where crew had 
signed on and signed off from two di fferent lobbies/loc ations at the 
same time, though it was not feasible  as the lobbies were physically 
apart from each other and in these cases, test check revealed that CMS 
has also allowed mileage allowa nce without validating sign on/off 
time.  
Thus, lack of logical controls in CMS to validate sign on and sign off 
time from two physically apart lobbie s for the same crew at the same 
time has resulted in irregular generation of mileage allowance.   
In reply (September 2015), RB whil e endorsing remarks of CRIS that 
validation for duty hours are not propos ed as there is no minimum run 
time, issued necessary instructions to zonal railways. 
The remarks of CRIS are not acceptabl e as necessary validations are 
required to prevent wrong charging of mileage allowance for zero duty 
hours. 
2.5.4.3 Wrong configuration of minimum guarantee/handicapped section 
As per codal provision 36, each Railway shall identify such sections 
and circumstances which do not have the potential for enabling the 
r u n n i n g  s t a f f  t o  e a r n  a d e q u a t e  k i lometrage  within  the  stipulated 
duty  hours.    For  these  identified  sections  and  circumstances,  the 
r u n n i n g  s t a f f  s h a l l  b e  p a i d  a t  t h e  r a t e  o f  1 2 0  k m s .  f o r  t h e  f u ll 
stipulated duty hours. 
• In Hubli division of SWR, six sections were identified as 
handicapped sections in August 2008 effective from April 2004. 
During May 2011, four sections were also identified as 
handicapped/minimum guarantee section effective from April 2011 
up-to March 2012. 
                                                            
35 NR=728 cases, ER=4 
36Paragraph 914 (ii) of Indian Railways Establishment Manual 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 27 
 
 
It was noticed in audit that no orders were issued by SWR to extend 
the validity of identified handica pped sections after March 2012. This 
resulted in irregular payment of kilometrage allowance of ` 13.40 lakh 
(approximately) for handicapped section during September 2014 to 
November 2014 by SWR. 
(Annexure - 28 - Table-A & B) 
• As per NR letter dated 21 October 2008, Narwana-Kurukshetra 
(NRW-KKDE) section has been defined as minimum guarantee 
section but has been marked in CMS as only one way on Route No. 
1097 between NRW to KKDE and has not been marked as such on 
route No. 1760 between KKDE to NRW. 
• Over ECoR, KDJR-NYG-PRNR-GADH
37 and KDJR section was 
defined as a minimum guarantee section.  However, the same was 
not marked as such in CMS whic h resulted in computation of 
mileage allowance on the basis of actual kms. rather than 
computing of minimum guaranteed mileage allowance. 
In reply (September 2015), RB stated that necessary instructions have 
been issued to zonal railways. 
2.5.4.4 Wrong calculation of ghat allowance 
As per extant orders
38, Lalkaun-Haldwani (LKU-HDW) and Haldwani-
Kathgodam (HDW-KGM) sections over NER have been selected as 
special ghat sections. Ghat allowance for ghat section is to be 
calculated at twice of actual distance for LKU-HDW section and at 
thrice of actual distance for HDW-KGM section. As per CMS 
database, the section between L KU-HDW (having distance of 16.09 
kms) has been defined as type-II ghat section under route number 890 
and 1464  and mileage for type-II ghat  section is computed by CMS at 
thrice the actual distance (two times of normal working plus actual 
length) instead of  at twice of act ual distance. Moreover, under route 
numbers 890 and 1464, the section between Haldi Road (HLDD) and 
Lalkaun (LKU) (having distance of  7.63 kms.) has been marked as 
type-II ghat section viz. the mileage for this section is also computed at 
thrice of actual distance.  However, the section between HLDD and 
LKU is not a ghat section.  
 Hence, mileage computed under route number 890 and 1464 for HDW 
to LKU and HLDD to LKU was not co mputed as per extant orders and 
payment was made as per the mileage generated by the CMS. 
In reply (September 2015), RB stated that necessary instructions have 
been issued to ZRs. 
                                                            
37 See glossary 
38 DME/(O&F)/IZN letter no. Mechanical/539/3/4/ Part I dt. 1 June 2011 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 28 
 
 
2.5.4.5 Computation/Payment of excess shunting mileage allowance due to 
late signing off 
As per CRIS documentation on CMS, a Shunter is allowed a mileage 
of 15 kms. for a shunting duty of one hour (rounded off to 30 minutes). 
Shunters are generally booked for eight hours’ duty in one shift or for 
16 hours’ duty in two shifts of ei ght hours. It was, however, observed 
in Audit that CMS has not been co nfigured to highlight cases where 
the mileage allowance is for excess ively high hours of duty, thereby 
denying an opportunity to the Railway Administration for taking 
corrective measures and the mileage allowance as calculated by CMS 
is being paid to the Shunters (except for the few cases where the Lobby 
staff was vigilant and manual interv ention was made). In this regard, 
observations are as follows: 
• Audit found during data analysis over NR & CR that in 1772 
cases
39, the CMS allowed shunting mileage allowance @ 15 
kilometers per hour for performi ng shunting duties for a period 
beyond 17 hours to 270 hours 40 which resulted in computation of 
shunting mileage allowance of 7,60,095 kms 41, pertaining to duty 
exceeding a period of 17 hours. This occurred probably due to poor 
supervisory control over approvi ng abnormal ‘crew sign on’/sign 
off time’. 
• Scrutiny of physical records at TKD lobby revealed instances 
where crew was paid shunting mileage allowance as computed by 
CMS. For example, a crew (ID TKD1456) booked for a duty of 
eight hours shift on 11 October 2014 was allowed shunting mileage 
allowance for a duty of 32 hours and against the entitlement of 
shunting mileage allowance fo r 120 kms. was paid shunting 
mileage allowance for 480 kms. A crew (ID TKD1441) deputed for 
16 hours duty (two shifts of 8 hours) was paid for 32 hours’ duty 
and against the entitle ment of shunting mileage allowance for 240 
kms. was paid shunting mileage allowance for 480 kms.  
• At GZB lobby, crew booked for eigh t hours duty (one shift) or 16 
hours duty (two shifts) were paid mileage for a duty period ranging 
from 32 hours to 61 hours and against the entitlement of 120 kms. 
or 240 kms. were paid shunting m ileage allowance for 480 kms. to 
915 kms. At GZB lobby, system allowed payment of mileage 
allowance for 1530 kms to a crew (ID GZB1527) for a shunting 
duty performed continuously from  1 October 2014 to 5 October 
2014 (102 hours) even though the crew  was absent from 1 October 
                                                            
39 NR=1216 cases, CR=556 cases 
40 CR=17 hours to 264 hours, NR=17 hours to 270 hours 
41NR= 4,29,195 kms., CR=3,30,900 kms. 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 29 
 
 
to 2 October 2014 which clearly gives rise to the suspicion that he 
was logged in by a proxy.  
Excess payment of mileage allowan ce was due to the fact that the 
concerned crew had not timely signed off in CMS but the same was 
approved by the Supervisor an d CMS also lacked adequate 
controls/provision to prevent delayed sign off as well as generation 
of abnormal shunting mileage allo wance and the concerned crew 
members also did not point out  excess charging of mileage 
allowance for payment. 
• In 3488 cases, Shunters/crew performed shunting duties for 511 to 
539 minutes (i.e. more than 8½ hours  to less than nine hours) and 
were allowed mileage allowance by  the system for nine hours, 
though as per Shunter Roster, Shun ter is deputed for eight hours 
shift. Similarly, in 149 cases , Shunters /crew members were 
allowed shunting mileage allowance for duty performed for more 
than 16½ hours and less than 17 hours though as per the Roster, 
Shunters/crew members are booke d for 16 hours (in two shifts 
cases). Thus, delay in signing off in 3637 cases led to computation 
of excess mileage allowance by 54,555 kms. 
• Further, test check of physical  records at GZB and TKD lobbies 
revealed instances where Shunters deputed for eight hours’ duty of 
one shift or 16 hours’ duty of two shifts were paid for nine hours or 
17 hours’ duty though their duty period of nine or 17 hours was not 
regularized. During test check of physical records at SSB lobby, 
Audit found that the CMS allowed excess computation of shunting 
mileage allowance but the concerned crew who was allowed 
mileage for a duty period of more  than 8½ hours, pointed out the 
excess mileage for deduction of the same from his pay bill.  
• Analysis of NR data also reve aled that in 1911 cases, CMS 
computed shunting mileage allowa nce of 72495 kms. pertaining to 
shunting duty performed for a period beyond eight hour viz. for 
duty performed between nine hours to 15 hours which were not as 
per duty roster hours. 
• Over NFR, it was noticed that CM S was not serving as a tool for 
controlling payment of mileage allowance as was evident from the 
results of test check of Mileag e Summary Report for the period 1 
October 2014 to 31 October 2014 which revealed that due to non-
approval of TA by Supervisor with in time, crew had to sign off 
manually and improper up-dation of CMS data of manual sign on 
& sign off by crew at non-CMS lo cations, resulted in computation 
of mileage in excess of 1395 kms to 3200 kms by CMS which 
required manual corrections. 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 30 
 
 
In reply (September 2015), RB while endorsing CRIS remarks that 
validation can be introduced if pa rameters are defined by Railways, 
stated that necessary instructions  have been issued to the zonal 
railways. 
2.5.4.6 Time lag in data updation leading to inadmissible 
computation/payment of officiating mileage allowance 
As per CRIS documentation, Senior A ssistant Loco Pilot/Loco Pilot 
Shunters (SALP/LPS) are not en titled for officiating mileage 
allowance for performing shunting duties. A review of CMS data 
revealed that between 5 September and 5 December 2014, the CMS 
computed 7,681 kms. as officiating mileage allowance to SALP and 
LPS for performing shunting duties.  
These kilometers were computed after the date of  promotion as 
SALP/LPS. During test check of r ecords at TKD and SSB lobbies of 
NR, it was noticed that such inadmissible payment of officiating 
mileage allowance was made as promotion dates of crew were not 
timely updated in CMS which led to charging of inadmissible 
officiating mileage allowance.   
In reply (September 2015), RB stated that necessary instructions have 
been issued to the zonal railways.
 
2.5.5 Increase in percentage of non-pr ogrammed utilisation of crew to 
their programmed utilisation over the years 
Efficient utilisation of crew mean s more deployment of crew in 
programmed activities as well as re duction in deployment of crew in 
non-programmed activities. An analysis of CMS’s crew utilization data 
of 13 ZRs 42 pertaining to April 2014 to November 2014 revealed that 
the percentage of total non-programmed hours (period utilized on 
leave, stationary duty, training, and ot her miscellaneous type of duties) 
to total programmed hours (i.e. period utilized on running duty and 
rest) was in the range of 5.68 percent (SR) to 19.28 percent (ECoR).  
An year wise analysis of CMS’s crew utilization data of these ZRs 43 
pertaining to April 2011 to Nove mber 2014 revealed that the 
percentage of total non-programmed hours to total programmed hours 
indicated an increasing trend ove r ER, NWR, SECR, WR, WCR, CR, 
SER, NCR, SR and SWR whereas it indicated a decreasing trend over 
NR, ECoR and NFR. During April 2011 to November 2014, it 
increased from 1.75 per cent to 8.71 per cent over ER and from13.52 
per cent to 17.12per cent over SECR. It decreased from 23.57 per cent 
to 19.28 per cent over ECoR and from 8.64 per cent to 7.73 per cent 
over NFR. 
(Annexure - 29) 
                                                            
42CR, ER, ECoR, NR, NFR, NWR, SER, SECR, SWR, WCR, WR, NCR & SR 
43 CR, ER, ECoR, NR, NFR, NWR, SER, SECR, SWR, WCR, WR, NCR & SR 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 31 
 
 
Thus, the increasing trend of utiliz ation of crew on non-programmed 
activities leads to the conclusion that due control is not being exercised 
to improve the deployment of crew in programmed activities. 
In reply (September 2015), RB stated that necessary instructions have 
been issued to zonal railways. 
2.5.6 Comparison of crew movement data vis-a-vis FOIS/CMS/COA 
train departure/arrival time 
An analysis of data containing deta ils of the crew sign-on/sign-off and 
FOIS/CMS/COA arrival/departure  time was done over eight ZRs 
which indicated that system lacked adequate control to validate the 
data input pertaining to crew sign on/sign off time or the 
COA/CMS/FOIS train movement time was wrong.  
Audit noticed instances where the crew signed on after FOIS train 
departure time, crew signed on a bnormally early to FOIS train 
departure time, crew signed off before FOIS arrival time of the train, 
FOIS train departure time and crew’s sign-on time was same, CMS 
train departure time was abnormally after train ordering time.  
Comparison of CMS data with COA data revealed instances where 
crew sign on time was not regular/within the specified limit. 
(Appendix - XXII) 
(Annexure - 30)

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 32 
 
 
Chapter 3 – Review of Application Controls 
Audit Objective 2 
To review the application controls to  ensure that proper authorization, 
completeness, accuracy and validity of transactions, their maintenance and 
other types of data input were in place. 
3.1 Multiple Traffic Advices (TAs) of same train – Non-validation of 
crew competency 
Traffic Advice contains details for which a crew is to be booked like 
route number, station from, statio n to, loco number, traction, train 
ordering time, train number, crew required etc. and is used for booking 
a crew.  
A review of the TAs pertaining to  5 September to 7 December 2014 44 
created by different lobbies over different zones revealed that multiple 
TAs were created where route numb er, train ordering date & time, 
station from and to, service type and train number were same. 
Multiple transactions of TAs having similar type of details, as 
mentioned above, were noticed in respect of three types of duties, viz. 
Road Learning
45 (11 ZRs 46), Working 47 (12 ZRs 48) and Spare 49 (12 
ZRs50). The number of records of TAs, having similar details as 
mentioned above, were 27262 for Road Learning type duty (with same 
number repeated up-to 96 times),  437389 for Working type duty (with 
same number being repeated up-to 52 times) and 45345 for Spare type 
duty (with same number repeated up -to 75 times). These figures did 
not include any cancelled TAs. 
A  comparison of 11 working type TAs, having similar details as 
mentioned above,  of GZB lobby of NR with Mileage Reports/physical 
records revealed that Assistant Lo co Pilot/Loco Pilot (ALP/LP)/(Train 
Drivers) were booked against all the 11 multiple TAs although they 
were not booked for the destination mentioned in the 10 TAs. This 
indicates that TAs with dummy deta ils were in use for booking crew. 
Similarly, out of 21 working type TAs, having similar details as 
mentioned above, of TKD lobby of NR, 18 TAs were processed for 
booking ALP/LP (Train Drivers) and in all these 18 TAs, loco number 
and loco type were also same.  
                                                            
44(including 14 TAs pertaining to future period from December 2015 to August 2024) 
45Road Learning is a type of duty where crew is booked for learning route /getting familiar with a 
specific route of a section.  
46 CR, NR, NWR, NFR, SR, SCR, SECR, SER, ER, WR 
47Working is a type of duty where a crew is booked for working/driving a train. 
48 CR ,ECoR, NR, NWR, NFR, SR, SCR, SECR, SER, ER, WR 
49 Spare is a type of duty where a crew is booked for his movement from one station to another station. 
50 CR, ECoR, NR, NWR, NFR, SR, SCR, SECR, SER, ER, WR 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 33 
 
 
Booking of loco pilots against multiple TAs between 11-18 times 
having same train ordering time, same  loco number, same destination 
and same routes is not practicable and this has led to failure in 
validating crew competency for correct loco, actual route for which 
crew was booked. It also leads to the conclusion that preparation of TA 
with wrong details may be one of the reasons for bypassing the 
validation of crew competency for loco and route and this also resulted 
in populating the CMS with dummy data  leading to generation of false 
information.  
Thus, the above deficiencies indicate  that the CMS failed to generate 
proper and correct Traffic Advices  to ensure booking of competent 
crew. The system allowed populating dummy TA data leading to 
wastage of manpower and generati on of wrong information, thereby 
compromising the efficiency of CMS operations.  This also indicates 
that TAs are being prepared just be cause of provision in the system for 
booking crew and are not being prep ared by taking their significance 
into consideration. 
In reply, RB endorsed CRIS remarks that observations have been noted 
for remedial action. 
(Annexure - 31) 
3.2 Discrepancies in traffic advice data/Incomplete data 
A review of TA data of a few coaching trains at various lobbies
51 of 
NR, NFR & SER revealed that no uniformity as to train number, 
destination station, service type et c. was maintained while preparing 
TAs. Same train was being operate d with TAs having different train 
number/names, destination, type of train/service, different 
ordering/departure time etc. On some  days, a train operated as express 
train, was operated as passenger/freight train on other days. A few such 
examples are given in Appendix XXIII. 
Thus, CMS lacks data validation controls and lack of 
uniformity/inconsistency in Traffic Advices leads to wrong generation 
of mileage allowances, populates CMS with wrong data leading to 
generation of wrong information. 
3.3 Multiple acknowledgement of call 
After booking a crew for duty, a call is served to the crew intimating 
him about his duty details and the call is acknowledged by the crew 
either by accepting or rejecting the sa me.  A review of the call data 
                                                            
51Train Number 14095(DEE),12954(NZM), 14086 (SSB),12011,12029, 12226(DLI), 12455/12455 Exp 
(JHL),12428,14006(ANVR), 54412(MTC), 12057, 19326(GZB),54009, 74012 (ROK),12481, 13007 
(Jind), 64002, 04032, 54026,04426(PNP),05817U P(APDJ), 15717UP(GHY), 15670(LMG), 
05610(KIR), 55908(NTSK), 02503DN(NJP) and 05726DN (NCB), (18409, 18615, 18625 of SER) 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 34 
 
 
pertaining to 11 ZRs52 for the period 5 September to 5 December 2014 
revealed that 54852  calls made to crew of 11 ZRs were acknowledged 
between two to 38 times.  
Acknowledging same call multiple times indicates that either the 
earlier acknowledgements of calls were wrongly entered in CMS or the 
crew did not turn up on time against earlier call, hence, went into non-
run and he was again booked on the same TA. 
(Annexure - 32) 
3.4 Non-capturing of train number 
As per review of 25425 Freight/Mail express/Passenger trains TAs of 
ten ZRs
53it was noticed that TAs of these trains were prepared without 
capturing their train numbers. Name of five coaching trains over SECR 
was captured as “/”. Over SCR, 57 types of (each type containing 
several records) single digit train numbers were fed into the database. 
 Non-capturing of train number indica tes inadequate validation controls 
to ensure completeness of  train data input and th is leads to failure in 
identification of train in which a crew was booked. 
3.5 Non-capturing of traction details 
While preparing Traffic Advice, details of the traction of the loco i.e. 
whether the loco is of di esel power or of electri c power is captured in 
the system. However, out of 2091419 transactions pertaining to 14 
ZRs
54 containing details of TAs and booking of crew, in respect of 
22531transactions, traction of the loco for which a crew was booked 
could not be ascertained as Tract ion related information was not 
captured. In respect of 3215transactions , irrelevant values like Z, NG, 
Auto etc. were recorded in the Traction field.  
Thus, complete and exact details of loco/train could not be ascertained 
in respect of these trains and this also raises doubt as to whether the 
crew competency for operating the train was validated. 
In reply (September 2015), RB while  endorsing CRIS remarks that in 
case of Guards, no traction is re quired, stated that necessary 
instructions have been issued to the zonal railways.  
However, audit observations contain cases where traction details of 
crew members other than Guards ar e missing. Hence, remedial action 
in the matter is required. 
(Annexure - 33) 
                                                            
52 NR, SECR, SCR, CR, ER, ECoR, NFR, WCR, WR, SR, NCR 
53 NR=286, SECR=181, ER=10514, WR=9796, CR=1030, NFR=11, NWR=2921, SER=641, SWR=20, 
WCR=25 
54ER, NWR, NR, CR, ECR, ECoR, NFR, SECR, SER, SCR, SWR, WR, SR, NCR 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 35 
 
 
3.6 Non-updation of training, leave and security records of crew in 
CMS 
During audit of records of CMS at selected lobbies, no formal 
procedure was found to be establis hed for ensuring updating of data 
pertaining to training, l eave/absence etc. in CMS. During test check of 
records of selected lobbies over di fferent ZRs, differences were found 
between manual records and CMS records as is evident from the 
following examples: 
i. Security grading details of crew  of NFR (APDJ lobby) pertaining 
to the period 2005 to 2012, NR (SSB Lobby and Electric lobbies of 
DLI Division) were different in CM S from those recorded in Loco 
Inspectors’ Hand Book/Manual Records. Manually maintained 
Periodical Medical Examination/ Refresher Training Courses 
records at SSE/Loco offices of NFR, SER, ECoR, WR selected for 
Audit, were not found updated in the CMS database on ‘real time’ 
basis.  Over NWR lobbies, dates of LAP shown in CMS were not 
matching with leave account. Leave details were found not updated 
in SWR and NR. Over NWR, in CMS, reason for non-run was 
wrongly shown as 'TLC' i.e. Traction Loco Controller meant for 
Electrical Traction which does not exist in NWR. 
Delay in data updating leads to wrong calculation of allowances, 
depicting wrong information and reflec ts the deficiencies in internal 
control, monitoring and rectification mechanism. 
In reply (September 2015), RB stated that necessary instructions have 
been issued to the zonal railways.  
3.7 Non-capturing of correct data for cancellation of TA 
System allows cancellation of TAs necessitated due to various reasons. 
However, improper/meaningless reas ons for cancellation of TA were 
captured.  As per the TA Cancella tion Report of GZB, Jind, Panipat, 
NZM, MTC lobbies of NR, in ma jority of the cases of TA 
cancellation/put-back,  proper reasons we re not recorded as irrelevant 
entries like single digit alphabet/numerical K, E, Y etc. were used 
which  did not convey any meaningful information.    
Over SECR, SER & SCR, in 372
55 cases reasons found for TA 
cancellation did not convey any mean ingful information.  The data 
analysis over ECoR and NCR also re vealed that in 3230 cases of TA 
cancellation56, reasons for cancellation of TA were not available.  
In reply (September 2015), RB stated that necessary instructions have 
been issued to the zonal railways.   
                                                            
55 SECR=1, SER=24, SCR=347 
56 ECoR=3219, NCR=11 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 36 
 
 
3.8 Improper capturing of reasons for changes in sign on/off time of 
crew  
There is a provision in the CMS to modify values in crew sign on/off 
field and Rest Given field and the reasons for modifications are also 
recorded in the database. A review  of transactions data of 9,41,224 
records relating to modification don e in the above fields by 10 ZRs 57 
between November 2013 to December 2014 pertaining to various 
duration revealed that in all the cases,  remarks recorded for changes in 
the Crew Sign on field were ‘Sign On Time Changed By User’ which 
did not convey actual reasons for m odification. In respect of changes 
made in Crew Sign off values and Rest given field values, remarks 
column in almost all/majority of the cases were  either blank or reasons 
recorded irrelevant entries like,/, A, X, ‘+’ etc. which did not convey 
any meaningful information. 
Lack of adequate controls to  enforce capturing of proper 
remarks/reasons for alteration in date and time field deprived 
management of becoming aware of ac tual reasons for altering critical 
data for proper monitoring and for taking remedial action in the matter.  
In reply (September 2015), RB stated that necessary instructions have 
been issued to the zonal railways.  
3.9 Review of ‘Lobby Utilization Report’ data 
CMS generates ‘Lobby Utilization Re port’ containing breakup of the 
hours utilized by crew on different types of duties like running duties, 
rest, leave, training, stationery duties etc. during a par ticular period of 
time.   
Analysis of data pertaining to utilization of hours by the crew for 
different periods was done over NR, ER, SR, NCR and SECR for two 
periods
58 in respect of 13880 59 and 13905 60 crew respectively.  It was 
noticed that in the first period each  crew had an avai lable time of 744 
hours whereas in the second period each  crew had an available time of 
720 hours.  
 
 
 
                                                            
57NWR=15824, ECR=16628, CR=93230, NR=106399,  SECR=171699, ER=159184, NFR=11841, 
SCR=333155, SER=20509, SWR=13665 
58 NR=1st period = 15-10-2014 to 14-11-2014,   2 nd period = 08-09-2014 to 07-10-2014 
 ER=Ist Period  = 06-10-2014 to 05-11-2014,   2 nd period = 06-11-2014 to 05-12-2014 
 SECR=1st period= 11-10-2014 to 10-11-2014,   2nd period = 11-09-2014 to 10-10-2014 
  SR   = Ist period =01-10-2014 to 31-10-2014  2nd period = 01-09-2014 to 30-09-2014 
 NCR=Ist Period = 05-10-2014 to 04-11-2014 2nd Period = 05-09-2014 to 04-09-2014 
59NR=3757, ER=811, SECR=3921,  SR=1859, NCR=3532 (Total=13880) 
60NR=3731, ER=820 and SECR-3893, SR=1852, NCR=3609 (Total=13905) 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 37 
 
 
Period No. of hours 
Available 
No. of 
Crew 
Observations 
Ist Period 744 196 Details of utilization in the 
range of 745-863 hours 
54 Depicted details of utilization 
in the range of 616-736 hours 
IInd Period 720 800 Details of utilization in the 
range of 723-976 hours  
31 Details utilization in the range 
of 544-719 hours.   
Depiction of excess utilization was due to the fact that some of the sign 
on/off (crew movement) transactions were included in the report/data 
multiple times and depiction of less u tilization was due to the fact that 
complete movements of crew were not captured.  
 Further, as per CMS Lobby Utiliza tion Reports data of NR, ER, SECR, 
SR and NCR for the first period , 1237 crew and for the second period 
1205 crew  of NR, ER, SECR and N CR did not perform any running 
duties and were on rest for the whole period. However, as per the test 
check of records at TKD lobby of NR , it was informed to Audit (May 
2015) that majority of the crew members who had zero (0) duty hours 
and 744/720 rest hours were either performing duties at 
location/lobbies other than TKD or  were on long leave/absent but 
Lobby Utilization Report showed them under Rest. 
 In the absence of reliable Lobby Ut ilization Report, management was 
denied an opportunity to control and deploy crew in the most 
productive manner. 
(Annexure - 34) 
3.10 Inconsistency in output reports 
 A review of reports pertaining to ‘Crew Due for Periodical Rest’, 
‘Crew Training History’, ‘Crew Training Particular’, ‘Breach of Rest 
Details’ and ‘Crew Mileage Summary’ revealed inconsistencies. 
As per column ‘No PR in Last seve n days’ of Crew Due for Periodical 
Rest’ report, the crew had not taken any rest during the last seven days 
from the date of report but as per ‘Last PR Hours’ column of the same 
report, the crew had taken the rest. 
In case of ‘Crew Training History’ & ‘Crew Training Particular’, both 
the reports generated at the same ti me indicated different due dates of 
training for same crew. 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 38 
 
 
In case of ‘Breach of Rest Details’ report and ‘Crew Mileage Summary 
Report’, both these reports depict ed different period of breach of 
rest.(Appendix - XXIV).   
 The above deficiencies indicate that the CMS failed to generate correct 
MIS which could lead to wrong decision making by the Railway 
Administration. Thus, correct generation of various MIS reports should 
be ensured to facilitate Railway Administration in proper monitoring 
and decision making process. 
3.11 Non-usage/Incomplete usage  of ‘Abnormality Module’ 
The CMS kiosks used for sign on and sign off purpose has feature/ 
facility to enter the abnormalities noticed by the crew at the time of 
sign off. Apart from that Lobby officials can also enter abnormality 
details in CMS. When the abnormality is entered, the system 
immediately sends SMSs to all the concerned users configured in the 
system about the abnormality notice d. The status of the abnormality 
remains as Pending in CMS. The oper ator has the option of setting the 
status as Complete by selecting the option YS in CMS and also by 
giving the reasons/ remarks about the action taken in the case. 
Over CR, NR, SER, SCR, SWR, WR it was noticed that crew were not 
actively using this facility and instead they recorded the abnormalities 
in the manual register kept in th e lobby which was then communicated 
by the Lobby officials to Control office. A test check of records at 
DLI, GZB and PNP lobbies of NR  revealed that the abnormality 
communicated by crew was also not re gularly entered / updated in the 
CMS. Instead, Divisional Contro l office at DLI daily collected 
Abnormality Position from different lobbies. Over SCR, a separate 
Access based programme viz. ‘Centralised Control Statistics’ was in 
use for the purpose. 
Over CR, the lobby which had reported the abnormality did not get the 
feedback about the action taken or when the reported fault was set 
right. Hence, in most of the cases, the status of most of the 
abnormalities entered in CMS remained pending. Moreover, setting the 
status of an abnormality as comple te is a supervisory function and 
needs to be performed by a Supervisor. Since the outsourced data entry 
operators have also been given su pervisory privileges, the security 
aspect of this important function is compromised thereby safe 
operations may be adversely affected.  
It was further noticed that Loco Inspectors conduct footplate 
inspections and may notice abnormalities. However, CMS had no 
provision to enter abnormalities noti ced by Loco Inspectors (CR, NR, 
SECR). 
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 39 
 
 
3.12 Non-usage of Link 
There is a provision for inclusion of crew links 61 in the system and 
book passenger and mail/express crews. However, this module was not 
found to be actively in use as the cr ew links had not been uploaded in 
the system of almost all the lobbies test checked over 12 ZRs62. 
Non-usage of links results in manual preparation of Traffic Advices in 
CMS and defeats the purpose of developing Link module. 
 
                                                            
61Link are created for Mail Express/Passenger/Rajdh ani/High speed trains drivers, for daily/weekly, 
multi-weekly days, contains details  about train arrival/departure time , crew reported time for duty, 
periodical/long rest and are used  for booking crew by assigning them to a specific link. 
62 CR, ECR,  NCR, NFR, NER, SECR, SR, SCR, SER, SWR, WCR, WR 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 40 
 
 
Chapter 4- Review of IT Security 
Audit Objective 3 
To review the IT security mechanism to ensure that it was capable of 
reasonably protecting all business critical information and IT assets from loss, 
damage or abuse. 
To review the Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP) /Business Continuity Plan (BCP) 
to ensure the continuity of the or ganization’s business in the event of 
unforeseen events. 
Crew Management System is a part of the Freight Operations Information 
System (FOIS) having interface with othe r modules/applications of FOIS and 
covers important activities such as  assignment and booking of crew for 
various trains, validation of competen cy of crew for train operations and 
captures critical data which is very impor tant for safe train operations.  Apart 
from that, CMS also manages data pert aining to various allowances of crew. 
As such it is very important to adopt adequate preventive, detective and 
corrective measures to protect CMS for its confidentiality, integrity, 
availability and to ensure safe, smooth, timely and continued train operations. 
Railway Board formulated its Baseline IT  Security Policy in April/May 2008 
within which subsidiary procedures a nd instructions were to be drawn by 
CRIS/zonal railways/individual units. The Baseline IT Security Policy 
addresses different aspects of IT Secu rity including environment and location 
security, equipment security, physical access control, data access right, user 
identification and privilege manage ment, password management, Business 
Continuity Plan, data backup, applic ation development and maintenance 
security, protection against virus and malicious software, internet/email 
security, software and patch management etc.  
Audit has noticed that subsequent to the RB’s Baseline Security Policy, no IT 
Security Policy or subsidiary procedur es and instructions relevant to CMS 
have been drawn over 13 ZRs
63.  In reply, Railway Administration of NR, ER, 
SECR and SER reported that the matter pertains to CRIS/ CAO (FOIS) office.  
However, Audit of CMS application security was conducted broadly keeping 
in view the IR’s Baseline IT Security Policy/CRIS Information Security 
Policy.  Audit observations in this regard are as under: 
4.1 Physical Access controls 
Physical risks to the system in clude physical damage, theft and 
disclosure/copying of information. P hysical controls of IT systems 
ensure prevention of unauthorized access to IT system or their 
malfunctioning.  
                                                            
63SR, CR, NWR, NR, ER, NER, SWR, NCR, SECR, WCR, SCR, WR and SER. 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 41 
 
 
As per IR’s Baseline IT Security  Policy, computer rooms should be 
restricted area, only authorized pe rsons should be allowed entry into 
the premises and suitable access control system should be put in place. 
All visitors to the computer rooms should be monitored all times by an 
authorized member of the Railway staff. 
During the visit to vari ous lobbies of 12 ZRs
64, it was noticed that 
adequate measures65 were not adopted to prevent and detect the entry 
of unauthorized persons to lobbies a nd to protect the IT Assets from 
theft/damage. Over different zones, detective security measures like 
CCTV cameras were either not inst alled or inadequate number of 
CCTVs were installed as details given in Appendix XXV. 
In reply (September 2015), RB stated that necessary instructions have 
been issued to the zonal railways.   
CMS Users: CMS is used at different levels by different types of users 
having different privileges. It is ma inly used by System Administrator, 
Database Administrator, Database user and Software (Application) 
Access users. The Software Applic ation Access users include Super 
user for creating Supervisor us er for lobby, Supervisor user 
(Loco/Traffic) for creating Train Cl erk (TNC) user for lobby and for 
approving sign on/off, TNC user for booking of crew on various 
Traffic Advices and Crew Console us er for Kiosk which enables every 
Crew Console user to access CMS through Kiosk for sign on/off, 
viewing his personal details etc. 
As per Baseline IT Security Polic y of IR, every user ID should 
uniquely identify one user. Group or shared user ID should not be 
created unless permitted explicitly and approved by the Department IT 
Security Manager. Each passwor d should have a minimum length, 
restricted words/format and a valid ity period among ot her restrictions. 
All information system privilege s should be revoked at a time a 
member is transferred or ceases to  serve railway.  Moreover, data 
access rights should be granted on need  to know basis. In this regard, 
audit observations are as under: 
4.2 Logical Access control – password policy 
A system in the form of software control aimed at protecting computer 
resources (data, programs etc.) against unauthorized access is classified 
as logical access control. In this re gard, following issues were noticed 
in audit: 
 
 
                                                            
64 WR, SWR, ER, SR, SER, NWR, SCR, ECoR, NCR, NER, ECR & WCR 
65 Like Electronic Door Lock, Bio-metrics Door Lock, Swipe Card, Security Guard etc. 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 42 
 
 
Password Policy 
As per CRIS’s Information Secur ity (Password) Policy, password 
length should be minimum six characters for user account and 10 
characters for Administrator account  and should be a combination of 
upper and lower case characters , digits and permitted special 
characters.  
• Test check revealed that CMS neither ensured a password 
consisting of lower/upper case ch aracters, digits and special 
character nor ensured minimum 10 characters password for System 
Administrator/Database user a nd accepted minimum six character 
simple password such as ‘123456 ’. At application level, CMS 
allowed single character user ID as well as password to enable 
crew to login/access the system , without forcing change of 
password at first login and periodical change of password.  
• Analysis of data pertaining to diffe rent types of users revealed as 
under: 
User Type Details 
Crew Console User  
(Drivers/Guards) 
Between 11.91 per cent and 100 percent 
users of all ZRs were using same password 
which, though in encrypted form, was the 
default password.  
Loco 
Inspector/Senior 
Loco Inspector/Chief 
Loco Inspector 
Between 74.01 per cent (SEC) and 98.53 
per cent (ER) users of all ZRs were using 
same password.   
CMS Users 
(Supervisor/TNC) 
Between 36.68 per cent and 87.82 per cent 
users over all ZRs were using same 
password. 
In view of the fact that user ID is  visible to all and password can also 
be easily guessed, possibi lity of unauthorised  access/login by proxy 
users cannot be ruled out as is further evident from the facts mentioned 
under paragraph number 2.5.4.5 in the report that a crew was found 
logged in during his absence. 
Thus, the basic security measures, pr escribed in the IR’s Baseline IT 
Security Policy/CRIS Information Security Policy, were not adopted to 
ensure security and safety of CMS resources. 
In reply (September 2015), RB admitted audit observations for 
remedial action. 
(Annexure – 35, 36, 37) 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 43 
 
 
4.3 Poor User Profile Management 
Administrative/supervisory privilege s were assigned to dummy users 
and privileges assigned were not commensurate with the requirement 
of user’s designation, supervisory privileges were compromised and 
this could lead to loss of data integrity/misuse of system and wrong 
booking of crew.  CMS users were created in obscure/lobby names and 
outsourced staff was not given separate user ID . This may lead to 
failure in identifying the actual pers on who populated the data, failure 
in fixing responsibility fo r wrong CMS operations. Audit 
observations/Instances of irregularities noticed in this regard are as 
under: 
• Irregular privileges to outsourced staff: Over SR, data feeding in 
CMS at crew booking lobbies
66 was outsourced through a contractual 
agency but no separate user IDs and passwords were allotted to 
outsourced staff and common user id  and password was shared by 
every CMS user in a lobby.  
• Over SCR, in 1,16,383 cases, the pe rson who booked the crew also 
accorded supervisory approval which indicated that in most of the 
cases the outsourced staff had gran ted supervisory approval which was 
in violation of the prescribed procedure and, therefore, irregular. 
• Over ER, all the staff including outsourced staff of lobbies test checked 
used common user-id and password. 
• Irregular privileges to railway CMS User : During data analysis, 
audit noticed over different zones that Administrative/Supervisory 
privileges were assigned to non-exis tent/dummy railway users or the 
privileges assigned were not commen surate with user’s designation.  
Users were found created in obs cure/lobby name which did not 
disclose identify of the actual user. (Appendix - XXVI) 
(Annexure - 38) 
• Different roles/functions p erformed by CMS users, using 
Supervisory ID 
As per CRIS’s CMS documentation, different roles have been provided 
for Train Clerk and Supervisor and the same are supposed to be 
performed by actual users.  
• As per CMS User Manual, Superv isory function of approving sign 
on/off activity of crew is to be performed by crew Supervisor. An 
analysis of data pertaining to crew calling, booking and approving their 
sign on revealed that over 11 ZRs
67, out of 2071319 cases, in 669393 
                                                            
66 Tambaram, Chennai Egmore, Chennai Central, Tiruvottiyur, Arakkonam and Jolarpettai 
67 ER, NR, NWR, WR, NFR, CR, SCR, SER, SECR, SR, NCR 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 44 
 
 
cases, User IDs of Calling Clerk, B ooking Clerk and Supervisor were 
the same.  
(Annexure - 39) 
• During lobby visits of Delhi divi sion of NR, it was noticed that 
unified68 user IDs were created for pe rforming CMS operations and at 
majority of the lobbies, Assistan t Loco Pilots/Loco Pilot Shunters 
(ALP/LPS) were using unified 69user ID and password of their Crew 
Controller/Supervisor for crew  booking and approving their sign 
on/sign off.  Similar position was also noticed over SR, SWR and other 
zonal railways. 
Thus, non-performance of Supervisor y functions by actual user could 
be affecting the operations of CMS as brought out under paragraph 
numbers 2.5.4.5, 3.1 etc. and thereby security of the system was also 
compromised which may expose the train operations to risk. 
• Creation of multiple user ID s (multiple profiles) and non-
deactivation of CMS Application users account 
 A analysis of the CMS users da ta as well as scrutiny of CMS 
operations/records at lobbies reveal ed that users had multiple IDs, 
users created were in excess of the requirement, ex-officials were 
active as CMS user as is evident from the details given in Appendix- 
XXVII. 
Thus, database of users has not been timely updated and can be 
misused by using IDs of ex-officials. 
4.4  Non-monitoring of activiti es of Database Administrator 
(DBA)/Lack of audit trail 
CMS development and maintenance functions are performed by CRIS 
CMS group at New Delhi which in cludes, among other functions, 
programming the application, testin g of development/modification of 
software, managing database/updating database, managing users etc. 
As per the information made available to Audit, seven users have DBA 
privileges. Further, 40 CRIS users had Administrative privileges at 
application level and one of them ha d Administrative privileges with 
multiple ID. Users having DBA privileges can access the CMS tables 
and effect modification in the da tabase from backend without any 
monitoring of their activities as neither any logs/audit trail for 
monitoring activities of DBA were ma intained nor other measures like 
restricting the access to single pe rson were adopted to avoid any 
unauthorized and undetected changes in the database. 
                                                            
68 A user having privileges of Supervisory functions and Train Clerk functions 
69 A user having the privilege  of Supervisor and Train Clerk (TNC) 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 45 
 
 
Absence of requisite logs/audit trail or other corrective measures (like 
restricted access) would result in failure to monitor/track unauthorized 
activities of users having Administrative privileges.  
In reply (September 2015), RB endorsed CRIS remarks that audit 
observations have been noted for necessary action. 
4.5  Non-installation/Updation of Antivirus and Operating System 
Patches 
As per CRIS’s IS Policy, System Administrator of respective 
groups/Users should ensure that appropriate anti-virus software 70 and 
latest Operating System (OS) patches71 are installed in server and other 
component managed by them and are timely updated.  Moreover, as 
per IR’s Baseline IT Security Po licy, Antivirus should always be 
enabled and regularly updated on personal computer  and computers 
connected with internal network via remote access channels. 
• A review of the CMS on 2
nd March 2015 revealed that Windows 
OS based server did not have updated antivirus software (anti-virus 
last updated on 24th February 2015).  
• Patches on servers having  Linux/AIX OS were last 
updated/installed on 27 January 2012.   
• Thin clients/Windows based PCs were in use over different zones 
for CMS operations.  Over SR, th e version of antivirus software 
used (Quick Heal Anti-Virus Pro 2014) in the selected Kiosks was 
outdated and not renewed since 4 th May 2014. Over SCR, anti-
virus software was in use in the CMS machines of Hyderabad 
(HYB) lobby but not in the CMS m achines of Secunderabad (SC) 
lobby. At Jind lobby of NR, PCs in use for booking had trial 
version of anti-virus.  
• Anti-virus software was not installed/updated in the CMS machines 
of lobbies over CR, ER, ECoR, NC R, NER, SER, NWR, SWR and 
ECR selected for Audit. 
Thus, lack of updated antivirus soft ware/updated software patches can 
be exploited and lead to disruption of smooth CMS operations. 
4.6 Deficiencies in Business Continui ty Plan/Disaster Recovery Plan 
(BCP/DRP)  
The objective of producing and maintaining a BCP/DRP is to ensure 
the integrity of the organization’s IT assets and to reduce the risks 
                                                            
70 Anti-virus or antivirus software is computer software used to prevent, detect and remove malicious 
software.  
71A patch is a piece of software designed to updat e a computer program or its supporting data, to fix 
problem or improving the performance of the system. This also includes fixing security vulnerabilities. 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 46 
 
 
arising from unexpected disruption of the critica l systems and to have 
continuity in business activities. 
CMS system has a centralised Com puter Data Centre at New Delhi 
which is being managed by CRIS sin ce inception of the system from 
2007-08. CRIS started the process of having a BCP/DRP in June 2012 
for ensuring uninterrupted operations of CMS and till the end of 
January 2015, the work of implementation of BCP/DRP was still under 
process.  
At zonal/divisional/lobby level, all ZRs did not have a structured and 
documented BCP/DRP. Route and media diversit y/alternative 
communication channels for ensu ring 24x7 connectivity were not 
available at lobbies of different zo nes. Connectivity/link failure, slow 
speed of network between central server and CMS client machines 
were the main reasons for disrup tion of continuous CMS operations 
over lobbies of different zones. 
Arrangements for alternative power supply were not adequate at a 
number of lobbies. CMS equipments /devices were not covered under 
AMC at majority of the lobbies.  
Working spare equipment/devices were not available for immediate 
replacement of defective equipment at different lobbies.  
Fire Extinguishers had outlived their shelf life/were not installed and 
Smoke Detectors/Fire Alarm Systems were not installed. (Appendix - 
XXVIII) 
In reply (September 2015), RB e ndorsed CRIS remarks that their 
Disaster Recovery setup at lo cal site (Data Centre/production 
environment) has been commissioned.  
The reply of RB is not acceptable because only phase-I of the CRIS 
DR Plan has been commissione d at local site (viz. Data 
Centre/Production environment) a nd phase-II of the DR plan for 
having a DR site at remote location has not been implemented. As the 
local DR setup (as well as Data Centre/Production environment setup) 
is prone to a number of  risks which may not ac hieve the objective of 
having a DR site for continued CMS operations on 24x7 basis, the 
implementation of phase-II of DR Plan needs to be expedited for 
having a DR setup at remote location. 
Moreover, the need of providing ad equate infrastructure and adopting 
corrective and preventive measures at different zones has not been 
addressed which has either resulted in  or could result in disruption of 
continuous CMS services. 
 
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 47 
 
 
4.7  Non/Irregular Maintenance of CMS data backup 
As per CRIS IS Policy, all proj ects are required to maintain 
remote/offsite back up of data for ensuring continuous operations of 
various railway projects. CRIS’s CMS group, which is maintaining 
centralized database of CMS, did not have any formal Documented 
Backup Policy addressing issues like  identification of criticality of the 
data/information, procedures for backing up data, verification of 
backed up data for ensuring its integrity and timely recovery, security 
of the onsite/offsite data backup, peri od for maintenance of backed up 
data etc. 
 
As per the duty list defined for various CMS group members, daily 
back up and weekly backup of data was to be maintained by CRIS. As 
per audit review of Backup process being followed by CRIS in January 
2015, daily backup was not being taken up. CRIS was also not 
maintaining any remote site backup.  Backup of CMS was stated to be 
tested randomly but due to lack of r ecords/logs as to when the testing 
was done, this aspect could not be verified. 
Thus, lack of any proper Data backup procedures in the CMS system 
entails the risk of jeopardizing th e operation of CMS in the wake of 
emergent situations. 
In reply (September 2015), RB endorsed CRIS remarks that remote 
site backup will be maintained. 
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 48 
 
 
Chapter 5 – Review of Contracting Issues, IT Operations,   
Project Management/Monitoring 
Audit Objective 4 
To review the contracting issu es, IT operations and project 
management/monitoring to ensure that various contracts, IT operations, 
project management and monitoring aspects were adequately addressed. 
5.1 Incomplete Project Implementation 
CMS project was sanctioned for implem entation in phases. In the first 
two phases, 302 crew lobbies and in the final phase, 445 crew 
lobbies/location including training ce nters and control offices were 
sanctioned for commissioning of CMS application, on the basis of 
minimum average of 36 sign on/off (per day). 
Target date for implementation of CMS Project under Phase-I was 
fixed by RB as 7
th March, 2007. Further as pe r railway budget speech 
of MR for the year 2007-08, all modules of FOIS including Rolling 
Stock Maintenance and Examination, Revenue Apportionment , C rew 
Management, Control Charting, COIS et c. were to be integrated and 
implemented in a time bound manner for completion by 2010. 
Though a considerable time has already elapsed, even the work of 
development and implementation of the Crew Management System 
could not be completed as is indicated below: 
• Non-implementation of bio-metric system 
Biometric system was not implemented in ER, ECR, NCR, NER, SER, 
SECR, NFR, SCR, WCR and SWR. Du ring test check of selected 
lobbies, it was noticed that Bio-metr ic system integrated with kiosk 
was installed at three lobbies of NR, two lobbies of CR, one lobby of 
SR and at all the selected lobbies of NWR, ECoR and WR. 
Lack of Biometric system resulte d in manual verification of crew 
which is prone to booking of crew through proxy. 
In reply (September 2015), RB stated that Bio-metric module could not 
be implemented earlier due to netw ork issues which have now been 
resolved and the system is being implemented at new lobbies.  
However, it cannot be implemented at already commi ssioned lobbies 
with non-compliant thin client as it  requires upgraded client for local 
storage of thumb/finger prints. 
The reply of RB contradicts itself as on one hand RB has stated that 
bio-metric system could not be im plemented earlier due to network 
issues and on the other hand they ha ve now stated that it cannot be 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 49 
 
 
implemented at already commissi oned lobbies due to non-compliant 
thin client.  
• Non-implementation of suburban module 
 Suburban Module is required in CMS to capture 100 per cent 
movement of running sta ff tackling the EMU tr ains running in ER, 
SER, SR, WR, CR and metropolitan cities. Implementation of the 
module has not been comp leted, which in turn de feated the declared 
objective of the system.  
 In reply (September 2015), RB endorsed CRIS remarks that the 
module has been implemented but its usage depends on Railways.  
However, Audit has noted that the module is not in use.  
• Non/Incomplete integration of CMS with other Information 
systems 
As per MOU with CRIS signed in March 2008, CMS was to be 
interfaced through a message broker t ype of application to exchange 
information between Crew Mana gement System and Freight 
Operations Information System (FOIS) and Crew Management System 
and Control Office Application/In tegrated Coaching Management 
Systems (COA/ICMS). Further, In July 2014, RB had instructed all the 
ZRs to transfer the mileage bills to Pay Roll system (PRIME)
72 in 
electronic form only by 31 July 2014. 
Audit review revealed that CMS wa s only partially integrated with 
FOIS as well as COA/ICMS. Inte gration between FOIS and CMS was 
not fully successful as train arriva l/departure data of FOIS was not 
found updated in CMS in respect of all trains. Further, integration with 
COA and ICMS was incomplete/partial as coaching trains’ 
arrival/departure time was not found updated in CMS. Similarly, 
integration of CMS with PRIME could not be found in all the ZRs.  
Incomplete integration of CMS with FOIS, COA and ICMS has 
resulted in generation of incomplete  reports of Pre Arrival Detention 
(PAD) and Pre-Departure Detent ion (PDD) leading to manual 
maintenance of PAD/PDD records and has also affected the 
management of crew movement monitoring for continuous duties 
beyond the period of 10 hours as reports  did not depict the requisite 
details of all crew pertaining to continuous running duties on wheels. 
In reply (September 2015), RB endorsed CRIS remarks that integration 
of CMS with other application was partial earlier and will now be fully 
implemented after sanction of integration.  Regarding PRIME, it was 
stated by CRIS that a standard facility for data exchange has been 
made available but its usage depends on Railways. However, Audit has 
                                                            
72 Pay Roll and Related Integrated Module 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 50 
 
 
noted that the CMS data is manually entered in PRIME application 
over all ZRs. 
• Non-observance of RB directives 
As per RB’s directives, Electric and Diesel Crew and Guards lobbies 
were to be at one place in the inte rest of efficiency, economy and ease 
of operations and there were not to be multiple crew lobbies at the 
same location. Review of records re vealed that 18 stations/locations
73 
over IRs have more than one lobby. 
The above indicates that proper ro admap could not be drawn up by 
Railway Administration for the complete rollout of CMS as per the 
target fixed. RB’s orders to in tegrate lobbies were not fully 
implemented. The process of integrating lobbies should be expedited to 
achieve the benefits of economy, efficiency and ease of operations. 
5.2 Poor planning for implementation 
As per CMS project papers, benefits  of computerization of CMS can 
be fully realized on computerizin g all crew-booking lobbies over IR 
and linking them to each other over a data-network. During the course 
of test check of project papers as well as lobby visits, it was noticed 
that all the lobbies in  operation over IRs were  not covered under CMS 
Network. Details are given as under: 
• Over ER it was found that in the first phase 17 lobbies were 
sanctioned for implementation of CMS against a proposal for 21 
lobbies. Again in the second phase RB sanctioned 17 lobbies for 
implementation of CMS. But 16 lobbies, which were sanctioned in 
first phase, were also included in the sanctioned list of lobbies to be 
implemented under second phase. The left out 4 lobbies under first 
phase could not find place in the list of second phase.  
• Over NR, PWL Lobby, selected for CMS under first phase, had 
work pertaining to booking of cr ew on EMU trains but the module 
for booking of crew on EMU train was not 
developed/implemented. PWL lobby also could not be 
commissioned due to non-availabi lity of connectivity/electrical 
equipment. Hence, Terminal Support System provided to PWL 
lobby had to be shifted to An and Vihar lobby. However, PWL 
lobby was made operational in August 2014 and crew booking was 
being done through preparation of individual TA. 
• Over SWR, Castlerock lobby has been commissioned for Drivers 
only and is yet to be commissioned for Guards. 
                                                            
73 LNL, CSTM, PNVL, IGP, PUNE (CR), SC, BZA (SCR), HWH (ER), LKO, MB, NDLS, GZB, LDH 
(NR), BSB (NER), VSKP (ECOR), ALD (NCR), MGS (ECR), NGP (SECR) 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 51 
 
 
The facts stated above revealed that locations were selected for 
implementation of CMS application w ithout considering the feasibility 
aspect, which resulted in sanction of  locations non-feasible to operate. 
This has also resulted in idling of valuable IT resources.  
5.3 Non-implementation of pr oject within target date 
RB sanctioned ` 80 crore (approx.) during th e period from 2005-06 to 
2013-14 for implementation of CMS application in 747 locations in 
three phases
74. As on 31 March 2015, 372 lobbies 75 were 
commissioned i.e. only 49.8 per cent of the target has been achieved 
during last nine years. Such a prol onged period of implementation of a 
project in highly developing technol ogy era has hampered the interest 
of the administration. Reasons fo r non/delayed implementation of 
CMS over different zones are given in Appendix – XXIX. 
Thus, Railway Administration’s failure  to prepare the site in time 
delayed the implementation of the project which also resulted in failure 
to avail the warranty of the TSS eq uipment supplied but not installed. 
Delay in implementing CMS deprived the Railways of benefits of 
computerization of CMS.  Hence, a ll out efforts need to be made to 
expedite the implementation of CMS at all lobbies. 
5.4 Lack of trained personnel to operate the terminals 
CMS is a potentially powerful MIS t ool in the hands of Administration 
for optimum utilization of running staff. Various MIS reports 
generated through the system are eff ective only when the database is 
up-to-date i.e. all the data is fed timely and accurately into the system. 
As the CMS work is 24X7 in nature, the data entry work is also 
manpower intensive. Trained and skilled manpower is required for 
successful and smooth running of CMS.  
As per Project Report on CMS, st aff per lobby, called CORE team, 
shall be trained at CRIS in use of the CMS software. This CORE team 
shall be responsible for implementa tion of the software in Railways. 
They shall also act as trainers for imparting further software training at 
Railways. In this regard, audit observations are as under: 
Zone Status of Trained personnel 
ER At six locations, a few trained personnel of Core 
Implementation Group were working in the system. 
CR In Pune division, one Core Implementer was trained by CRIS. 
NWR At four lobbies of Jaipur di vision, four out of 37 operators 
                                                            
74 Phase-I-153 locations, Phase-II-149 locations, Final(Third)-Phase-Stage-I - 220 locations and 
Stage-II -225 locations 
75 Lobbies include two training locations and one CMS location at CRIS/NDLS Headquarters 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 52 
 
 
were not trained. 
SER Trained personnel were not available for working system at 
KGP, ADL and NMP lobbies. 
At SRC, only one trained personnel was available. Outsourced 
personnel of KGP and SRC lobbies had not been provided any 
official training. 
SECR Outsourced operators were not given training. 
SWR Out of five trained operators , two crew members had returned 
to their running duties, one ha d been transferred to NCMS 
location and remaining two had been transferred elsewhere. 
WR At seven lobbies test checked in Audit , trained staff was not 
available at three lobbies  (Sabarmati, Palanpur and 
Gandhidham). 
ECR Operators were not trained pr operly on the functionality of the 
system. 
Most of the operators were wo rking in the locations without 
training in 12 ZRs76. 
• There is no arrangement for imparting training to new entrants in 
the locations test checked. CMS operators at lobbies learnt their job 
from ex-colleagues but were not  imparted any formal training. 
Moreover, users were ignorant about manual/documentation to 
operate CMS. At ASN, CMS l obby of ER, booking of guards was 
being done manually mainly due to ignorance of the operators 
about CMS working in the lobbies. Further, non-utilization of some 
of the CMS features and errors  in the generation of TA/CMS 
operations, as highlighted under chap ter 3 of this report, indicates 
that CMS operators were not trai ned properly. (NR, ER, NCR, CR, 
WCR) 
• As per Vision Document Version 1.1 of June 2006 of CMS, Train 
Clerks (TNC) were to do the activ ity of crew booking, call serving 
etc. However it was noticed that  there was no Joint Procedure 
Order (JPO) issued in CR for assi gnment of CMS data entry work 
and other related work. 
5.5 Non-usage of CMS 
 It was observed in audit that operat ions of all the cr ew were not being 
covered under CMS, resulting in non-monitoring and non-management 
of crew through CMS. 
 Guards were manually signing on/off their duties. Bio-data of diesel 
crew was not captured in CMS, even after five years of commissioning 
of MAS lobby. System was lying i noperative/not-in use due to non-
availability of CMS operator and defective system. Over Mumbai 
                                                            
76ER, SER, ECR, SCR, NER, NFR, NCR, CR, WR, SECR, NWR and SWR 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 53 
 
 
division, due to non-availa bility of Slate system , CMS was not in use. 
(Appendix - XXX) 
5.6 Manual reporting of various ty pes of information by different 
lobbies to control office 
• Over NR, it was noticed that Di visional office/Control office at 
Delhi division was collecting vari ous types of information from 
different lobbies though either th e same information was already 
available in CMS or could be  obtained from CMS. Delhi 
Divisional office/Control office co llects morning position of crew, 
Diesel Crew Availability, Abnormality details, CMS Fuel position, 
Crew Booking, Average Rest etc. from lobbies which could be 
obtained from CMS.  
• In ER (HWH Division), NFR (APDJ
77 Division), CR and SER 
reporting of various type of info rmation by different lobbies to 
Control Office was being done manually and/or over telephone. 
• In WCR and SR Control offices we re collecting va rious types of 
information from different lobbi es, though the same information 
was already available in CMS. 
This highlights that CMS has not been implemented properly and 
management lacks faith in CMS application resulting in manual 
intervention/parallel manual operations. 
5.7  Contracting Issues – supply of hardware/thin clients and 
maintenance thereof 
5.7.1 Non-execution of Annual Mainte nance Contract at CMS locations 
As of March 2015, CMS application was available in 372 lobbies over 
IRs. In November 2010, RB approve d the proposal for centralized 
processing of AMC of the TSS and Datacom equipment in CMS 
lobbies, after expiry of their in itial warranty and intimated ZRs 
accordingly. However, in July 2011, RB turned down the proposal for 
centralized AMC and advised ZRs in August 2011 to ensure the 
maintenance of the equipment at CMS locations at zonal level. In this 
regard, audit observations are as under:- 
• IT equipment/TSS equipment of 13 ZRs
78 were out of maintenance 
support since completion of their respective warranty period.  
• Non- availability/maintenance of PC  system led to halt of working 
of CMS and switch over back to  manual working in NWR. The 
lobby at Nimpura (SER) was non- operational since 22 May 2013 
due to the equipment being def ective. Due to non-functioning of 
                                                            
77 See glossary 
78 ECR, ER, SER, SCR, NFR, NER, CR, NWR, SWR, SR(UPS/Inverter of only two out of 26 lobbies 
were covered), WR, NR (Diesel lobbies of Delhi division) and NCR. 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 54 
 
 
the TSS equipment, a computerized CMS lobby turned into a 
Centre of Manual reporting of the crew.  
• In almost all the Diesel lobbies 79 of Delhi division (NR), 
equipment were lying in defect ive condition even up to two to 
three years without any support for their maintenance.  In CR, two 
kiosks, integrated with biometri c and CCTV, were lying unused in 
the lobby of Pune Electric Shed for want of repairs. 
Different officers of Railway Admini stration reported to CRIS that a 
large number of equipment had gone defective in absence of 
maintenance support. It was reporte d by the CPM/IT/CRIS that at the 
end of March 2012, 34 lobbies were out  of order and not performing 
their function of sign on/sign off. Th e situation arose due to failure of 
hardware, network connectivity loss etc. 
Equipment failure (PCs/kiosks etc.) without proper maintenance 
support hampers the smooth operations of CMS. No action has so far 
been taken by Railways to solve the problem.  
5.7.2 Non-replacement of over-aged and defective hardware and non-
maintenance of stock for spares 
 As per Advance Correction slip No.-71 amending paragraph 219 of 
Indian Railways Financial Code-Vol ume-I, revised life of UPS was 
four years, that of Thin Clients wa s five years and fo r printers it was 
three years. 
During the course of visit of loca tions by Audit parties for the purpose 
of assessment of performance of equipment at the CMS lobbies it was 
noticed that none of the old hardware  aging more than the prescribed 
codal life was replaced at lobbies test checked over ER, NR, SER, 
NWR, ECR, NFR and SWR. It was fu rther noticed that none of the 
locations, test checked under ER, SER, ECR,  WCR, SECR, CR, SCR, 
SR, NWR and NR
80 had working spare equipment (Thin client, 
Monitor, Printer, UPS, Modem, Kiosk etc.). 
5.8 IT Operations/CMS Operations 
5.8.1  Custodian of lobbies not fixed 
Proper functioning of a system requi res a well-designed organization 
and identification of proper custod ian of the same. Project papers 
revealed that lobbies under final ph ase will be under the control of Sr. 
DOMs while lobbies under Phase-I and II will be under the control of 
Sr. DEEs and Sr. DME. Such arra ngement leads to difficulties in 
maintenance of the lobbies. 
                                                            
79 Jind, MTC, Delhi, DEE, ROK, SSB 
80 MTC, ROK, NZM, JHL, Jind, GZB,DEE 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 55 
 
 
AM/IT, in his inspection notes of 20 12, raised the issue of authority as 
to who will execute the AMC for lobbies under final phase but no 
directives of RB in this regard were found in the records. 
• Over CR, in Pune division sepa rate contracts were awarded by 
Mechanical and Operating department for manning the CMS in 
respective lobbies. However, El ectrical department did not 
consider giving the contract for ope ration of CMS at Pune Electric 
lobby. This indicated lack of co -ordination between Operating, 
Mechanical and Electrical departments. 
• Over SWR, CMPE
81 was the overall in charge at zonal level for 
monitoring the activities of CMS.  However, no specific orders 
were placed on record to this effect.  Over ER, for ASN lobby 
custodian was Sr.DEE/OPN and for HWH lobby, it was Sr. DOM. 
Over SWR, persons responsible fo r uploading of circulars/caution 
orders, maintaining loco master, etc. have not been defined and 
therefore the same has not been do ne. No Joint Procedural Order was 
issued by SWR for effective usage of CMS. 
5.8.2 Non-provision of dust free a nd air conditioned environment 
Dust-free and air conditioned environment is essential for smooth 
working of the highly sophisticated IT equipment which can also 
reduce the maintenance requirement.  
• During lobby visit, it was noticed by  audit that most of the lobbies 
test checked did not have an environment conducive for smooth 
working of IT equipment as no ai r conditioned facilities were 
found in ER, SCR, ECoR, WR  NWR, SECR, SER (SRC and 
Nimpura lobbies) ECR (except Dhanbad lobby) CR (except at 
Ghorpuri), NCR (MGS lobby) a nd SWR. AC facilities were 
installed at GHY, NGC, NBQ, NJ P, MLDT, KIR lobbies of NFR 
but all were out of order since long. 
• Dust free atmosphere was not found  in Pune electric lobby of CR, 
TLHR Lobby of ECOR and at all selected lobbies of ECR. 
• Chennai Central (MAS) lobby of SR had water seepage problem. 
Roof/walls of the Delhi lobby of NR were found leaking. 
Tuglakabad lobby of Delhi division (NR) was situated within the 
railway tracks and shunting/trai n operations were hampering the 
movement of crew which affects e fficiency of the crew.  Moreover, 
situation of the lobby within the tracks was a risk to the life of the crew 
and others associated with lobby operations. 
 
                                                            
81See glossary 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 56 
 
 
Chapter 6 – Review of Change Management and Outsourcing 
of Activities 
Audit Objective 5 
To review the effectiveness of ch ange management and outsourcing of 
activities. 
6.1 Change management – Lack of formal change procedure 
Managing Change Controls are used to ensure that amendments to a 
computer system are properly au thorized, tested, accepted and 
documented. CRIS is responsible for effecting changes in the software. 
However, no formal procedure, containing among other things, 
authority competent to make reque st for change, level/procedure of 
testing of changes, authority compet ent to approve changes, level of 
documentation for changes to be maintained etc. has been 
devised/prescribed for effecting changes in the CMS though as per 
CRIS IS Policy, each group is required to maintain Documented 
Change Management Procedure.  
A review of the process being fo llowed by CRIS for effecting changes 
in the CMS was conducted and it was noticed that testing by the end 
user and formal approval of the CAO/FOIS or any other officer 
authorized to approve changes in the software on behalf of end user 
(Railway/Owner) was generally not available on record.  
Thus, lack of proper Change Management Procedure and non-
involvement of end users in testin g and approving software changes 
has inherent risk of incorrect and unauthorised changes in the 
application.  
6.2 Non-Updation of CMS documentation 
 As per CRIS’s Information Security  (System Documentation) Policy, 
all the systems/applications main tained and operated by CRIS should 
be comprehensively and accurately documented. 
The System Design Document on CM S was also not complete and 
updated. It did not contain structur e of each and every table including 
their field names, field types, field description and thei r linkages with 
other tables. Data Flow Charts were also not available in the document. 
Details of the reports to be gene rated/being generated by the system, 
and their format etc. were also not available in this document.  
 CRIS’s Training Manual for CMS cont ains instructions/guidelines on 
‘How to Operate/Use CMS’ but th is document was not updated after 
April 2012 and was also not found uploaded on CMS website.  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 57 
 
 
CRIS intimates about the new version release to all zonal railways and 
also makes disclosure of the changes made in the software on its 
website. However, as per the feedback received from the lobby 
officials over CR, NR, ER, NWR, NFR, SER, ECR, SWR, WR and 
SR, the lobby officials were generally not satisfied with the process of 
intimating changes/new version/featur es of the software and training 
and in the absence of the adequate knowledge/documentation about the 
added or modified feat ures (like how to use them), lobby staff were 
handicapped in using such new features/options.   
Thus, lack of complete and upda ted documentation could adversely 
affect the working of CMS at Data Centre level as well as at lobby 
level. 
In reply (September 2015), RB endorsed CRIS remarks that the need 
for regular updation of documentati on on System Design has been 
noted for compliance. Training ma nual has been updated till version 
3.8 and further changes have been appr ised separately but did not find 
it fruitful to upload it online due to large size. 
The reply of Railway Administration is not acceptable to the extent 
that Training Manual has not be en comprehensively updated and 
uploaded on the website which can be done in a number of ways.  
6.3 Lack of dedicated staff at  lobbies for CMS operations 
In the absence of dedicated staff for operation of the CMS, the work of 
lobbies is being done by deploying  the skilled personnel (Guards and 
Drivers) and outsourced personnel.  
CMS operations of RPH, KWAE, AZ, PKR
82 lobbies of ER, Pune 
Division of CR, KGP and SRC of SER, KUR division of ECoR, 
Chennai Division of SR, lobbies of SECR and SCR except at the 
Aurangabad (AWB) were being ma naged/operated by the outsourced 
staff whereas at HWH (Electrical, Diesel and Guard), BWN (electrical) 
lobbies of ER and at all the lobb ies of Delhi division were being 
managed/operated by crew members (Drivers and Guards). Over NFR, 
CMS data feeding was being carri ed out even by Gate Man, ALP, 
Porters, Retiring Room Bearers etc. posted at different lobbies. 
It was further noticed that ther e were no documented and approved 
policies listing specific activities which could be outsourced, as well as 
for ensuring the individual re sponsibilities of railway users vis-à-vis 
outsourced users.  
The safety and quality of data wa s compromised as highlighted under 
paragraph 4.3.  As manning of CMS involves safety requirement and 
financial implications in the form of running allowance, policy may be 
                                                            
82 See glossary 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 58 
 
 
formulated duly describing th e functional requirement and 
responsibilities of outsourced personnel. 
The Railway Administration failed to create a dedicated pool of staff to 
operate CMS and also to ensure high er degree of continuity of trained 
staff in the job. This arrangement can strike a balance between 
deploying costly running staff and inexperienced outsourced staff for 
the operation of CMS.  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 59 
 
 
Chapter 7 – Conclusion and Recommendations 
7.1 Conclusion 
The Crew Management System (CMS) is a critical IT application of 
the Indian Railways (IR) which manages crew assignment to various 
trains and directly impacts the safety of train operations. The 
application aims at managing ove r one lakh drivers and guards to 
ensure round the clock safe operati ons of IR. The obj ectives of this 
application were to improve the efficiency of train operations, 
effectively monitor crew and to co mply with the safety requirements 
relating to crew management and to improve the financial management 
and monitoring. The extent of achievement of the objectives of CMS 
was evaluated in Audit and the as pects relating to IT application 
controls, IT security, continuity  of the organization’s business, 
contracting issues, project management/monitoring and change 
management were also reviewed.  
Though introduction of CMS has helped in improving certain aspects  
of crew operations, the CMS has faile d to fully achieve its objectives 
and may impact the efficient and sa fe running of trains as complete, 
accurate and updated inventory of crew, routes, locos, stations etc. was 
not maintained; Crew scheduling and assignment was not found 
effective; Booking of competent cr ew, fulfilling all the prescribed 
criteria, was not ensured; System wa s not fully capable of assisting the 
management in monitoring crew for training and for compliance with 
safety requirement. Biometric a nd Breath Analyser (BA) devices 
which were to be integrated with CMS for authentication of crew and 
ensuring that consumption of alcoho l by crew is eliminated, have not 
been integrated with kiosk at all lobbies thereby compromising safe 
operations of trains. Grading and c ounselling of crew was not taking 
place at the prescribed periodicity and data was not updated accurately. 
System lacked adequate controls to ensure completeness, accuracy and 
validity of data pertaining to vari ous aspects of CMS operations.  Lack 
of adequate controls allowed booking of superannuated crew.  CMS 
was not configured as per extant  orders/proper authority, delayed 
signing off the crew and lack of adequate controls led to inaccurate 
generation as well as payment of mileage allowances. 
Multiple TAs using dummy loco number and dummy routes generated 
for booking crew did not ensure validation of crew competency for 
safe train operations.  
Manual records were also maintained along with CMS 
database/records.  Non-integration of CMS with pay roll system also 
resulted in failure to achieve the concept of paperless lobby.  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 60 
 
 
Incomplete integration of CMS wi th FOIS, COA/ICMS resulted in 
engagement of manpower for main tenance of manual records and 
deprived the management to effectively monitor the CMS operations.  
A number of reports generated did not provide correct information and 
failed to assist Railway Administ ration in deployment and optimum 
utilization of crew. SMS facility was not fully utilized to enhance the 
efficiency of CMS operations. 
The CMS lacked adequate security measures to prevent unauthorised 
access to the system and uninterrupted operations. There was no 
Business Continuity Plan to con tinue operations 24x7 at lobby level. 
There was no arrangement for remote backup of data and BCP/DRP at 
remote site was yet to be implemented. No procedure was devised for 
effecting changes in the software.  
There was no policy for outsourcing of CMS activities.  There was 
lack of dedicated staff for CMS ope rations.  Lack of trained manpower 
over different zones to operate CM S and availability of updated and 
complete documentation was also adversely affecting the operations.  
Lobbies did not have an y annual maintenance contract. Defective and 
overage equipment were neither replaced nor repaired. Standard IT 
environment could not be established in most of the lobbies. 
7.2  Recommendations 
I. The Master tables in the CMS dat abase need to be standardized.  
Necessary validation controls on im portant fields may be introduced 
for ensuring completeness and accuracy of data input. It will 
enhance the user’s reliability and dependency on CMS and enable 
the users to dispense with the system of parallel maintenance of 
manual records. 
II. Effective integration of CMS with  Pay Roll Application, Control 
office Application, FOIS and ICMS should be expedited so that 
needs of the users may be served. 
III. Grading and counseling of crew should be ensured at prescribed 
periodicity by completely and accurately updating the relevant 
database.     
IV. Implementation of biometrics and integrated BA devices should be 
expedited at all lobbies to ensure crew validation at the time of sign 
on/off and that crew remains sober while operating the train 
respectively. 
V. Adequate checks/validation controls should be introduced for data 
validation.  Controls such as dropdown menu/list box etc. may be 
considered for validating data.   

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 61 
 
 
VI. Adequate controls may be introduced and CMS may be configured as 
per extant orders/authority to prevent excess payment of allowances. 
VII. IT Security Policy including backu p and password policy should be 
strictly implemented. Implementation of BCP/DRP at remote 
site/lobbies should be expedited to  ensure uninterrupted operations. 
Physical security at lobbies may be strengthened. Software 
patches/updates may be timely and regularly installed. 
VIII. The Change Management Procedure should be devised. Formal 
training mechanism to educate CMS operators about new features of 
CMS may be ensured and complete/updated CMS documentation 
should be made available to all concerned.   
IX. Dedicated staff for CMS operations should be provided. In case 
outsourced staff is deployed for CM S activities then there should be 
approved policy for outsourcing, specifying the individual 
responsibilities of railway users vis-à-vis outsourced users.  
 
 
 
(SUMAN SAXENA) 
Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
New Delhi 
Dated:    
 
 
 
Countersigned  
 
 
 
 
 
(SHASHI KANT SHARMA) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
New Delhi 
Dated:    
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
23 November 2015
23 November 2015

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No.  47 of 2015  Page 62 
 
Firewall
Appendix I - CMS Server Architecture (Reference Para 1.2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Storage  
DS4700 
1.5 TB 
            WebSphere Cluster 
cmswas107   
IBM X 3620 M3 Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5620 @ 
2.40GHz, 500 X 2 GB 
cmswas108                                                                   
IBM X 3620 M3 Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5620 @ 
2.40GHz, 500 X 2 GB 
cmswas102                                                                       
IBM X‐346, Xeon Processor 2 CPU, 3.2 GHz, 4 GB  
RAM, 2 X 73 GB HDD 
LDAP
AIX Cluster (DB2)
RISC Processor, 
P‐550, 4 CPU 
Dual Core 2.097 
GHz, 16 GB RAM
cmsldap_primary                  
X‐346, Xeon Processor, 2 
CPU 3.2 GHz, 4 GB RAM, 
73X2 GB HDD4GB Ram  
H/W Load balance 
10.60.200.168 
cmsldap_secondary        
X‐346, Xeon Processor, 2 
CPU 3.2 GHz, 4 GB RAM, 
73X2 GB HDD4GB Ram  
RISC Processor, P‐
550, 4 CPU Dual 
Core 2.097 GHz, 
16 GB RAM 
 internet 
Firewall
SMS                                                  
IBM X‐346, Xeon Processor 2 
CPU, 3.2 GHz, 4 GB  RAM, 2 X 
73 GB HDD
RMM                                  
IBM X‐3650, Xeon 5460 
Quad core Single 
Processor, 3.16 GHz, 8 
GB  RAM, 3X73 GB HDD
TSM                             
X‐3200, Intel(R) Xeon(R) 
2 * CPU 3050  @ 
2.13GHz, 2 GB RAM, 
73X2 GB HDD 
Domain Server 
ClearcaseServer           
IBM X‐346, Xeon 
Processor 2 CPU, 3.2 
GHz, 4 GB  RAM, 2 X 73 
GB HDD 
CMS SMS
and other  SMS 
applications         
Staging Server           
X‐346, Xeon  CPU 
Staging  DB                
RISC Processor, P6‐550, 
2 CPU, 8 GB RAM      
Staging LDAP           
X‐346, Xeon Processor, 
1 CPU 3.2 GHz, 4 GB 
RAM, 73X2 GB HDD2 
cpu /  4GB Ram  
VNC Server           
IBM X‐Server 346 / 2 
cpu / 8 GB Ram
 Fois Railway 
Network 
X‐346, Xeon  CPU, 
3.2 GHz, 2 CPU, 4 
GB RAM, 73X2 GB 
HDD4GB Ram
1 
2
3
4
5
1. CMS User makes a request to the 
CMS Application via H/w Load 
balancer. 
2. Load balancer forwards the 
request to CMS Webserver. 
3. Webserver forwards the request 
to the respective WAS server that 
are in load balancing mode. 
4. WAS forwards the request to the 
LDAP server for user 
authentication. 
5. Authenticated user is allowed 
login in CMS Application .The 
CMS application communicates 
with Database sever if required. 
6.  
Front End and 
Middleware 
 Back End

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 63 
 
 
 
Appendix – II 
[Reference Para 2.1.2] 
 
Statement Showing Discrepancies in the Crew Bio-data 
 
Analysis of CMS database of 16 zona l railways (ZRs), available as on 5 
December 2014 revealed as under:- 
i. The data of active crew had 483 records where age of the crew was less than 18 
years (Boy Service). 
ii. In respect of seven crew members, the difference between date of birth and date 
of appointment was more than 38 years and in respect of 31 crew members it 
was more than 50 years.  
iii. There were 1161 1 crew members whose dates of  appointment and promotion 
were same (NR, ECoR2). 
iv. In six cases, dates of birth and dates of appointment were same. 
v. There were 712 3 crew members who had crossed their retirement age but were 
still found to be active in CMS.  
vi. Out of 142 active crew of NR who had attained thei r superannuation age, seven 
crew of NR were booked for duty between  1 to 55 times during 5 September to 
5 December 2014.  
A comparison of CMS data pertaining to da te of birth, date of appointment and 
date of promotion of crew of Delhi di vision with their manual records revealed 
difference of a period upto 29 years between the two sets of records.  
(Annexure – 3) 
 
  
                                                            
1NR=1146, ECoR=15 
2See Glossary 
3Pertaining to all ZRs except SR 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 64 
 
 
 
Appendix – III 
[Reference Para 2.1.3] 
 
Statement Showing Cases of Important  Details of Crew Not Being Captured 
 
i. The data analysis of 23 fields of 85301 r ecords of all ZRs revealed that overall 
there were 7,97,932 blank fields.  
ii. Correct/updated mobile number/address were not captured which may result in 
call not being served in time. 
iii. Updated/Correct promotion dates were not captured which may lead to wrong 
generation of reports.  
iv. Blank Traction details may lead to non-validation of crew competency. 
v. Blank Loco Inspector (LI) name may result in non-updation of grading and 
counseling data of a crew as a crew was linked to a particular Loco Inspector. 
 
(Annexure - 4) 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 65 
 
 
 
Appendix – IV 
[Reference Para 2.1.6] 
 
Statement Showing Incomplete/Incorrect Family Details 
i. As per crew Bio-data details, out of  70300 active crew memb ers over 15 ZRs, 
43490 active crew members had 1-10 dependents. As against this, family details 
of only 2109 crew members were available in CMS. 
ii. CMS lacked adequate controls to validat e gender and marital status data of 
family member, crew name/father name as is evident from the following 
instances noticed over different  zones4:-  
Crew Id Dependent’s Relation Gender Marital status 
BHC 7066 Wife Male Unmarried 
BHC7066 Son Female ---- 
HWH1182/GZB1872 Wife Female Unmarried 
JMP1328/MTC1120 Daughter Male -- 
NH1100 Sister Male --- 
DDN1028 Widow Mother Male  
iii. Data analysis revealed that CMS neither validated crew name, father name nor 
ensured completeness of data as it accepte d single character crew name, father 
name field were found  blank/contained value like ‘-‘.  
 
(Annexure - 7) 
  
                                                            
4ECoR, ER, NR, WR, SECR, SCR, NCR, WCR, SER 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 66 
 
 
Appendix V 
[Reference Para 2.1.7] 
Statement Showing Details of Locos Having No Corresponding Zone Codes 
Loco 
Traction/Gauge → 
3PH DSL ELEC MG NG TOTAL 
No. of Locos → 500 699 413 5 83 1700 
 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 67 
 
 
Appendix VI 
[Reference Para 2.1.8] 
 
Statement Showing Incomplete/Inconsistent Data of Station, Routes, Distance etc. 
i. Zone and division codes for 257 stations were not available in CMS database.  
ii. On ER, NWR, SECR, NER and SWR5, 226 stations were not available in CMS.  
iii. On ER, NFR, SCR 6 and SWR, codes of 43 stations  were found to be incorrect 
in CMS. 
iv. On CR, ECR, ER, SCR, SER and ECoR 7, 159 routes were not available in 
CMS.  
v. Over ER, NCR and SCR, on comparison of  distances recorded in CMS and as 
available in Working Time Tables, Audit found that in respect of nine routes, 
the distances recorded in CMS were lower by 0.08 kms. to 408.76 kms. whereas 
in respect of 20 routes, th e distances recorded in CMS were higher by 0.15 kms 
to 57.3 kms. Capturing of wrong distan ces leads to manual corrections of 
mileage reports.  
vi. Audit also found that the distances record ed in CMS in resp ect of the above 23 
routes were higher than the distances recorded in Rate Branch System (RBS) by 
0.14 kms to 229.80 kms. Whereas in respect of  six routes they were lower than 
the distances recorded in RBS by 0.08 to 46.08 kms. Capturing of wrong 
distances leads to manual corrections in mileage reports.  
vii. CMS did not contain the r oute Ghorpuri (GPR) to Kolhapur (KOP) via Pune, 
whenever the crew was booked from GPR lobby of CR to work the train from 
Pune to KOP, the crew gets the mil eage of 323 kms instead of 326 kms. The 
train leaves from Pune station and the crew has to bring th e engine from GPR 
which is three kms. away from Pune. Hence, the crew gets three kms. less 
mileage and every time this needs to be corrected manually in the mileage 
reports. 
 
(Annexure - 9) 
  
                                                            
5North Western Railway (NWR), South East Central Railway (SECR), South Western Railway (SWR) 
6 North East Frontier Railway (NFR), South Central Railway (SCR) 
7 Central Railway (CR), East Central Railway (ECR), South Eastern Railway (SER), East Coast Railway (ECoR) 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 68 
 
 
Appendix – VII 
[Reference Para 2.1.9] 
 
Statement Showing Details of Transactions/Discrepancies Where Crew 
Were Booked with Fetch All Option 
i. A review by Audit of the 2713032 finalized transactions/records 8 of tables 
containing historical data for the pe riod 5 September 2014 to 4 December 2014 
of the 15 ZRs revealed that crew members (74 per cent) in 2009077 transactions 
were booked by choosing ‘Fetch Crew All’ option rather than  ‘Fetch Crew as 
per Rule’ option.  
ii. During test analyses of reasons recorded  for using ‘Fetch Crew All’ Option for 
crew booking, Audit found that out of 734925 transactions analyzed by six 
ZRs9, in respect of 145752 transactions, re asons were not recorded for using 
‘Fetch Crew All’ option.  
iii. As per the analysis of 115538 transactio ns (NR), 8353 types of codes (reasons) 
were used for booking crew by using ‘F etch Crew All’ option including 71 
types of codes (reasons with minor vari ations) pertaining to  LR (LR Due/LR 
not-updated etc. with minor changes) and 40 types of codes (reasons) pertaining 
to rest (Rest due/Rest Cancelled etc. with  minor changes) and in respect of rest 
of the records, in majority  of the cases, reasons r ecorded did not convey actual 
and meaningful information as some nu meric/alpha numeric like AA, BB etc. 
were recorded for using ‘Fetch Crew All’ option. Similar position was observed 
in respect of the booking transaction using ‘Fetch Crew All’ option pertaining to 
other ZRs10. 
iv. During test analysis of ‘Crew Booked With/Without Rules Reports’ of Delhi 
division lobbies for December 2014, audit found that almost all the loco crew at 
DLI lobby and majority of Guards at DL I, Ghaziabad (GZB), Jhakal (JHL), 
Jind, Shakurbasti (SSB) and TKD11 lobbies were booked by opting ‘Fetch Crew 
All’ option rather than ‘Fetch Crew as per Rule’ option. However, during 
February 2015, the percentage of Loco crew booked by using ‘Fetch Crew All’ 
option at DLI lobby was nearly 50 percent but almost all/majority of the Guards 
at DLI, GZB, JHL, Jind, TKD & SSB lobbi es were still booked by using ‘Fetch 
Crew All’ option.  
(Annexure - 10) 
  
                                                            
8A transaction/record contains details of TA, call book/receive time, sign on/off time etc. of one crew. 
9 NWR, NFR, NR, SCR, ECoR and SER 
10 NWR, NFR, SR, SCR and SER 
11See Glossary 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 69 
 
 
Appendix VIII 
[Reference Para 2.1.10] 
 
Statement Showing Results of Analysis of Data of Call Made to Crew 
An analysis of 2599975 transactions of 16 ZRs pertaining to Crew Calling Time 
relevant to 5th September 2014 to 5th December 2104 revealed as under:- 
i. Calls were found to be made in  173311 transactions after train 
scheduling/ordering time.  
ii. In respect of 559558 transactions, calls were found to be made more than 165 
minutes before/in advance of train ordering time.  
 
(Annexure - 11) 
 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 70 
 
 
Appendix – IX 
[Reference Para 2.1.11] 
 
Statement Showing Results of Analysis of Data Pertaining to Call Serve 
Time and Receive/Acknowledge Time 
An analysis of the call serve time and call receive/ackn owledge time of 
2745140 transactions (historical data) of 16 ZRs pertaining to 5 September 2014 to 5 
December 2014 revealed as under:- 
i. In two cases (one each from NR and SER), calls were found to be received even 
before the calls were made indicating weak application control. 
ii. In 441317 cases, calls were found to be acknowledged 165 minutes after call 
were made.  
iii. In 1488253 cases, calls were acknowledged within 30 minutes.  
 
(Annexure - 12) 
 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 71 
 
 
Appendix – X 
[Reference Para 2.1.12] 
 
Statement Showing Results of Analysis of Data Pertaining to Crew Sign On Time 
An analysis of 2771169 transactions of 16 ZRs revealed as under:- 
i. In 724513 cases, crew  were found to ha ve signed on or after train ordering 
time. 
ii. In 338653 cases, crew were found to have signed on less than 10 minutes before 
train ordering time against the requirement  of 10 to 45 minutes  before expected 
departure (ordering) time of the train. 
 
(Annexure - 13) 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 72 
 
 
Appendix XI 
[Reference Para 2.1.13] 
 
Statement Showing Results of Analysis of Data pertaining  to Supervisory 
Approval  of Crew Sign on Time 
Analysis by Audit of 3070897 transactions of 16 ZRs revealed that: 
i. In 1425 cases, Supervisor approval of ‘crew sign on’ time was prior to the ‘crew 
sign on’ time.  
ii. In 2096485 cases, ‘crew sign on’ time wa s approved by Supervisor after 30 
minutes or more from ‘crew sign on’ time.  
 
 
(Annexure - 14) 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 73 
 
 
 
Appendix – XII 
[Reference Para 2.1.14] 
 
Statement Showing Discrepancies in Supervisor Approval of Crew Sign  off Time 
An Analysis of 1642377 transactions of 15 ZRs12 revealed that: 
i. In 143062 transactions, crew  sign off approval time indicated lack of data 
input validation control.  
ii. In 612965 transactions, Supervisor was f ound to have approved ‘crew sign off’ 
time after a delay of more than one hour. 
 
(Annexure – 15) 
  
                                                            
12 All zones except NER  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 74 
 
 
 
Appendix – XIII 
[Reference Para 2.1.15] 
 
Statement Showing Irregularity in Crew Sign on vis-à-vis Sign off Time 
An analysis by Audit of crew sign on  time and crew sign off time of 1367760 
transactions approved by Supervisor pertaining to 15 ZRs13 revealed that:  
i. In 160 transactions, ‘crew sign on’ and ‘s ign off’ time was same, i.e. the sign 
on/off transactions were wrongly conducted. 
ii. A difference of more than 20 hours between the ‘sign on’ and ‘sign off’ times in 
38541 transactions indicated that either the crew had not timely performed his 
sign off duties or dummy sign off times were approved. 
 
(Annexure – 16) 
  
                                                            
13All zones except NER  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 75 
 
 
 
Appendix – XIV 
[Reference Para 2.2.1] 
 
Statement Showing Status of Usage of SMS over Different Zones 
A review of CMS database pertaining to crew and SMS from 5 September 2014 
to 5 December 2014 revealed the following: 
i. Position of SMSs communicated on all ZRs except SR with active crew 
members was as under: 
TYPE OF SMS NO. OF SMS 
Sent 644079 
Acknowledged/Replied 68454 
Pending 349759 
ii. Only 10.63 per cent of the SMSs sent were acknowledged/replied by the crew 
which was very low and 54.30 per cent of the SMSs sent to the crew were 
shown as ‘Pending’, which was too high. 
iii. The SMS service was not used at 43 lobbi es (ten lobbies of SCR, seven lobbies 
each of CR and WR, five lobbies each of  NFR and WCR, four lobbies each of 
NR and SER and one lobby of NER).  
iv. In 13983 cases, even though Closed Us er Group (CUG) mobile status was 
shown as Y, the mobile number was shown as zero on 13 ZRs. 
v. In 45062 records of nine ZRs, though CUG mobile was available with the crew, 
the CUG status was shown as blank. 
vi. On CR, NR, NWR and SCR, 170683 SMSs were sent against 1066202 sign on 
transactions which was only 16.01 per cent of total sign on transactions.  
vii. On NR, just 178 SMS were utilized by 11 lobbies for serving calls to crew. 
 
(Annexure - 17) 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 76 
 
 
Appendix – XV 
[Reference Para 2.4.1] 
 
Statement Showing Cases Where LR Due Date Was Not Computed Correctly 
A. An analysis of LR related data, having total number of LR trips as zero,  
pertaining to the period 1 December 2013 onwards14, revealed as under:- 
i. In 153264 records, due dates of LR were prior to last drive date.  
ii. In 93137 records, last drive dates and due dates of LR were same.   
iii. In 4503 records, due dates of LR were greater than last drive dates but the 
difference was  less than 89 days viz. CMS did not correctly compute due 
date of LR with a gap of three months.   
iv. In 236145 records, the difference between  due dates of LR and last drive 
dates was more than 92 days viz. CMS computed LR due date after a gap of 
more than three months. 
B. An analysis of LR related data,  having total number of LR trips more than 
zero,  pertaining to the period 1 December 2013 onwards 15,  where LR due date 
had not expired16, revealed as under:- 
i. In 29563 records, the difference between Last Drive dates and LR Due dates 
was less than 89 days viz. CMS computed LR due da tes within a period of 
three months. 
ii. In 15955 cases, though trips of LR we re pending but CMS computed due 
dates for a period of three months which was irregular. 
iii. In 255 cases, where number of LR tr ips due were more than zero, CMS 
computed LR due dates after a period of  three months (i.e. between 95 days 
to 180 days) which was irregular. 
iv. In 2767 cases, where LR due dates had expired viz.LR due dates were prior 
to 6 December 2014 and LR trips were due, CMS computed LR due dates 
after a period of more than three months. 
 
(Annexure - 19) 
 
  
                                                            
14 Last Drive Date from 1 December  2013 and onwards 
15 Last Drive Date from 1 December  2013 and onwards 
16Last Drive dates were prior  to 5 December 2014 and LR Due Dates pertained to period beyond 5 December 
2014 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 77 
 
 
 
Appendix – XVI 
[Reference Para 2.4.2] 
 
Statement  Showing Discrepancies in Training Reports/Data 
i. An analysis of the CMS database as well as Training Reports on CMS revealed 
that CMS was depicting next due date for different types of training courses like 
Refresher Training Courses for Diesel and Electric Traction (REFD & REFE), 
Automatic Signaling (ASIG) training for Shunter etc. even though these were 
not required.  
ii. During review, Audit noticed instances where concerned officials of Delhi 
division lobbies (ANVR, NZM etc.) were not deputed for training on due dates. 
In response, lobby officials informed th at a crew working on Diesel traction 
does not require refresher training of Electric traction and vice versa. Moreover, 
a crew who had attended REFE and RE FD courses did not require 3PH and 
WDG4/WDP417 training respectively and a Shun ter does not require signaling 
training.  
iii. During analysis of training data, Audit found that CMS database depicted next 
due dates of ASIG training in respect of 24254 cases pertaining to 12 lobbies of 
NR whereas in respect of 73 cases of sa me lobbies, database did not indicate 
due dates of next ASIG training. As per Indian Railway General and Subsidiary 
Rules (NR-2011), Automatic Signaling training becomes due after one year and 
as per CRIS documentation on Business Logic for CMS (2006), Automatic 
Signaling training becomes due in six mont hs. In Delhi division, in three cases, 
due dates of next ASIG training pert aining to the year 2014 were after six 
months and during the same year the due da tes were after one year in respect of 
3214 cases.  
iv. In SECR, CMS database depicted next due  dates of ASIG training in respect of 
2526 cases pertaining to 15 lobbies of SE CR.  Out of 2526 cases, in 316 cases, 
due dates of next ASIG training pert aining to the year 2014 (BSP Division) 
were after six months and during the same year it was after one year in respect 
of  one case (BSP Division). Over ER, CMS database depicted next due dates of 
ASIG training in respect of 1070 cases pe rtaining to 14 lobbies of ER whereas 
in respect of one case, database did not indicate due date of next ASIG training. 
  
                                                            
17Training pertaining to Locomotives of different types 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 78 
 
 
Appendix – XVII 
[Reference Para 2.4.3] 
Statement Showing Discrepancies Noticed in Loco Details used in TA 
i.  Review of the Traffic Advi ce (TA) data pertaining to nine18 zones for the period 
5 September 2014 to 5 December 2014 reveal ed that in respect of  28305 TAs 
of General type where crew were booked for working/spare type duty and their 
‘sign on’ time was approved by Supervisor, the loco type was recorded as zero. 
However, audit found that no loco of su ch type was available in the master 
tables.  
ii.  From an analysis of CMS data of TA, Audit found that most of the lobbies were 
using dummy numbers of locos for generation of multiple TAs as is evident 
from the following: 
a. Invalid loco numbers were used for generation of multiple TAs with loco 
number as 123 and 11111 in four lobbies
19 of SECR.  
b. Four lobbies 20 in Jaipur division of NWR attached loco number 111 with 
their multiple TA for booking of 291, 1719, 17 and 1414 crew respectively 
in September and October 2014. In fact, loco number 111 was attached with 
54 trains of above four lobbies of Jaipur division on 2 October 2014. 
c. Over CR, in 2829 records for generati on of TA, invalid loco number i.e. 
11111 was entered. 
d. Over NR, Lucknow (LKO) lobby attached loco number 147 of type ‘0’ with 
their 25 TAs on 14 October 2014, DLI l obby attached loco number 1111 of 
type ‘2’ with their 65 TAs on 8 November 2014. 
e. Over NR, multiple lobbies 21 used loco number 1111 on 30 November 2014 
with their multiple TAs.  
f. Over ER, on 20/11/2014 loco number 100 was used for 128 times in 
different lobbies of ER22. 
g. Over WR, in respect of 93452 records, f our fields of loco number and one 
field of loco type for capturing loco details contained ze ro. Over ER and 
NFR loco number 100/1000/10000 was used in 33756 cases23.  
h. Over ER & SCR, no loco number was used in 145521 cases24. 
i. Over SCR, in 1714 cases, loco numbe r 111 and in 5163 cases, loco number 
123 was used. Over ER, loco number ‘0 ’ was used in 39 cases and loco 
number ‘1’ was used in six cases.  
 
                                                            
18 NFR=53, NWR=11646,  SWR=2376, NR=2376, CR=830, ER=819, SECR=3361,  SER=323, WR= 5676, 
SCR=845 (Total=28305) 
19 Raipur, MIB, CWA, DGG 
20Bandikui, Phulera, Jaipur & Rewari 
21 DLI, Ludhiana (LDH), Ferozepur (FZR), Delhi Sarai Rohilla(DEE), Amritsar(ASR), Pathankot PTK), 
Bathinda (BTI) 
22(AZ-53 times, HWH-47 times, KOAA-6 times, MLDT-7 times, PKR-14 times, RPH-1 time) 
23 ER=13834, NFR =19922 
24 ER=36385, SCR=109136 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 79 
 
 
Appendix – XVIII 
[Reference Para 2.4.8] 
Statement Showing Discrepancies in the Crew Counseling Data  
i. In order to increase the knowledge base  of a crew, various methods are used 
like deputing crew to various training, thei r counseling by their LIs etc. In this 
regard, RB issued its orders 25 on 28.10.2014 giving norms for periodicity of 
crew counseling.  On the same date, NR 26 issued orders in this regard.  As per 
NR order dated 28 October 2014, loco pilo ts of safety grade ‘A’ were to be 
counseled once in two months, of safety grade ‘B’ were to be counseled once in 
one month and of safety grade ‘C’ were to be counseled once in a fortnight. As 
per RB orders, ‘A’ Grade crew to be counseled once in three months, ‘B’  grade 
crew  to be counseled once in two mont hs and ‘C’ grade crew  to be counseled 
once in a month.  Thus, the periodicity of  counseling in both the orders was not 
same.   
ii. Audit has done the data analysis in the lig ht of the orders of NR to review the 
position of counseling. In order to see th e last counseling imparted to the crew, 
reference had to be made to the data prior to 28 th October 2014.  Audit found 
during the review of the CMS data for the period prior to 6 December 2014 
pertaining to periodicity of the counseli ng of crew (Grade A, B and C) by their 
Chief LI/LI that around 29 percent crew over NR, 88 per cent crew over NFR 
and six per cent crew over NWR were not counseled at the periodicity 
prescribed by NR.   
iii. It was further noticed over NR from the analysis of CMS data for the period 
prior to 6 December 2014 that 23 per cent crew were not found counseled as per 
the periodicity prescribed by RB. 
iv. Analysis of counseling data available at  kiosks of various lobbies of Delhi 
division
27  in January 2015 to March 2015 also confirmed that crew grading and 
counseling was not being done at the prescribed periodicity. 
v. Out of total 7840 active crew on CR, data pertaining to counseling of only 1593 
crew had been captured in CMS. The num ber of times the counseling had been 
done ranged between one to 157.  
vi. Over six zones28 there were 2167 instances where crew were counseled by Loco 
Inspector, but IDs of Loco Inspectors , who counseled the crew, were not 
available on CMS record. 
(Annexure - 21)
                                                            
25Letter Number 2012/Safety(DM)/7/25 dated 28.10.2014(As per RB letter dated 28.10.2014)  
26 No. 45RS/9/Train Operation dated 28.10.2014 
27 MTC, DEE, Jind, SSB etc, 
28 CR=529, ECOR=773, SECR=446, NR=101, NFR=98, NWR=220 (Total =2167) 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 80 
 
 
Appendix – XIX 
[Reference Para 2.4.10] 
 
Statement Showing Status of Breath Analyzer Devices over Different Zones 
i. Breath Analyzer (BA) could not be in tegrated with the system in 12 ZRs 29. 
Integrated BAs were installed over thr ee lobbies of Delhi division (NR), five 
lobbies of ECoR, three lobbies of WR and two lobbies of NWR test checked 
during audit. In PSA lobby of ECoR, though BA has been integrated with CMS, 
the integration was not functioning. BA unit installed and integrated into the 
CMS/kiosk at MAS lobby during 2012 was deactivated due to software 
problems. In other lobbies of SR, the en tire BA testing of crew was being done 
using hand-held BA units. 
ii. In other selected lobbies in IRs, the kiosk was not having an integrated BA unit. 
The entire BA testing of crew was being done using hand-held BA units, 
supervised by Chief Crew Controller/Crew Controller. The results were then 
recorded in CMS by clicking on the relevant check box. As the process taking 
the BA test by crew is manual, it lack s vital safety related system control. 
Hence, possibility of misuse of this feature cannot be ruled out. 
iii. An analysis of the crew’s Breath Sign on data pertaining to  5 September to 5 
December 2014 revealed that in 246 cases over seven ZRs 30, the Supervisor 
approved ‘crew sign on’ though the va lue of ‘breath sign on’ was ‘N’ viz. crew 
had not performed ‘breath sign on’ and CMS allowed approval of crew sign on 
which indicates weak controls to validate crew sign on. 
(Annexure - 23) 
iv. As per the value recorded in the Superv isor’s approval field of crew ‘sign on’, 
in 2731cases of crew ‘sign on’ over NR, NFR and CR respectively, Breath Test 
failure (Code BF) was recorded as reason for non-approval of crew ‘sign on’ by 
the Supervisor during 16 October to 5 December 2014 but the value of ‘breath 
sign on’ field in all the cases was found to be zero ( viz. crew had cleared BA 
test).  This indicates inadequate controls to validate crew sign on. 
v. At DEE lobby of NR, results of BA test we re stated to be di rectly recorded in 
CMS and no manual register for recording results of BA test was maintained. In 
the absence of Bio-metric and integrated BA devices, it could not be ascertained 
whether the BA test of all crew was being conducted at all at DEE lobby. 
vi. Maula Ali (MLY) lobby of SCR is a cr ew changing point between Hyderabad 
(HYB) and Secunderabad (SC) divisions . Audit found that this lobby is not 
functional and the activities relating to sign on/off, breath analysis at MLY 
lobby were not monitored as no staff wa s posted at MLY lobby. The data entry 
work pertaining to crew operations of  MLY lobby like sign on/off, breath 
                                                            
29 ER, CR, WCR, ECR, NCR, SER, SECR, NCR, NFR,NER,  SCR and SWR 
30 NR, SCR, SER, WCR, SECR, NCR and CR 
31 NR=23, NFR=2, CR=2 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 81 
 
 
analysis etc. was being done at its sister lobbies 32 at KCG & SNF which were 
around 13-14 kms. away from MLY lobby. 
vii. In CR, it was noticed by AEME 33 (Fuel) during his in spection of Daund lobby 
that out of 372 staff signed on/off on 29 December 2014, 109 crew did not take 
the BA test. Failure to ensure BA test results for all the crew shows 
lackadaisical attitude of the Railway admi nistration to this vital safety aspect. 
There was an incident on CR during January 2015 (press clipping) where one 
Motorman of suburban train was caught in a drunken state which could be a 
result of failure of BA test at the time of sign on. He had hit the emergency 
brake causing the train to halt after it was pulling out of the station. The 
mandatory BA test through integrated BA  device at the time of sign off will 
mitigate the risk of crew consuming alcohol en route or during the trip. 
                                                              
32 Sister lobby concept is applicable wh ere CMS user wants to serve call to Lobby “A” crew but the crew need to 
sign ON at Station “B”. Similarly on  returning, the crew signs OFF at station “B” but he has to be made 
available at station A for further crew booking. 
33 See glossary 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 82 
 
 
 
Appendix – XX 
[Reference Para 2.5.1] 
Statement Showing Details of Discrepancies in the Configuration of Mileage 
Allowance 
i. A review of the allowances configured  in the CMS by vari ous lobbies of 10 
ZRs34 revealed that in violation of the extant rule, CMS was configured to allow 
charging of 80/120/160 kilometrage per day (depending upon the type of duty to 
be performed) to crew for attendi ng non-running duties/tr aining at their 
headquarters. Between 9 March and 4 December 2014, CMS allowed mileage 
allowance of 21136799 kms. valuing around  485 lakh to crew of ten ZRs for 
attending various non-running duties/training courses
35 at their Headquarters.  
ii. Over CR and NR, in 111 cases 36, even though crew was shown to perform non-
running duties at other than headqua rter, his headquarters locations and 
outstation locations were exactly the same, however, CMS allowed outstation 
allowance of 13,560 kms.
37 This indicated inconsistent data.  
iii. In CMS, 98 types of non-running duties we re defined in the master data of 
CMS.  However, one to 100 types of non-running duties38 were found processed 
under CMS by different ZRs. The list also  included non-running duties such as 
NREST, CREST, WOFF etc. which were not found in the master list. It was 
observed that non-running allowance in terms of kms. was computed by CMS 
for non-running duties such as Absent, LAP, CL etc. for which it was not 
allowed. 
iv. Based on the results of CMS data analys is, test check of physical records was 
conducted at TKD (NR), Bilaspur (BSP)  and Brajrajnagar (BRJN) (SECR) 
lobbies and during test check audit f ound instances where payment for mileage 
allowance @ 160 kms. was made to offi cials for performing non-running duties 
at their headquarters (NR, SECR ) instead of payment of pay element equivalent 
to 30 per cent of the basic salary. 
(Annexure - 24) 
 
                                                            
34 CR, ER, ECR, ECoR, NR,  NWR, SCR, SECR,  WCR, WR, NCR 
35such as REFE, PD, SHDT, PCR, REFD, REFSC, SFCM, CTCC, CTLC, PME, TCC, STDTO etc.(see  glossary) 
36 CR=106, NR=5 
37 CR=12800, NR=760 
38 such as REFE, PD, SHDT, PCR, REFD, REFSC, SFCM, TCC, CTCC, CTLC,  PME, STDTO etc. 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 83 
 
 
Appendix – XXI 
[Reference Para 2.5.2] 
Statement Showing Details of Discrepancies in Admissible Kilometrage 
i. At DEE lobby, Audit noticed during test check of mileage reports that when a 
crew (DEE1089) was relieved at 19:15 hrs on 9 November 2014 for Safety 
Camp training at Dhampur, he was immediately booked in CMS as ‘on training’ 
and the crew returned back on 16 November 2014 at 08:00 hours. He was 
allowed 1440 kms. by CMS which includ ed ‘admissible kms.’of 320 as CMS 
has been configured for DEE lobby to pay 320 kms. (160x2 for to and fro) as 
admissible kms. for attending non-running duties at Dhampur and additional 
160 kms. for one additional day. However,  his mileage allowance for training 
period was corrected manually by lobby and he was paid mileage allowance of 
1120 kms. (160x7) for seven days, i.e. si x days of training and one additional 
day.  Thus, the mileage allowance paid was not as computed by the CMS. 
ii. Over ER, it was noticed that crew of two lobbies
39 were deputed during the 
month of November 2014 and March 2015 fo r PME training at Howrah (HWH) 
for two and three days respectively.  However, the CMS allowed  536 kms. and 
800 kms. respectively to crew as mil eage allowance which comprised 320 kms. 
and 480 kms. for attending training and another 216 kms. and 320 kms. as 
admissible kms. as these lobbies were configured in CMS for charging 
additional 216 kms. and 320 kms. as admissible kms.  
 
(Annexure - 25) 
                                                              
39AZ (ID AZ1176) and RPH (ID RPH7176) lobbies 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 84 
 
 
Appendix – XXII 
[Reference Para 2.5.6] 
Statement Showing Details of Discrepancies/Irregularities in Crew Sign on Time 
vis-a-vis Train Departure/Arrival Time 
 
Zone Names Discrepancies/Audit observations 
SECR, ER, CR, 
SER, NFR, SR &  
NCR 
In 1349 cases, crew signed on after FOIS train departure time 
with a gap of one minute to 93 hours 10 minutes. 
SECR, ER, CR, 
SR & NCR 
In 3073 cases, crew signed on before FOIS train departure time 
with a gap of 31 minutes to 2635 minutes. 
SCR In 2022 cases, crew signed off before FOIS arrival time of the 
train and in 2020 cases, crew si gned on after FOIS departure 
time of the train. 
CR, ER & SER In 33 cases, FOIS train departur e time and crew’s sign-on time 
was same viz. there was no gap though as per rules, crew had 
to signon 10-45 minutes prior to the departure of the train. 
NR &  SER in 6549 cases, CMS train departure time was after train 
ordering time and the gap was in the range of 30 minute to 599 
minutes. 
NR, CR, SER & 
NWR 
In 9570 cases, crew signed on after train ordering time and the 
gap was in the range of one minute to 1485 minutes. 
NR, CR, WR, 
NWR & NFR 
In 1183 cases, crew signed on after CMS train departure time 
and the gap was in the range of one minutes to 104 hours. 
SCR Comparison of CMS data with C OA data revealed that in 45 
cases, where train was late, the 'sign on' time was just 15 
minutes to two minutes before the actual departure time of the 
train. In three cases the crew 'sign on' time was same as the 
scheduled departure time of the train and in 62 cases the crew 
'sign on' time was later to the scheduled departure time. In all 
the 65 cases the train got delayed. 
In 17 cases, crew 'sign on' time was later than the actual 
departure time (COA time). Th e time difference ranged from 
one minute to 29 minutes in 16 cases and in one case the time 
difference was 985 minutes.  
 
(Annexure - 30)

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 85 
 
 
Appendix – XXIII 
[Reference Para 3.2] 
Statement Showing Discrepancies in Particulars of Traffic Advice 
Train 
Number/Name  
& Lobby Name 
Particulars of discrepancies noticed 
14095 (Himalyan 
Queen) 
(DEE) 
In one TA of 30.11.2014, train ordering time was 05:35 and in 
second TA of 30.11.2014, train ordering time was 05:40. 
14086 (Haryana 
Express) 
(SSB) 
On 26.10.2014, TA was prepared from SSB to DBSI, on 
27.10.2014, TA was prepared from SSB to NZM and on 
30.10.2014, TA was prepared from SSB to DLI station. 
12455 (DEE-
SGNR S.F. 
Express) 
(JHL) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14006 (Lichchavi 
Express) 
(ANVR) 
 
On 16.09.2014, TA was prepared for Mail service type train of 
Train Number 12455Exp and on 18.09.2014, TA was prepared 
for Freight service type train of Train number 12455Exp, though 
on both the days, other particulars like From station, To station, 
Loco Number, Loco Type, Ordering Time, Route name etc. were 
same. 
On some days, this train was operated with train number 
12455Exp and on other days , this  train was operated with train 
number 12455. 
On 25.11.2014, TA of train number 14006 was prepared for 
Freight type train and on 26.11.2014, TA of  train number 14006 
was prepared for Passenger type train 
On 2.11.2014, TA of train number 14006 was from ANVR to 
CNB for Mail service type train and on 3.11.2014, TA of train 
number 14006 was from ANVR to TDL for Passenger service 
type train 
In one TA of train number 14006 of 23.9.2014, Train ordering 
time was 21:45 and in other TA of train number 14006 of 
23.09.2014, train ordering time was 23:30. 
18409 (Sri 
Jagannath 
Express.) 
18625 (Patna 
Hatia Super 
Express) and  
18619 (Ranchi 
Dumka Intercity 
Express) 
Over SER, no uniformity as to service type was maintained while 
preparing TAs. On some days, a train operated as express train, 
was operated as passenger/ freight train on other days. 
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 86 
 
 
Appendix – XXIV 
[Reference Para 3.10] 
Statement Showing Details of Cases Having Inconsistencies in CMS Reports 
i. A review of the Crew Due for Periodical Rest (PR) Report revealed that the report 
was not giving correct output. For exam ple, ‘Crew Due for PR Report’ of ANVR 
lobby of 3 March 2015 depicted that two crew (ID ANVR1041 and ANVR1062) 
had taken their last rest on 28 February 2015 and 1 March 2015 but the same report 
indicated that the crew had not taken any rest during the last seven days from the 
report date i.e. 3 March 2015.  
ii. As per CMS ‘Crew Training History Report 40’ of 3 March 2015, Crew (ID 
ANVR1046) was due for PME on 14 September 2014 but the ‘Crew Training 
Particular Report
41’ generated at the same time indicated that the Crew ID 
ANVR1046 was due for PME training on  12 September 2018. The above facts 
were also verified at ANVR Lobby and it was found that report was giving wrong 
output. (NR) 
iii. A comparison of different reports at PNP lobby revealed that as per Crew Mileage 
Summary Report for the month of February, there was a BoR of 36 hours but as per 
BoR Report for the month of February 2015, there was a BoR of 29 hours. (NR) 
  
  
                                                            
40 The report depicts details of various training of a crew like training name, training due date and done date etc. 
41 The reports depicts details of a specific training course like training name, crew names, their training due date and 
done date etc. 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 87 
 
 
Appendix – XXV 
[Reference Para 4.1] 
 
Statement Showing Deficiencies in Security Measures Noticed over Different Zones 
i. Over nine ZRs 42, CCTV cameras were not installed at lobbies test checked during 
audit. Only at three out of seven lobbie s of WR, CCTV cameras were installed on 
KIOSK machines.  
ii. Over SWR, CCTV camera installed at Hubli lobby was not connected to any 
monitor for effective monitoring on real time basis.  
iii. Over ECR, some lobbies such as Barwadih, Dhanbad and Patratu had single CCTV 
camera installed which was not sufficient to monitor the activities of a large 
number (200 to 300) of crew. 
iv. Over ER, two lobbies were located beside the 2 nd Class Waiting Room in Howrah 
Station, thereby exposing the lobbies to the risk of unauthorized entry. 
v. Over CR and WCR, CMS equipment were pl aced in a controlled atmosphere at 
lobbies of CR and WCR and CCTV surveillance was available in all the lobbies of 
Pune division of CR but not at the lobbies of WCR. 
  
                                                            
42 NMP and ADL lobbies of SER (CCTV cameras available at  KGP and SRC lobbies over SER were not functional), 
six lobbies of SECR, four lobbies of NW R, 14 lobbies of SCR, five lobbies of ECoR, all CMS l obbies of Delhi division 
of NR, NFR lobbies, NCR lobbies (except Allahabad lobby) and NER lobbies (Except Gorakhpur Lobby) 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 88 
 
 
Appendix – XXVI 
[Reference Para 4.3] 
Statement Showing Deficiencies/Irregularities Noticed in the Management of Railway 
CMS Users at Different Levels 
 
i. Over NR, at DLI lobby, five CMS users were assigned administrative (DRMN) 43 
privileges, one of them was in the name of ‘Test’ with designation as ‘Mobile’. At 
SSB, NZM and GZB lobbies, two us ers had administrative (DCMN)
44 privileges 
and one of the two users having administrative privileges was either an Assistant 
Driver or Guard viz. the user was not a Supervisor.  
ii. Over ER, four users having administrati ve privileges (DRMN) were created in 
division name and division name was recorded as designation i.e. ÁSN’, ‘HWH’, 
‘MLDT’ & ‘SDAH’’  
iii. Over SECR, four DCMN (Administrative) users were created in the name of 123, 
ABCD, GGSGS, CCC.  Over SWR, one Administrative ID was created in the name 
of 123 and one official had two IDs with administrative privileges. Over ECoR, at 
TLHR lobby, two users had administrative privileges and one of them was in the 
name of TLHR Console. Over NER, one TNC had DCMN (Administrative) 
privilege. At Rourkela of SER, two ac tive users had DCMN (Administrative) 
privilege. Over LKO Lobby of NER, three users had DCMN/DRMN 
(Administrative) privilege.   
iv. Over NR, ER, NER, SER, SCR, WCR, NWR, CR, SR, ECoR and NFR
45 ZRs, user 
IDs were created in the name of lobbie s/obscure names and over SECR, user ID 
was in the name of zone.  Over CR, 16 di fferent user IDs were created with names 
of the users as "Lobby". 
v. Over NER, one user created for the representative of Annual Maintenance Service 
provider firm was designated as Assistant Loco Pilot.  
vi. On WR, four records of duplicate lobby name and user ID were found at the 
lobbies test checked. 
vii. Over 13 ZRs 46, 888 TNC/ALP/Box Porter/Cleaner/ Call boy, Gangman/RR 
Bearer/Private operators/Contractor/SLI etc. were assigned Supervisory privileges.  
(Annexure – 38) 
                                                            
43 Divisional Report Manager Privileges 
44 Divisional  Console Manager Privileges 
45(ALH & RBL with designation as Kiosk, AMGGTNC and AMGLTNC at AMG Lobby, DDNLS and DDNGS at DDN 
Lobby, N (JUC lobby), NI(FD lobby), FDGS of FD over NR), Bandikui over NWR, GD & MLN over NER, BWNA, 
BWNB, BNNO, AMLA, GPR, BWBI at BWN Crew Lobby, JMP at JMP Lobby, HWH DC, HWH SD, HWH GTNC at 
HWH Lobby, MLDT CMS, PSA with name as RRR (ECoR), MLDT DC at MLDT Lobby etc. 
46 NR, NWR, SER, NER, ER, NFR, NCR, SECR, CR, WR, SWR, SR, WCR 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 89 
 
 
Appendix – XXVII 
[Reference Para 4.3] 
Statement Showing Details of Irregularities in the Management of CMS Users   
Nature of 
irregularity 
Particulars 
Multiple 
Profile/User ID 
466 CMS users 47 over six ZRs, having same Lobby Name, User 
Name and Phone Number had two to 10 user profiles and multiple 
types of authority. 
40 users over NFR had IDs in the range of two to nine and over 
SER, 24 crew had 2-3 active crew IDs.  
Over SWR, two users had user IDs in two different lobbies. 
Over Pune division of CR, 14 di fferent user IDs were created for 
single person. 
Users created in 
excess of 
requirement 
Over CR, 544 user IDs were create d for 201 user names. Many of 
the user IDs created were not being used by the lobbies as verified 
during the lobby inspections. 
Over SCR, as many as 856 user ids were created for 42 lobbies on 
SCR, which seems to be very much in excess of the actual 
requirement and indicates that the un-used user IDs of the retired 
and outsourced staff were not being deleted from the system. 
The CMS users created for seven lobbies of SR visited by Audit 
were found higher than the actual requirement as against the 
requirement of around 12 users 48, all the lobbies (except MSB) 
had more than 25 users. 
Active User ID of 
ex-officials 
Profile Analysis and scrutiny of records at ANVR, MTC, ROK, 
Jind, Jhakhal lobbies over Delhi division of NR, Kashipur and 
Farrukhabad lobbies of NER and NCB lobby of NFR revealed that 
user IDs of ex-officials/transferred officials, who were no longer 
associated with CMS, were still found to be in use/active. 
                                                            
47 NR=132, NER=8, SECR=70, ECR=113, ER=26, SCR=117 
48 Calculated on the basis of each lobby working on three shifts for four users (3 TNC+1 Supervisor). 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 90 
 
 
Appendix – XXVIII 
[Reference Para 4.6] 
Statement Showing Deficiencies in Infrastructure/Business Continuity Plan at 
Lobbies 
i. Connectivity/link failure, slow speed of network between central server and CMS 
client machines were the main reas ons for disruption of continuous CMS 
operations over lobbies of 13 ZRs 49test checked during audit. Though RB had 
issued instructions for maintenance of route and media diversity/alternative 
communication channels for ensuring 24x7 connectivity but the same was not 
ensured for the lobbies of seven ZRs
50 test checked during audit. Route and media 
diversity/alternative communication channels were found available during test 
check of selected lobbies over SR. 
ii. The arrangements for alternative powe r supply at lobbies of eight ZRs
51 were not 
adequate. Power backup equipments supplied for GHY and NGC lobbies of NFR 
were not installed and were lying idle for more than two year. Adequate Power 
backup facility was available at the lobbies of SECR and WCR. 
iii. CMS equipments/devices of lobbies at 13 ZRs 52 test checked during audit were not 
covered under AMC. CMS equipments/devices were covered under AMC at ECoR, 
SECR, NR (Electric lobbies of Delhi di vision), and equipment/devices of WCR 
were under warranty.  
iv. Working spare equipment/devices were not available for immediate replacement of 
defective equipment for ensuring continuous operations at lobbies of 11 ZRs 53.  
Working spares were available at the lobbies of ECoR and WR. 
v. Fire Extinguishers were found to be expired/not installed at SR 54, SWR 
(Castlerock), NWR (Jaipur), NFR Lobbies , ER (four lobbies), ECR(were not 
adequate at ECR).  Fire Extinguisher were available at lobbies of WR, NR, CR, 
SER, SECR, WCR.  
vi. Smoke Detector/Fire Alarm System were no t found installed at the lobbies of all 
ZRs test checked by Audit. 
  
                                                            
49CR, NR, SR, SCR (13 lobbies), ECoR, SECR, ER, ECR, NFR, NCR, NWR, WCR, SER 
50 Delhi Division (NR), SECR, NFR, ECR,  SCR (available only at two lobbies), ER,  WCR 
51 WR (three lobbies), SR (11 lobbies), SCR(one lobby), ECoR (two lobbies), SWR, ER (five lobbies), NR(one lobby 
only-GZB), NWR 
52 ECR, ER, SER, SCR, NFR, NER, CR, NWR, SWR, SR (UPS/Inverter of only two out of 26 lobbies covered), WR 
and NR (Diesel lobbies of Delhi division). 
53ECR, ER, SER, NWR, SECR, CR ,NR( MTC, ROK, NZM, JHL, Jind, GZB, DEE lobbies), SR, SCR, WCR 
54Expired at Tambaram lobby in January 2015 and were also not located at a place which could facilitate their 
immediate usage during emergency 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 91 
 
 
 
Appendix – XXIX 
[Reference Para 5.3] 
 
Statement Showing Cases of Delay in Commissioning of Lobbies over Different ZR 
i. The work of supply and commissioning of TSS equipment in 39 locations was 
awarded to a firm in January 2012. The date of completion of commissioning was 
fixed as 25 April 2012. There was delay in commissioning initially due to 
development work at CRIS and later-on due to non-availability of site readiness. As 
of April 2014, only 15 lobbies could be  commissioned and 24 lobbies were still 
pending as site was not ready.  
ii. Against the target of implementation of CMS under phase-I over 40 lobbies of NR 
by 31 March 2007, all the lobbies were either not commissioned or were 
commissioned without populating referentia l data work during February 2008. Six 
lobbies did not commission/start booking of crew even by the end of July 2008. 
The basic reason for not achieving target of implementation was non-completion of 
civil/electrical/S&T (Network infrastructure) related work. 
iii. Even during the final/third phase, the target  of implementation of CMS was yet to 
be achieved as CMS was not implemente d at 16 lobbies over NR (till 31 March 
2015) due to lack of connectivity, site  readiness, non-availability of CMS 
equipment. 
iv. Over SR, no target date had been planned/fixed for full implementation of CMS. 
 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 92 
 
 
 
Appendix – XXX 
[Reference Para 5.5] 
 
Statement Showing Details of Non-usage of CMS over Different Zones 
i. Over SCR, in Secunderabad lobby, Guards ’ were manually signing on/off their 
duties. 
ii. Over SR, data of 162 diesel crew of MAS lobby was not captured in CMS and their 
operations were  not covered under CMS. 
iii. Over SER, in SRC lobby, booking of guards was being done through manual 
system. 
iv. Over NR, at NDLS, GZB, PNP and ANVR 55 lobbies, Guards were not using CMS 
for sign on/sign off purpose. 
v. Over WCR, in Beohari and Rewa lobbies,  system was lying in operative due to 
non-availability of proper operator and defective system. 
vi. Over SR and ER, CMS lobbies at MSB (Guard lobby) and BDC were lying 
inoperative since their commissioning and hardware remained idle. Over ER, one 
set of hardware of BDC lobby was shifted to HWH lobby. 
vii. Over CR, in 12 lobbies of Mumbai Division, CMS usage was poor even after a 
lapse of nine years. Wh ile accepting the contention of Audit, Railway 
Administration stated that poor usage was due to various problems (mainly due to 
non-availability of slate system of booking in CMS, equipment with outlived codal 
life etc.). 
 
 
                                                            
55 See glossary 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 93 
 
Annexure 1 
[Reference Para 1.5] 
Statement Showing Names of Railway Zones, Divisions and Lobbies 
Selected as Sample 
Sr. 
No. 
Names of the 
Railway Zones 
Names of the 
Divisions 
Names of Lobbies 
1 Central Railway Pune Division  Ghorpuri, 
Miraj,  
Pune Station, 
Pune Electric,  
Satara 
Kolhapur 
2 East Coast Railway Khurda Di vision  Khurda Road Junction 
Talcher  
Paradeep  
Bhadrak  
Palasa  
3 North Central 
Railway 
Allahabad Division Mughalsarai 
Allahabad 
Kanpur  
Kanpur Marshalling Yard 
Tundla  
Chheoki (Single diesel lobby) 
Allahabad (Single diesel lobby) 
4 North East Railway Izzat Nagar Division Farrukhabad 
Kashipur 
Kathgodam 
Gorakhpur 
5 Southern Railway Chennai Division Chennai Central 
Chennai Egmore  
Chennai Beach 
Arakkonam   
Tiruvotriur 
Tambaram  
Jolarpettai  
6 Western Railway Ahmeda bad Division Ahmedabad 
Vatva 
Sabarmati 
Bhirdi 
Dhrangdhra 
Gandhidham 
Palanpur 
7 South Eastern 
Railway 
Kharagpur Division Kharagpur 
Nimpura 
Santragachi  
Andul lobby 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 94 
 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Names of the 
Railway Zones 
Names of the 
Divisions 
Names of Lobbies 
8 East Central Railway Dh anbad Division  Barwadih 
Chandrapura  
Krishnashila 
Khalari 
Ray 
Patratu 
Dhanbad 
Gomoh 
9 Eastern Railway Howrah Division Howrah  
Pakur  
Bardhaman 
Rampurhat  
Azimganj  
Katwa 
10 South Central 
Railway 
Secunderabad 
Division 
Secunderabad 
Parli Vaijnath 
Hyderabad 
Kazipet Junction 
Sanatnagar 
Bhadrachalam Road 
Bellampalli 
Moula Ali 
Ramagundam 
Bidar 
Dornakal Junction 
Chittapur  
Motimari  
Manuguru  
Lallaguda 
Pandhar Pavani 
11 South East Central 
Railway 
Bilaspur Divison  Bijuri  
Brajrajnagar 
Bilaspur  
Korba  
Raigarh 
Shahdol 
12 South Western 
Railway 
Hubli Division Hubli,  
Hospet  
Castle rock 
 
 
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 95 
 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Names of the 
Railway Zones 
Names of the 
Divisions 
Names of Lobbies 
13 West Central 
Railway 
Jabalpur Division Jabalpur Junction 
Katni 
New Katni Junction 
Satna  
Saugor   
Beohari  
Rewa  
14 North East Frontier 
Railway 
Alipurduar Division Alipurduar Junction 
New Coochbehar  
Guwahati  
New Guwahati 
Lumding  
15 North Western 
Railway 
Jaipur Division Jaipur  
Phulera  
Bandikui  
Rewari  
16 Northern Railway Delhi Division Delhi 
Tuglakabad  
Nizamuddin   
New Delhi   
Delhi Sarai Rohilla 
Shakurbasti  
Anand Vihar  
Rohtak 
Jind  
Jhakhal  
Panipat  
Ghaziabad 
Meerut 
Palwal  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 96 
 
Annexure 2 
[Reference  Para 2.1.1] 
Statement Showing Sanctioned Strength and Men In Position  
as per CMS and Manual Records 
Sr. 
No. 
Zone Number 
of 
Lobbies 
Audited 
Sanctioned 
Strength as per 
Men in Position 
as per 
CMS Manual 
Records
CMS Manual 
Records 
1 CR 5 409 397 469 344 
2 ER 6 2044 2826 2279 2307 
3 ECoR 5 NA 3008 2278 2275 
4 NR* 12 3521 4108 2972 3061 
5 NFR 5 1355 1332 1449 897 
6 SR 7 419 403 3204 1474 
7 SECR 6 4115 3376 4012 3871 
8 SWR 3 1080 1181 1046 1015 
9 WCR 5 1958 991 1393 975 
10 NWR 4 1157 1122 1335 1012 
11 SCR 1 447# 548# 396 345 
12 ECR 8 1407 673 1400 505 
13 NER 4 631** 796 698 697 
14 WR 7 1776 2053 1799 1853 
15 SER 4 855 1476 1198 1439 
16 NCR 7 5080 6211 4125 4185 
*Details include Loco crew deta ils and exclude details of NDLS 
Guard lobby which was not in use and guards of other lobbies.  The 
details also exclude PWL lobby wh ich has sanctioned strength of 8 
crew and ‘nil crew’ as men-in-pos ition and these details were not 
posted/updated  in CMS 
# Loco Pilots of SC lobby 
**Excluding FBD lobby whose data was not entered into CMS master 
data 
 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 97 
 
Annexure 3 
[Reference Para 2.1.2] 
Statement Showing Results of Analysis of Profiles of Active Crew 
Sr. 
No. 
Zone Cases where 
difference of 
more than 50 
years noticed 
between Date 
of Birth and 
Date of 
Appointment  
Cases where 
difference of 
less than 18 
years noticed 
between Date 
of birth and 
Date of 
Appointment 
Cases 
where 
same 
Date of 
Birth 
and Date 
of 
Appoint
ment 
shown  
Cases 
where 
Retirement 
Age 
Crossed 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
1 CR 0 32 1 34 
2 ER 2 17  122 
3 ECR# 7 66  12 
4 ECoR 0 0 0 1 
5 NR 12 79 1 142 
6 NCR 0 0 0 28 
7 NER 0 28 0 10 
8 NFR 0 8 1 35 
9 NWR 8 11 0 1 
10 SCR 0 104 0 38 
11 SECR 5 15 1 7 
12 SER 1 26 0 175 
13 SWR 0 0 0 7 
14 WR 0 23 1 83 
15 WCR 3 44 1 17 
16 SR 0 30 1 0 
  Total 38 483 6 712 
#Difference is more than 38 years 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 98 
 
Annexure 4 
[Reference Para  2.1.3] 
Statement Showing Number of Blank Records of Active Crew 
Sr. 
No. 
Field Name Number of  Blank Records of Active Crew 
CR ER ECR ECoR NR NCR NER NFR NWR SR SCR SECR SER SWR WR WCR Total  
1 Blood Group 1790 2566 468 447 6134 2424 1320 320 984 884 3262 1940 1972 431 2393 948 28283 
2 Mobile Number and 
Personal Mobile 
Number 
640 1421 105 78 1227 5474 249 2227 1312 4434 453 248 721 59 11330 3471 33449 
3 Service PNT 
Number 
6782 6983 2238 2145 9915 5631 - 2653 914 5081 8287 5963 7325 954 6370 0 71241 
4 Railway Number 7319 6487 2269 2262 10506 5982  2872 1267 3027 8384 5769 7669 977 6913 2630 74333 
5 Last Promotion 
Date 
817 1146 167 132 412 1030 127 105 51 692 349 358 1140 147 1061 197 7931 
6 Call Serve Address 1542 46 26 1 134 1041 918 2 1335 138 3753 434 33 - 42 0 9445 
7 Permanent Address 4157 3535 752 270 3944 1804 716 954 331 1649 4881 2088 3033 635 2293 0 31042 
8 Alcohol 245 155 - 2 431 195 12 13 14 152 39 5 327 1 15 0 1606 
9 Increment Due 
Date/Last 
Increment Date 
237 60 5 24 183 - - 30 1174 591 213 65 727 47 338 30 3724 
10 Traction 2155 2022 591 537 2567 1458 604 954 367 1213 28 23 2066 277 2455 0 17317 
11 Marital Status 2107 2458 518 219 2799 1358 582 658 179 1283 3427 1445 1939 410 1417 374 21173 
12 Loco Inspector 
Name or LI Code 
(For Designation 
Loco) 
384 3728 1239 997 463 1850 1305 1393 870 681 6180 2150 1895 13 - 673 23821 
13 Identification Mark 7286 6790 1873 2185 10577 4977 1992 2679 1267 3091 8217 6409 7337 910 6976 1903 74469 
14 Initial Medical Date 7659 7324 2201 2210 10666 5806 2268 2824 1303 3177 9210 6689 7712 935 7432 1927 79343 
15 Bill Unit Number 7634 7130 2214 1079 11116 4690 2219 2753 818 3037 9257 6589 6398 1040 7226 1986 75186 
16 Aadhar Number 6196 4969 2284 2276 8727 3644 2403 2955 1326 2761 6368 6801 5196 1042 7501 1581 66030 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 99 
 
 
 
Annexure 4 (Contd.......) 
[Reference Para  2.1.3] 
Statement Showing Number of Blank Records of Active Crew 
Sr. 
No. 
Field Name Number of  Blank Records of Active Crew 
CR ER ECR ECoR NR NCR NER NFR NWR SR SCR SECR SER SWR WR WCR Total 
17 PAN Number 7565 7051 2164 2244 10892 5169 2278 2823 984 3195 9472 6643 7719 1039 7336 1955 78529 
18 PF Number 101 342 10 67 2756 75 251 135 167 134 102 84 440 0 209 5 4878 
19 Seniority 7501 6793 2275 2270 10858 6123 2389 2645 855 3190 9171 6766 7760 1039 6683 1524 77842 
20 Appointment 
Date 
65 67 5 - 79 33 10 22 3 51 129 22 28 9 46 0 569 
21 Railway 
Quarter 
245 149 -  2 398 158 12 13 13 - - 5 327 1 10 0 1333 
22 Education 
Qualification 
"select" 
436 611 78 37 236 103 93 46 60 551 504 180 290 49 237 72 3583 
23 Appointment 
Post "Select" 
1265 2033 193 550 505 847 265 307 97 1239 1339 1020 1528 48 1246 323 12805 
  Total  74128 73866 21675 20034 105525 59872 20013 29383 15691 40251 93025 61696 73582 10063 79529 19599 797932 
 
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 100 
 
Annexure 5 
[Reference Para 2.1.4] 
Statement Showing Details of Incorrect/Invalid Data for Different Fields 
Sr. 
No. 
Zone Availability 
Date 
Increment 
Date 
Basic 
Pay 
Officiating 
Date 
PF 
Number 
1 CR 0 5560 567 7438 848
2 ER 13 3855 460 7273 395
3 ECR 3 2034 479 2126 0
4 ECoR 0 2 0 2171 28
5 NR* 87 5885 492 10076 1796
6 NCR 0 520 0 12106 38
7 NER 10 720 37 2097 48
8 NFR 9 2402 90 2735 388
9 NWR 17 104 19 1277 167
10 SR 0 0 0 2302 0
11 SCR 86 213 503 8709 207
12 SECR** 33 5905 - 6574 37
13 SER 9 3957 916 7795 557
14 SWR 9 200 52 948 12
15 WR 4 338 0 7156 209
16 WCR 0 30 0 3046 80
  Total 280 31725 3615 83829 4810
**37 Cases of duplicate PF Numbers.  *Increment due date either zero or prior to 30 June 2014
 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 101 
 
Annexure 6 
[Reference Para 2.1.5] 
Statement Showing Reason-wise Analysis of Inactive Status of Crew 
Sr. No. Zone Reasons for Inactive Status 
Select Superannuation# Others 
1 CR  88 231  962 
2 ER 16 284 645 
3 ECR 18 32 267 
4 NR 57 54 1080 
5 NER 4 101 124 
6 NFR 40 250 230 
7 NWR 10 19 53 
8 SR  - 218 -  
9 SCR 103 99 1006 
10 SER 26 171 581 
11 SECR 18 249 391 
12 SWR 10 134 100 
13 WCR 12 143 133 
14 ECoR 9 184 160 
15 WR 73 41 732 
16 NCR 78 129 466 
  Total 474 2339 5968 
        6442 
#Cases where crew did not attain superannuation age Others 
+ 
Select 
 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 102 
 
Annexure 7 
[Reference Para 2.1.6] 
Statement Showing Number of Cases of Family Particulars 
Sr. 
No. 
Zone Total 
Crew 
Total Crew 
Members 
having 
Dependent 
Family 
Members 
Cases where 
Family 
Particulars 
available in 
CMS 
Cases where 
Family Particulars 
not available in 
CMS 
1 CR 7840 4565 118 4447
2 ECR 2305 1411 143 1268
3 NR 11437 5446 36 5410
4 NER 2404 1544 7 1537
5 NWR 1335 963 1 962
6 SECR 6808 3514 21 3493
7 SER 7795 4068 11 4057
8 WR 7596 7596 187 7409
9 ER 7520 3497 34 3463
10 NFR 2960 2960 5 2955
11 SR 3204 1595 126 1469
12 SWR 1046 338 3 335
13 WCR 1505 1075 754 321
14 ECoR 2278 2278 2 2276
15 NCR 4267 2640 661 1979
  Total 70300 43490 2109 41381
 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 103 
 
Annexure  8 
[Reference Para 2.1.7] 
Statement Showing Loco Holdings Position in CMS vis-a-vis Manual Records 
Sr. 
No. 
Zone Electric Shed as 
per 
Electric Locos as 
per 
Diesel Shed as 
per 
Diesel Locos as 
per 
CMS Manual 
Record 
CMS Manual 
Record 
CMS Manual 
Record 
CMS Manual 
Record 
1 ER 6 3 286 248 7 4 513 360
2 ECoR 2 2 277 321 1 1 258 212
3 NR 3 3 398 361 6 4 748 561
4 NCR N -  337 403 - -  162 140
5 NER N -  - - 2 2 364 245
6 NFR N -  - - 3 3 258 364
7 SECR 2 1 281 209 1 1 154 142
8 SER 6 4 535 562 4 3 418 260
9 SWR# N  -  - - 3 2 389 320
10 CR 3 3 583 604 3 3 374 315
11 SCR 8 3 538 545 NA NA NA NA
12 SR 3 3 367 421 5 4 473 403
13 WCR 3 3 477 580 2 2 501 367
14 WR 2 2 328 346 5 7 570 570
  Total 38 27 4407 4600 42 36 5182 4259
#Over SWR, in addition to 389 Diesel BG locos,  CMS data base contains 13 MG Diesel locos 
which are not actually available on ground. 
 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 104 
 
Annexure 9 
[Reference Para 2.1.8] 
Statement Showing Details of Non-availability/Incorrect Data of 
Zone/Divisional Codes/Stations in CMS 
Sr. 
No. 
Zonal 
Railway 
Details not available in CMS 
 Zonal/ 
Divisional 
Code* 
Stations In 
correct 
Station 
Code 
Routes not 
Created 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
1 ER 257 148 1 4 
2 NFR  - - 36  - 
3 NWR  - 17  -  - 
4 CR 0 0 0 8 
5 ECR  - - - 2 
6 ECoR 0 0 0 127 
7 SECR  - 53  - -  
8 NER 0 6  - -  
9 SWR  - 2 3  - 
10 SCR  -  - 3 17 
11 SER 0 0 0 1 
 Total 257 226 43 159 
*The figure does not pertain to any specific zone/division. 
 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 105 
 
Annexure 9 (Contd..) 
[Reference Para 2.1.8] 
Differences in Distances Recorded in Working Time Table, CMS and RBS 
Sr. No. Pair of Stations Route 
Number 
KMs as 
per RBS 
KM as 
shown 
in 
CMS 
Difference 
between 
RBS & 
CMS 
Kms as 
per 
Working 
Time 
Table 
Difference 
between 
CMS & 
WTT 
1 HWH-ASN 3034 199.8 202.8 3 199.79 3.01
2 RPH-HWH 3059 206.3 222.25 15.95 218.62 3.63
3 HWH-SBG 3045 339.9 340.93 1.03 339.89 1.04
4 HWH-SBG 3163 339.9 353.3 13.4 352.22 1.08
5 SBG-HWH 3130 339.9 341.45 1.55 339.89 1.56
6 SBG-HWH 2915 339.9 351.81 11.91 352.22 -0.41
7 HWH-RPH-HWH 10390 412.6 416 3.4 412.58 3.42
8 HWH-BHP-HWH 10140 291.62 334 42.38 331.26 2.74
9 HWH-BHP-HWH 6941 291.62 310 18.38 306.7 3.3
10 HWH-AZ 3042 216.73 219.08 2.35 216.73 2.35
11 AZ-HWH 4396 275.04 279.38 4.34 277.86 1.52
12 AZ-HWH 3086 216.73 219.11 2.38 219.77 -0.66
13 HWH-UDL-RPH 3169 275.3 291.22 15.92 287.62 3.6
14 RPH-UDL-HWH 3061 275.3 291.22 15.92 287.62 3.6
15 HWH-DHN 3034 258.57 261.56 2.99 258.55 3.01
16 DHN-HWH 2893 258.57 261.08 2.51 258.55 2.53
17 BWN-GMO 3054 193.43 251.3 57.87 194 57.3
18 PRLI-UKH 4698 11.10 9.04 -2.06 11.10 -2.06
19 PAU-MRV 4698 9.88 10.04 0.16 9.88 0.16
20 MRV-PPLC 4698 6.89 6.81 -0.08 6.89 -0.08
21 PPLC-BMF 4698 5.55 5.73 0.18 5.54 0.19
22 SIF-BLC 4698 8.11 3.57 -4.54 8.11 -4.54
23 AK-JUK 4697 56.28 10.20 -46.08 58.84 -48.64
24 HNL-DNE 4697 9.36 9.52 0.16 9.36 0.16
25 JUNX-CWI 4697 5.05 5.19 0.14 5.04 0.15
26 KNRG-KKG 5098 11.16 11.02 -0.14 11.16 -0.14
27 WHM-KXX 5098 11.16 10.49 -0.67 10.19 0.30
28 CNBI-TDL 12251 5.32 3.92 1.40 232.68 -228.76
29 SBB-CNB 12432 236.52 6.72 229.80 415.48 -408.76
WTT= Working Time Table   
 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 106 
 
Annexure 10 
[Reference Para 2.1.9] 
Statement Showing Booking of Crew Using Fetch All Option Rather Than Fetch 
Crew as Per Rule Option 
Sr. 
No. 
Zone Finalised 
Transactions 
Booked  using 
Fetch All 
Option(In 
violation of 
rules**) 
No 
reason 
Garbage/Misc * 
1 CR 419565 280717 - - 
2 ER 227849 227710  - - 
3 ECR 73320 67342  --  
4 NR 391880 120457 4919 115538
5 NCR 68207 35500  - - 
6 NER 119344 89123  - - 
7 NFR 110663 110660  5692 104968
8 NWR 73031 73031 72932 99
9 SR 22314 20222  - -
10 SCR 222603 92519 1120 91399
11 SECR 336125 311388  - - 
12 SWR 28324 28165  - - 
13 WR 368544 301345  - - 
14 ECoR NA 87610 18542 - 
15 WCR 514 250 - -
16 SER 250749 250648 48239 202409
  Total 2713032 2009077# 145752 534635
**As per Book_Rule  field 
value=WoR 74.05
*Over NR, 115538 records contained 8353 types of reasons for using Fetch All Option 
#Excluding ECoR figure of 87610 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 107 
 
Annexure 11 
[Reference Para 2.1.10] 
Statement Showing Difference Between Train Ordering Time and  Crew Call Time 
Sr. 
No. 
Zone Difference between Train Ordering Time and Crew Call Time Remarks 
  
Call made after Train 
Ordering Time (1 to 359 
minutes) 
Call made between 0 to 
129 minutes before 
Train Ordering Time 
Call made between 130 
to 165 minutes before 
Train Ordering Time 
Call made beyond 165 minutes before 
Train Ordering Time and upto 171 hours 
  
  
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Total  
(Col. 9+10) 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
1 CR 33898 2409 18327 2006 2733 139 12838 264 13102 -  
2 ER 14788 2667 97033 35864 7292 7215 23618 36830 60448 171 Hrs 
3 ECR 1412 184 51986 9229 6315 1856 2879 6780 9659 30 Hrs 
4 ECoR 582 117 53362 7067 13080 3386 2031 7982 10013 171 Hrs 
5 NR 20548 8285 144784 67600 4989 13180 12385 120109 132494 171 Hrs  
6 NFR 2809 1678 45831 33558 2327 5212 1859 17389 19248 1770Mts 
7 NWR 991 446 34242 15677 2070 3729 575 15301 15876 171Hrs 
8 SECR 6183 2296 202355 36023 43045 10168 5275 26217 31492 170Hrs 
9 SER 2413 776 120827 25996 40277 7896 8029 44535 52564 171Hrs 
10 SWR 821 144 14181 1730 2312 463 266 8407 8673 171Hrs 
11 WR 5760 2008 139379 34303 29582 7607 14668 104185 118853 -  
12 NER 1026 1916 13831 20957 2240 3379 668 20845 21513 -  
13 SCR 29221 7484 91692 48530 1156 4698 2265 37557 39822 171Hrs 
14 WCR 5042 2739 117714 59148 23634 13729 1290 1773 3063 -  
15 SR 1527 1136 7766 4780 64 944 618 12529 13147 NA 
16 NCR 10149 1856 30154 11739 3028 1690 2893 6698 9591 25 Hours 
  Total 137170 36141 1183464 414207 184144 85291 92157 467401 559558 -  
  Grand 
Total 
  173311           559558 2599975   
 
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 108 
 
Annexure 12 
[Reference Para  2.1.11] 
Statement Showing Difference Between Call Time and Call Received/Acknowledged Time 
Sr. 
No. 
Zone Difference between Crew Call Time and call Acknowledged Time 
Call 
Received/Acknowledged 
before Call Made 
Call 
Received/Acknowledged 
immediately (Call Time 
and Acknowledged 
Time same) 
Call 
Received/Acknowledg
ed  between 1 minute 
to 30 minutes of Call 
Time 
Call 
Received/Acknowledg
ed between 31 to 165 
minutesfrom call time 
Call Received/Acknowledged 
beyond 165 minutes of call 
made 
Ranged 
upto for 
Col. No. 11 
& 12 
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Freight Other 
Than 
Freight  
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Freight Other 
Than 
Freight  
Total 
(Col.10+
11) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
1 CR 0 0 69155 23637 42216 17287 25076 8892 3855 4743 8598  1499 hrs 
2 ER 0 0 49177 22467 61177 25349 20590 16514 14030 18545 32575 1499Hrs 
3 ECR 0 0 24743 6080 29528 7023 7416 2562 905 2384 3289 87 Hrs 
4 ECoR 0 0 23269 3870 0 4511 16357 7295 29432 2874 32306 1499Hrs 
5 NR 0 1 68612 33789 53951 29498 48363 46880 11704 98969 110673 1499Hrs 
6 NFR 0 0 19759 16736 14047 11964 17093 17063 1927 12074 14001 4225Hrs 
7 NWR 0 0 14363 7523 8197 6684 14770 10733 547 10210 10757 3240Hrs 
8 SECR 0 0 49124 20132 93185 20483 110640 20355 3909 13734 17643 49 Hrs 
9 SER 1 0  34988 12124 53278 18519 80719 21312 2531 27237 29768 *51 hours to 
1499 Hrs 
166 min. 
10 SWR 0 0 7202 2373 5150 7164 3611 458 1617 749 2366 21Hrs 
11 WR 0   0 64628 26756 41414 31708 74789 25201 8036 64218 72254  - 
12 NER 0 0 7895 10286 1703 3720 6092 12031 375 17882 18257 - 
13 SCR 0 0 58478 35602 33192 0 25911 9191 6752 24366 31118 22101Hrs 
14 WCR 0 0 28260 20298 27570 16318 92998 48234 4502 42094 46596 ****** 
15 SR 0 0 6129 8083 2573 8318 1028 1354 351 1586 1937 - 
16 NCR 0 0 17163 5596 11166 3063 15251 6789 2644 6535 9179 136 hours 
  Total 1 1 542945 255352 478347 211609 560704 254864 93117 348200 441317 - 
  G. Total   2        1488253       441317 2745140   
* Combine figure for freight & other 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 109 
 
Annexure 13 
[Reference Para - 2.1.12] 
Statement Showing Difference Between Crew Sign on Time & Train Ordering Time 
Sr. 
No. 
Zone Difference Between Crew Sign on Time & Train Ordering Time 
Crew Signed on After 
Train Ordering Time (1 
minute to 1461 hours) 
Crew Signed on within 1 
to 9 minutes before Train 
Ordering Time* 
Crew Signed on between 
10 to45 minutes before 
Train Ordering Time 
Crew Signed on beyond 
45 minutes and upto 165 
minutes before Train 
Ordering Time 
Crew Signed on beyond 165 minutes 
before Train Ordering Time 
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Total 
(Col. 11+12) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
1 CR 93792 29882 4247 1096 27694 16728 4456 3033 7568 3026 10594 
2 ER 18817 4235 8692 1746 78470 64097 18099 6587 9216 4913 14129 
3 ECR 2436 599 2387 425 51563 16125 2701 384 3505 516 4021 
4 ECoR 20685 5073 8 1 632 0 2173 0 45559 13478 59037 
5 NR 38890 31095 27418 12521 77205 129941 17233 24187 21926 11400 33326 
6 NFR 5099 3857 4402 2648 36359 40423 4084 8990 2880 1915 4795 
7 NWR 33180 32257 2201 802 1709 885 708 822 71 384 455 
8 SECR# 13506 1827 105279 25267 129118 39046 4372 5473 8736 3501 12237 
9 SWR 5104 3465 401 24 4711 455 539 58 1934 532 2466  
10 SCR 29221 7484 37647 15866 31792 17015 23409 20347 2264 37557 39821  
11 SR 4988 9864 298 79 208 55 59 10 11  - 11  
12 WCR 131720 105748 7912 6211 9050 7221 3883 6304 767 1461 2228  
13 NER 4708 10871 4670 4639 22160 49331 615 757 1118 1301 2419  
14 SER 8872 2826 11419 2979 140905 70556 7294 1976 3056 866 3922  
15 WR 18759 17648 24479 16281 133897 97144 3276 10136 4822 3666 8488  
16 NCR 18397 9608 4962 1646 15072 8871 2706 538 5087 1320 6407  
  Total 448174 276339 246422 92231 760545 557893 95607 89602 118520 85836 204356  
Grand Total 724513     338653             2771169  
 *For NR, it is within 0 to 9 minutes 
# For SECR - Col. 3 & Col. 4 range 1 mts. to 41 hrs.,  Col.5 & 6 -range 0 to 29 mts., Cols. 7 & 8 - range 30-45 mts. 
 
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 110 
 
Annexure 14 
[Reference Para - 2.1.13] 
Statement Showing Difference Between Crew Sign on Time and Supervisory Sign on Approval Time 
Sr. 
No. 
Zone Difference Between Crew Sign on Time and Supervisory Sign on Approval Time 
Supervisor approved Crew 
Sign on before Crew Sign 
on Time (Difference 1 
minute to 28 minutes) 
Supervisor approved Crew Sign on 
immediately/within 30 minutes of  
Crew Sign on (Difference 0 minute 
to 30 minutes) 
Supervisor approved  Crew  Sign on after 
Crew Sign on with a time difference of 30 
minutes to 452 hours) 
Ranged upto for Co. No. 7 & 8 
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Freight Other Than Freight  Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Total  
(Col. 7+8) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
1 CR 435 -  94802 -  147623 -  147623 Combined. Col. 7 & 8 upto 1252 hrs 
2 ER 27 50 45716 27741 91999 55106 147105 876Hrs 
3 ECR 3 1 16900 5817 45687 12231 57918 44409 Mts. 
4 ECoR 11 0 24121 5629 44925 12923 57848 876Hrs 
5 NR 23 129 42771 76095 139878 132920 272798 31 minutes to 876 Hrs 
6 NFR 6 13 16696 17580 36121 40241 76362 52575Mts 
7 NWR 24 27 16816 12313 20941 22666 43607 333Hrs 
8 SECR** 41 35 96616 27992 160172 46673 206845 31 minutes to 1180Hrs 
9 SWR 1 4 3761 3132 13817 7606 21423 452Hrs 
10 SCR 7 48 32130 28801 92096 69355 161451 1016Hrs 
11 SER 42 20 45083   24665 126421 180939 307360 31 minutes to 888 hrs. 
12 SR 8 73 3406 12762 7181 15822 23003   
13 WCR 94 91 64911 48383 86041 76519 162560 ***** 
14 WR 43 72 63159 52570 124697 94279 218976 -  
15 NER 13 18 8173 17361 26682 50268 76950 -  
16 NCR 47 19 22451 14634 78682 35974 114656 Upto 701 hours 
  Total 825 600 597512 375475 1242963 853522 2096485 -  
  Grand Total   1425       2096485 3070897   
  **For column 2 and 3, values are in the range of 1 to 9. 
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 111 
 
Annexure 15 
[Reference Para 2.1.14] 
Statement Showing Difference Between Crew Sign off Time and Supervisory Sign off Approval Time 
Sr. 
No. 
Zone Difference Between Crew Sign off Time and Supervisory Sign off Approval Time 
  
Supervisory Crew Sign off 
approval before Crew Sign off 
Time (Difference 0 minute and 
upto 7 minutes)$ 
Supervisory Sign off 
approval within 1 minute 
to 60 minutes after  Crew 
Sign off* 
Supervisor Sign off approval beyond 60 
minutes after Crew Sign off 
Ranged upto for Col. No. 7 & 8 
Freight Other Than Freight  Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Total  
(Col. 7+8) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
1 CR 5412 - 86723 - 60961 - 60961  1207 hrs 
2 ER 69705 37386 34500 17646 24602 24262 48864 815Hrs 
3 ECR 285 224 3672 3042 4838 3544 8382 3063 Mts 
4 ECoR 1643 242 11114 2027 5621 2352 7973 815Hrs 
5 NR 499 1591 16272 46414 19983 52305 72288 Beyond 60 minutes to 815Hrs 
6 NFR 300 506 9530 13645 13789 19372 33161 42113Mts 
7 NWR 654 742 6999 11212 4995 11640 16635 433Hrs 
8 SECR 1798 1025 40651 21036 36201 22520 58721 293Hrs 
9 SWR 0 112 4 2133 29 1004 1033 51Hrs 
10 SCR 376 742 93120 49939 19884 40676 60560 1028Hrs 
11 SR 94 470 623* 0 1343 8131 9474  
12 WCR 4197 3501 92648 76470 26033 37517 63550 ****** 
13 WR 2350 3253 47286 58655 50772 43096 93868   
14 SER 793 440 17503 17727 11940 24229 36169 61 Minutes to 28 hours 
15 NCR 3322 1400 72463 33296 25395 15931 41326 Upto  1369 hours 
  Total 91428 51634 533108 353242 306386 306579 612965   
  G.Total   143062     612965 1642377   
  $For NR, it is in the range of 1 minute to 5 minutes and for SECR, it is in the range of 1 to 7 minutes 
  *For NR, it is 0 minute to 60 minutes 
*Due to blank service type field in 623 records, all entries shown under Freight 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 112 
 
Annexure 16 
[Reference Para -2.1.15] 
Statement Showing Difference Between Crew Sign on and Crew Sign off Time 
Sr. 
No. 
Zone Difference Between Crew Sign on and Crew Signed off Time 
Crew Sign on and 
Crew Sign off time 
same 
Crew Sign on and 
Crew Sign off time 
between 1 minute to 10 
hours) 
Crew Sign on and 
Crew Sign off time 
between 10 hours to 
20 hours* 
Crew Sign on and Crew Sign off 
time beyond 20 hours 
Ranged upto for 
Col. No. 9 & 10 
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Freight Other Than 
Freight  
Total  
(Col. 9+10)  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
1 ER 10 3 4409 43972 30638 1933 2664 653 3317 1559Hrs 
2 ECR 0 1 8641 7971 8643 786 2436 551 2987 446 Hrs 
3 ECoR 0 0 10703 4947 26641 122 1212 7 1219 1559Hrs 
4 NR 22 14 27422 95984 8215 2926 1095 1386 2481 1559Hrs 
5 NFR 30 10 15520 32406 7707 918 363 188 551 1559Hrs 
6 NWR 0 0 9222 23956 4073 165 27 29 56 1559Hrs 
7 SECR 10 6 50874 43632 27382 908 384 35 419 429Hrs 
8 SWR 0 0 43 3377 26 62 64 8 72 82Hrs 
9 SCR 5 4 20687 60401 14153 2498 3239 2922 6161 878Hrs 
10 SR 2 2 1909 15723 1071 357 51 47 98 -  
11 CR 11 6 25885 58696 10971 2111 631 2875 3506 1267Hrs 
12 WCR 2 3 64883 98738 39028 3808 5744 2696 8440  - 
13 WR 27  67410 108075 39042 1181 611 237 848  - 
14 SER 0 0 29597 51251 23982 2596 5029 1696 6725 20 Hrs. to 1080hours 
15 NCR 8 2 25238 22268 27669 5607 1336 325 1661 1369 hours 
  Total 102 58 362443 671397 269241 25978 24886 13655 38541  - 
  *For NR, it is beyond 600 minutes to 20 hours 1367760   

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 113 
 
Annexure 17 
[Reference Para 2.2.1] 
Statement Showing Position of SMS During 5th September 2014 to 5th December 2014 
Sr. 
No. 
Zone Types of SMS Miscellaneous 
Sent Received Pending Sign on 
Transactions
Active 
crew 
Active crew having 
CUG status shown 
as blank 
Mobile status as 'Y' 
but mobile No. shown 
as 0 
Lobbies 
Not using 
SMS 
No. of  Sent 
Transactions 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
1 CR 53551 7120 22992 231403 7840 6236 69 7 53551 
2 ER 92328 9322 62998 NA 7520 7298 1380  - -  
3 ECR 16702 714 7134  -  -  -  -  - -  
4 ECoR 16663 3738 12925 NA NA NA 939  - -  
5 NR 34139 3102 42406 404954  10037 1227 4 34139 
6 NCR 20097 1916 14970  - - -  786  - -  
7 NER 6667 0 14591  -  -  - 1562 1 -  
8 NFR 5649 192 11242 - 2960 2937 411 5 -  
9 NWR 11409 183 10715 22307 1244 0 0 0 11409  
10 SR NA NA NA  - - 45 6451  - -  
11 SCR 71584 0 34037 407538 9696 9488 25 10 71584 
12 SECR 131847 0 29916   -  - 248  - -  
13 SER 101139 11591 35702 - 6055 Nil Nil 4 -  
14 SWR 9222 113 2256 - 1046 1037 2 0  - 
15 WR 65411 30138 33887  - 7596 7498 383 7  - 
16 WCR 7671 325 13988 NA 3046 486 500 5  - 
  Total 644079 68454 349759 1066202 47003 45062 13983 43 170683 
10.63 54.30 16.0085 
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 114 
 
Annexure 18 
[Reference Para 2.3.1] 
Statement Showing Reason-wise Position for Non-generation of Mileage Report through CMS 
Reasons Railways 
Either crew sign on or off is manual 
in the register because of non 
working of CMS at the location/other 
operational reasons or non 
availability of CMS at that location. 
CR SR WR ECR WCR NR SWR SCR ER SER ECoR NFR SECR NCR 
Details of leave have not been 
entered in CMS. 
CR  -  -  - WCR NR SWR SCR ER  -  -  - - -  
Non-definition/incorrect definition of 
routes and distance in CMS. 
CR  - -  ECR WCR -  -  SCR ER -  -  -  -  -  
Data Entry Errors /Wrong sign on/off  
time 
CR SR  - -  WCR NR SWR SCR ER  -  -  - SECR  - 
Missing transactions (due to CMS 
failures/non-updation)/Delay in 
updation 
CR SR  -  - WCR NR -  -  -  SER ECoR -  -  NCR 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 115 
 
Annexure 19 
Statement Showing Review of Route Learning Data - Details of Cases where LR Due Date not Computed Correctly  
[Reference Para 2.4.1] 
  
Zonal 
Railway 
Name 
Cases were LR trips due were zero Cases where LR trips due were more than zero and LR Due date 
had not expired (beyond 5 December 2014) 
  
Cases 
where LR 
Due date 
expired but  
computed 
after a 
period of 3 
months 
  
Differ-
ence in 
Days 
(For 
Column 
No. 14) 
Cases 
having 
LR 
Due 
Date 
prior 
to  Last 
Drive 
Date 
Differ-
ence in 
days 
(For 
Column 
2) 
Cases 
having 
Last 
Drive 
Date and 
LR Due 
Date 
same 
Cases having 
LR Due Date 
greater than 
Last Drive 
Date but 
difference 
less than 89 
days (3 
months) 
Differ-
ence in 
Days 
(For 
column 
5) 
Cases having 
difference 
between Last 
Drive Date 
and LR Due 
date more 
than 92 days 
Differ-
ence in 
Days (For 
column 7) 
Cases where 
difference 
between Last 
Drive Date 
and LR Due 
Date less than 
89 days (3 
months) 
Differ-
ence in 
Days 
(For 
Column 
No. 9) 
Cases 
where 
CMS 
computed 
LR Due 
Date for a 
period of 
3 months 
Cases 
where 
CMS 
computed 
LR Due 
Date after 
a period of 
3 months 
Differ-
ence in 
Days 
(For 
Column 
No. 12) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
NR 23850 1-1905 16656 992 -  70840 149-184 27723 1-88 600 183 95-180 115 183-184 
CR 308 2-819 233 8 - -  -  1283 1-88 29 -   -  - - 
SWR 3 upto 761 
days 
1 17 1-84 0  - 110 1-88 11336 0 - 28 182 
ER 58 5-916 40 2 85-87 89171 181-184 263 1-88 983 13 99-163 25 183-184 
SCR 265 1-828 128 10 5-81 5254 181-184 0  - 0 -  0 2 182 
NCR 37 1-723 36 1 87  - -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  
NWR 0 0 2 0 - - - - - - - -  -  - 
WCR 1316 1-1662 1663 20 6-84 0 0 20 6-84 188 0   -  - 
ECR 11159 1-1035 6150 - - 2325 181-184 - - - - - - - 
ECoR 61137 213-233 -  -  -  4765 - - - -   - -   -   
SER 70 1-195 153 3 - 40607 181-184 -  -  -   -  -  -  -  
SR 46367 1-367 67942 1260 1-85 21892 - -  - 2802 58 95-180 -  -  
NER 5 114-867 7 0 0 119 181-184 - - - - - - - 
SECR 46 1-876 27 2174 1-180 -    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  
NFR 8173 1-1843  - -  -  1172 183-184 -      1 -  2597 - 
WR 470 2-877 99 16 43-88 - - 164 1-88 17 - - - - 
Total 153264   93137 4503   236145   29563   15955 255   2767   
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 116 
 
Annexure 20 
[Reference Para 2.4.7] 
Statement Showing Position of Grading Done by Loco Inspector 
Sr. 
No. 
Zonal 
Railway 
Number 
of Active 
Loco 
pilots 
Analysed 
Active Loco 
Pilots 
graded by 
LI at 
prescribed 
interval 
Active loco 
pilots Not 
graded by 
LI at 
prescribed 
interval 
% of 
Active 
Loco 
Pilot not 
graded 
1 CR 2325 1920 405 17.42 
2 ER 3596 1881 1715 47.69 
3 SWR 1046 300 746 71.32 
4 SECR 3618 2625 993 27.45 
5 NR 2581 1855 726 28.18 
6 ECR 2305 922 1383 60.00 
7 SR 986 824 162 16.43 
8 NFR 2960 2518 442 14.93 
9 NWR 1217 1119 98 8.05 
10 SCR 3022 2694 328 10.85 
11 SER 659 275 384 58.27 
12 NER 374 297 77 20.59 
13 WR 3483 2222 1261 36.20 
14 WCR 7213 7050 163 2.25 
15 ECoR 2177 1630 547 25.13 
16 NCR 128 122 6 4.69 
  Total 37690 28254 9436 33.39 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 117 
 
Annexure 21 
[Reference Para 2.4.8] 
Statement Showing Counselling Details of Crew 
Category Name of the Zones/Divisions and Number 
of Crew Analysed 
Results 
NR Delhi 
Division 
NFR APDJ 
Division
Jaipur 
Division
NR* NFR NWR 
‘A’ 1298 541 366 83 4201 Counselling due date of 276 (21%) crew 
had expired by a period of more than 60 
days to 1602 days, 170 (31%) pertained to 
Delhi Division. 
 
Counselling due date of 215 (16%) crew 
had expired by more than 90 days. 
 
Counselling due date 
of 322 (87.97%) 
Crew members had 
expired by a period 
of more than 60 days 
to 1887 days. 
NIL 
‘B’ 865 224 109 24 5046 Counselling due date of 258 (29%) Crew 
Members was more than 30 to 1517 days 
old, 75 (33%) pertaine d to Delhi Division
 
Counselling due date of 160 (18%) crew 
had expired by more than 60 days. 
Counselling due date 
of 99 (90.82%) crew 
was more than 30 to 
1242 days old. 
Counselling due date 
of 391 (7.75%) Crew 
Members was more 
than 60 days 
‘C’ 643 262 71 27 870 Counselling due date of 268 (42%) Crew 
Members was more than 30 to 1492 days 
old, 129 (49%) pertained to Delhi Division 
Counselling due date 
of 60 (84.50%) Crew 
Members was more 
than 30 to 1051 days 
old. 
Counselling due date 
of 260 (29.89%) 
Crew Members was 
more than 30 to 60 
days old 
‘D’ 4 0 -  -  19 Counselling due date of 2 Crew was 73 to 
106 days old 
- Counselling due date 
of 12 Crew was 15 to 
30 days old 
*Even after taking into consideration period for data updation by Loco Inspector in CMS, number of non-counselling cases were almost within the same range.

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 118 
 
Annexure 22 
[Reference Para 2.4.9] 
Statement Showing Status of Crew Who Have Taken Quiz 
Sr. No. Zonal Railway No. of Active 
Crew 
Crew taken 
online Quiz  
Percentage 
1 CR 7840 2358 30.08 
2 SWR 1046 68 6.50 
3 NFR 907 472 52.04 
4 NR* 3766 168 4.46 
5 ECR 2305 655 28.42 
6 ECoR 2278 823 36.13 
7 SR 2930 574 19.59 
8 ER 7520 1909 25.39 
9 NWR 1335 1012 75.81 
10 SCR 9696 2815 29.03 
11 WCR 699 472 67.52 
12 WR 7596 2361 31.08 
13 NER 2404 759 31.57 
14 SECR** 6808 441 6.48 
15 SER 2342 592 25.28 
16 NCR 4257 922 21.65 
  Total 63729 16401 25.74 
*Pertaining to Delhi Division Crew 
**Crew play dates are between march 2014 to 5 Dec, 2014 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 119 
 
 Annexure 23 
 [Reference Para 2.4.10] 
 Statement Showing Results of Data Analysis of Breath Analyzer Test  
Value/ 
Contents 
of 
Breath 
Sign on  
field 
 Breath Sign On Remarks 
 (No. of Records) 
CR NR SCR SER WCR SECR NCR TOTAL 
N 174 9 24 24 
  
1 13 1 246 Records indicate that Breath sign 
on has not been done/approved by 
the Supervisor but Crew Sign on 
has been approved by the 
Supervisor 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 120 
 
Annexure  24 
[Reference Para 2.5.1] 
Statement Showing Mileage Allowance Charged by CMS 
 for Performing Non-running Duties at Headquarters 
Name of 
the 
Railway 
No. of 
Lobbies 
No. of Types 
of Non-
running 
duties 
configured for 
Mileage 
Allowance at 
Headquarters 
Mileage 
Allowance 
(In kms.) 
for zonal 
railway 
Approx. 
value of 
Mileage 
Allowance 
() 
Mileage 
Allowance 
(in kms.) 
pertaining to 
Sample 
division* 
CR 35 1-61 1735440 3952000 50400 
ER 17 1-100 1713263 3700000 126802 
ECoR 11 1-64 116800 3313634 84840 
NR 45 1-64 2060560 4358512 199120 
NWR 21 1-91 2977160 6311579 462760 
SCR 38 1-38 3636680 7621299 404320 
SECR 18 1-57 3044200 6500809 2053000 
WCR 16 1-48 2327120 5270775.80 1000622.60 
WR 27 1-28 29800 66603 8200 
NCR 15 1-71 3495776 7411045 917000 
Total   21136799 48506256.8 5307064.6 
*Names of the sample divisions are given in Annexure A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 121 
 
Annexure 25 
 
[Reference Para 2.5.2] 
 
Statement Showing Admissible Kilometrage Configured in CMS by IR  Lobbies 
Railway 
Name 
Lobby 
Name/Crew’s 
Headquarters 
Location of 
Training/Non-
running duties 
Admissible 
Kms. 
(To and fro) 
Remarks 
CR KOP MRJ 320 Admissible Kms. rates are for 
single side MRJ KOP 160 
CLA CSTM 18 
CSTM CLS 160 
CSTM KYN 160 
KYN CSTM 57 
NR DEE Baroda House 160x2=320 Distance between SSB and 
Baroda House is much more 
than distance between DEE and 
Baroda House. (Both SSB and 
DEE stations are located at 
Delhi). 
SSB Baroda House 0 
SSB ROK 80x2=160 Kms. are admissible to Crew 
posted at SSB but not to a Crew 
posted at ROK 
ROK SSB 0 
TKD SNP 62x2=124 Panipat is far away from TKD 
than Sonipat but nothing is 
payable for performing non-
running duties at Panipat. 
TKD PNP 0 
GZB UMB 0 If a Crew’s Hq. is Ambala, he 
gets 436 Kms. for attending 
training/non-running duties but 
a Crew having Hqrs. at GZB 
gets nothing for  non-running 
duties at Ambala 
UMB GZB 218x2=436 
KLK CDG 160x2=320 Jind is far away from CDG than 
Kalka but Crew at Jind gets 
nothing. 
Jind CDG 0 
DEE CNB 160x2=320 Delhi, DEE, NZM, NDLS 
lobbies are at Delhi but Kms. 
are different for same station of 
Non-running duties. 
DLI CNB 221x2=442 
NZM CH 80x2=160 
NDLS CH 160x2=320 
DLI CH 102x2=204 
FZR LDH 160x2=320 GZB is farthest from LDH than 
FZR but mileage is more to 
Crew of FZR Lobby than that 
of GZB lobby.   
GZB LDH 80x2=160 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 122 
 
Railway 
Name 
Lobby 
Name/Crew’s 
Headquarters 
Location of 
Training/Non-
running duties 
Admissible 
Kms. 
(To and fro) 
Remarks 
BTI KGP 2200x2=4400 A huge variation in terms of 
Kms. 
 
FD KGP 0 
BTI HWH 1450x2=2900 
SLN HWH 160x2=320 
UMB CNB 642x2=1284 
FZR CNB 160x2=320 
UMB CKP 1500x2=3000 
SLN CKP 160x2=320 
NFR APDJ MLDT 400 To and Fro 
MLDT APDJ 320  
APDJ NBQ 320  
NBQ APDJ 46  
APDJ NCB 320  
NCB APDJ 46  
APDJ NJP 16  
NJP APDJ 320  
SECR BJRI BSP 160x2=320 Distance between BJRI and 
BSP is almost same distance 
between BRJN and BSP. (BJRI 
To BSP 197 Km. BRJN To 
BSP 192Km.)  
BRJN 
  
BSP 0 
DGG BSP 160x2=320 Distance between DRZ and 
BSP is more than distance 
between DGG and BSP 
however, no admissible km is 
allowed to DRZ crew.   
DRZ BSP 0 
R KGP 160x2=320 Distance between DURG and 
KGP is more than that of R and 
KGP however, crew having HQ 
at Durg gets nothing for non-
running duties at KGP 
DURG KGP 0 
KGS USL 160x2=320 Distance between DURG and 
USL is more than distance 
between KGS and USL 
however, crew having HQ at 
Durg gets nothing for 
performing non-running duty at 
USL. 
DURG USL 0 
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 123 
 
Annexure 26 
[Reference Para 2.5.3] 
Statement Showing Different Mileage Allowance Charged  
for Loco Pilot and Guards 
 
Crew ID: PKR1098 (Loco Pilot Goods) 
Date Duty/SER/ 
Loco 
From To Train Total 
Km. 
Route 
No. 
Duty 
hours 
Total KM 
Earned 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
07/11/2014 WR/FGHT/GEN PKR PKR PKR/PT 4 10151 06:30 160 
14/11/2014 WR/FGHT/GEN PKR PKR PKR/PT 4 10151 06:30 160 
21/11/2014 WR/FGHT/GEN PKR PKR PKR/PT 4 10151 06:30 160 
24/11/2014 WR/FGHT/GEN PKR PKR PKR/PT 4 10151 05:30 160 
25/11/2014 WR/FGHT/GEN PKR PKR PKR/PT 4 10151 06:00 160 
28/11/2014 WR/FGHT/GEN PKR PKR PKR/PT 4 10151 06:30 160 
 
Crew ID: PKR7018 (Goods Guard) 
Date Duty/SER/ 
Loco 
From To Train Total 
Km. 
Route 
No. 
Duty 
hours 
Total 
KM 
Earned 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
09/11/2014 WR/FGHT/GEN PKR PKR PKR/PT 4 10150 06:14 210 
11/11/2014 WR/FGHT/GEN PKR PKR PKR/PT 4 10150 07:30 210 
12/11/2014 WR/FGHT/GEN PKR PKR PKR/PT 4 10150 07:09 210 
13/11/2014 WR/FGHT/GEN PKR PKR PKR/PT 4 10150 05:45 210 
19/11/2014 WR/FGHT/GEN PKR PKR PKR/PT 4 10150 07:15 210 
21/11/2014 WR/FGHT/GEN PKR PKR PKR/PT 4 10150 06:45 210 
23/11/2014 WR/FGHT/GEN PKR PKR PKR/PT 4 10150 06:14 210 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 124 
 
Annexure 27 
[Reference Para 2.5.4.1] 
Statement Showing Mileage Charged for Zero Duty Hours Transaction 
CREW_ID DATE SIGN ON TRAIN DUTY/ SER/ 
Loco FN 
SIGN OFF HRS TOTAL 
KMS 
Route 
No. 
MGK 
TIME FROM TIME TO DUTY NIGHT 
ASN2124 11-11-2014 23:  15 ASN EC/JAJ WR/FGHT/ 
GEN 
23:15 ASN 00:00 00:00 120 7174 Y 
ASN7005 03-11-2014 05:39 ASN 0 WR/FGHT 
/GEN 
05:40 ASN 00:00 00:01 120 7173 Y 
ASN7393 19-11-2014 16:00 ASN EC/MTPS WR/FGHT 
/GEN 
16:00 ASN 00:00 00:00 120 7178 Y 
HWH1111 12-11-2014 14:00 HWH SIC 14/00 WR/FGHT 
/GEN 
14:00 HWH 00:00 00:00 120 7170 Y 
PKR1118 11-10-2014 15:30 PKR CANCLEED ZM/FGHT 
/GEN 
15:30 PKR 00:00 00:00 160 10143 N 
UDL2852 11-11-2014 07:30 UDL EC/COAL/PT WR/FGHT 
/GEN 
07:31 UDL 00:00 00:00 120 6815 Y 
UDL2852 17-11-2014 20:15 UDL EC/AB ZM/FGHT 
/GEN 
20:16 UDL 00:00 00:00 120 6815 Y 
DLI2117 29.10.2010 20:10 DLI 12556 ZM/CCHM/ 
Gen 
20:10 DLI 00:00 00:00 120 11261 N 
JAT1156 27.11.2014 16:00 JAT Goods  Yard WR/FGHT/ 
Gen 
16:00 JAT 00::00- 00:00 120 6814 N 
HW1048 30.10.2014 7:50 HW Yard Duty WR/CCHP/ 
Gen 
7:50 HW 0000 00:00 144 6717 N 
FZR1501 01.11.2014 20:00 FZR SP CPM LDH WR/FGHT/ 
Gen 
20:0 FZR 00:00 00:00 248 10112 N 
FZR7020 26.11.2014 06:00 FZR 6JF WR/CCHP/ 
Gen 
06:00 FZR 00;00 00:00 234 6797 N 
MB7282 29.11.2014 20:00 MB 54398/97 WR/CCHP/ 
Gen 
20:00 MB 0:000 00:00 150 8442 N 
SSB1889 08.09.2014 00:00 SSB CC Duty 16/24 SP/FGHT/ 
Gen 
00:00 SSB 00;00 00:00 39.995 10039 Y 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 125 
 
 
Annexure  28 
[Reference Para 2.5.4.3] 
Statement Showing Handicapped Sections 
Hubli Division 
Table - A 
 (Effective from April 2004) 
1 Hubli – Castlerock 
2 Castlerock – Hubli 
3 Castlerock – Belgaum 
4 Belgaum – Castlerock 
5 Hospet – Toranagallu 
6 Toranagallu – Hospet 
 
 
Table - B 
(Effective from April 2011 upto March 2012) 
 
1 Toranagallu – Ranjitpura –Toranagallu 
2 Toranagallu – JVSL Siding – Toranagallu 
3 Hospet – Vyasanakeri – Hospet 
4 Bellary – BIOP Siding/ Obalapuram Siding – Hospet 
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 126 
 
Annexure 29 
[Reference Para 2.5.5] 
Statement Showing Year-wise Programme Hours and Non-Programme Hours of Crew 
Railway 
Name 
CR ER ECoR NR 
Year Programme 
Hours 
Non-
Programme 
Hours 
Percentage 
of Non-
programme 
Hours to 
Programme 
Hours 
Programme 
Hours 
Non-
Programme 
Hours 
Percentage 
of Non-
programme 
Hours to 
Programme 
Hours 
Programme 
Hours 
Non-
Programme 
Hours 
Percentage 
of Non-
programme 
Hours to 
Programme 
Hours 
Programme 
Hours 
Non-
Programme 
Hours 
Percentage 
of Non-
programme 
Hours to 
Programme 
Hours 
2011-12 57388108.85 4013039.44 6.99 38552712 674040 1.75 2369664.32 558611.31 23.57 319,82,762.49 32,45,121.50 10.15 
2012-13 60590174.24 4335912.44 7.16 54472293 2026672 3.72 3527793.74 851411.06 24.13 546,95,119.34 52,57,293.21 9.61 
2013-14 62530765.76 4638699.19 7.42 52929017 3854794 7.28 3298489.62 646712.45 19.61 664,39,292.01 64,43,149.90 9.70 
2014-15* 37472370.62 2720411.15 7.26 38127455 3321872 8.71 2130318.81 410664.95 19.28 545,71,002.54 52,10,121.45 9.55 
 
Annexure 29 
[Reference Para 2.5.5] 
Statement Showing Year-wise Programme Hours and Non-Programme Hours of Crew 
Railway 
Name 
NCR NFR NWR 
Year Programme 
Hours 
Non-
Programme 
Hours 
Percentage 
of Non-
programme 
Hours to 
Programme 
Hours 
Programme 
Hours 
Non-
Programme 
Hours 
Percentage 
of Non-
programme 
Hours to 
Programme 
Hours 
Programme 
Hours 
Non-
Programme 
Hours 
Percentage 
of Non-
programme 
Hours to 
Programme 
Hours 
2011-12 6163064.69 452625.26 7.34 14691894.27 12 ,69,659.36 8.64 76,66,412.99 9,78,784.96 12.77 
2012-13 30052102.83 2436564.94 8.11 20360438.93 2 050373.47 10.07 103,05,316.53 14,36,879.74 13.94 
2013-14 27843075.93 2322994.35 8.34 21551371.95 19,8 7,162.17 9.22 111,20,718.24 16,34,802.11 14.70 
2014-15* 47327704.16 3985502.38 8.42 15628600.05 12 ,08,029.58 7.73 76,02,438.27 11,60,064.04 15.26 
 
 
 
 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 127 
 
Annexure 29 
[Reference Para 2.5.5] 
Statement Showing Year-wise Programme Hours and Non-Programme Hours of Crew 
Railway 
Name 
SER  SECR  SWR 
Year Programme 
Hours 
Non-
Programme 
Hours 
Percentage 
of Non-
programme 
Hours to 
Programme 
Hours 
Programme 
Hours 
Non-
Programme 
Hours 
Percentage 
of Non-
programme 
Hours to 
Programme 
Hours 
Programme 
Hours 
Non-
Programme 
Hours 
Percentage 
of Non-
programme 
Hours to 
Programme 
Hours 
2011-12 30454720.96 2217410.64 7.28 30991649 4191197.71 13.52 5449570 559064 10.26 
2012-13 45409690.99 4598847.22 10.13 42133187 7982309.01 18.95 8189344 1059952 12.94 
2013-14 50654288.08 5382006.36 10.62 45739680 8015309.71 17.52 8174325 1078335 13.19 
2014-15* 34581888.19 4176697.76 12.08 29399162 5032255.98 17.12 4783652 600774 12.56 
 
Annexure 29 
[Reference Para 2.5.5] 
Statement Showing Year-wise Programme Hours and Non-Programme Hours of Crew 
Railway 
Name 
WCR WR SR 
Year Programme 
Hours 
Non-
Programme 
Hours 
Percentage 
of Non-
programme 
Hours to 
Programme 
Hours 
Programme 
Hours 
Non-
Programme 
Hours 
Percentage 
of Non-
programme 
Hours to 
Programme 
Hours 
Programme 
Hours 
Non-
Programme 
Hours 
Percentage 
of Non-
programme 
Hours to 
Programme 
Hours 
2011-12 4479367.09 392915.39 8.77 34768827 3122924 8.98 11152007.58 521797.69 4.68 
2012-13 7458168.1 821628.04 11.02 52715830 6075066 11.52 14455620.42 852005.74 5.89 
2013-14 7170992.42 886739.02 12.37 49824913 6009259 12.06 14692577.91 812561.35 5.53 
2014-15* 6062590.48 777024.3 12.82 31877290 3288436 10.32 9066938.72 514906.78 5.68 
     *Pertains to period upto November 2014

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 128 
 
Annexure 30 
[Reference Para 2.5.6] 
Statement Showing Results of Comparison of Crew Sign on/off Time with 
CMS/COA/FOIS Train Departure/Arrival Time 
Particulars Railway 
Name 
Number 
of Cases
Gap 
Crew Signed on after FOIS 
Departure time 
SECR 325 1 minute to 2 hour 15 minutes 
ER 113 1 minute to 135 minutes 
CR 229 1 minute to 4 hour 29 minutes after 
NFR 138 1 minute to  1 hour 59 minutes 
SER 376 1 minute to 6 hours 45 minutes 
SR 1 7 minutes 
NCR 167 4 minutes to 93 hours 10 minutes 
Total 7 1349  
Crew Signed on before FOIS 
Departure time 
SECR) 3 15-30 hours before FOIS  departure time of train 
SECR 15  2 to 3 ½ hours before FOIS departure time 
ER 1108  31 to 2635 minutes before  FOIS departure time 
CR 1875 31 minutes to 36 hour be fore FOIS departure time 
SR 4 More than 30 minutes before FOIS departure time 
NCR 68 Two minutes to 62 hours 30 minutes 
Total 5 3073  
Sign on/off before/after FOIS 
Arrival/Departure time 
SCR 2022 Signed off before FOIS arrival time 
SCR 2020 Signed on after FOIS departure time 
 
FOIS Train Departure time 
and crew Sign on time was 
same 
ER 6  
CR 6  
SER 21  
Total 3 33  
Train departed after train 
ordering time 
NR 5784 30 minute to 599 minutes 
SER 765 30 minute to 385 minutes 
Total 2 6549  
Crew sign on after CMS train 
ordering time 
  
NR 3083 0 minute to 552 minutes (NR) 
CR 1340 1 minute to 488 minutes (CR) 
SER 4830 1 minute to 1485 minutes (SER) 
NWR 317 1 minute to 218 minutes 
Total 4 9570  
Crew signed on after CMS 
train departure time 
NR 101 2 minutes to 104 hours(NR) 
CR 56 4 minute to 5 hours(CR) 
WR 1019  1 minutes to 665 minutes (WR) 
NFR 4 3 minute to 28 minutes (NFR) 
NWR 3 13 minutes to 32 minutes 
Total 5 1183  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 129 
 
Annexure 31 
[Reference Para  3.1] 
 
Statement Showing Details of Multiple Traffic Advices Prepared for Crew 
Booking  
Railway Name Duty Type No. of 
Records 
Number  of Times 
TA prepared 
CR Road Learning 182 2-6 
NR Road Learning 1384 2-52 
NWR Road Learning 21378 2-8 
NFR Road Learning 266 2-10 
SR Road Learning 3 2 
SCR Road Learning 424 2-16 
SECR Road Learning 671 2-6 
SER Road Learning 162 2-3 
ER Road Learning 1001 2-10 
WR Road Learning 993 2-96 
NCR Road Learning 798 2-25 
Total  27262 Upto 96 times 
CR Working 26024 2-34 
ECoR Working 74787 2-6 
NR Working 18953 2-21 
NWR Working 23 2 
NFR Working 16859 2-24 
SR Working 30204 2-21 
SCR Working 24702 2-29 
SECR Working 69292 2-17 
SER Working 75196 2-6 
ER Working 28193 2-31 
WR Working 56063 2-52 
NCR Working 17093 2-40 
Total  437389 Upto 52 times 
CR Spare 4338 2-75 
ECoR Spare 10230 2-4 
NR Spare 3561 2-10 
NWR Spare 2337 2-5 
NFR Spare 1295 2-9 
SR Spare 497 2-6 
SCR Spare 3402 2-25 
SECR Spare 9748 2-10 
SER Spare 3723 2-6 
ER Spare 2257 2-9 
WR Spare 2257 2-32 
NCR Spare 1700 2-30 
Total  45345 upto 75 times 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 130 
 
 
Annexure 32 
[Reference Para 3.3] 
Statement Showing Multiple Call Acknowledgement by Crew 
Name of the Railway Zone Number of Calls Number of Times 
acknowledged 
NR 5983 2-10 
SR 12890 2-7 
SECR 2890 2-4 
SCR 7726 Multiple times 
CR 4248 2-17 
ER 5159 2-4 
ECoR 8151 2-38 
NFR 1303 2-4 
WCR 839 2-3 
WR 3696 2-5  
NCR 1967 2-10 
Total 54852  
 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 131 
 
Annexure 33 
[Reference Para 3.5] 
Statement Showing Railway Zone Wise Missing Traction Details 
Name of the Zones Total Transactions Traction 
(Blank) 
Values like 
Z, ZM, Auto 
etc. 
1 2 3 4 
ER 227849 567 36
NWR 73031 1124 424
NR 391880 603 1616
CR 152774 768 0
ECR* 80641 60 0
ECoR 87610 20
NFR 110663 26 0
SR 35672 62 4
SECR 336125 2180 1044
SER 177385 59 2
SCR 222603 627 23
SWR 21087 10
WR* 36752 13878 0
NCR 137347 2574 66
Total 2091419 22531 3215
*Figures  for WR and ECR in column 3 includes blank, Z, Auto etc. 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 132 
 
Annexure 34 
[Reference Para 3.9] 
Statement Showing Wrong/Incomplete Details of Period of Crew Utilization  
Name of 
the 
Railway 
Period Number 
of Hours 
Available 
with 
Crew 
Number 
of Crews 
Number of Crew 
having details of  
utilization of 
excess period 
Number of 
Hours 
utilized by 
Crew 
Number of 
Crew on 
rest for 
whole 
period 
Remarks 
Wrong Details of Utilization of Crew  
NR 15-10-2014 to14-11-2014 744 3757 167 745-863 661  
08-09-2014 to 07-10-2014 720 3731 352 723-976 639  
ER 06-10-2014 to 05-11-2014 744 811 - - 386  
06-11-2014 to 05-12-2014 720 820 393 725-795 381  
SR 01-10-2014 to31-10-2014 744 1859 28 749-794 1  
01-09-2014 to 30-09-2014 720 1852 23 725-783 Nil  
SECR 11-10-2014 to 10-11-2014 744 3921 - - 188  
11-09-2014 to 10-10-2014 720 3893 29 726-744 184  
NCR 05-10-2014 to 04-11-2014 744 3532 1 760 01  
05-09-2014 to 04-10-2014 720 3609 3 742-921 01  
Incomplete Details of Crew Utilization  
NR 15-10-2014 to 14-11-2014 744 3757 41 616-736  Incomplete Details 
08-09-2014 to 07-10-2014 720 3731 16 544-719  Incomplete Details 
SECR 11-10-2014 to 10-11-2014 744 3921 13 704-736  Incomplete Details 
11-09-2014 to 10-10-2014 720 3893 15 655-712  Incomplete Details 

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 133 
 
Annexure 35 
[Reference Para 4.2] 
Statement Showing Details of Password Used by Crew 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the 
Railway 
Number of records 
containing 
passwords  of 
Crew Analysed 
Number of 
Crew using 
same 
password 
Percentage of 
Crew using same 
password 
1 WR 7596 7536 99.21 
2 CR 7840 7662 97.73 
3 NCR 6253 6176 98.77 
4 SER 7795 6959 89.28 
5 SECR 6808 5430 79.76 
6 SCR 9696 9491 97.89 
7 NR 11437 11378 99.48 
8 ER 7520 7487 99.56 
9 ECR 2305 2263 98.18 
10 ECoR 2017 2001 99.21 
11 NER 2404 2253 93.72 
12 NFR 2960 2948 99.59 
13 SR 2871 2853 99.37 
14 NWR 1335 1331 99.7 
15 WCR 495 59 11.91 
16. SWR 1046 1046 100 
 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 134 
 
Annexure 36 
[Reference Para 4.2] 
Statement Showing Details of Password Used by CMS Operators 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
the 
Railway 
Number of records 
containing passwords  
of CMS Users 
(Operators) Analysed 
Number of CMS 
Users (Operator) 
using same 
password 
Percentage of 
CMS Users 
(Operator) 
1 WR 269 212 78.81 
2 CR 1399 877 62.69 
3 NCR 220 120 54.55 
4 SER 471 185 39.28 
5 SECR 687 273 39.74 
6 SCR 856 422 49.3 
7 NR 1587 847 53.37 
8 ER 315 192 60.95 
9 ECR 368 135 36.68 
10 ECoR 171 70 40.94 
11 NER 518 238 45.95 
12 NFR 312 249 79.81 
13 SR 271 238 87.82 
14 NWR 121 73 60.33 
15 WCR 666 495 74.32 
16. SWR 136 69 50.74 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 135 
 
Annexure 37 
[Reference Para 4.2] 
Statement Showing Details of Password Used by Chief Loco 
Inspector/Senior Loco Inspector/Loco Inspector 
Railway 
Name 
Number  
of cases 
No. of cases 
having same 
password 
Percentage 
CR 530 491 92.64 
ECR 310 302 97.42 
ECoR 154 126 81.82 
ER 272 268 98.53 
NCR 330 297 90.00 
NER 105 98 93.33 
NFR 175 165 94.29 
NR 602 501 83.22 
NWR 236 221 93.64 
SCR 486 439 90.33 
SER 209 182 87.08 
SECR 227 168 74.01 
SR 316 266 84.18 
SWR 112 106 94.64 
WCR 193 164 84.97 
WR 319 282 88.40 
 
 
 
 
  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 136 
 
 
Annexure 38 
[Reference Para 4.3] 
Statement Showing Railway wise CMS Users (ALP/TNC/Call Boy/Porter/Gang-
man/RR Bearer/Private Operator) having Supervisory Privileges. 
 
 
Name of the Railway Number of Users Designation of Users 
CR 51 TNCs/ ALPs/ Contractors  
ER 51 TNC/ALP 
NWR 43 TNC/ALP 
SER 36 TNC/ALP 
NER 105 TNC/ALP 
NR 182 TNC/ALP 
NCR 4 Box Porter/Cleaner 
NFR 188 Call boy, Gangman, Porter, RR 
Bearer  
SECR 117 TNC/ALP/Call Boy/ Porter/Junior 
Clerk/ Private Operator 
WR 50 TNC/Clerk/CLI 
SR 2 SLI 
WCR 35 ALP/TNC 
SWR 24 Non-supervisory officials 
Total 888  

Crew Management System in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 47 of 2015 Page 137 
 
  
Annexure 39 
[Reference Para 4.3] 
Statement Showing Cases Where  
Booking and Supervisory Operations  
Performed by Same Person 
Railway 
Name 
Number of 
Cases 
examined 
Number of cases 
having same user ID 
ER 277849 42803 
NR 391880 256525 
NWR 73031 896 
WR 336752 13865 
NFR 110591 3516 
CR 2332 817 
SR 271 26 
SCR 222603 116383 
SER 250749 44711 
SECR 336125 145384 
NCR 69136 44467 
Total 2071319 669393 
 