Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 
Union Government
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution
Report No. 31 of 2015
(Performance Audit)

Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
For the year ended March 2014 
Union Government 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs,
Food and Public Distribution 
Report No. 31 of 2015 
(Performance Audit) 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool i
 Index 
Page Nos. 
Preface iii  
Executive Summary v 
Chapter-I  Introduction 1 
Chapter-II Procurement incidentals 13 
Chapter-III Procurement of paddy 39 
Chapter-IV Selection of millers and linkage of mills with the Mandis 65
Chapter-V By-products and out-turn ratio 75 
Chapter-VI Delivery of rice by rice millers to Food  81 
Corporation of India/State Government Agencies  
Chapter-VII Review and Monitoring Mechanism 91 
Annexures 105
Glossary 124

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool iii
Preface
The Food Corporation of India (FCI) was incorporated under the Food Corporation Act, 1964 with 
the objective to undertake purchase, storage, movement, transportation, distribution and sale of 
food grains on behalf of the Government of India (GoI). FCI, in coordination with the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, Department of Food and Public Distribution at 
Central level and State Governments Agencies (SGAs) at State level carries out the procurement 
operations of paddy/rice as an integral part of the food grains management operations. The main 
objective of procurement of paddy is to make rice (after milling of paddy) available at lower rate to 
the consumers {including Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) beneficiaries} on one hand 
and to provide Minimum Support Price (MSP) to the farmers.
In the above backdrop, Audit took up the performance audit of the FCI/State Governments and 
their agencies to assess the performance of procurement and milling of paddy procured for the 
Central Pool and delivery of rice to FCI/SGAs. The performance audit covered a period of five 
years from 2009-10 to 2013-14 and involved examination of records relating to the State 
Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Odisha, Punjab, Telangana and 
Uttar Pradesh, which accounted for nearly 95 per cent of the total procurement during 2012-13 
This Performance Audit Report points out a large number of deficiencies/weaknesses in the 
conceptual and operational framework of the procurement and milling of paddy by FCI/SGAs in 
the country. Audit observed, interalia, procurement of substandard paddy by the FCI/SGAs, 
widespread instances of MSP being paid to farmers without ascertaining their bonafides, large 
scale non-delivery of paddy/rice by the rice millers to FCI/SGAs and irregularities in transportation 
of paddy/rice. Resultantly, these ended up in benefitting the rice millers/middle logistics providers 
at the cost of both the producers i.e. the farmers and the end consumers i.e. the TPDS beneficiaries 
and eventually contributed to avoidable increase in the food subsidy expenditure of the GoI.  
The Audit Report has been prepared in accordance with the Performance Auditing Guidelines, 
2014 and Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation received from the Ministry/FCI/State Governments 
and their field formations at each stage of the audit process. We do hope that the Government will 
expedite the actions to implement the recommendations, such as- refixation of milling charges, out-
turn ratio and driage allowance; ensuring payment of MSP to bonafide farmers; and ensuring 
collateral security for food grains in the custody of the millers. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool v
 Executive Summary 
Why did we select this subject for Audit? 
The Government of India (GoI) spends huge amount of money for supply of rice under 
Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS). The milling charges were fixed by the GoI long 
back in 2005, on the basis of recommendations of the Tariff Commission of India and since 
then the milling charges have not been revised. However the rice millers are still carrying out 
the milling operations at milling charges fixed in 2005, without any demand for increase in 
the milling charges even though the cost of milling has increased. Significantly, the selling 
price of the by-products i.e. rice bran, broken rice and husk generated in the milling process, 
has increased substantially. There were also concerns regarding payment of Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) to farmers, revision of mi lling charges for paddy and non-delivery of 
rice. Accordingly, this Performance Audit was conducted to examine such issues along with 
the effectiveness of monitoring and control processes at various stages. 
What were our audit objectives? 
The performance audit was conducted to evaluate whether: 
• the rates of various incidentals, including milling charges, in the cost sheet were fixed in 
a transparent and economical manner; 
• the system of selection of millers was sound, linkage of mandis with rice mills was 
economical and allocation of paddy to rice millers was carried out efficiently; 
• the system of ensuring quality and quantity of paddy/rice procured for the Central Pool 
was effectively implemented; 
• the terms and conditions of Milling Agreements/Levy 1 Orders were duly complied with; 
and
• the monitoring and review mechanism for procurement of paddy, storage, milling and up 
to the stage of delivery of rice was adequate and effectively operationalised. 
What did our performance audit reveal?
Highlights of the major observations pertaining to this performance audit are as below: 
A.  Observations on Procurement of Paddy 
The rice millers who procure paddy at regulated mandis are entitled for reimbursement of 
Mandi Labour Charges (MLC). Though the purchases were made at farm gate/mill point, 
                                                           
1 Paddy procured and milled by rice millers under levy orders and the resultant specified percentage of rice delivered to FCI 
is called Levy Rice. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
vi Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
Food Corporation of India (FCI) unjustifiably reimbursed MLC to the rice millers without 
verifying whether paddy was procured at mandi or at farm ga te. This resulted in irregular 
payment of MLC and consequential undue benefits to millers to an extent of ` 194.23 crore 
in Bihar, Odisha and Andhra Pradesh regions of FCI during 2009-10 to 2013-14. 
(Para 2.1.1 a) 
As per Gokak Committee’s recommendation, two to three per cent driage of moisture was 
inbuilt while fixing 67 per cent  out-turn ratio for raw rice. However, the GoI has been 
allowing additional one per cent driage allowance since 1998 for all the States, though the 
demand was raised only by the millers of Punjab. This resulted in not only additional 
avoidable incidence of subsidy on the GoI to the tune of ` 952.37 crore  from the period 
2009-10 to 2013-14 but also undue benefit to the millers to the same extent.
(Para 2.1.4)
A large number of deficiencies like non authentication of land holdings of farmers, cases of 
payments to farmers with doubtful identity, non-obtaining Minimum Support Price (MSP) 
certificates, non-availability of details of farmers (bank account number, name of village etc.) 
were noticed in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh. 
The amount of such MSP payments made was ` 17,985.49 crore  for which there was no 
assurance that the farmers actually did get full MSP for their produce from millers/SGAs/FCI 
in these States. 
(Para 3.2.1 and 3.2.2) 
A quantity of 82.46 LMT paddy valuing ` 9,788.50 crore was procured by SGAs in Punjab 
during 2010-11 and 2013-14 under Fair Average Quality (FAQ) specifications but the same 
was found below specifications during inspection by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution. Evidently, full payment was made by SGAs in Punjab for paddy 
even though it was substandard in quality.
 (Para 3.3.3) 
In Punjab, the millers whose mills were tagged within a distance of eight kilometres were not 
eligible for transportation charges (as this element was included in the milling charges). 
However, an amount of
` 163.72 crore was incurred by SGAs on transportation of paddy for 
these mills thereby passing undue benefit to the rice millers to the same extent.  
(Para 4.1.2)
In Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Chhattisgarh, large quantities of paddy/Custom Milled Rice 
(CMR) ranging from 14 quintals to 1,800 quintals were transported through doubtful means 
of transport such as Motorcycle, Auto Rickshaw, Jeep, Taxi, Thela (Jugad), Car etc. In all, 
the total quantities of paddy/CMR depicted as transported through these doubtful means was 
5,744.09 MT valuing ` 6.58 crore indicating possibility of false claims being submitted by 
the transporters. 
(Para 4.4) 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool vii
B.  Observations on milling of paddy and delivery of rice
Despite significant increase in realization value of by-products, milling charges have not been 
revised since 2005. This resulted in excess net realization of ` 3,743 crore from sale of by-
products by the millers in Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh during 
2009-10 to 2013-14. This excess realization has been worked out from partial data furnished 
by selected districts of these four States. The paddy procured in these selected districts in the 
four States was 395.10 LMT against 2499.37 LMT procured in the country during the five 
year period, which represented 15.81 per cent  only, of the total procurement. The actual 
figure will invariably be much higher, if the Gol undertakes an exercise to ascertain full 
quantum of excess realization by millers, across the country.  
 (Para 5.1.1)
In Punjab, the procuring agencies did not recover the applicable penal interest from the 
millers for delayed milling of paddy/delivery of rice for KMS 2009-10, 2012-13 and 2013-14 
resulting in undue benefit of ` 159.47 crore to the millers due to waiver of penal interest. 
(Para 6.2) 
The paddy given to millers is to be delivered back in the form of resultant rice. Moreover, 
millers are supposed to deliver levy rice to SGAs/FCI for the Central Pool. However, Audit 
noticed in the selected districts of Bihar, Haryana, Odisha, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and 
Telangana that 15.89 LMT paddy/CMR valuing ` 3,042.87 crore and 23.34 LMT of Levy 
rice valuing ` 4,527.91 crore (totalling ` 7,570.78 crore ) was not delivered by millers to 
FCI/SGAs. In absence of collateral security from the millers, the SGAs/FCI had no recourse 
to recover the value of non delivered CMR. This practice also increases the risk of 
misappropriation of CMR and diversion to open market of Levy Rice by the millers.  
(Para 6.3) 
What do we recommend? 
1. Based on the instructions issued in Punjab and Haryana, the GoI may consider specifying 
the minimum quantity of paddy to be filled in each gunny, across the country to optimize 
gunny utilization and reduce expenditure on this account. 
2. The GoI may consider revisiting the decision to allow one per cent  additional driage 
allowance after taking expert technical opinion on the matter. 
3. In view of the huge amount of State revenue involved, the Ministry may direct FCI to 
accept Government of Andhra Pradesh’s recommendation to deduct Value Added Tax 
(VAT) at source from private rice millers to ensure timely collection of VAT and revenue 
to the exchequer. 
4. The Ministry may direct FCI/SGAs to ensure that payments for custody and maintenance 
charges and Society commission are made only after verification of documentary 
evidences for actual incurrence of expenditure by the SGAs on this account. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
viii Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
5. The Ministry may ensure that payments are released by FCI/State Governments only after 
obtaining certificates for market fee/tax/cess paid in the previous marketing season. 
6. In view of large scale MSP related payments being made without ascertaining the 
bonafide of the farmers, it is recommended that FCI/SGAs may consider direct transfer of 
MSP payments to the identity linked accounts of the farmers. 
7. In view of public health concerns arising from supply of Targeted Public Distribution 
System food grains without adequately complying with the applicable Standards for 
toxins, insecticides and pesticides residue, FCI/SGAs may augment the testing facilities 
for the same.  
8. The GoI may devise a mechanism whereby the benefits of relaxation in Fair Average 
Quality (FAQ), because of adverse weather conditions affecting the crops, may accrue 
only to the intended beneficiaries, that is the farmers and not to the millers. 
9. In view of widespread damage to paddy because of lack of pre-milling storage, the 
GoI/FCI/State Governments may augment the pre-milling storage capacity to minimise 
the risk of damage to precious food grains. 
10. The State Governments/SGAs should ensure that paddy is given to millers only after 
obtaining the required security for the paddy. 
11. The State Governments may ensure that all mills within a distance of eight kilometres are 
tagged first, only after which mills situated at further distance may be considered, taking 
into account the milling capacity and quantity of paddy to be milled. 
12. All doubtful cases of transportation of paddy need to be properly investigated by the State 
Governments concerned and FCI needs to exercise due diligence before passing such 
claims for payment. 
13. The GoI may take up with the State Governments to impress upon the millers to provide 
the data about milling and other costs to Tariff Commission for timely completion of 
study for refixation of the milling charges and out-turn ratio. 
14. The State Governments/SGAs/FCI may consider a mechanism by way of obtaining bank 
guarantee from rice millers as collateral security to safeguard against non-delivery of 
CMR/Levy Rice. Also, it may consider recourse to legal proceedings to recover the value 
of non- delivered CMR/Levy Rice. 
15. Finalisation of procurement incidentals needs to be carried out in a time bound manner by 
adhering to the prescribed schedule. 
16. There is an urgent need to have a mechanism in place to reduce the chances of recycling 
and to detect old versus new rice. The GoI may consider to evolve a procedure to detect 
old/ recycled rice delivered by millers. 
17. FCI/SGAs may consider augmenting manpower for quality checks at the stage of 
procurement and redress the weaknesses in monitoring and internal control system for 
procurement of paddy, milling and delivery operations. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 1
Chapter-I
 Introduction 
Procurement of food grains is one of the important elements for implementation of Food 
Management Policy of the Government of India (GoI) and for catering to the need of public 
consumption of food grains in the country. For procurement, movement and storage of food 
grains such as paddy/rice and wheat in the country at large scale, the GoI incorporated Food 
Corporation of India (FCI) in 1964. FCI, in coordination with the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, Department of Food & Public Distribution at Central 
level and State Governments and State Government Agencies (SGAs) at State level carries 
out the procurement operations of paddy/ rice as an integral part of the food grains 
management operations.  
1.1 Food Grains Procurement Policy 
The Food Grains Procurement Policy of the GoI has the following objectives:- 
a) To meet the requirement of Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) and Other   
Welfare Schemes (OWS) of the Government, so that the subsidized food grains are 
supplied to  the poor and needy; 
b) To ensure that farmers get remunerative prices for their produce; and 
c) To build up buffer stock of food grains to ensure food security. 
To meet these objectives, the Government of India procures wheat and paddy/rice every year 
through Food Corporation of India (FCI) and State Governments/SGAs at Minimum Support 
Price (MSP). Apart from procuring paddy directly from the farmers and getting it milled to 
convert it into rice, a substantial quantity is procured through rice millers in the form of levy, 
whereby rice millers procure paddy directly from the farmers, convert it into rice and deliver 
the same to FCI and State Governments/SGAs. 
1.2  Food Corporation of India (FCI) 
FCI works under the administrative supervision and control of the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, Department of Food & Public Distribution (hereafter 
referred to as the Ministry) which is responsible for implementation of the national food 
security system. 
The affairs of FCI are managed by a Board of Directors headed by Chairman & Managing 
Director along with two Directors representing the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution, one Director from the Ministry of Agriculture & Co-operation, one ex-
officio Director (Managing Director of Central Warehousing Corporation) and non official 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
2 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
Directors. Its functions are managed through country-wide network of offices with 
headquarters at New Delhi with five Zonal offices, 24 Regional offices, 168 District offices 
and one Port office at Adipur (Kutch), Gujarat. The main operations of FCI comprises of 
Procurement of food grains, Storage of food grains, Movement of food grains and 
Distribution and sale of food grains.
1.3  Operational framework for procurement of paddy and delivery of rice 
The Government has built up an elaborate administrative mechanism for implementation of 
the Food Management Policy. The Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution formulates and implements the Food Management 
Policy of the Government of India. The Ministry of Agriculture is responsible for formulation 
of national policies and programmes relating to prices of agricultural products. The 
formulation and implementation of national policies relating to procurement, management, 
storage and distribution of food grains, TPDS, maintaining  of buffer stock, export and 
import, quality control and specifications of fo od grains, administration of subsidies on food 
grains etc. are handled by the Ministry.
A flow chart depicting various stages from procurement of paddy to delivery of rice to 
FCI/State Government/SGAs is shown below: 
   
    
   
   
   
* Paddy soaked in water and steamed in mild steel cylindrical parboiling tank and dried in dryer before milling
Paddy procured under 
Custom Milled Rice 
operations by   FCI 
Paddy procured under 
Custom Milled Rice 
operations by State 
Government Agencies 
Paddy procured under Levy 
Rice operations by Private Rice 
Mills 
Milling by 
Private
Rice Mills 
Storage
(Private Rice Mills) 
Storage (FCI) Storage
(Private Rice Mills) 
By-products 
retained by 
millers 
By-products 
retained by 
millers 
Milling by 
Private Rice 
Mills 
By-products 
retained by 
millers
Milling by 
Private
Rice MillsCustom 
Milled Rice
Custom Milled 
Rice
By-products cost 
recovery at the 
rate        ` 33.96/ 
37.38 per quintal 
adjusted while 
fixing milling 
charges of    
` 15.32/ 25.48 per 
quintal for Raw 
rice and Par-
boiled* rice
respectively.
By-products cost 
recovery at the rate     
` 33.96/37.38 per quintal 
adjusted while fixing 
milling charges of     
` 15.32/25.48 per quintal 
for Raw rice and Par-
boiled rice respectively.
By-products cost 
recovery at the rate    
` 33.96/ 37.38 per 
quintal adjusted 
while fixing 
milling charges of 
` 15.32/25.48 per 
quintal for Raw 
rice and Par-boiled 
rice respectively.  
Levy 
Rice
CENTRAL 
POOL
Procurement of Paddy 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 3
The main components of the Food Management Policy are explained below: 
Minimum Support Price (MSP) 
Based on the recommendations of the Commission of Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP)2,
views of the State Governments and various Central Ministries, the GoI fixes MSP for 
different food grains every year to protect interest of the farmers. 
Economic cost of food grains 
It is the aggregate of acquisition cost of food grains including procurement incidentals, 
administrative overheads, handlings and shortages etc.
Procurement Incidentals 
Expenses incurred by FCI from procurement to the stage of receipt in the first storage point 
are classified as the procurement incidental charges. These expenses are incidentals on direct 
procurement of paddy and rice procurement from millers and SGAs and comprise of statutory 
expenses like mandi3  charges, Purchase tax/Value Added Tax (VAT) and non-statutory 
charges like Mandi Labour Charges (MLC), Custody and Maintenance (C&M) charges etc.
Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) 
Under this system, the States are required to formulate and implement foolproof 
arrangements for identification of poor, for delivery of food grains to Fair Price Shops (FPS) 
and for their distribution in a transparent and accountable manner at the FPS level. 
Central Issue Price (CIP) 
Wheat and rice are issued from the Central Pool to the State Governments/Union Territories 
administrations at the CIP for distribution. The CIP is fixed below their economic cost. 
After streamlining and restructuring of the Public Distribution System (PDS) with focus on 
the poor (the Targeted PDS), two different CIPs are fixed, one for the families Below Poverty 
Line (BPL) and the other for Above Poverty Line (APL). The Central Government bears the 
subsidy burden on this account, especially for making available food grains at subsidised 
rates to the BPL category. 
Buffer Stock Policy 
Food stocks are maintained by the GoI: i). to meet the prescribed minimum Buffer Stock 
norms for food security; ii). for monthly releases of food grains for supply through the 
PDS/TPDS/Welfare schemes; iii). to meet emergent situations arising out of unexpected crop 
failure, natural disasters etc.; and iv). for market interventions to augment supply so as to help 
moderate the open market prices. 
                                                           
2 CACP submits its recommendations to the Government in the form of Price Policy Reports every year, separately for five 
groups of commodities namely Kharif crops, Rabi crops, Sugarcane, Raw Jute and Copra.
3 The market place notified by the State Government/FCI where food grains are brought by farmers for sale.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
4 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
The Central Pool stock is maintained by FCI, the State Governments and SGAs. Wheat, 
paddy and coarse grain are procured at the purchase centres opened in the surplus States by 
FCI/SGAs. The stock procured by the State Governments/SGAs is taken over by FCI on 
payment of MSP and incidental charges. A certain percentage of paddy milled by millers and 
resultant rice4 produced has to be handed over to FCI under the Levy Orders issued by the 
State Governments under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. The percentage of rice to be 
delivered under Levy orders varies from State to State. 
1.4  Procurement of paddy for the Central Pool  
Under the existing Procurement Policy of the GoI, paddy for the Central Pool is procured by 
various agencies such as FCI, SGAs and private rice millers. Procurement for the Central 
Pool is carried out on open ended 5 basis at MSP fixed by the GoI. Paddy procured by the 
State Governments falling under Decentralised Procurement (DCP) scheme is also part of the 
Central Pool. Under this scheme, the DCP States/UT 6 procure, store and directly distribute 
food grains, including Levy Rice, towards TPDS and OWS. Any surplus stock over their 
requirements is taken over by FCI for the Central Pool. In case of any shortfall in 
procurement against allocation made by the GoI for distribution to TPDS, FCI meets the 
deficit out of the Central Pool. 
Custom milling of procured paddy
The paddy procured for the Central Pool by FCI, State Governments and SGAs and private 
rice millers, based on MSP, is milled in rice mills. This activity is called custom milling of 
paddy7. Custom milling of paddy by Government/private rice millers results in conversion of 
paddy into rice (called resultant rice) and delivery of this rice to FCI on payment of specified 
milling charges. Milling of paddy under the present arrangement is for paddy procured for the 
Central Pool through CMR and Levy route.
• Custom Milled Rice (CMR) -  During Rabi/Kharif Marketing Seasons (RMS/KMS 8)
every year, FCI along with SGAs, Co-operative Societies etc. procures paddy directly 
from the mandis/procurement centres which is got converted into rice through rice millers 
and the resultant rice (which is known as CMR) is delivered to FCI. The paddy procured 
by FCI is first transported to its godowns from where the same is issued to millers for 
conversion of the same into rice. In this arrangement, rice is to be received by FCI in 
advance from the miller before giving paddy to rice millers for milling. In the case of 
                                                           
4 Rice obtained from milling of paddy. 
5 There is no upper ceiling on procurement; whatever is brought to the mandis by the farmers is to be procured by 
FCI/SGAs. 
6 Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Uttrakhand, and 
West Bengal. 
7 Removal of husk and the bran layers, and production of edible, white rice kernel that is sufficiently milled and free of 
impurities.
8 Rabi crops are sown in winter from October to December and ha rvested in summer from April  to June. Kharif crops are 
grown with the onset of monsoon in different parts of the country and these are harvested in September-October. In most of 
the southern States paddy is sown in both the seasons as against the northern states (Punjab, Haryana etc.) where wheat is a 
major crop in the Rabi season.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 5
paddy procured by SGAs, the same is generally moved directly from mandis to the 
millers’ premises for milling and the resultant rice is delivered directly to FCI. In a few 
cases, paddy procured by the SGAs is first stored in their own godowns and from there the 
paddy is issued for milling to private rice millers. 
• Levy Rice –  Paddy procured directly from the farmers and milled by rice millers under 
Levy orders and the resultant specified percentage of  rice delivered to FCI is called Levy 
Rice. This is carried out under the statutory levy system wherein the State Governments, 
in exercise of powers conferred by the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, issue levy orders 
in consultation with the GoI, directing the private rice millers/dealers to deliver a specified 
percentage of the resultant rice (from paddy procured by them directly from the farmers) 
to FCI for the Central Pool.
The production, mandi arrival and procurement of paddy during 2009-10 to 2013-14 were as 
under:
Table 1.1 
Production, mandi arrival and procurement of paddy (in terms of rice)* 
      (Lakh Metric Tonne - LMT) 
Year Production
of paddy in 
India
Mandi
arrival
of
paddy
Procurement* 
FCI SGAs Total Levy Rice 
(Included  in 
Total)
2009-10 890.90 346.39 101.73  218.61 320.34 112.64 
2010-11 959.80 363.81 119.70 222.09 341.79 116.05 
2011-12 1043.20 375.20 91.10 259.31 350.41 97.85 
2012-13 1030.00 403.34 70.33 270.11 340.44 80.44 
2013-14 1061.90 399.32 60.30 261.30 321.60 80.07 
*Paddy is converted into rice at the out-turn ratio of 67 per cent; accordingly, the figures for paddy are based on this 
conversion ratio.  
Source: Annual Report of the Ministry of Agriculture, Annual Report of the Ministry and FCI Procurement Division 
As can be seen from Table 1.1, procurement by FCI is showing a decreasing trend over the 
years. Under the current procurement framework, rice obtained through the direct purchase of 
paddy by FCI costs less because of comparatively lower incidentals as against rice received 
by it through SGAs under CMR operations. Thus, decreasing procurement by FCI translates 
into additional expenditure on overall rice procurement and supply resulting in higher subsidy 
burden on the GoI. 
1.5  Food Subsidy 
Food subsidy is provided in the budget of the Ministry to meet the difference between 
economic cost of food grains and their sales realization at Central Issue Prices (CIPs) for 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
6 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
TPDS and OWS. In addition, the Central Government also procures food grains for meeting 
the requirements of buffer stock for which carrying cost 9 is also reimbursed by the GoI as 
part of subsidy. 
The Government notified the National Food Security Act, 2013 on 10 September 2013 with 
the objective of providing food and nutritional security by ensuring access to adequate 
quantity of quality food at affordable prices to people to live with dignity. The Act provides 
for coverage of up to 75 per cent of the rural population and up to 50  per cent  of the urban 
population for receiving subsidized food grains under TPDS, thus covering about two-thirds 
of the population.
Reimbursement of Subsidy 
The Central Government undertakes to reimburse the entire expenditure incurred by the State 
Governments/SGAs on the procurement operations undertaken on behalf of it, as per the 
approved costing Principles10.
The subsidy is provided to FCI, which is the main instrument of the GoI for procurement and 
distribution of wheat and rice under TPDS and other welfare schemes and for maintaining the 
buffer stock of food grains as a measure of food security. The GoI determines State specific 
economic cost under DCP scheme and the difference between the economic cost so fixed and 
the CIP is passed on to the respective State as food subsidy. 
Under the existing system of release of food subsidy to the State Governments, the Ministry 
issues provisional cost sheets indicating various incidentals to be paid to the SGAs (Millers in 
case of Levy Rice) before each marketing season, after receiving proposals from all the States 
in respect of CMR and Levy Rice. 
The State Governments/SGAs procure food grains for Central Pool, which is either delivered 
to FCI or used for their own PDS requirements under the DCP scheme. Therefore, separate 
cost sheets are worked out for the food grains to be delivered to FCI, and retained by the 
State Governments for distribution under DCP scheme.  
The State Governments/SGAs prefer their claims to FCI on the basis of provisional cost 
sheets in respect of delivery/off take for Central Pool operations. For DCP operations, the 
SGAs submit their quarterly claims to the Mini stry. Since the cost sheets are provisional and 
subject to finalization based on the audited accounts and there is always a time-lag in 
finalization of accounts in the States, quarterly subsidy is released on provisional basis after 
deducting five per cent on the amount claimed. In addition to the provisional subsidy after the 
end of the quarter, 90  per cent  of the estimated subsidy for the next quarter is also paid in 
advance as ‘advance subsidy’. The advance subsidy is adjusted from the claim of the States 
made during the subsequent quarter. After finalization and submission of the accounts by 
SGAs, the cost sheets are finalised by the GoI and provisional subsidy, already released to the 
                                                           
9 Includes storage cost, maintenance, insurance etc., less opportunity costs and losses.
10  Issued by the GoI in 2003 for finalization of cost of procurement incidentals.   

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 7
State Governments is adjusted from the final claims of the State and the differences are to be 
paid/recovered appropriately. Under the system, therefore, all the actual costs incurred by the 
States on the operations carried out on behalf of FCI are reimbursed by the GoI. 
Similar system for payment of subsidy is applicable for FCI wherein it prefers quarterly 
claims in respect of consumer subsidy i.e. the difference between the economic cost and sales 
value of the food grains meant for distribution under PDS. In addition, subsidy is also paid in 
respect of the cost incurred in carrying the Buffer Stock as per the existing guidelines. The 
provisional claims are finalised based on the audited accounts of FCI. 
It was observed in audit that procurement incidentals of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, 
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Odisha, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh had been finalised only till 2008-09 
(Andhra Pradesh and Telangana), 2007-08, 2011-12, 2004-05, 2008-09 and 2006-07 
respectively. Moreover, the accounts of Bihar are awaited since 2000. 
The year-wise break-up of subsidy released for distribution of subsidized food grains (Wheat, 
Rice and Coarse grains) and maintenance of buffer stocks during the last five years to FCI 
and the States operating the DCP scheme is as under: 
Chart 1.1 
Food subsidy released by the GoI to FCI/SGAs
(` in crore) 
Source: Annual Report of the Ministry 
As is evident from the above chart, the food subsidy outgo has shown a continuous rise over 
the last five years and it stood at ` 89,740 crore as on 31 March 2014. 
1.6  Rationale of Audit 
The GoI spends huge amount of money for supply of rice under TPDS. As indicated in chart 
1.1, the food subsidy burden stood at ` 89,740 crore as of 31 March 2014. The milling 
46,867 50,730
59,526
71,980 75,500
11,375 12,200 12,845 12,574 14,240
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
80,000
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
FCI States

Report No. 31 of 2015 
8 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
charges were fixed by the GoI long back in 2005, on the basis of recommendations of the 
Tariff Commission of India and since then the milling charges have not been revised. 
However the rice millers are still carrying out the milling operations at milling charges fixed 
in 2005, without any demand for increase in the milling charges even though the cost of 
milling has increased significantly. The selling price of the by-products i.e. rice bran, broken 
rice and husk generated in the milling proces s, has increased substantially. There were also 
concerns regarding payment of Minimum Support Price (MSP) to farmers, revision of milling 
charges for paddy and non-delivery of rice. Accordingly, this Performance Audit was 
conducted to examine such issues along with the effectiveness of monitoring and control 
processes at various stages. 
1.7  Audit Objectives 
The performance audit was conducted to evaluate whether: 
• the rates of various incidentals, including milling charges, in the cost sheet were fixed in 
a transparent and economical manner; 
• the system of selection of millers was sound, linkage of mandis with rice mills was 
economical and allocation of paddy to rice millers was carried out efficiently; 
• the system of ensuring quality and quantity of paddy/rice procured for Central Pool was 
effectively implemented; 
• the terms and conditions of Milling Agreements/Levy Orders were duly complied with; 
and
• the monitoring and review mechanism for procurement of paddy, storage, milling and up 
to the stage of delivery of rice is adequate and effectively operationalised. 
1.8  Scope of Audit 
The present performance audit broadly covers the following areas: 
• Compliance with instructions of the GoI while procuring paddy/rice, allotment of 
paddy and linking of rice mills; 
• Issue of paddy to rice millers and its storage; 
• Custom milling and delivery of rice to FCI/SGAs; 
• Accounting of paddy received/stored and rice issued; and 
• Compliance with various regulatory requirements by the rice millers. 
Storage and movement of food grains operations of FCI were covered in Performance Audit 
on ‘Storage Management and Movement of Food grains in Food Corporation of India’ 
printed in Report No. 7 of 2013 of the C&AG of India. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 9
1.9  Audit Criteria 
The performance was assessed against the criteria drawn from the following: 
• The GoI instructions/guidelines, State Government orders, Operational guidelines of 
SGAs;
• Custom Milling Agreement entered into by FCI/SGAs with rice millers; 
• Levy Orders of the respective States; 
• Returns/Stock accounts of paddy procured, milled and rice delivered etc.; and 
• Relevant records of FCI, concerned State Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), Food & 
Civil Supplies Departments, SGAs, Co-operative Societies, and other concerned 
Departments (e.g. Land Revenue and Transport) of the States. 
1.10  Audit Methodology
After a preliminary study and collection of background information, an Entry Conference  
(16 May 2014) was held with the Ministry/FCI Management wherein the scope, objective and 
methodology of audit were discussed and the audit criteria were agreed upon. Field audit was 
conducted during May 2014 to December 2014 in case of non DCP States
11 and September 
2014 to January 2015 in case of DCP States12.
The performance audit was carried out in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, 
Haryana, Odisha, Punjab, Telangana, and Uttar Pradesh (these States accounted for 
approximately 95 per cent  of the total procurement of paddy in 2012-13) by selecting a 
sample of 20 to 25 per cent of their districts13 (in different States) on the basis of procurement 
of paddy during 2009-10 to 2012-13. As much as 17 to 25 per cent of rice mills (in different 
States) were considered for detailed examination in these selected States. Further, the States 
of Chhattisgarh and Odisha were selected being Decentralized Procurement States (DCP) for 
rice, wherein 25 per cent  of districts and 10 per cent  of mills were selected for detailed 
examination. (Annexure-I) 
Besides examination of records for the selected States’ authorities and FCI offices, the 
relevant records of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Food & Public Distribution for the five year period from 2009-10 to 2013-14 
were also examined. 
The Draft Report was issued to the Ministry on 22 June 2015. The Ministry communicated its 
response vide letters dated 24 June 2015. The Exit Conference with the Ministry/FCI was 
                                                           
11 Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, Punjab, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh  
12 Chhattisgarh and Odisha 
13 including respective FCI Regional/Area Offices 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
10 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
held on 25 June 2015 at Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi, wherein the audit findings and 
recommendations were discussed.  
1.11  Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges and appreciates the co-operation and assistance extended by the 
Ministry, State Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Odisha, 
Punjab, Telangana, and Uttar Pradesh and the Management of FCI at various stages of the 
performance audit. Audit also expresses its appreciation for the promptitude displayed by the 
Ministry in offering its specific replies to the audit observations and responses to the 
recommendations made by Audit in the Report.   

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 13
Chapter-II
 Procurement incidentals 
In order to meet objectives of food grains Procurement Policy, the Government procures 
large quantities of paddy every year through FCI and SGAs. Apart from procuring paddy 
directly from the farmers and getting it custom milled, a substantial quantity of rice is 
procured through rice millers in the form of levy whereby the millers procure paddy directly 
from farmers, convert it into rice and deliver the same to FCI and SGAs. 
While taking delivery of rice, FCI makes payment to SGAs on the basis of cost sheets issued 
by the Ministry before each Rabi/Kharif Marketing Season. Several items of expenditure on 
procurement/distribution called ‘procurement incidentals’ have wide variations across the 
States. For fixing these costs in a transparent manner, the Ministry notified the detailed 
“Principles” (2003) regarding fixation of Economic cost and incidentals of CMR/Levy Rice 
and wheat, which were revised several times on the request of the State Governments. The 
State Governments are advised to base their proposals for arriving at the acquisition cost/ 
economic cost on these “Principles”. 
For the purpose of making provisional cost sheets,  MSP and incentive bonus are as fixed by 
the Central Government, Statutory taxes and Arthia14 commission are based on tax structure 
in the respective State Governments, and Driage 15, Milling charges16 and Out-turn ratio17 are 
based on the Tariff Commission’s 18  recommendations. The other incidental charges like 
Mandi Labour Charges (MLC), transportation and handling charges etc. are provisionally 
fixed by indexing the respective latest available finalized cost sheets rates (in absence of such 
rates, the previous season’s provisional rates are adopted) based on the Consumer Price 
Index.
2.1  Evaluation of the mechanism for determining rates of various incidentals 
in the Cost Sheet and their payment 
The State Governments/SGAs prefer their claims to FCI on the basis of provisional cost 
sheets in respect of delivery/off take for Central Pool operations. For DCP operations, the 
SGAs submit their quarterly claims to the Mini stry. Since the cost sheets are provisional and 
subject to finalization based on the audited accounts and there is always a time-lag in 
finalization of accounts in the States, quarterly advanced subsidy is released by the GoI on 
                                                           
14 Arthias render the services of the immediate inte rmediary and aggregator in the process of procurement for which they 
charge their commission as notified in the Agricultural Produce Markets Act of the respective State. 
15 Losses occurring during the process of procurement of paddy to its ultimate milling is termed as driage. 
16 Charges paid to rice millers for conversion of paddy into rice. ` 15 per quintal  for raw rice and ` 25 per quintal for par-
boiled rice  
17 Out-turn Ratio of production of 67 per cent of raw rice and 68 per cent of par-boiled out of one quintal paddy was 
recommended by Gokak Committee during 1994. 
18 Tariff Commission was assigned determination of milling charges for raw rice and parboiled rice. It gave its last 
recommendations in September 2005. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
14 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
provisional basis. This advance subsidy is adjusted from the final claims of the State 
Governments on submission of audited accounts. Under the system, therefore, the GoI 
reimburses actual costs incurred by the States on the operations carried out on behalf of FCI. 
Similar system for payment of subsidy is applicable for FCI. The FCI prefers quarterly claims 
in respect of consumer subsidy i.e. the difference between the economic cost and sales value 
of the food grains meant for distribution under TPDS. In addition, subsidy is also paid in 
respect of the cost incurred in carrying the Buffer Stock as per the existing guidelines. The 
provisional claims are finalised based on the audited accounts of the Corporation. 
A review of the elements of cost sheet and associated claims/payment in the selected States 
resulted in observations on avoidable/irregular subsidy burden on the GoI to the tune of                
` 3,594.93 crore as brought out below: 
2.1.1 Mandi Labour Charges (MLC)/Handling Charges 
In the cases of procurement by FCI, mandi labour is engaged only for operations 19 at mandi.
All operations at storage point onwards are performed by internal labour, whose costs are 
shown under the head ‘distribution cost’. However, in the case of States, all operations 
performed by labour up to the point of delivery to FCI/distribution point are loaded into the 
head ‘Mandi Labour’
20.
During 2009-10 to 2013-14, an amount of ` 1,771.89 crore was incurred, in respect of States 
selected in audit, on the element of MLC as detailed as follows: 
Table 2.1 
Expenditure reimbursed on account of MLC by the GoI to SGAs 
                      (` in crore) 
Year Non-DCP States DCP States* Total
Levy Rice CMR Levy Rice CMR 
2009-10 73.32 207.80 NA 0.08 281.20 
2010-11 95.12 229.25 NA 0.00 324.37 
2011-12 113.95 334.03  NA 0.00 447.98 
2012-13 72.79 276.53 NA 0.00 349.32 
2013-14 57.73 311.29 NA Accounts not yet 
finalised
369.02 
Total     1,771.89 
*Includes only Chhattisgarh and NA indicates Not Available 
Source: FCI Procurement Division and the Government of Chhattisgarh 
                                                           
19 Like unloading of paddy from the vehicles of the farmers, heaping, rebagging, weighment, temporary stacking and loading 
of paddy into the millers’ vehicles. 
20 Report on fixation of Economic Costs/Incidental Charges of Department of Food and Public Distribution, Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 15
Following deficiencies amounting to ` 243.05 crore were noticed as a result of test audit of 
payments on account of MLC: 
a)  Irregular payment of ` 194.23 crore MLC to rice millers for supply of Levy Rice in 
Odisha, Bihar and Andhra Pradesh regions of FCI 
In respect of Levy Rice deliveries, only those private rice millers who purchase paddy at 
regulated mandis are entitled for reimbursement of the MLC at the rate specified in the GoI 
approved cost sheet issued for every marketing season. Audit observed that though the 
purchases were made at farm gate/mill point 21, FCI unjustifiably reimbursed MLC to the 
private rice millers without verifying whether paddy was procured at mandi or at farm gate. 
This resulted in irregular payment of MLC and consequential undue benefits to millers to an 
extent of ` 194.23 crore
22 in Bihar, Odisha and Andhra Pradesh regions of FCI during 2009-
10 to 2013-14. 
Though irregular payment during KMS 2007-08 to 2009-10 in the case of Andhra Pradesh 
(AP) region was pointed out by Audit and brought out in the C&AG’s Audit Report (Para no 
6.2 of Report No. 8 of 2012-13), yet FCI AP Region continued to release MLC for 
subsequent KMS viz., 2010-11 to 2013-14 without checking the quantum of purchase at farm 
gate/mill point. 
FCI, in its reply, stated that it is following the prescribed cost sheet and the GoI has not 
specified the mandi labour rates payable for respective purchases. It was further stated that 
private rice mills were incurring labour charges in case of purchases made at locations other 
than at mandi and FCI has to reimburse the same. 
The reply is not acceptable in view of the fact that in case of incurrence of labour charges by 
private rice mills, the State Government in its operational guidelines has stated that the same 
may be deducted from the MSP and only the net MSP is to be released to the farmers. 
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that MLC allowed to the private rice millers are based on 
normative costs and generally fixed at lower level than that of the actual costs incurred by 
various SGAs. 
The reply is not acceptable as the reimbursement for the incidental not actually incurred by 
the millers is undue benefit being passed on to millers which should have been checked at the 
time of making payment and necessary recoveries need to be made.  
b) Excess payment of ` 5.91 crore to the State Government and its Agencies due to 
double reimbursement of elements of MLC on purchase of CMR in FCI, Uttar 
Pradesh region
The Government of India while fixing provisional rates for procurement of CMR for Central 
Pool in case of Uttar Pradesh region (KMS 2012-13 and 2013-14) allowed an element of 
                                                           
21 Purchases made directly from the farmers and not from the mandis (without the involvement of any MLC)
22 Andhra Pradesh region-` 192.04 crore, FCI Gaya and Patna Districts of Bihar region-` two crore, in selected revenue 
districts under FCI, Odisha region-` 0.19 crore

Report No. 31 of 2015 
16 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
MLC at the rate of ` 10.91 per quintal of paddy. However, it was observed in Audit that 
certain elements (loading into truck from stack - ` 1.20, arrangement of tents - ` 1.90,
drinking water - ` 0.50; petromax at purchase centres - ` one) included in the MLC were 
already being paid under other incidental heads i.e. Mandi Shulk 23 (comprises arrangement 
of tent, drinking water and petromax at purchase centre) and Milling Charges (loading into 
truck from stack). Thus, an excess/double payment of ` 5.91 crore was made to SGAs under 
the head MLC for elements already paid under other heads. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that excess payment of
` 5.91 crore made to SGAs of Government of Uttar Pradesh would be recovered from future 
payments to them. 
c)  Excess claim of ` 6.63 crore as MLC in Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh
The cost of CMR approved by the GoI for delivery of one quintal of rice to FCI includes cost 
of paddy, MLC and other incidentals. Further, component of MLC in CMR provisional cost-
sheet issued by the GoI every year is provided for in respect of expenditure incurred on 
cleaning of paddy, loading and unloading and stacking of paddy gunnies at Paddy Purchase 
Centres24  (PPCs). Hence, this component has to be passed on to those PPCs which are 
actually involved in CMR operations. The State Government releases labour (hamali) charges 
to PPCs in terms of rates indicated in the cost sheet and the amounts are to be disbursed to 
labour for undertaking handling operations in the procurement of paddy. 
Audit observed in selected districts of Uttar Pradesh that though the actual expenditure of   
` 4.11 crore was incurred as MLC for procurement of paddy during 2010-11 to 2013-14, the 
Department of Food & Civil Supplies submitted claims of ` 7.57 crore to FCI on the basis of 
rates laid down in the cost sheet. Thus, FCI also paid the full amount claimed, without 
verifying the actual expenditure, resulting in excess MLC of ` 3.46 crore.
In reply, the Department of Food & Civil Supplies stated (July 2014) that excess MLC 
amount was deposited in the Government account.
Though, the Department accepted the audit observation, however, FCI did not exercise due 
diligence by properly checking the bills before making payments. 
It was also observed in audit of SGAs of Andhra Pradesh that out of ` 3.60 crore claimed 
from FCI on account of MLC, the charges passed on to farmers/labourers were only  
` 0.43 crore and the balance amount of ` 3.17 crore was unjustifiably retained by District 
Managers.
                                                           
23 Statutory charge on the food grains procured for Central Pool as well as DCP States. 
24 A common point opened by FCI/SGAs/State Government to facilitate the farmers to get the best option not less than MSP 
for their produce as per specifications prescribed by the GoI.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 17
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that out of ` 3.79 
crore claimed from FCI by SGAs of Andhra Pradesh towards MLC, only ` 56.80 lakh was 
passed on to the labour and the same would be automatically taken into account at the time of 
fixation of final cost sheets, which would be based on amount of expenditure after its audit. 
d)  Irregular payment of ` 27.33 crore as Handling/ Mandi Labour Charges to Andhra 
Pradesh State Civil Supplies Corporation (APSCSC) in respect of paddy stocks 
purchased by IKP (SHG) Groups under State CMR - (FCI, Andhra Pradesh 
Region)
The activities enumerated for payment of commission to Self Help Group viz., Indira Kranthi 
Padhakam (IKP) overlaps the activities prescribed for mandi labour and hence the payment of 
MLC in addition to commission is not warranted where paddy purchases are through IKP. 
The demand for additional remuneration by IKP group for the functions enumerated for 
Mandi Labour was turned down by the State Government and it was reiterated that the 
commission allowed at 2.5  per cent  of the MSP already covers these operations.  It was 
clarified by the State Government (October, 2011) that “IKP Group shall have to pay 
handling charges from their commission’. It was further reiterated (December, 2011) that 
labour (hamali) charges from weighment stage are to be paid by IKP out of the commission 
of 2.5 per cent.
APSCSC issued a clarification in April 2012 that MLC will be payable at rates 
communicated by the GoI as part of the commission to IKP from 1 April 2012 (Rabi 2011-
12). It implied that the MLC reimbursed by FCI for earlier KMS 2009-10 ( ` 1.76 crore) and 
for KMS 2010-11(` 25.57 crore) totalling ` 27.33 crore were not actually incurred by SGA 
but nevertheless retained by it. 
The release of MLC by FCI to APSCSC for CMR deliveries out of paddy stocks purchased 
by IKP groups in addition to Commission payable lacked justification as the remuneration for 
operations performed was already covered in the Commission Charges of 2.5  per cent paid to 
SGAs for the KMS 2009-10 and 2010-11. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that amount of 
handling charges paid to IKP would be recovered after examination. 
e)  Undue benefit to Paddy Purchase Centers (PPCs) due to irregular release of hamali 
charges- ` 8.95 crore in Telangana 
The hamali charges25 are released to PPCs in Telangana in terms of rates indicated in the cost 
sheet and the amounts were to be disbursed to labour for undertaking handling operations 26 in 
the procurement of paddy.  
                                                           
25 Indicated as MLC in the cost sheet
26 Filling, weighment, unloading from balance, stitching, marking temporary stacking and loading into trucks.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
18 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
In Nizamabad District, paddy farmers (ryots) carried out handling operations on their own 
without involving labour. This was taken cognizance of by the District Administration and it 
was proposed (May 2012 and April 2013) for release of labour charges directly to farmers 
along with the cost of paddy. However, the State Civil Supplies Corporation stated (May 
2013) that handling operations were to be carried out by the labour at the PPCs and hence the 
charges were to be paid to PPCs and added that those operations were not connected to 
farmers. The Corporation further reiterated (December 2013) its stand. This payment was in 
addition to the commission released to PPCs.  
Thereafter, the Nizamabad District Manager released hamali charges of ` 4.88 crore to PPCs 
pertaining to KMS 2011-12 to 2013-14. Nalgonda District Manager also paid ` 4.07 crore to 
Primary Agricultural Cooperative Societies (PACS) and Indira Kranthi Padhakam (IKP) run 
as Self Help Groups, during KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14.
Thus, irregular release of amount on account of hamali charges to PPCs even without 
engaging labour deprived the farmers who had carried out handling operations and resulted in 
undue benefit of ` 8.95 crore to PPCs.
Commissioner of Civil Supplies of Telangana stated (December 2014) that payment of hamali 
charges to PPCs was being made through separate cheques on the basis of certificate that the 
amounts were paid.
The reply confirmed that the amounts were paid to labourers/PPCs and not to farmers, who 
should have been the actual recipients, as they were associated with paddy 
handling/procurement in special circumstances in the above two districts. 
The Ministry accepted the audit observation (June 2015) and stated that hamali charges paid 
to PPCs would be recovered after examination. 
2.1.2  Gunny Cost and its Depreciation 
The estimated cost of new gunnies 27 included in the provisional cost sheet is based on the 
calculations provided by FCI. These calculations are arrived at on the basis of six months’ 
average cost of basic price of jute gunnies notified by the Office of Jute Commissioner, 
Kolkata and include various elements of duties, taxes, interest, freight etc. The actual cost 
though may be different and depends upon the source of procurement of gunnies. In case 
gunnies are supplied by FCI, no cost is incurred by the State Government/SGAs under this 
head. Where the State Governments directly purchase gunnies from Directorate General of 
Supplies and Disposals (DGS&D), the breakup of actual cost in terms of basic price, 
branding charges, taxes/duties/cess, departmental and inspection charges are to be provided 
by SGAs. States may purchase new gunnies from the open market/local market subject to the 
conditions laid down by DGS&D. If the market rates are lower than the DGS&D rates; in 
such cases the actual purchase rates are to be claimed. 
                                                           
27 Gunnies are bags made of jute/plastic used for packing of paddy/rice 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 19
Depreciation on gunnies in case of CMR is to be claimed on the basis of accounting policy of 
the organization undertaking such purchase. In case of gunnies used once, the basis adopted 
for such claims are to be separately indicated. 
During the period under audit, amounts of ` 10,015.00 crore and ` 1,871.20 crore were 
incurred in selected States towards gunny cost and gunny depreciation respectively as 
follows:
Table 2.2 
Yearwise expenditure on gunny cost and gunny depreciation reimbursed by the GoI 
     (` in crore) 
Year Non-DCP states DCP States* Total
  Levy 
Rice
CMR Paddy Depreciation Levy 
Rice
CMR Paddy Deprecation Gunny 
Cost
Depreciation 
2009-10 1,085.40 1,062.80 100.80 196.40 NA 69.20 15.60 69.20 2,333.80 265.60 
2010-11 1,497.60 2.30 62.90 27.90 NA 218.10 107.60 87.20 1,888.50 115.10 
2011-12 NA 1,994.40 31.40 471.50 NA 342.20 0.00 136.90 2,368.00 608.40 
2012-13 1,656.30 1.40 62.40 431.90 NA Accounts 
not yet 
finalised
Accounts
not yet 
finalised
Accounts
not yet 
finalised
1,720.10 431.90 
2013-14 330.80 1,323.90 49.90 450.20** NA Accounts
not yet 
finalised
Accounts
not yet 
finalised
Accounts
not yet 
finalised
1,704.60 450.20 
Total 10,015.00 1871.20 
*Includes only Chhattisgarh              **Includes ` 1.25 lakh paid on paddy                                        NA- Not Available 
Source: FCI Procurement Section and Government of Chhattisgarh 
Audit noticed deficiencies amounting to ` 469.01 crore in this regard which are detailed 
below:
a)  Non-recovery of ` 131.23 crore towards cost of gunnies from SGAs in Uttar 
Pradesh
As per the provisions of Purchase Policy 2010 to 2013, arrangement of gunnies for purchase 
of food grains was to be made by the Department of Civil Supplies through respective 
Regional Food Commissioners (RFCs), according to the demand of procuring agencies. The 
Department had to ensure supply of gunnies for one month’s requirement of SGAs without 
any advance payment. For subsequent requirement gunnies were to be supplied only after 
receipt of advance payment from SGAs and RFCs were responsible for recovering the cost of 
gunnies supplied to SGAs. 
In 11 revenue districts of the State, it was observed that RFCs supplied 560.77 lakh units of 
gunnies (Jute and plastic) valuing ` 182.25 crore to SGAs during 2010-11 to 2013-14, but 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
20 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
recovered only ` 51.02 crore up to July 2014. The balance ` 131.23 crore was still 
outstanding.
Thus, the Department did not follow the provisions of purchase policy and continued to 
supply the gunnies without taking advance payment from the SGAs. As a result, unrecovered 
cost of gunnies resulted in blockage of Government money to the tune of ` 131.23 crore. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015), that Government of 
Uttar Pradesh is taking steps to recover the amount from SGAs. 
b)  Loss of ` 47.58 crore due to non-recovery of gunnies from defaulter millers in 
Bihar
The guidelines issued by the Bihar State Food & Civil Supplies Corporation (BSFC) in 
December 2013 regarding decentralization of paddy procurement during KMS 2013-14 
provided that standard norms for packing of paddy in gunnies will be 40 kilogram (kg) per 
gunny and packing of custom milled rice (CMR) will be 50 kg per gunny.  Besides, in case of 
defaulter millers, in addition to non delivery of required CMR, gunnies were also retained by 
them. As such, depreciated value of the gunnies retained by the millers was to be recovered 
from them.  
The agreement executed between BSFC (First party) and millers (Second party) provided 
that, “the rice will be accepted in the same gunnies in which the paddy is delivered by the 
first party.  For the first consignment/lot, rice will be delivered by the second party in new 
gunnies.  The excess gunnies will be returned by the second party and if gunnies are retained 
by the second party, then cost of excess gunnies (in which paddy is supplied to second party) 
will be deducted by the first party at the rate of 60 per cent of new gunnies at the purchase 
rate from DGS&D, Kolkata and will be adjusted from the bills submitted by the second 
party”.
Audit observed that 944 defaulter millers did not deliver 3.32 LMT of CMR and also did not 
return the remaining excess 2,00,23,873 units of gunny during KMS 2011-12 to 2013-14. 
Thus, BSFC incurred loss of ` 47.58 crore due to non-receipt of gunnies supplied to the 
millers along with paddy in the seven28 districts of the State. After the objections were issued, 
one district (East Champaran) replied that cases under Public Demand Recovery (PDR) Act 
have already been filed for recovery of dues from defaulter millers while other districts 
replied that action is being taken. Observations about non-delivery of CMR are elaborated 
later in para 6.3. 
The BSFC accepted (February 2015) the aud it observations and assured to recover the 
depreciated cost of gunnies, but did not furnish the details of amount recovered (June 2015). 
                                                           
28  Aurangabad, Nalanda, Rohtas, Bhabhua, East Champaran, Bhojpur and Patna. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 21
c)   Avoidable expenditure of ` 174.62 crore on gunnies in Punjab, Haryana, Bihar 
and Andhra Pradesh regions of FCI 
The GoI fixes the rates to be reimbursed by FCI for CMR delivered by the SGAs to the 
Central Pool. Besides various other elements, these rates include gunny cost for two gunnies 
and gunny depreciation for another two gunnies per quintal of rice delivered in the Central 
Pool.   
It was observed in audit that in Bihar and Andhra Pradesh regions of FCI, 50 kg capacity 
gunnies, meant for packing 50 kg wheat/rice, are used for packing 40 kg paddy with the out 
turn  ratio of 67 per cent rice. Thus 149.25 kg paddy (equivalent to 100 kg rice) is packed in 
3.73 gunnies. Out of these 3.73 gunnies, 100 kg rice is delivered back to FCI in 2 gunnies and 
remaining 1.73 gunnies are retained by SGAs. The retained 1.73 gunnies are eligible for 
depreciation. However, as per cost sheet, the GoI reimburses depreciation on two gunnies, 
resulting in excess payment of depreciation on 0.27 gunny (per quintal). This resulted in extra 
expenditure to the tune of ` 22.51 crore29 in Bihar and Andhra Pradesh regions of FCI.
It was further observed in Punjab and Haryana regions of FCI that only 35 kg paddy was 
filled in 50 kg capacity gunnies with the out turn ratio of 67 per cent  rice. For the period 
2010-11 to 2013-14, 590.6030 LMT of paddy were filled in gunnies @ 35 kg per gunny. Had 
Punjab and Haryana regions also followed the practice of packing 40 kg paddy like Andhra 
Pradesh and Bihar region of FCI, they would have avoided the excess use of 10,68,42,041 31
gunnies and consequently reduced the extra burden on subsidy on the GoI to the tune of  
` 152.11 crore32.
Thus different States were found to follow varying practices specifying differing quantities of 
paddy to be filled in a gunny. Whereas in Bihar and Andhra Pradesh regions of FCI, 40 kg of 
paddy was filled in each gunny, the corresponding figure for Punjab and Haryana was found 
to be only 35 kg. This practice resulted in excess consumption of gunnies and huge avoidable 
expenditure of ` 174.62 crore. 
The Ministry partially accepted the audit observation and stated (June 2015) that packing of 
specified quantity of paddy in 50 kg gunny bag may vary from State to State considering the 
size of the grains and other relevant factors. However, on the basis of a Committee’s visit to 
mandis of Punjab during 2014-15, it was found in the spot study that on an average 37.5 kg 
of paddy can be filled in/packed in a Gunny bag of 50 kg in Punjab and Haryana. 
Accordingly, instructions were issued to States to fill at least 37.5 kg of paddy in a 50 kg 
capacity gunny bag. 
The reply of the Ministry indicates that paddy in Punjab and Haryana was not optimally 
packed in the gunny bags. The above observation also highlights the urgent need for fixation 
                                                           
29 FCI Bihar Region- ` 6.66 crore, FCI AP Region- ` 15.85 crore
30  Punjab – 465.04 LMT, Haryana – 125.56 LMT 
31 Punjab –84128563 gunnies, Haryana – 22713478 gunnies
32 FCI Punjab Region-` 132.03 crore, FCI Haryana Region- ` 20.08 crore

Report No. 31 of 2015 
22 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
of quantity of paddy to be packed in gunny bags in various states to reduce avoidable 
expenditure.
Recommendation No. 1 Ministry's Reply 
Based on the instructions 
issued in Punjab and 
Haryana, the GoI may 
consider specifying the 
minimum quantity of 
paddy to be filled in each 
gunny, across the country, 
to optimize gunny 
utilization and reduce 
expenditure on this 
account
The paddy grown in various States pertains to different varieties and 
therefore, differs in grain size, moisture content, weight, etc. Therefore, 
in all States, same quantity of paddy cannot be filled in a 50 kg gunny 
bag. The spirit of fixation of Acquisition Cost is that State Agencies 
should get actual cost paid for procurement operations. Therefore, 
adoption of a uniform quantity of paddy to be filled in gunny bags will 
not be practical and will not be acceptable to the State Governments. At 
best, we can fix the lower limit of paddy to be filled to safeguard the 
interest of the Government and that is what the Ministry is following by 
adopting a norm of minimum 37.5 kg of paddy to be filled in a 50 kg 
gunny bag, or in other words by paying only for maximum four bags for 
each quintal of the rice to be delivered (two gunny bags for rice and two 
gunny bags at depreciated rate for paddy).         
The reply of the Ministry is accepted. However, keeping in view the practice of filling 40 kg 
of paddy in a 50 kg capacity gunny bag in some States, the recommendation to optimise the 
gunny utilisation is being insisted upon. 
d)  Non-recovery of gunny cost amounting to ` 2.30 crore from the private rice millers 
in FCI, Bihar Region
In case of FCI Bihar region, it was observed that Area office, Gaya and Patna allowed the 
millers to retain two left over gunnies used to obtain one quintal of rice. These gunnies were 
to be returned to FCI by the millers. As per norms, 40 per cent depreciation was allowed for 
first use of two gunnies. Therefore, 60 per cent cost of the gunnies retained by the millers 
should have been recovered by FCI. However, this was not done which resulted in non/short 
recovery of gunny cost from the private rice millers to the tune of ` 2.30 crore for the period 
from 2009-10 to 2011-12. Moreover, as against this, an amount of only ` 0.54 crore was 
available with FCI as security deposit of the rice millers (March 2014) making the chances of 
recovery of the balance amount doubtful. 
e)  Extra expenditure of ` 6.34 crore due to non-revision of value cut on supply of 
underweight gunnies in FCI, Punjab and Haryana Region 
GoI fixes the rates to be reimbursed by FCI to SGAs for various elements of cost during each 
KMS. These rates include an element of cost of two gunnies to be delivered with one quintal 
of CMR to FCI. The price fixed is for new gunnies having prescribed specifications. As per 
IS: 12650/97, the specified tare weight for 50 kg gunny is 665 grams (gms) (+10 per cent,  
-7.5 per cent). Thus, the tare weight 33of individual gunny varies from 615 gms to 732 gms. 
                                                           
33 Weight of empty gunny  

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 23
In order to enforce quality of gunnies at the time of purchase of CMR, FCI Headquarter 
directed (25 February 2000) the field offices that there should be no cut if the tare weight of 
the gunny of 50 kg is 615 gms and above. However, a cut of ` one per gunny may be levied if 
the average tare weight ranged from below 615 gms to 584 gms and a cut of ` two per gunny 
may be imposed where the tare weight of the 50 kg gunny ranged from below 584 gms to 554 
gms. The gunny having a tare weight below 554 gms may be rejected. 
In seven area offices 34 of FCI, it was noticed that tare weight of gunny of 50 kg capacity 
delivered by SGAs along with CMR was less than the 615 gms and the value cut at the rate of 
` one per gunny was being recovered from SGAs. Audit observed  that FCI Headquarter did 
not revise the rate of value cut in spite of the fact that rate  per gunny of 50 kg capacity which 
was ` 18.54 in KMS 2000-01 had increased to ` 31.76, ` 39.07, ` 42.11, ` 35.43 and  
` 40.59 per gunny during KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14 respectively.
Thus non-revision of rate of value cut for low tare weight of gunnies resulted in extra 
expenditure of ` 6.3435 crore on supply of under-weight gunnies by SGAs during KMS 2009-
10 to 2013-14. 
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that the value cut imposed by FCI for lesser tare weight of 
gunnies is applicable for delivery of rice where gunnies were supplied by the rice millers. The 
said instructions were issued for ensuring delivery of stock in standard weight of gunny. This 
is normally an exception and not a rule as the majority of the gunny purchase is made 
through the GoI from DGS&D, both by the SGAs and FCI. Therefore, periodic revision of 
such value cut has not been attempted.
The Ministry needs to ensure that periodic revision of such value cut is considered in case of 
increase in the price of gunny to avoid undue benefit to the rice millers.  
f)  Avoidable expenditure of ` 66.14 crore due to excess fixation of gunny cost for levy 
and CMR with reference to DGS&D rates in FCI, Andhra Pradesh region 
It was noticed that as against FCI weighted average cost of gunny at ` 33.4236 per gunny, the 
GoI fixed a price of ` 36.16 per gunny in respect of Levy Rice deliveries and ` 42.05 per 
gunny for CMR deliveries, for Central Pool operations (KMS 2011-12). Thus the GoI 
approved rate was higher by ` 2.74 per gunny (Levy Rice) and ` 8.63 per gunny (CMR). 
Moreover, while releasing procurement cost to private rice millers and SGAs, FCI relied on 
the cost sheet issued by the GoI and no cross checking  with the actual cost incurred for its 
own purchases was made, which resulted in payment of higher rate for gunnies to an extent 
of ` 66.14 crore. 
                                                           
34 Fatehabad, Karnal, Kaithal, Kurushetra in Haryana Region and Ludhiana, Sangrur and Patiala in Punjab Region.
35 FCI Haryana (Levy rice)- ` 0.04 crore on 5,37,119 gunnies, FCI Haryana (CMR) – ` 1.89 crore on 1,89,01,483 gunnies, 
FCI Punjab ` 4.41 crore on 4,02,83,624 gunnies
36 Cost (` 4,17,77,760) /No. of gunnies(12,50,000 )= ` 33.42 per gunny.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
24 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
The FCI Management replied that it is releasing payment towards gunny cost based on the 
cost sheets released by the GoI.
The reply is not acceptable for the fact that the gunny purchases by FCI were made at lower 
cost and it should have restricted the payment based on actuals.
g)  Extra expenditure of ` 40.80 crore on internal transportation on gunny bales in 
Odisha & Chhattisgarh regions of FCI and Government of Chhattisgarh
As per Principles, July 2003 issued by the Ministry (amended in November 2004) for fixation 
of incidentals/economic cost of CMR to various States, cost of gunnies shall be inclusive of 
the cost towards internal movement of gunnies beyond the railhead, based on final rate 
approved for that State Government, both for the Central Pool procurement as well as for 
DCP. In other words, the element of ‘internal transportation of Gunny Bales 37’ is a part of 
‘Gunny cost’ in respect of cost sheets of both DCP and Non DCP States and is not to be 
allowed as a separate element of cost. 
However, it was seen that allowance for the element of internal transportation on gunny in the 
cost sheet was provided in FCI Odisha and Chhattisgarh region as well as Marketing 
Federation (MARKFED) in Chhattisgarh. This resulted in additional expenditure of ` 40.80
crore38 for the five year period from 2009-10 to 2013-14.  
The Ministry replied (June 2015) that elements of internal transportation shown separately in 
the cost sheet is the transportation charges from the railhead of the receiving State to 
different centres where gunnies are required and not the rail freight for transporting gunnies, 
which is included as part of gunny cost.
The reply is not tenable as the ibid circular clearly stated that the cost of gunnies shall include 
the cost towards internal movement of gunnies beyond the railhead. Thus, the expenditure of 
` 40.80 crore was avoidable in this case.
2.1.3  Custody and Maintenance Charges (C&M Charges) 
The charges incurred by the SGAs for storage and preservation of paddy after procurement 
for a specified period are known as C&M Charges. In order to compensate these expenses, 
FCI reimburses C&M charges in accordance with the Principles laid down by the GoI in 
2003. Therefore, these charges should not be paid if the stocks are delivered directly to 
FCI/millers from mandis.
Storage cost is provided in the provisional cost sheet at acquisition stage as ‘C&M charges’ 
and as ‘Storage charges’ at distribution stage. These costs depend upon the storage period, 
type of storage viz. Covered and Plinth (CAP) or covered and also on the storage rate per 
                                                           
37  One Gunny Bale contains 500 gunnies. 
38 Chhattisgarh - ` 24.47 crore, FCI West Zone (Chhattisgarh)- ` 11.73 crore, FCI East Zone (Odisha)- ` 4.60  crore 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 25
gunny (or per quintal) charged by the godown owner. In the provisional cost sheets, these 
charges are provided separately for CAP and covered godowns at Central Warehousing 
Corporation (CWC) rates for the storage period prescribed in the Standard Principles for 
different food grains. Storage cost is applicable only when the food grains are actually stored 
in the godown. In case the commodity is directly delivered from the mandis/procurement 
centers to FCI, no storage cost is applicable. Similarly, in case the storage is at the millers’ 
premises or for which no separate storage cost is paid, no storage cost is to be booked under 
the head. The State Government/SGAs are therefore, required to provide break-up of all such 
quantities, for which no storage cost is incurred. 
During the period under audit, an amount of ` 466.30 crore was incurred in the selected 
States on the element of C&M charges as below: 
Table 2.3
Custody & Maintenance charges reimbursed by the GoI 
                     ( ` in crore) 
Year Non-DCP states DCP States* Total
 Levy Rice CMR Levy Rice CMR 
2009-10 0.00 62.16     NA** 15.15 77.31 
2010-11 0.00 78.22 NA 21.11 99.33 
2011-12 0.00 87.97 NA 18.29 106.26 
2012-13 0.00 96.09 NA Accounts not yet finalised 96.09 
2013-14 0.00 87.31 NA Accounts not yet finalised 87.31 
Total 466.30 
*includes only Chhattisgarh            
 **Not Available 
Source: Annual Report of Ministry and FCI Procurement Division 
Audit noticed discrepancies amounting to ` 193.90 crore related to payment of C&M charges 
as detailed below- 
a) SGAs in Punjab and Uttar Pradesh region delivered 238.04 39 LMT rice to FCI during 
2009-10 to 2013-14. However, an amount of ` 144.44 crore was paid by FCI to SGAs on 
Custody & Maintenance charges without obtaining any evidence to the effect that actual 
expenditure was in fact incurred by SGAs. As the SGAs did not produce any evidence to 
prove incurrence on the custody or maintenance of paddy, payment of C&M charges of  
` 144.44 crore to the SGAs was not regular. 
The SGAs of Punjab stated (February/March 2015) that they had to bear cost on C&M as 
they had to provide cost of crates, gunnies/tarpaulins/polythene covers/nets etc. Hence these 
charges were reimbursable by the GoI/FCI.
                                                           
39 Punjab – 206.84 LMT and Uttar Pradesh – 31.20 LMT 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
26 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
The reply is not acceptable as the SGAs have not provided details of cost incurred by them as 
agreed in State Exit Conference (February 2015) held in Punjab; as such the reasonableness 
of these claims was unverifiable. 
Recommendation regarding verification of documentary evidence for payment of C&M 
charges has been consolidated with similar recommendation below Para No. 2.1.8. 
b) In seven 40 revenue districts of Chhattisgarh, though 86.02 LMT paddy was directly lifted 
by the millers from the purchase centre (Societies), still two months C&M charges amounting 
to ` 31.24 crore were irregularly paid by the Chhattisgarh State Civil Supplies Corporation 
(CGSCSC) and FCI to Marketing Federation (MARKFED), despite the fact that paddy was 
not stored by MARKFED even for a single day.
CGSCSC stated (December 2014) that C&M charges are paid to Societies for the period of 
paddy stored by Societies, till its delivery to millers. 
The reply is, however, not acceptable as paddy procured by the Society was directly lifted by 
the millers from mandis. Hence, payment of ` 31.24 crore should not have been made on 
account of C&M charges. 
c) FCI Policy allowed millers only 15 days period for delivery of rice to FCI. Further, paddy 
purchased by SGAs is to be directly transferred to rice mills without storage of paddy. It was 
observed in audit that FCI Andhra Pradesh region made a payment of ` 18.22 crore to 
Andhra Pradesh Civil Supplies Corporation as C&M charges for two months which was not 
in accordance with the provisions of Procurement Policy of Andhra Pradesh. Thus, FCI has 
incurred avoidable expenditure of ` 18.22 crore on this account. 
FCI Region Andhra Pradesh replied that release of C&M charges was based on cost sheet of 
the Ministry and certificate obtained from the SGAs. Further, it was contended that all 
releases were on the basis of provisional cost sheet.
The contention of the Management is not correct as the Procurement Policy clearly states that 
all CMR should be delivered within 15 days from the acceptance of stocks at procurement 
point and thus reimbursement of these charges for two months was in contravention of the 
provisions of Procurement Policy. 
The Ministry, while accepting the audit observation (June 2015), stated that SGAs of Punjab, 
Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh were asked to provide the proof of actual 
incurrence as well as details of payments of C&M charges. 
                                                           
40 Raipur, Bilaspur, Durg, Rajnandgaon, Dhamtari, Mahasamund, Janjgir - Champa 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 27
2.1.4  Avoidable incidence of subsidy of ` 952.37 crore on account of additional driage 
allowance given to the millers 
Moisture content in paddy is an important determ inant of its quality and the price it fetches. 
Regarding moisture, the recommendation contained in the Gokak Committee Report 41 states, 
“Moisture content in paddy is always a variable factor. It varies from layer to layer, grain to 
grain, lot-to-lot, gunny to gunny, stack to stack etc. It is completely dependent on the 
atmospheric conditions prevailing during the storage period. In a normal year of procurement, 
the moisture content in paddy will be well within the prescribed maximum limit of  
18 per cent . There is no authentic data to scientifically establish the reduction in weight due 
to moisture loss during storage of paddy”.  
The GoI issued guidelines applicable for all procuring States in September 2010 for 
submission of incidental claims in respect of procurement of paddy/wheat by the State 
Governments and their Agencies. In the guidelines, it was mentioned that the shortage/driage 
may be due to various factors like transit losses, storage losses, driage, damage etc. Paddy is 
procured at the maximum level of moisture content at 17 per cent and milled at 14 per cent to 
15 per cent. Hence, some losses occur during the process of procurement to ultimate milling, 
which is termed as driage. 
As per the Gokak Committee’s recommendation, two per cent  to three per cent  driage of 
moisture was already inbuilt while fixing 67 per cent out-turn ratio for raw rice 42. As two to 
three per cent driage has already been taken into account for fixation of the out-turn ratio of 
rice out of paddy, no additional driage allowance should have been permitted. However, it 
was noticed in Audit that additional driage allowance of one per cent  was allowed to 
SGAs/millers by the GoI as per approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) in 1998.
Audit noticed that in the note for Cabinet, it was clearly mentioned that as the out-turn ratio 
of 67 per cent takes into account the normal driage, therefore even the two per cent driage 
permitted is over and above the normal driage. However, the note further stated that the rice 
millers of Punjab were not prepared to mill paddy if the driage is not increased and the paddy 
if not milled may deteriorate and this loss may be far higher than the cost of enhancing 
driage.
Under these circumstances, driage was enhanced from two per cent to three per cent for 
Punjab and Ex-post facto approval for the same was sought. However, the order of Ministry 
dated 8 September 1998 extended the driage allowance to all the States. No justification for 
doing so was found on record especially in view of the fact that both, the experts (Gokak 
Committee Report), as well as the Ministry, were of the opinion that the existing driage 
allowance of two per cent was more than sufficient. As a result, the GoI has been allowing 
this one per cent additional driage allowance since 1998. This resulted in undue benefit to 
                                                           
41 Report of the Expert Committee on technical examination of reports on trial milling of paddy to obtain out-turn ratios and 
rice specifications. (21 November 1994). 
42 Raw rice refers to the shelled yet un-cooked rice. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
28 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
millers amounting to ` 952.37 crore, and also additional avoidable incidence of subsidy to 
the same extent, from the period 2009-10 to 2013-14 as detailed in the table as follows: 
Table 2.4 
Expenditure reimbursed by the GoI on the element of Driage Allowance  
(` in crore) 
Year Non-DCP states DCP States* Total
2009-10 143.98 27.78 171.76 
2010-11 180.67 15.10 195.77 
2011-12 215.71 39.58 255.29 
2012-13 206.00 Accounts  not yet finalised 206.00 
2013-14 123.55 Accounts not yet finalised 123.55 
                             Total     952.37 
*Includes only Chhattisgarh  
Source: FCI Procurement Division and the Government of Chhattisgarh 
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that this decision to 
allow driage at the rate of one per cent to all States was a decision taken by CCEA. However, 
as recommended by Audit, the Ministry will revisit the issue of one per cent additional driage 
in consultation with FCI. 
Thus, apparently decision to increase driage was taken because of the demand of the rice 
millers association of Punjab and not on the basis of any scientific expert opinion. Moreover, 
provision which was meant only for Punjab for one year was inexplicably extended to whole 
of the country resulting in huge outflow of money. 
Recommendation No. 2 Ministry's Reply 
The GoI may consider revisiting the decision 
to allow one per cent  additional driage 
allowance after taking expert technical 
opinion on the matter. 
The Recommendation is accepted and it will 
be considered in consultation with FCI. 
2.1.5  Transportation cost 
Transportation cost for movement of paddy/rice from mandi/purchase centre to SGAs/FCI 
depends on the lead distances between procurement centres to storage points, storage points 
to rice mills, and rice mills to delivery points at FCI/Agencies godowns. 
Location/concentration of these points and geographic spread of States are, therefore, 
important determinants of the lead distances. The cost also depends on the rates of 
transportation per kilometer per quintal applicable for such distances at different places, 
which varies among the States. In case the food grains are directly delivered from the 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 29
procurement centres to FCI, no transportation cost is borne by the State Government/SGAs 
for such quantities. 
Transportation cost up to eight kms from purchase centres to mills and from mills to storage 
godowns on paddy as well as rice is already included in the milling charges fixed for 
converting the paddy into rice. Thus, such transportation cost is to be borne by millers and the 
State Governments should not claim these charges and they are also required to submit a 
certificate that such cost is not included in the claim. In case the distance involved is more 
than eight kms, breakup of the quantities and gross transportation cost, deductions made up to 
eight kms and the net cost claimed is to be provided. Slab rates of transportation cost 
(separately for first eight kms) are also to be enclosed. Such adjustments may, however, be 
not required in case milling charges are excluding the transportation cost for first eight kms. 
As per provisional cost sheets, for food grains delivered from procurement centres to the 
depots/storage point of FCI for Central Pool, transportation charges are payable on the basis 
of rates fixed by District Magistrate or FCI’s rate, whichever is lower, for actual distance 
involved.
During the period under audit, an amount of ` 694.42 crore was incurred in the selected 
States on the element of transportation charges as payment to SGAs/millers, as below:
Table 2.5 
Expenditure reimbursed by the GoI on the element of transportation charges 
(` in crore) 
Year Non-DCP states DCP States* Total
 Levy Rice CMR Paddy Levy 
Rice
CMR  
2009-10 34.82 59.72 21.09    NA** 50.07 165.70 
2010-11 35.86 37.11 23.76 NA 50.55 147.28 
2011-12 48.77 53.50 6.04 NA 77.73 186.04 
2012-13 31.31 47.39 12.75 NA NA 91.45 
2013-14 11.64 77.89 14.42 NA NA 103.95 
Total 694.42 
*Includes only Chhattisgarh   ** NA- Not Available 
Source: FCI Procurement Division and Government of Chhattisgarh 
Audit noticed discrepancies amounting to ` 45.20 crore as given below:- 
a)  Unjustified lump sum transportation charges of ` 38.20 crore in FCI, Odisha Region 
During KMS 2009-10 to 2011-12 in Odisha, the ‘transportation charge’ at the paddy stage 
was fixed at lump sum rate and included in the cost sheet of CMR while the same at rice 
delivery stage was fixed at lower of the rate decided by the District Collector (DC) of the 
State or FCI’s rate. This was, however, changed during KMS 2012-13 and 2013-14 wherein 
transportation charge both at the paddy stage and at the rice stage was fixed at a rate lower of 
the DC or FCI’s rates. During the KMS 2009-10 to 2011-12 transportation charge at paddy 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
30 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
stage was paid at lump sum ( ` 27.89, ` 31.35 and ` 34.20 per quintal) to the SGAs 
irrespective of the distance covered. Audit noticed that during KMS 2012-13 and 2013-14, 
the actual distance covered on an average was only 20 km in the seven revenue districts of 
Odisha region (except Bhadrak); the incidental towards transportation charge during KMS 
2009-10 to 2011-12 could have been reduced by ` 38.20 crore, had the transportation charges 
during this period been fixed on the actual distance basis at the existing transportation rate  
(` 0.27 per km) as was fixed in subsequent KMS. 
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that specific transportation charges for the Central Pool at 
acquisition stage for KMS 2009-10 to 2010-11 was allowed to Odisha as a special case with 
the approval of competent authority, keeping in view the difficult physical condition of the 
State and location of mills at far-flung areas.  However, from KMS 2012-13, transportation 
charges in the provisional cost sheet for Odisha are also being fixed as per the provision 
made in the Principles and applicable in case of all other States. 
As there was no change in “difficult physical conditions” of the State and/or location of mills 
at “far flung areas” in 2012-13 as compared to previous years, the Ministry’s contention is 
untenable and the lump sum transportation charges of 
` 38.20 crore for the period were not 
justified. 
b) Irregular part-payments of ` seven crore in Nalgonda District of Telangana
Nalgonda District Administration has been making part-payments and terming them as 
advances though it was not provided in the agreements entered into with the transport 
contractors. These advances were adjusted from the amounts payable to transport contractors 
at the end of the season. It was observed in audit that ` seven crore was advanced to 
transporters during KMS 2012-13 and 2013-14, of which, ` 0 .56 crore was awaiting 
adjustment as on November 2014.  
While accepting the audit observations of non adjustment of advance from transportation 
charges, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that the amount of 
` 0.56 crore would be adjusted. 
2.1.6  Avoidable payment of interest charge of ` 31.59 crore to SGAs by Bihar and 
Andhra Pradesh region of FCI   
a) Value Added Tax (VAT) was implemented in Andhra Pradesh (AP) w.e.f. 1 April 2005. 
As per the AP VAT Act, 2005 even though paddy and rice were taxable at the rate of five  
per cent, the paddy was exempted from levy of sales tax in case of first sale of rice in the 
State. The Government of Andhra Pradesh stated (23 September 2005) that sale of rice would 
be taxed only at the point of first sale in the State. Thus, in respect of sale of rice by State 
Civil Supplies Corporation, out of the paddy (custom milled), the VAT was payable only on 
the value of rice delivered to FCI and paddy was exempted from levy of sales tax. Thus, it is 
clear that the SGAs were under no obligation to pay VAT at the time of purchase of paddy 
from the farmers. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 31
However, Audit noticed that FCI Regional office, Andhra Pradesh region intimated to the 
GoI that five per cent  tax was payable on the paddy purchases. The fact of exemption of 
paddy from levy of VAT should have been brought to the notice of the GoI which was not 
done.
The Management stated that in the final accounts submitted by the State Government the 
interest element was more and from KMS 2013-14 onwards, while communicating the cost 
structure to unit offices, the notional element of VAT, and VAT on Rural Development (RD) 
Cess, Market Fees were excluded and net cost was communicated for release to SGAs.  
The reply is not tenable as the final accounts were being submitted by SGAs after 
considerable time and in case of KMS 2007-08 and 2008-09, the final cost was much less 
than the provisional amount paid to them. In the process, FCI has now to recover ` 30.84 
crore from SGAs. 
The Ministry accepted the audit observation on avoidable payment of VAT on purchase of 
paddy and stated (June 2015) that steps for recovery will be taken. 
b) In the cost sheet for the CMR, the items of incidentals do include interest cost. Interest at 
acquisition stage is provided on the elements of MSP/ Bonus, statutory charges and MLC at 
the prevailing interest rate for time period spec ified in the Principles, i.e. for two months. In 
the cost sheet for the KMS 2009-10 to 2011-12, in respect of Bihar and its SGAs, VAT did 
not form part of the elements on which interest charges were payable. However, w.e.f. KMS 
2012-13 the GoI allowed interest on notional VAT @ four  per cent of MSP of paddy.  While 
notifying the rates of CMR, it was categorically stated in the cost sheet of KMS 2012-13 that 
VAT, as applicable at every stage, would be payable as per the relevant legal provisions. 
Scrutiny of bills relating to payment of CMR at FCI Area Office, Gaya in respect of KMS 
2012-13 revealed that payment made to the SGAs included ` 27.06 per quintal towards 
interest cost at acquisition stage of paddy. This amount included ` 1.02543  being the interest 
on VAT payable on MSP of paddy. The proportionate interest charges on VAT element at 
rice stage, taking out-turn ratio at the rate of 67  per cent, would be ` 1.53 (` 1.025 x 100/67) 
per quintal or ` 15.30 per MT. During KMS 2012-13, the SGA i.e. Bihar State Food & Civil 
Supplies Corporation supplied three LMT and 1.90 LMT of CMR to FCI Area Office, Gaya 
and Patna respectively on which no VAT was paid by the SGA either at paddy or rice stage 
as the bills submitted to FCI for payment was at the rate of ` 2165.56 per quintal which did 
not include any element of VAT. However, payment was made by FCI without deducting the 
proportionate cost incidental towards interest charges resulting in excess payment of ` 0.75
crore to the SGA. 
                                                           
43 (1250*4/100)X 12.30 per cent for two months

Report No. 31 of 2015 
32 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
2.1.7  Release of Value Added Tax of ` 1,023.92 crore to Private Rice Millers in 
contravention of the GoI/ GoAP instructions in FCI, Andhra Pradesh region 
The GoI while communicating the levy prices payabl e to private rice m illers stipulated that 
the statutory charges would be payable only on production of relevant official/statutory 
receipts evidencing payments. Levy procurement prices  payable to private rice millers 
comprises three elements of statutory charges i.e. Market Fee, Rural Development (RD) Cess 
and VAT. Market Fee and RD Cess were payable on procurement of paddy by private rice 
millers whereas VAT was payable on sale of rice to Food Corporation of India. FCI Andhra 
Pradesh Region reimburses the Market Fee on production of proof by private rice millers and 
pays RD Cess directly to Commercial Tax Department (CTD).  
Cases of non-payment of VAT by private rice millers on the entire cost as well as on certain 
elements of procurement prices were reported, in spite of full reimbursement by FCI, 
resulting in undue benefit to some millers. Thus, Andhra Pradesh, Revenue (Commercial 
Taxes-II) Department communicated that, Group of Ministers constituted by the State 
Government had accepted the request of the rice millers that VAT payable by them on sale of 
rice to FCI may be deducted at source and remitted to CTD. It was also stated that, insertion 
of such provision relating to such tax deduction at source may take some more time, and 
hence FCI was requested to deduct VAT at the rate of five per cent from the amounts payable 
to rice millers for sale of rice, after obtaining willingness for such deduction from the 
individual millers. 
However, FCI Regional Office Hyderabad turned down the proposal put forth by the GoAP 
mainly on the grounds of shortage of staff /non-maintenance of records of milling and 
unwilling millers. The FCI RO Hyderabad continued to adopt the existing procedure and 
released VAT payments to private rice mills and did not act upon the request of the GoAP, 
thus violating the instructions of the GoI on the subject matter about obtaining evidence 
before releasing statutory charges. This resulted in irregular release of VAT of ` 1023.92
crore for KMS 2012-13 and 2013-14 to private rice millers in contravention of the GoI 
instructions.
Recommendation No. 3 Ministry's Reply 
In view of the huge amount of State revenue involved, the 
Ministry may direct FCI to accept Government of Andhra 
Pradesh’s recommendation to deduct Value Added Tax 
(VAT) at source from private rice millers to ensure timely 
collection of VAT and revenue to the exchequer.
The Recommendation is 
accepted and it will be 
considered in consultation 
with FCI. 
The issue of deduction of VAT by FCI and its deposit with the State Commercial Tax 
Department of the State of Andhra Pradesh was discussed in the Exit Conference (25 June 
2015), wherein the Ministry accepted the audit observation and agreed to the audit 
recommendation of FCI deducting VAT at source from private rice millers. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 33
2.1.8  Irregular payment of ` 73.70 crore as commission to Societies for supply of 
CMR by SGAs during KMS 2009-10 to 2012-13 
As per the Ministry’s instructions (March, 2010) the commission to Societies, Self Help 
Groups and Co-operative Societies undertaking procurement of paddy on behalf of 
FCI/SGAs would be allowed at the maximum of 2.5  per cent  of MSP for each KMS, after 
obtaining documentary proof as regards to the eligibility.  
During the year 2009-10 to 2013-14, an expenditure amounting to ` 768.35 crore was 
incurred in selected States on Societies commission, as below:  
Table 2.6 
Expenditure reimbursed by the GoI on the element of Society Commission*
           (`  in crore) 
Year Non-DCP states DCP States Total
Levy
Rice 
CMR Paddy Levy Rice CMR 
2009-10 - - -    NA** 105.96 105.96 
2010-11 - - 14.46 NA 128.28 142.74 
2011-12 - - 5.58 NA 160.90 166.48 
2012-13 - - 19.43 NA Accounts not yet 
finalised
  19.43 
2013-14 - 317.09 16.65 NA Accounts not yet 
finalised
333.74 
Total 768.35 
*Rate of commission to Societies at maximum at the rate of 2.5 per cent of MSP was fixed by the GoI.  **NA- Not Applicable 
Source: Annual Report of the Ministry and FCI Procurement Division 
However, Audit observed that out of ` 768.35 crore, an amount of ` 73.7044 crore was paid 
by FCI in six 45 area offices of three 46 regions without obtaining any proof to the effect 
whether Primary Agricultural Co-operative Societies (PACS) were engaged in the 
procurement process by SGAs. The payment without documentary proof was not only against 
the GoI instructions but also carried a risk of reimbursement for expenditure not actually 
incurred by SGAs. 
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that PACS are Panchayat level co-operative bodies with 
elected members. These are engaged in procurement through a notification issued by the 
Government of Bihar every year. The quantity purchased by PACS was certified by district 
co-operative officers or nodal officers. Thus, the payment of Society commission was in 
order.
                                                           
44 FCI Area offices Gaya-` 46.53 crore and Patna-` 24.42 crore (KMS 2009-10 to 2012-13), Uttar Pradesh- ` 2.57 crore, 
FCI, Area office Kurnool – ` 0.18 crore.  
45 Patna, Gaya, Shahjehanpur, Mirzapur, Basti and Kurnool 
46 Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
34 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable as the FCI (August 2013) had withheld the 
commission to Society for KMS 2011-12, 2012-13 and RMS 2012-13 and had called for the 
proof of engagement of the Society in procurement operations.
As regards Andhra Pradesh, the Ministry accepted the audit observation and stated (June 
2015) that SGAs had been asked to provide the proof of engagement of cooperative Societies 
and on failure to provide such document, the amount would be recovered.
In the case of Uttar Pradesh also, the Ministry accepted the audit observation and stated that 
(June 2015) the commission paid to Societies during 2010-11 had already been recovered 
and no payment on this head was made thereafter. Recovery of inadmissible amount of 
Societies commission paid in 2009-10 was under process.
However, recovery particulars were awaited in audit (June 2015). Moreover, as much as  
` 1.10 crore was paid by the Uttar Pradesh as Society commission during 2011-12 and 2012-
13, which also needs to be recovered.
Recommendation No. 4 Ministry's Reply 
The Ministry may direct FCI/SGAs to ensure 
that payments for custody and maintenance 
charges and Society commission are made only 
after verification of documentary evidences for 
actual incurrence of expenditure by the SGAs 
on this account. 
The Recommendation is accepted and FCI 
will be asked to ensure its implementation. 
2.1.9  Non-submission of certificates for payment of Market Fee amounting to ` 17.09
crore in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana
a) In Andhra Pradesh, District Managers did not obtain the market fee paid certificates from 
the Marketing Department of APSCSC for an amount of ` 2.37 crore paid to it as Market 
Fee. Thus, the end-utilisation of the Market Fee could not be verified.
In the State Exit Conference held with Collectors in Andhra Pradesh (August 2014), it was 
assured that the certificates would be obtained and submitted to FCI. These were awaited in 
Audit (June 2015).  
b) Audit scrutiny of certificates for payment of market fee amounting to ` 14.72 crore for the 
period 2009-10 to 2013-14, submitted by the Marketing Department of APSCSC 47  in 
Telangana revealed that these certificates were not supported by the receipt of payment and 
expenditure particulars. Hence end-utilisation of the amount paid as Market Fee could not be 
verified in Audit.
                                                           
47 The nomenclature pertains to period prior to bifurcation into two separate States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 35
While accepting the audit observation, the State Government replied (December 2014) that 
the purchaser had to pay the Market Fee and RD Cess to the concerned Departments and the 
certificates were being obtained in coordination with all concerned and added that Market 
Fee was being paid from cash credit.
Recommendation No. 5 Ministry's Reply 
The Ministry may ensure 
that payments are released 
by FCI/State 
Governments only after 
obtaining certificates for 
market fee/tax/cess paid 
in the previous marketing 
season. 
Market Fee and RD Cess is imposed by the concerned authorities of 
the State Government under various statutory provisions. Obviously, 
the payment of such statutory charges cannot be linked to the end 
utilization of the revenue collected out of it, as the FCI or State 
Agencies can be subjected to penalties for not paying such fee/ cess. 
It is the responsibility of the State Government to ensure proper 
utilization of such funds and C&AG can audit the same at their end. 
Thus, the Recommendation is not acceptable.  
Though the Ministry has not accepted the recommendation, yet it agreed to (during Exit 
Conference held on 25.06.2015) insist upon State Governments to furnish tax/fee paid 
certificates for earlier years.
2.1.10 Non-uniformity in fixation of MLC and Gunny Cost for CMR and Levy 
Operations
The rice for Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) is sourced through two operations 
namely Levy and CMR. Whereas in CMR, the paddy is procured by SGAs/FCI and given to 
millers, in case of Levy, the paddy is procured directly by millers and delivered to FCI/SGAs 
at pre-decided rate. However Audit noticed that despite procurement of paddy for both CMR 
and Levy Rice being made in the same mandi, the rates of mandi labour charges and Gunny 
cost were different. Following observations were noticed in this regard: 
a) Excess payment of ` 436.69 crore as MLC for CMR in Chhattisgarh, Punjab, 
Haryana regions of FCI, State Governments of Chhattisgarh and Uttar Pradesh
The rate of MLC fixed for CMR was higher than the rate of MLC fixed for Levy Rice during 
the period from 2009-10 to 2013-14 in Non-DCP States of Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana 
and DCP State of Chhattisgarh (2009-10, 2011-12 and 2012-13) as follows: 
Table 2.7 
Rates of Mandi Labour charges fixed by the GoI for Paddy Procurement
     (` per quintal)
Year Punjab Haryana Uttar Pradesh Chhattisgarh
CMR Levy Rice CMR Levy Rice CMR Levy Rice CMR Levy Rice
2009-10 12.21 6.21 11.95 6.21 7.92 6.21 9.92 6.21
2010-11 13.24 6.98 12.69 6.98 8.90 6.98 6.41 6.98
2011-12 11.05 7.60 13.20 7.60 9.94 7.60 11.81 7.60
2012-13 11.68 8.03 13.84 8.03 10.91 8.03 10.37 8.03
2013-14 13.64 8.89 15.39 8.89 10.91 8.89 5.18 8.89
Source: Annual Report of the Ministry and FCI Procurement Division 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
36 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
 As the procurement of paddy for both CMR and Levy Rice was made in the same mandi,
there should have been no difference between the rate of MLC fixed for CMR and Levy Rice. 
This has led to an excess payment of ` 436.69 crore48 to SGAs/FCI by the FCI/GoI during 
the period from 2009-10 to 2013-14.  
On the other hand in Chhattisgarh, fixation of higher MLC for delivery of Levy Rice as 
compared to the MLC for CMR for the Khariff Marketing Season (KMS) 2010-11 and 2013-
14 resulted in undue financial benefits to the millers to the tune of ` 0.29 crore. Thus in the 
same State, the State Government and FCI had two diametrically opposite price mechanisms 
for mandi labour which was not justified. 
b)  Different rates of gunny cost for CMR and Levy Rice resulted in extra expenditure 
of
` 42.27 crore - Bihar, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh regions of FCI 
Fixation of gunny cost under CMR operations is done by the GoI on the basis of FCI’s 
recommendation and FCI proposes the rate by adopting a practice of taking average cost of 
gunnies prevailing during the immediately preceding six months as the basis for the 
calculation of cost of gunnies. To this, elements like branding charges, safety stitches, Central 
Sales Tax, Education Cess, etc. are added. However, in the case of Levy Rice, gunny cost is 
finalized by the GoI on the basis of open market prices of gunny at Kolkata, during normal 
season, as received from Gunny Traders Association, Kolkata and by adding thereto other 
elements like freight, incidental charges and interest of one month.
Thus different rates of gunny cost have been prescribed for CMR and Levy Rice operations 
though the gunnies are used in the same time period and for same purpose. The table follows 
illustrates the position: 
Table 2.8 
Different rates of gunny cost for CMR and Levy Rice operations 
(` per quintal)
State Operations Years 
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 
Punjab CMR 63.53 78.14 84.22 70.86 81.18 
Levy Rice 59.68 64.78 72.34 70.86 78.00 
Haryana CMR 63.38 78.24 84.10 70.86 81.18 
Levy Rice 59.64 64.74 72.30 70.86 78.00 
Odisha CMR 63.35 78.32 79.64 79.64 81.34 
Levy Rice 54.00 63.48 70.98 69.46 75.66 
Chhattisgarh CMR 65.33 80.00 87.59 73.40 80.18 
Levy Rice 58.82 63.92 70.52 69.90 76.90 
Uttar Pradesh CMR 49.24 51.94 83.74 70.06 80.34 
Levy Rice 49.24 51.94 71.64 70.06 76.36 
Bihar CMR 50.40 62.00 80.80 69.53 79.82 
Levy Rice 50.40 63.60 71.84 69.58 75.78 
Andhra
Pradesh and 
Telangana 
CMR 58.00 78.16 84.10 70.86 81.18 
Levy Rice 58.00 64.76 72.32 70.86 78.00 
Source: Cost  sheets issued by the Ministry 
                                                           
48 Chhattisgarh-` 55.60 crore, Uttar Pradesh-` 2.55 crore, FCI Punjab- ` 288.23 crore, FCI Haryana- ` 90.31 crore. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 37
It was further seen that the rates for gunny used in CMR operations was fixed higher than that 
for Levy Rice operations even when there was no justification for doing so. This fixation of 
different rates of ‘new gunny’ for CMR and Levy Rice respectively led to payment of 
accumulated higher incidental charges amounting to ` 42.27 crore
49 for CMR delivered by 
SGAs and Levy Rice delivered by rice millers during KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14.  
The Ministry replied (June 2015) that as levy operations are being discontinued from 2015-
16 thus these observations are no longer relevant. 
Though the Ministry has replied that levy operations are being discontinued from 2015-16, 
the fact remains that different price structure were prevalent for CMR and Levy Rice for 
MLC and Gunny cost respectively whereas essentially both the operations were similar. This 
led to higher expenditure and avoidable subsidy outgo and underscores the need for better 
harmonization of distributed data sets for cost fixation of incidentals to optimally economize 
the expenditure on the same. 
                                                           
49 FCI, Odisha region (2009-10 to 2013-14)-` 20.71 crore, FCI Bihar region (2010-11 & 2011-12)- ` 5.84 crore, FCI Uttar 
Pradesh region (2009-10 to 2013-14)-` 15.72 crore. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 39
Chapter-III
 Procurement of paddy 
Every year FCI and SGAs undertake an open-ended procurement of paddy at MSP declared 
by the GoI for the Central Pool. By this, Government aims to prevent distress sale of 
paddy/food grains by farmers. The total mandi arrivals are estimated based on variables like 
area under cultivation, previous years’ data, etc. Then procurement targets of all the 
procurement agencies including FCI are fixed each year after considering the factors like 
availability of storage space, gunnies, dunnage50 and staff, etc. In order to facilitate purchases 
and ensure maximum procurement in mandis, FCI prepares an Action Plan for each KMS. 
The Action Plan is to help achieve objectives of Procurement Policy, to render effective price 
support to the farmers and gear up procurement operations. 
Audit observations on procurement of paddy are indicated below: 
3.1  Extra expenditure of ` 256.73 crore due to shortfall in achievement of 
procurement targets of paddy by FCI in Punjab and Haryana   
During review of records at Regional Office, Punjab, it was observed that target of 
procurement of paddy for the Region was fixed at 68.40 LMT during the years 2009-10 to 
2013-14 against which the actual procurement of paddy was only 25.00 LMT. Similarly, 
target of procurement of paddy in Haryana region was fixed at 2.28 LMT during the years 
2009-10 to 2013-14 against which actual procurement of paddy was only 0.98 LMT. This 
shortfall in procurement of paddy was eventually made good by procurement through SGAs. 
The cost of procuring paddy through SGAs is high because of incidence of additional charges 
such as C&M charges, interest charges and administrative charges in comparison to paddy 
being procured by FCI. 
Short procurement of targeted paddy by FCI resulted in overburden on SGAs to procure 
additional quantity of 44.70 LMT paddy being the FCI's share during 2009-10 to 2013-14.  
This also resulted in avoidable extra expenditure of ` 256.7351 crore towards C&M charges, 
interest charges and administrative charges being reimbursed by FCI to SGAs in Punjab 
Region, and interest charges in case of  Haryana Region of FCI.
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that target of procurement of paddy arrived at after 
consultation with States is primarily for making adequate arrangements for procurement 
operations in relation to placing orders for gunnies, opening of Procurement Centres, 
posting of adequate Quality Control staff and arranging godown space etc. In fact, there had 
been a complete shift in approach to procurement which is shifting from FCI to States. Thus, 
                                                           
50 Loose wood, matting or similar material used to keep a cargo in position 
51 FCI Haryana Region-` 3.34 crore, FCI Punjab Region-` 253.39 crore

Report No. 31 of 2015 
40 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
lesser procurement by FCI than the target and increase in procurement by the SGAs need not 
be construed as incurrence of extra expenditure due to higher cost of CMR. 
The Ministry did not justify the shift in approach for procurement by SGAs in view of 
incidence of higher cost of CMR procured by SGAs. 
3.2 Deficiencies in payment of ` 17,985.49 crore as Minimum Support Price to  
farmers
3.2.1  Doubts about the authenticity of MSP payment  
The objective of the GoI Procurement Policy is to provide farmers fair value of produce to 
prevent distress sale . MSP and bonus should be given to the actual beneficiaries i.e. farmers 
for which procuring agencies should obtain authentic copy of Jot Bahi/Kisan Bahi/ 
Khatauni52.
Audit observed a large number of deficiencies like non authentication of land holdings of 
farmers, cases of payments to farmers with doubtful identities and delivery of paddy in 
excess of the land holdings of farmers etc. in the States. Details are given in Annexure-II.
In the case of observation relating to Punjab, the Food & Supplies Department stated 
(February 2015) that Identification Documents (ID) of farmers should have been available 
with the Marketing Board and SGAs cannot ask for ID/land ownership proof as it is  
responsibility of the Marketing Board which issues forms to all farmers who sell paddy.
The reply confirmed the fact that the SGAs were not having any verifiable land 
ownership/payment records as was required as per the State Government’s directions. 
The Ministry replied (June 2015) that for ensuring the payment of MSP to the farmers in 
every State, the State Governments prescribe documents for identification of farmers and 
MSP is paid after obtaining such proof of identity. Payments are made by account payee 
cheque/Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) or other electronic mode. It further stated that in 
Odisha, advance registration of farmers is done and farmer’s identity cards are issued 
mentioning therein the land holdings and in Uttar Pradesh, Khatauni is invariably obtained 
before payment of MSP. In case of Levy Rice, FCI is accepting milled Levy Rice as per the 
MSP certificate issued by District Authorities concerned.
The reply is not acceptable as the Audit has noticed large number of deficiencies in case of 
various States which are included in Annexure-II, for which no specific reply was given by 
the Ministry. Further, FCI is not having any separate mechanism to check whether millers 
had paid the full MSP to the farmers or not and FCI is completely dependent on the State 
Government. 
                                                           
52 Land records maintained by State Authority concerned. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 41
Audit also noticed in case of FCI, Uttar Pradesh region that State Agriculture Produce Market 
Board had prescribed Form number 6R, which was to be issued on every first purchase of 
food grains by the buyer. As per practice, the form is made in quadruplicate (1 st Copy for 
Seller, 2nd Copy for Mandi Samiti, 3rd Copy for VAT Department and 4th Copy for the buyer) 
specifying among other things, the name of the seller, name of buyer, quantity purchased, rate 
of purchase and Mandi Fee due etc. Thus, when first purchase is made from the farmers this 
form is issued to them and it acts as a proof that the purchase was made from the farmers and 
rate paid to the farmer was not below the MSP. Similarly, when second or subsequent 
purchase (Arthia to Arthia or Arthia to Miller) is made there is a provision of issue of another 
Form number 9R which is issued by seller to the buyer. It acts as a proof, among other things, 
for levy of Mandi Shulk  and genuineness of purchase from registered seller. Thus, these 
forms are vital control instruments to ensure that MSP benefit reaches the farmer and not to 
ineligible persons. However, Audit while reviewing 509 vouchers, noticed several 
irregularities in the system raising doubts about the genuineness of MSP benefit being given 
to farmers. For example, in 175 cases, the 6R Form did not contain the farmers’ signature; in 
19 cases, the handwriting on the 6R Form and the signature of farmers were apparently 
similar and in 120 cases, neither 6R Form nor 9R Form were found attached.   
This raises doubt as to whether the benefit of MSP did actually accrue to farmers. Thus, there 
was no assurance that the farmers actually did get full MSP for their produce from 
millers/SGAs/FCI.
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that the Government 
of Uttar Pradesh has been sensitized for strict adherence to the prescribed Quality Control 
and paddy purchase guidelines. Compliance of Ministry’s instruction by the Government of 
Uttar Pradesh was awaited in audit (June 2015). 
3.2.2  MSP certificates not obtained for paddy procured in Punjab, Haryana, 
Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh 
a) Under Rule 11(a & b) of Punjab Agricultural Produce Market (General) Rules, 1962, the 
Katcha Arthia 53  shall make payment to the seller through account payee cheque or by 
electronic transfer after the weighment is over. A quantity of 13.03 54 LMT of paddy was 
purchased by FCI during KMS 2011-12 to 2013-14 in Punjab and Haryana Region for which 
payment of ` 1,666.07
55 crore was made by FCI to Arthias on account of MSP. It was 
observed in audit that  Punjab and Haryana Regions of FCI had purchased 2.32 56 LMT paddy 
valuing ` 296.6457 crore during KMS 2011-12 to 2013-14 but had not obtained the details of 
farmers along with name of village, bank account number, phone number, details of purchase 
and details of payment along with acknowledgement of farmers from the Katcha Arthia. This 
                                                           
53 Katcha Arthias renders services as immediate intermediary or aggregator in the process of procurement of food grains. 
54 FCI Haryana Region-0.23 LMT, FCI Punjab Region-12.80 LMT
55 FCI Haryana Region-` 30.51 crore, FCI Punjab Region-` 1635.56 crore
56 FCI Haryana Region-0.09 LMT, FCI Punjab Region-2.23 LMT
57 FCI Haryana Region-` 12.69 crore, FCI Punjab Region-` 283.95 crore

Report No. 31 of 2015 
42 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
was in violation of the instructions of the GoI. In absence of this the actual benefit of MSP to 
farmers could not be verified from records. 
b) In Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, the rice millers were required to furnish a certificate to 
the effect that paddy was purchased at MSP from the farmers, duly countersigned by the 
Sarpanch/Panchayat Secretary and Ward Member. After verifying the details, the Mill Levy 
Certificates shall be issued by the District Collectors for delivering Levy Rice by the 
millers/dealers to FCI. This mechanism helps the District Administration to ensure that 
millers pay MSP to farmers for the paddy purchased at farm-gates. In Telangana and Andhra 
Pradesh, Audit observed that MSP certificates for 153.79 LMT58 valuing ` 17,681 crore were 
not obtained by the millers.  
Audit also noticed that in FCI Area Office Nalgonda, millers purchased non-FAQ59 paddy for 
the KMS 2013-14 and offered less than MSP rate to the farmers. As against the MSP of                       
` 1,345/1,310 per quintal {for FAQ and Under Relaxed Specification (URS) respectively}, 
the average price paid was ` 1,269 per quintal. The District Supply Officer was found to have 
wrongly issued certificate stating that full MSP was paid by the miller in respect of purchase 
of non-FAQ paddy, a fact which was not borne out of the actual records. This resulted in 
excess payment of ` 0.21 crore by FCI to private rice millers, 
c) Purchase Policy of Uttar Pradesh provides that payment of MSP should be made to farmers 
immediately after purchase of paddy. It was, however, observed in Mirzapur district that the 
Uttar Pradesh State Agro and Pradeshik Cooperative Federation (PCF) had not paid MSP to 
the farmers for purchase of paddy amounting to ` 7.85 crore during 2010-11 to 2012-13. It 
was replied by State Agro that funds were not available. However, PCF in a contradictory 
reply stated that funds were indeed given to the Societies. Further, in absence of MSP 
certificates furnished by Societies, payment at MSP rates could not be verified in audit. 
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that for ensuring payment of MSP to the farmers in every 
State, the State Government prescribes documents for identification of farmers and MSP is 
paid after obtaining such proof of identity. It further stated FCI is not having any separate 
mechanism to check whether millers have paid the full MSP to the farmers or not and FCI is 
completely dependent on the State Governments in this regard. 
The reply is not convincing as the audit observations detailed in Annexure-II highlights the 
violation of these instructions in almost all the States for which no specific reply was given. 
Thus, there was no assurance that the farmers actually did get full MSP for their produce 
worth ` 17,985.49 crore from millers/SGAs/FCI in these States. 
                                                           
58 41.79 LMT in Nalgonda and Nizamabad districts of Telangana Region valuing ` 4,820 crore, 112 LMT in East Godavari 
and West Godavari districts of Andhra Pradesh Region valuing ` 12,861 crore.
59 Fair Average Quality specifications are uniform specifications of food grains which are formulated by the GoI before the 
commencement of each marketing season.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 43
3.2.3  Irregular mode of MSP payment by SGAs/FCI 
As per instructions of the Food Supplies Department (FSD) of the respective State 
Governments and Action Plan of FCI Headquarter in vogue for the respective year, the 
FCI/SGA should make payments to the farmers after purchase of paddy immediately or 
within 48 to 72 hours , as applicable. It was also to be ensured that the payment of MSP for 
paddy procured by FCI (bonus declared by GoI, if any) for KMS 2013-14, was made directly 
to the farmers, through electronic mode/account payee cheques. However, it was observed in 
Uttar Pradesh, Odisha and Andhra Pradesh that payment of ` 27.27 crore was made in cash 
to farmers by millers (Annexure-III). Moreover, delays in payment of MSP to farmers as 
against the instructions to make payment within 48 to 72 hours were noticed in large number 
of cases. Details are given in Annexure-IV.
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that response of the State Governments was awaited.  It 
further added that FCI does not have any separate mechanism to check whether millers had 
paid the full MSP to the farmers or not and it is completely dependent on the State 
Governments in this regard. It also stated that payments are made by account payee 
cheque/RTGS or other electronic mode. 
The reply is not acceptable as the cases of payment of MSP in cash by millers were noticed as 
detailed in Annexure-III which underlines the need to rectify the deficiencies to ensure that 
the payment are made only to genuine farmers. 
Recommendation No. 6 Ministry's Reply 
In view of large scale MSP related payments 
being made without ascertaining the 
bonafide of the farmers, it is recommended 
that FCI/SGAs may consider direct transfer 
of MSP payments to the identity linked 
accounts of the farmers.  
The Recommendation is accepted for 
implementation subject to progress of 
seeding of Aadhar card numbers with the 
accounts of the farmers over a period of time.  
3.3  Deficiencies in quality of procured paddy 
The GoI issues uniform specifications of paddy and rice (Grade ‘A’ and ‘Common’) each 
marketing season so that farmers get due price for their produce and rejection of stocks is 
avoided.
Uniform Specifications are standards prescribed to take care of quality of food grains 
marketed in the country and to identify and distinguish the quality differences noticed from 
lot-to-lot besides explaining purity of the grains for edible requirements. It should always be 
within the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (PFA) standards {now The Food 
Safety and Standards Act (FSSA), 2006 w.e.f. 5 August 2011}. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
44 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
Audit noticed a number of deficiencies in the procurement of paddy which are detailed 
below:
3.3.1  Non-Compliance of Food Safety Standards in Punjab and Haryana regions of  
FCI
Uniform specifications of food grains, which are also known as Fair Average Quality (FAQ) 
specifications, are formulated by the Ministry every year before commencement of marketing 
season. These specifications are finalized by a High Power Committee constituted by the 
Ministry and comprises of representatives from producing and consuming States. Renowned 
institutions like Central Food and Technological Research Institute (CFTRI), Mysore are also 
consulted before finalizing these specifications. These specifications provide the upper limit 
(in terms of percentage) of various refractions beyond which the paddy/rice is not to be 
procured/accepted by procuring agencies.
In addition to the specifications prescribed by the GoI, the procured rice must conform to the 
Food Safety and Standards Act (FSSA) i.e., Uric acid (not more than 100 mg per kg) and 
Aflatoxin (not more than 30 microgrms per kg) must be within prescribed limits. {Regulation 
2.4.6(5) (v) and (vi) of Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food 
Additives) Regulations, 2011}. 
However, it was observed that the GoI procurement specifications of rice do not specify these 
two specifications/adulterants as mandated by the FSS Act. FCI had not established any 
mechanism to ensure that rice conformed to food safety standard at procurement stage.  
The FSSA, 2006 came into force with effect from 5 August 2011 wherein every Food 
Business Operator (FBO) was to register afresh under the new Act within one year i.e., by 04 
August 2012. During review of records of districts of Punjab Region of FCI, it was observed 
that the District Offices had not got a valid license covering all the centres (till December 
2014) as required under FSSA, 2006.  
In case of units hired from Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC)/State Warehousing 
Corporation (SWC)/private service providers, licenses were to be obtained by concerned 
parties wherever they were responsible for maintaining the stock. The transport operators 
engaged for moving food grains are also covered under the Act. In Sangrur District of 
Punjab, it was observed that out of 17 centres, the Area Office had not obtained licenses in 
respect of 11 centres and no license was obtained by Ludhiana District in respect of any of its 
centres till October 2014. Further, requirement of obtaining license under the Act in respect 
of units hired from CWC/SWC/private service providers and transport operators engaged for 
moving food grains was also not ensured by FCI. 
The Ministry, while accepting the audit observation, stated (June 2015) that registration 
process under the FSSA has been completed in respect of all depots both owned and hired in 
Punjab. In respect of all depots in Haryana, the license under FSSA had been applied.
Progress of full compliance to the Act was awaited in Audit (June 2015). 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 45
3.3.2  Issue of 1.84 LMT of old rice without tests for insecticides/pesticides residue 
After procuring the rice, FCI stores it and preserves it by carrying out fumigation and 
prophylactic treatment of rice. Before issue of rice for sale under TPDS or other schemes, it 
must conform to food safety standards, which also provide for maximum tolerance limits of 
various insecticides and pesticides found in rice. However, it was observed that the FCI did 
not have a regular system to ensure that the rice conformed to food safety standards at issue 
stage. 
FCI Headquarter vide its circular dated 29 March 1994 instructed that the Zonal as well as 
Regional chemical labs should test the samples of sound food grains which are in storage for 
more than two years or had undergone more than twenty fumigations treatments, whichever 
is earlier for pesticidal residues/uric acid contents to ascertain whether the stocks were well 
within the tolerance limits prescribed under FSSA.
Picture 3.1 
Anti-pest treatment  
During review of records of Regional Office, FCI, Punjab (2010-11 to 2013-14) and Haryana 
(2013-14), it was observed that rice stock totalling 1.835 LMT was more than two years old. 
This was issued during the years 2011-12 to 2013-14. However, no samples were got checked 
by FCI for the food safety standards relating to toxins, insecticides or pesticides before issue. 
There was no system in place for ensuring compliance of food safety standards relating to 
insecticides and pesticides residue as the District and Regional labs did not have any such 
facility. In absence of a system for ensuring compliance of food safety standards relating to 


Report No. 31 of 2015 
46 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
insecticides and pesticides residue and compliance of the instructions of the GoI/FCI on this 
subject, the possibility of unsafe food grains being issued for public consumption could not 
be ruled out. 
The Ministry replied (June 2015) that FCI follows a drawl of joint sample at the time of issue 
and stocks conforming to food safety standards are only issued. Besides, an officer is 
nominated for each depot by FCI who is responsible for compliance.
However, the procedure prescribed above was not complied with as has been brought out 
above.
Recommendation No. 7 Ministry's Reply 
In view of public health concerns arising from supply of 
Targeted Public Distribution System food grains without 
adequately complying with the applicable standards for 
toxins, insecticides and pesticides residue, FCI/SGAs may 
augment the testing facilities for the same.  
The Recommendation is 
accepted. 
3.3.3  Procurement of substandard paddy valuing ` 9,788.50 crore by SGAs in Punjab 
In SGAs of Punjab, no separate account was found maintained for paddy purchased under 
FAQ and under relaxed specification respectively. 
 A quantity of 82.46 LMT paddy valuing ` 9,788.50 crore was procured during KMS 2010-
11 and 2013-14 by SGAs 60 under FAQ but the same was found below specification during 
inspection by the Ministry. It was corroborated from the fact that FCI even imposed recovery 
of ` 4.20 crore against the quality cut imposed on CMR of crop year 2009-10 to 2013-14 in 
the District Office, Ludhiana of Punjab State Warehousing Corporation (PSWC). 
Since no separate record showing purchase of paddy URS was available in Area offices, 
purchase of paddy under relaxed specifications was not clearly identifiable.
                                                           
60
Name of the SGA Quantity  
(in LMT) 
Value( ` in crore) 
Punjab Agro Food Grains Corporation Limited (PAFCL) 10.24 1,234.35 
Punjab Grains Procurement Corporation Limited (PUNGRAIN) 35.32 4,182.67 
Punjab State Warehousing Corporation Limited (PSWC) 12.29 1,446.26 
Punjab State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited (PUNSUP) 24.61 2,925.22 
Total 82.46 9,788.50 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 47
The SGAs admitted (February/March 2015) that no separate account for paddy purchased 
under FAQ and URS had been kept. Food and Supplies Department stated (February 2015) 
in State Exit Conference held in Punjab that separate account should have been maintained 
for paddy purchased under FAQ and URS. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that Government of 
Punjab was sensitized for strict adherence to the prescribed Quality Control and paddy 
purchase Guidelines. 
Compliance of the same by Government of Punjab was awaited in Audit (June 2015). Thus, 
evidently full payment was made by SGAs for paddy which was substandard in quality.
3.3.4  Procurement of 191.35 LMT paddy without ensuring quality by the Government 
of Chhattisgarh 
It was observed in Chhattisgarh that out of prescribed five checks 61, only moisture content 
check was conducted by the State Government during procurement of paddy. Further, it was 
observed that number of samples for test was not fixed either by the GoI or the SGAs. Thus, 
in  absence of above checks and without fixing sample size of checks, it was not clear as how 
the State Government ensured the minimum quality standard for 191.35 LMT paddy worth  
` 21,115.13 crore procured during KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that Government of 
Chhattisgarh was sensitized for strict adherence to the prescribed Quality Control and paddy 
purchase guidelines.
Compliance of the Ministry’s instructions by the Government of Chhattisgarh was awaited in 
Audit (June 2015). 
3.3.5  Procurement of paddy worth ` 19.56 crore from 2,831 farmers without quality
tests in Odisha 
As per guidelines for DCP operations in Odisha, the Paddy Purchase Centres (PPCs) are 
required to conduct sample testing of paddy upon arrival of paddy to see if it conforms to the 
FAQ standards (moisture content, damaged/weevilled, colouration etc.). If the paddy 
conforms to the specifications, it is to be purchased and payment made by the PPC to the 
farmer within seven days. Records regarding quality test report of paddy need to be 
maintained at the PPC. 
                                                           
61 1. Foreign matter, 2. Damaged discolor, sprouted and weevilled grains, 3. Immature, shrunken and shriveled grains,                  
4. Admixture of lower class and 5. Moisture content

Report No. 31 of 2015 
48 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
The District Managers of seven districts (Bargarh, Bhadrak, Bolangir, Deogarh, Sambalpur, 
Sonepur and Malkangiri) stated that they procured paddy conforming to FAQ specifications 
and confirmed that no URS paddy was procured during KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14.
However, it was observed in five 62 Primary Agricultural Cooperative Societies (PACS) of 
four63 districts that 1.30 LMT of paddy valuing ` 19.56 crore was procured from 2,831 
farmers for which no records of quality tests being conducted in Bargargh, Bhadrak, 
Malkangiri and Kalahandi districts of Odisha were found on record. Notwithstanding this fact 
in all the cases, FAQ price was paid by the Government of Odisha. In absence of quality 
tests, it is not clear as to how the Government of Odisha satisfied itself about the paddy 
meeting FAQ requirements, before full payment was made. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that State Government 
of Odisha was sensitized for strict adherence to the prescribed Quality Control and paddy 
purchase guidelines. 
Compliance of the same by the Government of Odisha was awaited in Audit (June 2015). 
Recommendation regarding augmentation of manpower resources has been consolidated and 
placed under Para 7.3.7 of this report. 
3.4  Relaxation in procurement of paddy/rice 
All procurements are to be made by the State Governments/SGAs or FCI as per FAQ 
specifications. The State Governments/SGAs, however, request from time to time for 
relaxation in the FAQ specifications due to circumstances arising out of climatic 
factors/natural calamities like excessive rainfall, flood and drought etc., which adversely 
affect the quality of food grains produced in a particular region. To reduce hardship to the 
farmers, relaxations in specifications are agreed for procurement by the GoI on case-to-case 
basis. Such relaxation for procurement URS are mainly sought regarding the moisture 
content, color change, percentage increase in broken/damaged grains etc. and depends upon 
the extent of the crop affected due to natural climatic changes. Separate cost sheet is issued 
for such URS grains by normally imposing a value cut depending upon different refractions. 
As per procedure, if relaxations in some refraction of uniform specification are allowed in 
respect of paddy, then a corresponding value cut is imposed on paddy, which is a reduction in 
the price payable for this paddy. As far as CMR is concerned, there is no value cut as in such 
cases it is obtained from paddy on which value cut has already been applied. In case of Levy 
Rice, value cut is imposed on rice as paddy has been procured by rice millers at MSP. 
                                                           
62 Jharbanda, Thumbapada, Medinipur, Malkangiri and Korukonda.
63 Bargarh, Bhadrak, Kalahandi, Malkangiri.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 49
Normally, relaxation in any State is to be allowed after examination and joint analysis of 
paddy/rice samples with due approval of the Hon’ble Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food & 
Public Distribution, the GoI.
Audit noticed following deficiencies regarding grant of relaxation in paddy/rice: 
3.4.1  Excess payment of ` 208.27 crore to millers in Punjab due to acceptance of rice 
under relaxed specifications (URS) without corresponding value cut for KMS 
2009-10
The GoI relaxed (October 2009) the permissible limit of damaged/slightly damaged grains 
from three per cent to four per cent considering request of the Government of Punjab (GoP) 
during KMS 2009-10. This relaxation was again enhanced (March 2010) to 4.75  per cent for 
damaged/slightly damaged grains for three 64  revenue divisions of Punjab. Thereafter, 
Government of India further relaxed (7 January 2011) the permissible limit of 
damaged/slightly damaged, including pin point damaged grains, for custom milled raw rice 
Grade A/common rice, up to four  per cent (against the limit of three  per cent) with full value 
cut during KMS 2010-11 for the entire State of Punjab. Later, the GoI (18 January 2011) 
changed these relaxations whereby percentage of damaged/slightly damaged grains, including 
pin point damaged grains, was relaxed up to four  per cent. This was subject to the condition 
that damaged/slightly damaged grains, should not exceed three  per cent  without any value 
cut. As these relaxations were applicable for CMR, out of paddy procured by SGAs, the 
relaxation in uniform specifications of rice was not allowed by the GoI for Levy Rice and 
CMR. 
The GoP had first requested for relaxation in specifications of rice (KMS 2009-10) as early as 
25 August 2009 when the paddy crop was in growing stage. No scientific analysis of samples 
was carried out before granting relaxation, inspite of the fact that CMD, FCI had 
recommended (October, 2009) to the Ministry for scientific analysis of samples before 
allowing relaxation. During KMS 2009-10, permissible limit of damaged/slightly damaged 
grains was enhanced from three  per cent  to four  per cent  and thereafter up to 4.75  per cent ,
but no corresponding value cut was imposed for relaxation in specifications. The relaxation in 
specifications without any value cut resulted in benefit of ` 196.87 crore to the millers in 
Punjab who got FAQ rates for supplying non-FAQ rice. This also resulted in avoidable 
subsidy burden of the equal amount on the GoI. 
Relaxation was also allowed for left over CMR of KMS 2008-09 despite recommendation    
(October 2009) of CMD, FCI that poor quality of remaining rice was owing to the omissions 
and commissions on the part of rice millers and SGAs of Punjab, who did not adhere to the 
Government’s specifications at the time of procurement. CMD, FCI had specifically 
recommended not to allow any relaxation in the specifications.  
                                                           
64 Patiala, Ferozepur and Faridkot 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
50 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
The Ministry while replying to the above observations stated that Government of Punjab had 
requested for relaxation in KMS 2009-10 due to incidence of higher damaged, discoloured 
and pin point grains in paddy variety PAU 201 of KMS 2008-09. It was further stated that 
relaxation was issued on 3 October 2009 and not in the month of August 2009, keeping in 
view the anticipated severe shortfall in production of rice that year and in order to maximize 
the procurement of rice in drought year. The Ministry further stated that FCI was 
subsequently asked to analyse the field samples, as officers from the Ministry were also sent 
to Punjab for collection of samples. 
The reply is not acceptable as relaxation order was issued on 03 October 2009 but the process 
of considering request was initiated on 02 September 2009 itself by sending proposal to 
CMD, FCI by the Ministry for comments. However despite the CMD’s recommendation (18 
September 2009 ) to consider extending time instead of giving relaxation, relaxation was 
granted on 03 October 2009. As the 2008-09 KMS had already ended in March 2009 and the 
stock situation was already known six months before relaxation was granted in October 2009, 
it is evident that relaxation was granted without taking into account the actual situation. Also, 
subsequent analysis of samples, once the relaxation is already granted, does not serve any 
purpose. Moreover, no evidence for conducting such analysis was found on record.
Audit further observed that in case of FCI, in terms of milling agreement, the millers were 
required to deliver the rice to FCI as per the uniform specifications fixed by the GoI. During 
examination of records of Regional Office (RO) FCI, Punjab it was noticed that 6,35,806 MT 
of URS rice was delivered by millers during KMS 2009-10 and 2010-11. However, no 
corresponding value cut was recovered from millers. As the permissible limit of 
damaged/slightly damaged grains was enhanced from three  per cent  to four  per cent , a 
corresponding value cut was to be imposed on the cost of CMR which was not done. Thus, 
due to allowing relaxation in specification without value cut, the FCI also made excess 
payment of ` 11.40 crore to the millers. 
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that relaxation in uniform specification allowed by the GoI 
was equally applicable for FCI procured CMR and Levy Rice as per the GoI’s instructions            
dated 07 January 2011 and relaxation was given without any value cut considering the 
prevailing circumstances. As a result there was no excess payment to the millers. 
The reply is not tenable as records of the Ministry did not indicate any justification for 
making full payments without any value cut to the millers for rice which was lower than the 
required specifications.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 51
3.4.2  Payment of ` 124.23 crore as upgradation charges in Punjab without 
determining quantities of specified variety of rice and actual expenditure 
incurred thereon   
The GoI fixes the rates to be reimbursed by FCI for the rice delivered by the SGAs in Central 
Pool. The GoI, relaxed the uniform specifications 65 of raw rice during KMS 2009-10 on the 
basis of requests received from the GoP from time to time to expedite the milling of paddy 
and in order to maximize procurement of rice in drought year (as brought out in para 3.4.1 
above). Subsequently, when the required quantity of rice to be milled out of paddy procured 
by SGAs of Punjab during KMS 2009-10 could not be delivered in Central Pool in spite of 
the relaxations, the GoP sought further relaxations (beyond 4.75 per cent ) in respect of 
damaged grains. This was not acceded to by the GoI owing to the fact that the percentage of 
damaged grains should not exceed five  per cent  for food grains to be classified as fit for 
human consumption as per norms. Thus, the relaxations in specifications of raw rice in 
respect of discolored, damaged and broken grains during KMS 2009-10 had put the quality of 
rice almost at the verge of being declared unfit for human consumption. 
As the SGAs of Punjab could deliver only about 69  per cent  of the rice pertaining to KMS 
2009-10 by June 2010, the GoP requested (June 2010) the GoI for allowing export of 15 
LMT of rice milled out of paddy stocks procured for Central Pool during KMS 2009-10, to 
reduce losses. 
Based on the recommendations of the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) after examination of 
proposals through Inter Ministerial Committee (IMC), the Empowered Group of Ministers 
(EGoM) decided (28 September 2010) that the leftover stocks of PAU 201 variety of paddy 
be milled, de-reserved and allowed to be disposed. This was to be done in open market as 
rice, and was not to be disposed of as paddy (with MSP as reserve price). The loss incurred in 
the process was to be shared equally by the GoI and GoP, after deducting Statutory and other 
charges. The carrying cost from 01 April 2010 to 30 September 2010 was to be borne solely 
by the GoP. At the same time, the total loss  to be borne by the GoI was capped at ` 277.29
crore. 
The GoP did not agree with the decision of the GoI and submitted the revised proposal as 
under-
i) The balance quantity of paddy as on 1 October 2010 be got milled and resultant rice 
delivered to FCI within relaxed specifications applicable for KMS 2009-10. 
ii) As the resultant rice was likely to have higher percentage of damaged grains than 
allowed (4.75 per cent) for KMS 2009-10, upgradation66 of rice would be undertaken. 
                                                           
65 Discolored/red grains, damaged/slightly damaged grains from three to  four per cent; broken grains from 25 to 28  
per cent; damaged/slightly damaged grains from already relaxed limit of 4 to 4.75 per cent.
66 Blending of good quality of rice with low quality rice to bring it at acceptable specification 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
52 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
iii) Cost of upgradation ` 200 per quintal (in two 67 revenue districts) and ` 100 per 
quintal (in eight68 revenue districts) be allowed by the GoI. 
iv) The GoP would ensure delivery of balance rice for KMS 2009-10 before delivery of 
rice for KMS 2010-11; the delivery of rice for KMS 2009-10 would be completed by 
31 January 2011. 
The proposals were approved (5 October 2010) by the GoI with the conditions that the GoI’s 
assistance for upgradation would be limited to district wise quantities as intimated by the GoP 
vide letter dated 3 September 2010 minus any subsequent quantities delivered thereafter. This 
was to be an exceptional case not to be cited as precedence in future. Accordingly, revised 
orders regarding leftover stocks of PAU 201 variety of paddy were issued by the Ministry (6 
October 2010) and the ibid decision was given ex-post-facto approval by EGoM (28 
December 2010). Subsequently, the due date for completion of delivery of rice of KMS 2009-
10 was further extended first up to 15 May 2011 and then again up to 15 July 2011.
The SGAs of Punjab procured 131.36 LMT of paddy during KMS 2009-10 and 72.41 LMT 
of rice was delivered by SGAs to FCI in Central Pool up to 30 September 2010. 
Subsequently, 10.05 LMT of CMR was delivered by SGAs following the sanction of 
upgradation charges in the revenue districts where such charges were allowed. An amount of 
` 139.26 crore was payable on this quantity of rice delivered by SGAs in Central Pool as per 
the orders of the GoI of which an amount of ` 124.23 crore had already been paid by the  
GoI/FCI.
As the relaxations in specifications of raw rice allowed by the Ministry during KMS 2009-10 
was without imposition of any quality cut, the subsequent sanction of upgradation cost to 
compensate the expenditure incurred by SGAs on making the leftover CMR conform to the 
already relaxed specifications was not justified.  
Moreover, the sanction of upgradation cost was done without checking the actual 
procurement of PAU 201 variety of paddy or the evidence of actual activities/processes 
carried out for upgradation. Similarly no verification was done about the actual expenditure 
involved therein and also without ensuring that rice of KMS 2010-11 was not passed off as 
upgraded rice of KMS 2009-10. All this led to avoidable subsidy outgo of ` 124.23 crore on 
acceptance of 10.05 LMT of upgraded rice. 
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that the sanction for upgradation had the approval of the 
EGoM and was granted in view of special circumstances after careful consideration.
Evidently, the payment was made by FCI/SGAs of GoP without going into detailed 
procedure as to the actual procurement of PAU 201 variety or the actual activities/processes 
carried out for upgradation, more so when relaxation in specifications was done without any 
                                                           
67 Bathinda and Mansa 
68 Barnala, Faridkot, Fatehgrarh Sahib, Ferozepur, Moga, Muktsar, Patiala and Sangrur

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 53
value cut. Thus, the FCI/SGAs of GoP could not ensure proper compliance of the relaxation 
given by EGoM. 
3.4.3  Relaxation in specification without imposition of value cut in Punjab in KMS 
2010-11 leading to avoidable subsidy burden of ` 142.64 crore 
During KMS 2010-11, Government of Punjab (GoP) requested (October 2010) the GoI for 
allowing relaxations in the uniform specifications of paddy and rice citing damage due to 
untimely rains at pre-maturing stage of PUSA-44 variety of paddy which took more time to 
mature and which had been sown in seven lakh hectares with likely production estimates of 
around 50 LMT. After collection of 101 samples of paddy from mandis of 10 districts 69 and 
analysis of quality parameters in Central Grain Analysis Laboratory (CGAL), New Delhi, the 
GoI relaxed (November 2010) the uniform specifications of paddy in respect of damaged, 
discoloured, sprouted and weevilled grains from the limits of four  per cent  prescribed in 
uniform specifications to ten per cent.
At the same time, 20 of the samples ibid (two from each district) were test milled to assess 
the quality of rice and it was decided that the matter regarding relaxations in specifications of 
resultant rice would be decided after test milling of more samples. Accordingly, 79 more 
samples of paddy were collected, milled and resultant rice samples were analyzed. Analysis 
results of 99 samples of rice showed that 71 samples were found to be within uniform 
specifications and 28 samples were found to be eligible for relaxations sought by the GoP in 
the intervening period. However, the uniform specifications of raw rice in respect of 
damaged/slightly damaged grains including pin point damaged grains were relaxed by the 
GoI (07 January 2011) from the limits of three  per cent prescribed in uniform specifications 
to four per cent with value cut. The recorded reason for imposition of value cut was that it 
would ensure maximum rice deliveries within uniform specifications as it was an industry 
practice to mix different varieties of rice to bring it within specifications. However, on being 
informed by the GoP (14 January 2011) that the ibid decision was not acceptable and the 
millers had halted the milling process in the State, the value cut was withdrawn by the GoI 
(18 January 2011).  The decision of the GoI to withdraw the value cut and pay for the URS 
rice received at the rates fixed for FAQ food grains during KMS 2010-11 was not justified 
due to the following reasons –
i) The primary issue necessitating relaxations in uniform specifications of paddy and rice 
during KMS 2010-11 was sowing of PUSA-44 variety of paddy which constituted about 
1/3rd of the total paddy production. However, the relaxations allowed by the GoI for 
paddy as well as rice were not restricted to any particular variety or a specified quantity as 
the GoI expressed impracticability of such restrictive relaxations owing to non 
maintenance of variety wise records of procurement and practice of mixing different 
varieties of rice to bring it within specifications amongst the rice millers of Punjab. In 
                                                           
69 Ropar, Fatehgarh Saheb, Mukatsar, Ludhiana, Moga, Patiala, Sangrur, Barnala, Mansa and Bhatinda. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
54 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
such a scenario, the relaxations in uniform specifications of rice should logically have 
been accompanied with a corresponding value cut which was not done. 
ii) The relaxations were granted based on analysis of 99 samples of rice of which 71 samples
were found to be within uniform specifications and only 28 samples were found to be 
eligible for relaxations finally granted by the GoI. However, eventually the relaxations in 
uniform specifications were granted without imposition of any value cut and without 
restricting the relaxations to a particul ar variety or a specified quantity. Moreover as 96.5
per cent (74.72 LMT out of a total of 77.43 LMT) of rice finally delivered by SGAs in 
Central Pool during KMS 2010-11 was URS, it clearly indicated that the decision to do 
away with the value cut was not justified. 
iii) Incidentally relaxations in uniform specifications of paddy in Chhattisgarh and Tamil 
Nadu and rice in Odisha had also been allowed by the GoI during KMS 2010-11 itself but 
the same had been accompanied with full value cut.  
It is pertinent to mention here that the value cut imposed on paddy is borne by farmers while 
the value cut on rice is to be borne by  SGAs/millers. In case of Chhattisgarh and Tamil Nadu 
the relaxations in uniform specifications had only been granted for procurement of paddy and 
the uniform specifications for the resultant rice had not been relaxed and the rice delivered in 
Central Pool was conforming to the uniform specifications. The cut which had been imposed 
on the relaxations granted for procurement of paddy was borne by the farmers in Chhattisgarh 
and Tamil Nadu, whereas in the case of Punjab no value cut was imposed even when 96.5
per cent of rice finally delivered by SGAs/millers in Central Pool during KMS 2010-11 was 
URS. It implies that there was no consistency in the manner of allowing relaxations in 
uniform specifications for different States and the same were being dealt in an ad-hoc 
manner.  
Thus, had the decision to accompany the relaxations in uniform specifications of rice with 
value cut during KMS 2010-11 not been withdrawn by the GoI merely due to non 
acceptability of the decision by the GoP/millers of Punjab an amount of ` 19.09 per quintal 
would have been imposable as value cut on URS rice received in Punjab during KMS  
2010-11. A quantity of 77.43 LMT of rice had been delivered in Central Pool by SGAs of 
Punjab during KMS 2010-11 of which 74.72 LMT URS rice was delivered against the 
estimated production of 50 LMT. This was accepted by FCI without imposing any value cut 
leading to an avoidable subsidy burden amounting to ` 142.64 crore on the GoI. 
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that paddy is procured in the Central Pool irrespective of 
variety, if it meets the uniform specifications. 
The reply is not specific and does not address the concerns enunciated in the audit 
observation.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 55
3.4.4  Relaxation in uniform Specification of normal paddy/rice in Haryana without 
following the mandatory procedure in KMS 2013-14
During review of records pertaining to relaxation granted in uniform specification of rice for 
Haryana for KMS 2013-14, it was observed that on request of Government of Haryana 
(initially requested in October 2013), the Ministry deputed a joint Team for analysis of extent 
of damage of rice due to unseasonal rain and for relaxations required in rice for KMS 2013-
14. On the basis of sample collected and analyzed in laboratory, the Team had recommended 
that there was no problem of damaged/slightly damaged grains in Ambala, Panchkula and 
Kaithal (Gulha Cheeka belt) districts as all the samples collected from these districts were 
found well within the prescribed limit. Relaxation, if allowed, may be considered only for 
balance CMR in Karnal, Kurukshetra, Yamuna Nagar and Palwal districts. Accordingly as a 
special case, GoI decided  (02 January 2014) to allow relaxation in the percentage of 
damaged/slightly damaged grains up to four per cent,  as against the existing limit of three  
per cent,  with full value cut in balance quantity of CMR of KMS in Karnal, Kurukshetra, 
Yamuna Nagar and Palwal district in Haryana.
However, later on the basis of request from the Government of Haryana (GoH) dated 9 
January 2014, the GoI extended (10 January 2014) the benefit of relaxation to three more 
districts which were not recommended by the Team, namely Ambala, Panchkula and Guhla 
Cheeka belt of Kaithal district for the balance quantity of CMR with the same terms and 
conditions and with immediate effect. The relaxation granted to Ambala, Panchkula and 
Kaithal (Gulha Cheeka belt) districts for which the Team did not recommend any relaxation 
was not justified in absence of damaged/slightly damaged grains in samples collected from 
these districts.  
The Ministry stated (October 2014) that it was given as a special case by the then Hon’ble 
Minister (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution) in November 2009. 
Later, on request of the GoH (9 January 2014) and based on the Team report, GoI extended 
(5 February 2014) relaxation for the balance quantity of CMR raw rice in Dhand centre of 
Kaithal district and Narwana centre of Jind district. However GoI, thereafter, extended (25 
July 2014) the relaxation benefits for the balance quantity of 4,336 tons custom milled raw 
rice in Kaithal, Pundari and Siwan centres for which neither Team was formed nor 
recommendation of FCI was sought.  
On inquiring about reasons for granting above relaxation for 4,336 tons CMR raw rice, the 
Ministry replied (October 2014) that it was done as the State Government had been 
repeatedly requesting for relaxation in these centers.  
The reply is not acceptable as repeatedly calling for the relaxation in specification does not 
make one eligible for it in the absence of justification for the same. 
Importantly, it was noticed in Audit that no relaxation was sought in case of paddy as the 
paddy procured was apparently conforming to uniform specifications prescribed by the 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
56 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
Ministry. Thus, even though the rice should also have been within specifications, relaxation 
was granted in its respect. On being pointed out, the Ministry replied that due to heavy rains 
in second week of October 2013, the paddy crop which was lying in open fields led to some 
of the standing crop getting damaged and thereby quality was affected. The Ministry’s reply 
highlighted the fact that  the compensation for standing crops getting damaged which should 
have been given to farmers by relaxing paddy specific ations was actually passed on to the 
rice millers by relaxing milled rice specifications. 
The Ministry further replied (October 2014) that it was assumed that SGAs must have 
procured paddy as per uniform specifications and accordingly paid MSP for it.
However, mere assumption does not suffice as the Ministry should have confirmed this 
assumption by writing to the State Government, along with confirmation from them that 
paddy procured from farmers was within specifications and full MSP was paid to farmers on 
this account. The above indicates that benefits meant for farmers were actually passed on to 
ineligible rice millers. 
Recommendation No. 8 Ministry's Reply 
The GoI may devise a mechanism whereby the benefits of 
relaxation in Fair Average Quality, because of adverse 
weather conditions affecting the crops, may accrue only to 
the intended beneficiaries, that is the farmers and not to the 
millers.  
The Recommendation is 
accepted. 
3.5  Inadequate deployment of staff in Mandis to conduct quality checks 
Audit noticed insufficient deployment of staff across the States for procurement of paddy. 
This situation was exacerbated in Haryana by deployment of unqualified staff at the mandis.
The shortcomings are detailed below: 
a) In 16 districts of Punjab four procurement agencies, only 1,336 officials were deputed for 
2,390 mandis during the KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14 which was less than even one person per 
mandi. This raises concerns about the process of ensuring quality and quantity of 
procurement of paddy. 
While accepting the fact of inadequate staff the SGAs and Food Supplies Department (FSD) 
stated (February 2015) that it is not possible to post one inspector in each mandi by each 
SGA as the Ministry pays administrative charges to the SGAs on one crop only.
The Ministry also admitted (June 2015) that due to paucity of staff in few cases, one staff is, 
at times, allotted more than one mandi and depending upon arrivals, such mandis are 
operated on alternate days by single staff. The reply corroborates the fact that insufficient 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 57
staff is leading to less than adequate operation of the mandis thereby increasing the risk of 
procurement of sub optimal quality of paddy. 
b) As far as procurement by FCI is concerned, it was noticed in four districts each (Ludhiana, 
Sangrur, Moga and Patiala) of Punjab and (Fatehabad, Karnal, Kaithal and Kurukshetra) 
Haryana regions of FCI, 6.44 70 LMT of paddy valuing ` 720.8571 crore was purchased by 
FCI during KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14.  Out of this, samples of 0.13 LMT were sent to district 
laboratory in case of only the Punjab region. No sample was sent to laboratory in case of 
Haryana region. Thus, sample pertaining to only 2.02 per cent  of paddy was checked in 
district laboratories. Moreover, the analysis results of paddy sample were not even 
transmitted to Regional Office and Zonal office concerned for feedback. Thus, the 
instructions issued by the FCI Headquarters for purchase of paddy from mandis were not 
followed in the District Offices in absence of which the adherence to quality parameters 
could not be vouchsafed in Audit. 
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that samples submitted to district lab are based on lot-wise 
acceptance and not on percentage of quantity procured. Besides, stocks were checked by 
Manager (Quality Control) and subsequently by the Area Manager and Assistant General 
Manager (Quality Control). All paddy procured was milled and no loss had occurred to FCI. 
The reply is not specific as the audit observation is about non-compliance of prescribed 
instructions by FCI headquarters which carries the undesired consequence of procuring paddy 
without fulfilment of the prescribed specifications. 
c) The Haryana Agro Industries Corporation (HAIC) deployed unqualified staff and FSD, 
provided moisture meters
72 only in 30 out of 85 mandis, but still claimed and got the entire 
reimbursement amount on this account (2009-10 to 2013-14). Moreover, the samples were 
found to be drawn from only few heaps as against the requirement of selection of sample 
from each heap and in case of Haryana State warehousing Corporation (HSWC); no record of 
day-wise representative samples taken was available.
The Management accepted (January 2015) the audit observation and stated that sufficient 
number of moisture meters were provided to the inspectors during the KMS 2014-15.The 
reply was endorsed by the Ministry (June 2015). 
d) In Uttar Pradesh, the prescribed norm for manpower deployment for purchase of paddy 
was three officials in each purchase centre for ensuring the quality of paddy. However, 
prescribed number of staff was not deployed in 617 purchase centres (80 per cent) out of 768 
purchase centres. There was an overall shortage of 60 per cent (925 officials were deployed 
against norms of 2,304).   
                                                           
70 FCI Haryana region – 0.74 LMT, FCI Punjab region – 5.70 LMT
71 FCI Haryana Region-` 79.18 crore, FCI Punjab Region-` 641.67 crore
72 One moisture meter is required in each mandi 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
58 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
e) In Odisha, as per operational guidelines, each purchase team shall consist of one Purchase 
Officer, one Junior Accountant, one Sales Assistant (SA) cum Godown Assistant (GA) and 
one supporting staff in case of purchase centers run by Odisha State Civil Supplies 
Corporation (OSCSC). Purchase team may work on rotation basis and cover up to three to 
four purchase centres in a week. Audit noticed that very few personnel were deployed in PPC 
in Bhadrak  (2009-10 to 2011-12) and Deogarh (2012-13 to 2013-14). In fact, not even one 
staff on an average per Primary Agricultural Cooperative Society was deployed in Bhadrak 
during the above period.
Similarly, Operational Guidelines prescribed specific strength of Rice Receiving Centre 
(RRC)-in-charge, Sales Assistant-cum-Data Entry Operator, Quality Analyst, Dusting 
Operator, Sweeper and Security Guard in each RRC. The manpower in RRCs in Bargarh and 
Bhadrak was found to be deficient. Moreover, despite having 80 per cent  to 87 per cent 
vacancies, the quality of rice surprisingly was stated to be at accepted levels as per 
acceptance notes signed by the Sales Assistant-cum-Godown Assistant/others. Audit also 
observed that acceptance notes did not bear the signature of the Quality Analyst in a large 
number of cases in Bargarh district. Though the District Manager of Bargarh stated that each 
and every lot of rice had been checked before its receipt in RRCs, such checks fell short by 
90 per cent in Bhadrak district.
3.6  Pre-Milling storage and damage to paddy
As per custom milling policy of each State, paddy procured by the SGAs need to be safely 
stored in the premises of the allotted Rice Mills in joint custody with millers. It needs to be 
ensured that paddy purchased by the SGA is stored and kept under safe custody so that 
pilferage or damage to stocks is minimised.  
However due to inadequate storage facilities or storage in open area, following cases of 
damage to paddy were noticed in audit: 
3.6.1 Storage in open area resulted in damage to paddy worth  ` 179.76 crore in 
Chhattisgarh
As per instructions issued (September 2009) by the Department of Food, Civil Supplies and 
Consumer Protection, procured paddy should be stored by way of Covered and Plinth (CAP),  
covered  with polythene along with provision of drainage at site. 
It was observed that in four out of seven districts viz. Raipur, Durg, Mahasamund and 
Rajnandgaon, 1.96 LMT of paddy amounting to ` 85.93 crore procured during KMS 2012-13 
was stored in open space without plinth, which was to be milled up to September 2013. 
Further, as per information furnished by the MARKFED, Chhattisgarh, 1.50 LMT paddy 
valuing ` 179.76 crore, procured during KMS 2011-12 and 2012-13, was damaged in the 
State due to non milling of paddy in time (September 2014), as detailed below: 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 59
Table 3.1 
Details of damaged paddy in Chhattisgarh 
             ( ` in crore)
KMS year Quantity of damaged paddy 
(in MT) 
Rate of damaged paddy 
(` per MT) 
Value of damaged paddy 
(`)
2011-12               46,674                      10,800 50.41
2012-13                 1,03,483 12,500 129.35 
Total 1,50,157  
or say 1.50 LMT 
179.76 
Source: Records of MARKFED, Chhattisgarh  
While accepting the audit observation, MARKFED, Chhattisgarh stated (December 2014) 
that excessive procurement of paddy, storage in open area up to two KMS periods and non-
milling of paddy within stipulated time resulted in damage and discoloration of paddy. 
Audit also noticed that in FCI Chhattisgarh region, out of total paddy of 6.67 LMT, a quantity 
of 6.26 LMT of paddy was issued to millers and 0.26 LMT of paddy was stated to be storage 
loss for KMS 2010-11. However, in respect of balance 0.15 LMT paddy valuing ` 16.67
crore
73, no details were found about its whereabouts in the records of FCI. 
While accepting the audit observation MARKFED, Chhattisgarh stated (December 2014) 
that the time schedule for milling was not adhered to due to excessive procurement of paddy. 
Picture 3.2 
Damaged Paddy at Storage Centres – Rajnandgaon, Chhattisgarh  
                                                           
73 Calculated on the basis of cost of ` 1,103.41 per quintal as per provisional incidental of paddy being taken over by FCI 
for KMS 2010-11, no detail was available.  


Report No. 31 of 2015 
60 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
3.6.2  Loss due to storage in open area resulted in damage to paddy worth  ` 21.28
crore in Bihar
In Bihar, as per provision contained in BSFC guideline (28 October 2013), it was specified 
that the total storage capacity should be at least 50 per cent of total paddy procured and 25 
per cent of CMR. It was observed in audit that against the required storage capacity of 27.55 
LMT, BSFC had 12.03 LMT storage capacity in which a quantity of 55.10 LMT of food 
grains was stored during 2011-12 to 2013-14. Thus, due to procurement in excess of storage 
capacity, 0.17 LMT of paddy worth ` 21.28 crore was reported as damaged by the concerned 
District Managers of the BSFC in three74 selected districts.
It was further observed in BSFC, Patna that paddy relating to KMS 2012-13 was auctioned 
(1,47,373 quintal valuing ` 18.42 crore at the rate of ` 1,250/quintal) for ` 9.72 crore 
resulting into loss of ` 8.70 crore. Incidentally, two tenderers (M/s Arena Agro Industries and 
M/s Kalyani Enterprises) had reported that the paddy worth ` 0.24 crore which they had bid 
for was not available at godowns 75. This implies that either the bid was invited by BSFC 
without availability of the paddy in these godowns or the paddy which was available in the 
godowns was removed without proper authorization/procedure. 
The BSFC accepted the facts and stated that paddy was kept in the open space due to 
inadequate storage space. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that the Government 
of Bihar has repeatedly been requested to develop intermediate storage as well as milling 
capacity. However, no claim lies with the Ministry for any damaged paddy.  
Compliance of Ministry’s request by Government of Bihar with a view to prevent damage to 
precious food grains is awaited in Audit (June 2015).
                                                           
74 Rohtas, Patna and Aurangabad 
75 Pandarak, Ghoswari, Athmalgola, Belchhi, Barh, Chandor, Patut, Mokamch, Fatuha and Nathpur. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 61
Picture 3.3 
Damaged Paddy at Storage Centre – Sasaram, Bihar 
3.6.3  Non-availability of adequate and proper storage facilities leading to damage of 
paddy worth ` 7.93 crore in Odisha 
Audit observed that SGAs of Odisha (OSCSC) had no pre milling storage facilities for paddy. 
The paddy procured at purchase centres were transported to millers’ premises for joint 
custody to be milled within three days under execution of agreement. 
Audit observed that the District Managers of SGA had not made prior visits to the millers’ 
premises to ensure adequacy of infrastructure for proper storage of the paddy. Eventually, the 
paddy stored in the millers’ premises exceeded the storage capacity in Baragarh (2009-10 to  
2013-14) and Bolangir (2009-10 and 2013-14) districts. Though in other districts it was stated 
to be within the storage capacity a joint inspection of the selected millers in the presence of 
Audit in Bargarh, Bolangir and Malkangiri districts revealed that no separate fencing was 
made in mills to identify the stock of the respective agency and that of the miller, some of the 
paddy stock was kept in open without cover. Thus, the prescribed method of First-In-First-
Out (FIFO) of storage was not possible in these districts. This practice carries the risk of 
outward movement of new stock before the old stock resulting in deterioration of food grains 
because of prolonged storage. Audit observed that 6,054.99 MT of paddy worth ` 7.93 crore, 
was damaged in millers (21) premises in Sambalpur district due to heavy rain (August 2014). 
The SGA instructed (September 2014) the District Manager for immediate milling of 
damaged paddy to determine salvage value. However, action taken reports for claim of 


Report No. 31 of 2015 
62 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
insurance and recovery from the millers as per terms of agreements were not available with 
the District Authorities. 
The Ministry replied (June 2015) that the GoI reimburses the subsidy claim of the DCP State 
based on offtake from the Central Pool stock out of procurement undertaken by State. The 
stock conforming to PFA/FSSA only is issued under TPDS. Thus, for any damaged paddy no 
claim lies with the GoI.
Though the Ministry has stated that for any damaged paddy, no claim lies with the GoI, the 
fact remains that this deficiency has led to damage to paddy worth ` 7.93 crore which clearly 
being a loss needs to be addressed on priority. 
Recommendation No. 9 Ministry's Reply 
In view of widespread damage to paddy 
because of lack of pre-milling storage, the 
GoI/FCI/State Governments may augment 
the pre-milling storage capacity to minimize 
the risk of damage to precious food grains.   
The Recommendation is accepted. 
3.7  Unsecured paddy worth ` 5,221.09 crore and non-insurance of paddy 
stock in Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh 
As per milling agreements of the respective States, millers are required to furnish security 
deposit in the form of bank guarantee/post dated cheques/advance rice etc. to the State 
Governments and paddy is to be given to millers only after obtaining the required security for 
the paddy.
However, it was noticed in audit that security was either not obtained or was partially 
obtained from the millers, leaving paddy worth ` 5,221.09 crore unsecured in the millers 
premises. Details are given in Annexure-V.
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that it is seeking latest 
status of obtaining bank guarantee in place of post dated cheques. 
As per the conditions of the milling agreement of respective States, millers have to safeguard 
their factory premises against all risks by an insurance coverage at their own cost for insuring 
the risk and cost of paddy lying in their premises.  
However, in FCI Chhattisgarh region, no proof of insurance of paddy was produced to Audit. 
Similar discrepancy was noticed in Odisha during KMS 2009-10. Though in subsequent 
KMS, insurance was undertaken by OSCSC centrally, insurance particulars were not 
furnished to Audit in this regard, stating that the same were not available.  In Uttar Pradesh 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 63
120 millers in nine revenue districts 76 had taken no insurance coverage for 5.69 LMT paddy 
valuing ` 631.31 crore during the period from 2009-10 to 2013-14. Thus, paddy remained 
uninsured in the premises of rice millers during the period from 2009-10 to 2013-14. 
This practice creates a risk of non recoverable loss in the event of damage/theft/loss of paddy 
from the premises of the miller. 
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that in Chhattisgarh, the practice of releasing paddy to the 
miller after receipt of equivalent rice in advance was followed and as such insurance of stock 
was not required and in case of any damage, loss etc. to paddy of SGAs in storage is not 
borne by the GoI. 
The reply of the Ministry only partially addresses the issue regarding the FCI but is silent 
regarding observations pertaining to the States. Moreover, the practice of leaving paddy in 
control of private rice millers without any collateral security is fraught with the risk of non 
delivery of rice, the magnitude of which is brought out in para 6.3, later in this report. 
Recommendation No. 10 Ministry's Reply 
The State Governments/SGAs should ensure 
that paddy is given to millers only after 
obtaining the required security for the paddy. 
The Recommendation is accepted. 
                                                           
76 Includes Kushinagar, Deoria, Maharajganj, Gorakhpur, Pilibhit, Allahabad, Ghazipur, Amethi and Mirzapur 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 65
Chapter-IV
 Selection of millers and linkage of mills
 with the mandis
As a part of process of paddy procurement, the rice mills are selected every year by District 
Milling Committees (DMC)77 keeping in view criteria like distance of mills from the mandis,
(normally within eight kms from the mandi), milling capacity of the rice mill and past record 
of timely delivery of rice in the earlier years. This process is called tagging of mills. As 
transport charges up to eight kms are included in the milling charges, maximum tagging of 
mills should be done with those mills situated within eight kms from the mandi/storage point 
to minimize expenditure. 
Paddy procured by the SGAs is to be distributed equally amongst all the eligible rice mills at 
a particular main/permanent/storage milling centre for the purpose of custom milling on the 
basis of their milling capacity, which is to be certified by the District Food and Supplies 
Controller as per the provisions of respective State’s custom milling policy.  
A number of deficiencies noticed in the selection of millers are detailed below: 
4.1     Improper linkage of mandis with rice mills 
4.1.1  Injudicious linking of paddy purchase centres with rice mills  
As per custom milling policies in various States, purchase centre/ mandis should be linked 
with the nearest milling centre/storage centre, keeping in view the availability of milling 
capacity at the milling/storage centre(s) at which paddy is proposed to be stored/milled. All 
the procuring agencies should make necessary arrangements of linking the proposed purchase 
centres/mandis with storage points/milling centres in suc h a way as to incur minimum 
expenditure on transportation.
It was however, noticed in Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Punjab and FCI Bihar region that rice 
mills were tagged to purchase centre/ mandis at a distance much beyond eight kms leading to 
avoidable transportation cost of ` 407.33 crore
78 in case of SGAs/FCI. 
The SGAs and the Government of Punjab stated (February 2015) that it was due to delay in 
finalization of the issue by the GoI. It was further stated that as per the decision of the GoI, 
                                                           
77 District Milling Committee constitutes the Deputy Commissioner of the concerned District as Chairman and Director of 
Food and Supplies Corporation as Member Secretary. The districts heads of procuring agencies including FCI and two 
nominees of rice millers are its members.
78 SGAs-Uttar Pradesh region-` 6.78 crore,  Chhattisgarh region-` 248.15 crore, Punjab-` 152.28 crore, FCI Bihar region-
` 0.12 crore

Report No. 31 of 2015 
66 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
the claims for reimbursement of transportation charges had been submitted as per revised 
checklist and payment was likely to be released by the GoI.
The reply is not acceptable as the distance limit of eight kms was well known before linking 
the mills to mandi. Thus, there was no justification for transportation of paddy beyond eight 
kms for milling. 
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that there was no stipulation that mandis could not be 
tagged to mills beyond eight kms. However, the least cost principle was to be followed. 
The reply lacks proper justification for selecting mills beyond eight kms and satisfactory 
justification of such selection were not found on record. Thus, injudicious tagging of rice 
mills which were at a distance more than for which transportation cost was already included 
in the milling charges led to huge avoidable outflow of ` 407.33 crore on account of 
transportation of paddy/rice by FCI/SGAs in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, 
Punjab and Bihar. 
4.1.2  Irregular expenditure of ` 163.72 crore on transportation of paddy in Punjab 
As per provisional cost sheet of CMR approved by the GoI for the Central Pool for KMS 
2009-10 to 2013-14, milling charges already included transportation charges within a 
distance of eight kms, from/to mills, for transportation of paddy as well as rice. However, 
from records/information furnished by four districts 79 of Punjab, it was noticed that during 
KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14 the SGAs incurred an expenditure of ` 163.72 crore on 
transportation of paddy from purchase centre/ mandis to milling centres/storage centres 
located at a distance within eight kms. Incidentally, in the neighbouring State of Haryana, 
transportation charges of paddy within eight kms were being borne by millers themselves. 
Thus, expenditure on transportation of paddy by the SGAs, within eight kms resulted in 
avoidable payment of transportation charges of ` 163.72 crore and passing of undue benefits 
to the millers of the same amount.  
The State Government and the SGAs stated (February 2015) that this was part of milling 
cost and cited operational difficulties in implementing the same. It was also brought to 
notice that the matter was again referred to the GoI. 
The reply is not acceptable because as per the instructions of the GoI transportation charges 
up to eight kms are already in-built in the milling charges determined by the GoI and were 
not payable separately. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that FCI had not 
released the transportation charges up to eight kms for transportation of paddy by SGAs in 
Punjab for KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14 as the same was not payable. 
                                                           
79 Sangrur, Patiala, Ludhiana and Moga.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 67
Thus, the millers whose mills were tagged within a distance of eight kms were not eligible for 
transportation charges (as this element was included in the milling charges), in Punjab and an 
amount of ` 163.72 crore was incurred on transportation of paddy by SGAs for mills tagged 
within eight kms, thereby passing of undue benefit to the rice millers to the same extent.  
4.1.3  Extra expenditure of ` 44.27 crore due to incorrect fixation of transportation 
charges
For transportation of paddy from mandis to the storage points, mandi Transportation 
Contractor (MTC) is appointed for each agency in each district. Allotment is done by a tender 
committee comprising of all District Heads of all SGAs and a representative of Deputy 
Commissioner of the district concerned. The Director, Food & Supplies and ex-officio 
Special Secretary to Government of Punjab stressed (July 1998) that while fixing 
transportation rates, the Committee should ensure that for same distance, similar rates are 
fixed.
However, it was observed in audit that tenders for transportation from mandis to Storage 
points were allotted by allowing certain adhoc percentage enhancement over the previous 
years’ rates. Moreover, the rates were fixed on per quintal basis without considering the 
distance, resulting in extra expenditure of ` 44.27 crore80 during 2009-10 to 2013-14. It is 
also worthwhile to mention here that in the neighbouring State of Haryana, basic ‘schedule of 
rates’ was fixed for transportation of food grains from mandi to storage point allowing fixed 
per quintal per kilometer rates to the transporters thus reducing the risk of such extra 
expenditure.
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that necessary 
instructions were issued to the GoP for keeping the distance involved as primary factor while 
finalizing mandi transport contracts. 
Recommendation No. 11 Ministry's Reply 
The State Governments may ensure that all mills within a 
distance of eight kilometres are tagged first, only after 
which mills situated at further distance may be considered, 
taking into account the milling capacity and quantity of 
paddy to be milled.  
The Recommendation is 
accepted. 
4.1.4  Payment of extra transport charges of ` 32.23 crore in contravention of the GoI 
guidelines in Odisha 
In Odisha, as per the GoI instructions issued from time-to-time, milling charges were allowed 
at ` 10 per quintal for raw and at ` 20 per quintal for par-boiled rice, wherein transportation 
charges were excluded. The transportation charges were fixed at the rate of ` five per quintal 
                                                           
80 Area offices- Sangrur- ` 8.58 crore, Moga- ` 8.89 crore, Patiala- ` 1.73 crore, Ludhiana- ` 25.07 crore

Report No. 31 of 2015 
68 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
for distance from 0-8 kms from the mandis/purchase centres to mills for paddy and from 
mills to storage points for rice respectively. Thus, milling charges of ` 15 and ` 25 per 
quintal fixed by the GoI for KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14, were inclusive of transport charges up 
to eight kms. 
However, as per information furnished by the District Managers, Odisha State Civil Supplies 
Corporation (OSCSC), transport charges for 0-10 kms were paid to millers at ` seven per 
quintal for KMS 2009-10 to 2011-12 and at ` 12.50 per quintal for KMS 2012-13 and 2013-
14. Thus, payment of transportation charges in excess of norm fixed by the GoI for distance 
up to eight kms ( ` five per quintal), led to extension of undue benefit to the millers to the 
tune of ` 32.23 crore during 2009-10 to 2013-14. No recorded reasons were available either 
at the corporate office of the OSCSC or at district offices for fixing higher transportation 
charges than that prescribed by the GoI.  
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that in Odisha, the milling charges do not include the 
transportation cost up to eight kms from KMS 2010-11 onwards. 
The reply is not specific as the audit observation points toward difference in rates provided in 
cost sheet where transportation charges are included in milling charges and those paid where 
transportation charges are de-linked from milling charges leading to extra expenditure. 
4.2  Irregularities in allotment of paddy in Haryana 
The District Milling Committee (DMC) allots rice mills to each SGA on the basis of paddy to 
be procured by it. As per the norms fixed by the Food and Supplies Department (FSD), the 
SGAs are required to allot paddy to each miller according to its milling capacity so that 
milling of paddy by rice millers is carried out efficiently. 
However, it was observed in Kurukshetra district during KMS 2013-14 that in majority of the 
cases in the State, paddy was not allotted to millers as per the norms fixed by the FSD. Out of 
142 cases, paddy was allotted in excess of the norms fixed by FSD in 60 cases. In the 
remaining 82 cases, paddy was allotted less than the norms. Non adherence to norms 
indicated poor management by SGAs in allotment of paddy. 
The Department of Civil Supplies admitted (January 2015) the audit observation and 
intimated that an enquiry would be conducted. 
The Ministry endorsed (June 2015) views of the State Government. 
4.3  Non-recovery of extra expenditure due to transfer of paddy from the 
allotted rice mill to another mill in Telangana
The Nizamabad District Administration transferred 18,079 MT of paddy (cost: ` 22.79 crore) 
from the originally allotted rice mills to another rice mills during KMS 2011-12 to 2013-14 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 69
due to non/delayed delivery of CMR to FCI by the originally allotted rice mills. This 
constituted 52 per cent of allotted paddy. The maximum transfers were reported during KMS 
2012-13. It was also observed that even though two rice mills 81 were chronic defaulters, yet 
5,026 MT of paddy valuing ` 6.34 crore82 was unloaded at these two mills (KMS 2011-12 to 
2013-14). Out of this, as much as 4,223 MT of paddy worth ` 5.32 crore had to be transferred 
to other rice mills for custom milling.  
No action was taken against the two erring rice mills and allotment of paddy was continued to 
be made.  
The Commissioner of Civil Supplies accepted the Audit observation and stated (December 
2014) that paddy was shifted due to the failure of the designated rice mills and the extra 
expenditure incurred on such shifting was to be recovered from millers. 
The Ministry accepted (June 2015) the audit observation and stated that the Government of 
Telangana was being reminded to confirm the recovery of cost of shifting of paddy from 
millers. Progress of recovery was awaited in audit (June 2015). 
4.4   Doubtful means of transport used for movement of paddy/rice
Transportation of paddy/CMR is to be carried out by executing an agreement between 
transporters and SGAs. The transporters also have to specify the registration number of the 
truck while executing the contract. However Audit noticed a number of discrepancies 
indicating doubtful transportation claims which are detailed below: 
a)  It was observed in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Chhattisgarh that large quantities of 
paddy/CMR ranging from 14 quintals to 1,800 quintals were shown as transported 
through Motorcycle, Auto Rickshaw, Jeep Taxi, Thela (Jugad), Car etc. In all, the total 
quantities of paddy/CMR depicted as transported through these doubtful means was 
5,744.09 MT valuing ` 6.58 crore. Details are given in Annexure-VI.
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that the State 
Governments have been asked to look into the discrepancy and initiate suitable action.
b)  In Punjab, out of 3,319 registration numbers of vehicles scrutinised by Audit, 3,231          
(97.35 per cent ) registration numbers did not match with computerised data of the 
transportation Authority of the State. Out of 88 traceable vehicles, 15 vehicles (17.05
per cent) were found to be other than trucks i.e. bus, car, bike and tanker etc. Further, in 
nine offices, incomplete registration numbers of 41,033 vehicles were provided to Audit 
by FCI which were not verifiable for the genuineness of the transportation of 4.36 LMT 
paddy involving an expenditure of ` 13.86 crore (4.51 per cent of total transportation 
cost).
                                                           
81 Dhana Laxmi Rice Mill, Yellareddy and Sri Raghavendra Industries, Kamareddy
82 On the basis of proportion to the total amount 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
70 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
Similarly, in 15 out of 16 district offices (of four procuring agencies 83 in the four selected 
districts of SGAs), information regarding registration number of vehicle used for 
transportation of paddy (constituting 19.92 per cent of total transportation cost) was not made 
available to Audit, though categorically asked for. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Government of Punjab and the SGAs stated 
(February 2015) that due to heavy volume of paddy and pressure from various authorities for 
lifting of paddy in short time, other vehicles might have been used. 
From the reply it is not clear as to how vehicles like motorcycle, cars etc. were used for 
transportation of tons of paddy/rice, in these cases. As transportation of paddy/rice in various 
States were observed to have been carried out through vehicles other than regular means of 
transport (like car, motor cycle, delivery van, etc.) it indicated possibility of false claims 
being submitted by the transporters. These cases need to be investigated to rule out any 
misappropriation of Government money and/or payment of false claims towards 
transportation of paddy/rice. 
Recommendation No. 12 Ministry's Reply 
All doubtful cases of transportation of paddy need to be 
properly investigated by the State Governments concerned and 
FCI needs to exercise due diligence before passing such claims 
for payment.   
The Recommendation is 
accepted. 
4.5     Improper selection of millers 
4.5.1  Non-constitution of competent authority for selection of rice mills in Andhra 
Pradesh and Telangana led to extra expenditure of ` 39.64 crore 
As per operational guidelines of the Government of Andhra Pradesh on custom milling of 
rice, a District Milling Committee should be constituted for selection of rice mills within a 
distance of eight kms from the Paddy Purchase Centre ( Mandi) for custom milling of paddy 
and delivery of rice to the FCI/SGAs. Records produced to Audit did not contain any 
evidence in support of such Committees having been constituted in three districts84 of Andhra 
Pradesh and two 85 districts of Telangana. Instead, District Rice Millers’ Association were 
seen to have been asked from season to season to provide the mill-wise targets, keeping in 
view the milling capacity of each rice mill.  
In Andhra Pradesh, besides non-constitution of committees for selection of rice mills, 558 
mills out of 709 mills got selected which were at a distance beyond eight kms from paddy 
                                                           
83 PSWC, PUNSUP, PUNGRAIN and PAFCL 
84 East Godavari, West Godavari and Krishna
85 Nizamabad and Nalgonda

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 71
procurement centers, leading to avoidable expenditure of ` 6.99 crore on account of excess 
transportation expenses.
In reply, Commissioner of Civil Supplies agreed to consider constituting designated 
committees. Progress in this matter was awaited (May 2015). On the other hand, the Ministry 
stated (June 2015) that though the Committee was not constituted but the paddy procurement 
centres were tagged to rice mills on least cost and milling capacity basis. 
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable as in absence of constitution of District Milling 
Committees, the compliance of the operational guidelines for tagging of mills was 
unverifiable.
Audit also observed that out of a total of 2478 selected mills in Telangana in the districts of 
Nizamabad and Nalgonda, during KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14, only 624 mills (25 per cent )
were within a distance of eight kms. Thus, paddy was sent for milling to rice mills located 
beyond eight kms in Nizamabad and Nalgonda districts leading to excess expenditure of  
` 32.65 crore on transportation of paddy.
4.5.2  Improper Selection of rice millers during KMS 2009-10 to KMS 2011-12 
Audit observed a number of deficiencies in records pertaining to millers in Odisha, Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana and FCI Bihar region, some of which are as follows: 
i) Physical verification of 151 premises of millers was not conducted before the 
selection of millers; 
ii) Permanent Account Number was not available in 81 cases while in 89 cases Taxpayer 
Identification Number was not available; 
iii) Land documents were not collected from 85 millers; 
iv) The validity of the certificate issued for boilers had expired long back in 37 cases; 
and
v) There was no certificate regarding running status of the 22 mills granted by the 
District Task Force (DTF), current electricity bill and Income Tax Return during the 
year 2009-10 to 2011-12. 
Thus, the selection procedure of bonafide millers in these States was questionable. Further 
details about deficiencies are pointed out in Annexure-VII.
The Ministry, while accepting the audit observation, replied (June 2015) that in Bihar, 
millers were reluctant to mill FCI paddy on account of lower milling charges. However, the 
issue was drawn to the notice of the respective States seeking remedial measures taken by 
them.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
72 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
4.5.3  Selection of millers despite non-delivery of CMR in Odisha 
Audit noticed that in Kalahandi district, two millers failed to deliver 1,773.34 MT of rice 
relating to KMS 2010-11, till 31 December 2014. However, they were again selected as 
custom millers for KMS 2013-14 on the basis of the order issued by the General Manager 
(Procurement), Odisha State Civil Supplies Corporation. Later, ` 2.98 crore being the value 
of 1,773.34 MT rice not delivered by the millers for 2010-11 KMS along with 193.84 MT 
rice due for 2013-14 remained unrecovered from these two
86 millers as of December 2014. 
Similar cases of selection of twelve millers in two 87 districts despite their failure to deliver 
4,770.02 MT of custom milled rice due by cut-off date during the period from 2009-10 to 
2013-14 were also noticed by Audit. These examples are indicative of lack of due diligence 
by the officers concerned of the SGAs in these districts. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that there was no 
subsidy burden on the GoI for this but the State Government was suitably sensitized to avoid 
any short delivery of CMR by the millers. 
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable because though there may not be an addition to the 
subsidy burden on the GoI but the above observation points towards non compliance of the 
GoI orders by the millers and needs to be addressed on priority. 
                                                           
86 Sivananda Rice mill (529.93 MT  and 100.03 MT for 2010-11 and 2013-14 respectively–` 0.97 crore), Sri Manikewari 
Food Products (1243.41 MT and 93.81MT  for 2010-11 and  2013-14 respectively– ` 2.01 crore)
87 Bhadrak and Bargarh

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 75
Chapter-V
 By-products and out-turn ratio 
5.1  Introduction  
As per the CMR Scheme, the paddy procured by FCI/SGAs is required to be delivered to the 
mills for milling operation and the resultant ri ce is to be delivered to FCI stocking point for 
which transportation cost is reimbursed by FCI. After conversion by milling as per norms laid 
down by Tariff Commission, (2005), 100 kg of paddy is expected to produce 67 kg raw rice 
or 68 kg in case of par-boiled rice. During conversion process of paddy, valuable by-products 
such as rice bran, broken rice, phack (by-product of paddy used as cattlefeed) and husk are 
generated, which have a realizable market value. These by-products are retained by the rice 
millers and the GoI recovers market value of by-products at the rates fixed in 2005 on the 
basis of report submitted by the Tariff Commission (TC), Department of Industrial Policy and 
Promotion, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of India. These rates have 
neither been revised thereafter nor is there any provision for yearly increase in the by-product 
recovery rates. Audit examined the impact of non-revision of these rates. For this, Audit 
compared the prevailing market rates of by-products, wherever made available, vis-à-vis 
those fixed by the Tariff Commission. Important audit observations are brought out in 
subsequent paragraphs. 
5.1.1  Non revision of milling charges/deductible value of by-products resulting in 
undue benefits of ` 3,743 crore to the Millers 
Tariff Commission was entrusted (January 2005) the study for determination of normative 
milling charges 88  for raw rice and par-boiled rice, by the Ministry. The Commission 
submitted its report in September 2005 after conducting a detailed study of various rice mills 
situated in different States 89 of the country. The recommendations of the Commission were 
accepted (October 2005) by the Ministry resulting in fixation of milling charges of ` 15 per 
quintal for raw rice and ` 25 per quintal for par-boiled rice. These milling charges include 
transportation cost of paddy and rice from 0-8 kms from the mandis/Paddy Purchase Centres 
to mills and from mills to storage point, for all the states. These normative milling charges 
were arrived at by the Tariff Commission after deducting the value of by-products 90 from the 
cost of milling, as the by-products are retained by the millers and sold in the open market, as 
per the instructions of the GoI. All these by-products have realizable market value because of 
their varied use (especially broken rice and rice bran which is used to make rice bran cooking 
                                                           
88The normative milling costs was computed on the basis of actual cost assessed in respect of sel ected millers in the State 
covered under the study and by adopting the technical norms assessed by the Tariff Commission.
89 Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Orissa, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh. 
90 During conversion process of paddy, the by-products such as broken rice, rice bran, phack and husk are generated which 
have a reasonable realizable value and these by-products are retained by the rice millers. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
76 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
oil). The Tariff Commission while fixing the normative milling charges for raw and par-
boiled rice had worked out the realizable market rate of rice by products at ` 339.60 per MT 
of paddy milled for raw rice and ` 373.80 per MT of paddy milled for par-boiled rice. 
These milling charges as well as deductible value of by-products have not been revised since 
2005 despite significant increase in the realizable value of by-products extracted out of 
convertible paddy into rice. This was reported by Tariff Commission (2012) and also in 
subsequent report of Quick Study (2012) which involved members from FCI and the 
Ministry.
It was also seen in audit that though the Government of India entrusted fresh study for 
fixation of milling charges to the Tariff Commission way back in April 2009, out of 12 
States91 covered in the study, only four States 92 responded. The millers were stated to be 
hesitant to disclose their financial information; the Government of Haryana in fact stated that 
due to fear of Income Tax Authorities, the millers were not submitting the required 
information. As a result, the Tariff Commission has not been able to suggest a formula for 
increase in milling charges.
Based on the information provided by the State Governments, Audit noticed that excess net 
realization per MT on sale of by-products ranged from a low of ` 10.13 (during 2011-12 in 
case of Uttar Pradesh) to a high of ` 2,226.47 (during 2013-14 in case of Andhra Pradesh). 
Audit collected data of the excess net realization by millers in different States. Based on the 
data available from the States (Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and Chhattisgarh), 
it was seen that ` 3,743 crore (Annexure - VIII) was retained as excess net realization value 
by the private rice millers between 2009-10 and 2013-14 in selected districts of above States. 
Details are given in table below: 
Table 5.1 
Statement showing excess net realisation derived from by-products during  
the period from 2009-10 to 2013-14 
States Procurement in selected 
districts
(in LMT) 
Total Excess net 
realization in selected 
districts 
(` in crore) 
Andhra Pradesh 267.47 3156.06 
Telangana  40.02 185.93 
Uttar Pradesh 37.22 -9.85
Chhattisgarh 50.39 410.86 
Total 395.10 3743.00 
                                                           
91 Punjab, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Kerala 
92 Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, Punjab and Kerala

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 77
Thus, non revision of milling charges resulted in undue benefit of ` 3,743 crore to the 
millers. This also led to loss of revenue to the GoI and consequently lost opportunity to 
reduce food subsidy to that extent. 
Importantly, the above excess net realization of ` 3,743 crore pertains only to 15.81 per cent
of total paddy procurement in the country during 2009-10 to 2013-14. As the actual figures 
for the entire country will invariably be much higher, it is recommended that the GoI may 
ascertain the full quantum of excess realization by millers in order to realistically revise the 
milling charges and reduce the food subsidy burden on the exchequer. 
Recommendation No. 13 Ministry's Reply 
The GoI may take up with the State 
Governments to impress upon the millers to 
provide the data about milling and other 
costs to Tariff Commission for timely 
completion of study for refixation of the 
milling charges and out-turn ratio.     
The Recommendation is accepted. 
5.1.2  Non-revision of out-turn ratio led to excess retention of rice by millers valuing               
` 1,195.40 crore in Andhra Pradesh Region of FCI 
The Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) with the prior approval of the GoI imposes levy 
on private rice millers for delivery of Levy Rice. The levy percentage was fixed at 75 per 
cent for the seasons KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14.
The rate payable for levy deliveries is communicated by the GoI and FCI admits the bills of 
private rice millers accordingly. Th e rates payable for the levy  deliveries are derived by 
adopting 67 per cent out-turn ratio for raw rice and 68 per cent out-turn ratio for par-boiled 
rice.
In 2005, the Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technology (IICPT) Thanjavur (under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Food Processing Industries, the GoI) conducted test 
milling of MTU 7029 variety of paddy largely grown in East Godavari and West Godavari 
districts (referred to as the rice bowl of Andhra Pradesh). The out-turn ratio was reported for 
such variety at 72.08 per cent and the reports were intimated to FCI Head Office, New Delhi.
However, the above mentioned higher out-turn ratio obtained on milling of the paddy and 
deliveries thus made under levy route was not considered by FCI/the GoI in the Cost Sheet 
and no suitable adjustment for higher out-turn ratio was incorporated for Andhra Pradesh 
region.  The lower out-turn ratio adopted for these two districts would result in retention of 
excess rice by private rice mills. Even though the entire cost in terms of paddy was 
reimbursed to private rice mills due to fixation of lower out-turn ratio, the private rice mills 
benefited by way of retention of excess rice obtained (on account of higher output). The value 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
78 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
of such excess rice retained for KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14 worked out to around ` 1,195.40
crore. 
FCI Regional Office, Andhra Pradesh replied that out-turn ratio was fixed by the GoI and it 
is accepting the Levy Rice accordingly.  
In respect of Paddy MTU 7029 variety, the IICPT, Thanjavur carried out test milling and 
concluded that the out-turn ratio was over 72 per cent and this was also communicated to FCI 
Head Office. 
As the Mill Levy receipts at Area Office, Kakinada (East Godavari) and Tadepalligudem 
(West Godavari) forms part of this variety, a change in out-turn ratio at least in respect of 
these two districts is need of the hour. 
Moreover, technology advancement since last report of Tariff Commission report (2005) 
warrants that out-turn ratio of 67 per cent is reassessed to ensure that the millers do not reap 
undue benefits at the cost of the GoI leading to non-reduction of subsidy on this account.
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that test milling study on MTU 7029 paddy by IICPT, 
Thanjavur pertains to one specific variety and the paddy procurement under the Central Pool 
is not done on varietal basis. It further replied that a fresh study has been assigned by FCI to 
IICPT, Thanjavur to ascertain out-turn ratio in various States including Uttar Pradesh where 
hybrid varieties are also to be taken for the study.
5.1.3.  Wrongful payment of VAT to the tune of ` 6.26 crore to State Excise and 
Taxation Department of Punjab 
As per milling agreements between Millers and SGAs, by-products are the property of 
millers. However, the State Excise and Taxation Department of Punjab served notices to the 
district drawing and disbursing officers of all four 93 SGAs in Punjab and FCI to pay VAT, 
since 2009-10, on the amount generated by the sale of by-products of paddy, by rice millers. 
SGAs in Punjab also paid ` 6.26 crore as VAT on the income generated by the sale of by-
products of paddy by rice millers. Thus, despite the by-products of paddy being the property 
of rice millers, SGAs wrongfully paid VAT which otherwise should have been paid by rice 
millers. 
                                                           
93 PSWC, PUNSUP, PAFCL and PUNGRAIN 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 81
Chapter-VI
 Delivery of rice by rice millers to
 FCI/SGAs 
Delivery of CMR/Levy Rice is governed by various instructions stipulated in Custom Milling 
Agreement/Levy orders of the respective States. Some of the instructions enunciated in these 
agreements/orders include utilization of milling capacity strictly on the basis of paddy stocks 
stored by SGAs and paddy purchased by millers on their own, maintaining the ratio for 
delivery of custom milled and Levy Rice, process the paddy as per specifications laid down 
by the GoI, compliance to delivery schedule etc. 
Procurement of rice under statutory levy system is one of the significant sources of the 
Central Pool Stock. FCI is the designated procurement agency to receive Levy Rice from the 
millers. As per the procedure of levy orders of respective States, District Collectors are to 
ensure that the Levy Rice as per law is collected from the miller before they dispose any 
stock in open market. The target for levy is set for the millers by the District Administration 
on the basis of their milling capacity and also in proportion to the target set for delivery of 
CMR. 
6.1  Grant of extensions for delivery of rice in excess of prescribed norms and 
waiver of pending delivery of CMR/Levy Rice 
Prior to KMS 2012-13, extensions for delivery of rice were used to be given by the Ministry 
on case to case basis for various States. In KMS 2012-13, the GoI laid a clear-cut policy that 
in case of any constraints on the part of FCI, the last date of delivery of CMR/Levy Rice will 
be considered for extension by one month at a time and up to three months in all, on the 
receipt of request in a prescribed format duly countersigned by the General Manager of FCI 
concerned.
It was observed in the case of Punjab that target date for milling of entire paddy procured 
during KMS 2009-10 was 31 March 2010. However, based on requests of the Government of 
Punjab, the period was extended six times (up to 10 July 2010, 31 July 2010, 30 September 
2010, 31 January 2011, 15 May 2011 and 15 July 2011). Moreover, substantial relaxation in 
the specification regarding damaged grains was also given more than once and the same was 
intimated to the State Government from time to time. While claiming the extension, the 
reasons furnished by the State Government for non delivery of rice in time were inadequate 
space and manpower with FCI. However these reasons were countered by FCI, stating that 
the State Government was not giving its mill wise schedule for delivery of rice and as such, it 
is not able to create space specifically at such places as and when it was required. 
Further, it has been observed that with a view to clean slating of pending cases, the GoI 
removed (August 2013) the obligations of CMR and Levy Rice purchased by the State 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
82 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
Governments and their Agencies on behalf of Central Government during marketing seasons 
(2007-08 to 2011-12) pending for delivery in the Central Pool. Till KMS 2011-12, 23.35 
LMT of Levy Rice and 15.94 LMT of CMR was pending for delivery with various State 
Governments pertaining to KMS 2007-08 to 2011-12. On the basis of difference between the 
rates of KMS 2012-13 and the rates of respective year for which CMR/levy obligation was 
pending, along with carry over cost on storage and interest on capital employed, a notional 
gain of ` 118 crore to the GoI was stated to have been worked out in the Ministry. Despite 
various objections of FCI and Integrated Finance Division (IFD) of the Ministry, it was 
decided to close the chapter of undelivered Levy Rice and CMR of all previous KMS up to 
2011-12. Status of imposition of prescribed penalty imposed (if any) on rice millers/SGAs, 
for not supplying CMR/Levy rice as per quantities prescribed and as per target dates was not 
known from the records made available to Audit. 
The Ministry stated (September 2014) that the Government believed that whatever quantity of 
CMR or Levy Rice was not delivered in time, virtually did not exist in the stock of millers and 
if the Ministry allowed it to be considered as pending for delivery for an indefinite period it 
offered chance to serious malpractices including recycling of PDS-leaked stock. The strict 
enforcement of a cut-off date for delivery alone could bring discipline and force SGAs to 
arrange timely milling and prevent malpractices. As SGAs took penal action against 
defaulting millers including their exclusion from operations in next season, there was no 
chance of old stocks coming in for delivery in next season. Moreover, proper quality check 
also helped in identifying old stock and its rejection. The Ministry further stated that the 
concerned State Governments/SGAs did take necessary action against the defaulting rice 
mills for non-delivery of CMR/Levy Rice and recover the losses from the defaulting mills as 
per their policy. These penalties vary from State to State. 
The reply is not satisfactory as this decision of the Ministry opens the possibility for the 
millers to sell the undelivered rice in open market at higher rates, and/or deliver the rice of 
earlier KMS to FCI at current KMS rate which is obviously higher than earlier rates. This 
allows the millers to gain undue benefit without passing the benefits to the farmers who have 
been paid at the lower price (MSP) of the year in which the paddy was procured from them 
by the millers. The practice, in fact, increased the benefit margin of millers. 
6.2  Waiver of penal interest of ` 159.47 crore led to undue benefit to millers in 
Punjab 
As per Custom Milling Policy (CMP) and Draft Agreements, the millers in Punjab were 
required to deliver CMR by 31 March of KMS 2009-10, 2010-11, 2012-13 and 2013-14 
(except KMS 2011-12 where the rice was to be delivered by 30 June 2012). 
To avoid unnecessary delay in milling of paddy by the millers, which leads to interest burden 
on SGAs, a clause of penal interest was incorporated in the CMP of KMS 2009-10, 2010-11, 
2012-13 and 2013-14. According to this clause, in the event of delay in delivery of CMR, 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 83
penalty in the shape of interest at specified rates (12 per cent for KMS 2009-10 and 2010-11 
and 13 per cent for 2012-13 and 2013-14) was to be recovered from the defaulting millers. 
However, Audit noticed that the penal interest clause applicable for KMS 2010-11 was 
dispensed with (October 2010) by the GoP without compensating the procuring agencies for 
their increased liability of interest on cash credit, in case of delayed period of milling of 
paddy and delivery of rice. Further, in CMP of KMS 2011-12, approved by the State 
Government (September 2011), the penal interest clause was not even incorporated.
As per provisional rates for CMR for each KMS, the GoI allowed interest for only two 
months on the amount invested by the procuring agencies for procurement and milling of 
paddy. On the request of the Government of Punjab, the GoI extended the delivery period of 
rice from time to time up to July 2011 (16 months), June 2012 (15 months), December 2012 
(six months), January 2014 (ten months) and June 2014 (three months) for KMS 2009-10 to 
2013-14 respectively. Consequently, the milling operations also continued up to the extended 
period. However, the procuring agencies did not recover the applicable penal interest from 
the millers for delayed milling of paddy/delivery of rice for KMS 2009-10, 2012-13 and 
2013-14 resulting in loss of penal interest of ` 159.47 crore. 
Further, in CMP for 2012-13 and 2013-14, though the clause of penal interest was 
incorporated but charging of penal interest was not linked to delay in delivery against 
monthly milling/delivery schedule. The clause was applicable only for delivery of rice after 
the last date i.e. 31 March 2013 for KMS 2012-13. For the KMS 2013-14, interest was 
chargeable w.e.f. 1 April 2014 in the event of delivery of rice after 30 June 2014. As penal 
interest was not to be charged for default in adhering to the monthly delivery schedules, the 
inclusion of delivery schedule in CMPs was pointless.
SGAs and Food & Supplies Department of the State Government stated (February 2015) that  
delay in delivery of rice is not due to the fault of the rice millers, but was due to failure of 
FCI in providing space and technical staff. The Ministry stated (June 2015) that due to 
fixation of interest for a fixed period of two months in the cost sheet for CMR delivery by 
Punjab, the GoI has not suffered any loss.
The reply does not address the fact that the decision of waiver of penal interest by GoP led to 
avoidable expenditure of 
` 159.47 crore and was unjustified. Moreover, the SGAs were left 
with no remedy to recoup the loss of interest which they were paying on outstanding cash 
credit due to delays in delivery of rice by the millers. This resulted in undue benefit of  
` 159.47 crore to the millers.  
6.3  Non-delivery of paddy/CMR/Levy rice by millers 
The paddy given to Rice Millers is to be delivered back in the form of resultant rice in 
proportion to the out turn ratio. However, Audit noticed in the selected districts of following 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
84 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
States that 15.89 LMT paddy/CMR amounting to ` 3,042.87 crore (including penalty) was 
not delivered by millers. Details are as follows: 
Table 6.1 
Non-delivery of paddy/CMR by millers 
Name of the 
State
Year Quantity of paddy 
non-delivered
(in LMT) 
Value of paddy non-delivered 
(net of recovery) 
(` in crore)
Punjab 2009-10 to 2013-14 8.84 1,485.06 
Haryana 2012-13 to 2013-14 0.46 200.07 
Telangana 2010-11 to 2013-14 0.63 147.26 
Utttar Pradesh 2009-10 to 2013-14 0.95 161.86 
Bihar 2011-12 to 2013-14 3.35 647.68 
Odisha 2009-10 to 2013-14 1.66 400.94 
Total 15.89 3,042.87 
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that it reimburses the subsidy claim of the State 
Governments based on offtake from the Central pool stock procured by the SGAs. The 
shortages are borne by the State Governments and not reimbursed by the GoI.
Though the Ministry stated that shortages were borne by the State Governments and not 
reimbursed by the GoI, however, 15.89 LMT paddy worth ` 3,042.87 crore was not delivered 
which was a huge loss for which remedial action needs to be taken on priority. 
Regarding non delivery of CMR in Odisha, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh, it stated that 
undelivered quantity was deleted from the Central Pool and the final figures are being 
reconciled. In case of Telangana, recovery position was called for from the State 
Government. In case of other States, the reply is awaited. 
Further, Audit noticed that in the select ed States the quantum of Levy Rice, not delivered, 
from 2009-10 to 2013-14 was 23.34 LMT valuing ` 4,527.91 crore as detailed below:
Table 6.2 
Non-delivery of Levy Rice 
Name of the State Year Quantity of Levy Rice not 
delivered (in LMT) 
Value of Levy Rice not 
delivered (` in crore)
FCI Andhra 
Pradesh
2009-10 to 2013-14 15.27 3,060.55 
FCI Haryana  2009-10 to 2013-14 1.04 197.35 
Uttar Pradesh 2009-10 to 2013-14 4.23 782.94 
FCI Odisha 2009-10 to 2013-14 2.80 487.07 
                                     Total 23.34 4,527.91 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 85
Salient observations with regard to CMR/Levy Rice are given below:- 
a) In Haryana, Audit noticed that in the case of Haryana Agro Industries Corporation Ltd. 
(HAIC), physical verification reports were not available. Moreover, in case of Haryana State 
Warehousing Corporation (HSWC) and Food and Supplies Department (FSD), physical 
verification reports were deficient as only a summary of stocks was prepared without actually 
conducting physical counting of the gunnies and stacks. Moreover, neither the record of 
paddy received, paddy milled/un-milled was maintained by the millers nor any related 
information was sent by them to the SGAs, though it was required under agreement.  
It was observed that allotment of paddy in excess of millers’ capacity, non-obtaining of 
proper guarantee from the millers, non-conducting of physical verification of paddy lying 
with the millers coupled with poor monitoring resulted in the non-delivery of 0.24 LMT 
paddy valuing ` 122.10 crore by 11 millers in Haryana during the period KMS 2009-10 to 
2013-14. Further, as much as 0.22 LMT of CMR valuing ` 77.97 crore was not delivered 
(November 2014) by the 19 millers in Haryana.  
The Food and Civil Supplies Department accepted (January 2015) the audit observation and 
stated that necessary action was taken against the millers and necessary details in this regard 
would be provided to Audit. It further stated that in order to avoid the recurrence of such 
events in future, efforts were being made to strengthen the monitoring and control 
mechanism.
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that Government is 
seeking latest status on obtaining bank guara ntee from the millers in place of post dated 
cheques; implementation of the same was awaited in Audit (June 2015).  
b) In Punjab region of FCI, Audit noticed that procurement of Levy Rice from millers was a 
cheaper option than CMR obtained from SGAs during 2009-10 to 2010-11 due to significant 
price difference ranging from ` 1,268.20 to ` 1,433.50 per MT. As there was short delivery 
of Levy Rice by millers it resulted in extra cost to the GoI amounting to ` 31.26 crore during 
these two years on account of purchase of CMR to fill the gap. Similarly in case of Haryana 
region, due to significant price difference ranging from ` 838.10 to ` 1,160.90 per MT, short 
delivery of Levy Rice by millers resulted in extra cost to the GoI amounting to ` 9.78 crore.
c) Against the target of 152.75 LMT of paddy under levy, millers supplied rice to the tune of 
129.29 LMT with a short delivery of 23.46 LMT during KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14. Audit 
observed that the percentage of milled rice, out of Government paddy delivered to the Central 
Pool through CMR route, ranged only from 34 per cent to 40 per cent against the prescribed 
out-turn ratio of 67 per cent.  No reasons for this exceptionally low out-turn ratio were 
ascertainable from the records. Out of 20.79 LMT paddy procured for CMR during KMS 
2012-13 and 2013-14, only 7.78 LMT of paddy (5.23 LMT rice) was delivered to FCI/SGAs 
and 13.01 LMT was still lying with millers. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
86 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
Further, only seven rice mills supplied CMR within stipulated 15 days and 75 mills supplied 
rice with delay ranging between 46 and 90 days; in RMS 2012-13, delay up to 205 days was 
noticed. In the selected district of Andhra Pradesh, Audit noticed incidents of  
non-delivery/delay in delivery of CMR where the cost of paddy/interest/penalty to the tune of 
` 0.47 crore was not recovered from the millers. Such  practices carry the risk of diversion of 
Government paddy to outside market or alternatively, utilization of the same for making levy 
deliveries and/or trading of Government paddy by the millers for their private business.  
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that separate data for 
Andhra Pradesh is not available up to 2013-14. However, as per combined data available, an 
undelivered quantity of 0.13 LMT has been deleted from the Central Pool and final figures 
are being reconciled. 
d) The Purchase Policy 2009-10 to 2013-14 of Uttar Pradesh provided that the State 
Government and SGAs were responsible for getting delivery of the CMR after milling of 
paddy, within 20 days from the date of receipt of paddy to the nearest depot of FCI. Further, 
Para 32.3 of Policy 2011-12 and Para 29.8 of Purchase Policy 2012-13 of Uttar Pradesh 
provide that the next lot of paddy would be delivered to the miller only after delivery of 
resultant rice from the previous lot of paddy to FCI. However, the envisaged targets of CMR 
were not achieved in the State of Uttar Pradesh and the shortfall ranged between 7 per cent
and 64 per cent for 2009-10 to 2013-14. A quantity of 2.39 LMT CMR (October 2014) was 
outstanding for delivery from the rice millers in Uttar Pradesh. 
In reply, Food and Civil Supplies Department, Uttar Pradesh stated (July 2014) that 
Recovery Certificates (RC) had been issued against the millers and departmental action 
against erring employees had been referred to the Commissioner, Food & Civil Supplies.
However, neither the details about RC amount recovered nor departmental action initiated 
were available (June 2015). 
Moreover, as per Purchase policy in Uttar Pradesh, in case CMR is not delivered within 
stipulated period, millers would be responsible to pay holding charges at the rate of ` one per 
quintal per day to the Government. However, Audit noticed that on the total quantity of 
95,283.86 MT of rice, pending for delivery for the period 2009-10 to 2013-14 in the selected 
districts
94, the corresponding holding charges of ` 65.16 crore were lying unrecovered from 
millers till June 2014. 
The Ministry replied (June 2015) that the estimate for procurement is drawn up after 
discussion with States Food Secretaries before onset of the Kharif Season. However the 
actual procurement is dependent on factors like production, market arrival and procurement 
by private traders. 
                                                           
94 Allahabad, Amethi, Basti, Deoria, Ghazipur, Gorakhpur, Kushinagar, Maharaj Ganj, Mirzapur, Pilibhit, Shahjahanpur

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 87
The reply is not convincing as targets should be realistically fixed based on procurement 
trends of earlier years and taking into account other known variables. Major deviations 
should be recorded and got approved from the competent authority.  
e) In case of one district (Kurukshetra) of Food and Supplies Department (FSD), Haryana, 
four rice millers did not deliver the due CMR to FCI as per approved schedule during KMS 
2009-10, 2011-12 and 2012-13. As such, ` 2.65 crore holding charges were due from these 
millers. However, FSD could recover only ` 0.32 crore and balance ` 2.33 crore were still 
recoverable from the millers. In one case the rice mill was closed and the owner of the rice 
mill had expired in another case. Thus, the chan ces of recovery were remote in these cases. 
For the other two millers from whom ` 2.14 crore was recoverable the cases were in 
arbitration. It was observed that SGAs did not take security in the form of mortgage of the 
property of the millers, due to which it could not recover the dues. Thus, there was non-
recovery of ` 2.33 crore out of which recovery of ` 2.14 crore was doubtful. 
The Food and Civil Supplies Department stated (January 2015) that comments of the 
concerned Director General of Food and Supplies (DGFS) of State Government would be 
obtained and FIR would be lodged against the defaulting officials.
Similarly, in Haryana State Warehousing Corporation (HSWC) Fatehabad, for the year 2013-
14, it was noticed that ` 0.67 crore was shown recoverable from various millers. However, 
details regarding the nature of recovery, period since when the amount was recoverable and 
the millers from whom this amount was recoverable were not available on the record.  
The Food and Civil Supplies Department stated (January 2015) that 
` 24 lakh was recovered 
and ` three lakh shall be recovered very soon and balance amount of ` 40.43 lakh was 
pending due to litigation. 
f) A review of delivery of CMR by the State Governments/SGAs during KMS 2009-10 to 
2013-14 in Punjab and Haryana regions revealed that State Government/SGAs had delivered 
102.6495 LMT (38 per cent) of rice to FCI after a delay of one to 18 months. 
In the case of Levy Rice, the Department of Food and Civil Supplies, Haryana accepted 
(January 2015) the audit observation and stated that action would be taken against the 
defaulting millers. 
The Ministry replied (June 2015) that in addition to the normal milling period allowed by the 
GoI, extension in milling are given based on request of the State Governments and taking into 
consideration the availability of milling capacity in the area/ State. 
The reply is not tenable as the GoI has a clear cut policy that in case of any constraints on the 
part of FCI, the last date of delivery of CM R and Levy Rice will be considered for extension 
by one month at a time and up to three months in all on receipt of request in a prescribed 
format duly countersigned by the General Manager of FCI concerned. However, in the above 
                                                           
95 Haryana Region-15.04 LMT, Punjab Region-87.60 LMT

Report No. 31 of 2015 
88 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
case the extension was up to 18 months, a period much longer than the maximum permissible 
period of three months. 
g) In Chhattisgarh, as per instruction issued (November 2013) by the State Department of 
Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection (for KMS 2012-13), for those millers who 
lifted the paddy from the Societies and were unable to deposit rice in FCI or Chhattisgarh 
State Civil Supplies Corporation (CGSCSC), the cost of paddy was to be recovered from 
them. The rates of paddy for adjustment/recovery from the millers was to be as follows: 
i. Common Paddy- ` 1,285.53 per quintal 
ii. Grade ‘A’ Paddy- ` 1,316.19 per quintal 
The cost sheet for KMS 2012-13 the CMR rate for Common and Grade ‘A’ paddy was found 
as ` 1,336.48 per quintal and ` 1,367.89 per quintal respectively. Further, in the rate of 
CMR, the Society Commission, administrative charges, MLC etc. are included. After 
inclusion of above charges, cost of CMR becomes higher than the rate fixed by the State 
Government for the recovery/adjustment of cost of the paddy for rice not deposited by the 
miller. Thus, the recovery from the miller should have been made after inclusion of the above 
charges instead of the rate fixed by the Department. 
However, Audit noticed in District Marketing Office (DMO), Raipur (September 2014) that 
due to non-delivery of rice by the millers against 59,301.62 MT of paddy lifted (Common-
20,840.77 MT and Grade A-38,460.85 MT), the Department had recovered only  
` 77.41 crore from the millers as per the rate fixed by the Department and not at the rate after 
inclusion of other charges. Thus, non-recovery of amount of paddy at the appropriate rate 
resulted in loss of ` 3.05 crore to the Government of Chhattisgarh. 
The Ministry replied (June 2015) that the shortages are borne by the State Government and 
not reimbursed by the GoI. 
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable because though the shortages are borne by the State 
Government and not reimbursed by the GoI, the above observation points towards non 
compliance of the GoI orders by the millers and needs to be addressed on priority. 
h) Audit noticed that there was sub-optimal performance of the rice mills in the selected 
revenue districts of Odisha as a whole during KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14 (except in Bhadrak 
and Kalahandi during KMS 2011-12). During KMS 2013-14, millers of selected revenue 
district did not deliver any Levy Rice except two revenue districts 96 where only 165 MT and 
107 MT respectively were delivered.
As per procurement policy, the District Collector of the district concerned was required to 
ensure that the levy dues were collected from the millers in the district before they sell any 
stock in the open market. However, there was no persuasion by district authorities as well as 
FCI for the compliance of levy order and fulfillment of targets set for individual miller during 
                                                           
96 Malkangiri and Sambalpur 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 89
the respective KMS. Also, no action was taken agains t the defaulter millers by the State 
Authority. Thus there was no preventive or corrective action to guard against non delivery of 
CMR/Levy Rice by the millers in Odisha.  
Thus, Audit noticed that there were multiple instances of non-delivery of rice by private rice 
millers even after having taken custody of the paddy meant for conversion into CMR/Levy 
Rice. The total value of such non-delivery of rice in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, 
Haryana, Odisha, Punjab, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh was ` 7,570.78 crore (15.89 LMT 
paddy/CMR valuing ` 3,042.87 crore and 23.34 LMT of Levy rice valuing ` 4,527.91 crore). 
In absence of a collateral security from the millers, the State Governments/SGAs/FCI had no 
recourse to recover the losses on this account. This also increases the risk of misappropriation 
of CMR and diversion to open market of Levy rice by the private rice millers.  
Recommendation No. 14 Ministry's Reply 
The State Governments/SGAs/FCI may 
consider a mechanism by way of obtaining 
bank guarantee from rice millers as collateral 
security to safeguard against non delivery of 
CMR/Levy Rice. Also, they may consider 
recourse to legal proceedings to recover the 
value of non- delivered CMR/Levy Rice.
The Recommendation is accepted. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 91
Chapter-VII
 Review and Monitoring Mechanism 
During procurement of paddy, its transportation to FCI/SGAs godowns and premises of rice 
millers and up to the stage of delivery of rice to FCI/SGAs, various deviations from norms 
such as procurement of substandard paddy, damages/misappropriation of paddy in millers’ 
premises and absence of periodical physical verification of paddy stock etc. were noticed in 
audit. These were attributable to lack of monitoring system and weak internal controls. Audit 
observations in this regard are discussed in the following paragraphs. 
7.1  Delay in finalization of incidentals by the Ministry  
Under the existing system of release of food subsidy to the State Governments, after 
receiving proposals from all the States, the Ministry issues provisional costing sheets 
indicating various incidentals to be paid to SGAs (millers in case of Levy Rice) before each 
marketing season. The incidentals for provisional cost sheets are decided on the basis of 
standard principles fixed by the Ministry and are subsequently finalised based on the audited 
accounts of SGAs. Similar system for payment of subsidy is applicable for FCI. 
The Ministry issued Guidelines in September 2010 with revised procedure for submission of 
accounts, audited by auditors appointed by the C&AG in order to finalise procurement 
incidentals of SGAs and economic cost of rice, wheat and coarse grains for the past years. As 
per the guidelines ibid, while finalizing cost sheet on the basis of audited accounts submitted 
by the State Governments, a copy of the provisional findings is to be sent by the Ministry to 
the State Government with a request to send its comments, if any, within 30 days of receipt of 
the provisional findings. An option may also be given to the State Government to indicate 
whether it wants further discussion in the matter. And, in case the comments/view of the 
State Government are not received within a period of 30 days from date of receipt of 
provisional findings, the procurement incidentals are to be finalized on the basis of 
provisional finding and other information available. 
It was noticed in Audit that finalisation of the incidentals and claims of the State 
Governments/ SGAs for many years (varies from State to State) were pending in the Ministry 
due to various reasons viz. non submission of audited accounts in time by the State 
Governments, delay in furnishing provisional findings by the Ministry, delay in submission 
of comments on provisional findings by the State Governments etc. 
The discrepancies noticed during KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14 are discussed below: 
a) Provisional findings of the Ministry on the accounts of the Government of Haryana for 
KMS 2009-10 were issued on 27 December 2013 but the comments of the State Government 
were received on 28 March 2014. Similarly, for KMS 2010-11 provisional findings were sent 
to the State Government on 7 January 2014 but the replies were received on 29 April 2014. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
92 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
Thus, the State Government replied after a period of about 90 days as against the prescribed 
time limit of 30 days. The incidentals were not finalized till September 2014.   
b) The State Government of Uttar Pradesh sent audited accounts and other documents for 
finalization of incidentals for KMS 2009-10 on 31 October 2013, however, provisional 
findings were not issued by the Ministry till August 2014. 
Similarly, pendency was also observed in finalization of incidentals of the remaining five 
States (Punjab, Bihar, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh and Chhattisgarh). At the same time there 
were also delays on the part of the Ministry in sending the provisional findings to the State 
Governments. As such, incidentals are lying in provisional form despite lapse of one to five 
years for different States. 
c) In the case of Andhra Pradesh, Audit observed that the final rates approved by the GoI for 
KMS 2007-08 and 2008-09 were lower than the provisional rates communicated earlier. 
Audit worked out the differential amount and found that an amount of ` 30.84 crore is 
recoverable from Andhra Pradesh State Civil Supplies Corporation Ltd (APSCSCL) for the 
CMR stocks delivered for the seasons KMS 2007-08 and KMS 2008-09. However, no 
amount was recovered from APSCSCL in spite of lapse of considerable time from the date of 
communication of final rates by the GoI. 
The Ministry, while accepting the audit observation, replied (September2014 and June 2015) 
that most of the States are unable to submit their proposals in spite of repeated reminders 
and regular meetings. However, in case no progress is made in case of the defaulting States, 
it will consider some deterrent such as disallowing benefit of indexation, etc. 
Thus, though the Ministry accepted the audit observation but monitoring of timely 
submission of accounts by the States and finalization of incidentals is not being done as per 
the prescribed schedules. 
Recommendation No. 15 Ministry's Reply 
Finalization of procurement incidentals 
needs to be carried out in a time bound 
manner by adhering to the prescribed 
schedule.
The Recommendation is accepted. 
7.2  Lack of monitoring leading to delivery of rice pertaining to previous 
seasons in Punjab and Haryana regions of FCI 
As per Action Plan of the KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14, General Managers (Region) were to 
ensure through their own control mechanism that the recycling of PDS food grains in 
procurement process do not take place and strict vigilance is kept with respect to the milling 
capacity of mills, quantity of paddy processed by the millers during current KMS qualifying 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 93
for levy etc. Any incident of recycling 97 of PDS rice in procurement is to be immediately 
brought to the notice of the State Government for remedial action. 
Audit noticed in Sangrur, Ludhiana, Patiala and Moga districts in Punjab region that CMR of 
19.13 LMT valuing ` 3,739.96 crore, which pertained to previous crop years i.e. 2009-10 to 
2012-13 was delivered by millers to FCI during subsequent KMS i.e. 2010-11 to 2013-14 
respectively. 
Similarly, in districts of Karnal, Kaithal and Kurukshetra of Haryana region CMR of 1.14 
LMT valuing ` 242.25 crore, which pertained to previous crop years (2009-10 to 2012-13) 
was delivered by millers to FCI during the ensuing KMS i.e. 2010-11 to 2013-14. 
The observations indicated that custom milled rice (CMR) of SGAs was being delivered by 
millers after one year of purchase of paddy and delivery of CMR for two seasons was done 
simultaneously to FCI.  FCI quality staff follows the old manual procedure for physical 
analysis of food grains and had not put in place any procedure in the rice quality analysis (lab 
test) to detect old/recycled rice delivered by millers. 
Recommendation No. 16 Ministry's Reply 
There is an urgent need to have a 
mechanism in place to reduce the chances of 
recycling and to detect old versus new rice. 
The GoI may consider to evolve a procedure 
to detect old/recycled rice delivered by 
millers.    
The Recommendation is accepted. 
7.3  Deficiencies in monitoring mechanism 
Audit noticed a number of deficiencies in the mechanism related to activities associated with 
milling of rice. Salient State-wise observations are given in following paragraphs. 
7.3.1  Position in Punjab 
a) Up to the crop year 98 2012-13, the paddy stock procured from mandis by the SGAs for the 
Central Pool on behalf of FCI was stored directly in the miller’s godown/premises, under 
joint custody for milling purpose. However, for the crop year 2013-14, the paddy procured 
was kept in the millers’ premises and not under joint custody. As per the provisions of 
Custom Milling Policy relating to KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14, the SGAs staff was required to 
conduct physical verification (PV) of the paddy stocks on a fortnightly basis to monitor the 
quantity and quality of paddy and submit copies of PV reports regularly to the District 
                                                           
97 It means deferred delivery wherein paddy procured in one KMS is used to produce rice which is supplied at higher rate in 
next KMS resulting in undue benefit to millers. 
98 Crop year is analogous to the financial year, similar to the Rabi crop from April to September and Kharif crop from 
October to March. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
94 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
Offices of the concerned agencies. These reports,  besides indicating physical availability of 
stocks and their quality, should clearly give the quantity delivered and available with the 
miller.  
Audit observed that there was shortfall of 58 per cent in conducting PVs in the three SGAs. 
District offices of Punjab State Warehousing Corporation did not supply information relating 
to PVs conducted. 
The SGAs and Food and Supplies Department stated (February 2015) in the State Exit 
Conference held in Punjab that due to shortage of manpower and non-reimbursement of 
Physical Verification expenses by the GoI only peripheral PV of paddy was conducted. 
Otherwise too, it is not possible to conduct PVs by destacking, weighment and restacking, 
being a huge operation. 
The reply is not acceptable as the shortfall in PV, as brought out by Audit, is against the 
target fixed by the State Governments which already take into account the method of 
conducting PV, whether through peripheral count or through weighment. 
b)  Non compliance of clauses of Custom Milling policy and inadequate monitoring 
As per custom milling policies, the entitlement of millers is fixed according to their milling 
capacity, both, with and without cash security. Since paddy is stored in the miller’s premises, 
regular fortnightly PV is required to be conducted to safeguard the interests of the SGAs. 
SGAs did not comply with provisions of CMPs mentioned below in selected district offices: 
i) In two districts {Punjab State Warehousing Corporation (PSWC), Ludhiana and PSWC, 
Patiala}, paddy allotted was more than milling capacity. 
ii) In 13 cases out of 14 (except PSWC Sangrur) fortnightly PVs were either not conducted 
or not conducted properly. 
iii) In spite of slow milling, timely action to shift the paddy to other millers was not taken. 
Non-compliance of the provisions of CMPs like allotment of paddy more than the milling 
capacity of the millers, non verification of stock lying in millers’ premises by the State 
Government/FCI and lack of internal control resulted in non-delivery of paddy stocks worth         
` 73.08 crore. 
The SGAs stated that due to shortage of manpower and non-reimbursement of PV expenses 
by the GoI only peripheral PV of paddy stock was being conducted. 
The SGAs accepted the audit observation. However the fact remains that lack of PV as per 
prescribed procedure greatly increases the risk of non-delivery of food grains.
c)  Procurement of sub standard rice by technical staff  
It was noticed that in districts of Sangrur, Ludhiana, Patiala and Moga, the Area Manager/ 
Assistant General Manager (Quality Control) detected 0.99  per cent,  while Regional Office 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 95
squad detected 26.95  per cent  rice as not conforming to the specification during 2009-10 to 
2013-14. Moreover, Zonal Office/Headquarter team detected 9.15  per cent  rice as beyond 
rejection limit during the same period. This indicated that there was wide spread acceptance 
of sub-standard 99rice by the technical assistants.   
Though the Ministry stated (June 2015) that non detection of beyond rejection level sample in 
district lab does not indicate that district labs have not discharged the duties in a fair 
manner.
It is evident that the district labs did not properly perform one of the main functions for which 
they were established in Punjab i.e. detection of beyond rejection level rice in samples tested. 
7.3.2  Position in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
a)   Non-submission of prescribed returns 
Staff members 100  of Enforcement in District Supply Officers’ (DSOs) offices in Andhra 
Pradesh were required to conduct inspections of stocks with reference to book balance at 
regular intervals, obtain required information fr om the millers and submit business returns at 
fortnightly intervals to DSOs. However, the Enforcement staff did not submit such business 
returns. Rice millers also did not submit monthly returns to the DSOs. Due to this, 
compliance by millers with the instructions issued by the Government from time to time with 
regard to supply of Levy Rice and custom milling of paddy could not be examined in audit.  
b)  On paper transfer of levy-free rice without physical movement in Andhra Pradesh 
and Telangana 
Movement of Levy Rice is carried out under the statutory system wherein the State 
Government issues levy orders, in consultation with the GoI, directing the private rice 
millers/ dealers to deliver specified percentage of the rice resulting from milling of paddy, to 
FCI for the Central Pool. The private rice miller or dealer shall deliver 75 per cent  of 
resultant rice, and balance 25 per cent as levy-free rice can be sold in the free market.  
Audit noticed that in all the five districts 101, 20.45 LMT rice valuing ` 4187.48 crore was 
stated to have been used by millers as levy fr ee rice. However, analysis revealed that these 
stocks were not actually moved from the miller s’ premises to other millers/traders during 
KMS 2012-13 and KMS 2013-14. The movement of stock was only on paper and no physical 
movement of rice took place. This practice carries the risk of use by millers of previous 
years’ levy free rice to fulfill the levy quota for the next year at a higher price as the old stock 
was likely to fetch higher price realization in subsequent year. 
                                                           
99 Rice not conforming to uniform specifications, prescribed by GoI. 
100 Grain Purchasing Assistants, Assistant Grain Purchasing Officers and Food Inspectors
101 East Godavari, West Godavari, Krishna, Nizamabad and Nalgonda 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
96 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
While accepting the audit observation that transfers were only on paper and did not involve 
physical movement of rice, the Andhra Pradesh State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited 
stated that the transfer of levy free eligibility was issued in compliance with the orders of the 
Government issued from time to time. The miller were not instructed to transfer the rice 
physically after obtaining the eligibility certificate; however it was ensured to achieve the 
district levy targets. 
The practice of carrying out movement of levy free rice without actual transfer is fraught with 
the risk of millers recycling the old stock in  the next year and getting a higher price for the 
same. 
7.3.3  Position in Uttar Pradesh 
a)   Lack of Special Physical Verification (SPV) 
As per Purchase Policy, SPV should be conducted by the authorities to ensure safe storage 
and quality norms. However, SPV of 160 millers of 11 districts were not carried out by the 
various higher authorities viz. Commissioner, Regional Food Commissioners and district 
level authorities to check the status of stock in millers’ premises.  
Further, Regional and District level officers were responsible to conduct weekly verifications, 
to ensure safe storage of paddy in the miller’s premises and timely delivery of CMR to FCI. 
However, SGAs did not maintain any verification reports. In absence of verification reports, 
there were no means to ascertain whether delivered paddy and resultant rice was stored in 
open or covered and plinth (CAP) area during 2009-10 to 2013-14. 
b)   Inadequate monitoring for ensuring quality of paddy  
As per prescribed norms of purchase policy, District Food & Marketing Officer (DFMOs) 
should inspect each purchase centre at least once in a week to ensure that required facilities102
are given to farmers along with timely opening of centre, besides, ensuring that procurement 
of paddy was made as per standard and required quality. 
The required number of inspections were not carried out by DFMOs in all the selected 
districts. Further, it was also observed that no separate laboratory was established at the 
district/regional level, which implied that quality of paddy procured, was not ascertained by 
the SGAs. 
The millers of 11 districts had not submitted an y return/ reports to the authorities prescribed 
in the purchase policy during the period from 2009-10 to 2013-14. The above facts indicate 
inadequacy in monitoring mechanism, leading to risks of misappropriation of paddy/rice. 
                                                           
102 Drinking water, fan, tent etc.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 97
c)  Unadjusted damaged Paddy worth ` 7.33 crore
Audit noticed in Regional Accounts Office, Bareilly that 38,653.03 103 quintals of rice valuing 
around ` 7.33 crore was shown as damaged in the financial year 2011-12, which was not 
adjusted/written off by the Commissioner, Food & Civil Supplies. Justification for damage of 
paddy and action taken were not provided by the Department of Food and Civil Supplies, 
Uttar Pradesh to Audit in absence of which reasonableness of justification could not be 
examined in audit. 
7.3.4  Position in Haryana 
a)  Procurement of sub standard rice by technical staff  
Analysis of rice in the district laboratories in revenue districts of Kaithal, Kurukshetra and 
Fatehabed during 2009-10 to 2013-14 revealed that the district laboratories had checked 4.68 
LMT (9.47 per cent) of rice after taking 2907 samples (out of 49.42 LMT of rice received in 
these revenue districts) and detected none of the sample as Beyond Rejection Limit (BRL). 
Thus district labs found the rice conforming to specifications. 
However in Haryana region of FCI, Area Mana ger/ Assistant General Manager (Quality 
Control) detected 0.16 per cent, while Regional Office squad detected 2.44 per cent rice as 
not confirming to the specification during 2009-10 to 2013-14. Moreover, Zonal 
Office/Headquarter team of FCI detected 13.58  per cent rice as beyond rejection limit during 
the same period. This indicates that there was wide spread acceptance of sub-standard rice by 
the Technical Assistants. As no case of substandard rice was noticed in the above district labs 
during the last five year from 2009-10 to 2013-14 it raises question marks on the sampling 
techniques adopted and the effectiveness of district labs. 
b)  Shortcomings in records relating to rice millers  
Guidelines for the purchase of paddy issued by the Food & Supplies Department every year 
provide that millers undertaking custom milling of paddy shall execute an agreement with the 
concerned SGAs immediately in the prescribed proforma. Further, the guidelines provide that 
each miller would prepare in triplicate a pictorial chart/sketch depicting the positioning of the 
stacks, stack number with the number of gunnies in each stack. Guidelines also provide that 
storage capacity available with the millers shou ld be ensured. Further, milling agreements 
entered into by the SGAs with the m illers, provided that each miller would get the entire 
paddy and rice insured.
Audit, however, observed that: 
i) No pictorial chart/sketch was submitted by the millers.  
ii) The proof of the storage capacity of the m illers was not available in the district offices 
of the SGAs.   
                                                           
103  26,253.42 quintal of rice in district Pilibhit and 12,399.61 quintal of rice in district Shahjehanpur.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
98 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
iii) There was no record showing that any miller had insured the paddy. 
iv) Further, in case of Haryana State Warehousing Corporation, Panipat, agreement entered 
with millers for the KMS 2009-10 and 2010-11 were not made available to Audit, 
though asked for. 
The Department of Food and Civil Supplies, Haryana assured that remedial action would 
be taken in this regard.
7.3.5  Position in Chhattisgarh 
a)  Shortfall in inspections 
As per the inspection, sampling and analysis procedure of FCI to be followed in procurement 
of paddy and acceptance/purchase of rice stock, in order to ensure acceptance of rice 
conforming to laid down specifications only, super inspection shall be done.
It was, however, observed in audit that there was considerable shortfall in the super 
inspections done by the higher officials. During the year 2010-11 to 2013-14, in three cases 
the Area Manager had test checked less than two per cent of the accepted stock and in six 
cases the Assistant General Manager (Quality Control) had test checked less than ten per cent
of the stock accepted during a fortnight. The shortfall of inspection in respect of Deputy 
General Manager (Quality Control) ranged between 63 per cent and 72 per cent during 2010-
11 to 2012-13 and between eight per cent  and 63 per cent  in respect of General Manager 
(Region) during the year 2010-11 and 2013-14.
The FCI Regional Office, Chhattisgarh replied (December 2014) that mandatory inspections 
by all the supervisory officers are being carried out regularly as prescribed by FCI Hqrs. In 
regard to shortage of quality control staff/officers (Technical Assistants) for initial 
inspections, while confirming the fact, it was replied that the matter was taken up with FCI 
Zonal Office/Hqrs. and on the request FCI Zonal Office/Hqrs. arranged staff from other 
regions on temporary basis. 
The reply is not tenable since there was shortfall in the prescribed inspections by the higher 
authorities as well. Further, it was observed that under Mahasamund Centre though the 
milling capacity of the mills was 100 lot per day, due to shortage of technical staff only 45 
lots were accepted. Thus, shortage of staff was adversely affecting the procurement 
operations.
The Ministry stated (June 2015) that prescribed check of ten per cent and two per cent by 
Assistant General Manager (Quality Control) and Area Manager is based on the number of 
lots procured after their last inspection whereas the Audit has calculated the percentage on 
the quantity procured during the fortnight. It also stated that shortfall on the part of GM 
occurred when he was occupied in other important assignments.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 99
The reply is not tenable as the norms do not specify that the prescribed checks should be done 
after the last inspection and thus the existing practice led to shortfall in inspections in 
Chhattisgarh. 
b)  Inadequate physical verification of stocks in millers’ premises
As per milling agreement/ levy orders of the State Government, mandatory PV of stock of 
paddy and rice is to be conducted in millers’ premises on a regular basis. The enforcement 
officials are required to inspect rice mills periodically to ensure purchase of paddy at MSP, 
milling of paddy and delivery of Levy Rice. The PV report should clearly depict the quantity 
delivered and available with the millers besides indicating physical availability of stocks and 
their quality. 
In seven selected districts of Chhattisgarh, it was observed that PV was not conducted by the 
officials concerned on regular basis and no norms were fixed regarding periodicity of PV. In 
some instances where PV was conducted, it was observed that miller had either not 
maintained or improperly maintained stock records. MARKFED, Chhattisgarh also registered 
nine cases against the defaulter mills and 1,347.80 MT of paddy and 380.14 MT of rice was 
seized in the selected four districts.104
On this being pointed out, the Food Controller, Chhattisgarh (November 2014) accepted the 
audit observation that no norms for PV were fixed by the Department. 
Audit is of the view that the norms for conducting PV should be in place for better and 
effective storage management of paddy/rice stocks.  
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (June 2015) that Government of 
Chhattisgarh is being advised to adhere to fortnightly PV of stocks remaining in miller 
premises. 
c)   Non-submission of reports by millers  
As per clause 10.1 (2) of custom miller agreement, every miller has to submit the details of 
lifting of paddy and delivery of rice on the seventh of every month to respective District 
Marketing Officers (DMOs). It was observed in seven districts that in contravention of the 
condition of agreement no report regarding lifting of paddy and delivery of rice was 
submitted by the millers. 
DMOs of these districts accepted the fact and stated that no instructions were issued by the 
State Government regarding submission of returns/ reports by the millers. 
                                                           
104 Raipur, Dhamtari, Durg and Rajnandgaon

Report No. 31 of 2015 
100 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
d)  Double handling of stock resulting in avoidable handling charges of ` 3.94 crore in 
Chhattisgarh
In Chhattisgarh, the Ministry made (May/June 2011) additional allocation of rice for Below 
Poverty Line (BPL) and Above Poverty Line (APL) for the period June 2011 to March 2012. 
In view of this, the Ministry approved additional allocation of 5,180 MT of rice per month in 
Chhattisgarh for APL category and 1.35 LMT of rice for BPL families under central issue 
price up to March 2012. The stock of additional allocation under APL and BPL schemes were 
to be lifted from the FCI stock. Against the allocated quantity, FCI issued 1.66 LMT of Rice 
from stock held by FCI to the State Government during June 2011 to March 2012.  
It was observed from the stock position extracted from Stock account of the State 
Government that the State Government had sufficient stock of rice during the period June 
2011 to March 2012. However, to meet the additional allocation, the Ministry instructed to 
lift the food grains from the FCI Stock which involved incidence of expenditure on handling 
etc. This resulted in extra expenditure towards handling cost of ` 3.94105 crore during the 
year 2011-12.
7.3.6  Position in Odisha 
a)   Inadequate physical verification for ensuring quality and quantity of paddy
Despite having a laid down mechanism of checks (by an authorised officer) and counter 
checks {by Enforcement Officer, periodical inspection of District Manager-cum-Civil Supply 
Officer (DM cum CSO), District Magistrate} for ensuring quality and quantity stored at 
millers premises, these were not implemented properly as authorised officers were not regular 
in conducting the physical verification of stock and there were lack of periodical inspection 
by DM-cum-CSO, Enforcement Officer and the District Magistrate. The findings of special 
audit conducted by Odisha State Civil Supplies Corporation Ltd (OSCSC) also corroborate 
this fact. 
b) Authorised officers appointed for joint custody and maintenance of paddy and rice are to 
make weekly physical verification for submission to the district offices. Any discrepancies in 
the stock, misappropriation, diversion, slow delivery of CMR compared to milling capacity is 
to be brought to the notice of District Manager immediately. The agreement entered by 
OSCSC with the millers provided that the District Manager or his authorized official is 
responsible to conduct physical verification of the paddy stocks on a regular basis. Under 
levy, enforcement officer shall verify the stock at a periodicity of not less than once in a 
week.
                                                           
105 Calculated at the average handling cost of ` 239 per MT 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 101
Audit noticed that the regularity in periodicity of physical verification was not maintained. In 
Bhadrak district, in respect of 153 agreements, only 2,472 verifications (50  per cent ) were 
conducted against 4,949 verifications required during the period from 2009-10 to 2013-14. In 
Bargarh district, against 442 agreements, 8,502 verifications (39  per cent) were done against 
21,408 required during 2009-14. During 2009-2014, in Malkanigiri district, 1,259 physical 
verifications (26 per cent) against the requirement of 4,784 verifications in respect of levy 
orders were conducted.
7.3.7  Position in Bihar 
The deficiencies noticed in respect of monitoring mechanism of paddy procurement are 
illustrated as follows:- 
i) As per norms fixed by the Bihar State Food & Civil Supplies Corporation (BSFC), 
paddy was to be provided to the miller only after proper physical verification of the mill 
by the District Administration before selection of mill. However, such physical 
verifications were not conducted by the authority concerned in the State. 
ii) Further, as per agreement between millers and SGAs, the millers had to deliver/supply 
rice to the FCI in advance. After milling of rice proportionate quantity of paddy was to 
be issued to the millers. However this was not complied with.  
iii) Deputy Collector and above were made enforcement officer to verify the paddy receipt 
with verification of necessary land records but in 14 blocks of seven selected districts it 
was not done as per prescribed norms. The reasons cited was multiplicity of work 
resulting in poor verification. 
iv)  Important control documents like details of cash book, cash credit account, Fixed 
Deposits accounts and Budget/allotment records were not properly maintained. 
v) While framing the guidelines for distribution of food grains under DCP scheme for 
KMS 2013-14 (April 2014), the SGA i.e. BSFC had defined the role of FCI.  
Accordingly, the representatives of FCI were to check the availability of CMR and 
conduct PV thereof and affix their signature in the prescribed format meant for PV. 
However, it was observed in audit that FCI did not associate with BSFC in checking the 
quality aspect of the CMR procured under DCP Scheme during KMS 2013-14, as 
prescribed in the GoI guidelines for DCP states. FCI on its part stated that BSFC stocks 
were not kept in countable position, and hence it would be difficult for FCI staff to 
assess the number of gunnies/weight of stocks. It further added that FCI, Bihar Region 
was facing staff shortage. Further, to check the quality aspect of the stock during KMS 
2013-14, BSFC requested FCI, Regional Office Patna to depute 101 quality controllers 
for which action was not taken by FCI. 
Slow pace of delivery of CMR resulted in additional requirement of food grains from other 
States for meeting the requirements of National Food Security Act (NFSA) in Bihar Region 
which involved substantial transportation costs. However FCI was found lacking in 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
102 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
monitoring the pace of procurement by the SGA to avoid additional cost on freight and 
multiple handling.  
Audit also observed that guidelines issued by the GoI with respect to quality control aspect 
for CMR procured under DCP scheme were not followed properly by FCI. The State 
Government is still dependent upon FCI to meet its requirement under NFSA as it lifted 
13.28 LMT rice during April 2014 to Oct 2014, though the State has switched over to DCP 
scheme with effect from KMS 2013-14. 
Recommendation No. 17 Ministry's Reply 
FCI/SGAs may consider augmenting manpower 
for quality checks at the stage of procurement 
and redress the weaknesses in monitoring and 
internal control system for procurement of 
paddy, milling and delivery operations. 
The Recommendation is accepted. 
Conclusion:
The Custom Milled Rice/Levy Rice scheme was envisaged by the GoI to take advantage of 
the synergies between public sector procurement structures and private sector milling 
capacities. However, delay in revising the milling charges and poor control over custody of 
paddy/rice resulted in not only undue gains to the rice millers but also widespread and large 
scale non-delivery of paddy and rice by them. Moreover, because of uneven operational 
practices and costing parameters huge avoidable expenditure was incurred throughout the 
country. Further, there is possibility of MSP being released without ascertaining the 
bonafides and genuineness of the farmers. Additionally, the benefit of quality relaxation in 
paddy/rice due to adverse climate conditions ended up being passed on to the millers instead 
of the farmers. These deficiencies also contributed to avoidable increase in food subsidy 
expenditure of the GoI. 
The scheme needs to be comprehensively revisited to address the lacunae brought out in this 
report. The Government may consider, inter alia , the following for immediate 
implementation: 
(i) Obtaining collateral security for paddy and rice handed over to the millers for milling. 
(ii) Bringing uniformity in the cost sheet parameters relating to gunny bags depreciation, 
custody and maintenance charges and mandi labour charges. 
(iii) Bringing uniformity in the specification of paddy packed in a gunny bags, based on 
best practices across the country. 
(iv) Direct benefit transfer of MSP into the account of the farmers. 
(v) Re-fixing the milling and costing charges 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 103
(vi) Create sufficient facilities for ensuring compliance of applicable standards related to 
food safety pertaining to toxins, insecticides and pesticides residue. 
As the CMR/Levy Rice scheme is a very important component in the food security scenario, 
especially for the BPL families, it needs immediate fine tuning to make it more efficient and 
effective to make it serve its intended purpose. 
  (A .K. SINGH) 
New Delhi  Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Dated : 14 August 2015  (Report Central  and Local Bodies)
Countersigned
New Delhi  (SHASHI KANT SHARMA) 
Dated : 17 August 2015  Comptroller and Auditor General of India


ANNEXURES

Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 107
ANNEXURE- I 
(Refer to Para 1.10)
Name of the State Name of the selected revenue District  Name of the selected FCI Area Offices  
Andhra Pradesh 1. East Godavari 
2. West Godavari 
3. Krishna
1. Kakinada (covering East Godavari) 
2. Tade Palli Gudem (covering West Godavari) 
3. Vijaywada (covering Krishna) 
Bihar 1. Rohtas
2. Kaimur
3. Nalanda
4. Aurangabad 
5. Patna 
6. Bhojpur
7. East Champaran 
1. Gaya (covering Rohtas, Kaimur and 
Aurangabad) 
2. Patna (covering Patna, Nalanda and Bhojpur) 
Chhattisgarh 1. Raipur 
2. Bilaspur 
3. Durg
4. Rajnandgaon 
5. Dhamtari
6. Mahasamund
7. Janjgir-Champa
1. Area Office Raipur- (covering Revenue 
Districts-Raipur, Dhamtari, Mahasamund, 
Baloda Bazar and Gariaband) 
2. Area Office Durg- (covering Revenue Districts 
Durg, Rajnandgaon, Baalod, Bemetra, 
Kabirdham, Bastar, Kondagaon, Narayanpur, 
Kanker, Dantewada, Sukma and Beejapur) 
3. Area Office Bilaspur- (covering Revenue 
Districts Bilaspur, Janjgir, Mungeli, Korba, 
Raigarh, Sarguja, Surajpur, Balrampur, Karia 
and Jaspur) 
Haryana 1. Karnal
2. Kurukshetra
3. Kaithal 
4. Fatehabad 
1. Karnal
2. Kurukshetra (covering Kurukshetra and Kaithal) 
3. Hissar (covering Fatehabad) 
Odisha 1. Bargarh 
2. Bhadrak 
3. Bolangir 
4. Deogarh 
5. Kalahandi 
6. Malkangiri 
7. Sambalpur
8. Sonepur
1. Balasore
2. Titilagarh 
3. Sambalpur
4. Jeypore 
Punjab 1. Moga
2. Ludhiana 
3. Sangrur
4. Patiala 
1. Moga
2. Ludhiana 
3. Sangrur
4. Patiala 
Telangana 1. Nalgonda
2. Nizamabad 
1.             Nalgonda 
2.             Nizamabad 
Uttar Pradesh 1. Allahabad 
2. Amethi
3. Basti
4. Deoria
5. Ghazipur 
6. Gorakhpur
7. Kushinagar 
8. Maharaj Ganj 
9. Mirzapur 
10. Pilibhit 
11. Shahjahanpur 
1. Allahabad 
2. Faizabad (covering Amethi) 
3. Gorakhpur (covering Basti, Deoria, Gorakhpur, 
Kushinagar and Maharajganj) 
4. Varanasi (covering Ghazipur and Mirzapur) 
5. Bareilly (covering Pilibhit) 
6. Shahjahanpur 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 108
Annexure-II
(Refer to Para 3.2.1)
Doubts about authenticity of MSP payment 
States
Name of 
the States 
Name of 
selected 
district 
Doubtful MSP 
amount worth       
(` in crore) 
Period Sample Remarks
Bihar All selected 
revenue
districts 
` 14.88 (Fake: `
6.82 crore, 
Fabricated: ` 3.07 
crore and Irregular 
land receipt:   ` 4.99
crore)  
2009-10
to
2013-14
14 block level  circle offices (Shiv 
Sagar, Akodhigola, Bihar Shariff, 
Islampur, Udwantnagar, Ara 
Sadar, Bhabua, Ramgarh, Obra, 
Daudnagar, Fatuha, Bihta, 
Motihari Sadar, Banjara) 
Land records did not match with entry in Register-II maintained by Circle Officer. 
Haryana All selected 
revenue
districts  
- - - No documents obtained from farmers before procuring food grains 
Odisha Bhadrak & 
Bargah 
- 2013-14 608 (332 and 276) farmers in 
Tihidi block and Jharbandh 
Primary Agricultural Cooperative 
Society of Bargarh Women Self 
Help Group in Bhadrak and 
Bargah 
1. Land details of farmers, who had sold paddy during KMS 2013-14 were not 
produced. There was no authentication of land holding based on revenue records. 
2. Name of account holders as mentioned in cheques issued and purchase register 
differed from bank records. 
Bolangir - 2011-12
to
2013-14
Tusura 360.25 quintal of paddy was procured against fake Farmer Identity  Card Numbers in 
case of six farmers. 
4068.25 qunital Paddy was purchased from 16 farmers whose land ownership/land 
under cultivation details were not available with the Revenue Inspector of Tusura. 
Bolangir - - Tusura and Sauntpur Primary 
Agricultural Cooperative 
Societies. 
1. 4861.82 quintal of paddy purchased from farmers in excess of their eligibility limit 
2. Cheques issued to 12 farmers credited to 6 other persons. 
3. Out of cheques for ` 0.19 crore issued to 36 farmers, amount worth ` 0.08 crore 
only was credited to accounts of 13 farmers.  
Punjab All selected 
revenue
districts  
- - - No documents obtained from farmers before procuring food grains. Moreover, the 
State Government did not prescribe any conditions of payment after verification of 
bank accounts or Kisan cards of farmers. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 109
Name of 
FCI
region 
Name of 
selected office 
Doubtful MSP 
amount worth (`
in crore) 
Period Sample Remarks
Andhra
Pradesh 
All Sampled 
offices 
Not Available 2012-13 Out of 84.12 LMT paddy(in terms of rice) arrivals, 66.07 LMT (78.54 per cent) was 
procured by millers till January 2013 whereas mill levy rate was communicated by 
the GoI on 4-2-2013. Though millers had produced MSP certificates while claiming 
Mill levy rate, the payment of full MSP to farmers is doubtful because of the above 
discrepancy. 
Bihar All selected 
Area Offices 
Not Available - - In Area Office Patna and Gaya (under FCI, Bihar region), no records were kept and 
no checks were carried out regarding genuineness of the farmers before releasing the 
payment 
Uttar
Pradesh 
Gorakpur
and
Mahrajganj 
revenue
districts 
Not Available 2009-10 19 out of 22 cases reviewed Tampered Kishan Bahi/ documents with respect to names and identities of farmers. 
Telangana Nalgonda and 
Nizamabad 
- - - 1. In RMS 2012-13 in Nizamabad district, 0.32 LMT paddy valuing ` 40.75 crore 
was purchased from 9244 farmers without obtaining crucial details such as acreage, 
land classification, details of tenant farmers. 
2.  For the KMS 2013-14 in Nizamabad district, in more than 50 per cent cases (51 
per cent to 59 per cent), details of Pahani (land record) were kept blank. Details of 
tenant farmers were kept blank in 51 per cent cases during Kharif and Rabi 2013-14. 
3. In Nalgonda and Nizamabad district, for purchase of 80302.94 quintals of paddy 
from the farmers, the sales transactions were made either without Pahani number or 
on the same Pahani number.  
4. In Nizamabad district, there were several incomplete and unfilled columns in the 
data provided by Paddy Purchase Centres (PPCs) to the District Administration. 
5. In Nalgonda district due to non-implementation of on-line payment system directly 
from Civil Supplies Corporation (CSC), the CSC did  not have details regarding  
information in 25-column relating to  the crit ical information like acreage, land 
classification details, details of tenant farmers, paddy sown acreage, expected yield 
and Pahani number, etc.  
FCI Regions

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 110
Annexure-III
(Refer to Para 3.2.3) 
Payment in cash by Millers
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State 
Period Sample MSP paid by Remarks
1. Uttar Pradesh 2013-14 Selected revenue districts Millers Payment made for ` 27.21 crore in cash for 0.21 LMT of paddy 
2. Odisha 2013-14 Aditi Rice Mill in Bhadrak 
revenue district 
Millers Payment made to 32 farmers (`  0.06 crore for 46.33 MT of paddy) 
3. Andhra
Pradesh 
2009-10 to 
2013-14
Selected districts Millers In case of purchases by APSCSC and IKP, payment of MSP through Account 
Payee cheque not confirmed by State Authorities 
Annexure-IV
(Refer to Para 3.2.3) 
Delay in payment of MSP to farmers 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State 
Delay in payment of MSP (in days) Remarks
1. Andhra
Pradesh 
10 days on average in case paddy was purchased at farm gates. Delay noticed in all three selected districts. 
Upto 55 days in case payment was made at PPCs Delay noticed in all three selected districts. 
2. Haryana Payment not made within the prescribed period in two selected 
districts (Karnal and Kaithal) of Food and Supplies Department. 
3. Odisha Delay of seven months in Kalahandi revenue district 
4. Telangana More than 30 days (prescribed period – three days) Delay noticed in Nalgonda district. 
12 to 17 days (prescribed period – three days) Delay noticed in Nizamabad district. 
5. Uttar Pradesh Delay of 10 to 86 days  Delay noticed for MSP amounting to ` 0.98 crore during 2012-14 in Mahrajganj revenue 
district.
FCI Region
6. Uttar Pradesh Upto 25 days (prescribed period of 24 hours) Delay noticed in 8 revenue districts for procurement of 2315.96 MT. 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 111
Annexure-V
(Refer to Para 3.7) 
State wise details of unsecured paddy 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the State 
Selected districts Period Type of security 
taken from millers 
Amount
of
security 
taken 
Unsecured paddy 
worth (`)
Remarks
1. AP and 
Telangana
All 2009-14 Security not obtained Not
given 
` 2559.83 crore 
for 21.71 LMT 
paddy. 
Though the agreement stipulated obtaining of Bank 
guarantee/collateral security equivalent to value of paddy or 
‘Undertaking’ from Rice Millers Association on behalf of mills 
owning the responsibility for delivery of CMR, these provisions were 
not invoked in Andhra Pradesh region. 
2. Bihar All 2011-12 Security deposit   
`  0.50 lakh from 
each miller in the 
form of Demand draft 
`  0.50 
lakh
Security deposit 
obtained but 
advance rice was 
not obtained as per 
the agreement 
Terms of agreement provided for delivery of advance rice and security 
advance of ` 0.50 lakh by millers, out of which no advance rice was 
received from millers. 
2013-14 Bank Guarantee `  5 lakh Security deposit 
and deed of pledge 
of immovable 
property obtained 
but the deeds were 
not registered. 
1. During KMS 2013-14 amount of bank guarantee and security 
deposit fixed as security deposit of   ` five lakh up to two MT per day, 
` 10 lakh up to five MT per day and ` 15 lakh for above five MT per 
day. A deed of pledge of immovable property also to be obtained to 
secure the recovery in ca se of default. Deed of pledge of immovable 
property obtained during 2013-14 from the millers not registered, led 
to non-compliance of deed related provisions under Bihar and Orissa 
Public Demand Recovery, Act, 1914.  
2. No specific provision of security deposit, proportionate to the 
quantity and cost of paddy provided in the guidelines. Clause for 
recovery and penalty in case of non-delivery of CMR in time not 
incorporated in the agreement. 
3. Chhattisgarh Raipur 2013-14 Post dated cheques `  2.62 
crore 
` 0.64 crore In the inter-state milling agreement for 1995.18 MT between the States 
of Chhattisgarh and Andhra Pradesh, ` 0.97 crore (out of ` 2.62 crore) 
was irregularly recovered from other millers of Andhra Pradesh 
region.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 112
4. Haryana All 2009-10 to 
2013-14
Post dated cheques Not
given 
Not given SGAs’ funds to the tune of `  122.10 crore blocked and involved 
unnecessary litigation with resultant non-recovery of  `  2.59 crore. 
5. Odisha All 2009-14 Security not collected ` 53.44 
crore 
`  2270.09 crore 1. Non-collection of security deposit with reference to milling capacity 
resulted in short collection of ` 139.66 crore from selected millers of 
selected districts except Sonepur during 2009-14 KMS.  
2. In case of M/s Manikyam Rice Mill 41059.15 quintal of paddy 
lifted, and rice to the extent of 11073.313 quintal only delivered, 
leaving a balance of CMR 16846.909   quintal  of 2013-14 KMS 
amounting to ` 3.66 crore, against which available bank guarantee of  
`  50 lakh was only revoked (November 2014) and recovery of the 
remaining amount awaited (December 2014). 
3. Of 7590.053 MT paddy for KMS 2012-13 valuing ` 11.31 crore yet 
to be realised from Mangalam Agro Tech (P) Ltd (September 2014) 
for which security deposit of only `  18.50 lakh was available. 
4. Non-collection of security deposit from five selected millers (Shree 
Mahalaxmi Rice Industries, Utkal Industries, Sri Jyoti Rice Industries, 
Laxminarayan Paddy Processing Private Limited, Triveni Food 
Products) in Bargarh district for 2013-14 KMS.  
6. Uttar
Pradesh 
9 (Kushinagar, Deoria, 
Gorakhpur,
Mahrajganj, Pilibhit, 
Shahjahanpur,Allahaba
d, Ghazipur, Basti) 
2009-10 to 
2013-14
Adequate Security not 
obtained. (Security 
obtained in the form 
of Fixed Deposit and 
Bank Guarantee) 
`  6.82 
crore 
`  390.53 crore 3.62 LMT paddy amounting to ` 390.53 crore during 2009-10 to 2013-
14 delivered to millers without obtaining bank guarantee. 
FCI Region
7. Chhattisgarh Raipur 2009-10
to    
2013-14
Security not obtained Not
given 
Not given In FCI, District Office, Raipur, out of 1010 cases, in respect of 272 
cases, the details relating to completion of contracts, availability of 
Security Deposits was not available with the Accounts Section of the 
District Office; furnishing of Security Deposits by the millers 
unverifiable.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 113
Annexure-VI
(Refer to Para 4.4) 
Means of transport other than trucks used for movement of paddy/rice 
Uttar Pradesh 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
districts 
Name of 
SGAs 
Purchase 
centres 
Type of Vehicle Period of 
Transportation
Transported
quantity ( in 
Quintal)
1. Maharajganj FSD* Maharajganj Motorcycle 16.12.2010 60.00 
Pradeshik 
Cooperative
Federation
(PCF) 
Ramhauli Auto rickshaw 11.12.2010 to 
20.12.2010 
2000.00 
2. Gorakhpur FSD Chargawan Jeep Taxi 17.12.2012 150.00 
Khorabar Bus 25.12.2009 160.00 
Khorabar Motorcycle 15.12.2010 to 
19.1.2011 
663.60 
3. Shahjehanpur PCF Chandpur -
Waratpur 
Auto rickshaw 11.01.2011 and  
19.12.2011 
398.98 
Atsalir-Roja Jeep Taxi 22.11.2011 & 
11.12.2011 
358.60 
FSD Jalalabad Motorcycle 24.11.2010 176.80 
4. Deoria FSD Deoria Pick-up van 3.12.2011 to 
7.1.2012 
600.00 
5. Pilibhit Department,
Uttar
Pradesh 
Upbhokta
Sahakari
Sangh
(UPUSS)
and Uttar 
Pradesh 
Agro
Pilibhit mandi,
Neuriya 
Thela (jugar),three 
wheeler, motor 
cycle,scooter, 
combine (paddy 
cutter) 
27.01.2010 to 
26.11.2012 
25629.67 
6. Allahabad FSD Meza road and 
Meza Tehsil 
Auto-rickshaw, 
Vikram, bus, 
motorcycle, 
moped, scooter 
and car 
09.12.2011 to 
31.01.2014 
4453.60 
7. Ghazipur FSD and  
PCF 
Sadar, Jangipur, 
Mardah, SSS 
Mubarakpur,
SSS Sultanpur 
Motorcycle, car 04.12.2011 to 
12.02.2014 
7909.20 
8. Mirzapur FSD Gaipura & 
Mirzapur/Rajesh 
Trading 
Tanker, car and 
Auto-rickshaw 
26.12.2010 to 
22.02.2014 
1370.00 
9. Basti FSD Saughat and 
Bahadupur 
Motorcycle, Auto-
rickshaw, Bus and 
Jeep Taxi 
30.12.2011 to 
20.03.2013 
1711.00 
10 Amethi FSD Gauriganj and 
Jais 
Moped and Qualis 11.12.2012 to 
24.01.2014 
4917.60 
Total 50559.05 
Cost =Quantity transported * Minimum Support Price of respective KMS   `   5.50 crore 
* Food and Civil Supplies Department

Report No. 31 of 2015 
114 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
Annexure-VI
(Refer to Para 4.4) 
Means of transport other than trucks used for movement  
of paddy/rice - Bihar
District-Patna (2013-14) 
Sl.
No
Type of
vehicle 
(1)
Quantity of 
paddy/CMR
transported
(in Quintal) 
(2)
From
(3)
To 
(4)
Cost of 
Transportation 
including
Handling
Charge (in ` ) 
(5)
MSP/Cost
price per 
Quintal
(6)
Total cost 
(in ` ) 
(7)=((2)*((6) 
1 Delivery Van 90.00 Purchase
centre 
M/s Baba Sidhi 
Vinayak rice 
mill, Masaudhi 
3287 1560 1,40,400
2 Delivery Van 90.00 Purchase
centre 
M/s Baba Sidhi 
Vinayak rice 
mill, Masaudhi 
3287 1560 1,40,400
3 Loader
(Medium 
Goods
Vehicle) 
200.00 Purchase
Centre
Lala
Bhusver 
Apolo rice mill, 
Amhara, Bihta 
7530 1560 3,12,000
4 Loader 90.00 Purchase
centre 
Maan Ambe 
Rice Mill 
Sonar, Fatuha 
2987 1560 1,40,400
5 Loader 90.00 Purchase
centre 
Maan Ambe 
Rice Mill 
Sonar, Fatuha 
2987 1560 1,40,400
6 Loader 90.00 Purchase
centre 
Maan Ambe 
Rice Mill 
Sonar, Fatuha 
2987 1560 1,40,400
7 Delivery Van 135.55 Maa
Vaishno 
rice mill, 
Fatuha 
FCI Depot 
Mokama 
7043 2478.56 3,35,969
8 Delivery Van 89.60 Apolo rice 
mill 
FCI Depot
Phulwari 
3320 2478.56 2,22,079
9 Delivery Van 90.20 R.K.Gupta
rice mill, 
Khedalpur 
FCI Depot
Phulwari 
3305 2478.56 2,23,566
Total 965.35 17,95,614

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 115
Annexure-VI (Contd…) 
Means of transport other than trucks used for movement of paddy/rice
District-Motihari, Bihar, 2013-14 
Sl. 
No
Type of  
vehicle
(1)
Quantity of 
paddy 
/CMR
transported
(in Quintal) 
(2)
From 
(3)
To
(4)
Cost of 
Transportation
including 
Handling
Charge (in ` ) 
(5)
MSP/Cost 
price per 
Quintal
(6)
Total cost   
(in `)
(7)=(2)*(6)
1 Tractor(Com) 250.00 PPC/Raxual Trideo Rice Mill NA 1560 3,90,000.00 
2 SFC/407
(Medium
Goods
Vehicle) 
130.00 do do NA 1560 2,02,800.00 
130.00 do do NA 1560 2,02,800.00 
120.00 do do NA 1560 1,87,200.00 
120.00 do do NA 1560 1,87,200.00 
104.00 do do NA 1560 1,62,240.00 
200.00 do do NA 1560 3,12,000.00 
200.00 do do NA 1560 3,12,000.00 
230.00 do do NA 1560 3,58,800.00 
224.00 do do NA 1560 3,49,440.00 
190.00 do do NA 1560 2,96,400.00 
180.00 do do NA 1560 2,80,800.00 
196.00 do do NA 1560 3,05,760.00 
3. Saloon
(LMG)
200.00 do Vikash Rice Mill, 
Raxaul
NA 1560 3,12,000.00 
4. Tractor 140.80 Base
Godown 
S.K.Rice 
Mill,Kolharwa 
NA 1560 2,19,648.00 
5. Delivery Van 200.00 do Jai Ambe Rice 
Mill,Chhapwa 
NA 1560 3,12,000.00 
6. Trailer 160.00 do PPC,Chhauradano NA 1560 2,49,600.00 
7. Pick-up 240.00 do do NA 1560 3,74,400.00 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
116 Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
District-Ara (2013-14) 
8. Pick-up 140.00 do Shakil Rice Mill, 
Ramgharwa
NA 1560 2,18,400.00 
Pick-up 132.80 do do NA 1560 2,07,168.00 
Pick-up 142.00 do Baba Baikunth Nath 
Rice mill 
Chhauradano 
NA 1560 2,21,520.00 
Pick-up 142.00 do do NA 1560 2,21,520.00 
Pick-up 144.00 do do NA 1560 2,24,640.00 
Pick-up 114.00 do do NA 1560 1,77,840.00 
Pick-up 98.00 do do NA 1560 1,52,880.00 
Pick-up 100.00 do do NA 1560 1,56,000.00 
9. Pick-up 200.00 do S.K. Rice Mill, 
Kolharwa
NA 1560 3,12,000.00 
Total 4,427.60 69,07,056.00
Sl. 
No
Type of  
vehicle
(1)
Quantity of 
paddy/CMR 
transported
(in Quintal) 
(2)
From 
(3)
To
(4)
Cost of 
Transportation
including 
Handling
Charge (in ` ) 
(5)
MSP/Cost 
price per 
Quintal
(6)
Total cost 
(in `)
(7)=(2)*(6)
1 Light Goods 
Vehicle-407
Model
80.00 B.S.ARA Maa Tara Mordern 
Rice Mill,Acona 
Not Available 1560 1,24,800.00
80.00 do do Not Available 1560 1,24,800.00
80.00 do do Not Available 1560 1,24,800.00
80.00 do do Not Available 1560 1,24,800.00
80.00 do do Not Available 1560 1,24,800.00
80.00 do do Not Available 1560 1,24,800.00
80.00 do do Not Available 1560 1,24,800.00
80.00 do do Not Available 1560 1,24,800.00
Total 640.00 9,98,400.00

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 117
Annexure-VI (Contd…) 
Means of transport other than trucks used for movement of paddy/rice
District-Nalanda, Bihar (2013-14) 
Sl. 
No
Type of  vehicle 
        
        (1) 
Quantity of 
paddy/CMR 
transported (in 
Quintal)
       (2) 
From 
    (3) 
      To 
       (4) 
Cost of 
Transportatio
n including 
Handling
Charge (in ` )
 (5) 
MSP/ 
Cost
price 
per 
Quintal
(6)
Total cost (in ` ) 
(7)=(2)*(6)
1. Auto Rickshaw 150.20 Base
Godown 
Maa Gayatri 
Rice
Mill,Harnaut 
Not Available 1560 2,34,312.00 
2. Jeep 149.30 do do Not Available 1560 2,32,908.00 
Total 299.50 4,67,220.00
Grand total 
(Patna+Motihari+Ara+
Nalanda) 
6332.45 1,01,68,290
Annexure-VI (Contd…) 
Means of transport other than trucks used for movement of  
paddy/rice - Chhattisgarh State 
Market-
ing
Season 
Name of the 
district 
Name of the 
miller 
Date of 
issue of 
Release 
order 
Supply of paddy Rate of 
paddy 
(Amoun
t per 
quintal  
in ` ) 
Value 
(Amount 
in ` ) 
Name of 
mandi/go
down
from 
where 
paddy is 
released 
Transportation 
vehicle no. (from 
godown/ mandi
to mill) 
Date Qty (in  
Quintal
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8(6*7) 
2009-10 Jaanjgir-Champa Bhagwati Rice 
Mill(MA542909) 13/03/2010 18/03/2010 142.23 950 135119 Akaltara CG10G0363  
Mini Bus 
2009-10 Jaanjgir-Champa Bhagwati Rice 
Mill(MA542909) 13/03/2010 18/03/2010 14.40 950 13680 Akaltara CG10G0363 
Mini Bus 
2009-10 Jaanjgir-Champa 
Tirupati Rice 
Industries 
(MA542755) 
17/03/2010 18/03/2010 20.48 950 19456 Akaltara CG10G0363 
Mini Bus 
2012-13 Raipur 
Balaji Enterprises 
(MA441248) 20/07/2013 23/07/2013 37.84 1250 47300 Abhanpur 
CG 04 B 7957 
Light Motor 
Vehicle-Car 
2011-12 Rajnandgaon 
Annapurna 
Industries 
(MA421471) 
08-03-2012 08-04-2012 167.92 1080 181354 Thelkadih CG08A3282 
Motor Cycle 
2012-13 Raipur 
Agrasen 
Industries 
(MA441569) 
30/04/2013 05-03-2013 166.56 1250 208200 Lakholi 
CG 04 JB 1556 
Light Goods 
Vehicle 
Total 549.43 605109 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool118
Annexure-VII
(Refer to Para 4.5.2) 
District-wise deficiencies in selection of millers
State Government/SGAs 
Sl.
No.
Name
of the 
State (s) 
Selected
Districts
Period Remarks
1. Odisha 3(Kalahandi,
Bhadrak,
Bargarh)
KMS 2009-10 to 
2013-14
In 14 cases, millers failed to deliver prescribed percentage of
CMR (6523.45 MT) due for KMS 2009-10 to 2013-14 yet
were selected for milling in subsequent years.
In all the cases, financial position of the millers were not
considered while selecting the millers for KMS 2009-14. 
In seven cases, clearance from State Pollution Control Board
and land documents with registration details were not obtained
from millers before executing agreement with millers.
The miller code was not available for 13 out of 24 millers for
KMS 2012-13 in Sonepur district for ascertaining the PAN/ 
TIN registration of the millers. 
In Bolangir district, information about electricity connection
was not available (seven cases ); permission not obtained from 
Pollution Control Board (18 cases); period of validity expired
in 36 cases; Boiler Certificates not available in 11 cases; No
registration certificate were issued by the District Industries
Centre in 15 cases out of 41 cases.
2. Andhra
Pradesh
KMS 2009-10 to 
2013-14
Agreement with the rice millers were not concluded for the
KMS 2009-10 and 2010-11 in West Godavari District, for
KMS 2010-11 and 2011-12 in Krishna district and for KMS 
2009-10 to 2013-14 in East Godavari District.
3. Telangana KMS 2009-10 to 
2013-14
District managers of the Civil Supplies Corporation did not
enter into an agreement with the rice mills in Nizamabad and
Nalgonda districts.
FCI Regions 
4. Bihar region No transparency in the selection procedure of the rice millers
as no Expression of Interest (EOI)/ Request for Proposal were
invited from the prospective rice millers through
advertisements in newspapers for milling of FCI procured
paddy.
No physical verification of the rice mills engaged in milling of
FCI paddy was conducted to ascertain whether actual milling 
of the paddy was carried out or the rice was supplied through
other means.
During KMS 2010-11, no tagging of the concerned rice mills
with the Paddy Procurement Centers (PPCs).
For KMS 2009-10, no milling agreements were furnished,
except for revenue district Rohtas.
In case of FCI, Area office, Gaya, no committee was
constituted for selection of rice millers interested in milling of
FCI procured paddy.

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 119
Annexure-VIII
(Refer to para 5.1.1) 
Total excess realisation on sale of by-products by the millers 
Year/State Districts CMR Procurement 
(MT) 
Levy Rice 
Procurement (MT) 
Milling  Cost 
per MT (in `)
Realisation  from by 
product  per MT  
(in `)
Excess Realisation 
per MT (in `)
Total Excess Realisation 
(in `)
1 2 3 4 5 6 (7)= (6)- (5) (8) = [(3)+(4)]X7 
2009-10 
Andhra Pradesh West Godavari 1322.71 3294114.00 1050.00 1551.79 501.79 1653617186.71 
East Godavari NA 2275023.00 310.00 1997.60 1687.6 3839328814.80 
1322.708 5569137.00 680.00 1774.70 1094.695 
Uttar Pradesh 
Kushinagar 35796.23 11229.48 937.50 548.43 -389.07 -18296292.99 
Deoria 33518.10 14644.47 358.20 383.89 25.69 1237296.42 
Gorakhpur 45925.62 16532.76 651.20 464.50 -186.70 -11660979.55 
Mahrajganj 49522.79 33593.04 500.50 602.50 102.00 8477814.66 
Basti 46734.27 0.00 916.70 846.67 -70.03 -3272800.93 
Mirzapur 19571.19 44286.95 644.47 390.30 -254.17 -16230823.44 
Pilibhit 95053.49 44199.12 700.00 847.47 147.47 20535582.40 
Sahajehanpur 89850.00 21708.81 809.72 902.11 92.39 10306918.46 
Ghazipur 28887.46 106199.75 733.33 575.50 -157.83 -21320814.35 
444859.15 292394.38 694.62 617.93 -76.69 
Chhattisgarh Durg 639314.35 NA 350.00 1253.84 903.84 577837882.10 
Rajnandgaon 182148.06 NA 350.00 1043.30 693.30 126283250.00 
821462.41 350.00 1148.57 798.57 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 120
Year/State Districts CMR Procurement 
(MT) 
Levy Rice 
Procurement (MT) 
Milling  Cost 
per MT (in `)
Realisation  from by 
product  per MT (in  
`)
Excess Realisation 
per MT (in `)
Total Excess Realisation 
(in `)
2010-11 
Andhra Pradesh West Godavari 168016.70 3913340.00 1150.00 2064.85 914.85 3733829177.00 
East Godavari 9308.12 2352082.00 350.00 2275.60 1925.60 4547092815.07 
177324.822 6265422.000 750.00 2170.23 1420.23 
Uttar Pradesh 
Kushinagar 44974.34 10791.06 1012.50 601.00 -411.50 -22947462.10 
Deoria 56545.68 12228.70 472.70 529.68 56.98 3918764.172 
Gorakhpur 54621.32 17816.50 749.30 491.80 -257.50 -18652738.65 
Mahrajganj 57999.09 27978.22 703.30 662.17 -41.13 -3536246.76 
Basti 46870.22 16887.59 933.33 1013.33 80.00 5100624.80 
Mirzapur 39387.36 28564.66 808.30 391.20 -417.10 -28342787.54 
Pilibhit 67082.08 16821.24 700.00 1031.35 331.35 27801365.08 
Sahajehanpur 87833.00 21708.81 792.10 1201.80 409.70 44879279.56 
Amethi 26268.70 19434.20 617.50 926.00 308.50 14099344.65 
Ghazipur 38524.76 159278.64 1015.91 713.64 -302.27 -59790033.72 
520106.55 331509.61 780.49 756.20 -24.30 
Chhattisgarh Durg 795368.35 NA 400.00 1221.47 821.47 653371238.47 
Rajnandgaon 318544.01 NA 400.00 1112.90 712.90 227090024.73 
1113912.36 400.00 1167.18 767.18 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 121
Year/State Districts CMR Procurement 
(MT) 
Levy Rice 
Procurement (MT) 
Milling  Cost 
per MT (in `)
Realisation  from by 
product  per MT 
(in `)
Excess Realisation 
per MT (in `)
Total Excess Realisation 
(in `)
2011-12 
Andhra Pradesh West Godavari 13477.56 3318481.00 1260.00 2095.08 835.08 2782451954.28 
East Godavari 5350.57 1636144.00 530.00 2091.97 1561.97 2563965273.50 
18828.125 4954625.00 895.00 2093.53 1198.53 
Telangana Nizamabad 292036.59 1398270.63 1150.00 1555.00 405.00 684574424.10 
292036.59 1398270.63 
Uttar Pradesh 
Kushinagar 65165.08 6444.04 1212.50 664.71 -547.79 -39226759.85 
Deoria 76924.21 15109.10 461.90 565.02 103.12 9490474.93 
Gorakhpur 85065.61 21750.91 811.30 533.80 -277.50 -29641584.30 
Mahrajganj 92966.85 36657.27 754.30 764.43 10.13 1313092.34 
Basti 62596.08 19018.34 933.30 926.67 -6.63 -541375.65 
Mirzapur 66952.36 54792.86 775.50 375.50 -400.00 -48698088 
Pilibhit 80527.19 42875.07 700.00 1049.35 349.35 43110579.53 
Sahajehanpur 95804.00 36285.06 718.60 1151.70 433.10 57207771.89 
Amethi 60704.77 18612.65 723.00 1117.50 394.50 31290722.19 
Ghazipur 66003.85 157020.47 1155.30 896.67 -258.63 -57680779.88 
752710.00 408565.76 824.57 804.53 -20.04 
Chhattisgarh Durg 1009920.10 NA 450.00 974.80 524.80 530006068.48 
Rajnandgaon 392527.16 NA 450.00 1215.90 765.90 300636551.84 
1402447.26 450.00 1095.35 645.35 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 122
Year/State Districts CMR Procurement 
(MT) 
Levy Rice 
Procurement (MT) 
Milling  Cost 
per MT (in `)
Realisation  from by 
product  per MT (in  
`)
Excess Realisation 
per MT (in `)
Total Excess Realisation 
(in `)
2012-13 
Andhra Pradesh West Godavari 7442.99 3872027.00 1380.00 2276.26 896.26 3477013773.23 
East Godavari 1463.20 1961845.00 550.00 1877.50 1327.5 2606291635.50 
8906.185 5833872.000 965.00 2076.88 1111.88 
Telangana Nizamabad 124525.36 1175440.00 1220.00 1788.00 568.00 738380324.48 
124525.36 1175440.00 
Uttar Pradesh 
Kushinagar 50189.56 2540.29 1327.50 629.83 -697.67 -36788034.45 
Deoria 44663.95 6534.39 714.90 662.48 -52.43 -2683816.98 
Gorakhpur 54010.01 5450.23 952.70 584.00 -368.70 -21922990.49 
Mahrajganj 55034.67 9421.05 819.90 834.47 14.57 939119.84 
Basti 34829.81 2578.25 933.30 930.00 -3.30 -123446.60 
Mirzapur 52569.20 52305.70 807.20 471.67 -335.53 -35188675.20 
Pilibhit 37139.21 28534.50 700.00 1319.57 619.57 40689460.51 
Sahajehanpur 85766.52 18045.09 753.90 1510.19 756.29 78511682.53 
Amethi 47779.16 5406.51 813.33 1265.21 451.88 24033540.56 
Ghazipur 47178.11 124040.60 1300.00 1069.30 -230.70 -39500156.40 
509160.21 254856.61 912.27 927.67 15.40 
Chhattisgarh Durg 347900.23 NA 450.00 1582.73 1132.73 394077027.53 
Rajnandgaon 444609.39 NA 450.00 1343.40 893.40 397214029.03 
792509.62 450.00 1463.06 1013.06 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool 123
Year/State Districts CMR Procurement 
(MT) 
Levy Rice 
Procurement (MT) 
Milling  Cost 
per MT (in `)
Realisation  from by 
product  per MT (in  
`)
Excess Realisation 
per MT (in `)
Total Excess Realisation 
(in `)
2013-14 
Andhra Pradesh West Godavari 2617.20 1867658.00 1520.00 2482.23 962.23 1799634905.69 
East Godavari 192.320 2046697.00 570.00 2796.47 2226.47 4557337664.30 
2809.515 3914355.000 1045.00 2639.35 1594.35 
Telangana Nizamabad 326511.09 685958.62 1470.00 1901.00 431.00 436374445.01 
326511.09 685958.62 1470.00 1901.00 431.00 
Uttar Pradesh 
Kushinagar 3224.94 212.20 1350.00 696.83 -653.17 -2245036.73 
Deoria 11633.97 1386.00 826.60 601.91 -224.69 -2925457.06 
Gorakhpur 12084.06 3165.33 1028.30 620.30 -408.00 -6221751.12 
Mahrajganj 15239.64 924.23 896.70 894.00 -2.70 -43642.45 
Basti 2121.27 0.00 933.30 1016.67 83.37 176850.28 
Mirzapur 13438.25 28245.58 791.70 468.50 -323.20 -13472213.86 
Sahajehanpur 18833.28 10708.40 841.70 1306.00 464.30 13716202.02 
Amethi 26214.85 3046.82 934.67 1357.89 423.22 12384123.98 
Ghazipur 4866.39 52381.67 1383.33 1265.00 -118.33 -6774162.94 
107656.64 100070.23 998.48 914.12 -84.36 
Chhattisgarh Durg 397921.00 NA 500.00 1471.85 971.85 386719523.85 
Rajnandgaon 510795.53 NA 500.00 1508.90 1008.90 515341610.22 
908716.53 500.00 1490.38 990.38 
15742893.70 62368953.68 
Total Excess 
Realisation 37429961259.00 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool124
Glossary
Sl. No. Term used in Report Description 
A
1. AGM Assistant General Manager 
2. APL Above Poverty Line 
3. APSCSC Andhra Pradesh State Civil Supplies Corporation 
B
4. BPL Below Poverty Line 
5. BSFC Bihar State Food & Civil Supplies Corporation 
C
6. C&AG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
7. C&M Custody and Maintenance Charges 
8. CACP Commission on Agricultural Costs and Prices 
9. CAP Covered and Plinth 
10. CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
11. CFTRI Central Food and Technological Research Institute 
12. CGAL Central Grain Analysis Laboratory 
13. CGSCSC Chattisgarh State Civil Supplies Corporation 
14. CIP Central Issue Price 
15. CMD Chairman & Managing Director 
16. CMR Custom Milled Rice 
17. CoS Committee of Secretaries 
18. CSC Civil Supplies Corporation 
19. CTD Commercial Tax Department 
20. CTR Contaminants, Toxins and Residues 
21. CWC Central Warehousing Corporation 
D
22. DC District Collector 
23. DCP Decentralised Procurement  
24. DFMO District Food & Marketing Officer 
25. DGFS Director General of Food and Supplies 
26. DGM Deputy General Manager 
27. DGS&D Director General of Supplies and Disposals 
28. DMC District Milling Committees 
29. DM-cum-CSO District Manager-cum- Civil Supply Officer 
30. DMO District Marketing Officer 
31. DSO District Supply Officer 
32. DTF District Task Force 
E
33. EGoM Empowered Group of Ministers 
34. EOI Expression of Interest 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
125Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool
F
35. FAQ Fair Average Quality 
36. FBO Food Business Operator 
37. FCI Food Corporation of India 
38. FIC Farmers Identity Card 
39. FIFO First-In-First-Out
40. FIR First Information Report 
41. FOR Freight on Receipt 
42. FPS Fair Price Shop 
43. FSD Food Supplies Department 
44. FSSA Food Safety and Standards Act 
G
45. GA Godown Assistant 
46. GoAP Government of Andhra Pradesh 
47. GoB Government of Bihar 
48. GoI Government of India 
49. GoM Group of Ministers 
50. GoP Government of Punjab 
H
51. HAIC Haryana Agro Industries Corporation 
52. HSWC Haryana State Warehousing corporation 
I
53. IFD Integrated Finance Division 
54. IICPT Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technology 
55. IKP Indira Kranthi Padhakam 
56. IMS Inter Ministerial Committee 
K
57. KMS Kharif Marketing Season 
L
58. LMT Lakh Metric Tonnes 
M
59. MARKFED Marketing Federation 
60. MLC Mandi Labour Charges 
61. MOCAF&PD Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
62. MSP Minimum Support Price 
63. MTC Mandi Transportation Contractor 
N
64. NFSA National Food Security Act 
O
65. OSCSC Odisha State Civil Supplies Corporation 
66. OWS Other Welfare Schemes 
P
67. PACS Primary Agricultural Cooperative Societies 
68. PAFCL Punjab Agro Foodgrains Corporation Limited 

Report No. 31 of 2015 
Performance Audit Report on Procurement and Milling of Paddy for the Central Pool126
69. PAN Permanent Account Number 
70. PCF Pradeshik Cooperative Federation 
71. PDR Public Demand Recovery 
72. PDS Public Distribution System 
73. PFA Prevention of Food Adulteration 
74. PI Procurement Incidentals 
75. PPCs Paddy Purchase Centres 
76. PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
77. PSWC Punjab State Warehousing Corporation 
78. PUNGRAIN Punjab State Grains Procurement Corporation Limited 
79. PUNSUP Punjab State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited 
80. PV Physical Verification 
Q
81. QC Quality Control 
R
82. RC Recovery Certificates 
83. RD Rural Development 
84. RFC Regional Food Commissioners 
85. RI Revenue Inspector 
86. RMS Rabi Marketing Season 
87. RO Regional Office 
88. RRC Rice Receiving Centre 
89. RTGS Real Time Gross Settlement 
S
90. SA Sales Assistant 
91. SGAs State Government Agencies 
92. SWC State Warehousing Corporation 
T
93. TA Technical Assistant 
94. TC Tariff Commission 
95. TDPS Targeted Public Distribution System 
96. TIN Taxpayer Identification Number 
U
97. UPUSS Uttar Pradesh Upbhokta Sahakari Sangh 
98. URS Under Relaxed Specification 
99. UT Union Territory 
V
100. VAT Value Added Tax 
Z
101. ZO Zonal Office 

© COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in