 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
  on 
Ratna and R-Series Hydrocarbon Fields 
 
For the period ended 31 March 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Report No. 43 of 2015 
(Compliance Audit) 
 

Contents 
Sl. No. Particulars Page No. 
 Preface i 
 Executive Summary ii - iv 
1.  Introduction  1 
2.  Background  1 
3.  Ratna and R-Series fields 2 
4.  Bidding/Award of contract for Ratna and R-Series fields 3 
5.  Deliberations by Negotiating Team of Secretaries 6 
6.  Deliberations on Techno-Legal Issues 6 
7.  Issue of royalty and cess 7 
8.  Re-assessing  financial capability of the bidder 10 
9.  Process of CCEA approval 11 
10.  Non-maintenance of idle facilities  12 
11.  Impact of delays in decision making 15 
12.  Financial implications 16 
13.  Conclusion 17 
 Annexures A-1 to A-7 
 

Report No. 43 of 2015 
 
(i) 
Preface 
This Report of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India has been prepared for 
submission to the Presid ent of India under Arti cle 151 of the Constitu tion for being laid 
before the Parliament. 
The Report contains the results of the audit of ‘Ratna and R- Series Hydrocarbon Fields’. 
Ratna and R Series (R&RS) medium sized hydr ocarbon fields are located in the Western 
Offshore area (at an average water depth of  45 metres) 130 kilome tres southwest of 
Mumbai city. These fields were discovered  and partially developed by the Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC)  in November 1979.  ONGC commenced 
commercial production of Crude Oil and Na tural Gas from the fields from February 
1983. Following initiation of process by the Government of India (GoI) for private sector 
participation for further deve lopment of these fields, ONGC stopped production from 
these fields from September 1994 onwards. Though  letter of award of  R&RS fields had 
been issued in March 1996 to  a consortium of successful bidders (CoSB) and CCEA had 
approved to conclude the Produc tion Sharing Contract in Ma rch 1999, final decision had 
not been taken yet by GoI for entering into the Production Sharing Contract for Ratna and 
R Series Fields. 
This report brings out various aspects of the decision making process, which have 
contributed to the delay of more than 16 years after CCEA ap proval depriving the 
country of the hydrocarbon production from these discovered fields. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation extended by the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas and ONGC in pr oviding records, information and clarification which 
facilitated completion of audit. 

Report No. 43 of 2015 
 
ii 
 
Executive Summary 
 
Background 
 
The Ratna and R Series (R&RS) medium sized hydrocarbon fields are located in the Western 
Offshore area (at an average water depth of 45 metres) 130 kilometres southwest of Mumbai 
city. These fields were discovered and part ially developed by the Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited (ONGC) in November 19 79. ONGC had drilled 35 exploratory wells 
and 9 development wells and had installed one  well cum production platform in one of the 
fields viz. R-12. Commercial production of Crude Oil and Natural Gas was started by ONGC 
from R-12 field in February 1983. The Govern ment of India (GoI) decided in 1991 for 
inviting private parties in upstream oil sector . In 1993, GoI issued noti ce inviting offers for 
development of R&RS fields. ONGC stopped production of Petroleum from these fields from 
September 1994. 
 
Following invitation of bids from private parties by GoI, the Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA) approve d (February 1996) award of c ontract in respect of R&RS 
fields to a Consortium of Successful Bidders (CoSB). Accordingly, the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas (MoPNG) issued (March 1996) a Letter of award of R&RS fields to CoSB. 
Thereafter, CCEA approved (March 1999) negotiation to be held by the Negotiating Team of 
Secretaries (NTS) for finalising and concludi ng Production Sharing Contract (PSC) within 
six months.  
 
Records pertaining to R&RS fields of MoPNG and ONGC were examined. 
 
Highlights 
 
The process of reaching upto a decision to fina lise the PSC was not completed despite more 
than 16 years having passed (as of August 2015)  since the CCEA approval for entering into 
negotiations with CoSB. Analysis of sequence of events for finalisa tion of PSC by MoPNG 
revealed the following: 
 
(i) NTS kept setting targets for completion of negotiations and signing of PSC. In 
November 1999, the NTS decided that the en tire process of negotiations would be 
completed by 15 February 2000. In Ma rch 2000 meeting, NTS decided that 
negotiations should be completed by 30 April 2000 and in 7 September 2000 meeting, 
NTS decided to conclude the negotiati on process by 18 September 2000. However, 
NTS did not adhere to its own targets for completion of the negotiations. NTS held 20 
meetings between November 1999 and June 2013. During the period from May 2010 

Report No. 43 of 2015 
 
iii 
 
to July 2015, only two meetings of NTS were held and on both occasions, it was 
decided to hold another meeting to take a final decision in the matter. 
(Paragraphs 5.1 and 5.2) 
 
(ii) Frequent deliberations were held on certain techno-legal issues from February 2001 to 
April 2005 among the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG), the Ministry 
of Law and Justice (MOL&J) and the Ministry of Finan ce (MOF). Various rounds of 
clarifications and confirmations were sought  though the Secretarie s of all these three 
ministries were the members of NTS. 
(Paragraph 6) 
 
(iii) CCEA had approved (9 March 1999) freezing of the rates of levy of royalty and cess 
prevailing at the time of biddi ng. Draft PSC was initialled by all the parties in April 
2001 with the same rates of royalty and cess. NTS advised (April 2005) that 
Consortium of Successful Bidders (CoSB) may be asked to confirm payments of 
statutory levies at the current level rather than those prevailing in 1995. It 
recommended that the consequential changes to PSC subsequent to the above may be 
initialled after vetting by MoL&J. However,  CoSB did not agree to the change in the 
rates of royalty and cess. The Government  was advised (June 2005) by the Attorney 
General of India (AGI) to pr oceed with signing of PSC in relation to R&RS fields, 
with the successful bidder on the basis of royalty and cess as fixed in the draft PSC. 
NTS in its various meetings till March, 2008 ad vised to maintain the cess and royalty 
at old rate. However, the issue was raised  and referred among various ministries and 
had been repeatedly sent for opinion of  the MoL&J and AGI who reiterated their 
earlier opinion. 
(Paragraph 7) 
 
(iv) Financial capability of CoSB  was evaluated in 1995 before award of contract to it. 
After assignment (March 1999) of work  to NTS by CCEA for negotiation on the 
terms and conditions and signing of PSC w ith CoSB, NTS decided (March 2000) to 
assess the updated financial strength of th e CoSB. This was carried out in June 2000 
and NTS gave its go ahead for processing the PSC in February 2001. Thereafter, 
assessment of financial capability was agai n carried out in October 2004 and January 
2012. Delays in taking final decision on various  matters and raising of already settled 
issues led to the need for fresh assessments of the financial capability of CoSB, which 
contributed to further delays which were avoidable. 
(Paragraph 8) 
 
(v) While approving the proposal in March 1999, CCEA approved conclusion of contract 
keeping the cess and royalty at the levels  prevailing at the tim e of inviting bids. 
Despite the above decision of CCEA and the f act that PSCs for rest of 11 fields from 
the bundle of 12 fields offered simultaneously under similar terms and conditions had 
been finalised and signed till the end of 2004, opinion of AGI to go for finalisation of 
PSC and recommendation of NTS (April 2006)  for conclusion of PSC, the case was 

Report No. 43 of 2015 
 
iv 
 
sent (January 2008) to CCEA for an appr opriate decision. CCEA Note was returned 
by the Cabinet Secretariat to obtain una mbiguous recommendations of NTS. NTS 
forwarded its unambiguous recommendations in March 2008. MoPNG submitted 
(June 2008) the Note to CCEA, agreei ng with NTS recommendations. Cabinet 
Secretariat again returned (July 2008) the Note to make certain 
modifications/corrections re lating to some deficiencies . A proposal for modification 
in the Note to CCEA was approved on 09 July 2008. Howe ver, the matter was again 
re-examined in MoPNG and it  was decided that NTS shoul d consider the matter once 
again, with a view to analysi ng in detail the various alte rnatives available along with 
their financial implications. Thereafter no final decision was taken. 
(Paragraph 9) 
 
(vi) ONGC had created facilities in Ratna R-12 field at a cost of ` 472.55 crore. These 
facilities were used by the Company for production since February 1983. Following 
stoppage of production from the field (Sep tember 1994), ONGC did not maintain the 
facilities though specific dire ctions were issued by MoP NG/NTS with an acceptance 
to reimburse the cost by the Consortium Partners. ONGC’s own inspections reported 
the facts of serious deterior ation in the condition of th e facilities and ‘Plundering and 
looting’ of platform utilities and equipment.  The estimated repair cost for the existing 
facilities at current exchange rates (September 2015) would be ` 1085.70 crore. 
(Paragraph 10) 
 
(vii) For want of requisite details, Audit attempted to work out the financial implications 
on indicative basis assuming that (a) PSC for R&RS mid-sized fields could have been 
finalised in 2001 along with nine other sma ll sized fields and (b) the production from 
the R&RS fields would have started in four  years eight months (eight out of nine 
fields started production  and maximum time taken to st art production in these fields 
was four years eight months) from Oc tober 2005. In this scenario, based on 
development plan submitted by CoSB to GoI, domestic production of 56 mbbls of 
Crude Oil (valuing ` 25650 crore) and 920 mmscm of Natural Gas (valuing ` 550 
crore) had been deferred during October 2005 to March 2015. GoI's take to the tune of 
` 1050 crore on account of royalty  and cess on Crude Oil and ` 55 crore towards 
royalty on Natural Gas for the said period also remained deferred and unrealised.   
(Paragraph 12) 
 
 

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
1 
 
1. Introduction 
1.1. Ratna and R Series (R&RS) medium sized hydrocarbon fields are located in the 
Western Offshore area (at an average water dept h of 45 metres) 130 kilo metres southwest of 
Mumbai city. These fields were discovered an d partially developed by the Oil and Natural 
Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC) in Nove mber 1979. ONGC had drilled 35 exploratory 
wells and 9 development wells and had installe d one well cum production platform in one of 
the fields viz. R-12. Commercial production of Crude Oi l and Natural Gas was started by 
ONGC from R-12 field in February 1983.  
1.2. The Government of India (GoI) decided in 1991 for inviting private parties in 
upstream oil sector. In 1993, GoI issued notice inviting offers for de velopment of R&RS 
fields. ONGC stopped production of  Petroleum from these fields from September 1994.The 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCE A) approved (February 1996) award of 
contract in respect of R&RS fields to a Consortium of Successful Bidders (CoSB). 
Accordingly, the Ministry of Petroleum a nd Natural Gas (MoPNG) issued (March 1996) a 
Letter of Intent (LoI) for award of R&RS fields to CoSB. Ther eafter, CCEA approved 
(March 1999) negotiation to be held by a Negotiating Team of S ecretaries (NTS) for 
finalising and concluding Production Sharing Contract (PSC) within six months.  
1.3. However, the process of reaching upto a decision to finalise the PSC was not 
completed despite more than 16 years havi ng passed (as of August 2015) since the CCEA 
approval for entering into negotiations with Co SB. Deliberations on some technical clauses 
were held till 2004 between MoPNG and the Ministry of Law and Justice (MoL&J). 
Thereafter, issue of royalty and cess had b een raised by MoPNG and NTS which had been 
frequently referred among various Ministri es and sent for opinion of MoL&J and the 
Attorney General of India (AGI) multiple times.  Simultaneously, these references to various 
agencies and consequent delays had led to re -assessments of financial capability of the 
bidders at various points of time. No final decision on signing of PSC for R&RS fields had 
been taken as yet (August 2015). As production of Crude O il and Natural Gas from R-12 
field was stopped in September 1994, following th e decision of GoI to develop the fields 
further under private sector pa rticipation, and final decision ha d not been taken, there was no 
production from these fields for more than 20 y ears, as discussed in detail in subsequent 
paragraphs. GoI also could not realise the revenue in the fo rm of royalty, cess and profit 
petroleum for this duration. The production facilities of R& RS fields were also not 
maintained by ONGC which resulted in deteriora tion in the condition of the facilities with an 
avoidable repair liability.  
2. Background 
2.1 Under the policy of economic liberalisation introduced in 1991, GoI took initiatives to 
attract investment capital in the upstream oil se ctor to augment the production of oil and gas 
in the context of the growing deficit between demand and availability of oil and Natural Gas 
in the country and the need for large investments in this sector. 

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
2 
 
2.2 For this purpose, GoI adopted (1992) a twin strategy of putting on offer exploration 
blocks to the private sector as well as discovered medium and small-sized fields to the private 
sector/ joint sector for development on the basis of international competitive bidding.  
2.3 The main reasons for offering discovered fi elds for private/joint sector development 
were that: 
(i) the declining trend in domestic production of Crude Oil had come at the time of 
severe balance of payment cr ises and had exacerbated the foreign exchange resource 
crunch; and 
(ii) small sized oil and gas fields discovered  by National Oil Companies (NOC) in the 
different basins of the count ry over the past few years had not proved economically 
feasible to develop. 
2.4 In the first round of bidding for discovered fields in 1992, five medium and fifteen 
small sized fields were awarded and contracts signed. The medium sized fields awarded were 
Ravva (KG Offshore), Panna an d Mukta (Bombay Offshore), Mid & South Tapti (Bombay 
Offshore) and Kharsang (Arunachal Pradesh) . In the medium-sized fields, NOCs had 40 per 
cent participating interest (PI), while the small-sized fields were to be developed entirely by 
the private sector. 
2.5 In 1993, GoI issued Notice Inviting Offers  (NIO) for the development of eight 
medium sized fields including R&RS fields a nd thirty-three small sized discovered oil and 
gas fields in India. As per the terms and c onditions for the developm ent of medium sized 
fields, a Joint Venture was to be formed which could be either a venture incorporated in India 
with equity participation upto a maximum of 51 per cent by the  bidding company or it could 
be an unincorporated venture, with PI of ONGC/OIL being 40 per cent. 
3. Ratna and R-Series fields 
3.1. ONGC discovered oil in R-12 structure of R&RS fields in November 1979 and started 
commercial production of oil in February 1983  which continued up to September 1994. 35 
exploratory and nine development wells were  drilled in R&RS fields and one well cum 
production platform was installed. 
3.2. At the time of bidding, these fields had cumulative total oil production of 12.33 
million metric tonnes (MMT) and estimated cu mulative total gas production of 1285 million 
metric standard cubic metres (mmscm) over a project life time of 22 years. Further, the 
reserve estimated at the bidding stage were expected to increase substantially through 
Exploration and Production activities, as happen ed in the case of similar fields in the 
neighbourhood.  

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
3 
 
4. Bidding/Award of contract for Ratna and R-Series fields 
4.1. GoI invited (1993) bids 1 for development of discovered oil and gas fields including 
R&RS fields . Bids in respect of R&RS fields were received (31 March 1994) from two 
consortia of bidders.  
4.2. A joint team from the Directorate Ge neral of Hydrocarbons (DGH) and ONGC 
evaluated the technical contents of the bids, sought clarificati ons from the bidders, and held 
direct negotiations with them . Thereafter, the bidders submitt ed final bids on 08 February 
1995. DGH and ONGC conducted a detailed techno- economic analysis and arrived at the 
conclusion that R&RS fields be awarded to CoSB after resolving the following issues: 
(i) R-12 structure of R&RS fields with exis ting facilities would be handed over free of 
cost; 
(ii) Nhava2 base facilities of ONGC would be utilised free of cost; 
(iii) The assumption of the bidder that oil/gas would be delivered at Heera needs to 
examined by ONGC for its techno-economic feasibility; and 
(iv) Any increase in committed capex would neither be cost recoverable nor would be 
shared by ONGC.  
4.3. An Empowered Committee of S ecretaries (ECS) at its meeting held on 26 December 
1995 recommended the award of R&RS fields to CoSB subject to the following conditions:  
(i) the consortium should be informed that the terms and conditions for the use of ONGC 
storage facility at Nhava would need to be  directly negotiated by the consortium with 
ONGC and no commitment be given on this; 
(ii) CoSB should be informed that the gas could be received by ONGC at Heera complex 
with certain modifications subject to settl ement of other commercial issues with it. 
Crude Oil had to be evacuated through SBM 3 as ONGC would not receive oil at 
Heera complex upto 2001-02 due to capacity constraint; 
(iii) CoSB should be informed that creation of a ppropriate storage facility for Crude Oil at 
the offshore loading point woul d be at the cost of CoSB and could be charged as a 
project cost; and 
(iv) CoSB to be asked to delete  the phrase ‘any abnormal situation’ from their bid to 
ensure firmness of capital and operating expenditure figures submitted by them. 
4.4. CCEA approved (February 1996) the recomm endations (26 December 1995) of ECS 
for award of contract in respect of R&RS fields to CoSB subject to the above conditions 
alongwith the time schedule that PSC would be negotiated and finalised within six months of 
the receipt of CCEA approval. Accordingly, MoPNG issued (12 March 1996) letter of award 
                                                             
1  8 medium (including Ratna and R-Series field) and 33 small sized fields. 
2 Jawaharlal Nehru Port, known as Nhava, is the largest container port in India. It is located south 
of Mumbai. 
3 A Single buoy mooring (SBM) is a loading buoy anchored offshore, that serves as a mooring point and 
interconnect for tankers loading or offloading gas or liquid products.  

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
4 
 
to CoSB intimating the decision of GoI for aw ard of contract for development of R&RS 
fields. 
4.5. The contract negotiations with the successf ul bidders of small and medium sized 
fields were not finalised from  March 1996 to February 1999 due  to various investigations 
relating to the award of contracts in the 1 st round, public interest liti gations before the Delhi 
High Court and the Supreme Court and ONGC's request to compensate it for the past cost.  
4.6. CCEA approved (March 1999) a proposal of MoPNG for: 
(a) concluding contracts in resp ect of the 12 discovered fields awarded under the second 
round in 1996 after due negotiations were held with the parties by the NTS, consisting 
of  
• Secretary, MoPNG; 
• Finance Secretary; 
• Secretary Expenditure; 
• Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs (DEA); 
• Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs (DLA) and; 
• The Chairman and Managing Director (CMD) of ONGC. 
(b) to continue the policy of offering disc overed fields for private participation,  as 
hitherto, but with bids being invited by National Oil Companies (NOCs); 
(c) MoPNG evolving modalities for past cost co mpensation separately with the MoF and 
the Planning Commission, independent of the issue under consideration herein; and  
(d) Keeping the cess and royalty levies in resp ect of awarded discove red fields at the 
levels prevailing at the time of inviting bi ds with the flexibility to provide for 
increased royalty, if required by State Government, by adjustment from cess. 
In its approval, CCEA also prescribed that PSC should be finalised within six months of the 
approval.  
4.7. In Report no. 5 of 1996 relating to audit of first round of bidding of Panna Mukta and 
Tapti fields, the Comptroller and Auditor Gene ral of India (C&AG) had observed (December 
1996), inter alia, against freezing of the rates of royalt y and cess and recommended to keep 
these on ad-valorem basis. Pursuant to this, MoPNG put up (February 1999) a proposal to 
CCEA for approval to keep the cess and royalty  levies in respect of awarded discovered 
fields at the level prevailing at the time of  inviting bids. CCEA approved the proposal in 
March 1999 for 11 small sized blocks and one medium sized block i.e. Ratna R Series. 
CCEA, thus, decided to overrule the audit recommendations in 1999. 
4.8. After CCEA’s decision, PSC in respect of nine small sized fields were signed in 
February 2001. For the remaining two small size d fields, PSC were signed in February 2004. 
Royalty and cess in respect of these eleven fields were kept fixed at the level prevailing at the 
time of inviting bids. However, PSC for R&RS fi elds had not been finalised till date (August 
2015). 
 

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
5 
 
Sequence of events for finalising and signing of PSC by MoPNG is indicated on the chart 
given below: 
 


Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
6 
 
5. Deliberations by Negotiating Team of Secretaries 
5.1 CCEA approved (March 1999) holding due negotiations with the parties by the NTS. 
Audit noticed that NTS held 20 meetings between November 1999 a nd June 2013. Further, 
during the period from May 2010 to July 2015, only two meetings were held and on both 
occasions, it was decided to hold another meeting to take a final decision in the matter. 
5.2 The NTS kept setting targets for completion of negotiations and si gning of PSC. In 
November 1999, the NTS decided that the entire process of negotiations would be completed 
by 15 February 2000.  In March 2000 meeting, NT S decided that negotiations should be 
completed by 30 April 2000 and in 7 Septembe r 2000 meeting, it was decided by NTS to 
conclude the negotiation process by 18 Septem ber 2000. However, NTS did not adhere to its 
own targets for completion of the negotiations due to reasons as disc ussed in succeeding 
paragraphs. 
5.3 MoPNG replied (August 2015) that NTS concluded the process of finalisation of PSC 
in respect of 11 small sized fields and unde rtook series of meetings examining several 
complex commercial, technical, financial and legal issues related to the negotiations and 
bringing convergence on these issues.  
5.4 Reply should be seen in the light of the f act that CCEA approval prescribed a time of 
six months for finalisation of PSC and final deci sion in respect of Ratna and R Series fields 
had not been taken even after 16 years of the CCEA approval. 
6. Deliberations on Techno-Legal Issues 
6.1 During discussion in its meeting held on 20 February 2001, NTS gave go ahead to 
process the PSC for R&RS fields for approval and signing, after financ ial capability of the 
CoSB had been analysed and accordingly the dr aft PSC was initialled by all the parties in 
April 2001. 
6.2 Review of MoPNG’s files revealed that while forwarding the draft PSC to MoL&J  
for vetting, MoPNG noted as follows: 
a) CCEA had approved finalisation of PSC after due negotiations by NTS; 
b) NTS approved that the Model PSC would be the basis for negotiation and finalisation 
of PSCs; 
c) CoSB had also confirmed acceptance of all issues raised by NTS; 
d) NTS had also approved the consequential changes; and 
e) CVC had given no objection if MoPNG desired to proceed further to  take a view on 
proposed signing of PSC of R&RS fields.  
6.3 Audit observed that MoL&J had informed (29 January 2002) MoPNG that the draft 
PSC appeared to be formally in order from legal angle subject to (i) MoPNG exercising 

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
7 
 
powers under Petroleum and Natural Gas Rule s 1959 (PNG Rules) for grant of petroleum 
Mining Lease (ML) for 25 years instead of 20 year s and grant of contract area in excess of 
250 square kilometres (sq. kms.); (ii) clarity to be brought out in PSC regarding the party 
responsible for bearing 'all costs and risks at  the delivery point' and (iii) confirmation on 
certain other changes suggested by MoL&J.  MoPNG, after review ing MoL&J's advice, 
forwarded (18 February 2002) the issue again to MoL&J for consideration and advice on the 
issues relating to the delivery point and ML. MoL&J responded (22 April 2002) that they had 
no legal objection for grant of ML for a period of 25 years and reiterated its stand that 
necessary amendment in PSC may be carried out specifying the name of the party responsible 
for bearing the costs and risks relating to delivery point to avoid dispute in future. 
6.4 Audit noticed that a series of discussions  were held thereafter within MoPNG, and 
also with MoL&J/MoF/CoSB (between May 20 02 to September 2004) for finalising of PSC 
wherein the issue relating to the loan agreemen t signed by CoSB partner,  financial capability 
of CoSB, applicability of rate of cess a nd royalty on Crude Oil and reimbursement of 
maintenance cost to ONGC were raised. The three ministries (MoPNG, MoL&J and MoF) 
kept on deliberating these issues. It was in its  meeting of 15 April 2005 that NTS authorised 
MoPNG to take necessary action on these issu es including asking confirmation from CoSB 
on applicability of cess and royalty. 
7. Issue of royalty and cess 
7.1 CCEA had approved (9 March 1999) freezing of the rates of levy of royalty and cess 
prevailing at the time of bidding and not at the time of execution of PSC. This had been 
applied in 11 other fields (exc luding R&RS fields) in respec t of which GoI had decided in 
1996 to award contract for development of fi elds. PSCs for these fields had been signed 
accordingly between February 2001 and February 2004. 
7.2 As per the draft PSC initialled by all the pa rties (including the successful bidder) in 
April 2001, royalty and cess were ` 528 per metric tonne and ` 900 per metric tonne of 
Crude Oil respectively. Levy of royalty in case of Natural Gas was to be kept at the rate of 10 
per cent of wellhead value of gas. Th ese were the rates that were prescribed at the time of 
bidding. 
7.3 During deliberations in April 2005, NTS obs erved that a long time had elapsed and 
there had been significant change in the oil price market. NTS advised that CoSB may be 
asked to confirm payments of statutory levies at  the current level rather than those prevailing 
in 1995. It recommended that the consequential changes to the PSC subsequent to the above 
may be initialled after vetting by MoL&J. 
7.4 However, CoSB did not agree to the change in the rates of roya lty and cess and stuck 
to the old agreed rates. ONG C, on its part relating to 40 per cent PI initially did not agree  
(2 May 2005) to current rates but subsequently agreed (4 Ma y 2005) to pay royalty and cess 
at the current rates. 

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
8 
 
7.5 In June 2005, AGI opined, that “Government cannot take a position contrary to what 
it did in regard to 11 other fields in the ye ars 2001 and 2004. This sta nd would not be just, 
fair and reasonable. There is no basis for discri minating against one of the twelve fields in 
fixation of royalty and cess different from the eleven others where it agreed to lesser rate.”  
AGI further stated, “there will, in any event clearly be a case of discrimination and violation 
of Article 14 of the Constitution. Further no good reason appears as to why ONGC supports 
the increase in the royalty and cess when it w ould be one of the beneficiaries of lower 
cess/royalty ......xxxx.” Moreover, representative of Mo L&J stated (19 April 2006) that “the 
NTS would be going beyond its mandate in negotiati ng any material changes such as rates of 
cess and royalty through the PSC.” 
7.6 Thus, the Government was advised (June 2005) by AGI to proceed with signing of 
PSC in relation to R&RS fields, with the succes sful bidder on the basis of royalty and cess as 
fixed in the draft PSC. Representative of MoF agreed in principle, in the NTS meeting (19 
April 2006), that cess and royalty on Crude Oil be maintained at the old rate. NTS decided 
(19 April 2006) that based on the legal opinion by AGI and MoL&J, the contract would stand 
concluded with the issue of award letter in  March 1996 and statutory levies should be 
maintained at the old level, ONGC be given 45 days to initial the ch anges to the draft PSC 
and finalise other subsidiary  agreements/contracts with Co SB partners. However, MoPNG 
decided (24 August 2006) that clear concurrence of Finance Minister be obtained.  
7.7 MoF informed (09 August 2007) that MoP NG may consider issue of necessary 
notification, in consultation with  MoL&J, prescribing the applicab le rate of cess and royalty, 
in accordance with the terms of concluded cont ract, on Crude Oil pro duced in R&RS fields 
awarded under PSC to CoSB. 
7.8 NTS (20 March 2008), which also had as its member the Secretary (Law), reiterated 
its earlier stand of maintaining old rate of cess and royalty with old cost recovery limit 
(CRL)
4. 
7.9 MoPNG re-examined the matter and decided (21 July 2009) that matter may be 
considered by NTS once again to analyse all al ternatives available. MoPNG observed that 
NTS had not analysed in detail the alternatives  available and had only reiterated its earlier 
recommendation.  This observation of MoPNG may be  seen in the light of the fact that NTS 
was chaired by its own Secretary (MoPNG) and was having representation of other Secretary 
level officers of GoI. 
7.10 Meanwhile, in response to advice sought  by MoPNG, MoL&J stated (17 December 
2009) that the award of contract for the deve lopment of R&RS fields on 12 March 1996 had 
been duly concluded and had acquired finality. It was also emphasised that the only option 
                                                             
4 Cost Recovery Limit indicates cost s incurred relating to the constructio n and/or establishment of such 
facilities as are necessary to produce, process, stor e and transport Petroleum from within the Existing 
Discoveries to enable Contractor to achieve the prod uction profile of Petroleum. The CRL for CoSB was  
USD 298.17 million. 

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
9 
 
available to GoI for consideration was the op tion, which specifies levying old rates of cess 
and royalty and old CRL. 
7.11 NTS asked (7 April 2010) DGH to prepare a comparative and consolidated statement 
regarding revenues, which would accrue to GoI applying old rates of cess and royalty and 
current rates of cess and royalty with production profile of the discovered field, so as to know 
the exact stake of GoI. DGH submitted (December 2010) analysis of GoI's take under various 
scenarios in its report. However, DGH in its repo rt stated that GoI's sh are of profit could not 
be reliably estimated as it depended on multiple  dynamic variables and any estimates would 
be indicative only.  
7.12 In November 2011, it was advised by the Fi nance Secretary, who was also one of the 
members of the NTS, that the parameters of  the bid undertaken so many years earlier are 
dramatically different today a nd the PSC had not been entered into for such a long period, 
and it would be appropriate that fresh opinion  of the Attorney General be obtained, on 
whether GoI was obliged to enter into a Production Sharing Contract with CoSB. In response, 
MoPNG referred to MoL&J’s opinion dated 30.12.2009 that “ we may reiterate our earlier 
stand confirming the opinion of the earlier Attorn ey General. There is no need to refer it to 
present AG again” and requested NTS to decide upon the course of action in the matter. 
7.13 In February 2012, the Finance Secretary reit erated his earlier queries and suggested 
that MoPNG should have a fresh look into th e matter and sought fresh opinion from the AGI 
through MoL&J. MoPNG referred the matter ag ain to MoL&J for opinion of the AGI. The 
AGI, in his opinion in October 2012, stated that the matter ha d been pending for a very long 
time and it was advisable that  it should be concluded on a fa ir and reasonable basis as 
suggested. 
7.14 Finally, CoSB agreed (August 2012) to accept the payment of cess and royalty at 
current rates with updated cost recovery limits  (CRL) based on current costs to expedite the 
formal execution of the PSC. CoSB, however, cl arified that the rates would remain fixed 
during currency of the PSC. 
7.15 MoPNG, while agreeing to the facts of the case, in reply, admitted (August 2015) that 
the issue of royalty and cess definitely delaye d finalisation of PSC fo r R&RS fields and the 
issue has been a major factor which could not be resolved to satisfaction of all the 
stakeholders.  
7.16 Audit observed that there were clear opini on on the issue of r oyalty and cess by the 
AGI and MoL&J. However, the issue was re peatedly raised and referred among various 
ministries and had been sent for opinion of  MoL&J and AGI who reiterated their earlier 
opinion. This led to avoidable delay. 

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
10 
 
8. Re-assessing financial capability of the bidder 
8.1 Audit noticed that the Notice Inviting Offer (NIO) did not indicate  any criteria for 
evaluating financial capability. However, bids  of both the bidders were evaluated by DGH 
and ONGC and based on this valuation, awar d of contract to CoSB was recommended 
(December 1995) by an Empowered Committee of Secretaries (ECS) for the approval of 
CCEA. CCEA approved (February 1996) the r ecommendations and Letter of Award of 
contract for R&RS fields was issued in favour of CoSB on 12 March 1996. 
8.2 However, after assignment (March 1999) of work to NTS by CCEA for finalisation of 
PSC, NTS decided (March 2000) to assess th e updated financial strength of the CoSB. 
Accordingly, DGH carried out (May 2000) assess ment of financial cap ability and informed 
(September 2000) NTS that net worth of CoSB was positive and it had sound financial health. 
Accordingly, NTS decided (February 2001) to pr ocess the PSC. However, final decision was 
not taken due to techno-legal issues, as discussed in para 6 above.  
8.3 Later, in August 2004, NTS again asked DGH to carry out assessment of financial 
capability of CoSB. Based on the inputs provided (Oct ober 2004) by DGH and MoF, NTS 
concluded that CoSB was financ ially capable to meet its obligations as envisaged in PSC. 
However, before processing of PSC for fina lisation, NTS raised (April 2005) the issue of 
applicability of rates for cess and royalty and fi nal decision had not been taken as discussed 
in paragraph 7 above. 
8.4 In NTS meeting (October 2011), the issue of  negative net worth of the successful 
bidder partner was again raised and it was decide d to freshly ascertain the present net worth 
of CoSB. The issue was further raised on two occasions by one of the members of the NTS 
through letters to MoPNG (November 2011 a nd February 2012). Meanwhile, in January 
2012, the CoSB partners submitted the net wo rth certificates issued by their statutory 
auditors, indicating a positive and higher net worth than that ascertained in earlier 
assessments. 
8.5 MoPNG is its reply (August 2015) stated th at NTS decided (March 2000) to assess 
the updated financial status of all awardee companies is respect  of 12 fields and matter of 
financial capability was accepted by NTS afte r obtaining opinion from ICICI Limited. The 
issue of re-assessing financial capability of  CoSB came up again only during the NTS 
meeting of October 2011. It further detailed th e circumstances leading to re-assessment of 
financial capability of CoSB.  
8.6 MoPNG’s contention of re-assessments of fina ncial capabilities may be viewed in the 
light of the fact that this exercise was conducted in the years 2000, 2004 and in 2011. Delays 
in taking final decision on va rious matters and raising of already settled issues (refer 
paragraphs 6 and 7) led to repeated assessments of the financial capability of CoSB which 
contributed to further avoidable delays. 

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
11 
 
9. Process of CCEA approval 
9.1 CCEA in March 1999 approved conclusion of contract keeping the cess and royalty at 
the levels prevailing at the time of inviting bids and directed NTS to conduct negotiations and 
finalise PSC within six months of the CCEA appr oval. Further, PSCs for the rest 11 fields 
from the bundle of 12 fields offered simultaneously under the similar terms and conditions 
had been finalised and signed by the end of  2004. As pointed out in Para 7, matter of 
applicability of cess and royalty at current rates was raised in April 2005 by NTS. AGI 
opined against the stand taken by NTS and suggest ed to go for finalisation of PSC. NTS also 
recommended (April 2006) conclusion of PSC with CoSB. However, MoPNG again decided 
(4 October 2007) that as a lot of time has elap sed since the last direction/approval of the 
CCEA as well as the announcement of the disc overed field policy, the case may be again 
submitted to the CCEA for an appropriate decision on merits. Accordingly, MoPNG 
submitted (January 2008) a Note to CCEA to take a decision whether recommendation (April 
2006) of NTS may be accepted.  
9.2 Audit noticed that the Note was returned (21 February 2008) by the Cabinet 
Secretariat to MoPNG to obtain unambiguous reco mmendations of NTS, particularly in the 
light of, inter alia, the following: 
a) It appeared that in the facts and the circ umstances of the case, there was a scope for 
differing interpretations of the legal position and, hence,  the need for the clear 
recommendations of NTS; 
b) The Note was more in the nature of a chro nicle of events and di d not clearly identify 
the issues and record the pos ition of MoPNG on them, and, the alternate courses of 
action available in the list of conflicting legal opinions had not been brought out in the 
Note after taking into account all the pros and cons. 
9.3 NTS, in its meeting in March 2008, deliberated on these issues and gave unambiguous 
recommendations which, inter alia, included: 
a) the contract ( viz. PSC) stood concluded with the issu e of Letter of Intent in March 
1996; 
b) there was no case of lack of unanimity requiring further interpretation by NTS; 
c) no alternative course of action was called for as there were no conflicting legal 
opinions; 
d) PSC should be signed as per draft PSC with  old rates of cess and royalty as the 
contract having been concluded was a legally settled issue. 
e) old rates of cess and royalty with old cost  recovery limit should be applied without 
any provision for upward revision on account of higher prices. 
9.4 MoPNG submitted (June 2008) the Note to CCEA, agreeing with the NTS 
recommendations, and requested to consider th e issues and approve th e signing of PSC with 
CoSB at old rates of cess and royalty. Cabinet Secretariat again returned (July 2008) the Note 

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
12 
 
and asked MoPNG to make certain modificati ons/corrections for some deficiencies of 
reference and removal of unwanted details observed in the Note. 
9.5 Audit noticed that as advised by the Cabine t Secretariat, a proposal for modification 
in the Note to CCEA was approved by the Minister, PNG on 09 July 2008. However, it was 
instructed by the Minister, PNG on 23 July 2008, that since the new Secretary is assuming 
charge with effect from 01 August 2008, the la tter may examine the issue contained therein 
afresh and resubmit the file. Thereafter the ma tter was again re-examined in MoPNG and it 
was decided that NTS should consider the matter once again, with a view to analysing in 
detail the various alternatives available along with their financial implications.  
This indicated change of stance by MoPNG when: 
(i) the Secretary, MoPNG was the Chairman of NTS; 
(ii) MoPNG had conveyed its agreement with the views of NTS while re-submitting the 
Note for the approval of CCEA in June 2008 only; and  
(iii) Cabinet Secretariat had returned the Note (July 2008) for some 
modifications/corrections only.  
9.6 MoPNG replied (August 2015) that the matter was re-examined by it and it was 
observed that NTS had earlier not analysed in detail the alternatives available and had just 
reiterated the earlier recommenda tions. Thus, in order to fully comply with the directions of 
Cabinet Secretariat, NTS should consider the matter once again with a view to analyse in 
detail the various alternatives available along wi th the financial implications. It then detailed 
various alternatives considered for examination by NTS in the meeting held on 21 July 2009. 
Thereafter, MoPNG narrated the sequence of events. It mentioned about the next NTS 
meeting which was held subsequently in June 2013 in which number of issues were raised 
similar to the ones discussed in the past. MoPNG further informed that a CCEA Note dated 
02 May 2014 was sent to the Cabi net Secretariat regarding issues relating to the finalisation 
of PSC for R&RS fields. However, due to change of Government in May 2014, the circulated 
Note was not considered by CCEA at that time. 
9.7 MoPNG’s reply should be seen in the light of the fact that NT S had categorically 
submitted (March 2008) clear recommendations, as  desired by the Cabinet Secretariat and 
thereafter the same were approved and forw arded by MoPNG (June 2008) for consideration 
of CCEA. CCEA returned (July 2008) that Note for correction of some deficiencies in it. 
MoPNG, also approved the revised Note on 09 July 2008. However, MoPNG’s changed 
stance again led to series of deliberations a nd clarifications which unnecessarily delayed the 
matter and has not yet (August 2015) resulted in any decision. 
10.  Non-maintenance of idle facilities  
10.1 ONGC had created facilities in Ratna R-12 field at a cost of ` 472.55 crore. These 
facilities were used by the Company for produc tion since February 1983. It had obtained a 
Mining Lease (ML) for the field in 1986 which was valid upto  February 2001.When the field 

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
13 
 
was offered for private participation, ONGC st opped production with effect from September 
1994. After adjusting the tax benefits and reve nue enjoyed by ONGC from the field, the net 
past cost that remained to be compensated to ONGC, was ` 270.46 crore. Need for settlement 
of this compensation amount has been highlighted in the earlier audit reports5. Though CCEA 
had directed (March 1999) MoPNG to evolve  modalities for past cost compensation in 
consultation with MoF and the Planning Commi ssion, the same was yet to be finalised 
(March 2015). 
10.2 Following stoppage of production from th e field (September 1994), ONGC did not 
maintain the facilities . In this regard, audit analysis of issue relating to the deterioration of 
facilities is given below:  
a) In March 2002, ONGC informed MoPNG th at pending signing of PSC between GoI 
and CoSB, facilities at R&RS fields ly ing in abandoned condition would require 
scheduled maintenance and, hence, request ed (April 2002) for reimbursement of 
expenditure on maintenance. An inspec tion team of ONGC no ticed (May 2002) 
serious deterioration of facilities including utilities and pipelines which were found to 
be totally rusted. ‘Plundering and looting’ of platform utilities and equipment in the 
absence of appropriate security system was also noticed. 
b) A team representing CoSB along with ONG C officials also visited (2007) the 
facilities and observed that the top side stru cture of platform of R-12 field as well as 
equipment, piping were severely rusted.  
c) Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD) observed (February 2010) that (i) the platform 
and associated facilities were in very bad shape – widespread corrosion, rusted 
utilities and pipes and non-operative x- mas valves, missing piping / equipment etc., 
and (ii) if this facility was to be put to use, it would require detailed examination for 
major repair/refurbishment.  
d) ONGC informed (August 2010) DGH that in view of the fact that bidding of R&RS 
fields had taken place, it discontinued field operation and accordingly no operation 
and maintenance activity had been undertaken since 1994/1995. Though ONGC 
prepared (August 2010) an estimate for the re pair /refurbishment, no action was taken 
for actual repair. 
10.3 ONGC applied (December 2002) for re-grant of ML for another 20 years which had 
not been granted by MoPNG as yet (March 2015). 
10.4 Audit noted that one of the main reasons for not undertaking repair and maintenance 
activities by ONGC was the issue of non-resolu tion of compensation for such activities. The 
issue is discussed below: 
a) ONGC informed (March 2002) MoPNG that pe nding signing of the contract between 
GoI and CoSB, facilities at R&RS fields lying in abandoned condition would require 
                                                             
5  Audit Report no.5 of 1996 of Union Government-Commercial (Paragraphs 2.15 to 2.20) and the follow up 
Report no.6 of 2005 of Union Government Commercial (Paragraph 3.3.4 (i)) 

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
14 
 
scheduled maintenance and, hence, request ed (April 2002) for the reimbursement of 
expenditure on maintenance. 
b) ONGC informed (August 2002 and April 2003) MoPNG of the necessity for 
undertaking repairs of certain  facilities, which, if not  undertaken, might become a 
safety hazard and requested for adjustment of repair cost through cost recovery.  
c) ONGC informed (December 2004) MoPNG that as a de-facto custodian of the field, it 
had incurred ` 6.92 crore and USD 3.35 lakh towards maintenance of the field during 
the years 1993 to 2002. 
d) ONGC stated (August 2010) that the estimated repair cost for the existing facilities 
would be ` 780 crore (approximately i.e. USD 159.386 million plus ` 30.25 crore).  
Audit observed that, at average exchange rate (1USD =`66.22) for September 2015, this cost 
would increase to ` 1,085.70 crore. 
10.5 In this connection, Audit fu rther observed that NTS had d ecided  (October 2004) that 
ONGC would be reimbursed the maintenance cost incurred between the date of award and 
effective dates of PSCs. CoSB also agreed to  reimburse the cost of maintenance of the 
facilities (January 2006).  Beside s, even in the event of actu al award, ONGC would continue 
to hold 40 per cent  share in the field and proper main tenance of the asset was in its own 
interest. 
10.6 Thus, while PSC remained to be finalised, the existing idle facilities deteriorated with 
passage of time. Non-maintenan ce of facilities is likely to place an additional financial 
burden on development of the field, which coul d have been avoided. It remains unclear 
whether this additional financia l burden would be cost recovera ble, in which case, it would 
reduce the revenue share of government as well as of ONGC. 
10.7 In reply to the observation issued by audit, ONGC stated (March 2014) that: 
a) ONGC had applied for re-grant of ML in December 2002, but the same was not 
responded to by GoI. Hence, ONGC was not liab le to maintain the installations as the 
field/ facilities were no longer the property of ONGC but only lying with ONGC after 
award to a JV. ONGC added th at it had been regularly highlighting the issue of 
repair/maintenance of the facilities th rough its various communications during 2002-
2004 and during the meetings of NTS, no firm decision in this regard had ever been 
conveyed to ONGC.  
b) Since there had been neither any decision on past cost reimbursement (in respect of 
discovered fields) nor on conclusion of PSC  for R&RS fields a nd in light of non-
reimbursement of expenditure already incu rred on inspection / ma intenance, it was 
not prudent for ONGC to incur any further expenditure on R&RS fields. 
c) R-12 field is located almost 40 kms. south of its nearest oil complex viz. Heera 
complex. Offshore fields were being mon itored by Coast Guards, 'Offshore Defence 
Advisory Group (India)' (ODAG), etc. and even then, inst ances of unauthorised 

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
15 
 
approach towards working installations  were reported over which ONGC had no 
control. 
10.8 Reply of ONGC needs to be viewed agai nst the fact that though ONGC had stated 
that the R&RS fields and the facilities were no  longer its asset, in the annual accounts, it 
showed that it was the owner of this field and provided abandonment liability in the accounts.  
Thus, the reply was contradictory to financial statement of ONGC. 
Further, MoPNG instructed (August 2002 and October 2004) ONGC to maintain the facilities 
and NTS also decided (October 2004) that ONG C would be reimbursed the maintenance cost 
incurred between the date of award and effectiv e date of PSC. Even after these instructions/ 
decisions, ONGC failed to maintain the facilities th at led to deterioration. CoSB also agreed 
(January 2006) to reimburse the cost of maintenance of facilities. Even after such acceptance, 
ONGC did not maintain these facilities. Fu rther, as ONGC would continue to hold 40 per 
cent share in the field, as a prudent measure, it  should have maintained these assets, which 
would have reduced the burden of repair cost. Also, linking the maintenance of the facilities 
with the non-reimbursement of past cost was not justified since the modalities for 
reimbursement of past cost were to be decided by MoPNG in consultation with MoF and 
Planning Commission.  
10.9 Thus, non-maintenance of facilities by ONGC at R&RS fields, even after specific 
directions from MoPNG/NTS was not justified and it led to deterioration of the assets with an 
avoidable repair cost. 
10.10 MoPNG in its reply (August 2015) stated that the issue of reimbursement of past cost 
to ONGC is another significant issue in making the field operational and monetizing the field 
reserves. The issue of reimburse ment of past cost to ONGC, including the cost incurred by 
ONGC on maintenance & security of these fields  over last 21 years subsequent to publishing 
the NIO would require considerat ion based on number of possi ble alternatives. It further 
stated that a salient issue has been pointed out by Audit regarding non -maintenance of the 
idle facilities in the field.  
10.11 Reply of MoPNG needs to be viewed in light of the fact that MoPNG itself was 
responsible for resolution of issues regarding reimbursement of past cost to ONGC which had 
been inordinately delayed.  Non-maintenan ce of the installations  by ONGC over last two 
decades had led to their deterioration and estimated repair cost of ` 1085.70 crore was 
avoidable. 
11.  Impact of delays in decision making 
One of the fields ( viz. R-12) in R&RS fields was a producing one. To augment production of 
oil and gas in the context of the growing defi cit between demand and availability of Crude 
Oil and Natural Gas in the country and to attr act investment of capital in the upstream oil 
sector from private entrepreneurs, GoI i ssued Notice Inviting Offers (NIO) for the 
development of eight medium sized fields  including R&RS fields and 33 small sized 

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
16 
 
discovered oil and gas fields in India. On issue of such an offe r, ONGC stopped production 
from R-12 field with effect  from September 1994. The initial in-place reserves of 
hydrocarbons estimated (1993) in R&RS fields were 57.60 MMT of Crude Oil. The reserves 
estimated at the bidding stage were expected to increase substantially through Exploration 
and Production activities. Further,  as per the proposed development plan of CoSB, expected 
production from R&RS fields over a period of 22 years was 90.39 million barrels (mbbls) of 
Crude Oil and 1285 million metric standard c ubic metre (mmscm) of Natural Gas. The 
inordinate delay in award of the field had led to deferment of such production. 
12.  Financial implications 
India is a net importer of Crude Oil and Natu ral Gas. Any domestic production of Crude Oil 
and Natural Gas would have a direct implicatio n of reducing the equiva lent import of these 
resources. Accordingly, stopping the production from the R&RS fields and GoI's continued 
indecision for their finalisation had resulted in deferment of domestic production of Crude oil 
and Natural Gas from Ratna R Series fields a nd consequent avoidable imports. Further, GoI's 
take in the form of cess, royalty and profit petroleum had not been received and been 
deferred. 
Audit attempted to work out the financial imp lications in the scenario if the commercial 
production from R-12 field of R&RS fields would have continued from October 1994 
onwards, as was being operated by ONGC earlier. However, th ese financial implications 
could not be computed as MoPNG could not prov ide business plan/details of quantities of oil 
and gas estimated to be produced by the ONGC from these fields from 1994 onwards.  
For want of requisite details, Audit attempte d to work out the financial implications on 
indicative basis, assuming that (a) PSC for R&RS  mid-sized fields coul d have been finalised 
in 2001 along with nine other fields and (b) the production from the R&RS fields would have 
started in four years eight months (eight out of nine fields starte d production and maximum 
time taken to start production in these fields was four years eight months) from October 2005. 
In this scenario, as per the proposed development plan submitted by CoSB to GoI, 56 mbbls 
of Crude Oil and 920 mmscm of Natural Gas could have been produced from the R&RS 
fields from October 2005 to March 2015. 
Audit observed that keeping discovered hydrocarbon fields (Ratna and R Series) idle without 
assigning the production rights to any party ha d led to deferment of domestic production of 
Crude Oil and Natural Gas from the fields fr om October 2005 to March 2015 to the tune of 
USD 5135 million (equivalent ` 25650 crore) and USD 110 million (equivalent ` 550 crore), 
respectively. GoI's take to the tune of ` 1050 crore on account of royalty and cess on Crude 
Oil and ` 55 crore towards royalty on Natural Gas for the said period also remained deferred 
and not realised so far (August 2015). Assumptions taken by Audit for calculations of 
financial implications are given in Annexure-I and detailed calculations are given in 
Annexure-II. 

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
17 
 
In addition to the above, the delay had led to idling of existing facilit ies at Ratna R-12 field 
since September 1994, which coupled with non-mai ntenance of these facilities, would result 
in an avoidable financial burden of ` 1085.70 crore6 on re-development of the field.  
MoPNG in its reply (August 2015) stated that the computations carried out by audit are only 
notional since no Crude Oil / Natural Gas ha s been produced from these fields and 
hydrocarbon reserves of these fields would still be in place. MoPNG further stated that the 
figures are only indicative for financial stake due to hydrocarbon reserves estimated for these 
fields. The hydrocarbon quantities indicated in the A udit Report would stil l be available as 
recoverable reserves from these fields. 
MoPNG’s reply should be seen in light of the f act that India is an import dependent country 
for hydrocarbon resources and that a producing fi eld had been closed for participation of 
private sector. Thereafter, indecision by Mo PNG/GoI for more than 20 years resulted in 
deferment of the benefits of domestic produc tion of Crude Oil and Natural Gas from R&RS 
fields. Amount of financial implications had been calculated to emphasise upon the 
materiality of deferment of financial benefits.  
13.  Conclusion  
R&RS fields were producing fiel ds at the time the decision for private sector participation 
was taken (1993). Accordingly, the fields were awarded in  1996 to a CoSB and specific 
CCEA approval was taken in 1999 for finalisa tion of PSC for the fields. CCEA decided 
(March 1999) that PSC should be negotiated and finalised within six m onths of its approval. 
However, the issue remained unsettled even af ter 23 years of the policy decision, 19 years of 
award and 16 years of approval of CCEA. This was a clear indication of lack of seriousness 
in the approach of MoPNG towards reaching at a final decision on this issue. Further, ONGC 
had also written (March 2002) to MoPNG proposi ng transfer back of these fields to the 
former. However, in the last 16 years of the deliberations at NTS and processing of the matter 
at MoPNG, there had been changes in the st ance taken on various i ssues relating to the 
matter. Indecision on award and signing of PSC fo r the fields are significant looking at the 
fact that R&RS fields were discovered fiel ds and one of the fields (R-12) was under 
production upto September 1994. Audit observed that the fact that an already developed and 
producing field was lying closed for more than 20 years, was never given its due importance 
and urgency at any level of deci sion making. This was in contra st to the objectives of GoI's 
policy of 1991 to attract private investment cap ital for further development of upstream oil 
sector. 
In reply (August 2015), MoPNG admitted the audit view that the intended contribution from 
the R&R series fields could not be realised as per objectives of GoI’s policy of 1991. 
MoPNG further stated that PSC for R&RS fields is only one off case out of 12 which could 
not be signed during last two decades owi ng to number of reasons/ circumstances beyond 
MoPNG’s control and it cannot be attributed to any lack of seriousness in approach of 
MoPNG as concluded by audit.  
                                                             
6  ONGC’s estimated cost for repair of existing infrastructure at 2010 prices with exchange rate of September 
2015. 

Audit Report No. 43 of 2015!
	
18 
 
Reply of MoPNG was not borne out  by the facts, as brought out in detail in the paragraphs 
above. MoPNG was the nodal Ministry to steer the case for final decision on R&RS fields. 
CCEA approval of 1999 clarified all the important  aspects of decision making and gave clear 
mandate to finalise the case. Also, NTS had part icipation of all the stakeholder Ministries. 
However, various aspects of the case were repeatedly refe rred for clarifications, re-
clarifications and recommendations within the same Ministries. Steps for finalisation of the 
case were not apparent even when clear view s of all the stakeholder Ministries were 
furnished. The level of importance given to this  case could be further noticed from the fact 
that only one NTS meeting was held from November 2011 to August 2015. 
Keeping discovered hydrocarbon fields idle wit hout assigning the production rights to any 
party had led to deferment of domestic produc tion of Crude Oil and Natural Gas from the 
fields from October 2005 to March 2015 to the tune of USD 5245 million (equivalent 
` 26200 crore). GoI's take to the tune of ` 1105 crore on account of royalty and cess on 
Crude Oil and royalty on Natural Gas for the said period also remained deferred (August 
2015). In addition to the above, the delay had led to idling and non-maintenance of existing 
facilities at Ratna R-12 fiel d since September 1994, which would result in an avoidable 
financial burden of ` 1086 crore on re-development of the field.  
GoI’s indecision was directly agai nst the national interest of ener gy security as it resulted in 
deferment of domestic production of oil and gas of substantial value. Keeping in view the fact 
that it was a producing field, it is imperative th at a decision is taken by GoI in the matter at 
the earliest so as to find a resolution to th is long pending issue and the fields are put to 
production again without further delay. 
 
 
 

 Report No. 43 of 2015	
 
A‐1 
 
  
Annexure – I 
(Referred to in paragraph No. 12) 
Audit had taken the following assumptions for calculation of financial implications 
1. PSC for R&RS fields would have been signed in 2001 alongwith PSCs for 9 other small sized fields 
which were signed in February 2001. All these fields were part of the CCEA’s approval for conclusion of 
contracts for 11 small sized fields apart from R&RS fields. 
2. Development of production facilities and commencem ent of commercial production from R&RS fields 
would have taken four years eight months (eight out of nine fields started production and maximum time 
taken to start production in these fields was four years eight months) from October 2005. 
3. MoPNG, in its reply to an audit query, stated (May 2015) that it was not in a position to provide details of 
quantities of oil and gas to be produced from R&RS fields. Audit has, therefore, assumed that R&RS 
fields would have been developed and production profile for the R-12, Basal Clastics, R-10, R-7 and R-9 
structures would be as indicated in the proposed Plan of Development (PoD) submitted by CoSB to GoI, 
after making required capital investment and incur ring the required cost of production. Accordingly, 
commencement of commercial production of Crude Oil and Nature Gas from various constituent fields of 
R&RS fields would have been as under: 
1. 1st Year  R-12 field    From October 2005. 
2. 2nd Year  R-10 field and Basal Clastics From 2006-07. 
3. 3rd Year  R-7 field and R-9 field   From2007-08. 
4. Though annual production of Crude Oil and Natural Gas as projected in PoD by CoSB submitted to GoI 
was lower than the daily production (shown in PoD) multiplied by number of days in the relevant year, 
Audit has, to be on conservative side, adopted the said lower figures of annual production depicted in 
PoD. It was assumed that the reduced annual figures of production so adopted would have factored into 
(a) normative loss of Crude Oil and flaring of Natural Gas that would have occurred during petroleum 
operations and (b) loss of production due to shut down of production facilities for preventive maintenance 
and/or normal repairs and maintenance etc. 
5. Crude Oil prices have been arrived at after adopting average monthly price of the Brent Crude Oil 
(specification as mentioned in the draft PSC and bidding documents) from October 2005 to March 2015, 
(source:http://www.indexmundi.com/commodities/?commodity=crude-oil&months=360 & commodity= 
crude-oil-brent). 
6. Sale price of Natural Gas = US$ 3.11 per MMBTU (as per draft PSC for R&RS fields). 
7. In the absence of data regarding post wellhead expenses, sale price of Natural Gas has been assumed as 
the wellhead price. 
8. In case of Crude Oil, royalty at the rate of  ` 528 per metric tonne and cess at the rate of  ` 900 per metric 
tonne have been assumed, as envisaged in the draft PSC. 
9. In case of Natural Gas, royalty has been assumed at the rate of 10 per cent of the sale price of Natural Gas 
as per draft PSC. 
10. In the absence of information about year wise estimated operating expenditure, an estimate for profit 
petroleum receivable by GoI could not be made. 
 

Report No. 43 of 2015 
A-2 
 
Annexure II 
(Referred to in paragraph No.12) 
Part A - Quantity and Value of Crude Oil Production Deferred from October 2005 to 
March 2015 and Consequent Deferment of related Royalty and Cess 
(To be read in conjunction with the assumptions stated in Annexure I) 
Month 
Production  
(in million 
bbls) 
(Annual 
Production/
12) 
Rate of 
Brent crude 
(In 
USD/bbl.) 
Value of 
Crude Oil  
(in million 
USD)  
{Col.2 x 
Col.3} 
Exchange 
rate   
1 USD to 
` 
Value of 
Crude Oil 
(in ` crore) 
{Col.4 x 
Col.5/10} 
Production(in 
MT) 
 (Ibbl = 0.131 
MT)  
{Col.2 x 0.131 
x 1000000} 
Royalty + 
Cess  
(in ` crore) 
{Col.7 x 
(528+900)} 
Col.1 Col.2 Col.3 Col.4 Col.5 Col.6 Col.7 Col.8 
October-05 0.121 58.52 7.061 44.82 31.65 15807 2.26 
November-05 0.121 55.53 6.701 45.73 30.64 15807 2.26 
December-05 0.121 56.75 6.848 45.65 31.26 15807 2.26 
January-06 0.121 63.57 7.671 44.40 34.06 15807 2.26 
February-06 0.121 59.92 7.230 44.33 32.05 15807 2.26 
March-06 0.121 62.25 7.512 44.48 33.41 15807 2.26 
April-06 0.121 70.44 8.500 44.95 38.21 15807 2.26 
May-06 0.121 70.19 8.470 45.41 38.46 15807 2.26 
June-06 0.121 68.86 8.309 46.06 38.27 15807 2.26 
July-06 0.121 73.90 8.917 46.46 41.43 15807 2.26 
August-06 0.121 73.61 8.882 46.54 41.34 15807 2.26 
September-06 0.121 62.77 7.574 46.12 34.93 15807 2.26 
October-06 0.233 58.38 13.627 45.47 61.96 30578 4.37 
November-06 0.233 58.48 13.650 44.85 61.22 30578 4.37 
December-06 0.233 62.31 14.544 44.63 64.92 30578 4.37 
January-07 0.233 54.30 12.675 44.33 56.19 30578 4.37 
February-07 0.233 57.76 13.482 44.16 59.54 30578 4.37 
March-07 0.233 62.14 14.505 44.03 63.86 30578 4.37 
April-07 0.233 67.40 15.732 42.15 66.31 30578 4.37 
May-07 0.233 67.48 15.751 40.78 64.23 30578 4.37 
June-07 0.233 71.32 16.647 40.77 67.87 30578 4.37 
July-07 0.233 77.20 18.020 40.42 72.83 30578 4.37 
August-07 0.233 70.80 16.526 40.82 67.45 30578 4.37 
September-07 0.233 77.13 18.003 40.34 72.63 30578 4.37 
October-07 0.667 83.04 55.408 39.51 218.94 87410 12.48 
November-07 0.667 92.53 61.741 39.44 243.51 87410 12.48 
December-07 0.667 91.45 61.020 39.44 240.66 87410 12.48 
January-08 0.667 91.92 61.334 39.37 241.50 87410 12.48 
February-08 0.667 94.82 63.269 39.73 251.36 87410 12.48 
March-08 0.667 103.28 68.914 40.36 278.11 87410 12.48 
April-08 0.667 110.44 73.691 40.03 294.97 87410 12.48 
May-08 0.667 123.94 82.699 42.13 348.37 87410 12.48 
June-08 0.667 133.05 88.778 42.82 380.15 87410 12.48 
July-08 0.667 133.90 89.345 42.84 382.72 87410 12.48 
August-08 0.667 113.85 75.966 42.94 326.19 87410 12.48 
September-08 0.667 99.06 66.098 45.56 301.17 87410 12.48 

Report No. 43 of 2015 
A-3 
 
Month 
Production  
(in million 
bbls) 
(Annual 
Production/
12) 
Rate of 
Brent crude 
(In 
USD/bbl.) 
Value of 
Crude Oil  
(in million 
USD)  
{Col.2 x 
Col.3} 
Exchange 
rate   
1 USD to 
` 
Value of 
Crude Oil 
(in ` crore) 
{Col.4 x 
Col.5/10} 
Production(in 
MT) 
 (Ibbl = 0.131 
MT)  
{Col.2 x 0.131 
x 1000000} 
Royalty + 
Cess  
(in ` crore) 
{Col.7 x 
(528+900)} 
October-08 0.640 72.84 46.587 48.64 226.61 83785 11.96 
November-08 0.640 53.24 34.051 49.00 166.86 83785 11.96 
December-08 0.640 41.58 26.594 48.64 129.36 83785 11.96 
January-09 0.640 44.86 28.692 48.83 140.11 83785 11.96 
February-09 0.640 43.24 27.656 49.22 136.13 83785 11.96 
March-09 0.640 46.84 29.958 51.23 153.48 83785 11.96 
April-09 0.640 50.85 32.523 50.06 162.82 83785 11.96 
May-09 0.640 57.94 37.057 48.53 179.85 83785 11.96 
June-09 0.640 68.59 43.869 47.77 209.58 83785 11.96 
July-09 0.640 64.92 41.522 48.48 201.28 83785 11.96 
August-09 0.640 72.50 46.370 48.34 224.14 83785 11.96 
September-09 0.640 67.69 43.293 48.44 209.71 83785 11.96 
October-09 0.617 73.19 45.122 46.72 210.81 80762 11.53 
November-09 0.617 77.04 47.495 46.57 221.18 80762 11.53 
December-09 0.617 74.67 46.034 46.63 214.66 80762 11.53 
January-10 0.617 76.37 47.082 45.96 216.40 80762 11.53 
February-10 0.617 74.31 45.812 46.33 212.23 80762 11.53 
March-10 0.617 79.27 48.870 45.50 222.35 80762 11.53 
April-10 0.617 84.93 52.359 44.50 232.99 80762 11.53 
May-10 0.617 76.25 47.008 45.80 215.32 80762 11.53 
June-10 0.617 74.84 46.139 46.56 214.84 80762 11.53 
July-10 0.617 74.74 46.077 46.84 215.81 80762 11.53 
August-10 0.617 76.69 47.279 46.57 220.17 80762 11.53 
September-10 0.617 77.79 47.958 46.06 220.89 80762 11.53 
October-10 0.614 82.92 50.927 44.41 226.18 80456 11.49 
November-10 0.614 85.67 52.616 45.02 236.86 80456 11.49 
December-10 0.614 91.80 56.381 45.16 254.61 80456 11.49 
January-11 0.614 96.29 59.138 45.39 268.45 80456 11.49 
February-11 0.614 103.96 63.849 45.44 290.11 80456 11.49 
March-11 0.614 114.44 70.285 44.99 316.21 80456 11.49 
April-11 0.614 123.15 75.635 44.37 335.58 80456 11.49 
May-11 0.614 114.46 70.298 44.90 315.67 80456 11.49 
June-11 0.614 113.76 69.868 44.85 313.37 80456 11.49 
July-11 0.614 116.46 71.526 44.42 317.69 80456 11.49 
August-11 0.614 110.08 67.607 45.28 306.12 80456 11.49 
September-11 0.614 110.88 68.099 47.64 324.41 80456 11.49 
October-11 0.562 109.47 61.531 49.26 303.08 73633 10.51 
November-11 0.562 110.50 62.110 50.84 315.79 73633 10.51 
December-11 0.562 107.97 60.688 52.67 319.63 73633 10.51 
January-12 0.562 110.99 62.386 51.35 320.33 73633 10.51 
February-12 0.562 119.70 67.281 49.16 330.78 73633 10.51 
March-12 0.562 124.93 70.221 50.32 353.37 73633 10.51 

Report No. 43 of 2015 
A-4 
 
Month 
Production  
(in million 
bbls) 
(Annual 
Production/
12) 
Rate of 
Brent crude 
(In 
USD/bbl.) 
Value of 
Crude Oil  
(in million 
USD)  
{Col.2 x 
Col.3} 
Exchange 
rate   
1 USD to 
` 
Value of 
Crude Oil 
(in ` crore) 
{Col.4 x 
Col.5/10} 
Production(in 
MT) 
 (Ibbl = 0.131 
MT)  
{Col.2 x 0.131 
x 1000000} 
Royalty + 
Cess  
(in ` crore) 
{Col.7 x 
(528+900)} 
April-12 0.562 120.59 67.782 51.80 351.13 73633 10.51 
May-12 0.562 110.52 62.121 54.47 338.40 73633 10.51 
June-12 0.562 95.59 53.730 56.03 301.05 73633 10.51 
July-12 0.562 103.14 57.973 55.49 321.72 73633 10.51 
August-12 0.562 113.34 63.707 55.56 353.95 73633 10.51 
September-12 0.562 113.38 63.729 54.61 348.00 73633 10.51 
October-12 0.536 111.97 60.053 53.02 318.43 70260 10.03 
November-12 0.536 109.71 58.841 54.78 322.31 70260 10.03 
December-12 0.536 109.64 58.804 54.65 321.35 70260 10.03 
January-13 0.536 112.93 60.568 54.32 328.99 70260 10.03 
February-13 0.536 116.46 62.461 53.77 335.88 70260 10.03 
March-13 0.536 109.24 58.589 54.40 318.75 70260 10.03 
April-13 0.536 102.88 55.178 54.38 300.03 70260 10.03 
May-13 0.536 103.03 55.258 55.01 303.98 70260 10.03 
June-13 0.536 103.11 55.301 58.40 322.94 70260 10.03 
July-13 0.536 107.72 57.774 59.78 345.35 70260 10.03 
August-13 0.536 110.96 59.512 63.21 376.17 70260 10.03 
September-13 0.536 111.62 59.866 63.75 381.66 70260 10.03 
October-13 0.466 109.48 50.999 61.62 314.24 61024 8.71 
November-13 0.466 108.08 50.347 62.63 315.34 61024 8.71 
December-13 0.466 110.63 51.535 61.91 319.06 61024 8.71 
January-14 0.466 107.57 50.110 62.08 311.06 61024 8.71 
February-14 0.466 108.81 50.687 62.25 315.55 61024 8.71 
March-14 0.466 107.41 50.035 61.01 305.28 61024 8.71 
April-14 0.466 107.88 50.254 60.36 303.32 61024 8.71 
May-14 0.466 109.68 51.093 59.31 303.00 61024 8.71 
June-14 0.466 111.87 52.113 59.73 311.27 61024 8.71 
July-14 0.466 106.98 49.835 60.06 299.30 61024 8.71 
August-14 0.466 101.92 47.478 60.90 289.12 61024 8.71 
September-14 0.466 97.34 45.344 60.86 275.99 61024 8.71 
October-14 0.449 87.27 39.141 61.34 240.10 58754 8.39 
November-14 0.449 78.44 35.180 61.70 217.08 58754 8.39 
December-14 0.449 62.16 27.879 62.75 174.95 58754 8.39 
January-15 0.449 48.42 21.716 62.23 135.13 58754 8.39 
February-15 0.449 57.93 25.982 62.04 161.18 58754 8.39 
March-15 0.449 55.79 25.022 62.45 156.26 58754 8.39 
Total: 56.166  5136.95  25655.51 7357104 1050.42 
Rounded off to 56   5135   25650 737100 1050 
 
  

Report No. 43 of 2015 
A-5 
 
Part B - Quantity and Value of Natural Gas Production Deferred from October 2005 to 
 March 2015 and Consequent Deferment of related Royalty 
(To be read in conjunction with the assumptions stated in Annexure I) 
Month 
Production (in 
million metric 
standard cubic 
metres i.e 
mmsm3) 
(Annual 
Production/12) 
Production 
(in MMBTU) 
(1 m3= 
0.0397) 
{Col.2 x 
0.0397 BTU} 
Value of Natural 
Gas (in million 
USD) @ USD 
3.11 per MMBTU 
{Col.3 x 3.11} 
Exchange 
rate 
1 USD to ` 
Value of Natural 
Gas (` in crore) 
{Col.4 x Col.5}/10 
Royalty @ 10% of 
Gas Value 
(` in crore) 
{Col.6 x 10%} 
Col.1 Col.2 Col.3 Col. 4 Col.5 Col.6 Col.7 
October-05 11.48 0.46 1.42 44.82 6.35 0.64 
November-05 11.48 0.46 1.42 45.73 6.48 0.65 
December-05 11.48 0.46 1.42 45.65 6.47 0.65 
January-06 11.48 0.46 1.42 44.40 6.29 0.63 
February-06 11.48 0.46 1.42 44.33 6.28 0.63 
March-06 11.48 0.46 1.42 44.48 6.30 0.63 
April-06 11.48 0.46 1.42 44.95 6.37 0.64 
May-06 11.48 0.46 1.42 45.41 6.44 0.64 
June-06 11.48 0.46 1.42 46.06 6.53 0.65 
July-06 11.48 0.46 1.42 46.46 6.58 0.66 
August-06 11.48 0.46 1.42 46.54 6.60 0.66 
September-06 11.48 0.46 1.42 46.12 6.54 0.65 
October-06 7.45 0.30 0.92 45.47 4.18 0.42 
November-06 7.45 0.30 0.92 44.85 4.12 0.41 
December-06 7.45 0.30 0.92 44.63 4.10 0.41 
January-07 7.45 0.30 0.92 44.33 4.08 0.41 
February-07 7.45 0.30 0.92 44.16 4.06 0.41 
March-07 7.45 0.30 0.92 44.03 4.05 0.40 
April-07 7.45 0.30 0.92 42.15 3.88 0.39 
May-07 7.45 0.30 0.92 40.78 3.75 0.37 
June-07 7.45 0.30 0.92 40.77 3.75 0.37 
July-07 7.45 0.30 0.92 40.42 3.72 0.37 
August-07 7.45 0.30 0.92 40.82 3.75 0.38 
September-07 7.45 0.30 0.92 40.34 3.71 0.37 
October-07 9.12 0.36 1.13 39.51 4.45 0.45 
November-07 9.12 0.36 1.13 39.44 4.44 0.44 
December-07 9.12 0.36 1.13 39.44 4.44 0.44 
January-08 9.12 0.36 1.13 39.37 4.44 0.44 
February-08 9.12 0.36 1.13 39.73 4.48 0.45 
March-08 9.12 0.36 1.13 40.36 4.55 0.45 
April-08 9.12 0.36 1.13 40.03 4.51 0.45 
May-08 9.12 0.36 1.13 42.13 4.75 0.47 
June-08 9.12 0.36 1.13 42.82 4.82 0.48 
July-08 9.12 0.36 1.13 42.84 4.83 0.48 
August-08 9.12 0.36 1.13 42.94 4.84 0.48 
September-08 9.12 0.36 1.13 45.56 5.13 0.51 
October-08 8.83 0.35 1.09 48.64 5.30 0.53 
November-08 8.83 0.35 1.09 49.00 5.34 0.53 

Report No. 43 of 2015 
A-6 
 
Month 
Production (in 
million metric 
standard cubic 
metres i.e 
mmsm3) 
(Annual 
Production/12) 
Production 
(in MMBTU) 
(1 m3= 
0.0397) 
{Col.2 x 
0.0397 BTU} 
Value of Natural 
Gas (in million 
USD) @ USD 
3.11 per MMBTU 
{Col.3 x 3.11} 
Exchange 
rate 
1 USD to ` 
Value of Natural 
Gas (` in crore) 
{Col.4 x Col.5}/10 
Royalty @ 10% of 
Gas Value 
(` in crore) 
{Col.6 x 10%} 
Col.1 Col.2 Col.3 Col. 4 Col.5 Col.6 Col.7 
December-08 8.83 0.35 1.09 48.64 5.30 0.53 
January-09 8.83 0.35 1.09 48.83 5.32 0.53 
February-09 8.83 0.35 1.09 49.22 5.36 0.54 
March-09 8.83 0.35 1.09 51.23 5.58 0.56 
April-09 8.83 0.35 1.09 50.06 5.46 0.55 
May-09 8.83 0.35 1.09 48.53 5.29 0.53 
June-09 8.83 0.35 1.09 47.77 5.21 0.52 
July-09 8.83 0.35 1.09 48.48 5.28 0.53 
August-09 8.83 0.35 1.09 48.34 5.27 0.53 
September-09 8.83 0.35 1.09 48.44 5.28 0.53 
October-09 9.19 0.36 1.13 46.72 5.30 0.53 
November-09 9.19 0.36 1.13 46.57 5.28 0.53 
December-09 9.19 0.36 1.13 46.63 5.29 0.53 
January-10 9.19 0.36 1.13 45.96 5.21 0.52 
February-10 9.19 0.36 1.13 46.33 5.25 0.53 
March-10 9.19 0.36 1.13 45.50 5.16 0.52 
April-10 9.19 0.36 1.13 44.50 5.05 0.50 
May-10 9.19 0.36 1.13 45.80 5.19 0.52 
June-10 9.19 0.36 1.13 46.56 5.28 0.53 
July-10 9.19 0.36 1.13 46.84 5.31 0.53 
August-10 9.19 0.36 1.13 46.57 5.28 0.53 
September-10 9.19 0.36 1.13 46.06 5.22 0.52 
October-10 8.47 0.34 1.05 44.41 4.65 0.46 
November-10 8.47 0.34 1.05 45.02 4.71 0.47 
December-10 8.47 0.34 1.05 45.16 4.72 0.47 
January-11 8.47 0.34 1.05 45.39 4.75 0.47 
February-11 8.47 0.34 1.05 45.44 4.75 0.48 
March-11 8.47 0.34 1.05 44.99 4.71 0.47 
April-11 8.47 0.34 1.05 44.37 4.64 0.46 
May-11 8.47 0.34 1.05 44.90 4.70 0.47 
June-11 8.47 0.34 1.05 44.85 4.69 0.47 
July-11 8.47 0.34 1.05 44.42 4.65 0.46 
August-11 8.47 0.34 1.05 45.28 4.74 0.47 
September-11 8.47 0.34 1.05 47.64 4.98 0.50 
October-11 7.33 0.29 0.90 49.26 4.46 0.45 
November-11 7.33 0.29 0.90 50.84 4.60 0.46 
December-11 7.33 0.29 0.90 52.67 4.76 0.48 
January-12 7.33 0.29 0.90 51.35 4.64 0.46 
February-12 7.33 0.29 0.90 49.16 4.45 0.44 
March-12 7.33 0.29 0.90 50.32 4.55 0.46 
April-12 7.33 0.29 0.90 51.80 4.69 0.47 

Report No. 43 of 2015 
A-7 
 
Month 
Production (in 
million metric 
standard cubic 
metres i.e 
mmsm3) 
(Annual 
Production/12) 
Production 
(in MMBTU) 
(1 m3= 
0.0397) 
{Col.2 x 
0.0397 BTU} 
Value of Natural 
Gas (in million 
USD) @ USD 
3.11 per MMBTU 
{Col.3 x 3.11} 
Exchange 
rate 
1 USD to ` 
Value of Natural 
Gas (` in crore) 
{Col.4 x Col.5}/10 
Royalty @ 10% of 
Gas Value 
(` in crore) 
{Col.6 x 10%} 
Col.1 Col.2 Col.3 Col. 4 Col.5 Col.6 Col.7 
May-12 7.33 0.29 0.90 54.47 4.93 0.49 
June-12 7.33 0.29 0.90 56.03 5.07 0.51 
July-12 7.33 0.29 0.90 55.49 5.02 0.50 
August-12 7.33 0.29 0.90 55.56 5.03 0.50 
September-12 7.33 0.29 0.90 54.61 4.94 0.49 
October-12 6.70 0.27 0.83 53.02 4.39 0.44 
November-12 6.70 0.27 0.83 54.78 4.53 0.45 
December-12 6.70 0.27 0.83 54.65 4.52 0.45 
January-13 6.70 0.27 0.83 54.32 4.50 0.45 
February-13 6.70 0.27 0.83 53.77 4.45 0.45 
March-13 6.70 0.27 0.83 54.40 4.50 0.45 
April-13 6.70 0.27 0.83 54.38 4.50 0.45 
May-13 6.70 0.27 0.83 55.01 4.55 0.46 
June-13 6.70 0.27 0.83 58.40 4.83 0.48 
July-13 6.70 0.27 0.83 59.78 4.95 0.49 
August-13 6.70 0.27 0.83 63.21 5.23 0.52 
September-13 6.70 0.27 0.83 63.75 5.28 0.53 
October-13 5.69 0.23 0.70 61.62 4.33 0.43 
November-13 5.69 0.23 0.70 62.63 4.40 0.44 
December-13 5.69 0.23 0.70 61.91 4.35 0.43 
January-14 5.69 0.23 0.70 62.08 4.36 0.44 
February-14 5.69 0.23 0.70 62.25 4.37 0.44 
March-14 5.69 0.23 0.70 61.01 4.29 0.43 
April-14 5.69 0.23 0.70 60.36 4.24 0.42 
May-14 5.69 0.23 0.70 59.31 4.17 0.42 
June-14 5.69 0.23 0.70 59.73 4.20 0.42 
July-14 5.69 0.23 0.70 60.06 4.22 0.42 
August-14 5.69 0.23 0.70 60.90 4.28 0.43 
September-14 5.69 0.23 0.70 60.86 4.28 0.43 
October-14 5.34 0.21 0.66 61.34 4.04 0.40 
November-14 5.34 0.21 0.66 61.70 4.07 0.41 
December-14 5.34 0.21 0.66 62.75 4.14 0.41 
January-15 5.34 0.21 0.66 62.23 4.10 0.41 
February-15 5.34 0.21 0.66 62.04 4.09 0.41 
March-15 5.34 0.21 0.66 62.45 4.12 0.41 
Total 923.16 36.78 114  552.98 55.26 
Rounded off to 920 36  110   550.00  55.00 
 