 
 
 
 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society, Mumbai
 
The Report has been laid on the table of the Parliament house 
                                         on 09-08-2011 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Defence Services) 
No 11 of 2011-12 

 
 
Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India 
for the year ended March 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government 
(Defence Services) 
 
No.11of 2011-12
 
The Report has been laid on the table of the Parliament house 
                                          on 09-08-2011 

 
 
 
 
Contents 
 
Para No./ 
Sub Para No. 
Subject Page 
 Preface ii 
1 Background and Scope of audit of the case of Adarsh  
Co-operative Housing Society 
1 
2 The Genesis 2 
3 Chronology of Events  4 
4 The land was in possession of Army though title was not 
transferred 
7 
5 Expansion of the membership of the Society 13 
6 Concessions granted by the Government of Maharashtra 14 
6.1 MMRDA Development Plan for the Area was modified 
to accommodate the Society 
15 
6.2 Grant of additional FSI 16 
6.3 Further relaxation to grant additional FSI in lieu of 
Recreation Ground 
20 
6.4 High Rise Committee 21 
6.5 Eligibility conditions relaxed in favour of the members 24 
7 Environmental clearance under Coastal Regulation Zone 
Notification 
26 
8 Inadequate oversight by the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests 
30  
9 Conclusion and Recommendations 31 
Annexure I Letter of February 2000 of Chief Promoter of the Society 
addressed to the Chief Minister of Maharashtra 
36 
Annexure II Final list of 102 members as of 2010 40 
Annexure III Inclusion of Chiefs of Army Staff as a ‘One Time Special 
Case’  
51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11 of 2011‐12  Page  ii 
Preface 
The present Report contains the findings of the examination by audit of the 
Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society. The Report emanates from the scrutiny 
of files and documents pertaining to the Ministry of Environment and Forests, 
Defence Estates and Local Military Aut horities of Mumbai and Departments 
and Agencies of Government of Maharashtra. Audit is neither equipped nor 
empowered to investigate from a criminal or forensic point of view.  
The episode of Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society reveals how a group of 
select officials, placed in key posts, could subvert rules and regulations in order 
to grab prime government land- a public property- for personal benefit. They 
resorted to falsification of records, suppression of facts, ruse of welfare of 
servicemen and their widows and children, flouting of acts and rules. The case 
is particularly alarming as individuals across the governance system at many 
levels have participated in this deceit and benefitted from it. These public 
servants have been trusted by public to safeguard its interests but there is 
enough evidence that they betrayed the fiduciary trust and acted against all 
norms of public interest and probity. The entire process of allocation of land to 
the Society, obtaining no objection from the Army, obtaining modification to 
the MMRDA development plan, getting an NOC for residential development in 
Coastal Regulation Zone, obtaining NOC from BEST for transfer of 
developmental rights of the adjoining land, getting additional Floor Space 
Index, raising height of the building wa s riddled with instances of decisions 
being taken by those who exploited their official capacity for personal benefit. 
The episode poses serious questions of probity, integrity and ethics in public 
life and among public servants, which need to be addressed by the Polity. It 
displays failure at all levels of governance. 
The Report has been prepared for submission to the President under Article 151 
of the Constitution.  

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 1 
 
 
1. Background and Scope of the audit of the case of Adarsh Co-operative 
Housing Society1 
A Performance Audit of the Defence Es tates Management was undertaken by 
Audit from June 2009 to September 2010. The Audit Report (Report No 35 of 
2010-11 of the Comptroller & Auditor Genera l of India) was placed in Parliament 
on 25 March 2011. The audit of management of Defence land as reported in the 
aforementioned Audit Report indicated dismal performance on all aspects of land 
management. It was noticed in audit that poor record keeping and lack of mutation 
of the land already in possession of the armed forces were among the major 
reasons that contributed to mismanagement of Defence land. Many cases were 
noticed where though the land was in possession of the armed forces for long, 
adequate efforts were not made to get such land mutated in favour of the Ministry 
of Defence, which is the title holder of all the Defence land. Encroachment on 
Defence land was rampant.  
It was pointed out in the said audit report that multiplicity of agencies managing 
Defence land had further contributed to the mismanagement. No centralized 
information was available on land holdings and responsibilities were diffused. The 
lines of responsibility and consequently  of accountability were blurred and on 
many aspects of land management, no agency accepted responsibility. 
In connection with the abovementioned Performance Audit of Defence Estates 
Management, the case of issue of No Ob jection Certificate (NOC) in favour of 
Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society came to notice of Audit. When Audit 
attempted in April-May 2010 to examine records relating to the case, the related 
records were denied to Audit by the Headquarters Maharashtra, Gujarat and Goa 
Area, Mumbai (HQ MG&G) and Headquarters Southern Command, Pune. Audit 
was eventually allowed to access the records at HQ MG&G Area only during 
September - October 2010. 
While examining the case in the Defence offices concerned, it was also noticed 
that questionable decisions were taken by various Departments and Agencies of 
                                                
 
1 Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society in this report has been frequently referred to as Society 
with capital S. 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 2 
 
the Government of Maharashtra and hence the scope of audit was expanded to 
cover the concerned Departments and Agencies of Government of Maharashtra 
dealing with the issue. The scope included tracing the genesis of the case and 
examining the different decisions that were taken at various levels in Defence 
offices, Departments and Agencies of Government of Maharashtra and Ministry of 
Environment and Forests, Government of India. The methodology included 
scrutiny of files and documents in these o ffices to examine the decisions taken at 
various levels. It was noticed in audit that in most cases decisions that were taken 
resulted in undue favour to the Society. Many of the officials who were involved 
in such decisions were direct beneficiaries. Either they or their relations already 
were or later became members of the Society.  
The relevant audit observations were issued to the Ministry of Defence, Ministry 
of Environment and Forests and to the Departments and Agencies concerned of 
the State Government in November 2010 and March/April 2011. The replies of 
the organisations wherever received ha ve been incorporated as and where 
applicable.  
2. The genesis  
In February 2000, Shri Ramchandra Sonelal Thakur, a serving Sub-divisional 
Officer in the Defence Estates Office (DEO) Mumbai in his capacity as Chief 
Promoter of Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society addressed a letter to the then 
Chief Minister of Maharashtra for allotment of 3854
2 square metres of land in 
Block No VI of Back Bay Reclamation Scheme (BBR), Colaba, Mumbai for 
construction of residential building for the welfare of serving and retired personnel 
of Defence Services. Copy of the letter is placed at Annexure I. The Chief 
Minister recorded on the letter on 19 February 2000 as follows: 
“Pr Sec (Rev) 
Pl call for the proposal and put up. 
Sd/” 
                                                
 
2 The actual area of the land was 3824.43 square metres. 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 3 
 
On 29 March 2000, Collector, Mumbai City approached the Headquarters, 
Maharashtra and Gujarat Area (HQ M&G) 3 for issuance of “No Objection 
Certificate” for the plot as it was under the occupation of the Military. With an 
alacrity which is usually not evident, in just six days, on 5 April 2000, the HQ 
M&G Area conveyed to the Collector that “ the said land falls in Block No VI of 
Colaba Division (Backbay Reclamation Sc heme -VI), which falls outside the 
Defence Boundary. Necessary action at your end may be taken as deemed fit for 
the welfare of service personnel/ex-servicemen/their widows”.  
The stand taken by the Local Military Authorities (LMA) was contrary to the 
facts and it allowed the select few-  the members of the Society- to 
misappropriate the piece of prime land which was in possession of the Army 
for decades though it was not formally transferred and mutated to the 
Ministry of Defence. It allowed in October 2004 the transfer of the plot of 
land measuring 3824.43 square metres  in Colaba, to the Society for ` 10.19 
crore in the name of welfare of serv icemen, ex-servicemen and their widows. 
As membership of the Society continue d to expand, the avowed objective of 
army welfare receded and the benefits accrued to senior Service officers, 
senior civilian public servants and private individuals, most of whom were 
relations of politicians and public servants. 
From the very beginning, the welfare of the servicemen and ex-servicemen in one 
form or the other was used as a ruse to grab this piece of public land. In various 
correspondences from the Society, Defence Authorities and Government of 
Maharashtra at different points of time, the prime reason for allotment of the land 
has been described as welfare of service personnel and ex-servicemen. “Girls’ 
hostel for wards of army officers posted in far flung areas”, “welfare of Kargil war 
heroes”, “welfare of widows of servicemen”, “welfare of soldiers who have served 
their motherland” were used as grounds  on almost all occasions for seeking 
relaxations in favour of the Society at different points of time.  
Contrary to such pious avowals, the acti on of the Local Military Authorities 
acting in collusion with the official s of the Defence Estates Organization 
enabled misappropriation of prime government land in Mumbai for the 
                                                
 
3 Maharashtra & Gujarat Area was changed to Maharashtra, Gujarat & Goa Area from 9.2.2004. 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 4 
 
benefit of a select few. These officials in fact were those entrusted with the 
fiduciary responsibility of protection of Defence land. They betrayed the trust 
reposed in them for the personal benefit of a number of favoured individuals- 
all of whom are highly placed. As even ts would turn out, there was no place 
for any girls’ hostel or for that ma tter any other facility for welfare of 
servicemen.  
It would be only reasonable to conclude that though references to ‘widows’ 
and ‘Kargil Heroes’ was being repeatedly made, such could never have been 
the intention as these individuals would not have the financial capability to 
meet the cost of apartments in this structure. 
3. Chronology of events 
A chronological enumeration of the violation of norms and various concessions 
given to the Society by the LMA and Departments and agencies of the 
Government of Maharashtra is given below: 
Date Event 
7 February 
2000 
Society submits proposal to the Chief Minister of Maharashtra for 
allotment of 3854 square metres of land in Block VI Back Bay 
Reclamation for construction of residential building.  
19 February 
2000 
Chief Minister marked the Society’s proposal to Principal Secretary 
(Revenue), Revenue and Forest Department (RFD), Government of 
Maharashtra with instructions to call for the proposal and put up. 
06 March 
2000 
RFD, Government of Maharashtra fo rwarded the Society’s proposal to 
the Collector, Mumbai City for self-explanatory report. 
27 March 
2000 
Site inspection by Collector indicate d that the land was enclosed by a 
boundary wall constructed by the ‘Military Department’. 
29 March 
2000 Collector approached the HQ M&G Area for NOC. 
05 April 
2000 
HQ M&G Area informed the Collector that the land fell “outside the 
Defence boundary”. It was further requested that “necessary action at 
your end may be taken as deemed fit for the welfare of Service personnel/ 
ex-Servicemen/ their widows”. 
12 May 2000 
Collector informed RFD that 
 the land is reserved for road widening as per MMRDA’s 4 
development plan; therefore NOC from MCGM 5 and approval of 
MMRDA should be taken; 
 membership should be approved by the Government and  
 Occupancy charges at 20 per cent of market rate as on 1st 
 January of the year in which the allotment is made is leviable. 
02 June 2000 Society in its letter dated 2 June 2000  accepts in writing to accommodate 
40 per cent civilians as discussed in a meeting on the same day with Shri 
                                                 
4 Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority 
5 Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 5 
 
Ashok Chavan Revenue Minister. Th e Society requested his help to 
reward and accommodate the Kargil heroes. The Minister marked the 
Society’s request to Secretary RFD. 
10 April 
2002 
Urban Development Department (UDD) approved modifications by 
deletion of 60.97 metres wide road le ading to South Colaba Harbour link 
and changing width of Captain Prakash Pethe Marg from 60.97 metres to 
18.40 metres. 
18 January 
2003 
Revenue and Forest Department, Government of Maharashtra issued 
‘Letter of Intent’ to the Society regarding allotment of the plot of land.  
17 March 
2003 
The Society wrote to Shri Sunil Tatkare, Minister of State for Urban 
Development, Government of Mahara shtra for allotment of additional 
FSI of the adjoining plot used by  Brihan-Mumbai Electric Supply & 
Transport Undertaking (BEST) as approach road, as it was finding it 
difficult to accommodate all the 71  members already approved by the 
Government.  
10 May 
2003 
Shri Kanhaiyalal Gidwani MLC and a member of the Society approached 
Shri Shivajirao Nilangekar, Re venue Minister Government of 
Maharashtra for exemption of  the income level beyond `12,500 in the 
case of ex-service men as a ‘good gesture to our brave soldiers’. 
16 June 
2003 
Shri Saurav Ray, Defence Estate Of ficer’s letter to District Collector, 
Mumbai conveying certain facts against the proposal to allot land for 
ACHS for construction of multi storeyed residential building at Block 
VI/VII in Colaba adjacent to the Backbay Bus Stand/Army POL Depot. 
08 October 
2003 
Out of the 71 members, the Collector scrutinized the eligibility of 41 
members with reference to income, domicile in Maharashtra and caste 
category and only 30 were found eligible.  
09 July 
2004 
Government of Maharashtra accorded sanction for allotment of land to 
the Society levying occupancy charges of ` 10.19 crore. List of 20 
members approved by the Government was also enclosed with the 
sanction. 
12 July 
2004 
The Society wrote to Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, Chief Minister of 
Maharashtra and Shri Sunil Tatkare, Minister of State for Urban 
Development for additional FSI of the adjacent plot used by BEST as 
approach road to Backbay Reclamation Depot. 
14 July 
2004 
Meeting held by Shri Sunil Tatkare, Minister of State for Urban 
Development for discussing the request of the Society for additional FSI 
in which Shri Ramanand Tiwari, Principal Secretary UDD stated that the 
land was reserved for BEST bus depot and was being used by BEST as 
access to the Depot, so it was not possible to allot the FSI of the reserved 
plot to the Society. The Society wa s therefore asked to approach the 
Government to de-reserve the plot by following the normal procedure 
which would take at least six months. 
28 
September 
2004 
Adarsh Cooperative Housing Society was formally registered.  
04 October 
2004 The plot was handed over to the Society. 
30 October 
2004 
UDD called for the comments of BEST on the Society’s request for 
allotment of additional FSI of the adjacent plot. 
07 
December 
2004 
Assistant General Manager (Civil) an d Additional GM of BEST opined 
that the land should be out of purview of any allotment/reservation and 
should be retained as access to the BEST Depot. 
15 In a meeting held by Shri Sunil Tatkare, Minister of State for Urban 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 6 
 
December 
2004 
Development at Nagpur, representati ve of BEST indicated that BEST 
would not give NOC as requested by the Principal Secretary (Revenue) 
for de-reservation of the land.  

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 7 
 
 
05 January 
2005 
In a meeting held in the Chamber of Sh ri Sunil Tatkare, Minister of State 
of Urban Development, Shri Ramanand Tiwari Principal Secretary UDD 
stated that the land belonged to the St ate Government and if it is to be 
allotted to BEST, it would be required  to bear the cost of land at the 
current market rate. 
11 January 
2005 
BEST decided to leave the decision to the State Government regarding 
the issue of allotment of the FSI of th e plot but requested that the interest 
of BEST be protected by maintaining present status of access without any 
encroachment on the plot. 
15 February 
2005 
The State Government amended the GR of 9.7.1999 raising the income 
limit for eligibility to all and waiving the requirement of domicile in 
respect of serving Defence personnel and ex-service men belonging to 
Maharashtra, retired State Governme nt employees and officers appointed 
to the Government of Maharashtra. 
05 August 
2005 
Government of Maharashtra allowed the additional FSI of the adjoining 
land used by BEST to the Society. 
 
Environment clearance and CRZ Violations 
11 March 
2003 
In response to a reference by the Urban Development Department of 
Government of Maharashtra for grant of ‘Development Permission’ to 
the Society, the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of 
India (MoEF) informed UDD that the proposed residential complex falls 
in CRZ II and MoEF had already delegated powers to the concerned 
State Governments for undertaking developments in CRZ II. The 
construction may be taken up as pe r the CRZ notification and approved 
revised Coastal Zone Management Plan of Mumbai. 
15 March 
2003 
Interpreting this as a ‘No Objection’ Certificate, Shri PV Deshmukh, 
Deputy Secretary UDD informed MCGM that MoEF had communicated 
‘No Objection’ to residential development in the CRZ II by the Society. 
28 July 
2004 
The State Government set up ‘High Rise Committee’ to scrutinize 
development proposals of all buildings having height more than 70 
metres. 
06 
September 
2005 
MMRDA deducted 15 per cent  FSI for Recreation Ground while 
approving the building plan of the Society. 
06 
September 
2005 
MMRDA issued Commencement Certificate for the building up to plinth 
level. 
11 June 
2007 
MMRDA forwarded Commencement Certificate to MCGM up to four 
floors. 
01 
September 
2007 
High Rise Committee issues NOC for 3 rd to 27 th  upper floors with a 
height of 97.60 metres up to terrace floor level (stilt+ 2 level podium + 1st 
and 2nd floor for commercial use + 3rd  to 27th  upper residential floors) 
22 January 
2008 
MMRDA forwarded Commencement Certificate to MCGM from 5 th to 
27th floor. 
 02 January 
2009 
The Society approached MMRDA to grant FSI in lieu of 15  per cent FSI 
for Recreation Ground deducted by MMRDA. 
24 March 
2009 
MMRDA took up the case with UDD for approval to exclude the 15  per 
cent deduction on account of Recreation Ground. 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 8 
 
 
20 July 
2009 
UDD approved the proposal to exclude the 15 per cent  deduction on 
account of Recreation Ground. 
14 October 
2009 
Meeting in MCGM to consider the prop osal of the Society to regularize 
the 28 th floor constructed by the Society without insisting on clearance 
from the High Rise Committee. 
21 October 
2009 
Shri Jairaj Phatak, Commissioner MCGM accepted the proposal of the 
Society to regularize the 28 th floor without clearance from the High Rise 
Committee and to obtain the approval of MMRDA. 
09 
November 
2009 
MCGM informed the Society to ob tain the approval of MMRDA for 
regularization of the additional 28th floor. 
04 August 
2010 
Commencement Certificate for 28 th floor issued by MMRDA directly to 
the Society. 
16 
September 
2010 
MMRDA approved issuance of occupa ncy certificate for stilt + 2 level 
podium + 28 upper floors. 
30 October 
2010 Occupancy certificate was cancelled by MMRDA. 
15 
November 
2010 
Principal Secretary UDD observed that orders for exclusion of the 15  per 
cent FSI for Recreation Ground were issued without verification about 
the availability of 15  per cent  Recreation Ground in the BBR scheme as 
large tracts of land otherwise served as Recreation Ground were occupied 
by slums. 
 
The chronology of the aforementioned events indicates the alacrity with which the 
varied requests of the Society were attended to. It illustrates how permissions were 
sought, and granted, on grounds which do not now stand to public scrutiny. It also 
indicates how vague clearances, susceptible to multiple interpretations, were 
provided so as to facilitate the rather dubious intentions of the members and 
promoters of the Society. The complicity, as  is evident, is from the organs of the 
State Government, the Armed Forces, the Central Government and Local Bodies, 
each of which is otherwise prone to be intransigent when approached by a 
common citizen. 
4. The land was in possession of Army though title was not transferred 
Facts of the case as gathered from various correspondence available in 
Government of Maharashtra as also from records of DEO Mumbai conclusively 
prove that the land was in possession of Army, a fact that the officials of 
Government of Maharashtra, HQ M&G area and Defence Estates Office should 
have been aware of, but probably chose to  ignore. The title to the land however 
was never formally transferred to the Ministry of Defence.  

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 9 
 
The following excerpts from a letter dated 12 December 1989 from City Survey & 
Land Records Branch, Collectorate Bombay City and Bombay Suburban District 
addressed to Additional Chief Secretary, Revenue and Forest Department, 
Government of Maharashtra on the propos al for construction of Rest House for 
ex-Servicemen would indicate that the Collectorate was aware as early as in 1989 
of the fact that the land was in possession of Army. It is evident that the 
Collectorate was also aware that the land did not have any City Survey number 
and the Military area and jurisdiction began from this piece of land. While dealing 
with the case of No Objection Certificate, the Local Military Authorities and 
Defence Estates Office did not have any hesitation to aver that the piece of land 
fell outside the Defence boundary. 
  
Even the letter from the Chief Promoter to the Chief Minister corroborated the fact 
that the land was in possession of the Army authorities. 
 
The letter of the Chief Promoter would clearly indicate the knowledge that 
the land was in the possession of the army. The title of the land was never, 
however, transferred to Ministry of Defence. As subsequent events would 
prove, this fact of possession of land by Army without holding the title of the 
land, was exploited in full to misappropriate the land for private benefit. 
Excerpts of letter dated 7 February 2000 from Chief Promoter of the 
Society to the Chief Minister 
 “… Presently this land is duly fenced with a compound wall and in physical possession of the local 
military authorities... We have negotiated with the local military authorities who have expressed their 
willingness to allow the Society to go-ahead with the project if certain amount of accommodation is also 
provided for Army Welfare i.e. for Girls Hostel, who will be female children of Army Officers serving in 
the far flung, remote and field areas”.  
Excerpts from Collector Bombay’s letter No CSLR/REV-II /T-2/ Misc 
1989-90 /3368 dated 12 December 1989. 
 
…The land demanded by the City Sainik Board is Government land between the Backbay Bus Depot 
and Prakash Pethe Marg in BBR Block VI. This land bears no C.S No and it is reclaimed land.……The 
land in question is in possession of the Military Department since 1940 and Military area/ jurisdiction 
begins from this demanded land. 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 10 
 
 
Even the site inspection of the Collect or on 27 March 2000 indicated that the 
land was in possession of army. 
The Collector, Mumbai City request ed General Officer Commanding (GOC) 
M&G Area, Mumbai on 29 March 2000 to confirm that Army had no objection 
for allotting the said plot to the Chief Promoter of the Society. The Collector’s 
letter again mentioned that a site inspection on 27 March 2000 revealed that the 
“military department has constructed the wall to the above plot and hence the 
Government land protected from encroachment. The same land applied by the 
above proposed Society”.  
Thus it would be evident that even the site inspection indicated that the land had a 
boundary wall put up by the military authoritie s. Indeed, it was seen in audit that 
on the land in Plot No.6 of Block VI Army had created an ‘Ecological Park’ 
named Khukri Eco Park which was inaugurated in October 1996 by Major 
General B A Cariappa, the then GOC M&G Area. This ‘Ecological Park’ was 
fenced by a boundary wall with a gate constructed by Military Engineer Services.  
Unusual alacrity by Local Military Auth orities and Defence Estates Office in 
issuing the No Objection Certificate 
The Collector’s letter was dated 29 Ma rch 2000. On the next day itself, the 
HQ M&G Area wrote to DEO Mumbai and HQ Mumbai Sub Area for 
confirmation by 01 April 2000 of the status of land in Plot No.6. Block VI. 
Displaying surprising alacrity, the DEO too on the same day, i.e. 30 March 
2000 confirmed that the land in question forming part of Block VI fell outside 
the Defence Boundary and belonged to Government of Maharashtra. The 
replies of the local military authority and the DEO, who were responsible for the 
safe custody of all Defence land in possession, ignored the fact that the site 
inspection by the Collector just a few days earlier indicated boundary walls 
erected by military authorities. 
Although the said land was in occupation by LMA, Colonel (Q) signing the letter 
for GOC HQ M&G Area concealed this fact and informed the Collector on 5 
April 2000 that the land  "falls outside the Defence Boundary ” and exhorted the 
Collector to take action as deemed fit for the welfare of Service Personnel/Ex-
Servicemen/their widows.  

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 11 
 
 
The hurry in which the case was processed by HQ M&G Area and the Defence 
Estates Office assumes significance as most of the initial members were officials 
from the Local Military Authorities and Defence Estates Office. The son of the 
then GOC HQ M&G Area was a member of  the Society, a fact that would 
indicate a clear conflict of interest . Shri M Gurusamy, then DEO, Mumbai, 
who certified that the said land was outside the Defence area was a member 
of the Society as per the list of memb ers issued by the said society on 23 
August 2002. He was later replaced.  
All Service Officers except one 6, who held charge as General Officers 
Commanding MG&G Area from February 1998 to July 2010, became 
beneficiaries as per the lists of members of the Society as made available to audit 
by Collector, Mumbai City. While Lieutenant A P Kumar, a member, is the son of 
Major General A R Kumar, the other offi cials were themselves members of the 
Society. These Officers, and the Defence Estates Officers, were individually and 
collectively in their official capacity re sponsible for the custody and protection of 
the said Defence land at different points of time. The Officers holding the post of 
the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief Southern Command from October 
2000 to September 2001 and from October 2001 to February 2004 also became 
members of the Housing Society. 
By 2002, Admiral Madhvendra Singh, former Chief of Naval Staff and Lt Gen GS 
Sihota had become members of the Society, apart from many other officers from 
Army and Navy. Eventually General NC Vij and General Deepak Kapoor former 
Chiefs of Army Staff also became members of the Society. 
 
                                                
 
6 The membership of Lt Gen Tejinder Singh was approved by the Collector on 8 February 2008. 
His name however does not appear in the final list of 2010. 
 
Excerpts from letter of Col(Q) for GOC, HQ M&G Area dated 05 April 
2000 addressed to the Collector Mumbai City. 
 
Subject: Lands- Mumbai City 
 
Please refer to your office letter No CSLR/ REV/ I/ BBR VI  Branch Revenue I dated 29 March 2000. 
The said land falls in Block No VI of Colaba Division (Backbay Reclamation Scheme- VI), which falls 
outside the Defence Boundary. Necessary action at your end may be taken as deemed fit for the 
welfare of Service personnel/ Ex- Servicemen / their widows.  

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 12 
 
List of proposed members as of April 2000 submitted by the Society to the 
Collector, Mumbai City7 
Sl. 
No 
Name of Member 
S/Shri 
Branch of 
Defence 
Services 
attached 
Sl. 
No 
Name of Member 
S/Shri 
Branch of 
Defence 
Services 
attached 
1. Brig. MM Wanchu Army 21 M Gurusamy Defence 
Estates 
2. RC Thakur Defence 
Estates 
22. PK Hinduja Defence 
Estates 
3. Col. KJS Khurana Army 23. Col. Amarjit 
Singh 
Army 
4. Cdr. SP Singh Navy 24. Lt Col. PH Ram Army 
5. Maj. RK Singh Army 25. Lt Col. RM Jain Army 
6. Maj.MD Singh Army 26. Brig RC Sharma Army 
7. Col. RK Bakshi Army 27. Lt Cdr. GS 
Garewal 
Navy 
8. Col. SD Tandon Army 28. Capt. Pravin 
Kumar 
Navy 
9. Lt. A Puran Kumar Navy 29. Lt. Cdr. JE 
Mathew 
Navy 
10 Brig. AC Chopra Army 30. Cdr. AS 
Balakrishna 
Navy 
11. Brig.HH Israni Army 31. Lt Col. HS 
Garewal, 
Army 
12. Lt. Gen. IK Varma Army 32. Rear Admiral RP 
Sutan 
Navy 
13. Brig. TK Kaul Army 33. Surgeon Cdr. PS 
Tambi 
Navy 
14. Smt Sushila 
Shaligram, Widow 
MES 34. RP Singh Defence 
Estates 
15. Cdr. Rajiv Pilo Navy 35. Maj. Ajay S 
Kapoor 
MES 
16. Capt. KH Chaoji Army 36. Col. SK Jain Army 
17. R Srinivasan Defence 
Estates 
37. Lt. Col. HS Puri Army 
18. K Subramanian Defence 
Estates 
38. Maj. Ramesh 
Bakshi 
Army 
19.  Aditya Kumar Defence 
Estates 
39. Brig. PK Rampal Army 
20.  D K Reddy  Defence 
Estates 
40. Sub. RN Thakur Army 
 
 
                                                 
7 Many of the members proposed in this list do not feature in the final list of 102 members  

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 13 
 
 
List of members proposed by the Society as of August 2002 
Sl. 
No 
Name of Member 
S/Shri 
Branch of 
Defence 
Services 
attached 
Sl. 
No 
Name of Member 
S/Shri 
Branch of 
Defence 
Services 
attached 
1 Ramchandra Sonelal 
Thakur 
Defence 
Estates 
36 JM Abhayankar Reserve 
2 Brig MM Wanchu Army 37 Cmde GB Bharti Navy 
3 Col SG Tandon Army 38 Smt Mamta R 
Kanade 
Reserve 
4 Cdr Rajiv Pilo Navy 39 PB Shingankar  
5 Lt A Puran Kumar Navy 40 AH Sancheti  
6 Maj Gen VS Yadav Army 41 PV Deshmukh  
7 Maj Gen PK Rampal Army 42 Rajesh Tiwari  
8 Lt Cdr GS Grewal Navy 43 Smt P Mamta Devi Reserve 
9 Brig RC Sharma Army 44 GS Koli Reserve 
10 Col Amarjeet Singh Army 45 Maj Tejbir Singh Army 
11 Lt Col PH Ram Army 46 SS Chavan Reserve 
12 Capt Praveen Kumar Navy 47 SR Ruke Reserve 
13 Col RK Bakshi Army 48 AV Karbhari Reserve 
14 M Gurusami Defence 
Estates 
49 KW Bhandge Reserve 
15 Brig AC Chopra Army 50 Miss HM Havnur Reserve 
16 Aditya Kumar Defence 
Estates 
51 Kanhaiyalal 
Gidwani 
MLC 
17 K Subramanian Defence 
Estates 
52 Miss KS Godbole  
18 DK Reddy Defence 
Estates 
53 Cdr KG Singh Navy 
19 Cdr AS Balakrishna Navy 54 Cdr H Singh Navy 
20 Maj RK Singh Army 55 Jawahar K Jagyasi Reserve 
21 Sub RA Thakur Army 56 Kailash K Gidwani  
22 Lt Cdr John Mathews Navy 57 Miss Devyani 
Khankhoge 
 
23 Cdr PS Tampi Navy 58 Miss Archana 
Tiwari 
 
24 Rear Adm RP Suthan Navy 59 Amit Gidwani  
25 R Srinivasan Defence 
Estates 
60 Sunil S Patil  
26 PK Hinduja Defence 
Estates 
61 Dr AK Bopardikar  
27 SR Kowey Reserve 62 VS Jadhav  
28 Smt Susheela 
Shaligram 
 63 JM Vaidya  
29 Col KSJ Khurana Army 64 Miss Nikita R 
Kasat 
 
30 Maj Gen TK Kaul Army 65 Smt Jayashri A 
Bhosale 
 
31 SF Rajput Reserve 66 Smt Rakhi J 
Bhangad 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 14 
 
32 Adm Madhvendra 
Singh 
Navy 67 Malay J Shah  
33 Lt Gen GS Sihota Army 68 Hiralal D Shah  
34 HP Badriprasad Defence 
Estates 
69 Arun Pawar  
35 Maj MD Singh Army 70 Seema Vinod 
Sharma 
 
   71 Wg Cdr KV 
Bopardekar 
Air Force 
The final list of 102 members as of 2010 is at Annexure II. 
As would be seen from the lists of members, while on the one hand, the 
membership kept expanding, on the other hand even junior service and civilian 
officers went out of the Society and many senior service officers and public 
servants became members. Notable among the service officers who became 
members of the Society at a later date were two former Chiefs of Army Staff, 
General NC Vij and General Deepak Kapoor. Both of them were allowed to be 
members of the Society as “one time special case” (Annexure III)  keeping in 
view their noteworthy service in Indian Army and their social status. Thus in the 
name of welfare of servicemen and ex-servicemen, it was the select elite 
belonging to Services and civilian administration, politicians and individuals 
connected with them who benefitted from misappropriation of the public property. 
As subsequent paragraphs would reveal, Government of Maharashtra and Ministry 
of Environment and Forests actively further aided and abetted by relaxing 
regulations and turning a blind eye to the construction of a 31 storey building in 
the heart of Mumbai, not far from Mantralaya. 
In terms of Collector, Mumbai City letter No. CSLR/REV-1/ACHS/2011 dated 
11.06.2011, General (Retd.) NC Vij in his letter dated 30.10.2010 had requested 
the Honorary Secretary of the Society to communicate the necessary formalities to 
enable him to return his flat to the Society. He had also requested that the returned 
flat may be allotted to a war widow. No decision has yet been taken either by the 
Society or by the Collector’s office. 
5. Expansion of the membership of the Society 
Even though, the Society was originally formed to help primarily the 
“Servicemen, ex-servicemen and their widow s”, increasingly, as events unfolded, 
its membership was expanded considerably to include civilian officers belonging 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 15 
 
to Indian Administrative Service, politicians and their relations and other senior 
Service officers. As of December 2010, the Society had 102 members. 
Table 1: Changing composition of members of the Society 
Year Defence8 Other than Defence Total Members 
2000 40 0 40 
2002 38 33 71 
2003 45 50 95 
2010 37 65 102 
The list of the members as intimated by the Society to the Collector, Mumbai City 
initially on 10 April 2000 indicated that the Society largely comprised members 
belonging to Defence Services and civilia n organisations related to Defence. Out 
of the 40 members, 30 were serving and retired Service officers, Eight belonged to 
Defence Estates Organisation, one offi cer belonged to the Military Engineer 
Services (MES) and one was a widow of a retired MES employee. The final list of 
102 members as of 2010 included 37 Defence officers including civilians, 15 
retired government servants, Eight Members of Parliament or State legislatures 
and 42 individuals, who were mostly re latives of Government officers and 
politicians. 
Although letters to the State Government by the Society mentioned welfare 
measures like “ Girls hostel ” and “ to reward Kargil heroes ”, in reality, the 
membership was extended from time to time to accommodate more senior officers 
of Services, State Government and private individuals. 
6. Concessions granted by the Government of Maharashtra 
The flouting of norms in the case was not only restricted to wrongful 
appropriation of government land to benef it influential armed Forces and civilian 
officers, politicians and their relations. Almost at every stage, significant 
concessions were extended by the Government of Maharashtra in favour of the 
Society. Many officers -both civilian and Services- who were dealing with the 
case and were instrumental in taking those decisions eventually became members 
of the Society. In some cases, relations of these officers became the members. 
 
                                                
 
8 Including Defence related civilian organizations. 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 16 
 
6.1 MMRDA Development Plan 9 for the Area was modified to 
accommodate the Society 
On 12 May 2000, Collector, Mumbai City reported to Government of 
Maharashtra, Revenue and 
Forest Department (RFD) 
that the land sought by the 
Society was reserved for 
road widening as per 
Mumbai Metropolitan 
Region Development 
Authority’s (MMRDA) 
development plan and 
therefore NOC from 
Municipal Corporation of 
Greater Mumbai (MCGM) 
and approval of MMRDA 
should be taken and that the 
membership should be 
approved by the 
Government.  
On 02 June 2000 the 
Society addressed another 
letter to the Minister of Revenue signed by Shri R C Thakur as Chief Promoter 
and Brigadier (Retd) MM Wanchu as Secretary of the Society. The letter referred 
to a meeting that had taken place with the Minister on the same day. The Society 
conveyed in the letter its consent to accommodate 40 per cent civilian members- 
19 members against 31 from Defence Services as stated in the letter. It stated that 
they would be willing to leave an area of 10 to 15 feet for further widening of the 
road, though  "basically the area falls in the vicinity of Military area and there 
appears to be no proposal of widening of road by Defence Department ”. The 
Society in the same letter sought the help of the Minister “ to accommodate and 
reward our Heroes of Kargil operation who bravely fought at Kargil to protect 
                                                
 
9 The map shown below is taken from Urban Development Department, Govt of Maharashtra 
PART PLAN OF SANCTIONED DEVELOPMENT PLAN OF BACK BAY 
RECLAMATION AREA
Colours added for clarity 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 17 
 
our Motherland ”. The Society therefore requested to “ kindly allot this piece of 
land which is already in the physical custody of Local Military Authorities, who 
have been protecting the land from encroachment since last 25-30 years”. 
After calling for objections/suggestions fro m the public in October 2001, Urban 
Development Department (UDD) appr oved modifications to the MMRDA 
Development Plan in April 2002 by deletion of 60.97 metres wide road leading to 
South Colaba Harbour link and changing width of Captain Prakash Pethe Marg 
from 60.97 metres to 18.40 metres and inclusion of the deleted area in Residential 
Zone, Parade Ground, Helipad, Garden and BEST Depot. During audit, it was 
noticed that on past occasions
10, the Government of Maharashtra had decided 
against allotment of the land for genuine welfare of ex-servicemen on the ground 
that the land was earmarked for widening of the very same road.  
Thus the Development Plan of the area was amended and the area reserved 
for roads was converted into residential area to facilitate the housing project 
by the Society. 
6.2 Grant of additional FSI 
Meanwhile, the membership list of Society went on expanding much beyond the 
19 civilian members agreed to earlier by the Chief Promoter in June 2000. On 15 
March 2003, the Chief Promoter of the Society furnished the information required 
in the Letter of Intent along with a list of 95 members comprising 45 Defence 
personnel (including eight Defence Estates Officers and one MES officer) and the 
remaining either MLAs/MLCs, or officers of Government of Maharashtra or their 
relations and private persons. In order to  accommodate the additional members, 
Society requested the Urban Development Department (UDD) on 17 March 2003 
for allotment of additional Floor Space Index (FSI) of adjoining plot of 2669.68 sq 
metres used by BEST as approach road to its depot on payment of reasonable 
charges. Interestingly, in his letter, the Chief Promoter termed the use of the land 
by BEST as “unauthorized” and also stated that  BEST cannot use the FSI of this 
land for expansion of Depot due to CRZ restrictions.  
                                                
 
10 Request of Bombay City Sainik Welfare Office for allotment of land for construction of a rest 
house was refused in March 1986 by Collector Mumbai City and again in December 1989. 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 18 
 
 
It could be seen that the Society had no hesitation to state that the use of the 
adjacent plot of land by BEST was “unauthorised” ignoring the status of their own 
plot. While it stated that no building coul d be constructed on the land used by 
BEST “there being restrictions of CRZ in their open plot”, it conveniently ignored 
the fact that transfer of developmental rights on the plot was not admissible in 
accordance with the CRZ regulations and Development Control Rules. While 
DCR11 1967 did not even mention about Transferable Developmental Rights 
(TDR), DCR 1991 prohibited utilisation of TDRs in the island city. Society’s 
claim in the same letter that Ministry of Environment and Forests had issued a No 
Objection Certificate was also misleading as explained in Paragraph 7 below in 
this report.  
Shri Kanhaiyalal Gidwani, MLC and a member of the Society also addressed a 
letter on 21 March 2003 to the Chief Minister of Maharashtra enclosing the letter 
of the Society and requesting to “ adopt a supporting and positive approach to 
their request ”. He had mentioned in the letter that the Society was “ mainly of 
persons from the Armed Forces (Army, Ai r Force, Navy and other Service), who 
have dedicated their lives to the safety of our Motherland”. By that time, however, 
a majority of members were civilians. 
                                                
 
11 DCR is Development Control Rules. Details have been discussed in Paragraph 6.3 of this report. 
Excerpts from the letter of the Chief Promoter 
In view of its unauthorised use by BEST for approach road the said area is not likely to be used for any 
Construction/Development activity which will remain open to sky forever. The BEST can not use it’s FSI for 
expansion of their Depot, there being restrictions of CRZ in their open plot. We also do not want hindrances 
to the BEST for its use as approach road to their depot. 
 
While granting the subject land to our society, the Govt. of Maharashtra has imposed specific condition that 
the society will obtain NOC from Department of Environment and Forest, Govt. of India, since it falls in CRZ 
II Zone. It is submitted that the department of Environment and Forest Govt. of India have considered our 
case on priority as a goodwill gesture to serving and ex-service man looking to their service towards the 
mother land and have accorded their NOC. They have also directed the Urban Development Department of 
Govt. of Maharashtra that such cases of permission for construction in CRZ II Zone need not be referred to 
them and same can be decided by Mantralaya in Mumbai. Thus it can be seen that our efforts have brought 
positive result for all such cases pending in Mantralaya in CRZ II Zone. In this connection a copy of letter of 
Govt. of India Ministry of Environment and Forest, Paryavaran Bhavan, C.G.O. Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi – 110003, No. J. 17011/46/2002-IA III dated 11
th March, 2003 is enclosed herewith. Based on above 
clearance the Urban Development Department of Govt. of Maharashtra have already directed the Chief 
Engineer, (Development Plan), Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation, Fort, Mumbai, to sanction building 
construction vide their letter no. TPB 2099/1095/CR-154/99/UD-12 dated 15
th March, 2003. 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 19 
 
The request of transfer of developmental rights was rejected by the Chief Minister 
in November 2003 and Shri Gidwani was informed accordingly by Shri Sunil 
Tatkare, Minister of State for Urban Development in his letter dated 6 January 
2004. 
The Society again addressed letters to the Chief Minister and the Minister of State 
for Urban Development on 12 July 2004 requesting allotment of additional FSI to 
accommodate the members as per the entitlement. Reiterating its request for 
allotment of the FSI of the adjacent land used by BEST as approach road to the 
Backbay Depot, the Society pointed out in its letter that while the proposed action 
would benefit BEST as they would continue to use the land as approach road since 
the Society had undertaken to keep the land “ open and free from any 
construction”, “at the same time,” the letter mentioned that “it will benefit some of 
our members, who are mostly from the Armed Forces and are serving the Mother 
Land”.  
The Minister of State for Urban Development convened a meeting on 14 July 
2004 for considering the proposal of the So ciety for allotment of additional FSI. 
The Commissioner MMRDA, Collector Mumbai City, Shri Kanhaiyalal Gidwani 
Member of the Legislative Council (MLC), Shri Ramanand Tiwari Principal 
Secretary UDD and representatives of BEST  were present in the meeting. Shri 
Gidwani informed in the meeting that the Government of Maharashtra had allotted 
3758.82 square metres land for construction of residential building and as per the 
directives 71 members were to be accommodated. To suggest that 71 members 
had to be accommodated “as per the directives” was itself misleading as the 
members were proposed by the Society itself.
12  
As the FSI was not sufficient, Shri Gidwani indicated the requirement of 
additional FSI of adjoining land being used by BEST. Shri Ramanand Tiwari, 
Principal Secretary, UDD informed that as the land was reserved for BEST Depot 
and was in use as an access to the BEST bus depot, it would not be feasible to 
allot the FSI of this reserved land to the Society. “In order to sort out the issue”, he 
further stated that the Society would have to approach the Government of 
                                                
 
12 The deliberations in the meetings have been taken from the minutes and notes of BEST. 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 20 
 
Maharashtra for allotment of the said land by deleting reservation of BEST bus 
depot by following the due process of law, which would take at least six months.  
Subsequently, in October 2004, UDD called for the specific comments of BEST to 
consider request of the Society for a dditional FSI. In a meeting held on 15 
December 2004 at the official residence of Shri Rajesh Tope, Minister of State 
(UD) in Nagpur in which S/Shri Kanhaiyalal Gidwani and RC Thakur were 
present, the Assistant General Manager (Civil) of BEST informed that it would 
not grant NOC for de-reservation of land as suggested by Shri Ramanand Tiwari 
Principal Secretary UDD in the earlier meeting. Further he informed that if the 
Government of Maharashtra decided to transfer FSI of this plot to the Society with 
certain conditions, BEST would examine the proposal as and when received.  
In the subsequent meeting convened by the Minister on 05 January 2005, Shri 
Ramanand Tiwari, Principal Secretary (UDD), informed that the land belonged to 
the State Government and that BEST would be required to pay the cost of land at 
the then market rate if allotted to them. The Minister of State directed BEST to 
send their comments to UDD.  
In response, BEST informed UDD on 12 January 2005 that BEST was using the 
land as an access to Back Bay Depot since 1976 though the land was not in 
possession of BEST and that the Government may decide on the request of 
Society. However, while allowing use of land as per the Society’s request, BEST’s 
interest should be fully protected by main taining the present status of the access. 
Accordingly, Revenue and Forest Department allowed the additional FSI of the 
adjoining land of BEST to Society on 05 August 2005. 
Thus, the misappropriation of the land in possession of the Army was further 
compounded by transfer of FSI of anot her piece of public land. It would be 
clear from the meetings that the propos al of the Principal Secretary to ask 
BEST to pay for the land amounted to a threat which possibly compelled 
BEST to succumb to agree with the proposal of the Society. Asking a public 
utility to pay the market price of the land essentially to compel them to agree 
to transfer the FSI in favour of the pri vate Society was blatant violation of all 
norms of public interest. While BEST was asked to pay the cost of land at the 
market rate, the Society paid only `6.14 crore. 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 21 
 
The fact that the proposal was once rejected  by the earlier Chief Minister did not 
figure in any discussions. Audit also did not come across any 
correspondence/documents which suggested that Shri Ramanand Tiwari Principal 
Secretary UDD had brought this issue on record.  
Shri Onkar Tiwari, son of Shri Rama nand Tiwari eventually became a 
member of the Society. 
6.3 Further relaxation to grant additional FSI in lieu of Recreation 
Ground (RG) 
MMRDA, while approving the plan of the Society building in September 2005 
and January 2008, had deducted 15 per cent FSI for ‘Recreation Ground’ (RG) 
under Regulation 35 of DCR 1991. A proposal to release this FSI to the Society 
was earlier rejected by the Government of Maharashtra in June 2006. 
The architect of the Society again proposed to MMRDA on 02 January 2009 to 
grant additional FSI in lieu of RG area on the grounds that in Back Bay 
Reclamation Scheme as block wise RG was already provided and therefore FSI on 
account of RG was not to be deducted from individual plots. Later, on 26 May 
2009, Society also forwarded to the Collector eight names
13 “to be accommodated 
in Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society if the additional FSI is sanctioned by the 
Government.” The conditional membership of the Housing Society was unusual. 
In the same letter, the Society also intimated the approval of membership of 
Shri Mukundrao Govindrao Mankar and Smt I A Kundan. Smt Kundan was 
as on that date Collector, Mumbai Ci ty and was directly dealing with the 
matters relating to the Society.  
Meanwhile, Shri Ratnakar Gaikwad, Commissioner MMRDA addressed a letter 
on 24 March 2009 to Shri TC Benjamin Principal Secretary Urban Development 
Department enclosing the letter of the architect and conveying that there was no 
need for deduction of 15 per cent of FSI towards RG. He requested for a decision 
in the matter.  
                                                
 
13 S/Shri Dilip Dattatray Walse Patil, Anil Kumar Thakur, Dr Sharda Chintaman Mormare, Prof 
Sattya Sandha Vinayak Barve, Major Ganpatrao Madhavrao Chavan, Ms Sheetal Vinod Ganju, 
Smt Nandini Mudholkar  and “ one serving army officer- name to be forwarded subsequently, who 
is away on field duty.”  

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 22 
 
On a note of Urban Development Department dated 4 April 2009 on the letter 
from Commissioner, MMRDA, the Principal Secretary on 8 April 2009, rejected 
the proposal for relaxation of FSI on account of RG. However, in another note on 
2 June 2009, the same Principal Secretary proposed to the Chief Minister that “if 
15 per cent  RG area is available in the Scheme, we may agree with the 
Metropolitan Commissioner to allow the developer not to exclude 15  per cent RG 
area from FSI computation.” The Chief Minister approved the proposal and 
Principal Secretary received the file back on 20 July 2009. On the same day, 
approval was communicated to the Commissioner, MMRDA. 
A subsequent note of the same Principal Secretary on 15 November 2010 
indicated that “It was expected that while issuing orders, after this note (note dated 
2 June 2009
14) was approved, required verification about the availability of the 15  
per cent RG area in the Scheme would be done. This does not seem to have been 
done. From what I gather, large tracts of land otherwise reserved for RG, is 
presently occupied by slums, thereby creating a possibility that RG area may not 
be to the extent of 15  per cent . This indeed will vitiate the decision of the 
Government.” 
It would be apparent that in the note put up to the Chief Minister, there was no 
mention of any verification of availabili ty of RG area on the ground. The note of 
November 2010 thus appears to be an afterthought and of little value to correct the 
situation. 
6.4 High Rise Committee 
The CRZ Notification of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of 
India (MoEF) came into effect on 19 February 1991. As per that Notification the 
plot in question fell in CRZ II.  Buildings permitted in the area shall be subject to 
the existing local Town and Country Planning Regulations. As on that date, for 
Backbay Reclamation Area, Development Control Rules (DCR) 1967 were 
applicable.  This fact was corroborated  and supported in the meeting of the 
Maharashtra Coastal Zone Management Authority (MCZMA) held on 3-11-2010.  
As per the minutes, the authority noted that the site under reference falls in CRZ-
II.  As per the clarifications given by MoEF vide letters dated 8-9-1998 and 18-6-
                                                
 
14 Insertion in the bracket is by audit for clear reference. 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 23 
 
2006 as well as the order of Hon. Supreme Court dated 14-12-2007 in SLP (C) 
No. 14578 regarding M/s Suresh Estate v/ s Govt. of Maharashtra, the approved 
Development Control Rules, 1967 (i.e. the Development Control Rules under 
implementation and in force as on 19- 2-1991) are applicable for building 
construction activities proposed in CRZ-II areas of Mumbai. 
According to DCR 1967, no building should be erected or raised to a height 
greater than one-and-a-half times the sum of  the width of the streets on which it 
abuts and the width of the open space between the street and the building as 
measured from the level of the centre of the street in front. The maximum height 
of the Society building permissible as per the DCR 1967 according to MCZMA 
was 45.6 metres. 
However, for the Society, DCR 1991 was c onsistently applied incorrectly by the 
Adarsh Society as also by different Departments and agencies of Government of 
Maharashtra. The DCR 1991 had no height restriction but brought down the FSI 
for BBR Block VI to 1.33 from 3.5 as per the DCR 1967. The Society as also the 
Government of Maharashtra used DCR 1991 to avoid the applicable height 
restriction (45.6 metres) of DCR 1967.  The loss of FSI (from 3.5 to 1.33) was 
offset by transferring the developmental rights of the BEST plot and relaxation of 
15 per cent  on account of RG as and when required.  The Society was thus 
allowed to circumvent both DCR 1967 and DCR 1991.  
The Government of Maharashtra set up a High Rise Committee chaired by a 
retired Chief Justice of Tamil Nadu High Court on 28 July 2004 to scrutinize the 
development proposals of all the buildings with height of more than 70 metres and 
advice the Municipal Commissioner on the feasibility of development proposals. 
The proposal of the Society for the construction of the building up to 27 floors 
(stilt + 2 level podium + 27 upper floors) height of 97.60 metres was accepted by 
the High Rise Committee.  This was after MMRDA informed that the marginal 
open spaces and parking proposed were in accordance with DCR 1991 sanctioned 
by the Government.  The NOC was issued by the Chief Engineer (Development 
Plan) of MCGM on 01 September 2007 based on this approval. 
However, against the approval for 27 floors issued by MCGM, the Society 
constructed 28 floors. A meeting was held in MCGM on 14 October 2009 for 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 24 
 
considering the proposal of the Society for one additional floor which was already 
constructed by increasing the height to 100.70 metres (stilt + 2 level podium + 28 
upper floors).  In the meeting, the Managing Committee members of Adarsh Co-
operative Housing Society and its architect explained that NOC was issued for 
97.6 metres on 01 September 2007.  They further added that at the time the 
structural design of the building was submitted, it was for the height of 103.40 
metres, thereby the High Rise Committee had already scrutinized the proposal for 
the height of the building of 103.40 metres .  But as the Architectural Plans were 
submitted for the height of building at 97.6 metres, the NOC dated 01 September 
2007 was accordingly issued.  Further as the CFO, NOC and environmental 
submission had also been submitted at that time as per the requirements, the 
Managing Committee members of the Societ y requested grant of permission to 
regularize the constructed floor without insisting on the clearance from the High 
Rise Committee.   
The Deputy Chief Engineer (BP) City submitted a note on 20-10-2009 to the 
Municipal Commissioner (MC) on which the MC 'ordered' 'Yes'.  The note read as 
follows: "This has reference to the discussion with OSD to MC on 20-1-2009.  
The information in respect of Adarsh Co -op. Hsg. Society is as follows:- The 
plans are approved for stilt +2 level podium +27 upper floors for the said building 
with the proposed built up area upto 27th floor is 7692.64 Sq. mt.  As per the letter 
of MMRDA dated 22-1-2008, the C.C. is also granted for stilt + 2 level podium + 
27 upper floors.  It may be mentioned that as per the approved plan, the total floor 
height of the building is 97.60 mt. and height upto top of lift machine room is 
102.80 mt. and upto top of overhead tank is 104.60 mt.  The High Rise Committee 
u/no. CHE/HRB=57/DPWS dated 1-9-2007 has issued N.O.C. upto 97.60 mt. upto 
terrace floor level as per the approved plan and C.C.  As such there is no necessity 
to obtain fresh N.O.C. from High Rise Committee."   Shri Jairaj Phatak, Municipal 
Commissioner, MCGM accepted the cont ention of the Society on 21 October 
2009 stating that "there is no need to obtain fresh NOC from High Rise 
Committee.  However the appropriate au thority i.e. MMRDA's approval may be 
obtained", MMRDA then issued the NOC for 28
th floor on 04 August 2010. The 
son of Shri Jairaj Phatak eventually became a member of the Society. 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 25 
 
The NOC issued upto 27 th floor for the total height of the building included 
machine room and overhead water tank, was 104.45 metres (97.60 +6.85). After 
construction of the 28 th floor, without prior approval of MCGM/MMRDA, the 
total height of the building increased to 107.55 metres (100.70 +6.85). 
6.5 Eligibility conditions relaxed in favour of the members 
Revenue and Forest Department, Government of Maharashtra issued a letter of 
intent on 18 January 2003 conveying the intention of the Government to allot the 
plot of land to the Society subject to inter alia  verification of eligibility of the 
proposed members by the Collector in terms of the GR dated 9 July 1999. The 
letter enclosed a list of 71 members to the Collector with the direction to verify the 
eligibility of the proposed members in terms of the abovementioned GR. The 
conditions envisaged in the said GR included a minimum of 15 years’ domicile in 
the state of Maharashtra and stringent income limit. For example, the income limit 
for a 650 square feet carpet area was ` 12,500 per month. There was no limit for 
carpet area of 1076 square feet.  
Initially the Society submitted details of 41 members, which were scrutinized by 
the Collector Mumbai City with respect to the criteria of income, domicile and 
caste. Only 30 members were found eligible. This was communicated by the 
Collector Mumbai City to the RFD on 8 October 2003.  
At the instance of the RFD, the Collector re-checked the eligibility after obtaining 
additional details from Society and intim ated RFD on 18 March 2004 that out of 
the same 41 members, only 19 were eligible, four ineligible and for 18 members, 
decisions were required to be taken at Government level. Out of the 18 members, 
in the case of 16, Government decision regarding cut off length of service in 
Maharashtra for domicile certificate was required while in two cases, Government 
decision was required on both the domicile as well as income criteria as their 
income exceeded the prescribed limit of `12,500. On 11 March 2004, the Society 
furnished details of balance 30 members which included a proposal to replace 16 
members from the earlier list. It also forwarded another list of 22 members on 
‘waiting list’.  

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 26 
 
 
Meanwhile Shri Kanhaiyalal Gidwani, MLC, approached the Revenue Minister on 
10 May 2003 to increase the income limit prescribed in the GR of 09 July 1999 in 
respect of ex-servicemen beyond `12,500 as a good gesture to the brave soldiers 
who served the motherland. It would be apparent that many of the proposed 
members of the Society did not fulfill the eligibility criteria in terms of domicile 
conditions or income limits.  
Government of Maharashtra amended, on 15 February 2005, the provisions 
of the Government Resolution of July 1999 by raising the income limit of all 
and waiving the requirement of domi cile in respect of retired State 
government employees and serving a nd retired service personnel from 
Maharashtra.  
Government of Maharashtra’s relaxation of domicile requirement and income 
limit on 15 February 2005 was another favour that enabled many to become 
members of the Society. In fact, the relaxation of domicile condition enabled 
many current or retired service officers to become members. In one case of a 
Lieutenant General, his serving period at a training centre in Maharashtra from 
January 1968 to July 1971 made him eligible. There were other officers also 
whose serving periods were for a few year s in Maharashtra in late sixties and 
seventies. 
Excerpts from the Collector’s letter dated 18 March 2004. 
1st issue raised by Government was that requirement of domicile in Maharashtra is not relaxable on 
blanket basis in respect of serving defence personnel as well as ex-servicemen. It was mentioned that 
based on their duration of stay/service in Maharashtra, if the length of service is less than 15 years then 
the condition of domicile in Maharashtra for membership in co-operative housing societies could be 
relaxed in case of serving as well as ex-servicemen.  Out of 41 members list given by Society, domicile 
certificate of Maharashtra is available in case of 18 members while in case of 23 members (1 MLC & 22 
serving/ex-servicemen), domicile certificates of Mahara shtra is not available. The duration of service in 
Maharashtra in these cases of ex-servicemen as well as serving defence personnel varies from 2 years 3 
months to 21 years but generally it is in the range of 4-8 years. Since the Government Resolution of 
9/7/1999 does not prescribe minimum length of service or minimum duration of residence for relaxation of 
domicile requirement, this office is not in a position to take view on eligibility of such proposed members 
and State Government would need to decide on some cut-off duration of service and decide on the 
eligibility of proposed members accordingly. Out of these 22 service/ ex-servicemen members, one 
member has no service in Maharashtra (but was born in Maharashtra and some education is in 
Maharashtra), another member is reported to be posted at forward location and details of service in 
Maharashtra are not made available by the Society and the Society Promoter informs that the details 
could be made available by the end of this month…… 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 27 
 
In July 2004, RFD, Government of Maharashtra accorded sanction for allotment 
of 3758.82 square metres land to Society for construction of residential tenements 
on levying tentative occupancy charges of `10.19 crore along with approved list 
of 20 members. On 24 August 2004, RFD accorded approval for another 51 
members and thus total 71 members were approved which included 33 members 
in the earlier list of 71 in the LOI of January 2003. 
In August 2004, RFD informed the Collector that as 71 members were approved 
by Government, there was no objection to hand over the land to Society. RFD 
issued corrigendum on 21 February 2005, correcting the area as 3824.43 square 
metres as per actual measurement. Soci ety was registered as a Co-operative 
Society on 28 September 2004 before the land was handed over to it on 04 
October 2004. Society went on adding new members and the final list consisted of 
102 members which included 37 Defence personnel, even though its Chief 
Promoter had initially approached the Chief Minister for allotment of the land for 
residential development for its members belonging to the Defence services. The 
Society also did not provide any accommodation for girls’ hostel for the children 
of serving/retired Defence personnel as requested by the Defence Authorities 
while giving the ‘go ahead’ for the project. The Defence Authorities, surprisingly, 
did not press their earlier demand either.  
7 Environmental Clearance under Coastal Regulation Zone Notification 
Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India notified the Coastal 
Regulation Zone effective from 19 February 1991. The land transferred to Society 
was in Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) II. Ministry in a notification dated 21 May 
2002 amended the said notification incorporating a new clause (iii)(a) under 
Paragraph 3(2) which required environm ental clearance from the Ministry for 
housing schemes in the CRZ areas as specified in Paragraph 6(2) of the said 
notification. 
Shri PV Deshmukh, Deputy Secretary, Urban Development Department, 
Government of Maharashtra addressed a letter dated 5 October 2002 to the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India (MoEF), requesting 
for No Objection Certificate for development of plot under reference. In this letter, 
Shri Deshmukh also informed that the State Government “has decided to allot plot 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 28 
 
under reference to the Adarsh Housing Society for residential development.” It 
referred to the letter of the Chief Promoter of the Society requesting grant of 
Government land for construction of “welfare and housing facility to serving and 
ex-servicemen of Defence services.” 
Shri PV Deshmukh was a member of the Society. 
The above letter was issued by the Urban Development Department without the 
knowledge of the Environment Department and Maharashtra Coastal Zone 
Management Authority of the Government of Maharashtra, which were the nodal 
department/agency for processing environmental clearances. The letter also 
highlighted the fact that the proposal was for welfare and housing facility to 
serving and ex-servicemen. This was only partially true. There were already 
civilians among the 
members of the 
Society. Similarly, the 
averment that 
Government of 
Maharashtra had 
decided to allot plot 
for residential 
development was also 
not correct as the letter 
of intent was issued 
only in January 2003. 
Shri A Senthil Vel, 
Joint Director in the 
Ministry of 
Environment and 
Forests, Government 
of India in his letter 
dated 2 December 
2002 asked for some 
more documents. That the correspondence was receiving attention at the highest 


Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 29 
 
level, is apparent from the fact that the letter by the Joint Director in the 
Government of India to the Deputy Secretary, Government of Maharashtra was 
seen by the Chief Minister and Principal Secretary to Chief Minister at the dak 
stage. It was diarised in CM’s Secret ariat on 7 December 2002. The documents 
were handed over personally in Delhi by Shri Deshmukh on 6 January 2003. 
On 11 March 2003, Shri Senthil Vel wrote to Shri Deshmukh that “As per the 
information provided in the above le tter and the revised Coastal Zone 
Management Plan of Greater Mumbai, it is noted that the proposed residential 
complex falls within the Coastal Regul ation Zone-II area. This Ministry has 
already delegated the powers to the concerned State Governments for undertaking 
development in Coastal Regulation Zone II. Accordingly, the proposed 
construction may be taken up as per the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification, 
1991 (as amended from time to time) and the approved revised Coastal Zone 
Management Plan of Greater Mumbai.”  
Shri PV Deshmukh thereafter issued a letter dated 15 March 2003 to the Chief 
Engineer (Development Plan) Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation stating inter 
alia that “The Ministry of Environment and Forests have communicated their 
no objection to allow the said residential  development since it falls within the 
Coastal Regulation Zone II  area which satisfies the norms of Notification dated 
19 February 1991 and amendments therein made up to 21 May 2002. Now, there 
appears therefore, no objection to allow the residental development to the Adarsh 
Co-op Housing Society on the land included in the residential zone as per the 
Notifications sanctioned by the Government.” 
The letter issued by Shri Deshmukh was misleading and indeed false. This 
enabled the Society to overcome a sign ificant barrier of “environmental 
clearance” for the building. This was fa cilitated by the letter of the Ministry 
of Environment and Forests, Governme nt of India, which abdicated its 
responsibility regarding environmental clearance of such buildings in the 
CRZ area. 
The intimation by the MoEF that it ha d already delegated the powers to the 
concerned State Governments for undertaking development in Coastal 
Regulation Zone II ignored the Notification dated 21 May 2002 by which 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 30 
 
environmental clearance of the MoEF was required for housing schemes in 
the CRZ areas. The letter of Government of Maharashtra never asked for 
“environmental clearance” and only soug ht no objection “for development of 
plot”. The Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India failed 
to draw attention of the State Govern ment to the extant provisions. It’s 
communication stating that “the propos ed construction may be taken up as 
per the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification, 1991” created adequate context 
to allow the Government of Maharashtra to interpret it as a ‘No Objection’ 
to the proposed residental development by the Society and thus use it as 
“environmental clearance” from the MoEF. 
As per the laid down procedures, the project proponent was required to submit the 
project proposal to the concerned Coastal Zone Management Authority, which in 
this case was not done. Apart from this, the correspondence also indicate a 
deliberate attempt on the part of both Mini stry of Environment and Forests in the 
Government of India and the Urban Development Department of Government of 
Maharashtra to skirt the procedures to enable grant of NOC to the Society. 
It is not surprising that the Society used this to their advantage. In March 2003, the 
Chief Promoter in a letter addressed to the Chief Minister and separately to 
Minister of State for Urban Developmen t did not hesitate to write that “ it is 
submitted that the Department of Environment and Forest, Government of India 
have considered our case on priority as a goodwi ll gesture to serving and ex-
service man looking to their service towards the mother land and have accorded 
their NOC.”  
Thus the residential development on the land allotted to Society in the CRZ-II was 
carried out without the requisite enviro nmental clearance from the MoEF. Despite 
this, MMRDA granted “Occupancy Certificate” to Society on 16 September 2010, 
which was cancelled on 30 October 2010 at the instance of MoEF. 
The Ministry of Environment & Forests in its reply of June 2011 stated that the 
amendment of 21 May 2002 is not applicable to Adarsh Cooperative Housing 
Society as it is a private cooperative society and not a project of Maharashtra 
Housing and Area Development Authority (MHADA). The reply of the Ministry 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 31 
 
is not tenable since the concerned proviso carves out an exception for housing 
societies of State Urban Development Authorities. 
8. Inadequate oversight by the Ministry of Environment and Forests 
Significantly, despite the existence of  several agencies like Department of 
Environment in Government of Maharashtra, the Maharashtra Coastal Zone 
Management Authority, and the Ministry  of Environment and Forests in the 
Government of India, a building more than 100 metres tall could come up 
within a few kilometres of Mantralaya in Mumbai without requisite 
clearance and also receive an occupancy certificate from the concerned local 
authorities. 
In response to an audit observation, the MoEF stated in April 2011 that for 
monitoring and enforcing the Coastal Re gulation Zone (CRZ) Notification 1991 
and the CRZ Notification 2011, the Ministry had constituted the State/Union 
Territory level Coastal Zone Management Authority including the Maharashtra 
Coastal Zone Management Authority. These authorities have been delegated the 
necessary powers under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 for taking 
punitive action against violations of th e CRZ Notification including those taking 
place in CRZ-II areas. Further, at the National level, The National Coastal Zone 
Management Authority has been constituted. The State/Union Territory Coastal 
Zone Management Authorities report to the National Coastal Zone Management 
Authority. The MoEF added that apart from the State/Union Territory Coastal 
Zone Management Authorities including the National Coastal Zone Management 
Authority, the MoEF has five regional offices of which three namely, Bhopal, 
Bengaluru and Bhubaneswar also monitor the projects cleared under the Coastal 
Regulation Zone Notification 1991 and 2011.  
MoEF while confirming that the residential development in CRZ II was carried 
out without the requisite clearance from the Ministry in Government of India 
stated that the regional offices monitor only those projects which are cleared by 
them.  

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 32 
 
The reply of the Ministry would indicate a contradictory situation, where projects 
cleared by them would be monitored but projects which were not cleared by them 
would remain out of the ambit of their monitoring system. 
The Ministry of Environment and Forests had issued a Press Note on 28 
October 2010 indicating that the Ministry had never issued CRZ clearance or 
NOC. The Maharashtra Coastal Zone Management Authority, one of whose 
functions was ensuring compliance of all specific conditions that are 
stipulated and laid down in the approved Coastal Zone Management Plan of 
Maharashtra, as also the Environment Department of Government of 
Maharashtra confirmed in 2010 that no environment clearance was obtained. 
However, the facts indicate that the Ministry of Environment and Forests, 
Government of India and the Depart ment/ Authority concerned of the 
Government of Maharashtra failed to ensure compliance, at least in this case. 
It would be reasonable to conclude that such an omission was indeed wilful. 
9. Conclusion and Recommendations 
The entire episode of the Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society, Mumbai is a 
remarkable case study. It is a classic example of the fence eating the crops; of 
those holding fiduciary responsibility betraying the same for personal 
aggrandizement. It reflects a consistent failure across all departments, State and 
Central Governments and cross sections of  officialdom. This case would perhaps 
have no parallel anywhere else in the country where all concerned agencies have 
pooled their strengths not for a common national cause but for personal benefit. It 
is an example of how a group of select and powerful elite could collude to subvert 
rules and regulations for personal benefit. In the process of seeking apartments in 
a prime location for themselves they have resorted to falsification of the records, 
suppression of facts and abundantly used the avowed noble cause of welfare of ex-
servicemen and their widows. 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 33 
 
The saga starts with an innocuous letter written in February 2000 (copy placed at 
Annexure I) by a serving Sub Divisional Officer in the Defence Estates Office in 
Mumbai to no less than the Chief Minister of Maharashtra, for allotment of certain 
extent of land in the Back Bay Reclamation Scheme, Colaba for construction of a 
residential building for the “welfare of serving and retired personnel of defence 
services”. He addressed this letter in his capacity as the Chief Promoter of Adarsh 
Co-operative Housing Society (proposed). It was processed speedily in 
Mantralaya and passed on to the Collector of Mumbai City. The letter got a 
surprisingly prompt response such that on 29 March 2000 the Collector, Mumbai 
City approached the Headquarters Maharashtra & Gujarat Area for issuance of an 
NOC for the plot as it was under the occupation of the Military. This request of 
the Collector got further prompt respon se from the Headquarters M&G Area such 
that, on 5 April 2000 itself- within 6 days of the earlier letter- the Collector was 
informed that the land falls outside the defence boundary and “necessary action 
could be taken as deemed fit for the welfare of serving personnel and their 
widows”. This communication was construed by the Society as a NOC. Thereafter 
commenced a series of letters addressed to agencies within the State Government 
and the Central Government seeking concessions and liberally using phrases such 
as: “members who are from the Armed forces and serving the motherland”, 
“dedicated their lives to the safety of our motherland”, “reward for heroes of 
Kargil operations who bravely fought at Kargil and protected our motherland”.  
Those in positions of responsibi lity should have sensed that ab initio the concept 
was flawed as very few war widows or ex-servicemen would have had the 
financial capacity to pay for an apartment in such a prime locality. It is also 
remarkable that a State Government Department approached the Central 
Government in the Ministry of Environment and Forests and “persuaded” them for 
a prompt response which was then construed by them to be an environmental 
clearance. The Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India 
certainly either failed, or consciously decided, not to apprise the State Government 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 34 
 
of the extant provisions of the CRZ  notification of 1991 and subsequent 
modification of May 2002. 
As per laid down procedures, the project promoter was required to submit the 
project proposal to the concerned Co astal Zone Management Authority for 
environmental clearance, which in this case was not done nor insisted upon. Apart 
from this, the correspondence also indicates a deliberate attempt on the part of 
both Ministry of Environment and Forests in the Government of India and the 
Urban Development Department of Government of Maharashtra to skirt the 
procedures to enable grant of “NOC” to the Society. 
It is not surprising that the Society used this to their advantage.  In March 2003, 
the Chief Promoter, in another letter addr essed to the Chief Minister directly and 
separately to Minister of State for Urban Development, Government of 
Maharashtra did not hesitate to write that “it is submitted that the Department of 
Environment and Forests, Government of India have considered our case on 
priority as a goodwill gesture to serving and ex-servicemen looking to their 
service towards the motherland and have accorded their NOC”. 
On 9 July 2004 Government of Maharashtra accorded sanction for transfer of land 
to the Society levying a charge of ` 10.19 crore. On 28 September 2004, the 
Society was formally registered and on 4 October 2004, the plot was handed over. 
The promoters were so confident of allotment of land that even before registration 
of the Society and before hand over of the site, on 12 July 2004 they wrote for 
additional FSI from the adjacent land in use by BEST. Within two days of the 
letter, the Minister of Urban Development also discussed the same. This issue was 
pursued till BEST finally acquiesced! 
It is significant that the residential development on the land allotted to the Society 
in CRZ-II was carried out without the re quisite environmental clearance from the 
MoEF.  Despite this, MMRDA granted “Occupancy Certificate” to the Society on 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 35 
 
16 September 2010. This was cancelled on 30 October 2010 at the instance of 
MoEF. This was done by MOEF only after media and public attention was 
repeatedly drawn towards the grave irregularities and dereliction at all levels in 
the administration. 
This report details how public servants, who have been entrusted by the 
Government to safeguard national interest, facilitated, in the belief that cronyism 
would be rewarded, a private housing Society to obtain “NOC” from the Army, 
modification to the MMRDA Development Plan, NOC for Residential 
Development in the CRZ area and transfer to the Society of Developmental rights 
of adjoining land in use by a public utility (BEST) with an additional FSI on 
account of Recreation Ground. 
The entire episode reveals glaring examples  of dereliction of duty and severe lack 
of probity and accountability which needs to  be very seriously investigated.  This 
case has engaged the attention of national headlines. Not taking exemplary 
remedial and punitive action which woul d serve as a deterrent, would seriously 
erode the credibility of Government. Laxi ty in follow-up would encourage similar 
attempts in future. Audit merely strives, as it is constitutionally mandated to do so, 
to place documentary evidence in this Report in a sequential form before the 
ultimate stakeholder. It is for the Parliament and the Government to ensure that 
public trust is not betrayed.  
There have been various statements by high dignitaries and observations in the 
media of the irregularity of this construction. In many of these, there is an explicit 
suggestion that the building should be demolished. Such suggestion probably is 
hasty and inadequately considered. To raze it to the ground would compound the 
problem. Now that it has been constructed, though incorrectly so, indeed it should 
not be allotted to those who fraudulently tr ied to appropriate it. An option would 
be for the building to be acquired by the Government and used for Central 
Government Housing of which there is enormous shortage in Mumbai. Those of 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 36 
 
the Society members who have paid, may be compensated as per law. In case 
there are a few and they certainly are less than half a dozen, genuine war widows 
and deserving ex-servicemen, the Government could allot apartments to them as 
an independent and deserving gesture.  
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated:               2011 
(GAUTAM GUHA) 
Director General of Audit 
Defence Services 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated:                 2011 
(VINOD RAI) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 37 
 
 
ANNEXURE- I 
Letter of February 2000 of Chief Promoter of the Society addressed to the  
Chief Minister of Maharashtra 
 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 38 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 39 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 40 
 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 41 
 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
FINAL LIST OF 102 MEMBERS AS OF 2010 
 
Office of the District Collector and District Magistrate, Mumbai City 
.                                                 (Revenue Branch)                                             . 
Shahid Bhagat Singh Road, Fort, Mumbai-400 001 
 
No. CSLR/REV-1/ACHS/2010/396  
         5 November 2010 
To, 
 The Principal Secretary (Revenue) 
 Revenue and Forest Department 
 Mantralaya, Mumbai-400032 
  
Sub  :  Regarding Membership in Adarsh Cooperative Housing Society15 
 
Ref  :   Government General Administration Department letter No. IAS- 
 1010/Case No. 370(15)/2010/9 dated 3.12.2010 
 
Sir, 
 Vide the letter under reference on the above mentioned subject, 
Government has instructed to submit  the administrative department-wise 
information of those Officers/Officials in Government/Semi-Government who 
are themselves the members of Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society, 
Captain Prakash Pethe Marg, Colaba, Mumbai, or whose family members or 
relatives are the members of the said Society.  
 Accordingly, the information of the members of the Adarsh Co-
operative Housing Society, Captain Pr akash Pethe Marg, Colaba, Mumbai is 
submitted along with this letter. 
 
        Yours faithfully, 
         S d / -  
           Resident Deputy Collector 
        M u m b a i  C i t y  
 
                                                
 
15 Translated version of Marathi letter at next page 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 42 
 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 43 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 44 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 45 
 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 46 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 47 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 48 
 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 49 
 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 50 
 
 
 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 51 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE – III 
 

Report of the C&AG on Adarsh Co‐operative Housing Society, Mumbai  
 
Report No 11of 2011‐12  Page 52 
 
INCLUSION OF CHIEFS OF ARMY STAFF AS A 
 “ONE TIME SPECIAL CASE” 
 
 
 