Design, Development, Manufacture and Induction of  
Light Combat Aircraft
Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Presented in Lok Sabha on: 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 
Union Government 
Defence Services (Air Force) 
Performance Audit 
No.17 of 2015 

_________________________________________________________________________________________________
i
    
Paragraph Page 
Preface  iii 
Executive Summary  iv 
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
Introduction 1.1 1 
Organisational structure for implementation of LCA 1.2 2 
Roll out of the LCA project 1.3 2 
Expenditure on LCA programme 1.4 3 
Audit objectives 1.5 4 
Sources of Audit Criteria 1.6 4 
Scope and methodology of Audit 1.7 5 
Acknowledgement 1.8 5 
CHAPTER II
PROJECT PROGRESS
FSED Phase-I 2.1 6 
FSED Phase-II 2.2 9 
Shortfall in accomplishment of Air Staff Requirement (ASR) 2.3 14 
Work-packages for LCA programme 2.4 24 
Lack of user involvement 2.5 27 
CHAPTER III
DEVELOPMENT OF INDIGENOUS CAPABILITY 
Absence of Indigenisation Plan 3.1 29 
CONTENTS

_________________________________________________________________________________________________
ii 
CHAPTER IV
MANUFACTURE AND INDUCTION OF LCA
Introduction 4.1 38 
Design and development activity 4.2 39 
Creation of production facilities and manufacture of LSPs 4.3 43 
Delay in creation of facilities for Repair and Overhaul (ROH) 4.4 47 
Delay in manufacture and supply of LSP aircraft 4.5 48 
Premature conclusion of contracts for LCA (IOC and FOC) 
before freezing of design 
4.6 51 
LCA induction Plan 4.7 54 
Shortfall in creation of production facilities impacted Induction of 
LCA 
4.8 56 
Operational Impact 4.9 57 
CHAPTER V
CONCLUSION
Conclusion  58 
Annexure-I  61 
Annexure-II  62 
Annexure-III  63 


PerformanceAuditon'Design,Development,Manufactureand
InductionofLightCombatAircraft’


iii

Preface
his Performance Audit Report for the year ended March 
2014,  has been prepared for submission to the 
President of India under Article 151 of the Constitution 
of India. 
The Report contains the results of examination by Audit 
of the issues relating to Design, Development, 
Manufacture and Induction of Light Combat Aircraft 
(Air Force). The Performance Audit (PA) covers the 
progress made in execution of LCA programme since 
the last Review, i.e., Para 28 of the Report No. 8 of 1999 
of the C&AG of India, Union Government, Defence 
Services (Air Force & Navy) for the year ended 31 
March 1998.

T

PerformanceAuditon'Design,Development,Manufactureand
InductionofLightCombatAircraft’


iv



Background 
Indian Air Force (IAF) was operating MIG-21 series of aircraft manufactured during 1966 to 
1987 and majority of these aircraft were expected to be phased out in the 1990s, thereby 
resulting in significant fall in combat level of IAF. Thus, IAF mooted the proposal (early 
1980s) for a replacement aircraft for MIG-21 fleet.  It was against this backdrop that the 
indigenous design and development of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) was sanctioned (1983). 
Government of India constituted (June 1984) Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA), 
Bangalore, a society registered (June 1984) under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 under 
the Ministry of Defence, as a dedicated institution for the management of LCA project.   
IAF had issued Air Staff Requirement (ASR) in Oct 1985 with a projected requirement of 
220 Light Combat Aircraft (200 Fighters + 20 Trainers) to be inducted by 1994. As per the 
ASR, Light Combat Aircraft is required to be built as a light weight multi-mission fighter 
aircraft, having contemporary air combat and offensive air support capabilities with excellent 
maneuverability for close air combat at low and medium altitudes. The aircraft should be able 
to provide extended Air Defence cover over the forward bases and tactical battle area. 
The LCA management structure consists of the General Body (chaired by the Defence 
Minister) responsible for taking decisions on the scientific and technical activities of ADA 
and the Governing Body (chaired by the Scientific Advisor to Raksha Mantri) for effective 
monitoring of its aims and objectives, apart from Technical committee (chaired by Director 
General, ADA) and LCA Programme Management Committee (chaired by Programme 
Director, ADA), which are responsible for the progress of the design and development of the 
LCA. 
ADA executes the LCA development by utilising the capabilities of national 
agencies/institutions (referred as work cent ers) working in Aerospace technology. Hindustan 
Aeronautics Limited (HAL) is the principal contractor for detailed design, development, 
manufacture and flight testing of LCA.   
Light Combat Aircraft Programme got delayed considerably and even after a lapse of thirty 
years, the Light Combat Aircraft has only achieved Initial Operational Clearance (December 
2013) involving a delay of eight years and the Full Operational Clearance, which was 
scheduled to be completed by December 2008, is now scheduled to be achieved by December 
2015 (as projected by ADA). 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

PerformanceAuditon'Design,Development,Manufactureand
InductionofLightCombatAircraft’


v

Audit Approach 
The Performance Audit (PA) covers the progress made in execution of LCA programme 
since the last Review, i.e. Para 28 of the Report No. 8 of 1999 of the C&AG of India, Union 
Government, Defence Services (Air Force & Navy) for the year ended 31 March 1998. Our 
conclusions are based upon audit conducted at Aeronautical Development Agency, Hindustan 
Aeronautics Limited, Air Headquarters and DRDO Headquarters and its laboratories. The 
Report has five Chapters. Chapter I is introduction and Chapter II, III and IV contain audit 
findings. In Chapter V, the audit conclusions have been summarized. 
Ministry of Defence (R&D)/ADA/Air HQ response 
The PA report was issued to Ministry of Defence, ADA and Air HQ in December 2014. Our 
findings were finalized with reference to the replies furnished by ADA, HAL, Air HQ and 
DRDO Headquarters and its laboratories. Reply from Ministry of Defence is awaited (March 
2015).
Key findings 
LCA programme was initially sanctioned in 1983 with a development schedule of eight to ten 
years against IAF’s requirement of induction by 1994. Our analysis revealed that the project 
schedules had slipped, mainly on account of design changes necessitated due to change in 
weapon requirements, non-availability of Kaveri
1 engine, delay in completion of work 
packages by the work centres, etc. LCA achieved IOC in December 2013 with 53 
concessions/permanent waivers considerably reducing its operational employability, is yet to 
be inducted in IAF squadrons, as discussed below:
1. Execution of LCA Project, extent of meeting Air Staff Requirement 
including weaponisation 
¾ ADA’s decision to advance building of two prototypes from Full Scale 
Engineering Development (FSED) Phase-II to FSED Phase-I on the ground of 
accelerating the development process of LCA, failed to yield the desired 
results as the FSED Phase I was closed in March 2004 involving a delay of six 
years and without completing all the activities, which were carried forward to 
FSED Phase-II. More importantly, this decision of ADA rendered the 
prototypes deficient of critical onboard systems (Multi-Mode Radar, Self-
Protection Jammer, Radar Warning Receiver) and led to ADA using the 

1  Gas Turbine Research Establishment, Bangalore co uld not develop the Kaveri engine, meant for LCA, 
as per the LCA schedule and specifications, necessitating ADA to go in for import of GE-F404-IN20 
aero engine from M/s GE, USA to continue the development activities of LCA.  

PerformanceAuditon'Design,Development,Manufactureand
InductionofLightCombatAircraft’


vi

Limited Series Production aircraft (meant for IAF use) towards flight 
testing/evaluation of these critical on board systems, in contravention to the 
commitment given to the GoI while obtaining sanction (November 2001) for 
building of these aircraft. (Para 2.1)
¾ LCA Mark-I, which achieved Initial Operational Clearance (December 2013) 
has significant shortfalls (53 permanent waivers/concessions) in meeting the 
ASR as a result of which, it will have reduced operational capabilities and 
reduced survivability, thereby limiting its operational employability when 
inducted into IAF squadrons. Shortcomings in LCA Mark-I (increased weight, 
reduced internal fuel capacity, non-compliance of fuel system protection, pilot 
protection from front, reduced speed) were expected to be overcome by 
development of LCA Mark-II, an aircraft with lower weight and a higher 
thrust engine which is expected to meet the ASR, had been taken up by ADA 
in November 2009 and is scheduled for completion by December 2018.
(Para 2.3)
¾ IAF would be constrained to induct fighter LCA without availability of trainer 
LCA, adversely impacting pilot training. Production of trainer aircraft at HAL 
was delayed as the trainer LCA had not achieved IOC/FOC. As regards flight 
training simulator, IAF was using an upgraded Full Mission Simulator (FMS) 
at ADE for pilot training, pending supply of a FMS by HAL at LCA operating 
base. (Para 2.3.1)
¾ Addition of new weapons by Air HQ for operational edge of LCA         
(March 1997, December 2009) necessitating design changes on the aircraft ,
coupled with delayed specifying (December 2009) of integrating R-73E 
missile with Multi-Mode Radar/Helmet Mounted Display and Sight and 
delayed identification (December 2009) of Beyond Visual Range Missiles also 
contributed to the delays in achieving IOC/FOC by LCA. (Para 2.3.2, 2.3.3)
¾ LCA Mark-I is deficient in Electronic Warfare capabilities as specified by 
IAF, as the Self Protection Jammer coul d not be fitted on the aircraft due to 
space constraints and the Radar Warning Receiver/Counter Measure 
Dispensing System fitted on the aircraft are having performance issues, which 
are yet to be overcome (January 2015). (Para 2.3.4)
¾ LCA programme is being monitored by General Body, Governing Body, 
involving the representation of MoD, Ministry of Finance at the highest level, 

PerformanceAuditon'Design,Development,Manufactureand
InductionofLightCombatAircraft’


vii

various committees at ADA/HAL, Empowered Committee chaired by Chief of 
Air Staff. In spite of this, delays in completion of work packages which 
affected the LCA programme schedules, indicates that coordination of efforts 
at various levels and monitoring of the programme by all the agencies 
involved, has not been as envisaged. (Para 2.4)
¾ Need for a Liaison Group between Air HQ and ADA to ensure closer 
interaction between the design team and the user for better appreciation of 
mutual perception, had been recommended by the LCA PDP Review 
Committee
2 as early as in 1989. However, no such liaison group was formed 
and active user (Air HQ) participation in the LCA Programme started only 
after November 2006, which also impacted the LCA development. (Para 2.5)
2. Development of Indigenous capability through LCA Programme 
¾ Government of India had emphasized (June 1993) on increasing the 
indigenous content of LCA while sanctioning FSED in phased manner, but 
ADA did not make any roadmap for indigenization during LCA development. 
As a result, indigenous content of LCA estimated by ADA as 70 per cent
actually worked out  to about 35 per cent (January 2015). (Para 3.1) 
¾ LCA systems such as Kaveri engine, Multi-Mode Radar, Radome, Multi-
Functional Display System and Flight Control System Actuators taken up for 
indigenous development could not be developed successfully, resulting in 
LCA’s continued dependency on import of these systems. Development of Jet 
Fuel Starter, though achieved indigenously, had performance issues which are 
yet to be resolved (January 2015) (Para 3.1.1). 
3. Creation of manufacturing facility at HAL for LCA and operational 
impact on IAF 
¾ Prototype version (PV) and Limited Series Production (LSP) of LCA 3 built by 
HAL had low serviceability due to delay in snags analysis, slow recovery of 
aircraft from rectification, shortage of critical LRUs at flight hangar, aircraft 
being used as test rigs, large number of unproductive sorties etc. which 
impacted availability of aircraft for flight  testing and contributed to delays in 
development of LCA (Para 4.2.2).

2     A committee chaired by Director, NAL, and consisting of members from ADA, HAL, ADA and Air 
HQ, constituted by SA to RM in May 1989 to revi ew the comments of Air HQ on the LCA Project 
Definition Phase report prepared by ADA in September 1988. 
3  Technology Demonstrators, Prototype Vehicl es and Limited Series Production aircraft. 

PerformanceAuditon'Design,Development,Manufactureand
InductionofLightCombatAircraft’


viii

¾ The manufacturing facilities created at HAL presently cater for production of 
only four aircraft per annum  against the envisaged requirement of eight 
aircraft per annum due to delays in procuring plant and machinery, tools and 
jigs and also construction of production hangars, which would further impact 
production of LCA and induction into IAF squadrons. (Para 4.3)
¾ Repair and Overhaul (ROH) facility for LCA, as specified in the ASR has not 
been created fully at HAL. Out of the 344 Line Replaceable Units
4 of LCA, 90 
LRUs were considered non-repairable. Of the remaining 254 LRUs, while 
ROH facilities in respect of 185 LRUs were available, ROH facilities were yet 
to be established for 69 LRUs (January 2015). (Para 4.4) 
¾ Design, development and productionisation of LCA through concurrent 
engineering did not compress the development time as envisaged in the FSED 
Phase-II sanction (November 2001) since LSP aircraft were built in a phased 
manner with specific capabilities for the purpose of flight testing/evaluation 
and even LSP-8 fell short of the ASR in terms of weight and speed, for which 
permanent waivers had to be granted by Air HQ when LCA achieved IOC 
(December 2013) (Para 4.5.1).
¾ Awarding of the 20 IOC contract by MoD to HAL in 2006 when LCA design 
was nowhere near finalization, was premature, as only Technology 
Demonstrators/Prototypes were flying and LSPs were yet to be built. This lead 
to delay in productionisation of LCA and formation of squadrons by IAF, as 
HAL is yet to supply any aircraft against the contract (January 2015).          
(Para 4.6.1) 
¾ Awarding of contract (December 2010) for supply of 20 FOC configuration 
aircraft by MoD to HAL even before commencement of supply of IOC 
configuration aircraft, freezing of designs and achieving of FOC was 
premature. Further, HAL had advances of `1509.22 crore since 2010 without 
utilising it against the contract. (January 2015). (Para 4.6.2) 
¾ Due to delay in manufacture and supply of LCA, IAF had to undertake 
alternate temporary measures such as upgradation of existing aircraft
5 at a cost 
of `20,037 crore to overcome depleting squadrons with obsolete aircraft and 

4  It is a modular component of an aircraft that is designed to be replaced quickly in case of failure, which 
reduces down time of the aircraft. 
5 MiGBIS,Mirage,MiGͲ29andJaguarfleet.

PerformanceAuditon'Design,Development,Manufactureand
InductionofLightCombatAircraft’


ix

IAF is looking forward for early induction of LCA to overcome the drawdown 
of squadrons. (Para 4.7) 
4. Conclusion
While we appreciate the efforts made by ADA and its work centres in the indigenous 
development of LCA which is comparable to many contemporary aircraft in the world, 
considerable time taken in the development of LCA has delayed the productionisation and 
subsequent induction of the aircraft into IAF thereby impacting the operational preparedness 
of IAF with reduced squadron level. Moreover, the LCA Mark-I despite achieving the Initial 
Operational Clearance does not meet the ASR, which reduces its operational employability. 
Final Operational Clearance of LCA is yet to be achieved. This PA, therefore, points out the 
need for a more efficient management of planning and execution of aircraft development 
programmes, closer interaction and coordinated efforts among all the stake holders involved, 
ensuring effective indigenisation efforts, creation of adequate manufacturing facilities in a 
timely manner and supply of aircraft to IAF in line with their induction planning. 
Recommendations
x Realistic timelines should be projected by MoD while seeking approval for such 
projects from the GoI and the same be adhered to during their execution with 
coordinated planning and effective in-built monitoring mechanism to produce desired 
results in time. 
x In view of the complexity of the technology involved, while deviating from the 
approved plan of development, ADA should consult the user (Air HQ) and obtain 
prior approval of sanctioning authority/Ministry for such deviations, so as to minimize 
waivers and concessions at the time of acceptance by the user (IAF). 
x The agencies viz. DRDO, ADA and HAL, should undertake the projects strictly in 
conformity with the specifications projected by the IAF, who should be involved right 
from the planning stage, so as to ensure timely achievement of their requirements. 
x Indigenisation efforts should be made in coordination with all the agencies involved, 
with a well-defined indigenisation plan and a clear roadmap, so as to develop quality 
product as per the requirement, in order to avoid import substitution. 
x MoD should award contract to production agency at an appropriate stage of 
development of a system/equipment in order to avoid the necessity of extending 
delivery schedule consequent to delay in development of the system, apart from the 
resultant blocking of funds/inventory and to overcome obsolescence of the 
components procured by the production agency. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Introduction Page1
1.1  Introduction
Government of India (GoI) sanctioned (August 1983) design, development 
and manufacture of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) over 8 to 10 years from 
1983 at an estimated development cost of about `560 crore including six 
flying prototypes. Subsequently after the completion of the feasibility study 
and project definition, the Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs (CCPA) 
approved (February 1991) to execute the project in two phases of Full Scale 
Engineering Development (FSED). The project was assessed
1 to be completed 
by 2004. The project is still in progress (January 2015). 
Delays in execution of LCA project w ith respect to project definition, 
deficiencies in planning and financial management were commented upon in 
Para 50 of Report No. 3 of 1989 of the C&AG of India, Union Government 
Defence Services (AF&Navy) for the year ended 31 March 1988. Delay in 
execution of Phase-I of LCA project which included development of Multi 
Mode Radar, Flight control system, Digital Electronic Engine Control, 
integration of Kaveri engine on LCA, etc and consequent up-gradation of 
MiG-Bis aircraft, import of Su-30 MKI aircraft to cover the shortfall in fighter 
aircraft, were highlighted in Para 28 of the Report No. 8 of 1999 of the C&AG 
of India, Union Government, Defence Services (Air Force & Navy) for the 
year ended 31 March 1998. 
Ministry of Defence (MoD) in their Action Taken Note (ATN) had stated 
(July 2004) that regular review meetings of monitoring bodies were conducted 
and periodical Joint Review of LCA Programme by Scientific Advisor to 
Raksha Mantri (SA to RM) /Director General-ADA, Chairman HAL & Vice 
Chief of Air Staff of IAF to accelerate programme implementation had been 
introduced since 2002. Status of compliance to the ATN is discussed in 
Chapter II. 
1  As per joint recommendations (March 1990)  of Chief of Air Staff and Secretary, 
Department of Defence R&D for Phased development of LCA. 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Introduction Page2
However, the LCA development has slipped delaying manufacture of LCA at 
HAL and induction into IAF.  Consequently, it has impacted the operational 
preparedness of IAF. Hence, the present review of the project was taken up to 
examine the project execution. 
1.2 Organisational structure for implementation of LCA 
GoI constituted (June 1984) Aeronautical Development Agency 2 (ADA) as a 
dedicated institution for the management of LCA project. MoD, besides 
sanctioning funds for LCA project, is involved in the decision making process 
through the General Body and Governing Body of ADA. The General Body of 
ADA presided by Raksha Mantri annually reviews the progress of LCA 
project, while the Governing Body chaired by the Secretary, Department of 
Defence R&D manages all affairs and funds of the society. Thus, Ministry had 
pivotal role to play in overall implementation of the LCA project. Hindustan 
Aeronautics Limited
3 (HAL), a Defence Public Sector Undertaking is the 
principal contractor for the LCA project. 
1.3  Roll out of the LCA project
The FSED Phase-II was taken up in February 2000 even before the closure of 
Phase-I and the FSED Phase-I was retrospectively closed (July 2005) with 
effect from 31 March 2004 within the sanctioned cost of `2,188 crore by 
carrying forward the pending activities to FSED Phase-II as discussed in 
Chapter-II.  
It is seen from the minutes of the Empowered Committee meeting          
(October 2007) that LCA powered by the imported engine would have 
performance shortfalls towards meeting the ASR and further observed that 
LCA weight had exceeded the specification by one tonne, and accordingly it 
was felt that a higher capacity and bigger aero engine was the only possible 
solution to achieve LCA performance as laid out in the ASR. The Committee, 
therefore, recommended (October 2007) redesigning of airframe in order to 
2       A society set up under Societies Registration Act, 1860 under MoD. 
3     Engaged in design, development and manufacture, upgr ade, repair and overhaul of 
aircraft, helicopters, aero engines, avionics and navigation system equipment and marine 
and industrial gas turbine engines for both military and civil applications. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Introduction Page3
accommodate a larger diameter engine and suggested that LCA Mark-II 4 with 
redesigned airframe must be ready by the time existing LCA Mark-I with IOC 
and FOC configuration would be produced by HAL, with an aim to 
productionise LCA Mark-II by 2016.  
Accordingly, MoD sought (August 2009) sanction from GoI for an additional 
FSED Phase, termed as FSED Phase III, at a cost of `2431.55 crore               
(FE `818.60 crore), with the stated benefits of an aircraft with alternate engine 
and lower weight having better performance to meet the requirements of IAF. 
Government of India, accordingly, sanctioned (November 2009) FSED     
Phase-III at a cost of `2431.55 crore (FE `818.60 crore) for design and 
development of two prototypes of LCA Mk-II with an imported alternate 
engine
5 with a delivery schedule of 31 December 2018. Thus, LCA 
development can be termed as completed only when the LCA Mk-II is 
developed (December 2018) under FSED Phase-III, productionised and 
inducted into IAF squadrons thereafter, as LCA Mk-II is expected to meet the 
ASR.  
Development of LCA Mk-II under Phase-III is also simultaneously in progress 
(January 2015) along with FSED Phase II and an expenditure of `804.15 crore 
had been incurred (January 2015). 
1.4  Expenditure on LCA programme 
A total amount of `10397.11 crore (FE `3800.01crore) was sanctioned for the 
three FSED phases of LCA programme, against which, ADA had incurred 
(October 2014) a cumulative expenditure of `8294.39 crore (FE `2768.18
crore) as detailed in the Annexure-I. This sanction and expenditure are 
exclusive of cost of Kaveri engine (`2,839 crore) and Electronic Warfare Suite 
(EWS) (Mayavi) ( `154.74 crore) developed for LCA as development of 
Engine and EWS were sanctioned (1989, 2005) as separate projects by 
DRDO. These two cases are discussed in Chapter II and III. 
4 LCA Mark I and Mark II distinguished only in October 2007, as the aircraft planned 
with improved aero engine was designated as LCA Mark II, and the present version as 
LCA Mark-I. 
5  GE-F414-INS6. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Introduction Page4
1.5 Audit objectives 
The execution of the LCA programme was examined to assess the extent of 
i. Achievement of Air Staff Requirement (ASR) and  Weaponisation of 
LCA; 
ii. Indigenous capability developed through LCA programme; 
iii. Development and manufacturing of LCA (AF) including setting up of 
manufacturing facilities at HAL; 
iv. The preparedness of IAF to induct LCA into Service and consequent 
operational impact.
1.6 Sources of Audit Criteria 
The sources of Audit Criteria were: 
¾ The Air Staff Requirement of 1985; 
¾ Ministry of Defence’s (MoD) sanction letters and approvals of Cabinet 
Committee on Security (CCS) including papers leading thereto; 
¾ Procedure for Design, Development and Production of Military 
Aircraft and Airborne Stores (DDPMAS) – 2002; 
¾ Minutes of meetings of General body, Governing Body of ADA, 
Empowered Committee, Programme Management Team of IAF, HAL 
Board of Directors etc.; 
¾ Memorandums of Understanding, Consultancy contracts, supply orders 
entered into by ADA and HAL and MoD contracts with HAL for 
supply of LCA; 
¾ Papers relating to the Work services and IAF preparedness for 
induction into IAF and operation of LCA; 
¾ LCA trial reports, reports of various committees and certifying 
agencies;

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Introduction Page5
1.7 Scope and methodology of Audit 
The Performance Audit (PA) covers the progress made in execution of LCA 
programme since the last Review i.e. Para 28 of the Report No. 8 of 1999 of 
the C&AG of India, Union Government, Defence Services (Air Force & 
Navy) for the year ended 31 March 1998. The records of ADA, Air HQ, HAL 
and DRDO Headquarters and its laboratories
6 affiliated to design and 
development of LCA were seen for conducting the review. As MoD had 
requested (October 2013) to take up the audit after completion of Initial 
Operation Clearance of LCA, an Entry Conference for the performance Audit 
could be held on 24 March 2014 at DRDO Bhavan, New Delhi. The field audit 
was conducted during the period from April 2014 to mid October 2014. 
Preliminary Audit observations and questionnaires were issued to ADA, Air 
HQ, DRDO and HAL for eliciting their replies and obtaining requisite 
information, evidences and clarifications, wherever required. A draft PA 
report was issued (December 2014) to the Ministry of Defence, for which 
reply is awaited. MoD was requested (December 2014) for an Exit Conference 
which is still (March 2015) to be held. 
1.8 Acknowledgement 
We acknowledge the support extended by MoD, Air HQ, ADA, DRDO & its 
laboratories and HAL in the furnishing of documents, information, and replies 
to the audit queries raised during the course of the PA. 
6  Defence Avionics & Research Establishment (DARE), Bangalore, Aeronautical 
Development Establishment (ADE), Bangalore and Centre for Air Borne Systems 
(CABS), Bangalore. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page6
Objective: To examine the execution of the LCA project to 
assess the achievement of Air Staff Requirement 
and Weaponisation for LCA.
2.1 FSED Phase-I  
Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs approved (Feb 1991) in principle, 
execution of the LCA project in two Full Scale Engineering Development
(FSED) phases as detailed below: 
FSED Phase-I: Building and limited flight testing of two LCA Technology 
Demonstrator (TD1 and TD2) aircraft to demonstrate confidence levels in 
critical technologies 1 through 210 hours of test flying and parallel 
development of other technologies 2 and proving them on ground rigs/ flying 
test beds. 
FSED Phase-II: Building further five prototypes and integration of other 
technologies developed in parallel in Phase I, Integration of Kaveri engine, 
Flight-testing and weapon integration to achieve IOC and FOC. 
Accordingly, FSED Phase-I was sanctioned (June 1993) by GoI at a cost of 
`2188 crore3 [including Foreign Exchange (FE) `873 crore] for development 
and limited flight testing of two LCA Technology Demonstrators (TD1 & 
TD2) and parallel development of other technologies by June 1998. 
It was however seen in audit from the approval (November 1995) of the 
General Body, ADA, that during the course of FSED Phase-I, ADA had, on 
the ground of accelerating the development process of LCA, advanced the 
manufacture of two prototypes (PV1 and PV2) from FSED Phase II to FSED 
1  Fly-by-wire control system, Composite technology, computer controlled Electro 
Mechanical System & Glass    Cockpit. 
2  Multi-Mode Radar (MMR), Internal Se lf-Protection Jammer (SPJ)/Radar Warning 
Receiver (RWR). 
3  This amount was inclusive of `560 crore sanctioned in August 1983. 
CHAPTER  II : PROJECT PROGRESS 
FSED Phase-I 
closed
without 
achievement 
of milestones 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page7
Phase-I so as to utilise the savings in FSED Phase-I occurred due to shifting of 
certain systems 4 from import list to indigenous development list. ADA’s 
decision was in contravention of the Cabinet approval for Phased 
development, wherein the building of PVs was to be taken up in FSED Phase-
II only after TDs had been built and flight tested for 210 hours to demonstrate 
confidence levels in critical technologies.
As a result of ADA’s decision, the two PVs (viz. PV1 and PV2), building of 
which was taken up even before the first flight of TDs
5 and development of 
other technologies, could not be integrated with systems such as Multi-Mode 
Radar
6 (MMR), Internal Self Protection Jammer 7 (SPJ)/Radar Warning 
Receiver8 (RWR) (other technologies) which had not been developed by then 
(1995-2006). These systems were required to be developed and proved on 
ground rigs/flying test beds in FSED Phase-I and integrated on the PVs in 
FSED Phase-II as per the phased development sanctioned in June 1993. 
Subsequently, as per the sanction (November 2001) for FSED Phase-II, 
remaining three PVs and eight Limited Series Production (LSP) aircraft were 
to be manufactured and the LSPs were required to be delivered (May 2006-
May  2008) to IAF. Besides, the PVs were also required to be integrated with 
the other technologies (MMR, SPJ, RWR). 
However, we observed that decision of ADA to advance the development of 
PV1 and PV2 had a cascading effect on the remaining PVs (PV3, PV4 
(converted as PV6
9) and PV5), which were also rendered deficient of these 
systems (MMR, SPJ, RWR). As a consequence of this, ADA had to resort to 
utilisation of even the LSP aircraft (which were to be handed over to IAF) 
towards flight testing/evaluation as disc ussed under Para 2.2.  The decision to 
advance building of two PVs was got ratified by ADA from GoI (January 
1998).
4  Carbon Fibre Composite Wing, Jet fuel Starter and Aircraft Mounted Accessory Gear 
Box. 
5     First flight was made on January 2001. 
6     Used for tracking targets from Air to Ai r, Air to Surface including sea. It facilitates all 
weather launching of weapons. 
7    Internally mounted electroni c warfare system that detects an d interprets radar signals and 
automatically selects the proper countermeasure to jam or deceive them. 
8 Alerts pilots of the various types of hostile  emitters employed by other countries and 
enables pilots to initiate suitable action to minimize attrition.
9     Discussed at Para 2.3.1. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page8
The development of other technologies (MMR, SPJ, RWR) and development 
of Kaveri engine was also delayed as discussed in sub Para 2.3.4 and       
Chapter III. 
Various milestones under FSED Phase-I and their actual achievements are 
indicated in Table I below: 
Table I 
Sl
No
Milestone Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
Actually date of 
completion 
1 Roll out of first aircraft (TD1) June 1995 November 1995 
2 First flight of first aircraft 
(TD1)
December 
1996
January 2001 
3 First flight of second aircraft 
(TD2)
September 
1997
June 2002 
4 First flight of PV1 10 December 
1999
November 2003 
5 First flight of  PV2 11  June 2000 Shifted to FSED 
Phase II 
6 Completion of 210 hours of 
flying (TD1 and TD2)  
June 1998 124 hours completed 
by 31 March 2004 
and balance shifted to 
FSED Phase II 
Department of Defence R&D, MoD had requested (April 2005) approval of 
Cabinet Committee on Security for post-facto closure of FSED Phase-I with 
effect from 31 March 2004 and within the sanctioned cost of `2,188 crore 
while the remaining flight testing of TDs, flight testing of PV2 and completion 
of development of Multi-Mode Radar (MMR) would be carried out as part of 
LCA FSED Phase-II. Based on CCS approval, GoI accorded post-facto 
sanction (July 2005) for the closure of FSED Phase-I with effect from             
31 March 2004. ADA also carried forward (August 2005) balance work of 42 
ongoing work packages valuing `65.16 crore as on 31 March 2004 to FSED 
Phase-II. These 42 work packages pertained to development of MMR, Flight 
control System actuators, Digital Flight Control Computer, Jet Fuel Starter, 
Drop Tanks, etc (delay in development of these systems has been discussed in 
sub-para 2.3.4, 2.4.2  and Chapter III). 
10  As per GoI ratification of January 1998. 
11  As per GoI ratification of January 1998. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page9
Thus, in spite of the fact that FSED Phase-I was delayed by six years and 
treated as completed in March 2004 as against the scheduled completion of 
June 1998, the intended objectives of the phased development were not met 
completely. ADA’s decision (1995) to advance two PVs from FSED Phase-II 
to FSED Phase-I in order to accelerate the LCA programme failed to yield the 
desired results, as other technologies (MMR, SPJ, RWR) to be integrated on 
PVs were yet to be developed and proved.
2.2 FSED Phase-II  
While FSED Phase-I was in progress, MoD, Department of Defence R&D 
submitted (November 1999) a Note to CCS seeking an interim sanction of 
FSED Phase-II towards developing remaining three prototypes including one 
trainer variant (PV-3, PV-4 and PV-5) at a cost of `666.34 crore, on the 
ground that some of the work centres had already completed the activities 
assigned to them under FSED Phase-I and it was necessary that the remaining 
tasks were also assigned to them to avoid idling of facilities. Accordingly, GoI 
accorded sanction (February 2000) for Interim FSED Phase-II, specifying that 
this sanction would merge with the final FSED Phase-II sanction.
Later, Department of Defence R&D, MoD submitted (October 2001) a Note to 
CCS for sanction of FSED Phase-II which included apart from the three 
prototypes sanctioned under Interim FSED Phase-II, completion of Initial 
Operational Clearance (IOC) and Final Operational Clearance (FOC) using all 
the LCA prototypes by December 2008. The Note also sought (October 2001) 
creation of production facilities at HAL at the rate of eight aircraft  per annum 
and concurrent production of eight Limited Series Production (LSP) aircraft 
(for IAF use), in order to address technology transfer issues involved in the 
transition from development to production and also to reduce production lead 
time. GoI sanctioned (November 2001) the proposal of DRDO for FSED 
Phase II at a total cost of `3301.78
12 crore (FE `1526.49 crore) with a 
probable date of completion (PDC) by end December 2008.  
Various milestones under FSED Phase-II and their actual achievements are 
indicated in Table II below: 
12  Including interim sanction of `666.34 crore.  
FSED Phase-II 
ongoing with 
delayed 
completion of 
mile-stones 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page10
Table II 
Sl
No 
Milestone Original date of 
completion 
(November 2001) 
Revised date of 
completion 
(November
2009) 
Actually achieved date
1 PV2- first flight (Carried 
forward from Phase-I) 
December 2002 - December 2005 
2 PV3-first flight July 2003 - December 2006 
3 PV4 13 -first flight  December 2003 Jan-Feb 2010 November 2014 
4 PV5-first flight (Trainer) October 2004 August 2009 November 2009 
5 Achievement of IOC December 2005 December 2010 December 2013 
6 Creation of facilities for 
achieving LSP of 8 aircraft 
per annum at HAL 
May 2006 May 2006 Facilities created at 
HAL only for 
manufacture of four 
aircraft 
7 Manufacture of eight LSP 
standard LCA by HAL and 
delivery to IAF 
May 2006 - May 
2008 
May 2006 - 
May 2008 
HAL  manufactured 
seven LSP aircraft 14
during April 2007 to 
March 2013  
8 Achievement of FOC  December 2008 December 2012 Not achieved 
It is evident from the above Table that building of PVs was completed three to 
eleven years beyond the scheduled date. This further contributed to delay in 
achieving of IOC, which was achieved in Dec 2013, against the sanctioned 
date of December 2005.
Audit observed that delays pertaining to achievement of milestones of FSED 
Phase II were mainly on account of continued design modifications on LCA 
(discussed at Chapter IV Para 4.5.1) and low availability of aircraft (discussed 
at Chapter IV Para 4.2.3).
As per the MoU (June 2002) entered into between HAL and ADA, HAL was 
to manufacture and supply eight LSP aircraft between 2006 and 2008. Against 
this, HAL supplied seven LSP aircraft during April 2007-March 2013 with a 
delay ranging from 4 to 51 months, mainly due to design changes by ADA, 
which resulted in equipping each of the LSPs with different configuration (as 
discussed in Chapter IV Para 4.5.1).  We also observed that ADA had utilised 
these LSP aircraft towards flight testing/evaluation for achieving IOC/FOC, 
13  PV4, which was a fighter version was re-designated as a Trainer Version, PV6 in 
December 2005, thus rendering one fighter prototype deficient for flight 
testing/evaluation against the initially planned four fighter prototypes (PV1 to PV4). 
14    LSP-6 was planned for 2015-16. 
LSPs built for 
IAF use were 
utilised by 
ADA towards 
flight testing 
/evaluation 
purposes 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page11
instead of handing over these aircraft to IAF, in contravention to the 
commitment given (October 2001) while obtaining GoI sanction for building 
these LSPs under FSED Phase II.
When reasons for using the LSPs for flight testing/evaluation instead of 
handing them over to IAF were enquired (July 2014) in audit, ADA stated 
(October 2014) that due to shortcomings on TD/PV aircraft (discussed in Para 
2.1), LSP aircraft were built in a phased manner with specific capabilities. As 
such the transfer of technology to the production agency (HAL) was executed 
in batches by identifying the LSP-1 to LSP-8 to resolve design issues and 
conduct the flight test towards finalization of standard of preparation (SOP) 
for production.
Reply of ADA confirms the audit view that building of PVs before 
development of other technologies resulted in these aircraft having 
shortcomings, compelling ADA to utilise even the LSPs towards flight testing 
of LCA. 
Thus, the purpose of manufacturing of LSPs for the usage by IAF has not yet 
been met (January 2015) and these aircraft have been used by ADA as 
additional prototypes for evaluation purposes, in contravention to the 
commitment given (October 2001) while obtaining sanction for building these 
LSPs.
In November 2009, GoI extended the milestones of LCA project up to end of 
December 2012 (IOC-December 2010 and FOC-December 2012) and 
additional amount of `2475.78 crore (FE `581.92 crore) was sanctioned to 
cover extended programme cost, expenditure towards Programme 
Management, maintenance and operational cost of 15 aircraft (2 TDs, 5 PVs 
and 8 LSPs), foreign flight test consultancy for optimizing the flight testing, 
spares for LSP aircraft, etc. Out of this, the major portion of the cost towards 
maintenance of 15 aircraft ( `187.78 crore) during this extended period was 
due to ADA utilising the LSP aircraft along with TDs/PVs towards flight 
testing/evaluation.
However, even these extended timelines could not be adhered to by ADA as 
LCA achieved IOC only in December 2013 and FOC is yet to be achieved 
(January 2015). In response to an audit observation (December 2014) 
regarding non-accomplishment of FOC, ADA stated (January 2015) that FOC 
of LCA had been rescheduled to December 2015. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page12
Thus, LCA programme sanctioned in 1983 and taken up (1993) as phased 
development for completion by 2004, is yet to be completed (January 2015). 
This had impacted the manufacture of 20 IOC standard LCA and 20 FOC 
standard LCA, for which contracts had been awarded by the Ministry to HAL 
in 2006 and 2010 (as discussed in Chapter IV Para 4.6.1 and Para 4.6.2) and 
induction into IAF to tide over the depletion of combat squadrons (as 
discussed in Chapter IV Para 4.7 and 4.9). 
2.2.1 Inadequate expertise in flight testing and consequent flight test 
consultancy with a foreign firm 
An Empowered Committee (EC) was constituted (November 2006) with Chief 
of Air Staff as its chairman to monitor the flight development activity and all 
issues for smooth induction of LCA on a quarterly basis. It is seen in Audit 
from the minutes of the very first meeting of the EC (December 2006) that 
there was inadequate expertise in flight testing within the Indian design 
community; and therefore EC felt that consultancy with reputed design centres 
in advance nations would be needed for flight testing to meet the IOC and 
FOC schedules.
Accordingly, ADA concluded (March 2009) a consultancy contract with        
M/s EADS, Germany at a cost of 18.5 Million Euros ( `127.65 crore) which 
comprised two Phases: 
¾ Phase I of the consultancy contract was to be completed by July 2011 
along with the achievement of IOC of LCA and 
¾ Phase II of the consultancy contract was to be completed by          
January 2013 along with the achievement of FOC.  
ADA could not implement all the recommendations of the consultancy 
contract pertaining to both Phase-I and II during its currency by January 2013 
as detailed below:  
¾ Pertaining to IOC Release Sequence of carrier Bomb, Light 
Stores
¾ Pertaining to FOC i. System test philosophy, test process, rig 
test environment,  
ii. BVR Missile and usage of Air-to-Air 
Identification of Friend or Foe,
iii. ADA Rig improvements using the Test 
Support System 
ADA could not 
complete flight 
testing activities for 
FOC during the 
currency of the 
consultancy contract 
and had to go in   
for a second 
consultancy contract 
for completing these 
activities 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page13
However, ADA signed (March 2013) the Closure Report of the consultancy 
contract treating the contract closed with retrospective effect from          
January 2013, as PDC of consultancy contract had since expired in January 
2013.
In response to an audit observation seeking (October 2014) the reasons for not 
implementing the recommendations of the consultant and acceptance of the 
closure of the contract, ADA clarified (October 2014) that it could not  
implement the consultant recommendations during the period of the contract 
as IOC schedules were shifted because of major safety related snags, ejection 
related issues, etc. ADA further stated (January 2015) that task wise 
recommendations of consultant were since implemented for achieving IOC 
and in respect of Phase II of the contract (FOC), it was stated that these were 
understood and work was in progress. 
Audit further observed (October 2014) that ADA concluded (August 2014) 
another contract with the same firm viz. EADS, Germany for consultancy in 
flight testing for achieving FOC and Post-FOC activity for a period of            
16 months with consultation charges of 3.7 Million Euros ( `30.34 crore). The 
scope of work included consultancy for (i) Flight test envelope expansion and 
carefree maneuvering and (ii) separation of weapons and stores from LCA and 
(iii) design improvement of the Crew Escape System. Out of the three tasks, 
two tasks at (i) and (ii) were already included as part of the scope of the first 
consultancy contract (March 2009). 
Audit enquired (October 2014) reasons for conclusion (August 2014) of 
another contract with the same firm for two tasks which should have been 
completed under the first contract. In response, ADA while admitting the fact 
of re-inclusion of the two tasks in the scope of work, clarified (October 2014) 
that the Phase III included not only FOC related tasks, which would be 
completed within six months, but also post–FOC activity related to design 
improvements of Crew Escape System.   
The fact remains that all the recommendations of consultant under the first 
contract (March 2009) were not implemented. The financial impact on account 
of re-inclusion of the two tasks of the first contract again in the second 
contract could not be quantified in Audit as there was no task wise price in the 
above contracts. Also, the very purpose of going in for flight consultancy for 
timely meeting of the IOC/FOC schedule was also not met. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page14
2.3 Shortfall in accomplishment of Air Staff Requirement 
(ASR)
Air Staff Requirement (1985) prescribes the physical parameters of LCA such 
as aircraft weight, fuel capacity, load carrying capacity of weapons, missiles, 
survivability, navigation, etc and features like single point defueling, pilot 
protection system, all weather operations, fuel system protection etc. to make 
the aircraft capable of performing its role of multi mission fighter aircraft and 
have increased survivability against battle damage. The ASR also envisages 
timeline for induction of LCA, quantity of LCA fighter and trainer required. 
There were no revisions to the ASR by IAF, except in respect of weapon 
requirements, as discussed in Para 2.3.2.  
The Project Definition Phase (PDP) document of LCA prepared by ADA 
(December 1988) had been reviewed by Air HQ (March 1989) who found it 
deficient in the crucial parameters of aerodynamic configuration, volume and 
weight as set in ASR, particularly with reference to significant increase in 
weight of LCA, which could adversely affect performance. To resolve the 
deadlock, it had been decided (March 1990) that the development may be 
executed as Full Scale Engineering Development (FSED) in a phased manner.  
We however observed during the course of audit that LCA which had 
achieved (December 2013) IOC did not meet the ASR in terms of increased 
weight, reduced internal fuel capacity, non-compliance of all-weather 
operations, non-achievement of single point defueling, fuel system protection, 
pilot protection, etc., for which, ADA obtained (December 2013) from Air HQ 
altogether 53 temporary concessions/permanent waivers.  
To an audit observation (June 2014) regarding operational impact of the 
concessions/ waivers, IAF replied (December 2014/February 2015) that the 
concessions/permanent waivers would adversely impact the operational 
performance. 
The 20 permanent waivers were granted for ASR parameters which the current 
configuration of LCA Mk-I with GE-F-404-IN20 engine cannot achieve.  
Also, the performance shortfalls applicable to 20 IOC aircraft under 
production at HAL will also be applicable 20 FOC aircraft as these waivers 
were granted for LCA Mk-I in its current configuration.  The 33 temporary 
time bound concessions were granted for ASR parameters which are still 
under design/development and testing and would adversely affect LCA's 
combat potential. 
LCA Mark-I 
achieved IOC in 
December 2013 
with 53 waivers/ 
concessions due to 
shortfalls in 
meeting the ASR, 
impacting its 
operational 
utilisation by IAF 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page15
Thus, the views expressed by Air HQ as early as in March 1989 that the 
aircraft planned to be developed by ADA would be deficient in crucial 
parameters of aerodynamic configuration, volume and weight adversely 
affecting its performance have not been overcome in LCA Mk-I developed by 
ADA as it does not meet the requirements of IAF fully in terms of combat 
potential and survivability.
It was precisely with this forethought that the Empowered Committee headed 
by Chief of Air Staff had recommended in October 2007 for the building of 
LCA Mk II under FSED Phase III in order to meet the ASR parameters. 
Consequently, till the LCA Mk II is developed, manufactured and inducted 
into squadrons, the IAF would be constrained to use the LCA Mk-I (40 
aircraft) with reduced operational capabilities. 
2.3.1 Delay in development and supply of trainer aircraft and simulator
In order to impart effective operational training in air combat and ground 
attack to IAF pilots, the ASR also specified delivery of a trainer variant of 
LCA and a full mission flight simulator, which are discussed below:
A. Trainer aircraft 
The ASR envisaged a total requirement of 200 fighters and 20 trainer aircraft 
of LCA. The trainer variant of the LCA was to retain all attributes of the 
fighter variant except for the changes necessary to accommodate a second seat 
for imparting training to IAF pilots. The ASR had envisaged that the fighter 
and trainer aircraft should enter the IAF service by 1994.
Out of the five prototypes to be built under FSED Phase-II, PV5 was to be the 
trainer prototype. However, based on the requirement projected          
(December 2005) by IAF for an additional trainer prototype, ADA decided 
(March 2006) to convert PV4, a fighter variant prototype, to a trainer variant 
(as PV6). These trainer prototypes (PV5 and PV6) were also to be built and 
flight tested along with the fighter prototypes (PV1, PV2 and PV3) towards 
achieving IOC/FOC and consequent production of trainer aircraft against 20 
IOC and 20 FOC contracts (2006, 2010) at HAL (each of these contracts 
included 4 trainers along with 16 fighters). However, first test flight of PV5 
was achieved only in November 2009 and PV6 achieved its first flight only in 
November 2014. Consequently, trainer LCA is yet to achieve IOC/FOC 
LCA trainer aircraft 
is yet to achieve 
IOC/FOC, thus 
trainer aircraft cannot 
be produced by HAL 
and supplied to IAF, 
impacting the 
training requirements 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page16
(January 2015).  Air HQ had expressed in Empowered Committee meeting 
held in April 2013 that availability of operational trainer aircraft was essential 
for pilot training.
When Audit pointed out (May 2014) delays in attaining IOC/FOC of trainer 
prototypes and their consequent non-availability to IAF, Air HQ stated 
(December 2014) that non-availability of trainer aircraft would have adverse 
impact on pilot training. In response to an audit query (December 2014) 
regarding non availability of trainer LCA, ADA stated (January 2015) that 
PV-6 would be handed over to IAF for pilot training.
ADA’s reply is not tenable as a prototype trainer is not a substitute for a 
production standard trainer which had undergone flight testing/certification 
towards meeting the operational standards. 
Thus, HAL would not be able to produce production standard trainer aircraft 
(against IOC/FOC contracts) for IAF till the achievement of IOC/FOC of 
trainer aircraft and its finalization of Standard of Preparation (SOP). Thus, 
trainer variant as specified in ASR was yet to be handed over to IAF      
(January 2015), and resultantly, IAF would be constrained to induct fighter 
LCA without availability of trainer aircraft which would have adverse impact 
on pilot training. 
B. Full Mission Simulator 
A flight simulator artificially re-creates aircraft flight and the environment in 
which it flies, for pilot training. It includes replicating how aircraft fly, how 
they react to applications of flight controls, the effects of other aircraft 
systems, and how the aircraft reacts to external factors such as air density, 
turbulence, wind shear, cloud, precipitation, etc.
ASR specifies that a full mission flight simulator of the LCA single seater 
variant was to be developed and delivered in advance of production aircraft 
(1994) as part of training requirement. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page17
It was observed in audit that HAL forwarded (November 2006) a proposal for 
manufacture and supply of Full Mission Simulator (FMS) in respect of LCA to 
Air HQ. While the proposal was pending for clearance by MoD, ADA 
sanctioned (July 2010) a project to Aeronautical Development Establishment 
(ADE), Bangalore to upgrade the existing Real Time Simulator
15 (RTS) at 
their end to the standard of FMS at a cost of `4.50 crore in order to meet the 
training requirements of the IAF pilots. 
In response to an audit observation (September 2014) regarding the status of 
FMS, ADE stated (October 2014) that the existing RTS had been upgraded to 
FMS and was being used by NFTC
16/HAL test pilots for evaluation and 
training.
When present position of HAL’s proposal for supply of FMS submitted 
(November 2006) to Air HQ was enquired (February 2015) in audit, Air HQ 
stated (February 2015) that though technical evaluation of HAL’s proposal 
had been accepted by MoD, a case for procurement of FMS from ADE is 
being processed as per the decision taken (July 2014) in the Empowered 
Committee. 
Thus, IAF would be using the RTS upgraded as FMS at ADE, till a full 
fledged FMS is manufactured by HAL and supplied for the usage at LCA 
operating base.
2.3.2 Meeting of weapon requirement on LCA as per ASR 
As per the ASR, LCA is required to be provided with seven under-
wing/fuselage hard points for the carriage of bombs, rockets, missiles, 
Recce/laser designator pods and fuel tanks. The outboard stations were 
exclusively for the carriage of close combat missiles (CCMs). The aircraft 
should be able to carry a weapon load of at least 3000 kg. 
15   RTS built under a work package sanctione d (March 2008) by ADA at a cost of `98 lakh, 
for evaluation of control law of LCA.    
16     National Flight Test Centre, Bangalore. 
As a full mission 
simulator (FMS) 
required for training 
of IAF pilots is yet to 
be built by HAL and 
supplied to IAF at the 
LCA operating base, 
IAF pilots have to 
utilise the up-graded 
FMS at ADE, 
Bangalore 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page18
Weapon stations load carrying capacity- Source: http:/defenceforumindia 
Audit observed (May 2014) that IAF had revised 17 the weapons requirement 
from time to time such as replacing R-60 missile with R-73E missile 18, adding 
M-62 Russian Bombs, Counter Measures Dispensing System 19, etc for 
integration on LCA. When impact of these changes on the LCA programme 
were enquired in audit, ADA stated (June 2014) that these changes had 
delayed the programme schedules as follows: 
¾ Change of Close Combat Missile from R-60 to R-73E had resulted in 
redesign of integral wing and associated manufacturing and testing 
efforts involving delay of 14 months. 
¾ Addition of Russian 500 Kg (M-62) bombs necessitated design and 
fabrication of adopter and software development which delayed the 
programme by 16 months. 
¾ Addition of CMDS led to design modifications and software 
development with an additional time of 18 months. 
When the above delays caused due to changes in the weapons by IAF as 
reported by ADA was pointed out (September 2014) in audit, Air HQ stated 
(December 2014) that the extended schedule of design and development of 
17   March 1997 and December 2009. 
18    An infrared-guided (heat-seeking) missile.  
19    A mission critical system to protect the aircraft against radar and heat-seeking missiles  
and Radar Guided Anti-Aircraft Missiles. 
Revising the 
requirement of 
weapons on LCA 
by IAF periodically 
contributed to the 
delays in LCA 
programme 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page19
LCA had resulted in several weapons and systems becoming obsolete/out of 
stock/operationally irrelevant and to retain operational edge, newer weapons 
had to be included. It was also stated that ADA being the programme manager 
could have inducted additional resources to realize the integration of the 
changed weapons in time.
Thus, due to design and development of LCA programme getting extended 
from time to time, IAF had to opt for newer weapons to retain operational 
edge of LCA. This consequently had a further impact on the timelines of the 
LCA programme. 
2.3.3 Status of integration of weapons on LCA 
Audit observed that delayed identification/procurement of weapons/integration 
also contributed to delays in LCA programme as discussed below: 
i. Integration of R-73E Missiles 
R-73E is an infrared-guided (heat-seeking) missile capable of being targeted 
by a helmet-mounted sight allowing pilots to designate targets by looking at 
them. The R-73E is a highly maneuverable missile capable of making a 
significant difference in combat.  
As per the ASR, R-60 a close combat missile was to be fitted on LCA. IAF 
revised (March 1997) the requirement to fitment of R-73E missile in place of 
R-60 missile.  ADA concluded (August 2004) a contract with M/s Elbit, Israel, 
for integration of R-73E missile on LCA including consultancy thereon at a 
total cost of 3.69 Million USD ( `17 crore) to be completed within 24 months         
(August 2006). There were delays in integration of R-73E missile on LCA due 
to redesign of integral wing and associated manufacturing and testing efforts 
(necessitated due to change from R-60 to R-73 missile). In the meanwhile, Air 
HQ while revising (December 2009) the weapon requirements, further 
specified that R-73E should be integrated with Multi-Mode Radar
20 (MMR) 
and Helmet Mounted Display & Sight 21 (HMDS) as an IOC requirement. The 
delivery schedule was amended several times (eight times involving a total of 
20  Used for tracking targets from Air to Air,  Air to Surface including sea and facilitates all 
weather launching of weapons. Delay in development of MMR is discussed in         
Chapter III. 
21   HMDS is used for launching of weapons accurately. HMDS was procured from M/s Elbit 
Israel by ADA (Purchase Order dated August 2004 valuing 6.85 MUSD, items received 
in November/December 2011). 
Delayed 
specifying of 
integrating the 
R-73E missile 
with MMR/ 
HMDS 
contributed to 
the delays in 
achievement of 
IOC 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page20
delay of 88 month) due to integration of R-73E missile with HMDS/MMR and 
related flight tests. The integration of R-73E missile with LCA was completed 
(December 2013) by ADA, after integration and release of R-73E using 
HMDS and MMR, and LCA achieved IOC (December 2013). 
In response to audit observation (October 2014) regarding impact of delay in 
integration of R-73E missile on LCA on IOC schedule, ADA admitted 
(October 2014) that delay in integration of R-73E missile with HMDS and 
MMR had impacted the IOC schedule. ADA further stated (January 2015) that 
the avionics integration of R-73E missile with MMR and HMDS sensor was 
delayed due to delay in development and flight testing of MMR/HMDS.
Thus, IAF specifying additional requirement of firing the R-73E missile using 
HMDS/MMR sensors in December 2009, which was not specified earlier in 
the ASR (1985), contributed to slippage of IOC schedule beyond the planned 
date of December 2010, which was achieved only in December 2013. 
ii.  Integration of Derby & Python-5 Missile
Derby missile is a Beyond Visual Range
22 (BVR), medium-range (50 km) 
active-radar seeker, air-to-air missile built by the Israeli weapons 
manufacturer M/s Rafael Advanced Defense Systems. Python-5 is also a 
missile built by M/s Rafael with a range of 20 kms with an advanced electro 
optical imaging and infrared seeker. 
ASR of 1985 broadly indicated the requirement of BVR configuration missiles 
on LCA without specifying any particular BVR missile. It was only in 
December 2009 the Air HQ communicated the requirement of specific BVR 
missiles viz. Derby and Python-5 Missiles on LCA as part of the FOC.
ADA placed (December 2011) a Purchase Order on M/s Rafael Advanced and 
Defence Systems Ltd, Israel for supply and Integration of Derby & Python 
Missile on LCA-Air Force / Navy at a total cost of 21.2 Million US dollars 
(equivalent to `99.64 crore) with a delivery schedule of 20 months which was 
revised (June 2013) to 34 months (i.e. up to October 2014). Audit also 
observed from the ADA records that ADA had attributed (October 2013) 
delayed identification of specific BVR missiles viz., Derby and Python-5 by 
IAF had resulted in revision of the FOC schedule beyond December 2008.  
22     BVR missile is an air-to-air missile which engages enemy target at 37 kms or above. 
Delayed 
identification of 
BVR missiles 
by IAF 
impacted the 
FOC schedule 
of LCA 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page21
To an audit query (October 2014) with regard to present position of receipt of 
the missiles and integration on LCA, ADA stated (October 2014) that the 
missiles had been received in October 2014 and integration on LCA was in 
progress.
Audit sought (November 2014) the reasons for belated decision of IAF in 
identifying specific BVR missiles. In reply, Air HQ stated (December 2014) 
that correct choice of weapons on any platform was a critical decision and 
effectiveness of the platform was directly proportional to the weapons that it 
could employ. Thus, weapons were to be introduced when the aircraft was 
close to maturity to maintain an operational edge over the adversary. Air HQ 
also did not accept the contention of ADA that delay in identification of BVR 
missile by IAF resulted in extension of FOC schedule as even core issues such 
as design of avionics, all weather clearance, MMR evaluation, etc were 
required to be resolved.
ADA further replied (January 2015) that all weather clearance of the aircraft 
had no impact on BVR integration and avionics design did not have any 
issues. It was further stated that BVR integration activities were undertaken by 
them only after concluding contract in December 2011, after Air HQ had 
given (July 2011) go-ahead for integration of Derby and Python missiles. 
The fact remains that delayed development of LCA by ADA, coupled with 
delayed identification/go-ahead of specific BVR missile by IAF had impacted 
the FOC schedule of LCA, which is now expected to be achieved by 
December 2015.  
iii. Manufacture of Drop tanks and pylons 
Drop tanks are auxiliary externally mounted fuel tanks and Aircraft pylon is a 
vertical structure used to mount external equipment such as drop tanks and 
weapons (stores) on an aircraft. The MoU (June 2002) between ADA and 
HAL stipulated supply of eight aircraft sets of role equipment consisting of 
drop tanks
23 and pylons. 
23  1200 litres-16 Nos, 800 litres -16 Nos and 725 litres-8 Nos. 
Delay in 
manufacture and 
supply of 725 litre 
drop tanks by HAL 
resulted in non-
compliance of IOC 
requirement and 
concession had to be 
obtained by ADA 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page22
It was observed in audit  (October 2014) that as against 64 pylons and 40 drop 
tanks to be supplied by 2008, HAL manufactured and supplied 49 pylons and 
13 drop tanks between April 2007 and August 2014 thereby completing only 
60 percent of the deliverables.
In response to Audit enquiry (October 2014) regarding delay in manufacture 
and supply of drop tanks and pylons, HAL stated (November 2014) that delay 
in manufacture of drop tanks and pylons were due to changes in design of 
components, process of manufacturing, non-availability of anodizing
24 plant 
facility in Composite Manufacturing Division (CMD), and delay in getting 
type approval for drop tanks and pylons. 
HAL further stated (November 2014) that it had planned for completing the 
manufacture and supply of the balance drop tanks and pylons by 2015-16.
Thus, due to changes in design and de lay in establishment of manufacturing 
facilities, HAL could not adhere to the committed delivery schedule. As a 
result, 725 litre drop tank was not integrated on LCA (IOC requirement) and 
ADA had to obtain concession towards this while achieving IOC        
(December 2013) (discussed at Para 2.3).
2.3.4 Electronic Warfare capabilities for LCA 
Combat aircraft are equipped with Electronic Warfare (EW) capabilities to 
degrade the effectiveness of enemy radar and radio systems. ASR specified 
that LCA should be capable of carrying an Electronic Counter Measures 
(ECM) Pod. In addition, provision was to be made for an internally mounted 
Self Protection Jammer (SPJ) in the LCA with provision for future updates. 
Air HQ revised (March 1997) the EW capability on LCA to include SPJ, 
Radar Warning Receiver (RWR) and Counter Measures Dispensing System 
(CMDS).
24  An electrochemical process that gives the metal surface a durable, corrosion-resistant 
finish. 
LCA Mark-I will 
be deficient in EW 
capabilities as the 
SPJ developed by 
DARE cannot be 
fitted on it due to 
space constraints 
and RWR/CMDS 
are having 
unresolved 
performance 
issues, impacting 
operational 
utilisation of LCA 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page23
Details of development of these EW systems for LCA Mk-I by Defence 
Avionics Research Establishment (DARE), Bangalore – SPJ and RWR – and 
Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL), Hyderabad – CMDS – are indicated in the 
Table below:      
 (` in crore) 
Sl
No. 
Item 
Description 
Role on the 
aircraft
Sanction No and 
date 
Sanctioned 
cost/
Revised 
cost
Original 
PDC/ 
Revised 
PDC
Present
position 
Impact 
on LCA 
1 Self-Protection 
Jammer 
It radiates 
interfering signals 
toward an enemy's 
radar, blocking 
the receiver with 
highly 
concentrated 
energy signals.
No DARO/ 
04/1216/M/01 
/91/ S/D(R&D) 
dated 29 
September 2005 
116.02/ 
154.74 
March 
2011/ 
December 
2014 
System 
developed 
by DARE 
will not be 
fitted on 
LCA Mk-I 
due to 
space
constraints 
LCA Mk-I 
is
deficient
in a self -
protection 
jammer 
2 Radar Warning 
Receiver
It alerts pilots of 
the various types 
of hostile emitters 
employed by 
other countries 
and enables pilots 
to initiate suitable 
action, which is 
crucial for the 
success of 
missions and 
survival of aircraft 
deployed for such 
missions. 
ADA letter No 
ADA/PD (S)/ 
TARANG-
1B/2010 dated 15 
May 2010 
7.12 December 
2010 
RWR fitted 
on LCA 
Mk-I  is 
having 
issues such 
as
degradation 
of direction 
finding 
accuracy,
reset in air, 
etc and 
DARE is in 
the process 
of 
resolving 
these
issues.
LCA Mk-I 
is
deficient
of a fully 
functional 
RWR 
3 Counter 
Measure 
Dispensing 
System 
It is a mission 
critical system to 
protect the aircraft 
against radar and 
heat seeking 
missiles and 
Radar Guided 
Anti-Aircraft 
Missiles 
ADA letter No 
ADA/PD(S)/ 
CMDS /08/06 
dated 27 October 
2006 
1.58 April 
2008/ 
May 2010 
CMDS
fitted on 
LCA Mk-I  
exhibited 
deficiency
in 
misguiding 
enemy 
missiles 
and
ADA/BDL 
are in the 
process of 
modifying 
the design 
to 
overcome 
the flaw. 
LCA Mk-I 
is
deficient
of a fully 
functional 
CMDS

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page24
It can be seen from the above Table that development of SPJ by DARE was 
not successful, and as a result, the LCA Mk-I will be deficient of this system. 
As regards the other two EW components - RWR and CMDS - till the 
performance issues are resolved, these two systems will also have 
performance shortfalls as indicated in the above Table. Consequently, LCA 
Mk-I remains deficient in full EW capabilities as specified in the ASR. 
2.3.5 Shortfall in creation of Manufacture and repair facilities 
ASR also envisaged establishment of manufacture and repair facilities at 
HAL. However, there were shortfalls in creation of manufacture and repair 
facilities at HAL as discussed in Chapter-IV.
2.4 Work-packages for LCA programme  
As per the Memorandum of Association (1984), ADA was to execute the LCA 
development by utilising the capabilities of national agencies/ institutions 
(referred as work centers) working in Aerospace technology. There were/are 
152 work centres in all, viz. DRDO labs (38), Public Sector Undertakings 
(PSUs) (22), Government organizations (36), educational institutes (14) and 
other private agencies (42). Audit examination of the work packages awarded 
to work centres by ADA and results thereof are discussed below:
2.4.1 Non-maintenance of complete data in respect of Work-packages 
for FSED Phase-I
ADA had not maintained the work package-wise complete details of FSED 
Phase I as confirmed by it (January 2015) in its reply to draft Audit report 
(December 2014).  Thus, analysis of the work packages  (WPs) undertaken by 
ADA under FSED Phase-I could not be carried out in the present Audit. 
2.4.2 Work-packages for FSED Phase-II
The details of the WPs awarded by ADA for FSED Phase II and its 
completion are indicated in the Table below:

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page25
As per the Table , ADA had awarded 503 WPs amounting to `1,112.39 crore 
for FSED Phase-II.  Out of 503 WPs, ADA had identified 110 WPs valuing            
`630.21 crore as critical based on the basic functionality requirement for the 
safe flight of the aircraft. ADA entrusted all the work packages (from 2002 to 
2013) to 152 work centres and out of which, only 27 per cent of the WPs were 
completed within the schedule and remaining 73 per cent of the WPs were 
delayed. Among the critical WPs, only 13 per cent were completed within 
schedule. Even the on-going 62 WPs (related to FOC activities) were also 
behind schedule with delays ranging from 2 months to 11 years.  
Audit on a sample review of execution of 194 WPs (51 critical, 143            
non-critical) valuing `632.23 crore ( `338.37 crore - critical, `293.86 crore -         
non-critical) noticed instances of delayed completion of work packages, which 
are shown in the Table below:
 (` in crore) 
Sl.
No. 
Item
description 
Name of the 
work centre 
Sanction No. 
and date 
Sanctioned 
cost/revised 
cost ( `)
Original 
PDC/revis
ed PDC 
Actual 
date of 
comple-
tion 
Delay in 
month 
1 Digital Flight 
Control 
Computer 
Aeronautical 
Development 
Establishment, 
Bangalore  
ADA sanction 
letter No 
ADA/LCA/IFCS 
/DFCC/PM/99 
dated 27 May 
1999 
8.30/12.84 May 2001/ 
September 
2009 
September 
2009 
100 
2 Multi-Mode 
Radar 
Electronic & 
Radar 
Development 
Establishment 
(LRDE), 
ADA letter No 
ADA/PD(S)/192/
91/631 dated 17 
June 1991 
62.27 December 
1997/ 
December 
1999 
MMR developed by 
LRDE/HAL found 
short of expectations 
and joint development 
of MMR with a 
Type  Number of 
work 
packages 
Value  
(` in crore) 
Work packages completed Ongoing 
Work 
Packages Within
schedule 
With delay ranging 
< one 
year 
1- 3 
years 
> 3 
years 
Critical 110 630.21 14 32 16 29 19 
Non-
Critical 
393 482.18 119 89 46 96 43 
Total 503 1112.39 133 121 62 125 62 
Percentage to total packages 27 24 12 25 12 
Delay in 
completion of work 
packages by work 
centres contributed 
to the overall delays 
of the LCA 
programme 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page26
Bangalore & 
HAL, 
Hyderabad 
Division 
foreign firm discussed 
in Chapter III  
3 Hydraulic 
System LRUs 
HAL, Lucknow 
Division 
ADA sanction 
letter No 
ADA:GS:9438: 
S09 dated 07 
October 2000 
3.69 March 
2002/ 
December 
2009 
December 
2009 
93 
4 LRUs for fuel 
system 
sensors, 
Hydraulic 
systems, etc 
HAL, Lucknow 
Division 
ADA Sanction 
No 
ADA:GS:16712:
080/S103(A) 
dated 28 January 
2006 
3.40 June 2007/ 
April 2012 
April
2012 
58 
Audit enquired (September 2014) about delays in completing the WPs by the 
entrusted work centres and basis for selection of work centres. In reply, ADA 
stated (September 2014) that it had no authority/control on the working of 
work centres. ADA also admitted (October 2014) that the delay in 
development of WPs had affected the LCA programme schedule. ADA also 
stated (January 2015) that work packages/ project sanctions were continuously 
reviewed and monitored by ADA through participation in Project Review 
Committee (PRC) meetings. However, the priority accorded by these work 
centres was depending upon the production targets set by their management on 
which ADA had no authority.   As regards the basis for selection of work 
centres, ADA stated (October 2014) that during 1990s selection of vendor for 
development of strategic aviation equipment was very limited in the country, 
hence it had no choice but to go with the vendors who had past experience in 
the related field.
ADA’s contention that they had no authority/control on the working of the 
work centres is not tenable in audit as the LCA programme was being 
monitored by MoD and ADA had representation at all levels in the decision 
making of the Government. The work centres, majority of which were DRDO 
labs, PSUs and Government organizations, should have accorded due 
importance to the LCA development programme due to its national 
importance.  As such, delays in completion of work packages which affected 
the LCA programme schedules indicates that coordination of efforts at various 
levels and monitoring of the programme by all the agencies involved, has not 
been as envisaged.

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page27
2.5 Lack of user involvement 
Audit observed (September 2014) from the LCA PDP Review Committee, 
which examined the work done at Project Definition Phase, had strongly 
recommended (September 1989) early establishment of a standing Liaison 
Group between Air HQ and ADA to ensure closer interaction between the 
design team and the user for better appreciation of mutual perception, 
including appropriate trade-offs in performance, weight, time frame, cost, 
technological complexity and operational considerations of LCA.
However, audit observed (September 2014) that no such liaison group was 
formed. As a result, IAF played limited role as a member in Governing Body 
and General Body meetings. The active user participation in the LCA 
Programme was started only after the formation of an Empowered Committee 
(November 2006), LCA Review Committee consisting of ADA, HAL and IAF 
(November 2006) and LCA Project Management Team (LCA-PMT) at ADA 
(August 2007). The Empowered Committee chaired by Chief of Air Staff and 
co-chaired by Secretary (DP) and SA to RM/DG ADA met Quarterly to 
review the complete programme with the sole objective to monitor the flight 
development activities. The LCA Review Committee headed by Deputy Chief 
of Air Staff met every month to review all the issues concerning the 
programme. LCA Project Management Team (LCA-PMT) headed by Air Vice 
Marshal to function as a single point interface between the IAF and ADA/ 
NFTC/HAL for co-ordination of flight test activities, positioning of weapons 
stores for LCA, etc. 
Audit sought (September 2014) the reasons for non-formation of standing 
Liaison Group between Air HQ and ADA to ensure closer interaction between 
the design team and the user as recommended (September 1989) by the LCA 
PDP Review Committee. In reply, Air HQ stated (December 2014) that 
expertise of IAF personnel was not in the area of design of aircraft, but in 
capability to guide the programme in terms of user requirement of operations 
and maintainability.  Hence formation of standing Liaison Group earlier than 
2007 may not have been fruitful. It was also stated that IAF test pilots and test 
engineers were involved in the project as part of National Flight Test Centre 
(NFTC), Bangalore since 2001.   
Involvement of user 
(Air HQ) commenced 
only after 2006 even 
though LCA 
programme 
commenced in 1983 
and need for a liaison 
group between Air HQ 
and ADA had been 
expressed by the LCA 
PDP Review 
Committee as early as 
in 1989 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page28
However, Air HQ reply is not tenable as user involvement would be essential 
right from inception for effective and efficient completion of any project. This 
is evident from the fact that as soon as Empowered Committee was formed 
(November 2006), in its very first meeting (December 2006), need for foreign 
consultancy in flight testing was emphasized (as discussed at Chapter II Para 
2.2.1) and in its fourth meeting (October 2007), need for going in for LCA 
Mk-II was highlighted (as discussed at Chapter I Para 1.3) based on which 
FSED Phase III was sanctioned (November 2009). 
Thus, non-formation of a standing Liaison Group between Air HQ and ADA 
to ensure closer interaction between the design team and the user for better 
appreciation of mutual perception, including appropriate trade-offs in 
performance, weight, time frame, cost, technological complexity and 
operational considerations of LCA also impacted the LCA development 
timelines. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Indigenisation Page29
Objective:  To assess whether Indigenous capability was 
developed through LCA programme
3.1 Absence of Indigenisation Plan
The GoI sanction of LCA project (August 1983) envisaged use of as many 
sub-systems as were readily available in the world market. However, GoI 
sanction (June 1993) for FSED Phase-I required to shift the focus on 
maximising the indigenous development, even if it meant increase in cost and 
time, partly because of severe foreign exchange crunch faced by the country in 
early 1990s and partly for attaining self-reliance in critical areas. Accordingly, 
ADA had proposed (June 1993) to undertake indigenous development of items 
such as Jet Fuel Starter, Gear Box, avionics software development and 
mechanical systems of LCA. In addition, import content was planned to be 
reduced in design and development of Carbon Fibre Composite (CFC) Wing, 
Multi-Mode Radar, General systems, import of components instead of 
systems, apart from increase of import content in infrastructure and aircraft 
manufacturing activities. 
In response to audit observation (July 2014) regarding indigenisation plan for 
LCA, ADA stated (August 2014/January 2015) that no indigenization plan/ 
roadmap for LCA was made because the scope of the Project was to develop 
advanced technologies/components along with LCA development. ADA, 
however, further stated (January 2015) that sufficient emphasis had been given 
towards indigenous design and development of various critical systems right 
from the beginning of the programme.  
Various systems/equipment/items of LCA that were taken up for indigenous 
development are indicated in Annexure II . In response to an Audit query 
(July 2014) regarding the extent of indigenisation in LCA, ADA claimed 
(August 2014) that indigenous capability developed worked out to 70 per cent
of the LCA content in terms of value. 
CHAPTER  III : DEVELOPMENT OF 
INDIGENOUS CAPABILITY 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Indigenisation Page30
Audit observed (August 2014) from the CCS Note submitted (August 2009) 
for extension of FSED Phase-II  that indigenous Line Replaceable Units 1
(LRUs) had been developed with the imported electronic components and 
accessories. 
 In response to audit query (August 2014) on the extent of indigenous content, 
ADA clarified (October 2014) that the LRUs were built in-house using 
imported components with indigenous design qualifications and certification 
efforts and hence indigenous content had been worked out at LRU level. 
ADA, however, further stated that the indigenous content of LCA worked out 
to about 35 per cent  considering the use of imported components and 
accessories in LRUs. ADA also confirmed (October 2014) the continued 
dependency on imported electronic components, accessories etc. for LCA.  
In the absence of a roadmap for indigenous development, the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the indigenous development achieved in the LCA programme 
could not be assessed in Audit. We also observed (December 2014) that ADA 
had further initiated (February 2014) a proposal for indigenous development 
of 109 LRUs at an estimated cost of `479 crore.
3.1.1  Indigenisation efforts
While ADA successfully developed systems such as CFC Wing, Gear Box, 
efforts made by ADA and its work centres for indigenous development of 
major items like Kaveri engine, Radome, Multi-Mode Radar, Jet Fuel Starter, 
etc, were not completely successful as discussed below:
i. Development of Engine for LCA 
Government of India sanctioned (March 1989) a project for the design and 
development by Gas Turbine Research Establishment (GTRE) of an engine 
(named ‘Kaveri’) for LCA at a cost of `382.81 crore (FE `155.39 crore) with 
a PDC upto December 1996. The prototype version of LCA would be 
developed with a proven imported engine, while the production version of 
LCA was to use indigenous engine.
1      It is a modular component of an aircraft that  is designed to be replaced quickly in case of    
failure, which reduces down time of the aircraft. 
GTRE’s failure to 
develop Kaveri 
engine as per the 
requirements has 
made the LCA 
perennially 
dependant on 
imported aero 
engines throughout 
its service life 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Indigenisation Page31
GTRE, however, could not develop the Kaveri engine as per the LCA 
schedule and specifications; particularly the engine weight exceeded by 135 
Kgs (1235 Kgs as against 1100 Kgs) and also engine thrust achieved was 70 
kilo Newton (kN) against the requirement of 81 kN despite extensions of the 
project schedule till December 2009 and enhancement of the sanctioned cost 
to `2,839 crore (FE `1,730 crore). Inordinate delay in fructification of Kaveri 
engine and cost overrun of the programme was commented upon in Paragraph 
5.1 of the Report No 16 of 2010-11 of the C&AG of India, Union 
Government, Defence Services (Air Force and Navy) for the year ended 
March 2009.
The Ministry in their Action Taken Note (ATN) had stated (August 2011) that 
indigenous development of Kaveri engine for technology demonstration would 
continue.
In response to the present position of the Kaveri Project sought for (December 
2014) in Audit, GTRE stated (December 2014) that a revised proposal was 
under preparation to develop the Kaveri engine for another aircraft
2 at an 
estimated cost of `2652 crore and time frame of 7 years.  
Thus, even after incurring (January 2015) a development expenditure of     
`2020 crore by GTRE, indigenous development capability for LCA propulsion 
was not successful and ADA would continue to depend on GE imported 
engine for LCA. 
ii. Development of Radome 
The Radome is a primary structure on an aircraft, which houses the antenna. It 
needed to possess electro-magnetic 
(EM) transparency to get the best 
performance of the Antenna as well as 
structural integrity. The Radome 
designed and developed by the Advance 
Systems Laboratory (ASL), Hyderabad 
was selected (December 1989) for the 
LCA prototypes.
2      Unmanned Combat Air Vehicle (UCAV), being proposed for development by ADA. 
Radome
Radome developed 
by ASL and 
manufactured by 
HAL was not found 
suitable for LCA and 
imported Radome is 
yet to be tested along 
with MMR for 
assessing its 
performance 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Indigenisation Page32
Manufacturing of Radomes was started (June 2008) in HAL and the Regional 
Centre for Military Airworthiness (Aircraft), Bangalore accorded structural 
clearance (October 2009) to Radome manufactured by HAL. The first 
Electromagnetic test result of production Radome, supplied (December 2011) 
by HAL showed (June 2012) high loss of signal power resulting in significant 
reduction in radar range thereby affecting its performance. The Empowered 
Committee (June 2013) noticed that the losses of signal power were due to 
design deficiency and choice of Kevlar
3 material.   Subsequently, due to this 
deficiency, ADA had to conclude (September 2013) a contract with M/s 
Cobham, England for development and supply of six Radomes
4 with quartz 
material at a cost of GBP 2.5 million ( `22.75 crore) by January 2015 for 
testing on LCA.  
Thus, ADA has to depend on imported source for meeting the requirement of 
Radome as the one developed indigenously by ASL, Hyderabad and 
manufactured by HAL was not found suitable for LCA. This had impacted 
testing of MMR with cascading effect on accomplishment of FOC. 
iii. Development of Multi-Mode Radar (MMR) 
Multi-Mode Radar (MMR) is used in 
LCA for tracking targets from Air to Air, 
Air to Surface including sea. It facilitates 
all weather launching of weapons. It 
should operate under different modes viz., 
single target tracking (STT)
5 mode, close 
combat mode and air-to-ground ranging 
modes.
3   Kevlar is a super-strong plastic. 
4      One for qualification testing and the others for testing on different aircraft for consistency  
       in results. 
5     This mode is used to provide the most accurate information to the fire control computer 
so that accurate missile or gun firing can be accomplished. 
Multi Mode Radar (MMR)
MMR developed 
jointly by 
LRDE/HAL had 
performance 
shortfalls and ADA 
had to go in for     
co-development of 
MMR with foreign 
firm, performance 
of which is yet to 
be tested with 
imported Radome 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Indigenisation Page33
The joint indigenous development of MMR for LCA was 
entrusted (June 1991) to M/s HAL, 6 Hyderabad Division 
and LRDE 7, Bangalore at a cost of `62.27 crore             
(FE `35.374 crore), to be completed by December 1997.  
The delay in development of MMR despite consultancy 
from Ericsson and consequent import of three antenna 
were commented in Paragraph No 28 of Report of C&AG 
of India for the year ended March 1998 (No 8 of 1999).
However, Ministry’s reply was silent on this aspect while furnishing (July 
2004) the ATN. 
The MMR developed by HAL/LRDE was found (2006) short of expectations. 
Subsequently ADA concluded (October 2006) a contract with M/s Elta Israel 
for co- development/ consultancy, supply & integration of MMR on LCA at a 
cost of 26.5 Million USD ( `119.25 crore) by June 2009. Though the MMR 
was ready by 2009 for integration on LCA, the LCA (LSP3) required 
structural changes in front fuselage for installation of MMR LRUs. After the 
LSP3 was ready in 2010, the MMR was put to functionality and performance 
testing. While the functionality testing of MMR was completed in December 
2013, it could not be cleared in performance testing.  
To an audit observation (October 2014) seeking reasons for delay in testing of 
MMR and resultant impact on IOC/FOC schedule of LCA, ADA stated 
(October 2014) that the MMR required several software updates during its 
development, which contributed to delay apart from non-availability of aircraft 
for testing. As regards availability of MMR for IOC achieved in December 
2013, ADA stated (October 2014) that though MMR was integrated on LCA 
at the time of IOC, certain performance requirements such as range 
performance was falling short due to Radio Frequency (RF) losses of Radome 
and these limitations were recorded as part of Release to Service Document 
(RSD) of IOC of LCA. This had resulted in ADA concluding a fresh contract 
with M/s Cobham for an improved Radome with quartz material as has been 
discussed in sub-para 3.1 (ii). 
6   Hindustan Aeronautics Limited. 
7   Electronics and Radar development establishment. 
MMR Test Rig

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Indigenisation Page34
As MMR performance could not be proven due to change in Radome, ADA 
had to obtain (December 2013) concession from Air HQ while obtaining IOC 
for LCA. As discussed in Para 2.3, Air HQ while commenting (December 
2014) on impact of concessions on the combat potential of LCA, had stated 
with regard to non-evaluation of MMR that ‘Delay in addressing the issue 
would have an adverse impact on combat employability of LCA’. 
Thus, indigenous development of MMR for LCA could not be accomplished 
even after 22 years. Further, pending testing of MMR with the newly 
developed Radome, the performance testing and integration of MMR would 
remain incomplete, which would impact the combat employability of LCA.
iv. Multi-Functional Display  System (MFDS) 
Multi-Functional Display System (MFDS) facilitates display of information to 
the pilot relating to various functions of the aircraft. MFDS was identified in 
MoU (June 2002) for productionisation in Korwa Division with Transfer of 
Technology (TOT) from M/s Thales, France.  However, the TOT did not 
include the core element, i.e., Optical Display Device - Active Matrix Color 
Liquid Crystal Display (AMLCD). As such, HAL approved (March 2006) 
formation of a Joint Venture Company (JVC) with M/s Samtel HAL Display 
Systems Limited (SHDS), New Delhi with the main objective to design, 
develop and manufacture various types of display systems. However, since the 
development of MFDs was getting delayed, HAL imported (from September 
2010 to December 2012) MFDS at a total cost of `9.69 crore for the 20 SP 
(IOC) aircraft from M/s Elbit, Israel.  
In response to an audit observation (October 2014) regarding delay in 
development of MFDS for LCA, HAL stated (November 2014) that the HAL 
Board had approved (January 2008) placement of an order on SHDS for 
development and supply of MFD prototypes for LCA and Intermediate Jet
Trainer (IJT) on successful development and certification of MFDs for Su-30 
MKI.
Fact remains that HAL was unable to manufacture MFDs either in-house or 
through the JV Company formed for the specific purpose of developing MFDs 
and had to resort to procurement from foreign source. 
Due to delay in 
development of 
MFDS by SHDS, 
LCA will be fitted 
with imported 
MFDS till the 
indigenous MFDS 
are realised. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Indigenisation Page35
v. Jet Fuel Starter (JFS) 
JFS is used to start the engine. Its performance becomes very critical 
particularly while operating in the Himalayan Terrain, where the temperature 
goes below (–) 16 degrees centigrade. As per the ASR, the LCA power plant 
and intake should permit at least two consecutive starts. 
ADA approached (November 1984) M/s HAL Engine Design Bureau        
(HAL-EDB), Bangalore for development 
of JFS (Model GTSU 110) for LCA. 
HAL-EDB developed and delivered to 
ADA
8 the first unit of JFS in February 
1994 and 12 units from August 2002 
onwards for PV series aircraft at a total 
cost of `25.81 crore. JFS (GTSU-110) 
developed by HAL-EDB had two 
consecutive starts capability.  
We observed from the records of ADA that IAF expressed
9 the need for three 
consecutive starts capability of JFS against its own approved ASR. This was 
necessitated to cater for two main engi ne starts and dry rollover in-between.  
Accordingly, ADA sanctioned (September 2011) modification of JFS by HAL 
ETBRDC
10 at a cost of `1.99 crore. Modified JFS (GTSU 110 M1) could not 
be proved for the mandatory three consecutiv e starts in the high altitude trials 
and in cold weather trials held in January 2013 and January 2014 respectively 
at Leh. During the trials held (January 2014) at Bangalore, excessive oil 
consumption by JFS beyond permitted levels was noticed. 
When rectification of the snag of excess oil consumption of JFS was enquired 
in audit (May 2014), ADA stated (June 2014) that another proposal for 
modification to JFS (GTSU 110 M2) had been mooted (2014) to overcome the 
issue of excessive oil consumption. It also stated that the first two Series 
Production (SP) aircraft would, however, be delivered only with the original 
JFS (GTSU 110) and the modification kits would be retrofitted during 
March/April 2015. 
8     For testing at engine test bed. 
9     Copy of IAF letter and details as to when I AF expressed are not furnished to Audit           
by ADA. 
10   Engine Test Bed Research and Development Centre – HAL EDB was later renamed as 
HAL ETBRDC. 
JFS developed by 
HAL for LCA is 
having performance 
issues and the 
modified JFS is yet 
to be developed and 
flight tested 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Indigenisation Page36
Thus, development of JFS as required by IAF with three consecutive starts 
was still pending (January 2015) and even after the induction of LCA into 
IAF, the aircraft would continue to operate under concessions in respect of the 
JFS until it is retrofitted with modified JFS.   
vi. Flight Control System Actuators 
LCA is equipped with quadruplex digital Fly-By-Wire Flight Control 
System
11.   The maneuverability of the LCA is controlled by 13 Flight Control 
System Actuators12. ADA, in order to combat the US sanctions, had taken up 
(May 1998) the task of indigenizing the flight control system actuators for 
LCA. A committee was set up (May 1998) with participation of Control 
system experts from DRDO, ISRO, HAL and ADA.
Vikram Sarabai Space Research Centre (VSSC), Thiruvananthapuram was 
assigned (September 1998) the task of developing some of the flight critical 
components of the actuators viz., Elevon and Rudder actuators under the name 
‘Development and Advanced Linear Actuators (DALIA)’. VSSC was to pass 
on the Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) to the Nodal Agency, HAL for 
productionisation. A consortium consisting of HAL, MTAR Hyderabad, 
Godrej Mumbai was formed (May 2006) for productionisation of the actuators 
at HAL. Subsequently, HAL Board approved (November 2007) establishment 
of assembly and test facilities at HAL Accessories division, Lucknow for 
manufacture of the Actuators.  
DALIA was to transfer the IPR to consortium in three phases for manufacture 
of 13 sets of actuators. Accordingly, HAL placed a Purchase Order (August 
2009) on the consortium for manufacture, assembly and testing of the 
actuators at a cost of `14 crore after a delay of 21 months.  The activities, 
timeframe and achievement against the delivery schedule as per the purchase 
order are tabulated below: 
11   Fly-by-wire control systems allow aircraf t computers to perform tasks without pilot 
input. Gyroscopes fitted with sensors are mounted in an aircraft to sense movement 
changes and send signals to the computer, which automatically moves control actuators to 
stabilize the aircraft. 
12   (4 Elevon actuators, 1 Rudder actuator, 6 Leading edge slat Actuators & 2 air-brake 
Actuators).   
Due to delay in 
development of 
flight control 
system actuators 
by VSSC, LCA 
will be dependent 
on imported 
actuators till the 
indigenous 
actuators are 
realised

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Indigenisation Page37
Audit observed (September 2014) from the records of HAL that it continued to 
procure the Actuators from foreign source 13 due to the delay in indigenous 
development of the actuators. HAL replied (September 2014) that the 
development work and the qualification tests were completed in January 2014 
and the first stage of supply of actuators would be completed by           
December 2014. 
Thus, till the indigenously developed flight worthy actuators are delivered to 
HAL by DALIA, LCA will depend on imported source for these items. 
To sum up, even though GoI had emphasized (June 1993) on increasing the 
indigenous content of LCA while sanctioning FSED in phased manner, there 
was no roadmap for indigenization during LCA development. ADA could not 
achieve indigenisation as planned in June 1993. As a result, indigenous 
content of LCA estimated by ADA as 70 per cent actually amounted to about 
35 per cent (January 2015), with the aircraft dependent on foreign sources for 
important components such as aero engine, Multi-Mode Radar, Radome, 
Flight control System Actuators and Multi-Functional Display System.  
13  M/s BAe Systems, USA. 
Phase Activity Time 
frame 
(To = 
August 
2009) 
Revised 
Time frame 
Actual 
I
(2.5 sets) 
DALIA to take up assembly and 
testing activity.  The consortium 
members along with HAL, 
Lucknow will participate in 
assembly and testing activity and 
absorb the technology.   
To+21 
months 
i.e.
May
2011 
To + 10 
months i.e.  
June 2010 
Expected to 
be supplied 
by December 
2014. 
II 
(2.5 sets) 
Fabrication assembly and testing to 
be carried out under the guidance of 
DALIA team with the participation 
of HAL, Lucknow. 
To+30 
months 
i.e.  Feb 
2012 
To + 16 
months i.e.  
December 
2010 
Not
completed 
III 
(8 sets) 
The entire activity from 
procurement of material to supply 
of flight worthy actuators to ADA 
was to be carried out. As a parallel 
activity, HAL, Lucknow was to 
establish minimum test facility at 
their factory which would help in 
conducting the sub-assembly and 
testing activity to su pport the future 
LCA squadron requirement.  
To+36 
months 
i.e.  Aug 
2012 
To + 20 
months i.e.  
April 2011 
Not
completed 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page38
Objective:  To examine and assess whether manufacturing of 
LCA (AF) including setting up of manufacturing 
facilities at HAL was completed efficiently and the 
level of preparedness of IAF to induct LCA into 
Service and consequent operational impact 
4.1 Introduction  
In line with the approval of CCPA (February 1991) for development of LCA 
in two FSED phases as discussed in chapter-II, ADA signed three 
Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) with HAL as detailed below: 
1  Shifting of PV1 and PV2 from FSED Phase II to FSED Phase I in 1995 and consequent 
impact on LCA Programme is discussed in Chapter II Para. 
Sl.
No. 
FSED
Phase 
Date of signing 
MoU 
Sanction 
(`in crore) 
Scope of work Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
1 I January 1992 661.80 
(Overall 
sanction `2188 
crore)
Detailed Design, 
Development, 
Manufacture, Flight 
Clearance and Testing of 
Technology 
Demonstrators (TDs) TD1 
and TD2 – Building of 
PV1 and PV2 was 
included in 1995
1
June 1998 
2 II (a) June 2002 
(manufacture and 
creation of 
facility-LCA),
and
Amendment-I 
January 2011 
795.23 
(Overall 
sanction 
`3301.78 crore) 
1471.52 
(Overall 
sanction 
`5777.56 crore) 
Creation of facilities at 
various divisions of HAL 
for manufacturing eight 
LCA per annum and eight 
LSP standard aircraft 
(LSP1 to LSP 8)  
May 2006  
to 
 May 2008 
Revised to 
2007-08  to 
2011-12 for 
manufacture 
and delivery of 
aircraft  
3  (b) December 
2006 
(Development-
ARDC) 
Amendment-1 
(November 
2010) 
650.58 
(Overall 
sanction 
`3301.78 crore) 
`732.12 
(Overall 
sanction 
`5777.56 crore) 
Design, development, 
manufacture of three PVs 
(PV3, PV4 & PV5) and 
testing of the PVs and 
TDs to achieve Initial 
Operation Clearance 
(IOC) and Final 
Operation Clearance 
(FOC) 
December 
2005 to 
December 
2008 
Revised to 
December 
2010 to 
December 
2012 
CHAPTER  IV : MANUFACTURE 
AND INDUCTION OF LCA 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page39
Delays in execution of Phase-I activities of LCA programme (covered under 
the MoU of 1992 at Sl No. 1 of the above table) were highlighted in Para 28 of 
the Report No. 8 of 1999 of the C&AG of India, Union Government, Defence 
Services (Air Force & Navy) for the year ended 31 March 1998. In the present 
Report, MoUs at SL No 2 and 3 of the above Table covering activities under 
FSED Phase II sanctioned in  November 2001 are discussed below in order of 
their activity i.e. design & development of PVs (MoU 2006) and manufacture 
of LSPs (MoU 2002).
Premature conclusion (2006, 2010) of two contracts by MoD with HAL for 20 
IOC configuration and 20 FOC configuration LCA even before the design of 
LCA was frozen by ADA, resulted in delays in supply of aircraft against these 
contracts by HAL due to delay in freezing of design of LCA, which impacted 
the handing over of Series Production (SP) aircraft to IAF for formation of 
squadrons, besides blocking up of funds/inventory at HAL as discussed in this 
chapter. 
4.2 Design and development activity 
As discussed in Para 2.2 of Chapter II, though sanction for development 
(FESD phase II) was accorded in November 2001, the MoU for design and 
development of LCA was signed between ADA and HAL only in December 
2006.   MOU of December 2006 with HAL envisaged continuance of the 
development activities of FSED Phase-I along with that of FSED Phase-II.      
As per MOU 2006 scope of work of HAL broadly included: 
¾ Design, development, fabrication and testing of LCA (PV5) (discussed 
in Chapter II); 
¾ Fabrication and testing of LCA (PV3 & PV4) (discussed in Chapter 
II);
¾ Fatigue Test Specimen (FTS); 
¾ Delivery of LCA (PV3, PV4 & PV5) as per the prescribed timeframe; 
¾  Participation in flight testing of LCA (TD’s & PVs) to achieve IOC 
and FOC; and
¾ Co-ordination/control of all technical/development activities as 
envisaged in HAL(AR&DC) projections;   
 Absence of FTS, 
low availability of  
aircraft for flight 
tests and 
deficiencies  in 
LSP  aircraft 
affected the Design 
and development 
activity  

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page40
ADA allocated (November 2001) `650.58 crore against the MoU activities, 
which was enhanced (November 2009) to `1382.70 crore, out of which, HAL 
received `1006.57 crore and spent `1046.43 crore (March 2014). 
Audit Scrutiny of the records relating to the above scope of work brought out 
the following findings: 
4.2.1 Absence of Fatigue Test Specimen (FTS) 
A Fatigue Test Specimen (FTS) was required to be built for testing the 
endurance of LCA for determining the total technical life. Audit observed that 
(February 2014) building of FTS was not taken up by HAL.
When reasons for not building the FTS was enquired (February 2014) in audit,  
HAL stated (July 2014) that production standard fuselage was required for 
carrying out the FTS and the same was yet to be manufactured.  
Reply of HAL is not tenable in audit as the FTS was to be built under the 
MoU of 2006 covering developmental activities and not after building 
production standard aircraft as stated by HAL now. 
Thus, in the absence of FTS, technical life of LCA could not be determined 
and ADA/HAL had to obtain concession at the time of IOC (December 2013) 
from Air HQ which limited the life of airframe to 1000 hours as against the 
ASR specification of more than 3000 hours. 
4.2.2  Low availability of LCA for flight testing towards achieving 
IOC/FOC
HAL was to provide TDs and PVs for flight testing to achieve IOC and FOC 
as per the MoU (December 2006).  However, due to deficiencies in the PVs as 
discussed in Chapter II Para 2.1, LSPs were included for flight testing 
activities by an amendment in November 2010. 
Audit observed from minutes of EC meetings (December 2006 to July 2014) 
that low availability of LCA for flight testing was a critical issue delaying the 
achievement of IOC.  The reasons pointed out in the EC meetings were mainly 
delay in snags analysis, slow recovery of aircraft from rectification, shortage 
of critical LRUs at flight hangar, aircraft being used as test rigs, large number 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page41
of unproductive sorties2, production quality issues affecting flight safety, non-
availability of aircraft in the correct SOP.  Serviceability of LSP 7 and 8 
aircraft had remained low even though both of them were the representative 
aircraft closest to production series. However, it was observed that no 
solutions/timelines were advised for analysis and rectification of snags even 
though  the EC had representation from MoD,  Air Force and HAL.  
Audit examination from HAL records brought out that the number of flights 
undertaken with each aircraft, average number of flights achieved per month 
and the number of days for which the aircraft were not available for 
conducting flight tests as per details indicated in Annexure-III.
It could be seen from the annexure that the average number of sorties per 
month ranged between one and five sorties and were well short of the 
minimum of 22 sorties per month desired by ADA. The LCA was not made 
available for flight trials at several occasions resulting in low availability of 
aircraft for flight testing for 18891 days. Out of 12 aircraft (except PV5 
trainer aircraft) utilised for conducting tests, five had performed their last 
flights for 20 to 72 months prior to the date of IOC.  
To an audit query (October 2014) seeking reasons for low availability of LCA 
for flight testing, HAL stated (November 2014) that TD 1 and TD 2 were 
taken off from the development test flight phase by ADA as their SOP was not 
upgradable to sustain the level of requirement for current flight testing. HAL 
further stated that the shortfalls in sorties per month were attributable to the 
delay in the developmental programme in implementing the improvements to 
clear the test points envisaged as an evolution process.
HAL’s Reply is not acceptable as the reasons stated by HAL now are different 
from those observed by the EC in its various meetings where HAL was also 
represented.
Thus, low availability of LCA for flight testing impacted the timely 
achievement of IOC/FOC.
2  Sorties used for display and fly pasts. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page42
4.2.3  Deficiencies in the HAL manufactured LSP aircraft  
Audit observed (October 2014) from the Empowered Committee (EC) 
meetings (September 2012 to July 2014) that the LSP aircraft manufactured by 
HAL had the following deficiencies: 
(a) Design deficiencies in fuel system, brake management system, brake 
parachute, undercarriage system;  
(b) Quality problems (September 2012) on the MMR with HAL 
manufactured Radome (also discussed in Chapter III Para 3.1); 
(c) Water seepage observed during the flight testing to prove all weather 
clearance,  in critical areas of aircraft including cockpit, radar, DFCC, 
avionics bay, etc. which required design solutions;
(d) Structural problems like fuel leak, cracking of turkey feathers,                
de-lamination, and contour deviation;   
(e) The performance of aircraft was affected by low reliability of critical 
LRUs like Jet Fuel Starter (JFS), Cockpit Pressure Transducer
3 (CPTCV) 
on the aircraft.
In reply to audit query, HAL informed (November 2014) that the deficiencies 
noticed in fuel system, brake management system etc were part of 
developmental issues and resolved subsequently. While Radomes 
manufactured by HAL were as per the technology provided by ADA, shortfall 
in performance was due to material selection and not due to production 
process and CPTCV and JFS were new units which were under certification.
HAL’s contention to have resolved the  deficiencies in fuel system and brake 
management system is not tenable as permanent waiver for deficiencies in fuel 
system and concession for deficiencies in the brake parachute system were 
obtained from Air HQ at the time of achieving IOC of LCA (December 2013). 
Thus, all the LCA Mk-I would have deficiencies in Fuel System, being a 
permanent waiver. As regards deficiencies in Brake Parachute System (under 
concession), LCA Mk-I will fly with this deficiency till the issue is resolved. 
A
3   Used for providing position feedback information of flight control surfaces to the cockpit.     
   

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page43
4.3 Creation of production facilities and manufacture of 
LSPs 
 and anufacture of LSPs 
MoU of June 2002 between ADA and HAL envisaged creation of 
manufacturing facilities under FSED Phase II at the rate of eight aircraft per 
annum by May 2006 and production of eight LSP aircraft during May 2006 to 
May 2008. (As discussed in Chapter II Para 2.2) 
Audit scrutiny of the records relating to MoU implementation brought out 
delay in completion of manufacturing facilities as discussed in the following 
paragraphs:
4.3.1 Delay in creation of production facilities:
Audit observed that HAL had been utilizing the existing facilities available 
with it for manufacture of LCA. Even though HAL initiated action in April 
2006 to form a dedicated LCA facility, LCA Project Group was established as 
a full-fledged Division only in March 2014 as seen from HAL’s 371
st Board 
Meeting papers.
MoU of 2002 sanctioned `391.18 crore towards creation of facility i.e. 
Capital4 expenditure Rs. 188.71 crore and DRE 5 `202.47 crore. Audit noticed 
that as of March 2014, HAL had incurred an amount of `118.99 crore (63 per
cent) towards capital expenditure and `139.12 crore (69 per cent ) towards 
DRE.   
When reasons for delay in creation of manufacturing facility was enquired 
(October 2014) in audit, HAL stated (November 2014) that extensive changes 
in the design and development post 2006 had resulted in reviewing the facility 
requirement and a capacity augmentation plan was being put up for meeting 
the objectives. It was also stated that non-finalisation of configuration of LCA 
had led to the postponement of establishment of production facilities. 
Reply is not acceptable as the GoI sanction of November 2001 stipulated that 
the facilities for manufacture of eight LCA were to be created and the first 
LCA was to be delivered within 4 ½ years from the date of sanction i.e. by 
May 2006. Further, the delay in creation of manufacturing facility of eight 
4  Capital expenditure consists of expenditure towards Plant & machinery and civil works. 
5  Deferred Revenue Expenditure (DRE) consis ts of expenditure to wards tooling, test 
equipments, technical assistance, training, project management, publications and long and 
series tests. 
Creation of 
facilities for 
manufacturing 
eight aircraft per 
annum was not 
achieved.   

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page44
aircraft per annum impacted the production of LSPs, as discussed in Para 4.3.4 
as well as the Series Production Aircraft.  
4.3.2 Delay in procurement of plant and machinery
As against the target date of May 2006 for creation of facilities for 
manufacture of eight aircraft per annum, HAL placed 308 purchase orders 
valued `73.85 crore during the years 2006-07 to 2013-14.  Of these, 203 
purchase orders valuing `70.84 crore were placed only between 2011-12 and 
2013-14. Further, the sanctioned cost of the project was revised             
(January 2011) to include procurement of five machines for `54.50 crore to 
enhance quality and productivity.  The details of purchase orders placed and 
progress made (December 2014) in respect of these five machines are as given 
below:
Sl
No 
Purchase
Order date 
and 
Machine name 
Value 
`in
crore 
Scheduled 
delivery 
Date of 
receipt
Date of 
Installation/ 
commissioning
Delay 
(in months) 
1 6.11.2012-Laser 
tracker
1.93 January 
2013 
January 
2013 
commissioned in 
January 2013 
-
2 14.6.2011-
Automatic wing 
drilling LOXIN 
Machine 
14.95 June 
2012 
December 
2012 
Installed 
in May 2013 
but not 
commissioned. 
5
3 18.2.2013- 
5 Axis skin 
Router 
12.32 March 
2014 
June 
2014 
Installed in May 
2013 but not 
commissioned 
18 
4 HSM Profiler 7.00 Purchase Order yet to be placed 24 
5 30.1.2014 - 
CNC Profiler 
5.41 January 
2015 
Yet to be 
received 
- 24 
Source: compiled from HAL records. 
It could be seen from the above table, that against the order of four machines 
between June 2011 and January 2014, three machines valued `29.20 crore 
were received between December 2012 and June 2014.  However, only one 
machine has been commissioned so far (November 2014) while two machines 
even though installed in May 2013 could not be commissioned as the supplier 
had to prove wing drilling on one aircraft. The fourth machine valued         
`5.41 crore was expected to be received in January 2015.  Action to procure 
one machine i.e. HSM profiler was yet to be initiated (November 2014).
In response to audit observation (October 2014) regarding delay in creation of 
manufacturing facilities for LCA, HAL while admitting the fact stated 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page45
(November 2014) that the establishment of facilities was accelerated after 
2011.
Thus, on account of delayed creation of manufacturing facilities, and that too 
limited to four aircraft per annum as against required eight aircraft per annum 
the production of 20 IOC LCA has been delayed although IOC was achieved 
in December 2013. HAL had not supplied any aircraft (IOC standard) to Air 
Force so far (January 2015). 
4.3.3  Delay in completion of LCA hangars
While according (July 2003) approval for completion of hangars for LCA 
production by HAL Board, one of the benefits expected to be realised was 
contiguous location of assembly shops with related departments to reduce 
movements, handling and reduce the cycle time, etc.  Audit observed that the 
hangars were completed in April 2009 against the scheduled date of 
completion by September 2007.  Due to delay in completion of LCA hangars, 
certain machines
6 (costing `30.56 crore) procured during 2004 to 2006 out of 
LCA funds and installed in the Aircraft Division (Jaguar Machine Shop) 
continued to remain in the Aircraft Division even after construction of new 
hangars for LCA production.  Hence, the intended benefit from construction of 
the new building was not realised by HAL completely. 
In reply to an audit observation (October 2014), HAL stated (November 2014) 
that the new hangars built was planned for structural assembly and final 
assembly and hence, the machines could not be shifted from Aircraft Division 
to new LCA division. 
Reply is not acceptable as the envisaged benefits of having a dedicated hangar 
facility for LCA to have contiguous location of assembly shops with related 
departments to reduce movements and handling and thereby to reduce the 
cycle time had not been achieved. 
6  5-axis Profiler, 3-axis Profiler, 5-axis machining centre, 2.5m x 6m CM machine, CNC 
jig-borer, controlled heating/quenching furnace and chrome-plating facility etc. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page46
4.3.4  Delay in procurement of tools and jigs 
The rate of manufacture of LCA depended on availability of the main 
assembly jigs. The time chart prepared by the division showed that 66 weeks 
were required for completion of the main assembly activity subject to 
availability of the required jigs and man power. The Methods Engineering 
Group of LCA division, reassessed (October 2012) the total jig requirement as 
57 for manufacturing of eight LCA per annum out of which it already had 32 
jigs and balance 25 were to be procured. However, the production plan of the 
Division for the year 2014-15 stipulated manufacture of only four LCA. 
LCA Division had placed a total of 932 purchase orders (value: `43.40 crore) 
for tools and jigs required for assembly of LCA from May 2006 (scheduled 
date for delivery of first LSP) to as late as March 2014.  43 purchase orders for 
a total value of `2 crore were yet to be placed (December 2014).  As per GoI 
sanction (November 2001), the creation of facilities for eight LSP aircraft per  
annum and delivery of the first LSP standard LCA was 4 ½ years from the 
date of sanction i.e. by May 2006. 
Audit scrutiny (October 2014) of purchase orders revealed that the purchase 
order for procurement of 25 jigs were placed between February 2008 to 
January 2014. Out of this, 10 have been received and commissioned (one in 
March 2014 and nine in November 2014). Commissioning of eight jigs 
received (December 2010 to January 2013) were under progress. The balance
seven jigs were under fabrication at vendor’s premises (November 2014).  
HAL in response to audit observation (October 2014) while concurring with 
(November 2014) the fact regarding lack of facility to produce eight aircraft 
per annum stated that even the current structural assembly operations on the 
jigs were not continuous due to breakage in supply of parts due to changes in 
the acceptance standards by certification agency vis-à-vis the procedure 
adopted in the LSP program.  
The fact remains that HAL had estimated that 66 weeks were required for 
completion of main assembly activity of LCA aircraft and considering the lead 
time of one year for procurement of jigs, the purchase orders should have been 
placed at least by January 2004. Further, HAL’s reply is silent on the issue of 
delayed placement of orders for jigs. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page47
Thus, due to delay in placement of purchase orders in time, HAL could not 
ensure timely creation of facility to adhere to the committed delivery schedule. 
A
4.4 Delay in creation of facilities for Repair and Overhaul 
(ROH) 
 and
ASR stipulated that manufacturer would be responsible for defect 
investigation, repair and overhaul of the aircraft, engine and components.  
Repair and overhaul of certain equipment may be undertaken by IAF.   
However, during the interim period, before IAF facilities are established, 
repair and servicing of all rotables will be manufacturer’s responsibility.  
Development/manufacturing agency should be prepared to maintain the repair 
facility for selected equipment and sub assemblies for the proposed lifespan of 
the aircraft or as required by IAF.
LCA comprises 344 Line Replaceable Units (LRUs).  Of these, 90 LRUs were 
considered non-repairable.  While Repair and Overhaul (ROH) facility in 
respect of 185 was available with HAL. For the remaining 69 LRUs, ROH 
facilities were required to be established in HAL. Audit observed          
(October 2014) that proposals received (between May 2008 and May 2009) 
from Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM) for creating ROH facilities in 
respect of 40 LRUs were under evaluation (October 2014 ) and proposals for
ROH facilities for the remaining 29 LRUs were awaited (October 2014). 
HAL, while concurring with the audit observation (October 2014) replied 
(November 2014) that for the remaining 69  repairable LRUs, Long Term 
Repair Agreement (LTRA) was planned for 29 LRUs, ROH establishment was 
planned for 39 LRUs and one LRU had been deleted from ESOP
7. Respective 
Divisions were taking up the matter with the OEMs and the establishment of 
the ROH facilities would be completed by December 2016.
The fact remains that HAL delayed finalising the proposals received in May 
2009 from vendors.  As a result, establishment of the ROH facilities for the 
repairable LRU’s was yet to be fully accomplished
8 by HAL (January 2015). 
7  Equipment Standard of Preparation (ESOP) envisages the standard specification of the 
aircraft. 
8  HAL Bangalore letter No.HAL/CM/LCA-LMG/97/2015 dated 05.02.2015. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page48
4.5 Delay in manufacture and supply of LSP aircraft 
MoU of June 2002 stipulated manufacture and supply of eight LCA (LSP) 
between 2006 and 2008 , which was revised (January 2011) to 2007-08 to 
2011-12. HAL manufactured and supplied seven LSP between 2007 and 2013. 
Audit reviewed (October 2014) the planning, actual manufacture and supply 
of LCA and cost of manufacture as discussed below: 
4.5.1 Frequent changes in design after release of standard of preparation 
Audit observed (October 2014) that frequent changes to SOP were made from 
time to time by ADA which required changes to design of the aircraft resulting 
in changes in Drawing Applicability Lists
9 (DAL).
Details of the number of design changes effected in each of the seven LSP 
standards LCA are tabulated below: 
Aircraft Date of release 
of ESOP 
Configuration/ modifications added 
further in comparison to respective 
previous aircraft 
Number of 
design changes 
after ESOP 
LSP-1 29.12.2005 Basic  2337 
LSP-2 24.05.2007 Open Architecture Computers 891 
LSP-3 16.07.2007 Major changes in Avionics Sensors 646 
LSP-4 31.10.2008 CMDS 2954 
LSP-5 12.02.2010 Night Vision LRUs 1046 
LSP-6 Aircraft not manufactured 
LSP-7 23.09.2011 Major cha nges in fuel system and all 
weather clearance LRUs was added 
150 
LSP-8 31.08.2012 Fully configured   874 
Source: compiled from HAL records 
Due to frequent and continuous changes in design, each of the aircraft differed 
in its configuration and as a result even LSP-8 fell short of the standard 
required for achievement of IOC.  These design changes resulted in addition 
of 3041 new drawings, 3965 changed drawings and cancellation of 245 
drawings with additional cost implications besides time overrun impacting the 
delivery schedules.
9  List containing systems wise detailed drawings of an aircraft. 
HAL did not supply 
the LSP aircraft 
according to the 
delivery schedule 
and as per the 
weight and speed 
envisaged in the 
ASR 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page49
In reply, HAL stated (November 2014) that the changes in the SOP of the LSP 
aircraft vis-à-vis TD and PV aircraft were introduced by the program manager 
ADA.  ADA, had released the SOP for LSP 6 as IOC standard in January 
2014.  The design and development of aircraft of the class of LCA without the 
availability of a similar class indigenous aircraft was an ambitious program.  
Concurrent development and production would be successful only if the user 
accepted the aircraft in smaller batches (say 4 to 5 aircraft) as per the SOP 
frozen at regular intervals of development cycle. It further stated IOC is 
precursor for production agency to deliver the aircraft and due to the delay in 
IOC, the concurrent development and production approach was not fully met 
in the program. 
Thus, fact remains that the design, development and productionisation of LCA 
through concurrent engineering did not compress the development time as was 
envisaged in the FSED-II sanction of November 2011 and even LSP-8 fell 
short of the standard required for achievement of IOC.  It also resulted in time 
overrun and substantial delay in achieving IOC apart from having a cascading 
effect on the supply of Series Production LCA to IAF.  
4.5.2  Delay in supply of aircraft to ADA 
The following Table shows the dates of stipulated and the actual delivery of 
aircraft:
Sl. No. 
of the 
LSP
aircraft
Stipulated 
date of 
delivery 
(MoU June 
2002) 
Revised 
Delivery      
(Amendment 
(January 
2011) 
Actual 
date of 
delivery 
Delay in 
delivery from 
stipulated 
dates 
(months) 
Delay in 
delivery 
from 
amended
dates 
(months) 
1 2006 2007-08 25.04.2007 4 - 
2 2007 2008-09 16.06.2008 6 - 
3 2007 2010-11 23.04.2010 28 - 
4 2008 2010-11 02.06.2010 17 - 
5 2008 2010-11 19.11.2010 23 - 
6 2008 2011-12 Aircraft not manufactured 
7 2008 2010-11 09.03.2012 38 12 
8 2008 2011-12 31.03.2013 51 12 
Source:  compiled from HAL records 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page50
It can be seen that none of the aircraft was delivered within the stipulated date 
and the delay ranged from 4 to 51 months.
In reply to audit observation (October 2014), HAL stated (November 2014) 
that production of LSP-1 to LSP-8 (except LSP-6) had to be progressed at 
HAL for different SOP standards. Even as on date, final ESOP for full IOC 
configuration was yet to be frozen which is evident from the concessions 
given by IAF at the time of achieving (December 2013) IOC. 
Fact remains that there had been delay of 12 months in adhering to even the 
extended delivery schedule. Thus, reduction in production lead time envisaged 
in adopting concurrent engineering was not accomplished.  
4.5.3  Stipulated weight not achieved 
ASR specified that basic weight of LCA should not exceed 5500 kg. The MoU 
(June 2002) stipulated the basic weight of the aircraft (with fuel) to be 8485 kg 
and the empty weight (without fuel) to be 5365 kg. The basic and empty 
weights achieved in respect of each of the LSP aircraft are tabulated below: 
(weight in kg)  
Aircraft
No. 
Empty weight Basic weight 
Stipulated Actual Excess Stipulated Actual Excess
LSP 1 5365 6707 1342 8485 9799 1314 
LSP 2 5365 6696 1331 8485 9855 1370 
LSP 3 5365 6802 1437 8485 9949 1464 
LSP 4 5365 6755 1390 8485 9911 1426 
LSP 5 5365 6683 1318 8485 9861 1376 
LSP 7 5365 6682 1317 8485 9852 1367 
LSP 8 5365 6735 1370 8485 9851 1366 
Source: compiled with HAL records 
It can be seen that the parameters of both empty weight and basic weight were 
not achieved in any of the LSP aircraft.
Audit observed (October 2014) that the low weight envisioned to maximise 
the combat capabilities of this aircraft had not been achieved. In reply, HAL 
stated (November 2014) that the aircraft were produced as per the SOP 
released by ADA. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page51
Fact remains that the LSP aircraft did not meet the prescribed parameters of 
weight as envisaged in the MoU (June 2002). Consequently, ADA/HAL had 
to obtain permanent waiver towards this from Air HQ at the time of achieving 
IOC (December 2013). It is also pertinent to mention that increased weight of 
LCA had necessitated ADA going in for LCA Mk-II development with a 
higher capacity engine, as discussed in Chapter II. 
4.5.4 Envisaged speed not achieved 
ASR specified that the LCA should have maximum speed in excess of 1300 
kmph and minimum touch down speed of 240 kmph. The MoU (June 2002) 
specified the maximum speed  at sea level as 1325 kmph  and  touchdown 
speed of 240 kmph. However, the maximum speed achieved was 1204 kmph 
and touchdown speed of 308 kmph (December 2013). Thus, there was 
shortfall in achievement of maximum speed as well as in touchdown speed 
with reference to MoU specifications.
In reply to audit observation (October 2014), HAL stated (November 2014) 
that LSP aircraft were produced as per the Standard of Preparation (SOP) 
issued by ADA. The parts have been realized as per the drawings and in case 
of deviations, necessary design concurrences had been obtained as part of the 
production process.
Fact remains that the aircraft could not achieve the speed range specified in 
the MoU. Consequently, ADA had to obtain permanent waiver from Air HQ at 
the time of achieving IOC (December 2013) towards the limitation of LCA.  
4.6 Premature conclusion of contracts for LCA (IOC and 
FOC)  before freezing of design 
The Equipment Standard of Preparation (ESOP) for IOC 10 aircraft was jointly 
released (September 2005) by ADA and HAL. Based on the ESOP, MoD 
concluded a contract (March 2006) with HAL for manufacture and supply of 
20 LCA of IOC standard to IAF. Notwithstanding the delay in implementation 
of this contract, MoD concluded (December 2010) another contract for 20 
LCA of FOC standard. However, ADA could freeze the   design for IOC 
standard LCA only in December 2013 and freezing of design for FOC 
standard aircraft was still pending (January 2015).
10 Design specification for LCA with IOC standard. 
Premature 
conclusion of IOC 
and FOC 
contracts before 
freezing of 
designs affected 
the formation of 
squadrons 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page52
Therefore, conclusion (March 2006, December 2010) of two contracts by 
MoD pending freezing of design for IOC and FOC was premature. This had 
resulted in HAL’s inability to effect deliveries against the two contracts for 40 
LCA and their consequent induction into IAF as discussed below: 
4.6.1 Manufacture and supply of LCA(IOC standard) under Series 
Production
MoD concluded (March 2006) a contract with HAL for supply of 20 LCA 
built to IOC standard (16 fighter and 4 trainer) along with role equipment and 
support equipment consisting of spares and Tools, Testers and Ground 
Equipment (TTGE) items, training devices and maintenance simulators, four 
reserve engines, engine support package and engine test bed at a total cost of 
`2701.70 crore. The above deliverables were to be supplied between          
April 2009 and December 2011.  The contract was amended in May 2008 to 
`2812.91 crore to include escalation in price of engines.  Up to March 2014, 
HAL had claimed
11 and received `2104.11 crore after achievement of 
milestones against which HAL had spent `2039.13 crore and committed 
further expenditure of `709.26 crore.
Audit observed that conclusion (March 2006) of contract for supply of 20 IOC 
aircraft by MoD even before freezing of design of LCA, had a cascading effect 
on manufacture and supply of IOC configuration aircraft to IAF (which 
affected operational preparedness of the Air Force, discussed at sub-para 4.7 
and 4.9) besides extra cost due to cost overrun and holding of inventory as 
brought out below: 
¾ HAL has not supplied (January 2015) aircraft of the IOC configuration 
but supplied reserve engines valuing `87.21 crore. 
¾ HAL completed (December 2011) the construction of Engine Test 
Bed
12 at Sulur  at a cost of `46 crore even though LCA squadrons were 
yet  to be set up (as discussed in sub-para 4.7). 
¾ HAL held warranty expired inventory 13 valuing `521.14 crore  at its 
divisions which were procured prior to 2012.
11   For 20 aircraft on start of manufacturing activity, for 16 air craft on start of structural 
assembly and for 8 aircraft on commencement of equipping. 
12  Engine Test Bed are used for testing the engines for conducting tests before fitment on the 
aircraft. 
13   Engine Division `443.16 crore, LCA Division `65.70 crore and Hyderabad Division 
`12.28 crore. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page53
¾ Retro modification of LRUs were to be carried out by OEM’s on LRUs 
(20 types) to enable them to be integrated along with other LRUs in the 
aircraft. Out of 20 types of LRUs,  HAL  incurred an expenditure of  
`10.63 crore on 5 types of LRU’s  and the cost of retro modification 
would further increase as the balance 15 types of  LRUs are yet to be 
taken up. 
¾ HAL supplied spares valuing `97.36 crore (up to March 2014) where 
as the aircraft was yet to be delivered, and these spares will remain 
unutilized till LCA get inducted into IAF squadron. 
¾ Against the above supplies, IAF deducted (July 2013) liquidated 
damages (LD) of `9.83 crore towards delayed supplies as per the terms 
of the contract and the LD amount would further increase on supply of 
aircraft, even though this situation has arisen due to premature 
conclusion of contract by MoD. 
¾ HAL sought (October 2011) additional funds of `1381.98 crore 
towards meeting the extra costs of manufacture
14.
HAL replied (November 2014) that the delayed finalisation of SOP due to 
delay in achievement of IOC (December 2013) contributed to delayed 
procurement of materials and postponement of production activities. 
Regarding the cost overrun of the IOC contract, HAL further stated that the 
detailed cost revision proposal covering all the design changes effected from 
2006 in the basic build of the aircraft, LRUs, GHE/GSE, testers had been 
submitted to ADA for vetting which was still under progress (December 
2014).
Thus, awarding of the contract for delivery of 20 IOC configuration aircraft by 
MoD to HAL in March 2006, when only two TD’s and PV’s (development 
stages as discussed in Chapter II) were flying and LCA design was nowhere 
near maturity, was premature. Further, HAL is yet to supply (January 2015) 
the IOC configured aircraft.  Delay in productionisation of LCA impacted the 
induction of LCA and formation of IAF squadrons, besides cost overrun of the 
contract as discussed above. 
14  Towards changes in drawings ( `564.64 crore), escalation in procurement and increase in 
labour cost ( `516.85 crore), Statutory levies on indigenous procurement `43.89 crore), 
additional scope towards supp ly of floats of LRU’s `90.70 crore) and technical 
publications `65.90 crore. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page54
4.6.2 Supply of LCA (FOC standard) under Series Production 
MoD concluded (December 2010) a contract with HAL for supply of 20 LCA 
FOC standard (16 fighter and 4 trainer) along with role equipment, 
engineering support package consisting of spares/TTGE/GHE/GSE, training 
aggregates, four reserve engines, engine support package, operational support 
equipment, etc. at a total price of `5989.39 crore. The delivery of 20 FOC 
aircraft was to commence within 42 months from the date of signing the 
contract i.e., by June 2014 and to be completed gradually by 72 months i.e., by 
December 2016. 
Audit observed (October 2014) that in accordance with the terms of payment, 
HAL claimed and received `1810.59 crore against the stipulated milestones.  
Out of `1810.59 crore received since 2010, HAL had (March 2014) spent only 
`287.59 crore and committed `1099.51 crore.  However, HAL has not 
supplied any aircraft (January 2015) 
HAL stated (November 2014) that it had drawn the advance as per the activity 
based milestones stipulated in the contract. Further, commitment aggregating 
about `1200 crore had been made towards start of the manufacturing activity 
of FOC Aircraft.  Further HAL stated that the FOC was yet to be accorded and 
delivery of 20 FOC aircraft could commence only after achieving FOC . A 
change order to the FOC contract would be put up after the FOC certification 
was accorded by ADA. 
Thus, awarding of contract by MoD for supply of 20 FOC configuration 
aircraft even before supply of IOC configuration aircraft, freezing of designs 
and achieving of FOC was premature. Further, HAL had not utilised advances 
to the tune of `1509.22 crore drawn since 2010 against the contract. (January 
2015).
4.7 LCA induction Plan  
The Air Staff Requirement (ASR) (October 1985) envisaged that LCA was 
required to be inducted in IAF squadrons by 1994 as a replacement of Mig-21. 
The requirement projected by Air HQ was for 200 fighters and 20 trainers, 
with a view to form 11 squadrons of LCA in order to overcome depletion of 
squadrons due to phasing out of ageing fleet. However, inordinate delay in 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page55
development of LCA (as discussed in Chapter II) has delayed the induction of 
LCA into service and impacted formation of the squadron as discussed below:
I) IAF had to resort to alternate measures to maintain the force level 
Audit enquired (June 2014) regarding steps taken by Air HQ to overcome the 
depletion of squadron level in view of delay in induction of LCA. In reply, Air 
HQ stated (February 2015) that the following measures had been taken by 
them, apart from revising the phasing out of MiG-21 squadrons: 
a. Up-gradation (November 1995) of 125 MiG BIS aircraft at a 
cost of 626 million USD (equivalent to `2135 crore)
b. Up-gradation (March 2008) of 62 MiG-29 aircraft into multi 
role MiG-29UPG standard aircraft at a cost of 964 million USD 
(`3841.87 crore). Upgradation was in progress (February 2015) 
c. Up-gradation (December 2009) of 61 Jaguar Aircraft at a cost 
of `3113.02 crore. Upgradation was in progress (February 
2015)
d. Up-gradation (2011) of Mirage 2000 aircraft through OEM and 
HAL at a total cost of `10947 crore. Upgradation was in 
progress (February 2015) 
Thus, due to delay in development and induction of LCA, IAF had to up-grade 
other aircraft at a cost of `20,037 crore. Besides, phasing out of MiG-21 was 
also revised (January 2013) to utilise the ageing fleet for extended period. 
II) Delay in formation of LCA squadron 
Air HQ had planned to have two squadrons of LCA and placed two contracts 
(March 2006, December 2010) for supply of 40 aircraft (20 IOC and 20 FOC 
aircraft). However, forming of LCA squadrons could not materialize       
(January 2015) due to delay in LCA programme (as discussed in Chapter II) as 
delivery of aircraft was pending (January 2015). 
Audit observed from the ADA documents that IAF had planned (September 
2010) to initially operate the first squadron of LCA (No 45 Squadron) from 
Bangalore for a period of two years to complete first 50 sorties per aircraft, for 
timely product and maintenance support in order to resolve teething problems, 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page56
before relocating the Squadron at Sulur. However, operation of No.45 
Squadron from Bangalore was still pending (January 2015). 
In the meanwhile, based on a proposal submitted (October 2013) by Air HQ, 
MoD sanctioned (December 2013) the necessary work services for 
construction of new infrastructure for induction of two LCA squadrons at  Air 
Force Station, Sulur at an estimated cost of `524.05 crore. The tendering 
action for the work services was in progress (December 2014). 
Thus, formation of the first squadron at Bangalore, its consequent operation 
for two years before relocating to Sulur and synchronization with the 
infrastructure being created at Air Force Station Sulur remains to be seen. 
4.8 Shortfall in creation of production facilities impacted 
Induction of LCA 
Audit observed that due to delays in development and achieving IOC 
(December 2013) of LCA, HAL had indicated (July 2014) supply of 20 IOC 
aircraft during 2014-15 to 2016-17. Consequently, HAL production lines 
would be engaged in manufacturing of 20 IOC aircraft up to 2016-17. In case 
FOC of LCA Mark-I is achieved by December 2015 (as projected by ADA) 
the production of FOC aircraft cannot commence before 2016-17.  
On the similar lines, even if LCA Mark-II would be developed by 2018         
(as per the delivery schedule of FSED Phase III), the production of LCA 
Mark-II could commence only in 2020-21, as production line of HAL would 
be occupied with the production of LCA Mark-I FOC aircraft from 2017-18 to 
2019-20.
In response to an audit observation (September 2014), HAL stated (October 
2014) that in-principle approval was obtained (2012) from the GoI for 
capacity augmentation of LCA production line and CCS approval envisaging a 
total outlay of `1259.80 crore was under process (October 2014). Thus, with 
the anticipated capacity augmentation, HAL planned to increase progressively 
the rate of production to 16 aircraft per annum in three years to take up 
manufacture and delivery of aircraft in FOC configuration from 2016-17.
Reply of HAL is not acceptable due to the fact that in spite of obtaining in 
principle approval (2012) from the GoI, HAL was yet (October 2014) to get 
CCS approval for the proposed augmentation of LCA production line. In view 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
ManufactureandInductionofLCA Page57
of this, HAL would continue to encounter production capacity constraints 
which would further delay the induction of LCA into IAF.
4.9 Operational Impact  
Audit enquired (June 2014) regarding the operational impact of delay in 
development and productionisation of LCA on the formation of squadrons of 
IAF. In reply, operational impact brought out by Air HQ (July - October 2014) 
was as under: 
i. IAF is operating with 35 squadrons as against 42 squadrons 
sanctioned. Against this, squadrons for MiG 21 aircraft and MiG 27 
aircraft would retire over the next ten years. Therefore, it was crucial 
for an early induction of LCA for maintaining the operational 
preparedness of IAF. The formation of the first Squadron was being 
continuously postponed due to delay in LCA development. 
ii. Air HQ further added that the measures taken to import/upgrade other 
aircraft were of temporary nature to prevent the decline of squadron 
strength of IAF. Therefore LCA’s induction into IAF was necessary to 
overcome the drawdown of the squadrons permanently. 
Thus, in view of depleting squadrons, delay in development of LCA and its 
consequent delay in induction into IAF was a cause of concern to IAF. The 
first two squadrons, even if inducted with LCA Mark-I, would not be provided 
with complete EW capabilities
15. Besides, 20 LCA of IOC configuration 
(forming the first squadron of LCA), would not have BVR missiles till the 
aircraft were upgraded to FOC configuration at a later date. Also, IAF would 
be constrained to use LCA Mk-I having reduced survivability, lower 
performance, lower range and endurance, reduced pilot protection, reduced 
operational capability and reduced weapon accuracy as discussed in        
Chapter II. 
15   Only RWR and CMDS would be provided without  SPJ. 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Conclusion Page58
Indian Air Force (IAF) was operating MI G-21 series of aircraft manufactured 
during 1966 to 1987. Majority of these aircraft were to complete their total 
technical life and were expected to be phased out in the 1990s, thereby 
resulting in significant fall in combat level of Air Force. Thus, IAF mooted the 
proposal (early 1980s) for a replacement aircraft for MIG-21 fleet.  It was 
against this backdrop that the indigenous design & development of Light 
Combat Aircraft (LCA) was sanctioned (1983) and Aeronautical Development 
Agency, Bangalore was formed (1984) to execute the programme.   
As specified in the ASR (1985), LCA was required to be inducted into IAF by 
1994. However, the LCA programme was riddled with delays right from the 
sanction of 1983 and even after three decades since, LCA is yet to be inducted 
into IAF squadrons.
During the course of phased development, ADA’s decision to advance 
building of two prototypes from FSED Phase II to FSED Phase I rendered 
these prototypes deficient of critical on board systems, which had a cascading 
effect on the remaining three prototypes, and led to ADA using even the 
Limited Series Production aircraft meant for IAF use towards flight 
testing/evaluation, in contravention to the commitment given to the GoI at the 
time of obtaining sanction for building of these aircraft.
Further, IOC for LCA Mark-I was achieved (December 2013) with 53 
concessions/permanent waivers, which limits the operational efficiency and 
survivability of the aircraft. Consequently, LCA Mark-I currently under 
development (both IOC/FOC aircraft) has shortfalls in meeting the engine 
thrust and other parameters such as weight of the aircraft, fuel capacity, pilot 
protection from front against 7.62 mm bullets etc. The self-protection jammer 
which was originally to be fitted on LCA Mark-I is now planned to be fitted 
on LCA Mark-II, thus the 40 LCA Mark-I would be provided only with RWR 
Tarang-1B and deficient of self-protection jammer, thus limiting its electronic 
warfare capabilities. Thus, IAF would be constrained to use 40 LCA Mk-I 
CHAPTER V: CONCLUSION 

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Conclusion Page59
aircraft with limited operational capabilities, and LCA Mark-II being 
developed by ADA presently is expected to meet the ASR. 
Delays in identification/replacement/ addition of weapons by IAF and their 
integration as per IAF requirement to make the LCA contemporary also added 
to the delays. In addition, there have been delays in completion of work 
packages by various work centres, which indicated ineffective monitoring of 
the project by MoD. 
User involvement right from inception would be essential for effective and 
efficient completion of any project However, active user (Air HQ) 
participation in the LCA Programme started only after November 2006, even 
though the need for a Liaison Group between Air HQ and ADA to ensure 
closer interaction between the design team and the user for better appreciation 
of mutual perception, had been recommended by the LCA PDP Review 
Committee as early as in 1989. 
Though ADA claimed achievement of 70 per cent indigenisation, half of these 
sub-systems are developed with imported electronic components and 
accessories etc. The LCA programme suffered major setbacks in the 
indigenous development of Kaveri engine, Multi-Mode Radar, self-protection 
jammer, etc. The proposal for indigenous development of 109 LRUs was 
pending approval since February 2014.
The setting up of a production capacity of eight LCA per annum was delayed 
by HAL, which coupled with delay in production capacity augmentation, had 
impacted the formation of LCA Squadrons. Further, there has been delay in 
the manufacture and supply of series production aircraft due to delayed LCA 
development. 
As a consequence of delay in development and induction of LCA, IAF had to 
up-grade MiG Bis, MiG-29, Mirage-2000 and Jaguar aircraft at a cost of 
`20,037 crore and revise phasing out of MiG-21 to ensure credible combat 
potential.

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Conclusion Page60
Considering that measures taken by IAF to upgrade other aircraft were of 
temporary nature and induction of LCA was crucial for maintaining the 
operational preparedness of IAF in order to overcome the drawdown of 
squadron strength permanently, the LCA programme needs to be expeditiously 
completed to cater to the needs of the Defence Forces so as to avoid import of 
the fighter aircraft of this class and to ensure self-reliance in the long run. 
New Delhi                       (RAJIV KUMAR PANDEY) 
Dated:     Principal Director of Audit  
             Air Force  
Countersigned
New Delhi                    (SHASHI  KANT SHARMA) 
Dated:           Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
21 April 2015
21 April 2015

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Annexures Page61
Financial progress of the LCA programme 
                     (` in crore)  
Period Brief
Description of 
the Activity
Date of 
sanction 
Sanctioned cost - FE within bracket Actual 
expenditure 
(Jan 2015) 
`Original  
`
Revised 
`
Total 
`
1983 – 1994 Sanction for 
LCA
Programme  
August 1983 560.00               
- 2188.00 
(873.00) 
2188.00 
(815.00) 1993-2004 Full Scale 
Engineering 
Development 
(FSED) –I 
June 1993 2188.00 
(873.00) 
(Including 560.00 crore 
sanctioned in August 
1983) 
2000-in 
progress 
Interim FSED 
Phase-II 
February 2000 666.34 
(349.71) 
5777.56 
(2108.41) 
5302.24 
(1468.54) 
FSED Phase-II  November 
2001 
3301.78 
(1526.49) (Including 
666.34 crore sanctioned 
in February 2000) 
November 
2009 
 2475.78 
(581.92) 
2009-2018 FSED Phase-III  November 
2009 
2431.55 
(818.60) 
- 2431.55 
(818.60) 
804.15 
(484.64) 
 Total  7921.33 
(3218.09) 
2475.78 
(581.92) 
10397.11 
(3800.01) 
8294.39 
(2768.18) 
ANNEXURE-I
(Refer Para 1.4)

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Annexures Page62
Details of development of indigenous capability 
Sl No Description Indigenisation level projected 
1 Aerodynamic design Complete 
2 System Architecture Complete 
3 Structural Design Complete 
4 Manufacture of structure 95 per cent indigenous 
5 General Systems 85 per cent indigenous
Import–heat exchangers, pumps, sensors 
6 Metallic materials 80 per cent indigenous 
7 Engines Import – as interim solution 
8 Avionics equipment 80 per cent indigenous
Import – Multi Functional Displays, 
Electrical Generators, RLG, Electronic 
components 
9 Software Complete 
10 Flight Control System 40 per cent indigenous 
Import – Actuators, sensors 
11 Radar Indigenous  
Import – Electronic components 
12 Aircraft integration Complete 
13 Ground test rigs Complete 
14 Flight testing Complete 
Total Indigenous content 61 percent 
Total Import content 39 per cent
ANNEXURE-II
(Refer Para 3.1)

Performance Audit on 'Design, Development, Manufacture and        
Induction of Light Combat Aircraft’
Annexures Page63
Statement showing aircraft details of flights undertaken, average number 
of flights achieved and number of days for which the aircraft were not 
flown for conducting flight tests 
Sl. 
No.
LCA reference 
Date of 
first flight 
Date of 
last flight 
Number of 
Sorties
Average  Sortie 
Per month 
Cumulative hours 
flown 
(in hours) 
Flight duration 
(in minutes)
From first 
flight to 
IOC
Aircraft 
not flown
Aircraft 
flown
for tests
Mini
mum
Maxi 
mum
Average
per sortie 
Number of days 
1 TD 1 04.01.2001 11.12.2007 233 3 133.58 6 78 34 2532 2305 227
2 TD 2 06.06.2002 14.05.2009 305 4 152.24 6 68 30 2533 2242 291
3 PV 1 25.11.2003 18.01.2010 242 3 161.33 8 112 40 2245 2015 230
4 PV 2 01.12.2005 26.04.2012 222 3 123.23 6 102 33 2338 2132 206
5 PV 3 01.12.2006 19.12.2013 381 5 226.01 6 105 36 2575 2231 344
6 PV 5 
(Trainer) 26.11.2009 20.04.2011 36 2 21.42 12 50 36 510 475 35 
 Total   1419 817.81       12733 11400 1333 
7 LSP 1 25.4.2007 21.4.2012 74 1 40.10 6 103 33 1823 1750 73
8 LSP 2 16.6.2008 7.12.2013 289 3 185.43 5 108 39 2000 1730 270
9 LSP 3 23.4.2010 20.12.2013 183 2 142.06 12 102 47 1337 1166 171
10 LSP 4 2.6.2010 23.11.2013 95 1 77.22 8 91 48 1270 1178 92
11 LSP 5 19.11.2010 20.12.2013 242 3 186.31 8 102 46 1127 907 220
12 LSP 7 9.3.2012 15.12.2013 77 1 59.54 16 102 47 646 576 70 
13 LSP 8 31.3.2013 20.11.2013 62 1 52.33 14 100 51 234 184 50 
 Total     1022 742.99       8437 7491 946 
Grand
Total     2441 1560.80       21170 18891 2279 
ANNEXURE-III
(Refer Para 4.2.2)