सत्यमेव जयते
Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
for the year ended March 2011

Union Government (Civil)
Autonomous Bodies
Performance Audit
No. 14 of 2012-13



Page

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

| =| हि. |



PREFACE

This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India containing results
of performance audit on the following topics has been prepared for submission
to the President of India under Article 151 of the Constitution:

ae
i ल्‍ 2टिक न

These performance audits incorporate the results of test check of records of
the above mentioned units conducted during March 2011 to February 2012.

iii


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This Report contains the results of performance audit of the Bureau of Indian
Standards and the Dental Council of India as well as the academic activities of
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Institute of Asian Studies, Kolkata.

MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC
DISTRIBUTION

Bureau of Indian Standards

Considering the important role of standardisation for achieving competitive
efficiency and quality production, the Government of India set up the Indian
Standards Institution (ISI) in 1947 as a registered society. Later on, to bring
the formulation of standards and other related work under legislation, the
Government decided to restructure ISI and invest it with statutory authority for
Indian Standards (ISs) by passing the Bureau of Indian Standards Act in
November 1986. As a result, the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) came into
being on 1 April 1987, after taking over the staff, assets, liabilities and
functions of the erstwhile ISI.

BIS had formulated a total of 18222 standards, out of which 1627 were
formulated during the audit period. Audit test-checked 214 standards and
noticed delays in formulation of standards from one month to 18 years in 137
cases. Printing of standards also took considerable time against the prescribed
norms with delays ranging from four to 55 months in 153 cases. There was
poor adoption of standards under the product certification scheme. Significant
delays in grant of licences, ranging between 121 days and more than two
years, were noticed. BIS was unable to perform its monitoring and inspection
roles adequately. Shortfalls in collection of factory samples ranging from 52 to
68 per cent and market samples ranging from 26 to 72 per cent as well as
infrequent surveillance visits ranging from 39 to 62 per cent were observed.
Testing facilities in the laboratories were not adequate. There were shortfalls
in testing of samples (17 per cent), persistent accumulation of samples and
non-availability of testing facilities in respect of certain products in BIS and
outside laboratories.

Awareness of standardisation and certification activities among consumers is
vital for the success of these activities. Achievements against the targets fixed
for programmes of 'consumer awareness', industry awareness' and ‘educational



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

utilization of standards' were 51 per cent, 43 per cent and 34 per cent
respectively. Consumers were exposed to the risk of buying impure gold
jewellery due to inadequate coverage of Indian jewellers and goldsmiths under
BIS’s voluntary hallmarking scheme as the hallmarking of gold jewellery was
not made mandatory. Shortage of manpower continued to persist, although the
activities of BIS were predominantly manpower-based.

(Chapter I)

MI

STRY OF CULTURE

Academic Activities of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Institute of Asian
Studies, Kolkata

The Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Institute of Asian Studies (Institute), Kolkata
was set up in January 1993 as a Society under the West Bengal Societies
Registration Act, 1961 at the joint initiative of the Government of India and
the Government of West Bengal, to act as a centre for research and learning,
focusing on various issues related to developments in Asia with special
emphasis on their links with India, on secularism and universal brotherhood
and on the life and works of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. The Ministry of
Culture provided separate grants to the Institute, for conducting research
activities relating to the North-East Region. The Institute was also maintaining
a museum at the residence of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad since 2006.

A performance audit of the academic activities of the Institute disclosed that
the Institute had not framed any policy specifying the criteria for selection of
research topics keeping in view of its objectives. Resultantly, many of the
selected research topics were unrelated to the objectives of the Institute. The
process of selection of Fellows was not documented and lacked transparency.
The Institute had an inadequate monitoring and review system to ensure
timely completion of research projects, as a result of which, out of 58
completed projects, only 19 projects (33 per cent) were completed within the
scheduled time and the rest of the projects were delayed for periods upto over
seven years. The publication of research project reports was also inordinately
delayed. Only 23 out of 58 completed project reports had been published till
July 2011. The Institute had not ensured optimal utilization of information
technology for its library and also had not made the library accessible to the
public, which was against the stated objective of the Institute of making papers
and library sources available to them. However, following the audit

vi


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

(Chapter II)

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE

Dental Council of India

The Dental Council of India (Council), a statutory body, was constituted on 12
April 1949, under an Act of Parliament, viz. the Dentists Act, 1948, to regulate
dental education, dental profession and dental ethics in the country. The
Council is a recommendatory body to the Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare (Ministry) and acts as its technical arm for regulation of dental
education, dental profession and dental ethics.

The performance audit of the Council covering the period from 2006-2011
revealed that there was a concentration of dental colleges in five States and
there was only one college in the North-East, indicating skewed distribution of
dental colleges across the country, which both the Council and the Ministry
failed to prevent. Audit also found non-adherence to the prescribed standards
for (i) establishment of new dental colleges; (ii) increasing the number of seats
in existing dental colleges and (iii) renewal of permissions for yearly
admissions. There were several instances of substantial variations between the
reports following inspections of dental colleges by the Council and those of
Special Inspection Teams (SITs) constituted by the Ministry, the latter failing
to analyze the reasons for such wide variations. There were instances where
negative recommendations of the Council were ignored on the basis of
unverified compliance reports received from the colleges. Delays of three to
five years by the Ministry were noticed in cases of derecognition of colleges
on the recommendation of the Council. The Council did not adhere to its own
norms of periodical inspections of recognized dental colleges once in a block
of five years. The Ministry allowed the dental colleges to function despite
shortages of faculty and deficient infrastructure. The database of faculty
members also exposed the possibility of the same people working in multiple
colleges. The Council had no complaint redressal mechanism. The Council
was not maintaining the Indian Dentists Register, in violation of the
requirement prescribed in the Dentists Act. Inspection fees amounting to
= 7.07 crore were outstanding against various dental colleges.

(Chapter III)

vii


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Highlights

>

As of March 2011, the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) had
formulated 18222 standards. A test check of 214 standards
revealed delays in formulation of standards ranging from one
month to 18 years in 137 cases. Printing of standards also took
considerable time against the prescribed norms, with delays
ranging from four to 55 months in 153 cases.

(Paragraphs 1.13.3 and 1.13.4)

BIS did not formulate standards in some of the new and emerging
areas affecting the health and safety of consumers.

(Paragraph 1.13.8)

There was poor adoption of standards under certification, due to
lack of awareness among the stakeholders.

(Paragraph 1.14.2)

Despite being a quality assurance body, BIS was unable to perform
its monitoring and inspection roles adequately. There were
significant delays in grant of licences, ranging between 121 days
and over two years. Besides, there were significant shortfalls in
surveillance visits ranging from 39 to 62 per cent, collection of
factory samples ranging between 52 to 68 per cent and market
samples ranging from 26 to 72 per cent.

(Paragraphs 1.14.3, 1.14.6 and 1.14.7)

The laboratory modernization programme initiated in 2005 could
not be completed even after a period of seven years as BIS failed to
procure 198 out of the proposed 403 pieces of test equipment.

(Paragraph 1.15.2)



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

> Testing facilities in the laboratories were inadequate. There were
shortfalls in testing of samples (17 per cent), accumulation of 1103
samples for testing, for more than a year as well as non-availability
of testing facilities in respect of some of the products in the BIS
laboratories and outside laboratories. Audit also noted inadequate
surveillance of outside laboratories.

(Paragraphs 1.16.1, 1.16.2, 1.17 and 1.18)

> Achievements against the targets fixed for the programmes of
‘Consumer Awareness’, ‘Industry Awareness’ and ‘Educational
Utilization of Standards’ were 51, 43 and 34 per cent respectively.

(Paragraph 1.19.1)

> There were shortfalls in achievement of targets under the
Management System Certification scheme operated by BIS.

(Paragraph 1.20)

Recommendations

* BIS may make the monitoring mechanism stronger for all stages of
standard formulation to avoid delays.

* There is a need for timely formulation and review of standards in all
areas, particularly those affecting the health and safety of consumers.

“BIS may focus on formulation of standards in new and emerging fields.

“There is a large untapped market for product certification activities.
BIS should make sincere efforts to increase the base of its Product
Certification Scheme.

“ BIS may ensure adherence to the prescribed provisions for
surveillance visits and collection of factory and market samples.

* BIS may ascertain the reasons for the large number of cases of
dropping of licences and take appropriate action.

“BIS may consider reiterating its various norms to its officers so that
these can be observed scrupulously.

न BIS may ensure regular supervisory visits to the licencees for effective
control.

“+ BIS laboratories need to be well-equipped in terms of manpower and
infrastructure to avoid delays in testing of samples.



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

“+ BIS needs to provide complete testing facilities for all items under
certification, either in-house or through recognised laboratories.

* The promotion of Indian standards and product certification being
important functions, BIS needs to make all out efforts to achieve the
targets fixed for its awareness programmes.

“Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution and BIS

may consider bringing the hallmarking of gold jewellery under

mandatory certification so as to safeguard the interest of the
consumers.

&

+ BIS needs to increase the number of licencees under the management
system certification scheme by increasing its competitiveness as well
as by conducting awareness programmes and review meetings with the
licencees.

* BIS should carry out its enforcement activities effectively by deploying
requisite manpower.

“BIS should have a formal web policy and a well-structured website.

“BIS should make sincere efforts to fill up the vacancies in all cadres to

carry out its mandated activities effectively.

“BIS may consider setting up its own internal audit wing.

1 Introduction
1.1 Background

Prior to independence, standardization! activities in India were sporadic and
confined mainly to a few Government purchasing organizations.
Subsequently, the important role of standardization in industry for achieving
competitive efficiency and quality production was
recognized by the Government following which the
Indian Standards Institution (ISI) was set up in 1947 as a
registered society, under a Government of India

resolution,

In the above scenario, while product certification had been given statutory
status with the enactment of the Indian Standards Institution (Certification
Marks) Act 1952, the formulation of standards and other related works were

1 Standardization is an activity of establishing, with regard to actual or potential, provisions
for common and repeated use, aimed at the achievement of optimum degree of order in a
given context. (ISO/IEC)



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

not governed by any legislation. Therefore, the Government decided to
restructure [SI and invest it with statutory authority for Indian standards (155)
by passing the Bureau of Indian Standards Act in November 1986. As a
result, on 1 April 1987, the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) came into being,
after taking over the staff, assets, liabilities and functions of the erstwhile IST.
Through this change, the Government envisaged building up of the climate of
quality culture as well as consciousness and greater participation of
consumers, Central and State Governments, research organizations and
regulatory agencies in formulation and implementation of national standards.

Before ISI was restructured into BIS on 1 April 1987, there were 13533
standards in force, against which 9350 licences were operative. As of March
2011, 18222 standards were in force, against which 32510 licences were
operative.

1.2. Functions
The Bureau of Indian Standards is responsible for the following functions:

(i) Formulation and updating of standards;

(ii) Harmonization with international standards;

(iii) Certification of products (including  hallmarking) and
management system certification;

(iv) Consumer promotion activities and information services and

(v) Laboratory services for standardization and quality control.

1.3 Organizational structure
BIS is the national standards body of India, functioning under the aegis of the
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (MoCAF&PD),

Government of India. The organizational structure of BIS is as depicted
below:
Figure-1: Organisational Structure
President
Bureau
Advisory
Executive Committees
Committee
- Finance Certification
‘Standing
Committees
Standards Consumer
Policy
Hallmarking of Planning and
Gold Jewellery | | Enfeecement Laboratory Development



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

The Bureau is a body corporate consisting of 25 members, representing the
Central and the State Governments, Members of Parliament, research and
consumer organizations etc. The Minister in-charge of MoCAF&PD acts as
the President while the Secretary of MoCAF&PD is an ex-officio member.
The Director-General (DG) of the Bureau is its Chief Executive Authority.

The Executive Committee, which makes rules and regulations and performs
administrative and other functions, consists of the Director-General as ex-
officio Chairman and nine other members, as appointed by BIS, with the prior
approval of the Central Government representing MoCAF&PD, other
Ministries, public sector enterprises, recognized consumer organizations,
industry, trade and their associations and scientific and research institutions.

Six Advisory Committees have been constituted by BIS for advising on policy
matters and efficient discharge of its functions relating to finance, standard
formulation and certification, laboratory activities, consumer policy and
planning.

For standards formulation work, an apex level Standards Advisory Committee
(SAC) with 14 Division Councils (DC) and 312 Sectional Committees (SC)
has been constituted. The main function of the DCs is to advise BIS on
subject matters to be taken up for formulation of standards in their respective
areas. Annex-I gives details regarding the various Division Councils. SCs are
primarily responsible for formulation and maintenance of standards.

1.4 Financial position

BIS generates its resources mainly from certification and has not been
receiving any grant from the Government for the last 20 years, except for
specific projects. As on March 2011, BIS had a corpus fund of हैं 245 crore,
which comprised fixed assets, working capital, fixed deposits and Government
securities. Income and expenditure figures of BIS from 2006-07 to 2010-11
are given in Table-1:



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Table-1 : Year- wise income and expenditure figures
@ in crore)

[Heng [2006-07] [2007-08] [2008-09 || ७09७ || आया |
Income 149.84 172.83 195.91 223.50

| Expenditure

53.10 | 55.37 L 87.20 il] ia | 101.99

Account

Contribution towards shortfall in 34.90 [|] [| 70.11 82.55
Pension/Gratuity Liability Fund

As per Accounting Standard 15, the organisation should provide accrued
pension and gratuity liability of its employees as per actuarial valuation.
However, BIS did not fully provide for contribution towards pension and
gratuity liability on actuarial basis during the years 2009-10 and 2010-11, and
there was a shortfall of € 154.38 crore and हैं 59.70 crore in the years 2009-10
and 2010-11 respectively, for the same”. Had BIS fully provided for the above
liability, the ‘nil’ surplus during 2009-10 and 2010-11 would have been
converted into loss of € 154.38 crore and % 59.70 crore respectively.

1.5 Scope of audit

The Bureau of Indian Standards is audited under Section 19(2) of the
Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of
Services) Act 1971. The last review of BIS was conducted by the C&AG
during 1991, covering the period from 1985-86 to 1990-91. The current
performance audit covered the period 2006-07 to 2010-11 and was conducted
between July 2011 and February 2012.

1.6 Audit sampling

BIS had formulated a total of 18222 standards, out of which 1627 were
formulated during the audit period. Audit selected 214 standard formulation
cases for detailed scrutiny on the basis of proportional representation using the
stratified sampling method. The Bureau had issued 32510 licences under the

? Annual accounts for the year 2009-10 and 2010-11



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

certification marks scheme for 924 standards, out of which 200 licences were
selected for audit. DC-wise sample sizes are given in Annex-I.

BIS has five regional and 34 branch offices, apart from eight laboratories,
located at various places in the country. The performance audit was based on
test check of BIS’s records at its headquarters in New Delhi and selected
regional/branch offices* and laboratories.’

1.7. Audit objectives

Performance audit of BIS was taken up to see whether:

> the laid down procedures for formulation of standards were adhered to;
> regular reviews of standards were carried out to keep them up-to-date;

> it was able to increase the product certification adequately;

Vv

procedures for certification of products including surveillance of
licencees’ premises, drawal and testing of samples from factories and
markets, were effective and transparent;

Vv

the capacities of laboratories owned by BIS were adequate and
optimally utilized;

Vv

activities to promote concepts of standardization, certification and
quality among consumers were adequate and effective; and

> it had adequate manpower to carry out its activities.

1.8 Audit methodology

An entry conference was held on 27 July 2011 with the DG and other officers
of BIS, in which the audit scope and objectives were discussed. As stated
earlier, field audit was conducted during the period July 2011 to February
2012 through examination of records, interaction with concerned officers,
issue of questionnaires, collection of evidence etc.

The draft performance audit report was issued to MoCAF&PD and BIS in
April 2012. MoCAF&PD requested BIS to send its replies to Audit directly,
under intimation to it. The replies of BIS were received in May 2012 have
been suitably incorporated in the report. An exit conference with the DG and

> Central Region Office (CRO) at New Delhi; Southern Region Office at Chennai; Branch Office,
Ghaziabad under CRO, Branch Office, Faridabad under the Northern Region Office.
* Central Laboratory, Sahibabad; and the Southern Region Office Laboratory, Chennai.



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

other officers of the BIS was held on 15 June 2012, wherein the main findings
of Audit and related recommendations were discussed.

1.9

Sources of audit criteria

The sources of audit criteria for performance audit were derived from the

following:
> BIS Act 1986;
> Manual for Standards Formulation;
> BIS Certification Regulations, 1988;
> BIS Operating Manual for Certification, 2004;
> BIS Guidelines on Assaying and Hallmarking of Gold and Silver
Jewellery;
Laboratory Testing and Inspection Guidelines of BIS;
Enforcement Guidelines; and
Other circulars, Rules & Regulations issued by BIS and MoCAF&PD.
1.10 Previous audit findings

A performance audit report on BIS had appeared in CAG’s Report No. 11 of
1992, in which Audit had observed the following major deficiencies:

>

Vv

Vv

There were considerable delays in formulation of standards, ranging
from two years to more than 10 years.

Only 30 to 56 per cent applications could be processed for grant of
licences.

The dropout rate of licences ranged between six and 11 per cent.

The shortfalls in conducting periodic inspections ranged between eight
and 33 per cent.

The number of samples drawn, both from the factories and the markets
was lower than that prescribed under the Certification Marks Manual.

There were inordinate delays in testing of samples at BIS laboratories.

Thirteen pieces of laboratory equipment worth हैं 75.69 lakhs had not
been put to optimum use.



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

However, as detailed in this Performance Audit Report, most of the
deficiencies pointed out in the earlier Audit Report continue to persist, which
is a matter of concern.

1.11 Structure of the Audit Report

The findings in the Performance Audit Report have been arranged in the
following paragraphs:

Y Standard Formulation;
Y Product certification;
* Laboratories;
v

Other activities (promotional and consumer related activities,
hallmarking scheme, management system certification, enforcement
mechanism and website of BIS);

v Manpower management; and

v Internal audit.

1.12 Audit acknowledgement

Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by BIS at
various stages during the conduct of this performance audit.

1.13 Formulation of standards

As per the Manual for Standards Formulation, the objectives of
standardization are promotion of economy in human efforts, materials and
energy in the production and exchange of goods as well as protection of
consumer interests through adequate and consistent quality of goods and
services. Under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act 1986, BIS establishes
Indian Standards in relation to any article or process and amends, revises or
cancels the standards so established, as may be necessary, by a process of
consultation with consumers, manufacturers, technologists, scientists and
officials through duly constituted committees. Standards are formulated in
respect of products, methods of test, codes of practice, terminology,
dimensions, symbols etc. All the standards are required to be notified in the
Gazette of India for their formulation, revision and withdrawal.

As stated earlier, BIS had formulated a total of 18222 standards by March
2011, out of which, 1627 standards were formulated during the audit period.
Test check of 214 standard formulation cases revealed significant gaps in the



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

various stages of standard formulation, as discussed in the succeeding
paragraphs.

1.13.1 Process of standard formulation

Proposals for formulation of new ISs or for their revisions or amendments
may come from any Ministry of the Central Government, State Government,
Union Territory Administration, consumer organization, industrial unit,
industry association, professional body or from BIS itself. The process of
standard formulation consists of five stages 1.6. the proposal stage, the
preparatory stage, the committee stage, the approval stage and the publication
stage, as shown in Figure 2.

Figure-2: Stages of standard formulation

Proposal Stage Preparatory Stage

Publication Committee Stage
Stage
evelopment and
acceptance

Preliminary dr

As mentioned earlier, a three-tier committee structure i.e. one Standard
Advisory Committee (SAC), 14 Division Councils (DCs) and 312 Sectional
Committees (SCs), handles the task of standard formulation as illustrated in
Figure-3.



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Figure-3: Three-tier committees

Consists of a Chairperson and nine other members, appointed
by BIS from amongst its members. The SAC advises BIS
One Standard Advisory on matters relating to:

Committee (SAC) + Harmonious development of standards
+ Publication of standards:
+ Promotion of standards

Consist of officers of the Bureau and representatives of
various interests such as consumers, regulatory and other
Government bodies, industries, scientists, Chairpersons of
14 Division Councils (DCs) Sectional Committees (SCs) under the division etc. DCs
render advice to the SAC on the subject area to be taken up
either for formulation or revision of standards. DCs approve
proposals for work to be taken up and direct concerned SCs
to undertake the approved work and determine the priorities
for different work.

Consist of concerned officers of the Bureau and
312 Sectional Committees Tepresentatives of consumers, NGOs, regulatory and other
GS Government bodies, industries, consultants etc. Their work
consists of the following:

+ Preparation and approval of the preliminary drafts
+ Wide circulation of the approved preliminary drafts

for comments
+ Finalisation of the draft standards in consultation
with the DCs after receipt of comments from

stakeholders.

1.13.2 Meetings of the committees

As per the BIS (Advisory Committees) Regulations, 1987 and the Manual for
Standards Formulation, the Advisory Committees, DCs and SCs should each
meet at least once in a year to discuss various issues like processing of draft IS
from stage to stage, reviewing and prioritizing the various items of work in
hand, resolving controversies by consensus etc. Audit found that during the
period 2006-07 to 2010-11, the SAC had held only four meetings against the
requirement of five. The DCs also did not hold regular meetings and there was
a shortfall of 24 per cent in holding the required number of meetings. As far
as the meetings of the 312 SCs were concerned, the shortfalls ranged from 14
to 68 per cent. Details are given in Annex-II.

Test check of records also revealed that the intervening period between two
meetings in many instances was much more than 12 months. In fact, certain
DCs and SCs operated for as long as 27, 34, 35 and 53 months, without even a
single meeting taking place (Annex-III). Infrequent and irregular meetings
could lead to delays in preparation, review, revision and harmonization of
standards and affect their quality as well.



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Audit observed that the participation of members in the meetings was very
poor. Test check of 214 cases pertaining to standard formulation revealed that
54 per cent of members did not attend SC meetings. Further, it was observed
that 39 standards were formulated without receiving any comments from the
concerned SC members.

In its reply, BIS stated (May 2012) that the shortfall in conducting SAC
meetings was due to changes in the composition of the SAC. It further stated
that there was no mandatory requirement for conducting of such meetings
every year. However, all efforts were made by BIS to increase the
participation of members in the committee meetings, like sending meeting
notices as well as agenda well in advance and requesting them to attend the
meetings.

The reply is not acceptable since the meetings are mandatory as per clause 3(7)
of the BIS Advisory Committee Regulations, 1987. Secondly, the meetings are
necessary for discussing various issues like processing of draft IS from one
stage to another, reviewing and prioritizing various items of work in hand,
resolving controversies by consensus etc.

1.13.3 Formulation of standards

As per clause 5.3.7 of the Manual for Standards Formulation, a standard
should be formulated within a time-frame of 12 to 28 months* from the
availability of the preliminary draft. Further, as soon as the finalized draft
standard is adopted, the same should be notified in the Gazette within a period
of 30 days. Monitoring of progress of formulation of standards against the
agreed dates should be done by the Secretariats of the respective SCs as per
clause 5.1.4 of the Manual for Standards Formulation.

It was noted that during the audit period, out of 1627 standards formulated, the
time taken in formulation ranged between three to four years in 236 cases and
five to 10 years in 39 cases (excluding the time taken in printing the
standards). Delays ranging from one month to 18 years in standard
formulation were noticed in 137 out of 214 test-checked cases (64 per cent).
Delays in formulation of standards were indicative of inadequate monitoring
by BIS.

5 The time schedule for formulation of standards on ‘top priority’ subjects is 12 months. For other
subjects, the time schedule can vary from 20 to 28 months, depending upon the nature of the subject and
the priority assigned to it.



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

BIS stated (May 2012) that there were a number of reasons which could cause
delays in finalization of IS, which were attributable in some cases to BIS but
in the majority of the cases, to agencies outside the purview of BIS.

The reply is not acceptable since sufficient time of 12 to 28 months was
allowed for formulation of standards and although outside agencies or
members are involved in the process of standard formulation, the final
responsibility for the same is that of BIS.

1.13.4 Printing of standards

The normative time schedule of 12 to 28 months prescribed by BIS for
standard formulation/revision includes a period of three months for printing of
the standards. It was, however, observed during audit that BIS did not adhere
to this time schedule. In 153 out of 214 test-checked cases (71 per cent),
printing of standards took considerable time, ranging between four and 55
months.

BIS stated (May 2012) that a decision had been taken with effect from April
2011 to publish all ISs in soft copies, dispensing with the conventional
printing of ISs through the Government of India Press, which caused delays in
printing.

1.13.5 Review of standards

As per clause 5.11.1 of the Manual for Standards Formulation, every standard
is to be reviewed by the Sectional Committee concerned in not more than five
years after publication, reaffirmation, revision or declaration of obsolescence,
to establish whether the standard is still relevant and, if it is not, to identify
and initiate appropriate action. Audit scrutiny revealed that the number of
cases in which BIS did not adhere to the time schedule in respect of review of
standards during the period 2006-07 to 2010-11 were 444 out of the 17887
standards due for revision. The delays ranged between seven and 34 months
as detailed in Annex-IV. The reasons for the delays in review of standards
were attributed by BIS to shortage of manpower (227 cases), delays in
conducting of meetings (140 cases) and oversight (77 cases).

In its reply, BIS stated (May 2012) that 97.6 per cent of ISs were reviewed in
time. However, review of the remaining 2.4 per cent standards had taken little
longer time than stipulated.



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

1.13.6 Revision of standards

According to clause 5.11.2 of the Manual for Standards Formulation, while
reviewing a standard, a SC has five options available:

a) Reaffirmation, indicating continuation of the current standard without
change in the old IS;

b) Amendment, indicating the continuation of the current standard after
necessary changes to bring it up to date;

c) Revision, involving the procedure for a new standard and reaffirmation
for the time being;

d) Declaration of obsolescence, indicating by an amendment that the
standard is not recommended for use in new equipment but needs to be
retained to provide for the servicing of the existing equipment that is
expected to have a long working life and

e) Withdrawal, indicating that the standard is no longer needed.

On reviewing a standard, if the concerned committee feels that it is required to
be revised to bring it in line with the present national and international
practices in the field, the same is done by adopting the procedure used for a
new standard. The revision of a standard is expected to be completed within a
time schedule of 12 to 28 months.

During the performance audit, it was observed that in the five cases
detailed in Table-2, the process of revision of standards took excess
time. As a result, updated technical specifications for safety and other
purposes reached the beneficiaries belatedly.

Table-2: Delay in revision of standards



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

and side impact tests. The revision process is yet to be completed.(July 2012)

BIS’s reply : BIS stated (May 2012) that even if the standard was revised in line with
the European standard (EC 22.05), there would be no testing facilities for the new
standard which would result in cancellation of all licences. As such, its
implementation would not be feasible.

The reply is not acceptable since revision of testing facilities is also the responsibility
of BIS and the same could be done simultaneously with the preparation of the
standard.

Impact : Helmets are for human safety. Due to non-implementation of the updated
standard, human safety would remain compromised to that extent.

Audit findings : The standard was formulated in 1969. BIS decided to revise it in
1995-96 but the draft was circulated only in December 2001. In August 2004, the SC
finalized the document subject to certain conditions. No further progress was made
by the committee thereafter and the issue was referred to the Mechanical Engineering
Division Council in April 2009 for necessary guidance in the matter.

The standard had not been revised despite the lapse of more than 10 years.

BIS’s reply: BIS stated (May 2012) that a preliminary draft was approved for wide
circulation during February 1995 by the Heavy Mechanical Division. Subsequently,
in July 1999, this division was split into the Mechanical Engineering Division (MED)
and the Production and General Engineering Division. The work was assigned to
MED and the document was sent for wide circulation during December 2001. MED
finalized the document in August 2004, subject to incorporation of allowable stress
for material. The matter of allowable stress had not been finalized till March 2012.
BIS concluded that the standard was not finalized due to technical limitations beyond
its control.

Audit, however, observed that no progress had been made from February 1995 when
the draft was approved for wide circulation, till 1999 when the division was split. The
new division took two years (July 1999 to December 2001) for issuing the draft
standard for wide circulation and a further three years (December 2001 to August
2004) for finalization. However, the matter of allowable stress could be decided only
in March 2012. It is therefore, obvious from the above, that although the work was of
a technical nature, it was not carried out in a timely manner.

Impact: This standard is for the safety of pressure vessels. A pressure vessel is a
closed container designed to hold gases or liquids at a pressure substantially different
from the ambient pressure. In the absence of the standard, the quality assurance of
pressure vessels is likely to be compromised.

nt nt yn findings : BIS felt (May 2004) that the current form of IS 3231:1986
series was not easily understood by the common person as there were lots of



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

cross-references. It was, thus, decided (December 2005) to combine the
complete IS 3231:1986 series in one or two parts only. Accordingly, a small
group was constituted to align the standard with the available standard of the
International Electro technical Commission on the subject. However, only
preliminary drafts had been prepared till date (June 2012).

BIS’s reply : BIS stated (May 2012) that the SC, in its seventh meeting,
informed (February 2008) that even after issuing of reminders during 2007,
the recommendations had not been received from the working group and the
issue had been reconsidered (February 2012) to upgrade the standard with the
latest IEC 60255 standard. BIS also stated that the time taken for formulation
of the standard should be reckoned from February 2012.

The reply of BIS is not acceptable since it could not finalise the preliminary
draft even after the lapse of over six years.

Impact : Electrical relays are used for power systems protection and in the
absence of the revised standard, advancements in power systems protection
were not available to the consumers.

= findings : In November 2007, the concerned Sectional Committee of
BIS entrusted the work of revision of the standard to M/s Godrej & Boyce
Mfg. Co. Ltd, one of the members of the SC. As of May 2012, the standard
had not been revised.

BIS’s reply : In its reply, BIS stated (May 2012) that the work of preparation
of the draft standard and its revision is done on a voluntary basis and BIS does
not make any payment to the members. It further stated that during November
2011, the committee had once again requested M/s Godrej to prepare the draft
for revision of the standard.

However, the fact still remains that the standard could not be revised till date
(May 2012).



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

1.13.7 Gazette notification for formulation and withdrawal of standards

In terms of clause 5.17 of the Manual for Standards Formulation, all ISs
including tentative and recognized standards, their revisions, amendments,
cancellations and withdrawals are notified in the Official Gazette. As per
clause 5.6.6 of the Manual, as soon as a finalized draft standard has been
adopted by the Chairman and the IS number is made available from the
Printing Division, the concerned head of the department and Member
Secretary of the technical committee has to get the same notified in the gazette
within 30 days.

Audit found that in 79 out of 214 cases of standard formulation as detailed in
Annex-V-A, BIS took two to 29 months for gazette notification. Similarly, in
127 out of 298 (as detailed in Annex-V-B) cases of withdrawal of standards,
BIS took three to 44 months for the same.

In its reply, BIS stated (May 2012) that gazette notifications of withdrawn ISs
were not required as per BIS Rules, 1987 and further stated that it decided the
withdrawal of ISs in consultation with their licencees and till that time, the old
ISs continued to be implemented.

The reply is not acceptable in audit as although the BIS Rules, 1987 are silent
in this regard, the Manual for Standards Formulation (clause 5.17) envisages
that all ISs, including tentative and recognized standards, their revisions,
amendments, cancellations and withdrawals should be established by
notification in the official gazette.



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

1.13.8 Formulation of standards in new and emerging fields

Audit observed that in the following cases included in Table-3, insufficient
efforts were made by BIS to formulate ISs in new and emerging fields:-

Table-3: Insufficient efforts for formulation of standards in new and emerging fields

Hospital Bio-medical
Waste Management and
Infection Control
including —_ equipment/
instruments used

There are various areas in Hospital Biomedical Waste
Management where standardization work is required to be
carried out, e.g. instruments for sterilization of equipment i.e.
autoclaves. Besides, there are waste management systems,
wafer process systems for critical cleaning and sterilization of
bio-medical components, implant devices,
equipment/containers required under Biomedical Waste
Management and handling etc. However, Audit observed that
no standard was formulated by BIS in this field.

BIS, in its reply, stated (May 2012) that it had already prepared
a working draft on ‘autoclaves’ and two SC meetings had been
held. In the second meeting held in March 2012, it was noticed
that the working draft was not sufficient and therefore, the
committee assigned the work for providing more details to one
committee member.

Safe magnetic fields level
for pregnant ladies and
cardiac pacemaker users

A proposal was received from the Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare in December 2009 in this regard but work for
formulation of the standard had not been started so far (May
2012).

BIS, in its reply, (May 2012) stated that it had never identified
this subject as a thrust area.

The reply is not acceptable since the proposal had been
received from the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, for
formulation of a standard. Since it concerned the health of

women and heart patients, the standard should have been
formulated.

resources management

Halogen free flame | There was no available standard on this aspect. Standardization

retardant cables work was pending since May 2008.
BIS, in its reply, stated (May 2012) that the draft of 2008 was
discussed in May 2010 and the working panel was
strengthened. The new panel had approved the revised draft
and had sent it for wide circulation.
However, the fact remains that no standard had been
formulated on the subject as of June 2012.

Handbook for —_ water | There was no available standard on this aspect.

BIS, in its reply, stated (May 2012) that an SC for the subject
matter was constituted in 2008. The committee had 14 panels
and each panel (except one) had met once and their work
allocation had also been decided but the preliminary draft had
not been prepared.

Audit observed that work in this field was very slow as even
after a period of four years, the preliminary draft had not been
prepared.



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Industrial
such as value engineering,
reverse engineering,
method study, time &
motion study and material
management, process
planning and control

engineering

had not started the work on this aspect.

BIS, in its reply, stated (May 2012) that the subject was
initially taken up by the Production & General Engineering
Division but later on, it was found that a similar subject was
being dealt with by the Management System Division and
therefore, the matter was transferred to the Management
System Division.

However, the fact remains that no progress had been made so
far (June 2012).

Standardization in the
field of Ayurveda, in
terms of terminology and
quality standards of
ingredients

There were no available standards on this aspect. The SC had
not yet been constituted.

BIS, in its reply, stated (May 2012) that efforts were on for
nomination of a chairperson and for constitution of a SC.

Mobile phones

(The details are discussed in the case study below).

A proposal for formulation of a standard was received in
November 2010.

However, even the draft standard had not been finalized as of
June 2012.

Limiting and measuring
radiation from mobile
phone towers, mainly
being installed in
residential complexes and
also for other radiation
from mobile phones

The proposal for formulation of a standard was received in
December 2009 but work was still to be started.

BIS, in its reply, stated (May 2012) that the work of standard
formulation under the subject had been assigned to
Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC)° in July 2010 as
TEC was already taking care of the standardization work in
that area.

However, the fact remains that standard in this field is not
formulated so far (June 2012).

Radio emissions _ for
protection of common
consumers - Certification/
registration of mobile
phones for safety
requirements, particularly
in the cases of lithium
batteries and radio
emissions for protection
of consumers,

A proposal was received from MoCAF&PD in December 2009
but work was yet to start.

BIS, in its reply, stated (May 2012) that the work of standard
formulation under the subject had been assigned to the TEC in
July 2010 as the TEC was already taking care of the
standardization work in that area.

However, the fact remains that the standard in this field has not
been formulated so far (June 2012).

Environment and other
radio frequency related
safety standards - Human
exposure in radio
frequency
electromagnetic fields for
the Indian region

There was no available standard on this.

BIS, in its reply, stated (May 2012) that the work of standard
formulation for the subject had been assigned to TEC in July
2010 as TEC was already taking care of the standardization
work in that area. However, the fact remains that the standard
in this field has not been formulated so far (June 2012).

© Telecommunication Engineering Centre, a technical wing of Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology, is also one of the standard making bodies.

19



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Given the huge advancements in technology and opening of new fields of
study and research, leading to development of new products viz. Hospital
Biomedical Waste Management, infection control, nanotechnology etc, BIS
did not initiate action quickly to meet emerging needs of standardization in
these areas.

= study on Mobile phones

Issue On 31 May 2011, the World Health Organization confirmed that mobile
phone use might represent a long-term health risk, classifying mobile phone
radiation as a ‘carcinogenic hazard’.

Importance of the issue for customers - India represents over 11 per cent of
the world mobile phone market and the same is expected to increase to 13.4
per cent by the year 2013. At present
(March 11), there are about 85 crore
mobile users in India, constituting 70
per cent of the total population (TRAI
Annual Report). As a result, there would
be a demand for approximately 200
million handsets in the year 2013 alone.
With such a high demand, not only is the
Indian market increasing but the import
of substandard mobile phones is also rising. There have also been reports of
mobile phones malfunctioning and even exploding, causing injuries to people.
The Indian Cellular Association (ICA) had stressed (2010) the need to develop
an IS for mobile phone handsets to ensure that only quality and safe products
are offered to the Indian consumer.

International comparison — Standards formulated by the European
Telecommunications Standards Institute are in force in Europe for a number of
years on subjects related to mobile phone handsets, usage and disposal.

Audit observation - There was no IS in any of the following areas:

Mobile phone handsets;

Radiation from mobile phones and

Batteries for mobile phones.
BIS, in its reply, stated (May 2012) that the Indian Cellular Association (ICA)
had been requested (September 2011) to prepare a draft on mobile phones,

which was still awaited from them. BIS, further stated that ISs on mobile
batteries had already been finalized and were under printing.

The fact remains that standards on important aspects i.e. mobile handsets,
radiation from mobile phones etc. had not been formulated so far.

20


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

1.13.9 Formulation of important standards identified in annual action
plans

Every year, BIS identifies some areas as thrust areas for standard formulation
and includes them in their annual action plan. BIS identified 124 cases as
thrust areas on the basis of some new and emerging technologies in the
respective fields in its action plans during the period 2006-07 to 2008-09,
where standards were to be formulated. In 101 out of these 124 identified
cases, standards were formulated and implemented in only 40 cases; standards
were in the printing stage in 25 cases and they were under different stages of
formulation in respect of 36 cases as of March 2011.

Thus, BIS failed to achieve the targets of standard formulation, even in the
thrust areas identified in their action plans.

Recommendations

e BIS may make the monitoring mechanism stronger for all stages of
standard formulation to avoid delays.

e There is a need for timely formulation and review of standards in all
areas, particularly those affecting the health and safety of consumers.

e 815 may focus on formulation of standards in new and emerging fields.

1.14 Product certification

The Bureau operates a Product Certification Scheme, which is governed by the
BIS Act, 1986 and the rules and regulations framed thereunder. Under the
scheme, BIS grants licences to such manufacturers who are capable of
producing goods of consistent quality on continuous basis as per the relevant
155. The presence of the Standard Mark (popularly known as the ISI Mark) on
a product indicates conformity to the relevant IS. The BIS product certification
scheme is essentially voluntary in nature and aims at providing third party
assurance on quality, safety and reliability to the consumer. However, there
are a number of areas related to health, safety, consumer protection, export ete.
where BIS product certification is mandatory. As of March 2011, there were
32510 operative licences under certification, under 924 standards.
Certification was the main source of revenue for BIS.

BIS follows two procedures, i.c. normal and simplified, for grant of licences to
the manufacturers. Under the normal procedure, the licence is required to be
granted within 120 days. Under the simplified procedure introduced in 2007-
08 the time taken for grant of licences was reduced to 30 days. For this the
applicants have to furnish test reports of the samples from BIS approved

21


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

laboratories, along with their applications. After the preliminary evaluations
are found to be satisfactory and the samples have passed independent testing,
licences are granted if the applicants agree to operate the defined Scheme of
Testing & Inspection (STI)’ and pay the prescribed marking fees in advance.
Applicants have the option to apply under any of the procedures.

1.14.1 Certification Advisory Committee

The Certification Advisory Committee (CAC) advises on policy matters
relating todevelopment of certification activities of BIS, coordination of
certification activity with other organizations using ISs, collaboration with
organizations abroad which deal with certification, formulation of guidelines
for assessment of quality assurance etc. As per the BIS Advisory Committee
Regulations, 1987, one meeting of the CAC is to be held in a year. However,
it was noticed, that during the period 2006-07 to 2010-11, only three meetings
of the CAC were held which, inter-alia, affected the development of

certification activities.

In its reply, BIS stated (June 2012) that in future, the specified frequency of
the meeting would be ensured.

1.14.2 Adoption of product standards

Out of 18222 standards in force as on March 2011, 8894 were amenable to
product certification i.e. different products could be certified as per the
relevant ISs. The remaining standards were meant for test methods, codes of
practice*, dimensions, terminology, symbols etc. The year-wise information
for the period 2006-07 to 2010-11 in respect of the total number of standards
formulated, the number of standards amenable to certification vis-a-vis the
number of standards actually covered under the product certification scheme
by BIS is shown in Chart-1:

7 An agreement entered between BIS and a firm, which lays down the system for checks and
controls to be exercised by the firm in ensuring quality of a product during various stages of
its production, The STI contains details for testing the product for quality parameters defined
in the relevant IS.

3 Sets of standards outlining the codes of proper practices for individuals or organizations

22


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Chart-1: Low adoption of standards

20000 [1111 1807... 17029. 17095. विश्टर

18000
16000 ब Number of standards in force
12000 at the close of the year
10000 8827 8831. है 8861 8880 8894
ब Product standards amenable

8000 to certification

6000

4000 999 1010 1023 1040 924 ll Number of product standards

2000
covered under certification

No. of standards

2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11

year

It may be seen from the chart that although BIS had formulated a large number
of standards which were amenable to certification, the actual adoption of
standards was quite low and it ranged between 10.39 and 11.71 per cent of the
amenable standards.

It was observed that only 924 product standards were used to grant 32510
product certification licences (March 2012). Out of 924 standards, 313
standards resulted in 30548 licences, whereas for the remaining 611 standards,
only 1962 licences were issued. In other words, 34 per cent of the standards
covered under certification resulted in 94 per cent of the product certification
licences.

Further out of 32510 licences, 7484 licences (23 per cent) were under
mandatory certification against 83 standards and 25026 licences (77 per cent)
pertained to voluntary certification against 841 standards.

There were 83 standards under mandatory certification but there were no
licences in 11 standards for areas such as high alumina cement, oil pressure
stoves, valve fittings for use with liquefied petroleum gas cylinders and rapid
hardening portland cement, leading to the risk of uncertified manufacturing in
these areas. (Annex-VI).

Thus, there was a large untapped market for product certification and the base
of the certification scheme could be enlarged. It was observed by Audit that
poor utilization of the standards was partly on account of lack of efforts on the
part of BIS in organizing publicity and awareness programmes.

BIS stated (May 2012) that though there were 924 product standards for which
BIS product certification licences had been granted, those product standards
referred to a number of other ISs on test methods, definitions, raw materials

23


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

etc. which were an integral part of the product standards. As such, the number
of ISs actually implemented was much more.

The contention of BIS regarding the total number of standards is not relevant
as the audit observation is about lack of licences issued, for standards
amenable to certification which apart from being an important mechanism of
quality assurance of products in India, was also the main source of revenue for
BIS.

1.14.3 Grant of licences

Clause 2.2.3 of the Operating Manual for Product Certification 2004 envisages
that all applications for licences should be scrutinized with respect to
availability of adequate manufacturing machinery, testing facilities and
qualified testing personnel. In case any deficiency is observed, it should be
brought to the attention of the applicant through a letter within 10 days of
receipt of his application and the applicant should be given 30 days time to
remove the deficiency. In case no response from the applicant is received
within 30 days, the application should be returned. The maximum time
prescribed for grant of licences under the normal procedure and the simplified
procedure was 120 and 30 days respectively. Licences are granted initially for
a period of one year and are renewed for a further period of one or two years.

Scrutiny of records revealed that during the period 2006-07 to 2010-11, a total
of 25140 applications were received for grant of licences, out of which 2627
applications were closed due to various reasons such as non-receipt of fees,
lack of responses from applicants ete., 157 applications were under different
stages of process (March 2011) and 22356 applications had resulted in grant of
licences. The analysis of the time taken for grant of licences in respect of
these 22356 licences is given in Table-4:

Table-4: Time taken in grant of licences

22356 17886 4204 181 85

The table shows that 20 per cent of the licences could not be given within the
prescribed time.

BIS stated (May 2012) that 100 per cent compliance to the specified time
norms could not be achieved due to unavoidable circumstances such as

24


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

dealing with cases of applications of foreign manufactures, unforeseen
complications in handling all-India first products in certification’ ete.

The reply is not acceptable, as the norm of 120 days for grant of a licence had
been fixed by BIS after considering all such aspects.

1.14.4 Monitoring of 'stop marking’

210 : : :
10 when sufficient evidence is

BIS may direct a licencee for ‘stop marking
available that a product carrying the standard mark is not conforming to the
requirements of the relevant IS, failing quality tests, receiving complaints from
genuine consumer fora, receiving unsatisfactory surveillance inspection

reports etc.

As per the Operating Manual for Product Certification 2004, in case ‘stop
marking’ instructions are issued, BIS authorities are required to conduct a visit
to the licencee's factory/premises/godown within 30 days of the issue of such
instructions to ensure compliance and physically take stock of the last batch of
manufacture as well as the stock of the marked products available with the
firm.

In the audit sample of 200 product certification cases, it was observed that
‘stop marking’ instructions were issued in 92 cases. It was, however, noted.
that compliance visits had not been carried out in 46 cases (50 per cent).
Compliance visits were carried out in the other 46 cases, but were undertaken
after delays ranging from one to 12 months. Thus in no cases were compliance
visits undertaken within the stipulated 30 days. In three cases, firms continued
the production of ISI marked articles (packaged drinking water, thermostatic
electric irons and rubber for welding usage) during the stop-marked period, in
contravention of orders. Possibility of continued production and sale of sub-
standard articles using ISI marks with consequent health and safety risks could
not, therefore, be ruled out.

BIS attributed (May 2012) the above deficiencies to shortage of manpower,
manifold increase in other acti

es such as enforcement, management
system certifications, complaint handling, court cases, awareness programmes
ete.

The fact remains that BIS did not follow its 'stop-marking' instructions in respect
of compliance visits.

° First application of a new product covered under certification by BIS
"'Stop marking’ is an instruction to a manufacturer to stop marking of ‘ISI’ on its products

25


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

1.14.5 Cancelled/ dropped licences

The BIS (Certification) Regulations stipulate that unless a licence is renewed
or its renewal is deferred, it will expire automatically at the end of the period
(one or two years) for which it was granted. The position of operative licences,
grant of new licences and licences cancelled/dropped during the period 2006-
07 to 2010-11 is given in Table-5:

Table-5: Details of cancelled/ dropped licences

| | licences at the beginning of
the year”

Annual increase of number | | 7 Lt 5
of licences (per cent)

granted during the year

Number of __ licences 135 354 238 253
cancelled

dropped

Percentage of dropped |_|। 7 7 | |
| «६ | licences with reference to
operative licences

Percentage of dropped 46 64 51 a
licences with reference to
the number of _ licences
granted during the year

# ,
Figures of operative licences are exclusive of licences under hallmarking

It may be seen from the above table that the annual increase in the number of
licences was between four and seven per cent. Further, the percentage of
dropped licences in comparison to the operative licences at the beginning of
the year, ranged between six and seven per cent. However, the percentage of
dropped licences, with reference to new licences granted during a year, was
high and ranged between 41 and 64 per cent, which was a matter of concern.
The main reasons given by BIS for the large number of licences being dropped
were non-receipt of renewal applications and advance marking fees; firms not
being interested in further renewal of licences; voluntary surrender of licences
etc. It was observed that BIS had not conducted any in-depth analysis to
ascertain the reasons for the large-scale dropping of licences.

BIS stated (May 2012) that there had always been a increase in the number of
operative licences every year and it may not be responsible for the large-scale
cases of dropping licences. There may be other reasons like financial non-
viability of industry, economic recession, etc. BIS was regularly making

26

Number of operative 18090 19286 20025 20972 | 22526

Number of new licences 2463 2102 2595 2898 3151

Number of licences 1145 1350 1325 1197 1291



Targets

Report No. 14 of 2012-13

efforts through awareness programmes, advertisements, State level meetings,
inter-ministerial meetings etc.

The reply is not acceptable as the annual growth in the number of licences was
very low. Audit had also observed as described later in the report (para
number 1.19.1), that there were shortfalls even in conducting of awareness
programmes to popularize the Product Certification Scheme.

1.14.6 Surveillance visits to licencees’ premises and collection of factory
samples

Surveillance visits involve drawal of samples for independent testing and
ensuring compliance with relevant standards. As per clause 3.3 of the
Operating Manual for Product Certification, 2004, BIS is required to conduct a
minimum of two such visits to the licencees’ premises in a year and collect
one factory sample per visit for independent testing. Records revealed that
during 2006-07 to 2010-11, there were shortfalls in conducting surveillance
visits, ranging between 39 per cent (2006-07) and 62 per cent (2008-09). As
regards the collection of factory samples, the shortfall ranged between 52 per
cent (2010-11) and 68 per cent (2006-07) as shown in Chart-2:

Chart -2 : Targets and achievements for surveillance visits and factory samples

45000 bbkkh 42108 42108

40000 | 3853 38531
35000
30000 MTargets
25000 23385 20199 21613 fllAchieverents-surveillance visits
20000 18427 16123 aren 347 lal Achievements-factory samples
15000 12451 74
10000

5000

oO

2006-07 2007-08 = 2008-09. 2009-10. 2010-11
Achievements

Examination of 200 test-checked cases of product certification further
revealed that:

e in 75 cases (which included 25 cases pertaining to mandatory items),
the requirement of two surveillance visits per operative year per
licencee was not adhered to. As against the 656 requisite surveillance
visits for these cases, only 357 (54 per cent) visits were made.

27


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

e 85 per the Operating Manual for Product Certification 2004, the gap
between two surveillance visits was not to exceed six months and all
the licencees were required to intimate their production schedule etc. to

s, the

gaps between the two surveillance visits exceeded six months and in

BIS well in advance. Out of the test-checked cases, in 43 cas

56 cases, the surveillance visits were rendered infructuous and samples
could not be taken due to the absence of production/stock and technical
persons from the licencee units. Thus, it was apparent that BIS was
slack in monitoring of licencees regarding maintenance of minimum
prescribed norms.

¢ in 83 cases, against the requirement of collection of 716 samples (two
factory samples per year per licencee), only 305 (43 per cent) samples
were collected for testing.

e 85 per the Operating Manual for Product Certification 2004, in case a
test report is not received within 60 days of receipt of a sample, a
reminder has to be issued to the laboratory concerned. Audit noticed
that in 73 cases, where test reports had not been received within 60
days, reminders were not issued to the laboratories concerned.

Although the ISI certification mark is an assurance of quality and is intended
to provide third party assurance to consumers, the failure of BIS to draw the
required number of factory samples for independent testing reduced the
effectiveness of the marking scheme.

BIS attributed (May 2012) the shortfall in surveillance visits to shortage of
manpower. As regards collection of factory samples, BIS stated (May 2012)
that there was no such requirement. Majority of the licences were of a
voluntary nature. Many licences were Government tender-based and some
were seasonal. With such a distribution of licences, it was not possible to get
factory samples or certified material stock during each surveillance. Hence,
the logic of sampling during every surveillance visit could not be applied in
such circumstances. Regarding delays in sending test report reminders or
reminders not being sent, the main reason was acute shortage of manpower.

While BIS accepted the shortfall, the reply on the absence of requirement for
collection of factory samples is not acceptable as Clauses 2.5.2 (b) and 3.3.1
of the Operating Manual for Certification, 2004 mandate the collection of two
factory samples per licencee every year.

28


No. of market samples

Report No. 14 of 2012-13

1.14.7 Collection of market samples

As per the STI, apart from samples from factories, two market samples of each
certified product produced by licencee are required to be purchased from the
market or procured from organized consumers for testing every year. Testing
such market samples gives additional evidence as to whether the Product
Certification Scheme is operating satisfactorily or not. Audit noticed that the
shortfall of 26 per cent in the collection of market samples in 2006-07
gradually increased to 72 per cent in 2010-11. Details are given in Chart-3.

Chart-3: Market samples-Targets and Achievements

45000 42053 42108 42108
40000
35000
३0000 | 27435
25000 19049 w Targets
10000 हे 12940 14329 12524 aagaq_ Achievements
10000
5000

o4

2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11

Year

Audit observed that out of 200 test-checked cases, in 117 cases, the
requirement of two market samples per year per licencee was not being
adhered to. As against the 999 requisite market samples, only 201 (20 per cent)
samples were collected. The failure of BIS to draw the required number of
market samples for independent testing reduced the effectiveness of the
Product Certification Scheme.

BIS, in its reply, stated (May 2012) that as such, there was no defined
frequency of collecting market samples. In order to monitor the quality of
products effectively, efforts were made to purchase as many market samples
as possible with the available manpower, which was acutely deficient. The
other factors for reduction in the numbers of market samples could be non-
availability of products on regular basis, captive consumption by parent
companies or their ancillary concerns, supplies against tenders of Government
sectors/public sectors which were not found in the open market, seasonal
production based on seasonal demands, etc.

29


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

The reply is not acceptable as Clause 2.5.2 (a) of the Operating Manual for
Product Certification 2004 envisages that two market samples of certified
products should be purchased and tested each year.

1.14.8 Supervisory visits

As per Clause 3.4.1 of the Operating Manual for Product Certification 2004,
the head of the certification departments in the Branch Offices (BO) were
required to pay at least two supervisory visits in a month to the licencees by
rotation, especially for products under mandatory certification, new products
brought under certification in the BOs and licencees whose performances were
inconsistent, to ensure that the stipulated procedures were strictly followed,
both by the licencees and the technical auditors. An appraisal of supervisory
inspections conducted by the test-checked BOs (Bhopal, Dehradun, Ghaziabad,
Jaipur and New Delhi) during the period 2006 to 2011 indicated that the
number of such visits was grossly inadequate. The percentage of shortfall
ranged from 76 to 98 per cent as shown in Table-6:

Table-6: Yearwise shortfall in number of supervisory visits

1. 27 |_ 84 |

2006 168
[2] 2007 168 [| wo 76
3. 2008 168 Los 97
[4 | 2009 168 [4 | [lk
5. 2010 168 | 8 | 95
| 6. | 2011 168 7 fw

30


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

1.15 Laboratories

The Bureau has eight laboratories'' to cater to the needs of testing for standard
formulation and the Product Certification Scheme. In-house testing of samples
under this scheme was started in 1963 when the Central Laboratory (CL) was
established at Sahibabad in U.P. Subsequently, with the number and variety of
samples going up progressively, systematic expansion of laboratory activities
led to establishment of four more regional laboratories and three branch
laboratories. In addition to its own laboratories, BIS recognized outside
laboratories for testing of samples.

1.15.1 Laboratory Advisory Committee

A Laboratory Advisory Committee (LAC) was constituted by BIS to give
advice on various issues relating to laboratories. Audit observed that the LAC
held only one meeting during the period 2006-07 to 2010-11, against the norm
of one meeting per year, as envisaged in the Advisory Committee Regulations
of 1987. Meetings of the LAC could have helped in proper execution of the
laboratory modernization programme mentioned below, as well as in the
overall performance of laboratories.

1.15.2 BIS laboratories-Modernization programme

In order to modernize its laboratory facilities, BIS finalized (March 2005), the
purchase of 403 pieces of testing equipment for all its eight laboratories at a
cost of = 11.47 crore. Audit observed that BIS had not determined any time-
frame for completion of the procurement. Consequently, even afier the lapse
of seven years, it had failed to procure 198 pieces of equipment worth हैं 7.17
crore.

In its reply, BIS stated (May 2012) that the manpower requirement under the
laboratory modernization programme was calculated at various stages but had
not been provided and there had been a steady decline in the number of testing
personnel.

The reply is not acceptable as BIS should have taken corrective steps for
deploying the requisite manpower. Moreover, even in respect of the procured
equipment, Audit found that some pieces of equipment were under-utilized for
long periods of time. These cases are illustrated in Table-7.

"' Central Laboratory-Sahibabad, Northern Region Laboratory -Mohali , Eastern Region Laboratory -

Kolkata , Western Region Laboratory -Mumbai , Southern Region Laboratory -Chennai, and three
branch office laboratories at Patna, Bengaluru and Guwahati

31


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Table-7: Details of under-utilised equipment

Weather-o- The Weather-o-Meter, meant | BIS stated (May 2012) that it
Meter lakh for testing the requirement of | was not in a position to fully
fastness to light in paint | utilize the Weather-o-Meter till
samples was purchased in | the time the relevant standards
October 2008 even though: were suitably amended. The
(a) the existing BIS standard
did not require conformity to
the parameters tested by this
equipment;
(b) for cement paint, the size
of panels prescribed for
conducting the test was not
suitable for use in the
Weather-O-Meter.
As a result, the device
remained under-utilized.
Only 10 samples of enamel | amendment was in process.
interior finishing paints had | As regards the payment of
been tested on the Weather- | Customs duty, BIS stated that it
o-Meter till date, while 44 | had already taken up the matter
licences were granted based | of refund of Customs duty with
on existing standards. the Customs authorities and
The Central Laboratory also | assured that corrective action in
made an avoidable payment | this aspect would be suitably
of %3.28 lakh towards | incorporated in the internal
Customs duty in spite of BIS | procedures, particularly —_ for
being exempted from | purchase of equipment from
Customs duty for purchase of | foreign suppliers.
the equipment.
Fourier हैं 15.30 | The FTIR is used for testing | BIS stated (May 2012) that only
Transform lakh the presence of mineral oil in | when the equipment was put to
Infrared packaged drinking water as | use, the non-suitability of the
Spectrophoto required under IS | solvent was identified and the
meter (FTIR) 14543:2004. The method of | matter was immediately taken up
testing specifically mentions | with the concerned technical
that ‘Hexane’ is to be used as | committee. As and when the
the solvent for the test. After | matter was finalized by the
purchase of the FTIR in | technical committee, the
March 2008, it was found | equipment would be optimally
while testing, that the device | utilized.
could not perform the test
using ‘Hexane’ as the
solvent. The FTIR has been
lying idle since __ then.
Incidentally, despite this test
not being carried out,
licencees were allowed to
continue usage of the ISI
mark (IS 14543:2004).



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

1.16 Performance of BIS laboratories

1.16.1 Testing of samples in laboratories

Year-wise targets were fixed by BIS for testing of samples in its eight laboratories
during the period 2006-07 to 2010-11. Achievements against these targets were as per

Table-8:

Table-8: Year-wise targets and achievements of testing of samples

2006-07 30465 26945 3520 12 15624
2007-08 34345 25321 9024 26 18512
2008-09 27624 20802 6822 25 17947
2009-10 22600 19388 3212 14 16105
2010-11 19800 19282 518 3 18069

It is evident from the above table that the targets set for testing of samples
could not be achieved and there were shortfalls in testing of samples ranging
between three and 26 per cent during the period 2006-07 to 2010-11. Despite
the targets being reduced by 42 per cent from 2007-08 to 2010-11, shortfalls
in achievement continued. Interestingly, against the decreasing trend in fixing
of targets for BIS laboratories, the outflow of samples to outside laboratories
registered an increasing trend (16 per cent) from 15624 samples in 2006-07 to
18069 samples in 2010-11.

In its reply, BIS attributed (May 2012) the above deficiencies to shortage of
manpower. Further, outside laboratories were recognized in such sectors
where BIS laboratories did not have testing facilities. The outside laboratories
were utilized not at the cost of working of the BIS laboratories but with the
aim of supplementing the facilities to meet the requirement under the product
certification scheme. It also stated that the Branch Offices took decisions to
send the samples to BIS laboratories or outside laboratories based on
urgencies depending upon the type of samples pertaining to resumption of
marking, investigation of complaints etc. which were treated as priority
samples.



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

The reply of BIS is not acceptable as Audit found that some samples were
being sent to outside laboratories by BIS even though testing facilities were
available in its own laboratories.

1.16.2 Persistent accumulation of samples in BIS laboratories

For testing of samples in the laboratories, a maximum period of 60 days is
prescribed. However, it was observed that during 2006-07 to 2010-11, the
actual time taken in testing of samples was as detailed in Table-9:

Table-9: Age-wise analysis of time taken for testing of samples

Less than three months 48676
3-12 months 31335
Over | year 1103

From the data given above, it can be seen that a significant proportion of
samples could not be tested within the prescribed schedule. Further in respect
of 1103 samples, the actual time taken was more than a year, raising the
possibility that the samples may have deteriorated in the meantime, rendering
them unfit for testing. (The CL did not furnish the age-wise data of testing of
samples for the years 2006-07 to 2009-10).

The main reasons stated by BIS for the undue delays in testing were
decreasing strength of personnel engaged in testing, delays in procurement of
laboratory consumables, participation in technical meetings etc.

Laboratories also expressed their inability to accept samples in cases of
sample accumulation. Audit scrutinized 17 groups of products!” involving 245
TSs in detail and found accumulation of samples for periods ranging between

30 and 860 days.

Thus, it was evident that non-achievement of targets of testing of samples in
laboratories and under-utilization of laboratory infrastructure resulted in
persistent accumulation of samples which subsequently led to increased
outsourcing of testing to outside laboratories directly by various branch offices
of the BIS.

" Scrutiny of 245 standards involving 17 groups of products was conducted at the Central Laboratory,
Sahibabad.

34


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

In its reply, BIS attributed (May 2012) the above to long duration tests, sudden
break-downs of testing equipment, repeat tests etc. It also mentioned the
shortage of manpower as well as deployment of testing personnel in many
other activities such as quality assurance etc. as the basic reasons for
accumulation of samples.

In the opinion of audit, the sudden break-downs of testing equipment, repeat
tests as well as shortage of technical manpower etc., could have been avoided
if BIS had taken effective steps for rectification of the problems.

1.17 Testing facilities
1.17.1 Absence of testing facilities for certification

As stated earlier, the Government of India has been notifying items which
have to be mandatorily certified by BIS prior to production and sale in the
market as of March 2011, there were 83 such items. In order to ensure
consistency in the evaluation of product conformity to specifications, the
licencee has to follow an agreed STI and maintain records of the test results
while exercising his self-marking rights. The Operating Manual for Product
Certification 2004 provides that in case a licence is being operated exclusively
on factory testing basis, complete testing of the samples during surveillance
visits at least once in a year should be done to ensure conformity of products
to the relevant standard. Scrutiny of records pertaining to testing facilities for
various items, including 83 mandatory items under product certification
revealed the following irregularities:

(a) No testing facility with BIS or outside laboratories - No testing
facilities were available in the cases of four mandatory items (covering 37
licences) and three non-mandatory items (covering 77 licences) under product
certification, either with BIS or with the outside laboratories (Annex-VII-A).
These items included essential medical items e.g. diagnostic medical X-ray
equipment, pathological microscopes, anaesthetic medicines for use with
human and sensitive devices viz. ‘valve fittings for gas cylinder valves for use
with breathing apparatus' and ‘multifunction valve assembly for permanently
fixed liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) containers for automotive use’. It was
evident that in the absence of testing facilities, strict compliance to the
standards could not be ensured and sub-standard items could possibly be in
circulation, which could put the lives and safety of the general public at risk.

(b) Partial testing facility with BIS and no testing facility with outside
laboratories - In respect of five mandatory items covering 45 licences and

35


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

four non-mandatory items covering 140 licences.
existed with BIS laboratories and no testing facility was present in any of the
outside laboratories (Annex-VII-B). Some of the items included in the list
were indispensable for consumers, both by law as well as for protecting life
and limb, viz. protective helmets for motorcycle riders, disposable surgical
tubber gloves and cylinders for on-board storage of Compressed Natural Gas
(CNG) as a fuel for automotive vehicles.

partial testing facilities

Thus, lack of testing facilities posed safety risks and health hazards to
consumers.

In its reply, BIS stated (May 2012) that upgradation of testing facilities was a
dynamic process directly linked to the existing provisions of the 1558 and their
revisions and issuance of amendments from time to time. If testing facilities
were created through procurement of new equipment for a particular product
for which the number of licences was less, it might lead to under- utilization of
that equipment. BIS also stated that BIS laboratories were under no obligation
to create testing facilities for every product under mandatory certification.

However, the reply of BIS is not acceptable as complete testing facilities,
whether in house or through recognized laboratories, is necessary for
independent testing of samples taken by BIS under its product certification
scheme.

1.17.2 Partial testing facility not converted into full testing facility

Partial testing facilities were available in respect of 267 ISs in Central
Laboratory (CL), Sahibabad. Every year, BIS included completion of these
partial facilities as one of its targets in its annual action plan. The CL had also
decided that the testing sections should complete the testing facilities for
products where only partial testing facilities were available. Audit observed
that non-upgradation of partial testing facilities into full testing facilities had
led to under-utilization of its existing infrastructure.

In its reply, BIS stated (May 2012) that CL had upgraded the facilities from
partial to complete in 33 out of the 267 cases pointed out in audit.

However, the reply of BIS is not acceptable as it was found that out of the 267
cases of partial testing facilities, upgradation to full testing facilities has been
done only in four cases.

36


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

IS 12933: 2003

In 2006, BIS initiated the process of setting up of a complete testing facility for Solar Flat
Plate Collectors as per IS 12933: 2003 in two of its laboratories at Bengaluru and Mohali.
However, even after the lapse of more than six
years, the said facilities could not be created. Out
of the grants-in-aid of € 33 lakh sanctioned (March
2006) by the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources for this purpose, only हैं 16.50 lakh
(first instalment) released by the Ministry could be
utilized upto March 2011. BIS stated that the
facility at the Bengaluru laboratory was incomplete
due to lack of expertise to complete the work. The
facility at the Mohali laboratory could not be created due to delay in clearance of its building
by the State Government, lack of expertise as well as non-receipt of feedback from the
Bengaluru laboratory.

‘Thus in spite of grants by the Government of India, BIS could not create testing facilities for
solar flat plate collectors.

In its reply, BIS stated (May 2012) that since there was no dedicated cadre of officers for BIS
laboratories, transfers/promotions/superannuation affected such projects. However, it was
expected that testing facilities would be operationalised at the Bengaluru laboratory by June
2012. As regards the laboratory at Mohali, the same was in a dilapidated building which
required major repairs, for which the State PWD had been assigned the work.

1.17.4 Creation of testing facilities for certification of fire extinguishers

BIS was engaged in formulation of ISs for firefighting equipment/extinguishers using water,
carbon dioxide, foam, dry powder and halon as
extinguishing agents. The standards IS 940, 2171,
6234, 10204, 13849 and 2878 were formulated for
certification of fire extinguishers with the total number
of licences issued thereagainst'’ being 253. These
standards were revised and replaced by a single
standard viz. IS 15683 in 2006, which was to be
implemented w.e.f. the year of revision of the
standards i.e. 2006. To this end, the CL was required
to create testing facilities. It was revealed during audit
that the process of obtaining administrative approval for purchase of equipment for the
purpose was initiated belatedly in March 2008 and the approval finally came through only in
April 2009.

४०1]

Audit observed that the CL had not been able to create the testing facilities till May 2012, even
after the lapse of six years since the revision of the standards. Not only was an undue long
time taken for administrative approval, but the process of purchase of equipment for creation
of the facilities had also not been completed till May 2012. Since no testing facilities existed at
outside laboratories also for the revised standard, consumer safety was compromised.

' [5 2171 : 54 licences; IS 6234 : 4 licences; IS 10204 : 41 licences; IS 13849 : 59 licences; IS 15397 : 2
licences; IS 2878 : 44 licences; IS 940 : 49 licences,

37


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

1.18 Surveillance of outside laboratories

BIS has been operating a Laboratory Recognition Scheme for outside
laboratories which are technically competent to perform tests as per the
procedures stipulated in the relevant ISs. As of March 2011, 115 laboratories
had been recognized under the scheme.

As per the guidelines of the scheme, recognition granted to outside
laboratories expired automatically at the end of three years after recognition
unless renewed, for which laboratories were required to submit their renewal
applications three months in advance. It was, however, noticed that in 20 out
of 74 test-checked cases (Annex-VIII-A) the laboratories continued testing of
samples for periods ranging between one and 28 months, even after the expiry
of the recognition periods.

BIS was also required to conduct two surveillance visits every three years to
verify the effective implementation and maintenance of the quality system
established by the respective laboratories. Test check of records of 18
laboratories revealed that only 18 surveillance visits were carried out against
the target of 70 requisite visits since inception (Annex-VIII-B).

BIS admitted (May 2012) the shortfalls in surveillance of outside laboratories
and further informed that the amendments in the relevant guidelines of the
Laboratory Recognition Scheme had been recommended by the Laboratory
Advisory Committee in March 2012 for approval by the Executive Committee.
As per the provisions stated in the draft, the laboratories would not be
permitted to test samples during the deferment period or the expiry period in
cases of recognition from fresh dates. The shortfalls in surveillance visits were
mainly because of non-availability of dedicated manpower.

38


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

1.19 Other activities
1.19.1 Promotional and consumer-related activities

A Consumer Advisory Committee advises on policy and other matters relating
toconsumer interests and welfare. As per the Advisory Committee
Regulations of BIS, meetings of the Consumer Advisory Committee are to be
held once in a year.

It was, however, noticed that only three meetings were held during the period
of five years from 2006-07 to 2010-11. Adherence to the prescribed norms for
conducting Consumer Advisory Committee meetings was required to ensure
that consumer interests were safeguarded.

Promotional and consumer-related activities were also carried out by BIS
through consumer awareness programmes, programmes on industry awareness
and programmes on educational utilization of standards.

The position of targets set for holding the above programmes as per the annual
action plans and achievements thereagainst for the years 2006-07 to 2010-11
were as per Table-10:

Table-10: Awareness Programmes

360 238 [44 |
2007-08 360 125 35 39 12 31 [44 | [09 | 20
2008-09 | 200 | [116 | [58] 30 13 43 30 [| 37
2009-10 | 200 | 76 38 30 [04 | 13 30 [09 | 30
2010-11 226 129 57 30 02 07 30 [05 | 17

As is evident from the above table, the achievements against the reduced
targets of programmes fixed for consumer awareness, industry awareness and
educational utilization of standards, were only 51, 43 and 34 per cent
respectively for the period from 2006-07 to 2010-11. The shortfalls in
achievement of targets for awareness programmes could be one of the reasons
for low adoption of the standards under the Product Certification Scheme.



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

In its reply, BIS attributed (May 2012) the shortfalls in the awareness
programmes to shortage of manpower.

Recommendation

The promotion of Ss and product certification being important functions, BIS
needs to make all out efforts to achieve the targets fixed for its awareness
programmes.

1.19.2 Hallmarking scheme

Hallmarking is the accurate determination and official recording of the
proportionate content of precious
metal in precious metal articles.
Government of India took
cognizance of the need for
protecting public interest in their
purchase of gold jewellery,
especially with regard to standards
of fineness and prevention of

adulteration. As a consequence,
BIS was identified as the sole body
to operate the Hallmarking Scheme in India.

Hallmarking of gold jewellery was launched by BIS in April 2000 with the
objective of providing third party assurance to consumers regarding the purity
of gold. Under the scheme, hallmarking centres were recognized by BIS, after
ensuring that the centres had the required infrastructure for assaying and
marking of gold jewellery.

On the advice of MoCAF&PD, BIS conducted a market survey on non-
hallmarked gold jewellery in 2006 through an agency, to ascertain the quality
of gold jewellery being sold in the country. The findings of the survey
revealed that 146 out of the 162 samples (90 per cent) drawn from 16 cities
were not of the declared purity. The average shortage in purity was observed
to be 13.51 per cent and the highest purity shortage was 44.66 per cent. In
Chandigarh, Delhi, Jaipur, Kanpur, Madurai and Pune, all the 10 samples
failed the purity test. Consequently, MoCAF&PD approved (2006) bringing of
gold jewellery under mandatory certification w.e.f. 1.1.2008 and accordingly,
directed BIS to chalk out a strategy for successful implementation of the
scheme. The BIS Act, 1986 was also required to be amended for
implementation of mandatory hallmarking. BIS proposed (September 2006),

40



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

the following phase-wise programme to the MoCAF&PD for making the
hallmarking scheme mandatory, under which, 53 hallmarking centres were
proposed to be set up and a requirement of 105 officers as well as
infrastructure like building space etc. was anticipated for Phase I. Details for
the subsequent phases were to be worked out on the basis of experience of
implementation of Phase I. The proposed phase-wise implementation was as
given in Table-11.

Table-11: Phase-wise programme of implementation of hallmarking scheme

~|[Phase-I1 In all State capitals and towns
having Municipal Corporations

01.01.2012

~ | [Phase-IV_In all other locations 01.01.2016

Covering hallmarking under mandatory certification was kept in abeyance by
MoCAF&PD in March 2008, stating that it would be premature to proceed
with the draft notification for mandatory hallmarking of gold jewellery in the
four metros till the BIS Act was amended. Thus, the proposal for covering
hallmarking under mandatory certification, which was initiated in 2006, had
not materialized even after the lapse of six years. Meanwhile, the buyers of
jewellery continued to suffer. The BIS Act had not been amended (June 2012)
to cover hallmarking under mandatory certification. MoCAF&PD had also
approved a Plan outlay of = 10.50 crore for setting up of hallmarking centres,
out of which only % 2.62 crore had been provided to 27 such centres.

Data from the World Gold Council revealed that India imported about 800
tonnes of gold every year, of which 80 per cent (640 tonnes) was used for
jewellery making. Since the average shortage in purity as per the market
survey got conducted by BIS in 2006 was 13.51 per cent, it seemed that
consumers in India were being cheated to that extent in the absence of a
mandatory hallmarking scheme.

In its reply, BIS stated (May 2012) that it did not set up any centre of its own
but granted recognition to assaying and hallmarking centres set up by
entrepreneurs. The jurisdiction to amend the BIS Act, 1986 for making

41


No. of Hallmarking licences

Report No. 14 of 2012-13

hallmarking mandatory rested with MoCAF&PD and the regulations could be
amended after amending the principal Act.

The reply of BIS is not acceptable, since it is the national standard body of the
country and is mandated to provide quality assurance to the consumers,
whether the concerned standard is made mandatory or not.

Further analysis of records revealed that BIS was also lagging behind in
achievement of targets fixed for grant of licences to jewellers under the
voluntary hallmarking scheme as given in Chart-4:

Chart-4 : Hallmarking licences-Targets and achievements

3000 2825
11117" 2500
2500 2275
2075 2100
2000
1500

1500 1244 1297 Mt Targets

* 1125 - ld Achievements
1000 r
500

o+
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11

Year

It may be seen from the above chart that there was a shortfall in the
achievement of targets, ranging between 14 and 55 per cent. The annual target
for the year 2010-11 was also lowered by 40 per cent as compared to the
earlier years. The shortfall in achievement of targets could also be attributed
to the shortfall in conducting awareness programmes on hallmarking by BIS
as the responses from jewellers were not encouraging.

1.19.2.1 Market surveillance

BIS was to carry out market surveillance of certified jewellers, covering at
least 10 per cent of the total number of licencees at the end of the previous
financial year on a rotational basis. Market surveillance involved collection of
hallmarked gold jewellery from licencees’ retail outlets or manufacturing
premises and getting it tested for conformity at a BIS recognized hallmarking
centre. The details of targets fixed and achievements thereagainst are given in
Table-12:

42


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Table 12: Year-wise targets and achievements in respect of market

surveillance
5511 143 88 55 38
2007-08 371 231 140 38
2008-09 581 282 299 51
2009-10 705 310 395 56
2010-11 789 412 377 48

The shortfalls in the achievement of targets ranged between 38 per cent
(2006-07) and 56 per cent (2009-10). Surveillance visits indicated a number
of lapses on the part of jewellers like licence documents not being displayed,
magnifying glasses not being available, details of hallmarking not being
displayed on cash memos etc. Inadequate surveillance visits could lead to
such discrepancies going un-noticed.

Apart from periodic surveillance of certified jewellers, one surprise
surveillance assessment every quarter was required to be conducted by BIS on
the assaying and hallmarking centres. Audit scrutiny revealed that yearly
shortfalls in assessment visits showed an increasing trend during this period,
ranging between 51 per cent (2007-08) and 70 per cent (2010-11) as detailed
in Table-13:
Table 13: Year-wise targets and achievements in respect of Surveillance of
Hallmarking Centres

Sasa NA [_- |]

2006-07 NA

2007-08 196 97 [99] 51
2008-09 420 201 219 52
2009-10 548 221 327 [ «0 |
2010-11 596 181 415 70

In the absence of the required surprise surveillance visits, the possibility of

inadequate compliance can increase substantially.

In its reply, BIS attributed (May 2012) the shortfall to shortage of manpower
and multiplicity of its activities.

43


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

1.19.2.2 Awareness programmes

Under the hallmarking scheme, BIS conducts awareness programmes all over
the country, including rural and suburban areas, for spreading awareness
among jewellers. Besides, consumer awareness is also increased through
advertisements in the print and electronic media and artisan training
programmes. The details of the targets fixed and achievements thereagainst
during the period under review are given in Table-14:

Table-14: Awareness Programmes under Hallmarking Scheme

It may be seen from the above table that there were shortfalls ranging between
14 and 46 per cent in conducting awareness programmes; 11 and 26 per cent
in release of advertisements and 13 and 53 per cent in conducting artisan
training programmes. Targets were also significantly reduced in respect of
awareness programmes.

BIS attributed (May 2012) the shortfalls to shortage of manpower and stated.
that conducting of awareness programmes depended upon the availability of
various factors viz. faculty to deliver lectures, willing participants etc.

1.20 Management system certification

The management systems certification function of BIS consists of a series of
activities aimed at assessing the ability of an organization’s management
systems. BIS launched the scheme of management system certification in
1991. It operates various management system certification schemes viz.
IS/ISO 9001 (Quality Management System), IS/ISO 14001(Environment
Management System), IS 18001 (Occupation Health and Safety Management

44


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

System), IS 22000 (Food Safety Management System) and IS 15700 (Service
Quality Management System) certification.

Audit analysis of the records relating to the Management System Certification
Scheme revealed that in respect of targets for grant of licences for the period
2006-07 to 2010-11 under the scheme, the shortfalls in achievement ranged
from 11 to 61 per cent as shown in Chart-5.

Chart-5: Year-wise targets and achievements for grant of licences

350
1६६४ & $

300 | 264
§ 250
© 200 165 165 MTargets
5 20 (203 97 94 100 89 123 ll Achievements
S 100 -

50

o +

2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11
Year

BIS attributed (May 2012) the shortfalls to shortage of manpower.

It was observed that the total number of operative licences under the
Management System Certification Schemes also reflected a downward trend.
From a total of 1431 licences in 2006-07, the number reduced to 1093 licences
in 2010-11. This indicated that BIS had failed to adequately popularize its
management system certification schemes.

Further, for the purpose of creating awareness among licencees about changes
in the requirements of certification standards and for obtaining first-hand
feedback from the licencees, BIS was supposed to conduct review meetings
with the licencees, Audit observed that BIS had conducted only 11 review
meetings against the target of 25, during the period 2006-07 to 2010-11.
During the year 2008-09, only one review meeting was held. Thus due to
shortfalls in conducting review meetings, the purpose of creating awareness
among licencees, regarding the requirements of certification standards and of
obtaining first-hand feedback from them could not be fully achieved.

BIS also organizes awareness programmes on management systems. Audit
scrutiny revealed that there were shortfalls in conducting these awareness
programmes during the period from 2006-07 to 2009-10 (figures for 2010-11

45


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

were not available). BIS had conducted only 42 programmes against a target
of 216 programmes, resulting in a shortfall of 81 per cent.

BIS stated (May 2012) that many foreign certification bodies had opened their
offices or franchises in India and BIS could not compete with their aggressive
way of working in the area of management system certification. It further
stated that the Ministry of Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises (MSME) was
operating a subsidy scheme under which entrepreneurs preferred to go to
private certification bodies rather than BIS, for getting certification, in order to
obtain subsidies from MSME.

Thus BIS accepted its weakness in an important area of its operation. It should
have tried to improve its procedures to compete with the foreign certification
bodies as well as private competitors instead of tamely accepting their
superiority.

Recommendation

BIS needs to increase the number of licencees under the management system
certification scheme by increasing its competitiveness as well as by conducting
awareness programmes and review meetings with the licencees.

1.21. Enforcement mechanism of BIS

During the operation of the product certification scheme over the last four
decades, there had been instances of misuse of the standard marks. During the
last five years, the particulars of targets of enforcement raids vis-a-vis the
actual numbers of raids conducted by BIS on firms misusing the BIS standard
marks are given in Chart-6:

Chart -6: Year-wise targets and achievements of enforcement
raids

400
350

bhicg 350

300 250

250 12 200 200

200 56 52

150 25 35 m Targets

100 = Achievements
50

0

2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11

No. of enforcement raids

Year

46



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

It is evident from the data depicted above that BIS had not achieved the targets
for conducting enforcement raids. Both the targets set and corresponding
achievements reflected a downward trend with only 135 raids being conducted
as against a low target of 200 raids in 2010-11. The average number of raids
(150 per year) was inadequate in view of the fact that BIS had issued 32510
licences (including hallmarking) in respect of 924 standards and the number of
licences was increasing. The fact that even the unusually low yearly targets

had not been achieved was a cause for concern.

It was, however, observed that the enforcement system through raids had been
reasonably effective. Following 780 raids conducted during 2006-07 to 2010-
11, 629 court cases had been filed against defaulters and 51 court cases were
decided (2010-11). In respect of 47 cases, the accused were penalized with
imprisonment and fines and in two cases, appeals had been filed by BIS. The

remaining two cases were decided against BIS.

BIS stated (May 2012) that there were many constraints for non-achievement
of targets viz. shortage of manpower, engagement of inspecting officers in
other works, difficulty in securing police protection in areas of Bihar and
Jharkhand due to prevailing Maoist activities etc.

Recommendation

BIS should carry out its enforcement activities effectively by deploying
requisite manpower.

1.22 Information technology
1.22.1 Website of BIS

The website of BIS, which can be accessed at http://bis.org.in, contains
information regarding ISs. The site was developed in-house over a period of
time, based on the inputs received from the various departments of BIS. Audit
observed the following deficiencies in the web-related activities of BIS.

1.22.1.1 Lack of Web Policy

BIS did not have a web policy. No documentation was available with it on
design, development, updation and maintenance of their website. Further, the
lack of a web policy and the consequent absence of a content management
policy resulted in several discrepancies in the contents of the website as stated
further:

47



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

”

Out of a total of 1186 links, only 70 per cent (831) of the links were
functional, while 30 per cent of the links returned errors like ‘not
found’ or ‘no such host’.

“Several links led to wrong pages. For example, the links ‘Past Vice
President’, ‘Past Directors General’ and ‘History of Standardization’
led to the 'Annual Reports' page, which in turn, did not have a link to
go back to the home page.

Some pages like ‘Complaint related to BIS certified product/services
of BIS’ etc. were giving system generated errors.

* Some forms viz. ‘register complaint relating to BIS certified product’
accepted invalid data.

The Hindi and English versions of the site were not similar. The Hindi
version did not contain the main links.

1.22.1.2 Security Issues

“Cross Site Scripting - The site was vulnerable to Cross Site Scripting
(also referred to as XSS), a vulnerability that allows an attacker to send
malicious codes (usually in the form of JavaScript) to another user.

“« ASP net Error message - The website disclosed ASP.net error
messages. These error messages might disclose sensitive information
like the Web Server Version etc. This information could be used to
launch further attacks.

BIS stated (May 2012) that though there was no web policy, the same was
being attempted. Further, it was in the process of making necessary corrections
and changes.

Recommendation

BIS should have a formal web policy and a well-structured website.

1.23, Manpower management

BIS had a sanctioned strength of 560 and 1576 posts in the scientific and non-
scientific cadres respectively as of March 2011. The sanctioned strength,
persons-in-position and the vacancy position during 2006-07 to 2010-11 were
as per Table-15:

48



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Table-15: Year-wise position of sanctioned strength, persons-in-position and
vacancy position

In this connection, the following deficiencies were observed:

There was a shortage of manpower by nine to 22 per cent and nine to 24 per
cent in the scientific and non-scientific cadres respectively. As the activities of
BIS had increased manifold since 1987, it could not adequately carry out its
requisite functions due to the shortage of manpower.

1.23.1 Assessment of manpower requirement

Due to the lack of timely action in filling up of vacancies by BIS, 93 and 172
posts in its scientific and non-scientific cadres respectively, had lapsed during
2003. In order to assess the proper requirement of personnel as well as make
future projections, BIS conducted a comprehensive review through an
agency’ in March 2005, which recommended increase in manpower by 20 to
25 per cent. BIS took up the matter with MoCAF&PD which resulted in the
revival of 74 and 50 posts in the scientific and non-scientific cadres
respectively (November 2010). MoCAF&PD directed (January 2009) BIS to
conduct a work study of the organization to assess the manpower requirement
for smooth functioning. After a year BIS decided (February 2010) to get the
study conducted by a committee consisting of BIS officers and an officer from
the Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) of the Ministry of Finance. The study was to
be completed in three to four months, but could not be completed (May 2012)
as the information sought by SIU was not furnished by BIS. Further, out of
124 vacant posts in the scientific cadre and 376 posts in the non-scientific
cadre, BIS could issue (May 2012) appointment letters to only 80 candidates
for its scientific cadre.

34 AF, Ferguson & Co.

49


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Thus though the workload of BIS had increased and it was attributing most of
its deficiencies to the shortage of manpower, action to increase its sanctioned
strength or fill up its vacant posts was grossly inadequate. BIS stated (May
2012) that further action for filling up the vacancies in other cadres besides the
scientific cadre, had also been initiated.

Recommendation

BIS should make sincere efforts to fill up the vacancies in all cadres to carry
out its mandated activities effectively.

1.24 Internal audit

Internal audit is an independent appraisal function established within an
organization to examine and evaluate its activities. Audit observed that there
was no internal audit wing in BIS and the internal audit was being conducted
through an agency. BIS had conducted corporate audit of 25 branch offices
during June to December 2008. No follow-up action on the findings of the
reports had been taken so far. Audit reports of 10 of these branch offices had
not been scrutinized by BIS as of May 2012.

BIS stated (May 2012) that although there was no stipulation for annual
corporate audit of Branch Offices and Regional Offices under the BIS Act, it
had on its own volition, initiated corporate audits to ensure uniform application
of certification procedures and identify deficiencies with a view to make
systematic improvements.

The contention of BIS is not acceptable as the process of corporate audit
initiated by BIS had not been completed so far and no action had been taken
on the finding of the reports.

Recommendation

« 815 may consider setting up its own internal audit wing.

1.25 Conclusion

The Bureau of Indian Standards is a national standardisation body for the
harmonious development of the activities of standardisation, marking and
quality certification of goods. The Bureau had formulated 18222 standards,
out of which 8894 product standards were amenable to certification, against
which 32510 licences had been issued as of March 2011. The meetings of
various committees viz. Advisory Committees, Divisional Councils and

50


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Sectional Committees were not held periodically. There were considerable
delays in formulation of standards at all stages. There was poor adoption of
standards under the Product Certification Scheme. Despite being a quality
assurance body, BIS was unable to perform its monitoring and inspection roles
adequately as there were shortfalls in conducting surveillance visits, collection
of factory and market samples, compliance visits after ‘stop marking’ etc. BIS
took considerable time between drawal and testing of samples. There were
shortfalls in achievement of targets fixed for the testing laboratories. A
laboratory modernisation programme initiated in 2005 could not be completed
even after a period of seven years. There were shortfalls in various activities
under BIS’s hallmarking and management system certification scheme. There
was no formal web policy in BIS. Shortage of manpower continued to persist,
although the activities of BIS were predominantly manpower-based.

51


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Details of Division Councils, their Standards and Certit

Annex -I

(Refers to paragraphs 1.3, 1.6)

tions (as on 31.3.2011)

Amenable Sample Number of
SL | Name of Division MDG standards selected standards | Number of Semele
हि Standards li selected for
No. Council 011०१ from under ieencees | tification
P (Products) | Standards | certification
1. | Production and 2083 1439 22 30 147 1
General
Engineering (PGD)
2. Civil Engineering 1801 600 23 181 6355 42
(CED)
3. Chemical (CHD) 1562 951 22 97 560 4
[4 | Electrical (ETD) 1380 810 15 123 5629 37
5. | Food & 1885 1204 24 174 5299 30
Agriculture (FAD)
a Electronics & 1433 467 16 1 | | स्तर
Information
Technology
(LITD)
7. Mechanical 1161 558 13 89 2457 15
Engineering
(MED)
| * | Management and 17] 3 3 5 1093 2
Systems (MSD)
9. Metallurgical 1611 655 17 73 9601 60
Engineering
(MTD)
10. | Petroleum, Coal 1383 768 7 52 552 a
and Related
Products (PCD)
11. | Transport 1085 425 18 16 294 1
Engineering (TED)
12. | Textile (TXD) 1131 34 10 32 317 2
13. | Water Resources 433 11 a 1 5 1
(WRD)
14. | Medical Equipment 1103 969 6 50 193 1
& Hospital
Planning (MHD)
Total | 18222 | 8894 | 24 | 924 32510 200



Annex-II

Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Details of Meetings of Division Councils and Sectional Committees

(Refers to paragraph 1.13.2)

(As on 31.3.2011)

i Meetings
कक न के लि 2९ Percentage
Councils/ a 4 held during | Shortfall ag
८ a conducted during shortfall
‘ommittees 2006-07 to 2010-11 2006-07 to
2010-11
Division Councils 14 70 53 17 24
Sectional Committees
Civil Engineering 35 175 104 71 41
(CED)
Chemical (CHD) 20 100 | _ 64 | 36 36
Electrical (ETD) 37 185 141 44 24
Food & Agriculture 25 125 108 17 14
(FAD)
Electronics & 20 100 63 37 37
Information
Technology (LITD)
Mechanical 27 135 60 75 56
Engineering (MED)
Medical Equipment 22 110 57 53 48
& Hospital Planning
(MHD)
Management and |_* | 40 25 15 38
Systems (MSD)
Metallurgical 24) 120 92 28 23
Engineering (MTD)
Petroleum, Coal and 10 50 38 12 24
Related Products
(PCD)
Production and 28 140 52 | | 63
General Engineering
(PGD)
Transport 15 75 63 12 | | 6
Engineering (TED)
Textile (TXD) 24) 120 38 82 | 68 |
Water Resources 17 85 72 13 15
(WRD)
Sectional
Committees (Total) = | 80 977 583 37



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Annex-III

Details of gaps between Division Council/Sectional Committee meetings

(Refers to paragraph 1.13.2)

Division Council meetings

| 5७ | No. Name of Division | Date of holding of last Gap between two
Council three meetings meetings (in months)
CED 07.02.2007 fF ० - |
03.10.2007 fs
‘ 24.04.2009 19
06.09.2010 16
CHD 22.03.2005 ____ ८: [|
14.06.2006 15
* 11.11.2008 29
20.10.2010 24
ETD 11.04.2008 [fo -
09.01.2009 fl
* 13.03.2009 |... 8 |
01.11.2010 fk
FAD 20.02.2006 fl -
06.02.2007 12
= 05.03.2008 12
21.06.2010 25
LITD 26.06.2006 fo -
5 08.05.2009 35
21.12.2010 19
MED 27.11.2006 |. तह |
14.03.2008 16
ही 24.4.2009 13
09.06.2010 14
MHD 03.02.2006 [|
13.09.2007 19
t 15.01.2009 15
11.02.2010 13
MSD 16.09.2004 |. तह |
08.02.2006 16
| 24.07.2009 13
26.08.2010 13



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

| $७ | No. Name of Division | Date of holding of last Gap between two
Council three meetings meetings (in months)
MTD 14.03.2007 fl -
28.04.2008 13
= 26.06.2009 14
16.07.2010 13
PCD 10.03.2006 [ -
19.04.2007 12
10.
10.04.2008 12
02.08.2010 21
PGD 01.02.2007 [ -
07.12.2007 10
11. 12.03.2009 15
29.10.2010 20
TED 18.03.2009 [ -
12. 07.12.2009 |... 9 |
09.07.2010 7
TXD 12.06.2007 ििओओ
13. 25.04.2008 10
24.02.2010 22
WRD 17.11.2006 |. तह |
14, 25.03.2008 16
10.06.2010 26

Sectional Committee meetings

Name of Sectional Committee

Gap between holding of two meetings

CHD 05 to 27 Months
ETDC 04 to 53 Months
WRD. 11 to 30 Months
MTD 05 to 34 Months

55


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Annex-IV

Delays in review of standards

(Refers to paragraph 1.13.5)

No. of Period of G
Name as standards | Review due in का ef cca) pendency Reasons furnebed
Division 4 review ५ by BIS
not reviewed (in months)
FAD 4 2006-07 March 2010 34 Due to oversight
3 2006-07 September 2009 29 Due to oversight
45 2006-07 March 2009 23 Due to oversight
24 2006-07 April 2009 24 Meeting could not
be convened
1 2006-07 April 2008 12 Meeting could not
be convened
25 2006-07 January 2008 | 9 [| Due to oversight
56 2006-07 November 2007 7 Meeting could not
be convened
CHD 1 2008-09 Not reviewed so In view of
far (June 2012) comments received
on the standard, the
same could not be
reviewed
[ 2008-09 June 11 26 Reaffirmation was
not done during
2008-09 however,
reaffirmed in 13
meeting in June
2011.
3 2009-10 June 11 13 Meeting could not
be convened
50 2010-11 June 11 13 Meeting could not
be convened
| | 2010-11 Not reviewed so In view — of
far (June 2012) comments received
on the standard, the
same could not be
reviewed
| _!' | 2010-11 Not reviewed so Meeting could not
far (June 2012 be convened
| | 2010-11 Not reviewed so In view of
far (June 2012) comments received
on the standard, the
same could not be
reviewed
|| 2010-11 Not reviewed so Meeting could not
far (Tune 2012) be convened
PGD 227 2007-08 2008-09 12 Shortage of
manpower, less
number of meetings
held ete.
Total | 444 |



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Annex-V-A
Delays in gazette notification of formulation of 155

(Refers to paragraph 1.13.7)

Date of Date of gazette een =“
SL. No. IS Number publication of notification of a tie
notification
standard standard
months)
1. 2190:2010 November 2010 March 2011 4
2. 15682:2006 September 2006 November 2006 2
3. 15821:2008 October 2008 February 2009 4
[4 | 15877:2010 January 2010 August 2010 7
5. 15878:2010 January 2010 August 2010 7
6. 15833:2009 January 2009 March 2009 2
7. 15834:2008 December 2008 March 2009 3
3370
| * | (PART1):2009 June 2009 October 2009 16
3370 (PART October 2009
| 2 | 2):2009 August 2008 14
qt October 2009
10. 15883(PART1):20 July 2009 3
09
11. TS 4457:2007 June 2007 January 2008 7
12. IS 4971:2007 June 2007 January 2008 7
13. 15710:2010 January 2010 March 2011 14
14. 11951:2009 November 2009 February 2010 3
15. 14480:2006 May 2006 October 2006 5
9804 (PART
16. 1):2009 May 2009 March 2010 10
15841:2009/ISO a
17. 11634:1996 March 2009 March 2010 12
15842:2009/ISO arc!
18. 14573-2002 May 2009 March 2010 10
15843 (PART
19. 1):2009/ISO 10958 June 2009 March 2010 |* |
ap, || 0 शदाड October 2006 February 2007 4
:2000
IS
21. 15705:2006/ISO October 2006 January 2007 3
23429:2009
22. IS 15744:2007 June 2007 December 2007 |__ 6 |
23 TS 15745:2007 June 2007 December 2007 |__ 65 |
24. 15 15746:2007 June 2007 December 2007 6
25. IS 15747:2007 June 2007 December 2007 6

57


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

26. 15 3082:2008 April 2008 June 2008 2
27. IS 15777:2008 June 2008 August 2008 2
28. TS 15854:2009 February 2009 September 2009 7
29. IS 15837:2009 November 2009 January 2010 2
30. 15 15864:2009 September 2009 November 2009 2
31. 15 15809:2008 October 2008 January 2009 3
32. TS 15447:2008 January 2009 November 2009 10
33. 15 15810:2008 October 2008 January 2009 3
34. 15 15073:2008 October 2008 January 2009 3
35. 15 15779:2007 November 2007 January 2008 2
36. | 3008 PART 25: March 2006 May 2006 2
37. 15 15656:2006 May 2006 September 2006 4
38. IS 14025:2006 September 2009 January 2010 4
39. 15827:2009 January 2009 ‘November 2009 10
| 40. | 15831:2009 July 2008 November 2009 16
41. 15828:2009 May 2009 September 2011 28
42. 15829:2009 January 2009 ‘November 2009 10
43. 15830:2009 January 2009 November 2009 10
44. 15857:2009 June 2009 September 2011 27
45. 15863:2009 June 2009 September 2011 27
46. | ee May 2008 | September 2008 4
41. i आओ at ‘April 2008 November 2009 19
| 48. | 15743:2007 June 2007 December 2007 |__ 6 |
49. 10221:2008 November 2008 February 2009 3
50. | 3 0 October 2010 April 2011 Fos |
51. 12573:2010 February 2010 August 2010 |__ 6 |
52. 15280:2009 January 2009 April 2009 3
53. ee April 2009 September 2011 29
54. 15865:2009 February 2009 Feb. 2010 12
55. 15765:2008 April 2008 June 2008 2

58



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Date of Date of gazette 5
SI. No. IS Number publication of notification of & ti
notification
standard standard
(months
gg, || Beeainies January 2007 March 2007 2
31993
1528(Part
16):2007/ISO
57. 8894-2:1990 Part September 2007 July 2008 10
16
1528 (Part
21):2007/1SO.
58. 8894-1:1987 September 2007 July 2008 a |
Part21
59. 7512:2006 June 2006 August 2006 2
8910:2010/1SO रण stents
दा. || Soares February 2010 September 2010 7
61 8328:2007 January 2007 March 2007 2
62. 15876:2009 April 2009 September 2009 5
63. 12832:2010 September 2010 February 2011 5
64. 15846:2010 March 2010 August 2010 5
65. | 3573:2010 January 2010 August 2010 71
66. 13749:2009 August 2009 December 2009 4
67. 10694(part 8):2009 July 2009 Mar. 2010 [os
14363:2009/ ISO
68. 11243-1994 March 2009 October 2009 7
8450:2009/ ISO
69. 9519-1990 April 2009 September 2009 5
70. 4602:2009 August 2009 May 2010 fp 9
71. 6685:2009 March 2009 September 2009 |__ 6 |
72. 14553:2008 July 2008 September 2008 2
73. 6218:2008 December 2008 April 2009 4
7451(Partl):2007/1 Ss व
74. SO 2710-1:2000 eptember 2006 February 2007 5
10478:2007/ISO
75. 6519:1993 August 2007 October 2007 2
12978:2006/ISO a arc!
76. 8667:1992 January 2006 March 2006 2
71. 4731:2009 April 2009 October 2009 |__ 65 |
9401 (PART 1): 5
7B | आए May 2010 July 2010 2
79. 4453:2009 August 2009 ‘November 2009 3

59


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Annex-V-B

Delays in gazette notifications of withdrawal of standards

(Refers to paragraph 1.13.7)

Sl. Year/Name of Particulars of Date of Date cfig asi eo of
No. Division standard withdrawn | withdrawat | tification | लाल a titcation
published (in months)

1 2008-09/LITD IS 5608(Pt 5):2002 01-07-2008 21-02-2011 32
2. IS 5608(Pt 6):2002 01-07-2008 21-02-2011 32
3 TS 12598:1989 01-07-2008 21-02-2011 32
4. IS 13176:1991 01-07-2008 21-02-2011 32
5 2010-11/LITD TS 15114:2002 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
(6 | TS 15115:2002 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
7 TS 5000(OD 01) :1969 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 | 9 |
[3 | IS 5000(OD 04) :1969 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
9. IS 5000(OD 05) :1969 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
| 10. | IS 5000(OD 06):1969 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 fF |
11. IS 5000(OD 07):1969 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
12. IS 5000(OD 08):1979 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
13. IS 5000(OD 09):1986 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 fo
14. TS 5000(OD 10):1971 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
15. IS 5000(OD 11):1971 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
| 16. | 15 5000(OD 12):1971 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
17. IS 5000(OD 13):1971 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 |. 9 |
18. TS 5000(OD 14):1971 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
19. IS 5000(OD 15):1973 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
20. IS 5000(OD 16):1973 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
21. TS 5000(OD 17):1974 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 | 9 |
22. IS 5000(OD 18):1974 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
23. 15 5000(OD 19):1978 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
24. IS 5000(OD 20):1978 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
25. TS 5000(OD 21):1979 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
26. IS 5000(OD 23):1978 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
27. IS 5000(OD 25):1978 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
28. IS 5000(OD 26):1971 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 fF 8
29. IS 5000(OD 27):1978 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
30. IS 5000(OD 28):1978 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9
31. IS 5000(OD 29):1979 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 fo

60



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

ti Date of gazette twine ete i
Sl. Year/Name of Particulars of Date of notification publication of
No. Division standard withdrawn | withdrawal published gazette notification
(in months)

32. IS 5000(OD 31):1981 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9

33. IS 5000(OD 32):1981 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9

34. IS 5000(OD 33):1981 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9

35. TS 5000(OD 34):1981 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 |. 9 |

36. IS 5000(OD 35):1981 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9

37. IS 5000(OD 36):1981 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9

38. IS 5000(OD 37):1982 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 fo

39. TS 5000(OD 38):1984 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 | 9 |

40. IS 5000(OD 39):1986 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 | 9 |

41. IS 5000(OD 40):1986 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9

42. IS 5000(OD 41):1986 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 |_ 9 |

43. TS 5000(OD 42):1986 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 | 9 |

44. IS 5000(OD 43):1986 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 | 9 |

45. IS 5000(OD 44):1986 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9

46. IS 5000(OD 45):1986 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 |_ 9 |

47. IS 5000(OD 46):1986 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 | 9 |

48. 15 5000(OD 47):1986 20-05-2010 21-02-2011 9

49. | 2009-10/MHD IS 4089: 1967 29-09-2009 02-02-2010 [4 |

50. TS 6986: 1973 -DO- -DO- | 4 |

51. IS 5588: 1970 -DO- -DO- 4

52. IS 13069: 1991 -DO- -DO- [| 4 |

53, | 2010-11/MHD TS 5110: 1969 10-11-2009 25-06-2010 7

54. 15 5226: 1989 -DO- -DO- 7

55. IS 5231: 1990 -DO- -DO- 7

56. IS 5233: 1990 -DO- -DO- 7

57. TS 7757:1975 | -Do- | | po. | 7

58. IS 7783: 1981 -DO- -DO- 7

59. IS 8158: 1976 -DO- -DO- 7

| 60. | TS 8163: 1976 | -po- | | -po- | 7

61 TS 8774: 1985 -DO- -DO- 7

62. IS 9173: 1979 -DO- -DO- 7

63. IS 9318: 1987 -DO- -DO- 7

64. TS 9982: 1981 | -po- | | -po- | 7

65. IS 10395: 1983 -DO- -DO- 7

61


Report No.

14 of 2012-13

ti Date of gazette twine ete i
Sl. Year/Name of Particulars of Date of 3 5 publication of
No. Division standard withdrawn | withdrawal PT gazette notification
(in months)

66. 2010-11 IS 10849: 1984 -DO- -DO- 7

67. | 2009-10/TED IS 10289: 1982 04-06-2009 15-07-2009 22 (upto 31.3.2011)

(Sent date)
68. IS 10841:1984 04-06-2009 -DO- 22 (upto 31.3.2011)
69. IS 13493:1992 04-06-2009 -DO- 22 (upto 31.3.2011)
70. IS 2646:1986 09-06-2009 -DO- 22 (upto 31.3.2011)
71 TS 5977:1981 09-06-2009 -DO- 22 (upto 31.3.2011)
72. IS 7528:1974 09-06-2009 -DO- 22 (upto 31.3.2011)
73. 15 3404:1979 04-06-2009 -DO- 22 (upto 31.3.2011)
74. TS 4384:1967 09-06-2009 | -po- | DO- 22 (upto 31.3.2011)
75 TS 10548:1983 09-06-2009 -DO- 22 (upto 31.3.2011)
76. IS 13915:1994 09-06-2009 -DO- 22 (upto 31.3.2011)
77. IS 9212:1979 22-01-2009 14-20 March 26 (upto 31.3.2011)
2010

18. IS 13507:1992 22-01-2009 | -po- | DO- 26 (upto 31.3.2011)
79. IS 7699:1975 22-01-2009 -DO- 26 (upto 31.3.2011)
| 80. | TS 1133:1985 22-01-2009 | _-00- | - 26 (upto 31.3.2011)
81. IS 11734:1986 22-01-2009 -DO- 26 (upto 31.3.2011)
82. IS 11735:1986 22-01-2009 -DO- 26 (upto 31.3.2011)
83. | 2009-10/MTD IS 1137:1990 26-06-2009 20.02.2010 |. 8 |

84. TS 1528(Pt 8):1974 -DO- -DO- [os

85. | 2010-11/MTD 15 6331:1987 16-07-2010 23.10.2010 3

86. | 2008-09/CHD IS 3025:1964 11.11.2008 18.01.2010 14

87. 2009-10/CHD IS/ISO 14041:1998 20 08 2010 22 11 2010 3

88. IS/ISO 14042:2000 20 08 2010 22 11 2010 3

89. IS/ISO 14043:2000 20 08 2010 22 11 2010 3

90. | 2010-11/CHD noo (art 15/See 1) | 31 93 2010 20.08.2010 5

91. | 2006-07/PGD 15 8692:1978 31.05.2006 29.08.2006 3

92. 2009-10/?00 TS 14439(Part 3):1998 10.11.2009 17.03.2010 4

62



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Date of gazette मी पक
Sl. Year/Name of Particulars of Date of पाए! ane tion publication of
No. Division standard withdrawn | withdrawal ublished gazette notification
P (in months)
93 15 11065(Part 1):1984 09.07.2010 18.04.2011 fp 8
94 18 11065(Part 2):1985 09.07.2010 18.04.2011 9
95. IS 15057:2001 09.07.2010 18.04.2011 9
96 PCD 2007-08/PCD | IS 15439:2004/ ISO. 19 April December 2007 } |
1994:1976 2007
97 IS 15440:2004 /ISO -DO- -DO- | |
9931:1991 Coal
98 2010-11/PCD IS 5188:1985 2.08.2010 March 2011 | 8 ।|
99. 2006-07750 18 1667: 1981 28.07.2006 25.03.2010 44
100. TS 7464: 1988 28.07.2006 25.03.2010 44
101. IS 7999: 1998 28.07.2006 25.03.2010 44
150 5494: 1978
102. TS 8574: 1977 28.07.2006 25.03.2010 44
103. IS 8806: 1978 28.07.2006 25.03.2010 44
104, IS 9194: 1979 28.07.2006 25.03.2010 44
105. 18 10524: 1982 28.07.2006 25.03.2010 44
ISO 3983: 1977
106. 15 10834: 1984 28.07.2006 25.03.2010 44
107. | 2007-08/FAD IS 1613: 1960 December 27.11.2008 12
2007
108. IS 6387: 1987 December 27.11.2008 12
2007
a 2010-11/FAD. TS 1509: 1972 21.06.2010 | 29.03.2011 9 (as of 31.03.2011)
(sent for
gazetting)
110. IS 1705: 1972 21.06.2010 | 29.03.2011 9 (as of 31.03.2011)
(sent for
gazetting)
a TS 2144:1962 21.06.2010 | 29.03.2011 9 (as of 31.03.2011)
(sent for
gazetting)
112, TS 2145: 1962 21.06.2010 | 29.03.2011 9 (as of 31.03.2011)
(sent for
gazetting)
113. IS 2146:1962 21.06.2010 | 29.03.2011 9 (as of 31.03.2011)
(sent for
gazetting)
114. IS 3162:1965 21.06.2010 | 29.03.2011 9 (as of 31.03.2011)
(sent for
gazetting)

63



Report No.

14 of 2012-13

Sl.
No.

Year/Name of
Division

Particulars of
standard withdrawn

Date of
withdrawal

Date of gazette
notification
published

Time taken in
publication of
gazette notification
(in months)

115

IS 5064:1980

21.06.2010

29.03.2011
(sent for
gazetting)

9 (as of 31.03.2011)

116.

IS 7061:1973

21.06.2010

29.03.2011
(sent for
gazetting)

9 (as of 31.03.2011)

117.

18 7247 (part-2):1974

21.06.2010

29.03.2011
(sent for
gazetting)

9 (as of 31.03.2011)

a

TS 9599:1980

21.06.2010

29.03.2011
(sent for
gazetting)

9 (as of 31.03.2011)

119.

IS 9967:1997/ISO
4099:1994

21.06.2010

29.03.2011
(sent for
gazetting)

9 (as of 31.03.2011)

120.

TS 10670:1983

21.06.2010

29.03.2011
(sent for
gazetting)

9 (as of 31.03.2011)

121.

TS 11063:1984

21.06.2010

29.03.2011
(sent for
gazetting)

9 (as of 31.03.2011)

122

IS 11135:1984

21.06.2010

29.03.2011
(sent for
gazetting)

9 (as of 31.03.2011)

123.

TS 13399:1992

21.06.2010

29.03.2011
(sent for
gazetting)

9 (as of 31.03.2011)

124.

18 13574:1992

21.06.2010

29.03.2011
(sent for
gazetting)

9 (as of 31.03.2011)

125.

TS 14443 (part-1):1997

21.06.2010

29.03.2011
(sent for
gazetting)

9 (as of 31.03.2011)

TS 14825:2000/ISO
5983:1997

21.06.2010

29.03.2011
(sent for
gazetting)

9 (as of 31.03.2011)

127.

IS 14830:2000150
6496:1983

21.06.2010

29.03.2011
(sent for
gazetting)

9 (as of 31.03.2011)

64



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Annex-VI
Mandatory product certification with ‘nil’ licences

(Refers to paragraph 1.14.2)

65


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Annex —VII-A
Testing facilities with BIS or outside laboratories
(Refers to paragraph 1.17.1 (a)

7620 Diagnostic Medical X-Ray Nil | * |
Equipment

नि 100 Multifunction Valve Nil -
Assembly for Permanently
A Fixed Liquefied Petroleum
Gas (LPG) Containers for
Automotive Use

IS 4381 : Specification for Pathological Nil 15
1967 Microscope

TS 9020: Power Threshers - Safety Nil 54
2002 Requirements

66


Annex -VII-B

Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Partial testing facilities with BIS and no testing facility with outside laboratories

(Refers to paragraph 1.17.1 (b)

S.No. | IS Number assume | Subject No. of licencees
1. | 3224 Valve fittings for compressed gas 12
cylinder excluding liquefied petroleum
gas cylinder
2. | 183745-0: | Yoke type valve connections for small 3
1978 medical gas cylinders
3. 15 7285-0: | Refillable Seamless steel gas cylinders — 20
1988-Pt.1&2 | Specification — Part 1: Normalized Steel
Cylinder
4. | IS 8776: Valve fittings for use with liquefied | No licencee
1988 petroleum gas cylinder up to and
including 5 liter water capacity
5. 14899-2000 | Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) p
Containers for Automotive Use —
Specification
6. 14300 - 0 : Neem Based EC Containing Azadirachtin | ' |
1995
The IS 13422: Disposable Surgical Rubber Gloves 16
1992
| 15490 - 0: Cylinders for On-Board Storage of 13
2004 Compressed Natural Gas As a Fuel for
Automotive Vehicles
a 4151-1993 Protective Helmets For Motorcycle 103

Riders.

67


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Annex -VITI-A.

Testing of samples by laboratories even after the expiry of recognition period

(Refers to paragraph 1.18)

10.

12.

14.

16.

18.

Yadav Measurements Pvt. Ltd. Udaipur

-
3

Fluid control research institute Palakkad

Electronics Regional Test laboratories (E)
Kolkata

CEPC laboratory & technical division

Monarch Bio tech Pvt. Ltd

SGS India Chennai

Bhagavathi Ana Labs Ltd

MSME Coimbatore

Gujrat Test House

NCCBM ballabgarh

01.06.2010

01.12.2009

01.04.2009

15.12.2007

04.10.2010

15.02.2007

01.04.2009

06.12.2009

19.05.2009

04.05.2009

11.09.2010 3

07.01.2011

20.08.2009 5

8.12.2008 12

15.02.2011 |__4 |

25.11.2007 10

20.08.2009 5

15.07.2011 19

29.10.2009 5

09.04.2010 ll

68


Annex -VIII-B

Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Shortfalls in surveillance visits of recognized laboratories

(Refers to paragraph 1.18)

No. of Actual no. of
“ पा, | Shortfall in
. . surveillance surveillance .
Name of the recognized Period of we . — carrying out
- Lie laboratories recognition MELO ves the surveillance
B tobe conducted | conducted visits
by BIS. by BIS

| | Yadav Measurements Pvt. | 01.06.2004 to 2 Nil 2
Ltd. Udaipur 01.06.2007

2. Fluid control research | 01.12.2000 to 2 1 1
institute Palakkad 01.12.2003

01.12.2003 to

01.12.2006 2 Nil 2

01.12.2006 to 2 Nil 2
01.12.2009

3. Electronics Regional Test | 01.04.2003 to 2 1 1
laboratories (E) Kolkata 01.04.2006

01.04.2006 to 2 1 1
01.04.2009

4. NSIC Rajkot 08.06.2001 to 2 Nil 2
08.06.2004

08.06.2007 to 2 Nil 2
08.06.2010

5. MSME Coimbatore 06.12.2006 to 2 Nil 2
06.12.2009

6. | Regional Solar Energy | 01.07.2003 to 2 1 1
Testing Centre 01.07.2006

01.07.2006 to 2 1 1
01.07.2009

Te Gujrat Test House 19.05.2003 to 2 1 1
19.05.2006

12.09.2008 to 2 Nil 2
12.09.2011

69



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

No. of Actual no. of. .
ill ill: Shortfall in
. . surveillance surveillance .
Name of the recognized Period of carrying out
- No. laboratori r nition visits required visits th illan
seins Cage to be conducted | conducted . visits ame
by BIS by BIS
8. NCCBM Ballabgarh 04.05.2000 to 2 Nil 2
04.05.2003
11.12.2003 to 2 Nil 2
11.12.2006
08.01.2007 to 2 Nil 2
08.01.2010
9. Geo chem. Laboratories pvt. | 22.05.2002 to 2 Nil 2
Ltd 22.05.2005
23.01.2007 to 2 1 1
23.05.2010
10. CEPC laboratories क्षाव | 01.12.2004 to 2 Nil 2
Technical Division 01.12.2007
08.12.2008 to 2 1 1
08.12.2011
11. Bangalore test house 01.11.1998 to 2 Nil 2
01.11.2001
12. Monarch bio tech Pvt. Ltd 04.10.2007 to 2 1 1
04.10.1010
13. Footwear design and 22.05.1998 to 2 Nil 2
development institute 22.05.2001
27.06.2002 to 2 1 1
27.06.2005
27.12.2007 to 2 1 1
27.12.2010
14. International testing centre 01.8.2001 to 2 1 1
01.8.2004
01.07.2005 to 2 1 1
01.07.2008
07.05.2008 to 2 Nil 2

70



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

FICCI Research and | 11.06.1999 to
Analysis Centre 11.06.2002

11.06.2002 to
24.03.2005

Bhagavati Ana laboratories | 01.04.2006 to
Ltd 01.04.2009

71


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Highlights

> The Institute had not laid down any policy for selection of research
topics and documenting the basis for their selection, keeping in
view the objectives laid down in its Memorandum of Association
(MoA). A number of selected research topics were unrelated to
these objectives.

(Paragraph 2.9.3.1)

> The Institute had not framed any bye-laws specifying the criteria,
methodology and documentation process to be adopted by
Selection Committees for selection of research Fellows.

(Paragraph 2.9.3.2)

Vv

The Institute had an inadequate monitoring and review system
because of which, it could not ensure that the research Fellows
complied with the terms of their agreements with the Institute and
completed their projects on time.

(Paragraph 2.9.3.3)
> The publication of research projects reports was inordinately

delayed. Only 23 out of 58 completed reports had been published
till July 2011.

(Paragraph 2.9.3.4)

> The Institute had no policy, laying down the criteria for selection
of issues for discussion at seminars and symposia organised by it as
well as those organised in collaboration with other institutions.
(Paragraph 2.9.4.1)
> The Institute had not ensured optimal utilization of information
technology for its library and had not made the library accessible
to the public, as envisaged in its objectives. Following the audit
objection, the Institute announced the availability of its library
sources to the general public through its website.

(Paragraph 2.9.5)



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

> The Ins
collection of 22 objects since its establishment in 2006.

itute failed to make any addition to the museum’s original

(Paragraph 2.9.6)

Recommendations

% The Institute may frame bye-laws in terms of the provisions of the
Memorandum of Association and correlate their annual action
plans with the budget estimates.

+ The Institute may frame guidelines for selection of projects based

on its objectives. The process of selection of projects may be
documented to ensure transparency.

“ The Institute may formulate bye-laws specifying the criteria,
methodology and documentation process for transparent selection
of research Fellows.

“The Institute may put in place an effective system for monitoring

and reviewing the research projects to ensure that the research
Fellows comply with the terms of the agreements with the Institute
and complete their projects on time,

“The Institute may consider taking assistance of outside expert for

reviewing the quarterly progress reports in case it is not feasible
for the Director to review all the progress reports in addition to
his/her administrative duties.

“ The Institute may frame guidelines for timely publication of
research outputs and dissemination of its publications.

*% The Institute may widen the circle for distribution of its

publications so that its research outputs are utilized by more
people and purchased publications do not lie idle.

“ The Institute may evolve a system for selection of issues for

discussion at seminars and symposia and identifying the objectives
to be achieved through the same. Proceedings of the seminars and
symposia may be well documented and disseminated to the
concerned persons, institutes and organisations

“ The Institute should follow Government rules and regulations

regarding payment of allowances to its Fellows and avoid
incurring expenditure on items disallowed by them.

“* The Institute may take steps to ensure optimum utilization of

74


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

information technology to make its library user-friendly.

“The Institute should take effective action to collect more writings,
photographs, audio and video materials etc. that throw light on the
life, ideas and activities of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad.

2.1 Introduction

The Maulana Abul Kalam
Azad Institute of Asian
Studies (Institute), Kolkata
is an autonomous institution
under the Ministry of
Culture, Government of
India — (Ministry). The
Institute was set up in
January 1993, as a Society
under the West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961 at the joint initiative
of the Government of India and the Government of West Bengal. The Institute

was to act as a centre for research and learning, focusing on various issues
related to developments in Asia, with special emphasis on their links with
India, on secularism and universal brotherhood and on the life and works of
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad.

2.2 Objectives of the Institute

The main objectives of the Institute as defined in its Memorandum of
Association are:

e to be a centre for research and learning with focus on (i) social,
cultural, economic and political/administrative developments in
Asia, from the middle of the nineteenth century onwards, with
special emphasis on their links with India (ii) the life and works of
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad;

e to organize, undertake, conduct, encourage and promote study and
research in the field of secularism and universal brotherhood;

¢ to foster academic contacts within India as well as in other
countries through exchange of personnel and research material;

e to establish and maintain a library of books, periodicals and other
materials having a bearing on the secular tradition of Modern India

75



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

with special reference to social, cultural and political movements
and events from the middle of the nineteenth century onwards; to
make available to the public in a suitable place, the collection of
papers and library sources for study and research; and

e to establish and maintain a museum at the former residence of
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad in Kolkata.

Besides, the Institute is also entrusted with the responsibility of promoting
activities relating to the North-Eastern Region (NER) of India for which the
Ministry provides separate grants.

2.3 Organizational set-up

The Institute is run by a Society, as stated earlier and is headed by the
Governor of West Bengal who is its President. The Society runs the Institute
through an Executive Council (EC), headed by a Chairman who is nominated
by the Ministry. The EC has full powers and authority to do all acts, matters,
things and deeds which may be necessary or expedient for the Society. The
Director of the Institute, who is the Member Secretary of the Society as well
as the EC, is responsible for the administration of the affairs of the Society and
the Institute, under the overall guidance of the Chairman.

2.4 Scope of Audit

The Institute is audited under Section 14(1) of the Comptroller and Auditor
General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. Performance
audit of the academic activities of the Institute, covering the period from 2005-
06 to 2010-11 was conducted from March to July 2011.

2.5 Audit objectives
Performance audit of the academic activities of the Institute was carried out to
ascertain whether:

e the Institute had an effective planning mechanism to attain its
objectives;

e the Institute had a sound financial management system;

e the Institute carried out its academic activities efficiently and
effectively in an economic manner; and

e an effective internal control and monitoring mechanism existed in the
Institute.

76


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

2.6 Audit criteria

The audit criteria were derived from the following:

« Memorandum of Association (MoA) of the Institute;

e Rules and Regulations of the Institute;

e Rules as given in the General Financial Rules (GFR) 2005 and
orders issued by the Government of India from time to time and

« Minutes of meetings of the Society, the EC and other committees
of the Institute.

2.7 Audit methodology

The performance audit commenced with an entry conference with the Director
and other officials of the Institute in February 2011, wherein the audit scope,
objectives, criteria and methodology were discussed. The audit methodology
consisted of detailed scrutiny of research projects, publications and seminars,
selected through simple random sampling. The sample consisted of all the 41
internal research projects (100 per cent), 24 out of 79 external research
projects (30 per cent), 17 out of 66 publications (25 per cent) and five out of
21 seminars (24 per cent). Audit observations were discussed with the
Director at an exit conference held in August 2011. Detailed replies of the
Institute were received in December 2011 and have been suitably incorporated
in the report. The draft report was referred to the Ministry in December 2011;
their reply has not been received (July 2012).

2.8 Acknowledgement

We acknowledge the cooperation and assistance extended by the Institute
during the course of this performance audit.

2.9 Audit findings

2.9.1 Planning for academic activities

Planning is essential for optimal utilization of resources towards attainment of
the Institute's objectives. The Institute had not been preparing annual plans
since its inception. It was found that the Institute had prepared its first annual
action plan only for the year 2010-11. The plan included details about
organisation of seminars/workshops, expansion of the museum, publication of
books etc. The plan also included details regarding field trips by Fellows,
related to existing research projects. However, the action plan did not dwell on
the number and specific areas of new research projects to be undertaken

77


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

during the year. Moreover, the annual action plan was prepared in May 2010
while the budget for the year 2010-11 had been prepared and sent to the
Ministry in September 2009. This shows that the plan was not correlated with
the budget.

2.9.2 Financial management

The Institute is fully funded by the Government of India. The year-wise
grants-in-aid received and expenditure incurred during the period 2005-11 is
shown in Table-1.

Table
(@ in lakh)

As per Rule 32(ii) (a) of the Rules and Regulations of the Institute, the
EC has the power to make and frame bye-laws for the preparation and
sanction of budget estimates, the sanctioning of expenditure, making
and execution of contracts, the investment of the funds of the Institute
and the sale or alteration of such investment, and account and audit.
The Institute, however, had not framed such bye-laws. Thus, the
procedures for budgetary control were inadequate as would be evident
from the subsequent paragraphs.

In terms of Rule 48(a) (iii) of the Rules and Regulations of the
Institute, the Finance Committee has the duty to scrutinise the budget
estimates of the Institute and to make recommendations to the EC for
its approval. The Institute prepared budgets during 2005-11 with the
approval of the Director but these were neither scrutinized by the
Finance Committee nor approved by the EC.

Rule 26 (ii) of the GFR 2005 as well as conditions of sanction of grants
released by the Ministry stipulate that expenditure is to be incurred for
the purpose for which it is sanctioned. Audit observed that the Institute
had diverted Plan expenditure of हैं 52.08 lakh during 2005-11 to the
heads ‘Non-Plan’ and ‘North-East’. The Institute had neither obtained

78


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

approval from the Ministry for such diversions of funds nor had the
Ministry ever pointed out such diversions.

¢ Rule 26 (i) of GFR 2005 stipulates that expenditure should not exceed
budget allocations. Audit, however, observed that under 72 out of 238
expenditure sub-heads (30 per cent), the Institute incurred हैं 349.63
lakh in excess of the budget (RE) provisions (148 per cent variation)
during 2005-11. Out of these, under 13 sub-heads, the Institute
incurred हैं 37.33 lakh, although there were no budget provisions for the
same.

The Institute stated (June 2012) that it had initiated the process of framing
bye-laws for better functioning and management.

Recommendation

The Institute may frame bye-laws in terms of the provisions of the
Memorandum of Association and correlate their annual action plans with the
budget estimates.

2.9.3 Management of Research Activities

The Institute conducts research
projects by appointing internal and
external Fellows. Internal Fellows
carry out the work in the Institute
while external Fellows carry out the
research projects outside. External
Fellows are funded by the Institute
and internal Fellows are paid
scholarships. The duration of the research projects is three years in the case of
internal Fellows and six months to five years in the case of external Fellows.
On completion of the research projects, the Fellows submit research reports
for approval, after which the same are published as priced books. The Institute
gets royalty from the publishers for the books sold.

The position of research projects conducted during 2005-11 is given in Table-2.

79



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Table-2
2005-06 33 23 1 55 27.22 0.62
2006-07 55 4 | 68 | 51 37.46 0.71
2007-08 5] 11 | 6 | 56 46.27 0.86
2008-09 56 21 17 | 60 [| 89.94 1.55
2009-10 | 60 | 17 17 | 60 | 80.55 1.34
2010-11 | 60 | | 1 [| 3 | 68 | 103.00 1.61

TAt the end of July 2011, 62 projects were ongoing
*Expenditure/average of opening and closing ongoing projects

The average expenditure on the projects increased from हैं 0.62 lakh to = 1.61
lakh during 2005-11.

2.9.3.1 Selection of research topics

As stated earlier, the Institute conducted research in the following areas:

e Social, cultural, economic and political administrative developments in
Asia, from the middle of the nineteenth century onwards, with special
emphasis on their links with India;

© Secularism and universal brotherhood;
e Life and works of Maulana Azad; and
e North Eastern Region (NER).

The number of research projects conducted during 2005-11 in different areas
is shown in Table-3.

Table-3

External 20 4 11 44 79

Internal 25 2 | 6 | 41

The Institute selected research topics on the basis of research proposals
submitted by the applicants. Audit observed that it had not laid down any
policy for selection of research topics and documenting the basis for selection
of the topics, keeping in view the objectives of the Institute. In the absence of

80


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

the same, there was a risk of selecting research topics unrelated to the
Institute’s objectives.

Out of the 65 approved research project proposals selected for audit scrutiny,
16 project proposals, as detailed in the Annex-I, seemed to be unrelated to the
Institute’s objectives as described below:

© Out of 30 project proposals under “Asian developments’, 11 proposals
seemed to have no links with India. For example, the project proposals
on 'Zionism and the State of Israel: a critical study', 'From Siberia to
Kazakh steppes: re-exploring regional histories of Eurasia’ and.
‘Religion and politics in Bangladesh: 1971—2004', were sought to be
taken up under 'Asian developments' but the impact of these issues on
India was not visible in them;

¢ out of 11 project proposals taken up under ‘Secularism and universal
brotherhood’, in two proposals, i.e. ‘Contemporary scenario of Bihar
politics: a political economy approach’ and ‘Politics of indebtedness of
indigenous people:

sues, policies, actions and consequences - study
of Purulia district’, no relation with secularism was found;

e in three out of four project proposals on the ‘Life and works of
Maulana Azad’, no linkage was established with the life and works of
Maulana Azad. For example, the project proposal on 'The culture of
history' and 'Role of the Bengali press in the Bengal renaissance of the
19th century and in the national movement of the 20th century’ seemed
to have no links with the life and works of Maulana Azad.

In July 2006, the President of the Society had appointed a Review Committee
on the functioning of the Institute. This committee, in its interim report, had
also emphasised (December 2009) that the original objective of establishing
the Institute was to understand the Indian perspective of Asia and South Asia.
It had also pointed out that some of the Fellows were concentrating on the
study of Asia on their own terms, without linking their studies to India. It
recommended that the academic programmes might sharply focus on the
concerns of India.

The Institute stated (August 2011) during the exit conference and in its reply
in December 2011, that Audit had misinterpreted the objectives in the MoA. It
explained that researches were carried out on various developments of Asian
countries which might or might not be necessarily linked with India. The
Institute further stated that it was adequate that the Selection Committee
recognized the value of the subjects for India.

81


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

The Institute’s reply was, however, against its own objectives.

2.9.3.2 Selection of research Fellows

The Institute selects internal Fellows on the basis of newspaper advertisements
while the external Fellows are selected on the basis of research proposals
along with the bio-data submitted by them. As per practice, a Selection
Committee comprising all the EC members and two external experts select the
Fellows. It was observed that:

As per Rule 32 of the Rules and Regulations of the Institute, the EC
has the power to make and frame bye-laws regarding the powers,
functions and conduct of business by Advisory Boards or Committees.
However, the Institute had not framed any bye-laws specifying the
criteria, methodology and documentation process to be adopted by the
Selection Committees for selection of research Fellows.

Out of 41 Fellows for internal research projects, two were selected for
three projects without any newspaper advertisement. In five cases,
Fellows whose applications were received after 14 to 61 days from the
last date for receipt were selected.

To make the selection process transparent, the basis of selecting the
Fellows should have been documented. Audit observed that the bases
of selecting the Fellows were not being documented by the Selection
Committees. Instead, only the names of the selected Fellows were
mentioned. Thus the selection process of the Fellows lacked
transparency.

In one case, the Institute invited (May 2007) applications from
candidates having Ph.D. in Economics or Management or having
publications of equivalent standard for appointment as research
Fellows but selected (February 2008) a candidate who had neither a
doctoral degree nor any publication. Accepting the facts, the Institute
clarified (April 2011) that the candidate was selected for his
exceptionally distinguished record. However, the minutes of the
Selection Committee did not contain any comment or justification
relaxing the qualifying criteria based on the Fellow’s ‘distinguished’

tecord.

The Institute stated (June 2012) that it was working towards initiating the
process of framing the bye-laws, keeping in view the ambit of the areas as

recommended by Audit.

82


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

2.9.3.3 Monitoring of research projects

The terms and conditions of appointment of Fellows provide for submission of

quarterly progress reports, as well as the dates of completion of the projects
and submission of final manuscripts. During the period 2005-11, the Institute
had 58 completed projects, 34 incomplete projects and 28 (18 internal and 10

external) other projects, which were not due for completion as of July 2011.

The following deficiencies regarding monitoring of research projects were

noticed.

Out of 58 completed projects (17 internal and 41 external), only 19 (16
internal and three external) projects (33 per cent) were completed
within the scheduled time. Of the remaining 39 projects which were
delayed, 23 projects were completed after delays ranging between
approximately one to seven years (as of July 2011). The delays were
mainly in respect of external projects (38 projects).

Out of 34 incomplete projects (six internal and 28 external), eight (four
internal and four external) projects involving expenditure of हैं 20.25
lakh were lying incomplete as the research Fellows had left without
submitting the final reports. Of the remaining incomplete projects, 11
projects were delayed by approximately one to nine years (as of July
2011).

To ensure the quality and timely completion of projects, regular
monitoring and review are essential. As per the terms and conditions
for appointment, the Fellows were required to submit quarterly
progress reports to the Institute. The Director reviewed the quarterly
progress reports. Audit observed that in 14 out of 24 external research
projects selected for scrutiny, the terms and conditions included a
clause regarding discontinuance of Fellowships in case of non-

submission of progress reports but the time frame for submission of the

progress reports was not stipulated. In the absence of such stipulations,
the Institute was not in a position to enforce the terms and conditions.

In respect of 41 internal projects, 76 out of 329 quarterly progress
reports were not submitted. Out of 253 such reports, 182 were
submitted late. Out of these 182 reports, 151 were submitted within
three months from the due date of submission of quarterly progress
reports, while delays in the case of 31 reports ranged between three
and 17 months. Audit observed that out of a total of 253 progress
reports, the Director had reviewed only 37 reports while the rest of the
reports (216) were not reviewed and were simply filed. Failure to

83


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

review the reports was fraught with the risks of the projects not
progressing in the right direction and their delayed completion.

The Institute took no action such as sending reminders or warnings or holding
up of funding and discontinuation of Fellowship against the defaulting Fellows
for late submission and non-submission of their quarterly progress reports.

Thus the Institute had an inadequate mechanism for monitoring the progress of
the projects, which adversely affected their timely completion. Consequently,
the research projects taken up for fulfilment of the Institute’s objectives were
delayed and the academic fraternity was deprived of the output in respect of
these areas.

The Institute stated (December 2011) that a mechanism for proper
implementation and monitoring of projects was being devised.

2.9.3.4 Publication of research work

The Institute’s MoA provides for
undertaking publication of books,
monographs, periodicals and
papers incorporating the results of
research. After receipt of final
reports from the Fellows, the

Reviewers. After their vetting,

these reports are sent to publishers as approved by the Publication Committee
of the Institute. Publication can also be got done directly by Fellows through
publishers of their choice, with due acknowledgement to the Institute in the
published research reports. In the case of research reports published by itself,
the Institute has to purchase a specified number of copies (100 to 175) which
are to be distributed free of cost to reputed Universities, Institutes, Indian

Missions etc.

Being a premier institution in the area of research, the Institute should have
published its research outputs and studies in a transparent and time-bound
manner. Audit observed that the Institute had been undertaking publication of
its research outputs since 2000-01. A total of 66 research project reports had
been published till July 2011. At the instance of Audit, the Institute prepared
(June 2009) guidelines for publication which, included peer review of the final
reports submitted by the Fellows, selection of publishers, terms and conditions
for publications etc. Scrutiny of records, however, showed that there were

84


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

several deficiencies in the area of publication of research projects as described
below:
e The Institute had not prescribed any time frame for publication of the
completed research projects.
© Only 23 out of 58* completed project reports were published. The
Institute took one to 28 months in entering into agreements with the
publishers for publication of these 23 project reports.
e The remaining 34 completed project reports were not published even
after time lags of one month to over five years from the dates of
completion.

© The process of selection of publishers was not documented, thereby

compromising transparency.

e In 14 out of 17 test-checked cases, no time schedule for publication
was incorporated in the agreements with the publishers. The dates of
receipt of published copies of books varied between 22 and 646 days
from the dates of agreements with the publishers.

e In accordance with the objectives of fostering academic contacts
through exchange of research materials, the Institute distributed copies
of books purchased from the publisher free of cost to reputed
Universities, Institutes, Indian Missions etc. A test check of 17 projects
revealed that the Institute had purchased (June 2006 to March 2011) a
total of 2264 copies of publications of research outputs of these
projects, but 88 per cent of the total stock (2003 copies valuing हैं. 6.24
lakh) remained undistributed as of July 2011.

The Institute attributed (June 2011) the delay in publication of research
projects mainly to: (i) research reports submitted by the Fellows not being
traceable (ii) review processes by the Reviewers and modification processes
by the Fellows remaining incomplete and (iii) Publication Committee
mectings not being held regularly. The reasons given revealed that the Institute
did not have a proper system for storage of research papers which was a
serious failure which had led to papers not being traceable. The reasons further
indicated lack of effective monitoring of the processes leading to the
publication of research reports. The system of mandatorily purchasing a
specified number of copies of books from publishers needed a relook as the
Institute was unable to distribute most of the copies. The Institute, however,

' One project being a documentary film was not required to be published.

85


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

assured (December 2011) that guidelines for publication were being revised in
the light of the audit observations.

2.9.3.5 Internal control on external research expenditure

The Institute exercised internal control on research expenditure, for which it
had adopted the procedure shown below:

obtained from Fellows

Scrutiny of expenditure statements and original vouchers given by
Fellows before reimbursement

Ensuring release of final payment only after receipt of the

Scrutiny of budget proposals on research projects

publishable manuscripts

Test check of records of 24 out of 79 external projects selected randomly,
brought out the following instances of violations of the above procedure:

e Project grants of ¥ 4.23 lakh were approved without obtaining budget
proposals from research Fellows in three cases. In 10 cases, approved
grants of 51.85 lakh were revised without recording any reasons and
without altering the head-wise allocations.

e Expenditure of ¥ 3.26 lakh was reimbursed in excess of the approved
grants in four cases.

e Interim payments of हैं 31.82 lakh were released before receipt of
progress reports in violation of project terms and conditions in seven
cases.

Thus, the internal control mechanism of the Institute was inadequate for
monitoring project expenditure. The Institute stated (December 2011) that the
audit observations would be taken care of with the streamlining of the
monitoring mechanism.

86


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Recommendations

The Institute may frame guidelines for selection of projects based on its
objectives. The process of selection of projects may be documented to
ensure transparency.

The Institute may formulate bye-laws specifying the criteria,
methodology and documentation process for transparent selection of
research Fellows.

The Institute may put in place an effective system for monitoring and
reviewing the research projects to ensure that the research Fellows
comply with the terms of the agreements with the Institute and complete
their projects on time.

The Institute may consider taking assistance of outside expert for
reviewing the quarterly progress reports in case it is not feasible for the
Director to review all the progress reports in addition to his/her
administrative duties.

The Institute may frame guidelines for timely publication of research
outputs and dissemination of its publications.

The Institute may widen the circle for distribution of its publications so
that its research outputs are utilized by more people and purchased
publications do not lie idle.

2.9.4 Fostering academic contacts

The Institute organizes seminars
and symposia on its own as well

as

Institutes with the objective of
fostering academic contacts within
India and abroad, as laid down in

its

symposia provide opportunities

in collaboration with other

MoA. These seminars and

for exchange of personnel and research materials.

87



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

The position of seminars organized during 2005-11 is given in Table-4.

Table-4
Seminars organised by the Institute Seminars organised in collaboration
Year NER Other than NER [| NER. Other than NER
Number us naan Number a moo Number 2 nia Number a moo

2005-06 | 0 | | 0 | | 1 | 7.42 | 1 | | 1.00" | 00 | 8 | 12.20
2006-07 | 0 | jo | | 1 | 19.38 | 1 | 2.00 | 0 | jo |
2007-08 3 8.15 0 0 2 3.53 4 15.49
2008-09 2 6.90 3 22.22 | 0 | 0 5 13.38
2009-10 1 1.96 3 22.04 4 6.65 5 18.66
2010-11 2 23.68 5 22.62 4 9.50 14 54.56
Total | 3 | 40.69 13 93.68 12 | 22.68 | | 36 | | 11429 |

2.9.4.1 Selection of issues for seminars and publication of proceedings

The Institute selects the topics of the seminars on the basis of proposals
submitted by the Fellows or collaborating Institutions. The seminar
proceedings are normally published and circulated among the research
Fellows and other participants. It was observed that the Institute had no
criteria for selection of issues for discussion at seminars or symposia and the
objectives sought to be achieved by holding these were not documented. The
Institute did not publish the proceedings of nine out of 21 seminars organised
by it. In respect of collaborative seminars, the Institute received only four
published proceedings in respect of 48 seminars. This indicated that the
Institute did not have a proper system for publishing seminar proceedings and
following up with collaborative institutions for receipt of the same.

In its reply as well as during the exit conference, the Institute stated (August
2011, December 2011) that some of the seminar proceedings had no merit for
publication but were useful in other ways. Regarding collaborative seminars,
the Institute stated (June 2012) that the publications of proceedings of
collaborative seminars were at the discretion of the organising institutions.

Audit is of view that even if the proceedings of some seminars were not
published, they should have been documented for internal use of the Institute.
Since the Institute released grants for the collaborative seminars, it should
have insisted that the proceedings were forwarded to it even though the same
may not have been published by the collaborating bodies.

88



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

2.9.4.2 Seminar expenditure

Grants released by the Ministry to the Institute have a condition that
allowances should be so regulated as not to exceed the corresponding
allowances sanctioned to Government employees. Further as per GFR 209(6)
(iv) (a) all grantee institutions which receive more than 50 per cent of their
recurring expenditure in the form of grant-in-aid, should ordinarily formulate
terms and conditions of service of their employees which are, by and large, not
higher than those applicable to similar categories of employees in Central
Government. In exceptional cases, relaxation may be made in consultation
with the Ministry of Finance.

In terms of the Ministry of Finance’s order of October 2008, participation in
conferences/seminars/study tours and presentation of papers etc. abroad in
cases where invitations are directly received by the officers by name, by virtue
of their expertise in a particular field, are to be treated as personal visits, for
which the officers would have to proceed on leave. Visits of the above nature
are to be allowed only if 100 per cent funding support is provided by the
organisers. Scrutiny revealed that the Institute, in violation of the aforesaid
order, provided financial assistance of = 7.10 lakh to five Fellows, who
attended seminars abroad, during the period from August 2009 to July 2010 on
direct invitations from the organisers. No relaxation as required under the Rule
mentioned above, had been obtained from the Ministry of Finance regarding
this matter.

2.9.5 Maintaining the library

The Institute’s library had a
collection of 13327 books as on 31
March 2011. During 2005-11, it
procured 5498 books valuing



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

₹ 85.69 lakh and 533 journals valuing हैं 73.39 lakh. Audit observed the
following shortcomings in the maintenance of the library:

Computerisation of library information is essential for proper
maintenance of a library. Audit observed that the library information
software (LSEase’), installed at a cost of % 2.60 lakh had several
constraints such as limitation of data entry, limitation of search field,
link with other databases, single tasking, non-availability of year-wise
reports etc. The software failed to generate information relating to
issued and returned books. Besides, it did not provide subject-wise
views of the library’s collection, making it difficult for readers to
search for books on specific subjects.

The MoA envisages that the Institute should make its library sources
available to the public for study and research purposes. However, the
Institute took no initiative to make its library accessible to the public.
Consequently, access to the library was limited to 33 to 58 Institute
Fellows and officials during 2005-11. The Review Committee
constituted by the Institute (as mentioned earlier in paragraph 2.9.3.1)
also recommended making of the library’s sources accessible to the
public. Thus, the objective of the Institute to extend library facilities to
the public was not fulfilled.

General Financial Rules 2005 provide that for libraries having not
more than 20,000 volumes, complete physical verification of books
should be done every year. Audit observed that physical verification of
library books had not been done since April 2006. Resultantly, the
actual number of books present in the library could not be ascertained
by Audit.

The Institute contended (December 2011) that access to the library was
restricted as this was not a general public library. The Institute’s reply was
contradictory to its objective of making its library sources available to the
public. Following the audit objection, the Institute announced (2012) the
availability of its library sources to the general public through its website.

Recommendation

The Institute may take steps to ensure optimum utilization of information
technology to make its library user-friendly.

? An indigenous library software developed by LIBSYS Corp.

90



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

2.9.6 Maintaining the museum

The Institute’s MoA stipulated
the establishing and maintaining
of a museum at the former
residence of Maulana Abul
Kalam Azad in Kolkata with the
objective of highlighting his life
and works as a distinguished
national leader and thinker. The a

Institute took over (September 2005) possession of the said building and
opened a museum there in November 2006. Audit noted the following:

¢ The Institute failed to make any addition to the museum’s original
collection of 22 personal belongings of Maulana Azad viz. the Bharat
Ratna award, his reading glasses, caps, trousers, cigarette case etc.,
which were acquired in October 2004. Although the Review
Committee appointed (July 2006) by the Institute (mentioned earlier in
paragraph 2.9.3.1) had recommended that efforts should be made to
procure valuable materials from different parts of India, no such efforts
seemed to have been made. It had also recommended that the museum
should have not only the items belonging to Maulana Azad but also
writings, photographs, audio and video materials that throw light on
the life, ideas and activities of Maulana Azad. No such additions had,
however, been made by the Institute.

e The Institute took no initiative to increase public awareness about the
museum. Audit observed that only 398 visitors had visited the museum
during January 2007 to July 2011.

Thus, the objective of setting up the museum, as envisaged in the MoA,
remained mostly unfulfilled due to lack of effective action on the part of the
Institute.

The Institute informed (December 2011) that an initiative had been taken for
publicity of the museum. The Institute also stated (June 2012) that it had
formed an internal sub-committee for the museum, to look into its affairs.

Recommendation

The Institute should take effective action to collect more writings,
photographs, audio and video materials ete. that throw light on the life, ideas
and activities of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad.

91


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Conclusion

The Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Institute of Asian Studies was created as a
centre for research and learning on developments in Asia from the middle of
the nineteenth century onwards, with special emphasis on their links with
India and to promote study and research on secularism and universal
brotherhood and on the life and works of Maulana Azad. Audit observed that a
number of research project proposals on developments in Asia seemed to be
unrelated to India. Similarly, some of the project proposals on secularism and
the life of Maulana Azad were not related to these areas. The Institute did not
have any policy to facilitate transparent selection of research Fellows. It had
an inadequate monitoring and review system, because of which it could not
ensure that the research Fellows complied with the terms of their agreements
with the Institute and completed their projects on time. Publication of research
reports was inordinately delayed. The library of the Institute was not initially
accessible to the public. Following the audit observation, the Institute
announced (2012) the availability of its library sources to the general public
through its website. Annual physical verification of library books had not been
carried out since April 2006. Proper efforts were not made to increase the
collection of the museum since its establishment by the Institute.

92


Annex-I

(Refers to paragraph 2.9.3.1)

Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Statement showing details of 16 research project proposals not linked with the objectives of the MoA

Sl.
No.

Title of the Project

Objective
under which
the project was
taken up

Institute's justification

Audit comments

Zionism and the state of
Israel :
a critical study

Asian
developments

Zionism and its critics are the heart
of Israeli position which required
attention of India. Hence, linked
with 3(i)(a) of MoA

Impact of Israeli position on
India not brought out in the
project proposal.

Israel leadership and
negotiations in context of
Arab Israel conflict 1990
onwards

Asian
developments

Tsraeli position was required
attention of India. Hence, linked
with 3(i)(a) of MoA

Impact of Israeli position on
India not brought out in the
project proposal.

Contemporary scenario of
Bihar politics: a political
economy approach

Secularism

Project is on secularism at state
level. Hence linked with 3(i)(e) of
MoA

Project proposal is on politics
of Bihar. No link with
secularism.

The heartland debate in
central Asia

Asian
developments

Study on the consequences of Soviet
disintegration which were crucial to
Indian foreign policy. Hence linked
with 3(i)(a) of MoA

Impact of consequences of
Soviet disintegration on India
not brought out in the project
proposal.

Politics of indebtedness of
indigenous people : issues,
policies, actions and.
consequences - study of
Purulia district

Secularism

Project is on secularism at regional
level. Hence linked with 3(i)(e) of
MoA

Project proposal is on socio-
economic and _ geopolitical
status of indigenous people of
Purulia district and not on
secularism.

Evolution of Russian
foreign policy, orientation
towards the central Asia
region (1992-2002) - the
first decade

Asian
developments

Study on the consequences of Soviet
disintegration which were crucial to
Indian foreign policy. Hence linked
with 3(i)(a) of MoA

Impact of consequences of
Soviet disintegration on India
was not brought out in the
project proposal.

From Siberia to Kazakh
steppes: re-exploring
regional histories रण
Eurasia

Asian
developments

Study on the consequences of Soviet
disintegration which were crucial to
Indian foreign policy. Hence, linked
with 3(i)(a) of MoA.

Impact of consequences of
Soviet disintegration on India
was not brought out in the
project proposal.

Addressing the challenges
of human security in
Afghanistan

Asian
developments

Afghanistan's current status is a
fundamental concer of India's
foreign policy. Hence, linked with
3(i)(a) of MoA

Impact of Afghanistan's
current status with respect to
India was not brought out in
the project proposal.

West Bengal since
partition 1947

Life and works
of Maulana
Azad

Maulana A.K. Azad was crucial to
post partition politician linked with
Bengal hence Project was on ideas
of Maulana Azad. Hence, linked
with 3(i)(a) of ४०५

Project proposal is on the
political position of Bengal
since Partition but not on the
life and works of Maulana
Azad.

93



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

[|
No.

Title of the Project

Objective
under which
the project was
taken up

Institute's justification

Audit comments

‘The debates on the Israeli
state and society in
transition, setting new
paradigms in the state and
nation building processes

Asian
developments

Project touches the Palestinian
question, which is crucial to India's
relations with West Asia. Hence,
linked with 3(i)(a) of MoA

Impact of the Palestinian
position on India not brought
out in the project proposal.

11.

The Caucasus ulcer:
changing dynamics of
crime-terror interaction in
the trans-Caucasus in post
9/11 era

Asian
developments

Terrorism in the Caucasus is linked
with terrorism in Kashmir. Hence,
linked with 3(i)(a) of MoA

Impact of terrorism in the
Caucasus on Kashmir/India
not brought out in the project
proposal.

Reflection of political
ideas on Chinese literature
in post 1949 period

Asian
developments

The change in China’s relations with
India was reflected in the attitude of
writers and required study. Hence,
linked with 3(i)(a) of MoA

Impact of changes in China’s
relationship with India was
not brought out in the project
proposal.

13.

Religion and politics in
Bangladesh : 1971 - 2004

Asian
developments

The importance of developments in
Bangladesh for India is self evident.
Hence, linked with 3(i)(a) of MoA

Impact of developments in
Bangladesh on India was not
brought out in the project
proposal.

Role of the Bengali press
in the Bengal renaissance
of the 19th century and in
the national movement of
the 20th century

Life and works
of Maulana
Azad

Maulana Azad was influenced by the
intellectual traditions of Bengal in
his youth, hence linked with
Maulana Azad's life and works.
Hence linked with 3(i)(a) of MoA

The project proposal was on
the role of Bengali press in
the Bengal renaissance and
not on the life and works of
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad.

15.

Central Asia: geopolitics,
security and regional
stability

Asian
developments

Study on the consequences of Soviet
disintegration which were crucial to
Indian foreign policy. Hence linked
with 3(i)(a) of MoA

Impact of the consequences of
the Soviet disintegration on
India was not brought out in
the project proposal.

The culture of history

Life and works
of Maulana
Azad

Study of the development of India's
cultural policies - which was linked
to the life and ideas of Maulana
Azad, who was the India's first
Minister of Culture. Hence linked
with 3(i)(a) of MoA

The project proposal was for a
study of the development of
India's cultural policies and
not on the life and works of
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad.

94



Report No, 14 of 2012-13

Highlights

> Out of 292 dental colleges, 75 per cent were established after an
amendment to the Dentists Act (Act) in 1993 to prevent the
mushrooming of such colleges. Of the 292 dental colleges, 152
colleges (52 per cent) were concentrated in five States. On the other
hand, only one dental college existed in the North-Eastern region,
indicating skewed distribution of dental colleges across the
country, which both the Dental Council of India (Council) and the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Ministry) failed to
prevent.

(Paragraph 3.9.1.1)

» The Ministry granted permission to establish 13 new dental
colleges despite negative recommendations of the Council. In two
cases, permission was given without adequate justification and in
five cases, the Ministry granted permission despite deficiencies
being noted during both the Council’s inspections and those
conducted by Special Investigation Teams (SITs) constituted by
the Ministry itself. In four cases, there were wide variations
between the reports of the Council and those of the SITs.

(Paragraph 3.9.1.2)

> Permissions for starting 128 post-graduate dental specialties in
Master of Dental Surgery courses in dental colleges were granted
despite negative recommendations of the Council. In 73 cases, the
Ministry bypassed the normal mechanism of the Council
conducting inspections as defined in the Act and its Regulations
and constituted its own inspection teams, citing shortage of dental
specialists.

(Paragraph 3.10)

> The Council was required to undertake periodical inspections of
colleges to ensure continued maintenance of minimum standards
of dental education. However, it did not put in place any system to
identify the dental institutions which had become due for such
periodical inspections and thus could not conduct them in time.



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Vv

Vv

Vv

Vv

Vv

(Paragraph 3.11.2)
In 15 out of 50 dental colleges, the shortage of teaching faculty
ranged from eight to 97 per cent. The shortage was far above the
minimum staffing pattern prescribed by the Council but it did not
seem to have taken any measures to address this pressing issue, as
it could provide no records regarding the same.

(Paragraph 3.13.2)

A total of 139 students in six dental colleges and 59 students in nine
colleges were given admissions for Bachelor of Dental Surgery and
Master of Dental Surgery courses respectively, in excess of the
sanctioned number of seats.

(Paragraph 3.14)

For the purpose of regulating the dental profession, the Council
was required to maintain a register containing details of all
practicing dentists in India, known as the Indian Dentists Register,
as laid down in the Act. However, the Council was not maintaining
such a register.

(Paragraph 3.15)

The Council failed to implement its policy decision of monitoring
faculty attendance through a biometric system. The entire
expenditure incurred on the procurement of biometric machines
for this purpose at a cost of 71.32 crore, was thus rendered
unfruitful.

(Paragraph 3.17.1)
Dental institutions inspected by the Council are required to pay
inspection fees to the latter towards renewal/ recognition/
verification of compliance reports for various courses. As of March
2011, fees amounting to रैं 7.07 crore were outstanding against such

institutions.

(Paragraph 3.18)

96


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

है

Recommendations

The Ministry may consider formulating a policy to encourage the
establishment of dental colleges in States having shortages of such
colleges.

In order to adhere to the minimum standards of dental education, the
Ministry should ensure fulfilment of the norms laid down under the
regulations of the Council while according permissions for
establishment of new colleges or courses.

In cases of serious deficiencies noticed in the Council’s inspection
reports, Enquiry Commissions, as provided under Section 54 of the
Dentists Act, 1948, may be constituted and appropriate action may be
taken to improve its functioning.

The Council may lay down a schedule for inspections and scrupulously
conduct them to ensure that recognized dental colleges continue to
comply with the norms laid down for recognition.

The Ministry should take action to derecognize dental colleges which
do not conform to the prescribed standards of dental education.

The Council should regularly monitor the adequacy of faculty in dental
colleges and ensure compliance as per the norms.

The Council should initiate appropriate action against colleges which
admit excess students, to discourage the practice.

The Council should maintain the Indian Dentists Register as required
under the Dentists Act.

A suitable mechanism should be set up by the Council for redressal of
complaints.

The Council should establish an effective mechanism for recovery of its
dues. Suitable provisions should be incorporated in its Regulations,
defining penal action against defaulters.

3.1

Introduction

The Dental Council of India (Council), a statutory body, was constituted on 12
April 1949 under an Act of Parliament viz. the Dentists Act, 1948. The
Council is a recommendatory body to the Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare (Ministry) and acts as its technical arm for regulation of dental

97



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

education, the dental profession and dental ethics. The mandate of the Council
as per the Act is as given in the box below:

Prior to the amendment to the Dentists Act 1948, the minimum requirements
for opening of a new dental college or a post-graduate dental department were
laid down by the Council and approved by the Ministry. However the final
decision rested with the Governments of the States, where the proposed
colleges / departments were to be located.In order to strengthen the role of the
Council and the Ministry in regulating dental education in India, the Dentists
Act was amended on 27 August 1992. With this amendment, prior permission
of the Ministry became mandatory for establishing any dental college,
increasing seats in existing colleges and introducing new courses in a college.

The primary input used in the regulatory process by the Council is the system
of inspections. On the basis of these inspections, the Council recommends
recognition of colleges, starting new courses, increasing the number of seats in
courses, de-recognising courses or colleges ete. Based on these
recommendations and after calling for such other particulars as it deems
necessary, the Ministry may either approve or disapprove the proposals.

३.2. Organizational Structure

The Council functions under the administrative control of the Ministry.
Section 3(1) of the Act provides for its constitution and composition. The
Council has six constituents representing the Central Government, the State
Governments, universities, dental colleges, the Medical Council of India and
private practitioners of dentistry in the following composition: -

98


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

(a) six members nominated by the Central Government;

(b) one registered dentist from each State;

(c) one member from each university which grants recognised dental
qualifications;

(d) not more than four members elected from dental colleges in the
States, by Principals, Deans, Directors and Vice-Principals and
Heads of dental wings of medical colleges in the States;

(e) one member from the Medical Council of India; and

(f) one member nominated by each State Government from among
persons registered either in the medical register or the dental
register of the State.

The above members constitute the General Body of the Council. The Council
also has an Executive Committee, which acts as its governing body. This
Committee deals with all procedural, financial and day-to-day activities and
affairs of the Council. The President, Vice-President and the members of the
Executive Committee are elected by the Council from amongst its members.
The Director-General of Health Services is an ex-officio member, both of the
General Body and the Executive Committee. The elected President and the
Vice-President are the ex-officio Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the
Executive Committee respectively.

3.3 Income and expenditure

During the years 2006-07 to 2010-11, the Council received grants amounting
to = 94 lakh from the Ministry. It also generated its own receipts, amounting
to % 74.50 crore by way of inspections and application fees from dental
colleges and interest carned from fixed deposits. The total expenditure
incurred by the Council during this period amounted to 30.13 crore. The
details are given in the table below.

Table : Income and expenditure of the Council

(₹ in lakh)
2006-07 18.00 722.51 740.51 377.05 363.46
2007-08 19.00 1077.61 1096.61 570.15 526.46
2008-09 19.00 1474.74 1493.74 499.60 994.14
2009-10 19.00 1792.34 1811.34 622.84 1188.50
2010-11 19,00 2383.22 2402.22 943.09 1459.13

99


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

3.4 Audit mandate

The audit of the Council is conducted by the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India under Section 19(2) of the Comptroller and Auditor General’s
(Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 and Section 53A of the
Dentists Act, 1948.

3.5 Audit objectives

The performance audit was conducted to verify whether:
a) the Council was fulfilling its mandate in an efficient and effective
manner; and

b) the Ministry was fulfilling its role effectively in connection with
the functioning of the Council .
3.6 Audit scope
The performance audit involved the examination of records related to the
functioning of the Council and relevant records of the Ministry for the period
2006-07 to 2010-11.
3.7 Audit criteria

The audit criteria were derived from the following:

. The Dentists Act, 1948 along with the Dentists Amendment
Act,1993;
. The Dental Council of India (Establishment of New Dental

Colleges, Opening of New or Higher Courses of Study or
Training and Increase of Admission Capacity in Dental
Colleges) Regulations, 2006 (called Council Regulations, 2006

hereafter);
° Miscellaneous Regulations, 2007;
e Dentists (Code of Ethics) Regulations, 1976;
e Instructions issued by the Ministry and Council from time to

time; and

. General Financial Rules and other established procedures.

3.8 Audit methodology

The performance audit of the Council commenced with an entry conference
with the Secretary, Dental Council of India and other officials of the Council
on 21 October 2011. During the entry conference, the audit objectives, audit
criteria, scope of audit and methodology were discussed. The field work,

100


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

comprising examination of records and interviews with the officials of the
Council and the Ministry, was conducted from 21 October 2011 to 24 January
2012.

The sample size and selection criteria for detailed audit were as given below:

e Hundred per cent cases (16) of establishing new dental colleges where
approvals were granted despite negative recommendations of the
Council (13) or where permissions were granted for establishment with
admission capacities in excess of those recommended by the Council

(3).

e Twenty per cent of cases i.e. 24 out of 128 cases where Master of
Dental Surgery (MDS) courses were started despite negative
recommendations of the Council.

e Hundred per cent cases (32) of increasing and restoring admission
capacity in Bachelor of Dental Surgery (BDS) courses.

e Hundred per cent cases (5) of reopening of closed dental colleges.

e Hundred per cent cases (6) where approvals had been granted in 2002-
03 or before, but recognitions were still pending.

e Ten per cent of 5044 inspections carried out by the Council, i.c., 504
inspections.

The audit findings were issued to the Council and the Ministry on 10 May
2012. The exit conference to discuss the audit findings was held on 26 June
2012 with the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the
Secretary, Dental Council of India. The Ministry’s response (June 2012) to the
draft performance audit report has been duly incorporated in this report. The
Council’s response has not been received as of July 2012.

We acknowledge the cooperation and assistance rendered by the Council and
the Ministry during the course of this performance audit.

3.9 Maintenance of standards of dental education

3.9.1 Establishment and recognition of new dental colleges

The Council is entrusted with the maintenance of uniform standards of dental
education. As stated earlier, prior permission of the Ministry became
mandatory for establishing new dental colleges as well as for increasing the
number of seats and starting new courses, subsequent to the amendment
carried out in the Dentists Act in 1992.

101


As per Regulation 6 of the Council (Establishment of New Dental Colleges, Opening of New or Higher Courses

Report No. 14 of 2012-13

The Ministry forwards all proposals relating to the above matters, to the
Council for its evaluation. As stated earlier, the Council, thereafter, conducts
inspections and sends recommendations to the Ministry. The Ministry takes
decisions on the proposals afier considering these recommendations and
gathering any other information it deems necessary.

The norms for establishing a new dental college are given in Box 2.

Box 2: Norms for establishing a dental college

of Study or Training and Increase of Admission Capacity in Dental Colleges) Regulations, 2006, the following
important norms are required to be adhered to for establishing a new college:-

1.

The dental college has to be constructed on a plot of land owned/leased by the applicant. The land should
not be less than five acres. The college should increase the constructed area, in a phased manner, as per the
following norms:-

50 30,000 sq ft 50,000 sq ft
100 60,000 sq ft 100,000 sq ft

Hostel accommodation in separate blocks for boys and girls and accommodation for staff, to the extent of
50 per cent of the strength, should be available in the same plot. This should be in addition to the built-up
area for the college.

Affiliation to the concerned University, valid for the entire duration of course has to be obtained by the
applicant requesting for establishment of a college.

The applicant should not have already admitted students to the proposed dental college.

The applicant should own and manage a General Hospital of not less than 100 beds in the campus of the
proposed dental college or in proximity of a recognized Medical College. An undertaking that the Medical
College would facilitate training to dental students should be provided. Alternatively, the proposed dental
college should have tied up, at least for five years, with a Government General Hospital having 100 beds
and located within a radius of 10 km from the proposed dental college.

The applicant should manage a dental clinic in the proposed dental college, with not less than 10 dental
chairs with specifications as prescribed in the regulations.

The applicant should make provision for teaching faculty in a phased manner as shown below:-

| 580 | 21 2 |[10|31 4 | 20 | ¢ | 11 | 30
| 10 | 2|3 fle} 4 | [30] 6 | 3 | 40

P»Professors R»Readers L»Lecturers

102



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

3.9.1.1 Spread of dental colleges in the country

Sections 10A, 10B and 10C were introduced in the Dentists Act, 1948 through
amendments in 1993, mainly to check the mushrooming growth of dental
colleges. The amendments made it mandatory for an applicant to obtain prior
permission of the Central Government for starting dental colleges.

There were 292 dental colleges, comprising 40 Government and 252 private
ones in the country, as of March 2012. Out of these, 218 dental colleges, (75
per cent) were established after 1993 i.e., afier the amendment.

Audit noted that 52 per cent dental colleges were concentrated in five States',
where 102 colleges were opened after the 1993 amendment, whereas for all
the North-Eastern States, there was only one dental college and not a single
college had been opened since the amendment. (The State-wise distribution of
dental colleges is shown in Annex-I)

In its communication to the State Governments regarding dental health care
services in rural areas, the President of the Council had observed (December
2011) that there had been an unprecedented explosion of dental colleges in
India since Independence. About 25000 graduate and about 3500 post-
graduate dental students were passing out of dental colleges with very bleak
job opportunities.

The Ministry stated (January 2012) that no specific regulation had been
enacted to establish dental colleges in disturbed areas or any other areas where
the private sector might hesitate to enter. The Ministry also contended (June
2012) that the role of the Central Government was limited as far as setting up
of new dental colleges in any particular region was concerned as the State
Governments had to determine the desirability of setting up dental colleges in
proportion to the existing population of particular regions.

It is clear from the facts mentioned earlier that despite the amendment carried
out in 1993, there had been a mushrooming of colleges in some States besides
skewed distribution of the same across the country, which both the Council
and the Ministry failed to prevent.

1 Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu

103


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Recommendation

The Ministry may consider formulating a policy to encourage the
establishment of dental colleges in States having shortages of such colleges.

3.9.1.2 Establishment of dental colleges

As per Regulations 8 and 9 of the Council Regulations, 2006, the Council has
to evaluate the proposals submitted by applicants to ascertain the desirability
and feasibility of setting up dental colleges. After evaluation of the proposals
and conducting physical inspections, it has to send its recommendations to the
Ministry. The Council has to reconsider its recommendations, after taking into
account, new or additional information as may be forwarded by the Ministry
and re-submit its reports, if so required by the Ministry.

Further, as per Section 10A (4) of the Act, the Central Government may, after
considering the proposals and the recommendations of the Council and after
obtaining, where necessary, such other particulars as may be considered
necessary, either approve (with such conditions, if any, as it may consider
necessary) or disapprove the proposals and any such approvals would be a
permission to establish dental colleges. Before disapproving any case, the
Ministry has to give a reasonable opportunity to the applicant to make a
written representation against the decision.

During the period under review, the Ministry accorded permission for the
establishment of 82 dental colleges. However, it was noticed that out of these
colleges, permission for 13 new colleges” was given by the Ministry, despite
negative recommendations by the Council.

The major deficiencies on the basis of which the Council gave negative
recommendations for these 13 new colleges included the following:

° Shortage of faculty as compared to the prescribed norms for
medical, dental and para-dental staff.

° Deficiencies in infrastructure like college buildings, libraries,
attached hospitals, hostels etc.

2 (j) Aditya Dental College, Beed, Maharashtra (ii) Hindustan Institute of Dental Sciences,
U.P. (iii) Institute of Dental Sciences, Bhubaneswar (iv) Maharashtra Institute of Dental
Sciences & Research, Latur (v) NIMS Jaipur (vi) Nootan Dental College & Hospital, Gujarat
(vii) Rishiraj Keer Dental College (viii) Singhad Dental College & Hospital, Pune (ix) Sofia
Dental College, Trichy (x) PDM Dental College & Research Institute, Bahadurgarh (xi)
Vallinayaki Dental College & Hospital, Pondicherry (xii) Vyas Dental College & Hospital
(xiii) Yogita Dental College & Hospital

104



Report No. 14 of 2012-13
. Deficiencies in clinical material in terms of dental chairs,
patients and other equipment.

The detailed college-wise position of approvals given by the Ministry despite
negative recommendations by the Council, is given at Annex-II. Some of the
cases are discussed below:

a. Permission by the Ministry without justifiable reasons

In the following two cases outlined in the table below, the Ministry overruled
the recommendations of the Council without any further verification or
justifiable reasons. The analysis of shortcomings pointed out by the Council
and the views of the Ministry for overruling the same, along with the
comments of Audit, are summarized below:

worked for less than
one year in their
respective previous
institutes, which
was less than the

1. Nootan Dental |e Seven medical | The Ministry stated that the
College and teaching staff did | reasons for the Council not
Hospital, Gujarat not possess | accepting certain faculty
for the Session qualifications as per | members were not fully justified.
2006-07 MCI norms. Further, the Council itself had
(details in S. No. 1 |« The Principal and | accepted medical faculty with
of Annex-II) two Readers had | MBBS degrees as lecturers in

other colleges. After examination
in the Ministry, the permission to
start the dental college with
reduced intake of 50 students was
granted (22 September 2006).

norms.

° One Associate
Professor was not
present during the
inspection.

Audit comments: The Council had rejected the proposals as the faculty members did not
possess the required educational qualifications as prescribed by the Medical Council of India.
The Ministry gave an acceptance to the proposal on the ground that the Council itself had
accepted medical faculty with MBBS degrees as lecturers in other colleges. The reason
advanced by the Ministry, even if true, is a poor rationalization of an incorrect decision as a
wrong acceptance in one case cannot be used to relax the provisions in another case without
any other justification. Besides, the Ministry had earlier rejected the case on 31 August 2006
on the basis of the Council’s recommendations, but reversed its decision within a month.



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

2. Rishiraj Keer Dental |e Deficiencies in | The Ministry stated that on the
College for the faculty orders of Supreme Court, the
Session 2006-07 © Shortage of dental | applicant was directed to give its
(details in Sl. No.2 chairs representation within two days
of Annex-IT) © Inadequate clinical | and the Ministry was directed to

material give a personal hearing. After
© Shortage of | getting the compliance report of
infrastructure the applicant, a Special
+ Shortage in | Investigative Team (SIT) was
attached hospital __| deputed to inspect the college. On
the basis of the report of the SIT,
permission was granted for a
reduced intake of 50 instead of
100 BDS students

Audit comments: The reply of the Ministry is factually incorrect as the records revealed that
permission was granted by the Ministry on the basis of a compliance report by the college and
not that of the SIT. As per the records, the Ministry gave permission stating that “based on the
documents submitted by the college authorities along with compliance report, the deficiencies
pointed out by the Council did not seem to exist”. Further, in respect of faculty and other
additional deficiencies, the Ministry stated that “the Council have not substantiated these
deficiencies and also earlier team had not found these deficiencies”. Further, the Council’s
first inspection only reported deficiency in faculty whereas its subsequent inspection within
one month, indicated deficiencies on account of faculty, dental chairs, clinical material,
infrastructure and attached hospital. The Ministry did not ask the Council for the reasons for
the divergent findings and no further inspection or compliance verification was carried out.
Thus, both the Council’s inspections and the Ministry’s decision lacked transparency.

b. Permission by the Ministry despite deficiencies being pointed out both
by the Council and SITs

Out of the remaining 11 new colleges, in nine cases’, the Ministry constituted
SITs to inspect the colleges. These colleges approached the Supreme Court
against rejection of their cases. The Court directed the Government to give a
personal hearing to the colleges by specified dates, after which the Ministry
could give its decisions. Out of these nine cases, in five cases*, the SIT
inspection reports also pointed out deficiencies (details in serial numbers 3-7
of Annex —II). However, the Ministry ignored the deficiencies pointed out in

3 (i) Aditya Dental College, Beed, Maharashtra (ii) Hindustan Institute of Dental Sciences,
U.P. (iii) Institute of Dental Sciences, Bhubneshwar (iv) Maharashtra Institute Of Dental
Sciences & Research, Latur (v) NIMS Jaipur (vi)Singhad Dental College & hospital, Pune
(vii) Sofia Dental College, Trichy (viii) PDM Dental College And Research Institute,
Bahadurgarh (ix) Vyas Dental College& Hospital

(i) Institute of Dental Sciences, Bhubneshwar (ii) Maharashtra Institute Of Dental Sciences
& Research, Latur (iii)Singhad Dental College & hospital, Pune (iv) Sofia Dental College,
Trichy (v) Vyas Dental College& Hospital

106



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

the inspections done by the Council and the SITs and gave permissions for the
establishment of the colleges.

९ Wide variations in inspection reports of the Council and SITs:

In the remaining four’ cases, Audit noticed wide variations between the
findings of the Council and the SITs (Annex-III). The two sets of inspections
were carried out within short gaps of one to two months and the SITs
disagreed with the findings of the Council’s inspection team on most issues,
including those related to infrastructure. This brought into question the quality
of inspections carried out by the Council and the SITs.

The Ministry stated (June 2012) that as per the provisions of the Dentists Act
1948 and the subsequent amendment in 1993, the Central Government was the
final authority for granting permission for establishment of new dental
colleges and even after receiving negative recommendations from the Council,
which was a technical recommendatory body, the Central Government could
gather further information from any person, authority or institution concerned,
through any means which included sending special investigation teams to the
concerned institutions before reaching the final decision on the matter. Hence,
the Central Government had acted very well within the powers conferred by
the provisions of the Dentists Act, 1948. The Ministry further stated that the
investigation teams were deputed from reputed institutes of the Central
Government under Section 10A (4) of the Act and it could not be concluded at
one go that the reports submitted by SITs were not reliable as compared to the
recommendations of the Council.

The Ministry’s reply may be viewed in light of the fact that four out of nine
reports of the SIT were at wide variance with those of the Council. The
Ministry, in its reply has also stated that the reports of the SIT cannot be said
to be unreliable. If this is taken to be correct, serious doubts can be raised
about the inspection process of the Council. Section 54 of the Act provides for
ion of Enquiry to be appointed by the Ministry when it appears that
the Council is not complying with any of the provisions of the Act.

a Commiss:

The Ministry should have appointed such a commission to enquire into these
cases. The cases where the Ministry overruled the Council and gave

5. (Aditya Dental College, Beeds, Maharastra, (ji) PDM Dental College and Research
Institute, Bahadurgarh (iii) Hindustan Institute of Dental Sciences, Noida, Uttar Pradesh and
(iv) NIMS, Jaipur.

107


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

permission despite several deficiencies being mentioned in the latter’s
inspections, pointed towards lack of transparency in the approval process.

3.10 Introduction of new post-graduate specialties

During 2006-07 to 2010-11, 706 post-graduate specialties were approved by
the Ministry, whereas the Council had given positive recommendations in only
578 cases. Audit test-checked 24 out of the 128 cases where the Council had
given negative recommendations on account of major deficiencies relating to
faculty and infrastructure after conducting inspections, but were overruled by
the Ministry. It was observed that in 22 out of the 24 cases test-checked, the
Ministry had constituted SITs, the main reason being severe shortage of dental
specialists in the country. The findings of the SIT were at wide variance with
those of the Council. The detailed position of these cases is given in Annex-
Iv.

In the 22 cases in which the Ministry had constituted SITs, the acceptance of
the SIT’s reports by the Ministry, implied that the reports of the Council were
incorrect. Commission of Enquiry should have been set up in these cases also.

The Ministry stated (June 2012) that it had granted permission for these
specialties as there was a shortage of dental specialists across the country and
also, that it had the power to depute SITs under Section 10A(4).

The reply of the Ministry is not acceptable as the Council, in its
communication to the State Governments, as stated earlier, had observed
(December 2011) that a very ‘healthy number’ of students (about 25000 dental
graduates and about 3500 dental post-graduate students) were passing out of
dental colleges with very ‘bleak job opportunities’, implying that there was no
shortage of dental specialists in the country.

108


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

3.11 Regular Inspections

3.11.1 Annual Renewal Inspections

As per Regulations 6 and 10 (4) of the Council’s Regulations, 2006, initial
permission to establish a new dental college is granted for one year, which is
to be renewed on a yearly basis, after verifying the phased expansion of
infrastructure facilities and the number of required faculty as per norms, till

the first batch of students takes the final year examination.

These renewals are granted by the Ministry on the basis of recommendations
arising out of the annual renewal inspections conducted by the Council.

During 2006-07 to 2010-11, 580 renewals were granted by the Ministry for
continuing BDS courses. Out of these, in nine cases (Annex-V), renewals
were granted despite negative recommendations by the Council. In two
cases, renewals were granted to colleges for admission capacities in
excess of those recommended by the Council.

¢ In five® out these nine cases (at serial numbers | to 5 of Annex-V),
recommendations of the Council were overlooked on the grounds that
these were Government colleges and assurances had been obtained
from them that they would rectify the deficiencies pointed out by the
Council.

© Inrespect of one case’, the Council had stated that the Principal did
not have the requisite teaching experience. The Ministry, on the other
hand, had pointed out (June 2007) that the same person had been found
acceptable as the Principal during the first year’s inspection conducted
on 21 August 2006. The fact that six faculty members, i.e. the Principal
and five others were private practitioners and thus were not
acceptable by the Council, was overlooked by the Ministry on the
ground that these were new deficiencies and notarized affidavits to the
contrary had been provided by the college.

¢ In one case*, permission was granted despite non-fulfilment of norms
relating to the infrastructure of the required hospital, which was
incomplete at the time of granting the permission. The Ministry stated
(June 2012) that the ground on which a negative recommendation was
given by Council did not appear to be valid.

5 (i) Dr. Harvansh Singh Judge Institute of Dental Sciences (27 year renewal, 3" year and 5"

year) (ii) Govt. Dental College, Raipur (5" year renewal) (iii) Indira Gandhi Govt. Dental
College, 2"! year renewal

20) Purvanchal Dental College-2™’ year renewal

36) PDM Dental College-2™ year renewal

109


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

e In the remaining two casi
granted after the Council gave negative recommendations on the
compliance reports, without any further verification. The Ministry
stated (June 2012) that the responses received from these colleges were
justified and hence, the permissions were given.

» permissions for reduced capacity were

The Ministry justified its action on the basis of powers conferred by the Act
and stated (June 2012) that the Council was only a recommendatory body and
the Ministry could overrule it after obtaining information as deemed
necessary.

While it is accepted that the Ministry has powers to overrule the Council, it
should not violate the mandated norms for dental education contained in the
Council’s Regulations, 2006.

3.11.2 Periodical inspections of recognised dental colleges.

The Council had laid down (June 2007) a policy for periodical inspections of
dental colleges for continued recognition of dental qualifications to ensure the
maintenance of minimum standards of dental education. The prescribed
periodicity was once in every block of five years after the recognition of a
college. However, it was observed that the Council had not formulated any
system to identify the colleges that had become due for periodical inspections
in accordance with this policy. Consequently, the Council was unable to
adhere to its own norms for timely inspections.

Test check of the records of 24 out of 240 recognised dental colleges revealed
that periodic inspections of eight recognised colleges, established between
1982 and 2007 (Annex-VI) had not been conducted since their recognition. In
respect of 14 other colleges, though periodic inspections had not been done,
inspections had been conducted for purposes such as increase in seats, starting
new courses etc. In the remaining two colleges, viz. Punjab Government
Dental College and Hospital, Amritsar, and Government Dental College and
Hospital, Afzalgunj, Hyderabad, inspections were carried out by the Council
in 2010-11, after more than 33 years and 10 years respectively. In the case of
the Punjab Government Dental College and Hospital, Amritsar, gross
deficiencies of faculty and infrastructure required for teaching BDS courses
were found, but the Government Dental College and Hospital, Afzalgunj,

20) Aditya Dental College-2™ year renewal, (ii) New Horizon Dental College & Institute-2™
year renewal.

110


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Hyderabad was found to be functioning satisfactorily. Absence of periodic
inspections exposed dental students to the risk of sub-standard levels of
education.

Recommendation

The Council may lay down a schedule for inspections and scrupulously
conduct them to ensure that recognized dental colleges continue to comply
with the norms laid down for recognition.

3.12 De-recognition of dental colleges

Section 16 (A) of the Act stipulates that whenever it appears to the Council
that an institution or a college does not, in the matter of staff, equipment,
accommodation, training and other facilities, satisfy the prescribed standards,
the Council shall make a recommendation for de-recognition to the Ministry.
The Ministry, after considering such a recommendation, may send it to the
Government of the State in which the institution is situated. The State
Government, after seeking clarification from the institution within a
reasonable period, shall make its recommendations to the Ministry. The
Ministry thereafter, may issue a notification on de-recognition of the said
college.

Audit found that the Council conveyed (February 2007 and April, June,
December 2008) recommendations to the Ministry for de-recognition of BDS
degrees in respect of nine colleges on account of serious deficiencies related to
infrastructure, clinical material and faculty. The Ministry, however, did not
withdraw recognition of five of these dental colleges (Annex-VII) as of
December 2011. In respect of the remaining four colleges, the Council revised
its recommendations on the basis of justifications given by the State
Governments.

In the cases of the remaining five colleges, the Ministry did not take any
action to withdraw recognition, despite the passage of over three years from
the initial recommendations of the Council.

The Ministry stated (December 2011) that the decision for de-recognition was
not taken pending comments from the State Government. It further clarified
that if the degrees of the colleges had been de-recognised, without receipt of
the comments of the State Governments concerned, the latter might not co-
operate while shifting the students from the de-recognised colleges. The
Ministry informed (June 2012) that in one college (Jamanlal Goenka Dental
College, Akola), the final decision by the Ministry would be taken shortly.

111



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

The reply may be seen in light of the fact that three to five years have already
elapsed since the Council forwarded its recommendations for de-recognizing
the colleges. To safeguard the students’ interests, the Ministry should have
withdrawn recognition after the current batches had passed out and not
allowed any further admissions. It is pertinent to note that these institutions are
located in States having large concentrations of dental colleges and shifting
the students from institutions with inadequate facilities to better institutions
was not likely to pose serious challenges. The State Governments had also
committed, in the form of essentiality certificates, to take responsibility of
such students in case the institutions were de-recognised.

Recommendation

The Ministry should take action to derecognize dental colleges which do not
conform to the prescribed standards of dental education.

३.13. Issues related to faculty
3.13.1 Database of dental faculty

The Council was maintaining a database of all faculty members working in
various colleges in India. The database contained (October 2011) a total of
21362 entries. Analysis of the database revealed that in 412 cases of faculty
members, there were repetitions of entries with slight modifications in name,
date of birth, father’s name etc. but having the same essential details like
Permanent Account Number (PAN), etc. This revealed that the database of
the Council was faulty. The possibility of the same person claiming
employment at more than one college could also not be ruled out.

The Council stated that it was in the process of developing new software to
prevent such misconduct. Further, this matter, as conveyed by Audit, had
been placed before the Executive Committee of the Council for consideration.

3.13.2 Acute shortage of teaching staff

Adequacy of teaching staff is the most important element for ensuring
maintenance of minimum standards of dental education. The staffing norms of
the Council as per the provisions of Regulation 6 of the Council Regulations,
2006, prescribe appointment of 11 and 13 Readers for 50 and 100 admissions
respectively. Similarly, the prescribed ratio for Lecturers or Senior Lecturers
is 30 and 40 respectively. As stated earlier, Section 16(A) of the Act stipulates
that if an institution does not satisfy the requirements of the Council in matters
of staff, equipment etc., the Council can recommend for its derecognition.

112



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Out of 292 dental colleges in the country, the Council could produce
information about the faculty of only 50 colleges, for the period between
January and June 2011, indicating that they did not have the required data
regarding the faculty of all the dental colleges. Audit noticed shortages of staff
in 15 such colleges as detailed in Annex-VIII. It was observed that the
shortages of teaching faculty ranged between eight and 97 per cent in these

cases. In 13 of these cases, the shortfalls exceeded 50 per cent either in respect

of Readers or Sr. Lecturers/ Lecturers or both.

Thus, there were significant shortfalls against the prescribed staffing pattern.
However, no records were provided by the Council indicating any action being
taken to maintain minimum standards of dental education.

Recommendation

* The Council should regularly monitor the adequacy of faculty in dental
colleges and ensure compliance as per the norms.

3.14 Excess Admissions

As per Section 10 B (3) and explanation 2 below Section 10 A of the Dentists
Act, the Council decides the maximum number of seats in any course of a
dental college. If any college admits students in excess of the admission
capacity fixed by the Council, the degrees awarded by the college are not to be
recognised for the purpose of the Act.

The Council obtains a list of admitted students from each college every year
after admissions are over. Audit found that during 2006-07 to 2010-11, 139
students in six dental colleges for and 59 students in nine colleges were given
admissions for BDS and MDS courses respectively in excess of the sanctioned
seats. (Annex-IX),

The Council did not take any action under the provisions of Section 10B of the
Act. Admissions in excess of sanctioned capacities were occurring
consistently from 2006-07 to 2010-11, which indicated the lack of proper
action by the Council to curb such instances.

113



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

3.15 Non-maintenance of Indian Dentists Register

In terms of Section 18 (1) of the Dentists Act, in order to regulate the dental
profession, the Council has to maintain a register of dentists known as the
Indian Dentists Register, consisting of the entries made in the State registers of
dentists. Further, in terms of sub-section (2) of the Act, each State Dental
Council’, has to supply to the Council 20 printed copies of its Dentists
Register after the first day of April of each year. Each State Council has a
Registrar who may also act as a Secretary and as a Treasurer to the State
Council. The Registrar has to inform the Council of all additions to and other
amendments in the State Register, without delay.

Audit observed that the Council was not maintaining the Indian Dentists
Register. The absence of information on practicing dentists in India would
hamper effective regulation of the profession of dentistry. The Council stated
(February 2012) that despite repeated reminders, the State Dental Councils did
not give the required information and as such, it was not feasible for it to
compile and maintain the Indian Dentists Register.

If it was facing problems in collecting the information, the Council should
have approached the Ministry to help it to coordinate with the State
Governments in collecting in obtaining the same.

10 As per Sections 21 and 22 of the Act, all State Governments were to constitute Dental
Councils either singly or jointly with other States,

114


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

3.16 Complaints Redressal Mechanism and monitoring by the Council
and the Ministry

As stated earlier, regulating the dental profession is a part of the mandate of
the Council. As per Section 17A of the Act, the Council has framed the
Dentists (Code of Ethics) Regulations, 1976. Audit noted that the Council as
well as the Ministry had been receiving various types of complaints related to
unethical practices by colleges, faculty and practitioners. Complaints
forwarded to the Council by the Ministry were further forwarded to the
concerned State Governments for remedial action, with requests to intimate
the results of the action taken.

Audit, however, found that there was no mechanism, either in the Council or
in the Ministry for following up these complaints. No complaint register was
being maintained by the Council to track the status of the complaints.

3.17 Administrative Issues

3.17.1 Centralized biometric attendance system for the teaching staff

The Council observed that the teaching staff of dental institutions visited the
colleges only for a few days or just during inspections. The Executive
Committee of the Council decided (October 2009) to install biometric
machines in all the dental colleges. | The expenses related to the installation
of the biometric machines were to be borne by the Council. The Ministry
approved (December 2009) the decision of the Council on the ground that this
would improve dental education in the country.

The Council awarded (February 2010) the work of installation of the biometric
machines in around 290 colleges to M/s Rasilant Technologies Private Ltd. the
only firm which was found to be possessing the required technical
qualification after the tendering process, at the rate of हैं 54,240 per machine.
Apart from this, annual maintenance charges (AMC) of % 10,848/- per
machine were also payable. The firm started phase-wise installations in the
colleges from March 2010 and the last installation was carried out in April

115


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

2011. Scrutiny in audit revealed that the firm installed biometric machines in
267 out of the 290 dental colleges. In 131 out of these 267 colleges, the
machines were reported to be non-functional. In spite of this, the Council
made payments amounting to 1.32 crore to the firm from May 2010 to
January 2011.

In view of the numerous complaints received regarding non-functioning of the
machines, the Council terminated (August 2011) the agreement with the firm
and discontinued the use of biometric machines within 18 months of the award
of the work.

Thus, the expenditure of % 1.32 crore incurred on the procurement of the
biometric machines was rendered unfruitful and the policy for ensuring
attendance of the teaching staff could not be implemented.

3.18 Outstanding dues against colleges

Dental institutions inspected by the Council are required to pay inspection
fees to the latter towards renewal, recognition or verification of compliance
reports for various courses. The Council prescribed different rates for
different types of inspections. Besides, each recognized college was required
to pay an annual fee of = 25,000 (revised to हैं 50,000 from September 2007).

The component-wise breakup of the outstanding dues from colleges is
indicated in the chart below:

Outstanding dues against colleges
(Tin crore) inspection
Annual fees for
fees, 0.63 recognition,
1.38
Other हे
inspection Inspection
fees, 3.11 fees for
ह compliance
verification,
1.95

Out of the outstanding amount of % 7.07 crore, हैं 2.36 crore was pending for
more than one year'!, Audit noticed that there was no mechanism to ensure

un

Year

‘Amount in lakh

116


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

that the colleges deposited the fees prior to the inspections. The Council also
did not follow up with the defaulting colleges. It had also not initiated any
action against any of the defaulting colleges.

The Council stated (February 2012), that in the absence of any provision in the
Act or in the Regulations for imposing any penalty, it was only issuing
reminders to deposit the outstanding dues.

The steps taken by the Council in the form of issuing reminders were
obviously inadequate. It should have requested the Ministry to intervene in
this matter. It should have also framed suitable regulations for penal action
against defaulters.

Recommendation

The Council should establish an effective mechanism for recovery of its

dues. Suitable provisions should be incorporated in its Regulations,
defining penal action against defaulters.

3.19 Conclusion

The performance audit of the Council, covering the period from 2006 to 2011
revealed that there was a concentration of dental colleges in five States while
there was only one college in the North-East, indicating skewed distribution of
dental colleges across the country, which both the Council and the Ministry
failed to prevent. Audit also found non-adherence to the prescribed standards
for (i) establishment of new dental colleges; (ii) increasing the number of seats
in existing dental colleges and (iii) renewal of permissions for yearly
admissions. There were several instances of substantial variations between the
reports of inspections of dental colleges conducted by the Council and by the
Special Inspection Teams (SITs) constituted by the Ministry, the latter failing
to analyze the reasons for such wide variations. There were instances where
negative recommendations of the Council were ignored on the basis of
unverified compliance reports received from the colleges. Delays of three to
five years by the Ministry were noticed in cases of derecognition of colleges
on the recommendation of the Council.

The Council did not adhere to its own norms of periodical inspections of
recognized dental colleges once in a block of five years. The Ministry allowed
the dental colleges to function despite shortages of faculty and deficient
infrastructure. The database of faculty members also exposed the possibility
of the same people working in multiple colleges.



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

The Council had no complaint redressal mechanism. It was not maintaining
the Indian Dentists Register, in violation of the requirement prescribed in the
Dentists Act. Inspection fees amounting to हैं 7.07 crore were outstanding
against various dental colleges.

i. (५४८०...

New Delhi (ROY MATHRANI

Dated: 21 August 2012 Director General of Audit
Central Expenditure

Countersigned
New Delhi (VINOD RAI)
Dated: 21 August 2012 Comptroller and Auditor General of India

118


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Annex-I
(Refers to Paragraph 3.9.1.1)

Distribution of dental colleges across the country

दर
8

| 4._| Chandigarh | 0 (| 1 [| 1 |

| 6. | Daman & DIU (UT) ; oS 1 | 1 [|

| 8. | Goa | 1 [| | oi | 1 |

10. | Haryana 2 [os | 10" |

12. | Jammu & Kashmir | 1 [| | 2 [([ 3

14._| Karnataka | 28 | 16 44

16... Madhya Pradesh 1 13 14

18. | Orissa 1 | 4 | 5 |

20. | Punjab 3 12 15

119


ra’

"9007 Joquiordag Zz Uo pansst
sem (107) Wau] Jo Joya] pue payuesld sem uorsstwed
Aj3urpiosoy ‘saZayjoo Joyjo UW siomnjooy se Sag
ta Aynoey [eorpour paydaooe Jjasy plounoy oy yyy
ose pur plounosg ay) Aq quoloyjap punoy Ayjnoey yeep
ग्य [४ Jo yoadsar ur ANsturpy tp Aq ouop sisAyeue op Jo
MOIA पा a]qeidodoR sem YSUaNs AyNoVy Sunstxe oy) wy
(9007 s9quiojdag QZ) poieis AnsTurpy oy} Joye] “IDADMOHL

“9007 raquiardag
| Uo poyeotunumMos sem aynynsuy 0} uoIsstuUad SunueA
JOU J0J UOISIOap ए pue paydasoe 919/6 “9002 ISNSNY LZ
polep 5प०णप्रशएप्ण्प्रप०> S} UT [IoUNDD oy} Aq no poyutod.
se Aynony 1० sarouatoyep oy} yey) एग०प ANstury, oy,

“poqutodde usaq pey yyeis Suryovey-uou (3

“syyUOUL >ग्पा UT sio}1eNb ० poylys 9q pynom

उण$ Joyo [Je pue pajonysuos useq pey sioyenb yyris Jo
S100]} 20141 JO Mo 970 pu MopeSuNg s,]edioutrg ०प (q
“ajqeorjdde-uou एप

uonoadsur
Suunp quosoid you
JOSSAJOIg गशु००४४ए 2UQ,
“samnqnsur
snorAoid aanoadsar

Toy) wl JeoX ouo uey
S89] JO} poytom FuLAvY
sioproy OM) pue [ediourg

suziou
IOW sed se suoneoyrenb
Buissessod jou yes
Buryors}  [एणएशा UdAog

(9002 s2quiardes
pl) [ounog oy} Aq WOATS sem UoTepuoUTUTOaI
aaneBau ‘uredy “yodes couerjdwios गए 4900
0} uonsedsur seyjour Ino parses [०प्रा०) eyL

LO

JOOLIOOUL d19M ]IUNOD OU} JO SyTeUID ०००० “SULIOU dy) Seis -900Z 7४०४ oY उणु syeos OOT
zed se Ayjnow Jo suourosmbaa je poyylny erey #0प (e | WPeuHered Jo aBeuoys «५
sey pores pey stoprenb yereiny
ada]joo ay 10५ parou Ansty ay pue asajjoo ay way | FPS JO uona|duios-toN « (9007 isnBny 17) pounog | “aweeN seaystA  ‘Tedsopy
POATa90I 5४७७ 9002 IsNSNVT¢ parep Yods1 souerduo0; Aynoey ur sorusisyeq | ay) Aq UdAld uoHepuoumMoser aaneFon | 2 aBo][oD [Rus uejOoN ‘T
eaordde s,Aajsturyy ama postou पोपजुगाग्त [PunoD ey) 1० suoyEpuemU0I.2Y jo soqung aaa [0०1० any “ON ‘IS

soBa]]09 [४१७०० MoU Jo JUDUIYSHGeISA 10y WoIsstUIOd poyuBAB LAySTUTTA! 249YAA ६७६४० 1० IST

(C16 ydvsSving ० s12f2y)
q]-xouuy

£I-C10Zf0 PI ‘ON Moday



Ka!

oBo]]09
dup JO juoUTYsH|qeIse 10} 900८ s9quioidag 6Z UO ponssr
5९६७ JOT ‘SS1SUDIOYOp aso} ३७० प्प्रथ ० SUOTJOOIIP TIM
“sleas 05 YIM ada][oo ay} Jo JuatUYsT|qeise payruuad pue
soloustoyjap oy) poynosr Ayjensed pey ०्ठथा०० गया yey)
pojou Anstumpy uJ, “parsisiod [etayeur [एणुपा[० एफ suey
JeIWop UT sFurMOSOYs yetP payou LTS oJ, ्॒युगागगाण
ayy AJUPA ण [IS ue paymisuoo Ans YL
“Suneay [euosiod oy) Joy dn wan) 107 pip yaearfdde ayp nq
jueordde ayy 0} uorsioap sy AsAuos एप 900८ Jequieidag
L@ ¥ 9८ Uo उगप्रणा॥०7 arp ण Survey Jeuosied ए aatd ण
ASIUTA] OY P2}oa4Ip 17103 op 900८ Joquiaidog ZZ UO,

aaoqe
poeis se sofouatoyjop oueg «

“yoda sip payoaler

uese (9007 Ainy 6) [0फ10.3 ay pue 900८ ०्णाए
67 Wo yodar soueydutos ४ 1098 aFa]]oo ou,

sareyo yeyuop
Jeouse]2 Jo sJequinu ssoq e
Jels JO roquinu sso] «
AnjsTUroysorsy
pue ABojoIskyg
UI JaIN 997] 9प० Jo aTeOYS «
Awojewy Ul voresyTenb
Dd YA sremjoeT sey}
pure Jopeoy alo Jo afeyoyg «
AQsnUog २७१४७३०४प०.)
UI Japear गा० Jo aBeyOYs
soquopoyysorg
UW Jopeoy = ०००. एप
AOssajolg ०प० Jo aBey0ys «
yedioursg Jo oBe1104g «

(9007
dung [Z) 17०प्रपश[१ृ४४० 10} popusUIUIOID JON

LO

-900Z 7४०४ BY) उणु syeas OOT
Jemsaueqnyg

‘ssoualog [eJuoq JO जायरा

“900 raquiaidog
6Z UO pansst sem (01)1एथणु Jo Jaya] ७ एप syeas 0५
TIM suoIsstupe wes 0) UoTsstued payuRIs (गुणा at
‘SolOUdIOYOp >ग्पा PUNOJ 107 PRY Wed} उण[70२ dy} DUIS
sje pue saloualoyap asay) payenueisqns 107 pey [louno}
up yey powers ANsTUIA oY) ‘sa1ousTsYyop JeuonIppe
Joyjo pue Aynoey ayy Jo 1090४. ur ‘Joyyny “oder
29०प्रशावप्र०० oy YJIM Suoye sonwoyne ग्ठैथ[०० oy hq
एथ्राप्परवा8 sjuswNoop ot) UO 995४१ 18709 ० प्र998 JOU PIP
एण्णा०) ay} Aq yno poyutod sorousroyap ay} Jey} poyou
pey Ansrury ayy yey} pemoys ssuyou apy “aAsMofy

yeqdsoy
poyoeye ur o8ey0ys
oINjonyse.yUI JO dejI0YS,

yeuoyeur
yeoruro ayenbepeuy =e

smeyp [शफ्ण Jo aBeyoys «
Aynoey ut Aousoyoq *

aBa][O9 ग्पा Jo 17०ए्रपश[व्ध३० Joy
yeaoiddesip sit 17०प्रप््र7५०7) [BNUID ० 9005
Aoquiaidag 1] uo pepusunuosa urese plounod
OL “9007 >०्वृष्पग१०8 p] Uo Odor souRT|duI0d
ग्प AJHOA ० poioadsut ureSe sem aBa[joo ayy,

40-9007 1४०४ ayy 10} syeas 0५

“yoda [IS ay) Uo poseq sem प०1०४ oy} puke pojnyysuos (9007 sn8ny 17) JlounoD dW ‘Tedoyg
u20q pey [IS ue yu pars [पंथ sy ut &गशणाब oy Aynoey णु Kouayoq | a fq uals uonepuaumoses saneSay | ‘osoyfog [ejwaq 7००भ्र fenysry Z
Jeaoadde s,Axysturyay femmes [Puno| aq) Jo suoyepusmw0say TOISSOS/SIBOS “ON IS

ay Aq paapou sajuatyeq

Jo A9qQuinyy /ada][09 yo गाए

E1-107S0 FI “ON Hoday



rial

“9007 soquiardes Gz ए०
ponsst sem 101 “steas OS IM ofoT]09 Jo uoUTYsTqeIs9
पिया AMY yp ENN] खाक solousroyjop [eMonAseUT © -9007 7४०४ oY) Joy syeas oor
Aylenuosso prea ४ ssossod you pip ssojjoo oy} yey) एथ०प —_
ose पृणपु७ [IS ue pamnsuos Aysimpy ay, “Sureay ay oBepoys Aynowy « (9007 oquiaydag 11 pue ‘9997 IsnSny (८ “NpeN True,
Puaye 107 PIP nq 9002 Jaquiardes 17 २ 97 ए० Fureoy 20-9007 गण PHEAIOU —_| 900८ AINE 01 “9007 PUNE ZZ “SOOT JaquIAd9q, ‘@8eTIoD remaq Aq)
Jeuosiad ९ 10y Aunjzoddo ue usals sem yueoydde oy | sem oiwoynios Ayenuessy| e | [) jlounoy ey} Aq papuoututosar JON ada][oD [Rua BOS 9
“9007 1quin|dog Gz UO pons} sem [OT OUL
sasinod Sq 10} sivos
OS JO Aqroedeo poonpor YIM ०हज[ा०० oy} Jo yuouTYsT[qeyso
peaoidde Ansty, भा “LIS ey) puke rounod
oy Aq yno payutod sotoustoryop snonea Jo जात uy
"9007 Jaquiaidag 97 uo 115 stp Aq poonou osye
AIOM SOTDUSTOTJap JO ४एपत्र Ie[MWWIG ‘aFo]Joo oy) oodsur
0} LIS ue paymysuos Ansty oy pue 90907 Jequiaideg 20५५ ७५॥॥
ZZ ए० Aystu oy) hq poatooor svar yoda ००प्रशावैप्ा०9 s ANSTUTAY at 18 WoRN|HsUT ay) Aq paystmy
ज ‘euonnad amp 0} uotsioap toy) (०७४०० pue Suresy 9007 euns QZ peep yoder soueryduos oy 40
yeuosiod ४ oAIS 0) ANsIUIPY 94) pojooMp yNoD oy], TeHoyeur BULOpIsuod Joye Uoepuaututoses ३४०१४ Noy | 900८ eaK ay 1OJ sivas 001
“nog ayp peaow juesjdde arp yorya soye ‘oggzisnsny | UTS = Jo. aBeLOYS —¢| porroy1or uIeSe [rounoD ०प “9007 AINE 6 UO
L parep sane, sAnsiuy, oy epra aSatjoo jueordde Jyeas (9007 aung ‘uorSpa, ‘endsoy
dU} 0} 72(9७प09 sea [IOUNOD oy} Jo पणाएएप०्रप्र००० YL | Suryoes. ul so1ousIoyaq | aun Zz) [lounog oy Aq papuouMOdaL JON | 7 a89]]0D JeUaq prysuis रु
“9007 saquiaidag 67 Uo pansst [QT pue
payers sem ०3०० Sag parees 00] ४३० Sutuado उग्र
uorsstanied ‘[eLayeut [एज ayenbapeur pue qowdinba
JO uoneleisul-uou ‘Q[novy Surpseder salousalayeap नृष्प्रणष्पा
ino एथगपरुण्व S1odar uonsadsm था ur “LIS stp ysnoyp jeotuys go afeuoug «
UeAT 900८ Jequiaideg gz UO paniigns sem j10de1 0-900 70०४ उण IPOS 00[
uonsadsut 8, 1189 ey, “9007 saquiadag ¢z uo गहैग[०० juaudinbs Jo adeyoys —«
oy) poysodsur yorym 119 ue pomnsuos AnsturjAy जप, arnjonyse.gul ayey
“9007 Joquiaidag 17 2p 9८ UO Suteay peuossed | UF SQSUAeUSG * “yorwasey 2 9०परभ०5 [थप्न्त॒
8 OAIS 0} ANstuIA, ग्पा एग०णाए ग्रा०0 ouosdng oyy | els Suryoes} पा oFeuocys « (9007 tequiaidag 11) pepuoummosarjoN | Jo थाग्राश्ण.. ध्यप्ष्ण्ण्प्णुष्‌ >
Tpunop WoIssag/syuas vo.
Teaordde s,Cgsturyy ap mae TounoZ ay} Jo suojepuamu0s2y Da Somes | ENTS

£I-C10Zf0 PI ‘ON Moday



घ्दा

9006 Jaquiaydag 67 UO panssI 5४४७
107 21 pue juourystqeyso उग्र porosdde sem ०३००० oy,
‘Jounoy ay Jo sSmpuy ou) YM poauSesip LTS ay) pue
a¥o]Joo गए yoadsut ० LIS ue pomnsuoo Ans, oy,
“9007 Jaquiaideg 97 Uo UAATS sem SutIVay [eUosed oy,
“yurorjdde ayp 0) पग॒श०भ भा (9४0०० pue 9006 Jaquiaydag
LT | 9T uo ssuONHad ayp ण Suseay euosiad ए Bard ण

गभुव्पाण्गा aimonyseyuy *

(900८ sequiardes ॥] pu 900८ Ainge

40
5900८ 7४०४ oY उणु syeos OOT
exYyseIRYe

ANSTUIAL OY) POOP NOD ०प “9007 Joquinidog ZZ UD. Aymoes पा sa1ous19yaq * | 6) [ounoy oy) Aq uoHepuoumuooos oaneBon | ‘poog ‘oFo[Jo9 [eusq ep 8
“9007 juourdinbs poyyejsuiup, *
Jaquiaides ul ANstur ey) Aq paquesd sem seas 05 YA प्राणण
aFa]Jo> गया Jo 1एगपपुशावथः० Toy Hossa ५9020] | इतप्ष्वुणा० एए७ sontTion)
“2 | AouaSiowio ‘yes [एणएज्प
sommory Aouas1ows Surpnout sonyioey Aueur oaey 10प | pred — ur solousioyoq = *
एफ poyonysuos ysnoy} jeydsoy oy) ‘o}0]dW09 jou sem Tenoyeur
छा S,]13 oy pue sieyenb Jes ey) Jo uoronnsu0s ime «© stm o
oy) Suonsodsur oy) ठिपायाए yuososd you 31906 sosinu oy)
pur paptAoid 107 sem yyeis [eorpout -exed say Jo Ist] 9 snduieo १890०
JU Paqou YyoIYM 900८ Jaquardag ut 118 ue pommnsuos | UPN tou siouenb Yyeig «
Ansty, ग्पा, ‘Jueoydde oy oj uaard aq Kew Suresy Aynoey (9007 Joquiardeg
Jeuosiod ४३४५३ payoomp 110० oy "9006 Joquuadag ZZ UO | SuryoRar Ul salousIoyaq e| 7) jlounod oy Aq papuouMosar JON
woor
Suruyequio एप senior
AouoSiowio ‘Jyeys [एणएशप
-ered = पर. solouatoyjoq *
"900८ oquiaydag ¢] uo oBa][o9 oyp paroodsur urese (EEE Es
[०णा०3 ey) pue uin0> ey) parow eBayjoo ग्पा 9005 | MHS «= JO. OBRLOYS  * 40-900 7४०४ गए 103 ४०४ 0५
Joaquiaydag | Uo >हगा०० oy} Jo 1ए०पएपशा[वृ्य४३ pororddestp Anoey (9007 3snsny | uegisefey ‘indypor ‘teytdsoyy
ANSI, AY वरग्णा०0 ay Jo suonepucumUOsar a UG | Suiyoear ul safouaoyeq | 77-97) JIouNog ay Aq एकपएशएपराठ> JON | WY esayjog yewaq seka L
Tpun09 UWorssag/s}eas ours
Teaoadde s,Cysturyy aD Cia AG ETAT [puno| ay) Jo suoyepusmmosay DENTON eeeopanay | CLS

E1-107S0 FI “ON Hoday



vel

“9007 4equiaidasg 67 UO panss! 5४७ [OT ‘polueld sem
91895 QQ] Joy uoTsstuod pue 5जण०प्रणणाुण ० oy} एप poynosr
pey adajjoo ay} yey) payeys yodai LIS ey} pue LIS ue
एगाषाप्रषघ०० ANsTUIPY OY, “9007 Iquiaydag 97 Uo BOATS
8४७ Yorya ‘aFayjoo ay} ण Surreay [euosiod v oars op
Ansty, oy) Sunsanp ‘g99z soquiardag zz uo wWoWspnl
e passed yorym nod ay} peAow juvoidde ayy

yenoyeur
yess = jo. aseyoyg
Aynovy

Buryor ul sofuaioyoq —°

900८ Jequiaydag
LI uo prounos ay Aq papuounmoser JON

Asi9atun pauzadu0s
ayy Aq atop uonosdsut oN

sroqenb yes oN ®
rodosdurt Gq Jo spro00y *

sjley uoneuruexa
jo Q0Ud}SIXS ON *
sjeumofjo Koenbopeuy

uoKoNysUOD aja]dwoou] «

suey

Teuaq jo uonryersuy «
Jeyoreur
yeomurs = Jo. oseyoys *

Jauonnoesd aun पाप
japeay /ossajorg/jediouuig «

900 Isnsny
LZ/9TZ Uo [IouNoD ey} Aq pepueututose JON

L0
“9007 1४० oY) उग्र SIRS OOT

Ander ‘adaqjo_ [eusq SWIN “Ol

“9007
doquiajdeg GZ UO panss! gOT pue JOT “Ausimpy ay
Aq एगएश३ sea ofo[]oo ou Sutuodo soy worsted ‘siseq

छाप UO pue jlounoD ay) Jo ssuIpuly ay} YIM pacidesip
LIS UL “9007 Tequindsg 97 uo oFayJoo oy) poyoodsut
YMA [Ig ue painynsuos Aqsturp] ay, १900८ Joquiadeg
97 UO UaAIS sem BuLeasy yjeuosied W “seuonyed

Aynoey

L0
-900Z 1४०४ oy) उग्र SIRS OOT

ysopeid 22g ‘epion

Dy} 0) परगुश०्भ था KoAuoo pue 900८ soquiodog | ष्शिएगप ur AouaIoyoqT «६ (saouatag

LT ९ 9८ vO Surseay jeuosied ४ ३७४३ ० Asim, ayy Aynoey 900Z | [थप्न्त Jo [००प०४) seoualog

एथ०्गाए YyoryM 1०0 प्रवाह oy} poaow yueoydde oy] | [euep Ul sofousIoyaq = e | शाप 6 UO [IOUNOD oY} Aq एक्‌ण्ण्प्रप००० JON | [eJUOG 1० थाषणु URIsNpUT_ 6
qpunod WOIssag/syEas

Jwaosdde $,&.)्रशणा५॒

aup Aq poonou sapouonyod

एरणा०3 १३ Jo suoHepusMMOs2y

Jo zoquinyy /हगा०० yo गाए | “ON TS

£I-C10Zf0 PI ‘ON Moday



StL

“1907 roquiaydag ¢z Uo ponsst 107 PUR 80-0002 UOISSas
गण्णए-४ ay} JOJ aINYsUy] ay) 0} PayueIs sem s}eas
05 Joy vorsstied pur प्रणाश्णाप०७ JoypINy Joy [Iounos;

suLiou
SIq@ tod se jou st [थाकण्प

yes Buryora} Jo adeyw0 ys

L00z saquindag टट
UO प्रणाशप्रण्प्रप्र००91 sAedoU ४ 98४5 [IOUNOD
oy ‘uornsodsur oy} Jo siseq ay] UQ “yNOD
auroadng ayy Aq possed 7997 r0quiadag
bl एगएशए s0pio ue ० asuensmd ut 1007
Jaquiajdag |Z Uo mo palsies sem uonoadsuy

yeudsoy pur oumonyseyur

80
-LOOT 2४०४ oY) JOY seas 00[

a} 0} pauayer jou sem aseo oy 'ग्याए ut sou | UF sajousryed * 80-L00Z UY JUSMUYsT|qQeISO Jo eacrdde
AJOM SoTOUTOTJop [eINjonI|seUT pUe SUOTSSTUIPe 0५ Oy Aynoey Joy plouno ay Aq papuautwose: 10N. Auoyonpng ‘Tewdsoyy
qUOIOYJNS sem Jes SuNsixo ay yey pares Ansty oy | Suryoear Jo. aBeuoys « LOOT ATM 6 | 7% PoN[OD Teo rAeUeA | दा
ainjonyseyur syenbopeuy *
suui0u
SIg Jad se jou sem eudsoyy « afojjoo
‘JeLoyeu jeoruyfo renbopeuy * | 10 juoumyst{qeyso व puourwossr you PIP
Ayinoey UI sa}ouaToyaq * | plounog amp १9005 sequiaydag 6] प० JOyUNA
suu0u
SIq@ sed se jou sem pure
spoq OF YIM omoy Suismu
B ०01 poyoeye sem ०ठश[०2 «
Jetje yeorurjo oyenbepeuy *
suONIpuos SUTOM
ul jou sey [॒थण्न्त *
900८ Jequiandas 6Z UO एभाध्श [01 |. aumonnseayut or|dwoouy «
“pojuvss seM 9४०४ QO] JO} UoIssTuLiod pur solousIyop
B B एगाथश्पा jou juourdmby «
ay] payoar pey ०हैग[०० ay) yey paproep Aysturpy
०प ‘900z soquiordeg Lz uo आ०१ 18 oy) Jo siseq om Aynowy UE Lo
uQ ‘uonsedsur s,jlouno) ०प Jo ssupuyy ayy ypim seude | SSPUOYS एफ sotousIyoq * 9002 Aine 6 pue | -9007 7४०४ ०प उग्र seas QOT
3०7 PIP LIS OY] ‘painmsuos sem [TS we “६ग्रशणाए om aderao — | 9002 oung Zz ए० oFo[Jo9 ap Jo JHoUTYsTqeyso गापफ़णु Yoreasoy
Aq 9007 Jaquiadeg 17-97 uo Sutmeay Jeuosiad ay} ayy | 2q 0} punoy sem jedioulig * | oy) pueurUtosar jou pip jlounop ayy | y adayop jeueaq Wdd IL
Teaoadde s,Aaystuyya] femmes [Puno ay) Jo suoyEpuawMMOIay MOISSOS/E EOS, “ON ‘IS

ay Aq paapou sajuatyeq

Jo A9qQuinyy /ada][09 yo गाए

E1-107S0 FI “ON Hoday



9@1

“suuoU $,]I9uN0; oy} Jopun poxmnbar se Teydsoy
Pappag-0Ol ays Jo Aurpiqeyteak inoyprm 8002 saquiardag
LI Uo adatjoa ey) Jo Suruado paaoidde AnsturA, oy,

“jendsoy poppog-po1 ७४ 0} popeisdn
9१ pmnom jendsoy Sunstxe om yey pue
popraoid us0q pey ojo spuny oy yey) Sunes
‘equnyy (ए्गाए्णाएत्त [एणएगु९) उणग्ग्यत sy
WO 8005 Isnsny 0६ poyep Jono] ४ paystuANy
queoydde yy ‘jeydsoy esouss peppoq
5001 ४ Jo jUoWUYSRHE jnoYYIM pudUITUODAI ७
छाप s,jlounod oy) Jepun asnejo ou sem पा
se ANSIUT OY ० JOWELL oy} एथ्यशुण 8002
Jaquiaydag | Uo ‘lounoD stp 'शिप्भणाउण Jato
pue syoder eouvlduios Suuepisuoa soyy

"800८ ISHN pI porep JoND| था OprA २४४०
AY} Jopisuoder ० [louNOD orp poyse urese Ansturyy ण्पा,

AQNoey ur Kouatoyeq *

(pappeq -0६
Aquo) jendsoy प्‌ Kousroyoq

60-8007 JOJ Worssas superar
JO} poystyqerso 0g Jou pynoys aBojJoo oy wp
pepusummoses jrouno amp ‘gooz AINE 01 UO

“8007 Jequiadag
OT 0} dn ayep pastaer Surpuarxe Aq Jeprsuosel ० [IouND,
aul payse 8002 PUNE OZ parep Jone] क७ AnstUTA,
au) ‘adaljoo jeluep #9प yo dn Sunjes गणाएश्शु 0} peou
ose pue AQUNOd dy} UT s}st}UOP JO 9SRUOYs 9२०३४ ण ONG,

Aynoey Jo aSey0ys «
[श्‌प्रथष्प्प [एणपा[9 syenbopeuy

(एगए०१ -0६
Aquo) jendsoy प्‌ (०पशणाभ्त॒«

800८ भणाए्‌ प्‌ [एप्रा०9
oy} Aq ए०७ह 58१४ UONepUdUILUOSDI SARTON

60
-Z00Z 1४०४ oy) Joy syeas 00[

eqysereyeyy पराविष्पराण्त
‘oSoy]oD [थष्ण्त BIO,

“el

Teaoadde s, Casini

ypuno5
ayy Aq poonou बभूजगुगाग्त

एरणा०3 १३ Jo suoHepusMMOs2y

WOIssag/spuas
Jo zoquinyy /हगा०० Jo MEN,

“ON ‘IS

£I-C10Zf0 PI ‘ON Moday



at

“janooUT are
JounoZ Aq ino poyutod oimonysexut

sjuawudinba
Jetoods ut Suryor] गणा> jeuop
urjuaudinba umumumu aieg (10

8ण्ज़्ष्ण
pue poysruyun woor Areiqry (A

snduied oy) ul siojrenb yyeys ON (AL

गगभुग्प०्गा Surpying [गशष्ण (TIT

SUIOOI dU} JO JSOUT
woy Burst st ग्राणाण्णपु otseg (11

SuIpying ग्हीभ[०० Jo 9०पए९४एथएुशप

uruzsouod sarsuatoyep ou [TV ood एप aeyea] si oxy, (1 amponnsexuy
pardasoe aie
Aynory [४ ‘SuARpyye Jo stseq amy UE. Jers SUNISTA om sxoquioul woADg Aynoey [eorpoyw
“aiqeidosor are 10peoy "भाषा snoraoad ज॒ण्प wos
-portead seam syeos auo ydaoxe ४ ‘soJaroyy, ‘anmnsut | poaosjar Sutoq a10Joq poutol s1apeoy
001 YIM JudUAYs!]qQe}SO Joy UoIssiuLEd snotAaud sty wo Jap10 SutAorar OM) puke aFa]]0o JayjouR पा SuLyIOM
pue yoauoour ३१ ० punoy ud0q pey | Peonpord opeoy ००० pue spzeo uoHex | 5} Jossajorg २७० ‘siouoNnoeid owaud
[uno am Aq poarosqo so1ustoyop puv suavpyye poystumy sey jerg | out ny exe sopeay ouo pue [ediourrg Aynoey घष्ग्त eayseEyEyy
ye wsouye 8 oy jo ssupuy ‘paag ‘asaqjop
ayy 44१ Suto resp एथ०प Ansar oy, | एथण sdep 1ए१०) 900८ ‘oquiordog 5८ 900z ‘1oquiadog / uonodsut Jo oq Jewog véupy | 1
poyrodaa भार 0
sistpeuy 5.६ णा sSurpuy ५,118 sSurpuy s,founo9 s8urpuy Aa0jo1pe.qu09 | >्हैगा०२ ayy yo amen | “ON
aAoyAd OnSS] 15
sjzodoa uorsadsut ur षाण1शूय A,

E1-107S0 FI “ON Hoday

(16४६ ydvsspang 0} ssafay)

I-xouuy



sz

‘PalULAT sem syeos 001 YIM
dFoqJoo Jo quowryst|quyso Jo uorsstuHod
‘sy JO. MAIA uy पृण्णा०) = ayy
Jo suuou Aynoey oy) J99Ur 0} poseodde
asaqjoo oy} ‘TIS ey) 1० ssurpury
am Aq SuroF rey एथ०प ANStUTY OU,

yao
एपाणु 107 प्रण1४५198१० 8 [०प्रा०5

uonsedsur
TOW 94) Suninp yuasosd osye sem oy se
poydooor jou st (Atuoyeuy) sossayorg

eS [ROIPOTAL

1991109 punoy JON

srouonnoead owaud
umn} पाप गए sYOIN}DI| OM, (AL

J10M se uooodsur s,98o]]09 omjour
Sutnp juosaid sem sopeor ०००0. (प्‌

AQuOHHovsd oyeAtid ४ SI Jopedy २०० (It

qeak
ह UkY} S82] JOJ paysom Jopeay २००0 (I

yeas [धप्ग्त

(aaqey,
sep | syyuoUur Z) 9907 Ioquadas 97

9002 ‘Aine 6

uonsodsut Jo गष्तु

ysopeag जा]
“epIon

‘sanuatog [1०२6 Jo
aynyNsuy ueysnpury | ६

>हगा०० गा 0} payuRss
SPM s}eas QO] Yim 3ए०एपशञाव्य४०
jo uoisstuiag = ‘yeldsoy e jo
juauyoene SuIpresar sjuswesueue dn
-oi ayenbape savy 01 pauses Karp pur
Aynovy Suryovs} ण Suyeyer Aoustoyop
aq) payyoor cary 0} posvodde
adaqjoo oy ivy paiou गाव oy,

swui0u ¢fg aod se you pue

(डप्प्राण्प S]gq Moge 1s]IS) 7०7०१ -001 | SP9q OF YIM AJUO auoY उप्राध्याप्र ४ st I] yendsopy
प्रणप्रपा09 ore
paxreulies pue ojesedag | suojsenb jyeis pur s[i13/skoq 1णु [भष्ण [21s0H,

parojduro

poystuumy-ttiag,

Trey anjooT

arenbepy

ayenbepeu]

yee peorur[D,

AguaIolap ON,

quoloyjop punoy

Aynoey

(गण ४४४० 01) 9007 “Yoquiardag 17

900ट' roquiandog / [

uonsadsut Jo गष्त॒

ques.inpeyeg
#ग्रापप्रश्ञा YIsvasay
pur ग्हैगा०3
Tewweq Wad | 'ट

sisdjeuy $.४.7रश्‌णाु५्‌

SSuIpUyy S,.LIS

ssulpuy s,jmounod

payiodas a10m.
sSurpury A10)91pe.sju0s
day ans]

>हगा०० ayy 1० aWEN

£I-C10Zf0 PI ‘ON Moday



671

-poyuerS sea syros
001 WIM asayjoo jo juawyYst|qeiso
Joy worsstwuied एप [ounoy ayy £q ino
pajuiod saisuatoyap |[e pelynoas pey

(Kep 10d 0६-5८ sem sjuoned jo
adesoAe)ojenbape श [euayeul [एणपा[>)

Quosoid 9३७ swuoned ony
Ajuo)ayenbapeur st [etoyeu (एजपा[उ

[enor [एजणा[>

ado]Joo

dtp Jo saoXojdwo yuoueuuod o10
Kay} Jeu SHAepyye pazieiou Jo siseq
otf wo siguonoeid oyeatad ouuy पाए
JOU 2q 0} pajels alam S1ossajord ay],

somutyo
ye srouonnoeid ayeatd oun नाप ०१
0} punoy प००१ २०४प /०प se poydoooe
JOU ore SIOssayord ayeID0sse OMT.

Aynovy e1usq

adayjoo oy) yet) payers Ansty, ग्पा, (एगशु ४८४० outu) 9907 “Ioquiaydag 97 9007 “equiaidag 11 uonsadsut Jo a1eq andie¢ ‘SIWIN +
payiodos a9. ०
sissqeuy ४.६) भणा sSuppuy 5,118 sSurpuy s,foune5 sSurpuy A10)1peayu09 | >्हैगा०० ayy Jo omen ~~

DADA ONS]

£1-C107 fo FI “ON woday



0६1

‘ayep popud}xo oy} ए70/०१ sem
YIM (8005 IHdy 97 uo panss! 5४७ sanyelsads aay
20०१४ oy} []e Ul ‘Yova syeos >०प JOF [QT ‘stoyoodsur
oy) Aq apeut sem jeridsoy poyoene ay} 0} aouarazor
ON ‘sjusned pur Aynovy Jo siseq at) Uo sonjetoods avy
गए) पु Jo Jeaosdde popuaumuosar 119 oY "800८ Edy
JO एप pue puoses uo peronpuos sem uonsedsut ay)

pordoooe jou jendsoy poyseny *

sonuopoypig (A

AxoBing [४००0 (Ar

Aysnusg oaneasosuod (ता
soyuopoleg (I

soquopotpsorg ( 60-8007
"3007 INdy $1 0} suorsstued Sunuerd 9०प्रशागपरशपर : पा sonyeroods weujedeyyeyst A
Joy aep Ise] 9} papusixo os|e ग ‘systjeroads jeyuap Jo | P1ove1 jo ssuTMooys | roy (8007. Ye LI) [ounog ‘odoq]0D
aBeoys atoaas ठपाय 115 ue pamnsuoo Ansturpy ayy | Aynoey Furyoea) Jo ousiayaqr * | ayy Aq प्रणाणरप्र०्परय००० aAneTaN यु eywsq = wey,
गरणणाण oy) Aq 49s ove yse] papusyxo ayy puosaq
SEM YOIYM 800८ [dy 9Z UO panss! sem 107] ay pue
SUONEPUSUTIODAI 5, [TS OY) प्रा७ 9२०१४ AysTUrA] OL,
“syeas Z -
इग्ाप्क्‌ण्प्‌0 pur ‘syeas Z- जाएणायभ्त “Wes | - AroSing suaned त॒व॒0 Jo eseu0ys «
[४००0 10०8 [- ANsyusg eaneAsosuoD 10 गवागा[३ sem पशु Jo शीष्याण्पूए. «
>हैभ[०० oy) ey) Ans, ग्प1 ण एकुपशएरप्र००थ प्रश्य हल
UL “8007 [Udy Z uo >प०० sem LIS oy Aq UoNoodsuy jou pip euuerford Sunmen
"800८ [dy ¢] 0} suorsstunted गाप्रपष्टठि 10J गण yse] ay] | SIeNpesSispun 10} payepueut
pepuaixo ose वा ‘sistfeloads JeyUop Jo aseyoYs 39७०४ | SoNovZ [eIMonyseyUL Jeyo (8007 YoueW L1) ese jrounos,
Jo uosvar om गिरा LIS ue poymysuos Ans ayy | PUP JES Jo 109प्प्रणुवाा०० ताज * | ay Aq UoHpuauMOsar sANLdaN
“suaned GqO Jo aseyoyg « somuopoyug (Ar)
AyNovy Jo aseyoyg « soyuoponiad (गा)
4SIx9 JOU pip suTmteIsoId Arading [४४०0 (11)
suuren ayenpessiapun Ansa aaneasasuo;) (1) 60-8007
Joy Ppopuoututosa1 : UL sanetoods “eyeyeurey
(8007 YouRW L) Uonesopisuosal | santoey [emMonyseyur Jao Joy (800८ Ateniqgaz 67) Jlounog ‘osaqjoQ 1थप्ग्त
Joy pounod ey ण॑ Yorq 1098 sem [४०१०३ | एप४ yyeis Jo juawejduios [Inq * | ay Aq Uonepuawtoser 2५1४891ए v eueupPIS | 7
+पगभ्णा ग्पा Aq uaye) ण्गाम्फ् tpanea [oun0| ayy jo suoyepuoum0sdy sopmrepads TOqSsOs 7 “ON ‘IS
7 है ayy Aq ए०जा०प ध्जु०्गगजाग्त ° है JO"ON, a8a]]09 Jo MEN

प्‌एणा०3 oy) Jo suoHEpuoUIMIOD94 ०१) ISUTEBE (500) SONTeIDAdS oFENPwAS-ysod Mou SuT.Ae)S जग UOISsTULIOd posuwAs CAystUNA! 94) 2494 ४३४४०

(or's 4dosSning 01 siafoy)

AL-xouuy

£I-C10Zf0 PI ‘ON Moday



1431

"8007 dy 97 UO एणाइनु Se [OT paseaiour aq
0} porinbad 99७ pur yWotalyap aq 0} punoy ०००७ ध्याएप०

Jeqwop एप sjeumof ‘oaomopy पृण्ञाथष्पा [एणुप[० pue 60-8007
Jyeis WuoloyyNs savy 0} punoy sea a¥aqjoo ayy ‘odar ASojoipey pue ourorpout ysopelg
uonoadsur orp red sy "8002 [Edy L Uo a¥oqJoo amp Jo [R19 ut Ayeroads roy (800८ Arenuqeq pn ‘Ayemg
uonoadsut ue ino Aled ० 118 Ue paynysuos Ansty 67 puke 800: Arenigey ¢Z) JounoD ‘saouatag [थप्ण्त
oy} ‘Ayetoods [eyuap Jo asevoOYs aJaAas oy] JO MOTA UT Aynovy ut Aoustoyoq: am Aq uonepuotmosar aaneSan I jo गाया दर
"3007 [dy 97 wo एगग्पष्व
TRIO 79 2UISIPSW [PIO 10} ponsst sem 101 “Aynoey Jo SUIDIPI [४७०० (11) 60-8007
AOUSIOYap OU 19M d19Y} Jey] PepuauUOdeL WED} OY ABopomped [PAO (1) PYRIUIEY]
“suLIOU s,[IounoD oy} Jod se sinjonyseyur pue Aynoey 5 UL soneroads 10J (8007 yore] ‘ouojeSueyy]

AJUSA ० LIS ue ponjysuoo Ansturpy oy ‘systperoads

LI pue 8002 Azenageq 6Z) [HUNoD

‘seouatog yeuaq

Jewsp Jo oSeyoys 9098 Jo uosear oy) SUID Aynoey ut Aous1oyaq ay Aq wonepusumuoss: sane3on Zz jo aimmnsuy ५ छू
“(@1ep papuarxe oy) puokaq)
8007 dy pZ ए० Ansrury oy Aq pansst 5४७ JOT
pu एगप्रष्ठाह sea souopoyzig (111) pue ouIoIpaw [IQ saeyo [enueut sonuopoyzig (111
(i) AraBans [४०0 (1 UT sasinos Suyrw}s Joy uorsstunag | OZ ह[ए० pey pur areyo poysodo ज्याणएणप [४0 (IT
>गएशा sea sorouatoyap | वराष्ण॒ग्र्भु३ ou pey eBe[]oo oy, Ares yeroejoj]ixeur pur [४70 (1
JoJo ० aoUaIaJoI ON “AJPANOadsor soruopotpio pue 999]]09 duo URL Joy 60-8007
AzaSans [eroejoj]ixeur एफ [e10 Joy Aep sad 0६ 0} ¢Z sem | WOW ur Suryoea} a19M sjoolqns Sllonepuauuosal aanedau ०५४३ uese (saw)
srojoadsur ay) Aq ino payutod [eLeyeur [earatja Yysnoyy | [षणए०ण UL sisyoeey [Je soWTy 800८ Aleniqey 5८ uo aouerdutos eyeyeure yy
<Aynory ayy ur Aouatayap ou punoy [IS ay], 'शाप्रणा (Aep sod 5५ Buuepisuoo = aye = pue~—parjdde ‘eSreqiny
jounog ey) sed se ammonnseyur pue Aynovy ayp | JO JUoWOUINbos ysuIeSe siuoyed pey e8ayjoo ay) yorym soy sanjeroeds endsopyy = एप
AJUDA ० LIS Ue एथाग्रफप०० Ansru] yp ‘sistperoods | OF ण 0६ ATWO) [eHOyeUR [एणणा[३ गाणु JO} इप्रणाएफ्प्प्रपा०99 sAneSOU asayJop थप्ण्त
[elusp Jo oaSeyoys oxsaes jo uoseor oy) Sug | ‘Aynowy Suryors} Jo Aoustoyaq: (8002 Arenues ¢Z) २७४७ jlounoD oy, € yey sepeg-1v €
AagstuyA, ayy Aq uaye) UOLIW foamed [PunoD ay) Jo suopepuawU0say sonepeds एणृ४४२४ 4 NCIS
ay} Xq 9०1०7 sayuarayaq Jo-ON, >ठैजा०० Jo amen

E1-107S0 FI “ON Hoday



cel

कट santeisads yo ‘ou [६१०],
01-6007
“0107 [dy 9 uo panss] sem 1071 pure Sasinod ay} .छ8 sonuopoyyg ण॒ Ayelseds “A ‘seuere A,
0} एगपथ sem uorsstuuod ‘sarouvsea oy} postuoape Joy (600Z 4290190 6Z)_[HOUNOD “Kysioatug)
Pey तर souls pue AysioAluy) JeNUID ४ SPM शाप SY Aynory Jo aeuoys | oy} Aq uonepuoummosor oaneion I nputy — seieueg, 6
60-8007
eypyeuey
"800८ %णा। ४] UO [OT Panss! pue aSo]Joo ay YM. ‘ninjesuog
Q[QRIIPAR 91०७७ SIOINJOI] ' JO sisquinu jUsIOYyNs paydasoe jou JanjooT Ig * ABoLOIpeY I OULSIpIut [IQ UL +$9०परण०४ [थपण्तु
pur गृपृथ्र1०००४ ४४७ GOH ग्प्रा Jey} एभणा[०प०० ‘adayjoo | ००ए्रणा०फकर थाशाएश ssassod jou Ayeroads 103 (800८ Your LI) [०णा०3 jo गहगा०3
ayy Aq uoneyuasoidar ४ Jo siseq ay} Uo “(प्रणणाए ayy | PIP ey se एगव०००४ jou GOH «| ay} Aq uonepuawuosar  ००५1४१०ए ॥ प्राषशुश्‌. 83प्रष्ठ
४णप्ए०ए०प४७0 (A)
800८ [dV कट Uo pansst sear [QT '8०प्रएणए०प०0 AraBing [शज्धुणाएशर 7 [210 (At)
(A) 7०619 Jerorjorpixeyy 2 [४००0 (AT) sonuopomsorg sonuoporjsarg (पा)
(7). sonuoponeg = (0. Ansnuaq — aatearesuiod, sonuopoliog (7) 60-8007
(1) Ajoureu ‘sjoolqns oAly Ul sasinos yEIs ण गपाग[० Anstwacy aapeAsasuos (1) npen.
SBM 932]]O9 dy} D10Jo194y} pue oJenbope sem yWsuons sproser quaned posodurey, * “sonyeroods aay ymuey, ‘teuusy>
sjusned pue Ayjnovy ayy ‘sloyoadsur Jo ssumpuyy ay sed | JeHoreut [eoruryo Jo Aoenbopeuy « SUIMOT[OJ UI esos Sq Sunseys Joy ‘qendsoyy xR
se ey} poyys ANstuTP] SY] ‘eBd][09 ot) Jo uoNodsur Aynoey Jo aouasqy | uoissiutiod yuesS 0} 107 popuswt0sd1 asaqJop धष्ग्त
yno Aus 0} 118 ue paynyNsuos jusuUIIAOD [eNUsD, Aynoey pounos oy (800८ yore LT Pur 800: Tystquedooyw
oy} ‘sisteroads [छप्०0 Jo Feo Ys 99५95 dy} JO MIA Uy | JO Jo}sISo1 souepusye [NFqnog e | Arenig9,j {Z) uonoadsur uo poseg [पु एप, L
"४00८ [Hay 9८ ए० pansst o10m sonqersads जाग
Tle 10 TOT “sonqeoads omy १४०५) ur porous! ०९ pinoys
Aoustoysp sip ‘sny) pue eSapjoo ay} ur sonuopoyiC:
pue sonuopolieg Ul SIN Sunseys Joy Suipuswiu0sas
ay mo si peyurod jou prey spas pfounog
om yey एगश$ Ansrurpy oy ‘[eydsoy om Surpresor
Aguatoyap ap Joy sy “AnsUaq sANeAJasUOD Ul syeas
OM} एप SOTUOPOYJOIg UI 189४ 97० YIM sosinod oY} Areagy] ur asey0ys « sorjuopoyjorg: (0) 60-8007
Suypieys Joy uorsstuuad payuers Ansty oy “ArUN0o Sprepuras छाप Aysnusg aaneArasu0d (Gs npen [एप्प
au Ur systersods Jeuap Jo oBeyoys 99095 Burro | WAS Burfjdwos you jendsoy « ur “wexeyederewoy
‘suliou s,jlounod ay} Jed se sayipioey eamonysesyul Teuoreur jeotuyo awenbapeuy © | ७0-8002 उणु esmoo SIN UeIs 0} JOU ‘jeytdsopy pue
pue Suryorsy (9७ 0} AystuTy] oy) Aq paynysuos 19७ Jgeis jeorpaut-ered 5४०1 | (४007 yore 81 pue 8४002 Aleniqoy asayjog — yeyuaqy
SLIS ‘souuopoyjoig puke Ansuap aaneatesuod Joy Aynoey ut Aoustoyaq? «| gz) papuaututosar rounog ay, Zz eleeeN = Ir 9
Astana ay) Aq aye) एणपम्ण teamed Tpuno| ay} Jo suopepusmmosay sopmrepads noqssos क “ON ‘IS
= है ayy Aq pasyjou ध्जुञागभजाग्त ° हे JO"ON a8a]]09 Jo आएए

£I-C10Zf0 PI ‘ON Moday



eel

“uonTUsOoeL “plounop
yeuly asojaq YUM parjduios aq pynhom saroustoyep oy) ay) Aq uaald sem uonepuaunmoser
ye yey) Suryeyopun ue Surureygo soye 010८ 19quiojdog jno payutod ureSe or. aanedou Be puke 00: Joquiajdag
8Z WO JeMouDI 40 प्रणश्ाप्रा३त pojuRAs Ansiu oy | AlnoRy Jo solusIyaq * | ¢z uo pajonpuod sea  uonsodsuy
>हगाण OU} Ul PoysTXo
IIs sarousroyap ay ey) papnyouos pur
010८ rquioidog 9 pue 010८ Aine 9८
‘a8a]]O9 गप ण tes} प्रण19965ए Ay ए798 ० [9परा०3 paiep wodar aouerduios ay) ए००ए[5४प09
am (010८ Jaquiadeg टूट) payse ulese Ansty oy, Aynoey jo satouarayaq © | (0107 Ioquiadog [Z) flounog oy,
१958० otf} JOpIsuoser
0} paysenbar urede sem jlounog oy) pue ग्याप्रप्ा०0 | शाण्पू) [eUEqJoeseucys *
Joquioul Moy B ० palojal sem JoneW गया 00८ eee JeMouol 1eaK ,¢
Ajng 9Z uo adayjoo amp Aq paytugns yoda1 asueyduros | [ero fo adeuoyg « yemattar LI-0107
oy} JO siseq ot UO JoAAMOF] ‘s/HapMs jItUpe oO} 10u जय Jo qeak ५५ Joy (010८ ०णा। 5) YoUNED 89०7रभ०5 [णशए०त॒ Jo गागार्णु
“२हणा०० ayp pasiape 4वण॒आण (010८ 4 ५1) Ansty oy | Aoustoyop pur ssevoys | ay 4१ _uonepuowuosar aanedoN odpny ysurg ysuearey “Iq €
qemauor 1४०४ |. €
“8007 IsNSnYy 9] UO ddo]]09 oy) 0} PoyURIS sem s}eas 001 60-8007
Joy uorsstuned ‘Aynovy sup ynsz991 0} usye} Sutoq sdors oy) (3007 yresipueya,
Suyeorput yodsr souerduios ४ poysruiny pey AyisioatuE, Aynoey Aine 0 pue gooz oung हा) prounog ‘soomalog [eyUaq Jo गायाश्णु
gefung ay) pur 99गभू०० juouUISADH ४ ४४७ J ooUIg | SUIyDeD} Jo oFeyoyg © | oy: Aq uoNepusuUIOd21 oANeTON ospne ysurg ysuearey “Iq. T
TeMouor 1eoK 7
(a8a]]09 JuswUIAA0D)
“salouatoyap ay) Ajyoo 0} SUDYeLOpUN Ue UAATS osTe 818०5 001
pey pue १हग[०० JUAWIUIaA0D ४ 5४५ ०8०० ay} Se [४४०7 80-L00T
Joy uorsstmed (1002 Alng pI) payers Aystmpy oyy, | SMeYD [eUEp jo edeyoyg « (Lo0z Aine 6 qefung “yzesipuey
“suonepuauosar Aynovy Suyorsy ur एप £00z ung pT) JlOuNoD ‘soouarag [equa Jo गाप्राष्णु
शा MOTAST ० (L007 Aime ¢) poyse sea founog | edeyoys pue Aouatoyeaq e | गा Aq suoKepuouMos0r ०/1ए5०ए aspne ysurg ysueareyy “Iq. I
+.प्रशणाह ग्पा Aq waye) ण्णाम्प्च 10103) TPuNo|D ay} Jo suoHEpudTAMIOIIY 1४०5 ३० “ON IS
— है ayy Aq ए2/1०० sapuaryaq 7 है जउ>प॒णा।ए />5गा०० ay} Jo आएए

(Sd) $98.1n0d ayeNpeAS-1apuN Jo [४७४० ज्न्च

एम्णा०3 94} Jo suOHLpusMUTODaL 1) ysUTESE spEMaUaT 10J WOIssTUted Jo 106-:)

E1-107S0 FI “ON Hoday

(पा ६ ydos8nang 07 ssafor)
A-xouuy



1241

“srouonnoerd
oyeauid osye, 1301
“Looz थाए | अभ्पष्णणय yyeys उण्पा० ary «
€] UO 9४०४ 0५ 7णु पणछ्शाप्रा०1 poyuRAS (जप ot) (४०४४० “rsuormoead ayeaud (000८ Aine 6 ) ounog
MOU 319 SoIUDIOYOpP AyNoey osoyy ey) vayd oy Suryey | गाय गाए ए sem yedioug * | oy q  uoNepusuOde1 oANeTON yemauar 19K |Z
“morodsur ioyjoue JonpuoS 80-L00Z
0} [IouNOD ay) pestape pue 9007 IsNSNy [ट uo UOTOadsuT “soustedxo ysoprag जया]
saeok उप oy UL Jedisug se pordesse usaq pey | Surya, auisinbex (६00८ aung ¢]) [ए9फा०3 sindypyez0y ‘aous19g
uosiad aures atp yet (L007 ००० 82) 74०7 Ans ayy | OM ०४४पु 10 छाए [edioug * | ayy Aq _uoHepuaw0sar aaneSay | _jejuaq jo aNyNsuy ;eyoueAINg 9
paidaooe 10u 'अग॒ग्ण्पा
‘poystumy — suoneordde
‘oBoqjoo | २४४णू ou pue प्रणा2०वेशा [ए७०पथ 10०6 ,,Z
ap Jo पणा7०पंपु 1४०५ arojaq ए०्णा०७ ayy Aq आ० payutod | Jo eum ay) ye asaid 60-8007
SOIDUDINIJP (प्र ० SYOJJD 18०१ भष्प ० aFoyJoo ayy | 107 stoquiour AyNoPJ om], © (g00z Aine OT) [un0d numer 2 51॥५७॥
Surstape uorsstuuad (8005 IsNSny g) powers Ans Aynory Jo sseyloyg e¢ | ayy Aq uoNepueuoder aaneSay | [eueq 1४०0 rypuey enpuy ¢
“OBO|[OO USUMADAOS ४ 5४७ ग JBU} OS|e pue [एफ Aq yno
poqiod ‘aimjongyseayur pue Aynovy 0} Suejar soroustoryap
IT व poaowtor pey ofayjoo ayy yey) poreys yoder oy],
“yodar eourrduios ay) pue गण oy} JO JOISIUTA, प्राध्ण
oy) pur उगशणाब्‌ JoryD oy) Jo isonbar गया SuLapistios (4007 Aine 6) 1००3
Joye [emoual amp (L007 Aine ६1) peaoadde Ansty oy, “Aynovy Jo adeyoys + | ayy Aq  voNepueuosal eanedan
भ्रमण
989 ][09/Jo}S0y,
ut Aouayoqd «
sureyo Jo uoney[eysut-uou
0} Surpeoy oumonnseayur
ut so1ouaiyeq *
sjuauidinba yo Aouaiyaq *
[evareut
yeorunyo ayenbapeuy e
‘adayjoo seas 80-L007
at] Woy asuodsax ayy Suuapisuos suoyepuoumuosa sy | ठैपापृ०४०-ए1णा Jo oseyoyg « (४00८ ABW [¢) Tounod, Wessineyy
AMAIAAI ० [IOUNOD oY} payse (L007 Aine ६) AUST, Oy, “Aynoey Jo aseyoyg + | ayy Aq  voNepueumUosaI aaneday | ‘mdrey ‘aBaqjo yewaq 1४०७० 7
AastuyA aq) Aq ण्म्रष्ठ UoRHIW Teune> Tpuno| ay} Jo suonepusmmosay Geen “ON IS
os है ayp Aq pasyou saruarpyaq ° हे daquiny />हैज[०० 943 Jo aE Ny

£I-C10Zf0 PI ‘ON Moday



sel

suonensoy om sod
Se JOU SBM YoIYM 289]}09
aoyjoue = jo. tpSuans
oy} uo sem AynoRy
-paroadsut aBa[]oo oy) 108 0} fIouno; ayy payoartp yorya | [EOIPSu — aaa Ye [emouar 18०6 7,
5०3 पगा oy) poyseosdde >5था०० ayy, “L007 ढीएण SZ yevoreut 81295 00] प्रा yemauor 80-L00Z
parep Jane] &परशणाब् का adoqfoo ayy 01 payeorunumuoo | [Pout] oyenbopeul © | weak ,.Z soy (LOOT Amr L) [ound yressnpeyyo ‘anyysuy
sem [eMouar ey SutAoidde jou Jo  uorsioaq Aynovy Jooseyoyg «| ay Aq UonLpueumoser aanedan | 2p adel[oD [थप्न्त UoZTIOF] MeN 6
“aBo[]oo oy Woy odor soueyjdwu0o sireqo
७ उगु Surpeo uaad 10 uonoadsur zaypany Aue ग्राण्पा॥ ५002 | UP UF solouaroyaq «
yoquiaydag ¢Z ए० syeas 05 YIM एथप्रशह sem uorsstuod | sAMonnsesyUT o[dwosuy * (Lo0z soquiodeg
‘uoepuauuiode! aaesou s.[loun0g ay) oyidsaq Aynory पु satoustoyoq’ © | ZZ) wonepuswurosar aanedon
८006 quiandag
81 pap oder aoueydwos ay} 1णरा0००४ oT Surye} quauidinba
‘Tlounog oY) 01 poLayos प्राएव४ sear Janeur om A[surprosay | Pur ammjonayseyjuy
‘uoIsioap 24} Jepisuoser 0} poyonp sem Ansturpy | Ut fousioyaq «
aq ‘L007 Joquiaidas pT एगएए Japro ग्रा०0) outardng गा Aynoey ur sorousioyaq «© | (४00८ Alay 1) Uonepuourutosal aanesaN
yuoudinbs yemoual 10०४ pug
pue aunjonuyseayur 80-L00Z
6007 Aine ६ payep Jay] गा suoHepuatuosar | UT Aoustoyed « (६00८ गणा[ ६) 1०णा०0 छयपष्णाण्पणुश्ष
Toy MOrAaT 0} ylsunoD am poyse ANSI, OU, Aynoey ut saroustoyaq © | om <q uoNepuoumuossr anon | ‘poag ‘oFoq[o9 eC. eAIpy 8
हद 1aquiaydag एव Summonouny aes pjnom (Zooz कण o)uonepusmmumoser sanedou
pue ajajduros 1४०7 vad ५6 sem [eydsoy oy) ey) spunold yeqidsoy 8 OARS पाए [loUNOD aq) ‘a8ay[oo amp Jo
atp uo £00 Aine दवा ए० uorIsstued payuerd Ansty गा, | UMO OU PIP ख्ूग[०0 * | yrodax aouerjduos oy) BuLIApIsuos IW
ayqeidoooe you o10.M.
sisquiout Aynoey soy, e
uoIssas 18३६
pad OU} JO WOULSDUDUTUIOS Jemouias 1९३४ pug
240J2q 2uo 80-L00Z
yonysuoo 01 Suryeyspun euedseyy ‘ysesunpeyeg
ue paytugns yng jeydsoy (L00z oung 51) Pounog | ‘onnsuy पृ०४०४०चच
® uMO jou PIP sdoT]0D ¢ | भ्पा Aq uonepuswuosa: aanean | pue oBa1]0D  [छप्न्त Wdd L
ta TpuneD $}B95 JO
4प्रशुणाह ay) Aq uaye) uoLoy Tpuno| ay) Jo suoyepuammosay “ON IS

ayy 44 pastou saruaryaq

AaquINN />ठगा०३ a4} Jo aN

E1-107S0 FI “ON Hoday



9El

“uonsadsmr s,1eaXK एप ay a10Jaq Aynoey jeorpour yurodde
0} ada]joo ay} payse osje AnsIMI] ayy 7४०६ ism ayy
ul suonoalgo dsay} asies 10U PIP [loUNOD oy) IBY spunoss
ayy uo (00८ soquieideg ¢z UO Sikes 0५ YPM JeMouer
Jeok puosss pamoy[e sem pue ANsiuL] pousia jueoydde
YL “sofa sod se opqisstuuiod you sea YyoryAr oBoI[00
Joyjoue JO ySusNs uo ousOg sem AyNovy [eorpou शा Tey)
powtuipe वाभ्या pey aFayjoo ou yey) pajou (ग्रशणार oy],

oaoge uaAld se suoseay

odor souejduaoo ou SupOprsu0s

soye (4007 s2quiajdag का) jounod
am 44 प्रणाएएप्रशप्रप्र००थ. 301४5/प

एण्णा०3 ayy
ग popueaLiog SEM पगुपृ७ +प्रशणाब ग्पा 0} (006 JoquIa}dog
OL एगणश्ए ywodas aouerydwos ४ pays aynyysur गया,

“eIpUy JO [9फा०ठ
TeOIpaW ay} O} stAepye
uoais Apragje aaey pur
afoj[oo eolpour soyjouR
Jo srayoesy atom Kay} yey)
sem Woy} <q WoAIT Uoseor
YL “eouasard soy soy
SHARPYJe USIS ० pasnyar
srequiaw Aynovy [एणएग. «
[epoyeur
ध्णणा> ayenbopeuy «
Aynoey पु Kouoroyaq «*

(L007 Isnsny [ ६) OUNOD
ayy Aq UoRRpuswMOde! sANeFou प्राण)

ayy JO suonsadp ay} Uo uoTsadsut Jay

AagsturyA, aq) Aq waye) UORIW

qpunoD
ayy Aq paonou sapustyaq

Teuno| ey Jo suoHepuammos2y

‘syeas Jo

aaquiny /ग्हज[०० ay} Jo aUTE Ny “ON IS

£I-C10Zf0 PI ‘ON Moday



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Annex-VI
(Refers to Paragraph 3.11.2)

List of colleges where periodic inspections were not conducted

137


Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Annex-VII
(Refers to Paragraph 3.12)

Colleges not de-recognised by Ministry

Date of
SI A al Whether a recommending
Sl. | Name ofthe dental | Government | , Date of Deficiency noticed withdrawal of
No. college 2 inspection rv
or Private recognition by the
Council
1, | Farooqui Dental College Private 26.08.2006 Inadequate infrastructural | 28 February 2007
& Hospital, Mysore, facilities
Kamataka Clinical material grossly
inadequate
All dental chairs in bad
conditions.
2. | Rajiv Gandhi College of | Private 26.08.2006 Acute shortage of teaching | 28 February 2007
Dental Sciences & faculty
Hospital, Banglore, Inadequate _ infrastructural
Karnataka facilities
Clinical material grossly
inadequate
3. | Jamanlal Goenka Dental | Private 12.04.08 College shifted to new | 22 April 2008
College, Akola, premises without any
Maharashtra information to the Council
Inadequate faculty
Inadequate infrastructural
facilities
Poor clinical material
4. | College of — Dental | Private 29.05.08 Shortage of teaching | 13 June 2008
Sciences & Hospital, faculty
Indore, M.P. Information of faculty on
General Medicine, General
Surgery and Anaesthesia
not provided by the college
authorities.
5, | KGE College of Dental | Private 26.03.08 Shortage of teaching | 19 December 2008
Sciences & Hospital, faculty
Kolar (Kamataka) Clinical material grossly
inadequate

138



6६

npen [we],

Or - कट डा Ob €l 001 ‘oFa]]O Jeu suorssy eyeXeuIA | ZI
pen [ie y, ‘oF9]]03)

09 8 91 ral Ob €l 001 Jeqq Jo omnsuy eSekeur, eBedrey | वा
DpeN [rue y, ‘Tedsopy

zL 8६ I 8 Ob €l 001 7  asaqfoy ee = runysiepeAig | 01

16 LZ 1 8 0६ TI 0५ ग्रकण ‘AQSHUDG] Jo ग्हगा०2 | 6
epoieg

£9 Sb I 9 0६ I 05 81०2 [शफ्०्त [गण्व reyqnuey | 8
PPION उणए०१) “०1००० Yorrasay

५9 घट vl ol Ob €l 001 7 seipms jeweq Joy enue SII] “L
L9 8 €1 rat Or £1 001 aBo]]OD eA] 5९५५
qendsoy

79 €@ SI 0 Or €I 001 2 eBoy] euoq ueleneN wor] | ५
essuQ ‘yornng

06 9 € v 0६ I 0s aBoTOD OPO, AOS “Burm reo | #
yeudsoyy

06 6 € ol 0६ IL 0s 7 2891109 [ews Auou eA | ६

os ts ST s 0६ a 0s aBo]09 [euoq भाड़ | ८
गाकंशाप्त

LL 1६ 6 6 Ob €l 001 गण) पद प्रण्णप्रण॒ MON | 71

zoanys'] qapeay peal dapeay | जग्गाएज्जु /12.1j99'T “1g Aapeay
/42.40)99"] “AS [4210999] “1S
nowy soSa]]09 poztusoda. Ul SUOIssTUIpE एग्र[प्पएए
उ०्वाष्य11०प६ aBeyuao109q 04 | १६ ay) 001 % 05 40) swu0U [PUNOD aspun sjuapnys aBaqjoo ay} Jo aMEN ON IS
uy uopisod 4ynovy enjoy | paamnbes se wayed Suyyeys uM Jo “on

1-710 J0 FI ON Hoday



ial

£1-7107 JO I ON Modoy


Annex-IX
(Refers to Paragraph 3.14)

Admissions in excess of sanctioned capacity

Report No. 14 of 2012-13

[Bs PSF
Ver College Name | Sanctioned | Excess College Name Sanctioned Excess
2006-07 Govt. Dental College &|4 seats in 1
Hospital, Ahmedabad Conservative
Dentistr
3 seats in 1
Prosthodontics
1 seats in Oral 1
Medicine
2007-08 Chhatrapati 40 14 Rama Dental College Hospital | 2 seats in 1
Shahu ji & Research Centre, Kanpur Pedodontics
Maharaj,
Lucknow
Patna Dental | 40 3 3 seats in 2
College & Prosthodontics
Hospital, Bihar
4 seats in Oral 3
Surgery
3 seats in 3
Orthodontics
3 seats in Oral 3
Medicine
3 Seats in 1
Community
Dentistry
‘Nil’ Seats in 3
Conservative
Dentistry
‘Nil’ Seats in 3
Oral Pathology
‘Nil ‘Seats in 5
Periodontics
2008-09 Hindustan 50 46 Rama Dental College Hospital | 2 seats in 1
Institute of & Research Centre, Kanpur Pedodontics
Dental
Sciences,
Greater Noida

141



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

Year

|) )) |

MDS

College Name

Sanctioned

Excess

College Name

Sanctioned

Excess

3 seats in
Prosthodontics

2

3 seats in Oral
Surgery

3 seats in
Orthodontics

3 seats in Oral
Medicine

‘Nil’ Seats in
Community
Dentistry

‘Nil’ seats in
Conservative
Dentistry

‘Nil’ seats in Oral
Pathology

Bapuji Dental College, [2 seats in Oral

Davangere

Pathology

Faculty of Dental Sciences, | 4 seats in Oral

Lucknow

Surgery

4 seats
Orthodontics

4 seats in
Prosthodontics

4 seats in
Conservative
Dentistry

2009-10

Rajiv Gandhi
Institute of
Health
Sciences,
Bangalore

40

19

Saveetha Dental College & | 6 seats in

Hospital, Tamil Nadu

Conservative
Dentistry

Faculty of
Dental
Sciences,
Lucknow

40

12

6 seats in
Orthodontics

142



Report No. 14 of 2012-13

|... ४5952... |[ MDS
YEP College Name | Sanctioned | Excess College Name Sanctioned Excess
5 seats in | |
Prosthodontics
Chhatrapati Shahu Ji Maharaj, | 4 seats in | |
Lucknow Conservative
Dentistry
3 seats in 1
Orthodontics
4 seats in 1
Prosthodontics
2010-11 JKK  Natrajah | 70 45 Postgraduate Institute of | 2 seats in 1
Dental College Medical Education & | Orthodontics
& Hospital, Research, Chandigarh
Nammakkal,
Tamil Nadu
Dental Wing, SCB Medical | 2 seats in Oral 1
College, Cuttak Pathology
Total | 6 [ 139 | 9ःग ्([ 59

143