Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sl. No CONTENTS PAGE NO. 
 Glossary ii 
 Preface iii 
 Executive Summary v 
1 Background of the decision of Joint Venture 1 
2 PPP Projects of AAI 5 
3 Audit Objectives 6 
4 Audit Criteria 6 
5 Scope of Audit and Methodology 6 
6 Description of transaction documents 9 
7 Conflict between OMDA and AERA Act 11 
8 Concession Period 12 
9 Right of First Refusal 13 
10 Misuse of the concept of Upfront Fee 14 
11 Commercial Exploitation of 239.95 acres 16 
12 Airport Development Fees 17 
13 DIAL’s Financing of the Project 19 
14 Lack of Land Records 20 
15 Change in Major Development Plans 21 
16 Actual Project Cost vis-à-vis original Project Cost 22 
17 Mandatory Capital Projects 24 
18 Aeronautical/ Non-aeronautical airport charges 
including till 
27 
19 Delayed Payment of Retirement compensation by 
DIAL 
31 
20 Funds diverted from PSF Security Component 34 
21 Conclusions and Recommendations 37 
Annexure-I GMR letter No. DIAL/CR/ Subsidiaries/ 2069 dated 
27 September 2007 indicating calculation of 
income through lease rentals over the period of 57 
years 
42 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
ii Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
 
 
 
 
 
 AAI -  Airports Authority of India 
AERA  - Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 
APAO -   Association of Private Airport Operators 
ASC -  Airport Service Charge.  It includes landing, parking, X-Ray Baggage and 
passenger service fee. 
ATC -  Air Traffic Control 
BCAS -   Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
CISF -  Central Industrial Security Force 
Concessionaires - party to the PPP Agreement in whose favor, the concession is granted. 
Consortium Members -  (i) GMR Infrastructure Ltd; (ii) GMR Energy Ltd; (iii) Fraport AG 
Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide; (iv) Malaysia Airports (Mauritius) 
Private Limited; (v) GVL Investments Pvt Ltd; and (vi) India Development 
Fund. 
DF -  Airport Development Fee 
DGCA -   Director General of Civil Aviation 
EGoM -   Empowered Group of Ministers 
GOI -   Government of India 
IGIA -  Indira Gandhi International Airport Delhi, as located on the Airport Site. 
DIAL -  Delhi International Airport Limited 
MAF -   Monthly Annual Fee 
Major Development Plan -  a plan prepared for each major aeronautical or other 
development or groupings of development which sets out the detail of 
the proposed development which has been set out in broad terms in the 
Master Plan and will include functional specification, design, drawings, 
costs, financing plan, timetable for construction and capital budget. 
Mandatory Capital Projects- the development project described in Schedule 7-8 of OMDA  
Master Plan  -  master plan for the development of the Airport, evolved and prepared by 
the DIAL in the manner set forth in the State Support Agreement, which 
sets out the plans for the staged development of the full Airport area, 
covering Aeronautical Services and Non-Aeronautical Services, and which 
is for a twenty(20) year time horizon and which is updated and each such 
updation is subject to review/observations of and interaction with the GOI 
in the manner described in the State Support Agreement. 
Ministry  -   Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoCA -  Ministry of Civil Aviation 
OMDA -   Operation Management and Development Agreement 
PSF -  Passenger Service Fee chargeable at the Airport. It shall be inclusive of 
cost of security expenditure on the designated agency (65per cent of PSF) 
per embarking passenger i.e. “Security Component” and the facilitation 
component payable to the DIAL (35per cent of PSF) per embarking 
passenger i.e. “Facilitation Component”. 
PID -  Perimeter Intrusion Detection Systems 
PLR -   Prime Lending Rate 
RFP -   Request for Proposal 
SOP -   Standard Operating Procedure
 
 
Glossary 

Implementation of Public Private Partnership
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
contains the results of the Performance Audit of 
implementation of Public Private Partnership Project by 
Airports Authority of India at Indira Gandhi International 
Airport Delhi. The Audit covered the period from 2006 to 201/g1006. 
The Report emanates from the scrutiny of files and documents 
pertaining to the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Airports Authority 
of India, Airport Economic Regulatory Authority of India, 
Operation, Management and Development Agreement of 
2006, Passenger Service Fee (Security Component) Escrow 
Account, etc. 
The Report has been prepared for submission to the President 
of India under Article 151 of the Constitution. 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi v 
 
 
 
1. Background 
With the opening of Indian airspace to private and international operators, the 
existing airport infrastructure in the country proved to be inadequate to cope with 
the unprecedented growth in traffic and cargo. The Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(MoCA) in 2006, projected a requirement of an additional ` 40,454 crore to 
augment and modernize existing airports as also to construct new greenfield 
airports. The revenue surplus generated by Airports Authority of India (AAI) was 
found to be grossly inadequate to meet this requirement. 
In January 2000, the Cabinet approved the restructuring of airports through the 
long term leasing route. Later, however, in September 2003, the Cabinet approved 
the restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports through the Joint Venture mode. In 
pursuance of this decision, after selection of the JV partner, AAI incorporated a 
subsidiary company viz. M/S Delhi International Airport Pvt. Ltd (DIAL), and 
subsequently sold 74% of the shares of DIAL to the JV Consortium. On 4 April 2006, 
in the capacity of the state promoter, AAI signed an Operation Management 
Development Agreement (OMDA) with DIAL. The AAI handed over IGI airport, 
Delhi to DIAL on 3 May 2006 on ‘as is where is' basis and granted DIAL the 
exclusive right to undertake functions of operations, maintenance, development, 
design, construction, modernization, finance and management of the Airport.  
On 26 April 2006 Government of India signed another agreement with DIAL viz 
State Support Agreement (SSA). The agreement laid down conditions and nature 
of support to be provided by Government of India, along with the mutual 
responsibilities and obligations between Government and DIAL.  
During the course of audit, Ministry of Civil Aviation informed Audit: 
“The decision to restructure and modernize Delhi Airport is a policy decision of the 
highest body i.e. the Cabinet. The terms and conditions as well as the modalities of 
modernization/ restructuring as mentioned in the transaction documents were 
finalized and approved by the EGOM. It is further clarified that there has been no 
change in the finalized transaction documents. Several issues such as JV route, 
leasing of land /assets, Concession Period, Right of First Refusal (ROFR) etc. are 
policy decisions of the Cabinet based on expert inputs in formulation and inter-
ministerial consultation. Hence these policy decisions should not be brought into 
question at this stage through audit observations.” 
Admittedly, the decision to adopt the joint venture route is a policy decision. Audit 
acknowledges the sole prerogative of the Government to take such policy 
decisions. This audit exercise, on the other hand, has been restricted to 
operationalization of the decision of the Joint Venture mode. The terms and 
Executive Summary 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
vi Implementation of Public Private Partnership
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
conditions as agreed to in the transaction documents do not fall in the domain of 
the policies though they have been approved by the empowered group of 
ministers.  
It is acknowledged in this report that there have been significant improvements 
in services at the airport for the travelling public. The new terminal T3 was 
completed within time for the Commonwealth Games. The airport has been 
adjudged as the second best in the world in the category of 25-40 million 
passengers per annum by Airports Council International. 
As per the agreement relating to revenue share with AAI, DIAL is to pay 45.99 per 
cent of its gross revenue. Accordingly, DIAL paid 
` 271.98 crore in 2006-2007,  
` 402.72 crore in 2007-08, ` 445.63 crore in 2008-09, ` 538.92 crore in 2009-10 
and ` 577.26 crore in 2010-2011 to AAI.  
Our observations pertain to operationalization of the JV mode and implementation 
of the OMDA and SSA. In the course of audit, we have also tried to assess whether 
during the conceptualization and implementation phases, the interest of 
Government and the revenue accruing to it has been protected. The decision to 
enter into a joint venture to develop and manage Indira Gandhi International 
Airport is a first of its kind. The present audit report thus should be viewed in 
terms of lessons learnt for future guidance. 
It is to be noted that at the time when OMDA and SSA were being considered and 
finalized, no regulator was in place. The SSA in fact records the intention of the 
Government to establish an independent Airport Economic Regulatory Authority 
(AERA). The AERA Act establishing such an authority was passed in December 
2008. The Act came into force on 1 January 2009. The powers and functions of 
AERA, which are contained in Chapter III of the Act came into force on  
1 September 2009. 
2.  Major highlights of the Report 
2.1  Conflicts between OMDA and AERA Act in defining aeronautical and non 
aeronautical services 
Audit noted conflicts between provisions in OMDA and SSA on one hand and the 
AERA Act on the other, which will have long term repercussions on the Regulator’s 
role on tariff fixation in Delhi and Mumbai airports. In terms of Section 13(2) of the 
AERA Act, one of the important functions of the Authority was to determine the 
tariff for the aeronautical services. However, definitions of aeronautical services 
differ substantially between OMDA and the AERA Act. Ground Handling Service, 
for example is a non-aeronautical service in accordance with OMDA but it is an 
aeronautical service in terms of AERA Act. Similarly, Cargo Handling Services 
defined as non-aeronautical services in OMDA have been defined as aeronautical 
services in AERA Act. According to AERA, these services are less capital intensive 
and more profitable. 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi vii 
 
Treatment of services such as Ground handling, Cargo handling or parking as non 
aeronautical services in OMDA provided undue financial advantage to DIAL, as in 
terms of SSA, the Targeted Revenue for the purpose of tariff fixation takes into 
account only 30 per cent of the revenue generated from non-aeronautical 
services. Following SSA, a significant part of the revenue generated by DIAL in 
the airport could not be included by AERA for determining the Targeted Revenue 
for the purpose of tariff fixation for IGI Airport. 
 (Para 2.2 and Chapter 4) 
2.2  Concession Period 
In terms of Article 18.1(b), DIAL enjoys the unilateral right to extend the 
concession period for another 30 years “ on the identical terms and conditions” , 
provided no JVC event default had taken place during the 20 th and 25th year of the 
first concession period.  
The decision to adopt the joint venture route was taken based on the Cabinet Note 
of September 2003. While seeking approval for restructuring of the Delhi and 
Mumbai Airports, this Cabinet Note specifically envisaged an initial concession 
period of 30 years which could be extended by another 30 years subject to 
"mutual agreement and negotiation of terms" . However, in the draft OMDA 
which formed part of the bid documents, the important condition "subject to 
mutual agreement and negotiation of terms" was omitted. The OMDA, which 
was signed in April 2006, did not contain any provision of mutual agreement and 
fresh negotiations before extension of the concession period.  This is not only a 
violation of the commitment in the Cabinet Note but is also a unilateral and unfair 
advantage given to DIAL which is detrimental to Government interest as it does 
not provide the Government any scope for review of any of the conditions.  
The four critical elements that determine a typical concessional agreement in any 
public private partnership of this type are: traffic volumes, tariffs, concession 
period and capital cost. In OMDA, the provisions of which regulate the 
development of the IGI airport, the concession period has no trigger indicating any 
linkage to any of the above four elements. Neither MOCA nor AAI could provide 
any evidence to indicate that these inputs were considered while fixing the 
concession period at 60 years. 
The possibility of any JVC event default in the small window of 5 years between 
20
th and 25 th year is remote. Such a sweeping provision, without any scope of 
review at any time during the currency of the concession period, has effectively 
granted DIAL the sole right to operate the airport for a period of sixty years with 
the terms and conditions frozen in the OMDA.  
Audit could not find any infrastructure project, except Delhi and Mumbai Airports 
wherein the concession period is initially for 30 years and which can be extended 
for another 30 years at the sole option of the JVC and that too on identical terms 
and conditions. 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
viii Implementation of Public Private Partnership
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
According to the model concession agreement issued by the Committee on 
Infrastructure of Planning Commission, the concession period typically granted by 
Port Trusts are 30 years. Similarly, in the case of highways, the period is usually 20 
years. In the case of Male airport and Istanbul airport, where GMR is a 
stakeholder, the concession period is 25 and 20 years respectively.  
 
(Para 2.3) 
2.3    Right of First Refusal in case of second airport 
In addition to the unilateral right of DIAL to manage the IGIA for sixty years, the 
State Support Agreement (SSA) allows the Right of First Refusal (ROFR) to DIAL 
with regard to any second airport planned within 150 km radius of the IGIA. 
According to SSA, the second airport will be decided by following a competitive 
bidding process, in which DIAL can participate. In the event of DIAL being 
unsuccessful, it will be allowed to match its bid with the most competitive bid, if it 
is within 10 per cent of most competitive bid. This condition will be applicable for 
the first 30 years. The SSA does not elaborate on the competitive bidding process 
or the model that would be followed. This provision thwarts competition and 
provides DIAL with a natural advantage on the second airport. 
(Para 2.4) 
2.4    Misuse of the concept of Upfront Fee  
Article 2.6.3 of OMDA states:  
“with respect to land underlying the carved out assets, 1 the parties further agreed 
that if, at any time during the term, the JVC requires the said land for providing 
any aeronautical services or developing and/or constructing any aeronautical 
assets, the parties shall come together to negotiate in good faith  the terms and 
conditions on which the AAI shall lease to the JVC and the JVC, shall take on lease 
from the AAI, the said land.” 
A onetime upfront fee of ` 150 crore was fixed for each of the Delhi and Mumbai 
Airports by MOCA. Upon an enquiry from Audit, MOCA explained that the amount 
in the concept of upfront fee has no relation to either the extent of land or the 
assets of the airport.  
But when DIAL sought the lease of an additional 190.19 acres of land out of the 
carved out assets, to fix a lease rent for this land, AAI used the amount of upfront 
fee to arrive at a rate per acre and applied it to the additional land thereby fixing a 
onetime fee of ` 6.19 crore viz  [(` 150 crore/4608.9 acres)
*190.19 acres] 
It is to be noted that OMDA allows DIAL to use 5 per cent of demised land for 
commercial exploitation. The current value of 9.50 acres (5 per cent of 190.19 
acres) as per AERA’s communication to Audit amounted to ` 950 crore. The 
                                                            
1 Carved out asset is the land which remained with AAI after leasing out land to DIAL. The 
land leased out to DIAL is known as “demised premises”.  

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi ix 
 
earning potential for 58 years from 9.50 acres based on DIAL’s own projections  
(` 681.63 crore per acre) is ` 6475 crore viz [ ` 681.63 * 9.50 acres ]. 
On the other hand, AAI leased out 7.60 acres of land to Director General of Civil 
Aviation and Bureau of Civil Aviation Security at a license fee of ` 2.41 crore per 
annum. Application of this licence fee with the same escalation clause for 190.19 
acres of land would amount to ` 4534 crore for a period of 27 years.  
Ministry has not been able to provide a convincing reply as to why a private 
operator should be levied a fee which is much lower than that fixed by 
Government as payable by its own departments. 
(Para 2.5) 
2.5    Commercial exploitation of land 
Out of a total land area of 5106 acres of IGIA, AAI initially leased out 4608.9 acres 
for development of the airport. An additional 190.19 acres of land was leased to 
DIAL, thus bringing the total demised premises at 4799.09 acres. The demised 
premises were leased out at ` one hundred annually to DIAL. For 190.19 acres a 
one time fee of ` 6.19 crore was also levied on DIAL.  
Article 2.2.4 of OMDA permits DIAL to utilize 5 per cent of the total land area of 
4799.09 acres of demised premises for commercial exploitation.  This would work 
out to 239.95 acres.  
The projected earning capacity of this land in terms of license fee over the 
concession period of 58 years was indicated by DIAL itself as ` 681.63 crore per 
acre in a letter to the Joint Secretary, MOCA. Thus for the entire area of 239.95 
acres, the potential earning from the land, according to the calculations worked 
out by DIAL itself, amounts to ` 1,63,557 crore. Audit would like to draw 
attention to the fact that this area is part of the entire area of land that has been 
handed over to DIAL at the lease rent of ` 100 per annum.  
It has been ascertained from AERA that the current valuation of the land made by 
M/S Merrill Lynch in the report of 26th August, 2011 has been worked out at the 
rate of ` 100 crore per acre. Thus even in terms of this conservative estimate, the 
total current value of the land available to DIAL for commercial exploitation, 
would amount to approximately 
` 24,000 crore. 
Audit is constrained to observe that against the aforementioned calculations, 
MoCA allowed DIAL to use 239.95 acres of land for commercial exploitation at a 
consideration for one time payment of ` 31 lakh (5 percent of ` 6.19 crore) and an 
annual payment of ` One hundred only.  
(Para 2.6) 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
x Implementation of Public Private Partnership
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
2.6  Development Fees (DF) 
Article 13.1 of OMDA specifically provides that the : 
"JVC shall arrange the financing and/or meeting all financing requirements through 
suitable debt and equity contributions in order to comply with its obligations 
including development of airport pursuant to the master plan and the major 
development plans".   
However, MOCA vide their order dated 9th February 2009, allowed DIAL to levy a 
development fee (DF) at Indira Gandhi International Airport for the purpose of 
funding or financing the cost of up-gradation, expansion or development of the 
Airport. This was clearly in contravention of the provisions of Article 13.1 of 
OMDA, provisions in the AAI Act and in AERA Act as later confirmed by Delhi High 
Court.  
This decision to levy DF after the effective date, has vitiated the sanctity of the 
bidding process, as the draft OMDA, which was part of the bid documents, does 
not mention about funding of the project cost of the Airport through levy of 
development fees. In case the JV was to have been permitted to levy DF to finance 
the project after signing of the OMDA, this important condition should have been 
known upfront to all the bidders at the time of bidding.  
Approval of Ministry and later of AERA for levy of DF by DIAL (to bridge the funding 
gap) was a post contractual benefit provided to DIAL which was neither envisaged 
in the RFP nor included under any provision of OMDA or in the SSA.  This led to 
undue benefit to DIAL at the cost of passengers who were taxed for using Delhi 
Airport through levy of DF amounting to ` 3415.35 crore.  
 (Para 2.7)  
2.7    Highly concessional lease rent  
IGI airport has a total area of 5106 acres. As per provisions of OMDA, 4608.9 acres 
of land out of this (along with buildings, constructions or immovable assets) was 
leased to DIAL on  “as is where is basis” as per the term of the agreement, on a 
highly concessional annual lease rent of ` 100 (Rupees One hundred only) for the 
entire stretch. If the rate applicable to DGCA and BCAS as shown in Para 2.4 had 
been made applicable, DIAL would have had to pay ` 1461 crore.  
(Para 2.9) 
2.8   Deficient Land records at IGI Airport. 
As per the records of Directorate of Land of the AAI, as on 9 February 2011, the 
total land available at IGI Airport was 5106 acres of which 4799.09 acres was 
Demised Premises and 306.91 acres was Carved out Assets. Audit, however, was 
not able to verify the same as the details of khasara number, land award orders 
issued by Land Acquisition Collector etc. were not available with AAI. A proper 
physical survey should be conducted to earmark exact area of airport land, 
hospitality land, demised premises and carved out area so that future disputes are 
avoided. 
(Para 2.10) 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi xi 
 
2.9  DIAL's financing of the project  
Out of the total capital expenditure of ` 12857 crore (AERA has admitted 
`12502.86 crore for levy of DF), the promoter’s equity has been ` 2450 crore out 
of which 26 per cent (i.e. ` 637 crore) was contributed by AAI and 74 per cent (i.e. 
` 1813 crore) was contributed by the other JV partners. Out of the capital 
expenditure of ` 12502 crore as accepted by AERA, only 19 per cent  has been 
promoters’ contribution. ` 5266 crore (42 per cent ) have come from loans and  
` 1471 crore (12 per cent) has come from Security Deposits. While, only ` 50 Crore 
has come from internal accruals, ` 3415.35 crore (27 per cent ) have come from 
Airport Development Fees charged on the passengers.  
The internal accrual of ` 50 crore is in sharp contrast to Mumbai airport, where the 
internal accrual has been ` 1999 crore. 
Thus, with an equity contribution of `2450 crore out of which the private 
consortium’s share was ` 1813 crore, DIAL has got a brownfield airport for sixty 
years and in addition, commercial rights of land valued at ` 24000 crore with a 
potential earning capacity, according to it’s own estimates, of ` 163557 crore. 
(Para 2.8) 
2.10   Change in Major Development Plan and increase in Ground Floor Area  
Against the area of 470,179 square metres indicated in the Major Development 
Plans, DIAL actually constructed 553,887 square metres of area at IGI Airport, 
Delhi. Thus the actual built up ground floor area exceeded the Major Development 
Plan by nearly 83,708 square metres (17.80 per cent). The financial auditors (M/S 
KPMG Advisory Services Private Limited) appointed by AAI to verify the final 
project cost submitted by DIAL, reported (15 October 2010) that the ground floor 
area for peak hour passenger at T3 was higher than most of the leading airports in 
the Asia Pacific Region. M/S Engineers India Limited, the technical auditor, 
appointed by AAI also opined in August 2010 that “due to this increase in area, all 
other items of the project have increased proportionately.”  
Neither MOCA nor AAI took any action for such gross violation of the Master Plan 
and the consequent increase in the project cost.  
 (Para 3.1)   
2.11 Actual Project Cost vis-a-vis Original Project Cost  
As per the Business Plan, the original project cost approved by DIAL and 
communicated to AAI on 18 January 2008 was ` 8975 crore. Actual project cost as 
on 20 July 2010, as claimed by DIAL, was ` 12857 crore. However, the final project 
cost adopted by Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) for arriving at the 
Regulatory Asset Base (RAB) was ` 12502.86 crore 2 . The variation between the 
                                                            
2 Including the `701 crore incurred after 31.03.2010 for ATC `350 crore, Delhi Jal Board  
`54 crore and Provision `297 crore 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
xii Implementation of Public Private Partnership
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
approved project cost and the final project cost was ` 3882 crore, i.e., 43.25 per  
cent higher than the original project cost.  
As per the original estimates the entire funding was proposed to be through 
equity, debt, security deposits and internal accruals. However, this was reduced to 
72.68 per cent  of the total fund requirements of the actual project cost. This 
financial gap was mainly met by levy of DF which constitutes 27.32 per cent of the 
total capital outlay. OMDA did not envisage the funding of project cost through 
levy of DF from passengers since the entire funding was to be through debt and 
equity only.  
(Para 3.2)   
2.12  Mandatory Capital Projects (MCPs)  
Audit noticed that out of 15 MCPs to be completed by 3 April 2008, 11 MCPs were 
delayed for periods ranging from 87 days to 236 days. As per the clause 1 of 
Schedule 6 of SSA, DIAL was not entitled for any incentive in respect of base 
airport charges as 11 MCPs were not completed as per schedule. However, MoCA 
approved (February 2009), 10 per  cent  increase in the aeronautical charges 
including landing, parking, passenger service fee (facilitation component only),  
X-Ray Baggage and Housing Charges at IGI Airport, New Delhi w.e.f 16 February 
2009, as incentive to DIAL. Therefore, the permission to increase 10 per cent  
charges as incentive for base airport charges was against the provisions of SSA and 
was an undue favour to DIAL. 
 (Para 3.3)   
2.13   Aeronautical/ non- aeronautical airport charges  
As per existing airport business operations, there are two systems in vogue for 
levying of aeronautical and non-aeronautical charges termed as Single Till or Dual 
Till. Under Single Till system, all the revenue and cost are put together in respect 
of all aeronautical and non-aeronautical airport services and in case of Dual Till 
System, revenues are distributed between aeronautical and non-aeronautical 
services separately. 
AERA has recorded that non-aeronautical services are less capital intensive and are 
considered to be more profitable. Using OMDA’s provisions, DIAL has outsourced 
most of the non aeronautical services through the mechanism of JVs. While OMDA 
allowed DIAL to sub contract any service, this has an impact on the revenue to be 
shared with AAI.  
The provision of Dual Till taking into account only 30 per cent of the revenue 
generated by non aeronautical services gives unfair advantage to the DIAL at the 
cost of the Government/passengers. Outsourcing of these services through JVs, 
has put additional burden on passengers in the form of DF on one hand and has 
deprived AAI of the revenue, on the other. 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi xiii 
 
Many of these services outsourced were “non aeronautical” as per OMDA but as 
per AERA Act, these are aeronautical services.  
 (Para 4.1)  
2.14 Sharing of revenue from existing leases with DIAL resulted in loss of ` 23.15 
 crore  
Audit had pointed out a loss of ` 23.15 crore (March 2011) to AAI, due to lease 
rent in respect of existing leases being collected by DIAL in contravention of Article 
2.6 of OMDA, read with Article 2. 1.1 of the Lease Deed with DIAL. According to 
the provisions of OMDA/Lease Deed, the lease rent from existing leases was 
receivable by AAI till the expiry of respective lease periods.  
MoCA stated (March 2012) that as there was difference in the interpretation of 
the provisions of OMDA and Lease Deed, legal opinion of Ministry of Law has been 
sought on the treatment of Revenue accruing from existing leases at both MIAL 
and DIAL.  
(Para 4.2)  
2.15  Operation Support (Human Resource) 
Audit had pointed out in 2010-11 that against a claim of ` 250.88 crore towards 
retirement compensation in terms of provisions of Chapter VI of OMDA, DIAL had 
paid only ` 80 crore. This resulted in loss of interest of ` 19.73 crore (June 2010) 
due to delay in payment of the balance amount of `170.88 crore towards 
Retirement Compensation. Release of the balance amount was delayed by DIAL on 
the plea that there was no specific provision in OMDA as to the timing of payment 
of Retirement Compensation to AAI.  
MoCA directed AAI to recover the retirement compensation without penal 
interest from DIAL by March 2010. The MoCA also intimated (May 2010) that any 
payment due after 01 April 2010 automatically attracted the penal interest on 
State Bank of India Prime Lending Rate plus 10 per cent . Against this, the AAI 
allowed DIAL to pay the said amount as monthly installments spread over a 
period of 10 years without any contractual obligations.  
Thus the decision of the AAI was against the directions of MoCA resulting in loss of 
interest amounting to ` 58.57 crore calculated at 8 per cent per annum. 
(Para 5.1)   
2.16 Funds diverted from PSF (Security Component) Escrow Account for 
 purchase of Security Equipments by DIAL. 
As per clause 3.3.5 of SSA, DIAL was to procure and maintain, at its own cost,  all 
security systems and equipments. However, in contravention of the provisions of 
SSA, MoCA vide its order dated 16 April 2010, directed that the entire cost 
incurred on purchase of security equipments could be met from PSF (SC).  

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
xiv Implementation of Public Private Partnership
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
This resulted in undue favour to DIAL which led to loss of ` 239.69 crore during 
2006-11 to the public exchequer. 
 In addition to the above, DIAL also debited ` 4.34 crore (up to the year 2009-11) 
towards insurance charges to PSF (SC) Account in accordance with  Standard 
Operating Procedure issued (January 2009) by MoCA, which was otherwise to be 
borne by the DIAL as per Article 8.5.6 (i) of OMDA and SOP.  
(Para 6.1 and Para 6.3)   
2.17   Irregular withdrawal from PSF (SC) Escrow Account 
MoCA clarified during January 2010 and April 2010 that the security related 
expenses permitted under PSF (SC) should not include expenditure on any other 
security staff or other administrative set-up created/ engaged by the airport 
operators. Subsequently, considering the request of The Association of Private 
Airport Operators (APAO), MoCA clarified (5 July 2010) that the guidelines dated 
16 April 2010  have only prospective application. Accordingly, DIAL under the cover 
of this clarification, debited all the expenditure incurred during 2006-10 towards 
private security agencies including consultant fees to PSF (SC). This undue favour 
to the private operator i.e. DIAL, resulted in irregular withdrawal of ` 26.05 crore 
(up to March 2010) from PSF (SC) Escrow Account.   
(Para 6.2)   
The observations contained in the paras 2.1, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.12, 2.14, 2.16, 
2.17 etc would indicate that whenever  DIAL has raised an issue regarding 
revenue to accrue to it or expenditure to be debited to Government, in 
contravention of the provisions of OMDA, the Ministry and AAI have always 
ruled in favour of the operators and against the interest of the Government.  
 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 1 
 
 
 
1.1 Growth of Aviation Sector 
The Airports Authority of India (AAI) was and largely is the sole air traffic service 
provider for the air space in the country covering an area of 2.8 million square 
nautical miles of land mass and the adjoining oceanic area as recognized by 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). There are 115 airports in the country 
including 22 civil enclaves
1 of Defence airfields as on 31 March 2011.  
With opening of Indian airspace to private as well as international operators, the air 
traffic in the country registered phenomenal increase. Between 2000 to 2006, 
passenger traffic increased from 4.20 crore to 7.33 crore, cargo movements 
increased from 8.46 lakh MT to 13.97 lakh MT and movement of aircrafts rose from 
4.90 lakh to 8.38 lakh. In fact the growth commenced from 1996 and continues till 
today. 
The existing airport infrastructure proved to be inadequate to cope with the 
unprecedented increase in traffic and cargo. It led to congestion at many airports and 
in particular airports in metros. The country required new airports as also expansion 
and modernization of existing ones to efficiently handle passengers, cargo and 
aircrafts. Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA), in a Conference of Chief Secretaries held 
on 20 May 2006 projected a requirement of an additional 
` 40,454 crore to augment 
and modernize existing infrastructure and to construct Greenfield airports. The 
revenue surplus generated by AAI was found to be grossly inadequate to meet this 
requirement. 
1.2 Background of the decision of Joint Venture 
While approving the restructuring of airports of AAI in January 2000 through long 
term lease route, the Cabinet had also directed that after detailed plans were 
prepared for development of any airport, each such case for lease should be 
separately brought up for consideration of the Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs. 
Action was accordingly initiated by MoCA to restructure and upgrade Delhi, Mumbai, 
Chennai and Kolkata airports through the long leasing route. Financial and Legal 
consultants were appointed and work of due diligence and transaction structure 
started. During this exercise it was felt in the Ministry that the Joint Venture route 
had certain advantages over long term leasing route. The matter was again put up 
for consideration of the Cabinet in December 2002 seeking approval to the proposal 
of restructuring of Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata airports through Joint 
                                                            
1 Civil enclaves are airports under the control of Navy / Defence 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
2 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
Venture route by formation of separate Joint Venture company for each of these 
airports with the respective selected bidder, in which AAI would have five per cent 
equity. 
The Cabinet directed the MoCA to discuss the proposal further with Ministry of 
Finance and Ministry of Company Affairs and return to the Cabinet. In July 2003, 
Ministry of Finance opined that the proposal should be restricted to Delhi and 
Mumbai only. 
Finally in September 2003, Cabinet approved the proposal of MoCA that 
restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports may be undertaken through JV route by 
formation of two separate companies between AAI and selected JV partners. It also 
approved formation of an Empowered Group of Ministers(EGOM) comprising 
Minister of Finance, Minister of Law and Justice, Minister of Disinvestment and 
Minister of Civil Aviation (in-charge) to decide on the detailed modalities including 
the design parameters, bid evaluation criteria etc. based on which  the Joint Venture 
partner was to be selected. Later Minister of Defence became the Chairman of the 
EGOM. 
The EGOM in February 2005 approved all the key principles of the Request for 
Proposal (RFP) document along with the draft transaction documents i.e. Operation, 
Management and Development Agreement (OMDA), State Support Agreement 
(SSA), Shareholders Agreement (SHA), Lease Deed Agreement, CNS-ATM
2 Agreement 
and State Government Support Agreement. 
The EGOM after evaluation of the technical and financial bids recommended the 
Joint Venture Partners, which were submitted to the Cabinet for approval in a note 
dated 31 January 2006. The Cabinet approved the proposal on 1 February 2006. 
For Indira Gandhi International Airport, the JV partner approved was M/S GMR 
Consortium. The consortium comprised six private entities namely (i) GMR 
Infrastructure Limited (ii) GMR Energy Limited (iii) Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport 
Services Worldwide and (iv) Malaysia Airports (Mauritius) Private Limited (v) GVL 
Investments Pvt. Limited and (vi) India Development Fund. 
AAI incorporated on 1 March 2006 a subsidiary company namely M/s Delhi 
International Airport Private Limited (DIAL). After the OMDA was signed on 4 April 
2006 with the JV partner, 74  per cent  of the equity shares were sold to them in 
accordance with the Shareholders’ Agreement. In terms of the agreement, issued 
share capital of 
` 200 crore was jointly held by AAI (26  per cent), GMR Infrastructure 
Ltd (31.10 per cent ), GMR Energy Limited (10  per cent ), GVL Investments Ltd (9  per 
cent), Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide (10  per cent ), Malaysia 
Airports (Mauritius) Private Limited (10  per cent) and India Development Fund (3.90  
per cent ). Subsequently, shares of IDF were acquired by GMR group. The paid up 
equity capital of DIAL as on 31 March 2011 was ` 2450 crore with the share of AAI at 
26 per cent.  
                                                            
2 Communication, Navigation, Surveillance and Air Traffic Management 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 3 
 
Indira Gandhi International Airport was handed over to M/s DIAL with effect from 3 
May 2006. 
During the audit, MoCA informed (March 2012) Audit that “ the decision to the 
restructure and modernize Delhi Airport was a policy decision of the highest body 
i.e. Cabinet. The terms and conditions as well as the modalities of modernization/ 
restructuring as mentioned in the transaction documents were finalized and 
approved by the EGOM. It was further clarified that there has been no change in 
the finalized transaction documents. Several issues such as JV route, leasing of land 
/assets, Concession Period, Right of First Refusal (ROFR) etc. were policy decisions 
of the Cabinet based on expert inputs in formulation and inter-ministerial 
consultation. Hence these policy decisions should not be brought into question at 
this stage through audit observations.” 
Admittedly, the decision to adopt the Joint Venture route was a policy decision. 
Audit acknowledges the sole prerogative of the Government to take such policy 
decisions. This audit exercise, on the other hand, has been restricted to 
operationalization of the decision of the joint venture mode. The terms and 
conditions as agreed to in the transaction documents do not fall in the domain of 
the policies though these have been approved by the EGOM.  
Our observations pertain to operationalization of the JV mode and implementation 
of the OMDA and SSA. In the course of audit, we have also tried to assess whether 
during the conceptualization and implementation phases, the interests of 
Government and its revenue have been protected. The decision to enter into a 
Joint Venture to develop and manage Indira Gandhi International Airport is first of 
its kind. The present Audit Report thus should be viewed in terms of lessons learnt 
for future guidance. 
It is to be noted that at the time when OMDA and SSA were being considered and 
finalized, no Regulator was in place. The SSA recorded the intention of the 
Government to establish an independent Airport Economic Regulatory Authority 
(AERA). The AERA Act establishing such an Authority was passed in December 
2008. The Act came into force on 1 January 2009. The powers and functions of 
AERA which are contained in Chapter III of the AERA Act, came into force on  
1 September 2009. 
  

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
4 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
The steps in the public private partnership  process are shown in the flow chart below: 
Formulation, Development and Design of PPP in AAI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MoCA Advisors
/g131 Inter Ministerial Group 
/g131 Evaluation Committee (EC) i.e. a composite 
team of Financial Consultant ,Global Technical 
Advisor and Legal Consultant. 
/g131 Government Review Committee(GRC)  to 
review the evaluation by EC 
/g131 A Committee of Secretaries (CoS), to advice 
the EGoM  
/g131 CoS constituted a Group of Eminent Technical 
Expert (GETE) on 24th December, 2005  
K
E
Y
P
L
A
Y
E
 
R
The Beginning 
/g131 A high level Task Force for infrastructure was 
set up on 30 October 1998 in pursuance of 
Prime Minister’s declaration made on 24 
October 1998 that world class international 
airports would be set up in the country. 
/g131 Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) submitted a 
proposal to Cabinet on 5 January 1999 for 
corporatization of the existing Delhi and 
Mumbai Airports. 
/g131 The Cabinet approved this proposal in its 
meeting held on 20 January 1999. 
The Cabinet 
/g131 approved (11 September 2003) restructuring 
of Delhi and Mumbai airports through Joint-
Venture mode.   
/g131 constituted an Empowered Group of Ministers 
(EGoM) and also an Inter-Ministerial Group 
(IMG) to assist EGoM. 
/g131 reconstituted the EGOM, under the 
chairmanship of Defence Minister,  in its 
meeting held on 15 June 2004. 
AAI Advisors
/g131 M/S ABN AMRO- Financial 
Consultants 
/g131 M/S Airplan, Australia-Global 
Technical Advisor. 
/g131 M/S Amarchand & Mangaldas 
- Legal Consultant. 
EGoM 
/g131 finalized and approved the key 
principles of the Request for 
Proposal (RFP) 
/g131 concluded that at least four 
bidders for each Airport should 
be allowed to go forward to 
the next stage of the selection 
process  
GMR 
Consortium and 
GVK Consortium 
were selected as 
the successful 
JV Partners for 
Delhi and 
Mumbai 
Airports, 
respectively. 
The Bidders 
/g131 10 entities expressed an interest 
out of which 9 were shortlisted. 
/g131 Final version of RFP was issued 
to 8 bidders 
/g131 Out of 8 bidders, five bidders 
submitted their offer for Delhi 
Airport and six for Mumbai 
Airport. 

 
1.3
Pres
priv
resp
equ
resp
 
 
M
and
of
M
and
of 
G
G
H
 PPP P r
sently, fou r
vate comp a
pective Sta t
uity structur
pect of thes
Modernization
d restructurin
f IGI Airport a
Delhi 
Modernization
d restructurin
CST Airport a
Mumbai
Greenfield 
Airport at 
Bangalore
Greenfield 
Airport at 
Hyderabad
rojects of 
r airports i
anies with e
te Govern m
re and rev e
se four airpo
n 
ng 
t 
• 26 per
• 74 per
• 45.99 %
• The ai
n 
ng 
at 
• 26 per
• 74 per
• 38.7% 
• The ai
• 13 per c
• 13 per c
• 74 per c
Zurich A
• 4% shar
• The airp
• 13 per c
• 13 per c
• 74 per c
Berhad
• 4% shar
• The airp
AAI 
n India ha
equity par t
ments. All t
enue sharing
orts are as f
 
r cent equity 
r cent equity 
% Gross Reve
rport being m
r cent equity 
r cent equity 
Gross Reven
rport being m
cent equity pa
cent equity pa
cent equity by
Airport  and  L
re of Gross Re
port being ma
cent equity pa
cent equity pa
cent held by st
) 
re of Gross Re
port being ma
Implem
Indi
ve been a l
ticipation f r
hese are b a
g model as 
follows. 
 by AAI
by a strategi
enue Share b
managed by D
particpation
by a strateg
i
nue share by 
managed by M
articipation by
artcipation by
y a strategic JV
Larsen & Toubr
evenue to be p
naged by Ban
articipation by 
articipation by 
trategic JV par
evenue to be p
naged by Hyd
mentation of P
ira Gandhi Int
llowed to b
rom Airpo r
ased on re v
approved b
ic JV Partner
by AAI
Delhi Interna
 by AAI 
ic JV Partner
AAI
Mumbai Inte
AAI
Government o
V Partner ( a co
ro)
paid to GOI
galore Interna
AAI
Government 
rtners (GMR a
paid to GOI.
erabad Intern
Report 
Public Private 
ternational A
be develo p
rts Authori t
venue sha r
by Governm
ational Airpo
enational Airp
of Karnataka.
onsortium of S
ational Airport
of Andhra Pra
nd Malaysia A
national Airpor
No. 5 of 201
Partnership  
irport, Delhi 
ped and ru n
ty of India 
ring model. 
ment of Ind
rt Pvt. Ltd.
port Pvt. Ltd
Siemens, Uniqu
t Pvt. Ltd. 
adesh
Airports Holdin
rt Pvt. Ltd.
12-13 
5 
n by 
and 
The 
ia in 
 
.
ue    
ngs   

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
6 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
1.4 Audit Objectives 
The main objective of the performance audit was to assess whether; 
/g120 Crucial decisions for fixing of the concession period, Right of First Refusal, 
fixing of upfront fee and leasing of land for commercial exploitation reflected 
public interest and equity;  
/g120 Development of the airport was carried out as per Master Plan including 
funding of the project through debt and levy of development fee was as per 
the agreement; 
/g120 Whether transaction documents like OMDA, SSA etc were properly 
structured to support PPP project and adequate due diligence was carried 
out to safe guard public interest under PPP; and 
/g120 Receipt of revenue share of 45.99 per cent to AAI was as per OMDA including 
share of gross revenue generated from outsourced services. 
1.5 Audit Criteria 
The Performance Audit was carried out with reference to:  
/g120 The terms and conditions laid down in Request for Proposal (RFP) issued at 
pre-bid stage, OMDA and the supporting agreements relating to concession 
period, levy of DF, tariff determination, leasing of land, Master Plan, project 
cost etc. 
/g120 Guidelines/ directions issued by MoCA, AERA and AAI, the Board minutes and 
Agenda papers of AAI, 
/g120 Records maintained at the Co-ordination Cell of AAI, Independent Engineer’s 
Reports, Independent Auditor’s Reports, MIS Returns, and records and 
information maintained by AAI for calculation of revenue share of AAI.  
/g120 Agreements and other returns of DIAL. 
1.6 Scope of Audit and Methodology 
The audit was conducted on documents available with Ministry of Civil Aviation and 
Airports Authority of India. The audit covered mainly the period from 2006 to 2011. 
The audit methodology and objectives were discussed in the entry conference with 
the Executive Director (Internal Audit and Co-ordination), AAI in July 2011. During 
the audit, discussions with Management were also held whenever necessary. The 
draft Audit Report was issued to the AAI/MoCA on 15 February 2012 and the reply of 
the MoCA was received on 12 March, 2012. Audit findings were discussed during the 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 7 
 
exit conference on 16 March, 2012 in which Chairman AERA, Secretary MoCA and 
other senior officers of MoCA, AAI, AERA and DIAL were present. 
There have been significant improvements in services at Indira Gandhi 
International airport for the travelling public. The new terminal T3 was completed 
within time for the Commonwealth Games 2010. The Airports Council International 
has adjudged the airport as the second best in the world in the category of 25-40 
million passengers per annum.  
As per the agreement relating to revenue share with AAI, DIAL is to pay 45.99 per 
cent of its gross revenue. Accordingly, DIAL paid 
` 271.98 crore in 2006-2007,  
`402.72 crore in 2007-08, ` 445.63 crore in 2008-09, ` 538.92 crore in 2009-10 and 
`577.26 crore in 2010-2011 to AAI.  
1.7  Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation and assistance extended by the Chairman 
AERA, Secretary, MoCA, Chairman AAI, Senior Officers and the staff of Ministry , 
Executive Directors of AAI and staff at all levels for providing assistance during the 
Performance Audit. 
  

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 9 
 
 
 
2.1 Descriptions of the Transaction Documents 
Consequent on the decision to hand over the Indira Gandhi International Airport to 
the Joint Venture Company and before physically handing over the airport to the 
latter, a number of agreements were signed among the concerned parties. These 
documents individually and collectively determine the terms and conditions of the 
handing over including economic benefits accruing to the parties. It is to be noted 
that when these agreements were signed, the Regulator, namely Airport Economic 
Regulatory Authority (AERA) was not in existence. Some of these documents contain 
provisions relating to areas like tariff fixation for aeronautical services, which later, 
with the establishment of AERA came under the Regulator’s domain of decision 
making.  
Operation, Maintenance and Development Agreement (OMDA) 
Together with the State Support Agreement, this agreement is the most important 
document and forms the soul of the Public Private Partnership in Indira Gandhi 
International airport. Signed between Airport Authority of India and DIAL, this 
comprehensive agreement lays down the obligations and responsibilities of both the 
parties, the terms of revenue sharing and duration of the concession, conditions of 
assets transfers at present and in future, terms and conditions of land transfers etc. 
The agreement was signed on 4 April 2006.  
OMDA in Schedules 5 and 6 defines aeronautical services and non-aeronautical 
services. While DIAL was free to fix tariff for non-aeronautical services, 
responsibilities of fixation of tariff for aeronautical services was with the 
Government of India and later with its establishment, the Regulator, AERA. OMDA 
also allowed DIAL to outsource any services.  
State Support Agreement (SSA) 
Complementary to the OMDA, the State Support Agreement was signed between 
Government of India and DIAL on 26 April 2006. It lays down the responsibilities and 
obligations of the Government of India and DIAL in their respective domain and to 
each other. It lays down in Schedule 1, the principles of tariff fixation for 
aeronautical services.  
State Government Support Agreement 
State Government Support Agreement (SGSA) was signed on 26 April 2006 between 
the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi and DIAL to provide support 
services to the project. The agreement provided that the State Government will 
provide support to DIAL in matters relating to removal of encroachment, 
Chapter 2 
Transaction Documents and their impact 
and compliance 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
10 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
procurement of additional land for development of airport, removal of obstruction 
outside the airport boundary to ensure safe and efficient air traffic movement, 
improve the surface area access to the airport and to provide all the utilities on 
payment basis to DIAL. The SGSA also provided for assistance in procuring various 
clearances which are required by applicable law for undertaking and implementing 
the project as mentioned in OMDA. 
Lease Deed Agreement 
The Lease Deed agreement was signed on 25 April 2006 between AAI and DIAL to 
lease the demised premises on “as is where is basis” on an annual lease rent of  
` 100/- (` One hundred only) initially for a period of 30 years extendable for another 
30 years by virtue of extension of concession period. The demised premises include 
all the buildings, construction or immovable assets, if any on the premises as 
described in the agreement with the liberty to construct, erect, renovate, alter or 
otherwise deal with the leased Premises.  
Communication, Navigation and Surveillance (CNS)/Air Traffic Management (ATM) 
Agreement 
The agreement was signed on 25 April 2006 between AAI and DIAL to provide air 
traffic services support at the airport since only AAI is authorized to provide 
necessary air traffic services within Indian air space and at all civil airports in India.  
Shareholders Agreement 
Signed on 4 April 2006 by and between AAI and DIAL and other participants, 
Shareholders Agreement recorded the terms and conditions to govern the 
relationships in their mutual capacity as the shareholders of the JVC. 
Airport Operator Agreement 
As per Schedule 8 of OMDA, DIAL is required to enter into an Airport Operator 
Agreement with the Airport Operator (AO) who is a member of the consortium 
(nominated if more than one AO are in the consortium). The agreement 
contractually set out the role, responsibilities, accountabilities and financial 
arrangements between the AO and DIAL. Accordingly, an agreement  was signed on 
1 May 2006 between DIAL and Fraport AG Frankfurt Services Worldwide to provide 
airport services. 
2.2 Operation, Management and Development Agreement and State 
 Support Agreement 
Government of India adopted Joint Venture mode to facilitate involvement of 
private sector to participate aggressively in infrastructure projects being taken up for 
modernization. Two most important agreements- OMDA and SSA- determined the 
terms and conditions of transfer of Indira Gandhi International Airport to DIAL. 
  

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 11 
 
Conflicts between OMDA and AERA Act in defining aeronautical and non-
aeronautical services 
Clause 3.1 of the State Support Agreement(SSA) recognized Government of India’s 
intention to establish an independent Airport Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) 
which would be responsible for certain aspects of regulations (including regulation of 
aeronautical charges). Despite the above intention, provisions of OMDA or SSA were 
not subjected to review by the Regulator. The AERA Act establishing such an 
Authority, was passed in December 2008. The Act came into force on 1 January 
2009. The powers and functions of AERA which are contained in Chapter III of the Act 
came into force on 1 September 2009. 
Audit noted conflicts between provisions in OMDA and SSA on one hand and the 
AERA Act on the other, which will have long term repercussions on the Regulator’s 
role on tariff fixation in Indira Gandhi International Airport. Section 13(1)(a) of the 
AERA Act states that one of the functions of the Authority is to determine the tariff 
for the aeronautical services. However, definitions of aeronautical and non-
aeronautical services differ substantially between OMDA and the AERA Act, thus 
affecting the calculation of targeted revenue for the purpose of tariff fixation for 
aeronautical services at the airport. Schedule 5 and 6 of OMDA define aeronautical 
and non-aeronautical services. Cargo Handling Service, for example is a non-
aeronautical service in accordance with OMDA but it is aeronautical service in terms 
of AERA Act. Similarly, Ground Handling services which have been included  as non-
aeronautical services in OMDA are aeronautical services in AERA Act. 
Treating these as non-aeronautical services in OMDA also provides undue financial 
advantage as in terms of SSA, the Targeted Revenue for the purpose of Tariff fixation 
takes into account only 30  per cent of the revenue generated from non-aeronautical 
services.  
AERA follows single till
3 system in all other major airports. In the case of Delhi and 
Mumbai airports, however, AERA is constrained to follow the dual till system due to 
provisions contained in SSA, where, tariff fixation for aeronautical services is to be 
done as per dual till formula given in SSA which takes into account only 30 per cent 
of the gross revenue generated by DIAL from the revenue share assets. In fact the 
tariff fixed by the AERA according to the formula provided in the SSA did not take 
into account full amount of revenue generated by profitable services
4 like cargo 
handling and car parking. Since OMDA and SSA are static documents without any 
trigger for review either by Government or by AERA at any point of time, fixation of 
tariff for aeronautical services for IGIA remain outside the effective jurisdiction of 
the Regulator. 
Apart from Dual Till method, as per SSA, the target revenue does not include 
revenue generated from non-transfer assets- in case of IGIA- the rights of 
                                                            
3 Single Till method is the tariff fixation method which takes into account revenue generated 
both from aeronautical and non-aeronautical services. 
4 Some of the non-aeronautical services like cargo handling and ground handling have been 
stated by AERA as less capital intensive and more profitable than aeronautical services. 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
12 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
commercial exploitation of 239.95 acres of land. Thus revenue so generated does 
not even form part of 30 per cent  of the gross revenue as mentioned in the 
preceding paragraph. This is now confirmed by AERA order dated 20 April 2012 
wherein it is mentioned that “the Authority decided to exclude the gross revenue 
from non-transfer assets towards cross subsidization of aeronautical cost while 
determining the target revenue.” 
Audit noticed that several other provisions of OMDA and SSA favoured DIAL to the 
detriment of the financial interests of Government / AAI/public. These are discussed 
below: 
2.3  Concession Period 
Important condition in Note to Cabinet absent in the agreement 
While seeking approval of Cabinet to adopt Joint Venture route for restructuring of 
Delhi and Mumbai airports by formation of separate companies between AAI and 
selected JV Partner, the Note to the Cabinet dated 1 September 2003 envisaged 
concession initially for 30 years which could be extended by another 30 years 
subject to mutual agreement and negotiation of terms. However, as per the final 
bid documents, the “subject to mutual agreement and negotiation of terms” was 
left out. The OMDA which was signed in April 2006 did not contain any provision of 
mutual agreement and fresh negotiations before extension of the concession 
period and thus was a violation of what was proposed in the Cabinet Note. It gives 
DIAL the right to extend the term for another 30 years. 
This is not only a violation of the commitment in the initial Cabinet Note but also 
unilateral and unfair advantage given to DIAL which is detrimental to Government 
interest as it does not provide the Government any scope for review of any of the 
conditions in OMDA and SSA. 
The four critical elements that determine such types of concession agreements in a 
public private partnership are traffic volumes, tariffs, concession period and capital 
costs. In case of OMDA, the concession period had no trigger indicating any linkage 
to any of the above four elements.  
The initial concession period fixed as per the agreement is 30 years from the 
effective date. Article 18.1 (b) Chapter XVIII of OMDA provides that: 
“Prior to the expiry of 30 years from the Effective Date, JVC shall have the right to 
extend the Term hereof by a written notice for an additional term of 30 years on 
the same terms and conditions
5 provided no JVC Event of Default had taken place 
during the preceding five years of the 25 th year from the Effective date. Such right 
of extension shall be exercised prior to the 25 th anniversary from the Effective date 
but not earlier than six months from the 25th anniversary from the Effective date."  
                                                            
5 Emphasis added by audit. 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 13 
 
Thus DIAL enjoys the unilateral right to extend the concession period for another 30 
years, unless they default during 20 th to 25 th year. OMDA and resultantly all other 
agreements including SSA gain validity of 30 plus 30 years without any trigger or 
scope for review except an event of default by DIAL in the small window of five years 
between 20
th and 25 th year. Effectively, DIAL as a result has been granted rights to 
operate the airport for a period of sixty years with the terms and conditions frozen in 
the OMDA.  
In case of any infrastructure project, financial prudence entails systematic evaluation 
of benchmarks with reference to internal rate of return, return on investments, 
expected break even period, traffic trends which would include passenger and cargo 
movements before fixing the duration of concession period. In this case, neither 
MoCA nor AAI provided to Audit any evidence which would indicate that these 
inputs were considered while fixing concession period of 30 plus 30 years. No trigger 
of any kind has been included either in OMDA or in the SSA. The basis for fixation of 
30 plus 30 years as concession period though called for but was not provided to 
Audit(December 2011).  
The MoCA stated (March 2012) that a financial consultant was appointed and as per 
the advice, a period of 30 years was reasonable for the investors to recoup their 
investment. Claiming that concession period of 30 years is similar to other 
infrastructure projects in India, MoCA further stated that in case of the Delhi and 
Mumbai airports, the concession period and the traffic projections were not the 
bidding criteria. In fact, the sole bidding criterion was the revenue share. Leasing out 
the airports and provision for extension of the lease period was a policy decision 
taken by the Union Cabinet and this was known to all the bidders as it was finalized 
before issuing the Request for Proposal to the Pre-Qualified Bidders (PQBs). 
The reply of the Ministry that the concession period of 30 years is similar to other 
infrastructure projects in India i.e. Ports, Highways etc. is factually incorrect. 
According to the model concession agreement issued by the Committee on 
Infrastructure of Planning Commission, the concession period typically granted by 
Port Trusts is 30 years. Similarly, in the case of highways, the period is usually 20 
years. In the case of Male airport and Istanbul airport, where GMR is a stakeholder, 
the concession period is 25 and 20 years, respectively.  
Audit could not find any infrastructure project except in case of Delhi and Mumbai 
Airports wherein the concession period is initially for 30 years which can be further 
extended for another 30 years at the option of the concessionaire on the same terms 
and conditions.  
2.4 Right of First Refusal  
In addition to the unilateral right of DIAL to manage the IGIA for sixty years, the State 
Support Agreement (SSA) for 30 years allows the Right of First Refusal (ROFR) to DIAL 
with regard to any second airport if planned within 150 km radius of the IGIA. State 
Support Agreement (SSA) provides that the Right of First Refusal with regard to any 
second airport being planned within a 150 km radius of Indira Gandhi International 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
14 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
Airport will be given to DIAL by following a competitive bidding process, in which 
DIAL could participate. In the event of DIAL being unsuccessful in the bidding, it 
would be allowed to match the most competitive bid, if its bid is within the range of 
10 per cent of most competitive bid. This condition will be applicable for the first 30 
years. 
Allowing such right of first refusal in relation to second airport without triggers like 
saturation point of existing airport, traffic census, rate of return on capital and 
expected break-even period amounts to an undue favour to DIAL. This provision also 
thwarts competition and provides DIAL with a natural advantage on the second 
airport.
  
The MoCA replied (March 2012) that ROFR was considered imperative and it was a 
policy decision taken by the EGoM before issuing the RFP in order to protect the JVC 
against risks in investments if the traffic were to be diverted to a competitive airport 
in the vicinity after heavy investments had been made. 
2.5 Misuse of the concept of Upfront fee to transfer 190.19 acres of 
 land to DIAL at a paltry amount of ` 6.19 crore 
As per Article 11.1.1 of OMDA, DIAL paid an upfront fee of ` 150 crore to the AAI on 
29 April 2006. The upfront fee fixed for Delhi and Mumbai airports as per bid 
document was 
` 150 crore. The basis for fixing of the onetime upfront fee 
amounting to ` 150 crore paid to AAI were called for by Audit, however, it was not 
made available.  
As regards the nature of the upfront fee, Ministry informed (March 2012) Audit that 
“after discussions it was decided by the EGOM that one time upfront fee of ` 150 
crore will be paid by the JVC to AAI. It was also decided that only revenue sharing will 
be the single financial evaluation criterion and OMDA fee will not be pass through for 
fixation of aeronautical tariff. The EGOM also considered that a payment of upfront 
fee to AAI would provide some form of insurance to AAI between the effective date of 
OMDA and date of transfer post completion of the transition plan, since cash flow 
during the period will accrue to JVC only, it was further considered that the upfront 
fee would provide AAI with immediate funding for its 26 per cent equity contribution 
in the JVC. Therefore the quantum of upfront fee (
` 150 crore) had no relation with 
the extent of land and asset at an airport and it was only a part of the OMDA fee.” 
Article 2.6.3 of OMDA states that “ with respect to land underlying the carved out 
assets, the parties further agreed that if, at any time during the term, the JVC 
requires the said land for providing any aeronautical services or developing and/or 
constructing any aeronautical assets, the parties shall come together to negotiate in 
good faith
6 the terms and conditions on which the AAI shall lease to the JVC and the 
JVC, shall take on lease from the AAI, the said land.” 
                                                            
6 Emphasis by Audit. 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 15 
 
When handing over the airport to DIAL, the land area transferred to DIAL by AAI was 
4608.9 acres. This land is termed as “demised premises”. AAI kept to itself land area 
of 497.10 acres. This is termed as “carved-out assets”.  
The Board of the AAI decided in its 129 meeting on 6 March 2009 to lease out an 
additional 190.19 acres of land from the carved out assets to DIAL for aeronautical 
purpose as per Article 2.6.3 of OMDA. 
No negotiations in good faith as enjoined by the OMDA took place. It would be seen 
that the upfront fee was used as base to calculate the price for the additional land 
provided by AAI to DIAL. This allowed AAI to lease out an additional 190.19 acres at 
a meager amount of 
` 6.19 crore.  
It is to be noted that OMDA allows DIAL to use 5 per cent of demised land for 
commercial exploitation. The current value of 9.50 acres (5 per cent of 190.19 
acres) as per AERA’s communication to Audit amounted to ` 950 crore. The earning 
potential for 58 years from 9.50 acres based on DIAL’s own projections is  
` 6475 crore viz [ ` 681.63 * 9.50 acres ]. 
The above is confirmed by the following document.  
 
  


Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
16 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
This decision of AAI was in sharp contrast with the decision of the Board of AAI in 
March 2011 to lease out 7.60 acres of land out of the carved out assets to Director 
General of Civil Aviation and Bureau of Civil Aviation Security. These offices were 
charged annual license fee at a concessional rate of 50  per cent  applicable to 
Government Departments amounting to 
` 2.41 crore per annum with annual 
escalation clause. Application of the same concessional licence fee with the same 
escalation clause for 190.19 acres of land would amount to 
` 4534 crore for a period 
of 27 years. Contrasting this, the land has been leased to DIAL effectively for sixty 
years against a onetime payment of 
` 6.19 crore.  
MoCA stated (March 2012) that 190.19 acres of additional land leased out was 
purely aeronautical area and cannot be used for any construction or commercial 
usage. The reply was silent on the violation of Article 2.6.3 of OMDA which enjoins 
the parties to negotiate in good faith for any further lease of any further land out of 
the carved assets. Ministry’s contention on upfront fee even after the issue being 
pointed out in Audit was in contradiction with the stand taken by AAI while valuing 
the land on the basis of upfront fee. This would indicate that the Ministry decided to 
silently ignore the violation of OMDA by AAI.  
Ministry has not been able to provide a convincing reply as to why a private operator 
should be levied a fee which is much lower than that fixed by Government for its 
own departments. 
2.6  Commercial exploitation of 239.95 acres valued at ` 100 crore 
 per acre 
In terms of Article 2.2.4 of OMDA, DIAL can utilize five per cent of the total demised 
premises of 4799.09 acres of land for provision of non-transfer assets. This amounts 
to 239.95 acres of land. Non-transfer assets are defined as such assets required to 
provide Non-Aeronautical Services as listed in Part II of Schedule 6 of OMDA. This in 
effect means that such land is available for commercial exploitation. This land is 
commonly known as hospitality land.  
AERA in a communication to Audit has informed ( March 2012) that value of 195
7 
acres of hospitality land has been worked out at the rate of ` 100 crore per acre. The 
valuation was made by M/s Merill Lynch in their Report of 26 August 2011. It was 
stated that since the remaining 45 acres had already been monetized through lease 
rentals, AERA did not work out the value of the 45 acres. It is felt in audit that It 
would be reasonable to assume that for the remaining 45 acres also, the valuation 
would be the same. Based on this valuation, the current value of the hospitality land 
would amount to 
` 24000 crore. 
DIAL in a letter dated 27 September 2007 (Annexure-I) to the Joint Secretary, MoCA 
worked out the earning potential of 45 acres of this area at ` 681.63 crore per acre. 
This was in addition to one time security deposit of ` 71.45 crore per acre.  
                                                            
7 Remaining 45 acres was already leased out by DIAL. 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 17 
 
As of March 2012 DIAL has leased out only 45 acres of land. As against the projection 
of ` 1.92 crore per acre for 2012-2013, DIAL has actually reached a lease rental of  
` 1.96 crore per acre for the year. DIAL has also received a security deposit of ` 1471 
crore. While lease rental is shared by AAI, the security deposit is not. 
Using DIAL’s own projection for earning potential of ` 681.63 crore per acre, the 
same amounts to ` 163557 crore for 240 acres of land for 58 years. 45.99 per cent of 
the same amounting to ` 75220 crore would be AAI’s share. The net present value at 
a discount rate of 10 per cent amounts to ` 3566 crore. The share of DIAL would 
amount to ` 88337 crore, net present value of which is ` 4187 crore. 
Audit would like to draw attention to the fact that this area is part of the entire 
area of land that has been handed over to DIAL at the lease rent of  ` 100 per 
annum except for `6.19 crore paid one time for 190.19 acres of land. 
The gross revenue arising out of this asset being non-transfer asset, is not included in 
the target revenue for the purpose of determining the aeronautical charges in terms 
of State Support Agreement. Thus revenue so generated does not form part even of 
30 per cent of the gross revenue utilized for cross subsidization of aeronautical costs. 
This fact was also confirmed by AERA order dated 20 April 2012 wherein it has stated 
that “the Authority decided to exclude the gross revenue from non-transfer assets 
towards cross subsidization of aeronautical cost while determining the target 
revenue.” 
MoCA stated (March 2012) that market value was never the basic criteria for 
privatization of airport business at Delhi. Further the revenue that will accrue to DIAL 
would also be shared with AAI. 
2.7  Airport Development Fee 
Article 13.1 of OMDA states: 
“It is expressly understood that the JVC shall arrange for financing and /or meeting 
all financing requirements through suitable debt and equity contributions in order 
to comply with its obligations hereunder including development of the airport 
pursuant to the Master Plan and the major development plans.”  
In contradiction to the above provisions, in reality, 27.32 per cent  of the project 
funding came from Airport Development Fee levied on the travelling public. As 
would be apparent from the various provisions of the concerned Acts and as later 
confirmed by the Courts, approval of the Ministry vide its order in February 2009 to 
the levy and collection of Airport Development Fee by DIAL was wrong. It also 
amounted to extension of undue advantage to DIAL. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation vide their order No AV 24011/002/2008-AD dated  
9 February 2009 conveyed the approval of the Central Government under Section 
22A of the AAI Act 1994 as amended in 2003, for levy of Development Fee by DIAL at 
IGI Airport. Section 22A of the said Act reads as follows: 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
18 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
“Section 22A: The Authority 8 may, after the previous approval of the Central 
Government in this behalf, levy on, and collect from, the embarking passengers at an 
airport, the development fees at the rate as may be prescribed and such fees shall be 
credited to the Authority and shall be regulated and utilized in the prescribed 
manner, for the purposes of  
(a) Funding or financing the costs of upgradation, expansion or development of 
the airport at which the fee is collected; or 
(b) Establishment or development of a new airport in lieu of the airport referred 
to in clause (a); or 
(c) Investment in the equity in respect of shares to be subscribed by the authority 
in companies engaged in establishing, owning, developing, operating or 
maintaining a private airport in lieu of the airport referred to in clause (a) or 
advancement of loans to such companies or other persons engaged in such 
activities.” 
As would be clear, the section did not authorise the Central Government to allow 
DIAL to levy and collect such development fees to meet the project cost for 
upgradation of the Indira Gandhi International Airport.  
More importantly, allowing DIAL to levy and use the development fees violates 
one of the basic provisions of OMDA, which was part of the bid documents.  
Request for Proposal (RFP)/OMDA did not mention about funding the project cost of 
the airport through levy of DF. In case DF was to be levied after OMDA, this decision 
should have been known to all the bidders at the time of bidding to ensure that all 
the bidders submit their bids with prior knowledge of this fact. The decision to levy 
DF after the effective date amounts to contractual deviation and amounts to funding 
of the project cost through DF collected from the passengers. The action of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation was also in contravention of the provisions in OMDA and 
thus vitiated the bidding process. 
DF constituted 27.32 per cent  of the Capital Expenditure compared to 19 per cent  
equity contribution by the shareholders in DIAL. DF emerges as a significant 
component of project cost, as it is two and a half times of the security deposits 
collected by DIAL and one and a half times of the equity contribution by the 
shareholders of DIAL.  
Further, approval of AERA for levy of DF by DIAL in exercise of the powers conferred 
by Section 13(1)(b) of AERA Act 2008 read with section 22 A of AAI Act 1994 to 
bridge the funding gap was a post contractual benefit provided to DIAL which was 
neither envisaged in the Request For Proposal nor included under any provision of 
OMDA or in the SSA. This has led to undue benefit to DIAL of 
` 3415.35 crore 
collected or to be collected from passengers using Indira Gandhi International 
Airport.  
                                                            
8 Refers to Airports Authority of India 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 19 
 
2.8  DIAL’s financing of the Project 
 
Out of the total capital expenditure of  ` 12857 crore claimed by DIAL, AERA has 
admitted ` 12502.86 crore as the total project cost. The funding gap to the tune of   
` 3415.35  crore was permitted by AERA to be collected from the passengers 
through levy of DF which was not envisaged in OMDA and SSA. 
As would be seen from the above, out of the total capital expenditure of ` 12857 
crore, the promoter’s equity has been ` 2450 crore out of which 26  per cent  is 
contributed by AAI. 74 per cent of the equity capital of ` 2450 crore is ` 1813 crore. 
Out of the capital expenditure of ` 12857 crore, only 19  per cent  of the capital 
expenditure has been promoters’ contribution. ` 5266 crore have come from loans 
and ` 1471 crore has come from Security Deposits. While only ` 50 crore has come 
from internal accruals, ` 3415.359 crore have come from Airport Development Fees.  
It was also noted in audit that in case of Indira Gandhi International Airport, the 
contribution of internal accruals has been the barest minimum. It was only ` 50 
crore. In case of Mumbai airport, internal accrual was ` 1999 crore. 
Thus, with a owner’s equity contribution of ` 2450 crore out of which 
26 per cent is AAI’s contribution, DIAL have got an airport in the capital 
of India for thirty plus thirty years and in addition commercial rights of 
land valued at ` 24000 crore. Other substantial benefits have also 
accrued to DIAL. The equity contribution of the private partner is  
` 1813 crore. 
                                                            
9 The amount allowed by AERA to be collected from the passengers as Development Fees 
1200
4986
2739
50
0
8975
2450
5266
1471.51
50
3619.49
12857
Equity
Loans
Security Deposits
Internal Accruals
DF
Total
DIAL's project financing in ` in crore
DIAL: Final DIAL at Fin Closure

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
20 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
2.9  Additional issues relating to Land 
As per Article 2.6.1 of OMDA, AAI agreed to lease out land as Demised 10 Premises to 
DIAL, along with the existing buildings, described and delineated, as per schedule 25 
of OMDA, other than land along with buildings under existing leases and carved out 
assets as per schedule 28 and 27 respectively of OMDA, on ‘as is where is’ basis. 
Accordingly, AAI initially leased to DIAL 4608.9 acres of land out of total 5106 acres 
of land at IGI Airport along with buildings, constructions or immovable assets, from 
the effective date. This land was leased on a highly concessional annual lease rent of 
` 100 per annum for total land, payable in advance on 1 of April of every year. Later 
another 190.19 acres of land were also leased out. 
2.10  Lack of Land records at IGI Airport. 
As per the records of Directorate of Land of the AAI, total land available on effective 
date at IGI Airport was 5106 acres of which 4799.09 acres was demised premises and 
306.91 acres was carved out asset as on 9 February 2011. However, Audit was not 
able to verify the same as the details of khasara number, land award orders issued 
by Land Acquisition Collector were not available with AAI.  
Absence of clear title deeds in respect of land at IGI Airport Delhi was also pointed 
out by Audit earlier while finalizing the Annual Accounts of AAI during 2005-06. 
MoCA stated (March 2012) that the Indira Gandhi International Airport belongs to 
Civil Aviation Department prior to independence and the land was subsequently 
transferred to AAI through AAI Act 1971 on ‘as is where is’ basis. It was also stated 
that due to the absence of any claimants to the land handed over, the land is clear of 
title. 
It was noticed that before the public land was transferred to DIAL, no joint physical 
survey was conducted. Considering the commercial potential of the public land 
transferred to private parties, it is necessary that a survey is undertaken and physical 
markings are erected to identify the demised land and carved out assets for future. 
This is all the more important as five per cent of the land is allowed for commercial 
exploitation by DIAL. 
  
                                                            
10 Demised premises means the land handed over to DIAL on lease  for development of the 
IGI airport 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 21 
 
 
 
 
3.1  Change in Major Development Plan and increase in Ground Floor 
 Area  
Article 8.3 of OMDA required DIAL to prepare a Master Plan for the airport setting 
out the proposed development for the entire Airport over a 20 year horizon aligned 
with the traffic forecasts. It was required to provide for identifiable traffic triggers for 
undertaking specific capital expenditure projects. Clause 3.5 of the State Support 
Agreement provided that the Master Plan so prepared should be submitted to the 
Government of India. Within 30 days of the submission, the GOI was to provide in 
writing to the JVC its comments or suggested changes. If no comments were 
provided within the prescribed time limit, it was to be deemed that Government had 
no comments or changes to suggest and the submitted Master Plan was to be 
treated as the final Master Plan. Ministry of Civil Aviation did not suggest any 
changes to or provide any comment when the Master Plan was submitted by DIAL. 
As per Article 8.3.7 of OMDA, DIAL was to develop the airport in accordance with the 
applicable Master Plan. Further Article 8.4.2 required DIAL to submit the Major 
Development Plans relating to the design, development and construction of terminal 
buildings and parallel runways at the airport.  
As per the Major Development Plans prepared by M/S Mott MacDonald, consultant, 
the ground floor area of the Terminal T3 was estimated to be 451644 square metres, 
which was revised and the estimated area at the time of financial closure in January 
2008 was 470179 square metres. Eventually, the area constructed by DIAL was 
553887 square metres. Thus the actual built up ground floor area for T3 Terminal at 
IGI airport exceeded the major development plan by nearly 83,708 square metres 
(17.80 per cent).  
In response to the audit observations, MOCA sought comments from DIAL and 
forwarded the same to Audit. “ DIAL commented that the finalized Major 
Development Plan provided that:  
(i) A “theoretical floor area schedule” methodology was to be used 
(ii) An approximate gross floor area was to be calculated 
(iii) Upon amalgamation of individual areas, there will be a requirement for 
further floor area 
(iv) The finalized floor area will be evident at the stage of actual floor layout 
plans 
(v) The detailed space requirement upon conclusion of stakeholder 
consultation process will have to be taken into account.” 
Chapter - 3 
Project Management

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
22 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
It would be noted that Ministry neither did offer any comments on the Plans that 
were submitted to them by DIAL, nor did they offer comments when the above 
deviation was brought to their notice by Audit. They forwarded the comments of 
DIAL to Audit. 
The financial auditors (M/S KPMG Advisory Services Private Limited) appointed by 
AAI to verify the final project cost submitted by DIAL, reported that the ground floor 
area for peak hour passenger at T3 was higher than most of the leading airports in 
the Asia Pacific region. M/S Engineers India Limited, the technical auditor appointed 
by AAI also opined in August 2010 that “due to this increase in area, all other items of 
the project have increased proportionately. ” Neither MOCA nor AAI took any action 
for such gross violation of the Master Plan and the consequent increase in the 
project cost.  
MoCA replied (March 2012) that the increased area has generated additional 
revenue for DIAL which has also benefited AAI. 
The reply missed the point that the additional floor area was in violation of the 
Master Plan and hence in violation of OMDA and SSA. Apart from the fact that this 
violated the bidding process, the financial arrangements would also indicate that 
such additions also increased the project cost of the airport and had to be financed 
through Development Fees charged on the passengers. 
3.2  Actual Project Cost vis-a-vis Original Project Cost increased by  
 ` 3882 crore 
As per the Business Plan the original project cost approved by DIAL and 
communicated to AAI on 18 January 2008 was ` 8975 crore. Actual project cost as on 
20 July 2010 as claimed by DIAL was ` 12857 crore. The final project cost adopted by 
Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) for arriving at the Regulatory Asset 
Base (RAB) was 
` 12502.86 crore. The variation between the approved project cost 
and the final project cost was ` 3882 crore, i.e., 43.25 per cent higher than the 
original project cost.  
It was noted in audit that at the time of financial closure in January 2008 levy of 
Development Fee was not contemplated. Large part of the enhanced project cost 
was subsequently recovered by DIAL from the passengers using the airport through 
levy of DF.  
The following table will indicate the cost estimates at the time of financial closure of 
the project and the actual cost and the source of funding of the project: 
  

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 23 
 
 
 Table 1 - The  components adopted by DIAL to finance the project cost  
(` crore) 
Funding 
(1) 
Cost as per  estimates in  
January 2008 
(2) 
Final  cost in March 2010 
adopted by AERA 
(3) 
Cost 
Escalation 
( Percentage) 
3(b) -2(b) Amount 
(a) 
% of total 
cost 
(b) 
Amount 
(a) 
% of total 
cost 
(b) 
Equity 1202 13.39 2300 18.40       5.01 
Loans 4986 55.55 5266 42.11 (-) 13.44 
Security deposits 2738 30.51 1471.51 11.77 (-) 18.74 
Internal accruals     49   0.55 50   0.40 (-)  0.15 
DF Not 
Envisaged 
Not 
Envisaged 
3415.35 27.32      27.32 
Total 8975 100 12502.86 100  
 
From the above it is clear that as per the original estimates the entire funding was to 
be through equity, debt, security deposits and internal accruals. However, as is seen 
above, this was reduced to 72.68 per cent  of the total fund requirements of the 
actual project cost. This financial gap was mainly filled by levy of DF which 
constituted 27.32 per cent  of the total capital outlay. OMDA did not envisage the 
funding of project cost through levy of DF from passengers since the entire funding 
was to be through debt and equity only. Thus the inability of the shareholders of 
DIAL to bring in additional funds to the project through additional debt from 
financial institutions led to levy of DF on passengers. 
MoCA replied (March 2012) that “under none of the transaction document, the value 
of the contract was contemplated. The OMDA only provides that JVC would set up 
world class infrastructure to cater to traffic requirement and revise its Master Plan 
from time to time.” 
Ministry further stated that DIAL had initially submitted the original project cost of 
 
` 8975 crore and that was an estimate based on provisional drawings. It was also 
stated that since the initial cost was not based on finalized drawings, ` 1285711crore 
is not an escalation in the project cost but a finalization of the project cost post 
award of contracts. The AERA after due consideration has approved the final project 
cost of 
` 12502.86 crore. The increase in cost was not only due to increase in area 
                                                            
11  The actual project cost submitted by DIAL for consideration of levy of DF 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
24 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
but also due to price variation, increase in scope of work, new ATC tower, payment 
to Delhi Jal Board etc. 
The reply of the Ministry was misleading. None of the transaction documents 
provided for levy of development fees for meeting the project expenditure. Though 
the airport at Delhi was visualized as a world class airport, yet the total project cost 
involved was not approved and monitored by any government agencies. However, 
DF was levied to finance the funding gap on account of increased project cost.  
The Ministry also replied that the increase in project cost was on account of increase 
in scope of work like new ATC tower, rehabilitation of runway 10/28, payment to 
Delhi Jal Board etc. These were significant additions to the airport not envisaged in 
the plans proposed by DIAL for review and comments of MoCA/AAI. 
Transfer Assets on expiry of OMDA 
As per Article 19.6 of OMDA, in the event of AAI acquiring the transfer / non-transfer 
assets of DIAL while terminating the contract, the same shall be valued by a valuer 
appointed by AAI to ascertain the fair market value. Transfer assets include 
aeronautical and non-aeronautical assets existing as on the date of transfer.  
All the assets categorized as transfer assets shall necessarily be acquired by AAI on 
the expiry of the term of OMDA. These will include assets created by the 
Development Fees as well. In other words, it would mean that AAI and indirectly 
Government of India will have to pay for the assets created with the money collected 
from the travelling public as development fees.  
MoCA stated (March 2012) that the provisions of Article 19.6 of OMDA are 
procedural in nature, the rights of parties upon termination by AAI are covered in 
Article 17.3.1 of OMDA and DF is utilized only for creation of transfer assets and not 
in relation to non-transfer assets. The amount was subtracted from total admissible 
CAPEX and, therefore, does not confer any pecuniary benefit to the airport operator.  
The reply of the Ministry was incorrect as Article 17.3.1 was not relevant here as it 
provides for valuation of assets at the time of termination of contract in the event of 
default by DIAL. However, the relevant Article 19.6 of OMDA clearly provides 
valuation of transfer/non-transfer assets in the event of cessation of contract. Audit 
observed that the assets created using DF would be valued at fair value to be paid by 
AAI to DIAL in the event of cessation of agreement.  
3.3  Mandatory Capital Projects  
As per the Article 8.2 of Chapter VIII of OMDA, DIAL shall commence, carry out and 
complete the Mandatory Capital Projects (MCPs), latest by 31 March 2010, as set out 
under schedule 7 of OMDA. In terms of OMDA and the schedule, DIAL was required 
to complete all 33 MCPs by 31 March 2010 out of which 15 MCPs were to be 
completed within a period of 24 months of signing of OMDA i.e. by 3 April 2008. Out 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 25 
 
of these 15 MCPs to be completed by 3 April 2008, 11 MCPs were delayed for the 
period ranging from 87 days to 236 days.  
As per the clause 1 of Schedule 6 of SSA on determination of aeronautical charges, a 
nominal increase of ten (10) per cent  over the base airport charges was to be 
allowed for calculating aeronautical charges for the third year after the effective 
date as an “Incentive” provided DIAL duly completed and commissioned the MCPs 
required to be completed during the first two years from the effective date.  
In terms of the above mentioned provisions of SSA, DIAL was not entitled for any 
incentive in respect of base airport charges as 11 MCPs were not completed as per 
schedule. However, MoCA approved (February 2009) 10 per cent  increase in the 
aeronautical charges including landing, parking, passenger service fee (facilitation 
component only), X-Ray Baggage and Housing Charges at IGI airport, New Delhi w.e.f 
16 February 2009 as an incentive to DIAL.  
MoCA replied (March 2012) that the delay in completion of MCPs was attributable to 
circumstances and situations beyond the control of DIAL since the works being 
carried out in an operational airport involved the co-ordination with various external 
agencies such as airlines, security, immigration etc. 
  

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 27 
 
 
 
The sole bidding criterion for financial bid to select of the JVC partner was the 
revenue share of JV Company with AAI. GMR led consortium was the highest bidder 
offering 45.99 per cent of gross revenue to AAI.  
4.1  Aeronautical/ Non-Aeronautical Airport Charges 
As per existing airport business operations, there are two systems in vogue for 
determination of aeronautical and non-aeronautical charges termed as Single Till 
and Dual Till. Non-aeronautical services are less capital intensive and are considered 
to be more profitable.
12 Using OMDA’s provisions, DIAL has outsourced most of the 
non-aeronautical services through the mechanism of JVs.  
Under Single Till system all the revenue and costs are put together in respect of all 
aeronautical and non-aeronautical services and in case of Dual Till System revenues 
are distributed between aeronautical and non-aeronautical services separately. 
AERA vide its order no 13 dated 12 January 2011 decided to adopt Single Till 
mechanism ensuring a fair return on equity (consistent with risk profile) and at the 
same time, keeping the interest of the passengers in focus. AERA also informed Audit 
that any moderation of charges through Single Till directly benefits the passengers. 
However, it was further informed that AERA would follow Single Till in respect of all 
the airports excepting Delhi and Mumbai. 
The provision of Dual Till taking into account only 30  per cent  of the revenue 
generated by non-aeronautical services gives advantage to DIAL at the cost of the 
passengers. Diversion of non-aeronautical revenue aided and abetted by the 
contractual arrangements as also through outsourcing of these services through JVs 
has put additional burden on passengers in the form of development fee on one 
hand and has deprived AAI of the revenue, on the other. 
Adverse impact on revenue sharing by AAI on outsourcing of non-aeronautical 
services by DIAL 
Article 2.1.2(iv) of OMDA recognized the exclusive right of DIAL to contract and/or 
sub-contract with third parties all the functions to be undertaken by DIAL. It was 
noticed that many of the services to be provided by airport operator like DIAL had 
been outsourced to as many as 11 Joint Venture companies. DIAL has equity share in 
these companies ranging from 26 per cent to 50 per cent. The revenue share of DIAL 
in these companies ranges from 10  per cent  to 61  per cent . DIAL has also collected 
 
` 503 crore from these ventures as security deposits, which do not form part of the 
                                                            
12 Authority: AERA 
Chapter - 4 
Revenue Sharing

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
28 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
revenue of DIAL sharable with AAI and is reflected in the financial statements of DIAL 
as unsecured loans.  
It was noted that OMDA does not debar DIAL to contract or sub contract any 
function relating to the management of the airport. DIAL thus can outsource both 
aeronautical and non-aeronautical services, though so far it has outsourced only 
non-aeronautical services. Outsourcing of all the services in future cannot be 
overruled at this stage which would significantly affect the revenue share adversely 
in long run. 
Such JVs are in violation of terms and conditions in OMDA 
Further Article 8.5.7 (d) states that every such contract entered into by the JVC shall 
be on an arms length basis. An arms length transaction is defined by Institute of 
Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) as “transaction between parties that do not 
have a particular or special relationship that makes prices of transactions 
uncharacteristic of market conditions. The transaction is presumed to be between 
unrelated parties each acting independently.” 
Equity participation of DIAL in these JVs makes these contracts not on arms length. 
Since neither the Government nor the AAI has exercised any access to the books of 
accounts of these JVs, it can never be ascertained whether the revenue passed on as 
share of DIAL is indeed correct. 
  

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Eq: Equity share of DIAL in JV 
RS: Revenue share of DIAL in JV 
Note #: Management Fee `15 Cr over 10 year plus 5% on additional business   
Note$: First three year 10%, 4
th
  to 5
th
  year 15%, 6
th
 to 10
th
 20%, 11
th
 to 25
th
 40% 
Note@: 0  to 15; 55%, 16 to 20: 61% 
 
The position is further complicated by the fact that many of these services are “non-
aeronautical” as per OMDA but as per the AERA Act, these are aeronautical services. 
As per OMDA, therefore, DIAL would be competent to determine tariffs for these 
services but as per AERA Act, AERA would be competent to determine tariffs for 
these services. In a case of determining tariff for X ray baggage charges, DIAL did not 
furnish comments sought by AERA on a consultancy paper. In fact, the legal 
confusion would be apparent from the following extracts of AERA’s order No 
AERA/20011/DIAL-C/2010-11 dated 10 December 2010: 
Devyani Food 
Street Pvt Ltd (Eq: 
40% , RS: 23%) 
Delhi Cargo  
Services Pvt Ltd  
(Eq: 26% , RS: 24%)
Tim Delhi Airport 
Advertisement Pvt 
Ltd (EQ 49.90%, 
Note@) 
Travel Food 
Services Delhi T-3 
Pvt. Ltd (Eq: 40%, 
RS: 19-23%) 
Delhi Airport 
Parking 
Services Pvt Ltd 
(Eq 49.90%, 
Note$) 
Wipro Airport IT 
Services Ltd (Eq: 
26%, RS: Note # )
Delhi Select Service 
Hospitality Pvt Ltd 
(Eq: 40%,  
RS: 19-22.5%) 
Delhi Aviation 
Fuel Facility Pvt 
Ltd (Eq: 26%, RS: 
` 561.75 per Kilo 
Delhi Duty Free 
Services Pvt Ltd 
(Eq: 49.90%, 
RS 32%) 
Delhi Aviation 
Services 
Private Ltd 
(Eq: 50% RS: 
13%)
Celebi Delhi Cargo 
Terminal 
Management 
India Pvt Ltd  
(Eq: 26%. RS: 
36%)
1 2
3
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
11 
DIAL
10 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
30 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
“It is an admitted position of DIAL that as per Section 2(a)(v) of the AERA Act 2008, 
services provided for cargo facility (which includes X-Ray screening) at an airport is 
an aeronautical service. However, with reference to a concession agreement, they 
have claimed that cargo handling and services (which includes X-ray ) is a non-
aeronautical service and requested for compliance with the concession agreement. “ 
In order to ensure revenue share as per OMDA to AAI, OMDA provides for 
appointment of an Independent Auditor by AAI in consultation with DIAL to certify 
the applicable revenue used for final verification / reconciliation of the annual fee. 
The Independent Auditor however does not have access to any books of accounts of 
the sub contracting JVs which would establish veracity of the share of revenue 
earned by DIAL from these companies.  
In this connection, reference is invited to Para 2.3.1.1 of CAG’s Report No. 3, Union 
Government (Commercial) for the year 2011-12 wherein Audit commented on only 
three JVs dealing with cargo and car parking operationalised during 2009-10. Audit 
observed that there was substantial reduction in revenue share of 
` 103.29 crore to 
AAI for the period December 2009 to December 2010 on account of transfer of cargo 
and car parking business to JVs.  
The MoCA stated (June 2011 and March 2012) that the matter regarding recognition 
of entire revenue of concessionaires/ JV companies should be added to the revenue 
of DIAL or not has been referred to the Ministry of Law and Justice for their opinion, 
which is still under examination. MoCA further stated (March 2012) that the financial 
statements  of the Joint Ventures formed by DIAL for various non-aeronautical 
services already forms part of Independent Audit Report for each quarter and have 
been made available at the time of audit.  
The financial statements of JVs stated to have been part of independent Audit 
Report for each quarter were not made available to Audit. 
4.2  Sharing of revenue from existing leases with DIAL resulted in a 
 loss of ` 23.15 crore 
As on effective date, AAI had  valid leases with airlines/ allied agencies, oil and gas 
companies, Government agencies, private agencies and hotels/ caterers. As per 
Article 2.6 of OMDA, read with Article 2. 1.1 of the lease deeds executed with 
existing lessees (continuing as on effective date), the lease rent thereof was 
receivable by AAI till the expiry of respective lease period. This was not shareable 
with DIAL. However the lease rent in respect of existing leases is being collected by 
DIAL and 45.99 per cent  revenue is shared with the AAI resulting into a loss of 
 
` 23.15 crore as of March 2011.  
MoCA stated (March 2012) that as there was difference in the interpretation of the 
provisions of OMDA and lease deed, legal opinion of Ministry of Law has been 
sought on the treatment of revenue accruing from existing leases at both MIAL and 
DIAL.  

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 31 
 
 
 
 
5.1  Delayed Payment of Retirement Compensation by DIAL 
As per Chapter VI of OMDA, AAI was to provide the necessary Operation Support 
(OS) to DIAL through employees of AAI deployed at the Indira Gandhi International 
Airport for a period of three years termed as Operation Support Period (OSP) 
commencing from effective date. OMDA further provided that at least 60 per cent of 
the employees
13 of AAI under the service of DIAL would be offered employment by 
DIAL. In case of non-acceptance of offer of employment, retirement compensation 
would be paid by DIAL in respect of 60 per cent of the employees, reduced by the 
number of employees absorbed in AAI/retired/expired/transferred during operation 
support period.  
 2338
14 employees of AAI were deployed at Indira Gandhi International Airport on 
the effective date,  of which 251 15 retired/ expired/ were transferred/ resigned by  
2 May 2009. As per the agreement DIAL was to give offer of appointment by  
2 February 2009 i.e. three months prior to expiry of the support period. However, it 
was noticed by Audit that though all the AAI employees working at Indira Gandhi 
International Airport as on 31 December 2006 were offered employment by DIAL,  
only 141 employees accepted the offer. DIAL was required to pay retirement 
compensation to the AAI only in case of 1111 (60 per cent of the general employees 
of 2087) who did not join DIAL after the Operation Support period. AAI raised a claim 
of ` 250.88 crore towards retirement compensation on 9 March 2010, of which DIAL 
made payment of only ` 80 crore and the balance amount of ` 170.88 crore was to 
be paid by DIAL( March 2010). 
MoCA observed (November 2009) that the schedule for payment of retirement 
compensation from DIAL became due immediately after the Operation Support 
Period (OSP) i.e. 2 May 2009. However, a lenient view was taken with the approval 
of Minister of State of Civil Aviation (Independent Charge), and accordingly MoCA 
directed AAI to recover the retirement compensation without penal interest from 
DIAL by March 2010. The MoCA also intimated (May 2010) that any payment due 
                                                            
13 minus employees’ retired/expired/transferred  
14 Earlier management has indicated this figure as 2394 and the same was adopted in 
paragraph 2.3.2.2 of  CAG’s report No. 3 of 2011-12    
15 Similarly management earlier indicated this figure as 173 and the same was adopted in 
paragraph 2.3.2.2 of  CAG’s report No. 3 of 2011-12    
 
Chapter - 5 
Operation Support (Human Resource) 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
32 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
after 1 April 2010 automatically attracted the penal interest on State Bank of India 
Prime Lending Rate plus 10 per cent.  
Against this, the AAI allowed DIAL to pay the said amount as monthly installments 
spread over a period of 10 years without any contractual obligations in violation of 
the directive of the Ministry. Audit calculated the consequent loss of interest at   
` 58.57 crore calculated at eight 8 per cent per annum. 
  

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 33 
 
 
 
 
The passenger service fee (PSF) is an amount collected from each embarking 
passenger at the airports by the airlines. The PSF has two components viz security 
component (SC) which constitutes 65 per cent and facilitation component (FC) which 
is 35 per cent of the total charge. OMDA provides that the concerned airlines shall 
collect the entire PSF from embarking passengers and would remit the amount in 
two groups – 65 per cent as SC  to AAI and 35 per cent as FC to DIAL directly. 
As per Clause 3.1.A.4 of SSA, Government of India, throughout the term of the State 
Support Agreement (SSA), shall control some reserved activities which would include 
Customs and Immigration control, Quarantine, Health, Meteorological and Security 
Service etc. as mentioned in Para 3.3.1 of SSA. The facilitation component payable to 
DIAL could be revised under the provisions contained in OMDA by DIAL while the 
security component payable to AAI can be revised as and when directed by GOI.  
Thereafter MoCA issued instructions
16 from time to time for collection and utilization 
of PSF by airport operators. Broadly, these instructions were: 
(i)  PSF at airports would be collected from various airlines by the respective 
airport operator, which could be either AAI/ DIAL or any private operator. 
(ii)  A separate Escrow Account would be operated by the airport operator in 
fiduciary capacity. 
(iii)  In all ` 130 were collected as PSF (SC) per passenger to be deposited in the 
escrow account, within 15 days of the next calendar month of collection, for 
meeting the expenses relating to the CISF.  
(iv)  PSF (SC) collected at an airport operated by DIAL or a private operator would 
be utilised at the airport concerned only to meet the security related expenses 
at that airport. However, AAI would be considered as a single licensee in 
respect of all its airports across the country for this purpose with liberty to pool 
the PSF (SC) collections from any airport and use the same for meeting the 
security related expenses at any other airports.  
(v) The escrow account would be subject to audit by Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 
                                                            
16 May 2006, June 2007, April 2010 and July 2010 and Standard Operating Procedure in 
January 2009 
Chapter  - 6 
Passenger Service Fee (Security  
Component) – Escrow Account

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
34 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
6.1  Funds diverted from PSF (Security Component) Escrow Account 
 for purchase of Security Equipments by DIAL . 
As per the clause 3.3.5 of SSA, the JVC i.e. DIAL shall be responsible for procuring and 
maintaining at its own cost all security systems and equipments (except arms and 
ammunition) as required by GOI or the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security or its 
designated nominee(s)/ representative(s) from time to time. MoCA’s order No. AV-
13028/001/2009-AS dated 16 April 2010, stated that the entire cost incurred on 
security equipments purchased could be met from PSF (SC). DIAL included the cost of 
security equipments like Perimeter Intrusion Detection System (PIDS) installed over 
the perimeter wall of airports, patrolling tracks, etc. in the PSF (SC) account.  
Thus, the order of the MoCA permitting the same to be met from the PSF (SC), 
overriding the provisions of Clause 3.3.5 of the SSA, resulted in granting financial 
benefit of 
` 239.69 crore to DIAL. 
MoCA replied (March 2012) that a need was felt by the Government to upgrade the 
security equipment available at the airports to the best available internationally. 
Security being the sovereign responsibility of the state, it was considered by the 
Government that the expenditure on the security equipment be made out of PSF 
Escrow Account.  
The reply of the Ministry was not acceptable since MoCA letter dated 16.04.2010 
stated that in the case of new airports, the entire cost of the security equipments 
would be borne by the airport operator. However, in the case of Indira Gandhi 
International Airport, though DIAL was required to bear the cost of security 
equipments as per SSA, MoCA permitted the same to be met out of PSF (SC).  
6.2 Irregular withdrawal from Escrow Account 
MoCA clarified during January 2010 and April 2010 that the security related 
expenses permitted under PSF (SC) should not include expenditure on any other 
security staff or other administrative set-up created/ engaged by the airport 
operators. The Association of Private Airport Operators (APAO) represented to 
MoCA (9 April 2010) for clarifications regarding the applicability of the above 
guidelines. MoCA (5 July 2010) clarified that the guidelines dated 16 April 2010 may 
have only prospective application. Accordingly, DIAL under the cover of this 
clarification, debited all the expenditure incurred during 2006-10 towards private 
security agencies including consultant fees to PSF (SC) account. 
Therefore, the clarifications issued by the MoCA regarding withdrawal of expenses  
made to private security agencies including consultant fees by the airport operators 
during 2006-10 led to irregular withdrawal of 
` 26.05 crore from PSF (SC) Escrow 
Account by DIAL with consequent loss to the Government and undue favour to the 
private operator i.e. DIAL. MoCA (March 2012) has accepted the audit observation 
and has asked DIAL to reverse the entry on this account. 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 35 
 
6.3 Insurance Premium debited to Passenger Security Fee  
 (Security Component) 
As per Para 8.5.6 (i) of OMDA, during the term, DIAL shall maintain at its own cost 
the insurances set out in Schedule 11. Meanwhile MoCA while issuing the “Standard 
Operating Procedure for Account/Audit of PSF (SC) by JVC/ Private Operators” 
specified that all fixed assets acquired through PSF (SC) shall be adequately insured 
by DIAL / Private Operator and insurance charges shall be paid from PSF (SC).  DIAL 
charged 
` 4.34 crore 17 in the PSF (SC) accounts for the year up to 2010-11 as 
insurance charges. 
Therefore, the orders of MoCA were in contradiction of the provisions of OMDA 
regarding insurance charges to be borne by the airport operator which led to undue 
favour to the tune of 
` 4.34 crore to the airport operator i.e. DIAL up to the year 
2010-11. MoCA stated (March 2012) that once having decided to acquire this 
equipment out of PSF (Government funds), the Government is justified in getting the 
equipment insured through the PSF (SC).  
As per OMDA the cost of security equipments as well as insurance was to be borne 
by the airport operator, the interpretation of the Ministry is incorrect. Further, the 
reply of the Ministry was against the above provision. 
  
                                                            
17 ` 2.03 crore as  standalone terrorism policy for the year 2010-11,   ` 1.14 crore  as insurance charge on Fixed 
Assets acquired through PSF (SC) and ` 1.05 crore  as a standalone Terrorism Policy for the year 2009-10 and  
` 0.12 crore for the year 2008-09 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 37 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
PPPs are an appropriate way for airport development and modernization. From the 
point of view of development of infrastructure, Indira Gandhi International Airport 
can be considered as a success. The airport has been adjudged as the second best in 
the world in the category of 25-40 million passengers per annum. 
More rigour was necessary in drafting of the transaction documents as it was noticed 
in audit that many of the provisions were more skewed in favour of the 
concessionaire. It was also noticed that Ministry of Civil Aviation and Airport 
Authority of India, on some occasions, violated the provisions of these transaction 
documents in the interest of the concessionaire. 
Audit noted that provision of the concession period to be extended at the option of 
the concessionaire was detrimental to public interest. Similarly, the right of first 
refusal also unduly favours DIAL.  
It was noted that the concept of upfront fee was used to lease out an additional land 
of 190.19 acres for a paltry one time payment of ` 6.19 crore. Other Government 
offices like Director General of Civil Aviation and Bureau of Aviation Security were 
given a much harsher treatment when 7.60 acres of land was leased out to them at a 
license fee of ` 2.41 crore per annum. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation and later AERA allowed DIAL to collect Development Fees 
amounting to ` 3415.35 crore. The order of Ministry in February 2009 allowing that 
was in contravention of the OMDA, AAI Act and the AERA Act. 
Contrary to the provisions of OMDA, DIAL was allowed to use the amount collected 
as Development Fees to meet the project costs. In fact, only 19  per cent  of the 
project cost came from equity, approximately 42 per cent  came from debt. The 
remaining project costs were met from security deposits and Development Fees.  
Allowing these post contractual benefits violated the tendering process by which 
the JV partner was selected. 
It was also noted that against an equity contribution of ` 2450 crore, the JV was 
allowed rights of commercial exploitation of 240 acres of land. The land was valued 
by AERA at ` 24000 crore. The potential revenue from this land in license fee for 58 
years was calculated by DIAL itself at ` 163557 crore out of which DIAL’s share 
would be ` 88337 crore. 
As regards the Master Plan and major development plan, it was noticed that the 
floor area of terminal T3, as constructed by DIAL was 83708 square metres more 
Chapter - 7 
Conclusion and Recommendations 

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
38 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
than what was indicated in the major development plan. Ministry as also AAI did not 
take any action despite this being pointed out by the auditors appointed by AAI. 
As regards land handed over to DIAL, it was noted that basic documents like Khasra 
were missing thereby making it impossible for Audit to check the land actually 
transferred. 
Provisions of OMDA and SSA have a tilt towards the private operator i.e. DIAL in 
revenue sharing. 
Many observations in the present report would indicate that whenever DIAL raised 
an issue regarding revenue to accrue to it or expenditure to be debited to 
Government in contravention of the provisions of OMDA, the Ministry and AAI 
interpreted the provisions always in favour of the operators and against the 
interest of the Government. 
Recommendations: 
1. In case of PPPs, it is recommended that all pre bid conditions are declared upfront 
and monetized value of all concessions including assets transferred is arrived at 
before bids are invited. Any post bid concessions, which are not contemplated 
earlier, amount to undue favour to the concessionaire. Government should 
investigate all cases of such post bid actions and fix responsibility. It is necessary to 
review the various provisions of OMDA and verify to the extent provisions could not 
be adhered to.  
2. 
It is recommended that revenue earned by the Government from such 
arrangements is commensurate with the public asset transferred to the 
private entity. In case of revenue sharing agreements, adequate care should 
be taken to clearly list out the items to be included as shareable revenue. Its 
quantification, its verification by all the interested parties needs to be clearly 
defined. 
 
3. It is recommended that all public private arrangements must be linked to 
certain basic triggers like traffic volume, tariff, return on investment, break-
even period. A long concession period without any trigger may lead to undue 
financial benefit to the concessionaire.  
4. The clauses such as Right of First Refusal should not be designed to thwart 
competition and create a monopolistic situation.  
5. In terms of bid evaluation weightage allocation to higher non-aeronautical 
revenue share needs to be revisited for future bids.  
  

Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 39 
 
6. The land being the major input as Government share for PPP infrastructure 
projects, due care to be taken to monetize the value in public interest.  
7. A proper survey through a Government Approved Surveyor/ valuer should be 
conducted to find the exact area of airport land, hospitality area, demised 
premises, carved out area including the land available with the AAI. AAI 
should obtain clear title deeds in respect of total area handed over to private 
airport operators to avoid future disputes.  
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated:  1/g1005
th May, 2012 
(A K PATNAIK) 
Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
and Chairman, Audit Board 
  
 
  
  
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
New Delhi 
Dated: 11
th May, 2012 
(VINOD RAI) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
 
 
  
 


Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
42 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
Annexure I 
GMR letter No. DIAL/CR/ Subsidiaries/ 2069 dated 27 September 2007 indicating 
calculation of income through lease rentals over the period of 57 years  
          (Referred to in Para 2.6)  
 
 


Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership  
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi 43 
 
 
 
 
 


Report No. 5 of 2012-13 
44 Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
 
 
 
 
