 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
 
Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government 
Ministry of Textiles 
Report No. 52 of 2015 
(Performance Audit) 
 

 
Contents 
 
Para No. Particulars Page No. 
 Preface i 
 Executive Summary  iii - viii 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
1.1 Background 1 
1.2 Salient features of TUFS 1 
1.3 Organizational set up for the scheme 4 
1.4 Roles of various entities in the scheme 5 
1.5 Mechanism for release of TUFS subsidy 6 
1.6 Monitoring of scheme 7 
1.7 Financial Outlay 8 
Chapter 2:  Audit Framework 
2.1 Audit Mandate 10 
2.2 Audit Objectives 10 
2.3 Audit Scope and Coverage 10 
2.4 Sources of Audit Criteria 11 
2.5 Audit Methodology and Sampling 11 
2.6 Acknowledgement 12 
Chapter 3:  Audit Findings 
3.1 Planning 13 
3.2 Implementation 19 
3.3 Monitoring and evaluation 25 
Chapter 4: Conclusion and Recommendations 
4.1 Conclusion 32 
4.2 Recommendations 33 
Annexures 
 Annexure 1 to 9 A1 – A13 
 Abbreviations  A14 
 

 i 
Preface 
 
his report of the Comptroller and Audito r General of India has been prepared 
for submission to the President of India under article 151 of the Constitution. It 
contains the results of Performance Audit on Technology Upgradation Fund 
Scheme (TUFS) of Ministry of Textiles. 
The Government of India (GoI)  introdu ced  ‘TUFS’  in 1999-2000 to provide a 
focal point for modernization efforts thr ough technology upgradat ion in the Indian 
Textile Industry, which occupied a unique position in  the Indian economy in terms of its 
contribution to industrial production, em ployment and exports. The scheme was 
subsequently modified in 2007 (Modified  TUFS), 2011 (Restructured TUFS) and 2013 
(Revised Restructured TUFS). 
The scheme was implemented by Financial Institutions identified by the GoI and 
was a reimbursement scheme providing benefits to  Textiles units in th e form of Interest 
Reimbursement, Capital Subsidy and Margin Money Subsidy.  Ministry of Textiles 
released ` 18,580.45 crore as subsidy for the TUFS  during 1 April 1999 to 31 March 
2014.  
The nature of the scheme, substantial financial outlay and large number of 
beneficiaries made this an ambitious scheme . Audit was undertaken to get an assurance 
that the objectives of the scheme were achieved.  
T

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Executive Summary 
 

 
  iii 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
 
The Government of India (GoI) introduced Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) in 
1999-2000 to provide a focal point for modern ization efforts through technology upgradation 
in the Indian Textile Industry, which occupied a unique position in the Indian economy in 
terms of its contribution to industrial producti on, employment and exports. The scheme was 
subsequently modified in 2007 (as M-TUFS
1), 2011 (as R-TUFS2) and 2013 (as RR-TUFS3). 
 
At the Government of India level, the Ministry of Textiles (the Ministry) was the apex 
authority responsible for admini stration of the scheme.  Minist ry has appointed Office of the 
Textile Commissioner, Mumbai (TxC) as its nodal agency for implementing the TUFS.  The 
scheme was further implemented by Financial Institutions identified by the GoI and was a 
reimbursement scheme providing  benefits to Textiles units in the form of Interest 
Reimbursement, Capital Subsidy and Margin Money Subsidy. All claims for the scheme, 
processed by Financial Institutions (FIs), ar e routed through the TxC. The TxC collates and 
forwards these claims to the Ministry for issu e of sanction and release of funds. The Ministry 
released ` 18,580.45 crore as subsidy for the TUFS during 1 April 1999 to 31 March 2014.  
 
As per data provided by the office of the Te xtiles Commissioner, Mumbai, there were 22,998 
beneficiaries who had got their loans sanctioned between 1 April 2007 to 31 March 2014. 
Audit selected a sample of 3,231 cases out of these beneficiary units. The sample selected for 
audit, covered beneficiaries’  cases pertaining to M-TUFS as  well as R-TUFS. Performance 
Audit was undertaken to assess whether ma nagement of claims under TUFS was in 
accordance with relevant guidelin es and requirements. The period of Performance Audit of 
the scheme was from 1 April 2007 to 31 Marc h 2014, covering seven major States, namely, 
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu. 
 
 
                                                             
1   Modified Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme 
2  Restructured Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme 
3  Revised Restructured Tec hnology Upgradation Fund Scheme 

 
  iv 
HIGHLIGHTS 
The audit findings have been categorised under the following broad headings: 
(i) Planning (ii) Implementation, and (iii) Monitoring and evaluation. 
Planning 
Non-availability of baseline data 
 Audit observed that no documents were available in the Ministry indicating: 
¾ availability of baseline data about the magnitude of problem of obsolescence of 
machineries in Textile Industry when the scheme was proposed for continuation in 
2007 (for M-TUFS)  and 2011 (for R-TUFS); 
¾ reasonable level of upgradation identified / benchmarked, to be achieved through 
various phases of the scheme i.e. scheme before 2007, M-TUFS and R-TUFS; and 
¾ quantum and degree of modernisation achie ved under various phases of the scheme.
  
(Para 3.1.1)  
Shortfall in achievement of targets identified in XI Five Year Plan  
¾ As against the invest ment target of  ` 1,50,600 crore, investments of only ` 1,31,228 
crore were attracted during the XI Five Year Plan. The shortfall in attracting 
investments was inspite of increase in financial allocation from ` 10,273 crore to 
` 15,404 crore. 
¾ Plan allocation for M-TUFS period and pro cessing of TUFS claims were not being 
done segment-wise. Segment–wise monitoring was not provided for in the Scheme.  
(Para 3.1.2) 
Committed liabilities4 
 
Unreliable estimates of committed liability (M-TUFS) 
In the memorandum for Expenditure Fina nce Committee (EFC) of M-TUFS, while 
presenting its case for fund requirements for XI Five Year Plan, an amount of 
                                                             
4  Generally, Textile projects under TUFS were eligible, for a period of 10 years, for getting subsidy on repayments of its 
loan. The Ministry takes the responsibility of disbursing TU FS eligible subsidy for a maximum period of 10 years which 
is referred to as ‘committed liability’ by the Ministry. 
 

 
  v 
` 2,761.10 crore was reflected as committed liabilities. Ministry neither had 
beneficiary-wise and bank-wise details of aforesaid committed liabilities of ` 2,761.10 
crore nor the payments details of the said committed liabilities. 
(Para 3.1.3.1) 
Unreliable estimates of committed liability (R-TUFS) 
¾ Ministry was entirely dependent on FIs’ data which was varying constantly. As a 
result, Ministry could not properly estimate the amount of committed liabilities during 
XI Five Year Plan. The budget allocation, which was meant for entire XI Five Year 
Plan, was nearly exhausted by 28 June 2010 w ith the result the scheme was paused 
from 29 June 2010 to 27 April 2011. 
¾ In order to firm up committed liabilities as recommended by EFC, TxC compiled the 
data furnished by FIs and arrived at the committed liabilities of ` 5,432 crore for the 
balance period of XI Five Year Plan  i.e. upto 31 March 2012. However, there 
appeared to be no mechanism for gaining assurance on the accuracy of the amount of 
the committed liabilities submitted by FIs.  
¾ Audit observed that the Ministry neither had beneficiary-wise details of approved 
committed liabilities of ` 5,432 crore nor had beneficiary- wise disbursement there 
against. 
(Para 3.1.3.1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations: 
 
1. While designing the scheme in future , Ministry should assess segment wise 
magnitude of problem of obsoles cence in the industry and set the 
benchmarks to be achieved.   
2. Ministry may also consider segment-wi se monitoring of the scheme to keep a 
close watch on progress of each segment. 
3. Ministry should maintain its own data of beneficiary-wise committed 
liabilities. 

 
  vi 
Implementation 
 
¾ Extending subsidy to inelig ible beneficiaries  ( ` 46.96 crore  in 129 cases in six 
States) 
(Para 3.2.1) 
 
¾ Extending subsidy to ineligible investments ( ` 52.87 crore in 193 cases in seven 
States). 
    (Para 3.2.2) 
 
¾ Excess payment made to beneficiaries (` 6.42 crore in 40 cases in seven States). 
(Para 3.2.3) 
 
¾ Delay in crediting subsidy  (in 172 beneficiar ies’ accounts in six States  there was a 
delay of 1 to 1509 days). 
(Para 3.2.4) 
 
¾ Keeping funds in non-interest bearing accounts ( ` 4.77 crore in Gujarat were not kept 
in interest bearing accounts by seven disbursing branches of five FIs). 
(Para 3.2.5) 
 
¾ Though TUFS is a reimbursement scheme, Audit observed that in 2009-10, an amount 
of ` 121.45 crore was refunded by the FIs on account of either excess subsidy claimed 
or subsidy paid to ineligible beneficiarie s. Such instances were seen in the other 
financial years also, which indicated lack  of proper scrutiny of claims of the 
beneficiaries by the FIs. 
(Para 3.2.6) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  vii 
 
 
 
 
 
Monitoring and evaluation 
 
Minimal monitoring of implementation of scheme 
Monitoring of the working of FIs’ system of processing of claims, by the Ministry 
was weak. The monitoring is dependent solely upon FIs’ audit set up and their 
monitoring mechanism. 
(Para 3.3.1) 
Mechanism to check compliance of instructions by FIs
	
¾ As per the sanction letters of TUFS subsidy, the FIs/bank would maintain:  
• subsidiary accounts of the funds received from the GoI; and 
• a register of the details of beneficiary to whom subsidy was given. 
It was also provided that th e amount paid to FI, would remain open for inspection 
by the GoI (Ministry) / Chief Controller of Accounts (CCA) whenever required. 
¾ Audit observed that prior to 2014, mechanism of inspection was not used.  
(Para 3.3.2.1) 
Inclusion of Black out period cases in List-II  
Projects / term loan sanctioned during Bl ack Out period (29 June 2010 to 27 April 
2011) were not eligible for be nefits under TUFS. Audit observe d that cases in List-II, 
which was defined to contain only thos e cases where TUFS project scrutiny and 
determination of eligibility had been completed but installments of TUFS subsidy had 
not been released, approved by the Ministry  included 19 cases whic h were pertaining 
to Black Out period.  
 (Para 3.3.3) 
Recommendations: 
4. Ministry may instruct FIs for strength ening their due diligence mechanism to 
avoid recurrence of aforesaid implementation issues in future.   
5. Ministry may also consider instituting checks at its end to ensure that the FIs 
are exercising proper due dilig ence so that subsidy is passed on to eligible 
beneficiaries/investments. 

 
  viii 
Non-fulfilment of commitments 
Ministry has the important task of taki ng mid-course corrections whenever and 
wherever required and fulfiling of commitments made in the Government Resolutions 
(GRs) as well as in the documents for appraisal / approval of the scheme. However, in 
various instances noticed by Audit, Ministry did not fulfil its commitments. 
(Para 3.3.4) 
Monitoring lapses on the part of Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee (IMSC) 
¾ Audit observed that only two meetings of  IMSC were held during 39 months of 
operation of M- TUFS.  
¾ IMSC had to lay down norms for a monitori ng and appraisal mechanism for effective 
implementation of the scheme. However, Aud it observed that no separate norms have 
been laid down by the IMSC.   
(Para 3.3.5) 
Monitoring lapses on the part of Technical Advisory cum Monitoring Committee 
(TAMC) 
¾ Audit observed that only five meetings agai nst 13, as per requirement of frequency of 
meetings mentioned in the GR, were held in 39 months of operation of M-TUFS.  
¾ As per GR of R-TUFS, TAMC was to monitor the progress of Margin Money 
Subsidy (MMS) @ 15 per cent  under TUFS for small scale textile and jute units. 
Audit observed that minutes of various TAMC  meetings did not indicate monitoring 
of the progress of MMS @ 15 per cent under TUFS for small scal e textile and jute 
units. 
 
(Para 3.3.6) 
 
 
Recommendation: 
6. Ministry should activate its monitoring mechanism so as to take mid course 
corrective action, if needed. 

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
 
1 
Chapter 1 - Introduction 
 
1.1 Background 
 
Indian textile industry occupied  a unique position in the Indian economy in terms of its 
contribution to industrial production, employment and exports. In spite of a strong fibre and 
production base, for various historical reas ons, this industry suffered from severe 
technological obsolescence and lack of economies of scale1. 
Thus, it was felt by the Government to introduce a focussed and time-bound Technology 
Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS), hereinafter re ferred to as ‘scheme’ , to provide a focal 
point for modernization efforts through techno logy upgradation in the industry. Hence, the 
scheme was launched in 1999-2000 by the Ministry of Textiles, hereinafter referred to as 
‘Ministry’. The scheme was subsequently  revised in 2007, 2011 and 2013. The Ministry 
released ` 18,580.452 crore as subsidy for the TUFS during 1999-2000 to 2013-14. 
1.2 Salient features of TUFS 
 
1.2.1 Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme  
The scheme was introduced in 1999 to ca talyze investments in all the sectors 3/segments4 of 
textile and jute industry by way of Interest Reimbursement (IR) 5/ Capital Subsidy (CS) 6 on 
purchase of scheme eligible machineries/items 7  as identified by the Ministry, on loans 
obtained from approved Nodal Agencies and Nodal Banks, hereinaf ter referred to as 
‘Financial Institutions’ (FIs). The scheme wa s implemented with interest reimbursement on 
the interest actually charged by the approved financial instituti ons or/and Capital Subsidy at 
rates prescribed for different sectors/segments. Details of the scheme eligible 
machineries/items were published by the Minist ry through Government Resolution (GR) and 
                                                             
1  By which average cost of production falls as the volume of output increases    
2   ` 2,315.18 crore released from April 1999 to March 2007 and ` 16,265.27 crore released from April 2007 to March 2014  
3 Small Scale Industry (SSI) and Non-SSI 
4  Spinning, Weaving, Knitting, Processing, Garmenting etc. 
5  A part of interest reimbursed by GoI out of the interest charged by approved FIs on loan obtained by beneficiary for 
purchase of TUFS eligible items 
6  Subsidy paid as a percentage of cost of machinery and for which both SSI and Non-SSI units are eligible 
7  Captive Power Plant, Effluent Treatment Plant, Energy Saving Devices etc. 

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
 
2 
subsequent circulars issued by the office of the Textile Co mmissioner, Mumbai, hereinafter 
referred to as ‘TxC’8.  
The scheme was initially approved for a period of five years from 01 April 1999 to 31 March 
2004, which was subsequently extended upto 31 March 2007. The main feature of the scheme 
was allowing five per cent interest reimbursement for a ma ximum period of 10 years. Since 
the Ministry takes the responsibility of di sbursing TUFS eligible subsidy for a maximum 
period of 10 years, this is referred to as ‘committed liability’ by the Ministry. 
The Government observed that the scheme witne ssed varied benefits to the various segments 
of the textiles sector. The spinning and composite segments of the textiles sector had derived 
maximum benefits whereas the segments like processing, garmenting, powerlooms etc. which 
were the weak links in the textiles valu e chain, had not realized the potential for 
modernization. 
1.2.2 Modified Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (M-TUFS) 
In order to provide scheme be nefit to weak sectors and on recognizing the potential of 
garmenting and technical textiles
9, the Government modified the scheme for continuation in 
the  XI Five Year Plan (2007-2012). A dditional support in the form of 10 per cent  CS 
(besides 5 per cent  IR) was provided to garmenting and technical textiles segments in  
M-TUFS. Further, some more changes 10 in the scheme were also made and a component i.e. 
Margin Money Subsidy (MMS) 11  was introduced in the modified scheme (M-TUFS).  
M-TUFS remained in operation during the period from 01 April 2007 to 28 June 2010. 
1.2.3 Black Out period  
On the direction of the Ministry, an eval uation study of the M-TUFS was carried out by 
M/s CRISIL Research in July 2010. The study re vealed that the bene fits were still not 
uniform across the segments, with the pro cessing and powerloom segments emerging as 
major areas of concern. The evaluation study recommended th at TUFS may be completely 
restructured. Accordingly, Government took a policy decision to restructure the scheme. 
Thus, the M-TUFS was discontinued till approva l of modification in it and process of 
                                                             
8  A subordinate office under Ministry of Textiles 
9  Technical textiles ar e functional fabrics that have applications acro ss various industries includ ing automobiles, civil 
engineering and construction, agriculture, healthcare, industrial safety, personal protection etc. 
10  The rate of IR on spinning machinery reduced to 4 per cent from earlier 5 per cent, all other segments under the existing 
scheme continued to get 5 per cent IR;  CS and IR to be paid only on basic value of machineries excluding taxes and 
duties  etc. 
11  Subsidy paid as a percentage of cost of machinery and for which only SSI units are eligible 

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
 
3 
issuance of new sanctions under the scheme  was stopped from 29 June 2010. The scheme 
remained discontinued upto 27 April 2011. This 10 months period is k nown as ‘Black Out’ 
period. 
1.2.4 Restructured Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (R-TUFS) 
As mentioned in Para 1.2.3 above, the scheme (M-TUFS) was restructured and the period of 
restructured scheme i.e. R-TUFS was from 28 April 2011 to 31 March 2012 12 with an overall 
subsidy cap13 of ` 1,972 crore for new sanctions. With a view  to ensure that all segments get 
their due share in TUFS benefits, share of subsidy for different segments was fixed i.e. 26 per 
cent for spinning, 13 per cent  for weaving, 21 per cent  for processing, 8 per cent  for 
garmenting and 32 per cent for others. The major features of R-TUFS were as follows:  
¾ providing 5 per cent IR except for standalone spinni ng machinery where the IR was 4 
per cent;  
¾ reducing the repayment period of loan fo r the purpose of s ubsidy under TUFS to 7 
years from 10 years (in M-TUFS); and 
¾ enhancing the capital ceiling for powerloom segment for MMS. 
The scheme in its R-TUFS form was extended fo r the first year of the XII Five Year Plan 14 
i.e. upto 31 March 2013. 
1.2.5 Revised Restructured Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (RR-TUFS) 
The Government decided to further continue the sc heme for the textiles and jute industries as 
RR-TUFS with effect from 01 April 2013 to 31 March 2017.  However, Audit did not cover 
this scheme as no releases were made under this scheme upto March 2014. 
Salient features of M-TUFS & R-TUFS have been given in Annexure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
12  Which was further extended upto 31 March 2013 
13  Ministry decided to put an overall subsidy cap for new sanctio ns to  address the problem of open ended nature of the 
existing scheme as no mechanism existed to control future committed liabilities. 
14  2012-2017 

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
1.3 Organizational set up for the scheme 
 
The organizational set up for planning, implem entation and monitoring of the scheme is 
shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 1
• Planning: Policy formulation of 
the scheme 
• Implementation:  Release of 
funds to FIs after receipt of 
claims from TxC 
• Monitoring and Evaluation of 
scheme 
Ministry of Textiles 
(Ministry) 
 
• Implementation framework 
• Co-ordination with the Ministry 
and FIs i.e. Nodal Agencies/ 
Nodal Banks   
• Processing and forwarding of 
subsidy claims, of FIs to the 
Ministry 
Office of the Textile 
Commissioner, Mumbai 
(TxC) 
  
• Financing the projects and 
examining  eligibility of project 
components under the scheme 
• Processing and forwarding the 
quarterly subsidy claims of 
beneficiaries to  TxC 
• Monitoring the subsidy claims 
• Crediting the subsidy into 
accounts of beneficiaries 
Financial Institutions  
 

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
 
5 
1.4 Roles of various entities in the scheme 
 
1.4.1 Ministry of Textiles  
The Ministry of Textiles is the administrative Ministry for implementation of the scheme. It 
formulates policies, issues sanctions, releases the subsidy and monitors the scheme. 
1.4.2 Office of the Textile Commissioner (TxC) 
TxC acts as the principal technical advisor to the Ministry. TxC also implements and 
monitors various developmental and promotional schemes of Ministry.  It is the nodal agency 
for implementing the TUFS.  All claims (i.e. for IR, CS and MMS) for the scheme, processed 
by Financial Institutions, are routed through TxC.  TxC collates and forwards these claims to 
the Ministry for issue of sa nction and release of funds. In  respect of MMS cases where 
beneficiary directly approaches TxC, it al so processes (in M-TUFS and R-TUFS) their 
claims, issues sanctions and releases the subsidy. 
1.4.3 Financial Institutions: Noda l Agencies and Nodal Banks  
Nodal agencies finance the project, examine the eligibility of cases from TUFS angle and act 
as link between the beneficiary units and the Mi nistry for availing benefits under the scheme. 
The approved nodal agencies under the scheme for different segments are as follows: 
Segments Nodal Agencies 
Textile Industry (exc luding Small Scale 
Industries Sector)  
Industrial Development Bank of India 
Limited (IDBI) 
Small Scale Industries (SSI) Textile Sectors Small Industries Development Bank of 
India (SIDBI) 
Jute Industry Industrial Finance Corporation of India 
(IFCI) 
 
The nodal agencies also appoint other Institut ions / State Financial Corporations / State 
Industrial Development Corporations and Commercial / Cooperative Banks in the scheme for 
sanction and disbursement of loan so as to have a better reach.  

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
 
6 
Besides three nodal agencies, 36 banks (detailed in Annexure 2) were also appointed as nodal 
banks under the scheme. The nodal banks determine the eligibility and release the scheme 
benefit in respect of all the cases financed by them.  
1.5 Mechanism for release of TUFS subsidy 
 
1.5.1 Mechanism for release of subsidy under the scheme is given below: 
 
  
After ensuring budget provision and 
funds availability, claims are processed 
by Ministry for issuing sanction. 
 
After issue of sanction, the funds are 
released by the Ministry to the Nodal 
Agencies / Nodal Banks.  
Nodal Agencies / Nodal Banks transfer 
the subsidy to concerned lending 
branches. The lending branches credit 
the subsidy into beneficiaries’ 
accounts. 
Figure 2 

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
 
7 
 
1.5.2 Requirements for issue of sanction and release of subsidy 
The scheme prescribes the following conditions which are required to be fulfilled by 
FIs before sanction is issued and subsidy is released by the Ministry: 
¾ submission of UCs by FIs to the Ministry in prescribed formats before submission 
of their next claims; 
¾ submission of beneficiaries’ unit-wise data by the FIs in the formats prescribed by 
the TxC; 
¾ maintenance of separate bank accounts by all FIs for receiving funds under the 
scheme; 
¾ balance amount available with the FIs is to be indicated and the interest accrued 
thereon is to be credited to the account opened for the purpose; and 
¾ interest accrued to the FI s under the scheme is to be  deposited every quarter by 
the FIs to the Pay and Accounts Office, Ministry of Textiles. 
1.6 Monitoring of scheme 
 
Scheme is monitored through Inter-Ministeria l Steering Committee and Technical Advisory 
cum Monitoring Committee. 
1.6.1  Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee  
Ministry had constituted Inter-Ministe rial Steering Committ ee (IMSC), under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary 15  Ministry of Textiles, for laying down policies, norms and 
guidelines on a macro basis for operationalising the scheme. The functions of the IMSC were 
to: 
¾ lay down norms and guidelines for operationalising the scheme, including details 
such as period of repayment, margin money requirements etc.; 
¾ periodically review the f unctioning of the scheme to assess the direction and 
extent to which the objectives of th e scheme had been fulfilled and provide 
directions for an effective implementation of the same; 
                                                             
15  From RR-TUFS Minister of Textiles was the chairman of the IMSC. 

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
¾ take/suggest necessary corrective measures; 
¾ appoint ad-hoc committees to advise in the effective im plementation of the 
scheme; 
¾ meet at least once in a quart er during the first year of  the implementation of the 
scheme and at least once in six months thereafter, or as often as necessary; and 
¾ keep the Government apprised  of the direction and extent of the implementation 
of the scheme. 
1.6.2 Technical Advisory cum Monitoring Committee 
For effective implementation and monitoring of the scheme, Technical Advisory cum 
Monitoring Committee (TAMC) was formed under the chairmanship of Textile 
Commissioner. Besides technical advisory functions, functions of the TAMC were to: 
¾ review the progress of the scheme and critically analyze the operation thereof, at a 
macro level and sort out administrative and operational bottlenecks; and 
¾ keep the IMSC apprised of the direction and extent of the implementation of the 
scheme. 
1.7 Financial Outlay 
 
During 01 April 1999 to 31 March 2007, Mi nistry released an amount of ` 2,315.18 crore to 
the scheme beneficiaries. Year-wise Budge t Estimates, Revised Estimates and Subsidy 
released by Ministry for the scheme from 2007-08 to 2013-14 are given in Table 1. 
Table 1 : Year-wise Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Subsidy released by 
Ministry from 2007-08 to 2013-14 
 (` in crore) 
Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Subsidy released 
2007-08 945.00 1,185.37 1,143.37 
2008-09 1,140.00 2,843.61 2,632.00 
2009-10 3,140.00 3,073.84 2,885.98 

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
 
9 
2010-11 2,400.00 2,900.00 2,784.18 
2011-12 3,100.00 3,700.00 2,937.82 
2012-13 2,914.00 2,323.03 2,151.34 
2013-14 2,400.00 1,952.56 1,730.58 
Total 16,039.00 17,978.41 16,265.27 
 
  

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
 
10 
Chapter 2 - Audit Framework 
 
2.1 Audit Mandate 
 
The Performance Audit on Technology Upgrad ation Fund Scheme was carried out under 
Section 13 of Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1971. 
2.2 Audit Objectives 
The performance audit was conducted with a view to ascertain whether: 
¾ Ministry had data to assess current a nd projected future needs of technology 
upgradation of Indian Textile Industry at  the time of scheme continuation in 2007 
(M-TUFS) and in 2011 (R-TUFS); 
¾ Ministry had assessed subsidy requirem ent properly for achieving the technology 
upgradation targets and had got resources/funds for it; 
¾ Due amount of subsidy had been disbur sed for investments eligible under the 
scheme; and 
¾ Ministry had established a system for effective monitoring to keep watch on 
implementing agencies of the scheme and followed it. 
2.3 Audit Scope and Coverage 
From the details of financial outlay of the sc heme, mentioned in Para 1.7 above, it is evident 
that substantial amount of funds have been released during 01 Apri l 2007 to 31 March 2014. 
Therefore, the period of 01 April 2007 to 31 Ma rch 2014 was covered in this Performance 
Audit. A sample of 3,231 beneficiaries’ cases  was selected for audit during September 2014 
to May 2015. 
As per data available with the Ministry, funds were released to  beneficiaries across 20 States 
and 5 Union Territories. For conducting Performance Audit of the scheme, beneficiaries from 
seven States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Mad hya Pradesh, Maharashtr a, Punjab, Rajasthan  
 

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
 
11 
and Tamil Nadu, were selected in  the audit sample, as the data  available with the Ministry 
reflected that these were the major beneficiary States under the scheme.  
2.4 Sources of Audit Criteria 
 
Audit criteria for the Performance Audit were drawn from the following:  
¾ Government Resolutions (GRs) issued for the scheme; 
¾ circulars issued by Ministry / TxC from  time to time for implementation of the 
scheme; 
¾ documents pertaining to formulation of scheme , release of subsidy to FIs, details of 
interest, penal interest, subsidy refunds etc. maintained in the Ministry;  
¾ documents available with the FIs and TxC in respect of TUFS beneficiaries 
indicating their eligibility and receipt of subsidy under the scheme; 
¾ agenda and minutes of various meetings of IMSC and TAMC; and 
¾ documents pertaining to monitoring of the scheme maintained in the Ministry, and 
TxC.  
2.5 Audit Methodology and Sampling 
 
The following methodology for conducting Performance Audit was adopted: 
2.5.1   Entry and Exit conference 
An entry conference with the Ministry, TxC and representatives of FIs was held on  
03 September 2014 in New Delhi. Thereafter, audit was conducted in the Ministry, TxC and 
in the branches of FIs in seven States for a udit of selected beneficiaries’ cases and audit 
observations were issued. To discuss the aud it findings, exit conferences were held in the 
seven States with the representatives of FIs.  
Thereafter, a consolidated Draft Performan ce Audit Report on TUFS was issued to the 
Ministry on 19 May 2015 for which response wa s received from Ministry on 8 July 2015 and 
an Exit conference was held on 9 July 2015 with  the Ministry in New Delhi wherein major 
audit findings included in the consolidated Dr aft Performance Audit Re port were discussed. 
Additional set of Audit Observations, as discus sed during the Exit confer ence were issued to 
the Ministry on 21 July 2015. On 20 October 2 015 the Ministry forwarded responses of the 

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
 
12 
FIs.  Thereafter, draft final performance audi t report was issued to Ministry on 30 October 
2015 for which response was received on 20 Nove mber 2015. The replies of Ministry have 
been duly considered while finalising the Audit Report. 
2.5.2 Audit Sample 
As per data provided by TxC, there were 22,998 beneficiaries’ cases who had got their loans 
sanctioned between 01 April 2007 to 31 Marc h 2014.  Audit selected sample from these 
beneficiary units. The sample selected for audit, covered beneficiaries’ cases pertaining to M-
TUFS as well as R-TUFS. While selecting th e sample, efforts were made to have a 
representative sample considering the segmen ts, sectors (SSI and non-SSI) and types of FIs 
(Commercial and Co-operative FIs). State-wi se sample selected and audited in the 
Performance Audit is given in Table 2. 
 
Table 2 : State-wise sample selected and audited in the Performance Audit 
State 
 
Beneficiaries’ 
cases for which 
audit was taken 
up 
Beneficiaries’ cases for 
which records were 
produced to audit by 
FIs 
Beneficiaries’ cases for which 
records were not produced to 
audit by FIs 
 
Andhra Pradesh 183 180 03 
Gujarat 1,306 1,101 205 
Madhya Pradesh 55 54 01 
Maharashtra 627 579 48 
Punjab 402 300 102 
Rajasthan 150 137 13 
Tamil Nadu 508 480 28 
Total 3,231   2,831 400 
 
2.6 Acknowledgement 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the co-operation r eceived from the Ministry, Office of Textile 
Commissioner and Financial Instit utions during the audit process. Audit would also like to 
place on record its appreciation for the effo rts made by the Ministry for taking immediate 
corrective measures in respect of audit observations.  

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
  13 
Chapter 3 - Audit Findings 
The audit findings have been categorised under the following broad headings: 
(i) Planning (ii) Implementation, and (iii) Monitoring and evaluation. 
3.1    Planning 
3.1.1 Requirement of baseline data and relevant targets  
Magnitude of problem to be addressed is at th e core of the formulation of any scheme.  Once 
the magnitude of problem has been identified, th e next step is that of designing the scheme 
according to priorities decided by the Government  in short-term / long-term perspectives. 
Thereafter, relevant targets / benchmarks are identified for evaluating scheme performance. 
These targets / benchmarks are set to resolve the problem by providing scheme benefits to the 
intended beneficiaries within the scheduled time frame.  
In the above context, availability of relevant baseline data is a prerequisite for identifying the 
magnitude of the problem to be resolved. For this, there should be a mechanism to collect / 
analyse baseline data. Besides, co llection of baseline data, info rmation / data in respect of 
benchmarks identified for evaluating the success / impact of the scheme also need to be 
collected. In the above background, Audit observations are as follows: 
Non-availability of baseline data  
 (a) Audit observed that no documents were  available in the Ministry indicating: 
¾ availability of baseline da ta about the magnitude of problem of obsolescence of 
machineries in Textile Industry when the scheme was proposed for continuation in 
2007 (for M-TUFS)  and 2011 (for R-TUFS); 
¾ reasonable level of upgradation identified / benchmarked, to be achieved through 
various phases of the scheme i.e. scheme before 2007, M-TUFS and R-TUFS; 
¾ results of any study in 2007 and 2011 by Minist ry to envisage number of Textiles 
machinery, along with amount of investment  and subsidy, required for different 
segments and sectors in succeeding period in  any decided time frame (5 years, 10 
years, etc.), to achieve the desired level of upgradation; and 

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
  14 
¾ quantum and degree of modernisation achieved under various phases of the 
scheme. 
(b) Textile Commissioner also wrote (June 2014) to the Ministry that: 
¾ supporting data of exact degree of modern isation achieved and gap in sector-wise 
modernisation was not available  
¾ no records about the details of beneficiar ies and the quantum and type of benefit 
availed were available. Government ha d no data base about the TUFS except for 
the total number of beneficiaries and subsidy released and the quantum of 
investment taken place. 
¾ limited computerization had taken place from 2011 onwards under R-TUFS 
which was limited to the project cost an d quantum of subsi dy to the individual 
units.  The details of machinery instal led and quantum of modernization taken 
place was not covered. No efforts had been taken to build a data base covering 
modernisation that had taken place and exte nt of backlog in modernisation in the 
industry and its different segments. 
¾ at no point of time any verification had taken place about the beneficiary or the 
machineries installed and it would be diffi cult to say that the subsidy had gone to 
the real beneficiary and to the genuine cause as per the objective of the scheme. 
The Ministry, while replying to the audit observation on non-avai lability of base line data, 
stated (March 2015) that beneficiary-wise data was not available. In the proposed 
development of software for TUFS, attempts ar e being made to capture this data also. It 
further stated that since inception of the scheme in 1999, three studies of the scheme had been 
conducted and they had indicated about the modernisation that had taken pl ace in the textile 
industry.   
Audit, however, noticed that all the three studies referred to by the Ministry were silent on the 
issue of magnitude of problem of obsolescence and reasonable level of upgradation identified 
/ benchmarked, to be achieved through various  phases of TUFS. Ther e was no record with 
the Government to indicate that  the objective of removal of technological obsolescence and 
attainment of economies of scale was achieved. 
Ministry stated (July 2015 and November 2015) that suggestions of audit have been noted 
and accordingly data related to the exact degree  of modernization and gap will be monitored 

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
  15 
in future through the recently developed softwa re i-TUFS. Data relating to new machinery is 
also being captured in the i-TUFS. 
3.1.2 Shortfall in achievement of targets identified in XI Five Year Plan 
Audit observed that in XI Five Year Pl an (2007 to 2012) fina ncial allocation of ` 10,273.10 
crore for the scheme was sought by the Minist ry for propelling targeted investment to the 
tune of ` 1,50,600 crore. Segment-wise investment ta rgets and incremental physical targets 
set under scheme in XI Five Year Plan are given in Table 3. 
Table 3 : Segment-wise investment targets and incremental physical targets 
Sl. 
No. 
Segment Investment Target 
(` in crore) 
Incremental Physical Target  
1 Spinning 50,200 29.25 million Spindles 
2 Weaving 20,200 1,08,850 Shuttleless looms 
3 Knitting 2,400 9,400 Knitting machines  
4 Processing 56,000 38.48 billion square meter Continuous 
processing 
5 Garmenting 21,800 14.50 lakh Stitching machines  
 Total 1,50,600 - 
 
Against the required allocation of ` 10,273.10 crore, Plan outlay of only  ` 8,000 crore was 
approved in 2007 (M-TUFS) that too without a ny indication of proportio nate reduction in 
investment targets. Audit noticed that Cabinet Committee on Econom ic Affairs (CCEA), 
subsequently, enhanced (March 2011) the allocation from ` 8,000 crore to ` 15,404 crore for 
entire XI Five Year Plan. 
Audit noticed that against the investment target of ` 1,50,600 crore, the scheme was able to 
attract investments amounting to ` 1,31,228 crore16 only during the XI Five Year Plan.  
                                                             
16  As indicated in the CCEA note of August 2013 

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
  16 
Audit also observed that Mini stry had not made any provisi on in the scheme to ensure 
segment wise monitoring of the scheme with re gard to allocation of subsidy, investment as 
well as achievement of physical targets.   
Had there been such provision, Ministry could ha ve timely identified the lagging segments 
for taking remedial measures as per need.  In the absence of data relating to segment specific 
allocation of funds, segment-wise actual ex penditure / subsidy, segment-wise actual 
investment and segment-wise physical achievement in the Ministry, Audit could not ascertain 
as to how the Ministry evaluated the achievement of segment-wise targets which were set 
while approving M-TUFS in 2007. Ministry as sured (July 2015 and November 2015) that 
requirements of monitoring of segment-wise physical achievements is noted and will be taken 
care of in future. 
3.1.3 Committed liabilities 
Normally, Textile projects under TUFS were e ligible for a period of 10 years for getting 
subsidy on repayments of its loan. Accordingly, Ministry takes the responsibility of 
disbursing TUFS eligible subsidy for a maximum period of 10 years only which is referred to 
as ‘committed liability’ by the Ministry.  
3.1.3.1 Unreliable estimates of committed liability  
(a)  Audit noticed that in the memorandum for Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) of 
M-TUFS, while presenting its case for fund re quirements for XI Five Year Plan, an 
amount of ` 2,761.10 crore was reflected as committed liabilities. This committed 
liability for XI Five Year Plan was in re spect of the projects sanctioned upto 31 March 
2007.  Audit noticed that neither the benefici ary-wise nor the bank- wise details of the 
committed liabilities of ` 2,761.10 crore were available in th e Ministry.  Audit further 
noticed that Ministry also di d not have details of benefici ary-wise as well as bank-wise 
payments made against the said amount of ` 2,761.10 crore. 
Ministry replied (July 2015) that it did not ha ve the data of committed liabilities called 
for by the Audit.   
(b)   EFC reviewed the scheme in June 2010 a nd recommended for firming up of committed 
liabilities and pausing the scheme till the approval of CCEA.  EFC noticed that the 
expenditure incurred in the first three years of XI Five Year Plan along with the Budget 
Estimate for the 4
th year (2010-11) of XI Five Year Plan had already exceeded the XI 

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
  17 
Five Year Plan outlay. This was mainly due to large number of applications for getting 
subsidy under the scheme and committed liabilities of previous years.   
With a view to firm up committed liabilit ies as recommended by EFC, TxC compiled 
the data furnished by FIs (which was FI-wis e and not beneficiary- wise) in respect of 
liabilities pertaining to loans sanctioned upto 28 June 2010 which worked out to ` 5,432 
crore.  CCEA approved (March 2011) the said committed liabilities of ` 5,432 crore for 
the balance period of the XI Five Year Plan i.e. upto 31 March 2012. Thereafter, 
Government restructured the scheme (April 2011) and renamed it as R-TUFS wherein it 
was decided that Textile Commissioner would ringfence (i.e. to limit) the committed 
liabilities in re spect of loans sanctioned during 1 April 1999 to 28 June 2010.  In this 
ringfencing exercise, TxC called (April 2011) for the information on the committed 
liabilities from the FIs under the scheme.  IMSC in its first meeting (August 2011) 
stated that FIs have furnished the revised data and increased the total committed 
liabilities from ` 5,432 crore to ` 8,289 crore for the XI Five  Year Plan. IMSC viewed 
this increase in the committed liabilities seriously and asked FIs to conduct an enquiry 
into the matter and submit beneficiary-wise detailed claims, for loans sanctioned upto 
28 June 2010, by the end of August 2011.     
Thereafter, IMSC in its second meeting (October 2011) noted that effective ringfencing 
was proving difficult and FIs were frequently revising the data. Audit noticed that total 
committed liabilities were shown in this meeting as ` 7,410.90 crore as against ` 8,289 
crore mentioned in first meeting of IMSC as stated above.  
However, total committed liabilities  finally approved by CCEA were ` 6,336 crore 
only.  This included committed liabilities of ` 5,432 crore approved in March 2011 and 
` 904 crore approved in August 2013. Thus, in th e absence of beneficiary-wise firmed 
up data relating to future committed liabiliti es, the Ministry was entirely dependent on 
FIs which kept on changing the amount of committed liabilities. 
Ministry stated (March 2015) that only FI-w ise details of the committed liabilities was 
available and beneficiary-wise details of committed liabilities of ` 5,432 crore were not 
available. 
In this connection, Audit observed that: 
¾ consequent to non-maintain ing of its own data, Mini stry could not properly 
estimate the amount of committed liabilities during XI Five Year Plan. The budget 

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
  18 
allocation, which was meant for entire XI Five Year Plan, was nearly exhausted 
by 28 June 2010 with the result the scheme  was paused from 29 June 2010 to 27 
April 2011. Hence investments made duri ng this period became ineligible for 
benefits under the scheme. 
¾ no mechanism or system was devised or pr ovided for by the Ministry for gaining 
assurance on the amount of the committed liabilities submitted by FIs. In the 
absence of such system, the possibility of inclusion of ineligible claims, cases of 
blackout period and overpayments to the beneficiaries cannot be ruled out.   
Ministry stated (March 2015) th at it was in the process of  finalizing selection of two 
professional agencies to undertake the work of evaluation and reconciliation of data relating 
to committed liabilities cases and blackout period  cases. Ministry further stated (July 2015) 
that year-wise requirement of account-wise s ubsidy for the cases sanctioned under M-TUFS, 
R-TUFS and RR-TUFS period ar e available for XII Five Y ear Plan (2012-2017) onwards.  
Ministry’s reply proved the audit point that there was no mechanism in the Ministry, during 
the XI Five Year Plan, to ensure that the amount of subsidy pertai ning to a particular 
beneficiary was released to that beneficiary only. 
Besides, in the Exit conference, held in July 2015, Ministry advised TxC to take necessary 
steps for maintaining financial discipline on the issue of committed liabilities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations: 
 
1. While designing the scheme in future, Ministry should assess segment-wise 
magnitude of problem of obsolescence in the industry and set the benchmarks 
to be achieved.   
2. Ministry may also consider segment-wise monitoring of the scheme to keep a 
close watch on progress of each segment. 
3. Ministry should maintain its own data of beneficiary-wise committed 
liabilities. 

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
  19 
3.2 Implementation 
 
3.2.1 Extending subsidy to ineligible beneficiaries  
The eligibility criteria of a beneficiary under the scheme had been defined in the GR of 
November 2007 (M-TUFS), GR of April 2011 (R-TUFS) of the Ministry and circulars issued 
by the TxC from time to time.  
In delivering the benefits of the scheme, the FI s were responsible for ensuring that only those 
beneficiaries who met qualifying conditions were extended the due  benefits of the scheme. 
Accordingly, all the FIs were re quired to prepare quarterly clai ms of beneficiaries eligible 
under the scheme. The claim was to be forwarded to TxC after verification and authentication 
by designated officers of the FIs.  Every effort was to be made  to eliminate inclusion of 
ineligible beneficiaries. FIs were also required to certify the correctness and integrity of the 
claims of beneficiaries. 
Nonetheless, audit scrutiny revealed that out of sample of 2,831 beneficiaries’ cases 
examined, in 129 cases in six States, subsidy amounting to ` 46.96 crore was released to 
ineligible beneficiaries. These beneficiaries were found to be ineligible on account of: 
¾ submission of suspected Bills of Entries by the beneficiaries as proof of purchase 
of TUFS eligible imported machinerie s for claiming subsidy under TUFS. The 
importer name and assessable value mentioned in the Bills of Entries submitted 
did not match with the records of Customs department and in some cases no such 
Bills of Entries numbers were allotted by Customs department; 
¾ non-compliance of condition for availing of  MMS i.e. a) unit should at least 
function for a minimum period of three y ears under the same ownership from the 
date of disbursement of subsidy, and b)  FI should keep the minimum repayment 
period including moratorium period as three years; 
¾ purchase of machineries from supplie rs who were not manufacturers in 
contravention of the provisions of 15 per cent  MMS which states that the SSI 
entrepreneur would releas e its contribution of 15  per cent  directly to the 
machinery manufacturer; 
¾ beneficiary units not traceable;  

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
  20 
¾ machineries on which TUFS subsidy was claimed, not found in the custody of 
beneficiaries; and 
¾ non-submission of claims by FIs within the prescribed time li mit stipulated by 
TxC through its circulars. 
State-wise summary of cases of ineligible beneficiaries is given in Annexure 3. 
3.2.2 Extending subsidy to ineligible investments  
 
Eligible investments, to be covered under the sc heme, were explicitly detailed in the scheme 
guidelines i.e. GRs.   In addi tion, clarifications were also i ssued from time to time regarding 
eligible investments i.e. types of machinery eligible for TUFS subsidy, other investments 
eligible, investments made within cut off dates,  etc. and determination of eligible investment 
under certain conditions.  
Besides, the release of funds  under TUFS had been linked to the submission of data by the 
FIs in the formats prescribed by the TxC. These formats contained actual TUFS related 
specifications of the plant and machinery / e quipment proposed under the project. The funds 
were not to be released until the unit-wise data  in the prescribed format was submitted to the 
TxC. 
Nonetheless, audit scrutiny revealed that in sample of 2,831 beneficiaries’ cases, in 193 cases 
in seven States, subsidy amounting to ` 52.87 crore was released on TUFS ineligible 
investments. These investments were found ineligible on account of claiming subsidy on: 
¾ machineries which were not eligible for TUFS subsidy as per provisions contained 
in GRs; 
¾ taxes and duties included in the value of machineries purchased - the Scheme 
provided Interest subsidy / Capital subsi dy / Margin Money subsidy on the basic 
value of the machineries and excluded the tax component for the purpose of 
valuation; 
¾ land and factory building in case of segments  other than eligible segments i.e.  
apparel and handloom segment - the Scheme (M-TUFS) stipulated that investments 
in land and factory building, preliminary and pre-operative expenses and margin 
money required for working capital in ca se of apparel and handloom segment was 
eligible to the extent of 50 per cent of the total investment in plant and machinery in 
the said segments; and 

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
  21 
¾ machineries purchased before sanction of lo an - as per the provi sions contained in 
GRs, machines purchased on or after approa ch date (M-TUFS) and on or after date 
of sanction of term loan (R-TUFS) were eligible for TUFS subsidy under the 
scheme.
 
State-wise summary of cases of ineligible investments is given in Annexure 4.  
3.2.3 Excess payment made to beneficiaries 
The actual amount of subsidy that should be passed on to a beneficiary depends upon his 
eligible investments in identified sector and segments. Audit scrutiny of beneficiaries’ cases 
revealed that in some cases the calculation of  the due subsidy was not done properly in terms 
of the scheme guidelines. In an  audit sample of 2,831 beneficiar ies’ cases, in 40 cases in 
seven States excess payment of subsidy amounting to ` 6.42 crore was made to the 
beneficiaries. This excess payment was made on account of calculating TUFS subsidy: 
¾ at uniform rates for all the TUFS eligible investments for different segments / 
sectors instead of at different ial rates of subsidy for different segments  / sectors. 
The scheme provided a reimbursement of fi ve percentage points on the interest 
charged by the lending agency on a project of technology upgradation. However, for 
the spinning machinery the reimbursement was 4 per cent (M-TUFS). Whereas in  
R-TUFS, for spinning machin ery the scheme provided 4 per cent  for new stand 
alone / replacement / modernisati on of spinning machinery; and 5 per cent  for 
spinning units with matching capacity in weaving / knitting / processing / 
garmenting; 
¾ on full loan amount instead of the TUFS eligible part of the loan disbursed; and 
¾ on higher value of machineries as depicted in formats instead of on actual value of 
machineries as per invoices. 
State-wise summary of cases of excess payment is given in Annexure 5. 
3.2.4 Delay in crediting subsidy to beneficiaries accounts 
As per GR of the scheme, after receipt of subsidy from Ministr y, subsidy was to be released 
to the TUFS beneficiary by FI within one / tw o days in M-TUFS and three working days in 
R-TUFS.  The FIs had to ensure that the subsidy was released to the beneficiary within the 
prescribed time limit. In case of  delay in release of subsidy to the beneficiaries, it should be 

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
  22 
deposited in interest bearing account and interest earned on the same should be refunded to 
the Ministry.  
In this regard, Audit checked the records rela ting to transfer of fu nds from disbursing 
branches to the concerned beneficiaries’ accounts and found that in sample of 2,831 
beneficiaries’ cases, in 172 cases  in six States, there was a delay of 1 to 1509 days in 
crediting subsidy to benefici aries’ accounts. State-wise su mmary of cases of delay in 
crediting subsidy to beneficiaries’ accounts is given in Annexure 6.  
3.2.5 Keeping of funds in non-interest bearing accounts 
It was stipulated in the GR of M-TUFS and R-TUFS that all the FIs receiving funds should 
maintain a separate account for the purpose and any interest accrued on the undistributed 
amount available with FIs should be deposite d every quarter by the FIs to the Pay and 
Accounts Office, Ministry of Textiles, New De lhi. Further in the GR of R-TUFS it was 
specifically mentioned that funds were to be ke pt in interest bearing account and at the time 
of depositing the interest to the Pay and Accounts Office, FIs would submit details viz., the 
amount on which the interest has been accrued, the exact date and period and rate of such 
interest to the Pay and Accounts Office, Ministry of Textiles. 
Audit noticed that, before credit ing TUFS subsidy into the benefi ciaries’ accounts, funds of   
` 4.77 crore in Gujarat were not kept in inte rest bearing accounts in seven disbursing 
branches of five FIs. In these cases FIs parked funds in their own accounts for a period 
ranging between seven and 31 months but no inte rest on this account was credited to GoI. 
Details of retention of undisbursed subsidy by the FIs are given in Annexure 7. 
In order to ascertain that subsi dy released by Ministry to FIs wa s kept in a dedicated interest 
bearing account maintained for the purpose, A udit asked the Ministry to elaborate a) the 
existence of mechanism and follow up of such m echanism i.e. periodical inspections carried 
out by Ministry / TxC to ensure that FIs were complying with the above provisions, and b) in 
case of non-compliance, remedial actions initiated to ensure that the funds from Ministry had 
been kept in interest bearing accounts till their disbursal to concerned beneficiaries’ account. 
Ministry replied (March 2015) th at most of the FIs are keepi ng funds in current account in 
which no interest is earned.  Ministry further replied (July 2015) that though there are internal 
mechanisms available with FIs for proper mainte nance of such accounts, as advised by audit, 
mechanism will be strengthened further to ensure that the provisions of GRs are followed 
strictly.  Ministry also stated (July 2015) that the FIs who did not comply with requirement of 

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
  23 
keeping the funds in interest bearing account s were being directed  by TxC to refund the 
amount of interest accrued in su ch cases along with penal inte rest thereon. They were also 
being directed not to repeat such acts in future. 
Ministry’s response to Para Nos 3.2.1 to 3.2.5 
Ministry stated (October 2015) that this Scheme is implem ented through Banks and the 
irregularities pointed out pe rtain to Banks. Textile Commis sioner had taken up the issues 
regarding irregularities with the CMDs/MDs/EDs of the concerned Banks.  It was also stated 
that audit observations have b een taken into account in the revi sion of the scheme which is 
under process. Besides, Ministry also submitted a summary of responses on audit 
observations by FIs and this inter-alia contains: 
(i) Number of cases where recovery has been made/initiated by FIs; 
(ii) Number of cases where FIs did not agree with audit observations; 
(iii) Number of cases where reply was awaited from FIs. 
However, in respect of cases where FIs did not  agree with audit observations, Ministry did 
not offer its view regarding their concurrence with the views of FIs. 
Ministry should, therefore, obtain replies from  FIs in cases falling unde r category (iii) above 
and form its own view on each case falling under category (ii) and (iii). 
In response to the audit observa tion regarding delay in credit ing subsidy to beneficiaries’ 
accounts, Ministry had earlier stated (July 2015) that the system will be further strengthened 
so that amount released may not be kept by the FIs for more than the prescribed time limit in 
GR. 
3.2.6 Refund of subsidy  
TUFS is a reimbursement scheme and its main f eature is reimbursement of interest actually 
charged by the approved FIs. Accordingly, subsi dy is credited to the beneficiaries’ account 
by FIs after they had paid the interest on the TUFS eligible loan to FIs. This subsidy is to be 
kept in a dedicated interest bearing account of th e FI and is to be credited to beneficiary’s 
account within maximum of three days from recei pt of the same from the Ministry. Thus, in 
an ideal situation there should not be any bala nce amount in the dedicated account if all the 
subsidy received from the Ministry has been disbursed.  
Balance amount will be available in dedicat ed account only when there is delay in 
disbursement of subsidy (as interest will be earned on this undisbursed amount) to the 

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
  24 
beneficiary’s account or when refund is made by the beneficiary (if double payment is made 
for its single claim or excess payment is made  to it against its claim). Thus, in normal 
situation there should not be a ny refund of subsidy if claims are made by the FIs after due 
diligence.  
During the scrutiny of records in the Ministry, Audit observe d many instances of refund of 
subsidy by the FIs during 2009-10 to 2013-14.  In 2009-10, an amount of ` 121.45 crore was 
refunded by the FIs on account of either excess cl aimed subsidy or subsidy paid to ineligible 
beneficiaries.  These instances indicate lack of  proper scrutiny of claims  of the beneficiaries 
by FIs. 
Ministry accepted (July 2015 and November 2015) that there should not be any balance in the 
dedicated account which will be an ideal situa tion. Ministry also stated that the cases of 
excess claim of subsidy or subsid y paid to ineligible beneficiaries indicated lack of proper 
scrutiny of claims of the beneficiaries by FIs. In  all cases where there is refund of subsidy by 
FIs, the TxC investigates the reasons and also  ensures recovery of interest apart from 
insisting on production of a certificate at Executive Director (ED) level from the FI in respect 
of future claims, if any due.  
 
Ministry further added (July 2015 and November  2015) that the mistakes which are being 
committed by the FIs will be addressed under the new proposed scheme where subsidy will 
be back-ended which will be disbursed only af ter physical verification about installation and 
commissioning of bench-marked machinery an d its technology level by a Joint Inspection 
Team constituted for this purpose.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations: 
4. Ministry may instruct FIs for strengthening their due diligence mechanism to 
avoid recurrence of aforesaid implementation issues in future.   
5. Ministry may also consider instituting checks at its end to ensure that the FIs are 
exercising proper due dili gence so that subsidy is passed on to eligible 
beneficiaries/investments. 

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
  25 
3.3 Monitoring and evaluation 
 
Monitoring is an integral part of a scheme. Monitoring ensures that the scheme progresses in 
the direction determined at the time of its fo rmulation and planning.  Concurrent evaluation 
and review of the physical and financial progr ess of the scheme plays a crucial role in 
identification of weak areas which helps in be tter focus.  Effective monitoring mechanism 
also ensures that targeted beneficiaries av ail due benefits under the scheme within the 
prescribed time limit, thereby achieving the over all broad objectives envisaged at the time of 
formulation of scheme. 
3.3.1 Minimal monitoring of implementation of scheme  
 
As per the existing system of processing of clai ms (i) FIs prepare the claims at the branch 
level and forward them to the respective contro lling offices for consolidation at their Head 
Office; (ii) the consolidated claims for the FI  as a whole are submitted for reimbursement to 
the TxC; (iii) TxC scrutinizes the claims on the basis of requisite certifi cates from FIs; (iv) 
after collating the claims, TxC forwards them to the Ministry for processing and release of 
subsidy claims; and (v) Ministry, after scrutiny of claims, issues sanction letters for release of 
subsidy directly to the FIs. 
Ministry issued instructions to the implem enting FIs for maintenance of database of 
company, project-wise eligibil ity established, pending refere nces for TUFS-eligibility, 
interest reimbursement effected, etc. Since Ministry was responsible  for sanctioning and 
releasing funds directly to FIs on the basis of  claims submitted by TxC, it was imperative on 
the part of the Ministry / TxC to have eff ective scrutiny and monitoring mechanism in place 
to ensure follow up of its instructions and access to authentic and current data through 
systematized reports. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that in the system of processing of claims, mo nitoring of working of 
FIs by Ministry was weak. The scheme design was based on extensive delegation of authority 
to the FIs, who were the implementing agencies . The FIs were determining the eligibility of 
beneficiaries and preparing their claims. Audit observed that FIs claims were not scrutinized 
independently by the TxC or Ministry for accur acy. Ministry’s / TxC’s role was limited to 
issuing guidelines, instructi ons,  collating / consolidatin g data without conducting any 
independent verification of data and certificates, to confirm the ve racity of claims of FIs and 
releasing funds to the FIs. 

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
  26 
Ministry stated (March 2015) that FIs were under the Ministry of Finance and have their own 
audit set up. Ministry further stat ed that it had, from time to tim e, issued instructions to FIs 
for compliance. Audit observed that Ministry needed to have a mechanism for verifying 
compliance of its instructions, on a sample basi s, instead of completely depending upon FIs’ 
audit set up.  
Audit also observed that though Ministry was aware of flaws in the implementation of the 
scheme, i.e. extending subsidy to ineligible beneficiaries/ ineligible investments and excess 
claim of subsidy etc., yet it did not take ade quate measures to lay down norms for monitoring 
and appraisal mechanism for effective implemen tation of the scheme. The assertion of the 
Ministry that FIs had well-established mechanisms and that the TxC had limited 
responsibility in this regard, did not absolve it from its monitoring obligations.  
Ministry replied (July 2015 and November 2015) that suggesti ons given by the audit have 
been noted. Ministry also adde d that i-TUFS has been launched for better management of all 
accounts under TUFS sanctioned upto RR-TUFS.  Fu rther, in the new scheme it has been 
proposed that back-ended subsidy will be cons idered only after physical verification by Joint 
Inspection Team.  Besides, proper monitoring mechanism is also proposed to be put in place.  
3.3.2 Mechanism to check compliance of instructions by FIs 
 
3.3.2.1 Non-existence of mechanism to watch compliance of conditions of sanction 
While issuing the sanction lette r for the release of IR/CS unde r the scheme, the following 
major terms and conditions were incorporated in the sanction letters: 
¾ the FIs would maintain subsidiary accounts of the funds received from the 
Government; 
¾ the FIs would maintain a register of the details of beneficiaries to whom subsidy  
was given; and 
¾ the amount so paid to FIs, would rema in open for inspection by the Government 
(Ministry) / Internal Audit Party of the Chief Controller of Accounts (CCA), 
Ministry of Commerce & Textiles, New Delhi, whenever required. 
Audit observed that no mechanism was in place prior to 2014 to watch the compliance of the 
above conditions. Ministry, however, while accepting the lapses pointed out by Audit, stated 
(July 2015) that the monitoring mechanism would be further strengthened, wherever 
required.  

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
  27 
3.3.2.2    Non-inclusion of an important condition in the sanction letter 
As per GRs of M-TUFS and R-TUFS, the TUFS subsi dy released to the FIs was to be kept in 
interest bearing accounts till transf er of the same to beneficiary account. Further, FIs had to 
deposit quarterly such interest  earned with the Pay and A ccounts Office of the Ministry. 
Audit observed that this condition was not incorporated in the sanction letters.  
Ministry stated (July 2015) that the sanction order will be re-drafted keeping in view the audit 
observation.   
3.3.3 Inclusion of Black Out period cases in List-II  
As mentioned in the Para 1.2.3 above, lending agenci es i.e. FIs were advised not to issue any 
further new sanction of loan under TUFS and to freeze all new proposals till approval of 
additional allocations by CCEA. Accordingl y, M-TUFS was discontinue d and new sanctions 
under the scheme were stopped from 29 June 20 10. However, GR on R-TUFS was issued on 
28 April 2011 covering only such  loans as sanctioned by the FIs during the period from  
28 April 2011 to 31 March 2012. Hence, projects / term loan sanctioned during Black Out 
period (29 June 2010 to 27 April 2011) were not eligible for benefits under TUFS.  
 
Further at the time of restructuring the scheme as R-TUFS in April 2011, GoI decided that 
TxC would ringfence (i.e. to limit) the committe d liabilities in respect of loans sanctioned 
during 1 April 1999 to 28 June 201 0.  In this ringfencing exer cise, TxC called (April 2011) 
for information on the committed liabilities from the FIs under the scheme.  
 
Thereafter, in October 2011, IMSC decided  th at the Government should disburse committed 
liabilities of subsidy on the basis of classification viz. a) List I cases where 1
st installment of 
subsidy has been disbursed and b) List II cases  where project scrutiny and determination of 
eligibility has been completed but no installments of subsidy were released.  
 
These List-II cases were examined by an inte rnal committee of TxC a nd based on its report, 
IMSC in its meeting held in May 2012  r ecommended  2,196 cases under M-TUFS with 
subsidy amounting to ` 904 crore. Thereafter, Ministry of Textiles sought approval of CCEA 
for ` 904 crore towards liabilities pertaining to  2,196 cases of List-II under M-TUFS.  The 
CCEA approved the same in August 2013. 
 

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
  28 
Audit scrutiny revealed that  2,196 cases of List-II for ` 904 crore included 19 cases 
(Annexure 8) which were pertaining to Black Out period (29 June 201 0 to 27 April 2011). 
The loans sanctioned during this period were not eligible under TUFS as the scheme was 
paused during this period and no fresh sanctions fo r this period were allo wed to be covered.  
Thus, inclusion of Black Out period cases in Li st-II itself did not seem correct as List-II was 
supposed to contain only those cases where TUFS project scrutiny and determination of 
eligibility had been completed but installments of TUFS subsidy had not been released. 
 
Further, Audit also noticed that four cases ( Annexure 9) where loans were sanctioned after 
27 April 2011 i.e. during the peri od of R-TUFS, were also incl uded in List-II cases approved 
by IMSC which was also irregular as R-TUFS cases were not to be taken in List-II. 
 
Ministry replied (November 2015) that data on revised Committed Liability of List-II cases 
under M-TUFS has already been made available on the website of the TxC in which many 
cases have already been declared ineligible and reflected with zero liability.   
 
Fact remains that while taking approval from CCEA, ineligible cases  were included under 
List-II depicting lack of due diligence. Further,  Ministry has not declared all these cases as 
ineligible though none of the cases were eligible under the scheme. 
 
3.3.4 Non-fulfilment of commitments 
Ministry has important task of taking mid- course corrections whenever and wherever 
required and fulfiling of commitments made in  the GRs as well as in the documents for 
appraisal / approval of the scheme. However, A udit observed that Ministry did not fulfil its 
commitments in the instances given below: 
¾ Ministry, while replying (July 2007) to the observations (June 2007) of Department of 
Expenditure (Ministry of Finance) on memorandum for EFC, had stated that: 
 
(i) in order to verify whether loans have  been sanctioned to TUFS compatible 
projects, TxC, nodal agency for monitori ng the TUFS, obtains in the prescribed 
format from the FIs the details in resp ect of machinery items. However, during 
scrutiny of records, Audit noticed that the Ministry / TxC was not maintaining 
any such data regarding textile machinery. 

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
  29 
 
Ministry stated (March 2015)  that records in this c onnection are not  available. 
However, Ministry further stated (July 2015)  that machinery details will also be 
captured in its new initiative i.e. i-TUFS. 
 
(ii) monitoring mechanisms viz IMSC and TAMC  exist in the scheme for ensuring 
that loans had been sanctioned to TU FS compatible projects. Any further 
control mechanism on FIs needs to be devised in consultation with Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI) and Department of Banking (Ministry of Finance). 
 
Audit, however, noticed that no control mechanism on FIs apart from IMSC and 
TAMC was devised in compliance of the above observation. 
¾ As per GR of M-TUFS, the FIs were to implement an ‘on-line system’ for expeditious 
clearance of the TUFS cases and releasing subsidy to the beneficiary.  
In this regard, Ministry stated (March  2015) that a web based system of online 
submission of data by FIs was put in place in the year 2008. However, Audit observed 
that State Bank of India, handling almost 30 per cent  of the cases under TUFS, 
continued to submit offline claims to TxC under M-TUFS till March 2014. 
3.3.5 Monitoring lapses on the part of IMSC 
¾ As per GR of M-TUFS, the IMSC was requi red to meet at least once in a quarter 
during the first year of implementation of the scheme and once in six months after one 
year or as often as necessary. Audit obser ved that only two meetings of IMSC were 
held during 39 months of operation of M- TUFS.  
Ministry while accepting the fact stated (Jul y 2015) that since the GR was issued in 
November 2007, the scheme took some time to pick up. Hence, the first meeting of 
IMSC was held on 19 Janua ry 2009. Since the M-TUFS Sc heme closed on 28 June 
2010, there was not much time left to take up the issues to conduct more meetings.  
¾ GR of M-TUFS stipulated that the IMSC had to lay down norms for a monitoring and 
appraisal mechanism for effective implement ation of the scheme and would set up 
appropriate machinery thereof. Ministry in  this connection stat ed (March 2015) that 
no separate norms have been laid down by the IMSC.   

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
  30 
¾ In GR of M-TUFS, for providing specifi c thrust to garmenting, machineries for 
Computer Aided Design (C AD), Computer Aided Manufact uring (CAM) and design 
studios etc. were included in the separate heading of the guidelines of the scheme with 
a financial cap to be determined by IMSC. Further as per GR, investment in common 
infrastructure facilities owned by the association, trust or co-operative society of the 
units participating in the TUFS, to the exte nt necessary for this purpose, was eligible 
only upto 25 per cent of the cost of TUFS eligible machinery, with a maximum of 
financial cap to be determined by IMSC.  
Regarding determination of financial cap, Ministry stated (Mar ch 2015) that IMSC 
decided (in its meeting held on 19 January 2009) not to impose any financial cap at 
that time but decided that this  may be reviewed later on. Audit noticed that decision 
was never reviewed by IMSC and no financial cap in this regard was fixed. 
Ministry further stated (July 2015) that no stakeholder of the industry might have 
raised the issue for review and hence it was not reviewed. Besides, it also added that 
there was not much off-take under these segments. 
Reply of the Ministry needs to be consid ered against the fact that GR provision 
(issued on the basis of approval given by CCEA) was for determining financial cap 
and did not give discretion to IMSC for not-determining or postponement of decision 
on determination of financial cap.  
3.3.6 Monitoring lapses on the part of TAMC 
¾ As per GR of M-TUFS, TAMC had to keep IMSC apprised of the direction and extent 
of the implementation of the scheme. TAMC was ordinarily to meet once in a quarter. 
Audit observed that only five meetings against 13 were held in 39 months of 
operation of M-TUFS.  
Ministry stated (July 2015) th at in the absence of any majo r / urgent issue it is quite 
possible that the meetings were not held at regular intervals. As the GR on M-TUFS 
was released in November 2007, the industr y took time to understand the scheme and 
approach the lending agencies for implementation. Further, the scheme was stopped 
from 29 June 2010. Hence, there was lesser time to conduct more meetings of TAMC. 
¾ As per GR of R-TUFS, TAMC was specifi cally to monitor the progress of the MMS 
@ 15 per cent under TUFS for small scale textile a nd jute units. Aud it observed that 

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
  31 
minutes of various TAMC meetings did not  indicate monitoring of the progress of 
MMS @ 15 per cent under TUFS for small scale textile and jute units. Ministry stated 
(July 2015) that apart from re viewing the overall progress of TUFS in its meetings, 
the progress about the 15 per cent MMS cases is also now be ing separately reviewed 
in TAMC meetings. 
 
 
 
 
  
Recommendation: 
6. Ministry should activate its monitoring mechanism so as to take mid course 
corrective action, if needed. 

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
  32 
 
Chapter 4 - Conclusion and Recommendations 
 
 4.1 Conclusion 
 
Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS), a flagship scheme of the Ministry of 
Textiles, was introduced in 1999-2000 to catalyze i nvestment in all the sub-sectors/segments 
of textile industry for tec hnology upgradation of  the machinery by way of interest 
reimbursement. The scheme was subsequently  modified in 2007 (M-TUFS), 2011 (R-TUFS) 
and 2013 (RR-TUFS).  During 1 April 1999 to 31 March 2014, Ministry released subsidy of 
` 18,580.45 crore under TUFS. 
 
Performance Audit of Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) revealed the following: 
¾ Magnitude of problem to be addressed is at the core of the formulation of any scheme.  
Thereafter, relevant targets / benchmarks ar e to be identified for evaluating scheme 
performance. No documents were, however, available in the Ministry indicating 
availability of baseline data about the magnitude of problem of obsolescence of 
machineries which was sought to be addr essed through the scheme. Documents for 
level of benchmark to be achieved, quantum  and degree of modernisation actually 
achieved through various phases of the scheme were also not available. 
 
¾ As against the investment target of ` 1,50,600 crore under TUFS, investments of only 
` 1,31,228 crore could come during the XI Five Year Plan. The shortfall in attracting 
investments was inspite of increase in financial allocation by GoI from ` 10,273 crore 
to  ` 15,404 crore. 
 
¾ Ministry did not have beneficiary-wise and bank-wise details of future committed 
liabilities.  
 

Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
  33 
¾ Out of total 22,998 cases, Audit selected a sample of 3,23117 cases in which following 
deficiencies were noticed: 
(i) Extending  subsidy to in eligible beneficiaries (
` 46.96 crore in 129 cases); 
(ii) Extending subsidy to ineligible investments (` 52.87 crore in 193 cases); 
(iii) Excess payment made  to beneficiaries (` 6.42 crore in 40 cases); and 
(iv) Delay in crediting subsidy to benefici aries accounts (1 to 1509 days in 172 
cases).  
 
¾ TUFS was a reimbursement scheme. However, in 2009-10 an amount of ` 121.45 
crore was refunded by the FIs on account of either excess claimed subsidy or subsidy 
paid to ineligible beneficiaries which indi cated lack of proper scrutiny of claims by 
the FIs. 
 
 
¾  Monitoring of the working of FIs by the Ministry was weak. Monitoring was 
dependent solely upon FIs’ audit set up and their monitoring mechanism. 
 
¾ There was no mechanism existing in the Ministry to check compliance of its 
instructions by FIs. Further prior to 2014 mechanism of inspection was not used.  
 
4.2 Recommendations 
 
1. While designing the scheme in future, Mi nistry should assess segment-wise 
magnitude of problem of obsolescence in th e industry and set the benchmarks to be 
achieved.   
 
2. Ministry may also consider segment-wise monitoring of the scheme to keep a close 
watch on progress of each segment. 
 
 
3. Ministry should maintain its own data of beneficiary-wise committed liabilities. 
 
4. Ministry may instruct FIs for strengthen ing their due diligence mechanism to avoid 
recurrence of implementation issues in future.   
                                                             
17  Cases audited were, however, 2,831 due to non production of records for 400 cases. 

Report No. 52 of 2015 
 
 
 
  34 
5. Ministry may also consider instituting check s at its end to ensure that the FIs are 
exercising proper due diligence so that subsi dy is passed on to elig ible beneficiaries / 
investments. 
 
6. Ministry should activate its monitoring mechanism so as to take mid course corrective 
action, if needed. 
 
 

 Annexures 
 

 Report No. 52 of 2015  
 A-1 
Annexure 1 
Salient features of M-TUFS & R-TUFS (Referred to in Para 1.2.5) 
 
Features of 
Scheme 
M-TUFS (01.04.2007 to 28.06.2010) R-TUFS (28.04.2011 to 31.03.2013) 
Interest 
Reimbursement 
(IR) 
• IR of 5  per cent on the interest charged by the lending agency 
for eligible segments other than spinning; and IR of 4  per cent 
for spinning segment. 
• IR of 5  per cent  on the interest charged by the 
lending agency; IR of 4  per cent  for new stand 
alone /  replacement / m odernisation of spinning 
machinery; and IR of 5  per cent  for spinning 
units with matching capacity in weaving / 
knitting / processing / garmenting. 
Capital Subsidy 
(CS) / Margin 
Money Subsidy 
(MMS) 
• 15  per cent  MMS for SSI Textile and Jute sector in lieu of 5 
per cent  IR subject to a Capital Ceiling of ` 200 lakh and 
ceiling on MMS ` 15 lakh; A minimum of 15  per cent  equity 
contribution from beneficiarie s was to be ensured; and 25 per 
cent  CS on purchase of the new machinery and equipments 
for pre-loom and post-loom operations, handlooms / up-
gradation of handlooms and te sting and quality control 
equipments, for handloom production units. 
• An option to SSI textile and jute sector – 15  per 
cent MMS in lieu of 5  per cent  IR subject to a 
Capital Ceiling of ` 500 lakh and ceiling on 
MMS of ` 45 lakh; A minimum of 15  per cent  
equity contribution from beneficiaries will be 
ensured; 5  per cent  IR plus 10  per cent  CS for 
brand new shuttleless looms; 25  per cent  CS in 
lieu of 5  per cent  IR on benchmarked 
machinery of silk sector; and 25  per cent  CS in 
lieu of 5  per cent  IR on purchase of the new 
machinery and equipments for pre-loom & post-
loom operations, handlooms / up-gradation of 
handlooms and testing and quality control 
equipments, for handloom production units. 
Valuation of 
Machinery 
• IR/CS/MMS on the basic value of the machineries and 
exclude tax component for the purpo se of valuation in view of 
the decision for non-subsidizing the taxes. 
• IR/CS/MMS on the basic value of the 
machineries and exclude tax component for the 
purpose of valuation. 
Cut-off date for 
IR 
• The cut-off date under the scheme for availing the benefits 
was the date of sanction and in case part of the loan of the unit 
was sanctioned prior to 31.03.2007 and part after 31.03.2007, 
the portion sanctioned prior to  31.03.2007 was to be covered 
under erstwhile TUFS and only the portion which was 
• Only such loans as sanctioned by the lending 
agencies during the period from 28.04.2011 to 
31.03.2012 (the scheme was further extended 
upto 31.03.2013) were eligible  to be considered 
for grant of benefits under this scheme; and 

 Report No. 52 of 2015  
 A-2 
sanctioned after 31.03.2007 was to be covered under M- 
TUFS. 
Phase-wise expansion under R-TUFS was 
permitted provided R-TUFS loan was availed 
under single loan proposal for single project 
under phase-wise expansion of capacity. 
Investment in 
Land and 
Factory 
Building etc. 
• Investments like land, factory building, pre-operative expenses 
and margin money for working capital were ineligible for 
benefit of reimbursement under the scheme except meant for 
apparel sector and handloom with existing 50  per cent  cap. In 
case apparel unit was engaged in other activity, the eligible 
investment under this head was related to plant and machinery 
eligible for manufacturing of apparel. 
• Investments like factory building, pre-operative 
expenses and margin m oney for working capital 
were eligible for benefit of reimbursement under 
the scheme meant for apparel sector and 
handloom with 50 per cent  cap. In case apparel 
unit / handloom unit was engaged in any other 
activity, the eligible investment under this head 
was only related to plant and machinery eligible 
for manufacturing of apparel / handlooms. 
Other 
Investments 
• Other investments such as en ergy saving devices, effluent 
treatment plant, Captive Power Plant etc. (including non-
conventional sources) were eligible  for benefits of the scheme 
only upto 25 per cent  of the cost of machinery. 
• Common Effluent Treatm ent Plant and other 
investments like, ener gy saving devices,  
Captive Power Plant and electrical installations 
etc. was not eligible under R-TUFS. 
Cut- off date for 
determining the 
CS  
• In order to determine eligibil ity for CS for the eligible 
specified machinery, the cut-off date was the date of 
commencement of commercial production irresp ective of the 
date of the sanction of the loan. The date of commencement of 
commercial production was to be certified by Chartered 
Engineer and Chartered Accountant. 
• Advance / token paymen t up to the margin 
money for machine cost can be paid by the unit 
prior to the date of sanction of term loan. 
However, machines purchased on or after date 
of sanction of term loan is eligible subject to 
fulfilment of other terms and conditions. 
Moratorium • IR was available for a period of 10 years including 2 years 
implementation and moratorium period. 
• IR was for a period of 7 years including 2 years 
implementation / moratorium period. 
Subsidy cap • There was no cap in the scheme. • There was an overall subsidy cap of ` 1,972 
crore from 28.04.2011  to 31.03.2012, with 
sectoral investment shares of 26  per cent  for 
spinning, 13 per cent  for weaving, 21  per cent  
for processing, 8 per cent  for garmenting and 32 
per cent  for others. 
Second hand 
machinery 
• Entire range of imported second hand machinery was 
ineligible except automatic shut tle less looms with the value 
• Cover only imported automatic shuttle less 
looms of 10 years’ vintage and with a residual 

 Report No. 52 of 2015  
 A-3 
 
 
cap of  ` 8.00 lakh per machine and 10 years’ vintage and 
with a residual life of minimum 10 years. 
life of minimum 10 years. The value cap of the 
automatic shuttleless looms was to be decided 
by the TAMC. 
Processing • 5 per cent  IR plus 10 per cent  CS for specified Machinery. • 5 per cent  IR plus 10 per cent  CS for specified 
machinery. 
Powerloom units • An additional option to the powerlooms units - 20  per cent 
MMS in lieu of 5  per cent  IR subject to a Capital Ceiling of 
` 200 lakh and ceiling on MMS of ` 20 lakh; and A minimum 
of 15 per cent equity contribution from beneficiaries was to be 
ensured. 
• Additional option to the powerlooms units and 
independent preparatory units - 20  per cent  
MMS in lieu of 5  per cent  IR subject to a 
Capital Ceiling of ` 500 lakh and ceiling on 
MMS of ` 60 lakh; For bran d new shuttleless 
looms the ceiling on MMS was to be ` 1 crore; 
and A minimum of 15  per cent equity 
contribution from beneficiaries is to be ensured. 
Garmenting • For specific thrust to garmenting, machineries for CAD, CAM 
and design studios and likes were  included in the separate 
heading of the guidelines of the scheme with a financial cap to 
be determined by the Inter Ministerial Steering Committee 
(IMSC); and 5 per cent  IR plus 10  per cent  CS for specified 
machinery. 
• 5 per cent IR plus 10  per cent  CS for specified 
machinery. 
Technical 
Textile 
• 5 per cent  IR plus 10 per cent  CS for specified machinery. • 5 per cent  IR plus 10  per cent CS for specified 
machinery. 

 Report No. 52 of 2015  
 A-4 
Annexure 2 
Details of 36 designated nodal banks (Referred to in Para 1.4.3) 
 
Sl  No Name of Bank Sl  No Name of Bank 
1 Allahabad Bank                                                  19 ING Vysya Bank                                                   
2 Andhra Bank                                                        20 Jammu & Kashmir Bank                                                      
3 AXIS Bank                                                           21 Karnataka Bank 
4 Bank of Baroda                                                   22 Karur Vysya Bank                                               
5 Bank of India                                                        23 Lakshmi Vilas Bank 
6 Bank of Maharashtra   24 National Co-operative Development Corporation (NCDC) 
7 Canara Bank                                                        25 Oriental Bank of Commerce 
8 Catholic Syrian Bank                                            26 Punjab and Sind Bank 
9 Central Bank of India                                            27 Punjab National Bank 
10 City Union Bank                                                  28 Rajasthan State Industrial Investment Corporation 
11 Corporation Bank                                                29 South Indian Bank 
12 Dena Bank                                                          30 State Bank of India 
13 EXIM Bank                                                          31 Syndicate Bank 
14 Federal Bank                                                       32 Tamilnad Mercantile Bank 
15 ICICI Bank                                                           33 UCO Bank 
16 Indian Bank                                                         34 Union Bank of India 
17 Indian Overseas Bank                                         35 United Bank of India 
18 Indusind Bank                                                     36 Vijaya Bank 
  

 Report No. 52 of 2015  
 A-5 
Annexure 3 
State-wise summary of cases of ineligible beneficiaries  (Referred to in Para 3.2.1) 
 
 (` in lakh) 
Sl. No. Name of State No. of Cases Amount 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 4 257.05 
2.  Gujarat 94 1,595.32 
3.  Madhya Pradesh 7 2,039.08 
4.  Maharashtra 16 163.21 
5.  Rajasthan 5 599.88 
6.  Tamil Nadu 3 41.79 
 Total 129 4,696.33 
 

 Report No. 52 of 2015  
 A-6 
Annexure 4 
State-wise summary of cases of ineligible investments (Referred to in Para 3.2.2) 
 
(` in lakh) 
Sl. No. Name of State No. of Cases Amount 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 33 408.11 
2.  Gujarat 26 782.84 
3.  Madhya Pradesh 22 550.44 
4.  Maharashtra 84 3,386.69 
5.  Punjab 10 34.39 
6.  Rajasthan 6 60.36 
7.  Tamil Nadu 12 63.80 
Total 193 5,286.63 

 Report No. 52 of 2015  
 A-7 
Annexure 5 
State-wise summary of cases of excess payment (Referred to in Para 3.2.3) 
  
 
 (` in lakh) 
Sl. No. Name of State No. of Cases Amount 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 8 77.52 
2.  Gujarat 13 335.86 
3.  Madhya Pradesh 8 77.75 
4.  Maharashtra 1 0.58 
5.  Punjab 1 1.82 
6.  Rajasthan 3 41.22 
7.  Tamil Nadu 6 107.44 
 Total 40 642.19 

 Report No. 52 of 2015  
 A-8 
Annexure 6 
State-wise summary of cases of delay in crediting subsidy to beneficiaries’ accounts  
(Referred to in Para 3.2.4) 
Sl. No. Name of State No. of Cases Delay in Days 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 6 113-1017 
2.  Gujarat 14 11-716 
3.  Madhya Pradesh 36 1-268 
4.  Maharashtra 4 657-785 
5.  Rajasthan 14 4-1287 
6.  Tamil Nadu 98 1-1509 
 Total 172  
 
 

 Report No. 52 of 2015  
 A-9 
Annexure 7 
Details of retention of undisbursed subsidy by the FIs (Referred to in Para 3.2.5) 
 
 (` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the FIs Name of 
the Branch 
Amount 
of 
subsidy 
received 
Date of 
receipt 
Actual date of 
disbursement 
No of months 
(days) subsidy 
retained by the 
bank 
Remarks 
1 UCO Bank Mid 
Corporate 
Branch, 
Ahmedabad 
36.62 10.07.2012  31.01.2015 31 (933) Undisbursed subsidy of beneficiary 
retained by the bank. 
39.83 04.10.2013 08.08.2014 10 (306) 
2 State Bank of 
India 
SMECCC 
branch Surat 
15.00 12.04.2012 11.07.2014 27 (818) Undisbursed subsidy of 
beneficiaries retained by the bank. 
3 Punjab National 
Bank 
Main branch 
Surat 
178.22 18.03.2014 30.09.2014 7 (194) Undisbursed subsidy of 
beneficiaries retained by the bank. 
4 State Bank of 
India 
MCB, Surat 1.60 09.03.2013 02.04.2014 13 (387) Undisbursed subsidy of 
beneficiaries retained by the bank. 
5 State Bank of 
India 
Laghu 
Udyog 
Branch, 
Ahmedabad 
36.69 31.03.2014 13.10.2014 7 (194) Undisbursed subsidy of 
beneficiaries retained by the bank. 
6 Bank of India Bombay 
Market, 
Surat 
14.71 13.10.2012 02.02.2015 28 (840) Undisbursed subsidy of 
beneficiaries retained by the branch 
returned to the TUFS cell of the 
Bank on 02.02.2015. Status of 
refund of subsidy amount is not 
known. 
2.29 16.10.2012 02.02.2015 28 (837) 
13.80 02.11.2012 02.02.2015 27 (820) 
78.86 22.12.2012 02.02.2015 26 (770) 
3.55 07.03.2013 02.02.2015 23 (695) 

 Report No. 52 of 2015  
 A-10 
29.16 18.05.2013 02.02.2015 21 (623) 
7 The Varachha Co-
operative Bank 
Ltd 
Surat Main 
Branch 
13.42 05.10.2010 31.03.2012 18 (545) Subsidy amount in respect of 
closed account was kept by the 
bank and interest accrued was 
neither passed on to the beneficiary 
nor transferred to the Government. 
13.42 05.10.2010 28.12.2011 15 (451) 
  Total   477.17        
 
 

 Report No. 52 of 2015  
 A-11 
Annexure 8 
Details of cases pertaining to Black Out period included in List II (Referred to in Para 3.3.3) 
Sl.No. Category1 FIs Name Beneficiary’s Name Date of sanction of 
loan 
1.  A Oriental Bank of Commerce 
 (Taken over from State Bank of India) 
Mahadev Yarns Pvt. Ltd.# 04.08.2010 
2.  A State Bank of India (for State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur and 
taken over from ICICI) 
Ranjan Polysters Limited# 29.09.2010 (Term 
Loan- ` 74 lakh) 
3.  A State Bank of India (for State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur and 
taken over from ICICI) 
Ranjan Polysters Limited# 29.09.2010 (Term Loan 
- ` 180 lakh) 
4.  A HDFC Bank (Taken over from Union Bank of India) Bhagirathi Packaging Pvt. 
Ltd. #  
12.10.2010 
5.  A HDFC Bank (Taken over from Punjab and Sind Bank) Mann Feeds Pvt Ltd #  25.02.2011 
6.  C IDBI Pitru Art# 01.08.2010 
7.  C IDBI Kinjal Creation # 02.11.2010 
8.  C Punjab and Sind Bank Amar Textile#  19.12.2010 
9.  E City Union Bank  Sunpak^ 06.07.2010 
                                                             
1 Categories as defined by IMSC:  
A -Cases where eligibility decided, claims within time, subsidy released earlier towards interest reimbursement, pending release of capital subsidy or vice versa.  
B-Cases where eligibility decided, claims within time, no instalment of TUFS subsidy paid yet. 
C- Cases already condoned by the office of Textile Commissioner before the 3rd meeting of the IMSC dated 11.11.2012.  
D- Cases validated by the Textile Commissioners internal committee from the pending condonation cases. 
E- Cases where eligibility has been determined but claims not preferred by banks. 
F- Cases where eligibility decided but claims preferred after prescribed time limit.  
# As per reply given by Ministry these cases have already been declared ineligible in the revised list of committed liabilities. 
^cases still appearing as eligible in revised list of committed liabilities. 

 Report No. 52 of 2015  
 A-12 
10.  E SIDBI Fashion Knits# 14.07.2010 
11.  E SIDBI A V. Exports # 06.09.2010 
12.  E Dena Bank Dev  Cotton Industries^ 30.09.2010 
13.  E Punjab National Bank Lakshmi Cotsyn Ltd # 13.10.2010 
14.  E Punjab National Bank Lakshmi Cotsyn Ltd^ 15.10.2010 
15.  E AXIS Bank (Taken over from SIDBI) Sara Sales Private 
Limited# 
02.03.2011 (Term Loan 
- ` 54 lakh) 
16.  E AXIS Bank (Taken over from SIDBI) Sara Sales Private 
Limited# 
02.03.2011 (Term Loan 
-         ` 43.70 lakh) 
17.  E AXIS Bank (Taken over from SIDBI) Sara Sales Private 
Limited# 
02.03.2011 (Term Loan 
- ` 44.19 lakh) 
18.  E AXIS Bank Sara Sales Private 
Limited# 
02.03.2011 (Term Loan 
– ` 75 lakh) 
19.  F Indusind       Bank Royal Embroidery 
Threads Pvt. Ltd. # 
10.03.2011 

 Report No. 52 of 2015  
 A-13 
Annexure 9 
Details of cases sanctioned during the period of R-TUFS included in List II (Referred to in Para 3.3.3) 
 
Sl.No. Category FIs Name  Beneficiary’s Name Sanction 
Date 
1.  E Catholic Syrian Bank Vertex Knits (15  per cent- CS) # 03.06.2011 
2.  E Dena Bank Kashinath B Pujari^ 01.05.2011 
3.  E UCO Bank Colors Match^ 12.09.2011 
4.  F Catholic Syrian Bank Gomathi Spinning Mills# 18.05.2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
# As per reply given by Ministry these cases have already been declared ineligible in the revised list of committed liabilities. 
^cases still appearing as eligible in revised list of committed liabilities. 
  

 Report No. 52 of 2015  
 
A-14 
 
Abbreviations 
 
Abbreviation used  Stand for 
CAD Computer Aided Design 
CAM Computer Aided Manufacturing 
CCA Chief Controller of Accounts 
CCEA Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs 
CS Capital Subsidy  
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee  
FIs Financial Institutions  
GoI Government of India  
GR Government Resolution 
IDBI Industrial Development Bank of India Limited  
IFCI Industrial Finance Corporation of India  
IMSC Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee 
IR Interest Reimbursement  
MMS Margin Money Subsidy  
M-TUFS Modified Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme 
RR-TUFS Revised Restructured Technology Upgradation Fund 
Scheme 
R-TUFS Restructured Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme 
SIDBI Small Industries Development Bank of India  
SSI Small Scale Industries 
TAMC Technical Advisory cum Monitoring Committee 
TUFS Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme  
TxC Textile Commissioner 
 
 