Environment Management in Indian Railways 
i
  CONTENTS 
Paragraph Pages
PREFACE iii
Executive summary  v 
Major Audit Findings  vii 
Gist of recommendations  ix 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction 
Need for Environment Management in Indian Railways 1.1 1 
Study Report of Central Pollution Control Board 1.2 3 
Scope of Audit 1.3 3 
Audit Objectives  1.4 4 
Audit Criteria 1.5 4 
Audit Methodology 1.6 5 
Sample Selection 1.7 6 
Acknowledgement 1.8 7 
CHAPTER 2- Prevention and Control  of Pollution 
Policies and Guidelines 2.1 8 
Organizational Structure 2.2 9 
Air Pollution 2.3 10 
Noise pollution 2.4 21 
Water Pollution 2.5 23 
Conclusion 2.6 28 
Recommendations 2.7 29 
CHAPTER 3- Management and Conservation of Resources 
Organizational Structure 3.1 30 
Conservation of Water 3.2 31 
Conservation of Energy 3.3 36 
Carbon Credit under Clean Development Mechanism 3.4 43 
Energy Audit 3.5 44 
Bio-diesel 3.6 46 
Conservation of Forests and Wildlife 3.7 48 
Setting up of Eco park 3.8 50 
Afforestation 3.9 50 
Conclusion  3.10 51 
Recommendations  3.11 52 
CHAPTER 4-Waste Management 
Waste Management on Indian Railways 4.1 53 
Organisational Structure 4.2 54 
Findings of RITES and CPCB 4.3 54 
Previous Audit Report 4.4 55 
Garbage Disposal 4.5 57 

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
i
Toilets in Trains 4.6 60 
Conclusion 4.7 64 
Recommendations 4.8 65 
ANNEXURE
Sample Selection  Annexure I 66-68 

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
i
PREFACE 
This Report (No. 21 of 2012-13- Performance Audit for the year ended 31 March 
2011) has been prepared for submission to the President under Article 151 (1) of 
the Constitution of India.  The report contains results of the review of 
Environment Management in Indian Railways – Stations, Trains and Tracks.   
The observations included in this Report have been based on the findings of the 
test-audit conducted during 2011-12 as well as the results of audit conducted in 
earlier years, which could not be included in the previous Reports. 
.

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
i
Abbreviations used in the Report 
IR Indian Railways 
CR Central Railway 
ER Eastern Railway 
ECR East Central Railway 
ECoR East Coast Railway 
NR Northern Railway 
NCR North Central Railway 
NER North Eastern Railway 
NFR Northeast Frontier Railway 
NWR North Western Railway 
SR Southern Railway 
SCR South Central Railway 
SER South Eastern Railway 
SECR South East Central Railway 
SWR South Western Railway 
WR Western Railway 
WCR West Central Railway 
RPU Railway Production Units 



Environment Management in Indian Railways 
 
  Report No.   of 2012-13 (Railways)                  i 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
I Environment Management in Indian Railways 
Environment is a key survival issu e and its challenges and significance have 
assumed greater importance in recent years. The National Environment Policy, 
2006 articulated the idea that environmen tal protection shall form an integral 
part of the developmental process and cannot be considered in isolation. 
Indian Railways (IR) is the single larges t carrier of freight and passengers in the 
country. It is a bulk carrier of several  pollution intensive commodities like coal, 
iron ore, cement, fertilizers, petroleum et c. Being a major consumer of water and 
energy, policies adopted by the IR have a substantial impact on our environment 
and on the conservation of both water and energy in the country. The approach of 
IR towards protection of the environmen t, therefore, assumes great importance 
for tackling environment challenges to the country.  
A review on “Cleanliness and sanitation in IR” was earlier taken up and results 
included in Audit Report No.6 of 2007of Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
(Railways). The report, inter-alia, had highlighted several deficiencies of IR in the 
management of wastes. Public Accounts  Committee in their eighty third report 
(2008-09) also pointed out similar defic iencies. Nevertheless, adequate action 
was not taken by IR to integrate envir onmental concerns with  their operational 
policies.  
In this background a comprehensive audit exercise was undertaken to assess the 
performance of IR in managing environmental risks. A phase wise review of the 
entire gamut of environmen tal issues related to op eration and maintenance of 
Railways has been planned. This report presents the results of the first part of this 
exercise.   
II Current Report 
The operations of IR not only cause air pollution but also cause water and noise 
pollution. Air pollution mainly arises due to handling of commodities like coal, 
iron ore, cement, fertiliser etc. at si dings/goods sheds and transportation of these 
commodities in open wagons. Rules/guidelines framed for transportation of 
commodities in IR were, prima-facie, guided by commercial considerations. No 
criteria were laid by the Railway Board to enable it to  assess the performance of 
each zonal railway in minimizing envi ronmental pollution. Absence of clear 
criteria has been a limiting factor in our audit.  
Comprehensive guidelines specific to operation of  sidings for handling and 
transport of pollution intensive commodities have not been issued either by the 

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
 
  Report No.   of 2012-13 (Railways)                  ii 
 
Railway Board, the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) or the State 
Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs). As pe r statutory provisions all sidings and 
Railway Good sheds are required to obtai n Consent for Operation from their 
respective SPCBs. Compliance with thes e guidelines was partial. Even the 
existing statutory provisions and guidelines  issued by the SPCBs of West Bengal, 
Jharkhand and Odisha were not fully complied by the Railway Administration. At 
the request of Audit, CPCB assessed th e level of pollution  and compliance with 
the statutory provisions at fourteen major stations of IR. Their study revealed that 
IR generally failed to comply with the statutory provisions. Study also revealed 
that the values of various gaseous po llutants were in excess of the national 
ambient air quality standards.   
There was no system for monitoring the quality and quantum  of waste water 
generated at stations. Railway Board’s instruction for installation of Effluent 
Treatment Plant at all major stations were also not adhe red to. Frequently 
effluents were discharged from major stations to the nearby low lying areas/water 
bodies and municipal discharge system s resulting in contamination of 
surrounding surface and ground water. 
IR is a major user of both water and energy. IR has adopted a number of best 
practices in the field of conservation of  water for improving the efficiency of 
water use and reducing the use of fresh water by way of recycling of water and 
rain water harvesting. IR, however, has not made significant progress in 
implementing water conservation methods . In the past decade, IR has been 
exploring the use of renewable sources of energy.  The use of eco- friendly fuel 
i.e. blended biodiesel has been in use on the Railways since 2003. It, however, 
could not make any significant progress in th is field. Measures taken by the IR to 
conserve the flora and fauna alongside the tracks were not adequate, as animal 
mortality due to train hits remained high.  
Railway operations generate  vast quantities of differ ent types of wastes –both 
solid and plastic wastes. The Public Accounts Committee in their eighty third 
report (2008-09) had observed that while maki ng use of plastics, the Ministry of 
Railways must not lose sight of environmental concern and ensure that applicable 
rules are adhered to. However, negligence in adherence to instructions relating to 
adequate and proper collection and segregat ion and disposal of plastic wastes 
were observed. Non segregation of degradable and non degradable wastes, 
inadequate storage facilities and improper disposal of garbage were common at 
railway stations.  
IR transports about 14 Million of passe ngers every day and generates about 3980 
MT of human wastes per day which is di scharged directly on to the rail tracks. 
This pollutes the environment at both stations and alongside the tracks. IR has 

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
 
  Report No.   of 2012-13 (Railways)                  iii 
 
been experimenting since 1993 with various  models of environmental friendly 
toilets. Despite prolonged experiments/t rials for over two decades on different 
models of toilets for its coaches, IR has  failed to freeze a suitable option to 
address the environmental hazards caused by defecation in toilets on trains.  
 III       Major Audit Findings 
¾ IR is yet to formulate comprehens ive environmental guidelines for 
handling and transportation of bulk  commodities which are pollution 
intensive. Thus, no specific criteria have been laid down by the Railway 
Board to assess the performance of each zone in minimizing 
environmental pollution. Environmental aspects such as the prevention 
and control of pollution are only incident al to the core area of operation 
of each directorate at the Railway Board and zonal levels. There is no 
separate directorate or cell at the Railway Board level to co-ordinate 
various environmental issues involved in their operations.  
 
(Para 2.1 and 2.2) 
 
¾ As per Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, all sidings and 
good sheds should obtain Consent for Operation from their respective 
SPCBs. The Zonal Railway Administ rations failed to adhere to the 
statutory provisions in respect of fifty  per cent of the sidings test checked. 
Guidelines issued by the SPCBs of  West Bengal and J harkhand were also 
not fully complied with in both ER and SER in the good sheds and sidings 
test checked. In most of the zones coal and iron ore were being carried in 
open wagons without covering with tar paulin sheets, thus posing a health 
hazard to passengers/residents in neighbouring areas. 
 
(Para 2.3.1.1, 2.3.1.2 and 2.3.1.3) 
 
¾ The Railway Board had instructed that Effluent Treatment Plants (ETP) 
be installed at all major stations. On an average, one Effluent Treatment 
Plant was installed in each zone leaving most of the major stations without 
an ETP. In their absence, effluents were being discharged in the nearby 
low lying areas /water bodies and municipal drainage system resulting in 
contamination of surrounding surface and ground water.  
                                    (Para 2.5.1) 
 
¾ Railway Board had directed that Water Recycling Plants (WRP) be 
provided at locations where water is scarce. Test check revealed that in 12 

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
 
  Report No.   of 2012-13 (Railways)                  iv 
 
out of 17 zones no provision of WRP had been made. The WRPs installed 
in three zones were s ub-optimally utilized. De spite Railway Boards' 
instructions that Automatic Coach Wash Plants (ACWP) be planned for 
all coaching Depots; only eight ACWPs had been commissioned over five 
zones. Similarly, out of 212 stations  test checked, rain water harvesting 
systems were installed at only seven stations in five zones. This was 
indicative of low level of urgency attached to water conservation. 
 
(Para 3.2.1 and 3.2.2) 
 
¾ The energy conservation policy of  IR envisaged the use of non-
conventional energy sources. Test check revealed that bio-diesel was used 
in only five zones and its consumption wa s insignificant. The initiatives of 
IR for production of bio-diesel remained largely unsuccessful due to short 
supply of raw material and slow progress in setting up of new 
esterification plants. It was seen  that the overall achievement in 
electrification of level crossings with solar panels was far below the 
targets set for the period 2007-11. IR also failed in making major progress 
in tapping wind energy. During the period of review, only four wind power 
plants were sanctioned in three zones. 
(Para 2.3.3.1 and 3.6) 
¾ 62 elephants died during the review peri od due to train hits. The majority 
of elephant deaths occurred in NEFR followed by SR. Despite some 
initiatives like imposition of permane nt speed restrictions, display of 
signage, regular clearance of vegetat ion along the track etc., animal 
mortality rate due to train hits had not declined.  
(Para 3.7.1) 
¾ Despite recommendation of PAC to se gregate waste into biodegradable 
and non- biodegradable, a test check re vealed that in 16 out of 23 
contracts entered into in four zone s for disposal of garbage through 
outside agencies, no separate clause wa s incorporated for segregation of 
wastes. Disposal of garbage by outsi de agencies was being done either by 
burning or dumping in Railway premises in 37 stations (all categories) 
across all zones. At 54 out of 212 stations test checked, the Railway 
Administration resorted to disposal  by burning , dumping into adjacent 
canal, low lying areas, dumping  on Railway land near the track, thereby 
causing environmental pollution. 
(Para 4.5) 

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
 
  Report No.   of 2012-13 (Railways)                  v 
 
¾ IR is yet to finalise the technology for 'green toil ets', despite two decades 
of experimentation.  Open discharge of  toilets from running trains led to 
premature renewal of 47 Kilometers  of rail (SER) and resulted in an 
excess expenditure of ` 35.79 crores during the period 2007-11 alone.   
        (Para 4.6.3) 
 IV      Gist of Recommendations 
¾ IR needs to formulate a comprehensive environmental policy. It also needs 
to bring out appropriate guidelines fo r controlling air and water pollution 
on its station, yard, work places or in operations in coordination with 
Central and various State Pollution Control Boards.  
¾ A monitoring mechanism needs to be put  in place at all levels within IR 
including the Railway Board for checking compliance with pollution 
control laws/ guidelines and implementa tion of its guidelines/instructions 
on environment. 
¾ Environment management may be recognized, monitored and reckoned 
as a key result area for all Zonal and Divisional Railway Authorities and 
schemes devised to incentivize better performance in this regard.   
¾ To conserve water, measures like Water Recycling Plant, Automatic 
Coach Wash Plants and Rain Water harvesting system need to be 
implemented expeditiously by IR.  
¾  IR needs to take urgent and effective steps to explore across the country 
scope for and to maximizing the use of alternative sources of energy 
besides taking initiatives in conservation of energy. The targets set for 
adopting energy efficiency measures need to be effectively implemented. 
¾ Adequate effort needs to be put in to implement the long term measures for 
prevention of animal mortality. For this, the monitoring mechanism at the 
Railway Board’s level should be strengthened. 
¾ A comprehensive waste management policy needs to be framed and a 
separate waste management cell established in the Railway Board for 
dealing with all related issues including minimization of the use of plastics 
within the Railway stations and proper disposal of plastic waste . 
¾ IR needs to put in place a system of  estimation of waste generated in IR 
and also a system for segregation of bio-degradable and non bio-
degradable waste. Besides making provis ion for requisite infrastructure, 
an effective monitoring system needs to be put in place for ensuring 
compliance with the statutory regulati ons issued on the subject from time 

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
 
  Report No.   of 2012-13 (Railways)                  vi 
 
to time by the government and the recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee. 
¾  IR needs to draw up a definite ti me frame for finalizing eco-friendly 
toilets to prevent environmental degradation at stations, tracks and water 
bodies en route. 
 
 
 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
1
Environment in general refers to the surroundings of an object which may be 
natural or the built environment. Environmental management is essentially the 
management of interaction by modern human societies with, and its impact upon 
the environment. The National Environment Policy 2006 which articulated our 
national commitment to a clean environment as mandated by the Constitution 1
was intended to mainstream environmental concerns in all current and 
developmental activities. 
The principal objectives of the National Environment Policy include conservation 
of critical environmental resources and to integrate environmental concerns into 
policies and projects for economic and social development. Further, one of the 
principles of this policy clearly states that environmental protection shall form an 
integral part of the developmental process to achieve sustainable development and 
cannot be considered in isolation. 
1.1    Need for Environment Management in Indian Railways 
The Railways as a means of public transportation are perceived to be 
environmentally friendly. The recommendations of the   Expert Committee set up 
by the Planning Commission under the chairmanship of Dr. Kirit S. Parikh to 
formulate an integrated energy policy for promotion of the system of urban mass 
transport, energy efficient vehicles and freight movement by railways underline 
the significance of railways to over all environmental management in the country 
as well as of environment related issues in the internal governance of the Indian 
Railways (IR).
IR covers 64460 route kilometers and traverses through high density urban areas 
as well as vast rural and forest areas. It handles 7651 million passengers and 
carries 922 million metric tonnes of goods traffic per annum. It is the second 

1 Articles 48 A: The state shall endeavor to prot ect and improve the environment and to safeguard 
the forests and wild life of the country. 
Article 51 A (g): It shall be the duty of every citizen of India to protect and improve the natural 
environment including forests, ri vers, lakes and wild life, and to have compassion for living 
creatures. 
Chapter 1      Introduction


Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
2
largest carrier of passengers in the world and carries about 35 per cent of the total 
freight in the country. Operation and maintenance of the entire railway system in 
the country has considerable impact on environment as the IR is the bulk 
consumer of energy besides generator of waste in stupendous proportion.  Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB) sponsored a study through RITES 2 on plastic 
waste generated at three railway st ations (New Delhi, Old Delhi and Hazrat 
Nizamuddin station). The report (December 2009) indicated that about 6758 Kg. 
of plastic waste was being generated by these stations per day and there was no 
system in place to segregate degradable and non-biodegradable wastes generated 
at these stations.
‘Environment’ is a key survival issue and its significance has never been felt more 
acutely. IR has initiated a number of measures for protection of the environment 
by adopting cleaner technologies, conserving energy, harnessing renewable 
sources of energy. The Minister for Railways, in her Budget Speech on 25 
February 2011, declared 2011-12 as the “Year of Green Energy”  and reiterated 
her commitment to energy conservation. However, IR is yet to frame any 
comprehensive policy for environment management in compliance to various 
statutory provisions and orders issued by the Government of India. The role of 
CPCB and SPCBs 3 in monitoring and control of environmental pollution within 
the IR has been very insignificant. None except three 4 SPCBs, have come out 
with any guidelines for controlling air pollution in handling and transportation of 
polluting commodities from sidings/sheds. 
In this background we have undertaken a comprehensive audit exercise spread 
over three phases  with a view to assess the performance of IR in managing 
environmental risks to itself and the country as whole, to highlight good practices 
as well as to flag areas of concern and to make appropriate recommendations 
wherever necessary. This draft report reflects the results of the first part of this 
exercise. In the next phase environment management in workshops, sheds and 
production units of Railways will be undertaken and in the final phase 
environment management in offices, colonies, hospitals will be taken up.  

2 RITES stand for Rail India Technical & Economic Services 
3 SPCB stands for State Pollution Control Board 
4 West Bengal, Jharkhand and Odisha 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
3
1.2   Study Report of Central Pollution Control Board  
For independent assessment of pollution of air, water and noise at station 
premises/sidings/sheds, CPCB in March 2012, conducted a study at the instance 
of Audit at 14 major stations spread over 12 zones. The study revealed that the IR 
was not complying with statutory guidelines for prevention and control of 
pollution. CPCB observed that none of the stations had applied for consents under 
The Air (Prevention and control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and The Water 
(Prevention and control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977 and also for hazardous waste 
authorization under The Hazardous Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 
1989. Monitoring of ambient air quality and noise by CPCB also revealed that 
various gaseous pollutants and noise level were exceeding the limit prescribed by 
it. The report also commented on the discharge of effluents from the stations 
without proper treatment. Details of the findings of CPCB in regard to air, water 
and noise pollution have been factored in this audit exercise and highlighted at 
places in this report (see paragraphs 2.3.2 and 2.5.2). 
1.3   Scope of Audit 
In this Performance Audit, we have examined the commitment of IR towards 
ensuring environmental protection as an integral part of its 
development/operational process. We examined the entire gamut of interaction –
IR’s with the public through its stations, trains and tracks and its impact on the 
environment during the period 2006-07 to 2010-11.  The scope of the 
Performance Audit thus covered- 
¾ Evaluation of the policy framework governing environmental management in 
IR that includes stations, trains and tracks with regard to –  
 Pollution of air, water and noise, 
 Conservation of Natural Resources and; 
 Waste Management  
¾ Evaluating the compliance of IR with the laws/rules/regulations governing 
environmental management in India.   
¾ The compliance of IR with respect to the policies/regulations issued by it.  
In IR, there is no separate environment management cell for framing 
policies/guidelines, co-ordinating and monitoring implementation of different 
issues related to environment. In absence of any comprehensive guidelines 
relative to prevention and control of air, water and noise pollution specifically for 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
4
Railways, provisions laid down in various acts 5, rules, regulations issued by 
government and notifications issued by the CPCB and SPCBs, which  are binding 
on IR, were considered for assessing the performance of IR in controlling 
pollution.
In the absence of a monitoring mechanism in IR in regard to air, noise and water 
pollution, it was not possible to obtain reasonable assurance regarding compliance 
with the provisions of various statutory regulations concerning environmental 
issues. The extent of pollution caused due to handling of pollution intensive 
commodities was excluded from the purview of audit due to lack of evidence. The 
scope of audit suffered further limitation due to non maintenance of records at 
Railways installations relating to generation of  waste particularly plastic wastes 
and savings due to adoption of energy conservation measures. 
1.4  Audit Objectives  
The Performance Audit covering the period 2006-07 to 2010-11 was taken up 
with the broad objective of forming an opinion on the existence and adequacy of 
commitment, initiative apparatus put in place by IR for: 
I. Prevention and control of air, water and noise pollution; 
II. Management and conservation of natural resources for sustainable 
development with specific reference to conservation of water, energy and 
wild life; 
III. Management of waste generated on IR. 
The observations of Audit on each of the above three objectives of the 
Performance Audit have been presented in the succeeding chapters. 
1.5   Audit Criteria 
The Ministry of Environment & Forests is the nodal agency in the Government of 
India for the planning, promotion, co-ordination and overseeing the 
implementation of environmental and forestry programmes. The Performance 
Review was conducted on the basis of parameters prescribed under various acts, 

5 The Air (Prevention and control of Pollution)Act  1981, The water (Preve ntion and control of 
Pollution)Act 1974, The Noise (Prevention and Controls)Rules, 2000 and The Hazardous 
Wastes(Management and Handling) Rules, 1989 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
5
rules, regulations and notifications 6 issued by the Central/State Pollution Control 
Boards and Ministry of Environment and Forests for control of pollution in air 
and water, protection of environment and conservation of wildlife. 
In addition, policies of IR, guidelines as well as instructions issued by it from time 
to time besides the guidelines issued by the CPCB and SPCBs, were taken into 
consideration to assess the performance of IR in its environmental management. 
1.6   Audit Methodology  
The performance audit of the environment management on IR began with an entry 
conference with the Railway Board (RB) and identical conferences with the 
respective Head of Departments at the zonal level. During those meetings the 
audit methodology, scope, objectives and criteria were explained.  
Apart from its instructions for project planning, rules and regulations issued by 
the RB and their correlation with various isolated policy pronouncements, if any, 
were examined.  Records relating to guidelines/instructions issued by different 
Directorates of Ministry of Railways involved in policy formulation and issue of 
directives to zones for implementation were also examined between August 2011 
and March 2012 to ascertain the initiatives and performance of IR towards 
environmental management. At the Zonal level, audit checked the compliance of 
each zone with the various directives issued by the RB.  
Joint inspection at Stations and trains was also conducted with Railway officials 
for real time assessment of the initiatives taken by IR and its performance. 
Besides, feedback was also obtained from passengers through survey conducted at 
some important stations and in Mail/Express trains. 
In absence of any system of monitoring and documentation regarding air, water 
and noise pollution in station premises/sidings, study of the pollution level at 
stations/sidings was conducted through CPCB. 

6 The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986,The Air (Prevention and control of Pollution) Act, 1981 
,The Water (Prevention and control of Pollution) Ac t, 1974 ,The Water (Prevention and control of 
Pollution) Cess Act, 1977,The Noise Pollution (Regulation and Controls) Rules, 2000 ,The Forest 
(Conservation) Act, 1980 ,The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972,The Hazardous Wastes 
(Management and Handling) Rules, 1989 ,The Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and 
Handling) Rules, 2000 and The Plastic Manufacture, Sale  and Usage Rules, 1999  

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
6
1.7    Sample Selection 
For our macro level examination, data was collected from various departments of 
Zonal and Divisional offices all over IR.  For examination of certain issues at 
micro level, a sample of 212 stations from various categories 7 as indicated in the 
table below was selected for undertaking the review to ascertain the level of 
compliance with the statutory regulations on environmental issues in 34 sidings 
and 31 Goods Sheds. Following sampling technique was adopted: 
Sl.
No. 
Description Category Sample Size 
A1 25% subject to minimum of 2 stations 
A & B 10% subject to a maximum of 5 stations, 
covering at least one station from each 
divisions, to the extent possible 
1. Number of stations 
under different 
categories selected for 
audit that included 
stations, Joint 
Inspection by audit and 
Railway authorities. C, D & E 2 stations from each category 
2. Sidings  2 sidings - de aling with loose commodities 
such as  iron ore, coal, coke, fly ash, 
chemicals/petroleum etc. 
3. Goods sheds  2 sheds d ealing with cem ent, fertilizers, iron 
ore, coal, coke, fly ash, etc., 
4. Trains including Joint 
Inspection 
 Five 
Express/
Mail/
Passenger 
Trains
x    Tains having OBHS
8/ CDTS 9/Pantry 
Car
x Rajdhani /Shatabdi/JanShatabdi/ 
Ordinary passenger trains 
x Platform return trains 
5. Section SSE & 
P.Way 
Section10
Sections covering reserve forest/sanctuaries, 
elephant corridors, tunnels, RUBs11.

7 IR categorize stations on the basis of earnings. Th is categorization has been followed in the 
selection of audit sample size as it also broadly reflects the number of passengers using a station. 
8 OBHS refers to On Board House Keeping Service 
9 CDTS refers to Controlled Discharge Toilet System 
10 Senior Section Engineer /Permanent Way Sections 
11 RUB refers to Road Under Bridges 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
7
In addition, 35 Permanent Way sections were selected for examining the issues 
pertaining to ecology of forest areas, tunnels, road under bridges etc. 
Further, a joint inspection by audit along with railway officials of 212 stations and 
88 trains was also conducted for on the spot verification of the sensitivity of IR 
towards clean and safe environment.  
 Feedback from passengers was obtained through a passenger survey conducted in 
all zones, as per the following sample size:  
Passenger feedback No. of passengers to be surveyed 
At 2 Major stations dealing with 
maximum number of passengers per 
day.
75 passengers in each station. 
 5 Trains - Rajdhani, Mail/Express 
trains (including long distance trains), 
Shatabdi/ Jan Shatabdi, Day train. 
AC Passengers          – 100 
Non-AC Passengers  – 250 
1.8   Acknowledgement 
The audit objectives, scope of study and methodology were discussed with 
Advisor (Finance) at Railway Board as well as the General Managers/concerned 
departmental heads in the zones by the Principal Directors of Audit during entry 
conferences. The inputs provided on various aspects and the cooperation extended 
by railways is acknowledged with thanks. The audit findings and 
recommendations were discussed with Advisor (Finance) in an exit conference 
held in October 2012 in Railway Board. Similar exit conferences were also held 
by the Principal Directors of Audit in the zones, with concerned zonal authorities. 
The draft report was issued to the Ministry of Railways in June 2012. A partial 
reply of the Ministry was received in October 2012. Their views have been 
incorporated in the report.  

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
8
Pollution is the introduction of contaminants into a natural environment that 
causes instability, disorder, harm or discomfort to the ecosystem i.e. physical 
systems or living organisms. It can take the form of chemical substances or 
energy, such as noise, heat or light. 
The growing concerns regarding the adverse impact of pollution have led India to 
pass a number of legislations to protect the environment. This includes laws to 
control and prevent air, noise and water pollution besides other statutes passed by 
the legislature to protect the environment. 
IR which is the single largest carrier of freight and passengers in the country and 
by the very nature of its operations, generates an immense challenge to the overall 
management of the environment in the country; hence, it has a clear responsibility 
towards conservation of the environment. Its approach to pollution control is 
significant for tackling environmental challenges to the country.  
Our audit objective was to obtain reasonable assurance to the compliance with the 
pollution laws/directions of the Pollution Control Boards and existence of 
effective environment management system in IR. This chapter highlights the 
approach of IR in dealing with and eliminating or minimizing different forms of 
pollution.
2.1 Policies and Guidelines 
In IR, environmental problems arise mainly while transporting passengers and in 
handling and transporting pollution intensive commodities such as coal, iron ore, 
cement, fertilizers, petroleum etc. RB is yet to issue any comprehensive 
guidelines specifically for sidings, handling and transport of these commodities. 
 So far no standard instructions regarding packing and transporting of different 
kinds of goods have been detailed by the Railways in their codes and manuals
12.

12 Indian Railways Code for Traffic Department, Indian Railways Commercial Manuals Vol.II 
,and Red Tariff  detailing rules and conditions for carriage of dangerous and explosive goods.  
Chapter 2 Prevention and Control  
of Pollution

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
9
The instructions included in these manuals which date as far back as 1939, have 
been periodically revised. These instructions cover various aspects of 
transportation of different types of commodities. Environmental aspects involved 
in carriage of goods were not specifically and adequately addressed in these rules. 
For instance, there are separate detailed ins tructions for carriage of commodities 
like coal, iron ore, cement, POL, fertilizer etc. These instructions focus on the 
type of wagon to be used and packing conditions for transportation of these 
commodities. These were prima-facie, guided by both technical and commercial 
considerations13. Subsequent revisions also have not adequately focused these 
issues, despite the growing incident of environment pollution. For instance, coal is 
still generally carried in uncovered wagons despite directions to the contrary of 
some SPCBs.  
Thus, no specific criteria have been laid by the RB to enable itself to assess the 
performance of each zonal railway in minimizing environmental pollution. 
Absence of clear criteria has been a limiting factor in our audit. We observed that 
the CPCB also neither issued any specific guidelines for the transport of pollution 
intensive commodities by rail. However, SPCB of West Bengal, Jharkhand and 
Odisha have issued detailed guidelines regarding handling of goods at sidings and 
their transportation.
2.2   Organizational Structure 
There is no separate directorate or cell either at the RB level or at the Zonal level 
to co-ordinate various environmental issues involved in the operations of IR.  At 
the RB level, the policy issues and guidelines regarding core operations are 
addressed through a number of Directorates in the RB. The responsibility for 
implementation of various environmental measures relating to stations, trains and 
tracks is dispersed over a number of directorates in the RB viz. Mechanical, Civil 
Engineering, Commercial and Electrical Directorates. While Mechanical 
Directorate is responsible for formulating policies, issuing guidelines and 
implementation of measures in locomotives and coaches, such responsibility 
regarding sidings and goods sheds rests with Commercial and Civil Engineering 
Directorate. The Electrical Directorate plays a significant role in electrification of 
tracks which helps in prevention of air pollution due to emission from diesel 
exhaust.
Our examination of the charter of duties and range of issues handled by various 
directorates revealed that environmental aspects such as the prevention and 

13 Minimization of loss in transit and consequent claim by the consignors/consignees. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
10
control of air, water and noise pollution are only incidental to the core area of 
operation of each directorate.  
At the zonal level, the heads of the respective departments are similarly 
responsible for environmental issues which are handled in a manner similar to that 
in the RB. Hence, such issues are dealt with in a manner that is only tangential to 
their core activities. 
2.3   Air Pollution  
The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 has defined   "air 
pollutant" as any solid, liquid or gaseous substance (including noise) present in 
the atmosphere in such concentration as may be injurious to human beings or 
other living creatures or plants or property or environment. Thus the presence of 
‘particulate matter’, sulphur-dioxide, nitrogen-dioxide, carbon-monoxide, 
hydrocarbons, lead, etc., in the atmosphere in high enough concentrations and for 
a duration long enough to cause undesirable effects can be called air pollution. It 
could have an adverse impact on human health, of other living entities, man-made 
heritage, and life-support systems, such as global climate.  
In this section, we examined the approach of IR towards air pollution and 
measures taken both at the Board level and at th e operational level to mitigate this 
problem. 
2.3.1   Air Pollution at Stations, Sidings and Goods Sheds
An Indian Railway station is typically over crowded with large number of 
visitors, coolies and vendors. The pollution profile of a railway station is likely to 
follow that of the neighborhood as no major pollution source exists at a railway 
station. Pollution issues arise mainly while handling and transporting freight such 
as coal, iron ore, cement, fertilizers, etc. These commodities are mainly handled at 
Railway/Private sidings
14 and Good sheds. These materials create serious air 
pollution when carried by rail in open wagons and during loading/unloading 
operation. Further, fugitive emission15 is also caused by these commodities.  Such 
dust, when deposited on the track, impedes drains as it fills the interstices within 
the track ballast.

14 A siding is a place which is used to receive, temporarily store and load/unload materials in the 
rakes and dispatch materials. 
15 emissions of gases or vapors from pressurized  equipment due to leaks and various other 
unintended or irregular releases of gases 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
11
In absence of uniform guidelines issued by the RB, CPCB and SPCBs, we were 
constrained to assess the level of compliance with the statutory regulations 16 and 
guidelines issued by some SPCBs related to handling and transportation of 
commodities at sidings and goods sheds.  
2.3.1.1   Non-compliance with Statutory Regulations
As per section 21 17 of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 ,
all sidings and Railway Good sheds require Consent for Operation (CFO) from 
the concerned SPCB. RB had stipulated (June 2009) that before issue of Railway 
Receipt for booking of freight (iron ore, steel and cement) Railway 
Administration should ensure one time submission of CFO to the Senior 
Divisional Commercial Manager of the Division in which the loading takes place.  
Test check of 34 sidings over 16 zones 18 handling pollution intensive 
commodities like coal, coal dust, iron ore, cement, fertilizers, petroleum etc. 
revealed that  CFO was obtained only for nineteen (55 per cent) out of the 34 
sidings test checked. 19 10 out of the remaining 15 sidings (SR-3, ECR-2, SECR-
2,SCR-1 and ECoR-2) had not obtained CFO  on the ground of absence of 
specific instructions from the RB/ Pollution Control Boards. No action was taken 
against the sidings for non adherence to either the instructions of the RB or the 
statutory provisions. No action was also forthcoming from the concerned 
pollution control board for ensuring compliance with the statutory guidelines. 
In fact, the RBs instructions of June 2009 were interpreted by a couple of the 
Railway Administrations20 (SECR, NWR and NCR) as though obtaining of CFO 
was not required for sidings with only unloading facilities.
2.3.1.2   Non-compliance with SPCB Guidelines
The SPCBs of West Bengal, Jharkhand and Odisha issued detailed guidelines 
regarding handling of goods at sidings and their transportation. These guidelines, 
inter-alia, provided for covering of open wagons carrying pollution intensive 

16 Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, 
17 Section 21 provides that no person shall, without the previous consent of State Pollution Control 
Board, establish or operate any industrial plant in an air pollution control area. Railway 
sidings/goods sheds are covered under the provision of this section. 
18 Metro Railways excluded as there was no siding 
19 Sidings are dealing in coal and petroleum oil/petroleum products 
20 Railway Administration refers to the Zonal Railway Administration 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
12
commodities. The guidelines 21 issued by Pollution Control Boards of West 
Bengal, Jharkhand and Odisha between August 2010 and June 2011 provide for 
installation of water sprinkling system, plantation, construction of boundary wall, 
drainage and  proper approach roads, covering of all minerals when not in use etc.  
On verification of the status of implementation of prescribed guidelines in six 
sidings and six goods sheds test checked 22 in the three zones (SER, ER and 
ECoR) falling within the jurisdiction of the Pollution Control Boards of West 
Bengal, Jharkhand and Odisha, we observed that except ECoR, the guidelines 
were not completely followed in the remaining two zones as mentioned below: 
i.      In SER, despite instructions (June 2011) from Jharkhand State Pollution 
Control Board (JSPCB) to Noamundi Iron Ore Mines of M/s Tata Steel 
Limited in Jharkhand, minerals like coal, coal dust, iron ores etc. were 
not covered with tarpaulin 
when not in use. The siding 
authority also failed to 
comply with instructions of 
JSPCB for construction of 
boundary wall, drainage, 
plantation and water 
sprinkling. Besides, CFO 
granted by the JSPCB 
expired in June 2011 and the 
application for renewal was pending before JSCPB as of March 2012. 
The operation of the siding is however, still continuing (March 2012). A 
test check of another two goods sheds
23 handling coal and coal dust; it 
was observed that water sprinklers were either out of order (Bhojudi Coal 
Washery) or not provided (Nimpura Goods shed). 
ii.    In ER, on the basis of complaints lodged in 2008 by the residents of 
surrounding area of Chitpur Yard, WBPCB 24 issued directives (February 
2011) for taking remedial measures. This included undertaking feasibility 
study for using a mopping machine on the wharf as a substitute to 
sprinkling and for growing creepers on top of the wall fencing. These have 
not been taken up (March 2012). Regarding the New Alipore Coaching 

21 Guidelines of Odisha (OSPCB), West Bengal  WBSPCB) and Jharkhand Pollution Control 
Boards (JSPCB) were issued in August 2010, February 2011 and June 2011 respectively. 
22Two sidings and two goods sheds test checked in each zone 
23 Bhojudi Coal Washery and Nimpura Goods shed 
24 West Bengal Pollution Control Board 
Iron ore partially covered at Noamundi 
(TISCO) siding in Jharkhand, SER

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
13
Complex, it was seen that the Station Manager informed (November 2010) 
the divisional authorities regarding accumulation of huge cement dust due 
to offloading of cement from rakes. This frequently led to a storm of 
cement which often engulfed not only the station area but also the 
adjoining areas. Railway Administration did not take any remedial 
measures in this regard (March 2012). 
2.3.1.3   Pollution scenario in zones not covered by any guidelines
The SPCBs are yet to issue any guidelines for handling and transportation of 
pollution intensive commodities in respect of 13 zones25. We examined the impact 
on environmental pollution due to operations of sidings/goods sheds and efforts of 
the Railway Administration to minimise pollution. Deficiencies in adopting 
measures for controlling air pollution in sidings/goods sheds noticed in respect of 
the 13 zones where the SPCBs had not issued any guidelines are discussed below: 
i.  The transport of commodities like 
coal and iron ore was examined in all 
zones. A test check of 34 sidings 
covering 16 zones revealed that in 13 
zones (except NER, NEFR and 
ECoR) commodities like coal and 
iron ores were being carried in open 
wagons without covering with 
tarpaulin sheets. Handling of these 
loose commodities at sidings and 
their transportation without covering posed health hazards to the 
neighbouring residents and also for the line staff and passengers of 
adjacent platforms. There was no system in place to measure the extent of 
pollution due to open carriage of polluting commodities.
ii. The Railway Administration (NWR) failed to control fugitive emission at 
the time of unloading of coal at Merta Road Goods Shed resulting in 
public complaints. In fact, on one occasion, the court imposed penalty of  
` 5 lakh against the Railway Administration and  ` 25 lakh against the 
consignor. On being pointed out by Audit, Railway Administration stated 
(March 2012) that they had issued instructions for adoption of some 
remedial measures like provision of water sprinkler, plantation and 

25Excluding  ER, SER and ECoR 
Coal carried in open wagon without 
cover

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
14
construction of boundary walls.  It was, however, observed that the 
remedial measures are yet to be implemented (August 2012). 
iii. In SCR, SPCB carried 
out ambient air quality 
monitoring (May 2009) 
at the Jaggiahpet 
siding. They found that 
the value of Total 
Suspended Particulate 
Matter was 2179 micro gram per cum as against the norm of 500 micro 
gram per cum. Consequently, SPCB issued directives (June 2009) to make 
provisions of permanent water sprinkling system, erection of permanent 
wind breaking barriers along with geo-net screens, covering of   trucks 
loaded with coal with tarpaulin etc. During subsequent inspection (May 
2010), SPCB observed that the Railway Administration had not complied 
with its guidelines issued in June 2009 and therefore, issued a show-cause 
notice to stop loading / unloading activities. Even after a lapse of two 
years, the Railway Administration had not fully complied with the 
directives of SPCB in respect of provision of geo net screen for wind 
braking barriers, plantation, development of concrete approach road, 
repair of permanent water sprinkler etc. On being pointed out in Audit, 
Railway Administration stated (April 2012) that the activities of the 
sidings had almost been stopped.  
iv. In two Goods Sheds (Salt Cotaurs and Bunder goods shed, Mangalore) of 
SR handling commodities such as cement, soda ash and fertilizers etc. 
large quantities of cement dust were found strewn all over the area. 
Though there were no public complaints against these two sheds, the 
accumulated cement dust was a health hazard to the public as well as the 
staff posted there. 
v. In two Railway goods shed at Moga and Jagraon over NR handling food 
grain (outward traffic) and fertiliser (inward traffic), it was observed that 
no water sprinkling system had been installed. Metal roads provided in the 
goods shed were found in damaged condition causing dust (air) pollution 
along the track. 
vi. In CR, no remedial action was taken on three public complaints received 
from passengers in 2008 and 2009 in connection with the increase in air 
pollution because of coal dust in the Wani station area emanating from the 
Cement dust at Salt Cotaurs Goods shed, 
Chennai

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
15
coal loading point at Wani Goods Shed, near Wani station. Dust spread at 
Wani Station was also noticed during Audit Inspection (November 2011).  
vii. In Kankaria and Jogeshwari A.T. goods shed of WR, no action was taken 
by the Railway Administration to assess the air quality standard due to 
loading/unloading of cement and fertilizer. Measures like plantation 
around unloading areas to prevent fugitive dust, provision of wind 
barriers, covered sheds, water sprinkling, etc were not taken up by the 
Railway Administration to check the environmental pollution.  
Thus, the Railway Administrations failed to adhere to the statutory provisions i.e. 
obtaining CFO from the SPCBs in nearly fifty per cent of the sidings test checked. 
In response to a reference from WR regarding the necessity of covering open 
wagons, RB stated that the issue of covering of open wagons may be dealt with at 
Zonal Railway level and that the covering should be done by the consignor/rail-
user. Adequate measures were also not taken by the Railway Administration to 
follow the guidelines issued by the SPCBs in respect of sidings/goods sheds. 
Despite widespread pollution intensive activities and receipt of numerous 
complaints, IR is yet to frame comprehensive guidelines relating to handling and 
transportation of pollution intensive commodities. 
While agreeing to the audit observations regarding carriage of dusty cargo in open 
wagons, Ministry of Railways (MR) replied (October 2012) that the Railway 
Administration had already advised the customer to arrange for measures like 
provision of sprinklers for water sprays, dust screens/green cover to avoid coal 
dust pollution.MR also stated that petroleum products and chemicals were being 
transported in tanks and special type of covered wagons and therefore, there was 
no issue of pollution involved. 
The contention of MR is not tenable as instructions issued are merely an ad-hoc 
reaction to the audit observations. No attempt has been made by the MR to 
address the issue holistically and to issue consolidated instructions at the RB level 
in consultation with CPCB. Several instances, as highlighted in the preceding sub-
paras, were noticed where remedial measures for reduction of pollution were not 
taken up. 
2.3.2   Study Report of Central Pollution Control Board 
At the instance of Audit, CPCB had carried out a study in March 2012 for 
assessment of ambient air quality at 14 major stations over 12 zones of IR. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
16
Monitoring was done for 2 days. On the first day samples were collected on 24 
hour basis and on the second day, samples were collected on eight hour basis.  
CPCB observed that none of the stations covered in the study had applied for 
consents under Air (Prevention and control of Pollution) Act and Water 
(Prevention and control of Pollution) Act and also authorization 26 for handling 
hazardous waste. Further, the values of various gaseous pollutants exceeded the 
national ambient air quality standards prescribed 27 by the CPCB (November 
2009) at a number of stations.  
The observations of CPCB on the individual stations as a result of study are 
detailed below:
Stations/Zone Observations 
Bilaspur/SECR  RSPM 28 and SPM exceeded the prescribed limit29 at most of 
the monitoring   places. However, SO 2 and NOx values were 
observed to be within the limits. 
Jabalpur /WCR The value of RSPM was higher than the prescribed limit. 
Jaipur / NWR Air quality monitored at three locations around the station 
revealed that the values of gaseous pollutant were well 
within the prescribed limit of CPCB. 
Howrah & 
Sealdah / ER 
The ambient air quality exceeded the prescribed limits for 
RSPM & NO
x while SOx was within the prescribed limit. 
Khurda & 
Bhubeneswar
(ECoR)
The ambient air quality for RSPM, NO x and SOx was within 
the prescribed limit. 
Patna (ECR) RSPM values was in excess of  the prescribed limit.  
Vadodara(WR) SPM & RSPM value were found to exceed the prescribed 
limits. 
Ahmadabad(WR) RSPM value was in excess of the prescribed limit and the 
values of NOx and SOx were found well within the 
prescribed limit. 

26 Rule 5 of Hazardous Waste(Management, Ha ndling and Transboundary) Rules,2008 requires 
that every occupier handling hazardous wastes shall make an application for grant of authorization 
for handling hazardous wastes 
27The National Ambient Air Quality Standa rd (24 hours average) for RSPM for industrial and 
residential area is 100 micro gm per cubic metre and 80 micro gm per cubic metre respectively.For 
oxides of Sulpher (SOx ) and Nitrogen (NO
x), prescribed limit is 80 micro gm per cubic metre 
while for PM10  , the limit is 100 micro gm per cubic metre 
28 RSPM refers to Respirable Suspended Particulate Matter 
29 Prescribed limit refers to National Ambient Air Quality Standard 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
17
Air conditioning in trains
The release of Chlorofluorocarbons (CFC) damages the 
earth’s ozone layer. In IR, AC coaches with R12 CFC 
refrigerant and R22 HCFC refrigerant are being used. Till 
March 2011, 76 per cent under slung AC coaches had been 
converted to eco-friendly R134a refrigerant and the balance 
RMPU AC coaches were fitted with HCFC R22 refrigerant. 
The CFC refrigerant R-12 had been phased out completely in 
all zones. 
Secunderabad
/SCR
The values of PM10 exceeded the prescribed limit. 
Hubli /SWR Ambient air quality monitoring revealed that the values of 
PM10
30exceeded the prescribed limit. 
Guwahati / NEFR The value of PM 10 exceeded the prescribed limit of 100 
micro gram /cum by 64 per cent. CPCB also observed that 
the high amount of NO x  was due to burning of diesel as 
fuel. 
Chennai/SR The values of PM 10, NO x and SOx were found within the 
prescribed limit. 
From the above observations of CPCB, it is seen that the ambient air quality in 
respect suspended particulate matter (SPM/RSPM/ PM 10) at most of the railway 
stations was above the national ambient air quality standards. It was also observed 
in Audit that there was no system of monitoring pollution level at stations.  
2.3.3 Pollution from Trains 
The trains on IR are 
powered mainly by 
diesel and electricity. 
IR has been 
emphasizing 
increased 
electrification of its 
tracks which is an 
eco-friendly option 
for the consumer. The use of diesel, on the other hand leads to substantial 
emissions in the form of unburnt hydro carbons, carbon monoxide and particulate 
matters etc. which add to air pollution. Air conditioning in trains also adds to air 
pollution. As per Montreal Protocol, the deadline for phasing out CFC refrigerant 
R-12 was 2010 and that of HCFC refrigerant R-22 is 2040.The initiative of IR in 
phasing out of CFC R12 refrigerant was appreciable towards green environment. 

30 PM10 refers to particulate matter(size less than 10 micro  gram) 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
18
Research & Design 
 For control of harmful emission from 
locomotives, RDSO has undertaken two 
projects-Use of fuel catalyst and catalytic 
convertor and Procurement of emission test car 
& reduction of emission of ALCO engine with 
target of completion by September 2012 and 
March 2013 respectively. 
 Initiatives of RDSO resulted in reduction of 
noise level of power car and compressor for 
AC EMUs/MEMUs from 140db to 75-80 db 
and less than 66db respectively. 
 2.3.3.1 Emission from Diesel Locomotives   
Diesel is used to power traction in about 70 per cent of the track on IR. Scrutiny 
in audit revealed that IR had neither initiated any measure to fix standards for 
emissions from the use of 
diesel for traction purposes 
nor any system had been set 
up to monitor the emissions 
from diesel locos and assess 
or compare the extent of 
emission with the 
international standard. South 
Central Railway 
Administration stated that 
there were no instructions for 
regular monitoring of emission levels and there was no such monitoring anywhere 
in IR. 
IR has taken the initiative for using bio diesel to minimise air pollution and 
related public health risks as it reduces green house gas emission. After 
examining the potential applicability of bio diesel as a fuel for locomotives and 
conducting trials, RDSO 31 concluded (December 2003) that bio-diesel could be 
used without engine modification and could attain full operating power. It was 
also concluded that a blend of 20 per cent biodiesel was compatible with the 
locomotives operating on IR and India's climate condition. The action plan of 
Mechanical Directorate of RB for Vision 2020 envisaged setting in motion the 
initiative of IR for achieving 10 per cent blending of bio diesel. 
We observed that out of 16 zones
32, bio-diesel was used only in five zones (SER, 
SECR, ER SR and NR). During the period 2006-11, the production of bio-diesel 
over these five zones was only 155.123.Kl besides procurement of 47.46 Kl from 
outside agencies. The usage of bio-diesel was very insignificant (0.01 per cent) 
when compared with the total consumption of 109.30 lakh kilo litres of HSD oil. 
The percentage of blend during the period of review varied between 5 to 10 per 
cent in locos. 
From the reply of the Zonal Railway Administration, it revealed that the factors 
limiting the usage of bio-diesel were: 

31 Research, Design & Standard  Organisation 
32 Excluding metro railways where no diesel engine is used 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
19
i. Absence of specific instructions for adopting 20 percent blends for bio-
diesel (NWR). 
ii. The trials conducted for bio-diesel were not encouraging (CR). 
iii. There was no production and utilization of bio-diesel as the plantation of 
Jatropha had not been successful due to high mortality rate (ECR). 
iv. Poor yield of bio-diesel due to poor quality of Jatropha seeds (SER). 
Thus, the negligible use of bio-diesel clearly corroborates veracity of the 
contention of the Railway Administrations. The Railways had taken a number of 
initiatives for encouraging the use of bio-diesel—like setting up of Jhatropha 
plantations and setting up of esterification plants. However, the main reason for 
the limited and declining usage of bio-diesel was not addressed i.e. no instructions 
were issued to the field offices from the RB for using blended biodiesel. In 
addition, no system was set in place for monitoring emissions from diesel 
locomotives. 
Initiatives of IR for production of bio-diesel as an alternative fuel and the 
constraints in production of bio-diesel are discussed in sub-para-3.6. 
2.3.3.2   Electrification of Track  
Electric traction is environmentally friendly, pollution-free and energy efficient 
and offers an excellent alternative to fossil fuels as a source of energy. Its use as a 
motive power is eco friendly for the consumer.  As compared to diesel, electric 
traction is capital intensive and requires higher investment in terms of 
locomotives, overhead equipment, electric loco sheds, and other equipment. 
IR has progressively electrified 19607 Route Km (RKM) out of 64,460 RKMs till 
March 2011.  During the XI Five Year Plan period (2007-12), IR targeted to 
achieve electrification of 3500 RKMs at the rate of 700 RKMs per year. During 
the period 2007-11, 3391 RKMs were electrified.  
We observed that electrification was being carried out selectively for sections of a 
route instead of electrifying the whole route. Patch wise electrification of routes 
resulted in hauling of diesel engines on electrified route leading to avoidable 
pollution due to emission from diesel besides higher operational costs on account 
of higher line haul cost under diesel traction.  

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
20
CR Administration stated that Die sel locomotives over electrified routes were 
being used for operational requirements to avoid intermediate detention of trains 
due to change in traction. Contention of the Railway Administration side testify to 
the fact that situation could have been avoided had the Railway Administration 
had resorted to strategy of route wise electrification. 
The movement of diesel locos under electrified route led to continued dependence 
on diesel locos resulting in increased environmental pollution.  
2.3.3.3  Ventilation of Tunnel 
The essential requirements of a ventilation system of tunnels are to ensure 
sufficient air flow to prevent locomotives from over-heating and to keep thermal 
effects within desirable limits. The ventilation system should ensure sufficient 
airflow relative to moving train to keep the concentration of pollutant gases 33
inside the tunnel within permissible limits. Monitoring of air quality and 
temperature inside the tunnel was, therefore, important to assess the need and 
adequacy of ventilation of tunnels. As per Para 1007 B of Indian Railway Bridge 
Manual, ventilation of the  tunnel is one of the important aspects relating to 
passenger and crew comfort during movement of train inside the tunnel.  
During test check of provision of ventilation in 181 tunnels out of 479 tunnels 
over 16 zones, we observed that neither air quality nor temperature monitoring 
was carried out in the tunnels to verify whether:-  
x The pollutants inside the tunnels were within threshold levels and 
x The temperature was limited to 50 degree centigrade to prevent overheating 
and to keep thermal effects within the permissible limits.  
We also examined the status of functioning of ventilation provided in tunnels and 
observed that the artificial ventilation provided at a cost of 
` 5.33 crore in two 
tunnels34 in ECoR could not be commissioned till March 2012 due to non-
availability of power. Records of the Railway Administration revealed that the 
absence of ventilation had caused suffocation to maintenance staff after passing of 
trains.  
SCR administration stated that in longer tunnels, artificial ventilation was being 
provided depending upon the requirement and as such, there was no necessity of 
monitoring of air quality and temperature in tunnel. They further stated that 
monitoring of air quality /temperature was not being done anywhere in IR. 

33 Oxides of carbon,nitrogen,sulpher and hydrocarbons 
34Tunnel No. 23 (1.6 Km) and 25 (1.5 Km) in Koraput-Raygada section 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
21
Contention of the Railway Administration was not tenable as the requirement or 
adequacy of ventilation could be judged only on the basis of monitoring of air 
quality/temperature in the tunnel. 
Thus, the failure of the Railway Administration in monitoring of air 
quality/temperature in tunnel and commissioning of ventilation was indicative of 
the lack of concern of IR to protect its passengers and crew against potential 
health hazards.  
2.3.3.4   Dust level in passenger coaches 
At the instance of Commissioner of Railway Safety (CRS), RDSO conducted 
trials between March and June 2010 for measurement of dust ingress in coaches. 
On the basis of the trials, it was observed that in IR the average dust concentration 
in non-AC coaches was almost double the limits 35 prescribed by the CPCB as the 
speed increases from 80 to 100 kmph. The value of Particulate Matter (PM 10) was 
also found three times of CPCB prescribed limit and also higher than the standard 
for PM10 (150 micrograms per cubic meter) prescribed in other international rail 
systems. Based on the findings, CRS instructed (November 2010) RDSO to 
evolve standards to be maintained for dust particles inside non-AC coaches and 
develop dust mitigating measures to reduce the total dust values. However, no 
standards have been developed till now (March 2012). 
Passenger surveys of 3217 Non-AC passengers and 1322 AC passengers 
conducted by Audit between August 2011 and March 2012 over 17 zones 
revealed that 39 per cent of Non- AC passengers and 35 per cent AC passengers 
felt that the quality of the air inside the coaches ‘Requires improvement’.  
Response of the passengers was indicative of the deficiency in initiatives of IR in 
minimizing dust level in coaches. 
2.4    Noise pollution 
As per Rules 3(1) and 4(1) of the Noise Pollution (Regulation and Controls) Rules 
2000, different ambient air quality standards in respect of noise levels have been 
prescribed for different areas such as industrial, commercial, residential and silent 
zones. The noise levels in those areas should not exceed the standards 

35The National Ambient Air Quality Standa rd (24 hours average) for RSPM for industrial and 
residential area is 100 micro gm per cubic metre and 80 micro gm per cubic metre respectively.For 
oxides of Sulpher (SOx ) and Nitrogen (NO
x), prescribed limit is 80 micro gm per cubic metre 
while for PM10  , the limit is 100 micro gm per cubic metre 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
22
prescribed36. The principal contributors to ambient sound pressure levels at 
stations are the movement of trains, blowing of horns by trains and 
announcements. 
2.4.1    Noise Pollution at Stations 
An independent study by Annamalai University during September 2002 at three 
important stations-Chennai Central, Tiruchirappalli and Villupuram over Southern 
Railway revealed that the average sound level at platforms, driver's rest room, 
etc., were in the upper limits of the prescribed levels as applicable to commercial 
areas37.
During March 2012, CPCB conducted noise monitoring at different locations of 
14 major stations over 12 zones at different points of time in a day. Study 
revealed that noise levels were in excess of the prescribed limit at all stations and 
there was no system of monitoring the noise level.  
In absence of any monitoring mechanism of the sound level at stations, audit 
conducted a survey38 of 2439 passengers at 34 Railway Stations across 17 zones. 
The survey revealed that 31 percent of the passengers were of the view that the 
noise level at stations was unbearable.
2.4.2 Noise level in passenger coaches 
During the course of trials in two trains between March and June 2010 for 
measurement of noise in coaches, RDSO observed that the noise level increased 
from 76.8dB to 80.3 dB as the speed increased from 80 to 110 Kmph and at an 
identical speed, the noise level in AC coaches increased from 71 to 72 dB. The 
above noise levels were well above the UIC (Union Internationale des Chemins 
de Fer/International Union of Railways) prescribed levels of 68 dB for interiors of 
second class passenger coaches.
In response to our survey questionnaire  to 3352 Non AC passengers and 1295 
AC passengers in 80 trains as per sample selection, on an average 26 per cent and 
10 per cent of Non AC and AC passengers respectively were of the view that the 
noise level inside the coaches was unbearable.  

36As per Noise pollution Act, th e ambient air quality standards in  respect of noise for industrial 
area should be 75db(A) Leq during the day time and 70db(A) Leq during the night time. 
37 The ambient air quality standard in respect of noise for commercial area is 65 and 55 db(A) Leq 
for day time and night time respectively 
38 Collection of opinions of passengers through questionnaire 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
23
In the absence of any specific instructions either from Pollution Control Boards or 
from RB, the zones did not initiate any remedial measures to reduce noise 
pollution.
2.4.3  Noise control measures near habitation/silence zones 
CPCB code of practice for controlling noise from sources other than industries 
and automobiles suggests erection of acoustic barriers, reduction of speed and 
avoiding whistling within and along the Municipal limits and habitation zones for 
Railway operations. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that no instructions had been issued at the level of 
RB regarding noise control measures near habitation/silence zones.
2.5   Water Pollution 
Water pollution  is the contamination of water bodies namely lakes, rivers, 
oceans, and groundwater. Water pollution occurs when pollutants are discharged 
directly or indirectly into water bodies without adequate treatment to remove 
harmful compounds. Besides being a crucial resource, maintenance of its quality 
is also a major concern.  
As per Sections 24, 25 and 26 of The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Act, 1974, no person shall knowingly cause or permit flow of any poisonous, 
noxious or polluting matter into any stream or well or sewer or land without 
treating it.   
Sewage is an excellent medium for the development of bacteria, some of which 
may be pathogenic. Raw sewage is harmful, as it consists of pathogen bacteria, 
which are capable of causing diseases such as typhoid fever, dysentery, diarrhea 
and cholera.   
IR is a major user of water for cleaning of trains and stations. IR also generates a 
large quantity of sewage both on trains and stations.
2.5.1 Effluent Treatment 
Train servicing and maintenance processes generate effluents such as oil, 
antifreeze and cleaning chemicals which can pollute the environment, if not 
carefully controlled. IR, therefore, needs to ensure that the effluent from Railway 
stations/sidings is discharged after proper treatment into the municipal sewers. RB 
instructed (June 2009) installation of Effluent Treatment Plants (ETP) at all major 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
24
stations for treatment of effluents before being discharged into sewers/water 
bodies.
In SECR, petroleum products were found deposited alongside the track. These 
were deposited during unloading at the POL Siding at Bhilai. Oil spillages were 
also noticed during loading activities at GR siding, Bajwa (WR). It was noticed 
that there were no specific instructions from the RB regarding treatment of oil 
spillages at sidings. In WR, it was observed that the spilled oil along with other 
wastes was being treated through the effluent treatment plant. 
Scrutiny revealed that no records 
regarding quantity of water treated and 
chemical used were maintained in SCR. 
During joint inspection by Audit along 
with the railway officials, it was 
observed that in absence of any ETP in 
SER, effluents were being discharged 
from the major stations 39 to the nearby 
low lying areas /water bodies and 
municipal drainage system resulting in 
contamination of surrounding surface 
and ground water.
While applying for CFO, the siding owners are required to furnish details of 
sources of water pollution, types of pollutants generated, method of treatment and 
disposal to control pollution etc. In this regard, PCBs of Odisha and West Bengal 
directed that in case the waste  water contains any substance which is harmful to 
the environment, the same should be treated to remove the substance so as to meet 
the prescribed norms. Test check of two sidings 40 in ER, revealed that guidelines 
were not followed in both these sidings. 
Scrutiny in audit revealed that no assessment was made by the RB regarding the 
requirement of ETPs. Out of 17 ETPs sanctioned over five zones (SCR, SECR, 
WR, NWR and ER), 14 ETPs were installed in three zones (SCR, WR and ER) 
till March 2012. The sanction of only 17 ETPs at an all India level barely 
averages one ETP per zone and leaves most of the major stations (A1, A & B 
category) like Bilaspur / SECR, Jabalpur /WCR, Ahmadabad (WR) & Vadodara 

39 Chakradharpur, Panskura, Tatanagar and kharagpur Stations 
40 Budge Budge and Sodepur siding 
Discharge of waste water from Kharagpur 
Station (SER)

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
25
(WR), Hubli/SWR, Chennai /SR, Guwahati / NEFR etc.  without an ETP. There 
was little initiative for making provision of ETPs in the remaining 12 zones.  
 MR stated that the railways drainage systems are connected with the drains of the 
local municipal authorities in major cities and such plants have been set up by 
local authorities. They further added that ETPs were being sanctioned as per the 
recommendations of the Railway Administration. Contention of the MR was not 
tenable as no attempt was made to assess the actual requirement of ETPs at major 
stations taking into account the capacity constraints of the municipal authorities. 
Further, in a number of stations, the effluents from the station premises were 
being drained directly into nearby water bodies /low lying areas polluting the 
ground water. 
2.5.2   Study Report of Central Pollution Control Board 
CPCB carried out a study (March 2012) of method of treatment and mode of 
discharge of waste water generated at station. Study in 14 major stations over 12 
zones of IR revealed that the waste water /effluents were being discharged to 
public sewer. There was no system for monitoring quality and quantum of waste 
water generated at stations. The results of study were as follows:
Stations/Zone Observations 
Bilaspur / SECR x Effluents were being discharged directly in the nallah 
passing through Titli Chowk without any treatment 
that finally joins River Arpa. 
x Examination of the waste water quality at the point of 
generation revealed that the oil and grease 
concentration was found higher than the standards. 
Jabalpur /WCR x Wastewater from only one side is being treated. 
However, waste water from Itarsi side was collected 
through pipelines and discharged in to nallah without 
any treatment.  
x The analysis of waste water at station premises 
revealed that the parameters like COD, BOD, TSS 
etc. exceeded the prescribed limits. 
Jaipur / NWR      Waste water let out into municipal drains. 
Ahmadabad(WR) 
& Vadodara 
(WR)
x No system of quantification of waste water 
generation.
x The waste water from all operations at station is being 
discharged directly into the municipal sewerage 
system without any treatment.  

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
26
Secunderabad
/SCR
x Only part of the waster coming from aprons and 
coach yard was treated through water recycling plant 
and the remaining was being discharged into the 
municipal sewer. 
x The treated waste water was being used for apron 
cleaning, coach exterior washing and gardening. 
x No data available in respect of waste water treated 
and recycled. 
Hubli/SWR x No system of quantification of waste water generation 
x The waste water is being discharged directly into the 
municipal sewerage system as there was no waste 
water treatment facilities. 
Chennai /SR  No water treatment facility. Water is pumped into 
municipal sewer. 
Guwahati / NEFR x Liquid waste let into municipal drain without any 
treatment and the municipal drains finally let drain to 
nearby wetlands.
x Acid of the lead acid batteries are directly discharged 
to municipal drains without any treatment, violating 
the provisions
41 contained in  Batteries (Management 
& Handling) Rules 2001 for disposal of batteries. 
Note: Study of mode of discharge of waste water was not carried out at Patna (ECR), 
Bhubeneshwar (ECoR),Khurda(ECoR),Howrah(ER),Sealdah(ER) 
The results of the study of CPCB were indicative of lack of awareness of the IR 
towards its environment. The study supports our contention in the above para that 
installation of ETPs is important for the control of water pollution. The study also 
emphasizes the need for treatment of water before it is discharged into the 
municipal drains.
2.5.3   Toilet discharge from running trains    
IR transports about 14 million passengers on 9000 trains every day. It uses over 
40000 coaches regularly for providing passenger services with each coach having 
four toilets. About 3980 MT of human waste is generated everyday by travelling 
passengers from ‘Open discharge’ module toilets of these coaches that directly 
goes onto the rail tracks polluting the stations and the areas through which the 

41 Rule 4(b) provides that it shall be the responsibility of consumers to return their used batteries 
only to the dealers or deliver at  designated collection centers. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
27
trains pass. In order to avoid open discharge of toilets on track, introduction of  
‘Green Toilets' has been under consideration of IR. Five models of toilets had so 
far been experimented with and none of these have proved satisfactory resulting 
in continued pollution of the environment. Details of the initiatives of IR in this 
regard and their performance have been discussed in sub-para 4.6. 
In the existing scenario, the discharge from toilets falls directly into the water 
bodies or road running below the Road under Bridges (RUBs). The IRs Bridge 
Manual provides that rivers and road under bridges should be covered by suitable 
and approved means to prevent droppings, falling from passing trains on water 
bodies or roads. 
We examined the initiative of IR in preventing contamination of water bodies and 
nuisance to road users due to open discharge of toilets from trains passing over 
bridges.
Study in 16 zones revealed that out of 1196, 20 per cent (243) of Road Under 
Bridges (RUBs) were not covered at the bottom to prevent toilet discharge from 
the passing trains falling on the road users. Further, out of 424 and 5437 steel 
girder bridges across water bodies under ‘Important’ and under ‘Major’ category 
respectively, 326 (76 per cent) and 3772 (69 per cent) number of bridges were not 
covered at the bottom leading to water pollution by toilet discharges falling from 
passing trains.
In response to a writ petition seeking a directive to IR for prevention of dumping 
of toilet waste from running trains into the open environment, a bench of High 
Court of Kerala directed (October 2011) the Railways and the Union Ministry of 
Environment and Forests to file an affidavit proposing a solution to the problem. 
The Division Bench observed that the problem was very acute in Kerala as the 
railway lines passed through thickly populated areas and over rivers which were 
the main source of drinking water.  
The case though yet to be disposed off, clearly reflects the lack of sensitivity of 
the Railway towards a healthy environment and also lack of monitoring in 
implementing standard instructions issued by itself for prevention and control 
water pollution.
During the exit conference, SCR Administration opined that there was no need to 
cover the bottom of the bridges passing over water bodies as the pollution from 
toilet discharge was negligible compared to the volume of the stream. WCR 
Administration, on the other hand, stated that with the provision of green toilet 
covering of bridges would not be required.  

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
28
The contentions of the Railway Administrations were not in conformity with the 
provisions contained in the IR Bridge Manual. IR is yet to finalise the design and 
specification of toilet even after experimenting on different models for about two 
decades. Non compliance of provisions contained in the IR Bridge Manual on the 
plea of implementation of green toilet was, detrimental to the aquatic 
environment. 
2.6   Conclusion    
Environment is a key survival issue and its challenges and significance has 
assumed greater importance in recent years.  IR is the largest carrier of bulk 
commodities like coal, iron ore, cement, PO L and fertilizer which are basically 
pollution intensive.
Despite the growing concerns over pollution and its increasingly adverse impact 
on the environment; RB failed to mainstream these issues. No substantive action 
was taken to integrate environmental concerns with operational policies. Even 
though, the RB is an established organization that is known for many best 
practices and social responsibility, it ought to have taken the lead; but was a 
laggard. Most internal instructions/directions did not have an environmental 
orientation and were guided by commercial/administrative considerations. No 
guidelines were framed by the RB to address the issue of pollution during 
transportation/handling of commodities at railway / private sidings or goods 
sheds/ yards.
In a majority of the cases the Railway Administration failed to comply with the 
existing guidelines of obtaining CFO from the concerned SPCB, were not taken 
before operating the sidings /goods sheds. In some of the cases, there was 
inconsistent and variable understanding of issues and their urgency. This led some 
of the Railway Administrations to presume that Consent to Operate was not 
required for all sidings/good sheds. Further, the Report of the CPCB, conducted at 
the behest of audit; highlighted that the standards prescribed for control of 
pollution –water, air and noise were not being followed at a large number of 
Railway stations indicating negligence on the part of IR in minimizing pollution 
level.
 The CPCB also failed in framing guidelines for the transport of bulk 
commodities which are pollution intensive. Most of the SPCBs, also did not play 
an active role. Besides non issues of guidelines, SPCBs were indifferent to 
compliance even with the existing regulations. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
29
 Non-existence of higher directions from the RB, inconsistent and variable 
understanding of issues and their importance at the zonal level led to non-
compliance with the existing pollution control laws. Even the existing guidelines 
issued by some of the SPCBs were not complied with. 
2.7 Recommendations 
x IR needs to formulate a comprehensive environmental policy. It also needs 
to bring out appropriate guidelines for controlling air and water pollution 
on its station, yard, work places or in operations in coordination with 
Central and various State Pollution Control Boards.
x A monitoring mechanism needs to be put in place at all levels within IR 
including the Railway Board for checking compliance with pollution 
control laws/ guidelines and implementation of its guidelines/instructions 
on environment. 
x Environment management may be recognized, monitored and reckoned as 
a key result area for all Zonal and Divisional Railway Authorities and 
schemes devised to incentivize better performance in this regard.

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
30
Conservation is an ethic of resource use, allocation, and protection. Its primary 
focus is upon maintaining the health of the natural world, its fisheries, habitats, 
and biological diversity. Secondary focus is on materials conservation and energy 
conservation, which are seen as important to protect the natural world. The 
consumer conservation ethic is sometimes expressed by the four R's : "Rethink, 
Reduce, Recycle, Repair".
IR is the single largest user of both energy and water in the country. IR consumed 
about 1.61 billion KWh 42 of electricity during 2010-11 as against the national 
consumption of 568 billion KWh 43. Thus the policies adopted by it have a 
substantial impact on the conservation of both water and energy in the country. 
The tracks of IR traverse the length and breadth of the country. Thus its policies 
regarding conservation of forests and wildlife play an important catalytic role in 
conserving the natural habitat in the country and  should act as a trend setter for 
the rest of the country.
3.1  Organisational Structure 
In IR, multiple directorates are involved in management and conservation of 
resources like water, energy, flora and fauna. The Land and Amenities Directorate 
and Mechanical Directorate are responsible for creation of infrastructure for 
conservation of water through water recycling plant, rain water harvesting, 
automatic coach wash plants etc. Electrical Directorate is responsible for 
formulating policies and implementation of various energy conservation 
measures. Civil Engineering Directorate is primarily responsible for protection of 
ecology of flora and fauna alongside the railway tracks. 

42 Figures extracted from Indian Railways Year Book 2010-11 
43 www.indexmundi.com 
Chapter 3  Management and 
Conservation of Resources

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
31
3.2  Conservation of Water 
Water conservation can be defined as any beneficial reduction in water loss, use 
or waste as well as the preservation of water quality. It is a reduction in water use 
accomplished by implementation of water conservation or water efficiency 
measures. It refers to reducing the usage of water and recycling of waste water for 
different purposes such as cleaning, manufacturing, and agricultural irrigation. 
There is a general shortage of water in India and in some parts, even drinking 
water is scarce. Rain water harvesting, waste water recycling, low-water-use 
flushing, usage of efficient equipment to minimize use of water, etc. are essential   
for conservation of water. 
IR is a major user of water- both for drinking and for cleaning purposes. Water is 
used for cleaning of coaches and in toilets at stations and trains. Due to the 
presence of large number of passengers, attendants and vendors etc. the demand 
for water at stations and trains for sanitary purposes is substantial.  
IR has adopted a number of best practices in the field of conservation of water 
and has issued a number of instructions for improving the efficiency of water use 
by installing of automatic coach washing plants and reducing the use of fresh 
water by way of recycling of water and rain water harvesting.  
We examined the extent of implementation of the instructions of RB besides 
efficiency and effectiveness of initiative s of IR implemented in Zonal Railways. 
Besides at RB, examinations of the records at the zonal level were also examined 
to assess the quantum of conservation measures initiated or implemented in the 
zones. In all 212 major and minor stations test checked over 17 zones. The results 
of examination are discussed below: 
3.2.1  Water Recycling Plant 
Water recycling refers to reclaiming waste water from industrial, residential, 
municipal sources, by treating and purifying the wastewater for reuse.  Based on 
the extent of the treatment, the recycled water can be reclaimed and used in the 
industrial processes, gardening, etc. 
RB in July/August 2006 reiterated its instructions that the zones should provide 
water recycling plants especially at locations like stations and sheds where water 
is scarce and provision of the same is to be economically justified. Ministry also 
emphasized the need for use of fresh water optimally and for use of recycled 
water for non- domestic purposes at stations. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
32
Test check of 212 stations over 17 zones revealed that 13 water recycling plants 
(WRP) were sanctioned in only five zones. While five WRPs were installed in 
four zones44, the work for installation of eight WRPs was either not started or in 
progress as indicated below: 
In 12 zones no provision of WRP has been made (March 2012). No WRP has yet 
been sanctioned in NWR. Railway Administration stated (March 2012) that the 
proposal for WRP would be included in phased manner based on availability of 
funds. Jurisdiction of NWR covers largely desert and semi-dry areas. We 
observed that despite there being perennial water shortage; no action has so far 
been taken (March 2012) for installation of WRP at major stations as directed by 
the RB. 
Similarly, none of the major stations in SR, where shortage of water is acutely felt 
in summer months, were identified for provision of WRP.  During Joint 
Inspection with Railway Officials, we observed that instead of recycled water 
from WRP, only fresh water drawn from bore wells /Municipal /Corporation 
sources was being used for all operations such as cleaning of platforms, cement 
concrete aprons and coaches.

44 SCR, WCR, SWR and CR 
  Station (Zone) Year of sanction Status 
Work not commenced
Hyderabad  (SCR) 2008-09 Discharge of tender thrice for technical 
reasons and crunch of funds. 
Bilaspur (SECR) 2009-10 Pending for want of approved design 
and drawing. 
Lokmanya Tilak Terminus 
Pune
Ballaharshah (CR) 
2009-10 
2009-10   
2011-12 
Contract is yet to be awarded. 
Work in progress
Katni 
Bhopal
Satna
(WCR) 
2008-09 
2008-09 
2008-09 
Progress – 50 per cent. 
Progress – 85 per cent. 
Progress – 60 per cent. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
33
In WCR, the actual availability of water was 80.24 lakh litres per day against the 
requirement of 110.15 lakh litres of water; only one out of four WRPs sanctioned 
has so far been installed. 
While examining the efficiency of the functioning of WRPs installed in five zones 
(SCR, SECR,WCR, SWR and CR), we observed that: 
x In SWR (Bangalore) and CR (Chatrapati Sivaji Terminus), WRPs were 
working at 60 and 50 per cent of their installed capacity respectively. 
x The WRP installed at Secunderabad (SCR) at a cost of `ȱ0.96 crore was 
utilized upto only 22 per cent of its installed capacity.  This resulted in 
procurement of water from Municipal Corporation leading to extra 
avoidable expenditure of  
` 0.56 crore during the period May 2008 to March 
2011.
Thus, we observed that the IR had not made significant progress in making 
provision of WRP at places where water is scarce. WRPs installed in three zones 
could not be utilized optimally. Besides lack of initiatives on the part of zonal 
railways, there was no further initiative at the RB level to expedite the provision 
of WRPs.
3.2.2  Automatic Coach Wash Plants 
Cleanliness in trains has often been 
adversely commented upon by the 
Parliamentary Committees, other 
dignitaries and passengers. In September 
2008, RB emphasized that the quality of 
cleanliness and hygiene in trains depends 
to a large extent on the method of 
cleanliness adopted in the depots during 
the maintenance of rakes and directed that Automatic Coach Wash Plants 
(ACWP) must be part of all green field coaching depots to improve the quality of 
coach exterior cleaning and to optimize utilization of resources viz. water 
consumption, saving of time and manpower etc. RB further instructed that 
ACWPs should be planned for all existing coaching depots in a time frame of the 
next three years.  RB reiterated that the Zonal Railways should place their indents 
on COFMOW for ACWPs. 
We examined the progress of setting up of ACWP in the zones and their 
performance. We observed that in eight zones (SCR, NCR, NER,SR,SWR,NR, 
     ACWP at Hatia, SER

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
34
ECoR and ECR), no provision was made for setting up of ACWPs. The status of 
provision of ACWP in zones is tabulated below: 
Sl.
No.
Zone No. of 
ACWP
sanctioned
No. of 
ACWP
installed
Remarks 
1. NWR 2 NIL Installation of ACWP was delayed due 
to yard modeling works at Udaipur and 
modification of tender conditions in 
case of plants at Jodhpur. 
2. MR 1 NIL Target for commissioning by December 
2013.
3. SECR 1 NIL Not procured due to space constraints 
for installation at Coaching 
Depot/Bilaspur & Durg. 
4. WCR 1 NIL Tender is yet to be finalized. 
5. SER 3 1 Not installed for want of suitable sites. 
6. NEFR 2 1 Remaining plant is out of order since 
February 2008. 
7. ER 3 2 Tender is yet to be finalized. 
8. CR 2 2  
9. WR 2 2  
TOTAL 17 8  
From the table above, it was observed that out of total 17 ACWPs sanctioned by 
the RB, eight ACWPs had been commissioned in five zones and the works in 
respect of the balance 9 ACWPs in seven zones were either in progress or not 
taken up for delay in selection of site/ specification and selection of the plant, etc.
The impact of not commissioning of ACWPs on the water conservation efforts of 
IR was examined and the following were observed 
i. In SER, out of the three ACWPs sanctioned, only one was commissioned at 
Hatia. The works for installation of the remaining two plants at Tatanagar 
and Santragachi were held up due to failure in selection of sites. This resulted 
in non-achievement of savings of 10512 Kilo litre of water per annum, as 
assessed by the Railway Administration; 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
35
ii. In CR, out of two ACWPs sanctioned; only one was commissioned at 
Lokamanya Tilak Coaching Depot. It was obser ved that the installation of 
ACWP  led to a saving of 276 Kilo Liters consumption of water per day 
besides reduction in the cost of cleaning from `ȱ132 to `ȱ52 per coach;  
iii. In NEFR, an ACWP installed at New Guwahati in 2006 at a cost of ` 0.30
crore had remained unutilized since May 2008 due to a technical breakdown;  
iv. An ACWP with a capacity to wash 4 to 5 rakes per day was installed in 
October 2008 at Bandra Terminus Coaching Depot of WR. The saving in 
consumption of water was projected at 5400 liter per rake. The plant 
remained idle since April 2011 as the Railway Administration executed a 
mechanised cleaning contract which included external cleaning of coaches; 
v. In SR, an ACWP imported from UK at a cost of  ` 2.25 Crore could not be 
commissioned at Basin Bridge Coaching Depot due to space constraint. It 
remained idle between March 2007 and July 2010 before being transferred to 
Central Railway. This aspect was highlighted in Para 4.1.3 of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India’s Report No. CA 19 of 2008-09. 
The plant is yet to be installed and thereby defeating its objective of 
improvement of coach washing with minimum use of water. 
Thus, we observed that the benefits of ACWPs are yet to be availed of in 12 
zones. Delay in installation of nine ACWPs was indicative of a lack of urgency 
in water conservation. Further, in some zones, ACWPs installed were either not 
utilized or sub-optimally utilized thereby defeating the objective of   constructing 
ACWPs.  
3.2.3 Rain Water Harvesting 
Rainwater harvesting (RWH) is the accumulation and storage of rainwater for 
reuse before it reaches the aquifer. The rain water so harvested is stored at surface 
or in sub-surface aquifers. RWH mitigates the effect of drought, improves ground 
water level and is environment friendly. 
In May 2003, Ministry of Water Resources requested IR to make provision for 
rain water harvesting in all future Ra ilway constructions. Accordingly, RB issued 
(February 2005) instructions to zones for implementation of RWH system.  
Review of the status of implementation of RB’s directives at 212 selected stations 
revealed that roof top water harvesting systems were installed at only seven 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
36
stations in five zones (SER, WCR, SR, SWR and WR). There was no system of 
monitoring implementation of the instruction of the RB. 
The slow implementation of water conservation measures was indicative of the 
low level of urgency attached to water conservation, despite huge imbalance 
between demand and supply of water.  
3.3   Conservation of Energy 
Sustained economic growth of any economy is largely dependent upon 
availability of adequate energy and its efficient use.  An Expert Committee 45 set 
up by the Planning Commission to formulate an integrated energy policy 
highlighted the importance of lowering the energy intensity of GDP growth 
through higher energy efficiency. The Report noted that a unit of energy saved by 
a user is greater than a unit produced, as it saves on production losses as well as 
transport, transmission and distribution losses. In the context of the IR, the 
Committee recommended promotion of the system of urban mass transport, 
energy efficient vehicles and freight movement by Railways through scheduled 
freight trains. The Committee also emphasized greater reliance on renewable 
sources of energy. 
In IR, the expenditure on fuel constitutes a major portion of their Working 
expenditure. The total expenditure on fuel during 2010-11 was ` 10503 crore and 
constituted about 15 per cent of their total ordinary working expenses. Thus, fuel 
being a major cost element, needs greater focus for detection of areas of high 
energy wastage and adoption of energy saving techniques to realize a cost 
effective energy system with least environmental impact.  In fact, the Energy 
Conservation Act, 2001 classifies IR as an energy intensive industry.  IRs had 
issued various guidelines from time to time and fixed targets/norms for efficient 
use of fuels /electricity. 

45 Under the chairmanship of Dr. Kirit S. Parikh 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
37
3.3.1  Use of Energy Efficient Fittings 
In May and July 2008, RB advised the 
Zonal Railways to fix action plan / targets 
for energy consumption (non-traction) by 
adopting various energy conservation 
measures through energy efficient 
devices. Some major energy efficient 
measures implemented in the zones were 
segregation of 70/30 lighting circuits 46 at 
platform, replacement of HPMV lamps 
with metal halides lamps, use of CFL fittings in place of 60/40 watt incandescent 
lamps, use of T-5 fluorescent tube etc. RB had also fixed target for 
implementation of the above measures. 
We have examined the extent of implementation of energy efficient measures by 
the zones with reference to the target set by the Zonal Railway administration. IR 
assessed a saving of 860.25 lakh KWh of energy worth `70.20 Crore in 17 zones   
as a result of adoption of following energy efficient measure. Status of 
implementation of energy efficient measures is indicated below: 
Sl.
No.
Areas of 
activities 
Target of the 
Railway 
Administration
Status
(As of March 2011) 
1. Segregation of 
70/30 lighting 
circuits at 
platform 
100 per cent by 
December 2009 
All zones except SER, ECR and NR 
achieved the targets set. 
2. Use of solar 
panels at 
stations
5 nos. of 10 kw 
solar panels per 
division in 
2009-10
Only SWR achieved the target. While 
there was no progress in four zones 
(NCR, ECoR, SER and ECR), the 
status of  progress in five zones 
(SECR,NEFR,NR,WR and CR)  ranged 
between 20 and 50 per cent and the 
progress in SR was only 7 per cent. The 
records relating to progress in six zones 
(SCR,NWR,MR,WCR,NER and ER) 
were not available. 

46 Automatic illumination of station sensing the trai n arrival and  an automatic switch of 70  per 
cent of  lights after  three  minutes of the departure of train.
Sensor for 70/30 segregation at 
Kurnal Station, SCR 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
38
3. Replacement of 
HPMV lamps 
with metal 
halides lamps 
100 per cent by 
March 2011 
Out of twelve zones, where the 
achievement could be assessed, in 10 
zones+, achievement was more than 70 
per cent  and in one zone (SECR), there 
was no progress.
4. Use of CFL 
fittings in place 
of 60/40 watt 
incandescent 
lamps 
100 per cent by 
March 2011 
Except Metro Railway (12 per cent) 
and WR (35.45 per cent), other zones 
almost achieved their target. 
5. Use of T-5 
fluorescent tube 
100 per cent by 
March 2012 
While the achievement of six zones 
(SECR,SR,SWR,ECR,CR and NR) was 
in the range of 23 per cent to 46 per 
cent, the achievement in seven other 
zones (SER, NCR, MR, NEFR, NER, 
ECoR and WR) was 57 to 86 per cent. 
Achievement in respect of remaining 
four zones could not be ascertained. 
6. Timer switches 
in High Mast 
Towers
100 per cent by 
March 2012 
Out of eleven zones where records 
relating to achievement were available, 
achievement in 4* zones was 6 to 42 
per cent and in the remaining seven 
zones (SER, SWR, NEFR, ECoR, 
ECR, SECR and CR), achievement was 
between 60 and 97 per cent. 
+SER,NCR,SR,NEFR, ECoR, ECR, CR ,SWR and NR       *SECR,SR,NCR and NR  
Thus, the achievement of IR in implementation of vital energy efficient measures 
was commendable excepting the areas like use of solar panels at stations and use 
of T-5 fluorescent tube. Further, non-availability/non-maintenance of records 
relating to the achievements and quantification of savings due to adoption of 
energy efficient measures was indicative of lack of priority in implementation and 
monitoring at RB level. 
While admitting the audit contention regarding slow progress in adopting energy 
conservation measures in some areas, Ministry of Railways (MR) stated (October 
2012) that works related to energy conservation were being planned regularly and 
progressively by the Railway Administration subject to availability of funds. MR 
also stated that the high cost, frequent theft, shortage of skilled labour and 
availability of funds were the primary reasons for under achievement in the use of 
solar panels. MR asserted that non traction energy consumption during the period 
2008-12 remained almost constant despite 4-5 percent increase in connected load 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
39
per annum.  The fact however, remains that it has not been possible to quantify 
the energy saved due to adoption of energy conservation measures. 
3.3.2  Use of Renewable energy  
A natural resource is a renewable resource, if it is replaced by natural processes at 
a rate comparable or faster than its rate of consumption by humans. IR is the 
single largest consumer of diesel and electricity in the country and thus its energy 
policy has a significant impact on the energy scenario of the nation. To handle its 
vast freight and passenger traffic, IR operates as many as 5,137 diesel powered 
and 4033 number of electric locomotives. These locomotives consume 2567.37 
million liters of diesel & 16105.00 million units of electricity47.
The Expert Committee set up by the Planning Commission emphasized the need 
of greater reliance on renewable sources of energy. Unlike fossil fuels, most 
renewable energy sources do not release carbon dioxide and other air pollutants as 
by-products into the atmosphere. 
In the “IR Vision 2020 statement”, several measures for reducing carbon foot 
print were envisaged. One of the measures was to use at least 10 percent energy 
from renewable sources such as solar power, biomass, CNG and wind energy etc. 
The Minister for Railways, in her Budget Speech, declared 2011-12 as the “Year
of Green Energy”  and brought out some of the green measures viz. use of solar 
energy at level crossing gates, windmill etc. initiated by the IR. The energy 
conservation policy of IR envisaged use of non-conventional energy sources 
including the use of solar panels at stations, LC gates, use of wind energy for non 
traction purposes etc. 
Different types of solar water heaters provided at Tiruchhcirappalli,SR 

47 Figures quoted from the Indian Railways Year Book 2010-11 and  pertain to the year 2010-11. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
40
3.3.2.1 Use of renewable energy at manned level crossing gates  
RB issued instructions (March/May 2007) to provide solar based water heating 
systems for running rooms, rest houses, hospitals and base kitchens and also for 
provision of solar panels at level crossing (LC) gates. As per instructions (March 
2007), the Zonal Railways were directed to install solar based lighting system at 
all manned Level Crossings. 
RB also proposed (September 2008) that CR, NWR, ECoR, SR, SCR, SWR and 
WR should gain experience by providing a hybrid system48 consisting of solar and 
wind energy at 3 locations each on trial basis for electrification of LC gate or 
wayside halt stations, etc.  
We examined the extent of implementation of solar based/hybrid lighting system 
at all manned Level Crossings during the years 2007-11 as per RB’s instructions 
and their performance. The status of achievement of electrification of solar based 
/ hybrid lighting system at all manned Level Crossings are tabulated below: 
Target for 
electrification of 
manned LC 
Target Achieved Shortfall in 
achievements (in %)
Zone
Using
Solar
Using
Hybrid 
LC
electrified
using
Solar
LC
electrified
using Hybrid 
Whether
Target
achieved
LC
electrified
using
Solar
LC
electrif
ied
using
Hybrid 
SCR No Target 190 1 NA     
NWR 33 0 57 0 Yes     
SER 25 0 48 0 Yes     
SR 5 3 40 1 Yes   66.67
NFR 175 0 251 0 Yes     
WR 76 0 143 1 Yes     
NER 319 0 328 0 Yes     
CR 91 1 91 1 Yes     
ER 91 3 91 3 Yes     
NCR 389 0 329 0 No 15.42   
SECR 103 0 58 0 No 43.69   
WCR 354 1 208 1 No 41.24   
SWR 70 5 22 1 No 68.57 80.00

48 Hybrid system uses both solar and wind energy 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
41
ECOR 80 0 67 0 No 16.25   
ECR 1896 0 428 0 No 77.43   
NR 1984 0 594 0 No 70.06   
Totals 5691 13 2945 9   48.25 30.77
From the status of implementation, we observed the following: 
x Out of a target of 5704 manned level 
crossings, 51 per cent (Solar-2945, 
Hybrid-9) were electrified using solar 
energy and hybrid system during 2007-
11. The works in respect of 704 level 
crossings (Solar-602, Hybrid-102) are 
in progress. 
x 7 out of 15 zones
49 could not achieve 
the target set for electrification of 
manned level crossings. 
x In seven zones (SCR, WCR, SR, ER, 
CR, WR and SWR), 9 out of a target of 13 level crossings were electrified 
with hybrid system. There was shortfall in achievement in respect of SR and 
SWR, where out of eight manned level crossings; only two level crossings 
were electrified with hybrid system.   
x Seven zones (NCR, SECR, WCR, SWR, ECoR, ECR and NR) could not 
achieve the target of electrification of level crossings using solar energy. In 
five zones (SECR, WCR, SWR, ECR and NR), the shortfall ranged between 
41.24 to 77.43 per cent. 
Further scrutiny revealed that: 
x In SCR, there was a decline in the pace of electrification of LC gates through 
solar power during the period of review.  During 2007-08 and 2008-09, 94 
and 72 LCs was electrified through solar power whereas in 2009-10 and 
2010-11, only 18 and 6 LCs respectively were electrified. The reasons for 
declining trend could not be ascertained from the records of the Railway 
Administration. 

49 Achievement in respect  of SCR could not be assessed due to absence of target 
Solar Panel at manned level crossing 
between Darazpur - Mustafabad 
section, NR 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
42
x 22 solar panels out of total 91 installed in electrification of level crossings in 
ER had been stolen.
Thus, the overall achievement of the IR in electrification of level crossings with 
solar panel was far below the target set for the period 2007 to 2011. There was no 
system in place to monitor or document performance of level crossings energized 
with solar panels or hybrid system. There was also no system of quantification of 
benefit accrued to Railways as a result of implementation of solar panels/hybrid 
system in electrification of level crossings. 
Ministry of Railways stated (October 2012) that the level crossing gates only in 
non-electrified territory were being provided with solar panel/hybrid system on 
need basis subject to availability of funds. The reply of the MR was, however, 
silent about the reasons for failure to achieve the target of electrification with 
solar panels/hybrid system.
3.3.2.2   Wind Power Plants 
Power generation through wind is one of the most rapidly adopted and cost 
effective renewable energy technologies.  The wind potential is particularly high 
in coastal states of Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, and Karnataka, some parts of 
Maharashtra, Gujarat and in Rajasthan. It has added advantage of earning for the 
technology user, additional revenue in the form of carbon credit that could accrue 
from production of wind energy.  
We examined the initiative of IR in taping wind energy and the progress in setting 
up of wind power plants. Examination of the records of the Railway 
Administration revealed the following: 
x Four wind power plants had been sanctioned during 2010-12 in three zones 
(NWR, SR and WR). While the works relating to two plants (WR and 
NWR) were in the early stages of progress, the progress in respect of the 
remaining two plants was in contractual stage. 
x The proposals of two zones (SWR-3 and NEFR-1) for setting up of four 
wind power plants are still under process at the RB level. 
x In SR, two small wind mill units of 2 KW capacities were installed at 
Aduthurai and Kallukuzhi Stations in Tiruchirappalli Division in April 
2010. No record was being maintained regarding energy generated out of 
these two units. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
43
x RB did not approve the proposal of SCR for setting up of one wind power 
plant.
Thus, IR failed to make a major progress in tapping wind energy. During the 
period of review (2007-12) only four wind power plants were sanctioned in 3 
zones. This indicated a lack of urgency on the part of IR in exploiting cleaner and 
alternative renewable sources of energy.
3.4     Carbon Credit under Clean Development Mechanism
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) defined in Article 12 of the Kyoto 
protocol50 allows a country with an emission reduction under obligation to 
implement an emission-reduction project in developing countries. Such a project 
can earn tradable certified emission reduction (CER), each equivalent to one MT 
of CO2.  The purpose of this program was to reduce emissions of Green House 
Gases (GHGs) as well as to promote sustainable development in the host 
countries. Therefore, developing countries, such as India are expected to gain 
financial and environmental benefits by reducing the emission of GHGs. 
IR has the potential to save energy by introducing locos with regenerative braking 
features, setting up of wind mills, installation of solar panels, etc.  In order to 
claim CER, the project is required to be registered with National Clean 
Development Mechanism Authority (NCDMA) and obtain a host country 
approval.
In IR, only two projects have so far been registered under CDM. One project is 
replacement of incandescent lamps (ICLs) with compact Fluorescent lamps 
(CFLs) in Railway's residential quarters and the other project involves using 
EMUs with three-phase insulated gate bi-polar transistor (IGBT) technology and 
regenerative braking, for use along the Western and Central Railway corridors in 
suburban Mumbai. The regenerated electricity reduces the consumption of an 
equivalent amount of grid electrical energy, thereby conserving electrical energy 
and reducing net greenhouse gas emissions. The progress of induction of three 
phase electric locos with regenerative breaking features is discussed below.  

50 The Kyoto protocol is a legally binding agreement that arose out of the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change ( UNFCC) to tackle climate change through a 
reduction of green house gas emissions. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
44
3.4.1 Three Phase EMUs/Electric Locos with Regenerative braking 
MR decided to replace the existing Electrical Multiple Units (EMUs) with the 
new ones fitted with regenerative brakes by adopting three phase technology with 
Insulated Gate Bi-polar Transistor (IGBT) based system initially in Mumbai 
suburban area of Western & Central Railways. This was later extended to other 
zones. During braking, the system is capable of regenerating 25 to 30 per cent of 
the energy used and these passenger trains have the ability to draw the same from 
the Over Head Equipment (OHE).  The regenerated electrical energy reduces the 
consumption of equivalent grid electrical energy required by the powering train, 
thereby conserving electrical energy. This is expected to save the Railways ` 200 
crore annually on energy. 
The Designated National Authority (DNA) which is under Ministry of 
Environment & Forests has accorded host country approval (January 2009) for 
this project under Clean Development Mechanism (CDM). World Bank is 
working for registration of this project with United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). 
Review of consumption of energy by adopting three phase locomotives revealed 
that IRs had inducted 1566 three phase electric locomotives in nine zones (March 
2011). The average savings in consumption of energy ranged between 12 to 26 
per cent as against the envisaged level of 25 to 30 per cent.
However, savings in energy consumption due to regenerative braking features 
installed in three phase EMU rakes in suburban sections was much higher. In CR, 
energy savings ranged between 30 and 50 per cent during the review period and 
the range was between 31 to 36 per cent in WR.  
The project of regenerated braking featur e was submitted for validation in April 
2010. Till March 2012, no carbon credit could be earned or realized.  
3.5 Energy Audit 
Energy audit encompasses verification, monitoring and analysis of use of energy, 
including submission of recommendations for improving energy efficiency with 
cost benefit analysis and an action plan to reduce energy consumption. On the 
basis of guidelines issued  by Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE),  RB directed 
(July 2007/2008) all Zonal Railways to conduct energy audit of areas like major 
administrative buildings, hospitals, pumping installations, loco sheds, major 
railway stations and workshops as a onetime exercise and send the reports to 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
45
them. Subsequently, RB (July 2008) directed that energy audit of all Traction sub 
stations and workshops 51 of IR was also to be taken up periodically. All these 
establishments had been notified by BEE as energy intensive consumers.  
The progress of energy audit conducted in 17 zones and status of implementation 
of recommendations of energy auditors revealed the following:- 
¾ No energy audit was conducted in three zones (SER, ECR and SECR). 
¾ In the remaining 14 zones, 30 energy audits were conducted in workshops, 
traction sub-stations, pump houses, service buildings, etc. of the zones. 
Energy auditors made 149 recommendations for improving energy 
efficiency.
¾ While 48 out of 149 recommendations were not implemented in seven 
zones52, partial implementation was noticed in respect of 18 
recommendations. The reasons for non-implementation of 
recommendations of energy auditors were attributed to constraint of funds, 
lack of feasibility to implement etc. 
¾ Energy audit of 12 Traction Sub- Stations was conducted. In all cases, 
recommendations were either partially im plemented or no targets were 
fixed for implementation of the recommendation of the energy auditors. 
Thus, there was a lack of system at the RB level for monitoring the progress of 
energy audit and implementation of their recommendations. The slow progress of 
energy audit and implementation of their recommendations indicated a lack of 
urgency towards conservation of energy. 
Ministry of Railways (MR) stated (October 2012), that the IR had adopted the 
technique of sample energy audit for one type of asset as the cost of energy audit 
per installation varied between two to four lakhs and the findings of one/two 
energy audits of a similar type of asset was sufficient to make an action plan for 
energy conservation. MR also stated that the scope of energy conservation in 
traction substation was limited. Regarding implementation of the 
recommendations of energy audit, MR asserted that some suggestions were not 
accepted due to operational requirement. 
Contention of the MR was not acceptable as it was contradictory to its own 
instructions (July 2008). Further, no action plan for energy conservation measures 

51 Traction sub-station and workshops are energy in tensified units due to  consumption of  
substantial electrical energy 
52 NR,CR,SR,WCR,MR,NWR and SCR 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
46
had been drawn for implementing across zones on the basis of the 
recommendations of energy auditors.  
3.6   Bio-diesel 
Bio-diesel is a plant based renewable and cost effective fuel. It is biodegradable 
and non-toxic. Bio-diesel can help reduce emissions of many air pollutants such 
as particulate matter, carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, sulphar oxides,nitrogen 
oxides, and air toxics. Bio-diesel can be made from renewable resources, 
including non-edible oils of Jatropha, Curcas, Karanjia plants, Sal, Mahua, Neem, 
Rubber, Linseed, Castor, etc. Bio-diesel can also be manufactured from Lard and 
other waste animal fats, waste fish oil and vegetable fats.
The use of bio diesel blend of up to 20 percent does not require any engine 
modification.  A blend of 20 percent biodiesel and 80 percent petro-diesel (B20) 
is generally used in IR.  A B20 blend would be able to achieve an overall annual 
reduction in consumption of 489.84 million litres of petro-diesel53.
For production of bio-diesel, two bio-diesel plants were established in June 2006 
and November 2003 at Kharagpur (SER) and Loco Works, Perambur 
respectively. 
We examined the performance of bio-diesel plants and observed the following: 
¾ The Bio-diesel Esterification Plant of 2000 litre capacity commissioned in 
2006 at Kharagpur at a cost of  `ȱ0.29 crore produced 8803 litre of bio-diesel 
during 2006-10. No Bio-diesel was produced thereafter, due to non-
availability of good quality seeds; 
¾ In Loco Works, Perambur (SR), bio-diesel was being produced using 
Pungam seeds procured from the open market and used edible oil obtained 
free of cost from hotels. During the years 2008-11, the capacity utilization of 
the bio-diesel plant was only in the range of 12 to 16 percent. The under 
utilisation was due to short supply of raw material which was not envisaged 
at the time of setting up of the plant. Besides Southern Railway, various non 
governmental organizations resorted to large scale plantations with the aid of 
Tamil Nadu State Government. Government of India also identified Tamil 
Nadu for large scale plantations of bio-diesel plant. As a result of non-
utilisation of the plants to its full capacity, the objective of development of an 
alternative fuel could not be effectively achieved. 

53 RDSO Report on Bio-diesel (2003) 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
47
¾ During 2006-07, RB sanctioned two projects for use of bio-diesel as an 
alternative fuel for traction purposes. One project was for the conversion of 
100 Diesel Electric Multiple Units (DEMUs) to dual fuel mode using CNG 
and diesel and the other was for setting up of four bio-diesel esterification 
plants for the production of bio-diesel. To implement these projects, an 
organization viz., Indian Railways Organization on Alternate Fuels (IROAF) 
was set up in 2008 by RB.  The aim of the organization was to harness the 
bio-diesel potential and extend the use of CNG and other alternate fuels /non 
conventional sources of energy.
We also observed that the contracts were executed in April 2011 and May 2011 
for setting up of plants at Tondiarpet (SR) and Raipur (SECR) respectively. While 
the work of setting up of bio-diesel plant at Raipur was in progress, there was no 
progress in respect of   plant at Tondiarpet as of March 2012 except identification 
of land. 
Thus, the initiative of IR for production of bio-diesel remained largely 
unsuccessful as the existing bio-diesel plants could not yield desired results due to 
short supply of raw materials, a prime factor which should have been taken into 
consideration before setting up of plants. 
3.6.1     Jatropha plantation
In January 2003, RB directed all the Zonal Railways to take up work of plantation 
of Jatropha Curcas on as much Railway land as possible for production of bio-
diesel. RB’s correspondence (November 2005) revealed that one jatropha plant 
can generate at least one litre of bio-diesel during a year and each tree starts 
bearing fruits in two years. 
In February 2003, RB signed an Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with 
Indian Oil Corporation (IOC) whereby Railway agreed to provide 500 hectare of 
land to IOC at a nominal lease charge of `ȱ1 per annum for a period of 15 years 
for Jatropha plantation and setting up of facilities for production of biodiesel. The 
IOC however had taken possession of only 188.49 hectares and planted trees only 
in 70 hectares across various zones. The effort of the Railways as well as of IOC 
towards production of bio-diesel were not found satisfactory as the plants on 
which an expenditure of `ȱ4.35 crore was incurred died prematurely. This was 
highlighted vide Para No. 3.5.2 of Comptroller & Auditor General of India’s 
Report No. 6 of 2008 (Railways). Though the MR contended that the IR had not 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
48
incurred any expenditure and the Railway land got protected due to plantation, the 
very objective of exploring an alternative source of fuel was defeated. 
We examined the records relating to Jathropha plantation over 16 zones and their 
survival rate and observed the following: 
x Except NEFR, none of the zones could achieve the target set by the RB for 
plantation of Jatropha during the period 2006-11. Further, the survival rate 
was very low (up to 38 percent) in seven zones (NWR, WCR, SECR, 
NEFR, ER, ECR and WR). Low survival rate was attributed mainly to 
inadequate manpower for maintenance. Survival rate in five zones (SER, 
NCR, SR, ECoR and NR) ranged between 61 to 97 per cent. No records 
were being maintained in zones in respect of yield of seeds and their 
usage.
x In NEFR, 23.02 lakh Jathropha were planted during the period 2006-11 
incurring an expenditure of ` 2.67 Crore. Only 23 per cent of them 
survived yielding only 6783 Kg.of seeds which were sold for ` 0. 24 lakh.
x  61.22 per cent (95.93 lakh) of 136.61 lakh jatropha plantation done over 
16 zones during 2006--09 could not survive. As a result, IR could not 
generate 9593.24 KL of bio-diesel which could have saved equivalent 
quantity of diesel oil worth ` 30.28 crore54.
Thus, IR failed in achieving desired objective of developing alternative source of 
fuel through production of bio-diesel from Jathropha. Despite its insignificant use 
for production of bio-diesel, the need of continuance of Jathropha plantation was 
not reviewed and the wasteful expenditure on Jathropha plantation continued.
3.7   Conservation of Forests and Wildlife 
Article 48 of the Constitution of India specifies that, "The state shall endeavor to 
protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wildlife of 
the country" and Article 51-A states that "it shall be the duty of every citizen of 
India to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, 
rivers, and wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures". 
Conservation of wildlife involves the protection of entire ecosystems. Trains can 
disrupt local ecosystems in irreparable ways.  A diversity of flora and fauna live 
alongside the railway lines.  The flora and fauna in some areas is sufficiently 

54 Calculated as per rate cont ract dated 11.08.2009 for procurement of HSD Oil @ `ȱ31561.49 per 
KL.

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
49
distinctive to be of scientific value. To maintain operational safety, line side 
vegetations have to be managed in a sympathetic manner. 
3.7.1    Railways’ approach to protection of wild animals 
A Railway line passing through a rural/forest area can interrupt migration 
patterns, destroy habitat and even kill animals attempting to cross the track. In 
India, a large number of wild species are being killed annually due to accidents in 
Railway track and highways, but data maintained are very meager. Data are, 
however, available only for large animals like elephants.   
Animal mortality due to train hits, apart from causing loss of animals can also 
cause severe loss to the Railways. In certain ca ses it could lead to derailment of 
the train, damage to the track, wagons and coaches; injury and death of 
passengers and/or detention of the train. Sixty-seven animals died during the 
review period, 2006-11, which included 62 elephants and one lion. The majority 
of elephant deaths occurred in NEFR where 43 elephants died followed by SR 
where 10 elephants died. 
In March 2010, Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Environment & Forests 
jointly issued general advisories to prevent train accidents involving elephants. 
General advisories included measures like clearance of vegetation alongside the 
tracks sensitising programmes for train drivers/guards, keeping the track free from 
food wastes and engagement of elephant trackers. 
We test checked the extent of implementation of above measures in three zones 
(SER, SR and NEFR) where the rate of animal mortality was high. 
x The measures as mentioned in the general advisories were implemented in 
NEFR except the construction of forest underpasses/over passes across 
railway tracks 55 which were under progress.
x SR had taken a number of 
preventive measures like 
imposition of speed restriction, 
provision of warning boards, 
regular clearing of vegetation on 
sides of track for better visibility 
etc. The issue was also taken up 
by audit with Southern Railway Administration in June 2011 through a Study 

55 For safe passage of elephants in accident prone areas between Alipurduar and Siliguri section 
Guided Crossing of elephant by  forest officials, 
Nilambur, Palghat  Division, SR

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
50
Report. In response, Railway Administration stated (September 2011) that 
the long term measures were under scrutiny. They also stated that rail fencing 
had already been provided in forest areas between Ettimadai and Madukarai 
stations in Palakkad- Podanur section. 
x In SER, it was however, observed that neither any sensitizing programme 
was being conducted nor any action was taken for engagement of elephant 
trackers. Besides, no specific clause 
was incorporated in the agreements 
with IRCTC for proper disposal of 
wastes in order to keep railway tracks 
free from food wastes. 
Despite implementation of a number of preventive measures, the animal mortality 
due train hits had not declined.
 3.8  Setting up of Eco park 
Railway Minister, in her Budget speech of 2010-11, announced the setting up of 
10 Rail Eco-parks to conserve, protect and promote Railways’ wet lands and 
forest areas. The Parks were planned in different zones. Proposed Eco-Parks 
would provide facilities like herbal garden, nursery with rare plants, jogging track, 
gymnasium, health club, meditation centre, amphi-theatre etc. so as to develop 
natural environment with regional flora and fauna in the eco-parks, to provide a 
harmonious and natural environment. 
We observed that no eco-park has so far been set up in IR. 
3.9   Afforestation 
In terms of Para 702 of Indian Railway Works Manual (IRWM), each Division 
should prepare 'tree planting plan' for every subdivision and plantation work 
should be carried out accordingly. On all construction projects, provision should 
be made in the estimate for bulk afforestation in vacant land as an environmental 
improvement measure. Accordingly, afforestation measures were taken up  in 
zones.
We examined the afforestation 
measures taken up by the zones and 
their achievement with reference to 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
51
the RB’s target besides assessment of mortality rate. We observed that: 
x Out of 15 zones, target for plantation was achieved 56 i n  f i v e  z o n e s  
(WR,ER,NEFR, SWR and SCR); 
x In the remaining 10 zones 57, achievement was in the range of 59 to 96 per  
cent except in SECR and SR 
where the achievement was 49 per 
cent and 37 per cent respectively ;  
x Average mortality rate of 
plantation was in the range of 15 
to 41 per cent in eight zones 
(SCR, NWR, SER, WCR, SR, 
SWR, ECR and WR) except in 
ER where average mortality rate 
was 60 per cent. 
3.10   Conclusion 
IR has issued a large number of guidelines for the conservation of resources- both 
energy and water. However, their implementation is very low key and slow, 
indicating Railways lack of enthusiasm. Though guidelines have been issued for 
reducing the consumption of both water and energy and steps have been initiated 
for recycling water usage in the absence of proper emphasis and monitoring, its 
implementation leaves much to be desired. The actual performance on the ground 
is below par.  
The installation of the Automatic Coach Wash Plant leads to a substantial 
reduction in water use. There has, however, been a substantial delay in both 
sanctioning and installation of ACWPs. Further, IR also initiated a number of 
measures like provision of Water Recycling Plants and Rain Water Harvesting 
systems etc. for conservation of water. However their pace of implementation was 
also slow.
A number of detailed instructions have been issued by IR for conservation of 
energy and greater use of renewable energy. However, IR was unable to achieve 
its targets for adopting energy efficient devices. Audit also observed that the focus 
here was on use of energy for non-traction purposes on which only a small 
proportion of expenditure is incurred. Further, the IR has still not been able to 

56 Indicated by Blue bar 
57 Except NCR and CR where relevant records were not available 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
52
earn any Carbon Credit under Clean Development Mechanism, despite two 
projects being registered with CDMA for that purpose.
 The implementation of recommendations of Energy Auditors was patchy and 
slow which indicated the inconsistent attitude of IR towards the conservation of 
energy. We also observed that the production of bio-diesel was low and that the 
constructions of two more sanctioned plants were progressing very slowly.  
Railway tracks traverse through dense forests and hence conservation of forests 
and wildlife assumes importance. Steps taken by the IR to protect the flora and 
fauna were not adequate, as animal mortality due to train hits remained high. 
3.11  Recommendations 
x To conserve water, measures like Wa ter Recycling Plant, Automatic 
Coach Wash Plants and Rain Water harvesting system need to be 
implemented expeditiously by IR.  
x IR needs to take urgent and effective steps to explore across the country 
scope for and to maximizing the use of alternative sources of energy 
besides taking initiatives in conservation of energy. The targets set for 
adopting energy efficiency measures need to be effectively implemented. 
x Adequate effort needs to be put in to implement the long term measures 
for prevention of animal mortality. For this, the monitoring mechanism at 
the Railway Board’s level should be strengthened. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
53
Waste management is the collection, transport, processing or disposal, managing 
and monitoring of waste materials. The term usually relates to materials produced 
by human activity, and the process that is generally undertaken to reduce their 
effect on health, the environment or aesthetics.  
Waste, if not handled or disposed of properly, represents a threat to the 
environment and human health. The Municipal Solid Waste (Management and 
Handling) Rules, 2000 provide for safe disposal of municipal waste to prevent 
contamination of ground water, surface water and ambient air quality and fix the 
responsibilities on Municipal Authorities, District Administration, State Pollution 
Control Board and the State Government. 
 Strategies for waste disposal should focus on waste prevention and minimization 
through the ‘3 Rs strategy ’-Reduce Reuse and Recycle. According to this 
hierarchy, waste disposal strategies are ‘end of the pipe’ solutions and should be 
the least favoured option.  Emphasis on waste prevention and waste minimization 
would ensure in the first place that less waste which needs to be disposed is being 
produced.
The use of plastic products as packaging application in the recent years has 
increased the quantity of plastics in the solid waste stream to a great extent. 
Besides being non-biodegradable in nature, disposal of plastic wastes at landfill 
sites are unsafe since toxic chemicals leach out into the soil and underground 
water and pollute the water bodies. Government of India notified the Recycled 
Plastics Manufacture & usage Rules, 1999 under Environment (Protection) Act to 
regulate the manufacture and usage of recycled plastic bags and containers.  
4.1  Waste Management on Indian Railways 
IR generates vast quantities of different types of wastes.  The waste is mainly 
solid waste generated by train passengers, vendors, hawkers etc., during the 
journey and also at stations across the country. The garbage generated in trains 
and stations can be categorized as-   
Chapter 4  Waste Management


Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
54
x Biodegradable- This consists primarily of  left over foods, and paper waste 
like newspapers, disposable cups, food containers etc. and 
x Non-biodegradable- This comprises mainly of plastic waste from mineral 
water bottles, aluminum foil etc. 
The garbage accumulated in the trains and station premises are collected either 
departmentally or through outside agencies. The garbage collected from station is 
to be dumped initially at a dumping yard (Vat) and transported later to a 
centralized dumping yard and/or the notified Municipal dumping yard. 
4.2 Organisational Structure 
No separate Waste Management Cell exists to look after issues relating to solid 
and plastic waste management and there is no proposal for under consideration 
with IR in this regard. At present, waste management and cleaning is being dealt 
by Medical Department in respect of major A1, A and B category stations and by 
Commercial and Transportation Department in respect of other stations.  There is 
a Chief Health Director at the Zonal Level and Senior Divisional Medical Officer 
(H&FW) at divisional level to monitor various health activities. Additional 
Divisional Railway Manager (ADRM) with the officers of Medical, Commercial 
and Engineering department monitor the sanitation of stations as well as colonies.
4.3 Findings of RITES and CPCB 
Study conducted by RITES 58 in December 2009 on the Assessment of plastic 
waste and its management at three major railway stations at Delhi (New Delhi, 
Old Delhi and Hazrat Nizamuddin station) indicated that at railway stations, 
passengers dump the solid waste into dustbins placed for the purpose at platforms. 
Since, no separate dustbins were kept for degradable and non degradable waste at 
railway stations, the solid waste at the first collection point is not segregated. The 
collected waste from the formal system 59 finally goes to the municipal landfill for 
disposal.
However, along with the formal system, an informal system of waste collection 
also exists at the railway stations. Their Study depicted that a major part of value 
added plastic generated at railway stations in De lhi was collected by rag-pickers 
and channeled to local recycling units. Nevertheless, the plastic waste like carry 

58RITES stand for Rail India Technical & Economic Services
59 Formal system refers to cleaning  and garbage disposal through departmental staff or through 
execution of  contract with outside agencies  

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
55
bags and multilayered metalized plastics which are left behind goes to the landfill 
along with municipal solid waste. 
The RITES Report estimated the total quantity of waste generated at these three 
railway stations60 as 23,250 Kg per day. This included generation of plastic waste 
of 6758 Kg per day. The study estimated that the quantity of plastic waste 
generated per passenger at New Delhi Railway station varied from 7.8 gms per 
capita to 9.5 gms per capita. It also estimated the number of dustbins required at 
New Delhi Railway station on the basis of number of passengers and waste 
generated per capita as about 400.  
In a study report61 (March 2012), CPCB commented on the open burning of solid 
waste at Bilaspur station (SECR) and dumping waste unscientifically on the open 
lands available around the station areas in violation of the Solid waste 
(Management and Handling) Rules 2000. CPCB also observed that the plastic 
wastes were not being segregated in almost all the stations test checked. 
4.4  Previous Audit Report 
Audit Report No.6 of 2007 of Comptroller & Auditor General of India (Railways) 
on “Cleanliness and sanitation in IR” highlighted the following issues:- 
x Absence of any mechanism to assess the quantum of waste generated at 
Railway stations and trains. 
x The solid waste generated at trains and stations was not being segregated into 
bio-degradable and non-biodegradable. Further, as most of the catering was 
with IRCTC
62, the contract entered into with them needs to include 
provisions regarding disposal and segregation of waste before its disposal. 
In their Action Taken Note, Ministry of Railways (MR) stated that the garbage 
was being disposed off on a regular basis in a phased manner. Regarding 
segregation of solid wastes, MR stated that IRCTC was advised to include solid 
waste regulations while framing conditions for the catering contracts. 
Public Accounts Committee (PAC) in their eighty third report (2008-09) also 
pointed out deficiencies in the management of waste. PAC observed that while 
making use of plastic, the Ministry of Railways must not lose sight of 

60 New Delhi, Old Delhi and Hazrat Nizamuddin station 
61 Study conducted by CPCB at the instance of Audit for assessment of pollution of air, water and 
noise at 14 major stations over 12 zones. 
62 Indian Railway Catering & Tourism Corporation Limited 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
56
environmental concerns and ensure that applicable rules are adhered to. The 
action taken note of MR was, however, silent regarding use of plastics and plastic 
waste.
The action taken by the Ministry of Railways on the recommendations of PAC are 
indicated below: 
PAC
Observations
PAC Recommendations Action taken by the MR
There was no 
mechanism to 
realistically
assess the 
quantum of 
garbage generated 
at stations and 
segregation of 
wastes before 
disposal.
IR must frame a policy on waste 
management and lay down a 
mechanism whereby the 
quantum of garbage generated 
on stations can be assessed 
realistically so that adequate 
collection, segregation and 
disposal facility along with 
necessary infrastructure could be 
put in place by the authorities. 
Garbage disposal system 
was already in place on 
IR. Its quantification was 
being done before 
tendering for fixing the 
appropriate agency for 
this work. 
Several
shortcomings in 
collection and 
disposal of 
garbage.
Recommended for adequate 
provision of VATs and penal 
provision in the contracts for 
garbage disposal through outside 
agencies and regular review of 
the performance of contractors. 
The Committee also 
recommended transportation of 
garbage to disposal sites by 
resorting to highest professional 
standards. 
Garbage disposal system 
was already in place and 
was being monitored at 
various levels. IRCTC 
had been advised to take 
corrective measures in 
adherence to the 
observations of PAC. 
Up gradation of 
toilet standard in 
trains. 
IR should expedite the process 
of providing Controlled 
Discharge Toilet System/Zero 
Discharge Toilet System in as 
many trains/coaches as possible. 
Field trials were being 
conducted with different 
designs/types of 
environment friendly 
‘Green Toilets’ and 
based on evaluation of 
those trials, a final view 
would be taken. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
57
We examined the initiatives of IR to obtain reasonable assurance whether the 
instructions issued by RB and the commitments of Ministry of Railways actually 
translated into improvement of cleanliness and sanitation standard at stations and 
its impact on passengers and environment at stations. The results of examination 
are discussed in the succeeding sub-paras. 
 4.5  Garbage Disposal  
As per the Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules 2000, 
waste materials should be segregated into bio-degradable and non bio-degradable .
There should be sufficient storage facilities established based upon the quantities 
of waste generated. The storage facilities should be so designed that wastes stored 
are not exposed to open atmosphere and are aesthetically acceptable and user-
friendly.  Bins for storage of biodegradable wastes shall be painted green, those 
for storage of recyclable wastes are painted blue and those for non-bio degradable 
wastes are painted red.
We examined the system of garbage disposal at 212 stations as per sample 
selection over 17 zones and observed that the garbage disposal were being 
handled either departmentally or through outside agencies. Out of 212 stations test 
checked, 123 stations were in the major category. The major stations (A1, A and 
B category) handle considerable passenger traffic; proper disposal of garbage at 
major stations assume importance from the environmental point of view. 
Audit examined the system of garbage disposal in 212 stations 63 over 17 zones 
which revealed the following: 
i. In 64 per cent (135) of the total stations (212) test checked in audit,   
centralized dumping yard was not available within the station premises 
resulting in littering near station premises and along tracks. Further, there 
were instances when transportation of garbage was not being done 
hygienically i.e. covered by tarpaulin. 
ii. In 105 out of 123 major stations, disposal of garbage from stations to 
Municipal/ Corporation notified areas was done by engaging outside 
agencies. The quantity of garbage generated was, however, not assessed 
and incorporated in the agreements entered into with the outside agencies 
in 43 out of 105 agreements.  

63 123 major and 89 minor stations 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
58
iii. In the remaining 18 major stations, disposal of garbage was done in-house. 
The quantity of waste generated was not estimated wherever garbage 
disposal was done departmentally. 
iv. In 16 out of 23 contracts entered into in four zones (SER, WR, CR and 
SR) for disposal of garbage through outside agencies, no separate clause 
was incorporated for segregation of wastes as biodegradable and non-
biodegradable. Even where there was a provision for segregation of waste 
in one contract at Lokamanya Tilak Terminus (CR), the same was not 
followed.  
v. Despite entering into a contract with outside agencies, disposal of garbage 
was being done either by burning or dumping in Railway premises in 37 
stations (all categories) across zones64.
vi. At 54 out of 212 stations test checked over 17 zones where the cleaning 
was done departmentally, besides disposal of garbage in the 
Municipal/Corporation notified area, the Railway Administration resorted 
to disposal by burning, dumping into adjacent canal, low lying areas, 
dumping  on Railway land near the track, thereby causing environmental 
pollution.
Audit conducted a joint 
inspection with the railway 
officials at 212 stations over 17 
zones to assess the impact of the 
existing system of disposal of 
wastes. We observed the 
following: 
x Dustbins were either without lids or were overflowing (NCR, WR, SECR and 
NWR). Dustbins were also found without poly bags or in a broken condition.
x Plastic waste like carry bags and multilayered metalized plastics which are left 
behind at stations go to the landfill without any segregation. 
x Vats provided at important stations like Bangalore and Hubli (SWR) were 
inadequate leading to littering of garbage near the Vat. At Bhusawal station 
(CR) and Erode station (SR) littering and garbage was also noticed outside the 
Vat area.

64 Except NCR, SWR, ECoR, CR and NER where requisite information was not available.  
Overflowing dust bins at Borivali Station, 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
59
x In CR and SR, despite having provision of rag picking works in all the 
contracts of garbage disposal, tracks were found littered with used paper cups 
and other wastes.  
Unscientific Landfill at Tatanagar (A1) 
Railway station, SER 
Burning of garbage, Mangalore Central 
Station, SR
4.5.1 Segregation of wastes   
Plastic packaging is extensively used in the Railways catering services, resulting 
in significant quantity of plastic waste. Plastic, being non-biodegradable in nature, 
remains in environment for several years. Disposing plastic wastes at landfill are 
unsafe since toxic chemicals leach out into the soil and underground water and 
pollute the water bodies. 
Government of India notified the Plastics Manufacture, Sale & Usage Rules, 1999 
and Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) Rules 2011 under Environment 
(Protection) Act 1986 to regulate the manufacture and usage of recycled plastic 
bags and containers.
CPCB conducted a study (December 2009) regarding disposal of plastic waste 
and its management at  three Railway stations viz. Hazrat Nizamuddin, Old Delhi 
and New Delhi in Northern railway.  Study revealed that  IR  are the largest 
source of PET bottles generation (drinking water), food packaging, tumblers, 
multilayer metalized plastic, plastic carry bags and cups. These plastic wastes go 
to the landfill along with other municipal solid waste.  Study also revealed that the 
plastic wastes generated from the Railway stations are not collected, segregated, 
transported, treated, reused and disposed properly.


Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
60
We examined the system of disposal of plastics at 212 stations over 17 zones and 
observed the following: 
x There was no system of segregation of bio-degradable and non-
biodegradable wastes at any station. Plastic wastes go to the landfill 
without any segregation. 
x Rag picking contracts for collection of plastics , pet bottles etc. existed in 
only 69 per cent (85) of the major stations (123). 
x The use of plastic bags within the station premises was not discouraged in 
the zones except in SWR and NCR where the Railway Administration 
advised all catering unit licensees to use eco-friendly, bio-degradable carry 
bags for take away food items from static units. WCR Administration 
stated that they had issued Joint Procedure Order (December 2011) for 
segregation of kitchen waste at stations. On verification in audit, it was 
noticed that no segregation of wastes was being done as instructed through 
JPO. As a result, large number of PET bottles, food packaging, tumblers, 
multilayer metalized plastic, plastic carry bags and cup gets accumulated 
causing environmental problems as these plastic wastes ultimately goes to 
the nominated municipal landfills. 
Thus, we observed that though garbage disposal system was in place, the same 
was not effective enough due to lack of monitoring to ensure compliance with 
statutory obligations and provisions of contracts for proper disposal of garbage, 
deficiencies in infrastructure like ad equate provision of vats, dust bins etc. The 
commitment of Ministry of Railways for assessment and implementation of 
remedial measures to overcome the shortcomings in collection and disposal of 
garbage  remained mostly unfulfilled due to lack of focussed approach towards 
healthy environmental  at station premises. 
4.6 Toilets in Trains  
IR transports about 14 million passengers on 9000 trains every day. Travelling 
passengers generates approximately 3980 MT of human waste per day  that is 
dumped through 'open discharge' type toilets of these coaches and directly goes 
onto the rail tracks across the length and breadth of the country. This pollutes 
environment at station as well as in the areas through which the trains pass. 
Further this also creates problem of hygiene and has resulted in filing of 
numerous legal cases against the Railways. 
In the writ petition (Civil) No.583 of 2003 between Safai Karmachari Andolan Vs 
Union of India, the Supreme Court had directed (January 2011) the Delhi High 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
61
Court to enforce the directions given by them from time to time, where the IR was 
identified for the principal employer for implementation of the provisions of 
Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrine (Prohibition) 
Act, 1993.
It was in this context that IR conceived the idea of introduction of green toilets 65
in trains for keeping clean environment in trains and station premises. 
4.6.1   Initiatives of Indian Railways  
Since 1993, IR has been experimenting with various environment friendly toilets 
including purchase of prototypes from USA/Canada, development of toilets in 
collaboration with Defence Research and Design Establishment (DRDE). In 
November 2003, environment friendly toilet was included as one of the projects 
under ‘Technology Mission for Railway Safety’ (TMRS) and RDSO was 
entrusted with the task of carrying out research and suggest appropriate 
technology for IR. Subsequently, RB constituted a core Group (November 2009) 
to carry out the feasibility studies, do the techno-economic analysis and draw up 
action plan for implementation of environment friendly toilets. 
Globally, there are different models of green / biological toilets in use by various 
Railways.  This includes Vacuum toilets, Controlled Discharge Toilet Systems 
(CDTS), Zero discharge toilets, Aerobic and Anaerobic. IR has conducted trials of 
these various models of toilets. 
Vacuum toilet involves suction of waste using vacuum, retention and discharge 
at terminal. In the Budget speech for 2009-10, Minister for Railways proposed to 
have trials on vacuum toilets conducted. It was decided that this technology 
would be tried out on high end coaches, so that mishandling and pilferage related 
issues remain relatively under control. While vacuum technology is proven and 
effective with reduced water requirements, the technology is highly “intolerant” 
to non-degradable items like plastics. 
 In CDTS technology, waste is discharged after the train acquires a speed of 30 
kmph and thereby eliminates the problem of discharge at the stations and ensures 
that the stations are clean.  In the Integrated Railway Modernization Plan (IRMP) 
2005-10, it was mentioned that the work relating to identifying appropriate 

65  Green Toilets” refer to environ ment friendly toilets which ensure that human excreta is not 
discharged on to the railway tracks, but instead, is collected  in a separate tank fixed below the 
floor of the coach and treated/disposed off suitably.  

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
62
technology for eco friendly toilets would be completed in the initial two years 
(2005-07) and it would be scaled up during the remaining three years of the plan 
(2007-10).
As per the IRMP, CDTS were to be installed in 5000 coaches by March 2010. 
However, due to problems in flushing system and dropping of discharge at more 
or less the same locations, implementation of CDTS was restricted to Rajdhani, 
Shatabdi and Duranto coaches only.  
IR also experimented with Zero discharge toilets which work on the principle of 
solid liquid separation with solid part being stored-evacuated-transferred and 
dumped in to pits for composting and the liquid portion is filtered-treated-
recycled for flushing purposes. Despite RDSO reporting the performance of this 
model as satisfactory, the project was abandoned in September 2009, as part of 
closure of TMRS 66 projects and prototype toilets were remove (March 2010). 
Subsequently, after examining the trial reports, RDSO entered into an agreement 
(January 2011) with M/s Urbane Industries, Chennai for conducting field trials in 
14 coaches at a cost of  ` 2.10 crore. 
In January 2008, IR conducted trial of another model called Aerobic bio-toilets. In
this model, there is a compost chamber beneath the toilet seat where aerobic bio-
degradation occurs naturally. Though performance of this type of toilet is reported 
as satisfactory, no initiative was taken for its mass implementation. 
4.6.2   Recent Developments  
In January 2007, RB placed a development order on M/s Aikon Technology 
Limited for design, manufacture, supply, installation, commissioning, 
maintenance and operation of 80 bio toilets with aerobic bio-digester 67 in 
passenger coaches. So far, eighty of these prototype bio-toilets were procured and 
installed on Prayagraj Express and Rewa Express. During the trial period, the 
supplier carried out a number of modifications. There were, however, several 

66 Technology Mission on Railway Safety  was taken up jointly by  the Indian Institute of 
Technology (IIT), Kanpur, and the Research Designs and Standards Organisation (RDSO), 
Lucknow, the research wing of the ministries of railway and industry. Four mission programmes 
consisting of 14 project s, estimated to cost `ȱ265 million was planned..T he technology mission 
planned to cover traction and rolling stock, track and bridges, signal and communications and fog 
vision instrumentation. 
67 This system involves collection of excreta into a tank and breaking it down within six to seven 
days by enzymes procured by bacterial culture. The liquid is treated with chlorine before disposal. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
63
instances of the effluents not complying with the stipulated test parameters 68.The
performance of the toilet has so far been reported satisfactory. 
Further, the MR signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the 
Defence Research and Design Establishment (DRDE), where under, three models 
have been developed by RDSO and Rail Coach Factory (RCF) in January 2011 
which are under trial over North Central Railway Zone in Bundelkhand Express.
The RB announced recently that it would be setting up a separate unit at Motibagh 
Workshop at a cost of ` 14.20 crore to produce green toilets. The IR also 
announced a plan to install green toilets in 9,000 trains by 2011-13. 
Thus, we observed that despite over two decades of experimenting IR is still 
conducting trials with different types of green toilets and has not been able to 
finalize the technology for 'green toilets'. The time line (as committed in the 
Integrated Railway Modernization Plan 2005-10) for selection of appropriate 
technology by 2007 and large scale implementation by 2010 could not be 
achieved till March 2012. 
While accepting the audit contentions, Ministry of Railways stated that most of 
the available technologies in the market are proven for foreign conditions. 
However, the available technology are not subject to heavy usage as is the case in 
IR; due to very long journey times, choking of toilets due to objects thrown in the 
toilet and use of toilets by non passengers also. MR also stated that so far nine 
trains had been fitted with bi o-toilets. They added that based on the experience 
gained and outcome of the trials, it is planned to progressively induct bio toilets. 
MR committed that all new coaches would be fitted with bio-toilets from 2016-17 
onwards and cover the entire fleet by 2021-22 provided there is no major setback.  
4.6.3   Impact of Non implementation of Green Toilet  
An expert committee reviewing railway safety observed that the toilet droppings 
are one among the primary causes for rail corrosion and resulting rail failure. The 
Anil Kakodkar Committee also observed that human excreta had corroded a 
significant percentage of the country’s total 1.1 lakh kilometers of tracks because 
of the pH content of the toilet discharge and thereby adding to the cost of running 
the massive railway network. 
Test check in Audit revealed premature renewal of rails in down line of Bhadrak-
Kharagpur- Howrah sections (SER), where maximum numbers of overnight trains 

68E-coli, faecal coli form, ph, BOD and COD  

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
64
reach Howrah in early mornings. Further, premature renewal was more in 
comparison of the Up line of the same section as a result of corrosion due to 
falling of night soils on tracks. Premature renewal of 47 Kilometre of rail had 
resulted in an excess expenditure of  ` 35.79 crores during the period 2007-11 
alone.
4.7   Conclusion 
A fundamental principle of waste management is to reduce/reuse the waste 
generated. IR is the single largest carrier of passengers in the country and hence 
generates a large amount of waste including plastic waste. The IR has taken a 
number of initiatives in reusing the waste generated. Attempts were made to reuse 
the waste generated by employing rag-pickers. Waste management in IR was, 
however, primarily confined to disposal of garbage only.  
Despite recommendation of PAC that the IR must not lose sight of environmental 
concerns while using plastic, we observed negligence in adherence to instructions 
relating to adequate and proper collection, segregation and disposal of plastic 
waste at railway stations, especially when these were being done departmentally. 
In most cases, waste was not being segregated into bio-degradable and non- 
biodegradable which was contrary to the requirement of the Municipal Solid 
Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules 2000. Besides, assurance of MR on 
the recommendation of PAC regarding quantification of garbage generated at 
stations was not fulfilled.  
Adequate infrastructure was not av ailable for proper collection of different 
categories of waste. Both the number of dustbins and vats were found to be 
inadequate. Further, the Railway Administration frequently resorted to improper 
disposal of waste by burning, dumping into adjacent canal, low lying areas, and 
/or near the track, causing environmental pollution.  
The monitoring mechanism to enforce effective implementation of garbage 
disposal system was weak resulting in serious health hazards to the stake holders 
apart from contamination of ground water, surface water and affecting ambient air 
quality in and around the station. 
Despite prolonged experiment/trials on different models of environment friendly 
toilets in coaches, IR failed in freezing a suitable option to address the 
environmental hazards due to defecation in toilets in the train. Apart from the 
issue of hygiene, open defecation had also serious safety and financial 
implications due to premature corrosion of rails. IR is also a major violator of the 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 21 of 2012-13 (Railways) 
65
provisions of Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrine 
(Prohibition) Act, 1993.  
4.8   Recommendations 
x A comprehensive waste management policy needs to be framed and a 
separate waste management cell established in the Railway Board for 
dealing with all related issues including minimization of the use of plastics 
within the Railway stations and proper disposal of plastic waste. 
x IR needs to put in place a system of estimation of waste generated in IR and 
also a system for segregation of bio-degradable and non bio-degradable 
waste. Besides making provision for requisite infrastructure, an effective 
monitoring system needs to be put in place for ensuring compliance with the 
statutory regulations issued on the subject from time to time by the 
government and the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee. 
x IR needs to draw up a definite time frame for finalizing eco-friendly toilets 
to prevent environmental degradation at stations, tracks and water bodies en 
route.
               (B.B. PANDIT) 
New Delhi   Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Dated:
              Countersigned 
            (VINOD RAI) 
New Delhi   Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Dated:

Environment Management in Indian Railways
Zone
A-I A B C D E Name location Name Commodity T.No. Name SSE/P.Way name
Secunderabad Nanded Kurnool Town NIL Hi-Tech City Akkannapet Global Coal 
mining Ltd.
Asifabad Jaggayyapet Town Cement, 
Clinker, IW 
Coa
l
12285/86 Duoronto Exp. SSE/P.Way Akot
Vijayawada Kacheguda Machilipatnam Miryaloaguda Rangapuram BPCL, HPCL Cherlapalli Pandaripavani OW Coal 12715/16 Sachkhand 
Exp.
SSE/P.Way Bellampalli
Guntur Dornakal Jn. 12759/60 Charminar 
Exp.
Guntakal Nagarsole 17607/08 Tungabhadra 
Exp.
347 Pass.
RPU no caterization NO NO NO NO
Lucknow Junction Kathgodam Bhatni Badshahnagar Tanakpur Gauri Bazaar Lalkuan Deoria Cement, 
fertilizer
15035 KGM-DLI SSE/P.Way Tikonia
Gorakhpur Basti Kasganj Lucknow City Nautanwa Maghar Baitalpur Basti Iron Ore, coal, 
coke, fly ash
12511 GKP-TVC SSE/P.Way Pilibhit
Deoria Manakpur 55189 GD-BE
11016 GKP-LTT
15007 MUH-LJN
Bilaspur Raigarh Dongargarh NIL Pendra Raod Jairamnagar POL Siding Bhilai Kharisa Cement, 
fertilizer, iren 
ore, coal, 
coke, fl
yash
18239/40 Nagpur Exp. SSE/P.Way BSP
Raipur Durg Akaltara Belha New 
Kusumunda 
Collier
y 
Korba Baraduar 12855/56 Intercity Exp. Raipur
Gondia 8236/35 Pass. Nagpur
18234/33 Narmoda Exp
2851/52 Superfast Exp.
2849/50 Superfast Exp.
2069/70 Jan Shatabdi
405/06 Pass.
401/02 Pass.
1ABAM/2 Pass.
336/5 Pass.
8241/42 Pass.
12853/54 Amarkantak 
Exp.
Tatanagar Kharagpur Chakradharpur Santragachi Muri Salboni TISCO Noamundi Nimpura Cement, Slag, 
Clinker, Coal, 
Cok
e
12841 Coromondal 
Exp
SSE/P.Way Manoharpur
Rourkela Panskura Bishnupur Madpur Bhojudih 
washeries 
served by 
Santaldi
h
SNTD/ADA Jhargram iron ore, 12021 Jan Shatabdi SSE/P.Way Muri
Chakradharpur 58021 Pass.
Bokaro Steel 
City
12871 Ispat Exp
Adra 18001 Kandari Ex p
Ranchi
New Delhi Delhi Shahadara Kurushhetra NIL Ganaur Garhi Harsaru GACL Roopnagar Moga cement, iron 
ore, fertilizer, 
coal, coke fly 
as
h
12236 Rajdhani SSE/P.Way Haridwar
Lucknow Firozpur Cant Faridkot Dhandari 
Kalan
Goraya NFL Bhatinda Jagran 12011 Kalka Shatabdi DehradunNR
SCR
NER
SECR
SER
Stations Goods sheds Section TrainsSidings

Environment Management in Indian Railways
Varanasi Barabanki Abohar 12925 Pashchim Exp Jammu Tawi
Moradabad 19105 ADI mail UHP
Rajpura 305 Pass.
Mumbai CST Bhusawal Pandhar pur Ambernat h Igatpuri Anka i TATA TPS Trombay Cement NGSM 12105/06 Vidarbha Exp SSE/P.Way Lonawala
Pune Ballarshah Sewagram Shivajinagar Roha Hotgi TTPS Coal, Iron, Stee l Wani goods 12071/72 Jan Shatabdi SEE/P.Way Thane
HPCL Loni 11327/28 Pass.
12123/24 Deccan Queen
12139/40 Nagpur 
Sevagram Exp.
CNB FTP PHD NIL BDL TBT Thermal 
Power House
IOC-BAD Jhansi Iron, Coal, Fl y
ash
11124 Chhapra Exp. SSE/P.Way ALD
Jhansi LAR Babina KSV Bad Mathura 12033 Shatabdi SSE/P.Way MBA
AGC 361/51901 Pass.
12625 Kerala Exp
14215 pass.
Jaipur Ajmer Nagour NIL Devpura Rana Pratap 
Nagar
Shree Cement BNGM Kanakpura 19708 Exp. SSE/P.Way Rana pratap Ngr.
Jodhpur Bikaner Hanumangarh Karjoda Jalore Suratgarh 
Thermal 
Powe
r
Merta Road 12988 Exp. SSE/P.Way Jodhpur
Alwer 14854/64 Exp.
Jaisalmer 12240 Exp.
15610 Exp.
Jabalpur Katni Gangapur City NIL Ashoknagar Niwar loose 
commodity
Bhitoni Kachhpura cement, 
fertilizer, iron 
ore, coal, coke 
fl
y ash
12061 Exp. SSE/P.Way Ramganj mandi
Bhopal Itarsi Hindan City Bundi ACC Lakhery Kota 12189 Exp. SSE/P.Wa y Beohari
Kota 11466 Exp.
12181 Ex p.
11705 Exp.
Guwahati Rangiya BPRD NIL KYQ CGS Bharat 
Petroleum
NJP NJP Cement 12067/68 Jan Shatabdi SSE/P.Way APDJ-SDUJ
New Jalpaiguri New Coch Bihar SGUJ AUB Jhaua Tirap Tikok Ledo RNY Coal 12505/06 NE Exp. SSE/P.Way GHY-GLPT-
NBQ
Tinsukia 12509/10 Ghy-Banga 
Exp
KIR 12501/02 Sampark 
Kranti
DMV 55617/18 Ghy-NBQ 
pass.
Howrah Naihati Bandel Barrackpure Sainthia Khanna Electro Steel 
Casting
Sodepore Chitpur 12314 Sealdah Raj SSE/P.Way Dum Dum
Sealdah Bardhawan Shrirampur Andal Pandavaswar IOC Bud ge Budge New Alipore 12304 Purva Exp. SSE/P.Way Bardhman
Malda Town 12023 Jan Shatabdi
Assansol 13008 Tofan Exp
53178 Lalgola pas
Chennai Central Erode Rameswaram Tiruvallikeni Ariyalur Coimbatore 
North
Ennore Port 
Ltd
Attipattu Mangalore Central bunder goods 
shed
12615/16 Grand Trank 
Exp
SSE/P.Way Palghat
Coimbatore jn. Mangalore 
Central
Guruvayoor Chennai 
Beach
Sivakasi Chidambaram Oil siding at Irumpanam Chennai Salt cotaurs 12007/08 Shatabdi SEE/P.Way MAS
Ernakulam 
Town
12671/72 Nilgiri Exp.
Tiruchchirappal 12635/36 Vaigai Exp.
66021/22 Pass.
WCR
NFR
ER
SR
CR
NCR
NWR

Environment Management in Indian Railways
Vishakhapatnam BZM RGDA NIL Chhatterpur Barang VSKP Iron Ore Sukinda Road cement, 
fertilizer, iron 
ore, coal, coke 
fl
y ash
12421/22 Rajdhani SSE/tunnel AKMR
Bhubaneawar KUR Bobbili Skota ADB Coa l 12073/4 Jan Shatabdi SSE/Bridge KUR
Sambalpur 209/210 puri-Talsher 
8010/12 puri-oakha exp.
18411/12 Intercity Exp.
Bangalore City Mysore Jn. Bijapur NIL Tiptur Marikuppam Ranjit Pura Iron Ore Sasalu iron ore 12627 NDLS-
Bangalore Exp
SSE/P.Way Subramanya Road
Jaswant Pur Vascodigama Husan Jn. Ranibennur Alnavar Husan Petroleum Haberi Chemicals an d
fertilizer
12028 SBC-MAS 
Exp
56229 Mysore - SBC 
pass.
12779 VSDto NZM
12295 SBC-PNBE 
Exp
Bandra Terminus Valsad Billimora Jn. Borivali Umbergaon Atul GR Siding 
Bajwa
Badodara Mumbai Central Jogeshwari 
AT
12953 Rajdhani SSE/P.Way Bhavnagarpara
Ratlam Bharuc h Dahod Dahanu road Maninagar Sabarmati GEB Siding Ahmedabad Ahmedabad Kankaria 12009 Shatabdi SSE/P.Way Ahmedabad
12933 Karnavati Exp
12925 Pashchim Exp
19131 Kutch Ex p
Patna Jn. Dhanbad Patna Sahib NIL Chandrapur Khusurupur Kusunda Barauni cement, 
fertilizer, iron 
ore, etc
.
2309/10 Rajdhani SEE/P.Way Kiul-JAJ
Muzaffarpur Mikama BKP Semapur Gauchari Datrasgarh new KP 2355/56 RJPB MFP-RX L
Darbhanga Mughal sarai Naugachia Jahanabad Purnea Cour 2401/02 Magadh Exp BJU-KIR
Samastipur Mansi Rafiganj Sindri 2391/92 Shramjivi Exp.
KGG Gomoh 2553/54 Vaishali Exp
Sagauli
ECR
ECOR
SWR
WR