PREFACE

This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India contains the results of the
performance audit of the activities of Corporate
Social Responsibility undertaken by Coal India
Limited during the period from April 2004 to
March 2010.

i il Audit

Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



Executive Summary

Coal India Limited (CIL) is one of the largest coal producing companies in the world with a total
production of 431.32 million metric tonnes of coal in 2010-11. CIL has eight wholly owned
subsidiaries.’ As of March 31, 2011, it operated 470 mines in 21 major coalfields across eight
states in India, including 164 open cast mines, 275 underground mines and 31 mixed mines
(includes both open cast and underground mines).

Coal mining raises serious environmental and social concerns, including soil erosion, dust, noise
and water pollution, and impact on local biodiversity. The environmental and social issues
associated with coal exploration and production such as displacement are of special nature as
the coal reserves are located in river basins such as Damodar, Barakar, Sone, Wardha,
Bramhani, Mahanandi, etc. which are rich in forest cover and are habitats of precious wildlife
and indigenous tribal communities. CIL and its subsidiaries being profit making companies have
sufficient resources to discharge its responsibilities towards environment management,
resettlement and rehabilitation of displaced persons, community and peripheral development.

The performance audit of the CIL and its subsidiaries was conducted with a view to assess
whether the companies were able to fulfill their corporate social responsibilities (CSR) in an
effective and efficient manner towards environmental protection, safety requirement,
occupational health of the workers and community and peripheral development. A total of 18
open cast mines, eight underground mines and four washeries in seven coal producing
subsidiaries, selected on random sampling; were reviewed in audit.

Significant audit observations are discussed below.

CSR Policy Framework:

CIL has adopted a comprehensive CSR policy with effect from December 2009. However, to reap
the benefits of the policy, the company needs to implement it effectively by ensuring adequate
allocation of funds and setting up measurable targets. Allocation of funds for community and
peripheral development was below the norms of € one per tonne of coal produced in five out of
seven coal producing subsidiaries. In fact, the budget allocation of ~ 211.80 crore for
community and peripheral development during the period 2004-10 was only 0.7 per cent of the
aggregate net profit of ¥ 31,062.36 crore of CIL over the same period. Even the allocated
amount was not fully utilized as the utilisation of funds (%152.96 crore) during the period 2004-
10 fell short of budgeted allocation (¥ 211.80 crore) in all the subsidiaries and was least in MCL
(46 per cent) followed by NCL (53 per cent) and CCL (65 per cent) thus, allowing their CSR
activities to remain unfulfilled. The companies were not carrying out any need assessment
survey in the periphery to assess the requirements of the society and were also not assessing the
impact of their CSR activities on the society.

Environmental Issues:

Coal is extracted predominantly through open cast mining which disfigures the countryside and
tends to pollute the atmosphere within the locality. On the other hand, land subsidence may

‘Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL), Central Coalfields Limited (CCL), Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited (CMPDIL), Eastern Coalfields Limited (FCL),

‘Mahanaai Coalfields Limited (MCL), Northern Coalfields Limited (NCL), South Eastern Coalfields Limited (SECL) and Western Coalfields Limited (WCL). All the
subsidiaries except CMPDIL produce coal.

| Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



occur as a result of underground mining, if appropriate precautionary measures are not taken.
Consequently, protection of environment in terms of reclamation of land, dust suppression,
treatment of effluent and sewage, disposal of slurry and rejects and impact on ground water
level due to mining assumes great significance.

Audit observed that there was a backlog in backfilling and technical reclamation of 12,643
hectare land in seven subsidiaries of the Company as on 31 March, 2010. The backlog
increased in five out of seven coal producing subsidiaries.

Out of 18 open cast mines covered in Audit; topsoil was found preserved only in five
mines, density of tree plantation was found satisfactory (more than 2500 plants per
hectare) in only eight mines;

There was no effluent treatment plant in two mines and four mines did not have sewage
treatment plant. Out of 10 areas in Northern Coalfields Limited, rainwater harvesting had
started in only four areas. Similarly, Mahanadi Coalfields Limited had started roof top rain
water harvesting in residential and non-residential buildings in four open cast projects.
Thus, only a handful of projects had the rain water harvesting arrangement.

Out of 239 mines in CIL, which existed prior to 1994, 48 open cast mines, 170 underground
mines and 21 combined mines were found to be working without environmental
clearance.

Environment Management System enables an organisation to evaluate and continually
improve its environmental performance and operating efficiency. As of March 2011 only
71 out of total 629 units of CIL had got Environment Management System certification i.e.
ISO 14001 accreditation.

In essence, CIL and its subsidiaries have taken initiatives in areas impacting environment.
However, activities like backfilling, land reclamation, preservation of topsoil and
plantation of trees and other environmental issues need to be identified so that CIL's vision
of increasing coal production from 324 million tonnes in 2004-05 to 782 million tonnes in
2024-25 is achieved. The Company was also lagging behind in taking prior environment
clearance for mines. The Company should take early action to construct Effluent
Treatment Plant at the earliest and the subsidiaries should make continuous efforts to
keep the level of the quality of effluent in the water discharged from the mines within the
norm to avoid adverse effect of these chemicals.

Safety Issues

Mine safety including safety in stacking of overburden is a significant safety issue. In 10
out of 18 open cast mines selected in sample, there were cases of violation of safety
parameters such as excess height and gradient of overburden dumps.

Though the number of fatal accidents, number of fatalities and number of serious
accidents showed decreasing trend but it was not able to achieve the zero harm target.

Initial and periodical medical examinations were being done for the company employees.
However, only 1.58 per cent to 7 per cent of contractors' employees underwent medical
examination, although mandatory.

रस Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



This performance audit report contains seven recommendations to help the companies to
improve their performance in discharge of corporate social responsibilities. These were
accepted by Ministry of Coal, Government of India.

Significant recommendations are:

>

>

CIL and its subsidiaries should evolve a mechanism to set up measurable targets with
timeline so that performance on CSR activities can be monitored effectively.

CIL and its subsidiaries should plan and spend constructively on community and
peripheral development after assessing the needs of the society.

Topsoil should be preserved at earmarked sites without violating guidelines of Ministry
of Environment and Forests and proper record of its storage and use should be
maintained.

In order to arrest depletion of ground water level as a result of coal mining, subsidiaries
may take up rainwater harvesting.

Independent safety audit of every mine should invariably be conducted at a frequency of
two years as suggested by the safety committee of CIL.

All subsidiaries may maintain computerized database of medical history of employees
as is being done in NCL for effective medical care.

il Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



; |

Chapter 1
Introduction

@ Corporate Social Responsibility

Public sector enterprises have legal responsibilities to maximize shareholder profits; but a shift in
corporate mindset led by social expectations and pressure is causing business leaders to rethink
their responsibilities with respect to corporate performance measured in terms of economic
impact, social impact and environmental impact-commonly called the Triple Bottom line.

The Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) is seen as a concept in which companies voluntarily
integrate social and environmental concerns into their operations. The idea of being a socially
responsible company means doing more than comply with the law by taking concrete measures
to address environmental and social concerns. Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) is a concept
whereby organisations serve the interests of society by taking responsibility for the impact of
their activities on customers, employees, shareholders, communities and the environment in all
aspects of their operations.

Coal is the only natural resource and fossil fuel available in abundance in India. The major
environmental challenges encountering the coal industry are impacts of mine fires, dust
suppression and control particularly haul road dust consolidation, treatment of mine waters
containing heavy metals/acid mine drainage, restoration of water table and quality of ground and
surface water, augmentation of pumped out mine water for drinking purpose, reclamation of
mined out areas with pre-determined land use patterns conducive to the local populations etc.
The problem of mining-induced displacement and resettlement (MIDR) poses major risks to
societal sustainability.

Coal mining and the nature of operations and working conditions involved raise serious
environmental and social concerns. The environmental and social issues such as displacement
are of special nature as the coal reserves are located in river basins such as Damodar, Barakar,
Sone, Wardha, Bramhani, Mahanandi, etc. which are rich in forest cover and are habitats of
precious wildlife and indigenous tribal communities. Mining operations damage the
environment and ecology to an unacceptable degree, unless carefully planned and controlled.
Therefore, there is a need for balance between mining and environmental requirements.
Further, the problem of mining-induced displacement and resettlement poses major risks to
social sustainability. Therefore, the coal mining companies have a special responsibility
towards environment protection and social development.

Coal India Limited and its subsidiaries (Company), being coal mining companies are expected to
bear significant responsibilities towards environment management, resettlement and
rehabilitation of displaced persons, community and peripheral development and safety and
welfare of its employees.

| Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



@ Company Profile

Coal India Limited (CIL) a 'Navratna' Public Sector Undertaking under Ministry of Coal,
Government of India produces non-coking coal and coking coal of various grades for diverse
applications. As of March 31, 2011, it operated 470 mines in 21 major coalfields across eight
states in India, including 164 open cast mines, 275 underground mines and 31 mixed mines
(includes both open cast and underground mines). CIL is one of the largest coal producing
companies in the world with a total production of 431.32 million metrictonnes during 2010-11.
ClLhas eight wholly owned subsidiaries’.

During the year 2010-11, CIL recorded gross sales of रैं 60,245.21 crore with profit after tax of
% 10,867.35 crore. Being a profit making company; CIL has sufficient resources to discharge its
responsibilities towards environment, safety and social development.

@® Organisational Setup

The Board of Directors of CIL consists of five functional directors including the Chairman.
Subsidiaries have their own board of directors comprising of the Chairman cum Managing
Director (CMD) and other directors. Subsidiaries are divided into administrative areas headed by
General Managers (GMs), comprising of one or more projects, headed by Project Officers.

A Corporate Social Responsibility wing, looking after the community and periphery
development, employees' welfare and other welfare activities, functions under the Director
(Personnel) in ClLas also in the subsidiaries.

"Bharat Coking Coal Limited (8CCL), Central Coalfields Limited (CCL), Central Mine Planning and Design institute Limited (CMPDIL), Eastern Coalfields Limited (ECL),
‘Mahanadi Coalfields Limited (MCU), Northern Coalfields Limited (NCL), South Eastern Coalfields Limited (SECL) and Western Coalfields Limited (WCL). All the
subsidiaries except CMPDIL produce coal.

——— Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



a,

Chapter 2
Audit Framework

@ Scope of Audit

Performance audit of activities under Corporate Social Responsibility in CIL and its subsidiaries
was undertaken for the period 2004-05 to 2009-10 to review these activities with reference to
impact on the environment, safety in mining, health care of workers and community and
peripheral development. These issues are of great significance to areas of operations of CIL and
the adjoining areas, given the nature of mining operations and the working conditions involved.
For this purpose, the corporate offices of CIL and its subsidiaries and 18 open cast mines, eight
underground mines and four washeries in seven coal producing subsidiaries, viz., BCCL, CCL, ECL,
MCL, NCL, SECL and WCL, were reviewed in audit. The details of the sample selected and
selection criteria are given in Annexure - 1.

@ Audit Objectives

The objectives of the performance audit were to assess whether

>

>

the companies have formulated CSR policy which adequately addresses CSR concerns
and whether these have provided adequate resources for CSR activities;

adequate measures were taken by CIL and its subsidiaries to minimize adverse impact on
the environmentin course of mining;

safety practices prevailing in the companies conform to the norms/standards, rules
prescribed; and

the companies have been able to fulfill their social responsibility in an effective and
efficient manner towards health care to workers, community and peripheral
development, rehabilitation and resettlement.

@ Audit Criteria

The main criteria used by audit to assess the performance of the companies were as follows:

>
>
>
>

Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF) guidelines,

Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS) guidelines,

CSR policy of CIL,

Conditions imposed by MoEF/DGMS in respect of individual projects.

The details have been provided in the Annexure- 2

| Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



@ Audit Methodology

Audit examined the relevant records based on which preliminary observations were issued to the
Management and the replies of the Management wherever received, were considered while
drawing audit conclusions which have been discussed in the subsequent chapters. An exit
conference was held in December, 2010 to discuss the audit findings with the Management and
the report was finalized and issued to the Ministry of Coal, Government of India in January 2011.
The response of the Ministry of Coal was received in May, 2011 and _ has been appropriately
incorporated while finalising this report.

@ Acknowledgement

Audit acknowledges the active cooperation and assistance provided by ClL and its subsidiaries at
alllevels of management which facilitated the completion of this performance audit.

@ Audit Findings

Audit findings are discussed in four chapters as detailed below:
> Chapter 3: includes issues relating to CSR policy and implementation set up

> Chapter 4: highlights environmental concerns regarding backfilling and reclamation
of land, afforestation, mine closure plan, dust suppression measures,
disposal of slurry and rejects etc.

> Chapter 5: flags the issues of employees safety, fatal accidents, stowing in
underground mines, shortage of safety equipments etc.

> Chapter 6: discusses the issues of social development, rehabilitation and
resettlement, absence of need assessment/ survey of society for planning
CSR activities and impact assessment of CSR activities.

रस लत Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



Chapter 3
Corporate Social
Responsibility Policy Framework

@ CSR Policy

A defined Corporate Social Responsibility policy
addressing the following issues was formulated by CiL only

Each business entity is expe:

in December 2009: to formulate a CSR Policy to guid:
its strategic planning and provide
> environment, en है 4 a हि
a roadmap for its CSR initiatives,
> healthcare, which should be an integral part
> — education, of overall business policy and
> water supply including drinking water, Grae
>  socialempowerment, village electricity, solar light, BRSECSE) initiatives ashogle

include identification of
projects/ activities, setting
However, the Company did not set any measurable targets | measurable physical targets with
for the extent of activities proposed to be taken up गाव timeframes, organisational
schedule of completion under each of these sub-heads. mechanism and responsibilities

sports and culture

to implement CSR initiatives,

The Management stated (December 2010) that a separate
head of account is being created to book all expenditure get and monitoring setup.
related to CSR activities that would help in monitoring the

performance under CSR activities.

Audit is of the opinion that setting up of measurable targets in addition to accounting under
separate heads would serve as an effective tool for monitoring the performance of CSR
activities.

@ CSR budget and zation

Before adoption of the CSR policy in December 2009, CIL was having a policy to allocate ¥ one per
tonne of the coal produced from the year 2006-07 towards community and peripheral
development. This amount is utilized for social development and so far as environment and
safety issues are concerned, the resources were provided from the overall budget.

Audit observed that allocation of funds for community and peripheral development was below
the norm of % one per tonne of coal produced in five subsidiaries (BCCL, NCL, MCL, WCL and
SECL) out of a total of seven subsidiaries for the period 2006-07 to 2009-10 as detailed in the
graph below:

| Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited


Allocation of Budget for CSR

4000

3500

3000
= 2500
x
हैं. 2000
5 1500
* 1000

= व न

0 |
BccL CCL ECL NCL MCL. SECL WCL

हा Budget Required as Per Policy M™® Actual Budget

Further, as per CSR policy (December 2009), the fund for the CSR in each subsidiary from the
year 2010-11 is to be allocated annually to the tune of five per cent of the retained earnings of
the previous year subject to a minimum of & five per tonne of coal production of the previous
year. Out of the total fund allocated for CSR activities, 60 per cent would be allocated for CSR
activities to be carried out in the vicinity of coalfield and balance 40 per cent would be allocated
for carrying out CSR activities by the subsidiary company in the State to which the subsidiary
company belongs.

For funding against CSR activities to be executed by CIL (the Holding Company), 2.5 per cent of
retained profit of the last year of CIL would be allocated for execution of CSR activities in the
State which is not covered by the subsidiary company and in addition would also support the
loss making subsidiaries.

Audit while acknowledging the enhancement of CSR allocation is of the opinion that the
Company should ensure constructive spending of the allocated funds.

@ Separate Fund for CSR activities

A separate head of account for CSR fund has been created from the year 2010-11 and allocation
of CSR budgetis transferred to this fund.

Audit noticed that the unspent CSR fund available under the head does not lapse and is being
accumulated.

रस Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



@ CSR Implementation set up

After adoption of the CSR policy in December 2009, the Company has now a defined system of
implementation and monitoring of CSR activities.

For implementation of CSR activities, a CSR committee has been constituted at CIL, subsidiary
Headquarters and Area Level to interact with the concerned State Officials, to confirm the areas
for undertaking activities under CSR and to ensure avoidance of duplicity of the job.

For monitoring of CSR activities, a CSR cell was framed under Welfare department at CIL
corporate level and subsidiary level.

In sum, the CSR policy of CIL is comprehensive in coverage and scope and the funding
mechanism and implementation setup is also elaborate. A clear cut CSR policy was adopted in
December 2009 and the company now needs to implement it effectively by ensuring adequate
allocation of funds and setting up measurable targets.

Recommendation #1
CIL and its subsidiaries should evolve a mechanism to set up measurable targets with

timeline so that performance on CSR activities can be monitored effectively.

The Ministry while accepting the recommendation stated (May 2011) that the CSR Policy of CIL
has been introduced from year 2010-11 itself. CSR fund of five per cent of the retained
earnings of the last year subject to minimum of ® five per tonne of coal production has been
allocated for the same. In all the subsidiaries of CIL and its Headquarters, CSR Committees
have been constituted which are monitoring the achievements and targets of the CSR
activities. Moreover, action is under process for engagement of an independent agency for
guiding the company in designing a suitable reporting framework.

| Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited


Chapter 4
Environmental Issues

@ Coal Mining and Environment

Coal can be extracted through open cast or underground mining. In open cast mining, the
overburden i.e. the soil layers above the coal layers, are removed to extract coal. In underground
mining, the coal is extracted by means of vertical and inclined shafts. Extraction by open cast
mining is more productive and less expensive than underground mining. Open cast mining is the

predominant mode of coal mining
worldwide as also in CIL, but it is less

environmental friendly. It disfiguresthe = a: . a
countryside and the surface activities ft : ,

tend to pollute the atmosphere within
the locality. On the other hand, land
subsidence may occur as a result of
underground mining, if appropriate
precautionary measures are not taken.
Consequently, protection of
environment in terms of reclamation of
land assumes great significance.
Besides, there are other significant

environmental issues such as dust suppression, treatment of effluent and sewage, disposal of
slurry and rejects and impact on ground water level.

@ Environment Management System

Environmental management system (EMS) refers to the management of an organisation's
environmental programs in a comprehensive, systematic, planned and documented manner. It
includes the organisational structure, planning and resources for developing, implementing and
maintaining policy for environmental protection.

Audit observed that CIL and its subsidiaries have about 470 mines and 159 washeries/
hospitals/workshops spread over eight States and has initiated action for EMS certification i.e.
150:14001 in all its mines and washeries and other units. During the year 2009-10, only 15
projects got ISO: 14001 certification which includes opencast projects, workshops, hospitals and
washeries. However, only 47units of the Company got ISO certification as of March 2010.

The Management in its reply stated (May 2011) that till March 2011, 71 units have obtained ISO
14001 certification.

| Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited


In brief, the Company should take early action to get EMS certification for the remaining units
as EMS enables an organisation to evaluate and continually improve its environmental
performance and operating efficiency.

[4.3] Environment Ma

The mining operations like drilling, blasting, extraction, transportation, crushing and other
associated activities are carried out in underground and opencast mines. Mining operations
damage the environment and ecology to an unacceptable degree, unless carefully planned and
controlled. There is a need for balance between mining and environmental requirements.
Therefore, it is necessary to have Environment Management Plan (EMP) in place to address the
environmental concern.

॥ and Monitoring set up

Audit noticed that the Company was addressing the environmental issues through the MoUs
signed with the Government of India and with its subsidiaries.

The Company has an Environment Management Division functioning at its Headquarters and
Subsidiary headquarters. The Company has an ‘Environment Policy’ approved in 1995 with
defined objectives, principles, strategies and thrust areas. However, the policy was under
modification due to revision in various statutes and recent environment concerns. The
environment monitoring agency of the company i.e. CMPDIL conducts fortnightly examination
of samples in respect of air, water and noise pollution in different mines of its subsidiaries
through its regional offices. Reports are compiled every quarter and submitted to the respective
subsidiaries for submission to the respective State Pollution Control Boards.

Audit, however, observed that no mechanism exists at CIL headquarters to monitor the
deviations reported in these quarterly reports from the subsi ies so that remedial action
required to be taken by the latter could be taken timely.

@ En mental clearance

As per MoEF notification of 14 September 2006, prior environmental clearance is required for all
projects except those listed in Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) notification 1994 unless
their present status of lease area and/or production was changed in comparison to pre-1994
status.

Audit observed that out of 18 sample test checked open cast mines (OCM) and eight
underground mines (UGM), six’ mines were running without environmental clearance. In all,
239 mines in seven coal producing subsidiaries, which existed prior to 1994, 48° opencast, 170°
underground and 21 combined opencast and underground mines were working without
environmental clearance, although their status had changed in comparison to pre-1994 status.

*Ghanoodih 068 Begunia UGM of 8८८५ Urimari OCP and Jarangdih OCP of CCL; Rajpura
OCP and Lakhimata UGM of ECL (OCP-open cast pit; UGM-underground mine)

*BCCL (21), CCL(9), ECL5), SECL (7), MLC(6)

“BCCL(65), CCL (13), ECL (82), MCL (4), SECL(6)

——— Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



Further, MoEF stipulated (February 2002) that prior environmental clearance should be
obtained from them for increasing production above the existing approved levels in case of
mines existing prior to 1994.

Audit observed that out of 18 sample open cast and eight underground mines, there was
increased production to the tune of 45.70 MMT during April 2002 to March 2010 in 10 mines’
(38.46 per cent) for periods ranging from one to six years, but no prior environmental
clearance was obtained.

The Management stated (May 2011) that in order to meet the energy needs of the country,
including crisis situations in power plants, and to make up the shortfall in production in some
collieries, the production in some collieries have to be increased. Further, in respect of 62 mines,
environment clearance had been applied for increased production and renewal.

The fact however, remains that mining activities without prior environmental clearance were
in total violation of the instructions of the MoEF.

@ Backfilli

Mining operations result in voids due to extraction of coal. Land reclamation is necessary to
restore the mined area to an acceptable state of physical, chemical and biological quality of land
and water regimes which get disturbed by mining. Land reclamation involves backfilling (filling
the pit with extracted material), technical reclamation (stabilization of backfilled area against
hazards of wind, water and other natural disturbances through bull-dozing, etc.), followed by
biological reclamation (restoration of biological productivity of reclaimed land).

Technical Reclamation of

re)

The total land to be reclaimed in all the seven subsidiaries as on 31 March 2010 was 12,643
hectare. The status of backlog in land reclamation in different subsidiaries as on 31 March 2010 is
givenin the graph below:

Backlog in reclamation in subsidiaires as on 31 March
2010 (in hectare)
2
8
यु
मे कई |
q a
5 2
a 8
: x : 7 हु
a
का .. वा मी मी मी मी
BCCL प्‌ ECL MCL NCL SECL WCL

“Jarangdih OCP and Urimari OCP of CCL, Nigahi OCP of NCL, Gevra OCR. Rajnagar RO UGM and
Bagdewa UGM of SECL, Umrer OCP, Ghorawari OCP, Satpura Il UGM and Sasti UGM of WCL

ee छ Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



=

Audit observed that the backlog in backfilling and technical reclamation of land had increased on
31 March 2010 as compared to the previous years in respect of five subsidiaries, viz., BCCL, ECL,
MCL, SECL and WCL and the same had decreased in two subsidiaries, namely CCL and NCL. The
rate of increase in the backlog was highest in the case of WCL. The subsidiary-wise details are
given in Annexure - 3.

The Management stated (May 2011) that due to severe constraints in land acquisition, dumping
of excavated over burden in the decoaled void is always preferable to CIL and cost effective
option for mine operators. But in-spite of backfilling being cost effective option, it is not possible
to fill the void completely as there is further potential of coal extraction in dip —side and in case of
complete filling, it will result in huge cost due to re-handling of filled up material.

The fact remains that backlog in backfilling and technical reclamation of land had increased as
compared to previous year. Land reclamation is necessary to restore the mined area to an
acceptable state of physical, chemical and biological quality of land and water regimes.

@ Biological Reclama‘ of Land

Biological reclamation of land through
conscious plantation is required after
physical reclamation of land to restore the
natural flora and fauna and the productivity
of reclaimed land. Topsoil has to be
necessarily preserved for biological
reclamation of land.

—— Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



4.6.1 Preservation _ बाबा

Topsoil is the uppermost layer of soil, usually the top 2 to 8 inches. It has the highest
concentration of organic matter and micro-organisms and this is where most of the
earth's biological activity occurs. It takes approximately 1000 years for one inch of
topsoil deposit to be formed. Given the importance of topsoil, MoEF has stipulated that
top soil should be stacked at earmarked sites with adequate measures and should be
used for reclamation and rehabilitation of mined out areas.

Inasample of 18 open cast mines, Audit observed that:

>

4.6.2

Topsoil was preserved separately in five open cast mines’, and in the remaining 13 open
cast mines’, Management claimed that the topsoil removed was concurrently used for
biological reclamation.

No record was maintained for generation and utilization of topsoil in support of the
contention of the Management. Moreover, concurrent use of topsoil violates MoEF
guidelines and may defeat the objectives of preservation of topsoil and its use for
biological reclamation of land.

The Management stated (May 2011) that specific instructions have been issued to the
respective subsidiaries for maintaining proper records of top soil storage and its re-use
which is now being complied with.

Tree Plantation

Tree plantation mitigates the adverse effects of mining operations and protects the
environment. Tree plantation is done by the concerned State forest agencies after
receiving payments from the coal subsidiaries. Support and protection to the trees
planted are provided by the State forest agencies during the first three years, after
which these are handed over to the respective subsidiaries.

“Ghanoodih (BCCL), Rajmahal{ECL), Sonepur Bazari(ECL), Chhal (SECL) and Piperwar (CCL)

Jagannath, Lajkura and Samaleshwari of MCL, Amlohri and Nigahi of NCL, Jamuna and Gevra
of SECL, Ghorawari and Umrer of WCL, Block-ll of 8८६, Urimari and Jarangai of CCl ana

ii of ECL

Performance Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



The subsidiaries had planted 131.48 lakh trees and incurred expenditure of %.72.76 crore during
the year 2004-05 to 2009-10. The subsidiary-wise break-up of plantation done is shown in graph
below:

Tree Planted in subsidiaires during 2004-05 to 2009-10

©
+

%
&
N
o हैं
L ECL oM

BCCL CCl

CL NCL SECL WCL

Audit observed that

>  Inasample of 18 open cast mines, the density of plantation was satisfactory (more than
2500 plants per hectare norms fixed by MoEF) in eight open cast mines, but below the
norms in another eight open cast mines. In the remaining two mines (Ghanoodih of BCCL
and Umrer of WCL), negligible plantation was done. The details are given in Annexure -4.

The Management stated (May 2011) that the densities of the plantation on these mines are
found to be less, since plantation in these mines were done earlier and that time the norms
were 1600 plants per hectare.

> No system existed for further monitoring and protection of the trees once the trees were
taken over from the State forest agencies. Moreover, the period of three years when
support and protection to the saplings was provided by the state forest agencies, was
insufficient as the trees were still very young.

The Management agreed with Audit that the contract period of maintenance of saplings by
the State forest agencies should be increased to five years.

छः Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



@

Mining is only an intermediary use of land and mines have to be closed due to exhaustion of
mineable deposit or due to other reasons like policy changes, uneconomic productivity,
environment and safety considerations. Closure of mines has to be prompt to ensure speedy
reclamation of land for which advance planning action is required. Accordingly, environmental
clearance (EC) conditions stipulate that a final mine closure plan along with details of corpus fund
shall be submitted to MoEF for approval, five years in advance of final mine closure.

Out of 18 open cast mines and eight underground mines selected in the sample, three mines viz.,
Rajpura open cast mine of ECL, Jamuna open cast mine of SECL and Satpura-Il underground mine
of WCL were to be closed within next two to four years as the mineable reserve was due to be
exhausted. Audit observed that no mine closure plan had been prepared for any of these three
mines.

The Management stated (May 2011) that mine closure plan has been prepared for Rajpur open
cast mine and Satpura II. CMPDIL has already taken up the job of preparation of mine closure
plans. During 2010-11, mine closure plans for 26 mines have been prepared and sent to the
subsidiaries and mine closure plans for 69 mines are under preparation.

७

(a) Respirable particulate Matter (RPM)

As per the Notification issued by Central ‘
Pollution Control Board (CPCB) the, norm for RPM is the dust particulates having है
RPM for existing and old coal field/ mines on 24 diameter less than 10 um (micron)
hourly basis is 300 microgram / cubic meter and they are small enough to be
(ug/m3) for industrial area and 100 pg/m3_ for inhaled and may enter deep into
residential area. respiratory tract and pulmonary
system of human beings. RPM
because of its small size poses health
hazard due to easy inhalation and
deep penetration in respiratory
system during breathing. Mostly
> In CCL, RPM was above the norm on 34 diseases of lungs like asthma,
occasions during 2008-09 and on 15 bronchitis, allergic disorders etc. are

The air quality data for the year 2008-09 and
2009-10 in respect of three subsidiaries i.e. CCL,
BCCL and ECL was examined in selected locations
and we observed that:

occasions during 2009-10. caused by inhalation of respirable
>  RPMlevelin BCCLwas within norms during dust. y
the year 2008-09 and 2009-10. = कु

> In ECL it was within norm during 2008-09 but during 2009-10 it was exceeding the norm
onnine occasions only in residential area.

ee Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



(b) Suspended Particulate Matter (SPM)

SPM are the particulate having diameter less than 100 jum that tend to remain suspended in
the atmosphere for a longer period of time. The atmospheric suspended particulate affect
the environment by lowering the visibility, producing hazy condition, participating in
secondary reactions in atmosphere and affecting biotic population directly or indirectly.

As per the Notification issued by Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) , norm for industrial
SPM on 24 hourly basis is 600 g/m3 (for existing coal field/ mines) and 700 pg/m3 (for old
coal field/ mines). The air quality data for the year 2008-09 and 2009-10 in respect of three
subsidiaries i.e. CCL, BCCL and ECL was examined in selected locations and we observed that:

> In CCL, SPM was above the norm on 34 occasions during 2008-09 and on 20 occasions

during 2009-10.
> SPM level in BCCL was within norms during the year 2008-09 and 2009-10.

In ECL, it was within norm during 2008-09 and during 2009-10, it exceeded the norm
on eight occasions only in residential area.

v

In conclusion, the CIL and its subsidiaries should take early action to minimise the RPM and
SPM levels as these pose higher risk for respiratory diseases to the employees and the people
living in the vicinity of the mines.

(c) Dust Suppression Measures

Mining, handling and transportation of coal generate a substantial amount of dust and gaseous
pollutants. Moreover, as Indian coals are believed to be of drift origin, they have very high ash
content, necessitating beneficiation of the raw coal. The process involves crushing of raw coal
into smaller sizes in coal handling plants (CHPs) and then washing in coal washeries. All these
processes generate a large amount of dust and hence, adequate water spraying arrangement is
needed to suppress the dust on dust generating points such as receiving hopper of feeder
breaker, screening plant, truck loading hopper and ground stocks, haul and transportation, road
and railway sidings.

In order to evaluate the adequacy of dust suppression measures in the subsidiaries, Audit
selected railway siding in four subsidiaries and observed that:

(i) Water-spraying arrangements were either non-existent or inadequate in all the railway
sidings of BCCL; in Sonpur Bazari and Mugma railway sidings of ECL; and in Talcher,
Belpahar, Lakhanpur and Bharatpur railway sidings of MCL. In NCL, however, audit
noticed all the railway sidings were equipped with rapid loading system with inbuilt silo,
which ensured negligible dust generation during loading of coal.

——— Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



(ii)

(iii)

Spraying of Water through fixed Sprinkler

Audit also observed instances of inadequate numbers of sprinklers and water tankers
for suppression of dust at haul and transportation roads (Block II of BCCL, Urimari of CCL
and Lajkura of MCL), feeder breakers and truck loading points.

In order to reduce generation of dust during transportation of coal, the National Dust
Prevention Committee had suggested (May 2008) that all trucks should use tarpaulin
covers while transporting coal. Audit, however, observed that carrying coal in tarpaulin
covered trucks was not stipulated in the transportation contracts.

The Management while agreeing stated (May 2011) that:

>

In BCCL, the dust suppression measures are being strengthened in railway sidings.
Additional mobile tankers are to be deployed in Block ॥ to mitigate the air pollution in
haul roads and coal transportation roads.

Rapid loading systems with Silos are proposed to be taken up in 3 major mines. In
Mahespur, it will be in operation in 2012.

Adequate dust suppression arrangements have been proposed in the mines in ECL.

In case of MCL, Talcher railway siding was not in use and action for adequate dust
suppression arrangements have been initiated in other three railway siding .

i Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



4.9.1 Effluent Discharge

To maintain quality of water for re-use, the prescribed norms by CPCB are given below:

Parameters Standard--Concentration in igrai tre
(mg/Itr) except pH (not to exceed)

॥ किम 5.5 to 9.0

Total Suspended 100

solids

Oil and grease 10

Nitrate Nitrogen 10

coD 250

Discharge water quality data for the year 2008-09 and 2009-10 in respect of three subsidiaries
i.e. CCL, BCCLand ECL was examined in selected locations and we observed that:

> In CCL, during the years 2008-09 and 2009-10, elements like Total Suspended solids and
COD were much above the prescribed norms.

> In BCCLand ECL, effluent discharge level were within norms.

4.9.2 Effluent and Sewage Treatment Plant

As per the standard industry practice, effluent treatment plants (ETPs) and sewage
treatment plants (STPs) should invariably be installed to treat the discharged water to
prevent further degradation of water quality. Further, there should be oil and grease
traps (OGTs) to trap used oil and grease from the workshop effluent.

Audit observed that out of 18 sample open cast mines, there was no effluent treatment
plant in two open cast mines’. Four open cast mines” did not have STPs. Two mines
(Jarangdih of CCL and Jamuna of SECL) did not have OGTs and two mines (Lajkura and
Samaleshwari of MCL) had inadequate capacity to trap used oil and grease produced in
the workshop. Audit, however, observed that in NCL, all the 10 open cast mines were
equipped with ETPs and STPs.

The Management stated (May 2011) that in all major open cast projects, work shops
effluent plants/ oil and grease trap have been constructed and action has been initiated
to construct the same where it is non-existent. Jarangdih is on the verge of closure. The
effluent was with in the stipulated limits. Two settling tanks are proposed to be
constructed in Jamuna open cast project.

‘measure of the acidity or basicity of a solution
* Ghonoodih of 8CCL; and Jarangdih of CCL
“Block Il of BCCL; Usimari and Jarangaih of CCL; and Lajkura of MCL

उस Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



4.9.3 Acid Mine Drainage

Acid Mine Drainage (AMD) refers to distinctive types of waste bodies that originate from
the weathering and leaching of sulphide minerals present in coal and associated strata.
Environmental effects of AMD include contamination of drinking water and disrupted
growth and reproduction of aquatic plants and animals. It also results in corrosion of
mining equipments and structures such as barges, bridges and concrete materials.

Audit observed that such instances were noticed by CIL management in few mines. The
issue was referred to CMPDIL, its subsidiary which looks after exploration and drilling
work to establish coal reserves, which has taken up a R&D study by bio-treatment in one
of the selected area in WCL.

In essence, the Company and its subsidiaries should take early action to construct the effluent
treatment plant and make continuous efforts to keep the level of the quality of effluent in the
water discharged from the mines within the norm to avoid adverse effect of these chemicals. The
Company should also make constructive efforts to arrest the Acid Mine Drainage as it impacts
the ground water and aquatic life as well as mining infrastructure.

@ Disposal of slurr rejects

Slurry is a by-product generated during the washing of coal. Slurry is stocked in the slurry ponds
created near the washeries. Stockpiling of slurry beyond the capacity can create environment
hazards by way of water and land pollution in nearby areas, particularly in the rainy season.
Besides, spontaneous fire in summer can also cause air pollution as well as spread of fire to the
adjoining areas.

Ina test check of washeries in BCCL and CCL, Audit observed that stock of slurry and rejects as on
31 March 2010 was equivalent to 95.04 months! and 85.07 months' of production respectively
against the norms of one to three months' suggested by the Central Pollution Control Board. Out
of four washeries selected in sample, in Kathara washery of CCL, the stock of slurry as on 31
March 2010 was more than 122.19 months' production and in Nandan washery of WCL, there
was no identified location for disposal of rejects and the same were being used to fill low lying
areas.

The Management stated (May 2011) that action has been taken for disposal of existing stock of
slurry and rejects.

i Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



@ Impact on ground water level

Ground water is a potential hazard to mining operations. Large scale dewatering is done to
reduce ground water pressure, but this may bring about a decline in regional water table. The
Central Ground Water Authority conducted (July 2009) studies in 18 mining areas of two of its
subsidiaries SECL and WCL in Madhya Pradesh and found that the ground water level had
depleted in seven areas during the pre-monsoon period and in 11 areas during the post-
monsoon period. As per the standard practices, the depletion of ground water table may be
compensated through adequate rain water harvesting arrangement.

Audit observed that out of 10 areas in NCL, rainwater harvesting had started in four areas.
Similarly, MCL had started roof top rain water harvesting in residential and non-residential
buildings in four open cast projects. Further, BCCL converted an abandoned mine into rain water
harvesting pond. Thus, only a handful of projects had the rain water harvesting arrangement.

The Management stated (May 2011) that subsidiaries have been advised to take up rainwater
harvesting schemes.

@ Using Methane From Coal Mines

Methane gas is formed as part of coal formation process and is released from the coal seam and
surrounding disturbed strata during mining operations. Methane is a potent greenhouse gas
with a global warming potential 23 times that of carbon dioxide. As per World Coal Association,
coal mining accounted for 7.4 per cent of the total human induced methane emissions in 2005.

Audit observed that the Company has made a modest beginning in this area and only one project
at Moonidih coal mine of BCCL in Jharia coalfield in Jharkhand has actually been implemented for
coalbed methane (CBM) recovery and commercial utilisation while two other projects in Jharia
and Raniganj coalfields, were still under development with ONGC since August 2003 and June
2004 respectively. Thus, there is a need for expeditious identification and implementation of
CBM recovery projects.

The Management stated (May 2011) that identification and implementation of CBM recovery
projects would be expedited.

In conclusion, CIL and its subsidiaries have taken initiatives in areas impacting environment.
However, activities like backfilling, land reclamation, preservation of topsoil and plantation of
trees and other environmental issues need to be identified so that CIL's vision of increasing coal
production from 324 million tonnes in 2004-05 to 782 million tonnes in 2024-25 is achieved. The
Company was also lagging behind in taking prior environment clearance for mines.

———— Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



Recommendation #2
Topsoil should be preserved at earmarked sites without violating MoEF guidelines and
proper record of its storage and use should be maintained.

Recommendation #3
Contract period of maintenance of saplings by the State forest agencies may be increased
fromthe present three years to five years so that the plants become self sustaining.

Recommendation #4
In order to arrest depletion of ground water level as a result of coal mining, subsidiaries may
take up rainwater harvesting.

The Ministry while accepting the recommendations stated (May 2011) that the instructions have
been issued to CIL's subsidiaries.

il Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



Chapter 5

Safety in Mining

Safety in coal mines is governed by the Mines Act, 1952
and the rules and regulations framed under this act. The
Mines Rules, 1955, the Coal Mines Regulations, 1957, the
Mines Rescue Rules, 1985 are some of the major statutes
framed under the Mines Act. The Directorate General of
Mines Safety (DGMS), under the Ministry of Labour &
Employment has been empowered to enforce the
statutes relating to mine safety. The Mines Act or any rule
or regulation framed thereunder is amended from time
to time as per necessity as deemed fit by the DGMS, in
view of any recommendation of any Court of Inquiry into
any major accident or otherwise. However, from time to
time circulars are issued by DGMS on safety issues for
adoption in mine operation. There is a Standing
Committee on Safety in Coal Mines which is chaired by
Minister in Charge of Coal. This meeting is attended by
officers from Ministry of Coal, Ministry of Labour &
Employment, DGMS, representatives of Trade Unions,
Coal companies (All PSUs & Private companies), State
Mines & Mineral Development Corporations. The
Committee meets biannually to take stock of the safety
situation in coal and lignite mines and suggests measures
for bringing further improvement in the field of safety.

Safety is an important aspect in
functioning of an industry. It is
important not only for its
employees and workers but also for
the environment and the nations.
Coal industry poses one of the most
difficult challenges in the area of
safety, health and environment
when compared to many other
industries due to complex nature of
its operations and maintenance
activities and wide range of hazards
associated with them. Despite
tremendous technological progress,
the safety culture and safety at work
still are serious issues. Therefore,
maintaining of high standards of
health, safety and environment in
coal industry is of paramount
importance.

@ Safety Policy

The safety policy of CIL aims at 'zero harm potential’ in all mines and covers security issues like
designing and implementing of safety plans, deployment of dedicated safety personnel,
establishment of internal safety organization and multilevel monitoring.

@ Safety budget

Each subsidiary company prepares capital and revenue budget for safety related activities.
Examination of records for CIL as a whole, for the year 2006-07 to 2009-10, revealed that actual
expenditure, on capital head and revenue head ranged from 41 per cent to 64 per cent and 62
per cent to 92 per cent respectively to the budgeted expenditure, as shown in the graph below.

ee छ Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited

Performance Audit



Budget for Capital Expenditure vis-avis Actual Expenditure on Safety Budget for Revenue Expenditure vs-avis Actual for Safety Related Expenciture
related Activities from 2006-07 to 2009-10 during 2006-07 to 2009-10

2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2008-10 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
न] छा ॥ह९९९४५९७५७९४३४० छा ७९४७८६७९४४७०९+८४४ 10९0९ erie Pera clon

Audit observed that individually in all the subsidiaries, the actual expenditure on capital
account was less than the budgeted expenditure except SECL (2006-07, 2007-08 and 2009-10)
and ECL (2008-09). On the revenue head, actual expenditure was less than the budgeted
expenditure except CCL (2006-07) and NCL (2006-07 to 2008-09).

Audit is of the opinion that budget management was not adequate as despite the allocation of
funds available under 'Safety'head; expenditure on safety related issues was not spent.

@

As per the safety committee of CIL, every mine should be covered by an independent safety
audit at a frequency of two years to ensure adherence to the safety standards.

Audit, however, observed that safety audits were not carried out regularly in the subsidiaries.
In BCCL, no safety audit of opencast mines was carried out during the period 2003-07.
However, safety audit in 60 mines of BCCL was conducted during the period from September
2007 to January 2008.

The Management stated (December 2010) that safety audit would be conducted regularly in
respect of all the projects.

@ Safet

One of the major safety issues with regard to open
cast mines is the maintenance of overburden
dumps. These dumps have to be maintained
strictly in accordance with the safety parameters
imposed in terms of height, steepness of slope,
etc, otherwise they may collapse, endangering
human life, fauna and property, as it happened in
Bisrampur Area of SECL (May 2009) and Jayant
Area of NCL (December 2008). These safety
parameters are stipulated in the project reports
and environmental clearance given by MoEF,
based on local site conditions.

respect of Overburden Dumps i

छः Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



Out of 18 open cast mines selected in sample, Audit observed that in 10 mines”, there were
cases of excess height and higher gradient and accommodation of excess overburden than
prescribed in the environment clearance/ project reports. The details regarding excess height
and higher gradation are given in Annexure - 5.

The Management stated that:
@ excess height was due to non clearance of land (CCL);

e@ there has been no case of mudslide due to the properties of the overburden material and
resultant angle of repose (ECL);

७. theprescribed height was for external dumps and not for internal dumps (WCL);
@ Precautionary steps were being taken in case of fresh dumping of overburden.

The fact remains that the Company compromised with the safety requirements while dumping
overburden.

@ Stowing in under, nd mines

Stowing, the process of filling spaces left in underground mines after extraction of coal with sand
and or any other material, is required for the safety of the mines as well as for the conservation of
coal by combating mine fire. Improper stowing also encourages illegal mining as well as collapse
of mine roof, leading to subsidence of road, rail track and other physical structure erected over it.
One of the important reasons of historic mine fire in Jnaria region of BCCL was the improper
stowing of underground mine in pre-nationalized period.

Audit observed shortfalls in stowing in all the three subsidiaries, which have underground mines.
The reported shortfall in stowing as on 31 March 2010 was 4,41,912 cum in ECL; 3774 cum in
BCCLand 11330 cum in Sikra, Swang and Jarangdih underground mines of CCL

The Management stated that action would be taken to keep the backlog in stowing within
permissible limits.

The fact however, remains that shortfall in stowing is fraught with the risk of hazards of
accidents.

@ Accidents Reporting

The different types of accidental hazards are Roof/side Falls, Haulage, Conveyor and Winding,
Trucks, Dumpers and wagons, Explosive and Electricity etc.

The details of the fatal accidents during 2005 to 2009 are shown in the chart below:

* Block Il of BCCL, Urimari and Jarangaih of CCL, Rajpura and Sonepur Bazari of ECL,
Lajkura of MCL, Gevra and Jamuna of SECL, Ghorawari and Umrer of WCL.

i 9 Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



Fatalities

120
100
80
60
40
20

> There were 285 fatal accidents involving 382 fatalaties during the year 2005 to 2009 in
CIL.
> Audit observed that though the number of fatal accidents, number of fatalities, number

of serious accidents and serious injuries showed decreasing trend in CIL and its
subsidiaries during the period from 2005 to 2009 but it was not able to achieve the zero

harm target.

> The rate of accidents and injuries per million tonne of coal production in underground
mines decreased from 4.15 in 2005 to 2.39 in 2009 in ClLas a whole.

>

Analysis of reasons for fatal accidents
done by safety committee revealed that
majority of the fatal accidents were due to
ground movement, wagons & dumpers,
non-transport machines, explosives and
electrocution etc. This indicates that the
fatal accidents could have been avoided to
a great extent, had proper and adequate
steps been taken by the management.

The Management replied (December 2010) that rate of accident declined in 2009.

उस Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



@ ortage of Manpower and Safety ६ ment

According to Mines Rules, 1955, for every mine wherein 500 or more persons are employed,
there shall be designated overman, mine foreman or electrical supervisor to keep the electrical
and other mechanical installations running and in safe working condition.

Audit noticed that:

> In ClL and its subsidiaries, there was an overall shortage of 3213 employees against the
requirement as on 31 March 2010.

> The shortage over requirement was in the range of 0.63 per cent to 29.35 per cent in all
the categories. This shortage in the non-executive cadre was observed in all the
subsidiaries. (Annexure -6)

> In four” out of eight underground mines selected in sample, there were shortages of
safety equipment like flame safety lamps, cap lamps, exploders, fire extinguisher,
anchorage testing machine, self rescuer, carbon dioxide in absorbents, shoes, helmet,
methanometer, telecommunication equipment, personal dust sampler etc.

The Management stated that action has been initiated to fill up the vacancies and shortage of
safety equipments was being monitored regularly and action has been initiated for removing the
shortages.

@ Subsidence and Fire in Jharia and Raniganj coal field

The problems of subsidence and fire are the result of unscientific mining carried out by the
erstwhile mine owners over more than 200 years of operations in the coalfields of Jnaria and
Raniganj prior to nationalisation. In-spite of the declaration of these areas unsafe by the local
administration, the habitation increased unabated. The problem of subsidence and fire were
being addressed by the Government from time to time and a high level committee was also set
up in December 1996 under the chairmanship of the then Secretary, Ministry of Coal. Based on
the recommendations of the committee a Master Plan was prepared to deal with the problems
of fire and subsidence and related rehabilitation covering the areas under BCCL and ECL in 1999
forimplementation ina phased manner.

Further, based on the recommendations of Directorate General of Mines Safety and Planning
Commission to reduce the time frame from 20 years to 10 years, the Master Plan of Jharia and
Raniganj coalfields dealing with fire, subsidence, rehabilitation and diversion of surface
infrastructure was updated in March/ April 2008 which was approved by the Government of
India in August 2009 at an estimated investment of = 9773.84 crores (= 7112.11 crore for Jharia
and % 2661.73 crore for Raniganj) as detailed in Annexure - 7.

To meet this expenditure, CIL would contribute रैं 350 crore per annum from their own resources
and balance is to be provided from collection of Stowing Excise Duty under Coal Mines
(Conservation & Development) Act, (CCDA), 1974. CIL has released % 159.72 crore to ECL and
%14.34 crore to BCCL during the year 2010-11.

" Begunia and Jhanjara (ECL), Bagdewa (SECL) and Satpura of WCL

ee Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



Audit observed that the main constraint for implementation of Rehabilitation scheme by BCCL
and ECLis the problem of acquisition of land in the sites located on non coal bearing areas along
the periphery of Jharia / Raniganj coalfields. Therefore, Management needs to expedite
acquisition of land and ensure implementation of the scheme as the funds were available.

@ Occupational Health Care

Occupational health care is of immense significance in coal mining, given the hazardous working
conditions. Occupational health issues in coal mining are mainly governed by the Mines Act,
1952 and other rules and regulations framed under this Act.

5.9.1 Medical Examination of Workers

> According to Section 29B of the Mines Rules 1955, the pre-employment health
examination is mandatory for all employees, including contractors' employees. Audit
observed that although initial medical examination was done mandatorily in all the
subsidiaries for the company employees, very few contractors’ employees underwent
initial medical examination. The percentage of contractors' employees undergoing initial
medical examination in CIL and its subsidiaries was approximately 1.58 to 7 during 2005-
06 to 2007-08.

The Managements replied that efforts are on to cover the initial medical examination of
contractors' employees. CCL attributed the backlog to delay in finalization of charges to
be recovered from the contractors.

> Further, as per the provisions of the Mines Rule 1955, one-fifth of the workers are
supposed to undergo periodical medical examination every year so that each worker is
covered every five years. Audit observed that there was hardly any backlog in periodical
medical examination of the workers in any of the subsidiaries during the calendar years
2004 to 2009.

> Medical examination would be more effective if the medical history/findings of
periodical medical examination is properly maintained. Mine Rules 1955 also provide for
it through 'Form O'. The effectiveness would improve if the medical history is maintained
in a computerized database. Audit observed that such a computerized database was
being maintained in only one subsidiary, viz., NCL.

The Management agreed (December 2010) to look into the issue so that such data can be
captured in computerized environment.

——— Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



5.9.2 Mortality among employees

Audit analyzed the data relating to causes of death among employees in two subsidiaries, viz.,
BCCL and CCL for one year (2007) and observed the following:

e High percentage (BCCL-11.25 per cent and CCL-16.08 per cent) of deaths due to
conditions like liver cirrhosis and alcohol abuse;

e High percentage (BCCL-6.43 per cent and CCL- 14.57 per cent) of deaths due to acute
and chronic renal failure; and

e Incidence of death due to respiratory and cardio vascular diseases, malignancy and TB
below the national average”.

parameters in different mines need to be regularly monitored and upgraded.

Occupational health care of the workforce is of immense significance for CIL and its
subsidiaries, given the hard working conditions in the mines and the adjoining areas. CIL
and its subsidiaries need to pay greater attention to regular medical examinations and
follow up to prevent health hazards. All efforts need to be directed towards reducing
continuous exposure of the employees to hazardous environment.

In sum, the trends of mortality among employees and the analysis of the causes of mortalities
point towards the need for more effective medical examination and increasing medical
awareness among employees.

Recommendation #5
Independent safety audit of every mine should invariably be conducted at a frequency of
two years as suggested by the safety committee of CIL.

Recommendation #6
Allsubsidiaries may maintain computerized database of medical history of employees as is
being done in NCL for effective medical care.

The Ministry stated (May 2011) that:

> In MCL and NCL Safety Audit has already started and is under progress. In other
subsidiaries conducting of Safety Audit is also under process of starting.

> Computerized Data base of Medical History of employees for effective medical care is
being done and is under active consideration of implementation in totality in subsidiaries
of ClLas being done in NCL.

हक the age group of 25 -69 years

a  - Audit
lity of Coal India Limited

Corporate Social Responsil



Chapter 6
Community and
Peripheral Development

@ Community and Peripheral Development

ClL has a ‘Community and Peripheral Development' policy that lays down guidelines for taking up
development and welfare activities in the adjoining areas of mining operations.

@ Expenditure on Community and Peripheral Development

CIL and its subsidiaries have been
carrying out community and peripheral
development programmes such as
creation of infrastructure in adopted
villages; health care to local
community by means of mobile
medical van, health camps and free
outpatient checkups; and relief camps
at the time of natural calamities like
flood, drought, cyclone etc. In addition,
special programs like ‘Operation Jyoti’
(to restore eyesight) were being run.

Audit, however, observed that allocation of funds for community and peripheral development
was below the norms of ¢ one per tonne of coal produced in four years from 2006-07 to 2009-10
in BCCL, NCL, MCLand SECL and in few years, in the case of CCL, ECLand WCL.

In fact, the budget allocation of ¥ 211.80 crore for community and peripheral development
during the period 2004-10 was only 0.7 per cent of the aggregate net profit of ¥ 31062.36 crore
over the same period. The subsidiary-wise details of budgeted and actual expenditure on
community and peripheral development are shown in the graph below.

ee छ Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited


Total Budgeted Expenditure Vis-a-vis Actual Expenditure from
2004 -05 to 2009-10 (in = lakh)

5104
4986
4818

1267
1021
3101
2028
1750
1654
2360
2657
1420
2315
1995

BCCL CCL ECL MCL NCL SECL WCL
m Budgeted Expenditure =Actual Expenditure

(in crore)
Company Budget allocation ‘Actual expenditure (2004-10) Percentage of actual expenditure
(2004-10) to Budgeted allocation
“Bech | 12.67 10.21 80.58
ec | 31.01 20.28 65.40
ECL 17.50 ee (| 94.51
cmc | 51.04 23.60 46.24
cNcL | 26.57 | 94.20... | |
[sec | 49.86 48.18 | 56. |
‘wet | 23.15 [__. 13995... | 86.18
Total 211.80 152.96 72.22

The utilisation of funds during the period 2004-10 fell short of budgeted allocation in all the
subsidiaries and was least in MCL followed by NCL and CCL thus, allowing their CSR activities to
remain unfulfilled. In fact, while the budget allocation itself was less than one per cent of the
profits, even then, the Company failed to utilize this meager allocation fully.

The Managements replied (June-July 2010) that the shortfall in expenditure was due to non-
availability of approved list of activities from district administration, delay in tendering and other
procedural delays.

Audit is of the opinion that these are procedural lapses which could be taken care of through
suitable planning and effective monitoring.

——— Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



@ Reh

ation

id Resettlement of People Affected by Projects

CIL has a well defined Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy on the lines of the National
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, 2008.

Audit observed that money for land acquisition was promptly deposited to the concerned State
government authorities and any delays in land acquisition were not attributable to the
subsidiaries. By and large, the subsidiaries were prompt in releasing the compensation and other
benefits to the People Affected by Projects.

@ Planning for CSR activities

@ CSR Monito!

A long-term Corporate Social Responsibility Plan needs to be prepared matching with the
long term business plan. This may be broken down into short term and medium term plans,
specifying activities to be undertaken, budgets allocated, responsibilities and authorities
defined, and measurable results expected. The plans should be prepared after conducting
need assessment of the targeted community/area.

The CSR Committee of CIL examines the proposals received and accordingly proposals are
finalised based on the needs of the society.

Audit observed that the CIL was not carrying out any need assessment / survey of the society for
preparing the CSR plan.

The companies should map their CSR plan after assessing the needs of the society in order to
fulfill the essential requirements of the society.

ing and Impact Asses:

Audit observed that CIL and its subsidiaries were not evaluating CSR projects undertaken by it
and was also not doing any overall impact assessment of the CSR activities undertaken by it.

The Management stated (May 2011) that CSR policy has come into operation from the year
2010-11, hence the overall impact assessment and evaluation of CSR projects/activities would
be taken up through an outside agency.

The companies should evaluate impact on the society of these CSR activities which would also
help the Companies in future planning of CSR initiatives.

Conclusion: 0॥ and its subsidiaries have been taking up development and welfare activities
in the adjoining areas of mining operations as per their ‘community and peripheral
development' policy. However, allocation of funds and expenditure on community and
peripheral development was below the norms. CIL and its subsidiaries need to spend
constructively on community and peripheral development as per their norms. The company
was not carrying out any need assessment survey in its periphery to assess the requirements
of the society. The company was also not evaluating the impact on the society of their CSR
activities.

ee छ Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



Recommendation #7

ला and its subsidiaries should plan and spend constructively on community and peripheral
development after assessing the needs of the society.

The Ministry stated (May 2011) that CIL has formulated a CSR Policy in which fund has been
allocated at the rate of 5 per cent of the retained earnings of the last year subject to a minimum
of % five per tonne of coal production. This fund shall not lapse but shall be transferred to CSR
fund for the next year. This has ensured that the fund allocated for CSR activity shall be spent on
the activities earmarked only.

रू Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



Chapter 7
Conclusion and
Recommendations

@

The Company has a well defined CSR policy comprehensive in coverage and scope. However, to
reap the benefits of the policy, the company needs to implement it effectively by ensuring
adequate allocation of funds and setting up measurable targets. Allocation of funds and
expenditure on community and peripheral development was below the norms in case of five out
of seven subsidiaries. To discharge its CSR activities effectively, CIL and its subsidiaries need to
constructively spend on community and peripheral development as per their norms and policy.
The companies were not carrying out any need assessment survey in the periphery to assess the
requirements of the society and were also not assessing the impact of their CSR activities on the
society.

Mining operations damage the
environment and ecology to an
unacceptable degree, unless carefully
planned and controlled. While the
Company has taken initiatives in areas
impacting environment, there is a scope
for further improvement in the areas of
backfilling, land reclamation,
preservation of topsoil and plantation
of trees, recovery of Coal Bed Methane
so that Company's vision of increasing
coal production from 324 million tonnes
in 2004-05 to 782 million tonnes in
2024-25 is achieved.

Given the hard working conditions in the mines of CIL and its subsidiaries, occupational health
care of its human assets assume a greater significance. ClL and its subsidiaries, therefore, need to
pay greater attention to regular medical examinations and follow up to prevent health hazards.
Though the number of fatal accidents, number of fatalities and number of serious accidents
showed declining trend but it was not able to achieve the zero harm target.

ee 9 Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



@

Based on the audit findings discussed in the foregoing chapters, significant recommendations
are summarized below:

CIL and its subsidiaries should evolve a mechanism to set up measurable targets with
timeline so that performance on CSR activities can be monitored effectively.

Topsoil should be preserved at earmarked sites without violating MoEF guidelines and
proper record of its storage and use should be maintained.

Contract period of maintenance of saplings by the State forest agencies may be increased
from the present three years to five years so that the plants become self sustaining.

iv In order to arrest depletion of ground water level as a result of coal mining, subsidiaries
may take up rainwater harvesting.

Vv Independent safety audit of every mine should invariably be conducted at a frequency of
two years as suggested by the safety committee of CIL.

vi All subsidiaries may maintain computerized database of medical history of employees as
is being done in NCL for effective medical care.

vii The Company should plan and spend constructively on community and peripheral
development after assessing the needs of the society.

New Delhi (ARVIND K. AWASTHI)

Dated : 28 July, 2011 Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General

and Chairman, Audit Board
Countersigned
VBL .
New Delhi (VINOD RAI)
Dated : 1 August, 2011 Comptroller and Auditor General of India

उस Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



जल
की

Annexure -1

Statement showing details of sampled projects
(As referred to in Para 2.1)

of bsidi Op 0} derground
Ege Number & name of | Total Number & Total Number &
number sample number name of number name of
sample sample
Bharat Coking Coal 52 2 (Block Il, and 81 2 (Begunia 13 1 (Bhojudih)
Limited (BCCL), Ghanoodih) and
Moonidih)
Central Coalfields limited a 3 ( Piperwar,, 27 P| 7 2 (Piparwar
(CCL), Urimari and and
Jarandih) Kathara)
Eastern Coalfields 3 ( Rajmahal, | | 2 (Lakhimata | | | |
Limited (ECL), Sonpur bazari,and and Jhanjra)
Rajpura)
Mahanadi coalfields 25 3 ( Jaganath, | | | | | | | |
Limited (MCL), Samalewari and
Lajkura)
Northern Coalfields 11 2 (Nigahi and |? | P| 1 mz
Limited (NCL), Amlohri)
South Eastern Coalfields 25 3 (Gevra, Jamuna 73 2 (Rajnagar | | | |
Limited (SECL) and Chhaal) and
Bagdewa)
Western Coalfields 52 2 (Umrer and |“ | 2 (Satpura-ll 1 [शाप | (Nandan)
Limited (WCL). Ghorawari) and Sasti)
Total | 231 | | 18 | | 334 | | 8 | | 22 | | 4 |

NB : Total number of open cast project, underground mine and washeries includes operational as well
as non operational mines.

Sampling Criteria:

> Open cast mines for each subsidiary were stratified production wise in three categories i.e. less
than one MMT, between one MMT to five MMT and above five MMT. Three Open cast mines
were selected from each subsidiary from each of these strata wherever applicable. The largest
producing Open cast mine of each subsidiary was out rightly selected. Total 18 Open cast mines
(one being highest coal producing and others from remaining strata randomly) were selected.

> Two underground mines each in BCCL, ECL, WCL and SECL were selected one being the highest
producing and the other randomly.
> The largest producing washery from BCCL, CCL and WCL was selected. Other was selected

randomly.

ee छ Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



VV VV VV VV VV VV VV VY VV VV VV VV VV VV V 4

Annexure -2

Audit Criteria
(As referred to in Para 2.3)

The Mines Act, 1952

The Mines Rules, 1955

The Coal Mines Regulation, 1957

The Coal Mines Pit Head Bath Rules, 1959

Mines Créche Rules, 1966-(relates to workers' welfare)

The Mines Rescue Rules, 1985

The water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974

Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977

The Forest Conservation Act 1980

The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981

The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986

The Hazardous Waste (Management and Handling) Rules 1989

The EMP Notification 1994.

Revised EMP notification, 2006.

Project report of individual mines

EMP report of individual mines.

Circulars issued by DGMS, State pollution board etc. in respect of project and companies
Conditions imposed by MoEF/DGMS in respect of individual projects

Policy of CILon Community & Peripheral Development in CIL and its Subsidiaries
Policy of CIL on Rehabilitation and Resettlement

National R&R policy 2008

Mine safety policy of CIL

Pit safety committee report

Safety audit report

Guidelines of CIL on Environment management

National Dust prevention committee report

Guidelines for preparation of mine closure plan issued by ministry of coal.

CSR policy of CIL,

Corporate Social responsibility voluntary guidelines 2009 issued by ministry of corporate affairs

———— Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



Annexure -3

Status of land reclamation
(As referred to in Para 4.5)

Name of Progressive landtobe Progressive land to be Increase/ Decrease
the reclaimed as on reclaimed as on 31.03.09 —(-) in backlog in

company = 31.03.10 (Ha) (Ha) reclamation (Ha)
2129.36 2019.08 110.28
235.00 2442.38 (-) 2207.38
930.76 812.39 118.37
1367.72 1357.81 9.91
2687.00 2910.88 (-)223.88
743.19 738.22 4.97
4549.97 3507.97 1042

12643.00 13788.73 (-)1145.73

il Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited


——, 4

Density of Plantation of sampled open cast mines
(As referred to in Para 4.6.2)

Density of Plantation of Sampled Open Cast Mines
(plant per hectare) as on 31 March 2010

Gevra 4097
Chhal 3750

Nigahi

Amlohri

Urimari

Rajmahal

Block I!

Sonepur Bazari

Samleshwari

Ghorawari

Lajkura

Jamuna

Jagannath

Rajpura

Jarangdih

Piperwar

रू Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



Annexure -5

Safety parameters in respect of overburden dumps - actual vis-a-vis permissible
(As referred to in Para 5.4)

Comparison of Permissible Height and Actual Height of Two Sampled OC (in metre)

67
L
48
ii

Urimari, CCL Umrer, WCL

1 Permissible Height B Actual Highest Height

Comparison Between Permissible Slope and Actual Slope of Three Sampled OC (in degree)

45
38 “0 ॥ |
|. ॥
} । । ,

Gevra, SECL —_Jamuna, SECL Rajpura, SECL

@ Permissible Slope in Degree Actual Highest Slope in Degree

i 9 Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



Annexure 6

Table showing actual deployment and shortage of statutory
manpower in CIL and its subsidiaries
(As referred to in Para 5.7)

Category Appointment Existing as Requirement Excess
made during on 31/03/10 as On (+)/Shortage
2009-10 31/03/10 ()
17 class manager ना 1735 (-) 41
(Executive)

27१ class manager | 2596 (-)7 62
(Executive)

Overman 6124 (-) 875

( Non-Executive)

Mining sardar 8408 (-) 1451
( Non-Executive

Surveyor 1042 (-) 114
( Non-Executive

—— Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited



५

Annexure -7

Summarised details of master plan
(As referred to in Para 5.8)

Particulars of the different Raniganj (६ Jharia (BCCL)
components of Master Plan

1

७० ७ ++ ए7 ७

li]
lil]
W]

Dealing with fire
Total no. of existing fires

Estimated Cost [ % crores]
Rehabilitation

No. of sites to be Rehabilitated

Area affected in sq.km

No. of houses to be vacated/
Rehabilitated

BCCL [ Taking into account
superannuation]

Private [Authorised]

Encroachers [Un-authorised]

Others

Total No. of houses

Population covered

Land required for rehabilitation [Hal]
Estimated cost [% crores]

Diversion of Railway line/ Road/ OC
pipeline

Estimated Cost [% Crores]
Implementing Agency for fire projects
& rehabilitation of BCCL/ECL houses
Implementing Agency for
rehabilitation of Non-BCCL/ECL
houses —Private & Encroachers

Implementation Schedule, years

Estimated Capital Requirement for
fire projects, rehabilitation &
diversion of rail/road/ pipeline etc.
[8 crore]

7 67 [under 45 fire
projects]
40.28 2311.50
139 595
8.62 25.69
44155/25000
29444
23847
868
33196 98314/79159
180263 395795
896.29 1504.99
26.10.10 4780.60
7 sites Planning and survey

with an outlay of
Rs.20 crores
11.35 20.00
ECL BCCL

Jharia Rehabilitation
& Development
authority of [JRDA] of
Govt. of Jharkhand
10 [in two Phases
each of 5 years +2
years for pre
implementation
7112.11

Asansol Durgapur
Development
Authority [ADDA]
Govt. of WB
10 [in two phases
each of 5 years]

2661.73

i Audit
Corporate Social Responsibility of Coal India Limited