 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
On 
Social, Economic, Revenue and General Sectors  
for the year ended March 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Sikkim 
Report No. 1 of 2016 


 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
on 
Social, Economic, Revenue and General Sectors  
for the year ended March 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Sikkim 
Report No.1 of 2016 

 i 
 
 
Paragraph Particulars Page 
 Preface iii 
 Executive summary v 
CHAPTER I:  SOCIAL SECTOR 
1.1 Introduction 1 
1.2 Planning and conduct of Audit 2 
1.3 
Loss on interest 
(Sikkim State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited and Human 
Resource Development Department) 
2 
CHAPTER II:  ECONOMIC SECTOR 
2.1 Introduction 5 
2.2 Planning and conduct of Audit 6 
2.3 
Implementation of Re-structured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms 
Programme in Sikkim 
(Energy and Power Department) 
7 
2.4 Horticulture Development in Sikkim 
(Horticulture and Cash Crop Development Department) 28 
2.5 Extra expenditure due to avoidable retendering of the work 
(Energy and Power Department) 59 
2.6 Non-recovery of interest on Mobilisation Advance 
(Energy and Power Department) 61 
2.7 Avoidable expenditure 
(Roads and Bridges Department) 62 
2.8 Undue benefit to the contractor 
(Roads and Bridges Department) 63 
2.9 Avoidable expenditure 
(Rural Management and Development Department) 65 
2.10 Non-recovery of loan 
(Sikkim Housing and Development Board) 67 
CHAPTER III:  ECONOMIC SECTOR (Public Sector Undertakings) 
3.1 Overview of State Public Sector Undertakings 69 
3.2 Fraudulent withdrawal of cash 
(Sikkim State Co-Operative Bank Limited) 80 
3.3 Avoidable payment and idle expenditure 
(Sikkim Tourism Development Corporation Limited) 83 
CHAPTER IV:  REVENUE SECTOR 
4.1 Trend of Revenue Receipts 87 
4.2 Analysis of arrears of revenue 89 
4.3 Arrears in assessments 90 
4.4 Evasion of tax detected by the department 90 
4.5 Pendency of Refund Cases 90 
4.6 Response of the departments/ Government towards Audit 91 
4.7 Analysis of the mechanism for dealing with issues raised by Audit 93 
4.8 Action taken on the recommendations accepted by the Departments/ Government 94 
4.9 Audit Planning 96 
4.10 Results of audit 96 
4.11 Coverage of this Report 96 
4.12 Collection of Revenue from outsourced activities in Motor Vehicles Tax 
[Transport Department (Motor Vehicles Division)] 96 
4.13 
Deficiencies in the Input Tax Credit system 
[Finance, Revenue and Expenditure Department ( Commercial Taxes 
Division)] 
115 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  

 ii 
4.14 
Loss of revenue owing to suppression of sales turnover by the hoteliers 
[Finance, Revenue and Expenditure Department ( Commercial Taxes 
Division)] 
119 
4.15 Loss of revenue 
(Energy and Power Department) 120 
4.16 Non-realisation of Government dues 
(Excise (Abkari) Department) 121 
4.17 Loss of revenue 
(Excise (Abkari) Department) 123 
4.18 
Loss of revenue 
[Finance, Revenue and Expenditure Department (Directorate of Sikkim State 
Lotteries)] 
124 
CHAPTER V:  GENERAL SECTOR 
5.1 Introduction 127 
5.2 Planning and conduct of Audit 128 
5.3 Effectiveness in the functioning of State Pollution Control Board 
(Forest, Environment and Wildlife Management Department) 129 
CHAPTER VI:  FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 
6.1 Follow up action on earlier Audit Reports 171 
6.2 Response of the departments to the recommendations of  the Public Accounts 
Committee 171 
6.3 Follow up audit on PAC recommendations on Development of Hydro Power 
Projects – Public Private Participation 172 
6.4 Monitoring 175 
6.5 Outstanding Inspection Reports 176 
6.6 Departmental Audit Committee Meetings 177 
 
 
 
 
Appendix Subject Page 
1.2.1 Audit conducted during 2014-15 under Social Sector 179 
2.2.1 Audit conducted during 2014-15 under Economic Sector 180 
2.4.1 Fruits 182 
2.4.2 Vegetables 182 
2.4.3 Spices 182 
2.4.4 Physical Target and Achievement under HMNEH 183 
2.7.1 Unwarranted inclusion of GSB-III in addition to GSB-I and GSB-II in works 184 
2.10.1 Statement showing details of defaulters who have availed housing loans 185 
3.1.1 Statement showing investments made by State Government in PSUs whose accounts 
are in arrears 187 
3.1.2 
Summarised financial position and working results of Government Companies and 
Statutory Corporations as per their latest finalised financial statements/accounts as on 
30 September 2015 
188 
3.2.1 Cases of fraudulent cash withdrawal 190 
4.13.1 Details of ITC sales uploaded by the wholesaler as compared with figure of ‘sales to 
registered dealer’ shown in quarterly returns 190 
4.13.2 Comparison of ITC purchase with local purchase shown in the returns 191 
4.15.1 KVA demand of the HTS consumers 192 
5.2.1 Audit conducted during 2014-15 under General Sector 194 
 
LIST OF APPENDICES

 
iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. This Report for the year ended March 2015 has been prepared for submission 
to the Governor of Sikkim under Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
2. The Report contains significant results of the performance audit and 
compliance audit of the Departments of the Government of Sikkim under the 
Social, Economic, Revenue and General Services including the Departments 
of Human Resource Development; Energy and Power; Horticulture and Cash 
Crop Development; Forest, Environment and Wildlife Management; Roads 
and Bridges; Rural Management and Development; Transport; Finance, 
Revenue and Expenditure; Excise (Abkari); Land Revenue and Disaster 
Management; Building and Housing and public sector undertakings/Board, 
viz. Sikkim State Co-operative Bank Limited, Sikkim Tourism Development 
Corporation Limited and Sikkim Housing Development Board. 
3. The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which came to notice in the 
course of test audit for the period 2014-15 as well as those which came to 
notice in earlier years, but could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports; 
instances relating to the period subsequent to 2014-15 have also been 
included, wherever necessary. 
4. The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
  
PREFACE  
 

Executive Summary 
 
 v 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Audit Report has been prepared in six chapters. Chapters I to V deal with Social, 
Economic, Public Sector Undertakings, Revenue and General Sectors and Chapter VI 
deals with Follow up of Audit observations. 
This Report contains 30 audit paragraphs (including 14 general paragraphs) and three 
Performance Audits. According to the existing arrangements, copies of the draft 
compliance audit paragraphs and draft performance audits were sent to the Secretary of 
the Department concerned by the Accountant General (Audit) with a request to furnish 
replies within six weeks. Replies were received from the departments concerned except in 
respect of 4 paragraphs (1.3, 2.7, 2.8 and 3.3).   
 
SOCIAL SECTOR 
 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT 
 
Against the financial propriety, Human Resource Development Department (HRDD) 
procured laptops at an expenditure of  47.43 crore for free distribution to the students. 
Due to drawal of loan on behalf of and for the HRDD, the Sikkim State Cooperative 
Supply and Marketing Federation Limited (SIMFED) suffered a loss of  1.22 crore 
towards payment of interest on loan. 
(Paragraph 1.3) 
 
ECONOMIC SECTOR 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
 
Implementation of Re-Structured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms 
Programme in Sikkim 
 
In order to restore the commercial viability of the power distribution sector, Government 
of India (GoI) introduced (2000-01) the Accelerated Power Development Programme 
(APDP), which was later renamed (2002-03) as Accelerated Power Development and 
Reforms Programme (APDRP). The objectives of APDRP were to improve financial 
viability of State Power Utilities, reduce Aggregate Technical and Commercial (AT&C) 
losses and increase reliability and quality of power supply. The GoI continued 
(September 2008) ‘Re-structured Accelerated Power Development and Reform 
Programme (R-APDRP) with revised terms and conditions. The R-APDRP scheme was 
to be implemented in two parts - Part-A involved establishment of an IT system capable 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 vi 
of energy accounting, auditing and measuring AT&C loss and Part-B involved 
improvement of distribution infrastructure.  
The Energy and Power Department (EPD), Government of Sikkim (GoS) selected two 
towns namely Gangtok and Upper Tadong for the implementation of the Scheme in the 
State which had AT&C loss of around 59 and 54 per cent before the implementation of 
the scheme. Part-A of the Scheme, which was approved (September 2009) had been 
completed (November 2013). The works relating to Part-B of the Scheme, which was 
approved (August 2010) by GoI were ongoing (October 2015).  
The Performance Audit on the implementation of the R-APDRP scheme by EPD for the 
period from 2010-11 to 2014-15 showed that due to delay in release of counterpart 
funding by GoS, GoI stalled release of balance funds ( 41.07 crore) towards its share of 
project funding causing adverse impact on implementation of the projects. Detailed 
Project Reports prepared for Part-B project works were not realistic due to adoption of 
unverified data of AT&C losses. Further, EPD made certain revisions in the approved 
DPRs of the projects without approval of PFC/GoI contrary to the scheme conditions. The 
implementation of the project by EPD was found to be deficient as instances of sub-
contracting of project works by the Contractors were noticed in violation of the agreed 
terms of the works contract. EPD did not plan for dismantling and disposal of the 
replaced assets leading to possibility of damages/theft of these assets as well as 
unnecessary occupation of the available space.  
Despite the mandatory requirement of the Scheme, EPD did not ensure an active State 
Level Distribution Reforms Committee in place for monitoring of the Scheme works. 
EPD also failed to submit the Monthly Progress Reports on the Scheme works to the 
Power Finance Corporation Limited/GoI for monitoring of the project works and 
utilisation of project funds. In absence of an effective monitoring mechanism for 
implementation of the Scheme works, Part-A works of the project were completed after a 
delay of 18 months from the scheduled date of completion while the Part-B works could 
be completed to the extent of 45.13 per cent only even after lapse of more than one year 
of the scheduled completion date.  
As against the envisaged target of reducing the AT&C losses to the level of 15 per cent 
for a continuous period of five years, EPD could bring down the AT&C losses in respect 
of two cities (Gangtok and Upper Tadong towns) covered under the Scheme to 36.97 and 
34.32 per cent respectively during the first five years of Scheme implementation. Due to 
failure in achieving the targeted level of AT&C loss as well as non-completion of the 
Part-B project works within five years of sanctioning (August 2010) of the Scheme, EPD 
was not likely to get the benefit of conversion of GoI loan into grants under the scheme.  
The progress of installation of consumer electronic meters by EPD was slow due to taking 
up the work departmentally. 
 
(Paragraph 2.3) 
 
 

Executive Summary 
 
 vii 
Horticulture Development in Sikkim 
 
Considering the varied topography, scattered and marginal land holdings of the farmers in 
Sikkim, horticultural crops were thought to be a viable alternative in generating 
employment and supplementing farmers’ income beyond subsistence level. The efforts of 
the Department through technological transfer, input and infrastructure support such as 
green houses, irrigation facilities, etc. had helped the farmers in supplementing their 
income to an extent. Some of the farmers have also excelled and earned income ranging 
between 0.50 and 2.5 lakh per annum. However, majority of the farmers were not able 
to come above the subsistence level primarily owing to small land holding and absence of 
adequate marketing facilities. The Department also needed to expedite the base line 
survey, formulation of TSG, appropriate preparation of Perspective Plan and Annual 
Action Plans. The infrastructural facilities such as Integrated Floriculture Pack House, 
Sorting and Grading line for Sikkim mandarin, etc. should be put to their intended use. 
The mother blocks should be executed in CoEs to ensure contribution towards improved 
varieties of various crops as was done in Odisha, Haryana, etc. Suitable steps were 
required to be initiated to enhance the productivity of fruits, vegetables and spices to 
catch up with similarly placed States and all India average. This will help to realise full 
potential of the horticulture and make it an effective tool for accelerating development in 
the State. The Horticulture Development will receive further fillip once the Department 
initiates corrective actions in the areas of concern pointed out in this report. 
(Paragraph 2.4) 
 
 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT 
 
Imprudent decision of Energy and Power Department for re-tendering of work led to 
extra expenditure of 2.27 crore on execution. 
(Paragraph 2.5) 
 
Failure of Energy and Power Department to communicate the Government approved 
terms for release of Mobilisation Advance (MA) to the contractor led to non-recovery of 
interest of  2.79 crore on MA. 
(Paragraph 2.6) 
 
The unwarranted inclusion of item of work Water Bound Macadem (WBM)-III in 
addition to WBM-I and WBM-II in construction of road works by Roads and Bridges 
Department led to extra avoidable expenditure of  2.32 crore in 16 works. 
(Paragraph 2.7) 
 
Non-adherence to the provision of SPW Manual in tendering process by Roads and 
Bridges Department, absence of competitive bidding and award of work at abnormally 
higher tender rate over and above Schedule of Rates (SOR) 2012 rates resulted in an extra 
expenditure with consequential undue financial benefit to the contractor to the tune of  
 2.27 crore and further committed extra benefit of  5.21 crore on residual work. 
(Paragraph 2.8) 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 viii 
Unrealistic assessment of damaged houses, improper planning and execution of works by 
Rural Management and Development Department resulted in delay in reconstruction of 
houses, failure in extending intended benefits of providing emergent shelters to displaced 
victims due to earthquake. Avoidable expenditure of 1.09 crore was also incurred. 
(Paragraph 2.9) 
 
Failure of Sikkim Housing Development Board to recover and adjust the outstanding 
loans against the retirement/terminal benefits of the Government employees led to non-
recovery of loan to the tune of  63.94 lakh over a period since May 1994. Also,  33.57 
lakh given to 6 ineligible private persons remained to be recovered and no action had 
been initiated in respect of 59 employees against the outstanding loan of  23.51 lakh 
from the Government employees on roll. 
(Paragraph 2.10) 
 
ECONOMIC SECTOR (PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKING) 
 
 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT 
 
Failure of the internal control system in Sikkim State Co-operative Bank Limited and 
serious negligence on the part of branch officials led to fraudulent withdrawal of cash 
aggregating  24.12 lakh at Hee Gaon Branch. 
(Paragraph 3.2) 
 
Sikkim Tourism Development Corporation paid  0.33 crore to the contractor for the 
work components not executed and did not utilise components created at a cost of  0.31 
crore. 
(Paragraph 3.3) 
 
REVENUE SECTOR 
 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT 
 
Collection of Revenue from outsourced activities in Motor Vehicles Tax: The State 
Government had outsourced three activities, viz. implementation of HSRP, Smoke 
emission testing and sale of various forms for availing services under MV Act and Rules. 
Though the Department successfully implemented the HSRP scheme in the State, 
however, implementation process lacked efficiency and effectiveness. The data on 
vehicles’ population was not reliable as there was marked difference in the report 
furnished by the Department based on its computerised system with that shown in its own 
Annual Reports. The Department failed to assess the reasonability of rates while 
awarding the contract to the successful bidder for affixing HSRP resulting in higher cost 
of HSRP affixation in the State as compared to other States. The Department did not float 
NIT well in time to protect the revenue interest of the State and could not avail 
competitive rates for subsequent term and instead kept on renewing the contract to the 
existing firm for a period exceeding a year.  

Executive Summary 
 
 ix 
Two Auto Emission Testing Centres were being operated in the State by one firm at an 
annual royalty of 0.90 lakh which was increased to 2.53 lakh as of March 2015. The 
contract with the existing firm continued to be renewed periodically despite submission of 
offers from other interested firms for operating the centres. This indicated absence of 
transparency and competitive bidding in selection process resulting in failure to safeguard 
the revenue interest of the State. Revenue sharing model was defective as it did not ensure 
linkage between the increasing number of vehicles and revenue to be deposited to the 
Government by the firm. Due to incorporation of defective clause in the contract 
agreement as well as in SMV Rules requiring the owners to undertake pollution control 
check every six months right from the date of registration even for new vehicles as 
against the provision of CMV Rules requiring pollution check only after expiry of 12 
months from date of initial registration resulted into extra financial burden on vehicle 
owners. Only 7 to 9 per cent of registered vehicles in the State had obtained Pollution 
Under Control (PUC) certificates which indicated weakness of enforcement mechanism 
creating the possibility of increasing vehicular pollution in the State.  
The services relating to sale of forms for availing various services under Motor Vehicles 
was outsourced to one agent since 1990-91 against the instruction of the Ministry of 
Surface Transport, GoI for issue of forms free of cost resulting in extra financial burden 
to the vehicle owners. 
(Paragraph 4.12) 
 
The Audit of Commercial Taxes Division revealed system and compliance deficiencies in 
the Input Tax Credit system. In the existing system, the ITC module is not directly linked 
with the quarterly returns module as a result of which there were differences in ITC sales 
figure as compared with the ‘sales to registered dealer’ figure reflected in the returns or 
ITC purchase figure as compared with the local purchase figure reflected in the returns. In 
most of the cases, scrutiny of returns of selling dealers revealed that the sale to registered 
dealer were more than ITC allowed by them. Provisions of SVAT 2005 were not 
incorporated in the system. 
(Paragraph 4.13) 
 
Inadequate action on the part of the Assessing Authorities at Commercial Taxes Division 
to scrutinise the e-returns submitted by the hoteliers in respect of sales of cooked food 
and non-alcoholic beverages for the period 2012-13 and 2013-14 led to loss of revenue of 
 2.59 crore. 
(Paragraph 4.14) 
 
Failure of Energy and Power Department to install Maximum Demand Indicator resulted 
in non-levy of Demand Charges of  0.42 crore from High Tension Supply consumers for 
the load exceeded over and above the Contract/Sanctioned demand. 
(Paragraph 4.15) 
 
Excise (Abkari) Department failed to realise committed payment of  5.79 crore from the 
person entrusted with management, control and governance of Sikkim Distilleries 
Limited (SDL) during December 2009 to March 2015. The State exchequer also suffered 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 x 
a resultant loss of  1.20 crore towards interest that could have been earned from the 
investment of revenue not realised. 
(Paragraph 4.16) 
 
Error in language in the notification by Excise (Abkari) Department for imposing bottling 
fee resulted in a revenue loss of  4.32 crore during the years 2011-12 to 2013-14. 
(Paragraph 4.17) 
 
Without issue of original license by Directorate of Sikkim State Lotteries which should 
have been obtained against payment of five crore for five years, renewal of the same @ 
 50 lakh per annum for five years resulted in revenue loss of 2.5 crore. 
(Paragraph 4.18) 
 
GENERAL SECTOR 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
 
Performance Audit on “Effectiveness in the functioning of State Pollution 
Control Board” 
 
The Board did not prepare Annual Action Plans since its inception in 1992. There was no 
inventorisation of industries, stones crusher/hot-mix plants, DG sets, hotels, HCFs, etc. 
which resulted in operation without consent as well as non-realisation of revenue by the 
Board. Several industries, municipalities, healthcare establishments were operating 
without valid/renewed Consent for Operation. Out of 13 towns, 12 towns were operating 
without any sewage treatment facilities. Some of the industries were not having any ETPs 
and in some of the industries, ETPs were not functioning. Municipal waste was not 
treated properly and treatment facilities were not sufficient to treat waste generated in the 
State as most of the towns were not having such facilities. The UDHD had not so far 
constructed any landfill site for disposal of untreated non-biodegradable waste. 
Hazardous waste was also not disposed in prescribed time as most of the industries had 
kept accumulated hazardous waste in their premises openly. Out of 69 HCFs, only 20 
HCFs had obtained BMW authorisation. Some of the HCFs were not having required 
treatment equipment. The Board was not fully equipped with lab equipment to carry out 
various types of water and air testing and monitoring facilities. No Air Quality 
Monitoring Stations were established despite incurring expenditure of 30.77 lakh on 
procurement of equipment. There was no authorised collection centre and registered 
dealer in the State for handling of e-waste. There was huge shortage of water and air stack 
lab equipment in the Central Lab of the Board. Out of total funds of  13.70 crore 
available with the Board during the period of PA, the Board could utilise  8.02 crore 
only with a saving of  5.68 crore. The Board failed to enforce Water Cess Act and hence 
could not collect water cess of  0.60 crore. There was diversion of funds towards various 
purposes like construction, payments on salaries, purchase of vehicles, furniture, 
computers, establishment of saw mills, etc. amounting to  90.01 crore from the Sikkim 

Executive Summary 
 
 xi 
Ecology Funds and Environment Cess, which was collected to protect and improve the 
quality of environment, control and abate environment pollution and to take measures for 
restoration of ecological balance of the State. The Board did not categorise the industries 
into ‘Red’, ‘Orange’ and ‘Green’ as a result of which there was substantial shortfall in 
conducting inspections in these industries. There was no monitoring exercised by the 
Board on compliance of environmental norms by industries, stone crushers, STPs, MSW 
Plants, etc. Despite such large number of violations, the Board failed to initiate legal 
action to contain pollution. 
(Paragraph 5.3) 

Chapter I: Social Sector 
 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.1     Introduction 
 
This Chapter of the Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 201 5 deals with the 
findings on audit of the State Government units under Social Sector. 
The names of the State Government departments and the total budget allocation and 
expenditure of the State Government under Social Sector during the year 201 4-15 are 
given in the table below: 
Table 1.1.1 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the departments Total Budget Allocation Expenditure 
1 Cultural Affairs and Heritage 30.28 18.96 
2 Ecclesiastical Affairs 8.62 7.52 
3 Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs 37.90 33.13 
4 Health Care, Human Services and Family Welfare 361.17 261.34 
5 Human Resource Development 537.00 472.74 
6 Labour 18.11 13.29 
7 Social Justice, Empowerment and Welfare 140.92 94.25 
 TOTAL 1,134.00 901.23 
 
 
Besides the above, the Central Government has been transferring a sizeable amount of 
funds directly to the implementing agencies under the Social Sector to different 
departments of the State Government. The major transfers for implementation of flagship 
programmes of the Central Government are detailed below: 
Table 1.1.2 
(` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Department 
Name of the 
Scheme/Programme Implementing Agency 
Funds 
transferred 
during the year 
1 Cultural Affairs  Promotion and Dissemination 
of Art and Culture 
Himalayan Heritage Research 
and Development Society 5.01 
2 Ecclesiastical 
Affairs Buddhist and Tibetan Studies 
Tingkye Gonjang Nyingma 
Trust 15.00 
Sikkim Namgyal Institute of 
Tibetology, Gangtok 220.00 
Sendrup Choiling Trust 2.50 
3 
Health Care, Human 
Services and Family 
Welfare 
Assistance to Voluntary 
Organisation for providing 
Social Defence 
Association for Social Health 
in India 9.95 
4 Human Resource 
Development 
Higher Education Statistics and 
Public Information System 
(HESPIS) 
 
Aishe State Unit Sikkim 2.00 
 
CHAPTER I 
SOCIAL SECTOR 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 2 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Department 
Name of the 
Scheme/Programme Implementing Agency 
Funds 
transferred 
during the year 
5 
Social Justice, 
Empowerment and 
Welfare 
Grant-in-aid to NGOs for STs 
including coaching and allied 
scheme and award for 
exemplary service 
Human Development 
Foundation of Sikkim, GRBA 
Road Chongey Tar, Gangtok, 
East Sikkim 
25.64 
Assistance to disabled persons 
for purchase/fitting DDRC, Gangtok, East Sikkim 14.66 
Awareness Gemeratopm and 
Publicity DDRC, Gangtok, East Sikkim 4.76 
TOTAL  299.52 
Source: Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System of the GOI. 
 
 
1.2     Planning and conduct of Audit 
 
Audit process starts with the assessment of risks faced by various departments of 
Government based on expenditure incurred, criticality/complexity of activities, level of 
delegated financial powers, assessment of overall internal controls, etc. 
After completion of audit of each unit on a test check basis, Inspection Reports containing 
audit findings are issued to the heads of the departments. The departments are to furnish 
replies to the audit findings within one mont h of rece ipt of the Inspection Reports. 
Whenever replies are received, audit findings are either settled  based on reply/action 
taken or further action is required by the audited entities  for compliance . Some of the  
important audit observations arising out of the  Inspection Reports are processed for 
inclusion in the Audit Reports, which are submitted to the Governor of the State under 
Article 151 of the Constitution of India for laying on the table of the Legislature. 
Test audits were conducted involving expenditure of ` 685.97 crore (including 
expenditure of ` 657.98 crore of previous years) of the State Government under Social 
Sector. The details of year-wise break-up is given in Appendix 1.2.1. 
This Chapter contains one Compliance Audit Paragraph as given below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3     Loss on interest 
 
 
 
 
 
SIKKIM STATE COOPERATIVE SUPPLY AND MARKETING 
FEDERATION LIMITED  
AND 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
Against the financial propriety, Human Resource Development Department 
(HRDD) procured laptops at an expenditure of ` 47.43 crore for free 
distribution to the students. Due to drawal of loan on behalf of and for the 
HRDD, the Sikkim State Cooperative Suppl y and Marketing Federation 
Limited (SIMFED) suffered a loss of ` 1.22 crore towards payment of interest on 
loan. 

Chapter I: Social Sector 
 3 
 
With a view to empower the senior school children and college students with modern IT 
tools, the State Government launched (2013 -14) a flagship programme to enable students 
to approach higher education with the confidence of being completely computer literate 
and having the ability to access information through the internet and other software at par 
with their peers elsewhere in the country.  
SIMFED, an apex Co -operative Society, on behalf of Human Resources Development 
Department (HRDD), Government of S ikkim, Gangtok procured 18,500 l aptops (Lenovo 
brand) in two phases, i.e. 11,000 in July 2013 and 7,500 in November 2013 from Lenovo 
India Private Limited at a total cost of ` 44.99 crore for distribution to students of Class 
XI, XII and collegians all across the State. The laptops were distributed during September 
2013 to December 2013. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that the Government of Sikkim had made provision of ` 20 
crore for purchase of computers during 2013 -14. SIMFED was requested to arrange 
finance to purchase the laptops and make payment on behalf of HRDD. Accord ingly, 
SIMFED availed soft loan to the tune of ` 18 crore1 from State Bank of Sikkim @ 12 per 
cent per annum interest accruing thereon amounting to ` 1.22 crore 2. Total expenditure 
incurred on purchase of laptops amounted to ` 47.43 crore (including SIMFED  
commission and other taxes). 
Despite inadequate budget provision, the purchase of laptops as one-time exercise for 
academic session 2013 instead of implementing the programme in a phased manner as per 
availability of fund was against the financial proprie ty on the part of HRDD. Further, 
drawal of soft loan on behalf of HRDD by the SIMFED led to an avoidable expenditure 
of ` 1.22 crore towards interest. 
While the HRDD had not replied till September 2015, SIMFED stated (August 2015) that 
it did not suffer from any loss in this transaction since the interest components had not 
been borne by SIMFED. The reply is not tenable, though the interest component will be 
borne by HRDD as stated by SIMFED but it is actually a loss to the Government in the 
form of interest.  
 
  
                                                           
1      ` 10 crore (January 2014), `  5 crore (March 2014) and ` 3 crore (June 2014). 
2      ` 30 lakh (July 2014), `  76.17 lakh (September 2014) and ` 16.10 lakh (January 2015). 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1     Introduction 
 
This Chapter of the Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 201 5 deals with the 
findings on audit of the State Government units under Economic Sector. 
The names of the State Government departments and the total budget allocation and 
expenditure of the State Government under Economic Sector during the year 2014-15 are 
given in the table below: 
Table 2.1.1 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Departments Total Budget 
Allocation Expenditure 
1 Animal Husbandry, Livestock, Fisheries and Veterinary Services 48.97 40.63 
2 Buildings and Housing 56.92 49.59 
3 Commerce and Industries 57.62 44.99 
4 Co-operation 16.52 15.31 
5 Energy and Power 202.78 167.75 
6 Food Security and Agriculture Development 73.00 51.16 
7 Forest, Environment and Wildlife Management 286.23 175.98 
8 Horticulture and Cash Crops Development 93.69 59.92 
9 Irrigation and Flood Control 154.48 22.66 
10 Mines, Minerals and Geology 4.23 3.78 
11 Roads and Bridges 303.16 155.05 
12 Rural Management and Development 494.19 379.95 
13 Tourism  and Civil Aviation  442.72 285.05 
14 Transport 56.87 51.19 
15 Urban Development and Housing 280.86 111.56 
16 Water Security and Public Health Engineering 92.04 55.51 
 TOTAL 2,664.28 1,670.08 
 
Besides the above, the Central Government has been transferring a sizeable amount of 
funds directly to the implementing agencies under the Economic Sector to different 
departments of the State Government. The major transfers for implementation of flagship 
programmes of the Central Government are detailed below: 
Table 2.1.2 
 (` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Department 
Name of the 
Scheme/Programme Implementing Agency 
Funds 
transferred 
during the 
year 
1 
Animal Husbandry, 
Livestock, Fisheries 
and Veterinary Services 
Scheme for Infrastructure 
Development FPI 
Sikkim Livestock Processing and 
Development Corporation Ltd. 18.93 
2 Energy and Power 
Grid Interactive Renewable 
Power MNRE 
Sikkim Power Development 
Corporation Limited 139.70 
Information Publicity and  
Extension 
Sikkim Renewal Energy 
Development Agency 0.06 
Off Grid DRPS Sikkim Renewable Energy 
Development Agency 141.33 
Renewal Energy for Rural 
Applications for all Villages 
Sikkim Renewal Energy 
Development Agency 28.30 
 
CHAPTER II 
ECONOMIC SECTOR 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 6 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Department 
Name of the 
Scheme/Programme Implementing Agency 
Funds 
transferred 
during the 
year 
3 
Forest, 
Environment and 
Wildlife 
Management 
Environment Information 
Education and Awareness State Environment Agency 64.83 
North East Council State Forest Development 
Agency 4.75 
National Medicinal Plants 
Board SMPB, Sikkim 1.00 
National Medicinal Plants 
Board 
State Forest Development 
Agency 610.82 
4 
Gangtok 
Municipal 
Corporation 
Technical Assistance from 
Department of International 
Development 
Gangtok Municipal 
Corporation 125.00 
5 
Handicraft and 
Handloom 
Directorate 
National Handloom 
Development Programme 
Sikkim Handicrafts 
Development Corporation Ltd. 45.80 
NER – Textile Promotion 
Scheme 
Sikkim Handicrafts 
Development Corporation Ltd. 147.72 
Technology Development 
Programme A158 
Sikkim Handicrafts 
Development Corporation Ltd. 2.50 
6 Tourism and Civil 
Aviation 
Capacity Building for Service 
Provider 
Sikkim Tourism Development 
Corporation Ltd. 18.82 
Capacity Building for Service 
Provider 
Food Craft Institute, 
Kichudumra, Namchi, South 
Sikkim 
8.14 
North Eastern Council Sikkim Tourism Development 
Corporation Ltd. 5.75 
TOTAL 1,363.45 
Source: Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System of the GOI. 
 
 
2.2     Planning and conduct of Audit 
 
Audit process starts with the assessment of risks faced by various departments of 
Government based on expenditure incurred, criticality/complexity of activities, level of 
delegated financial powers, assessment of overall internal controls, etc. 
After completion of audit of each unit on a test check basis, Inspection Reports containing 
audit findings are issued to the heads of the departments. The departments are to furnish 
replies to the audit findings within one month of receipt of the Inspection Reports. 
Whenever replies are received, audit findings are either settled based on reply/action 
taken or further action is required by the audited entities  for compliance. Some of the 
important audit observations arising out of these Inspection Reports are processed for 
inclusion in the Audit Reports, which are submitted to the Governor of the State under 
Article 151 of the Constitution of India for laying on the table of the Legislature. 
Test audits were conducted involving expenditure of ` 1,306.82 crore (including 
expenditure of ` 902.76 crore of previous years) of the State Government under 
Economic Sector. The details of year -wise break -up is given in Appendix 2.2.1 . This 
Chapter contains two Performance Audits on ‘Implementation of Re -structured 
Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme in Sikkim’, and ‘Horticulture 
Development in Sikkim’ and six Compliance Audit Paragraphs as given below: 
 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 7 
 
 
 
 
2.3  Implementation of Re -structured Accelerated Power Development and 
Reforms Programme in Sikkim 
 
In order to restore the commercial viability of the power distribution sector, Government 
of India (GoI) introduced (2000 -01) the Accelerated Power Development Programme 
(APDP), which was later renamed (2002 -03) as Accelerated Power Development and 
Reforms Programme (APDRP).  The objectives of APDRP were to improve financial 
viability of State Power Utilities, reduce Aggregate Technical and Commercial (AT&C) 
losses and increase reliability and quality of power supply. The GoI continued 
(September 2008) ‘Re -structured Accelerat ed Power Development and Reform 
Programme (R-APDRP) with revised terms and conditions. The R-APDRP scheme was to 
be implemented in two parts – Part-A involved establishment of an IT system capable of 
energy accounting, auditing and measuring AT&C loss and Part-B involved improvement 
of distribution infrastructure.  
The Energy and Power Department (EPD), Government of Sikkim (GoS) is responsible 
for transmission and distribution of electricity in the State of Sikkim.  Besides, the EPD 
also undertakes the pow er generation upto 25 MW while the generation of electricity 
above 25 MW in the State was being undertaken through Independent Power Projects 
(IPPs). The EPD selected two towns namely Gangtok and Upper Tadong for the 
implementation of the programme in the State of Sikkim which had AT&C loss of around 
59 and 54 per cent before the imp lementation of the scheme. Part-A of the Scheme, which 
was approved (September 2009) had been completed (November 20 13). The works 
relating to Part -B of the Scheme, which was ap proved (August 2010) by GoI were 
ongoing with completion percentage of around 45 per cent (October 2015).  
The present audit was conducted to assess the performance of EPD in implementation of 
the R-APDRP scheme in the State during the period 2010 -11 to 20 14-15. The following 
are the highlights of the Audit: 
 
Highlights 
 
Due to delay in release of counterpart funding by GoS, Government of In dia 
(GoI) also stalled release of  the balance funds (` 41.07 crore) towards its share of 
project funding causing adverse impact on implementation of the projects. 
(Paragraph-2.3.7.1) 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) prepa red for Part -B project works were  
unrealistic due to adoption of unverified data of Aggregate Technical & 
Commercial (AT&C) losses. Further, the revisions made by EPD in the approved 
DPRs of the projects without approval of PFC/GoI was irregular. 
(Paragraph-2.3.7.3) 
ENERGY AND POWER DEPARTMENT 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 8 
Contrary to the provisions of the Work Manual, EPD did not plan for 
dismantling and disposal of the replaced assets leading to possibility  of 
damages/theft of these assets and unnecessary occupation of the available space. 
(Paragraph-2.3.7.5) 
Due to failure in achieving the targeted level (15 per cent) of AT&C loss as well as 
non-completion of the Part -B project works within five years of sanctioning 
(August 2010) of the Scheme, EPD was not likely to get the benefit of conversion 
of GoI loan into grants under the scheme. 
(Paragraph-2.3.9.4) 
 
2.3.1    Introduction 
 
The Energy and Power Department (EPD), Government of Sikkim (GoS) is responsi ble 
for transmission and distribution of electricity in the State of Sikkim. Besides, the power 
generation upto 25 MW was also being undertaken by EPD while generation of electricity 
above 25 MW in the State was being undertaken through Independent Power P rojects 
(IPPs). 
Background 
The distribution system of the power sector constitutes the final link between the 
distribution utility and the consumer. Thus, the real challenge of reforms in the power 
sector lies in efficient management of the distribution system. As a mean for restori ng the 
commercial viability of the power Distribution Sector, Government of India (GoI) 
introduced (2000 -01) the Accelerated Power Development Programme (APDP), which 
was later renamed (2002 -03) as Accelerated Power Development and Reforms 
Programme (APDRP). The objectives of APDRP were to improve financial viability of 
State Power Utilities, reduce Aggregate Technical and Commercial (AT&C) losses and 
increase reliability and quality of power supply. The GoI continued (September 2008) 
‘Re-structured Acceler ated Power Development and Reform Programme (R -APDRP) 
with revised terms and conditions.  
R-APDRP Scheme features 
The R -APDRP introduced (September 2008) by the GoI envisaged establishment of 
reliable and automated systems for sustained collection of accurate base line data and 
adoption of Information Technology in the areas of energy accounting before taking up 
the regular distribution strengthening projects. EPD was responsible for the 
implementation of R-APDRP in the State of Sikkim. 
The main objectives of R-APDRP were to: 
 reduce Aggregate Technical & Commercial losses (AT&C losses); 
 reduce outages and interruptions; 
 increase consumer satisfaction. 
In the case of Special Category States (viz. all North Eastern States, Sikkim, Uttarakhand, 
Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir), R-APDRP was intended to cover the urban 
areas (towns and cities) with a population limit of 10,000 and more. 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 9 
Projects under the present scheme were to be taken up in two parts as detailed below: 
Part-A: Preparation of Base-line data for the project area covered. The work of 
preparation of Base-line data broadly included the works relating to Consumer Indexing, 
Global Information System (GIS) Mapping, Metering of Distribution Transformers and 
Feeders, Automatic Data Logg ing for all Distribution Transformers and Feeders and 
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)/Distribution Management System 
(DMS)1 and Asset Mapping 2. Besides, the work also included compilation of 
information/data relating to adoption of IT appl ications for meter reading, billing and 
collection; energy accounting and auditing; Management Information System (MIS); 
redressal of consumer grievances; establishment of IT enabled consumer service centres , 
etc. Further, the base line data as well as the  newly installed system was required to be 
verified by an independent agency appointed by the Ministry of Power (MoP). 
Part-B: Renovation, modernisation and strengthening of 11 KV level substations, 
Transformers/Transformer Centres, Re -conductoring of line s at 11 KV level and below, 
Load Bifurcation, Feeder Separation, Load Balancing, 11 KV High Voltage Distribution 
System (HVDS), Aerial Bunched Conductoring in dense areas, replacement of 
electromagnetic energy meters with tamper proof electronic meters, in stallation of 
capacitor banks and mobile service centres , etc. In exceptional cases, where the sub -
transmission system was weak, strengthening at 33 KV or 66 KV levels was also to be 
considered.  
The EPD was simultaneously required to initiate the process of obtaining sanction and 
completing other formalities for execution of Part -A and Part-B projects. Part-B activities 
of the scheme were, however, likely to start 3 -6 months after making arrangements of 
ring fencing 3 of the project area and verification of  the starting figure of AT&C loss of 
the project area by an independent agency under Part-A of the R-APDRP. 
Nodal Agency 
The Power Finance Corporation (PFC) was appointed as the ‘Nodal Agency’ for 
operationalisation and implementation of R -APDRP programme,  under the overall 
guidance of the Ministry of Power (MoP), Government of India (GoI). 
Funding of the Scheme 
Part-A   Initially 100 per cent funds for the projects were to be provided by GoI in the 
form of interest bearing loan. The said loan along with interest was to be converted into 
grant after successful achievement of the system efficiency parameters and its verification 
by the independe nt agency appointed by the MoP through the nodal agency. Conversion 
of GoI loan to grant was, however, not allowed in case the R -APDRP projects were not 
                                                           
1      Only in project areas having a population over 4 lakh and annual input energy of 350 Million Unit . 
2     Asset Mapping of the entire distribution network at and below the level of 11 KV transformers and shall 
include the Distribution Transformers and Feeders, Low Tension lines, poles and other distribution 
network equipment. 
3     The project area is electrically ring fenced. Ring fencing is done to measure net input energy (difference 
of energy entering into and leaving) the project area through installation import/export meters at the 
boundary of the project area. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 10 
completed within three years from the date of sanctioning of the project. In such cases, 
the State util ity concerned was bound to repay the entire loan amount along with the 
interest. 
Part-B   For all North Eastern States including Sikkim, the GoI was to provide loan to the 
extent of 90 per cent of the PFC approved project cost under Part -B of R -APDRP. The 
balance funds were, however, required to be arranged by EPD through own sources or 
through borrowings from Financial Institutions (FIs) 4. To avail the benefit of conversion 
of GoI loan to grants, the State utility concerned was required to achieve the targ et of 
bringing down the AT&C loss to 15 per cent on sustainable basis, for five years besides 
completing the project within five years of its approval. The said benefit of conversion of 
loan into grant was to be provided in equal tranches every year for 5 years, starting one 
year after the year in which the base line data system of project area concerned was 
established and verified by the independent agency. 
 
2.3.2     Organisational chart 
 
The EPD was headed by the Principal Chief Engineer -cum-Secretary (PCE -cum-
Secretary) who was assisted by PCEs, CEs and Additional CEs, etc. as shown in the 
Chart-2.3.1. The CE/Electrical (HQ) was appointed as the nodal officer for 
implementation of R-APDRP in the State: 
Chart-2.3.1 
 
The three posts of PCEs were created as part of restructuring of EPD, which was to be 
done under the power sector reforms. The said reforms envisaged for unbundling of EPD 
into separate companies for taking up the activities re lating to generation, transmission 
and distribution of power in the State. Since GoS had not taken a decision on unbundling 
of EPD as envisaged under the power sector reforms, appointment to the above posts of 
PCEs was also pending. 
 
2.3.3     Audit objectives 
The objectives of the performance audit were to: 
                                                           
4       Namely PFC/Rural Electrification Corporation (REC)/multi-lateral institutions and/or own resources. 
PCE-cum-Secretary
PCE
(vacant)
PCE
(vacant)
CE (Mechanical)
1
CE (Electrical)
Out of 7, only 4 in position
CE (Civil)
1
PCE
(vacant)

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 11 
 assess the adequacy of funding and effectiveness of Financial Management; 
 efficiency and effectiveness in the implementation of projects; 
 adequacy of monitoring; and 
 achievement of scheme objectives.  
 
2.3.4     Audit Criteria 
 
The audit criteria adopted for assessing the achievement of the audit objectives were 
derived from the following sources: 
 R-APDRP guidelines; 
 Quadripartite agreement entered between GoS, PFC, EPD and MoP; 
 Sikkim Works Manual 2009; 
 Schedule of Rates approved by State PWD; 
 Terms and conditions of work contracts; 
 Detailed Project Reports for the scheme; 
 Guidelines issued by GoI/nodal agency for R-APDRP (PFC)/GoS. 
 
2.3.5    Audit Methodology  
 
The Performance Audit (PA) commenced with the entry conference on 27 May 2015 with 
the PCE -cum-Secretary, EPD where audit objectives and criteria were explained. The 
methodology adopted for attaining the objectives with reference to audit criteria consisted 
of scrutiny of records at EPD Offi ce, interaction with the officials of the audited entity, 
physical verification of completed/on -going projects jointly with the EPD officials, 
analysis of data with reference to audit criteria, raising of audit queries, discussion of 
audit findings with the officials of EPD and issue of draft PA report to EPD, Government 
of Sikkim (GoS) for comments. The findings of the Report were also discussed (2 
November 2015) with the PCE -cum-Secretary of EPD and other officials of EPD in the 
exit conference. The formal replies of EPD as well as the views offered by the EPD in the 
‘exit conference’ were considered while finalising this Report and the same appropriately 
included wherever necessary. 
 
2.3.6    Scope of Audit 
 
The present audit conducted during June 2015 to  August 2015, covered the 
implementation of the scheme in the State during the period 2010 -11 to 2014-15. The R-
APDRP scheme in Sikkim ha d been implemented in two towns,  viz. Gangtok and Upper 
Tadong. Under the two projects, Part -A works were completed (No vember 2013) while 
Part-B works under both the towns were ongoing (October 2015). Hence, the audit report 
covered the implementation of Part-A and Part-B works in these two towns. 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 12 
 
2.3.7    Audit Findings 
 
Audit findings relating to the implementation of  R-APDRP in the State are discussed in 
the succeeding paragraphs: 
Audit Objective-1: Funding and financial management 
Funding 
The funding mechanism for the scheme and the funds released there against are detailed 
in Table 2.3.1: 
Table 2.3.1 
 (` in crore) 
Particulars Part A Part B 
PFC approved project cost 11.63 68.46 
Project Cost after tendering 11.63 75.83 
 
Funding mechanism 100 per cent  
funding by GoI 
90 per cent of PFC approved project cost funded by 
GoI. The balance 10 per cent  plus tender premium, 
taxes and DPR preparation cost to be funded by GoS. 
Amount of GoI funding 11.63 61.61 
Amount of GoS funding Not applicable 14.22 
Amount released by GoI till 
date 10.47 20.54 
Amount released by GoS 
till date Not applicable 5.00 
 
2.3.7.1   Delay in release of counterpart funding by GoS 
As per clause 5.2 of R -APDRP guidelines, 90 per cent of the Part -B project cost was to 
be provided by GoI and the balance funds were to be arranged by EPD/GoS from own 
sources or by availing borrowings from Financial Institutions (FIs)/multi -lateral 
institutions. 
For implementation of R -APDRP scheme in Sikkim, EPD, GoS, MoP (GoI) and PFC 
signed (23 February 2010) a Quadripartite Agreement. As per Clause 5.3 of the 
agreement, EPD after adjustin g the GoI funding to the project cost, should make 
necessary tie ups with PFC/REC/multi -lateral institutions and/or own resources for 
arrangements of the balance project funding within two months of sanction of the project. 
For implementation of Part -B pro jects under R -APDRP in two towns (Gangtok and 
Upper Tadong) of Sikkim, PFC approved a cost of ` 68.46 crore. Accordingly, GoI 
sanctioned (August 2010) ` 61.61 crore being its share of 90 per cent  of the PFC 
approved project cost.  After tendering, the proj ect cost was revised to ` 75.83 crore. 
Hence, the balance amount of ` 14.22 crore5 should have been arranged by EPD through 
own resources or through borrowings from FIs, multilateral institutions, etc. Instead of 
initiating immediate steps to arrange the balance project funding through own 
resources/borrowings from FIs, etc., EPD preferred to avail the counterpart funding from 
GoS through budgetary allocation. EPD, however, could obtain (September 2012) 
commitment from GoS in this regard after a lapse of 25 months from the date (August 
                                                           
5    ` 75.83 crore - ` 61.61 crore = ` 14.22 crore. 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 13 
` 20.54 crore
` 5 crore
` 41.07 crore
` 9.22 crore
PART-B – Total cost ` 75.83 crore           
Amount released by PFC Amount released by GoS
To be released by PFC To be released by GoS
2010) of GoI sanction. This had correspondingly delayed execution of R-APDRP projects 
in the State. 
As per quadripartite agreement, 30 per cent of the PFC approved project costs were to be 
released by the GoI on sanction of project. Accordingly, GoI released (April 2011) 
` 20.54 crore out of its share ( ` 61.61 crore) for implementation of R -APDRP in the 
State. The release of the balance amount of ` 41.07 crore from GoI was, however, 
depended on release of counterpart funding of ` 14.22 crore by GoS. During March 2014 
to February 2015, EPD had received only ` 5 crore from GoS out of its committed share 
of ` 14.22 crore. The details of funding received by EPD from GoI/GoS against Part -B 
projects of R-APDRP are illustrated in Chart-2.3.2 below: 
Chart-2.3.2 
 
As the EPD was yet (October 2015) to receive the balance counterpart funding of ` 9.22 
crore from GoS, the release of the balance share of project funding ( ` 41.07 crore) from 
GoI had been stalled. As the entire amount of ` 25.54 crore received towards the  Part B 
project works had been utilised for the works, non -release of balance funds of ` 50.29 
crore by GoS ( ` 9.22 crore) and GoI ( ` 41.07 crore) had adversel y affected the progress 
of Part-B project works. 
The EPD stated (October 2015) that being a State  Government Department, EPD could 
not raise funds/loans independently and it had to depend on GoS for the counterpart 
funding of the scheme.  
However, it stands to reason that EPD as a Department of the State Government should 
actually have been prevailing upon GoS for timely providing of the counterpart funding 
so that balance project funding from GoI was available in time. 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 14 
2.3.7.2   Additional interest burden due to diversion of borrowing to scheme works 
To provide interest free advances to the Consultants 6 appointed in respect of Part -A and 
Part-B works of the Scheme, EPD borrowed funds from the State Government owned 
company, Sikkim Power Development Corporation Limited (SPDCL). The funds 
available at SPDCL had bee n borrowed from PFC at 13 per cent interest rate leading to 
avoidable interest burden on the GoS as detailed in Table-2.3.2:  
 
Table 2.3.2 
(` in lakh) 
Date of borrowing Amount 
borrowed Date of repayment Interest on7 
borrowing 
NPTI 
23.03.2009 39.90 Not repaid as of October 2015 34.29 
19.03.2010 13.93 Not repaid as on October 2015 10.14 
WIPRO 
22.09.2009 7.72 13 October 2010 1.06 
18.03.2010 23.16 13 October 2010 1.72 
Total additional interest burden 47.21 
The EPD accepted (October 2015) the facts and  stated that the borrowed fund would be 
repaid on receipt of R -APDRP funds.  Due to the diversion, there was an  avoidable 
interest burden on GoS to the extent of ` 47.21 lakh. 
Financial Management 
A prudent financial management requires that all funds received are utilised 
economically, efficiently and effectively. The deficiencies noticed in the financial 
management of EPD in implementation of the scheme in Sikkim have been discussed in 
succeeding paragraphs:  
2.3.7.3    DPRs prepared adopting unverified AT&C loss data 
The GoI approved (19 September 2008) the R -APDRP as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme. 
Even before sanctioning of the scheme, however, EPD issued (6 September 2008) a work 
order in favour of National Power Training Institute (Consulta nts) for implementation of 
Part-A and Part -B works of the scheme. It was, however, observed that the Consultants 
were appointed by EPD without inviting any tenders in violation of the provisions of 
Sikkim Financial Rules. The consultancy fee for executing the above work was fixed at 
1.6 per cent  of the total cost of DPRs. The scope of the work order included the 
following: 
1. Establishment of baseline data system. 
2. Conducting study for improvement and strengthe ning/up-gradation/renovation/ 
augmentation of existing power distribution system and other related issues to 
fulfil the objective of bringing down technical and commercial losses to 15 per 
cent. 
                                                           
6    Namely M/s WIPRO, Kolkata and National Power Training Institute (NPTI), an autonomous body 
functioning under MoP, GoI. 
7   Interest on borrowed funds calculated at  13 per cent simple interest per annum from the date of 
borrowing to date of repayment or 31 October 2015 whichever is earlier.  

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 15 
3. Preparation of DPRs for each town separately.  
Subsequently, an agreement was entered (14 November 2008) between EPD and the 
consultants wherein the scope of the work was reduced to preparation of DPRs for Part-B 
works only. 
It was observed that the guidelines (December 2008) of R-APDRP did not allow the State 
Utilities to incur consultancy charges on preparation of DPRs for Part -B works out of the  
GoI scheme funds. Hence, the EPD had to seek (November 2010) the approval of GoS for 
allocation of funds out of the State budget to meet the consultancy charges ( ` 1.23 crore) 
incurred by EPD which was approved (September 2013) by GoS. 
In this connection, following observations are made: 
 The planned sequence of work and the actual sequence of work are illustrated in 
Chart-2.3.3. The DPRs were prepared utilising base line d ata of Aggregate 
Technical & Commercial (AT&C) loss which had been calculated manually by 
the Consultants without ring fencing 8 and without being verified by an 
Independent Third Party Agency (ITPA). Ring fencing and verification of AT&C 
loss figure had be en introduced in the R -APDRP scheme so that high AT&C loss 
feeders could be identified and works could be taken up after fixing priority in 
such areas. In the absence of ring fencing and verification of base -line data 
calculation, the DPR prepared by the Consultants had no realistic basis. 
Chart 2.3.3 
 
 
 
 It was further observed that the actual work orders for execution of Part -B works 
in respect of Upper Tadong and Gangtok towns were issued (September 2012) 
after more than 40 months and 27 months of preparation (April 2009/May 2010) 
of DPRs for the two towns respectively. In the meantime, some components of 
works involving aggre gate cost of ₹ 12.68 crore had already been completed by 
EPD under North Eastern Council funded project and therefore, same were 
excluded from the work scope of the project. Besides, EPD had also added certain 
new items of work involving equivalent cost ( ₹ 12.68 crore) in the project scope 
on the plea that the requirements for these works emerged subsequent to 
                                                           
8     The project area is electrically ring fenced. Ring fencing is done to measure net input energy 
(difference of energy ente ring into and leaving) the project area through installation import/export 
meters at the boundary of the project area.  
1
•Fixing and verification of base
line AT&C data
2
•Preparation of DPR for Part B
works
3
•Commencement of Part B
Works
2
•Preparation of DPR for Part B works
(2010)
1
•Fixing and verification of base line
AT&C data (2011)
3
•Commencement of Part B Works
(2012)

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 16 
preparation of DPRs and were necessary to fulfil the basic purpose of the scheme. 
EPD accordingly recompiled the DPR incorporating the above changes in the 
project scope without changing the overall cost estimates of the project. It was, 
however, observed that EPD had neither referred the above changes to the 
Consultants for their concurrence , nor had obtained formal approval of PFC/GoI 
for the revisio ns made in the DPR. In the absence of approval by PFC for the 
changes made in the DPR, it also could not be confirmed whether the said changes 
had any impact on the overall achievement of scheme objectives.  
Thus, the DPRs prepared by EPD were unrealistic  due to adoption of unverified data of 
AT&C losses.  Further, the revisions made by EPD in the approved DPRs of the projects 
without approval of PFC/GoI was irregular. 
The EPD stated (October 2015) that the Consultant, being a GoI undertaking, was aware 
of the R -APDRP scheme before its approval by the GoI and had approached EPD 
offering its consultancy service. The agreement was, however, entered only after the 
sanction of the scheme. As regards preparation of DPR before ring fencing and 
verification of base-line data, EPD accepted the audit finding and stated that the objective 
of the scheme had not been compromised. Regarding the changes made in the DPRs, it 
was stated that the gap in time and resultant change in site conditions necessitated 
revision in DPRs. 
The fact, however, remained that to avail the intended benefits of the scheme, DPRs 
should have been prepared based on realistic and verified base-line data for achieving the 
intended benefits of the Scheme. Further, as per the Scheme conditions, it was  mandatory 
for EPD to obtain approval of PFC/GoI for any revisions in the approved DPRs. 
Audit Objective-2: Implementation of projects 
Project Execution 
Execution of the project finally determines the achievement of the scheme objectives.  
The deficiencies  relating to execution of the project are discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs: 
2.3.7.4    Sub-contracting of works 
A.  EPD awarded (14 November 2008) the  work of preparation of DPR for Part -B 
projects under R-APDRP to National Power Training Institute (NPTI) without following 
the tendering process. Clause 11.4 of the work contract stipulated that the agreement was 
personal to the parties to the agreement and that it should not be transferred or assigned 
wholly or in part by any party without the written consent of the other party.  
It was, however, observed that contrary to the agreed terms of the contract, NPTI h ad 
assigned the contract to M/s  Feedback Ventures Private Limited (sub -contractor) without 
obtaining the concurrence of EPD. 
In reply, EPD stated (October 2015) that the sub -contracting of the work was not 
intimated to EPD and it was not aware of the same.   

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 17 
The contention of EPD regarding not being aware of the sub -contracting of the work is 
not tenable in view of the fact that in a meeting convened (16 March 2009) by EPD to 
discuss the status of preparation of DPR, the representatives of the s ub-contractor were 
also present, as per the power point presentation made by NPTI to EPD. 
B.  The work of implementation of Part -B work pertaining to Upper Tadong was 
awarded (September 2012) to M/s Sinhal infrastructure (contractor). Clause 24 of the 
work contract stipulates that no part of the work should be assigned or sub -contracted by 
the contractor without the written approval of the Engineer-in-charge of EPD. 
During the joint physical inspection (July 2015) of the works at Upper Tadong by the 
audit team and the officials of EPD, it was noticed that all the feeder panels that had been 
installed under the scheme, at 66/11 KV Switch Yard at 5 th Mile and 11/11 KV Switch 
Yard at Deorali, had the name of the sub -contractor firm (M/s Pema Thupten Sherpa) 
instead of the Contractor (M/s Sinhal Infrastructure).  
The fact remained that sub-contracting of the work without the consent of EPD could lead 
to quality issues apart from violation of the agreement. 
In reply, EPD stated (October 2015) that the matter had been taken up with the 
Contractor. 
The replies are silent about why periodical inspections of the work were not carried out so 
that sub-contracting of scheme could have been deducted. 
2.3.7.5    Treatment of old and dismantled assets not specified  
As per clause 8.21 to 8.24 of the Works Manual, the account of dismantled old 
structure/assets should be maintained separately and recorded in the measurement book. 
Such dismantled assets should either be utilised on other works as far as possible or 
disposed of through tendering or auction. The indisposed balances of old and dismantled 
should also be physically verified once a year. 
Under the R -APDRP scheme, various overhead lines had been converted into 
underground lines. Contrary to the provisions of the Work Manual, however, it was 
noticed that the old/replaced overhead lines and poles had not be en dismantled/disposed 
of even after installation of underground lines in their place. It was further noticed that the 
work contracts entered into for the above works were also silent on treatment of the 
old/replaced assets. The following images illustrate  non-dismantling of old and replaced 
assets: 
 Image 2.3.1 Image 2.3.2 Image 2.3.3 
   
Old unused overhead cables  Old unused steel lettuce structures Old and unused Distribution 
transformer 


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 18 
In reply, EPD stated (October 2015) that due to fund constraints the dismantling of old 
structures could not be executed and some old structures were used for street lighting. 
The reply is not tenable as non -dismantling of old assets could lead to possibility of 
damages/theft of assets and unnecessary occupa tion of space besides loss of potential 
revenue through disposal of said scrap. 
 
2.3.8   Monitoring mechanism 
 
Audit Objective-3:  Monitoring 
 
2.3.8.1    Distribution Reforms Committee not active 
For the implementation of the R-APDRP scheme in Sikkim a quadripartite agreement was 
signed (February 2010) between EPD, MoP, GoS and PFC.   
Clause 11.1(b) of the agreement stipulates that GoS should constitute a state level 
Distribution Reforms Committee (DRC) under the Chairmanship of the Chief 
Secretary/Principal Secretary/Secretary (Power/Energy) to monitor the implementation of 
projects under the R-APDRP scheme. 
It was, however, noticed that though the DRC was constituted (2009) for monitoring of 
the project works, the same was non -functional since August 2009. In the absence of an 
active DRC, the monitoring of implementation of R -APDRP scheme was not effective 
leading to several deficiencies as discussed below: 
A. Delay in completion of works 
The works relating to Part A projects of R -APDRP were awarded (24 May 2011) to M/s 
Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) with scheduled date of completion as 23 May 2012. 
The works, however, could be completed (18 November 2013) after a delay of 18 
months. Similarly, EPD awarded (14 September 2012) work contracts for implementation 
of Part-B works pertaining to Gangtok and Upper Tadong towns to Mr. Bishal Chamling 
and Sinhal Infrastructure respectively with scheduled date of completion as 13 September 
2014. It was noticed that in spite of lapse of 14 months from the scheduled completion 
date (13 September 2014), the works were still pending for completion (October 2015).  
The progress of work in respect of Part-B projects as of October 2015 is in Table-2.3.3: 
Table 2.3.3 
(` in crore) 
Particulars Gangtok Upper Tadong Total 
Contract value  42.87 24.69 67.56 
Value of Work completed9 13.15 17.34 30.49 
Percentage of completion 30.67  70.23 45.13 
 
As could be seen from the above, even after the lapse of more than one year from the 
schedule completion date (13 September 2014), only 45.13 per cent  of Part -B works 
could be completed (October 2015) . Due to delay in completion, there was a risk of not 
                                                           
9     As measured and billed. 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 19 
availing the benefit of conversion of GoI loans into grants which could result in additional 
financial burden on the GoS in implementation of scheme. 
In reply, EPD stated (October 2015) that the delay in completion of work was due to non -
release of funds f rom GoS and consequential non -release of funds from PFC besides 
practical problems at site. 
The reply is not tenable as existence of an effective DRC could have helped EPD in 
addressing the issues like delays in release of project funds and difficult site conditions, 
etc. through better co-ordination with GoS and effective monitoring of project works. 
B. Non submission of Monthly Progress Report 
As per Clause 13(f) of the scheme guidelines, EPD was required to submit the progress 
report on execution of project  and utilisation of funds to PFC on monthly basis. It was, 
however, observed that EPD had not submitted any such r eport to PFC in respect of Part -
B works of R-APDRP projects since beginning (September 2012). Non-submission of the 
monthly progress reports by EPD could have adverse effects on the monitoring of project 
works and utilisation of project funds at the level of PFC/GoI. 
In reply, EPD stated (October 2015) that in the absence of requisition from PFC, EPD had 
not furnished any monthly progress report for Part-B works. 
The reply is not tenable since EPD was required to submit the monthly progress reports as 
per the scheme guidelines without the insistence of PFC. 
C.  Non operation of separate bank accounts 
As per clause 6.2 of quadripartite agreement, EPD was required to maintain separate bank 
accounts for effecting the financial transactions relating to Part-A and Part-B works of the 
scheme. The above provisions were aimed to ensure easy accounting, segregation and 
monitoring of expenditures incurred on t wo parts of the scheme. Contrary to the above 
stipulations, however, EPD had been operating all the financia l transactions relating to 
Part-A and B works of the scheme through single bank account only. EPD informed 
(October 2015) that the matter of opening  separate bank accounts for Part -A and Part -B 
works was taken up with GoS, but the same was not approved. 
Thus, in absence of separate bank accounts for Part -A and Part -B works, the monitoring 
and control of EPD over the expenditure incurred on two works was difficult. 
2.3.8.2    Ambiguity in scheme guidelines on payment of Consultancy charges 
As per the scheme guidelines (December 2008), the towns and cities with population of 
more than 30,000 (more than  10,000 in case of Special Category States) only wer e 
eligible for implementation of the scheme. The scheme guidelines were, however, silent 
on the source of data to be considered for deciding on the population criteria in respect of 
towns or cities to be selected for implementation of the scheme. 
Based on the available data on population of the cities/towns, EPD had identified total 13 
towns for implementation of scheme. The work for preparation of DPRs for Part-A works 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 20 
was awarded (February 2009) to M/s Wipro at a cost of ` 78.63 lakh in respect of 
selected 13 towns.  
Subsequently, PFC issued (May 2009) directions to select the towns/cities for scheme 
implementation based on the population data as per the 2001 census. Accordingly, EPD 
instructed (03 June 2009) M/s Wipro to co nsider only Gangtok and Upper Tadong for the 
above work as only these two towns fulfil the required population criteria as per the 2001 
census. By that time, however, Wipro had already (May/June 2009) prepared the site 
readiness report and the DPR in respe ct of all 13 towns originally envisaged for 
implementing the scheme. 
Audit observed that due to ambiguity of scheme guidelines regarding the source of 
population data to be considered for selection of towns/cities, EPD had to incur an 
avoidable expenditure of ` 66.5310 lakh, being the consultancy fee paid for preparation of 
site readiness report and DPR for eleven ineligible towns. 
In reply, EPD accepted (October 2015) the facts and confirmed that the guidelines did not 
specify the sourcing of population data. 
The EPD, however, should have obtained necessary clarification from PFC regarding the 
source of population data to be considered for the selection of towns/cities for the scheme 
before awarding the work to the Consultants. 
2.3.8.3    Absence of a functional State Electricity Regulatory Commission  
One of the eligibility criteria for availing the GoI funding under R-APDRP scheme in any 
State was that the State Governments concerned must have constituted a State Electricity 
Regulatory Commission (SERC).   
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 17(1) of the Electricity Regulatory 
Commission Act 1988, the GoS issued (November 2003) notification constituting the 
Sikkim Electricity Regulatory Commission (SERC). It was, however, observed that 
although the SERC was constituted (November 2003), GoS appointed (April 2011) the 
Chairperson of the Commission after more than seven years of its formation. Thus, even 
after approval of Part -A and Part -B projects (September 2009/August 2010) under the 
Scheme, the SERC remained inactive for 18 and 7 months respectively in violation of the 
Scheme conditions. 
 
2.3.9    Internal Control 
 
2.3.9.1    Payment against uninstalled equipment 
The work of implementation of Part -A project, involving IT related works, was awarded 
to M/s TCS Limited (TCS) at a contract value of ` 8.19 crore. The scope of work also 
included creation of a customer care centre (CCC) at a cost of ` 2.99 crore and involved 
installation of the following equipment: 
 
 
                                                           
10     ` 78.63 lakh for 13 towns.  Avoidable expenditure for 11 towns =` 66.53 lakh (78.63/13 x 11). 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 21 
Table 2.3.4 
(` in lakh) 
Sl. No. Particulars Quantity Total cost 
1 Head set 5 0.24 
2 Touch screen kiosk 1 1.61 
3 Integrated Database Management System (IDMS) along with 
automatic token dispenser machine 1 1.50 
4 Cash/cheque collection kiosk     2 5.90 
TOTAL  9.25 
 
During the joint physical verification of the site undertaken (06 August 2015) by audit 
and EPD officials, the above mentioned equipment were not found delivered/installed by 
TCS at CCC. It was, however, observed that while releasing payment against the running 
bills of TCS, these equipments were considered to be installed by EPD. 
Thus, EPD made payment of ₹ 9.25 lakh against uninstalled equipment without verifying 
the project site leading to excess payment to TCS besides defeating the scheme 
objectives. 
In reply, EPD accepted (October 2015) the audit finding and stated that any excess would 
be adjusted in the final bill of TCS. 
The reply confirmed the poor/ineffective monitoring of project works by EPD. 
2.3.9.2    Dedicated IT team not formed 
Information Technology (IT) wing of EPD was assigned with the works of resolving 
connectivity issues of leased line from BSNL. It was, however, observed that no 
dedicated IT team was created for R -APDRP and thus EPD was depende nt on the IT 
implementing agency of the scheme (viz. TCS) for attending/addressing IT related issues 
of R-APDRP. The contract of TCS was also to expire after five years of date of system 
becoming operational (November 2013). 
In reply, EPD stated that being  a Government Department, it could not appoint any IT 
related staff directly and some of the engineers had been trained and assigned with IT 
implementing agency. 
The reply is not tenable as EPD could not rectify any problems connected with the IT 
system an d had to solely rely on the IT implementing agency for attending IT related 
issues. 
2.3.9.3    Works Manual provisions ignored leading to excess payments 
As per Chapter 2.49 (1) and (3) of the Works Manual, the running account bills of the 
contractors should be verified for arithmetical accuracy and correctness of rates with 
reference to contract agreement. The above checks were, however, not exercised before 
release of payments agai nst contractor’s bill leading to several instances of excess 
payments as discussed below: 
A. Excess payment in violation of contract terms 
For execution of Part-B works, the contracts were awarded at a tender premium of 10 per 
cent above SOR. As per the contract agreement, said 10 per cent  premium was to be 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 22 
computed on original work value put to tender without tax components , viz. VAT, 
environment cess and labour cess. 
Scrutiny of running account bills of the Contractor revealed tha t EPD had paid 10 per 
cent tender premium on cost of work executed  including VAT and cess components 
leading to excess payment to contractors to the tune of ` 34.08 lakh. 
B. Labour cess not recovered 
Section 3(1) and (2) of the Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Cess Act, 
1996 (BOCW) stipulate a cess at rates 11 as notified by the State Government(s) 
concerned. Further, the BOCW Cess Rules, 1998 stipulate that in case the building and 
other construction wor k pertains to Government or a Public Sector Undertaking, such 
Government or the Public Sector Undertaking concerned was required to deduct the cess 
amount from the bills of the contractors in respect of such works. 
In violation of the above stipulations, t he EPD did not recover the labour cess amounting 
to ` 13 lakh 12 from the Contractors bills and not remitted the same to the Labour 
Department leading to undue benefit to the Contractors of Part-B projects. 
EPD stated (October 2015) that above issues were being looked into and if any excess 
payment had been made, the same would be recovered from the future bills of the 
Contractor’s concerned. 
The fact, however, remained that non -compliance to the provisions of the works 
contract/BOCW Act led to undue benefit to the Contractors. 
 
Audit Objective-4:  Fulfilment of scheme objectives 
 
Aggregate Technical and Commercial (AT&C) Loss 
AT&C Loss is the sum total of technical and commercial losses and it included 
unrecovered dues against energy billed as illustrated in the chart below: 
Chart-2.3.4 AT&C Loss components 
 
                                                           
11     Not exceeding two per cent and not less than one per cent. 
12    ₹ 11.93 lakh (Gangtok) and ₹ 1.08 lakh (Upper Tadong) worked out at the rate of 1 per cent (as notified 
(June 2009) by the State Government) on the cost of the works concerned.  
1. Energy Purchased
2. Energy Consumed
3.Energy Billed
4. Energy Paid
Commercial Losses
Unbilled energy = 2 minus 3
Unpaid energy = 3 minus 4
Technical losses= 1 minus 2

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 23 
 
Reasons for AT&C losses 
Chart-2.3.5 Reasons for AT&C Losses 
 
 
2.3.9.4    Achievement against AT&C loss targets 
The R -APDRP scheme was introduced in the S tate during 2008 and the work on the 
scheme began in 2011 -12. One of the primary objectives of R -APDRP was to reduce the 
AT&C loss. To avail the benefit of conversion of GoI loan (90 per cent  of approved 
project cost) into grants relating to Part -B works, EPD was required to complete the Part -
B projects within five years of sanctioning (August 2010) the Scheme for the State as 
well as  bring down the AT&C loss to the level of 15 per cent  on sustainable basis 
continuously for a period of five years. As alread y discussed under Paragraph 2.3.8.1 
supra, the Part-B works of the project could be completed to the extent of 45.13 per cent 
only and same were still ongoing (October 2015). 
The summarised details of the targets envisaged under the scheme regarding AT&C l oss 
and revenue realisation vis-à-vis the actual achievements of EPD there against as of 2014-
15 have been given in Table-2.3.5. 
Table 2.3.5 
Particulars Units 
Base Year 
2011-12 
2014-15 with 
envisaged 15 per cent 
AT&C losses 
2014-15 with actual 
AT&C losses 
Gangtok Upper 
Tadong Gangtok Upper 
Tadong Gangtok Upper 
Tadong 
Total input (units) MUs 66.00 41.00 66.00 41.00 66.00 41.00 
AT&C losses % 59.12 46.17 15 15 36.97 34.32 
Total units for which 
revenue realised MU 26.98 22.07 56.10 34.85 41.60 26.93 
Average tariff (` per unit) 3.57 3.77 3.57 3.77 3.57 3.77 
Total realisation (` in crore) 9.63 8.32 20.04 13.13 14.85 10.15 
 
 
Technical losses
poor maintenance of 
equipment & sub
stations
old/over-aged 
transformers
overloading of 
transformers, feeders 
and conductors
insufficient reactive 
compensation
inadequate HT:LT 
ratio
Commercial losses
theft and pilferage
metering issues eg. 
unmetered 
consumers and 
tampered/ defective 
meters
billing issues eg. 
inefficient, under 
billing and lack of 
spot billing
collection issues eg. 
inadequate revenue 
collection 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 24 
In this connection, following observations are made: 
A. The conditions of the scheme for conversion of the loan into grants stipulated that 
if the utility achieves and sustains the 15 per cent AT&C loss continuously for a 
period of five years, after the grace period of one year, one fifth of the 90 per cent 
loan shall be converted into grant each year from the year 2012 -13 (for Sikkim) 
onwards. As could be noticed from the table above, however, EPD could bring 
down the AT&C loss in respect of two towns to 36.97 (Gangtok) and 34.32 per 
cent (Upper Tadong) only for the year 2014 -15 as against the envisaged target of 
15 per cent. As the EPD did not complete the Part -A works till November 2013, 
the system generated data on AT&C losses was not available for 2012 -13 and 
2013-14. 
B. The DPR for Part -B of the scheme env isaged increase in revenue realisation by 
` 10.41 crore in the third year of implementation by 2014 -15 in respect of 
Gangtok town. This could have been achieved by bringing down the level of 
AT&C loss figure to 15 per cent (2014-15). As against this, howev er, the actual 
increase in revenue realisation during 2014-15 was only ` 5.22 crore (50 per cent).  
Similarly, in Upper Tadong, as against the envisaged increase of ` 4.81 crore in 
revenue realisation during 2010-11 to 2014-15, EPD could achieve the increase of 
` 1.83 crore (38 per cent) in revenue realisation during 2014-15. 
Thus, due to non -completion of the project works within five years of sanctioning 
(August 2010) of the scheme for the State as well as failure in achieving the targeted level 
of AT&C loss during the first five years of scheme implementation, EPD was not likely 
to get the benefit of conversion of GoI loan into grants.  
During the exit conference (November 2015), EPD stated, that it was mak ing efforts for 
improving the revenue realisation and bringing down the AT&C losses as envisaged in 
the scheme. It was further stated that there had been a significant reduction in AT&C loss 
from the base line year to 2014-15.  
The reply is not tenable as although the AT&C loss figure had been reduced, the scheme 
objective of achieving 15 per cent  AT&C loss figure had not been achieved by EPD. 
Besides, EPD had also failed to complete the Part -B works within five years of 
sanctioning (August 2010) of the Sch eme, which was also one of the pre -conditions to 
avail the benefits of GoI grants. Hence, possibility of conversion of loan into grants 
stands remote.  
Billing Efficiency 
2.3.9.5    Short levy of surcharge 
As per the electricity Tariff order, the consumers with outstanding dues were liable to pay 
surcharge at the rate of 10 per cent (LT consumers) or 15 per cent (HT consumers) on the 
amount of dues pending as on 31 March every year. Audit observed short levy of 
surcharge aggregating to ` 19.73 lakh in two sub-divisions as detailed below: 
 
 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 25 
i)    Deorali sub-division 
Considering two months for the billing process, consumers should normally be levied 
surcharge on the balance outstanding as on 31  March excluding the dues pertaining to the 
months of February and March. It was, however, observed that while calculating the 
amount of surcharge for 2014-15 in Deorali Sub-Division, EPD had wrongly excluded the 
dues pertaining to three months instead of t wo months from the outstanding closing 
balance as on 31 March 2015. As a result, there was short levy of surcharge to the tune of 
` 11.16 lakh in respect of consumers under High Tension Supply and Bulk Supply 
categories. 
EPD accepted (October 2015) the aud it finding and stated that it would work towards 
better billing efficiency.  
ii)      Gangtok Division 
Similarly, in Gangtok sub -division, Audit noticed short levy of surcharges due to 
adoption of incorrect closing balances and wrong calculation. The Sub -division levied in 
aggregate ` 5.58 lakh as surcharge from four consumers instead of levying the correct 
amount of ` 14.15 lakh leading to short levy of surcharge by ` 8.57 lakh. 
Further, the actual outstanding dues 13 as on 31 December 2014 in respect of the  above 
four consumers was ` 1.17 crore, however, the dues reflected in the demand register was 
only ` 1.06 crore which showed a difference of ` 11.05 lakh. This may be verified and 
rectified in the Demand Register. 
In reply, EPD stated (October 2015) that the matter would be examined by the revenue 
division. 
Collection Efficiency 
2.3.9.6    No disconnection in cases of non-payment of dues 
As per the conditions of supply contained in the Tariff orders, if the consumer fails to pay 
the bills raised within the  due date, the EPD is empowered to disconnect the power 
supply. It was, however, observed that the Department continued power supply to the 
defaulted consumers even though no amount was paid against the arrears and subsequent 
bills. Audit observed that dur ing the period of five years (2010 -11 to 2014 -15) covered 
under the Report, there was no instance of disconnection of power supply to consumers 
on account of delay or non-payment of bills. The Department needs to strictly enforce the 
payment terms and conditions as contained in the Tariff order and take appropriate action 
for the recovery of dues from defaulting consumers. 
EPD stated that (October 2015) steps had been initiated for disconnection of power 
supply to defaulters. 
EPD should put an effective system in place for timely recovery of dues and 
disconnection of supply to defaulters so as to improve collection efficiency and financial 
health of the Department. 
                                                           
13    Opening balance + surcharge + bills raised less realisation during April 2014 to December 2014 . 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 26 
Consumer Metering  
The scheme envisaged provision of tamper -free electronic meters to all consumers in the 
scheme area.  In this connection, the following observation is made: 
2.3.9.7    Slow progress in the installation of Electronic Meters  
To check meter tampering and get accuracy in reading, EPD had proposed to replace the 
old electro-mechanical meters with new electronic meters under R -APDRP. Accordingly, 
M/s Unicorn Enterprises was issued supply order for supply of 13,396 electronic meter s 
which had been delivered (September 2013).  The work of replacement of old meters with 
new electronic meters was taken up (November 2013) by EPD departmentally. It was, 
however, observed that even after a lapse of 24 months, only 28 per cent of old consumer 
meters could be replaced by EPD in Upper Tadong (October 2015). The data regarding 
installation of electronic meters was not furnished in respect of Gangtok. 
EPD stated (October 2015) that the replacement of old meters had been done very 
cautiously to avoid any public outrage and assured that the same would be completed by 
December 2015. 
The reply is not tenable as the scheme guidelines stipulates that the utilities had to award 
all R-APDRP projects on turnkey basis in order to maintain a rigid completi on schedule 
and single point responsibility. Due to taking up the metering work departmentally EPD 
could not maintain a rigid completion schedule thereby adversely affecting AT&C loss.  
Consumer satisfaction 
Sikkim is a power surplus State and the EPD has taken following initiatives to increase 
the consumer satisfaction in areas covered under the R-APDRP. 
Chart-2.3.6 Consumers satisfaction activities undertaken by EPD 
 
The R -APDRP scheme envisaged the establishment of a Customer C are Centre (CCC) 
under the  Part-A projects for resolving billing complaints, complaints regarding power 
shut down and providing relevant information for all customers of EPD residing at 
Gangtok and Upper Tadong.  In this connection, the following observation is made: 
2.3.9.8    Defeat of intended purpose of CCC created at a cost of ` 2.99 crore 
As of September 2015, the State had only one full -fledged Customer Care Centre (CCC) 
which commenced functioning from November 2013. The CCC was created at a cost of 
Consumer 
Satisfaction
Computerised
billing
Online payment of 
bills
Reaching out 
through social media
Dedicated  CCC 
available 24 X 7

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 27 
₹ 2.99 crore under Part A of R -APDRP scheme to cater to the customers of Gangtok and 
Upper Tadong. 
The function of the CCC was to receive complaints from consumers and pass on the same 
to the maintenance division concerned for rectification. On receipt of a complaint , the 
complaint would be recorded in the call logger and complaint/ docket number generated.  
Subsequently, the details of the complaint were also to be provided to the complainant for 
future reference. This complaint number would be closed on rectificatio n of the 
complaint.  
Audit observed that during the period from November 2013 to 30 October 2015, the CCC 
had received only 113 calls. It was further noticed that from March 2015 onwards, the 
CCC had not been able to generate any docket numbers for the com plaints lodged with 
CCC. Besides, the information provided by CCC to the customers was very limited 
mainly due to deficiency in the system to properly interact within the modules. 
In reply, EPD stated (October 2015) that the operations of CCC had been wide ly 
publicised in local dailies along with toll free numbers for registering complaints. The 
issue of non-generation of docket numbers and absence of interaction within modules had 
been taken up with the IT implementing agency of the project.  
The reply is not tenable as even after the lapse of more than two years after the CCC 
became operational, the functioning of the CCC was not effective due to persisting 
deficiencies in the software. 
 
2.3.10   Conclusion 
 
 Due to delay in release of counterpart funding by Government of Sikkim (GoS), 
Government of India (GoI) also stalled further release of its share of project 
funding causing adverse impact on implementation of the Scheme in the State. 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) prepared for Part -B project works wer e 
unrealistic due to adoption of unverified data of Aggregate Technical & 
Commercial (AT&C) losses. Further, EPD made changes in the approved DPRs 
of the project without the approval of the Scheme nodal agency , viz. Power 
Finance Corporation Limited (PFC)/GoI in violation to the Scheme conditions.  
 The implementation of the project by EPD was found to be deficient. Instances 
of sub-contracting of project works by the contractors were noticed in violation 
to the contract terms. Further, contrary to the provi sions of the Work Manual, 
EPD did not plan for dismantling and disposal of the replaced assets leading to 
possibility of damages/theft of these assets and unnecessary occupation of the 
available space. 
 The monitoring mechanism of EPD for monitoring of the project works was not 
effective due to absence of an active State Level Distribution Reforms 
Committee (DRC) as well as non-submission of Monthly Progress Reports to the 
PFC/GoI. As a result, the Part -A works of the project were completed with 
delays of 18 months while the Part -B works could be completed to the extent of 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 28 
45.13 per cent only even after lapse of more than one year of the scheduled 
completion date (September 2014). 
 As against the envisaged target of reducing the AT&C losses to the level of 15 
per cent for a continuous period of five years, EPD could bring down the AT&C 
losses in respect of two cities (Gangtok and Upper Tadong towns) covered under 
the scheme to 36.97 and 34.32 per cent respectively during the first five years of 
scheme implementation. Due to failure in achieving the targeted level of AT&C 
loss as well as non -completion of the Part -B project works within five years of 
sanctioning (August 2010) of the Scheme, EPD was not likely to get the benefit 
of conversion of GoI loan into gran ts under the scheme. The progress of 
installation of consumer electronic meters by EPD was also slow due to taking 
up the work departmentally. 
 
2.3.11    Recommendation 
 
 EPD needed to effectively pursue with GoS for release of counterpart funding 
well in time so as to implement the scheme without further delay.  
 Strict compliance to scheme guidelines as well as the contract terms may be 
ensured for efficient and effective implementation of project. EPD needed to 
take appropriate action on any deviations noticed on part of the contractors 
to the agreed terms of the work contract. 
 An active State Level Distribution Reforms Committee needed to be in place 
to ensure effective monitoring of project works and achievement of scheme 
objectives as well as safeguarding of assets. EPD should also ensure regular 
submission of monthly progress reports to Power Finance Corporation/GoI 
for centrali sed monitoring of the work progress and u tilisation of scheme 
funds. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.4 Horticulture Development in Sikkim 
 
The Horticulture and Cash Crop Development Department was mandated for 
development of horticulture in the State. The Department mainly implemented (i) 
Horticulture Mission for North Eastern and Himalayan States, (ii) National bamboo 
Mission, (iii) National Mission for Micro Irrigation, and (iv) National Mission for 
Medicinal plants. Performance Audit for the period 2010 -15 disclose d that the 
Department had achieved the target in full except during 2014 -15. In overall terms, area 
under cultivation, production and productivity of various crops registered marginal 
 
HORTICULTURE AND CASH CROP DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 29 
increase during 2010-15. The Department had to its credit a number of success stories in 
establishing the livelihood of some of the farmers in floriculture, vegetable, etc. paving 
way for economic upliftment of the farmers. The beneficiary survey of the farmers by 
Audit disclosed that the farmers were satisfied by the suppor t and assistance extended by 
the Department. The farmers however, were dependent upon the Department for 
continuance in farming. 
Regarding planning we noticed during the course of the  Performance Audit that the 
Perspective Plan was not available in the Dep artment to provide strategic road map for 
development. Annual Action Plans did not accompany project report of each district and 
assessment of export potential and detailed quantification of all inputs and outputs. The 
Department had not constituted a Technical Support Group for rendering expert advice 
towards implementation of horticulture programmes, IT Policy was neither adopted nor 
website of the Department launched in a full-fledged manner for dissemination of 
information to public. The Department had not initiated action to conduct Horticulture 
census to obtain accurate, reliable and relevant horticulture database for integration of 
markets. 
Programme implementation of Horticulture Mission for North East and Himalayan States 
(HMNEH) revealed that three  Centers of Excellences (COEs) , with the objective to grow 
more from less areas , were established  in farmers’ field instead of being set up on 
Government farm as envisaged. In case of National Mission on Micro Irrigation, although 
the Department had achieved physical target of 43.63 ha during 2010 -15 the perspective 
plan to provide road map for micro irrigation technology was not formulated. 
Under National Mission on Medicinal Plants (NMMP), though the Department stated to 
have carried out base line s urvey and feasibility studies to determine potential and 
demand the survey report , etc. was not made available to Audit. The Department had 
neither maintained details of seedling grown and supplied by each of the nurseries nor 
initiated adequate measures t o ensure end to end approach, especially post-harvest 
management to enable the farmers to sell their produce. 
Although the monitoring of the schemes/programmes were carried out by departmental 
officers, the monitoring schedules were not drawn up  and efforts were therefore adhoc  
and erratic . The monitoring reports were not maintained for verification and initiating 
corrective actions, if any. Evaluation studies of various programmes were not attempted 
by the Department through independent agencies to assess the extent of success of the 
programme. 
 
Highlights 
 
The Perspective Plan of the Department was not available to provide strategic 
road map for development and the Annual Action Plans did not accompany 
project report of each district and assessment of export potential and detailed 
quantification of all inputs and outputs.  
(Paragraph-2.4.7.1 and 2.4.7.2) 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 30 
Integrated Floriculture Pack House constructed at a cost of ` 1.52 crore in May 
2008 was not yielding value for money towards the project objective of collecting, 
sorting, grading, preserving, weighing and packing cut flowers for export. 
(Paragraph-2.4.9.4) 
The Department had not initiated action towards post-harvest collection, 
preservation-cum-storage, processing and marketing of bamboo crop and 
bamboo based products to provide stable and regular farm income to the 
farmers, provide employment and livelihood security to artisans, and others 
despite incurring ` 26.29 crore towards plantation and maintenance of bamboo 
crop during 2006-15. 
(Paragraph-2.4.10.1) 
The Department had neither drawn up inspection/monitoring schedules nor 
maintained these reports for verification and initiating corrective actions. 
Similarly, evaluation studies of various programmes through independent 
agencies to assess the extent of success of the programme were not initiated by the 
Department.  
(Paragraph-2.4.13) 
 
 
2.4.1     Introduction 
 
Sikkim is basically an agrarian State with 64 per cent people dependent on Agriculture 
and allied activities. The State had limited area of operational holdings of about 1,00,000 
hectare for agricultural/horticultural crops and the net cultivated area was around 70,000 
hectare, agriculture/horticulture sector contributing approximately 15 per cent of total 
GSDP. The State Government had accorded priority to the horticulture sector with a view 
to attain higher levels of rural prosperity by adopting the policy of growth with 
sustainability for higher income generation to farming community. The concentration was 
on securing maximum production of horticulture crops and managing primary agro -
resources like soil, water and bio -diversity. Large cardamom, ginger and turmeric are the 
major spice crops, while mandarin ora nge, guava, mango, banana are the principal fruits 
grown in the State. Sikkim is also a paradise for flowers. Gladioli, anthuriums, lilliums, 
primulas, rhododendrons, orchids as well as many other floral species thrive here. The 
Department of Horticulture and Cash Crop Development (HCCDD) is involved in 
motivating and providing technical guidance to local farmers and taking forward the 
mission of the Government towards Horticulture Development in Sikkim. In the process, 
the Department had initiated steps to  strengthen existing horticulture infrastructure, 
availability of inputs and technological know-how to the farmers. 
 
2.4.2     Scope of audit 
 
Performance Audit on Horticulture Development in Sikkim, covering a period of five 
years (2010-15) was conducted during July -August 2015 through test check of records in 
Head Office of HCCDD and all four districts covering 30 per cent of the expenditure. 12 
Blocks were selected on two stage sampling basis for audit scrutiny. In the first stage, all 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 31 
the blocks were categorised district -wise and in the second stage 12 blocks (out of 31) 
(indicating 40 per cent) were selected covering each district on simple r andom sampling 
basis without replacement (SRSWOR). During audit various activities relating to the 
schemes, viz. (i) Horticulture Mission for North East and Himalayan States (HMNEH), 
(ii) National Bamboo Mission (NBM), (iii) National Mission for Medicinal Plants 
(NMMP) and (iv) National Mission for Micro Irrigation (NMMI) were examined. The 
records relating to Food Security and Agriculture Department were also examined in 
West and East districts to assess its synergy with HCCDD and to verify overlapping, if  
any, in implementation of schemes. 
 
2.4.3   Audit objectives 
 
The Performance Audit was conducted with the objective of assessing whether: 
 Overall planning for Horticulture Development in the State was adequate, 
effective and participative; 
 Financial management was economic and efficient; 
 Programme management was efficient and effective;  
 The various schemes, programmes and plans had the desired impact; and 
 Monitoring, evaluation and internal control mechanism were adequate and 
effective. 
 
2.4.4   Audit criteria 
 
Audit findings were benchmarked against the criteria in the following documents:  
 National Horticulture Policy; 
 Sikkim Horticulture Plan, Annual Reports of the Department; 
 Scheme Guidelines issued by the Government of India/State Government; 
 Guidelines/instructions issued by the Ministry of Agriculture and Co -operation, 
Department of Horticulture, GoI/State Government;  
 Directions issued by the Secretary, HCCDD, Government of Sikkim 
 Sikkim Financial Rules; 
 Schedule of Rates, Sikkim Public Works Department Code and Manual; and  
 Prescribed monitoring mechanism. 
 
2.4.5    Audit methodology 
 
The Performance Audit commenced with entry conference (1 July 2015) with the 
HCCDD wherein audit objectives, scope of audit, audit methodology and audit criteria 
were explained. Audit process included issue of requisitions for information/data/records, 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 32 
scrutiny of records and analysis of information/data followed by framing of audit 
observations. Physical verification of government farms and farmers field was conducted. 
Beneficiary survey involving 100 farmers spreading over all four districts was also 
carried out to ascertain the extent of support received from the Department and also th e 
constraints encountered by them. The report was prepared after incorporating replies 
tendered by the Department during the course of Performance Audit. The audit findings 
were discussed in an Exit Conference (October 2015) with the Secretary, HCCDD and the 
report was finalised duly taking into consideration the views of the Department. 
 
2.4.6    Organisational set-up 
 
The Department of Horticulture and Cash Crop Development (HCCDD) is headed by the 
Secretary, who is assisted by Directors (2), Additional Directors (11) and Joint Directors 
(13) in districts who in turn are assisted by Deputy Directors, Horticulture Development 
Officers and Horticulture Inspectors as shown in the chart below:  
Chart 2.4.1 
 
 
 Audit findings  
 
The results of Audit are enumerated in succeeding paragraphs:  
 
2.4.7    Planning  
 
Audit Objective-1:  
To assess whether overall planning for horticulture development in the State was 
adequate and effective.  
 
The Department undertook various activities under different schemes to expand the area 
under coverage, enhance production and improve upon productivity. These inter-alia 


Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 33 
included creation of water sources, distribution of seeds/seedlings to farmers, technology 
transfer through training and demonstration, infrastructural and marketing support. 
Adequate planning was therefore a prerequisite for achievement of scheme objectives. 
The observations in this regard are detailed below: 
2.4.7.1   Perspective Plan 
Operational Guidelines of Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) 
(Para-4.8(a) and 5.1) stipulate that State level agency shall prepare Strategic/Perspective 
and annual State Level Action Plan (SLAP) in consonance with Mission’s goals and 
objectives in close co -ordination with Technical Support Group (TSG), State Agriculture 
Universities (SAUs), ICAR institutes and oversee its implementation. The plan should 
invariably contain information on geography and climate, potential of horticult ure 
development, availability of land, analysis of strength weaknesses opportunities and 
challenges (SWOC), strategy for development and plan of action proposed to be taken to 
achieve goals in each district of the State. The document should focus on crops having 
comparative advantages and natural potential for development in the State, adoption of 
cluster approach for production and linking with available infrastructure, post-harvest 
management, processing, marketing and export. 
The Department stated (July 2015) that Perspective Plan and strategic road map was 
prepared during 1995 -96 by Agriculture Finance Corporation India Limited and updated 
through regular modification in the form of vision documents. This was obviously only of 
vintage value. However, a current Perspective Plan was not made available to audit and 
its existence was unlikely and definitely unknown to most stakeholders. Audit could not 
therefore, obtain assurance that strategies adopted by State Horticulture Mission (SHM) 
were in accordance w ith the main objectives cited in the perspective plan and as per the 
strategic road map. 
2.4.7.2     Annual Action Plan 
The Operational Guideline of HMNEH required the Department to draw up Annual 
Action Plan (AAP) after approval from the State Level Steer ing Committee (SLSC). The 
AAP should incorporate requirements under various schemes for execution and be 
accompanied by project reports of each district. However, audit observed that:  
 The Department had prepared an AAP for submission to GOI but it was not  
accompanied with project report of each district as required under the guideline. It 
was also devoid of assessment of export potential and detailed quantification of all 
inputs and outputs as prescribed in the guidelines. 
 Further, the AAP was not supporte d by data/write -up on outcome of past 
interventions, covering the details of area expansion, water resource development, 
integrated nutrient management (INM)/integrated pest management (IPM) and 
Organic farming as required under the guideline. Therefore, it was sketchy, lacked 
comprehensive analysis and was not result oriented. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 34 
The Department stated (October 2015) that efforts would be initiated to improve the AAP 
duly incorporating all details on quantification of inputs, impacts of past interventions, 
lessons learnt and future strategy.  
2.4.7.3    Constitution of Technical Support Group at State level 
The Operational Guideline of HMNEH stipulated constitution of Technical Support 
Group (TSG) through engaging technical persons and experts to advice, formul ate, 
appraise and to monitor the implementation of programmes. The technical persons and 
experts should comprise of Mission  - I (Research), II (Production and Productivity 
improvement), III ( Post-Harvest Management, Marketing and Export) and IV (Food 
Processing Unit). 
It was noticed that the Department did not constitute TSG. As a result, the Department 
was devoid of expert advice from TSG. The Department stated (July 2015) that experts 
having technical p roficiency were engaged as and when required for specific period and 
maximum benefits derived from their experience. However, verification in Audit revealed 
that details of such engagements and opinion and advice rendered, if any, by the experts 
were neither documented by the Department nor was there any indication to establish that 
those advices were put to use.  
The Department stated (October 2015) that TSG at the State level would be constituted 
during next year (2016-17).  
2.4.7.4     Constitution of District Mission Committee 
The Operational Guidelines (Para -4.9) for MIDH for 12 th Plan period stipulated 
constitution of District Mission Committee (DMC) for carrying forward the objectives of 
the Mission for project formulation, implementation and monitori ng. The guidelines also 
stipulated (Para -4.10) involvement of the District Planning Committee and Panchayati 
Raj Institutions in implementation of the programme. 
Audit found that DMC was constituted in 2010 -11 in three (Out of 4) districts (West, 
South and East) consisting of members from various departments of district with District 
Collector as Chairperson. However, notification depicting constitution of DMC was not 
published. The details of meetings of the Committee, its minutes, etc. were not available 
on record. Therefore, Audit could not vouch for either the existence or effectiveness of 
functioning of the Committee.  
The Department assured (October 2015) that efforts would be initiated to improve the 
functioning of the Committee. 
2.4.7.5     e-Governance not brought in 
HMNEH, an important scheme for Horticulture development under implementation in the 
State envisaged for adoption of Information Technology (IT) for dissemination of 
horticulture related information through website by establishing hyper linkages with other 
Departments, Ministries and Organisations. Audit noticed that the Department had neither 
adopted IT Policy nor launched its website in full -fledged manner for dissemination of 
information to public as envisaged in the Mission guidelines. 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 35 
The Department stated (August 2015) that the task of designing the website on content 
management based concept had been taken up (October 2014) by Department of 
Information Technology. The approval of the Department would be given after final 
presentation of web site by CRTI - an autonomous body under IT Department, 
Government of Sikkim. This indicated that very low priority was being accorded to this 
important activity. 
2.4.7.6     Horticulture census not initiated  
In view of globalisation and integration of markets and increasing demand for accurate, 
reliable and timely horticulture database, the Department of Agriculture and Co -operation 
(DAC), GOI instructed (August 2009) State Directorate of Horticulture for sending 
proposal for financial support for conducting Horticulture Census. 
Audit noticed that the Department had neither sent any proposal to DAC, GOI for 
financial support nor initiated any action to conduct Horticulture census as of March 
2015. As a result, HCCDD was devoid of accurate,  reliable and relevant horticulture 
database. 
The Department stated (October 2015) that Agency engaged in conducting Agriculture 
census would be entrusted with the census of Horticulture as well. 
2.4.7.7    Base line survey 
The Operational Guideline (Para -7.2) for MIDH stipulated for carrying out base line 
survey. The survey would inter-alia include data/information on area, production and 
productivity. 
Two (out of 4) districts (East and South districts) claimed to have condu cted base line 
survey in compliance with MIDH guidelines. However, copies of survey were not made 
available to Audit. Therefore, the existence of data/information on area, production and 
productivity at State level could not be verified in Audit. 
The Department stated (October 2015) that provision has been kept for baseline survey 
during 2015-16. 
 
2.4.8     Financial management 
 
Audit Objective-2:  
To assess whether financial management was economic and efficient. 
 
2.4.8.1    Budget provision, expenditure and surrenders 
According to Sikkim Financial Rules (Rules 75 and 76), the budget of the Department 
was to be prepared based on inputs received from the field offices. It was however, noted 
that the budget was prepared centrally in Head Office of HCCDD with out obtaining 
inputs from the field offices. It was noticed in Audit that Non -Plan budget was prepared 
on the basis of anticipated expenditure based on the instructions issued by the State 
Finance Department. The Plan budget was prepared based on the lump -sum amount 
allocated by Development, Planning, Economic Reforms and North Eastern Council 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 36 
Affairs Department (DPNERCAD). In case of Centrally Sponsored Schemes, budget 
provision was made under supplementary budget after funds were released by GOI. 
The budgetary allocation and expenditure there against during 2010-15 was as under: 
Table 2.4.1 
(` in crore) 
Year 
Budget allocation Expenditure Excess(+) / 
 Savings (-) Capital Revenue 
Total Capital Revenue Total O S O S Capital Revenue 
2010-11 00 00 31.02 0.77 31.79 00 27.79 27.79 00 (-) 4.00 (13) 
2011-12 00 1.60 17.21 18.79 37.60 1.60 32.78 34.38 00 (-) 3.22(10) 
2012-13 1.00 00 32.23 00 33.23 1.00 31.95 32.95 00 (-) 0.28(1) 
2013-14 0.95 00 29.96 00 30.91 0.95 29.38 30.33 00 0.58(2) 
2014-15 00 00 93.69 0 93.69 00 59.92 59.92 00 (-)33.53(36) 
TOTAL 1.95 1.60 204.11 19.56 227.22 3.55 181.82 185.37   
Source: Details Appropriation Accounts; O=  Original and S = Supplementary; Figure in brackets indicate 
percentage. 
Chart 2.4.2 
 
Audit noticed the following: 
  While savings varied from 1 to 13 per cent  during 2010 -11 to 2013 -14, it 
increased to 36 per cent in 2014-15 (revenue expenditure). 
 Although supplementary provision of ` 0.77 and ` 18.79 crore under revenue 
during 2010-11 and 2011-12 was sought, actual expenditure was less than the total 
funds available. This led to savings of ` 4 crore and ` 3.22 crore during 2010 -11 
and 2011 -12 respe ctively. This indicated that supplementary provision s was 
obtained without actual requirement. 
The Department stated (October 2015) that the supplementary grants were sought 
for execution of various works/programme of the Department, which could not be 
implemented on time due to non -receipt of resources from the Finance, Revenue 
and Expenditure Department which led to savings. 
31.79
36
32.23
29.96
93.69
31.79
37.6
33.23
30.91
93.69
1.6
1
0.95
27.79
32.78
31.95
29.38
59.92
27.79
34.38
32.95
30.33
59.92
0.1
1
10
100
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
Allocation and Expenditure
Budget allocation Capital Budget allocation Revenue Budget allocation Total
Expenditure Capital Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Total

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 37 
 Analysis of expenditure revealed that advance of ` 8.08 crore was released during 
the years 2010-11 to 2014-15. Out of this ` 2.43 crore remained unadjusted as of 
March 2015. Further analysis revealed that in 16 cases, the advances were 
adjusted between 2 and 29 months after the drawal of advance, in 12 cases (drawn 
between March 2009 and March 2014), materials/services had not been re ceived 
by the Department as of March 2015. 
These instances indicated that advances were released without immediate requirement or 
adjustments of advances were no t insisted upon by the Drawing and  Disbursing Officer 
and Controlling Officer as enshrined in S ikkim Financial Rules. This also led to loss of 
interest of ` 18.19 lakh14 on unadjusted advances. 
The Department stated (October 2015) that necessary steps were being taken to settle the 
advances. 
 
2.4.9     Programme Management 
 
Audit Objective-3:  
To assess whether programme management was efficient and effective. 
 
Programme management plays an important role in achieving overall objectives of the 
Department. During 2010-15, HCCDD implemented four major schemes, which included 
Horticulture Mission for North East and Himalayan States (HMNEH), National Bamboo 
Mission (NBM), National Mission for Medicinal Plants (NMMP) and National Mission 
for Micro-Irrigation (NMMI). The impact of these schemes w.r.t . area under production, 
production and productivity for the period under audit for various crops are given below: 
Table 2.4.2 
Area, production and productivity of various crops 
 
Crop Particulars 
Year Increase(+)/ 
Decrease (-) 
during 2014-15 
over 2010-11 
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Fruits 
Area 12.89 13.39 14.65 16.02 17.59 (+) 4.70 (36) 
Production 20.11 22.24 24.02 25.04 26.42 (+) 6.31 (31) 
Productivity 3,089* 3,097* 3,115* 3,127* 3,129* (+) 40 (1) 
Vegetables  
Area 14.40 14.58 14.80 15.15 15.17 (+) 0.77(5) 
Production 75.20 77.10 79.75 80.97 80.84 (+) 5.64(8) 
Productivity 5220 5285 5387 5342 5329 (+) 109(2) 
Roots and Tubers 
(R&T) 
Area 10.11 10.44 10.75 10.95 10.95 (+) 0.84(8) 
Production 49.16 50.55 52.75 53.55 53.56 (+) 4.40(9) 
Productivity 4,862 4,840 4,905 4,889 4889 (+) 27 (1) 
Spices 
Area 24.38 25.5 26.56 27.52 28.32 (+) 3.94(16) 
Production 52.37 56.68 60.09 60.91 61.53 (+) 9.16(17) 
Productivity 2,148 2,222 2,222 2,213 2,172 (+) 24(1) 
Flowers Area 0.089 0.098 0.104 0.111 NA (+) 0.022(25) 
Production 114.08 126.65 129.55 134.54 NA (+) 20.46(18) 
Area- in ‘000 hectares; Production - in ‘000 tones except for Flowers (in lakh no.) and Productivity in Kg/ha. 
Source:  Annual Progress Report of the Department; NA= Figure Not Available. 
*           Department mentioned that since the orchard includes bearing and non -bearing fruit plants, the productivity is 
not derived by normal method as for other plants but by eye estimation. 
                                                           
14     Calculated @ 4 per cent per annum from the date of drawal of advances till March 2015.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 38 
It was noticed that area under production increased marginally but steadi ly from 12.89 to 
17.59 hectares (36 per cent) for fruits 15, from 14.40 to 15.17 hectares (5 per cent)  for 
vegetables16, 10.11 to 10.95 hectares (8 per cent) for Root and Tubers17 (R&T) and 24.38 
to 28.32 hectares (16 per cent) for spices18 during 2010-15. In case of flowers, area under 
production increased by 0.022 hectares (24 per cent) from 0.089 to 0.111 hectares during 
the same period. 
Similarly, the production increased from 20.11 to 26.42 thousand tonnes (31 per cent) for 
fruits, 75.20 to 80.84 thousand tonnes (8 per cent) for vegetables, 49.16 to 53.56 thousand 
tonnes (9 per cent) for R&T and 52.37 to 61.53 thousand tonnes (38 per cent) for spices 
during 2010-15. In case of flowers, production increased by 20.46 lakh numbers (18 per 
cent) from 114.08 to 134.54 lakh numbers during the same period. 
The productivity increased 109 kg/ha (2 per cent) from 5,220 to 5,329 kg/ha for 
vegetables, 27 kg/ha (1 per cent) 4,862 to 4,889 kg/ha hectare for R&T, 24 kg/ha (1 per 
cent) from 2,148 to 2,172 kg/ha for spices a nd 40 kg/ha (1 per cent) from 3,089 kg/ha to 
3,129 kg/ha for fruits during 2010-15.  
Comparison with other States 
A comparison of productivity of major corps such as fruits, vegetables and spices was 
attempted by Audit. The data pertaining to other States was not available with the 
Department therefore, Indian Horticulture Database - 2014 published by National 
Horticulture Board (NHB) was adopted for comparison. Audit noticed that the 
productivity of Sikkim recorded by NHB did not match with the productivit y figures 
reflected by the Department in their Annual Progress Reports in case of fruits and spices 
whereas the figures pertaining to vegetables tallied. The difference could not be explained 
by the Department. Based on the productivity figure reflected by  National Horticulture 
Board for different States, comparison by Audit revealed following: 
Fruits: The comparison revealed that productivity of fruits for Sikkim ranged between 
1.5 MT/ha and 1.7 MT/ha whereas other States such as Himachal Pradesh (1.7 to 3 .9 
MT/ha), Arunachal Pradesh (3.6 MT/ha), Mizoram (5.9 to 6.3 MT/ha), Nagaland (7.4 to 
10.3 MT/ha), Jammu and Kashmir (5 to 5.8 MT/ha), Uttarakhand (4 MT/ha) and 
Meghalaya (9.3 to 9.9 MT/ha) showed better averages ranging between 1.7 and 10 
MT/ha. The all India average ranged between 11.4 and 12.3 MT/ha. The details are 
shown in the Appendix 2.4.1. 
Vegetables:  The comparison revealed that productivity of vegetables for Sikkim ranged 
between 5.2 MT/ha and 5.3 MT/ha whereas other States such as Himachal Pradesh (18.2 
to 19.1 MT/ha), Arunachal Pradesh (13.2 to 25 MT/ha), Mizoram (5.9 to 6.2 MT/ha), 
Nagaland (6.7 to 12.8 MT/ha), Jammu and Kashmir (22.1 MT/ha), Uttarakhand (11.5 to 
12 MT/ha) and Meghalaya (9.8 to 11.8 MT/ha) ranged between 5.9 and 25 MT/ha and all 
India average of 17.3 to 17.6 MT/ha. The details are shown in the Appendix 2.4.2. 
                                                           
15      Fruits: Orange, Litchi, Kiwi, Peer, Banana and Guava. 
16      Vegetables: Cauliflower, Cabbage, Tomato, Radish, Pea and Bean. 
17      Root and Tubers: Carrot and Radish. 
18      Spices: Large Cardamom, Ginger, Turmeric and Cherry Pepper. 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 39 
Spices:  The comparison revealed that productivity of spices for Sikkim ranged between 
1.7 MT/ha and 2.2 MT/ha whereas other States such as Himachal Pradesh (1.4 to 4 
MT/ha), Arunachal Pradesh (6.1 to 6.3 MT/ha), Mizoram (2.7 to 5.6 MT/ha), Nagaland (4 
MT/ha), Jammu and Kashmi r (0.2 to 0.3 MT/ha), Uttarakhand (5.1 to 5.9 MT/ha) and 
Meghalaya (4.4 to 4.8 MT/ha) ranged between 0.2 and 6.3 MT/ha and all India average of 
1.9 MT/ha. The details are shown in the Appendix 2.4.3. 
This indicated that the Department needed to initiate su itable steps to enhance the 
productivity of fruits, vegetables and spices to catch up with similarly placed States and 
the all India average. 
2.4.9.1     Horticulture Mission for North East and Himalayan States  
This HMNEH is the back bone of horticulture development initiatives in the State. The 
programme was executed through Sikkim Farmers’ Agri -business Consortium (SFAC) 
headed by an Executive Director. The programme focused on establishing convergence 
and synergy among numerous ongoing programmes in horticulture sector with a view to 
achieve horizontal and vertical integration for ensuring adequate, appropriate, timely and 
concurrent attention to all the links in production, post -harvest management and 
consumption chain to maximise economic, ecological and social benefits. 
2.4.9.2    Target and achievement 
The achievement of major components under HMNEH for the State for 2010 -15 is given 
below: 
Table 2.4.3 
Achievement (physical) of Target under HMNEH 
Sl. No. Component Unit 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
1 Production of Planting Materials Nos 5 41 56 70 58 
2 Area Expansion of Fruits, Vegetables, 
Flowers and Spices Ha 5,520 6,700 4,939 6,028 5,765 
3 Rejuvenation/replacement of senile 
plantation Ha 400 700 620 750 732 
4 Creation of Water Sources Nos 4 108 135 150 169 
5 Protected Cultivation  Sq. m. 94,000 2,99,155 2,19,260 3,31,800 6,21,923 
6 Promotion of INM/IPM Ha 1,800 10,500 5,000 5,000 10,800 
7 Organic Farming Ha 4,115 9,887 13,233 11,857 16,951 
8 Pollination support through Bee keeping Nos 3,001 1,433 1,003 4,520 0 
9 Horticulture Mechanism Nos 50 101 612 495 1 
10 Centre of Excellence  Nos 1 0 1 1 0 
Source:   Annual Progress reports of the Department . The component of  mushroom not included in the 
table as it was not substantial. 
 
It was noticed that the targets were fully achieved under various components of the 
HMNEH during 2010-14. During 2014-15, while achievement (16,951 ha) under organic 
farming was higher than the target (7,80 9 ha); there were shortfalls in production of 
planting materials, area expansion in case of flowers and fruits, rejuvenation/replacement 
of senile plantation, protected cultivation and horticulture mechanisation. Details are 
given in Appendix 2.4.4. The pollination support through bee keeping was not taken up at 
all during 2014-15 against the target of 2,832 nos. due to non -availability of bee boxes. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 40 
Failure to execute pollination support activities was fraught with the risk of lower 
productivity of various crops in future. 
The Department assured (October 2015) that efforts would be initiated in future for 
achievement of the target.  
2.4.9.3    Irregularity in implementation of Centre of Excellence 
The SFAC Sikkim took up execution of three Centres of Excellence (CoE) in 
Horticulture in South, West and East districts at a cost of ` 5 crore each (total ` 15 crore) 
fully funded by G OI with the primary goal of growing more from less area. The major 
component of the CoE included establishment of mother block of improved varieties of 
fruit, flower and vegetable in open field conditions, rootstock block of citrus and apple 
(under open  conditions), high -tech green houses, naturally ventilated green houses, net 
houses, low tunnel poly houses, various types o f irrigation facilities, support systems for 
fruits grown in vines/climbers, vermin compost/farm yard manure unit, tissue culture 
units, training centre, etc. Audit observed that the programme was implemented by the 
Department in individual farmers’ fields like any other area expansion programme for 
fruits, vegetables , etc. through construction of green houses, distribution of seeds, 
seedlings, manure, etc. for taking up plantation by farmers.  The guidelines envisaged that 
independent CoEs fully under the control of the Department ought to be established. This 
was obviously to provide access and demonstration to all farmers which would become 
restricted when such centres come up on private land. 
 
Image 2.4.1 Image 2.4.2 
Green House constructed in farmers’ field at 
South District  
Green House constructed in farmers’ field at 
West District 
  
Activities like cultivation of local vegetable/drum stick were taken up by farmers, which 
was easily available locally and did not contribute towards establishing or even introduce 
improved varieties. In other States like Haryana, Maharashtra and Odisha, the C oEs had 
been established in technical collaboration with Israel by Horticulture Directorates of 
respective States, for the purpose of improvement of varieties. 
The major components of the C oEs envisaged in the programme vis -à-vis actual 
execution in the field is tabulated below to indicate departure from the approved 
programme: 
 
 


Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 41 
 
Table 2.4.4 
Major component 
Name of the districts, year of establishment (in brackets)  and 
action taken  
South 
 (2010-11) 
West 
 (2013-14) 
East 
 (2013-14) 
Establishment of mother block of improved 
varieties in open field condition  Not done Not done Not done 
Establishment of mother block of citrus in 
greenhouse  Not done Not done Not done 
Hi-tech green house Not done Not done Not done 
Automation fertigation/irrigation unit Not done Not done Not done 
Vermin compost/FYM unit Not done Not done Not done 
Tissue culture unit Not done Not done Not done 
Training Centre 
Training centre not constructed and 
instead renovated existing building. 
Funds lying without utilisation. 
80 per cent  
completed as 
of July 2015. 
Site not 
finalised as 
of July 2015. 
Grading, pack house and cold room Not done. Not done Not done 
Technical support/manpower Done Done Done 
Source: Information collated from Departmental records. 
A comparison of Sikkim with the other States such as Haryana and Odisha revealed that 
the major components of CoEs were implemented by other States but had not been done 
in Sikkim as shown below: 
Table– 2.4.5 
Major component Name of the State and action taken  
Haryana Odisha Sikkim 
Establishment of 
mother block of 
improved varieties in 
open field condition  
Mother block of improved 
variety of tomatoes, 
capsicum, cucumber and 
brinjal was established. 
Mother block of improved 
variety of tomatoes, 
capsicum and cucumber 
was established. 
Mother blocks not 
established. 
Establishment of 
mother block in 
greenhouse  
Mother block of vegetable 
was established. 
Mother block of vegetable 
was established. 
Mother blocks not 
established. 
Hi-tech green house 
Hi-tech green house with 
fitted with cooling, misting 
heating system alongwith 
humidity and temperature 
control system  and raised 
platform were constructed. 
Hi-tech green house with 
fitted with cooling, misting 
heating system alongwith 
humidity and temperature 
control system and raised 
platform were constructed. 
Tubular structure 
green houses were 
constructed in the 
farmers’ field 
instead of high 
tech green houses. 
Automation 
fertigation/irrigation 
unit 
Established.  
Overhead sprinkling and 
fogging system installed 
for Fertigation. 
Not established. 
Tissue culture unit Established.  Established. Not established. 
Training Centre 
Training Centre established 
and training to the farmers 
were provided. 
 
2 (out of 3) 
centres were taken 
up but not 
completed as of 
March 2015.  
Grading, pack house 
and cold room   Not done. 
Technical 
support/manpower Done. Done. Done. 
 
Audit verification further revealed that the (i) detailed project report, guidelines were not 
available in the concerned districts as well as in the Head Office, (ii) evaluation study was 
not carried out to assess the impact on productivity, (iii) permanen t register indicating 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 42 
layout of promising variety was not maintained, (iv) agreement with the beneficiary 
farmers were not entered into for enabling free access and use of facilities by Government 
and other farmers for demonstration and other purposes in future and (v) irrigation system 
was not installed in the three test checked Green Houses in West District. 
Thus, the CoE, which was intended to grow more from less area by establishment of 
mother block of improved variety and other associated facilities wa s not achieved despite 
incurring ` 13.93 crore by the Department. 
The Department stated (August 2015) that the CoEs were established in the farmer’s field 
as (i) existing State Government farms were located at different places where sufficient 
area for imp lementation of various components was not feasible; (ii) establishment of 
different economic crops in accordance with the varied agro -climatic condition was not 
possible to be taken up in the existing Government farms; (iii) the programme was funded 
by GoI  as one time grant, post maintenance of the project would not be possible; (iv) 
mother blocks of different kinds of fruits, flowers, vegetables could be accomplished by 
using different agro -climatic condition in the farmers’ field; and (v) that the program me 
had become focal unit to disseminate the success stories and replication to surrounding 
cluster areas as it was implemented in the farmer’s field.  
However, not only the establishment of CoE in farmers field was against the spirit of the 
guideline, programme objective of establishment of mother blocks of different kinds of 
fruits, flowers, vegetables, etc. for improving the productivity had not been accomplished 
as of November 2015. Further, approval from G OI to implement the CoEs in farmer’s 
field instead of Government farm was not obtained. 
2.4.9.4    Idling of floriculture infrastructure  
The Department took up construction of Integrated Floriculture Pack House (IFPH) for 
fresh cut flowers, flower bulbs and allied products at Rangpo and Melli at a tota l project 
cost of ` 299.30 lakh under the financial assistance ( ` 280 lakh) of Agriculture and 
Processed Food Export Development Authority (APEDA). The project was taken up with 
the objective of collecting, sorting, grading, packing, preservation and export of cut 
flowers to earn maximum foreign exchange. The project was split in two phases: Phase -I 
envisaged establishment of Rangpo Pack House at ` 151.90 lakh and Phase -II envisaged 
establishment of Melli Pack House and two cold storages at ` 147.40 lakh.  
Audit noticed that the Department undertook Phase -I of the project entailing construction 
of Integrated Floriculture Pack House (IFPH) at Rangpo in 2007 -08. The project 
consisted of a cold storage unit, sorting/grading rooms, office block, two reefer vans, 
crate buckets, weighing scale, packing materials , etc. The construction of project 
commenced in August 2007 through contractor and was completed in May 2008 at a cost 
of ` 151.90 lakh. The project was handed over only in April 2011 to SIMFED for 
operation. However, the project was returned back (May 2012) by SIMFED as they could 
not use the facility for reasons not on record. Thereafter, the project remained idle as seen 
in the photograph below: 
 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 43 
 
Image 2.4.3 Image 2.4.4 Image 2.4.5 
   
Closed down Integrated pack house, Rangpo 
 
The Department while agreeing that the facility could not be used by SIMFED stated 
(October 2015) that the same was likely to be handed over to Sikkim Rural Development 
Agency (SRDA). The Department further added that monitoring Committee would be 
formed consisting of members from SRDA, SIMFED and Department to ensure its proper 
usage. 
Thus, the project completed at a cost of ` 151.90 lakh was rendered unfruitful as of 
October 2015 and the project objective of collecting, sorting, grading, packing, 
preservation and export of cut flowers to earn maximum foreign exchan ge were not 
achieved.  Phase -II of the IFPH project proposed to be established at Melli at a cost of  
` 147.40 lakh was substantially revised (June 2010) to ` 384.03 lakh. The civil 
construction part of the project was completed to the extent of 90 per cent by incurring  
` 2.17 crore as of August 2015. However, installation of machinery and equipment was 
awaited due to want of funds. The Department had invited (October 2015) expression of 
interest for leasing out the facility at Melli. However, as of October  2015, value for 
money was not obtained from the facility and it remained idle despite incurring an 
expenditure of ` 2.17 crore. 
2.4.9.5  Inordinate delay in establishment of Modern Flower Electronic Auction Centre 
and Pack House 
The Department decided (August 2012) to set up a Modern Flower Electronic Auction 
Centre and Pack House in the upcoming Airport at Pakyong with the objective of export 
of floriculture products. The HCCDD accordingly selected (October 2013) M/s Global 
Agri System Pvt. Ltd, a New Delhi based firm through Notice Inviting Tender 
(November 2012), for preparation of feasibility report and Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
of Modern Flower Electronic Auction Centre for ` 27.52 lakh. The agency submitted 
(July 2014) th e feasibility report and DPR to the Department and  ` 4.71 lakh (out of  
` 27.52 lakh) was paid (July 2015) to the agency. Audit verification revealed that even 
after lapse of more than one year of submission of DPR, the approval of DPR was not 
accorded by HCCDD owing to fund constraints. Thus, the Department had incurred 
` 27.52 lakh (` 4.71 lakh paid and ` 22.81 lakh committed liability) without ensuring its 
utility. The project remained incomplete as of August 2015. Failure to complete the 
project was fra ught with the risk of non -achievement of intended objective of boosting 
export of floriculture products. 


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 44 
2.4.9.6   Creation of Sorting and Grading line 
National Horticulture Board (NHB), GOI sanctioned (March 2012) ` 2.99 crore towards 
Sorting and Grading line for Sikkim Mandarin (Orange) alongwith pack house, low cost 
preservation unit and pusa zero energy cool chamber to facilitate easy marketing of 
products within and outside the State. The NHB simultaneously releas ed ` 1.50 crore as 
50 per cent share and advised the State Government to invest State share and Central 
assistance in equal proportion. The HCCDD released (March 2013) ` 1 crore to SIMFED 
for establishment of project in all four districts of the State with in July 2014, failing 
which amount along with interest earned therefrom would be refunded by SIMFED. The 
project after completion would be handed over to SIMFED for operation.  
It was noticed that out of four Sorting and Grading line units, only two were t aken up by 
SIMFED in North (Gnon Samdong Farm, Dzongu) and West (Kamling Farm) districts as 
of March 2015. The other two units in East and South districts were not taken up at all, 
primarily due to failure of the State to release its matching share. The HC CDD had 
neither requisitioned from the State Government for release of matching share of ` 1.50 
crore nor the State Government released the same. The said two projects in North and 
West districts had been completed belatedly, recording a delay of six month s at a cost of  
₹ 1 crore, owing to delayed finalisation of site. The completed projects in North and West 
districts had also not been operation alised by SIMFED as of August 2015, despite a trial 
run conducted (January 2015) in case of West district as the orange season was over. 
Thus, against the four sanctioned Sorting and Grading line units of ` 2.99 crore, the 
Department constructed only two units, that too had not been operationalised as of August 
2015 despite incurring ` 1 crore. As a result, project objective of easy marketing of 
Sikkim Mandarin (orange) products was not achieved. 
The Department stated (October 2015) that remaining two projects could not be taken up 
in absence of matching grant from State Government. In a subsequent reply, the 
Department stated (November 2015) that local Panchayats and Co -operative societies had 
expressed their interest to run the infrastructure. Hence, the Department was 
contemplating to hand over the facilities to them on mutually agreed terms. However, as 
of November 2015, the projects were neither handed over to Co -operative Societies nor 
put to operation. 
2.4.9.7  Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) and Integrated Pest Management 
(IPM) 
With a view to discourage indiscriminate use of nutrients and pesticides by farmers, 
component of promotion of INM and IPM was implemented through technology 
dissemination. Assistance was also given for developing long term plant protection 
facilities like disease forecasting units, bio -control laboratories, plant health clinics and 
Leaf/Tissue Analysis laboratories. The Mission spent ` 3.06 crore during 2010 -15 to 
implement INM/IPM in farmers’ field and Government Farms. 
Audit observed that the fund was ut ilised for short term activities such as trial -cum-
demonstration for large cardamom ( ` 2 lakh), procurement of inputs for establishment of 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 45 
large cardamom nurseries ( ` 12.96 lakh), purchase of insect traps, agro -shed nets and 
chemicals (` 35 lakh) during 2012-13. The expenditure did not conform to the purpose of 
establishment of infrastructure for disease forecasting units, plant health clinics/tissue 
analysis units , etc. for which funds had been sought under the INM/IPM components. 
This not only constituted  deviation but also deprived farmers of common facilities for 
INM/IPM. 
The Department stated (August 2015) that fund availability under the component was not 
sufficient enough to accommodate the high cost of establishment of plant health clinic 
and disease  forecasting units as per the standards of the guidelines. The Department 
further added that the establishment of above infrastructure would be implemented once 
the funds are available. The action of the Department to utilise the funds against the 
stipulation of the guidelines was irregular and did not help in developing long term plant 
protection facilities. 
2.4.9.8   Protected cultivation 
HMNEH guidelines (Para-10.2.11) envisaged promotion of activities like construction of 
shade net house, green houses, mulching and plastic tunnels, anti -bird/hail nets to 
increase the productivity. State Horticulture Mission constructed a number of structures in 
the farmers field at an aggregated cost of ` 65.64 crore during 2010 -15. Audit observed 
during beneficiary survey that the structures were put to use by the farmers and the 
farmers regarded the structure very useful in improving the productivity the reby 
supplementing their income. The State Horticulture Mission, however, had neither 
collected the production particulars from the beneficiaries to establish that there was 
proper utilisation of subsidy and increase in production and productivity after 
implementation nor realised 50 per cent  beneficiary contribution of ` 32.82 crore as 
envisaged in the guidelines. 
The Department stated (August 2015) that farmers contribution was not taken in financial 
terms but they had contributed towards land leveling in cluding stone walls, arrangement 
of required organic manure, water for irrigation, labour for cultivation, etc. The guidelines 
however, mandated for 50 per cent cost recovery from farmers which was not effected by 
the Department. Regarding the production p articulars from the beneficiaries, the 
Department stated (August 2015) that records were regularly sought from district officials 
and farmers were being trained to maintain proper production records to facilitate 
monitoring. However, details of records sou ght from districts were not available for 
verification by Audit. 
2.4.9.9   Creation of Water Sources  
The HMNEH provided assistance for creating water sources through construction of 
community tanks, farm ponds/reservoirs with plastic/RCC lining to ensure life saving 
irrigation to horticulture crops. The assistance was to be dovetailed in conjunction with 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) and 
wherever possible adequate convergence was to be ensured. 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 46 
During 2013-14, the Dep artment incurred ` 3.16 crore towards creating water sources in 
the form of Genap community tank ( ` 1.60 crore), dug out ponds for individual/farmers 
(` 0.80 crore) and ` 0.76 crore towards procurement of pipes. 
Audit noticed that as per approved Annual Ac tion Plan for 2013-14, 10 community tanks 
(size 100mx100mx3m) aggregating to total storage facility of 30 crore litres, with use of 
plastic/RCC was to be created at a cost of ` 1.73 crore for non-MGNREGS beneficiaries. 
It was noticed in Audit that while im plementing the programme, the Department had 
deviated from the approved plan and procured 27 readymade tanks (Genap tanks) of 
50,000 litres each (involving a total cost of ` 1.60 crore) along with pipes and fittings to 
be installed at different locations a ll over the State. The total capacity of the 27 tanks @ 
50,000 litres per tank worked out to 13.50 lakh litres only against the targeted storage 
capacity of 30 crore litres to be created under the programme. Thus, there was a shortfall 
of creation of community water storage facility of 29.86 crore litres (99 per cent). 
The Department stated (October 2015) that Genap tanks were installed considering its 
water use efficiency which was much higher due to less evaporation loss and less 
maintenance cost.  
The reply was not acceptable as installation of Genap tanks led to considerable shortage 
(99 per cent) in storage capacity of water. Further, approval of the funding agency in G OI 
for this major diversion from the scheme specifications was not sought. 
Similarly, the Department obtained the approval of G OI for construction of water 
harvesting system for individual farmers at a total cost of ` 1.44 crore for 140 ponds of 
20mx20mx3m size all over the State. In terms of the approved action plan, the 
Department was required to create total water storage capacity of 16.80 crore litres 
(20x20x3x140x1,000 litres) at a cost of ` 1.44 crore in 140 ponds. Against the above 
approved plan, the Department created 93 lakh litres storage capacity in three districts of 
the State (East-30 lakh litres; South 40 lakh litres and West -23 lakh litres) by incurring  
` 1.56 crore towards dug ponds of various sizes ranging between 20,000 litres and 50,000 
litres and procurement of pipes. Thus, there was shortfall of water harvesting c apacity of 
15.87 crore litres (99 per cent) under the component of providing water harvesting facility 
to individuals.  
The Department stated (October 2015) that dug out ponds could not be executed in 
Sikkim due to difficult terrain entailing high transportation and labour cost. The reply was 
not acceptable as approval from G OI was not sought for deviation from the approved 
plans. Further, deviation led to considerable reduction (99 per cent) of storage capacity of 
water, which was bound to impact o n production and productivity of various crops in 
coming years. 
2.4.9.10    Award of work to NGO without tender  
The NEC, Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region, GOI sanctioned (December 
2012) a project ‘Cultivation of Commercial Floriculture Crops, Rumtek, East Sikkim’ at a 
cost of ` 3.83 crore on cost sharing of 90:10 between G OI and State Government and 
simultaneously released (December 2012) ` 1.20 crore towards first installment. The 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 47 
project comprised of infrastructures like green houses, stores, irrigation systems, planting 
materials in 2.75 acres of land, with a view to promote production of anthurium, lilium 
and orchids under green house. The terms and conditi on of the NEC sanction 
categorically stipulated that the project should be implemented by the HCCDD and 
completed (November 2015) within three years 
from date of sanction.  
Audit noticed that the work was awarded 
(December 2012) to an NGO, Sikkim Social Youth 
Welfare Association (SSYWA) through SIMFED 
based on their request, without inviting tenders and 
specific approval of the funding agency  (NEC). 
The Department also did n ot verify the bona -fides 
and credentials of the NGO, authenticity of the 
beneficiary farmers included in the project and cost 
and quantities included in the project. The terms of 
entrustment to the NGO were also not spelt out by the Department. Physical ve rification 
of the project by Audit along with departmental officers revealed (September 2015) that 
the progress of work was slow, construction of green houses were not completed, 
irrigation systems had not been installed and plantation had not commenced. Therefore, 
the progress of the project was very poor as compared to its stipulated date (November 
2015). 
Thus, award of work to the SSYWA without inviting tenders and without ascertaining the 
authenticity of the beneficiary farmers included in the Project R eport vitiated fair 
competition and was against the financial propriety. This led to extension of undue favour 
to the NGO. Besides, delay in implementation of project also indicated that robust 
monitoring was lacking to reap the benefits of promoting produ ction of anthodium, lilium 
and orchids envisaged in the project in time bound manner. 
 
2.4.10      National Bamboo Mission 
 
The National Bamboo Mission (NBM) was launched (2006 -07) by the Department of 
Agriculture and Co-operation (DAC), GOI with the objective to uplift the socio-economic 
condition of the poor villagers by introducing large scale bamboo production in rural 
areas so that poor villagers would get direct benefits of using the bamboo and its 
products.  
The HCCDD was designated as the Nodal Department to implement this programme in 
the State. Against the total funds of ` 14.88 crore under NBM during period under audi t, 
funds were allocated among three departments for various activities as detailed below: 
Table 2.4.5 
(` in crore) 
Name of 
Department Fund Activities 
HCCDD 8.57 Plantation in non -forest areas, maintenance of plantation, training of farmers 
and overall monitoring of implementation of NBM in the State. 
Image 2.4.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Incomplete work 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 48 
Name of 
Department Fund Activities 
Forest, 
Environment 
and Wildlife 
Management 
Department 
(FEWMD)  
5.59  
Plantation in forest area, maintenance of plantation, treatment of harvested 
crop to enhance durability, introduction of new designs and mechanisation of 
bamboo based crafts, introduction of grading systems of round and primary 
processed bamboo, introducti on of preservative methods, construction of 
warehouses for storage of harvested bamboo crops, setting up of bamboo 
wholesale and retail markets near villages, marketing through bamboo 
festivals, Melas, expos, craft bazaars, bamboo markets and introduction of 
effective electronic information flow system for promotion, popularisation 
and sale of bamboo and bamboo based products to benefit all stake holders 
involved in the bamboo sector. 
DHH 0.72  
Enhancing employment opportunities, preservation and introduction of new 
designs and mechanisation of bamboo -based crafts, conversion of niche 
bamboo handicraft products to mass products, introduction of utility 
handicrafts through  industrialised means, setting up of bamboo wholesale and 
retail markets near villages, marketing through Bamboo Festivals, Melas, 
Craft Bazaars, bamboo markets and introduction of effective Electronic 
Information Flow systems. 
 
Audit verification revealed the following:  
 Forest, Environment and Wildlife Management Department (FEWMD)  
The FEWMD incurred funds ( ` 5.63 crore)19 primarily towards plantation (` 2.85 crore), 
maintenance of plantation in forest area ( ` 2.67 crore) besides other minor activities  
(` 0.11 crore) associated with bamboo plantation. The FEWMD had thus, not utilised the 
funds towards other important activities as laid out in NBM guidelines such as 
construction of suitable warehouses near the forest areas for storage of bamboo crops, 
treatment of harve sted crops to enhance durability, introduction of new designs, 
introduction of effective electronic information flow system for promotion, popularisation 
and sale of bamboo and bamboo based products to benefit all stake holders involved in 
the bamboo sector. 
In reply, the FEWMD while agreeing that the funds were mainly incurred towards 
bamboo plantation and its maintenance in forest areas stated (October 2015) that one each 
of bamboo whole sale market and retail outlet had been approved during 2014 -15 which 
would be completed during the current year (2015 -16). Introduction of new designs, 
introduction of effective electronic information flow system for promotion, popularising 
and sale of bamboo and bamboo based products to benefit stake holders were being do ne 
through pamphlets/brochures on bamboo crafts, participation in trade fairs, seminars in 
the district, exposure visit to different institutes like Cane and Bamboo Technology 
Centre, Guwahati, Forest Research Institute (FRI) Dehradun, etc. 
However, as of November 2015, important activities such as construction of suitable 
warehouses near the forest areas for storage of bamboo crops, treatment of harvested 
crops to enhance durability, introduction of new designs, introduction of effective 
electronic informa tion flow system for promotion, sale of bamboo and bamboo based 
products to benefit stake holders had neither been achieved nor assessment carried out to 
assess the production and productivity. 
                                                           
19     Additional ` 4.17 lakh was incurred from interest earned.   

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 49 
 Directorate of Handloom and Handicraft (DHH) 
The DHH utilised the transferred funds of ` 72.10 lakh during 2010 -15 towards 
construction of retail outlets at Gangtok ( ` 10.66 lakh), Namchi ( ` 13.33 lakh), New 
Delhi ( ` 13.33 lakh), Soreng ( ` 10 lakh) and Innovative Intervention and Skill 
Development Training (` 11.95 lakh). Thus, the DHH had not carried out the important 
activities such as enhancing employment opportunities, preservation and introduction of 
new designs and mechanisation of bamboo -based crafts, conversion of niche bamboo 
handicraft pro ducts to mass products, introduction of utility handicrafts through  
industrialised means, setting up of bamboo wholesale and retail markets near villages and 
marketing through Bamboo Festivals, Melas, Craft Bazaars, bamboo markets and 
introduction of effe ctive Electronic Information Flow systems as listed in the NBM 
guidelines. Annual Action Plans within the parameters of the Mission detailing the 
activities as required under NBM guidelines was also not formulated by DHH.  
The DHH stated (October 2015) that skill upgradation training like Innovative Design and 
Development Training Workshop, Integrated Design for Artisans, etc. in different parts of 
districts were being organised for enhancing employment opportunity. For creating 
platform for marketing, DHH was directly procuring bamboo products made by bamboo 
artisans and sending bamboo artisans for exhibition and fairs outside Sikkim. 
However, as of November 2015, preservation and introduction of new designs and 
mechanisation of bamboo -based crafts, convers ion of niche bamboo handicraft products 
to mass products, setting up of bamboo wholesale and retail markets near villages and 
introduction of effective Electronic Information Flow systems as listed in the NBM 
guideline had not been taken up. 
Thus, the FEWMD and DHH had not undertaken the important activities as listed above 
despite incurring substantial funds of ` 6.35 crore. The HCCDD also, on its part, had not 
monitored the works carried out by FEWMD and DHH to ensure achieving the intended 
objectives under the NBM. Even the assistance was provided to FEWMD on year to year 
basis without assessing the survival of 90 per cent of the plants as envisaged in the NBM 
guidelines. Further, monitoring and evaluation of the impact of the scheme to increase 
employment opportunities, preservation and introduction of new designs and 
mechanisation of bamboo -based crafts to assist in marketing the products were also not 
attempted either by HCCDD or the other implementing agencies.  
2.4.10.1 Absence of processing and marketing of bamboo produce  
The Department reported achievement of 7,939 hectares of bamboo plantation during the 
period 2006-07 to 2014-15 as shown below: 
Table 2.4.6 
Year Target  (ha.) Achievement (ha.) Beneficiaries covered 
Upto 2009-10 5,067 5,030 6,942 
2010-11 860 837 1,086 
2011-12 1,200 1,197 677 
2012-13 80 80 124 
2013-14 300 300 NA 
2014-15 500 495 460 
TOTAL 8,007 7,939 9,289 
Source: Figure furnished by the Department.  NA= Data not made available. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 50 
 
Out of 7,939 hectares, 5,030 hectares of bamboo plantation done in 2006 -10 by the 
HCCD Department had already completed five years and thus became mature for 
extraction. In terms of the expected annual economic return from bamboo plantation, the 
net commercial value of the product upto 2009 -10 would be ` 172.22 crore as detailed 
below: 
Table 2.4.7 
(` in crore) 
Yield during  Area (ha.) Value of yield Total value  
2011-12 70020    700 x ` 1.52 lakh21  10.64  
2012-13 2,300 (700+1,60022)  2,300 x ` 1.52 lakh  34.96  
2013-14 3,300(700+1,600+1,000) 3,300 x ` 1.52 lakh  50.16 
2014-15 5,030(700+1,600+1,000+1,730) 5,030 x ` 1.52 lakh   76.46 
TOTAL 172.22 
 
Further, the HCCDD had incurred expenditure of ` 26.29 crore under NBM towards 
plantation and maintenance of bamboo crop during 2006 -15. However, records provided 
to audit did not show any planning and action undertaken by the Department towards 
post-harvest collection, preservation -cum-storage, processi ng and marketing of bamboo 
crop and bamboo based products. Thus, raw bamboo crop valu ing ` 172.22 crore which 
became mature for harvesting during 2011-15 failed to yield any benefit to the farmers.  
The Department stated (August 2015) that the bamboo plant ation was mostly done in the 
sloppy, unfertile, degraded land which were unsuitable for agricultural purposes. Land 
profile of Sikkim coupled with non-application of chemical fertilisers, low population and 
absence of buyers from other states constrained e asy and large scale harvesting, 
processing and marketing of bamboo and bamboo based products. The Department 
further added that export of bamboo based products was economically not feasible due to 
high labour cost, difficulties in harvesting and processing  and high transportation cost. 
The reply was not acceptable as these constraints and non -feasibility of export of bamboo 
based products should have been analysed before taking up the programme.  
In a subsequent reply, the HCCDD while accepting that data on  production and quantity 
of bamboo Culm used and bamboo shoot consumed locally was not available with the 
Department stated (October 2015) that baseline survey to assess the production and 
productivity of bamboo under forest and non -forest areas had been i nitiated. Bamboo 
Treatment Plant, Post-harvest management structure with preliminary processing of 
bamboo and wholesale outlet for marketing of bamboo had been established at Rangpo in 
the current year (2015-16) to promote marketing of treated bamboo. 
The Department, however, had not initiated suitable steps to harness the value of products 
as of November 2015. This defeated the objective of the NBM to provide stable and 
regular income to the farmers besides failing to provide employment and livelihood 
security to artisans, skilled labourers and others associated with the bamboo sector.  
 
                                                           
20     700 ha planted during 2006-07 matured in 2011-12. 
21     Calculated on the basis of ` 1.52 lakh per ha reckoned by Arunachal Pradesh. 
22     1,600 ha planted during 2007-08 matured in 2012-13. 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 51 
2.4.11    National Mission on Micro Irrigation 
 
Water is one of the most critical inputs for agriculture. The availability of adequate water for 
irrigation is a key factor in achieving higher productivity. National Mission on Micro 
Irrigation, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme on Micro Irrigation was introduced in January 
2006. The Scheme objective was to increase the area under improved methods of irrigation 
for better water use efficiency to provide stimulus to agricultural growth in a mission mode. 
The scheme aimed to help converge micro irrigation activities under major government 
programmes23 to create integrated water harvesting structures for increasing water use 
efficiency, crop productivity and farmers’ income. The salient features of the scheme vis -à-
vis the position of the State is given below: 
2.4.11.1    State Micro Irrigation Committee 
The Operational Guidelines (November 2010) of National Mission on Micro -Irrigation 
(NMMI) envisaged (Para-4.3 and 4.4) constitution of a State Micro Irrigation Committee 
(SMIC) under the chairmanship of the Secretary, Horticulture/Agriculture with members 
/representatives from concerned departments like Water Resources, Rural Development,  
Ministry of Agriculture, State Panchayati Raj Institution, etc. to oversee the 
implementation of the Mission programme.  
The function of SMIC inter-alia included (i) organising of base line survey and feasibility 
studies in different parts of the State, (ii) finali se the consolidated action plans of the 
districts, (iii) register the System Manufacturers and circulate the list thereof along with 
quote price to DMIC and implementing agencies and (iv) organise various training and 
extension programmes for farmers.  
Audit noticed that although the SMIC was constituted (July 2010), it had not met on 
quarterly basis as required under the guidelines. Base line survey and feasibility studies in 
different parts of the State covering various crops and technologies we re not initiated as 
of March 2015. No action had been taken by the SMIC to register the system 
manufacturers of Irrigation equipment and circulate list of such manufacturers along with 
the quoted price to the District Micro Irrigation Committees (DMIC) and  Implementing 
Agencies to facilitate installation and commissioning of the systems to the satisfaction of 
the farmers in order to ensure good quality components having BIS mark.  
The Department had also never approached the SMIC to indicate quantum of money to be 
paid by the beneficiaries/banks to the manufacturers before installing the systems as 
envisaged in the Guidelines. Instead, the Micro Irrigation systems were procured directly 
from SIMFED, an apex Cooperative Society engaged in marketing of agricul tural 
produce and procurement of agricultural inputs, without ensuring quality certification by 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS).  
The Department stated (August 2015) that (i) all supplies in the State were procured from 
registered companies through SIMFED, (ii) the SMIC would meet quarterly in future, and 
(iii) action had already been taken by the SMIC to register the Irrigation system 
                                                           
23      HMNEH, Rashtriya Krishi Vigyan Yojana (RKVY), National Food Security Mission (NFSM). 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 52 
manufactures and circulate the list of such manufacturer along with quoted price to 
DMIC. 
However, the guidelines had stipulated that the registered system manufacturing company 
must provide free after sale service to the farmers for at least three years and they should 
set up service centres for providing technological and  agronomic support at the grass root 
level, which had not been done till date.  
Similarly, though DMIC was constituted in all districts between 2010 -11 and 2013-14 as 
required under the Operational Guidelines (November 2010) of NMMI (Para -4.5) for 
implementing the NMMI programme in the district, the meeting o f the Committee was 
not held on monthly basis. 
2.4.11.2    Perspective/strategic plan  
Perspective/strategic plan and road map for micro irrigation technology was not 
formulated as required in the Operational Guidelines of NMMI (Para -12.2). Synergy and 
convergence with the other departments like RMDD, FSADD was also not carried out 
except in 2014-15 with RMDD for water harvesting tanks. 
The Department stated (October 2015) that perspective plan would be prepared in 
consonance with mission goals and objectives.  
2.4.11.3    Target and achievement  
The physical target and achievement of NMMI during 2010-15 is given below: 
Table 2.4.8 
Year Target  (ha.) Achievement (ha.) Beneficiaries covered 
2010-11 00 00 00 
2011-12 364.33 364.33 1,686 
2012-13 201.59 172.67 1,014 
2013-14 992.07 992.07 3,516 
2014-15 841.70 841.70 2,268 
TOTAL 2,399.69 2,370.77 8,484 
Source: Figure furnished by the Department. 
 
The Department achieved the target except in 2012-13. During 2012-13, achievement was 
172.67 ha against the target of 201.59 ha leading to shortfall 29 ha (14 per cent) despite 
incurring entire sanctioned funds of ` 2.40 crore. The reasons for this shortfall could not 
be furnished by the Department.  
2.4.11.3    Lapse of central fund  
NMMI was launched in June 2010. The Department was required to prepare AAP for the 
year 2010 -11. The proposal for ` 2 crore was mooted but was not finalised by the 
Department. Due to non -finalising the AAP, the central fund of ` 1 crore (50 per cent of  
` 2 crore) was not sanctioned by GOI resulting in loss of central assistance.  
The Department accepted (October 2015) the audit observation.  
2.4.11.4   Disbursement of micro irrigation system to the beneficiaries 
In terms of the Operational Guidelines (Para -4.7), the Implementing Agency (IA) was 
required to disburse financial assistance to the beneficiaries at the rate commensurate with 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 53 
the size of the holdings as per revenue records in accordance with the guidelines of the 
scheme and furnish Utilisation Certificates and Monthly Progress Reports in the 
prescribed proforma to the Ministry of Agriculture.  
Audit noticed that financial assistance was not disbursed to the beneficiaries directly as 
envisaged in the scheme guidelines. Instead, the micro -irrigation systems procured from 
SIMFED were provided to the farmers, without considerin g the size of holdings. Thus, 
there was deviation from the guidelines.  
The Department stated (August 2015) that the system was procured from SIMFED and 
provided to the beneficiaries as per the policy of the State Government to procure all 
agricultural inputs from SIMFED. The action however, was in deviation of the Scheme 
Guidelines.  
2.4.11.5     Excess expenditure on demonstration units 
Assistance for demonstration of micro irrigation (MI) technology was provided by the 
Central Government @ 75 per cent of the system cost for a maximum area of 0.5 ha per 
beneficiary. MI demonstration was to be taken up on farmers’ field and also on farms 
belonging to State/Central Governments, State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), ICAR 
Institutes, Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs)/Trusts. 
Audit noticed that the Department executed drip irrigation demonstration without 
realising 25 per cent cost contribution from the beneficiaries. During 2011 -14, the State 
implemented drip irrigation in 443.84 hectares (1,196 units)  on demonstration mode at a 
cost of ` 2.85 crore entirely from the Central funds. Non -realisation of beneficiary 
contribution was not only against the guidelines but also resulted in unauthorised excess 
expenditure of ` 0.95 crore from the NMMI funds on installation of drip irrigation system 
on demonstration mode. 
The Department stated (August 2015) that the beneficiaries contributed their share in kind 
through supply of pipes, fittings, storage tank and transportation of water from source to 
the farm. The action however, was in devi ation of the Scheme Guidelines and the 
quantum of contribution was neither quantified nor documented. 
Thus, creation of infrastructure for the irrigation facilities was not done in full to provide 
required facility to the farmers  as pointed out in Para-2.4.9.9 and the implementation 
under NMMI was also not in conformity with the scheme guidelines as mentioned above. 
Besides, additional areas could have been covered with ` 0.95 crore incurred towards 
meeting beneficiaries contribut ion. Failure to enrol stakeholders through contribution 
could prove to be a deterrent to full beneficiary participation in this scheme. 
 
2.4.12    National Mission on Medicinal Plants 
 
The National Mission on Medicinal Plants (NMMP), a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, 
funded by National Medicinal Plant Board, GOI was launched in the State during 2009 -
10 with the objectives to (a) support cultivation of medicinal plants; (b) promote 
standardisation and quality assurance by adopting good agricultural and collection 
practices; (c) support setting up of processing zones/clusters through convergence of 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 54 
cultivation, warehousing, value addition and marketing; (d) develop infrastructure for 
implementation and certification mechanism for ensuring quality standards. The HCCDD 
was the implementing agency in the State. Under the scheme, production of medicinal 
planting materials through setting up of nursery in public as well as private sector, 
cultivation of medicinal plant, etc. were taken up. Position of the NMMP in the State is 
given below: 
2.4.12.1 Base line survey and feasibility studies 
Operational Guidelines of NMMP [para 7.11 (iv) ] envisaged conducting of base line 
survey and feasibility studies in different pa rts of districts and sub -districts to determine 
the status of medicinal plants, its potential and demand and tailor assistance accordingly. 
The Department claimed to have conducted the base line survey and feasibility studies 
but the reports were not documented and produced to Audit. Thus, the Department did not 
possess the exact information on various aspects of medicinal plants relevant to its 
geographical condition for effective implementation of the scheme to realise its full 
potential. 
The Department s tated (October 2015) that base line survey and feasibility studies were 
carried out during 2009 -10 and informed that the same would be taken up again during 
the current year (2015-16). 
2.4.12.2   Technical Support Group 
According to para 7.11 of the Operat ional Guidelines of NMMP, the State Mission will 
have a technical screening committee consisting of domain expert to appraise the 
proposals. Audit noticed that the TSG was not constituted as of March 2015 and thus the 
Department was devoid of the benefits envisaged through TSG in the State. 
The Department stated (October 2015) that the TSG would be constituted during the 
current year (2015-16). 
2.4.12.3    Target and achievement  
The physical target and achievement of NMMP during 2010 -15 as indicated below 
revealed that the target was met in full by the Department except during 2013-14: 
Table 2.4.9 
Year Target  (ha.) Achievement (ha.) 
2010-11 00 00 
2011-12 287.74 287.74 
2012-13 595 595 
2013-14 349 179.48 
2014-15 446 446 
TOTAL 1,677.74 1,508.22 
Source: Figure furnished by the Department. 
 
2.4.12.4     Establishment of new nurseries 
To meet the requirement of quality planting material, financial assistance was to be 
provided for establishment of new nurseries (public as well as private sector) under the 
scheme.  The details of establishment of new nurseries were as under: 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 55 
Table 2.4.10 
(` in lakh) 
Year 
Public Private Amount 
involved  Model Small Model Small 
T A T A T A T A  
2009-10 5 5 6 6 10 10 12 12 140.28 
2010-11 6 6 6 6 1 1 2 2 178.00 
2011-12 2 2 2 2 0 0 0 0 80.00 
2012-13 2 2 6 6 0 0 10 10 48.00 
2013-14 2 2 2 2 0 0 0 0 48.00 
2014-15 0 0 4 4 0 0 0 0 16.00 
TOTAL 17 17 26 26 11 11 24 24 510.28 
Source: Figure furnished by the Department. T: Target, A: Achievement  
 
Audit noticed that although the Department maintained details of public and private 
nurseries for raising medicinal plants in the district, details of seedling grown and 
supplied by each of the nurseries was not maintained by the Department. Therefore, 
extent of availability of quality planting material through nurseries could not be assessed 
in Audit.  
The Department stated (October 2015) that district officials had been instructed to furnish 
the detailed data of medicinal plants, seedling production from public and private 
nurseries. However, as of November 2015, details had not been received. 
2.4.12.5    Marketing facilities not created 
There was no achievement under Post-Harvest Management component despite having a 
provision of ` 80 lakh for establishme nt of Drying Sheds and Storage Godowns during 
2009-10. Similarly, during 2010 -11, there was no achievement under creation of 
marketing infrastructure ( ` 20 lakh); testing charges ( ` 25 lakh); organic certification  
(` 10 lakh) and linkage ( ` 10 lakh). Due to non-utilisation, GOI did not release funds in 
the subsequent years under these components. 
The Department stated (October 2015) that they were responsible for production and area 
expansion only and the marketing was done by farmers through marketing coo peratives. 
The reply was not acceptable as GOI Guidelines envisaged for end to end approach which 
inter alia includes creation of marketing facilities for farmers produces.  
2.4.12.6    Dovetailing with other schemes  
According to the scheme guidelines ( para 7.15), some components would be dovetailed 
into Action Plan from other schemes of the other departments such as micro irrigation, 
application of fertiliser, cons truction of irrigation tank, etc . However, it was not initiated 
by the Department. 
The Depa rtment while accepting the Audit observation stated (October 2015) that 
dovetailing with other schemes would be done in future programmes. 
2.4.12.7     MoU with GoI and District Implementing Authorities 
According to para 12.2 of the NMMP Guideline, MoU bet ween State and G OI, detailing 
the duties, responsibility and commitments of State and GOI was to be signed between 
GOI and the State Government for effective implementation of the scheme. The copies of 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 56 
MoU were not available in the Department. Similarly, M oU between District 
implementing authorities and the State Government was also not initiated by the 
Department as of March 2015. 
The Department stated (October 2015) that MoUs would be signed in due course. 
2.4.12.8     End to end approach  
End to end approach covering production, post-harvest management, processing and 
marketing was required to be initiated by the district authorities as per guidelines (Para -
7.15). The Department had not initiated adequate measures to ensure end to end approach, 
especially post-harvest management. As a result, the farmers were not able to sell their 
produce as the forest Department was reluctant to issue permits to growers for sale 
outside the State. Similarly, synergy linkages with production and supply of q uality 
planting materials, processing, quality testing, certification, warehousing as envisaged in 
the guidelines was not adequately attempted by the Department.  
The Department while accepting the Audit observation stated (October 2015) that the post 
harvesting infrastructure were not created by the Department due to scattered cluster of 
medicinal plant growers.  
 
2.4.13      Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
Audit Objective-4:  
To assess the adequacy and effectiveness of monitoring, evaluation and internal 
control mechanism. 
 
2.4.13.1    Monitoring 
Monitoring of programmes/schemes provide assurance that the organisation’s objectives 
are being achieved and the entity is functioning in an economical, efficient and effective 
manner.  
It was however, noticed that although the Department had carried out monitoring of 
schemes through field verification from time to time, schedule for monitoring/inspection 
were not drawn up and the monitoring reports of the inspections were not recorded for 
initiating corrective actions, if any. 
The Department assured (October 2015) that this would be taken care of in future.   
2.4.13.2    Internal Audit 
Internal Audit occupies an important place in ensuring proper monitoring of 
schemes/programmes. This also provides assurances to  higher management about the 
functioning of the Department. It was however, noticed that internal audit of the 
Department had not been conducted by the Directorate of Internal Audit, Finance, 
Revenue and Expenditure Department (FRED) even once during the review period. 
The Department stated (October 2015) that the FRED would be requested to take up 
Internal Audit.   

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 57 
2.4.13.3    Evaluation 
Evaluation of programmes and schemes implemented by the Department was not 
attempted even once in the last five years. T his is despite the fact that all the important 
programmes such as HMNEH, NBM, NMMI and NMMP had components and funding 
provision for carrying out such evaluation studies by independent agencies. 
The Department stated (October 2015) that this would be done in coming years. 
 
2.4.14    Success story   
 
Ms. Trishna T. Rai, aged 27 years, from Tangji -Bikmat GPU of South district with 
educational qualification of B Tech took up farming profession with land holding of 1.60 
ha. She and her four family members cultivate Dutch Rose in 0.3 ha . Prior to intervention 
by the Department, production level was very low and the family had difficulty in proper 
maintenance of the plants and suffered from financial instability. At present, Ms Rai 
cultivates rose in 2,000 sqm area under protected cultivation mode and produces stem 
ranging between 13,000 and 20,000 fetching an annual income ranging between ` 65,000 
and ` 1,00,000. She confided that this success was possible owing to support extended by 
the Department in the form of opportunity for participating in a training programme at 
Horticulture Training Centre, Pune; assistance for construction of hi -tech green house, 
planting material, bio -fertiliser, bio -pesticides, drip irrigation; and exposure on various 
technology for rose cultivation. Of late, she had become the le ader in her village in the 
protected cultivation of high value crops and 60 more farmers of surrounding villages 
took up rose cultivation under protected condition. 
Image 2.4.7 Image 2.4.8 
  
Similarly, Shri Partaman Rai of Poklok -Denchung GPU of South District with land 
holding of 1.5 ha took up protected cultivation of tomato in 134 sqm area with assistance 
from Department in the form of inputs like seeds, organic manure, bio -pesticides and low 
cost bamboo green house with poly pipe and spray machine. His own investment included 
land, labour and Farm yard manure. Shri Rai started growing tomato crops by adopting 
new technology like growing seedlings in protray, applying plenty of organic manur es 
and farm yard manures. Bio -pesticides, training and exposure trips increased his 
production manifold. Shri Rai had planted 270 nos. of tomato seedlings in his green house 
and harvested and sold 4,050 kg of tomato crop fetching ` 1.20 lakh per annum as against 


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 58 
his earlier annual income of ` 10,000. Shri Rai has been emulated by 60 farmers who 
have started tomato cultivation in large-scale thereby raising their income. 
 
2.4.15    Beneficiary survey  
 
Audit carried out (August-September 2015) Beneficiary survey of 100 farmers consisting 
of 19 females and 81 males across the state. The farmers possessed land holding ranging 
from 0.1 ha to 4 ha and practiced integrated farming approach in horticulture alo ng with 
agriculture, animal husbandry, etc. The earning from Horticulture ranged between  
` 50,000 and ` 2,50,000 per annum. The survey revealed that the farmers had received 
inputs such as seeds, irrigation facilities, green houses, etc. from Department on time and 
were satisfied with the assistance and support extended by the Department. They 
highlighted the inadequacy of marketing facilities and requested for improvement in 
marketing facilities and setting up of collection centres. The farmers however, were 
dependent upon the Government for replacement of the infrastructure and other inputs for 
continuance in the farming profession. 
 
2.4.16     Conclusion  
 
Considering the varied topography, scattered and marginal land holdings of the farmers in 
Sikkim, horticultural crops possessed viable alternative in generating employment and 
supplementing farmers’ income beyond subsistence level. The efforts of the Department 
through technological transfer, input and infrastructure support such as green houses, 
irrigation facilities, etc. had helped the farmers in supplementing their income. Some of 
the farmers have also excelled and earned income ranging between ` 0.50 and ` 2.5 lakh 
per annum. However, majority of the farmers were not able to come above the 
subsistence level primarily owing to small land holding and absence of adequate 
marketing facilities. The Department, however needed to accelerate conduct of base line 
survey, formulation of TSG, appropriate preparation of Perspective Plan and Annual 
Action Plans.  The infrastructural facilities such as Integrated Floriculture Pack House, 
Sorting and Grading line for Sikkim mandarin, etc. should be put to their intended use. 
The mother blocks should be executed in CoEs to ensure contribution towards improved 
varieties of various crops as was done in Odisha, Haryana , etc. Suitable steps were 
required to be initiated to enhance the productivity of fruits, vegetables and spices to 
catch up with similarly placed States and all India average. This will help to realise ful l 
potential of the horticulture and make it an effective tool for accelerating development in 
the State. The Horticulture Development will receive further fillip once the Department 
initiates corrective actions in the areas of concern pointed out in this report. 
 
2.4.17   Recommendation   
 
 The Department should initiate action to frame Perspective plan to provide the 
roadmap for horticulture development. Annual Action plans should also be 
strengthened by incorporating project reports of all districts distinctly, export 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 59 
potential and detailed quantification of all inputs and outputs, base line survey and 
feasibility studies. 
 The Department should initiate action to establish mother blocks in Centres of 
Excellence to contribute towards improved varieties of crops and grow more from 
less area. 
 End to end approach should be initiated to provide all round support commencing 
from plantation till post-harvest to the farmers. 
 Monitoring, evaluation and internal control mechanism should be strengthened to 
make it more effective. 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.5    Avoidable expenditure due to retendering of work 
 
 
 
 
 
North Eastern Council (NEC), Government of India approved (December 2011) the work 
of ‘Up-gradation and strengthening of HT and LT lines and sub -stations at helipad area, 
Bakthang and adjoining places in East S ikkim’ at an estimated cost of ` 4.63 crore which 
included the financial grant of 90 per cent (` 4.17 crore) from GoI. After obtaining (18 
February 2012) approval of Government of Sikkim (GoS), the work was tendered (31 
March 2012) by the Energy and Power Department (Department). The Department 
received 21 offers in the tender out of which 20 bidders  quoted their rates below the 
Schedule of Rates, 2008 (SOR) value and only one bidder quoted 26.60 per cent above 
the SOR value. 
Since the L1 rate obtained was 32.98 per cent  below the SOR value, the Department 
called for explanations from the L1 bidder (S hri Bijay Agarwal). The L1 bidder justified 
(6 June 2012) his bid citing that he had the required materials 24 procured at a cheap cost, 
favourable location of work site would enable work to progress at faster pace and the firm 
was having less volume of work  in hand. The Department, however, was not satisfied 
with the clarification of L1 bidder, and hence, scrapped (30 June 2012) the tender and 
decided to re-tender the work.  
In the re-tendering of work, the Department received (27 August 2012) only three bid s in 
which the L1 bidder (Shri Mukesh Agarwal) quoted lowest rate of 16.5 per cent above 
SOR 2008. After negotiation with the L1 bidder, the Department brought down the rate to 
14 per cent above SOR. Accordingly, a work order for a value of ` 5.01 crore was issued 
                                                           
24       Latticed structures, Aluminum conductors, Disc insulators, etc. 
 
ENERGY AND POWER DEPARTMENT 
Imprudent decision of the Department for re -tendering of work led to extra 
expenditure of ` 2.27 crore on execution. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 60 
(04 February 2013) in favour of the L1 bidder. The work was completed in September 
2014. 
In this connection Audit observed the following:  
i. In the original tendering, out of the 21 bids received, 20 bidders (95 per cent ) 
quoted the rates below the SOR ranging from 32.98 per cent to 1.5 per cent and 
only one bidder quoted above the SOR. Considering the above, the action of the 
Department to scrap the tender was not a prudent and justified decision under the 
given circumstances.  
ii. While cancelling the original tender, the Department justified the action on the 
plea that the quality of work of L1 bidder might not be up to the mark due to the 
unreasonably lower rates quoted. In support of its decision, however, the 
Department did not cite any previous ins tances of poor or bad quality of work by 
the contractors concerned who had quoted rates below SOR. In this connection, it 
was also observed that during the same period, the Department had issued (August 
2012) a work order 25 for similar work at a contract va lue of ` 4.68 crore which 
was at par with SOR value (SOR 2008). The said work had been completed in 
August 2013. This showed inconsistency in the action and decision making of the 
Department in the matter of awarding two works of similar nature for execution. 
iii. While 21 bids were received in the original tender, only 3 were received in the re -
tender. The bidder who was L1 in the scrapped tender had not submitted his bid in 
re-tender and 17 bidders who had participated in the original tender had not turned 
up for purchasing tender documents in the re -tender even though their application 
were found eligible for issuing the tender documents. The position stated above 
was indicative of the fact that the re -tendering of the work proved to be less 
competitive. 
Thus, the imprudent decision of the Department to go for re -tendering of work had 
resulted in an extra expenditure of ` 2.27 crore 26 on execution of works which was 
avoidable. 
In reply, the Department stated (September 2015) that the work was put to re -tender as it 
was found that majority of the bidders had quoted the rates arbitrarily with no knowledge 
of the technical parameters of the work including site conditions. Since the estimate for 
the work was based on SOR 2008 cost escalation over the years was inevit able and thus 
feasibility of executing the work duly maintaining the quality seemed to be questionable. 
It was further stated that the majority of the bidders who had quoted in the original tender 
had not executed any major works in the Department. The ext ra expenditure due to re -
tendering as pointed out by the Audit is a matter of perception as the quality of work 
could have been compromised due to lack of expertise besides the probability of time and 
cost overrun. 
                                                           
25      Work of conversion of existing 440v LT distribution overhead lines including service connection in to 
UG system at Gyalshing Bazar and its surrounding area in West Sikkim. 
26      Work order value ` 5,01,26,857 – (value put to tender ` 4,08,76,273 – 32.98 per cent below as quoted 
in the original tender ` 1,34,80,995) = ` 2,27,31,579. 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 61 
The reply is not acceptable in view of th e fact that all bidders who had participated in the 
original tender were registered electrical contractors with the Department. Moreover, the 
Department did not mention about the difficult site conditions and the required technical 
expertise in the origina l tender which indicated that the work was of a standard/regular 
nature. Further, while scrapping the original tender due to lower quotes, the Department 
did not verify the justification put forth by the L1 bidder for quoting bids below SOR, 
which establishes the fact that the decision of the Department for re -tendering of work 
lacked prudency. 
 
 2.6     Interest on Mobilisation Advance not recovered 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Energy and Power Department (Department), Government of Sikkim had taken up 
(December 2006) the work of “Construction of 132 KV transmission line from 132/66 
KV sub-station near Lower Lagyap Hydel Project (LLHP) to Sherathang in East Sikkim” 
at an estimated cost of ` 31.01 crore. The Ministry of Development of North East Region 
(MDONER), Government of India was to provide the financial assistance to the extent of 
90 per cent (` 27.91 crore27) of the project cost by way of grants. The work was awarded 
(28 February 2007) through tendering to L1 bidder (Contractor) at a negotiated rate of 
` 29.98 crore with a scheduled completion period of 24 months (February 2009). 
Subsequently, the Contractor requested (March 2007) for grant of Mobilisation Advance 
(MA) fo r the project on the plea that the work involved the procurement of costly 
equipment. Since there was no provision in the Sikkim Financial Rules (SFR) or Public 
Works Department (PWD) code for release of MA to work contractors, the Department 
sought (March 2007) the approval of the Government of Sikkim (GoS) in this regard. 
The GoS approved (30 March 2007) release of MA amounting to ` 6.77 crore against 
furnishing of Bank Guarantee by the Contractor for equivalent amount and subject to 
recovery of simple interest at the rate of 5 per cent per annum from the Contractor on the 
MA so provided. 
Accordingly, the Department released (31 March 2007) ` 6.77 crore as MA to the 
Contractor after obtaining the Bank Guarantee 28 of equivalent value. The Department, 
however, had neither communicated nor had entered into any formal agreement with the 
Contractor regarding levy of interest at 5 per cent per annum on the MA. 
Audit observed that although the Department had recovered/adjusted MA (June 2015) of 
` 6.77 crore from the running bills of the contractor, simple interest amounting to 
                                                           
27      Under Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR). 
28      (BG No.184-186/2007 dated 31 March 2007). 
Failure of the Department to communicate the Government approved terms for 
release of Mobili sation Advance (MA) to the contractor led to non -recovery of 
interest of ` 2.79 crore on MA. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 62 
` 2.79 crore on the MA for the period from April 2007 to June 2015 had not been 
recovered till October 2015. 
Thus, failure of the Department to recover interest on MA provide d to the Contractor in 
violation of the directions of GoS led to loss of ` 2.7929 crore to the exchequer.    
The Department replied (August 2015) that levy of interest on MA was moved by the 
Department at the time of seeking Government approval but it was f ound at a later stage 
that there is no provision in the SFR and as such it was not enforced. While appreciating 
the audit observation, the Department stated that the audit observation has been noted for 
future. 
The reply is not acceptable in view of the fact that the approval of Government for release 
of MA was specific on levy of interest at the rate of 5 per cent per annum. Hence, the 
Department should have obtained prior approval of the Government for not enforcing the 
condition regarding levy of interest on MA. 
 
 
 
 
 2.7     Avoidable expenditure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The various structures in flexible pavement in construction of road works in terms of 
Indian Road Congress (IRC) as well as Central Public Works Department (CPWD) 
specification consists, inter-alia, of (i) Sub -grade; (ii) Sub -base course; (iii) Base course 
and (iv) Surface course. Sub-grade is the surface of the ground in its final shape after 
completion of earthwork and consolidation, compaction or stabilisation, Sub-base course 
is a WBM  (Water Bound Macadem) laid over the sub -grade with stone aggregate of 90 
mm to 45 mm size (WBM -I). Base course is also a WBM to be laid either with stone 
aggregates of 63 mm to 45 mm (WBM -II) or with stone aggregates of sizes 53 mm to 
22.4 mm size (WBM-III) with screening. These are the standard base courses used in road 
works. Surface course may, inter-alia, consist of surface dressing with hot bitumen or 
premix carpeting with hot bitumen or bituminous macadam using hot mix plant and paver 
equipment.  
As would be se en from the above specifications, after the Sub -base formation with 
WBM-I, the standard base courses prescribed for road works, other than National 
Highways and City Roads with high traffic density, are either water bound macadam with 
                                                           
29     ` 6.77 crore x 5/100 x 99/12 months = ` 2.79 crore. 
ROADS AND BRIDGES DEPARTMENT 
The unwarranted inclusion of item of work Water Bound Macadem  (WBM)-III 
in addition to WBM -I and WBM-II led to extra avoidable expenditure of ` 2.32 
crore in 16 works. 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 63 
stone aggregates of s ize of 63 mm to 45 mm (WBM -II) or 53 mm to 22.4 mm size 
(WBM-III) with appropriate screening and binding materials. Thus, the use of both the 
specifications of WBM-II and WBM-III was beyond the prescribed norms. 
Scrutiny of records of the Roads and Bridges  Department revealed that during February 
to November 2014, the Department incorporated the item WBM -III also in addition to 
WBM-I and WBM-II in 16 works. Since only one out of the two courses of WBM -II and 
WBM-III at base level was prescribed in IRC as we ll as CPWD specifications, inclusion 
of 16,753.916 cum of WBM -III was unwarranted with consequential extra avoidable 
expenditure of ` 2.32 crore as detailed in the Appendix 2.7.1. 
The matter was reported to Department/Government (May 2015); their reply had not been 
received (October 2015). 
 
 2.8     Undue benefit to the contractor  
 
Non-adherence to the provision of SPW Manual in tendering process, absence of 
competitive bidding and award of work at abnormally higher tender rate over and 
above Schedule of R ates (SOR) 2012 rates resulted in an extra expenditure with 
consequential undue financial benefit to the contractor to the tune of ` 2.27 crore 
and further committed extra benefit of ` 5.21 crore on residual work. 
 
The work “Upgradation and carpeting of Namchi-Phong-Mamring road in South Sikkim” 
was approved and sanctioned (February 2013) by Government of India (GOI), Ministry 
of Development of North Eastern Region at a total cost of ` 47.71 crore under Non -
Lapsable Central Pool of Resources ( NLCPR) with stipulation that completion was to be 
ensured within 36 months (i.e. by February 2016). The project cost was to be shared 
between the GOI and the State in the ratio of 90:10 , i.e. Centre: ` 42.94 crore and the 
State: ` 4.77 crore. 
The work was put to e-tender on 6 April 2013 and only two bidders 30 with rates of 69.19 
per cent  and 82.74 per cent  above the SOR 2012 participated in the Bid (which was 
opened on 21 June 2013). Despite participation of less than the mandatory number of 
three required under the Sikkim Public Works (SPW) Manual [Section 9.6(vi)], that too, 
with very high and imbalanced tender, the Department validated the tender. The rate of 
69.19 per cent as above, offered by M/s MSR Infrabuild (JV)  being lower of the 2 bids 
received, was accepted for consideration. 
The estimate being based on SOR 2012, the Department carried out (July 2013) rate 
analysis31 applying the FIDIC formulae and found that the cost escalation/difference of 
cost for one year (between 2012, the year of SOR and 2013 , the year of tender) would be 
                                                           
30      M/s MSR Infrabuild (JV) and M/S SP Enterprise (JV). 
31     Work analysis was done adopting the FIDIC (The International Federation of Consulting Engineers, 
having French acronym of “Federation Internationale Des Ingenieurs Conseils”) formulae which was 
notified (25 April 2012)  by the Department itself using whole sale price index for all items from the 
official website of the office of the Economic Adviser, GOI and from the official site of MoSPI, GOI. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 64 
5.45 per cent only indicating that the lowest bid of 69.19 per cent above was very high 
and imbalanced. Despite being aware of the reasonable/workable rate, instead of rejecting 
the exorbitantly high tender and inviting fresh  tenders as per provision of SPW Manual 
for ensuring competitive and valid bidding, the Department again analysed (July 2013) 
the rates. This time, the differential rate between SOR 2012 and the prevailing market rate 
during May-June 2013 was worked out at  28.42 per cent which was remarkably higher 
than the initial rate worked out at 5.45 per cent. 
Audit scrutiny of ‘workability analysis’ of 28.42 per cent  above revealed that the 
Department had taken higher cost for all the materials than prevailing market rate, added 
excess differential cost of 23.56 per cent towards cost of POL and enhanced the labour 
cost by 28.32 per cent. This was not justifiable as (i ) the issue rates of stock materials 
(fixed on the basis of Proforma Invoice received from STCS) during the same period, 
were lower than those taken by the Department; (ii) the higher rate of POL was already 
considered (in-built) for arriving at the total differential cost of materials, hence there was 
no need to add extra differential cost; (iii) the total enhancement of 28.32 per cent  in 
labour cost within a period of one year was also not acceptable as all labour payments in 
respect of departmentally exe cuted works were being paid at the prevailing rate of SOR 
2012; (iv) another work “ Upgradation of Rongli-Rorathang road” with estimated cost of 
` 17.75 crore based on SOR 2012 and tendered in April 2013 was awarded to a 
contractor32 at 7 per cent below by t he Department and (v) as worked out by the Audit, 
taking the prevalent market rate of cost of materials and issue rates 33 fixed by the 
Department and operative during the period, the total enhancement/cost escalation was 
only 3.74 per cent above the SOR rate of 2012.  
In the meantime, the tendered rate of 69.19 per cent  above was further negotiated and 
finalised at 21.50 per cent  above. The work order was issued (October 2013) at the 
negotiated tendered value at ` 56.80 crore with the stipulated date of comp letion of 36 
months (October 2016). Work valuing ` 24.07 crore (42 per cent) was completed and the 
payment released as of February 2015. 
Thus, despite working out the workability rate of 5.45 per cent  adopting the FIDIC 
formulae based on National Price Index being followed by the Department for working 
out the cost escalation and without ensuring the reasonability of rate through competitive 
offers from at least three tenderers as required under SPW Ma nual, the Department 
awarded the work at a very high rate of 21.50 per cent above (higher by 16 per cent as 
compared to 5.45 per cent above worked out by Department itself). The reasonability of 
the rate of 5.45 per cent based on FIDIC formulae also corrob orated with the workability 
rate analysis of less than 4 per cent as worked out by the Audit. This resulted in an extra 
expenditure with consequential undue financial advantage to the contractor to the tune of 
` 7.48 crore (out of which ` 2.27 crore had already been paid to the contractor and ` 5.21 
crore remaining as extra committed liability on residual work). 
 
                                                           
32      Smt. Devi Dhakal. 
33     Issue rate was fixed by the Department on the basis of Performa Invoice received from STCS.  

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 65 
 
The matter was reported (May 2015) to the Government/Department; their reply had not 
been received (October 2015).  
 
 
 
 
 2.9   Avoidable expenditure   
 
 
 
 
 
The Rural Management and Development Department (RMDD) submitted (November 
2011) Detailed Project Report to the Planning Commission of India through Land 
Revenue and Disaster Management Department for reconstruc tion of 7,972 fully/severely 
damaged houses at an estimated cost of ` 455.51 crore34 after the earthquake in Sikkim on 
18 September 2011. The Planning Commission of India approved (January 2012) the 
project “Reconstruction of Earthquake Damaged Rural Houses” (REDRH) under Prime 
Minister’s Special package which was subsequently revised (Ja nuary 2012) and reduced 
to ` 391 crore ( ` 389.80 crore for construction and ` 1.20 crore for IEC) at unit cost of  
` 4.89 lakh per house. The work was to be executed by RMDD through Gram Vikash 
Kendras (GVKs).  
7,972 damaged houses were again redistributed  among all four districts of Sikkim after 
noticing faulty distribution of houses in these districts. Such reallocation of houses 
amongst the districts indicated the fact that initial survey on assessment of damage of 
houses caused by earthquake was not bas ed on ground realities and thus, it was 
unrealistic. 
The Department initially took a decision (April 2012) to execute the entire work of 
reconstruction of 7,972 earthquake damaged houses on Departmental Model under which 
the execution and the procurement o f materials were to be entirely undertaken by the 
Department without involving the beneficiary based on State PWD Schedule of Rates 
(SOR) of 2006. However, it could not make much headway and the Department adopted 
(December 2012) another model, i.e. Joint Model where the materials were to be supplied 
by the Department through State Trading Corporation of Sikkim (STCS) and Sikkim 
State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited (SIMFED) and the 
                                                           
34    ` 453.61 crore for reconstruction and ` 1.90 crore for Information, Education and Communication 
(IEC) and Training related activities. 
RURAL MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT 
Unrealistic assessment of damaged houses, improper planning and execution of 
works resulted in delay in reconstruction of houses, failure in extending intended 
benefits of providing emergent shelters to displaced victims due to earthquake. 
Avoidable expenditure of ` 1.09 crore was also incurred. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 66 
beneficiaries were to get construction work executed. T he Joint Model also failed due to 
delay in supply of materials. Finally, the Department adopted (October 2013) another 
model, i.e. Self Purchase Model where complete work relating to construction were to be 
done by the beneficiaries themselves. 
In its meeting dated 06 September 2012, the Planning Commission of India had fixed the 
target date (March 2013) for 50 per cent completion of reconstruction of 7,972 damaged 
houses. While reviewing the progress of work under the National Flagship Programme 
(12 Septem ber 2013), the Planning Commission instructed that the house constructions 
should be expedited and completed by March 2014. However, as of November 2014, only 
2,765 houses (34.69 per cent) were completed and 5,207 houses remained incomplete at 
different stages. Thus, even after a lapse of three years, the Department failed to provide 
necessary emergent shelters to 5,207 affected families. The reasons behind the inordinate 
delay were faulty distribution of houses among districts as stated above, delay in 
executing the suitable model for the project, delay in supply of materials by STCS and 
SIMFED, shortage/non-deployment of technical persons like Junior Engineers in GVKs 
and frequent transfer of officers. The delay resulted in cost escalation of cement and TMT 
bars to the tune of ` 1.09 crore 35 against the payments made till the date of Audit 
(February 2015) due to time and cost overrun.  
Thus, delay in completion of projects not only led to failure in extending intended 
benefits of providing immediate shelters to displaced victims due to earthquake but also 
led to an avoidable expenditure of ` 1.09 crore, which would considerably increase after 
all the works get completed/payments made. 
The Department stated (June 2015) that bes ides non -release of requisite fund by the 
Government of India (GOI), the initial survey was made by the Land Revenue and 
Disaster Management Department (LRDMD) and the re -distribution was made on the 
basis of Gram Sabha meetings held by the Department, whi ch resulted in delay in 
finalisation of beneficiaries. 174 Junior Engineers were appointed (June 2012 and 
October 2013) and all AEs/JEs were trained. It was, further stated that the purchase of 
materials between 2012 and 2014 were within the project period  and hence cannot be 
indicated as cost overrun and time overrun.   
The reply was not tenable as there was faulty identification of beneficiaries of houses 
among districts and re -distribution caused delay in execution of work. Further, despite 
deploying hug e manpower, the Department failed to complete the houses within the 
scheduled time of March 2014. The reasons for non -release of fund by the GOI was not 
acceptable as the Department could spend ` 213.86 crore out of ` 231.04 crore received 
from GOI till Ju ly 2015. As regards cost escalation, there were differences in the rates 
mentioned in supply orders and those at which final payments had been made indicating 
cost overrun due to delay in supply of materials by STCS. 
 
 
                                                           
35      Cement ` 1.02 lakh and TMT bars ` 0.6 crore. 

Chapter II: Economic Sector 
 67 
 
   
 
 
 2.10     Non-recovery of loan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Sikkim Housing Development Board (SHDB), a Government of Sikkim Enterprise, 
implemented a Housing Loan Scheme for construction of house/purchase of flat for 
employees of Government of Sikkim during 1989 to 1997. As per terms and condition, 
the instalments of loans were required to be deducted from the salary of loanee 
employees. SHDB was required to obtain an undertaking from Drawing and Disbursing 
Officers (DDOs) of concerned offices that in case, any loanee employee working in his 
office applies for resignation from service, the same should not to be accepted until a ‘No 
Objection Certificate’ (NOC) from SHDB is produced by the employee. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that an amount of ` 1.21 crore (out of ` 36.61 crore) 
disbursed during 1990 to 1997 to 103 loanee employees (out of 6,329) was not recovered 
since May 1994. The Board initiated legal action only in 15 cases leaving 88 cases 
without any action as mentioned below: 
Table 2.10.1 
Defaulter loanees No. of 
cases 
Amount 
outstanding 
(` in lakh)  
Cases taken to Court No 
action Certificate Under trial 
Government employees not in service  35 63.94 2 6 27 
Government employees in service  62 23.51 1 2 59 
Private   6 33.57 2 2   2 
Total Defaulters 103 121.02 5 10 88 
 
Scrutiny of records revealed that 35 employees left service/suspended/retired/got 
terminated/ expired before the settlement of outstanding loans to the tune of ` 63.94 lakh 
(including interest/penal interest) and the outstanding loanees included 6 private 
individuals against whom ` 33.57 lakh was not recovered. The Board was also not aware 
about the present status of two Government employees suspended in November 1995 and 
January 2004. Against the outstanding loan of ` 23.51 lakh from 62 employees still on 
roll, no action had  been initiated against 59 employees till June 2015. The details are 
given in Appendix 2.10.1. 
SIKKIM HOUSING DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
Failure to recover and adjust the outstanding loans against the 
retirement/terminal benefits of the Government employees  led to non -recovery 
of loan to the tune of ` 63.94 lakh over a period since May 1994.  Also, ` 33.57 
lakh given to 6 ineligible private persons remained to be recovered and no action 
had been initiated in respect of 59 employees against the outstanding loan of  
` 23.51 lakh from the Government employees on roll. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 68 
Thus, inadequate monitoring on monthly recovery by the DDOs, non -pursuance through 
NOCs, loans to ineligible private persons without proper mortgage, initiating recovery 
process in only 15 out of 103 cases, absence of follow -up in safeguarding financial 
interest of the Board, the possibility of recovery of outstanding loans to the tune of ` 1.21 
crore being defaulted since May 1994 has become remote. 
In reply the Board stated (May 2015) that the matter is sub -juice under Sikkim Public 
Demand Recovery Act (S PDRA) to recover the loan from defaulters. The Board further 
stated (August 2015) that efforts are being made to get the entire loan settled within 2 -3 
years. However, fact remained that at present only 15 out of 103 cases were pursued 
under SPDRA, ` 33.57 lakh was given to ineligible persons, timely action was not taken 
by the Board for recovery of ` 1.21 crore and possibility of recovery from employees not 
in service to the tune of ` 63.94 lakh seems remote. 

Chapter III: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 69 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1     Overview of State Public Sector Undertakings 
 
 Introduction 
 
3.1.1 The State Public Sector Undertakings (SPSUs) consist of State Government 
Companies and Statutory Corporations.  The SPSUs are established to carry out activities 
of commercial nature keeping in view the welfare of the people. In Sikkim, the SPSUs 
occupy an insignificant place in the State economy. As on 31 March 2015, there were 15 
SPSUs. Of these, none of the companies were listed on the stock exchange. None of the 
companies were closed down during the year. The details of the SPSUs in Sikkim as on 
31 March 2015 are given below.   
Table 3.1.1: Total number of SPSUs as on 31 March 2015 
Type of SPSUs Working SPSUs Non-working SPSUs1 Total 
Government Companies 7 5 12 
Statutory Corporations 2 1 3 
TOTAL 9 6 15 
 
The working SPSUs registered a turnover of 149.28 crore as per their latest finalised 
accounts as of September 2015. This turnover was equal to 1.03 per cent of State Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP2) of 14,517.73 crore for 2014-15. During 2013-14, however, 
the turnover (147.55 crore) of working SPSUs was significantly higher at 1.19 per cent 
of State GDP (12,376.69 crore). During 2014-15, the working SPSUs had incurred an 
aggregate loss of  23.66 crore as per their latest finalised accounts as of September 2015 
as compared to the aggregate loss of 12.99 crore incurred by SPSUs during 2013-14. 
The increase in the aggregate loss of working SPSUs was mainly on account of heavy 
losses incurred by the power sector SPSU3. The working SPSUs had employed 618 
employees as at the end of March 2015. 
 
 Accountability framework 
 
3.1.2   The Companies Act 1956 as well as the New Companies Act 2013 have not been 
extended to the State of Sikkim. The Government Companies in Sikkim are registered 
under the ‘Registration of Companies Act, Sikkim 1961’. The accounts of these State 
Government companies are audited by Statutory Auditors (Chartered Accountants) who 
are directly appointed by the Board of Directors (BoDs) of the respective companies. In 
                                                 
1      Non-working SPSUs are those which have ceased to carry on their operations. 
2      Source: Department of Economics, Statistics, Monitoring and Evaluation, Government of Sikkim. 
3      Serial No.A-6 of Appendix 3.1.2. 
 
CHAPTER III 
ECONOMIC SECTOR 
(PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS) 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 70 
addition to the statutory audit conducted by the Statutory Auditors, supplementary audit 
of these companies had also been taken up by the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India (CAG) on the request of the Governor of the State under Section 20(1) of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act 1971. 
3.1.3 There are three Statutory Corporations in the state, namely, State Bank of Sikkim, 
State Trading Corporation of Sikkim and Sikkim Mining Corporation established under 
the proclamation of the erstwhile Chogyal (King) of Sikkim. The accounts of these 
Corporations are audited by the Chartered Accountants directly appointed by the BoDs of 
the respective Corporation. Supplementary Audit of these Corporations was taken up by 
CAG under Section 19(3) of the CAG’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act 
1971. 
 
Stake of Government of Sikkim 
 
3.1.4    The State Government has huge financial stake in these SPSUs. This stake is of 
mainly three types: 
 Share Capital and Loans - In addition to the Share Capital Contribution, State 
Government also provides financial assistance by way of loans to the SPSUs from 
time to time. 
 Special Financial Support - State Government provides budgetary support by 
way of grants and subsidies to the SPSUs as and when required.  
 Guarantees - State Government also guarantees the repayment of loans with 
interest availed by the SPSUs from Financial Institutions. 
 
 Investment in SPSUs 
 
3.1.5 As on 31 March 2015, the investment (capital and long-term loans) in 15 SPSUs 
was 392.88 crore as per details given below. 
Table 3.1.2: Total investment in SPSUs 
( in crore) 
Type of SPSUs 
Government Companies Statutory Corporations Grand 
Total Capital Long Term 
Loans Total Capital Long Term 
Loans Total 
Working SPSUs 59.07 273.25 332.32 2.19 - 2.19 334.51 
Non-working SPSUs 45.87 0 45.87 12.50 - 12.50 58.37 
TOTAL 104.94 273.25 378.19 14.69 - 14.69 392.88 
 
Out of the total investment of 392.88 crore in SPSUs as on 31 March 2015, 85.14 per 
cent was in working SPSUs and the remaining 14.86 per cent was in non-working SPSUs. 
This total investment consisted of 30.45 per cent in capital and 69.55 per cent in long-
term loans. The investment had decreased by 20.31 per cent from 492.99 crore in 2010-
11 to 392.88 crore in 2014-15 as shown in Chart-3.1.1. The decrease ( 100.11 crore) 
was on account of repayment of long term loans by Sikkim Industrial Development and 
Investment Corporation Limited and Sikkim Power Development Corporation Limited. 

Chapter III: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 71 
Chart 3.1.1: Total investment in SPSUs  3.1.6 The sector wise summary of investments in the SPSUs as on 31 March 2015 is given below:  Table 3.1.3: Sector-wise investment in SPSUs Name of Sector Government/Other4 Companies Statutory corporations Total Investment  Working Non-Working Working Non-working ( in crore) Power 1 0 0 0 1 121.10 Manufacturing 0 3 0 1 4 55.63 Finance 1 0 1 0 2 45.74 Miscellaneous 0 0 0 0 0 0.00 Service 1 1 1 0 3 8.37 Infrastructure 1 0 0 0 1 158.44 Agriculture and Allied 3 1 0 0 4 3.60  TOTAL 7 5 2 1 15 392.88  The investment in five significant sectors and percentage thereof at the end of 31 March 2011 and 31 March 2015 are indicated in Chart-3.1.2. Chart 3.1.2: Sector wise investment in PSUs                                                   4    ‘Other Companies’ as referred to under Section 139(5) and 139(7) of the Companies Act 2013. in crore) (in crore) 150.35121.1052.9855.6347.53 45.74229.94158.4412.19 11.970.0050.00100.00150.00200.00250.00300.00350.002010-11 2014-15PowerManufacturingFinanceInfrastructureOthers(30.50)(10.75)(9.64)(46.64)(2.47)(30.82)(14.16)(11.64)(40.33)(3.05)Figures in brackets show the percentage of total investment
492.99374.90398.70399.13392.880.00100.00200.00300.00400.00500.00600.00ValueYearInvestment (Capital and Long-term loans)

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 72 
It could be noticed from Chart-3.1.2, during the period of five years from 2010-11 to 2014-15, investment in SPSUs decreased in all sectors excepting the marginal increase of ₹ 2.65 crore in manufacturing sector. The significant decrease in the infrastructure sector was on account of repayment of long term loans (₹ 71.50 crore) by one SPSU (Sikkim Industrial Development and Investment Corporation Limited) during the five years. The thrust of SPSU-investment was mainly in power5 and infrastructure sectors, which constituted more than 70 per cent of the total investment (₹ 392.88 crore) in SPSUs during 2014-15.   Special support and returns during the year  3.1.7 The State Government provides financial support to SPSUs in various forms through annual budget. The summarised details of budgetary outgo towards equity, loans, grants/subsidies, loans written-off and interest waived in respect of SPSUs are given in Table-3.1.4 for three years ended 2014-15. Table 3.1.4: Details regarding budgetary support to SPSUs ( in crore) Sl. No. Particulars 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 No. of SPSUs Amount No. of SPSUs Amount No. of SPSUs Amount 1 Equity Capital outgo from budget - - - - - - 2 Loans given from budget - - - - - - 3 Grants/Subsidy from budget - - 1 0.18 1 0.16 4 Total Outgo (1+2+3) - - 1 0.18 1 0.16 5 Waiver of loans and interest 3 1.22 - - 1 0.06 6 Guarantees issued 1 1.07 2 131.76 1 96.57 7 Guarantee Commitment 2 162.84 2 120.96 2 109.50  The details regarding budgetary outgo towards equity, loans and grants/ subsidies for past five years are given in Chart-3.1.3. Chart 3.1.3: Budgetary outgo towards Equity, Loans and Grants/Subsidies                                                   5      Serial No.A-6 of Appendix 3.1.2.  in crore)  2.752.310.000.180.160.001.002.003.004.00Budgetary outgo towards Equity, Loans and Grants/Subsidies

Chapter III: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 73 
It may be observed from Chart-3.1.3 that during the period of five years from 2010-11 to 
2014-15, the budgetary outgo was the highest ( 2.75 crore) in 2010-11 and had shown 
decreasing trend thereafter upto 2012-13, when there was no budgetary outgo to any of 
the SPSUs. During 2013-14 and 2014-15, there was a total budgetary outgo of  0.18 
crore and  0.16 crore respectively by way of grants to one SPSU, namely, Sikkim 
Poultry Development Corporation Limited. As could be noticed from Table-3.1.4, the 
guarantee commitment has decreased from  162.84 crore (2012-13) to  109.50 crore 
(2014-15) mainly due to the repayment of loans by Sikkim Industrial Development and 
Investment Corporation Limited during previous three years. As on 31 March 2015, 
guarantee commitment of  109.50 crore were outstanding against two SPSUs, namely, 
Sikkim Industrial Development and Investment Corporation Limited and Sikkim 
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes Development 
Corporation Limited. 
 
Reconciliation with Finance Accounts 
 
3.1.8 The figures in respect of equity, loans and guarantees outstanding as per the 
records of SPSUs should agree with that of the figures appearing in the Finance Accounts 
of the State. In case the figures do not agree, the SPSUs concerned and the Finance 
Department should carry out reconciliation of differences. The position in this regard as at 
31 March 2015 is given in Table-3.1.5. 
Table 3.1.5: Equity, loans, guarantees outstanding as per Finance Accounts vis a vis records of SPSUs 
(  in crore) 
Outstanding in respect of Amount as per Finance 
Accounts 
Amount as per records 
of SPSUs Difference 
Equity   80.69 89.63 8.94 
Loans*   37.03 2.03 35.00 
Guarantees* 109.50 109.50 Nil 
*     SPSU-wise figures of loans/guarantee not available in the Finance Accounts of the State. 
 
Audit observed that the differences occurred in respect of 116 SPSUs and some of the 
differences were pending reconciliation since 2004-05. It was further observed that the 
un-reconciled differences in respect of equity of SPSUs decreased by  2.34 crore during 
the year from 11.28 crore (2013-14) to 8.94 crore (2014-15). The Accountant General 
had pursued the issue regularly with the Principal Secretary (Finance), Government of 
Sikkim and the heads of the SPSUs concerned for early reconciliation of long pending 
differences. No significant progress, was, however, seen in the matter. The Government 
and the SPSUs concerned should take concrete steps to reconcile the differences in a 
time-bound manner. 
 
 Arrears in finalisation of accounts 
 
3.1.9   The Companies Act 1956/Companies Act 2013 have not been extended to the 
State of Sikkim. The Government Companies in Sikkim are registered under the 
                                                 
6      Except for Serial No.A-1,B-9, C-10 and C-11 of Appendix 3.1.2. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 74 
Registration of Companies Act, 1961 while the Statutory Corporations are governed 
under the proclamation of the erstwhile Chogyal (King) of Sikkim. The Table-3.1.6 
provides the details of progress made by working SPSUs in finalisation of accounts as of 
30 September 2015. 
Table 3.1.6: Position relating to finalisation of accounts of working SPSUs 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
1 Number of Working SPSUs 11 8 8 8 9 
2 Number of accounts finalised during the year 8 7 10 5 3 
3 Number of accounts in arrears 22 20 18 21 28 
4 Number of Working PSUs with arrears in accounts 9 8 7 8 9 
5 Extent of arrears (numbers in years) 1 to 5 1 to 4 1 to 4 1 to 5 1 to 6 
 
From the Table-3.1.6, it could be noticed that the number of accounts in arrears had shown 
a decreasing trend upto 2012-13. During previous two years, however, the working 
SPSUs have finalised only 8 accounts. As a result, the backlog of accounts of working 
SPSUs had increased from 18 accounts (2012-13) to 28 accounts (2014-15), which 
included arrears of 12 accounts relating to 2 SPSUs (namely, Sikkim Poultry 
Development Corporation Limited and Sikkim Hatcheries Limited). The delay in 
finalisation of accounts of the working SPSUs was due to delay in compilation/adoption 
of accounts by the Board of Directors of respective SPSUs.  
The Administrative departments have the responsibility to oversee the activities of these 
entities and to ensure that the accounts are finalised and adopted by these SPSUs within 
the stipulated period.  The Departments/Ministries concerned were informed regularly (on 
quarterly basis) of the arrears in finalisation of accounts by these SPSUs. No 
improvement was, however, noticed in the position of arrears of accounts of the SPSUs. 
3.1.10   The State Government had invested 0.16 crore in one SPSU (Sikkim Poultry 
Development Corporation Limited) by way of grant during the years the accounts of the 
SPSU have not been finalised as detailed in Appendix 3.1.1. In the absence of finalisation 
of accounts and their subsequent audit, it could not be ensured whether the said 
investment had been properly accounted for and the purpose for which the amount 
invested was achieved or not. Thus, Government’s investment in the said SPSU remained 
outside the control of State Legislature. 
3.1.11    In addition to above, there were arrears in finalisation of accounts by non-
working SPSUs as on 30 September 2015. None of the six non-working SPSUs were in 
the process of liquidation. The six non-working SPSUs have arrears of 50 accounts as of 
September 2015 as detailed in Table-3.1.7. 
Table 3.1.7: Position relating to arrears of accounts in respect of non-working SPSUs 
No. of Non-working SPSUs Period for which accounts were in arrears No. of accounts in arrears 
2 1995-96 to 2014-15 40 
1 2011-12 to 2014-15 4 
3 2013-14 to 2014-15 6 
6 TOTAL 50 
 
 

Chapter III: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 75 
 
 Placement of Separate Audit Reports 
 
3.1.12   The position depicted in Table-3.1.8 shows the status of placement of Separate 
Audit Reports (SARs) issued by the CAG (up to 30 September 2015) on the accounts of 
Statutory Corporations in the Legislature. 
Table 3.1.8: Status of placement of SARs in Legislature 
 
 Impact of non-finalisation of accounts 
 
3.1.13  As pointed out above (para 3.1.9 to 3.1.11), the delay in finalisation of accounts 
may result in risk of fraud and leakage of public money apart from violation of the 
provisions of the relevant statutes. In view of the above state of arrears of accounts, the 
actual contribution of SPSUs to the State GDP for the year 2014-15 could not be 
ascertained and their contribution to State Exchequer was also not reported to the State 
Legislature. 
It is, therefore, recommended that: 
 The Government may set up a cell to oversee the clearance of arrears and set 
targets for individual SPSUs which would be monitored by the cell. 
 The Government may consider outsourcing the work relating to preparation 
of accounts wherever the staff is inadequate or lack expertise. 
 
 Performance of SPSUs as per their latest finalised accounts 
 
3.1.14  The financial position and working results of working Government Companies 
and Statutory Corporations are detailed in Appendix 3.1.2. A ratio of SPSU turnover to 
State GDP shows the extent of SPSU activities in the State economy. Table-3.1.9 provides 
the details of working SPSU turnover and State GDP for a period of five years ending 
2014-15. 
Table 3.1.9: Details of working PSUs turnover vis-a vis State GDP  
( in crore) 
Particulars 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Turnover 42.81 86.43 143.91 147.55 149.28 7 
State GDP 7,411.57 8,906.64 10,472.60 12,376.69 14,517.738 
Percentage of Turnover to State GDP 0.58 0.97 1.37 1.19 1.03 
 
 
                                                 
7     Turnover as per the latest finalised accounts as of 30 September 2015. 
8     Source: Department of Economics, Statistics, Monitoring and Evaluation, Government of Sikkim. 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Statutory 
Corporation 
Year up to which 
SARs placed in 
Legislature 
Year for which SARs not placed in Legislature 
Year of SAR Date of issue to the 
Government 
1 State Bank of Sikkim 2007-08 2008-09 to 2010-11 20 December 2013 
2 State Trading Corporation 
of Sikkim 2010-11 - - 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 76 
 It may be noticed that during 2010-11 to 2014-15, the State GDP had grown by 95.88 per cent while the increase in turnover of SPSUs during the corresponding period was to the extent of 248.70 per cent. Thus, there was appreciable growth in SPSUs turnover during the period of five years from 2010-11 to 2014-15 as compared to the growth in the state GDP during the corresponding period. As a result, the percentage of SPSUs turnover to state GDP has increased from 0.58 (2010-11) to 1.03 (2014-15) in five years period, though it declined from the last year. 3.1.15   Overall losses incurred by working SPSUs during 2010-11 to 2014-15 are given in Chart-3.1.4. Chart 3.1.4: Losses of working SPSUs 
 
(Figures in brackets show the number of working SPSUs in respective years)  As per the latest finalised accounts of nine working SPSUs as on 30 September 2015, three9 SPSUs earned profit of 4.17 crore and six SPSUs incurred loss of 27.83 crore. The major contributor to profit was Sikkim Industrial Development and Investment Corporation Limited (3.28 crore). The heavy losses were incurred by Sikkim Power Development Corporation Limited (16.64 crore) and State Bank of Sikkim  (7.05 crore). As could be noticed from Chart-3.1.4, the overall losses incurred by working SPSUs showed an increasing trend after 2011-12. During the four years from 2011-12 to 2014-15, the overall losses had increased by more than seven fold from  3.24 crore (2011-12) to 23.66 crore (2014-15). The increase in the overall losses of working SPSUs was mainly attributable to the losses incurred by two SPSUs (namely, Sikkim Power Development Corporation Limited and State Bank of Sikkim) during the last four years. 3.1.16   Some other key parameters of SPSUs are given in Table-3.1.10.                                                  9    Serial No.A-5,7 and B-9 of Appendix 3.1.2. 
-25-20-15-10-502010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15-11.4-3.24-10.85-12.99-23.66Overall losses incurred during the year by the working SPSUs(9)(8)(8)(11)(12)

Chapter III: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 77 
Table 3.1.10: Key Parameters of State PSUs 
( in crore) 
Particulars 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Return on Capital Employed (per cent) 2.00 5.24 4.30 4.36 3.91 
Debt 395.91 260.93 279.07 273.89 273.25 
Turnover10 42.81 86.43 143.91 147.55 149.28 
Debt/ Turnover Ratio 9.25:1 3.02:1 1.94:1 1.86:1 1.83:1 
Interest Payments 24.56 64.90 87.49 90.15 88.16 
Accumulated losses  69.82 83.57 90.29 97.92 117.72 
 
There was constant improvement in Debt-Turnover Ratio after 2010-11. During  
2014-15, it decreased by 0.03 per cent due to decrease in the debts of Sikkim Industrial 
Development and Investment Corporation Limited. Further, during last four years, the 
percentage of Return on capital employed has decreased from 5.24 per cent (2011-12) to 
3.91 per cent (2014-15) mainly due to heavy losses incurred by two SPSUs, viz. Sikkim 
Power Development Corporation Limited and State Bank of Sikkim during this period. 
3.1.17    The State Government had not formulated (October 2015) any dividend policy 
regarding payment of minimum dividend by SPSUs. As per their latest finalised accounts 
as on 30 September 2015, three11 SPSUs earned aggregate profit of 4.17 crore, 
however, only one SPSU12 declared dividend of 0.51 crore. 
 
 Winding up of non-working SPSUs 
 
3.1.18   There were six non-working SPSUs (five Companies and one Statutory 
Corporation) as on 31 March 2015. All these SPSUs mentioned above are closed down 
(April 2011) under the order of the Government. The Government Companies in Sikkim 
are registered under the Registration of Companies Act, 1961 while Statutory 
Corporations are governed under the proclamation of the erstwhile Chogyal (King) of 
Sikkim. There was, however, no prescribed procedure for liquidation of Government 
Companies/Statutory Corporations under their respective governing Act/Statute. The 
numbers of non-working SPSUs at the end of each year during past five years are given in 
Table-3.1.11. 
Table 3.1.11: Non-working SPSUs 
Particulars 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
No. of non-working companies 3 6 6 6 5 
No. of non-working corporations 1 1 1 1 1 
TOTAL 4 7 7 7 6 
 
3.1.19  The stages of closure in respect of non-working SPSUs are given in Table-3.1.12. 
Table 3.1.12: Closure of Non-working SPSUs 
Sl.  
No. Particulars Companies Statutory 
Corporations Total 
1 Total No. of non-working SPSUs 5 1 6 
2 Of (1) above, the No. under: - - - 
(a) Liquidation by Court (liquidator appointed) Nil Nil Nil 
(b) Voluntary winding up (liquidator appointed) Nil Nil Nil 
(c) Closure, i.e. closing orders/instructions issued but liquidation 
process not yet started. 5 1 6 
                                                 
10   Turnover of working SPSUs as per their latest finalised accounts as on 30 September of respective year. 
11   Serial No.A-5, A-7 and B-9 of Appendix 3.1.2. 
12   Serial No.A-5 of Appendix 3.1.2. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 78 
In the absence of specific provisions regarding winding up of non-working SPSUs in the 
Registration of Companies Act 1961/proclamation of the erstwhile Chogyal (King) of 
Sikkim, the Government needs to specify the procedure and initiate the liquidation 
process for the above mentioned six closed down SPSUs. 
 
 Accounts Comments  
 
3.1.20  Three working companies forwarded their three audited accounts to Accountant 
General during the year 2014-15 (October 2014 to September 2015). Of these, only one 
year accounts of one company were selected for supplementary audit and two accounts 
pertaining to two companies were issued Non-Review Certificates. The details of 
aggregate money value of comments of Statutory Auditors and CAG are given in Table-
3.1.13.  
Table 3.1.13: Impact of audit comments on working Companies 
( in crore 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
No. of 
accounts Amount No. of 
accounts Amount No. of 
accounts Amount 
1 Decrease in profit Nil Nil  Nil Nil Nil Nil 
2 Increase in loss 1 0.04 3 1.45 1 0.01 
3 Non-disclosure of 
material facts Nil Nil  1 1.34 1 0.02 
4 Errors of classification Nil Nil 1 0.84 Nil Nil 
 
During the year, Statutory Auditors had given qualified opinions to all the three accounts 
of the three SPSUs. During 2014-15, none of the Statutory Corporations had submitted 
their finalised accounts to the Accountant General for audit. 
 
 Response of the Government to Audit 
 
Performance Audits and Paragraphs 
3.1.21   For the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year 
ended 31 March 2015, two audit paragraphs involving two Departments were issued to 
the Secretaries of the respective Departments with request to furnish replies within six 
weeks. However, the replies in respect of one audit paragraph was awaited from the State 
Government (October 2015). 
 
 Follow up action on Audit Reports 
Replies outstanding  
3.1.22   The Report of the CAG represents the culmination of the process of audit 
scrutiny. It is, therefore, necessary that they elicit appropriate and timely response from 
the executive. According to instructions issued by the Finance, Revenue and Expenditure 
Department (FRED), Government of Sikkim, all the Administrative departments 
concerned were required to furnish explanatory notes on the paragraphs/performance 
audits included in the Audit Reports of the CAG of India within a period of three months 
of their presentation to the Legislature, in the prescribed format without waiting for any 
questionnaires from the Public Accounts Committee. 

Chapter III: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 79 
Table 3.1.14: Explanatory notes not received (as on 30 September 2015) 
Year of the Audit 
Report 
(Commercial/PSU) 
Date of placement 
of Audit Report in 
the State 
Legislature 
Total Performance audits 
(PAs) and Paragraphs in the 
Audit Report 
Number of PAs/ Paragraphs for 
which explanatory notes were not 
received 
PAs Paragraphs PAs Paragraphs 
2011-12 27 April 2013 1 4 1 4 
2012-13 28 June 2014 0 2 0 2 
2013-14 17 March 2015 1 4 1 4 
TOTAL - 2 10 2 10 
 
From the Table-3.1.14, it could be seen that explanatory notes to none of the above 
mentioned 10 paragraphs and 2 performance audits pertaining to seven13 Companies/ 
Corporations and one Department (Energy and Power Department) were received 
(October 2015). 
Discussion of Audit Reports by Public Accounts Committee 
3.1.23   The status as on 30 September 2015 of Performance Audits (PAs) and paragraphs 
relating to SPSUs that appeared in State Audit Reports and discussed by the Public 
Accounts Committee (PAC) was as detailed in Table-3.1.15. 
Table 3.1.15: Performance Audits/Paras relating to SPSUs appeared in Audit Reports vis-a-vis 
discussed as on 30 September 2015 
 
During the year 2009-10 to 2013-14 total 3 PAs and 17 paragraphs relating to SPSUs had 
appeared in the State Audit Reports. All 3 PAs and 17 paragraphs were, however, 
pending for discussion by the Public Accounts Committee (October 2015). 
Compliance to Reports of Public Accounts Committee  
3.1.24   Action Taken Notes to seven recommendations pertaining to three Reports of the 
Public Accounts Committee (PAC) presented to the State Legislature as of March 2015 
had not been received (October 2015) as indicated in Table-3.1.16. 
Table No. 3.1.16: Compliance to Reports of Public Accounts Committee 
Year of the PAC 
Report 
Total Number of PAC 
Reports 
Total no of Recommendation in 
PAC Report 
No of Recommendations 
where ATNs not received 
2008-09 1 2 2 
2009-10 1 3 3 
2010-11 1 2 2 
 
It is recommended that the Government may ensure:  
                                                 
13     Serial No.A-1, 4, 5 and 6, B-8 and 9 and D-15 of Appendix 3.1.2. 
Period of Audit 
Report 
Number of PAs/paragraphs 
Appeared in Audit Report Paras discussed 
PAs Paragraphs PAs Paragraphs 
2009-10 0 4 Nil Nil 
2010-11 1 3 Nil Nil 
2011-12 1 4 Nil Nil 
2012-13 0 2 Nil Nil 
2013-14 1 4 Nil Nil 
TOTAL 3 17 Nil Nil 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 80 
 furnishing of replies to Inspection Reports/Explanatory Notes/Draft 
Paragraphs/Performance Audits and Action Taken Notes on the 
recommendations of PAC as per the prescribed time schedule; 
 recovery of loss/outstanding advances/overpayments within the prescribed 
period and 
 revamping of the system of responding to audit observations. 
 
 Coverage of this report 
 
3.1.25   This Chapter on SPSUs contains two paragraphs involving financial effect of 
0.57 crore. 
 
  Disinvestment, Restructuring and Privatisation of SPSUs and any reforms in power  
sector 
 
3.1.26   The Energy and Power Department, Government of Sikkim continued to function 
as a Government Department and no reforms were implemented in the power sector as 
envisaged in the Electricity Supply Act, 2003. 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2 Fraudulent withdrawal of cash 
 
Failure of the internal control system and serious negligence on the part of 
branch officials led to fraudulent withdrawal of cash aggregating  24.12 lakh at 
Hee Gaon Branch.  
 
The Sikkim State Co-operative Bank Limited (the Bank), a registered Co-operative 
society under Sikkim Co-operative Societies Act 1978, is the Apex Cooperative Bank for 
the State of Sikkim. The Bank is governed by the Banking Regulation Act 1949 and is 
covered under the purview of Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and National Bank for 
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD). The audit of the Bank is entrusted to 
CAG by the Government of Sikkim in terms of Section 20(1) of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act 1971. 
The Bank, in addition to its role as Apex Bank, functions as a developmental bank 
providing financial assistance for different kinds of economic activities in the State. The 
Bank performs the banking operations through its 14 branches spread across the State of 
Sikkim.  
Hee Gaon Branch (Branch) of the Bank headed by a Branch Manager, was opened in the 
year 2012. The Branch, however, had comparatively lesser business. Normally, all 
transactions in the branches need to undergo proper checks by the bank staffs. Cash 
 
SIKKIM STATE CO-OPERATIVE BANK LIMITED 

Chapter III: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 81 
withdrawals from the accounts of the customers are approved only after proper 
verification of cheque and its authorisation for payment by the Branch Manager. 
During the audit of daily transaction vouchers of Hee Gaon Branch for the month of 
March 2015, Audit prima facie noticed several serious deficiencies in some of the 
payment vouchers (paid cheques) as illustrated below: 
 non-authorisation of the voucher; 
 unsigned cheques (only name written on the cheques); 
 mismatch of the signature on the cheques with the specimen signature of the 
account holders; 
 difference between the cheque amount written in words and figures; and  
 non-mentioning of the Account Number on the cheque. 
Considering the seriousness of the issue, Audit took up (25 June 2015) the detailed 
scrutiny of payment transactions of the Branch covering the period from January 2015 to 
June 2015. Scrutiny revealed the following: 
(i) A cheque book of 50 leaves (series 31601 to 31650) recorded to have been issued 
to Shri Dawa Gyatso Bhutia against his Account No.101234001000209 was used 
for cash withdrawal from the accounts of other customers bearing distinct account 
numbers. Besides the above, a cheque book bearing series 31326 to 31350 issued 
to Shri Milan Kumar Limboo in respect of Account No.101234001000489 was 
also used for fraudulent withdrawal from other accounts.  
(ii) Audit traced out 19 transactions of fraudulent cash withdrawals aggregating 
24.12 lakh using the above cheque books as listed in Appendix 3.2.1.  
(iii) The Bank issued distinct series of cheques to individual account holders which 
could not be used for withdrawal of money from other accounts. As per the 
controls envisaged in the computer system, an alert notification would appear on 
the monitor when a cheque, different from the cheque series issued to the account 
holder, is entered in the system for payment. In such a situation, if the transaction 
is to be proceeded further, it would be possible only with another authorisation 
key. For accessing the computer system, only the bank officials have been 
provided with unique Login ID and Password. The said Login ID and Password 
needed to be kept secret by the Branch officials for entering, verifying and passing 
of transactions for payments. In the instant cases, all the cheques were out of the 
series; as such the payments as detailed in the Appendix 3.2.1 have been effected 
only by use of additional authorisation key.   
(iv) Further, from the 19 fraudulent transaction pointed out above, it was observed 
that:  
(a)   in 914 cases cheques were not authorised for payment;  
                                                 
14     Sl.No.1 to 7,16,18 and 19 of Appendix 3.2.1. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 82 
(b)   in 315 cases cheques did not bear Account number; 
(c)   in 1016 cases though signatures were verified, the same did not match with the 
specimen signature of the account holders and  
(d)   in 117case, although the account holder’s specimen signature was in Nepali 
language, cheque signed in English (forged) was passed for payment.  
The cases mentioned above indicated that the payment authorising official failed 
to verify the genuineness of the cheques before passing them for payment. 
Further, before making the payment against the above mentioned cheques, the 
cashier also failed to exercise minimum diligence of ensuring that all these 
cheques were properly authorised for payment.  
(v) The Concurrent Auditor of the Bank also failed to notice such obvious 
discrepancies in the transactions. 
(vi) One finished cheque book (series 31601 to 31625), was recovered from the 
possession of the security staff of the Branch. During the course of audit, it was 
alleged by the bank staff that the said cheque book might have been obtained by 
the security staff by manipulating entry in the Cheque Book Issue Register. The 
balance unused/cancelled cheques were, however, not found in the cheque book 
recovered from the security person. The bank staff claimed that the said cheques 
might have been destroyed by the security person. 
Thus, failure of the internal control system and serious negligence on the part of branch 
officials led to fraudulent withdrawal of cash aggregating  24.12 lakh at Hee Gaon 
Branch. 
The Bank stated (November 2015) that there were blatant violation of systems and 
procedures though no fraud or financial loss had been caused on the Bank.  It was further 
stated that domestic enquiry into the transactions had been initiated and in order to 
prevent recurrence of such incidents, the Bank had introduced Internal Transaction audit 
of branches.  
The Government replied (November 2015) that based on the above audit finding, an 
enquiry committee had been constituted under Sikkim Cooperatives Societies Act 1978 to 
ascertain the factual position of fraudulent case. It was further stated that the enquiry 
committee would submit its report by the first week of December 2015. 
The reply of the Bank that no fraud/fraudulent transactions had taken place was not 
tenable in view of the facts that cash withdrawals, amounting to  24.12 lakh, were made 
fraudulently using illegally secured cheques, forging signatures and through unauthorised 
access to the system. The report of the enquiry committee stated to have constituted by 
the Government and action taken thereon were, however, awaited (November 2015). 
 
 
                                                 
15     Sl.No.5, 8 and 9 of Appendix 3.2.1. 
16     Sl.No.8 to 15 and 17 of Appendix 3.2.1. 
17     Sl.No.10 of Appendix 3.2.1. 

Chapter III: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 83 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3 Avoidable payment and idle expenditure 
 
The Corporation paid 0.33 crore to the contractor for the work components not 
executed and did not utilise components created at a cost of 0.31 crore. 
 
With a view to develop tourism in the State, the Government of Sikkim (GoS) envisaged 
the development and implementation of an interactive website providing a host of 
services for tourists including online booking facility for hotels, vehicles, helicopter, 
navigation facilities, etc. The Sikkim Tourism Development Corporation Limited 
(Company), which was responsible for development of tourism in the State was assigned 
with the responsibility to complete the above project. The project also included office 
automation of the Company and was taken up with 100 per cent financial assistance 
aggregating to 2.03 crore18 by way of grant from North Eastern Council (NEC), 
Government of India.  
The Company awarded (June 2010) the project work of development of e-commerce web 
portal to M/s SIBIN Group (Contractor) at a contract value of 2.14 crore. The project 
was required to be completed within one year (June 2011) after award (June 2010) of 
work. The scope of the work inter-alia included the works relating to online booking 
portal, helicopter booking, vehicle management system, automation of office, asset 
information system and employee management information system.  
Review of the project records and modules hosted on the web site19 of the Company 
revealed that the Contractor had not carried out/implemented several important 
components of the project works costing 0.33 crore as detailed below: 
Table 3.3.1 
Sl. 
No. Scope of the envisaged Module/Software Actual Work done Amount  
( in crore) 
1 
Online booking module in the website for Helicopter 
Booking by specifying search criteria like date of travel, 
number of passengers destination including online payment 
facility. 
Facility for online booking 
and payment for Helicopter 
and Taxi services not installed 
in the web. Instead, 
guideline/information for 
offline booking only was 
provided in the web. 
0.1220 
2 
Online booking module in the website for Taxi Reservation 
by specifying search criteria like date of travel, number of 
passengers, destination, and vehicle type including online 
payment facility. 
0.1521 
3 
Provision of an application software, viz. Vehicle 
Management System for effective management of the 
Corporation’s five luxury taxis. 
No such software available in 
the Corporation’s computers. 0.0622 
 TOTAL 0.33 
 
                                                 
18       Released 0.24 crore in April 2010, 0.49 crore in April 2011 and 1.30 crore in March 2012. 
19       www.sikkimstdc.com 
20   System Requirement Study (SRS) and freezing 0.01 crore plus Application Development cost  
0.11 crore. 
21 0.01 crore for SRS and freezing and 0.14 crore for Application and Development. 
22    ( 0.01 crore for SRS and  0.05 crore for development). 
 
SIKKIM TOURISM DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
LIMITED  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 84 
Despite the above mentioned deficiencies in completion of the project work, the 
Company released (April 2012) the payment of 0.33 crore to the Contractor in respect 
of the modules not made available on the web and software/work not provided to the 
project. 
Audit further observed that various application software components developed with a 
value of 0.31 crore remained unutilised/underutilised by the Company as detailed 
below: 
Table 3.3.2 
Sl. 
No. Application Software installed Utilisation of the Application Software Amount  
( in crore) 
1 
Installation of an application software, viz. 
Human Resource Information Management 
System (HRIMS) in the in-house computer 
system with ability to generate various 
employee related reports including payroll 
preparation.  The software was installed in 
March 2013. 
Yet to be utilised by the Company 
even after 17 months of its 
installation.  Data entry not made 
into the software and all required 
reports and payroll being done 
manually due to delay in imparting of 
necessary training to the employees 
of the company by the contractor. 
 
0.0823 
2 
Installation of an application software, viz. 
Asset Management.  Incorporated along 
with HRIMS in March 2013. 
0.0724 
3 
Application software for online hotel 
reservation system. Accordingly, an online 
booking system for hotels has been 
incorporated (since June 2013) in the web 
site. 
Of the 22 locations25incorporated in 
the online booking module, only 11 
hotels in two locations (10 in 
Gangtok and one in Pelling) were 
provided with hotel information and 
online booking. 
0.1626 
 TOTAL 0.31 
 
Thus, the Company irregularly released payment of 0.33 crore to the contractor against 
the work components not executed and also could not fully utilise the facilities created at 
a cost of 0.31 crore, thereby defeating the intended objectives of the project. 
The Company stated (August 2015) that the helicopter service is used mainly for the 
purposes like medical emergencies, departmental exigencies, etc., instead of being 
restricted to ferrying passengers; and thus, the use of the booking facility developed was 
restricted. Further, the built in facilities for online booking of Taxi service and Vehicle 
Management System could not be used due to small size of available vehicle fleet. The 
Company further stated that the Human Resource Information Management System 
(HRIMS) and Asset Management are installed and the details are uploaded. 
The plea of the Company regarding restricted use of helicopter services and availability 
of small vehicle fleet raises questions on the investment made by the Company for 
installation of on-line booking portal under the project. Further, the reply regarding 
installation of HRIMS and Asset Management does not address the audit observation 
                                                 
23     ( 0.01crore for SRS + 0.07 crore for development). 
24     ( 0.01 crore for SRS and 0.06 crore for development). 
25     20 in Sikkim and two outside. 
26 0.01 crore for SRS and 0.15 crore for Application development cost. 

Chapter III: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 85 
regarding preparation of all related reports and pay rolls manually despite availability of 
system. 
The matter was reported (May 2015) to the Government; their reply had not been 
received (October 2015). 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 87 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1 Trend of revenue receipts 
 
4.1.1 The tax and non-tax revenue raised by the Government of Sikkim during the year 
2014-15, the State's share of net proceeds of divisible Union taxes and duties assigned to 
States and Grants-in-aid received from the Government of India during the year and the 
corresponding figures for the preceding four years are mentioned in Table-4.1.1: 
Table 4.1.1 
Trend of revenue receipts 
(` in crore) 
Sl.  
No.  2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
I 
Revenue raised by the State Government 
 Tax revenue 279.54 293.92 435.48 524.92 527.54 
 Non-tax revenue 1,137.76 1,044.57 806.96 794.49 698.08 
TOTAL 1,417.30 1,338.49 1,242.44 1,319.41 1,225.62 
Percentage of increase over previous year (-) 10.30 (-) 5.56 (-) 7.18 (+) 6.20 (-) 7.11 
II 
Receipts from the Government of India 
 State’s share of net proceeds  of divisible 
Union taxes 524.99 611.65 698.48 762.62 809.33 
 Grants-in-aid 1,105.02 1,722.50 1,852.40 2,244.41 2,427.00 
TOTAL 1,630.01 2,334.15 2,550.88 3,007.03 3,236.33 
III Total receipts of State Government (I + II) 3,047.31 3,672.64 3,793.32 4,326.44 4,461.95 
IV Percentage of I to III 47 36 33 31 27 
 
Note: Tax and Non-tax revenue during 2009-10 was ` 1,580.09 crore. 
 
The above table indicates that during the year 201 4-15, the revenue raised by the State 
Government (` 1,225.62 crore) was 27 per cent of the total revenue receipts. The balance 
73 per cent of the receipts during 2014-15 was from Government of India. Non-tax revenue 
and total receipts of the State shown in the table above include gross receipts under State 
Lotteries. 
4.1.2 The details of the tax revenue raised during the period from 2010-11 to 2014-15 
are given in Table-4.1.2: 
Table 4.1.2 
Details of Tax Revenue raised 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Head of revenue 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Percentage of 
increase (+) or 
decrease (-) in 
2014-15 over 
2013-14 
BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual 
1 Sales Tax/VAT 118.50 142.74 160.11 124.19 187.14 227.08 225.00 286.33 259.45 282.10 15 (-) 1 
2 
Taxes on Income and 
expenditure other than 
Corporation Tax   
1.92 4.94 2.01 4.86 5.62 6.73 7.01 8.68 8.01 7.93 14 (-) 9 
3 State Excise 55.50 70.64 67.44 96.26 95.00 111.12 109.00 120.64 120.93 131.36 11 9 
 
CHAPTER IV 
REVENUE SECTOR 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 88 
4 Stamps and Registration 
Fees 3.13 5.70 3.26 8.27 7.47 5.35 7.91 6.46 7.70 6.77 -3 5 
5 Taxes on Vehicles 9.00 10.67 10.00 16.56 15.00 16.38 16.80 18.52 18.82 19.42 12 5 
6 Other Taxes and Duties on 
Commodities and Services 19.39 37.52 22.47 39.17 37.63 63.16 53.40 80.90 75.60 73.81 42 (-) 9 
7 Land Revenue 3.82 7.33 3.82 4.61 5.48 5.66 6.56 3.39 6.89 6.15 5 81 
TOTAL 211.26 279.54 269.11 293.92 353.34 435.48 425.68 524.92 497.40 527.54 17 1 
 
The respective departments reported the following reasons for variations: 
Increase: 
State Excise: The increase was due to revision of excise duty. 
Land revenue: The increase was mainly due to more collection from tax and other receipts. 
Decrease: 
Sales Tax/ VAT: The decrease was due to shortfall in TDS. 
In respect of other heads  of revenue, n o reason was furnished by  concerned departments 
despite being requested (May 2015 and September 2015). 
4.1.3 The details of the non-tax revenue raised during the period 2010-11 to 2014-15 are 
given in Table-4.1.3: 
Table 4.1.3 
Details of Non-Tax Revenue raised 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Head of revenue 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Percentage of 
increase (+) or 
decrease (-) in 
2014-15 over 
2013-14 
BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual 
1 Power 190.00 87.86 150.00 79.70 100.05 82.90 110.10 98.93 121.10 113.56 10 15 
2 Interest receipts 25.57 28.14 13.91 29.39 21.15 46.00 28.85 67.02 31.05 66.44 8 (-) 1 
3 Police 24.42 9.57 39.29 12.89 44.88 49.23 50.29 41.14 55.32 17.60 10 (-) 57 
4 Road Transport 21.20 24.76 23.75 30.89 29.05 29.01 36.04 34.10 43.00 27.63 19 (-) 19 
5 Forestry and Wild Life 11.00 12.25 11.00 12.53 13.48 12.28 15.35 14.27 15.35 11.45 0 (-) 20 
6 Other Administrative 
Services 3.19 4.72 2.84 6.68 3.03 9.64 4.29 11.06 10.25 13.59 139 23 
7 Public Works 3.80 3.48 3.80 5.38 4.56 4.70 4.46 4.68 5.68 3.66 27 (-) 22 
8 Plantations 2.70 2.90 2.80 2.59 3.20 3.98 3.50 3.62 5.00 2.31 43 (-) 36 
9 Water Supply and Sanitation 2.82 2.61 3.49 2.90 3.40 2.74 3.87 3.17 3.91 3.25 1 3 
10 Tourism 3.11 3.00 5.00 1.84 5.00 2.13 5.60 2.65 2.80 2.64 (-)50 0 
11 Medical and Public Health 0.56 0.72 0.56 1.27 1.27 1.50 1.27 2.19 2.50 1.97 97 (-) 10 
12 Other Rural Development 
Programmes 2.79 1.17 2.32 1.25 2.32 1.46 1.50 2.13 1.50 1.65 0 (-) 23 
13 Stationery and Printing 1.51 1.52 1.51 1.92 1.51 2.08 1.81 2.05 1.90 1.75 5 (-) 15 
14 Crop Husbandry 0.42 0.51 0.42 0.46 0.07 0.71 0.53 1.45 0.91 0.56 72 (-) 61 
15 Education, Sports, Art and 
Culture 1.21 1.73 1.40 1.35 1.40 1.37 1.69 1.38 1.34 1.22 (-)21 (-) 12 
16 State Lotteries1 Gross 973.85 938.15 1,010.78 844.15 780.99 546.39 776.03 474.37 787.23 418.64 1 (-) 12 
Net (60.00) (42.54) (70.00) (43.62) (50.00) (41.43) (40.00) (41.47) (36.00) (44.33) (-)10 7 
17 Others 6.41 14.67 8.67 9.38 10.14 10.84 9.35 30.28 10.08 10.16 8 (-) 66 
 TOTAL 1,274.56 1,137.76 1,281.54 1,044.57 1,025.5 806.96 1,054.53 794.49 1098.92 698.08 4 (-) 12 
Source: Finance Accounts and Estimates of Receipts. 
 
The respective Departments reported the following reasons for variation: 
 
 
                                                           
1     Figures in brackets represent net receipts. 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 89 
 
Increase: 
Other Administrative Services: The increase was due to reimbursement of Government of 
India’s share of Election related expenditure for Lok Sabha and Vidhan Sabha Elections in 
April 2014. 
Decrease: 
Police: The decrease was due to delay in sanction of reimbursement for expenditure on Police 
Check-posts and Indian Reserve Battalion by Government of India and lesser number of 
renewal of gun licenses. 
Education, Sports, Art and Culture: The decrease was due to waiver of fees upto College 
level and hiring of Mannan Bhawan (Hall for organising meetings, etc.) on lesser occasions. 
Crop Husbandry: The decrease was due to reduction in lease rent of  Bio-fertiliser unit at 
Mazitar and decrease in sale of Cymbidium orchid. 
Other Rural Development Programme: The decrease was due to non-sanctioning of fresh 
work during 2014-15 resulting into lesser than anticipated sale of tender forms. 
Public Works: The decrease was due to less use  of Government machinery by the 
contractors, less sale proceeds from sale of tender documents, non-settlement of pending 
payment to the contractors and less sanction of new projects. 
Medical and Public Health: The decrease was due to less collection of user charges, 
collection of less fees due to lesser number of tenders, less collection of fees and fines under 
Tobacco Act and reduction of Lab test charges. 
State Lotteries: The decrease was due to closure of lottery market in big States. 
Forestry and Wildlife: The decrease was due to free distribution of forest produce like 
timber, sand and stone as per Government policy and less realisation of revenue from 
royalties due to stalling in development of Hydel Power Projects. 
Tourism: The shortfall in Actuals as compared to BE was due to non-payment of lease rent 
and low selling of tender forms. 
In respect of other heads  of revenue, no reason was furnished by  concerned departments 
despite being requested (May 2015 and September 2015). 
 
4.2     Analysis of arrears of revenue 
 
The arrears of revenue as on 31 March 201 5 in respect of some Heads of Revenue as 
reported by the departments amounted to ` 5.65 crore of which ` 2.74 crore was 
outstanding for more than five years, as detailed in the Table-4.2: 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 90 
 
Table 4.2 
Arrears of Revenue 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Head of 
revenue 
Total Amount 
outstanding as on 
31 March 2015 
Amount 
outstanding 
for more than 
five years 
Replies of Department 
1 Public Works 2.13 1.03 No reply received from the Department. 
2 Tourism 0.98 0.98 Department has issued reminder Legal Notice to 
pay the rent. 
3 Animal 
Husbandry 0.57 0.57 No reply received from the Department. 
4 Water Supply 
and Sanitation 1.97 0.16 
Some of the old lines are damaged partially and 
unrepairable. Such cases with disturbed water 
supply remained without up-to-date payment. 
 TOTAL 5.65 2.74  
Source: Information received from departments. 
 
It would be seen from the proceeding table that recovery of ` 2.74 crore was pending for more 
than five years and no sincere efforts were being made to recover them. The total arrears of 
revenue pending with the departmental authorities were ` 5.65 crore. 
 
4.3 Arrears in assessments 
 
The details of cases pending at the beginning of the year, cases becoming due for assessment, 
cases disposed of during the year and number of cases pending for finalisation at the end of the 
year as furnished by the Commercial Taxes Division (Finance, Reve nue and Expenditure 
Department) in respect of Sales Tax (including VAT) was as given in the following table: 
Table 4.3 
Arrears in assessments 
Head of 
revenue 
Opening 
balance 
New cases due for 
assessment during 
2014-15 
Total 
assessments 
due 
Cases disposed of 
during 2014-15 
Balance at the 
end of the year 
Percentage 
of disposal  
(col. 5 to 4) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
VAT 3214 458 3,672 18 3,654 0.49 
 
As can be seen from the table , the performance regarding disposal of cases of CTD was 
unsatisfactory. The Department may thus take steps to increase the percentage of disposal of 
cases of assessment. 
 
4.4 Evasion of tax detected by the Department 
 
No Department reported any case of evasion of tax. 
 
4.5 Pendency of Refund Cases 
 
As per information received in respect of Commercial tax/VAT, there was refund of ` 5.78 
lakh out of claim received during 2014-15 of the same amount. 
 
 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 91 
4.6 Response of the departments/Government towards Audit 
 
The Accountant General (Audit), Sikkim conducts periodical inspection of the 
Government departments to test check the transactions and verify the maintenance of the 
important accounts and other records as prescribed in the rules and procedures. These 
inspections are followed up with the Inspection Reports (IRs) incorporating irregularities 
detected during the inspection and not settled on the spot, which are issued to the heads of 
the offices inspected with the copies to the next higher authorities for  prompt corrective 
actions. The heads of the Offices/Government are required to promptly comply with the 
observations contained in the IRs, rectify the defects and omissions and report 
compliance through initial reply to the Accountant General within one month from the 
date of issue of the IRs. Serious financial irregularities are reported to the heads of the 
Department and the Government.  
IRs issued upto December 201 4 disclosed that 267 paragraphs involving ` 561.78 crore 
relating to 95 IRs remained outstanding at the end of June 2015. The details alongwith the 
corresponding figures for the preceding two years are mentioned in the following table: 
Table 4.6.1 
Details of pending Inspection Reports 
 June 2013 June 2014 June 2015 
Number of outstanding IRs 131 97 95 
Number of outstanding audit observations 328 292 267 
Amount involved (` in crore) 710.16 598.29 561.78 
 
4.6.1 The Department-wise details of the IRs and audit observations outstanding as on 
30 June 2015 and the amounts involved are mentioned in the Table-4.6.2: 
Table 4.6.2 
Department-wise details of IRs 
Sl. 
No. Name of  Department Nature of Receipts 
No. of 
Outstanding 
IRs 
No. of 
Outstanding 
Audit 
Observations 
Money 
value 
involved 
(` in crore) 
1 
Finance, Revenue and 
Expenditure (Commercial Taxes 
Division) 
VAT/Taxes on Sales, 
Trade, etc. 11 38 41.18 
2 
Finance, Revenue and 
Expenditure (Income Tax 
Division) 
Income Tax 14 60 32.95 
3 Excise (Abkari) State Excise 10 28 29.63 
4 Land Revenue and Disaster 
Management Land Revenue 22 27 0.87 
5 Transport Taxes on Motor 
Vehicles 6 14 3.68 
6 Mines, Minerals and Geology Non-ferrous Mining and 
Metallurgical Industries 3 3 3.35 
7 Forest, Environment and 
Wildlife Management Forestry and Wildlife 5 12 0.15 
8 
Finance, Revenue and 
Expenditure (Directorate of 
Sikkim State Lotteries) 
Lottery 2 5 24.10 
9 Energy and Power Power 11 48 415.60 
10 Urban Development and 
Housing Urban Development 11 32 10.27 
TOTAL 95 267 561.78 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 92 
Audit did not receive even the first replies from the heads of offices within one month 
from the date of issue of the IRs for 6 IRs (issued during 201 4-15) upto June 2015. This 
large pendency of the IRs due to non -receipt of the replies is indicative of the fact that 
heads of offices and heads of the Departments did not initiate adequate action to rectify 
the defects, omissions and irregularities pointed out by the Accountant General through 
IRs.  
The Government may consider to have an effective system for prompt and appropriate 
response to audit observations. 
4.6.2 Departmental Audit Committee Meetings 
The Government set up audit committees to monitor and expedite the progress of the 
settlement of the IRs and paragraphs in the IRs. The details of the audit committee meetings 
held during the year 2014-15 and the paragraphs settled are mentioned in Table-4.6.3. 
Table 4.6.3 
Details of Departmental audit committee meetings 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Department Number of 
meetings held 
Number of 
IRs settled 
Number of 
paragraphs settled Amount 
1 Commercial Taxes Division 01 02 36 132.96 
 
The overall progress of settlement of paragraphs needs to be improved in view of the 
huge pendency of the IRs and paragraphs. 
4.6.3 Non-production of records to audit for scrutiny 
The programme of local audit of Tax revenue/non - tax revenue offices is drawn up 
sufficiently in advance and intimation s are issued, usually one month before the 
commencement of audit, to the departments to enable them to keep the relevant records 
ready for audit scrutiny. 
Audit observed non-production of records like assessment files, returns, refunds, registers 
and other relevant records relating to 48 cases as mentioned below: 
Table 4.6.4 
Non-production of records 
Name of the Office/Department Year of audit Number of cases for which 
records were not produced Tax amount 
Commercial Taxes Division 2013-14 48 Not known 
 
4.6.4 Response of the departments to the draft audit paragraphs 
The draft Audit paragraphs proposed for inclusion in the Report of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India are forwarded by the Accountant General to the Principal 
Secretaries/Secretaries of the concerned Department, drawing their attention to audit 
findings and requesting them to send their response within six weeks. The fact of non - 
receipt of replies from the Departments/Government is invariably indicated at the end of 
such paragraphs included in the Audit Report.  
 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 93 
 
Five draft paragraphs proposed for inclusion in the Audit Report of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India for the year ended March 201 5 were forwarded ( May and July 
2015) to the heads of the respective departments through demi -official letters. The heads 
of departments furnished replies in respect of all draft paragraphs. 
4.6.5 Follow up on Audit Reports - summarised position 
The Rules of Procedures of the Committee on Public Accounts of the Sikkim Legislative 
Assembly (internal working) laid down that after the presentation of t he Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India in the Legislative Assembly, the Departments 
shall initiate action on the audit paragraphs and the action taken explanatory notes thereon 
should be submitted by the Government within three months of  tabling the Report for 
consideration of the Committee. In  spite of these provisions, the explanatory notes on the 
audit paragraphs of the Reports w ere being delayed inordinately . Twenty-three 
paragraphs (including Performance Audits) included in the Reports of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India on the Revenue Sector of the Government of Sikkim for the 
years ended 31 March 2010, 2011, 201 2, 201 3 and 2014 were placed before the State 
Legislative Assembly  between March 2011 to March 2015. Action taken explanatory 
notes in respect of 14 paragraphs from four departments  (Finance, Revenue and 
Expenditure, Excise, Transport and Labour Departments) had not been received for Audit 
Reports for the years ending 31 March 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2014. 
During the year 2013-14, the PAC discussed Audit Report  for the year 2008 -09 and its 
recommendations were incorporated in their 96 th Report (2014)  and ATNs have been 
received by the PAC in respect of one performance review and two paragraphs  discussed. 
Audit Report for the year 2009-10 was under discussion.  
 
4.7 Analysis of the mechanism for dealing with issues raised by Audit 
 
To analyse the system of addressing the issues highlighted in the IRs/Audit Reports by 
the departments/Government, the action taken on the paragraphs and Performance Audits 
included in the A udit Reports of the last 10 years in respect of Energy and Power  
Department is evaluated and included in this Report. 
The succeeding paragraphs 4.7.1 to 4. 7.2 discuss the performance of the Energy and 
Power Department in dealing with the cases detected in course of local audit conducted 
during the last ten years and also the cases included in the A udit Reports for last ten 
years. 
4.7.1 Position of Inspection Reports 
The summarised position of IRs issued during the last ten years, paragraphs included in 
these Reports and their status as on 30 June 2015 are given in the following table: 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 94 
Table 4.7.1 
Position of Inspection Reports 
(` in crore) 
Year 
Opening balance Addition during the year Clearance during the year Closing balance 
IRs Para-
graphs 
Money 
value IRs Para-
graphs 
Money 
value IRs Para-
graphs 
Money 
value IRs Para-
graphs 
Money 
value 
2005-06 7 13 106.28 1 4 1.17 0 0 0 8 17 107.45 
2006-07 8 17 107.45 1 8 37.14 0 2 2.06 9 23 142.53 
2007-08 9 23 142.53 1 10 80.18 1 1 1.63 9 32 221.08 
2008-09 9 32 221.08 0 0 0 1 5 32.98 8 27 188.10 
2009-10 8 27 188.10 0 0 0 0 2 1.65 8 25 186.45 
2010-11 8 25 186.45 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 25 186.45 
2011-12 8 25 186.45 1 9 214.91 0 3 66.82 9     31 334.54 
2012-13 9 31 334.54 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 31 334.54 
2013-14 9 31 334.54 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 31 334.54 
2014-15 9 31 334.54 1 6 91.27 0 2 12.30 10 35 413.51 
 
The Government did not arrange any Audit Committee Meeting between the Department 
and AG’s office to settle the old paragraphs during 2014-15. 
4.7.2 Recovery of accepted cases 
The position of paragraphs included in the A udit Reports of the last 10 years accepted by 
the Department and the amount s recovered there against are mentioned in the following 
table: 
Table 4.7.2 
Year of 
Audit 
Report 
No. of 
paragraphs 
included 
Money 
value of the 
paragraphs 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
paragraphs 
accepted 
Money value 
of accepted 
paragraphs 
(` in crore) 
Amount 
recovered during 
the year 
(` in crore) 
Cumulative position 
of recovery of 
accepted cases 
(` in crore) 
2007-08 3 9.29 2 8.84 0.08 0.08 
 
It is evident from the preceding table that the progress of recovery even in accepted cases 
was very slow during the entire period of last ten years. The recovery of accepted cases 
was to be pursued as arrears recoverable from the concerned parties. No mechanism for 
pursuance of the accepted cases had been put in place by the Department/Government. 
Further, the arrear cases including accepted audit observations were not available with the 
Energy and Power  Department. In the absence of a suitable mechanism, the Department 
could not monitor the recovery of accepted cases. 
The Department may take immediate action to pursue and monitor prompt recovery of the 
dues involved in accepted cases. 
 
4.8 Action taken on the recommendations accepted by the departments/ 
Government 
 
The draft report on P erformance Reviews conducted by the AG are forwarded to the 
concerned Department/Government for their i nformation with a request to furnish their 
replies. These reviews are also discussed in the exit conference s and the 
Department’s/Government’s views are included while finalising the reviews for the Audit 
Reports. 
The following reviews on the Commercial Ta xes Division (Finance, Revenue and 
Expenditure Department) had featured in the last 10 year’s Audit Report. The details of 
recommendations and their status is given in the following table: 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 95 
Table 4.8 
Year of 
AR 
Name of the 
Review 
No. of 
recomm-
endations 
Details of the recommendation Status 
2008-09 
Performance 
Audit on 
transition 
from Sales 
tax to VAT 
8 
Implement computerisation of VAT system 
completely and effectively in all areas. 
Computerisation of VAT 
implemented under MMPCT. 
Establish effective mechanism to review 
database at periodic interval and to prepare 
database of dubious/risky dealers. 
Such mechanism has been 
established under the eSEVA2. 
Establish effective mechanism to ensure 
submission of regular and timely returns by 
the dealers. 
Returns have to be submitted on 
time, else the TIN of the dealer 
gets blocked by the system. 
Hence effective mechanism 
established. 
Establish effective mechanism for scrutiny of 
every returns submitted by the dealers, 
assessment of dealers and VAT audit  of 
selected dealers. 
Scrutiny of returns is mandatory 
and is being done before 
acceptance. 
Fix responsibility at various levels in the 
Department for strict compliance of codal 
provisions to avoid tax evasion by any 
dealer. 
All the penal provisions are 
implemented before and after 
assessment. 
Ensure fixing the quantum of minimum 
penalty for each kind of offences and to 
continue VAT Fraud Task Force 
Minimum penalty is provided in 
the SVAT Act/Rules. 
Strengthen internal control mechanism 
including internal audit. 
Internal Audit section 
established with the Joint 
Commissioner/Audit as Head of 
the Section. 
Review and rectify various 
loopholes/deficiencies of SVAT Act and 
Rules. 
SVAT Act/Rules have been 
amended to rectify various 
loopholes. 
2010-11 
Performance 
Audit on 
Utilisation of 
Declaration 
Forms in 
Inter State 
Trade and 
Commerce 
8 
Maintain data bank of dealer involved in 
Inter State Trade and Commerce. 
Such provision exists in the 
eSEVA. 
Print Declaration form assessing its 
requirements taking into account pace of 
issue of declaration forms. 
All the declaration forms are 
issued online. 
Maintain proper records of declaration forms 
printed, issued and closing stock. 
Such records are maintained in 
the system since the Forms are 
issued online. 
Ensure issue of declaration form s to the 
dealers only after receipt of details of 
utilisation of declaration forms issued earlier. 
Issue of declaration forms are 
done after verification and 
acceptance of the request. 
Issue declaration forms chronologically and 
not randomly to have a track of declaration 
forms. 
Declaration forms are being 
issued online and records are 
available in the system. 
Install a system of verification of each and 
every declaration form submitted by  the 
dealers with the database available in the 
TINXSYS website before allowing 
exemption/concession of tax. 
Such system has been 
established and is under 
effective use. 
Install a system for picking up a sample of 
declaration forms and taking them up for 
further verification with the concerned States 
and also a system of uploading the details of 
utilisation of declaration forms in the 
TINXSYS website. 
Ensure submission of CST returns by every 
dealer and assess all dealers involved in Inter 
State trade and commerce. 
CST returns  are to be filed  online. 
Assessment of the dealers are on the 
basis of the assignment by the 
Commissioner. 
NB: Status as in the table is based on departmental replies. 
                                                           
2    Commercial Taxes Division’s tax administration system for online payment, e -return filing, waybill 
endorsement, etc.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 96 
4.9 Audit Planning 
 
The unit offices under various departments are categorised into high, medium and low 
risk units according to their revenue position, past trends of the audit observations and 
other parameters. The annual audit plan is prepared on the basis of risk analysis which 
inter-alia include critical issues in Government revenues and tax administration, i.e. 
budget speech, White Paper on State Finances, Reports of the Finance Commission (State 
and Central), recommendations of the Taxation Reforms Committee, statistical analysis 
of the revenue earnings during the past five years, factors of the tax administration, audit 
coverage and its impact during five years, etc. 
During the year 201 4-15, ther e were  19 auditable units, of which s even units were 
planned and audited which is 37 per cent of the total auditable units.  
 
4.10 Results of audit 
 
Test check of the records of seven units under Revenue departments (Urban Development 
and Housing; State Excise; Forest, Environment and Wildlife Management; Mines, 
Minerals and Geology; Directorate of Sikkim State Lotteries and Energy and Power ) 
conducted during the year 201 4-15 revealed irregularities involving revenue aggregating 
` 61.48 crore in 31 cases. Duri ng the course of the   year, the d epartments concerned 
accepted 20 cases which were pointed out in audit during 2014-15. 
 
4.11 Coverage of this Report 
 
This chapter contains six paragraphs (selected from the audit detections made during the 
local audit referred to above  and one detected during previous year ) involving financial 
effect of ` 16.82 crore and the findings of audit based on the theme ‘Collection of 
Revenue from outsourced activities in Motor Vehicle Tax’ involving financial implication 
of ` 4.13 crore. The departments have accepted audit observations involving ` 11.85 crore 
out of which  ` 4.34 crore has been recovered . These are discussed in succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.12    Collection of Revenue from outsourced activities in Motor Vehicles Tax 
 
Highlights 
 
Selection and participation of two companies owned by the same person defeated 
very purpose of fairne ss and competitiveness in the  tendering process for 
implementation of High Security Registration Plate. 
(Paragraph 4.12.4.1) 
 
TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT  
(MOTOR VEHICLES DIVISION) 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 97 
Failure on the part of the Department to assess the reasonability of rates resulted 
into higher cost of HSRP affixation in the State as compared to other States  and 
also led to extra financial burden  of ` 2.65 crore to the vehicles owners of the 
State. 
(Paragraph 4.12.4.2) 
Failure to deposit the Government revenue directly into revenue head resulted 
into delay in deposit of revenue ran ging from four days to 736 days. There was 
loss of revenue of ` 0.59 lakh due to non -provision of security 
deposit/performance guarantee in the agreement. 
 (Paragraphs 4.12.4.4 and 4.12.5.3) 
In absence of competitive bidding for outsourcing of two Auto Emission Testing 
Centres at Ga ngtok and Jorethang and also due to non -linkage of share  of 
Government revenue with the number of registered vehicles in the State resulted 
into loss of revenue to the tune of ` 1.11 crore. 
(Paragraphs 4.12.5.4) 
Only 7 to 9 per cent of the total number of registered vehicles in the State  were 
issued PUC certificates by the designated agency during the entire period covered 
under audit resulting in environment pollution and health hazard to the general 
public. 
(Paragraph 4.12.5.8) 
Due to incorporation of def ective clause in the contract agreement as well as in 
SMV Rules requiring the owners to undertake pollution control check every six 
months right from the date of registration even for new vehicles as against the 
provision of CMV Rules requiring pollution check only after expiry of 12 months 
from date of initial registration resulted into extra financial burden of ` 18.35 
lakh on vehicle owners.  
(Paragraph 4.12.5.9) 
Sale for forms for availing various services under Motor Vehicles against the 
instruction of the Ministry of Surface Transport, GOI for issue of form s free of 
cost resulted into extra financial burden to the vehicle owners. 
(Paragraph 4.12.6) 
 
4.12.1     Introduction 
 
The Transport Department, Government of Sikkim has two Divisions - (i) commercial 
Division named as Sikkim Nationalised Transport (SNT) which caters to the 
transportation needs of all Government departments and other agencies besides the 
public; and (ii) Motor Vehicles Division which is primarily responsible to enforce a nd 
implement the laws relating to Central Motor Vehicles  (CMV) Act 1988, Central Motor 
Vehicle (CMV) Rules 1989, Sikkim Motor Vehicles (SMV) Rules  1991 and the Sikkim 
Motor Vehicles Taxation (SMVT) Act 1982.  
The State Transport Authority (STA) constituted  under Secretary, Transport Department 
as Chairman is empowered to exercise and discharge the powers and functions specified 
under the Motor Vehicles Act 1988. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 98 
Vehicles at a glance: 
Total number of registered vehicles worked out by Audit from the Annual Re ports3 of the 
Department are given below: 
Table 4.12.1 
Year 31.03.2010 31.03.2011 31.03.2012 31.03.2013 31.03.2014 31.03.2015 
Total vehicles registered 
by end of  the year 43,052 47,612 51,881 60,848 64,574 68,162 
Sources: Annual Reports of the Department. 
 
However, as per information subsequently provided by the Department, total number of 
registered vehicles as on 31 March 2015 totalled only 46,205.   
The Department stated that the reason for difference in the number of vehicles was due to 
the fact that prior to the computerisation of registration of vehicles, registration of 
vehicles and compilation works were done manually and accurate numbers could not be 
arrived. However, after commencement of computerisation of registration process, the 
actual figure could be established as under:  
Table 4.12.2 
Year 31.03.2011 31.03.2012 31.03.2013 31.03.2014 31.03.2015 
Total vehicles registered 
by end of  the year 23,135 27,695 31,964 40,931 46,205 
 
It is seen from the above that there is significant difference in the number of vehicles 
furnished by the Department with those given in their Annual Reports. This indicates that 
the Department needs to reconcile both figures and update these in their computer system 
so as to show reliable and complete number of vehicles in the next Annual Report. 
 
4.12.2     Outsourced Activities in Motor Vehicles Tax 
 
Three activities under Motor Vehicles Tax had been outsourced by the State Government 
to different firms/agencies during the period March 2001 to October 201 4 and revenue 
collected thereof was deposited under revenue head : 0041 - Taxes on Vehicle, as detailed 
below: 
Table 4.12.3 
Sl. 
No. 
Activities/revenue collection 
works Name of  firm engaged Date from which the 
firm was engaged 
1 High Security Registration Plate 
(HSRP) 
M/s Tonnjes Eastern Security Tech. 
Private Ltd. New Delhi 02 February 2008 
2 Vehicle Emission Testing M/s SiMTEI, Deorali, M/s Navigator 
and Ms. C.L. Bhutia 
15 October 2001, April 
2011 and October 2014 
respectively 
3 Sale of Forms prescribed  under 
MV Act and Rules Mr. M.L. Sharma 26 March 1990 
 
                                                           
3       The number of figures as on 31  March 2010 and 31  March 2011 shown in the Annual Reports were 
43,052 and 47,612 respectively. New registration shown in subsequent years in Annual Reports were 
taken since total figures were not mentioned in said Reports. New registration figures for 2011 -12, 
2012-13 and 2013-14 were taken as 4,269, 8,967 and 3,726 respectively. The Department furnished in 
their reply new registration figures as 3,588 for 2014-15.  

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 99 
Major sources of revenue receipts for Motor Vehicles Tax were registration fee, token 
tax, transfer of ownership, recommendation fee, issue of national permit, issue of driving 
license, countersignature charges, route permits, fines for offences, etc. The year-wise 
collection of revenue under Motor Vehicles Tax vis-à-vis revenue collection from 
outsourced activities during the period covered under audit are:  
Table 4.12.4 
(` in lakh) 
Particulars  2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 Total 
Revenue on MV Tax 1066.44 1656.27 1638.22 1852.17 1941.39 8154.49 
Revenue from Outsourcing  
HSRP Affixation  5.75 8.42 10.96 4.44 4.10 33.68 
Auto Emission Test 2.30 2.30 2.53 2.53 2.53 12.19 
Sales of forms  1.35 2.25 3.27 3.12 1.82 11.81 
Total of outsourcing 9.40 12.97 16.76 10.09 8.45 57.68 
Percentage of revenue from 
outsourcing  w.r.t. to total 
revenue 
0.88 0.78 1.02 0.54 0.44 0.71 
 
Percentage of revenue collected through outsourced activities was insignificant ranging 
from 0.44 per cent to 1.02 per cent  compared to total revenue collection under Motor 
Vehicle Tax during the entire period from 2010-11 to 2014-15. 
This was due to the fact that royalty for HSRP affixation, revenues to be deposited from 
auto emission test and sale of forms were fixed at a very low rate. 
 
4.12.3    Audit framework 
 
Audit on “Collection of revenue from outsourced activities in Motor Vehicle s Tax” was 
taken up with an Entry Conference with the Secretary, Transport Department on 22 July 
2015 to assess tran sparency and competitiveness in selection process of outsourced 
agencies, adequacy of agreements with outsourced agencies to safeguard revenue 
interests of the State and adherence to terms and conditions of the agreement by 
outsourced agencies for effectiv e and timely collection of revenue. Audit was conducted 
through test check of records in Transport Department (Motor Vehicles Division) at 
Gangtok and four Regional Transport O ffices (RTO) located at Districts level during 
July-August 2015 covering the period April 2010 to March 2015. The audit findings were 
discussed in the Exit Conference h eld on 12 October 2015 and the  replies received have 
been suitably incorporated. The audit findings were benchmarked against criteria 
stipulated in the bid documents, a greements, CMV Act 1988, CMV Rules 1989,  SMV 
Act 1988, SMV Rules 1991, SMVT Act 1982 and State Financial Rules 1979. 
Audit findings 
 
4.12.4     Implementation of High Security Registration Plate 
 
The High Security Registration Plate (HSRP) Scheme was implemented in compliance to 
the Notification issued by the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways 
(MORTH) and Rule 50 of the Central Motor Vehicle Rules 1989 and the directions issued 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court.  The State Government issued a notification for making 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 100 
HSRP effective from 1 July 2008 in Sikkim. However, actual implementation started 
from 2 February 2009. 
The contract for implementation of HSRP was entrusted to a Delhi based fi rm M/s 
Tonnjes Eastern Security Technologies (EST) Pvt. Ltd. on ‘Build, Own and Operate’ 
(BOO) basis through an agreement signed between the Government and the firm on 2 
April 2008 for five years. After completion of this agreement period, the Department 
continued to give periodical extensions to the same firm. According to current extension, 
the period of extension was up to 31 March 2016. 
While auditing the available records relating to implementation of HSRP scheme, 
following observations came to light. 
4.12.4.1   Irregularities in tendering process 
The State Government published Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) in April 2007 for selection 
of firm in order to implement the scheme and the following five bidders responded in 
June 2007. 
Table 4.12.5 
Sl. No. Name of Company 
1 M/s  Tonnjes Eastern Security Tech Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi 
2 M/s Hind Industries Ltd., New Delhi 
3 M/s Shimnit Utsch India Pvt. Ltd. Mumbai 
4 M/s Promuk Hoffman International Ltd., Secunderabad 
5 M/s Real Mazon India Ltd., New Delhi 
 
As per records, only two bidders , viz. (i) Tonnjes EST Pvt . Ltd, New Delhi, and (ii) M/s 
Shimnit Utsch India Pvt. Ltd, conformed to bid requirements in pre -qualification bids. 
However, the statement of Association of Registration Plates Manufacturers of India  
indicated that three below mentioned companies have the same owner Shri Nitin Shah. 
i. M/s  Shimnit Utsch India Limited 
ii. M/s  Tonnjes Eastern Security Limited 
iii. M/s Real Mazon India Pvt. Limited 
Selection and participation of two companies owned by the same person (Shri Nitin Shah) 
defeated the very purpose of fairness and competitiveness in entire tendering process. 
The Department contended (October 2015) that no deviation was done as the firm was 
awarded contract only after qualifying in all the rounds of eval uation. The Department 
further added that Law did not prohibit anyone to own more than one company. However, 
the fact remained that out of five firms who participated in the bid , three companies were 
owned by one and the same person of which two firms inci dentally qualified to the final 
round. This vitiated the practice of fair competition. 
4.12.4.2 Excess charging of HSRP affixation and loss of potential Government  
revenue 
While finalising tendering process, the Department was required to assess reasonability of 
rates offered by the bidders. Audit collected information regarding rate of HSRP 
affixation in different States including North Eastern States as shown below: 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 101 
Table 4.12.6 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State 
Rate of affixing 
HSRP for  four 
wheelers (figures 
in ` excluding tax) 
Rate of affixing 
HSRP for  two 
wheelers (figures 
in ` excluding tax) 
Name of firm awarded contract  for affixing 
HSRP  
1 Himachal 
Pradesh 315 105 M/s Link Utsav Ventures  Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi 
2 Goa 1,200 650 M/s Shimnit Utsch India Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai 
3 New Delhi 280 180 M/s Rosemerta Technologies 
4 Haryana 364 140 M/s Utsav Safety System Pvt. Ltd. 
5 Mizoram 945 669 M/s  Shimnit Utsch India Ltd., Mumbai 
6 Manipur 735 597 M/s Shimnit  Utsch India Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai 
7 Nagaland 1,298 599 M/s ShimnitUtsch India Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai 
8 Arunachal 
Pradesh  1,568 660 M/s Shimnit Utsch India Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai 
9 Sikkim 1,816 735 M/s Tonnjes EST Pvt Limited 
10 Sikkim 645 326 Rate quoted by M/s Rosemerta during 2014 bid. 
 
It was seen from above that cost of HSRP affixation was exorbitantly high compared to 
other States. Even comparison among the North Eastern States showed that Sikkim was 
having highest rate for HSRP cost. Rates of HSRP varied from ` 280 to ` 1816 in case of 
four-wheelers and ` 105 to ` 735 in case of two -wheelers, the highest being in case of 
Sikkim. The rates quoted by M/s Rosemerta Technologies Ltd.  ( ` 645 for four-wheelers 
and ` 326 for two -wheelers) on subsequent tendering process during July 2014 was 
reasonable as compared to various States mentioned above. This shows that while 
finalising tendering process, the Department did not assess reasonability of rates offered 
by the bidders. Even by taking the rate of Goa, one of the highest rates amongst othe r 
eight States as above, the rate in Sikkim was higher by ` 616 and ` 85 for four-wheelers 
and two wheelers respectively. This exorbitant high rate s in cost of HSRP added 
unwarranted burden on vehicle owners by ` 2.65 crore4 during the period 2009-2015 and 
consequential gain to M/s Tonnjes EST Pvt. Ltd. 
The Department in its reply stated (October 2015) that the firm had not been charging 
excess HSRP affixation charges as it had been awarded the work after financial bid. Due 
to low vehicle population, hilly terrain, remote locality, unreliable road connectivity, cost 
of transportation, manpower, machinery, materials were expected to be higher compared 
to other States. The reply is not acceptable as the HSRP affixation rates for four -wheelers 
and two-wheelers in other hilly and far flung states like Himachal Pradesh (` 315: ` 105), 
Manipur ( ` 735: ` 597) and Mizoram ( ` 945: ` 669) were much lower than that of 
Sikkim. Thus, low vehicle population could not be justified for exorbitant rate s of HSRP 
affixation. 
4.12.4.3     Unprofitable rate of royalty 
The main purpose of publishing NIT was to maximise fairness  and competitiveness 
without compromising quality of the work. This implied that it should be ensured that 
Government revenue should be  safeguarded along w ith provision of service to general 
public at minimum cost. 
                                                           
4     Four-wheelers - 42,575 x ` 616 = ` 2,62,26,200; Two-wheelers – 3,630 x ` 85 = ` 3,08,550. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 102 
Audit observed that while tendering for implementation of HSRP dur ing 2008, t he 
Department attached the condition in the Bid documents itself vide clause 4.3.1, “the 
successful bidder shall pay on  monthly basis to the State Government, a sum equivalent 
to 5 per cent of the amount (excluding local taxes) collected on sales of HSRP from the 
vehicles owners as Royalty”. It implies that whatever be the cost of HSRP plate 
affixation, the bidder would pay only 5 per cent of it as Royalty.  Thus, instead of quoting 
the rate of royalty to be paid by the bidders on competitive basis along with the rate of 
HSRP, fixing the rate of 5 per cent  towards Government revenue defeated the idea of 
safeguarding the revenue interests of the State. Thus due to rigidity on rate of royalty, the 
Department earned a royalty of  ` 36.78 lakh5 (5 per cent) only  during the period 2009 -
15 which fared minimal compared with the total transaction of the firm amounting to 
` 8.34 crore during the same period.  
The Department stated (October 2015) that tendering was done in fair and competitive 
manner and the royalty was calculated and released as per the conditions la id down under 
the bid documents. The Department, however, did not address the issue of fixing the rate 
of royalty instead of bidding by the firms which failed to safeguard the revenue interest of 
the Government. 
4.12.4.4    Delay in submission of royalty and loss of interest 
As per Clause 16 of the agreement, the M/s Tonnjes EST Pvt. Ltd. shall pay on monthly 
basis to the State Government a sum equivalent to 5 per cent of the amount (excluding 
local taxes) collected on sales of HSRP as royalty. The royalty shall be paid directly in 
the revenue head of Transport Department on or before 10 th of the following month. Any 
delay in the payment of royalty by the firm will attract an overdue interest for every 
month of delay or part thereof. Such overdue interest will be compounded on a monthly 
basis and the applicable interest will be the Prime Len ding Rate (PLR) of State Bank of 
India prevailing at the time plus 2 per cent.  
Audit of records of the Department and corresponding deposit details at State Bank of 
Sikkim, Gangtok Branch revealed the following: 
(a) Instead of depositing royalty directly into  the revenue head, the firm forwarded 
royalty in form of cheques in name of Secretary, Motor Vehicles Department. 
(b) Out of 73 cases of deposit, there were delays in all cases ranging between 4 days 
to 736 days from the stipulated date , i.e. 10th  of the next month attracting a penal 
interest of ` 0.89 lakh for delays as detailed below: 
Table 4.12.7 
Delays in deposit No of cases Penalty (in `) 
Upto 50 days 52 27,786 
50 to 100 days 12 19,479 
101 to 500  days 8 29,131 
Above 500 days 1 12,851 
  89,247 
                                                           
5       Total cost on affixation of HSRP w.e.f. 2009-10 to 2014-15: `  8,34,18,640.  
        (Net amount: ` 7,35,60,359+Taxes: ` 98,58,281). Royalty @ 5  per cent  realised on net amount =  
` 36,78,018). 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 103 
Penal interest was not realised from the firm till the date of audit (August 2015).  
In reply, the Department stated (October 2015) that there was no delay in submission of 
royalty by the firm and loss of interest thereof due to the fact that the head office of the 
firm was located at New Delhi and there was no RTGS facility to deposit the Government 
revenue. The head office of the firm forwarded the royalty in the form of cheque in 
favour of Secretary, Transport Department through time taking postal services. The 
cheques were subsequently required to be deposited into Government Account th rough 
challans by the Department.  
The contention of the Department is not acceptable as the head office of the firm could 
easily transfer royalty money electronically, without any time lag, to its branch office in 
Sikkim. Further, as per clause 16(a) of t he agreement, the monthly royalty could be paid 
by the branch office of the firm directly in the revenue head of the Department within 10 th 
day of every next month. Moreover, it was not the responsibility of the Department to 
deposit the royalty money into the Government Account. 
4.12.4.5     Liquidated damage not recovered  
As per the agreement entered with the firm  on 2 April 2008, the contract was for a period 
of five years from the date of commencement of the scheme  which would be 90 (ninety) 
days from the date of signing of the contract agreement. As per clause 27 of the 
agreement, for timely fixation of HSRP on the newly registered vehicles in the State, the 
contractor was required to install necessary infrastructure at all location of Registering 
Authorities in the State within 90 days from the date of signing of the agreement. Further, 
the agreement also stipulated that if necessary infrastructure 6 were not installed or made 
operational at any of the locations of registering authorities in the State o n stipulated time 
as referred above, it would be considered as delay in commencement of contract and 
would result in recovery of liquidated damage at the rate of ` 0.25 lakh for each day of 
delay subject to maximum of ` 25 lakh without prejudice to other r emedies under the 
contract. 
Audit scrutiny revealed the following: 
 The firm started the work with effect from March 2009 at Gangtok, East District 
after delay of eight months.  
 The firm established office and necessary infrastructure at one of the four 
locations of Registering Authorities at East District (Gangtok) only. In the 
remaining RTO Offices, the firm only deployed a person for collecting cost and 
fixation of HSRP supplied from Gangtok Centre.  
This showed violation of agreement as t he Department no t only failed to ensure 
compliance with terms and conditions but also failed to initiate action for recovery of 
liquidated damage of ` 25 lakh for delayed implementation of the scheme. 
                                                           
6      Equipment: 1) Embossing Machine; 2) Hot Stamping Machine; 3) Third Registration plate printer. 
        Personnel: 1) Embossing Station In -charge; 2) Embossing Technician; 3) Information Technology; 
4) Network In-charge; 5) Fitment Engineer. 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 104 
The Department stated (October 2015) that necessary infrastructure were  installed in 
other districts too and there was no delay in implementation of scheme. However, the fact 
remained that necessary infrastructure were not installed in the remaining three RTO 
Offices (except RTO East Office at Gangtok) as  of November 2015 whi ch attracted 
recovery of liquidated damage as per the provision. 
4.12.4.6    Delayed tendering and undue extension  
Existing agreement for implementation of HSRP expired on 1 February 2014.  The 
Department, however, extended the contract of M/s Tonnjes EST Pvt. Ltd. (subsequently 
renamed as M/s Test Security License Plates Pvt. Ltd.) till 31 August 2014 on the same 
terms and conditions as per earlier contract and at the same price. The  Department floated 
fresh tender for the implementation of HSRP on 20 June  2014 after delay of four months 
vide e-tendering against which only one bid was received from a Delhi based firm M/s 
Rosemerta Technologies Ltd. (RTL), New Delhi.  Due to single bidder, Tender Selection 
Committee decided for retendering. Retendering was d one on 25 July 2014 through e -
tendering as well as publishing of NIT in Economic Times, New Delhi and Kolkata 
editions and local newspaper - Sikkim Herald. Again the same firm M/s Rosemerta 
Technologies Ltd. was the only bidder.  The Tender Selection Commit tee decided to go 
ahead and opened (12 August 2014) the bid documents. The firm quoted the following 
rates: 
Table 4.12.8 
Sl.No. Vehicle category Rate quoted per pair Remarks  
1 Four-wheeler ` 644.62 Local cess (1 per cent) extra on base price 
2 Two-wheeler ` 326.24 Local cess (1 per cent) extra on base price 
 
The Department meanwhile received (August 2014) alleged information that M/s 
Rosemerta Technologies  Ltd. was member of a consortium  which violated certain 
conditions of contract while  implementing affixation of HSRP in Delhi and was issued 
show cause notice by the Delhi Government for supplying HSRP plate from a factory 
which did not possess Conformity of Pro duction (COP) certificate. T he Department kept 
the tendering process in abeyan ce and did not seek any  clarification from M/s Rosemerta 
Technologies Ltd. In April 2015, the Department unilaterally sent letter of non -
acceptance of the contract to M/s Rosemerta Technologies Ltd. The contract was further 
extended with effect from September 2014 to 31 March 2016 at reduced rates  (as 
compared to the earlier rates at which M/s Tonnjes EST Pvt. Ltd. was operating)  as given 
in the following table: 
Table 4.12.9 
Sl. No. Vehicle category Rate Remarks 
1 Four-wheeler ` 1,458 Local taxes extra  
2 Two-wheeler    ` 599 Local taxes extra  
 
Thus, it was obvious from above that the Department failed to initiate timely action for 
retendering. The tendering process was kept in abeyance for inordinately long period of 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 105 
nine months 7 based on alleged information without documentary proof for which  
clarification from the bidder was not sought. On the other hand, HSRP services continued 
from the existing firm on ad-hoc basis by extending the contract in a piecemeal manner.  
Further, it  was observed that the existing firm M/s Tonnjes EST Pvt. Ltd. did not 
participate in fresh tender but continued to get extension . Thus, due to delayed tendering 
and keeping the tender process in abeyance without seeking clarification from bidder, the 
Department was forced to extend  the contract to the existing firm without the bidding 
process and deprived the vehicle owners from getting services on competitive rates. 
The Department replied (October 2015) that delay occurred due to enforcemen t of model 
code of conduct for Assembly E lection in Sikkim. Further, due to receipt of report of 
enquiry committee set up by Delhi Government for alleged involvement of the bidder 
firm which was also  under litigation in Supreme Court, the Department, after seeking 
legal advice from Learned Advocate General, kept the tendering process in abeyance and 
later issued non -acceptance letter  of the contract  to the firm. The Department further 
stated that under the above conditions, it had to grant the extension to the existing firm for 
continuation of the services. The reply of the Department is , however, not acceptable as 
the old contract  came to end on 2 February 2014 and  the Department could have 
commenced the tendering process much ahead of expiry of the old contract and 
completed the tendering process before the enforcement of the model code of conduct  
(5 March 2014). During the intervening period, the Department did not initiate the 
tendering process. Further, the Department failed to obtain the clarification from the 
bidder and issued non-acceptance letter unilaterally. 
 
4.12.5    Smoke Emission Testing 
 
Under Rule 115(7) of the CMV Rules  1989, every vehicle shall carry a valid Pollution 
Under Control (PUC) certificate after expiry of one year from the date of first 
registration. The PUC is valid for a period of six months for vehicles which are already 
on road. The Transport Department ou tsourced different agencies to run and operate the 
“Auto Emission Testing Centres” (AETCs) for an initial period ranging from three to five 
years by signing agreements with concerned agencies. Details are as under: 
Table 4.12.10 
Year Places Firms Period of agreement 
2001 Gangtok and Jorethang M/s SiMTEI Ranging from three years to five years 
2011 Mobile Vehicular Testing Unit M/s Navigator Three years w.e.f. April 2011 
2014 Rangpo, Geyzing, Mangan, Namchi M/s SiMTEI Five years w.e.f. October 2014 
2014 Ranipool Ms. Cheoki Lhamu Bhutia Five years w.e.f. October 2014 
 
Audit of records relating to outsourcing revealed the following: 
4.12.5.1    Award of work without competitive bidding  
It was observed that license was granted (October 2001) to a private firm - M/s Sikkim 
Motor Training and Engineering Institute (SiMTEI), Gangtok to run the AETCs at 
                                                           
7     NIT published initially - 20.06.2014; NIT republished - 27.07.2014; Opening of bid - 12.08.2014; letter 
of non-acceptance sent -  April 2015. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 106 
Gangtok and Jorethang without competitive bidding.  For the services rendered, the firm 
collected fees at prescribed rate of ` 80 per certificate from two/three wheelers and ` 100 
per certificate from four wheelers.  
The deed of agreement was signed with the Government on 28 September 2001 to be 
effective from 15 October 2001 for the initial period of five years and subsequently 
renewed (three occasions in between October 2006 to October 2012) to run the AETCs at 
Gangtok and Jorethang, valid till October 2017. Initially annual revenue inflow from 
outsourcing was fixed at ` 0.90 lakh which was subsequent ly revised thrice to ` 1.80 
lakh, ` 2.30 lakh and ` 2.53 lakh. 
In reply, the Department stated (October 2015) that during the year 2000 -01, the 
implementation of AETC was at very initial stage in the State. In order to run the AETCs 
required technical expertise and during that period, no other firms were readily available. 
Since the Department had to implement the same immediately, it had no option but to 
grant permission to M/s SiMTEI to run the AETCs at Gangtok and Jorethang. Moreover, 
the proprietor of t he firm, an unemployed educated local youth of Sikkim, was given 
opportunity under the employment generation policy in line with the Government. 
The reply of the Department was not tenable considering the fact that during the entire 
period of 14 years from 2000-01 to 2014-15, the Department had never opted for floating 
the tenders to safeguard revenue interest of the Government. Instead, it continued to 
renew the agreement with the firm ranging from three to five years as per request of the 
firm while there were number of parties including M/s Sikkim Motors, Tadong interested 
in opening the AETCs in the State during this intervening period.  
4.12.5.2   Agreement not safeguarding Government interest 
Audit scrutiny of agreement signed with the firm and subsequ ent renewal of contract 
agreements noticed that though the annual revenue to be paid by the firm was increased 
thrice from ` 0.90 lakh to ` 2.53 lakh over the period of 11 years (2001 -02 to 2011 -12), 
the Department failed to link the annual revenue with in crease in number of vehicles over 
the years, i.e. 43,052 in 2009 -10 to 68,162 in 2014 -15 while fixing the annual revenue to 
be paid by the firm. Failure to establish the linkage between annual  revenue inflow to 
increasing vehicles compromised revenue interests of the State. Besides, conditions like 
performance security/security deposit, penalty/interest clause in case of delay or failure 
on the part of the firm for non -payment/delay in payment of Government re venue, etc. 
were lacking in the agreement. Similar lacunae in agreement were also noticed with the 
other outsourcing agencies (M/s Navigator and Ms. C.L. Bhutia) for running the Mobile 
Vehicular Testing Unit and AETC. Further, long contract period and rene wal of 
agreement ranging from three to five years also debarred the Department from chances of 
enhancement of Government revenue each year.    
4.12.5.3   Loss of Government revenue 
With a view to facilitating easy access to the vehicle owners for auto emis sion test, the 
Department awarded (April 2011) work of operating Mobile Vehicular Test Unit 
(MVTU) to M/s Navigator for a period of three years. The firm was to run MVTU on 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 107 
rotation basis at interval of every 15 days in each location at capital, districts,  sub-
divisions and major vehicular junction s of the State and issue a PUC certificate  after test. 
For the services rendered, the firm collected the fees from the vehicle owner @ ` 100 per 
certificate for all types of light, medium and heavy motor vehicle a nd ` 80 from all types 
of two wheelers. 
As per clause 21 of agr eement, the firm shall deposit G overnment revenue on quarterly 
basis @ 33 per cent of ` 80 for each two wheelers tested and @ 27 per cent of ` 100 for 
each Light Motor Vehicle (LMV)/Medium Motor Vehicle (MMV)/Heavy Motor Vehicle 
(HMV) tested. The firm operated MVTU till 20 July 2013, however, neither the firm 
deposited revenue valuing ` 0.59 lakh 8 nor was the Department in a position to recover 
the same due to absence of any security deposit/performance guarantee. The Department 
terminated the contract with the firm with effect from 21 July 2013 due to breach of 
clause of agreement. Legal notice to the firm to deposit the revenue had been issued, 
however, the revenue had not been deposited by the firm (September 2015).  
While accepting the audit observation, the Department stated (October 2015) that the 
contract agreement had been terminated and legal notice sent to the firm to deposit the 
Government revenue immediately. Since the firm had not responded, the Department 
proposes to forward the matter to the Arbitrator and outcome of the same would be 
intimated to the Audit. As of November 2015, no further development had taken place. 
4.12.5.4   Low fixation of revenue 
The firm, i.e. M/s SiMTEI had been collecting ` 80 for two wheelers and ` 100 for four 
wheelers for conducting emission test and issue PUC certificates thereof from all vehicle 
owners. In lieu of contract granted to the firm, the Departm ent set the yearly revenue to 
be deposited into Government account by the firm for two AETCs at Gangtok and 
Jorethang @ ` 2.30 lakh per year  which was enhanced to ` 2.53 lakh per year from 
October 2012. Basis for setting up of this target of annual revenue  to be deposited by the 
firm was not available with the Department.  
Considering the number of registered vehicles in the State (47,612 in 2010 -11 and 68,162 
in 2014 -15) and validity of PUC certificate, yearly revenue target fixed by the 
Department was far below than the earnings of the firm as analysed below: 
Table 4.12.11 
Year Number of registered vehicles under      
P, G, T and E series in the State 
Total earning taking the rate of 
` 80 per test per vehicle  
(required to undergo 2 tests  per year) (in `) 
2010-11 25,071 ` 40,11,360 
2011-12 28,120 ` 44,99,200 
2012-13 34,079 ` 54,52,640 
2013-14 37,073 ` 59,31,680 
2014-15 39,396 ` 63,03,360 
TOTAL ` 2,61,98,240 
 
 
                                                           
8     PUC certificates issued by the firm, i.e. 2,169 nos. x ` 100 = ` 2,16,900 x 27% = ` 58,563. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 108 
 
From the table above, yearly earning ranged from ` 40.11 lakh to ` 63.03 lakh 
aggregating ` 2.62 crore taking the total registered vehicles under P (Private), G 
(Government), T (Local taxi) and E (Tractor and Trailors) series as these vehicles mostly 
ply within the State and hence, there were remote chances that these series of vehicles 
undergo emission test outside the State. Thus, considering the formulae adopted for 
fixation of offset price 9 by the Department while awarding contract for running the 
AETCs for other places , viz. Rangpo, Namchi, G yalshing and Mangan to the same firm 
(M/s SiMTEI) in October 2014, total potential Government revenue worked out to ` 1.23 
crore10. Thus, failure of the Department to link assessment of revenue with number of 
vehicles led to potential loss of revenue amounting to ` 1.11 crore (` 1.23 crore - ` 12.19 
lakh11) during the period from 2010-11 to 2014-15. 
The Department stated (October 2015) that all vehicles registered in Sikkim need not 
carry out smoke test in the State only. The vehicle owners have option to undergo smo ke 
test as per their convenience and MVD could not mandate vehicle owners to carry out 
smoke testing only in Sikkim. Hence, comparison with the increase of vehicles to revenue 
of smoke testing was not relevant. As such, there was no loss of revenue as the AETCs 
were established to facilitate vehicle owners/drivers for auto emission test.  
Reply of the Department is not tenable as earning of the firm on account of issue of PUC 
certificates have been calculated taking only the total number of registered vehic les under 
P, G, T and E series which have the possibility to ply within the State only.  
4.12.5.5 Delay in selection of outsourced agencies and operationalisation of AETCs 
led to loss of revenue 
Audit observed that while the contract for running AETCs at D eorali and Jorethang was 
in operation (till October 2017) with M/s SiMTEI, Department invited ‘Expression of 
Interest’ (EOI) from interested parties for running of AETCs at six places , i.e. Ranipool, 
Rangpo, Gyalshing, Mangan, Namchi and Soreng. In respons e to EOI only two agencies 
submitted their willingness to operate the centres in the following five places as detailed 
below: 
Table 4.12.12 
Sl.No. Individual/Firm Places 
1 Ms. Lendup Cheoki Bhutia Ranipool 
2 M/s SiMTEI Rangpo, Gyalshing, Mangan, Namchi 
 
On receipt of EOI from the parties, the Technical Committee worked out the offset price 
for five years on the basis of estimated ve hicles in the concerned places  with yearly 
addition of vehicles at 10 per cent as under: 
 
                                                           
9    Minimum revenue fixed by Department to be deposited by successful bidder after conclusion of 
agreement. 
10     Net earnings =` 2,61,98,240 (total earnings) - ` 15,34,512 (recurring and non -recurring expenditure 
for five years) Offset price = ` 2,46,63,728x50 per cent of total earning = ` 1,23,31,864.  
11     Total revenue paid by the firm for 2010 -11 to 2014-15 (2010-11 and 2011-12 @ ` 2.30 lakh per year 
and 2012-13 to 2014-15 @ ` 2.53 lakh per year). 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 109 
Table 4.12.13 
Sl. No. Place Present estimated number of vehicle Offset price for 5 years 
1 Rangpo 3,000 ` 10.65 lakh 
2 Ranipool 2,000 ` 4.55 lakh 
3 Gyalshing 2,000 ` 4.55 lakh  
4 Namchi 2,500 ` 7.60 lakh  
5 Mangan 1,500 ` 1.50 lakh  
  11,000 ` 28.85 lakh 
 
Despite Singtam being one of the important place with large vehicular traffic , i.e. entry 
point for vehicles for all other districts (South, West and North) and availability of 
interested parties, the Department had not included Singtam while inviting EOI. Reason 
for non-inclusion of Singtam was not available in records.  
The offset price worked out by the Committee was approved by the Government. While 
both parties agreed the terms and conditions for operation of AETCs in March 2014, M/s 
SiMTEI requested one month time to start AET Cs. The matter remained pending due to 
announcement of model code of conduct for Assembly and Parliamentary Election in 
April-May 2014. Finally, deed of agreement with the agencies was signed on 2 August 
2014 which was effective from 1 October 2014 for fiv e years, i.e. till 30 September 2019. 
Though AETCs were to be operationalised on 01 October 2014 as per clause 5 of the 
agreement, none of AETCs  were operationalised till 31 March 2015. It was seen that the 
Department had not safeguarded the Government rev enue by incorporating the interest 
and penalty clause in the agreement in case of delay in commencement of operation , etc. 
by the outsourced firm s. Thus, there was a loss of Government revenue of ` 2.13 lakh12 
due to delay in commencement of AETCs by the agencies beyond the agreement date. 
Further, it was observed that M/s SiMTEI expressed its unwillingness to operationalise 
the AETC at Namchi as the volume of vehicles in Namchi was below the projected 
number. This was clear violation of terms of the agreement by the firm but no action was 
taken by the Department against the firm. This resulted into loss of revenue amounting to 
` 7.60 lakh to the Government. In such event, earnest money deposit of the bidder sho uld 
have been forfeited. However, in absence of suitable clause for forfeiture of earnest 
money deposit, in case of default, the Department was not in a position to forfeit the same 
resulting in loss of revenue. 
In reply, the Department stated (October 2015) that delay in operation of AETCs was due 
to requirement of specific machines which would be installed only after conclusion of 
agreement to avoid any eventual loss to the firm in the event of cancellation of agreement. 
Reply of the Department was not acceptable as the offer of acceptance for the work along 
with terms and conditions issued in March 2014  and agreed by both the firms in March 
2014 itself were not abided till March 2015.  
4.12.5.6    Short deposit and delay in deposit of Government revenue 
As per agreement signed, M/s SiMTEI was required to submit Government revenue @ 
` 2.30 lakh per year w.e.f October 2009 to October 2012 and ` 2.53 lakh with effect from 
                                                           
12      Offset price for four AETCs (Rangpo, Ranipool, Gyalshing and Mangan) for five years = ` 21.25 lakh. 
Thus, revenue to be paid for 6 months’ delay = ` 35,417 x 6 = ` 2,12,502. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 110 
October 2012 to October 2017 in quarterly instalments. Scrutiny of Challans in support o f 
payments of yearly revenue during the period from 2010 -11 to 2014 -15 revealed that 
there was short deposit of ` 0.50 lakh by M/s  SiMTEI. Further, the firm was required to 
deposit the revenue in quarterly instalments as per the terms and conditions of the  
agreement, the firm deposited the revenue in number of instalments ranging from 13 to 26 
instalments in a year. Thus not only there was short deposit of Government revenue but 
payment in instalments also caused delay in deposit of revenue. The Department had not 
taken any action against the firm in violating the clause of agreement. 
The Department while accepting the observation stated (October 2015) that the firm had 
been directed to deposit the fixed revenue towards operation of AETCs on quarterly 
instalments as per agreement.  
4.12.5.7    Records not maintained as per Agreement 
As per clause 10 and 20 of the agreement , the outsourcing agencies were required to 
maintain certain records and furnish reports to the Department containing date of testing, 
registration number of vehicle and smoke density level after check. Further, as per clause 
20 of the agreement, the firm was required to maintain a “Register of Vehicle Tested” in 
the proforma given below: 
 
Registration 
No. of vehicle 
Class of 
vehicle 
Date and time 
reported for testing 
Testing 
Report 
Serial 
Number of 
Certificate 
Fees  
realised 
Other 
particulars, 
if any 
       
 
However, no such records  were maintained and furnished by the firm during the period 
covered under audit. The Department also failed to ensure compliance to the above 
provisions. 
The Department stated (October 2015) that the firm was adhering to all the terms and 
conditions of the agreement. Registers were being maintained by the firm which would be 
produced to Audit. The contention of the Department is not acceptable as the Department 
failed to produce the monthly reports furnished by the firm (November 2015). 
4.12.5.8   Vehicles plying without PUC certificates 
As per information furnished by the firm, the year -wise total number of vehi cles required 
to undergo auto emission test and the number of PUC certificates issued by M/s SiMTEI 
during the period covered under audit from two AETCs (Gangtok and Jorethang) showed 
huge discrepancy as compared to total registered vehicles available in the State as under: 
Table 4.12.14 
Year As on 
31.03.2011 
As on 
31.03.2012 
As on 
31.03.2013 
As on 
31.03.2014 
As on 
31.03.2015 
No. of total registered vehicles 47,612 51,881 60,848 64,574 68,162 
PUC to be issued as above (twice in a year) 95,224 1,03,762 1,21,696 1,29,148 1,36,324 
PUC certificate issued by firm 9,008 9,084 8,619 9,692 9,846 
Vehicles running without PUC (percentage in 
brackets) 
43,108 
(91) 
47,339 
(91) 
56,539 
(93) 
59,728 
(92) 
63,239 
(93) 
Percentage of vehicles whose emission was 
tested  9 9 7 8 7 
 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 111 
It is clear from the above table that if figures of PUC certificates issued by the firm during 
the period is taken into account, percentage of vehicles possessing PUC certificate ranged 
from 7 per cent to 9 per cent only during the period 2011 to 2015, thereby leading to the 
conclusion that 90 per cent or more number of registered vehicles were plying in the State 
without PUC certificates against the prescribed provision of CMV Act/Rules and SMVR, 
1971 causing environment pollution and health hazard to the general public.  
Even on subtracting vehicles registered in various other series J (Jeep), B (Buses), D 
(Goods Vehicles) and Z (Luxury Tourist Taxi) which may undergo emission test and 
obtain PUC certificates from outside the State as they run inter-State for transportation 
services of goods and passengers, the number of PUC certificates issued by the firm 
(9008 to 9846) during the period 2011 -15 was far less than the total registered vehicles 
(25,071 to 39,396) during the same period in the ser ies P (Private Four -wheelers); G 
(Government vehicles); T (Local taxi) and E (Tractors and trailers) which ply within the 
State only and chances of availing auto emission services outside the State by these 
vehicles was remote. 
Further, the firm did not ma intain records of vehicles detected for emission of excessive 
smoke and reported for re -test. Thus, in absence of such records, number of vehicles 
running without re -test for issue of fresh PUC certificate and polluting the environment 
was not available with the firm. The firm failed to produce relevant records requisitioned 
through Transport Department (Motor Vehicles Division) to enable Audit to verify the 
factual position submitted by the firm. 
4.12.5.9  Auto Emission Test and issue of PUC certificate ag ainst the provision  of 
Act/Rules  
Rule 115(7) of the CMV Rules, 1989 requires that every motor vehicle on expiry of one 
year from the date of initial registration should obtain a PUC certificate which shall be 
valid for six months.  
However, audit scrutiny  revealed that while notifying the SMV Rules, 1991 the 
Department prescribed the validity of PUC certificates for a period of one year for vehicle 
registered for first time vide Rule 170 (3) of Rules, 1991 ibid against the requirement of 
obtaining PUC certificates on expiry of one year from the date of initial registration as per 
CMVR 1989. Similarly, while entering into agreement with the firm the Department 
incorporated validity of PUC certificates vide clause 13(b) of the agreement that the 
certificates issued by the firm shall be valid for a period of six months from the date of 
test. For the new vehicle registered from the registering authority, the validity of the 
certificate initially shall be for a period of one year or 12 months from the date of 
registration. 
The firm was issuing PUC certificates valid for six months only for the vehicles already 
on the road as well as for new vehicle s. Thus, incorporation of faulty clause in the SMV 
Rules and agreement resulted not only in unauthorised action by the Department as per 
the provision of CMV Rules, but also resulted in extra financial burden on the new 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 112 
vehicle owners amounting to ` 18.35 lakh13. This also led to undue benefit to the firm to 
that extent during the period from April 2010 to March 2015.  
While accepting the Audit observation, the Department stated (October 2015) that 
inadvertent mistake in agreement would be rectified. The Department, however, 
contended that there was no extra financial burden to vehicle owners. Reply of the 
Department is not acceptable as the agreement compelled the new vehicles to obtain PUC 
certificate right from the date of its registration with the validity period of six months 
only instead of expiry of one year from the initial registration. 
4.12.5.10    Absence of periodical checking of AETCs 
As per clause 18 of the agreement, AETCs established by the firm should be inspected 
occasionally by the Department or his authorised representative. The firm shall be 
required to produce all registers, papers , etc. on demand and all ow examination of the 
activities of centre as well as the efficiency of the equipment for proper and reliable result 
of auto emission test and certificate thereof by the firm. However, no such periodical 
checking was conducted by the Department during the period under audit.   
The Department stated (October 2015) that the Enforcement wing of MVD was 
conducting/inspecting the AETCs, however, due to insufficient technical manpower, the 
Department was unable to inspect AETCs in frequent intervals. Reply of the Department 
was not ac ceptable as no records with regard to inspection of AETCs conducted by the 
Department during the period covered under audit was available with the Department.  
4.12.5.11   Lease rent of Government premises not revised 
Government premises at Jorethang and D eorali were leased out to M/s SiMTEI for 
running auto emission test centres at lease rent of ` 193 and ` 530 per month respectively 
based on assessment given by the Building and Housing Department in April 2002. 
Whereas Shri M.L. Sharma was provided space for sale of forms at SNT complex, 
Gangtok, no records could be provided to Audit with regard to rate of rent and 
commencement of occupancy. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that lease rent of Jorethang and Deorali were not 
revised since 2002 despite revision o f rates by the Government from time to time with 
regard to hiring of private buildings by the Government and latest rate was revised in 
December 2011 @ ` 1,100/sft from ` 300/sft. In case of Jorethang, the amount of lease 
rent short realised was ` 0.39 lakh.  
While accepting the audit observation, t he Department stated (October 2015)  that it 
would pursue the matter of  revision of re nt of leased Government premises  at Gangtok 
and Jorethang with the Building and Housing Department and outcome of the sa me 
would be intimated to Audit. 
 
                                                           
13     Total new registration with effect from April 2010 to March 2015 = 25,110 -2,169 (PUCs issued by 
M/s Navigator) = 22,941. Taking lower rate of ` 80 for all the vehicles, the fee for PUC certificates to 
be paid for 22,941 vehicles= 22,941x80=` 18,35,280.  

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 113 
4.12.6    Sale of Forms 
 
Forms of application for various services have been prescribed in the CMV Act, 1988, 
CMV Rules, 1989and SMVR, 1991. These forms are required for applying services , viz. 
registration of vehicles, applicatio n for driving license, change of ownership of vehicle, 
obtaining the permit, hypothecation of vehicle, etc. The Department outsourced (March 
1990) printing and sale of forms to Shri M.L. Sharma. The initial cost of form was fixed 
at ` 1 per form, out of which ` 0.25 was to be deposited by the agent into Government 
account: 0041 Taxes on Motor Vehicle as royalty. The rate has been revised from time to 
time with the increase in the printing cost of forms. Till date of audit, rate of vario us 
forms had been prescribed at  ` 8 per form out of which ` 3 was required to be deposited 
into Government account as royalty. 
Audit scrutiny of records revealed the following shortcomings: 
 The Ministry of Surface Transport, Government of India vide letter  dated 11 May 
1999 directed the State Government/Department to provide forms to the public 
free of cost. Despite instruction from the Ministry, the Department continued to 
sell various forms to the public through its agent on payment basis resulting in 
extra financial burden of  ` 39.57 lakh14 to the vehicle owners during the period 
2008-09 to 2014-15.  
The Department stated (October 2015) that although the letter was received from 
the Ministry, however, there was no specific instruction in the MV Act/Rules f or 
providing forms to public free of cost. The Department had awarded the work to 
agent ( Shri M.L. Sharma) due  to lack of budgetary provision and  further, the 
general public had the option either to download the forms from the website or to 
purchase the forms. Reply of the Department is not acceptable as the Department 
had not taken any action  in the last 25 years for  providing the services to the 
general public at minimum cost with competitive bidding. Further, the Registering 
authorities accepted the form s sold by agent countersigned by designated 
officer/official of the Department and did not accept the downloaded or 
photocopied forms.  
 The agent had not obtained the approval for printing of forms from the 
Department and did not  furnish quarterly report also indicating sale and stock 
position to the Department as specified in the work order which led to non -
compliance of terms and conditions of work order. 
The Department stated (October 2015) that all forms were printed with its prior 
concurrence and annual reconciliation was being done. The agent was adhering to 
all the terms and conditions of the work order. The reply is not acceptable as the 
Department failed to produce the relevant records during audit despite written 
requisition and could not furnish  any documentary evidence  also to substantiate 
the reply. 
                                                           
14      Total form sold = 4,94,619 numbers @ ` 8 per form. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 114 
4.12.7    Conclusion 
 
The State Government had outsourced three activities , viz. implementation of HSRP, 
Smoke emission testing and Sale of various forms for availing services under MV Act and 
Rules. Though the Department successfully implemented the HSRP scheme in the State, 
however, implementation process lacked efficiency and effectiveness. The data on 
vehicles’ population was not reliable as there was marked difference in the report 
furnished by the Department based on its computerised system with that shown in its own 
Annual Reports. The Department failed to assess the reason ability of rates while 
awarding the contract to the successful bidder for affixing HSRP resulting in higher cost 
of HSRP affixation in the State as compared to other States. The Department did not float 
NIT well in time to protect the revenue interest of t he State and could not avail 
competitive rates for subsequent term and instead kept on renewing the contract to the 
existing firm for a period exceeding a year.  
Two Auto Emission Testing Centres were being operated in the State by one firm at an 
annual royalty of ` 0.90 lakh which was increased to ` 2.53 lakh as of March 2015. The 
contract with the existing firm continued to be renewed periodically despite submission of 
offers from other interested firms for operating the centres. This indicated absence of  
transparency and competitive bidding in selection process resulting in failure to 
safeguard the revenue interest of the State.  Revenue sharing model was defective as it did 
not ensure linkage between the increasing number of vehicles and revenue to be 
deposited to the Government by the firm.  Due to incorporation of defective clause in the 
contract agreement as well as in SMV Rules requiring the owners to undertake pollution 
control check every six months right from the date of registration even for new vehicles as 
against the pr ovision of CMV Rules requiring pollution check only after expiry of 12 
months from date of initial registration resulted into extra financial burden on vehicle 
owners. Only 7 to 9 per cent of registered vehicles in the State had ob tained Pollution 
Under Control (PUC) certificates which indicated weakness of enforcement mechanism 
creating the possibility of increasing vehicular pollution in the State.  
The services relating to sale of forms for availing various services under Motor Vehicles 
was outsourced to one agent since 1990 -91 against the instruction of the Ministry of 
Surface Transport, GOI for issue of forms free of cost resulting in extra financial burden 
to the vehicle owners. 
 
4.12.8    Recommendations 
 
The Transport Department may consider implementing the following recommendations: 
 Suitable action may be taken to provide HSRP to public at competitive rate s as 
prevailing in other States.  Timely action to ensure response to tender should be 
taken. 
 Suitable action may be taken to link royalty from operation of AETC to number of 
registered vehicles. 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 115 
 Action may be taken to provide various forms free of cost for availing different 
services. 
 Adherence to the provision s of CMV Act/Rules and SMV Rules for issua nce of 
PUC certificates should be ensured.  
 Steps like tendering for selection of outsourced agents through competitive 
bidding, adherence to the terms and conditions of the agreements may be taken to 
safeguard Government and public interest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.13  Deficiencies in the Input Tax Credit system 
 
Value Added Tax (VAT) is a multi -point tax payable by manufacturer, processor, 
wholesaler and retailer on the value added at each point of sale with provision for credit 
of tax paid during purchase and also at each point of purchase of such goods at rates 
mentioned in Notification and Circulars issued under Sikkim Value Added Tax Act 2005 
(SVAT Act) and Sikkim Value Added Tax  Rules 2005 (SVAT Rules 2005). The tax 
payable by a dealer under the Act on sale is called Output tax while the tax paid by the 
dealer on purchases is called Input Tax. To avoid cascading effect of multiple taxations, a 
dealer is liable to pay the net tax through the process of setting off Input Tax Credit (ITC) 
from the Output tax. The net tax payable by the dealer shall thus be the difference between 
the output tax and the input tax. 
The SVAT Act and SVAT Rules provide that ITC can be claimed only on sale of  goods 
purchased from another registered dealer of the State and the dealer claiming ITC should 
not be a Compounded Tax payer15.  
The online taxation system, including ITC within its ambit, named Sikkim electronic 
Vanijiyakar Administration (SeVA) was intro duced in Sikkim in 2012-13. Accordingly, 
the entire process of taxation, right from registration of dealers to payment of taxes, has 
gone online since April 2012 under SeVA. In this online system, there are various modules 
for each of the components of VAT  system such as registration, generation of way bill s, 
filling of returns, ITC sales and purchases, etc. In Sikkim, unlike in other states, ITC claim 
of the retailer is initiated by the selling dealer (wholesaler) by uploading his sales details to 
registered dealer (retailer) and the buying dealer or retailer has got scope to either approve 
or reject it. When the buying dealer approves  the claim, he gets ITC claim, which gets 
auto-filled in his return without the scope for any change in the figure of ITC cl aim. The 
sales uploaded by a particular wholesaler for ITC claims when approved by various 
retailers would remain in the system as ‘ITC Sales’ of that wholesaler and ITC sales as 
approved by a particular retailer (buying dealer) would remain in the system as ‘ITC 
Purchases’ of that buying dealer. 
                                                           
15     The dealer whose annual tax turnover exceeds ` 3 lakh but does not exceed ` 15 lakh. 
 
FINANCE, REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE DEPARTMENT 
(COMMERCIAL TAXES DIVISION) 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 116 
During the period from April 2012 to March 2014, an aggregated amount of ` 16.36 crore 
was claimed as ITC as detailed below: 
Table 4.13.1 
Year Amount of ITC claimed Number of dealers who claimed ITC 
2012-13 ` 4.85 crore 407 
2013-14 ` 11.51 crore 582 
TOTAL ` 16.36 crore 989 
 
In Sikkim,  under the system as adopted by the Commercial Taxes Division (CTD) the 
system provides for an inherent control to prevent irregular ITC claims and role of the 
assessing authorities is limited to scrutiny of the returns and cross -verification of data 
related to returns data with ITC sales and purchases. However, scrutiny of relevant records 
and online data revealed the following inconsistencies in complying with the mandates of 
the pertinent Act and Rules: 
4.13.1 ITC system not in compliance to provision  
As per Section 21(1) of SVAT Act 2005, ITC shall be claimed by a reg istered dealer only 
on sale of goods that are locally purchased from another registered dealer. In the system as 
adopted by the CTD, once the wholesaler uploads sale and the retailer approves it, the 
retailer gets ITC regardless of whether those goods are sold or not. 
Moreover, the system was also not designed to upload and check details of ITC sales to 
ensure the actual sales as required under Section 21(6) of SVAT Act 2005 which states 
that 'No dealer shall claim input tax credit in respect of inputs purchased, unless he is in 
possession of an original copy of tax invoice, signed and issued by the selling registered 
dealer containing the prescribed particulars of sale'.  
The provisions of the Act were not taken care of in the system adopted by the CTD. 
In reply, the Division stated (October 2015) that a dealer becomes eligible to claim ITC by 
his act of purchase of goods and the period in which he can avail the claim is the tax 
period in which the goods were purchased. The Division further contended that it was no t 
necessary for the buying dealer to sell the goods for being eligible to claim the credit of 
input tax. The reply is not tenable as Section 21(1) of the SVAT clearly stipulates that an 
input tax credit as provided in this section shall be claimed by a reg istered dealer after 
complying with the conditions and restrictions prescribed for sale of goods in the 
circumstances specified under the sub -sections (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of Section 21(1). 
Hence, actual sale of goods as per the Act is one of the criteria for claiming credit of input 
tax. 
4.13.2 ITC Sales or Purchases module not linked with Returns module 
ITC Sales:   The ITC sales uploaded by the wholesaler were not linked with declaration of 
‘Sale to registered dealer’ filed by that dealer in the re turns, due to which there were risks 
of (i) giving ITC claim to the retailer but not showing it as ‘sale to registered dealer’ in the 
return; and (ii) n on-uploading of ITC sales by the wholesalers which can result in double 
taxation or over burdening the consumer. Audit cross verified the ITC Sales and quarterly 
returns of eight wholesalers as detailed in Appendix 4.13.1 and found that in all the cases, 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 117 
there were differences in the figures between ITC claims and ‘sales to registered dealer’ 
declared in the returns. The difference was as high as ` 24.80 crore in case of Indian Oil 
Corporation, which meant that the retailers could not claim credit of Input Tax. Although 
tax was paid by the retailer while purchasing the goods, adjustment of the input tax paid 
was not made when the same goods were sold to the consumer resulting into possibility of 
double taxation with the consequence of ultimately getting it s hifted to the consumers. 
Again, in case of four wholesalers 16, ITC claims were more than the sales declared in 
returns indicating that ITC credit was allowed but the tax was not actually reali sed from 
the retailers, as the same was not reflected in their quarterly returns. 
In reply the CTD stated (October 2015) that ITC module was not directly linked with the 
return module to provide scope for availing ITC for retrospective period. It was further 
stated that there was process of scrutiny where tax authority could check the values of 
sales to registered dealers in the quarterly return against the value of ITC sales entered for 
relevant months. Moreover, all the dealers had also been asked to explain the reason of the 
difference in the figure of ITC sales and ‘ sale to registered dealer’. The reply is not 
acceptable as there were differences in figures in all the eight cases checked by audit and 
CTD could not readily explain the differences for which dealers were asked to clarify the 
differences. 
ITC Purchases:   The ‘ITC purchase’ of a retailer is the ‘ITC sales’ uploaded by the 
wholesalers and approved by the retailer. Moreover, ITC cannot be claimed for non -
taxable goods and goods purchased from non -registered dealer even if it is purchased 
within the State. Con sidering these facts, gross amount of ITC purchase should never be 
more than the total amount of local purchases shown in the returns and in absence of 
purchase of non -taxable goods or purchase of goods from non -registered dealer, ITC 
purchase must be equal to local purchase shown in the quarterly returns. However, it was 
observed that the ITC purchase module and module related to local purchase mentioned in 
the returns were not linked in the system . It was observed  in the cases of 11 dealers 
checked by audit, while ITC purchases were either more or less than the local purchases in 
case of 10 dealers, whereas ITC purchase in case of the remaining one dealer was equal to 
local purchase as detailed in Appendix 4.13.2. Since the ITC module was not linked with 
the return module, the differences were not detected by the system.  
Agreeing to the observation, CTD stated (October 2015) that the differences pointed in 
audit was due to various reasons such as wrong filing of returns, wrong entries of data, etc. 
and acc ordingly, returns were revised and dealers were asked for clarification for such 
differences. The CTD further stated that the local purchases may not always be equal to 
ITC purchases due to non -taxable goods purchased from registered dealers and local 
purchases from non-registered dealers. This justification is not tenable in the instant cases 
pointed out by audit as the differences were mainly due to wrong filing of returns, wrong 
entries of data or ignorance of the dealers and the same could not be detected either by the 
system or by the authority scrutinising the returns. 
 
                                                           
16     1) M/s Goodwill Enterprises, 2) Ess Ess Traders, 3) Himalayan Hardware and 4) Samvritdhi. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 118 
 
The CTD either should explore the possibility of linking ITC Sales and Purchase module 
with the Returns module or strengthen its scrutiny procedure to prevent recurrences of 
differences as pointed out by audit. 
4.13.3 Non-adjustment of ‘negative’ tax payable 
Section 20 (3) (b) of SVAT 2005 provides that if an amount of net tax payable is negative, 
an amount of credit remaining after the adjustment so made shall be carried forward to the 
next quarter. During 2012 -13 when online system was ini tiated, though purchases were 
made from wholesalers, ITC could not be claimed by the retailers as the same was not 
uploaded by the selling dealer. In most of the cases, the ITC sales of 1 st and 2nd quarter of 
2012-13 were altogether uploaded in the 3 rd or 4th quarter of 2012-13. Audit test checked 
returns of 30 dealers out of which in case of 14 returns, the Input Taxes were more than 
the Output Taxes and the ‘tax payable’ were shown as negative.  These adverse balances 
were not adjusted in the next qua rter, due to which the retailers could not avail of the 
benefit of ITC. This resulted in double taxation to the extent of unadjusted amount. 
Agreeing to the observation, CTD stated (October 2015) that ITC could have been availed 
of by the buying dealers on ly after approving the ITC sales data uploaded by the selling 
dealer. The buying dealer could assess his output tax and accordingly could approve the 
month-wise ITC sales data in such a manner that there would be no surplus credit. The 
reply is not relevant to the observation that there were cases where the tax payable were 
less than the ITC claimed and the present online system had not taken care of the provision 
of Section 20 (3) (b) of SVAT 2005 relating to carrying forward of negative tax payable in 
the next quarter. The CTD also clarified that the case of negative tax payable was only 
during the first year and there was no such case thereafter. However, fact remained that 
presently there may not be any case of negative tax payable, but the system should  be in 
place to take care of such cases. 
4.13.4 Absence of criterion and procedure for Tax Audit 
Under section 39(2) of the SVAT Act 2005 read with sub clause (1) Rule 47 of SVAT 
2005, the Commissioner may select not less than 20 per cent of the registered dealers for 
audit of input tax credit and tax payable by each of them for any period or year on or 
before the 31 March, such selection being made by draw of lots either mechanically or 
with the use of computers. The audit of the dealer shall be conducted by the auditor in 
well laid down procedure. 
However, it was observed that neither any criterion/procedure for tax audit had been 
formulated in the State as of August 2015, nor was any audit party constituted for 
conducting audit to ensure the veracity of I TC claimed by the dealers on the basis of 
actual turnovers. This omission had made the system vulnerable to the risk of suppression 
of assessable turnover and evasion of tax by the errant dealers, besides the risk of 
breaking the VAT chain in the context of cross verification before allowing ITC claims. 
Agreeing to the observation CTD stated (October 2015) that at the instance of audit, the 
Tax Audit team had been constituted. 
 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 119 
4.14 Loss of revenue owing to suppression of sales turnover by the hoteliers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
According to Rule 12 of the Sikkim Value Added Tax Act 2005, hoteliers dealing with 
sale of cooked food and non-alcoholic beverages were required to pay SVAT on total sale 
turnover at the rate of 12.5 per cent on the sale of goods specified in the Sched ule V of 
the Act. 
Scrutiny of records of the Commissioner, Commercial Taxes Division revealed (May 
2015) that during 2012 -14, in five cases (out of 10 cases test checked) , the hoteliers 
deposited SVAT of ` 3.02 crore 17 on reduced turnover of ` 24.13 crore a s against the 
actual turnover of ` 44.84 crore towards the sale of cooked food and non -alcoholic 
beverages as detailed below: 
Table 4.14.1 
Name of 
hotel Year Gross 
turnover 
Actual turnover on 
sale of cooked food 
and non-alcoholic 
beverages 
Turnover at which 
SVAT realised @ 
12.5 % 
Difference Loss of 
revenue 
Mayfair 2012-13 217737340 158788001 71997744 86790257  10848782 
2013-14 246900472 109140593 81525040 27615553 3451944 
Royal Plaza 2012-13 63210459 38265688 24823915 13441773 1680222 
2013-14 59178900 19571265 19571265 0 0 
Norkhill 2012-13 31144000 31144000 10893800 20250200 2531275 
2013-14 31983700 31983700 12667278 19316422 2414553 
Mount 
Pandim 
2012-13 23495232 23495232 8025024 15470208 1933776 
2013-14 25430700 25430700 9942067 15488633 1936079 
Sonam 
Delek 
2012-13 4761092 4116745 857965 3258780 407348 
2013-14 7958255 6502255 999393 5502862 687857 
TOTAL  711800150 448438179 241303491 207134688 25891836 
 
Thus, inadequate action on the part of the Assessing Authorities to scrutinise the e -returns 
and suppression of turnover by these hoteliers led to loss of revenue of ` 2.59 crore.   
The Division, in its reply, stated (June 2014) that the intention  of the hoteliers was not to 
evade the tax but due to lack of knowledge during the initial stages of SVAT, the 
hoteliers clubbed the room services with the taxable items and wrongly filed the quarterly 
returns. In a subsequent reply, the Division forwarded (August 2015) the copies of 
revised returns submitted by the hoteliers, scrutiny of which revealed that these were 
revised by simply reducing the taxable turnover of ‘Sale of cooked food and non -
alcoholic beverages’ and including the same under ‘Receipts against s upply of all kinds 
of services’ which were exempt of SVAT.   
The reply was not tenable as the ‘cooked food and non -alcoholic beverages’, ‘alcoholic 
beverages’ and ‘supply of all kinds of services ’ had been clearly segregated in the e -
returns filed by the hoteliers.  Further, the revised returns were also not acceptable as the 
figures in respect of ‘Receipts against supply of all kinds of services’ mentioned therein  
                                                           
17    ` 24,13,03,491 x 12.5 per cent = ` 3,01,62,936. 
Inadequate action on the part of the Assessing Authorities to scrutinise the e -
returns submitted by the hoteliers in respect of sales of cooked food and non -
alcoholic beverages for the period 2012 -13 and 2013 -14 led to loss of revenue of 
` 2.59 crore. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 120 
varied widely with those mentioned in the Service Tax returns separately submitted by 
these hoteliers c asting doubt on the reliability of the figures subsequently altered by the 
hoteliers and accepted by the Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
4.15 Loss of revenue 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Sikkim State Electricity Regulatory Commission (SSERC) notifies the electricity 
tariff to be levied from the consumers for supply of electricity by the Energy and Power 
Department (the Department), Government of Sikkim. The SSERC revised the tariff 
schedule from time to time. As per the tariff schedules effective since April 2012, all 
types of supply with contract demand 18 at single point having three phases supply voltage 
above 3.3 KV had been categori sed as High Tension Supply (HTS). The tariff of HTS  
consumers consisted of two parts - fixed charges and variable charges on energy . While 
fixed (demand) charges were levied on the respective sanctioned/contracted load  of the 
HTS consumers, the energy charges were levied for the units of energy consumed  during 
a particular month.  
The Tariff Schedule also provided for installation of Maximum Demand Indicator (MDI) 
at the consumer premises to record the maximum electrici ty demand on monthly basis. If 
in a month, the recorded maximum demand exceeded the contract demand, that portion of 
the demand in excess of the contract demand had to be billed at twice the prevailing 
demand charges. Audit scrutiny revealed that the Depar tment had not installed /insisted 
for installation of MDI in respect of majority of HTS consumers due to which the actual 
load/demand was not being recorded. The Department also failed to observe the actual 
demand of the consumers with respect to the energ y consumption and bill additional 
demand charges wherever the actual demand had exceeded the sanctioned/contracted 
demand.  
Audit worked out the actual electricity demand of the HTS consumers given in the 
Annexure with respect to the recorded energy consum ption using reverse calculation of 
the formula19, viz. KVA x 0.8 (power factor) x 24 (hours) x 30 days x 0.6 (load factor). It 
                                                           
18      Energy demand sanctioned by the Executive Engineer. 
19     KVA (Kilo volt ampere) is the unit for measuring real power supplied to the consumer. However, on 
load side (consumption), due to induction and presence of reactive power owing to the conditions of 
equipment, the actual recorded power consumption measured in KW (kilo watts) would be lesser than 
Failure of the Department to install Maximum Demand Indicator resulted in 
non-levy of Demand Charges of ` 0.42 crore from High Tension Supply 
consumers for the load exceeded over and above the Contract/Sanctioned 
demand. 
 
 
ENERGY AND POWER DEPARTMENT 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 121 
was observed in 14 cases that the HTS consumers had drawn load in excess of the 
contracted demand/sanctioned load. The excess demand/load was, however, not assessed 
as per the tariff schedule. The additional demand charges exceeding the 
contract/sanctioned demand worked out to ` 0.42 crore ( Appendix 4.1 5.1) during the 
period from April 2012 to March 2014.  
Thus, due to non-installation of MDI and failure of the Department to monitor the 
demand with respect to the actual energy consumpti on resulted in revenue loss of ` 0.42 
crore.  
While accepting the audit observation, the Department stated (September 2015) that the 
consumers were at liberty to pay the contract demand as per installed KVA capacity of 
the transformer or install MDI meter with approval from the Department. If in a month, 
the recorded maximum demand exceeded  the contract demand, the demand in excess of 
contract demand would be billed at twice the prevailing demand charges. The Department 
further stated that necessary action was being initiated to install MDI in all HTS 
consumers. 
 
 
 
 
 
4.16 Non-realisation of Government dues 
 
 
The Department failed to realise committed payment of ` 5.79 crore from the 
person entrusted with management, control and governance of Sikkim 
Distilleries Limited (SDL) during December 2009 to March 2015. The State 
exchequer also suffered a resultant loss of ` 1.20 crore towards interest that could 
have been earned from the investment of revenue not realised. 
 
The Sikkim Distilleries Limited (SDL) is a Company registered under the provisions of 
the Registration of Companies Act, Sikkim, 1961 having its registered office at Rangpo, 
East Sikkim. The Company is operating primarily in the State of Sikkim and is in t he 
business of brewing, distilling and manufacturing of whisky, rum, brandy, wine, country 
spirits, beer and other related alcoholic beverages.  
The authorised share capital of the company was ` 10,00,00,000 divided into 1,99,90,000 
ordinary shares of ` 5 each and 500 preference shares of ` 100 each against which the 
issued, subscribed and paid up share capital was ` 5,03,88,815 divided into 1,00,69,763 
ordinary shares of ` 5 each and 400 preference shares of ` 100 each. Out of the above, the 
State Government held 48,24,817 ordinary shares of ` 5 each, one Shri Harish Aneja held 
18,58,448 ordinary shares  of ` 5 each and the small shareholders (737  in number) held 
                                                                                                                                                                             
the real power drawn. The ratio of KW to KVA is called Power Factor (PF). Since all installations 
may not be used at the same time, a Load Factor (LF) is applied for working out the KVA demand. So, 
monthly consumption of energy = KVA x PF x LF x number of working hours in a day x 30 days. 
 
 
EXCISE (ABKARI) DEPARTMENT 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 122 
15,59,265 ordinary shares  of ` 5 each and 400 preference shares of ` 100 each in the 
entire paid up share capital of the Company. As per the agreement, b alance 18,27,233 
ordinary shares of ` 5 each were sub-judice. 
Against the backdrop of the situation that the Company was not working commercially 
well (as mentioned in the agreement) and with a view to achieve synergies of operation 
and streamlining functioning of the Company, the Board of Directors decided (September 
2009) to vest the entire management, control and governance of the Company to Shri  
Harish Aneja, the single largest shareholder of the company . Accordingly, an agreement 
for 20 years was entered (14 December 2009) amongst the State Government , the small 
shareholders of Sikkim Distilleries Limited (SDL), Shri Harish Aneja and the SDL for 
vesting the entire management, control and governance of the SDL to Shri Aneja.  
In terms of Clause 3.1 (a) of the agreement, Shri Aneja agreed to pay ‘Committed 
Payment’ at the rate of ` 3 per share per year with respect to 48,24,817 and 15,59,265 
ordinary shares held by the Stat e Government and the small shareholders respectively. 
The year-wise break-up of committed payment required to be paid by Shri Aneja to the 
Government and the small shareholders accordingly worked out to ` 1.45 crore  and 
` 46.78 lakh respectively per year. The committed payment was to be remitted within 180 
days after the end of each term of 365 days from the effective date of agreement. In case 
the Company declared dividend in any year during the operating term and remitted the 
same to the Government and sm all shareholders, then the obligation of Shri Aneja for 
making committed payment under the agreement would stand reduced by the amount 
already remitted by it to the Government and the small shareholders.  The basis for 
arriving at the rate of committed paym ent of ` 3 per share payable by Shri  Aneja was 
elucidated neither in the Departmental notes nor in the agreement. 
Scrutiny of records revealed (October 2014) that there was a serious flaw in the 
agreement drawn between the parties. No penal clause was inco rporated in the agreement 
envisaging any punitive measure to be adopted in the event of Shri Aneja failing to remit 
committed payment to the Government within due dates. Further, although letter was 
issued (May 2013) for payment of dues, the Department did  not take any effective 
initiative to recover the amount. As a result, Shri Aneja did not pay any amount to the 
Government in terms of the agreement. Moreover, the Company also did not pay any  
dividend to the Government. As on 31 March 2015, the total comm itted payment due 
from Shri Aneja stood at ` 5.79 crore as detailed below: 
Table 4.16.1 
(` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. Term 
Amount of 
committed 
payment due 
Number of days delayed beyond 
the grace period of 180 days till 31 
March 2015 
Loss of 
interest @ 
9%20 
1 14-12-2009 13-12-2010 144.74 1389  49.57 
2 14-12-2010 13-12-2011 144.74 1024  36.55 
3 14-12-2011 13-12-2012 144.74   658  23.48 
4 14-12-2012 13-12-2013 144.74   293  10.46 
  TOTAL 578.96   120.06 
 
                                                           
20    Rate of interest on retail domestic deposits below ` one crore. 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 123 
Thus d ue to non -remittance of yearly committed payments within the due dates, the 
Government was denied opportunity to utili se its revenue aggregating ` 5.79 crore. 
Further, the State exchequer also suffered a resultant loss of ` 1.20 crore towards interest 
that could have been earned from investment o f unrealised Government revenue 
calculated at the rate of 9 per cent per annum from the aforementioned due dates. 
The Department intimated (June 2015) that they had realised ` 4.34 crore as committed 
payment for the period 14 December 2009 to 13 December 2012, after being pointed out 
by Audit, and was is in the process of obtaining the remaining committed amount for the 
period 14 December 2012 to 13 December 2014. 
However, the fact remained that due to delayed realisation, Government suffered 
unrecoverable interest loss of ` 1.20 crore till March 2015  and revenue of ` 1.45 crore 
also remained unrealised. 
 
 4.17 Loss of revenue 
 
Error in language in the notification for imposing bottling fee  resulted in a 
revenue loss of ` 4.32 crore during the years 2011-12 to 2013-14. 
 
Rule 33 and 34 of Sikkim Excise (Distillery for Manufacture of Spirit and Foreign 
Liquor) Rules 2000, inter alia , envisage that licensee may undertake the job of 
manufacturing of brands of foreign liquor on behalf of manufacturers from outside the 
State and in such cases, bottling fee as prescribed by the State Government may be 
charged to the licensee on the volume of production.  
On March 2011, the Department dec ided to charge such bottling fee and issued 
Notification (9 March 2011) prescribing a fee of ` 15 per case for Beer bottled in Sikkim. 
It was, however, noticed (September 2013 and June 2015) that the Department could not 
impose the prescribed fee despite n otification due to error in its language. Though the 
Department intended to charge bottling fee on Beer bottled in Sikkim on behalf of 
companies located outside Sikkim, it wrongly connoted the same as “Beer Bottled from 
outside Sikkim” in the notification.  Due to this mistake, the Department was unable to 
realise bottling fee on the basis of the said notification. Consequentially, during the period 
2011-14, an amount of ` 4.32 crore could not be realised from two breweries as under: 
Table 4.17.1 
 
Breweries Year Total production  
(Cases) 
Bottling fee  
(Cases x ` 15) 
M/s Denzong Albrew Ltd. Mulukey, 
Rhenock 
2011-12 6,95,633 1,04,34,495 
2012-13 7,99,972 1,19,99,580 
2013-14 13,63,956 2,04,59,340 
M/s Sikkim Breweries Ltd, Baghay Khola 2012-13 19,223 2,88,345 
TOTAL 4,31,81,760 
 
While accepting the audit observation, the Department stated (April 2015) that in 
pursuance of audit observation, the notification was amended in August 2014 and bottling 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 124 
fee was being realised from the concerned breweries. The fact remained that due to the 
error in the notification, the Government had to suffer a revenue loss of ` 4.32 crore. 
Further, loss could have been substantially minimised, had the Department taken timely 
action to issue amended notification immediately after its being initially pointed o ut by 
Audit in September 2013.  
 
 
 
 
 
4.18 Loss of revenue 
 
 
Without issue of original license which should have been obtained against 
payment of ` five crore for five years, renewal of the same @ ` 50 lakhs per 
annum for five years resulted in revenue loss of ` 2.50 crore. 
 
According to Sikkim Casino Games (Control  and Tax) Rules  2007, any interested 
person/company/firms desiring to obtain  license for operating  casino games may apply 
for issue of the same (Rule 3). On receipt of such application, the State Government after 
making necessary enquiries in this regard, may grant the provisional license for five years 
or refuse to grant the license without assigning any reason or reasons  (Rule 4). L icense 
may be issued for operating of casino and casino games in a hotel having infrastructural 
and other facilities of the standard of any five-star hotel with capability to establish and 
operate casino games (Rule17).  
State Government amended (March 2011) the  Sikkim Casino Games (Control and Tax) 
Rules 2007 by substituting Rule 4 with the stipulation that on receipt of such application, 
the State Government on its satisfaction that the applicant has a hotel having 
infrastructural and other facilities of the standard of any five  star hotel with capability to 
establish and operate casino games, may grant a provisional license for six months against 
the payment of  ` one lakh made one month prior to issue of such license  to enable the 
licensee to set up the necessary infrastructure and other requirements and to co mmence 
operation of casino games at any time within the said period.  If required, the provisional  
license may be extended for a  further period of six months on payment  of additional fee 
of ` one lakh. On full compliance of the stipulations prescribed in th e said provisional 
license, the Government may grant a regular license under Rule 17 for operation of casino 
games for five years on payment of ` five crore. 
Scrutiny of records of the Directorate of Sikkim State Lotteries  (DSSL) revealed that M/s 
Teesta-Rangit Pvt. Ltd. (TRPL) had entered into an agreement with the State Government 
(6 November 2007) and was granted a provisional license (12 November 2008 ) for five 
years (12 November 2008 to 11 November 2013) under Rule 4 of Sikkim Casino Games  
(Control and Tax) Rules 2007 for installation and operation of  casino games. One of the 
conditions laid down in the license was that the original license under Rule 17 will be 
FINANCE, REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE DEPARTMENT 
(DIRECTORATE OF SIKKIM STATE LOTTERIES) 

Chapter IV: Revenue Sector 
 125 
issued after fulfilment of norms of five-star hotel infrastructure facilities within five 
years.  
DSSL requested TRPL (30 October 2013) to cease operation of casino games with effect 
from 12 November 2013 as the provisional license was expiring on 11 November 2013. 
TRPL filed a writ petition before the High Court of Sikkim to quash the order issued by 
the Directorate. By an interim order (11 November 2013), the High Court stayed the 
operation of Government’s letter and permitted the petitioner to continue with the 
operation of casino games. The High Court of Sikkim passed an order (18 February 2014) 
to TRPL to move an application for renewal of the license as per Rule, if they so desire d. 
In view of the Government’s approval (18 August 2014) for renewal of license, the High 
Court disposed off the writ petition (29 August 2014). 
The DSSL renewed (29  September 2014) the license under Rule 17  of Sikkim Casino  
Games (Control and Tax) Rules 2007 for one year by realising ` 50 lakh as renewal fee as 
approved by the Government. As per the Rule, a provisional license  was to be issued  for 
six months (renewable for six months on payment of ` 1 lakh) after which on fulfilment 
of certain stipulations , a regular license  could be issued for five years on payment of  
` five crore which could again be renewed annually @ ` 50 lakh per annum. In this case, 
the Go vernment issued a provisional license and  did not issue  any regular license . 
However, without issuing the regular license,  the Government without support of  any 
Act/Rule renewed it @ ` 50 lakh per annum rendering not only extension of undue favour 
to the licensee but it also resulted in a revenue loss of ` 2.5021 crore during the five years 
period. Further, the Directorate had neither obtained any information from other agencies 
like Tourism Department nor ascertained itself  about the fulfilment  of stipulat ed 
condition of the hotel attaining infrastructural and other facilities of the stand ard of any 
five-star hotel for issue of the regular license under Rule 17. 
In their reply, the DSSL stated that as no fee had been prescribed for renewal of 
provisional license after the term of five years, they renewed the same @ ` 50 lakhs for 
one year under Rule 17. Reply of the DSSL was not tenable, as the fact remained that 
without issuing the regular license, the Government renewed it @ ` 50 lakh per annum  
which did not have support of any Act/Rule. 
 
                                                           
21      Fee for issue of License for 5 years ( ` 5 crore) – Fee being realised for 5 years ( @ ` 50 lakh) for the 
period (1 October 2014 to 30 September 2019) 

Chapter V: General Sector 
 127 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.1     Introduction 
 
This Chapter of the Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 201 5 deals with the 
findings on audit of the State Government units under General Sector. 
The names of the State Government departments and the total budget allocation and 
expenditure of the State Government under General Sector during the year 201 4-15 are 
given in the table below: 
Table 5.1.1 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Departments Total Budget 
Allocation Expenditure 
1 Development Planning, Economic Reforms and North Eastern 
Council Affairs 117.05 35.54 
2 Election 16.23 16.37 
3 Governor 6.16 5.80 
4 Finance, Revenue and Expenditure 1,508.52 1,125.37 
5 Home 62.80 46.13 
6 Information and Public Relation 12.81 10.59 
7 Information Technology 34.01 17.80 
8 Judiciary 25.89 21.50 
9 Land Revenue and Disaster Management 462.70 267.88 
10 Law 8.46 8.08 
11 Legislature 17.80 17.42 
12 Parliamentary Affairs 1.81 1.30 
13 
Personnel, Administrative Reforms and Training, Public 
Grievances, Career Options and Employment, Skill 
Development and Chief Minister's Self Employment Schemes 
13.19 7.87 
14 Police 314.62 273.35 
15 Printing and Stationery  8.00 8.00 
16 Public Service Commission 3.39 3.39 
17 Science, Technology and Climate Change 7.47 1.96 
18 Sports and Youth Affairs 23.08 13.71 
19 State Excise (Abkari) 7.02 6.83 
20 Vigilance 6.35 6.42 
 TOTAL 2,657.36   1,895.31 
 
Besides the above, the Central Government has been transferring a sizeable amount of 
funds directly to the implementing agencies under the General Sector to different 
departments of the State Government. The major transfers for implementation of flagship 
programmes of the Central Government are detailed below: 
 
CHAPTER V 
GENERAL SECTOR 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 128 
 
Table 5.1.2 
(` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Department 
Name of the 
Scheme/Programme Implementing Agency Funds transferred 
during the year 
1 Land Revenue and 
Disaster Management MPLAD scheme District Collector East 500.00 
2 Science, Technology 
and Climate Change 
Alliance and R&D Mission Sikkim State Council of 
Science & Technology 150.00 
State Science & Technology  
Programme 
Sikkim State Council of 
Science & Technology 106.12 
Environment Information 
Education and Awareness 
Sikkim State Council of 
Science & Technology 10.30 
Science and Technology 
Programme for Socio 
Economic Development 
Kanchendzonga  
Conservation Committee 9.66 
 
3 
Sikkim Information 
Commission 
Propagation of  RTI Act – 
Improving Transparency 
and Accountability 
Sikkim Information 
Commission 3.00 
Propagation of  RTI Act – 
Improving Transparency 
and Accountability 
Accounts and 
Administrative Training 
Institute (AATI) 
5.48 
 TOTAL 784.56 
Source: Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System of the GOI. 
 
5.2 Planning and conduct of Audit 
 
Audit process starts with the assessment of risks faced by various departments of 
Government based on expenditure incurred, criticality/complexity of activities, level of 
delegated financial powers, assessment of overall internal controls, etc. 
After completion of audit of each unit on a test -check basis, Inspection Reports 
containing audit findings are issued to the heads of the departments. The departments are 
to furnish replies to the audit findings within one month of receipt of the Inspection 
Reports. Whenever replies are received, audit findings are either settled based on 
reply/action taken or further action is required by the audited entities for compliance. 
Some of the important audit observations arising out of these Inspection Reports are 
processed for inclusion in the Audit Reports, which are submitted to the Governor of the 
State under Article 151 of the Constitution of India for laying on the table of the 
Legislature. 
Test audits were conducted involving expenditure of ` 1,238.49 crore (including 
expenditure of ` 1,209.58 crore of previous years) of the State Government under General 
Sector. The details of year -wise break -up is given in Appendix 5.2.1 . This Chapter 
contains one Performance Audit report on ‘Effectiveness in the functioning of State 
Pollution Control Board’ as given below: 
 
 
 

Chapter V: General Sector 
 129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.3 Performance Audit on ‘Effectiveness in the functioning of State Pollution 
Control Board’ 
 
 
Highlights 
 
Annual Action Plan defining various activities and sub -activities was never 
prepared and thus policy, legislations and action plan programmes to control 
pollution was not ensured by the SPCB. 
(Paragraph 5.3.7.1) 
Against total of 256 industries (Pharmaceuticals, Hydro -Electric Power, Small-
Scale Industries, Hot -mix Plants, Hotels, etc.), 86 numbers of Industries did not 
obtain Consent for Operation (CFO) for 2015 -16. The number of Industries not 
obtaining CFO ranged between 13 and 32 during 2012-15. 
(Paragraph 5.3.8) 
Against total of 10 Sewerage Treatment Plants (STPs), nine STPs had not 
obtained Consent to Establish/Consent to Operate for treatment of effluents  and 
only one STP was actually functioning. 
(Paragraph 5.3.9.1) 
Against total of 65 water polluting industries, five Effluent Treatment Plants 
(ETPs) were either not established or were found non-functional. 
(Paragraph 5.3.9.3) 
1,721.16 MT of hazardous wastes were generated against which only 619.04 MT 
was disposed of at TSDF and the remaining 1 ,102.12 MT of untreated hazardous 
waste were not transported through TSDF. 
(Paragraph 5.3.10) 
Health Care Facilities (HCFs) were functioning without BMW treatment  facilities 
and Stone Crushers were operating without obtaining consent. 
(Paragraph 5.3.11.2 and 5.3.12.2) 
Board had never issued any advice for setting up vehicular pollution control 
laboratories nor were these laboratories set up by the MVD. 
(Paragraph 5.3.12.4) 
Against 11 slaughter houses in the State, 10 were functioning without any consent 
from the Board and had even not applied for the consents. 
(Paragraph 5.3.16) 
 
 
FOREST, ENVIRONMENT AND WILDLIFE 
MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 130 
Audit survey revealed that around 72 per cent of the population was not aware of 
Pollution Control Board, 64 per cent of the population did not know the function 
and activities of the Pollution Board and the common citizen never approached 
SPCB for environmental issues. 
(Paragraph 5.3.17) 
Utilisation of funds by the Board was poor and it ranged between 19 and 24 per 
cent during 2012-13 to 2014-15. 
(Paragraph 5.3.20.2) 
The Board was functioning with shortage of 17 numbers of technical and non -
technical staff. 
(Paragraph 5.3.21.1) 
The Board did not organise training programmes for target groups despite having 
huge unspent balance at the disposal of Board. 
(Paragraph 5.3.24) 
Against the minimum requirement of 20 meetings, the Board could hold only three 
meetings and no follow up action could be taken even for these three meetings. 
(Paragraph 5.3.25) 
 
5.3.1 Introduction 
 
The Sikkim State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) was set up during 1992 to implement 
the provisions of Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, which was 
functioning under “State Land Use and Environment Board’’ of Department of Forest, 
Environment and Wildlife Management. The SPCB was separated from State Land Use 
Environment Board during March 2008. Since then the scope of its functioning has 
widened and it has been implementing following Environment Acts and Rules.  
 The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1974;  
 The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) CESS Act I977;  
 The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1981;  
 The Public Liability Insurance Act 1981;  
 The Environment (Protection) Act 1986 and the Rules made ther e under, i.e. 
Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 and the rules made for Management and 
Handling of Municipal Solid Wastes (1999), the Bio -Medical Wastes (1998), 
Hazardous Wastes (2002), Plastic Wastes (1999), Batteries (2001) and E -waste 
(2011); and Noise (Regulation and Control) Rules 2000, as amended from time to 
time. 
The Board had vision of cleaner and pollution free environment in the State of Sikkim 
with the following mission: 
 To oversee the implementation of different Environment Acts and Rules in the 
State; 
 To control and abate water, air, and soil pollution from industrial sources;  

Chapter V: General Sector 
 131 
 To control and restrict use of horn, playing of loud speakers and bursting of 
fireworks;  
 To protect the water bodies;  
 To monitor water quality, air quality and noise level at major areas in the State;  
 To encourage, conduct and participate in research activities on environmental 
issues; and  
 Disseminate the information available with the Board.  
This Performance Audit attempts to examine the functioning of the Board in the effective 
operation of safeguards relating to water pollution, solid waste management and air 
pollution in the State. 
 
5.3.2  Organisational structure 
 
The Board is headed by a Chairman who is assisted by the Member Secretary in day to 
day functioning of the Board. The organisational structure of the Board is given in the 
following organogram: 
Chart 5.3.1 
 
 
 
5.3.3 Audit objectives 
 
The objectives of the Performance Audit were to assess whether: 
 mechanisms adopted by SPCB to prevent, control and for abatement of pollution 
were effective and efficient; 
 monitoring by the Board of the compliance to Acts, Rules and conditions by the 
stakeholders was efficient and effective; 
 fund management by the Board was efficient to secure optimum utilisation; and 
Chairman 
 
Member Secretary 
 
Technical Wing Scientific Wing Accounts & 
Administration 
Legal Cell 
Assistant 
Environment 
Engineer 
Principal Scientist 
 
Sr. Scientific Officer-cum-DDO 
including Central laboratory 
 
Scientist ‘B’ Assistant Scientific Officer Accountant, LDC & Steno 
Legal Counsel (Hired) 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 132 
 adequate man power and effective Internal Control mechanisms existed.  
 
5.3.4    Audit criteria 
 
The sources of Audit criteria for the Performance Audit were: 
 The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1974; 
 The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act I977;  
 The Public Liability Insurance Act 1981;  
 The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1981; 
 The Environment (Protection) Act  1986 and the Rules made there under, i.e.  
Environment (Protection) Rules  1986 and the Rules made for Management and 
Handling of Municipal Solid Wastes (1999), the Bio -Medical Wastes (1998), 
Hazardous Wastes (2002), Plastic Wastes (1999), Batteries (2001) and E -waste 
(2011); and Noise (Regulation and Control) Rules 2000, as amended from time to 
time; 
 Directions and notifications issued by Central Pollution Control Board (CPC B), 
GOI and the State Government; 
 Sikkim PWD Code, Manual and Schedule of Rates. 
 
5.3.5  Audit scope and methodology 
 
The Performance Audit sought to evaluate functioning of the Board regarding effective 
implementation of various Environmental laws and rules. Performance Audit covering a 
period of five years (2010-15) was conducted during May-July 2015 through test check of 
records of Board’s Office and Central Laboratory of the Board, Urban Development and 
Housing Department (UDHD), Water Security and Public Health Engineering 
Department ( WSPHED), Municipalities , Health Care, Human Services and Family 
Welfare Department (HCHSFWD) (including hospitals, thereunder) and other involved 
entities. Audit also analysed responses to audit questionnaires, reports and records 
available at various levels. 
The Performance Audit commenced with an entry conference held on 19 May 2015 with 
the Secretary of Forest, Environment and Wildlife Management Department (FEWMD), 
Member Secretary and other senior officers of the Board, wherein, the audit objectives, 
criteria, scope and metho dology were explained. The exit conference was held on  15 
October 2015 with the Secretary of FEWMD, Member Secretary and other Senior Board 
officials, wherein the audit findings were discussed. Response of the Government/Board 
during exit conference and wr itten replies received (15 October 2015) from 
Government/Board have been taken into account while finalising this report.  
 
5.3.6  Sample size 
 
The Board had only one office and one Central Laboratory at Gangtok without any 
regional/branch office and hence, records of the Board at Gangtok were verified. The 

Chapter V: General Sector 
 133 
schemes relating to pollution control were being implemented by UDHD (Municipal 
Waste Colle ction and Treatment), WSPHED (Installation of Sewerage Systems and 
Sewage Treatment Plants) and HCHSFWD (Treatment of Bio-Medical Waste). Sikkim is 
having only four districts; for the purpose of audit, schemes implemented by these 
departments in East Distr ict and South District (50 per cent) were selected. Records of 
two Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) Plants were test checked which were under the 
control of UDHD. WSPHED was having six schemes for installation of Sewerage 
Systems and Sewage Treatment Plants (ST Ps) in East Sikkim and three in South Sikkim. 
Expenditure records of these nine schemes were audited. Records relating to HCHSFWD 
were examined at their Head O ffice. In addition, availability of treatment facilities for 
Bio-Medical Waste (BMW) was verified  physically at State Hospital , Gangtok; District 
Hospitals (East and South) and Central Referral Hospital, Tadong. 
 
Audit findings 
 
Audit findings relating to effectiveness in the functioning of the Board are discussed in 
succeeding paragraphs: 
 
Audit objective-1: 
Whether mechanisms adopted by SPCB to prevent, control and for abatement of   
pollution were effective and efficient? 
 
5.3.7  Planning Process  
 
5.3.7.1  Comprehensive Action Plan to address environmental pollution 
As per Section 17 (1) (a) of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 
and Air Pollution Act 1981, the Board has to plan a comprehensive programme for the 
prevention, control or abatement of pollution of streams, wells and air in the State and to 
secure the execution thereof. Further, Annual Action Plan defining various activities and 
sub-activities proposed to be taken up including physical and financial targets to be 
achieved in the ensuing year in line with the vision and long/short term goals of the Board 
was to be prepared. However, audit found that the Board never prepared any Annual 
Action Plan. 
Further, the Government had not formulated a separate policy for addressing water and 
air pollution in Sikkim. It had not enacted legislations  for ecological restoration of rivers, 
lakes and groundwater. Periodic and regular meetings of the water quality review 
committee and ambient air quality review committee had not taken place to improve co -
ordination between the Centre and the State. Thus, Policy, Legislations and Action Plan 
programmes to control pollution were not prepared by the State Government. 
In reply, the Board stated that Annual Action Plan was not prepared due to lack of funds 
and assured that the Board would now prepare Annual Act ion Plan and place before the 
Hon’ble members of the Board for approval. 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 134 
5.3.7.2   Database for identification of risk 
As per Section 16 (2)(f) of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and 
Section 16 (2)(g) of Air Pollution Act, 1981, the Board is required to collect, compile and 
publish technical and statistical data relating to pollution and the measu res devised for its 
effective prevention and control and prepare manuals, codes or guides relating to 
treatment and disposal of sewage and trade effluents and disseminate information 
connected therewith. Further, the National Water Policy 2002 envisages de velopment of 
an information system for water related data at the State level for resource planning. In 
order to plan the programme to prevent, control and for abatement of pollution, the Board 
must have a detailed database of the pollutants, sources of the same and pollution loads.  
Audit however revealed that the Board had not prepared any such database. In absence of 
this, risks to the environment and health caused by pollution from water, air, noise, etc . 
could not be assessed by the Board. Hence, the Bo ard was not able to exercise effective 
control over the industries and plan for pollution abatement measures in an effective 
manner. 
5.3.7.3  Inventory of polluting sources 
Inventory management is necessary for ready reckoning of type and number of industries 
and its discharge and its resultant impact on the environment. However, it was seen that 
the Board had not prepared any inventory of water polluting industries (Red, Ora nge and 
Green Category), air polluting industries and hazardous waste generated in the State. The 
Board had also not prepared any inventory of sources generating BMW, MSW, e -waste, 
effluent discharged from STPs, waste from slaughter house, plastic waste , etc. and 
systems for their handling and disposal in prescribed manner. While accepting the fact, 
the Board stated that a proposal for conducting survey for inventory of major river basins 
and their polluting sources would be initiated. 
5.3.7.4  Establishing standard  
Under the provisions of Section 64 of Water (Prevention, Control of Pollution) Act 1974 
and Section 54 of Air (Prevention, Control of Pollution) Act 1981, the Board was 
required to prescribe its own standards for various types of pollutants. However, the 
Board had not prescribed its own standards for any kind of pollutant but was instead 
adopting various standards concerning different pollutants like industrial effluents, MSW, 
sewage effluent, etc. prescribed by the CPCB at the tim e of giving consent to establish/ 
operate. 
 
5.3.8  Industries operating without consent from the Board  
 
As per Section 25 (1) (a) of the Water Act, no person shall, without previous consent of 
the State Board, establish or take any steps to establish any industry, operation or process, 
or any treatment and disposal system or an extension or addition thereto, which is likely 
to discharge trade effluent into a stream. Similar provision was also contained in the Air 
Act in respect of persons likely to dischar ge effluents into the air. Under these Acts, the 
Board was empowered to issue Consent for Establishment (CFE) and Consent for 

Chapter V: General Sector 
 135 
Operation (CFO). Before expiry of consents granted initially, the units were required to 
renew their consents prior to 60 days of its expiry.  
During audit, it was found that neither the Board nor the Commerce and Industries 
Department had the data of actual number of industries running in the State. However, 
from records provided by the Board, it was noticed that out of total 256 in dustries 
(Pharmaceuticals, Hydro -Electric Power, Small -Scale Industries (SSI), Hot -mix Plants, 
Hotels, etc.), registered with Commerce and Industries Department, Government of 
Sikkim, 86 numbers of industries did not obtain CFO for 2015 -16. Similarly, the number 
of industries not obtaining CFO, ranged between 13 and 32 during 2012 -15. The 
operation of these industries without any consent not only led to irregular/unauthorised 
operation but also led to forfeiture of consent fees amounting to ` 1.45 crore which could 
have been used for prevention, control and abatement of pollution. Reasons for non -
renewal of consents were not found on records. It was found that the Board had issued 
show cause notices to only ten industries during 2010-11 to 2014-15 but the Board neither 
initiated further follow up action nor took any penal actions as per the provisions of the 
Acts in respect of the defaulting industrial units. The details of consents obtained and 
consents due with the defaulting period of various categories  of industries are given 
below: 
Table 5.3.1 
Category of 
industries 
No. of 
units 
Consent not obtained for Outstanding consent 
fees due to non-
realisation (in rupees) 2011-12 2012- 13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 
Hydro Electric 
Powers 17 0 4 5 5 7 1,07,50,000 
Pharmaceuticals 38 0 3 5 5 7 10,65,000 
Hotels 119 Figures not available 0 39 7,09,000 
Distilleries and  
Breweries  10 0 2 2 5 7 9,30,000 
Hot-mix Plants 18 0 0 0 0 0 0 
SSI and others 54 0 4 12 17 26 10,91,000 
TOTAL 256 0 13 24 32 86 1,45,45,000 
Source: Board’s figures. 
 
Audit further noticed that in 110 cases, there were delays in obtaining consents by various 
units as given in the table below: 
Table 5.3.2 
Year Below 30 
days 
30 to 90 
days 
91 to 180 
days 
180 days and 
above Total 
Hydro Electric Powers - 07 04 - 11 
Pharmaceuticals 04 03 05 - 12 
Hotels 13 31 04 - 48 
Distilleries and Breweries  01 -- 04 01 06 
Hot-mix Plants - 03 - - 03 
SSI and others 01 08 13 08 30 
TOTAL 19 52 30 09 110 
 
Thus, it could be seen from the above tables that the Board had failed to evolve effective 
monitoring mechanism for timely issuance of consent, realisation of consent fee and 
follow up action for defaulting units. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 136 
 
In reply, the Board stated that due to absence of penalty clause in the consent fee 
notification, consents were not renewed in time by the units. However, a proposal to 
incorporate penalty clause was under process.  Further, follow up action for realisatio n of 
due consent fees was being taken up by the Board.  
In further reply (October 2015), the Board stated that a direction had been issued to 
initiate penalty provision for late renewal, to include conditions in the consent for 
information prior to closure of any unit and in the event of failure to inform the Board the 
fee would be realised from the units. 
 
5.3.9    Water pollution  
 
Water pollution means contamination of water or alteration of physical, chemical or 
biological properties of water by discharge of various kinds of wastes into water, directly 
or indirectly, which renders water harmful for public health and health of animals, plants, 
aquatic organisms, etc. 
The Board had set up 14 numbers of water quality monitoring stations on banks of two 
major rivers of the State, viz. Teesta and Rangit. The Board was collecting samples from 
these 14 water monitoring stations on monthly basis and its four general parameter s were 
analysed in the Central Laboratory. However, 10 parameters were not being monitored 
due to shortage of technical manpower. The analysed data was neither posted in the 
website of the Board nor used for preparation of strategy for water pollution control. 
5.3.9.1   Treatment of domestic effluents  
Twelfth Schedule under Article 243W of the Constitution of India entrusted urban local 
bodies with duties of protection of environment and promotion of ecological aspects, 
which include water supply, sewerage , etc. Further, as per Section 17 (1)(f) of Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act  1974, the Board is required to inspect sewage 
or trade effluents for their treatment and  every authority treating sewage needs to obtain 
authorisation from the Board.  
The WSWSPHED is responsible for construction of STPs for treatment of domestic 
effluent under directions of the Board. It was observed that out of ten STPs, nine STPs 
had not obtained Consent to Establish/Consent to Operate from the Board for treatment of 
effluents. Further, the Board was only issuing notices to WSPHED from time to time 
without enforcing penal provisions of the Environment (Protection) Acts . This not only 
led to non-realisation of ` 10.001 lakh towards consent fees but also granting permission 
for establishment of these STPs was irregular without obtaining consents. 
In reply (October 2015), the Board stated that the concerned Department ( WSPHED) had 
assured to apply to obtain the consent to establish/operate and outstanding fees would 
also be realised from the Department. 
 
                                                           
1    Consent fee due for 10 STPs @ ` 20,000 per year for 5 years. 

Chapter V: General Sector 
 137 
 
5.3.9.2     Inadequate treatment of domestic effluents  
Scrutiny of the records of the Board and WSPHED revealed that there were thirteen local 
bodies in the State under the jurisdiction of the Board but there was only one STP 
functioning in the State at Adampool, Gangtok. The status of domestic effluents 
generated and treated in these STPs as of March 2015 is detailed in the table below: 
Table 5.3.3 
Status of town-wise population and generation of sewer and its treatment in STPs 
District 
with 
Towns2 
District-wise 
Urban 
Population  of 
2011 census 
Sewage generated as per 
national per capita 
generation of sewage (@ 121 
lt/ day/person)  (in mld3) 
Sewage 
collected 
(in mld) 
Sewer 
treated in 
the STPs 
(in mld) 
Sewer being disposed 
of without any 
treatment in STPs 
(in mld) 
East 1,22,487 14.82 8.00 8.00 6.82 
North  4,644 0.56 0 0 0.56 
West  5,248 0.64 0 0 0.64 
South  21,199 2.57 0 0 2.57 
TOTAL 1,53,578 18.59 8.00 8.00 10.59 
Source: Board’s figure. 
 
It could be seen from the above table that out of 18.59 mld of sewage generated and 
collected in the State, only 8.00 mld were being treated and the rest 10.59 mld of effluents 
were being discharged untreated in the rivers through jhoras (long drains) . Further 
analysis of records revealed that: 
 Sewage in respect of only one town (Gangtok)  out of total 13 classified urban 
towns was treated and for rest 12 urban towns, sewage was discharged off without 
any treatment. 
  Nine new STPs were constructed only in  seven towns under two districts, viz. 
East and South and sewer network had not started yet in six towns in North and 
West districts. 
 Out of these nine STPs (with estimated cost ` 1.91 crore), none had been 
commissioned despite incurring ` 1.24 crore due to delay in completion ranging 
from 39 to 86 months. The delay was attributed to reasons like non -
acquisition/availability of land, change in design, increase in span of rainy 
seasons, shifting of work site to new location, delay in obtainin g forest clearance, 
etc. 
Physical verification of the only functioning STP at Adampool, Gangtok revealed that: 
 Though WSPHED had installed an inflow meter at the STP, it was not functioning 
and no out flow meter was installed to measure the quantum of inflow and outflow 
of sewage effluents. As a result, actual inflow and outflow of sewage relating to 
capacity of STP could not be ascertained. 
 
                                                           
2   East: Gangtok, Ranipool, Singtam, Rangpo, Pakyong, Rhenock and Rongli. North:  Mangan and 
Chungthang. West: Gyalshing and Soreng.  South: Namchi, Jorethang, Melli and Ravangla. 
3     Mld = million litres per day. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 138 
 During last five years only three inspections were done against prescribed 
monthly inspections by the officials and the effluent samples were taken only 
twice during 2014-15.  
 There were no engineers having requisite skills (Mechanical/Chem ical Engineers) 
to look after the STP and it was being looked after by one Junior Engineer (Civil) 
and one Assistant Engineer (Civil).  
This indicated that capacity to treat domestic effluents in the State was far from 
satisfactory. The reasons for not pro viding STPs in uncovered towns were not furnished 
by the Board to the Audit. 
In reply, the Board stated that untreated sewage effluents were being treated in the septic 
tanks and the WSPHED was constructing STPs for treatment of sewage. The reply is not 
tenable as septic tanks were to be connected to STPs for effective treatment of sewage. 
However, the fact remains that while on the way to physical verification by the Audit 
team as well as from the social media, it was seen that untreated sewage was being 
disposed of directly into the water stream at Jalipool which was contaminating river water 
on which neither WSPHED nor the Board had any control a s could be seen from the 
photographs below: 
Image 5.3.1 Image 5.3.2 
  
Disposal of untreated sewage directly into the water stream at Jalipool  
 
In reply (October 2015), the Board stated that sewage effluents generated by the  houses 
which were not connected with the sewage network system were being treated in their 
own septic tanks. The contention of the Board is not acceptable as it can be seen in the 
DPRs of the STPs wherein it is clearly mentioned that the untreated sewage wastes are 
discharged into existing drains which ultimately flows into the river. Besides, many 
houses have septic tanks along with pit latrines and the effluent from it also gets 
discharged into river. Some houses do not have soak pits for which highly po lluted liquid 
wastes are being discharge into river directly. 
5.3.9.3   Industrial Effluents 
Industrial effluent is any waste water generated by an industrial activity. The impact of 
industrial discharges depends not only on their Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) and 
the amount of suspended solid material but also on their content of inorganic and organic 
substances. Water pollution caused by major industries can be controlled at the point of 
generation by constructing Effluent Treatment Plants (ETPs) for individual industries and 


Chapter V: General Sector 
 139 
Common Effluent Treatment Plants (CETPs) for clusters of medium and s mall-scale 
industries. 
Scrutiny of records of the Board revealed that there were 65 water polluting industries in 
the State. However, physical inspection (15-16 July 2015) of 16 industries revealed that- 
 three4 industrial units did not have any ETPs.  
 two5 industrial units were having non -functional ETPs; as a result, trade effluent 
was not treated. 
 It was seen in one 6 industry that though the industry had ETP, untreated trade 
effluent was directly drained out outside the industry compound creating risk to 
health of the nearby habitants. Further, it was seen that domestic wastes of the 
industry were thrown haphazardly in the compound of the industry creating risk 
to health of the public as could be seen from the photographs below. 
 One industry7, a pharmaceutical unit, was running in a small rented building in an 
unhygienic condition without ETP and entire trade effluent was thrown in the 
side drain of the road in front of the said rented building. 
Image 5.3.3 Image 5.3.4 
  
 
Non-functional ETP at C G Foods, , Rangpo, and Sheela Foams, Bagheykhola, East Sikkim 
Image 5.3.5 Image 5.3.6 
 
 
Untreated trade effluent being drained out at 
Micro Labs, Mamring, South Sikkim 
Domestic waste thrown near ETP at Micro Labs, 
Mamring, South Sikkim 
                                                           
4     Government Fruit Preservation Factory, Pristine Life science and Mayell and Fraser Distillery.  
5     CG Foods and Sheela Foam. 
6     Micro Labs, Mamring, South Sikkim. 
7     Pristine Life Science, Singtam, East Sikkim. 


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 140 
Image 5.3.7 Image 5.3.8 
  
 
Rented building in which Pristine Life Science industry was running in an unhygienic condition  
 
Inaction on the part of industry for installation of ETPs as well as non -functioning of 
ETPs by the industries led to discharge of untreated effluent into the nearby water bodies.  
The Board did not issue any direction to the defaulting industries and had not taken any 
legal action as required under Section 33(1) of the Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act 1974 to ensure adequate treatment of effluents by these industries. Instead, 
the Board gave consents to industries to operate in usual manner which indicated that the 
Board had been giving consents without inspecting these industries. 
In reply (October 2015), the Board stated that it would conduct field visits of defaulting 
units and issue stringent directions. 
5.3.9.4   Test results of treated water samples 
Section 21 of Water (Prevention, Control of Pollution) Act 1974, the Board is required to 
take samples of water or of sewage or trade effluent for analysis or tests. During audit, the 
Board could not produce any record in support of test conducted on trade effluent . 
However, during physical inspections of industries, audit team collected water samples of 
treated trade effluents of seven pharmaceutical industries and tested these samples in the 
Board’s Central Laboratory for four parameters . The details are given in the following 
table: 
Table 5.3.4 
(In mg/litre) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
industry 
Parameters 
PH level Total Dissolved Solid Biological Oxygen 
Demand (BOD) 
Chemical Oxygen 
Demand  (COD) 
Permissible Test 
result Permissible Test 
result Permissible Test 
result Permissible Test 
result 
1 Sun Pharma 5.5-9.0 7.0 500 425 30 30 250 115 
2 Unichem 
Pharma  5.5-9.0 6.5 500 480 30 32 250 240 
3 Microlab, 
Mamring 5.5-9.0 6.0 500 478 30 34 250 270 
4 Zydus 
Healthcare  5.5-9.0 6.0 500 419 30 32 250 200 
5 Glenmark 
Pharma  5.5-9.0 7.0 500 350 30 26 250 145 
6 Intas 
Pharma 5.5-9.0 7.5 500 230 30 28 250 145 
7 Torrent 
Pharma  5.5-9.0 6.5 500 430 30 26 250 155 

Chapter V: General Sector 
 141 
 
From above test results, it could be seen that in respect of three industries (Sl. Nos. 2, 3 
and 4), BOD level was in excess of permissible limit and in case of one industry (Sl. No. 
3), COD was also in excess of the permissible limit. The Board should con duct regular 
test of treated effluent and take follow up action to ensure effective functioning of ETPs. 
While accepting the audit contention (October 2015), the Board stated that they would 
initiate regular monitoring of the effluents. 
5.3.9.5    Handling of Municipal Solid Wastes 
As per Section 4(1) of Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules 2000 
(MSW Rules) every municipal authority was responsible for the implementation of the 
provisions of these rules and for any infrastructure d evelopment for collection, storage, 
segregation, transportation, processing and disposal of municipal solid wastes within its 
territory.  
Further, Schedule 1, Rule 4(2 and 3) of the Rules, ibid stipulated that municipal authority 
or an operator of a facili ty shall obtain authorisation from the Board for setting up waste 
processing and disposal facility including landfills and comply with the following 
implementation schedule: 
Table 5.3.5 
Compliance Criteria Schedule 
Setting up of waste processing and disposal facilities By 31.12.2003 or earlier 
Monitoring the performance of waste processing and disposal 
facilities Once in six months 
Improvement of existing landfill sites as per provisions of these 
rules By 31.12.2001 or earlier 
Identification of landfill sites for future use and making site (s) 
ready for operation 
By 31.12.2002 or earlier 
 
 
MSW Rules also provide that the biodegradable wastes shall be processed through 
biological processes like composting, vermi -composting, etc. and non-biodegradable 
wastes which could not be recycled shall be disposed of through landfills. It was observed 
that even after a passage of more than 11 years since the Rules were enforced, the State 
was yet to have a fully functional integrated MSW treatmen t plant for disposal of MSW 
in a scientific manner. 
As the data was not available either with the Board or with the Municipal Bodies, the 
audit calculated figures of generation of MSW as per the national standard of 0.45 
kg/day/person based on urban population of the State. Further, there was a wide gap 
between total MSW generated and treated/disposed of in the State during 2010 -15. The 
status of disposal of MSW in the State during 2010-15 was as under: 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 142 
Table 5.3.6 
Sl. 
No. 
District 
(13 towns) 
Urban 
Population 
based on 
2011 census 
MSW generated as 
per national per 
capita generation of 
solid waste @ 0.45kg 
/day/ person. 
(in Metric Ton per 
day) 
Total 
capacity of 
MSWT plant 
for treatment 
of waste 
(in Metric Ton 
per day) 
MSW  
treated in 
the MSWT 
plant 
(in Metric 
Ton per day) 
MSW 
disposed 
through 
landfills 
(in Metric 
Ton per day) 
MSW being 
disposed-off 
without any 
treatment in 
MSWT plant 
(in Metric Ton 
per day) 
1 East  1,22,487 55.12 35.00 42.00 Nil  20.128 
2 North  4,644 2.09 Nil  Nil  Nil  2.09 
3 West  5,248 2.36 Nil  Nil  Nil  2.36 
4 South  21,199 9.54 Nil  Nil  Nil  9.54 
 TOTAL 1,53,578 69.11 35.00 42.00 Nil  34.11 
 
Considering the figures of 69.11 MT MSW generated every day, 34.11 MT (49  per cent) 
of untreated MSW were dumped in the open every day, which worked out to a huge 
quantity of 12,450 MT of municipal wastes piled up every year causing environmental 
degradation and health hazards. Further analysis of records revealed that UDHD had 
adopted cluster approach with regard to treatment of MSW by establishing two MSW 
treatment plants at Martam for North and East districts and Sipchu for South and West 
districts.  
Further examination of records of UDHD and physical inspection of these plants reveal ed 
that: 
 Despite incurring ` 2.69 crore on the project setting up of Solid Waste Treatment 
Plant at Sipchu in South District was still incomplete which was scheduled to be 
completed in June 2008. 
 Even after incurring an expenditure of ` 7.60 crore (out of estimated sanctioned 
cost of ` 12.01 crore) on the project ‘Landfill sites at Martam’, the project was 
only 65 per cent complete due to slow pace of work which was scheduled to be 
completed by September 2015. 
 Due to non -completion of the proje ct ‘Landfill sites at Martam’ MSW was being 
thrown haphazardly here and there at the dumping site and leachates generated 
from excess wastes dumped at dumping sites were going to ground water. 
 MSW Rules 2000 (Management and Handling) also require separatio n of waste 
into bio -degradable and non -biodegradable categories right from the point of 
generation itself. While the bio-degradable MSW was to be converted to compost, 
non-biodegradable MSW was to be thrown at landfill sites and thereby decreasing 
the volume of waste to be thrown into landfill sites. It was found that UDHD had 
not put any mechanism for segregation of MSW as prescribed either at the point 
of generation or during treatment. 
 Rule 23 and 25 of MSW Rules stipulated that both water and ambient ai r quality 
in and around landfill sites need to be monitored to ensure that ground water and 
ambient air quality are not contaminated beyond acceptable limit. However, it was 
observed that the Board had not been monitoring air and ground water quality in 
                                                           
8     Figure arrived at by considering the total capacity of MSWT plant of treatment of waste. 
 

Chapter V: General Sector 
 143 
and around the dumping sites. As a result, ill effects of environment pollution 
could not be ruled out. The photographs given below substantiate the above 
findings. 
Image 5.3.9 Image 5.3.10 
  
 
Unused landfill site of Solid Waste Management at Sipchu 
 
Image 5.3.11 Image 5.3.12 
  
 
Garbage being put in the landfill at Sipchu constructed under NABARD funding  
 
Image 5.3.13 Image 5.3.14 
  
 
Incomplete landfill site at Martam, East Sikkim 
 
The MSW are being thrown haphazardly at 
the dumping site at Martam 
 
Image 5.3.15 Image 5.3.16 
  
Throwing of un-segregated  municipal waste at dumping site at Sipchu, South Sikkim 
 
Thus, the failure on the part of the Board to impress upon the municipalities/UDHD to 
comply with MSW Rules and not analysing of the reasons for non -compliance to take 
necessary remedial measures led to MSW being disposed of untreated. 


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 144 
 
In reply, the Board stated that necessary action will be taken in coordination with the 
concern Department at the earliest. 
5.3.9.6    Effects of water pollution 
Shortfalls in effluent treatment in STPs, MSW, CETPs and ETPs in the State have been 
discussed in the above paragraphs. Poor treatment of effluents before finally dischargin g 
them into jhoras and rivers adversely affects public health in the State. Polluted water 
causes water -borne diseases such as gastroenteritis, diarrhoea, hepatitis, typhoid, etc . 
Incidences of such diseases were seen in the State during the period from 2010 -15 as 
given in the Table below. 
Table 5.3.7 
Year Attention Deficiency 
Disorder Hepatitis Typhoid Enteric Fever Total 
2010-11 26,439 575 276 338 27,628 
2011-12 30,946 519 149 128 31,742 
2012-13 36,826 770 164 121 37,881 
2013-14 33,879 512 262 90 34,743 
2014-15 32,450 339 260 36 33,085 
TOTAL 1,60,540 2,715 1,111 713 1,65,079 
Source: Data furnished by the Health Care and Family Welfare Department. 
 
As may be seen from the above table, the number of water -borne diseases increased from 
27,628 in 2010 -11 to 33,085 in 2014-15. During the last five years there were a total of 
1.65 lakh cases of water borne diseases. 
 
5.3.10     Management of Hazardous Wastes  
 
As per Rule 22 of Hazardous Waste (Management, Handling and Trans Boundary 
Movement) Rules 2008, occupiers generating hazardous wastes and operators of the 
facilities involved in disposal of hazardous wastes are required to furnish an annual return 
to State Board showing details of hazardous wastes generated by them and disposal 
thereof. Based on returns filed by occupiers/operators, the Board shall prepare an 
inventory of hazardous wastes within its jurisdiction and compile  related information like 
their recycling, treatment and disposal. 
It was seen that Board had not compiled such inventory using the annual returns furnished 
by the occupiers/operators as on date of audit (July 2015). As there were no Treatment, 
Storage and Disposal Facilities (TSDFs) available in the State, the hazardous waste was 
being sent to TSDF at Haldia in West Bengal by the industries. As per the records 
(pertaining to 25 out of 48 industries generating hazardous wastes) furnished by the 
Board, 667.04 MTs of hazardous waste was sent to the TSDF, Haldia during 2010 -15. 
Details are given below:  

Chapter V: General Sector 
 145 
 
Table 5.3.8 
Details of hazardous waste treated/disposed of during 2010-15 
(In MT) 
Year Waste 
generated 
Waste disposed of 
by TSDF 
Un-disposed 
hazardous waste 
Percentage of disposal against 
total waste generated 
2010-11 343.51 Nil 343.51    0 
2011-12 343.51 Nil 343.51    0 
2012-13 343.51 Nil 343.51    0 
2013-14 343.51 271.92 71.59   79 
2014-15 347.12 347.12 Nil 100 
 1,721.16 619.04 1,102.12   36 
 
The above table revealed that during last five years 1 ,721.16 MT of hazardous wastes 
were generated by the test checked industries, out of which only 619.04 MT was disposed 
of at TSDF and the remaining 1 ,102.12 MT (64 per cent) of untreated hazardous waste 
were not transported through TSDF and there were no records available with the Board as 
well as with industries as to how these wastes were disposed of. It is likely that the wastes 
lie around in unsafe condition which would raise the toxicity of the environment.  
Further, Rule 7 of the Hazardous Wastes (Management, Handling and Trans boundary 
Movement) Rules, 2008 provides that the occupiers, recyclers, re-processors, re-users and 
operators of facilities may store the hazardous wastes for a period not exce eding ninety 
days and shall maintain a record of sale, transfer, storage, recycling and reprocessing of 
such wastes and make these record available for inspection. However, the Board may 
extend the said period in certain conditions. In the case of failure to comply, the Board 
may suspend or cancel the authorisation under Rule 6 of Hazardous Waste (Management, 
Handling and Trans-boundary Movement) Rules 2008. 
While doing physical inspection (15 -16 July 2015) of industries it was seen that most of 
these industries kept huge quantity of hazardous waste/sludge which had accumulated for 
more than ninety days, that was neither disposed of in time nor any extension of time was 
sought from the Board. The photographs below show accumulation of hazardous 
waste/sludge. 
Image 5.3.17 Image 5.3.18 
 
  
 
Sludge/Hazardous waste kept openly at CG Foods, and at Zydus Healthcare, Bagheykhola, East Sikkim 
 


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 146 
Image 5.3.19 Image 5.3.20 
 
  
 
Sludge kept in haphazard manner in the compound of Sikkim Agro Chem, Majhitar, East Sikkim 
 
In reply (June 2015), the Board stated that considering merits of each case the Board may 
extend the storage period under the Act.  
In further reply (October 2015), the Board stated that the accumulation of hazardous 
waste generated by the pharmaceuticals was because of non -lifting of waste by Haldia 
based TSDF plant due to expiry and non -renewal of MOU between West Bengal and 
Sikkim. However, reply is not tenable as records in support of contention of the Board 
were not made available to audit. 
 
5.3.11     Bio Medical Waste 
 
As per Rule 4 of the Bio -Medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998, it is 
duty of occupier of an institution generating bio -medical waste to take all steps to ensure 
that such waste is handled without any adverse effect to human health and environment. 
5.3.11.1  Health Care Facilities (HCFs) functioning without valid BMW authorisation  
As per the Notification dated 7 May 2012 and in exercise of the power conferred under 
Sub-rule (3) of Rule 8 of the Bio -medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules 
1998, occupier of an institution generating, collecting, receiving, storing, transporting,  
treating, disposing and handling bio -waste in HCFs had to obtain authorisation from the 
Board for which an occupier/operator had to pay fee as fixed by the Board according to 
various types of HCFs for grant of authorisation. 
It was observed that out of a total of 69 HCFs in the State, 49 to 62 HCFs 9 did not obtain 
any BMW authorisations during period under performance audit. Further, it was seen that 
during the same period, 20 HCFs obtained the authorisation belatedly. The irregular 
operation of HCFs witho ut any authorisation not only led to non/short realisation of 
authorisation fee amounting to ` 11.65 lakh but also left the scope of these HCFs working 
without prescribed norms leading to possibility of spreading of diseases due to improper 
treatment and disposal of BMW. 
                                                           
9     62 number of HCFs in 2010 -11, 60 number of HCFs in 2011 -12, 56 in 2012 -13, 53 in 2013 -14, 52 in 
2014-15 and 49 in 2015-16. 


Chapter V: General Sector 
 147 
5.3.11.2   Health Care Facilities (HCFs) functioning without BMW treatment facilities 
As per schedule I of Rule 5 of the Bio -medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules 
1998, every occupier shall set up requisite BMW treatment facilities  like incinerator, 
autoclave, microwave system, shredders, etc. for treatment of waste or ensure requisite 
treatment of waste by having a tie up with a common BMW treatment facility. It was 
observed that no common BMW treatment facility existed in the Stat e. Audit of records 
revealed that most of HCFs were not complying with above conditions as given in table 
below: 
Table 5.3.9 
Year Total no. of 
HCFs 
No. of HCFs submitting 
Annual Reports to 
SPCB 
Status of treatment equipment in the HCFs 
Incinerators Autoclaves Micro-oven Shredders 
Required 
Available 
Shortage 
Required 
Available 
Shortage 
Required 
Available 
Shortage 
Required 
Available 
Shortage 
2010-11 48 34 6 6 0 34 1 33 34 4 30 6 1 5 
2011-12 48 14 6 6 0 14 1 13 14 4 10 6 1 5 
2012-13 48 15 6 6 0 15 1 14 15 4 11 6 1 5 
2013-14 69 24 6 6 0 24 9 15 24 6 18 6 11 - 
2014-15 69 22 6 6 0 22 5 17 22 2 20 6 1 5 
Source: Departmental figures. 
 
It could be seen from the table above that the total numbers of HCFs during 2010 -11 to 
2012-13 were 48 which rose to 69 from 2013 -14. However, it was seen that during the 
years 2010-11 to 2014-15, only 34, 14, 15, 24 and 22 HCFs submitted their annual reports 
in the respective years to the Board and rest HCFs did not submit their annual reports/ 
returns for onward forwarding to the CPCB. Further, all these HCFs were not having 
requisite BMW treatment facilities as per norms throughout the period of audit, v iz. 13 to 
33 HCFs were running without any autoclave during the period of audit, 10 to 30 HCFs 
were not having any micro -oven and 0 to 5 HCFs were operating without any shedders. 
Under the circumstances, spreading/transmission of diseases could not be ruled out.  
The Board did not have records of total BMW generated by 69 HCFs in the State; 
however, the Board had partial records of total quantity of BMW generated from HCFs 
which had submitted annual reports during the period under audit.  
Compilation from a nnual reports revealed that total BMW generated during the year 
2010-15 was around 606.27 MT (quantity would have been much higher had the Board 
furnished total figure of BMW generated in all the HCFs) and its treatment was not done 
as per the Act as BMW t reatment equipments were insufficient to treat it properly. The 
Board failed to issue directions or initiate legal action under the EP Act against defaulting 
HCFs. 
5.3.11.3   Physical verification of Health Care Facilities (HCFs) 
The Healthcare, Human Services and Family Welfare Department informed that for the 
purpose of treatment and disposal of bio -medical waste, State Hospitals and District 
Hospitals were required to have Incinerator, Microwave Disinfection Machine, 
Autoclave, Shredder, Needle destroyer and Sharp Pit and Public Health Centers were 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 148 
required to have Microwave, Disinfection Machine, Autoclave, Needle destroyer and 
Sharp Pit. 
Availability of BMW treatment facilities were physically verified by Audit (June -July 
2015) in some of HCFs and it was seen that: 
 District Hospital, Namchi was not having a Shredder; 
 STNM Hospital, Gangtok was not having Autoclave;  
 Microwave Disinfection Machine was out of order and Sharp Pit was kept open; 
 Central Referral Hospital, Tadong was  not having Shredder and Microwave 
Disinfection Machine while the Sharp Pit was under construction; 
 PHC, Temi was having two Autoclaves, one of them was not working for want of 
repair and the other one was not installed; 
 PHC, Jorethang was having uncovered Sharp Pit; 
 PHC, Rhenock was having idle shredder for want of three phase electricity supply. 
The following photographs show the above deficiencies: 
Image 5.3.21 Image 5.3.22 
  
Image 5.3.23 Image 5.3.24 
  
 
Under construction Sharp Pit at CRH, Tadong 
 
Unused Autoclaves at PHC, Temi 
 
In reply (October 2015), the Board stated that the necessary actions for compliance would 
be taken in coordination with the concerned Department. 
 
 
 


Chapter V: General Sector 
 149 
 
5.3.12     Air Pollution  
 
Air pollution occurs due to increase in the concentration of foreign particles like 
Respirable Suspended Particulate Matter (RSPM), Sulphur Dioxide (SO 2), Nitrogen 
Dioxide (NO 2), Carbon Monoxide (CO), Lead, Ozone depleting substances, etc. which 
are harmful to living organisms. 
Increased air pollution adversely affects human health by causing respiratory diseases like 
asthma, bronchitis, etc. For grant of consent under the Air Act 1981 it was mandatory 
before commissioning of the smoke emitting plants (HEP, Pharmaceuticals, Disti lleries, 
Stone crushers, etc.) that infrastructural facilities for monitoring of stack emissions and 
ambient air quality, emission control instruments and a well -equipped laboratory should 
be in place.  
5.3.12.1   Inadequate monitoring of air quality 
The B oard had identified seven 10 numbers of sites for air quality monitoring stations 
across the State but had not established any air quality monitoring stations as on date of 
Audit. Though the CPCB prescribed (April 2011) a list of twelve important air quality  
parameters11 to be analysed by monitoring laboratories, the Board had procured 
equipments for monitoring of only four air quality parameters 12. The Board had not 
conducted any studies to know whether the levels of 12 parameters were within 
permissible limit as prescribed under National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) 
and to identify the causes for air pollution. It was further observed that under National Air 
Quality Monitoring Programme, the Board had procured (May 2011) all machines and 
equipments at  a cost of ` 30.77 lakh with assistance of CPCB ( ` 26.89 lakh) for 
establishment of seven ambient air quality monitoring stations in the State. Further, 
despite repeated requests and reminders from CPCB for immediate installation and 
commissioning of these  stations and furnishing of air monitoring data, the machines and 
equipments had not (July 2015) been installed and put to operation. Scrutiny further 
revealed that after purchase of above machines and equipments, the Board started (June 
2011) proposal for  recruitment of technical staff for operating these stations which had 
not been finalised so far despite assurance from CBCB that all recurring expenditure on 
operation and maintenance of these stations including salary would be borne by the 
CPCB. The machines and equipments were kept idle/uninstalled at Central Laboratory as 
seen from the following photographs: 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
10        Namchi, Jorethang, Mangan, Chungthang, Singtam, Rangpo and Pelling. 
11      SO2, NO2, PM10, PM 2.5, Ozone, Lead, Carbon Monoxide, Ammonia, Benzene, Benzo, Arsenic and 
Nickel. 
12       NO2, SO2, SPM and RSPM. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 150 
Image 5.3.25 Image 5.3.26 
  
 
Machines and equipments kept idle/uninstalled at Central Laboratory, Gangtok  
 
In reply, the Board stated that at present it was able to monitor only four parameters of air 
pollution and process for procurement of infrastructure (machines and equipments) to 
monitor all parameter as per NAAQSs was under progress. Further, it is also m entioned 
that the Board is in the process of installation of seven air monitoring stations in 
important towns for monitoring all the 12 parameters as per National standard. However, 
the fact remains that the monitoring of only four parameters of air pollut ion, viz. NO2, 
SO2, SPM and RSPM could only do a partial evaluation of the quality of air and in absence 
of such complete evaluation of the air quality, remedial measures could also not be 
ascertained. 
5.3.12.2    Stone Crushers operating without obtaining consent 
As per Schedule 1 to Environment (Protection) Rules 1986, various parameters and 
standards for consent to stone crushers were prescribed for preventing and abating 
environmental pollution.  
It was noticed that there were 75 stone crushers register ed for consent to operate from the 
Board. However, actual number of stone crushers operating in the State were not known 
as the Board did not have inventory of these crusher machines. From records made 
available to audit, it was seen that during the period  of PA, three to 23 stone crushers 
were operating without any consents. It was observed that Board renewed consent to 
operate of even those crusher machines which did not deposit their consent fees due for 
the previous years. The reasons for renewing conse nts despite non -payment of previous 
dues was not on record. It was also noticed that the Board gave consent to 18 stone 
crusher operators who had belatedly applied for renewal of consent ranging from 20 to 80 
days. 
Further, pollution created due to particl es generated by stone crushing units was not 
monitored by the Board with regard to compliance of the standards for stone crushers in 
the State. The Board was to analyse samples for Suspended Particulate Materials (SPM) 
twice a month throughout the year for  each stone crusher, drawing samples at a distance 
of 40 metres from an isolated unit as well as from a unit located in a cluster in order to 
ensure that presence of SPM was within prescribed limit. However, the Board did not 
conduct regular inspections of  stone crushers and never analysed air samples in the 


Chapter V: General Sector 
 151 
vicinity of any of the stone crushing unit nor issued notices/directions to defaulting units. 
The Board also did not take any legal action against the erring units under environmental 
Acts/Rules.  
Thus, allowance to operate these crusher machines without consent resulted in free 
blowing of dust/sand particles in air which could result in occurrence of various health 
hazards. Further, non -realisation of consent fees also led to loss of Government revenue 
to the extent of ` 20.65 lakh during the period under audit. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Board replied (October 2015) that the points 
raised by the audit had been noted for adherence in future. Further, the Board stated that 
due to lack of manpower it could not conduct the inspections and the units were required 
to carry out the monitoring through third party accredited laboratories. 
5.3.12.3    Non-monitoring of emission from Diesel Generator sets  
As per Sl.No.95 of Schedule 1 of Environme nt (Protection) Rules 1986, which states that 
for the purpose of protecting and improving quality of environment and preventing and 
abating environmental pollution, the standards for emission or discharge of environmental 
pollutants from the industries, op erations or processes shall be as specified in Schedule I 
to IV.  
The Board did not have any data in respect of total number of Diesel Generator (DG) sets 
with a capacity of 15 KVA and above available in the State. However, from examination 
of the consent records available with the Board, DG set operators were 125 in number in 
the State. The Board had fixed consent fee of ` 5,000 per year for each DG set. It was 
seen that the Board was realising consent fee towards CFO from those DG set operators 
who were applying for CFO. However, the Board did not have any actual figure of the 
DG sets. There was also a delay in applying for renewal of consent by the 39 DG set 
operators ranging between 16 and 235 days. 
Further, it was also found that the Board was granting  renewal of consent to the operators 
without clearing their outstanding consent fees due for the previous years. No measures to 
control the pollution were ever taken by inspecting the units by the Board as no such 
records could be made available to the audit. 
Thus, operation of DG sets without consent was not only irregular but also led to non -
realisation of consent fee of ` 21.50 lakh. 
While accepting the fact, the Board replied (October 2015) that the points raised by the 
audit has been noted for initiation of necessary action. 
5.3.12.4   Vehicular Pollution  
Monitoring of air pollution is the responsibility of the Board under the Air Act, while the 
control of vehicular pollution is vested with Transport Department under Central Motor 
Vehicle Act, 1988 and  Rules 1989. The Board was to lay down the standards for 
automobile emission under Section 17(1)(g) of the Air Act and the State Government in 
consultation with the Board was to instruct the Transport Department to ensure 
compliance of the standards so laid down. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 152 
Motor Vehicle Division (MVD) under transport department  was directly responsible for 
implementation of MV Acts and Rules. As per Rule 115 of MV Rules 1989, idling CO 
(Carbon Monoxide) emission limits prescribed by STA for vehicles by volume were 4. 5 
per cent and 3 per cent respectively. There was a growth of 43 per cent  vehicles in 
Sikkim from 47,612 vehicles in 2011-12 to 68,162 vehicles in 2014-15. 
In Sikkim, only two numbers of private Auto Emission Testing Centres (AETCs) were 
authorised by MVD till 2014 -15 for routine check of vehicular emission and issuing 
Pollution Under Control (PUC) certificate under MV Rules. T he year-wise total number 
of vehicles required to do auto emission test and PUC certificates issued by two AETCs is 
given below: 
Table 5.3.10 
Year 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
No. of registered vehicle 47,612 51,881 60,848 64,574 68,162 
PUC to be issued as above (twice in a year) 95,224 1,03,762 1,21,696 1,29,148 1,36,324 
PUC certificate issued by firm 9,008 9,084 8,619 9,692 9,846 
Vehicles running without PUC  
(percentage in brackets) 
43,108 
(91) 
47,339 
(91) 
56,539 
(93) 
59,728 
(92) 
63,239 
(93) 
Percentage of emission tested  9 9 7 8 7 
Source: Annual Reports of Transport Department (Motor Vehicle Division) 
 
It can be seen from the table above that the percentage of PUC issued to vehicles were 
very low and ranged between seven per cent and nine per cent. Further, records relating 
to vehicles detected with emitting excessive smoke and required to undergo re -test for 
issue of fresh PUC certificates and polluting the environment were not available. I t was 
found that neither the Board had ever issued any advice for setting up vehicular pollution 
control laboratories nor these laboratories were set up by the MVD. Be sides, surprise 
checks of vehicles on roads by expert monitoring team attached to each laboratory were 
to be conducted. However, no such surprise checks were conducted. Thus, monitoring of 
vehicle emission norms could not be carried out.  
In reply (October 2015), the Board stated that the necessary action for compliance would 
be taken in coordination with the concerned Department. 
 
5.3.13     Laboratory Management  
 
As per Section 17(2) of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1974 and Air 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1981, the Board may establish or recognise a 
laboratory or laboratories to enable the Board to perform its functions including the 
analysis of samples of water from any strea m or well or of samples of any sewage or 
trade effluents and stack emission. 
5.3.13.1   Lack of infrastructure facilities and manpower at laboratories 
The State Board may establish or recognise laboratories for analysing water/air samples 
to enable the Board to perform the functions stipulated in those Acts. Guidelines issued 
(June 2008) by CPCB for recognition of environmental laboratories under EP Act by 
Central Government stipulated certain minimum standards, which included availability of 
capacity/equipment for conducting certain minimum air/water quality tests and 

Chapter V: General Sector 
 153 
recognition/accreditation by the National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibrati on 
of Laboratories (NABL).  
Audit observed that the Board had established only one Central Laboratory. The 
laboratory had neither been recognised under the EP Act by Central Government nor 
recognised/accredited by the National Accreditation Board for Testi ng and Calibration of 
Laboratories (NABL). The Laboratory did not have adequate facilities even for a 
minimum of five essential group tests, viz. physical, inorganic, organic, microbiological 
and toxicological tests for water analysis. For air analysis, th e laboratory must have 
facilities for the first four of the above tests and an Environmental Laboratory should also 
provide for biological tests, characterisation of hazardous waste and soil/sludge/  
sediment/solid waste analysis. It was, however, noticed t hat the laboratory did not have 
the capacity for conducting all the mandatory tests as out of 37 water test analysis 
equipments, only 14 equipments were available in the laboratory. Similarly, out of 16 
equipments for air stack test analysis, only two equi pments were available in the 
laboratory.  
The laboratory either did not have most of the mandatory equipments or had non -
functional equipments. As per norms (February 1996), the Board was required to collect 
water and stack samples and report the results o f the analysis to the CPCB, but it was 
found that the Board had not kept any record in respect of number of samples collected 
and reports analysed. Further, it was found that laboratory also had shortage of three 
technical staff as against the norms prescr ibed by CPCB. The Board did not have any air 
stack analysis laboratory till the date of audit and air testing machines which were 
procured four years back were still lying in the space of water testing laboratory. The 
Central Laboratory was also in very po or condition as can be seen from the following 
photographs: 
Image 5.3.27 Image 5.3.28 
  
 
Pitiable condition of the Central Laboratory  
 
In reply, the Board stated that a proposal was being submitted for recognition of the 
laboratory. Further, the Board had submitted a comprehensive proposal on requirement of 
lab equipments to MoEF for financial support. However, the fact remains that the SPCB 
was yet to be recognised under the EP Act by Central Government and was also not 
recognised/accredited by the National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration of 
Laboratories (NABL).  Further, the laboratory needed to be equipped with necessary 
equipments. 


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 154 
5.3.14    Management of Plastic Wastes 
 
As per Rule 3 of the Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) Rules 2011, the 
concerned municipal authorities are responsible for ensuring safe collection, storage, 
segregation, transportation, processing and disposal of plastic waste. 
As per data available with the Board, there was no plastic manufacturing /recycling unit 
and there were also no registered plastic collection centres in the State. Moreover, the 
Board did not have the actual information regarding generation, segregation, collection 
and disposal of plastic in the State. In the absence of such da ta, the quantum of plastic 
waste generated could not be ascertained as a result of which the enormity of problem and 
related remedial measure could not be determined. 
In reply, the Board stated that process for management of plastic waste was being 
initiated. 
 
5.3.15    Management of e-wastes 
 
Ministry of Environment and Forest, GOI vide gazette notification 13 enacted the e -waste 
(Management and Handling) Rules 2011 with the primary objective of managing e -waste 
generated in the country in an environmentally  friendly manner. These Rules came into 
force since May 2012. As per the Rules, e -waste   consists of “waste electrical and 
electronic equipment, whole or in part or reject from their manufacturing and repair 
process, which are intended to be discarded”. T he e -waste falling under this category 
cannot be disposed of along with the MSW; instead, the Rules stipulate that it should be 
channelised to authorised collection centres or registered dismantlers or recyclers.  
However, audit observed that there were no authorised collection centres or registered 
dismantlers or recyclers in the State, except some initiation taken by the Department of 
Information Technology in co -ordination with other departments in this direction . 
Further, it was seen that in absence of any registered e -waste dealer and authorised 
collection centre in the State, e -waste was being thrown by generators of e -waste along 
with MSW at the MSW dumping sites as could be seen from the photographs below:  
Image 5.3.29 Image 5.3.30 
  
 
e-waste thrown at municipal waste dumping site at Sipchu 
 
                                                           
13   Gazette Notification No.1125 (E) dated 14 May 2010, Extraordinary Part II, Section 3, sub -section(ii). 


Chapter V: General Sector 
 155 
Thus, failure in establishing authorised collection centres in the State for handling e-waste 
generated was fraught with risk of creating environmental hazards as e-waste contained 
cadmium, lead oxide, mercury, polychlorinated biphenyls, etc. which are very harmful for 
human health and environment. 
In reply, the Board stated that process for management of e-waste was being initiated. 
 
5.3.16    Pollution from Slaughter Houses 
 
Standards for discharge of effluents from slaughter -houses have been laid down and 
notified under Sl .No.50 of Schedule I of the Environment (Protection) Act  1986. 
Abattoirs generally use large quantities of water for washing meat and clea ning 
processing areas. CPCB had prescribed (January 2001)  that waste water discharged from 
slaughter-houses should be treated appropriately to meet the prescribed standards. 
Discharge of untreated effluents from these slaughter houses could result in incre ase in 
pathogens which may percolate and contaminate groundwater. 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that there were 11 slaughter houses in the State. Out of 
these, 10 were functioning without any consent from the Board and had not even applied 
for the conse nts and only one at Majhitar, East Sikkim was functioning with the valid 
consent from the Board. Further, it was found that thes e slaughter houses were 
functioning without any ETPs and discharging sewage into municipal drains/nearby water 
bodies/lands, cau sing water pollution and increasing the risk to public health. Further, 
there were no arrangements for safe disposal of solid waste generated in these slaughter 
houses. Till date of audit, only five slaughter houses were functional and six slaughter 
houses were closed since September 2014. The Board also failed to realise ` 8.80 lakh of 
consent fees from these slaughter houses. 
The Board stated that the Slaughter House at Majhitar, East Sikkim which was under the 
control of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services Department, though was not 
having Effluent Treatment Plant but was having Septic Tank for effluents of the Slaughter 
House. However, physical inspection (16 July 2015) of the said Slaughter House revealed 
that the Slaughter House was not having an y Septic Tank and entire effluent of the 
Slaughter House was directly discharged into the river Teesta through drains as could be 
seen from the photographs below: 
Image 5.3.31 Image 5.3.32 
  
 
Effluent of the Slaughter House, Majhitar directly going in the drain 


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 156 
 
Though the Board has power to issue directions under the provisions of Water Act to 
violators of environmental laws including the power to direct closure of any industry, 
operation or process, it did not issue any directions to these slaughter houses. 
In reply (October 2015), the Board stated that it had already issued directions to the 
Animal Husbandry Department, Government of Sikkim to comply with the norms 
governing the slaughter houses. 
 
5.3.17    Public Awareness Meetings and Advertisement 
 
According to Section 17 (1)(e) of Water (Prevent ion and Control of Pollution) Act  1974, 
the Board is required to collaborate with Central Board in organising mass awareness 
programme relating to prevention, control and abatement of water pollution. It wa s seen 
from records that the Board had given very little emphasis on conducting of public 
awareness programmes to encourage the citizens regarding environmental issues. Regular 
meetings at quarterly intervals with representatives of Local Residents and Welfare 
Associations and NGOs were also not held. Further, the Board also needed to conduct 
awareness programmes by publishing pamphlets, appeal in newspapers, etc. However, it 
was found that the Board spent ` 42.20 lakh during the period 2010 -15 for conducti ng 
some awareness programmes but there were no written records/documents of meetings/ 
activities held available with the Board. In the absence of these records, the actual number 
of public awareness meetings held could not be ascertained. Further, the Boar d had not 
ever published any study/research paper till date of audit (August 2015). 
As the Board could not produce records/documents of meetings/activities held, the Audit 
team, in order to assess public awareness on environment pollution in the State, prepared 
questionnaires for survey on the awareness of environment pollution in the State from the 
common citizens. The questionnaires were uploaded in the web sites as well as advertised 
in the local newspapers seeking public responses but the obtained re sponses were very 
poor. Hence, survey was taken up independently by the audit team in two selected 
districts (East and South) with a sample size of 157 persons from different classes of 
society like teachers, students, farmers, contractors, etc. The analys is of the feedback 
obtained from survey revealed the following points: 
 Even though most of the people were aware of Pollution Control Board (around 
72 per cent) but the people did not know the functions and activities of the 
Pollution Board (64 per cent ) a nd the common citizen never approached SPCB 
(not even one per cent) for environmental issues; 
 People had a general idea of air pollution, water pollution and noise pollution. As 
per the survey, the main reasons behind air pollutions were due to smoke emitt ing 
from vehicles, burning of plastic and emission of smoke from industries. The main 
reasons for water pollutions were leakage of sewage waste, dumping of garbage, 
improper drainage system, etc. The noise pollution was caused due to the 
movement of heavy vehicles, blowing of horns and loudspeakers; 
 

Chapter V: General Sector 
 157 
 Majority of people (i.e. around 60 per cent) had no fair idea of bio medical waste 
and its sources and treatments; 
 Around 52 per cent of people did not have knowledge about the Municipal Solid 
Waste and its sou rces and treatments; 66 per cent people did not know about the 
e-Waste and its treatment and 75 per cent people did not have any idea about the 
Battery Waste and its treatment; 
 Though the State had two MSW Treatment Plants in South and East Districts, 
around 70 per cent of people were not aware of these Treatment Plants and 64 per 
cent of people were not aware of Sewage Treatment Plants and Effluent Treatment 
Plants in the State; 
 Around 61 per cent  of people had never heard of any Environment Education 
Programme conducted by State Government/Pollution Board or any other Agency. 
However, most of the environment education related programmes were conducted 
on Environment Day celebration in the schools and not by the SPCB. 
 Most of the people (90 per cent) surveyed had no idea about the categorisation of 
industries. 
Thus from the analysis of survey conducted by the audit team, it was observed that the 
SPCB had failed to create awareness  among the common citizens on the environment 
issues such as the activities of the Board, different types of wastes generated and its 
sources; various types of treatment plants in the State, conducting of environment 
education programmes by the Board and categories of polluting industries in the State. 
 
Audit objective-2: 
Whether monitoring by the Board of the compliance to Acts, Rules and conditions by 
the stakeholders was efficient and effective? 
 
5.3.18    Compliance mechanism 
 
As per provisions of various Rules made under Environment (Pollution) Act, the Board 
may cancel or suspend authorisation/registration granted if there is failure to comply with 
any of the conditions by the authorised persons/registered manufacturer, recycler or 
dismantler. The  Board may also issue directions to the defaulting persons during the 
course of suspension and failure to comply with or contravention of any provision or 
orders or directions issued, shall entail imprisonment and/or fine. 
However, it was seen that though the Board stated that during inspections, non -
compliance was being monitored in the industries, no such inspection reports were 
available with the Board and even inspections of the industries were also very few in 
number. Notices and directions were being drafted by the hired legal person/general staff 
available with the Board and not by the law/ technical division as no such division 
existed. Though only one direction for closure of an industry was issued during the period 
under PA, no penalty was imposed on that industry. It was also found that though the 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 158 
Board had issued 10 show -cause notices to various industries, their follow -up actions 
were not taken by the Board. 
Further, in the physical verification it was seen that though the ‘ Pristine Life Science, 
Singtam’, a pharmaceutical industry, and ‘Mayell and Fraser, Bagheykhola’, a brewery, 
were not having any ETP, consents to operate were being renewed every year by the 
Board with condition to have ETP with Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD) . This showed that 
the industries had not been complying with the directions and despite this, the Board had 
been renewing consents without physical inspection of the industries. 
While accepting the fact, the Board replied (October 2015) that the points ra ised by audit 
had been noted and it was prepared to carry out prior inspection before renewal of 
consents in further instances. 
 
5.3.19    Non-submission of Environmental Audit Reports (EARs) 
 
As per Notification issued by GOI in March 1992, every industry requiring consent under 
Air Act 1981 or Hazardous Waste (Management and Handling) Rules 1989 shall submit 
an EAR for the preceding financial year to the State Board by 15 May every year, 
indicating the quantity of pollutants generated.  
It was found that out of total of 55 numbers of industries (HEPs and Pharmaceuticals), 
which were registered with Commerce and Industries Department, only 16 industries 
submitted EARs and other 39 industries to whom consents were granted by the Board had 
not submitted their EARs. The Board, despite this violation, had not initiated any action 
against the erring industries. In the absence of the EARs, the quantity of pollutants 
released by these industries to the atmosphere was not ascertainable by the Board. 
The Board replied (October 2015) that on the basis of audit observation it had directed all 
the industries to comply with the requirements of submission of environmental audit 
reports without further delay. 
 
Audit objective-3: 
Whether fund management by the Board was efficient to secure optimum utilisation? 
 
5.3.20    Financial Management 
 
5.3.20.1   Financial resources of the Board 
The main sources of income of the Board were contributions made in the form of grants -
in-aid by the State/Central Governments including CPCB, fees collected while granting 
Consent for Establishment/Operation (CFE/CFO) and their renewals under Air and Water  
Acts, sample analysis fees, Bio-Medical Waste Management authorisation fee, etc. 
5.3.20.2   Budget and Expenditure 
Under Section 38 of the Water Act, the Board shall, during each financial year, prepare a 
budget in respect of the ensuing financial year sh owing the estimated receipt and 
expenditure. It was noticed that the Board was not preparing any budget estimate to plan 

Chapter V: General Sector 
 159 
its resources (funds). However, expenditure was incurred by the Board in an ad-hoc 
manner. The total funds received and expenditure inc urred by the Board during last five 
years is shown in table below: 
Table 5.3.11 
(` in lakh) 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Funds received Total 
funds 
available 
Expenditure 
incurred 
Percentage of 
expenditure 
incurred 
Closing 
balance 
Percentage 
of savings GOI State Other 
2010-11 68.78 26.89 11.00  265.76 372.43 242.67 65 129.75 35 
2011-12 129.75 32.00 28.62 225.83 416.20 193.65 47 222.55 53 
2012-13 222.55 86.00 15.41 152.77 476.73 112.82 24 363.91 76 
2013-14 363.91 Nil  Nil  222.55 586.46 117.48 20 468.99 80 
2014-15 468.99 Nil  54.08 180.25 703.32 135.17 19 568.15 81 
TOTAL  144.89 109.11 1,047.16  801.79    
Source: Audited Annual Accounts of the SPCB. 
 
Further, the year-wise break ups of expenditure under different heads by the Board during 
the last five years are given in the table and chart below:  
Table 5.3.12  
 (` in lakh) 
Year 
Total 
funds 
available 
Expenditure incurred 
Savings 
over 
total 
funds 
available 
Dir& 
Adm. 
Vehicles Lab 
Equip-
ments 
Monito-
ring Trainings 
Awareness 
& 
Advertise-
ments 
MSW Projects, beautification of 
bird park, Hydel Power 
Projects, Waste Water 
Management (WWM) Total 
expenditure 
Purchase Running 
expenses 
MSW 
project HEPs WWM Others 
(misc) 
2010-11 372.43 52.06 
(21) Nil 4.75(2) 9.43 
(9) Nil 0 (0) 13.56 (6) 66.25 28.69 9.09 58.85 242.67 (65) 129.75 
(35) 
2011-12 416.20 55.90 
(29) 
17.13 
(9) Nil 2.74 
(1) 
30.77 
(16) 0 (0) 5.91 
(3) 25.78 36.78 Nil 18.64 193.65 (47) 222.55 
(53) 
2012-13 476.73 51.31 
(46) 25.55 1.09 3.48 
(3) Nil 1.20 (1) 2.61 
(2) Nil Nil Nil 27.58 112.82 (24) 363.91 
(76) 
2013-14 586.46 75.81 
(65) Nil 9.64 (8) 18.87 
(16) Nil 0.10 (1) 2.54 
(2) Nil Nil Nil 10.52 117.48(20) 468.98  
(80) 
2014-15 703.32 75.15 
(56) 
12.34 
(9) 10.85 (8) 0.85 
(1) Nil 6.21 (4) 17.58 
(13) Nil Nil Nil 12.19 135.17 (19) 568.15 
(81) 
TOTAL  310.23 55.02 26.33 35.37 30.77 7.51 42.20 92.03 65.47 9.09 127.78 801.79  
(Source: Audited Annual Accounts of the SPCB):      Note: Figures in brackets indicate percentage 
Chart 5.3.2 
 
310.23
81.35
35.37 30.77 7.51
42.2
166.59
127.77
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Expenditure in various components during 2010-15
(` in lakh)

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 160 
 
From the above table and chart it could be seen that utilisation of funds by the Board 
against the available funds was poor and it ranged between 19 and 24 per cent during 
2012-13 to 2014 -15. Poor utilisation of funds was attributed mainly due to imbalance d 
spending as could be seen that funds during 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 were utilised mainly 
for MSW and HEPs leaving other items like awareness, training, etc . with less 
expenditure.  Reasons for poor utilisation of funds were not on record. 
Further, the Board had not given emphasis on inspections and monitoring (except in 
2011-12) of the industries and similarly only a meagre amount was spent on awareness 
drives, advertisement and trainings. 
While accepting the points raised by audit, the Board stated (October 2015) that it had 
placed the budget before the Board Members in September 2015 and had also obtained 
approval of the same. 
5.3.20.3      Non realisation of Water Cess by the Board 
As per Rule 3 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act 19 77, enacted 
by Parliament, water cess is to be collected from the State Industries and Municipalities 
by the Board and remitted to the Central Government. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that the Board was not collecting Cess from the 
industries/municipal bod ies under Water Cess Act  1977. The water cess as calculated 
from the 71 test checked files of different industries by the audit revealed that the 
WSPHED supplied 7,88,61,900 kilo litre ( @ 1,57,72,380 kilo litre per year) water for 
domestic consumption, hospitals, etc. and the industries utilised 4,37,67,205 kilo litre (@ 
87,54,747 kilo litre per year) of water for the industrials uses. The total water cess 
amounted to ` 59.54 lakh ( ` 43.77 lakh from tes t checked industries at the rate of 
` 0.10/kilo litre and ` 15.77 lakh from the WSPHED at the rate of ` 0.02/kilo litre) which 
remained to be realised. Further, the details of consumption of water by the HEPs were 
not furnished by the Board to audit and hence could not be examined.   
Failure to collect water cess from users resulted in shortfall in income amounting to 
` 59.54 lakh to the Board as the amount of cess apportioned to State Board by GOI 
depends on the amount collected in that State. Thus, amount  to that extent was not 
available to the Board for its activities. Though the Water Cess Act provides that non -
payment of water cess attracts levy of interest (two per cent per month), penalty (up to an 
equal amount of arrears) and imprisonment (up to six months), the Board failed to take 
initiatives for effective implementation of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Cess Act, 1977. 
While accepting the audit contention, the Board replied (October 2015) that the points 
raised by the audit had been di scussed thoroughly in the Board Meeting and all the 
members of the Board agreed the proposal unanimously to implement the Water Cess Act 
1977. 
 
 

Chapter V: General Sector 
 161 
 
5.3.20.4    Diversion of funds under Sikkim Ecology Fund and Environmental Cess  
The State of Sikkim notified the Sikkim Ecology Fund and Environmental Cess Act in 
2005 and the Rules there under were framed in 2007. As per the Act, whoever brings non-
biodegradable materials in the State of Sikkim with whatsoever purpose would be levied 
environmental cess at the ra te of one per cent of total turnover on sale price. The broad 
objective for utilisation of this fund was to protect and improve the quality of 
environment, control and abate environment pollution and to take measures for 
restoration of ecological balance of the State. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that the collection of environmental cess started from the 
year 2007-08 onwards under the Sikkim Ecology Fund and Environmental Cess Act. It 
was found that a total of ` 172.60 Crore was collected till 2014 -15. However, while 
scrutinising utilisation of this ecology funds, it was seen that out of ` 106.46 crore of 
expenditure, a huge amount of ` 90.01 crore (85 per cent ) was diverted for various 
purposes like construction, payments towards salaries, wages, muster rolls, purchase of 
vehicles, furniture, beautification of religious places, computers, establishment of saw 
mills in various places, and release of state share of various centrally sponsored schemes. 
Further, it was also noticed that out of the total diversion of ` 90.01 crore , the funds 
amounting to ` 16.46 crore was transferred to Tourism Department for the project Sky -
walk at Bhale ydunga, South Sikkim and an amount of ` 24.60 crore was transferred to 
different sectors, other than ecology and environment for development purpo ses. The 
details are given in the following table: 
Table 5.3.13 
(` in lakh) 
Ecology Cess Funds ulitised for various purposes other than environment and 
ecology Amount 
Funds transferred to different sectors for developmental purposes other than ecology 
and environment purposes. 2,460.00 
Payments towards salaries; wages; muster rolls 1,916.09 
Release of state share of various centrally sponsored schemes 1,866.16 
Funds transferred to Tourism Department for the project Sky-walk at Bhaleydunga 1,646.05 
Construction works, viz. Residential quarters, offices, footpath, gates, repairs, etc.  866.31 
Purchase of vehicles 79.04 
Establishment of saw mills in various places 65.60 
Furniture of offices and forest residential quarters 31.65 
On computers 26.20 
Beautification of religious places 14.50 
Miscellaneous items  29.50 
TOTAL 9,001.10 
 
Hence, the funds so collected for the purpose of protection and improving the quality of 
environment, control and abating environment pollution and for taking measures for 
restoration of ecological balance of the State was mostly (85 per cent) diverted to other 
works defeated the purpose for which the environment cess was collected. 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 162 
Audit objective-4: 
Whether adequate man power and effective Internal Control mechanisms existed? 
 
5.3.21    Manpower Management 
 
Deployment of adequate manpower in the Board is required to carry out its various 
functions for prevention, control and abatement of pollution. 
5.3.21.1   Shortage of manpower 
Audit of records of the Board revealed that it was functioning from the existing 
manpower which was appointed prior to 2005. However, there was considerable increase 
in number of industries from 82(2005) to 331(2015) due to rapid industrialisation and 
establishment of industries like Hydro Electric Projects, Pharmaceutical units, Distilleries, 
Breweries, etc. in post 2005 period as shown in Table-5.3.14. Thus, it was imperative that 
the volume of work had increased, which necessitated increased requirement of 
manpower for monitoring, inspection and supervision of establishments for enforcement 
of various environmental Acts.  
It was seen from the proposal of the Board (September 2012) sent to CPCB that they were 
in need of 31 number of technical and non -technical staff against which the Board was 
having at its disposal only 14 people with a shortage of 17 numbers of staff as shown in 
Table-5.3.15. 
The details of industries established and manpower available is given in the tables below: 
Table 5.3.14 
Status of industries 
Status of industries HEPs Pharma-
ceuticals 
Distilleries & 
Breweries Hotels Hotmix 
plants 
SSI & 
others 
Stone 
crushers Total 
No. of industries 
prior to 2005 01 01 04 50 0 24 02 82 
No. of industries 
at present 17 38 10 119 18 54 75 331 
Table 5.3.15 
Details of manpower 
Cadre/ post Number of staff available Number of staff  required Shortage of staff 
Scientific  07 11 04 
Technical  01 02 01 
Administration  05 07 02 
Finance  01 04 03 
Computer  00 01 01 
Legal 00 01 01 
Drivers and Gr ‘D’ 00 05 05 
TOTAL 14 31 17 
 
Thus, it was evident that there was inadequate staff which led to compromise in 
discharging its responsibilities effectively with regard to issue of consents/authorisations 
to establish and operate, inspection, monitoring, supervision, conducting public hearings, 
etc. 

Chapter V: General Sector 
 163 
The disproportionate deployment of manpower has adversely impacted the objective of 
retaining the pollution under control in the context of supervision, inspection and 
monitoring of industrial units and units generating BMW, STPs, MSWs, etc. 
5.3.21.2   Appointment of Chairperson and Member Secretary  
As per the Section 4.2(a) and (f) of Water (Prevention and Control) Act 1974 and section 
5.2 (a) and (f) of Air Act 1981, the Chai rperson of the Board should have qualification 
and special knowledge or experience in respect of matters relating to environmental 
protection or he should be a person having knowledge or practical experience in 
administering institutes dealing with environmental matters. He is to be nominated by the 
State Government. Similarly, the Member Secretary (MS) should possess qualification, 
knowledge and experience of scientific, engineering and management aspects of pollution 
control and he is to be appointed by t he State Government. Further, it was seen that the 
MoEF, as directed by the Supreme Court Monitoring Committee (SCMC), requested (16 
August 2005) the Chief Secretaries (CS) of all States for filing affidavit taking clear stand 
in matter of appointments of the Chairperson and MS in the State Boards on the 
directions issued by the SCMC. As per the directions of SCMC, the Chairperson of the 
Board should be individual with a sense of vision and a feeling for future and they must 
have an understanding of the com plexity of modern science and technology since they 
will be dealing with highly technical issue. Similarly, the MS was required to be full 
timer and should possess a post -graduate degree in science, engineering or technology 
and have adequate experience of  working in area of environment protection. Finally, it 
was instructed that only technically qualified professionals should be appointed to the 
critical positions of Chairperson and MS, so that their functioning could be strengthened 
as required in terms o f paragraph 41.1 of Supreme Court’s order dated 14 December 
2003. 
However, it was seen that the Chairperson as well as MS did not possess above  
mentioned requisite qualification. The Chairman was a public representative having 
qualification of BA, whereas the MS possessed the qualification of B.Sc. Further, the MS 
was not a full timer as he also looked after functions of other wings of FEWMD. 
Hence, the SPCB was headed by the people not having pre -requisite qualifications and 
under such circumstances, management aspects of pollution control and understanding of 
the pollution related complexity of modern science & technology remained questionable. 
5.3.21.3    Non-availability of qualified legal officers 
Under the provisions of the Acts and Rules made there un der, the Board was vested with 
authority to take legal action on violators of environmental laws. The Board was required 
to form a Legal Committee for this but it was found that no such Legal Committee was 
formed and reasons for the same were not furnished to audit by the Board. 
Further, it was observed that legal section at the Board’s Office did not have qualified 
legal officer and was manned by an engineer. The legal cases were dealt with through 
hired legal counsels appointed by the Board from time to t ime. Speedy disposal of legal 
cases under such circumstances were hampered to a great extent. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 164 
 
5.3.22    Inspections of industries 
 
As per instructions issued in Schedule IV of the Notification (December 1999) by 
Ministry of Environment and Forest, GOI, industries shall be inspected at the following 
frequency depending on their classification, viz., Red (highly polluting), Orange 
(moderately polluting) and Green (least polluting): 
Table 5.3.16 
Prescribed frequency of inspections of industries by Board 
Sl. 
No. Size of Industry Category of Industry Frequency of visit and effluent sampling 
1 Small scale 
Red Once in 12 months 
Orange  Once in 3 years, 
Green Once in 3 years on random check basis 
2 Large and Medium Scale 
Red Once in 3 months 
Orange  Once in 6 months 
Green Once in 12 months 
 
The instructions also included an advice that State Board may chalk out a programme of 
inspection/sampling by its staff so as to cover all the units for vigilance and monitoring 
purposes and also to improve the frequency as might be necessary. 
Audit noticed that the Board’s inventory did not have any information on the number of 
small, medium and large industries under each category and the categorisation of 
industries had not yet been done by the Board. Records  relating to numbers of inspection 
done were also not maintained. In absence of these information Audit could not make an 
assessment of the number of inspections due, conducted and shortfall thereto.  
In reply, the Board stated that inspection of industrie s were conducted only as and when 
required or on receipt of specific complaints, though number of inspections conducted 
could not be furnished by the Board due to non-maintenance of any records of inspection. 
Further, the Board stated that categorisation o f industries would be done shortly and as 
soon as the industries are categorised the inspection would be carried out accordingly. 
However, facts remained that the Board had failed to perform its function of periodic 
inspection effectively and in fact it is  doubtful that any inspections were conducted at all 
in view of the absence of documentation. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Board replied (October 2015) that the SPCB 
was waiting for uniform categorisation of industries from CPCB/MoEF after which 
regular inspection would be carried out as per the guidelines.  
 
5.3.23    Dissemination of information in the websites 
 
As per Section 17 (1) (c) of Water (Prevention and Control) Act 1974 and Air Act 1981, 
the Board is required to collect and disseminate information relating to water and air 
pollution and the prevention, control or abatement by posting data in the website of the 
Board. However, it was found that even after several req uests from the CPCB, the Board 
failed to upload any analysed data in the website of the Board. 

Chapter V: General Sector 
 165 
In reply, the Board stated that Board intended to carry out uploading of data at the earliest 
in the Web site. 
 
5.3.24   Trainings 
 
According to Se ction 17(1)(e) of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1974, 
the Board is required to collaborate with Central Board in organising training 
programmes for target groups relating to prevention, control and abatement of water 
pollution. It was also necessary  to keep workforce updated about latest environmental 
issues and technology. Audit scrutiny revealed that no such training was given to any 
persons during 2010-11 and 2011 -12. However, it was found that a very meagre amount 
of ` 7.51 lakh (less than one per cent of the total expenditure) was spent during last three 
years, i.e. 2012 -13 to 2014 -15 for training. This showed that the Board had not taken 
adequate efforts to organise training despite having huge unspent balance with the Board. 
While accepting it, the Board stated that they would give priority to organise training on 
regular basis. 
Audit survey on the awareness of pollution revealed that the people did have 
idea/knowledge on municipal solid waste -its source and treatment, etc. Had the SPCB 
imparted training to the targeted groups, the knowledge on source and treatment of 
various wastes could have been disseminated and consequently the pollution could have 
been controlled and abated. 
 
5.3.25     Board meetings 
 
Section 10 of Air (Prevention and Control) Act, stipulated that the Board shall meet at 
least once in every three months. It was observed that during the five year period of 2010-
15, the Board met only thrice as against the minimum requirement of 20 meetings. 
Though only three Board meetings were held during the period under PA, minutes of only 
two meetings held on 5 December 2011 and 10 May 2013 were produced to Audit. While 
going through these minutes of the meetings, it was seen that decisions like early 
appointments of technical staff for Air Quality Monitoring Stations, conducting of the 
Board meetings at interval of every three months, appointment of Accounts Officer for 
looking after the Board’s financial activities, getting of grants from the State Government 
on regular basis, condu cting surprise and frequent checks of industries on regular basis, 
preparation of annual action plans every year, etc. were taken up. However, the Board 
failed to initiate follow up action on the lines of these minutes. 
Thus, above facts corroborate that there was non-compliance to the standing Act. Though, 
the SPCB could hold only three meetings out of 20 requisite meetings, no follow up 
action could be taken for even these three meetings.  
In reply, the Board stated tha t a proposal to conduct meetings on regular basis as per the 
provisions of the Act was under process. However, the fact remained that the SPCB had 
trailed in conducting meeting and more importantly, no follow up action of the conducted 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 166 
meetings was taken which hampered the implementation of activities related to abatement 
of environmental pollution. 
 
5.3.26    Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
The Board had not developed any mechanism to monitor or to evaluate the compliance of 
the provisions of the Acts and Rules, as it did not have the required scientific and 
technical officials. The inaction of the Government was also responsible in not allowing 
the Board to discharge its statutory functions as the Board had not been given its 
autonomy in its functioning. F urther, the Board had not made its own Rules and 
Regulations and Recruitment Policies and had been adopting State Government Rules and 
Regulations. As a result, it was lagging behind in monitoring and evaluating the 
compliance of the provisions of the Acts  and Rules such that 86 numbers of units were 
operating without consent, three units were functioning without effluent treatment plant, 
healthcare facilities were inadequately equipped with respect to treatment of bio -medical 
waste, etc. 
In reply, the Boar d stated that the matter related to monitoring and evaluation was being 
taken up. 
 
5.3.27    Monitoring of Environmental Statements of industries not monitored 
 
As per Rule 14 of the Environment (Protection) Rules  1986, every person carrying on an 
industry, operation or process requiring consent under Section 25 of the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1974 or under Section 21 of the Air (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act 1981 or both or Authorisation under Hazardous Wastes 
(Management and Handling) Rules 1989 issued under the Environment (Protection) Act 
1986 was to submit an Environmental Statement (ES) for the financial years ending 31 
March in Form V to the Board on or before 30 September of every year. All the industries 
were required to submit ES as per the Rule.  
It was revealed that most of the industries had not submitted their ES as required under 
rules. As a result, the Board was not able to know compliance of Environmental Act and 
Rules by industries and could not initiate follow up action. 
 
5.3.28    Internal control mechanisms in the Board 
 
Internal audit is an independent appraisal of the control mechanism in the Department by 
the auditors. The responsibility of carrying out internal audit of the Board was assigned to 
Directorate of Internal Audit under Finance, Revenue and Expenditure Department. It 
was however, noticed that the Director of Internal Audit had not inspected records of the 
Board during any of the years under PA. Consequently, weakness, lacunae in the internal 
control were not brought to the notice of the Board to initiate corrective measures. 
 
 
 

Chapter V: General Sector 
 167 
5.3.29    Annual Reports not prepared 
 
As per Para 39 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1974, the Board is 
required to prepare the Annual Report in respect of the year last ended giving a true and 
full account of activities of the Board during previous financial year and shall submit such 
report to the State Government by 15  May each year to be laid before the State 
Legislature. However, it was found that the Board had not prepared any Annual Report 
since 2008 -09 onwards. Thus, the Board was not in a position to review the status of 
works already done and was not able to set the future programmes perspective. 
In reply, the Board stated that Annual Reports would be prepared and furnished. 
 
5.3.30    Good Practices  
 
State of Sikkim as well as some of the industries had adopted some good practices to 
improve quality of environment, control and abating environment pollution as mentioned 
below: 
1. The State of Sikkim has notified The Sikkim Ecology Fund and Environmental 
Cess Act in 2005 and the Rules 2007. As per the Act, the environmental cess 
would be levied at the rate of one per cent of total turnover on sale price whoever 
brings non -biodegradable materials in the State of Sikkim with an objective to 
protect and improve the quality of environment, control and abating environment 
pollution and to take measures for restoration of ecological balance of the State.  
2. On directions of the Board in consent letters, industries were developing green 
belt by planting various kinds of trees in factory premises. 
3. Industries were utilising the treated effluent water for reuse in toilets and watering 
of gardens within their industrial compound with the ZLD concept which could be 
seen from the photographs below: 
Image 5.3.33 Image 5.3.34 
  
 
Treated effluent being used for gardening 
purpose at Intas Pharma, Bagheykhola, East 
Sikkim 
 
Treated effluent being used for gardening 
purpose at STP/PTS, Sangkhola, East Sikkim 
 
5.3.31  Absence of preparedness to deal with environmental pollution in Himalayas 
 
The Himalayas are home to some 110 mountain peaks that stretch along 1,550 miles of 
Asia and harbour 10,000 glaciers. These massive rivers of ice hold the third largest 


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 168 
amount of stored fresh water on the planet (after the North and South Poles). This froz en 
water is the main source of replenishment to lakes, streams and some of the continent's 
mightiest rivers, on which millions of people depend for their water supplies. However, 
since the 1960s, the area covered by Himalayan glaciers has declined by more than 20 per 
cent. Some glaciers are melting away so rapidly that scientists are worried that they might 
disappear by mid of this century. 
Climate change is one of the greatest challenges faced by the world in present times. With 
the current rate of green -house gas emission, the global temperature is likely to increase. 
This increase in temperature has affected the climate pattern causing cascading effect on 
biotic and non -biotic components of the ecosystem. T he growing levels of greenhouse 
gases and the re sultant global warming are threatening the Himalayan glaciers. Large 
clouds of pollution which hang over South and East Asia could also be contributing as 
much as the recent increases in greenhouse gases to the heating of the lower atmosphere. 
Their combined effect could be warming the lower atmosphere in the region which may 
be sufficient to account for the observed retreat of the Himalayan glaciers. Further, diesel 
fumes, along with smoke from coal burning, cooking fires and the burning of waste are 
among the main sources of particulate matter called soot or black carbon. This black 
carbon rises into the atmosphere and is driven by winds on to the snow or ice in the 
Himalayas, darkening the surface and in the process reducing reflectivity and causing the 
surface to absorb more heat. 
Warming rate, and also its consequences, is higher in the Himalayas than the rest of the 
world. Sikkim occupies an important bio -geographic location in the entire Himalayan 
chain and represents high diversity of life forms. Over  the years, various climate induced 
adverse effects have been felt in the Sikkim Himalayas. Due to this climate change, many 
species of fauna have shifted upwards along the elevation gradient in Sikkim. The severe 
effect of climate change on Sikkim fauna m ay lead to serious consequences resulting in 
their extinction. The present climatic variability that is slow and steady may lead to a 
sudden climate change over a period of time. It is understood that the human activities 
like agriculture, running of facto ries, burning of fossil fuels for transportation, 
deforestation, urban development are changing the climate on a micro level which, in 
turn, is changing the climate in the Himalayan range in Sikkim.  
It is seen that many glaciers of the Sikkim Himalaya are  forming glacial lakes with 
increasing intensity, which in fact is corroborated with the intermediate effects of long-term 
climate changes apprehended by majority of scientists. Due to increase in the rate of 
melting of the glaciers, lakes are increasing in the area and so is their stored water capacity. 
Surrounded by potentially dangerous glacial lakes that can burst and cause floods any time 
in Teesta and Rangit rivers of the State, Sikkim needs immediate long and short term plans 
for mitigating the eminent danger. 
Despite the situation being alarming in the context of endangered Himalayan environment 
and pollution in rivers of Sikkim, the SPCB has not yet prepared itself to mitigate the 
adverse impact of such agents of pollution. 
 

Chapter V: General Sector 
 169 
5.3.32    Conclusion 
 
The Board did not prepare Annual Action Plans since its inception in 1992. There was no 
inventorisation of industries, stones crusher/hot -mix plants, DG sets, hotels, HCFs, etc. 
which resulted in operation without consent as well as non -realisation of revenue by the 
Board. Several industries, municipalities, healthcare establishments were operating 
without valid/renewed Consent for Operation. Out of 13 towns, 12 towns were operating 
without any sewage treatment facilities. Some of the industries were not ha ving any ETPs 
and in some of the industries, ETPs were not functioning. Municipal waste was not 
treated properly and treatment facilities were not sufficient to treat waste generated in 
the State as most of the towns were not having such facilities. The UD HD had not so far 
constructed any landfill site for disposal of untreated non -biodegradable waste. 
Hazardous waste was also not disposed in prescribed time as most of the industries had 
kept accumulated hazardous waste in their premises openly. Out of 69 H CFs, only 20 
HCFs had obtained BMW authorisation. Some of the HCFs were not having required 
treatment equipment. The Board was not fully equipped with lab equipments to carry out 
various types of water and air testing and monitoring facilities. No Air Qual ity 
Monitoring Stations were established despite incurring expenditure of ` 30.77 lakh on 
procurement of equipments. There was no authorised collection centre and registered 
dealer in the State for handling of e -waste. There was huge shortage of water and air 
stack lab equipments in the Central Lab of the Board. Out of total funds of ` 13.70 crore 
available with the Board during the period of PA, the Board could utilise ` 8.02 crore 
only with a saving of ` 5.68 crore. The Board failed to enforce Water Cess Act and hence 
could not collect water cess of ` 0.60 crore. There was diversion of funds towards various 
purposes like construction, payments on salaries, purchase of vehicles, furniture, 
computers, establishment of saw mills, etc. amounting to ` 90.01 crore from the Sikkim 
Ecology Funds and Environment Cess, which was collected to protect and improve the 
quality of environment, control and abate environment pollution and to take measures for 
restoration of ecological balance of the State. The Board did not categorise the industries 
into ‘Red’, ‘Orange’ and ‘Green’ as a result of which there was substantial shortfall in 
conducting inspections in these industries. There was no monitoring exercised by the 
Board on compliance of environmental norms by industrie s, stone crushers, STPs, MSW 
Plants, etc. Despite such large number of violations, the Board failed to initiate legal 
action to contain pollution. 
 
5.3.33    Recommendations 
 
The Board should consider implementing the following recommendations: 
 prepare robust database regarding different polluting sources, pollution load, etc., 
and prepare annual comprehensive action plans. These needs to be done in a time 
bond manner; 
 initiate legal actions for violation of provisions of environmental laws and ensure 
that no establishment is working without consent of the Board; 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 170 
 take immediate steps for implementation of Water Cess Act, issues of setting up 
STPs and utilise its accumulated funds towards prevention, control and abatement 
of pollution; 
 take measures for sa fe disposal of hazardous and biomedical/organic and 
inorganic waste which needs to be ensured through stringent action including 
shutting down defaulters institution and periodical verification of air/water 
monitoring stations; and 
 the ambient air quality meters need to be established immediately. 
 

Chapter VI: Follow up of Audit Observations 
 171 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.1 Follow up action on earlier Audit Reports 
 
Audit observations on financial irregularities and deficiencies in maintenance of initial 
accounts noticed during local audit and not settled on the spot are communicated to the 
audited departments and to the higher authorities through Inspection Reports (IRs). 
Serious irregularities noticed in audit are included in the Report of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India (Audit Reports) and presented to the State Legislature. 
According to the instructions issued by the Finance, Revenue and Expenditure 
Department (FRED), Government of Sikkim, all the concerned administrative 
departments were required to furnish explanatory notes on the paragraphs/reviews 
included in the Audit Reports within one month from the date of issue of the Audit 
Reports. 
It was however, noticed that as of October 2015, in more than 90 per cent cases, the 
concerned administrative departments had not submitted the explanatory notes on the 
paragraphs/reviews included in the Audit Report pertaining to the year 2011-12. In 
respect of Audit Report for the year 2012-13, explanatory notes had not been submitted 
by concerned departments in 69 per cent case. Further, no explanatory notes have been 
received for Audit Report 2013-14. 
 
6.2 Response of the departments to the recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee (PAC) 
 
Finance Revenue and Expenditure Department issued instructions to all departments to 
submit Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on various suggestions, observations and 
recommendations made by PAC for their consideration within 15 days of presentation of 
the PAC Reports to the Legislature. The PAC Reports/recommendations are the principal 
medium by which the Legislature enforces financial accountability of the Executives to 
the Legislature and it is appropriate that they elicit timely response from the departments 
in the form of ATNs. 
As of October 2015, ATNs had been received in respect of all 598 recommendations of 
the PAC, made between 1990-91 and 2008-09. 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 172 
 
6.3     Follow up audit on PAC recommendations on Development of Hydro Power 
Projects - Public Private Participation  
 
The PAC in its 96th Report made thirteen recommendations to Energy and Power 
Department (EPD), Government of Sikkim in connection with the Performance Audit 
Report on ‘Development of Hydro Power Projects - Public Private Participation’ featured 
in the Audit Report for the year 2008-09. The para-wise compliance to the PAC 
recommendations are detailed below. 
Table 6.1 
Para reference/ 
Subject in brief 
Observation and 
Recommendation of PAC 
Reply of the 
management Follow up audit 
Para-1.1.8   
Private power 
policy 
PAC observed that the set of 
terms and conditions approved 
by the State Government based 
on the recommendations of the 
Hydro Committee may be 
declared as the Hydro Power 
Policy of the Government of 
Sikkim as a guiding principle 
in future so that the State would 
be fully able to achieve the 
objective of harnessing the 
hydro power potential of the 
State to the fullest possible 
extent. 
The Hydro Power 
Policy which was 
being followed is 
under revision and 
would be immediately 
notified as 
recommended by the 
PAC once revised 
hydro policy is 
approved by the 
Government of 
Sikkim. 
The PAC recommendation 
was not complied with 
since Hydro Power Policy 
of the Government of 
Sikkim had not yet been 
finalised till October 2015. 
Para-1.1.9.2 
Safeguards 
against Plants 
remaining 
defunct 
PAC desired the Department to 
enlighten it with regard to the 
details of the visits conducted 
by the Eastern Region Power 
Committee, GOI and that of 
SSERC and their consequent 
findings on failures of private 
developers, if any, and 
necessary action taken thereon 
accordingly. 
There is no defunct 
Independent Power 
Projects (IPP) as of 
October 2015. 
The recommendation 
might be taken as 
complied with since there 
was no defunct 
Independent Power 
Projects (IPP).  
Para-1.1.9.3 
Modality for 
Transfer of 
Projects 
PAC observed that details of 
modalities for transfer of 
projects on expiry of agreement 
period had not been formulated 
as on January 2014. Similarly, 
the strategy for taking over the 
projects after expiry of award 
period including the manpower 
engaged in projects would be 
formulated. 
The modalities for 
transfer of the IPP to 
the State on expiry of 
agreement period 
including 
requirements for 
trained manpower for 
the operation and 
maintenance and 
management of the 
assets is under  
preparation and will 
be submitted to the 
PAC on finalisation 
and approval of the 
Government. 
The PAC recommendation 
was not complied with as 
the modalities for transfer 
of the IPP to the State on 
expiry of agreement period 
including requirements of 
trained manpower for 
operation & maintenance 
and management of the 
assets was under 
preparation. 
Para-1.1.10.4 
Penalty for 
delay in 
Commissioning 
PAC observed that the pre-
requisite exercises of obtaining 
forest and environment 
clearances, techno-economic 
A list of projects 
submitted. 
As per records furnished to 
audit, in respect of 12 
projects for which MOUs 
had been signed after 

Chapter VI: Follow up of Audit Observations 
 173 
Para reference/ 
Subject in brief 
Observation and 
Recommendation of PAC 
Reply of the 
management Follow up audit 
of IPP projects 
 
concurrences, etc. should have 
been thoroughly made before 
execution of such vital projects. 
The Department may initiate 
necessary co-ordination of all 
the concerned agencies well in 
advance before embarking on 
such vital projects of the State 
in future. 
2009, no work had 
commenced as the pre-
requisite condition of 
obtaining environmental 
clearance, forest clearance, 
etc. were not fulfilled. 
Para-1.1.11.1 
Equity 
Subscription 
Agreement 
PAC recommended that the 
Department may speed up the 
process of execution of equity 
subscription agreement 
between GOS and the 
Developers in terms of the 
agreement laid. 
Equity has been 
subscribed to two 
projects till October 
2015, Teesta Stage-III 
and Rangit-IV. 
It was complied with in 
respect of two projects 
only whereas for four 
other projects (Teesta I, II 
& IV and Panan) it was 
found to be not complied 
with. 
Para-1.1.11.3 
Abandonment 
of Projects 
 
PAC observed that all aspects 
behind considerable delays in 
implementation of power 
projects as brought to the 
notice of the Committee 
indicate lack of appropriate 
planning by the concerned 
Department. PAC observed that 
the Department may 
accordingly rectify the lapse for 
future guidance so that any 
potential loss to the State on 
account of non-commissioning 
of projects within stipulated 
period of time is avoided in 
future. 
No projects have been 
abandoned. Due to 
various constraints 
like geological 
surprises, natural 
calamities, road 
blockages, etc., 
projects were delayed.  
No projects were 
abandoned till October 
2015 but delay occurred 
due to reasons cited by the 
Department. 
Para-1.1.12.1 
Environment 
Impact 
Assessment 
 
PAC recommended that the 
Department may take up the 
matter for clearing up the 
existing lack of co-ordination 
between the concerned 
Departments in particular, with 
the Department of Forest, 
Environment and Wildlife 
Management so that further 
delays in implementation of 
projects are avoided in future. 
As per MOU, the onus 
for obtaining all 
required 
environmental 
clearances lies with 
the 
company/developer. 
The EPD interacts 
with the Forest, 
Environment and 
Wildlife Management 
Department, 
Government of 
Sikkim and other 
concerned agencies. 
However, all matters 
related to EIA and 
EMP are being 
directly dealt with by 
the Forest, 
Environment and 
Wildlife Management 
Department, 
Government of 
Sikkim. 
 
Audit could verify the 
formation of multi-
disciplinary committees in 
respect of six projects out 
of 30 projects. The 
Committees had been 
constituted with 
representatives of both the 
Departments. Hence, the 
recommendation had been 
partially complied with.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 174 
Para reference/ 
Subject in brief 
Observation and 
Recommendation of PAC 
Reply of the 
management Follow up audit 
Para-1.1.12.2 
Catchment 
Area Treatment 
Plans 
PAC recommended that the 
Department, in this respect 
should work out proper co-
ordination between all the 
concerned Departments 
including Forests and Private 
Developers so that necessary 
aspects of environment are 
protected in future. 
All Catchment Area 
Treatment (CAT) 
Works are under the 
direct supervision of 
the Forest, 
Environment and 
Wildlife Management 
Department, and 
Government of 
Sikkim. 
In respect of coordination, 
multi-disciplinary 
committees had been 
constituted. The amount 
spent towards CAT works 
by the Forest Environment 
and Wildlife Management 
Department for the years 
2009-10 was  1.37 crore 
(for four projects) and  
 9.93 crore in 2010-11.  
Para-1.1.12.3 
Implementation 
of 
Compensatory 
Catchment 
Area 
Treatment, 
Wildlife 
Preservations, 
etc. 
PAC recommended that the 
Department may expedite 
release of the Compensatory 
Afforestation Management and 
Planning Agency (CAMPA) 
fund to the concerned Forest 
Department and co-ordinate on 
the matter for early 
implementation. 
The Forest, 
Environment and 
Wildlife Management 
Department, 
Government of 
Sikkim is the nodal 
Department for 
implementation of 
Compensatory 
Catchment Area 
Treatment, wildlife 
preservation and other 
environmental 
safeguard works.  
Total receipts for the State 
CAMPA for the period 
2009-12 was  27.28 crore 
which was fully utilised. 
Hence, complied with. 
Para-1.1.12.6 
Disaster 
Management 
Plan 
 
PAC recommended for 
working out on priority a 
robust Disaster Management 
Plan (DMP) in the form of a 
well co-ordinated action plan 
and implemented towards 
prevention and preparedness to 
face any disasters in future. 
The DMP has to be 
prepared for 
individual hydro 
projects and the same 
is prepared by the 
developer operating 
the project. A safety 
guideline for public 
safety at hydro power 
projects has been 
prepared by the 
Department and 
notified by the 
Government of 
Sikkim. 
Disaster Management Plan 
had been prepared only for 
two projects out of 10 
projects. 
Para-1.1.14.1 
Monitoring of 
Projects 
implementing 
by SPDC 
 
PAC observed that the success 
of projects, to a large extent 
depends on proper monitoring. 
The Department may further go 
for effective monitoring 
mechanism with a view to 
achieve full success of power 
projects in the State. 
As per the directives 
of the PAC, the 
Department has taken 
initiatives for proper 
monitoring of the 
ongoing hydro 
projects. District 
Officers of the 
Department under 
whose jurisdiction the 
projects are being 
developed have been 
directed to monitor the 
progress of the project 
and report to the HQ. 
Various High Level 
Monitoring 
Committees have been 
The SPDC had been 
restructured in August 
2011 by disinvestment of 
49 per cent of its equity 
stake to Athena Project 
Private Limited. In respect 
of projects under the 
control of SPDC (8 
projects), three projects 
were functioning, two 
projects were stalled 
(paucity of funds) and 
three more projects had 
been proposed.  In respect 
of EPD (22 projects), all 
issues related to 
hydropower projects had 
been assigned to a Chief 

Chapter VI: Follow up of Audit Observations 
 175 
Para reference/ 
Subject in brief 
Observation and 
Recommendation of PAC 
Reply of the 
management Follow up audit 
constituted by the 
State Government to 
monitor and have 
visited major projects 
like Teesta-III, Teesta-
V, Teesta-VI, 
Chujachen HEP, etc. 
to address issues 
during the 
development of the 
hydro projects.  
Engineer (2009) for 
monitoring. Considering 
the reply and the above, 
the recommendation had 
been complied with. 
Para-1.1.14.2 
Monitoring by 
Multi-
Disciplinary 
Committee 
PAC recommended to expedite 
the constitution of Multi-
Disciplinary Committee to 
avoid any lapse in the relevant 
aspects of projects in future. 
 
As nodal Department, 
the Forest, 
Environment and 
Wildlife Management 
Department, 
Government of 
Sikkim, constituted 
the Multi-Disciplinary 
Committees. 
Multi-Disciplinary 
Committees had been 
constituted in respect of 
six projects out of total 30 
projects. Hence complied 
with partially. 
Para-1.1.14.3 
Monitoring by 
Project Level 
Welfare 
Committee 
Paragraph 1.1.14.3 Monitoring 
by Project Level Welfare 
Committee 
PAC recommended the 
Department to take up the 
matter expeditiously for 
constitution of the Committee 
to avoid any lapse in the 
relevant projects in future. 
Project Level Welfare 
Committee is 
constituted project-
wise wherein local 
politicians, gram 
panchayat, village 
representatives, local 
administration and 
company 
representatives are 
members. District 
administration 
authorities where 
ongoing projects are 
located have 
constituted Project 
Level Welfare 
Committee for 
addressing any local 
issues within the 
project area. 
In the absence of 
notification for 
constitution of Project 
Level Welfare Committees 
for each projects under 
SPDC and EPD audit 
could not confirm the 
compliance.  
 
6.4 Monitoring 
 
The following Committees had been formed at the Government level to monitor the 
follow up action on Audit related matters: 
Departmental Audit and Accounts Committee: Departmental Audit and Accounts 
Committee (DAAC) had been formed (November 2010) by all departments of the 
Government under the Chairmanship of the Departmental Secretary/Head of Department 
to monitor the follow up action on Audit related matters. The DAAC’s function was to 
monitor the response and corrective action on findings reported in the Inspection Reports 
issued by the Accountant General (Audit). It was to hold meetings once in three months 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 176 
and send quarterly action taken report on the issues to the State Audit and Accounts 
Committee. 
State Audit and Accounts Committee: State Audit and Accounts Committee (SAAC) 
had been formed (June 2010) at the State level under the Chairmanship of the Chief 
Secretary to monitor the response and corrective action on the findings reported by audit, 
to review and oversee the working of DAAC and also to hold meetings once in three 
months.  
After formation of DAAC and SAAC by the State Government, Human Resource 
Development Department approached the Office of the Accountant General (Audit) to 
settle outstanding paragraphs and IRs during 2011-12. However, during 2013-14 and 
2014-15, not a single Department approached to settle outstanding paragraphs and IRs. 
 
6.5 Outstanding Inspection Reports 
 
The Accountant General (Audit), Sikkim (AG) conducts periodical inspection of the 
Government departments to test check the transactions and verify the maintenance of 
important accounts and other records as prescribed in the rules and procedures. These 
inspections are followed up with the IRs incorporating irregularities detected during the 
inspection and not settled on the spot, which are issued to the Heads of the Offices 
inspected with copies to the higher authorities for taking prompt corrective action. The 
Heads of the Offices/Government are required to promptly comply with the observations 
contained in the IRs, rectify the defects and omissions and report compliance through 
initial reply to the AG within one month from the date of the issue of the IRs. Serious 
irregularities are reported to the Heads of the departments and the Government. 
The position of outstanding IRs pertaining to Civil (Expenditure audit including that of 
Works, Forest and Autonomous Bodies), Revenue (Audit of Revenue departments) and 
Commercial (Audit of Public Sector Undertakings) audit as of March 2015 is shown 
below: 
Table 6.2 
Year 
Civil 
(including works, Forest and 
Autonomous Bodies) 
Revenue Commercial 
No. of IRs Paragraphs No. of IRs Paragraphs No. of IRs Paragraphs 
 Upto 2010-11 638 1,164 75 159 42 89 
2011-12 50 110 04 24 12 29 
2012-13 53 194 06 17 14 49 
2013-14 130 502 03 12 16 76 
2014-15 138 669 13 52 17 129 
TOTAL 1,009 2,639 101 264 101 372 
 
This large pendency of IRs was indicative of inadequate action by the Heads of offices 
and departments towards the remedial measures that should have been taken on the 
irregularities pointed out by Audit through the IRs. 
 
 

Appendices 
 179 
Appendix 1.2.1 
Audit conducted during 2014-15 under Social Sector 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.2, Page 2) 
(  in crore) 
Name of the Unit 
Expenditure of the unit 
(i.e. expenditure of the unit for the financial year for 
which audit conducted) 
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Commissioner-cum-Secretary, 
Urban Development and Housing Department - - - 93.99 - 
North Eastern Region Capital City Development 
Investment Programme,  - - - 14.94 - 
Secretary, Ecclesiastical Affairs Department - -- - 34.05 - 
Block Development Officer, Yangyang, South   1.64 3.25 2.23 3.13 - 
Block Development Officer, Ravangla, South  7.13 1.60 2.68 0.83 - 
Block Development Officer, Pangthang, East   - 1.76 3.84 5.17 - 
Block Development Officer,  Regu, East 0.65 0.97 7.14 5.85 - 
Block Development Officer, Mangan, North   - 0.64 1.05 1.21 - 
Block Development Officer,  Passingdong, North  1.20 1.73 1.20 1.55 - 
Block Development Officer,  Kaluk West 0.24 0.76 2.72 3.07 - 
Block Development Officer, Rakdong Tintek, East  1.21 0.71 14.62 - 
Block Development Officer, Sumbuk 0.64 1.29 4.20 12.98 - 
Block Development Officer, Temi, South  - 0.72 0.79 1.42 - 
Block Development Officer, Sikip, West   2.10 3.39 4.28 4.12 - 
Block Development Officer,  Duga, East   4.70 2.86 2.04 2.73 - 
Block Development Officer, Rhenock, East   2.87 3.75 4.66 4.85 - 
Block Development Officer,  Pakyong, East   5.04 6.22 2.43 5.14 - 
Block Development Officer,  Jorethang, South   2.68 2.55 2.80 4.68 - 
Block Development Officer, Ranka, East   0.60 0.76 0.85 0.84 - 
Block Development Officer,  Gangtok, East 0.79 1.02 1.02 1.06 - 
Block Development Officer, Namchi, South   1.26 0.98 0.87 0.96 - 
Secretary, Labour Department - - - 1.41 - 
Principal Vocational Training Improvement Project 
(VTIP), Rangpo - - - 0.72 - 
Commissioner-cum-Secretary, Employee State 
Insurance Corporation (Labour Department)  - - - 0.46 - 
Principal Secretary, 
Human Resource Development Department (HRDD) - - - 36.87  - 
Joint Director, West, HRDD - - 54.17 58.08 - 
Principal, Sikkim Govt. B. Ed College, Soreng  - - 0.74 0.80 - 
Director, Technical Education - - - 0.49 - 
Principal, Sikkim Government College, Gyalshing  - 0.44 0.69 1.08 - 
Principal, Sikkim Government College, Rhenock 1.14 1.19 1.65 1.36 - 
Principal, Government Sanskrit College, Samdong 0.40 0.37 0.42 0.50 - 
Principal, Namch Govt. College, Kamrang 3.44 2.09 1.58 2.99 - 
Commissioner-cum-Secretary, 
Social Justice Empowerment and Welfare 
Department, (Women and Child Welfare Division)  
- - - 3.65 - 
Commissioner-cum-Secretary, 
Social Justice Empowerment and Welfare 
Department, (Social Welfare Division) 
- - - 15.93 - 
Commissioner-cum-Secretary, 
Social Justice Empowerment and Welfare 
Department   (Welfare Division) 
- - - 13.45 - 
Welfare Officer, Social Welfare, West  0.40 0.23 0.26 - 
Welfare Officer, Social Welfare, South  0.32 0.18 0.23 - 
Welfare Officer, Social Welfare, North  0.16 0.17 0.22 - 
Child Development Project Officer,  
Urban Slum Project, Gangtok  1.13 1.56 1.43 - 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 180 
Secretary, Food & Civil Supplies and Consumer 
Affairs Department (FCSCAD) - - - 7.69 - 
Dy. Director, South/FCSCAD   1.88 0.96 1.08 1.25 - 
Dy. Director, West/FCSCAD 0.62 0.61 0.75 0.78 - 
Director General-cum-Secretary, Health Care, 
Human Services and Family Welfare Department - - 17.76 33.09 16.99 
STNM Hospital, Gangtok - - - - 11.00 
Chief Medical Officer, District Hospital, Gyalshing 23.69 12.21 14.12 15.84 - 
Mission Director, NRHM, Gangtok - - - 28.89 - 
Vice Chairman-cum-Chief Medical Officer, NRHM, 
East - - - 3.75 - 
Vice Chairman-cum-Chief Medical Officer, NRHM, 
South - - - 3.78 - 
Vice Chairman-cum-Chief Medical Officer, NRHM, 
West - - - 3.40 - 
Vice Chairman-cum-Chief Medical Officer, NRHM, 
North - - - 1.73 - 
Joint Secretary (S/W), UDHD, Jorethang - 35.84 39.63 28.53 - 
TOTAL 62.71 91.18 18.24 485.85 27.99 
 
 
Appendix 2.2.1 
Audit conducted during 2014-15 under Economic Sector 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2, Page 6) 
(  in crore) 
Name of the Unit 
Expenditure of the unit 
(i.e. expenditure of the unit for the financial year for which 
audit conducted) 
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Conservator of Forest, Wild Life Circle, Forest 
Environment & Wildlife Management Department 
(FEWMD) 
0.48 0.51 0.50 0.52 - 
DFO Social Forestry, FEWMD  - 0.44 0.57 0.51 - 
DFO, Social Forestry, Gangtok, FEWMD - 0.74 0.80 0.88 - 
DFO Social Forestry, Mangan, FEWMD - 0.32 0.29 0.33 - 
DFO Social Forestry, Gyalshing, FEWMD  - 0.30 0.36 0.47 - 
Chief Conservator of Forest, Environment & Soil 
Conservation, Gangtok, FEWMD - 1.22 1.26 1.20 - 
DFO, Environment and Soil Conservation, Mangan, 
FEWMD - 0.55 0.64 0.63 - 
DFO, Environment and Soil Conservation Soil 
Conservation, Gangtok, FEWMD - 0.57 0.96 0.74 - 
DFO, Kanchadzonga National Park - 2.26 1.90 2.75 - 
DFO, Banbas Programme - 0.97 0.48 0.99 - 
Project Director, Japan International Cooperation 
Agency (JICA) Assisted Sikkim Biodiversity 
Conservation and Management Project 
- - - 18.45 - 
State Compensatory Afforestation fund 
Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA), 
FEWMD 
17.78 10.08 5.45 - - 
Secretary, Commerce and Industries Department - - - - 28.41  
General Manager District Industries Centre 
(South/West) - 0.93 0.88 0.99 - 
Secretary Mines and Geology Department. - - - 3.58 - 
Superintending Engineer, Energy & Power 
Department, West District, Gyalshing 15.28 5.20 6.48 7.92 - 
Secretary, Co-operation Department,  - - - 7.19 - 
Joint Registrar, Co-operation Department, Namchi - 1.25 13.14 1.58 - 
Joint  Registrar, Co-operation Department, Gangtok - 1.65 1.21 1.92 - 
Joint Registrar Co-operation Department, Gyalshing  - 3.16 0.96 1.36 - 
Joint Registrar, Co-operation Department, Mangan - 0.78 0.84 0.84 - 

Appendices 
 181 
Principal Chief Engineer-cum-Secretary, 
Water Security and Public Health Engineering 
Department (WSPHED) 
- - - 24.03 - 
Divisional Engineer, Namchi, WSPHED - - 3.95 6.57 - 
Divisional Engineer, Gyalshing, WSPHED - 0.29 0.30 4.89 - 
Secretary, Horticulture & Cash Crop Department  - - - 30.46 - 
Small Farmers Agri Business Consortium, 
Technology  Mission -  - 50.21 - 
Principal Chief Engineer-cum-Secretary,  
Roads and Bridges Department (RBD) - - - - 191.66  
Superintending Engineer, Namchi, RBD - - - - 2.55 
Divisional Engineer, Gyalshing, RBD 7.75 38.99 66.14 59.11 24.65 
Assistant Engineer, Mangan, RBD - - - - 0.94 
Project Director North Eastern Region Capital City 
Development Investment Programme (NERSAP) - - - 9.82 - 
Commissioner-cum-Secretary, Animal Husbandry, 
Livestock, Fisheries and Veterinary Services 
Department (AHLFVSD) 
- - - - 8.65 
Additional Director,  Gyalshing, AHLFVSD - 5.98 3.01 4.05 - 
Dy. Director, Namchi AHLFVSD  0.78 0.79 0.92 - 
Dy. Director/Fisheries, Mangan, AHLFVSD - 1.54 0.85 0.82 - 
Secretary, Food Security and Agriculture 
Development Department - - - - 45.40 
Sikkim Organic Mission - - - 0.53 - 
Secretary, Irrigation and Flood Control Department 
(IFCD) - - - - 16.36 
Divisional Engineer, Mangan, IFCD - - - 3.10 - 
Divisional Engineer, Namchi, IFCD - - - 3.80 - 
Divisional Engineer Gyalshing, IFCD - - - 3.23 - 
Divisional Engineer, Gangtok, IFCD - - - 0.77 - 
Secretary, Transport Department 
(Sikkim National Transport Division) - - - 41.41 - 
Secretary, Rural Management and Development 
Department (RMDD). - - - 285.76 - 
Additional District Collector/Development, RMDD, 
Namchi - - - 1.82 - 
Additional District Collector/Development, RMDD, 
Gangtok - -  2.64 - 
Additional District Collector/Development, RMDD, 
Mangan - - - 1.64 - 
Additional District Collector/Development, RMDD,  
Gyalshing - - - 1.48 - 
Principal Chief Engineer-cum-Secretary, 
Building and Housing Department (BHD) - - - - 85.44  
Assistant Engineer, Mangan, BHD - - - 3.67 - 
Divisional Engineer, Namchi, BHD - - - 2.51 - 
Divisional Engineer, Gyalshing, BHD - - - 4.59 - 
Secretary, Tourism and Civil Aviation Department - - - 68.33 - 
South Asian Tourism Infrastructure Development 
Project    2.19 - 
TOTAL 41.29 78.51 111.78 671.20 404.06 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 182 
Appendix 2.4.1 
Fruits 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.4.9, Page 38) 
Year Particulars Sikkim 
States 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Mizoram Nagaland J &K Uttarakhand Meghalaya 
2011-12 
Area 13.4 214.6  85.1 43.7 33.7 415.7 200.7 32.3 
Production 22.5 372.8  308.9 275.7 347.7 2,329 802.1 300.4 
Productivity 1.7 1.7  3.6 6.3 10.3 5.1 4.0 9.3 
2012-13 
Area 14.7 218.0 86.9 49.7 37.2 347.2 200.9 33.2 
Production 24.0 555.7 312.2 293.0 276.0 1,742 805.7 316.6 
Productivity 1.6 2.5 3.6 5.9 7.4 5.0 4 9.5 
2013-14 
Area 16.0 220.7  89.1 57.6 40.6 355.2 171.6 35.3 
Production 24.1 866.3  321.3 343.9 411.0 2,073 678.5 348.0 
Productivity 1.5 3.9  3.6 6.0 10.1 5.8 4 9.9 
Area- in ‘000 hectares; Production- in ‘000 MT. 
Source: Indian Horticulture Database-2014 published by National Horticulture Board. 
 
Appendix 2.4.2 
Vegetables 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.4.9, Page 38) 
Year Particulars Sikkim 
States 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Mizoram Nagaland J &K Uttarakhand Meghalaya 
2011-12 
Area 25 85.7 6.3 37.4 33 63.1 89.3 39.5 
Production 127.7 1561.5 83.5 221.1 222.6 1395 1066.7 385 
Productivity 5.1 18.2 13.2 5.9 6.7 22.1 11.9 9.8 
2012-13 
Area 25.6 79.5 1.5 39.3 26 63.1 88.0 40.5 
Production 132.5 1521.1 37.6 236.7 207.7 1395 1059.6 403 
Productivity 5.2 19.1 24.7 6.0 8.0 22.1 12.0 10 
2013-14 
Area 26.1 86.6 1.4 41.1 38.6 63.1 88.3 43.6 
Production 134.5 1635.9 35.0 254.1 492.4 1395 1016.8 515 
Productivity 5.2 18.9 25.0 6.2 12.8 22.1 11.5 11.8 
Area- in ‘000 hectares; Production- in ‘000 MT  
Source: Indian Horticulture Database-2014 published by National Horticulture Board 
 
Appendix 2.4.3 
Spices 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.4.9, Page 39) 
Year Particulars Sikkim 
States 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Arunachal 
Pradesh Mizoram Nagaland J &K Uttarakhand Meghalaya 
2011-12 
Area 24.4 4.8 10.1 20.6 9.8 4.1 6.6 16.8 
Production 54.4 19.3 61.6 115.0 39.2 1.1 38.8 74.8 
Productivity 2.2 4 6.1 5.6 4.0 0.3 5.9 4.4 
2012-13 
Area 26.6 7.3 10.2 22.5 9.8 4.1 8.1 16.9 
Production 60.1 10.3 64.3 59.6 39.2 1.1 41.1 74.8 
Productivity 2.3 1.4 6.3 2.7 4.0 0.3 5.1 4.4 
2013-14 
Area 32.1 8.4 10.2 22.5 9.8 4.9 8.1 17.5 
Production 55.8 14.2 64.3 59.6 39.2 1.1 41.1 83.9 
Productivity 1.7 1.7 6.3 2.7 4.0 0.2 5.1 4.8 
Area- in ‘000 hectares; Production- in ‘000 MT. 
Source: Indian Horticulture Database-2014 published by National Horticulture Board. 
 
 

Appendices 
 183 
Appendix 2.4.4 
Physical Target and Achievement under HMNEH 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.4.9.2, Page 39) 
Sl. 
No. Component Unit 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
 T A T A T A T A T A 
1 Production of Planting 
Materials Nos 5 5 41 41 56 56 70 70 64.5 58 
2 Area Expansion            
 Fruits Ha 3,023 3,023 3,430 3,430 1,408 1,408 1,585 1,585 4,091 2,017 
 Vegetables Ha 775 775 665 665 840 840 1,220 1,220 620 775 
 Flowers Ha 470 470 645 645 625 625 705 705 272 257 
 Spices Ha 1,252 1,252 1,960 1,960 2,066 2,066 2,521 2,518 2,688 2,716 
3 Rejuvenation/replaceme
nt of senile plantation Ha 400 400 700 700 620 620 750 750 800 732 
4 Creation of Water 
Sources Nos 4 4 108 108 135 135 150 150 169 169 
5 Mushroom Nos 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 2 3 3 
6 Protected Cultivation  Sq.m 94,000 94,000 2,99,155 2,99,155 2,19,260 2,19,260 3,31,800 3,31,800 6,67,862 6,21,923 
7 Promotion of INM/IPM Ha 1,800 1,800 10,500 10,500 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 10,800 10,800 
8 Organic Farming Ha 4,115 4,115 9,887 9,887 13,233 13,233 11,857 11,857 7,809 16,951 
9 Pollination support 
through Bee keeping Nos 3,001 3,001 1,433 1,433 1,003 1,003 4,520 4,520 2,832 0 
10 Horticulture Mechanism Nos 50 50 101 101 612 612 495 495 2 1 
11 Centre of Excellence  Nos 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 184 
Appendix 2.7.1 
Unwarranted inclusion of GSB-III in addition to GSB-I and GSB-II in works 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.7, Page 63) 
Sl. 
No. District Name of work RA Bill No 
GSB-III 
executed 
quantity 
Rate Total 
Executed 
Tender 
rate 
(above:  
+-  & 
below : -) 
Total With 
tender 
Contractors 
name 
SOR 
used 
1 East 
Upgradation, carpeting 
including P/w and drainage 
along Sangkhola Sumin 
Road  KM 1st to Km 5th . 
4th RA/Ch.No. 
107354/5.2.14 703.564 1168.86 822367.817 15 945722.9896 
Shiv Kumar 
Agarwal, 
Singtam 
2006 
Revised 
2 East 
Upgradtion & premix 
carpeting including P/w 
and improvement of 
drainage of Tintek Dikchu 
Road Km 1st to km 12th .   
4th RA Bill/Ch.No. 
501306 /22.10.14 2685.06 1168.86 3138459.232 22 3828920.263 KK Group of 
Co. 
2006 
Revised 
3  
Upgradation of Kingstone 
Simanakhola road Km 1st 
to 2nd 
3rd RA Bill/Vr.No. 
19/24.3.14 303.85 1168.86 355158.111 15 408431.8277 Thendup Sherpa  
4 East 
Carpeting work along with 
Lingtam-Agamlok.  2nd RA Bill/29.10.14 612.35 1168.86 715751.421 15 823114.1342 
M/s Premlakha 
Subaney dara 
Contractors  
5 East 
Upgra, Improve, Drainage, 
& Carpeting of Pakyong 
Machong Rolep Road KM 
20 to 35th.    
4th RA Bill/  Vr.No. 
5/1.10.14 610.17 1168.86 713203.3062 22 870108.0336 
M/s Apex 
Projects PVt 
LTD  
6 South 
Surface Improvement, 
carpeting, drainage & 
P/works on Benthalaari to 
Mangley Road 1st  to 7 th  
km.  
2nd RA/Vr.No. 111-
112/31.3.14 1948.44 1168.86 2277453.578 20 2732944.294 Tsewang 
Gyatso Kaleon 
2006 
Revised 
7 South 
Improvmet carpeting along 
Melli Kerabari road km 1st 
- 5th km TFC. 
3rd RA Bill/ 
Vr.No.15/28.3.14 478.08 1168.86 558808.5888 16 648217.963 
M/s Mellidara 
Paiyog educate 
unemployed 
coop society 
2006 
Revised 
8 South 
Premix carpeting drainage, 
& P/works along Satam 
Samru Road Km-2nd  Ch 18 
Ch 25 STIDF 
Vr.No 17/26.8.14/MB 
No 006/P 371.212 1168.86 433894.8583 15 498979.0871 
M/s Rangrang 
Yangyang Coop 
Society 
2006 
Revised 
9 South 
Const of Truckaable road 
from Old Vety. Compound 
to Tharpu (Kopchey) 5054-
Removal. 
Vr.No.134/31.3.14/  
MB No.83/D/6th & 
Final 
83.8 1168.86 97950.468 14.55 112202.2611 CP Rajalim 2006 
Revised 
10 South 
Surface Improv. Carpetting 
drainage & P/works along 
Ralong - Namlung Rd 
under Ravangla Sub 
Division STIDF. 
2nd & Final / Vr.No.39/ 
22.10.14/MB No.361 
/P, 0113 /P/52/P 
1655.85 1168.86 1935456.831 15 2225775.356 Shyam Sunder 
Sharma 
2006 
Revised 
11 South 
Upgradatom of Mellidar  
Paiyong Road to Mellidar 
& Kerabari  ISC 
Vr.No.51/31.10.14/MB 
Part II/444/D/5th RA 
Bill 
3212.39 1168.86 3754834.175 15 4318059.302 Bigyan Rai 2006 
Revised 
12 South 
Const. & Improvement of 
Simchuthang  Pabong 
Yangyang Road  Km 14th 
to Km 23rd  NEC. 
Vr.No.96-97/30.9.14 
MB No.002/P /6th RA 
Bill 
3257.86 1168.86 3807982.24 22 4645738.332 Ashok 
Chamling 
2006 
Revised 
13 South 
Surface,  improvement,  
drainage & carpeting of on  
3 km Road from Janata 
Bazar to U. Lingmoo 
(Phase IV). 
Vr.No.21-22/15.11.14 
MB No. 227/D/4th & 
Final Bill 
206.93 1168.86 241872.1998 15 278153.0298 
Lingmoo 
Kolthang 
Constr.  Coop 
society 
2006 
Revised 
14 South 
Surface,  improvement,  
drainage & carpeting of on  
3 km Road from Janata 
Bazar to U. Lingmoo 
(Phase I). 
Vr.No.20-
22/15.11.14/MB No. 
224/D/4th & Final Bill 
86.4 1168.86 100989.504 15 116137.9296 
Lingmoo 
Kolthang 
Constr.  Coop 
society 
2006 
Revised 
15 South 
Surface,  improvement,  
drainage & carpeting of on  
3 km Road from Janata 
Bazar to U. Lingmoo 
(Phase III)  NABARD. 
Vr.No.21-
22/15.11.14/MB No. 
226/D/4th & Final Bill 
271.58 1168.86 317438.9988 15 365054.8486 
Lingmoo 
Kolthang 
Constr.  Coop 
society 
2006 
Revised 
16 South 
Surface,  improvement,  
drainage & carpeting of on  
3 km Road from Janata 
Bazar to U. Lingmoo 
(Phase III)  NABARD. 
Vr.No.19/15.11.14/MB 
No. 225/D/4th  & Final 
Bill 
266.38 1168.86 311360.9268 15 358065.0658 
Lingmoo 
Kolthang 
Constr.  Coop 
society 
2006 
Revised 
   16 Works 16753.916  19582982.26  23175624.72    
 
 

Appendices 
 185 
Appendix 2.10.1 
Statement showing details of defaulters who have availed housing loans 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.10, Page 67) 
Sl. No./ 
Code Name Department Year of 
Sanction 
Amount o/s as on 
03/15 
(incl. int./p.int) 
Remarks 
1/2615 Radhika Pradhan PAO (Left Service) 1994 822505  
2/2797 Sonam Topden Bhutia Police (Expired) 1994 609636  
3/3575 Topda Bhutia SBS (Expired) 1995 224143 Certificate issued 
4/594 Chung Tshering Bhutia High Court (Expired) 1994 247309  
5/1137 Sukman Gurung Police (Retired) 1994 118994  
6/2912 Man Bdr Lakhandan Forest (Retired)  1994 101445  
7/3114 Shyam Kumar Sah Land Revenue  
(Left Service) 1994 25039  
8/2619 Tshewang D. Tonyot PART (Expired) 1994 385355 Under trail 
9/4332 Puspalal Biswakarma Police (Expired)  1996 89194  
10/1543 Deepak Subba SNT (Terminated) 1995 502860  
11/3305 Passang Tamang Sikkim Fire Service 
(Expired) 1994 149759  
12/3634 Nima Bhutia Police (Terminated) 1995 160704 Under trail 
13/3915 Jit Bdr Subba Police (Terminated) 1995 159199 Under trail 
14/3918 Dil Bdr Tamang Sikkim Fire 
(Terminated) 1995 96552  
15/4633 Tul Man Rai Police (Terminated) 1996  96709 Certificate issued 
16/4903 Dhan Bdr Gurung Police (Retired) 1997 102329  
17/4913 Topgay Lepcha SBS (Expired) 1997 32264  
18/5093 Zanul Abden SAP (Expired) 1997 109357  
19/5003 Ramesh Kumar Chettri SAP (Terminated) 1997 181629 Under trail 
20/5069 Kumar Chettri Police (Suspended) 1997 42322 Under trail 
21/7006 Tempo Gyatso Lepcha SAP (Terminated) 1997 156085  
22/2430 Kathup Lepcha Forest (Expired) 1993 2465  
23/2829 Amrit Kr. Chhetri Home (Expired) 1994 16914  
24/437 Tenzing Bhutia SLA (Retired) 1992 46338  
25/482 Rinchen Tshering Bhutia Police (Terminated) 1992 78502  
26/572 Budhiman Tamang Power (Retired) 1992 148889  
27/1863 Bhama Singh Subba Education  
(Left Service) 1993 121941  
28/2778 Dambar Singh Chettri UDHD (Expired) 1994 34419  
29/3209 Deepak Rai UDHD (Expired)  1994 22935  
30/3439 M.A. Kumar UDHD  (Left Service) 1994 779552  
31/9298 Kumar Chhetri Police (Expired) 1998 52255  
32/9374 Ramesh Kumar Chettri SAP (Terminated) 1999 140346  
33/9582 Man Bahadur Lakhandri Forest (Retired) 1999 265253 Under trail 
34/9721 Topgay Lepcha SBS (Expired) 1999 107314  
35/9801 Lall Bahadur Gurung RDD (Expired) 1999 163962  
      63,94,474 
36/186 S. Bose Private (Expired) 1992 118846   
37/4695 Sam Tshering Lepcha Private  43191 Retired 
38/155 Kamal N. Pradhan Private  194819 Certificate issued 
39/79 Bhim Kumari Chettri Private  2106526 Certificate issued 
40/207 Dhan Bahadur Gurung Private  102756 Under trail 
41/145 D.B. Thatal Private  796126 Under trail 
     3357264 
42/3926 L.T. Wangchuk Education  1995 279988 Certificate issued 
43/7021 Karna Deo Gurung Education 1997 14340 Under trail 
44/3324 Sarswati Gurung Education 1994 175117 Under trail 
45/3565 Dawa Lhakpa Sherpa Police 1994 59137  
46/3267 Mindu Tshering Lachungpa Power 1994 27393  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 186 
47/3367 Chenga Lachungpa Forest 1994 305924  
48/4584 Dharni Prasad Sharma Education 1995 368  
49/4131 P.T. Bhutia Animal Husbandry 1995 1151  
50/4186 Pavitra Sanyashi SNT 1996 37556  
51/4396 Gurmey Tenzing Lachenpa  Power 1996 173327  
52/4797 Bhim Kumar Pradhan Land Revenue 1998 1544  
53/4888 Pema Lepcha Forest 1998 352  
54/9104 Dhan Bahadur Pradhan Home 1997 32771  
55/7090 Kaziman Basnett Education 1997 1758  
56/9121 Pem Tshering Bhutia Police 1997 3441  
57/7055 Sonam Ongmoo Karthok Power 1997 1050  
58/170 Dorji Tshering Bhutia DC 1997 809  
59/189 Lawang Norbu Bhutia. SNT 1990 1465  
60/100 Loknath Pokhrail DC 1990 627  
61/117 T. Wangmu Lepcha DHH 1990 518  
62/1900 Dhan Kumar Subba SPWD (R&B) 1991 606  
63/1958 Kenzong Bhutia Education 1991 831  
64/1140 Kharda Bdr. Bhandari  Education 1991 3633  
65/1590 Kiran Bahadur Gurung Education 1991 998  
66/1032 Kul Bahadur Gurung Education 1991 881  
67/2063 Nima Tshering Tamang Health 1991 1475  
68/1548 Passang Dugyal Lepcha  Home 1991 672  
69/1602 Purna Bahadur Subba  Education 1991 308  
70/1442 Sangay Sherpa Police 1991 2330  
71/1168 Til Dhoj Subba Education 1991 708  
72/2079 Ugen Bhutia Education 1991 701  
73/1169 Ugen Lepcha Police 1991 6614  
74/2085 Bal Bahadur Subba Power 1991 5756  
75/2788 Dambar Singh Lohar Welfare 1991 2051  
76/273 D.B. Chettri Education 1991 9149  
77/2542 Dilli Ram Chettri Forest 1991 673  
78/2563 Lall Bahadur Subba Education 1991 66392  
79/2556 Pem Dorji Sherpa Agriculture 1991 597  
80/2153 Raj Man Subba Health 1991 101306  
81/2514 Ram Prasad Chhetri SPWD (R&B) 1991 3235  
82/2047 Sam Bahadur Rai SBS 1991 17209  
83//2533 Tobgay Lepcha SPWD (R&B) 1991 21679  
84/2919 Tulsi Das Biswakarma Sikkim Jewels 1991 538  
85/505 Asok Kumar Basnett Education 1992 2106  
86/887 Bir Bahadur Chhetri Police 1992 5355  
87/601 Bir Bahadur Darnal Police 1992 850  
88/827 Karzang Lepcha UDHD 1992 955  
89/735 Kharga Bahadur Chettri Khadi Board 1992 282  
90/701 Prem Dorji Tamang Police 1992 2463  
91/702 Prem Lall Basnet RDD 1992 27044  
92/746 Rapden Serpa Police 1992 599  
93/874 Tek Bahadur Subba Rajya Sainik Board 1992 3252  
94/592 Til Bahadur Chhetri Education 1992 6119  
95/1889 Jagat Bahadur Khatri PAO 1993 2265  
96/1886 Karna Bahadur Pradhan Police 1993 14214  
97/2191 Tenzing Shenga SPWD (R&B) 1993 4025  
98/3746 Karna Bahadur Gurung Education 1993 29803  
99/3955 Naina Singh Basnett Health 1993 1178  
100/1740 Stella Singh Education 1993 235  
101/3630 Chandra Singh Rai Welfare 1993 1254  
102/9691 Dawa Lhakpa Sherpa Police 1993 772817  
103/9545 Gopal Sunar Police 1993 109332  
       23,51,126 

Appendices 
 187 
Appendix 3.1.1 
Statement showing investments made by State Government in SPSUs whose accounts are in 
arrears 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.10; Page 74) 
 
(Figures in columns 4 and 6 to 8 are  in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the State Public 
Sector Undertaking 
Year up 
to which 
accounts 
finalised 
Paid up 
capital 
Period of 
accounts pending 
finalisation 
Investment made by State 
Government during the 
year of which accounts are 
in arrears 
Equity Loans Grants 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
A Working Government Companies 
1 Sikkim Poultry Development 
Corporation (SPDCL) 2008-09 0.00 2009-10 to  
2014-15 Nil Nil 0.16 
 GRAND TOTAL (A + B)  0.00    0.16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 
188 
Appendix 3.1.2 
Summarised financial position and working results of Government Companies and Statutory Corporations as per their latest finalised financial 
statements/accounts as on 30 September 2015 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.14; Page 75) 
Sl 
No Sector/Name of the company Period of 
accounts 
Year in 
which 
accounts 
finalised 
Paid 
up 
capital 
Loan 
outstanding 
at the end of 
the year 
Accumulated 
Profit (+)/ 
loss(-) 
Turnover 
Net 
profit 
(+)/ 
loss(-) 
Net 
impact of 
Accounts 
comments 
Capital 
employed 
Return 
on 
capital 
employed 
Percentage of 
return on 
capital 
employed 
Man-
power 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
A. Working Government Companies 
Agriculture and Allied 
1 Sikkim Poultry Development Corporation 
Limited (SPDCL) 2008-09 2009-10 0.00 0 -0.73 0 -0.08 0 0.16 -0.08 - 4 
2 Sikkim Hatcheries Limited (SHL) 2008-09 2009-10 0.46 0 -1.67 0.98 -0.14 0 -1.33 -0.14 - 5 
3 Sikkim Livestock Processing and Development 
Corporation (SLPDC) 2012-13 2014-15 0.69 0.01 -1.02 0.05 -0.01 -0.11 0.06 -0.01 - 3 
Sector wise total - - 1.15 0.01 -3.42 1.03 -0.23 -0.11 -1.11 -0.23 - 12 
Finance 
4 
 Schedule Caste, Schedule Tribe and Other 
Backward Classes Development Corporation 
Limited (SABCCO) 2012-13 2015-16 14.02 31.14 -15.26 2.02 -3.91 0.01 29.90 -2.88 - 23 
Sector wise total     14.02 31.14 -15.26 2.02 -3.91 0.01 29.90 -2.88 - 23 
Infrastructure - -                     
5 Sikkim Industrial Development and Investment  
Corporation Limited (SIDICO) 2013-14 2014-15 17.14 141.30 6.82 18.03 3.28 0 167.63 18.31 10.92 37 
Sector wise total     17.14 141.30 6.82 18.03 3.28 0 167.63 18.31 10.92 37 
Power - -                   
6 Sikkim Power Development Corporation 
(SPDC) 2013-14 2015-16 20.30 100.80 -45.50 4.31 -16.64 0 132.84 -14.14 - 73 
Sector wise total - - 20.30 100.80 -45.50 4.31 -16.64 0 132.84 -14.14 - 73 
Service 
7 Sikkim Tourism Development Corporation 
(STDC) 2012-13 2013-14 6.46 0 -1.90 2.21 0.04 0 4.69 0.06 1.27 66 
Sector wise total - - 6.46 0 -1.90 2.21 0.04 0 4.69 0.06  1.27 66 
Total A (All sector wise working Government 
companies) - - 59.07 273.25 -59.26 27.6 -17.46 -0.10 333.95 1.12  13.13 211 
B Statutory Corporations 
Finance 
 8 State Bank of Sikkim (SBS) 2010-11 2013-14 0.58 0 -13.32 74.15 -7.05 0 1290.44 62.53 4.85 315 
Sector wise total - - 0.58 0 -13.32 74.15 -7.05   1290.44 62.53  4.85 315 
Service 
9 State Trading Corporation of Sikkim (STCS) 2010-11 2013-14 1.61 0 7.73 47.53 0.85 0 9.34 0.85 9.10 92 
Sector wise total     1.61 0 7.73 47.53 0.85   9.34 0.85 9.10 92 

Appendices 
 
189 
Sl 
No Sector/Name of the company Period of 
accounts 
Year in 
which 
accounts 
finalised 
Paid 
up 
capital 
Loan 
outstanding 
at the end of 
the year 
Accumulated 
Profit (+)/ 
loss(-) 
Turnover 
Net 
profit 
(+)/ 
loss(-) 
Net 
impact of 
Accounts 
comments 
Capital 
employed 
Return 
on 
capital 
employed 
Percentage of 
return on 
capital 
employed 
Man-
power 
Total B (All sector wise working Statutory 
corporations) - - 2.19 0 -5.59 121.68 -6.2 0 1299.78 63.38  13.95 407 
Grand Total (A+B) - - 61.26 273.25 -64.85 149.28 -23.66 -0.10 1633.73 64.50  27.08 618 
C. Non-working Government Companies 
Agriculture and Allied 
10 Sikkim Flour Mills Limited (SFML) 1994-95 1995 2.44 0 -0.13 0 0 0 2.44 0 - Nil 
Sector wise total     2.44 0 -0.13 0 0 0 2.44 0 - Nil 
Service 
11 Chandmari Workshops and Automobiles 
Limited (CWAL) 1994-95 1997 0.30 0 -0.02 0 -0.14 0 0.30 -0.14 - Nil 
Sector wise total     0.30 0 -0.02 0 -0.14 0 0.30 -0.14 - Nil 
Manufacturing 
 12 Sikkim Jewels Limited (SJL) 2012-13 2013-14 15.25 0 -15.89 0 -1.09 0 0.06 - - Nil 
 13 Sikkim Times Corporation (SITCO) 2012-13 2013-14 23.49 0 -21.42 0 -2.23 0 2.80 - - Nil 
14 Sikkim Precision Industries Limited (SPIL) 2012-13 2013-14 4.39 0 -3.53 0 -0.64 0 0.86 - - Nil 
Sector wise total - - 43.13 0 -40.84 0 -3.96 0 3.72 - - Nil 
Total C (All sector wise non-working Government 
companies) - - 45.87 0 -40.99 0 -4.10 0 6.46 -0.14 - Nil 
D. Non-working Statutory Corporation 
 15 Sikkim Mining Corporation (SMC) 2010-11 2012-13 12.50 0 -11.88 0 0 0 5.26 0 - Nil 
Sector Wise Total - - 12.50 0 -11.88 0 0 0 5.26 0 - Nil 
Total D - - 12.50 0 -11.88 0 0 0 5.26 0 - Nil 
GRAND TOTAL (A+B+C+D) - - 119.63 273.25 -117.72 149.28 -27.76 -0.10 1645.45 64.36 3.91 618 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 190 
Appendix 3.2.1 
Cases of fraudulent cash withdrawal 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2; Page 81) 
Sl 
No Date Cheque 
No. Amount Account No. Remarks 
I From Cheque book issued in the name of Bhanu Bista Account No.101234001100 
1 9-Feb-15 31602 30000 101234001100486 Account holder Bhanu Bista; Signature not matching 
2 7-Mar-15 31603 150000 101234001000459 A/c Holder Laxmi Prasad Bista; signature not matching 
3 14-Mar-15 31604 250000 101234001000459 A/c Holder Laxmi Prasad Bista; Word and figure not matching 
;signature not matching 
4 17-Mar-15 31605 17000 101234001000459 A/c Holder Laxmi Prasad Bista; signature not matching 
5 7-Apr-15 31608 300000 101234001000459 A/c Holder Laxmi Prasad Bista; Cheque do not bear A/c 
number; Signature not matching 
6 13-Apr-15 31610 300000 101234001000459 A/c Holder Laxmi Prasad Bista; Signature not matching 
7 7-May-15 31611 25000 101234001100486 Account holder BhanuBista; Signature not matching 
8 13-May-15 31613 150000 101234001100491 Account Holder T N Sharma; Cheque do not bear A/c number; 
signature not verified 
9 13-May-15 31614 50000 1012340010100040 Account holder C M Sharma; Cheque do not bear A/c number; 
Signature not verified 
10 8-Jun-15 31615 150000 101234001000082 Account holder Kamala Chettri; Signature not verified 
(specimen signature in Nepali) 
11 8-Jun-15 31616 229000 101234001000164 Account Holder Phurba Tsh Bhutia, signature not verified 
12 8-Jun-15 31617 28000 101234001000459 A/c Holder Laxmi Prasad Bista; signature not verified  
13 8-Jun-15 31618 28000 101234001000459 A/c Holder Laxmi Prasad Bista; Word and figure not matching 
;signature not verified  
14 11-Jun-15 31619 200000 101234001000164 Account Holder Phurba Tsh Bhutia, signature not verified 
15 9-May-15 31621 255000 101234001000459 A/c Holder Laxmi Prasad Bista; Words and figure differs; 
signature not verified 
16 9-Feb-15 31622 100000 101234001100152 Account holder Sujan Kumar Bista; signature not matching 
17 11-Jun-15 31623 30000 101234001000459 A/c Holder Laxmi Prasad Bista ;signature not verified  
II Cheque book issued in the name of Milan Kumar Limboo, Account No.101234001000489 
18 16-Jan-15 31327 85000 101234001100152 Account holder Sujan Kumar Bista; signature not matching 
19 21-Jan-15 31328 35000 101234001100152 Account holder Sujan Kumar Bista; signature not matching 
 TOTAL 2412000   
 
 
Appendix 4.13.1 
Details of ITC sales uploaded by the wholesaler as compared with figure of ‘sales to 
registered dealer’ shown in quarterly returns 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.13.2, Page 116) 
Name of the 
Wholesaler Year 
Goods sold at 4 % VAT ( ) Goods sold at 12.5 % VAT ( ) 
Sales uploaded 
for allowing 
ITC claims  
Sales 
declared in 
the quarterly 
Returns 
Difference* 
Sales 
uploaded for 
allowing 
ITC claims 
Sales 
declared in 
the quarterly 
Returns 
Difference* 
Goodwill 
Enterprise 
2012-13 14392940 12853793 1539147 13651237 10362339 3288898 
2013-14 37230189 37485843 -255654 33385254 33762866 -377612 
Krishan 
Company 
2012-13 3086274 3672883 -586609 31382995 40293643 -8910648 
2013-14 5114074.94 5219116.53 -105041.59 51505644 55970126 -4464482 
Style 2012-13 833008 833008 0 2865277 2865277 0 
2013-14 888348 10869152 -9980804 4510063 4510064 -1 
EssEss 
Traders 
2012-13 10541308 10123042 418266 24258988 23046602 1212386 
2013-14 31874637 32237233 -362596 55696506 55939884 -243378 
Himalayan 
Hardware 
2012-13 803356 929896 -126540 28551840 42468703 -13916863 
2013-14 4628269 1436180 3192089 89999555 78006965 11992590 
Samvritdhi 2012-13 975000 953144 21856 143697880 170795210 -27097330 
IOC 2012-13 185311226 303032125 -117720899 46143533 188688511 -142544978 
2013-14 260473920.2 318741693 -58267772.8 60518291 308540057 -248021766 
Vikash 
Agency 2013-14 316974 380211 -63237 21142061 21317337 -175276 
Source: Online data of ITC sales and Quarterly Returns. 
         *  Positive figure denotes that ITC was allowed to the retailers but tax was not actually collected from 
them and the negative figure denotes that though Input Tax was charged to the retailer they could 
not avail ITC. 

Appendices 
 191 
Appendix 4.13.2 
Comparison of ITC purchases with local purchases shown in the returns 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.13.2, Page 117) 
Name of Dealers TIN No. Year ITC Purchases 
( ) 
Local purchases as 
per Qtly Return 
( ) 
Differences ()* 
M/s. Neel 11321772112 2012-13 1174036.50 8919986.97 -7745950.47 
2013-14 3382227.69 40343785.82 -36961558.13 
M/s. Surajmall 
Manoharla 11260565812 2012-13 0 17797890.00 -17797890.00 
2013-14 7935734.78 50869825.00 -42934090.22 
M/s. Balaji 
Enterprises 11550714312 2012-13 25544788.00 25333700.00 211088.00 
2013-14 34395241.90 34395491.00 -249.10 
M/s. Future Value 
Retail Ltd. 11810324212 2012-13 7169885.95 17501485.52 -10331599.57 
2013-14 9488825.96 12175925.56 -2687099.60 
M/s. Banwarilall 
Omkarmull 11400122912 2012-13 0 0 0.00 
2013-14 4260000.00 1507000.00 2753000.00 
M/s. Laxmi 
Surana 11046653612 2012-13 1207629.00 1207629.00 0.00 
2013-14 1663133.00 1663133.00 0.00 
M/s. Madhukar 
Prasad Gupta 11306524412 2012-13 1046934.00 1083174.00 -36240.00 
2013-14 1774825.00 1748303.00 26522.00 
M/s. Maheshwari 
Trading Co. 11839793712 2012-13 2059802.52 2684275.00 -624472.48 
2013-14 2382206.29 2903473.37 -521267.08 
M/s. Internet Point 11968032212 2012-13 4183392.00 5288664.91 -1105272.91 
2013-14 125793.66 125772.66 21.00 
M/s. Zion Mobile 
Store 11757395312 2012-13 21363988.58 22356578.00 -992589.42 
2013-14 30940027.05 30936044.00 3983.05 
M/s. Dew Kumar 
Thapa 11934907312 2012-13 1809260.00 0 1809260.00 
2013-14 5415000.00 0 5415000.00 
Source: Online data of ITC Purchases and Quarterly Returns. *‘Difference’ denotes is the amount of ITC 
purchases minus amount of local purchases shown in the returns. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 192 
Appendix 4.15.1 
KVA demand of the HTS consumers 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.15, Page 121) 
Sl. No. Month 
Energy 
units 
consumed 
Equivalent KVA 
demand for the 
consumption 
Contracted 
Demand 
Excess 
demand 
KVA 
charge 
Twice the 
KVA charge to 
be levied 
  LLHP II (Non-Residential HTS) 
1 Universal Enterprises 
  Apr-12 632000 1829 1600 229 220 100760 
  May-12 596000 1725 1600 125 220 55000 
  Jun-12 703000 2034 1600 434 220 190960 
  Jul-12 690000 1997 1600 397 220 174680 
  Aug-12 630000 1823 1600 223 220 98120 
  Sep-12 628000 1817 1600 217 220 95480 
  Oct-12 569000 1646 1600 46 220 20240 
  Nov-12 582000 1684 1600 84 220 36960 
  Dec-12 616000 1782 1600 182 220 80080 
  Mar-13 610000 1765 1600 165 220 72600 
  May-13 702000 2031 2000 31 450 27900 
  Jun-13 770000 2228 2000 228 450 205200 
  Jul-13 860000 2488 2000 488 450 439200 
  Aug-13 798000 2309 2000 309 450 278100 
  Sep-13 840000 2431 2000 431 450 387900 
  Oct-13 763000 2208 2000 208 450 187200 
  Nov-13 767000 2219 2000 219 450 197100 
  Dec-13 869000 2514 2000 514 450 462600 
  Jan-14 735000 2127 2000 127 450 114300 
  Topakhani (Non-Residential HTS)   
2 Airtel Mobile Tower, Sawney   
  Apr-12 13271 38 25 13 145 3770 
  May-12 14736 43 25 18 145 5220 
  Jun-12 9911 29 25 4 145 1160 
  Jul-12 15347 44 25 19 145 5510 
  Aug-12 10839 31 25 6 145 1740 
  Sep-12 14174 41 25 16 145 4640 
  Oct-12 16380 47 25 22 145 6380 
  Nov-12 8897 26 25 1 145 290 
  Dec-12 13960 40 25 15 145 4350 
  May-13 14417 42 25 17 150 5100 
  Nov-13 11574 33 25 8 150 2400 
  Jan-14 11091 32 25 7 150 2100 
3 Torrent Pharmaceuticals Ltd   
  Jun-13 537990 1557 1500 57 450 51300 
  Jul-13 560594 1622 1500 122 450 109800 
  Aug-13 592347 1714 1500 214 450 192600 
  Sep-13 574981 1664 1500 164 450 147600 
  LLHP I (Non-Residential HTS)   
4 Airtel Company Pvt. Ltd.   
  Apr-12 11000 32 25 7 145 2030 
  May-12 11000 32 25 7 145 2030 
  Jun-12 11000 32 25 7 145 2030 
  Jul-12 11000 32 25 7 145 2030 
  Aug-12 11000 32 25 7 145 2030 
  Sep-12 11000 32 25 7 145 2030 
  Oct-12 11000 32 25 7 145 2030 
  Nov-12 11000 32 25 7 145 2030 
  Dec-12 11000 32 25 7 145 2030 

Appendices 
 193 
  Jan-13 11000 32 25 7 145 2030 
  Feb-13 11000 32 25 7 145 2030 
  Mar-13 11000 32 25 7 145 2030 
  Apr-13 11000 32 25 7 150 2100 
  May-13 11000 32 25 7 150 2100 
  Jun-13 11000 32 25 7 150 2100 
  Jul-13 11000 32 25 7 150 2100 
  Aug-13 11000 32 25 7 150 2100 
  Sep-13 11000 32 25 7 150 2100 
  Oct-13 11000 32 25 7 150 2100 
  Nov-13 11000 32 25 7 150 2100 
  Dec-13 11000 32 25 7 150 2100 
  Jan-14 11000 32 25 7 150 2100 
  Feb-14 11000 32 25 7 150 2100 
5 Bharati Cellular Pvt. Ltd.   
  Jun-12 11923 34 25 9 145 2610 
  Aug-12 9076 26 25 1 145 290 
  Sep-12 9817 28 25 3 145 870 
  Dec-12 10115 29 25 4 145 1160 
  May-13 9800 28 25 3 150 900 
  Jun-13 13934 40 25 15 150 4500 
  Jul-13 8744 25 25 0 150 0 
  Sep-13 9300 27 25 2 150 600 
  Nov-13 8927 26 25 1 150 300 
  Feb-14 10712 31 25 6 150 1800 
6 Vodafone Essar Pvt. Ltd.   
  May-13 10440 30 25 5 150 1500 
7 MayFair Hotel & Resort Pvt. Ltd.   
  Jun-12 178000 515 500 15 220 6600 
  May-13 198665 575 500 75 450 67500 
  Jun-13 227500 658 500 158 450 142200 
8 Epitome Petro Chemical Pvt. Ltd.   
  Sep-12 240015 694 625 69 220 30360 
9 Hutchisson Essar Co. Namli   
  Aug-12 35840 104 25 79 145 22910 
  Sep-12 10056 29 25 4 145 1160 
10 Dishnet Wireless Pvt. Ltd. Kayathang   
  Apr-12 30640 89 25 64 145 18560 
  May-12 25300 73 25 48 145 13920 
  Jun-12 27800 80 25 55 145 15950 
  Jul-12 27930 81 25 56 145 16240 
  Oct-12 27010 78 25 53 145 15370 
11 Smile Land Resorts   
  Dec-12 11880 34 25 9 145 2610 
12 Tata Tele Services Pvt Kayathang   
  Jun-12 11000 32 25 7 145 2030 
  Jul-12 11000 32 25 7 145 2030 
  SD-II  East (Non-Residential HTS)   
13 Vodafone Essar Pvt. Ltd.   
  Mar-13 14424 42 25 17 145 4930 
  Rongli (Non-Residential HTS)   
14 Telephone Exchange, Rhenock   
  Apr-12 12049 35 25 10 145 2900 
  TOTAL 41,95,600 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 
 194 
Appendix 5.2.1 
Audit conducted during 2014-15 under General Sector 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2; Page 128) 
(  in crore) 
Name of the unit 
Expenditure of the unit 
(i.e. expenditure of the unit for the financial year for which 
audit conducted) 
2010-11* 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Principal Secretary, Home Department - - - 19.42 - 
Secretary, Printing and Stationery Department - - - 7.02 - 
Director General of Police, Police Department 5.49 6.16 6.49 6.30 - 
Inspector General of Police, Training - 2.45 2.47 2.71 - 
Sr. Superintendent of Police, Gyalshing 6.75 6.76 7.81 9.72 - 
Commandant, Sikkim Armed Police, Pangthang   36.82 38.69 - 
Commandant, 3rd Battalion, Indian Reserve Battalion of 
Police   14.97 19.30 - 
Commandant, 1st Battalion Indian Reserve Battalion of 
Police - - - 38.46 - 
Commandant, 2nd Battalion Indian Reserve Battalion of 
Police - - - 18.34 - 
Additional  Director General of  Police, Check Post 
Branch - - - 8.85 - 
Secretary, Department of Personnel, Administrative 
Reforms, Training and Public Grievances  - - - 4.78 - 
Secretary, Information Technology Department - - - 5.32 - 
District Collectorate, Gangtok - 5.12 8.24 7.26 - 
District Collectorate, Mangan - - 5.50 5.54 - 
Registrar General, High Court of Sikkim  6.83 7.81 9.03 - 
Secretary, High Court Legal Committee, Gangtok - 0.07 0.07 0.11 - 
Civil Judge, South, Namchi - 1.56 1.67 2.64 - 
District and Session Judge, North East, Gangtok - 3.45 3.52 4.06 - 
Commissioner-cum-Secretary, Raj Bhawan - - - 5.75 - 
Secretary, 
Land Revenue and Disaster Management Department,  - 8.58 4.73 6.53 - 
Secretary-cum-Relief Commissioner, 
State Disaster Response Fund  8.58 4.73 6.53 - 
Special Secretary, Land Records - 2.41 0.84 0.93 - 
Principal Secretary, 
Finance Revenue and Expenditure Department  - - - 334.15 - 
Secretary, Department of Personnel, Administrative 
Reforms, Training and Public Grievances  - - - 4.78 - 
Director, Sikkim Lotteries - - - 432.90 - 
Principal Director,  
Accounts and Administrative Training Institute - 0.88 0.91 0.68 - 
Election Commissioner, Election Department - - - 3.22 - 
Principal Secretary, State Excise (Abkari) Department - - - 6.41 - 
Dy. Commissioner, State Excise (Abkari), Jorethang  2.19 1.32 1.52 - 
Secretary, Information and Public Relation Department - - - - 12.80 
District Information Officer/South, Information and 
Public Relation Department - 0.23 0.31 0.31 - 
Principal Secretary, Sports and Youth Affairs 
Department - - - - 16.11 
Joint Director, Sports and Youth Affairs Department, 
South/West, Namchi - 1.71 1.16 1.36 - 
Development Commissioner, Development, Planning 
and Economic Reform & NECA Department - - - 18.37 - 
TOTAL 12.24 56.98 109.37 1030.99 28.91 
 
 

                              
      
 
APPENDICES 

                              
      
 
SOCIAL SECTOR 

                              
      
 
ECONOMIC SECTOR 

                              
      
 
ECONOMIC SECTOR (Public Sector Undertakings) 

                              
      
 
REVENUE SECTOR 

                              
      
 
GENERAL SECTOR 

                              
      
 
FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERVATIONS  

        
       
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2016 
© COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.saiindia.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agskm.cag.gov.in 
 